THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. IV (April 1846 to January 1847).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/zoistajournalce01goog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  ZOIST:


A  JOURNAL


CEREBRAL  PHYSIOLOGY  &  MESMERISM,


THEIR  APPLICATIONS  TO  HUMAN  WELFARE.


"Thli  bTlDTB,  UiMtb  spputnl  u  the  Fhikiuidijr  or  Afr%."—Oi


VOL.  IV.
MARCH,  I8-)6,  TO  JANUARY,  [847.


LONDON :

HIPPOLYTE  BAILLIERE,  PUBLISHER,

219,  REGENT  STREET;

PARIS :  1.  B.  BAILLIERE,  RUE  DE  L'ECOLE  DU  MBDBCINE ;

LEIPSIC :  T.  O.  WEIGEL.

HDCCCXLVII.


LONDON  :

PRINTKD BY WALTON AND MITCHBLLi
94,  Wardonr-ftreet,  Oxford-itrtet.


INDEX.


pag«

Add,  strong  muriaticy  applied  painlessly 41

Amputations,  painless 34,  35,  36,  315,  431,  755

Amott,  Mr.,  his  refusal  to  attempt  to  cot  off  a  leg  without  pain 216

Arsenic,  wonderful  Fact  in  Poisoning  hy 525

Ashbumer,  Dr.,  on  the  Analogy  of  Mesmerism  and  Magnetism 124

Theory  of  Sleep 254

Association,  British 472

Bell,  Professor,  his  painless  Extractions  of  Teeth 206,  209,  573

Bickentetfa,  Rev.  E.,  kis  satanic  absurdities 451

Bird,  Mrs.,  her  wonderful  esse 517

Breast,  Cancer  of,  cut  away  without  pain 1 — 8

Brendon,  Mr.,  his  painless  Tooth  Extraction 55

Briggs,  Mr.,  his  Benevolence 230

Brodie,  Sir  B.,  his  antimesmeric  absurdities 16,  17y  583,  596

Brown,  Mr.,  his  Cures 377

Buxton,  Dr.,  his  Cures 68—75

Campbell,  Lord,  his  antimesmeric  absurdity 1

Cancer,  alleged  case  of  cure 218

Carpenter,  Dr 479

Cataract,  operation  for 312

Caustic,  lunar,  painless  application  of  to  the  eye 51

Chandler,  Mr.,  his  services  to  Mesmerism 102,  206,  290,  327,  571

Charlotte  Elizabetii  Tonna 332

Churvoyance 71,82,152,410,517

Committee,  Mesmeric,  fiivourable  report  of 566

Consciousness,  double,  instances  of 157,  158

Conversion  of  Medical  Men  to  the  duty  of  preventing  surgical  pain 563

Convulsions,  cured 386

Copland,  Dr.,  his  antimesmeric  absurdity  2,  583

Crampton,  Sir  P.,  his  antimesmeric  absurdities ...» 140,  155

Danger  of  Trifling  with  Mesmerism 388

Davey,  Dr,,  his  Cure  of  Epilepsy 230


IV  INDEX.

page

Darey,  Mr.,  his  Cores  of  Epilepsy,  Deafness,  and  Dumbness 242

Dumbness 451

Deafiiess,  cored  with  Mesmerism 68,  246,  461

Dilke,  Mr.,  his  Antimesmeric  absnrdity 308

Dropsy,  cored 361

Dogos,  Dr.,  his  removal  of  a  breast  painlessly 1—9

Dumbness,  cored 243, 454

Dyspepsia,  cured 378,  379

Edwards,  the  Rev.  T.,  his  socoess  over  Rheomatism 92

Edwards,  Mr.,  his  painless  Teeth  Extractions 214

Elliotson,  Dr.,  his  answer  to  Sir  P.  Crampton  140

'  instances  of  Dooble  Conscioosness 157,  187

Harveian  Oration 291

Danger  of  Trifling  with  Mesmerism 388

Core  of  Fatoity 466

on  Antimesmerists 576

Elliot,  Dr.,  his  wisdom 595

Engledoe,  Dr.,  his  castigation  of  Messrs.  Waldey,  Forbes,  Brodie,  &c.  . . 584

Epilepsy  cured  with  Mesmerism 71,  73,  230,  231,  240,  242,  447,  517

Esdaile,  Dr.,  his  admirable  mesmeric  labours  .... 21—50,  193—199,  284—
290,  293—327,  382-388,  488,  563

Ether,  inhalation  of  yapour  of,  prevents  surgical  pain 576

Excrescence,  removal  of 306

Fatuity,  Cure  of 466

Female  ailments  cured  with  Mesmerism. 75,  81

Fits  and  Fracture,  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in 333

FlintoiF,  Mr.,  his  cure  of  alleged  Cancer 218

Cure  of  Epilepsy 240

Forbes,  Dr.  John 58,  294,  588

Fox,  Mr.,  his  painless  Tooth  extraction 212

FradeUe,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  alleged  Cancer 218

Fry,  Mr.  E.,  his  services  to  Mesmerism 55,  82

GarUck,  Mr.,  his  childishness 466,  601

Gregory,  Professor,  his  Opinion  on  the  case  of  Poisoning  by.  Arsenic  .... 558

Hall,  Dr.  M.,  his  Antimesmeric  absurdity  18

Hands,  Mr.  D.,  his  Cures 75,  82,  385,  361

Head-ache  cured 253,  379

Hollings,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  the  Spinal  Chord 95

Hot  Iron,  application  of. 316

Hydrocele,  painless  operations  for 32,  284,  285,  309,  315

Hypochondriasis,  cured 379

Incisions,  painless 37,  39,  40,  286,  288,  289,  305,  306,  309,  313,  316

Inflammation,  cured  by  Mesmerism 48,  50


INDEX.  V

page

JamoQ,  Mr.,  his  core  of  ^fennlgia 341

Johnson,  I>r.  James 330

Key,  Mr 328,  571

King,  Mr.,  lus  Amputation  431

latcik,  1>r.,  luB  castigation  by  Bfr.  S.  Hall 141

lionSi  diseaaed,  cured 249

lAxmoore,  Mr.,  his  wonderful  Case 517,  562

Mftcaniley,  Mr.,  bia  Antimesmeric  absurdity 193

Mama,  great  effect  on 238

HaitiDean,  Miss,  her  complete  recorery 275

Mathematics  of  Phrenology, 60

Mesmerism,  Local 232

Middlesez  Hospital,  sad  story  of 224

Mflier,  Dr.,  his  Amputation 575

NaU  cut  out  painlessly 40,  315

Neuralgia,  Cure  of 341,  388

NJchoIlea,  Mr.,  his  painless  Tooth  extraction 54

Nixon,  his  success  in  Fracture  of  the  liSg  and  Fits. 333

Oration,  Harveian 291

Ophthalmia,  Cure  of 458,  461,  463

Pkin,  cured  by  Mesmerism,  44—47,  395, 382,  383, 384,  459, 460,  461,  464, 465

prevented  by  Mesmerism,  under  violent  force 43,  47

Pkinkas  Operations 1—5,  193-218,  284—290,  293—320,  562

reduction  of  Prolapsus 323

P^y,  cured 361,387

Parher,  Mr.,  his  Painless  Application  of  Caustic  to  the  Eye 51

use  of  Mesmerism  in  After-pains 409

Parsons,  Mr.,  Cure  of  Diseased  Lung 249

Parturition,  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  and  after 405

Phenomenon,  a  remarkable 236

Peat,  Dr.,  his  Antimesmeric  Absurdity 272

:,  Mr.,  on  the  British  Association 472

on  Dr.  Carpenter,  &c 479


lin,  Mr.,  his  Mesmeric  success 267

Reichenbach,  his  Researches 104,  277,  341

Reynoldson,  Cure  of  Head-ache 253

Rheumatism,  successfully  treated 92,  286,  287,  386,  387

Rintoul,  Mr.,  his  Antimesmeric  Absurdity 299

Savage,  Idiss,  verses  by 100

Seton,  introduced  painlessly 38

Sle^,  Theory  of 254

Society,  Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical,  its  Antimesmeric  Absurdity. . . . 3,  12
Spinal  Chord,  Cure  of 95


VI  INDEX.

StoreTi  Dr.,  his  Cures  of  Epilqisy 447

Stnton,  Mr.,  hia  Contribatioii  to  the  Mathematics  of  Fbrenologj 60

Tait's  Magazine,  iti  Antimesmeric  Absurdity 193

Tie^piiig  for  Dropsy  painlessly 38,  309

Teeth  extracted  painlessly ....  39,  40,  53,  55,  206,  209,  212,  213,  214,  216,
288,  289,  430,  573,  575,  601

Tendon  of  Achilles  dirided  painlessly 14

Tingling,  severe,  cored  by  Mesmerism 47

Thompson,  Mr.  H.  S.,  on  Local  Cerebral  Mesmerism 232

his  Cui«  of  Pain 233

— — ^ curious  Phenomena 236

great  Effect  in  Mania 239

Tomes,  Mr.,  his  painless  Tooth  Extraction 215

Tonsil,  Removal  of 571

Tumors,  painless  Removal  of..  ..34,  36,  194,  199,  204,  205,  285,  289,  305,

306,  307,  310,  311,  312,  314,  317,  318,  319,  320,  563,  567

University  College,  its  Antimesmeric  Absurdity 2,  420

Vesical  Affection,  cured 187

Wakley,  Mr 293,  579,  597

WaUace,  Miss,  her  Cures 458

Weddell,  Mr.,  Cure  of  Vesical  Affection 187

Wilde,  Sir  T.,  his  Antimesmeric  Absurdity 59


THE ZOIST.


No.  XIII.


APRIL,  1846.


I. Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations.
CommuniAted  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

"  While  11111  a  mere  chIM,  he  (Lord  Bacon)  tlole  away  from  bit  playraatea  to  a  Taalt  in
St.  Jamea'i  Fields,  for  the  porpote  of  Invettlgitlog  the  eanae  of  a  ilngalar  echo  which  he  iMd
diacoverc<1  there ;  and,  when  a  liille  older,  be  amaaed  hinuelf  with  very  logeniooa  ipecala*


tiona  OD  the  art  of  lemrdnmaim,  mi  pnamt  JUmrUhlna  umdtr  the  title  qf  wiemmeriem."'^  L\f^  ef
jLerd  Baemh  in  the  Umt  qfihe  Lord  Chemeeilan.  Bj  JoHjt  Lobo  CkmrmmLL,  A.M.,  P.R  6.B.
Vol.  U.,  p.  S89.

"  la  the  diary  of  the  famoaa  Eliaa  Aahmoir,  ooder  date  S3rd  October,  1681,  we  And  thia
entry :  '  My  Lord  Chancellor  Finch  aeirt  for  me  to  core  him  of  his  rhenmatlam.  1  dined
there,  bat  woaM  not  nadertake  the  care.'  On  calcolaling  the  Lord  Chancellor'a  oalivlty,  I
presame  it  waa  aacertalned  that  the  aspect  of  the  stars  was  nnfavoorable.  If  he  Joined  Dr>dcB
In  snch  •o^orias,  need  we  be  mach  astonished  when  its  Jbtd  arave  charactera  belinbtg  In
' of  (ike  fremU  de^  r'-^lAfk  ^  Lord  Nottimgham,  in  ditto. YoL  111.,  p.  4SS.


I. Two  removals  of  Cancer  from  the  Breaat,  in  America.

In  The  Zoist  for  October  last  (No.  XI.),  I  recorded  the
remoyal  of  a  lady's  cancerous  breast  in  the  mesmeric  state,
without  anj  pain,  on  the  20th  of  January,  1845,  by  Dr.
Dngas,  Professor  of  Physiology  in  the  Medical  College  of
Georgia.  The  whole  breast,  weighing  sixteen  ounces,  with
the  tumor  in  it  as  large  as  a  turkey's  egg,  was  cut  away  with
two  elliptical  incisions,  each  eight  inches  in  length;  the  integu-
ments were  dissected  in  the  usual  manner,  and  the  wound
was  left  open  for  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour  while  six
bleeding  blood-vessels  were  tied.  The  patient  gave  no  indi-
cation whatever  of  sensation,  but  remained  all  the  time  in  a
sound  mesmeric  sleep.  The  placidity  of  her  countenance  was
finaltered,  the  natural  blush  of  her  cheeks  undiminished;  so
that,  had  the  several  eminent  physicians  present  observed  her
without  knowing  that  an  operation  was  performing,  none  of
them  would  have  suspected  such  a  thing :  and,  on  her  being
awakened  to  her  natural  state  after  having  been  dressed  again
in  her  sleep,  she  was  not  aware  that  the  operation  had  been
performed,  was  anxious  that  it  should  not  be  delayed  as  she
wished  to  return  home  from  Augusta  city,  and  for  a  short

VOL.  IV.  B


2  Accounts  of  more  painlesM  Surgical  Operations,

time  fancied  that  Dr.  Dugas  was  joking  when  he  assured  her
that  the  operation  was  over.  She  became  convinced  only  on
carrying  her  hand  to  the  part  and  finding  that  the  breast
was  no  longer  there.  "  She  remained  apparently  unmoved
for  a  few  moments^  when^  her  friends  approaching  to  congra-
tulate her^  her  face  became  flushed  and  she  wept  unaffectedly
for  some  time.'^

What  can  be  the  cerebral  composition  and  organization
of  the  medical  man  who  can  read  this  and  not  be  deeply
affected ;  and^  at  the  same  time^  not  feel  almost  ashamed  at
belonging  to  a  body  of  men,  the  veiy  great  majority  of  whom
proudly  scoff  at  mesmerism  as  a  thing  totally  unfit  for  their
condescending  notice  for  a  single  moment,  and  whose  highest
medical  society — the  Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society
of  London — so  vociferously  scouted'^a  history  presented  to
them  of  a  similar  operation  that,  after  bestowing  all  the  con-
tempt of  which  they  were  capable  upon  the  subject,  the  pa-
tient, the  mesmeriser  and  the  surgeon,  they  would  not  allow
a  syllable  to  remain  upon  their  minutes  that  might  divulge
to  posterity  the  disgraceful  fact  that  such  a  communication
had  been  received  and  Ustened  to  by  them  I — a  madness,  and
a  conceit,  and  a  hard-heartedness,  equal  to  that  of  the  council
of  University  College,  who,  without  the  decent  courtesy  of  a
previous  deliberation  with  me  or  any  intimation  to  me,  peremp-
torily forbade  any  patient  to  receive  the  benefit  of  mesmerism
in  their  hospital,  and  desired  their  secretary  only  to  shew
me  their  resolution,  in  abject  obedience  to  Mr.  Wakley  who
had  declared  that  they  should  take  this  measure — had  declared
that  mesmerism  should  be  no  longer  employed  in  any  hospi-
tal. "  Do  you  read  what  is  said  in  the  Lancet  ?"  said  Mr.
William  Tooke,  one  of  the  council  and  of  the  committee  of
management  and  treasurer  of  the  hospital,  to  a  friend  of
mine  to  justify  their  doings.* What  can  be  the  cerebral

•  The  council  were —

The  Duke  of  Somerset,  Mr.  6.  J.  Bishop,

Lord  Brougham,  -«-  J.  Booth,

Sir  Isaac  Lyon  Goldsmid,  Bart.  —  G.  B.  Greenough,

S.  Duckworth,  M.P.  —  £.  Holland,

Mr.  Ewart,  M.P.,  —  E.  N.  Hurt,

—  Leader,  M.P.,  —  R.  HuttoUi

—  J.  Romilly,  M.P.  —  J.  R.  Mill,

—  E.  Strutt,  M.P.  —  J.  L.  Prerost,

—  Thornly,  M.P.  —  W.  C.  RobinsoD,

—  W,  Tooke,  M.P.  —  J.  Taylor,

—  Warburton,  M.P.,  —  H.  Waymouth,
Dr.  Boott,  —  C.  Wood.

Sir  I.  Goldsmid  made  a  great  stand  for  mesmerism,  and  afterwards  moved
that  I  should  be  requested  to  withdraw  my  resignation,  and  was  supported
by  Lord  Brougham,  Mr.  Tooke,  and  Mr.  Bishop.  Mr.  W.  Crabb  Robinson
would  have  joined  him,  but  was  absent.


communicaied  by  Dr.  EU%ot$on.  8

composition  and  organization  of  that  man^  and  him  a  hus-
band, a  father,  a  brother,  and  getting  his  living  on  the
ground  of  professing  to  relieve  the  sick  of  their  su£fering8,
who  unblushingly  rose  in  the  Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical
Society  of  London,  and  moved  and  carried,  without  one  dis-
senting  voice,  the  erasure  of  the  minutes,  even  containing  no
account,  but  only  a  very  short  allusion  to  the  detail  of  the
painless  amputation  ;*  and  protested  that  he  would  not  have
the  pain  of  poor  wretches  under  surgical  treatment  lessened
or  prevented,  because  it  was  a  good  thing,  a  wise  ordination  of
the  Almighty .t  Yet  this  good  man  goes  about  taking  money
for  prescribing  opium  and  other  anodynes,  and,  with  sympathy
in  his  looks  and  tones,  professes  to  patients  his  great  anxiety
to  lessen  their  sufferings.  Does  he  not  endeavour  to  frustrate
this  wise  provision  in  tooth-ache,  rheumatism,  cancer,  &c.,
instead  of  telling  patients  to  thank  God  for  their  agony  as  it

*  ^*  A  secretary  read  as  minates  of  the  preceding  meetiog  merely  that  such
a  paper  had  been  read ;  no  abstract  being  given  according  to  the  established
custom  of  the  society."— See  my  pamphlet  entitled  NwnenuB  Coms  qf  Sur^
gieml  OperxUionM  wUkwt  jnuji  in  the  Mesmeric  State j  i^e,,  p.  59.

t  **  Dr.  Copland  rose  to  oppose  the  motion  (the  routine  motion  of  the
chairman  for  confirmation  of  the  minates)  on  two  grounds,— >the  character  of
the  paper,  and  the  publication  of  it  by  the  authors  without  the  permission  of
the  society.  *  He  would  allow  no  trace  to  remain  that  such  a  paper  had  been
read,'  The  president  stopped  his  arguments  on  the  first  point,  as  the  paper
had  been  discussed  at  a  previous  meeting  and  thanks  been  voted  for  it«  The
deadly  hostility  of  Dr,  Copland  to  mesmerism  is  well  known.  But  to-night
he  was  particularly  unwise.  He  protested  that  the  paper  ought  not  to  have
been  read,  because  the  aaUhor  was  not  a  medical  man  / — ^As  though  knowledge
was  ever  to  be  despised  from  any  source.  Why  one  of  the  authors  was  a
surgeon,  though  neither  was  a  fellow  of  the  society.  I  have  heard  papers
read  at  the  meetings  of  the  College  of  Physicians  (of  which  he  rejoices  to  be
a  fellow)  by  persons  not  medical,  once  by  the  very  reverend  Dean  of  West-
minster ;  and  the  society  has  of  course  no  law  as  to  who  may  be  authors  of
papers :  and  several  members  of  the  society  are  not  medical  men.  On  this
point  he  was  set  right  by  more  than  one  member.  He  then  contended  that,
if  the  account  of  the  man  experiencing  no  agony  during  the  operation  were
true,  *  the  /act  was  unworthy  ^  their  consideration,  because  pain  is  a  wise  provi-
sian  qfnaiure,  and  patients  ought  to  suffer  pain  while  their  surgeon  is  operating;
iheff  are  all  the  better  for  it,  and  recover  better/*  Will  the  world  believe  that
such  folly  was  gravely  uttered?  This  will  be  remembered  as  a  doctor's
speech  in  1842,  when  the  doctor  himself  shall  be  forgotten.  In  doe  con-
sistency. Dr.  Copland,  when  he  is  about  to  have  a  tooth  extracted,  of  course
goes  to  a  clumsy  dentist  and  begs  the  man  to  give  him  all  the  pain  he  can.
In  due  consistency,  he  of  course  gives  his  patients  that  physic  which  he
thinks  most  likely  to  pinch  them  well,  because  they  must  be  all  the  better
for  being-twisted  with  sharp  pain  while  it  is  operating ;  the  agony  must  do
them  good,  and  make  them  anxious  to  take  his  physic  again.

**  So  the  virtuous  indignation  of  a  large  minority  condemned  the  minutes
to  non-confirmation, — a  most  ridiculous  proceeding,  since,  from  reporters
being  admitted,  the  whole  proceedings  of  the  previous  meeting  were  already
published  in  the  various  journals,  and  recorded  more  publicly  than  they
would  have  been  in  the  minute-book  of  the  society,  which  nobody  sees  but
the  secretary  when  he  writes  in  it  and  the  president  when  he  signs  his
name." — Same  Pamphlet,  pp.  59, 64.

b2


4  Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

does  tliem  good  ?  Dr.  Copland  for  shame !  You  profess  to
believe  in  a  "  wise  provision'*  and  the  Bible,  and  in  your  Bible
you  read  that,  before  the  Almighty  performed  what  was  really
a  surgical  operation  upon  Adam, — "  took  one  of  his  ribs,  and
closed  up  the  flesh  instead  thereof/'  He  made  "a  wiseprovi'
sion" — Hb  spared  the  human  being — ^the  patient — all  suflFer-
iQ&  by  what  was  tantamount  to  mesmerism, — He  "  caused  a
deep  sleep  to  fall  upon  Adam,  and  he  slept/'*

The  barefaced  assertion  that  the  agony  of  surgical  opera-
tions does  people  good  is  disproved  by  the  fact  that  the  most
painful  operations  are  not  better  recovered  from  than  the
less  painful,  and  that  all  the  operations  performed  in  the
mesmeric  state  have  been  well  recovered  £rom  ;  many  better
than  is  usual  in  ordinary  circumstances.  The  next  genera-
tion of  the  medical  world  vrill  point  back  to  the  present  as  a
sad  specimen  of  untutored,  unregulated  lower  feelings  mas-
tering intelligence,  manliness,  and  humanity.

The  unfortunate  lady,  from  whose  case  my  feelings  com-
pelled me  to  digress,  suffered  a  return  of  her  disease,  and  was
operated  upon  again  with  no  more  sensation  than  on  the  first
occasion.  The  following  account  is  from  the  same  Southern
Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  published  in  Augusta  city.
The  number  was  for  September,  1845,  Vol.  I.,  No.  9,  p.  508.

'^  Extirpation  of  a  scirrhous  tumor,  the  patient  being  in  the
Mesmeric  state,  and  evincing  no  sensibility  whatever  during
the  operation.  By  L.  A.  Dugas,  M.  D.,  Professor  of
Physiology,  ^c,  in  the  Medical  College  of  Georgia.

"  Mrs.  Clarke,  the  lady  whose  mamma  I  removed  in  January
last,  enjoyed  for  several  months  afterwards  an  unusual  degree
of  health.  In  the  month  of  May,  however,  she  began  to
suffer  almost  daily  with  slow  fever,  and  perceived  a  small  in-
duration in  the  adipose  tissue  surrounding  the  region  formerly
occupied  by  the  breast.  This  soon  assumed  the  form  of  a
distinct  tumor,  which  was  increasing  in  size  with  some  rapi-
dity, and  was  becoming  painful,  when,  in  the  early  part  of
June,  I  advised  Mrs.  C.  to  have  it  extirpated.  To  this  pro-
posal she  readily  consented,  remarking  veiy  philosophically,
that  she  would  rather  have  such  a  tumor  removed  every  six
months,  than  permit  it  to  remain  and  grow  on  her.  There
was  no  evidence  of  disease  in  the  axilla.

"  I  now  requested  Mr.  Kenrick  to  ascertain  whether  he
could  still  mesmerise  her,  and,  if  she  were  susceptible,  to

*  Genesis  ii.


communicaied  by  Dr.  Elliotson.  5

repeat  the  operation  a  few  days,  so  that  we  might  test  her
sensibility  in  that  state.  Mrs.  C.  was  readily  put  into  the
mesmeric  state^  and  found  to  be  entirely  insensible  during
its  continuance.  Deeming  it  unnecessary  to  repeat  the  tests^
I  determined  to  operate  on  the  13th  June,  several  days  sooner
than  was  expected  by  either  herself  or  her  friends.  The  ope-
ration was  performed  in  presence  of  Professors  L.  D.  Ford  and
Jos.  A.  EvCi  Drs.  L.  Kennon  and  J.  F.  Hammond,  the  Bev.
Mr.  Alfred  Ford  and  Mr.  F.  J.  Martin.  The  patient  was
mesmerized  at  9  o'clock,  a.m.,  and  the  extirpation  efifected
at  about  10  o'clock,  hy  making  a  semilunar  incision  along  a
portion  of  the  circumference  of  the  tumor,  turning  over  a
flap,  and  dissecting  away  the  indurated  mass  and  surrounding
tissues,  making  up  the  volume  of  a  hen's  egg.

"  During  the  operation,  Mr.  Kenrick,  being  blind-folded  to
avoid  the  unpleasant  spectacle,  sat  by  the  patient,  with  her
hands  in  his.  Mr.  K.  avers  that  Mrs.  C.  evinced  no  uneasi-
ness by  grasping  his  hands,  that  her  fingers  did  not  ttvitch,  and
in  short,  that  her  hands  remained  perfectly  passive.  Prof.
Ford,  whom  I  had  requested  to  note  the  pulse  and  respiratory
act  particularly,  informs  me  that  there  was  no  appreciable
change  in  their  character  and  frequency  before,  during,  and
after  the  operation.  The  countenance  of  the  patient  and  the
hue  of  her  cheeks  presented  no  change  whatever,  nor  was
there  the  least  indication  of  sensibility  detected  during  or
subsequently  to  the  operation,  by  those  who  were  present  and
anxiously  watching  the  result.  There  was  neither  twitching
of  the  pectoral  muscle  when  touched  with  the  sponge,  nor
tremor  of  the  lower  jaw.  Indeed  the  patient  slept  on  as  quietly
as  an  undisturbed  ivfarU,  through  the  entire  operation.

**  The  wound  was  left  open  about  half  an  hour,  a  small  ves-
sel ligated  and  the  ordinary  dressing  applied.  The  patient
was  permitted  to  sleep  on,  and  awoke  spontaneously  at  a  quar-
ter-past 1  o'clock,  p.m.,  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Ford,  the
Rev.  Mr.  Ford,  Mr.  Kenrick  and  myself.  Dr.  Kennon
arrived  a  moment  afterwards.  She  appeared  entirely  uncon-
scious of  what  had  been  done,  and  was  much  surprised  as
well  as  gratified,  on  being  informed  that  the  operation  was
over.  She  stated  that  she  had  not  suspected  our  design,  and
had  no  recollection  of  having  experienced  the  least  uneasiness
during  her  nap.

"  I  will  add  on  this  occasion,  as  I  did  on  reporting  the  for-
mer case,  that  the  above  statement  has  been  submitted  to  all
the  professional  gentlemen  present,  and  that  they  fully  con-
cur in  its  accuracy.  This  is  perhaps  the  only  instance  on
record  in  which  a  serious  and  painful  operation  has  been  twice


6  Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

peiformed  on  the  same  individual  in  the  mesmeric  state^  a
circumstance  that  may  lend  it  additional  interest  with  those
who  are  disposed  to  collect  facts  on  an  interesting  subject*
"  Augusta,  1st  July,  1845/'

The  following  private  letter  was  written  to  a  gentleman
in  London,  who  was  anxious  to  have  the  characters  of  the
parties.

"  Mayor's  Office,  City  of  Augusta,  Georgia,  U.  S.  A.

'' December  26,  1845.
"  Dear  Sir, — ^Your  favour  of  the  29th  November  is  before
me.  I  have  great  pleasure  in  replying,  to  say  the  Dr.  Dugas,
the  operator  in  the  case  you  allude  to,  is  a  gentleman  of  the
very  highest  character,  both  as  a  man  and  a  physician ;  and
that  the  most  entire  confidence  may  be  placed  in  his  state-
ments, being  not  exaggerated  in  the  slightest  degree.

''The  professors  mentioned  as  present  during  the  first
operation  are  professors  in  the  Medical  College  of  G^rgia^
located  here. — ^An  institution  of  the  highest  respectability.

''  The  Bev.  Mr.  Ford,  mentioned  as  present  during  the
second  operation,  is  a  clergyman  of  the  episcopal  church,  who
would  not  have  sanctioned  any  representation  which  was  not
strictly  true.

"  I  have  pleasure  in  sending  you  two  numbers  of  the  Souths
em  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal, — a  journal  issued  by  the
faculty  of  the  college,  containing  these  two  cases,  and  am
gratified  to  perceive  that  they  contain  besides  these,  articles
from  Professors  Means  and  Ford,  by  which  you  may  be  able
to  judge  of  their  professional  character.

"  I  have  requested  Dr.  Dugas  to  furnish  me  a  short  state-
ment of  a  third  operation,  still  more  wonderful,  performed
recently  upon  the  same  patient,  which  if  I  receive  in  time  I
will  inclose;  and  if  not,  I  will  send  the  number  of  the  journal
that  may  hereafter  contain  it,  to  your  address.

"  I  have  neglected  to  say  that  the  professors  and  other  gen-
tlemen present  are  men  of  the  highest  character.

''  M.  M.  Dye,  Mayor,  C.  A.
"  To  Robert  H.  Gould,
^'  26,  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,
"  London.^'

"  State  of  Georgia,  U.S.A.  >
City  of  Augusta.  )

"  I,  W.  MUo  Olin,  Clerk  of  the  City  Council
of  the  City  of  Augusta,  truly  certify  that  the  Hon.  M.


cammumcated  by  Dr.  ElUotson.  7

M.  Dye,  whose  name  is  affixed  to  the  forgoing  commu-
nication, is  the  Mayor  of  the  City  of  Augusta,  and  that
said  signature  is  genuine.

^'Intestimony'whereof,  I  have  signed  my  name,
and  affixed  the  Corporate  Seal  of  said  City,  this  26th
day  of  December,  1845.

"W.  MiloOlin.
Clerk  of  the  City  Council,

City  of  Augusta,  Georgia.
[Seal  of  the  City  Council,  j4ugu8ta.Y


Unhappily  the  disease  returned  a  second  time,  and  the
foUowing  private  account  of  the  third  operation  was  received
early  enough  for  transmission  to  Mr.  Gould  with  the  preced-
ing letter  by  the  Honourable  the  Mayor  of  Augusta.

''To  his  Honor  Martin  M.  Dye,  Mayor  of  the  City  of  Augusta.

**  Dear  Sir, — In  compliance  with  your  desire,  I  furnish  you
a  brief  statement  of  the  third  and  last  operation  performed  on
Mrs.  Clarke,  whilst  under  the  mesmeric  influence.  A  more
detailed  account  of  it  will  be  inserted  probably  in  the  next
number  of  the  Southern  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  a
copy  of  which  I  will  cheerfully  present  you.

''The  subject  of  these  remarks  is  one  whose  name  has  already
been  twice  before  the  public.  About  the  middle  of  November
last,  Mrs.  Clarke  came  to  the  city,  and  I  found  that  she  was
suffering  considerable  annoyance  from  pain  in  the  right
mammary  region,  which  sometimes  darted  towards  the  arm-

Eit  of  the  same  side ;  that  there  were  two  indurated  lumps  to
e  felt  beneath  the  skin  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  cicatrix
resulting  firom  the  last  operation,  and  that  one  of  the  axillary
glands  was  considerably  enlarged.  Her  general  health  not
as  good  as  usual ;  irregular  febrile  paroxysms  occurring  fre-
quently, especially  at  night;  very  low-spirited  and  apprehensive
that  another  operation  would  certainly  prove  fatal,  particularly
if  the  arm-pit  had  to  be  attacked.

''  Perceiving,  however,  that  the  removal  of  the  tumors  was
all  that  could  be  done  with  the  slightest  possibility  of  averting
their  rapid  development,  she  consented  to  have  those  removed
from  the  mammary  region  first,  and,  after  the  wound  had
healed,  she  would  submit  to  the  more  formidable  operation
on  the  axilla,  if  she  bore  the  first  without  pain.  With  this
understanding,  she  was  daily  mesmerised  by  Mr.  Kenrick
with  as  much  facility  as  heretofore.  Whilst  in  this  state  I
tested  her  sensibility  and  became  satisfied  that  she  would
not  feel  the  operation. I  then  determined  to  operate  on  the


8  AccounU  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

19th  day  of  NoYember^  to  remove  the  mammary  tumors  first,
and  if  she  proved  to  be  insensible,  to  go  on  immediately  to
the  extirpation  of  the  axillary  gland.  This  determination
was  carefully  concealed  £rom  the  patient  and  her  friends.

"  On  the  appointed  day,  Mrs.  C.  was  mesmerised  at  about
half-past  9  o^clock,  a.m.,  and  the  operation  commenced  at
about  half-past  10.  Mr.  Kenrick,  still  preferring  to  be  blind-
folded, lest  he  might  be  affected,  a  handkerchief  was  placed
over  his  eyes,  and  he  held  the  hands  of  the  patient  in  his
own  during  the  operation.  The  two  tumors  on  the  chest
were  included  between  two  elliptic  incisions,  each  about  three
inches  long,  and  dissected  out.  It  was  then  perceived  that
some  of  the  adjacent  tissue  had  a  bad  appearance,  and  this
was  removed  along  with  another  small  portion  of  skin.

''No  evidence  of  sensibility  having  been  evinced,  I  an-
nounced my  intention  to  proceed  to  the  axilla,  and  did  so
after  some  delay  in  arresting  the  bleeding  of  the  wound  just
made.  An  incision  about  four  inches  long  was  made  through
the  skin  and  subcutaneous  cellular  tissue  of  the  axilla,  and
the  tumor  gradually  detached  by  lacerating  the  surrounding
tissues  with  an  ordinary  grooved  director.  The  nervous  fila-
merUSy  so  numerous  in  this  region,  were  broken  either  with  a  di-
rector or  with  forceps  in  such  a  manner  as  purposely  to  pro^
duce  the  greatest  possible  pain.  The  tumor  was  globular,
about  an  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter,  and  much  softer  than
the  normal  tissue  of  these  glands.  It  was  very  easilv  torn
by  the  hooks  used  in  elevating  it,  which,  together  with  the
great  depth  of  its  position,  the  use  of  blunt  instead  of  cut-
ting instruments,  and  the  conviction  on  the  part  of  the
surgeon  that  as  he  gave  his  patient  no  pain  haste  was  unne-
cessary, all  combined  to  consume  much  more  time  than  is
usually  required  for  such  operations.  About  an  hour  elapsed
from  the  commencement  of  the  first  extirpation  to  the  ter-
mination of  the  last.  The  wounds  were  allowed  to  remain
open  about  an  hour  more  and  then  dressed  with  adhesive
strips.  The  patient^s  dress  was  then  adjusted,  and  she  was
permitted  to  sleep  until  half-past  2  o'clock,  p.m.,  when  her
mesmeriser  aroused  her  by  an  effort  of  volition,  without
word  or  contact.

**  During  the  whole  time  the  patient  remained  perfectly
quiet,  and  gave  no  indication  whatever  of  sensibility  nor  of
muscular  contraction.  Lying  in  the  horizontal  position,
her  right  arm  was  raised  and  placed  over  the  head  and  re-
mained so  during  the  entire  operation,  no  other  person  touch-
ing her  but  the  mesmeriser  and  surgeon.  There  were  pre-
sent Professors  Ford  and  Means, of  the  Med.  College  of


eommumeaied  by  Dr.  EUiotmm.y  9

Greorgia ;  Docton  J.  Carter^  J.  A.  Hammond,  H.  F.  Camp-
bell, W.  H.  Tutt,  E.  Barry,  Hitchcock  (of  the  U.  S.  Army) ;
and  Messrs.  Wright  (Judge  of  the  Superior  Court  of  Georgia),
J.  Harris,  jun.,  and  L.  C.  Dugas,  Esq.,  also  Dr.  Wilson.

"  I  am,  very  respectfully,

'*  Your  obedient  Servant,

'^L.  A.  DuoAS,  M.D.,

Prqf.  Pk^tioi.  and  Path.  Amai.  m  the
Med.  Col.  qf  Otorgia.

"Augusta,  Georgia,  26th  December,  1846.''

For  these  accounts  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Gould,  late
of  the  United  States'  Legation,  from  whom  they  were  kindly
brought  to  me  by  Dr.  Brabant,  of  Devizes.

I  shall  be  pardoned  for  expressing  my  extreme  regret  that
mesmerism  was  not  daily  employed  after  each  operation  by
these  enlightened  eentlemen  to  prevent  or  retard  the  return
of  the  disease.  The  surgical  removal  of  cancer  of  the  breast
or  uterus  very  rarely  prevents  a  return  of  the  disease.  Sur-
geons sometimes  operate  upon  those  parts  when  there  is  no
cancer,  and  then  Doast  of  the  permanent  success  of  their
operation.  I  have  known  very  many  examples  of  this ;  and
I  have  known  operations  proposed,  have  prevented  them,  and
cured  the  disease  by  hydriodate  of  potass,  employed  externally
and  internally,  being  satisfied  it  was  not  cancerous.  A  lady
at  Leicester,  where  the  medical  men  have  witnessed  such  re-
sults of  mesmerism  that  it  is  a  very  great  disgrace  to  them,
as  mere  men,  not  as  professedly  scientific  and  medical  men,
not  to  employ  it  extensively  instead  of  being  contented  with
making  their  daily  rounds  to  write  for  only  draughts,  lotions,
ointments,  &c.,  well  remembers  that  some  years  ago  a  great
city  operator  of  one  of  the  borough  hospitals  assured  her  that
her  safety  required  her  breast  to  be  cut  away  within  a  very
few  days,  and  that  I  assured  her  she  had  no  cancer  at  all,
and  cured  her  to  this  hour  by  one  prescription  for  hy-
driodate of  potass,  internally  and  externally.  Mild  diseases
are  sometimes  pronounced  dangerous,  and  mild  and  curable
diseases  called  by  the  names  of  severe  and  incurable  ones,
and  a  cure  is  afterwards  declared  to  have  been  effected  ;  and
this  is  the  habitual  rascality  of  professed  quacks.  We  have
no  remedy  for  cancer.  But  I  am  treating  an  instance  of  it
in  the  breast  with  astonishing  advantage  by  mesmerism.  A
single  person,  nearly  forty  years  old,  had  a  genuine  scirrhous
tumor  of  the  right  breast.  It  was  of  stony  hardness,  and  the
seat  of  severe  stabbing  pains  which  prevented  her  from  sleep-


10 AccounU  of  more  pmnless  Sutgicdl  Operations,

ing  except  by  snatches,  and  for  more  than  five  hours  altogether
in  the  night,  and  the  pain  went  as  low  as  the  elbow :  the  nipple
was  drawn  in,  and  the  surrounding  surface  puckered.  Her  frame
was  grown  very  feeble,  her  flesh  wasted,  her  appetite  im-

! paired,  and  her  pulse  was  quick  and  weak, — like  the  American
ady,  ''  she  began  to  suffer  almost  daily  with  slow  fever."  I
began  in  March,  1843,  to  mesmerise  her  with  the  view  of  en-
abling her  to  so  through  the  extirpation  of  her  breast  without
suffenng.  Aner  mesmerising  her  daUy  ha^f  an  hour  for  a
month,  sleep  was  induced :  but  for  six  months  the  sleep  did
not  increase,  and  the  faintest  word  spoken  to  her  always
woke  her  up,  and  she  felt  pinching  and  was  awakened  by  it.
In  September  I  left  town  for  a  continental  holiday  of  six
weeks.  The  family  general  practitioner,  Mr.  Powel,  of  Coram
Street,  who  had  nothing  to  do  with  her  case,  and,  notwith-
standing he  had  witnessed  the  facts  at  University  College
Hospital,  followed  the  worthy  doctors  and  surgeons  of  the
place  in  considering  mesmerism  all  a  humbug,  though  he  is
now  converted,  assured  her  in  my  absence  that,  if  the  breast
was  not  removed  immediately,  it  would  be  as  bie  as  his  hat
before  Christmas  and  she  would  then  soon  die.  lie  took  her
to  Mr.  Samuel  Cooper,  Professor  of  Surgery  at  University
College,  who  thought  the  operation  might  be  deferred  till  my
return,  but  could  not  with  safety  be  deferred  any  longer.  She
wisely  and  honestly  disregarded  what  they  said,  considering
herself  under  the  care  of  me  alone.  I  had  left  her  in  charge
of  a  person  to  be  mesmerised  for  me ;  but,  on  my  return,
found  she  had  retrograded  in  her  health  and  sufferings.  How-
ever, I  myself  took  her  in  hand  again,  and  in  a  few  weeks
by  my  again  devoting  half  an  hour  daily  to  her  she  presently
improved  in  all  respects ;  and,  in  about  eight  months  from
the  time  I  first  took  her  in  hand,  went  into  sleep-waking,
answering  questions  in  a  whisper  without  waking,  and  bear-
ing any  pinching  or  pricking  without  notice.  In  March
(1844)  she  had  a  severe  pleurisy  on  the  same  side  as  the
cancer.  I  had  her  bled  in  the  mesmeric  state  without  her
knowledge,  and  she  bore  eflicient  blisters  without  the  slightp>
est  sensation ;  for,  as  any  one  could  send  her  to  sleep  by
a  few  passes,  she  was  kept  asleep  nearly  all  day  and  night  by
her  family  mesmerising  her  whenever  she  had  been  awoke
spontaneously  for  a  very  short  time ;  and  had  abundance  of
the  sweetest  repose  without  any  narcotic,  and  only  four
doses  of  medicine  were  taken.*  I  was  not  then  aware  of  the
power  of  local  mesmerism  over  inflammation,  and  therefore
did  not  employ  it. Her  recovery  was  rapid,  and  the  renewal

*  See  this  little  history  in  The  ZoUt,  Vol.  II.,  p.  91 ;  April,  1844.


afhnnumcated  by  Dr.  ElUotson.  11

of  her  previous  health  after  the  illness  astonished  her ;  for  she
had  long  been  subject  to  inflammatory  attacks  in  the  air  pas-
sages and  had  always  taken  loads  of  medicine  and  been  very
slow  in  recruiting.  I  wonder  whether  if  poor  Mad.  Plantin,
who  died  of  pleurisy  some  time  after  the  painless  removal  of
her  breast  by  M.  Cloquet  in  Paris,*  had  been  well  mesmerised
day  and  night  she  would  not  have  recovered.  I  dare  say
that  she  would.  For  the  power  of  mesmerism,  general  and
local,  over  inflammation,  is  great ;  and  both  should  be  em-
ployed in  every  case,  though  not  to  the  omission  of  esta-
olished  means.  In  the  venesection  some  blood  had  passed
below  the  skin  of  my  patient  and  given  a  bruised  appearance,
to  remove  which  I  begged  them  to  rub  her  arm  gently  down-
wards. This  little  process,  performed  by  her  sister-in-law  with
that  view,  to  their  surprise  made  her  arm  rigid,  and  it  was
found  that  she  could  be  thus  made  rigid  all  over.  There  was
no  exertion  of  will  on  the  part  of  her  sister-in-law,  or  of  ima-
gination on  her  own  part,  to  produce  this  effect:  it  was
purely  mesmeric.  She  continued  steadily  to  improve  in  health,
the  tumor  became  nearly  free  from  pain,  if  not  softer  and
smaller,  till  I  left  town  in  this  autumn  also.  A  medical
friend  kindly  mesmerised  her  and  two  others  for  me.  But  on
my  return  to  England,  I  found  her  less  strong,  the  pain  had
increased,  and  the  tumor  was  larger  and  grown  to  the  ribs.  I
presumed  that  she  required  much  more  daily  mesmerism,  and
therefore  arranged  that  she  should  come  to  me  every  morning
at  ten,  as  I  could  now  send  her  off*  by  one  pass  or  even  a  steady
look  for  a  few  seconds,  and  should  sleep  till  I  left  home  at
one  or  two  o'clock :  and  that,  on  retiring  to  bed,  her  family
should  send  her  into  mesmeric  sleep,  and  also  make  slow
passes  with  contact  upon  her  bosom.  The  effect  of  this  abun-
dant mesmerism  was  soon  apparent.  She  is  now  heartier
than  she  had  been  for  twelve  years — ever  since  the  fatal  in-
fluenza of  1834,  from  which  she  suffered  and  from  the  de«
bility  of  which  she  had  never  recovered.  She  has  regained
her  appetite  and  flesh  and  healthy  looks,  walks  some  miles
vigorously  every  day,  has  no  pain,  and  sleeps  eight  or  ten
hours  uninterruptedly  every  night, — the  mesmeric  sleep  pro-
duced on  going  to  bed  expending  itself  after  two  or  tnree
hours  and  passing  into  undisturbed  ordinary  sleep,  as  is
shewn  by  her  remembering  in  the  mesmeric  state  the  next
mominff  at  my  house  everything  for  the  first  few  hours  she
was  in  bed,  but,  in  the  waking  state,  nothing  of  these  first
few  hours.  The  same  happens  with  my  epileptic  patient,  Mary

*  See  my  Bame  Pamphlet,  p.  78.


12 Accounts  of  morepainleBS  Surgical  Operations,

Ann,  so  often  spoken  of  in  previous  numbers.*  Her  disease
being  very  obstinate,  she  is  now  kept  in  the  mesmeric  state
at  my  house  as  regularly  and  as  long  as  the  cancerous  patient,
and  sent  to  sleep  by  her  father  on  going  to  bed.  I  am  sure
that  mesmerism  often  fails  because  patients  are  not  suffi-
ciently subjected  to  the  process ;  or,  when  capable  of  being
sent  into  the  mesmeric  sleep,  are  not  in  it  sufficiently  long.
Some  cures  may  require  that  patients  should  be  in  it  the
greater  part  of  every  day  and  nigiit.

II.  At  Cherbourg,  where  was  performed  the  painless  am-

Eutation  of  Miss  D  Albanel's  le^,  recorded  in  the  last  num-
er  of  The  Zoist,  another  but  mmor  operation  has  been  per-
formed,  and  recorded  in  the  Phare  de  la  Manche,

Before  I  extract  the  account,  I  must  mention  that,  as  the
Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  had  no  record  of  the  cele-
brated Nottinghamshire  case  which  was  read  to  them,  havinc
deprived  themselves  of  the  record  in  a  fit  of  philosophy,  I
the  other  day  directed  to  the  society  a  printed  copy  of  the
original  French  history  of  the  case  of  amputation,  with  a
note  to  the  president,  who  is  at  present  Dr.  Chambers,  beg-
ging leave  to  present  it,  and  presuming  that  it  would  be  inte-
resting to  the  society  from  being  a  complete  parallel  to  the
case  by  Mr.  Topham  and  Mr.  Ward,  read  to  them  three  years
ago.  Dr.  Ashburner,  who  is  a  Fellow  of  the  society,  was  so
obliging  as  to  offer  to  convey  the  account  and  the  note.  He
presented  them  at  the  meeting  to  the  chairman  of  the  even-
ing,— to  Dr.  George  Gregory,  as  it  happened,  whose  wise  re-
marks in  a  late  lecture  at  St.  Thomas  s  Hospital  I  employed
as  a  motto  in  the  last  number  (p.  612).  Dr.  Ashburner  after-
wards wrote  to  me,  "  You  would  have  laughed  at  the  ugly
sneer  that  was  made  as  it  was  handed  to  the  secretary  by  the
president."  It  is  the  usage  of  this  society,  as  of  all  others,
to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  every  present  with  thanks.
But  I  received  no  thanks,  and  an  acknowledgment  only,  and
that  not  of  the  printed  account,  of  my  note.

"  53,  BernerB  Street,  Feb.  13,  1846.
**  Sir, — I  am  directed  by  the  presideDt  aod  coaocil  of  the  Royal  Medical
and  Chirurgical  Society  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  27th
January.  "  I  am,  Sir,

'*  Your  obedient  Servant,
**  John  EUiotBon,  M.D.,  &c.  &c.  **  Oborob  Cursham,  Hon.  Sec."

I  then  wrote  back  that  the  note  merely  accompanied  a
pamphlet,  and  I  trusted  this  had  been  received.  The  secretary
replied  that  he  thought  acknowledging  the  note  was  acknow-
ledging the  pamphlet,  as  both  were  in  one  envelope! — as

•  Zoi$t,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  216,  217  ;  Vol.  III.,  pp.  52, 68,  322,  361,  374,  465.


commnmicaied  by  Dr.  EllioUon.  18

though  when  we  receive  a  box  of  game  and  a  note  in  it,  we
acknowledge  the  note  but  say  not  a  word  of  the  game.  Was
anything  ever  more  farcical  than  this  ?  I  had  been  told  by  a
physician  that  I  was  wrong  in  resigning,  for  that  I  could  in
time  have  prevailed  upon  the  society  to  investigate  mesmerism.
My  reply  was,  that  mesmerism  would  be  well  investigated
without  them,  and  I  was  sure  they  would  not  attend  to  it
till  completely  shamed.  I  took  the  present  step  to  test  them ;
really  for  a  bit  of  fun ;  satisfied  that  they  would  behave  ab«
surdly :  and  they  did  to  my  heart's  content,  proving  that  I
was  right  in  my  opinion  of  them,  and  that  at  the  end  of  all
this  time  they  have  the  same  disgraceful  hostility  to  mesmerism
as  ever.  The  cause,  however,  of  my  resignation  was  not  their
hostility  to  the  truths  of  mesmerism,  but  tne  immoral  character
of  the  hostility,  as  appears  in  the  62nd  page  of  my  pamphlet.*
Will  it  be  believed  that  not  only  does  this  society,  like  all
others,  return  thanks  for  any  printed  present  to  the  library,
however  small, — I  use  the  wonis  of  a  gentleman  who  was
long  secretary  to  the  society, — but  has  the  following  printed
form  for  the  purpose  :-—

**  Royal  Medical  and  Chinirgical  Society,  63,  Beroers  Street.
"  Sir, — We  are  directed  by  tlie  Royal  Medical  and  Chirargical  Society

to  retarn  you  their  thamk»  for  your  ftretent  of  — ^—

which  has  beea  received  and  deposited  in  the  Society* $  Library,

**  We  have  the  honor  to  be.  Sir,

**  Your  obedient  tervanta,

"  To  Idifrmriane."

As  the  society  would  not  allow  it  to  remain  on  their
minutes  that  they  had  passed  the  customary  vote  of  thanks
for  the  Nottinghamshire  case  of  amputation,  or  even  had  it
read  at  their  meeting,  so  they  would  not  allow  it  to  be  said
that  they  had  returned  thanks  for,  or  even  received,  the  French
case,  or  had  ^*  deposited  it  in  the  society's  library."  They
avoided  till  mention  of  it.  Two  Fellows  asked  for  it  six  weeks

*  Aa  the  antimesmeric  doings  of  the  society  recorded  in  my  pamphlet
and  those  which  I  now  record  will  form  a  striking  point  in  the  history  of
medicine,  1  give  the  list  of  the  ooancil  of  the  society  who  directed  the
secretary  to  merely  acknowledge  my  letter.

Dr.  Chambers  (President),  F.R.S.
Dr.  N.  Amott,  F.R.S.  Mr.  T.  B.  Curling,

R.  G.  Babington,  F.R.S.  R.  Dunn,

W.  Baly,  Ceetar  Hawkine,

T.  A.  Barker,  A.  Nasmyth,

G.  Barroiet,  J,  G.  Perry ^

O.  Cursham,  B.  Phillips,  F.R.S.

J.  Pareira,  F.R.S.  S.  Solly,  F.R.S.

H,  S,  Roote,  E.  Stanley,  F.R.S.

R.  B.  Todd,  F.R.S.  M.  Ware.

T.  Watson,  R.  Welbank,

Those  in  italics  figured  on  the  former  occasion.


14 Accounts  iff  marepainleis  Surgical  Operaiions,

after  I  had  presented  it,  but  the  aBsistant-librarian,  who  de-
livers books,  had  never  seen  it  and  could  tell  nothing  about  it !
I  need  not  say,  except  to  the  enemies  of  mesmerism,  that  I
desired  no  thanks  for  the  piece  of  paper,  but  sent  it  to  test
the  society's  feelings.

To  the  Editor  of  the  Phare  de  la  Manche.

**  Mr.  Editor. — You,  not  long  since,  informed  your  readers
of  an  operation  rendered  remarkably  successful  by  means  of
mesmenc  sleep ;  another,  not  less  interesting,  has  now  been
performed.  As  many  persons  have  expressed  to  me  their
desire  of  knowin?  all  its  details,  I  do  myself  the  pleasure  of
communicating  them  to  you.

''Miss  A.Ij«,  26  years  of  age,  born  at  St.  Sauveur-Ie-
Vicomte,  came  to  Cherbourg  to  be  treated  for  a  retraction  of
her  fingers.  Seven  weeks  previously  she  had  twisted  her
foot  in  a  fall,  while  her  foot  had  to  support  her  whole  weight.
Notwithstanding  the  usual  means,  her  foot  was  very  large ;
she  had  acute  pain,  and  her  nights  were  very  restless.

"  Before  all  this  happened,  she  had  frequently  been  thrown
into  the  mesmeric  sleep.  With  the  view  of  lessening  her
sufferings,  I  employed  that  valuable  resource.  In  a  short
time,  the  size  of  the  foot  lessened^  the  pain  was  mitigated,  and
she  passed  her  nights  in  rrfreshing  sleep.  At  the  very  first
mesmerisation  I  produced  perfect  insensibility.

''  Many  days  afterwards,  owing  to  an  unfortunate  pre-
disposition, the  foot  became  contorted,  the  sole  directed  in-
wards, the  internal  edge  hollowed,  and  the  point  turned
towards  the  heel.  No  time  was  to  be  lost  in  remedying  this
increasing  deformity.  T\oo  operations  were  performed  m  the
waking  state,  and  the  patient  declared  that  the  pain  of  them
was  extreme.

''  After  some  time  the  point  of  the  foot  lowered,  the  heel
rose,  and  any  degree'  of  flexion  was  impossible.  A  third
operation,  much  more  painful  than  the  two  former  ones,  was
necessary  and  without  delay.  On  this  occasion,  in  order  to
prevent  all  suffering  and  spare  the  patient  useless  terror,  we
decided  upon  her  being  mesmerised.  The  operation  was  fixed
for  Wednesday,  the  10th  of  December,  1845,  at  five  o'clock
in  the  afternoon.

"  At  the  appointed  day  and  hour.  Miss  A.  L.  was  mes-
merised to  sleep,  not  having  been  apprized  of  our  further  in-
tentions: the  msensibilitv  was  then  examined  in  various
ways,  and,  after  it  was  tound  to  be  complete,  the  operator
proceeded  to  cut  through  the  tendon  of  Achilles. An  open-


eommnmeated  by  Dr.  EtUotion.  16

ing  was  made  in  the  skin,  about  four  centimetres  above  the
heel  and  at  the  inner  and  back  part  of  the  lee.

**  When  the  instrument  had  passed  throuen  the  flesh,  the
patient  b^an  making  a  dull  humming  sound.  Immediately
many  of  the  bystanders^  who  did  not  know  that  she  habitu-
ally sang  in  her  sleep-waking,  fancied  that  this  was  an  ex-
pression of  pain :  but  gradusdly  her  voice  became  clearer,
and  the  dullness  of  the  first  sounds  was  replaced  by  thrilling
and  loud  singing.

"  The  operator  stopped  for  an  instant,  and  then  passed
the  cutting  instrument  on  between  the  skin  and  the  tendon  in
order  to  cut  it

''  During  this  second  period  her  voice  became  more  dis-
tinct, the  measure  was  better  observed,  each  modulation
seemed  performed  with  more  skill.  One  would  have  said  that
the  patient  was  becoming  animated  by  her  singine,  and
pleased  with  listening  to  herself,  especially  during  the  follow*
mg  words, —

'  A  mes  malhenn  yenez  mettre  an  terme,
SaoTez,  Seigoevr/  &c.

''  A  sudden  rebound,  occasioned  by  the  section  of  the  ten-
don, interrupted  her  singing  all  at  once.  As  if  she  were  aware
that  the  operation  was  over,  she  exclaimed,  '  Thanks,  gentle-
men,  thanks,  for  the  good  you  have  done  me.  ...Oh  that  I  could
tell  you  on  my  knees  that  I  shall  never  forget  your  kindness  /'

'^TYi^ pulse,  noticed  before  and  after  the  operation,  under-
went no  change  of  frequency ;  respiration  was  continued  so
calmly  that  the  movements  ot  the  chest  were  scarcely  percep-
tible. A  moment  afterwards  the  foot  was  restored  to  its  na-
tural position,  and  kept  in  it  by  a  suitable  apparatus.

**  Five  minutes  after  the  dressing,  she  was  asked  if  she
wished  to  be  waked,  and  replied,  *  I  am  too  constable  for
that :  let  me  sleep  on*

**  On  waking  she  had  no  knowledge  of  what  had  passed ;
she  smiled  to  her  surgeon,  and  found  from  the  large  number
of  persons  around  her  that  the  operation  must  have  been  per^^
formed.  Being  told  that  it  was  not,  she  was  greatly  dis-
tressed, and  earnestly  begged  that  it  might  be.  One  of  the
bystanders  then  informed  her  that  all  was  over.  On  hearing
this  she  was  overjoyed,  and  gave  way  to  her  natural  cheer-
fulness. She  only  regretted  one  thing — not  having  been  mes-
merised during  the  two  previous  operations.

**  The  next  day,  being  curious  to  see  the  wound,  she  was
not  mesmerised  before  tne  dressing,  and  therefore  suffered
sev^e  pain  both  during  the  whole  of  it  and  afterwards.  On
every  following  day  she  was  mesmerised,  and  so  had  no  pain.


16 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

**  She  suffered  between  every  dressing ;  and,  when  tlie
pain  acquired  a  certain  intensity,  she  was  mesmerised  and  had
no  pain,  even  for  a  long  while  after  she  was  awakened  again.

**  Nothing  unfavourable  occurred  after  the  operatioUi  and
the  parts  will  soon  be  healed.  '

**  This  operation  was  performed  in  the  presence  of  eight
witnesses  (five  of  them  medical),  several  ot  whom  had  never
before  seen  the  phenomena  of  mesmeric  insensibility.  All
left  perfectly  satisfied  of  the  advantage  of  mesmerism  in  sur-
gical operations.

**  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  &c.y
"  Cherbourg,  Dec.  18,  1846.  "  A.  Dblbntb."*

What  will  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  say  to  this  ?  Against  the
amputation  performed  in  Nottinghamshire  he  childishly  urged
that  the  patient  might  have  been  by  nature  insusceptible  of
paiuyf  in  the  face  of  the  fact  that  the  poor  man  had  suffered
excruciating  agony  up  to  the  moment  of  the  operation.^:  The
French  young  lady  also  suffered  "  acute  pain,"  causing  *'  very
restless  nights/'  and  had  undergone  two  operations  on  her
foot  already  with  '^  excessive  pain."  Others  as  foolishly  and
untruly  declared  that  the  man  had  been  trained,^  and  one  said
trained  in  order  to  become  a  great  mesmeric  card.  The  young
lady  had  been  so  trained  that  the  second  operation  in  her
waking  state  agonized  her  no  less  than  the  first,  and  admir-
ably prepared  her  for  the  " much  more  painful  third**  The
dressing  on  the  day  after  the  operation,  being  done  in  her
waking  state,  caused  her  exquisite  suffering.  The  mesmerism
practised  before  any  of  the  operations  had,  as  in  the  Not-
tinghamshire patientjl  and  Mdlle.  D'Albanel,  whose  case  is
recorded  in  the  last  number,  most  beneficial  effects.  ''  In  a
short  time  the  size  of  the  foot  lessened,  the  pain  was  miti-
gated, and  she  passed  her  nights  in  refreshing  sleep."  But
Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  cunningly  passed  all  this  over  in  his
anxiety  to  prove  that  mesmerism  did  nothing  and  that  the
Nottinghamshire  man  was  an  impostor,ir  and  so  did  every
one  else.**

Can  a  man  be  worthy  of  the  name  and  not  feel  deeply
on  reading  this  history  also  ? Will  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  and

*  The  Director  of  the  MUitary  Hospital  at  Cherbourg,  who  sanctioned
the  operation  on  Miss  D'Albanel.

t  See  my  pamphlet,  p.  36,  37.  t  P*  7,  14.  §  p.  12, 19.

I  p.  6.  t  p.  36.

**  Mr.  Coulson,  for  instance,  who  afterwards  *'  confessed  to  me  that  he
had  never  seen  a  mesmeric  fact  and  was  quite  ignorant  of  mesmerism/'  told
the  society  that  *'  the  only  poiut  qf  intere$t  was  the  non -expression  of  pain,
and  that  was  a  common  thing,  and  he  had  no  doubt  the  man  had  been  irwined
ioU."  p.  12,  13,  14.


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotaon,  17

the  other  Fellows  of  the  society  still  be  unable  to  disiinffuish
between  fortitude  to  bear  pain  and  insenribiUty  to  U  ?  Neither
he  nor  any  of  them  seemed  ever  to  have  thought  of  the  dif«
ference,  or  of  the  difference  of  the  manifestation  of  the  two,
while,  in  the  absence  of  all  expression  of  fortitude  and  the
presence  of  every  si^n  of  perfect  freedom  from  suffering,  they
Qi^ed  that  the  Nottinghamshire  man  was  only  a  courageous,
and  a  trained  courageous,  fellow,*  common  enough  to  meet
with.  Will  the  society  still  display  their  entire  ignorance  of
the  phenomena  of  sleep-waking,  even  when  not  mduced  by
mesmerism,  but  idiopatnic  or  spontaneous,  and  imagine,  be-
cause this  patient  heard  and  answered  questions  and  sang,
that  she  was  therefore  sensible  to  mechanical  injury  ?  Dr.
George  Burrows,  positively  a  teacher  of  the  practice  of  me-
dicine in  the  large  metropolitan  hospital  of  St.  Bartholomew,
and  who  therefore  ought  to  have  made  himself  acquainted
with  all  the  affections  of  the  nervous  system,  catalepsy,  som-
nambulism, &c.,  doubted  the  reality  of  the  Nottinghamshire
case  because  the  man  honestly  said  that  he  fancied  he  once
hedrd  something  in  his  8leep,t — a  kind  of  crunching,  which
no  doubt  was  the  sawing  of  bis  own  thigh  bone.j:  The  most
ordinary  fact  of  sleep-waking  is  insensibility  to  mechanical
injury  with  no  impairment  of  hearing.§  Withput  sleep-waking,
persons  every  day  have  no  feeling  in  a  palsied  arm  or  leg  and
can  hear  perfectly  well,  and  every  day  deaf  people  can  feel
very  well.  Poor  Mr.  Bransby  Cooper,  positively  the  teacher
of  anatomy,  physiology,  and  surgery,  in  the  large  metropo-
litan hospital  of  Guy,  displayed  the  same  ignorance  as
Dr.  George  Burrows,  and  contended  that  if  the  man  could
not  feel  he  could  not  hear, — "  hearing  and  feeling,'  said  he,
"are  the  same  !"||  If  the  faint  hearing  of  the  crunching
sound  in  the  Nottinghamshire  patient  when  he  could  not  feel
so  puzzled  these  gentlemen,  they  must  be  completely  at  their
wit's  end  on  readmg  that  the  French  young  lady  sang  a  hymn
while  the  operation  was  going  on,  tuning  up  very  gradually
from  a  faint  humming  till  she  was  in  full  song.**

Like  the  other  French  young  lady  whose  leg  was  ampu-
tated,^ this  patient  was  so  bad  a  physiologist,  so  ignorant  of
the  reflex  motions,  that  she  too  omitted  to  move  the  other  leg
while  the  surgeon's  knife  entered  the  diseased.  When  I
think  of  the  folly  of  Dr.  Marshall  Hall,  and  his  followers,

*  Pamphlet,  p.  15,  16,  17,  18.  t  p.  35.  X  P*  10,  11.

§  See  farther  on,  pp.  28,  33.  ||  p.  65.

f  Zoist,  Tol.  III.,  p.  496.

**  While  correcting  this  sheet,  I  see  the  case  noticed  in  the  London  Me-
dical Gazette,  Feb.  20,  p.  351,  and  actually  with  the  following  remarks,  il-
lustrating all  I  have  Jost  said  of  the  ignorance  of  the  profession : — "  Thai

VOL.  IV.  C


18  Accounts  of  morepainkss  Surgical  Operations,

Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  poor  Mr.  Wakley,  Mr.  Toswill,  &c.y
in  assuring  us  that,  when  a  person  can  feel  nothing  and  one
leg  is  wounded,  the  other  and  the  other  only  ought  to  start,
I  can  scarcely  credit  their  absurdity.*

There  is  much  to  be  regretted  in  the  treatment  of  this
case  also  by  these  enlightened  gentlemeui  owing  no  doubt  to
their  not  being  habituated  to  the  employment  of  mesmerism.
When  the  cure  of  Miss  CoUins'sf  foot  and  Miss  Critchley's
fingers,  and  the  other  local  cures,  recorded  in  the  two  last
numbers,  are  remembered,  it  is  impossible  not  to  consider
whether  the  retraction  of  the  French  female's  fingers  might
not  have  been  cured  by  mesmerism,  general  and  local,  se*
dulously  employed ;  especially  as  the  mesmerism  which  was
practised  reduced  the  size  of  the  foot  and  lessened  the  pain.
Her  susceptibility  was  such  that  mesmerism  had  frequently
been  employed  to  lessen  her  suffering,  and  I  should  say  that,
as  she  was  so  readily  sent  to  sleep,  she  ought  to  have  been
kept  asleep  continually,  in  order  to  reduce  her  suffering  to
the  lowest  point :  and  m  this  sleep  abundant  local  mesmerism
would  have  told  even  more  than  m  her  ordinary  state.

The  two  first  operations  ought  not  to  have  been  performed
in  her  ordinary  state  :  they  might  and  should  have  been  per-*
formed  in  her  sleep  and  rendered  painless.  It  is  distressing
to  read  that ''  the  pain  of  them  was  extreme"

The  first  dressing  should  have  been  done  in  her  sleep :  if
it  was  thought  right  to  gratify  her  silly  wish  of  seeing  the
wound,  all  the  dressing  should  have  been  removed  in  her

a  peraon  should  be  able  to  resist  the  expression  of  pain,  daring  the  perform-
ance of  this  or  even  of  a  more  severe  operation,  is  nothing  wonderful ;  but
the  singing  is  a  new  feature  of  the  remarkable  mystery  known  under  the
name  of  animal  magnetism  ;  and  on  the  part  of  a  female,  it  may  be  regarded
as  a  very  delicate  way  of  shewing  gratitude  to  the  operator !  Unfortunately
for  the  credit  of  the  story,  it  rests  upon  the  authority  of  a  notorious  mesmeric
journal." — This,  I  presume,  is  the  Journal  du  Magnitiame,

•  Pamphlet,  p.  19,  &c.,  22,  50.  Zn$t^  vol.  II.,  p.  425.  Mr.  Toswill
says  that  Dr.  M.  Hall  **  withdrew  his  allegiance  to  mesmerism,"  because  tb«
sound  leg  of  the  man  in  Nottinghamshire  did  not  start  while  the  other  was
cutting  off.  Why  Dr.  M.  H.  never  had  an  allegiance  to  mesmerism  to  with-
draw. Mr.  Toswill  ridiculously  considers  him  *'  perhaps  the  greatest  living
authority  on  the  functions  of  the  nervous  system :"  whereas  he  is  no  authority
at  all, — never  made  a  discovery,  is  a  scoffer  at  all  Gall's  discoveries,  and  has
not  written  a  true  opinion  upon  reflex  movements  that  had  not  been  written
before  he  was  born,  and  even  the  word  reflex  had  been  thus  applied  by
Prochaska  in  1784.  He  never  once  mentions  the  name  of  Dr.  Prochaska
or  Sir  Gilbert  Blane  in  his  communication  to  the  Royal  Society  announcing
his  pretended  discoveries,  so  that  I  repeat  what  I  said  in  my  pamphlet,  that
it  is  worth  considering  *'  which  was  the  greater,  Dr.  Hall's  boldness  in  send-
ing the  paper,  or  the  council's  in  printing  it"  His  false  claims  and  prepos-
terous comparisons  of  himself  to  Harvey  may  be  seen  in  my  Pamphlet,
p.  24,  &c.

t  Miss  Collins  writes  that  she  has  just  kept  her  birth-day  in  perfect  healthy
for  the  first  time  these  ten  years.


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson,  19

sleep,  and  then  she  should  have  been  awakened  for  an  instant
to  see  the  wound  and  sent  off  again.  She  ought  to  have  been
continually  mesmerised  at  this  period,  generally  or  locally,
or  both  ways,  and  not  allowed  to  suffer  between  every  dress-
ing. Mesmerisation  should  not  have  always  been  delayed  till
^*  the  pain  had  acquired  a  certain  degree  of  intensity.''  I  am
sure  tiiat  with  more  practice  in  such  cases  the  medical  atten-
dants will  agree  with  me.

I  cannot  proceed  to  the  next  cases  without  directing  the
attention  of  my  readers  to  the  striking  circumstance  that
these  two  French  operations  have  not  been  performed  in
Paris,  but  in  a  distant  province.  In  Paris,  Madame  Plantin's
breast  was  removed  by  M.Jules  Cloquet,  seventeen  years  ago,
and  so  satisfactory  were  the  facts  that  the  French  Academy
of  Medicine  thus  reported  upon  it.  **  The  committee  sees  in
this  case  the  most  evident  proof  of  the  suspension  of  sensi-
bility during  sleep-waking,  and  declares  that,  though  it  did
not  witness  the  case,  they  find  it  so  stamped  tvith  the  cha-
racter of  truths  it  has  been  attested  and  reported  to  them  by
so  good  an  observer  who  bad  communicated  it  to  the  surgical
section,  that  they  do  not  fear  to  present  it  to  vou  as  a  most
unquestionable  proof  of  the  state  of  torpor  and  stupefaction
produced  by  mesmerism."* Yet  amid  the  abundance  of  sur-

fical  operations  performed  there  and  in  the  sreat  cities  of
yons,  Strasburg,  &c.,  daily  ever  since,  not  a  smgle  attempt
that- 1  have  heard  of  has  been  made  to  turn  mesmerism  to  the
same  blessed  account — no  recollection  seems  to  have  existed
of  the  astounding  and  all  important  fact  with  all  their  great
hospitals  and  everlasting  teaching  of  young  men.  Even  M.
Cloquet  the  operator  has  been  totally  lost  to  it :  and  been  ope-
rating for  his  oread  without  bestowing  one  thought  upon  what
he  witnessed  and  was  a  party  to.  Of  a  truth  numan  nature
is  in  manv  particulars  a  most  sorry  nature.  The  total  indif-
ference of  the  medical  profession  to  facts  most  astounding  in
medical  science  and  most  important  in  medical  and  surgical
treatment  of  disease  shows  now  much  of  the  savage  still
remains  in  what  is  incorrectly  considered  civilized  man.  The
stupid  indi£krence  of  nineteen  out  of  twenty  of  the  profession
to  the  profound  character  and  the  mighty  importance  of  the
phenomena  of  mesmerism,  even  when  prevailed  upon  by  me
to  witness  them,  and  their  looking  at  the  phenomena  as
merely  strange,  amusing,  and  funny ,t  if  perchance  they  do

*  Foissac's  Rapperti  et  Discu8sion$y  &c.,  p.  400.  It  is  related  as  per-
fectly geniiioe  in  oar  Penny  Cyclopadia^  article  SamnamlmUsM,

t  A  aorgeoo  io  Leicester  who  makes  Uioasaods  a  year,  witnessed  some
mesmeric  phenomena,  and  all  be  afterwards  said  of  them  was  that  they  were
*•  very  fanny." Zotsf,  toI.  I.,  p.  326.

C  2


20 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

not  regard  them  as  sheer  imposition,  is  precisely  what  occurs
among  savages  who  are  shewn  our  arts  or  a  demonstration  of
our  scientific  discoveries.  Captain  Parry  tells  us  that  among
the  Esquimaux  was  a  woman  of  superior  intellect  called
Iliglinky  who  absolutely  put  all  the  men  to  shame,  as  the
Lady  Mary  does  to  whom  we  owe  the  first  great  surgical
operation,  the  first  amputation,  in  this  country,  and  as  the
Lady  Mary  did  who  forced  inoculation  upon  the  English
doctors  of  the  last  century.

"  Of  all  the  wonders  they  had  ever  witnessed  on  board,  the
welding  of  two  pieces  of  iron  especially  excited  their  admiration,  and
I  never  saw  lUglink  express  so  much  astonishment  at  anything  before.
Even  in  this  her  sapenor  good  sense  was  observable,  for  it  was  evi-
dent that  the  utility  of  what  she  saw  going  on,  was  what  forced  itself
upon  her  mind;  and  she  watched  every  stroke  of  the  hammer,  and
each  blast  of  the  bellows,  with  extreme  eagerness,  while  numbers  of
other  Esquimaux  looked  stupidly  on,  without  eamressinff  the  smallest
curiosity  or  interest  in  the  operation,  except  by  desiring  to  have  some
spear  heads  fashioned  out  by  this  means."

How  this  reminds  me  of  Mr.  Wakley,  Mr.  Liston,  Mr.
Quain,  Dr.  A.  T.  Thomson,  aod  Dr.  Sharpey,  beholding  the
exquisite  mesmeric  phenomena  of  the  two  Okeys  and  my
other  patients  of  University  College  Hospital.  It  was  the
four  last  of  these  who  got  up  all  the  opposition  to  mesmerism
at  University  College  ;  Dr.  Sharpey  and  Mr.  Quain  being
the  most  active,  but  in  the  slyest  manner,  doing  their  utmost
in  privacy  with  individual  members  of  the  council.  Those
three  honest  men,  Drs.  Grant  and  Lindley  and  Mr.  S.  Cooper,
took  no  part  in  the  opposition.  The  two  former  have  since
been  more  than  once  to  my  house  to  witness  mesmerism,  such
is  their  interest  in  it :  and  the  latter  wrote  to  me  a  month  ago
that  he  had  always  greatly  deplored  my  leaving  the  college.

Medical  men  write  ardently  and  carry  on  fierce  contro-
versies about  matters  important  enough,  for  all  science  is
important,  but  of  infinitely  less  importance  than  mesmerism,
and  of  a  far  lower  order  in  physiology  and  practice,  and
never  bestow  a  single  thought  upon  it.  They  pique  themselves
upon,  and  wage  war  for,  originality  about  the  smallest  mecha-
nical improvements  and  the  smallest  discoveries  that  require
only  industrious  eyes  and  no  intellect ;  they  make  a  mighty
fuss  about  the  poorest  observations  in  disease  and  the  poorest
and  most  limited  fresh  method  of  treatment, — the  very  thing
they  make  so  much  pother  about  ending  after  a  longer  or  short

Eeriod  most  frequently  in  nothing,  proving  erroneous,  and
ecoming,  like  themselves  and  all  their  medical  clatter,  com-
pletely forgotten,  to  make  room  for  successors  like  themselves.


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotion.  21

Yes !  sixteen  years  elapsed,  as  far  as  I  know,  before  the
great  fact  at  Paris  of  Dr.  Uhapelain's  production  of  painless-
ness under  M.  Cloquet's  operation  was  imitated  in  France :
and  then  it  was  imitated  in  a  remote  province.  Not  one  of
the  great  operations  which  have  been  performed  in  England
has  been  performed  in  London,  or  our  otner  cities,  where  there
are  schools,  great  hospitals,  and  redoubtable  surgeons.  The
first  amputation  was  performed  in  the  village  of  Wellow,  at
a  hospital  supported  by  a  few  wealthy  families,  and  possess-
ing but  twelve  beds ; — the  others  at  the  watering  place  of
Torquay ;  in  the  country  town  of  Leicester,  a  place  of  no  me-
dical or  surgical  reputation ;  and  at  some  place  called  Alyth,
in  Perthshire,  not  in  Edinburgh  or  Glasgow:  and  all  these  by
men  whom  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  Mr.  Reate,  Mr.  Key,  and
the  rest  of  our  metropolitan  surgeons  regard  as  humble  and
obscure  individuals.  Indeed  no  surgical  operation  beyond
extraction  of  teeth,  the  introduction  of  setons,  and  bleeding,
has  yet  been  performed  in  London,  Edinburgh,  or  any  other
British  city ;  and  these  have  been  performed  at  the  instance
of  the  few  known  individuals  who  have  subjected  themselves
to  the  persecution  of  the  medical  profession.  The  other  am-
putations, removal  of  tumors,  &c.,  have  been  performed  in
our  colonies,  eastern  and  western,  or  in  the  country  which
was  our  colony  till  nobly  wrested  from  our  unjust  domination.
This  is  a  sad  tale  to  tell.

III.  Amputations,  removal  of  Tumors,  &c.  &c.,  in  the
East  Indies.

Several  painless  surgical  operations,  besides  those  recorded
in  the  last  number  of  7%e  2!oist,  have  been  performed  in  India
by  Dr.  Esdaile.  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Ash-
burner  for  the  loan  of  a  pamphlet  published  at  Calcutta  by
Dr.  Esdaile,  under  the  same  title  as  his  paper  in  the  India
Journal  of  Medical  and  Physical  Science,  containing  all  his
mesmeric  practice  up  to  the  end  of  August.  What  appeared
in  The  Zoist  constituted  his  second  report,  and  extended  from
April  9th  to  May  14th.  I  now  lay  before  your  readers  a
previous  report  and  three  subsequent  ones.

The  following  are  the  remarks  with  which  his  first  report
are  preceded : —

"I  rather  choow  to  endare  the  wonsdi of  thoie  dtrts  which  envy  catteth  at  novelty,  than
to  go  on  lafely  and  deepUy  in  the  easy  wayi  of  ancient  mittakings.'— Ralbiob.

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  India  Journal  of  Medical  and  Physical

Science.
"  Sir, — I  hope  that  the  time  has  at  last  arrived  when  a  mao,
under  his  own  name,  may  address  the  public  seriously  on  the  sub*


22 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations^

ject  of  mesmerism,  and  declare  his  belief  ia  it,  without  a  cry  of
'  mad  dog  V  being  raised  against  him.  A  member  of  the  medical
profession,  and  a  public  servant  of  the  Government,  maj  expect  to
be  patiently  listened  to  when  he  relates  the  facts  that  have  come
under  his  own  observation  regarding  mesmerism;  especially  when  he
pledges  his  private  and  professional  character  (as  I  hereby  do)  for
the  absolute  truth  of  his  statements.  A  writer  has  a  right  to  expect,
that  under  such  circumstances  his  reported  facts  will  not  be  at  once
rejected  as  incredible  and  worthless;  it  will  be  time  enough  for  this
when  thev  are  contradicted,  or  when  dishonesty  in  any  of  the  parties
concerned  shall  have  been  detected,  or  the  reporter  proved  to  be  a
credulous  simple  fool,  though  perhaps  honest.  But  I  confess  that  I
expect  a  liberal  tone  of  mind  from  the  Indian  public,  for  I  believe  it
to  possess  an  impartiality  of  judgment,  and  a  capacity  for-reoeiving
new  ideas,  to  be  met  with  in  few  communitiesy  and  it  is  not  difficult
to  explain  why  this  should  be  so.  Belying  then  on  my  own  good
faith,  and  the  liberal  construction  of  my  readers,  I  will  proceed  to
relate  the  mesmeric  facts  I  have  lately  witnessed.  Before  doing  so,
I  may  perhaps  be  excused  the  egotism  of  giving  a  short  sketch  of
the  history  of  my  belief  in  mesmerism,  as  it  is  a  remarkable  epoch
in  a  man's  life  the  day  he  discovers  that  he  has  the  temporary  power
of  life  and  death  over  his  fellow-creatures.

"Ever  since  Dr.  EUiotson  declared,  years  ago,  *that  he  should
despise  himself  if  he  did  not  declare  his  conviction  of  the  truth  of
mesmerism,'  I  ceased  to  resard  it  lightly,  and  paid  attention  to  all
well-attested  reports  upon  the  subject;  at  last  the  facts  became  so
numerous,  and  were  so  well  supported  by  credible  witnesses,  and
kept  their  ground  so  firmly  both  against  adverse  reasoning  and  ridi-
cule (the  test  of  truth),  that  I  felt  compelled  to  surrender  my  belief
in  the  existence  of  the  unknown  power,  or  cease  to  be  a  reasoniuff
and  judging  being.  Ten  days  before  making  my  first  experiment,  I
thus  wrote  to  a  friend  at  home:  '  What  think  you  of  this  new  mys-
tery, mesmerism?  For  my  part  I  am  thinking  seriously  about  it,
and  cannot  help  suspecting  that  we  have  hit  upon  one  of  nature's
great  secrets.  I  keep  myself  perfectly  neutral,  and  hear  the  evidence
pro  and  con.  If  it  turns  out  a  delusion,  I  will  be  happy  to  assist  in
digging  its  grave.'

"  The  uniformity  of  the  phenomena  described  by  different  persons
and  coming  from  various  parts  of  the  world,  strongly  arrested  my
attention,  and  impressed  me  with  the  conviction  that  some  new  gene«
ral  law  of  nature  had  been  discovered.  England,  France,  Germany
and  America,  all  combined  to  give  the  same  evidence  in  support  of
the  new  doctrines,  or  rather  new  phenomena  of  nature."

I  hope  that  no  accusation  of  vanity  will  be  made  against
me  for  expressing  the  comfort  I  derive  from  the  second  para-
graph of  this  Quotation.  It  is  a  satisfaction  to  receive  credit
for  truth,  carefulness,  and  industry  from  an  able  and  modest,
an  honest  and  undaunted  man,  after  being  for  eight  long
years  suddenly  treated  by  the  profession  of  Great  Britain


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiolson.  23

aad  Ireland  as  a  madmaD  or  impostofy  and  injured  in  every
possible  way  by  those  who  before  professed  to  regard  me  as  a
very  careful  observer  and  faithful  narrator. This  is  ray  com-

f>laint  against  the  profession,  not  that  they  hesitated  to  be-
ieve,  but  that — the  facts  being  of  the  utmost  importance
scientifically  and  practically,  and  vouched  for  by  me  who  had
never  led  them  into  error,  never  advanced  anything  hastily,
or  for  display,  or  for  catching  practice,  nor  anything  that
was  not  ultimately  found  true — they  have  not  for  eight  long
years  condescended  to  ascertain  whether  the  statements  of
mesmerism  be  true,  but  unceremoniously  scouted  them,  cry-
ing out,  like  the  rabid  Jews  of  old,  **  Not  this  man,  but
Barabbas" — ^that  is.  Not  nature^  not  truth,  not  humanity,  but
imperfection,  ignorance,  error,  and  inhumanity.

Dr.  Esdaile  commences  his  fifth  report  with  similar  re-
marks, redounding  greatly  to  his  character.

"  *The  enqniry  of  troth,  which  It  the  loTC-roaklng,  or  wooing  of  It;  and  the  knowledge  of
tralh,  which  Is  the  pretence  of  It :  and  the  belief  of  trvth,  which  U  the  enjoying  of  it ;  It  the
aovereign  good  of  hnmM  Daiore.'— Bacoir's  Buats.

*'  In  commnnicating  mv  first  mesmeric  successes  to  my  friend.
Dr.  Grant,  now  in  England,  I  wrote  thus :  ^  I  now  know  mesmer-
bm  to  be  true,  and  should  think  myself  a  poor  cowardly  creeper  if  I
did  not  declare  it.*

"  Apart  from  the  personal  gratification  of  being  admitted  to  see
the  secret  processes  of  nature  s  work-shop,  and  the  advantages  of
being  able  to  imitate  them  successfully  for  the  alleviation  and  re-
moviu  of  human  suffering;  it  is  a  sufficient  satisfaction  to  me  to  be
able,  from  personal  observation,  to  give  my  evidence  in  support  of
the  truths  discovered,  and  declared  b^  honest  and  independent  men
in  different  parts  of  the  world,  both  hving  and  dead.

"  If  my  labours  should  assist  in  raising  the  dishonoured  dead
into  the  public  consideration  and  respect  which  is  their  due,  and  ex-
cite a  regret  that  *  wisdom  called  aloud  in  the  streets,  and  no  one
regarded  her,'  or  if  my  proceedings  should  strengthen  the  testimony
of  the  living  witnesses  who  have  been  persecuted  for  the  truth,  and
hasten  their  tardy  reward,  I  shall  not  have  laboured  in  vain.

"  I  now  know  (and  deplore  my  long  ignorance)  that  the  battle
was  fought  and  won  before  I  was  born,  by  the  truthful  and  benevo-
lent Deleuze,  Pnysegar,  and  their  associates,  and  I  am  only  repeat-
ins  upon  the  Hooghly,  what  they,  and  their  worthy  successor
EUiotson,  had  long  ago  established  on  the  banks  of  the  Seine  and
Thames;  thereby  proving  the  universality  of  the  truths  propounded
by  them.  While  France  issued  royal  and  academic  commissions  to
investigate  the  matter,  and  her  literature  abounds  with  works  written
by  medical  and  scientific  men  on  the  subject;  and  Prussia  very  pro-
perly prohibited  it  from  being  practised  except  by  medical  men;  and
Holland,  Denmark,  Sweden,  Germany  and  Russia,  have  been  fami-
liar,  for  the  last  thirty  years,  with  both  the  good  and  evil  of  mes-


24  Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

merism;  we,  in  consequence  of  our  insular  ignorance,  pride  and
presumption,  are  now  only  hearing  of  what  the  whole  civilized  world
has  long  known,  and  condescending  to  give  an  unwilling  attention  to
well-established  natural  phenomena,  which  are  as  much  part  of  the
human  constitution  as  the  processes  of  thought  and  digestion.

"  All  I  have  done,  or  maj  hereafter  do,  has  been  done,  and  shall
be  done,  in  the  face  of  daj;  and  every  case  hitherto  related  has  had
from  six  to  fifty  native  witnesses,  having^  been  treated  in  two  public
hospitals.  The  patients  are  on  the  spot,  or  may  easily  be  found,
and  a  host  of  witnesses  are  ready  for  any  one  who  may  take  the  trou-
ble to  investigate  the  matter  on  the  spot.  And  I  hope  it  will  be  re-
membered, that  I  am  no  longer  the  only  mesmeriser  here,  but  have
four  assistants,  who  sometimes  succeed  when  I  fail,  and  who  enable
me  to  do  more  good  than  I  could  do  unaided;  and  it  is  now  a  matter
of  course  to  attempt  to  make  a  person  insensible  be/ore  operating  on
him. I  consider  it  cruelty  in /act  not  to  do  so.**

Let  the  president,  council,  fellovt^s,  and  all  other  dignitaries,
if  there  be  any,  of  the  College  of  Surgeons,  read  this  and  blush.

Dr.  Esdaile's  first  trial  is  thus  ushered  in  : —

"In  choosing  a  proper  subject  to  experiment  upon,  I  should
probably  have  selected  some  highly  sensitive  female  of  a  nervous
temperament  and  excitable  imagination,  who  desired  to  submit  and
succumb  to  the  supposed  influence.  But  I  beg  it  to  be  particularly
remarked,  that  my  first  essay  was  not  guided  by  theory;  and  was
not  made  on  any  such  favourable  subject.  On  the  contrary,  the  very
worst  specimen  of  humanity,  theoretically  considered,  was  the  person
experimented  upon;  being  no  other  than  a  Hindu  felon  of  the  hang^
man  caste,  condemned  to  hard  labour  on  the  roads  in  irons.  Accident
alone  determined  my  choice,  for  I  should  as  soon  have  thought  of
operating  on  t?^  first  dog  or  pig  on  the  road,  as  of  selecting  this  man
for  his  good  '  materiel  ;* — chance  decided  the  matter  perhaps  much
better  than  reasoning  would  have  done.

*'  There  are  some  particular  points  of  interest  in  this  case,  to
which  I  beg  to  attract  attention.

"1st.  The  purely  accidental  and  unpremeditated  nature  of  the
experiment.

"2nd.  All  want  of  consent  between  the  parties.

"  3rd.  The  operator's  want  of  belief  in  his  own  powers.

"  4th.  The  absolute  ienorance  of  the  subject  in  the  patient.

"  5th.  The  impossibility  therefore  of  his  imitating  so  exactly  the
phenomena  of  mesmeric  coma.

"  6th.  Collusion,  it  will  be  allowed,  I  presume,  could  not  possi-
bly exist  between  the  agent  and  subject,  and  every  possible  care  has
been  taken  to  exclude  any  source  of  fallacy  in  the  experiments.

"European  gentlemen,  sceptical  and  critical,  or  so  strong  in  dis-
belief that  they  would  reason  thetnselves  out  of  the  evidence  of  their
senses,  if  they  could;  ignorant  Hindus  and  Mussulmans,  who  simply
used  their  eyes  and  ears  without  an  attempt  at  reflection,  will  all  be


communicated  by  Dr,  EUiotson.  25

found  by  their  separate  and  independent  reports  bearing  testimony
to  the  same  series  of  phenomena.

*'  As  I  may  never  succeed  again,  possibly,  and  at  all  events  can-
not afford  the  physioJ  exhaustion  of  subduing  new  patients  in  the
hot  weather,  I  have  endeavoured  to  make  this  case  as  perfect  as  pos-
sible in  all  its  parts,  by  bringing  the  senses  of  different  people  to
bear  upon  it  in  all  its  stages;  and  I  must  declare,  that  I  cannot  see
any  possible  opening  for  mistake  or  deception.  I  may  hope  to  be
able  to  retain  my  power  over  this  person,  and  shall  be  happy  to  have
any  source  of  error  pointed  out  to  me,  that  it  may  be  guarded  against
in  future.

"  To  those  who  may  desire  to  test  the  truth  for  themselves  by
their  own  powers,  I  would  venture  to  suggest  that  an  earnest  desire
to  know  the  truth,  a  fixed  attention,  and  a  resolution  to  subdue  in-
terposing difficulties,  are  essential  conditions  of  mind  for  the  opera-
tor, as  the  means  of  concentrating  and  keeping  up  the  continued
action  of  the  vital  agent,  whatever  it  may  be.  All  after-dinner  and
joking  experiments  are  therefore  likely  to  fail,  and  ou^ht  not  to  be
practised  either  by  those  who  desire  to  see  the  truth  with  their  own
eyes,  or  by  those  who  have  seen  it  and  believe.

"  My  profound  impression  is,  that  the  first  effects  are  produced
by  a  purely  physical  influence  exerted  by  one  animal  over  another,
but  I  can  hardly  doubt  that  it  extends  also  to  the  mind,  for  the
mental  phenomena  (though  more  subject  to  suspicion)  are  as  nume-
rously attested  as  the  bodily.  In  the  present  case  no  mental  pheno-
mena can  be  reasonably  expected,  for  the  individual  is  only  one  (?)
degree  above  the  brutes,  and  if  his  mind  can  be  acted  upon,  I  sus-
pect it  must  be  by  some  one  who  has  more  sympathy  with  his
mental  constitution,"

Let  those  who  make  one  sick  with  their  foppish  and  con-
temptible remarks  about  females,  delicate  females,  and  hyste-
rical females,  anticipation,  preparation,  habit,  and  collusion,
read  the  preceding  passage  over  a  second  time.

**  M4dhab  Kauri,  a  hog-dealer,  condemned  to  seven  years'
imprisonment  with  labour  on  the  roads  in  irons,  for  wounding
a  man  so  as  to  endanger  his  life,  has  got  a  hydrocele  duplex
(a  double  local  dropsy).  He  was  ordered  to  be  taken  from  the
jail  to  the  charity  hospital,  to  be  operated  upon.

**  April  4th. — The  fluid  was  drawn  off  one  side,  and  two
drachms  of  the  usual  corrosive  sublimate  injection  were  thrown
in.  On  feeling  the  pain  from  the  injection,  he  threw  his  head
over  the  back  of  the  chair,  and  pressed  his  hands  along  the
<!our8e  of  the  spermatic  cords,  closing  his  eye-lids  firmly,  and
making  the  grimaces  of  a  man  in  pain.  Seeing  him  suffering
in  this  way,  I  turned  to  the  native  sub-assistant  surgeon,  an
*  eleve'  of  the  medical  college,  and  asked  him  if  he  had  ever


26  Accounts  qf  more  pabdeis  Swrgtcal  Operaiionsj

seen  mesmerism  ?  He  said,  that  he  had  seen  it  tried  at  the
medical  college,  but  without  effect.  Upon  which  I  remarked,
I  have  a  great  mind  to  try  it  on  this  man ;  but  as  I  never  saw
it  practised,  and  know  it  only  from  reading,  I  shall  probably
not  succeed.  The  man  continuing  in  the  position  described,
I  placed  his  knees  between  mine,  and  began  to  pass  my  hands
slowly  over  his  face,  at  the  distance  of  an  inch,  and  carried
them  down  to  the  pit  of  his  stomach.  This  was  continued
for  half  an  hour  before  he  was  spoken  to ;  and  when  ques-
tioned at  the  end  of  this  time,  his  answers  were  quite  sensible
and  coherent.

^*  He  was  ordered  to  remain  quiet,  and  the  passes  were
continued  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  longer — still  no  sensible
effect.  Being  now  tired,  (thermometer  85^,)  I  gave  it  up  in
despair,  and  declared  it  to  be  a  failure.  While  I  rested  my-
self, the  man  remained  quiet,  and  made  fewer  grimaces,  and
when  ordered  to  open  his  eyes,  he  said  there  was  a  smoke
in  the  room.  This  roused  my  attention,  and  tempted  me  to
persevere.  I  now  breathed  on  his  head,  and  carried  my  hands
from  the  back  of  his  head  over  his  face,  and  down  to  the  epi-
gastrium, where  I  pressed  them  united.  The  first  time  this
was  done,  he  took  his  hands  off  his  groins  and  pressed  them
both  firmly  down  upon  mine,  drew  a  long  breath,  and  said,

*  I  was  his  father  ana  mother,  and  had  given  him  life  again.'
The  same  process  was  persevered  in,  and  in  about  an  hour  he
began  to  gape,  said  he  must  sleep,  that  his  senses  were  gone,
and  his  replies  became  incoherent.  He  opened  his  eyes  when
ordered,  but  said  he  only  saw  smoke,  and  could  distinguish
no  one :  his  eyes  were  quite  lustreless,  and  the  lids  were
opened  heavily.  All  appearance  of  pain  now  disappeared ;
his  hands  were  crossed  on  his  breast  instead  of  being  pressed
on  the  groins,  and  his  countenance  showed  the  most  perfect
repose.  He  took  no  notice  of  our  questions,  and  I  called
loudly  on  him  by  name  without  attracting  any  notice.

'*  I  pinched  him  without  disturbing  him,  and  then  asking
for  a  pm  in  English,  I  desired  my  assistant  to  watch  him
narrowly,  and  drove  it  into  the  small  of  his  back ;  it  produced
no  effect  whatever,  and  my  assistant  repeated  it,  at  intervals,
in  different  places  as  uselessly.  His  back  had  continued  to
arch  more  backwards  latterly,  and  he  now  was  in  a  state  of

*  opisthotonos;^  the  nape  of  hie  neck  resting  on  the  sharp  back
of  the  chair,  and  his  breech  on  the  edge  of  it.  Being;  now
satisfied  that  we  had  got  something  extraordinary,  l  went
over  to  the  Kutcherry,  and  begged  Mr.  Russell  the  judge,
and  Mr.  Money  the  collector,  to  come  and  see  what  had  been
done,  as  I  wanted  the  presence  of  intelligent  witnesses  in


communicated  by  Dr.  EUioiicn.  27

what  remained  to  do.  We  found  him  in  the  position  I  had
left  him  in^  and  no  hallooing  in  his  ears  could  attract  his
attention.  Fire  was  then  applied  to  his  knee  without  his  shrink'
in  the  least,  and  liquor  ammonia,  that  brought  tears  into  our
eyes  in  a  moment,  was  inhaled  for  some  minutes  with  perfect
composure  and  without  causing  an  eyelid  to  quiver.  This
seemed  to  have  revived  him  a  little,  as  he  moved  his  head
shortly  afterwards,  and  I  asked  him  if  he  wanted  to  drink ;
he  only  gaped  in  reply,  and  I  took  the  opportunity  to  give
him  slowly  a  mixture  of  ammonia,  so  strong  that  I  could  not
bear  to  taste  it :  this  he  drank  Uke  milk,  and  gaped  for  more.
As  the  '  experimentum  crucis/  I  lifted  his  head,  and  placed
his  face,  which  was  directed  to  the  ceiling  all  this  time,  in
front  of  a  full  light;  opened  his  eyes  one  after  the  other,  but
without  producing  any  effect  upon  the  iris :  his  eyes  were  ex-
actly like  an  amaurotic  person's,  and  all  noticed  their  lack-
lustre appearance.  We  were  all  now  convinced  that  total
insensibility  of  all  the  senses  existed,  and  I  ordered  him  to  be

f  laced  on  a  mattress  on  the  floor,  and  not  to  be  disturbed  till
returned. It  was  now  1  o'clock,  the  process  having  com-
menced at  11  a.m.

*'  I  returned  at  3  o'clock,  and  was  vexed  to  find  that
he  had  awoke,  and  been  carried  back  to  the  Jail  Hospital.
The  native  doctor  of  the  jail  had  come  in,  and  on  hearing
that  the  S&hibs  could  not  awake  the  patient,  he  set  about
doing  so,  and  succeeded  by  throwing  water  on  his  face,  &c.
I  again  went  to  Messrs.  Russell  and  Money,  and  requested
them  to  accompany  me  to  the  jail  to  be  present  when  lie  was
interrogated  regarding  his  reminiscences,  and  we  put  down  a
series  of  questions  to  put  to  him  at  once,  and  without  expla-
nation. We  found  him  looking  well,  with  a  lively  expression
of  face,  and  the  following  questions  were  put  to  him ;  his
answers  being  taken  down  at  the  same  time.

*'  How  do  you  feel  ?

"  Very  well.

**  Any  pain  in  the  throat,  or  elsewhere  ?

''  A  little  uneasiness  in  the  throat ;  no  pain  anywhere  else.

'*  What  has  happened  to  you  to-day  ?

'^I  went  in  the  morning  to  the  Imambarah  Hospital  to
get  the  water  taken  out  of  my  swelling.

"  Was  the  water  drawn  off?

"  Yes.

''  What  do  you  remember  after  the  operation  ?

'^  I  went  to  sleep  soon  after,  and  remember  nothing  else.

**  Did  you  eat  or  drink  after  the  operation  ?


28 Accounts  of  mare  painless  Surgical  Operations,


**  I  felt  thirsty,  but  got  nothing  to  drink  till  Kurreem  Ali
(the  native  doctor)  awoke  me.

"  Did  any  body  prick,  or  burn  you  ?

«  No,  no.

*^  Did  you  smell  anything  disagreeable  ?

"No.

"  Were  you  happy  when  asleep  ?

"  Very.

"  Did  you  hear  anything  when  you  were  asleep  ?

"  I  heard  voices,  but  did  not  understand  them.

"  Did  you  see  any  gentleman  in  the  hospital,  but  me  ?

"No.

"  Did  you  feel  any  pain  in  the  part  after  going  to  sleep  ?

"  I  felt  none  till  I  awoke.

"  Any  pain  in  that  part  now  ?

"  A  very  little.

"  How  many  actions  have  you  had  to-day?  (he  was  suf-
fering from  chronic  diarrhoea.)  Four,  before  going  to  the
hospital ;  none  since :  beUy  is  much  easier  than  it  has  been  for
some  time.

"  Having  answered  all  these  questions  readily  and  frankly,
he  began  to  cry,  thinking  it  was  some  kind  of  judicial  inves-
tigation, I  suppose.

"  The  above  is  an  exact  relation  of  what  took  place  in  our
presence,  and  we  are  thoroughly  convinced  that  there  was  a
complete  suspension  of  sensibility  to  external  impressions  of
the  most  painful  kind.

"  F.  W.  Russell,

"  D.  J.  Money,

"  BUDDEK  ChUNDER  ChOWDARBB,

"  Sub-Assistant  Surgeon.

"  April  5th. — ^There  is  less  than  the  usual  inflammation,
and  he  makes  no  complaint.  I  intend  to  operate  on  the  other
side  in  a  few  days,  mesmerising  him  first,  if  possible,  and
have  invited  many  persons  to  be  present.

"  April  6th,  1 1  o'clock,  a.m« — ^The  inflammation  has  be-
come high  during  last  night :  the  part  is  hot,  and  excessively
tender;  the  lightest  touch  causes  great  pain.  Skin  hot.
Pulse  quick.  I  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  satisfy
myself  still  further,  and  relieve  him  at  the  same  time ;  so
turning  to  the  native  doctors,  I  said  that  I  would  again  try
the  *  Selatee  Muntur'  (the  Europe  charm),  and  began  the


eommumcaied  by  Dr.  ElUotson.  29

process  as  before,  he  lying  in  bed.  In  ten  minutes  the  mes-
meric haze,  smoke  he  always  calls  it,  was  produced.  After
half  an  hour,  he  still  complained  of  the  pain  in  the  inflamed
party  and  could  not  bear  Us  being  touchea;  in  three-quarters
of  an  hour  the  coma  was  established,  and  I  squeezed  the  in-
flamed part  with  no  more  effect  than  tf  it  had  been  a  bladder.
Having  business  to  attend  to  in  Chandernagore,  six  miles  off,
I  called,  in  passing,  on  the  Rev.  Mr.  Fisher,  and  said  that
he  might  now  satisfy  himself  by  going  to  the  hospital  in  my
absence,  and  that  he  was  at  liberty  to  use  every  possible
means  to  awake  him,  or  make  him  feel,  except  mesmeric
ones.  Here  I  have  the  pleasure  to  introduce  a  report  of  the
proceedings  of  Mr.  Fisher  and  Mr.  Money  while  I  was  at
Uhandernagore : —

*'  To  J.  Esdaile,  Esq.
**  My  dear  Sir, — I  beg  to  certify  that  I  twice  saw  the  na-
tive whom  you  had  put  into  a  mesmeric  trance  or  state  of
catalepsy ;  and,  from  the  successful  application  of  different
tests,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  stating,  should  my  statement
add  any  weight  to  your  own  testimony,  or  be  of  any  service
to  the  cause  of  the  imperfectly  known  and  hitherto  unfairly
treated  science  of  mesmerism,  that  the  individual  in  question
was  in  that  state  entirely  insensible  of  pain,  and  that  i  believe,
if  you  had  cut  his  leg  off,  he  would  not  have  felt  it.  I  saw,
when  I  was  in  England,  both  publicly  and  in  private,  many
cases  of  mesmerism  accompanied  by  unnatural  and  wonderful
phenomena,  without  being  convinced.  But  your  case  is  one
so  free  from  all  possibility  of  suspicion,  that  to  have  doubted
it  one  might  as  well  have  doubted  one's  own  existence.

"  Yours  truly,
''Hooghly,  9th  AprU,  1845.  "  D.  J.  Money.

''  I  have  only  to  add  to  the  above,  that  I  was  present  upon
the  last  occasion  referred  to  by  Mr.  Money,  and  fully  concur
with  him  in  thinking  that  the  patient,  during  the  mesmeric
trance,  was  totally  insensible  to  pain.  Indeed,  all  the  senses
appeared  to  be  unnaturally  suspended  from  any  manifestation
of  their  ordinary  operations,  and  every  available  test  was
tried  in  vain.  Dr.  Esdaile  upon  this  occasion  was  absent  at
Chandernagore,  having  previously  put  the  patient  into  the
trance.

"F.  Fisher.

'^  Returned  to  the  hospital  at  3  o'clock,  and  found  him
lying  just  as  I  had  left  him. Awoke  him  in  a  few  minutes  by


80 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

rapid  transverse  passes,  blowing  in  his  face,  and  giving  water
to  drink.  Is  free  of  pain,  and  still  desires  to  sleep;  says  his
head  *  turns.'

''  Translatum^of  a  Beportfrom  Kureem  Ali  Khan,  native  doctor ,
of  what  he  saw  and  heard  in  the  Jail  Hospital,  on  the  6th
April,  1845."

'^  ^At  11  o'clock,  a.m.,  the  patient,  Mfidhab  Kaur&,  was
in  a  fever,  and  there  was  an  acute  pain  in  the  part.  The
worthy  Dr.  S&hib  (may  he  ever  prosper)  came  to  the  hospital,
and  began  to  do  something  to  him.  When  the  experiment
was  going  on,  M&dhab  was  asked.  What  do  you  see?

**  *  I  cannot  see  clearly ;  something  like  smoke  is  before
my  eyes.

"  *  Do  you  see  the  doors  ?

*'  *  No,  nothing  but  smoke.

«  '  Do  you  see  Dr.  S4hib  ?

**  *  No,  I  see  nobody,  but  perceive  some  one  is  talking
near  me.

*'  '  Is  there  any  pain  in  your  body  ?

'•  *  Yes,  breathing  causes  pain  in  the  belly.

"  '  Is  there  pain  in  the  part  ?

"  *  Yes,  as  acute  as  ever,

'* '  How  do  you  feel  now  ?
'  I  feel  cold,  and  sleepy.

'After  the  Doctor  S&hib  had  tried  for  nearly  three-
quarters  of  an  hour,  he  fell  into  a  deep  sleep,  and  there
seemed  to  be  no  pain  in  the  part :  he  slept  so  sound  that  even
the  pricking  of  his  body  witn  a  pin  did  not  restore  his  senses,
or  awake  him.  Before,  a  touch  of  the  part  was  painful,  but
after  he  was  asleep,  even  pricking  it  caused  no  pain  whatever.

** '  He  continued  in  this  state  for  three  hours,  when  the
Doctor  S&hib  calling  him  aloud  twice,  or  thrice,  he  came  to
his  senses,  and  opened  his  eyes.  He  asked  for  water,  which
he  drank;  and  feeling  cold,  covered  himself."

"  TVanslation  of  a  Report  from  Noboo,  native  doctor,  of  what
he  saw  and  heard  in  the  Jail  Hospital,  on  the  6th  April,
1845.

**  'On  the  morning  of  the  6th  April,  I  went  to  the  hos-
pital, and  found  the  body  of  Mfidhab  Kaur&  hot  and  feverish,
and  he  felt  a  great  pain  m  the  part.

'' '  At  11  o'clocK,  Dr.  Esdaile,  the  civil  doctor,  came  and
made  some  operations  on  the  body :  something  I  do  not
know. While  the  operation  was  going  on,  the  patient  was


u


eomfnunieated  by  Dr,  EOiotson,  81

asked  if  he  could  see  plainly ;  but  said.  No.  When  asked  if
he  could  see  any  one,  he  answered,  that  he  could  see  no  one»
but  knew  by  the  sounds  that  some  people  were  there.

"  '  Again  he  was  asked  if  he  felt  any  pain ;  he  said,  that
he  felt  a  severe  pain  in  the  bellvy  on  breathing,  and  also  in
the  part,  and  felt  very  cold.  Soon  afterwards,  he  became
senseless.

" '  At  2  o'clock,  p.m.,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Fisher  and  Mr.  Money
came  to  the  hospital,  and  tried  to  bring  him  to  his  senses  by
pricking  him  with  a  pin,  putting  fire  on  his  hand,  and  beat-
ing a  gong  at  his  ear,  but  all  proved  ineffectual.'

''  I  forgot  to  note  down  what  these  reports  notice — ^his
complaining  of  feeling  cold  soon  after  the  process  began  ;
and  when  i  left  him  the  temperature  of  his  body  was  natural.

"  On  these  two  occasions,  the  effects  were  witnessed  by
all  the  patients  and  hangers  on  in  and  about  both  hospitals.

**  April  7th. — Has  had  a  eood  night ;  is  a  little  feverish  ;
pain  in  part  much  less.  He  now  complains,  for  the  first
time,  of  pain  in  the  places  where  he  was  pricked  and  burned.

**  T7ds  makes  one  ashamed  of  one's  incredulUy,  and  I  will
never  put  ^  patient  to  the  '  question'  in  this  way  again.  It
is  only  excusable  for  the  first  time  when  we  can  hardly  believe
the  evidence  of  our  senses.  Whenever  the  mesmeric  haze  is
produced,  the  operator  may  be  sure  that  he  has  obtained  the
specific  effect,  and  the  insensibility  of  the  pupil  will  incontro-
vertibly  prove  the  presence  of  mesmeric  coma.

''April  11th. — ^Took  the  sub-assistant  sui^eon  with  me
to-day  to  the  jail  hospital,  and  desired  him  to  watch  the  time
taken  to  produce  the  different  effects.  There  is  still  consider-
able pain  in  the  side  operated  upon.  Pulse  regular,  60.
Skin  warm.  At  1 1  a.m.,  I  seated  him  on  the  floor  with  his
back  against  the  wall ;  placed  myself  before  him  on  a  stool,
and  proceeded  pretty  much  as  before.  The  process,  in  one
particular,  was  varied ;  I  leaned  my  elbows  upon  my  knees,
placed  my  mouth  over  the  back  of  my  joined  hands,,  and
oreathed  along  their  upper  surface,  the  points  of  my  fingers
being  pointed  steadily  at  his  eyes,  nose,  and  forehead  in  suc-
cession. This  seemed  to  be  very  effectual,  and  was  done
with  the  idea  of  concentrating  the  mesmeric  influence  of  the
whole  body  into  one  conductor.  It  was  curious  to  observe
that  he  had  begun  to  think  on  the  subject,  and  was  observing
the  effects  for  himself,  and  testing  his  senses  as  we  proceeded.
After  manipulating  for  a  few  minutes,  he  opened  his  eyes,
looked  sharply  and  minutely  about  him»  and  being  asked  if


82  Accounts  of  more  painkss  Surgical  Operations,

"he  saw  quite  well,  he  said,  *  Oh  yes.'  In  a  minute  or  two,
he  repeated  his  inspection,  and  answered  again,  that  he  saw
quite  distinctly :  in  seven  minutes  he  again  looked  about
him,  seemed  surprised,  and  said  he  only  saw  '  smoke/

'Mn  fifteen  minutes  he  was  pinched;  and  when  asked  if
any  one  was  pinching  him,  he  replied,  that  he  could  not  tell,
as  I  might  now  cut  apiece  out  of  his  body  without  his  feelkng
it,  I  now  tried  for  an  abnormal  mental  manifestation ;  cer-
tainly not  expecting  to  be  gratified.  I  asked,  What  will
cure  your  complaint?  You  know  best.  Has  the  Baboo  any
complaint  ?  How  should  I  know !  I  understood  this  as  a
hint  to  attend  to  the  business  in  hand,  the  body,  and  there-
fore proceeded  to  induce  the  mesmeric  coma  as  quickly  as
possible,  and  succeeded  in  twenty  minutes  from  the  commence-
ment. I  then  said  to  the  sub-assistant  surgeon  that  I  would
operate  upon  him  in  this  state  if  I  could  find  some  of  the
European  gentlemen  to  be  witnesses.  On  going  to  Chinsurah,
two  miles  off,  I  fortunately  found  a  considerable  party,  con-
sisting of  the  Baron  Law  de  Clapernoii,  Governor  of  Chan-
dernaffore,  Mr  Russell  the  Judge,  Mr.  Wauchope  the  Ma^s-
trate,  J.  St.  Pour9ain,  Esq.,  Mr.  Clint,  Principal  of  Hoognly
College,  and  Mr.  Clermont,  head  Master  of  the  Lower  School,
who  nil  accompanied  roe  back  to  the  hospital.  The  man  had
fallen  down,  and  was  lying  on  his  back.  The  large  gong  of  the
jail  was  brought,  and  struck  violently  within  a  few  inches  of
his  ear  unth  no  effect.  I  then  pierced  the  part,  and  threw
in  the  injection  without  any  one  being  sensible  of  the  smallest
movement  in  his  face,  or  body.  His  limbs  were  quite  flexible,
but  on  holding  one  of  his  legs  in  my  hand  for  a  few  seconds,
it  gradually  became  quite  rigid,  and  we  could  not  bend  it
again  ;  the  same  occurred  in  the  other  leg.  The  arms  were
supple,  and  lay  in  any  position  into  which  they  were  thrown,
and  when  the  fore-arm  was  bent  upon  the  humerus,  and  then
let  go,  it  fell  upwards,  or  downwards  instantly.  But  on
placing  my  united  fingers  over  the  ends  of  his,  the  arm  re-^
mainea  fixed  at  a  right  angle  in  the  air,  and  swayed  to  and  fro
according  to  my  movements.  The  insensibility  of  the  iris  was
also  tested,  and  proved.

"  6  o'clock,  a.m. — Still  sleeps  ;  most  complete  relaxation
of  all  the  limbs  now  exists.  The  legs  and  arms  can  be  tossed
about  in  every  direction,  and  where  they  fall  there  they  lie.
Being  curious  to  ascertain  the  effect  of  the  artificial  state  on
the  natural  process  of  inflammation,  I  did  not  awake  him,
but  saw  that  the  part  was  as  flaccid  as  when  the  water  was
just  withdrawn.

''  April  12th. — He  awoke  at  12  o'clock  last  night  sponta^


communicaled  by  Dr.  ElUotson.  33

neously.  Recollects  nothing  after  going  to  sleep ;  sees  the
water  is  gone,  knows  not  how ;  supposes  the  Doctor  S&hib
did  it.  Admodum  tumet  hodie  testis;  there  is  little  pain,
and  it  did  not  swell  till  after  he  awoke.  He  has  had  ckronic
diarrkma  for  wme  time,  four  and  five  motions  a  day,  but  hat
had  none  since  yesterday  forenoon  till  this  morning.  Natural,
art^cial,  and  diseased  actions  have  therefore  been  all  equally
arrested  for  the  last  thirteen  hours;  a  practical  fact  of  the
utmost  importance^  which  will  not  be  lost  sight  of  by  myself,
or  others,  I  hope.  What  a  blessed  prospect  this  opens  to
sufferers  who  may  be  sensible  to  the  mesmeric  influence !  In
time  we  may  hope  to  discover  who  they  are,  by  detecting  the
laws  which  reeulate  this  power  of  nature,  and  thereby  save
ourselves  much  trouble  and  disappointment.  In  the  mean-
time,  let  us  accumulate  ,^to,  as  the  seeds  for  a  correct  theory
hereafter.  Although  I  should  never  succeed  again,  I  will  in
future  think,  speaJc,  and  write  of  mesmerism  as  being  as
much  a  reality  as  the  principle  of  gravitation,  or  the  properties
of  opium."

The  members  of  the  London  Medical  and  Chirurgical
Society  who  could  not  imagine  the  possibility  of  a  man  with
palsy  of  his  nerves  of  common  sensation  hearing  ever  so
obscurely,  should  read  over  again  the  hog  dealer's  answer—
''  I  heard  voices  but  did  not  understand  them :"  the  Notting-
hamshire man's  answer  was,  ''  I  once  felt  as  if  I  heard  a
kind  of  crunching."*  "^^^y  ^^^^  iQ  ^^  natural  state  had  a
faint  degree  of  memory  of  the  mesmeric.  A  change  took
place  in  the  mesmeric  state  of  the  Asiatic,  for  on  April  the
i2th  on  awaking  spontaneously  he  recollected  nothing.  Those
who  fancy  mesmensm  to  be  useful  in  nervous  diseases  only,
should  remember  its  effect  upon  the  diarrhoea  and  the  pam
of  stomach.  And  those  who  prefer  a  stupid  and  dogged
disbelief  to  the  clearest  evidence  of  the  senses  and  yet  cannot
brin^  themselves  to  obey  the  Scriptures  and  pluck  out  their
deceiving  eye  or  cut  off  their  deceiving  hand,  with  which  they
ought  to  be  offended,  should  imitate  I>r.  Esdaile  and  become
"  ashamed  of  their  incredulity."  The  nature  and  truthfulness
of  the  man's  answers  at  pp.  27,  28,  30,  are  striking.

Mr.  Bransby  Cooper,  who  in  the  Medical  Society  strangely
at  the  time  he  ridiculed  the  alleged  facts  as  humbug  begged
for  a  rationale  of  them,  might  read  the  last  sentence  but  one
of  the  last  quoted  paragraph  :  and  the  medical  profession  at
large  may  rest  assured  that  all  we  mesmerists  have  the  deter-
mination expressed  by  Dr.  Esdaile  in  the  concluding  sentence.

*  Pamphlet,  p.  10.
YOL.  IV.  D


84 Accounts  of  more  painless  Swffical  Operations,

Amputation  of  a  thxmb. — *^  May  29th.  Sibcham  Sing,  a
young  robuBt  man,  had  his  thumb-nail  nearly  cut  through  by
a  sword,  fourteen  days  ago.  An  attempt  was  made  to  unite
it,  but  failed  ;  and  the  point  of  the  finger  would  be  a  source
of  annoyance,  if  kept.  In  ten  minutes  I  made  him  insen-
sible, and  cut  off  the  end  of  his  thumb  without  awaking  him.
He  shortly  after  opened  his  eyes,  and  I  asked  him ;  Have
you  been  asleep?  Yes.  Have  you  any  pain?  No.  Has
anybody  hurt  you  to-day  ?  No.  Do  you  wish  your  nail  cut
off  ?  Yes.  Look  at  it.  He  did  so ;  looked  confounded,  and
exclaimed.  It's  cone  !  Who  did  it  ?  God  knows.  How  did
it  happen  ?  I  Know  nothing  about  it.  Has  it  fallen  off
itself? I  can't  tell.'*

Removal  of  a  tumor  frightfully  disfiguring  the  face, — *^  June
Srd.  Teencowrie  Paulit,  a  peasant;  aged  40.  He  began  to
suffer  from  a  tumor,  two  years  ago,  in  the  antrum  maxillare.
The  tumor  has  pushed  up  the  orbit  and  eye  of  that  side,  filled
up  and  distorted  the  nose,  and  caused  an  extraordinary  en-
largement of  the  glands  of  the  neck.

'^  I  was  very  desirous  to  reduce  him  to  a  state  of  insensi-
bility before  operating  on  him,  and  for  the  last  fortnight  my
assistants  have  all  tried  it  perseveringly,  but  without  produc-
ing sleep  even.  I  took  him  in  hand,  at  10  o'clock  a.m.  to-
day, and  succeeded  after  great  labour,  for  three  quarters  of
an  hour,  in  entrancing  him  sitting  erect  in  a  chair.  /  then
put  a  long  knife  in  at  the  comer  ^  his  mouth,  and  brought  it
through  his  cheek  over  the  cheek-bone,  dividing  the  parts  be-
tween ;  from  this,  I  pushed  it  through  the  skin  at  the  inner
comer  of  the  eye,  and  dissected  back  the  cheek  to  the  nose.

'^The  pressure  of  the  tumor  had  caused  the  absorption  of
the  anterior  wall  of  the  antrum,  and  on  pushing  my  fingers
between  it  and  the  bones,  it  burst,  and  proved  to  be  a  medul-
lary tumor.  A  shocking  gush  of  blood  and  brain-like  matter
followed.  It  extended  as  far  as  the  points  of  my  finders
could  reach  under  the  orbit  and  cheek-bone,  and  passed  into
the  throat,  having  destroyed  the  bones  and  partition  of  the
nose.

**  No  one  held  the  man,  and  I  turned  his  head  into  any  po-
sition  desired,  without  resistance,  and  there  it  remained  till
again  moved.  The  man  never  stirred  or  shewed  any  signs  of
life,  except  an  indistinct  occasional  moan,  till  I  passed  my
fingers  into  his  throat,  and  directed  the  blood  into  his  wind-
pipe.

"  Farther  insensibility  was  incompatible  with  life  appa-
rently, for  he  coughed  and  leaned  forward  to  get  rid  of  the


commmnicaied  by  Dr.  ElHotson.  85

blood. The  operation  was  by  this  time  finished^  and  he  was
laid  on  the  floor  to  have  the  woands  dressed.

''June  4th.  This  is  even  a  more  wonderful  affair  than  I
.supposed  yesterday. The  man  declares  by  the  most  emphatic

Eantomime,  that  he  felt  no  pain  while  in  the  chair,  and  that
e  first  awoke  upon  the  floor.  So  that  his  coughing,  and
forward  movement  yesterday,  were  purely  instinctive  motions
for  the  preservation  of  life. He  is  wonderfully  well.

**  June  6th.  The  dressings  were  undone  to-day,  and  the
whole  extent  of  the  wounds  in  the  face  has  united  completely
by  the  first  intention.  He  is  out  of  all  danger  from  the  ope-
ration, and  can  speak  plainly ;  he  declares  most  positively,
that  he  felt  no  pain,  and  did  not  come  to  his  senses  till  he
awoke  on  the  floor,  and  found  me  to  be  stiching  his  face,  and
I  presume  he  knows  best.

''  Translation  of  a  statement  in  Bengalee  by  Teencowrie  Paulit.

'*  *  For  two  years  I  laboured  under  this  sickness,  and
scarcely  slept  for  five  months.  On  the  19th  May,  I  came  to
the  Imambarah  Hospital,  and  three  or  four  persons  tried  to
make  me  sleep,  but  all  in  vain.  On  the  3rd  June,  Dr.
Esdaile  having  kindly  undertaken  my  cure,  with  a  great  deal
of  labour,  made  me  sleep,  and  having  operated  on  my  left
cheek,  took  out  something,  which  at  that  time  I  did  not  per-
ceive. After  the  operation,  I  did  not  sleep  for  two  days;  but
after  the  third  day,  I  have  slept  as  usual.

"  *  Tbbnoowrie  Paulit,
'''Of  Madrah,  Thannah Dkumakhaly: "

Removals  of  coUs  and  ofpnqmtia, — "  June  1 1th.  Kaloo,
a  &queer,  has  an  excrescence  larger  than  a  man's  fist  ad
extremitatem  colis,  and  the  body  of  the  organ  is  also  much
enlarged.

''He  was  entranced  in  a  few  minutes  on  the  /irst  trial ;
and  in  the  presence  of  Major  Riddell,  Captain  Anderson,
Mr.  Bennett,  and  Mr.  Jackson,  I  dissected  out  the  organ,
but  was  obli^d  to  sacrifice  the  glans,  as  the  enlargement
was  a  cartilaginous  degeneration  of  all  the  structures.  I  lost
much  time  in  trying  to  extricate  the  ^lans,  but  finding  it  im-
possible, performed  amputation  behmd  it,  and  the  man  did
not  awake  jtill  this  point  of  the  operation.

*'  Wonderful  to  say,  he  relapsed  into  the  trance  in  a  few
minutes,  and  remained  for  twenty  minutes  quite  rigid  and  in-
sensible, with  his  eyes  wide  open  in  a  full  light,  onrf  as  insen-
sible to  the  light  as  a  corpstfs.  This  is  the  only  case  in  which
the  eyes  have  been  quite  open  during  the  trance,  and  the
eyes  would  not  remain  shut  when  I  closed  them ;  shewing,  I

d2


86 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

conceive,  the  absolute  extinction  of  muscular  vitality.  la
most  cases,  the  muscles  of  the  eye-ball  continue  to  act  invo-
luntarily after  the  rest  of  the  muscular  system  has  gone  to
rest ;  and  on  opening  the  eye-lids,  the  ball  of  the  eye  is  seen
rolling  around  the  orbit  like  an  agitated  magnetic  needle.

*'  Under  the  extreme  influence  of  this  agent,  the  muscles
of  the  eye  and  iris  also  lose  their  contractility,  and  the  eye
remains  as  motionless  and  insensible  to  light  as  a  dead  man  s.

''That  the  second  trance  was  not  a  raint  we  all  satisfied
ourselves,  not  only  from  the  continued  rigidity  of  the  limbs^
but  from  the  regular  natural  pulse."

"  July  17th.  To-day,  in  the  presence  of  Mr,  Davidson,
Commissioner  of  the  Division,  and  Mr.  Alexander,  Registrar
to  the  Board  of  Revenue,  who  have  requested  me  to  name
them  as  witnesses,  I  operated  on  a  man  for  hypertropia
prseputii,  without  disturbing  him.  After  letting  him  sleep
some  time,  I  asked  the  gentlemen  if  I  should  awake  him,
and  at  their  desire  did  so,  in  a  moment,  by  blowing  in
his  eyes.  He  was  restored  at  once  to  full  consciousness,  and
Mr.  Davidson  remarked,  '  I  wish  ■  was  here,  who  says

you  do  this  by  opium.'

''  My  visitors,  knowing  Bengalee,  asked  him.  If  any  one
had  hurt  him  to-day  ?  He  answered,  No.  If  he  would  like
to  have  his  disease  removed  ?  He  said,  that  he  would  thank
God  if  any  one  would  do  so.  He  was  then  desired  to  sit
up,  and  his  cloth  removed ;  when  seeing  that  his  nuisance
was  gone,  he  fell  back  with  an  exclamation  of  wonder  and
gratitude."

''July  29th.  In  the  presence  of  some  sixty  witnesses  who
came  from  Calcutta,  &c.,  I  removed  a  prseputium.  He  awoke
and  cried  out,  before  I  had  finished ;  but  was  immediately
thrown  back  into  the  trance,  from  which  all  the  efibrts  of  the
spectators,  six  doctors  included,  could  not  arouse  him.  He
was  operated  on  at  12  o'clock,  and  awoke  at  3.

"On  being  questioned,  he  said,  that  he  had  not  seen  an
European  that  day,  and  had  suffered  no  pain ;  as  I  said  would
probably  be  the  case,  if  the  trance  could  be  speedily  re-
established.

"  Next  day,  he  complained  much  of  the  pricks  inflicted
upon  him  by  ttie  practical  philosophers^  who  had  Uterally  made
a  pincushion  of  him"

Removal  of  a  tumor  on  the  calf  of  the  kg. — ^"  June  12th.
Lokee,  a  peasant  woman,  aged  60 ;  has  a  sacculated  tumor


commumcated  by  Dr,  EUiotson.  37

on  the  calf  of  the  left  leg,  of  nine  years  standing.  It  is  full
of  deep  ulcerations  and  maggots.  I  tried  to  subdue  her  yes-
terday, but  the  pain  did  not  allow  her  to  get  beyond  common
sleep.

''  To-day,  after  much  trouble,  first  by  one  person  and  then
another,  she  was  entranced,  and  I  cut  out  the  tumor  in  the
presence  of  Captain  Elder,  without  herfeeUng  it,  and  we  left
her  sleeping.

''June  l3th.  She  awoke  three  hours  after  the  operation,
without  knowing  anything  about  it,  and  to-day  asked  me
who  cut  off  the  tumor?

''  Translation  of  a  Bengalee  statement  made  by  tins  patient.

**  *  The  swelling  on  my  leg  was  removed  on  the  12th  June ;
but  I  know  not  when,  how,  and  by  whom  it  was  done.
Certified  by  me,

•'M2thJune,  1845.'  'Lokbb.'"

•

Opening  abscesses. — ''  June  1 4th.  Toorab,  a  peasant,  aged
30,  of  a  ricketty  constitution ;  has  a  sinus  six  inches  in  length,
below  the  pectoral  muscle,  of  seven  months'  standing.  We
have  not  been  able  to  close  it  by  any  means,  and  it  was  ne-
cessary to  lay  it  open.  He  was  entranced  by  one  of  my
assistants,  and  /  laid  open  the  whole  length  of  the  diseased
tract  without  his  being  aware  of  it,  and  left  him  sleeping.

''June  15th.  He  awoke  soon  after  I  left  him,  but  imme-
diately fell  back  into  sleep ;  and  on  awaking,  asked  where
the  blood  came  from  ?  He  has  suffered  Httle  or  nothing  since,
and  has  no  recollection  of  having  been  injured.

"  TVanslation  of  a  Bengalee  statement  made  by^  this  patient,

"  '  My  breast  was  laid  open  on  the  14th  June,  but  I  have
no  recollection  of  it. Certified  by  me,

"  '  16th  June,  1845/  '  Toobab.'  "

"  May  30th.  Modoomohun  Roy,  a  fine  boy,  12  years  old,
was  brought  to  hospital  fourteen  days  ago,  with  a  compound
fracture  of  both  bones  of  the  fore-arm.  My  assistants  have
several  times  tried  to  mesmerise  him  in  the  hope  of  assuag-
ing the  pain,  but  without  success.

"  Matter  has  formed,  and  the  wound  must  be  enlarged
upwards  and  downwards.  As  he  was  apprehensive,  I  put  a
piece  of  cloth  soaked  in  cold  water  over  his  eyes,  and  went
on  with  my  affairs,  telling  him  that  it  would  cool  his  brain.
The  people  were  dismissed ;  and,  approaching  him  anawares.


38 Accounts  cf  mare  painless  Surgical  Operations,

I  succeeded  in  entrancing  him  in  ten  minutes,  and  laid  open
the  arm  without  disturbing  him.

^'  I  came  back  after  three  hours  and  found  him  still  asleep.
On  awaking,  he  said  that  the  pain  was  much  less,  and  that
no  one  had  hurt  him  to-day.

''June  2nd.  Gungaram  Dass,  a  prisoner,  was  injured  ten
days  ago  by  some  rubbish  falling  upon  him,  and  three  ab*
scesses  nave  formed  in  consequence,  at  the  elbow,  wrist,  and
ankle  of  the  left  side,  which  require  to  be  opened.  In  a  few
minutes  I  subdued  him ;  opened  the  abscesses,  and  left  him
still  sleeping.

"  On  my  return,  after  two  hours,  I  found  him  sitting  up
looking  at  tne  pus  flowing  from  the  wounds,  and  asked,  How
it  had  escapea  since  I  saw  him  in  the  morning  ?  He  could
not  tell.  Ot  its  own  accord  ?  I  suppose  so.  Has  any  body
cut  you,  or  given  you  pain  to-day  ? Nobody.

"  TVanslation  of  a  Bengalee  statement  made  by  this  patient.

'''On  the  2nd  June,  three  wounds  were  made  on  my
body  by  the  Doctor  S&hib,  without  my  knowing  it  at  the
time. Certified  by  me,

"  '  GUNQARAM  DaSS.

" '  Jail  HovUal,  6th  June,  1845.' ''

Tapping  for  dropsy. — "June  24th.  A  man  was  tapped  to-
day for  dropsy,  when  asleep,  and  ten  quarts  of  water  with-
drawn. He  afterwards  said  that  he  was  only  aware  of  being
pricked  by  the  trocar,  but  remembered  nothing  more."

Seton  run  through  a  Umg  abscess. — ^"  Parbuttie,  an  elderly
woman,  has  a  sinus  extending  from  a  little  above  the  inner
ankle  under  the  calf  to  the  outer  side  of  the  leg  near  the
knee,  which  is  contracted  by  a  dense  cicatrix  running  two-
thirds  round  it,  and  involving  the  ham-strings  :  the  knee  has
been  in  this  state  for  ten  years.  Being  put  to  sleep,  a  coun-
ter opening  was  made  in  the  leg,  and  a  seton  run  through
the  sinus  without  her  feeling  it.  I  then  leant  all  my  weignt
on  the  knee,  and  succeeded  in  extending  it  a  little,  but  the
diseased  structures  would  yield  no  further.  A  strong  and
heavy  gentleman  present  then  applied  all  his  power,  and
effected  a  little  more ;  but  it  was  clear  that  no  force  short  of
breaking  the  limb  could  straighten  it.  But  it  was  equally
certain,  that  any  common  muscular  or  ligamentous  contrac-
tion must  have  yielded  on  the  spot.  The  woman  continued
to  sleep  for  flours  afterwards.


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotBon.  30

Operaium  on  the  gums. — ^'^  July  9th.  Mrs.  C.  is  suffering
much  from  one  of  her  wisdom  teeth ;  half  of  it  has  come
through,  but  the  rest  is  covered  with  the  indurated  and  ul-
cerated gum.  I  explained,  that  the  source  of  the  irritation
must  be  removed  by  cutting  away  the  gum.  As  she  was
harassed  by  face,  jaw,  and  ear-aches,  I  mesmerised  her  for
ten  minutes  locally  to  soothe  the  pain,  and  removed  it  com-
pletely for  two  hours.

'^  J  uly  10th.  I  entranced  her  to-day  sitting  on  a  conch,  in
the  presence  of  her  husband  and  his  sister ;  laid  her  back,
and  cut  off  the  offending  gum,  without  awaking  her,  and  left
her  sleeping.

"July  11th.  This  is  a  very  interesting  case,  as  it  shews
the  invasion  of  the  waking  state  by  the  mesmeric  one.  Mrs.
C.  on  waking  yesterday,  arose  as  if  from  common  sleep,  and
the  blood  about  her  mouth  only  attracted  her  notice  to  the
tooth ;  she  thought  the  gum  had  burst,  and  was  expecting
to  see  me.  For,  strange  to  say,  she  had  no  recollection  of
having  seen  me  that  day,  nor  of  what  happened  for  half  an
hour  oefore  her  sleep.  The  incidents  that  took  place  imme-
diately before  she  was  mesmerised  were  these,  as  her  husband
informed  me, —

**  She  received  letters  from  the  postman,  a  lady  came  to
visit  her,  and  then  I  arrived,  and  sat  conversing  with  her  and
her  visitor  a  short  time :  after  seeing  the  lady  to  her  carriage,
I  returned,  and  mesmerised  her.  All  these  incidents  were
blotted  from  her  mind.*

''She  feels  quite  well,  and  awoke  much  refreshed.  If
such  inroads  are  made  into  the  regions  of  sense  at  one  sitting,
it  may  probably  be  pushed  to  the  extinguishment  of  all  sense ;
and  this  is  the  power  made  a  show  of  for  money  I"

Extraction  of  teeth. — ''  Sheik  Nurree  Ooden.  Seen  for
the  first  time  to-day;  was  entranced,  and  the  last  grinder
tooth  taken  out,  without  awaking;  slept  for  an  hour  after,
and  felt  no  pain  on  waking."

"  I  had  ordered  a  man  to  be  mesmerised  in  the  morning,
on  purpose  to  have  a  tooth  taken  out,  and  on  reaching  the
Charity  Hospital  had  the  satisfaction  to  find  him  entranced,
and  begged  Mr.  Mc  Questen  to  draw  the  tooth.  This  he  de-
clined, and  I  extracted  it  before  him,  without  awaking  the
man,  and  presented  it  to  the  lady  as  a  mesmeric  souvenir.
Seeing  a  collection  of  matter  at  the  ear,  I  also  made  an  incision
into  tne  swelling^  before  he  awoke.  On  coming  to  his  senses,
he  said  that  he  felt  as  if  an  ant  had  pricked  him  when  asleep.' -

*  See  my  remarks,  Zoist,  vol.  III.,  p.  476.


40 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations^

Mr.  dentist  McQuesten  was  of  the  ndble  fraternity  of  bis
art  mentioned  in  Vol.  III.,  p.  508.  A  lady  present  had  said,
"  It's  impossible ;  it  can't  be  :  I  wonft  believe  it — it's  all  a
trick."  She  was  now  convinced,  and  Dr.  Esdaile  **  took  the
liberty  to  hint  in  the  most  respectful  manner  that  there  was
something  still  more  wonderful  to  him  than  mesmerism — and
that  was  the  extent  of  human  incredulity  on  the  subfect.*'

"  May  26th.  Ram  Dass,  a  large  robust  man,  has  a  super-
numerary tooth  between  the  eye-tooth  and  the  first  grinder,
growing  horizontally  into  his  mouth,  and  causing  him  great
annoyance.  I  put  him  on  a  mattress  on  the  table.  In  a
quarter  of  an  hour  his  limbs  were  cataleptic,  and  I  proceeded
to  open  his  jaws.  The  temporal  muscles  cost  me  some  trou-
ble to  relax  them,  and  I  had  to  operate  with  great  caution  as
he  was  not  under  the  extreme  influence  of  the  power,  and  I
had  failed  two  days  before  in  the  case  of  a  lady  for  want  of
necessary  precaution  in  like  circumstances.  It  was  difficult
to  get  hold  of  the  tooth  from  its  position,  but  it  was  at  last
grasped  and  extracted.  He  moved,  and  moaned ;  but  I  soon
tranquillized  him,  and  he  did  not  awake  till  suffocated  by  the
blood.

**  He  declared  that  he  awoke  from  this  cause,  and  not
from  feeling  pain.  Several  patients  have  exhibited  these  in-
stinctive movements,  of  which  they  have  no  recollection  on
coming  to  their  senses."

Removal  of  a  hemorrhoid. — ^'  July  25th.  fiuggabuttee,  a
Hindoo  woman,  aged  40,  has  been  much  troubled  with  a
suppurating  heemorrhoid  as  big  as  the  end  of  my  thumb.
She  was  mesmerised  at  1 1  o'clock,  and  at  12  I  cut  off  the
tumor :  she  moved  and  groaned,  but  on  awaking,  half  an
hour  after,  recollected  nothing  about  it.  She  missed  the
swelling,  but  knew  not  what  had  become  of  it."

Dissecting  out  a  diseased  nail. — ''August  4th.  Sona,  a
Hindoo  woman,  aged  25.  Both  nails  of  the  great  toes  are
decayed  to  the  roots;  their  place  being  filled  by  fungoid
ulcers,  the  effects  of  syphilis  and  mercury.

**  She  was  mesmensed  at  12  o'clock,  and  at  half-past  one
I  dissected  out  the  entire  root  of  one  nail,  without  awaking
her.  The  left  arm  and  hand  trembled  only,  and  this  I  sub-
dued bv  placing  her  hand  between  mine  for  some  minutes,
and  left  her  sleeping.

"  August  5tb.  Repeated  the  operation  to-day  with  pre-
cisely the  same  effects.  On  neither  occasion  did  she  feel  any
increase  of  pain  on  waking."


eommumcated  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  41

AppUcatian  ofHrong  add. — '^  Aug.  8th.  Gendo,  a  Hindoo
woman,  aged  60.  There  is  a  large  sloughing  ulcer  covering  all
the  right  temple.  She  was  mesmerised  at  10  o'clock,  and  at
half-past  11,  I  applied  muriatic  acid  (there  being  no  nitric
acid  in  store)  freely  to  the  whole  surface,  without  her  shew^
mg  any  smuUnUty :  she  awoke  twenty  minutes  after,  and
knew  nothing  about  it/'

''  August  13th.  Dr.  Finch"  (editor  of  the  Calcutta  Medical
Journal^  and  bound  therefore  to  look  as  sagacious  as  Wakley,
Forbes,  and  the  other  medical  editors  of  England),  '^  freely  ap-
plied muriatic  acid  (such  as  is  furnished  by  the  Company's
jDispensary)  to  the  sore  covering  the  whole  right  temple  of  the
woman  Gendo,  who  was  mesmerised  in  their  presence  by  one
of  the  hospital  attendants,  without  her  shewing  the  smallest
degfree  of  consciousness ;  and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  that
I  awoke  her,  after  they  had  failed  to  do  so.  On  coming  to
her  senses,  she  declared  that  she  knew  nothing  about  it."

*'  August  18th.  The  woman  Gendo  next  fell  under  his
observation.  The  ulcer  on  this  woman's  temple  was  covered
with  muriatic  acid  by  Dr.  Finch  on  the  11th  instant,  with  the
results  alreadv  related.  Dr.  Bedford  asked  leave  to  apply  the
acid  to  her  when  awake;  and  whatever  I  might  think  of  such
a  proposal,  I  consented.  The  end  of  the  glass-stopple  wetted
with  the  acid  was  applied  once  or  twice,  and  the  woman  for  a
few  seconds  shewed  none  of  the  instinctive  movements  of
acute  pain.  There  could  be  no  mistake  about  it — she  was
found  out,  and  I  confess  that  I  felt  considerably  obfuscated,
and  not  relieved  from  my  thick-coming  fancies  bv  Dr.  B.  sug-
gesting that '  she  was  probably  a  naturally  insensible  person.'*  1
began  to  think  the  arch-deceiver  was  at  the  bottom  of  it  after
all;  and  that  having  set  a  snare  and  delusion  for  me,  he  was
now  laughing  at  my  beard.  Then  again,  I  thought  of  com-
plaining to  the  Medical  Board  against  the  Apothecary  General
for  furnishing  such  asses'  milk  as  mineral  acids  for  the  public
service — when  lo !  I  was  roused  from  my  trance  of  bewilder-
ment by  hearing  the  woman  complain,  that  we  had  'put
pepper  on  her  head ;'  and  her  actions  corresponded  with  such
an  idea,  for  she  sat  up  shewing  that  she  was  in  great  pain,
and  immediately  after  declared  her  head  was  on  fire ;  got  out
of  bed,  and  walked  distractedly  about  the  room  in  great
agony.  I  ordered  her  head  to  be  fomented  to  soothe  her ;
Dr.  B.  saying,  that  *  he  had  done  more  than  he  intended.'
The  defective  sensibility  that  had  nearly  compromised  my
mesmeric  surgical  operations,  and  the  honestv  of  my  patients
and  the  Company's  acids,  was  simply  a  film  of  insensible

*  Dr.  Bedford  imitates  Sir  BeDjainin  Brodie  in  the  East. Pamph.  p.  36.


42 Accounts  of  more  painless  SUrffical  Operations,

lymph  that  adhered  to  the  surface  of  the  sore,  and  protected,
for  a  moment,  the  nerves  below.  As  the  most  effectual  means
of  assuaging  the  poor  woman's  sufferings,  I  desired  the
Durwan,  who  is  her  mesmeriser,  to  endeavour  to  throw  her
into  the  trance ;  this  he  succeeded  in  doing,  and  I  took  the
occasion  to  pare  off  some  tubercles  around  the  sore  that  pre-
vented it  from  healing ;  she  moved  a  little,  and  put  her  hand
to  her  ear  ;  but  immediately  after  became  quite  tranc^uil.  In
about  half  an  hour  I  awoke  her  with  very  great  difficulty,
that  Dr.  B.  might  see  her  awake,  and  hear  her  first  words  ;
which  were,  that  she  knew  nothing  about  what  we  were  talk-
ing of,  she  had  even  forgotten  being  burned."

To  shew  that  Dr.  Finch  hesitated  at  no  barbarity  in  his
absurd  scepticism,  for  barbarity  such  doings  are  in  sceptics,
I  make  the  following  quotation  :-—

''  Madub  was  placed  in  a  chair  at  one  end  of  the  veran-
dah, having  been  carefully  examined  first,  and  Dr.  Finch
planted  himself  at  the  other  end,  at  the  distance  of  200  feet.
Having  given  Dr.  Finch  his  instructions*  and  sent  the  other
gentlemen  down  to  watch  the  effects  on  the  man,  I  retired  to
a  room  out  of  sight,  and  only  took  an  occasional  peep  to
ascertain  progress.  In  about  twenty  minutes,  I  suppose,  I
called  on  the  man  by  name ;  and  as  he  paid  no  attention,  I
begged  Dr.  Finch  to  go  and  look  at  his  work.  Suffice  it  to
say  here,  that  he  was  subjected  to  torments  from  which  an
Indian  at  the  stake  would  have  shrunk,  and  which  I  only  per-
mitted, that  it  might  not  be  said  I  interfered  to  save  my  phe-
nomena. The  man  might  have  been  a  corpse  for  any  effect
produced;  the  only  sign  of  vitality  being  that  streams  of
tears  ran  down  from  his  chin  from  the  long  irritation  of  the
lachrymal  gland  by  the  fumes  of  ammonia.

"  The  medical  physiologist,  or  attentive  observer,  has  no
need  of  such  expedients  for  testing  the  condition  of  a  living
being."

Dr.  Finch  was  the  very  Liston  of  our  Asiatic  dominions,
if  Mr.  Wakley,  with  the  tenderness  for  his  fellow-creatures
so  characteristic  of  him,  is  correct  in  denouncing  Mr.  Liston
as  the  perpetrator  of  the  following  brutality  upon  a  poor  girl
in  the  Edinburgh  Infirmary,  who  was  spontaneously  cataleptic
and  insensible  to  mechanical  injury — precisely  by  disease  in
the  state  which  we  every  day  induce  artificially  by  mesmerism.
I  extract  it  from  the  32nd  page  of  my  pamphlet.

*^  *  We  cannot  avoid  noticingy'  says  Dr.  Duncan,  in  his  clinical
lecture  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh, '  and  we  do  so  with  feelings  of
the  most  unmixed  disgust,  an  unmanly,  wanton,  and  barbarous  expe-


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  48

riment,  pnettsed  on  this  unfortmiate  patient  by  an  individual,  on*
connected,  we  are  happy  to  add,  with  the  department  of  clinical
medicine*  (aa  distinguiahed  from  dinical  turnery).  '  It  will  scarcely
be  credited,  but  nevertheless  it  is  strictly  true,  that  during  a  pa*
rozysm  of  insensibility,  the  person  to  whom  we  allude,  tore  with  hi9
naUa  two  separate  piecea  of  ekin  from  the  hand  of  the  patient*
She  was  not  aware  of  the  cruel  and  unwarrantable  experiment  at  the
time,  but  she  felt  the  effects  in  the  intervals  very  acutely.  It  is
satisfactory,  however,  to  know  that  but  one  feelins;  of  the  most  un-
equivocal reprobation  pervaded  teachers  and  pupils  at  this  inhuman
and  unprofessional  act.*  Dr.  Duncan  hints  oniv  that  it  was  a  sur-
geon. Mr.  Wakley  declares  the  surgeon  was  Mr.  Liaton;  for,  in
the  index  is  this  reference  to  the  two  pages  in  which  the  experiment
is  related: —

**  *Li8Tt>N,  Mr.,  inhuman  experiment  by,  pp.  278,  281.'
'*  Yet  it  is  impossible  not  to  think  the  statement  erroneous,  be-
cause Mr.  Wakley  and  Mr.  Liston  are  now  inseparable  friends,  and
Mr.  Wakley  has  placed  his  son  under  Mr.  Listou.  There,  how-
ever, stands  the  accusation  in  the  index  to  Lancet,  May  22,  1830,
p.  278,  vol.  18."

The  following  are  examples  of  the  useful  removal  of  sen-
sibility when  no  surgical  instrument  was  employed,  or  of  ab-
solute pain.

''  June  24th.  Alunga,  a  woman,  with  slight  contractions  of
both  elbow-joints  from  rheumatism,  with  acutepain  on  pressing
the  ulnar  nerve  at  the  elbow.  At  first,  she  did  not  bear  much
handling  without  awaking;  but  on  being  left  alone,  the
trance  deepened,  and  she  permitted  me  to  work  her  joints  as
if  they  were  door-hinges,  and  extend  them  to  the  necessary  ex^
tent  without  awaking.  One  arm  was  much  freer  in  its  move-
ments afler  the  first  process,  and  there  was  no  pain.

**  June  27th.  Alunga  complains  of  considerable  pain  from
the  extension  in  her  left  arm  to-day,  and  the  nerve  at  the
elbow  is  Tory  tender.  I  passed  my  fingers  along  the  course
of  the  nerve  for  a  few  minutes,  which  removed  the  pain,  and
allowed  her  to  extend  the  arm.  I  then  held  my  fingers  before
her  eyes  for  a  few  seconds,  and  she  fell  into  my  arms  quite
insensible.

**  I  have  already  mentioned  several  instances  of  persona
awaking  and  falling  back  again  into  the  trance  immediately,
and  in  this  woman  it  may  be  seen  several  times  in  one  fore-
noon. The  difficulty  they  find  in  opening  their  eyes,  even
when  quite  awake  and  in  possession  of  all  their  other  senses,
is  very  curious,  and  characteristic  of  the  mesmeric  state.

'^  I  awoke  this  woman  to-day,  and  she  sat  up  conversing
with  us  as  usual ;  but  she  could  not  possibly  open  her  eyes,


44 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

and  when  ordered  to  do  so,  was  obliged  to  pull  her  eye-lids
asunder  with  her  fingers :  but  the  leye-lids  would  not  remain
open,  the  muscles  being  completely  relaxed.  By  rubbing
and  blowing  in  her  eyes,  the  difficulty  was  removed.

**  July  3rd.  Alunga.  This  woman's  pains  fly  about,  but
I  can  chase  them  away  in  less  than  a  minute  from  any  part,
by  merely  holding  my  fingers  over  it.  She  came  limping  up
to  me  to-day  to  have  the  pain  taken  out  of  her  heel  and
'  tendo  Achillis ;'  and  this  I  did  by  passing  my  fingers  along
the  pained  part,  and  then  grasping  it.  She  expressed  the
utmost  astonishment  and  delight  both  by  words  and  looks.

''Aug.  18th  I  requested  Dr.  B.  to  satisfy  himself  if  the
woman  Alunga  had  pain  in  any  part  of  her  body.  On  being
asked,  she  said  there  was  acute  pain  in  one  heel,  and  Dr.  B.
spent  a  long  time  in  testing  the  reality  of  its  existence.  He
at  last  said  that  he  was  convinced  there  was  considerable  pain
in  that  spot.  I  then  passed  my  fingers  over  the  part  for  a
a  minute,  and  grasped  the  heel  as  firmly  as  I  could,  and  she
declared  the  pam  had  vanished  ;  and  Dr.  B.  allowed  that  it
had."

''  May  16th.  Ramtarun  Battacharjie,  whose  arm  was  am-
putated on  the  5th  instant  while  in  the  mesmeric  trance,  com-
plains oi great  pain  in  the  stump  to-day. To  be  mesmerised,

''  May  17th.  He  was  easily  put  to  sleep  yesterday,  and
slept  for  three  hours  (the  average  length  of  the  induced  slum-
ber); on  awaking  whs  free  from  pain,  and  remains  so  to-day."

**  May 22nd.  Keeno,  a  prisoner;  saw  him  for  the  first  time
to-day,  at  1 1  o'clock.

"He  has  had  a  severe  pain,  extending  from  the  left  eye-
brow to  one  half  of  the  head,  for  four  days ;  and  there  is  pain
on  pressure  at  the  supra-orbitar  notch.

''  I  made  him  lie  down  on  the  floor  in  a  small  room  of  the
hospital,  and  in  twenty  minutes  left  him  asleep  with  one  arm
suspended  perpendicularly  in  the  air :  locked  the  door,  and
left  him  alone.

'*  I  returned  at  1  o'clock,  and,  opening  the  door,  found
him  lying  exactly  as  I  had  left  him.  He  awoke  whilst  I  was
looking  at  him,  and  said  that  he  had  not  been  asleep.  On
being  asked  why  his  arm  was  still  in  the  air,  he  could  sive  no
account  of  it.  So  insensible  is  the  approach  of  sleep  under  this
grand  narcotic,  or  so  instantaneous  its  invasion,  that  gene-
rally no  trace  remains  in  the  minds  of  the  sleepers  of  the  cir-
cumstances attending  their  repose.  This  will  be  seen  in  the
following  case  also. He  awoke  perfectly  Jree  from  head-ache.


eammunicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  45

There  is  a  little  pain  on  pressing  the  supra-orbitary  foramen :
three  leeches  to  t>e  put  over  it.

''May  24th.  iNo  return  of  pain. Discharged  cured."

*'  May  22nd.  Went  to-day  to  see  my  patient  Mr.  Cler-
mont, head  master  of  the  Lower  School,  Hooghly  College,
and  found  that  he  had  gone  out  to  his  duty.

"  Mrs.  Clermont  mentioned,  that  she  was  suffering  from
one  of  her  constitutional  nervous  head-aches,  which  com-
mence with  a  pain  in  the  back  of  the  neck,  that  spreads  over
the  scalp  and  around  the  eye-brows.  She  has  been  weakly
and  nervous  of  late.  I  said,  that  she  had  better  permit  me
to  try  the  effect  of  mesmerism  on  her  complaint :  tnat  I  had
just  put  a  prisoner  to  sleep  with  a  similar  disease,  and  ex-
pected to  find  him  well  on  my  return.

''  No  objection  being  made,  I  requested  her  to  turn  her
back  to  me,  and  sit  erect  in  her  chair,  and  describe  anything
uncommon  she  might  feel  during  the  process.  After  a  few
minutes,  she  said,  that  she  felt  a  warmth  in  the  neck,  and
on  extending  my  manipulations  it  advanced  to  the  head  and
eyes.  In  about  eight  minutes,  she  said  the  pain  was  much
less,  but  that  she  felt  very  drowsy.  Upon  which,  I  asked,
*  Shall  I  put  you  to  sleep  V  In  reply,  she  only  smiled  ;  and
in  two  minutes  more  sne  lifted  her  right  hand,  put  it  to  the
side  of  her  head,  and  went  to  sleep.  At  this  moment  a  lady
entered  the  room,  (Mr.  Clermont's  sister,  I  afterwards  learned,)
and  I  begged  her  to  be  eood  enough  to  remain  by  Mrs.  Cler-
mont till  1  returned  with  her  husband.  Having  found  Mr.
Clermont,  I  asked  his  pardon  for  taking  such  a  liberty  with
his  wife  without  his  consent,  and  requested  him  to  return
with  me  to  be  present  at  her  waking.  We  found  her  as  I
had  left  her,  with  some  members  of  the  family  looking  on.
I  extended  her  arm  at  a  right  angle  from  her  boay,  in  which

Eosition,  or  any  other,  it  remained  fixed  till  I  moved  it,  and
er  sister-in-law  pricked  her  hand  several  times  unheeded.  As
I  saw  the  party  becoming  uneasy,  I  proceeded  to  awake  her,
and  it  requiredf  considerable  trouble  to  do  so.  When  awoke,
she  felt  confused  and  ashamed  to  have  been  found  asleep  by
me,  and  it  was  only  after  long  reflection  and  questioning  that
she  recalled  the  circumstances  under  which  she  had  gone  to
sleep. 7%6  head-ache  was  quite  gone  when  she  awoke.

''  6  o'clock  p.m.  There  is  no  head-ache,  and  she  feels  and
looks  greatly  refreshed."

"  June  2nd.  Mrs.  Clermont  says  that  she  is  better  than
ihe  has  been  for  a  long  time  past;  having  never  risen  with-
out a  head-ache  of  late. There  has  been  no  return  of  the


46  Accouni$  of  more  painless  Surfficai  Operations,

complaint^  and  she  no  longer  feels  the  distressing  languor
and  oppression  that  she  complained  of  till  operated  upon  by


me.


«


May  24th.  When  we  were  leaving  the  hospital,  the
native  doctor  reported  that  a  man  had  just  been  admitted
with  a  pain  on  one  side  of  his  head,  like  the  man  cured  on
the  22nd.  I  desired  him  to  be  brought  before  us,  and  he
stated  that  for  the  last  six  days  he  had  suffered  from  an  acute
intermittent  head-ache  confined  to  one  side  of  his  head ;  that
it  commences  at  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  continues  till
12  p.m.  Turning  to  my  friends,  I  observed  that  I  should  like
to  entrance  this  man  as  a  preventative,  if  they  felt  disposed
to  look  on.  They  consented  to  do  so ;  and  Mr.  Fisher  has
i>een  good  enough  to  send  me  his  notes  of  what  followed.

''Mr.  Fisher^s  Report.

*' '  On  Saturday  last,  the  24th  instant,  I  visited  the  jail
hospital  in  company  with  Dr.  Esdaile,  for  the  purpose  of
seeing  a  prisoner  awakened  out  of  the  mesmeric  trance,  who
had  been  suffering  for  some  time  from  an  inflamed  eye.  Upon
our  arrival  the  man  was  awake,  and  no  farther  experiment
could  therefore  be  tried  with  this  patient.  Another,  however,
immediately  presented  himself,  who  had  never  been  subjected
to  the  mesmeric  influence  before,  and  whom,  I  believe,  the
doctor  had  never  seen.  He  had  been  suffering  much  for  some
days  from  severe  pains  in  the  head  and  face,  and  though  not
at  that  moment  in  pain,  it  was  thought  advisable  to  try
the  effects  of  mesmerism  as  a  preventative.  The  manipula-
tions were  immediately  commenced,  and  in  seven  minutes  the
man  was  in  a  cataleptic  state.  We  tried  various  means  to
test  the  intensity  of  the  trance.  His  limbs  rigidly  main-
tained themselves  in  any  posture  in  which  Dr.  Esdaile  chose  to
place  them,  and  at  last  he  was  raised  up  on  his  feet ;  his  back
Deing  slightly  bent,  his  arms  stretched  over  his  head,  which
was  drooping^  upon  his  shoulder :  and  he  remained  fixed  in
this  constrained  position  for  some  time,  without  exhibiting
any  symptoms  of  consciousness  or  uneasiness.  After  a  few
minutes,  he  was  left  to  his  '  deep  repose,'  reclined  upon  the
ground ;  and  I  understand  that  since  this  first  trial,  he  has
never  had  the  slightest  return  of  the  pains  of  which  he  pre-
viously complained.  We  were  much  astonished  at  the  pheno-
mena exhibited  on  this  occasion ;  the  limbs  being  so  extra-
ordinarily supple,  and  at  the  same  time  capable  of  being  so
rigidly  fixed  in  any  position,  at  the  will  of  the  operator.

*' '  K  Fish  BR.
"  '  Chinsurah,  29th  May,  1846/  "


communkMed  by  Dr,  EUiotson.  47

''Jaly  10th.  Oboychum  Roy,  a  Hindoo  Zemindar,  a
stout  brave  man,  had  his  left  fore-arm  struck  off  at  the  mid-
dle, twelve  days  aeo,  in  defending  his  house  against  a  gang
of  dacoits,  who  killed  his  servant  at  the  same  time.

**  There  are  two  white  rings  on  his  arm,  the  marks  of  cruel
ligatures  applied  to  stanch  the  blood,  and  the  wonder  is,  that
the  arm  was  not  strangled  and  mortified.  Several  pieces  of
dead  bone  required  to  be  removed.  This  of  course  gave  him
much  pmn,  for  which  the  whole  arm  was  mesmerised,  wUh  great
reU^.  He  dropped  asleep  in  half  an  hour,  for  a  short  time,
and  slept  the  whole  of  that  night :  the  only  sleep  he  has  had
since  the  injury  was  inflicted"

*'  July  2nd.  Nobee,  an  elderly  worn-out  woman,  has  had
rheumatic  pains  in  her  back  for  some  months.  She  was  put
into  the  trance  to-day ;  and  on  waking,  was  freefrompain.

^*  July  4th.  Dookee,  for  several  months  has  had  a  con-
stant feeling  of  insects  crawling  about  his  face  and  scalp,  and
it  extends  often  to  the  whole  body ;  his  eyes  wink  and  water
constantly.  He  was  mesmerised  for  an  hour,  and  then  got  a
dose  of  water.  He  soon  complained  of  general  agitation  and
feeling  of  alarm  at  the  heart,  and  then  slept  a  little.  On
leaving  the  hospital,  ttie  sense  of  formication  had  entirely  dis-
appeared, and  he  did  not  wink  more  than  natural."

''July  13th.  Four  men  and  one  woman  were  entranced
to-day.

'' rfo.  1.  for  lumbago.

"No.  2.  for  sciatica.

''  No.  3.  for  pain  in  the  course  of  the  crural  nerve.

"  No.  4.  for  syphilitic  rheumatism.

"  No.  6.  ditto.  They  were  all  affected  by  the  usual  mani-
pulations, assisted  by  the  breath.

''  After  the  first  day,  the  trance  was  induced  in  them  all
by  giving  mesmerised  water  daily,  till  the  17th;  on  which
day,  the  uiree  with  neuralgic  pains  were  dismissed  cured ;  the
syphilitic  cases  were  not  materially  benefitted,  as  might  be
expected,  the  constitutional  specific  disease  being  still  in
operation."


"  August  6th.  Golam  Hossein.  His  knee  has  been  con-
tracted to  this  extent  n.  for  two  months  from  rheu-
matism. He  was  mesmerised  or  the  first  time  at  11  o'clock,
and  his  leg  made  quite  straight  at  1  p.m.  I  both  felt  and
heard  the  new  ligamentous  adhesions  cracking  under  my
hands.


48 Accounts  of  more  painless  Swrgtcal  Generations,

"  It  did  not  at  all  annoy  him,  and  on  coming  to  his  sensesi
half  an  hour  after,  he  knew  nothing  about  it/'

The  power  of  mesmerism  over  inflammation  has  been  de-
monstrated in  Vol.  II.,  p.  239;  Vol.  III.,  p.  24,  326,  512.
I  am  happy  to  add  fresh  proofs  from  Dr.  Esdaile's  experience.

''May  17th.  Nazir,  a  Mussulman,  aged  20,  is  suffering
from  the  sequelae  of  ophthalmia^  of  two  months  standing:
the  sight  of  trie  left  eye  is  destroyed  bj  the  kis  adhering  and
protruding  through  the  cornea.

''  The  cornea  of  the  right  eye  is  muddy,  with  superficial
ulcerations  on  it,  and  a  pterygium  is  forming ;  there  is  con-
stant lacrymation,  and  he  cannot  distinguish  a  to/uie  man  from
a  black  one.  Placing  him  erect  in  a  chair  before  me,  I  di-
rected the  operation  to  the  eyes  and  head  generally,  and
desired  him  to  mention  what  he  felt  as  we  proceeded.

"  He  soon  said  that  he  felt  an  agreeable  warmth  where
my  fingers  passed  without  touching  him;  shortly  after  he
said  that  his  eyes  were  easier,  and  on  extending  the  process
to  the  body  he  felt  a  general  warmth  pervade  it,  and  sweat
stood  in  drops  on  his  face.  He  next  said  that  he  felt  a  fear
come  over  him  that  he  could  not  account  for,  and  desired
greatly  to  sleep.  Having  no  desire  to  go  iarther,  we  here
stopped.  To  be  put  into  the  sleep  to-morrow,  and  mesmer-
ised for  ten  minutes  daily  afterwards.

"  May  22nd.  Has  been  mesmerised  daily,  and  put  to  sleep
twice.  He  always  feels  better  after  the  process ;  says  that
after  it  his  body  feels  light  and  pleasant ;  and  the  expression
of  his  face  is  much  improved.  The  lacrymation  has  ceased,
and  he  read  two  words  m  Bengalee  and  rersian  to-day :  the
pterygium  will  be  the  only  impediment  to  his  sight."

"  May  24th.  Nazir  Mahomed,  a  prisoner.  Saw  him  for
the  first  time  to-day,  at  11  o'clock  a.m.  For  the  last  four
days  he  has  laboured  under  acute  inflammation  of  the  con-
junctiva of  the  right  eye.  The  conjunctival  vessels  form  a
raised  zone  around  the  cornea:  there  is  constant  lacrymation;
pain  over  half  the  head,  and  he  cannot  distinguish  objects.

*'  I  made  him  lie  down  on  the  floor,  and  rendered  him
cataleptic  in  twenty  minutes :  then  putting  his  clasped  hands
above  his  head  in  the  air,  I  locked  the  door,  and  took  the
key  with  me  to  Chinsurah,  where  I  met  Mr.  Money  and  Mr.
Fisher,  who  are  much  interested  in  my  proceedings,  and
daily  ask  '  What  progress  V  I  answered,  that  there  was  a
man  entranced  waiting  my  return,  and  they  offered  to  go


commusncaied  by  Dr.  EOiotwn.  49

back  with  me.  On  opening  the  door,  we  found  that  the  man
had  just  awoke,  (after  IJ  nours,)  and  being  asked  in  what
attitude  he  found  himself  on  waking,  he  said,  that  his  hands
were  clasped  above  his  head.  The  patient  reported,  that  the
pain  had  quite  left  the  side  of  his  head,  and  only  a  little
remained  about  the  eye ;  the  eye-lid  moves  much  freer,  and
the  watering  is  less.  His  general  feelings  were  greatly  im-
proved ;  his  body  before  the  process  was  hot  and  heavy,  and
18  now  cool  and  light.

''  Cold  water  to  the  head  and  eyes  constantly — a  dose  of
physic  at  night.

**  May  25th.  Nazir  Mahomed,  entranced  yesterday  for
conjunctivitis. He  has  slept  well  all  night.

''  There  is  no  pain  in  the  head ;  very  slight  uneasiness
about  the  eye;  no  watering — zone  of  blood-vessels  around
the  cornea  gone,  and  the  inflammation  is  reduced  from  vivid
redness  of  the  acute  stage,  to  the  dull  brick-red  colour  of  the
chronic  state.  He  can  now  see  very  well  with  the  inflamed
eye.

^'  I  put  him  on  a  high  stool  before  me,  and  desired  him  to
tell  me  when  he  became  sleepy ;  but  he  had  not  time  to  do
so,  as  I  left  him  sitting  entranced  in  five  minutes.

''  This  was  done  with  the  idea  of  lessening  the  determina-
tion of  blood  to  the  head.

'*  I  then  proceeded  to  my  usual  business  in  Chinsurah. . . .
we  returned  to  the  jail  hospital,  after  I  had  been  absent  an
hour,  and  found  the  man  sitting  precisely  as  I  had  left  him,
and  his  body  colder  than  natural.  The  influence  was  now
nearly  worn  out,  (partly,  no  doubt,  by  remaining  by  mus-
cular exertion,  though  insensible  to  it,  so  long  in  this  con-
strained position,)  and  he  awoke  soon  after  my  arrival.  He
said,  that  the  eye  was  still  farther  improved,  and  it  looked
80.  I  consider  the  case  terminated,  it  was  evident  to  the
most  unpractised  eye,  that  inflammation  was  incompatible
with  such  a  state  of  the  system."

'*  June  29th.  Sidissur  Ghose,  a  prisoner,  I  saw  for  the
first  time  to-day,  at  eleven  o'clock.  He  had  been  sufierine
for  three  days  from  orchitis,  and  the  part  has  been  enlarged
for  years ;  it  was  exceedingly  tender  to  the  touch,  and  he
was  bent  double  in  walking.  I  determined  to  subject  him  to
the  trance,  if  possible,  for  the  same  reasons  that  induced  me
to  treat  an  inflamed  eye  in  this  way.  It  seemed  very  pro-
bable to  me,  that  inflammation  would  die  out  during  many
hours  of  absolute  repose  to  the  nervous  and  muscular  systems,
as  fire  expires  for  want  of  fuel ;  pain  and  irritation  being  the

TOL.  IV.  B


60 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

exciting  and  sustaining  causes  of  inflammatory  action.  Re-
move aJl  pain  and  sensibility  for  hours^  and  it  is  only  natural
to  suppose  that  the  circulation  will  return  to  its  natural  chan-
nels. If  the  absolute  repose  be  too  short  to  recruit  the  vital
energies  at  once^  the  mesmeric  slumber  can  be  reproduced  at
will^  when  once  established^  and  how  important  mesmerised
water  would  be  for  this  purpose  I

''  6  o'clock  p.m.  The  man  entranced  at  eleven  o'clock  to-
day, awoke  at  three.  He  bore  pressure  much  better,  and
there  was  no  heat  in  the  part.  I  administered  three  ounces  of
mesmerised  water,  and  in  five  minutes  he  was  in  the  trance.

''  June  30th.  Sidissur  awoke  at  nine  o'clock  last  night,
but  went  to  sleep  again  immediately,  and  slept  well  all  night.
The  swelling  has  decreased,  and  I  can  squeeze  the  part  aU  over
unthoutpain,  and  he  walks  erect  without  uneasiness.  The  disease
is  subdued,  but  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure,  I  repeated  the
dose  of  water,  and  in  three  minutes  he  became  insensible.

''July  1st.  Sidissur  slept  till  nine  o'clock  last  night,  and
had  a  good  night  afterwards.  Dismissed  cured  at  his  own
request."

"  Julv  8th.  Geereeah,  a  girl  of  10  years,  is  suffering  from
suppressio  urinsB  for  two  days,  in  consequence  of  violence
done  to  the  perineum,  by  which  the  recto-vaginal  septum  has
been  destroyed.  The  vesica  extends  up  to  the  umbilicus,  and
the  abdomen  is  extremely  tender.  It  is  impossible  fistulam
demittere  in  iter  urin»  from  the  inflamed  state  of  the  parts.
I  mesmerised  her  for  half  an  hour,  after  which  she  slept  for
an  hour,  minxit  abunde  on  waking,  and  all  disagreeable
symptoms  immediately  disappeared,  and  she  was  cured  with^
out  a  dose  of  medicine"

.  I  must  bestow  my  humble  tribute  of  admiration  upon
Dr.  Esdaile.  He  has  proved  himself  a  man  of  both  acute
and  philosophical  observation.  Not  merely  the  general  facts
which  he  details,  but  the  modifications  of  the  phenomena,
are  exactly  what  we  all  notice  here,  and  in  reading  every
case  we  could  fancy  some  one  or  other  of  our  own  pa-
tients was  spoken  of:  and  yet  his  observations  are  nearly
all  to  him  original.  His  moral  character  is  as  fine  as  his
intellectual.  He  loves  truth  sincerely  and  ardently  and  for
her  own  sake,  and  dares  to  proclaim  her  in  the  sight  of  all
men,  defending  her  with  the  most  undaunted  and  noble
spirit,  well  contented  to  have  the  world  against  him  while
engaged  so  gloriously.*

*  I  of  coane  hare  substituted  many  latin  expressions  in  my  extracts.— J.  E,


communieaied  by  Dr.  ElUotson.  51

IV.  Application  of  Caustic  to  the  Eye,  in  Devonshire.

I  have  been  favoured  by  a  private  gentleman  in  Devon-
shire with  an  account  of  the  painless  application  of  caustic  in
the  mesmeric  state  to  the  eye,  which  would  otherwise  have
been  agonized.


St


Alphington,  6th  March,  1846.
My  dear  Doctor, — I  find  from  ^Lt.  Janson  that  you  wish
specific  information  respecting  the  application  of  caustic  to
Miss  Hole's  eye,  and  she  having  kindly  given  her  consent,  I
with  great  pleasure  communicate  to  you  the  facts  of  the  case,
with  foU  permission  to  publish  them  with  the  names  if  you
think  proper.

''About  a  month  since  I  was  asked  by  my  firiend  Mr.
Parker,  the  surgeon,  to  mesmerise  Miss  Hole,  the  daughter
of  the  late  Bev.  —  Hole,  of  Belstone  in  this  county,  with  a
view  to  the  improvement  of  her  general  health,  and  also  with
the  hope  of  hieing  able  to  apply  caustic  to  her  eye  without
causing  the  excruciating  and  prolonged  pain  she  before  suf-
fered under  the  operation.  I  succeeded  in  producing  sleep
at  the  first  sitting  in  about  twenty  minutes.  On  the  fourth
time  of  her  being  mesmerised,  caustic  was  applied  to  the  left
eye,  and  so  perfect  was  her  insensibility  to  pain  that  on  being
awoke  she  was  perfectly  unconscious  of  anything  having  been
done ;  and  the  next  morning  Mr.  Parker  with  difficulty  per-
suaded her  that  she  had  without  her  knowledge  gone  through
an  ordeal  which  she  from  previous  experience  so  much
dreaded.  During  my  absence  from  Exeter,  Mr.  Janson
kindly  mesmerised  Miss  Hole  twice,  and  the  first  time  caustic
was  again  applied  with  perfect  success;  but  on  the  second
occasion  she  only  felt  some  incovenience  on  awaking,  owing
to  the  coma  not  having  been  continued  sufficiently  long  after
the  operation.  (I  alwavs  continue  it  at  least  two  hours  after
the  eye  has  been  touched.)  On  Saturday  last  caustic  was
again  used  during  sleep,  and  Miss.  H.  was  not  aware  of  it
until  she  looked  in  the  glass  some  time  after  I  had  roused  her.
Mr.  Parker  is  of  opinion  that  the  eyes  derive  much  more
benefit  when  the  caustic  is  applied  in  the  mesmeric  than  in
the  normal  state.

''  In  Miss  Hole's  case  the  phenomenon  of  '  prevision'  or
'prescience'  is  beautifully  manifested,  added  to  which  she
gives  most  specific  directions  as  to  her  treatment.  One  in-
stance of  which  I  will  now  relate  as  briefly  as  I  can.  On  the
27th  of  February,  while  in  sleep-waking,  she  informed  me
that  on  the  3rd  of  March  she  should  have  severe  spasms  in

e2


52 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

the  head ;  they  would  commence  a  little  before  7  o'clock  in
the  evening ;  and  she  directed  that  precisely  at  7  a  pint  of
blood  should  be  taken  from  her  left  arm^  at  night  some  ape-
rient medicine  must  be  administered^  and  the  next  day  tonic
mixture ;  the  latter  to  be  taken  three  times  a  day  for  four
days.  She  also  said^  '  K I  am  not  bled  on  the  3rd  of  March,
I  shall  lose  the  sight  of  my  right  eye  (the  left  is  already
dark)/  Miss  Hole  having  requested  that  the  bleeding  might
be  performed  during  sleep^  Mr.  Parker,  Mr.  Janson,  and
myself,  visited  her  at  a  little  after  six  in  the  evening  of  the
3rd,  and  found  her  already  suffering  considerably  and  in  a
state  of  partial  delirium,  objecting  to  be  put  to  sleep,  or  to
allow  either  of  the  party  to  approach  her.  I  however  suc-
ceeded in  producing  coma  in  less  than  three  minutes,  and  at
a  quarter  before  seven  the  spasms  commenced  and  were  very
violent.  At  five  minutes  before  seven  o'clock  I  enquired  if
she  would  be  bled.  She  replied,  '  Not  yet — ^it  wants  a  few
minutes  of  seven.'  At  seven  she  was  bled  to  the  extent  she
directed ;  the  spasms  continued  exactly  one  hour  as  she  had
predicted,  after  which  she  became  quite  comfortable.  I  kept
her  asleep  altogether  three  hours  and  a  half,  when  I  awoke
her  perfectly  unconscious  of  anything  having  taken  place.

"  On  Mr.  Parker  visiting  Miss  H.  the  next  morning,  he
was  most  agreeably  surprised  to  find  her  so  comfortable.  She
has  mentioned  another  spasm  from  which  she  shall  suffer  on
the  evening  of  the  9th  instant,  and  directed  to  be  again  bled
to  the  extent  of  half  a  pint.  '  The  spasms  of  the  9th  will  be
just  as  severe  as  those  on  the  3rd,  but  will  not  last  so  long.'

"  I  had  forgotten  to  name  that  a  little  time  after  caustic
had  been  applied  the  first  time  during  sleep,  I  asked  Miss  H.
if  she  felt  any  pain  in  the  eyes.  To  which  she  replied,  '  A
little  in  the  one  to  which  caustic  was  applied  on  Sunday.'
This  was  not  the  eye  that  had  just  been  touched,  I  shall  be
happy  on  some  fhture  occasion  to  give  you,  if  desired,  a
report  of  anything  worth  naming  that  may  occur  in  the
above  case.

"  I  have  read  this  account  to  Mr.  Parker,  who  perfectly
agrees  in  every  particular,  as  a  proof  of  which  he  means  to
add  his  signature.

"Yours,  very  sincerely,

"  J.  C.  LUXMOOBE.

"  John  Battishill  Parker,  Member  of  the  Boyal

"  College  of  Surgeons,  London.
"  Exeter,''


eammunieated  by  Dr.  ElUoisan.  53

V.  Two  remarkable  Tooth  Extractions.

1.  Extraction  of  a  tight  Double  Tooth,  in  London.

So  many  teeth  have  now  been  extracted  vrithoat  pain  in
the  mesmeric  state,  that  I  should  not  have  thought  it  worth
while  to  record  another,  but  for  the  stupid  incredulity  of  the
medical  world  and  the  disposition  of  some  dentists  to  cringe
to  the  physicians  and  surgeons  who  they  think  can  be  of
service  to  them  and  form  a^mense  mqokty  fiercely  adverse
to  mesmerism.  I  trust  therefore  that  every  future  painless
extraction  will  be  recorded  till  our  enemies  lie  prostrate  at
our  feet,  as  for  their  comfort  I  tell  them  they  all  soon  must,
though  sprawling  in  the  same  heap  with  such  interesting  beings
as  Mr.  Wakley  and  Dr.  Forbes.  Independently  of  this  reason,
I  am  most  anxious  to  record  the  following  case  because  it
illustrates  an  important  point  in  producing  local  insensibility.

In  Vol.  II.,  p.  247, 1  mentioned  that  I  had  a  patient  who,
precisely  like  two  others,  has  insensibility  of  mechanical  in-
jury in  the  mesmeric  state  as  high  only  as  the  collar-bones.
I  contrived  to  take  the  sensibility  very  nearly  away  by  long
passes  with  contact  upon  her  cheek.  At  p.  888, 1  mentioned
that  another  tooth  was  extracted,  and,  as  we  were  not  hurried,  I
continued  the  passes  down  the  cheek  till  sensibility  gradually
left  the  outside,  then  the  inside  of  the  cheek,  next  the  outside,
and  then  the  inside  of  the  gum,  in  succession.  A  third  tooth
was  decayed  and  lately  gave  her  severe  pain,  which,  however,  I
was  always  able  to  remove  by  passes  upon  the  cheek  for  two
or  three  minutes,  when  she  came  to  me  and  was  thrown  into
the  mesmeric  state  in  the  morning.  But  it  was  better  for  the
tooth  to  be  extracted,  and  Mr.  NichoUes  again  obliged  me
by  operating  upon  her.  With  one  pass  she  was  thrown  into
the  mesmeric  state.  I  now  placed  one  of  my  forefingers  upon
the  outside  of  her  left  lower  gum,  and  the  other  upon  the
inside,  and  continued  drawing  them  along  the  gum  for  a
minute.  This  entirely  removed  all  sensibility,  for  I  forced
the  edge  of  my  naU  against  the  gum  without  giving  her  the
least  pain.  She  is  a  most  truthful  and  in  all  respects  excel-
lent girl,  as  a  daily  intercourse  with  her  for  three  years,
except  when  I  have  been  out  of  town  in  the  autumn,  has
amply  proved.  The  tooth  was  extracted  without  any  sign  of
pain ;  and  the  operation  was  difficult  and  cautiously  slow,  so
slow  that  during  it  I  twice  had  an  opportunity  of  turning
round  to  the  bystanders  and  remarking  how  excruciating  it
would  have  been  but  for  mesmerism.  She  said  she  had  no
pain  :  and,  to  use  Dr.  Esdaile's  words,  "  I  presume  she  knew
best.''  (p.  85.)  Of  course  when  she  woke  she  knew  nothing
of  what  had  passed,  and  was  delighted  to  find  the  tooth  gone.


54 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

The  following  is  Mr.  NichoUes's  account : —

"  Upon  examining  the  young  lady's  mouthy  I  found  the
offending  tooth  to  be  the  anterior  sinister-molar  of  the  infe-
rior jaw ;  and  was  somewhat  pleased  that  I  was  called  upon
to  perform  the  operation  under  the  mesmeric  insensibility^  as
I  foresaw  that  I  should  have  occasion  to  employ  some  consi-
derable and  continuous  pressure  in  consequence  of  the  con-
tiguous teeth  preventing  my  removing  the  tooth  by  the
expansion  of  the  external  alveolar  plate.  After  the  young
lady  was  placed  in  a  mesmeric  trance^  the  tooth  was  removed,
notwithstanding  the  great  obstacles  alluded  to,  without  the
least  sensibility  on  the  part  of  the  patient.  On  her  recovery
from  the  mesmeric  influence,  she  expressed  much  surprise  at
having  lost  her  troublesome  companion.

"  This  operation  was  performed  in  the  presence  of  two
friends,  one  a  medical  gentleman,  who  both  expressed  their
astonishment  and  delight  at  such  an  extraordinary,  and,  to
them,  novel  exhibition.^'

This  is  the  fifth  tooth  that  Mr.  Nicholles  has  been  good
enough  to  remove  from  my  patients  in  the  mesmeric  state :
and  he  has  always  allowed  me  to  tell  the  thing  to  every  body,
thus  not  resembling  either  Mr.  Tomes,  who  would  extract  but
would  not  tell,  or  those  other  worthies  who  would  not  ex-
tract at  all.*  A  London  dentist  has  just  made  it  known  that
several  of  his  colleagues  here  have  resolved  to  refuse  to  ex-
tract teeth  in  the  mesmeric  state.  Happily  Mr.  Nicholles  is
not  one  of  the  magnanimous  party.f  Mr.  Bell  of  the  city  ad-
mitted the  truth  of  mesmerism  when  I  shewed  him  the  Okeys
at  the  hospital  and  has  admitted  it  ever  since  on  all  occasions
and  does  not  refuse  to  extract :  nor  does  Mr.  Purland  4  <uid
I  have  received  the  following  note  from  a  stranger : —

'^Mr.  Hayes  presents  his  compliments  to  Dn  Elliotson,
and  begs  to  inform  him  that  he  will  have  much  pleasure  to
^  extract  teeth  in  the  mesmeric  state,'  as  also,  if  his  humble
aid  would  tend  to  advance  that  noble  science  mesmerism,  by
publicly  certifying  to  the  result  of  operations  under  that  state,
he  will  at  all  times  be  happy  in  so  doing.

''Mr.  H.  has  twice  operated  in  the  mesmeric  state,  and
has  practised  mesmerism,  non-professionally,  for  some  years.

"  Mr.  H.  has  Dr.  Elliotson's  '  Cases'  and  The  Zoist  on  the

•  Vol.  III.,  p.  508.

t  Besides  these  three  from  Mary  Ann,  he  extracted  one  from  Rosina
(Pamphlet,  p.  66),  and  one  from  the  younger  Okey.
X  Vol.  in.,  p.  214,  216.


communicaied  by  Dr.  ElHotson.  56

table  in  his  reception  room,  notwithstanding  the  detractions
of  Dr.  Forbes  and  the  sneers  of  professional  brethren.

''  13,  Brook  Street,  March  10,  1846.
''  J.  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.,  &c.  &c.  &c.''

2.  I  have  just  received  the  following  interesting  narrative
for  The  Zoist  .—

"  Plymouth,  March  14th,  1846.
''  Difficult  case  of  Tooth  Extraction  in  the  mesmeric  state,
without  pain.

''to  the  editob  of  the  zoist.

''  Sir, — Permit  me  to  add  my  mite  to  the  mass  of  valuable
evidence  which  you  have  accumulated  in  proof  of  the  power
of  mesmerism  as  a  preventive  of  human  suffering,  in  cases
of  surgical  operation.  Notwithstanding  the  sneers  of  the
college  authorities,  who  act  and  speak  as  though  the  dignity
of  the  profession  would  be  endangered  if  there  were  no  pangs
inflicted  by  the  use  of  their  instruments,  we  find  growing
evidence  that  it  is  only  the  wilful  indifference  or  bigotted  pre-
judice of  medical  practitioners  which  enforces  the  endurance
of  needless  suffering  upon  a  vast  number  of  our  fellow-crea-
tures ;  for  although  mesmerism  might  not,  and  would  not,  in
all  cases  accomplish  the  desired  object,  yet,  firom  the  very
hmitted  experiments  which  have  hitherto  been  tried,  a  suffi-
dent  number  of  successful  cases  may  be  cited,  to  prove  that
it  is  not  only  worth  while  to  try  the  experiments  upon  a
broader  scale,  but  that  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  every  en-
lightened and  humane  man  to  do  so.

''  On  Thursday,  the  6th  of  March,  an  operation  was  per-
formed at  my  house,  by  Mr.  Brendon,  surgeon-dentist,  of
this  town^  upon  a  young  woman  in  my  employ  as  nurse-maid.
She  had  been  suffering  very  severely  from  tooth-ache  for  seve-
ral days,  and  Mr.  Brendon,  being  applied  to,  advised  the  ex-
traction of  a  stump  of  a  double  tooth  in  the  lower  jaw,  which
was  decayed  completely  down  to  the  level  of  the  jaw-bone.  i

Knowing  the  girl  to  be  a  good  mesmeric  subject,  I  placed  her  ;

under  the  influence,  and  Mr.  Brendon  commenced  the  ope-  j

ration  by  lancing  the  gum  extensively. He  then  introduced  |

the  key,  and  made  several  attempts  to  lift  the  stump,  but
could  obtain  no  hold  for  the  instrument :  he  was  equally  un-
successful with  the  forceps,  the  tooth  breaking  away  as  pres-
sure was  applied.  He  then  resorted  to  the  punch,  with  which
he  endeavoured  to  extract  the  £eings  separately,  but  was  again
foiled  in  his  efforts,  as  he  was  fearful  of  injuring  the  alveolar


56 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

process  by  employing  too  much  force.  Twenty-five  minutes
had  elapsed  since  the  commencement  of  the  operation,  and
during  this  period  not  the  slightest  symptom  of  feeling  had
been  evinced  by  the  girl ;  not  a  sound  indicative  of  any  sen-
sation had  escaped  her  lips,  nor  had  she  shrunk  in  the  sUght-
est  degree  from  any  application  of  the  instrument,  although
Mr.  Brendon  stated  that  under  ordinary  circumstances  the
operation  would  have  been  more  painful  than  the  removal  of
six  teeth.

"  Mr.  Brendon  now  left  the  house,  and  returned  some
hours  afterwards,  accompanied  by  a  professional  friend.  The
girl  had  in  the  meantime  been  kept  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,
with  the  exception  of  about  half  an  hour,  when  she  was
awoke  to  take  her  dinner.  She  said  she  was  totally  uncon-
scious of  any  operation  having  been  performed ;  but  in  a  very
few  minutes  after  she  was  awoke,  excruciating  pain  came  on,
the  result  of  what  she  had  undergone.  I  soon  threw  her  into
the  sleep  again,  and  at  five  o'clock  Mr.  Brendon  and  Mr.
Bate  arrived ;  and,  having  minutely  examined  the  jaw,  the
former  gentleman  succeeded  in  very  skilfully  removing  the
larger  &ng  with  the  punch  and  forceps.  He  was  however
again  baffled  with  the  smaller  fang,  which  appeared  to  be
completely  buried  in  the  socket.  The  most  perfect  insensi-
bility was  manifested  by  the  girl;  but  after  watching  the
operation  for  some  time,  I  began  myself  to  feel  symptoms  of
faintness,  and  the  girl  soon  complained  of  feeling  faint  too,
and  requested  that  her  hands  might  be  placed  in  cold  water.
This  was  done,  and  unfortunately  it  had  the  efiect  of  imme-
diately rousing  the  girl  from  the  mesmeric  sleep,  and  restor-
ing her  to  consciousness.

"  Her  look  and  expression  of  terror  at  the  sight  of  the
operators  and  the  instruments,  were  very  striking,  and  shewed
how  utterly  unconscious  she  had  been  of  what  had  been  going
on.  I  endeavoured  again  to  put  her  to  sleep,  but  the  agita-
tion caused  by  her  sudden  fright  prevented  me  from  inducing
anything  like  unconsciousness.  Being  told,  however,  that
there  was  only  one  small  fragment  of  the  tooth  to  remove,
she  allowed  Mr.  Brendon  to  attempt  its  removal  in  her  waking
state.  There  was  however  the  usual  manifestation  of  shrink-
ing fear  shewn  by  persons  in  the  normal  state,  and  the  mo-
ment the  instrument  was  brought  to  bear,  she  screamed
loudly,  and  shewed  every  symptom  of  extreme  suffering.
The  fang  was  now  loosened  from  its  socket,  but  did  not  come
away  with  the  instrument,  and  she  refused  to  submit  to  any
further  effort,  saying  that  she  could  not  bear  a  repetition  of
such  pain.


communicated  by  Dr.  ElUotson.  57

I  requested  the  gentlemen  to  leave  the  room^  and  made
the  passes  over  her  face  for  some  minutes  without  however
inducing  unconsciousness.  After  a  short  time^  Mr.  Brendon
and  Mr.  Bate  returned  into  the  room,  and  told  her  that  the
fang  being  loosened  would  now  come  away  immediately,  and
that  the  operation  would  then  be  quite  completed.  She  was
with  considerable  di£Sculty  induced  once  more  to  place  herself
in  their  hands ;  and  Mr.  Bate  very  speedily  completed  the
diflScult  task  of  extracting  the  fang,  not  however  without
again  eliciting  loud  cries  from  the  poor  girl.  At  the  bottom
of  the  fang  was  found  a  small  abscess,  which  must  have  added
greatly  to  the  tenderness  of  the  part,  and  increased  the  seve-
rity of  the  operation.

'^  This  case  is  curious,  as  having  been  performed  partly  in
the  mesmeric  state  and  partly  in  the  waking  condition,  and  a
more  remarkable  contrast  could  not  have  been  presented.
At  one  period  there  were  all  the  indications  of  utter  uncon-
sciousness— the  muscular  system  relaxed — the  nervous  system
in  perfect  repose.  At  the  other,  every  symptom  shewed  the
keenest  susceptibility — the  hands  clenched — the  limbs  drawn
up,  and  the  most  piercing  screams  uttered.

''Neither  of  the  operators  had  ever  before  had  a  mesmeric
subject  under  their  hands.  They  were  perfectly  convinced  of
the  entire  unconsciousness  of  their  patient  whilst  in  the  mes-
meric state,  and  expressed  their  high  gratification  at  having
had  the  opportunity  of  witnessing  and  testing  so  remarkable

"  The  operation  was  one  of  extreme  difficulty,  owing  to
the  entire  decay  of  the  tooth,  and  had  it  not  been  conducted
with  great  skill  and  judgment,  the  extraction  could  not  have
been  accomplished.

"  I  am.  Sir,

"  Your  obedient  servant,

"  Edmund  Fry.*'

In  a  letter  to  me  which  accompanied  the  narrative,  Mr.
Fry  writes : —

''  You  would  have  liked  to  have  seen  the  case  of  tooth  ex-
traction. Many  of  its  features  were  most  curious;  and  a
more  triumphant  case  was  certainly  never  seen.  I  wish  that
Brodie  and  Aston  Key  (under  both  of  whose  care  I  have
been)  could  have  been  at  my  elbow,  while  the  punch  was  dig-
ging away  at  the  girFs  jaw  while  she  was  asleep,  and  then
presently  after,  when  awake,  to  hear  her  shriek  till  one's  ears
rang  again. It  would  have  bothered  them.''


S8 Accounts  qf  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

I  entreat  the  combined  refiising  dentists  to  persevere.  We
can  do  without  them.  The  ice  is  breaking.  The  fact  of  the
weak  editor  of  the  Medical  Gazette,  Dr.  Alfred  Taylor,
teacher  at  Guy's  Hospital,  noticing  the  Cherbourg  case,  even
as  he  does,  shews  a  change  of  weather :  and  a  general  thaw
is  certain,  though  it  will  be  oppressive  and  dirty.

Before  I  conclude,  let  me  inform  the  bustling,  but  only
bustling.  Dr.  Forbes,  that  the  narratives  of  this  paper,  and
all  the  other  splendid  cures  and  operations  in  the  various
numbers  of  7%e  Zoist,  are  modem  mesmerism :  and  he  would
do  well  to  sit  still  and  coolly  investigate  the  most  elementary
facts,  if  he  is  capable  of  investigation,  instead  of  running
about  to  exhibitions  of  clairvoyance  and  of  advertizing  his
disappointments  daily  in  the  newspapers,  under  the  false
name  of  modem  mesmerism,  and  stooping  to  puff  off  his
wretched  pamphlet  with  a  respectable  recommendation  from
the  Lancet,  written  by  Mr.  Wakley's  son,  a  mere  boy,  of
whom  the  profession  knows  no  more  than  of  Dr.  Forbes's
own  progeny. Let  him  listen  to  Dr.  Esdaile.

"  If  the  members  of  the  medical  profession  wish  to  see  and  un-
derstand the  effects  of  mesmerism  on  the  body,  the  natural  and  ra-
tional mode  is  to  attempt  to  develop  them  themselves  in  their  own
patients;  and  if  they  will  take  one  tithe  of  the  trouble  I  have  been
at,  I  can  promise  them  very  general  success.  Then  the  finest,  as
well  as  most  striking,  symptoms  will  be  equally  diagnostic  to  their
practised  eye,  and  their  understandings  will  be  left  clear,  and  free  to
study  and  imitate  the  curative  processes  of  nature,  undisturbed  by
doubts  and  suspicions  regarding  the  powers  of  observation  and  the
honesty  of  others."

He  has  just  published  a  letter  in  the  Athenaum  declaring
he  has  detected  a  M'^^.  Julie  to  be  an  impostor  of  a  clair-
voyante.  Suppose  he  has.  Is  there  therefore  no  clairvoyance?
Au^d  if  there^S  no  clairvoyance,  can  no  other  mesmen^  phe-
nomena  be  true  ?  Suppose  because  his  patron  declared  the
virtuous  Lady  Flora  Hastings  to  be  pregnant,  I  were  to  call
Sir  James  Clark  an  impostor,  a  mere  guesser  of  a  physician
on  all  occasions,  would  that  be  rationed?  And  suppose  Sir
James  Clark  were  so  proved,  would  there  be  no  such  persons
as  scientific  physicians  ?  And  if  a  diagnosis  of  pregnancy  wer«
impossible,  would  it  prove  all  medical  science  to  be  unreal?
Yet  Dr.  Forbes  in  the  Athenaum  of  Feb.  28th,  1846,  heading
his  paper  with  "  Mademoiselle  Julie,  or  Witchcraft  for  the
Aristocracy ,'*  says,  "  it  is  well  known  that  the  two  most  strik-
ing and  attractive  delusions  of  recent  times  are  homoeopathy
and  MESMERISM.^'  You  unblushingly  write  this  when  you  know


commumeaied  by  Dr.  Ettiotion.  59

the  host  of  indispntable  and  mighty  recent  facts  pnbliahed  in
The  Zaiat.  Your  conduct  is  very  sad^  and  you  calculate  your
own  interest  very  badly.

"  To  those  who  may  charitably  think  me  msd/*  says  Dr.  Esdaile^
''  I  only  wish,  for  the  sake  of  hamanity»  that  they  were  eqmdly
rabid  in  their  daily  deeds,  and  the  eooner  they  euimit  to  be  bitten
the  better;  far  voluntary  inoculation  is  eafer  and  pleaeanter  than
FORCED  contagion,**  p.  35.


My  two  mottos  are  firom  Lord  Campbell^  who,  in  perfect
ignorance  of  what  the  word  mesmerism  means,  has  forgot-
ten that  he  has  assumed  the  character  of  a  philosophical
author  and  is  not  pleading  a  cause  in  a  court  of  law,  where
too  often  the  advocate's  object  is  not  truth  but  victory,  bold
assertion  without  reference  to  fact  is  thought  clever,  hard
bullying  words  are  poured  into  the  ears  of  witnesses,  and
*'  divine  philosophy^'  is  unknown.  The  coarse  and  bad  habits
of  the  pleader  still  stick  to  him,  and  thus  disfigure  him  in  his
new  occupation.*  He  should  remember  the  words  of  Bacon,
whose  life  he  has  written, —

"  That  the  inquiry  of  truth,  which  is  the  love-making,  or  wooii^
of  it;  the  knowledge  of  truth,  which  is  the  presence  of  it;  and  the
belief  of  truth,  wmch  ia  the  enjoying  of  it;  is  the  sovereign  good  of
human  nature."

To  which  I  will  add,  in  the  words  of  Dr.  Esdaile, —

"  That  this  highest  gratification  of  humanity  can  only  be  at-
tained by  careftilly  training  and  exercising  our  intellect,  to  which  the
senses  are  only  handmaids."

As  your  lordship  presumes  to  give  an  opinion  upon  mesmerism
before  you  have  learnt  what  it  is,  I  will  further  add  from  Dr.
Esdaile,  that,

"  I  would  venture  to  recommend  you  to  examine  the  evidence  in
support  of  it,  as  you  would  do  in  any  other  matter  worth  enquiring
about;  and  I  can  confidentlv  promise  that  you  will  be  richly  re-
warded, and  I  should  think  that  you  could  not  be  better  employed."

*  Sir  Thomas  Wilde,  in  arguing  that  Mr.  Dyce  Sombre  was  sane  after  I
had  given  evidence  of  hie  insanity,  said  "  It  was  his  duty,  as  counsel  for
Mr.  Sombre,  to  insist  that  whatever  errors  or  follies  he  had  been  guilty  of
he  never  was,  and  is  not  now,  a  lunatic,  or  incompetent  to  the  management
of  his  property  or  person,  ilf^n  mighi  ikew  their  confidence  in  Dr,  ElUoimm^
er  belim  in  mesmerism,  and  escape  a  commission  ;  but  let  them  form  peculiar
habits  and  feelings,  entertain  a  suspicion  of  their  wife's  fidelity,  and  they
laboured  under  the  delusions  of  insanity,  and  must  be  confined  for  life/'
Morning  Chronicle,  July  16, 1844.--"  Dr.  Elliotoon,  with  his  ideas  respecting
Mesmerism,  was,  in  his  opinion,  quite  as  insane  as  Mr.  Dyce  Sombre."—


Tiaus,  July  17th. Lord  Chancellor  Lyndhurst,  so  far  from  gravely  rebuking
Sir  Thomas  Wilde  for  this  foul  language,  began  joking  with  him.


( 60 )

II.  ConiribtUums  to  the  Mathematics  of  Phrenology. By
Mr.  James  Straton. Aberdeen.

In  the  preceding  number  of  The  Zoiat  (Vol.  III.,  pp.  441 — ^6),
I  offered  a  few  particulars  intended  to  elucidate  more  fully
some  of  the  points  treated  of  in  my  "  Contributions  to  the
Mathematics  of  Phrenology"  In  that  number  I  confined
myself  chiefly  to  the  measurement  of  the  head  as  a  whole,
and  the  nature  of  average  sizes.  With  the  same  views  I  now
submit  some  additional  particulars  relating  to  the  subsequent
steps  in  the  practice  of  observation.

Measurement  of  parts.— In  measuring  the  head  in  separate
portions  or  regions,  the  structure  of  the  brain  must  be  kept
constantly  in  view,  and  care  must  be  taken,  first,  not  to  in-
clude any  part  in  one  region  which  functionally  belongs  to
another;  and,  secondly,  that  the  whole  mass  of  the  brain  be
included  as  nearly  as  possible,  in  the  first  instance,  in  the
sum  of  the  parts ;  so  that  the  same  proof  which  certifies  the
absolute  size  of  the  head,  may  also  certify  that  of  its  parts.

It  is  known  that  the  brain  is  a  fibrous  structure ;  that  the
medulla  oblongata  (M,  fig.  1)  is  a  common  centre  from  which
the  fibres  radiate  to  all  parts  of  the  convoluted  surface ;  and
that  the  fibres  from  the  centre  to  the  surface  of  the  brain,  are
part  and  parcel  of  the  cerebral  organs.  Such  being  the  case,
each  organ,  or  region  composed  of  a  bundle  of  oi^ns,  may
be  popularly  described  as  originating  in  a  point  near  M,  fig.  1,
and  spreading  outwards  as  it  passes  to  the  surface  of  the  brain.
Each  region  is  then  of  a  pyramidal  or  conical  shape,  the  base
being  the  convoluted  surface  shewn  in  the  figures,  and  the
apex  being  at  M,  fig.  1,  2,  8.

The  surface  of  each  region,  i.e.  the  base  or  broad  end  of
the  conical  mass,  is  bounded  by  an  irregular  or  waving  out-
line, corresponding  to  that  of  the  bounding  organs  which
compose  the  regions.  It  would  be  desirable  to  adhere  to  these
boundaries  in  taking  our  measurements ;  but  in  the  present
state  of  our  knowledge  this  is  impracticable,  if  not  impossible
in  most  cases.  Moreover  it  is  desirable,  nay,  indispensable,
that  the  parts  measured  have  the  shape  of  some  regular  geo-
metrical  W,  any  part  of  which  Ly  be  measured  sfpa-
rately,  if  that  shaU  be  found  necessary  at  any  of  the  subse-
quent steps  of  our  progress.  Now  the  natural  boundaries  of
each  region  being  a  waving  line,  it  of  course  presents  no
regular  figure,  either  round,  oval,  square,  oblong,  or  trian-
gular. It  being  impracticable  then  to  adhere  to  the  natural
boundaries  of  the  regions,  it  is  believed  that  a  sufScient  ap-
proximation to  accuracy  is  obtained  if  we  measure  the  largest


by  Mr,  Straian.  61

possible  portion^  or  nearly  so^  in  each  region  to  which  a  regu-
lar outline  of  surface  can  be  easily  and  certainly  found  by
observing  anatomical  points  and  lines ;  provided  that  the  part
measured  always  bears  a  proportional  relation  of  size  to  the
entire  region.  This  is  the  plan  which  I  have  adopted.  The
superficial  space  of  each  region  will  therefore  be  a  parallelo-
gram, more  or  less  long,  more  or  less  broad,  according  to  the
measurements  of  each  individual  case,  and  always  below  the
actual  size  of  the  phrenological  group  measured.  Cantrilmtions,
p.  25.

I  have  adopted  this  plan  the  more  willingly,  perhaps,  that
it  presents  some  peculiar  advantages.  It  dispenses  entirely
with  the  ordinary  ^'  mapping  "  of  the  head,  and  thereby,  first,
enables  those  who  know  nothing  of  phrenology  to  execute  the
specified  measurements  as  well  as  those  who  do ;  and,  secondly,
it  enables  the  mere  anatomist  to  examine,  to  verify,  or  refute,
the  great  leading  features  of  Grall^s  physiology  oi  the  brain,
by  systematic  measurements  of  anatomically  defined  portions.
I^ere  have  not  been  wanting  (if  my  memory  serves  me  right)
opponents  who  maintained  that,  apart  from  the  "  arbitrary
mapping,''  phrenology  had  no  support,  and  that  anatomical
measurements  would  overturn  the  whole.  The  results  of  such
measurements  applied  to  a  tolerably  extensive  variety  of  cases
are  given  in  the  CoTitrUnUions,  pp.  80  and  81 ;  copies  of  all
the  casts  there  quoted  may  be  seen,  examined,  measured,  or
purchased  in  every  town  in  the  kingdom,  and  I  wish  the  gen-
tlemen ioy  of  such  victory  as  they  are  justly  entitled  to  claim.
If  my  object  in  these  researches  had  been  to  serve  their  cause
only,  I  could  have  seen  no  alternative  as  yet  but  to  acknow-
ledge a  very  signal  defeat.

The  accompanying  figures  will  make  the  proposed  method
of  measuring  the  separate  regions  plain.  Fig.  1  represents  a
lateral  vertical  section,  fig.  2  a  horizontal,  and  fig.  8  a  trans-
verse vertical  section,  of  the  head.

The  Antebiob,  or  intellectual  region,  is

Bounded  by  13,  M,  22,  fig.  1.
And  32,  M,  32,  fig.  2.

The  parts  not  indnded  are  shewn  between  9  and  32  on  each  side,
fig.  2.

Coronal,  or  moral  region,  is

Bounded  by  13,  M,  15,  fig.  1.
And  19,  M,  19,  fig.  3.

The  parts  not  measured  lie  between  12  and  19,  fig.  3,  on  each
side.


62 Contriiuiums  to  the  Mathematict  of  Phrenology,
Fig.  1.


Fig.  2.  Pig.  8.


by  Mr.  Siraton,  63

Late&al,  or  aggressive  region^  is

Bounded  by 9,  M,  2,  fig.  2.
And  12,  M,  6,  fig.  3.

The  parts  not  measured  lie  below  the  line,  6,  M,  6,  fig.  3.

PoBTSRioB,  or  domestic  region,  is

Bounded  by  15,  M,  1,  fig.  1.
And 2,  M,  2,  fig.  2.

The  part  not  measured  lies  below  the  line,  M,  1,  fig.  1.

The  measurements  of  the  regions  are  described  in  the
Contributions,  pp.  25  and  26.  A  cast  of  the  head  of  Dr.  Oall
measured  in  this  way,  gives,  in  cubic  inches.

Ant.  20,  cor.  54,  lat.  34,  post.  46,  addi^=15,  entire  169,  proof  174

Before  we  can  render  the  measurements  inteUigible  and
useful  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  size  of  individual
organs  and  elucidating  character,  it  is  necessary  to  determine
what  sizes  constitute  an  equal,  normal,  or  model  balance  of
head ;  because  it  is  only  when  we  know  this  that  we  under-
stand whether  any  particular  measurement,  when  obtained,
IB  large,  small,  moderate,  full,  or  whatever  else  it  may  be ;
whether  any  head  measured  is  well  balanced  or  otherwise,
and  where  the  balance  is  in  preponderance  or  deficiency.  In
short,  we  must  be  able  to  understand,  when  the  size  of  any
region  is  determined,  in  what  size  of  an  equally  balanced
h^d  the  region  in  question  would  find  its  appropriate  place.
In  the  Contributions,  p.  28,  it  is  shewn  that  in  an  equally-
balanced  head  (of  any  size,  from  the  smallest  to  the  largest),
the  regions  measured  in  the  manner  specified  are  in  the  fol-
lowing proportion  :—

The  Anterior  region  is  one  tenth  part  of  the  head.
Coronal  region  is  three  tenths  of  the  head.
Lateral  region  is  two  tenths  of  the  head.
Posterior  region  is  three  tenths  of  the  head.

Such  being  the  case,  it  is  a  very  easy  matter  when  the
measurements  of  the  regions  of  any  head  are  obtained,  to
discover  what  the  balance  of  the  head  is.  Thus :  divide  the
cubic  inches  of  the  anterior  region  by  1,  the  lateral  by  2,  the
coronal  and  posterior  each  by  3 ;  annex  a  0  to  each  of  the
quotients ;  they  then  represent  the  cubic  inches  of  the  corre-
sponding model ;  or,  in  other  words,  multiply  each  quotient
by  10,  because  it  is  a  tenth  part  of  the  head  required.  Tak-
ing the  previous  example  of  (jail's  head,  we  thus  obtain : —


64 Contributions  to  the  Mathematics  of  Phrenology,

Anter.  20-rl=204  annex  a  0=200  cubic  inches  size  of  cor.  model.
Coron.  54-r3=18 „ =180  „  „

Later.  34-r-2=17 „ =170  „  „

Poster.  46-7-3=15 „ =150  „  „

Absolute  size  of  Dr.  Gall's  head^  174  cubic  inches.


We  thus  complete  the  second  step  (the  first  is  measuring
the  head  as  a  whole,  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  442 — 4)  in  the  pro-
cess of  estimating  development,  and  now  the  individual  pecu-
liarities become  apparent  so  far  as  the  balance  of  the  regions
can  exhibit  them.

Up  to  this  point  the  process  is  entirely  mathematical,  the
sizes  obtained  are  absolute  or  positive,  and  the  figures  (the
number  of  cubic  inches  imperial  standard)  can  be  understood
in  one  sense  only,  by  all  parties,  at  all  times,  and  in  all
places,  however  widely  separated  their  fields  of  observation
may  have  ever  been.  Up  to  this  point,  then,  uniformity  of
estimate,  definite  language  or  terms  of  size,  the  use  of  one
clearly  defined  and  fixed  value  of  scale,  is  secured  in  practice.
And  farther,  the  terms  of  our  scale  being  positive  or  absolute,
comparison,  or  relative  size,  becomes  obvious  on  a  glance  at
the  figures ;  not  only  as  regards  the  different  sizes  of  heads,
but  the  different  regions  of  any  one  head  may  be  compared
with  the  others  of  the  same  heaa,  and  with  those  of  any  other
head  whatever  which  has  been  measured  in  the  same  way.

The  scale  proposed  fZoist,  Vol.  III.,  p.  435),  is  a  very
simple  modification  of  that  in  common  use  in  this  country.
The  terms  10,  20,  80,  and  so  on  up  to  200  or  higher,  repre-
sent the  cubic  inches,  or  absolute  size  of  the  head,  to  which
the  mode  of  application  cannot  be  misunderstood.  But  the
application  of  the  terms  to  express  the  size  of  the  separate
regions  and  individual  organs,  may  require  a  brief  explana-
tion. There  are  two  ways  in  which  the  sizes  of  parts  may  be
expressed.  First,  by  the  inches  and  fractions  which  they  really
measure.  This  could  easily  be  done — ^is  done  indeed  in  the
first  instance — with  the  regions,  because  we  measure  their
size ;  but  it  is  impracticable,  if  not  impossible,  to  measure
each  individual  organ.  We  have  just  seen,  however,  that  to
know  the  number  of  inches  in  any  part  or  region  of  the  head,
is  chiefly  useful  for  our  purpose,  by  leading  us  to  the  equally-
balanced  head  to  which  the  part  corresponds.  The  force  of
this  will  be  more  fully  perceived  by  looking  again  at  the
measurements  of  Dr.  GalFs  head.  To  see  that  the  anterior
region  is  20  inches,  the  coronal  54,  the  posterior  36,  and  so
on,  as  we  have  found,  conveys  little  satisfactory  meaning  to
the  mind  until  the  farther  information  is  obtained,  that  20


t

99


by  Mr.  Straion.  65

inches  of  an  anterior  region  is  that  of  an  equally-balanced
head  of  200  inches ;  and  so  with  the  others :  all  is  then
plain^  because  the  positive  information  conveyed  furnishes  a
standard  of  comparison  which  renders  the  whole  intelligible.
This  leads  us  to  the  second  mode  by  which  the  size  of  parts
may  be  stated^ — that  which  we  propose  to  adopt ;  namely,  to
designate  the  size  of  the  regions  and  organs  by  that  of  the
equally-balanced  heads  to  which  they  respectively  correspond.
Following  this  role,  we  would  say  of  the  regions  of  Dr.
Gall's  head,  that  the

Anterior  is  200»  that  is,  *' very  large/'
Coronal  is  180, „ <<  large."
Lateral  is  170, „ '' rather  large  or  large.'
Posterior  is  150, „ '*fall  or  rather  large.'

Designating  the  indiridual  organs  in  the  same  way,  we
would  say,

Amativeness 80,  "  small."

Adhesiveness  100,  "moderate."

Self-esteem 140,  "foil."

Benevolence 160,  "  rather  large."

And  so  on  with  all  the  other  organs.

For  the  sake  of  brevity,  which  is  of  some  consequence  in
practice,  the  final  0  may  either  be  inserted  or  omitted ;  it
matters  nothing  which,  prorided  it  be  distinctly  understood
and  remember^,  that  8,  9,  10,  14,  16,  &o.,  means  80,  90,
100, 140,  &c. ;  in  other  words,  that  the  parts,  whether  regions
or  organs,  to  which  these  numbers  are  attached,  are  understood
to  be  of  the  same  size,  as  the  same  parts  must  be  in  an  equal
balance  or  model  head  of  the  dimensions  indicated  by  the  at-
tached numbers.  For  the  same  reason  (brerity),  I  would  advise
to  discontinue  the  use  of  the  words,  "  smiJl,^'  "  large,''  &c,,
and  use  the  figures  only  in  the  sense  just  explained.

We  now  come  to  the  third  step  in  the  practice  of  observa-
tion ;  namely,  to  estimate  the  size  of  the  indiridual  organs.
This  is  a  very  simple  process,  if  the  prerious  steps  (measuring
the  head  and  the  regions)  have  been  executed  with  the  requi-
rite  accuracy.  The  same  term  of  the  scale  which  expresses
the  size  of  the  region  (i.e.  the  model  to  which  it  belongs),  ex-
presses also  the  average  size  of  the  organs  composing  the  re-
gion, and,  as  a  matter  of  course,  the  size  of  the  average
organs  in  the  region.  It  then  remains  for  the  eye  to  deter-
mine what  organs  in  each  region  are  above,  and  what  below,
and  how  much,  that  is,  how  many  sizes  either  above  or  below,
the  average  which  has  been  mathematically  determined ;  the
range  of  eye  being  limited to  one  region  at  a  time,  and

p


66 Contributions  to  the  Mathematics  of  Phrenology,


guided  by  the  mathematical  average  in  determining  the  size
of  the  other  organs.  It  is  presumed  that,  the  eye  being  thus
limitted  in  its  range  and  guided  in  its  estimate,  it  will  rarely
happen  that  practised  observers  will  differ  in  their  opinion  of
the  individual  organs  to  the  extent  of  one  size.

My  cast  of  Dr.  Gall's  head  presents  the  foUowing  pecu-
liarities : —

Anterior  reg.  20  inches,  corresponding  model  and  average  organs,

size  200,  or  20.

Organs  average  size — ^Weight,  Eventuality,  and  Time.

Organs  one  size  above  the  average — Individuality,  Form,  Size,  Lo-
cality, Language,  and  Causality;  all  210,  or  21.  No  organs  in
the  region  larger.

Organs  one  size  below  the  average  of  the  region — Number,  Order,
Tune,  and  Comparison;  all  190,  or  19.

Organs  two  sizes  below  the  average — Colour,  180  or  18;  none
smaller.

Coronal  region,  180.

Average  organs — Veneration,  Conscientiousness,  Wonder,  Ideality,
and  Imitation; 180,  or  18.

One  size  above  the  average  of  the  region — Benevolence  and  Firmness;
190,  or  19. None  larger.

Organs  one  size  below  the  average  of  the  region — Hope  and  Cautious-
ness;  170,  or  17. None  smaller.

Lateral  region,  170.
Average — ^Acquisitiveness; 170,  or  17.
Larger — Destructiveness  and  Secretiveness; 180,  or  18.
Smaller — Constructiveness,  160,  or  16;  Combativeness,  140,  or  14.

Posterior  region,  150.
Average  organs — none.
Larger — Amativeness,  180,  or  18;  Self-esteem, 170,  or  17;  Philo-

progenitiveness  and  Concentrativeness,  160,  or  16.
Smaller — Adhesiveness,  130,  or  13; Love  of  Approbation, 140,

or  14.

Arranged  in  the  usual  numerical  order^  the  development
will  stand  thus  : —


1  Amativeness  . .  18  or  180  mod.

12  Cautiousness.

.  17  or  170  mod.

2  Philoprogenit. 16

160

13  Benevolence  .

.  19

190

3  Concentrative. 16

160

14  Veneration. . .

.  18

180

4  Adhesiveness. .  14

140

15  Firmness . . .

.  19

190

5  Combativeness  14

140

16  Conscientious.

18

180

6  Destructiveness  18

180

17  Hope

.17

170

7  Secretiveness . .  18

180

18  Wonder

.18

180

8  Acquisitiveness  17

170

19  Ideality

.  18

180

9  Constructive.  ..16

160

20  Wit

.17

170

10  Self-esteem  ..17

170

21  Imitation . . .

.18

180

11  Love  of  Appro.  14

140

22  Individuality.

.21

210

ly  Mr.  Siraion.  67


30  ETentoality  . 20  or  200  mod.

31  Timo  ...... 20 200


32  Tone 19  190

33  Languaffe  ..  21  210

34  Comparison  19  190

35  Causalitj  ..  21  210


23  Form 21  or  210mod.

24  Size 21  210

25  Weight 20  200

26  Ck>loiir 18  180

27  Locality 21  210

28  Number 19  190

29  Order 19  190

It  is  not  meant  that  this  is  a  correct  development  of  Dr.
Gall's  head^  for  I  am  not  certain  whether  the  cast  before  me
be  correct  or  not.  My  present  object  is  merely  to  exempUfv
the  processes.  Let  it  then  be  granted  for  the  time  that  botu
the  cast  and  the  development  are  accurate.  The  development
is  now  complete  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term^  and  all
the  organs  of  the  head  may  be  compared  with  each  other,
and  with  those  of  any  other  head  whatever  which  has  been
estimated  in  the  same  way.  The  field  of  comparison  being
thus  opened  up  to  an  extent  which  is  only  bounded  by  the
human  race^  the  greatest  possible  facility  is  afforded  for  elu-
cidating development  and  character.

It  will  be  seen,  however,  on  referring  to  The  Zoist,  Vol.
III.,  p.  444,  that  one  step  still  remains  to  be  accomplished
before  the  elements  of  size  (and  power  also  of  course)  are
placed  in  their  true  terms  for  comparison.  It  will  there  be
seen  that  a  large  head  (say  210  inches)  contains  more  brain
in  proportion  (30  inches,  ue.  three  sizes),  than  a  small  head
(70  inches).  And  so  it  is  with  all  the  intermediate  sizes.
Now  as  the  mental  power  must,  tueteris  paribus,  be  in  pro-
portion to  the  size  of  brain,  it  follows  that  the  developments
of  the  larger  heads  must  be  increased  one,  two,  or  three  sizes,
as  the  case  may  be,  before  their  true  relative  size  to  the
smaller  heads  be  brought  into  view.  I  will  now  make  this
correction  on  Dr.  Gall's  development,  and  every  experienced
phrenologist  will  see  at  a  glance  the  broad  light  which  the
change  gives  on  the  immense  power  manifested  by  large
heads  as  compared  with  small.

Here  is  the  development  in  the  previous  order  and  the  brief-
est form,  I.e.  without  the  name  of  organ  or  final  0  to  the  sizes  :
No.  1-21 No.  10-19 No.  19-21 No.  28-22


2-18

11-16

20-19

29-22

3-18

12-19

21-21

30-23

4-16

13-22

22-24

31-23

5-16

14-21

23-24

32-22

6-21

15-22

24-24

33-24

7-21

16-21

25-23

34-22

8-19

17-19

26-20

35-24

9-18

18-21

27-24

*  The  cast  from  Oair§  Hting  head  was  taken  by  Mr.  Deville,  in  the  pre-
sence of  Dr.  EUiotsoD. — Zoist,

f2


68 Cures  of  Chronic  Deafness,  ifc,  tvUh  Mesmerism,

There  is  at  least  one  other  correction^  which  it  may  be
necessary  to  make  to  some  parts  of  some  heads.

If  it  be  the  fact  that  mental  power  is  more  dependent  on
the  grey  matter  of  the  convoluted  surface  than  on  the  internal
fibrous  parts,  and  if  that  surface  does  not  uniformly  bear  the
same  relative  proportion  to  the  central  mass,  then  in  every
abnormal  case  a  ^rresponding  correction  mo^t  be  made.  I
am  not  in  possession  of  the  facts  necessary  to  demonstrate
whether  such  be  really  the  case  or  not,  and  have  only  alluded
to  the  question  to  keep  it  in  view.  It  is  in  the  anatomical
theatre  where  it  must  be  settled.

And  now  one  remark  in  conclusion,  on  what  must  at  first
sight  appear  to  many  to  be  the  tedious,  troublesome  nature
of  the  proposed  method  of  estimating  development  mathema-
tically. I  have  repeatedly  seen  the  cranium  measured  accu-
rately as  a  whole,  and  in  regions,  at  the  first  attempt,  by
parties  who  knew  nothing  of  phrenology ;  and  all  my  experi-
ence as  yet  warrants  the  statement,  that  four,  five,  or  six
lessons  of  an  hour  each,  is  sufficient  to  make  any  person  of
average  talents  acquainted  with  the  system.  But  in  this,  as
in  everything  else,  extensive  and  careful  practice  alone  can
secure  accuracy,  ease,  and  confidence.  See  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,
p.  443.

James  Straton.


III.  Cures  of  Chronic  Deafness,  Epileptic  Fits,  ^c,  uriih

Mesmerism, By  Dr.  Buxton.

TO THE editor  O? THE ZOIST.

Sir, — In  the  number  of  The  Zoist  for  October,  1845,  you
were  pleased  to  record  some  of  my  cases  of  recovery  by  means
of  mesmerism.

The  two  following  are,  I  conceive,  remarkable  both  for
the  obstinate  and  generally  hopeless  nature  of  the  diseases,
and  for  the  length  of  time  required  to  bring  them  to  a  favour-
able termination.  I  regret  that  circumstances  do  not  always
admit  of  the  name  and  address  of  the  patients  being  given.

I  am.  Sir,

Your  obedient  servant,

J.  Buxton.
Brownlow  Street,  Bedford  Bow,
2Srd  Feb.,  1846.

Miss  S.,  set.  30,  a  dress-maker,  short,  spare,  pale,  and
of  a  nervous  temperament,  began  mesmeric  treatment  on  the


by  Dr.  Buxton.  69

25th  September,  1846.  She  had  been  very  deaf  for  above
nine  years,  and  complained  of  constant  loud  noises  in  the
head.  She  thought  that  the  deafiiess  had  been  caused  by  re-
peated colds,  and  by  her  brothers  often  startling  her  by  bawl-
ing in  her  ears.

When  with  her,  in  order  to  make  her  hear,  it  was  neces-
sary to  engage  her  full  attention,  to  be  near  her,  and  speak
clearly  much  above  the  ordinary  tone  of  conversation.  She
had  used  Solomon's  voice-conductors,  but  they  only  appeared
to  increase  the  deafness.

She  had  also  been  subject,  for  eight  or  nine  years,  to  fits
coming  on  at  uncertain  intervals,  bearing  the  general  charac-
teristics of  epilepsy,  but  unattended  by  the  foaming  at  the
mouth  or  subsequent  coma;  but  during  the  last  year  had
been  almost  free  from  them.  These  fits  were  attributable  to
very  severe  domestic  trials.

She  had  had  much  advice  and  medicine  from  various  me-
dical men  and  aurists,  but  without  any  permanent  benefit.

In  July  and  August,  1844,  she  had  a  sharp  attack  of  in-
fluenza, which  left  her  in  a  state  of  great  debility,  and  sub-
ject to  severe  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  giddiness,
dimness  of  sight,  especially  affecting  the  left  eye,  and  a  feel-
ing of  numbness  in  the  right  arm  and  leg.  As  medicine  and
a  tonic  plan  of  treatment  seemed  of  no  avail,  she  was  pre-
vailed upon  to  go  into  the  country  for  a  fortnight ;  but,  as
soon  as  she  returned,  the  symptoms  again  recurred  in  an  ag-
gravated form.

At  this  time  her  appetite  was  very  indifferent ;  she  had
constantly  severe  pains  in  her  sides,  chest,  loins,  and  between
her  shoulders ;  and  had  not  known  what  refreshing  or  uninter-
rupted sleep  was  for  nine  years,  being  subject  to  dre$im  ex-
ceedingly and  to  wake  frightened.  The  bowels  were  regular,
but  menstruation  was  accompanied  by  acute  suffering,  and
lasted  for  seven  or  eight  days,  but  was  scanty,  and  with  inter-
missions.

The  first  time  she  was  mesmerised,  the  eyes  closed  in
seven  minutes,  a  general  tremor  came  over  her,  and  she
seemed  to  have  much  head-ache.  If  I  left  her  the  eyes  opened,
and  she  became  much  agitated.  On  waking  her  in  three
quarters  of  an  hour,  she  was  unconscious  of  having  been  to
sleep,  but  felt  as  though  she  had  been  in  fits,  and  the  palms
of  her  hands  were  moist,  as  was  usual  after  the  attacks.

Sept.  26th.  Since  her  visit,  has  been  very  poorly,  and
passed  a  bad  night,  owing  to  head-ache  and  side-ache.  Mes-
merised as  yesterday,  and  while  in  this  state  had  several  at-
tacks of  convulsions,  with  violent  cardiac  action  and  anxiety ;


70 Cures  of  Chronic  Deafness^  SfC,  with  Mesmerism,

^but  on  wakins  only  remembered  that  she  had  had  very  great
pain  in  the  len;  side  of  the  head.  This  was  soon  dispelled  by
transverse  passes^  blowing  on  the  part,  &c.

28th.  Has  felt  exceedingly  well  since  I  saw  her,  having
had  long  and  sound  rest  at  night,  freedom  from  side-ache,
and  a  good  appetite.  Her  hearing  is  also  somewhat  better.
From  this  time  she  very  steadily  improved,  became  clairvoy-
ant by  the  17th  October,  so  as  to  predict  her  recovery  from
the  fits  by  the  end  of  March,  stating  that  till  then  they  would
be  frequent.  She  directed  me  to  mesmerise  her  three  times
a  week,  for  an  hour  each  time,  which  was  regularly  performed.
The  attacks  almost  always  occurred  during  the  mesmeric
state,  and  were  generally  more  or  less  felt  beforehand  work-
ing about  her,  by  causing  pain  in  the  head,  side,  or  chest.
Towards  the  end  of  October,  I  found  that  she  responded  to
phreno-mesmerism.

In  December  her  mother  died  after  a  month's  illness.
The  exertion  and  exposure  of  nursing  her,  and  the  sorrow
her  death  caused  my  patient,  offered  a  slight  check  to  her  re-
covery ;  and  in  January  she  told  me  that  she  would  have  eleven
more  fits,  the  last  to  take  place  about  the  end  of  May,  and
that  the  hearing  would  not  be  perfectly  restored  till  Christmas.

Till  September  she  came  to  me  twice  a  week,  was  able  to
predict  the  exact  time  the  several  attacks  would  befall  her,
and  I  was  thus  enabled  to  appoint  the  times  of  her  visits,  so
that  the  fits  should  occur  during  her  sleep,  and  by  this  plan
prevented  the  pains  always  consequent  on  these  attacks.
Once  or  twice,  when  prevented  being  punctual  by  other  en-
gagements, I  have  found  her  in  the  predicted  fit  before  being
mesmerised.

So  soon  as  February,  menstruation  had  occurred  without
pain  or  debility,  and  much  more  copiously ;  and  in  September
all  other  unpleasant  symptoms  had  entirely  disappeared,  ex-
cept partial  deafness,  and  sometimes  pain  in  the  ears.  Till
Christmas  she  was  mesmerised  once  a  week,  and  I  usually
applied  my  hands  to  the  ears  for  about  five  or  ten  minutes.
This  invariably  removed  pain,  if  present;  and  by  lessening
the  noises  in  her  head,  improved  the  hearing.

In  November  and  December  it  became  gradually  more
and  more  difficult  to  induce  sleep.  Till  then  it  had  been  easy
to  mesmerise  her  completely  in  a  quarter  of  a  minute,  by  fix-
ing my  eyes  on  her,  by  passes,  or  by  my  will,  even  when  she
was  unconscious  of  any  intention  on  my  part  to  produce  this
effect :  but  on  the  28rd  of  December  it  required  steady  passes
for  four  or  five  minutes.  She  was  then  quite  well,  having  a
good  colour,  stout, and  in  every  particular  enjoying  good


by  Dr.  Buxton.  71

health,  though  perhaps  still  a  little  hard  of  hearing.  In  her
sleep  she  told  me  it  would  do  her  good  to  come  once  or  twice
in  February,  as  that  month  always  tries  her.

Feb.  16th.  I  observe  scarcely  any  trace  of  her  former
deafness.  She  says  the  ears  have  been  a  little  uneasy  occa-
sionally, but  attributes  this  to  cold.  Otherwise  is  quite  well.
When  I  had  mesmerised  her,  she  told  me  that  after  one  or
two  months  it  will  not  be  in  my  power  to  send  her  to  sleep
at  all.

Had  not  this  patient  had  clairvoyance  su£5cient  to  predict
her  ultimate  recovery,  I  believe  that  both  the  patient  and
myself  would  have  been  dispirited  by  the  long-continued  re-
currence oi  fits  without  diminishing  in  severity,  and  have
given  up  the  treatment  in  despair.  This  case  encouraged  me
in  others  not  favoured  with  tlus  power,  and  during  the  treat-
ment of  the  following  case.

Epilepsy,

Elizabeth  Matthias,  aged  33,  married,  and  rather  spare,
living  at  No.  6,  Little  Windmill  Street,  Golden  Square.  One
morning,  about  two  years  and  a  half  before  I  saw  her^  she
awoke  much  frightened  by  the  screams  of  some  children.
She  continued  apparently  well  for  a  fortnight,  when  she  had
a  fit  which  seized  her  while  still  asleep,  about  3  or  4  o'clock,
a.m. ;  and  subsequently  became  subject  to  them  at  least  two
or  three  times  a  month.  At  the  onset  of  the  attack  she  would
throw  herself  across  the  bed,  and  every  muscle  appear  in  a
state  of  tension ;  the  hands  became  rigidly  clenched^  as  also
the  jaws ;  the  eyes  wide  open  and  fixed ;  and  this  condition
might  last  one  or  two  hours,  or  even  longer.  After  a  short
interval,  a  second,  and  even  a  third  fit  would  sometimes  come
on,  and  then  she  would  fall  asleep,  and  on  awaking  know
nothing  of  what  had  passed,  till  a  soreness  and  pain  all  over
her  made  her  aware  of  having  had  a  fit.  These  attacks  in-
creased both  in  severity  and  frequency,  being  worst  soon  after
menstruation.

For  these  symptoms  she  applied  to  one  public  hospital,
where  cupping  at  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  opening  medi-
cines were  prescribed;  but  on  finding  the  disease  gaining
ground  more  rapidly  after  ten  months'  treatment,  she  went
to  a  second,  and  then  to  a  third  of  the  neighbouring  medical
establishments,  with  equally  fruitless  results.

She  first  visited  me  on  the  11th  November,  1844.  Her
general  health  was  then  very  indifferent;  the  appetite  was
bad,  the  tongue  whitish,  the  bowels  regular,  menstruation
attended  with  great  pain  in  the  hypogastrium  and  loins,  last-


72 Cures  of  Chronic  Deafness^  ifc,  with  Mesmerism,

ing  three  or  four  iRjs,  and  scanty ;  and  she  was  subject  to
much  leucorrhcea  after  the  catamenia.  The  pulse  was  88^  and
rather  weak.  She  also  complained  of  almost  constant  weight
and  heat  at  the  vertex,  which  were  worst  in  the  morning.

As  I  placed  myself  before  her,  and  fixed  my  eyes  upon
her's,  before  I  had  time  to  raise  my  hand  and  begin  the
passes,  her  eyes  closed,  the  limbs  became  stiff,  and  the  breath-
ing laborious,  and  she  soon  passed  into  a  deep  sleep.  At  the
end  of  half  an  hour,  I  woke  her  with  some  difSculty  by
transverse  passes,  and  blowing  on  the  eyes  and  forehead.

Nov.  15th.  Mesmerised  equally  easily  and  thoroughly  for
nearly  an  hour.  Since  the  11th  has  had  excellent  nights,
better  than  she  has  known  for  many  months.  She  was  now
mesmerised  twice  or  three  times  a  week,  and  for  about  a
month  was  free  from  fits,  except  one  sharp  attack  of  hysteria,
to  which  she  had  been  occasionally  subject  during  the  two
previous  years,  but  after  this  time  the  fits  continued  appear-
ing frequently  till  the  end  of  May.

Meanwhile,  however,  health  and  strength  returned,  her
head-aches  subsided,  and  the  attacks  did  not  try  her  so  much.
She  took  cold  in  February,  her  appetite  became  very  indif-
ferent, a  severe  and  tight  cough  soon  came  on,  with  night
sweats,  and  other  signs  of  debility.  These  symptoms  were
soon  removed  by  the  use  of  pil.  scillse  co.  and  ext.  conii,  with
infus.  calumbs.  Soon  after  this  she  became  able  to  answer
questions  a  little  while  asleep,  and  told  me  that  had  she
attended  regularly,  she  would  have  been  cured  by  the  end  of
April,  but  now  this  would  not  be  the  case  before  the  middle
of  May.  After  this  period,  she  was  mesmerised  about  once
or  twice  a  week.  It  was  again  necessary  in  April  to  have
recourse  to  the  calumba  and  cough  pills,  and  in  May  still
finding  her  losing  flesh,  subject  to  nocturnal  perspirations  and
a  loose  cough,  I  gave  her  m.  x.  of  naphtha,*  terdie,  which  she
continued  to  take  for  five  weeks  with  considerable  benefit.

In  June,  after  great  exertions  on  a  very  hot  day,  and  im-
prudently drinking  some  beer  to  quench  her  thirst,  she  had
three  or  four  sharp  fits.  She  soon  after  gave  up  mesmerism,
finding  herself  quite  weU,  free  from  head-ache,  leucorrhoea,
and  from  pain  at  the  times  of  the  catamenia,  having  gained
flesh  and  colour,  and  again  enjoying  a  healthy  condition  of
intellect  and  memory,  both  which  had  been  impaired  by  her
disease.

To  this  account  I  must  add  that  in  the  middle  of  July
she  went  to  her  native  country,  Wales,  and  towards  the  end

*  Hastings. Pulmonary  Canwmpiion  8Ucce$tfuUy  treated  with  Naphtha,
Second  Edition ;  Cburchill,  London,  1845.


by  Dr.  Buxton.  73

of  the  month  had  a  slight  fit,  and  others  on  the  12th  Sept.
and  14th  Oct.,  attributable  to  anxiety.

In  January,  1846,  the  former  symptoms  of  cough,  noc-
turnal perspirations,  and  anorexia,  reappeared,  but  were  again
subdued  by  the  pilk  and  calumba,  and  she  has  since  been
well  in  all  respects.

She  still  appears  as  susceptible  of  mesmeric  influence  as
formerly,  as  she  passed  into  the  mesmeric  state  as  quickly  as
at  first  upon  my  mesmerising  her  once  in  January.

The  following  case  has  required  much  less  time  to  effect
recovery,  and  is  interesting  from  the  tender  age  of  the
patient.

Herbert ^  aged  20  months,  had  been  subject  since

birth  to  very  great  restlessness  and  wakefulness  night  and
day,  and  great  irritability  and  violence  of  temper,  shewn  by
loud  and  long-continued  screaming,  tearing  his  mother's  or
nurse's  caps  and  dress,  scratching  their  faces  and  hands
severely,  and  striking  them  without  even  the  least  provoca-
tion ;  but  after  the  lapse  of  one  or  two  hours  would  appear
for  a  short  time  gentle  and  affectionate.

These  symptoms  doubtless  originated  in  his  mother's  hav-
ing had  very  much  anxiety  and  nursing  to  undergo  shortly
before  his  birth.  She  lost  a  child  with  similar  symptoms  a
few  years  ago,  and  had  never  entertained  the  least  hope  of
rearing  this  one.

About  the  middle  of  last  November,  he  had  a  mild  attack
of  scarlet  fever,  but  owing  to  his  raving  fits  and  restlessness
was  exposed  to  cold,  and  swelling  of  the  throat  and  general
anasarca  came  on.  These  complaints  gave  way  under  the
use  of  diuretics  and  mild  aperients,  but  the  previous  symp-
toms increased  considerably,  and  he  was  therefore  given  a
little  syrup  of  poppies,  which  stupified  him  for  a  while,  but
effected  uo  permanent  change.

11th  Dec,  1845.  For  the  last  week  the  right  arm  has
hung  helpless  at  his  side,  and  if  any  one  attempts  to  move  or
touch  him,  he  begins  to  scream  violently.  He  has  also  fre-
quently put  his  hand  to  the  left  side  of  his  head,  expressing
pain  there.  The  left  ear  has  discharged  a  little  during  the
last  three  days.  His  tongue  is  clean,  and  though  the  bowels
are  sluggish,  the  appetite  is  good,  and  the  urine  now  passes
freely.

I  mesmerised  him  at  11  a.m.  by  placing  him  on  my  knee,
allowing  him  to  sit  upright,  and  made  the  passes  both  before
and  behind  him.  As  soon  as  I  took  him,  he  screamed  and
struggled  most  violently  to  go  to  his  mother,  but  in  about


74 Cures  of  Chronic  Deafness,  ifc,  with  Mesmerism,

four  minates  became  tranquil,  and  the  eyes  closed^  though
he  did  not  sleep.  I  returned  him  to  his  mother  in  about
twenty  minutes.  Having  had  cough  and  hoarseness,  he  was
given  a  little  antimonial  wine  and  tinct.  conii  three  or  four
times  a  day.

12th.  Has  been  rather  quieter  since.  Mesmerised  as  yes-
terday, and  this  treatment  was  continued  daily  at  uncertain
times  and  with  similar  effects.  For  some  days  the  left  ear
discharged  offensively. The  bowels  soon  became  regular.

On  the  19th  the  shoulder  had  swelled  to  a  great  degree,
distended  veins  were  distributed  over  the  part,  which  assumed
the  appearance  of  a  white  swelling  of  the  knee.  Linseed-
meal  poultices  were  ordered,  and  a  teaspoonful  of  cod-liver
oil*  was  given  three  times  a  day.  The  poultices  being  found
too  heavy  for  the  very  tender  state  of  the  shoulder,  were  soon
exchanged  for  carrot,  and  afterwards  starch  poultices.

Notwithstanding  the  increase  of  the  swelling,  and  its
tender  and  painful  eondition,  the  little  patient  continued  to
improve,  the  nights  were  quiet,  his  appetite  keener,  and  he
began  to  gain  flesh ;  and  on  the  night  of  the  10th,  the  tumor
burst,  just  under  the  acromion  process,  and  discharged  a  large
quantity  of  healthy  pus,  which  smelt  strongly  of  the  oil  be
had  been  taking.

I  then  gave  him  for  about  a  week  ferri  sesqui-oxydi  gr.  iss
bis  die,  and  he  rapidly  acquired  strength  and  health  under
these  means.

Since  the  19th  I  have  mesmerised  him  about  every  other
day,  generally  about  nine  in  the  evening,  as  I  had  become
capable  of  inducing  sleep ;  and  when  owing  to  other  engage-
ments I  have  been  prevented  seeing  him  for  four  or  five  days,
he  has  shewn  unequivocal  tendency  to  his  former  irritability
of  temper  and  wakefulness.  I  feel  no  doubt,  however,  of
being  able  to  perfect  his  cure.

The  difference  in  him  is  very  striking ;  firom  an  emaciated,
ill-tempered,  wayward  infant,  he  is  now  lively  and  playful,
can  nearly  walk  alone,  and  though  growing  very  fiAst,  is  tole-
rably stout.

I  have  met  with  two  or  three  cases  which  shewed  great
susceptibility  of  mesmeric  agency.  Some  who  were  poorly
derived  immediate  benefit,  and  others  were  subjected  to  the
unexpected  circumstance  of  an  afternoon  nap.

One  of  these  persons  was  a  young  lady  who  came  to  see
a  friend  of  her's  mesmerised.  No  sooner  was  he  affected  than
her  eyelids  began  to  flutter, although  sitting  about  three

*  Bennett  on  the  Oleum  JecorU  AselU, Highley,  Londoo,  1841.


by  Dr.  Buxton.  76

yards  off^  and  by  a  couple  of  passes  she  went  into  a  clair-
voyant state.  By  the  application  of  my  hand  I  removed  pain
from  the  chest  and  side,  from  which  she  had  suffered  for
some  days,  and  were  attributable  to  cold  and  cough,  and  Z
woke  her  in  about  an  hour,  when  she  expressed  herself  much
refreshed.

Her  sister,  who  is  some  years  her  senior,  also  finds  it  diffi-
cult to  keep  awake  in  a  room  where  mesmerism  is  going  on,
and  like  her  finds  great  benefit  from  it  when  poorly.

Herbert's  mother  cannot  stay  in  the  room  during  mes-
merism, without  feeling  great  weight  in  the  forehead  and
over  the  eyes,  with  great  drowsiness,  which  she  does  not  lose
till  she  has  had  one  or  two  hour's  sleep.  This  effect  has
always  occurred  whether  she  has  diverted  her  thoughts  and
attention  to  work  or  otherwise,  and  even  when  she  has  re-
ceived the  child  from  me  after  the  mesmerism.  She  has  not
had  occasion  to  try  its  use  as  a  remedy.

Several  other  persons  when  present  during  the  mesmer-
ism, have  experienced  a  strong  disposition  to  sleep,  which  has
not  left  them  till  the  next  day.


lY. Cures  of  severe  Female  Chronic  Ailments,  with
Mesmerism. By  Mr.  Decimus  Hands.

TO  THE EDITOR  OF THE ZOIST.

22,  Thayer  Street,
Manchester  Square.
Sir, — In  the  last  number  of  your  valuable  publication,
you  deemed  the  few  facts  I  had  contributed  respecting  the
sanativeness  of  my  mesmeric  touch  of  sufficient  importance  to
justify  their  insertion.  I  then  mentioned  I  could  furnish
some  other  cases  of  equal  interest  (in  my  opinion),  though
differing  in  the  method  of  procedure ;  accordingly  I  now  have
the  pleasure  of  transmitting  the  following  for  your  perusal,
and  shall  feel  gratified  if  their  publication  in  your  April  number
may  in  any  measure  promote  the  extension  of  mesmerism,
which  only  requires  to  be  more  bruited  to  become  universal,
at  least  amongst  the  suffering  and  afflicted ;  and  also  offers
a  delightful  study  connected  with  phrenology  to  the  more  cul-
tivated minds  of  the  educated  and  studious.  So  far  from  the
fanaticism  of  imputing  its  beneficial  results  to  satanic  agency,
it  will  be  found  one  of  those  choice  blessings  which  ought  to  raise
the  heart  in  pious  gratitude  to  the  great  giver  of  all  our  good.

I  remain,  Sir,  with  esteem.

Yours,  respectfully,
March  11th,  1846.  Decimus  Hands.


76  Cures  of  severe  Female  Chronic  Ailments,

P.S.  You.  will  find  my  statement  of  Mrs.  Osborne's  illness
accompanied  by  her  own  account,  which  necessarily  embraces
a  much  longer  period  than  that  of  my  acquaintance  and
attendance.

March  12th,  1846.  Daring  the  months  of  July  and
August  last  year,  I  was  in  occasional  attendance  on  Mrs.
Osborne,  residing  at  273,  Oxford  Street,  who  was  then  in  a
state  of  pregnancy  for  the  third  time,  and  affected  with  more
than  usual  sickness.  She  was  likewise  suffering  from  extreme
nervousness  and  continual  alarm  and  apprehension,  as  if  in
expectation  of  some  great  calamity  or  misfortune;  accom-
panied by  much  fearful  anxiety  as  to  her  confinement.  I  was
obliged  to  cheer  her  frequently  with  repeated  assurances  of  all
ultimately  being  brought  to  a  favourable  issue;  as  twenty
years'  practice  and  experience  warranted  me  to  believe  pro-
oable,  and  as  she  had  proved  on  former  occasions.

On  the  25th  of  August,  however,  I  was  sent  for,  as  she
had  become  much  more  seriously  alarmed,  from  an  utter  in-
capability of  retaining  either  fluids  or  solids  on  the  stomach ;
the  smallest  pills  and  even  water  were  rejected.  Soda  water,
though  taken  bv  a  teaspoonful  at  a  time,  yet,  after  swallow-
ing a  few,  was  likewise  rejected.  Under  such  circumstances,
the  dejection  increased,  and  she  lost  flesh  to  a  great  extent.
The  cough  that  had  been  troublesome  from  the  commence-
ment, now  augmented,  which  induced  me,  on  the  7th  of
November,  to  take  a  few  ounces  of  blood,  having  previously
very  slightly  mesmerised  her.

On  the  8th,  a  physician  saw  the  patient  with  me,  ap-
proved of  what  I  had  done,  and  said  he  thought  she  might
do  well;  but,  considering  all  the  prevailing  symptoms,  gave
a  cautious  prognosis  indicative  of  the  existence  of  danger.

This  state  of  things  continued  till  the  14th,  varying  but
little;  sometimes  apparently  better,  at  other  times  not  so
weU;  still  there  was  no  real  alteration  in  the  disease,  no  re-
mission of  the  sickness.  I  became  very  anxious  about  her^
when,  in  the  night  of  the  14th,  I  was  called  up  to  go  to  her.
I  found  her  very  ill,  in  the  arms  of  her  servant,  being  carried
about  the  room.  I  had  her  removed  from  her  ordinary  bed-
room to  the  drawing-room,  which  was  larger  and  loftier,  and
where  the  temperature  could  be  more  easily  regulated ;  and  at
5  o^clock  I  went  to  and  brought  my  brother  with  me,  wishing
him  to  see  Mrs.  Osborne,  and  to  consult  him  as  he  had  visited
her  with  me  a  few  times  previously.  He  proposed  our  going
back  to  Ellen  Dawson,  who  was  fortunately  staying  that  night
at  his  house.  We  did  so ;  she  was  called  up,  and  came  down
to  us  very  shortly  afterwards.


by  Mr.  D.  Hmd$.  77

He  asked  her  to  travel  with  him  to  see  a  patient.  She
consented,  and  he  took  her  hand  and  condncted  her  to  Oxford
Street.  (It  mnst  be  remembered  that  this  was  an  ideal  walk,
as  we  were  in  my  brother's  honse  in  Duke  Street,  and  she
was  travelling  mesmerically.)  On  her  supposed  arrival  at  the
house,  he  made  her  give  a  minute  description  of  it,  to  be  cer-
tain she  was  correct.  She  described  everything  most  accu-
rately, and  on  entering  the  shop  said  there  was  a  staircase
with  a  brass  hamster  descending  to  the  cellar,  which  my  bro*
ther  had  not  observed,  but  knew  it  to  be  right.  He  then
desired  her  to  look  for  the  staircase  leading  up  to  the  room
where  the  patient  was.  She  said,  '^  I  see  it.''  He  told  her
to  go  and  seek  her;  she  now  accordingly  entered  the  room,
described  it  distinctly,  as  well  as  the  person  of  the  lady,  and
proceeded  to  relate  all  the  symptoms  of  the  case  with  the
most  surprising  minuteness  and  fidelity.  Had  I  never  before
given  credit  to  mesmerism  and  clairvoyance,  I  could  not  have
resisted  such  convincing  proof  as  was  now  evidenced.  We
asked  her  what  was  to  be  done :  she  said  she  must  be  mes-
merised, or  she  would  die,  and  she  must  take  quinine ;  that
her  left  lung  was  so  changed,  nothing  else  could  restore  it.

But  here  arose  a  difficulty.  How  could  we  obtain  the
patient's  consent,  her  prejudice  being  very  great  against  mes-
merism, believing  it  to  proceed  from  satanic  agency  ?  Ellen
said,  my  brother  should  place  his  hand  on  her  head,  and  with
the  other  hand  take  her's,  as  if  feeling  her  pulse ;  and  that  a
current  would  thus  be  produced  which  would  effect  much.
We  then  left  EUen,  and  returned  to  Oxford  Street.

By  this  time  it  was  near  eight  o'clock  on  the  15th.  My
brother  did  exactly  as  Ellen  had  directed.  There  seemed  to
be  produced  great  tranquillity,  but  no  sleep ;  and  as  all  other
means  had  likewise  failed  to  obtain  so  desirable  an  effect,
poor  Mrs.  Osborne  became  dreadftiUy  exhausted  and  fatigued
from  constant  coughing,  an  extensive  expectoration,  and
sleepless  nights.  The  case  appeared  hopeless,  and  she  gave
herself  up  to  die.  My  feelings  were  most  painful,  having
been  acquainted  with  her  for  years,  and  attended  her  in  her
previous  confinements,  and  witnessed  all  her  sufferings.  There
had  grown  up  an  intimacy  and  friendship,  which  generally
subsists  between  a  professional  person  and  his  patients ;  con-
sequently the  respect  and  attachment  I  felt  towards  this  lady
made  me  more  than  usually  anxious.  I  now  considered  it  my
duty  to  prepare  Mr.  Osborne  for  the  but  too-probable  fatal
termination  of  her  illness,  either  by  immediate  death  or  con-
sumption.

On  or  about  the  25th  of  November,  I  was  surprised  and


78  Cfjores  of  severe  Female  Chrome  Ailments,

much  delighted  by  Mrs.  Osborne's  proposing  to  me  the  ques-
tion of  what  I  thought  mesmerism  would  do  for  her?  Of
course  I  hesitated  not  one  moment  (remembering  Ellen's
opinion)  to  express  my  belief  of  its  proving  beneficial,  and
dwelt  much  on  the  good  e£Pects  I  had  obtained  from  employ-
ing it.  She  then  became  anxious  to  have  it  tried  immedi-
ately. I  complied  apparently  to  satisfy  her,  but  as  Ellen  had
named  my  brother,  I  preferred  asking  him.  Accordingly
that  evening  he  mesmerised  her,  and  though  he  did  not  pro-
duce sleep  at  the  time,  she  slept  after  he  left  and  was  much
refreshed.  The  quinine  which  had  been  ordered  by  Ellen
not  having  been  retained  on  the  stomach,  I  had  substituted
very  small  doses  of  ammonia  in  solution  with  beneficial  re-
sults, and  she  continued  to  take  it  as  required,  but  from  this
time  it  was  but  seldom  given,  for  now  she  retained  food  and
fluids,  and  only  had  need  occasionally  of  a  mild  aperient.
Still  the  expectoration  continued,  and  the  matter  was  of  such
a  character,  accompanied  with  so  much  dullness  throughout
the  left  lung,  that  I  was  justified  in  fearing  consumption  had
already  set  in,  notwithstanding  Ellen's  assurances  that  she
would  get  well,  and  those  of  my  brother,  who,  confiding  en-
tirely in  her  knowledge,  constantly  encouraged  the  patient
and  her  friends  b^  prognosticating  her  complete  restoration.
He  ceased  mesmerising  her  after  the  first  week,  and  I  became
her  sole  mesmeriser.  A  few  weeks  afterwards  she  was  en-
abled to  go  out,  and  on  Christmas-day  she  went  to  see  a
friend  in  the  same  street.

I  happened  to  call  at  the  time  she  was  absent,  and  she
was  not  mesmerised  that  day.  She  had  a  sleepless  night,
and  in  consequence  I  believe  of  that  one  omission,  had  a
relapse  and  was  attacked  with  spasms  of  the  heart.  She
complained  of  this  for  several  days,  a.nd  asked  me  if  I  thought
the  spinal  support  she  had  formerly  from  Mr.  Aymesbury
would  be  serviceable.

I  made  a  stethoscopic  examination  of  the  heart,  and
heard  distinctly  the  bruit  de  soufflet  in  the  left  ventricle,  and  I
determined  to  ask  Dr.  Elliotson  to  see  her  on  the  first  oppor-
tunity ;  but  the  next  night  while  mesmerising,  (which  I  did
by  placing  my  fingers  on  the  one  side  and  my  thumb  on  the
other,  so  as  to  feel  the  pulsation  of  the  arteries  of  the  thyroid
cartilage,)  she  suddenly  cried  out  with  the  pain  of  her  heart.
It  then  occurred  to  me  for  the  first  time  that  I  might  succeed
in  removing  it,  as  I  had  done  in  other  instances,  by  the  simple
application  of  my  hand  to  the  affected  part.  I  Uien  placed  my
hand  on  the  region  of  the  heart,  when  to  her  great  surprise
and  delight,  as  well  as  that  of  her  husband  who  was  present.


by  Mr.  D.  Hands.  79

the  paiii  quite  left  that  place  and  removed  to  the  ulnar  nerve  at
the  bend  of  the  elbow.  I  put  the  extremities  of  my  fingers  in
contact  with  the  spot,  and  drawing  them  gently  and  slowly
down  the  arm  and  hand  drew  it  out  with  a  sudden  jerk,  and
left  her  quite  free  from  any  uncomfortableness.

I  saw  Dr.  Elliotson  the  next  day,  and  spoke  of  it  to  him :
with  his  accustomed  kindness  he  accompanied  me  to  visit  the
patient.  We  found  her  comparatively  well,  for  she  had  no
longer  any  suffering.  I  had  feared  structural  disease,  but  the
doctor  declared  it  to  be  only  functional,  caused  by  irre^lar
contraction  of  some  of  the  fibres  of  the  left  ventricle.  I  was
a  little  surprised  that  he  did  not  hear  the  sound  that  was  so
audible  the  previous  night.

I  continued  to  mesmerise  her  for  some  time,  occasionally
missing  a  night,  but  she  was  always  sure  not  to  sleep  that
night.  I  then  thought  of  Mr.  Osborne's  trying,  and  he
succeeded  when  I  ceased,  and  she  continued  improving  till
her  health  was  quite  reestablished,  when  mesmerism  failed  to
produce  any  effect.  She  now  sleeps  well  without  it,  far  better
than  she  had  done  for  years.  A  short  time  since  she  had  a
cold  and  could  not  sleep,  when  Mr.  Osborne  tried  again  to
mesmerise  her,  and  she  again  felt  its  influence  till  the  cold
was  gone^  and  then  it  lost  its  power  as  before.

"  Oxford  Street,
"  February  6th,  1846.

''Dear  Sir, — ^I  have  much  pleasure  in  sending  vou  the
following  particulars  of  my  iUness :  I  have  committed  to
paper  dl  that  I  can  remember  of  my  many  years  of  severe
suffering.  Had  you  not  expressed  such  a  wish,  I  think  it
would  have  been  no  less  a  duty  to  many  of  my  suffering
fellow-creatures,  who  may  be  benefitted  through  the  know-
ledge of  the  means  made  use  of  for  my  astonishing  recovery.
Persons  seeing  me  now  for  the  first  time  will  hai^dly  believe
the  acute  pain  and  severe  illness  I  have  borne  for  so  many
years  of  my  life.

''  When  I  was  only  nineteen  years  of  age,  I  was  attacked
by  typhus  fever,  and  ever  since  my  recovery  from  that  illness
I  have  suffered  continually  firom  ill  health,  never  having  re-
gained my  former  strength.  I  was  shortly  afterwards  seised
with  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  followed  by  a  relapse,  which
so  weakened  me  that  my  medical  attendant  and  my  friends
were  alarmed  at  the  apparent  symptoms  of  approaching  con-
sumption. I  continued  in  this  weak  state  nearly  a  year,
sometimes  feeling  better  and  at  other  times  worse,  when  hav-
ing taken  a  long  walk,  which  overtired  me  and  brought  on  an


80  Cures  of  severe  Female  Chronic  Ailmenis,

extraordinary  kind  of  inflammation  of  the  bowels,  I  was  so
reduced  as  to  cause  the  spine  and  almost  all  the  other  organs
to  be  affected.  I  was  then  attended  by  another  doctor,  who
continued  his  visits  for  some  months  but  without  my  deriving
any  benefit ;  indeed  I  became  rapidly  weaker,  insomuch  that
half  an  hour's  sitting  up  was  sufficient  to  weary  me.  This
gentleman  advised  my  coming  to  London  to  consult  Mr.
Aymesbury,  who  recommended  his  spine  support,  from  which
I  benefitted  greatly  for  a  time,  when  I  discontinued  its  use.

*^  I  was  married  soon  after,  and  almost  immediately  became
pregnant ;  and  during  the  whole  period  till  my  confinement,
I  never  was  one  hour  free  from  suffering  and  pain,  either
bodily  or  mental,  as  my  nerves  were  then  so  weakened  that  I
was  afraid  almost  of  my  own  shadow,  never  getting  any  rest
to  refresh  me ;  consequently  I  felt  nearly  worn  out  by  the
time  of  my  confinement,  and  even  after  I  had  recovered  from
that,  my  general  health  was  not  ameliorated,  nor  was  I  less
nervous ;  in  fact,  I  think  I  was  worse.  Fifteen  months  later
I  was  confined  of  my  second  child,  having  suffered  during
my  pregnancy  exactly  as  I  had  on  the  previous  occasion,  nor
did  I  obtain  more  rest  after  its  birth  than  I  had  after  that  of
the  first.  I  was  so  weak  as  to  find  my  life  almost  a  burden,
when  you,  dear  Sir,  advised  me  (having  attended  me  in  both
my  confinements)  to  try  the  sea-side,  which  I  did  in  the  early
part  of  last  summer,  but  without  deriving  the  benefit  we
anticipated.

''  I  now  nearly  despaired  of  ever  recovering  health  or
strength  sufficient  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  my  station  as  a  wife.
About  this  time  you  will  remember  my  having  a  violent  at-
tack of  inflammation  on  the  lungs,  attended  with  acute  pain
of  the  heart,  to  which  I  had  been  subject  ever  since  the  com-
mencement of  my  illness  at  the  age  of  nineteen.  The  physi-
cian who  attended  me  with  yourself,  agreed  with  you  in  pro-
nouncing me  to  be  in  a  very  precarious  state.  I  continued
thus  for  some  days,  when  you  brought  your  brother  to  visit
me,  and  you  expressed  a  wish  I  should  consult  another  physi-
cian I  this  I  declined,  feeling  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  at-
tendance I  had  already.  However,  I  at  last  yielded  to  the
solicitations  of  my  husband,  and  promised  to  comply  the  next
day  if  I  felt  no  better.  When  it  suddenly  occurred  to  me
(thinking  myself  past  cure),  could  mesmerism  do  anything
for  me  ?  I  had  never  had  faith  in  it  previously  :  knowing,
however,  that  you  practised  it,  I  asked  you  what  was  your
opinion,  and  you  said  it  might  give  me  a  chance,  but  you
did  not  urge  it.  I  then  felt  a  great  desire  it  should  be
tried  immediately,  and  you  very  kindly  complied  with  my


by  Mr.  D.  Hands.  81

reqoest.  I  now  need  only  add,  that  from  that  moment  I  be-
gan to  get  better.  I  slept  soundly  all  night,  ate  heartily  at
dinner  the  next  day,  and  felt  quite  a  different  creature*
Three  months  have  now  elapsed  since  that  night  when  I  was
first  mesmerised.  I  still  continue  well,  far  better  than  I  have
been  far  years;  and  notwithstanding  my  being  again  in  the
family  way,  I  sleep  well  every  night,  have  lost  my  dreadful
nervousness,  and  never  suffer  from  sickness.  I  am  a  wonder
to  myself  and  to  aU  around  me.  I  still  continue  to  be  mes-
merised, and  do  not  intend  to  cease  till  after  my  confinement,
as  I  feel  such  full  assurance  of  its  efficacy.

''  It  is  my  earnest  wish  that  my  case  may  be  published,
convinced  of  the  benefit  it  must  confer  on  all  who  nrom  their
acquaintance  with  it  may  be  induced  to  try  mesmerism  to  re-
lieve their  suffering.  Any  further  information  that  I  can  give
relative  to  my  long-protracted  painful  illness  and  subsequent
recovery,  I  shall  readily  give  with  pleasure,  in  answer  either
to  written  or  personal  enquiry.

"  I  remain,  dear  Sir,

"  Your  obliged,

"  M.  A.  OSBOBNS.''

2.  Disease  of  the  Uterus.

Another  case  of  severe  suffering  has  been,  I  am  happy  to
say,  completely  relieved ;  and,  as  the  poor  woman  eipresses
herself,  1  have  done  her  as  much  good  as  if  I  had  given  her
an  estate.  Had  she  possessed  one  when  I  first  saw  her,  I  am
sure  she  could  not  have  derived  much  pleasure  from  it.  In
the  month  of  January  this  year,  I  received  a  visit  from  a
philanthropic  gentleman,  Mr.  Briggs,  of  Nottingham  Place,
who  delights  in  going  about  to  do  good  to  the  poor  and  suffer-
ing. He  came  to  ask  me  to  see  this  poor  woman,  Mrs.  Don-
nelly, living  in  little  Coram  Street,  and  if  I  thought  mesmerism
wotdd  be  beneficial,  then  to  attend  her  professionally.

I  went  the  same  day,  found  her  in  bed,  pale,  languid,
not  able  to  sit  up ;  suffering  from  disease  and  poverty,  and
dependent  principally  on  the  benevolence  of  Mr.  Briggs  for
all  she  required.  Her  illness  was  ulceration  of  the  uterus,
proceeding  from  an  injury  received  two  years  previously.  It
had  been  neglected  at  first,  as  she  expected  shortly  to  be  con-
fined ;  and  it  was  not  till  some  months  after  the  child  was
bom,  that  she  was  obliged  to  get  a  letter  of  recommendation
as  ont-patient  of  the  University  College  Hospital.  At  first
she  was  obliged  to  go  there  in  a  coach,  which  by  the  kindness
of  the  aforesaid  gentleman  she  was  enabled  to  do.  She  con-
tinued to  attend  the  hospital  regularly  every  Friday  for  five

VOL.  IV.  G


82 Examination  of  a  case  of  Clairvoyance  at  Plymouth,

months,  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Murphy,  the  Professor  of  Mid*
wifery,  who  at  length  declared  that  an  operation  was  necessary,
and  that  nothing  more  could  be  done  for  her  withoui.  To  this  she
would  not  submit,  and  consequently  returned  no  more  to  the
hospital.  This  was  in  the  year  1843.  Since  that  time  she  has
had  no  farther  medical  advice  or  attendance,  except  in  another
confinement  in  December,  1844.  At  the  end  of  last  year,  she
was  mnch  alarmed  by  a  fire  which  broke  out  in  a  house  ad«
joining  the  one  she  resided  in.  This  fright  increased  her
illness.  I  found  her  in  much  pain  the  day  I  called  (Jan.  14),
and  proceeded  to  mesmerise  her :  she  slept  for  half  an  hour.
The  next  day  I  missed ;  but  the  following  one  she  slept  four
hours  and  a  half.  I  continued  almost  daily  to  visit  her.  She
slept  each  time,  with  this  difierence  only,  that  after  that  long
sleep  it  each  day  became  shorter  and  shorter,  till  at  last  she
awoke  as  soon  as  I  left  the  room.  In  all  I  mesmerised  her
eighteen  times,  and  she  is  at  the  present  moment  perfectly
recovered.

8.  While  attending  the  mother,  Mr.  Briggs  directed  my
attention  to  one  of  her  children,  a  girl  of  about  ten  years  of
age,  of  a  very  delicate  and  sickly  appearance.  I  found  her
suffering  from  prostration  of  all  the  powers  of  life,  great  de-
bility of  body,  pallor  and  sallowness  of  countenance,  ema-
ciation, and  a  troublesome  cough.  After  mesmerising  her
five  or  six  times,  her  restoration  to  health  was  completed
without  the  aid  of  any  medicine.

y.  Report  of  an  Examination  of  a  Case  of  Clairvoyance  at
Plymouth  before  a  Committee.  By  Mr.  Edmund  Fry.
Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

Plymouth,  March  8th,  1846.
My  dear  Sir, — I  have  great  pleasure  in  placing  at  your  dis^
posal  the  enclosed  narrative  of  the  committee  of  investigation
at  my  house.  I  hope  it  may  serve  the  purpose  of  stimcdating
to  further  enquiry,  and  may  suggest  one  or  two  useful  hinta
in  the  conduct  of  future  experiments.

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,

Veiy  faithfully  yours,

Edmund  Fry.
J.  EUiotson,  Esq.,  M.D.

TO THE EDITOR  OF  THE ZOIST.

Sir, — I  beg  to  present  you  with  the  following  particulars
of  a  case  of  clairvoyance  tested  before  a  committee  of  twelve


by  a  Committee,  83

geDtlemen  ot  this  town^  the  results  of  which  were  highly
satis&cto^.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  mesmeric  subjects
who  maoifest  these  phenomena  are  not  more  frequently  sub"
mitted  to  examinations  conducted  with  the  same  ditpaasumate
care.  I  shall  be  particular  in  giving  the  details  of  this  exa-
mination, because  I  believe  it  formed  a  striking  contrast  to
the  scenes  of  disturbed  and  angry  excitement  wMch  have  too
frequently  accompanied  the  private  as  well  as  public  displays
of  clairvoyance.

Many  very  successful  and  important  cases  of  mesmerism
have  been  conducted  in  Plymouth,  and  considerable  attention
and  interest  have  been  drawn  to  the  subject,  mingled  with
the  usual  display  of  scepticism  as  to  the  higher  phenomena,
particularly  of  clairvoyance.  Several  lectures  have  been  de-
livered upon  the  subject  at  the  Athenseum,  the  Mechanics'
Institute,  and  elsewhere ;  and  discussions,  sometimes  of  a
very  stormy  character,  have  followed  the  lectures.  A  lecture
was  delivered  at  the  Central  Hall,  by  Mr.  Lundie,  on  the
29th  of  January,  in  the  course  of  which  he  aDuded  to  charges
of  fraud  and  imposture  made  against  him  by  one  of  our
newspapers.  The  Plymouth  Journal;  and  in  reply  to  those
charges  he  offered  to  submit  one  of  his  subjects  (the  integrity
of  whose  case  had  been  violently  and  coarsely  assailed  by  the
journal)  to  the  private  examination  of  a  committee  of  twelve
gentlemen,  who  should  be  at  liberty  to  submit  him  to  any
tests  they  thought  proper.  A  gentleman  of  high  respecta-
bility in  the  town,  who  was  known  to  be  extremely  sceptical
on  the  subject,  immediately  rose  and  said,  that  if  such  a
committee  was  formed,  and  the  boy  manifested  clairvoyance
to  their  satisfaction,  he  would  give  five  pounds  to  be  distri-
buted to  any  of  the  public  charities  of  the  town.  The  five
pounds  were  deposited,  and  the  next  day  a  committee  was
chosen ;  the  following  rules  being  drawn  up  to  govern  the
conduct  of  the  experiment.

First. — ^That  twelve  persons  be  enrolled  as  a  committee  to
witness  the  experiments.

Second. — ^That  this  being  a  private  meeting,  no  visitor  shall
be  aUowed  to  enter  without  a  promise  that  he  shall  only
publish  such  a  report  as  may  be  sanctioned  by  the
chairman.

Third. — That  the  experiment  shall  be  conducted  in  the  fol-
lowing manner : — ^After  the  subject  is  placed  in  the  mes^
meric  state,  his  eyes  shall  be  covered  with  slips  of  plaster,
and  a  square  piece  of  plaster  shall  afterwards  be  placed
entirely  over  the  whole.

g2


84 Examination  of  a  case  of  Clairvoyance  at  Plymouth^

Fourth. — ^The  gentleman  who  deposits  the  five  poiinds  shall
be  at  liberty  to  provide  any  printed  papers  or  books^  not
exceeding  three^  which  shall  be  handed  to  the  mes-
meriser^  and  shall  be  opened  by  him^  and  placed  before
the  subject,  who  shall  be  allowed  ten  minutes  to  read
each.

Fifth, — ^That  a  chairman  and  two  scrutineers  shall  be  ap-
pointed, who  shall  be  at  liberty  to  give  any  instructions
respecting  the  application  of  the  plasters,  and  keeping
them  fast  during  the  whole  experiment.

Sixth. — ^That  the  opinions  of  the  scrutineers  only  be  first
taken  as  to  the  result  of  the  experiment.  Should  there
be  any  difference  of  opinion  between  them,  the  chairman
shall  be  requested  to  take  the  opinion  of  those  present
by  vote ;  the  names  of  each  being  taken  in  writing,  and
if  equal,  the  chairman  to  have  the  casting  vote.

Seventh, — That  all  conversation  respecting  the  experiment
shall  be  carried  on  before  and  after  the  experiment,  and
not  in  the  presence  of  the  subject.  No  remarks  to  be
made  during  the  experiment  except  by  the  scrutineers.

Eighth. — Should  any  of  the  dissentients  wish  to  express  the
reasons  of  their  dissent,  they  will  be  at  liberty  to  do
so,  in  writing,  below  the  statement  sanctioned  by  the
chairman.

The  committee  consisted  of  the  following  gentlemen : —
Major  Fraser,  Mr.  W.  C.  Perry,  Mr.  J.  Latimer,  Mr.  W.
Hunt,  Mr.  Dobb,  Mr.  Milroy,  Mr.  Mc  Cullum,  Mr.  Minards,
Mr.  Harvey,  Mr.  Norrington,  Mr.  Libby,  Mr.  Towson,  Mr.
Croyden,  Mr.  E.  Pry.

These  gentlemen  assembled  at  the  house  of  Mr.  E.  Fry
on  Wednesday  morning  the  4th  of  February  at  10  o'clock.
Mr.  W.  C.  Perry  was  requested  to  act  as  chairman  to  the
committee,  and  Mr.  Towson  and  Mr.  Croyden  were  appointed
as  scrutineers.  It  was  suggested  that  the  experiment  would
be  more  satisfactory  if  Mr.  Lundie  were  not  in  the  room,  as
his  absence  would  effectually  destroy  the  imputation  of  col-
lusion. Mr.  Lundie  readily  acceded  to  this  request,  and
placed  his  subject  at  the  entire  disposal  of  the  committee ;
indeed  his  conduct  throughout  the  transaction  was  that  of  a
man  honestly  desirous  of  the  fair  elucidation  of  truth.  Mr.  E.
Fry  was  requested  by  the  committee  to  conduct  the  experi-
ments, which  he  did ;  never  having  before  attempted  to  mes-
merise the  boy  upon  whose  clairvoyant  powers  .the  committee
were  to  adjudicate.  The  plan  of  proceedings  was  then  dis-
cussed, and  it  was  resolved  that  no  person  should  be  allowed


by  a  Committee:  B5

to  tOQcli  the  mesmerised  boy  except  the  mesmeriser ;  that  the
scratineers  should  place  themselves  one  on  each  side  of  the
boy,  and  watch  minutely  the  whole  case,  giving  whatever
instructions  they  might  deem  necessary  for  the  most  effectual
security  of  the  plasters,  and  keeping  them  fast  during  the
whole  experiment.  Should  any  of  the  committee  wish  to
add  any  suggestions,  they  were  to  do  so  in  writing,  which
was  to  be  communicated  by  the  chairman  or  scrutineers  to
the  mesmeriser.

The  scrutineers  then  proceeded  to  cut  up  a  number  of
slips  of  adhesive  plaster  spread  on  linen,  about  three  eighths
of  an  inch  in  width  and  two  inches  long.  They  also  cut  two
square  pieces,  sufficiently  large  to  cover  the  whole  region  of
each  eye.  These  preparations  having  been  completed,  the
boy,  Thomas  Laycock,  a  bright  intelligent-looking  youth,
about  15  years  of  age,  was  brought  into  the  room,  and  in
about  three  minutes  he  was  thrown  into  the  mesmeric  sleep
by  Mr.  E.  Fry.  The  passes  were  continued  for  a  short  time
to  deepen  the  influence,  when  Mr.  F.  lifted  the  bo/s  eyelids ;
the  pupils  of  the  eye  were  turned  upward,  only  the  white  of
the  eyebaU  being  visible.  He  was  then  asked  if  he  could  tell
how  many  persons  there  were  in  the  room ;  when  after  appa-
rently counting  with  his  fingers  he  answered,  giving  one  less
than  the  right  number.  He  individualized  two  or  three  of
the  committee  correctly,  but  pointed  in  the  wrong  direction
when  naming  one  gentleman.  The  passes  were  again  con-
tinued for  a  few  minutes,  and  the  organs  of  Firmness  and
Self-esteem  excited,  the  results  of  which  were  very  striking.
He  drew  himself  up  in  his  chair,  folded  his  arms,  stamped
his  foot,  and  assumed  the  most  determined  air.  Mr.  Fry
now  drew  from  his  pocket  a  slip  of  paper  which  he  had  pre-
viously cut  from  a  posting-bill,  on  which  the  word  *'  Prospect^'
was  printed  in  bold  type  ;  this  he  breathed  upon  and  handed
to  the  boy,  asking  him  if  he  could  read  it.  The  moment  he
took  it  in  his  hand  he  pronounced  the  word,  and  immediately
after  he  read  with  equal  readiness  a  second  slip  containing
the  words  '^Chemist  and  Druggist.'^  His  eyes  were  fast
closed,  and  the  scrutineers,  who  were  watching  him  closely,
fsdled  to  detect  any  effort  on  his  part  to  unclose  the  lids.  He
was  also  asked  if  he  could  see  and  describe  the  table-cover
before  him,  which  he  did  correctly.  These  trials  were  made
by  Mr.  Fry  to  ascertain  if  the  boy  was  in  a  right  state  to
apply  the  tests,  and  he  now  stated  that  he  was  ready  to  apply
the  plasters,  which  he  did,  first  placing  the  slips  longitu-
dinally and  horizontally  so  as  to  form  a  complete  casing  over
each  eye ;  and  as  the  plasters  were  warmed  before  applying


86 Examination  qf  a  case  of  Clairvoyance  at  Plymouth,

them^  they  adhered  closely  to  every  part.  When  the  scruti-
neers were  satisfied  that  a  su£Scient  number  of  slips  had  been
applied^  the  square  pieces  were  put  on,  fitting  closely  over
the  whole,  and  additional  slips  were  then  applied  covering
the  edges  of  the  square  pieces.  Wherever  the  scrutineers,
or  any  of  the  committee,  pointed  to  a  spot  to  be  covered,
Mr.  Fry  immediately  applied  a  plaster,  until  the  scrutineers
declared  themselves  perfectly  satisfied  that  the  eyes  were
effectually  secured.  The  process  of  plastering  occupied  about
twenty-five  minutes.  A  few  passes  were  made,  and  the  depo-
sitor of  the  five  pounds  then  produced  a  paper  which  no  one
in  the  room  had  previously  seen.  This  was  handed  to  the
mesmeriser,  who  held  it  between  his  hands  for  a  few  seconds,
and  breathed  upon  it ;  he  then  placed  it  in  the  bov's  hands,
desiring  him  to  read  it.  Laycock  placed  it  on  the  table  before
him,  passed  his  hands  over  it,  and  almost  immediately  read,
"  Plymouth  and  South  Devon  Savings  Bank,''  which  he  said
was  printed  in  red  ink,  and  then  flung  the  paper  from  him.
He  was  perfectly  correct — ^the  paper  being  a  receipt  form  from
the  savings  bank,  and  printed  in  red  ink.  In  about  five
minutes  a  second  paper  was  placed  in  his  hands.  It  seemed
to  require  greater  effort  for  him  to  read  this.  He  appeared
to  concentrate  his  attention  upon  it,  and  there  was  a  rapid
vibratory  motion  of  the  muscles  above  the  eye.  The  scruti-
neers kept  a  close  watch  upon  the  fastenings,  and  if  there
was  the  least  indication  of  one  of  the  slips  of  plaster  loosen-
ing, it  was  immediately  pressed  closely  down  by  the  mes-
meriser. In  about  four  minutes  the  boy  pronounced  the  date
quite  correctly,  and  presently  after  spelt  the  word  "  Sutton,''
and  then  read  on,  "  Harbour  and  Dock  Company."  He  said
that  this  was  all  printed  black,  which  was  incorrect :  the  date
was  written  in  black,  but  the  words  were  printed  in  blue.
He  seemed  much  fatigued  after  reading  this;  his  head
drooped  upon  his  shoulders,  and  his  muscular  system  became
completely  relaxed.  Passes  were  again  made  over  him,  and
the  organ  of  Firmness  excited.  In  a  few  minutes  a  third
paper  was  placed  in  his  hand,  part  of  a  druggist's  hand-bill.
The  effort  required  to  read  this  appeared  to  be  much  greater
than  for  either  of  the  preceding  papers,  and  it  was  nearly  ten
minutes  before  he  made  out  any  part  of  it.  At  length  he
pointed  to  and  pronounced  the  words,  ''  Genuine  Medicines,"
immediately  throwing  away  the  paper,  and  screwing  up  his
features  and  limbs,  crying  out,  ''  Oh !  the  nasty  stuff — ^the
filthy  salts ;  how  I  hate  them ;"  and  he  shuddered  violently.
He  was  quieted  by  a  few  passes,  and  requested  to  read  the
bill  again. He  was  very  unwilling  to  handle  it,  and  said  that


by  a  Committee.  87

Iiifl  neck  gave  him  great  pain.  He  was  told  that  this  was  the
last  paper  he  would  have  to  read^  and  after  some  hesitation
he  renewed  his  efforts,  and  soon  pointed  to  the  printed  figure
of  a  hand,  (a  small  note  of  observation,)  which  he  described
correctly ;  he  then  read  the  word  ''  Leeches/'  The  moment
he  pronounced  this  word,  he  dashed  the  paper  away,  became
more  violently  excited  than  before,  and  manifested  the  great-
est disgust.  It  required  considerable  care  and  attention  on
the  part  of  his  mesmeriser  to  quiet  him.

The  conditions  having  now  been  fulfilled,  the  experiments
were  virtually  concluded ;  but  several  of  the  committee  were
very  desirous  that  the  boy  should  make  one  mofe  effort.
Mr.  Fry  suggested  the  impropriety  of  any  fiirther  trial,  as
the  boy  had  been  distinctly  told  that  his  previous  effort  should
be  the  last,  and  he  thought  it  desirable  always  to  keep  perfect
faith  with  subjects  in  the  mesmeric  state.  He  however  asked
the  lad  whether  he  would  oblige  the  committee  by  reading
one  other  paper,  and  after  some  difficulty  he  consented  to  do
so,  and  a  £6  Bank  of  England  note  was  placed  in  his  hands.
He  said  directly,  "  Oh  this  is  the  best  that  I  have  had  yet.
I  would  not  hurt  this  for  a  pound.''  He  spread  it  on  the
table  before  him,  passed  his  hands  over  it,  and  soon  pointed
to  the  number,  the  two  first  figures  of  which  he  easily  made
out,  but  was  some  minutes  before  he  read  the  whole,  which
however  he  accomplished  quite  correctly,  together  with  the
date  and  value  of  the  note.  He  now  complained  of  great
pain  across  the  neck  and  down  the  spine,  and  the  committee
declared  the  experiments  to  be  concluded.  It  was  requested
that  the  pieces  of  strapping  might  be  removed  singly,  that
the  committee  might  observe  when  the  upper  pieces  were
removed  whether  the  under  slips  remained  firmly  attached  to
the  skin.  This  was  done,  and  although  three  or  four  of  the
upper  slips  had  become  somewhat  loosened,  the  square  pieces
and  all  the  under  slips  were  found  securely  fastened ;  indeed,
when  the  whole  were  removed,  and  the  boy  was  wakened  out
of  the  mesmeric  sleep,  it  wa$  with  difficulty  that  he  could  open
Mi  eye$  at  all,  so  firmly  had  the  lashee  been  fastened  together.
He  was  asked  if  he  knew  what  had  taken  place  whilst  he  had
been  before  the  committee,  and  he  stated  that  he  was  quite
unconscious  of  what  had  been  done.  He  was  then  sent  out
of  the  room,  and  in  accordance  with  the  regulations,  the
scrutineers  were  first  called  upon  to  give  their  decision.
Mr.  Towson  stated  that  as  scrutineer  he  had  watched  the  case
as  scrupulously  as  he  possibly  could,  and  that  he  had  entirely
failed  to  discover  any  means  by  which  the  boy  could  have


88 Examinaium  of  a  case  of  Clairvoyance  at  Plymouth,

evaded  the  precautions  takeD^  and  he  must  pronounce  the
experiment  to  have  been  successful.

Mr.  Towson  was  known  to  have  been  a  decided  sceptic  in
reference  to  mesmeric  clairvoyance;  one  of  the  committee
therefore  asked  him  whether  he  meant  now  to  say  that  he
believed  that  the  boy  had  read  by  the  exercise  of  that  faculty.
Mr.  Towson  said  that  he  must  decline  committing  himself  to
that  opinion.  He  conceived  that^  as  scrutineer^  his  duty  had
simply  been  to  watch  the  case^  and  see  that  every  precaution
was  taken  to  secure  the  effectual  fastening  of  the  boy's  eyes.
He  had  done  so  to  the  best  of  his  ability.  He  had  lain  down
on  the  floor  that  he  might  watch  the  under  parts  of  the
strappingj  and  he  must  say  that  he  had  been  unable  to  detect
any  opening  by  which  ordinary  vision  could  be  exercised.  He
pronounced^  therefore^  that  the  conditions  required  by  the
committee  in  this  case  had  been  fuliilledj  and  that  the  money
had  been  gained  for  the  charities.  Some  further  endeavour
was  made  by  one  or  two  gentlemen  to  induce  a  more  decided
expression  of  opinion  from  Mr.  Towson^  as  to  his  belief  or
disbelief  of  clairvoyance^  but  he  positively  declined  to  make
any  such  statement.

Mr.  Croyden  was  then  applied  to  for  his  opinion.  He
stated^  that  he  too  had  watched  the  case  with  all  possible
care ;  that  at  one  time  he  thought  the  plasters  appeared  to
be  loosening^  but  on  examining  closely  he  found  that  it  was
only  the  superficial  slips  which  had  moved,  the  under  plasters
adhered  closely  to  every  part.  He  was  thoroughly  convinced
that  the  boy  could  not  see  in  the  ordinary  way^  and  he  must
pronounce  the  case  to  have  been  entirely  successful.

Mr.  Towson  and  Mr.  Croyden  are  both  well  known  in  the
neighbourhood  as  practical  scientific  men^  and  for  the  highest
integrity  of  character.  Mr.  Towson  was  very  sceptical  on  the
subject  of  mesmerism^  Mr.  Croyden  was  experimentally  ac-
quainted with  it.  Whilst  the  scrutineers  were  delivering
their  opinions^  two  of  the  committee  were  obliged  to  leave ;
but  before  quitting  the  room,  they  expressed  their  opinion
that  the  case  had  been  perfectly  successful.  After  the  scruti-
neers had  delivered  their  judgment,  the  chairman  was  re-
quested to  take  the  opinions  of  the  committee  individually^
which  he  did ;  when  seven  gentlemen  expressed  their  entire
satisfaction  that  the  experiment  had  succeeded,  and  two  gen-
tlemen voted  against  that  decision.  It  is  however  worthy  of
remark,  that  these  two  gentlemen  had  committed  themselves
to  a  strong  public  opposition  to  clairvoyance;  whereas  all
those  who  came  to  the  committee  unfettered  by  previous


by  a  Committee.  89

judgment,  expressed  tkeir  thorough  conviction  that  the  case
brought  before  them  was  a  genuine  one,  and  recorded  their
votes  to  that  effect.  The  five  pounds  were  awarded  as  follows :
Devon  and  Cornwall  Hospital • • £2
Plymouth  Eye  Infirmary  . . , JEI

Ditto  Lying-in  Institution  . • £1

And  one  pound  was  given  to  Thomas  Laycock  for  his  attend-
ance, but  no  previous  intimation  had  been  given  to  him  that
any  part  of  the  money  would  be  awarded  to  himself.

A  resolution  was  then  proposed,  and  carried  unanimously,
to  the  effect  that  Mr.  Fry's  conduct  as  mesmeriser  was  en-
tirely satisfactory  to  the  committee,  every  facility  having
been  afforded  by  him  for  the  full  and  fair  examination  of  the
case.

After  the  experiments  with  the  boy  had  terminated,  Mr.
Towson  requested  that  hia  eyes  might  be  plastered  as  the
boy's  had  been,  in  order  that  he  might  see  whether  the  eyes
were  effectually  secured  by  such  a  process.  His  wish  was
complied  vrith,  and  as  soon  as  the  plasters  were  applied  he
commenced  making  violent  contortions  of  the  face,  and  shak-
ing his  head  rapidly  from  side  to  side.  Several  of  the  com-
mittee remarked  that  the  boy  had  done  nothing  of  that  sort.
In  his  case  there  had  been  strong  vibratory  movement  of  the
muscles  occasionally  above  the  eye,  but  nothing  at  all  analo-
gous to  the  efforts  made  by  Mr.  Towson  for  the  evident  pur-
pose of  loosening  the  plasters.  By  these  efforts  Mr.  Towson
succeeded  in  detaching  the  whole  mass  of  plasters  from  the
upper  corner  of  one  eye,  and,  taking  up  a  volume  of  the
Penny  Magazine,  he  discerned  some  architectural  diagrams.
After  several  minutes'  more  exertion  he  loosened  the  strap-
pings still  Airther,  and  read  the  word  '^  Baltimore."  He
continued  his  efforts  again,  and  after  a  further  interval  he
read  the  heading  of  a  paper  in  large  type,  '^  Friend  of  Peace."
The  committee,  however,  observed  that  by  this  time  there
was  a  large  opening  above  the  right  eye,  through  which  the
eye  could  be  distinctiy  perceived.  The  two  sceptical  mem-
bers of  the  committee  were  very  desirous  that  great  import-
ance should  be  attached  to  Mr.  Towson's  test ;  but  the  com-
mittee very  justly  decided  that  no  inference  could  be  drawn
from  it,  except  to  shew  how  necessary  it  is  carefully  to  watch
all  such  cases.  If  any  inference  could  have  been  drawn  at
all  from  the  case,  it  would  have  been  very  much  in  favour  of
that  of  the  boy ;  for  in  his  case,  two  scrutineers  watching
most  vigilantly  could  detect  no  aperture  for  the  exercise  of
ordinary  vision ;  whereas  with  Mr.  Towson,  the  loosening  of
the  plaster,  caused  by  the  violent  motions  of  his  face,  was


90 Examination  of  a  case  of  Clavrvoyance  at  Plymouth^

immediately  detected  and  pointed  ont.  The  boy  read  the
first  paper  presented  to  him  very  quickly  and  with  great  ap-
parent ease ;  each  succeeding  reading  occupied  longer  time^
and  required  much  greater  effort^  ^ving  him  increased  fatigue
and  pain  at  each  trial.  This  is  the  very  reverse  of  what  we
ought  to  expect  if  ordinary  vision  was  exercised  through  an
opening  of  the  plasters.  We  might  naturally  suppose^  that
with  increased  effort  the  aperture  would  gradually  be  enlarged,
and  the  reading  would  be  easier  as  the  experiment  proceeded.
Mr.  Towson's  experiment  exactly  confirmed  this  idea.  He
only  made  out  one  word  with  considerable  difficulty  at  first,
but  as  he  enlarged  his  aperture  he  read  with  increased  fad-*
lity.  It  should  be  observed  too  that  Laycock's  eyes  are  full
and  projecting,  with  very  slight  hair  upon  the  eyebrows.
Mr.  Towson's  eyes  are  deeply  sunk,  and  his  projecting  eye-
brows are  fringed  with  an  unusual  quantity  of  long  bristly
hair,  to  which  the  plasters  would  not  adhere  as  they  did  to
the  soft  skin  of  the  child.  Perhaps  the  most  striking  differ-
ence in  the  two  cases  was  observed  when  the  plasters  were
removed  from  Mr.  Towson.  An  attempt  was  made  to  remove
them  singly,  as  had  been  done  with  the  boy ;  but  the  very
first  piece  that  was  attempted  to  be  taken  away  brought  off
the  whole  mass  at  once — so  insecurely  had  they  adhered:
each  piece  was  pulled  off  separately  firom  the  boy,  without  at
all  disturbing  the  plasters  below.

If  many  of  the  pretended  exposures  of  clairvoyant  tricks
were  as  carefully  compared  with  the  originals  as  in  this  case,
we  believe  that  they  would  reflect  back  the  charge  of  humbug
and  credulity  which  is  so  boastingly  urged  against  the  advo-
cates of  mesmerism.  If  mesmerists  are  charged  with  a  want
of  honesty  in  relying  upon  doubtful  experiments,  what  is  to  be
said  of  sceptics  who  would  bolster  up  their  scepticism  by  tests
-  so  utterly  fidlacious  as  this  ?

This  committee  examination  of  the  young  clairvoyant  has
proved  two  or  three  important  positions  in  connection  with
the  public  advocacy  of  the  phenomenon  of  clairvoyance.  It
must  be  evident  to  every  impartial  mind  that  Mr.  Lundie
must  have  had  a  thorough  conviction  of  the  real  possession  of
the  faculty  by  the  youth,  or  he  never  would  have  been  such
a  fool  as  to  risk  his  own  reputation  by  placing  the  boy  in  the
hands  of  twelve  strangers,  who,  if  the  boy  had  been  a  mere
impostor,  must  have  detected  the  imposition,  when  no  limit
was  placed  upon  the  tests  they  were  at  liberty  to  apply,  and
when  no  accomplice  was  present  to  aid  him  in  eluding  the
precautions  taken.  Would  Mr.  Rumball,  or  any  of  the  itine-
rant opponents  of  mesmerism,  allow  their  well-trained  actors


by  a  Committee.  91

to  undergo  the  same  ordeal  ?  They  know  that  certain  detec-
tion would  follow  the  attempt.  It  had  been  nrged  in  pabUCi
that  Mr.  Lnndie  did  not  apply  a  snfficient  number  of  slips  of
plaster^  and  great  stress  was  laid  upon  the  use  of  square
pieces  applied^  so  as  entirely  to  cover  idl  the  under  strappings.
All  these  precautions  were  carefully  attended  to  by  the  com-
mittee ;  wherever  the  most  watchful  sceptic  suggested  the  ap-
plication of  a  plaster^  there  it  was  put^  and  the  square  pieces
were  securely  laid  on ;  and  to  satisfy  the  last  lingermg  scruples
of  some,  the  very  edges  of  the  squares  were  again  covered,
so  that  at  last  not  a  peg  was  left  td  hang  a  doubt  upon.  The
result  proved  that  Mr.  Lundie's  confidence  was  not  mis-
placed.

The  circumstances  attending  this  examination  must  not  pass
unnoticed.  No  one  was  allowed  to  touch  the  mesmerised
youth  but  his  mesmeriser,  whose  influence  upon  his  subject
was  thus  preserved  without  interruption  to  the  end.  No  con-
versation was  allowed  in  the  presence  of  the  boy,  and  thus
the  most  undisturbed  attention  could  be  given  by  all  parties
to  the  case.  Any  angry  or  excited  feeling  was  thus  effectu-
ally prevented,  and  justice  was  secured  for  both  parties.  Had
the  boy  failed,  none  of  the  ordinary  reasons,  wluch  are  fiedrly
urged,  could  have  been  offered, — no  crowded  room  and  heated
atmosphere,  no  interference  with  the  influence  of  the  mes-
meriser,  no  distraction  of  the  mesmeriser's  mind.  His  suc-
cess, under  circumstances  so  favourable  for  the  calm  and
watchful  investigation  of  the  presumed  exercise  of  the  faculty,
leads  naturally  to  the  inference,  that  if  similar  rational  pre-
cautions and  conditions  were  more  frequently  observed  in
clairvoyant  expositions,  the  truth  of  this  faculty  would  soon
be  satisfactorily  demonstrated.

Edmund  Fry.

I  hereby  certify  that  the  foregoing  narrative  of  the  experi-
ments, conducted  before  the  committee  over  which  I  presided,
is  a  correct  statement  of  the  circumstances  which  occurred.

W.  Champion  PsaaY.


The  following  is  extracted  from  a  letter  to  me  by  Mr.  Fiy.

J.  Elliotson.

"  Last  evening  I  tried  the  same  boy,  holding  the  eyelids
firmly  down  upon  the  cheek-bone.  He  gave  me  the  time  by
a  lady's  watch,  11^  minutes  past  7,  quite  correctly ;  and  de-
scribed every  part  of  a  portrait,  pointing  to  each  feature  and
limb. Nothing  could  be  more  satisfactory.''


( 92 )

VI.  TuH>  Cases  ittuatraiive  of  the  great  power  of  Mesmerism
over  Rheumatism.  By  the  Rev.  John  Edwards^  Prest-
bury^  Cheltenham. Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

To  Dr.  Elliotson.  Prestbury,  Cheltenham,

March  7th,  1845.

Mt  dear  Sir, — Having  made  a  few  experiments  in  mes-
merism for  the  cure  of  various  diseases,  and  the  results  hav-
ing been,  in  my  judgment,  astonishingly  favourable,  I  feel
impelled,  by  a  sense  of  duty  to  suffering  fellow-creatures,  to
communicate  them  to  you,,  as  the  great  patron  of  the  much-
controverted  and  abused  science.  I  know  but  very  little  of
what  has  been  done  by  others ;  but  should  you  consider  the
two  enclosed  cases,  as  compared  with  those  of  others,  worth
public  notice,  I  beg  that  you  will  make  what  use  you  please
of  them.  I  have  not  tried  it  in  more  than  about  twelve  in-
stances, and  I  think  I  may  say  with  almost  uniform  advan-
tage. The  other  cases  of  suffering  have  been  (except  one,
which  is  in  progress  of  cure)  comparatively  slight  in  degree
and  duration.

To  avoid  the  chance  of  exaggeration  in  my  description  of
the  two  cases,  I  have  this  morning  read  it  over  to  each  of  the
parties  in  the  presence  of  a  friend,  requesting  their  particular
attention,  and  expressing  my  anxious  wish  that  they  would
assist  me  in  correcting  any  unintentional  error.

I  am,  dear  Sir,

Yours  truly,

John  Edwabds*

I.  Susan  Merchant,  aged  45,  has  suffered  for  fifteen  years,
without  the  intermission  of  a  day  and  night,  from  rheumatic
pain  in  her  head.  She  has  passed  three  successive  nights
without  being  able  to  lay  her  head  on  her  pillow,  resting  the
back  part  of  it,  almost  without  sleep,  on  the  board  at  the
head  of  the  bed.  She  has  been  al^o  subject  to  frequent
vomiting,  and  has  been  obliged,  from  excessive  soreness  and
pain  in  her  jaws,  to  avoid  eating,  till  (to  use' her  own  lan-
guage) she  thought  she  should  "  be  cast  away.^'

The  first  week  of  June  last,  I  was  induced  (almost  my
first  attempt  at  cure)  to  try  passes  over  her  head,  from  the
forehead  backwards.  The  pain  soon  moved  from  thence  in
the  direction  of  the  passes,  and  in  less  than  a  minute  she
said  in  a  whisper,  but  with  emphasis,  ^'  Beautiful !  beautiful  1^'
In  half  a  minute  more  she  rose  from  the  chair,  saying  she
had  not  felt  so  for  years.  She  continued  for  seven  weeks
entirely  free  from  pain,  or  inconvenience  of  any  sort. She


7\oo  cases  of  Rheumatism  treated  with  Mesmerism, 93

then,  when  heated  with  work,  got  wet,  and  took  a  bad  cold;
this  produced  a  return  of  the  pain,  which  was  again  very
easily  removed.  She  now  remains  well  and  free  from  pain,
except  in  a  very  slight  degree,  and  that  occurring  very  rarely,
not  even  inducing  her  to  seek  relief,  though  so  readily
obtained.

II.  Mary  Cummins,  aged  59,  was  attacked  twelve  years
ago  with  rheumatism.  She  was  relieved  by  medical  treat-
ment, but  was  soon  after  attacked  with  increased  violence,
and  became  crippled  in  hands  and  feet.  Six  years  ago  her
crutch  .lipped  6^m  under  her,  and  she  feU,  Ibreaki^g  the
neck  of  the  right  thigh-bone.  She  was  carried  to  bed :  she
lay  with  the  heel  of  the  broken  leg  inclined  inwards,  and
the  other  foot  across  the  ankle  of  it.  In  about  a  fortnight
the  left  leg  as  well  as  the  other  became  quite  useless.  She
could  not  change  their  position.  She  has  remained  on  her
back  in  this  condition,  constantly  suffering  much  pain,  and
unable  also  to  use  her  hands,  except  to  feed  herself,  and  that
with  difiSculty.  She  has  usuallv  been  moved  once  a  month
on  the  sheet  to  another  bed,  while  her  own  was  made ;  this
however  caused  her  such  pain,  that  she  has  frequently  passed
two  and  three  months,  shrinking  from  the  task.  She  had
not,  to  the  best  of  her  recollection,  passed  a  night  for  years
without  wakefulness  and  pain  after  twelve  or  one  o'clock.

On  Monday  the  14th  of  July,  at  the  suggestion  of  a
friend  and  neighbour,  I  accompanied  him  to  try  the  effect  of
mesmerism  upon  her,  feeUng  however  on  my  own  part  that
her's  was  a  hopeless  case,  beyond  relief.  We  found  her  in
her  usual  state,  complaining  especially  of  rheumatic  pain  in
the  right  arm  and  left  leg,  and  pain  in  the  head.  I  com-
menced operating  by  passes  down  the  right  arm,  in  which  the
pain  almost  immediately  yielded,  and  she  also  found  that  after
a  few  transverse  passes  she  had  gained  the  power  of  moving
her  fingers.  I  then  made  passes  from  her  forehead,  and  the
pain  almost  in^mediately  moved  from  the  forehead  to  the  outer
comer  of  the  right  eyebrow,  where  it  remained  with  somie
obstinacy,  but  in  about  five  minutes  entirely  left.  I  then
commenced  on  the  right  leg :  the  pain  ceased,  and  she  ob-
served that  her  foot  was  dead.  I  continued  the  passes  for
some  time,  then  demesmerised  the  limb,  when  she  found  that
she  could  move  her  toes.  I  then  repeated  the  passes  on  her
right  arm  and  left  her.

I  went  to  her  again  with  my  friend  the  next  morning,  and
found  that  she  had  been  quite  firee  from  pain,  and  was  in
every  respect  comfortable. I  commenced  by  passes  on  the


94 Ttoo  cases  qf  RheunuUism  treated  with  Mesmerism.

right  arm^  by  which  the  power  of  motion  was  much  increased;
then  tried  the  left  leg  with  the  same  effect ;  then  made  passes
down  the  left  arm  for  the  first  time^  and  after  transverse
passes  she  fonnd  that  she  had  gained  the  long-lost  power  of
tnming  its  palm  upwards,  and  was  able  to  move  that  and  the
other  hand  over  her  head^  and  in  any  other  direction.  After-
wards during  passes  down  her  right  arm^  I  observed  that  she
was  going  off  to  sleep,  which  I  encouraged  by  a  few  passes
over  her  &ce,  and  produced  a  calm  but  not  very  deep  sleep.
On  waking  her,  she  was  unconscious  of  having  slept,  and  was
much  astonished  (her  astonishment  being  equalled  only  by
her  thankfulness)  at  the  increased  power  of  moving  her  limbs,
with  the  exception  of  her  right  leg,  which  had  not  yet  been
mesmerised. We  then  left  her.

On  the  16th  I  went  to  her  in  company  with  Mr.  Beamish,
meeting  my  friend  before  mentioned  there.  I  commenced
by  passes  over  the  right  leg.  (I  should  here  say  that  by  this
time  a  few  passes  put  any  limb  over  which  they  were  made
into  a  state  which  she  described  by  the  word  '  dead/)  On
demeamerising  it,  she  found  that  she  had  gained  the  power
of  moving  it  as  well  as  the  other.  I  then  endeavoured  to
mesmerise  her  by  looking  in  her  e^es,.  but  without  success ;
but  very  soon  after,  as  I  was  making  passes  down  her  right
arm,  she  went  off  into  sleep,  upon  which  I  threw  the  limbs
also  into  a  state  of  insensibility;  and  on  demesmerising  them
one  by  one,  and  her  head  or  brain,  she  was  rejoiced  to  find  a
further  increase  in  her  strength  and  power  of  motion.  We
then  wished  to  mesmerise  her  back,  to  effect  which  we  first
tried  to  raise  her  from  her  bed  in  a  sitting  posture,  but  were
unable.  We  then  tried  to  turn  her  upon  her  left  side,  but
desisted,  fearing  that  we  should  hurt  her ;  she  however  giving
every  assistance  to  our  attempt.  We  then  left  her  a  litSe  ex-
hausted from  the  effort.  She  had  slept  well  the  whole  of  the
previous  night.

I  went  to  her  alone  on  the  17th ;  my  obiect  was  now  to
mesmerise  the  body.  Getting  at  her  back  I  despaired  of;  so
I  commenced  by  passes  down  her  sides,  and  by  putting  my
fingers  as  fistr  as  I  could  under  her  body,  and  making  passes
between  it  and  the  bed.  She  was  soon  asleep,  when  I  con-
tinued to  make  passes  down  her  limbs  and  body.  I  left  her
in  a  very  calm  and  much  sounder  sleep  than  she  had  been  in
before  for  about  twenty  minutes.  On  being  awaked,  she
found  she  had  increased  power  in  all  her  limbs,  and  without
assistance  drew  herself  up  into  a  sitting  posture.

July  26th.  After  an  absence  from  home,  I  found  that  she
had  been  quite  free  from  pain,  and  in  full  possession  of  the


Cure  of  disease  qf  the  Spinal  Chard  with  Mesmerism. 95

powers  which  had  been  regained  by  former  mesmerism,  though
they  did  not  seem  to  have  increased  during  the  intenral.
I  mesmerised  her  again,  endeavouring  espedally  to  affect  the
left  knee,  which  however  remained  perfectly  inflexible,  but
the  right  leg  gained  a  decidedly  increased  power  of  motion,
and  she  moved  altogether  with  much  more  freedom.  She  had
been  nursing  an  infant  of  eleven  months  old,  which  she  could
raise  in  her  anns  and  move  about  from  one  part  of  the  bed
to  another.

She  has  frequently  been  mesmerised  since  by  myself  and
my  friend  Capt.  James,  but  I  cannot  see  much  further  pro-
gress ;  her  answer,  however,  to  any  remark  upon  it  is,  ''  I
never  wish  to  be  better  in  this  world.  I  can  never  be  thank-
ful enough.''

She  has  neither  ache  nor  pain,  and  sleeps  well.  She  once
came  down  stairs,  but  does  not  feel  inclined  to  do  so  again,
as  she  felt  less  comfortable  than  in  her  bed :  she  was  carried
down.  I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  if  her  right  thi^-
bone  had  not  been  broken,  and  the  left  knee  anchylosed,  she
would  be  well  able  to  walk.  She  can  move  her  legs  very  freely
about  the  bed,  and  without  assistance  sit  on  the  edge  of  the
bed  with  her  feet  on  the  floor.*


YII.  Cure  of  disease  of  the  Spinal  Chord,  with  Mesmerism.  By
Mr.  HoLLiNos,  Leicester. In  a  letter  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

Mt  dear  Sir, — ^As  I  am  well  aware  of  your  willingness  to
receive  at  any  time,  or  from  any  quarter,  additional  evidence
of  the  applicability  for  the  relief  of  the  severest  human  suffer-
ing of  diat  powerful  remedial  agency,  to  the  disinterested  in-
vestigation and  advocacy  of  which  you  have  devoted  so  much
time  and  ability,  I  make  no  apology  for  forwarding  you  the
particulars  of  a  highly  interesting  case  of  long-standing  dis-
ease, lately  entrusted  to  my  care,  and  in  which  the  use  of
animal  magnetism  has  been  attended  by  beneficial  results  of
the  most  striking  and  unquestionable  character.

*  We  neTer  baTe  greater  pleasure  io  recording  mesmeric  cares  thaa  when
they  have  been  performed  by  the  ministers  of  religion,  whose  proper  office
is  to  go  about  doing  good,  especially  to  the  poor ;  not  to  harass  people  with
mysteries,  dogmas,  and  trumpery  formalities,  or  any  matters  that  can  give
rise  to  sects,  bat  to  imitate  Christ's  simple  teaching  on  the  Mount,  urging
mankind  to  love  one  another  and  be  as  little  children ;  and,  instead  of  spend-
ing their  leisure  hours  in  Justicing,  sporting,  or  listlessness,  to  further
imitate  him,  when  possible  and  the  scantiness  or  failure  of  common  medical
aid  justifies  it,  in  healing  the  sick,  as  they  so  often  can  by  the  blessed  power
of  mesmerism  which  they  possess. — Zoiit.


96 Cure  qf  Disease  of  the  Spinal  Cord  with  Mesmerism,

James  Ratcliffe^  set.  87^  a  market-gardener  by  occupation^
residing  at  No.  8^  Alfred  Street^  Leicester^  applied  to  me
about  four  weeks  since,  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  some  relief
from  mesmeric  treatment^  as  a  last  and  almost  desperate
resource,  every  other  remedy  having  proved  ineffectual  to
remove  or  materially  to  affect  the  serious  and  alarming  ma-
lady with  which  he  was  at  the  time  afflicted.  His  complaint
had  been  supposed  by  two  medical  gentlemen  of  known  skill
and  extensive  practice  in  Leicester,  to  be  an  organic  affection
of  the  spinal  chord,  and  had  continued  with  greater  or  less
violence  for  more  than  seven  years.  In  the  spring  of  1889,
while  working  in  the  fields,  he  was  suddenly  seized  with  a
sensation  of  drowsiness,  attended  by  a  coldness,  numbness,
and  partial  rigidity  of  the  left  leg  and  foot,  extending  to  the
extremities  of  the  toes,  together  with  acute  pains  in  the  back
and  head ;  which  subsequently  assumed  so  severe  a  character
as  almost  to  incapacitate  him  from  attending  to  the  labour  he
was  nevertheless  compelled,  under  whatever  circumstances  of
distress  or  suffering  to  himself,  to  pursue,  as  the  only  means
of  obtaining  a  livelihood.  On  many  occasions  he  had  been
compelled  to  give  up  work  for  several  weeks  together,  and
one  of  these  periods  of  intermitted  exertion  had  lasted  for  no
less  than  three  months,  during  which  time  he  had  been  kept
by  his  medical  attendant  constantly  in  a  recumbent  position.
Blisters  had  been  applied  in  succession  to  every  part  of  the
spine,  in  addition  to  the  employment  of  different  embroca-
tions, counter-irritating  ointments,  leeches,  &c. :  these  exter-
nal applications  being  accompanied  with  the  internal  exhibi-
tion of  all  the  remedies  ordinarily  recommended.

From  my  own  personal  knowledge  of  the  gentlemen  under
whose  treatment  he  had  placed  himself,  I  am  confident  that
every  expedient  which  ability  and  experience  could  suggest
had  been  employed  in  his  behalf.  Nevertheless  it  was  evident,
that,  however  ably  some  of  its  severest  effects  might  be  com-
bated by  the  judgment  and  humane  attentions  of  his  medical
advisers,  the  radical  cure  of  the  disease  was  far  from  being
accompUshed ;  and  that,  although  partial  and  temporary  relief
might  be  afforded  to  his  sufferings,  the  cause  from  which  they
had  primarily  originated  remained  substantially  the  same.

When  I  first  saw  him,  in  addition  to  the  distressing
numbness  and  want  of  flexibility  in  his  leg  and  foot,  which
had  continued  without  interruption  from  the  time  at  which
he  was  first  attacked,  he  complained  of  violent  pain  between
the  shoulders,  as  well  as  in  two  fingers  of  each  hand;  of
cramp-like  sensations  at  the  wrists,  dizziness  of  sight,  espe-
cially after  rising  in  the  morning ;  and  of  frequent  helul-aches.


by  Mr.  Hollings.  97

especially  in  the  occipital  region.  The  whole  spine  was  so
exceedingly  sensitive^  that  the  slightest  pressure  upon  it  pro-
duced exquisite  suffering.  In  addition  to  this^  his  nights
were  restless  and  disturbed,  and  his  wasted  appearance  and
haggard  countenance  gave  ample  testimony  to  the  severity  of
a  disorder,  to  the  sufficiently  formidable  character  of  which,
in  the  first  instance,  had  now  been  added  all  the  aggravating
circumstances  of  an  obstinate  continuance  for  many  years.

My  first  efforts  to  produce  mesmeric  coma,  which  were
continued  for  about  half  an  hour,  seemed  to  all  outward  ob-
servation to  produce  but  little  effect.  The  ordinary  manipu-
lations were  adopted,  and  were  attended,  as  it  appeared  to
me,  by  nothing  more  than  a  somewhat  hurried  respiration  on
the  part  of  the  patient.  He  however  afterwards  assured  me
that  he  had  actually  lost  all  consciousness,  although  his  eyes
had  remained  constantly  open.  On  my  next  attendance,  the
ordinary  character  of  the  mesmeric  sleep  was  manifested,
attended  by  perfect  catalepsy  of  the  arms  and  legs ;  a  pheno-
menon which  I  afterwards  found  could  be  easily  produced
during  a  waking  condition.  Appearances  being  thus  far
favourable,  I  proceeded  to  manipulate  for  the  relief  of  the
disease,  by  making  passes  down  the  partially-paralyzed  limb,
and  along  the  spinal  column.  I  also  ventured  upon  the
experiment,  which  had  been  adopted  with  so  much  success
in  the  case  of  Mary  Ann  Lakin,  of  desiring  the  patient  to
sleep  during  the  subsequent  night  for  a  given  number  of
hours.  On  being  aroused,  he  declared  that  he  felt  a  comfort-
able glow  down  the  back,  and  a  similar  sensation  in  the  left
leg  and  foot,  and  that  he  was  on  the  whole  already  much  re-
lieved, the  pain  between  his  shoulders  having  entirely  ceased.

By  a  regular  repetition  of  the  method  of  manipulation  I
had  at  first  adopted,  his  progress  towards  a  complete  recovery
soon  became  daily  perceptible,  and  presented  a  more  encou-
raging character  at  every  visit.  In  no  instance  did  he  fail
either  to  fall  into  natural  sleep  or  to  awaken  from  it  (which
perhaps  is  still  more  extraordinary)  at  the  hour  appointed.
On  one  occasion,  as  a  more  perfect  test,  I  desired  him  to
retire  to  rest  half  an  hour  after  the  time  of  his  being  awoke
from  the  mesmeric  state.  This  injunction  was  given  at  half-
past  eight  in  the  evening;  and  at  nine,  without  having  com-
municated my  intention  either  to  himself  or  to  any  member
of  his  family,  I  suddenly  returned  to  his  house.  He  had
already  gone  up  stairs  to  bed,  feeling,  as  he  said,  an  irresisti-
ble and  unaccountable  drowsiness ;  and  five  minutes  after-
wards, having  taken  a  candle  in  my  hand  and  entered  his
bed-room,  I  convinced  myself  that  he  was  buried  in  a  pro-

VOL.  IV.  H


98 Cure  of  Disease  of  the  Spinal  Cord  with  Mesmerism^

found  slumber.  On  'waking  firom  each  suocessive  mesmeric
sleep^  he  persisted  that  he  felt  a  greater  degree  of  warmth
and  flexibility  in  his  foot  than  before ;  and  I  should  perhaps
state^  that  while  manipulating  the  latter^  by  placing  my  fin-
gers on  opposite  sides  of  the  limb^  a  starting  or  tremulous
motion  of  the  tendons  was  most  distinctly  perceptible,  much
resembling  the  nervous  twitchings  caused  by  the  transmission
through  any  part  of  the  body  of  a  gentle  current  of  voltaic
electricity.  Within  about  ten  days  he  assured  me  that  per-
fect freedom  of  motion  and  entire  sensation  had  been  restored
to  the  affected  member.

Without  detaining  you  by  the  recital  of  farther  parti-
culars^ which  would  merely  tend^  if  detailed,  to  corroborate
the  truth  of  mesmeric  phenomena,  now  almost  universally
known,  I  have  simply,  and  with  no  Uttle  pleasure,  to  add,
that  my  patient  considers  himself  at  the  present  moment
petfectly  cured.  The  pains  in  his  back,  hands,  and  head
have  been  completely  removed.  The  soreness  and  tenderness
is  also,  so  far  as  I  can  ascertain,  entirely  gone  from  the  spine.
His  left  leg  (in  which,  I  may  observe,  that  partial  atrophy
had  already  taken  place)  is  as  sound,  and  almost  as  available
for  hard  labour,  as  the  right.  He  sleeps  well,  and  certainly
looks  ten  years  younger  than  when  I  saw  him  for  the  first
time.  His  own  expression  is,  that  he  feels  himself  a  new
man,  and  that  he  has  now  a  useful  foot  instead  of  one  of
stone.  But  the  most  satisfactory  evidence  of  his  real  condition
is  the  circumstance,  that  for  the  last  twelve  or  fourteen  days
he  has  been  in  full  and  constant  work  as  a  garden-labourer,
and  that  for  two  or  three  days  past  he  has  been  working  with
a  potato-dibble  of  some  nine  or  ten  pounds  weight,  for  seve-
ral hours  together,  without  experiencing  the  least  uneasiness
or  the  slightest  unpleasant  result  whatever.  Finally,  upon
all  the  circumstances  I  have  stated  in  relation  to  this  singular
cure,  I  boldly  challenge,  and  am  ready  to  meet,  the  most  free
and  minute  investigator.

I  willingly  embrace  the  opportunity  thus  afforded  me  of
informing  you,  with  reference  to  the  first  instance  of  ampu-
tation performed  in  this  town  eighteen  months  ago,  that  my
former  patient,  Mary  Ann  Lakin,  continues  up  to  the  present
time  in  tolerable  health  and  free  from  the  least  appearance  of
malignant  disease;  although  one  of  the  most  eminent  sur-
geons in  Leicester  assured  me,  a  short  time  previously  to  the
operation,  that  it  was  one  on  which  he  would  by  no  means
venture,  so  firm  was  his  conviction  that  the  terrible  affection
which  had  attacked  the  knee-joint,  and  which  I  may  remind
you  was  confirmed  fungus  hsematodes,  must  inevitably  and


by  Mr.  HoUings.  99

speedily  return.  My  own  time  being  very  much  occupied  in
professional  pursuits  and  engagements^  I  have  but  scanty  op-
portunities left  for  devoting  my  attention  to  mesmeric  inves-
tigations. Within  the  last  year  and  a  half^  however^  I  have
been  happily  instrumental  in  curing  two  cases  of  tic  doulou-
reux ;  in  one  instance  at  the  first  sittings  although  the  sufferer,
a  young  lady  of  the  highest  respectability  of  station  and  cha-
racter^ had  been  for  months  adopting  the  ordinary  remedies
without  benefit^  and  had  even  consented  to  the  extraction  of
a  toothy  which  it  had  been  supposed  might  be  in  some  degree
connected  with  the  continuance  of  the  complaint.  It  is  true
that  she  was  threatened  with  a  return  of  the  disorder  many
weeks  afterwards^  on  the  other  side  of  the  face^  but  every
unpleasant  symptom  was  dissipated  on  the  day  of  my  second
attendance ;  since  which  time  she  has  experienced  no  return
of  the  torture  to  which  she  was  constantly  subject.

I  regret  to  have  the  unpleasant  news  to  communicate^  that
my  esteemed  friend^  Mr.  Toswill,  the  operator  in  the  case  of
Mary  Ann  Lakin  and  in  two  instances  of  strabismus,  recorded
in  The  Zoist,  has  been  compelled  by  ill  health  to  remove  his
practice  from  Leicester  to  Devonshire.  It  would  be  well  that
this  fact  should  be  generally  understood,  to  account  for  the
non-occurrence  of  other  operations,  in  a  field  which  has
afforded  such  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  power  of  animal
magnetism  to  suspend  and  to  subdue,  under  the  most  trying
circumstances,  all  sense  of  physical  suffering.

I  know  not  whether  you  have  seen  the  address  of  a
Mr.  Estlin,  delivered  at  the  meeting  of  a  medical  association
in  the  west  of  England,  some  time  during  the  course  of  last
autumn,  on  the  subject  of  mesmerism.  To  the  arguments
contained  in  it,  few  supporters  of  animal  magnetism  will,  I
imagine,  think  it  worth  while  to  answer.  But  one  observa-
tion I  feel  compelled  to  make  with  respect  to  certain  matters
of  fact  embodied  in  Mr.  Estlin's  harangue ;  and  this  is,  that
his  account  of  the  Leicester  operations  is  not  only  most
grossly,  but  even  ludicrously  incorrect.  He  supposes,  for
instance,  or  at  least  gives  his  hearers  to  understand,  that  but
one  amputation  has  taken  place  in  this  town  during  mesmeric
sleep,  and  confounds  the  phenomena  and  circumstances  of
two  distinct  operations,  besides  making  other  misstatements,
which  the  slightest  degree  of  candour  or  industry  in  collect-
ing the  materials  for  his  disquisition  would  have  enabled  him
to  avoid.  Yet  to  this  distorted  and  ex  parte  statement,  it
appears  that  the  assembled  medical  science  of  the  province  in
which  he  resides  listened  with  much  complacency,  and  with-
out the  least  suspicion  regarding  the  authenticity  of  the  nar-

h2


100  Verses  by  Miss  Savage.

rations  with  which  their  credulity  was  abused"*^.  And  this  is
the  way  in  which  evidence  given  ex  cathedrd  on  the  subject  of
mesmerism  is  received.  That  it  is  not  the  way  in  which
truth  can  be  ultimately  suppressed^  or  mankind  prevented
from  availing  themselves  of  a  benefit,  the  vital  importance  of
which  eveiy  day  is  rendering  more  palpable,  needs  no  demon-
stration.

I  need  scarcely  say  that  you  are  at  liberty  to  make  any
use  you  may  think  proper  of  the  whole  or  any  portion  of  the
present  letter.

Believe  me,  my  dear  Sir,

With  much  respect  and  esteem,
Up.  Carlton  Place,  Leicester,  Yours  very  sincerely,

March  14th^  1846.  J.  F.  Hollings.

J.  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.

As  this  disease  in  my  experience  always  returns,  and  within  four  or  fire
years  at  the  latest,  I  should  advise  that  this  patient  be  mesmerised  daily  for
a  year  or  two,  to  lessen  her  liability.— J.  £.


VIII.  Verses  bjf  Miss  Savage.

The  following  lines  were  suggested  by  the  reply  of  a  slave,  who,  on
being  asked  to  describe  his  feelings  in  the  mesmeric  state,  answered,  *'  As  I
never  felt  before — free  !"t

As  sweeps  the  rapid  current
To  the  river's  rolling  flood —
As  the  cataract's  mountain  torrent.
Or  the  whirlwind  through  the  wood —
Did  my  slumbering  spirit  waken
From  the  thraldom  of  the  slave.
And  its  course  unchecked  hath  taken.
Free,  as  whirlwind,  or  the  wave.

When  the  bounding  billow  bore  me —
When  beneath  the  forest  tree.
The  wild  deer  fled  before  me,
I  deemed  that  I  was  free, —

*  The  ignorance,  displayed  in  the  Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  So-
ciety of  London,  of  the  characters  of  somnambulism  and  various  points  of
physiology,  of  the  difference  between  firmness  and  insensibility  and  the
marks  of  each,  and  of  mesmerism,  together  with  the  credulity  of  the  mem-
bers when  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  misrepresented  the  remarkable  and  genuine
case  of  the  sleeping  man  near  Bath  and  they  with  him  passed  over  the  va-
rious curious  facts  of  the  Nottinghamshire  case,  prevents  all  surprise  at  the
ignorance,  credulity  and  incredulity,  (for  credulity  and  incredulity  are  the
twin  offspring  of  the  same  ignorance  and  faulty  state  of  brain,)  of  the  country
members  of  the  profession. — ZtnBt.

t  See  a  similar  reply  in  Vol.  III.,  p.  65. — Zoitt.


Verses  by  Miss  Savage.  101

That  my  swift  food  did  inherit,
With  its  light  unshackled  bound,
All  the  bliss  of  the  Great  Spirit,
In  the  happy  hunting  ground.

The  fierce  hyena  howling
No  tangled  brake  could  hide.
If  Manon's  step  was  prowling
The  green  Savannah's  side :
The  spear  that  in  the  forest
Would  clear  the  hunter's  path,
Fell  in  the  war-whoop  sorest.
And  told  of  Manon's  wrath.

When  shouting  through  the  wild  wood

In  unquelled  native  glee.

In  the  brave  sports  of  my  childhood,

O'er  the  trackless  prairie ;

Upon  the  war-path  ever.

Like  an  arrow  from  the  bow ;

Yet  freedom  ! — never,  never !

Have  I  dreamed  of  it  'tiU  now.

Awhile  in  gentle  numbers.
Like  the  voice  of  rippling  streams.
Sweet  sounds  came  o'er  my  slumber
As  haunt  the  land  of  dreams :
From  the  body's  shackles  parted.
On  the  pinions  of  the  wind.
Free — forth  my  spirit  started.
And  its  fetters  left  behind.

Through  space  unbounded  winging

It  took  its  upward  flight.

To  freedom's  regions  springing.

As  flies  the  course  of  light.

Bring  back  the  chain  that  bound  me,

That  at  thy  bidding  fell.

But  breathe  once  more  around  me

The  mercy  of  thy  spell.

Its  mighty  strength  hath  taught  me
These  fetters  are  in  vain ;
And  though  with  gold  they  bought  me,
I'm  free,  I'm  firee  again.


102  Letter  from  Mr,  Chandler.

do  seek  the  hearts  that  languish.
As  Manon's  languished  long ;
Go  sooth  the  sidk  man's  anguish.
And  change  his  grief  to  song.

Yet  white  men  love  their  prison.

And  forge  themselves  the  chain,

When  slaves'  crushed  souls  have  risen

In  freedom's  light  again ;

And  scorning  him  who  breaketh

Their  darkness  but  to  bless.

Heed  not,  though  knowledge  speaketh

In  truth  and  tenderness.


IX.  Letter  from  Mr.  Chandler.

TO THE EDITOR  OF THE ZOIBT.

Sib, — I  have  not  any  new  cases  sufficiently  advanced  for
publication  in  your  next  number,  though  I  have  several  very
interesting  ones  in  hand.  One  of  them  (a  case  of  epilepsy
deriving  great  benefit)  is  very  curious,  and  well  calculated  to
convince  sceptics.  I  shall  be  most  happy  to  show  him  to  any
who  will  come  with  their  eyes  open  and  willing  to  be  con-
vinced. He  is  so  completely  under  the  influence  of  my  will,
that  I  can  awake  him  at  any  time  in  about  twenty  seconds  by
merely  willing  it ;  and  this  I  can  demonstrate  most  satisfac-
torily to  the  greatest  sceptic,  except  such  a  one  as  Mr.  Wakley,
who  might  find  it  to  his  interest  to  shut  his  eyes  to  the  most
beautiful  facts.

Mr.  F.,  whose  case  was  reported  in  your  last  number,
came  to  me  a  few  days  ago  complaining  of  chronic  rheuma-
tism of  the  head  and  face,  produced  by  applying  a  wet  towel
round  his  head  for  head-ache  some  time  ago.  He  had  not
been  free  from  pain,  more  especially  of  an  evening,  for  five
weeks.  It  was  not  severe,  but  quite  sufficient  to  cause  him
much  annoyance.  I  mesmerised  him  half  an  hour.  When
he  called  the  next  day,  he  told  me  it  was  well  we  did  not  live
in  the  last  century,  or  I  might  be  burnt  for  witchcraft ;  his
rheumatism  had  quite  left  him,  nor  has  it  returned.

Mary  Ann  Smith,  reported  in  the  number  for  July,  has
had  an  attack  of  partial  paralysis  of  the  right  side,  evidently
an  hysterical  affection.  She  could  not  hold  anything  in  the
right  hand,  and  the  left  leg  was  dragged  after  her.  Four
times  mesmerising  completely  restored  her.


Letter  from  Mr.  Chandler.  108

Hoping  to  have  muck  interesting  matter  for  you  before
July.

I  remain^  yours  obediently,
68,  Paradise  Street,  Botherhithe,  -  Thomas  Chandler.

March,  1846.

*]|e*  I  have  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Chandler  to  be  for-
warded to  The  Zoiet :  and,  in  complying  with  his  wish,  am
desirous  of  stating  that  a  more  beautiAil  example  of  the
power  of  the  will,  or  of  singular  perception,  cannot  be  wit-
nessed. It  is  worth  a  day's  journey  to  see.  A  stout,  sturdy-
looking  young  man,  in  good  circumstances,  subject  to  epilepsy,
was  easily  sent  into  deep  mesmeric  coma.  Without  a  word,  or
visible  movement,  or  the  slightest  noise,  Mr.  Chandler,  stand-
ing at  a  distance  from  him,  in  a  room  full  of  patients  and
spectators,  many  of  them  talking,  woke  him  several  times
at  pleasure  by  simply  willing  and  moving  a  finger  invisibly.
The  effect  invariably  followed  in  less  than  a  minute.  I,
like  some  others,  stood  close  by  Mr.  Chandler,  at  his  side
and  rather  behind  him,  with  one  hand  close  to,  almost  touch-
ing, his  back ;  and  the  signal  I  gave  for  Mr.  Chandler  to  will
the  waking,  was  just  to  advance  the  tip  of  one  finger  and
touch  Mr.  Chandler's  back.  The  man  could  not  have  learnt
what  I  did,  or  when  I  did  it,  unless  he  was  clairvoyant.  The
gradual  disturbance  of  the  breathing,  and  movements  of  the
arms,  head  and  body,  till  full  waking  was  accomplished,  was
most  striking.  Mr.  Chandler  makes  a  beautiful  experiment
upon  his  insensibility ;  putting  a  smaU  roU  of  paper  up  his  nose
and  moving  it  about  against  the  organ  without  the  faintest
mark  of  sensibility,  though  in  the  waking  state  he  cannot
bear  this  a  moment.  Yet  though  there  is  no  conscious  sen-
sation, the  eye  of  that  side  gradually  sympathizes,  and  at
length  a  tear  appears  in  the  comer.  It  will  be  remembered
that,  at  page  8,  the  American  lady  after  the  third  operation
on  her  cancerous  breast  is  said  to  have  been  awakened  by
the  mesmeriser's  mere  will.

Another  patient  of  Mr.  Chandler's  is  equally  worth  a
day's  journey  to  see.  A  very  pretty  young  girl  is  as  suscep-
tible in  her  ordinary  state  as  the  two  Okeys  were  in  their
mesmeric  delirium,  in  which  they  frolicked  about  with  their
eyes  open.  One  pass  instantly  stupifies  her,  bringing  down
her  eyelids,  arresting  her  in  the  very  position  in  which  she
may  be  walking,  stooping,  putting  on  her  bonnet,  using  her
handkerchief,  or  doing  whatever  else:  instantly,  like  the
Okeys,  she  becomes  a  silent  statue.  She  is  as  instantly
awakened  by  a  transverse  movement  of  the  fingers,  but  not


104  Reichenbach's  Researches  an  Magnetism,  8fC.,

unless  that  is  done  within  the  sphere  of  her  vision ;  and  her
eyes  are  never  quite  closed.  Do  it  close  to  her  face,  do  it
with  a  noise,  make  the  air  wave,  if  you  please,  give  her
every  other  means  of  knowing  it, — no  effect  ensues,  unless
you  do  it  below  the  level  of  her  upper  lid  so  that  the  cir-
cumstances can  pass  through  the  pupil  to  the  retina.  She
gives  no  other  evidence  of  seeing ;  and  this  is  unconscious
seeing.*  Just  as  with  the  Okeys,  a  pass  with  merely  bend-
ing a  finger  stupifies  her :  or  a  bow  before  her,  which  amounts
to  a  pass  with  the  whole  body.  She  can  also  be  drawn  at
once  by  slight  tractive  movements  of  one  hand,  though  these
be  made  behind  her,  at  the  middle  of  her  back,  when  she
cannot  suspect  them,  and  even  though  her  eyes  are  covered
with  a  cloth.

Of  two  females,  whose  arms,  &c.,  can  be  stiffened  when
they  are  awoke,  one  completely,  and  one  imperfectly,  can
relax  them  by  breathing  upon  the  parts,  as  Miss  Collins
could  :t  and  one  can  also  produce  the  rigidity  herself,  even
of  a  single  finger,  by  long  contact  passes  of  the  other  hand.

What  an  example  has  Mr.  Chandler  set  to  his  medical
brethren !  He  had  never  seen  mesmerism  when  I  advised  it
in  a  case  to  which  he  had  called  me  in  and  shewed  him  the
method.  He  forthwith  mesmerised  the  patient,  cured  the
disease,  and  brought  out  phenomena :  sending  the  important
statement  first  to  the  Lancet,  and  afterwards  to  the  London
Medical  Gazette,  both  which  rejected  it;  but  it  was  after-
wards published  in  The  Zoist.X  From  that  day,  he  has
employed  mesmerism  among  his  patients  just  as  freely  as
other  medical  means;  and  made  no  secret  of  it,  as  some
sickening  believers  do,  but  advised  it  openly,  defending  it
on  all  occasions,  and  exhibiting  it  to  his  friends  and  those  of
his  brethren  who  would  condescend  to  witness  it.  He  has
not  considered  whether  he  could  afford  to  have  a  conscience.

John  Elliotson.

X.  Review  of  an  Abstract  of  Researches  on  Magnetism  and
Certain  Allied  Subjects,  including  a  supposed  new  Impon-
derable. By  Baron  von  Reichenbach.  Translated
and  abridged  from  the  German,  by  William  Greoobt,
M.D.,  F.R.S.E.,  M.R.I.A.,  Professor  of  Chemistry  (in
the  University  of  Edinburgh).  London:  Taylor  and
Walton,  28,  Upper  Gower  Street.  1846.  pp.  112,  with
two  plates. By  Dr.  Elliotson.

In  the  58rd  volume  of  Liebig  and  Wohler's  Annalen  der

♦  Compare  Vol.  III.,  p.  361-2. t  Vol.  III.,  p.  449. t  Vol.  I.,  p.  162.


including  a  supposed  new  Imponderable,  105

Chemie  und  Pharmacie,  was  a  sapplement  of  270  pages^  last
springs  with  the  above  title^  by  the  minute,  laborious,  and
faithfol  discoverer  of  creosote  and  some  other  substances  in
tar, — ^the  German  Chemist,  Beichenbach.  It  appears  by  a
letter  from  the  author  at  Vienna  to  his  translator,  dated  last
February,  that  his  observations  have  been  made  upon  twenty-
three  persons,  men  and  matrons,  all  confirming  the  same
facts  and  opinions.

Magnets  of  10  lbs.  supporting  power,  when  drawn'  along
the  body  downwards,  without  contact,  produced,  in  some
persons,  more  frequently  females  and  those  who  are  nervous,
especially  those  affected  with  nervous  diseases,  and  above  all
lunatics  and  somnambulists,  a  rather  unpleasant  sensation,
like  a  wind,  warm  or  cooling,  pricking  or  creeping,  and  some-
times also  rapid  headache;  though  the  patient  knew  not
what  was  doing.  Occasionsdly  fainting,  catalepsy,  or  violent
spasms  were  induced,  with  extreme  acuteness  of  the  external
senses.

Beichenbach  thought  that  a  cataleptic  and  spasmodic  girl
of  twenty-five,  whose  vision  made  a  dark  room  twilight  to
her,  and  who  was  very  susceptible  to  the  magnet,  might  per-
ceive some  luminous  appearance  about  the  magnet :  and  as
soon  as  the  armature  was  removed  from  one  bearing  80  lbs.,
and  of  nine  elements,  she  actually  did  see,  in  profound  dark-
ness, a  luminous  appearance,  which  uniformly  disappeared
when  the  armature  was  applied.  In  a  similar  experiment,  on
her  recovery  from  a  cataleptic  attack  when  her  sensibility  was
the  greatest  and  others  could  discern  nothing,  she  saw,  at
the  distance  of  ten  feet,  a  luminous  vapour,  surrounded  by
rays  i  or  |  inch  long,  constantly  shooting  and  lengthening
and  shortening  in  the  most  beautiful  manner  fi^m  the  poles,
which  were  placed  upwards,  disappearing  when  the  armature
was  applied,  and  reappearing  on  its  removal;  more  strongly
than  ever  just  at  the  moment  of  its  removal.  The  light  was
almost  purely  white,  sometimes  mixed  with  iridescent  colours,
and  denser  towards  the  middle  than  towards  the  corners  of
the  edges  of  the  magnet.  When  she  was  nearly  cured,  she
discerned  two  luminous  threads  only,  no  doubt  the  edges  of
the  poles,  and  at  length  nothing  but  a  flash  just  on  the  re-
moval of  the  armature ;  and  the  same  was  the  case  at  her
most  seasitive  period,  if  a  weaker  magnet  was  employed.

A  somnambulant,  cataleptic,  spasmodic,  phthisical  girl
of  nineteen,  fell  into  spasms  and  unconsciousness  if  the
armature  was  removed  from  the  large  magnet  within  six  paces
of  her  feet  when  in  bed  in  the  dark,  and  on  coming  to  her-
self declared  she  had  seen  white,  red  and  blue  fire  of  the  height


106 Reichenbach^s  Researches  on  Magnetism^  ^c.,

of  a  small  hair's^breadth^  rise  from  the  magnet.  She  wished
to  examine  it  more  minutely,  but,  the  circuit  not  being  closed,
she  was  again  thrown  into  unconsdonsness.

A  stupid  spasmodic  boy  of  eighteeii  saw  flame  a  hand-
breadth  high,  whenever  the  armature  was  removed,  in  the
dark.

A  spasmodic  girl  of  twenty-five,  with  the  lower  extremi-
ties palsied,  did  the  same,  and,  when  the  spasms  were  on,  the
light  from  the  poles  seemed  much  larger,  and  currents  of
weaker  light  issued  from  all  the  surface,  dazzling  her,  and
largest  and  brightest  at  the  poles.

A  strong  girl  of  twenty-nine,  was  subject  to  distant  attacks
of  spasms,  somnambulism  and  insanity,  and  a  great  intensity  of
sight  that  lasted  when  she  was  otherwise  recovered.  She  was
very  intelligent  and  could  bear  the  proximity  of  magnets  well.
She  saw  the  light,  even  in  twilight,  though  larger,  brighter,
and  with  more  defined  outlines  and  distinct  play  of  colours,
in  the  dark;  and  then,  if  the  armature  was  on,  the  light
did  not  proceed  particularly  from  the  poles,  but  from  every
point,  short,  flammular,  uniform,  and  constantly  undulating,
about  as  long  as  the  little  finger  is  thick ;  but,  if  the  armature
was  removed,  rays  almost  as  long  as  the  magnet  (nearly  9
inches)  proceeded  from  the  poles,  rather  broader  than  the  bar ;
the  two  flames  not  inclining  to  each  other  any  more  than  in
the  first  case.  The  position  of  the  bar  had  no  influence,  nor
was  any  heat  perceptible  by  NobiU's  thermoscope.

Another  spasmodic  and  somnambulant  girl  of  twenty,
who  went  about  the  city  and  looked  well,  saw  all  the  same
appearances,  but  larger,  more  distinct  and  brilliant.

A  very  delicate  daguerrotype  plate  was  placed  opposite  a
magnet  without  its  armature  in  a  closed  box,  covered  with
the  bed  clothes  to  exclude  light  as  much  as  possible.  After
64  hours,  the  plate  when  held  over  mercurial  vapour  was
throughout  as  fully  affected  as  by  light :  whereas  in  the  same
experiment,  without  a  magnet,  the  plate  remained  unaffected.

An  electro-magnet  gave  the  same  appearance  as  a  steel
magnet :  and,  it  being  within  the  poles  of  the  steel  magnet,
the  flame  of  the  latter  bent  down  to  its  flame,  as  the  flame  of
a  taper  does  to  the  blast  of  the  blow-pipe.  The  magnetic
light  could  be  concentrated  by  a  lens.

When  one  of  the  females  was  in  a  state  of  insensibility
and  catalepsy,  a  horse-shoe  magnet  was  taken  near  her
hand.  She  seized  it  and  her  hand  followed  it  whitherso-
ever it  was  moved :  even  if  it  was  forcibly  separated  from
her  hand,  and  removed  frirther  than  she  could  reach,  she
raised  herself  in  bed  and  followed  it  with  her  hand  as  far  as


including  a  iupposed  new  Imponderable.  107

she  could  reach :  if  the  magnet  was  still  farther  removed,
she  unwillingly  let  it  go,  but  remained  fixed  in  her  position.
The  same  phenomena  took  place  when  she  was  quite  con-
scious. ''  She  described  the  sensation  as  an  irreeiBtihIe  attrac-
tion, which  she  felt  compelled  against  her  will  to  obey ;"  the
sensation  being  agreeable,  refreshing,  peculiar,  indescribable.
With  two  other  of  the  females,  fdl  the  same  results  were
obtained.  Baron  Reichenbach  says,  that ''  the  adhesion  of  a
Uving  Umb  to  a  magnet  is  a  fact  nnkaown  ia  physiology  or  in
physics,'^  yet  also  says  that  the  attraction  of  the  hand  by  a
magnet  was  formerly  described  by  Dr.  Petetin,  of  Lyons. "  The
next  question  was,  is  the  attraction  mutual,  or  wUl  the  hand
attract  bodies  that  are  attracted  by  the  magnet  ?''  He  pro-
perly determines  in  the  negative :  for  their  hands  did  not
attract  iron  filings,  nor  affect  a  needle  or  a  balance  magnet,
nor  magnetise  a  needle.

I  have  two  patients,  the  cancerous  female  mentioned  at  p.  9,  and
Biary  Ann,  (Vol.  III.,  p.  361,)  who  are  affected  by  the  mere  magnet  in
both  their  ordinary  and  their  sleep-waking  state.  Their  hand  con-
tracts involuntarily  and  firmly  upon  either  pole  of  the  magnet,  grows
rigid;  and  on  removing  the  magnet,  the  rigidity  continues,  and  ap-
parently would  for  hoars.  On  removing  the  magnet  the  rigidity
continued:  but  was  at  once  removed  by  mesmeric  means,
"— >dy  applying  iron  to  the  hand,  by  breathing  upon  it^  by  transverse
passes  over  it^  by  pointing  closely  at  it,  or  by  putting  my  own  hand
in  contact  with  it.  Nothing  could  exceed  my  joy  at  seeine  what  I
had  discovered  and  related  of  the  effects  of  mesmerised  gold,  silver,
&c.,  upon  the  Okeys,  and  of  iron  and  other  means  in  antagonizing
them,  thus  all  verified  in  regard  to  the  unmesmerised  magnet.  By
allowing  the  magnet  to  remain  in  the  hand  of  Mary  Ann,  after  I
had  sent  her  into  deep  sleep^waking  by  one  pass  as  usual,  the  hand
and  arm  being  already  stiffened,  the  whole  body  participated,  the
brain  became  dull,  and  at  last  a  degree  of  stupefaction  and  debility
occurred:  and  strongly  mesmerised  gold  causes  all  these  effects  in
M.  A.  so  rapidly  and  violently  that  I  dare  apply  it  for  only  a  few
moments  and  over  a  limited  surface ;  otherwise,  the  hand  relaxes
after  violently  grasping  the  gold.  She  grasps  a  finger  on  which  she
feels  there  is  a  gold  ring,  for  in  her  sleep-waking  she  has  no  power
.  of  opening  her  eyes  ever  so  little.  She  experiences  so  delightful  a
sensation,  she  says,  from  the  gold,  and  cannot  avoid  grasping  it ;  but
she  presently  drops  thoroughly  relaxed,  and  has  tetanus  in  the  form  of
pleurosthotonos,  just  as  Elizabeth  Okey  had  similar  effects  ^m
nickel,  but  tetanus  in  the  form  of  opisthotonos:  and  then  M.  A.,
after  very  rapid  respirations,  followed  by  very  slow  and  deep  inspira-
tion, is  exhausted,  pale,  cold,  has  a  filthy  taste  in  her  mouth,  and
is  profoundly  melancholy  for  some  time,  requiring  stimulants,  and
wakes  into  a  cross, half  delirious  state, — ^all  just  as  occurred  in


108 Reichenbach^s  Researches  on  Magnetism,  ^c,

the  Okejs  after  mesmerised  metals  or  water  had  heen  much  ap-
plied; and  she  is  recovered  from  this  depressed  and  delirious  state
by  mj  inducing  sleep  and  waking  her  afresh.  This  waking  is  into
a  rational  state,  though  relapses  maj  occur  and  repetitions  of  sleep
be  required,  and  debility  may  remain  for  many  hours.  When  the
magnet  had  been  held  some  time  by  her,  after  being  sent  to  sleep
by  a  pass,  she  grew  more  and  more  silent,  and  at  length  stupia,
snappish  and  miserable,  exactly  as  she  is  after  the  most  Tiolent
effects  of  strongly  mesmerised  gold  have  passed  off.  Her  arms  in
her  mesmeric  state  are  spontaneously  rigid,  if  raised :  but  now,  if
rais«d,  after  I  had  relaxed  her  hands  they  dropped  relaxed. — In  her
waking  state  the  effect  of  the  magnet  on  her  cerebral  ftmctions  was
little  or  nothing,  though  held  by  her  for  half  an  hour;  but  on  send-
ing her  to  sleep  by  a  pass,  its  influence  greatly  increased,  for  the
cerebral  disturbance  came  on.  The  local  effect  of  the  magnet  on
the  hands  was  probably  greater  in  the  mesmeric  state:  but  I  have
not  had  time  to  ascertain  this  satisfactorily.  An  uumesmerised
sovereign  causes  rigidity  of  her  hands  and  arms  in  the  mesmeric
state,  but  nothing  more.  All  the  results  which  ensued  on  applying
mesmerised  gold,  &c.,  to  the  Okeys,  and  all  the  results  which
ensued  when  the  parts  were  stiffened  by  mesmeric  means;  and  which
have  appeared  in  my  Physiology,  in  my  clinical  lectures,  the  reports
in  the  Lancet  and  other  joumds  for  1838,  and  in  my  farewell  Letter
to  the  students  of  University  College  Hospital.  I  hope  to  repeat
all  Baron  B.'s  experiments,  and  hope  he  will  repeat  them  on  persons
in  the  mesmeric  state,  and  make  my  experiments  also.

Iron  has  no  effect  upon  her  in  either  state  any  more  than  it  had
on  the  Okeys:  she  holds  the  poker  any  time,  awake  or  sleep-waking,
with  no  result.  In  truth  the  plain  uumesmerised  magnet  has  the  same
effect  that  mesmerised  memerisable  metals  had  upon  the  Okeys,
upon  whom,  however,  I  never  found  the  magnet^  mesmerised  or
uumesmerised,  to  have  any  effect.  They  were  affected  by  no  metal,
unless  it  was  first  mesmerised^  that  is,  held  in  the  hand  or  against
some  other  point  of  the  surface,  breathed  upon,  or  eazed  intensely
at.  Certain  metals,  gold,  silver,  platinum,  nickel,  could  be  so
mesmerised:  while  others,  as  copper  and  lead,  could  not,  unless
the  breath  or  perspiration  was  left  on  them;  and  then  an  effect  came,
but  none  if  tney  were  well  wiped;  and  if  any  substance,  but  iron,
not  wiped  after  a  good  application  of  the  breath  or  cutaneous  moisture
to  it,  were  applied,  the  effects  came.  Iron  could  never  be  made  to  affect
them.  When  they  were  rigid  and  unconscious  and  the  eyes  closed,
from  a  mesmerised  sovereign  lying  on  their  hand,  their  muscles  all
relaxed,  their  eyes  opened,  and  they  were  restored  instantly,  by
placing  iron  upon  the  gold:  the  effects  returned  on  withdrawing  the
iron,  and  ceased  on  placing  it  again  upon  the  gold.  "  Some  metals,
as  lead  and  copper,  could  never  be  charged  so  as  to  affect  the  elder;
and  nickel  had  always  a  tremendous  influence  over  her,  such  as  I
defy  any  human  being  to  imitate.  But  lead  and  copper  affected  the
younger,  if,  after  having  been  held  in  the  hand  of  another,  the  per-
spiration was  not  wiped  off  them. If  it  was  wiped  away,  no  effect


including  a  supposed  new  Imponderable.  109

ever  occurred.  Iron  could  never  be  made  to  affect  either,  under  any
circumstance;  on  the  contrary,  it  invariably  destroyed  the  power  in
cliarged  gold  or  silver.  Nothing  could  be  more  interesting  than  to  see
a  charged  sovereign  or  shilling  lying  in  their  hand,  a  screen  being
held  between  it  and  their  head;  and,  as  soon  as  the  hand  began  to
close  and  the  eyes  to  fix,  to  observe  these  effects  instantly  arrested
and  subside  when  a  short  iron  rod  was  brought  into  contact  with  the
metal,  and  augment  again  when  it  was  withdrawn.  I  have  often
substituted  a  rod  of  silver  or  of  some  other  metal,  for  I  had  rods
made  of  various  metals  precisely  similar  in  form  and  size,  when  it
was  impossible  the  girl  could  know  which  was  being  used;  and  in
the  case  of  a  leaden  rod  I  myself  should  not  have  known  by  the
eye  at  the  moment^  but  to  prevent  confusion  had  put  each  into  a
separate  pocket.  The  silver,  copper,  and  lead  had  no  neutralizing
power,  and  therefore  never  diminished  or  arrested  the  effect.  1 1^
collect  one  day  having  put  a  charged  sovereign  into  the  hand  of  the
younger.  Her  hand  began  to  contract,  and  she  could  not  by  any
effort  open  it.  She  was  ver^  cross,  and  seeine  two  rods  exactly
alike,  took  up  one,  thinking  it  was  iron;  and  told  me  now  she  was
a  match  for  me  and  would  open  her  hand.  But  her  hand  would  not
open.  I  then  went  to  look  at  the  other  rod,  and  found  that  it  was
the  iron  rod,  and  that  she  had  taken  the  leaden.  I  pulled  the  leaden
one  out,  and  introduced  the  iron  one  between  the  fingers  and  palm,
and  her  hand  immediately  opened."*

Both  my  present  patients  followed  the  magnet  with  their  hand,
as  a  piece  of  iron  would,  and  adhered  to  it  as  closely  as  possible.
On  beinff  asked  why  they  did  so,  their  reply  was  that  they  did  not
know — tney  could  not  help  it.  The  action  was  not  regular  like  that
of  a  needle  following  a  magnet,  but  irregular,  like  that  of  a  person
striving  to  keep  close  to  and  up  with  another.  Baron  R.  is  correct
in  considering  this  to  be  no  magnetism.  It  is  evidently  a  willed
action;  an  involuntary,  forced  wilGng.  The  patient  has  a  pleasant
sensation,  and  finds  the  inclination  to  touch  tne  magnet  irresistible.
The  movements  produced  by  traction,  even  when  they  vex  the  pa-
tient, are  equally  willed,  although  by  compulsion  (see  Vol.  II.,  p.
58,  204.)  Although  the  magnet  produced  these  effects  upon  Baron
B.'s  patients  even  when  apparently  insensible,  the  sleep  of  sleep-
waking,  which  was  their  state,  is  seldom  so  deep  but  that  certain
influences,  different  in  different  cases,  are  felt,  and,  if  there  be
strength  enough,  some  active  voluntary  sign  of  the  influence  mani-
fested.f  The  brains  of  his  patients  in  the  deep  sleep  no  doubt  felt
the  influence  of  the  magnet,  and  unconsciously  and  involuntarily
willed  movements  towards  it.  When  patients'  eyes  are  open  in  their
mesmeric  state  and  they  see,  some  roll  them  involuntarily  rapidly
from  side  to  side,  upwards  or  downwards,  just  as  a  prism,  or  piece
of  wood,  &c.,  is  moved.

When  the  hand  was  contracted  by  the  magnet  applied  to  the

*  Human  Physiology ,  p.  1177.

t  See  my  Pamphlet,  p.  38,  41 ;  Zoist,  Vol.  II.,  p.  53.


1 10 BeichenbacKs  Researches  on  Magnetism,  ifc,

palm»  I  opened  it  by  applying  the  magnet  to  its  back;  and  it  was
rigidly  opened.

The  contraction  and  rigidity  produced  by  the  magnet  are  evi-
dendy  distinct  from  the  followmg,  which  is  a  compelled  Yolition,
jost  as  the  rigidity  from  mesmeric  processes  is  distinct  from  traction.

I  have  tried  the  magnet  in  the  hands  also  of  Bosina,*  who
is  usually  sent  to  sleep-waking  by  pointing  at  her  eyes  for  seren
minutes:  in  Mrs.  Hall,  who  is  readily  sent  into  silent  sleep-waking,
and  formerly  with  general  rigidity  :t  in  a  lady  who  required  that
morning  but  two  passes  to  go  into  sleep-waking,  and  is  neuralgic
and  subject  to  opistnotonos:  in  another  lady,  who  is  subject  to  vo-
miting, and  is  sent  to  sleep-waking  as  reaoily.  In  none  of  these
was  there  any  effect.  Now  Mary  Ann  and  the  cancerous  patient  are
always  stiffened  by  passes.  Rosina  formerly  was,  but  is  not  now.
Mrs.  Hall  formerly  was  rigid,  but  is  not  now,  nor  can  she  be  made
so.  The  two  other  patients  have  never  shewn  rigidity.  I  have  tried
it  repeatedly  with  no  effect  upon  two  whom  I  have  tried  in  vain  for
half  an  hour  daily  for  five  months  to  mesmerbe.  I  tried  six  of  Mr.
Chandler's  patients,  both  in  their  ordinary  and  mesmeric  state,  who
all  are  put  to  sleep^waking  very  readily.  Except  that  one  felt  a
pricking  in  his  palm^  five  expenenced  nothing;  but  one,  a  middle-
aged  woman,  had  her  hand  contracted  exactly  as  Mary  Ann's  was,
and  it  was  relaxed  by  all  the  same  means,  breathing,  transverse
passes,  iron,  contact  of  my  hand.  She  also  presently  felt  drowsy  and
passed  into  the  sleep-waking  state,  exhibiting  all  her  sleep-waking
phenomena.  She  only  of  uie  six  can  be  made  rigid  by  passes;  two
of  the  others  are  catalepsed,  but  never  rigid.  She  only,  of  all  Mr.
Chandler's  six  cases  and  my  six,  when  awake  saw  light  from  the
magnet  in  the  dark:  but  she  saw  two  masses  of  "beautiful"  light
in  dots  working  about,  and  while  looking  at  it,  placed  a  foot  from
her,  went  to  sleep. She  saw  some  light  even  in  the  light.

The  magnet  I  employed  was  not  to  be  compared  with  Baron  B.'s.
It  has  five  elements,  and  supports  six  lbs.,  but  is  the  best  I  could
obtain  in  the  few  davs  which  elapsed  between  the  receipt  of  Dr.
Gregory's  book  and  the  publication  of  The  Zaisi.  The  unaffected
patients  were  equallv  unaffected,  though  I  previously  mesmerised  the
magnet  by  holding  it  in  my  hand.  When  the  curve  of  the  magnet
was  employed,  Mr.  Chandler's  patient's  hand  stiffened;  Mary  Ann's
did  not.

The  medical  world  will  now,  I  hope,  believe  that  all  the  exquisite
results  which  I  obtained  in  the  Okeys  from  inanimate  substances
were  real.  I  found  in  them  that  when  a  mesmerised  metal  or
the  mere  breath  had  affected  one  hand,  if  the  other  was  applied  to
it,  the  other  grew  rigid  also;  and  that  the  effect  was  increased  in  any
part  by  friction  with  anything;  and  if  the  rigidity  had  ceased,  was
renewed  by  friction.  Even  after  their  hand  had  relaxed,  if  they
closed  it  again  at  my  desire,  the  action  reproduced  the  rigidity,  and
they  could  not  open  it  for  some  time.  These  trials  I  have  made
after  the  application  of  the  unmesmerised  magnet,  with  the  same

•  Vol.  II.,  p.  194.  t  Vol.  II.,  p.  42.


including  a  ngaposed  new  Imponderable,  111

successful  results.  Mary  Ann,  in  her  mesmeric  state,  has  a  slight
effect  from  unmesmerised  gold  coin,  far  less  than  when  it  has  been
mesmerised, — but  in  that  only;  her  hands  spasmodically  contract,
and  they  are  relaxed  by  mesmeric  means.

Reichenbach  eives  two  lists  of  substances  in  reference  to
the  possession  of  a  power  similar  to  that  of  the  magnet.
I.  Inert,  as  gold  and  silver  coins,  copper,  &c.  2.  Active,  a.
fine  crystals,  of  gold,  diamonds,  sulphate  of  copper,  &c.,
causing  the  fingers  to  close  mildly ;  b.  rock  salt,  rock  crys-
tal, &c.,  to  close  with  spasm ;  and  c.  fluor  and  heavy  spar,
gypsum,  &c.,  to  close  with  violent  spasm,  and  to  attract  when
near  the  hand.  The  effect  was  greater  if  they  were  first  mag-
netised ;  and  greater  in  the  cataleptic  than  the  natural  state.
Therefore,  in  certain  patients,  the  period  of  an  attack  is  some-
times one  of  great  susceptibility.  I  presume  that  an  enlarged
sphere  of  trial  will  disclose  great  differences  of  effect  upon
different  individuals.  In  my  trials  before  Reichenbach's  ex-
periments, this  was  the  case  in  reference  to  substances  mes-
merised. I  never  happened  to  try  upon  the  Okeys  any  of  the
substances  mentioned  by  him,  as  producing  effects  of  them-
selves without  magnetism,  except  the  diamond  and  other
precious  stones,  metallic  antimony  and  bismuth ;  and  they

Eroduced  no  effect,  neither  did  jewels  produce  any  after  being
eld  in  the  hand  and  then  wiped.  I  trust  he  will  repeat  all
his  experiments  in  the  two  other  conditions  of  the  substance,
first  held  in  the  hand  and  then  wiped ;  and  secondly,  held  in
the  hand  and  not  wiped.  He  may  find  some  of  his  inert  class
powerful  on  some  patients.  Thus  unmesmerised  gold  coin
IS  in  his  inert  class,  but  it  affects  Mary  Ann.

He  found  that  magnetized  water,  or  that  over  which  a
magnet  had  been  passed,  was  readily  distinguished  by  his
patients  by  the  taste,  and  even  inclined  the  head  to  follow  it.
He  could  thus  pqoduce  the  same  change  in  all  sorts  of  sub-
stances, so  that  they  acted  upon  the  hand  as  the  magnet  (I  pre-
sume it  is  implied  that  water  did  the  same) ;  some  occasioning
spasms  of  the  hand,  some  of  the  arm,  some  of  the  whole
body,  though  all  equally  magnetized.

The  Okeys  felt  nothing  from  common  water;  but  mesmerised
water  drunk  threw  them  into  insensibility:  and  at  one  time,  in
one,  it  did  not  till  a  second  draught  or  a  draught  €^  plaint  water
was  afterwards  taken.  Applied  to  the  finger  of  one,  but  of  Elizabeth
only,  it  caused  contraction  inwards,  if  applied  to  the  inside;  out-
wards, if  applied  to  the  outoide:  when  sight  was  impossible,  and
water  from  a  mesmerised  and  an  unmesmerised  glass  variously,  kept
behind  her  back,  even  behind  a  screen,  was  employed  I  These
beautiful  experimente  were  shewn  by  me  to  Mr.  Wakley,  and  he  had


1 1 2  ReichenbacVs  Researches  on  Magnetism,  ^c,

nothing  to  object  to  them:  he  was  quite  at  a  loss  even  for  impudence,
and  passed  them  over  in  silence  in  nis  unfair  and  ignorant  account  of
what  he  says  he  saw.  At  length,  if  much  was  employed,  insensi-
bility and  extreme  debility  for  a  time  ensued.  Mary  Ann  finds  mes-
mensed  water  sweet,  and  would  drink  any  quantity  of  it.  She  can
distinguish  a  person  in  the  mesmeric  state  by  the  touch,  even
though  her  eyes  are  fixedly  closed  and  she  prevented  from  all
ordinary  means  of  knowing.  She  has  a  sensation  so  delightful,
that  her  hand  firmly  squeezes  theirs,  and  can  be  drawn  from
it  only  by  force.  She  fancies  that  some  adhesive  substance  has
been  put  by  me  upon  it — she  says,  "sticky  stuff;"  finds  it  ex-
quisite, and  can  tell  precisely  how  far  the  person  is  under  the
mesmeric  influence.  I  have  often  put  her  hand  upon  a  patient's,
and,  having  covered  her  head,  begun  to  mesmerise  him;  and  pre-
sently as  signs  of  drowsiness  began  in  him,  did  she  say  some  sticky
stuff,  is  coming:  as  the  sleepiness  increased,  so  did  her  sensation;  if
it  lessened,  so  did  her  sensation;  and  the  deeper  his  state,  the  stronger
her  sensation.  At  length  the  effect  upon  her  is  the  same  as  that  of
gold,  and  she  drops  senseless,  powerless,  and  breathless.

Many  cannot  distinguish  mesmerised  water  and  experience  no
effect  from  it.  Of  the  Okeys  I  said,  in  my  Physiology ^  p.  1179:
''Water  has  no  effect:  but,  if  it  is  breathed  into  or  has  a  finger
placed  in  it,  acquires  the  power  of  producing  sudden  sleep  if  drunk
by  either  sister:  and,  in  the  elder,  contraction  of  a  finger  or  limb
which  is  moistened  with  it,  as  well  as  deep  sleep.  We  send  her  to
sleep  by  passes,  and  measures  are  taken  to  prevent  the  possibility  of
sight,  and,  when  she  is  asleep,  we  moisten  any  finger,  the  side  of
the  nose,  or  any  other  part  of  the  face  with  it  or  with  plain  water.
If  with  plain  water,  there  is  no  effect:  if  with  the  mesmerised,  the
part  after  a  time  contracts.  If  the  back  of  the  finger  is  moistened,
the  finger  extends :  if  the  inside,  it  bends :  if  the  forehead,  this
wrinkles  and  moves  up  and  down:  if  the  eyelids,  they  open:  if  the
angle  of  the  mouth,  it  twitches  sidewise.  These  experiments  have
been  made  thousands  of  times,  and  always,  except  for  some  evident
reason,  with  the  same  results.  But  the  mesmerised  water  has  a
powerful  narcotic  and  depressing  property.  The  longer  it  is  applied,
and  the  more  of  it  is  used,  the  deeper  the  sleep  and  snoring  become:
and,  if  too  much  is  used,  paleness,  exhaustion,  rapidity  and  extreme
smidlness  of  pulse  take  place,  so  that  no  one  should  presume  to
make  these  experiments  unless  well  acquainted  with  the  subject.
Indeed,  with  respect  to  any  of  these  experiments,  for  an  ignorant
man  to  take  the  matter  in  hand  himself,  as  though  he  had  made
himself  master  of  the  subject,  is  as  absurd  and  disgusting  as  if  a
countryman  should  push  aside  a  chemical  lecturer,  and  mix  acids,
alkalies,  and  salts  from  various  bottles,  and  declare,  because  things
did  not  happen  as  he  expected,  that  chemistry  was  Aidge:  or  if  such
a  clown,  who  had  never  seen  a  microscope  before,  should  put  objects
under  it,  and  knowing  nothing  about  the  instrument,  be  able  to  see
fog  and  confusion  only,  and  therefore  declare  the  instrument  an  im-
position. If  the  susceptibility  is  not  strong,  water  swallowed  may


including  a  mppased  new  Imponderable.  118

hATe  DO  effect  till  a  second  draught  is  taken,  or  even  a  draught  of
unmesmerised  water,  so  as  to  occasion  friction  of  the  part  wet  with
the  mesmerised  water.  Since,  if  a  part  has  heen  breathed  upon  or
touched  by  another,  or  touched  with  something  mesmerised,  friction
with  any  unmesmerised  or  unmesmerisable  substance  will  bring  out
the  effects  of  the  previous  and  hitherto  dormant  cause  or  re-excite
effects  that  had  ceased:  should  a  finger  be  held  by  another  person,
Mid  then  rubbed  with  a  brush  moistened  with  unmesmerised  water,
effects  will  ensue  just  as  if  water  first  mesmerised  were  used.  Should
mesmerised  gold  or  nickel  have  been  applied  to  a  part,  and  from  the
susceptibility  betng  low  no  effect  haye  occurred,  or  should  there  have
been  ao  effect  and  it  have  ceased,  friction  with  anything  will  bring
out  the  effect  of  the  thing  previously  applied:  or  should  a  thing  not
directly  mesmerisable,  but  mesmensable  by  contact  with  a  directly
mesmerisable  metal,  be  ignorantly  allowed  to  be  in  contact  with  a
mesmerisable  metal,  and  then  be  applied  to  the  person,  the  effects
of  the  directly  mesmerisable  metal  will  be  produced."

The  effect  of  all  mesmerised  substances  I  found  different  in  dif-
ferent people,  and  in  the  same  at  different  times.  Metals,  even
mdcel,  nad  no  effect  upon  Elizabeth  Okey  at  last.  All  the  manifesta-
tions and  all  the  phenomena  of  these  cases,  whether  spontaneous  or
mesmeric,  are  liable  to  fluctuation.  In  the  same  way,  not  only  do
different  medicines  act  differently  upon  different  persons,  but  the
same  medicine  at  different  times.

Baron  R.  found  that  the  effects  were  sometimes  alow,
sometimes  quick,  and  that  the  power  of  substances  had  no
relation  to  their  electric  character ;  exactly  as  I  had  observed
in  regard  to  mesmerism.  All  active  bodies  were  crystallized,
all  the  amorphous  inert ;  but  confusedly  crystallized  bodies
were  also  inert ;  even  the  same  substance  was  active  when  a
crystal,  inert  when  amorphous.  The  piece  of  nickel  which  I
used  with  Elizabeth  Okey  was  a  polished  spheroid;  what
Mr.  Wakley  used  was  a  rough  piece.  Whether  this  made  a
difference  or  not  I  cannot  tell,  nor  do  I  care,  because  belief  is
involuntary,  and  I  do  not  believe  a  word  of  his  statement
of  his  experiments  behind  my  back ;  and  because  he  was  ig-
norant that  lead,  &c.,  in  contact  with  mesnoerised  nickel  ac-
qoired  its  mesooieric  properties,  and  that  after  nickel  had  been
rubbed  with  no  effect  on  a  part,  the  effect  comes  as  soon  as
an  inert  substance  is  rubbed.  I  saw  him  apply  nickel  to  Eliza-
beth Okey  but  once ;  no  effect  came.  But  as  soon  as  the  part
was  rubbed  with  lead,  all  the  frightful  effects  of  nickel  arose.
She  could  not  tell  what  was  applied,  and  he  had  not  a  word
to  say.  His  day  of  discomfiture  is  arrived !  He  was  totally  ig-
norant of  the  subject,  never  having  seen  an  experiment  before ;
and  a  Somersetshire  ploughman  was  just  as  well  qualified  td
make  experiments  as  nimself—- especially  behind  my  back.

VOL.  IV.  I


114 BeichenbacVs  Researches  on  Magnetism^  ifc,

Reichenbach's  patients  distinguished  two  opposite  points
of  the  principal  axes  in  crystals  as  poles.  The  minus  or
noith  pole  less  powerful  and  cool ;  the  other^  the  south  or
plus  pole,  lukewarm.  All  agreed  as  to  the  situation  of
the  poles.  If  the  point  of  a  large  rock  crystal,  or  a  magnet,
was  drawn  along  the  palm  towards  the  finger  ends,  the
movement  occupying  five  seconds,  an  agreeable  and  cool
sensation  was  expenenced ;  when  in  the  opposite  direction,
a  disagreeable  and  warm  sensation.  But  this  varied  with
the  poles  in  different  persons.  A  large  crystal,  three  times
larger,  drawn  towards  the  wrist,  caused  violent  spasms  of
the  arm ;  and  in  one  patient  such  flushing,  also  followed
by  paleness,  that  a  repetition  of  the  experiment  was  not  ven-
tured upon ; — it  was  to  her  what  nickel  was  to  Elizabeth
Okey.  Some  gentlemen,  indeed  half  his  neighbours,  in
good  health,  experienced  analogous  sensations  from  crystals,
Uie  north  and  south  pole  of  the  crystals  being  distinguishable
through  the  difference  of  sensation  by  many,  though  they
looked  the  other  way.  Yet  these  crystals  gave  no  sign  of
magnetism.

They  all  distinguished  also  secondary  polar  axes.  The
power  of  a  crystal  could  be  transferred  to  solid  bodies  and
water  by  stroking  them  with  one  of  its  poles,  so  that  every
patient  could  distinguish  them  from  those  not  stroked,  if  no
time  was  lost  in  making  the  experiment.

This  is  the  case  with  mesmerism;  in  water  and  inanimate  bodies
mesmerised  by  contact,  breath,  passes,  &c.  I  also  find  that  by
rubbing  mesmerised  gold,  &c.,  upon  a  body  not  capable  of  direct
mesmerisation,  although  it  might  appear  so  if  the  animal  moisture
upon  it  was  not  wiped  off,  this  substance  might  be  indirectly  charged.
Thus  by  rubbing  mesmerised  gold  on  copper,  this  becomes  mes-
merised.

The  power  in  mj  experiments  instantly  began  to  dedme  and  was
soon  lost,  just  as  with  Reichenbach's  crystal  and  magnet  power.

I  have  known  parties  mesmerised  at  a  distance  by  sending  them
by  the  post  a  piece  of  leather,  &c.,  first  mesmerised.  The  effect,
however,  was  gradually  lost,  and  a  fresh  piece  required.  Once  un-
mesmerised  leather  was  sent  with  no  intimation,  and  there  was  no
effect;  a  mesmerised  piece,  as  usual,  was  then  sent,  with  no  inti-
mation, and  the  effect  came.

Reichenbach  found  ''  that  some  bodies  lost  their  power
almost  instantly,  as  paper;  others  after  a  few  minutes ;  and
in  no  case  did  the  power  lost  remain  in  the  body  charged
longer  than  ten  minutes.

This  was  my  general  experience  with  the  mesmeric  influence.


incbiding  a  suppotted  new  Imponderable.  115

Bat  the  longer  the  mesmerisatioii  is  continued,  the  greater  and
more  lasting  is  the  power:  the  more  spongj  or  capable  of  retaining
mesmerised  moisture  the  substance,  and  the  less  the  exposure^  the
longer  does  the  power  last.

The  crystal  and  magnet  power  penetrates  solid  matter ;
through  thick  paper^  wood,  marble,  slowly ;  through  metals
instantaneously,  if  the  crystal  is  in  contact  with  Uiem,  and
exceedingly  well  if  not  in  contact.

The  chaise  could  not  be  increased  beyond  a  certain  point,
soon  reached,  according  to  the  sensation  of  the  patients.
The  charge  of  mesmerism  can  be  increased  to  the  point  of
perfect  insensibility ;  but  on  the  degrees  of  this  capable  of
bein^  effected  I  never  made  any  trials.

When  crystals  were  only  an  inch  and  a  half  long,  their
power  was  scarcely  perceptible ;  above  this  size,  their  power
increased  with  the  dimensions,  according  to  the  law  of  nature
that,  cseteris  paribus,  power  is  proportionate  to  size.

Like  the  magnet,  crystals  caused  the  hand  to  follow
them,  and  a  flame  proceeded  from  their  poles.

Warmth  did  not  increase  the  power  or  magnets  or  crystals.

3.  Effect  of  position  in  relation  to  the  magnetic  mmidian*
Mr.  Schub,  a  surgeon,  had  been  accustomed  on  waking  from
his  first  sleep  to  change  his  position  and  place  his  head
where  his  feet  had  been  all  night ;  and  his  short  second  sleep
was  then  far  more  refreshing  than  all  his  previous  sleep,  if
he  omitted  the  change,  he  was  weary  all  day.  Reichenbach
found  that  in  his  first  sleep  he  lay  from  south  to  north ;
his  head  to  the  south,  his  teet  to  the  north ;  in  his  second
from  north  to  south.  On  lying  at  first  from  north  to  south,
he  never  had  to  change  in  the  morning.  Another  surgeon,
named  Schmidt,  had  severe  pains  in  his  right  arm,  and  shi-
verings ;  and  a  magnet  only  relieved  him  for  the  time.  He
always  lay  from  south  to  north.  He  then  lay  from  north  to
south,  and  the  magnet  was  more  pleasant,  and  the  arm  ra-
pidly recovered.  The  first  female  patient  in  whom  the  phe-
nomena with  the  magnet  and  crystals  were  detected  always
lay  from  east  to  west,  and  had  a  great  magnet  carrying  eighty
pounds,  over  her  head,  with  no  effect.  She  was  placed  from
north  to  south,  and  instantly  lost  her  restlessness,  and  had
the  first  night  of  sound  sleep  for  a  long  time.

At  anotner  time  the  position  to  the  north  was  tried,  and
the  effects  were  restlessness,  flushing,  oppression  of  the  head,
&c.,  and  the  same  magnet  instantly  produced  violent  effects
at  the  distance  of  four,  nay,  at  seven  paces  from  her  head,
immediately  causing  insensibility  and  spasm.  When  the  arma-
ture was  removed  mm  it  at  the  distance  of  thirty  feet,  she

i2


116  Reichenbach' 8  Researches  on  Maffnetism,  Sfc,

felt  nothing  at  first,  but  after  a  minute  ceased  speaking  actu-
ally in  the  middle  of  a  word.  The  four  others  shewed  analo«
gous  differences ;  all  positions,  and  especially  that  from  west
to  east,  except  that  from  north  to  south,  being  unpleasant  and
injurious.  Terrestrial  magnetism  is  weakest  at  the  full  moon,
when  some  nervous  diseases  are  often  the  worst.  The  general
position  of  many  of  the  sick  during  the  use  of  the  magnet
and  the  use  of  mesmerism  demands  serious  consideration.

Though  soft  iron  while  in  contact  with  a  magnet  is  mag-
netic, it  18  thought  to  cease  to  be  so  as  soon  as  removed ;
but  the  five  females  felt  the  same  as  from  a  weak  magnet
after  its  removal.  They  could  distinguish  a  glass  of  water
which  had  been  placed  between  the  poles  oi  a  horse-shoe
magnet,  and  the  band  of  a  cataleptic  patient  was  attracted
by  it.  These  facts,  with  those  mentioned  at  p.  114,  shew  that
all  substances  suffer  a  temporary  change  from  a  magnet, —
''  a  conclusion,"  says  R.  "  which  people  do  not  like  to  draw;
against  which,  in  fact,  they  have  struggled  hard  a  priori
and  which  seems  especially  offensive  to  chemists/'  A  person
magnetised  by  passes  with  a  magnet  could  now,  during  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  for  the  first  time  attract  the  hand  of  two
of  the  patients.  If  he  placed  his  hand  in  the  patient's  hand,
she  felt  the  pain  in  it  move,  swelling  or  throbbing,  every  time
a  magnet  was  passed  down  his  back.

Now  listen  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  you  who  in  your  vanity
presumed,  in  the  Quarterly  Remew,  to  stigmatize  the  Okeys
as  impostors ;  and  you,  Mr.  Wakley,  who  traduced  them  and
me,  and  ridiculed  all  my  experiments ;  listen,  ye  professors  and
council  of  University  College,  who  scorned  the  no  less  won-
derful phenomena  I  displayed  in  your  building ;  and  listen
the  rest  of  you,  medical  men  of  all  degrees,  royal,  fashionable,
rural,  parochial, — listen,  and  look  back  upon  your  conduct
during  the  last  eight  years.  If  when  Reichenbach  drew  a  mag<»
net  or  crystal  several  times  down  a  patient's  back  she  became
catalepsed  and  convulsed,  the  same  happened  from  his  hands
alone.  If  he  drew  the  fingers  of  his  right  hand  successively
along  the  palm,  not  in  contact,  all  the  susceptible  women  or
men,  felt  a  warm  or  cool  air.  Here  was  the  influence  of  a
living  body.  He  next  found  it  could  be  transmitted.  If  the
patient  held  one  end  of  packfong  callipers,  or  an  iron  wire
4}  feet  long,  and  he  placed  bis  five  finger  points  of  his  right
hand  on  the  other,  she  felt  at  the  point  or  contact,  warmth
up  to  the  elbow ;  and,  if  he  added  nis  other  five  finger  points
the  effect  was  twice  as  strong  :  on  removing  the  fingers  the
sensation  rapidly,  but  not  instantly,  ceased ;  and  the  results
came  and  went  just  as  the  fingers  were  taken  off  and  oiIL


incbidinff  a  supposed  new  Imponderable.  117

These  experiments  were  successfully  tried  on  the  rest,  and
also  by  different  persons.

I  have  mesmerised  a  sovereign  without  the  knowledge  of  the
Okejrs^  and  placed  other  unmesmerised  sovereigns  upon  it,  and  a  finger
of  one  sister  upon  the  last  of  them,  and  the  effect  has  always  at
length  come.  When  an  unmesmerised  roll  of  sovereigns  has  long
lain  in  Mary  Ann's  hand  without  increase  of  effect,  1  have  put  my
finger  on  the  highest,  and  the  effect  presently  became  great.

Reichenbach  and  her  confessor  produced  an  equal  effect
on  one  female,  and  more  effect  than  her  physician,  who  was
ten  years  younger  than  Reichenbach.  The  nurse  produced  less.
Her  sister,  also  'a  nervous  patient,  produced  still  less.  Ten
fingers  of  another  lady  produced  less  effect  than  five  of  Rei-
chenbach's. Even  some  healthy  men  were  thus  susceptible.

The  Baron  thus  played  the  fool  so  shockingly  in  his  course
of  investigation,  as  to  mesmerise.  I  must  nere  quote  my
Physiology,  p.  1176:

''  By  means  of  chargeable  metals,  I  devised  a  mode  of  shewing
Tery  accurately  the  influence  of  health  upon  the  mesmerising  power.
I  took  one  of  the  sisters  into  a  female  ward  in  which  she  had  never
been,  and  respecting  the  inmates  of  which  she  and  I  were  perfectly
ignorant.  Every  ticket  with  the  name  of  the  disease  on  the  bead
of  the  bed  was  removed:  every  patient  had  the  clothes  drawn  com«
pletely  over  her.  A  sovereign,  which  had  lain  long  untouched,  and
bad  therefore  no  mesmeric  charge,  was  taken  up  by  her,  and  we
proceeded  to  the  ward.  She  put  the  sovereign  under  the  bed-clothes
mto  the  hand  of  each  patient  in  succession,  and  at  the  same  number
of  moments  by  my  stop-watch  took  it  out  again  and  kept  it  in  her
band.  I  noted  the  period  in  which  the  effect  began,  the  length  of
time  it  lasted,  and  the  amount  of  it, — whether  it  caused  spasm  of
the  hand  only;  of  the  hand  and  arm;  or  spasm  and  stupefaction.
So  we  went  round  the  ward,  and  in  one  bed,  at  the  request  of  a
certain  student,  I  repeated  the  experiment.  As  soon  as  each  expe-
riment was  finished,  the  bed-clothes  were  turned  down  and  the
ticket  examined.  The  effects  were  in  every  instance  precisely  pro-
portionate to  the  strength  of  the  patient  in  whose  hand  the  sovereign
had  been  placed.  Those  in  consumption  or  worn  down  with  para-
lysis produced  little  or  no  effect:  those  who  had  complaints  not  im-
pairing the  health  and  strength  produced  full  efieot:  and  all  the
mtermediate  degrees  were  exquisitely  proportionate  to  the  condition
of  the  patient.  One  patient  had  produced  a  great  effect,  who,  the
student  said,  was  continuallv  bled  and  kept  constantly  on  low  diet.
But  I  found  she  had  not  been  bled  for  some  weeks,  had  been  for
some  time  on  full  diet,  was  taking  bark,  looked  in  capital  condition,
and  had  onlv  some  cutaneous  disease  not  interfering  with  her
strength.  Oi  the  two  experiments  made  at  one  bed,  the  first  had
produced  a  full  effect  proportionate  to  the  strength  of  the  patient.
The  second  experiment  produced  only  a  moderate  effect:  the  clothes


118 RdchenbacVs  Researches  on  Magnetism,  Ifc,

^ere  then  turned  down,  and  it  proved  that  a  nurse  said  to  be  in
good  health,  and  to  do  all  the  work  of  the  ward,  had  been  lain  in
it.  The  woman,  however,  looked  verj  sickly,  and  I  found  that  she
had  just  lain  in,  and  had  come  back  to  her  place  very  weak,  and  lone
before  she  was  competent.  The  experiment  was  triumphant,-  and
an  apol(^  was  the  next  day  made  to  me  by  the  student  who  had  so
misrepresented  to  me  the  state  of  those  two  patients,  and  at  whose
request  1  had  willingly  made  the  experiments  in  this  his  wise
uncle's  ward,  because  the  results  in  the  case  of  both  sisters,  per-
fectly accordant  in  every  instance  up  to  that  time  with  the  strength
of  each  patient,  though  modified  like  all  results  in  their  form  in
each  sister,  had  been  made  in  my  own  ward,  where  they  and  I  knew
every  patient.

*'  Another  beautiful  set  of  experiments  was  made  with  brutes.
If  their  hand  was  brought  into  contact  with  a  brute,  the  rapidity
and  intensity  of  the  effect  was  always  proportionate  to  the  size  of
the  animal.  If  their  fingers  were  placed  under  the  wing  of  a  per-
roquet,  the  effect  was  much  inferior  to  what  it  was  if  they  were
placed  under  the  wings  of  a  cockatoo.  If  placed  on  the  nose  of  a
small  deer,  the  effect  was  inferior  to  what  it  was  if  placed  upon  a
lama  or  a  large  deer: — a  mere  rigiditv  and  concussion  of  the  head
in  the  first  instance,  stupefaction  and  at  last  perfect  insensibility
and  relaxation  in  the  latter.  Contact  of  the  ends  of  the  fingers
with  the  dry  rough  trunk  of  the  elephant  had  no  efiect  upon  the
elder:  but,  the  instant  she' touched  the  soft  moist  mucous  membrane
of  the  trunk  of  this  immense  beast,  she  dropt  senseless  and  snored
loudly,  and  did  not  become  sensible  for  ten  minutes."

He  found  that  the  influence  could  be  collected  in  a  body.
He  held  things  in  his  hand,  first  warmed  by  the  patients'
hands,  and  gave  them  to  the  patients,  who  at  once  expe-
rienced the  crystal  effect,  and  distinguished  substances  not
so  held  by  him.  llie  charge  remained  in  the  substances
many  minutes,  and  gradually  wasted.  He  thus  charged
water,  grasping  the  glass  with  both  hands,  and  they  distin-
guished it  by  the  smell,  taste,  &c.  '''Against  this  statement,"
says  Reichen bach,  ''all  those  may  cry  out  who  have  never
investigated  the  matter,  and  to  the  number  of  whom  I  for-
merly oelooeed :  but  of  the  fact,  all  those  who  have  sub-
mitted to  the  labour  of  investigation,  and  have  seen  the
efifects  I  allude  to,  can  only  speak  with  amazement.  This
water,  which  is  quite  identical  with  that  treated  by  the  mag->
net  or  with  the  crystal,  in  all  its  essential  properties,  has,
therefore,  received  from  the  fingers  and  hand  abundant  charge
of  the  peculiar  force  residing  in  them,  and  retain  this  charge
for  some  time  and  with  some  force.'*

I  must  here  give  another  extract  from  my  Physiology ,  p.  1 1 74 :
''A  beautiful  experiment  shewed  the  gradual  diminution  of  the


including  a  supposed  new  Imponderable.  119'

power  imparted  to  the  gold:  and  could,  for  the  most  part,  be  made
upon  the  younger  Okej  only,  as  her  susceptibility  was,  in  general^
not  so  great  as  to  show  powerful  effects  from  moderate  causes. A
sovereign  is  held  in  a  person's  hanc^  and  then  given  her. Instantly
her  hand  closes  violently  upon  it,  she  becomes  stupified  with  her
eyes  open,  and  at  last  falls  senseless  and  relaxed:  on  waking,  in  a
minute  or  two,  she  is  desired  to  pick  up  the  sovereign,  and  again  it
causes  her  hand  to  dose,  and  stupifies  her;  yet  not  so  soon  but  that
ahe  has  time  to  rise  a  little  from  the  floor,  before  the  stupefaction
and  rigidity  come;  and  the  perfect  sleep  and  relaxation  are  longer  in
supervening. On  waking  she  is  desired  to  pick  up  the  sovereign
again;  the  effects  are  longer  in  supervening,  so  that  she  rises  higher
from  the  floor  before  they  come,  and  there  is  time,  by  pointing  one's
finger  at  her  dose  hand,  to  cause  it  to  relax,  and  drop  the  sovereign;
and  in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  this,  the  rigidity  and  stupe-
fiu^ion  are  not  kept  up,  and  terminate  in  waking  instead  of  pertect
sleep  and  relaxation. She  is  desired  again  to  pick  up  the  sovereign;
ahe  does  so,  and  rises  higher  than  ever  before  the  effects  come,  and
they  are  shorter. All  is  repeated,  she  rises  completely  before  they
oome,  and  they  are  still  shorter. Again  all  is  repeated,  and  she
not  only  rises  but  goes  about,  and  talks  before  the  effects  come,  and
they  are  slight. On  repetition  a  still  longer  time  intervenes,  and
still  slighter  are  the  effects;  and  so  experiment  after  experiment  goea
on  till  the  sovereign  has  lost  its  power  altogether. The  sovereign
often  rolb  fkr  away;  and  in  such  cases  it  has  been  changed  for  one
charged  by  contact  with  another  person,  it  being  impossible  for  her
to  observe  the  change  and  impossible  for  her  to  detect  any  difference
in  r^ard  to  warmth  or  moisture,  as  the  original  sovereign  has  been
as  much  in  her  own  hand  as  the  new  sovereign  in  the  hand  of  another
person. The  new  sovereign  has  always  produced  a  far  more  quick
and  strong  effect  than  the  exhausted  one."

He  considers  there  is  polarity  even  here :  for,  when  the

{>atient  and  he  held  one  end  of  a  spiral  copper  wire,  9  feet
ong,  of  eleven  turns,  he  found  the  influence  greatest  at  the
other  end,  gradually  less  to  the  middle  or  sixth  turn/  from
which  it  increased  again  till  it  was  as  strong  at  the  opposite
end  as  at  her  end.  He  conceives  that  the  principal  polar  axis
of  the  human  body  is  transverse;  the  longitudinal  beine
secondary,  because  sensitive  patients  suffer  trom  lying  with
their  body  across  the  magnetic  meridian.  For  if  the  body
lies  from  east  to  west,  it  is  differently  acted  upon  magneti-
cally in  its  breadth, — a  thing  intolerable  to  such  persons :
and  chills  are  both  more  active  and  dangerous  if  they  come
from  the  side  than  if  from  the  back  or  front :  also  because  in
very  sensitive  persons  it  makes  a  great  difference  which  hand
of  another  person  is  put  into  their  hand.

''When  the  author  placed  his  right  hand  in  the  left  hand  of
Mdlle.  Maix,  she  felt  it  exactly  like  a  small  magnet  or  a  crystal


120 ReichenbacKs  Researches  on  Magnetism^  IfC,

placed  with  the  N.  pole  perpendicularlj  on  her  hand.  Bat  if  he
mve  the  left  hand,  the  feeling  was  very  much  more  disagreeable.
When  he  placed  his  right  hand  in  her  left,  and  his  left  hand  at  the
same  time  in  her  right,  she  described  the  sensations  as  of  a  perpe-
tnal  current  of  something  up  her  right  arm,  across  her  breast  and
shoulders,  down  her  left  arm,  and  through  him  continually.  It  was
painful,  and  nearly  caused  her  to  faint.  If  he  now  crossed  his  hands,
she  could  not  endure  it,  and  declared  that  there  then  arose  so  pain-
ful a  sensation  of  a  straage  kind  of  struggle  and  contest  in  her  arms
and  through  her  breast,  an  undulation  up  the  arm  and  down  asain,  that
she  found  it  absolutely  unendurable.  In  fact,  after  she  had  released
her  hands,  it  was  found  impossible  to  persuade  her  to  repeat  the  ex-
periment, which  was  always  done  if  possible,  for  the  sake  of  a  check
on  errors.  If,  then,  it  be  established  by  these  experiments,  that  in
nervous  cases  it  is  anything  but  indifferent  which  hand  is  given  or
taken,  it  follows  that  both  hands,  in  respect  to  the  influence  residing
in  them,  are  not  in  the  same  condition;  and  it  would  even  appear
from  the  last  experiment  that  there  is  a  current,  after  the  fashion  of
an  electric  current,  from  his  left  hand  to  her  right,  and  then  from
her  left  to  his  right,  a  motion  which  meets  with  obstacles,  and
strives,  as  it  were,  to  break  through  them,  as  soon  as  like  hands
are  joined.  This  difference  between  the  hands  can  only  be  due  to
polarization,  as  vre  see  it  artificially  produced  in  the  copper  wire,
and  as  we  have  found  it  in  magnets  and  in  crystals.  In  tnis  point
of  view,  the  chief  axis  in  man  is  transverse,  and  the  long  axis  is
only  secondaiy.  In  fact,  it  is  only  transversely  that  we  are  formed
of  two  symmetric  halves.  Everything,  brain,  organs  of  sense,  or-
gans of  mastication  and  deglutition,  arms,  hands,  and  feet,  are  op-
posed to  each  other  transversely;  and  it  is  especially  transversely
that  we  are  polarized."

He  confirined  these  observations  on  two  others  of  the
females,  and  concludes,

*'  That  all  the  symmetrically  arranged  organs  of  the  body,  and
especially  the  hands,  exhibit  a  difference,  which  is  caused  by  a
magnetic  polar  opposition;  and  that  consequently  there  exists  a  dual-
ism of  the  fundamental  influence  above  aUuded  to,  exactly  as  we
have  seen  it  to  exist  in  crystals."

**  Doubtless  the  perfectly  healthy  man,  who  probably  is  never
sensitive,  is  in  no  way  affected  by  the  earth's  magnetism,  how
strongly  soever  it  may  act  on  certain  patients.  The  author  has  not
been  able  in  any  animal,  even  in  blind  ones,  such  as  larvee,  to  dis-
cover any  evidence  of  an  action  being  exerted  on  them  by  terrestriid
magnetism.  In  this  indifference,  therefore,  to  the  influence  of  the
earth's  magnetism,  the  force  of  ciystals  and  that  of  the  human  hand
fully  agree."

I  have  a  patient  who  in  his  deep  sleep-waking  would  never  allow
one  of  his  hands  to  be  put  in  contact  with  the  other,  or  with  any
part  of  the  opposite  half  of  his  body,  but  moved  it  away  very


including  a  $uppo$ed  new  Imponderable.  121

angrilj.  Neither  would  he  allow  my  right  hand  to  touch  his  left,  or
anj  part  of  the  right  half  of  mj  frame  to  touch  his  left  half,  or  the
converse.  In  Yol.  II.,  p.  215,  I  said,  ^' As  a  further  illustration  of
occult  property  in  the  mesmeric  state,  I  haye  a  patient  who,  in  his
silent  sleep,  with  his  eyes  perfectly  closed,  and  any  thickness  of
doth  thrown  over  his  head  and  chest  and  drawn  close  round  him,  is
instantly  distressed  beyond  measure  by  a  piece  of  gold  placed  upon
the  back  of  his  hand  alter  lying  in  the  hand  of  another  person,  but
not  at  all  if  it  has  been  taken  from  my  hand.  Any  one  with  ^oves
on  makes  the  experiment,  placing  the  soyereign  first  on  my  hand  or
the  hand  of  another  at  pleasure,  in  eyery  succession  and  with  as
many  repetitions  as  are  thought  proper.  Aay,  if  the  gold  is  taken
off  my  right  hand  and  placed  upon  his  left,  w  off  my  left  and  placed
%p(m  his  right,  he  is  distressed,  and  shakes  ii  off,  and,  ^  it  is
j^4Ked  in  his  palm,  violent  spasm  of  the  hand  occurs  /  though  he  est'
presses  no  uneasiness  when  it  is  taken  from  my  right  and  placed  in
his  right,  or  from  my  left  and  placed  upwi  Ms  left,  Neitner  tem-
perature nor  anything  but  occult  property  can  explain  these  won-
derful facts.''  If  while  his  right  hand  was  holding  my  right  hand
tightly,  I  touched  any  part  of  his  left  half  or  my  left  half  with  eyen
one  finger,  he  instantly  let  my  hand  go  angrily,  just  as  he  did  if  I
touched  another  person  with  it;  and  when  ordinary  ocular  knowledge
was  an  impossibility.  He  is  a  high-minded,  modest  youth,  disdain-
ing all  affectation  and  artifice.

Baron  R.  found  these  patients  in  their  cataleptic  state—
not  mesmerised^  obserye — follow  with  their  hands

''readily  those  of  any  rigorous  youn^  man,  and  indeed  those  of
the  author  himself,  insomuch  that^  while  insensible,  this  attraction
of  the  hand  has  often  made  them  rise  from  their  chair,  and  follow
the  hand  for  some  distance.  It  was  eyen  possible  to  attract  their
hands  through  an  intermediate  substance,  such  as  a  lump  of  chalk
held  in  the  hands  of  the  experimenter.  .  .  •  All  these  obseryations
proye,  that  the  hands  and  fingers  of  vigorous  healthy  men,  like  the

Soles  of  crystals,  possess  an  attractive  power  for  the  hands  of  cata-
sptic  patients.

"  But,  in  this  comparison,  the  luminous  phenomena  which  are
now  to  be  described,  constitute  a  really  brilliant  point.  When  the
author,  for  the  first  time  after  her  violent  convulsions,  saw  MdUe.
Beichel  playing  with  the  magnetic  fiame,  he  thrust  his  hand  in  the
dark  between  her  eyes  and  the  magnet,  when  she  began  to  play  as
before  with  the  points  of  his  fingers,  and  to  speak  of  five  litUe  fires
dancing  about  in  the  air.  She  did  not  see  the  hand,  and  she  took
the  motion  of  his  fingers,  from  the  points  of  which  flames  came
forth,  for  a  spontaneous  motion  of  tne  flames.  She  saw,  in  like
manner,  in  the  dark,  flame  from  the  points  of  all  men's  fingers,  but
from  no  women's,  except  in  some  cases  a  feeble  light,  neither  bright
nor  flaming.  As  long  as  her  illness  continued,  she  amused  herself
and  her  friends  by  her  observations  on  these  lights.  But  after  she
had  recovered,  it  came  out  that,  not  only  during  her  illnessi  but


122 Reichenbach's  Researches  on  Magnetism,  8fC.,

also  when  quite  well,  she  saw  the  ma^etic  flame,  the  crystal  lights^
and  the  lif^ht  from  men's  hands,  provided  it  was  dark  enough.  In-
deed, she  had  possessed  this  power  from  her  early  youth;  for  while
an  infant,  her  mother  had  often  to  lift  her  up  to  convince  her  that
nails  and  hooks  in  the  wall  were  not  on  fire,  as  she  declared  them  to
be.  She  had  even  brothers  and  sisters  who  in  like  manner  saw
luminous  appearances  everywhere,  where  others  saw  nothinff.  At
this  time,  the  author  makes  use  of  her  power  daily  in  researches  on
electricity  and  magnetism,  which  will  soon  be  made  public,  and
which  have,  by  her  means,  led  to  important  results/'

He  concludes,  at  the  44th  page,  that

**  This  /ores,  which  fuu  been  called  animal  magnetism,  has  the
following  properties;  it  is,  namely,  conductible  through  other  bodies;
it  may  be  communicated  to  other  bodies  either  by  directly  charging
them  or  by  its  dispersion.  It  soon  disappears,  but  not  immediately,
from  bodies  charged  with  it.  It  assumes  a  polar  arrangement  in  the
animal  body,  by  virtue  of  its  apparent  dualism.  It  has  no  marked
relation  to  the  eartKs  magnetism.  It  attracts  mechanically  the
hands  of  cataleptic  patients,  and  its  presence  is  associated  with  lumi-
nous phenomena.  In  all  these  points  it  agrees  with  the  force  of
crystals,  with  which  it  coincides,  and  in  tUl  particulars  obeys  the  same
physical  laws  as  that  force,**

Mesmerism  is  thus  placed  by  a  philosopher,  who  was  no
mesmerist,  among  the  physical  sciences.'^

*  It  is  not  very  uncommon  for  patients  during  mesmeriBm  to  see  light
from  the  fingers,  &c.,  of  the  operator.  Mr.  D.  Hands  has  sent  me  the  fol-
lowing account : —

*<  In  compliance  with  your  request,  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,  I  proceed  to
transcribe  for  you  the  graphic  description  one  of  my  somoambulant  patients
gives  of  that  which  is  now  very  generally  called  mesmeric  fluid.  I  shall
endeavour  to  adhere  as  closely  as  possible  to  her  own  diction,  which  is  ori-
ginal, quaint,  and  frequently  piquant;  only  premising  that  the  expressions
are  those  she  makes  use  of  in  the  clairvoyant  state,  and  that  she  is  a  simple,
uneducated  servant  girl,  about  twenty  years  of  age.  Her  case  presents  the
most  remarkable  phenomena  I  have  ever  witnessed,  but  as  it  is  my  intention
to  publish  the  whole  with  all  its  interesting  minutiae  very  shortly,  I  shall  at
present  confine  myself  to  the  delineation  of  that  appearance  you  enquired
about.

**  This  mesmeric  fluid,  then,  is  compared  by  Martha  to  a  clear  stream  of
light  issuing  from  the  ends  of  my  fingers,  very  bright  and  '  quivering,  not
glimmering,'  resembling  in  colour  and  brilliancy  the  rays  of  the  sun  more
than  the  milder  silvery  light  of  the  moon,  and  resting  on  the  mesmerised
persons  as  a  track  of  a  phosphoric  match  would  be  seen  on  wood  in  the
dark,  but  brightly  loading  and  illuminating  the  head  and  brain  and  seat  of
muscular  motion,  or  the  heart;  or,  as  I  should  say  in  anatomical  language,
the  head,  comprising  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum.  These  all  retain  the
dazzling  transparent  brilliancy,  the  limbs  are  equally  lightened  up,  but  they
soon  lose  the  brightness.  If  the  foregoing  statement  be  received  as  a  fact,
would  it  not  account  for  the  gradual  and  progressive  increase  of  the  influence
over  those  who  are  daily  mesmerised  f — the  nobler  parts  of  the  human  struc-
ture possessing  a  capability  of  containing  this  fluid  as  it  were  in  store,  to  be
developed  as  occasion  requires  or  according  to  the  will  of  the  mesmeriser.


including  a  supposed  new  Imponderable.  123

Time  and  space  fail  me,  and  I  must  finish  my  account  of
this  most  remarkable,  most  originali  and  most  important
work  in  the  next  number ;  entreating  every  person  interested
in  mesmerism  to  purchase  Dr.  Gregory's  book  in  the  mean-
time. My  own  observations  in  mesmerism  made  eight  years
ago  coincide  in  every  point  with  those  of  the  author  which
are  analogous.  Every  one  of  his  observations  I  feel  must  be
true.  I  &rmerly  prosecuted  the  physics  of  mesmerism  much
more  than  had  been  done  by  others,  and  I  see  in  Baron
Riechenbach*s  statements  of  his  experience,  in  what  is  really
another  field  of  the  same  estate,  pure  truth.  He  has  only  to
make  artificial  sleep-wakers  and  cataleptics,  and  thus  enlarge
his  means  of  experience,  in  order  to  be  enabled  to  strike  a
rock  and  pour  forth  a  mighty  stream  of  knowledge  for  our
benefit. To  Dr.  William  Gregory  we  are  deeply  indebted.

That  there  was  a  distinct  power  for  which  I  adopted  the
term  mesmerism,  after  finding  it  used  by  Mr.  Chenevix,  but
whether  invented  or  not  by  him  I  knew  not,  I  was  satisfied ;
and  stated  in  my  demonstrations  at  University  College  Hos-
pital in  1838,  and  subsequently  in  my  own  house.  I  also
declared  I  could  discover  no  grounds  for  supposing  it  iden-
tical with  electricity  or  magnetism,  and  therefore  preferred
an  arbitrary  name  to  one  which  implied  a  speculation.  I
never  ventured  to  call  it  an  imponderable,  because  I  did  not
know  whether  there  are  any  imponderable  bodies.  I  invari-
ably called  it  a  power,  force,  or  influence,  expressing  a  mere
fact — the  existence  of  a  certain  power  in  animal  bodies,  both
human  and  brute;  and  of  its  existence  in  the  latter,  I
gave  sufficient  proofs.  But  whether  this  was  a  property  of
the  forms  and  states  of  matter  with  which  we  are  acquainted,
or  of  a  peculiar  matter,  I  never  ventured  to  determine :
its  existence  in  animal  bodies  being  the  fact,  it  having  a  pe-
culiar matter  imponderable  and  subtle,  being  a  mere  specula-
tion and  fancy. 1  always  gave  ample  proofs  of  its  communi-

"  When  Martha  first  spoke  of  this  bright  flame,  I  qaestioned  her  aa  to
what  it  wa4  like.  She  answered,  '  Like  smoke ;  like  steam  ;  like  vapour.
Bat  no ;  it  is  distinctly  different  from  each.  I  don't  know  what  it  is  like.'
And  then  after  appearing  puzzled  and  perplexed  in  wishing  me  to  compre-
hend her  meaning,  she  said,  '  It  resembles  the  phenomena  often  obsenrable
in  a  hay-field  from  the  currents  of  cold  and  hot  air  mingling,  but  the  one
mounting  up  whilst  the  other  is  falling  down  ;  or  you  may  liken  it  to  the
mixing  of  spirits  and  water.'

**  Aa  regards  the  operation  of  mesmerising  water,  this  same  somnambulist
described  the  fiery  fluid  as  dropping  in  quivering  streams  from  the  tips  of  my
fingers  to  the  bottom  of  the  glass,  till  all  the  liquid  was  wholly  illuminated,
brilliant,  and  transparent,  very  similar  in  appearance  to  the  pale  lemon-
coloured  show  bottles  in  a  druggist's  shop  when  lit  up  by  the  gas  lamps
placed  behind  them."


124  Mesmeric  and  Magnetic  Phenomena.

cability  to  inanimate  matter,  by  the  mesmerisation  of  metals,
water, &c. :  its  gradual  wasting  again:  its  trausmssion through
substances  transparent  and  opaque.

The  time  is  now  arrived  for  the  appreciation  of  the  facts
of  the  cases  of  the  two  Okeys,  and  I  will  take  the  earliest
opportunity  of  drawing  them  up  from  my  voluminous  notes.
To  have  presented  them  to  the  world  before  would  have  been
idle.  Mr.  Wakley  had  declared  them  all  to  be  **  humbug/'
and  humbug  the  envious  unreflecting  medical  world  therefore
authoritatively  told  all  the  rest  of  the  world  that  they  were,
and  humbug  the  rest  of  the  world  at  once  believed  them,
foolishly  supposing  that  medical  men  had  condescended  to
make  themselves  acquainted  with  the  subject,  and  were
studious,  enlightened,  and  calmly  reflecting  philosophers.

(To  be  coDtiQiied  in  No.  XIV.)


XI.  Observations  upon  the  Analogies  between  the  Mesmeric  and
Magnetic  Phenomena. By  John  Ashbubneb,  M.D.

Some  of  the  most  interesting  as  well  as  most  important
among  the  facts  which  have  come  under  the  observation  of
the  cultivators  of  mesmeric  science,  relate  to  the  analogies
between  the  mesmeric  and  magnetic  fluids.  That  these  exist
is  an  assumption  based  upon  the  direction  taken  by  certain
currents  of  forces,  and  by  the  light  emitted  under  certain
circumstances  when  particular  arrangements  of  matter  are
attended  by  its  evolution.  Abstractedly  considered,  there  is
no  proof  that  magnetic  matter  exists,  and  its  entity  is  granted
only  to  account  for  numerous  phenomena  which  require  ex*
planation  and  which  can  be  accounted  for  only  by  a  hypothe-
tical reality.  In  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  the
eagerness  to  carp  at  new  facts,  and  the  tendency  to  dispu-
tation,  form  the  drag-chain  to  stay  the  rapidity  of  scientific
progression  ;  and  it  is  only  by  such  a  cultivation  of  the  mind
of  the  masses  as  to  permit  the  reception  of  new  ideas,  new
trains  of  reasoning,  the  original  thoughts  of  intellects  wider
than  those  of  the  common  herd,  that  the  vulgar  opposition
to  truth  can  be  overcome.

Assuming  that  electric  and  that  magnetic  currents  exist,
we  may  infer  that  a  fluid  in  many  particulars  analogous  to
magnetism  may  be  proved.  We  may  be  led  to  infer  from
numerous  observations  made  at  difierent  times  by  numerous
persons,  that  certain  eflects  are  produced  by  the  operation  of
an  influence  from  one  living  human  being  upon  another.  An
endeavour  will  be  made  to  shew  that  this  influence,  indebted


by  Dr.  Ashbwmer.  125

for  its  existence  perhaps  to  psychological  causes,  operates  by
the  agency  of  a  supposed  fluid,  which,  producing  physiolo-
gical phenomena  similar  to  those  produced  by  the  magnetic
fluid,  may  be  inferred  to  be  analogous  to  it*  Striking  facts
may  be  adduced,  too,  which  may  tend  to  the  conclusion  that
the  exercise  of  the  fticulties  of  the  human  mind»  and  parti-
ticularly  that  of  the  will,  is  attended  by  the  emanation  of  a
fluid  from  the  brain,  from  the  fingers,  seats  of  the  functional
extremities  of  nerves,  or  from  some  part  of  the  person  who
may  be  exercising  the  mental  faculties.  I  propose  to  shew
that  the  same  series  of  events  may  be  produced  in  individuals
of  a  certain  nervous  diathesis  by  the  impingement  of  a  fluid
evolved  by  the  will  of  another ;  or  by  manipulations  attended
by  the  emanation  of  the  same  fluid ;  or  by  certain  emanations
from  magnets,  or  from  some  metallic  wires  through  which
currents  of  electricity  are  passed ;  or  from  the  direct  applica-
tion of  certain  metals.  1  do  not  attempt  to  establisn  the
identity  of  these  fluids,  for  the  facts  daily  developing  them-
selves tend  to  shew  that  the  distinctive  properties  of  these
fluids  are  as  various  as  the  substances  from  which  they  ema-
nate, and  it  may  be  that  the  great  power  antecedent  to  all
consequents  may  ordain  the  simplicity  and  unity  of  one  elec-
tric, and  gravitating  with  centrifugal  force,  evolving  an  infi-
nite complication  and  variety  of  magnetic  cohesive  and
repulsive  agencies;  the  entire  system  emerging  from  the  vo-
lontS  directing  "  La  Grande  Formule  P^

An  attempt  to  satisfy  stifi*  and  superficial  thinkers  by
demonstrations  to  which  they  cannot  yield  their  inflexible
and  gnarled  habits  of  trained  reflection,  is  but  an  idle  occu-
pation. To  apprehend  ideas  that  are  out  of  the  ordinary
trains  of  men's  habitual  thoughts,  there  must  be  a  flexibility
of  mind.  The  child's  facile  uptake  of  its  alphabet,  and
i|uick  apprehension  of  facts,  its  joyous  perception  of  novel-
ties, contrasts  strongly  with  the  stolidity  of  the  hinde  who
has  passed  his  life  in  the  sameness  of  low  agricultural
drudgery.  Let  any  one  try  what  years  ago  it  was  my  lot  to
essay, — to  teach  poor  children  and  their  adult  parents,  in  a
remote  agricultural  district,  the  rudiments  of  reading,  writing,
and  arithmetic,  and  this  observation  will  not  long  want  his
assent.  Let  the  same  person  study  with  an  open  mind  the
phenomena  connected  with  the  nervous  system,  and  seek  for
the  interesting  facts  poured  in  great  abundance  on  the  world
of  late  years  by  the  students  of  animal  magnetism ;  and  if
he  see  no  reason  to  deplore  the  inflexibility  of  mind  and  the
illogical  trains  of  thought  which  characterize  the  great  majo-
rity of  would-be  philosophers,  he  must  himself  belong  to  their
stupid  phalanx.


126  Mesmeric  and  Magnetic  Phenomena,

I  shall  not  pretend  to  labour  for  the  sake  of  conversioa
or  for  the  love  of  controversy.  I  have  only  to  state  iacts
which  may  be  proved  by  testimony  as  good  as  any  that  ordi-
narily directs  the  force  of  conviction ;  racts  that,  for  the  most
part,  may  be  observed  by  any  one  who  will  exercise  the  re-
quisite patience  and  perseverance  in  watching  for  them.

It  is  a  common  observation  that,  for  the  most  part,  those
persons  who  are  by  mesmeric  treatment  put  into  a  state  of
somnambulism,  exhibit  sincerity  and  truthfulness.  The  man-
ners become  easy,  familiar,  and  confiding.  With  them  rank  has
no  existence.  Eauality  of  station  is  established,  and  nature
is  supreme  until  the  progress  of  magnetic  development  places
the  individual  in  relation  to  external  objects  in  a  condition  to
exercise  all  the  cerebral  organs  in  the  same  manner  as  in
ordinary  vigilance.  Even  then  when  the  sleep-waker  has
returned  to  a  knowledge  of  this  artificial  world,  and  tastes  of
the  fraudulent  practices  which  govern  mankind  in  their  daily
intercourse,  the  exceptions  to  a  love  of  candour  and  sincerity
seem  to  be  dependent  upon  the  existence  of  an  unusually
large  size  of  those  cerebral  or^ns  which  in  the  wide-awake
state  determine  the  habit  of  loving  falsehood  better  than
truth.  It  would  be  useless  to  enlarge  upon  this  point  to  ex-
perienced mesmerists,  and  the  objection  that  deceit  has  fre-
quently been  met  with  in  sleep-wakers  would  apply  with  far
greater  force,  if  statistics  could  be  resorted  to,  against  a
large  majority  of  persons  wide  awake

Human  testimony  is,  or  is  not,  credible  according  to  the
circumstances  under  which  it  is  elicited.  If  the  individual
stating  certain  matters  be  in  a  sane  condition  of  mind,  and
of  character  habitually  sincere  and  truthful,  there  is  no  reason
to  doubt  the  veracity  of  that  individual.  If  that  person  be
supported  in  testimony  by  another  equally  above  suspicion,
the  facts  stated  have  an  additional  value.  If  corroborations
to  stated  facts  be  afforded  by  a  number  of  persons  uncon-
nected with  each  other, — some  unknown  to  each  other, —
these  give  additional  value  to  the  testimony ;  and  supposing
the  facts  to  have  been  witnessed  at  different  periods  ot  time,
— in  different  places  and  by  different  persons,  who  had  not
only  no  cognizance  of  each  other,  but  who  could  have  no
idea  that  similar  events  to  those  in  course  of  observation  had
been  witnessed  by  others, — these  suppositions  would  tend
very  far  to  complete  the  reliance  to  be  placed  upon  the  mat-
ters testified.  Although  it  might  occasionally  happen  that
some  of  the  witnesses  to  a  fact  might  not  fulfil  every  one
condition  required  by  a  sceptic,  yet  there  is  such  abundant
evidence  on  which  to  rest  the  truth  of  the  chain  of  facts  I
shall  adduce,  that  I  willingly  leave  it  to  find  its  way.


by  Dr.  Ashbumer.  127

In  the  month  of  Augusti  1842,  I  first  magnetized  Jane
Love,  a  young  woman  then  about  23  years  age,  of  tali
stature,  ample  frame,  with  dark  hair  and  eyes,  neuro-
sanguineo  temperament.  She  had  been  my  patient  at  the
Middlesex  Hospital  for  some  months  previously  for  a  painful
tumor  in  the  right  hypogastrium,  wtiich  I  considered  to  be
ovarian.  She  had  undergone  much  medical  treatment  with-
out the  slightest  alleviation  of  her  symptoms,  and  had  lat-
terly been  losing  flesh.  Her  mother  told  me  that  several
doctors  in  the  country  and  in  London  had  prognosticated  a
progressive  emaciation  of  the  body  and  an  enlargement  of
the  tumor,  until  a  period  should  arrive  when  the  young  woman
would  die  of  dropsy.  Her  complexion  was  half  waxy,  half
sodden,  of  a  green  hue,  insomuch  that  at  the  hospital  she
was  compared  to  green  '' wax-work. *'  Having  undergone
the  routine  treatment  in  our  establishment, — purgatives,  al-
teratives, depuratives,  emmenagoeues,  narcotics,  having  been
unintentionally  salivated,  all  witnout  the  slightest  benefit,  I
determined  to  try  the  experiment  of  mesmerising  her.  I  ef-
fected my  object  by  pointing  at  her  eyes  with  two  fineers,
and  she  went  to  sleep  in  less  than  an  hour.  The  relief  ob-
tained was  so  striking  that  I  made  her  attend  at  my  house
for  three  hours  every  morning  to  have  the  benefits  of  the
magnetic  sleep.  At  nrst  it  was  necessary  to  bring  her  to  me
in  a  cab,  for  she  was  not  able  to  walk  the  distance  of  two
miles  frofn  her  own  residence  to  my  house.  On  the  fourth
morning,  she  dispensed  with  the  venicle,  but  she  was  much
exhausted  on  her  arrival,  and  the  agony  of  the  tumor  was
very  great.  It  was  attended  with  nausea,  retching,  and
sense  of  bearing  down,  with  pain  between  the  scapulas.
I  mesmerised  her  and  she  had  a  most  refreshing  sleep  of  three
hours.  The  passes  down  the  back  and  the  arms  made  her
rigid.  The  eyeballs  on  examination  were  found  to  be  turned
upwards.  Tne  pulse,  first  at  120,  fell  to  84,  was  full  and
soft.  The  improvement  in  her  condition  was  very  gratifying.
She  had  come  into  the  house  extremely  ill,  and  suffering
much ;  she  went  out  perfectly  relieved  and  walked  home  with
ease  and  with  cheerful  spirits.  On  the  eleventh  day,  this
young  woman,  who  had  not  been  able  for  two  years  to  mount
a  flight  of  stairs,  responded  to  the  mesmeric  beckoning,  and
followed  me  in  her  sleep  up  twenty-four  steps  to  my  drawing
rooms,  where  she  walked  in  and  oat  among  the  furniture,
and  after  sitting  down  for  five  minutes  in  a  deep  sleep,  again
followed  me,  descending  the  stairs  and  returning  to  her  seat
in  the  library.  I  did  not  perform  the  phrenological  experi-
ments upon  her  head  until  I  had  given  her  the  advantages  of


128  Mesmeric  and  Magnetic  Phenomena,

deep  and  placid  sleep  with  occaBional  passes  to  produce  the
rigidity,  which  these  patients  find  so  refreshing,  for  a  space  of
three  weeks.  She  had  repeatedly  broken  out  into  fits-  of
laughter,  and  had  spoken  a  few  sentences  during  this  time,
but  as  the  effort  to  make  her  converse  caused  confusion  in
her  head,  I  allowed  the  phenomena  scope  for  development
before  any  number  of  experiments  were  tried*  When  at  last
I  excited  Mirth  by  placing  my  fingers  on  the  organ  of  gaiety,
she  laughed  most  joyously.  I  found  that  by  exciting  the
organ  of  Tune,  she  sang;  by  exciting  Imitativeness,  she
mimicked.  I  pursued  the  experiments,  and  had  reason  to
conclude  that  though  some  organs  responded  very  well,  yet
that  the  range  in  her  head  was  limited.  Langu^e,  Weight,
Size,  Individuality,  Tune,  Gaiety,  Imitation,  Senevolence,
Veneration,  Self-esteem,  Adhesiveness,  Acquisitiveness,  Se-
cretiveness,  Alimentiveness,  are  all  that  I  have  been  able
to  excite  to  clear  manifestation.  The  excitation  of  Des-
tructiveness  and  Combativeness  produce  discomfort^  but  do
not  manifest  the  usual  phenomena.  It  is  remarkable  that
in  her  sister's  head  the  excitation  of  these  organs  is  attended
by  very  violent  effects.  In  Jane«  the  sympathies  of  taste  and
sensation  with  the  mesmeriser  are  verv  remarkably  exhibited.
I  come  now  to  the  point  for  which  I  adduce  this  case  an
illustration.  Not  until  Jane  had  been  daily  mesmerised  for
five  weeks  did  she  exhibit  the  curious  phenomenon  of  the  per-
ception of  a  light  from  the  upper  part  of  her  forehead.  On
the  first  morning  that  this  attracted  my  attention,  I  saw  her
sitting  very  quietly  sleeping  with  her  head  slightly  bent  for-
ward. She  was  not  so  joyous  as  usual,  and  appeared  ab-
sorbed in  attention.  Presently  she  said,  ''  O  how  lovelj^ —
how  beautiful.''  I  asked  what  was  so  lovely  and  beautiful.
'^  Oh,  that  charming  blue  light,  how  bright  I  It's  like  the
sky  !  It's  like  violets  !  Oh !  the  room  is  all  sunshine.  Now
it's  all  the  colours  of  the  rainbow  :  now  it's  all  clear  bright
light :  now  it's  beautiful  sky-blue. I  would  like  to  have  a

fpwn  of  that  colour."  Upon  being  asked  how  she  saw  this
ight,  she  said  that  it  was  from  this  part,  placing  her  hands
above  her  forehead,  and  shutting  and  opening  them  as  if  she
were  desirous  of  catching  something.  She  had  repeatedly
drank  mesmerised  water,  and  had  taken  it  always  for  a  mix-
ture of  brandy  and  soda  water.  Up  to  this  time  she  had
always  taken  me  for  her  sister  Harriet.  Nothing  could  induce
her  to  believe  that  I  was  not  Harriet,  and  some  comic  scenes
had  been  exhibited  with  a  coloured  horse-blanket,  which  al-
though she  was  sitting  or  standing,  she  would  take  for  her
bed  covering,  and  when I pulled  it  away  from her,  she


by  Dr.  A0hbumer.  129

would  insist  on  the  unfairness  of  Harriet's  taking  a  larger
share  of  the  bed  and  the  coverings  than  she  was  entitled  to.
If  she  were  asked  where  she  was,  she  would  stoutly  aver  that
she  was  lying  down  in  her  bed,  although  she  was  perfectly
erect  and  made  to  walk  about  the  room.  When  the  develop-
ment of  light  reached  her,  however,  she  no  longer  took  me
for  her  sister ;  she  knew  me  for  the  doctor.  Previously  she
heard  only  her  mesmeriser,  now  she  saw  and  heard  every
body  in  the  room,  and  distinguished  the  colour  and  other
peculiarities  of  dress  of  every  individual.  Now  when  I  mes-
merised water  by  darting  my  fingers  upon  its  surface,  she
described  **  beautiful  blue  sparks'  as  going  from  the  tips  of
my  fingers  into  the  water ;  sometimes  they  were  like  large
spangles.  The  operation  of  mesmerising  water  always  rivetted
her  attention,  and  she  eagerly  drank  the  water  as  soon  as  she
could  get  it.  One  morning  I  gave  her  six  tumblers  full  of
mesmerised  water,  which  she  swallowed  with  voracity  and
very  evident  satisfaction.  I  said,  ''So  much  brandy  and
soda  water  will  disagree  with  you."  ''  What  nonsense,"  she
replied,  ''  it's  not  brandy  and  soda  water, — it's  mesmerised
water"  From  that  time  she  never  entertained  the  halluci-
nation which  had  previously  possessed  her,  nor  was  she  con-
scious that  she  had  ever  held  mesmerised  water  to  be  aught
but  what  it  was.  Finding  now  that  when  I  beckoned  her
or  exerted  tractive  movements,  she  could  see  what  I  did,
I  tried  the  experiment  of  silently  willing  her  to  come  to  me
when  I  sat  at  several  yards  from  her.  I  had  heard  of  Mr.  H.
Thompson's  experiments  with  the  will  long  before  I  had  the
pleasure  of  his  acquaintance,  and  I  tried  the  force  of  the
will  in  this  case,  but  in  her  state  of  sleep-waking,  and  I
succeeded  so  far  as  to  make  her  get  up  from  her  sleep  and
walk  up  to  me.  She  always  fell  into  the  profound  uncon-
scious sleep  after  I  had  made  this  experiment.  She  de-
scribed a  rope  of  blue  light  proceeding  from  my  eyes  to  her
head  whenever  I  willed  her.  She  said  it  pulled  her  so  hard
she  could  not  resist  it ;  she  was  obliged  to  come  up  to  me.
I  have  repeatedly  asked  her  about  the  size  of  this  rope  of
light,  and  her  answer  was  always  that  it  was  in  strings,  all
in  lines  together  as  thick  as  her  arm,  most  frequently  blue,
.but  sometimes  all  the  colours  of  the  rainbow.

I  have  occasionally  sat  reading  while  this  patient  has  been
sleeping  in  a  chair  near  me ;  but  invariably,  whenever  my  at-
tention has  been  rivetted  to  the  subject,  she  has  got  up  with
her  hands  to  her  head  and  approached  me,  begging  me  to
lay  down  the  book,  for  my  head  was  covered  with  a  blue
cloud  which  affected  her  very  disagreeably. If  I  persisted

VOL.  IV.  K


ISO  Mesmeric  aful  Magnetic  Phenomena,

in  reading*  she  became  vexed,  and  said  that  her  head  would
split.

By  those  who  have  not  studied  the  facts  resulting  from
mesmeric  events,  I  may  be,  as  I  have  been,  charged  with
great  credulity.  The  habits  of  education  have  modified  the
brains  of  these  people  who  so  accuse  me.  They  have  not  ap-
prehended the  philosophy  of  Gall.  Perhaps  the  habit  of  rest-
ing on  foregone  conclusions  has  so  ol)tunded  their  perceptions,
that  certain  kinds  of  facts  do  not  find  admission  into  their
minds,  and  they  pity  my  credulity ;  while  I  deeply  regret  that
they  cannot  participate  in  the  delight  which  I  experience  in
bringing  out  new  trains  of  ideas,  founded  on  fresh  developments
of  truth,  which  are  destined  to  enlighten  mankind  on  the  most
sublime  subjects  that  can  arrest  the  attention  of  philosophers.

These  details  shew  that  magnetic  sleep  is  induced  by  the
pointing  of  two  of  my  fingers  to  the  eyes  of  this  young
woman.  I  have  often  produced  the  same  kind  of  sleep  by
passing  my  hands  alternately,  at  the  distance  of  half  an  inch
from  the  surface  of  her  head  and  face,  down  from  the  crown
of  the  head  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ;  by  darting  my  fingers
at  her  face ;  by  darting  them  at  the  nape  of  her  neck ;  by
standing  before  her  and  willing  her  to  go  to  sleep ;  by  stand-
ing at  some  distance  behind  her  and  willing  her  to  go  to  sleep:
often  even  when  she  was  unconscious  that  I  was  doing  it,  as  I
shewed  before  an  audience  at  the  Polytechnic  Institution,  on
an  occasion  when  the  Directors  were  kind  enough  to  permit
me  to  make  use  of  some  of  their  splendid  apparatus  for  my
experiments ;  and  as  I  have  shewn  to  hundreds  besides.  I
have  a  right  to  infer  that  these  effects  are  produced  by  the
emanation  of  a  fluid  from  my  person,  which  has  been  seen  by
this  person  herself  when  I  have  mesmerised  water,  when  I
have  mesmerised  other  persons,  when  I  have  willed  her  to
sleep,  or  when  I  have  willed  her  to  get  up  and  to  walk  across
a  long  room.  The  blue  streams  of  light,  the  blue  sparks
from  my  fingers,  have  been  seen  not  by  Jane  only,  but  by
other  persons  in  a  state  of  magnetic  sleep ;  and  by  other  per-
sons as  well  as  by  herself  in  the  ordinary  condition  of  waking
or  vigilance.  That  the  exercise  of  thought  is  accompanied  by
some  emanation  from  the  brain,  is  manifest  from  Jane's  re-
peated observation  of  a  blue  cloud  of  li^ht  over  my  head,
whenever  I  concentrated  my  mind  in  reading.  Other  patients
have  told  me  the  same  thing.  Except  upon  the  idea  of  an
emanation  of  fluid  or  influence  from  one  person  to  another,
how  is  the  following  fact  to  be  accounted  for  ? The  Prince

i]e could  speak  only  a  few  words  of  English. He

agreed  with  me,  in  another  room,  before  the  s&»nce  one  morn*


by  Dr.  Mkbumer.  181

ingy  that  he  was  to  think  intently  of  a  wish  to  kiss  Jane,  whea
she  should  be  seated  in  a  state  of  somnambulism.  We  went  into
the  library,  and  Jane  having  been  put  to  sleep,  the  Prince  ap-
proached her  and  did  just  as  he  proposed.  The  youn^  woman
started,  put  up  her  hands  repelling  him,  and  declanng  that
**  she  should  do  no  such  thing/'  The  Prince  then  spoke  his
wish  in  Italian,  and  with  the  same  repulsive  gesture  as  before
she  said,  "  I  won't  suffer  it — ^you  shan't  do  it."

How,  except  upon  the  existence  of  a  magnetic  light  ema-
nating from  one  person  to  another,  and  passing  through  a
thick  opaque  bookcase  full  of  books  and  a  wall  dividing  the
rooms,  could  be  accounted  for  the  fact  repeatedly  observed
and  testified  by  Mr.  Marsh,  the  bookseller,  of  Old  Cavendish
Street,  and  by  others,  of  Jane's  seeing  and  stating,  while  in
my  library,  what  I  was  about  in  my  breakfast^room  ?  She
has  described  my  burning  my  lips  with  hot  tea  ;  my  handing
ray  cup  for  more  sugar ;  my  cutting  slices  of  ham ;  my  butter-
ing dry  toast  and  cutting  it  into  strips ;  all  which  things  I
had  done,  not  suspecting  that  Jane  was  a  spectator  of  my
actions.  One  morning,  in  her  sleep,  the  Brazilian  minister  and
his  lady  being  present,  she  suddenly  cast  her  attention  to  a
distance  of  two  miles,  and  described  an  arrival  of  which  it
was  clear  that  she  could  have  previously  known  nothing.  She
went  on  to  state  a  series  of  events  which  were  occurring  there
while  she  was  in  my  house,  and  I  went  over  and  fully  ascer-
tained the  accuracy  of  her  narrative.  How  can  this  be  ac-
counted for  except  upon  the  admission  of  the  existence  of  a
magnetic  light  or  fluid  travelling  to  or  from  her  brain,  render-
ing her  cognizant  of  the  events  which  were  occurring  ?

I  have  a  letter  from  a  lady  of  noble  birth,  and  of  unim-
peachable veracity,  in  which  is  given  a  detail  of  a  number  of
circumstances  described  by  Jane  Love  while  she  was  in  mes-
meric sleeo  fifty  miles  in  the  country,  relating  to  events  in  the
interior  or  a  house  in  Eaton  Square,  into  which  the  young
woman  had  never  set  her  foot.  The  facts  are  incontrovertible.

I  have  endeavoured  to  shew  that  a  fluid  passes  in  these
cases  as  in  the  exercise  of  the  will,  and  that  opaque  walls
and  distance  form  no  obstacle  to  the  passage  of  this  magnetic
fluid,  any  more  than  to  the  magnetic  fluid  which  reaches  the
needle  of  the  compass  from  the  North  Pole,  and  directs  the
mariner  in  his  course  aright.  Mr.  Kiste  told  me  that  he  had
repeatedly  induced  sleep  in  a  child  by  will  at  the  distance  of
several  miles  when  he  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Plymouth,
and  that  the  fact  was  known  to  hundreds  of  witnesses.  Mr.
Thompson,  of  Fairfield  Lodge,  York,  has  exercised  the  will  at
several  miles'  distance  with  striking  effects.  There  are  varioas

K  2


132  Mesmeric  and  Magnetic  Phenomena,

results  produced  by  the  fluid  of  the  will  by  different  persons.
Mr.  Thompson  can  will  certain  individuals  to  perform  certain
actions  while  they  continue  awake.  If  I  try  the  same  expe-
riment on  the  same  individuals,  I  produce  deep  sleep.  In
mesmerising  a  gentleman  who  is  very  refined  in  his  percep-
tion of  the  differences  of  influence  between  different  mes-
merisers,  Mr.  Thompson's  influence  was  said  to  be  clear  and
light,  while  mine  was  dull,  harsh,  and  heavy:  Mr.  Thomp-
son's was  very  agreeable, — mine  was  overpowering,  and  pro-
duced the  deep  sleep :  Mr.  Thompson's  was  compared  to  the
passage  of  a  mail-coach  wheel, — mine  to  a  broad  heavy  wag-
gon wheel.  These  striking  differences  are  but  specimens  of
the  vast  variety  of  character  to  be  observed  in  the  mesmeric
influences  of  different  persons.  They  are  probably  as  numer-
ous as  the  individuals  of  mankind.

I  adduce  a  case  to  illustrate  further  some  of  the  points
we  have  been  considering.

In  the  month  of  June,  1844,  Miss  C came  to  consult

me.  Her  health  had  been  very  seriously  affected  for  two
years.  She  had  a  slight  figure  with  a  large  head.  The  tem-
perament was  nervous ;  the  hair  and  eyes  black  ;  complexion
sallow.  Her  brain  was  of  a  high  order,  and  her  mind  had
been  well  cultivated.  She  had  so  happy  a  proportion  between
the  moral  and  intellectual  qualities,  that  ner  case  could  not
fail  in  phreno-mesmerism  to  be  one  of  deep  interest.  Her
features  were  admirably  formed,  and  her  beau^  rendered  the
physiognomy  of  her  feelings  very  charming.  She  was  cured,
under  my  care,  by  mesmerism,  of  a  complaint  that  had  simu-
lated some  of  the  forms  of  organic  malignant  disease.  It
was  at  first  very  diflScult  to  affect  her,  and  she  at  no  time
lost  her  primary  or  vigilant  consciousness  during  her  mes-
meric sleep.  She  responded  to  the  excitation  of  the  phreno-
logical organs,  and  felt  obliged  to  obey  the  will  of  the  mes-
xneriser  up  to  the  point  of  following  him  about  the  room ;  but
if  she  were  commanded  to  do  anything  very  repulsive  to  her
feelings,  she  became  awake  instantly  and  suddenly.  To
witness  the  grace  of  this  beautiful  female  in  the  state  of
mesmeric  sleep-waking— the  delicacy  of  her  poses,  and  the
the  physiognomy  resulting  from  her  refined  feelings,  was  very
high  enjoyment.  I  introduce  this  case  for  the  purpose  of
stating  a  feet  I  witnessed  myself.  I  proposed  one  morning
to  exercise  the  will  in  silently  commanding  this  young  lady
to  come  to  me  at  the  distance  of  twenty-four  feet.  Her
mother  was  present,  and  there  was  a  playfiil  recommendation
to  resist  the  power  of  my  will.  I  was  determined  that  she
should  obey,  and  I  spoke  out  my  determination,  which  put


by  Dr,  Ashbumer.  188

the  yoang  lady  upon  her  mettle,  and  she  was  at  first  ecj^ually
resolute  that  she  would  not  obey.  I  continued  to  will  for
about  six  minutes,  concentrating  all  my  ideas  on  the  resolu-
tion. At  last,  I  saw  her  covered  with  a  violet  coloured  halo.
She  burst  into  tears,  and  very  unwillingly  yielded  her  obedi-
ence, not  without  continuing  to  resist  at  every  step  she  took
in  advancing  towards  me.

The  case  which  follows  further  illustrates  the  facts  relat-
ing to  the  existence  of  the  blue  fluid  in  mesmerism.

Mrs.  A  ,  a  young  married  lady,  was  cured  by  mes-

merism of  an  extremely  painful  neuralgic  afiection  of  the
bladder.  After  she  haa  been  magnetized  about  a  fortnight,
having  up  to  that  time  exhibited  only  heavy  sleep,  she  re-
sponded to  a  large  proportion  of  the  cerebral  or^ns.  She
took  me  always  for  her  mother  up  to  a  certain  day,  nearly
six  weeks  from  the  first  time  I  put  her  to  sleep.  Then  she
knew  me  quite  well,  and  I  could  no  longer  will  the  water  I
mesmerised  and  gave  her  to  drink  to  be  anything  but  mes-
merised water.  Before  that  time,  I  could  make  her  believe  it
was  camomile  tea,  cofiee.  Port  wine.  I  failed  if  I  wished  it
to  be  Sherry  or  Madeira,  but  always  succeeded  if  I  wished  it
to  be  lemonade.  When  this  lady  had  lucidity  enoueh  to  see
me  and  to  know  me  for  myself,  she  could  see  me  dart  blue
sparks  into  a  glass  of  water  whenever  I  mesmerised  it ;  and
it  I  passed  my  hand  over  any  other  person,  that  individual
became  quite  clear  to  her ;  and  she  said  that  in  such  cases
she  always  perceived  blue  streams  of  light  from  my  finger-
ends.  If  I  willed,  she  saw  blue  streams  of  light  issuing  from
my  eyes.  If  I  made  passes  rapidly  down  her  own  person  or
down  that  of  any  other  individual,  she  said  she  saw  a  blue
light  in  streaks,  which  resembled  a  beautiful  striped  satin
ribbon.  Several  of  my  patients  in  lucid  mesmeric  sleep-
waking  have  compared  the  appearance  presented  on  my  mak-
ing rapid  passes  to  very  brilliantly  coloured  blue  satin  striped
ribbons.

The  next  case  is  interesting,  and  continues  my  train  of
evidence.

Sophia  Jones,  32  years  of  aj5;e,  dark  brown  hair,  grey
eyes,  short  stature,  pale  complexion,  a  dress-maker,  was  for
two  years  subject  to  copious  discharges  of  blood  from  the
bowels.  Sometimes  the  quantity  amounted  to  a  pint ;  occa-
sionally there  was  mixed  with  the  blood  an  amount  of  pus.
There  was  a  sense  of  constriction  across  the  abdomen,  and  a
soreness  and  pain  increased  on  pressure  in  the  right  hypo-
chondrium.  This  patient  knew  wnen  she  was  to  expect  a  loss
of  blood  by  an  unusual  tightness  of  the  integuments  of  the


184  Mesmeric  and  Magnetic  Phenomena,

head,  and  sometitnes  on  these  occasions  her  sight  would  fail
her.  She  complained  of  great  thirst  and  want  of  appetite.
Her  bowels  were  relaxed,  the  motions  were  very  dark ;  the
catamenia  regular,  but  scanty  in  quantity  and  lasting  only
one  day.  She  was  much  emaciatea ;  coughed  and  expecto-
rated matter,  sometimes  tinged  with  blood.  She  had  a  small
thready  pulse  of  120.  The  sounds  on  percussion  and  aus-
cultation were  not  insisted  upon,  because  there  was  difference
of  opinion  upon  the  subject,  more  especially  when  it  was  an-
nounced that  this  patient  was  to  be  mesmerised.  She  had
been  for  eleven  months  an  in-patient  of  the  Middlesex  Hos-
pital, under  the  care  of  Dr.  Wilson,  and  very  nearly  two
years  under  various  treatment  at  that  establishment.  The
first  time  I  saw  her  was  on  an  occasion  of  my  accompanying
Dr.  Wilson  from  the  wards  through  the  hospital  passages,
when  he  asked  her  how  she  was.  She  looked  very  cadaverous,
and  was  much  exhausted  from  the  blood  she  bad  lost  on  that
day.  From  the  striking  effects  which  mesmerism  had  pro-
duced in  menorrhagia,  I  felt  much  disposed  to  try  its  effi-
cacy in  this  case.  Dr.  Wilson  was  desirous  too  of  the
trial,  and  I  appointed  the  next  day  at  my  own  house  for  the
experiment.

At  nine  in  the  morning  of  the  20th  of  June,  1844,  Sophia
Jones  first  came  to  me.  Under  the  operation  of  the  fingers
pointed  to  her  eyes  and  of  slow  passes,  she  fell  asleep  in  three
minutes,  and  continued  in  a  calm  deep  slumber  for  an  hour
and  a  quarter.  The  next  day,  three  minutes  sufficed  to  put
her  again  into  a  very  tranquil  sleep,  which  lasted  upwards  of
two  hours.  She  felt  much  disposed  to  lie  down,  and  chose
the  hearth  rug  as  the  most  convenient  place  for  her  repose.
Here  she  soon  began  to  chuckle  and  laugh,  talked,  and  got
up  to  walk  about  the  room.  I  gave  her  a  glass  of  mesmer-
ised water,  and  while  I  was  mesmerising  it,  she  exclaimed,
"What  beautiful  bright-coloured  spangles  !"  "Of  what  co-
lour are  they,  and  whence  do  they  proceed  ?"  she  was  asked.
Her  reply  was,  that  •*  they  were  all  the  colours  of  the  rain-
bow, and  proceeded  from  my  finger-ends  to  the  surface  of
the  water,  which  shone  with  a  beautiful  light.  Oh,  how  de-
lightful !"  "Tell  me,"  I  said,  "what  colours  do  you  dis-
tinguish?" "There  are  red  and  yellow  spangles  amone
them,  but  most  of  them  are  blue  and  violet."  She  drauK
the  water,  and  was  evidently  much  exhilarated  by  it.  I
made  long  passes  from  her  head  to  her  feet  and  she  became
very  quiet,  said  that  the  room  was  so  full  of  light  she  could
not  see  anybody,  she  was  so  dazzled  by  the  light.  Shortly
she  put  herself  down  on  the  hearth  rug,  and  with  the  excep-


by  Dr.  Askbumer.  135

tion  of  a  little  fit  of  laughter  now  and  then,  continued  the
rest  of  her  time  in  a  cahn  sleep.  In  the  course  of  a  week,
sleeping  daily  on  her  favorite  rug  and  covered  over  with  a
horse  blanket,  her  head  resting  on  a  cushion  while  I  attended
to  other  matters,  her  health  was  strikingly  improved ;  and
at  the  same  time,  she  exhibited  symptoms  of  a  progress  in
clairvoyance.  She  referred  the  light  to  the  upper  part  of
her  forehead ;  sometimes  said  ''  it  was  of  a  beautiful  sky-blue
colour, — sometimes  all  the  colours  of  the  rainbow."  With
the  blanket  covering  her  head,  her  face  being  turned  to  the
wall,  she  has  not  unfrequently  described  the  dress  of  persons
both  male  and  female  who  have  entered  the  room,  even  an
hour  after  she  has  been  lying  down  in  the  position  stated, —
her  back  being  towards  the  parties.  If  unaer  these  circum-
stances I  threw  some  sparks  at  her,  she  spoke  of  their  influ-
ence being  very  agreeaole,  and  was  delighted  in  describing
their  colours,  so  brilliant  and  yellow  and  blue.  Sometimes
she  has  spoken  of  occurrences  in  the  streets ;  then  she  would
revert  to  me,  and  if  I  went  into  the  dining  room  to  break-
fast, she  would  describe  to  persons  remaining  in  the  library,
occurrencess  taking  place  in  the  room  in  which  I  happened
to  be.  She  has  gone  to  sleep  at  eight  in  the  morning  m  the
library,  the  servant  has  taken  up  the  breakfast  things  at  nine
into  the  dining  room,  she  has  described  to  me  what  he  has
been  doing,  the  colour  and  pattern  of  the  plates,  the  urn,
the  tea-pot,  the  pattern  of  the  damask  table  cloth.  One
morning  she  was  puzzled  about  the  contents  of  an  oval  dish»
which  she  described  very  accurately  as  being  placed  upon  a
side  table  with  a  knife  and  fork  in  front  of  it, — the  gilt  rim
of  the  dish  and  a  colored  landscape  in  its  centre.  She  could
not  make  out  the  remains  of  a  ham,  which  she  spoke  of  as
having  four  large  red  knobs.  I  went  into  the  room  and
found  a  large  nam  bone  which  she  had  very  accurately
described.  There  was  very  little  meat  upon  it,  and  when  I
returned  and  told  her  what  it  was,  she  apprehended  at  once
the  real  thing,  and  observed  that  it  should  not  appear  again,
for  it  was  too  shabby  to  put  upon  table.  It  must  be  remem-
bered that  she  was  on  the  floor,  her  head  and  body  covered
with  a  blanket,  and  a  bookcase  full  of  books  besides  a  wall
interposed  between  her  and  the  objects  which  she  beheld  and
clearly  described.  Here  was  another  instance  of  transmission
of  light  through  opaque  masses  of  matter  from  or  to  her
cerebral  organs.

Sophia  Jones  had  been  mesmerised  for  more  than  three
months  daily;  had,  upon  an  average,  slept  for  two  hours
each  time. She  lost  her  cough  and  expectoration  ;  was  very


186  Mesmeric  and  Magnetic  Phenomena^

seldom  troubled  with  discharges  of  blood  from  the  bowels,
and  when  the  occurrence  did  take  place  it  resulted  in  conse-
(]^uence  of  some  error  in  diet,  and  was  insignificant  in  quan-
tity. She  gained  flesh,  had  colour  in  her  cheeks,  and  was
more  cheerful  in  her  spirits.  I  took  her  one  day  into  my
bath  room,  where  I  mesmerised  a  glass  of  water  for  her  to
drink  before  she  went  away.  She  exclaimed,  *^  What  beau-
tiful blue  sparks  of  light  I  see  from  your  fingers'  ends  going
into  the  water,  I  never  saw  such  a  thing  before."  On  this
occasion  she  was  wide  awake.  This  patient,  of  so  suscep-
tible a  nervous  character,  responded  to  a  very  limited  range
of  phrenological  organs.  Mirth,  Imitation,  Benevolence,
Melody,  and  Adhesiveness  were  the  most  remarkable.  From
the  first  occasion  of  her  sleep  she  never  mistook  me  for  any
other  person.

Maria  M — ' ,  aged  26,  black  eyes, black  hair,

very  slight  figure,  well  made,  but  of  short  stature;  head
rather  large.  Occupation, — straw  plaiter.  Married.  This
patient  has  been  afflicted  for  six  years  and  a  half  with  a  burn-
ing pain  in  the  epigastrium,  and  the  pain  increased  upon
pressure  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  extending  to  the  hip  on
the  same  side.  Appetite  bad.  Spirits  always  very  low.
Catamenia  scanty ;  regular  in  their  period,  but  lasting  only  a
day  and  a  half.  Takes  care  that  by  the  aid  of  medicine  her
bowels  are  regular.  Pulse  weak,  irritable ;  90  in  a  minute.
Has  applied  to  several  physicians  successively ;  has  found  no
relief.  I  magnetized  her  seven  times  for  three-quarters  of
an  hour  each  time,  before  I  succeeded  in  inducing  sleep.
Afterwards  she  slept  soundly  about  two  hours  daily.

On  the  23rd  of  June,  1844,  I  have  this  note, — ^' Maria

M has  slept  nearly  four  hours. She  takes  me  for  her

husband  and  is  very  cross.  Upon  Adhesiveness  and  Bene-
volence being  excited  she  becomes  very  amiable;  but  she  does
not  respond  strikingly  to  many  of  the  phrenological  organs.
When  awake  she  is  much  attached  to  her  husband  who  comes
to  walk  home  with  her."  This  patient  had  been  with  me  daily
for  fifteen  days.  It  was  three  weeks  more  before  she  saw  light
from  the  upper  part  of  her  forehead,  and  in  nine  days  more
she  recognized  me  as  the  doctor.  She  relished  mesmerised
water  at  all  times.  Now  she  saw  me  when  I  threw  ^'  beautiful
blue  sparks  into  it."  Her  health  was  completely  re-esta-
blished without  an  atom  of  medicine,  and  she  acquired  the
habit  of  daily  visiting  the  closet  without  her  former  physic.

Lady was  repeatedly  magnetized  by  me  during

several  months.  She  saw  during  her  waking  state  blue
globules  of  light  along  the  internal  surface  of  my  hand  and


iff  Dr.  A$hbumer.  187

fingers,  and  issuing  from  the  fingers'  ends,  before  her  eyes
were  closed.

Mrs.  K.,  aged  27,  light  hair,  ^rey  eyes,  tall  stature,
large  head,  is  very  susceptible  of  being  magnetically  influ-
enced. After  I  had  magnetized  her  seven  times,  she  could
in  her  state  of  ordinary  wakefulness  see  the  sparks  emitted
from  the  ends  of  my  nngers  when  I  mesmerised  water,  or
when  I  threw  them  by  passes  upon  any  other  person.  She
cannot  see  the  light  from  my  eyes  during  the  operation  of
willing  while  she  is  awake,  but  if  I  put  her  to  sleep,  she
sees  the  light  immediately,  and  she  describes  it  as  passing
in  blue  streaks  from  my  eyes  to  the  person  or  object  willed.
If  I  will  the  back  of  a  chair  to  be  magnetized,  she  cannot
put  her  hand  upon  it  without  her  hand  being  spasmodically
closed  and  rigidly  grasped  upon  the  chair-back.

Four  other  patients  besides  these  have  seen  blue  sparks
from  my  fingers  when  I  mesmerised  water.  These  persons
were  severally  in  their  ordinary  wakeful  state — in  primary
consciousness.  Several  of  the  patients  having  described  to
me  during  their  sleep  the  issuing  of  a  light  blue  or  grey  cloud
of  light  from  my  electro-magnetic  coils,  I  was  induced  to
make  experiments  upon  them  with  various  electric  and  magne-
tic apparatus.  On  placing  Jane  Love  in  communication  with
the  pnme  conductor  of  a  small  cylindrical  electrifying  machine,
I  produced  such  a  fearful  state  of  convulsions  with  temporary
paralysis  of  the  whole  left  side  of  her  body,  that  I  was  not
eager  to  try  the  experiment  again.  Mr.  W.  was  placed  on  a
large  insulating  stool  at  the  Polytechnic  Institution,  and  in
connexion  with  the  prime  conductor  of  the  magnificent  plate
machine.  The  discomfort  produced  in  him  lasted  for  several
days.  When  these  patients  were  submitted  to  the  influence
of  the  electro-magnetic  apparatus,  having  been  previously
mesmerised  to  sleep,  it  invariably  deepened  the  sleep.  I
tried  this  experiment  with  eight  other  cases,  and  found  that
the  results  were  similar.  In  two  cases  of  extreme  nervous
susceptibility,  there  was  very  deep  coma  with  stertor.

Finding  that  in  some  I  observed  deepened  sleep  from  the
application  of  the  electro-magnetic  apparatus,  and  that  in
otners  there  was  superadded  great  rigidity  of  the  whole  mus-
cular system,  I  constructed  a  helix  of  wire,  of  such  a  size  as
would  enable  me  to  cover  any  person  seated  in  a  chair.  It  was
of  an  oval  form,  8  feet  in  circumference,  made  of  iron  wire,  a
(quarter  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  which  was  coiled  fifty-six
times  in  a  height  of  thirty-three  inches.  With  this  apparatus
I  have  been  able  to  make  some  curious  observations.  On  the
4th  of  December,  1846^  I  put  a  man,  aged  45,  of  strong


188  Mesmeric  and  Magnetic  Phenomena^

nerves,  within  this  coil,  and  then  passed  a  current  of  electri-
city through  the  wire  by  means  of  a  lai^e  pair  of  Smee's  gal-
vanic plates.  He  sat  for  two  hours  apparently  quite  unaffected
by  the  magnetic  influence.  The  next  morning  he  went  in
again,  and  in  less  than  twenty-five  minutes  complained  of
great  giddiness  and  sickness.  I  removed  the  apparatus,  and
desired  the  man  to  lie  down.  He  said  that  he  felt  as  if  he  had
been  recovering  from  drunkenness.  He  walked  home,  and  on
his  way  through  the  streets  as  well  as  for  several  days  after-
wards, at  intervals,  he  felt  as  if  he  was  enveloped  in  a  light
grey  smoke.  By  daily  mesmerisine  this  person  tor  three-quar-
ters of  an  hour,  at  eight  o'cIock  every  morning,  for  three
months,  I  have  produced  the  magnetic  sleep.

Mrs.  Cottrell,  who  often  saw  blue  fluid  proceeding  from
me  when  I  willed  any  one  to  do  my  silent  bidding,  has  re-
peatedly, during  her  magnetic  sleep,  observed  that  there  was
a  cloud  of  greyish-blue  light  about  this  magnetic  helix.  She
has  said  of  a  strong  boy,  who  has  been  submitted  to  this  ap-
paratus for  two  hours  four  times  a  week  during  three  months,
and  who  is  very  somnolent  while  he  sits  in  it,  that  there  are  a
heap  of  greyish-blue  sparks  going  up  to  him  from  the  wires.
If  I  make  her  touch  the  wires,  she  instantly  sleeps  heavily
and  becomes  quite  rigid  and  insensible.

Mrs.  H ,  the  wife  of  a  well-known  surgeon,  cannot

stay  in  the  room  while  the  current  is  passing  through  the
wire.  In  her  primary  waking  state,  she  sees  a  light  coming
from  my  large  norse-shoe  magnet,  and  cannot  remain  in  the
same  room  with  it  without  going  to  sleep  very  heavily.

Mrs.  K  , when  she  is  wide  awake,  sees  bright

sparks  from  the  wires  of  my  helix  when  the  apparatus  is  in
action,  a  grey  cloud  issuing  from  it,  and  a  heavy  sleep  results
if  she  stands  too  near  it.

Mrs.  H ,  a  lady  of  highly  nervous  temperament,

at  first  sees  nothing  emanating  from  the  apparatus.  If  she
stands  near  the  wires  or  touches  them,  the  sensation  is  very
agreeable ;  she  sees  light,  feels  lifted  up  from  the  ground,
and  falls  back  in  sleep,  quite  ri^id  and  insensible.

Harriet  P is  similarly  affected; sees  blue  light

within  the  apparatus  and  red  without.  But  the  most  striking
results  are  seen  in  the  case  of  Mary  Ann  Douglas,  who  sees
the  blue  sparks  within  the  coil  and  the  red  light  without,  in  a
few  seconds  falls  asleep,  and  becomes  extremely  rigid.  Un-
magnetized  iron  applied  to  the  back  of  the  neck  relaxes  the
tonic  spasm  in  these  patients,  and  speedily  wakens  them.

In  six  of  these  patients,  sleep  and  rigidity  of  the  muscles
are  produced  by  the  application  of  gold  to  the  back  of  the


by  Dr.  Ashbwmer.  1S9

head,  between  the  insertion  of  the  trapezii  muscles.  In  Jane
Love's  and  Mary  Ann  Douglas's  cases,  this  metal  and  pla-
tinum produce  a  sense  of  burning,  and  leave  the  painful  sen-
sation for  sometimes  forty-eight  hours.

I  forbear  to  state  the  result  of  my  further  experiments  with
the  metals,  in  the  hope  that  Dr.  EUiotson  will  one  day  publish
his  original  experiments  with  these  substances  upon  the  girls
Okey>:  mine  are  but  repetitions  and  corroborations  of  what
he  has  established,  except  in  the  case  of  mercury.  A  very  curi-
ous fact  presents  itself  with  regard  to  this  metal  when  applied  to
the  palm  of  the  hand  in  the  sleep-waking  state.  In  all  cases
of  high  nervous  susceptibility  in  which  I  have  yet  tried  the  ex-
perimenti  immediate  rigidity  of  the  side  occurs ;  the  patient
exclaims  with  pain  before  the  coma  comes  on,  the  access  of
which  is  very  rapid ;  and  on  recovering  a  little,  great  pain  is
felt  on  the  side  of  the  face.  A  burning  sensation  all  down
the  same  side  of  the  body,  and  the  next  day  a  painful  mer-
curial sore  mouth  on  one  side  of  the  face — that  on  which  the
application  has  been  made  to  the  hand — has  supervened,  and
has  been  accompanied  by  the  foBter  of  the  breath:  an  influence
pecuUar  to  the  metal  mercury  has  been  communicated  to  the
system.  The  sleep  and  rigidity  are  results  common  to  some
other  metals  and  to  magnetic  iron,  and  to  the  mesmeric
passes  and  to  the  exercise  of  the  human  will.  Do  not  these
facts  tend  to  establish  something  like  the  existence  of  an  in-
fluence ? — let  it  be  blue  fluid  or  grey.  Let  future  observers
find  their  patients'  relation  of  the  colour  to  be  some  other
belonging  to  the  prismatic  spectrum.  I  have  put  down  facta
enough  to  excite  further  enquiry,  which  seems  to  have  been
more  or  less  at  rest  from  April,  1786,  when  Tardy  de  Mon-
travel  published  his  Journal  du  TraUemerU  Magn&ique  de  la
Demoiselle  N.,  in  which  he  speaks  of  this  fluid,  p.  56,  until
within  a  few  years.  I  knew  nothing  of  Tardy 's  work  until
it  was  brought  to  my  notice  more  than  a  year  ago  by  my
friend,  Mr,  Ashhurst  Majendie ;  and  I  have  been  unable  to
procure  a  copy  of  it  until  within  a  few  months.  This  is  men-
tioned only  to  shew  that  the  same  facts  had  been  observed  in
1786,  and  bears  out  the  remark  that  they  have  been  noticed
by  difierent  persons  who  could  have  no  cognizance  of  each
other,  and  at  different  times.

Having  full  reliance  myself  on  the  truth  of  all  these  state-
ments, it  remains  only  to  hope  that  they  will  force  the  atten-
tion of  the  reflective  part  of  the  community  to  this  branch  of
the  very  remarkable  and  interesting  study  of  mesmerism.


( 140 )


XII.  Letter  to  Sir  Philip  Crdmptonj  Bart.,  from  Dr.  EUiotson.

Sib, — You  have  published  a  letter,  as  all  agree,  in  the
Mail,  and  evidently  with  the  object  of  injuring  mesmerism.
You  offer  a  £100  note  to  any  person  who  shall  read  the  par-
ticulars of  the  note  and  three  English  words  written  upon  a
slip  of  paper  in  which  it  is  folded ;  there  being  also  an  en-
dorsement on  the  envelope  to  this  effect.

Now,  Sir,  allow  me  to  ask  you  why  you  are  so  anxious
about  the  truth  of  clairvoyance,  when  there  are  simple  and
intelligible  points  enough  in  mesmerism  that  you  may  ascer-
tain in  five  minutes  every  day  of  the  year,  and  of  the  highest
importance  to  mankind  m  reference  to  their  bodily  sufferings,
while  you  make  your  fortune  by  attempting  to  alleviate.
Learning  as  you  do,  from  all  quarters,  that  mesmerism  cures
diseases,  sooths  the  tormented,  and  absolutely  prevents  the
agony  of  your  surgical  instruments,  is  it  not  your  solemn
duty  to  ascertain  with  all  earnestness  and  dispatch,  especially
as  the  two  arts  of  medicine  and  surgery  wnich  you  profess
are  most  lamentably  imperfect,  whether  this  be  true  or  not  ?
Believe  me  mesmensm  is  nfD  subject  for  jokes,  sneers,  levity
or  contempt  If  you  are  not  philosopher  enough  to  discover
its  grandeur,  its  mighty  importance  as  a  portion  of  universal
nature,  at  least  let  the  feelings  of  humanity  as  it  is  termed,
and  which  even  the  brutes  so  often  beautifully  display,  prompt

iron  to  ascertain  its  medical  value.  This  would  not  be  the
ess,  were  clairvoyance  proved  a  delusion.  There  might  still
be  humble  useful  iron,  though  gold  were  not  to  be  found.
But  you  exhibit  the  same  range  of  intellect  and  feeling  with
Dr.  Forbes,  who,  like  you,  cries  out  all  day  for  clairvoyance !
clairvoyance !  and  no  more  heeds  the  simpler  and  already
practical  truths  which  surround  him,  than  the  animals  which
rove  the  forest  heed  the  wonders  in  botany,  in  geology,  in
astronomy,  which  are  above  and  below  their  heads  and  around
them.  Thus  Mr.  Liston,  when  he  had  heard  the  details  of
the  Nottinghamshire  amputation  case,  how  mesmerism  had
given  the  poor  sufferer  good  nights,  and  improved  his  health,
and  enabled  him  to  lose  his  leg  without  a  pain,  passed  all
this  by,  and  with  a  stolid  and  unfeeling  look,  which  I  shall
never  forget,  rose  in  the  society  to  say  be  should  be  happy  to
know  if  the  interesting  patient  had  since  the  operation  ''  learnt
to  read  with  his  belly*  *^  His  question  fell  flat — no  one  replied.
Thus  a  Dr.  Lietch  lately  declared  in  public,  that  **  he  regards
clairvoyance  as  the  key  stone  to  mesmerism,  and  that  if  it

*  My  Pamphlet,  p.  56.


4
I


Letter  to  Sir  Philip  Crampton,  Bart.  141

fails  the  whole  structure  falls."* At  the  same  time  I  am
certain  of  the  truth  of  clairvoyance.

*  "  Remarkable  Exposure  qf  an  AtUi-meemerie  Doctor.

"  The  foUowiDg  castigatioD  (reTised  and  abridged  from  the  Leamington
Spa  Courier)  was  recently  adiuinistered  by  Mr.  SpeDcer  T.  Hall.  It  was  at
the  close  of  a  Course  of  Lectures,  before  a  numeroas  and  highly  respectable
aadieoce,  that  Mr.  Hall  came  forward  and  said,  he  held  in  his  hand  a  news-
paper,— the  Warwick  Advertiser  of  Saturday, — upon  a  letter  in  which  not
mesmerism  only,  but  humanity,  demanded  that  he  should  now  make  some
remarks.  That  letter,  entitled  '  Mesmerism  in  a  Dilemma,'  and  signed
'  Scrutator,'  could  not  originally  have  been  intended  for  the  paper  in  which
it  appeared,  but  for  the  Leamington  Courier ^  for  it  began  as  follows :

*  To  the  Editor  of  the  Warwick  AdveHieer

*  Sir, — I  happened  to  be  in  Leamington  in  the  early  part  of  this  year,
when  a  person  named  Donovan  was  lecturing  on  mesmerism,  and  also  on
Wednesday  last,  when  Mr.  Spencer  T.  Hall  gave  his  firit  lecture  on  this
subject.  I  was  amused  and  gratified,  in  common  with  the  visitors  and  inha-
bitants of  your  beautiful  Spa, — (do  any  of  you  know  of  a  Spa  at  Warwick  ?
asked  Mr.  Hall,  amidst  laughter,) — by  the  straight-forward,  prompt,  and
effective  manner  in  which  Dr.  Lietch  exposed  the  hollow  pretensions  of  the
former  lecturer,  and  by  the  manner  in  which  he  followed  it  up,  as  I  saw  by
your  paper,  proving  that  the  four  Leamington  boys  who  exhibited  the  **  phe-
nomena on  that  occasion  were  "  rogues  all."  I  was  glad  to  see  that  the
audience  on  Wednesday  last,  warned,  I  suppose,  by  their  former  mistake,
did  not  attempt  to  hiss  down  the  gentleman  alluded  to.  In  my  own  opinion,
and  it  was  the  opinion  of  many  who  sat  near  me  on  Wednesday  evening,
Mr.  Hall's  exhibition  was  the  most  lame,  ridiculous,  and  transparently
artful,  on  the  part  of  the  boys,  that  could  well  be  shewn  to  an  audience
a-gape  for  wonders.  The  two  young  rogues  should  be  well  whipped,  and
taught  some  honest  way  of  livelihood.  . .  .  Mr.  Hall,  though  evidently  wish-
ing to  shirk  the  subject  of  clairvoyanee,  was  compelled,  by  the  questions  of
the  querist,  to  assert  that  he  believed  in  clairvoyance.  .  .  .  Having  got  all  this
distinctly  asseverated  by  the  lecturer, — as,  indeed,  with  his  book,  and  all
books  on  the  subject,  staring  him  in  the  face,  he  could  not  well  avoid  doing,
— Dr.  Lietch  then  very  ncavely  declared  that,  for  his  part,  he  believed  in
the  old-fashioned  way,  that  people  saw  with  their  eyes,  and  with  nothing
else.'

"  Then  comes  (said  the  speaker)  Dr.  Lietch's  challenge,  with  further
compliments  to  Dr.  Lietch,  and  abuse  of  myself;  and  the  letter  ends  with  a
date  from  *  Leamington.'  Now,  it  will  be  found  in  my  book  of  '  Mesmeric
Experiences,'  which  Dr.  Lietch  says  he  has  read,  that  there  is  a  history  of
my  connection  with  the  cases  of  William  Holbrook  and  Henry  Wigston,  the
youths  alluded  to,  one  of  whom  is  a  native  of  Nottingham,  and  the  other  of
Leicester,  in  which  towns  respectively  they  are  known  to  persons  of  station
and  influence,  who  can  speak  to  their  characters—- characters  in  which  I
know  no  blemish.  I  have  at  my  command,  at  least  four  hundred  cases  In
different  parts  of  the  country,  for  any  one  of  which  I  could  send  on  an  ade-
quate occasion,  but  I  prefer,  at  present,  to  operate  upon  these,  because  I
have  the  most  perfect  faith  in  their  integrity.  *  Scrutator'  has  ventured  to
assert  that  they  are  *  rogues ;'  and,  away  as  they  are  from  their  parents,  by
whom  they  are  entrusted  with  me  as  their  temporary  guardian,  I  have  felt
myself  called  upon  to  repudiate,  in  the  most  emphatic  manner,  such  a  false
imputation  (Cheers).  It  was  in  this  capacity,  and  from  a  due  regard  to  the
feelings  of  Henry  Wigston,  who  is  more  specifically  alluded  to  in  this  gross
libel,  and  to  the  feelings  of  his  parents,  to  whom  his  character  and  future
prospects  are  most  dear,  that  I  called  this  day  upon  Mr.  Sharpe,  the  pub-
lisher of  the  Advertiser,  to  demand  the  name  of  the  author.  Having  myself
been  connected  with  tne  public  press,  for  nearly  sixteen  years,  and  having
in  that  time  been  identified  with  the  management  of  several  leading  provin-


142  Letter  to  Sir  Philip  Crampton,  Bart.,

In  utter  defiance  of  history^  you  begin  ^our  letter  by
asserting  that  animal  magnetism  originated  m  Germany  in

cial  journals,  I  am  not  unaware  of  the  liability  of  an  editor  to  be  imposed
upon  by  unconscientious  contributors.  Although  knowing  that  the  publisher
of  the  paper  was  liable  to  an  action  for  libel,  in  consideration  of  what  I
have  now  stated,  I  felt  that  it  would  be  sufficient  for  the  present  case  if  the
name  of  the  writer  were  given  up  to  me,  that  I  might  deal  with  him  alone.
Calling  upon  the  publisher  (Mr.  Sharpe),  he  told  me  that  he  did  not  know
the  author,  and  argued  somewhat  irrationally  in  extenuation  of  the  libel ;
but  referred  me  to  the  editor  (Mr.  Hersee),  who,  without  hesitation,  and  in
the  most  prompt  and  courteous  manner,  informed  me  that  Dr.  Libtch  him-
self WAS  THE  O0ARANTEB  FOR  ITS  INSERTION  !  (Cheers  and  confusion.)  As
a  further  confirmation  that  it  was  Dr.  Lietch  who  had  thus  been  compliment-
ing and  endeavouring  to  raise  himself,  by  abusing  me  and  my  patients,  I
can  now  repeat  what  I  have  already  stated,  that  the  day  before  that  paper
was  published,  Dr.  L.  used  precisely  the  same  language  to  me  which  he
there  applies  to  the  boys,  against  whom  he  cannot  prove  a  single  act  of  dis-
honesty. In  whom,  then,  is  the  deception  ?  The  boys,  or  Dr.  Lietch  ?
(Cheers,  hisses,  and  signs  of  interruption  from  some  individual  in  the  back
seats.)  Now  all  that  I  require  is,  a  fair  hearing  and  clear  justice.  When
Dr.  Lietch  wrote  that  letter,  I  was  not  there  to  interrupt  him,  nor  will  I
now  be  interrupted  by  any  man  in  my  reply.  Dr.  Lietch  has  complimented
himself  on  the  *natve'  manner  in  which  he  professes  to  have  drawn  me  into
certain  admissions  regarding  clairvoyance ;  and  having  told  us  that  he  re-
gards clairvoyance  as  the  key-stone  to  mesmerism,  and  that  if  it  fails  the
whole  structure  falls,  he  considers  that  he  has  completely  established  his
point.  You  have  most  of  you  heard  the  anecdote  of  *  the  brow-beating  Bar-
rister,' in  Tyas's  Heads  of  the  People,  who,  having  done  all  in  his  power  to
shake  the  testimony  of  a  conscientious  witness  without  success,  boldly  asks
him  if  he  has  ever  been  at  Birmingham  7  Being  answered  in  the  negative,
he  repeats  the  question  with  still  greater  pertinacity,  *  Have  you  never  been
at  Birmingham  f  *  No.'  *  Then  tell  me,  and  remember  you  are  on  your
oath,  have  you  never  been  at  Manchester  V  *  Yes.'  *  There's  a  prevaricat-
ing fellow,  concludes  the  Barrister,  and  turning  to  the  jury  with  a  leer,
Bays,  *  I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  ask  such  a  witness  as  that  any  more
questions.'  Just  such  was  the  course  of  conduct  pursued  by  Dr.  Lietch.
When  I  was  lecturing  upon  a  class  of  phenomena  totally  different  from  clair-
voyance, and  whilst  confessing  that  at  that  time  I  had  no  certain  means  of
illustrating  it,  he  '  iiaiM/y'  drew  me  into  the  simple  admission  that  I  believed
it,  and  then  professed  to  have  disproved  all  the  rest  I  had  shewn,  and  you,
Mr.  Chairman^  and  others  had  tested.  As  well  might  he  have  argued  that
because  clairvoyance  could  not,  in  circumstances  inimical  to  its  develop-
ment, be  proved,  that  would  be  sufficient  evidence  that  James  Wombell's  leg
had  not  been  amputated  without  pain.  Presuming  (and  fairly  too  for  the
reasons  I  have  shewn)  that  Dr.  Lietch,  either  wrote  or  dictated  *  Scrutator's'
lettef,  he  further  compliments  himself,  and  endeavours  to  depreciate  me  and
mesmerism,  by  alluding  to  the'iuiioe'  manner  in  which  he  exposed  Mr.
Donovan  and  his  boys.  Not  being  acquainted  with  Mr.  Donovan,  of  him  in
this  case  I  can  say  nothing ;  but  there  are  gentlemen  of  veracity  and  honour
in  this  room,  at  the  present  moment,  who  have  furnished  me  with  incontro-
vertible documentary  evidence  as  to  the  trap  baited  by  Dr.  Lietch  to  catch
one  or  more  of  the  boys ;  gentlemen  who  will  come  forward  and  support  it
with  their  names  should  it  be  questioned.  After  these  boys  had  been  mes-
merised by  Mr.  Donovan,  Dr.  Lietch  took  a  policeman.  (Cries  of  '  no,  no.')
Well  there  was  one  present  at  Dr.  Lietch's  house,  as  if  in  attendance  to
apprehend  a  criminal.  [Mr.  H.  Young  here  exclaimed,  '  Only  part  of  the
time.'  This  observation  was  followed  by  mingled  cheers  and  jeers.]  Mr.
Hall  contioued  :  Be  it  so — *  only  part  of  the  time.'  That  a  policeman  was
there,  with  handcuffs,  is  established  by  the  fact  that  he  received  a  fee  for
his  services,  and  was  subsequently  reprimanded  by  his  superior  for  taking


fnm  Dr.  EUioiBon.  143

the  early  part  of  last  century,  and  has  lately  been  imported
into  this  coantry,  subjoining  that ''  such  at  least  is  the  general

any  part  in  the  traosaotion  (Cheera).  By  iray  qf  invaHdoHng  metmerUm^
t}r»  Lieteh  then  ioid  otu  qf  the  60y«,  t»  a  »Um  manner,  that  if  fce  did  noi  eon-
feu  thai  he  had  been  tricking  tkose  vho  believed  in  meMmeriem^  (the  handeuffe
having  been  displayed  before  hie  eyes,)  he  would  be  taken  to  gaol.  (Sensation.)
4fier  this  ca^fe$nom,  thue  wrung  from  him,  he  received  from  Dr,  Lieteh  five
^lUnge  as  a  reward  for  his  delinqueney.  (More  sensation.)  You  have  all
heard  of  Jonathan  Wild,  the  thief-trapper,  who  to  satisfy  his  own  selfish
ends,  bribed  Jack  Sheppard  and  others  into  one  crime,  and  frightened  them
into  another,  that  he  might  afterwards  receive  the  benefit  of  their  conTiction.
^Hear,  hear,  and  hisses.)  Is  not  Dr.  Lieteh,  so  far  as  science  is  concerned^
in  a  position  strictly  analogous  to  this?  (Cheers.)  Have  we  not  many  in-
stances in  the  history  of  our  race,  not  of  merely  poor  uneducated  boys,  hut
of  great  men,  who  for  years  have  endured  the  severest  persecution  rather
than  relinquish  a  faith  upon  which  they  believed  the  eternal  salvation  of  their
souls  to  depend,  but  who  at  last  have  been  driven  by  fear  of  the  screw,  and'
other  tortures,  to  confess  to  imaginary  crimes  rather  than  incur  the  pains  and
obloquy  of  further  persecution  ?  And  may  it  not,  therefore,  have  followed
that  the  boy  to  whom  I  have  alluded,  with  the  handcoflsand  gaol  before  his
eyes,  and  with  no  extraordinary  degree  of  moral  courage  to  sustain  him,
was,  by  the  stimulation  of  his  fears,  and  the  other  means  used  on  this  occa-
sion, driven  into  betraying  his  conscience,  unjustly  to  mesmerism,  and  for
the  gratification  of  its  opponents  ?  And  let  me  ask  whether  or  not,  if  a  pro-
fessor of  mesmerism  had  ever  employed  similar  means  to  induce  a  boy  thus
to  belie  himself  in  his  favour,  any  man  would  have  been  more  ready  to  con-
demn, and  to  hold  him  up  to  shame,  than  Dr.  Lieteh  f  (Cheers.)  There  is
at  the  present  time  in  Leamington  a  document,  signed  by  the  same  boy,  in
the  presence  of  a  gentleman  of  the  highest  respectability,  in  which  he  avers
that  he  really  had  been  put  into  an  abnormal  condition  by  mesmerism  by  that
gentleman,  subsequently  to  the  scene  at  Dr.  Lietch's,  and  further  that  he  had
been  induced  to  confess  what  he  had  done  there,  aUhamgh  that  confession  was
false,  by  the  fear  qf  the  punishment,  and  the  hope  qf  a  promised  bribe  from  his
tempter  and  eonvictor—Vr.  Lictch  I (Cheers.)"

Just  a  similar  occurrence  took  place  at  University  College  Hospital.  A
poor  girl  had  been  mesmerised  by  Dr.  Wilson  at  the  Middlesex  Hospital,
and  exhibited,  as  1  can  vouch,  many  exquisite  phenomena.  She  afterwards
went  to  University  College  Hospital,  under  Dr.  A.  P.  Thompson.  He
threatened  her  with  the  police,  &c.  &c.,  and  terrified  the  poor  creature  so
that  she  confessed  she  had  shammed  at  the  Middlesex :  and  was  allowed  to
leave  the  hospital.  But  she  went  to  Dr.  Wilson  and  detailed  the  whole
affair,  stating  that  the  violent  threats  of  the  doctor  and  his  nephew  had  ter-
rified her  into  saying  anything  they  wished  in  order  to  escape  from  them.

The  following  is  an  extract  from  Dr.  A.  F.  Thompson's  hospital  case
book : —

'*  14th.  It  being  suspected  that  the  fits,  and  shaking  of  the  right  arm,
he,  were  feigned,  and  it  being  desirous  to  ascertain  the  truth  as  to  the  mes-
meric effects  produced  upon  her  at  the  Middlesex  Hospital,  Dr.  A.  F.  T.,
with  a  view  to  detection,  ordered  mesmerism  to  be  employed  for  a  week.
All  medicines  were  omitted.

"  She  was  mesmerised  this  afternoon,  and  went  to  sleep  in  twenty  minutes.
To  test  the  reality  of  the  sleep,  the  bystanders  invented  various  phenomena
which  they  asserted  were  always  displayed  by  Okey  when  subjected  to  cer-
tain manipulations.  These  manipulations  were  then  performed  upon  Lucy
Morley,  she  being  apparently  in  a  state  of  perfect  insensibility,  and  in
every  instance  the  effects  followed ;  thus,  for  instance,  when  it  was  said  that
Okey's  eyes  were  opened  by  rubbing  in  one  direction,  and  shut  by  rubbing
in  another,  and  Morley's  eyes  were  rubbed  in  the  stated  directions,  they
opened  and  shut  as  expected.  In  this  manner  she  was  made  to  breathe
quickly  or  slowly,  to  shake  the  right  or  left  arm,  the  right  or  left  leg,  to


144  Letter  to  Sir  PMlip  Cramptm,  Bart.

opinion."  Now  Mesmer  was  born  in  1734,  and  practised
animal  magnetism  first  in  1773.

You  stigmatize  Mesmer  as  an  empiric.  In  what  do  you
differ  from  him  ?  He  performed  wonderful  cures  for  money,
so  of  course  do  you :  and  you  will  die  a  far  richer  man  than
Mesmer.  If  he  often  failea  to  cure,  so  do  you  e^ery  day  of
your  life,  receiving  ample  fees  without  bestowing  benefit.
He  employed  means  without  knowing  more  than  the  fact  of
their  power;  so  do  you.  You  cannot  tell  why  a  single  medi-
cine you  employ  acts  as  it  does.  You  cannot  tell  why  your
ipecacuanha  makes  your  patients  sick,  your  rhubarb  excites
their  bowels,  or  your  opium  stupifies  them.  You  assert,  in
justice  to  Mesmer  you  say.  that  our  doctrines  and  practices
form  no  part  of  his  system.  I  know  of  no  doctrines  enter-
tained  by  the  mass  of  us  but  the  facts  which  we  witness,  and
which,  being  in  our  senses,  we  believe.  You  declare  that  he
employed  powerful  magnets  for  his  cures,  whereas  we  do  not.
Now  before  you  write  mesmeric  history,  you  ought  to  know
that  Mesmer,  who  derived  his  views  from  English  and  Ger-
man writers  of  the  three  preceding  centuries,  did  actually  in
1776,  the  very  third  year  of  his  new  treatment  of  diseases,

five  up  the  use  of  magnets  furnished  to  him  by  Hehl,  the
esuit  and  professor  of  astronomy  at  Vienna,  ana  employed,
as  we  do,  manipulations  and  simply  the  powers  of  our  own
human  frame.  Additions  to  our  knowledge  have  been  made
since  his  time  :  but  that  no  more  prevents  us  from  being  his
followers,  than  the  discoveries  of  Herschel  renders  modern
astronomers  no  longer  followers  of  Galileo.  If  he  fancied  a
magnetic  fluid,  so  do  some  at  the  present  day, though

draw  up  the  arms  or  legs,  to  wake  np  or  go  into  delirium,  aod  to  display  all
the  phenomena  of  '  traction.'

*'  i5th.  The  experiments  were  tried  again  to-day  with  the  same  success,
in  addition  she  was  made  to  prophecy  in  the  prophetic  state.  She  sat  with
her  legs  crossed,  fas  the  bystanders  mentioned  that  Oiiey  did  so,)  and  saw
a  black  man  with  black  hair,  dressed  in  black  clothes,  who  ordered  her  to
be  bled  immediately.

*'  17th.  To-day  most  of  the  former  experiments  were  repeated  ;  in  addi-
tion she  was  led  to  believe  that  Okey  was  always  thrown  into  fits  by  rubbing
the  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth,  and  that  the  fits  were  stopped  by  pinch-
ing  the  chin.  Accordingly  when  the  inside  of  the  mouth  was  rubbed  with
the  forefinger  or  with  metals,  she  acted  most  violent  fits  in  a  very  superior
style ;  the  fits  were  suspended  by  pinching  the  chin.  After  this  she  endured
witkaui  evincing  any  sennbUiiy  the  most  severe  pinehee^  jnMing  qf  the  hair,
ATTEMPTS  TO  RAISE  THE  NAIL  FROM  THE  FINGERS,  pricking  wUh  a  ptJi,  and  veTy
intenee  shocke  given  her  by  an  electro-magnetic  machine.  Dr.  A.  F.  T.  consider-
ing that  no  more  experiments  were  necessary,  put  an  end  to  the  exhibition
by  charging  her  with  the  imposition,  and  exhorting  her  to  confess,  which
she  did  as  far  as  the  mesmeric  phenomena  were  concerned,  but  persisted  in
declaring  that  she  could  not  help  the  fits. --Discharged  cured."

The  girl  was  no  doubt  in  sleep-waking,  and  did  all  the  acts  madly  by
suggestion,  forgetting  them  on  returning  to  her  natural  state.


/rom  Dr.  Ettiotsm.  145

many  of  us  do  not  venture  upon  this  hypothesis,  and  speak
only  of  a  power,  without  fancying  its  essence  or  regarding  it  as
more  than  one  of  the  properties  of  matter  in  certain  condi-
tions and  circumstances.

You  assert  that  the  French  commissioners  ascribed  all  the
influence  to  imagination ;  whereas  what  they  witnessed  at  the
house  of  his  pupil.  Dr.  Eslon,  shamefully  refusing  to  see
Mesmer's  own  facts,  they  ascribed  to  imagination,  touching^
and  imitation  :  and  they  were  nearly  right,  though  the  touch-
ing exerted  a  power  independent  or  all  sense  of  touch,  and  not
conceived  by  them.  Imagination  has  astonishing  influence
upon  mesmeric  patients ;  and  imitation  likewise,  when  pa-
tients are  allowed  to  be  together.

You  next  inform  us  that  '^  Mesmer  died,  and  with  him
died  his  art."  Now  Mesmer  died  in  1815,  and  his  pupil,  the
Marques  de  Puysegur,  published  works  upon  mesmerism  and
practised  it  from  1784  to  1824  :  his  pupil,  Deleuze,from  1813
to  1829  :  the  year  after,  Mr.  Chenevix  practised  upon  several
of  my  patients  in  St.  Thomas's  Hospital.*  There  has  been
continued  existence  from  1776  to  1846,  as  you  might  know
by  merely  looking  into  an  excellent  book  so  commonly  known
as  Foissac's  Rapports^  and  the  numbers  of  The  2!oisL

You  then  write  that  you  determined  upon  an  honest
and  satisfactory  course,  and  upon  a  searching  experi-
mental enquiry,  having  **  witnessed  experiments  of  mesmer-
ism conducted  by  the  most  celebrated  professors  at  home  and
abroad,"  but  that  they  were  unsatisfactory,  "  because  the
parties  operated  upon  were  either  confessedly  the  associates
or  pupils,  not  to  say  confederates,  of  the  magnetizers ;"  meanly
adaing,  '^  or  they  might  have  been,  for  anything  I  knew  to
the  contrary."  You  dare  to  suggest  that  the  patients  I  be-
stowed two  hours  and  a  half  on  two  different  days  to  shew
you,  in  company  with  only  a  few  persons,  were  my  confede-
rates !  I  will  remind  you  of  what  took  place.  Sir  J.  Courcy
de  Lafian,  after  witnessing  the  phenomena  of  the  Okeys,  wrote
to  me  to  request  I  would  give  you  an  opportunity  of  wit-
nessing my  facts.  You  witnessed  them  for  two  hours  and
a  half.  I  then  received  a  letter  from  Sir  J.  C.  L.,  saying
that

"The  Surgeon-General  Crampton  was  greatly  struck  by  all  that
he  saw  the  other  day,  and  wishes  very  much  to  make  further  en-
quiries into  the  phenomc;pa  of  magnetism  under  your  guidance.  He
therefore  requested  me  to  say  that  he  would  be  greatly  obliged  to
you,  if  you  could  make  it  convenient  to  give  him  a  meeting  at  the
Hospital,  on  Monday  next,  at  your  usual  hour  of  three  o'clock. He

*  ZoUi,  Vol.  I.,  p.  68.

VOL.  IV.  L


146  Letter  to  Sir  PhUip  Cramptan,  Bart.,

is  obliged  to  name  an  earl^  day  as  his  time  in  London  is  limited,  and
the  time  of  his  departure  is  fixed.  Therefore,  mj  dear  Sir,  by  fixing
on  Monday  for  the  meeting,  you  will  afford  a  very  sensible,  dispas^
sionate,  and  enquiring  man,  the  only  opportunity  he  may  ever  have,
of  carrying  on  the  investigation,  under  the  control  of  your  enlightened
experience,  and  enlarged  views."

I  had  spent  two  or  three  hours  in  demonstrating  the
exquisite  effects  of  mesmerised  gold,  silver^  water,  kc.^  of
iron,  traction,  and  various  manipulations  upon  the  Okeys.
Your  astonishment  was  extreme,  and  at  your  request  I  be-
stowed the  same  time  upon  you  again,  and  allowed  you  to
make  the  experiments  yourself  that  you  might  have  full  satis-
faction. At  the  close,  Sir  Joseph  Laffan  asked  if  you  were
satisfied  of  the  truth  of  all  you  had  seen.  You  replied,
''perfectly."  He  then  asked,  knowing  you,  I  have  no  doubt,
better  than  I  did  then,  '^  But  will  you  say  so  when  you  get
back  to  Dublin  ?"  "  I  will,"  was  your  reply,  in  the  hearing
of  us  all.

I  will  refresh  your  memory  from  the  Lancet  of  1838,  by
some  passages  in  the  deputy  coroner's  (Mr.  George  Mills)
reports,  which  are  perfectly  true.

**  The  opinion  of  the  Surgeon-General  of  Ireland,  Mr.  Crampton,
also,  after  two  investigations,  on  the  7th  and  9th  of  July,  occupying
each  nearly  three  hours,  into  phenomena  exhibited  by  Elizabeth
Okey,  has  been  pronounced  in  favour  of  the  perfect  honesty  of  the
somnambulist,  and  the  reality  of  the  extraordinary  events  which
occurred  on  those  occasions."  p.  549.

"  Being  stupified  by  holding  some  object,  the  money,  or  glass,
or  whatever  else,  it  is  rigidly  grasped.  If  a  hand  be  then  pointed  to
the  girl's  fingers  for  a  few  seconds,  they  relax,  and  drop  the  object.
After  several  evidences  of  this  fact,  Mr.  Crampton  remarked  that
*  he  had  never  in  his  life  seen  any  effect  more  perfectly  demonstrated.' "
p.  587.

'*  She  was  now  put  to  sleep,  and  nothing  could  be  greater  than
the  contrast  between  the  sedateness  of  the  state  from  which  she  had
passed,  and  the  lively,  acute,  saucy  manner  of  the  ensuing  delirium.
Nor  could  anything  be  more  opposite  than  the  manner  of  the  delirium
and  the  quiet,  amiable,  invalid  demeanour  of  the  state  in  which  she
returned  to  the  ward.  Before  retiring,  however,  Mr.  Crampton  was
shown  the  convulsions  producible  by  placing  drops  of  magnetised
water  on  her  shoulders,  the  aloe  of  the  nose,  the  lips,  the  brows,  the
hands,  and,  lastly,  from  touching  the  naked  eyeball.  The  demoniac-
looking  convulsions  of  the  face  produced  by  this  latter  proceeding
were  remarkable  ;  the  eyes  stared  almost  to  starting,  and  the  head
\i  as  twisted  on  the  neck  in  every  direction,  and  when  the  agitation
was  soothed  by  mesmerism,  the  jaw  was  found  firmly  locked.  *  There
couM  not,*  Mr.  Crampton  said,  *be  the  least  question  of  the  truth
of  tiiese  effects.' She  was  returned  into  the  natural  state  by  Dr.


from  Dr.  EUiotsan.  147

EUiotson  and  Mr.  Wood  simultaneously  breathing  upon  the  face.
'  It  is  too  absurd/  Mr.  Crampton  observed,  at  the  close  of  the  expe-
rimentSj  '  to  deny  that  these  phenomena  are  real.  She  has  manifested
a  series  of  the  most  sudden  and  extraordinary  changes,  probably,
that  were  ever  seen  in  one  person  in  the  same  mterval.  Indeed,  in
every  transition  from  one  state  to  another  that  I  have  ever  seen  in
any  other  patient  or  person,  there  has  always  been  a  nuance ;  but
here  there  is  not  the  slightest,  however  great  the  change,  or  however
frequent.* "  p.  588.

"  In  one  experiment  to-day,  two  pieces  of  money  among  twelve
were  strongly  magnetised,  under  the  oirection  of  Mr.  Crampton.  Of
the  whole  twelve  these  two  alone  put  her  to  sleep,  and  their  effect
was  so  great,  that  the  hands  did  not  unclose  when  the  sleep  come  on,
but  convulsions  of  the  arms  and  eyes  ensued,  and  persisted  until  the
sovereigns  were  released  from  her  grasp.  '  There  could  be  no  arrange-
ment here,'  Mr.  C.  observed,  in  stating  which  two  pieces  he  had
handled ;  *  it  was  perfectly  accidental  how  many  I  took  up.  Nothing
ooidd  be  more  uniform  than  the  results  of  those  experiments.' "  p.  589.

"  Mr.  Crampton  then  tried  some  experiments  with  watches  which
had,  and  others  which  had  not,  been  held  in  his  hand.  In  each
instance  the  former  stupified  her  and  the  latter  did  not.  *  These,'
he  afterwards  remarked,  'were  as  fair  experiments  as  ever  were
made.  She  could  not  have  had  the  least  idea  of  what  I  was  doing.
It  is  impossible  that  anything  could  be  fairer.  Nothing  in  physiology
can  be  more  interesting.' "  p.  589.

And  you  kept  your  promise  at  first.  But  soon  a  laugh  was
raised  against  you,  and  being  a  worldly  fashionable  practi-
tioner,  happy  in  the  smiles  of  the  great,  and  not  a  humble
student  and  devotee  of  nature,  you  could  not  bear  to  be
laughed  at  by  the  ignorant,  and  published  the  following
letter  in  the  Freeman's  Jowmal:

"  Sir, — In  the  FreemarCa  Journal  of  the  20th  July  last,  there  is  a
paragraph  (copied  I  believe  from  a  provincial  paper)  in  which  I  am
represented  as  having  'avowed  myself  a  convert  to  the  extraordinary
and  inexplicable  doctrine  of  animal  magnetism.'

**  Without  dwelling  on  the  absurdity,  if  not  the  impossibility,  of
becoming  a  convert  to  'an  inexplicable  doctrine,'  I  beg  to  assure  you
that  the  statement  is  without  the  slightest  foundation.

"  That  very  extraordinary  affections  of  the  nervous  system,  may
in  certain  instances  be  excited  by  (so  called)  animal  magnetism,  is  a
fact  which  I  believe  no  medical  man  is  incUned  to  dispute;  but  from
the  doctrines  founded  on  this  fact,  (as  set  forth  in  the  treatises
which  I  have  seen  on  the  subject,)  I  totally  dissent.

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be,

"Philip  Crampton.
"Merrion  Square,  Aug.  1st,  1838."

This  you  desired  a  friend  to  shew  me  in  the  following
letter :

l2


148  Letter  to  Sir  Philip  Qrampton,  Bart.,

"  Merrion  Square,  Feb.  Srd,  1839.

*'  Mj  dearest  -^ ,  Pray  lose  no  time  in  transmitting  the  enclosed

to  Dr.  Elliotson;  he  is  far  too  sensible  and  too  liberal  a  man  not  to  per-
ceive at  once,  and  without  any  commenting  of  mine,  that  I  have  said
nothing  in  my  letters  inconsistent  virith  those  feelings  of  admiration
and  respect,  virhich  I  have  ever  entertained  and  avowed  for  his
talents,  integrity,  and  boldness.

**  He  will  not,  I  am  sure,  think  that  I  am  the  less  sensible  of  the
kind  attention  which  I  experienced  from  him  in  London,  because
I  cannot  go  the  length  of  adopting  his  opinion  on  a  subject  on  which
I  am  profoundly  ignorant,  and  on  which  would  require  more  time
than  I  can  ever  hope  to  command,  in  order  to  arrive  at  anything  ap-
proaching to  knowledge.  "  I  am,  dearest

"  Affectionately  yours,

"  P.  Cramfton."

Now  I  broached  no  "  doctrines,"  I  uttered  no  ^*  opinion"
to  you  :  I  simply  shewed  you  facts,  produced  by  certain
measures;  and  left  you  to  judge  if  they  were  facts,  and  if
they  resulted  from  certain  measures.  You  did  distinctly  at  the
time  allow  both,  and  inoreover  in  your  public  letter  said  that
"  very  extraordinary  affections  may  in  certain  individuals  be
excited  by  so-called  animal  magnetism."  But  this  is  all  I
have  ever  said — and  yet  you  cannot  go  the  length  of  my
opinions  !  So  disgusted  was  I,  that  a  year  or  two  ago,  meet-
ing you  one  morning  at  a  party  at  King's  College,  I  pointedly
avoided  you  every  time  I  found  myself  near  you.  You  at
length  came  up  to  me,  and,  finding  I  did  not  notice  you,
politely  told  me  that  you  were  Sir  Philip  Crampton;  on
which,  calmly  looking  you  in  the  face,  I  merely  replied,*' Yes.
I  believe  I  spent  some  hours  on  two  different  days  to  demon-
strate mesmeric  facts  to  you  :'*  and  without  another  word  I
walked  from  you.  You  shewed  that  you  felt  this,  but  uttered
not  a  word ;  nor  did  I  eyer  hear  of  you  afterwards.

After  asserting  that  my  patients  might  have  been  my  con-
federates, you  continue :

"  On  one  occasion,  in  Hanover  Square  Rooms,  a  young  woman
(one  of  the  audience,)  upon  much  persuasion  on  the  part  of  her
friends,  and  the  most  energetic  assurances,  on  the  part  of  the  pro-
fessor, that  she  should  not  be  put  to  the  smallest  pain  or  inconve-
nience, was  induced  to  submit  herself  to  the  operation.  She  exhibited
several  extraordinary  mesmeric  phenomena,  such  as  inflexible  rigidity
of  the  limbs,  insensibility  to  the  effluvia  of  ammonia,  and  to  the
punctures  of  pins,  &c. ;  but  the  effect  of  this  exhibition  was  conside-
rably weakened  when  I  discovered  that  this  novice,  taken  by  chance
from  the  audience,  was  an  old  acquaintance,  whom  I  had  seen  exhibit
the  very  same  phenomena  four  years  before  under  the  hands  of
M.  Dupotet."


frmi  Dr.  EUiotson.  140

Now  these  are  the  facts.  When  I  was  curing  patients  at  ^
University  College  Hospital  wonderfully  and  at  no  expense,
Mr.  Wollaston,  a  practitioner  at  Tottenham,  sent  me  up  a
very  nice  girl  afflicted  with  severe  epilepsy.  She  was  cured
by  M.  Dupotety  and  in  her  mesmeric  state  exhibited  many
wonderful  phenomena.  After  this,  M.  Dupotet  prevailed
upon  her,  though  with  difficulty,  to  allow  him  to  mesmerise
her  at  his  demonstrations  in  his  own  house.  Long  after  his
departure,  M.  De  la  Fontaine  exhibited  a  French  youth,
whose  case  was  genuine  and  striking :  but  he  wanted  another
subject,  and  I  thought  of  Sophia  Clark,  and  wrote  to  Mr.  Wol-
laston,  who  prevailed  upon  her  to  accompany  him  to  me  one
morning  of  M.  De  la  F.'s  exhibitions.  I  mesmerised  her,
found  her  still  susceptible,  and  she  went  after  great  entreaty
with  Mr.  Wollaston  to  the  Hanover  Square  Rooms, — not  as
one  of  the  audience,  but  on  the  platform  as  one  to  be  exhi-
bited. She  was  very  reluctant,  as  the  room  was  public  and
crowded,  and  M.  De  la  F.  a  stranger  to  her.  But  on  Mr.
Wollaston's  assurance  that  he  would  remain  with  her  and
protect  her  from  all  ijnjury  in  her  sleep,  she  at  length  con-
sented to  be  sent  off.  This  is  the  true  history,  and  I  entered
the  room  just  before  the  experiments  were  finished,  and  heard
ou  announce  your  wonderful  discovery  that  you  had  seen
er  mesmerised  before  by  M.  Dupotet.  How  this  could
weaken  the  effect  of  the  facts  which  you  allow, — **  the  several
very  extraordinary  mesmeric  phenomena,  such  as  inflexible
rigidity  of  the  limbs,  insensibility  to  the  effluvia  of  ammonia,
and  to  the  punctures  of  pins,  &c.," — I  am  unable  to  judge.
She  was  and  is  a  most  respectable  young  woman,  and  a
younger  sister  has  been  epileptic  too.

You  say  you  were  manipulated  yourself,  as  well  as  several
of  your  friends,  but  with  no  effect.  Why  so  have  I,  by
many:  and  I  have  mesmerised  three  persons  daily  for  half  an
hour  for  months  without  effect.  What  is  one  trial,  or  two,
or  fifty?  Some  persons  have  never  in  all  their  lives  felt
sick  on  going  to  sea :  some  of  your  ordinary  patients  have
told  me  that  your  medicines  never  lessened  their  diseases.
What  of  that  ?  Is  there  no  balm  in  Gilead  or  any  where  else,
because  none  grows  in  one  garden  ?  You  then  attended  some
private  experiments  where  collusion  was  impossible:  and  a
clairvoyant  that  day  happened  not  to  be  clairvoyant,  pos-
sibly because  of  your  sceptical  presence.  Some  trials  were
made  of  touching  over  cerebral  organs,  and  then  suggest-
ing another  feeling  or  idea  by  saying  something.  Truly
a  most  sagacious  proceeding !  The  feelings  are  often  so
excitable  in  the  mesmeric  state  that  suggestion,  imagination.


I


150  Letter  to  Sir  Philip  Crampton,  Bart.,

has  a  powerful  effect,  and  I  have  stated  that  you  may  suggest
a  feeliug  or  idea  by  touching  the  nose  or  chin.  If  a  patient
is  thus  excitable,  and  the  organs  not  excitable  or  less  excit-
able by  the  mesmeric  means  of  touching  or  pointing  over  them,
a  wrong  effect  may  be  prod  uced  at  pleasure .  These  experiments
should  be  made  in  perfect  silence,  on  a  person  ignorant  of
cerebral  physiology,  and  if  possible  by  pointing.  You  should
read  what  I  have  said  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  239.

Despairing  of  satisfaction  of  tne  truth  of  mesmerism  after
being  so  satisfied  in  my  hospital  in  1838,  you  have  contrived
the  present  bank-note  test.  But  I  trust  no  clairvoyant  will  allow
himself  to  be  so  tested.  Let  all  remember  how  you  served  me
after  clear  protestation  and  promises.  Let  all  remember  the
incorrect  statements  in  your  present  letter.  Let  all  remember
that  you  have  made  the  matter  unlikely  to  succeed.  The  note
is  folded  up,  so  that  one  word  may  be  in  one  fold,  another  in
another,  and  the  words  will  lie  on  each  other :  and  as  if  the
words  on  the  note  were  not  enough,  you  have  added  others  on
a  slip  of  paper,  probably  folded  hkewise :  on  the  envelope  are
more  words,  through  wnich  the  words  of  the  folded  paper  are
to  be  seen,  and  then  through  all  these  words,  the  words  of
the  note  also  lying  one  upon  the  other  in  its  folds.  You  ought
to  have  been  contented  with  writing  one  or  two  words,  and,
not  folding  them,  placing  them  in  a  thick  envelope.''^ But

*  Ad  excellent  answer  to  Sir  P.  Crampton's  letter  has  appeared  in  the
CheUenham  Free  Press,  March  28,  from  which  I  extract  the  following  facts :

**  We  now  come  to  the  offer  of  the  £100  note.  It  is  required  that  the
clainroyant  should  describe  all  the  particulars  of  the  note  or  bill,  including
number,  signature,  &c.,  and  also  read  three  English  words.  Now  to  those
who  have  not  seen  many  clairvoyant  cases,  this  appears  to  be  a  noble  offer —
an  extremely  fair  challenge — and  an  experiment  that  mesmerisers  ought  to
be  quite  satisfied  with.  And  so  ought  they,  did  they  ever  assert  clairvoyance
to  be  a  perfect  faculty.  Alexis,  one  of  the  most  successful  instances  of  its
manifestations  missed  the  prize  offered  in  France,  because  he  could  only
make  out  the  word  '  potuit'  which  he  said  was  the  third  word  of  a  latin
sentence.  Now  here  was  quite  sufficient  to  prove  his  possession  of  the  dis-
puted faculty,  but  not  enough  to  win  the  money.  Again,  I  heard  him  once
describe  a  £5  Bank  of  England  note  enclosed  in  a  piece  of  paper.  On  one
side  of  the  paper  there  was  written  an  account  of  what  it  contained,  and  on
the  other  side  the  letters  A  :  W  :  the  whole  placed  in  a  flexible  leather  card-
case,  which  was  wrapped  in  paper  and  sealed  ;  this  parcel  was  presented
to  Alexis  by  a  sceptical  medical  practitioner.  Alexis  said  that  the  parcel
contained  two  sorts  of  paper  and  that  there  was  both  writing  and  printing
in  it ;  he  then  took  a  pencil  and  wrote  on  a  piece  of  paper  the  letters  A  :  W  :
which  was  written  inside,  and  which  he  wrote  with  a  colon  after  each  letter ;
he  said  the  packet  also  contained  a  miniature  of  the  Queen  in  ink,  with
flowers  round  it,  and  that  he  could  make  out  the  word  '  Angland ;'  if  any  one
would  take  the  trouble  of  folding  a  £5  note  three  times ;  he  will  find  the
figure  of  Britannia  uppermost,  and  at  the  last  fold  immediately  behind  the
figure,  the  word  '  England'  present  itself.  This  partial  success,  although  in
my  opinion  sufficient  to  convince  any  reasonable  man,  was  not  enough  to
have  gained  the  £100. Had  there  been  collusion  in  this  case,  why  did  he


frwn  Dr,  Elliotsan.  151

why  be  anxious  about  clairvoyance, — a  myBteriouB,  a  compa-
ratively rare  and  uncertain  phenomenon  ?  Why  not  ascertain
whether  the  elementary  facts  of  sleep-waking,  rigidity,  in-
sensibility, &c.,  are  real  phenomena  r  Why  not  ascertain
whether  mesmerism  prevents  pain  in  torturing  surgical  ope-
rations and  cures  diseases  for  which  you  are  hourly  taking
money  for  vain  attempts  to  cure  or  even  alleviate?  And
why  not  make  all  these  trials  yourself,  as  Dr.  Esdaile
did,  instead  of  writing  letters  characterized  by  error,  super-
ficiality and  flippancy,  and  scraps  of  poetry  ?  This  is  your
duty.

You  terminate  your  letter  with  a  miserable  remark  :

''I  must,  however,  just  observe,  in  conclusion,  that  I  find  it
difficult  to  reconcile  all  these  facts  of  mesmerisers  with  the  generally
received  notions  of  moral  liberty,  and  consequent  accountability:
perhaps  the  Archbishop  of  Dublin  may  be  able  to  do  so.  I'll  see
about  it  to-morrow."

You  must  be  sadly  at  a  loss,  sadly  uneasy,  to  stoop  to  this
meanness.  The  distinguished  archbishop  is  said  to  be  a  be-
liever in  mesmerism  and  the  true  cerebral  physiology  called
phrenology  :  and  therefore  this  hit  at  his  Grace.  Among  all
philosophers  it  is  now  agreed  that  truth  only  shall  guide  us :
that  all  alleged  consequences  are  to  be  disregarded,  if  a  thing
can  be  proved  true.  To  talk  of  consequences  in  the  investi-
gation of  truth  is  always  the  mean  artifice  of  one  who  is
conscious  that  his  arguments  fail  him.  Will  you  inform
the  world  what  is  moral  liberty, — what  is  accountability  :  and
whether  mesmeric  facts  oppose  the  idea  of  free  will, — that
is,  will  with  a  necessary  and  irresistible  cause,  and  support
accountability,  that  is,  the  taking  the  consequences  of  con-
duct as  results  ensuing  upon  our  deeds  by  the  immutable
laws  of  nature, — any  more  than  any  other  facts  in  the  human
constitution  ?  The  writer  in  the  Cheltenham  paper  closes  his
answer  thus :

*'  Scrutator*  demands  how  the  phenomena  of  phreno-magnetism
can  be  reconciled  with Hhe  received  notions  of  moral  agency.'


not  describe  the  whole  7  If  there  was  Done,  was  the  A:  W:  with  the  colons
a  lucky  guess?"

The  writer  also  has  the  following  sentence ;  whether  he  refers  to  Sir  P.  C.
or  Dr.  Forbes,  I  know  not :

*'  A  writer  against  mesmerism  expresses  his  conviction  of  the  whole  of
animal  magnetism  being  a  delusion ;  the  same  writer,  in  privatej  declares
his  conviction  that  there  is  a  real  and  powerful  agent  operating;  will  Scru-
tator maintain  that  such  discrepance  between  the  jmblished  and  prit?ate  opi-
nion is  conformable  to  '  the  generally  received  notions  of  moral  rectitude  V  **

*  Sir  P.  C.  so  signs  himself  instead  of  putting  his  name  like  a  man.


152  Postscript  to  Miss  Hole's  case.

Will  he  be  so  good  as  to  explain  what  are  the  received notionsl  Are
they  such  as  he  can  reconcile  with  the  well-known  effects  produced
by  strong  liquors,  intoxicating  drugs,  and  some  other  powerful  medi-
cines, which  we  know  are  not  seldom  administered  secretly  for  the
worst  purposes  ?

'^In  conclusion,  allow  me  to  suppose  the  following  case.  A
writer  against  mesmerism  expresses  his  conviction  of  the  whole  of
animal  magnetism  being  a  delusion;  the  same  writer  in  private
declares  his  conviction  that  there  is  a  real  and  powerful  agent  operat-
ing. Will  Scrutator  maintain  that  such  discrepance  between  the
published  and  private  opinion  is  conformable  to  *  the  generally  re-
ceived notions  of  moral  rectitude  ?'  "

The  writer  might  also  have  asked  how  deep  is  the  feel-
ingy  which  Scrutator  possesses,  of  "  accountalnlity  ?'^

I  have  the  honor  to  remain^  &c.  &c.,

John  Elliotson.

Postscript  to  Mr.  Luxmoore^s  account  of  Miss  Holers  Case,

at  p.  52.

London,  March  20,  1846.
Being  aniious  to  learn  whether  Misa  Hole's  prediction  was  verified,  I
wrote  to  Mr.  Luxmoore;  bat  as  I  directed  to  Alphington  only,  ivithout  the
addition  of  Exeter  or  Devon,  my  letter  travelled  half  over  England,  and  did
not  reach  the  gentleman  till  yesterday. The  following  is  his  ansv^er.

J.  Elliotson.

During  Miss  Hole's  sleefHwaking,  on  the  3rd  of  March,
after  the  spasms  had  ceased,  she  said,  ^'  I  shall  have  another
attack  of  spasms  on  the  9th,  when  I  must  be  again  bled  to
the  entire  of  half  a  pint,  (on  the  7th  she  corrected  this,  saying,
three  parts  of  a  pint  would  be  necessary) ;  the  spasms  will  be
just  as  severe  as  to-night,  but  will  not  last  so  long.  I  shall
not  retain  much  food  on  my  stomach  until  Thursday  morning.
I  should  always  be  mesmerised  the  following  day  as  well  as
at  the  time  caustic  is  applied,  I  should  then  derive  much  more
benefit."  Miss  H.  then  added,  ''  If  I  am  not  bled  I  shall
have  palsy  of  the  left  side  of  the  head  and  left  eye,  and  I
should  lose  the  hearing  in  the  left  ear ;  if  it  were  even  omitted
for  one  day  this  would  take  place.  The  spasms  on  the  9th
will  only  last  half  a  hour.  I  must  have  aperient  medicine  the
same  evening,  and  tonic  four  times  the  following  day,  two
table-spoonsml  each  dose ;  the  medicine  should  be  the  same
sort  I  nave  before  had  from  Mr.  Parker.  The  spasms  will
commence  at  a  little  before  six  in  the  evening,  and  I  should
be  bled  a  few  minutes  after  that  hour."

On  the  9th  of  March,  at  quarter  before  six  p.m.,  Mr.
Parker  and  I  visited  Miss  Hole,  and  found  her  very  unwell,


PoaUcript  to  the  Review  of  Beichenbach.  158

suffenDg  from  a  benumbed  feeling  of  the  left  side  of  the
head,  and  slight  spasms.  I  mesmerised  her  into  sleep-n^ing
in  a  few  minutes.  Just  before  six  the  spasms  became  more
violent ;  at  ten  minutes  after  six  she  was  bled ;  in  half  an
hour  the  spasms  had  almost  ceased.  After  which  she  said,
"  I  shall  sleep  three  hours  and  a  half  after  I  am  in  bed  to-
night, commencing  at  half-past  eleven ;  to-morrow  night  I
shall  sleep  four  hours  and  ten  minutes  after  two  in  the  morn-
ing." Both  these  predictions  were  verified ;  indeed  in  every
particular  she  is  most  accurate.  An  account  written  after  the
circumstances  have  occurred  could  not  be  more  correct  than
the  statement  Miss  H.  makes  of  what  will  take  place  respect-
ing herself.  After  the  spasms  had  left,  she  added,  ''  I  shall
be  very  poorly  on  the  15th ;  I  shall  suffer  a  great  deal  of  pain
in  the  back,  especially  on  the  left  side.  I  must  have  medicine
for  it, — the  same  sort  I  have  before  had  from  Mr.  Parker  for
that  complaint;  it  must  be  continued  one  day  and  one  nieht
every  six  hours.  I  shall  also  have  difficulty  in  breathing  that
day,  which  must  be  relieved  by  a  mustard  poultice  over  the
chest ;  it  should  be  applied  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening."
She  suffered  precisely  as  she  had  foretold,  and  her  own  reme*>
dies  were  resorted  to  with  the  best  possible  effect.  Before  I
first  commenced  mesmerising  Miss  Hole,  she  rejected  almost
all  her  food  and  also  her  medicine,  since  which  she  has  re-
jected (with  the  trifling  exception  above  named)  nothing
worth  speaking  of;  and  she  is  considered  both  by  herself^
her  friends,  and  medical  attendant,  to  be  in  a  much  better
state  of  health  than  she  has  been  for  years.

J.  C.  LUXMOORE.

Jomr  Battishill  Parkkr,  M.R.C.S.L.


to  the  Review  of  Reiehenbachj  p.  122.

I  receiTed  this  note  from  Captain  Jamea,,  of  Povar^  ihi*  moraing
(March  30th).

J.  Elliotson.

In  one  of  your  notes  you  ask  me  whether  any  of  my
patients  have  perceived  ''  flashes,  sparks,  &c."  I  never  ask
the  question,  but  allow  them  to  make  their  own  remarks.
One  patient  (a  case  of  pure  catalepsy)  perceives  flashes  and
sparks*  proceeding  from  my  fingers  when  I  mesmerise  another
patient  in  her  presence,  particularly  when  I  advanced  my
fingers  with  a  darting  motion.  One  or  two  others  have  re^
marked  Uie  same,  btit  they  are  the  exceptions  generally.

VOL.  IV.  M


154 Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  ifc.

BOOKS  RECEIVED.

The  American  Jonnial  of  InBanity,  edited  by  the  Editors  of  the  New
York  State  Lunatio  Asylam. Utica ;  October,  1845.

Phrenology — ita  Natures  and  Uses :  an  AddreM  to  the  Students  of  An-
derson's University,  at  the  opening  of  Dr.  Weir's  First  Course  of  Lectnrep
on  Phrenology  In  that  Institution,  January  7th,  1846.  Edinburgh.  By
Andrew  Combe,  M.D.*

The  New  Church  Adrocate  and  Examiner.  No.  1.  January,  1846;
London.

The  Phrenological  Journal. January,  1846.

A  Reply  to  a  Letter  addressed  by  Charlotte  Elisabeth  to  Miss  Martineau.


NOTZOES  TO  OORBESPOmDENTS.

Mr,  BnMuigf  surgeon,  of  Brompton  Row,  who  like  his  neighbours,  Mr.
Woolly  and  Mr.  6.  Woolly,  both  belicTes  In  and  practises  mesmerism,  '<  calls
our  attention  to  an  admirable  *  Easy  Chair,'  excellently  adapted  for  inralids
in  general,  and  particularly  to  patients  being  mesmerised.  He  believes
it  can  be  obtained  at  any  old  established  upholsterer's,  but  a  pattern  chair
is  to  be  seen,  I  understand,  at  the  Office  of  the  Patentee,  Mr  Chinnock^
7,  Gerrard  Street,  Soho."

Madlle.  Jtdie,  we  hare  not  seen,  nor  are  we  acquainted  with  her  powers :
but  a  gentleman,  who  has  every  quality  of  a  gentleman,  says  the  letter  in
the  AtkeniBum  "  appears  to  me  to  come  from  the  pen  of  some  low  inferior
person,  devoid  of  gentlemanly  feelings.  Madlle.  Julie  is  not  of  high  birth,
but  her  character,  against  which  he  has  insinuated,  is  deserving  of  the  highest
praise,  and  she  conducts  herself  with  the  greatest  decorum,  I  have  been
given  to  understand  from  good  authority  that  she  has  taken  upon  herself  the
payment  of  very  heavy  debts  incurred  by  her  father,  who  is  dead,  and  nearly
supports  her  mother  (who  has  a  small  pension),  and  undertakes  to  educate
her  only  sister.  Her  manners  are  also  far  from  vulgar, — but  even  was.  it  all
trui  that  Dr.  Forbes  states,  I  think  he  would  have  done  himself  no  credit  in
publishing  the  letter  he  has."

Mr.  J.  A,  Gordow  has  our  best  thanks,  and  his  suggestions  shall  be  at-
tended to  in  our  next  number,  if  there  is  room.

*  ''  We  view  with  delight  the  circumstance  of  a  lectureship  of  Phre-
nology being  appointed  in  this  University.  We  regret,  however,  that  one
was  not  appointed  of  a  somewhat  higher  standing,  and  of  a  more  liberal  turn
of  mind  than  Dr.  Weir.  Still  the  very  fact  of  the  institution  of  a  professor-
ship in  a  University  is  a  matter  of  the  utmost  importance ;  and  we  hail  it  as
the  advent  of  a  new  era  in  this  science." — Elgin  Cowriery  Feb.  20.


Notices  to  Correspondents,  ^c.  155

Sir  P,  Crampton.  His  shewy  offer  roDt  that.  We  copy  it  from  the
Examiner^  of  Janoary  17th.  "  Bank,  Henry  Street,  DabliD,  Jan.  7, 1846. —
In  answer  to  the  numerone  inquiries  which  have  been  made  respecting  the
lodgment  of  a  hundred  pound  note  in  the  Bank  of  Messrs.  Ball  and  Co.,  to
be  paid  to  any  person,  who  shall,  by  the  operation  of  mesmerism,  describe
the  particulars  of  the  note,  I  beg  leare  to  say  that  such  a  lodgment  has  been
made  in  this  bank,  and  on  the  enrelope  in  which  it  is  contained  is  the  fol-
lowing endorsement: — '  This  enrelope  contains  a  bank  note  for  one  hundred
pounds,  which  will  immediately  become  the  property  of  the  person  who,
without  opening  the  envelope,  shall  describe,  in  the  presence  of  Philip
Doyne,  Esq.,  and  Sir  Philip  Crampton,  Bart.,  erery  particular  of  the  said
note,  namely — the  bank  from  which  it  was  issued,  the  date,  the  number,  and
the  signatures  attached  to  it,  and  who  shall  read  a  sentence,  consisting  of  a
few  English  words,  plainly  written,  and  which  is  contained  in  the  same  en-
velope with  the  half-note.' — (Signed)  James  Dudgeon."

The  MoMchester  PraetUioner  is  referred  to  his  book,  p.  27,  where  we  are
told  to  hold  a  bright  object  above  the  patient's  eyes,  and  "  produce  the  great-
est possible  strain  upon  the  eyes  and  eyelids :"  and  to  a  letter  which  we
have  seen  from  Dr.  Chawner  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  in  which  he  says  he  followed
*'  the  method  which  he  saw"  the  Manchester  practitioner  '^  use,"  and  kept
the  eyes  at ''  a  double  internal  squint."  The  double  internal  squint  was
a  mighty  point  at  one  time.

JIfr.  Horatio  Prater  informs  us  that  if  we  pass  the  middle  or  forefinger
very  lightly  downwards  over  our  own  upper  eyelid  or  that  of  another  person,
many  times  in  succession,  it  will  be  found  impossible  to  open  the  eyes  till  a
current  of  air  is  directed  on  them,  or  till  the  eyelashes  or  eyelids  are  touched.
He  supposes  that  if  the  eyes  cannot  be  opened,  a  loss  of  their  power  is  in-
duced :  but  it  is  spasm  that  is  induced,  like  the  rigidity  of  the  arms  by  long
contact  passes.  The  eyes  close  in  common  sleep  not  from  debility,  but
active  contraction.  The  effect  of  the  contact  passes  with  the  finger  is  merely
an  instance  of  local  mesmerism.  Mr.  Prater's  eyes  were  sometimes  opened
by  blowing  against  a  sheet  of  paper  or  a  fine  paper  box  placed  before  them.

We  have  tried  the  experiment  fairly,  with  a  hundred  or  more  movements
of  the  finger  upon  a  dozen  persons,  who  were  not  susceptible  of  mes-
merism :  and  succeeded  but  in  one,  and  she  had  in  vain  gone  through  the
process  of  mesmerisation  daily  for  very  many  weeks.

E.  W,  Those  who  doubt  the  permanency  of  mesmeric  cures  when  care  is
taken,  are  referred  to  Vol.  III.,  p.  354.

Many  valuable  communications  from  most  esteemed  correspondents  are
postponed  through  the  abundance  of  pressing  nuitter,  which  has  made  the
number  run  on  to  nearly  ten  sheets  instead  of  six.


ERRATA  iD  No.  XII.

Page  409,  lino  9,  for  <<  oar"  Mad  m.

416,  Hoe  6  in  note,  for  **  nof '  road  aoap.

445,  line  24,  for  <*  decided"  road  dioided.

446,  11,  for  <^  mad"  read  mofl.
480, 32,  for  "^  shew"  read  ihewing.

494,  25,  for  **  disappointment"  read  disappointed,

626,  25,  for  "  a  medical  man"  road  medical  men.

533,  20,  for  ««  need"  read  fwd.

535,  25,  for  "  po80e88ion"  read  nrqfituion,

538,  18,  for  «  obstruction"  road  obstructive,

d39,  3,  fbr  «<  his"  read  two.

540,  31,  for  <<  adopt;  it  aa"  read  adojX  «i.

545,  34,  for  "  Jones"  read  Holmes,


THE ZOIST


No.  XIV.


JULY,  1846.


J.  In»tance$  of  Double  States  of  Consciousness  independent  of
Mesmerism. Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

I  HAD  not  seen  mach  of  mesmerism  before  I  was  certain  that
nothing  occurs  through  it  which  does  not  occur  in  disease
without  it.  The  very  highest  phenomena  of  clairvoyance,
even  prescience  of  events  unconnected  with  the  party,  occur
without  it;  so  that  mesmerism  is  simply  an  artificial  method
of  producing  certain  phenomena. In  my  pamphlet  I  stated :

"Dr.  Hall  should  have  known  that  mesmerism  produces  no  pheno-
menon that  does  not  occur  in  nervous  affections  without  mesmerism^
as  I  often  stated  in  the  theatre  of  University  College  Hospital ;  but
that  it  does  produce  all  the  most  wonderful  phenomena  of  all  affec-
tions of  every  portion  of  the  nervous  system ;  and  that  the  torpor
or  somnambulism  or  sleep-waking,  which  it  produces,  is  that  which
occurs  in  trances,  as  the  deepest  form  of  singular  sleep,  with  very
moderate  cerebral  activity,  at  one  extreme,  and  that  of  persons  in
extatic  delirium  at  the  other,  in  which  most  of  the  faculties  are
very  active,  many  perhaps  far  more  active  than  when  in  the  natural
state,  and  only  some  faculties  torpid,  and  these  perhaps  but  par-
tially torpid,  so  that,  while  the  patient  may  be  very  talkative,  clever,
and  facetious,  he  may  be  divested  of  his  usual  proper  reserve  and
even  of  all  sense  of  propriety  and  really  be  in  a  new  waking  state."*

I  also  detailed  from  the  London  Philosophical  Transactions^
for  1706,  a  remarkable  and  beautiful  case  of  fits  of  idiopathic
or  unartificial  sleep-waking  in  a  young  man,  in  which  sleep
predominated  over  activity,  and  which  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,
in  his  discreditable  ignorance  of  these  affections  of  the  nerv-
ous system,  pronounced  to  be  an  evident  imposture.**  The
patient  would  sleep  for  months,  sometimes  taking  food  and
relieving  nature  in  his  sleep,  but  insensible  to  the  greatest
violence. I  related  a  similar  instance  which  occurred  to

*  p.  35. b  pp.  38,  46.
VOL.  IV.  N


168  Double  States  of  Consciousness,

Dr.  Amott  and  myself  in  a  Spanish  lady  who  had  been  thus
afflicted  at  times  for  many  years.''  These  two  were  instances
of  sleep-waking  with  double  consciousness ;  the  patients  being
in  a  sleep  generally  profound^  but  sometimes  with  sufficient
activity  to  do  certain  things,  eat^  drinki  and  evacuate ;  in  all
these  actions  voluntarily  administering  to  themselves,  but  not
remembering  one  of  them  when  awake. I  added :

''  In  some  instances  of  this  peculiar  sleep,  there  is  from  time  to
time  more  activity  than  he  shewed,  so  that  persons  walk,  talk,  write
and  work,  nay,  they  may  do  some  things  better  than  when  awake,
though  the  sleep  continue  and  they  be  insensible  to  mechanical
injury,  and  snore;  and  in  most  instances,  as  in  the  present  case,
nothmg  is  afterwards  remembered,  and  the  period  passed  in  this
sleep-waking  state  is  as  a  separate  existence."*^

A  remarkable  instance  in  a  girl  is  detailed  in  the  Edinburgh
Philosophical  TYansactions,  for  1822,  and  transferred  to  my
Physiology ,  p.  868,  in  whom  there  was  great  activity.

"  *  Dr.  Devan  read  to  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  in  February,
1822,  the  history  of  a  case,  observed  by  Dr.  Dyce  of  Aberdeen,  in
a  girl,  16  years  old,  which  lasted  from  2nd  March  to  Uth  June,
1815.  The  first  symptom  was  an  uncommon  propensity  to  fall
asleep  in  the  evenings.  This  was  followed  by  the  habit  of  talking
in  hef  sleep  on  those  occasions.  One  evening  she  fell  asleep  in  this
manner:  imagining  herself  an  episcopal  clergyman,  she  went  through
the  ceremony  of  baptising  three  children,  and  gave  an  appropriate
prayer.  Her  mistress  shook  her  by  the  shoulders,  on  which  she
awoke,  and  appeared  unconscious  of  everything,  except  that  she  had
fallen  asleep,  of  which  she  showed  herself  ashamed.  She  sometimes
dressed  herself  and  the  children  while  in  this  state,  or,  as  Miss  L.
called  it,  "dead  sleep;"  answered  questions  put  to  her  in  such  a
manner  as  to  show  that  she  understood  the  question;  but  the  answers
were  often,  though  not  always,  incongruous.  One  day  in  this  state
she  sat  at  breakfast,  with  perfect  correctness,  with  her  eyes  shut.
She  afterwards  awoke  with  the  child  on  her  knees,  and  wondered
how  she  eot  on  her  clothes.  Sometimes  the  cold  air  awakened  her ;
at  other  times  she  was  seized  with  the  affection  whilst  walking  out
with  the  children.  She  sang  a  hymn  delightfully  in  this  state;  and,
from  a  comparison  which  Dr.  Dyce  had  an  opportunity  of  making,
it  appeared  incomparably  better  done  than  she  could  accomplish
when  awake.  In  the  meantime  a  still  more  singular  and  interesting
symptom  be^an  to  make  its  appearance.  The  drcumstanoes  which
occurred  during  the  paroxysm  were  completely  forgotten  by  her  wh^
the  paroxysms  were  over,  but  were  perfectly  remarked  during  subse-
quent paroxysms.  Her  mistress  said,  that  when  in  this  stupor,  on
subsequent  occasions,  she  told  her  what  was  said  to  her  on  the
evening  when  she  baptised  the  children. A  depraved  feUow-servant,

b  p.  49.  c  Pamphlet,  p.  42.


comimudeaieit  by  Dr.  ElUoUon.  169

nndentaacliiig  that  she  whoUj  forgol  eyerj  trauMction  that  oocumd
during  the  fit,  dandestinely  introdueed  a  young  man  into  the  house,
who  treated  her  with  the  utmost  rudeness,  whilst  her  fellow-servant
stopped  her  mouth  with  the  hed-dothe^,  and  otherwise  overpowered
a  vigorous  resistance  which  was  made  by  her  even  during  the  influ-
ence of  her  complaint.  Next  day  she  had  not  the  slightest  recollec-
tion even  of  that  transaction ;  nor  did  any  person  interested  in  her
welfare  know  of  it  for  several  days,  till  she  was  in  one  of  her  pa-
roxysms, when  she  related  the  whole  fact  to  her  mother.  Next
Sunday  she  was  taken  to  church  by  her  mistress  while  the  paroxysm
was  on  her.  She  shed  tears  during  the  sermon,  particularly  during
the  account  given  of  the  execution  of  three  young  men  at  Edinburgh,
who  had  described,  in  their  dying  declarations,  the  dangerous  steps
with  whidi  their  career  of  vice  and  infamy  took  its  commencement.
When  she  returned  home,  she  recovered  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
was  quite  amaxed  at  the  questions  put  to  her  about  the  church  ser-
mon, and  denied  that  she  had  been  to  any  such  place ;  but  next
night,  on  being  taken  ill,  she  mentioned  that  she  had  been  at  church,
repeated  the  words  of  the  text,  and,  in  Dr.  Dyoe's  hearing,  gave  an
accurate  account  of  the  tragical  narrative  of  the  three  young  men,  by
which  her  feelings  had  been  so  powerfully  affected.' "

A  still  more  remarkable  instance  occurred  lately  in  a  little
girl  in  America^  and  is  printed  by  Dr.  Belden^  under  the  title
of  An  Account  of  Jane  Rider,  the  Springfield  Somnambulist,
a  copy  of  which  little  book  I  deposited  in  the  library  of  the
Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society,  as  the  members
proved  themselves  ao  thoroughly  ignorant  of  these  subjects ;
and  an  abstract  of  it  will  be  found  in  Chambers's  Edinburgh
Journal,  No.  493.

One  reason  why  medical  men  deny  mesmerism  is  their
very  limited  reading,  so  that  they  are  not  aware  of  the  oocor*
rence  of  certain  diseases  of  the  nervons  system.  The  very
occurrence  of  catalepsy  has  often  been  denied*^  by  authors,
and  I  have  heard  it  denied.

I  shaU  now  communicate  some  other  cases  of  the  kind,
in  order  to  lessen  the  difficulties  of  those  who  are  staggered  by
mesmerism^  prefacing  them  by  an  extract  from  my  Pamphlet.

'*  Sometimes  the  coma  is  profound  and  litde  or  no  activity  of
brain  is  discernible ;  sometimes  there  is  no  coma  but  great  activity
of  the  mind,  as  a  separate  period  of  existence,  the  character  or  ways
of  the  person  being  more  or  less  different  from  those  habitual,  and
mtirely  forgotten  when  the  brain  passes  again  into  its  natural  state :
and  between  these  two  extremes  are  endless  gradations  of  activity  in
the  Tarions  cerebral  faculties.  Sleep-waking  is  the  most  appropriate
title,  as  it  comprehends  aU  actions  that  may  be  performea;  though

d  See  an  extract  from  Dr.  Copland'o  MedietH  JHctunutry  in  The  Zoi$t,  Vol.
II.,  p.  07. I  entreat  my  readers  to  peruse  the  whole  of  the  note.

n2


160  Double  States  of  Consciousness,

die  word  somnambulism  is  often  loosely  employed,  which  strictly
applies  to  those  cases  in  which  the  patient  walks.  When  the  coma
is  profound  the  second  term  waking  is  hardly  appropriate;  and  when
there  is  no  coma  the  first  term  sleep  is  hardly  appropriate,  and
extatic  delirium  should  rather  be  the  designation.  But,  as  a  generic
denomination,  the  expression  sleep-waking  is  very  convenient  and
characteristic.  Extatic  delirium  was  the  wUd,  and,  to  a  philosophic
observer,  deeply  interesting,  state  in  which  the  Okeys  were  usually
seen  when  not  in  a  profound  coma  or  in  their  natural  condition.

*'  This  class  of  affections  are  most  wonderful  and  absolutely  rivet
the  attention  of  a  thoughtful  man :  and  their  varieties  are  great  and
beautiful,  though  beautifully  similar  to  each  other. But  too  often
medical  men  are  lamentably  ignorant  of  them,  and,  when  they  have
an  interesting  case  of  this  kind,  regard  it  only  as  a  strange  piece  of
business,  and  are  at  a  loss  what  to  do,  and  so  torment  and  physic
the  patient  without  mercy,  and  think  no  more  about  it;  or  perhaps,
to  save  meditation,  declare  it  was  all  imposition. The  records  of
medicine  supply  a  sufficient  number :  and,  now  that  by  mesmerism
we  know  how  to  produce  them  artificially,  no  medical  man  is  pardon-
able who  does  not  make  himself  well  acquainted  with  them. Igno-
rance of  these  wonderful  spontaneous  cases  has  caused  much  false
and  cruel  accusation. I  have  known  young  children  treated  as  liars,
as  naughty,  as  odd  children,  and  youth  and  grown-up  persons  vili-
fied as  impostors,  by  their  families  and  instructors,  and  chiefly  by
medical  attendants,  because  they  fell  occasionally  into  a  state  of
sleep-waking,  of  the  modification  termed  extatic  delirium,  during
which,  though  not  strong  enough  to  strike  every  one  as  delirium,
their  conduct  differed  from  what  was  habitual  and  proper;  or  because,
after  an  unsuspected  paroxysm,  one  in  which  no  extravagance  had
been  committed,  they  denied  all  knowledge  of  what  they  were  told
they  had  said  or  done. An  instance  occurred  of  a  gentleman  so
seized  while  in  a  box  at  the  Theatre,  and  losing  all  knowledge  of  his
situation  and  preparing  to  perform  a  private  act,  nothing  of  which
he  remembered  when  taken  before  a  ma^strate. A  strikmg  case  of
this  kind  has  lately  been  seen  by  me  in  the  Middlesex  Hospital.
Dr.  Wilson,  under  whose  care  the  patient  was  and  who  to  his  honour
knows  and  boldly  declares  the  truth  of  mesmerism,  was  from  this
knowledge  able  to  recognise  the  case:  but  some  uninformed  and
spiteful  person  about  the  Hospital  wrote  to  the  lady  who  kindly
interests  herself  in  the  poor  boy  that  his  only  complaint  was  temper,
and  a  medical  whisper  has  reached  me  that  the  case  is  an  imposition.
The  boy,  who,  in  his  natural  state,  is  very  respectful  and  particular
in  his  behaviour,  is  very  regardless  of  both  persons  and  places  in  his
delirium,  sings  with  great  feeling,  and  recites  with  capital  power  of
imitation,  and  eats  most  voraciously,  and  his  writing  is  a  great
curiosity,— quite  different  from  his  habitual  writing,  and  blotted  all
over. I  unhesitatingly  declare  the  case  to  be  as  real  as  the  boy's
existence,  and  should  never  have  been  tired  of  studying  it."

«

This  case  I  shall  now  describe^  as  written  out  by  Dr.  Wilson


communicated  by  Dr.  ElHoison.  161

for  the  Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society.  But  it  was
thought  unworthy  of  a  place  in  the  Transactions  of  the
Society  and  returned  to  Dr.  Wilson^  who  kindly  lent  it  to
me  with  permission  to  publish  it.

There  was  completely  double  consciousness;  nothing  of
the  diseased  state  being  remembered  in  the  natural^  and  the
character  being  completely  changed  in  the  paroxysms.

I.  ''  Case  of  Double  Consciousness  in  the  Middlesex  Hospital.

"  B.  Jones^  aged  15^  admitted  into  the  Middlesex  Hospital
2nd  March^  1842^  said  to  have  been  complaining  of  the
head-ache  for  two  or  three  days.  He  looks  remarkably  well.
"  On  the  day  he  was  admitted  he  met  the  nurse  in  the
ward  with  a  piece  of  bread  in  her  hand|  he  took  the  bread
from  her  without  saying  a  word|  and  instantly  ate  it.  He
then  went  to  the  fire-place^  sat  down^  took  the  key  of  the
boiler  cock^  and  let  the  hot  water  run  on  the  floor  of  the
ward.  Then  he  was  ordered  to  bed;  but  at  dinner-time
he  got  up^  seized  a  patient^s  beef^  and  ate  it  in  bed.  About
a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  this^  he  got  out  of  bed  again^
took  nine  potatoes  out  of  a  bowl  and  ate  them.  At  tea-time
he  had  three  slices  of  bread  given  to  him  with  his  tea.
Having  eaten  these,  he  pounced  upon  three  slices  of  the
nurse^s  toast,  returned  to  bed,  and  devoured  them  immedi-
ately. The  next  day  he  possessed  himself  of  a  man's  dinner
and  ate  it.  After  this,  he  was  occasionally  restrained  to  bed,
to  prevent  a  repetition  of  plunder.  When  not  restrained,  he
was  more  watched,  and  the  patients  took  more  care  of  their
food.  Those  who  were  not  able  to  take  care  of  their  own
allowances,  the  nurse  took  charge  of.

"  Butter,  sugar,  or  anything  eatable,  he  made  off  with,  and
despatched  with  equal  facility.

''  Though  he  was  always  on  full  diet,  that  never  satisfied
him  when  in  the  extraordinary  state.  Many  of  the  patients
gave  him  part  of  their  allowance,  and  from  those  who  could
not  eat  much  he  obtained  larger  shares.  When  not  occupied
in  eating  or  seeking  for  food,  he  generally  slept  night  and
day.  It  was  with  difficulty  an  answer  coidd  be  obtained  to
any  question  put  to  him.  This  extraordinary  state  of  appetite
and  sleep  continued  for  three  or  four  days,  when  he  recovered
his  natural,  or  ordinary  state  of  appetite,  sleep,  and  conscious-
ness. Then  he  had  no  recollection  of  any  thing  he  had  done,
nor  of  what  had  happened  to  him  since  his  admission,  neither
had  he  any  recollection  of  being  brought  to  the  hospital.

'^  The  patients  were  all  very  much  surprised  at  his  altered
state  and  behaviour. He  was  ready  to  assist  or  wait  upoix


163  Daubk  States  qf  Consckmsness,

any  of  them.  He  also  assisted  the  nurse  in  carrying  pails  of
water  and  filling  the  boiler.  He  now  ate  no  more  than  other
patients^  and  took  no  other  person's  food^  condacting  himself
in  all  respects  with  the  greatest  propriety.

^'  In  the  extraordinary  state  he  would  assist  no  one^  nor
even  help  himself  in  any  way^  except  in  appropriating  food,
but  called  for  the  nurse  on  all  occasions  when  he  wanted  any
thing.

"  He  now  says  he  has  often  been  in  '  a  state  of  forgetful-
ness.'  His  mother  says,  the  first  time  he  fell  into  this  state,
he  was  at  school  in  Westmoreland,  when  the  boys  said  he  had
turned  '  daft.'

''  He  remained  in  the  hospital  till  the  4th  of  April,  without
shewing  any  departure  from  the  ordinary  state,  and  was  then
discharged.

''April  6th.  Two  days  after  being  discharged,  he  was
brought  back  by  his  mother.  She  said  the  boy  was  now  again
in  his  sleepy  state,  and  that,  whatever  may  happen  to  him,  or
whatever  he  may  do  or  say,  he  retains  no  recollection  of  it
when  he  comes  to  himself.

"  He  now  persists  in  keeping  his  bed,  and  sleeps  continually,
and  his  appetite  is  voracious.  For  some  idnys  he  seldom  opened
his  eyes,  but  from  time  to  time  would  get  out  of  bed  and
prowl  about  the  ward,  with  heavy  and  only  partially  opened
eyes,  in  search  of  food,  and  devoured  what  he  could  lay  his
hands  on.  This  sleepy  state  continued  to  the  15th  (a  week
after  his  re-admission),  when  he  returned  to  his  ordinary  state,
and  was  surprised  to  find  himself  again  in  the  hospital.  His
mother  had  seen  him  on  the  -13th ;  but  on  his  recovery,  he
told  her  that  he  had  not  seen  her.

''  He  continued  for  some  time  longer  in  the  ward,  and  ate
and  slept  like  other  people,  and  without  any  deviation  from
his  common  consciousness.  His  spirits  were  good,  and  he
looked  in  full  health. Then  he  was  discharged.

"  Sept.  9rd.  He  was  admitted  for  the  third  time.  He  had
lately  been  employed  in  gardening.  The  day  before  he  was
brought  to  the  hospital,  he  said  he  was  going  to  be  attacked
as  before.  He  is  now  stupid,  very  sleepy,  and  has  a  voracious
appetite.  One  day  I  saw  him  seize  a  bowl  of  potato  peel-
ings, which  he  grasped  by  handfuls  and  devoured  till  the
bowl  was  taken  from  him.  For  three  or  four  days  he  con-
tinued to  sleep  almost  constantly.  Then  he  began  to  read  the
Bible  in  a  very  audible,  distinct,  and  emphatic  manner.
Next  he  woidd  sing  psalms.  These  reading  and  singing  fits
continued  at  intervals  for  some  days;  but  when  not  so
occupied,  he  seemed  indifferent  to  all  around  him,  and  went


ccmMmmeated  bg  Dr.  EUioiMon.  168

off  to  sleep.  He  took  notice  of  reiy  few  penonsj  bat  appeared
to  know  some.  The  day  nnrse  he  always  recognised  when  in
this  state^  thongh  he  never  appeared  to  know  the  night  nurse.
If  he  answered  any  one,  it  seemed  with  reluctance,  and  he
then  turned  over,  or  covered  his  head  under  the  bed  clothes,
and  went  off  to  sleep.  This  sleepy  state  continued  till  the
12th,  when  he  began  to  fret,  and  tears  flowed.  He  appeared
as  if  he  was  coming  to  himself,  for  such  a  change  had  been
noticed  before  when  he  was  beginning  to  recover.  His  appe-*
tite  was  not  long  ravenous  on  this  day.  He  at  length  said
he  felt  well,  but  knew  he  had  not  been  so.

"  On  Sept.  14th  was  quite  himself  again :  as  on  all  former
occasions,  he  recoUects  nothing  that  happened  while  in  the
late  state.  But  he  recollects  that,  for  two  days  before  the
change  came  over  him  (a  fortnight  ago)  he  felt  an  odd  sensa-
tion and  indistinct  vision,  particularly  on  first  getting  up;  and
that  he  then  told  those  with  whom  he  was  living,  that  he  was
going  to  be  unwell  again.

"  He  continued  quite  well  for  a  week  longer,  and  then  left
the  hospital  to  return  to  his  occupation.

**  Such  are  the  details  of  a  double  state  of  consciousness,  or
existence,— if  I  may  so  call  these  alternating  states — which  I
have  thrice  observed  in  the  same  individual  and  carefully
noted  down;  limiting  my  remarks  only  to  what  occurred  when
he  was  under  my  care,  and  omitting  aJl  that  I  may  have  heard
relative  to  his  varying  states  when  he  was  elsewhere,  and  hav«
ing  watched  the  case  without  attempting  to  ascertain  if  any
other  extraordinary  conditions  existed  besides  these  which  at-
tracted the  notice  of  every  one.  For  instance,  I  refrained  from
trying  if  any  of  the  external  senses  were  more  or  less  deve-
loped in  the  extraordinary  than  in  the  ordinary  state.  Neither
was  he  questioned  in  the  extraordinary  state  to  ascertain  if  he
remembered  anything  that  had  happened  when  he  was  before
in  his  extraordinary  state.  For  I  wished  to  direct  the  atten-
tion of  others  to  the  prominent  features  already  described,
and  not  to  ask  them  to  examine  into  too  much  at  once.  I
wished  them  only  to  observe,  that  each  of  the  three  times  he
was  under  my  care,  the  same  combination  of  changes  alter-
nated. Each  time  the  extraordinary  states  of  appetite,  sleep
and  consciousness  terminated  together,  and  together  the  ordi-
nary states  returned  as  reason  returned.  Moreover  I  abstained
from  interfering  with  nature, — ^under  such  circumstances — so
that  he  was  left  entirely  to  her  '  sweet  restorer,  balmy  sleep.'
''  I  shall  for  the  present  reserve  my  opinion  of  the  case  and
the  inferences  I  have  drawn  from  it.  My  object  being,  in
bringing  it  before  the  Society,  to  invite  further  examination


164  Double  States  of  Consciousness,

into  similar  cases^  for  I  doubt  not  that  others  will  be  found,
and  then  will  be  the  more  proper  time  for  discussion.''

Such  was  the  history  read  to  the  Society  at  the  beginning
of  1843.  In  the  course  of  a  year  the  lad  fell  three  times
more  into  his  sleep-waking ;  and  on  each  occasion  was  placed
in  the  hospital  under  Dr.  Wilson,  (1842,  March  2,  April  6,
Sept.  3,  Nov.  23,  Dec.  27 ;  1843,  July,  13,)  six  times  al-
together. I  once  saw  him  in  his  sleep- waking  state.  ^  He
was  in  the  nurse's  room  in  his  night  shirt,  having  just  got
out  of  bed.  He  was  sitting  in  a  chair,  moving  himself  about,
and  singing  with  great  feeling.  He  took  no  notice  of  me,
but  went  on  with  his  songs ;  and,  on  a  gentleman  sitting  before
him,  put  his  foot  unceremoniously  on  the  gentleman's  knee,
resting  his  elbow  on  his  own  knee,  and  still  sang  away.
Whenever  I  spoke  to  him  he  answered  me  like  a  half-witted
person,  and  shortly  and  carelessly,  scarcely  interrupting  his
singing.  He  rose  and  without  any  reserve  employed  a
chamber  utensil,  singing  all  the  whUe,  and  then  restlessly
walked  about  the  room,  and  asked  for  something  to  eat.
Dr.  Wilson  told  me  that  he  sometimes  imitated  exquisitely.

Dr.  Wilson  informs  me  that  each  attack  of  sleep-walung
was  attended  by  the  extreme  voracity  :  and  that,  at  the  end
of  long  attacks;  on  returning  to  his  oi^inary  state  he  found
himself  greatly  increased  in  bulk,  looking  like  an  over-fat
boy,  with  an  abdominal  protuberance  like  a  young  Bacchus ;
but  that,  as  the  natural  state  continued,  he  regained  his  usual
appearance.

I  am  now  mesmerising  a  lady,  who,  in  her  mesmeric
sleep-waking,  and  then  only,  has  a  very  great  appetite :  no
doubt  the  parts  of  the  brain  called  the  organs  of  Alimentive-
ness  being  for  some  reason  or  other  excited  in  the  state,  just
as  the  organs  of  Imitation,  Music,  Attachment,  &c.,  often
are.  The  strong  manifestation  of  a  particular  faculty  that  we
often  witness  in  insanity,  delirium,  and  even  in  other  dis-
eases, is  intelligible  enough  to  the  true  cerebral  physiologist,
who  knows  that  the  brain  is  a  congeries  of  organs.

After  leaving  the  hospital  the  sixth  time,  he  had  no  relapse
or  any  ill  health,  and  has  called  once  or  twice  to  express  his
gratitude,  having  grown  into  a  fine,  stout,  healthy  young
man, — well-behaved  and  intelligent,  and  eating  no  more  than
other  people, — and  it  being  now  four  years  since  his  first
admission.

Each  of  the  later  attacks  was  less  intensely  characterized
and  of  shorter  duration,  and  the  last  intermission  was  the
longest.


communicated  by  Dr,  ElUoison.  165

Dr.  Wilson  gaye  him  no  physic,  and  applied  no  local
means :  and  admitted  him  every  time  into  the  hospital  that
he  might  escape  bedoctering, — bleeding,  cupping,  leeching,
blistering,  mercorializing,  drenching,  narcotics,  minerals,  and
the  usual  absurd,  debilitating,  or  disgusting,  worrying,  and
even  torturing  measures,  to  which  he  would  to  a  certainty
have  been  subjected  if  he  had  fallen  into  common  hands,  and
to  which  most  practitioners  ignorantly  and  mercilessly  subject
all  unfortunate  patients  who  suffer  with  diseases  they  do  not
understand :«  and  of  the  very  character  of  the  more  extra-
ordinary nervous  diseases,  nay,  of  the  existence  of  the  most
extraordinary,  they  are  generally  ignorant.  The  greater  part
would  in  their  ignorance  have  ctdled  this  boy  an  impostor.
And  impostor  he  was  pronounced  by  many  medical  persons
in  the  hospital.  So  thought  many  in  the  Medical  Society,  for

''The  case  was  drawn  up  and  sent  to  the  Boyal  Medical  and
Chirurgical  Society  by  Dr.  Wilson,  in  November,  under  the  title  of
"  A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness,"  and  a  notice  affixed  in  the  library
that  it  would  be  read.  But,  when  tbe  members,  having  declared
that  the  history  of  the  amputation,  being  mesmeric,  had  disgraced
them,  learned  that  this  case  was  analogous  to  mesmeric  cases,  they
actually  took  down  the  notice,  gave  half  a  hint  to  Dr.  Wilson  that
he  might  withdraw  the  paper,  a  report  went  about  that  the  boy
shammed,  and  the  paper  was  not  react  till  Feb.  28."^

On  that  occasion,  "  Mr.  Bransby  Cooper  remarked  that
Dr.  Wilson's  patient  was  on  low  diet''  (an  incorrect  assertion) :
'^  he  liked  full  diet  better;  so  robbed  to  get  it.  A  good  thrash^
ing  would  have  cured  him  (laughter)*'  Such  gross  ignorance
of  the  subject  was  excusable  in  a  merely  pure  surgeon;  but

e  See  the  treatment  of  the  "  Extraordinary  Sleeping  Person  at  Tinsbury,"
in  my  Pamphlet :  "  a  ^ery  able  apothecary  of  Bath  went  to  him,  biedy  blU-
ieredf  cupped^  and  tcarified  him,  and  used  all  the  external  initating  medi-
einei  he  could  think  on,  and  all  to  no  purpose,  p.  46.  Hannah  Hunter,  whom
I  cnred  with  mesmerism  in  University  College  Hospital,  had  been  tormented
with  two  caustic  iuuei,  leeches^  endless  purgimgf  and  salivation^  Zoist,  Vol.  I.,
p.  301.  Master  Salmon  had  been  purged  molently  with  ctUomel  and  other
things  by  Dr.  Roots,  and  was  all  the  worse  for  it ;  and  had  literally  taken
under  various  doctors  **paiyuls  of  medicine"  pp.  315,  320.  Elizabeth  Kell
had  been  leeched,  poulticed,  bandaged,  linimented,  and  blistered,  and  given
various  drugs,  p.  334.  Maria  Pearsay  had  suffered  the  extraction  qf  her  four
front  teeth,  been  urged  to  part  with  her  leg,  been  severely  salivated  in  tho
Westminster  Hospital,  and  been  drugged  for  years.  Miss  Melhuish  had  been
well  leeched,  bUstered^  and  drugged,  pp.  427,  429.  Mary  Grimes  had  been
bled  twenty-five  times,  cupped  seventeen  times,  had  two  setons,  three  issues,
leeches  and  blisters  without  number,  salivation  for  seventeen  days,  physic  without
end,  and  had  been  electrified  and  had  her  head  shaved  by  the  order  of  Dr.
Watson  in  the  Middlesex  Hospital,  p.  453 :  and  so  with  respect  to  most
cases  that  are  treated  with  mesmerism  at  last,  when  doctors  have  gone
through  all  the  useless  and  severe  things,  they  ever  heard  of,  in  their  random
practice.

f  Pamphlet,  p.  43.


166  Double  States  qf  Consciousness,

it  was  inexcusable  in  the  physicians  and  general  practitioners^
nrho  ought  to  have  understood  the  case,  and  to  have  instantly
set  turn  right  and  defended  the  poor  boy  by  acclamation.  But
no,  this  ignorance  and  folly  and  cruelty  were  received  with
"  laughter  J'ti

**  Such  a  stitte  of  things  is  really  lamentable. Let  Mr.  Bransby
Cooper  stady  the  diseases  of  the  nervous  system  before  he  condemns

his  fellow-creatures  thus

"  His  flogging  of  the  poor  afflicted  boy  would  be  the  counterpart
of  the  tearing  the  hand  of  the  poor  girl  in  the  Edinburgh  Infirmary
with  the  other  surgeon's  nails.  Thrash  the  poor  boy!  The  con-
duct and  manners  of  the  two  Okeys  in  their  preternatural  state  were
perfectly  different  from  all  that  was  obserred  in  them  when  not  in
this  state.  They  were  totally  ignorant  of  all  persons,  things,  names,
and  circumstances,  with  which  they  had  become  acquainted  previ-
ously :  they  knew  neither  their  father  nor  mother,  nor  the  meaning
of  tne  words  father  and  mother :  forgetting  the  meaning  of  almost
every  term,  they  learnt  all  the  improper  language  so  constantly
used  in  the  wards  of  hospitals,  and  irreverently  swore  and  called  bad
names,  and  misapplied  words,  and  were  readily  taught  to  misapply
them,  without  bemg  aware  of  impropriety, — and  the  ignorant  portion
of  the  medical  periodical  press  cruelly  made  fun  of  this:  they  had  to
learn  everything  afresh:  they  would  have  enormous  muscular  power:
they  mimicked  exquisitely,  and  had  a  strong  propensity  to  mimickry
and  humour,  so  that  they  were  absurdly  thought  by  those  ignorant
of  particular  cerebral  faculties  being  ofl6n  highly  augmented  in
such  cases,  whether  spontaneously  or  mesmericuly  iuduoed,  by  Mr.
Wakley  for  example,  to  have  been  trained  and  practised  impostors,
whereas  not  a  single  mesmeric  phenomenon  ever  witnessed  by  any
person  in  them  was  unreal.  The  cases  of  both  sisters  were  genuine
throughout,  similar  but  very  differently  modified,  and  it  was  igno-
rance only  which  led  any  one  to  doubt  them,  and  it  was  heartless
cruelty  to  slander  two  perfectly  virtuous  and  afflicted  female  children,
who  had  been  carefully  brought  up  and  had  lived  only  with  their
parents  and  afterwards  in  a  respectable  family  till  they  were  seized
with  epilepsy.  Not  merely  the  editor  of  the  Lancet  knew  no  better,
but  the  editors  of  other  Medical  Journals ;  and  the  display  of  disre-
putable unacquaintance  with  this  kind  of  case,  and  the  composition
of  vulgar  tirades  by  so  many  professional  men  pretending  to  medical

s  Report  of  the  meeting  in  the  Lancet^  March  4,  1843,  p.  87.  Mr.  S.
Solly,  who  faTours  phrenology,  though  I  am  not  aware  of  his  being  much
acquainted  with  it,  was  struck  with  the  voracious  appetite  only,  which  was
merely  an  incidental  occurrence  in  the  case,  the  grand  nature  of  which
was  sleep- waking,  and  so  advised  treatment  of  the  alimentary  canal.  In
the  first  place,  the  removal  of  the  incidental  symptom  of  voracity  would
have  left  the  lad  uncured  of  fits  of  delirious  sleep-waking ;  and  in  the  next,
the  voracity  was  an  aflTection  of  the  brain — of  the  organs  of  Alimentiveness,
as  well  as  his  great  disposition  to  mimic  and  to  sing.  When  we  excite  the
organ  of  Alimentiveness  by  the  point  of  the  finger,  voracity  results.  (See
Vol.  III.,  p.  461).


eommiMcaied  by  Dr.  BlUotion.  167

knowledffe,  was  precisely  the  oondact  which  we  witness  in  the  streets
when  a  derangea  or  imbecile  person  is  pursued  and  hooted  by  boys
and  rabble,  as  though  he  were  master  of  his  own  condition  ibad  con-
duct, and  not  the  subject  of  an  affliction  profoundly  interesting  to
the  philosopher  and  to  the  man  who  can  feel  for  others.  Everything
stated  or  ever  printed  to  their  disadvantaee  was  an  absolute  falsehoods
I  repeat  these  words  emphatically,  an  absolute  falsehood.  They  are
both  cured  of  the  violent  fits  for  which  they  had  been  long  in  the
hospital,  and  the  reality  of  which  no  one  had  doubted,  and  for
which  I  at  length  mesmerised  them.  One  is  already  respectably
married  to  a  young  man  in  her  own  station  of  life,  and  a  mother ;
the  other  lires  with  her  parents  and  supports  herself  by  doing  needle-
work for  a  neighbouring  establishment.^

The  lad  who  was  left  oompletely  deaf  and  dumb  by  an
epileptic  fit  with  which  he  was  seized  in  the  street,  was  treated
as  an  impostor  by  Dr.  Todd,  Dr.  Gny,  and  Dr.  Budd,  and
therefore  by  the  students  in  King's  College  Hospital,  at  the
time  and  idter  I  had  cored  him  with  mesmerism,  though
palsy  of  some  part  or  other  and  even  insanity  or  imbecility  is
a  common  temporary  result  of  convulsive  fits,  and  therefore
not  wonderful.  He  was  suspected  of  mesmerism  by  one
doctor.

**  Dr.  Guy  asked  me  if  I  had  ever  had  the  hands  passed  before
my  eyes,  and  I  told  hiin  no;  and  when  the  students  came,  they
began  asking  me  such  foolish  Questions,  one  was  this,  *  Does  your
mother  know  you  are  out  7^  ana  this  is  my  answer,  'That  is  joking;
but  still  she  knows  that  I  am  not  at  home  now.' — '  Have  you  ever
been  in  the  same  way  before  T'  *  I  have  had  fits,  but  not  been  so
bad  before/—'  What  is  the  ring  for  V  *  For  fits.'—*  But  that  docs
not  do  you  any  good.'  '  No,  not  now,  sir.'  And  then  Dr.  Todd
hallooed  in  my  ear,  and  asked  me  if  I  felt  it,  and  I  told  him  that  I
heard  a  noise  like  a  pot  boiling;  and  a  great  many  other  foolish
questions  they  asked  me.  And  a  young  man  in  the  hospital  told  me
that  Dr.  Todd  said  cuckoo  in  mv  ear,  and  then  they  wrote  down  that
I  should  not  have  any  food  till  I  spoke  and  asked  them  for  some,
but  they  gave  me  some  when  I  told  them  I  could  not  ask  them  for
any;  and  one  day  Dr.  Budd  saw  me,  and  he  said,  *  Oh,  the  damn
young  scoundrel,  he  is  only  shamming :  if  I  was  Dr.  Todd,  I  would
whip  him  till  he  did  speak;'  the  sister  told  me;  she  wrote  it  down;
and  when  Dr.  Todd  came,  I  told  him,  and  he  told  me  to  take  off
ray  jacket  and  shirt,  and  he  would  give  me  the  whip ;  and  I  did
take  them  off,  but  he  did  not  whip  me,  and  then  he  ordered  me  a
cold  shower  bath  every  morning,  and  I  had  it  five  times ;  and  one
day  when  father  came  to  see  me,  Dr.  Russel,  the  house-surgeon,
told  him  that  it  was  no  use  him  keeping  me  there  any  longer,  so
father  brought  me  out  with  him,  after  I  had  been  in  twenty-one
days.

h  Pamphlet,  pp.  43,  44,  46.


168  Double  States  of  Consciousness,

'*  I  do  not  know  what  they  did  to  me  when  there,  during  the
time  I  was  insensible,  which  was  four  days  and  fiye  nights,  only  a
young  man,  a  patient  in  the  hospital,  told  me  that  they  thrust  pins
in  me,  and  burnt  me  with  hot  spoons,  and  done  several  other  thmgs
to  me  as  well,  to  make  me  speak."'

After  his  cure  by  mesmerism  he  went  to  shew  himself  at
the  hospital.

**  And  when  I  went  to  see  them,  they  told  me  that  mesmerism
would  never  do  me  any  good,  and  they  told  me  it  was  no  use  to
ooQie  to  you  to  be  mesmerised;  they  wrote  it  down,  and  they  told
me  to  come  again  and  see  them  again.  And  when  I  went  again  I
could  speak  and  hear,  and  they  said  to  me.  Well,  have  you  got
your  tongue  yet,  and  I  said.  Yes;  and  Dr.  Todd  said.  How's  that?
IS  that  with  mesmerising?  and  I  said,  Tes,  and  he  said.  Do  you
really  think  that  you  have  been  cured  by  mesmerism?  and  I  said.
Yes ;  and  they  said.  Oh  foolish  boy,  you  should  not  think  that,
because  you  would  have  got  your  speech  and  hearing  just  as  soon  if
you  had  stopped  here ;  and  I  said  to  them.  What  made  yon  send
me  home  then  if  you  could  have  cured  me?  and  then  they  began
laughing  at  me,  and  I  told  them  I  did  not  come  there  for  to  be  made
game  of;  and  then  they  'said,  That  will  be  a  fine  thing  for  Dr.
EUiotson  to  make  someuiing  of:  and  then  they  asked  me  a  great
many  questions,  but  they  laughed  at  me  so  that  I  would  not  answer
them ;  and  the  questions  were  about  Dr.  ElHotson ;  and  they  would
laugh  at  me  so  that  I  would  not  stop  any  longer.

Another  note  from  him  ended  thus : —

**  And  they  made  all  manner  of  game  of  me,  and  laughed  at  me,
and  said  that  I  was  a  foolish  boy  to  believe  that  Dr.  EUiotson  had
cured  me  by  mesmerism.  But  I  told  them  that  he  had  certainly
cured  me.  And  I  said  this,  that  I  had  no  hearing  or  speech  when
I  went  to  him,  and  that  now  I  could  both  hear  and  speak."J

II.  A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness  in  Bavaria  independent  of
Mesmerism^  and  attended  not  by  voracity,  mimicry,  and
singing,  but  by  delusion  and  murderous  propensity.

In  Anselm  Ritter  yon  Feuerbach's  collection  of  trials  is
one  of  a  poor  but  excellent  youth^  subject  to  epilepsy  and
also  afflicted  with  double  consciousness :  and  in  one  of  his
two  states^  the  diseased^  preternatural  one^  he  was  decidedly
insane,  and  at  length  committed  a  murder.  I  employ  Lady
Duff  Oordon^s  recent  translation  of  a  few  of  them.

Feuerbach  was  for  ten  years  president  of  the  central  cri-
minal court  of  a  province  of  Bavaria,  containing  several  towns^
and  inhabited  by  half  a  million  of  people  differing  in  religious
faith.

i  Zot«t,  Vol.  I.,  p.  341.

j  p.  347.  The  motto  of  King's  College  is  '  M,ncU  et  tapUnter  :*  this  cruel tj
and  igaoraace  become  neither  virtuous  nor  informed  men.


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  169

"  In  Bavaria,  on  the  discovery  of  any  crime,  the  Uniermtehungs
Richter  (examining  jndge) — and  Fenerbach  himself  once  filled  that
office,  which,  in  fact,  combines  the  duties  of  public  prosecutor  with
that  of  judge — ^instantly  sets  about  collecting  evidence.  Those
against  whom  he  finds  any  reasonable  grouna  of  suspicion  are  at
once  apprehended,  and  kept  in  prison  until  their  guilt  or  innocence
be  proved.  The  judge  meanwhile  endeavours  to  trace  back  the
prisoner's  life  to  his  very  cradle,  to  make  himself  thoroughly  ac-
quainted with  his  character  and  disposition,  in  order  thence  to  infer
whether  he  be  or  be  not  a  man  likely  to  have  committed  the  crime
imputed  to  him. To  this  end  witnesses  are  examined.

**  Children  under  eight  years  of  age,  persons  directly  interested
in  the  result  of  the  trial,  or  who  have  been  convicted  or  even  strongly
suspected  of  perjury,  falsehood,  or  suppression  of  evidence,  are  in-
competent witnesses.  Suspicious  witnesses  are  persons  under  the
age  of  eighteen,  accomplices,  the  injured  party,  informers,  except
such  as  are  officially  bound  to  inform,  persons  of  doubtful  character,
and  persons  in  any  way  connected  with  or  hostile  to  the  party  afiected
by  their  testimony.

''The  evidence  of  two  sufficient  witnesses  (those  against  whom
none  oi  the  above-mentioned  objections  can  be  raised),  as  to  facts
which  they  have  seen  with  their  own  eyes,  is  taken  as  proof;  that
of  one  sufficient  witness  as  half  proof.

"The  testimony  of  two  suspicious  witnesses,  if  agreeing,  is
equal  to  that  of  one  sufficient  witness.

''  Circumstantial  evidence  amounts  to  proof  when  all  the  circum-
stances are  Ailly  proved  by  witnesses,  and  cannot  be  reasonably  ac-
counted for  except  on  the  supposition  of  the  prisoner's  guilt;  but
while  any  other  explanation  is  possible  the  evidence  is  deemed  im-
perfect; and  even  when  circumstantial  evidence  is  complete,  the
conviction  of  the  prisoner,  in  cases  of  capital  ofience,  is  not  followed
by  sentence  of  death,  unless  he  confess  his  crime.

**  B^  far  the  most  important  evidence  is  that  eiven  by  the  pri-
soner himself;  he  is  questioned  by  the  examining  judge,  in  the  pre-
sence only  of  a  notary  employed  to  take  down  his  replies.  The
judge  begins  by  exhorting  him  to  tell  the  truth,  hinting  that  a  full
confession  may  soften  his  punishment.  He  then  asks  him  whether
he  knows  why  he  has  been  arrested ;  and  if  the  prisoner  afiects
ignorance  or  gives  a  false  reason,  he  is  again  admonished.  Should
he  persist  in  his  assertions  the  judge  closes  the  examination  for  that
day.  At  the  next  examination  he  reminds  the  prisoner  of  the  duty
of  truth  and  of  the  danger  of  persisting  in  falsehood,  and  then  begins
a  series  of  questions  calculated  to  entrap  him  into  admissions  incon-
sistent with  innocence.  If  on  the  other  hand  the  prisoner  states  the
true  cause  of  his  arrest,  he  is  called  upon  to  tell  aU  he  knows  of  the
matter.  His  statement  is  written  down,  and  the  judee  afterwards
questions  him  upon  every  circumstance  of  his  story,  important  or
trifling,  taking  care  that  he  shall  not,  if  it  can  be  avoidea,  perceive
which  questions  are  important,  and  that  no  time  be  allowed  him  to
consider  his  replies. During  the  inquiry  the  prisoner  is  kept  in


170  Dimble  States  qf  Consciouiness,

ignoranoe  of  the  charge  against  him,  and  any  endeavour  on  hb  part
to  gain  information  on  the  subject  is  an  offence  in  law.  He  is  not
allowed  to  see  a  copy  of  his  own  evidence  or  of  that  of  the  witnesses.
But  when  the  judge  has  failed  to  obtain  a  confession  the  prisoner  is
unexpectedly  confronted  with  one  or  more  of  the  witnesses  against
him,  or  with  an  accomplice,  if  there  be  one,  in  the  hopes  of  surprising
him  into  a  confession.  Should  the  prisoner  refuse  to  answer,  he  is
put  on  a  diet  of  bread  and  water.  In  cases  of  murder,  the  accused
IS  led  to  the  spot  where  the  crime  was  committed,  and  the  bleeding
corpse,  or,  it  may  be,  the  mouldering  remains,  are  suddenly  shown
to  him.  Feuerbach  remarks  that  in  cases  of  infanticide  this  expedi*
ent  has  never  been  known  to  fail;  but  it  is  manifest  that  such  terrors
can  have  little  or  no  effect  on  hardened  and  resolute  criminals.  A
confession  must  be  formally  made  before  the  examining  judge,  and
that  not  during  the  first  examination;  a  confession  made  dien  cannot
be  followed  by  conviction;  and  a  confession  made  before  two  sufficient
witnesses  in  the  absence  of  the  judge  is  only  half  proof,  and  requires
to  be  confirmed  bv  other  evidence.

"  But  even  when  a  confession  has  been  extorted  it  affords  no
proof  of  the  That  bettand,  the  carpus  delicti,  or  fact  that  the  crime
has  been  committed :  it  is  evidence  that  the  prisoner  committed  the
actions  which  he  describes,  but  it  does  not  prove  what  were  the
results  of  those  actions.  The  That  bestand  must  be  proved  beyond
all  reasonable  doubt,  and  in  cases  of  murder  it  must  be  shown  that
the  injuries  inflicted  were  undoubtedly  mortal.

"  It  is  the  duty  of  the  examining  judge  to  collect  evidence  for
the  prisoner  as  carefully  as  against  him;  but  when  he  has  got  to-

§  ether  all  that  he  can  find,  the  prisoner  is  furnished  with  a  legal
efender,  who  is  allowed  to  confer  with  him  in  private,  having  first
sworn  to  undertake  no  unrighteous  defence.  This  advocate  makes  a
minute  of  his  objections  to  the  course  of  procedure,  and  composes
a  written  defence,  which  is  sent  by  the  examining  jud^,  together
with  a  full  report  of  all  the  proceedings,  to  the  centnu  criminal  court
of  the  district.  This  court  decides  by  majority  iqx>n  the  guilt  of
the  accused,  the  nature  of  his  crime,  and  tne  punishment  to  be  in**
flicted;  when  the  punishment  is  death,  or  imprisonment  exceeding
twenty  years,  the  sentence  is  sent  for  revision  to  the  high  court  of
appeal,  and  in  other  cases  the  prisoner  may  appeal,  if  he  desires  it.
Wnen  the  ai^Uate  court  has  given  its  decision,  the  prisoner,  if
the  sentence  be  reversed,  is  instantly  set  free;  if  confirmed,  it  is
executed  within  twenty-four  hours.

*'  If,  ia  cases  of  capital  crimen  proof  fails  from  mere  technical
insuffidemiy,  the  prisoner  escapes  the  punishment  of  death ;  but
imprisonment  of  greater  or  less  duration  and  severity  is  inflicted."

The  criminals  thus  treated  usaally  confess  their  crimes  in
the  most  circumstantial  manner :  and  Feuerbach  was  so  struck
with  thiSj  that  he  devotes  a  whole  chapter  to  an  examination
of  it.  "  A  few,'*  he  says,  *'  very  few,  confess  from  remorse^
some  from  inability  to  evade  the  searching  interrogatories  of


eGmmmieaied  by  Dr.  EUioisan.  171

tho  judge,  some  from  indifference  to  their  fate,  others  from  a
desire  to  put  an  end  to  a  state  of  anxiety  and  suspense ;  but
by  for  the  greater  number  firom  dislike  to  the  strict  discipline
and  comptdsory  silence  of  a  Bayarian  prison.  One  criminal,
after  three  days^  imprisonment,  confessed,  saying,  *  That  he
could  no  longer  hold  his  tongue ;  that  be  had  been  accus-
tomed to  social  pleasures,  and  would  rather  tell  all  than  be
condemned  to  perpetual  silence/

One  trial  in  Lady  Duff  Gordon's  selection,  that  of  a  pu-
ritanical and  Jesuitical  priest  for  the  murder  of  one  of  the
women  he  had  seduced,  lasted  five  years,  filled  forty-two  folio
Tolumes,  and  consisted  of  abore  a  hundred  examinations.

^'Theresder/'  remarks  Lady  Duff  Gordon,  ''who  may  be  in-
clined altogether  to  condemn  this  German  prolixitj  and  deliberation,
should  remember  that  in  the  year  1827  no  fewer  than  six  persons,
who  had  been  oonyicted  of  capital  crimes  at  the  Old  Bailey,  and  left
for  execution,  were  proyed  to  be  innocent,  and  sayed  by  the  seal  and
actiyity  of  the  sheriff.  In  the  last  century  the  Bavarian  criminal
procedure  was  anything  but  slow.  Torture  was  not  abolished  until
1806,  a  reform  chiefly  owing  to  the  humane  exertions  of  Feuerbach,
and  extremely  distasteful  to  the  judges  of  the  old  school,  who  could
not  fbrgiye  him  for  baring  put  an  end  to  so  simple,  expeditious,  and
easy  a  mode  of  obtaining  eyidence.  '  What,'  said  they,  '  could  be
the  use  of  making  so  many  difficulties  about  hanging  a  pack  of  crimi-
nals?' The  time  lost  by  the  abolition  of  torture  was  at  first  regained
by  a  total  disregard  of  the  yery  slight  means  of  defence  aflbrded  to
the  accused  by  the  Codex  Juris  Bayarici  Criminalis  de  anno  1751.
The  doctrine  that  the  sooner  criminal  cases  were  disposed  of,  the
better,  was  acted  upon  until  the  16th  of  May,  1813,  when  the  cri-
minal code,  composed  by  Feuerbach  for  the  kingdom  of  Bayaria,
receiyed  th»  royu  assent.  This  code  was  adopted  by  the  duchy  of
Oldenburg,  and  forms  the  basis  of  new  criminal  codes  for  Weimar,
Wurtemlrarg,  and  other  German  states."

The  loye  of  the  German  lawyers  for  the  old*established
method  of  torture  corresponded  with  the  loye  of  our  lawyers
for  the  established  method  of  strangling,  A  yirtuous  and
enlightened  individual  springs  up  in  eyery  profession  and  de«
partment,  enforcing  humanity,  reformation,  or  truth,  while
his  brethren  set  their  faces  sternly  against  his  attempts,  stig-
matizing him  as  weak-minded,  yisionaxy,  or  innoyating.
Among  English  lawyers  there  haye  been  Basil  Montagu  and
Bomilly :  among  English  dirines.  Law,  Wheatley — but  how
few  more  I  When  good  and  able  men  stand  up  with  a  new
truth  or  a  reformation  in  their  hand  for  their  fellow-creatures,
those  of  their  own  profession  yociferate  against  it  and  cry  out
for  a  continuance  of  ignorance  and  error  and  of  bad  old  ways,
and  the  mass  of  mankind  join  the  professional  herd,  suppos*


172  Double  States  of  Conscumaness,

ing  they  must  know  best.  ''  Not  tkia  man,  but  Barabbas !"
was  the  cry  of  the  populace  chiming  in  with  the  voice  of
their  priests^  when  Christy  the  innovator  and  simplifier^  would
have  substituted  sincerity  for  hypocrisy^  simplicity  for  for-
malities^ and  virtue  for  subjection  to  priestcraft  and  for  gro*
veiling  superstition^ — ^all  doated  upon  by  the  majority  of  the
religious  worlds  protestant  as  well  as  papist^  at  this  very  hour
as  much  as  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  when  they  raised
sometimes  his  indignation,  and  sometimes  his  compassion.

A  day  labourer  of  Lenzenberg,  named  Conrad  Eichmiiller,
and  seventy-one  years  old,  did  not  return  home  on  the  night
of  the  7th  of  September,  1824,  from  digging  and  cutting  up
stumps  of  trees  on  a  hill  called  Hansgorgle  near  the  forest
Hersbruck.  His  wife's  son  and  some  other  vouths  found  him
dead,  and  on  carrying  the  news  to  the  widow,  were  sent  back
by  her  with  a  cart  to  fetch  the  body.

''  Eichmuller  was  found  about  three  feet  from  the  stump  at  which
he  had  been  working,  and  in  which  three  wedges  were  still  sticking;
he  was  lying  with  his  face  towards  the  ground ;  his  skull  shatter^,
and  both  feet  chopped  ofiP;  the  left  foot  still  adhered  to  the  body  by
the  boot,  but  the  right  lay  under  a  tree  at  a  distance  of  four  or  five
feet ;  traces  of  blood  clearly  showed  that  he  had  been  dragged  from
the  spot  where  he  was  at  work,  after  he  had  been  killed  and  his  feet
had  been  chopped  off :  his  jacket  and  his  two  axes  were  scattered
about,  and  one  of  the  latter  was  stained  with  blood  in  a  manner
which  left  no  doubt  that  it  had  been  used  in  the  murder  and  mutila-
tion of  the  unfortunate  old  man.  The  wife  had  charged  her  son  to
take  possession  of  the  money  which  her  husband  had  in  his  pocket,
amounting  to  about  two  norins,  but  on  searching  the  body  nothing
was  found  upon  it  save  one  button  in  the  breeches  pocket.

''On  the  7th  of  September  (the  day  of  the  murder),  Paul
Deuerlein,  a  day-labourer,  was  driving  a  cartload  of  grain  from
Reichenschwand  to  Hersbruck,  and  at  about  five  o'clock  in  the
afternoon  he  overtook  young  Sorgel  on  the  road,  and  called  out  to
him,  'Where  do  you  come  from?  the  Hansgorgle,  eh?'  Sorgel
replied,  pointing  to  the  hill,  "  A  year  ago  some  one  buried  my  blood
up  there  ; .  I  went  to  look  for  it  last  year,  but  it  had  not  curdled
then,  and  he  who  had  buried  it  flogged  me  soundly.  To-day  I  went
up  there  again  to  look  after  my  blood,  and  he  who  buried  it  was
there  again,  and  had  horns,  but  I  hit  him  on  the  head  with  the
hatchet,  chopped  off  his  feet,  and  drank  his  blood.'  Deuerlein,
ilfho  knew  that  Sorgel  was  foolish  at  times,  took  no  heed  of  what  he
said;  meanwhile  they  came  to  Hersbruck,  where  Sorgel' s  father  was
waiting  for  him  at  the  door  of  the  poorhouse,  into  which  he  and  his
family  had  been  received."

Sorgel  was  a  poor  innocent  industrious  youth,  subject  first


' communicated  by  Dr,  Elliotson.  173

to  violent  epilepsy  and  then  to  paroarysma  of  second  conscious-
ness, in  which  his  faculties  were  deranged, — in  which  he  had
delusions  and  ungovernable  criminal  propensities,  the  whole  of
which  he  was  ignorant  of  upon  returning  to  his  ordinary  state
of  consciousness^  though  in  his  morbid  state  he  remembered
the  occurrences  of  his  natural  */fl/e— precisely  as  is  most  com-
monly the  case  when  double  consciousness  is  induced  artifi-
cially by  mesmerism  and  which  must  have  begun  before  he
went  with  his  father  to  the  Hansgorgle,  since  he  remembered
not  even  this  in  his  natural  state.

*'  Sdrgel  came  quietly  along  with  Deuerlein,  who  told  the  father,
in  the  presence  of  a  blind  man  called  Albert  Gassner,  what  his  son
had  been  saying.  The  father  scolded  his  son  for  talking  such  non-
sense; but  he  replied,  'Yes,  father,  it  is  quite  true  that  I  knocked
a  man  on  the  head,  and  chopped  off  his  feet;  I  killed  him  in  order
to  drink  a  felon's  blood;  and  the  man  had  horns  upon  his  head.'
Gassner  followed  Sdrgel  into  his  room,  where  he  added,  '  I  also  took
from  him  a  purse  of  money,  but  I  threw  it  away  again,  for  I  will
never  keep  what  is  not  mine.'  Gassner  said,  jesting,  'Oh,  you
kept  the  money,  to  be  sure;'  whereupon  Sdrgel  was  angry,  and
said,  '  Hold  your  tongue,  or  I  will  strike  you  dead.'

*'  About  an  hour  later  Sdrgel  went  into  the  bam  of  the  inn  next
door  to  the  poorhouse,  laughing  heartily,  and  said  to  Katharine  Gassner,
'  Now  I  am  well  again;  I  have  given  it  to  some  one  soundly;  I  hit  him
on  the  head,  and  chopped  off  both  his  feet,  and  one  of  them  I  threw
away.'  Katharine  was  frightened  at  this  speech,  especially  as  she
perceived  blood  upon  his  face;  when  she  asked  him  how  it  got  there,
he  answered,  '  I  drank  a  felon's  blood;'  and  he  went  on  to  tell  her
that  the  man  was  sitting  on  the  ground  filling  a  pipe,  and  that  he
(Sdrgel)  took  up  the  man's  hatchet,  which  lay  beside  him,  struck  him
with  it  on  the  head,  and  took  two  florins  which  he  had  upon  him.

''  In  the  evening  he  told  Katharine  Gdtz,  the  daughter  of  the
sick-nurse  in  the  poorhouse,  that  he  had  come  upon  a  woodcutter
who  was  digging  up  stumps  in  the  forest,  and  that  at  first  he  had
helped  him  at  his  work,  but  that  the  man  then  appeared  to  him  to
have  horns,  whereupon  he  took  up  the  hatchet  and  hit  him  on  the
head,  that  the  man  groaned  very  much,  and  he  then  chopped  off
both  his  feet,  and  drank  his  blood.

''  Old  Sdrgel,  who  looked  upon  his  son's  storj  as  a  symptom  of
returning  insanity,  to  attacks  of  which  his  son  was  subject,  chained
him  to  his  bed  by  way  of  precaution.  The  son  bore  it  quietly,  ate
his  supper,  and  joined  in  prayer  with  the  rest  of  the  family  as  usual,
and  then  lay  down ;  but  towards  morning  he  broke  out  in  raving
madness,  stormed,  and  tugged  at  his  chain,  which  he  endeavoured
to  break.  In  this  state  he  was  found  by  the  constables  when  they
went  to  arrest  and  take  him  before  the  court,  and  they  were  accord-
ingly forced  to  depart  without  him.  Soon  after,  however,  he  be-
came perfectly  quiet,  and  his  own  father  and  another  man  took  him
before  the  court,  unfettered,  on  the  8th  of  September.

VOL.  IV.  o


174  Double  States  of  Consciousness,

"  He  was  immediately  examined  in  the  presence  of  his  father  and
his  father^s  companion.  On  being  questioned,  he  stated  that  his
name  was  John  George  Sorgel,  that  he  was  twenty  years  of  age,  a
Protestant,  the  son  of  a  day-labourer,  bom  in  the  poorhouse  at
Hersbruck,  unmarried,  and  without  property,  and  that  he  had
learned  the  trade  of  a  knife-grinder  and  of  a  chimney-sweep.  On
being  asked  whether  he  had  ever  been  in  custody  before,  he  replied,
'  Oh,  no  ;  who  would  do  any  harm  to  me — I  am  an  angel.'  He
then  related  the  murcUr  as  follows  : — '  I  went  yesterday  with  my
father  to  the  wood  called  the  Hansgorgle — I  left  my  father,  and  saw
at  a  distance  an  old  man  digging  up  stumps  of  trees — I  did  not  know
this  man ;  but  it  seemed  to  me  that  my  own  blood  was  buried  under
the  stump,  and  I  formerly  dreamed  that  my  parents  were  shut  up
in  that  place,  and  that  I  must  drink  the  blood  of  a  felon.  So  I
went  up  to  the  old  man  and  struck  him  on  the  head  with  his  hatchet,
and  chopped  off  both  his  feet.  I  then  drank  the  blood  out  of  his
head,  left  him  lying  there,  and  went  home.'  When  asked  what
could  induce  him  to  commit  such  a  deed,  he  said,  '  The  thing  is
done  and  I  cannot  help  it ;  it  was  because  I  thought  he  was  digging
up  my  blood.'  Sorgel  signed  the  protocol  properly,  but  during  the
examination  he  stared  about  him  wildly,  snowed  great  restlessness,
and  fidgeted  with  his  feet  and  hands;  moreover,  he  continually
expressed  a  desire  of  becoming  a  soldier,  and  could  only  be  kept  in
the  room  by  the  promise  that  his  wishes  should  be  complied  with.

''  On  the  same  afternoon  he  was  taken  to  Lenzenberg  to  see  the
body,  which  he  approached  without  the  slightest  air  of  dismav,  em-
barrassment, or  remorse.  When  asked  whether  he  recognized  it,  he
said,  '  Yes,  it  is  the  same  man  whom  I  struck  yesterday  evening,  he
is  dressed  in  the  same  clothes;  I  chopped  off  his  feet  so  that  he
might  never  be  laid  in  chains  affain.'  During  this  scene  he  displayed
the  same  bodily  restlessness  as  ne  had  done  at  his  examination.  He
frequently  lauehed,  and  said  that  he  was  an  angel,  and  that  he  had
known  very  well  that  the  old  man  man  was  good  for  nothing.

"  On  the  following  day,  9th  of  September,  the  judges  went  into
the  prison  of  the  accused  to  examine  him  again.  When  asked  how
he  felt,  he  said,  '  My  head  is  very  fuU,  and  I  have  bad  dreams;
among  other  things  I  dreamt  that  I  must  go  up  to  the  Hansgorgle;
where  there  is  a  dock  which  strikes  very  loud.'  You  told  us  yester-
day that  you  had  killed  a  man:  how  did  you  do  that?  '  I  saw  an
ola  man  digging  up  stumps  in  the  Hansgorele,  and  I  went  and  sat
down  near  him.  I  took  up  his  hatchet,  which  lay  beside  him,  and
struck  him  with  the  back  of  it  upon  the  head,  so  that  he  instantly
fell  down  dead;  then  I  chopped  off  both  his  feet.  He  had  an  old
wooden  tobacco-pipe  in  his  hand,  which  he  dropped  when  I  struck
him;  I  took  the  pipe,  but  threw  it  away  directly.  I  also  took  his
flint  and  steel,  ana  kept  them'  (these  were  found  upon  him  by  his
father,  and  delivered  to  the  court).  Sorgel  steadfastly  denied  having
taken  any  money  from  the  old  man,  or  having  confessed  to  any  one
that  he  had  done  so,  nor  was  a  single  coin  found  upon  him.  Why
then  did  you  chop  off  the  man's  feet? '  In  order  that  he  might  not


comnmnicaied  by  Dr.  ElUotstm.  175

be  laid  in  chains.'  Why  did  you  kill  him?  *  I  struck  him  because
I  thought  he  was  going  to  dig  up  my  own  blood.'  He  then  went  on'
to  say  that  a  strange  woman  had  once  told  him  he  must  drink  felon's
blood  to  be  cured  of  the  falling  sickness;  and  he  added  that  he  had
felt  much  better  since  he  had  drunk  the  old  man's  blood.  I  knew,
said  he,  that  it  was  forbidden  to  kill  people,  but  I  killed  the  man  in
order  to  be  cured  by  his  blood.  It  happened  soon  before  five  in  the
afternoon,  and  I  first  drank  the  blood  from  the  man's  head,  and
then  dragged  him  to  a  little  distance  and  cut  off  both  his  feet;  the
left  foot  remained  attached  to  the  boot,  and  the  right  foot  I  threw
away.'  The  blood-stained  hatchet  was  then  laid  before  him;  he
looked  at  it  attentively,  and  said  at  last,  '  Yes,  that  is  the  hatchet
with  which  I  struck  tne  man  and  chopped  off  his  feet.'  He  also
recognized  the  flint  and  steel  which  were  shown  him.  The  exami-
nation concluded  with  the  following  questions  and  answers: — Do  you
repent  of  what  you  have  done?  'Why,  he  beat  me  soundly  last
year,  and  that  is  why  he  did  nothing  to  me  when  I  hit  him  on  the
head.'  On  what  occasion  did  the  man  beat  you  last  year?  '  I  went
to  the  woods  once  before  to  catch  birds,  and  he  beat  me  then.'  "

This  second  or  morbid  state  of  consciousness  lasted  a
week. He  then  returned  spontaneously  to  his  natural  state.

*'  On  the  15th  of  September  the  court  was  informed  that  Sorgel
had  been  perfectly  quiet  for  several  days,  and  that  he  talked  co-
herently, without  any  mixture  of  foolish  fancies.  The  judges  here-
upon repaired  to  his  prison  in  order  to  avail  themselves  of  this
interval  of  reason  for  an  examination.  His  appearance  and  manner
were  totally  changed;  when  the  authoritiee  came  in  he  took  <^  hie
cap,  and  greeted  them  civilly,  which  he  had  never  done  he/ore,  at  the
eame  time  addressing  the  judge  by  name**

How  exactly  the  same  is  this  with  what  we  mesmerists
every  day  witness  on  restoring  our  patients  from  their  sleep-
waking  to  their  natural  condition :  and  how  much  more  must
the  identity  strike  those  who  have  witnessed  mesmeric  sleep*
waking  attended  by  a  greater  than  usual  dash  of  cerebral  dis-
turbance,— ^by  excessive  spirits,  by  impudence  or  mischievous
propensity.  Those  who  witnessed  the  second  consciousness
of  the  two  epileptic  Okeys,  their  wild,  unmanageable,  deli-
rious, sleep-waking  state,  must  be  most  forcibly  reminded
of  the  phenomena  of  the  two  sisters  upon  reading  this.

**  On  being  asked,  he  said  he  had  felt  much  better  ever  since  he
had  been  bled  by  order  of  the  physician.  That  before  that  he  had
not  been  at  all  well,  that  his  head  had  been  dizzy  and  full  of  strange
fancies,  and  that  he  had  dreamt  all  manner  of  nonsense.  He  was
then  asked  if  he  knew  the  cause  of  his  arrest.  '  My  father,'  said  he,
*  who  generally  watches  beside  me  at  night,  told  me  that  I  ran  away
from  £m  in  the  Hans§^rgle  and  killed  a  woodcutter,  so  I  suppose
that  is  why  I  am  in  prison.' Did  he  remember  going  to  the  Hans-

o2


1 76  Double  States  of  Consciousness,

gorgle  with  bis  father?  'No;  I  should  know  nothing  of  the  matter  had
not  my  father  told  me  about  it  the  other  day,  I  know  nothing  at  all
of  having  hilled  a  man;  and  if  I  did  so,  it  must  have  been  the  will
of  Grod  who  led  me  tbitber.'  He  was  then  reminded  that  be  had
himself  twice  told  the  court  that  be  bad  killed  a  woodcutter  with  bis
own  hatchet.  '  I  remember,'  said  he,  '  that  jou  were  here  in  my
prison,  and  that  somebodj  wrote  at  yonder  table,  but  /  know  nothing
of  having  confessed  that  I  killed  a  man,'  He  as  positively  deni^
any  recollection  of  having  had  a  dead  man  with  bis  legs  chopped  oiF
shown  to  him,  or  that  a  bloody  hatchet  and  a  flint  and  steel  bad
been  laid  before  him,  both  of  which  he  recognized.  Neyertbeless  be
knew  that  he  had  been  imprisoned  for  about  ten  days,  and  that  it
was  Saturday.  He  admitted  having  heard,  as  he  added,  from  his
mother,  who  bad  heard  it  from  some  one  else,  that  the  blood  of  a
felon  was  a  cure  for  the  falling  sickness,  but  observed  that  the  man
be  killed  was  no  felon,  but  rather  that  he  himself  must  be  one.  Still
be  maintained  that  he  never  remembered  drinking  human  blood  or
killing  the  woodcutter,  '  Every  one  tells  me  that  I  did  so,'  said  be,
<  and  therefore  I  am  bound  to  believe  it,  but  I  must  have  been  out
of  my  mind  at  the  time.'  During  the  whole  examination  bis  de-
meanour was  quiet  and  collected,  be  spoke  coherently,  and  without
any  confusion  of  ideas,  and  bis  look  was  open  and  unembarrassed.

*'  The  next  examination  was  deferred  until  the  28tb  September,
but  nothing  new  was  elicited.  Sorgel  still  answered  every  question
by  declaring  that  he  knew  absolutelv  nothing  of  all  that  he  had  for-
merly related  to  the  court  and  to  other  persons.  The  flint  and  steel
were  shown  to  him,  but  he  denied  all  knowledge  of  them,  or  of  how
they  bad  come  into  bis  possession.  The  axe  was  likewise  laid  before
him,  but  he  said  'I  don't  know  it.'  The  court  remarked  that  during
the  whole  examination  the  prisoner  behaved  with  composure  and
propriety,  was  perfectly  easy  and  unconstrained,  and  that  bis  coun-
tenance was  open  and  cheerful.'

Now  was  this  unfortunate  patient  called  an  impostor  by
the  Germans  because  of  his  double  consciousness  ?  Did  they
think  that  "  a  good  thrashing  would  have  cured  him  J"  Did
they  laugh  ?  No !  they  believed  the  facts  before  them.
Hear,  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  Mr.  Wakley,  Mr.  Bransby
Cooper,  Mr.  Listen,  Dr.  Chambers,  Dr.  Forbes,  and  the
whole  company  of  scoffers  at  the  Okeys  and  the  phenomena
artificially  induced  by  mesmerism, — ^bear  the  words  of  wisdom
which  proceed  from  the  mouth  of  Feuerbacb.

*'  It  is  evident  that  the  utter  ignorance  of  all  he  had  done,  which
Sorgel  professed  during  the  examinations  of  the  15th  and  28tb
Angust,  was  not  affected.  Falsehood  is  never  so  perfectly  consistent
as  were  bis  declarations  in  the  two  last  examinations,  nor  can  dis-
simulation ever  appear  so  frank  and  unconstrained  as  the  demeanour
of  this  young  man,  who  was,  moreover,  described  by  all  who  knew
him  as  a  simple,  kipd-hearted,  pious  lad,  when  in  his  right  senses.


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.  177

At  both  the  two  last  examinations  he  showed  himself  perfectly  sane^
whereas  if  he  had  had  any  reason  for  wishing  to  deceive  the  judge,
nothing  would  have  been  easier  for  him  than  to  continue  playing  the
part  of  a  madman.  If  his  ignorance  at  the  two  last  examinations  was
affected,  his  former  madness  must  necessarily  have  been  eoually  false,
a  supposition  which  is  contradicted  by  all  the  eyidence.  None  but  a
Garrick  could  have  acted  madness  with  such  fearful  truth  and  nature.
Nor  was  a  murderer  at  all  likely  first  to  confess  his  crime  in  the
assumed  character  of  a  madman,  and  then  to  affect  forgetfulness  of
the  past  upon  pretending  to  recoyer  reason.  If,  again,  he  were
really  mad  when  he  committed  the  crime,  when  he  related  it  and
when  he  recognized  the  corpse  and  the  blood-stained  axe,  he  could
haye  no  conceiyable  motive  for  acting  forgetfulness  of  deeds  committed
and  words  uttered  during  a  paroxysm  of  insanity.

"  His  behaviour  in  court  on  the  3rd  November,  when  his  advo-
cate's defence  was  read  to  him,  confirmed  the  truth  of  his  statement.
His  advocate  pleaded  for  an  acquittal  on  the  ground  that  he  was  not
accountable  for  his  actions.  During  the  reading  of  this  paper
Sorgel's  manner  was  unconstrained  and  almost  indifierent :  he  lis-
tened to  it  attentively,  but  without  the  slightest  emotion.  On  beine
asked  whether  he  was  satisfied  with  the  defence,  whether  he  had
anything  to  add,  and  if  so,  what  ?  he  answered,  '  I  have  nothing  to
add,  and  what  yonder  gentleman  has  written  is  quite  to  my  mmd.
As  I  have  often  said,  I  know  nothing  about  killing  any  many  and  if
I  did  so,  it  must  have  been  while  I  did  not  know  what  I  was  about.
If  I  had  been  in  my  right  mind,  as  I  am  now,  I  certainly  should  not
have  harmed  any  one.'  To  the  inquiry  how  he  felt,  he  replied,
'  Very  well,  but  a  few  days  ago  my  keeper  tells  me  I  was  very  crazy
again  and  talked  all  manner  of  nonsense,  but  /  do  not  know  a  word
of  the  matter.'

*'  Nothing  is  more  remarkable  than  that  Sorgel's  confessions,
which  were  made  during  his  fits  of  madness,  should,  with  one  single
exception,  tally  so  accurately  in  every  point  with  the  real  facts  of
the  case.  His  statement  was  as  connected  and  as  intelligible  a  one
in  every  respect  except  the  fantastic  motives  which  he  assigned  for
the  deed,  as  could  have  been  made  by  a  perfectly  sane  man.  The
only  one  of  his  assertions  which  was  contradicted  by  the  evidence  of
others  is  this,  that  before  the  court  Sorgel  denied  having  taken,  or
having  ever  told  any  one  that  he  had  taken,  the  murdered  man's
purse.  It  was  nevertheless  certain  that  the  woodcutter  had  had  two
florins  in  his  possession,  and  that  this  money  must  have  been  taken
by  Soi^l.  This  was  proved  by  the  declaration  of  the  widow  and
her  son,  and  by  the  confession  made  by  Sorgel  that  very  evening  to
the  blind  Gassner  and  to  Katharine,  both  parties  agreeing  exactly
as  to  the  sum.  It  is,  however,  equally  certain  that  Sorgel  did  not
keep  this  money  ;  in  all  probability  he  took  it  in  a  fit  of  childish
avidity,  and  afterwards  threw  it  away  as  a  useless  or  forbidden  pos-
session.

"The  perfect  unconcern  with  which  Sorgel  related  the  whole
transaction,  as  if  it  were  the  most  ordinary  event,  as  well  as  several


178  Double  States  of  Consciouanesi,

irrational  expressions  which  he  made  use  of  in  courts  proye  him  to
have  heen  mad,  not  only  when  he  committed  the  murder,  but  also
when  he  underwent  the  first  two  examinations.  The  most  remark-
able light  is  thrown  upon  his  condition  by  the  change  which  took
place  in  him  when  the  fit  of  madness  had  passed  away.  With  the
madness  every  trace  of  the  imaginary  world  which  it  had  called  into
existence  disappeared  from  his  mind.  His  recovery  was  like  waking
from  a  deep  sleep,  which  left  no  impression  but  a  vague  sense  of  bad
and  frightful  dreams.  So  long  as  his  soul  was  darkened  by  madness,
he  was  as  perfectly  conscious  of  his  own  fancies,  motives,  resolutions,
and  actions,  as  of  the  real  external  circumstances  of  the  deed,  and
was  able  clearly  to  describe  all  that  had  passed.  But  these  images,
motives,  and  recollections  vanished  as  soon  as  the  spell  of  madness
was  broken,  and  he  heard  the  account  with  as  much  surprize  as  he
would  have  listened  to  the  recital  of  the  strange  deeds  of  some  un-
known person.  He  knew  only  thus  much  of  a  period  of  several
days,  '  that  his  head  was  very  confused,  and  that  he  dreamt  all
manner  of  nonsense.'  He  did  not  even  remember  the  substance  of
his  dreams;  only  one  or  two  circumstances  remained  in  his  memory;
for  instance,  that  the  judge  had  visited  him  in  prison,  and  that  some
one  had  written  at  the  table.  He  was  not  aware  either  that  he  was
himself  the  principal  person  concerned  on  that  occasion,  that  the
subject  of  the  inquiry  was  his  own  deed,  or  that  he  had  confessed  it.

"  It  is  well  known  that  in  madness  or  delirium  the  patient  often
appears  to  himself  to  be  a  third  person,  or  ascribes  his  own  feelings
and  actions  to  some  one  else.  Thus  a  fever  patient  begs  his  nurse
to  remove  that  troublesome  guest  out  of  his  bed,  pointing  all  the
while  to  himself,  or  says  that  a  friend  sitting  by  his  bedside  has  a
violent  pain  in  the  side  or  is  thirsty,  and  reouests  that  something
may  be  given  him  to  drink ;  while  it  is  he  nimself  who  feels  the
pain  and  the  thirst  which  he  ascribes  to  another.  This  singular
confusion  of  persons  occurs  twice  in  SorgeFs  madness,  and  proves
its  reality  and  the  truth  of  his  confession ;  and  also  that  the  confes-
sion was  made  during  the  paroxysm  of  insanity,  as  in  it  he  relates
these  delusions  as  positive  facts.

"The  first  instance  of  this  delusion  was  that  which  prompted
him  to  drink  the  blood  of  the  murdered  man.  After  he  had  reco-
vered his  senses  he  was  perfectly  well  able  to  distinguish  a  felon  from
a  murdered  man.  Thus  his  application  of  the  vulgar  superstition
that  the  blood  of  an  executed  felon  is  a  cure  for  the  falling  sickness,
to  the  man  he  had  himself  killed,  was  no  doubt  entirely  the  result
of  this  delusion.  His  imagination  transferred  to  the  person  of  the
murdered  man  that  which  he  knew  himself  to  have  become  by  the
deed  he  had  committed.

"  We  find  exactly  the  same  confusion  in  the  motive  which  in-
duced him  to  chop  off  the  feet  of  the  murdered  man.  He  constantly
asserted  that  he  had  done  this  in  order  to  prevent  their  laying  the
old  man  in  chains  again.  Now  Sorgel  had  of  late  been  frequently
chained  himself,  and  indeed  had  but  just  been  released  from  the
chains  in  which  he  had  lain  all  night,  and  possibly  still  felt  the


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  179

pressure  of  the  rings  upon  his  ankles ;  and  here  again  his  disturhed
imagination  confounded  his  own  feet  with  those  of  the  dead  man,
and  in  order  to  secure  AtfiMe(^from  the  danger  of  being  hud  in  chains
in  future,  on  the  presumption  that  a  man  'who  has  no  feet  cannot
be  chained  bj  them,  he  chopped  ofif  both  the  feet  of  the  dead  wood-
cutter."

Mr.  Bransby  Cooper  not  being  the  medical  authority  ap-
pointed to  judge,  the  uufortunate  Sorgel  had  not  a  *'  good
thrashing.'^  Mr.  Wakley  and  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  not  being
appointed  to  judge,  he  was  not  a  practised  impostor  and
handed  over  to  insult  and  defamation,  like  the  Okeys  fourteen
years  afterwards.

"The  physicians  declared  their  opinion  that  Sorgel  had  com-
mitted the  uHU'der  in  a  paroxysm  of  madness,  when  he  was  not
accountable  for  his  actions,  and  accordingly  the  court,  on  the  23rd
November,  1824,  acquitted  him  of  murder.

"  For  the  safety  of  the  community  he  was  confined  in  the  mad-
house of  Schwabach,  where  he  died  in  the  course  of  a  few  months."

This  decision  was  given  in  1824.  The  Boyal  Medical  and
Chirurgical  Society,  ignorant  that  there  are  cases  of  double
consciousness,  refused  a  place  for  Dr.  Wilson's  paper  in  their
transactions  in  1843,  doubting  the  facts,  and  miserably  fear-
ing to  publish  them.  Well  it  is  for  the  members  and  the
bvdk  of  the  profession  that  it  is  now  published :  but  better
would  it  have  been  had  the  Society  been  sufficiently  informed
before  to  have  understood  and  appreciated  them  three  years
ago.

The  two  following  cases  were  kindly  written  out  for  me  at
the  time  the  profession  pronounced  the  Okeys  impostors,  by
Mr.  Wing,  then  of  Aberdeen  Place,  St.  John's  Wood,  and
previously  of  Lincolnshire,  where  they  occurred.  As  one
young  lady  died,  and  the  other  remained  obviously  ill,  I  hope
those  who  deride  and  are  ignorant  of  such  complaints  will  be
satisfied.

"  III.  Somnabidic  Case  of  Miss  J.

^'Miss  J.,  a  resident  in  the  country,  set.  17,  of  dark  hair
and  eyes,  spare  form,  and  of  short  stature,  of  interesting
features,  but  of  pale  complexion,  and  in  whom  the  catamenia
had  not  appeared,  was  seized  at  the  age  of  seventeen  with
various  symptoms  of  hysteria*;  there  was  a  loss  of  appetite
and  a  confined  state  of  the  bowels.  Miss  J.  had  a  particular
aversion  to  animal  food,  and  which  has  existed  to  the  present
day  to  such  a  degree  that  it  is  scarcely  ever  taken.

"  This  young  lady  suddenly  surprised  her  friends  and  my-


180  Double  States  of  Consciou8ne98,

self  upon  one  of  my  visits  by  raising  herself  to  an  erect  attitude
in  bed^  and  throwing  most  gracefully  her  arms  in  such  dif-
ferent positions  that  I  could  only  compare  the  mutations  to
the  never-ending  variations  of  the  kaleidescope.  In  a  mo-
ment my  patient  would  take  up  the  pillows  and  cast  them  at
myself,  her  friends  and  attendants,  for  perhaps  two  or  three
minutes,  and  then  as  quickly  would  descend  from  her  bed,
and  taking  a  seat  at  the  piano  in  her  bed-room,  would  play
some  airs,  all  present  thought  wilh  far  more  taste  and  excel-
lence than  when  performing  upon  the  instrument  in  her  natural
state.  These  attacks  would  last  from  about  one  to  six  hours
in  the  day ;  on  two  or  three  occasions  they  did  not  terminate
until  about  twelve  hours.  From  their  commencement  to  their
total  disappearance,  a  period  of  about  six  weeks  elapsed.
During  the  somnambulic  state  the  eyes  remained  perfectly
closed,  and  from  the  tongue  no  sound  was  uttered.  No  appeal
from  any  of  her  friends,  either  by  the  voice  or  nipping  her,
had  any  effect  whatever.  This  young  lady  was  returned  to
better  health  by  tonics  and  change  of  air,  but  her  health  to
this  day,  about  eight  years  since,  is  delicate,  as  indicated  by
her  countenance  and  want  of  strength ;  her  appetite  is  very
indijferent,  and  animal  food  is  seldom  or  never  taken.  The
catamenia  were  established  about  four  months  after  the  som-
uabulic  state,  but  have  continued  with  great  irregularity  and
deficiency."

IV.  "  Miss  A.,  whose  residence  was  in  the  country,  and
who  had  dark  hair  and  eyes  and  a  pleasing  complexion,
though  without  colour,  was  seized  when  17  with  painful  cata-
menia and  sickness,  which  continued  with  little  variation  to
the  end  of  her  suffering  life.  No  meal  that  Miss  A.  took
stayed  more  than  a  few  minutes ;  she  would  occupy  her  seat
with  her  family  at  the  dinner  table,  and  at  or  towards  the
end  would  quietly  leave  the  room,  and  return  as  though
nothing  whatever  had  happened  to  disturb  her.  It  was  a
matter  of  astonishment  to  every  one  how  little  she  was  re-
duced in  flesh,  and  how  little  her  complexion  presented  the
appearance  of  an  invalid.  I  was  called  to  attend  Miss  A.
when  her  age  was  nineteen,  and  then  she  complained  of  severe
pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  and  an  acute  pain  over  the
left  eye,  which  with  other  hysteric  symptoms  I  found  she  had
frequently  laboured  under.  There  had  been  a  cessation  of
the  catamenia  for  several  months.  For  the  hepatic  pain  cup-
ping was  successfully  employed.

"  About  this  time  Miss  A.  used  to  be  taken  once  and  some-
times twice  a  day  with  a  changed  voice,  and  apparently  with


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  181

a  totally  altered  mental  character.  The  former  became  weak
and  childish ;  the  latter  was  marked  by  a  particular  amiability
in  all  that  was  said  and  done  by  her.  Every  person  and  ob-
ject was  called  by  a  new  name.  For  instance,  leeches  were
called  blackeys,  and  myself,  Mr.  Flyaway.  This  state  would
continue  from  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  about  two  hours,  and
invariably  terminated  by  a  short  sleep  of  from  two  to  five
minutes.  IVhat  occurred  during  the  changes^  she  had  not  the
slightest  recollection  of  when  perfectly  herself;  but  upon  a  re-
currence,  circumstances  were  referred  to  which  had  taken  place
only  in  the  changed  states.

"  Miss  A.  was  subject  to  these  changes  for  about  two  years
and  a  half.  At  the  age  of  twenty-one,  a  polypus  in  utero
was  discovered,  and  removed  without  any  return.  There  had
been  little  uterine  haemorrhage  to  indicate  the  existence  of
such  a  disease,  but  much  pain  in  the  uterine  region  had  for
many  months  been  endured.

"  The  catameuia  were  irregular,  and  appeared  only  once  in
about  four  months.  The  sickness  continued  unabated  until
nature  was  completely  worn  down.

"  At  the  time  of  this  afflicted  lady's  decease,  I  was  many
miles  from  her,  and  I  am  unacquainted  with  the  particulars
which  immediately  preceded  her  final  sufferings.  She  lived
to  the  age  of  31.''

V.  I  received  the  following  history  from  a  gentleman  who
was  my  pupil  at  University  College  before  the  time  of  mes-
merism. The  patient  was  not  an  ^'  affected  or  cunning  miss,"
but  a  plain  industrious  middle-aged  mother.

"  Hereford,  Dec.  22,  1838.

''My  dear  Sir, — Thinking  the  outline  of  the  following  case
would  interest  you,  I  will  mention  its  principal  features  as
they  have  appeared  to  me,  and  beg  if  you  wish  to  know  more
of  it  you  will  let  me  know  what  kind  of  inquiry  you  wish
made,  and  I  will  most  gladly  attend  to  it.

"  I  am  attending  a  Mrs.  Griffiths,  the  wife  of  a  sawyer  and
mother  of  three  or  four  children,  about  40  years  of  age,  and
of  good  general  health,  for  an  extensive  scaJd  on  her  leg.

''For  some  years  she  has  been  subject  to  fits  of  ecstacy  or
somnambulism,  occurring  at  irregular  intervals,  and  not  in-
duced apparently  by  any  particular  condition  of  the  system
at  the  time  unless  occasionally  by  some  family  annoyance.
Of  late  they  have  been  more  frequent,  occurring  once  or
twice  a  week — more  or  less  often.'' She  is  a  very  industrious

k  **  Fits  occur  sometimes  daring  sleep.  Once  I  saw  her  in  them  and  ob-
served  that  when  she  was  induced  to  speak,  $he  called  some  eubetaniitee  by
Iheir  wrong  names,"  The  same  occurred  in  Dr.Elliotson's  patient,  vol.  I.  p.  437.


182  Double  States  of  Conscioutness,

and  what  we  call  tidy  woman^  and  keepa  her  house  remarks
ably  clean;  and  in  conformity  with  these  habits  generally
commences  at  the  onset  of  the  attack  to  take  down  the  rows
of  plates  and  dishes^  washes  the  shelves^  and  cleans  and
wipes  the  plates^  &c.,  sweeps  the  house^  makes  the  bed,  goes
up  and  down  stairs  for  express  objects,  and  so  on.  The  fit
lasts  ten  or  twenty  minutes,  during  which  time  she  keeps
ceaselessly  occupiea,  and  if  any  one,  even  her  husband  or
children,  interrupt  her  seriously,  or  get  so  much  in  the  way
that  she  is  incommoded  by  them,  she  boxes  and  cuffs  them
violently,  otherwise  never  interferes  with  them.

"  I£  the  attack  comes  on  when  she  is  doing  some  of  her
household  work,  she  generally  leaves  it  and  goes  about  some-
thing else ;  but  this  is  not  always  the  case,  for  on  the  occa-
sion of  her  scalding  her  leg  she  was  cooking  dinner,  and  in
the  act  of  frying  bacon ;  she  finished  the  fry,  and  then  took
the  fat  from  it,  and  in  that  cooked  the  potatoes,  which  were
previously  put  ready,  and  made  up  dinner  as  if  she  had  been
well.  But  somehow  she  threw  down  some  boiling  water  over
the  leg,  imt  was  not  aware  that  she  had  scalded  it,  and  when
a  neighbour  came  in  and  said  to  her,  '  You  have  scalded  your
leg/  she  replied,  'I  have  not;  for  if  I  had  I  should  have
wet  the  stocking,  and  I  have  not  wet  the  stocjking,'  not
being  conscious  I  suppose  by  its  feel  that  the  stocking  was
wetted.  She  then  'came  to  herself'  as  usual  without  any
event,  only  feeling  a  little  *  tired'  and  slight  head-ache,  and
had  910  recollection  of  what  had  passed,  which  she  never  has,
nor  yet  any  from  fit  to  fit ;  I  mean,  in  one  fit  of  what  took
place  in  the  former  one.  I  think  this  came  on  after  mar-
riage. The  catamenia  are  regular,  she  is  not  subject  to  head-
ache, has  intellect  unimpaired,  but  has  now  and  then  symp-
toms of  hysteria  and  nervousness.

'^  I  am,  dear  Sir,  in  haste,

"  Yours  very  respectfully  and  obliged,

"  C.  LiNGBN.''

Having  applied  again  lately  to  Dr.  Lingen  respecting  this
case,  he  writes  to  me,  June  10,  that,

'*  The  woman  is  still  living  and  in  much  the  same  condi-
tion :  she  has  again  scalded  herself  very  badly.  Nothing  has
happened  to  complicate  her  case  in  the  way  of  paralysis,  &c.,
&c.,  nor  do  I  think  that  her  mind  is  much  impaired,  though
it  has  evidently  sustained  some  impairment.

''  I  find  you  still  pursue  your  investigations, — I  dare  not,
if  I  were  so  disposed  !  I  am  not  rich  enough  !  I  firmly  be-
lieved much  that  I  read,  and  am  not  afraid  to  say  so ;  but  if


communicated  by  Dr,  Ettiottan,  188

I  practised  it^  it  would  play  the  deuce  with  me  at  once :  in-
deed I  regret  very  much  that  it  has  operated  even  as  far  as
here  to  interfere  with  your  being  consulted ;  all  the  world
knowing  how  stoutly  and  importunately  you  have  advocated
the  claims  of  mesmerism/'

YI.  The  following  case  was  published  in  the  London
Medical  Gazette,  of  Nov.  7,  last  year,  by  Dr.  Mayo,  brother
of  Mr.  Mayo  the  surgeon.

<<  April  1831.— Elizabeth  Moffiit,  resident  atTnnbridge  Wells,  a
heslthy  girl,  aged  aboat  18,  having  swallowed  by  mistake  some  blis-
tering ointment,  a  loDg  train  of  symptoms  of  pain  and  irritation  in
the  head,  thoracic  region,  and  bladder,  ensued.  These  gradually
subsided,  but  left  an  extreme  susceptibility  of  pain  in  the  head  from
either  sound  or  contact,  so  that  in  either  case  she  readily  became  in-
eennblcj  particularly  from  pressure  on  the  vertex.  On  this  physical
state  the  following  mental  phenomena  supervened.  She  appeared  to
pass  alternately,  and  in  succession,  through  two  different  states  of
mental  existence;  or  rather,  I  might  say,  her  normal  state  was  ex-
chaneed  for  an  abnormal  one,  which  I  shall  presently  describe,  out
of  which  she  would  return,  sometimes  after  it  had  lasted  some  weeks,
into  the  normal  one,— her  passages  from  either  state  into  the  other
occurring  suddenly.  The  phenomena  of  her  abnormal  state  were
those  of  extreme  excitement,  entirely  dissimilar  to  her  natural  habit,
which  was  dull  and  quiet.  Under  this  state  she  made  considerable
progress  in  needle-work,  and  in  many  points  of  intellectual  acquire-
ments, far  beyond  the  energy  and  ability  of  her  normal  condition.
She  became  also  lively  and  spirited  in  conversation.  At  the  same
time  she  lost  her  consciousness  of  her  relation  to  her  father  and
mother,  and  former  associates,  calling  them  by  wrong  names.  She
was,  however,  at  no  time  incoherent.  On  the  subsidence  of  her  ab-
normal state,  her  recollection  of  her  father,  mother,  and  friends,  in
their  just  relation  to  her,  would  return,  and  she  would  resume  her
quiet  and  dull  character ;  she  would  also  resume  her  true  position
and  reepectfid  manners  towards  some  ladies  of  Tunbridge  WeUs,
from  whom  she  was  receiving  kindness  and  instruction;  meanwhile,
in  both  her  states,  the  normal  and  abnormal  one,  the  associations
which  have  taken  place  in  each  are  obstinately  retained  without  the
smallest  confusion,  but  in  each  with  a  toted  oblivion  of  what  has  been
learnt  in  the  other  state.  Thus,  in  her  normal  state,  she  will  have
entirely  forgotten  all  those  manueU  or  intellectual  acquirements  which
she  may  have  made  during  that  of  excitement,  and  every  attempt  to
instruct  her  in  these  points  will  utterly  fail,

**  From  the  scantiness  of  my  notes,  and  an  unwillingness  to  trust
my  memory,  I  am  unable  to  supply  adequate  particulars  of  this  case;
for  instance,  I  cannot  answer  the  question,  under  what  conditions,
whether  from  pressure  on  the  vertex,  the  transition  from  one  state
into  the  other  seemed  to  occur?  I  can  affirm,  generally,  that  the
case  received  no  benefit  from  medical  measures,  that  it  gradually  lost


184  Double  Slates  of  Consciousness,

its  mental  peculiarities,  and  the  normal  state  became  permanent.
But  in  tlie  meanwhile  circumstances  of  misconduct  in  the  girFs  rela-
tives were  discovered,  which  led  to  an  impression  among  her  patrons
at  Tunbridge  Wells  that  the  case  was  an  imposture;  and,  fortunately
perhaps  for  the  patient,  it  was  left  to  itself.

*'  I  have  observed  that  a  suspicion  of  simulation  in  the  above  case
occasioned  it  to  be  dismissed  with  unbeUef.  It  is  probable  that  a
more  scrutinizing  eye  ought  to  have  been  applied  throughout  the  in-
quiry into  it.  But  does  the  discovery  of  simulation  in  hysterical
disease,  to  which  the  above  case  is  analogous,  involve  a  total  re-
jection of  every  other  symptom  of  that  state  ?  I  say  of  every  other
symptom,  for  simulation  itself  is  a  symptom  of  hysteria,  though
not  an  inseparable  one.  What  is  more  common  than  to  see  young
persons  become  deceitful,  to  the  extent,  exempli  gratid^  of  pretend-
mg  incapacity  to  take  food,  while  they  are- covertly  takios  articles  of
indigestible  food  to  a  great  quantity  ?  The  mental  pathology  of  that
state  is  fully  as  singular  as  its  physical.  I  do  not  believe  that  Eliza-
beth Moffat  could  have  simulated  all  the  phenomena  of  her  case;  and
when  I  find  that  case,  singular  as  it  is,  forming  one  under  an  assigned
medical  head  on  the  authority  of  an  eminent  pathologist,  I  more
readily  give  some  weight  to  my  own  convictions  on  this  subject.

**  Much  of  the  above  reasoning  has  a  bearing  on  that  train  of
symptoms  which  I  have  adverted  to  as  having  common  points  with
the  above  case;  I  mean,  the  trance  proctuced  by  the  manipulations  of
the  mesmerisers.  Is  it  philosophical  to  decline  inquiry  into  these
symptoms,  because  they  may  have  occasionally  been  exaggerated,  or
even  put  on,  when  adequate  evidence  is  afforded  of  their  general
reality  by  unbiassed  and  numerous  obsiervers  ?  But  if  the  question
cannot  be  answered  affirmatively,  let  me  put  another,  with  the  same
intention,  which  naturally  springs  out  of  it.  Is  it  wise  in  ««,  who
desire  to  obtain  for  our  tripartite  profession  exclusive  privileges  from
the  legislature,  to  prove  that  we  are  unworthy  of  these  privileges,  by
refusing  inquiry  into  practises  which  offer,  on  extensive  authority,
an  antidote  to  pain  and  irritation  in  their  direct  forms  ?  We  allow
our  nurses  to  rock  our  infants  to  sleep.  Are  we  to  be  told,  that  it  is
absurd  and  unjustifiable  to  produce  a  form  of  sleep  during  which  pain
is  unfelt,  and  irritation  allayed,  by  movements  of  the  hands  ?  Yet
such  a  proposition  I  have  heard  maintained  by  an  eminent  and  valued
member  of  our  profession  in  a  wise  and  learned  assembly.

"  I  allude  here  to  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  mesmerism — the
trance,  which  the  operators  in  these  cases  appear  to  have  the  power
of  producing  and  terminating  at  will.  Unless  we  propose  to  estab-
lish a  new  theory  of  the  value  and  effect  of  testimony  on  belief,  or
of  the  utility  and  desirableness  of  adding  to  our  means  of  subduing
pain  and  irritation,  it  is  our  duty  to  give  a  patient  and  candid  in-
quiry into  this  subject,  and  to  profit  by  it,  if  we  may."

The  rational  and  independent  remarks  of  Dr.  Mayo  do
him  honour.  His  conduct  was  excellent  in  the  Royal  Me-
dical and  Chirurgieal  Society  when  the  case  of  amputation


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.  185

was  ready*  and  he  was  the  only  physician  whom  I  heard  speak
with  either  sense  or  decency :  though  I  lament  that  he  sub-
sequently blamed  the  joint  writers  for  printing  the  case^™  as
they  most  justifiably  and  independently  did.°  I  must  also
mention  to  Dr.  Mayors  honour  that  the  Athenaeum  Club  has
taken  in  The  Zoist  at  his  suggestion.  This  induces  me  to
doubt  the  flying  reports  that  in  society  he  has  often  been  so
ambiguous  as  to  lead  persons  to  suppose  he  disbelieves  in
mesmerism,  and  has  not  recommended  it  in  cases  attended
by  him  when  other  remedies  were  useless,  and  has  alleged  as
his  reason  that  if  he  did  he  should  lose  his  patients.  I  lament
that,  strangely,  like  his  brother  and  Mr.  Colquhoun  of  Edin-
burgh, who  both  have  written  so  much  about  mesmerism,
and  the  former  busied  himself  so  much  to  see  it,  he  has  never
set  to  work  himself  to  cure  patients,  or  at  least  to  interrogate
nature  with  his  hands  and  eves.  His  allusion  in  the  Phreno-
logicalJoumal  is  probably  to  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  with  whom
he  so  manfully  grappled  in  the  Medical  and  Cbirurgical  So-
ciety.

VII.  In  the  Northern  Journal  of  Medicine  for  June  last
year  was  a  similar  case,  drawn  up  by  Dr.  David  Skae.

"  He  is  an  anmarried  gentleman,  in  the  prime  of  life,  connected
with  the  legal  profession,  of  a  leuco-phlegmatic  temperament,  regu-
lar in  his  habits,  which  have  always  been  retired,  and  extremely
temperate  in  his  mode  of  life.  His  complaint  commenced  with  the
usual  symptoms  of  dyspepsia — it  then  gradually  passed  into  hypo-
chondriacism— and  nltimatelv  into  its  present  form,  a  state  bordering
between  hypochondriasis  and  mental  alienation.

**  The  dyspeptic  symptoms  became  a  subject  of  complaint  and

solicitude  to  the  patient  about  ten  or  twelve  years  ago There

generally  sncceeded  a  train  of  morbid  feelings,  and  ultimately  of
illusions  founded  upon  them.  The  distress  occasioned  by  flatulent
distention  of  the  stomach,  and  the  painful  feelings  in  different  parts
of  the  body,  which  are  its  usual  concomitants,  led  the  patient  to
consult  many  medical  men,  and  use  large  quantities  of  medicine,
which,  as  he  still  persisted  in  the  habits  in  which  his  complaints
originated,  and  the  diet  by  which  they  were  excited,  rather  aggra-
vated than  abated  the  evil.  The  fugitive  pains  and  uneasy  feelings
experienced  in  different  parts  of  the  body  were  spoken  of  as  sufferings
of  a  mysterious  and  unparalleled  kind ;  they  were  at  one  time  be-
lieved to  be  wind  circulating  through  the  veins,  and  at  another,  the
whole  system  was  imagined  to  be  charged  with  water.  While  under
the  influence  of  these  impressions,  the  patient,  day  after  day,  would
sit  for  many  hours  in  the  water-closet,  believing  that  the  water  was
constantly  discharging  itself;  and  at  another  time,  he  continued

1  See  my  Pamphlet,  p.  56.  m  p.  62.  n  pp.  58,  63,  63.


186  Double  States  of  Consciousness.

spitting  incessantly  for  many  weeks,  under  the  impression  that  his
whole  frame  was  becoming  conrerted  into  saliva.

"  Feelings  of  gloom  and  despondency  were  at  the  same  time
developed: — ^the  most  trifling  errors  of  the  past  were  magnified  into
crimes  of  unpardonable  magnitude,  and  the  future  was  contemplated
with  the  utmost  dread.  He  commenced  a  system  of  reading  the
Scriptures,  psalms,  and  paraphrases,  with  great  zeal  and  rapidity  ;
this  soon  grew  into  a  system  of  rapidly  scanning  the  pages,  and
incessantly  turning  over  the  leaves,  and  he  persuaded  himself  that
he  read  the  whole  Bible  through,  and  all  the  metrical  psalms,  once
or  twice  daily.  He  now  sat  up  the  greater  part  of  every  night,  and
lay  in  bed  during  the  day ;  and  when  he  went  to  bed,  he  carefully
surrounded  his  person,  from  head  to  foot,  with  Bibles  and  Psalm-
books.

"  Under  the  influence  of  the  bodily  distress  and  mental  despon-
dency from  which  he  suffered,  he  not  unfrequently  spoke  of  drowning
himself,  or  of  throwing  himself  over  a  window,  ana  on  several  occa-
sions begged  earnestly  that  he  might  have  his  razors.  A  natural
timidity  of  disposition,  and  a  prevailing  conscientiousness,  prevented
this  tendency  from  displaying  itself  with  any  seriousness  or  determi-
nation of  purpose.

*'  From  an  early  period  in  the  history  of  this  case,  it  was  observed
that  the  symptoms  displayed  an  aggravation  every  alternate  day.
This  gradually  became  more  and  more  marked;  and  for  the  last
eighteen  months  the  symptoms  above  described  have  become  distinctly
periodic.  On  each  alternate  day,  the  patient  is  affected  in  the
manner  just  described,  and  will  neither  eat,  sleep,  nor  walk,  but
continues  incessantly  turning  the  leaves  of  a  Bible,  and  complaining
piteously  of  his  misery.  On  the  intermediate  days,  he  is,  compara-
tively speaking,  quite  well,  enters  into  the  domestic  duties  of  his
family,  eats  heartily,  walks  out,  transacts  business,  assures  every
one  he  is  quite  well,  and  appears  to  entertain  no  apprehension  of  a
return  of  his  complaints.

"What  is  chiefly  remarkable  and  interesting  in  the  present  fea-
tures of  the  case,  is  the  sort  of  double  existence  which  the  individual
appears  to  have.  On  those  days  on  which  he  is  affected  with  his
malady,  he  appears  to  have  no  remembrance  whatever  of  the  previous
or  €ff  any  former  day  on  which  he  was  comparatively  well,  nor  of  any
of  the  engagements  of  those  days  ; — he  cannot  tell  whether  he  was
out,  nor  what  he  did,  nor  whom  he  saw,  nor  any  transaction  in
which  he  was  occupied.  Neither  does  he  anticipate  any  amendment
on  the  succeeding  day,  but  contemplates  the  future  with  unmitigated
despondency.  On  the  intermediate  days,  on  the  other  hand,  he
asserts  he  is  quite  well,  denies  that  he  has  any  complaints,  or  at
least  evades  any  reference  to  them;  appears  satisfied  that  he  was  as
well  the  previous  day  as  he  then  is,  asserts  that  he  was  out»  and
that  he  has  no  particular  complaints.  On  that  day  he  transacts
business,  takes  food  and  exercise,  and  appears  in  every  respect
rational  and  free  from  any  illusions  or  despondency  ;  anticipates  no
return  of  illness,  and  persists  in  making  engagements  for  the  next


Power  of  Mesmerism  over  Vesical  Affection. 187

day  for  the  tranaaction  of  business,  although  reminded  and  assured
that  he  will  be  unfit  for  attending  to  them.  On  thoie  days  he  dis'
tinctly  remembers  the  transactions  of  previous  days  on  which  he  was
wellf  hut  appears  to  have  little  or  no  recollection  of  the  occurrences
of  the  days  on  which  he  was  ill.  He  appears,  in  short,  to  have  a
double  consciousness — a  sort  of  twofold  existence — one  half  of  which
he  spends  in  the  rational  enjoyment  of  life  and  discharge  of  its
duties;  and  the  other,  in  a  state  of  hopeless  hypochondriacism,
amounting  almost  to  complete  mental  aberration.

"  An  endless  variety  of  remedies  have  been  used  in  the  treatment
of  this  case,  and  among  others,  those  which  are  believed  to  be  useful
in  periodic  a£Pections,  but  without  marked  benefit."

Here  is  another  of  the  thousands  of  eases  in  which  nothing
has  done  good^  and  yet  the  condescension  of  a  single  thought
has  not  been  bestowed  upon  mesmerism.

I  have  two  more  cases  to  detail — one  of  a  child  who  at
length  ceased  to  be  a  sleep-waker,  grew  up  and  became  a
mother :  and  the  other  of  her  offspring,  who  at  the  same  age
became  a  sleep-waker,  was  seen  by  me  and  mesmerised,  ex-
hibiting very  interesting  phenomena,  and  also  completely
recovered.

(To  be  concloded  in  next  namber).

II.  Power  of  Mesmerism  over  Vesical  Affection.

Dr.  Elliotson  begs  to  forward  to  The  Zout  the  following  commanicatioo
from  a  genUeman  whom  he  has  not  the  honour  of  knowing.

Scarborough,  June  6th,  1846.
Dear  Sir, — I  feel  it  my  duty  to  place  on  record  the  par-
ticulars of  the  following  interesting  case,  illustrative  of  the
powers  of  mesmerism  in  the  cure  of  disease.  I  therefore,
send  it  through  you  for  publication  in  The  Zoist,  to  give  you
the  opportunity  of  stating,  how  deeply  I  consider  the  public
are  indebted  to  you  for  the  unflinching  advocacy  of  an  agent
so  potent  in  alleviating  human  suffering  and  conferring  so
many  blessings  on  mankind.

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  dear  Sir,

Your  very  obedient  Servant,
Thomas  Weddell^  Surgeon.
To  John  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.

Miss  N.,  aged  about  30,  the  daughter  of  a  clergyman  of
the  Church  of  England,  had  been  iU  since  Christmas  1843,
with  irritability  of  the  bladder,  produced  from  calculi  in  that
organ; about  30  having  been  passed  during  the  last  six


188  Power  ofMesmerUm  over  Vesical  Affection,

months^  of  sizes  varying  from  a  hempseed  to  that  of  a  pea  :
the  suffering  was  extreme  until  May,  when  total  suppressio
urinse  supervened.  From  that  time,  during  her  stay  at  Scar-
borough, for  two  months,  the  catheter  was  employed  daily  ;
the  fluid  was  healthy,  but  slightly  acid ;  she  always  suffered
extremely  from  the  operation.  The  usual  medical  treatment
was  perseveringly  tried  during  the  whole  of  that  summer,
under  the  direction  of  several  medical  practitioners,  without
any  permanent  benefit ;  her  health  gave  way,  her  appetite
entirely  failed,  so  much  so  that  she  took  but  one  cupful  of
milk  and  another  of  tea  during  the  24  hours,  scarcely  ever
solid  food,  even  in  the  smallest  quantity.  Recourse  was
obliged  to  be  had  to  morphia  to  relieve  the  acute  pain  con-
stantly endured ;  she  seldom  slept  until  the  morning,  and
then  only  for  about  two  hours ;  the  acetate  of  morphia  was
gradually  increased  until  she  took  two  grains  three  times  a
day  to  produce  anything  like  alleviations  of  her  sufferings.
She  neglected  the  use  of  the  catheter  from  the  pain  of  its
introduction,  occasionally  for  two,  sometimes  for  three  days,
(as  she  lived  9  miles  from  me,  I  saw  her  only  once  or  twice  a
week);  the  vesica  became  diseased,  the  renal  secretion  small  in
quantity  and  loaded  with  ropy  mucus,  very  dark,  sometimes
bloody f  with  an  offensive  ammonial  odour.  She  was  in  the
last  stage  of  emaciation,  could  not  be  removed  from  bed
without  fainting;  in  short  it  was  evident  nature  must  soon
give  up  the  struggle.  Having  heard  much  of  the  curative
power  of  mesmerism,  and  seen  something  of  it  from  itinerant
lecturers,  I  proposed  to  her  friends  to  permit  me  to  try  its
agency :  they  consented,  but  there  was  a  difficulty  in  removing
my  patient  from  her  extreme  debility.  By  means  of  a  bed  in  a
coach,  however,  I  succeeded  in  bringing  her  to  Scarborough ;
she  fainted  several  times  by  the  way,  and  was  unable  from  the
shaking  of  the  carriage  to  travel  quicker  than  a  foot  pace.
This  was  on  the  6th  of  April,  1844.  I  gave  her  two  grains  of
acet.  morphiae  on  her  arrival,  which  soothed  her  after  a
time,  but  she  passed  a  restless  night,  and  had  considerable
suffering.

27th.  Mesmerised  her  for  the  first  time  by  looking  steadily
at  her  for  four  minutes.  The  pulse  was  112,  breathing  20  in
a  minute.  During  the  sleep,  pulse  112,  breathing  12.  After
twenty-five  minutes  I  awoke  her  by  blowing  across  the  eyes ;
she  felt  perfectly  easy  for  some  time,  but  passed  a  restless  night.

On  the  morning  of  the  28th,  had  great  pain  in  the  hypo-
gastrium  with  painful  micturition ;  about  three  ounces  were
drawn  away,  and  she  took  two  grains  of  acet.  morphise,  which
relieved  her. I  saw  her  again  at  4,  p.m. ;  she  was  dozing.


by  Mr.  WeddeU.  189

firequently  starting,  the  countenance  sunk  and  anxious.  She
awoke  in  great  pain  with  much  tenderness  on  pressing  the
hypogastrium.  Mesmerised  in  three  minutes,  and  remained
half  an  hour  in  the  sleep ;  when  awoke  stated  she  was  very
comfortable,  free  from  pain,  and  could  bear  pressure  without
flinching;  raised  herself  in  bed  without  pain,  and  said  she
thought  she  could  sit  up;  fr^m  this  time  I  omitted  the
morphia.

29th,  11  a.m.,  had  a  good  night,  less  pain  but  little  sleep,
had  taken  more  food;  catheter  introduced  by  herself;  I  did
not  see  the  fluid,  stated  to  be  very  little,  but  not  bloody.
Mesmerised  in  two  minutes,  and  slept  an  hour;  during  the
trance,  I  introduced  the  catheter,  found  no  fluid  in  the
vesica;  exhibited  no  signs  of  feeling  during  the  operation;
when  awake,  it  produces  great  suffering.  She  awoke  quite
free  from  pain  and  requested  to  have  breakfast.

80th.  Sent  a  message  at  10  a.m.,  on  account  of  having
great  pain,  and  wished  to  have  the  morphia.  Mesmerised  for
an  hour^— awoke  perfectly  easy ;  she  had  taken  more  food  yes-
terday and  had  been  easy  until  this  morning.  Fluid  drawn
by  herself  (about  four  ounces),  less  ropy,  but  rather  bloody.
Health  improved.

May  1st.  Continues  better ;  fluid  less  bloody,  but  very
high  coloured;  mesmerised  at  4  p.m.  for  an  hour.

2nd.  Had  a  restless  night,  considerable  pain  at  the  hypo-
gastrium,  with  tenderness  on  pressure ;  bowels  regular  with-
out medicine;  fluid  bloody  and  small  in  quantity  (about  2
oz.) ;  mesmerised  in  one  and  a  half  minute,  for  an  hoiur,
with  great  relief.

3rd.  Better,  had  slept  some  hours,  calm,  and  free  from
pain,  pulse  80.

5th.  I  was  from  home  since  the  3rd.  Complains  of  great
pain  in  the  back  and  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  arising,
doubtless,  from  not  having  the  fluid  drawn  since  the  8rd.  She
had  neglected  this  on  account  of  the  great  pain  she  endured
during  the  operation.  I  drew  8  oz.  (which  was  very  dark,
turbid,  ammoniacal)  whilst  she  was  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  in
which  she  remained  an  hour. «

6th.  Passed  a  restless  night,  and  has  much  pain  to-day  in
the  back  and  abdomen ;  fluid  drawn  (3  oz.),  turbid  and  am-
moniacal ;  mesmerised  in  one  minute  by  looking  at  my  watch.

7th.  Symptoms  same  as  yesterday;  fluid  drawn  (about
2  oz.) ;  blister  to  the  back.

8th.  Pain  relieved ;  had  a  restless  night ;  appetite  bad ;
fluid  drawn  (3  oz.),  dark  and  turbid;  mesmerised  for  an
hour  in  the  evening.

VOL.  IV.  p


190  Power  of  Mesmerism  over  Vesical  Affection,

9th.  Had  a  good  night ;  ascribes  it  to  being  mesmerised
in  the  evening ;  restless  this  mornings  with  constant  painful
micturition ;  fluid  drawn^  same  as  yesterday ;  mesmerised  an
hour.

10th.  Bad  nighty  very  restless^  and  great  pain;  mesmerised
at  6  p.m.  for  an  hour.  When  demesmerised^  she  was  attacked
with  painful  micturition^  which  made  her  writhe  about  the  bed.

1  made  a  few  passes  down  the  spine  which  threw  her  into
the  trance.  When  in  that  state  I  passed  the  catheter^  and
drew  about  4  oz.  of  limpid  fluid.  She  had  drawn  about
3  oz.  in  the  morning  of  the  usual  character.  I  now  again
demesmerised  her^  when  she  was  somewhat  incoherent,  but
soon  recovered,  and  expressed  great  anxiety  to  have  a  Mor-
phia pill. I  sent  one  of  bread  crumb,

11th.  Had  a  restless  night  from  the  painful  micturition,
but  better  this  morning. Evening,  the  same  as  morning ;

2  oz.  of  dark  turbid  fluid  drawn ;  acted  upon  by  senna  and
salts  ;  mesmerised  an  hour.

12th  and  13th.  Fain  less  acute,  and  mesmerised  one  hour
each  day.

14th.  Passed  some  fluid  naturaUy,  three  hours  after  hav-
ing 4  oz.  drawn,  which  was  more  healthy  in  appearance.

15th  and  16th.  Unable  to  pass  fluid  without  the  catheter;
has  less  pain,  and  better  in  health ;  mesmerised  an  hour  each
day,  which  was  effected  in  three-quarters  of  a  minute,  by
looking  at  a  watch.

17th.  Not  so  well;  great  pain,  and  no  sleep;  fluid  drawn,

3  oz.,  and  bloody ;  mesmerised  in  the  evening.

18th.  Better  night,  and  easier  to-day ;  fluid  still  bloody,
though  much  less  ropy,  about  8  oz.  drawn.

19th,  20th,  21st,  and  22nd.  Grradual  improvement ;  fluid
larger  in  quantity  and  more  healthy.

23rd.  Has  taken  cold,  which  disorders  her  considerably ;
other  symptoms  the  same.

24th.  Continues  to  improve,  and  from  this  period  passed
the  fluid  naturally,  more  in  quantity,  but  still  turbid,  with
muco-purulent  matter.  I  now  ceased  taking  special  notes  of
the  case,  but  still  continued  to  mesmerise  her  daily  until  the
autumn.  The  kidneys  and  bladder  gradually  resumed  their
healthy  functions.  The  health,  strength,  and  flesh  increased,
and  I  am  happy  to  say,  my  patient  returned  to  her  friends
perfectly  well,  and  has  remained  so  ever  since,  now  a  year
and  a  half

I  ought,  perhaps,  to  be  satisfied  by  giving  to  the  public
the  notes  of  this  interesting  case,  and  leave  them  to  draw  their
own  conclusion  as  to  the  controlling  power  of  mesmerism  over


by  Mr.  Weddell.  191

organic  disease ;  bat|  during  the  progress  of  the  treatment,
the  patient  became  exceedingly  susceptible,  and  I  availed
myself  of  the  opportunity  for  producing  phenomena,  not  un-
usual, perhaps,  to  the  practical  mesmerist,  but  calculated,  I
think,  to  throw  some  light  upon  its  marvellous  agency.  It  is
only  by  sitting  humbly  at  the  feet  of  nature,  and  carefully
recording  the  facts  which  she  exhibits,  that  we  can  hope  to
unravel  her  mysteries.  It  is  but  recently  that  Electricity,
Magnetism,  and  Gralvanism  have  been  discovered  to  be  modi-
fications of  the  same  law  of  nature ;  and  if  we  can  prove  that
vital  phenomena  are  governed  by  the  same  law,  we  shall  add
another  link  to  the  chain  of  discovery  which  may  give  us  the
power  of  alleviating  human  suffering — of  arresting  disease
hitherto  beyond  the  reach  of  either  medicine  or  surgery.

When  Miss  N.  had  sufficiently  recovered  to  leave  her  bed,
I  called  at  an  unusual  hour  (for  some  time  I  had  mesmerised
her  in  the  evenings).  Her  sister  was  in  the  sitting-room  on
another  floor.  I  desired  her  to  stay  until  I  called  for  her,
and  went  softly  up  stairs,  and  made  passes  for  five  minutes
through  the  bed -room  door,  which  was  closed.  I  then  called
to  the  sister,  and  went  into  the  bed-room.  We  found  the
patient  in  the  trance.  I  left  her  in  the  sleep  the  usual  time,
then  awoke  her,  and  enquired,  how  she  had  fallen  asleep  ?
She  stated  that  she  had  felt  herself ''  seized  upon,''  and  knew
no  more.  This  experiment  not  being  entirely  satisfactory —
supposing  she  might  have  mesmerised  herself,  I  repeated  the
experiment  another  way.  A  week  later,  I  again  called  at  an
unwonted  hour,  and  desired  her  sister  to  go  up  stairs  and  sit
by  the  patient,  but  not  to  say  I  was  in  the  house.  I  then
went  into  another  room,  divided  from  the  patient  by  a  brick
wall,  and  closed  the  door.  After  I  had  made  passes,  through
the  wall,  for  two  minutes,  the  sister  opened  the  door  hastily,
and  called  out  for  me  to  come  up  stairs.  On  entering  the
room,  I  found  the  patient  on  her  feet,  arrested  by  the  trance
as  she  was  walking  to  the  window.  This  was  conclusive,  as
the  patient's  mind  was  engaged  by  another  object,  which  she
was  walking  towards  the  window  to  look  at.  It  will  be  in
the  recollection  of  my  readers,  that  some  eighteen  months
ago,  a  great  noise  was  made  about  galvanic  rings  for  the  cure
of  rheumatism,  especially.  Wishing  to  test  the  power  of
these  rings  (if  they  had  any),  I  had  three  procured — one  of
each — zinc  and  copper,  silver  and  copper,  and  gold  and  copper.
Being  careful  not  to  touch  them  myself,  I  desired  Miss  N's
sister  to  place  the  zinc  ring  upon  the  patient's  finger,  where
it  remained  ten  minutes  without  any  effect; it  was  then

removed,  and  the  silver  ring  placed  upon  another  finger  of

p  o


192 Power  of  Mesmerum  over  Vencal  Affection.

the  same  hand  with  no  better  result.  The  gold  ring  was
then  placed  on  one  of  the  fingers  of  the  other  hand^  when^  in
the  coarse  of  two  minntes,  the  hand  became  rigid,  and,  in
two  or  three  minutes  more  she  was  thrown  into  the  trance,
proving  the  superior  power  of  the  gold,  as  well  as  the  identity
of  effect  with  mesmerism.  On  mesmerising  the  zinc  ring,
the  same  result  was  produced.  Having  heard  from  a  scientific
friend  (Mr.  J.  Smith,  of  Malton),  that  by  placing  silver  and
copper  coin  upon  the  table  (asunder),  and  placing  the  thumbs
upon  the  coins,  if  the  patient  was  seated  near,  you  could  will
that  she  should  be  deaf,  (he  disbelieved  it  at  the  time),  I
agreed  to  make  the  experiment.  I  placed  the  patient  on  a
chair  about  three  inches  from  the  table,  and  then  put  the
coins  upon  it,  placing  my  thumbs  upon  each,  and  menialfy
willed  that  she  should  be  deaf.  Miss  N.  knew  nothing  of  the
experiment,  and  was  much  distressed  at  not  being  able  to
hear — ^the  deafness  was  complete,  she  could  hear  nothing,
however  loud  the  noise.  A  few  minutes  after  removing  the
coins  the  hearing  returned.  Supposing  that,  if  I  could  make
her  deaf,  I  might  also  produce  blindness^  or  take  away  the
taste,  in  both  cases  I  proved  equally  successful  by  the  same
means,  much  to  the  astonishment  and  dismay  of  my  patient,
who  had  no  idea  previously  of  my  intentions.  Imagining,
though  with  what  truth  must  be  hereafter  decided,  that  the
galvanic  circle  had  something  to  do  with  these  extraordinary
effects,  I  placed  Miss  N.  upon  an  insulated  stool,  and  repeated
the  last  mentioned  experiments  in  the  same  way,  but  found,
whilst  she  was  cut  off  from  communication  with  the  earth,  I
had  no  power  to  produce  the  same  effects.  Whilst  she  was
on  the  insulated  stool,  I  also  tried  to  mesmerise  by  passes
and  looking  steadfastly  at  her  for  ten  minutes,  without  the
slightest  effect ;  but  when  I  took  hold  of  her  hand,  and  thus
restored  the  communication  with  the  earth,  I  mesmerised  her
with  a  single  pass.  Mesmerised  water  has  been  frequently
employed  ;  but  I  am  not  aware  of  any  instance  being  shewn
of  its  retaining  its  power  for  any  length  of  time.  Having
occasionally  mesmerised  my  patient  by  this  mode,  I  sent  her
on  a  Tuesday  a  draught  of  1}  oz.  of  mesmerised  water,
desiring  her  to  take  it  at  seven  o'clock  p.m.,  and  awake  up  at
half-past  eight  p.m.  She  drank  about  a  third  of  it,  and
immediately  went  into  the  trance,  holding  the  glass  in  her
hand  during  the  whole  time,  her  sister  being  unable  to  take
it  from  her.  Exactly  at  the  time  specified  she  awoke,  and
her  arm  relaxed.  The  remaining  water  was  put  into  the
bottle,  corked  up,  and  on  the  Saturday  following  she  took
the  remainder  with  precisely  the  same  result.


AceomU  of  more  Painless  Surgical  Operations, 193

If  the  above  experiments  and  fitcta  are  worthy  of  insertion
in  your  admirable  joonial,  as  throwing  additional  light  upon
this  very  interesting  subject^  on  the  truth  or  fallacy  of  which
so  much  discrepancy  exists^  I  shaU  feel  much  gratification  in
so  far  aiding^  however  humbly^  the  cause  of  truths  and  fur«
thering  the  object  of  this  new  and  extraordinary  discovery.^

Scarborough,  May  80th,  1846.


ill.  More  Painless  Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotsom.

**  Some  are  led  by  it  (the  ladoctlTe  proeen)  to  truth,  and  lome  to  error.  It  led  Franklin  to
diMOver  the  nature  of  Hrii*t»*»»y-  It  led  thoowada.  who  had  lets  brains  than  Franklin,  to  believe
in  animal  magmrtimm.  Bat  thu  waa  not  becanie  Franklin  went  tliroart  the  proceM  deicribed
by  Bacon,  and  the  Am  of  Mmtmr  throagh  a  different  proce»."— -Mr.  M&caul4t's  article
on  Lord  Bacon,  Eimbmgh  itnicw,  toI.  (M  ;  and  hia  Aaqw,  p.  400.

"  And  nrely  no  Inetance  of  national  pride  and  foDy  ii  lo  intense  as  this  same  Scottish  entail

Sstem.  Onr  posterity  will  no  more  give  credit  to  the  ftaU  extent  of  its  practical  absordities,
■n  tliey  will  beliere  in  the  devoticm  to  tmbmal  magmetUm  and  homoeopathy,  or  any  other
Uadh^  aUerraUam  qf  mt  tv*-"— bait's  EdMmgh  MagoMbte,  April,  1840,  p.  SU;  article,
Scottish  Entails.

I  RBCBivED  the  following  letter  and  history  from  Dr.  Esdaile :

"Hooghly,  1st  Feb.,  1846.

*'  DsAB  Sib. — ^In  consequence  of  the  late  unexpected  en-
gagements with  the  Sikhs,  3000  wounded  have  been  thrown
on  oar  hands,  without  any  provision  being  made  to  receive
them,  and  the  civil  surgeons  are  therefore  ordered  to  join  the
army,  by  post,  with  the  least  possible  delay.  I  start  to-
morrow, but  before  going,  cannot  deny  myself  the  pleasure
of  informing  you  of  the  establishment  of  mesmerism  in
Bengal,  I  may  say,  in  India.  I  may  claim  the  undivided
credit  of  having  introduced  this  great  blessing  into  India,
and  of  having  demonstrated  the  wonderful  extent  to  which
the  natives  of  this  country  can  be  benefitted  by  it.  But  here,
and  elsewhere,  the  principal  honour  will  justly  revert  to  you,
for  without  your  courageous  and  independent  advocacy  of
the  truth,  the  different  nations  of  the  earth  would  have  been
deprived  of  this  most  valuable  natural  remedy  for  an  indefinite
length  of  time.

"  I  leave  a  mbsmsric  corps  here,  paid  by  the  Govbrn-
MBNT,  so  that  the  good  done  will  not  be  undone  by  my  de-
parture, and  I  hope  soon  to  establish  mesmerism  in  the  other
extremity  of  Hindostan,  and  to  benefit  even  our  enemies  by  it.

o  We  recoromeDd  this  case  to  the  special  aUention  of  Dr.  Prout,  who  is
the  great  authority  in  such  cases,  and  knows  how  little  good  he  can  do  in
them ;  yet  scoots  mesmerism  to  the  utmost,  in  perfect  and  voluntary  igno-
rance of  iU^ZoUt.


194 Accounts  o/morepainkss  Surgical  Operaiums,

Permit  me  to  congratulate  you  on  the  happy  results  of  your
labours^  which  will  be  an  encouragement  to  others  not  to  be
ashamed  of  the  truth.  I  have  the  pleasure  to  enclose  you  mv
seventy-fourth  painless  operation,  and  send  you  by  this  mail,
a  newspaper  containing  a  summary  of  my  mesmeric  doings
for  the  last  eight  months.  I  have  also  sent  the  MS.  of  a  work,
called  '^ Mesmerism  in  India"  to  my  friends  by  this  mail,  and
if  it  finds  a  publisher,  you  will  find  curious  matter  in  it.

"  I  am,  with  much  respect,  yours  truly,

'^  James  EsDAiLB,  M.D.,
"  CiM  Surgeon.
•'  Dr.  Elliotson,
"  Care  of  Mons.  Bailli^re,  Publisher,
"219,  Regent  Street,  London."

I.  Painless  removal  of  a  Thmor  weighing  Forty  Pounds.

"28th  Jan.  1846.
**  I  this  morning  received  a  note  from  the  sub-assistant
surgeon,  informing  me  that  a  man  had  come  to  the  hospital
yesterday  with  a  Targe  scrotal  tumor,  and  had  been  easily
entranced.  In  reply,  I  desired  him  to  have  the  man  mes-
merised at  10  a.m.  On  my  way  to  the  hospital,  I  met  Mr.
Wanchope,  the  magistrate,  who  offered  to  accompany  me.
At  11  o'clock,  we  found  him  completely  entranced,  with  very
little  cataleptic  action  in  the  limbs,  and  one  eye  was  half
open,  looking  exactly  like  a  dead  man's.  As  the  sub-assistant
surgeon  is  to  be  left  in  charge  of  the  hospital  during  my
absence  with  the  army,  he  requested  me  to  be  allowed  to
operate  in  this  case,  and  I  willingly  consented  to  assist  him.
The  operation  was  performed  in  the  usual  way,  and  the  man
remained  as  motionless  as  a  corpse  the  whole  time ;  his  breathing
being  entirely  abdominal,  and  the  pulse  sixty,  not  very  weak,
— the  half-closed  eye  remained  exactly  the  same  the  whole  time.
It  was  three-quarters  of  an  hour  before  the  stitching  of  the
flaps  together  was  completed,  as  the  vessels  to  be  tied  were
very  numerous.  In  ten  minutes  after  all  was  finished,  he
awoke  as  if  from  a  tranquil  natural  sleep,  and  said,  Mt  was
gone !'  He  only  knew  this,  he  said,  by  not  feeling  the  weight
of  the  mass,  and  declared  that  nothing  had  disturbed  him  in
his  sleep,  nor  had  he  any  pain  at  that  moment — that  he  felt
quite  well,  (he  looked  so)  and  was  not  at  all  faint,  in  short,
he  never  was  better.  I  asked  him  if  he  could  walk,  and  he
replied,  'certainly:'  I  offered  to  assist  him  to  rise,  but  he
rqfected  my  aid,  got  up,  and  walked  to  another  bed  without
being  at  all  faint. The  tumor  v^^ls  forty  pounds  in  weight,  and


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  195

the  bleeding  very  profuse.  Haying  heard  that  such  things
were  done  at  Hoognly,  he  had  travelled  70  miles^  and  arrived
yesterday;  the  first  time  he  saw  me  was  when  he  awoke  after
the  operation,

''The  tumor  has  been  sent  to  the  College  Museuniy
Calcutta,  and  Mr.  Wanchope  sent  the  following  certificate
with  it.

'*  'Certificate,  that  I  witnessed  the  above  operation,  and  that
the  man  on  awaking  declared  to  me,  that  he  not  only  felt  no  pain
daring  or  after  the  operation,  but  was  now  in  perfect  health  and
strength,  and  as  a  proof,  rose  from  the  bed  on  which  he  had  been
operated  upon,  and  walked  to  another  with  the  most  perfect  ease,
refusing  all  assistance.

"  '  S.  Wanchope,  Magistrate.'

''  After  getting  into  a  clean  bed,  he  called  in  his  friends,
and  dictated  a  letter  to  his  father,  of  which  I  obtained  a-
sight,  and  have  the  pleasure  to  give  a  translation.

"  'Your  servant,  Jabour  Dhun  Shah,  bowing  respectfully,  begs
to  inform  you,  that  through  your  blessing,  I  arrived  at  Hooghly  on
the  evening  of  the  26th  Jan.  On  my  going  to  the  hospital  next
day,  I  saw  the  native  sub-assistant  surgeon  (the  Doctor  Sahib  not
being  present)  who  put  me  to  sleep,  and  then  examined  my  disease.
This  morning,  the  28th  Jan.,  I  was  put  to  sleep  at  10  o'clock,  a.m.,
and  the  tumor  was  cut  off  toitkout  my  feeling  any  pain.  Being  then
asleep,  /  knoto  nothing  that  was  done.  I  awoke  in  an  hour  after,
and  saw  the  tumor  lying  on  the  ground.  The  Sahibs  questioned
me,  and  I  answered  quite  comfortably,  without  any  pain  about  me.

**  *  Ton  need  not  be  anxious  about  me,  I  will  often  communicate
to  you  the  state  of  my  health.

"  '  Hooghly  Hospital,
"•28th  Jan.,  1846.'

''Jan.  29th,  he  has  had  no  pain  whatever  up  to  this  time.

**  Jan.  31st,  he  still  declares  that  he  has  felt  no  pain  in
the  wound,  and  he  appears  quite  unbroken  yet.  The  wound
was  dressed  to  day,  and  two-thirds  of  it  have  united.

"  James  Esdailb,  M.D.
"  Hooghly,  "  Civil  Surgeon.

"1st  Feb.,  1846."

Let  any  one  contrast  this  narrative  with  a  similar,  but
fatal,  operation,  performed  a  few  years  ago,  in  Guy's  Hospital,
by  Mr.  Key,  upon  a  Chinese,  and  described  in  the  Lancet,
No.  398.


196 Accounts  of  more  paitUess  Surgical  OperatioiUf

The  following  is  the  newspaper  report  transmitted  to  me
with  the  manuscript.

"  CALCUTTA.

'^  MESMERIC  FACTS  REPORTED  BY  JAMES  ESDAILB, M.D.

''  To  the  Editor  of  the  Englishman.

"Sir, — Before  proceeding  to  join  the  Army,  I  have  the
pleasure  to  send  you  a  "  resume  of  my  mesmeric  practice
during  the  last  eight  months.

"  My  experience  has  demonstrated  the  singular  and  bene-
ficial influence  exerted  by  mesmerism  over  the  constitution  of
the  Natives  of  Bengal,  and  that  painless  surgical  operations
with  other  advantages,  are  their  natural  birthright,  of  which
they  will  no  longer  be  deprived,  I  hope.

"  Duty  calls  me  to  another  and  more  extensive  field,
where  I  hope  to  work  out  this  curious  and  interesting  subject
in  all  its  practical  details,  and  to  ascertain  to  what  extent
other  varieties  of  mankind  are  capable  of  being  benefitted  by
this  natural  curative  power.

"  I  am,  your  obedient  Servant,

"  James  Esdaile,  M.D.
"  Hooghly,  22nd  Jan.,  1846."


"  A  Return,

"  Showing  the  number  of  painless  surgical  operations
performed  at  Hooghly  during  the  last  eight  months."

Arm  amputated 1

Breast  ditto 1

Tumor  extracted  from  the  upper  jaw 1

Scirrhus  testium  extirpated 2

Colls  amputated 2

Contracted  knees  straightened 3

Ditto  arms 3

Operations  for  Cataract 3

Large  tumor  in  the  inguen  cut  off 1

Operations  for  Hydrocele 7

Ditto  Dropsy 2

Actual  Cautery  applied  to  a  sore 1

Muriatic  Acid  ditto 2

Unhealthy  sores  pared  down 7

Abscesses  opened 5

Sinus,  6  inches  long,  laid  open 1

Heel  flayed 1

End  of  thumb  cut  off 1


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliot  son.  197

Teeth  extracted 3

Gum  cut  away 1

Preeputium  cut  off 3

IHlea  ditto 1

Great  toe  nails  cut  out  by  the  roots 5

Seton  introduced  from  ankle  to  knee  1

Large  tumor  on  leg  remoTed 1

Scrotal  tumors,  weighing  from  8  to  80  lbs.  removed  17,

painless 14

Operations 73


"  A  ItSTUBN

"  Of  medical  cases  cured  by  mesmerism  during  the  last
eight  months.

Nervous  Headache . 3  cured  by  one  trance.

Tic  doloureux 1  ditto

Nervousness,  and  lameness  from  rheumatism  of  2^  years  standing,
1,  bv  chronic  treatment.  By  chronic  treatment  is  meant  daily  mes-
mensing  without  the  intention  of  entrancing  the  patient,  wnich  is
not  necessary.

Spasmodic  Colic 1>  by  one  trance.

Acute  inflammation  of  the  eye. . 1»  by  repeated  trances  in  24  houre

Chronic  ditto  • 1»  by  chronic  treatment.

Acute  inflammation  of  testis  . . 1,  by  repeated  trances  in  36  hours.

Convulsions 1»  by  one  trance.

Lameness  from  Rheumatism  . . 1,  by  chronic  treatment.

Lumbago Ij  by  generaland  local  mesmerising

for  a  week.

Sciatica 1,  ditto.

Pain  in  crural  nerve 1,  ditto.

Palsy  of  one  arm 1,  ditto  for  a  month.

Ditto  of  half  the  body 1,  ditto  for  six  weeks

18

'^  It  will  be  perceived  that  the  above  cases  are  chiefly  dis-
eases of  the  nervous  system.  But  as  sleep  and  the  absence
of  pain  is  the  best  condition  of  the  body  for  promoting  the
resolution  of  inflammation  by  the  powers  of  nature^  I  nave
extinguished  local  inflammations  by  keeping  the  patient  en-
tranced till  this  was  effected.

**  I  beg  to  state  for  the  satisfaction  of  those  who  have  not
et  a  practical  knowledge  of  the  subject,  that  I  have  seen  no
ad  consequences  whatever  arise  from  persons  being  operated
on  when  in  the  mesmeric  trance. Cases  have  occurred  in


I


198 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

which  no  pain  has  been  feltsabsequent  to  the  operation  even ;
the  wounds  healing  in  a  few  days  hy  the  first  intention  ]  and
in  the  rest,  I  have  seen  no  indications  of  any  injury  being
done  to  the  coustitution.  On  the  contrary,  it  appears  to  me
to  have  been  saved,  and  that  less  constitutional  disturbance
has  followed  than  under  ordinary  circumstances.

*^  There  has  not  been  a  deatn  among  the  cases  operated
on.  In  my  early  operations,  I  availed  myself  of  the  first  fit
of  insensibility,  not  knowing  whether  I  could  command  it
back  again  at  pleasure.

**  But  if  the  trance  is  not  profound  the  first  time,  the  sur-
geon may  safely  calculate  on  its  being  deeper  the  next,  and
when  operating  in  public,  it  will  be  prudent  to  take  the  se-
curity of  one  or  two  preliminary  trances.  Flexibility  of  the
limbs  till  moved,  and  their  remaining  rigid  in  any  position  we
put  them  in,  is  characteristic  of  the  trance :  but  there  are  ex-
ceptions, and  these  are  equally  diagnostic,  and  to  be  depended
on.  It  sometimes  happens,  that  the  limbs  become  rigid  as
they  lie,  and  on  bending  them  they  have  always  a  disposition
to  return  to  a  state  of  spasmodic  extension.  At  other  times,
there  is  a  complete  relaxation  of  the  whole  muscular  system,
and  the  limbs  can  be  tossed  about  like  those  of  a  person  just
dead.

*^  The  eyes  are  usually  closed,  but  the  eyelids  are  sometimes
seen  a  little  separated,  or  half-open  and  tremulous,  and  the
eye  is  even  occasionally  wide  open,  fixed,  and  insensible  to
the  light.  On  one  occasion,  having  ordered  a  man  to  be  en-
tranced, I  returned  after  two  hours,  and  was  told  by  my  as-
sistant that  the  man  was  not  affected.  I  went  to  see,  and
found  him  with  half  open  eyes,  quivering  eyelids,  and  trem-
bling hands.  I  immediately  said  that  he  was  ready,  and
without  further  testing  his  condition,  performed  a  most  severe
operation  upon  him,  without  his  knowing  any  thing  about  it.

^'  I  also  wish  to  remark,  that  I  have  seen  no  symptom  of
congestion  of  blood  in  the  brain  ;  the  circulation  in  the  trance
being  usually  quite  natural,  like  that  of  a  sleeping  person.
My  patients  appear  to  escape  the  stimulating  stage  of  the
mesmeric  influence  altogether,  and  to  pass  at  once  from  life
to  temporary  death.  This  I  am  disposed  to  attribute  to  the
concentrated,  uninterrupted  manner  in  which  the  power  is
applied  :  as  soon  as  it  is  felt,  there  is  no  time  given  to  the
system  to  rally  from  the  first  impression,  and  it  succumbs
without  a  struggle  to  the  constraining  power.

'^  Some  patients,  when  suddenly  awakened,  say  that  their
vision  is  hazy,  and  their  heads  light,  but  I  take  this  to  arise
from  the  imperfectly  recovered  sensibility  of  the  brain  and


cwnnmnieaied  by  Dr.  EUioUon.  19^

the  organs  of  Bense,  which  are  not  at  once  roused  up  into  the
full  possession  of  their  waking  powers^  just  as  is  seen  in  per-
sons suddenly  aroused  from  profound  natural  sleep.

*^  That  the  mesmeric  torpor  of  the  brain  and  nerves  does
not  arise  from  sanguine  congestion,  is  often  beautifully  seen
in  the  first  actions  of  persons  awaking  from  the  trance.

'^  They  open  their  eyes,  and  at  the  same  moment  recover
all  their  mcuities,  but  it  is  seen  that  the  pupil  is  insensible  to
the  light :  this  they  also  become  aware  of;  they  know  that
their  eyes  are  open,  and  that  they  ought  to  see,  but  do  not.
The  thought  fills  them  with  horror,  and  with  a  fearful  cry
they  bury  their  faces  in  their  hands,  like  persons  struck  blind
by  lightening,  but  this  soon  passes  ofi*,  and  the  retina  re-
covers its  sensibility  by  a  little  rubbing  of  the  eye.  The
dreadftil  shock  given  to  the  mind  under  such  circumstances,
or  when  a  Somnambulist  awakes  and  finds  himself  standing
in  some  strange  attitude,  naked,  in  the  midst  of  strangers,
(an  experiment  I  have  often  made)  is  a  trial  of  the  nerves
which  it  would  be  very  imprudent,  and  even  dangerous  to
make,  with  any  but  such  singularly  impassive  subjects  as  my
patients.

"  This,  and  the  inconveniences  of  inducing  the  Mesmeric
disease  (spontaneous  Mesmeric  action  in  the  system)  by  doing
more  than  is  necessary  for  the  cure  of  disease,  appear  to  me,
to  be  the  real  dangers  to  be  avoided  in  the  use  ot  Mesmerism
as  a  remedy.

*^  I  am  now  able  to  say  from  experience,  that  debility  of
the  nervous  system  predisposes  to  the  easy  reception  of  the
mesmeric  influence,  and  I  augur  well  of  a  patient  s  powers  of
submission,  when  I  recognise  in  him  the  listless  dejected  air.
Pair  abatiUf  that  usually  accompanies  functional  debility  of
the  nerves. — Englishman,  January  24.^'

II.  Removal  of  a  very  large  Tumor  from  the  Neck,  in  France.

I  have  received  fronj  Professor  Durand,  The  Journal  de
Cherbourg  of  the  31st  of  last  May,  containing  the  following
account : —

"  Every  one,  by  the  simple  power  of  his  will,  is  able  to
create  a  serious  perturbation  in  the  natural  state  of  another ;
and  in  the  results  of  this  extraordinary  condition,  called
artificial  sleep-waking,  may  be  observed  a  great  number  of
interesting  phenomena,  which  excite,  in  the  highest  degree,
the  astonishment  and  admiration  of  those  who  witness  them.
Among  these  phenomena,  one  of  the  most  useful  is  assuredly
the  absolute  insensibility  produced  in  the  organs  by  the  mes-
meric sleep,  and  its  happy  application  to  surgical  operations.


200 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations^

"  Mesmeric  insensibility  is  now  a  truth  which  only  requires
the  exercise  of  the  senses  in  order  to  be  known  and  appre-
ciated. Why  then  has  this  truth  still  to  encounter  so  much
opposition  ? Because  the  thing  cannot  be  conceived  possible.

**  But  have  we  yet  learned  the  boundaries  of  possibility  ?
Is  it  rational  to  condemn,  a  priori,  every  thing  the  results
of  which  human  reason  is  unable  to  comprehend  instantly,
every  thing  which  is  opposed  to  the  first  intuition  of  intelli-
gence? There  are  many  things  which  man,  by  appealing
only  to  his  reason,  cannot  understand,  but  which  nevertheless
he  is  obliged  to  accept  as  the  expression  of  truth.  All  is
wonderful  in  us,  and  around  us.  Who  can  explain  the  effects
of  hachich  and  belladonna  ?  Do  we  know  now  opium  pro-
duces sleep?  The  phenomena  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,
of  respiration,  the  principle  of  life,  the  human  will,  the  laws
of  gravitation,  electricity,  galvanism,  are  so  many  mysteries
which  frustrate  the  investigations  of  the  best  informed  men.
If  our  reason  sometimes  revolts  against  the  declarations  of
new  phenomena  still  incomprehensible,  let  us  not,  without
due  examination,  reject  them  for  the  mere  reason  that  they
are  inexplicable.

''  Therefore,  before  regarding  the  astonishins  effects  pro-
duced by  mesmerism  as  fabulous,  let  us  take  the  trouble  to
analyze  them  with  care,  to  try  to  produce  them  ourselves,
and  not  to  pronounce  judgment  before  we  have  entered  into
a  rigorous  and  minute  examination.  If  mesmeric  insensi-
bility, if  perception  through  opaque  bodies,  if  the  communi-
cation of  tnougnt,  be  real  phenomena,  they  are  most  certainly
well  worth  being  studied  :  if  they  are  so  many  errors,  still  let
us  examine  them ;  for  an  error  exposed  is  a  truth  verified.  Let
us  begin  with  doubting — that  is  natural  and  just ;  but  let  us
bring  to  bear  upon  our  multiplied  researches,  that  spirit  of
doubt  which  only  is  reasonable,  and  consists  in  neither  be-
lieving nor  denying,  until  we  have  seen  well,  examined  well,
and  applied  our  faculties  well.

''  These  observations  naturally  lea<f  us  to  speak  of  an  im-
portant operation  performed  on  Wednesday  last,  the  27th
May,  with  great  skill  and  complete  success  by  Dr.  Loysel,
assisted  by  four  other  physicians,  and  in  the  presence  of  more
than  thirty  very  honourable  witnesses,  all  quite  worthy  of
confidence,  and  assembled  in  a  very  suitable  apartment.  The
subject,  who  is  a  young  man,  eighteen  years  of  age,  had  be-
fore been  placed  in  a  state  of  absolute  mesmeric  insensibility
by  M.  Deiente  in  their  presence.  This  is  the  fourth  opera-
tion of  the  same  kind  tiiat  has  been  performed  at  Cherbourg
within  the  last  seven  or  eight  months  by  Dr.  Loysel. We


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotaon.  201

cannot  give  a  more  clear  relation  than  a  copy  of  the  report  of
the  operation,  at  which  we  werepermittea  to  be  present: —

*'  On  Wednesday,  the  27th  of  MaVi  at  forty  minutes  past
four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  Dr.  Loysel,  assisted  by  Dr.
Gibon,  and  in  the  presence  of  three  other  physicians,  per-
formed with  remarkable  skill  and  complete  success,  the  ope*
ration  hereafter  related,  upon  M.  Baysset,  jun.,  18  years  old,
who  was  put  into  the  mesmeric  sleep  and  absolute  insensibility
by  M.  Delente  his  mesmeriser.  The  operation  was  performed
in  the  presence  of  a  great  number  of  spectators,  attracted  less
by  curiosity  than  by  the  interest  they  felt  in  a  measure  which
promised  to  be  so  useful  to  mankind

"  At  four  o'clock  the  invalid,  seated  in  an  ordinary  arm
chair,  was  mesmerised  by  Mr.  Delente,  who  had  several  times
before  sent  him  into  the  mesmeric  sleep.  After  the  expiration
of  two  minutes,  M.  Baysset's  eyes  by  degrees  began  to  close;
the  upper  eyelids  were  agitated  with  a  slight  trembling,  and
pressed  upon  the  globe  of  the  eye,  which  seemed  to  be  con-
vulsed under  the  superciliary  arch  of  the  eyebrow.  The
muscles  of  the  neck  became  gently  relaxed,  the  head  inclined
backwards,  and  rested  upon  the  back  of  the  chair.  The
invalid  kept  his  two  arms  crossed  upon  the  pit  of  his  stomach;
his  countenance  ejppressed  the  most  profound  serenity.  The
mesmerist  then  pushed  a  long  sharp-pointed  probe  several
times  deeply  into  the  flesh,  the  patient  not  appearing  to  be
aware  of  the  experiment  to  which  he  was  subjected.

**  In  the  mean  time  Dr.  Loysel  got  his  instruments  ready,
while  the  other  physicians  present  were  preparing  themselves
to  assist  in  the  operation.  At  forty  minutes  past  four  o'clock,
the  first  cut  was  made,  which  produced  a  large  opening,
extending  from  the  left  and  back  part  of  the  lower  jaw  bone
to  the  centre  of  the  chin.  The  operator  then  carefully  dis-
sected away  a  considerable  masa»  which  presented  seven
united  glands,  the  largest  of  which  had  the  form  and  size
of  a  hm^s  egg.

''This  first  dissection  occupied  at  least  ^en  minii/^^,  not-
withstanding the  dexterity  with  which  it  was  performed.
During  aU  this  period  the  patient  appeared  perfectly  passive ;
no  motion  was  apparent  in  the  features ;  lAs  countenance  was
uninterrvptedly  calm ;  and,  what  was  remarkable,  there  was
not  the  least  decline  of  colour  in  the  complexion^  not  the  least
contraction  of  the  eyebrows,  or  any  sign  whatever  disclosing
the  slightest  pain.  The  spectators  were  all  deeply  affected;
some  were  even  so  terrified  at  the  sight  of  this  enormous
wound,  that  they  were  unable  to  support  it,  and  left  the
apartment.


202 Accounts  of  nwre  painless  Surgical  Operations,

"  The  pulsey  the  state  of  which  had  been  ascertained  at
the  commencement^  had  not  varied:  it  remained,  as  before,  at
84 ;  the  motion  of  the  chest  continued  regular  and  in  strict  re-
lation with  the  beating  of  the  heart.

"  After  a  repose  of  ten  minutes.  Dr.  Loysel  made  a  new
incision  on  the  right  side,  and  extirpated  two  other  glands  in
the  same  manner.  The  patient  remained  exactly  in  the  same
state  as  during  the  first  operation,  preserving  an  inexpressible
tranquillity  and  immobility.

"  The  two  operations  together  occupied  29  minutes  inclu'-
ding  the  interval  of  rest.  Afterwards,  one  of  the  spectators'
who  had  been  intensely  interested,  questioned  the  patient  in
the  following  manner : —

" '  How  do  you  find  yourself?

"  *  Very  well,  sir.

** '  Do  you  suffer  now  ? Have  you  suffered  at  all  ?

*'*  No  sir,  not  at  all!'

''At  31  minutes  past  five,  the  dressing  was  begun.  The
edges  of  the  first  wound  were  united  with  five  pins  run
through  the  tissues,  and  this  lasted  four  minutes.  The  second
wound  was  closed  with  one  pin,  and  then  some  adhesive
plasters  were  applied  upon  both  wounds.  The  dressing  ter-
minated at  57  minutes  past  five.  Every  thing  calculated  to
produce  a  disagreeable  impression  upon  the  mind  of  the
patient  was  then  taken  out  of  the  room ;  and  after  being
washed  and  dressed,  he  was  awakened  by  his  mesmeriser  in
less  than  one  minute.

'^  Restored  to  his  ordinary  condition,  young  M.  Baysset,
whose  tranquillity  and  comfortable  condition  still  continued,
declared  to  the  numerous  witnesses  of  the  operation,-^who
interrogated  him  with  much  eagerness  and  lively  emotion, —
that  he  had  no  remembrance,  no  knowledge,  of  what  had
taken  place ;  that  tie  did  not  suffer  anything;  and,  were  it  not
for  the  bandages  which  surrounded  his  head,  he  should  doubt
whether  the  operation  had  been  performed.  He  thanked  Dr.
Loysel,  M.  Delente,  and  the  physicians  around  him  affection-
ately; he  afterwards  withdrew,  going  on  foot,  without  sup-
port, to  his  home,  at  Equeurdreville,  about  two  kilometres
from  Cherbourg.

''  The  following  individuals,  who  were  present  at  the  ope-
ration, have  certified  to  the  above  &ct8 : —

''  MESSRS.

"  Noel*Agnes,  Sous-pr^fet  of  the  Arrondissement.
"  Obet,  M.D.  Corresponding  Member  of  the  Royal  Aca-
demy of  Medicine.


commMmcaied  by  Dr.  EiUotion.  208

"Gibon,  M.D.,  Paris.

''  Bordonne,  Naval  Surgeon.

**  Boelle,  Naval  Surgeon.

**  Rauline,  Chaplain  of  the  Naval  Hospital.

**  Cbevrely  authorised  Member  of  the  Council  of  the  Ar-

rondissement.
*'  Coutace,  Director  of  the  Military  Stores.
"  Durand,  Professor  of  Philosophy.
*'  De  Roussely  Naval  Engineer.
**  Lieut.  Lacombe,  R.N.
"  Ricardy  Professor  of  Magnetology.
"  Doisnel,  '  Proprietaire.'
"  VergnesSy  '  Enseigne  de  Vaisseau.'
^'Darragon^  Professor.
"  Ford,  Esq.y  from  Eaton  College.
'*  Auguste  Jean,  Merchant.
"Adolphe  Lambert,  '  Propri6taire.'
''  L'Empri^re,  jui^*9  Mercnant.
"  Pesnel,  "X

'aeSemaud ( Inhabitants  of  Equeurdreville.^'
"  F.  Grave,  ' )

When  will  the  naval  surgeons  of  the  opposite  English
coast  go  and  do  likewise  ?  I  shewed  some  ot  them  how  to
mesmerise  a  patient,  insane  and  cataleptic  for  years,  last
autumn,  at  Haslar  Hospital,  when  on  a  visit  to  Dr.  Engledue,
at  Portsmouth,  but  fear  I  failed  to  excite  even  the  faintest
interest.

The  French  operation  has  been  published  in  the  Chester
Chronicle,  which,  like  some  other  provincial  papers  sets  an
example  to  the  timid  and  worldly-wise  editors  or  most  London
newspapers,  by  continually  publishing  mesmeric  facts,  and

3 noting  The  Zoiat,  of  which  the  latter  are  almost  as  shy  as
octors. The  Chester  Editor  prefaces  his  translation  with
saying : —

"  We  trust  the  leading  men  on  the  other  side  the  channel
will  persevere  in  their  God-like  mission, — the  alleviation  of
human  suffering,  "ever  bearing  in  mind  that  true  philosophy
pursues  truth  regardless  of  consequences,  well  knowing  that
the  highest  attribute  of  the  Deity  and  the  Saviour  is  Etbrn  al
Truth  ;  and  that  the  bright  example  of  Catholic  Cherbourg
will  not  be  lost  sight  of  by  the  provinces  of  Protestant  Eng-
land. Truth  is  immutable  !  it  is  the  lens  of  the  mind  through
which  she  is  viewed  that  must  be  purified  of  its  rust,  igno*
ranee,  pride,  selfishness,  and  prejudice.


204 AccouniB  of  more  painkis  Surgical  Operations,

*'  The  illustrious  Louis  Philippe  receatly  granted  to  Cap-
tain Peel  (the  winner  of  the  Paris  Steeple  Kace)  the  Cross  of
the  Legion  of  Honour.  Will  that  great  sovereign — the  pro-
moter of  peace  and  human  happiness — withhold  from  the  phi-
lanthropists. Professors  Durand  and  Delente,  that  honoura-
ble distmction  Y*

IIL  Removal  of  a  large  Tumor  from  the  back  of  a  woman  in

America.

I  extract  the  following  from  the  New  York  Herald : —
'^Surgical  opbration  on  a  mbshbric  patient. — We,
in  company  with  a  number  of  other  persons,  among  whom
were  several  medical  gentlemen,  yesterday  were  witnesses  to  a
surgical  operation  performed  on  a  patient  while  in  the  mes-
meric state,  which,  to  say  the  least,  entirely  puzzled  us.  The
patient  was  a  coloured  servant  girl,  named  Emmeline  Brown,
about  33  years  of  age,  who  has  been  living  in  the  family  of
the  Rev.  Dr.  Higbee.  She  has  been,  for  some  time  past,  af-
flicted with  a  large  tumor  upon  her  back,  immediately  under
the  left  shoulder  blade,  and  has  tried  various  remedies  to  cure
it.  She  at  last  concluded  to  have  it  cut  out,  and  for  that
purpose  called  on  Dr.  Homer  Bostwick,  of  No.  75,  Chambers
Street.  Dr.  Bostwick,  who  has  always  been  sceptical  upon  the
subject  of  magnetism,  thought  this  might  be  a  good  case  to
test  it,  and  called  upon  Dr.  Oltz,  a  magnetic  practitioner,  liv-
ing near  him.  Dr.  Oltz,  after  seeing  the  girl,  expressed  per-
fect confidence  in  his  power  to  place  her  in  the  magnetic  state«
so  that  the  operation  could  be  performed  without  the  patient's
experiencing  any  pain.  Dr.  Oltz  commenced  magnetizing
her,  and  succeeaed  in  putting  her  asleep ;  the  first  time  in
half  an  hour.  Between  that  time,  whicn  was  last  Wednes-
day, and  yesterday,  when  the  operation  was  performed,  he
had  magnetized  her  five  times.  The  operation  was  performed
at  No.  142,  Church  Street,  about  four  o'clock.  Dr.  Oltz,  as-
sisted by  Dr.  E.  J.  Pike,  commenced  in  the  usual  manner  to
magnetize  her  about  half-past  three,  and  by  four  o'clock  the
girl  was  sound  asleep,  and  apparently  insensible.  There  were
at  this  time  about  a  dozen  persons  in  the  room.  Dr.  Oltz  now
said  the  patient  was  ready,  and  left  the  room,  leaving  Dr.
Pike  holding  the  hand  of  the  prl,  with  one  hand  upon  her
forehead.  The  girl,  before  bemg  magnetized,  was  sitting  in
a  chair  with  her  head  lying  forward  upon  a  pillow  on  a  table.
The  upper  part  of  the  aress  was  removed,  and  Dr.  Bostwick,
putting  on  his  apron,  and  taking  his  instruments,  prepared
to  commence.  He  first  made  a  longitudinal  incision,  eight
inches  in  length,  through  the  flesh  over  the  tumor,  and  then


communicated  by  Dr,  Elliotaon.  205

commenced  cutting  round  it.  When  the  knife  was  first  put
in  we  were  watching  the  face  of  the  girl  closely,  expecting  to
see  her  start,  and  hear  her  scream ;  but  there  was  not  the
slightest  motion.  She  lay  as  still  and  motionless  as  a  marble
statue.  Not  a  ouivering  of  the  lip  or  of  the  eye-lid  could  we
observe.  Dr.  bostwicK,  assisted  by  Dr.  Childs  and  Dr.
Stearns,  continued  cutting  away  upon  the  tumor,  and  in  three
minutes  it  was  taken  out,  there  being,  during  the  whole  time,
no  motion  on  the  part  of  the  girl.  During  the  whole  opera-
tion Dr.  Pike  sat  near  the  patient  with  his  hand  upon  her
head.  Several  physicians  examined  the  pulse,  and  said  it  was
apparently  in  a  natural  state.  Dr.  Bostwick  then,  with  a  large
darning  needle,  sewed  up  the  incision,  there  still  being  no  motion
of  muscle  or  nerve  on  the  part  of  the  patient.  After  placing
adhesive  plaster  upon  the  incision,  and  bandaging  it.  Dr.  Oltz
was  called  in  to  wake  up  the  girl.  This  he  did  by  making
passes  over  her  face ;  and  upon  waking  she  was  told  that  the
operation  had  not  been  performed,  and  that  she  must  now
have  it  done. .  This  was  aone  to  see  whether  she  would  know
anything  about  it.  'Well,'  she  said,  'she  was  sorry  but  she
wanted  it  taken  out,'  'Do  you  feel  no  pain?'  asked  Dr.
Bostwick.  '  None,'  said  the  girl.  '  Have  you  felt  none  V
*  None/  was  the  answer  again.  She  was  then  shown  the
tumor,  and  seemed  to  be  very  glad  to  see  it  out.  It  was  an
adipose  tumor,  and  weighed  10  ounces.  We  then  left  the
house  extremely  puzzled.  The  persons  present  who  witnessed
the  operation  were  Dr.  Homer  Bostwick,  Dr.  John  Steams,
Dr.  Samuel  R.  Childs,  Dr.  Eleazer  Parmly,  Dr.  Sherwood,
Dr.  E.  J.  Pike,  W.  H.  Stinemets,  E.  L.  Fancher,  M.  G.
Hart,  Oliver  Johnson,  John  R.  S.  Van  Vleit,  and  Edward
Gould  Buflum.  The  time  from  which  the  operation  was  first
commenced  till  she  was  awakened  was  just  30  minutes." —
May  6,  1846.

IV.  Removal  of  a  Tumor  en  America,

I  copy  the  following  from  the  Bermuda  Royal  Gazette  of
the  17th  of  last  March,  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.
Clarke,  of  Kingsland,  who  was  formerly  my  pupil  at  Univer-
sity College,  and  has  invariably  supported  mesmerism.

"  Mesmerism  and  Surgbbt. — On  Tuesday  last  a  surgi-
cal operation  was  performed  on  a  lady  in  Byron,  when  sne
was  in  a  magnetic  sleep,  which  is  of  so  novel  a  character  in
this  vicinity,  as  to  be  worthy  of  notice.

''  The  lady  is  Mrs.  Tuttle  the  wife  of  Mr.  Nelson  Tuttle,  a
respectable  farmer  in  Byron  ;  the  magnetizer  was  Mr.  J.  C.
Walker,  a  gentleman  who  is  teaching  a  school  in  the  neigh-

VOL.  IV.  Q


206 AceaunU  of  mare  painless  Surgical  Operations,

bourhood  of  Mr.  Tattle.  The  operation  was  the  removal  of
a  tumor  from  the  shoulder  partly  over  the  joint ;  the  operator
was  Dr.  John  Cotes,  of  this  village.

'^  The  facts,  as  related  to  us  are  briefly  these :  Mrs.  Tattle
who  is  about  thirty  years  of  age,  had  been  troubled  with  the
tumor  for  several  years,  and  when  its  removal  was  determined
upon,  the  idea  occurred  to  Mr.  Walker,  (who  it  appears  is
an  adept  in  mesmerism),  that  it  might  better  be  performed
when  sne  was  under  the  influence  of  magnetism.  lie  accord-
ingly magnetized  her  seven  or  eisht  times  between  the  8th
and  17th  instant,  on  which  day  me  operation  was  to  be  per-
formed as  arranged  between  the  husband  and  doctor,  though
unknown  to  the  patient.

''When  Dr.  Cotes  arrived  at  12  o'clock,  she  was  in  the
magnetic  sleep  and  had  been  so  half  an  hour.  Dr.  Lynd,  of
Byron,  and  some  fifteen  or  twenty  other  persons  were  present,
and  the  operation  was  performed  at  half-past  one — it  occupied
about  three  minutes,  and  during  the  whoje  performance  the
patient  appeared  to  be  perfectly  tranquil^  land  tmconscious  of
what  was  going  on.  The  tumor  was  about  three  inches  long
by  two  and  a  half  broad,  and  to  extirpate  it  required  an
external  incision  six  inches  long,  and  then  to  be  dissected
from  the  bone.  She  was  kept  in  the  mesmeric  state  for  three
hours  after  the  operation,  making  five  hours  in  all,  and  when
Mr.  Walker  awoke  her  she  was  perfectly  unconscious  of  all
that  had  transpired.

''  Whatever  opinions  may  be  entertained  of  animal  mag-
netism in  the  abstract,  this  case  is  too  strongly  authenticated
to  admit  of  doubt."

V.  VI.  VII.  Extraction  of  Teeth.

I  have  now  to  record  some  operations  performed  by  a  Pro-
fessor of  Kine's  College,  and  testified  by  another  Professor
of  King's  College.  The  operator  was  no  other  than  Mr.Thos.
Bell,  the  Zoologist,  an  honest,  virtuous  man.  Read  and
ponder  upon  this,  ye  Professors  of  University  College,  and

?re  gentlemen  of  the  council. It  is  absolutely  come  to  this
or  me. The  Sybil's  prophecy  is  fulfilled, —

Via  prima  salatis,
Quod  minitne  reris,  Graia  pandetur  ab  iirbe.

I  have  received  the  following  letter  from  Mr.  Chandler
for  The  Zoist.

''to  thb  bditor  of  the  zoibt.

''Sir. — When  I  concluded  my  last  communication  by
hoping  to  have  some  interesting  matter  for  you  before  July,


camnnmicated  by  Dr.  ElKot$on.  207

I  little  expected  to  have  it  in  my  power  to  send  you  anything
so  highly  important  as  the  following  case.  What  will  the
Brodies  and  the  rest  of  the  clausopates  say  now  ?  it  is  well
known  what  some  of  them  think.  Why  do  they  not  open
their  eyes  and  see,  and  abandon  their  wilful  ignorance  ?

**  James  Payne,  est.  23,  a  stout  healthy  sailor,  was  present
some  months  ago  whilst  I  was  mesmerising  Holdsworth ;
on  seeing  her  go  to  sleep  he  became  alarmed  and  ran  out  of
the  room,  but,  after  a  little  persuasion  he  was  induced  to
return,  and  after  a  time  he  even  submitted  to  be  mesmerised.
Six  minutes  put  him  asleep  and  rendered  him  cataleptic  the
first  time.

''  Finding  he  had  a  molar  tooth  that  he  wished  to  have
extracted,  I  recommended  him  to  let  me  mesmerise  him  a
few  days,  in  order  to  draw  it  during  the  sleep.  He  submitted ;
but  on  his  fourth  visit  he  said  he  must  have  the  tooth  drawn,
as  he  was  going  to  sea  the  next  day.  I  accordingly  with
much  reluctance  extracted  it.

*'  In  April,  1846,  he  again  presented  himself,  wishing  to
lose  the  fellow  tooth  on  the  opposite  side,  it  beine  very
troublesome ;  he  also  expressed  a  wish  to  be  mesmerisra,  that
he  might  not  suffer  so  much  pain  as  with  the  last.  I  readily
consented,  knowing  him  to  l>e  still  very  susceptible,  as  I  had
mesmerised  him  four  or  five  times  during  the  mterval,  for  the
purpose  of  showing  that  a  strong  healthy  man  could  be  mes-
mensed.  I  entranced  him  six  times  for  about  twenty  minutes
each  time;  and  finding  him  quite  insensible  to  the  prick  of  a
needle  in  any  part  of  the  body,  I  felt  quite  confident  of
success;  and  accordingly,  on  the  14th  of  April,  took  him
to  Mr.  Bell,  who  had  xindly  consented  to  operate.  His
account  of  the  case  will  be  read  with  the  greatest  interest
and  will  render  any  further  account  of  the  operation  quite
unnecessary.  One  circumstance  I  may  mention  which  struck
me  very  forcibly,  proving  the  perfect  unconsciousness  of  all
that  passed.  After  the  extraction  of  the  tooth,  the  mouth
remained  open  and  the  head  back,  just  as  I  had  placed  them
before  the  operation.  I  can  proauce  insensibility  in  this
patient  in  any  part  of  the  body,  when  he  is  in  his  natural
state,  so  that  he  might  look  at  his  arm  or  his  leg  whilst  being
amputated  without  suffering  the  slightest  pain.  The  same
occurs  in  two  or  three  other  patients.  I  sometimes  mesmerise
one  hand,  and  whilst  they  pnck  themselves  with  a  pin  on  that
hand,  I  gently  blow  upon  it  and  sensation  instantly  returns.

''  The  following  is  a  copy  of  Professor  Bell's  account  of
the  case.

'' '  James  Payne  was  brought  to  me  by  Mr.  Chandler  on

q2


208 Acamnit  of  more  pamktt  Surgical  Optratioiu,

Tuesday  morniag,  April  the  14th,  1846,  id  order  that  a  tooth
might  be  removed,  whilst  in  a  state  of  mesmeric  trance.  He
is  a  healthy,  vigorous  young  man,  with  a  couotenatice  ex-
pressive of  remarkable  simplicity  and  good  humour.  On  being
placed  in  a  chair,  Mr.  Chaudler  proceeded  to  throw  him  into
the  mesmeric  trance,  which  was  effected  in  about  a  minute,
or  a  minute  and  a  half.  The  right  hand  was  then  raised,  and
it  remained  in  a  state  of  entire  rigidity,  and  on  being  pricked
on  the  hand  and  face  with  a  pin,  not  the  slightest  inaicatiou
of  feeling  was  cTinced.  He  was  then  restored  to  conscious-
nesB,  ana  I  examined  the  state  of  the  teeth.  I  found  on  the
lefl  side  of  the  upper  jaw  that  the  second  bicuspid  and  the
first  molar  were  considerably  decayed ;  and  that  on  introduc-
ing a  small  instrument,  the  latter  was  very  tender,  shewing
exposure  of  the  pulp.  He  was  then  again  thrown  into  the
mesmeric  trance,  and  on  introducing  the  instrument  much
more  freely,  and  thoroughly  probing  the  cavity,  the  only  in-
dication of  any  sensation  being  felt  was  a  slight  movement  of
the  tongue  towards  the  tooth.  Mr.  Chandler  then  asked  him
in  a  very  low  whisper  whether  he  felt  any  pain  ?  To  which
he  replied  in  as  low  a  whisper,  "  Very  little."  A  few  more
passes  entirely  removed  this  sensibility,  and  the  free  probity
of  the  tooth-jmlp  produced  no  apparent  effect.


" '  The  head  was  now  placed  against  the  back  of  the
chair,  and  the  mouth  opened  bv  Mr.  Chandler,  and  they
remained  immovable.  I  then  witn  a  pair  of  forceps  removed
the  molar  tooth,  which  was  ufnauaUy  firm,  the  roots  being
not  only  very  divergent  but  bent.  Not  the  slightest  indica-
tion was  evinced  of  pain  or  of  sensation.  A  sponge  was
placed  against  the  orifice  of  the  alveolus  to  receive  the  blood,
and  I  closed  the  gum.  Mr.  Chandler  then  restored  the  pa-
tient, who  on  coming  to  himself  smiled,  and  appeared  wholly
unconscious  of  what  had  taken  place ;  and  on  being  asked,
"Well,  where  is  your  tooth?"  He  looked  eurpriaed  and
said,  "  It's  gone,  Sir."  I  asked  him  if  he  was  conscions  of
having  suffered  pain,  and  he  assured  me  that  he  did  not  know
that  anything  had  been  done ;  that  he  had  no  recollection  of
feeling  any  pain. On  the  whole  the  case  was  perfectly  satis-


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  209

factory  to  me  as  well  as  to  my  friend.  Professor  Edward
Forbesy  who  was  present,  and  who  will  attest  the  accuracy
of  this  report.

"  '  Thomas  Bbll,  F.R.S.  F.R.C.S.
" '  Professor  of  Zoology  in  King's  College,  London,
** '  and  Lecturer  on  Dental  Surgery  at  Ouy^  Hospital/

"  CSopy  of  certificate  from  Professor  Forbes.

**  *  I  was  present  when  Professor  Bell  extracted  a  tooth
from  the  man,  Payne,  when  thrown  into  a  mesmeric  trance
by  Mr.  Chandler.  I  fully  attest  the  accuracy  of  the  above
statement.

'' '  The  patient  was  strong  and  healthy.  When  awake,  he
evidently  suffered  pain  on  the  probing  of  the  decaying  tooth ;
but  during  its  extraction,  when  he  was  in  the  mesmeric  trance,
he  did  not  exhibit  the  slightest  symptoms  of  pain  or  incon-
venience. After  the  operation  he  did  not  shew  any  signs  of
fatigue  or  distress.

" '  Edward  Forbbs,
"  *  Professor  of  Botany,  King's  College,  London.' "

"These  statements  were  sent  to  me  with  the  greatest
readiness,  on  my  only  hinting  to  Professors  Bell  and  Forbes
that  I  should  like  a  line  from  each  of  them,  and  the  former
declared  that  he  should  not  fail  to  name  the  circumstance  in
his  lectures  at  Guy's  next  session.  I  will  endeavour  to  place
it  in  his  power  to  shew  the  class  a  living  demonstration.

"Yours,  obediently,

"  Thomas  Chandlbb.
^*  58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotherhithe,
"April  22nd,  1846."


t€


TO THB EDITOR OF  THB Z0I8T.


"  Sir, — If  not  too  late  for  insertion  in  the  July  number,
I  shall  feel  obliged  by  your  adding  the  following  account  of
further  operations  by  Mr.  Bell  to  my  previous  communication.

"On  May  12th,  I  took  Mr.  Ford,  my  epileptic  patient,
to  Mr.  Bell,  by  appointment,  to  have  a  tooth  extracted  during
the  mesmeric  sleep,  which  was  done  most  satisfactorily, — in-
deed even  more  so  than  the  previous  case, — for  he  submitted
to  the  usually  very  painful  operation  of  extraction  by  the  ele-
vator— (which  was  continued  for  above  five  minutes) — vnt?^
out  his  evincing  the  slightest  symptom  of  pain ;  and  on  my
awaking  him,  he  declared  he  had  no  knowledge  of  anything
having  been  done.  There  were  present  during  the  operation.
Dr.  F.  Ramsbotham, Messrs.  Luke, Hilton, Lewis, and


210 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

Beale^  who  all  admitted  that  there  was  some  very  extraor-
dinary effect ;  but  one  or  two  of  them  wished  to  see  a  little
more  before  expressing  their  opinions  on  the  subject^  and  by
Mr.  Bell's  great  kindness  I  was  soon  enabled  to  give  them
an  opportunity.

"  An  appointment  was  made  for  Wednesday,  June  3rd,
and  I  accordingly  attended  with  my  two  patients  who
had  been  previously  operated  on,  both  of  whom  had  been
anxiously  waiting  to  have  more  teeth  extracted.  Payne  was
first  submitted  to  the  operation ;  he  lost  a  bicuspid  as  before
without  moving  a  muscle.  I  next  mesmerised  Mr.  Ford,  who
wished  to  lose  the  stumps  of  two  superior  molars.  Mr.  Luke»
who  was  again  present,  held  his  pulse  during  the  several
operations,  which  lasted  at  least  ten  minutes,  and  he  declared
that  there  was  no  variation  in  the  pulse,  nor  the  slightest
muscular  movement  in  the  hand  or  arm,  Mr.  Bell,  with  his
usual  skill  and  dexterity,  extracted  with  the  elevator  the  six
fangs,  all  separately;  I  awaking  the  patient  twice  during  the
time  for  the  purpose  of  allowing  him  to  wash  the  blood  from
his  mouth,  as  well  as  to  prevent  any  choking  noise  in  the
throat,  which  on  the  former  occasion  was  construed  by  a
sceptic  present  into  a  groan.  There  were  present  besides
Mr.  Luke,  Messrs.  Fergusson,  B.  Curling,  Adams,  &c.,  &c.,
in  all  above  a  dozen,  and  each  one  expressed  Mmseiff  perfectly
satisfied  with  the  reality  of  the  phenomena ;  indeed  several  of
them  promised  to  sign  a  statement  of  the  case,  which
Mr.  Bell  very  kindly  offered  to  draw  up,  and  which  I  hope
to  get  completed  in  time  to  send  with  this.

''Mr.  Bell  has  behaved  most  handsomely;  he  deserves
the  best  thanks  of  all  who  are  interested  in  mesmerism,
having  devoted  much  of  his  valuable  time  to  the  advancement
of  our  interesting  science.

''  Many  persons,  even  some  professional  men,  run  away
with  the  idea  that  a  patient  can  be  mesmerised  and  rendered
insensible  to  pain  at  one  sitting ;  and  several  persons  have
come  lone  distances  to  me  with  that  impression,  and  have
been  mucn  disappointed  when  informed  that  such  was  not
the  fact ;  for  altnough  such  cases  do  occur,  they  are  rare ;
two  or  three  have  happened  in  my  practice,  and  several  of
my  patients  have  been  quite  fit  for  any  operation  after  being
mesmerised  five  or  six  times.

"  I  cannot  conclude  this  communication  without  adverting
to  the  foul  and  cowardly  slander  contained  in  the  Lancet  of
last  week  (June  13th);  foul,  because  it  contains  nothing  but
personal  abuse  of  Dr.  Elliotson  without  the  shadow  of  an
argument;  and  cowardly,  because  the  Lancet  admits  no  reply


communieaied  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  211

into  its  columns.  The  editor  of  that  scurrilous  journal  does
well  to  laugh  whilst  he  may;  the  time  will  arrive  when  he  will
have  to  alter  his  tone,  and  when  no  hospital  surgeon  will  ven-
ture to  operate  without  first  trying  the  effects  of  mesmerism
to  alleviate  the  sufferings  of  his  patients  during  and  after  his
operations.  ''  I  remain,

"  Yours  obediently,

"  Thomas  Chahdlbr.
'*  58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotherhithe,
-*  June  17th,  1846."

"  On  the  3rd  of  June,  1846,  I  again  saw  the  patient
Payne,  on  whom  1  had  previously  operated,  for  the  purpose
of  removing  a  bicuspid  tooth,  which  I  did  in  the  presence  of
several  professional  friends,  when  he  had  been  placed  in  a
state  oi  mesmeric  sleep  by  his  medical  attendant,  Mr.
Chandler.  The  result  was  in  all  respects  similar  to  that
of  the  former  operation.  Not  the  slightest  indication  was
afforded  of  his  oeing  even  conscious  of  the  operation,  not  a
muscular  movement  took  place,  nor  was  there  any  change  in
the  pulse,  which  was  held  by  Mr.  Luke  during  the  operation.

"  I  afterwards,  in  the  presence  of  the  same  gentlemen,
removed  six  stumps,  some  oy  means  of  the  forceps,  and  the
rest  by  the  elevator,  for  another  person,  a  respectable  man
named  Ford,  who  did  not  exhibit  any  indications  of  sensa-
tion during  the  operation,  and  declared  afterwards,  on  being
awakened,  that  he  had  not  been  in  any  way  cognizant  of  the
operation  being  performed.

"  In  both  cases  severe  pain  must  have  been  suffered,  had
the  patients  not  been  in  the  mesmeric  sleep.

'^  Thomas  Bell.

''The  undersigned,  who  were  present  at  the  operation
above  mentioned,  attest  the  accuracy  of  the  statement.

'*  W.  Fergusson,  Professor  of  Surgery  in  Kind's  Col-
lege, and  Surgeon  to  King's  College  Hospital.

"  E.  Forbes,  Professor  of  Botany  in  King's  College.

''  James  Luke,  Surgeon  to  th^  London  Hospital.

''John  Adams,  Assistant -Surgeon  to  the  London
Hospital."

Similar  testimony  is  civen  by  three  other  gentlemen
who  were  present,  and,  though  not  -medical  men,  are  all
addicted  to  scientific  pursuits. They  are,

Mr.  M.  J.  Rippingham,  Solicitor,  Gt.  Prescot  Street.
Mr.  C.  Richardson,  Merchant,  Dalston  Rise.
Mr.  J.  Holland,  Merchant,  New  Cross,  Lambeth.


212 Accounts  qf  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

The  first,  in  his  letter  of  testimony  to  Mr.  Chandler,
states  that,  "  eybrt  one  in  the  room  was  equally  sati^d:"
the  last,  that  '^  all  presbnt  appeared  to  be  astonished  beyond
measure,  and  expressed  their  conviction  that  the  whole  of  the
operations  had  been  effected  without  occasioninff  any  pain  to  the
patients,  and  lie  did  not  observe  that  any  doubt  was  entertained
of  the  farther  fact,  that  the  patients  were  not  cognizant  of  them
during  their  progress/'  "  and  all  expressed  their  willingness
to  sign  a  declaration  which  it  was  understood  should  be
drawn  up  by  Mr.  B.,  and  which  he  stated  (voluntarily)  should
be  limited  to  mere  facts."

VIII.  I  copy  the  following  from  the  Plymouth  and  De-
vonport  Weekly  Journal,  April  16th,  1846.

'*  Sir, — Observing  from  time  to  time  that  the  columns  of
your  paper  have  been  open  to  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  I
offer  you  the  statement  of  a  case  which  came  under  my  notice
on  Tuesday  last.  I  was  applied  to  on  that  day  to  extract  a
tooth  for  a  gentleman  who  always  felt  excessively  nervous
and  excited  at  an  operation  of  the  kind,  and  who  had,  there-
fore, consented  on  the  present  occasion  to  have  his  tooth
extracted  while  under  the  mesmeric  influence.  He  was  ac-
companied by  a  friend,  who  having  mesmerised  him  and
ascertained  that  he  was  quite  insensible  to  pain,  I  examined
the  tooth,  which  was  an  upper  bicuspis ;  it  was  in  a  most
carious  state,  with  the  gum  highly  inflamed.  I  extracted  it
without  his  manifesting  the  slightest  symptom  of  pain.  Be-
fore he  was  demesmerised  I  removed  everything  that  might
give  any  appearance  of  an  operation  having  taken  place;  and
on  his  being  awoke  I  asked  him  if  his  tooth  was  still  painful,
he  replied  no,  and  that  the  pain  had  quite  subsided.  On
other  questions  being  put  to  him  as  to  the  sensibility  of  the
tooth,  he  said  it  was  tender  to  the  touch.  I  requested  him
to  put  up  his  finger  and  feel  whether  it  was  still  sensitive.
On  his  doing  so  ne  shewed  great  astonishment  and  delight,
exclaiming  'Oh!  you  have  taken  it  out;  how  glad  I  am.'
He  assured  me  he  was  not  at  all  conscious  of  its  extraction,
and  that  he  had  not  suffered  the  slightest  pain.  Should  you
deem  the  above  worthy  a  place  in  your  next  publication,  you
are  at  liberty  to  insert  it.

"  Your  obedient  servant,

"  C.  W.  Fox.
Princess  Square,  April  16th,  1846."


it


I  was  favoured  with  the  Plymouth  paper  by  Mr.  Fry,
and  this  note  accompanied  it.


ccmrMmkated  by  Dr.  ElUotion.  218

"  Plymouth,  April  18th.
**  Dear  Sir, — I  send  you  another  case  of  tooth  extraction
in  the  Plymouth  Journal  of  last  Thursday. It  is  written  by
the  dentist,  who  is  one  of  our  first  practitioners,  and  had
never  before  operated  upon  a  mesmeric  subject.

"  Yours  faithfully,

"  E.  Fby.
"  To  Dr.  EUiotson."

IX.  X.  The  following  I  received  from  Dr.  Storer  of  Bath : —

«  9th  June,  1846.

**  My  Dear  Sir, — I  have  the  pleasure  to  enclose  two  cases,
which  I  hope  will  be  found  sufficiently  interesting  for  The
Zoisl.  The  other  cases  referred  to  I  shall  remit  on  a  future
occasion,  thinking  it  most  prudent  to  allow  more  time  to
elapse  to  prevent  medical  cavilling  in  case  of  any  relapse.

**  I  am  happy  to  say  we  have  at  Bath  a  good  many  quiet
believers,  amongst  these  a  few  medical  men :  there  are  also
many  opponents  in  the  profession,  but  I  invariably  find
these  to  consist  of  the  most  ignorant,  prejudiced,  and  routine
classes.

^*  Trusting  your  labours  in  the  cause  are  now  duly  appre-
ciated, I  beg  to  subscribe  myself  with  much  respect,

"  Yours  very  faithfully,

'*  27,  Brook  St.,  Bath.  Henry  Storbr.

"  To  Dr.  EUiotson."

'^TO  THE EDITOR  OF  THE ZOIST.

''  Two  Painless  Operations  of  Teeth  Extraction.

**  Sir, — As  it  is  units  which  make  numbers,  and  coinciding
with  the  opinion  expressed  in  your  last  journal,  that  all  ope-
rations without  pain  should  at  least  be  noticed,  I  think  the
fact  of  two  occurring  in  one  week  to  a  private  practitioner,
will  be  considered  sufficiently  interesting  for  your  pages.  I
cannot  omit  this  opportunity  of  thanking  the  editor  of  The
Zoistf  for  the  great  and  valuable  amount  of  information  which
that  journal  contains :  the  last  number  in  particular,  must
be  considered  a  staggering  if  not  a  crushing  one,  to  the
opponents  of  mesmerism,  and  were  it  generally  circulated
and  read,  an  impetus  would  be  given  to  the  subject  which
would  almost  defy  further  opposition :  however,  knowing  the
value  of  your  space,  I  will  not  further  digress,  but  give  at
once  an  abstract  of  the  two  cases  above  referred  to  : —

''  The  first  was  that  of  a  youth  placed  under  my  care


214 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations.

for  epilepsy ;  he  is  nearly,  if  not  quite  well,  his  case  presents
several  very  interestine  phenomena,  he  is  a  lucid  somnambu-
list and  clairvoyant ;  out  further  particulars  I  shall  reserve
until  I  forward  you  his  case  with  two  or  three  others  of  epi-
lepsy, successfully  cured  by  mesmerism  alone.  The  youth
in  question  is  the  son  of  respectable  parents  residing  at
Primrose  Hill,  Bath.  The  extraction  of  a  tooth  being  neces-
sary, I  called  on  Mr.  Edwards,  the  dentist,  before  a  stranger
to  me,  and  made  an  appointment  with  him  for  Tuesday  last,
— I  also  invited  several  parties  to  witness  the  results. — Having
mesmerised  the  youth,  I  then  placed  the  dentist  en  rapport,
who  at  once  proceeded  to  his  part  of  the  operation,  by  the
skilful  extraction  of  a  molar  tooth ;  during  this  period,  the
patient  was  closely  watched  by  the  spectators,  and  not  the
sli&:htest  appreciable  indication  of  pain  could  be  detected :  on
bemg  demesmerised  and  closely  questioned,  the  youth  de-
clared his  entire  ignorance  of  wnat  had  occurred.  From  this
united  testimony,  we  may  safely  conclude,  that  no  pain  was
actually  felt,  however  impossible  such  a  fact  may  appear  to
some  soi-disant  philosophers.?

*'  The  next  operation  took  place  four  days  afterwards,  the
lad  is  living  in  my  service.  Mr.  Edwards,  the  same  dentist,
having  decided  on  the  necessity  of  the  tooth  being  extracted,
I  again  asked  a  large  party  of  the  highest  respectability ;
there  were  also  present  tnree  gentlemen  connected  with  the
press,  who  eave  faithful  reports  in  the  local  papers.  The  lad
was  mesmerised  by  me  in  about  three  minutes ;  his  case  pre-
sents a  striking  contrast  to  the  other, — coma  to  a  great  degree
takes  place,  and  it  is  only  by  the  excitation  of  particular
organs,  that  I  am  enabled  in  the  least  to  arouse  him  from
this  state : — after  sleep  was  induced,  I  opened  his  mouth,
and  by  passes  renderea  his  jaw  rigid  and  fixed.  The  dentist
being  as  before  placed  en  rapport,  (an  important  point),  freely
lanced  the  gum,  and  by  a  powerful  wrench,  extracted  a
double-fanged  molar  tooth.  l*he  jaw  was  then  demesmerised,
the  lad  was  made  to  wash  out  his  mouth  by  imitation  and
the  will — a  piece  of  cotton  was  also  inserted  in  the  cavity.

'^  Throughout  this  period,  though  closely  watched,  it  was
the  unanimous  conviction  of  all  present,  that  not  the  slightest
indication  of  pain  could  be  discovered.

^*  The  lad,  on  being  awoke,  seemed  quite  incredulous  of
the  result,  until,  fi*om  the  taste  of  blood,  he  put  his  fingers
into  his  mouth,  and  then  half  smiling,  said  *  you  have  got
my  tooth  out  then.'

''  These  operations  were  witnessed  by  upwards  of  thirty

p  Forbes,  ListoD,  Waklcy,  Utimball,  Jone9,  Smith,  &c.


Another  patnkw  Surgical  Operation.  216

iDdiTidualSy  and  wishing  to  afford  every  facility  to  the  know-
ledge of  the  fact— I  invited  several  medical  men,  but  only
two  or  three  came.  Making  all  allowance  for  professional
engagements,  I  am  inclined  to  think  some  purposely  did  not
come,  lest  they  should  have  had  conviction  brought  to  their
minds.  Others  from  being  so  long  accustomed  to  witness
painful  operations,  would  probably  receive  too  severe  a  shock
m  seeing  painless  ones,  but  even  this  might  have  been  useful,
in  their  present  state  of  transition,  which  is  being  forced
upon  them  by  common  sense  and  pressure  from  without.

*^  I  am,  Sir,  yours  obediently,

''  Hbnrt  Stobbr,  M.D.
''27,  Brook  Street,  Bath.'*


*^*  Here  are  our  metropolitan  hospital  surgeons  thrown  into
the  shade  again.  Not  one  operation  has  yet  been  performed  by
them  in  the  mesmeric  state.  While  you,  Baron  de  Goldsmid,
add  wings  to  the  University  College  Hospital,  from  which
mesmerism  was  driven  through  the  macninations  of  the
medical  officers  without  your  once  threatening  to  withdraw
your  hitherto  all- necessary  support,  you  make  no  stipulation
for  the  patients  to  have  the  mercies  of  mesmerism,  which  you
know  and  declare  to  be  true.  You  must  have  been  listened
to  had  you  urged  the  duty  in  your  speeches  at  their  annual
hospital  dinners,  when  you  nobly  brought  such  large  col-
lections from  your  nation  to  aid  Christians. — Zoiat.


XL  We  have  received  the  following  from  an  authentic
source.

TO  THB EDITOR OF  THE ZOIST.

Sir. — On  the  16th  of  April  last,  between  one  and  two
o'clock,  a  number  of  persons  were'assembled  in  the  surgery
of  the  Middlesex  Hospital :  some  foreigners  were  there.  Sir
Benjamin  Smith  and  a  few  other  governors  of  the  hospital
too,  all  attracted  by  the  report  that  the  extraction  of  a  tooth
was  to  take  place  while  the  patient  was  under  mesmeric  in-
fluence. Soon  Dr.  Ashburner  and  some  other  of  the  medical
staff  of  the  hospital  appeared,  accompanied  by  Mary  Anne
Douglas,  a  delicate-looking  slight  girl,  about  20  years  of
age,  who  had  been  cured  by  mesmerism  of  hysterical  epilepsy,
after  various  efforts  had  been  made  in  vain  to  effect  a  cure
by  the  ordinary  remedies.  Dr.  Ashburner  mesmerised  this
patient  in  a  minute,  and  produced  rigidity  of  her  muscles  by
the  application  of  a  sovereign  to  the  nape  of  her  neck.  While
she  was  in  that  state,  Mr.  Tomes,  the  dentist  of  the  Hospital,


216  Another  painless  Surgical  Operation.

removed  a  large  carious  permanent  molar  tooth  from  the  right
side  of  her  lower  jaw.  When  she  was  awakened  she  was
quite  certain  that  the  tooth  had  not  been  removed*  and  she
could  not  be  persuaded  of  the  fact  until  she  ascertained  the
point  by  putting  her  finger  into  her  mouth  to  examine  the
cavity.  A  very  natural  question  was  asked  by  several  persons
present  at  this  operation,  **  Why  do  not  the  surgeons  of  the
hospital  resort  to  this  mode  of  preventing  the  pain  of  opera-
tions ?''  Dr.  Ashbumer  addressed  Mr.  Arnott,  the  senior
surgeon y  who  was  soon  to  amputate  the  foot  of  a  poor  girl
in  Northumberland  Ward :  he  offered  Mr.  Amott,  if  be  would
consent  to  postpone  the  operation  for  a  week,  to  prepare  the
unfortunate  creature  to  undergo  the  amputation  without  her
being  cognizant  of  it ;  and  was  emphatically  refused.  How
can  the  surgeons  of  London  go  on  apparently  evincing  such
pleasure  in  giving  pain  ?  Here  was  a  case  which  might  easily
have  been  prepared  for  a  painless  operation.  The  young
woman's  susceptibility  to  mesmeric  sleep  had  been  tested  and
she  could  easily  have  been  made  for  any  given  time  quite
insensible  to  pain.  But  no  !  it  was  not  to  be  permitted.  If
surgeons  did  their  duty,  they  would  learn  the  fact,  that  there
is  not  the  slightest  necessity  to  lop  off  such  limbs.  Continual
mesmerism  would  have  cured  that  poor  creature.  For  some
reason  which  they  either  cannot  or  dare  not  give,  the  oppo-
nents of  those  truths  which  must  force  their  way  seem  banded
together  to  perform  in  each  surgical  operation  an  act  of  gross
cruelty.  We  have  a  right  to  canvass  the  motives  of  those
who,  pretending  to  be  men  of  science,  are  throwing  every
obstacle  in  the  path  of  scientific  progress.  Mr.  Arnott  is
too  cautious  a  man  to  acknowledge  that  he  is  actuated  by
the  sordid  love  of  gain,  that  he  fears  the  disapprobation  of
the  brutal  and  the  ignorant,  who  set  themselves  up,  on  the
score  of  a  pretence  of  exclusive  piety,  against  the  holy  truths
which  the  great  ruler  of  the  universe  has  revealed  to  mankind
through  the  labours  of  Faraday,  Baron  von  Reichenbach,
and  others.^i  But  there  are  men  who,  believing  in  mesmerism
and  its  powers,  confess  that  they  dare  not  avow  their  faith.
There  are  men  in  the  station  of  gentlemen,  bound  by  oath
to  support  the  dignity  of  the  profession  and  advance  the
interests  of  science,  mean  enough  to  succumb  to  the  pre-

q  Mr.  Arnott  is  a  rery  soand  surgeon  and  an  excellent  man.  He  was  the
only  pure  Surgeon  that  did  himself  credit  at  the  Medical  and  Chlrurgical
Society,  when  the  case  of  painless  amputation  was  read,  saying,  "  that  the
statement  was  highly  interesting  and  the  subject  deserving  of  attention."
His  present  conduct  is  referrible  to  nothing  but  a  want  of  moral  courage.
See  Dr.  EUioUon's  Pamphlet,  p.  56.— Z(»m^


Another  painless  Surgical  Operation.  217

jadices  of  the  ignorant  and  the  vulgar.  They  ought  to  know
that  truth  is  not  to  be  overcome.  They  ought  to  feel  that
their  mission  is  to  aid  in  the  advancement  of  knowledge.
They  ought  to  be  aware  that  humanity  claims  of  them  a  de*
votion  to  her  service.  How  do  they  evince  the  chivalrous
spirit  of  gentlemen  ?  Is  it  by  investigating  the  facts  daily
brought  under  their  observation y—^cF^  which  relate  to  the
alleviation  of  pain  and  other  suffering,-— ;/ac^«  which  relate  to
the  cure  of  the  worst  diseases,-— /ac/«  which  relate  to  the
existence  of  new  imponderable  agents,  and  which  relate  to
the  philosophy  of  the  mind  enlargmg  the  boundaries  of  know-
ledge, serving  to  forward  the  improvement  of  education,  and
to  widen  our  scope  in  the  amelioration  of  the  whole  human
race.  They  know  these  things  and  they  refuse  investigation  !
Duty  leads  the  soldier  to  the  battle.  His  life,  bis  do-
mestic ties,  all  that  are  dear  to  him  are  nothing  in  the  balance
when  weighed  against  his  honor.  He  is  ready  and  willing
to  sacrifice  all  if  it  be  his  duty.  The  medical  calling  has
been  held  up  as  one  which  has  emulated  the  chivalry  of  the
military  profession.  Fine  things  have  been  said  of  devotion
to  the  interests  of  humanity, — of  the  self  abandonment  to
the  interests  of  science  and  so  forth.  Behold  a  contrast
instead  of  an  analogy !  A  barbarous  love  of  cruelty  in  per-
forming operations,  many  of  which  might  be  entirely  pre-
vented by  mesmeric  cures, — most  of  which  might  be  rendered
painless  by  mesmeric  sleep.  A  mulish  contumacy  to  the
reception  of  the  plainest  facts.  A  sordid  fear  lest  the  ad-
vancing under  tne  banners  of  truth  should  render  these
cUvalrous  gentlemen  liable  to  be  hit  by  a  shot  in  their  reposi-
tories of  honour — their  pockets  and  their  purses.  Our  hos-
pital physicians  and  surgeons  have  had  ample  opportunities
afforded  them  of  testing  the  efficacy  of  mesmensm  as  an
agent  in  the  cure  of  disease, — as  an  agent  in  the  alleviation
of  suffering, — as  an  agent  in  the  prevention  of  pain,  when
an  operation  has  been  deemed  aavisable.  They  are  now
challenged  at  the  bar  of  public  opinion,  to  come  forward  and
declare  why  they  refuse  to  do  their  duty  in  investigating  the
facts  so  often  reiterated  by  respectable  authorities  in  TheZoist,
and  in  other  publications.  With  honour  they  cannot  shrink
from  the  challenge.  The  facts  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  America,
are  too  numerous  to  allow  of  the  tabooing  of  mesmerism  by
authority.  In  the  provinces,  the  public  are  enquiring  why
the  medical  profession  do  not  investigate  the  subject.  Infor-
mation is  sought  with  avidity,  and  if  the  pill  and  potion
lovers  and  the  doers  of  cruel  operations  do  not  perform  their
duty,  they  must  be  content  to  let  their  names  pass  down


218  Cure  of  an  alleged  Cancer  of  the  Breast,

the  stream  of  time  as  either  stupid  or  sordid  practitioners  of
their  art !  I  am.  Sir,  yours,  &c.,

Ihdignaut  Truth.

IV.  Cure  of  an  AUeged  Cancer  qf  the  Breast. By  Messrs.

Flintoff  and  Fbadelle.

Catherine  Ryan,  42  years  of  age,  accidentally  reoeiTed
a  blow  on  the  right  breast  on  the  26th  of  May,  1841,  and
first  consulted  the  late  Dr.  Davis  about  it,  at  the  University
College  Hospital.  About  a  month  after  the  accident,  the
breast  was  considerably  swelled  and  very  painful.  She  became
an  out-door  patient  for  two  months,  ana  had  twelve  leeches
applied  to  it  every  other  day  during  that  time.  But  getting
worse,  she  applied  to  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  who  ordered  medicine
and  ointment,  but  gave  her  to  understand  she  must  lose  the
breast.  She  went  the  following  week  to  St.  Bartholomew's
Hospital,  at  the  desire  of  Mr.  Pennington,  formerly  a  student
of  that  institution,  to  meet  Mr.  Stanley,  who  recommended
her  to  remain,  informing  her  she  had  cancer;  but  she  de-
clined.

Lady  Robert  Seymour,  of  27  Portland  Place,  then  gave  her
a  letter  of  recommendation,  to  be  treated  as  an  out-door  pa-
tient of  the  Middlesex  Hospital,  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Tuson;
and  she  continued  to  attend  there  till  Nov.  2nd,  when  she  was
received  as  an  in-door  patient,  and  on  the  20th  of  the  same
month,  she  underwent  the  operation.  Mr.  Amott  performed  it.

Two  months  before  she  had  become  an  in-door  patient,  Mr.
Tuson  discovered  that  the  left  breast  ''  was  affected  with  the
SAME  COMPLAINT ;"  to  usc  his  owu  words :  belladonna  plasters
were  applied  to  it,  and  occasionally  leeches.  Mr.  Tuson  in-
formed Mr.  Arnott  of  it,  who  after  examining  it  exclaimed,
"  Dear,  dear, — so  it  is  I"  and  directed  his  attention  to  that
as  well  as  to  the  other  breast,  till  the  operation  took  place.
Mr.  Arnott  told  her  to  make  up  her  ndnd  to  have  the  renuiining
breast  also  removed;  wishing  to  impress  on  her  that  it  would
be  better  for  her,  as  she  must  lose  it  at  some  time  or  other.
On  the  8th  of  January,  1842,  Mrs.  Ryan  was  transferred
from  the  Northumberland  to  the  Cancer  Ward,  when  Mr.
Amott  again  proposed  the  operation.  A  large  ticket  with  the
words  CANCER  BREAST  was  placed  over  the  liead  of  her  bed.^

r  The  ticket  with  the  words '  Cancer  BrtaU'  had  the  name  of  Mr.  Amott
upon  it  as  well  as  the  patient's ;  thus :

Mr.  Arkott.

Cancer  Breast.

Catherine  Ryan.


by  Messrs.  FHnioff  and  FradeUe.  219

She  remained  in  this  ward  till  the  18th  of  May  following.
Ever  since  the  operation,  her  strength  had  gradually  failed,
and  declining  the  proposed  operation,  she  was  removed  to
Handel's  Ward,  whence,  after  remaining  three  weeks,  she
was  discharged.  She  .had  the  benefit  of  the  shower  bath  on
this  occasion  to  strengthen  her  left  side,  which  had  become
paralyzed.  Mr.  Amott  declared  that  all  that  could  tiad  been
done ;  that  the  confined  air  of  the  hospital  did  not  agree  with
her,  and  that  it  was  better  for  her  to  leave  it.  The  porter  of
the  institution  had  to  carry  her  out  (though  she  had  walked
in)  and  put  her  in  a  cab,  as  she  was  utterly  unable  to  wdk
and  even  to  stand.

Nov.  24th,  1842,  Mrs.  B.  entered  Ouy's  Hospital  under
the  care  of  Dr.  Bright  and  Mr.  Aston  Key.  Mr.  Bransby
Cooper  and  Mr.  Aston  Key  pronounced  her  case  to  be  de-
cided CANCBB,  and  told  her  she  must  lose  her  remaining  breast.
Mr.  Morgan  termed  it  chronic  tumor.  Here  she  was  some-
what relieved  from  pain  by  the  application  of  several  plasters.
Two  months  after  leaving  the  hospital,  the  breast  was  worse
than  ever.

Mr.  Cooper,  of  the  Bloomsbury  Dispensary,  seeing  the
state  it  was  in,  proposed  to  perform  the  operation.

Mr.  Bishop,  of  the  Northern  Dispensary,  advised  her  to
undergo  it  by  the  same  operator  who  had  performed  the  first,
yet  said,  he  thought ''  it  was  too  far  gone.**  Both  these  gen-
tlemen said  she  had  canceb.

July  20th.  She  entered  the  Sussex  County  Hospital,
Brighton,  through  the  kindness  and  interest  of  liady  Inglis,
and  was  under  Mr.  Taylor.  She  had  leeches  applied  every
other  day,  hot  poultices  after,  took  powders,  mixtures,  and
piUs ;  was  galvanized  (for  the  paralysis),  had  warm  sea-baths,
shower-baths,  and  riding  in  the  open  air.  She  remained  till
February  25th,  1843,  and  Mr.  Taylor  told  her  the  reason  her
limbs  were  in  that  state  was  the  condition  of  her  breast,  and
that,  if  it  were  removed,  she  would  regain  the  use  of  them.
Here  her  health  was  considerably  improved,  and  the  pain  in
her  breast  also  diminished.

About  three  or  four  days  after  her  return  to  London,  she
was  re-admitted,  at  the  request  of  Lady  Inglis,  into  the  Mid-
dlesex Hospital,  under  Mr.  Shaw,  and  was  reinstated  in  the
Cancer  Ward,  wUh  the  ticket,  cancer  bbeast,  placed  as
before.  Little  was  attempted  on  this  occasion  for  her,  and
at  the  end  of  a  fortnight  she  was  again  discharged  in  this
perfectly  helpless  and  destitute  condition.  Lady  Inglis,  who
had  been  apprized  by  her  long  ago  of  her  objection  to  the
operation,  had  expressed  a  desire  to  her  that  if  the  operation


220  Cure  of  an  alleged  Cancer  of  the  Breast,

were  again  proposed,  she  should  subnvit.  But  it,  however,
this  time  was  not ;  and  when  Sir  Robert  Inglis  requested  to
know  the  reason  of  her  being  so  soon  discharged,  Mr.  Forbes,
house-surgeon,  wrote  in  reply,  that  she  could  walk  if  she
liked ;  that  it  was  want  of  perseverance  only  that  prevented
her.  Mr.  Amott  had  made  the  same  statement  to  Lady
Inglis  a  twelvemonth  before.

Aug.  23rd,  1843.  She  was  received  into  St.  George's
Hospital,  considerably  emaciated,  under  Dr.  Naime,  for  para-
lysis. On  her  mentioning  to  him  the  state  of  her  breast,  and
her  intention  not  to  have  it  removed,  he  advised  her  not  to
have  it  touched,  to  let  it  alone,  so  as  not  to  increase  the  irri-
tation, and  good-humouredly  told  her  **  to  live  as  long  as  she
could.'' She  left  January  14th,  1844.

March  23rd.  She  entered  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital
under  Dr.  Hue.  He  called  in  Mr.  Vincent  to  examine  the
breast,  who  declared  it  to  be  affected  with  canceb  ;  and  added
that  the  spine  was  also  diseased,  and  that  she  required  to  be
strengthened  previously  to  the  removal  of  the  canceb,  that
must  ultimately  take  place.  She  left  the  hospital  June  8th,
the  nurse  having  previously  told  her  they  would  not  have  let
her  go  so  soon  but  that  they  expected  her  soon  back  for  the
operation.  She  however  never  returned  to  that  or  any  other
hospital.

She  was  taken  home  and  has  remained  in  her  room  (with
two  or  three  exceptions)  ever  since.  Her  sufferings  at  that
time  were  extreme;  the  pain,  frequently  darting  and  stabbing
(her  own  words)  in  her  breast,  would  extend  to  the  extremity
of  the  fingers  on  her  left  hand.  She  could  not  bear  the  least
pressure  on  the  breast.  The  pain  sometimes  would  prevent
her  from  going  to  sleep,  at  others  would  awaken  her  with  its
severity.  Her  extremities  were  so  cold,  that  even  in  summer
she  applied  flannel  to  her  feet.  Her  hearing  and  sight  had
become  much  impaired;  the  debility  in  her  left  arm  pre-
vented her  from  holding  anything  longer  than  a  few  minutes.
She  had  lost  all  sensation,*  as  well  as  the  power  of  motion,  in
her  lower  extremities.  If  she  was  raised  and  she  attempted  to
stand,  her  knees  immediately  gave  way  under  her.  She
could  not  turn  in  bed  without  holding  the  bedstead,  and
could  not  lie  on  her  left  side.  Her  appetite  was  bad,  and  her
bowels  had  been  in  a  torpid  state  for  five  years.

She  continued  thus  till  mesmerism  was  begun  December,

•  A  palsied  part  may  be  ingeDsible  to  pricking  and  cutting,  and  yet  be
very  sensible  of  heat  and  cold,  though  many  medical  men  are  not  aware  of
this,  and  we  hare  heard  students  of  St.  George's  Hospital  stoutly  deny  it  oa
the  authority  of  their  teachers.--Zoi«<.


by  Messrs.  Flinioff  and  Fradelle.  221

1845y  from  which  period  she  dates  her  first  steps  to  recovery
from  her  many  complaints^  and  her  improvement  from  her
state  of  paralysis^  being  now  able  to  use  the  left  arm  equally
well  with  the  right,  and  with  equal  strength ;  she  can  now,
with  the  assistance  of  a  chair,  walk  about  the  room,  and  even
stand  a  little  while  unsupported.  She  feels  warm  and  com-
fortable, and  can  easily  turn  on  either  side  in  bed.  She  soon
goes  to  sleep  and  sleeps  well,  except  when  the  noise  in  the
neighbourhood  disturbs  her ;  for  she  has  now  perfectly  reco-
vered her  hearing,  and  sometimes  to  her  discomfort,  since  a
noise  which  formerly  was  heard  as  a  faint  murmur,  now  stuns
her.  Her  sight,  too,  is  so  good  as  to  enable  her  to  read
small  print,  and  to  work  without  glasses,  which  she  had
hitherto  used.  Her  appetite  is  improved,  and  her  bowels  act
regularly  without  the  aid  of  medicine,  which  she  had  not
been  able  to  dispense  with  for  years. Every  vestige  of

DISEASE IN THE BREAST HAS  DISAPPEARED. It  is  perfectly

cured.  The  tumor  and  hardness  are  not  to  be  found,  and
she  can  bear  pressure  on  the  part  without  the  least  pain.  A
few  weeks  after  mesmerism  was  begun,  she  observed  the
tumor  to  diminish.  At  first  it  was  the  size  of  a  turkey^s  egg;
in  a  month  it  was  reduced  to  one-sixth  of  this  size,  and
shortly  after  disappeared  altogether.  Those  of  her  acquaint-
ance who  had  not  seen  it,  to  whom  she  relates  the  fact,
laugh  at  her  and  say  she  had  no  tumor ;  that  it  was  all  fancy.
But  she  solemnly  declares  that  all  she  can  say  about  it  is,
that  she  "  once  had  a  bad  breast,  and  that  now  it  is  well.^^

Previously  to  being  mesmerised,  she  consulted,  being  a
Roman  Catholic,  the  clergyman  who  was  in  the  habit  of
attending  her,  to  know  whether  she  might  be  mesmerised.
He  replied,  that  he  knew  good  had  been  effected  by  it,  and
he  could  not  therefore  see  any  objection  to  it.*

The  poor  woman,  though  most  intelligent  and  respectable,
cannot  write,  but  she  thus  certifies  to  the  truth  of  the  above.

The  above  is  a  correct  statement,

Catherine  Ryan's  mark  x .

Administration  and  Phenomena  of  Mesmerism  in  the  Case.

Mesmerism,  begun  by  Mr.  Flintoff,  Dec.  5th,  1845,  was
continued  an  hour  each  day  with  few  exceptions  till  Jan.  9th,
1846,  and  for  a  fortnight  longer  about  three  times  a  week.

»  The  Rev.  Hugh  M'Neile,  Charlotte  Elizabeth  Tunna,  and  the  other
fanatics  of  iheir  class,  should  blush.  They  would  surely  not  burn  such  a
papist. — Ztfiit.

VOL.  IV.  R


222  Cure  of  an  alleged  Cancer  of  the  Breast,

His  mode  of  operating  was  to  keep  her  attention  fixed  on
a  watch  held  above  the  level  of  her  eyes.  He  looked  intently
at  them^  and  made  downward  passes  from  the  forehead  to  the
chest.  He  placed  his  hand  occasionally  on  her  head.  The
staring  made  her  eyes  smart  and  run^  and  sleep  teas  not  pro^
duced.  She,  however,  gradually  regained  strength  during
the  whole  of  this  time,  sensibility  in  her  lower  extremities,
and  the  power  of  moving  her  legs.  No  further  progress  ap-
pearing to  be  made,  Mr.  Flintoff  gave  up,  at  the  request  of
Mr.  Briggs,  of  Nottingham  Place,  who  defrayed  the  expense
of  attendance  upon  her;  that  gentleman  being  desirous  to
see  whether  a  change  of  operator  would  accelerate  her  cure.
On  January  27th,  1846,  I  therefore  began  to  mesmerise  her,
and  she  went  to  sleep  in  fifty  minutes,  and  passed  into  the
sleep-waking  state.  I  mesmerised  her  by  holding  her  hands
and  looking  steadily  at  her  till  her  eyes  appeared  heavy,  when
I  desired  her  to  close  them,  and  then  directed  passes  slowly
from  the  forehead  to  the  epigastrium,  and  from  the  temples
downwards.  When  I  thought  the  effect  complete,  I  enquired
of  her  if  she  were  asleep.  She  attempted  a  reply,  but  could
not  articulate  distinctly.  I  continued  the  passes  a  little
longer,  when  to  the  same  question  she  answered  plainly,
'^  Yes  ;^'  said  she  felt  very  comfortable,  and  added,  *'  But  how
strange  it  is  I^^  I  woke  her  at  the  end  of  half  an  hour ;  she
was  astonished  at  having  slept,  and  much  refreshed.  She  had
lost  all  recollection  of  having  been  spoken  to  and  of  having
answered.  I  mesmerised  her  daily  till  the  81st  of  March,
from  which  time  I  have  done  so  occasionally.

The  sleep  would  continue  till  she  was  awakened  out  of  it
either  by  transverse  passes  or  by  blowing  on  her  eyes.  When
told  to  sleep  for  twenty-four  hours,  she  has  done  so,  and
taken  her  meals,  and  conversed  with  those  about  her  through
the  day  as  rationally  as  when  awake.  She  could  be  awakened,
if  she  wished  it,  by  others  as  well  as  myself,  if  for  any  reason
she  desired  them  to  wake  her.  Less  and  less  time,  and  at
length  five  minutes  only,  were  required  to  produce  sleep.

There  were  no  marked  phenomena  in  her  case,  beyond
extreme  susceptibility  of  the  mesmeric  action.  She  could
easily  distinguish  where  the  passes  were  directed,  even  through
opaque  substances, — a  tea-board  for  instance.  I  once  tried
outside  the  room-door,  and  successfully,  before  two  witnesses.
It  is  from  this  susceptibility,  I  think,  the  labours  of  my  prede-
cessor and  myself  have  been  successful  in  so  many  respects.
In  about  a  fortnight  after  I  had  mesmerised  her,  the  tumor,
she  told  me,  appeared  to  diminish,  and  gave  her  much  less
pain, I  had  directed  passes  locally  without  contact  or  even


by  Messrs.  FJinioffand  Fradelle.  223

touching  the  shawl  she  wore  over  her  dress  (for  she  suffered
from  the  cold)^  pointing  the  ten  fingers  at  the  distance  of  a
few  inches  off,  and  spreading  the  passes  as  from  a  centre.
This  would  communicate  a  glow  to  the  surrounding  parts.

Thus  at  the  end  of  six  weeks  the  result  exceeded  my
expectation.  The  tumor  was  gone !  Mr.  Flintoff  kindly
watched  the  progress  made,  and  can  bear  testimony  to  what
I  assert.*  Knowing  she  was  in  the  constant  habit  of  taking
aperient  pills,  I  mesmerised  water  with  a  view  to  remove  the
difBiculty  she  suffered  from.  I  repeated  this  from  day  to  day,
always  successfully,  but  the  action  was  checked  if  I  purposely
missed  mesmerising  the  water.  Finding  this  succeed,  I  mes-
merised it  for  a  much  longer  time,  and  at  last  with  the  fixed
idea  that  the  effect  should  be  permanent.  The  result  has,  up
to  this,  proved  so.  Breathing  in  her  ears,  and  pointing  to
their  opening,  removed  her  partial  deafness.  Her  sight  be*
came  stronger  as  her  health  returned.  I  used  no  passes  to
strengthen  her  eyes.  The  spine  proved  the  most  rebellious
to  my  efforts,  yet  is  considerably  strengthened.  Passes  made
in  front  of  her  she  felt  distinctly  from  the  cervical  vertebrae
to  the  extremity  of  the  spine,  and  great  rigidity  was  felt  at
its  lower  region.  I  could  never  produce  perfect  rigidity  in
her  arms  or  legs,  yet  I  could  communicate  a  feeling  of
warmth  to  the  paralyzed  side  that  would  last  for  days.  This
warmth  is  now  permanent.

I  made  a  few  attempts  to  excite  the  cerebral  organs,  but
failed.  She  could  easily  distinguish  the  taste  of  mesmerised
firom  other  water  in  her  sleep-waking  state,  but  only  then ;
and  described  it  sparkling  like  soda-water,  and  extremely
pleasant  to  the  taste.  I  must  not  omit  mentioning  that  shortly
after  having  been  mesmerised,  she  could  in  the  natural  wak-
ing state  distinctly  feel  passes  made  even  at  a  distance  of
eight  or  ten  feet ;  and  that  her  eyes  could  be  closed  when
awake,  so  that  she  covld  not  open  them.  On  my  leaving  her
mesmerised  in  her  chair,  and  telling  her  to  go  to  bed  and  wake
at  seven,  eight,  or  any  particular  hour  the  following  morning,
the  desired  resnlt  ensued  as  punctually  as  the  clock  struck.

I  may  mention  another  mode  I  employed  to  invigorate
her  shattered  frame.  It  was  simply  holding  her  hands  firmly,
and  the  mesmeric  influence  spread  upwards  till  it  had  reached
the  shoulders,  then  descended  slowly  and  gradually  down  the
spine  to  the  loins,  and  finally  reached  her  feet ;  this  was  done
for  ten  minutes.  H.  J.  Fradelle.

No.  9,  Percy  Street,  Fitzroy  Square.
•Tune  15th,  1846.

t  See  Mr.  FUotoff's  Case  of  Epilepsy,  p.  242.

r2


224  Cure  of  an  alleged  Cancer  of  the  Breast,

P.S.  A  few  days  ago  she  was  enabled  with  the  assistance  of
one  person  to  descend  the  stairs,  and  afterwards,  taking  hold
of  two  arms,  to  walk  into  the  street  at  the  distance  of  twenty
yards ;  and  after  having  been  conveyed  in  a  cab  to  chapel  and
back,  returned  in  the  same  way  up  the  court  to  her  lodgings.
Not  being  a  medical  man  I  can  give  no  opinion  upon  the
nature  of  her  disease.  But  Mr.  Flintoff  considered  it  was
not  cancer :  and  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  visited  her  after  the  cure,
told  me  that  he  ''  found  a  long  seam  on  the  flat  and  breastless
right  side  where  the  cut  had  been  made  in  the  removal,  and
on  the  left  a  perfectly  healthy  breast,  full,  moveable,  and
soft,  without  the  least  spot  of  hardness ;  so  that  his  impres-
sion was,  that  there  had  never  been  cancer  of  it,  but  such  a
tumor  or  induration  as  is  often  called  cancer  and  cut  away  as
cancer."  ^


*:((*  In  consequence  of  this  cure,  Mr.  Briggs,  on  being
invited  to  attend  the  annual  hospital  dinner  of  the  Middlesex
Hospital,  addressed  the  following  letter  to  the  Secretary.

27,  Nottingham  Place,
30th  April,  1846.

Sir, — I  have  received  your  invitation  to  attend  the  annual
dinner  of  the  Middlesex  Hospital,  which  I  beg  leave  to  decline,
for  two  reasons.  The  first  is,  that  I  have  long  ceased  to  take
any  part  in  public  dinners.  The  second,  however,  is  of  more
importance,  as,  in  my  opinion,  materially  regarding  the
utility  of  the  institution,  and  also  affecting  in  some  small
degree  its  pecuniary  resources ;  and  therefore  1  think  it  right
to  state  it  frankly,  in  order  that  it  may  be  submitted  to  the
managing  committee  for  their  consideration.

Having  become  acquainted  with  the  extraordinary  efficacy
of  mesmerism  in  curing  various  diseases,  which  had  baffled  all
the  ordinary  modes  of  treatment,  I  was  desirous  that  several
poor  persons  whom  I  knew  should  partake  of  its  benefits,
and  accordingly  applied  at  the  Hospital  to  ascertain  whether
it  would  be  employed  or  not ;  but,  to  my  great  regret,  was
answered  in  the  negative.  Upon  my  enquiring  into  the  reason
for  refusing  it,  the  only  one  assigned  was  that  mesmerism  is
not  orthodox.  What  may  be  the  precise  import  of  this  mys-
terious theological  term  when  applied  to  medicine,  it  is  impos-
sible for  me  to  form  an  idea.  If  it  be  meant  to  forbid  every
innovation,  however  valuable,  upon  ancient  practice,  such  a
sweeping  proscription  appears  to  me  little  suited  to  the  en-

T  See  hia  remarks  od  this  point  in  Vol.  IV.,  p.  9.


by  Messrs.  FUntoff  and  Fradelle.  225

quiring  spirit  of  the  age  we  live  in,  and  ill  adapted  to  promote
that  progress  in  medical  science  which  may  reasonably  be
expected  from  the  extensive  experience  to  be  gained  in  these
large  establishments.  Instead  of  enquiring  whether  a  pro-
posed remedy  had  been  used  by  our  forefathers,  it  should
seem  that  the  only  important  point  to  be  ascertained  is,
whether  it  has  been  found  to  be  beneficial.  Now  on  this
head  the  evidence  in  favour  of  mesmerism  is  already  most
abundant,  and  is  increasing  daily,  as  it  becomes  more  gene-
rally known ;  and  the  vast  advantages  to  be  derived  from  its
adoption  in  hospital  practice  may  be  seen  detailed  in  Dr.
Esdaile's  last  report  from  Calcutta,  published  in  The  Zoist  of
this  month,  together  with  several  other  very  interesting  cures,
of  the  truth  of  which  there  can  be  no  doubt,  from  the  re-
spectability of  the  gentlemen  whose  names  are  affixed  to
them."  In  confirmation  of  these  and  all  other  testimonies  I
have  heard  and  read,  I  have  had  ocular  demonstration  of
the  clearest  kind  in  several  cases,  two  of  which  are  so  striking
that  I  think  it  right  to  state  them  here.  The  first  is  that  of
a  very  poor  woman,  named  Ryan,  who  several  years  ago  was
a  patient  in  your  Hospital,  and  was  then  labouring  under  a
complication  of  most  grievous  maladies,  consisting  of  cancerous
swellings  in  both  breasts,  a  diseased  spine,  insensibility  of  the
lower  extremities,  and  total  inability  to  move  them ;  her  sight
and  hearing  also  were  a  good  deal  impaired.  In  order  to  get
rid  of  the  cancer,  one  of  her  breasts  was  taken  off  by  Mr.
Arnott,  who  also  afterwards  proposed  to  operate  upon  the  other.
To  that,  however,  she  objected,  as  being  unable  to  bear  a
second  amputation.  She  was  then  treated  in  the  usual  way
for  this  and  her  other  complaints,  but  with  very  little  benefit,
and  after  a  considerable  residence,  partly  in  the  cancer  ward,
she  was  discharged  in  a  most  deplorable  condition.  She  has
also  been  in  several  other  hospitals  in  London  and  Brighton,
but  without  finding  any  material  relief.  Under  such  most
distressing  circumstances  I  resolved  that  mesmerism  should
be  tried  upon  her,  as  a  last  resource,  and  being  precluded
from  it  in  the  Hospital,  I  engaged  Mr.  Flintoff,  of  Titchfield
Street,  and  afterwards,  Mr.  Fradelle,  of  Percy  Street,  to  attend
her,  which  they  have  done  with  such  astonishing  success  that
the  scirrhus  tumor  in  her  remaining  breast,  which  had  been
getting  worse  and  worse  for  five  years,  is  entirely  dispersed,
she  is  free  from  pain,  the  weakness  in  her  back  is  removed,
sensibility  and  the  power  of  motion  are  restored  to  her  limbs,
and  her  sight  and  hearing  are  greatly  improved.  In  short,
she  seems  to  be  completely  cured  of  all  her  appaUing  maladies,

«  See  Vol.  ill.,  p.  490,  &c. ;  Vol. IV.,  p.  1,  &c.


226 Disregard  of  Mesmerism  by  the  Committee  of  the

m

with  the  exception  of  a  weakness  in  her  knees^  which  I  hope
will  ultimately  yield  to  the  same  sanative  influence.  For  the
accuracy  of  these  facts  I  can  personally  vouch^  being  in  the
constant  habit  of  visiting  Mrs.  Ryan ;  and  I  mention  them
for  the  purpose  of  giving  Mr.  Arnott,  or  any  other  officers  of
the  Hospital^  an  opportunity  of  verifying  them  by  personal
inspection.  She  lives  at  a  little  grocer^s^  No.  15^  Compton
Flace^  Compton  Street^  Tavistock  Square^  and  will^  I  have
no  doubt,  give  every  information  that  may  be  desired ;  for
she  is  very  intelligent.

I  have  also  witnessed  another  remarkable  cure  effected  in
a  very  short  time  by  the  same  means,  upon  a  poor  woman,
named  Donelly,  living  at  No.  12,  Coram  Place,  Little  Coram
Street,  through  the  instrumentality  of  Mr.  Hands,  of  Thayer
Street.  Her  case  was  one  of  ulcerated  uterus,  with,  I  believe,
prolapsus  uteri,  of  which  she  was  healed  in  about  three  weeks,
after  having  been  informed  at  the  North  London  Hospital
that  nothing  more  could  be  done  for  her  unless  she  would
submit  to  an  operation.""

With  such  instances  as  these  before  my  eyes,  in  addition
to  all  I  hear  and  read  on  the  subject,  I  cannot  help  feeling  a
strong  desire  that  all  the  sick  and  infirm  poor  should  partake
of  the  benefit  of  this  invaluable  discovery, — of  such  potency
to  relieve  many  of  the  most  formidable  diseases  incident  to
our  nature,  that  too  often  bid  defiance  to  all  other  modes
of  treatment.

But  as  the  expense  of  paying  gentlemen  to  attend  upon
any  considerable  number  of  sufferers  would  far  exceed  my
means,  I  am  exceedingly  anxious  that  this  work  of  mercy
should  be  undertaken  by  a  public  institution,  and  do  hope  and
trust  the  Middlesex  Hospital  will  be  the  first  to  set  the  bright
example.  Great  and  manifold  as  would  be  theblessings  thus  con-
ferred upon  their  afflicted  fellow  mortals,  the  Committee  would
have  the  additional  satisfaction  of  reflecting  that  so  much  good
might  be  accomplished  not  only  without  entailing  upon  the
institution  any  increase  of  expenditure,  but  that  a  great  saving
might  be  effected,  by  shortening  the  process  of  cure,  and
thereby  diminishing  the  cost  of  provisions  and  drugs,  so  that
a  much  greater  number  might  be  admitted  in  the  course  of  a
year  than  are  at  present.  This  consideration  appears  to  me  well
worth  the  attention  of  the  committee  ,*  and,  as  connected  with
it,  I  think  it  proper  to  add  that,  although  I  have  evinced  my
good  will  for  the  Middlesex  Hospital  by  subscribing  to  it  for
many  years,  and  inserting  in  my  will  a  handsome  legacy  to
it,  yet  as  I  cannot  afford  both  to  contribute  to  that,  and  at

V  Zoi$t,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  81.


Midttteaex  HotpUcJ,  227

the  same  time  to  pay  for  mesmerising  the  poor^  I  must  make
a  choice  between  the  two,  and,  if  the  present  system  is  per*
severed  in  at  the  Hospitd,  I  shall  feel  it  my  duty  to  give  a
preference  to  that  which  I  am  convinced  is  calculated  to
confer  the  greatest  benefits  on  the  unfortunate  objects  who
stand  most  in  need  of  assistance.  I  shall  therefore  wait  with
some  degree  of  anxiety  to  know  the  determination  of  the
committe  upon  this  point ;  and  when  it  is  formed  I  shall  be
obliged  by  your  acquainting  me  with  it.

I  am.  Sir,

Your  most  obedient  Servant,

Joseph  Briogs.

The  following  particulars  of  the  reception  of  this  letter
have  been  given  us  on  what  we  regard  as  unexceptionable  au-
thority. But  we  shall  be  happy  to  publish  any  counterstate-
ment  on  equally  good  authority.

"  Mr.  Briggs  having  understood  that  his  letter  was  to  be
taken  into  consideration  on  the  5th  inst.,  went  directly  to
Compton  Place,  got  Mrs.  Byan  put  into  a  cab,  and  conveyed
to  the  hospital,  so  as  to  be  ready  to  undergo  any  examination
that  might  be  thought  proper.  After  some  other  business
had  been  dispatched,  his  letter  was  produced  and  begun  to
be  read  by  the  Secretary;  but,  as  the  latter  appeared  to  have
some  difficulty  in  reading  the  hand-writing,  Mr.  Briggs  pro-
posed to  finish  it  himself.  This  was  allowed,  although  not
without  evident  signs  of  dissatisfaction  from  some  of  the
Governors,  one  of  whom,  a  Mr.  Brewster,  expressed  his  hope
that  he  was  not  going  to  begin  again.  Indeed  the  sneers,
interruptions,  and  discourtesy  exhibited,  were  such  as  to
induce  Dr.  Ashburner  to  appeal  to  the  Chairman  whether  in
any  society  of  gentlemen,  a  letter  addressed  in  the  pure  spirit
of  benevolence,  on  a  subject  connected  with  the  interests  of
humanity,  would  not  be  heard  to  the  end  without  indecent
interruptions.  This  appeal  having  had  some  beneficial  efiect,
and  the  reading  being  finished,  a  conversation  took  place
as  to  what  should  be  done  with  it,  when  it  was  moved  that
the  matter  should  be  referred  to  the  Medical  Committee  of
the  establishment.  This  was  objected  to  by  Mr.  Brewster  as
giving  too  great  a  sanction  to  mesmerism,  and  by  Dr.  Mer-
riman,  because  mesmerism  is  no  new  thing,  and  because  on
some  former  occasion  a  man  had  pretended  to  cure  cancer  by
the  application  of  the  inside  of  a  dead  puppy  to  the  part ;  and,
lastly,  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Scobell,  on  the  ground  that  much  has
been  written  for  and  against  mesmerism,  and  that  while  it  is
*  struggling  into  existence,'  it  ought  not  to  be  countenanced  by


228 Duregard  of  Mesmerism  by  the  CommUtee  of  the

the  governors  of  that  hospital.  Mr.  Briggs  then  made  a  few
observations  on  the  importance  of  the  subject  before  them,
and  upon  the  inconsistency  of  refusing  to  admit  mesmerism
as  contrary  to  ancient  practice,  while  they  allowed  galvanism,
which  was  declared  by  one  of  their  officers  to  be  nearly  the
same  thing.  He  told  them  that  Mrs.  Ryan  was  in  attend-
ance, and  ready  to  undergo  any  examination  they  might
think  fit.  His  reasonings,  however,  whether  written  or  ver-
bal, availed  little.  Two  amendments  upon  the  motion  of
reference  were  moved;  one  by  Mr.  Brewster,  to  the  effect
that  it  was  not  expedient  to  take  any  further  notice  of  his
letter ;  and  a  second  by  Mr.  Scobell,  that  it  be  allowed  to  lie
upon  the  table.  Upon  these  amendments  Mr.  Briggs  was
beginning  to  make  some  observations,  when  he  was  stopped
short  by  the  Chairman,  who  said  with  a  most  peremptory
tone  aud  angry  look,  '  Sir,  you  have  already  spoken  two  or
three  times,'  although  he  had  in  fact  only  spoken  'once,'  and
that  for  a  very  short  time,  (the  rest  being  merely  conversa-
tion,) while  his  opponents  were  not  restricted  from  speaking
as  often  as  they  pleased ;  and  such  indeed  is  probably  the
general  practice  in  committees.

"  The  debate,  if  such  it  can  be  called,  being  thus  forcibly
brought  to  a  conclusion,  the  resolution  and  second  amend-
ment were  put  to  the  vote ;  and,  there  being  only  seven  hands
held  up  for  the  former,  while  ten  were  for  the  latter,  the
amendment  was  declared  to  be  carried  :  and  so  the  appeal,
from  which  Mr.  Briggs  had  hoped  for  a  better  result,  is  to
have  the  honour  of  lying  upon,  or,  perhaps,  under,  the  table
of  the  institution,  whose  true  interests  it  was  intended  to
promote,— which  is,  we  apprehend  tantamount  to  its  being
consigned  to  utter  oblivion,  and  that,  too,  without  any  one
of  the  persons  present  thinking  it  worth  while  to  see  Mrs.
Ryan,  who  was  in  the  waiting  room.  It  should  seem  there-
fore that  there  is  not  much  probability  of  mesmerism  being
introduced  into  the  Middlesex  Hospital  at  present.  Yet  we
do  not  despair  of  that  being  accomplished  at  no  distant
period,  as  we  know  some  of  its  medical  officers  are  zealous
supporters  of  the  inestimable  discovery.  Indeed,  no  one  will
admit  that  the  recent  resolution,  founded  on  such  bases  and
conducted  in  such  a  manner,  can  be  regarded  as  a  satisfactory
and  much  less  a^na/ settlement  of  the  question,  and  we  do  hope
the  discussion  will  be  renewed  on  some  other  occasion  under
more  favourable  auspices.  It  was  evident  from  the  first  that
the  Chairman  looked  upon  the  matter  as  unworthy  of  serious
attention ;  for  while  Mr.  Briggs's  letter  was  in  reading,  he
ivas  making  mock  passes  upon  his  neighbour,  and  when  the


Middlesex  Hospital.  229

division  took  place^  he  was  the  first  to  hold  up  his  hand; — a
thing  which  seems  to  us  quite  contrary  to  reason  and  prac-
tice,  as  a  person  placed  in  such  a  situation,  whatever  may  be
his  private  opinions,  ought  at  least  to  preserve  the  appearance
of  impartiality,  and  not  to  vote  for  either  party  except  where
the  others  are  equally  divided.

"  Let  Mr.  Briggs,  however,  feel  assured  that  this  mighty
influence,  although  for  a  time  thwarted  by  ignorance,  preju-
dice, or  selfishness,  will  speedily  overcome  all  opposition,  and
be  hailed  as  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  vouchsafed  by  a
merciful  Creator  to  poor  suffering  mortals/'

On  the  dignified  tricks  of  the  chairman,  Mr.  R.  Yaughan
Eichards,  Q.C.,  during  so  grave,  so  holy  a  question  as  that
of  allowing  the  poor  wretches  in  the  hospital  to  have  the
inestimable  blessings  of  mesmerism,  we  shall  make  no  other
remark  than  that  they  would  have  been  still  more  delightful
to  behold  if  he  bad  been  decked  out  at  the  time  with  his
gown  and  full-bottomed  dress  wig.  If  the  Mr.  Brewster,
whoever  he  is,  formerly  suffered  himself  repeatedly  to  be  told
at  the  board  that  he  was  indulging  in  falsehoods  when  defend-
ing Mr.  Tuson,  what  he  did  on  this  occasion  was  of  no  im-
portance. The  conduct  of  Dr.  Merriman,  whose  enduring
soabriquet  at  the  hospital  we  will  not  mention,  though  it
is  beautifully  appropriate,  does  not  surprize  us.  It  was  in
keeping  with  the  wisdom  evinced  during  his  whole  life.  Being
an  accoucheur,  and  therefore  occupied  day  and  night  in  fur-
thering the  progress  of  little  things  ''  struggling  into  existence?*
and  intended  to  grow  into  men  and  women,  he  could  not  for
shame  use  Mr.  ScobelPs  clever  argument,  and  therefore  tried
another.  ''  Mesmerism,''  he  said,  "  is  no  new  thing.  I  re-
member a  proposal  for  the  cure  of  cancer  being  made  by  a
person  who  actually  applied  the  warm  inside  of  a  recently
killed  puppy,  and  maggots  were  afterwards  found  which  were
supposed  to  come  from  the  patient."  According  to  this  sage
— or  sage-femme,  mesmerism  is  unworthy  of  regard  at  the
Middlesex  Hospital  because  dead  puppies  do  not  cure  cancers.

But  the  sad  part  of  this  affair  i»  the  conduct  of  the  Rev.
Mr.  Scobell,  the  man  of  God,  who  earns  his  bread  by  preach-
ing the  gospel  of  Christ, — of  him  that  came  preaching
comfort  to  the  poor  and  healing  all  manner  of  diseases.
Mr.  Scobell  knows  what  mesmerism  is:  we  saw  him  years  ago
in  Dr.  Elliotson's  drawing  room  when  the  most  indisputable
phenomena  were  produced,  and  he  knows  that  his  curate  and
his  curate's  brother  have  both  mesmerised  much  and  effected
good  cures.  But,  waving  all  this,  it  was  his  duty  to  ex-
hibit a  little  correspondence  between  his  skilfully  composed


230  Cure  of  Epilepsy  in  Ceylon  and  Russia.

Sunday  appeals  to  the  feelings  of  his  congregation  and  his
actual  sympathies  with  the  suffering.  He  knows  that  im-
mense benefit  to  both  medical  and  surgical  patients — benefit
far  beyond  what  any  other  single  means  can  afford — ^is  de-
clared on  unquestionable  and  most  abundant  authority  to
result  from  mesmerism ;  and  his  duty  was  obvious  and  im-
perative. But  mesmerism  was  struggling  into  existence,  and
so  it  deserved  no  notice  !  Had  he  lived  therefore  in  the  age
of  Tiberius^  he  would  have  turned  his  back  on  the  founder
of  his  religion,  and  if  told  to  sell  aU  he  had  and  give  it  to  the
poor  and  " follow  me"  his  reply  would  have  been,  " Not  I
— ^your  religion  is  struggling  into  existence :  when  it  is  well
established  and  I  can  get  a  good  living  through  it,  let  me
know.''  Mr.  Scobell,  You  have  not  so  learned  Christ.  You
remind  us  of  his  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan,  in  which  he
represents  the  priest  as  caring  not  for  the  poor  creature,  but
walking  away  on  the  other  side.


MESMERISM IN CEYLON.

V.  Cure  of  Epilepsy, By  Dr.  Davey.

The  following  short  account  of  the  cure  of  a  case  of  epilepsy
in  Ceylon,  is  contained  in  a  letter  received  by  Dr.  Engledue
from  Dr.  Davey,  now  resident  in  that  island,  and  formerly  of
the  Hanwell  Lunatic  Asylum.

"  A  Cingalese  boy,  who  had  suffered  for  several  years  from
epilepsy,  came  under  my  care  in  the  hospital.  He  generally
had  four  or  five  fits  every  twenty-four  hours.  I  mesmerised
him  regularly  for  three  months.  In  a  very  short  time  the
number  of  fits  diminished,  and  at  the  end  of  the  second
month  he  occasionally  passed  through  the  entire  day  without
an  attack.  The  disease  gradually  left  him,  and  he  has  not
had  an  attack  for  two  months.  I  shall  discharge  him  cured
in  a  short  time.''


MESMERISM IN RUSSIA.

VI.  Cure  of  Epilepsy.

Dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — A  friend  of  mine  in  Russia,  holding
a  high  official  situation,  has  written  me  that  mesmerism  is
making  great  progress  in  that  country,  and  exciting  the
deepest  interest  in  the  most  intelligent  circles.  He  has  also
favoured  me  with  the  Journal  de  St.  Petersbourg,  Dec.  29th,


Cure  of  Epilepsy  in  Russia,  231

old  style  (or  Jan.  10th,  new  style),  containing  an  article  of
which  I  subjoin  you  a  translation,  and  which  ought  to  put
some  of  the  anti-mesmeric  doctors  of  England  to  the  blush.

Yours  truly,

Spencer  T.  Hall.
Old  Manor  House,  Wilford,  Notts,
16th  June,  1846.

fTranslationJ,

TESTIMONY OF GRATITUDE.

The  "  Russian  Invalided'  publishes  the  following  article : —

''  Of  a  weak  constitution  generally,  I  suffered  in  1844  in-
supportable pains  in  the  head,  which  lasted  more  than  nine
months  :  this  was  followed  by  excruciating  pains,  violent  pal-
pitations of  the  heart,  loss  of  sleep  and  appetite,  occasional
convulsions  in  the  right  leg,  complete  prostration  of  strength,
spasms  in  all  my  limbs,  and  lastly  attacks  during  which  I
lost  all  consciousness.  These  attacks  became  more  frequent,
five  within  twenty-four  hours,  and  lasted  whole  hours.  I  en-
tirely lost  the  use  of  my  legs,  and  was  obliged  to  be  carried
in  a  blanket.  In  consequence  of  the  last  fit  I  remained
twenty-four  hours  unconscious  and  deprived  of  sensation,
stretched  under  the  sacred  cloths  (or  veils)  like  one  dead.
Already  had  the  undertaker  been  called  to  take  the  measure
for  my  coffin.

"  The  doctors  who  had  attended  me  from  the  commence-
ment of  the  disease  had  tried  all  the  remedies  which  science
indicated.  According  to  the  indications  which  it  (science)
furnished,  they  had  sought  the  cause  of  the  disease,  and
formed  their  judgment  of  its  nature,  testing  the  exactness  of
their  conclusions  from  the  effect  of  the  medicines ;  and  re-
peatedly changed  their  mode  of  treatment.  But  all  the  re-
sources of  the  apothecary^s  art,  of  cold  baths,  of  bleeding,
and  remedies  against  tsenia,  were  without  success,  and  had  no
other  result  than  the  most  violent  sufferings  caused  by  their  use.

'' Whether  from  the  changes  in  the  manner  of  treating
it,  or  from  the  impotence  of  medicine  in  the  case,  my
disease  made  rapid  progress,  and  the  grave  appeared  likely
to  be  the  sole  termination  to  my  sufferings.  The  doctors
themselves,  after  having  exhausted  all  the  resources  of  their
art,  at  length  declared  that  I  was  afflicted  with  an  in-
curable epilepsy,  and  that  I  should  die  during  one  of  theae
attacks.  In  a  word,  the  violence  of  the  evil,  and  the  expe-
rience of  the  doctors,  condemned  me  to  inevitable  death.  The
next  crisis  was  to  carry  me  off. But  the  God  of  mercy


232  Local  Mesmerisalion  of  Cerebral  Organs.

deigned  to  send  me  a  preserver  in  the  person  of  his  Excel-
lency Major-General  Andrew  Pashkoff^  whom  my  family  had
requested  to  come  to  see  me.

"  Influenced  by  humanity^  he  consented  to  visit  Hhe  dying
man/  as  I  was  called^  the  day  after  a  crisis  of  twenty-four
hours ;  and  without  examining  into  the  causes  of  the  disease^
or  the  prescriptions  of  the  doctors^  he  showed  me  the  holy
image  of  our  Lady  of  Tichvine^"*"  and  the  first  application  of
animal  magnetism  caused  the  crises  and  convulsions  to  disap-
pear^ and  they  have  not  since  reappeared.  He  gave  his
stances  twice  a  week.  After  the  fifth,  the  cause  of  the  disease
manifested  itself  in  the  form  of  hemorrhoids ;  my  appetite
and  strength  returned  to  such  a  degree  that  I  could  not  only
get  n^,  but  by  the  advice  of  the  General  I  could  go  and
breathe  the  country  air.  At  the  fifteenth  sSance  all  pain  had
entirely  disappeared,  as  well  as  the  symptoms  of  the  crises,
and  I  could  with  ease  take  walks  of  five  or  six  versts  (from
three  and  a  third  to  four  miles).  After  the  twelfth  stance  I
had  resumed  the  management  of  my  affairs  as  entirely  cured,
blessing  the  name  of  my  preserver,  not  before  the  image,  in
the  presence  of  which  he  had  taken  me  under  his  protection,
but  in  the  holy  temple  of  the  Lord,  where  I  vowed  to  conse-
crate this  day  as  long  as  I  live,  to  pray  for  him  and  his  chil-
dren. Here  belo\v^  there  is  no  other  reward  for  him  who  has
restored  me  to  life,  and  from  the  feelings  which  actuate  him
he  can  have  no  other.  His  reward  is  not  of  this  world,  and
my  tongue  cannot  find  expression  for  the  feelings  with  which
my  soul  is  filled.

(Signed) '' Alexis  Zedotoff  Varlamieff,

"  Merchant  of  St,  Petersburg.*'


VII. Local  Mesmerisalion  of  Cerebral  Organs.
By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.

My  dear  EUiotson, — I  cannot  recollect  without  my  note-
book, which  I  have  not  with  me,  the  particulars  of  all  the
cases  that  I  have  met  with  where  the  cerebral  organs  have
been  excited  by  touch  without  the  patient  being  mesmerised,
but  such  as  I  do  I  send  you.

The  two  cases  which  I  think  are  the  most  striking  were
the  following.  I  was  staying  at  a  friend's  house,  when  one
evening  phrenology  was  the  topic  of  discussion,  and  the  lady
of  the  house  asked  me  to  point  out,  if  I  could,  the  particular

w  A  general  concomitaDt,  I  believe,  of  most  kinds  of  curative  treatment
among  members  of  the  Greek  Church. — Translator.


Cure  of  severe  Pain  with  local  Mesmerism,  233

traits  of  character  which  her  children  possessed.  AmoDgst
them  was  a  girl  about  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  of  age.  I
had  scarcely  laid  my  hand  on  the  organ  of  Self-esteem^  when
she  drew  herself  up  haughtily  and  said  that  she  disliked  my
hand  upon  her  head.  I  removed  my  hand  from  that  organ
and  shortly  replaced  it^  when  she  made  the  same  remark.
At  first  I  thought  I  had  not  got  the  most  amiable  of  indivi-
duals under  my  hands^  but  it  immediately  struck  me  that  the
organs  had  been  excited  by  contact.  I  removed  my  finger
and  placed  it  on  Benevolence^  and  after  keeping  it  there  a
short  time^  she  looked  up  and  smiled  and  said,  "  I  like  that
— that  is  pleasant.^'  I  then  placed  it  on  Wit,  and  she  began
to  laugh  and  seem  in  a  very  merry  humour.  I  tried  no  fiir-
ther,  as  I  knew  the  family  were  rather  averse  to  mesmerism,
and  I  thought  that  she  would  soon  be  in  a  mesmeric  state
from  the  extraordinary  eficct  produced  involuntarily  upon
her,  and  which  was  a  proof  of  her  extreme  susceptibility.

The  second  case  was  a  gentleman,  in  whom  I  excited  the
organs  of  Wit,  Imitation,  Tune,  Self-esteem,  Benevolence,
when  he  was  not  in  a  mesmeric  state,  and  who  had  just  de-
clared his  disbelief  of  the  power  to  excite  the  cerebral  organs
by  contact  in  a  mesmeric  state.  He  admitted  that  he  felt  no
inclination  to  resist  the  strange  impulse  that  he  immediately
had  to  develop  those  different  feelings  which  we  think  pecu-
liar to  the  several  organs  touched.

I  have  met  with  some  other  cases  accidentally,  but  they
were  not  so  clear  or  satisfactory  as  those  I  have  related,  nor
can  I  recollect  them  sufficiently  well  to  describe  them  with-
out refering  to  my  note-book.

Yours  ever,

H.  S.  Thompson.

I  have  only  just  time  to  write  you  thus  to  catch  the  post.

Fairfield  House,  near  York.
June,  1846.


VIII.  (hare  of  severe  Pain  with  local  Mesmerism :  and  the
production  of  singular  Phenomena,  by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,
in  a  Letter  to  Dr.  Ellioison.

The  patient  in  this  case  was  a  young  lady  twenty  years  of
age  j  she  had  never  suffered  from  any  serious  illness,  and  ap-
pears to  have  a  remarkably  healthy  and  strong  constitution.
At  the  age  of  sixteen  (four  years  before  she  became  my  pa-
tient), after  taking  quick  exercise,  she  felt  a  pain  between


234  Cure  of  severe  Pain  with  local  Mesmerism,

the  fourth  and  fifth  toes  of  the  right  foot ;  it  was  supposed
to  be  merely  the  result  of  a  sprain^  and  little  attention  was
paid  to  it  at  the  time. The  pain,  however^  increased^  and
at  last  was  accompanied  by  severe  spasms  shooting  from  the
foot  to  the  hip,  and  sometimes  accompanied  by  an  aching
pain  in  the  back  under  the  shoulder. She  could  not  bear  any
exertion,  nor  hang  her  leg  down  for  any  length  of  time. The
pain  was  so  acute  occasionally  that  it  caused  fainting  fits.
She  continued  in  this  way  for  two  years,  trying  all  the  usual
remedies,  and  derived  some  benefit,  when  on  the  continent,
from  the  treatment  of  a  medical  man  whom  she  consulted,
towards  the  end  of  the  second  year,  and  the  pain  gradually
subsided ;  so  that,  though  she  could  not  declare  herself  per-
fectly well,  and  was  subject  to  a  good  deal  of  inconvenience
from  any  exertion,  she  nevertheless  was  enabled  to  enjoy  her-
self tolerably  well  the  two  following  years. In  the  spring  of
1843  she  went  abroad  with  her  family,  and  without  any  ap-
parent cause,  nor  after  any  great  exertion,  the  pain  returned
more  violently  than  ever ;  she  now  could  not  put  her  foot  to
the  ground  at  any  time  without  pain, and  severe  spasms
shooting  to  the  hip,  and  from  thence  to  the  head,  were  con-
tinually occurring,  and  would  sometimes  cause  her  to  faint
two  or  three  times  in  a  day. After  a  fainting  fit,  she  inva-
riably felt  a  cessation  from  the  violence  of  the  pain. All  the
remedies  before  resorted  to  which  had  appeared  to  afford  any
relief  were  again  tried,  and  every  other  means  that  the  dif-
ferent medicsd  men  she  consulted  could  suggest ;  but  no  mi-
tigation, and  often  an  increase  of  pain,  was  the  consequence,
and  in  one  instance  she  suffered  so  severely  from  the  prescrip-
tions of  a  most  eminent  surgeon  in  London,  that  her  life  was
in  considerable  danger,  nor  did  she  recover  for  some  time
from  the  effects  of  the  intended  remedy. She  was  suffering
in  this  severe  manner  on  her  return  home,  which  was  in  July
of  the  year  1843. Her  father  asked  me  if  I  thought  mes-
merism could  at  all  relieve  her. I  proposed  a  trial. She  was
suffering  at  the  time  acutely  from  spasm. There  were  seven
or  eight  persons  in  the  room,  and  amongst  them  a  gentleman
(a  cousin)  who  was  sceptical  as  to  mesmerism. I  made  passes
over  the  foot  and  down  the  leg  for  about  ten  minutes,  when
she  declared  that  she  neither  felt  pain  nor  ache. The  foot
seemed  attracted  by  my  hand,  and  the  gentleman  whom  I
have  mentioned  wished  to  try  whether  he  could  produce  a
similar  effect. He  tried  and  succeeded  :  but  in  a  few  minutes
the  most  violent  convulsive  action  took  place  in  the  limbs,
nor  could  I  by  any  effort  allay  it  for  a  considerable  time,  nor
before  all  the  parties  who  were  standing  round  her  had  re-


by  Mr.  H.  S,  Thompson,  235

moved  to  some  distance.  The  pain^  however^  did  not  return
for  some  hours^  and  then  not  so  violently  as  before.  It  was
at  this  time  that  I  consulted  you ;  for  from  the  extreme  vio-
lence of  the  muscular  twitchings  and  convulsive  movements,
I  feared  lest  there  might  be  some  risk  in  persevering  with
mesmerism,  and  dared  not  undertake  the  case  on  my  own
responsibility.  Your  answer  was  encouraging.  Her  family
were  so  alarmed  at  the  unpleasant  result  of  our  first  mesmeric
experiment,  that  nothing  but  a  recurrence  of  the  violent  pain
would  have  induced  either  the  patient  herself,  or  her  family,
to  have  anything  more  to  do  with  mesmerism.

The  day  I  received  your  letter  advising  mesmerism  to  be
continued,  I  saw  her  again ;  she  was  unable  to  move  and
obliged  to  lie  on  a  sofa.  I  made  a  few  passes  over  the  foot
and  down  the  leg,  when,  as  in  the  first  instance,  the  pain
was  removed,  and  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  she  took  .my  arm
and  walked  about  perfectly  free  from  pain.  No  unpleasant
twitchings  occurred  this  day.  From  that  day  to  last  autumn,
%.e  from  July,  1843,  I  continued  to  mesmerise  this  patient
on  an  average  two  or  three  times  a  week  with  some  inter-
missions. Three  or  four  times  I  had  hoped  that  the  cure  was
complete,  and  had  ceased  to  mesmerise  her,  but  was  obliged
to  have  recourse  to  it  again.  The  last  time  of  its  recurrence,
an  interval  of  nearly  three  months  had  passed  with  absence
from  pain.

I  have  rarely  been  able  to  put  this  patient  to  sleep,  for
whenever  the  mesmeric  passes  have  been  continued  for  any
length  of  time,  almost  invariably  convulsive  twitchings  and
starting  would  come  on,  which  have  prevented  sleep  and
obliged  me  to  discontinue  the  operation ;  so  that  my  constant
endeavor  has  been  to  relieve  the  pain,  and  render  the  patient
as  little  sensitive  to  mesmerism  as  possible.  I  found  that
when  I  had  continued  the  passes  long  enough  to  overcome
the  convulsive  action  and  induce  sleep,  the  patient  became
so  highly  sensitive  that  the  approach  of  almost  every  one
produced  unpleasant  sensations  in  her;  and  even  some  hours
afterwards,  if  she  sat  near  any  persons,  or  was  touched  by  them,
or  by  any  animal,  very  unpleasant  involuntary  convulsive
twitchings  were  the  result.  Again,  I  have  occasionally  found
if  she  had  been  walking  arm  in  arm  with  any  person  previously
to  my  mesmerising  her,  that  as  soon  as  I  commenced,  the
same  convulsive  action  would  occur ;  and  also  that  she  has
been  differently  affected  by  my  mesmerising  different  persons
previously  to  mesmerising  her.  At  one  time  when  the  pain
was  obstinate,  and  I  was  in  the  constant  and  daily  practice  of
mesmerising  her,  I  had  also  two  gentlemen  patients,  both


23G  Cure  of  severe  Pain  with  local  Mesmerism,

suffering  from  asthma ;  they  each  took  me  from  a  quarter  of
an  hour  to  twenty  minutes  to  mesmerise^  and  I  invariably
found  that  if  I  mesmerised  her  immediately  |dter  one  gen-
tleman^ she  was  quiet  and  composed^  and  seemed  very  com-
fortable ;  but  if  after  the  other,  she  always  expressed  herself
as  feeling  cold  and  uncomfortable,  and  the  involuntary  action
was  produced.  I  have  tried  this  experiment  repeatedly  with
the  same  result,  and  there  has  been  a  similar  though  generally
a  less  effect  produced,  when  even  some  hours  had  elapsed
from  my  mesmerising  either  of  these  gentlemen.  I  was  not
at  all  aware  of  any  different  or  peculiar  sensation  from  either
of  them  myself.

On  some  occasions  some  very  curious  phenomena  have
been  produced.  I  usually  found  when  these  convulsive
twitchings  came  on,  that  the  readiest  way  to  allay  them  was
to  quietly  hold  the  hands  for  a  few  minutes,  and  this  almost
always  succeeded ;  but  sometimes  the  hands  and  arms  have
been  seized  with  involuntary  but  slow  automatic  action,  some-
times performing  all  sorts  of  convolutions,  twisting  and  turn-
ing about,  and  advancing  and  receding,  and  the  hand  then
insinuating  itself  between  books,  under  the  table-cloth,  or  any
thing  that  happened  to  be  near,  and  exactly  simulating  the
motions  and  actions  of  some  snake  or  reptile.  I  have  put  a
handkerchief  over  the  head  of  the  patient  so  that  she  could
not  see  her  hand,  but  it  has  receded  at  the  approach  of
mine,  advanced  as  I  drew  my  hand  back,  inserted  itself  be-
tween the  books,  &c.,  as  though  it  possessed  eyes  itself,  or
some  peculiar  power  of  knowing  where  it  was  going :  some-
times it  seemed  to  be  attracted  by  some  object  at  a  distance,
or  to  have  a  desire,  if  I  may  so  express  it,  of  advancing  for-
ward. I  have  requested  the  patient  to  follow  the  directions
of  the  hand,  but  have  rarely  been  able  to  guess  what  was  the
attractive  or  stimulating  power  of  these  extraordinary  fan-
tastic movements.

The  foot  that  was  subject  to  the  neuralgic  affection,  I  have
once  or  twice  observed  similarly  affected.  I  will  relate  one
instance,  in  which  the  result  was  as  satisfactory  as  extraordi-
nary. The  patient,  one  morning  when  I  had  an  engagment
and  could  not  remain  with  her,  complained  of  a  little  pain ;
I  made  some  rapid  passes  over  the  foot,  until  she  said  the
pain  was  removed:  and  I  left  her.  On  my  return  I  still
found  that  she  was  not  entirely  free  from  pain,  and  com-
menced mesmerising  her  again  Convulsive  motions  immedi-
ately came  on  in  the  foot,  and  I  gave  over  mesmerising :  but
in  a  few  minutes  the  foot  began  to  advance  forward,  and,
though  the  patient  had  the  power  to  control  its  action  by


by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.  237

holding  it  firmly  on  the  ground^  she  said  that  she  had  a  sen-
sation as  if  something  ^as  attached  to  her  foot^  that  drew
it  forward ;  and  when  she  held  the  foot  suspended  above  the
ground^  it  was  immediately  advanced  involuntarily  forward.

Anxious  to  discover  some  reason^  if  possible^  for  this^  I
requested  her  to  follow  the  foot  in  any  direction  it  might
seem  to  be  attracted.  She  did  so^  when  she  was  led  to  the
window.  The  room  was  on  the  ground-floor^  and  the  win-
dows down  to  the  ground^  opening  into  the  garden.  There
was  an  iron  plate  close  to  the  window^  which  I  thought  pos-
sibly might  have  been  the  attractive  power.  I  requested  the
patient  to  go  into  the  garden ;  she  still  felt  the  sensation  as
if  something  was  pulling  at  her  foot.  I  found  however  that
the  iron  plate  was  not  the  object  of  attraction;  the  foot
rested  for  a  moment  or  two  on  the  window-sill^  and  the  pa-
tient said  it  felt  quiet  and  comfortable ;  but  soon  again  the
same  sensation  was  experienced^  and  the  foot  was  again
drawn  by  some  invisible  agent  round  the  house^  resting  for  a
moment  on  the  sill  of  some  of  the  windows^  as  she  arrived  at
them  in  succession.  Having  made  the  circuit  of  the  house,
the  foot  seemed  attracted  through  a  thick  clump  of  shrubs
dlat  bounds  and  adjoins  the  north  end  of  the  house,  and
screens  the  yard  and  offices  from  the  gardens.  It  struck  me
immediately  that  a  little  dog  that  was  generally  in  the  house
must  have  something  to  do  with  these  phenomena.  I  made
no  remark  of  the  sort  to  the  patient,  but  proposed  to  return
to  the  house,  as  it  was  impossible  that  we  could  persist  in  the
pursuit  of  our  invisible  game  through  the  wet  bushes.  As
soon  as  we  had  re-entered  the  house,  I  went  in  search  of  the
dog,  and  on  finding  it  brought  it  into  the  house,  and  let  it
find  its  way  into  the  drawing-room  as  if  by  accident.  In  a
very  short  time  a  slight  convulsive  twitching  took  place  in
the  foot,  and  a  still  stronger  sense  as  if  something  was  draw-
ing it.  She  advanced  towards  the.  dog,  and  put  her  foot  on
its  back  as  it  was  lying  before  the  fire,  and  the  twitching  and
sensation  was  at  an  end.  She  immediately  exclaimed,  "  My
foot  has  at  length  found  its  resting-place.'^  On  enquiry,  I
found  that  in  the  morning,  directly  after  mesmerising  her,
she  had  placed  her  foot  on  the  dog  as  it  was  lying  on  the  rug
before  the  fire,  and  had  kept  it  there  nearly  half  an  hour ;
but  the  circumstance  had  never  struck  her,  until  she  again
found  her  foot  on  the  dog's  back,  and  all  the  sensations  she
had  experienced  at  an  end.  The  dog,  when  shut  out  of  the
house,  was  constantly  in  the  habit  of  trying  the  different
windows,  and,  if  unsuccessful  in  its  endeavours  to  get  into  the
house,  would  make  its  way  through  the  bushes  into  the  back

VOL.  IV.  s


288  Cure  of  severe  Pain  with  local  Mesmerism,

yard.  I  have  little  doubt  that  this  had  been  the  case  that
day.

Another  interval  of  several  months  has  elapsed^  and  the
patient  has  experienced  no  pain.  I  do  hope  that  we  shall  be
able  to  pronounce  the  cure  perfect.

I  have  met  with  several  cases  where  this  convulsive  and
involuntary  action  has  been  brought  on  by  a  second  person
touching  a  limb  of  a  person  who  had  been  mesmerised  for
some  time.

A  few  days  ago^  a  friend  of  mine,  who  has  the  misfortune
to  be  quite  deaf  and  nearly  dumb,  came  with  his  sister  to
consult  me  about  his  eyes :  he  is  an  artist,  and  from  close
application  to  his  pursuits,  a  nervous  affection  had  come  on
in  his  eyes,  which  his  medical  adviser  feared  might  terminate
in  amaurosis.  I  mesmerised  him,  and  anxious  to  ascertain
how  he  felt,  I  requested  his  sister  to  try  whether  she  could
make  him  understand  by  talking  to  him  on  his  own  fingers.
The  experiment  was  very  curious  and  successful )  but  a  short
time  afterwards  involuntary  action  came  on  in  his  hands  and
arms,  and  continued  when  he  was  quite  awake,  nor  did  it
cease  until  I  made  passes  down  them  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour
or  twenty  minutes.  "^

Sept.  3rd,  1845.  I  met  with  a  most  interesting  case.  A
poor  woman  of  the  name  of  Bell,  who  resides  in  Stillington,
was  attacked  with  mania.  She  had  had  a  previous  attack
about  a  year  since,  and  had  been  confined  in  the  York
Lunatic  Asylum  for  eighteen  weeks,  and  afterwards  remained
in  a  low  desponding  state  for  a  length  of  time.  She  gradu-
ally got  better,  and  had  been  engaged  in  harvesting  with  her
husband.  Whilst  at  work,  she  was  suddenly  attacked  with  a
kind  of  fit,  and  relapsed  into  a  state  of  mania.  When  I  first
saw  her,  she  had  been  in  a  most  violent  state  for  about  forty-
eight  hours,  yelling  and  screaming  at  times  most  frightfully,
and  endeavouring  to  strike  or  bite  any  one  who  came  near

w  I  think  it  as  weH  to  mention,  that  before  I  commenced  regularly  mes-
merising this  patient,  her  father,  haying  heard  of  Mr.  Braid's  hypnotism,
procured  his  book  on  the  subject,  and,  being  convinced  that  it  was  a  readier
method  of  getting  rid  of  the  pain  if  it  answered  as  well,  book  in  hand  set  to
work  with  his  daughter.  The  first  time  or  two  it  produced  no  sleep  or
hypnotism,  but  only  a  most  disagreeable  and  strained  feeling  in  the  eyes,
which  lasted  many  hours  after  the  operation,  and  at  length  brought  on  a
most  unpleasant  and  serious  aflfection,  the  eyes  being  coDTulsirely  and  in-
voluntarily turned  upwards  ;  and  this  occurred  for  several  days  after  this
dangerous  practice  was  discontinued,  whenever  ttie  patient  looked  upwards,
or  fixed  her  eyes  for  a  short  time  on  any  object.  No  relief  whatever  from
the  pain  was  experienced  during  this  process.


Power  of  Mesmerism  over  Mania,  239

her.  She  was  strapped  into  an  arm-chair^  and  her  hands  and
feet  tied.  I  determined  to  try  what  effect  mesmerism  would
have  on  her.  I  advanced  towards  her^  keeping  my  eye
steadily  fixed  upon  her's.  This  seemed  to  make  her  rather
more  tranquil.  I  then  made  a  few  passes  over  her  head  and
down  her  Umbs ;  at  first  she  slightly  tried  to  resist^  but  in  a
few  minutes  she  became  quiet  and  calm^  and  completely
under  my  control.  I  untied  her  hands^  and  loosened  the
bands  she  was  fastened  with^  and  then  recommenced  mes-
merising her.  In  ten  minutes  she  was  asleep^  and  in  her
sleep  she  thanked  me  for  the  relief  she  felt  in  her  head.  I
let  her  sleep  about  an  hour^  when  she  awoke.  She  was  quiet
and  composed;  the  excitement  seemed  over^  but  her  mind
was  weak  and  wanderings  and  she  appeared  exhausted.  She
had  one  paroxysm  that  night,  which  lasted  about  an  hour.

I  mesmerised  her  the  following  day;  there  was  still  a
wildness  in  her  look,  and  she  had  an  excitable  and  rambling
manner  of  talking,  but  she  did  not  break  out  into  any  acts
of  violence.  She  improved  steadily,  and  on  the  fourth  day
appeared  quite  as  well  as,  if  not  better  than,  before  her  attack.
She  had  not  suffered  from  lowness  of  spirits  or  despondency,
which  was  the  case  after  her  first  seizure.  She  has  had  no
relapse  since^  and  has  been  able  to  attend  to  her  family  and
to  work.

Mesmerism  had  a  most  curious  and  instantaneous  effect
on  this  poor  creature;  for  she  was  not  only  instantly  calmed,
but  in  a  few  minutes  was  incapable  of  being  violent,  had
she  tried  to  be  so;  for  her  limbs  were  partially  stiffened;
she  could  only  move  them  with  the  slowest  and  most  regular
action.  The  muscles  of  her  throat,  neck,  and  mouth  then
gradually  became  stiffened,  so  that  she  could  not  speak ;  then
her  eyes  closed^  and  she  slept  quietly  for  about  an  hour;
when  she  awoke,  she  slowly  and  by  degrees  was  enabled  to
speak  and  use  her  limbs.  Insanity  in  this  case  is,  I  am  sorry
to  say,  hereditary.  Her  father,  I  understand,  became  insane,
and  a  brother  and  sister  also  have  suffered  from  this  fearful
malady.

She  describes  the  sensation  of  mesmerism  as  being  very
agreeable,  relieving  her  head  from  the  pain,  which  was  very
violent,  almost  immediately,  and  before  going  to  sleep ;  and
then  a  sort  of  listlessness  and  inability  to  move  her  limbs
gradually  coming  on,  which  she  said  was  by  no  means  an
unpleasant  feeling.


s2


( 240 )

IX. Cure  of  Epilepsy  with  Mesmerism. By  Mr.  Flintoff,

Surgeon.

Feb.  20th,  1844.  I  was  called  to  Emma  Button,  aged  21,
residing  at  No.  47,  Oreat  Titchfield  Street.  I  found  her
labouring  under  considerable  exhaustion,  having  had  two
fits,  each  of  half  an  hour's  duration,  in  the  morning.  The
tongue  foul,  pulse  90  and  soft,  dimness  of  sight,  severe  head-
ache, and  great  pain  in  the  loins  and  thighs;  it  was  the
Eeriod  for  the  catamenia,  which  had  not  yet  appeared.  She
ad  been  subject  to  violent  epileptic  fits  ever  since  the  age
of  16,  supposed  to  have  been  at  first  produced  by  a  fright:
latterly  the  attacks  had  increased  in  frequency  and  severity,
and  for  the  last  10  months  she  had  several  every  month,  but
more  severe  and  frequent  immediately  before  and  during  the
catamenia,  which  had  always  been  more  or  less  deficient
et  quantitatem  et  colorem,  ever  since  their  commence-
ment, at  the  early  age  of  1 1 .  She  had  been  a  patient  at
the  Marylebone  Dispensary  for  years;  been  repeatedly
cupped,  leeched,  and  blistered,  and  had  taken  bd  immense
quantity  of  medicine  prescribed  by  a  number  of  eminent
medical  men,  without  the  slightest  benefit.

I  ordered  her  calomel  and  hyoscyamus  at  bec^-time,  and
a  saline  aperient  draught  in  the  morning,  hot  fomentations
to  the  abdomen,  hip  bath,  and  embrocation  to  the  loins.

Feb.  21st.  Saline  mixture.  Liq.  Opii.  sed.  Had  one
fit  which  lasted  25  miuutes :  in  the  evening  the  catamenia
appeared.

22nd.  One  fit,  mixture  continued.

23rd.  Tongue  and  pulse  better,  still  head-ache  and  sight
dim ;  aperient  pills  witn  hyos.  at  bed  time.

24th.  One  fit,  tongue  clean,  bowels  open.

27th.  Two  fits,  tongue  clean,  bowels  confined,  two  pills.

28th.  Mesmerised  for  the  first  time  for  half  an  hour,  by
the  advice  of  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  saw  the  patient,  and  urged
its  continuance.

It  was  accordingly  continued  by  me  daily,  without  the
mesmeric  sleep  being  produced,  until  the  15th  March,  when
she  passed  into  the  mesmeric  coma  after  being  mesmerised
about  twenty  minutes.  On  the  3rd  she  had  a  severe  fit
immediately  after  being  mesmerised.

15th  March.  She  remained  in  the  sleep  for  three  hours,
and  awoke  greatly  refreshed,  and  her  head  relieved.

16th.  Mesmerised,  asleep  in  10  minutes.

17th.  Had  a  fit  before  my  visit.  Mesmerised,  asleep  in
two  minutes,  and  continued  so  four  hours.


Cure  of  Epilepsy  taith  Mesmerism.  241

18th.  Mesmerised,  asleep  in  one  minute,  awoke  in  an
hour  with  a  violent  head-ache,  and  on  my  placing  my  hands
on  the  front  and  back  part  of  the  head  she  went  off  into  a
fit,  which  immediately  subsided  on  her  being  again  mes-
merised.

22nd.  General  health  and  appetite  greatly  improved.

Mesmerism  still  continued  every  day.

April  1st.  In  the  mesmeric  sleep  said  that  she  should  have
a  drea^fidfit  at  10  in  the  morning  of  the  I9th,  which  would  be
the  last  she  should  ever  have,  and  thai  she  should  be  very  ill
for  a  week  before.

12th.  Catamenia  appeared,  (it  being  a  week  before  the
proper  time,  this  never  having  occurred  before,  they  being
generally  rather  over  the  proper  time,)  without  any  pain,
color  naturalis,  quantitas  aucta.

15th.  Sent  for  in  the  morning  and  found  her  in  a  fit,  and
which  had  existed  for  10  minutes.  I  mesmerised  her  out  of
it  in  half  a  minute.  Found  on  enquiry  that  she  had  just
rinsed  out  some  clothes  in  cold  water,  had  been  instantly
attacked  with  violent  pains  in  the  uterus,  and  went  off  into
a  fit ;  another  occurred  in  ten  minutes,  which  immediately
subsided  on  her  being  again  mesmerised.  Had  another  in
the  evening,  which  continued  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  I
was  not  present.  Foretold  the  next  would  take  place  at  10
next  morning.

16th.  Had  two  fits  to-day,  the  first  at  10  a.m.  She  has  of
late  always  talked,  during  the  sleep,  of  Friday,  the  I9th  being  a
dreadful  day  f(rr  her.  17th.  Four  fits.  18th.  Thirteen  fits.
19/^  fHday,  twenty-six  fits,  the  last  at  ten  o'clock  at  night,
which  she  said  would  be  the  last  she  should  ever  have  unless
she  should  meet  with  a  great  fright.  During  this  week  she
always  mentioned  in  her  sleep  the  different  hours  at  which  each
fit  would  take  place,  which  always  occurred  to  the  moment.
The  holy  rapture,  and  the  grace  and  beauty  of  the  attitudes
which  she  assumed  during  the  greater  part  of  the  last  two
days,  in  her  mesmeric  state,  surpassed  description.''

The  patient  had  a  very  fine  regular  set  of  teeth,  with  the
exception  of  the  right  eye  tooth,  which  protruded  so  much
as  to  disfigure  the  mouth  and  irritate  the  upper  lip  from
pressure.  Although  it  was  very  firmly  fixed,  I  removed  it
during  the  mesmeric  sleep  without  her  feeling  the  operation,  two
of  my  own  friends  being  present.  Mesmerism  in  this  case
was  continued  for  three  months  longer.  She  has  had  no  re-
turn of  the  fits  since  April  \9th,  18&,  and  is  now  in  the  most
perfect  state  of  health.

""  See  Dr.  EUiotaoD'a  case  of  Miss  E.  Melhaisb.— Zom<,  vol.  I.,  p.  449.


242  Cures  of  Epilepsy ,  tfC,^  trith  Mesmerism,

I  have  lately  witnessed  the  beneficial  effects  of  mesmerism
in  a  case  of  tumor  of  the  left  breast,  combined  with  paralysis
of  the  inferior  extremities.  The  patient,  Mrs.  Ryan,  No.
5,  Compton  Place,  Judd  Street,  was  mesmerised  by  me  from
the  5th  December  last,  for  six  weeks,  after  which  time,  as
I  was  obliged  to  discontinue  the  case,  it  was  taken  up  by
Mr.  Fradelle,  of  19,  Percy  Street,  with  the  most  satisfactory
results.  Previously  to  mesmerism  being  employed,  the  tumor
was  about  the  size  of  a  turkey's  egg,  ana  the  inferior  ex*
tremities  were  entirely  devoid  of  sensation  and  motion ;  in
four  weeks  its  size  had  diminished  nearly  one-fourth,  and  the
other  unpleasant  symptoms  were  sreatly  relieved.  The  tumor
has  now  entirely  disappeared,  and  sensation  and  motion  have
in  a  great  measure  been  restored. ^

Thomas  Fliktoff.
73,  Great  Titchfield  Street,
June  8th,  1846.


X. Cures  of  Epilepsy, Loss  qf  Voice,  and  Deqfhess. By

Mr.  Davby.

The  following  accounts  have  been  handed  to  us  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  from
Mr.  Harrison,  junior,  of  Plymouth,  who  has  seen  the  original  certificates,
and  vouches  for  the  accuracy  of  the  copies.

Mr.  Davey,  who  effected  these  curesj  mesmerised  Mrs.  Northway  whose
arm  was  amputated  at  Torquay,  vol.  iii.  p.  207,  without  her  feeling,  and
restored  the  voice  of  Catherine  Brown,  vol.  ii.  p.  244. — Z^itt,

I.  Cure  of  Epilepsy  with  Mesmerism.

"  Holoford  Hartland,  Feb.  18th,  1845.
"  Sir, — I  received  your  note  and  am  happy  to  hear  that
you  are  doing  good. My  daughter's  health  is  rather  better
than  it  was  when  you  left,  she  had  one  fit  after  she  was  mes-
merised and  she  has  not  had  one  since.

"  Yours  very  truly,

"  Mary  Tubmbr."


This  case  was  one  of  epileptic  fits,  Mr.  Davey  thinks,  of
1 1  years  standing,  but  is  not  quite  sure  of  it.  The  above
letter  was  in  answer  to  an  enquiry  of  Mr.  D.'s  made  15  months
after  the  cure  had  been  effected.  The  fit  alluded  to  took
place  a  few  days  after  the  first  application  of  mesmerism,

Ereviously  to  which  her  health  and  intellectual  faculties  had
een  much  impaired  by  her  very  severe  attacks  of  epilepsy.
She  had  only  one  fit  after  the  first  application  of  mesmerism,
which  was  continued  at  intervals  during  the  space  of  about

J  The  case  is  described  in  p.  218.— Z«wl.


by  Mr.  Davey.  243

two  nionthB.  A  deep  state  of  coma  was  not  in  this  case  in-
duced. Her  health  was  partially  restored,  and  her  intellec-
tual faculties  which  were  above  the  average,  became  as  strong
as  they  were  previous  to  her  attacks.

II.  Cures  qf  Lass  of  Voice  with  Mesmerism.

We,  the  undersigned  inhabitants  of  Sheldon,  Devon,  do
feel  ourselves  in  duty  bound  to  acknowledge  the  efficacy  of
Mesmerism,  as  shewn  in  the  case  of  Margaret  Luscombe  of
this  place ;  she  having,  to  our  certain  knowledge,  been  de-
prived of  the  power  of  speech  for  six  months :  qfier  every
other  means  had  been  resorted  to,  she  obtained  admittance  to
the  Devon  and  Exeter  Hospital,  where,  after  five  weeks  in-
eflTectual  treatment,  her  health  declined  so  rapidly  that  she
despaired  of  her  life,  and  requested  leave  to  end  her  days  at
home ;  accordingly  she  left  on  the  10th  instant,  and  on  the
17th  instant,  her  speech  was  perfectly  restored  by  Mesme-
rism, through  Mr.  Davey,  at  his  first  lecture  at  the  Subscrip-
tion Rooms,  Exeter.  We  would  add  that  her  health  is  also
fully  re-established.

"  Margaret  Luscombe.

"  Susan  Luscombe.

"William  B.  Boyd.
«  Shaldon,  July  29th,  1846.

"  This  certifies  that  I  have  known  and  attended  the  within
named  Margaret  Luscombe,  and  that  she  had  lost  her  voice
for  some  time.

"  N.  A.  Bartlett,  Surgeon.

"  George  Hannaford.

"  Robert  Cade.

"  Adam  Bulley.

"  Elizabeth  G.  Harris.
"  Shaldon,  January  29th,  1846."

Margaret  Luscombe,  the  girl  alluded  to,  being  about  the
age  of  21,  was,  in  consequence  of  a  fright  and  of  ill  health  im-
mediately succeeding,  deprived  of  the  use  of  her  voice.  In  ad-
dition to  this  she  had  frequent  fainting  fits  after  the  fright.  She
WVL8  first  mesmerised,  and  passed  into  a  state  of  perfect  coma,
at  Mr.  Davey's  lodgings  during  his  stay  in  Exeter.  On  this
occasion,  attraction,  rigidity,  sympathy  of  sensation  were  pro-
duced and  she  responded  accurately  to  the  excitement  of  the
cerebral  organs  with  contact.  Mr.  Davey,  from  this  fact,  con-
cluded that  the  restoration  of  the  voice  could  at  any  time  be
effected,  and  therefore  preferred  accomplishing  this  in  public.


244  Cures  of  Loss  of  Voice  with  Mesmerism,

This  patient  and  Miss  BuUey  (referred  to  in  another  testi-
monial) accompanied  Mr.  D.  to  the  Royal  Subscription  Rooms,
Exeter,  where  in  the  presence  of  several  hundred  witnesses,
their  voices  were  almost  simultaneously  restored.  Margaret
Luscombe's  fainting  fits  left  her  from  the  first  mesmerisaSon  :
but  the  treatment  was  continued  for  a  fortnight  after  the  re-
covery of  her  voice  for  the  complete  re-establishment  of  her
health.  Instead  of  going  home  to  end  her  days,  she  took  a
situation  in  a  Lady's  family,  and  has  continued  well  up  to
the  present  time.  Mr.  D.  heard  from  her  only  a  few  days
ago. June  3rd.,  1846.

III.

"  August  3rd,  1844.
''Mary  NichoUs, living  at  Woolfardisworthy  belonging  to
the  parish  of  Hartland  has  been  under  my  care  K>r  the  last  four
or  five  years,  the  last  two  she  has  been  mcapable  of  speaking
otherwise  than  in  a  very  low  whisper,  it  came  on  after  tne  third
attack  of  Trismus  (Locked  Jaw)  unknown  to  me,  a  month
since.  She  was  taken  (during  her  stay  at  Bideford)  by  Mr.
James  Barrow,  relieving  officer  of  the  Bideford  Union,  to  Mr.
Davey,  who  was  then  lecturing  on  Phreno-Magnetism,  and
who  by  its  influence  in  four  days  restored  her  speech.  Hav-
ing examined  the  case  and  seen  the  said  Mary  NichoUs  mag-
netised in  my  own  house,  I  hereby  declare  my  conviction  that
there  has  been  neither  collusion  nor  deception  on  either  side,
but  a  full  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  Phreno-Magnetism.
As  there  may  be  some  individuals  whose  small  sotds  will
induce  them  to  traduce  the  magnetiser  and  magnetised,  I
protest  against  such  foul  calumniators,  and  subscribe  myself,

''  J.  H.  Bbll,  Surgeon."

"  Mary  NichoUs,  living  in  the  village  of  Woolfardiswor-
thy, near  Bideford,  had  lost  the  full  power  of  her  speech,
and  was  able  only  to  speak  in  a  very  low  whisper  after  a  pe-
riod of  nearly  two  years.  Upon  being  subjectea  to  the  power
of  Animal  Magnetism  at  the  hands  of  William  Davey,  Esq.,
Lecturer,  her  voice  has  been  restored.

"  J.  W.  Smyth,  D.D.
"  Incumbent  of  Woolfardisworthy.
"August  6th,  1844."

Mr.  Davey  saw  Mr.  Bell  16  months  after  the  date  of  these
documents,  who  then  stated  that  Mary  NichoUs  had  suffered
two  relapses,  but  that  by  the  use  of  mesmerism  he  had  suc-
ceeded in  restoring  her  voice  as  Mr.  Davey  had  done  on  a


by  Mr,  Davey.  245

former  occasion.  Mr.  Bell  having  left  that  part  of  the  coun-
try,  should  a  relapse  again  take  place,  there  is  no  good  Sa-
maritan near. Proh  pudor !

IV.

''  Shaldon^  Parish  of  Saint  Nicholas,
''July  24th,  1846.
**  This  is  to  certify  that  Amey  Bulley,  of  Shaldon,  in  the
Parish  of  St.  Nicholas,  after  having  suffered  from  the  loss  of
her  voice  for  several  months  regained  it  by  means  of  mes-
merism. Mr.  Davey  having  operated  upon  her  at  Shaldon
and  also  at  Exeter  with  great  success.

"  N.  A.  Bartlett,  Surgeon,

"  Amey  Bulley,

"  Adam  Bulley,  father  of  Amey  Bulley,

«  W.  B.  Boyd,

"  George  Hannaford^

"  Robert  Cade,

"  Elizabeth  G.  Harris."

This  young  person,  then  about  the  age  of  20,  had  alter-
nately lost  andl*egained  her  voice,  during  the  month  of  March
especially,  for  several  years;  Mr.  D.,  however,  thinks  that
she  was  in  possession  of  her  voice  during  the  remainder  of
the  year.  Her  voice  was  usually  restored  after  medical  aid
had  been  called  in ;  but  in  the  present  instance  she  had  lost
it  for  six  months,  and  her  surgeon,  Mr.  Bartlett,  was  not  as
successful  as  usual  in  restoring  it.  Recourse  was  had  to  the
assistance  of  Mr.  Davey,  who  mesmerised  her  every  day  for
about  a  fortnight,  before  the  expiration  of  which  her  voice
returned.  The  proper  organs  of  the  brain  for  the  restoration
of  her  voice  were  excited,  to  which  Mr.  D.  attributed  his
general  success.  Mesmerisation  was  continued  for  another
week  for  the  improvement  of  her  health,  which  had  been  deli-
cate. Mr.  D.  received  a  communication  from  her  only  a  few
days  ago,  June  3rd,  1846,  stating  that  she  is  now  in  perfect
health,  and  in  full  possession  of  her  voice;  so  that  the  month
of  March  has  passed  over  without  a  relapse.  Mr.  Bartlett,
her  medical  adviser,  has  thus  honourably  acknowledged  the
efficacy  of  mesmerism  after  the  failure  of  other  measures.

V.

"  London  Hotel,  Sidmouth,
•'  April  5th,  1845.
"  Dear  Sir, — In  answer  to  your  kind  enquiries,  I  beg  to


246  Cures  of  Deafness,  ^c.  with  Mesmerism,

state  that  I  have  been  confined  to  my  room  for  ten  days  with
the  most  severe  cold  I  ever  remember  to  have -had :  but  under
all  these  disadvantages  I  have  the  greatest  pleasure  in  in*
forming  you  that  by  your  never-to-be-forgotten  instrumen-
tality,  mesmeric  influence  restored  my  voice  after  a  total  loss
for  seven  years,  and  this  still  remains  strong  to  the  great
gratification  of  myself  and  friends ;  indeed  the  duty  I  owe
you  demands  my  sincere  thanks.  Trusting  that  many  of  my
fellow-creatures  who  may  labour  under  the  same  loss  may
have  cause  to  rejoice  at  the  power  of  mesmerism,  I  shall  at
all  times  be  most  happy  to  hear  of  your  success  in  a  science
which  must  tend  to  the  general  good  of  our  fellow-creatures.
The  whole  of  our  family  unite  in  kind  regards  to  Mrs.  Davey
and  self,  and  believe  me,  dear  sir,

**  Yours  truly,

"Arabella  Cawsky.*'

Mr.  Davey  has  not  heard  from  this  person  for  some
months,  but  requested  her,  should  there  be  a  relapse,  to
inform  him  of  it — as  the  same  means  would  probably  again
restore  her  voice.— She  was  mesmerised  first  about  January
20th,  1845,  during  seven  successive  days.  The  influence
increased  by  degrees,  and  on  the  7th  day  consciousness  was
lost,  and  her  voice  was  on  that  day  restored.  She  was  always
able  to  speak  by  a  great  effort  in  a  very  low  whisper,  but  after
mesmerisation  her  voice  was  clear  and  distinct.  Some  said
that  faith  made  her  whole ;  others  satanic  agency,  especially
the  sect  known  by  the  name  of  the  "  Plymouth  brethren,
who  have  used  all  their  efforts  to  prejudice  their  dupes  against
it.  Mr.  Davey  prefers  not  speaking  of  the  conduct  of  some
of  the  members  of  the  medical  profession  as  it  has  been  too
shabby.

VI.  Cure  of  Deafness  by  Mesmerism.

Copy  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Jones,  Surgeon,  of  Ilfracombe,
to  a  gentleman  of  Exeter : —

''  Ilfracombe,  Aug.  2nd,  1845.

"  Dear  Sir, — I  am  sorry  that  I  could  not  reply  to  yours
by  an  earlier  post.  The  boy  Cooke  has  been  known  to  me
from  his  birth,  from  which  time  to  that  of  his  being  brought
under  mesmeric  influence  by  Mr.  Davey  he  was  perfectly
dumb  and  deaf,  save  that  sounds  attended  with  very  ^reat
vibrations,  such  as  a  blow  on  an  anvil,  or  on  a  table  with  a
heavy  substance,  were  slightly  audible.  I  am  fully  confident
be  was  totally  incapable  of  hearing  the  human  voice,  ringing
of  bells,  or  any  such  sounds,  and  in  this  statement  I  am


r


by  Mr.  Davey.  247

borae  out  by  those  with  whom  he  has  had  daily  intercourse,
save  daring  the  time  he  was  in  the  Deaf  and  Dumb  Asylum
at  Exeter,  where  neither  of  his  infirmities  were  in  the  least
degree  benefited.  He  returned  from  the  institution,  where
he  was  maintained  at  the  cost  of  the  parish,  in  precisely  the
same  state  in  which  he  went.  I  am  happy  to  say  that  he
now  hears  minute  sounds  and  speaks  in  a  manner  perfectly
intelligible  to  any  one,  and  snould  he  be  present  at  Mr.
Davey's  next  lecture,'  he  will  have  no  difficulty  in  declaring
to  the  sceptics  of  your  city,  that  *  poor  and  ignorant  as  I  am
et  have  I  attained  to  the  invaluable  knowleclge  that  whereas
was  deaf  and  dumb  now  I  hear  and  speak.'  His  physical
health  was  always  good,  but  not  a  shadow  of  improvement  in
the  donnant  faculties  had  ever  taken  place  till  brought  under
the  influence  of  mesmerism.  You  are  fully  at  liberty  to  make
what  use  you  please  of  this  communication,  my  only  object
being  the  maintenance  of  truth.

"  I  remain,  dear  Sir,  yours  respectfully,
•*To  R.  W.  Fox,  Esq.'  ''John  Jones.'*

"Ilfracombe,  Feb.  15th,  1846.
"  Having  had  our  attention  called  to  a  paragraph  which
appeared  in  the  Western  Times  of  February  8th,  reflecting  on
the  veracity  of  Mr.  Davey,  in  reference  to  the  cure  by  mes-
merism, performed  on  our  son  George  Cooke,  we  hereby
voluntarily  declare  for  the  information  of  all  those  who  may
feel  interested  in  the  matter,  that  our  said  son  George  Cooke
was  born  deaf  and  dumb  and  remained  in  that  state  till
placed  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Davey,  with  this  exception  that
ne  could  always  hear  very  loud  sounds ;  but  such  is  the  im-

Erovement  in  his  case  that  he  can  now  distinctly  hear  the
uman  voice  when  spoken  to  even  from  a  distance,  and  his
faculty  of  speech  is  such  as  enables  us  to  carry  on  a  conver-
sation with  him  without  the  least  difficulty.  We  beg  to
express  our  sincere  thanks  to  Mr.  Davey  for  his  very  great
attention  and  kindness  to  him,  and  our  gratitude  to  God  for
the  great  blessing  thus  conferred  on  one  of  his  afflicted
creatures.

**  Robert  Cooke,  father  of  the  said  George  Cooke,
**  X  The  mark  of  Ann  Cooke,  mother  of  the  said

George  Cooke,
''  George  Cooke,  the  late  deaf  and  dumb  boy.
"  Witness  to  the  signature  of  Robert  Cook  and  the  mark
of  Ann  Cook,

''James  Greenwood,  Chemist,  Iliracombe."

>  He  wu  present.

*  Mr.  Fox  is  a  Snrgeon  Dentist,  7,  Sontherney  PUce,  Exeter.^ZoM^


248  Cure  of  Deajhess  unih  Mesmerism.

George  Cooke  was  first  mesmerised  1 1th  May,  1844,  being
then  21  years  of  age.  He  was  taken  to  Mr.  Davey  in  conse-
quence of  the  restoration  of  the  voice  of  Catherine  Brown
of  Ilfracombe,  which  had  just  then  been  effected,  the  parti-
culars of  which  cure  are  recorded  in  The  Zoist,  Vol.  ii.  p.  244.
The  coma  was  induced  by  gazing  and  passes  after  the  expira-
tion of  I  of  an  hour ;  at  the  first  trial,  Language  and  Imitation
being  excited,  the  operator  thought  that  on  shouting  into  his
ear,  the  patient  would  imitate  the  voice  :  but  no  such  mani-
festation took  place.  This  was  repeated  up  to  the  fourth  day,
when  the  faculty  of  hearing  was  so  far  brought  into  action,
that  he  was  enabled  to  catch  articulate  sounds ;  during  this
fourth  sleep  he  learnt  half  the  alphabet,  the  cerebral  organs
being  excited.  After  returning  to  the  normal  state,  he  was
enabled,  by  watching  the  mechanical  motion  of  the  lips,  to
repeat  the  portion  of  the  alphabet  learnt  in  his  mesmeric  state,
but  not  the  remainder.  Mr.  Davey,  thus  finding  it  possible
to  restore  the  deaf  and  dumb,  has  taken  this  young  man  on
his  own  responsibility  (his  parents  being  poor).  He  continues
with  him,  and  is  brought  forward  at  his  lectures,  as  a  proof
of  the  efficacy  of  mesmerism  in  such  cases.  His  improve-
ment is  such  that  he  can  now  hear  a  whisper,  and  hold  a  con-
versation on  very  ordinary  topics  sufficiently  well  to  be  under-
stood. His  knowledge  of  words  is  not  very  extensive,  for,
like  a  child,  he  is  learning  words  daily.  Any  persons  here
who  have  seen  him  would  be  willing  to  state  that  he  can  hear
distinctly.  Mr.  Fry  and  Mr.  Jonathan  Hearder,  Buckwell
Street,  Plymouth,  would,  I  should  think,  be  ready  to  give  their
testimony,  as  also  Mr.  Markes  the  postmaster,  Mr.  Karkeet,
my  father,  and  many  others.  He  pronounces  some  words
and  letters  far  less  distinctly  than  others.  His  improvement
has  been  gradual  and  proportionate  to  the  means  employed.
He  was  for  some  time  mesmerised  every  day,  subsequently
every  other  day  ;  he  is  not  now  mesmerised  much  oftener  than
once  a  week,  excepting  at  Mr.  D.'s  lectures.  On  one  occa-
sion, he  returned  home  and  worked  seven  months  at  his
trade  of  a  blacksmith,  and  suffered  no  relapse.  A  corre-
spondent in  the  North  Devon  Advertizer  stated  that  this  is
a  fact  which  all  the  waters  of  the  Bristol  Channel  will  not
wash  away.


( 249 )

XI. Cure  of  a  diseased  Limg  with  Mesmerism.

By  Mr.  Parsons.

TO THB EDITOR OF  THE ZOIST.

Brighton,  June  12th,  1846.
Koyal  Marine  Library.

Sir,— I  have  great  pleasure  in  forwarding  to  you  the  fol-
lowing statement  for  insertion  in  the  forthcoming  number  of
The  Zoist.

My  son,  a  child  (six  years  of  age  on  Monday  next),  was
troubled  with  a  hard,  dry,  irritating  cough  during  the  month
of  September,  last  year,  which  distressed  him  extremely.
He  was  then  at  a  Preparatory  School  in  Brighton,  where  I
reside.  As  the  cough  resisted  the  usual  discipline  observed
in  such  cases,  I  had  him  home  for  two  or  three  weeks,  at  the
end  of  which  period  the  cough  yielded  to  the  remedies  pre-
scribed by  my  medical  adviser,  Dr.  Plummer,  but  it  was
very  obstinate.  When  I  judged  him  well  enough,  I  sent  him
back  to  school,  where  he  continued  till  he  was  attacked  with
scarlatina  (about  the  middle  of  November).  The  disease
was  of  a  very  mild  and  favourable  character  apparently,  but,
when  it  subsided,  the  cough  returned  with  renewed  violence.
His  arm  also,  which  had  for  some  time  been  in  a  deranged
condition,  (indeed  I  believe  it  to  have  been  the  ^'  fons  et  ongo
mali^')  now  became  quite  inactive,  and  his  health  declined  so
rapidly  that  I  was  alarmed,  and  brought  him  away  from
school  entirely,  that  he  might  have  all  the  unremitting  care
and  soothing  attentions  which  only  a  mother  is  equal  to.  We
now  discovered  that  he  had  profuse  night  sweats,  and  from
some  observations  casually  made  by  those  who  had  the  care
of  him  when  at  school,  it  was  evident  that  these  perspirations
had  been  now  very  apparent  for  some  weeks.  I  called  tne  atten-
tion of  Dr.  Plummer  to  this  circumstance,  and  he  examined
the  chest  with  a  stethoscope,  and  the  result  of  this  examination
was  the  discovery  that  the  left  lung  was  quite  motionless.
His  health  altogether  was  so  shaken  that  Dr.  P.  having  found
that  he  never  answered  to  the  medicines  administered  in  a  sa-
tisfactory manner,  advised  me  to  remove  him  away  into  the
country  away  from  the  sea  air,  as  he  had  more  hope  in  the
alterative  effect  of  such  a  change  than  in  any  physic,  which
only  worried  him  without  benefitting  him.  1  took  him  to
Hurst,  (a  village  to  the  north  of  the  Southdown  Hill)  where
he  remained  a  month ;  but  the  weather  was  so  wretched,  that
there  he  was  perpetually  confined  to  the  limited  range  of  the
bed-room  ana  sitting-room,  and  he  derived  no  benefit  what-


250  Cure  of  a  diseased  Lung  with  Mesmerism,

ever.  I  then  brought  him  to  Brighton  to  be  examined  by
Dr.  Todd  of  King's  College  Hospital,  who  was  down  from
town  to  visit  a  patient.  Dr.  Todd  s  opinion  of  the  case  was,^
that  tubercles  were  formed  in  the  lung  and  that  there  was  no
hope  of  recovery ;  and  as  no  benefit  could  be  expected  from
country  air  at  that  time  of  year  which  could  compensate  the
inconvenience  of  being  away  from  home,  I  did  not  send  him
back  to  Hurst.  Dr.  Plummer's  view  of  the  case  was  not
quite  so  desponding  as  Dr.  Todd's.  He  thought  there  was  just
a  shade  of  hope ;  but  after  a  week's  use  of  the  remedies  pre-
scribed, the  alteration  for  the  worse  in  the  little  patient  made
him  abandon  hope  also,  for  he  stated  as  follows :  "  None  of
the  symptoms  are  abated ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  lung  is
rather  worse,  the  child  has  certainly  lost  flesh  and  is  weaker ;

five  him  as  much  nourishment  as  you  can  get  him  to  take."
considered  this  as  the  usual  formula  for  preparing  the  minds
of  the  parents  to  abandon  hope  of  recovery ;  and  as  I  had
never  liked  the  treatment,  which  was  severe  and  harassing,
I  was  not  surprised  at  the  result.  I  had  reluctantly  suffered
him  to  be  tormented  with  blistering  fluid,  mercurial  frictions,
calomel,  castor  oil,  and  injections  during  the  week,  because
I  had  sought  Dr.  Todd's  opinion,  and  it  was  unreasonable  to
refuse  a  trial  to  the  discipline  which  he  directed  for  my  boy  :
but  when  hope  was  thus  dismissed  from  medicine,  I  resolved
to  try  mesmerism,  which  I  had  been  practising  with  some
success  (non-professionally)  for  more  than  a  year.

As,  however,  I  did  not  feel  courage  to  take  the  case  into
my  own  hands  without  consulting  some  one  more  experienced
in  mesmerism,  I  took  the  liberty  of  stating  my  boy's  case
fully  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  fearing  that,  by  accelerating  the  pulse,
I  might  hasten  his  end  instead  of  healing  him.  Dr.  EUiotson
replied  in  the  kindest  manner,  directing  me  by  all  means  to
mesmerise  the  patient,  and  if  possible  avoid  all  drugs.  Thus
strengthened,  I  went  to  work  with  confidence  and  hope.

I  commenced  the  treatment  on  the  18th  of  January,  and
as  he  refused  to  submit  himself  when  awake  (for  he  resisted
everything  we  did  for  his  cure,  he  was  so  ill-tempered),  I
attempted  to  influence  him  while  asleep,  by  making  long
passes  from  the  head  to  the  waist,  ana  down  to  the  feet,
and  I  continued  them  during  half  an  hour.

He  usually  awoke  irritated  and  unrefreshed,  at  7  o'clock
in  the  morning.  TTiis  morning,  however,  he  was  still  asleep
at  ten  o'clock,  and  his  countenance  wore  such  an  unusual
and  death-like  appearance  that  my  wife  became  alarmed,
fearing  that  the  head  was  aflected.  I  confess  that  I  also
shared  this  alarm,  as  we  had  already  lost  a  fine  boy  of  the


by  Mr.  Parsons,  251

same  Bge^  whose  last  illness  terminated  in  effusion  on  the
brain^  manifested  by  a  lethargy  very  similar  to  that  we  were
now  watching.  Presently  the  boy  awoke  unusually  cheerful,
and  so  improved  in  countenance  and  spirits  that  I  greatly
hoped  the  mesmerism  had  influenced  him  beneficially.  I
now  resolved  to  mesmerise  him  regularly,  but  as  I  did  not
feel  confident  enough  to  abandon  at  once  the  medical  treat-
ment, I  contented  myself  with  discontinuing  it  without
avowing  it ;  and  as  the  patient  continued  to  mend  as  rapidly
as  I  could  expect,  I  was  each  day  more  confirmed  in  my  con-
fidence. The  cough,  however,  still  continued  troublesome
although  abated ;  and,  after  having  given  no  medicine  for
nine  days,  I  was  induced  to  obey  Dr.  Plummer's  directions,
one  day  when  he  called,  and  give  him  a  dose  of  calomel.

The  efiect  of  the  mesmerism  up  to  this  time  had  been  to
cause  a  great  amendment ;  but  that  it  may  be  more  readily
appreciated,  I  here  describe  his  state  when  1  commenced  the
treatment.

His  left  lung  was  quite  useless  and  motionless.  His  liver
was  so  inactive  that  his  stool  was  like  pipe-clay,  and  the
region  of  the  liver  was  much  enlarged,  shewing  that  organ
to  be  gorged.  There  was  considerable  disturbance  in  the
bowels,  so  that  they  were  painful  on  pressure,  and  tense
as  a  drum  with  included  wind.  He  had  a  dry  harassing
hacking  cough,  which  wore  him  out  day  and  night.  His
night  sweats  were  so  profuse  that  his  night  clothing  was  wet
through  as  if  it  had  been  dipped  in  water.  And  to  all  this
were  added  an  irritability  of  temper  and  depression  of  spirits,
which  made  him  miserable.  The  first  efiect  of  the  mesmerism
was  to  remove  the  last-named  symptoms.  He  became  cheerful
and  docile  in  comparison  with  what  he  was  before.  His  liver
began  to  act  as  shewn  by  his  evacuation,  which  became
darker  and  healthier  in  hue.

On  the  day  referred  to  above,  the  effect  of  the  dose  of
calomel  was  to  produce  a  clay-coloured  stool,  and  throw  him
back  to  what  he  was  before.  That  night  I  mesmerised  him
carefully  for  an  hour,  and  the  next  day  his  evacuations  had
again  recovered  their  former  appearance  before  the  calomel.
I  was  now  convinced  that  the  medical  treatment  was  worse
than  useless,  it  was  miscMevotts,  and  I  dismissed  the  doctor,
at  his  own  suggestion,  for  he  told  me  that  "  If  I  thought  the
benefit  derived  was ^rom  mesmertsm,  I  ought  to  give  it  a  fair
chance,  and  do  without  medicine."  I  accepted  the  challenge,
and  have  done  without  medicine,  by  the  blessing  of  God  on
mesmerism,  to  this  day.

I  continued  now  to  mesmerise  twice  daily.  At  first  I  was  20


252  Cure  of  a  diseased  Lung  with  Mesmerism,

or  twenty-five  minutes  in  producing  sleep;  but  the  time
shortened  every  day,  till  from  four  to  six  minutes  was  suffi-
cient to  send  him  to  sleep  however  playful  or  wakeful  he
might  be.  He  disliked  being  mesmerised  for  some  reason
which  I  could  never  get  from  him ;  but  I  suspect  it  was  merely
because  it  interrupted  his  amusements.  But  I  have  caught
him  when  he  has  run  away  from  me,  full  of  fun,  seizing  him
by  his  clothes  behind,  as  I  would  a  kitten.  I  have  laid  him
on  the  sofa  in  this  frolicsome  humor  and  he  has  been  laid
asleep  soundly  in  live  minutes.

I  have  sometimes  talked  to  him  and  sung  to  him  while  I
was  mentally  acting  on  him,  and  in  spite  of  these  opposing
circumstances  the  sleep  has  seized  him  in  nearly  the  usual
time.

Under  this  treatment  he  gradually  gained  strength,  and
the  general  health  was  wonderfully  improved,  but  I  could
not  get  rid  of  the  cough.  I  wrote  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  reporting
the  ravourable  change,  and  asking  his  advice  as  to  the  cough ;
and  he  with  the  same  kindness  as  before  advised  me  to  use
this.

Prussic  Acid,  2  minims,  ) k  *.  r  i

Syrup  of  White  Poppies  2  drachms,  S A  tea  spoonful  every

Water,  14  drachmsV  S  ^'"^  '^°""-

This  subdued  the  cough  immediately ;  so  that,  at  the  end  of
a  few  days  he  had  quite  lost  it,  and  it  was  no  longer  necessary
to  use  the  mixture.

I  continued  to  mesmerise  him  daily  till  the  8th  of  April,
giving  him  by  this  means  from  one  and  a  half  to  two  hours
sleep  every  day.

I  now  considered  him  so  far  restored  to  health  that  he
could  afford  to  substitute  change  of  air  for  the  mesmerism,
as  I  was  anxious  to  remove  him  from  Brighton  as  soon  as  it
was  practicable;  and  I  again  sent  him  to  Hurst,  where  I
could  reach  him  by  the  railway  if  I  found  it  advisable  to
renew  the  treatment.

The  change  of  air  caused  him  to  make  a  rapid  advance,
and  at  the  end  of  the  month  his  restoration  was  complete.

The  diseased  lung  now  rises  and  acts,  apparently,  as  well  as
the  sound  side.  He  takes  strong  and  sustamed  exercise  with-
out fatigue  ;  his  bowels  act  in  a  healthy  manner;  the  perspira-
tion has  ceased ;  he  ^ains  flesh  every  day ;  has  a  healthy  colour
on  his  cheeks,  and  in  every  respect  appears  in  robust  health.
At  first  I  mesmerised  him  with  passes  from  the  beginning  of
the  stance,  but  as  he  said  that  it  worried  him  to  have  my
fingers  moving  over  his  face,  (though  I  did  not  use  contact,)
1  succeeded,  after  repeated  failures,  in  mesmerising  him  by


Cure  of  Head-ache.  253

the  eves  alone,  and  holding  his  thumbs  in  my  hands  after
which  I  always  commenced  in  this  way,  making  the  passes
on  the  surface  after  the  sleep  took  place.  I  usually  mes-
merised him  for  half  an  hour,  or  till  I  felt  that  I  could  no
longer  command  the  requisite  undivided  attention,  as  L believe
that  it  is  useless  to  continue  longer  than  this.  When  the
effort  becomes  fatiguing  to  the  mind  of  the  operator,  it  is  time
to  leave  off, — he  will  no  longer  act  beneficially.  After  I  dis-
continued the  passes,  he  usually  slept  an  hour  or  an  hour  and
a  half.

His  sleep  did  not  differ  in  appearance  from  natural  sleep,
and  any  noise  readily  disturbed  him  from  it ;  although  when
such  a  thing  took  place  he  would  sometimes  go  to  sleep  again.
He  always  awoke  cheerful  and  greatly  refreshed.

Hoping  that  this  detail  may  induce  other  parents  to  under-
take the  cure  of  their  children  under  like  circumstances,  which
is  my  only  motive  for  thus  occupying  your  pages  by  so  length-
ened a  report  of  perhaps  a  comparatively  unimportant  cure
by  mesmerism,

I  beg  to  subscribe  myself.

Very  respectfully  yours,
W.  H.  Parsons.


XII.  Cure  of  Head-ache,  by  Mr.  Bbynoldson,  51,  Retuhaw

Street,  Liverpool.

Miss  A P had  been  subject  to  pain  in  her  head  for

eighteen  months.  The  first  week  in  April,  having  mesme-
rised a  good  deal,  I  was  myself  suffering  from  pain  in  the
situation  of  the  right  lobe  of  the  lung,  and  requested  her  to
make  a  few  passes  over  the  seat  of  pain.  In  a  few  minutes  it
was  relieved,  at  the  expense  of  considerable  pain  in  the  lady's
right  arm.  I  made  a  few  (not  more  than  six)  passes  down
her  arm,  two  or  three  over  the  left  side  of  the  body,  and  lo !
she  was  in  mesmeric  sleep.

She  continued  in  this  state  about  five  minutes,  when  I
woke  her  up ;  the  head-ache  was  entirely  gone,  and  did  not
return  for  a  month.  Her  general  health  is  essentially  improved.
I  have  since  mesmerised  her  twice  for  a  violent  cough,  which
was  entirely  cured  in  as  short  a  period ;  and  yesterday  sleep
resulted  on  a  few  transverse  passes  over  the  chest,  for  ailments
brought  on  by  over  exertion  in  the  intense  heat.

Miss  P.'s  prejudices  against  mesmerism  were  very  strong.
We  were  all  taken  by  surprize.  I  had  no  intention  of  inducing
sleep  in  the  two  first  instances ;  in  fact,  she  would  not  have

VOL.  IV.  T


254  Oft  a  Theory  of  Sleep ,

consented.  I  have  cured  several  cases  of  inveterate  head-ache
lately  without  sleep.

Mr.  N ,  aged  about  24  years,  has  had  continual  head-
ache for  eight  years,  accompanied  with  costiveness,  which
induced  him  to  take  aperient  medicine  three  or  four  times
every  week.

I  could  not  induce  sleep,  and  the  pain  was  aggravated
during  each  attempt,  but  moderated  before  we  closed  each
sitting.  He  has  taken  no  medicine  for  a  month,  and  is  regu-
lar in  his  habits  without.  He  visited  me  but  eight  times,
and  continued  daily  to  improve,  after  the  mesmeric  action
was  discontinued,  up  to  this  day.

I  have  had  many  cases,  in  which  the  same  has  happened,
and  I  would  direct  attention  to  this  particular  point ;  especially
since  many  individuals,  who  have  been  cured  by  mesmeric
treatment,  are  themselves  by  no  means  aware  how  much
benefit  they  have  received  from  it,  because  their  recovery
was  most  decided  after  the  mesmeric  treatment  had  been
discontinued.

The  son  of  a  gentleman,  aged  19,  well  known  at  Pres-
ton, had  sufiered  continual  head-ache  from  childhood;  he
was  studying  for  the  University,  but  compelled  to  forego
close  application.  After  a  friend  had  attempted  to  mesmerise
him  without  any  beneficial  result,  he  came  to  me,  and  at  the
first  pass  experienced  some  relief;  from  four  stances  the  pain
has  been  much  alleviated.  And  he  intends  re-visiting  Liver-
pool for  the  benefit  of  this  treatment.


XIII.  On  a  Theory  of  Sleep. By  Dr.  Ashburner.

The  sensitive  plant  exhibits,  under  two  different  conditions,
the  opposite  states  of  sleep  and  vigilance.  Its  contracted
leaves  are  in  a  state  of  spasm, — a  grasping,  active,  apparent
quiescence ;  and  when  its  leaves  are  open  and  expanded,  it  is
awake.  These  two  opposite  states  are  quite  analogous  to  the
sleep  and  vigUance  of  man.  ^  . .

The  phenomena  of  sleep  have  been  so  often  noted,  and  so
many  definitions  have  been  proposed  as  to  its  characteristics,
that  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  one  which  offered  novelty.
Yet  the  facts  daily  coming  to  light  are  so  ftiU  of  phy-
siological interest,  that  to  dive  into  the  depths  of  what  ap-
pears so  very  occult  need  not  be  despaired  of.  When  I  first
learned  to  believe  that  in  the  practice  of  mesmerism  was  to


by  Dr,  Ashbumer,  255

be  found  the  cure  for  most  of  the  intractable  and  hitherto
incurable  spasmodic  diseases  we  are  liable  to^  and  when  I
found  absolutely  that  by  its  aid  more  than  epilepsy,  hysteria,
chorea,  spasmodic  asthma  might  be  remedied,**  I  devoted  my
ingenuity  to  the  means  of  discovering  an  agent  which  might
assist  us  in  obtaining  the  deep  sleep  so  essential  for  our
objects.  To  produce  sleep  by  the  ordinary  means  was  a
process,  in  many  cases  so  tedious,  that  often  sufferers  had
no  patience  to  go  through  the  requisite  course  of  manipu-
lations. In  one  case  I  mesmerised  a  lady  238  times,  ave-
raging an  hour  each  time,  before  I  succeeded  in  the  induction
of  sleep  :  afterwards  her  sister  could  put  her  into  a  mesmeric
sleep  in  three  or  four  minutes.  I  have  had  patients  who
were  so  difScult  to  render  somnolent,  that  I  have  repeatedly
failed  in  my  object  up  to  about  120  times,  and  then  deep  sleep
has  come  on.  Several  have  taken  me  at  least  60  stances  of  an
hour  each.  If  the  difficulties  of  putting  to  sleep  be  so  great
in  some  instances,  people  get  it  into  their  heads  they  are  not
susceptible  of  being  affected,  and  give  up  the  pursuit  after
a  few  trials.  Convinced  that  mesmerism  was  the  most  important
remedial  agent  ever  yet  made  known  to  us,  I  braved  the
flood  of  disgraceful  slander  which  the  envy  of  many  medical
men  had  so  often  poured  out  upon  me,  and  ceased  not  to
study  a  subject  I  conscientiously  believed  would  one  day  be
acknowledged  as  a  blessing  to  mankind.  I  could  not  help
being  struck  with  the  analogies  which  this  subject  held  to-
wards magnetism.  Evidently  attraction  and  repulsion  were
the  leading  phenomena,  and  the  conditions  of  sleep  and  vigi-
lance  are  susceptible  of  being  referred  to  these  agencies  for
their  existence ;  and  it  can  be  shewn  that  they  are  the  powers
which  operate  to  produce  the  respective  states.  In  reflecting
upon  the  more  extensive  relations  of  this  subject,  I  was  led
to  conclude  that  it  had  a  very  close  relation  to  the  philosophy
of  the  mind.  The  disagreeable,  the  unpleasant,  and  the  un-
amiable  feelings  of  our  nature  are  found  to  be  the  results  of
a  condition  of  the  mind  influenced  by  repulsive  agencies.

Mr.  Faraday  may  exert  his  vast  ingenuity  in  discovering
how  far  the  diamagnetic  powers  are  in  operation  in  deter-
mining the  presence  of  attractive  and  repulsive  agencies  on
the  human  system,  and  his  deeply  interesting  researches  tend

b  It  would  not  be  too  much  to  say  that  cancer  and  other  malignant  dis-
eases have  been  wonderfully  alleviated.  Tubercular  diseases,  by  which  I
mean  consumption,  scrofulous  tumors,  scrofulous  caries  of  joints,  have
been  arrested  in  their  progress  and  brought  nearer  to  a  perfect  cure  than  by
any  other  treatment  of  which  I  know  any  thing.  If  medical  men  would
study  The  ZoUt  instead  of  studying  their  privileges,  they  might  learn  to
advance  the  knowledge  of  their  profession.

t2


256  On  a  Theory  of  Sleep,

to  the  discovery  of  more  than  analogous  states  of  electric
action  between  the  influences  productive  of  motives  to  mental
operation^  and  the  powers  which  actuate  the  interminable
combinations  of  matter.  The  Baron  von  Beichenbach  has
indicated  with  logical  precision  the  great  probability  of  the
existence  of  a  new  imponderable  agent.  It  may  be  per-
mitted to  point  out  the  corroborations  to  his  views  in  a  paper
I  contributed  to  the  last  April  number  of  The  ZoiatJ*  But
amidst  the  great  advances  which  men  of  transcendant  science
are  making  on  subjects  admitting  of  more  close  and  exact
experiment  and  reasonings  it  shall  be  lawful  to  vindicate  with
energy  the  truths  that  physiologists  ought  to  respect^  and
that,  for  the  sake  of  their  honour  and  of  humanity,  physi-
cians ought  to  investigate.

It  is  useless  to  ask  why  in  this  world  the  retarding  princi-
ple acts  upon  men  who  pretend  to  scientific  taste,  as  well  as
upon  the  ignorant  and  brutal.  The  desire  to  keep  back  one's
neighbour — to  feel  delight  in  his  misfortunes — to  be  envious
of  his  renown,  has  been  shewn  by  La  Rochefoucault  and  other
moralists  to  be  of  wider  extent  than  the  area  bounded  by  the
paltry  feeling  of  a  few  in  a  profession  ;  but  the  probabilities
have  not  yet  been  pointed  out  that  the  antecedents  to  these
consequents  are  dependent  upon  the  presence  of  certain  repul-
sive agencies  operating  upon  mind  and  matter.  It  is  proposed
now  to  shew  that  man  is  constantly  influenced  by  certain  at-
tractive and  repulsive  agencies,  and  if  this  be  made  out  it  must
follow  that  these  in  some  way  promote  the  tone  of  his  feelings,
the  temper  of  his  mind,  the  activity  or  indolence  of  his  man-
ners, as  well  as  the  diurnal  changes  in  his  condition  of  being.
The  illustrious  G^U  long  ago  indicated  the  true  path  to
the  examination  of  the  phenomena  of  mind.  The  convincing
nature  of  the  facts  corroborative  of  his  philosophy  afforded
by  mesmerism,  has  not  failed  to  excite  the  repulsive  agencies
of  certain  organs  of  the  brain  in  various  individuals,  and  the
result  has  been  repetitions  of  illogical  efforts  to  prove  that
fact  is  not  fact, — that  events  overwhelming  in  their  progress
are  impossibilities, — and  that  truth  is  satanic  agency !  The
organs  of  the  brain  established  by  the  phrenologists,  may  be
divided  into  those  which  for  the  most  part  are  excited  to
action  by  attractive  agencies,  and  those  which  are  influenced
by  repulsive  powers.  In  what  manner  these  operate  to  pro-
duce the  multifarious  combinations  of  mental  phenomena,  is
not  now  the  question.  It  is  sufficient  to  indicate  the  law  by
which  the  great  divisions  of  the  mind  are  regulated,  and  to
point  out  how  sleep  and  vigilance  are  dependent  upon  it,

b  When  I  wrote  that  paper  I  had  Dot  seen  the  BaroD  von  Reichenbach's  book.


by  Dr.  Ashbumer.  257

and  how  the  opposite  conditions  of  tonic  and  clonic  spasm,
the  signs  of  some  of  the  most  serious  diseases  to  which  living
beings  are  subject,  are  in  fact  but  continuations  of  pheno-
mena dependent  upon  attractive  and  repulsive  forces.

There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  fact,  that  to  the  well-consti-
tuted minds  of  mankind  the  exhibition  of  the  contempt  flow-
ing from  Self-esteem,  or  of  the  defiance  of  Combativeness,
or  of  the  mean  cunning  of  Acquisitiveness,  or  of  the  furious
anger  of  Destructiveness,  however  amusing  in  some  few  ex-
ceptional relations,  may  always  be  said  to  be  distasteful.  All
our  unamiable  dispositions,  specially  directed  to  any  indivi-
duals, are  repulsive  to  those  persons;  and,  in  like  manner,
the  exercise  of  our  amiable  dispositions  is  attractive  to  our  >
neighbours.  This  is  so  not  only  morally  speaking ;  but  it  is
a  physical  fact,  susceptible  of  proof  to  those  who  diligently
seek  for  true  reasons.  I  think  there  is  abundant  proof  of  the
mental  operations  of  mankind  being  attended  by  the  emana-
tion of  a  fluid  from  the  brain.  To  those  who  cannot  bend  '
their  faculties  to  the  belief  of  such  a  fact  as  this,  promulgated
in  my  paper  of  last  April  in  The  Zoist,  it  is  useless  to  address
the  train  of  reasoning  in  the  present  essay ;  but  the  progress
of  knowledge  will  not  wait  for  their  belief.

The  fluid  from  the  brain  of  the  individual  labouring  under
the  agency  of  repulsion  is  disagreeable  to  the  individual
affected  by  it,  and,  on  the  contrary,  the  amiable  or  attractive
fluid  is  very  agreeable.  There  is  a  physiognomy  of  action
and  of  expression  in  the  individuals  actuated  by  attractive  or
by  repulsive  agencies,  not  to  be  mistaken.  The  expres-
sion of  the  attracted  person  is  benignant,  and  the  action
tends  to  a  forward  progress ;  while  the  person  under  the  in-
fluence of  repulsive  feelings  has  a  tendency  to  retrogress,  and
the  action  is  indicative  of  a  desire  to  stand  off.  These  two
opposite  conditions  are  in  a  state  of  extreme  spasmodic  dis-
ease, curiously  reversed;  and  as  if  the  polarities  were  ex-
changed when  a  transition  took  place  from  health  to  disease,
the  physiognomical  expressions  and  actions  are  likewise  af-
fected. If  a  continued  state  of  attraction  be  kept  up  in  the
brain,  the  phenomena  of  sleep  supervene,  and  sleep,  it  must
be  understood,  is  not  a  condition  of  absence  of  all  action.
Dr.  Elliotson  long  ago  remarked  that  the  mesmeric  condition
by  no  means  implied  the  absence  of  action.  In  all  sleep  the
eyelids  close,  and  the  muscles  continue  in  action  to  close
them.  It  was  a  remark  of  Sir  Charles  Bellas,  that  fhe  eye-
balls were  drawn  upwards  into  the  orbit.  Mesmeric  sleep,
which  some  ignorant  persons  have  confounded  with  hysteria,
but  which  in  fact  is  the  sleep  the  older  writers  have  so


258  On  a  Theory  of  Sleep,

often  described  as  that  of  somnambulism^  is  but  a  degree  of
intensity  further  prolonged  beyond  common  sleep.  Facts
have  brought  me  to  the  conclusion^  that  in  every  case  com-
mon sleep  may  be  artificially  excited  to  become  the  deeper
sleep  of  mesmerism  ;  and  if  this  be  farther  prolonged  into  a
stage  beyond  the  first  of  mesmeric  sleep^  insensible  coma  is
the  result;  and  if  the  process  be  pushed  still  further^  a  state  of
rigidity  supervenes.  If  the  causes  directing  the  prolongation
of  such  a  condition  into  a  still  further  stage  continue  to
operate,  the  disease  tetanus,  characterized  by  the  most  in-
tense form  of  tonic  spasm,  results.  Now  the  tendency  is
no  longer  one  of  forward  progression.  Let  Sir  Charles  Bell's
Anatomy  of  Expression  be  consulted,  and  his  beautiful  gra-
phic delineation  of  the  disease  will  convince  any  one  that  the
tendency  of  the  spasm  to  produce  a  drawing  backward,  is
decided  in  the  case  of  tetanus.  Whereas  in  the  clonic  spasm
of  hydrophobia,  the  body  has  a  forward  tendency:  clonic
spasms  result  from  a  repulsive  agency  in  diseased  action,  the
polarities  probably  having  been  reversed.  It  is  not  pretended
that  diseased  states  present  no  complication  of  phenomena,
nor  is  every  symptom  to  be  strictly  scrutinized  as  necessary
to  establish  the  tendency  contended  for,  but  the  most  phi-
losophical mode  of  investigating  such  a  subject  is  to  regard
it  in  its  most  primitive  and  simple  aspect,  and  in  this  point
of  view  it  will  be  seen  that  all  clonic  spasms  belong  to  the
series  of  events  of  which  wakefulness,  vigilance,  or  activity
form  the  commencing  links.  These  are  accompanied  by  a
tendency  to  the  backward  start,  and  if  they  be  prolonged  into
diseased  action,  become  productive  of  slight  restlessness,
complete  insomnia,  jactitation,  or  hysteria,  epilepsy,  or  some
of  those  diseased  actions  which,  occasionally  complicated  with
sleep  and  tonic  spasm,  are  for  the  most  part  attended  by  for-
ward progress.  That  sleep  and  vigilance  are  dependent  upon
two  different  electric  or  magnetic  conditions  of  the  system,
the  attractive  and  the  repulsive,  is  an  hypothesis  susceptible
of  powerful  support  by  some  striking  facts.  In  the  mesmeric
manipulations,  the  passes  producing  sleep  in  most  common
use,  are  alternate  repetitions  of  the  downward  passage  of
each  hand  slightly  curved  at  the  distance  of  half  an  inch
from  the  crown  of  the  head  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach.
These  have  a  soothing  effect  upon  the  patient,  and  gradually
inducing  a  closing  of  the  eyelids,  bring  on  sleep.  If  the
hand  be  passed  even  in  contact  with  the  skin  of  the  patient,
the  effect  is  more  comforting  than  the  upward  passing  of  the
hands ;  an  action  sure  to  produce  the  state  of  vigilance  in-
stead of  sleep. All  the  methods  by  which  sleep  is  brought


by  Dr.  Ashbumer,  259

ODy  have  more  or  less  a  relation  to  the  soothing  of  those  men-
tal organs  which  come  under  the  division  of  attraction ;  and,
on  the  contrary,  as  repulsion  gives  energy  to  the  opposite
organs,  all  that  is  productive  of  the  higher  states  of  vigilance,
is  likewise  related  to  activity  and  energy  of  mind,,  whether
it  be  in  exercise  of  thought,  in  liberation  to  emotions,  or  to
the  indulgence  of  the  angry  and  low  passions  of  our  nature.
If  the  will  be  exerted  by  a  mesmeriser,  either  in  aid  of  mani-
pulation or  by  itself,  and  if  it  be  directed  to  the  function
of  any  repulsive  organ,  the  e£fort  to  induce  sleep  will  be  in
vain  even  with  a  person  addicted  to  it.  In  operating  with  the
will,  the  attraction  is  easily  seen  if  it  be  properly  directed.
With  susceptible  patients,  the  leading  characteristics  of  the
attractive  powers  are  very  strikingly  marked.  But  the  most
curious  new  facts,  regarding  the  induction  of  sleep,  relate
to  the  presenting  of  certain  crystals  to  the  face,  or  to  the
pit  of  the  stomach;  Baron  von  Reichenbach  refers  to  the
experiments  of  Dr.  Fetetin,  of  Lyons,  on  the  attraction  of
the  hand  by  a  magnet  (pp.  12,  13,  et  sequentes,  of  Gre-
gory's Abstract  of  Reichenbach' s  ResearchesJ,  and  after  stating
certain  facts  on  this  subject  relating  to  the  cases  of  Mdlle.
Nowotny  and  Mdlles.  Reichel  and  Sturman,  admits  that  in
certain  diseases,  especially  catalepsy,  an  attraction  exists
between  the  hand  and  a  magnet ;  and  subsequently  having
observed,  after  a  great  number  of  experiments,  that  mag-
netized water  attracted  the  hands  of  Mdlle.  Nowotny,  he
was  induced  to  try  numerous  crystalline  substances,  and  he
observed  that  in  these  resided  a  certain  attractive  ''power
not  previously  noticed,  and  of  a  peculiar  nature.^'  He  had
observed  that  this  power  was  concentred  in  two  poles,  which
were  always  diametrically  opposite,  and  constituted  the  poles
of  a  principal  axis.

In  repeating  the  experiments  of  Baron  von  Reichenbach
with  various  crystalline  bodies,  I  was  enabled  to  extend  them,
and  to  obtain  very  curious  results.

A  lady  called  upon  me  one  morning,  who  had  heard
much  of  mesmerism,  but  had  never  belk  mesmerised.  I
shewed  her  some  fine  large  rock  crystals,  and  explained  to
her  that  with  such  materials  the  Baron  von  Beichenbach  had
obtained  some  curious  results.  After  trying  the  Baron's  ex-
periments with  the  hands,  I  held  the  pyramid  of  the  crystal
to  her  forehead  for  nearly  three  minutes ;  she  regarded  the
sensation  from  the  crystal  as  "  cooling  and  agreeable,''  and
soon  sunk  into  a  delightful  sleep.

A  large  horse-shoe  magnet  applied  to  the  pit  of  the  sto-
mach or  to  the  palms  of  the  hands  or  held  before  the  face  in


260  On  a  Thewy  of  Skep,

the  cases  of  Mary  Anne  Douglas  and  of  Jane  Love^  produce
instant  rigidity  and  simultaneous  deep  sleep.  If  the  magnet
be  presented  to  them  at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  feet
in  a  dark  room,  they  see  a  beautiful  blue  light,  which  in-
stantly vanishes  if  the  armature  be  applied.  These  corrobo-
rations of  Reichenbach  are  so  numerous,  that  they  are  hardly
worth  repeating,  were  it  not  for  the  purpose  of  shewing  that
the  conditions  being  the  same,  the  truth  of  the  fact  is  esta-
blished by  multiplied  examples.  The  light  is  emitted  from
the  magnet,  although  the  sceptic  cannot  see  it ;  the  light  is
emitted  from  the  human  brain  in  the  act  of  mental  volition,
though  the  sceptic  cannot  see  it ;  the  pointer  does  scent  the
partridge,  although  the  sceptic  may  not  be  able  to  do  the
same ;  and  the  fox-hound  does  smell  out  reynard,  although
the  sceptic  may  not  have  the  same  quick  power  of  smell
in  his  nose.  Nature  will  not  arrest  the  progress  of  philo-
sophy to  please  the  slow-headed  doubters  of  the  age.

Mary  Anne  Douglas,  a  slight-built  small  person,  aged  21,
is  of  a  highly  nervous  temperament.  She  first  came  under
my  care  at  the  Middlesex  Hospital,  on  the  16th  of  March,
1845,  and  was  for  some  months  under  the  treatment  usually
had  recourse  to  in  such  cases  as  her's.  She  was  affected  with
fits,  which  were,  in  fact,  a  severe  form  of  hysterical  epilepsy.
Valerian  and  a  range  of  so-called  remedies  were  adopted  with
apparent  good  effect  for  a  time,  but  ultimately  she  had  a  re-
currence of  her  disease,  and  was  as  bad  as  ever.  In  the
month  of  August  I  tried  mesmerism  in  this  case.  She  fell
into  a  heavy  sleep  on  the  second  trial,  and  during  two
months  more  exhibited  no  phenomena  more  remarkable  than
common  deep  sleep.  Her  disposition  in  the  waking  state  is
very  quiet,  and  very  amiable.  She  is  characterized  by  strong
good  sense,  and  having  been  strictly  brought  up  by  a  very
worthy  mother,  is  morally  an  excellent  person.  She  is  habi-
tually truthful,  and  though  not  wanting  in  intellectual  power,
is  very  remarkable  for  her  benevolent  and  affectionate  feel-
ings. This  case  offers,  from  her  high  and  delicate  nervous
temperament,  an  example  of  very  quick  susceptibility  to  mes-
meric influence.  Gold,  platina,  nickel,  magnetized  iron,  anti-
mony and  bismuth,  or  one  of  the  poles  of  a  common  galvanic
battery  of  very  small  power,  each  instantly  produce  sleep  with
rigidity,  though  the  moment  before  she  had  been  wide  awake.
The  touch  of  a  person  who  had  been  for  ten  minutes  under
the  influence  of  a  galvanic  current  passed  through  300  feet  of
thick  iron  wire,  suddenly  induces  in  this  case  a  deep  sleep
with  rigidity.  Iron  or  zinc  applied  to  the  nape  of  the  neck
quickly  dissolve  the  rigidity  and  finally  the  sleep. Their


by  Dr.  Ashbupier.  261

agency  being  repulsive,  Mary  Anne  Douglas  becomes  awake.
A  middle-sized  rock  crystal  held  with  the  pyramidal  termin-
ation to  her  face,  induces  a  very  calm  placid  sleep ;  the  oppo-
site pole  of  the  crystal  being  held  near  her  forehead,  she
wakes  up  suddenly.  The  pyramidal  end  of  a  rock  crystal
being  offered  to  her  hand,  she  grasps  it  with  delight,  and  soon
sleeps;  but  if  the  other  pole  or  butt-end  of  the  crystal  be
applied,  she  complains  of  its  burning  her.  And  if  it  be  held
long  enough  to  the  palm  of  her  hand,  it  always  wakens  her
suddenly.  This  very  remarkable  effect  of  rock  crystal  to  in-
duce agreeable  sleep  or  sudden  wakefulness,  according  as  the
attractive  or  repulsive  end  of  the  crystal  be  held  to  the  face,  to
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  or  to  the  palm  of  the  hand,  I  have
verified  on  sixteen  cases  with  various  modifications;  but  I  hold
that  in  mesmeric  investigations,  in  order  to  establish  a  law,  a
selection  should  be  made  of  very  delicate  susceptibilities,  as
experiments  on  these  afford  results  more  clear  and  more  de-
cided. Harriet  P was  repeatedly  submitted  to  the  influ-

ence  of  the  pyramidal  terminations  of  rock  crystals,  and  one
morning  she  was  put  to  sleep  by  the  presentation  to  the  face
of  the  pyramidal  pole,  and  wakened  by  that  of  the  opposite
pole  twenty  times  in  four  minutes.  Mary  Anne  Douglas  and
Jane  Love  are  so  susceptible,  that  if  one  lens  belonging  to
a  pair  of  crystal  spectacles  be  held  before  the  eyes  of  either  of
them,  one  side  of  it  is  repulsive  or  disagreeable  and  wakens ;
the  other  is  attractive  or  agreeable,  and  induces  sleep. Mrs.

H has  often  gone  into  a  gentle  sleep,  in  the  duration  of

which  she  expresses  by  her  gestures  great  delight  in  approxi-
mating or  touching  the  pyramidal  end  of  the  crystal ;  but  if
the  pole  be  reversed  at  the  distance  of  a  foot  from  her,  she
expresses  a  disgust  and  horror  at  the  repulsive  agency  of  the
crystals;  and  if  it  be  persevered  in,  though  she  may  be  stand-
ing, she  falls  flat  upon  her  back  perfectly  insensible.  This
alarming  experiment  I  have  seen  unwittingly  performed  three
times.  The  repulsive  pole  in  her  case  does  not  waken,  but
produces  the  retrogressive  action  of  the  body — a  fall  back-
wards, and  insensibility.  If  the  disagreeable  repulsive  end
be  continued  to  be  held  towards  her,  a  subsultus  and  jactitation
supervene,  which  appear  very  alarming ;  but  she  has  always
recovered  from  them,  on  the  application  of  the  attractive  pole
of  the  crystal;  and  has  expressed  herself  refreshed  and
strengthened  beyond  measure.  The  more  usual  effect  in  well-
marked  healthy  cases  of  nervous  temperament,  is  the  sleep
alternating  with  the  wakefulness  according  to  the  end  of  the
crystal  which  may  be  presented.

Dr.  Bunnett  requested  me  to  try  the  effect  of  hazel-wood


262  On  a  Theory  of  Sleep,

upon  some  of  these  cases.  He  brought  me  a  couple  of  bits
of  hazel-stick  from  the  Countess  de  Salis'  property :  these
were  recently  cut  and  fresh.  Mary  Anne  Douglas  took  one
of  them  into  her  hands,  and  said  it  felt  warm.  In  two
minutes  she  was  fast  asleep,  insensible  to  external  impres-
sions, and  strongly  grasping  the  stick  in  both  hands.  A  gold
chain  was  wound  round  the  stick,  in  the  space  of  it  between
her  two  hands.  She  complained  of  a  burning  from  the  stick,
and  with  evidently  uncomfortable  feeling  relinquished  her
hold.  A  piece  of  white  thorn  or  a  piece  of  fir,  which  Dr.
Bunnett  sent  me,  produce  similar  effects.  The  stick  from  an
ash  tree  produces  no  apparent  effects.  These  experiments
with  precisely  similar  results,  have  been  tried  upon  nine  cases,
and  have  been  very  often  repeated.

Mary  Anne  Douglas  can  for  a  long  time  resist  the  will  of
her  mesmeriser,  but  the  determination  to  do  so  is  attended
always  by  severe  head-ache ;  and  if  she  be  cross-mesmerised,
the  meaning  of  which  is,  if  she  receive  the  influence  of  two
different  mesmerisers  at  one  and  the  same  time,  or  at  differ-
ent  times  within  a  short  interval  of  each  other,  she  becomes
heavy,  stupid,  and  occasionally  insensible  to  all  external  ob-
jects. On  one  occasion  she  slept  eleven  hours  after  having
been  cross-mesmerised,  and  awoke  with  an  intense  head-ache,
which  notwithstanding  the  adoption  of  all  the  mesmeric  ex-
pedients, it  was  very  difficult  to  remove.  I  have  repeatedly
witnessed  such  bad  effects  from  cross-mesmerism,  that  I  can-
not too  strongly  warn  ignorant  and  rash  and  unreflecting
persons  from  practising  it.  Some  fool-hardy  Irish  surgeons
have,  it  is  said,  incurred  an  awful  responsibility,  by  each,
within  a  few  hours,  mesmerising  a  poor  nervous  girl.

Mary  Anne  Douglas  responds  to  the  will  of  any  one  who
can  sufficiently  concentrate  and  intensify  his  thoughts.  She
sees  a  blue  fluid  emanating  from  the  eyes  and  brain  of  the
operator  while  he  is  thus  exerting  his  mind.  From  the  abun-
dant evidence  I  have  had  on  this  subject,  I  am  clear  in  the
conclusion  that  man  influences  his  fellow  man  by  the  agency
of  a  fluid  which  emanates  from  his  brain  during  the  slightest
operation  of  the  mind  f  and  if  the  ideas  be  of  a  repulsive  or

c  Mr.  Thompson  of  Fairfield  has  been  kind  enough  to  address  me  the
following  letter  on  this  subject.

*'  My  dear  Ashburner, — You  asked  me  to  put  on  paper  my  method  i^fwiU-
tn/Tt  I  comply  with  your  request,  but  think  the  operation  can  bo  more  easily
practised  than  described.  As  nearly  as  I  can  describe  it,  it  is  thus : — When
1  try  to  put  a  person  to  sleep  by  the  mere  will,  I  concentrate  my  whole  atten-
tion upon  them,  allowing  no  idea  or  thought  to  enter  my  mind  in  fact,  I
riret  my  attention  upon  the  person  and  think  of  nothing  else.  When
I  desire  to  convey  an  idea  or  thought  to  another  by  will,  I  fix  my  attention


by  Dr.  Ashbumer.  263

disagreeable  nature^  they  will  produce  corresponding  impres-
sions on  the  mind  influenced.  Anger  I  how  often  it  engen-
ders anger  in  another.  The  hasty^  impetuous^  and  irritable,
how  soon  are  they  influenced  by  the  repulsive  agencies  of
other  men's  repulsive  thoughts.  The  illogical  opponent  tells
me  that  I  am  a  materialist.  He  chatters,  and  knows  not
what  he  says.  I  speak  of  the  agency  of  physical  causes  ope-
rating upon  material  organic  matter.  The  enquiry  is  not
how  the  central  spring — ^the  immaterial  essence — acts  upon
this  organic  substance  and  produces  the  effects — ^the  emana-
tions we  are  recording.  Once  for  all,  he  who  urill  talk  of
things  understandable  is  the  real  bother-headed  materialist ;
for  he  is  always  eager  to  reduce  things  we  never  can  compre-
hend into  things  we  can  touch  and  weigh,  and  to  which  he  can
give  the  characters  of  matter.

If  Mary  Anne  Douglas  enters  the  room  in  which  my
large  helix  of  primary  electro-magnetic  iron  wire  is  in  action,
she  becomes  quite  rigid  and  insensible  in  a  moment,  and,  if
she  be  not  support^,  falls  to  the  ground.  It  will  be  seen
that  the  fluid  from  the  primary  wire  when  properly  directed
is  an  attractive  current.  I  wish  it  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that
when  the  fluid  of  the  human  brain  excited  to  existence  and
excited  to  leave  that  brain  by  the  operation  of  the  mind,  pro-
duces sleep,  it  is  analogous  to  the  attractive  force  which
induces  sleep.

We  have  then,  evidence  as  far  as  it  goes  that  the  attrac-
tive will  of  man,  the  attractive  power  of  Electro-Magnetism,

upon  the  person,  but  at  the  same  time  keep  the  idea  or  purpose  that  I  wish
to  communicate  steadily  and  unwaTeringly  in  my  mind  until  the  effect  I  de-
sire is  produced,  or  I  find  that  the  experiment  fails.

*<  From  experiments  and  obserrations,  I  am  more  and  more  convinced
that  we  are  continually  and  unwittingly  affecting  others  by  our  thoughts  and
feelings.  I  have  tried  an  amusing  experiment  two  or  three  times  very  suc-
cessfully ;  I  have  taken  a  party  (without  informing  them  of  my  intentions)
to  witness  some  galvanic  experiments ;  and  whilst  submitting  myself  to
continued  slight  galvanic  shocks,  have  fixed  my  attention  on  some  one  of
the  party.  The  first  time  I  tried  this,  I  was  much  aroused  by  the  person
soon  exclaiming,  **  well  it  is  very  strange,  but  I  could  fancy  that  I  feel  a  sen-
sation in  my  hands  and  arms  as  though  I  were  subject  to  the  action  of  the  bat-
tery." I  found  that  out  of  seven  persons,  /ovr-experienced  similar  sensations
more  or  less,  none  of  them  showed  any  symptom  of  being  affected  before  I
directed  my  attention  towards  them,  after  that  they  were  made  acquainted
with  the  experiment.  I  found  their  imagination  sometimes  supplies  the
place  of  my  will,  and  they  fancied  I  was  experimenting  upon  them  when
I  was  not  so.  This  we  so  often  see  in  other  cases.  I  hope  to  be  in  town  for
a  day  or  two  the  week  after  next,  when  I  shall  have  much  pleasure  in  call-
ing upon  you.

"  Yours  very  truly,

'*  H.  S.  Thompson.
^Fairfield,  near  York.
"June  16th."


264  On  a  Theory  of  Sleep,

the  attractive  power  of  Magnets,  the  attractive  power  of  Bock
drystal"^,  have  all  a  tendency  to  produce  sleep,  and  having
adduced  facts  to  shew  that  the  repulsive  agencies  of  some  of
these  powers  produce  vigilance  and  an  active  state  of  mind,
it  is  time  to  state  the  results  of  some  experiments  made  with
an  Electro-Dynamic  Coil  Apparatus  invented  by  Mr.  Noad
of  New  Millman  Street,  Foundling  Hospital;  whose  inge-
nuity and  kind  liberality  are  equalled  only  by  his  charming
zeal  for  the  science  to  which  he  devotes  himself.  Mr.  Noad
was  obliging  enough  to  come  to  my  house  with  his  machine
on  the  13th  inst.,  when  I  had  collected  some  very  susceptible
patients  for  the  sake  of  trying  on  them  the  effects  of  the
Direct  and  of  the  Inverse  Currents  from  the  positive  binding
screw  of  his  new  Coil  Machine". Besides  ourselves  and  the

d  Crystallized  Carbonate  of  Lime  or  of  Sulphate  of  Lime  act  with  still
more  attractive  power  :  in  Mary  Anoe  Douglas  they  produced  a  sense  of  heat
which  was  quickly  followed  by  deep  sleep  and  rigidity.

«  I  take  the  liberty  of  making  an  extract  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Noad,  not
only  because  it  is  in  itself  interesting  in  relation  to  his  own  invention,  but
because  it  gives  us  clearly  a  late  physiological  view  of  the  influence  of  the
electro-magnetic  current  on  certain  diseases.

'*  My  object  in  arranging  the  coil  in  this  form  was  to  endeavour  to  pro-
vide myself  with  an  instrument  with  which  I  might  apply  the  electrical
current  in  cases  of  paralysis  in  the  manner  recommended  by  Matteucci.

'*  It  was  concluded  by  this  indefatigable  electro  physiologist,  that  in
some  cases  of  paralysis  the  nerves  of  the  diseased  limb  are  altered  in  a
manner  analogous  to  that  which  would  be  produced  by  the  continuous  action
of  the  electric  current ;  and  as,  to  restore  to  a  nerve  the  sensibility  it  has  lost
by  the  passage  of  a  current,  we  must  act  on  it  with  a  current  in  a  contrary
direction  so  to  restore  a  paralyzed  limb,  we  must  pass  along  it  a  current  in
a  direction  contrary  to  that  which  occasioned  its  paralysis.  If  the  disease
be  paralysis  of  motion,  it  is  the  inverte  current  that  should  be  applied,  if
paralysis  of  sensibility  the  direct  current^  but  in  cases  of  complete  paralysis
it  does  not  seem  material  whether  the  current  be  direct  or  inverse.

**  Now  it  is  clear  that  with  no  form  of  the  coil  machine  can  we  administer
what  may  be  strictly  called  a  current  of  electricity,  for  the  philosophy  of  the
action  of  these  beautiful  instruments  necessarily  implies  a  series  of  shocks,
the  electricity  being  derived  not  directly  from  the  voltaic  battery  employed,
but  by  an  action  of  induction,  and  it  is,  as  every  electrician  knows,  not
during  the  time  that  the  current  of  electricity  is  rushing  through  the  coil  that
the  shocks  are  obtained,  but  at  the  moment  contact  between  the  battery  and
the  coil  is  broken  and  renewed.  I  now  speak  of  the  electro-magnetic  coil
machine  as  it  is  usually  constructed  with  a  secondary  coil  of  thin  covered
copper  wire  surrounding  the  thick  primary  wire,  through  which  the  elec-
trical current  from  the  battery  is  caused  to  circulate :  with  these  machines
there  are  produced  two  shocks,  one  when  contact  with  the  battery  is  made
and  another  in  d  contrary  direction  when  contact  with  the  battery  is  broken  ;
if  therefore  the  object  of  the  operator  be  to  give  a  series  of  shocks  in  one
uniform  direction,  it  is  clear  that  he  cannot  do  so  with  an  instrument
arranged  with  a  secondary  wire,  and  this  consideration  induced  me  to  fit
up  an  electro-dynamic  coil,  dispensing  with  the  secondary  wire,  and  after
numerous  experiments  I  have  succeeded  to  my  own  satisfaction  in  arranging
an  apparatus  which  not  only  enables  me  to  sidminister  to  a  patient  a  series
of  shocks  continued  for  any  length  of  time  in  one  invariable  direction  and  to
regulate  the  intensity  of  these  shocks  with  the  greatest  rapidity  and  nicety,


by  Dr.  Ashbumer.  265

patients  the  persons  present  were  my  ancient  friend  and  fellow-
student  Mr.  Lloyd  Williams,  of  Denbigh,  Mr.  Wass  and  Mrs.
Holmes.  Mary  Anne  Douglas  was  placed  in  a  chair  and  a  disc
of  copper  in  communication  with  the  positive  wire  being  held
to  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  the  negative  wire  around  the
instep,  the  current  passed  and  in  an  instant  there  was  deep
sleep  with  rigidity.  The  arrangement  was  reversed ;  the  posi-
tive wire  was  placed  near  the  foot  and  the  negative  wire  at  the
nape  of  the  neck.  The  patient  the  instant  before  was  in  a
deep  sleep,  at  that  moment  she  became  wide  awake ;  similar
results  were  obtained  in  seven  cases.  The  attractive  current
producing  sleep,  the  repulsive,  instant  vigilance.  Being  my-
self a  very  difficult  person  to  put  to  sleep  by  mesmeric  passes,
I  got  Mr.  Noad  to  try  the  direct  and  inverse  currents  on
myself;  I  could  have  borne  the  direct  current  with  great
satisfaction ;  it  was  producing  on  me  a  sense  of  calmness  and
an  indolent,  comfortable  feeling,  which  might  in  time  have
ended  in  sleep,  but  the  inverse  current  was  so  repulsive  and
disagreeable  to  me,  that  I  could  not  bear  it  for  many  seconds.


bot  which  placefl  it  in  my  power  to  arrange  with  the  utmost  precision  the
number  of  shocks  passed  in  a  given  interval  of  time  ;  and  although  it  is  true
that  I  do  not  with  this  instrument  get  a  continuous  current  of  electricity,
increasing  experience  serves  to  confirm  my  anticipation  that  it  is  a  valuable
improvement  on  the  electro-magnetic  coil  machine  as  a  theraputic  instrument,
indeed  the  experiments  of  Matteucci  show  satisfactorily  that  if  we  had  it  in
our  power  to  apply  to  a  patient  an  uniform  and  continous  stream  of  electricity,
no  useful  result  could  be  expected,  as  he  always  found  that  after  the  passage
of  a  current  had  been  continued  for  a  certain  time  along  the  nerves  of  an
animal,  those  nerves  lost  their  sensibility  to  the  action  of  the  current,  and
that  to  restore  their  sensibility  it  was  necessary  to  suspend  for  a  time  the
action  of  the  voltaic  battery,  in  other  words  it  was  necessary  to  inUrmit  the
action  of  the  current.

*'  I  would  rather  defer  any  account  of  the  apparatus  until  I  have  per-
fected it,  and  you  must  allow  me  to  rest  satisfied  with  merely  stating  that,
in  my  experiments  I  have  found  that  the  length  of  the  wire,  its  size,  and
the  length  and  thickness  of  the  coil,  have  all  had  considerable  effect  in  mo-
difying the  shock:  that  all  who  have  been  exposed  to  the  action  of  the  new
machine  have  noticed  the  peculiar  softness  of  the  shock,  so  difllerent  from
the  harsh,  disagreeable  feeling  of  the  common  secondary  coil.  The  expres-
sion of  one  of  my  patients  was  so  characteristic,  that  I  will  mention  it :  he
said,  after  experiencing  the  shocks  from  both  forms  of  apparatus,  that  the
shock  from  my  new  machine  was  like  that  from  the  common  coil '  filtered
through  cotton'-^and  when  it  is  considered  that  in  one  case  we  have  a  series
of  shocks  passing  uniformly  in  one  direction  while  in  the  other  the  shocks
are  alternately  direct  and  invene,  it  may  easily  be  imagined  that  the  sensa-
tions communicated  by  bis  instrument,  must  dififer  very  essentially.  I  will  not
enter  into  the  experiments  we  made  at  your  house  with  this  machine ;  to  me
they  were  of  a  most  surprising  nature  ;  and,  cannot  help  thinking  that  some-
thing of  a  valuable  character  will  be  elicited  from  them.

"  1  remain,  my  dear  Sir,
**  In  great  haste,

**  Very  truly  yours,
"  Dr.  Ashburner,  &c.,  &c.  '*  Henry  M.  Noad."


266  On  a  Theory  of  Sleep.

It  was  as  if  a  small  hammer  bad  been  percussing  tbe  posterior
part  of  tbe  bead  and  bebind  tbe  ears  especially.  Since  tbese
experiments  I  bave  arranged  a  coil  wbicb  enables  me  to  give
tbe  direct  and  inverse  current  like  Mr.  Noad's^  but  not  so
complete^  tbougb  it  answers  tbe  purpose  of  experiments.  I
bad  tbree  patients  wbo  were  so  obstinate  in  constitution^  as
not  to  yield  readily  to  tbe  mesmeric  sleep^  but  being  subjected
one  bour  eacb  to  tbe  direct  current,  could  not  resist  tbe  calm-
ing power  and  dropped  into  a  ligbt  slumber.

Tbese  facts  are  of  vast  importance,  and  I  believe  Mr.
Noad^s  macbine  is  destined  to  promote  an  extraordinary
cbange  in  tbe  mode  of  regarding  disease,  as  well  as  in  tbe
wbole  range  of  therapeutics.  Sucb  ideas  cannot  be  understood
by  tbose  wbo  bave  arrived  at  tbe  conclusion  tbat  tbe  word
Hysteria,  derived  from  ^Torepa,  tbe  womb,  is  a  sufficient  ex-
planation of  tbe  great  majority  of  nervous  diseases,  wbetber
it  be  a  pain  in  tbe  knee  or  ankle,  resulting  from  abnormal
dentition,  or  any  otber  neuralgic  or  spasmodic  inconvenience,
and  wbo,  practitioners  of  medicine,  sbroud  tbeir  apatby  for
tbe  improvement  of  science,  and  tbeir  ignorance  of  nervous
diseases  in  tbe  mantle  of  privilege  and  position  :  albeit,  some
of  tbese  are  prejudiced  and  obstinate,  and  like  men  of  small
minds,  wait  for  tbe  bidding  of  tbeir  leaders,  others  indulge  in
paltry  pride  or  envy,  and  some  few  are  sincere,  but,  like  timid
hares,  are  frightened  at  consequences  that  may  result  to  them
if  they  stop  to  enquire.  Charity  must  teach  us  to  forgive
them,  for  their  feelings  blind  some  of  them,  while  with  others
the  sordid  care  of  their  own  interests  absorbs  the  higher  and
more  philosophical — ^the  purer  and  more  elevated  sense  of
their  sacred  mission !

Mr.  Noad^s  ingenuity  in  divising  a  new  instrument,  has
enabled  me  to  come  to  tbe  conclusion  that,  however  the  minute
structure  of  the  cerebral  and  nervous  tissue  may  be  arranged
to  produce  results  analogous  to  electricity,  a  direct  current
passed  from  the  brain  to  tbe  extremities  tends  to  soothe  the
individual,  to  induce  a  sense  of  quietude,  somnolence,  sleep
or  rigid  spasm;  that  an  inverse  current  passed  from  the
extremities  to  the  bndn  establishes  the  reverse ;  wakefulness,
restlessness,  inquietude,  pain.  The  direct  current  is  attractive,
the  inverse  current  is  repulsive.  In  mesmerism,  the  down-
ward passes  are  analogous  to  the  direct  current,  and  produce
quietude,  sleep,  and  its  natural  sequences,  while  the  upward
and  all  other  dispersing  passes  are  like  the  inverse  currents,
tbeir  effects  being  similar.  The  phenomena  offered  by  tbe
magnet,  by  certain  metals,  by  crystals,  by  the  exertion  of  tbe
will, bear  out  the  conclusion, that  sleep  results  from  the


Mesmerism  in  Ireland,  267

attractive  agencies  of  the  brain^  and  that  vigilance  is  owing  to
a  repulsive  power  exerted  by  that  organ.

It  is  very  interesting  to  read  back  into  Locke/  and  to
observe  the  wanderings  of  his  great  mind  on  the  subject  of
sleep.  Had  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  been  studied  in
his  day  with  the  lights  that  shine  so  brilliantly  now  fix^m  the
labours  of  Faraday  and  of  Yon  Beichenbach,  I  think  he  must
have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  phenomena  which  so
much  puzzled  him  were  produced  by  attractive  agencies^  and
that  even  indolent  quietude  of  thought  with  costive  emission
of  ideas  were  dependant  upon  the  same  cause^  while  wakeful-
ness and  activity  of  thought  were  dependant  upon  repulsive
agencies.  His  vast  powers  of  "  reflection^'  would  have  cleared
up  during  his  study  of  somnambulism  all  the  questions  as  to
the  identity  of  Socrates  awake  and  Socrates  asleep.  The  best
respect  that  can  be  paid  to  his  great  genius,  is  to  suppose
that  he  would  not  have  spumed  the  use  of  any  of  those
torches  that  are  lighting  us  to  the  Temple  of  Truth.  It  will
easily  be  perceived  that  the  agencies  of  attraction  and  repul-
sion have  a  very  wide  range  in  explaining  difficult  questions
touching  life.  The  part  which  these  forces  play  in  the  formation
and  in  the  cure  of  disease,  leads  to  wide  speculation,  and
I  start  the  conjecture  that  at  some  future  day  the  expla-
natioa  of  arterial  energy  and  of  venous  conge8tion.-the  two
great  sources  of  inflammation  and  of  fever, — ^will  rest  upon
the  same  grounds  as  the  production  of  sleep  and  of  vigilance.


XIV.  Mesmerism  in  Ireland.

While  Sir  Philip  Crampton  is  neglecting  to  investigate  the
ordinary  facts  of  mesmerism  like  a  person  of  sense,  and
thirsting,  like  Dr.  Forbes,  for  clairvoyance  instead  of  benefit
to  the  i&icted,  putting  drafts  on  bankers  in  envelopes  which
he  tells  the  world  contain  bank-notes,  a  coach-maker  in  his
own  country  is  setting  him  and  the  rest  of  the  Irish  medical
profession  a  brilliant  example.  We  extract  the  following
from  the  Limerick  Reporter,  of  June  16th,  1846  : —

"  Dr.  Gelston  called  on  me  on  Monday  evening  (fortnight),
and  requested  my  attendance  at  the  hospital  to  make  ex-
periments on  a  man  and  a  woman  whose  limbs  were  to  be
amputated  on  Thursday.  I  remonstrated,  from  the  shortness
of  the  time,  but  he  pledged  himself  that,  '  If  I  could  dull
the  pain,  it  would  be  as  much  as  could  be  expected,  and  I

f  Euajf  on  the  Human  UndersUnding,  b.  ii.,  cap.  i.,  ^11,  12,  13,  14.


268  Mesmerism  in  Ireland.

should  have  the  full  benefit  of  it/  I  accordingly  went  to  the
hospital^  and  on  the  first  trial  put  the  woman  into  the  mes-
meric state.  The  second  trial  I  made  on  her  she  got  deeper
into  it^  and  remained  an  hour  in  a  chair^  from  which  she  fell
in  my  absence^  and  so  became  conscious  or  in  a  waking  state.
The  last  experiment  was  made  on  Wednesday^  and  I  had  no
further  interference  with  her  afterwards^  because  I  considered
myself  badly  treated  in  reference  to  the  amputation  in  the
case  of  the  man,  which  case  was  the  first  operation,  and  not
that  of  the  woman  as  erroneously  stated  in  the  Chromck,
The  leg  was  taken  off  the  day  after,  when  the  patient's  cries
were  most  frightful  from  the  effects  of  pain.  I  experimented
on  the  man  for  the  first  time  on  Wednesday,  and  succeeded
in  putting  him  into  a  very  deep  sleep.  I  saw  him  again  that
night  at  nine  o'clock — experimented  on  him  again  for  ten
minutes,  and  so  left  him.  I  saw  him  the  next  day  at  11,  and
had  him  by  my  desire  removed  to  the  room  where  the  opera-
tion was  to  be  performed — commenced  mesmerising  him,  and
succeeded  in  putting  him  into  a  slight  sleep  or  state  of  quies-
cence. I  then  announced  that  all  I  could  do  for  the  man  was
done.  He  was  then  placed  on  the  table,  and  the  limb  in-
stantly and  skilfully  removed  without  a  groan  and  without
pain.

'^  Such,  Sir,  are  the  simple  facts  of  the  case  as  far  as  I
have  had  to  do  with  both  patients — ^the  woman  not  having
been  mesmerised  or  seen  by  me  the  day  her  leg  was  ampu-
tated with  such  torture,  as  I  am  informed,  by  Dr.  Oelston ;
that  of  the  man  so  strikingly  different,  at  which  I  attended,
and  which  evinced  the  power  of  the  mesmeric  influence.  I
am  also  reported  to  '  do  wonders  as  an  amateur  in  the  mes-
meric art.'  Such,  Sir,  is  really  the  fact,  and  as  T  never
derived  any  emolument  from  my  practice  or  experiments  in
mesmerism,  perhaps  my  testimony  is  entitled  to  some  weight,
even  if  I  did  not  appeal  to  corroborating  witnesses  of  the
highest  character.

"  The  first  wonder  that  I  would  draw  your  attention  to
was  that  of  a  boy,  whose  hand  received  a  violent  sprain.  The
accident  occurred  thus — the  boy  was  playing  at  leap-frog
when  he  fell  on  his  wrist.  Doctor  Sayers  happened  to  be  in
my  place  at  the  time  the  boy  came  to  me,  and  kindly  ex-
amined the  boy's  hand.  I  asked  the  doctor  if  he  thought
anything  was  broken,  to  which  he  replied  he  could  not  say,
as  he  had  ceased  to  practice  surgery — but  this  I  know,  said
he,  the  boy's  wrist  has  got  a  very  violent  wrench,  and  will
keep  him  quiet  for  some  time.  A  gentleman  belonging  to
Her  Majesty's  ship  Flamer  was  also  present,  and  nephew  to


Mesmerism  in  Ireland,  269

Lord  Nelson,  Mr.  Blankley.  He,  like  myself,  was  not  asbamed
of  being  an  amateur  of  that  hated  and  maliciously  persecuted
science  of  mesmerism.  Mr.  Blankley  said  on  this  occasion,
that  he  often  heard  of  sprains  being  reduced  by  means  of
mesmerism ;  and  recommended  passes  from  the  shoulder  to
the  extremity  of  the  fingers.  The  first  pass  brought  the  pain
from  the  wrist  to  the  first  joints  of  the  hand — ^the  second  pass
brought  the  pain  to  the  next  joints  of  the  fingers — the  third
pass  was  accompanied  by  a  loud  bawl  from  the  boy,  and  to
the  astonishment  of  all  the  by-standers  (at  least  a  dozen
persons)  the  boy  declared  his  hand  and  wrist  to  be  perfectly
cured — ^in  proof  of  which  he  seized  an  axe,  which  happened
to  lie  on  the  loft  where  the  experiment  was  made,  and  struck
it  into  a  block  with  the  hand  which  an  instant  before  was
swollen  and  burning  with  heat.  The  doctor  examined  the  boy's
hand  after  the  mesmeric  application,  and  exclaimed  aloud,
'  That  he  would  not  have  believed  on  any  man's  telling  what
had  just  occurred,  had  he  not  seen  it  with  his  own  eyes.'  Dr.
Sayers  vouched  for  the  truth  of  the  above  statement,  in  the
presence  of  a  party  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  at  his  own  house.
"  The  next  case  was  that  of  a  lad  whom  Doctor  Gore  was
treating  for  imperfect  or  short  sight.  The  doctor  requested
me  to  attend  at  the  house  of  the  late  Surgeon  Thwaites,
where  I  experimented  on  the  boy ;  the  object  was  to  have  a
seton  put  through  the  back  part  of  the  neck.  I  succeeded  in
throwing  the  boy  into  a  mesmeric  state — ^but  it  appeared
strange  to  the  medical  gentlemen,  that  instead  of  producing
torpidity  in  the  patient,  his  sense  of  feeling  became  wonder-
fuUy  exalted,  so  much  so  indeed,  that  if  he  was  but  touched
with  a  pin's  point,  every  fibre  of  his  body  was  put  in  motion ;
indeed  the  lad  on  each  touch  of  it  appeared  like  a  person  who
received  a  violent  electric  shock.  I  suggested  to  the  medical
gentlemen  the  propriety  of  trying  the  mesmeric  influence  on
the  lad,  a  few  times  previous  to  the  operation.  The  result
was  after  eight  or  ten  times  experimenting  on  him,  he  gradu-
ally fell  into  the  torpid  state.  The  operation  of  inserting
the  seton  was  then  performed — the  boy's  hands  all  the  time
folded  on  his  lap.  He  seemed  indeed  to  feel  the  operation,
for  he  groaned  while  Surgeon  Thwaites  purposely  prolonged
it.  However,  I  let  him  sleep  for  half  an  hour  after,  and  then
awoke  him  up.  The  boy  was  questioned  by  the  medical  gen-
tlemen at  some  length,  when  he  declared  he  felt  nothing
done  to  his  neck — but  said  he  felt  something  in  his  toe.  The
wound  made  in  the  neck  was  at  least  two  inches  long.  The
medical  gentlemen  present  beside  the  operator  were  Dr.  Sayers
and  Dr.  Gore.

VOL.  IV.  u


270  Mesmerism  in  Ireland.

*^  The  next  case  of  wonder  was  that  of  a  young  woman,

her  name  was Dunn,  living  in  Boherbuoy,  in  this  city;

she  was  declared  by  Dr.  Parker,  of  Cecil-street,  to  be  stark
mad.  Her  brother  called  on  me  and  requested  that  I  should
see  her ;  I  found  her  held  down  to  her  seat  by  a  number  of
persons,  uttering  hideous  cries  and  yelling.  When  I  ap-
proached she  made  an  effort  to  bite  me,  notwithstanding
which,  I  induced  the  mesmeric  influence,  and  in  less  than
half  an  hour  the  girFs  senses  returned.  I  requested  all  the
people  to  leave  the  room,  and  have  her  kept  quiet ;  she  then
went  to  bed  and  slept  soundly.  I  called  on  her  the  next
morning;  she  complained  of  a  head-ache  and  dimness  in  one
of  her  eyes :  both  pains  I  removed  in  a  few  minutes ;  the
young  woman  went  to  her  work  the  next  day,  and  was  quite
well  when  I  last  saw  her,  which  was  six  months  afterwards.

"  The  next  wonder  was,  that  of  Fanny  Meek,  about  14
years  old,  her  father  a  respectable  tavern-keeper,  residing
many  years  at  the  New  Barrack-gate,  in  this  city.  She  was
afflicted  with  St.  Vitus's  Dance — Dr.  Peat  of  Patrick^s-well,
who  minutely  examined  her,  declared  it  to  be  a  well-marked
case  of  St.  Vitus's  Dance.  Dr.  Lawson,  of  H.M.  30th  Regi-
ment, up  to  the  time  she  came  to  me,  had  prescribed  for  her,
and  found  medicine  quite  useless  in  her  case,  but  observing
the  remarkable  change  in  the  girl,  introduced  himself  to  me,
and  found  at  the  end  of  one  week  that  Fanny  was  perfectly
restored  to  health.  I  invited  Dr.  Peat  to  witness  the  first
experiment  which  I  made  on  this  girl.  He  smiled  at  my
mode  of  cure — his  patience  quite  forsook  him,  and  in  five
minutes  he  left  the  room.  However,  I  took  Miss  Meek  to
Patrick's-well,  on  that  day  week,  where  Dr.  Peat  saw  her  at
Mrs.  O'Grady^s,  at  Fort  Etna,  and  to  his  utter  astonishment
and  confusion,  the  girl  stood  before  him  perfectly  cured,  of
which  he  bore  ample  testimony  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  O'Grady
and  family,  and  Fanny  Meek  remained  six  or  eight  months
in  Limerick  after  her  cure,  during  which  she  had  not  the
slightest  return  of  the  disease.  After  she  had  been  thus  per-
fectly cured,  I  made  several  interesting  experiments  on  her  in
the  presence  of  Lord  Downes,  Colonel  Slade,  and  a  number
of  military  gentlemen  and  their  ladies.  Dr.  Lawson  was  also
present,  who  assured  his  lordship  that  the  cure  was  complete.

"  The  next  case  mesmerically  treated  was  that  of  the  lady
of  John  Waller  O'Grady,  Esq.,  of  Fort  Etna,  within  four
miles  of  Limerick ;  her  complaint  was  said  to  be  a  thickening
of  the  gall,  or  that  the  gall  turned  to  stone.  Her  medical
advisers  were  Dr.  Peat,  of  Patrick's  Well,  and  Dr.  Griffin,
of  Limerick. On  my  first  visit  to  Fort  Etna, Dr.  Peat


Mesmerism  in  Ireland,  271

told  me  it  was  a  hopeless  case^  and  if  I  cured  her  I
would  do  more  than  any  man  in  Ireland.  She  was  then  in-
deed in  a  deplorable  state — ^the  skin  of  her  face  and  hands
had  a  jaundiced  appearance ;  her  voice  was  quite  gone^  and
she  could  only  spei^  at  intervals^  and  in  broken  sentences ;
such  was  the  state  of  her  breathing.  I  remained  that  day
until  Mrs.  O^Qrady  dined ;  she  partook  of  the  breast  of  a
roast  snipe  and  three  or  four  crumbs  of  bread ;  and  little  as
that  was^  her  stomach  was  so  completely  deranged  that  it
could  bear  it  but  a  few  moments.  The  exertion  was  so  great
in  this  case^  I  thought  she  would  have  expired.  She  was
then  laid  on  the  sofa  and  had  all  the  appearance  of  speedy
dissolution :  such^  then,  was  the  state  of  Mrs.  O'Grady  when
the  mesmeric  treatment  was  commenced.  Up  to  the  time  I
first  saw  her  she  was  seized  with  violent  spasms^  during  which
paroxysms  she  suffered  the  most  excruciating  tortures^  and
to  allay  them,  her  medical  advisers  prescribed  morphine,  and
so  produced  a  deadly  stupor,  firom  which  she  slowly  aroused,
and  was  under  the  Jiecessity  of  applying  that  drug  daily  to
deaden  her  sufferings.  On  the  first  time  I  mesmerised  her,
she  had  not  a  spasmodic  attack  for  three  days,  and  so  daily
the  symptoms  decreased.  The  first  marked  change  I  perceived
was  that  one  side  of  her  face  had  come  to  a  natural  colour ;
also  the  eye  at  that  side  had  lost  its  yellow,  or  rather  dark
brown  colour.  I  could  account  for  this  in  no  other  way  than
that  was  the  side  that  the  lady  complained  of  all  the  pain
being  in,  and  on  that  side  I  exercised  all  my  mesmeric  influ-
ence by  means  of  passes  without  contact.  I  called  the  atten-
tion of  Mr.  O'Orady  to  the  circumstance,  and  he  was  equally
struck  with  it.  I  then  commenced  operating  on  the  opposite
side,  and  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  a  healthy  colour  gradually
appear  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  face,  and  the  other  eye
become  clear  and  transparent.  The  entire  time  from  the
commencement  of  the  treatment  to  its  termination  was  about
two  months.  She  came  to  town  and  remained  one  week,
where  I  had  an  opportunity  of  experimenting  daily  upon  her,
after  which  she  went  home  and  gradually  acquired  perfect
strength.

"  Mrs.  (yOrady's  illness,  if  I  recollect  right,  was  between
two  or  three  years'  standing.  It  may  be  satisfactory  to  know
Mrs.  O'Grady's  sensations  while  under  the  mesmeric  influence.
In  the  first  place  she  was  always  conscious;  could  answer
questions,  but  with  extreme  difSculty ;  she  had  not  power  to
open  her  eyes,  or  move  her  limbs,  or  any  part  of  her  body.
Mesmerism  and  its  wondrous  powers  cannot  fail  to  astonish
those  who  are  ignorant  of  its  mode  of  action,  but  being  sus-

u  2


272  Mesmerism  in  Ireland.

tained  by  a  lady  so  highly  talented  as  Mrs.  O'Grady,  the
world  may  give  her  credit  for  superior  discernment  and
sincerity.

"  I  have  the  pleasure  to  state  that  I  had  a  visit  from  Mr.
O^Grady  and  his  eldest  son,  bearing  Mrs.  O'Grady's  compli-
ments and  respects  to  me  on  the  anniversary  of  the  time  I
first  visited  her,  and  to  assure  me  she  had  not  taken  for  the
twelve  months  any  medicine.

^'I  have  selected  the  above,  amongst  other  cases,  not
because  they  appear  extraordinary,  but  that  they  can  be
attested  by  the  medical  gentlemen  whose  names  appear  in
this  letter.

'^  I  could  give  scores  of  cases  quite  as  extraordinary,  but
not  being  known  to  the  medical  profession,  they  might  not
have  the  same  weight  in  public  estimation.  The  cases,  how-
ever, which  I  have  furnished,  establish  the  truth  of  mesmer-
ism upon  an  immoveable  basis.

"  I  have  now  to  apologize  for  the  names  I  made  usp  of  in
this  statement,  which  nothing  but  a  defence  of  my  own  name
and  character  could  justify.

I  am.  Sir,

"  Your  very  obedient  servant,

Anthony  Quinn,  Coach-maker.

Coach  Factory,  Thomas  Street,
"  Limerick,  June  10th."

Since  then  a  Dr.  Peat  has  been  playing  the  usual  medical
game.

"  MESMERISM.

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Limerick  Chronicle.

"Churchhill  Rectory,  Tralee,  June  15.
"  Sir. — I  perceive  by  Saturday's  Chronicle,  that  I  am
quoted  as  a  medical  authority  by  Mr.  A.  Quinn,  to  vouch  for
his  powers  as  a  mesmeric  charmer  of  diseases ;  but  I  beg
most  distinctly  to  deny  that  my  patient,  Mrs.  Waller  O'Grady,
was  cured  by  his  magic.  Mrs.  O'Grady  was,  for  several
months,  under  my  care,  after  being  first  mesmerised  by  Mr.
Quinn,  during  which  period  the  most  active  treatment  was
adopted  by  me.  With  regard  to  his  other  case,  I  know  no-
thing of  it,  with  the  exception  of  seeing  him  mesmerise  the
little  girl.  I  also  have  to  state,  that  Mr.  Quinn  was  never
able  to  place  Mrs.  O'Grady  under  the  influence  of  mesmeric
sleep.

"  I  remain,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

"  Clement  Peat,  M.D.''


t<


ft  ' ~


Mesmerism  in  Ireland.  273

To  this  Mr.  Quinn  replies  thus :

"  To  ike  Editor  of  the  Limerick  Reporter.

''Sir, — I  find  I  am  again  brought  before  the  pubhc  in
consequence  of  a  letter  of  Dr.  Peat,  in  Wednesday's  Chronicle,
The  Doctor  appears  to  have  a  very  bad  memory,  nay,  even  a
treacherous  one.  He  does,  indeed,  recollect  to  have  seen
Miss  Meek  mesmerised  by  me,  and,  strange  to  say,  he  has
no  recoUection  for  what  purpose;  and,  stranger  still,  he  en-
tirely forgets  saying  '  she  laboured  under  a  well-marked  case
of  St.  Vitus's  dance.'  He  has  quite  forgotten  all  the  convuU
sive  motions  of  Miss  Meek's  face  and  limbs.  He  also  forgets
having  seen  her  when  brought  by  me  to  Fort  Etna  to  exhibit
to  him  her  complete  cure,  which  was  but  one  short  week  after
he  recollects  so  clearly  the  girl  was  mesmerised  by  me.  Eeally
Mr.  Peat  is  a  very  reluctant  witness.

''In  reference  to  the  case  of  Mrs.  O 'Grady,  the  Doctor
denies  that  her  cure  was  effected  by  the  agency  of  mesmerism,
and  in  proof  of  that  unsupported  assertion  he  states  that  she
was  for  several  months  under  his  care  after  she  was  mesmer-
ised by  me,  and  that  during  this  period  he  adopted  the  most
active  treatment.  He  does  not  venture  to  say  what  was  the
result  of  this  treatment.  On  this  point  he  is  particularly
cautious.  Well,  then,  if  he  cannot  venture  to  say  she  was
cured  by  his  treatment  (and  hard  would  it  be  for  him  to  cure
a  lady  he  pronounced  dead),  upou  what  ground  can  he  deny
she  was  cured  by  mesmerism  ?  It  is  true.  Dr.  Peat  adminis-
tered medicine  to  Mrs.  O'Grady  after  she  was  first  mesmerised
by  me:  but,  fearing  the  consequences,  I  insisted  that  the
patient  should  give  up  taking  any  medicine,  as  I  should  cease
to  pursue  the  mesmeric  treatment  any  further.  Mrs.  O'Grady
did  give  it  up,  as  she  informed  me,  and  the  consequence  was
that  her  cure  was  completed  in  two  months,  though  she  had
been  ill  for  years  under  medical  treatment.  Mr.  O'Grady
and  his  son  called  on  me  in  twelve  months  afterwards,  and
said  that  during  that  time  she  had  taken  but  one  dose  of
medicine  (castor  oil).  So  much  for  Dr.  Peat's  accuracy.
But  he  seems  equally  oblivious  upon  other  points.  Does  he
forget  that  it  was  he  who  introduced  me  to  Mr.  O'Grady,  and
requested  my  attendance  at  Fort  Etna  to  mesmerise  the  lady  ?
And  if  he  does  not  forget  this  fact,  I  think  it  will  be  admitted
on  all  hands  that  it  now  comes  with  a  veiy  bad  grace  from
him  to  call  me  a  charmer  of  diseases,  and  that  in  reference
to  a  malady  which  he  admitted  to  be  beyond  his  skill  to  cure.

"  With  regard  to  the  last  sentence  in  Dr.  Peat's  letter,  in
which  he  says,  '  I  was  never  able  to  place  Mrs.  O'Grady  under


274  Mesmerism  in  Ireland.

the  influence  of  mesmeric  sleep  f  I  beg  to  say  that  I  never
made  any  such  assertion.  On  the  contrary^  I  expressly  said
in  my  letter  that '  she  was  always  conscious ;'  but  I  did  say,
and  now  repeat,  that  I  was  enabled  to  place  her  under  the
influence  of  mesmerism,  which  is  proved  by  the  fact  of  her
not  being  able,  during  its  action,  to  open  her  eyes,  move  her
limbs,  or  any  part  of  her  body.  It  is  not  in  every  case  that
the  deep  torpor  is  produced ;  nor  is  it  always  necessary  in  the
healing  of  diseases.  The  statements  contained  in  this  and
my  former  letter,  I  am  prepared  to  sustain  by  affidavit.  Will
Dr.  Peat  deny  them  in  the  same  emphatic  manner?

"Thankin^g  you  for  having  don^  me,  and  the  cause  of
truth,  justice,  by  inserting  my  letter  complete.

"  I  am.  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

"Anthony  Quinn.
"  Coach  Factory,  Thomas  Street,
"June  18,  1846.''

The  foUowing  are  the  editor's  remarks :

"  In  reference  to  the  foregoing  we  have  only  to  remark,
that  out  of  four  or  five  most  decided  cases  detailed  in  Mr.
Quinn's  lasjb  letter,  that  of  Mrs.  O'Grady  is  the  only  one
questioned — so  that  the  rest  are  tacitly  admitted.  But  Dr.
Peat,  (who  no  doubt  from  professional  pride  is  unwilling  to
award  to  Mr.  Quinn,  or  rather  to  mesmerism,  appUed  by
him,  the  merit  of  a  cure  he  was  unable  to  perform  himself,)
has  commented  on  the  case  of  Mrs.  O'Grady  in  so  unsatisfac-
tory a  manner,  and  Mr.  Quinn  has  replied  so  conclusively
and  emphatically,  that  it  is  very  easy  to  see  that  this  case  is
just  as  strong  as  the  rest.  The  medical  gentleman  has  an
interest  in  claiming  the  credit  of  the  cure,  which  is  calculated
to  warp  his  judgment,  while  Mr.  Quinn  has  no  interest  but
that  of  truth.  The  case  of  the  amputation  at  Barrington's
Hospital  has  now  been  quietly  surrendered  to  Mr.  Quinn,
though  it  was  first  made  an  object  of  silly  ridicule.  A  writer
complains  that  there  has  been  too  much  discussion  on  the
subject  for  persons  of  attainments  like  his.  We  believe  him ;
but  it  might  have  been  worth  his  while  to  consider  whether
it  was  prudent  to  expose  his  own  want  of  information  by
crying  '  sour  grapes.'

Since  the  foregoing  was  in  type  we  have  been  given  to
understand,  on  good  authority,  that  a  letter  from  Mr.  O'Grady
will  appear  in  a  day  or  two,  fully  sustaining  Mr.  Quinn  and
refuting  Dr.  Peat.

Mr.  O'Grady's  letter  has  just  reached  us : —


Miss  Martineaufs  Health  and  her  Maid's  ItUegrUy. 275


'*  MESMBRISM.


"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Limerick  Chronicle,

"  Sir. — I  do  not  wish  to  comment  on  any  of  the  letters  on
Mesmerism  lately  appearing  in  your  valuable  paper;  but  I
am  sure  that  you  will  give  me  space  for  an  act  of  justice  to  a
gentleman  to  whom  I  thus  publicly  beg  to  return  my  best
thanks^  for  his  very  kind  and  disinterested  attendance  on
Mrs.  J.  W.  CyGrady,  at  Mrs.  Rose's  in  Limerick^  for  over  a
fortnight^  at  great  personal  inconvenience^  during  which  time
she  improved  rapidly,  and  since  which  she  has,  thank  Ood,
not  been  under  any  medical  treatment  whatsoever.

"  I  have  further  to  state,  that  what  Mr.  Quin  mentioned
as  having  happened  at  Fort  Etna  is  perfectly  true,  and  also
that  myself  and  son  called  on  him  to  return  him  thanks.  I
hope  you  will  excuse  all  this  trouble,  and  beg  to  remain,

"  Tour's  most  truly,
"  June  20.''  "  J.  W.  O'Grady."


XV.  Miss  Martineau's  Health  and  her  Maid's  Integrity. By

Dr.  Elliotson.

I  RECEIVED  the  following  from  a  stranger  in  Wales  :—

"28th  May,  1846.


"  Sir. — I  pray  you  to  excuse  the  liberty  I  am  taking  in
troubling  you  with  an  enquiry  wholly  unconnected  with  your
profession  or  its  duties.  The  interest  I  take  in  a  subject  so
devotedly  advocated  as  that  of  mesmerism  is  by  yourself,
prompts  me  to  intrude  myself,  and  if  you  will  pardon  my  dis-
regard of  etiquette,  and  will  at  your  leisure  satisfy  my  enquiry,
I  shall  feel  extremely  obliged.

"  Has  Miss  Martineau's  servant  been  proved  an  impostor  ?
or  what  are  the  circumstances  attending  her  dismissal  from
service  ?  This  has  just  been  told  me  as  a  fact  by  a  cousin  of
that  lady,  and  as  it  comes  to  me  from  excellent  authority,
(though  unable  to  assure  me  of  the  particulars,)  I  am  most
anxious  to  ascertain  from  a  high  quarter,  likely  to  be  a  de-
positary of  the  facts,  whether  the  girl  has  been  proved  an
impostor,  or  is  only  one  of  the  usual  suspected  and  slandered
cases.

"  For  my  part  I  am  no  believer  in  imposition,  that  is  to
any  extent  worth  noticing;  and  moreover  so  many  utterly
false  statements  are  unblushingly  made  in  society,  that  the
notice  I  give  to  this  piece  of  information  is  simply  in  con-


276 Mi$8  Marimeau^s  Health  and  her  Maid's  Integrity.

sideration  of  my  author^s  connection  with  the  family,  fnot
even,  I  would  add^  on  account  of  his  honour  and  credibility.)

'*  With  the  highest  respect,
"  I  remain,  Sir,
"  Your  very  humble  and  obedient  servant,

tl w

I  despatched  this  to  Miss  Martineau,  and  the  following
was  the  lady's  answer :

"  The  Knoll,  Ambleside,
"  Saturday,  June  6th.

"  Dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — Thank  you  for  your  inquiry,  which
is  easily  answered.  My  good  girl  Jane  is  now  in  the  kitchen,
cooking  my  dinner ;  her  truth  and  honour  have  never  been
questioned  by  any  who  have  known  her.  The  idea  of  her
telling  a  lie  is  as  ridiculous  to  such,  as  that  of  her  getting
drunk  or  standing  on  her  head.

"  I  dare  say  the  mistake  arises  from  a  confusion  between
her  and  my  own  maid,  who  left  me  above  a  year  ago,  to
attend  her  sick  mother,  and  who  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
mesmeric  affair.  Jane,  the  girl  mesmerised,  never  was  my
servant  till  this  year.  She  was  the  housemaid  at  my  lodgings
at  Tynemouth.  As  soon  as  I  had  a  house  of  my  ofm,  I  in-
vited her  to  come  and  be  my  cook, — chiefly  because  she  was
ill  at  Tynemouth,  and  the  doctors  behaved  shamefully  to  her,
but  much  also  from  my  cordial  affection  for  her.  She  came
last  October  quite  ill,  and  almost  blind,  the  doctors  having
failed  to  do  her  any  good.  My  mesmerising  soon  set  her  up ;
and  here  she  is, — well,  busy,  universally  respected,  and  as
happy  as  the  day  is  long.  I  hope  and  believe  we  shall  never
part.

"  And  now,  who  can  this  cousin  of  mine  be  !  Will  your
correspondent  have  the  goodness  to  set  the  matter  right,  and
refer  the  said  cousin  to  me,  if  further  information  is  required?

''  If  you  hear,  as  I  am  constantly  doing,  that  I  am  ill,  please
say, — what  a  friend  of  mine,  (who  abhors  mesmerism)  replies
to  fdl  inquiries,  such  as  ''  Is  Miss  M.  well  V  "  She  is  better
than  any  body  else  whatever.^'  You  would  think  so,  if  you
saw  me  any  evening  (after  a  long  morning  of  writing)  rowing
on  the  lake,  mowing  my  grass,  riding,  climbing  mountains,
or  watering  my  pretty  new  shrubberies.  Few  could  say,  after
such  a  lapse  of  time,  as  I  can,  that  I  have  not  had  one  day's
illness  since  I  declared  myself  well :  and  yet  my  friends  are
always  writing  in  alarm  (always  given  by  doctors)  to  know
Sow  ill  I  am,  and  why  I  did  not  let  them  know. I  think  of


Reichenbach*9  Researches  on  Magnetism.  277

advertizing  ia  the  Times  a  promise  to  issue  a  circular  when-
ever I  am  ill,  on  condition  of  being  believed  well  till  then.
When  I  call  on  you,  which  I  hope  to  do  in  the  autumn,  you
will  wonder  to  see  the  change  in  your  once  pale-faced  friend.
''Jane  proved  highly  sensitive  to  Professor  Gregory's  experi-
ments here  lately, — on  the  Reichenbach  track,  and  so  did
others.

"  Believe  me  yours  very  truly, •

"  H.  Martineau.^'

"  Dear  Dr.  E. — ^I  hope  you  will  forward  the  inclosed  to  your
correspondent.  I  have  given  a  fuller  explanation  than  you
could  need,  and  if  my  note  travels  on  to  my  cousin,  (whoever
he  be)  so  much  the  better. Jane's  second  cure  is  a  capital

fact. I  believe  the  slanders  against  her  come  all  from

He  sticks  at  nothing ;  and  the  only  diiBctdty  about  vindicating
her  lies  in  the  improbability  that  any  professional  men  should
behave  as and have  done.  I  have  proof  how-
ever, which  satisfies  all  who  read  it.  Meantime,  Jane  is  well
and  happy. She  is  a  capital  girl.

"  Yours  ever,

"  H.  Maetineau.''

Why  will  so  many  medical  men,  the  practice  of  whose
profession  is  calculated  to  keep  benevolence  in  constant  play,
give  such  proof  to  the  world,  as  the  numerous  anecdotes
mentioned  in  7%e  Zoist  display,  that  they  had  rather  patients
should  remain  unrelieved  than  be  cured  with  mesmerism?
I  know  practitioners  who  confess  to  the  parties  themselves
the  advantages  derived  from  mesmerism,  and  even  highly
extol  it,  and  to  the  world  scoff  at  mesmerism  and  declare  it
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  cure  which  was  effected  solely  by
its  means.


XVI.  Review  of  Dr.  Gregory's  Abstract  and  TVanslation  of  Baron
Von  Reichenbach's  Researches. By  Dr.  Elliotson.

(Contioued  from  p.  124.)

In  the  account  which  I  gave  of  nearly  the  first  half  of  this
important  work,  in  the  last  number,  I  related  some  experi-
ments of  my  own,  confirmatory  of  those  of  Reichenbach,
with  respect  to  the  power  of  the  magnet  in  producing  rigidity
and  contraction  of  the  hand  and  arm,  and  an  involuntary.


278  ReichenbacVs  Researches  on  Magnetwn^  ifc,

but  willed^  following  of  it  in  the  mesmeric  state  of  certain
persons^  (p.  109;)  and  also  in  their  ordinary  state.  These
local  effects  were  of  the  same  character  as  those  produced
by  mesmeric  means^  for  they  could  be  dissipated  by  all  the
anti-mesmeric  means  which  dissipate  mesmeric  effects,  ''  by
applying  iron  to  the  parts,  by  breathing  upon  them,  by  trans-
verse passes  over  it,  by  pointing  closely  at  it,  or  by  putting
my  own  hand  in  contact  with  it/^

I  have  since  had  a  large  magnet  by  Mr.  Henley,  of  Hay-
don  Street,  Minories,  who  manufactures  them  for  Professor
Wheatston.  It  is  10  J  inches  long,  the  bars  are  1^  broad,
2^  deep,  its  weight  is  nineteen  pounds,  and  it  consists
of  eight  elements.  By  allowing  a  hand  of  the  patients,
mentioned  by  me  as  susceptible  of  the  local  influence  of  the
magnet,  to  remain  upon  it,  sleep,  or  rather  sleep-waking,
was  ultimately  induced,  in  no  point  differing,  like  the  local
effects,  from  mesmeric  sleep,  and  dissipated  by  all  the  means,
and  those  only,  which  dissipate  mesmeric  sleep,  just  as  holds
good  with  the  local  effects.  I  have  repeated  these  experiments
upon  a  considerable  number  of  patients,  and  hitherto  have
invariably  found  the  results  obey  the  same  rule  as  in  those
cases  which  I  reported  last  quarter,  p.  110,  that  those  only  who
are  rigid  in  the  mesmeric  state,  or  can  be  made  rigid  by  mesmeric
means,  can  be  made  rigid  in  either  the  ordinary  or  mesmeric  state,
and  that  nearly  all  of  them  can  be,  and  in  both  states,  with  the
magnet :  and  that  even  those  who  are  caialepsed  in  the  mesmeric
state,  but  cannot  be  made  rigid,  I  have  never  found  capable  of
rigidity  from  the  magnet,  in  their  ordinary  or  mesmeric  state.
My  first  trials  were  made  upon  Mary  Ann,  whose  arms  become
spontaneously  rigid  when  elevated  in  the  mesmeric  state,  and
who  can  be  mad!  rigid  in  any  part  by  long  passes,  in  either
her  ordinary  or  her  mesmeric  state :  she  was  stiffened  by  the
n^agoet  ia  L  ordinary  and  mesmeric  state.  My  nexf  was
made  upon  the  patient  with  the  cancer,  every  part  of  whom
can  be  made  rigid  by  long  passes,  and  who  grows  rigid  with-
out them  when  her  sleep  is  increased  by  my  placing  mv  hand
upon  her  forehead  :  she  was  made  rigid  by  the  magnet'in  her
ordinary  and  her  mesmeric  state.  I  tried  the  magnet  upon
two  patients  of  Mr.  Symes^s,  neither  of  whom  was  ever  stiff
or  cataleptic  in  the  mesmeric  state ;  and  no  effect  was  pro-
duced. I  tried  upon  six  of  Mr.  Chandler's  patients.  It  made
the  hands  of  only  one  rigid,  and  this  was  the  only  patient
who  could  be  made  rigid  by  mesmeric  means ;  yet  two  of  the
other  five  were  cataleptic  in  their  mesmeric  state.  I  was  not
prepared  for  this  result,  because  catalepsy  aud  rigidity  arc
so  closely  allied  in  their  character;  and  occasionally  the  same


including  a  supposed  new  Imponderable.  279

patients  exhibit  both  phenomena.  The  difference,  however,
between  the  two  states  of  rigidity  and  catalepsy,  I  ii^as  at
pains  to  point  out  in  vol.  III.  p.  67.  The  next  two  patients  I
tried  were  Bosina  and  Mrs.  Hall,  formerly  Miss  Critchley.  The
former  had  always  been  capable  of  rigidity  by  long  passes,  the
latter  had  always  been  very  rigid  in  her  mesmeric  state.  I
therefore  fully  expected  to  find  them  grow  rigid  with  the
magnet.  But  neither  did.  Yet  this  was  not  an  exception  to
the  former  facts.  I  had  not  mesmerised  them  for  a  very  long
time,  but  having  always  found  them  for  years,  the  former
capable  of  being  made  rigid,  and  the  latter  rigid  as  a  matter
of  course,  in  their  mesmeric  state ;  I  presumed  they  would
be  so  now.  I  therefore  mesmerised  them :  but  the  former  could
not  be  made  rigid  by  long  passes,  nor  did  the  latter  become
rigid  in  her  extremities  or  trunk,  but  only  in  her  closed  eye-
lids and  a  little  in  her  jaws. There  was  thus  no  exception.

A  young  man  was  kindly  brought  to  me  by  Mr.  Denn,  from
Maidstone,  to  see,  who  is  reputed  to  be  a  fine  clairvoyant,  and
to  be  capable  of  rigidity,  in  his  ordinary  and  mesmeric  state.
The  magnet  presently  stiffened  his  hand,  then  his  arm,  and
then  he  fell  into  a  profound  sleep,  in  no  respect  different  from
the  mesmeric  j  and  all  the  effects  local  and  general  could  be
dissipated  by  anti-mesmeric  means.  Mr.  Chandler  kindly
brought  me  one  of  his  patients,  just  returned  from  sea,  the
same  whose  tooth  Mr.  Bell  extracted  without  pain,  p.  207,
and  the  husband  of  his  female  patient  whom  the  magnet
stiffens.  He  always  had  been  capable  of  great  rigidity  in  his
mesmeric  state.  He  held  one  pole  of  the  magnet  for  half  an
hour,  with  very  little  effect,  but  still  some  effect,  upon  his  fin-
gers. Mr.  Chandler  then  with  a  pass  or  two  sent  him  to  sleep,
when  instantly  his  hand  upon  the  magnet  became  rigid.  Mr.
Chandler  then  awoke  him  by  transverse  passes  before  his  face,
and  relaxed  his  hand  by  other  passes  over  it.  The  magnet  now
applied  to  his  hand,  instantly  stiffened  it,  then  the  arm,  and
presently  sleep- waking  came  on,  just  as  perfect  as  from
mesmeric  means,  and  was  removed  at  pleasure  by  anti-mes-
meric means.  He  said  his  head  had  felt  benumbed  before  he
lost  himself.  A  lady  was  brought  to  me  by  Mr.  Spiller,  of
Battersea,  very  capable  of  rigidity  in  her  mesmeric  state.
The  magnet  presently  stiffened  her  hand  when  awake,  and
soon  the  rigidity  spread  and  she  was  in  the  sleep-waking  state,
in  no  point  differing  from  the  mesmeric.  There  came  also
a  young  woman,  whom  he  had  mesmerised,  and  who  was
servant  to  a  friend  of  this  lady.  The  magnet  produced  no
effect  upon  her  hand,  though  she  held  it  for  a  considerable
time,  and  had  seen  its  effect  upon  this  lady  and  my  two  pa-


380 ReichenbacVs  Researches  on  Magnetism,  ifc.,

tients  first  mentioned.  After  half  an  hour  Mr.  Thompson
mesm'erised  her,  and  she  went  to  sleep ;  still  the  magnet  upon
which  she  continued  to  rest  had  no  effect.  He  was  sitting
at  her  left  side,  I  at  her  right,  supporting  the  magnet  upon
one  pole  of  which  the  palm  of  her  right  hand  rested  :  Mr.  T.
extended  her  left  arm  and  made  passes  upon  it,  and  the  arm
remained  extended  without  support ;  it  appeared  rigid,  yet  no
rigidity  was  induced  in  the  right  by  the  magnet.  This  ap-
peared strange,  but  upon  examining  the  condition  of  the  left
arm,  we  found  it  was  not  rigid,  but  cataleptic.  This  patient
is  now  always  exquisitely  cataleptic  in  her  sleep-waking,  but
never  rigid,  and  the  magnet  never  produces  any  sort  of  effect
upon  her.  Mr.  Symes  lately  told  me  that  one  of  his  two  pa-
tients mentioned  at  p.  110,  on  whom  (never  being  rigid)  the
magnet  produced  no  effect,  had  now  become  rigid.  I  there-
fore took  the  first  opportunity  of  taking  my  magnet  to  his
house  when  this  lady  was  mesmerised ;  it  instantly  made  her
rigid,  and  as,  in  her  rigidity,  she  could  not  take  the  hand  of
her  mesmeriser,  to  whom,  whoever  might  be  the  person,
lady  or  gentleman,  she,  during  her  state,  is  attached,  she
was  annoyed  with  the  magnet,  jnst  as  she  is  with  her  mes-
meriser  if  he  makes  her  rigid,  as  he  always  can  at  pleasure
by  deepening  her  sleep.  She  said  the  magnet  was  very  dis-
agreeable to  her,  because  it  made  her  cross, — that  is,  made
her  contract  up  together,  retiring  from  her  mesmeriser.  She
was  awakened  ,*  and  the  magnet  applied  to  her  hand  caused  it
to  contract  strongly,  and  sent  her  into  sleep-wakiug,  agree-
ing in  all  its  points  with  mesmeric  sleep-waking.  To  shew
the  great  difference  between  catalepsy  and  rigidity  still  far-
ther,  I  must  mention  that  during  the  sleep-waking,  she  spon-
taneously sometimes  becomes  cataleptic,  sometimes  rigid.  If
I  applied  the  magnet  during  her  catalepsy,  it  never  once
made  her  rigid :  idthough  it  invariably  did  if  I  applied  it
when  she  was  neither  cataleptic  nor  rigid.

I  applied  the  magnet  to  another  patient  who  has  now
been  susceptible  of  mesmerism  for  several  years.  Though
her  arms  are  readily  made  rigid  and  extended  in  the  air  in
both  the  mesmeric  and  the  ordinary  state^  the  rigidity  lasts
but  a  short  time,  and  her  hand  does  not  become  rigid  even
by  long  passes  over  it.  In  her  ordinary  state  she  held  a  pole
of  the  magnet  for  ten  minutes,  without  any  effect.  I  made
her  arm  stiff  by  passes,  but  still  the  magnet  did  not  make
her  fingers  stiff,  nor  had  she  any  other  sensation  than  from
the  coldness  of  the  metal.  I  sent  her  to  sleep.  She  then
took  her  hand  from  the  magnet,  and  I  had  great  trouble  to
induce  her  to  hold  it  again,  because  the  cold  was  now  so  iu-


lincluding  a  mipposed  new  Imponderable.  281

tensely  disagreeable  to  her.  It  is  common  for  all  feelings  to
be  much  stronger  in  sleep-waking,  and,  if  disagreeable/ to  be
borne  with  less  patience.  However,  I  prevaUed  upon  her  to
hold  it  from  time  to  time.  There  was  no  effect  on  her  hand ;
not  even  afker  I  had  stiffened  her  arm  by  passes.  She  awoke
spontaneously,  as  is  usual  with  her,  after  eight  or  ten  minutes:
and  held  the  magnet  a  long  while,  but  still  with  no  effect :
and  she  laughed  and  said  it  never  would  affect  her.  I  stiff-
ened her  arm  again  with  passes ;  but  still  the  magnet  was  in-
efBcient.  I  sent  her  to  sleep  a  second  time,  and  prevailed
upon  her  with  difficulty  to  hold  the  cold  magnet.  It  produced
no  effect :  I  awoke  her,  and  it  stiU  produced  no  effect.  I
sent  her  to  sleep  the  third  time.  She  had  now  less  reluctance
to  hold  the  magnet,  for  she  said  it  was  not  so  cold ;  and  her
hand  stiffened  upon  it,  so  that  I  tore  it  from  her  with  diffi-
culty ;  and,  as  in  the  other  cases,  her  fingers  remained  stiff
and  in  the  same  position  as  when  they  were  grasping  it.  I
relaxed  them  by  transverse  passes,  by  the  breath,  &;c.  She
awoke,  and  taking  hold  of  the  magnet,  repeated  the  remark
of  her  sleep,  that  it  was  not  so  cold  as  before ;  and  presently
her  hand  stiffened  upon  it,  and  she  was  in  her  usual  sleep-
waking  state,  and  so  deep  was  her  sleep,  that  for  the  first
time  this  season  she  snored.  She  told  me  there  was  no  differ-
ence between  this  and  the  mesmeric  sleep.  I  went  from  her
sofa  to  the  table  to  write  a  prescription,  and  she  turned  round
towards  me,  as  is  usual  in  her  mesmeric  sleep.  She  begged
me  to  wake  her  as  it  was  late :  I  removed  the  magnet,  made
transverse  passes  before  her  face,  and  she  was  awake,  but
with  her  hand  stiffened.  I  applied  the  poker  to  it,  and  relax-
ation immediately  took  place.  It  is  probable  that  the  cold-
ness of  the  magnet  to  her,  for  she  is  very  sensitive  to  cold,
in  some  measure  prevented  the  effect  in  the  beginning  of
these  experiments ;  for  any  cold  substance  applied  to  stiffened
parts  has  great  power  to  effect  relaxation.  From  this  time,
the  magnet  stiffened  her  hand  and  arm  in  her  ordinary  and
her  mesmeric  state.

I  mentioned  (p.  110)  that  in  Mrs.  Hall  the  magnet  pro-
duced no  effect  when  applied  to  her  hands,  and  I  found  that,
though  she  was  formerly  always  invariably  rigid  in  her  mes-
meric state,  she  now  remains  relaxed ;  except,  indeed,  in  her
jaw  and  eyelids,  and  they  still  firmly  close  at  once  in  her
sleep-waking.  It  afterwards  occurred  to  me  to  apply  the
magnet  in  her  waking  state  to  one  side  of  her  jaws.  I  did
so,  and  her  jaw  instantly  closed,  the  eyelids  drooped,  and  she
was  asleep  and  universally  rigid.  This  fact  is  very  interesting,
as  shewing  that  if  one  part  of  the  body  remains  susceptible


282 ReichenbiUih's  Researches  on  Magneiimn,  ^c,

of  an  influence  the  rest  may  yield  to  the  inflnence  also^  al-
though rebellious  to  it  till  it  had  thus  gained  admission  at  the
susceptible  point.  I  had  on  this  very  occasion  applied  it  long
to  her  hand  without  any  effect.

These  facts  demonstrate  a  greater  difference  than  has
been  conceived  between  rigidity  and  catalepsy :  and  the  fact
of  one  part  only  remaining  susceptible  of  a  primitive  influence^
and  of  all  other  parts  becoming  secondarily  susceptible,  is
important  in  physiology  and  pathology. Hitherto  it  has  ap-
peared that  none  but  patients  susceptible  of  rigidity  from
mesmerism  are  susceptible  of  it  and  sleep  from  the  magnet :
whether  this  is  an  universal  fact,  further  experience  only  can
determine. This,  however,  I  have  determined,  that  patients
insusceptible  of  mesmeric  rigidity  are  not  necessarily  suscep-
tible of  effect  from  the  magnet ;  for  one  exception  has  oc-
curred. A  case  is  detailed  by  me  in  No.  V.,  precisely  similar
to  that  of  Mrs.  Hall  as  there  given. Sleep  and  rigidity  are
instantaneously  produced  together. Miss  Ambrose  called
upon  me  lately,  and  I  applied  the  magnet  to  her  hand  :  she
presently was  in  perfect  sleep  and  universal  rigidity. I
brought  her  to  her  ordinary  state  by  the  peculiar  method
which  has  never  failed  to  bring  her  out  of  her  sleep-waking.
She  again  called  upon  me  this  week,  to  say  that  the  short
sleep  of  half  an  hour  on  that  day  had  strengthened  her  in  a
surprising  manner,  and  she  had  not  been  so  well  as  now  for
four  months. I  told  her  she  should  have  the  magnet  again.
She  sat  down,  and  placed  one  hand  upon  a  pole ;  but  no  effect
came. I  gave  ample  time :  she  held  her  hand  upon  the  mag-
net for  half  an  hour,  but  without  any  result. Yet  her  mes-
meric susceptibility  was  as  great  as  ever. I  removed  the
magnet :  pointed  my  fingers  to  her  eyes,  and  in  a  moment,
as  usual,  she  was  asleep  and  universally  rigid. After  a  time
I  awoke  her,  and  applied  the  magnet  again  to  her  hand,  but,
as  at  first,  with  no  result. A  small  crystal  of  quartz  held  in
her  hand  on  the  first  day  produced  contraction  of  her  hand
and  sleep :  but  to-day,  it  was  as  inoperative  as  the  magnet.
I  awoke  her :  and  then  applied  the  pole  of  the  magnet  to  one
of  her  hands  :  but  at  the  end  of  half  an  hour  no  more  effect
was  produced  than  when  the  trial  was  made  before  I  mes-
merised her.

It  thus  is  not  invariable  that  the  susceptibility  of  mesmeric
stiffness  co-exists  with  susceptibility  of  stiffness  from  the  mag-
net. Nor  is  the  most  intense  local  effect  from  the  magnet  neces-
sarily co-existent  with  the  susceptibility  of  sleep  from  it,  for
I  applied  it  to  the  hand  of  a  lady  who  cannot  readily  be  put
to  sleep  by  mesmerism,  but  whose  arms  and  hands  are  very


including  a  9Uppo$ed  new  Imponderable*  288

easily  rendered  rigid  by  a  few  passes,  or  by  placing  her  hand
between  those  of  another  person.  Her  hands  had  not  been
placed  upon  the  magnet  more  than  a  minute  or  two,  when
they  became  so  firmly  and  forcibly  attached  to  the  magnet^
that  the  fingers  were  actually  bruised  and  in  one  place  the
skin  nearly  cut  through.  The  arms  were  rigid,  and,  though
the  magnet  was  not  of  less  weight  than  nineteen  pounds,
she  moved  it  about  at  nearly  arm^s-length  with  the  greatest
ease,  and  said  the  weight  was  scarcely  appreciable.  Her
husband  himself  relaxed  her  hands  by  holding  iron,  or  a
piece  of  wood,  upon  them.  The  iron  seemed  to  have  a
counteracting  efifect  most  speedily.  No  symptom  whatever
of  sleep  was  produced.  The  circulation  was  accelerated,
and  she  described  the  sensation  afterwards  as  that  of  having
taken  some  strong  stimulant,  though  no  depression  ensued
when  the  effects  were  over.  Whether  the  hand  was  in  contact
with  an  extremity,  or  the  centre  of  the  magnet,  precisely  the
same  powerful  effects  were  produced.  The  carbonate  of  lime,  on
the  contrary,  produced  a  disagreeable  sensation,  causing  great
trembling  and  vibration  of  the  arm.  The  sulphate  seemed
to  have  the  least  effect  of  the  three,  and  caused  a  sensation  of
coldness  instead  of  warmth.  In  trying  these  experiments,
we  presented  the  pointed  crystallized  end  of  spars  or  rock
crystals  to  the  hand.  The  butt  or  reverse  end  of  the  crystals
immediately  relaxed  the  hand  and  took  off  the  sensation  pro-
duced by  the  other  extremity  of  the  crystals.

I  have  repeatedly  since  applied  the  magnet  to  the  hand
of  this  lady,  and  always  with  the  same  powerful  local  effects ;
but  without  sleep  ensuing.

It  was  necessary  to  ascertain  whether  these  effects  would
result  from  steel  of  the  same  size  and  shape,  not  yet  made
into  a  magnet.  After  repeated  trials  I  had  found  it  made  no
difference  whether  any  of  my  patients  took  hold  of  one  pole  or
the  other,  or  the  legs  or  the  bend  of  the  magnet.  I  bor-
rowed the  steel  which  was  to  be  made  into  a  magnet  of  the
same  size  as  mine  for  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  b^ore  it  was
made  into  a  magnet ;  and  all  the  same  effects  were  produced  as
by  my  magnet^  and  in  the  same  intensity.

Though  steel,  and  especially  a  large  mass  of  hard  steel,
has  this  effect,  soft  iron  has  none  upon  those  few  of  my
patients  upon  whom  I  have  tried  it.  Yet  some  other
metals  have:  copper  among  the  rest  stiffens  the  hands  of
some.  I  gave  Mary  Ann  the  two  brass  handles  of  an  electro-
magnetic apparatus  to  hold :  her  hands  slowly  became  rather
stiff,  but  nothing  else  ensued.  The  apparatus  was  put  in
action,  and  their  contraction  presently  became  violent,  and


284  Postscript,  by  Dr.  EUiotson,

she  fell  senseless  and  tiniversally  relaxed,  jast  as  when  she
touches  strongly  mesmerised  gold,  or  holds  for  some  time
the  hand  of  a  patient  in  the  mesmeric  sleep.  The  same  ex-
periment was  made  with  the  same  results  upon  the  patient
spoken  of  at  p.  182,  except  that  the  utmost  effect  was  deep
coma  and  general  rigidity.  I  gave  them  both  to  hold  at  sepa-
rate times  one  end  of  a  very  large  electro-magnet,  not  yet
electro-magnetized.  They  did  so  for  nearly  half  an  hour  with
no  other  effect  than  a  slight  stiffness  of  the  hand ;  the  soft  iron
probably  counteracting  the  power  of  the  copper.  They  some
days  afterwards  told  me  in  their  sleep  that  they  had  been
greatly  afraid  of  it,  fancying  that  as  it  was  so  large  it  must  be
very  powerful.  This  proves  that  imagination  has  nothing  to
do  with  results  in  them.  In  truth  I  have  always  had  ample
proof  that  it  has  not.

As  soon  as  by  means  of  Grove's  battery  this  was  rendered
an  electro-magnet,  its  power  over  each  was  immense ;  violent
contraction,  followed  by  insensibility  and  general  relaxation,
took  place  in  Mary  Ann,  and  intense  coma  and  intense  general
rigidity  in  the  other :  the  former  remained  weak  long  after
she  had  at  length  come  to  herself,  the  other  awoke  quite  well.

I  on  other  occasions  gave  each  of  them  this  same  magnet,
if  so  it  could  be  called,  to  hold  without  employing  the  bat-
tery, and  the  effects  were  local  and  slight,  even  after  they
had  held  it  for  a  good  hour.

{To  be  concluded  in  our  next  Number,)


We  regret  that  the  rest  of  Dr.  EUiotson's  account  must
be  postponed  to  the  next  number,  as  well  as  some  interesting
mesmeric  papers  by  Mr.  D.  Hands  and  other  gentlemen,  and
communications  on  cerebral  physiology.


XVII.  Postscript,  by  Dr.  EUiotson,  to  the  Account  qf  Painless

Surgical  Operations,

June  25th.  I  have  to-day  received  two  Calcutta  news-
papers from  Dr.  Esdaile,  containing  accounts  by  himself  of
more  painless  operations.

In  The  Englishman  of  March  16th,  after  an  account  of  the
operation  described  at  p.  196,  comes  the  following,  for  he  was
unexpectedly  detained  at  Hooghly.


€t


' "  Ibth  Operation.
Dr.  Clapperton  then  went  to  inspect  the  Jail  Hospital^


to  the  Accauni  of  PabUesB  Surgical  Operations. 285

and  desired  oinch  to  see  a  mesmeric  operation,  if  possible;
bat  I  said  that  I  should  not  be  able  to  gratify  him^  as  very
few  operations  were  performed  among  the  prisoners.  On
reaching  the  hospital,  however,  I  found  that  water  had  re-
accumidated  in  a  case  of  hydrocele.  I  entranced  the  man
in  a  few  minutes,  and  performed  the  operation  without  dis-
turbing him.  He  would  have  slqpt  on,  but  Dr.  Clapperton
wished  to  see  him  awake.  This  was  accordingly  donet,  and
he  said  that  nothing  had  annoyed  him,  and  that  he  felt  no
pain  now,  and  waa  unconsdous  that  anything  had  been  done
to  him.  Extreme  laxity  of  the  limbs  is  the  condition  of  this
man  in  the  trance;  and  I  wished  to  show  the  superintending
surgeon  the  opposite  condition  of  intense  rigidity,  if  possible,
and  a  case  luckily  presented  itself.

''  76/A  Operation.
"  A  man  who  had  been  dismissed  cured  fit>m  hospital,  six
months  ago,  returned  to*day  with  fever  and  diarrhcea.  I
said  that  I  knew  not  whether  this  man's  susceptibility  still
continued,  but  would  try.  In  a  few  minutes  he  was  deeply
entranced,  showing  in  the  most  perfect  manner  the  cataleptic
condition  of  the  whole  muscular  system,  and  its  incredible
power  of  sustaining  fatigue  while  in  this  state.  I  next  con-
verted him  into  a  somnambulist,  and  exhibited  the  communi-
cative, imitative,  and  servilely-obedient  stages  of  somnambu-
lism ;  and  then  stripped  the  man  naked,  that  Dr.  Clapperton
might  observe  his  first  actions  on  awaking  and  finding  him-
self standing  in  his  presence  in  such  a  condition,  and  this
produced  a  discovery  that  led  to  an  interesting  '  ex  tempore'
experiment.  I  perceived  that  he  had  a  hydrocele  on  one  side,
of  which  I  was  not  before  aware,  and  turning  to  Dr.  Clap-
perton, I  reminded  him  of  the  case  in  which  Cloquet  took
off  a  lady's  breast  when  she  was  in  the  somnambulistic  state,
but  capable  of  conversing  the  whole  time  with  him,  and  yet
felt  no  pain.  I  showed  that  this  man's  skin  had  lost  all  sen-
sibility, although  he  obeyed  all  my  orders,  and  was  capable
of  giving  rational  replies  to  questions,  and  said  that  I  would
now  operate  upon  him,  if  the  Doctor  would  recollect  that  it
was  only  an  experiment  I  was  making,  and  that  if  I  wished
to  make  sure  of  the  result,  I  had  only  to  deepen  the  trance.
I  extended  the  man's  legs  and  arms  as  if  on  a  cross,  and  drew
off  the  fluid  without  the  slightest  alteration  in  his  attitude :
he  was  then  laid  on  his  back  on  the  floor  to  have  the  injection
thrown  in,  which  was  done  without  any  sign  of  uneasiness.
He  was  again  hauled  upon  his  legs,  and  dressed,  so  that  no
trace  of  our  proceedings  was  obsorvaUe. I  now  awoke  him,

X


286  Posiser^t,  by  Dr.  EUiotsan,

and  asked  if  he  had  been  distarbed  in  his  sleep ;  he  said '  no/
I  again  asked  him  what  his  complaint  was^  and  he  correctly
informed  us.  '  What !  said  I,  have  you  no  other  disease  V
'None,  Sir/  'Take  care!  I  know  you  have/  He  called
Gk>d  to  witness  he  had  not.  '  It  is  useless  to  conceal  anything
from  me,  I  know  you  have  a  swelling.'  '  Ah  1  yes,  but  that
does  not  trouble  me.'  '  Show  it  me.'  He  undid  his  dress,
and  on  feeling  the  part,  said  both  sides  were  now  alike.  '  How
has  that  happened  V  '  I  don't  know :  one  side  was  bigger
than  the  other  this  morning,  and  there  is  blood  too  1'  He
added,  that  there  was  no  pain  in  the  part  now."

7%e  Englishman  of  April  15,  affords  still  more  news.

"  I  hoped  that  in  my  absence  my  assistants  would  not  be
idle,  and  I  have  not  been  disappointed,  although  much  more
would  have  been  done  if  the  people  had  not  imagined  that  I
was  the  exclusive  possessor  of  the  potent  charm ;  many  patients
with  formidable  surgical  diseases  having  returned  to  their
homes  when  they  learned  that  I  was  not  here.  ^The  native
sub-assistant  surgeon  has  furnished  me  with  the  following
notes  of  what  has  been  done  in  my  absence.

"  A  report  of  cases  treated  by  mesmerism  in  the  Imamborah,
and  Jail  Hospitals,  Hooyhly,  in  the  months  of  February  and
March,  1846.

"  77th  Painless  Operation.
**  February  12th.  Bamdhun,  aged  40,  had  got  phimosis
for  three  months,  and  would  not  submit  to  the  necessary
operation,  unless  he  could  be  made  insensible  by  the  usaal
charm.  He  was  therefore  put  to  sleep,  and  the  operation
performed  without  awaking  him.

'^  February  2l8t.  Rassoo,  a  Hindoo  woman,  aged  56,  has
been  suffering  from  rheumatism  of  the  left  shoulder  and  elbow
for  two  months ;  the  former  is  quite  stiff,  and  she  can  only
remove  her  arm  a  short  distance  from  her  side.  Mesmerised
— bright  arm  perfectly  cataleptic,  respiration  abdominal,  and
slower  than  natural,  eyes  half  open.  The  left  arm  was  gra-
dually straightened,  and  brought  perpendicular  to  her  body.
During  the  extension,  a  crackling  noise  was  heard :  she  awoke
in  an  hour  after,  and  could  move  her  arm  freely.  Dismissed
in  a  few  days  cured.

''  March  4th.  Buttun,  a  Burkundauze,  aged  SO,  admitted


to  the  Account  of  Painlesa  Surgical  Operations, 287

ischuria  vesicalis  and  Buffering  from  excruciating  pain.  An
attempt  was  made  to  introduce  the  catheter^  but  failed.
Ordered  to  have  sixty  drops  of  laudanum,  and  to  be  placed
in  a  warm  bath,  another  unsuccessful  trial  was  again  made
with  the  catheter,  8  o'clock  p.  m.  To  be  sickened  with  tartar
emetic,  and  again  placed  in  a  warm  bath :  when  he  was  suffi-
ciently under  the  influence  of  the  tartar  emetic,  the  catheter
was  again  tried,  but  in  vain.

^'  March  5th.  The  lower  part  of  the  abdomen  much  dis-
tended ;  the  catheter  was  again  tried,  but  with  no  effect.

''11  o'clock  A.  M.  On  examining  by  the  rectum,  the  vesica
was  felt  through  it  much  distended.  To  be  mesmerised.
This  was  done  for  the  purpose  of  puncturing  the  vesica  through
the  rectum  rather  than  with  any  hope  of  overcoming  the
spasm  which  had  resisted  so  many  powerful  remedies.

''  1  o'clock  p.  If.  Slept  for  half  an  hour,  but  was  not  re-
lieved ;  to  be  mesmerised  again.

**  Slept  for  two  hours,  during  which  there  was  an  invo-
luntary vesical  and  alvine  discharge.  When  he  awoke,  he
said  he  was  unconscious  of  this.  He  slept  again  of  his  own
accord,  and  rose  in  the  evening  quite  free  from  pain ;  minxit
freely,  and  felt  hungry.

**  March  6th.  He  is  quite  well,  and  returned  home.

**  March  5th.  Puddoo,  aged  82,  a  husbandman,  has  had
rheumatic  pains  in  the  elbow  and  ankle  for  a  year  and  a  half;
the  former  is  so  weak  that  he  cannot  lift  a  light  weight — to
be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  daily.

''  March  7th.  A  little  better,  slept  to-day  for  an  hour  and
a  half.  The  pain  in  the  joint  is  much  less,  and  he  can  lift
light  bodies,  and  move  his  arm  freely.

''  March  8th.  Slept  for  two  hours ;  says  he  has  no  pain,
and  is  quite  well.

**  March  7th.  Solim,  a  Mahomedan,  aged  40,  complains
of  severe  pain  in  the  right  shoulder  which  disturbs  his  rest ;
to  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  daily.  Slept  for  an  hour  to-day ;
no  relief  from  the  pain.

''8th.  Passed  a  good  night,  mesmerised.  Slept  for  an
hour  and  a  half,  pain  much  less.

"10th.  Mesmerised.  Slept  for  two  hours  and  a  half,
pain  entirely  gone.

"February  22nd.  Shaik  Oolam,  a  prisoner,  has  been
labouring  under  rheumatism  for  a  couple  of  months :  the
larger  articulations  are  somewhat  swollen, and  painful  on

x2


288  Postscript,  by  Dr.  ElUotsan,

motion,  especially  the  left  shoalder  and  elbow ;  to  be  mesme-
rised for  an  hour  daily.

"  23rd  and  24th.  No  perceptible  change.

''  25th.  Can  move  the  arm  fireely,  and  there  is  less  pain.

''  27th.  Swelling  and  pain  of  the  shoulder  much  less.

"  On  the  lOth^  the  pain  and  swelling  left  the  elbow,  and
he  said  he  was  quite  wedl.

''  78/A  Painless  Operation.
"  February  8th.  Moodoo,  a  prisoner,  has  got  a  fistulous
sore  in  the  right  cheek,  communicating  with  the  second
grinder,  which  must  be  drawn  for  the  cure  of  the  sore.  He
was  entranced,  and  the  tooth  taken  out  without  awaking
him.


t(


"  79th  Painless  Operation.
February  18th. Gooroo  Churn,  a  prisoner,  has  a  fistu-
lulous  opening  in  the  chin,  connected  with  one  of  the  front
teeth. He  was  entranced,  and  the  tooth  extracted  without
his  knowing  it.

'^(Signed)  BunuN  Chundsb  Chowo&y,

Sub-Assist.  Surg.
"  On  the  6th  of  April,  I  returned  from  the  army,  and
found  several  patients  in  hospital  requiring  the  use  of  the
knife.

'^  80th  Painless  Operation.
^*  April  6th.  Gungaram  Doss,  aged  16,  a  beggar,  has  got
deep  extensive  sores  around  the  right  ankle,  with  numerous
sinuses  running  among  them.  He  was  mesmerised  for  an
hour,  and  all  the  diseased  channels  laid  open  without  annoy-
ing him  in  the  least,  and  there  was  no  pain  in  the  part  when
he  awoke  an  hour  after.

"  Slst  Painless  Operation.

"  April  6th.  Newfar  Bagdy,  aged  34,  a  cooly,  came  to
hospital  on  the  12th  March  with  a  compound  fracture  of  both
bones  of  the  right  leg.  The  discharge  is  very  fetid,  shewing
the  presence  of  dead  bone,  and  matter  comes  from  the  back
of  the  leg  to  the  wound  in  front;  mesmerised  for  an  hour
without  going  to  sleep.

"  Apnl  7th.  He  was  entranced  to-day,  and  I  cut  down
upon  the  bone  in  front,  and  made  a  counter-opening  behind,
three  inches  long,  without  causing  the  slightest  movement  in
his  body.  He  slept  for  a  long  time  after,  and  when  he  awoke,
felt  no  pain  in  the  part.


to  the  Accomi  of  Painkn  Smrgkal  Operatiavtg. 880

''  S2nd  Pamle$8  Operation.

''  April  6tli.  ICasinath  Ro^,  aged  86^  a  durwan^  has  got
an  extensiTe  abfeoess  on  one  ude  c^  the  scrotum^  and  a  hydro-
cele on  the  other :  did  not  deep  to-dav.

"  7th.  Entranced  to-day ;  reserved  till  to  morrow.

''8th.  To-day^  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Staiuforthj  the
Sessions  Judge,  I  laid  open  one  side  of  the  scrotnm  to  the
extent  of  four  inches  in  length,  drew  the  water  off  the  other
side,  and  threw  in  the  injection.  He  did  not  awake  till  half
an  hour  afterwards ;  had  no  pain  then,  and  no  recollection  of
having  been  disturbed  in  his  sleep.

<'  83rtf  Pamlesi  Operaium.
"  April  8th.  Ramdhun  Ghose,  aeed  40,  a  cow-keeper,
has  had  disease  of  the  right  ear  foir  eight  months,  and  there
is  a  fistulous  sore  behind  it.  He  was  mesmerised  lying  down,
as  usual,  and  in  half  an  hour  I  pulled  him  up  by  both  his
hands  into  the  sitting  posture,  and  laid  open  the  fistula  for
two  inches  without  awaking  him.  He  appeared  to  be  uneasy,
but  did  not  awake  till  ten  minutes  after,  and  on  seeing  the
blood  running  down  his  chest,  he  said  that  his  ear  had  burst
when  he  was  asleep ;  that  it  had  done  so  before  once,  dis-
diarging  matter,  but  this  time  it  was  blood.

"  April  8th.  Bagobun  Doss,  aged  55,  a  Sirdar-bearer,  has
got  a  huge  scrotal  tumor,  on  account  of  which  he  was  obliged
to  give  up  his  place  four  years  ago.  He  has  come  finom
Cuttack,  a  friend  of  his  here  having  written  to  him,  that
many  persons  had  been  relieved  of  their  burdens  by  me  with-
out being  put  to  pain.  He  was  easily  subdued  yesterday  on
the  first  trial,  and  again  to-day.  His  legs  and  arms  were
spread  out  to  the  utmost,  no  one  holding  them,  and  I  pro-
ceeded to  operate.  Before  commencing  his  ptdse  was  70,
natural,  and  one  eye  was  half  open,  glued,  and  death-like.
He  begem  to  moan  indistinctly  when  the  operation  was  nearly
over,  but  his  legs  and  arms  never  moved,  and  the  half-open
eyelid  never  quivered ;  the  eye  retained  its  death-like  look  till
he  awoke,  twenty  minutes  after  the  operation  was  over.  The
mass  weighed  80  lbs.  Shortly  before  awaking,  his  pulse  was
80,  weak,  but  regular,  and  immediately  after  commg  to  his
senses  it  rose  in  strength  and  frequency.  At  first  he  was
confused,  and  said  that  he  could  not  give  an  account  of  his
feelings.  Having  got  some  water  to  drink,  he  recovered  the
full  possession  of  his  senses,  and  said  that  he  recollected
nothing  till  after  drinking  the  water;  that  he  now  knew  from
the  pain  in  the  part,  and  from  reflection,  that  the  tumor  was


290  Postscript y  by  Dr.  EUiotsan,

removed^  but  he  had  no  idea  how  it  had  been  effected.  He
felt  a  little  weak^  nothing  to  speak  of;  sat  up,  and  said  he
could  walk  well  enough  if  it  was  not  for  the  heat  in  the  part.
Unfortunately^  at  the  end  of  twenty  minutes,  this  man  was
violently  awoke  by  a  tatty  falling  from  a  height  upon  his
body.  If  he  had  awoke  naturally,  the  pain  in  the  part  would
probably  have  been  less,  or  perhaps  he  would  have  felt  none;
the  longer  they  sleep  the  better  for  this  purpose.  From  this,
and  numerous  other  cases,  it  is  certain,  that  if  they  feel  pain
in  their  sleep,  they  have  no  recollection  of  it  when  awake.  Mr.
Staniforth  was  present  at  all  these  operations.'^


On  the  22nd  of  June  I  received  this  note  from  Mr.
Chandler.

'^  I  quite  intended  to  have  added  a  note  to  Ford's  case
(p.  209),  to  the  following  effect,  but  it  escaped  my  memory,
and  I  suppose  it  will  be  too  late  now.

**  I  have  on  several  occasions  whilst  in  the  mesmeric  sleep
given  him  a  succession  of  strong  shocks  with  an  electro-
magnetic apparatus,  which  produced  about  as  much  effect  as
would  be  produced  by  the  same  means  on  a  dead  man, — ^a
slight  twitching  of  the  hands  and  arms.  On  awaking  him  and
continuing  the  shocks  in  the  same  manner,  he  immediately
dropt  the  handles  and  observed  that '  He  was  sure  that  would
wake  any  one.'

»  Another  curious  thing  happened.  There  was  of  course  the
usual  tingling  sensation  remaining  in  his  hands.  This  was  in-
stantly dissipated  by  blowing  on  them  just  as  though  it  had
been  produced  by  mesmerism ;  and,  what  is  more  curious,  I
tried  the  same  with  several  other  persons  not  in  the  sleep,
and  the  tingling  was  removed  just  as  quickly.  I  have  also
tried  two  other  patients  during  the  sleep,  and  found  that  one
recollected  nothing  of  it  when  awakened,  and  the  other  very
little ;  neither  of  them  could  bear  a  single  turn  of  the  machine
(giving  about  twenty-four  shocks)  when  awake."

The  foUowing  incident  may  be  worth  recording.  A  boy,
set.  9,  was  in  the  London  Hospital  under  Mr.  Luke,  who
asked  Mr.  Chandler  to  mesmerise  him  in  order  that  he  might
divide  the  tendo  Achillis  of  each  leg,  for  distorted  feet.  Mr.  C.
tried  him  four  or  five  times  with  little  or  no  effect.  As  he
did  not  appear  likely  to  become  very  soon  sufficiently  suscep-
tible, Mr.  Luke  proceeded  to  the  operations  on  the  10th  of


to  the  Account  of  Painless  Surgical  Operations. 291

June.  To  the  surprise  of  all  present  he  smiled  during  the
whole  time  both  tendons  were  being  divided  :  and  on  ques-
tioning him  afterwards  Mr.  C.  found  he  had  not  had  the
slightest  sensation  in  the  legs  below  the  knees  for  the  last
eight  years.


XYin.  The  Harveian  Oration.

We  have  just  time  to  notice  that  the  Harveian  Oration
was  delivered  by  Dr.  EUiotson,  at  the  CoUege  of  Physicians^
on  Saturday^  the  27th  of  June.  We  are  anxious  to  inform
our  readers  of  the  marked  attention  with  which  it  was  re-
ceived, and  more  particukrly  that  portion  of  it  where  he  de-
scribed the  use  of  mesmerism,  and  called  on  his  professional
brethren  to  investigate  the  subject  for  themselves.  At  the
conclusion  there  were  two  distinct  rounds  of  applause.  This
is  indeed  gratifying.  Here  is  this  much  abused  science  openly
advocated  in  the  College  of  Physicians  and  respectfully  lis-
tened to,  notwithstanding  the  profession  have  been  for  years
denouncing  and  persecuting  the  orator.  Time  works  wonders.
We  are  not  at  fdl  anxious  to  refer  to  disagreeable  subjects,
but  we  must  remark  that  it  must  have  been  delightful  for
Dr.  Elliotson  to  be  enabled  to  declare  the  truth  on  such  an
occasion,  and  which  he  did  in  the  true  spirit  of  a  philosopher.
We  augur  firom  these  proceedings  the  practical  acknowledg-
ment on  the  part  of  the  majority  of  the  profession  of  a  belief
in  the  truth  of  mesmerism.  The  following  was  the  appeal
made  by  Dr.  Elliotson  to  his  compeers : —

*'  It  is  the  imperative,  the  solemn,  duty  of  the  profession,
anxiously  and  dispassionately  to  determine  these  points  by
experiment,  each  man  for  lumself.  I  have  done  so  for  teu
years,  and  fearlessly  declare  that  the  phenomena,  the  pre-
vention of  pain  under  surgical  operations,  the  productioti  of
repose  and  comfort  in  diseases,  and  the  cure  of  many,  even
after  the  failure  of  all  ordinary  means,  are  true.

''In  the  name,  therefore,  of  the  love  of  truth,  in  the
name  of  the  dignity  of  our  profession,  in  the  name  of  the
good  of  aU  maiJsind,  I  implore  you  carefully  to  investigate
this  important  subject.^


fj


BRRATA  IN  No.  XIII.

At  p.  70,  line  V,  for  **  mesmerbo/'  retd  mercmriaUm.
„  151» M W,  for  "  rapport/'  read  iiytpow.


THE ZOIST


No.  XV.


OCTOBER,  1846.


I.  More  painless  Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  Slate.

Commuiiicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  MODERN  MESMERISM,  from  Personal  IiiTeiti.
■■-  gfttloa. By  John  Formi,  M.D.,  F.R.8.,  Phydeiui  to  Her  Mi^Mty'i  Hooaehold.

"  A  imart,  able  prodoctioo.  J(f  thtrt  an  atiU  anm  doubten  a$  to  wtfiwMrlwi  heima  aframd,
wc  advlw  them  to  penue  this  pamphlet  It  cerutnly  It  a  prickly  rod  for  one  of  the  elaiwi
of  fModb/'— .Loncfl.

I  HAVE  received  another  letter  from  Dr.  Esdaile.

''  Hooghly,  28th  May,  1846.
"My  dear  Sir,

"  I  was  very  happy  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  Ist  April,
and  to  be  the  means  of  giving  you  pleasure.  If  my  labours
should  fortunately  add  weight  to  what  you  have  done  and
said,  and  assist  in  hastening  your  public  triumph  and  reward,
I  shall  be  satisfied.  I  returned  from  Ferozepore  the  day  after
reaching  it,  having  victoriously  marched  2,200  miles  without
seeing  an  enemy.  By  this  mail  I  have  the  pleasure  to  send
you  a  quantity  of  mesmeric  matter,  by  which  you  will  per-
ceive that  the  natives  of  this  country  are  acquainted  with  it
as  a  curative  agent,  and  I  have  little  doubt  that  they  are
adepts  in  the  villanous  department ;  but  this  is  not  easily
detected.  If  I  have  not  been  as  bitterly  opposed  and  maligned
as  you  by  the  doctors,  I  have  had  as  little  help  and  encourage"
mentfrom  them;  but,  luckily  for  me,  I  could  not  be  injured
in  the  usual  way,  being  a  public  servant  and  independent  of
private  practice.  A  contemptible  attempt  was  made  to  bum
me,  however,  but,  as  my  would-be  executioners  were  them-
selves consumed,  I  have  been  let  alone  for  a  long  while,  and
no  one  dares  to  attack  me  openly — it  would  only  be  to  draw
upon  him  a  fire  of  tumors  of  50,  60,  70,  80  lbs.  weight,  of

VOL.  IV.  Y


294 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

which  I  have  an  unlimited  command. As  it  will  make  you
laugh  (you  will  have  nothing  else  to  do  soon),  I  must  relate  to
you  the  first  and  last  mesmeric  battle  fought  by  the  neplus
ultras  in  defence  of  their  prescribing  privileges  and  right  of  tor-
menting the  human  r^ce  per  totam  terram. But  it  would  re-
quire a  Moliere  to  do  the  subject  justice.  Be  it  known  to  you^
then,  that  we  had  a  Wdkley  minimus  here  in  the  editor  of  the
Calcutta  Medical  Journal, When  I  first  took  up  the  subject,
I  invited  him  to  come  and  see  for  himself;  but,  as  usual,  he
contented  himself  with  sniggering  and  doing  nothing. All
he  knew  about  the  matter  was  what  he  had  seen  in  ^q  Lancet,
and  he  was  smitten  with  a  sudden  ambition  to  nickle  me. At
the  end  of  three  months,  he  asked  leave  to  accept  my  invita-
tion and  bring  two  friends  with  him. I  said.  Come,  on  con-
dition that  you  print  all  you  see  and  do. I  had  ascertained
by  numerous  experiments  with  all  kinds  of  persons,  that,  after
the  system  had  been  deeply  tainted  by  the  mesmeric  action,
any  one  could  produce  the  usual  phenomena  by  doing  as  he
was  ordered. /  looked  upon  my  visitor  as  a  mad  bull,  with
whom  it  would  be  absurd  to  reason,  and  resolved  to  bait  him
for  the  amusement  of  the  public. I  accordingly  invited  my
friends  to  the  bull  bait,  and  I  assure  you  the  sport  was  capital;
he  gored  and  tossed  the  fortunately  generally -insensible  pa-
tients fmade  so  by  himself  J,  and  roared  like  a  bull  of  Bashan
at  his  own  success. Since  the  days  of  the  MMecin  malgri  Im,
there  has  not  been  such  a  farce. I  published  a  true  and  sim-
ple account  of  his  mighty  deeds  and  presumed  conversion,
and  he  revenged  himself  in  the  journal  by  maligning  my  poor
patients  as  a  pack  of  hardened  and  determined  impostors,  and
kindly  permitted  me  to  be  perhaps  only  a  fool. I  laaghed  at
his  beard,  and  made  ballads  on  him  in  return ;  and,  when  he
had  exposed  his  ignorance,  I  began  to  speak  seriously  to  the
public  in  letters  published  monthly  in  the  newspapers.

**  Nearly  all  who  can  be  convinced  are  so,  and  I  will  not  rest
till  mesmerism  is  introduced  into  the  public  hospitals  in  Cal-
cutta. On  the  1st  June  I  expect  a  party  of  influential  gen-
tlemen from  Calcutta,  and,  if  I  have  my  usual  good  fortune,
I  hope  to  send  them  back  satisfied.  Dr.  O^Shaughnessy,  who
is  a  college  chum  of  mine,  was  here  yesterday,  and  we  tested
the  insensibility  of  three  men  by  the  electro-magnetic  ma-
chine ;  they  were  quite  indifierent  to  it,  so  I  consider  them
to  be  bagged.  Dr.  Mouat  is  coming  up  next  Monday,  and
will  perhaps  tell  you  what  he  sees.  I  am  26  miles  from  Cal-
cutta, and  have  only  a  village  hospital.

"  I  never  mesmerise  now,  for  others  do  the  work  just  as
effectually,  and  it  was  killing  me. I  wonder  that  you  do  not


communicated  by  Dr.  Ettiotstm.


295


keep  a  mesmeric  corps  too ;  but  I  have  a  great  advantage  in
the  docility  and  patience  of  my  agents  and  patients.

"  Believe  me,

"  Very  truly  yours,

'^  Jab.  Esdaile.
''  P.S.  I  have  found  a  copy  of  a  mesmeric  ballad,  and  I
assure  you  that  the/ac/«  are  as  true  as  if  they  had  been  sworn
to  before  a  magistrate  in  prose,  and  you  will  recognize  their
truth,  although  people  unacquainted  with  the  subject  will
think  it  a  burlesque/'*

♦  "  A  VISIT  TO  HOOGHLY.
And  how  the  Editor  did  more  than  he  intended.


'^  On  Gnnga's  banks  an  Editor,

To  make  himaelf  a  name,
ResoWd  to  kill  a  Meameriat,

And  gain  immortal  fiune.

«  To-morrow  I'll  gire  np  my  fees,

And  eke  to  Hooghly  hie ;
To  kill  the  dog  that  worries  ns ;

ResoWd  to  do  or  die.

"  Then  starting  boldly  np,  he  cried
Unto  his  slaves,  '  Quoi  Hye  !'

This  instant  go  to  Jann  Basaar,
And  order  me  a  fly.

'*  And  also  buy  me  plenty  rope
Both  new,  and  strong  as  steel,

With  which  to  bind  the  Mesmerist,
All  to  my  carriage  wheel.

*'  I'll  teach  him  to  distorb  onr

With  this  his  last  humbug ;
I'll  put  him  to  a  cruel  death,

And  crush  him  like  a  bug !

"  But  first  101  write  a  letter  fiur ;

By  d&k  it  shaU  be  sent ;
To  tiirow  the  rascal  off  his  guard,

And  hide  my  deep  intent.

*'  Now,  I  am  told,  the  Mesmerist,
When  he  recdved  the  chit —

'  Oh  !  ho  1*  quoth  he,  my  cunning  friend
The  biter  shall  be  bit.

**  *  You're  very  knowing.  Dr.  Slop,

And  take  me  for  a  cake ;
But  ere  we  part,  when  next  we  meet.

You'll  find  out  your  mistake.

*<  <  You  come  to  publish  me  a  fool,

Or  eke  a  naughty  knave  ;
But  those  who  would  a  rasor  wield.

Should  learn  the  art  to  shave.


*' '  And  I  will  shave  thee  like  an  egg,

And  make  of  thee  a  show,
Till  all  the  boys  shall  laugh  at  thee.

And  eke  thy  friends  also '

'*  Then  to  the  Judge  he  hied  him.

And  giving  him  a  nudge.
Told  him  of  Slop's  intended  plan,

To  prove  it  all  a  fudge.

''  Unto  the  worthy  Clergyman,

He  also  did  resort ;
And  begg'd  of  him  to  oountenanee,

A  litde  pleasant  sport.

<<  <  Most  willingly,— most  willingly,'

They  both  at  once  did  cry :
'  We'll  look  as  grave  as  mustard  pots,

And  laugh  not,  though  we  die.'

* ' '  A  thousand  thanks,  my  worthy  friends,'

The  Mesmerist  repli^ ;
'  I'll  baste  this  bragging  insolent.

Who  dares  to  say  we  lied.

'' '  Tlien  when  I  gravdy  do  propose

Unto  the  learned  Sk^.
That  he  should  practise  Mesmerism,

You'll  second  it  quite  pop.'

<< '  I'll  aid  you,'  said  the  Qergyman,
And  look  as  grave's  a  Church.'

'  And  I,'  said  the  Civilian,
'  Wm  leave  him  in  the  lurch.'

"  Nextmorningcame,  withfoamingsteeds.

The  gallant  Dr.  Slop,
Kihaling  death  to  Mesmeriste,

And  quaking  for  his  shop.

' '  With  tremblinglimbs,  andhumble  looks,

The  Mesmerist  appear'd,
For  now  he  stood  in  presence  of

"Die  only  man  he  fear'd.

y2


.296 Accounti  of  more  painkM  Surgical  Operations,

"  80th  May.  /  have  this  moment  taken  off  a  woman* s  leg
without  her  knowing  it.**

Six  numbers  of  the  Calcutta  Englishman  and  Military
Chronicle  arrived  by  the  same  mail.  I  extract  a  dialogue
from  that  of  May  18,  because  it,  with  the  ballad,  shews  the
identity  of  the  breeds  of  our  opponents  in  different  quarters  of
the  globe.  Mr.  Wakley,  Mr.  Bintoul,  and  other  editors,  and  Dr.
Forbes,  Dr.  Marshall  Hall,  and  other  members  of  the  Boyal
Medical  Society,  may  at  length  suspect,  when  they  read  what
has  passed  in  the  East  Indies  among  their  counterparts,  that
their  own  anti-mesmeric  thoughts  and  actions,  however  proud
they  may  be  of  them,  are  all  mere  inevitable  physical  results


**  Hit  nerres  he  stnmg  with  a^ua  eamph.

And  ahaking,  thus  begnn —
Bat  with  his  eye*8-tail  viewed  his  friends,

And  coll'd  them  to  the  fiio.

"Oh!  leaned,  and  redoubted  Slop  1

Would  you  but  condescend,
Your  portly  body  unto  me.

For  some  few  minutes  lend.

** '  Then  might  I  hope,  a  little  while,

To  breathe  these  vital  airs.
And  not  be  sent  by  kick  of  foot.

Head  foremost  down  the  stairs.

" '  And  doom'd  to  beg  my  daily  bread,

With  reputation  crack'd.
And  sentenc'd  to  a  life  of  shame.

Hie  public  having  quack'd.

"  *  If  you  will  but  restrain  your  rage.

And  give  me  leave  to  live ;
My  secret  and  my  magic  wand,
To  you  I  fireely  give.'

*' '  Perish  your  secret,  and  yourself !

But  as  you're  in  my  power,
With  you  I  will  amuse  myself.

And  wile  away  an  hour.'

*' '  Then,  mighty  sir,  will  you  but  deign,

To  let  your  piercing  eyes.
Rest  for  five  minutes  on  the  girl.

Who  on  that  charpoy  lies.'

**  The  learned  Doctor  turned  his  head.

And  fix'd  his  eagle  gaxe  ;
The  girl  fell  back,  with  quiv'ring  lids.

To  Doctor  Slop's  amase.


"  Stunn'd  was  the  Doctor—- mad  was  he!

And  oh  1  an  angry  wight.
To  see  such  tokens  of  the  truth.

And  of  his  own  great  might.

**  You  may  suppose  what  epithets

He  on  tiie  hussey  pour'd.
And  when  he  could  not  wake  her,

How  awfully  he  roar'd  I

**  With  looks  demure,  the  Mesmerist,
Some  add  next  brought  out ;

Let  which  but  touch  the  slightest  wound.
The  stoutest  would  cry  out.

"  And  begg'd  his  learned  brother  woold

Apply  it  to  a  sore,
Which  a  woman,  mesmerised.

Upon  her  temple  bore.

"  With  haughty  look,  but  inward  dread.

Slop  ruefaUy  conform'd :
The  woman  only  slept  the  more,*

And  was  not  even  warm'd.

**  But  when  the  hog-man  he  8ubdued,b

How  fearfully  he  swore  I
'  If  in  my  shop  I  were  again,

I'd  never  quit  it  more  !'

"  And  when  the  Mesmerist  so  meek.
Had  bow'd  him  to  the  door,

He  cast  upon  him  such  a  look.
As  I  ne'er  saw  before  1

"  Now  let  us  sing,  long  life  to  Slop !

The  Mesmerist  long  live  he  1
And  when  they  have  another  bout.

May  I  be  there  to  see  !"c


•  See  Zoifff,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  41.  b  See  ZoUi,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  25.

c  Hie  Wakley  genus  deserves  no  higher  notice  than  to  be  made  the  subject  of
such  ballads  and  of  nursery  rhymes. — J.  Elliotson.


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  297

of  their  cerebral  particles  composed  and  arranged  and  de-
veloped in  a  certain  sad  way  and  acted  upon  in  a  certain  way
by  external  circumstances,  and  that  by  reflecting  persons  they
are  regarded  as  puppets,  unable  to  act  otherwise  in  their
present  circumstances, — all  as  toys  making  pre-ordained  noises
and  gesticulations  when  certain  strings  are  pulled.  Mr.  Wakley
and  the  rest,  seeing  each  his  very  duplicate  in  the  East,  must,
must  feel  humbled.

"  A MESMERIC DIALOGUE.

"  Mr.  Freeman,  Mr.  Easy,  Dr.  Drench,  The  Rev.  Mr.  Pure.

"  Easy. — Just  in  time  for  tiffin,  and  the  very  man  I
wanted  I  Here  is  another  astounding  mesmeric  report  from
Hooghly .  Pray,  read  it,  and  tell  me  if  these  things  can  be  true.

"  Freeman. — I  have  already  read  it  with  great  satisfac-
tion, and  have  long  ceased  to  have  any  doubts  about  the
matter.

"  Easy. — I  know  you  are  a  learned  Theban,  skilled  in  all
the  knowledge  of  the  Egyptians,  and  really  I  wish  to  know
more  about  it.  Pray,  what  books  should  one  read  on  the
subject?

"  Freeman. — I  am  glad  to  see  your  curiosity  excited.  One
>^  leaf  out  of  the  book  of  nature  is  worth  a  whole  library,  and

'  an  hour's  observation  will  save  endless  and  useless  talking,

and  remove  a  thousand  misconceptions.  If  people  cannot
make  up  their  minds,  without  seeing  for  themselves,  why  don't
they  go  to  Hooghly,  where  mesmerism  is  in  daily  use  in  the
public  hospitals,  and  all  are  assured  of  a  welcome  ?  If  I  had
any  doubts  about  the  matter,  I  would  gladly  travel  a  1000
miles  to  resolve  them.

"Easy. — ^You  know  how  incorrigibly  indolent  we  are,  and
I  confess  that  I  wish  to  be  convinced  without  any  trouble ;  so
do  tell  me,  like  a  good  fellow,  aU  you  know  about  it.  Is  it
indeed,  possible  for  human  beings  to  be  cut  to  pieces  without
their  feeling  it? I  sincerely  hope  so.

"  Freeman. — I  cannot  give  you  any  reason  why  it  should
be  so,  but  we  know  it  is  so,  and  every  one  may  satisfy  himself
by  the  evidence  of  his  senses,  or  by  his  own  exertions,  if  the
most  positive  and  unimpeachable  evidence  cannot  affect  his
understanding.

''  Easy. — ^You  know  people  are  apt  to  mistake  the  self-
sufficiency  of  ignorance  or  obstinacy  for  strength  of  mind.

"  Freeman. — Then  we  are  indeed  a  strong-minded  race,
and  Dr.  Esdaile  may  as  well  expect  his  facts  to  penetrate
cocoa-nuts  as  to  affect  us.


298 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

"  Easy. — He  is  taking  the  only  way  to  do  it  however^  and
I  confess  that  his  monthly  battery  has  considerably  deranged
the  contents  of  my  cocoa-nnt,  and  I  feel  mnch  disposed  to
surrender.  No  one  who  has  witnessed  his  proceedings  has
ventured  to  deny  their  reality.

'^  Freeman, — It  seems  that^  during  the  last  year^  he  has
performed  ninety-one  painless  operations,  '^  a  large  proportion
of  them  being  of  the  most  severe  and  dangerous  description ;''
the  details,  and  the  names  of  those  who  were  present  have
been  given  to  the  public,  and  the  witnesses  invited  to  point
out  **  a  shadow  of  exaggeration,  even  in  his  descriptions,'^  of
the  wonderful  things  they  saw,  and  no  one  has  found  any-
thing to  object  to  or  cavil  at.

''  Easy. — ^And  men's  minds  are  shaken  to  the  bottom  by
it.  It  is  delightful  to  see  the  truth  running  such  an  unwonted
career  of  unbroken  triumph.

"  Freeman. — ^The  mists  and  fogs  of  ignorance  and  prejudice
are  clearing  away  rapidly,  and  we  shall  soon  enjoy  the  unob-
structed sunshine,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  the  Doctors  to
perpetuate  the  reign  of  darkness  and  old  Night.

"  Easy. — ^What  do  they  say  to  it  now  ?

"  Freeman. — Here  is  their  champion  and  self-elected  re-
presentative. Drench ;  he  will  tell  us  the  present  state  of  the
Medical  pulse.  When  I  last  felt  it,  it  was  '^  small  and  con-
traded."

"  (Enter  Dr.  Drench).

''  Easy. — Killing  weather  is  it  not,  Drench  ?  But  this  is
no  objection  to  you,  eh  ?

"  Drench. — ^Find  another  subject  for  your  wit,  Mr.  Easy ;
I  kill  no  more  than  my  neighbours.

"  Easy. — ^No  offence  mean't.  Doctor ;  take  a  glass  of
^'ceremsia  frigida"  or  perhaps  you  prefer  the  '*dimidium
dimidioqae?' — half-and-half.

''  Drench. — ^Thank  you,  but  fill  up :  I  hate  half  measures
in  practice.

"  Easy. — ^That  reminds  me  of  what  we  were  talking  of
when  you  came  in.  What  do  you  think  of  the  new  mesmeric
practice  at  Hooghly  ?  I  wish  that  I  could  be  entranced  till  the
rain  falls ;  Could  you  do  it  for  me  ?

''  (Drench  spills  his  beverage  from  agitation,  and  breaks
the  glass  by  replacing  it  violently  on  the  table).

"  Drench. — ^By  Pluto  I  I  think  the  people  have  all  gone
mad,  and  I  shall  be  driven  mad  myself,  I  think.  Wherever  I
go,  it  is.  What  do  you  think  of  mesmerism,  Dr.  Drench  ?  It
is  in  vain  that  I  answer — I  have  never  thought  about  it,  and
don't  intend  to. At  the  next  house,  I  am  assailed  with.  Do


communicated  by  Dr,  EUiotsan.  299

you  believe  in  mesmerism,  Dr.  Drench  ?  Do  I  believe  my
nose  is  green  cheese  ?  cry  I,  and  flounce  out  of  the  room.
But  at  another  patienf  s,  the  cuckoo  note  is  only  changed  to.
What  do  you  think  of  mesmerism  now,  Dr.  Drench  7  I  check
this  impertinence  by  gravely  demanding,  if  I  was  ever  known
to  change  my  opinion.

"  Easy, — So  the  doctors  are  not  convinced  yet  7

'*  Drench. — ^Most  thoroughly  convinced  that  it  is  a  humbug.
Beally  it  is  enough  to  provoke  a  saint — as  if  I  could  afford  to
learn  anything  new,  even  if  true.  But  come,  I  will  put  the
thing  to  the  test,  at  once ;  I  will  give  Esdaile  five  hundred
rupees,  if  he  mesmerises  me.

*^  Freeman. — One  man  may  take  a  horse  to  the  water,  but
twenty  can't  make  him  drink.  Ask  Easy's  bearer  how  often
he  throws  your  drenches  out  of  the  window  7

**  Easy. — Honour  !  Freeman,  honour  I  don't  believe  him
Doctor.  I  know.  Freeman,  you  are  bitten  with  this  madness,
and  am  sorry  for  it ;  all  men  of  sense  should  really  assist  us
in  putting  down  this  monstrous  quackery.

"  Freeman. — ^Dr.  Esdaile  may  be  a  tool,  knave,  or  liar,  I
have  no  knowledge  of  him ;  but  if  so,  I  rather  think  there
would  have  been  no  doubt  about  the  matter  by  this  time,  for
no  one  ever  gave  his  opponents  such  ample  means  of  detec-
tion.

"  Easy. — Numbers  of  my  Mends  have  seen  what  he  relates,
and  all  agree  that  he  faithftdly  reports  what  they  saw.  Many
a  one  waits  to  trip  up  his  heels,  but  he  still  runs  his  course
r^oicinff.

"  Drench. — He  seems  to  be  equally  insensible  to  shame  and
reason.

"  Freeman. — He  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  himself  for  sav-
ing ninety-one  persons  the  torments  of  the  damned  in  one  year,
and  his  patients  are  equally  shameless  and  irrational,  for  by
no  persuasion  or  argument  can  you  get  them  to  allow  that  they
felt  any  pain  when  tormented  by  fire  and  steel,  or  when  their
raw  flesh  was  corroded  by  mineral  acids.  Verily,  the  man
who  does  this  can  afford  to  be  laughed  at.

*' Drench. — It  is  an  awjid  and  melancholy  delusion.

"  Easy. — ^Very,  and  I  don't  see  how  you  are  to  get  rid  of
it,  except  by  a  general  order  of  the  O.  G.  in  council,  ordering
every  medical  officer  to  torment  his  patients  "secundum
artem^^  as  hitherto,  on  pain  of  dismissal  from  the  service.^

c  This  is  precisely  the  desire  of  the  Spectator,  The  editor  Mr.  Rlntool,
B,  father  I  in  a  notice  of  Dr.  Esdaile's  book,  August  1,  writes  thus  :—**  No
^aUtary  surgeon  should  be  permitted  to  subject  eoUiiery  to  a  practice  repu-
diaied  by  the  hulk  qf  the  prqfesaioHy  whether  mesmerism  or  anything  else,


aOO AccfjmmU  if  WMfrt  prntJeu  Smryieal


"Dremck, — ^I  diuk  too  fbrtiie  hist;  ksmgoodida,  and
I  vtQ  propoae  it  to  the  board— examples  ihoiiid  be  nade.

"  EMff. — ^I  see  that  Dr.  Esdaije  hat  lepoted  hit  CMet  to
the  Medical  Board,  and  if  ther  p«r  no  tti»wtinw  to  him  I
vonld  adriae  him  to  make  a  formal  appliotaon  to  Govemmenty
and  reqoest  an  namination  into  a  matter  that  haa  been  too
longshmed  over.

ArodL— WhT,  Vm^\  Toaare  not  incaneit?
£af. — ^Indeed  I  am ;  I  haie  been  hmg  eonfinoed,  bat,
haling  qaizaed  the  thing  at  fint,  I  «m  aAaaaed  to  recant.
Bat  this  is  no  joke,  and  I  repent  mj  leritr.

**  #>««aB.— Spoken  like  a  man,  and  nnmben  viU  fiiDow
Toor  example.

''DrerndL — ^Yon  will  next  believe  in  '  ClairfVfanoe,' I


«<
«


''Frena.— Perhaps,  but  I  viU  new  aA  vhcAer  yon
do  or  not,  iC,  vfaen  I  need  it.  Ton  vill  cat  off  m  j  leg  without
tnmbling  me  about  it.  Men  want  fuis  and  not  npimiomi,
and  vii/ bebere  the  eiidenoe  of  their  senses  in  pRCerenoe  to
ffMor  mmikarUf  erea,  however  absard  it  maj  appear  to  joo.

"  Dremck. — Absurd,  indeed  !  Evidence  of  one's  senses
fcnooth,  as  if  this  was  an  v  aigument. I  tell  Ton  that  I

would  not  bebere  mr  otrm  ^etuieg.

•

I  what  I  call  strength  of  mind«


oh!  Drendi,  far  repudiating  jour  owa

^  Areadk. — ^Whj,  I  have  aeen  a  conjnrar  cut  off  m  codi's
head,  ^rinkle  the  floor  with  its  blood,  and  pfai^  off  ita
CBathBrs;  jet  in  a  minute  after,  the  coc^  was  crowing  and


V  Boc  tei«  a.lovvd  aDkijetsio  W  vaccisaiMi^  »or  tiKw  aiteffitt  lobe
t»edo«  die  ftrid  of  btttl*-,  bat  iBscsted  «immi  Dr.  Eidu^*s  allovinc  tbca  to
M«tb^  ^ml\  pox  mod  blockiof  tbeir  vteries  witb  hmMm^  W^A,  See  mj
MimwMmm  Cftrofani,  pi.  64.  Mr.  Riotooi  s  opiaM^  io  i^Bid  lo  MOMeriMi
■f**^  ■otkioc.  uj  Bote  tkoo  tWiw  of  Mr.  DUke,  tbe  editor  of  the
_T";f*^  o»d  An^  .V^w«,  aod  so  mkmj  other  rdtion  ;  bet  it  is  rigbl  to
nvord  tbe  fedia^  aod  follj  of  tbose  wbo  txy  to  leod  ocben.  To  be  coa-
t,  be  sbo«id  lasist  epoo  tbe  coatiaoaooe  of  io<sio|^  io  the  aisy,  be-
beki-MTSAais,  iceoermls,  colooels,  «od  c^ptaios  bore  all  beea  for  it.


f*^..*^-.*^'*^****-  ■"»*  ^»«^  *>«<- ^«^-  RUfcoor*  R«Msa  bod  beea  giTea


!t^t?^  {•  "  ®*?«**=  be  bos  oow  deponed  «»r  tbe  books  of  tbe  SoUej,

i^fi.^'**^  ■■^"'**.  ^  ^"^^  ■^'^^ '^■^  '''»*  *^  •*  pensitted  by  tbe  bigber

!!y?"*^  wedKol  ootboritie^ • If  prit ote  bospito]  poiieots cbooae  tosob-

!!!!i!r*^'^*f  !*  eTpen»eoi»,  tbey  are  free  Oireots  ;  bot  soldier  potieoto  ore

mit^  T^^  ^^\  ■•*  •**-'  "^  ••riieoos-  ocdets,  and  sboold  ool  be  sob-


Mtted  to  tbe  irrrfolar  experuoeots  of  act  bodT  wbo  cbcwoco  to  pnctiae  oooo
ofanuof  Or  u  be  io  bis  seoMO  ?  He  sl«  for«P#*.k.- ft->»«-J™!^!!L,^


i»'.  £:>o«aic  oti«  m  mcsmtu  «


**f$:  fee  Z#««,  V<^1.  IV., p.  lio.— J.  Elliotsoii.


communicated  by  Dr.  EUioison.  301

clapping  its  wings  again — and  did  I  believe  my  senses,  think
ye?

"  Ea9y, — ^A  palpable  parallel,  yonr  honour.

"  Freeman, — With  some  slight  differences.  You  did  not
see  the  preparation  for  the  decapitation  of  the  cock ;  but  if
you  will  substitute  men  for  cocks.  Dr.  Esdaile  says  he  will
prepare  them  under  your  own  eyes.  You  need  never  let  go
hold  of  them  even,  and  yet  he  will  play  his  usual  tricks  with
your  featherless  bipeds.

"  Drench, — ^AU  very  well  talking.

**  Easy, — ^Nay,  the  talking  is  all  on  your  side ;  he  is  a
man  of  deeds,

"  Drench, — Well,  supposing  them  true,  Mr.  Pure  says  it
is  all  diablerie,  and  I  agree  with  him — (Padre  Pure,  Sahib  !)
You  are  much  needed  here,  Mr.  Pure ;  my  friends,  insensible
to  medical  authority,  may  perhaps  Usten  to  religion.

*^ Pure, — What  is  the  topic  of  conversation,  gentlemen?
But  I  may  first  mention  my  own  errand :  our  neighbourhood
is  much  in  want  of  a  hospital,  and  knowing  your  benevolence
and  liberality,  I  am  come  to  solicit  your  support  of  our
project.

**  Freeman, — ^With  all  my  heart ;  but,  seeing  the  extraor-
dinary  effects  of  mesmerism  on  the  natives  of  this  country,
I  hope  that  you  contemplate  introducing  it  into  your  new
hospital.

'^  Pwre, — I  presume  you  are  in  earnest.  Sir;  but  the  devil
shaU  never  with  my  consent  enter  any  institution  with  which  I
am  connected,

*^  Easy. — ^Nay,  Mr.  Pure,  we  never  thought  of  such  a
subscriber.

**  Pwre, — Perhaps  not.  Sir,  but  I  equally  object  to  his
agents  the  mesmerists.  It  is  said  in  the  Bible,  '  Thou  shalt
not  permit  a  witch  to  live,'  and  what  are  they  who  pretend
to  do  by  some  cabalistic  signs,  what  the  professors  of  the
healing  art  confess  to  be  beyond  their  power.

"  Drench, — Hear !  hear !

**  Freeman, — If  the  past  is  to  be  the  rule  for  the  future,
we  must  submit  to  be  tortured  unnecessarily,  and  hope,  like
the  eels,  to  become  accustomed  to  it.  But  we  are  told  that,
by  a  natural  process,  we  can  escape  these  natural  ills  often,
and  surely  it  is  allowable  to  mitigate  human  suffering  by  every
kind  of  knowledge  that  God  permits  us  to  acquire,

"  Drench, — None  but  liberals  practise  it,  Mr.  Pure.

"  F)reeman, — If  you  mean  liberals  in  opposition  to  illi-
berals,  I  believe  you  are  partly  correct.

^'  Easy, — I  rayther  think,  the  doctor  means  infidels.


302 Accounts  of  more  paifUess  Surgical  Operations,

"  Drench. — ^Yes  I  do,  if  you  unU  have  it.

"  Pure. — So  I  have  often  heard,  gentlemen ;  I  should  be
sorry  to  do  any  body  injustice.

"  Freeman. — ^The  injustice  is  with  those  who  abused  your
confidence.  Tried  by  this  test,  the  best  of  men  will  often  be
convicted  of  being  the  worst  of  infidels ;  for  this  is  a  general
power  of  human  nature,  though  dormant  under  ordinary  cir-
cumstances, yet  capable  of  being  developed  by  properly-
directed  efforts,  and  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  energy,
patience,  and  benevolence  of  true  Christians,  would  give  them
an  advantage  over  others  in  wielding  their  natural  powers  for
the  relief  of  human  suffering.

"  Pure. — ^You  speak  as  one  having  authority,  Mr.  Freeman.

^'  Freeman. — ^No,  Mr.  Pure,  but  as  one  having  knowledge.
I  first  believed  on  the  testimony  of  others,  and  now  I  know
from  my  own  experience.

^'  Pure, — But  do  you  really  think  that  I  could  mesmerise?

*'  Freeman. — ^Try,  Sir,  and  I  doubt  not  that  you  will  suc-
ceed as  well  as  the  Bev.  Mr.  Sandby,  and  other  clergymen
do,  who  go  about  continually  doing  good  like  their  great
Master.  I  would  recommend  you  to  read  Mr.  Sandby's
Mesmerism  the  Gift  of  God.

"  Pure. — ^Why,  Dr.  Drench,  you  never  told  me  this.

^'  Easy. — I  should  think  not.

^^  Drench. — Good  morning,  gentlemen,  I  have  a  great
deal  to  do.  (Exit  Drench).

'^  Pure. — I  perceive,  Mr.  Freeman,  that  I  have  taken  too
much  for  granted  in  this  matter,  and  shall  be  glad  to  learn
more  about  it  from  you.

"  Fi'eeman. — All  I  know  is  at  your  service,  but  Hooghly
is  only  25  miles  off,  and  I  would  recommend  you  to  judge
for  yourself.

"  Pure. — ^I  will  do  so  on  the  first  opportunity.

(Exit  Pure).

^'Freeman. — Mesmerism  will  defile  the  graves  of  many
medical  reputations.  What!  do  they  suppose  that  we  are
North  American  Indians,  who  tremble  at  the  fiat  of  their
medicine  man  ?  We  all  understand  why  the  practising  doctors
are  opposed  to  this  new  curative  power.  The  luckt  sou-
TiNisTS  Juite  any  thing  that  is  new,  and  which  requires  them  to
give  up  a  little  time,  to  them  money,  to  the  acquiring  of  new
knowledge;  and  those  who  desire  to  act  up  to  their  convictions,
fear  to  give  a  lever  to  their  rivals,  by  which  to  work  their  ruin.
They  would  fain  be  Elliotsons  without  his  manly,  courageous,
and  far-seeing  spirit ;  but  he  is  now  reaping  his  reward,  and
his  success  will  secure  tardy  followers.


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  803

"  There  are  several  hundreds  of  medical  men  in  the  public
service  in  this  country ,  who  are  above  the  frowns  of  the  public^
and  can  afford  the  small  martyrdom  they  would  be  subjected  to
in  the  advocacy  of  truth,  and  to  them  I  confidently  look  for  a
dispassionate  and  scientific  investigation  of  this  deeply  inte-
resting subject.

"  Easy. — Independence  of  means  usually  gives  independ-
ence of  mind^  but  it  also  engenders  indolence ;  and,  unless
people's  pockets  or  persons  are  effected,  it  is  very  difficult  to
get  them  to  think  and  act  vigorously.

"  Freeman. — ^Many  are  thinking,  however,  and  some  are  at
work,  and  the  public  is  a  fool  if  it  does  not  encourage  them.

''Let  us  drink  to  the  progress  of  useful  knowledge  all
over  the  world.

"Easy. — ^With  all  my  heart,  and  I  will  seize  the  first
holiday  to  go  to  Hooghly.

"F)reeman. — ^And  I  will  accompany  you.

"  Magnes.^'

The  papers  of  May  the  18th  contain  details  by  Dr.  Esdaile
firom  my  communications  to  The  Zoist  of  various  painless  sur«
gical  operations. It  begins  thus :

"  Mesmeric  Facts  from  different  parts  of  the  world,  collected  by

James  Esdaile,  M.D.

"  One  touch  of  nature  makes  the  whole  world  kin.''

"  To  the  editor  of  The  Englishman.

"  Sir, — ^I  am  daily  asked  '  why  don't  we  hear  of  these
things  being  done  in  England?'  The  answer  is,  these  things
are  doing  in  England  and  all  over  the  world,  but  we  won't
be  at  the  trouble  to  inquire  about  them.

"  If  we  did,  we  should  perceive,  that  '  God  acts,  not  by
partial,  but  by  general  laws,'  and  that  what  are  caJled  the
anomalies  of  Hooghly  are  occurring  all  over  the  globe  in
accordance  with  a  general  law  of  nature,  which  some  great
and  happy  individu^  will  perhaps  soon  explain  to  us.

''My  opportunities  of  acting  upon  the  European  consti-
tution have  been  very  limited,  but  very  satisfiEictory,  as  my
next  letter  will  show ;  and  the  last  accounts  from  England
bring  overwhelming  proo&  that  Europeans  in  all  climates  are
capable  of  feeling  the  extreme  degrees  of  the  mesmeric  influ-
ence as  well  as  the  natives  of  India.  Any  accidental  differ-
ences of  national  constitution  will  probably  be  equalised  by


304 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

the  hand  of  disease ;  and,  when  Europeans  need  to  be  mes-
merised, they  will  in  all  likelihood  become  capable  of  being
so,  as  your  readers  will  perceive  by  the  following  extracts
from  the  latest  mesmeric  intelligence.

"  If  any  unbelievers  still  exist  in  India,  and  their  silence
would  indicate  that  they  have  passed  to  forgetfulness  among
the  mummies  and  mammoths,  the  following  mesmeric  facts
from  the  western,  hemisphere  will  surely  extinguish  the  race
and  make  it  historical.  The  difficulty  is  in  selection,  and
your  limits  will  not  admit  of  more  than  one  specimen  from  a
few  countries.  I  have  only  chosen  examples  of  painless  sur-
gical operations,  on  the  principle  of  doing  one  thing  at  a  time,
and  that  thoroughly ;  but  this  is  only  a  fraction  of  the  practical
utility  of  the  subject,  and  we  may  hope  to  overtake  the  rest
with  time.''

Here  follow  some  of  the  operations  performed  in  England,
Scotland,  Ireland,  France,  and  America.
The  details  are  thus  concluded  :—
"  Such  are  the  facts  brought  daily  to  the  feet  of  Dr.
Elliotson  from  all  quarters  of  the  globe,  and  I  know  no  man
more  to  be  envied.

"  I  am,

"  Your  obedient  Servant,

"  James  Esdaile,  M.D.
"  Hooghly,  1st.  May,  1846.'


if


In  the  paper  for  May  9th,  are  accounts  of  nine  more  pain-
less operations : —


'*  *  When  men  deny  a  fact  of  natare,  it  is  certain  that  sooner  or  later  she
will  conquer.' — The  Zoiat.

«  To  the  editor  of  The  Englishman.

"  Sir, — It  is  now  a  year  ago  since  I  published  my  first
mesmeric  report,  which  concluded  thus — 'What  a  blessed
prospect  this  opens  to  sufierers  who  are  sensible  to  the  mes-
meric influence,  and  in  time  we  may  hope  to  discover  who
they  are,  by  detecting  the  laws  which  regulate  this  power  of
nature.  Although  I  should  never  again  succeed  in  producing
these  phenomena,  I  will  in  future  think,  speak,  and  write  of
mesmerism  as  being  as  much  a  reality  as  the  properties  of
opium  or  the  principle  of  gravitation.'

"  This  was  not  the  expression  of  a  foolish  seff-confidence,
but  a  simple  reliance  on  the  healthiness  of  my  senses,  and  the


communicated  by  Dr,  Ellioison.  305

reality  of  the  impresaions  conveyed  by  them  to  my  brain,  in
common  with  all  those  who  witnessed  the  same  appearances.
''It  was  morally  and  physically  impossible  under*lthe
circumstances  (see  my  Mesmeric  Facts,  published  by  Ostell
and  Co.,)  that  we  could  be  deceived  in  the  phenomena  pre-
sented by  the  first  person  mesmerised  in  India,  and  I  did  not
believe  myself  to  be  of  sufficient  consequence  for  nature  to
travel  out  of  her  course,  merely  to  have  the  satisfaction  of
laughing  at  me  for  believing  in  the  senses  she  had  given  me,
and  which  had  hitherto  enabled  me  to  distinguish  pretty  well
the  real  from  the  unreal,  and  to  discriminate  a  hawk  from  a
handsaw,  if  there  is  such  a  thing  as  matter.^'  Knowing  and
confessing  my  total  ignorance  of  the  subject,  on  which  the
previous  knowledge  of  so  many  ages  throw  no  light,  and  per-
ceiving that  it  must  be  learned  by  itself  as  something  quite
new  before  attempting  to  connect  it  with  our  former  know-
ledge, I  determined  to  observe  with  senses  unstuffed  by  pre-
judices whatever  nature  presented,  and  to  comply  unhesitat-
ingly with  what  she  required.  By  following  her  indications
with  docility,  I  have  had  the  satisfaction  to  perform  ninety-one

Eainless  operations  in  one  year,  ^a  great  proportion  of  them
eing  of  the  most  severe  and  dangerous  description),  besides
curing  and  relieving  many  diseases  over  which  medicine,  as
hitherto  practised,  had  little  or  no  control;  and  all  this  by  merely
doing  as  I  was  bid. When  will  others  go  and  do  likewise  V*

83rd  Painless  Operation.  Laying  open  a  Fistula,
''April  11th.  Bunjeet  Sing,  a  porter,  aged  86,  has  a
deep  fistula  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  of  four  months'  standing,
that  requires  to  be  laid  open  for  its  cure :  was  entranced  on
the  first  trial  in  half  an  hour,  and  the  part  freely  laid  open
without  his  feeling  it  J


99


84/A.  Removal  of  a  Tumor,
"April  12th.  Bogobun  Doss  operated  on  for  the  removal
of  a  tumor  of  301bs.  weight,  on  the  8th  instant ;  was  en-
tranced to-day  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Ewing,  and  two  other
gentlemen,  to  have  the  stitches  removed,  and  the  wound
dressed  for  the  first  time — ^always  a  distressing  process.  When
it  was  over,  he  was  removed  to  a  clean  bed,  and  on  being

d  <*  It  18  necessary  to  be  caations,  for  some  of  my  brethren  evidently
believe  that  there  is  nothing  real  in  this  seeming  world  of  ours;  that  'naught
is  everything,  and  everything  is  nau|^ht.'  A  learned  professor  actually  told
me,  that  he  would  not  believe  1  cut  up  people  without  their  knowing  it,  tten
\f  he  taw  Uf  Perhaps,  after  all,  I  have  been  dissecting  shadows  all  this
time,  which  sufficiently  accounts  for  the  insensibility  of  the  same.  I  wish
that  I  had  thought  of  this  sooner.


306 Accounts  of  more  painkss  Surgical  Operations^

awakened  was  astonialied  to  find  that  his  bed  had  been
changed.

"  As  the  greater  power  of  endurance  will^  of  course^  include
the  lesSj  your  readers  will  have  inferred  this^  and  other  prac-
tical applications  of  the  power;  but  nothing  should  be  taken
for  granted  that  can  be  proved  by  direct  experiment/'

S5ik.  Laying  open  a  Fistula.
^' April  17th.  Dookee  Bam^  aged  58^  a  shepherd^  has
had  a  fistulous  sore  on  the  back  of  his  hand  for  six  months.
On  going  to  the  hospital  to-day^  somewhat  later  than  usual,
I  found  two  gentlemen  there,  Mr.  Baxter  and  Mr.  Littlewood,
and  was  told  by  the  sub-assistant  surgeon  that  this  man  had
been  entranced  and  operated  on,  about  half  an  hour  before.
We  went  to  see  him,  and  he  awoke  while  we  were  looking  at
him,  and  expressed  great  surprise  at  the  altered  state  of  his
hand."

S6ih.  Bemoval  of  an  Excrescence.
^^  April  20th. Sumboo, a  boatman, aged  36,  has  got
phimosis  and  a  warty  excrescence,  which  requires  amputation
of  the  part. He  was  easily  entranced  on  the  first  trial,  and
the  part  removed  without  his  knowledge."

S7th.  Removal  of  a  Tumor.

"  April  24th.  Bammohun  Doss,  a  shop-keeper,  aged  40,
has  elephantiasis  scroti.  I  cut  off  the  tumor,  weighing  12
lbs.,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Qraves,  the  Head  Master  of
Hopghly  College,  and  Mr.  Brennan,  Lecturer  on  Natural
Philosophy  in  the  same  institution,  and  the  man  did  not
awake  till  after  aU  the  arteries  were  tied,  and  the  parts  covered
with  a  clean  sheet ;  the  organs  were  all  saved.  He  said  that
he  had  awoke  of  his  own  accord,  and  was  not  in  any  way
disturbed  in  his  sleep.  He  was  asked  by  me  why  he  had
come  to  the  hospital  ?  He  said, '  to  have  lus  tumor  removed.'
When  did  he  first  see  me  ?  ^  This  moment  on  awaking.'  I
had  found  him  entranced  this  morning,  and  then  saw  him
for  the  first  time.  We  asked  him  if  he  would  like  to  have
the  operation  done  now  ?  He  said,  that  as  he  felt  weak,  he
would  like  it  to  be  done  after  he  had  got  something  to  eat.

"  He  was  now  shewn  the  mass  of  flesh  which  he  recognized
as  his  property,  but  could  not  tell  how  I  had  got  hold  of  it."

88M.  Removal  of  a  Tumor.
^'This  case  is  more  than  usually  interesting, and  has
some  variety  in  its  circumstances.


commufdcated  by  Dr.  EUioison,  807

''April  24th.  I  left  the  last  patient  in  the  trance  in  which
I  found  him^  intending  to  operate  on  my  return  from  Chin-
surah.  On  the  way^  I  met  a  young  man  leading  an  old  blind
one,  and  saw  that  the  former  had  got  one  of  the  usual  tumors.
I  stopped  them^  and  found  that  they  had  just  come  up  from
Calcutta  about  some  suit  in  court  here.  I  asked  the  young
man  if  he  wished  to  get  rid  of  his  annoyance^  and  on  his  an-
swering that  he  did^  I  turned  back  with  them  to  show  them  the
hospital.  I  first  introduced  him  to  Bogobun  Doss,  the  bearer
from  Cuttack,  operated  on  for  the  same  disease  on  the  8th
April,  and  who  was  walking  about  the  hospital.  The  bearer
told  him  his  story,  and  showed  his  present  condition,  which
tJie  new  comer  was  simple  enough  to  believe.  I  then  took  him
into  the  mesmerising  room,  and  showed  him  the  last  patient,
pulling  off  his  cloth,  that  he  might  see  the  nature  of  his
complaint,  and  satisfy  himself  that  he  was  unconscious.  He
had  no  difficulty  in  believing  this  even,  (such  is  the  perversion
of  man's  natural  senses  I)  and  I  then  said,  that  if  he  would
lie  down,  and  do  as  he  was  bid,  I  would  cut  both  of  them
without  giving  them  pain.  He  accordingly  lay  down,  and
in  an  hour,  I  returned  with  Mr.  Graves  and  Mr.  Brennan,
and  found  both  of  the  men  ready  for  the  knife.  The  last
operation  having  fatigued  me,  I  said  that  I  would  reserve
this  man  till  to-morrow,  and  afford  Mr.  Brennan  an  oppor-
tunity of  making  some  experiments  upon  the  effects  of  elec-
tricity, applied  in  the  trance.

"  Faraday's  electro-magnetic  machine  was  put  in  motion,
and  the  handles  put  into  his  hands ;  his  arms  trembled  in
synchrony  with  the  continuous  shocks,  but  his  hands  and  face
remained  perfectly  passive,  and  on  adding  the  centre  magnet
to  increase  the  strength  of  the  shocks,  the  only  effect  pro-
duced was  to  extend  the  tremor  to  the  whole  body ;  his  coun-
tenance never  changed,  and  the  handles  had  to  be  packed
with  tow  to  keep  them  in  his  half -open  hands.  The  conductors
were  taken  out  of  his  hands,  and  transferred  to  those  of  his
mesmeriser,  a  large  strong  man,  the  hospital  door-keeper,
and  in  an  instant  he  made  the  most  horrible  grimaces,  convul-
sively grasped  the  conductors,  and  begged  that  they  might  be
taken  out  of  his  hands,  as  he  could  not  throw  them  away.*

•  See  Dr.  Lardner's  account  of  the  Okeys  in  the  Monthly  Chnmicle^
July,  1838,  p.  26 :  "  GaWanic  and  electrical  apparatus  were  prepared  by
Professor  Wheatstone,  and  administered  to  the  two  patients,  Elisabeth  and
Jane  Okey,  by  Professor  Wheatstone  and  Dr.  Lardner,  in  the  presence  of
Dr.  EUiotson,  Dr.  Roget,  and  a  great  number  of  medical  and  scientific  men.
The  shock  of  the  gaWanic  apparatus  was  taken  by  some  gentlemen  present,
among  others  by  Sir  William  Molesworth,  and  in  each  case  produced  a  very
scTcre  effect;  when  administered,  however,  to  the  two  patients,  no  visible


306 Accounts  of  more  painkss  Surgical  Operations,

"  After  this,  I  with  great  difficulty  awoke  the  man^  and
he  was  unconscious  of  anything  having  been  done  to  him.

''  April  25th.  In  the  presence  of  Mr.  Fowle,  assistant
magistrate,  Mr.  Shum,  Mr.  Baxter,  and  Mr.  Bazet,  I  re-
removed  the  tumor,  saving  all  the  organs,  and  the  man  showed
no  more  sensibility  than  a  corpse.

"  It  was  twenty  minutes  before  the  wound  was  all  stitched
up,  and,  when  the  last  stitches  were  putting  in,  it  was  found
that  there  was  too  much  skin  left ;  upon  which  I  sliced  off
three  inches  more,  to  which  he  was  quite  indifferent.  By
this  time,  the  spectators  had  recovered  their  senses,  and
become  convinced  that  he  was  a  real  man,  and  all  agreed
that  it  was  a  waste  of  sympathy  to  bestow  it  on  a  person  who
in  no  way  needed  it.  The  man  had  to  be  awoke  at  the  end
of  an  hour,  as  I  wished  the  spectators  to  hear  his  first  words,

effect  whatever  was  produced  :  they  held  the  ends  of  the  wires  steadily,  and
apparently  without  any  sensation  or  consciousness  of  any  particular  effect.
It  was  observed,  however,  that  a  contraction  of  the  muscles  of  the  hands  was
apparent,  and  the  patients  were  not  able  to  disengage  their  hands  from  the
extremities  of  the  wire.  Leyden  phials  were  subsequently  charged  by  an
electric  machine,  and  the  shock  taken  by  each  of  the  patients  without  any
effect,  except  an  expression  of  surprise,  and  a  burst  of  laughter  on  seeing
the  spark  pass  between  the  jar  and  their  hands."

See  also  my  Numeroua  Ctuea  <m  Surgical  Operations  wiihont  pain^  p.  30 :
"  One  of  the  Okeys,  during  her  mesmeric  state  of  ecstatic  delirium,  though
possessing  full  power  in  all  her  muscles,  was  insensible  to  mechani^
injury,  burning,  and  electricity.  The  cylinders  of  the  electro-magnetic
machine  were  held  in  her  hand  any  length  of  time,  while  the  wheel  was
turned  as  rapidly  as  possible,  without  any  evidence  of  the  slightest  sensa-
tion, though  no  one  else  could  hold  them  for  more  than  some  seconds.  She
received  the  charge  of  a  large  Leyden  phial,  and  no  effect  was  noticed.
When  asked  what  she  felt,  she  answered  in  the  former  instance,  '  I  heard  it
go  giggle,  giggle,  giggle ;'  and  in  the  latter,  '  1  saw  the  light.'  At  the
Adelaide  Gallery  I  put  the  hands  of  a  female  in  a  state  of  sleep-waking,  who
had  not  been  there  before,  upon  the  electrical  eel  near  the  head  and  tail,  and
she  took  no  notice,  though  1  felt  a  very  sight  movement  of  her  arms,  which
nobody  else  could  remark.  Now  the  shock  of  the  eel  made  very  many  jump.
When  I  was  not  present,  I  know  for  certain  that  she  received  at  once  the
charge  of  six  Leyden  jars,  each  sixteen  inches  high  and  eight  wide,  without
evidencing  sensation.  But,  because  the  condition  of  Elisabeth  Okey,  and
of  this  young  woman,  was  induced  by  mesmerism,  it  was  feigned ;  as
though  there  was  more  evidence  of  reality,  or  could  be  more  evidence  of
reality,  in  other  cases  than  in  these."

Mr.  Dilke,  in  his  Athenteum,  declared  respecting  all  the  experiments
with  the  Okeys,  that  "  every  scientific  man  who  regards  his  own  character
should  keep  aloof  of  them,  and  refrain  from  sanctioning,  by  direct  partici-
pation in  their  proceedings,  a  transaction  so  likely  to  lead  to  mischievous
consequences  /  and  that  ''  mankind  is  more  benefitted  by  doubt,  whether
reasonable  or  not  reasonable^  than  most  persons  imagine."  The  Daily  News
lately  had  the  following  passage  :  '*  We  have  men  in  these  days  whose  cre-
dulity is  pretty  strong.  Some  believe  in  clairwwnue;  others  in  the  healing
powers  of  Coosh  M  a  m  the  prophet.  The  Standard,  Herald^  and  Posl^  believe  that
the  Corn-law  will  be  re-enacted.  But  Lord  Stanley  has  shot  a-head  of  them
all,  for  he  believes  himself  qualified  to  be  prime  minister." — J.  Elliotson.


camtmmicated  by  Dr.  BUiotsan,  809

and  I  need  not  say^  that  he  knew  nothing  about  what  had  been
done  to  him,  and  stared  in  mute  astonishment  at  his  improved
appearance.

His  blind  father  was  brought  in,  and  was  told  hj  his  son
that  he  had  felt  no  pain,  and  was  now  quite  comfortable,  and
the  simple  old  man  actually  believed  him !  as  was  evident  by
the  beautiful  play  of  his  features,  and  the  blessings  he  invoked
on  those  who  did  it.

''April  29th.  He  was  entranced  to-day,  and  the  dressing
removed  without  giving  him  any  pain."


89th.  Tapping.

''April  21st.  Sheik  Meeah  Jan,  a  boatman,  aged  40:
His  abdomen  is  much  distended  with  water,  and  his  breathing
oppressed :  to  be  tapped  to  relieve  him.

"April  29th.  The  water  was  withdrawn  when  he  was
in  the  trance  to-day,  and  he  did  not  awake  till  half  an  hour
afterwards.  He  then  said,  that  when  he  went  to  sleep  his  belly
wasjull,  but  was  now  empty ;  but  Ood  only  knew  how  it  hap-
pened."

90th.  Paring  a  Sore.
"  April  29th.  Sheik  Dannoo,  a  cart-driver,  aged  30 :  has
been  suffering  for  four  months  from  a  sore  on  bis  right  heel,
of  which  the  skin  is  very  thick,  and  partially  detached  from
the  surrounding  parts.  The  whole  diseased  skin  requires  to
be  cut  off  the  plantar  fascia.  He  was  entranced  on  the  first
trial,  and  I  pared  the  whole  heel  to  the  quick,  to  which  he  was
as  insensible  as  a  cheese :  he  awoke  in  half  an  hour  after,  and
did  not  know  anything  had  been  done  to  his  heel.''

91*/.  Operation  for  Hydrocele.
"April  17th.  A  prisoner  came  to  hospital  to-day  with  a
hydrocele ;  it  was  very  tender,  and  he  could  not  bear  it  to  be
pressed.  I  desired  him  to  be  mesmerised  for  the  first  time  in
the  presence  of  Mr.  Baxter  and  Mr.  Littlewood,  and  in  half
an  hour  performed  the  operation  unthout  disturbing  him,  and
I  showed  that  the  tender  part  could  now  bear  severe  pressure
unthout  his  feeling  it.  I  left  the  room,  that  the  gentlemen
alone  might  be  present  when  he  awoke,  and  he  told  them  that
he  had  a  swelling  when  he  lay  down,  but  there  was  none  now,
and  he  knew  not  what  had  become  of  it.

"  I  am,  your  obedient  servant,

"Jas.  Esdaile,  M.D.

"  Hooghly,  Ist  May,  1846/'

VOL.  IV.  Z


810 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

The  Bev.  James  Esdaile  has  published^  by  means  of  Longman
and  Co.,  a  book  by  Dr.  Esdaile,  entitled  Mesmerism  in  India ;
and,  having  purchased  it,  I  extract  the  following  additional
accounts  of  painless  operations.  Several  others  are  recorded
in  the  book,  which  I  have  presented  to  the  mesmeric  public
in  former  numbers  of  Tke  Zoist.

Removal  of  a  very  large  tumor. — "  Sept.  1st.  Teg  Ali
Khan,  a  tall  strong-looking  man ;  has  a  hypertrophia  scroti,
caused  by  repeated  operations  for  hydrocele  by  native  doctors,
who  only  withdraw  the  water  as  often  as  it  accumulates,
without  attempting  the  radical  cure.  The  tumor  is  perfectly
round,  md  as  big  as  a  man's  head.  He  was  mesmerised  in
two  hours,  on  the  first  trial,  and,  in  the  presence  of  Drs.
Boss  and  Sissmore,  I  dissected  out  all  the  parts ;  which  was
very  tedious,  from  the  testes  having  contracted  adhesions  all
round  them ;  and  it  was  about  half  an  hour  before  the  organs
were  covered  up  again  by  stitching  flaps  over  them.  Not  a
qtdver  of  the  flesh  was  visible  all  this  time,  and,  at  theend,  his
body  was  as  stiff  as  a  log,  from  head  to  foot,  and  his  separated
legs  could  be  with  difficulty  put  together  again.  He  awoke  in
half  an  hour  after  the  operation,  mAfeli  no  pain.

''Sept.  4th.  The  stitches  were  taken  out  to-day;  the
wound  has  healed  throughout,  and  he.  has  had  no  pain  what^
ever  since  the  operation ; — so  much  for  the  absence  of  the
usual  irritative  shock  to  the  system.

"  We  can  renew  the  trance  at  pleasure,  in  order  to  render
people  insensible  to  repeated  operations.^'


Application  of  a  red-hot  plaster,  iron,  paring,  and  tearing
through  adhesions.  —  "  Sept.  18th.  Morally  Dass,  a  peasant,
aged  50,  has  an  unhealthy  cartilaginous  sore,  half  an  inch
high  above  the  skin,  and  extending  for  six  inches  along  the
outer  ham-string  of  the  left  leg,  which  it  has  contracted  to
nearly  a  right  angle  with  the  tlugh,  for  a  year  past.

**  He  was  entranced  to-day,  for  the  first  time,  and  I  deeply
cauterised  the  whole  sore  with  a  red-hot  plaster  iron,  without
awaking  him.

"  Sept.  19th.  The  excrescence  is  so  hard,  and  thick,  that
it  must  be  dissected  off  the  ham-string :  he  was  again  en-
tranced, and  the  diseased  part  was  pared  down  to  a  level  with
the  surrounding  skin,  without  his  feeling  it.

"  Sept.  20th.  TV  hen  he  was  in  the  trance  to-day  I  straight-
ened the  leg  completely,  and  bound  it  up  in  splints;  he  awoke
not,  and  when  he  did,  had  no  pain ;  although  it  took  all  my
strength  and  weight  to  break  down  the  adhesions,  which  I  felt


communicaied  by  Dr.  EUiotsan.  811

and  heard  cracking  under  my  hands.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Bradbury
saw  the  first  operation.  The  Bev.  Mr.  Fisher^  and  Mr.  Orayes^
the  second,  and  Mr.  Blyth  the  third.  In  the  treatment  of
chronic  diseases  suited  for  mesmerisnij  coma  is  not  required :
if  it  occurs,  it  is  probably  because  nature  needs  it ;  but  we
ought  to  be  satisfied  with  the  improvement  of  the  patient,
though  it  is  unaccompanied  with  any  striking  phenomena.
The  system  is  not  less  effectually  recruited  because  it  is  done
silently, — just  as  the  best  digestion  is  least  felt.  For  refresh-
ing the  nervous  system,  and  inducing  natural  sleep,  mes-
merising 'a  longs  couranis/  as  the  French  call  it,  will  be
found  sufficient.  These  are  steady  continuous  tractions,  with
the  points  of  the  spread  fingers,  from  head  to  foot ;  the  head
may  be  occasionally  breathed  upon,  and  the  hands  allowed  to
rest  for  a  few  minutes  on  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  An  hour
of  this,  on  going  to  bed,  will  often  soothe  restlessness,  bring
back  natural  sleep,  and  invigorate  the  nervous  system.''

Removal  of  a  Jungus  as  large  as  a  cauliflower. — ''Aug.  28d.
Napaul  Bagby,  a  husbandman,  has  a  singular  fungoid  mass
in  the  right  inguen;  it  is  the  size  of  a  small  cauliflower^  and
like  it  in  appearance,  the  surface  being  whitish  from  slough-
ing. It  spreads  from  a  peduncle  in  the  abdominal  ring,  and
bleeds  much  when  handled.  His  father  says  that,  at  his
birth,  there  was  only  one  testis  in  the  scrotum,  and  no  trace
of  the  other  was  seen  till  he  was  six  months  old,  when  a
swelling  appeared  in  the  inguen.  This  gradually  increased
tiU  his  twelfth  year,  but  wis  not  painf^  or  iniconTement.
About  this  time,  he  was  attacked  with  fever,  attended  with
increased  sensibility  and  increase  of  size  in  the  tumor,  and
the  paroxysms  came  on  twice  a  month,  up  to  June  last,  when
he  applied  to  a  barber-surgeon  who  used  means  to  ripen  the
swelling.  In  the  course  of  a  few  days  it  was  punctured,  and
blood  only  followed.  The  opening  was  plugged  as  well  as
possible  with  a  candle  covered  with  cloth  smeared  with  some
ointment,  but  in  a  few  days  this  came  out,  and  the  following
day,  a  fungus  shot  out  of  the  wound,  and  daily  increased  to
its  present  size.  It  is  now  a  very  foul  mass,  its  surface  mor-
tified, and  the  crevices  filled  with  maggots.

''  Aug.  26th.  He  was  mesmerised  after  two  hours'  trial,
and  the  mass  removed  unthout  his  feeling  it.

"  Aug.  31st.  Discharged  at  his  own  request — wound  look-
ing well.''

Removal  of  excrescences.  —  "  Sept.  1st.  Baimgopal,  a
young  Hindoo,  has  got  a  high  syphilitic  sore,  about  the  size

z2


312 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surffical  Operations,

of  half  a  lemon,  on  each  side  of  his  nates.  He  was  entranced
on  the  first  trial ;  and  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Boss  and  Dr.
Sissniore^  /  turned  him  round  like  a  loff,  and  cut  off  both  the
excrescences  level  with  the  skin,  tJien  turned  him  back  again,
and  left  him  sleeping. It  is  needless  to  say  he  did  not  fed  it.*'

Removal  of  an  enlargement  as  big  as  a  child's  head. —
*'  Oct.  8th.  Nazir^  a  peasant^  aged  sixty^  has  suffered  from
enlarged  and  scirrhous  testis  for  four  years ;  the  parts  are  as
large  as  a  child's  head^  and  extirpation  is  necessary. — He
was  entranced  after  two  hoars  to-day.

*'  Oct.  10th.  He  was  mesmerised  the  second  time,  to-day,
in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Sutherland,  Dr.  Owen,  the  Beverend
Mr.  Bradbunr,  Major  Biddell,  Mr.  Higgen,  Mr.  Muller,
Mr.  Graves,  Messrs.  Savigny,  Mr.  Calder,  and  Mr.  Bartlett.

*'  I  removed  the  parts  unthout  his  showing  any  sign  of  sen-
sibility till  the  last  artery  was  being  tied ;  he  then  woke  up,
but  went  immediately  to  sleep  again  for  half  an  hour,  and  on
waking,  said  that  he  was  only  conscious  of  a  little  pain  when
he  awoke  for  a  moment  and  found  me  to  be  tying  something.^
He  was  cheerful  and  talkative,  and  showed  no  signs  of  suffer-
ing or  exhaustion  in  his  countenance  or  manner,  and  said  the
pain  in  the  wound  was  very  trifling.^'

Operation  for  cataract, — "  Nov.  20th.  Mohun  Dass,  a
peasant ;  aged  fifty-five :  has  got  a  cataract  in  one  eye.  He
was  entranced  on  the  first  trial,  and  I  broke  down  the  lens
in  the  presence  of  Major  Smith  of  H.  M.'s  9th  Begiment,
without  awaking  him,

"  Nov.  21st.  There  is  much  pain  in  the  eye. — To  be  mes-
merised, and  leeches  applied.  He  slept  for  two  hours  with
the  leeches  on,  and  on  awaking,  the  pain  was  nearly  gone.''


«


Removal  of  an  enlargement  as  big  as  a  child's  head. —
Nov.  26th.  Mahes  Banergie,  a  Brahmin,  aged  forty,  has
got  an  enlarged  testis,  the  size  of  a  child's  head ;  it  is  red,
glistening,  and  very  painful,  and  there  is  a  scrotal  hernia
above  it.  He  was  entranced  on  the  first  trial,  and  I  returned
the  gut  into  the  abdomen,  handling  the  inflamed  part  very
rudely,  without  his  showing  the  least  sensibility, I  then,  in


f  Wat  this  the  langiinge  of  an  impostor  f  Did  it  not  bear  the  impress  of
artless  truth  r  And  did  not  the  language  and  manner  of  ever;  patient
whose  painless  operation  has  been  recorded  in  Thi  Zoist,  and  the  language
and  manner  of  every  patient  whose  operation  is  recorded  in  my  pamphlet  on
Surgical  Operatiotu  withmt  pain  in  the  Metmeric  State,  bear  the  impress  of
artless  truth?— J.  Elliotson.


communicated  by  Dr.  ElUotson.  313

the  presence  of  Captain  D.  L.  Richardson^  dissected  out  the
diseased  organ.  The  operation  was  tedious^  as  I  had  to  care*
fully  separate  the  mass  from  the  hernial  sack.  He  moved,
as  in  an  uneasy  dream,  but  did  not  awake  till  we  were  tying
the  arteries,  which  were  very  numerous ;  he  then  said,  that
he  had  felt  nothing  till  that  moment.  The  muscular  move-
ments, sometimes  seen,  looked  more  like  the  contractions
induced  by  cutting  a  recentlv  dead  animal,  than  the  common
contortions  from  pain;  and  I  believe  may  be  avoided  by
patience,  as  every  trance  seems  to  deepen  the  insensibility.
I  need  not  point  out  to  the  surgeon  the  advantage  he  would
derive  from  the  mesmeric  trance,  in  reducing  strangulated
hernia,  and  in  spasmodic  strictures  of  the  urethra.^'s

Paring  off  the  edges  of  an  ulcer. — "  Nov.  30th.  Mahes,  a
peasant,  aged  thirty-two,  has  got  a  deep  ulcer  of  a  year's
standing,  at  the  root  of  the  colis,  that  penetrates  under  the
pubes;  the  edges  are  callous,  and  prevent  it  healing.  He
was  subdued  in  two  hours  on  the  first  day,  and,  in  the  pre-
sence of  Dr.  Tritton  and  a  party  of  officers  of  the  71st  Regi-
ment N.  I.,  /  pared  off  the  margins  of  the  sore  unthout  his
awaking.  He  awoke  a  few  minutes  after,  said  he  had  been
asleep  and  dreamt  that  some  one  had  pulled  him  off  the
roof  of  a  house,  and  declared  that  he  felt  no  pain  whatever  at
the  moment  of  speaking.  /  thereupon  proposed  that  he  should
allow  me  to  cut  him  a  very  little,  as  it  would  facilitate  the
healing  of  the  sore,  but  he  would  not  hear  of  it.  Dr.  Tritton
and  the  rest  also  joined  their  persuasions ;  but  he  implored
us  for  the  love  of  God  to  let  him  alone — he  would  rather  die
than  be  cut,  that  tLe  proposal  had  already  killed  him,  &c.
He  was  desired  to  sit  up,  and  his  cloth  removed ;  on  seeing
the  altered  state  of  things,  he  was  greatly  alarmed  and
puzzled,  aiid,  on  being  shown  the  pieces  of  flesh,  said  they
had  certainly  belonged  to  him  before  he  went  to  sleep,  and
how  I  got  hold  of  them  he  had  no  idea.  As  I  found  myself
in  the  company  of  candid  and  dispassionate  observers,  I
showed  them  mesmerism  in  all  its  physical  symptoms,  whe-
ther directly  or  indirectly  produced,  and  Dr.  Tritton  very
kindly  said  at  parting,  that  he  was  quite  convinced  of  the

f  Dr.  MarahaU  HaU  aod  others,  i%ho  are  almost  monomaniacal  opoo
reflex  moTements,  nerer  think  of  them  when  pemsing  accounts  of  the  move-
ments  or  sounds  sometimes  noticed  under  mesmeric  surgery.

The  coma  may  often  be  deei>ened  by  keeping  the  hand  on  the  patient's
forehead  or  hands,  the  points  of  fingers  upon  the  eyelids,  breathing  un  the
patient,  especially  at  his  eyes,  nostrils  and  mouth,  wetting  him  with  mes-
merised water,  touching  him  with  mesmerised  gold,  or  by  stiffening  him
with  long  contact  passes,  &c.  &c. — J.  Elliotson.


314 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

reality  of  the  symptoms  from  first  to  last,  whether  produced
by  something,  or  nothing,  and  that  he  now  quite  understood
the  ^  mesmeric  disease/  and  said  I  was  at  liberty  to  say  so,  if
I  pleased/'**

Removal  of  an  enlargement, — "  Dec.  1st. — ^I  had  the  plea-
sure of  receiving  a  visit  from  the  gentlemen  engaged  in  the
railway  survey,  consisting  of  Mr.  Simms,  Captain  Western,
Captain  Boileau,  Mr.  Fraser,  and  Dr.  Macauley.  They  found
a  man  entranced,  from  whom  I  was  about  to  remove  a  hyper-
trophied  prseputium.  As  he  appeared  to  be  ready,  I  commenced
at  once ;  but  seeing  that  he  shrunk  from  the  knife,  without
awaking  however,  I  desisted,  and  proposed  to  adjourn  to  the
other  hospital,  saying  that  this  man  would  probably  be  ready
on  our  return.  We  accordingly  went,  and  I  requested  Dr.
Macauley  to  ascertain  if  a  man  brought  before  us  had  pain  in
his  scrotum.  He  said  there  was  no  doubt ;  and  the  rest  were
satisfied  that  there  was  no  mistake  about  it.  I  ordered  him  to
be  entranced  before  them,  which  was  easily  done,  as  he  had
been  twice  operated  on  for  hydrocele  in  the  trance.  I  pulled
him  up,  and  set  him  on  his  feet  sleeping,  before  the  gentlemen,
and  begged  them  to  deal  with  him  as  they  pleased.  He  was
catalepsed  by  them  in  the  most  pair^  attitudes,  to  which  he  was
as  indifferent  as  a  man  of  clay;  and  Dr.  Macauley  now  squeezed
thepaii\ful  part  unth  as  much  effect  as  if  the  man  had  been  a
mummy.  I  stripped  him  naked ;  and,  when  he  awoke  and
found  himself  standing  in  the  presence  of  gentlemen  in  this
condition,  his  look  of  wonder  and  shame,  i^  not  natural,  was
most  beautiful  acting,  and  he  certainly  escaped  being  found
out. — As  soon  as  he  awoke,  Dr.  Macauley  pressed  the  dis-
eased part,  and  there  could  be  no  doubt  about  his  feelings  on
the  subject ; — the  pain  was  evidently  instantaneotis  and  acute.
On  returning  to  the  charity  hospital,  I  removed  the  enlarged
cellular  substance  from  the  whole  colis ;  the  man  now  did  not
shrink  in  the  least  from  the  kntfe,  and  slept  a  good  while  qfier
the  operation.  On  questioning  him,  he  said  that  he  had  been
put  to  sleep  to  be  operated  on ;  but  as  he  was  now  awake,  he
would  wish  it  to  be  put  off  till  to-morrow.  We  then  showed
him  the  liberties  that  had  been  taken  with  him,  and  he  recog-
nized his  property ;  bttt  how  it  had  changed  owners  he  had  no
conception."

h  Consult  my  pamphlet  for  the  confusion  which  was  made  in  the
Royal  Medical  and  Chinirgical  Society,  by  Messrs.  Brodie,  Coutsoo,
Alcock,  and  others,  of  insensibility  with  fortitude.  Mr.  Aston  Key  might
contrast  himself  with  Dr.  Tritton  with  the  view  of  improTement.  See  p.
326. — J.  Elliotson.


comimmicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  315

Amputation. — ''Dec.  21  st.  Samoo,  a  weaver^  has  got  a
bad  slooghing  sore  of  the  prseputium  and  glans^  of  a  year's
standing. — ^To  be  mesmerised.

''  Dec.  22nd.  He  was  mesmerised  for  two  hours  yesterday^
and  slept  an  hour  afterwards^  apparently  naturally.  To-day
I  saw  him  after  half  an  hour's  mesmerising,  when  the  trance
was  folly  established,  his  whole  body  being  rigid.  As  I  had
not  time  then,  I  left  him,  and  returned  in  an  hour,  and
found  his  body  still  stiff.  I  cut  open  and  took  off  the  pr»-
putium;  and  finding  the  glans  half  eroded,  I  cut  it  off  too.
The  man  showed  no  sign  ofl\fe ;  the  body  continued  stiff,  and
the/mbe  natural.  He  awoke  in  half  an  hour  afterwards,  and
did  not  discover  that  anything  had  been  done  to  him  till  he
went  to  make  water.''

''  Dec.  29th.  Mahes,  operated  on  last  month.  The  sore
is  callous,  and  it  will  greatly  advance  his  cure  to  have  it  pared.
— ^To  be  mesmerised  in  my  absence.  I  went  on  to  Chinsurah,
and  there  met  the  Bev.  Mr.  Cahusac,  and  the  Rev.  Mr.
MuUins,  who  requested  to  see  any  mesmeric  cases  in  hand.
They  returned  with  me  to  the  hospital,  and  we  found  Mahes
entranced.  I  pared  the  sore,  and  he  did  not  awake  till  a  quarter
of  an  Jumr  afterwards.  Mr.  Mullins,  who  speaks  Bengalee,
asked  him  if  he  had  been  disturbed  in  his  sleep.  He  said
'  No  *f  and  that  the  pain  was  not  greater  than  before  he  went
to  sleep.''

''We  found  another  man  entranced,  whose  elbow  had
been  dislocated  for  twenty  days.  I  tried  to  reduce  it,  using
all  my  force,  but  did  not  succeed ;  he  moved  uneasily,  but
did  not  awake  till  ten  minutes  after  I  had  desisted,  and  then
said  that  nothing  had  disturbed  him."

Removal  of  a  nail,  and  operation  for  hydrocele. — "  Dec.
26th.  Goluck  Seit,  a  prisoner,  has  got  a  hydrocele  on  each
side.  A  young  Hindoo  subdued  him  to-day  in  ten  minutes,
on  the  first  trial.  When  about  to  operate,  I  saw  that  he
possessed  a  consecrated  nail,  on  one  of  his  little  fingers ;  and
knowing  the  value  attached  to  this,  I  resolved  to  get  pos-
session of  it,  if  possible,  as  a  moral  test  of  his  being  insensible,
for  he  would  as  soon  have  cut  a  cow's  throat  and  eaten  a  beef-
steak as  allowed  me  to  cut  off  his  nail,  while  in  possession  of
his  senses.  It  is  a  common  practice  with  the  Hindoos  to
vow  their  hair,  beards,  or  nails  to  Shiva,  the  Destroyer,  in
the  hope  of  averting  his  anger;  and  this  man  had  consecrated
his  little  finger-nail  to  Shiva  Forakissore, — Forakissore,  in


316 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

this  district^  being  a  famous  shrine  of  the  God.  /  tranrferred
the  sacred  excrescence  to  my  pocket,  without  any  remonstrance
being  made,  and  then  performed  the  less  formidable  operation
of  withdrawing  the  water,  and  throwing  in  the  injection,  of
which  he  knew  nothing  on  awaking  two  hours  after.  His
only  distress  was  the  loss  of  his  nail,  and  he  spent  hours  in
hunting  for  it,  supposing  that  it  had  been  broken  off  by
accident.

''Dec.  29th.  I  entranced  Goluck  Seit  to-day  in  five
minutes;  and  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Cahusac  and  Mr.  MuUins,
operated  on  the  other  hydrocele,  to  which  he  was  as  indif-
ferent as  on  the  first  occasion.  But  before  putting  him  to
sleep,  /  showed  the  gentlemen  how  pairrful  was  the  side  operated
on  three  days  ago ;  and  yet  in  five  minutes  after,  he  cMowed
me  to  squeeze  his  testis  to  any  extent,  without  exhibiting  a
vestige  of  uneasiness,  I  awoke  him  in  half  an  hour,  that  Mr.
MuUins  might  question  him ;  and  he  said  that  he  saw  the
water  was  gone,  but  how  it  had  escaped  he  had  no  idea.''

Paring  a  wound. — ''  Dec.  30th.  Bungsee,  operated  on  last
month  for  a  scrotal  tumor.  The  wound,  from  his  debilitated
condition,  is  glazed  and  callous,  and  is  wasting  him  with  a
useless  discharge.  It  would  greatly  shorten  his  cure  to  pare
the  sore,  and  bring  it  together  with  deep  sutures;  but  I
could  hardly  bring  myself  to  propose  it  to  a  person  in  his
senses,  as  it  would  be  as  painful  as  the  capital  operation.
Mesmerism,  however,  makes  surgery  pleasant  to  both  parties ;
and,  having  easily  entranced  him,  I  pared  and  shaped  the  sore
VERY  LEisu&ELT  fit  was  SIX  inchcs  long,  by  two  deepj,  inserted
the  deep  sutures,  and  left  him  sleeping.  He  awoke  after  four
hours.

"  Jan.  2nd.  The  sutures  were  taken  out  to-day,  and  the
sore  is  adherent  throughout.''

In  regard  to  the  removal  of  scrotal  tumors.  Dr.  Esdaile
says : —

''During  the  six  years  previous  to  April,  1845,  I  had
operated  on  eleven  cases  of  scrotal  tumor ;  and  in  the  last
eight  months,  since  I  began  to  operate  in  the  mesmeric
trance,  I  have  removed  seventeen  tumors,  making  in  all
twenty-eight,  varying  from  a  few  pounds  to  eighty  pounds ;
and  there  has  not  been  a  fatal  case  among  them.^

i  Dr.  Copland  must  now  be  satisfied  of  the  use  of  agoo  j  in  operations.
Mr.  Key  may  perhaps  remember  not  only  his  own  fatal  operation,  bat  the
rery  early  death  of  Dr.  Ooodeve's  patient  at  Calcutta  from  the  mere  shock
of  the  removal  of  a  scrotal  tumor.  See  Lancei^  No.  398,  and  No.  781. —
J.  Elliotson.


.♦


cwnmunicated  by  Dr.  Elliotsan.  317

''  Of  the  seventeen  operations  in  the  mesmeric  trance  three
only  were  imperfect^  the  persons  awaking  before  the  operation
was  finished ;  this  imperfect  sensibility  was  a  great  comfort
to  the  patient^  and  gave  great  facilities  to  the  operator/'

'^  Since  my  first  operation*'  I  have  had  every  month  more
operations  of  this  kind  than  take  place  in  the  native  hospital  in
Calcutta  in  a  year,  and  more  than  I  had  for  the  six  years  pre-
vious. There  must  be  some  reason  for  this,  and  I  only  see  two
waysof  accounting  for  it :  my  patients,  on  returning  home,  either
say  to  their  firiends  similarly  afflicted,  '  Wah  I  brother,  what
a  soft  man  the  doctor  Sahib  is  I  He  cut  me  to  pieces  for
twenty  minutes,  and  I  made  him  believe  that  I  did  not  feel
it.  Isn't  it  a  capital  joke  ?  Do  go  and  play  him  the  same
trick ;  you  have  only  to  laugh  in  your  elbow,  and  you  will
not  feel  the  pain.'*  Or  they  say  to  their  brother  sufferers, —
'  Look  at  me ;  I  have  got  rid  of  my  burthen,  (of  20,  30,  40,
50,  60,  or  80  lbs.,  as  it  may  be,)  am  restored  to  the  use  of
my  body,  and  can  again  work  for  my  bread  :  this,  I  assure
you,  the  doctor  Sahib  did  when  I  was  asleep,  and  I  knew
nothing  about  it; — you  will  be  equally  lucky,  I  dare  say;
and  I  advise  you  to  go  and  try ;  you  need  not  be  cut  if  you
feel  it.'  Which  of  these  hypotheses  best  explains  the  fact  my
readers  will  decide  for  themselves.  It  ought  to  be  added,
that  most  of  these  persons  were  not  paupers,  but  people  in
comfortable  circumstances,  whom  no  inducement  short  of
painless  operations  could  tempt  to  enter  a  charity,  or  any
other,  hospital ;  and  all  who  know  the  natives  are  aware  of
this."

"  1  have  said  that  only  three  out  of  the  seventeen  awoke
before  the  operation  was  finished ;  I  will  not  inflict  the  whole
fourteen  completely  successful  cases  on  the  reader,  but  only
present  some  of  the  last."

Removal  of  a  tumor  of  about  80  lbs. — "  Sept.  2nd.  I  was
stopped  on  the  road  to-day,  and  requested  to  go  into  a  tem-

1)le  to  a  see  a  sick  Fuqueer ;  on  entering  I  found  a  healthy-
ooking  man  of  60,  but  he  was  nearly  blind  from  cataracts,
and  had  a  scrotal  tumor  of  about  30  lbs.  weight,  which  he
begged  me  to  remove.  I  examined  it,  but  gave  no  opinion,
and  said  I  would  consider  of  it;  I  then  went  on  to  Chinsurah,
to  see  Dr.  Boss  (in  charge  of  the  troops  there),  to  whom  I

^  See  Zowf,  Vol.  III.,  p.  503.— J.  Elliotson.

1  This  actaallj  amoanto  to  Mr.  Key's  wise  supposittoii  at  p.  326. —
J.  Elliotson.

m  Mr.  Rintoul's  snarling  remarks  (p.  299)  forcibly  recur  to  me  oo  reading
this.~J.  Elliotson.


818 AcecufdM  qf  more  painle%»  Surgical  Operations,

aaidj  that  if  he  chose  to  return  with  me^  I  would  try  to
show  him  a  mesmeric  operation.  He  consented^  and  in
passing  the  Fuqueer's  house  we  carried  him  with  us  to  the
hospital.  The  cook  of  the  hospital^  one  of  my  best  mesmer-
isers,  was  set  upon  him^  and  in  half  an  hour  made  him  insen-
sible. The  operation  was  speedily  done.  The  man  never
moved,  and  did  not  awake  till  after  the  last  artery  was  tied.
Seeing  him  about  to  awake,  he  was  covered  up,  and  asked  if
he  had  been  in  any  way  disturbed;  he  said,  '  No.'  He  was
then  desired  to  sit  up,  and  show  me  the  tumor,  as  I  wished
to  examine  it ;  he  did  so,  and  actually  put  his  hands  under
it,  to  raise  the  mass  as  usual;  his  look  of  amazement,  on
missing  it,  was  something  not  to  be  easily  forgotten.  Dr.  Ross
published  an  account  of  this  and  other  operations  in  which  he
asssisted  me"

Removal  of  a  tumor  weighing  8  lbs. — "  Oct.  22nd.  Muffer
Dass,  a  peasant,  aged  40.  He  was  made  insensible  on  the
third  day  of  mesmerising;  and  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Beid,
the  collector,  Mr.  Wauchope,  the  magistrate,  and  Mr.  Bennett,
superintendent  of  Excise,  I  removed  a  tumor  weighing  8  lbs.,
without  the  man  being  disturbed:  although  the  operation
was  tedious,  from  the  testes  having  contracted  adhesions.  I
succeeded  in  saving  all  the  organs ;  he  awoke  soon  after  it
was  all  over,  said  he  felt  no  pain,  and  was  quite  ready  to  be
operated  on  now."

Removal  of  a  tumor  weighing  80  lbs. — ''Oct.  25th.  Oooroo-
chuan  Shah,  a  shopkeeper,  aged  40.  He  has  got  a  '  monster
tumor,'  which  prevents  him  from  moving ;  its  great  weight,
and  his  having  used  it  for  a  writing-desk  for  many  years,  has
pressed  it  into  its  present  shape.  His  pulse  is  weak,  and  his
feet  (edematous,  which  will  make  it  very  hazardous  to  attempt
its  removal ;  but  with  such  an  appendage  life  is  literally  a
burthen.  He  became  insensible  on  the  fourth  day  of  mes-
merising, and  was  drawn  with  the  mattress  to  the  end  of  the
bed  (my  usual  mode  of  proceeding :)  two  men  then  held  up
the  tumor  in  a  sheet,  pulling  it  forward  at  the  same  time,
and,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Bennett,  I  removed  it  by  a  cir-
cular incision,  expedition  being  his  only  safety.  The  rush  of
venous  blood  was  great,  but  fortunately  soon  arrested ;  and,
after  tying  the  last  vessel,  the  mattress  was  again  pulled  back
upon  the  bed  with  him  upon  it,  and  at  this  moment  he  awoke.
The  loss  of  blood  had  been  so  great  that  he  immediately  fell
into  a  fednting  state,  and  it  took  a  good  while  to  recover  him.
On  recovering  he  said  that  he  awoke  while  the  mattress  was


communicated  by  Dr.  ElUotsan,  319

being  pulled  back^  and  that  nothing  had  disturbed  him.
The  tumor  weighed  eighty  pounds^  and  is  probably  the  largest
ever  removed  from  the  human  body.  I  think  it  extremely
likely  that  if  the  circulation  had  been  hurried  by  pain  and
struggling,  or  if  the  shock  to  the  system  had  been  increased  by
bodily  and  mental  anguish,^  the  man  would  have  bled  to  death,
or  never  have  rallied  from  the  effects  of  the  operation.  But
the  sudden  loss  of  blood  was  all  he  had  to  contend  against ;
and,  though  in  so  weak  a  condition,  he  has  surmounted  this,
and  gone  on  well.

''Dec.  1st.  Has  been  allowed  to  go  home  at  his  own  request :
the  wound  is  filling  up  slowly,  for  want  of  integument.^'


Removal  of  a  tumor  weighing  80  lbs. — "  Oct.  27th.  Bam-
mohun  Sunokur,  a  jeweller,  aged  44,  has  got  a  large  tumor.
He  became  insensible  on  the  fifth  day,  and  I  removed  the
tumor  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Wauchope  and  Mr.  Bennett.
The  bleeding  was  violent.  About  the  middle  of  the  operation
he  gave  a  cry,  but  did  not  awake  till  twenty  minutes  after  it
was  over,  and  then  said,  that  he  wanted  something  to  eat,  as
he  felt  empty.  He  said  that  he  had  slept  well,  and  was  not
disturbed  in  any  way ;  that  he  was  now  beadt  to  be  cut,

BUT  BEGGED  TO  BE  ALLOWED  TO  GET  HIS  DINNER  FIRST. The

mass  of  flesh  was  now  shown  to  him,  which  he  recognized
with  amazement ;  thanked  the  gods,  and  said  it  would  weigh
24  pounds,  probably, — ^it  weighed  30  pounds.'^

Removal  of  a  tumor  weighing  25  lbs. — ''  Nov.  2nd.  Gk>bin-
chunder  Lane,  aged  32,  a  shopkeeper,  and  a  very  fine  hand-
some man,  is  afflicted  with  the  same  disease.

'^  At  three  o^clock  yesterday,  when  passing  the  hospital,
I  was  told  that  another  man  had  come  with  a  tumor,  since
my  morning  visit,  and  had  been  entranced.  I  went  to  see
him,  and  found  him  still  in  a  fit  state  to  be  operated  on,
although  he  had  been  asleep  for  four  hours, — to  be  mesmer-
ised again  to-morrow,  at  ten  o^dock.

''Nov.  3rd.  The  operation  was  performed  to-day,  at
twelve  o'clock,  in  the  presence  of  the  Eev.  Mr.  Bradbury,  and
Mr.  Bennett.  As  the  bleeding  was  moderate,  and  the  man
perfectly  passive,  I  tried  to  save  all  the  parts,  although  the
testes  adhered  to  the  sides  of  the  tumor,  which  were  very
thick.  It  was  twenty  minutes  before  all  was  over :  not  a  sign
of  life  appeared,  and  the  organs  were  all  saved.

Before  commencing,  I  put  his  arm  erect  in  the  air  as


ti


n  Dr.  Goodeve  believes  that  his  own  patient  (see  p.  316,  i.)  perished
from  mere  shock.— -J.  Elliotson.


320 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

an  *  oudanometer .-'  it  never  even  trembled,  was  quite  stiff  at
the  end  of  the  operation,  and  had  to  be  taken  down.  He
awoke  just  as  the  mattress  was  re-adjusted^  and  said^  'It  is
done !'  Being  asked  how  he  knew^  he  said^  by  seeing  me
bloody^  and  the  people  all  standing  rounds  but  that  he  had
felt  nothings  and  had  little  pain  now.  The  excrescence
weighed  twenty-five  pounds/'

Removal  of  a  tumor  weighing  30  lbs. — "  Nov.  16th.  Ameer
MuUick^  a  coolly^  aged  50^  has  a  large  tumor  of  twenty
years'  growth.  He  was  mesmerised  for  the  second  time  to-
day^ and^  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  S.  Palmer  and  Dr.  Scott^
I  dissected  out  and  saved  all  the  organs.  The  operation
was  tediQus^  on  account  of  old  adhesions;  but  he  did  not
awake  till  some  time  after  it  was  finished,  and  then  said,  that
nothing  had  disturbed  him — the  mass  weighed  thirty  pounds.''

Removal  of  a  tumor  weighing  28  lbs.  —  "  Nov.  18th.
Bungsee,  a  peasant^  aged  55^  has  a  tumor  which  weighed  28
pounds^  when  cut  off,  and  has  existed  for  nine  years.  He
was  entranced  on  the  second  day,  and  I  removed  it  in  the
presence  of  Mr.  Russell,  Judge  of  Hooghly,  Major  Smith,
li.M.'s  9th  B/Cgiment,  Dr.  Scott,  and  Captain  Smythe,  of  the
Engineers.  The  man  never  nuwed,  or  showed  a  sign  of  life
till  ten  minutes  after  the  operation,  and  he  then  said  that  lie
was  quite  ready  to  be  operated  upon.

"  In  concluding  this  practical  part  of  the  subject,  I  beg
to  state,  that  I  have  seen  no  bad  consequences  whatever
ensue  from  persons  being  operated  on  in  the  mesmeric  trance.
Cases  have  occured  in  which  no  pain  was  felt,  even  subsequent
to  the  operation,  and  the  wounds  healed  by  the  first  intention ;
and  in  the  rest  I  have  seen  no  indication  of  any  injurious
consequences  to  the  constitution.  On  the  contrary,  it  appears
to  me  to  have  been  saved,  and  that  less  constitutional  distur*
bancs  hasfoUowed  than  under  ordinary  circumstances.**

Dr.  Copland's  attention  I  earnestly  entreat  to  this  fact,
and  advise  him  to  give  up  his  bookish  theorick,  his  sedentary
habits  of  book  gluttony  and  preconceiving,  and  to  go  abroad
into  the  tree  and  invigorating  fields  of  nature.

**  In  my  early  operations,"  says  Dr.  Esdaile,  "  1  availed  my-
self of  the  first  fit  of  insensibUity,  not  knowing  whether  I  could
command  it  back  at  pleasure ;  and  when  the  coma  is  deep
enough  on  the  first  occasion,  it  is  probably  best  for  the  patient
that  it  should  be  taken  advantage  of,  as  the  fewer  liberties  we
take  with  nature  the  better,  the  rule  being  never  to  do  more


communicated  by  Dr.  ElUotsan,  821

than  enough.  But  if  the  trance  is  not  profound  the  first  time,
the  surgeon  may  safely  calculate  on  its  being  so  the  next,
and,  when  operating  in  public,  it  is  prudent  to  take  the  pre-
caution of  a  preliminary  trance  or  two.  I  have  already  said,
that  flexibility  of  the  limbs,  till  moved,  and  their  remaining
rigid  in  any  position  we  leave  them  in,  is  characteristic  of
the  trance :  but  there  are  exceptions,  and  these  are  equally
diagnostic  and  to  be  depended  upon.  It  sometimes  happens
that  the  limbs  become  rigid  as  they  lie,  and,  on  bending
them,  they  are  not  passive  and  plastic,  as  in  the  first  kind  of
catalepsy,  but  the  muscles  always  tend  towards  a  spasmodic
extension  of  the  limbs :  at  other  times,  there  is  a  complete
relaxation  of  the  whole  muscular  system,  and  the  arms  and
legs  can  be  tossed  about  without  resistance,  like  those  of  a
person  just  dead.  The  eyes  are  usually  closed,  but  the  eye-
lids are  sometimes  seen  a  little  separated,  or  half  open  and
tremulous ;  and  the  eye  is  even  seen  wide  open,  fixed,  and
the  pupil  dilated.  On  one  occasion,  having  ordered  a  man
to  be  entranced,  I  returned  in  two  hours,  and  was  told  by
my  assistant  that  he  was  not  affected :  I  went  to  see,  and
found  him  with  half  open  eyes,  quivering  eye-lids,  and  trem-
bling hands.  I  immediately  said  the  man  was  ready,  and,
without  testing  his  condition  farther,  performed  on  him  a
tedious,  but  painless,  operation.

"  I  also  wish  to  remark,  that  I  have  seen  no  indication  of
.  congestion  of  blood  on  the  brain ;  the  circulation,  while  my
patients  were  in  the  trance,  being  natural,  like  that  of  a
sleeping  person.  Those  I  operate  upon  appear  to  escape  the
stimulating  stage  of  the  mesmeric  influence  altogether,  and
to  pass  at  once  from  life  to  temporary  death  ;  and  this  I  am
disposed  to  attribute  to  the  concentrated  uninterrupted  man-
ner in  which  the  power  is  applied ;  as  soon  as  it  is  felt,  there
is  no  time  given  to  the  system  to  rally  round  the  first  impres-
sion, and  it  succumbs,  without  a  struggle,  to  the  constraining
influence.  Some  patients,  when  suddenly  awoke,  say  that
their  vision  is  hazy,  and  their  heads  light,  but  I  take  this  to
arise  from  the  imperfectly  recovered  sensibility  of  the  brain
and  organs  of  sense,  which  are  not  at  once  roused  up  to  the
full  possession  of  their  waking  powers;  just  as  is  seen  in
persons  suddenly  aroused  from  profound  natural  sleep.  That
the  mesmeric  torpor  of  the  nerves  and  brain  does  not  arise
from  sanguine  congestion,  is  often  strikingly  and  beautifully
illustrated  by  the  first  actions  of  persons  suddenly  awoke  from
the  trance.  They  open  their  eyes  wide,  and  at  the  same
moment  their  faculties  are  restored,  but  it  is  seen  that  the
pupU  is  dilated,  and  insensible  to  light :  this  they  also  imme-


822 Accounts  qf  more  painless  Surgical  Operations,

diatdy  become  aware  of;  they  know  that  their  eyes  are  openi
and  that  they  ought  to  see,  but  do  not.  The  thought  fills
them  with  horror,  and,  with  a  fearful  cry,  they  bury  their
faces  in  their  hands,  like  persons  struck  blind  by  lightning ;
but  this  soon  passes  off,  and  the  retina  recovers  its  sensibility,
by  a  little  rubbing  of  the  eyes/'

The  Manchester  device  of  explaining  the  coma  by  mere
cerebral  congestion  from  fatigue,  in  the  desire  to  utter  some-
thing original  and  wonderful  and  to  shew  there  is  nothing  so
surprising  in  mesmerism,  after  the  failure  of  the  first  attempt
to  shew  that  mesmerism  is  all  nonsense,  I  laughed  at  from
the  first  as  too  absurd  ;^  and  now  the  originator  would,  I  am
sure,  be  thankful  for  the  world  to  forget  it.  But  though
"  we  never  mention"  it,  it  "  can  never  be  forgot."

I  assure  the  leading  physicians  and  surgeons  in  London
and  provincial  towns,  and  worldly  wise-editors,  of  the  following
truth  told  by  Dr.  Esdaile : —

"  For  any  person  to  see  this,  or  even  hear  of  it  firom  a
credible  quarter,  and  still  talk  of  imposture,  is  to  convict
himself  of  an  incurable  moral  blindness,  which  it  would  be
folly  to  attempt  to  dissipate  by  experiment  and  reasoning  : —
'  none  are  so  blind  as  those  who  won't  see/  "

In  the  Indian  newspaper  for  May  28  is  the  following  ac-
count by  Dr.  Esdaile,  which  ought  to  produce  deep  contrition
for  their  wickedness  among  all  the  virulent  opponents  of  mes-
merism, especially  the  medical;  I  use  the  word  wickedness
most  deliberately  and  solemnly.

"  Before  giving  my  next  case,  I  beg  leave  to  present  the
reader  with  a  similar  one,  treated  by  me  a  short  time  before
becoming  acquainted  with  mesmerism.

''  About  a  year  ago,  a  peasant  was  brought  from  a  distance
to  the  hospital  with  prolapsus  am ;  the  size  of  a  pint  bottle,
that  had  existed  for  several  days.  Cold  and  astringent  lotions
were  assiduously  applied,  and  before  the  attempt  at  reduction
was  made,  the  man  was  suspended  by  the  heels  a  long  time,
to  facilitate  the  return  of  the  blood.  The  most  persevering
attempts  to  reduce  the  part  were  made  for  two  days,  but  to
no  purpose,  for  the  walls  of  the  abdomen  had  permanently
contracted  upon  their  diminished  contents,  and  no  force  could
distend  them  again  so  as  to  admit  the  extruded  organ.  Me-
dicine and  surgery  being  useless,  his  friends  carried  him  away

o  ZoUt^  Vol.  I.,  p.  308.


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.  328

to  die  a  lingering  and  miserable  death. Having  looked  at  that
picture,  wUl  the  reader  now  be  pleased  to  look  at  this :

''  Reduction  of  prolapsus, —  May  Ist.  A  peasant  was
brought  to  my  house  this  morning  with  a  prodigious  prolapsus ;
it  was  larger  than  the  last  mentioned,  being  as  big  as  a  chilcPs
head,  and  hard  and  congested ;  it  was  of  three  days  standing,
and  the  man  had  not  tasted  food  for  five  days.  My  opinion
of  his  case  might  have  been  understood  by  the  exclamation
of  dispair  that  escaped  me  on  seeing  it.  I,  however,  sent  him
to  the  hospital  with  this  order  in  his  hand  '  entrance  this  man
if  possible,  and  let  me  know  when  it  is  done/  The  sub-
assistant  surgeon  sent  me  notice  at  two  o^clock  p.  m.  that  he
was  ready.  I  found  him  lying  on  his  face,  in  which  position
he  had  been  mesmerised,  and  in  five  minutes  I  reduced  the
tumour  with  little  difficulty ,  and  no  resistance,  although  it  re-
quired all  the  fingers  of  myself  and  assistant  to  compress  its
circumference.  The  man  never  moved,  and  on  awaking  a  short
time  after,  was  only  conscious  that  his  torment  had  vanished,
but  had  no  idea  how,

"  He  was  dismissed  four  days  after,  quite  well,  and  there
had  been  no  return  of  his  complaint.

"  It  is  a  great  privilege  to  be  able  to  do  this  surely,  and
yet  surgeons  and  physicians  in  general  know  nothing  about  it,
and  will  not  condescend  to  team  it !"

In  the  newspaper  of  April  15,  Dr.  Esdaile  writes : —


**  *  UDlimited  Bcepticittm,  is  as  much  the  child  of  imbecility  as  implicit  cre-
dulity/--DtvaM  Stewart.

"To  the  editor  of  The  Englishman,

"  Sir, — ^In  the  interval  of  the  mails,  you  will  perhaps  find
room  for  this  rather  long  mesmeric  letter,  and  your  readers
will,  I  hope,  excuse  its  length  as  it  will  be  chiefly  taken  up
with  the  proceedings  of  others.

'^  1  have  lately  had  an  opportunity  of  ascertaining  the  im-
pression made  upon  the  pubUc  mind  by  my  monthly  iteration
of  facts,  and  have  every  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  result,
and  the  course  I  have  pursued  of  rousing  public  attention  to
the  importance  of  the  subject  through  the  daily  press.  If  I
had  listened  to  the  disinterested  professional  representations,
that  it  was  '  infra  dig.'  to  address  the  public  on  a  medical  sub-
ject except  through  professional  channels,  I  should  have  run
the  risk  of  being  pooh-poohed  to  death  by  editors  absolutely


824 Accounts  of  more  pairUeM  Surgical  Operations,

ignorant  of  the  subject  they  presumed  to  decide  upon,  and
the  public  would  not  have  had  the  opportunity  of  judging  for
themselves  of  a  matter  of  fa^it  by  a  daily  accumulating  mass
of  evidence  which  must  soon  convince  every  one  of  sane  mind,
who  will  be  at  the  trouble  to  examine  it,

''  But,  unfortunately^  many,  who  from  their  position  and
talents  are  naturally  the  leaders  of  public  opinion,  will  not
condescend  to  a  careful  and  dispassionate  examination  of  the
alleged  facts  by  the  rules  applicable  to  all  kinds  of  evidence.
I  wLld  beg  such  persons  to  ^aase  for  a  moment  in  their  ca-
reer  of  dictation  to  nature,  and  reflect  on  their  position,  if
this  is  true.  What  can  be  more  distressing  and  humiliating
to  honest  minds  than  to  find  at  last,  like  Saul,  that  they  have
been  blindly  persecuting  the  truth  to  their  own  great  loss,
and  the  ir^ry  of  mankind;  and  those  who  oppose  mesmerism
without  due  examination  will  soon  find  themselves  in  this  po-
sition. I  had  lately  the  satisfaction  to  hear  a  gentleman  say ;
^*  Well  I  if  mesmerism  is  not  true  there  is  nothing  left  to  be*
lieve  in/^  If  my  statements  are  not  essentially  true,  and
minutely  correct,  then  there  is  no  such  thing  as  s^fact  in  no-
ture,  and  life  is  a  farce,  which  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  take
any  trouble  about.  This  will  all  inevitably  appear  in  its  full
force  in  due  course  of  time,  but  in  the  meantime,  what  a
senseless  and  unnecessary  amount  of  torture  unll  be  inflicted  on
the  human  race,  and  how  many  will  continue  to  suffer  miserably
for  their  ignorant  and  perverse  refection  of  the  appointed  means
of  cure!

"  If  this  was  only  a  speculative  subject,  the  prosecution
of  which  terminated  in  the  establishment  of  an  abstract  truth,
I  should  be  satisfied  with  having  sought  the  truth  for  its  own
sake,  and  consider  the  knowledge  of  it  as  the  proper  reward
of  my  labours ;  for  I  desire  to  disturb  no  man^s  cherished
opinions,  or  even  prejudices,  as  long  as  they  are  not  injurious
to  the  public.  But  an  active  proselyting  unbelief  in  the  cura-
tive powers  of  mesmerism  is  not  among  the  inoffensive  errors
of  judgment  which  only  hurt  the  owners,  but  is  a  public
injury,  as  it  wantonly  prolongs  pain  and  various  diseases
which  might  otherwise  be  banished  from  the  world.  I  have,
therefore,  not  spared  time,  labour,  and  expense  in  attempt-
ing to  put  the  public  in  possession  of  their  natural  rights
as  soon  as  possible,  and  have  incurred  ridicule  and  detraction
with  patience  and  indifference.

"  I  will  continue  my  assaults  till  you  can  assure  me  that
my  object  {our^s  I  may  say,  as  you  have  been  the  steady  and
consistent  advocate  of  this  great  truth  from  the  moment  it  at-
tracted public  attention)  has  been  gained,  and  you  need  not


communicated  by  Dr,  Elliotsan*  325

fear  my  persisting  in  useless  preaching  like  the  Archbishop  of
Oranada.

"  Suffering  humanity  cannot  afford  to  wait  for  the  slow
conviction  of  indolence  and  unhealthy  indifference.  If  mes-
merism is  true,  every  reasonable  and  benevolent  being  should
assist  in  promoting  its  general  reception  by  the  community  as
an  important  truth,  whose  practical  utility  is  hardly  exceeded
by  the  discovery  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  or  the  intro-
duction of  vaccination,  also  a  natural  remedy.

"  I  have  already  given  to  the  public  the  details  of  seventy-
Ac  painless  surgical  operations,  and  challenged  the  most  scru-
pulous investigation ;  and,  as  far  as  I  know,  no  particular  as
related  by  me  has  ever  been  contradicted  or  corrected  by  any
one  of  the  hundreds  of  witnesses  present,  who  were  invited
to  correct  my  misstatements  or  point  out  a  shadow  of  exag-
geration in  my  descriptions.  Permit  me  to  ask  in  the  name
of  common  sense  and  humanity  what  more  is  wanted  ?  If
the  quality  of  the  evidence  is  suspicious,  I  shall  be  happy  to
have  the  weak  side  pointed  out,  that  it  may  be  guarded  in  fu-
ture. Is  the  quantity  of  evidence  insufficient  to  come  to  a
conclusion  upon,  and  are  700,  or  7000  painless  operations
needed  7  This  must  be  a  matter  of  time,  and  cannot  be  ex-
pected from  one  individual ;  but  this  paper  will  end  with  more
facts  of  this  nature.  Before  proceeding  to  them,  I  beg  to  in-
timate to  all  interested,  that  no  fair  and  reasonable  test  of
the  truth  of  my  statements  can  be  proposed,  which  I  shall  not
be  happy  to  entertain.  I  have  reported  the  results  of  my
mesmeric  practice  to  the  Medical  Board,  and  sent  them  a
paper  on  '  scrotal  tumors,'  containing  fifteen  cases  of  pain-
less operations  for  their  removal,  and  offered  the  Board  every
opportunity  for  personal  examination  if  they  felt  any  interest
in  the  subject,  and  the  same  offer  is  open  to  all  who  have  the
courage  to  believe  the  evidence  of  their  senses  in  preference
to  the  theories  of  schools,  and  the  dictation  of  individuals.^'

In  my  opinion,  the  admission  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism
is  of  infinitely  greater  direct  practical  importance  than  the  ad-
mission of  the  truth  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood.  For  this
has  not  yet  led  to  any  great  practical  advantage  that  I  am
aware  of.  Bleeding  from  veins,  cupping,  and  leeching  were
employed  by  the  ancients,  and  arteries  were  tied  to  stop
haemorrhage  before  the  time  of  Harvey.  Indeed,  when
the  circulation  was  first  believed,  some  were  for  discon-
tinuing the  useful  practice  of  taking  blood  from  the  surface
over  an  inflamed  lung  or  bowel,  because  they  imagined,  in
opposition  to  all  experience,  that  it  could  do  no  good  as  no

VOL.  IV.  A  A


826 Accounts  of  mare  painless  Surgical  Operations,

communication  between  the  surface  and  the  organ  within  was
discoverable,  except  as  far  as  all  blood-vessels  communicate,
however  indirectly  :  and,  as  to  the  indication  by  it  of  tying  ar-
teries on  the  side  nearest  the  heart,  this  had  been  already  found
necessary,  and  in  fact  experience  shews  that,  if  the  artery  is
not  tied  on  the  other  side  also,  the  one  ligature  may  be
of  little  avail.  The  discovery  of  the  circulation  was  the  mere
mechanical  discovery  of  the  mode  in  which  every  part  obtains
a  supply  of  fresh  blood — ^it  having  been  always  certain  that
every  part  had  such  a  supply.  AH  this  I  pointed  out  in  a
letter  to  the  Council  of  University  College.  But  thev  turned
a  deaf  ear  to  me ;  refused  me  permission  to  prove  the  truth
of  mesmerism  to  the  world  in  any  of  their  unoccupied  thea->
tres,  and  called  me  behind  my  back  an  enthusiast.

I  rejoice  that  Dr.  Esdaile  published  his  facts  in  the  news-
papers for  the  world  at  large,  for  I  am  certain  that  the  only
mode  to  convince  the  medicsil  world  is  to  convince  the  non-
medical world,  whose  convictions  will  bring  the  medical  world
by  force  of  interest  and  shame  to  attend  to  the  subject.  From
the  first  I  have  shewn  the  facts  to  any  respectable  person  who
has  desired  it,  from  royalty  and  the  peerage  to  the  artisan
and  domestic.  The  number  of  medical  men  who  have  applied
has  been  very  small  since  the  profound  experimental  phi-
losopher and  devotee  of  truth  and  fairness  terrified  them  by
his  assertions  and  denunciations  in  his  Lancet  in  1838,  as  a
man  who  makes  an  ugly  face  and  noise  and  holds  up  his
forefingers  on  his  temples  like  horns  frightens  little  children
and  makes  them  scamper  off.  Neither  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,
Dr.  Chambers,  Dr.  HoUand,  Dr.  Front,  Dr.  Forbes,  Sir
James  Clark,  nor  any  other  scoffer  at  mesmerism,  except  Dr.
Copland,  has  applied  to  me ;  and  they  remain  in  perfect  ig-
norance of  it,  though  they  assure  their  patients  daily  of  its
utter  absurdity.  Dr.  Copland  did  apply,  but  I  refused  him,
on  account  of  his  violent  conduct  in  the  Medical  Society,  as
not  likely  to  be  convinced ;  for  my  experience  has  long  since
proved  to  me  that  it  is  but  wasting  time  to  attempt  to  con-
vince those  who  have  already  been  philosophers  enough  to
come  to  a  positive  conclusion.  I,  however,  offered  to  shew
everything  to  his  son,  of  whom  there  might  be  some  hope,  as
belonging  to  another  generation.  Tanquam  insanabilem  rejed
patrem.p

The  solemn  importance  of  mesmerism  I  have  from  the  first
felt,  like  Dr.  Esdaile.  All  his  sentiments  charm  me.  Had
I  not  so  felt,  I  should  not  have  thought  it  worth  while  to

P  HarveioM  Oratumf  pp.  16,  50.


communicated  by  Dr.  ElHotson.  327

mention  mesmerism  before  the  assembled  College  of  Phy-
sicians^ nor  terminated  my  address  to  them  with  this  pero-
ration^—  Qua  cum  iia  sint,  ego  vos  magnoperi  oro  atque
obtestor,  ut  ianiam  vim  tot  argumeniis  humand  naturd  inesse
comprobatam,  si  unquam  apud  vos  veritatis  amor,  stprofessionis
nostra  diffnitas,  si  denique  omnium  hominum  salus  et  felicitas
valet f  diligentissimk  investigetis.

The  following  passage  occurs  in  the  Indian  paper  of  May
80th:—

"  What  I  have  now  stated  will,  of  course,  be  perverted
and  misrepresented,  and  I  shall  be  held  up  as  an  audacious
quack,  advocating  the  Universal  Medicine.  All  residts  short
of  those  now  related,  will  also  be  held  as  demonstrative  of  the
absurdity  of  the  whole,  just  as  certain  wise  men  of  the  East
go  about  testing  the  existence  ef  mesmerism  by  total  insensi-
biUty  alone,  and  do  not  know  it  even  when  they  meet  it.

''  But  the  candid  and  enlightened  reader  knows  that  the
cases  I  have  now  adduced  are  given  to  show  the  great  range
and  extent  to  which  this  remedial  agent  can  sometimes  go.
These  are  some  of  the  most  prominent  natural  features  in  an
interesting  new  country  lately  discovered,  whose  exact  geo-
graphy has  yet  to  be  ascertained,  and  which  opens  out  a  new
field  of  enterprise  for  the  surgeon,  the  physician,  the  philoso-
pher, and  the  philanthropist.  It  is  a  pity  that  the  profes-
sional explorers  are  so  few,  but  I  hope  to  contribute  occa-
sionally a  mite  towards  the  increase  of  knowledge  and  human
happiness.^'

*'  I  am  well  aware  that  all  I  have  done  and  said  will  make
no  impression  on  the  obstructives,  infallibles,  snAneplustdtras,
who  have  pre-determined  that  mesmerism  shall  not  be  true,
and  consider  it  an  insult  that  any  one  should  advance  in
knowledge  after  they  have  become  incapable  of  learning ;  but
when  men  cease  to  grow  wiser,  it  is  high  time  for  them  to  die,
and  make  room  for  others/^

Dr.  Esdaile  contrasted  two  cases  at  p.  323.  Let  me  entreat
Mr.  Aston  Key,  for  the  sake  of  his  poor  patients  in  Ouy^s
Hospital,  to  mark  the  contrast;  and  also  to  mark  the  contrast
between  the  fatal  end  of  his  operation  for  the  immense  tumor
which  the  poor  Chinese  came  to  England  to  have  removed,
and  the  successful  results  of  Dr.  Esdaile's  removal  of  tumors
recorded  now  and  in  the  last  number  at  p.  194.  The  reason
for  this  request  is  the  deliciousness  of  the  following  notes  from
Mr.  Chandler  to  myself.

aa2


328 Accounts  of  more  painkss  Surgical  Operations,

"  58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotherithe,
"July  17th.
"  Mj  dear  Sir, — I  am  doing  as  much  mesmerism  as  I  can  pos-
sibly find  time  for;  among  the  rest  I  mesmerise  daily  a  little  girl
three  years  old,  though  not  quite  satisfactorily;  I  cannot  always  get
her  to  sit  still  five  minutes.  The  object  is  to  remove  her  tonsils,
and  I  think  I  shall  succeed  to  a  certain  extent.

"  Mr.  Key  has  consented  to  operate,  but  I  must  send  you  a  copy
of  his  reply  to  me,  it  is  such  a  curiosity.

" '  My  dear  Sir, — I  shall  be  very  glad  if  you  can  by  any  means
quietize  the  little  girl  whilst  the  tonsils  are  being  removed.  Do  not
trouble  yourself  to  convince  me  of  the  truthfulness  of  all  you  say
about  Mr.  Bell*s  patients.  If  each  patient  were  to  testify  to  the
truth  of  his  statement,  I  should  still  remain  incredulous.  I  know
human  kind  too  well  to  be  deceived.

" '  Yours  truly,
"  '  C.  A.  Key.'

"  Do  not  trouble  yourself  to  tell  me  how  much  this  amuses  you.
I  think  I  shall  still  show  him  the  patient  Ford  (as  I  proposed  to  him),
just  to  make  him  say  something  as  ridiculous  as  his  letter.

*'  Believe  me  in  haste,

"  Yours  very  truly,

"Thomas  Chandler."


«


"  58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotherhithe,
July  25th,  1846.
My  dear  Sir, — I  went  to  that  very  amusing  man,  Mr.  Key,
on  Wednesday  last,  with  my  little  patient,  to  have  her  tonsils  re-
moved. Would  you  believe  it  I  he  would  not  wait  for  me  to  mes-
merise the  little  girl,  but  proceeded  at  once  to  the  operation — and  a
pretty  bunele  he  made  of  it,  cutting  the  tongue  severely,  and  getting
but  a  very  li tie  bit  of  tonsil;  when,  if  he  had  allowed  me  to  mes-
merise, (or  quietiiie,  as  he  was  pleased  to  call  it,)  he  might,  with
reasonable  dexterity,  have  seized  the  part,  and  nearly  cut  it  off  before
the  child  had  been  conscious  of  what  was  going  on.

"  In  his  note  to  me  he  said  he  would  not  believe  the  patients
operated  on  by  Mr.  Bell,  if  they  testified  to  the  fact  of  feeling  no
pain.  He  knew  human  kind  too  well  to  be  deceived.  Knowing  in-
dividual! He,  on  Wednesday,  in  the  presence  of  my  patient  Ford,
went  still  further,  and  declared  that  he  would  not  believe  any  person
on  his  oath,  who  swore  that  he  felt  no  pain  during  a  surgical  opera-
tion. He  told  me  that  the  woman,  for  whom  Cloquet  removed  the
breast  some  years  ago,  declared  on  her  death-bed  that  she  had  de-
ceived. If  this  is  untrue,  do  get  some  account  of  the  affair  for  the
next  Zoist;*  there  are  so  many  lies  of  this  kind  told  by  narrow-
minded  and  unprincipled  persons.

*  This  is  all  untrue,  as  Mr.  Key  ought  to  have  knowD  from  my  pamphlet,


communicated  by  Dr,  Elliotson,  329

*'  According  to  Mr.  Key's  way  of  aiding,  a  person  has  only  to
be  influenced  by  mesmerism  (for  be  does  not  deny  tbat  an  effect  is
produced  by  it)  to  become  a  most  atrocious  liar.  I  told  him  so,  and
the  way  he  got  over  it  was,  that  they  deceive  themselves,  fancying
that  they  feel  no  pain.  Sapient  man,  what  more  would  he  wish,
even  supposing  that  to  be  the  case?  Verily,  he  shows  such  wisdom,
that  he  would  do  well  to  go  to  Spain  for  a  title,  he  could  be  so  well
fitted  there.  If  Mr.  Key  were  shewn  a  magnet  for  the  first  time  in
his  life,  and  he  were  told  that  a  piece  of  iron  placed  an  inch  from  it
would  immediately  jump  towards  it,  he  would  of  course  say,  '  I
would  not  believe  it  if  you  were  to  swear  to  it.  I  know  the  laws
which  govern  inanimate  matter  too  well  to  be  deceived.'  And  when
the  thing  happened  he  would  of  course  open  his  eyes  very  wide,  give
his  face  an  extra  twitch,  and  declare  it  to  be  all  fancy.

**  Let  such  men  die  in  their  pig-headed  ignorance,  the  world  will
not  miss  them,  nor  will  the  advance  of  mesmerism  be  retarded  by
their  ridiculous  opposition.

"  Believe  me,

"  Yours  sincerely,

"Thomas  Chandler.*'

Such  remarks  as  those  of  Dr.  Esdaile  at  p.  324  and  325^
I  have  unceasingly  urged  upon  my  medical  brethren.

The  last  remark  of  Mr.  Chandler  was  acted  upon  by
Harvey^  and  ought  to  be  acted  upon  by  all  mesmerists  who
value  their  precious  time.  Harvey^  finding  Riolanus  impe-
netrable to  facts^  gave  him  up  as  hopeless^  'Heaving  him  to
the  wise  course  of  nature^  who  by  death  removes  men  and
all  their  absurd  prejudices  together.''"^

Dr.  Esdaile^s  reflection^  that  "  when  men  cease  to  grow
wiser,  it  is  high  time  for  them  to  die  and  make  room  for
others/'  had  often  forced  itself  upon  me  while  preparing  my
oration.

Two  of  the  bitterest,  most  ignorant,  and  unscrupulous  of
our  opponents,  have  just  been  removed  with  all  their  sins
unatoned  for  by  recantation.  Dr.  James  Johnson  is  no  more.
He  never  witnessed  one  of  my  facts  in  mesmerism,  but  in  his
Medical  and  Chirurgical  Journal  for  July,  1838^  p.  285,  called
it  a  ''  most  abominable  piece  of  humbugy*  and  my  demonstra-
tions, *' mountebank  ea^hibitions ;''  adding  that  some  members
of  our  profession  were  "  from  crediUousness  and  weakness  lend-
ing themselves  to  the  propagation  of  this  tomfoolery  :''  and,

p.  82.  Such  absardity  is  melancholy  ia  a  teacher  of  young  men  who  are  to
be  entrusted  with  the  lires  of  their  fellow-creatures.  The  man  whose  leg
was  cut  off  at  Wellow  was  reported  to  have  confessed  to  imposture ;  the
Okeys  confessed  to  imposture,  and  I  confessed  to  having  been  deceived.
For  the  denial  of  the  latter  medical  untruths  see  Zoitt,  Vol.  I.,  p.  209.
u  Harteian  Oraiion,  p.  16,  50.


380 Accounts  of  mare  painless  Surgical  Operations,

in  the  following  October,  p.  635,  he  protested  that  "  animal
magnetism  is  a  fiction,  a  falsehood;''  the  effects  he  termed
*'  blasphemous  mummeries" — " one  of  the  most  barefaced  and
outrageous  impostures  that  was  ever  foisted  on  the  public,  or
that  disgraced  the  members  of  a  liberal  and  enlightened  pro-
fession/' p.  638 :  and,  not  having  a  high  order  of  intellect
or  any  dignity  of  character,  though  he  had  allowed  himself
to  be  nearly  hunted  to  death  by  Mr.  Wakley  and  had  at
length  cried  out  for  mercy  and  arranged  articles  of  peace
with  the  noisy  but  really  laughable  coroner,  he  for  the  first
time  in  his  life  believed  Mr.  Wakley,  whose  details  of  experi-
ments with  the  Okeys  he  held  out  as  true,  and  wrote  that
"  a  PINAL  and  fatal  blow  had  been  given  to  animal  mag-
netism^'  by  Mr.  Wakley,  who  had  "  blown  the  disjecta  membra
of  mesmerism  into  the  air,  leaving  scarcely  a  wreck  behind,
and  had  owed  this  to  the  profession.*'  (p.  637).  The  army  of
giant  facts  in  The  Zoist  are  indeed  a  nice  little  wreck.  He
eagerly  quoted  the  following  remarks  of  Mr.  Dilke  in  the
AthewBum  with  reference  to  mesmerism :  "  There  are  many
paper-headed  coxcombs  who  will  as  tenderly  be  led  by  the  nose
as  asses  j  aye,  number  for  number,  fully  as  many  in  the
learned  professions  as  out  of  them ;  and  we  (Mr.  Dilke)  are
more  inclined  to  be  of  opinion,  that  afooPs  head  is  as  much  a
fooPs  head  when  enveloped  in  a  doctor's  bonnet  as  when  de-
fended by  a  single  thin  nightcap."  I  never  see  Mr.  Dilke
without  feeling  grateful  for  his  elegant  politeness.

Dr.  Johnson  thought  himself  quite  secure  under  the
wing  of  his  former  foe,  Mr.  Wakley,  and  especially  when  he
informed  the  world  that  "  not  one  of  the  seven  medical  journals
published  in  Great  Britain  had  supported  animal  magnetism.
Four  of  them  have  repudiated  it,  and  the  others  have  pre-
served silence."  (p.  638).  I  am  amused  to  say  that  more
have  repudiated  it, — The  Lancet,  Medical  Times,  Medical
Gazette,  Dr.  Johnson's  Journal,  Dr.  Forbes's  Journal,  Dr.
Stokes  and  Graves's  Dublin  Journal,  I  wish  that  all  medical
journalists  would  openly  repudiate  it :  for  the  sure  victory  of
mesmerism  would  then  be  the  more  glorious.

Dr.  Johnson  was  not  particular.  Though  the  father  of  a
daughter,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  write  what  is  too  indecent
for  me  to  transcribe  in  his  journal,  and  which  men  may  read
at  p.  634,  &c.,  Oct.  1838.  His  cruelty  to  the  Okeys,  whose
cases  were  perfectly  genuine  and  have  been  confirmed  by
hundreds  of  subsequent  cases,  and  who  are  perfectly  weU
and  respectable,  and  of  whom  the  younger  has  presented  her
husband  with  two  children,  was  afterwards  severely  visited
upon  him  in  his  own  family.


communicated  by  Dr.  ElUotsan.  881

He  proposed  to  call  meamerism  nickleas^ery.

His  subsequent  vulgarities  aud  absurdities  were  noticed  in
The  Zoist  of  July,  1844.  His  absurdity  was  such,  that  he
entered  into  the  class  of  those  whose  duty  it  is  to  pluck  out
their  eyes ;  he  declared  that  '*  he  would  not  believe  the  evi-
dence of  hie  own  senses"  He  laughed  at  our  folly  and  pitied
our  madness;  we  formed  three  classes, — arrant  charlatans,
weak  dupes,  and  high-minded  fanatics :  he  viewed  mesmer-
ism as  a  ludicrous,  if  not  mischievous  delusion,  which,  with"
out  regard  to  persons,  should  be  laughed  at  and  put  down"
His  vulgarity  was  beyond  what  might  be  imagined.  The
vignette  of  The  Zoist,  which  represents  a  sage  with  a  youth
of  either  sex  on  either  side  being  instructed  in  philosophy,
he  presumed  must  represent  myself  with  "  two  females  of
loose  habitSy  whose  petticoats  were  too  scant"  Females  of
loose  habits  I  "  The  mesmero-mania,''  he  said,  "  had  nearly
dwindled  in  the  metropolis  into  anile  fatuity;  but  lingers
in  some  of  the  provinces,  with  the  gobe-mouches  and  chaw-
bacons,  who,  after  gulping  down  a  pound  of  fat  pork,  would,
with  greased  gullets,  swallow  such  a  lot  of  mesmeric  mum-
mery as  would  choke  an  alligator  or  a  boa-constrictor.^'  Yet,
forsooth,  he  was  a  religious  man.  He  wrote  such  a  letter  to
the  Duke  of  Clarence  on  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  York,
that  his  Boyal  Highness  thanked  him  ''  for  his  religious  re-
marks.'^

He,  however,  did  far  more  mischief  to  his  fellow-creatures
by  exhorting  practitioners  to  bleed  profusely  in  the  fevers  of
warm  climates,  than  by  his  poor  hostility  to  mesmerism.
Most  surgeons  who  went  from  this  country  to  warm  latitudes
long  followed  his  advice,  which  was  not  founded  on  experi-
ence, and  tens  of  thousands  of  lives  have  been  thus  destroyed.
Better  would  it  have  been  for  all  so  treated  to  have  been  left
to  nature.  Venesection  is  now  but  moderately  employed  in
those  fevers,  and  the  mortality  is  much  reduced.  Yet,  after
doing  all  this  positive  mischief,  and  doing  his  best  to  prevent
mankind  from  having  the  incalculable  blessings  of  mesmer-
ism, he  appears  to  have  died  most  contentedly.  His  biogra-
pher says  that  '^he  was  not  embittered  by  regrets  of  the
past,'' — "  he  looked  back  with  satisfaction."^

Another  person  who,  in  preventing  the  spread  of  mes-
merism, did  as  much  mischief  among  weak-minded  men  and
women  out  of  the  profession  as  he  did  among  the  medical
host,  has  also  just  departed, — ^that  most  bitter,  uncharitable,

y  See  his  Life,  in  the  Medical  and  Chirurgieal  Review,  1846,  p.  47,  and
his  account  of  the  celebrated  meeting  at  the  Medical  and  Chirurgieal  So-
ciety, January,  1843,  p.  282-3,  and  of  my  Pamphlet,  July,  1843,  p.  147.


832 Accounts  of  more  painless  Surgical  Operations^

bigotted^  and  ignorant  writer/  who  fancied  herself  a  Chris-
tian, Charlotte  Elizabeth.  She  represented  the  natural  facts
of  mesmerism  to  be  supernatural,  as  savages  consider  a  watch
must  have  a  spirit — a  supernatural  being  inside  it.  As  the
Pharisees  ascribed  the  healing  of  the  sick  by  Jesus  to  the
devil/  so  did  she  :  and,  having  done  all  the  mischief  she  could
in  this  respect,  she  died,  like  Dr.  Johnson,  contentedly.  In
the  Record  of  July  20,  I  read,  ''  On  the  12th  inst.,  at  Barns-
gate,  LOOKING  UNTO  Jestts,  Charlotte  Elizabeth,  the  beloved
wife  of  Lewis  H.  J.  Tonna,  Esq.,  of  Whitehall  Yard.''*
If  she  had  looked  unto  Jesus  as  he  lived,  she  would  have

z  <<  IgooraDce,  mistaken  for  knowledge,  is  a  frightful  perpetrator  of
injustice  and  cruelty.  Were  I  a  preacher,  there  is  one  sin — a  daily,  hourly
sin — one  productive,  unheeded,  of  immense  mischief, — against  which  I
woald  lift  my  voice  in  season  and  out  of  season,  but  which  I  never  once
in  my  whole  life  heard  preached  against,  though  I  find  it  treated  of  in  one
of  the  late  Dr.  Arnold's  sermons.  It  is  the  sin  of  presuming  to  hold  opinions
on  matters  upon  which  we  have  not  qualified  ourselves  to  have  any  opinion
at  all.  Men  and  women,  young  and  old,  educated  and  uneducated,  rich
and  poor,  equally  commit  this  from  morning  to  night,  committing  it  not  only
in  word  but  in  action  :  and  yet  they,  in  superficial  routine,  pray  to  God  to
keep  them  from  presumptuous  sins, — *  Keep  thy  servant  also  from  presump-
tuous sins.'  " — Numerous  Case$  of  Surgical  Operatunu  without  jwin,  p.  90.

y  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  99,  532.

s  Her  bitterness  to  Roman  catholics  also  was  intense.  A  gentleman  who
was  present  informed  me  that  a  mild  good  woman,  at  an  evening  party  at
Clapham,  mentioned  that  she  had  distributed  a  large  number  of  tracts  in  the
catholic  cantons  of  Switzerland ;  on  which  the  Christian  Charlotte  Elizabeth
Tonna  instantly  said,  "  Ma'am,  I  hope  yoo  hate  the  papists."  The  mild
lady's  reply  was  beautiful — *'  Ma'am,  I  should  be  sorry  to  bate  any  of  God's
creatures."

Mrs.  Tonna  did  but  imitate  the  catholics  whom  she  hated.  For  "  the
Abb^  Wurtz  of  Lyons,  in  a  work  on  the  Superstitions  of  Philosophers^  wrote,
at  the  beginning  of  this  century,  that,  although  all  belief  in  the  devil  was
apparently  given  up,  he  was  really  the  chief  personage,  though  disguised,
in  the  lodges  of  freemasons,  mansions,  and  palaces,  and  acted  sometimes
under  the  form  of  a  wonderful  man,  a  physical  philosopher,  a  mesmerisery  &c.

"  Another  catholic  author,  in  a  book  published  not  many  years  ago  in
France,  wrote  thus : — *■  The  effects  of  mesmerism  are  not  explicable  by  any
natural  causes.  No  natural  means  are  employed  to  produce  them.  Mes-
merism is  a  strategem  invented  by  the  devif  to  seduce  souls,  to  increase  the
number  of  his  adherents,  and  oppose  the  works  of  Jesus  Christ  and  his
ministers.  No  Christian  can  employ  mesmerism  for  himself  or  others  with-
out mortal  sin.  Mesmerism  undermines  faith  and  morals.  Government
ought  to  proscribe  it.  In  order  to  be -initiated  into  its  mysteries,  Jesus  Christ
must  be  denied,  and  the  cross  trampled  upon.  All  mesmerisers  are  disciples
of  Lucifer.'  ^Foissac,  pp.  251,  394.)

**  How  slavishly  does  the  alleged  protestant  writer  of  a  disgraceful
English  sermon,  of  which  not  a  copy  would  have  sold  but  for  the  wretehed
state  of  our  education,  adopt  the  thoughts  and  words  of  the  Roman  catholics,
against  whom  he  is  so  fierce.  Thus  vaccination  was  discovered  to  be  anti-
christ, and  sermons  were  furiously  preached  against  it  when  I  was  a  boy,  as
they  had  been  previously  against  the  inoculation  of  small-pox.  Thus  we
read  that  the  miraculous  cores  of  Christ,  when  he  was  thought  <  beside
himself  by  'his  friends,'  were  attributed  to  the  devil,  as  though  this  were
so  benevolent  an  individual." — Numerous  Cases  qf  Surgical  OperationSy  4rc*y
pp.  89,  90.


Ben^  of  Mesmerism  in  Fracture  of  the  Leg,  ^c. 333

foand  him  urging  the  world  not  to  think  the  easy  observance
of  religious  forms  or  adoption  of  mystical  opinions  about  su-
pernatural points  to  be  of  any  value,  nor  to  think  the  better
of  people  who  observe  certain  religious  forms  and  hold  certain
opinions,  because  we  observe  and  hold  the  same,  and  through
the  circumstances  in  which,  like  them,  we  have  been  placed ;
but  to  be  humble  and  just  in  every  trifling  action  and  word,
and  to  be  delighted  with  everything  which  promises  to  lessen
ever  so  little  the  sufferings  of  our  fellow-creatures.


II.  Extraordinary  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  dangerous  Fracture
of  the  Leg  and  in  Fits, By  Mr.  Nixon,  Surgeon.

Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

I  AH  delighted  to  record  another  medical  conversion  to  mes-
merism with  happy  results  to  the  afflicted,  and  that,  as  in  so
many  other  instances,  by  the  good  sense  and  energy  of  a
lady.  How  delightful  must  be  Miss  Aglionby's  reflections,
that  she  has  been  the  indirect  and  original  means  of  saving  a
life,  and,  what  is  better,  of  putting  an  end  to  "  intolerable
agony"  which  our  hospital  surgeons  resolve  that  patients
shall  still  suffer  rather  than  they  themselves  condescend  to
listen  to  what  they  still  pronounce  on  all  occasions,  always
proudly  and  often  fiercely,  to  be  outrageous  nonsense.

I  received  the  enclosed  from  a  cousin  of  the  Member  for
Cockermouth.

J.  Elliotson.


It


Wigton  Hall,  Cumberland,
"June  20th,  1846.
Sir, — I  trust  you  will  excuse  the  liberty  I  take  in  for-
warding to  you  the  enclosed  papers.  They  are  written  by
Mr.  Nixon,  a  medical  man  in  the  town  of  Wigton,  Cumber-
land; and  it  will,  I  hope,  in  some  degree  interest  you  to  learn
that  another  of  your  profession  has  availed  himself  of  the
great  powers  of  mesmerism.  Mr.  Nixon  was  at  first  a  dis-
believer ;  but,  on  my  introducing  to  his  notice  two  or  three
curious  cases,  he  had  the  good  sense  and  candour  to  examine
and  try  for  himself,  and  the  result  has  been,  that  in  several
cases  he  has  been  enabled  greatly  to  benefit  his  patients  by
mesmeric  means.  I  must  again  beg  you  will  pardon  my
having  thus  intruded  on  your  time,  and  assure  you  that
Mr.  Nixon  will  feel  himself  highly  flattered,  should  you  con-


884 Benefit  qfMesmeritm  in  Fracture  of  the  Lejf,  ifc.

dder  hia  statement  of  sufficient  importance  to  interest  you  or
to  communicate  to  77^  Zoist,  should  you  think  proper  to
do  so.

''  I  remain.  Sir,

"  Your  obedient  servant,

''Elisabeth  F.  Aglionby."

The  existence  of  an  inexplicable  agent,  which  seems  to  set
at  defiance  all  our  present  physiological  knowledge,  has  not
been  admitted  on  my  part,  until  after  much  patient  and  close
practical  investigation ;  for  I  unhesitatingly  admit  that  I  be-
longed to  the  class  of  sceptics,  who,  because  they  could  not
havl  extraordinary  phenomenf  satirfactonly  expldned,  could
not  but  suspect  collusion  and  imposture.  The  following  cases
came  under  my  own  observation.

On  the  1st  of  January,  a  poor  aged  woman  sustained  a
very  severe  comminuted  fracture  at  the  upper  third  of  the
right  leg,  the  limb  having  for  nearly  three  years,  previous  to
the  accident,  been  in  a  weakened  condition,  from  extensive
varicose  ulcers.  The  immediate  consequence  of  the  injury
was  violent  inflammation,  and  swelling ;  these  were  speeidily
followed  by  all  the  symptoms  of  commencing  mortification,
so  that  it  became  a  question  whether  or  not  immediate  am-
putation should  be  had  recourse  to.  During  this  time  the
woman  was  suffering  the  most  intolerable  agony,  for  the  relief
of  which  I  exhamted  all  the  ordinary  resources  of  our  art,
without  avail.  I  then  resolved,  as  an  experiment,  to  try  to
induce  the  mesmeric  sleep,  and,  to  my  great  amazement  and
satisfaction,  in  about  fifteen  minutes,  the  wiehed-for  rel^f
was  procured.  This  sleep  lasted  fully  half  an  hour,  with  the
extraordinary  effect,  on  awakening,  of  perfect  freedom  from
pain.  The  same  process  was  gone  through,  morning  and
evening,  for  a  period  of  three  weeks,  with  the  happiest  result.
The  limbf  from  the  first  trial  of  meemerism,  began  gradually
to  improve^  and  at  length  became  quite  consolidated.  The
ulcerated  surfaces  also  healed.  No  other  means  than  mesmeric
sleep,  except  the  ordinary  treatment  of  keeping  the  limb
steady  and  cool,  were  employed.

While  the  above  case  was  still  under  treatment,  I  was
sent  for,  in  great  haste,  on  the  22nd  of  January,  to  S.  B.,
aged  31,  residing  in  the  country,  and  who  was  reported  to
be  in  a  dying  state.  I  found  the  lady  in  a  hysteric  paroxysm,
to  which  she  had  been  for  some  time  very  liable,  from  long
previous  illness  and  a  constitution  naturaUy  of  feeble  power
of  resistance  to  disease.  I  was  given  to  understand,  the
paroxysms  had  occurred  at  intervals  for  three  hours,  which


Cure  of  severe  and  constant  Pain  toith  Mesmerism. 886

aooounted  for  her  extremely  exhausted  and  alarming  condi-
tion. By  the  diligent  use  of  ordinary  means^  she  was  at
last  recovered  from  this  state,  and  expressed  herself  better;
soon  afterwards  having  some  quiet  sleep.  Two  hours  after,
I  was  preparing  to  leave,  when  I  was  told  she  was  worse.  On
hastening  to  her,  I  found  her  in  a  violent  fit  of  cataleptic
ecstacy.  The  paroxysm  lasted  for  two  or  three  minutes,  and
recurred  again  at  irregular  intervals,  seizing  and  rigidly
maintaining  her  in  whatever  posture  she  might  be  in  during
her  conscious  moments.  Having  heard  it  stated  that  mes-
merists considered  hysteria  and  catalepsy  the  mere  spontaneous
development  of  the  mesmeric  state,  I  resolved  to  put  it  to
the  test.  I  accordingly  began  to  attempt  neutralizing  the
exalted  condition  of  the  nervous  system  by  every  demes-
merising  manoeuvre  I  was  master  of.  I  failed,  however,  either
in  shortening  the  duration,  or  influencing  in  any  degree,  the
intensity  of  the  fits ;  but  I  acknowledge  I  did  not  make  the
reversed  passes  in  direct  relation  to  the  course  of  the  nerves ;
from  not  then  knowing  this  to  be  necessary.  These  experi-
ments were  several  times  repeated  during  the  total  suspension
of  the  intellectual  faculties.  I  therefore  waited  for  a  return
to  consciousness,  and  then  I  endeavoured  to  induce  somno-
lency, assuring  her  that  if  she  would  fix  her  attention  on  what
we  were  engaged  in,  and  look  me  steadily  in  the  fac^,  I  would
ensure  her  speedy  relief:  fortunately  her  confidence  was
thus  secured.  A  few  minutes  sufficed  to  bring  about  perfect
sleep.  She  awoke  at  intervals,  but  a  repetition  of  the  same
means  soon  sent  her  asleep  again.  She  was  kept  in  this  con-
dition for  five  hours,  and  then  allowed  to  rouse  up.  The  fits
had  now  become  mild  hysteric,  and  graduaUy  wore  ofi^  during
the  course  of  the  day.


III.  Cure  of  severe  and  constant  PaiUy  of  long  standing.

Communicated  by  Mr.  D.  Hands.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Dear  Sir, — I  send  you  the  account  of  the  cure  of  a  poor
Irish  woman,  effected  by  my  friend  Madame  Marie,  who
resides  in  my  house  and,  from  having  derived  great  benefit
from  mesmerism,  has  devoted  herseUT  to  its  practice.  She
has  been  singularly  successful ;  and  though  this  case  is  abso-
lutely void  of  all  marvel,  yet  is  the  cure  most  perfect,  and
the  poor  woman  who  for  ten  years  was  the  subject  of  disease
and  incapable  of  work  is  now  in  perfect  health,  and  I  have
no  doubt  after  her  confinement  will  be  enabled  to  gain  her


336 Cure  of  never e  and  constant  Pain  with  Mesmerism,

livelihood  by  the  labour  of  her  hands.  I  shall  feel  very
grateful  for  your  insertion  of  Madame  Marie's  statement.

I  remain^  &c.

Decimus  Hands^  Surgeon.
22^  Thayer  Street,  June  19th.

In  the  month  of  March  my  attention  was  drawn  by  the
benevolent  Mr.  Briggs  to  the  case  of  a  poor  Irish  woman,
named  Ann  Sullivan,  who,  having  met  with  a  serious  injury
by  a  fall  ten  years  previously,  had  ever  since  been  a  sufferer
firom  constant  and  often  acute  pain  in  the  side.  The  account
she  gave  of  her  accident  was  as  follows.  At  the  age  of  17  she
was  in  a  situation  as  servant  of  all-work,  and  had  always  a
horror  of  touching  anything  dead.  One  day  another  young
girl  ran  after  her  to  hit  her  with  a  dead  hare ;  in  her  haste  and
fright  she  missed  her  footing  and  fell  down  16  steps  into  the
yard  below  upon  her  side.  She  remained  stunned  for  some
time,  and  was  confined  to  her  bed  six  weeks,  attended  by  a
doctor  who  bled  her  frequently,  and  for  more  than  six  months
she  was  too  weak  to  be  able  to  carry  even  a  jug  of  water  up
stairs.  Three  years  afterwards  she  married,  and  her  first  child
was  born  the  year  following.  Having  never  recovered  her
health  or  strength  since  the  fall,  she  was  a  long  time  before
she  rallied  after  her  confinement ;  for  many  weeks  she  could
only  crawl  about  the  house  holding  by  the  chairs;  since  then
she  has  had  two  more  children,  and  when  she  came  to  me  was
already  pregnant  four  months  of  her  fourth  child.  Her  side
was  acutely  sensitive  to  the  touch ;  the  pressure  of  her  own
hand  made  her  scream,  and  she  could  not  wear  stays  or  bear
anything  tied  over  the  place.  She  was  28  vears  of  age,  very
pale  and  emaciated ;  temperament,  leuco-phlegmatic.  Bowels
always  confined;  hair,  a  light  sandy  brown;  eyes,  blue.
From  last  Christmas  she  had  cold  shiverings  at  night.  Her
appetite  was  very  bad,  or  rather  the  stomach  rejected  all  kinds
of  nourishment,  tea  being  all  she  lived  on.

Mr.  Briggs  was  anxious  she  should  try  if  mesmerism  could
be  of  any  benefit,  and  I  willingly  consented  to  undertake  the
case,  though  from  the  length  of  time  that  had  elapsed  I  was
not  sanguine  of  success.  The  poor  woman  called  on  me  March
80th,  when  I  commenced  by  making  long  passes  from  the  top
of  the  head  downwards  to  the  waist ;  she  said  she  felt  a  cold
stream  of  air  from  my  fingers,  and  complained  shortly  after-
wards of  head-ache,  faintness  and  sickness,  but  did  not  seem
drowsy.  I  continued  the  passes  for  about  20  minutes,  and
then  sent  her  home.  The  next  day,  Tuesday,  March  31st,  I
questioned  her  as  to  what  she  felt  after  she  had  left  me  the  pre-


communicated  by  Mr.  D.  Hands,  337

vious  day ;  she  said  she  had  been  very  sick  and  faint,  and  had
retched  violently  all  the  afternoon.  I  was  rather  fearful  that
this  might  prove  injurious  in  her  then  state,  and  therefore  con-
fined my  operations  to  a  slight  pressure  on  the  side,  wishing
to  consult  Mr.  Hands,  who  was  not  at  home  at  the  time.  She
complained  much  of  the  pain  my  hand  occasioned  her ;  I  gave
over  in  about  ten  minutes ;  she  said  her  side  felt  better  than
when  she  came.  On  Mr.  Hands's  return,  I  asked  him  if  he
thought  I  might  continue,  notwithstanding  the  retching ;  he
quite  reassured  me.  I  was  therefore  encouraged  and  deter-
mined I  would  exert  all  my  power  on  the  next  day,  as  she
thought  the  pressure  had  aUeviated  the  pain.  I  was  rather
disappointed  that  she  had  not  shewed  any  symptoms  of  sleep,
as  every  one  I  had  mesmerised  previously  had  been  sent  into
the  sleep  the  first  dey,*  consequently  I  was  not  prepared
for  the  contrary  efibct,  and  was  almost  inclined  to  doubt  her
having  felt  any  influence  from  me.

On  the  Wednesday  morning  I  had  a  lady  with  me  who
was  desirous  to  be  present,  to  which  I  consented.  The  poor
woman  told  me  she  had  been  better  than  she  had  felt  for  a
long  time,  and  almost  free  from  pain  till  four  o^clock,  from
which  time  she  suffered  intensely  up  to  the  moment  she  was
speaking,  and  that  she  was  then  in  such  torture  she  would
not  be  able  to  endure  my  hand  to  her  side.  I  however  de-
termined to  try.  On  placing  my  fingers  with  the  utmost  gen-
tleness on  the  part,  she  screamed  violently,  and  said  the  pain
was  as  bad  in  the  right  side  as  it  had  been  in  the  left ;  that
the  instant  I  had  touched  the  latter,  she  felt  pain  dart  into
the  other  side  likewise.  I  then  placed  the  fingers  of  each
hand  on  the  sides,  and  amidst  her  reiterated  cries  and  en-
treaties gently  drew  them  to  the  centre  and  then  slowly
towards  myself,  throwing  off  the  influence  each  time.  The
lady  who  was  present  became  alarmed,  and  joined  her  in  ask-
ing me  to  desist ;  but  I  still  persevered  tiU  she  acknowledged
the  acuteness  of  the  suffering  diminished.  In  about  20  minutes
she  declared  that  she  no  longer  felt  pain ;  that  she  had  not
been  so  free  from  it  for  ten  years.

Here  I  think  it  proper  to  state,  that  nothing  appears  so
much  to  strengthen  the  influence  and  necessarily  prove  benefi-
cial as  the  encouragement,  when  patients  are  ready  to  attribute
their  relief  to  mesmerism.  The  mesmeriser  feels  his  own  faith
increased  and  redoubles  his  efforts  with  confidence.  The
reverse  is  still  more  certain ;  none  but  those  who  have  expe-

*  This  lady's  eiperience  mast  have  been  limited,  or  she  would  not  have
felt  disappointment.—ZoMf.


888 Cure  of  severe  and  constant  Pain  with  Mesmerism^

rienced  it  can  understand  the  damp  that  is  thrown  on  all  his
exertions  when  there  is  a  disinclination  to  allow  they  have
derived  benefit^  or  they  attribute  it  to  chance,  or  indeed  to
anything  else  except  to  the  power  of  your  influence.

On  the  Thursday  following  I  was  very  unwell  and  told  the
servant^  when  Mrs.  Sullivan  came,  to  ask  her  to  return  in  the
afternoon,  when  I  hoped  to  be  able  to  exert  myself.  However,
she  begged  so  hard  to  see  me,  if  it  were  only  for  a  few  mi-
nutes, that  I  accordingly  went  to  her  in  the  hall.  She  told  me
she  had  been  quite  well  till  that  morning,  but  then  the  agony
of  the  side  was  so  acute  she  could  not  breathe,  and  implored
me  to  try  to  give  her  some  relief.  Though  very  unwell,  I  could
not  resist  her  entreaties,  and  placed  my  hand  on  her  side  while
she  stood  in  the  passage.  In  a  very  short  time  she  said  she
was  quite  comfortable,  and  left  me,  saying  she  would  not  re-
turn that  day  unless  the  pain  became  unbearable.  When  she
came  on  the  Friday,  the  alteration  in  her  appearance  was  most
striking ;  she  generally  seemed  in  too  low  spirits  for  any  un-
necessary exertion,  and  though  she  endeavoured  to  keep  her
husband  tidy,  she  was  a  picture  of  an  untidy  slattern  herself:
but  on  that  morning  she  was  clean,  looked  as  if  her  clothes
were  pinned  on  instead  of  hanging  loose  about  her,  and  she  had
made  herself  a  new  cap,  while  her  whole  face  was  brightened
up  and  smiling :  she  said,  she  had  no  return  of  pain,  she  was
quite  well;  she  laughed  and  talked  incessantly;  she  was  almost
wild,  I  could  not  keep  her  quiet.  Her  happy  gratitude  was
very  cheering ;  her  disposition  is  peculiarly  interesting  to  me.
In  the  midst  of  most  severe  trials,  there  never  escaped  a
murmur  from  her  lips ;  she  felt  the  afl9iction,  but  felt  too  her
mercies.  Suffering  for  many  years,  unable  to  work,  she  was
thankful  she  had  a  kind  and  affectionate  husband, — a  sober,
industrious  man,  who  was  always  willing  to  labour  for  her
support.  When  he  fell  from  the  scaffold  and  was  seriously
hurt,  and  consequently  thrown  out  of  work,  then  she  was
thankful  that  God  had  raised  her  up  a  friend  in  Mr.  Briggs,
who  relieved  their  wants,  placed  him  in  the  Middlesex  Hos-
pital, and  had  now  been  the  means  of  her  recovery.  There
are  few  sights  more  refreshing  to  witness  than  the  overflowings
of  gratitude  in  the  midst  of  adversity ;  this  is  Grod's  work
and  truly  marvellous  in  our  eyes.

The  next  day,  Saturday,  the  lady  who  witnessed  her  suf-
ferings on  Wednesday,  was  again  with  me,  when  Mrs.  Sul-
livan was  announced.  This  lady,  Mrs.  Phillips,  of  Islington,
who  kindly  allows  me  to  name  her,  was  much  amazed  at
seeing  her  so  happy  and  cheerful,  and  to  hear  her  declaration
of  being  perfectly  cured ;  the  only  symptom  that  remained


communicated  by  Mr.  D.  Hands.  839

was  her  night  shiverings.  On  ascertaining  this  I  tamed  all  my
attention  to  willing  them  to  cease  as  I  had  read  some  mes-
merisers  had  the  power  of  doing.

On  Monday  morning  I  anxiously  expected  Mrs.  Sullivan
that  I  might  learn  the  result,  but  in  vain ;  she  did  not  come.
At  two  o'clock  I  became  alarmed,  and  went  to  her  house,
and  found  her  quite  well ;  her  only  excuse  was  that  she  no
longer  required  mesmerism,  being  completely  recovered.  I,
however,  thought  it  better  not  to  relinquish  so  suddenly,
but  to  continue  a  few  days  longer.  She  also  stated  that  when
she  got  home  on  the  Saturday  she  felt  so  heavy,  she  lay  down
and  slept  profoundly  firom  half-past  twelve  to  near  six  o'clock.
I  appointed  her  to  come  to  me  as  soon  as  she  could,  and  I
returned  home.  She  came  about  three  o'clock,  and  while
mesmerising  her,  I  willed  her  to  sleep  for  two  hours  that
afternoon  as  soon  as  she  got  home.  I  forgot  to  mention  the
night  shiverings  had  ceased,  she  not  having  had  any  since
the  Saturday.  On  her  leaving  me  on  the  Monday,  I  merely
said  you  were  quite  right  to  lie  down  when  you  felt  sleepy  on
Saturday ;  be  sure  always  to  yield  to  what  you  feel.  When
she  was  gone,  I  was  so  pleased  by  the  success  attending  my
willing,  that  I' wrote  in  my  memoranda  book  my  having  willed
her  to  sleep  for  two  hours.

On  the  Tuesday,  the  kind  Mr.  Briggs  called,  and  I  showed
him  what  I  had  written,  saying,  now  when  Mrs.  S.  comes
you  will  see  what  power  I  have.  He  was  amused,  and  when
the  servant  said  she  was  down  stairs,  begged  she  might  come
up  at  once.  I  expected  to  see  her  as  happy  as  she  had  been
the  last  three  days ;  but,  alas,  how  altered  and  wretched  she
looked ;  and  when  I  enquired  what  was  the  matter,  I  was
indeed  surprised  to  learn  that  she  was  as  ill  as  she  had  ever
been ;  she  seemed  as  depressed  as  she  had  been  exhilarated
before.  The  pain  of  her  side  had  not  returned,  nor  the  shi-
vering or  sickness;  but  her  breathing  was  sonorous  and
painful,  her  chest  oppressed,  her  pulse  high  and  feverish.
She  complained  that  the  night  had  been  restless  and  agitated;
indeed  she  appeared  to  me  almost  delirious.  I  questioned
her  as  to  what  could  have  been  the  cause,  but  she  assured
me  she  had  not  committed  any  imprudence,  nor  taken  any
food,  except  her  tea,  bread  and  butter,  and  mesmerised
water,  which  I  had  given  her  from  the  first ;  and  that  so  far
from  having  done  anything  to  counteract  my  influence,  she
had  been  so  resolved  to  have  a  good  night,  that,  instead  of
yielding  to  the  sleep  that  almost  overpowered  her,^  she  had

*  The  patient  had  been  sleepy  and  gone  to  sleep  after  returning  home


340 Cure  of  severe  and  constant  Pain  with  Mesmerism.

scrubbed  her  room^  and  chairs  and  table^  notwithstanding
my  request  of  her  lying  down  if  she  was  sleepy.  You  cannot
imagine  my  vexation  at  this  candid  confession.  I  was  com-
pletely discouraged^  and  lost  all  my  influence  as  well  as  inte-
rest in  her.  She  had  a  relapse  of  all  her  former  symptoms,
and  it  was  in  vain  that  I  toiled ;  I  could  produce  no  effect  for
many  weeks.  At  length  I  announced  to  her  that  I  thought
it  useless  to  continue,  but  her  grief  was  so  touching  that  I  con-
sented to  try  another  week,  and  really  endeavoured  to  rouse
myself  into  feeling  some  interest  again  in  the  case,  assured
that  I  had  nothing  to  fear  like  her  former  disobedience.  In
a  few  days  she  seemed  to  derive  a  little  benefit  again  under
my  power.  From  the  time  I  regained  my  influence  her
amendment  was  rapid.  On  the  11th  of  May  she  was  perfectly
restored  to  health ;  she  could  allow  her  side  to  be  thumped
hard.  She  now  wears  stays  and  washes  blankets.  Since  her
recovery  she  has  had  a  severe  fall  into  the  coal  cellar,  from
which  she  escaped  with  bruises  and  contusion  of  the  same
side,  yet  she  never  felt  a  return  of  the  old  pain.

I  mentioned  at  the  commencement,  that  her  bowels  had
been  always  confined ;  but  from  the  third  time  of  being  mes-
merised, they  acted  daily,  and  have  continued  to  do  so  ever
since.

One  of  Mr.  Hands^s  clairvoyantes  advised  wash-leather  to
be  mesmerised  and  applied  to  the  side,  and  likewise  prescribed
arnica.  Mr.  Hands  gave  her  the  arnica,  the  eJEfect  of  which
was  surprising;  and  when  she  described  what  her  feelings
were,  you  would  have  thought  she  had  read  Jahr's  Manual  of
Homceopathy,  so  exact  was  her  description  in  harmony  with
it.*  She  took  no  other  medicine  all  the  time  but  one  dose
of  arnica.

There  were  no  phenomena  to  excite  curiosity ;  but  the  fact
of  perfect  restoration  to  health  and  strength  is  all  we  ought
to  desire.

It  is  rather  singular  that  whereas  all  the  other  persons  I
have  mesmerised  describe  my  influence  as  very  warm,  she

on  the  Saturday,  when  there  had  been  no  willing :  and  therefore,  though  we
know  the  power  of  the  will  {Zoist^  Vol.  III.,  p.  319),  we  have  no  right  to
ascribe  the  aleepineiis  of  Monday  to  Madame  Marie's  will.  Patients  are  often
overpowered  with  sleep  after  mesmerisation  is  over. — Zoist,

*  We  have  ascertained,  by  means  of  a  friend,  that  the  description
amounted  absolutely  to  nothing.  Jahr  mentions  nearly  two  hundred  symp-
toms, great  and  little  and  of  various  kinds,  produced  by  arnica,  just  as  he
gives  a  host  from  each  of  a  multitude  of  other  medicines.  Of  these  the
woman  mentioned  two  or  three  sensations  to  our  friend,  as  having  been  felt
by  her  in  her  side,  which  was  the  seat  of  her  disease :  but  they  were  such
as  she  had  frequently  experienced  before,  and  such  as  all  persons  with  her
nervous  effection  of  the  side  continually  experience. — Zoiet,


Striking  utility  of  Mesmerism  in  Tic  Douloureux. 341

invariably  has  found  it  cold^  though  pleasant.  When  she
suffered  from  head-ache^  it  was  increased  by  my  passes,  unless
made  in  the  inverse  direction  from  the  chin  upwards  to  the
vertex  of  the  head  and  thrown  off,  which  relieved  her.  I
have  no  doubt  her  cure  would  have  been  completely  effected
in  the  week,  had  she  not  resisted  the  influence.  During  the
whole  time  no  other  means  were  employed,  with  the  exception
of  the  dose  of  arnica  prescribed  by  the  clairvoyante  and
given  by  Mr.  Hands^s  direction,  and  the  wash-leather,  which
she  thought  was  of  great  service ;  indeed  I  have  generally
found  it  of  great  benefit,  as  likewise  the  use  of  mesmerised
water  as  a  beverage  as  well  as  external  application.

Marie.


IV.  Striking  Utility  of  Mesmerism  in  Tic  Douloureux, By

Mr.  H.  U.  Janson.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir. — ^At  length  I  have  the  pleasure  of  sending  you  some
particulars  of  a  distressing  case  of  neuralgia  which  I  have
so  long  attended  in  Exeter :  my  patient  (Mrs.  Canterbury,
No.  48,  Holloway  Street)  having  kindly  given  permission  for
its  insertion  in  our  excellent  periodical.  As,  however,  the
said  work  is  now  becoming  so  over-stocked,  that  space  must
be  a  matter  of  consideration,  I  am  desirous  of  condensing  my
communication  as  much  as  possible.  I  might  have  sent  it
long  ago,  but  was  resolved  not  to  do  so  until  I  could  announce
that  my  patient  had  completed  half  a  year  without  pain ;
which,  I  am  happy  to  say,  is  now  the  case.  Moreover,  I  have
recently  returned  from  an  absence  of  nearly  six  weeks,  during
which  time  she  had  no  other  operator ;  but,  on  visiting  her,
on  my  return,  I  was  informed  that  there  had  been  "no  return
of  the  pain.''  I  therefore  hope  it  is  quite  eradicated.  The
history  of  the  case  is  as  follows  :

Mrs.  C.  had  been  "a  martyr  to  the  tic*'  for  full  four  years
before  I  knew  her,  during  which  time  she  had  the  advice  of
several  physicians  and  surgeons  in  Exeter ;  but  without  any
permanent  benefit ;  though,  as  she  told  me,  "  the  medicines
sometimes  seemed  to  have  the  effect  of  stunning  the  pain  for
the  time  ;  but  it  always  returned  with  redoubled  violence,  so
that  no  advantage  was  derived.''  The  patient  expresses  her
belief  that  the  disease  has  heen  forming  for  full  eighteen  years;
it  was  therefore  a  thoroughly  deep-rooted  case.

Neuralgia,  I  may  observe,  appears  to  be  one  of  the  most

VOL.  IV.  B  B


342 Striking  utility  of  Mesmerism  in  Tic  Doulouretuc,

mystic  or  least  explicable  of  all  diseases.  I  do  not  require  to
be  told  that  it  is  owing  to  a  derangement  of  the  nervous
system,  &c.;  that  of  course,  is  admitted;  but,  the  question  is,
what  causes  this  derangement  7  One  of  my  medical  friends
tells  me  that  it  may  be  caused  by  disorder  of  almost  any  of
the  internal  organs.  As  far  as  my  own  observation  has  gone,
I  am  satisfied  that  these  deep-rooted  cases  are  frequently
caused  by  the  accumulation  of  a  mass  of  matter  in  the  chest.
That  it  is  so  in  this  case,  I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt,  both
from  the  self-evident  symptoms  of  the  case,  and  also  from  the
assertions  of  the  patient  herself  during  the  trance.  The
application  of  the  mesmeric  influence  always  produces  a  severe
cough,  which,  by  continuing  the  "  passes^^  with  energy,  may
be  worked  up  so  as  to  terminate  in  violent  vomiting.  In  this
way  the  amount  of  matter  that  has  been  removed  is  beyond
calculation;  for  I  have  attended  her  now  upwards  of  300
times,  and  the  process  has  been  going  on,  more  or  less,  from
the  commencement ;  though  the  expectoration  began  to  dimin-
ish with  the  pain,  and  has  now,  for  some  time,  nearly  ceased
altogether.  I  have  never  heard  of  a  worse  case  than  this.
When  I  first  became  acquainted  with  Mrs.  C.  she  was,  I
verily  believe,  on  the  point  of  being  starved  to  death  I  as  the
difficulty  of  eating  a  morsel  of  food  was  almost  insurmount-
able. She  told  me  that  even  to  see  preparations  made  for
dinner  was  just  the  same  to  her  as  to  see  a  dentist  preparing
his  instruments  to  draw  her  teeth ;  as  the  least  attempt  at
manducation  would  bring  on  such  a  paroxysm  of  agony  that
I  have  repeatedly  seen  the  couch  on  which  she  lay  tremble
beneath  her.  The  skin  of  the  face,  around  the  mouth,
became  discoloured  (as  sometimes  occurs  in  extreme  cases)
and  peeled  off  as  it  does  from  a  patient  after  a  fever ;  and
both  eating  and  speaking  were  becoming  every  day  more  and
more  impracticable.  She  used  to  receive  me  in  perfect
silence,  lying  on  the  sofa,  and  merely  pointing  to  a  slate  on
which  she  had  written  any  remark  she  might  have  wished  to
make.  In  this  state  she  would  prepare  herself  for  the  opera-
tion, looking  the  very  picture  of  misery  unutterable.  A  very
few  minutes  sufficed  to  place  her  in  the  mesmeric  sleep ;  and
any  one  who  entered,  half  an  hour  or  so  afterwards,  might
indeed  have  stood  astonished !  There  was  my  unutterably
miserable  patient,  sitting  np,  chatting,  laughing,  eating  her
dinner,  (not  gruel  and  slops,  but  such  things  as  beef  steaks
and  mutton  chops),  and  looking  as  happy  as  possible.

She  would  occasionally  exclaim  '*  I  cannot  think  how  this
is !  I  know  I  could  not  do  this  if  you  were  not  here,^'  &c.,  for
it  is  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  this  case,  that  the  patient  has


by  Mr.  Janson,  343

never^  from  the  firsts  been  in  the  slightest  degree  conscious
of  being  in  any  other  than  her  usual  state ;  though  she  has
not  the  slightest  recollection  afterwards  of  anything  that  has
occurred  during  the  trance.  Many  of  my  friends  have  come
to  see  Mrs.  C.  eat  her  dinner  without  knowing  it ;  and  it  really
was  quite  a  sight.  I  shall  never  forget  the  first  time  this
experiment  was  tried.  On  being  aroused^  the  patient  looked
much  surprized^  and  said^  *'  Have  I  been  eating  V*  I  replied^
"  What  makes  you  think  so  ?"  She  said,  "  I  have  no  recollec-
tion whatever  of  it,  but  I  feel  as  if  I  had  been  dining  most
sumptuously"  *' And  well  you  may/'  said  I,  "for  you  have
eaten  a  couple  of  mutton  chops,  a  large  piece  of  bread,  and  a
considerable  portion  of  pudding !''  The  astonishment  depicted
on  my  patient's  face  was  most  amusing.  In  this  way  she  was
gradually  brought  forward  from  strength  to  strength.  As
soon  as  the  violent  coughing  and  expectoration  (which
usually  took  place  as  soon  as  the  eyes  were  mesmerically
closed)  was  quite  over,  I  commenced  the  adminstration  of
edibles.  This  was  done  until  at  length  the  disease  became  so
far  subdued,  that  my  patient  informed  me  sha  could  eat
comfortably  when  awake.  I  never  heard  of  a  more  steady
cure.  The  disease  melted  away,  as  Bums  says,  "like  snow-
wreathes  in  thaw.''  The  dreadful  paroxysms  gradually  died
down  to  a  few  occasional  tuntches,  which  gradually  diminished,
in  number  and  severity,  until  at  length  I  received  the  pleasing
intelligence  that  she  had  got  over  an  entire  day  without  the
least  pain.  After  that,  the  improvement  was  most  rapid.  She
gained  flesh  and  spirits,  and  has  now,  as  I  have  stated,  passed
full  half  a  year  without  a  single  twitch  or  dart.  It  was  when
she  had  got  over  the  first  quarter,  that  she  one  day  presented
me  with  a  copy  of  original  verses,  which,  as  I  can  truly
testify  that  they  contain  a  simple  statement  of  facts,  will  I
think  be  appropriately  inserted  here.

FROM  ONE  WHO  HAS  BEEN  CURED  OF  TIC  DOULOUREUX.

TO H. V. JAN80N, ESCt.

To  ytm,  most  valued  friend,

Whoie  sympathetic  care
Relieved  my  cruel  woes.

And  saved  me  firom  despair,

Thanks,  more  than  words  can  speak,

I  fed  to  be  your  due,
And  heart-felt  gratitude,

Which  I  present  to  you.

When  first  you  saw  my  face,

I  lay  in  dreadfol  pain,
And  scarce  had  power  to  ask

If  you  would  come  again.  B  B  2


344 Striking  utility  of  Mesmerism  in  Tic  Douloureux^

But  anguuh  had  a  voice

Which  moved  your  tender  heart.
To  try  magnetic  power,

And  soothing  aid  impart.

The  efforts  that  yon  made,

A  blessing  did  obtain,
And  brought  to  me  more  ease

Than  medicines  could  gain.

I  now  a  comfort  feel,

Which  long  was  sought  in  vain, —
A  power  to  eat  or  speiiJc,

And  feel  no  darting  pain.

What  sweet  release  I  find,

Oh  happy  change  for  me !
Release  from  grief  and  gloom.

To  active  liberty.

May  every  bliss  be  yours,

That  mortal  can  obtain,
And  when  immortal  made,

In  heaven  for  ever  reign.

This  case  exhibits  several  of  the  "  ordinary  phenomena/'
(as  they  will  be  called  ten  years  hence,)  rigidity,  community
of  taste  and  sensation,  &c.  One  thing,  however,  is  remark-
able, that  on  attempting  to  draw  the  hands  by  the  "  tractive
passes,^'  that  very  common  phenomenon  is  never  produced ;
but,  instead  of  it,  they  shrink  away,  and  the  patient  com-
plains of  an  uncomfortable  sensation  of  cold,  and,  it  requires
some  rubbing  and  breathing  upon  them  before  they  are
restored.  I  do  not  know  whether  this  is  a  common  pheno-
menon or  not ;  I  merely  mention  it  because  I  have  never  met
with  it  in  any  other  case.

But  I  am  desirous  not  to  trespass;  and  will  therefore
merely  add  a  few  concluding  remarks.  I  am  sorry  my  mes-
meric labours  (now  of  about  three  years'  duration)  have  not
enabled  me  to  furnish  more  cases  for  your  valuable  work :
but,  the  fact  is,  it  has  been  my  misfortune  to  stumble  upon
cases  of  the  worst  description.  I  have  amply  verified  the
remark  of  Mr.  Sandby,  (Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents,  p.
195,^  ''  the  treatment  of  a  chronic  case  generally  demands
a  sacrifice  of  time,  which  even  if  men  have  the  inclination
they  have  not  always  the  leisure  to  bestow.''  I  am  sure  that
if  I  had  any  profession  or  trade  to  follow,  I  could  not  have
gone  through  with  this  single  case ;  for,  had  I  stopped,  even
after  the  two  hundredth  attendance,  I  am  confident  the
patient  would  have  been  no  better.  It  was  during  the  last
hundred  that  the  great  advance  was  made.  Another  of  my
cases  was  confirmed  epilepsy,  of  twelve  years'  standing,  and


by  Mr,  Janson,  345

which  had  been  getting  progressively  worse  and  worse,  until
it  had  arrived  at  the  frightful  height  of  about  thirty  fits  per
month,  with  periodical  attacks  of  twelve  or  fifteen  fits  in
succession,  going  through  a  whole  night  and  terminating  in
raving  madness  for  several  days  afterwards.  I  mesmerised
this  patient  above  one  hundred  times,  and  reduced  the  attacks
to  periods  of  six  weeks,  with  perfect  health  in  the  interval.
Moreover,  the  attacks  were  nothing,  compared  with  what
they  used  to  be.  I  was  then  obliged  to  deliver  this  case  to
another  operator,  under  whose  care  it  is  now  progressing
very  satisfactorily.

But  I  go  forward  with  the  beautiful  case,  p.  51,  in  the
April  number.  The  eye  has  now  been  cauterized  eleven  times
without  pain.  This  I  may  observe  is  one  of  the  strongest
cases  of  cross-mesmerism  that  I  ever  heard  of.  It  took  me
many  weeks  to  get  doum  the  influence  of  the  first  operator  and
establish  my  own ;  and,  during  my  late  absence,  very  serious
results  ensued  in  consequence  of  another  operator  having
been  tried ;  one  of  which  was  a  most  distressing  head-ache
for  seven  weeks,  which  took  me  full  a  fortnight  to  overcome.
I  think  this  is  a  point  in  our  science  which  has  not  yet  re-
ceived sufScient  attention.  I  doubt  whether  there  is  any
mesmeric  patient  who  is  not,  in  some  degree,  injured  by  a
change  of  operators  j  but  I  have  known  several  cases  in  which
it  is  most  dreadfully  injurious,  and  appears  to  overthrow  the
benefit  which  had  been  previously  effected.

I  have  spent  much  time  over  a  case  o{  permanent  headache ;
but  I  have  found  this  the  most  intractible  case  that  I  have  at-
tempted (hydrocephalus,  I  fear) ;  nevertheless  I  could  keep  the
patient  with  little  or  no  pain,  as  long  as  I  attended  regularly.
Lastly,  I  can  truly  say  that  I  have  never  yet  applied
mesmerism  continuously  without  producing  decided  benefit,  if
not  a  cure :  though,  in  every  one  of  them  the  "  ordinary  reme-
dies^' had  proved  a  mere  fiddle-de-dee ; — an  expressive  phrase
to  signify  most  superlatively  useless.  In  fact,  it  is,  I  think,
the  greatest  thing  in  favour  of  mesmerism,  that  nearly  all  our
marvellous  cures  have  been  effected  after  ''the  doctor^'  has
done  all  he  can. I  will  conclude  with  a

Memorandum.

As  a  copy  of  The  Zoist  is  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,
I  wish  to  record,  for  the  astonishment  of  the  men  of  1946,
that  though  the  splendid  case  of  Mrs.  C.  has  been  a  "  town's
talk''  for  nearly  two  years,  and  has  even  been  noticed  in  the
Exeter  newspapers,  yet  during  all  that  time,  not  a  single
medical  practitioner  who  formerly  attended  her, has ever


346 ReichendacVs  Besearches  on  Magnetism^  ifc,

once  thought  it  worth  while  to  request  me  to  shew  or  explain
the  case^  or  to  ask  me  a  single  question  about  it !  I  !*

I  remain,  my  dear  Sir,

Faithfully  yours,

Henry  Umfbeville  Janson.
Pennsylvania  Park,  Exeter,
August  18th,  1846.


V. Review  of  Baron  BeichenbaeVs  Researches  in  Magnetism
and  certain  allied  subjects,  including  a  new  Imponderable,

(CoDtinued  from  page  284.)

The  eflfects  produced  by  magnets  and  crystals  ensued  also
from  the  sun's  rays,

**  He  put  into  the  hand  of  one  of  the  patients  the  end  of  a
copper-wire  nearly  30  feet  long,  and,  when  her  hand  was  accustomed
to  the  sensation,  the  other  end  was  put  out  of  the  window  in  the  rays
of  the  sun.  Immediately  the  sensations  caused  by  the  force  of
crystals  were  perceived,  not  powerful,  but  quite  distinct.  The  end
of  the  wire  was  now  connected  with  a  plate  of  copper  9  inches  sauare
in  the  dark,  and  when  the  patient  was  accustomed  to  the  feel  oi  the
wire,  the  plate  was  exposed  to  the  sun.  No  sooner  was  this  done
than  he  was  saluted  with  a  cry  of  pleasure  from  the  sick-bed.  The
moment  the  sun's  rays  fell  on  the  plate  a  powerful  manifestation,
of  the  well  known  force  was  felt,  as  a  sensation  of  warmth  in  the
hand,  rising  through  the  arm  to  the  head.  But  this  sensation  was
accompanied  with  one  quite  new  and  unexpected,  namely,  a  peculiar,
somewhat  cooling,  but  astonishingly  refreshing  sensation,  a  pleasura-
ble feeling,  which  the  patient  compared  to  the  fresh  air  of  a  fine  May
morning.  This  sensation  flowed  from  the  end  of  the  wire  into  the
arm,  and  thence  spread  itself  over  the  whole  body,  dispensing
throughout  her  whole  nature  a  feeUng  of  strength  and  refreshment.
All  the  bystanders  were  affected  to  sympathy,  and  the  author  allowed
the  unfortunate  patient  for  a  considerable  time  the  new  enjoyment
derived  from  this  unknown  cordial  or  restorative.  It  was  something
which  flowed  through  her  whole  nervous  system  with  a  beneficiu
effect.  The  author  did  not  know  what  it  was,  and  as  it  did  not  im-
mediately bear  on  the  question,  it  was  left,  like  many  other  things,
for  subsequent  study."

*  We  know  of  a  dreadful  case  of  Tic  Douloareux,  io  which  mesmerism  was
begun,  but  discontinued  a  twelfremonth  ago  at  the  instigation  of  a  brother,
a  surgeon  in  one  of  the  Midland  Counties,  and  a  writer  in  one  of  the  London
Medical  Journals  against  mesmerism.  She,  at  his  suggestion,  feared  it
would  render  her  insane  like  the  Okey$I  who  have  been  well  for  many  years
and  whose  ecstatic  delirium  was  a  part  qf  their  disease,  as  it  is  in  other  instances.
This  poor  patient  is  not  allowed  the  blessings  of  mesmerism,  and  has  been
suffering  dreadfully  of  late,  and  had /our  teeth  extracted  at  a  sitting,  of  course
without  any  relief.— Zom<.


including  a  supposed  new  Imponderable.  347

The  effect  followed^  though  less  strongly,  if  the  wire  was
hung  with  dry  linen :  but,  if  the  linen  was  moist,  the  former
sensations  were  united  with  such  a  disagreeable  sensation  as
moist  air  was  said  to  produce  on  this  patient.

On  a  second  patient,

'*  When  the  wire  alone  was  used,  she  perceived  coolness  in  the
end  of  it  in  her  hand,  and  this  disappeared  and  reappeared  as  the
other  end  was  removed  from  the  sunsfaane  or  restored  to  it.  When
several  square  feet  of  tinned  iron  were  attached  to  the  wire,  and
exposed  to  the  sun,  the  sensation  of  coolness  increased  to  that  of
icy  coldness,  which  caased  the  hand  to  stiffen."

Another  perceived  the  peculiar  sensation,  not  only

"  When  the  wire  was  attached  to  sheet-iron,  sheet-copper,  sheet-
zinc,  tinfoil,  leadfoil,  silver-ribbon,  gold-leaf,  brass-plate,  and  German-
silver,  and  these  bodies  exposed  to  the  sun's  light ;  but  also  when
linen,  woollen  cloth,  cotton,  silk,  &c.,  attached  to  the  wire,  were
placed  in  the  direct  rays  of  the  sun.  Indeed,  every  substance  tried,
including  porcelain,  glass,  stone,  wood,  water,  lamp-oil,  alcohol,
sulphur,  when  tried  in  the  same  way,  produced  the  remarkable  sen-
sation of  increasing  coolness,  which  all  the  sensitive  patients  uni-
formly and  unanimously  testified  to,  being  as  much  astonished  at  the
apparent  contradiction  (which,  however,  was  afterwards  very  clearly
explained)  as  the  author  himself."

He  then  ascertained  that  this  power  of  the  sun^s  rays
could,  like  that  of  the  magnet,  crystals,  and  the  human  hand,
be  communicated  to  bodies. He  placed

'*  A  glass  of  water  for  five  minutes  in  the  sun,  and  caused  the
nurse,  whose  hand  was  very  weak  in  regard  to  the  new  force,  to  give
it  to  Mdlle.  Maix  without  her  having  any  idea  of  the  object  in  view.
Without  a  question  being  asked,  she  declared  it  to  be  magnetized
water  as  soon  as  it  touched  her  lips.  On  the  tongue,  gums,  throat,
down  the  gullet,  and  in  the  stomach,  at  every  point,  it  acted  with  its
peculiar  pepper-like  pungency,  well  known  to  the  sensitive,  and
exciting  spasmodic  attacks.  Another  elass  of  water,  lefl  in  the  sun's
rays  for  twenty  minutes,  and  handed  to  the  patient  by  one  of  the
weakest  female  hands,  acted  as  strongly  as  if  magnetized,  as  far  as
possible,  by  the  large  horse-shoe  magnet  of  9  bars,  capable  of  sup-
porting 80  lbs."

If  the  water  was  poured  into  another  glass,  it  retained  its
power,  like  water  magnetized  or  mesmerised ;  and  in  a  high,
though  less  high  degree,  at  the  end  of  an  hour.

The  callipers  of  German  silver  could  be  equally  charged
by  the  sun's  rays,  by  the  magnet,  crystals,  and  the  hand,  as
water.

The  Baron  then  charged  his  own  hand : — He

**  Next  gave  one  of  his  hands  to  the  third  lady,  that  she  might


348  ReiclienbacKs  Beseardies  on  Magnetism,  6fC.,

feel  it  accurately,  and  then  went  for  ten  minutes  into  the  sunshine,
taking  care  to  expose  himself  to  the  rajs  on  all  sides.  On  returning
to  the  room,  he  gave  her  again  the  same  hand.  She  was  much  sur-
prised at  the  sudden  change  in  it,  and  at  the  great  addition  of  force
which  she  perceived,  without  knowing  anything  of  its  cause."

They  placed  a  horse-shoe  magnet^

"  Which  had  become  weak,  in  the  sun's  rays,  instead  of  restor-
ing its  power  by  drawing  another  magnet  along  it.  It  was  so  strength-
ened and  became  so  powerful  in  its  action  on  the  patient,  that  from
that  time,  whenever  a  magnet  had  become  weak,  it  was  laid  in  the
sun,  to  restore  its  power  of  acting  on  the  patient."

So  with  rock  crystal^  and  a  crystal  of  gypsum.

LiDen,  woollen,  cotton,  silk,  served  as  conductors,  like
wires ;  silk  proving  the  quickest,  cotton  the  slowest,  conduc-
tor :  a  glass  tube  acted  much  more  quickly  than  a  bar  of
wood.

The  substances  so  charged,  exhibited  polarity.

They  also,  like  the  magnets  and  crystals,  exhibited
light,  in  the  form  of  bundles  of  flames :  and,  if  a  wire  was
connected  with  them,  carried  through  a  hole,  into  a  perfectly
dark  room,  and  then  held  by  the  patient,  a  slender  column  of
flame,  rising  from  the  wire,  appeared  to  her,  whenever  the
plate  was  moved  into  the  sun's  rays.  The  same  took  place,  if
the  end  of  the  wire  outside  was  not  connected  with  a  metallic
plate  or  other  inanimate  object,  but  was  held  in  a  person's
hand. As  soon  as  the  person

"  Went  into  the  sun's  rays,  the  flame  at  the  end  of  the  wire  rose
to  8  inches,  and  difiused  a  most  agreeable  solar  coolness.  As  often
as  she  removed  out  of  the  sun's  rays,  the  flame  sank  to  its  original
size,  and  again  diffused  warmth."

The  effect  was  produced  most  powerfully  by  exposure  of
the  wire,  &c.,  to  the  centre  of  the  solar  spectrum,  where  the
light  is  the  most  intense, — green,  and  still  more  yellow,  being

"  Especially  the  seat  of  the  delightful  sunny  feeling  of  refreshing
coolness."

The  sensation  of  warmth  was  produced  most  when  the
wire  was  placed  beyond  the  red  ray,  that  is,  in  the  seat  of
the  calorific  rays ;  though  true  warmth.  Baron  B.  conceives,
could  not  all  have  reached  the  patient.  When  the  wire  was
placed  in  and  beyond  the  violet  ray — ^that  which  magnetizes
steel — a  peculiar  disagreeable  tractive  sensation  was  felt,  such
as  is  part  of  the  effect  of  a  magnet.

The  moon's  rays  produced  the  same  phenomena  as  the
solar,  and  in  one  patient  much  more  powerfully,  so  that  her


including  a  supposed  new  Imponderable,  349

hand  involuntarily  moved  along  the  course  of  the  wire  when
its  opposite  end  was  exposed  to  the  full  moon.

Further  experiments  shewed  that  artificial  heat  had  the
same  effects  as  the  solar  and  lunar  calorific  rays.

If  the  further  end  of  the  wire  was  warmed^  but  not  to  a
degree  capable  of  producing  the  sensation  of  warmth  from
temperature^

''  Immediately  there  passed  from  the  wire  into  the  patient's  hand
a  very  strong  current  of  the  known  sensation  of  warmth  caused  by
crystals,  &c."

Upon  the  introduction  of  a  mass  of  ice  into  the  hot  water^

'*  Immediately  the  phenomena  altered  their  form.  The  sensation
of  warmth  and  its  accompanying  symptoms  decreased ;  a  long  trac-
tion through  hand  and  arm  was  felt;  the  disagreeableness  of  the
warm  sensation  gave  place  to  the  delightful  coolness  caused  by  the
sun's  rays,  and  this  refreshing  sensation  gradually  spread  over  the
breast,  the  back,  and  the  whole  person."

When  the  heat  was  applied,  though  to  the  end  of  the  wire
outside  the  room,  and  insufficient  to  cause  a  sensation  of
warmth  to  others,  the  patient  being  in  perfect  darkness,  red
and  green  flame  appeared  to  her  from  the  portion  of  the  wire
in  her  dark  situation.

Friction  of  the  plate  of  copper  to  which  the  wire  was
attached,  had  the  same  effect  as  the  treatment  of  the  plate  in
the  six  ways  mentioned :  the  friction  of  bodies  occasioned
very  far  greater  appearances  of  light  to  the  patients  than  to
other  persons.

The  influence  of  the  magnetic  baquet,  containing  a  hotch-
potch of  ingredients  acting  chemically  on  each  other,  a  wire
&c.,  connected  with  which  is  held  by  the  patient,  appears  to
Baron  R.  probable  and  explicable,  for  all  the  phenomena
now  mentioned  occurred  from  solutions  in  which  chemical
action  was  made  to  go  on,  the  farther  end  of  the  wire  being
placed  in  them.  Water  in  a  glass  placed  in  a  solution  in
which  chemical  action  was  going  on,  acquired  all  the  proper-
ties of  magnetized  water, — of  water  magnetized  by  sunshine.

The  sources  of  this  power  in  our  body,  he  thinks,  are  the
chemical  processes  of  digestion  and  respiration,  and  the  che-
mical changes  of  the  substances  supplied  from  the  food  and
air  by  these  functions  to  every  portion  of  the  body,  occasion-
ing its  universal  production  throughout  the  frame.

From  mixtures  in  which  chemical  action  was  going  on,—
dissolutions  of  sugar,  salt,  &c.,  mixtures  of  quicklime  and
water, — the  patients  perceived  light  proceeding :  and  Baron  R.
thus  explains  the  appearances  which  many  persons  have  de-


850 BeichenbacKs  Researches  on  Magnetism,  i^c,

dared  they  witnessed  from  graves. A  blind  poet  at  Colmar^
named  Pfeffel^

''  Had  employed  a  yomig  clerg3anan,  of  the  evangeUcal  church,
as  amanuensis.  Pfeffel,  when  he  walked  out,  was  supported  and  led
by  this  young  man,  whose  name  was  Billing.  As  they  walked  in
the  garden,  at  some  distance  from  the  town,  rfeffel  observed,  that,
as  often  as  they  passed  over  a  particular  spot,  the  arm  of  BilUng
trembled,  and  he  betrayed  uneasiness.  On  being  asked,  the  young
man  reluctantly  confessed  that,  as  often  as  he  passed  over  that  spot,
certain  feelings  attacked  him,  which  he  could  not  control,  and  which
he  knew  well,  as  he  always  experienced  the  same,  in  passing  over
any  place  where  human  corpses  lay  buried.  He  added,  that,  at  night,
when  he  came  near  such  places,  he  saw  supernatural  appearances.
Pfeffel,  with  the  view  of  curing  the  youth  of  what  he  looked  on  as
a  fancy,  went  that  night  with  him  to  the  garden.  As  they  ap-
proached the  spot  in  the  dark.  Billing  perceived  a  feeble  light,  and
when  still  nearer,  he  saw  a  luminous  ghost-like  form  floating  over
the  spot.  This  he  described  as  a  female  form,  with  one  arm  laid
across  the  body,  the  other  hanging  down,  floating  in  the  upright
posture,  but  tranquil,  the  feet  only  a  hand-breadth  or  two  above  the
soil.  Pfeffel  went  alone,  as  the  young  man  declined  to  follow  him,
up  to  the  place  where  the  figure  was  said  to  be,  and  struck  about  in
all  directions  with  his  stick,  besides  running  through  the  place  of  the
figure ;  but  the  ghost  was  not  more  affected  than  a  flame  would  have
been :  the  luminous  form,  according  to  Billing,  always  returned  to
its  original  position  aft;er  these  experiments.  Many  things  were  tried
during  several  months,  and  numerous  companies  of  people  were
brought  to  the  spot,  but  the  matter  remained  the  same,  and  the
ghost  seer  adhered  to  his  serious  assertion,  and  to  the  opinion  founded
on  it,  that  some  individual  lay  buried  there.  At  last,  Pfeffel  had
the  place  dug  up.  At  a  considerable  depth  was  found  a  firm  layer
of  white  Ume,  of  the  length  and  breadth  of  a  grave,  of  considerable
thickness,  and  when  this  had  been  broken  into,  there  were  found
the  bones  of  a  human  being.  It  was  evident  that  some  one  had
been  buried  in  the  place,  and  covered  with  a  thick  layer  of  Ume
(quicklime),  as  is  genendly  done  in  times  of  pestilence,  of  earth-
quakes, and  other  similar  events.  The  bones  were  removed,  the  pit
filled  up,  the  lime  mixed  and  scattered  abroad,  and  the  surface  again
made  smooth.  When  BilUng  was  now  brought  back  to  the  place,
the  phenomena  did  not  return,  and  the  nocturnal  spirit  had  for  ever
disappeared.

"  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  to  the  reader  what  view  the
author  takes  of  this  story,  which  excited  much  attention  in  Germany,
because  it  came  from  the  most  truthful  man  alive,  and  theologians
and  psychologists  gave  to  it  sundry  terrific  meanings.  It  obviously
falls  into  the  province  of  chemical  action,  and  thus  meets  with  a
simple  and  clear  explanation  from  natural  and  physical  causes.  A
corpse  is  a  field  for  abundant  chemical  changes,  decompositions,  fer-
mentation, putrefaction,  gasification and  general  play  of  affinities.


including  a  supposed  new  Imponderable.  851

A  stratum  of  quicklime,  in  a  narrow  pit,  miites  its  powerful  affinities
to  those  of  the  organic  matters,  and  gives  rise  to  a  long-continued
working  of  the  whole.  Rain-water  filters  through  and  contributes  to
the  action :  the  lime  on  the  outside  of  the  mass  first  falls  to  a  fine
powder,  and  afterwards,  with  more  water,  forms  lumps  which  are
very  slowly  penetrated  by  the  air.  Slaked  lime  prepared  for  building,
but  not  used,  on  account  of  some  cause  connected  with  a  war-like
state  of  society  some  centuries  since,  has  been  found  in  subterraneous
holes  or  pits,  in  the  ruins  of  old  castles ;  and  the  mass,  except  on
the  outside,  was  so  unaltered  that  it  has  been  used  for  modem  build-
ings. It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  in  such  circumstances  there  must
be  a  very  slow  and  long-continued  chemical  action,  partly  owing  to
the  slow  penetration  of  the  mass  of  lime  by  the  external  carbonic
acid,  partly  to  the  changes  going  on  in  the  remains  of  animal  matter,
at  all  events  as  long  as  any  is  left.  In  the  above  case,  this  must
have  gone  on  in  Pfeffers  garden  ;  and  as  we  know  that  chemical  action
is  invariably  associated  with  light,  visible  to  the  sensitive,  this  must
have  been  the  origin  of  the  luminous  appearance,  which  again  must
have  continued  until  the  mutual  affinities  of  the  organic  remains,  the
lime,  the  air,  and  water,  had  finally  come  to  a  state  of  chemical  rest
or  equilibrium.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  a  sensitive  person,  although
otherwise  quite  healthy,  came  that  way,  and  entered  within  the
sphere  of  the  force  in  action,  he  must  feel  by  day,  like  Mdlle.  Maix,
the  sensations  so  often  described,  and  see  by  night,  like  Mdlle.
Reichel,  the  luminous  appearance.  Ignorance,  fear,  and  superstition,
would  now  dress  up  the  feebly  shining  vaporous  light  into  a  human
form,  and  furnish  it  with  human  limbs  and  members ;  just  as  we  can
at  pleasure  fancy  every  cloud  in  the  sky  to  represent  a  man  or  a
demon.

''The  wish  to  strike  a  fatal  blow  at  the  monster  of  superstition,
which,  at  no  distant  period,  poured  out  on  European  society  from  a
similar  source,  such  inexpressible  misery,  when,  in  trials  for  witch-
craft, not  hundreds,  not  thousands,  but  hundreds  of  thousands  of
innocent  human  beings  perished  miserably,  either  on  the  scaffold,  at
the  stake,  or  by  the  effects  of  torture, — this  desire  induced  the  author
to  try  the  experiment  of  bringing,  if  possible,  a  highly  sensitive
patient,  by  night,  to  a  church-yard.  It  appeared  possible  that  such
a  person  might  see,  over  graves  in  which  mouldering  bodies  lie,
something  similar  to  that  which  Billing  had  seen.  Mdlle.  Reichel
had  the  courage,  rare  in  her  sex,  to  gratify  this  wish  of  the  author.
On  two  very  dark  nights  she  allowed  herself  to  be  taken  from  the
Castle  of  Reisenberg,  where  she  was  Uving  with  the  author's  family,
to  the  neighbouring  church-yard  of  Grunzing.  The  result  justified
his  anticipation  in  the  most  beautiful  manner.  She  very  soon  saw  a
light,  and  observed  on  one  of  the  graves,  along  its  length,  a  delicate,
breathing  flame :  she  also  saw  the  same  thing,  only  weaker,  on  a
second  grave.  But  she  saw  neither  witches  nor  ghosts  :  she  described
the  fiery  appearance  as  a  shining  vapour,  one  to  two  spans  high,  ex-
tending  as  far  as  the  grave,  and  floatbg  near  its  surface.  Some
time  afterwards  she  was  taken  to  two  large  cemeteries  near  Vienna,


352 Reickenbach's  Researches  on  Magmtism,  ^c,

where  several  burials  occur  daily,  and  graves  lie  about  by  thousands.
Here  she  saw  numerous  graves  provided  with  similar  lights.  Wher*
ever  she  looked,  she  saw  luminous  masses  scattered  about.  But
this  appearance  was  most  vivid  over  the  newest  eraves,  while
in  the  oldest  it  could  not  be  perceived.  She  described  the  appear-
ance less  as  a  clear  flame,  than  as  a  dense  vaporous  mass  of
fire,  intermediate  between  fog  and  flame.  On  many  graves  the
flame  was  4  feet  high,  so  that  when  she  stood  on  them,  it  surrounded
her  up  to  the  neck.  If  she  thrust  her  hand  into  it,  it  was  like  put-
ting it  into  a  dense  fiery  doud.  She  betrayed  no  uneasiness,  because
she  had  all  her  life  been  accustomed  to  such  emanations,  and  had
seen  the  same,  in  the  author's  experiments,  often  produced  by
natural  causes.  Many  ghost  stories  wUl  now  find  their  natural  ex-
planation. We  can  also  see,  that  it  was  not  altogether  erroneous
when  old  women  declared  that  all  had  not  the  gift  to  see  the  departed
wandering  about  their  graves :  for  it  must  have  always  been  the  sen-
sitive alone  who  were  able  to  perceive  the  light  given  out  by  the
chemical  action  going  on  in  the  corpse.  The  author  has  thus,  he
hopes,  succeeded  in  tearing  down  one  of  the  most  impenetrable  bar-
riers erected  by  dark  ignorance  and  superstitious  folly  against  the
progress  of  natural  truth."

The  warmth,  the  flame  resulted  when  wire  was  connected
with  an  electric  machine  or  with  a  hollow  brass  ball  brought
near  or  in  contact  with  the  conductor,  and  as  the  plate  was
rotated.  But  if  the  ball  was  so  placed  as  to  receive  a  succes-
sion of  sparks^

**  The  patient  felt  every  spark  as  a  shock,  but  saw  no  flame.
The  rapidity  of  the  electrical  action  appeared  to  be  too  great ;  so
that  the  flaming  principle,  less  mobile  perhaps  by  nature,  was  not
set  in  motion.  All  these  experiments  were  repeated  with  negative
electricity,  but  no  difference  could  be  detected."

£yen  the  electric  atmosphere  produced  the  peculiar  sensa-
tion^ and  at  considerable  distances ;

"  A  tin  electrophorus  plate,  1  foot  in  diameter,  with  a  wooden
handle,  held  for  a  minute  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  excited  con-
ductor, and  then  touched  with  a  moist  finger,  caused  a  strong  and
continued  sensation  of  a  current  of  cool  air,  when  brought  near  to
the  face  of  the  patient.  An  isolated  body  acted  in  the  same  way  ;
there  is  not,  as  yet,  any  means  of  isolating  the  magneto-crystalline
force.

''An  open  voltaic  arrangement  of  50  freshly-cleaned  zinc  and
copper  pairs,  with  cloth  between  them  moistened  with  salt  and
water,  appeared  to  the  patient,  when  she  brought  her  hand  near  to
it,  warm  at  the  positive,  and  cool  at  the  negative  pole.  The  warmth
extended  to  jth  of  the  length,  the  coolness  only  to  ^th:  the  latter
was  comparatively  feeble,  the  former  very  marked,  so  as  to  be  per-
ceived by  several  healthy  persons,  and  even  by  the  author  himself."


including  a  supposed  new  Imponderabk,  353

It  is  well  known  that  there  are

*'  Many  persons  on  whom  certain  substances  exert  a  peculiar,
generally  cUsagreeable,  influence,  which  often  borders  on  the  ludicrous.
Not  to  speak  of  the  strange  fancies  of  pregnant  females,  there  are
people  who  cannot  touch  fur,  others  who  cannot  endure  the  sight  of
feathers,  of  butter,  &c. ;  and,  if  forced  to  do  so,  famt  in  conse-
quence. Now,  observation  shews  that  such  antipathies  are  found
in  individuals  who,  although  outwardly  healthy,  are  yet  more  or  less
sensitive,  and  that  they  increase  in  number  and  strength  as  these
persons  become  more  nervous,  especially  if  subject  to  convulsive
diseases.  In  the  case  of  Mdlle.  Sturmann,  this  goes  so  far  that  she
often  cannot  touch  a  key  or  door-handle  without  her  fingers  being
paralyzed  by  spasms,  although  she  appears  otherwise  well.  In  his
researches  with  the  sensitive  patients,  the  author  soon  found  that
these  antipathies  were  connected  with  certain  sensations,  common  to
many  persons,  and  that  when  these  sensations  were  compared,  they
might  be  reduced  to  a  few ;  which  few  were  found  to  follow  certain
rules.  The  sensations  were,  apparent  heat  or  cold  in  substances  of
the  same  temperature;  decided  agreeableness  or  disagreeableness,
the  latter  rising  to  the  causing  of  spasms :  pungent,  knocking,  or
drawing  sensations  in  the  skin  and  limbs  ;  and  tonic  spasms  without
pain.

In  one  of  the  patients, ,

"  All  amorphous  bodies,  although  devoid  of  the  peculiar  action
of  crystals,  gave  rise  to  a  nauseous  sensation,  which  adhered  pretty
constantly  to  certain  bodies,  and  appeared  in  different  degrees  of
force.

"  To  investigate  this  point,  the  author  took  the  trouble  to  try
more  than  600  bodies,  in  reference  to  this  nauseous  sensation.  It
appeared  that  the  patient  could  easily  gire  to  every  substance  its
proper  place  in  the  scale  of  force.  This  she  could  repeat  without
failure  at  a  distance  of  several  days.

"  It  soon  appeared  that  these  bodies  arranged  themselves  accord-
ing to  their  electro-chemical  value,  and  indeed  in  such  wise  that  the
highly  electric  stood  at  the  top,  the  indifferent  at  the  bottom  of  the
scale,  without  regard  to  their  polar  opposition."

In  the  cataleptic  state  the  effects  were  stronger ;  just  as
I  noticed  in  the  Okeys,  and  have  since  noticed  in  many  other
patients,  that  what  we  term  the  mesmeric  effects  of  metals,
&c.,  are  stronger  in  the  mesmeric  state.  Contact  of  many  of
the  substances  was  not  necessary  in  the  cataleptic  state,  though
it  was  necessary  in  the  ordinary  state  :  a  fact  also  shewing  the
greater  susceptibility  in  the  peculiar  state.

The  rest  of  the  patients  and  many  other  persons  confirmed
these  observations.  Different  substances  placed  in  the  hand
would  feel  warm  or  cold,  as  it  might  be :  but  presently  a
peculiar  cool  aura  when  some  substances  were  employed,  a


354 BeichenbacVs  Researches  on  Magnetism,  ifc,

hot  sensation  when  others  were  employed,  spread  over  the
hand  and  from  it :  even  the  substances  were  placed  at  the
distance  of  perhaps  100  paces^  or  in  another  substance,  or
connected  by  a  very  long  wire.

After  many  experiments,  sulphur  was  found  to  represent
those  substances  which  gave  a  sensation  of  cold  after  a  time
or  at  a  distance,  or  through  the  intervention  of  another  body;
and  gold  those  substances  which  gave  a  sensation  of  heat  in
the  same  manner.

When  gold  produces  a  sensation  in  the  mesmeric  state,  I
have  usually  found  this  to  be  of  heat.

The  same  substance  did  not  produce  the  same  sensation
in  every  one.  This  is  analogous  to  what  I  have  noticed  in
the  mesmeric  state.  Some  have  never  been  affected  by  gold
or  other  metals,  some  by  one  and  not  by  another.  Nor  were
the  effects  of  contraction  of  the  hand,  pain,  numbness,  stupor,
&c.,  to  the  same  amount  in  all  mesmeric  cases  when  they
did  occur,  from  the  same  substance.  Nickel  produced  violent
effects  upon  Elizabeth  Okey,  but  no  more  than  silver  upon
Jane.

Even  if  some  of  these  substances  were  brought  into  con-
tact with  another  substance,  this  substance  would  imbibe  the
power,  exactly  as  was  observed  by  Baron  B.  in  regard  to  the
strong  power  of  magnets,  crystals,  &c.,  (see  above,  pp.  Ill,
114 ;)  just  as  we  all  know  that  substances  may  be  mesmer-
ised (pp.  111—114).

"  When  the  callipers,  after  being  placed  in  the  patient's  hand  for
some  time,  that  she  might  become  accustomed  to  the  sensation
caused  by  them,  were  laid  down  and  a  mass  of  sulphur  placed  on
them  for  a  few  minutes,  the  patient,  on  again  taking  the  callipers,
felt  very  strongly  the  pricking  due  to  the  sulphur,  and  consequently
something  had  been  transferred  to  the  metal."

I  ascertained  another  fact  in  the  Okeys  and  have  con-
firmed it  in  subsequent  cases, — ^that  a  substance  not  mesmer-
isable,  that  is,  which  will  not  affect  a  particular  patient,
though  held  in  the  operator's  hand  a  length  of  time,  and
subsequently  wiped  to  remove  mesmerised  moisture,  may  be-
come mesmerisable  if  well  rubbed  against  a  mesmerisable
substance  and  then  mesmerised.

In  my  Farewell  Letter  to  the  Students,  I  stated  that

''I  applied  lead  to  the  Okeys,  and,  indeed,  copper  also;  yet
never  obtamed  an  effect.  I  then  applied  the  lead  or  the  copper,  as
it  might  be,  against  a  piece  of  mesmerised  nickel  or  gold,  before
applying  it  to  her ;  and  its  application  to  her  was  then  always  pro-
ductive of  effects. I  discovered  that  the  surface  of  the  leaa  or


including  a  supposed  new  Imponderable  355

copper  had  become  nickelized  or  aurified  by  the  contact;  and  thus
the  difficulty  was  solved.  These  experiments  I  have  repeated  again
and  again  before  numbers  of  gentlemen,  taking  the  greatest  care
that  the  patient  should  not  know  when  I  applied  lead  or  copper  which
had  not  been  in  contact  with  nickel  or  gold,  and  when  I  applied  lead
or  copper  which  had  been  in  contact  with  either  of  them;  and  the
results  have  been  uniform."

I  trust  that  Baron  R.  will  make  experiments  on  the  aug-
menting power  of  friction^  both  with  substances  rubbed  on
the  patient^  and  when  charging  one  substance  from  another
before  the  second  substance  is  applied  to  the  patient.

He  found  that  a  body  might  be  charged  without  contact.

"  Thus  the  callipers  were  rendered  cold  by  sulphur  at  f  of  an
inch;  and  blue  vitriol  wrapped  in  paper  caused  the  long  glass-tube  to
become  cold  at  the  distance  of  9  inches.  The  hands  of  the  author's
daughters  when  held  over  a  surface  of  stflphur,  and  then  placed  in
those  of  Mdlle.  Reichel,  produced  coldness,  accompanied  by  the  sen-
sation of  pricking  as  of  needles."

It  could  also  be  conducted  without  contact.

"  A  copper-plate  being  connected  with  the  patient's  hand  bv  an
iron-wire  90  feet  long,  different  substances,  when  laid  on  the  plate,
caused  either  warmth  or  coolness  in  about  half  a  minute.  .  .  .

"  Sulphur  when  on/y  brought  near  the  plate,  caused  coolness  in
the  wire.  .  .  .

**  The  author's  daughter  gave  one  hand  to  Mdlle.  Beichel,  and
held  the  other  over  a  surface  of  sulphur,  without  contact.  The  patient,
in  half  a  minute,  felt  the  hand  become  cold,  and  afler  a  minute  she
felt  the  usual  pricking  of  sulphur.  This  experiment  was  also  made
with  gold  leaf,  when  the  sensation  of  warmth  was  experienced."

So  I  found  it  with  mesmerism.  I  have  looked  intensely
at  one  sovereign  among  several  lying  together :  and  then
called  the  Okeys  into  the  room,  and  desired  them  to  take
them  up  one  by  one.  No  effect  occurred  till  the  sovereign
which  had  been  stared  at  was  taken  up :  and  then  the  hand
was  violently  contracted.  No  word  was  spoken — no  look
given.  It  was  totally  impossible  for  the  children  to  have
known  anything  about  the  matter.  Sir  George  Cayley  well
recollects  one  occasion  of  these  satisfactory  experiments  at
University  College  Hospital^  though  beneath  the  notice  of
the  council  and  professors.

Baron  B.  found  that,  when  darkness  was  made  as  com-
plete as  possible^  all  metals  and  other  elements  were  luminous
to  one  of  his  patients ;  compounds  iess  so ;  still  that  all  solid
and  liquid  bodies  gave  forth

"  Luminous  emanations,  in  the  shape  of  flame,  glowing  appear-


356 Reichenbach's  Researches  on  Magnetism,  6fC,,

ance, and  luminous vapour^ in the  same  way  as  magnets and
crystals  do."

Each  bod;^  gives  out  its  own  tint  and  form  of  lights  and
her  accounts  never  varied.

His  castle  of  Reisenberg,  with  its  front  of  163  feet,
looked  out  freely  towards  east  and  south,  and  in  a  clear  night
she  felt  from  the  heavens,  when  at  a  window,  a  similar
influence  to  those  from  individual  substances.

"  On  a  neighbouring  hill,  in  a  clear,  calm,  moonless  night,  she
felt  that  some  parts  of  the  sky  sent  forth  a  current  of  coolness,  others
one  of  warmth.  This  was  tried  soon  after  sunset,  then  about  9  p.m.,
twice  at  midnight,  once  at  4  a.m.,  and  just  before  sunrise.  In
general  it  appeared,  that  soon  after  sunset  the  west,  and  before
sunrise  the  east,  were  especially  cool:  at  9  p.m.,  north  and  north-
west were  the  cooler,  soutV  and  south-east  the  warmer :  at  4  a.m.,
N.  and  N.E.  were  the  cooler,  S.  and  S.W.  the  warmer;  and,  finally,
at  midnight,  N.  was  cool,  S.  warm,  and  W.  and  £.  so  nearly  in
equilibrium,  that  little  difference  was  perceptible.  They  were  pro-
bably quite  equal  at  2  or  3  a.m.

*'  These  changes  depend  on  the  position  of  the  sun,  which  we
know  causes  coolness;  for  the  greatest  coolness  was  always  found  in
the  region  nearest  the  sun,  and  the  presence  of  clouds  made  no  dif-
ference. When  tlie  patient  was  asked  to  point  out  exactly  the
middle  of  the  north  cool  region  and  the  south  warm  one,  she  always
pointed  in  the  magnetic  meridian,  never  in  the  astronomical  meridian.
She  declared  that  towards  S.  she  felt  a  limited  strip  of  the  greatest
warmth.  Even  at  mid-day  she  found  the  line  of  the  magnetic  meri-
dian the  warmest  towards  the  south,  and  the  coolest  towards  the
north,  of  all  points  of  the  compass."

These  phenomena,  partly  solar,  partly  terrestrial,  are
mixed  up  with  the  influence  of  the  stars  also. As  to  these  she

"  Always  found  the  milky-way  cool;  also  the  Pleiades,  the  Great
Bear,  and  other  constellations:  indeed  the  starry  firmament  in
general.  On  the  other  hand,  certain  single  stars  gave  her  a  sensa-
tion of  warmth:  these  were,  Saturn  with  his  ring,  Jupiter  with  his
satellites,  Venus:  in  short,  planets  alone.  It  thus  appeared  that
stars  shining  with  reflected  light  were  warm;  those  giving  out  their
own  hght  cool.  This  agrees  beautifully  with  the  former  results  in
the  case  of  the  sun  and  moon.

"  The  patient  stated  that  all  the  stars  acted  on  her  as  if  united
like  a  magnet,  not  only  before,  but  also  behind,  so  as  to  affect  the
spine  and  the  head.  A  copper-plate,  1  foot  square,  was  connected
with  a  brass  wire,  the  other  find  of  which  was  given  to  the  patient  in
the  dark  stair.  By  itself,  the  wire  gave  a  smaU  flame:  but  when  the
starlight  was  allowed  to  fall  on  the  plate,  a  slender  flame  soon  rose
from  the  wire  to  the  height  of  more  than  one  span. Zinc  produced


including  a  ntpposed  new  Imponderable.  857

the  same  effect,  only  weaker. The  wire  felt  cool,  especially  when
no  planet  could  counteract  the  action  of  the  fixed  stars.

**  These  ohserrations  are  not  surprizing  after  what  we  have
learned :  hut  they  furnish  a  beautiful  proof  of  the  exactness  of  what
was  stated  in  regard  to  the  sun  and  moon;  also  of  the  action  of  the
whole  material  world,  even  the  heavenly  bodies,  on  us,  with  the
same  force  which  we  find  in  terrestrial  matter:  lastly,  they  prove
that  there  actually  does  exist  a  nnttual  in/luenee  between  us  and  the
univeree,  (tn  influence  hitherto  uneuepected;  eo  that  possibly  the  stars
may  not  be  altogether  without  some  influence  on  our  sublunary  world,
even  in  practical  matters,  or  on  the  working  of  the  human

BRAIN."

Baron  B.  was  desirous  of  learning  whether  there  was  a
dualism  or  opposition  in  this  new  force.  The  patients  we
found  to  distinguish  two  opposite  points  in  the  principal  axes
or  poles  of  crystals.  The  negative  or  north  was  less  powerful
and  cool :  the  positive  or  south,  lukewarm,  like  the  respective
poles  of  the  magnet.  We  also  found  that  when  a  crystal
was  drawn  along  the  hand  in  opposite  directions,  it  gave  op-
posite sensations.  The  effects  were  stronger  in  the  left  hand
than  in  the  right  (see  above,  p.  114.)  We  have  also  seen
that  different  substances  produced  a  sensation  of  coolness  or
warmth  independent  of  temperature  (p.  349) ;  of  coolness  in
some  persons,  of  warmth  in  others,  but  always  similar  in  the
same  person.

One  patient  felt  great  uneasiness  even  up  to  her  head,  if
her  right  hand  touched  the  positive  pole  and  her  left  the  ne-
gative :  the  right  hand  corresponding  to  the  negative  pole,
and  the  left  to  the  positive,  and  a  current  passing  from  the
positive  pole  of  the  magnet  through  the  right  arm,  body,  left
arm  and  hand,  to  the  negative  pole  of  the  magnet.  So  if  he
took  the  patient's  right  hand  in  his  right,  and  her  left  in  his
left,  the  same  uneasiness  of  conflict  began  (see  p.  120).  As
far  as  he  could  judge,  all  the  substances  which  produced  a
sensation  of  warmth  were  the  electro-positive :  those  which  pro-
duced the  sensation  of  coolness  (p.  354),  the  electro-negative,

"  Among  the  warm  bodies  were  found  all  the  metals,  with  two
exceptions,  tellurium  and  arsenic,  the  most  negative  of  the  metals:
most  organic  compounds  and  organic  bases;  compounds  of  carbon
rich  in  hydrogen,  and  hardly  any  acids.  Among  the  cold  were
found  sulphur,  iodine,  and  other  similar  bodies;  compounds  of
chlorine,  oxides  of  metals,  cyanides,  and  almost  all  adds.  As  far  as
we  can  judge,  the  former,  the  warm,  are  the  electro- positive;  the
latter,  the  cold,  electro-negative.  It  is  truly  astonishing  to  see  a
person,  totally  ignorant  of  such  matters,  capable  of  arranging  all
substances  accurately  according  to  one  of  their  most  obscure  proper-

VOL.  IV.  c  c


358 Reichenbach^s  Researches  on  Magnetism,  ifc.,


ties,  their  electro-chemical  character,  and  that  without  even  seeing
them,  by  a  kind  of  feeling."

Even  the  flames  of  the  bodies  which  produced  a  warm  sen-
sation felt  warm^  and  the  flames  of  those  which  produced  a
cold  sensation^  felt  cold.

The  emanations  of  all  electrified  bodies^  especially  if  posi-
tively electrified^  felt  cold ;  possibly  from  the  surrounding  air
becoming  oppositely  electrified  and  being  the  cause  of  this
sensation.

'*  Chemical  compounds  are  positive  or  negative,  in  reference  to
the  new  force,  according  to  the  prevailing  ingredient,  and  in  neutral
compounds  according  to  their  place  in  the  empirical  scale.  .  .  .

"  All  chemical  activity  implies  a  manifold  alternation  of  positive
and  negative,  depending  on  the  position  of  the  elements  in  the  scale,
so  that  we  can  always  predict  the  result,  if  we  know  the  relative  po-
sition and  quantity  of  one  element."

Living  plants,  when  one  end  of  the  copper  wire  was  applied
to  them  and  the  other  to  the  hand  of  a  patient^  gave  a  warm
sensation  in  proportion  to  their  vital  activity ;  but  different
portions  gave  opposite  sensations. Thus

**  The  roots  are  warm  or  positive;  the  upper  end  of  the  leaves
cold  or  negative.  The  point  of  the  stem  belongs  to  the  negative  di-
vision, since  it  is  resolved  into  leaves  and  buds.  We  may  therefore
say,  generally,  that,  in  the  descending  stem,  positive,  in  the  as-
cending, negative,  influence  prevails.  This,  however,  is  only  true
with  great  limitation.  But  we  can  perceive  that  where  nature  is  least
active  and  vigorous  in  construction,  the  result  is  negative;  and  where
she  exhibits  propulsion,  it  is  positive.  Thus  those  parts  of  the  leaves
where  growth  chiefly  takes  place  are  positive,  and  vice  versa.  It
would  appear  as  if  nature,  when  engaged  in  formation,  must  be  as-
sociated with  the  positive  forms  of  all  the  imponderables,  as  light,
heat,  electricity,  and  the  new  influence;  the  prevalence  of  the  nega-
tive forms  being  hostile  to  vitality."

Living  animab  though  warm  on  contact^  gave  out  a  cool
aura  through  the  wire.

"  The  author's  hands  being  raised  and  directed  towards  Mdlle.
Reichel,  she  felt,  even  from  a  distance,  the  left  hand  streaming  forth
warmth,  the  right  coolness,  like  a  distant  magnet.  Mdlle.  Atzmanns-
ddrfer  felt  the  same  still  stronger.  The  author's  whole  right  side
was  cool  and  negative,  the  left  warm  and  positive.  The  head  ap-
peared to  the  patients  very  strongly  charged,  its  right  side  negative,
and  its  left  side  positive.  The  forehead  was  rather  cool,  the  occiput
rather  warm.  In  the  arms,  there  are  6  points  of  great  power,  in-
creasing downwards,  and  always  at  the  lower  end  of  a  bone  and  on
the  inner  side:  consequently,  Uiese  points  are  at  the  lower  end  of  the


incbidi9iff  a  supposed  new  Imponderable.  359

arm,  of  the  fore-ann,  of  the  hand,  and  of  the  three  finger-joints,
all  on  the  inner  side.

*'  The  mouth,  with  the  tongue,  is  strongly  negative,  and  cool,
and  appears  to  enjoj  a  large  share  of  the  influence.  When  the  mouth
is  approached  to  any  object,  even  without  contact,  the  sensitive  pa-
tients find  that  object  as  strongly  charged  as  by  contact  with  a  magnet,
a  large  crvstal,  the  sun's  rays,  or  the  authoi^s  right  hand.

"  As  it  appears  that  the  lips  are  a  kind  of  focus  of  concentration
for  the  new  force,  the  author  hazards  the  conjecture  that  the  true
theory  of  kissing  with  the  lips  may  depend  on  this  circumstance.
He  states  that  the  flames  depicted  on  the  lover's  lips  by  poets,  do
really  and  truly  bum  there  for  those  who  can  perceive  them."

From  careful  experiments  with  several  subjects  on  this
influence  of  the  author  himself^  it  appeared

"  That  while  the  author  lay  quietly  in  bed  from  6  to  9  or  10,  the
force  steadily  increased,  and  after  breakfast  continued  to  do  so  till
mid-day.  The  ascending  sun,  therefore,  added  to  the  force  in  his
hand.  The  succeeding  depression  lasted  exactly  till  dinner  (3  p.m.),
and  was  obviously  caused  by  the  growing  hunger.  For  no  sooner
was  that  appeased,  than,  even  with  the  first  mouthful  of  food,  the
depression  ceased,  and  a  rise  set  in,  which  reached  its  maximum
about  the  evening  twilight.  Both  M.  Schuh  and  Mdlle.  Maix  also
found  the  author's  hands  more  powerful  after  he  had  taken  food  than
before.  .  .  .

"  The  food  enters  at  once  into  a  state  of  chemical  activity;  di-
gestion, that  is,  decomposition,  begins,  and  currents  of  the  new
force  arise.  It  matters  not  what  share  we  ascribe  to  vitality  in  these
phenomena  :  they  are  still  decompositions,  from  which  spring  mani-
festations of  the  new  force,  extending  over  the  whole  system,  and
charging  the  limbs  with  it."

In  the  absence  of  the  sun  at  night,  during  sleep,  one  of
the  patients  made  observations  upon  Baron  B.^s  hand.

*'  From  the  morning  there  is,  in  the  right  hand,  a  general  rise,
with  occasional  depressions,  as  we  have  seen,  till  the  evening,  the
maximum  being  attained  at  earliest  by  6,  at  latest  by  9  p.m.,  ac-
cording to  the  individual  and  his  habits.  The  force  now  falls  de-
cidedly, and  does  so  steadily  till  2  to  3  a.m.,  when  it  reaches  an
almost  stationary  minimum,  lasting  till  dawn,  which  at  the  time  of
the  experiments  was  at  5  or  6.  As  the  light  dissipates  the  darkness,
the  force  instantly  starts  upwards,  and  new  life  flows  into  the  ani-
mated world;  vitality  and  the  new  force  increase  anew  throughout  the
day,  as  long  as  the  sun  shines.  .  .  .

'^  It  is  the  sun,  one  of  the  chief  sources  of  the  new  influence,
which  sends  it  to  us  along  with  light  and  heat,  and  saturates  with
this  influence  all  on  which  it  shines,  till,  towards  evening,  a  maxi-
mum is  attained.  As  soon  as  the  sun  sets,  the  tension  of  the  new
force  in  the  human  organs  sinks,  and  with  this  change,  in  the  man
who  lives  a  natural  life,  come  feelings  of  weariness,  drowsiness,  and

cc  g


360 ReickenbacVs  Researches  on  Magnetism,  ifc,,

sleep.  As  the  day-spring  of  the  inflaenoe  ceases  to  flow,  so  fails
also  the  spring  of  conscious  and  waking  life.  Light  and  heat,  elec-
tricity and  magnetism,  are  not  the  only  powers  hy  which  the  sun  in-
fuses hfe  and  vigour  into  all  heings:  it  employs  another  influence  with
which,  as  with  heat,  it  penetrates  all  maUer,  and  the  fluctuations  of
which  we  may  now  compare  with  and  measure  by  the  waking  and
sleeping  conditions.

"  It  is  not  necessary  to  be  exposed  to  the  direct  rays  of  the  sun,
as  we  haye  seen  that  the  new  influence  is  conducted  through  all  bodies,
and  even  diffused  without  contact."

The  positive  energy  of  the  left  hand

"  Follows  a  course  not  exactly  similar,  but  still  very  analogous  to,
that  of  the  native  energy  of  the  right  hand.  It  reached  the  smaller
(mid-day)  maximum  later,  the  greater  (evening)  maximum  somewhat
earlier. On  the  whole  it  appeared  more  powerful."

Even  the  two  halves  of  the  head  differ.  Two  persons
found  the  Baron's  head

''Cold  on  the  right,  warm  on  the  left  hemisphere;  both  sensa-
tions verv  strong.  The  same  result  was  obtained  in  every  case  tried,
male  or  female.

And  as  the  force  in  the  two  hands  is  different  at  different
hours^  still  more  so  is  it  in  the  head,  but  the  course  of  the
variations  is  the  same.

The  two  sides  of  the  head  differ  in  these  variations.  The
force  of  the  left  increases  far  more  slowly  than  that  of  the
right  in  the  morning,  and,  having  attained  its  maximum,
does  not  begin  to  fall  till  five  hours  later.

The  brain  participates  much  less  in  the  effect  of  hunger.

Of  the  two  sides,

"The  right  is  sooner  disposed  for  sleep,  and  sooner  roused  to
action  in  the  morning,  and  indeed  exhibits  generally  more  excitability,
but  not  more  strength,  than  the  left."

The  forehead  and  back  of  the  head  differ  still  more  than
the  two  sides.  The  forehead  is  generally  cold,  the  back  of
the  head  very  warm.

The  force  of  the  forehead  rose  before  day-break,  was  little
affected  by  hunger,  and  reached  its  maximum  after  sunset ;
while  the  back  of  the  head,  at  6  p.m.,  stood  where  it  did  at
6  a.m.  But  now,  when  the  force  of  the  forehead  begins  to
fall,  that  of  the  back  of  the  head  begins  to  rise,  and,  when
that  of  the  forehead  is  the  lowest,  that  of  the  back  of  the
head  is  the  highest :  and  the  latter  falls  quickly  after  3  a.m.,
while  the  former  begins  to  rise  as  quickly  about  4  a.m.

Sleeping  is  represented  by  the  back  of  the  head,  waking


Cure  of  Palsy  and  Dropsy.  361

by  the  forehead ;  sleeping  and  waking  do  not  differ  as  activity
and  rest^  but  as  a  shifting  of  the  seat  of  activity.

If  these  observations  are  established,  they  will  prove  still
farther,  what  the  occurrence  of  day  and  night  and  all  experi-
ence show,  the  error  of  sitting  up  at  night,  and  the  natural
superiority  of  morning  to  night  study.  As  the  taking  of
food  no  less  than  daylight  promotes  the  development  of  the
force,  and  the  chemical  action  of  digestion  lasts  some  hours,
we  see  a  reason  for  eating  by  day  and  not  later  than  some
hours  before  bed-time;  for  while  night  is  increasing  the
force  of  the  back  of  the  head,  the  food  increases  at  the  same
time  the  force  of  the  forehead.  Common  observation  says
that  an  hour's  sleep  before  midnight  is  worth  two  afterwards :
and  sleep

*'  Naturally  comes  on,  at  san-set,  at  the  time  of  the  change  in
the  direction  of  the  new  force,  and  continues  till,  with  the  sunshine,
new  force  arises  in  the  forehead.  If  we  go  late  to  bed,  we  must
sleep  till  late  in  the  morning;  but  in  this  case  the  natural  current  is
against  us,  just  as  when  we  eo  to  sleep  with  a  full  stomach.  It  is
well  known,  that  when  we  go  late  to  bed  and  rise  late,  we  are  gene-
rally dull  and  out  of  spirits,  compared  with  those  who  accommodate
theur  habits  to  the  arrangements  of  nature.

He  who  would  ensure  the  continuance  of  health  by  attending  to
the  distribution  of  the  force  so  oflen  mentioned,  the  influence  of
which  is  so  penetrating  and  universal,  must  rise  at  latest  with  the
first  rays  of  the  sun,  take  his  chief  meal  at  from  11  a.m.  to  12,
never  later  than  1  p.m.,  eat  little  or  nothing  afterwards,  and  retire  to
rest  at  the  evening  twilight.  All  animals  do  this,  and,  indeed,  so
does  the  half  savage  in  his  condition,  which  is,  in  many  points,  a
natural  one.  So  also  do  many  poor  people  and  many  persons  of
small  means,  especially  in  the  country.  It  is  only  civilized  man,  as
he  is  found  in  our  cities,  who  does  better;  he  sups  at  10  or  11  at
night,  goes  to  bed  at  2  or  3  in  the  morning,  and  then  sends  for  the
physician  on  account  of  gout,  scrofula,  or  spleen."


VI.  Cure  of  Palsy  and  Dropsy,
By  Mr.  Decimus Hands, Surgeon.

TO  THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sir, — Your  kind  and  ready  insertion  of  my  former  cases
in  your  valuable  and  increasingly  interesting  periodical.  The
Zoist,  encourages  me  to  transmit  you  the  detailed  account  of
that  remarkable  one  I  alluded  to  in  my  note  to  that  justly
celebrated  and  brilliant  ornament  to  humanity,  as  also  to  the
medical  profession.  Dr.  Elliotson,  whom  I  esteem  it  a  privi-


862  Cure  of  Palsy  and  Dropsy,

lege  to  be  permitted  to  name  as  my  firiend.  The  description
there  given  of  the  appearance  of  the  mesmeric  fluid,  and
which  was  annexed  to  his  excellent  abstract  of  Baron  Von
Beichenbach's  researches  in  the  April  number  of  The  Zoisi,
was  given  in  the  precise  words  of  the  somnambulist,  Martha
Price,  forming,  however,  but  a  very  small  item  in  the  beau-
tiful imagery,  replete  with  wit  and  fancy,  which  flowed  from
her  lips,  yet  withal  accompanied  by  such  ndiveti  as  to  strike
all  present  with  astonishment  while  they  witnessed  the
singular  and  varied  phenomena  and  astounding  facts  called
forth  each  moment  by  the  powerful  magic  of  mesmerism,  and
listened  in  breathless  anxiety  to  the  metaphors  and  florid
eloquence  of  this  uneducated  yet  singularly  talented  servant
girl,  and  whose  language  was  as  remarkable  as  the  expressions
were  appropriate,  descriptive,  sententious,  and  sarcastic.  At
the  time  she  was  first  mesmerised,  her  natural  appearance
was  dull  and  heavy ;  yet  in  the  sleep- waking  state  she  was
wildly  original,  an/kejt  you  in  continued  wonL  and  curiou,
expectation.  It  would  require  a  painter's  pencil  and  a  poet's
art  to  render  justice  to  the  subject.

Inadequate  as  I  feel  for  such  a  task,  I  shall  content
myself  with  giving  a  plain  statement  of  incontrovertible  facts,
which  may  all  be  proved  by  unexceptionable  witnesses,  and
with  transcribing  verbatim  her  own  relation  of  her  iUness
previous  to  being  under  my  care.  The  filling  up  and  colour-
ing in  of  the  picture  I  must  leave  to  the  imagination.  I
would  only  further  add,  that  I  took  notes  from  the  com-
mencement, and  that  it  is  from  them  the  following  summary
is  drawn  up.

I  remain,  Sir,  with  sincere  respect.

Your  obliged  and  obedient  servant,

Decimus  Hands,  Surgeon.
22,  Thayer  Street,  Manchester  Square.

Martha  Price  is  now  21  years  of  age.  In  the  year  1844
she  was  in  service,  and  had  the  care  of  a  child  two  years  and
a  half  old.  On  the  14th  of  February  she  was  in  the  Begent's
Park  with  the  child,  having  been  sent  with  a  message  to  a
house  near  Cumberland  Gate,  when  it  began  to  rain  very
heavily ;  she  caught  up  the  child  in  her  arms,  and  ran  with
it  as  fast  as  she  could  to  her  destination  When  she  got  there
she  was  wet  and  tired,  and  drank  a  glass  of  hot  ale,  and
again  set  out  immediately  to  return  home,  though  the  rain
had  not  ceased.  She  made  all  the  haste  she  could,  but,  when
she  arrived  in  Upper  York  Street,  where  she  lived,  she  sank
down  on  a  chair  overpowered  with  fatigue,  and  so  fremsied  by


by  Mr.  D.  Hands.  363

pain  that  she  actually  threw  down  the  child  she  had  just
before  been  so  careful  of.  Her  statement  is^  that  her  head
and  face  were  in  such  agony  she  was  beside  herself^  and  that
the  latter  rose  up  in  large  bUsters  like  bladders  the  moment
she  was  seated.  The  pain  extended  down  the  shoulder,  the
arm,  and  left  side,  being  the  one  she  had  carried  the  child
on.  The  intensity  of  the  pain  soon  abated,  but  it  continued
wearing  and  tiring  for  two  days ;  it  then  changed  its  cha-
racter, and  became  violent  and  darting,  with  occasional  in-
termission, increased  by  any  exertion  or  rapid  movement.  It
began  at  the  top  of  the  head :  the  suffering  was  acute,  but
happily  it  lasted  only  for  a  few  moments;  it  would  then  cease
suddenly,  and  leave  the  part  dead,  that  is,  without  any  feel-
ing. The  pain  recurred  daily,  but  never  in  the  same  place,
always  descending  lower  and  lower,  till  at  the  close  of  five
weeks  the  left  side  of  the  head,  face,  and  neck,  to  the
shoulder,  were  quite  insensibk  to  the  touch.

On  Friday  evening,  March  15th,  while  she  was  at  a  reli-
gious meeting,  on  rising  from  her  chair  to  kneel  down,  she
felt  an  uneasy  tingling  in  the  left  foot  and  leg,  which  obliged
her  to  sit  down  again ;  she  then  felt  them  become  dead,  or
what  is  usually  termed  asleep.  In  a  few  moments  more  the
shoulder,  arm,  and  side,  were  similarly  affected,  though
mihout  the  previous  tingling.  Thus  all  the  left  side  had  be-
come paralyzed,  the  upper  part  having  been  so  already  prior
to  the  evening  of  the  16th.  She  was  assisted  home,  when  her
kind  mistress  paid  her  every  attention.  She  had  a  fire  lit  in
her  room,  additional  blankets  put  on,  and  finding  her  very  cold
her  mistress  gave  her  a  glass  of  hot  brandy  and  water.  The
next  day  she  was  taken  to  a  surgeon's  house,  who  bled  her
copiously,  put  a  blister  between  her  shoulders,  and  gave  her
an  aperient  draught,  which  did  not  produce  the  desired  effect,
though  she  continued  to  take  it  till  the  Wednesday,  March
20th,  when  she  entered  St.  George's  Hospital  under  the  care
of  Dr.  Edward  Seymour,  who  likewise  prescribed  an  aperient
with  no  better  result ;  she  was  also  cupped  the  same  day,  and
during  the  time  she  remained  in  the  hospital  she  was  bled
from  the  arm,  cupped  and  blistered  frequently,  and  leeches
were  several  times  applied.  She  derived  more  benefit  from
these  and  cupping  than  from  the  use  of  the  lancet.  At  the
end  of  six  weeks  a  slight  feeling  returned  in  the  joints,  but
the  flesh  remained  dead.  It  must  be  remembered  that  this
is  the  account  Martha  gives  of  her  illness  and  feelings,  by
which  I  imderstand  her  to  mean  that  the  motor  nerves  re-
gained very  slight  power,  while  the  nerves  of  sensibility  con-


364  Cure  of  Palay  and  Dropsy.

tinaed  as  before.  Before  her  removal  from  the  hospital  I
Tisited  her  there^  and  can  bear  my  testimony  in  corroboration
of  her  grateful  one  to  the  kindness^  attention^  and  taleat,
which  were  evinced  towards  her  by  the  faculty  and  attendants
of  that  admirable  institution.  She  left  it  on  May  14th^  having
been  an  inmate  for  eight  weeks.  She  then  became  an  out-
patient under  Dr.  Page^  but  the  distance  from  her  residence,
John  Street,  New  Road,  rendered  the  journey  too  fatiguing
and  injurious  to  allow  of  her  continuing  her  attendance ;  she
therefore  gave  it  up  altogether.

Previously  to  her  leaving  the  hospital,  symptoms  of  dropsy^
had  been  observed,  accompanied  by  great  shortness  of  breath
and  such  nervous  irritability  that  she  could  not  endure  any
one  in  the  room  or  near  the  bed,  but  felt  so  exasperated  as  to
threaten  their  destruction.

About  this  time  she  accidentally  met  with  Teste's  work
on  Animal  Magnetism.  Her  curiosity  was  excited,  yet  being,
as  I  believe,  a  truly  pious  person,  her  prejudices  were  strong
in  proportion ;  she  was  not  merely  sceptical,  but  fancied  so
great  a  power  must  proceed  from  satanic  agency.  It  was
under  these  circumstances  I  chanced  to  call  where  she  was,
and,  having  known  her  for  a  very  long  time,  I  was  startled  at
the  alteration  in  her  appearance,  and  was  induced  to  propose
mesmerism  to  her,  and  to  try  aU  my  powers  of  persuasion  to
overcome  her  objections  and  prevail  on  her  to  consent  to  my
mesmerising  her.  As  she  happened  to  be  a  Wesleyan  Me-
thodist, and  I  happened  to  be  her  leader,  she  confided  in  my
veracity  and  judgment ;  and,  when  I  told  her  that  mesmerism
was  a  therapeutic  agent,  and  that  the  devil  had  no  more  to
do  with  it  than  with  any  other  part  of  medicine  or  surgery,
she  believed  me,  and  so  submitted  to  its  influence.  I  then
arranged  for  commencing  that  evening.  Before  I  enter  on
the  details  of  the  case,  it  is  desirable  I  should  describe  her
appearance  prior  to  the  attack,  and  likewise  what  she  was  at
the  time,  with  the  symptoms  of  the  disease,  which  I  shall
transcribe  from  notes  dated  the  day  I  first  mesmerised  her.

At  the  commencement  of  the  year  she  was  an  active,
robust,  strong,  lively  girl,  smart  and  quick :  three  months
had  passed,  and  she  was  pale,  bhaied*^  languid,  and  infirm ;
her  left  arm  hung  long,  heavy,  lifeless  by  her  side ;  the  foot
and  leg  presented  the  same  appearance ;  the  right  leg  moved
slowly  forward,  while  the  left  was  drawn  up  to  it  with  a  sud-
den jerk,  and  served  as  a  prop  to  sustain  the  equilibrium,  and
even  then  she  required  the  assistance  of  two  persons  to  cross
the  room.

A  Entirely  from  Uie  profuse  bleediogs  in  the  hospital. — Zoisi.


by  Mr.  D.  Hands.  365


Notes  on  the  case  of  Martha  Price,  May  24/A^  1844.

Age  19.  Shorty  thick-set^  sangaineo-lymphatic ;  dark  hair
and  eyes.  Cerebrum-the  animal  part  preponderating,  while
the  intellectual  is  large.  Dropsy  of  the  abdomen,  chest,  and
whole  body ;  trembling  in  the  limbs  and  throughout  the  mus-
cles generally,  morning  perspirations,  giddiness,  taste  and
smell  impaired,  especi^ly  the  former ;  palpitation  of  the
heart,  with  a  sense  of  its  being  tied  down  and  not  haying
room  to  act ;  catamenia  scanty ;  motion  productive  of  pain
in  the  limbs,  even  in  the  fingers;  constipation;  sleepless
nights ;  palsy  of  the  left  arm  arid  leg.

May  24th.  I  commenced  mesmerising  Martha  Price  by
making  long  passes  downwards  very  slowly  from  the  vertex  of
the  head.  I  continued  for  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour
without  producing  any  apparent  result,  all  which  time  she
laughed  immoderately ;  then  her  eyes  assumed  the  heavy  ap-
pearance peculiar  to  the  mesmeric  state,  and  soon  closed,  so
that  she  could  not  open  them,  when,  as  it  was  late,  I  demes-
merised  her,  and  she  returned  home  and  slept  better  than
she  had  done  since  her  illness.  The  next  day  she  was  again
mesmerised  with  apparently  no  better  success,  but  on  her
return  home,  while  at  dinner,  she  feU  asleep,  (in  the  strict
meaning  of  the  words,)  for  the  knife  and  fork  dropped  from
her  hands,  so  suddenly  did  she  lose  consciousness.  She  was
put  to  bed  and  slept  from  1  to  6  o'clock,  and  again  at  night
from  12  to  8.

26th.  Mesmerised  as  usual :  nothing  occurred  worthy  of
remark,  yet  there  was  a  decided  improvement,  for  she  could
now  lie  down,  which  she  had  not  been  able  to  do  since  her
breathing  had  been  so  bad ;  the  pain  however  was  still  acute,
and  the  appetite  entirely  failed.

27th.  This  day  for  the  first  time  Martha  went  into  the
mesmeric  sleep,  though  only  for  a  very  short  interval.

28th.  She  again  slept,  and  complained  of  pain  in  the
stomach ;  from  this  day  her  loss  of  consciousness  gradually
encreased  in  duration,  and  her  breath  ameliorated  in  propor-
tion to  the  length  of  the  sleep;  the  stomach  and  chesty  which
were  swollen,  decreased  in  size.

Before  she  was  mesmerised,  the  kidneys  had  become,  if
not  altogether,  yet  nearly,  inactive;  after  the  third  day  of
her  coming  to  me  they  had  resumed  their  functions,  so  that
there  was  frequent  and  long  continued  micturition.  This  I
conclude  to  have  been  the  result  of  the  absorbents  having
been  stimulated  into  activity  by  the  magnetic  influence,  thus


866  Ctare  of  Palsy  and  Dropsy,

draining  off  the  contents  of  the  cavities  and  cellular  mem-
brane generally.  In  the  course  of  twelve  hours  the  patient
passed  six  pints  of  water.

29th.  Catamenia  came  on  a  fortnight  before  the  right
period ;  they  had  been  regular  hitherto.

30th.  During  the  sleep  I  perceived  a  slight  spasm  in  the
right  arm.

31st.  This  day  the  spasm  became  much  more  decided.  In
her  sleep  she  now  began  to  direct  my  operations.  She  desired
me  to  make  longitudinal  passes^  commencing  at  the  vertex^
and  going  very  slowly  down  the  left  side  of  the  head^  face,  neck,
and  shoulder,  to  the  end  of  the  fingers.  As  I  proceeded  I
observed  red  streaks  rising  from  under  my  fingers,  resembling
inflamed  absorbents ;  I  consequently  continued  these  passes
till  the  whole  surface  bore  the  appearance  of  a  person  who
had  been  the  subject  of  ardent  scarlet  fever.

The  passes  over  the  head  were  productive  of  excruciating
pain  in  the  face,  eye,  and  limbs  of  the  left  side,  and  lastly
in  the  head,  heart  and  side.  The  agony  was  so  intense  as  to
contort  all  her  features,  causing  her  to  grind  her  teeth  and
move  her  jaws  convulsively.^  She  described  the  pain  as  the
sensation  of  the  blood  flowing  to  the  head,  and  boUing  and
bubbling  in  the  brain.  The  arm  and  hand,  with  the  leg  and
foot  of  the  same  side,  were  stretched  out  and  elongated,  raised
up  or  lowered,  by  my  passes  and  will  combined.  The  passes
made  from  above  downwards,  in  the  course  of  the  extensor
muscles,  excited  the  flexors  into  action ;  and,  if  made  in  the
same  direction  along  the  flexors,  then  a  similar  effect  was
produced  in  the  extensors.

This  same  day.  May  31st,  I  placed  gold  in  her  hand,
when  the  fingers  closed  immediately,  though  slowly,  upon  it,
forming  a  fist ;  the  wrist-joint  fiexed  upwards,  then  the  elbow
in  like  manner  towards  the  shoulder,  the  whole  of  the  flexor
muscles  of  the  superior  extremity  being  evidently  influenced
by  the  gold,  and  with  violence  sufficient  to  have  crushed  to
atoms  a  glass  smelling  bottle  she  had  in  her  hand,  had  I  not
hastily  wrested  it  from  her  before  the  full  development  of  the
mesmeric  influence  on  the  muscles.  I  had  ceased  demesmer-
ising  her  for  some  days,  as  she  always  awoke  when  I  left  the
room.  The  following  relation  is  taken  down  from  her  dictation :

'^  On  the  31st  of  May,  after  Mr.  Hands  left  me,  I  awoke
as  usual,  and  on  rising  from  my  chair  I  felt  three  distinct
cracks  in  my  side  shooting  down  to  my  leg  and  foot,  which
made  me  scream  out  each  time ;  it  was  like  a  knife  running
through  me,  and  just  the  same  pain  I  felt  when  first  seized

b  See  the  same  in  Dr.  Elliotson's  Cure  of  PaUy,  Vol.  I.,  p.  343.— Zoul.


by  Mr.  D.  Hands.  367

on  the  14th  of  February.  I  then  found  I  could  move  my  leg
and  arm^  and  that  feeling  had  returned  to  my  side.  I  thought
I  would  try  and  walk  home  as  it  was  not  a  great  distancey  and
accordingly  I  did  walk  from  18^  Upper  York  Street  to  John
Street,  New  Road,  where  I  lived,  holding  by  the  iron  rail-
ing of  the  areas.  I  passed  my  mother  and  sister  as  they
were  coming  to  fetch  me  j  I  turned  away  my  head  and  they
did  not  see  me,  for  I  wished  to  enjoy  their  amazement.  The
next  day  I  determined  to  astonish  Mr.  Hands,  and  walked
to  his  house,  22,  Thayer  Street.^'

Indeed  it  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  the  delighted  sur-
prise with  which  I  received  such  an  encouraging  proof  of
the  curative  power  of  mesmerism.  The  exertion  did  not
prove  in  the  least  prejudicial  to  Martha.  The  same  pheno-
mena were  again  elicited  with  increased  strength.  She  con-
ceived that  a  string  which  had  contracted  the  limb,  snapped
in  two,  and  now  the  leg  was  at  liberty.  She  complained  of
weakness  in  the  back  of  the  neck  and  head;  the  bowels
were  confined ;  the  kidneys  again  became  partially  inactive ;
the  sleep  continued  good.  Nothing  worthy  of  being  noted
occurred  for  several  days. Laughing  always  awoke  her.

On  one  occasion,  my  friend,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bridgeman,
had  been  amusing  her  in  relating  some  entertaining  stories,
and  consequently  continually  awaking  her,  when  the  question
crossed  his  mind,  whether  his  tkinking  of  anything  droll
would  have  the  same  effect ;  and  he  immediately  put  the  idea
into  execution,  to  our  great  surprise,  for  she  awoke  as  quickly
and  quite  as  much  amused  as  if  he  had  given  utterance  to  the
thought.  However,  I  had  only  to  hold  up  my  hand,  and  though
she  might  not  see  me,  she  would  go  to  sleep  again  instantly  .<^

June  14th.  She  was  sufiering  from  head-ache,  brought  on
by  exposure  to  cold.  I  merely  touched  her  fingers,  and  she
went  into  the  sleep,  and  did  not  awake  on  my  going  to  the
other  side  of  the  room,  as  she  had  always  done  before ;  but
this  was  the  first  time  I  was  alone  with  her.

On  the  17th  she  walked  to  a  friend^s  house,  where  I  put
her  to  sleep  as  usual.  When  she  awoke,  I  formed  a  chain
of  fourteen  young  ladies,  making  Martha  the  first  link.  I
sat  opposite  her  and  used  long  passes,  but  without  influencing
her  in  the  least.  I  then  united  myself  with  the  chain,  by
taking  the  hand  of  the  last  lady;  yet  I  still  failed  to  influence
Martha.  I  then  isolated  each  of  us,  destroying  the  chain
completely,  and  in  one  minute  she  was  asleep.  This  is  a
convincing  proof  of  what  the  Bev.  Mr.  Townsend  asserts :
see  page  290  of  his  Facts  in  Mesmerism,  a  book  that  has  done

c  See  Mr.  Chandler's  Case,  toI.  I.,  p.  175.— Zout.


368  Cure  of  Palsy  and  Dropsy,

more  for  removing  prejudice^  and  gaining  an  impartial  inves-
tigation of  the  mesmeric  mysteries  than  any  other  publication
I  am  acquainted  with.  No  sincere  inquirer  should  be  without
this  admirable  work.

June  26th.  I  asked  her  in  her  sleep  when  she  would  be
well  of  the  paralysis.  She  considered  for  some  time^  and  re-
plied in  three  weeks.

July  2nd.  I  sat  down  at  the  distance  of  three  feet  from
Martha^  and  merely  looked  at  her ;  she  fell  asleep  in  four
minutes.  For  the  first  time  she  leant  towards  me ;  I  moved
round  her  chair^  and  she  followed  my  movements,  leaning
over  to  me  as  much  as  she  possibly  could  without  falling.  I
then  sat  down  and  immediately  stood  up  again,  when  she
made  two  ineffectual  attempts  at  imitation,  but  the  third
time  succeeded ;  stood  up  erect  and  sat  down  directly ;  some
one  present  laughed,  and  she  awoke,  and  was  surprised  at
what  we  told  her  she  had  done.

July  9th.  She  now  asserted  in  her  sleep  she  would  be
quite  well  in  a  week.  The  fulfilment  of  this  prediction  is
proved  by  the  fact  that  she  went  to  a  situation  as  housemaid  to
a  lady  residing  in  Oxford  Street,  on  the  22nd  of  July,  1844.

MartJuj^s  Relapse. — On  Monday,  July  22nd,  Martha  went
to  her  place,  exactly  eight  weeks  from  the  time  she  had  first
been  mesmerised ;  and  on  the  subsequent  Friday,  as  she  was
shaking  up  a  bed,  she  felt  a  sensation  pass  through  her  side,
like  a  flash  of  lightning.  It  darted  upwards  to  her  eye,  which
closed.  She  recognized  the  pain,  and  hastily  slid  down  the
stairs,  holding  the  baluster,  and  succeeded  in  reaching  the
bottom  before  her  foot  and  leg  were  seized.  This  attack  was
much  more  aggravated  than  the  former;  the  left  eye  remained
shut,  and  the  entire  side  was  paralyzed.  During  her  stay  at
home  she  had  gone  through  severe  mental  trial,  which  doubt-
less had  contributed  to  predispose  her  for  this  relapse.  She
first  felt  numbness  in  the  leg  and  arm,  then  in  the  fingers
and  up  the  course  of  the  radial  nerve ;  next,  the  extremities
of  the  left  side  were  quite  paralyzed ;  the  pulse  was  slow  and
soft ;  she  had  night  perspirations.  Just  prior  to  the  attack,
she  experienced  a  sense  of  vacancy  in  the  stomach,  and  had
a  severe  fit  of  sneezing.

I  was  sent  for,  and  mesmerised  her  immediately;  but,
though  she  went  into  the  sleep,  she  derived  no  apparent  be-
nefit. The  next  day  she  directed  me  to  draw  off  the  vesical
contents  with  an  instrument  while  she  was  asleep  (the  vesica
being  paralyzed)  which  I  did,  but  it  soon  accumulated  again.
She  assured  me  the  water  came  from  the  legs,  being,  as  I  had
before  concluded,  absorbed  and  conveyed  through  the  ordi-


by  Mr.  D.  Hands.  869

nary  channel  to  the  vesica.  She  was  removed  home  that  even-
ing, when  I  again  mesmerised  her.

Gold,  which  had  acted  so  powerfully  in  her  previous  ill-
ness, now  failed  in  producing  any  effect,  though  I  tried  it
each  time.

On  the  Sunday,  while  she  was  asleep,  the  closed  eye
rolled  slowly  open,  presenting  the  frightful  object  of  a  sight-
less orb.  After  a  short  time  it  reclosed,  but  when  she  awoke
it  opened  naturally  like  the  other,  and  she  found  she  had
recovered  the  use  of  it.

Monday,  July  29th.  In  her  sleep  she  desired  me  to  take
16  oz.  of  blood  firom  her  arm,  and,  while  the  blood  flowed,  to
place  a  sovereign  on  her  head  and  another  in  her  left  hand.
The  effect  was  instantaneous,  and  appeared  marvellous  from
its  previous  failure.  Now  there  was  an  exact  repetition  of  all
the  former  violent  contortions  of  the  31st  of  May,  but  with
increased  power.  There  was  the  closing  of  the  fingers,  the
flexing  of  the  wrist  and  elbow  joints;  but  now,  after  the
latter  had  folded  upwards  towards  the  shoulder,  it  slowly
lowered  itself,  and  then  kept  stretching  out  with  convulsive
jerks,  the  flexor  muscles  slowly  contracting  and  the  exten-
sors darting  forwards  until  the  power  of  both  sets  of  muscles
had  regained  ability  to  perform  their  functions  and  the  arm
was  fully  elongated.

Tuesday.  In  her  sleep  she  said  she  must  be  kept  very  low,
and  drink  barley  water,  and  eat  a  small  quantity  of  bread;  that
she  must  be  bled  again  on  the  next  Monday,  after  which  she
would  have  the  use  of  her  limbs.  She  assured  me  mesmerism
would  cure  her,  and  told  me  to  draw  off  the  vesical  contents
before  I  made  passes  over  the  leg;  she  fancied  that  she  saw
letters  on  her  heart,  but  confusedly;  she  should  see  them
better  another  day.

Wednesday.  In  her  sleep  she  felt  something  very  hot  pass
through  her  heart,  like  steam,  from  my  forehead ;  my  fingers
gave  her  pain :  she  saw  fluid  passing  up  and  down  on  her
heart.  The  letters  now  appeared  clear,  some  upside  down ;
she  fancied  the  words  Salivation  and  Mercury,  but  immedi-
ately corrected  herself,  and  said.  No,  that  the  latter  word  was
a  guess;  but  I  see  12  small  piUs  of  a  bluish  colour,  I  must
take  them  and  they  will  produce  salivation,  and  operate  on  the
bowels,  which  had  been  confined  for  several  days.

Friday.  Whilst  reading  the  letters  upon  her  heart,  Martha's
appearance  was  most  singular ;  she  seemed  to  be  looking
down  and  searching  about,  peering  into  the  interior  recesses
of  her  heart ;  she  compared  herself  to  a  hen  with  her  brood
under  her  wings. At  times  she  appeared  perplexed,  then


370  Cure  of  Palsy  and  Drqpiff,

would  brighten  up,  and  her  coontenance  sparkle  with  pleasure.
She  described  the  letters  as  if  written  with  a  fiery  pencil  and
all  light,  she  likewise  searched  into  the  head  and  brain,  the
left  side  of  which  she  saw  covered  with  blood.  While  she
was  in  the  hospital  every  application  was  directed  to  the  right
side. She  had  begun  her  pills  on  Wednesday,  one  twice  a  day.

Saturday.  The  bowels  acted  as  she  had  prognosticated.
She  slept  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  and  said  her  mouth  would
be  affected  when  she  had  taken  4  more  pills.  She  directed
me  to  draw  off  the  vesical  contents,  but  not  to  put  gold  in  her
hand  for  it  drew  the  blood  from  the  head ;  I  must  therefore
use  it  when  I  bleed  her.

Monday.  The  bowels  acted  and  micturition  occurred  twice.

Aug.  6.  I  took  away  more  blood.  The  catamenia  came  on.
She  said  that  when  they  ceased  she  should  be  quite  well.  She
now  in  her  sleep  always  read  on  her  heart  and  directed  me  what
to  do.  Sensibility  was  recovered  in  four  toes ;  the  middle  one
remained  insensible.  Salivation  began :  the  pills  were  finished.

August  7th.  She  was  very  red;  while  in  the  mesmeric
sleep  she  assured  me  she  should  be  quite  well  when  she  awoke,
meaning  that  she  would  have  regained  sensation  and  feeling
in  all  her  limbs  and  no  longer  suffer  from  paralysis.  She  like-
wise said  she  should  not  be  able  to  leave  her  bed  yet,  as  she
would  be  too  weak,  and  there  would  still  be  the  dropsy,  which
would  not  yield  quite  so  soon,  but  with  perseverance  she  should
be  cured  of  that  in  a  little  time.  I  placed  my  hand  on  the  top
of  her  head  which  had  been  hitherto  so  painful  to  the  touch.
She  fancied  there  was  a  string  covered  with  bloody  knots
that  tied  it.  I  produced  pain  and  spasm  of  the  arm  and  leg.  I
put  a  mesmerised  sovereign  on  her  shoulder  and  she  fancied
the  string  broke.  The  head  had  been  drawn  over  the  shoulder,
and  when  I  removed  the  sovereign  it  fell  back  to  its  place.  As  I
passed  my  hand  over  the  head,  tears  fiowed  copiously  down  the
cheeks,  especially  from  the  eye  that  had  been  affected.  The
back  of  her  head  felt  dead,  and  she  could  not  bear  the  couch  to
touch  one  part  of  it,  she  said  it  felt  as  if  a  piece  of  the  brain
was  loose  and  fell  against  her  forehead  when  she  leant  forwards;
she  fancied  matter  was  forming  on  the  brain,  like  a  scab  which
would  soon  appear  outwardly  on  the  skin  in  the  shape  of  scales,
and  would  have  to  be  brushed  off;  the  itching  sensation  was
terrible  and  relieved  by  grinding  the  teeth  and  shaking  the
head  which  seemed  to  scratch  it.

Martha  said  my  being  in  the  room  was  sufficient  of  itself
to  send  her  to  sleep,  and  that  there  was  a  large  collection  of
water  in  the  abdomen  in  a  sack,  but  more  on  the  right  side
than  on  the  left.


by  Mr.  D.  Hands.  371

Monday.  The  catamenia  came  on :  she  said  they  would
continne  till  Wednesday;  she  must  not  take  medicine,  for  mes-
merised water  would  produce  the  same  effect.  A  few  days
later,  Martha  said  the  water  in  the  peritonaeum  had  been  so
agitated  by  the  magnetic  power  that  it  was  now  nearly  gone.
She  wished  to  have  her  head  shaved,  when  we  had  the  demon-
stration of  the  truth  of  her  prediction :  there  was  a  large  oval
place  about  the  size  and  shape  of  a  section  of  an  egg,  having
the  appearance  of  dandriff  and  of  a  darkish  colour.  About
this  time  Martha's  mother  was  confined,  and,  as  she  required
her  daughter's  services,  we  were  obliged  to  discontinue  mes-
merism for  rather  more  than  a  fortnight,  after  which  period
we  again  resumed  it ;  but  she  said  the  interval  had  been  per-
nicious, the  peritonseum  having  again  filled,  and  that  it  would
require  24  hours  of  uninterrupted  sleep  for  the  water  to  be
absorbed  and  carried  off.  We  therefore  settled  that  she  should
come  the  next  day,  Saturday,  to  her  friend's  house  and  that
I  should  send  her  to  sleep  at  11  o'clock,  which  I  did.  But
she  had  not  been  asleep  long,  before  she  became  restless  and
appeared  uncomfortable :  she  had  not  acquainted  her  mother
with  our  intention  and  she  said  she  saw  her  very  angry.  I  of-
fered to  go  to  her  mother  and  get  some  one  to  do  the  work
instead  of  Martha.  To  this  she  consented,  and  on  my  return
I  told  her  her  mother  was  quite  satisfied.  But  I  had  hardly
left  the  house  before  she  peremptorily  ordered  her  firiend  to
awaken  her,  who  very  naturally  refused  and  remonstrated  with
her,  telling  her  that  I  should  be  most  justly  offended  after  the
trouble  I  had  taken,  especially  as  her  mother  had  offered  no
objection.  But  she  said,  if  she  had  not  to  Mr.  Hands,  she
was  making  a  famous  row  now.  Her  firiend  still  expostulated
and  declared  it  impossible,  as  she  did  not  know  how  to  awaken
her.  She  then  asked  for  two  bunches  of  keys  and  her  wedding
ring ;  as  there  was  but  one  bunch,  she  took  off  the  largest  key,
placed  it  in  one  hand,  the  bunch  in  the  other,  and  the  ring  on
her  forehead,  and  instantly  awoke.

But  now  arose  a  fresh  difficulty ;  she  refused  to  go  home.
Nothing  could  be  more  striking  than  the  contrast  which  pre-
sented itself  between  Martha  in  the  mesmeric  sleep  and
Martha  awake.  The  same  firmness  of  purpose  and  decision
of  character  were  erinced  in  each  state ;  but,  whereas  in  the
one,  she  was  all  nervous  anxiety  and  soUcitude  to  appease
and  conciliate  her  mother,  in  the  other  she  was  as  tenacious
and  obstinate  not  to  concede  in  the  least  to  what  she  deemed
her  mother's  ill  temper ;  in  desiring  her  to  return  after  con-
senting to  her  remaining,  and  it  required  much  persevering
entreaty,  before  she  was  prevailed  on  to  go  home. However,


873.  Cure  of  Palsy  and  Dropsy,

she  at  length  did  so ;  but,  when  her  mother  saw  her,  she  was
frightened  at  her  appearance  and  sent  her  back  immediately,
fancying  she  was  bewildered,  and  caused  her  to  be  watched
till  she  arrived  safe  at  her  friend's  house.  She  passed  a  very
bad  night ;  and  when  I  saw  her  on  the  Sunday,  I  was  much
surprised  at  all  that  had  happened.  I  sent  her  to  sleep  im-
mediately, and  she  said  that  all  the  alteration  had  been  very
pernicious,  and  that  in  consequence  it  would  be  necessary
now  that  she  should  sleep  three  nights  and  three  days  without
awaking :  I  must  dem  Jmerise  hir  that  eyening,  and  then
send  her  to  sleep  again,  and  leave  her  undisturbed  till  the
following  Wednesday.  The  day  previously,  during  her  sleep,
she  had  passed  a  considerable  quantity  of  fluid,  and  she  con-
tinued to  do  so  on  the  Sunday.  In  the  evening,  I  awoke
her  as  she  had  desired ;  she  took  some  refreshment,  and  I  after-
wards sent  her  into  the  sleep  again.  She  told  us  she  should
talk  and  eat  on  Monday  and  Tuesday,  but  would  be  too  ill  on
the  Wednesday,  and  continue  insensible  all  the  day  till  her
waking  hour,  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  we  should
find  the  dropsy  quite  gone.  During  this  sleep  which  presented
much  that  was  singukurly  interesting,  she  was  seen  by  many
persons ;  among  the  number  I  would  mention  Dr.  EUiotson,
the  Rev.  G.  Sandby,  and  Mr.  Atkinson.  As  soon  as  Dr.  E.
entered  the  room,  she  named  him,  though  she  had  never
seen  him ;  and  when  asked  how  she  knew  him  and  not  the
others,  she  said  he  was  one  of  the  family,  and  explained  that
each  person  I  had  mesmerised  was  lit  up  by  the  mesmeric
fluid  and  she  read  their  names.

I  now  hasten  to  the  Wednesday  evening,  half  an  hour
before  the  appointed  time  for  her  awaking.  Her  breathing  was
curious ;'  she  had  lain  all  the  day  apparently  unconscious  and
the  breathing  imperceptible,  now  it  became  deep,  very  deep,
then  again  it  nearly  ceased ;  at  times  there  was  a  restless
moaning,  and  the  frame  was  energetically  contorted,  relapsing
afterwards  into  apparent  insensibility.  The  Bev.  Q.  Sandby
and  Mr.  Atkinson  were  present;  Dr.  Elliotson  was  prevented
by  an  engagement.  We  were  all  anxiously  waiting  with  our
watches  in  our  hands,  when  the  church  clock  opposite  struck,
and  Martha  was  awake  in  an  instant.  I  was  fearful  she
might  be  agitated  on  seeing  the  two  gentlemen  who  were
strangers  to  her,  but  she  was  quite  calm  as  I  remained  near
her.  The  next  day  when  I  called  I  found  her  very  weak,  and
on  sending  her  to  sleep  she  complained  of  cold  and  of  suffer-
ing from  the  looseness  of  the  integuments  of  the  abdomen.
The  water  having  been  all  absorbed  and  carried  off,  she  di-
rected me  to  apply  a  bandage  8  yards  long. Before  I  came.


by  Mr.  D.  Hands.  873

she  had  prevailed  on  her  friend  to  give  her  a  quantity  of  very
hot  potatoes^  which  she  ate  very  greedily.  She  said  she  suf-
fered so  very  much  from  internal  cold,  and  they  warmed  her.
From  this  day  her  recovery  may  be  considered  as  complete,
for  she  had  no  return  of  Ly  of  the  symptoms,  either  of
dropsy  or  paralysis,  but  continued  to  gain  strength  daily.
Her  clairvoyance  encreased  likewise,  and  she  soon  was  equally
clever  in  discerning  and  in  prescribing  for  diseases  in  others
as  she  had  done  for  herself.  In  corroboration  of  this  I  send
extracts  from  two  letters  descriptive  of  Martha's  appearance,
and  the  impression  she  made  on  strangers  when  in  the  mes-
meric state.  I  have  only  to  state  farther,  that  at  the  present
time,  though  not  &  strong  woman,  yet  she  is  perfectly  able  to
undertake  any  light  situation  in  a  private  family,  and  that  it
is  now  nearly  two  years  since  her  recovery,  which  I  date  from
that  last  sleep,  September,  1844.

Accept  once  more,  dear  Sir,  my  thanks  for  all  your  kind-
ness, of  which  I  hope  to  avaU  myself  again  in  the  January
number  of  The  Zoist,  and  believe  me.

Your  obedient  servant,
24th  Aug.  1846.  D.  Hands.

Extract  from  a  letter  of  O.  Chapman,  Esq.,  to  a  friend,
describing  Martha^s  mesmeric  state : —

"  Martha  was  mesmerised  almost  at  once :  she  fell  into  a
disturbed  sleep,  and  almost  immediately  passed  into  the  lucid
state,  when  she  prescribed  for  two  patients ;  after  which  she
contmued  rather  talkative  for  some  little  time,  when  she  sud-
denly became  heavy,  and  went  off  into  a  state  of  somnolence.
Mr.  Hands  appeared  to  regard  her  with  alarm ;  he  said  that
a  change  was  coming  over  her,  but  he  could  not  tell  what  it
might  be,  and  cautioned  me  in  case  she  should  say  anything
unpleasant  to  me,  as  she  had  done  to  others.  She  awoke  in
a  state  so  peculiar,  that  I  fear  I  shall  not  succeed  in  describ-
ing it.  Her  features  had  assumed  an  expression  of  beatitude ;
she  appeared  not  to  breathe,  her  countenance  was  pallid,  her
eyes  were  closed,  and  she  got  up  and  followed  Mr.  H.  with
her  hands  partially  extended  in  so  solemn  a  manner,  as  to
make  me  feel  that  she  was  all  but  a  creature  of  the  other
world.

"  I  watched  her  with  alarm  and  awe,  and  felt  it  quite  a
relief  when  she  returned  to  her  seat.  I  cannot  explain  the
change  which  came  over  her  countenance  and  appearance,
and  can  only  imagine  it  like  that  which  the  Budhists  of  the
Isle  of  Ceylon  believe  to  take  place. in  those  who  attain
Nirwana,  when  they  become  all  alike — all  heavenly ;  so  differ-

VOL.  IV.  D  D


874  Cure  of  Palsy  and  Dropsy,

ent  was  the  countenance  of  Martha  in  ecstacy  firom  Martha
in  her  ordinary  state  some  hours  before  or  aftonprards.'^

The  accompanying  paper  is  a  copy  of  a  letter  written  by
a  lady  of  Queen  Adelaide's  Court,  after  witnessing  Martha's
somnambulic  state : —

''As  you  wish  for  an  account  of  what  I  saw  at  Mr.
Hands's  this  morning,  I  will  give  you  a  narrative  as  accurate
as  I  can  of  what  passed  whilst  I  was  there,  without  any  com-
ments or  theorizing  of  my  own.  When  I  went  in,  I  found
four  persons  (all  patients)  besides  Mr.  Hands  himself.  The
most  remarkable  of  these  was  the  young  woman,  Martha,
whom  I  was  already  aware  had  been  restored  firom  a  very
hopeless  state  of  dropsy ;  I  believe  also  some  paralytic  affec-
tion. During  the  course  of  his  treatment,  she  has  developed
in  turn  almost  all  of  the  most  remarkable  phases  of  mes-
merism, and  continues  almost  daily  to  exhibit  some  additional
manifestation  of  its  effects.  That  in  which  I  am  most  in-
terested at  present,  is  her  power  of  perceiving  disease  in
others,  distinguishing  whether  the  derangement  is  organic  or
functional,  and  I  believe  prescribing  the  proper  treatment,
certainly  so  far  as  concerns  the  mode  of  mesmeric  operation
requisite.

''  When  I  went  in,  one  of  the  patients,  a  lady  of  appa-
rently middle  age,  suffering  from  complaint  of  the  heart,  was
under  the  mesmeric  influence.  Her  eyes  were  closed,  and
she  had  not  the  power  to  open  them ;  but  she  retained  full
possession  of  her  consciousness,  though  she  had  no  control
over  the  motions  of  her  limbs.  Whether  she  was  able  to
speak  or  not,  I  am  unable  to  say,  and,  being  unwilling  to
make  any  disturbance,  I  did  not  enquire ;  she  did  not  how-
ever speak  during  the  treatment.  Mr.  Hands  was  mesmeris-
ing her,  and  Martha,  also  under  the  mesmeric  influence,  stood
by  watching,  and  by  her  looks  and  motions  directing  the
process.  It  is  rather  difficult  to  describe  her  posture,  which
appeared  to  me  to  be  a  remarkably  inconvenient  one  to  be  so
long  maintained,  almost  unchanged,  as  she  contrived  to  do  it.
I  can  best  describe  my  notion  of  it,  by  likening  it  to  that  of  a
person  arrested  in  the  act  of  bending  forward  in  salutation :
she  held  Mr.  Hands's  watch  in  her  hand,  but  did  not  appear
to  do  so  for  any  purpose  of  marking  time.  The  expression
of  her  countenance  was  very  striking;  it  indicated  earnest
concentrated  intelligence,  combined  with  a  kind  of  dreamy
look,  which  probably  arose  firom  her  eyes  being  so  intently
fixed  on  the  patient  and  her  apparent  unconsciousness  of  all
else  that  surrounded  her. Though,  as  I  have  said,  she  never


by  Mr.  D.  Hands.  875

altered  the  position  of  her  legs  and  feet^  there  was  an  almost
constant  gentle  motion  of  her  body  and  head^  arising  from
her  alternately  bending  and  erecting  herself  to  her  full  height,
indicating  thereby,  by  an  occasional  movement  of  her  hand,
the  direction  in  which  she  wished  Mr.  Hands  to  make  the
passes.  The  change  of  her  countenance  was  almost  incessant
— ^always  a  look  of  intense  attention,  accompanied  by  an  ex-
pression of  anxiety  and  disquietude  whenever  these  passes
were  made  in  the  direction  she  disapproved;  changing  to  one
of  great  satis&ction,  and  often  a  smile  of  delight,  when
Mr.  H.,  who  used  every  endeavour  to  catch  her  meaning,
succeeded  in  fulfilling  her  instructions.  She  is  a  girl  not
possessed  of  any  personal  attractions, — her  pallid  complexion
rather  takes  from  such  general  expressiveness  as  she  might
otherwise  have ;  but  at  times  the  expression  of  her  counte-
nance was  almost  lovely,  and  though  it  did  not  equal  it,  it
reminded  me  of  a  patient  of  Dr.  Elliotson's,  who  used  to  fall
into  a  state  of  ecstacy,  during  which  no  words  can  describe
the  loveliness  of  her  countenance ;  a  case,  I  suppose,  similar
to  the  extatics  who  excited  so  much  interest  three  or  four
years  ago  in  the  Tyrol.

''To  return,  however,  to  Martha.  After  about  twenty
minutes,  she  indicated  that  it  was  time  to  cease  mesmerising
the  patient.  The  effect  produced  on  this  latter  was  princi-
pally a  constant  movement  of  the  right  hand  and  arm,  which
was  elevated,  depressed  and  extended,  according  to  the  passes
made  by  Mr.  Hands.  But  I  must  observe  here  that,  con-
trary to  what  I  have  generally  seen,  the  arm,  instead  of  follow-
ing in  the  direction  in  which  his  hand  moved,  almost  always
took  the  opposite  direction,  as  if  repelled  instead  of  attracted.

"  There  now  remained  two  other  persons  to  be  operated
on.  Mr.  Hands  seemed  to  apply  to  Martha  for  instnictions
which  should  be  attended  to  first ;  and,  either  because  she
was  herself  undecided  or  did  not  make  her  will  sufficiently
evident,  there  was  some  little  demur;  at  length  it  was  clear
that  she  had  fixed  on  the  lady.  The  first  thing  she  did  was
to  make  signs  that  the  gloves  the  lady  had  on  and  a  ring  she
wore  should  be  pulled  off:  I  forgot  to  say  that  she  had
before  made  Mr.  H.  take  off  his  rings,  which  she  always
insists  on  being  done  previous  to  his  mesmerising.  She  be-
stowed the  same  attention,  evidenced  in  the  way  I  have
described,  upon  this  lady,  and  therefore  I  need  not  repeat  it ;
but  the  effect  on  the  lady  (the  nature  of  whose  complaint  I
am  not  aware  of)  was  different  from  anything  I  have  yet  seen.
Her  arms  were  immediately  set  in  slow  involuntary  motion,
the  hand  being  first  drawn  upwards,  the  forefinger  and  thiunb

dd2


376  Cure  of  Palsy  and  Dropsy.

coming  in  close  contact^  and  the  movement  of  the  arm  ac-
companied by  what  I  can  only  describe  as  a  sort  of  twisting
and  distorting  action.  Baron  Dupotet  had  a  patient  who
used  to  exhibit  motions  of  a  similar  kind^  only  much  more
distorted  and  energetic;  but  then  she  fell  into  a  state  of
catalepsy,  and  did  not  preserve  consciousness ;  whereas  Mr.
Hands's  patient  retained  the  most  perfect  consciousness  all
the  time,  conversing  on  the  subject,  and  describing  her  utter
inability  to  resist  the  movements,  which  were  not  attended
by  the  least  pain,  but,  on  the  contrary,  by  rather  a  pleasur-
able sensation.  She  too,  instead  of  being  attracted  towards
Mr.  H.,  was  strongly  repelled,  drawing  herself  up  to  the  very
back  of  the  sofa  on  which  she  was  seated,  and  seeming  as  if
she  contemplated  removing  still  further  if  she  could.  Martha
continued  all  this  time  directing  by  looks  and  gestures,  and
after  perhaps  half  an  hour,  or  it  might  be  less,  Martha  gave
the  signal  to  cease.

The  process  with  the  third  patient,  a  gentleman,  was  con-
ducted in  so  similar  a  manner,  that  description  would  be  little
else  than  a  repetition,  but  he  was  less  apparently  affected
than  the  other  two.  When  it  was  over,  Martha,  who  stiU
continued  in  the  mesmeric  state,  indicated  that  Mr.  Hands
should  mesmerise  a  bottle  of  water  that  stood  on  the  table,
and  give  it  to  the  lady  who  was  last  mesmerised,  but  seemed
to  prohibit  the  other  two  patients  from  having  any.  I  then
took  mv  leave,  leaving  Martha  in  the  mesmeric  state  convers-
ing with  the  two  lady  patients.''

*«*  It  may  be  well  to  inform  those  who  are  not  conyersant  with  clainroy-
ance,  that,  though  it  is  an  unquestionable  fact,  it  is,  like  every  phenomenon
of  living  systems,  liable  to  fluctuation  ;  sometimes  perfect,  sometimes  im-
perfect, sometimes  perverted,  and  even  during  the  same  fit  of  it.  When  it
is  genuine,  it  is  occasionally  mixed  ap  with  a  degree  of  delirium.  The
party  may  have  a  true  intuition,  and  yet  fancy  unreal  things.  Martha
foresaw  accurately,  but  the  foreknowledge  was  manifested  with  a  fancy  of
words  upon  her  heart.  Elizabeth  Okey  accurately  foresaw  the  events  of  her
case,  but  fancied  they  were  told  her  by  a  beautiful  negro :  if  in  her  higher
extatic  sleep-waking,  in  which  she  looked  like  an  unearthly  being,  she  was
asked  a  questiou,  she  asked  it  in  a  whisper  of  this  imaginary  being,  and
then  fancied  that  she  received  the  answer  from  htm,  before  she  herself  gave
it.  Such  hallucinations  are  recorded  of  patients  and  seers  of  all  countries
and  periods.  At  last  Elizabeth  Okey  predicted  without  this  fancy :  and
then  was  aware  and  told  her  mesmeriser  that  previously  a  degree  of  delirium
had  been  mixed  up  with  her  state.

The  effect  of  gold  on  the  hand  of  Martha  occurs  in  many  patients,  and
was  remarkable  in  the  Okeys,  in  whom  when  Mr.  Wakley  saw  it,  he  ex-
claimed that  all  mankind  had  been  touching  gold  for  thousands  of  years
without  any  such  effect,  and  therefore  it  most  be  a  sham.  He  forgot  that
all  mankind  had  not  for  thousands  of  years  been  first  subjected  carefully  to
the  mesmeric  process. — Zoist,


( 377 )


VII. Cures  of  Nervous  and  Dyspeptic  Affections. By
Mr.  Brown^  Chemist  and  Druggist^  Low  Leyton^  Essex.

CJommunicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

It  is  remarkable  that  a  large  number  of  chemists  and  drug-
gists not  only  are  satisfied  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism^  but
openly  advocate  it^  and  some  even  practise  it.  This  is  an
additional  reason  for  my  believing  that  the  general  hostility
of  medical,  men  arises  not  from  the  fear  of  professional  loss,
but  from  pride  and  ignorance.  I  have  always  thought  so,
because  the  same  ignorant  unhesitating  decision  against
mesmerism  has  been  manifested  by  innumerable  others  in  all
classes  of  society.  Druggists  would  suffer  very  far  more  than
practitioners  firom  the  general  use  of  mesmerism.  For  not
only  would  medical  men  still  have  to  give  drugs  more  or  less,
but  opinions  as  to  the  nature  and  prospects  of  cases ;  the
general  superintendence  of  most  cases  would  still  require  a
medical  man;  and,  except  in  simple  and  chronic  cases,  a
thousand  things  would  require  the  services,  and  often  the
daily  services,  of  persons  skilled  in  medicine  or  surgery.
Medical  men  are  indispensable  in  most  cases  except  the  most
simple,  at  one  period  or  other;  and  they  would  employ  mes-
merism as  only  one  of  their  numerous  means,  and  not  to  the
exclusion  of  other  means.  Frequently  they  might  operate
themselves,  and,  when  a  case  began  to  require  too  much  atten-
tion from  them,  they  would  more  or  less  superintend  its
administration,  as  they  do  the  administration  of  baths,  mine-
ral waters,  friction,  cupping,  &c.  &c.

They  have  shewn  the  same  hostility  to  novelty  which
could  not  affect  their  professional  gain.  Some  not  only  scom-
fuUy  condemned  without  any  examination,  but  grew  very
angry  at  the  mention  of,  the  employment  of  the  ear  in  affec-
tions of  the  chest :  yet  none  but  medical  men  could  ever  so
use  their  ears.  The  original  recommendation  of  prussic  acid,
quinine,  &;c.,  made  many  as  scornful  and  cross ;  yet  these
drugs  were  to  be  administered,  just  as  much  as  other  drugs,
by  medical  men.  Some  no  doubt  have  been  hostile  from  fancy
that  their  pockets  would  suffer:  but  many  with  abundant
means,  and  more  practice  than  they  could  get  through,  nay,
some  retired  from  practice,  have  manifested  the  same  spirit.


878  Cures  of  Nervous  and  Dyspeptic  Affections,

The  pride  of  conviction  that  what  we  know  of  the  department
of  nature  that  we  have  studied^  though  we  allow  it  to  be
capable  of  enlargement^  is  incapable  of  receiving  additions  of
a  totally  new  character,  and  that  what  we  thin^k  we  know  is
absolutely  proved  and  not  to  be  questioned,  appears  to  me  at
the  bottom  of  the  hostility ;  united  with  the  ignorance  or  for-
getfiilness  that  we  at  present  have  but  a  glimpse  of  the  facts  of
nature,  and  can  know  nothing  but  by  observation  of  her  and
inferences  from  what  we  know,  but  these  inferences,  if  just,
being  implied  necessarily  in  what  we  have  observed.

The  very  men  who  make  this  haughty  stir  against  mes-
merism would  have  raised  an  outcry  against  the  application  of
the  finger  to  the  wrist  for  the  purpose  of  learning  something
of  the  state  of  the  body  at  large  or  of  any  internal  organ  by
so  doing :  they  would  have  scornfully  rejected  the  drugs  in
common  use,  had  not  their  predecessors  been  in  the  habit  of
using  them, — ^would  have  laughed  at  the  fancy  of  opium  tak-
ing away  pain,  or  the  rust  of  iron  making  weak  people  strong
and  pale  people  ruddy.  All  they  admit,  they  admitted  ori*
ginally  because  in  their  circle  all  others  asserted  it  and
nobody  denied  it :  all  they  do,  they  do  because  in  their  circle
they  originally  saw  others  do  it  and  nobody  do  otherwise.
Experience  afterwards  proves  to  them  that  much  of  all  this
is  true  and  useful ;  but  they  blindly  believe  much  that  is  not
proved,  as  the  world  does  in  all  matters,  of  which  much  never
will  be  proved,  and  much  is  to  vigorous  and  free  brains
evidently  nonsense :  and  they  and  the  world  do  much  that
is  useless  by  daily  routine  thus  fallen  into  from  example*

The  four  following  cases,  though  not  of  a  dangerous  cha-
racter, were  distressing,  and  such  as  medical  men  are  daily
seeing  and  prescribing  for  to  little  purpose.

J.  Elliotson.

I.  Cure  of  Dyspepsia  and  Neuralgic  Pain.
Miss  Orris,  ladyVmaid  at  Ford  Barclay's  Esq.,  Orove
House,  Walthamstow,  Essex,  applied  to  me  in  the  month  of
January  last.  She  then  complained  of  having  been  suffering
for  the  last  two  years  with  pain  in  the  right  side,  extending
over  the  region  of  the  stomach,  nausea,  loss  of  appetite,  and
general  debility,  accompanied  with  great  nervous  excitement,
together  with  the  usual  symptoms  indicative  of  an  hysterical
disposition ;  pain  in  the  head  at  times  most  intense,  bowels  in-
active,  liver  torpid,  kidneys  acting  freely  with  pale  coloured
urine,  extremities  cold,  occasional  rigors,  catamenia  every  fort-
night; she  had  been  under  medical  trefUment  t^  to  the  period
of  her  applying  to  me. A  marked  improvement  was  indicated


by  Mr.  Brown.  379

after  mesmerising  her  daily  for  one  week,  and  at  the  expira-
tion of  ten  weeks  a  perfect  cure  was  effect^.^

II.  Cure  of  Dyspepeia  and  Cerebral  Disturbances.
Mrs.  Hope,  wife  of  a  gardener  residing  at  Whipps  Cross,
Walthamstow,  Essex,  aged  45,  afflicted  for  two  years.  (Com-
menced mesmerising  on  the  17th  April,  1845,  in  consequence
of  her  complaining  of  an  unpleasant  burning  sensation  with
great  weight  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  loss  of  appetite,  restless
nights,  constant  cough  accompanied  with  considerable  expec-
toration, pain  in  the  right  side,  great  irritability  of  temper,
accompamed  at  times  with  a  desire  to  grasp  every  thing  within
her  reach.  After  mesmerising  her  for  two  weeks,  her  cough
had  entirely  left,  her  appetite  was  much  improved,  and  her
whole  appearance  indicated  considerable  general  amendment:
at  the  expiration  of  six  weeks  she  was  quite  recovered.

III.  Cure  of  Nervous  Head-acJie  and  other  Nervous  Sufferings.
Miss  How,  Wood  Street,  Walthamstow,  Essex,  had  suffered
for  many  years  with  a  nervous  headache,  pain  in  the  left  side,
palpitation  of  the  heart,  shooting  pain  over  her  left  eye,  and
at  times  she  lost  the  use  of  her  hands  and  wrist.  Mesmerised
her  for  the  first  time  on  the  20th  September  for  one  hour,
which  considerably  relieved  the  pain  in  her  head  and  the  pal-
pitation of  the  heart ;  continued  mesmerising  her  every  other
day.  At  the  end  of  a  week  the  pain  of  the  side  had  entirely
left,  her  hands  and  wrists  very  much  improved,  and  at  the  ex-
piration of  a  fortnight  she  was  quite  recovered.

VI.  Cure  of  Hypochondriasis.
Mr.  Young,  Wood  Street,  Walthamstow,  Essex,  age  77,  an
independent  gentleman,  had  been  for  two  years  under  medical
treatment  in  consequence  of  an  affection  of  the  liver,  but
without  obtaining  any  material  relief;  his  spirits  at  times  were
very  much  depressed,  with  loss  of  appetite  and  sleep.  He  came
under  my  care  and  was  mesmerised  on  the  17th  September
1845.  I  mesmerised  him  every  day;  at  the  end  of  a  week,  he
found  himself  better,  and  after  this  treatment  for  eight  weeks
he  was  perfectly  cured  without  having  taken  a  singU  dose  of
medicine.

O.  L.  Brown.

d  This  case  resembled  that  cared  by  Madame  Marie  (p.  335).— Zoui.


( 880 )

VIII.  Benefits  of  Mesmerism  in  Neuralgia,  Rheumatism,  Palsy,
and  Convulsions.  By  Dr.  Esdaile.  Communicated  by
Dr.  Elliotson.

The  newspapers  of  May  28th  and  29tbj  sent  to  me  from
India^  contain  the  following  facts.

J.  Elliotson.

''  MEDICAL mesmeric FACTS, REPORTED BT J.  ESDAILE, M.D.


"  '  The  presamptuouB  scepticism  which  rejects  facts  without  caring  to
examine  them,  is,  in  many  respects,  even  more  destructive  than  uncritical
credulity.' — HumMdt.

"  To  the  editor  of  The  Englishman.

"  Sir, — Presuming  that  I  have  demonstrated,  by  nearly
one  hundred  cases,  not  only  the  possibility  of  painless  surgictd
operations,  but  that  they  may  be  reckoned  on  as  daily  mat-
ters of  course,  if  the  proper  means  are  used  to  secure  success,
I  now  consider  myself  at  liberty  to  enter  on  another  and
equally  important  branch  of  the  subject,  namely,  the  cura-
tive powers  of  mesmerism  in  various  diseases  within  the  pro-
vince of  medicine.

'^I  have  said  little  of  this  hitherto,  having  purposely
restricted  myself  to  proving  the  inestimable  value  of  this
agent  in  surgery,  which  it  has  revolutionized  to  such  an  ex-
tent, that  those  who  continue  to  torment  their  fellow-creatures
unnecessarily  will  run  the  risk  of  being  prosecuted  by  the
Society  for  the  Suppression  of  Cruelty  to  Animals.  The  pro-
duction of  insensibility  for  surgical  purposes  is  often  only  to
be  attained  by  great  labour  and  patience,  such  as  few  are
willing  to  give  it  appears,  and  this  incontrovertible  test  of  the
reality  of  mesmerism  is  therefore  not  so  frequently  seen  as  it
ought  to  be.

"  For  the  consolation  of  those  who  have  tried  and  failed,
I  would  remind  them  of  the  effect  of  his  first  disappointment
upon  Sheridan.  His  first  speech  was  a  decided  failure,  never-
theless he  exclaimed, '  By 1  it  is  in  me  though,  and

shaU  come  out  -/  and  if  the  mesmeriser  will  resolve  to  do  the
thing,  tf  possible,  he  will  generally  succeed.  How  unreason-
able it  is  to  hope  to  arrest  the  usual  course  of  nature  by
short,  weak,  impatient  efforts  I  This  is  to  combat  the  ocean
with  a  broom.

'^But  the  medical  administration  of  mesmerism  affords
numerous  proofs  of  its  powers,  equally  convincing,  and  often
as  striking  and  conclusive,  as  the  absence  of  suffering  under
the  most  cruel  torments;  and  it  has  this  advantage,  that  most


Benefits  of  Meemeriem  in  Medical  Cases,  881

Eersons  who  have  the  mil,  will  find  that  they  have  the  power,
y  very  moderate  exertions^  of  soothing  and  curing  their
friends  and  neighbours,  when  sufiering  nnder  many  painful
diseases,  especially  of  the  nervous  system.

"  But  the  nerves  cannot  be  benefitted,  without  leading  to
an  improved  condition  of  the  whole  body.  If  the  fountain  of
vitality  is  low  and  reduced  in  power,  the  nervous  currents
will  flow  feebly  to  the  different  organs,  and  life  will  languish
like  a  plant  for  want  of  water.  But  let  the  reservoirs  of
nervous  power  be  replenished,  and  then  the  vital  streams  will
flow  freely;  a  general  vigour  will  be  diffused  through  the
system,  and  the  organs,  refreshed,  will  perform  their  func-
dfons  with  ease  and  regularity.  The  primary  effect  of  mea-
merism  on  the  nervous  system  is  its  most  striking  feature,
but  its  secondary  influence  is  not  less  important  to  the  physi-
cian, by  enabling  him  to  attack  chronic  vices  of  function  by
a  general,  though  indirect,  stimulus  or  sedative,  according  to
the  object  he  has  in  view.

''I  will  first  present  the  reader  with  a  series  of  extreme  cases,
in  which  results  were  obtained,  not  procurable  by  any  other
known  means,  and  where  mesmerism  was  the  only  curative
agent  resorted  to,  so  there  can  be  no  mistake  about  the  matter*
The  effects  produced  must  have  been  caused  by  mesmerism,
or  were  purely  accidental.  But  the  processes  and  the  pheno-
mena  produced,  are  so  clearly  cause  and  effect,  that  to  doubt
the  presence  of  some  active  agent  in  the  matter  would  be  as
reasonable  as  to  deny  the  existence  of  the  wind,  with  the
wrecks  of  a  hurricane  before  our  eyes,  because  we  can't  see
it.  But  if  you  speak  of  aerolites  to  a  real  strong-minded  scep-
tic, and  tell  him  that  they  have  been  seen  to  fall  to  the  earth
— that  they  are  to  be  seen  in  certain  places — ^that  swords
have  been  made  of  them — and  men  killed  by  them,  he  will
probably  tell  you  that  he  won't  believe  it  till  he  is  killed  by
one  himself,

"  It  is  nearly  a  year  ago  since  I  said  in  my  third  report —
'  1.  I  was  certain  (if  life  is  not  altogether  a  phantasmagoria)
that  in  my  first  case,  the  muscles  of  the  whole  body  had  been
as  plastic  and  obedient  to  my  will  as  clay  in  the  hands  of  the
potter ;  and  I  felt  satisfied  that  if  the  same  state  of  things
could  be  again  brought  about,  muscular  spasms  and  muscular
contractions  would  disappear  before  this  great  solvent.

"*2.  Having  witnessed  in  this  case  the  total  extinction
of  nervous  sensibility,  it  led  me  to  conclude  that,  in  a  like
state  of  things,  nervous  pains  would  vanish  before  this  supreme
anodyne.

"*S.  I  had  seen  general  fever  and  high  local  inflammation


882  Benefiii  of  Mesmerism  in  Neuralgia,

arrested  and  subdued  in  this  patient,  by  the  mesmeric  trance,
and  that  the  artificial  inflammation  it  was  my  object  to  excite
for  the  cure  of  hydrocele^  did  not  develop  itself  while  the
mesmeric  influence  was  in  activity,  and  that  the  pulse  and
temperature  were  lowered — thence  I  inferred  that  inflamma-
tion was  probably  incompatible  with  this  state  of  the  system.'

"I  have  since  acted  upon  these  early  indications,  and
shall  now  proceed  to  show  the  effects  of  mesmerism  on  the
muscles,  nerves,  and  blood-vessels,  which  all  sympathise
however.

"  When  lately  ordered  to  join  the  army  of  the  Sutlej,  I
anticipated  finding  an  ample  field  for  mesmeric  practice
among  men  of  different  countries  and  temperaments,  and
hoped  to  find  that  our  sick  and  wounded  countrymen  would
benefit  by  this  healing  power  of  nature,  as  much  as  the
natives  of  Bengal ;  for  I  thought  it  probable  that  sickness
and  suffering  would  reduce  the  European  constitution  to  the
low  nervous  standard  of  the  Bengalee,  and  thereby  render  it
equally  susceptible  of  the  sanative  influence.  But  very  little
opportunity  was  afforded  me  of  testing  the  truth  of  this,  as
I  returned  by  d&k  the  day  after  reaching  Ferozepore^  my
services  not  being  required.

''  Accident  tlurew  the  means  of  making  a  few  experiments
into  my  way,  however,  and  the  occasion  was  not  neglected.

''  At  Loodiana,  I  was  unexpectedly  detained  to  take  on
some  thirty  wounded  men  to  Ferozepore,  a  march  of  six
days;  all,  with  two  or  three  exceptions,  had  lost  a  leg  or
arm,  but  were  convalescent,  and  only  suffered  from  painful
sensations  in  the  fingers  and  toes  of  the  lost  extremities.

"  A  few  cases  required  medical  treatment,  but  we  had  no
medicine,  and  I  was  obliged  to  fall  back  upon  nature,  and  it
was  Imckyfor  the  poor  feUowe  that  I  had  been  in  the  habit  of
constating  her.

Removal  of  agonizing  Pain,  ifc,  ifc.

''  March  7th.  D.  Canvan,  a  private  in  H.  M.'s  50th  regi-
ment :  saw  him  for  the  first  time  to-day.  He  complains  of
great  tenderness  on  pressure  all  over  the  chest,  and  especially
under  the  short  ribs  on  the  right  side ;  his  chest  feels  con-
tracted, and  he  cannot  take  a  deep  respiration.  The  knee-
joint  of  the  same  side  is  contracted,  and  the  ankle  and  toes
are  stiff  and  immovable;  there  is  great  tenderness  in  the
calf  of  the  leg,  and  he  cannot  put  his  foot  to  the  ground.

'*  He  says,  that  he  found  himself  in  this  state  on  recover-
ing from  a  delirious  fever,  three  weeks  ago,  and  in  the  list  I
received,  his  case  is  put  down  as  '  delirium  tremens.'  Believ-


by  Dr.  EsdaUe.  888

ing  him  to  be  suffering  from  a  neuralgio  affection  of  the
muscles  of  respiration  and  of  the  leg^  I  began  to  mesmerise
him,  mihout  a  word  of  eaphnation,  or  hading  him  to  expect
anything.  In  a  short  time  he  breathed  freer,  and  in  a  quarter
of  an  hour  could  take  a  deep  breath,  and  permitted  me  to
poke  his  sides  and  chest  without  it  annoying  him.  The  pro-
cess was  extended  to  the  leg,  and  without  my  touching  it,
the  knee  gradually  relaxed — ^the  ankle  and  toes  became  flexi-
ble, and  at  the  endofha\f  an  hour  the  kg  was  perfectly  straight ^
and  he  moved  it  freely  in  all  directions  without  pain.  I  shall
never  forget  the  man's  amazement  as  we  went  on.  He  kept
crying,  'How  strange  I  how  wonderful  I  how  delightful!
Oreat  God  I  it's  a  miracle  P  Till  at  last  his  excitement  and
bewilderment  became  so  ludicrous  that  I  was  obliged  to
desist  from  laughing.

'^  As  he  slept  ill,  I  desired  the  hospital  apprentice  to  try  to
put  him  to  sleep  the  same  night.  He  was  mesmerised  for
twenty  minutes  lying  on  the  coverlet;  at  the  end  of  this  time,
I  called  upon  him  loudly  by  name,  without  disturbing  him,  and
he  was  then  lifted  and  put  under  the  quilt,  sleeping  soundly.

"  March  12th.  His  cramped  position  in  the  cart  for  so
many  hours  daily,  brings  back  the  pains  in  his  leg,  but  they
can  always  be  chased  away  by  a  few  minutes  locaJ  mesmer-
ising, as  I  have  shewn  to  several  parties  of  gentlemen  I  met
on  the  road,  and  the  knee  continues  straight — ^the  chest  is
also  free.

''  I  do  not  pretend  to  say  that  this  man  was  cured,  for  his
constitution  was  ruined ;  but  I  should  be  glad  to  know  what
else  could  have  done  so  much  for  him.''

''March  11th. — G.  Adamson,  H.  M.'s  53rd  regt.,  having
seen  Canvan  put  to  sleep  yesterday,  begged  Mr.  Cox  to  do  as
much  for  Aim,  as  his  shoulder  ached  severely,  and  prevented
his  sleeping ;  his  arm  had  been  taken  off  at  the  shoulder  joint.
Mr.  Cox  complied,  without  speaking  to  me  about  it,  and  in  a
very  short  time  put  him  to  sleep.  He  told  me  this  morning
that  he  tried  all  he  could  to  keep  awake  to  watch  the  effect  on
himself,  but  he  very  soon  fell  asleep,  and  had  a  good  night.

"  Other  aching  stumps  were  soothed  by  local  mesmerising,
and  I  encouraged  the  men  to  learn  the  processes,  that  they
might  be  able  to  intruct  their  comrades  how  to  relieve  them.
Mesmerism  is  pre-eminently  the  soUAer^s  friend,^  and  the  regi-

•  Mr.  Rintoul  should  think  of  all  this  before  he  again  cruelly  inveighs
in  his  Speetat9r  against  Dr.  Esdaile's  benefits  to  the  poor  soldiers.  Mr.  Rin-
toul pretends  to  detest  flogging  soldiers,  but  would  not  hare  their  sufferings
removed  by  mesmerism. Oh,  pride ! Ob,  temper ! — J.  Elliotson.


884 Benefits  of  Mesmerism  in  Headache  and  Rheumatism^

mental  surgeon  who  confines  himself  to  laughing  at  it^  will
soon  be  punished  b;  the  distrust  of  both  officers  and  men.
These  are  the  chief  incidents  of  my  week's  mesmeric  campaign.

''April  11th.  Mr.  C.  has  come  up  from  Calcutta :  he  has
been  troubled  for  three  weeks  with  severe  rheumatism  in  his
left  knee  :  it  is  contracted,  swelled,  shining,  and  hot,  but  not
red,  and  so  tender  to  the  touch,  that  he  dreads  his  children
approaching  Aim,  lest  they  shoidd  touch  his  knee  by  accident.
He  cannot  sleep,  has  no  appetite,  and  looks  worn-out  and
languid.

''  I  mesmerised  his  knee  locally  for  a  short  time,  and  like
Canvan's,  it  gradually  became  straight.  In  twenty  minutes,  he
(Mowed  me  to  press  and  strike  his  knee  with  violence,  without
complaining,  and  then  got  up  and  walked  without  pain,  but
stiffly,  from  thickening  of  the  joint.  He  had  a  crutch  lying  at
his  side  when  I  came  in,  and  could  not  move  without  it.

''  April  12th.  Has  slept  very  well,  the  first  time  for  three
weeks:  the  swelling,  heat,  and  tenderness  of  the  knee  are  less,
and  I  again  removed  the  latter  by  a  few  minutes  local  mes-
merising.

''  April  18th.  The  gentleman  he  lives  with  has  mesmerised
him  generally  for  an  hour  daily,  but  without  entrancing  him:
he  sleeps  and  eats  well,  and  feels  his  nerves  restored.  There
is  only  some  stiflPness  of  the  joint  left,  and  he  returned  to
Calcutta  to-day.^


}f


€t


April  8th.  Two  da^s  after  my  return  from  the  army,  I

was  requested  to  see  Miss ,  aged  16. I  found  her  lying

on  a  couch,  complaining  of  excruciating  headache  on  one  side
of  her  head,  with  a  weight  on  the  top  of  it,  and  throbbing  of
the  right  temple,  so  severe  that  she  said  that  she  would  like
to  open  the  veins  with  her  scissors.  Her  eyes  were  heavy,
and  suffused  with  tears ;  she  looked  pale  and  exhausted,  had
no  appetite,  and  whatever  she  ate  turned  acid  immediately :
the  least  exercise  fatigued  her ;  coming  up  stairs  distressed  her
breathing,  and  she  heard  every  pulse  in  her  body.  Although
naturally  cheerful  and  active,  she  had  been  for  a  fortnight
dispirited  and  listless.  During  the  last  ten  days,  her  temples
had  been  leeched;  she  was  afterwards  bled  standing;  mustard
pofdtices  were  applied  to  her  feet,  and  strong  medicine  given
on  account  of  this  cerebral  congestion.  The  order  ''  repeta-
tur^'  had  been  given,  if  things  did  not  soon  mend.  These
measures  relieved  her  a  little  for  a  short  time,  but  she  has
suffered  much  daily  ever  since,  and  to-day,  says  she  is  as
bad  as  ever.


by  Dr.  EsdaUe.  885

^*  Her  mother  said,  that  she  feared  it  would  now  be  neces-
sary to  apply  the  leeches  to  the  head,  and  the  blister  to  the
neck,  which  had  been  ordered  in  the  event  of  her  not  getting
better  soon.  In  reply,  I  said,  that  there  was  a  possible  source
of  error,  which  I  should  like  to  remove  before  resorting  to
such  heroic  remedies.

^*  The  state  of  the  young  lady's  constitution  was  such  that
I  thought  it  possible  her  suflferings  arose  from  debility  of  the
nervous  system,  rather  than  from  sanguineous  congestion,
and  I  said  that  I  could  probably  decide  this  on  the  spot,  if
permitted  to  make  an  experiment.  The  parents  having  no
objection,  I  mesmerised  the  young  lady's  head  and  spine,  and
in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  all  the  pain,  weight,  and  throbbing  had
gone ;  her  usual  animation  of  look  and  manner  returned,  and
she  felt  quite  well,  she  said.  In  an  hour  after,  she  ate  her
dinner  with  appetite,  the  first  time  for  three  weeks,  and  di-
gested it  well.

"  April  I8th.  She  has  continued  perfectly  well  ever  since
her  first  mesmerising :  but  as  a  genend  stimulus  she  has  been
mesmerised  daily  for  a  few  minutes,  and,  all  her  natural  func-
tions having  been  restored :  it  was  left  ofif  to-day.

"  May  20th.  She  keeps  quite  well.  In  cases  like  this,
where  the  diagnosis  is  very  difficult,  and  accuracy  of  vital
importance,  mesmerism,  like  the  conjuring  wand  of  the  adept,
leads  the  physician  directly  and  infallibly  to  the  fountain-
head  of  the  evil,  and,  like  the  spear  of  Ithuriel,  it  in  a
moment  reduces  assumed  appearances  to  their  true  characters
and  relations.

"  With  my  former  medical  knowledge,  I  could  only  have
proved  the  correctness  of  my  suspicions  by  a  long  and  trou-
blesome course  of  treatment,  and  if  successful,  it  would  pro-
bably have  been  said,  that  the  disease  had  changed  its  nature ;
but  as  it  happened,  the  disease  existed  in  its  first  intensity,
and  the  metamorphosis  took  place  on  the  spot.''

Frightful  Convulsions. — "  June  6th,  1845.  I  was  called  at
eight  o'clock  last  night,  to  see  the  wife  of  Baboo  Essanchunder
Ohosaul,  deputy-magistrate  of  Hooghly.  I  found  her  in
dreadful  convulsions ;  she  was  speechless,  and  sufiering  firom
a  constriction  in  the  throat,  that  threatened  to  suffocate  her
every  minute,  and  she  constantly  beat  or  pointed  at  the  part.
At  one  moment  her  body  became  perfectly  rigid,  and  in  ano-
ther it  was  bent  back  like  a  bow,  till  she  rested  on  the  back
of  her  head  and  heels  only.  I  never  saw  such  convulsions  except
in  hydrophobia.  All  that  I  knew  of  the  resources  of  medicine
was  useless,  for  how  could  she  take  physic  when  she  could


886 Benefits  of  Mesmerism  in  Rheumatism  and  Nervousness,

not  take  breath  f  I  therefore  had  recourse  to  my  new  solvent
power^  and  after  nearly  an  hour's  hard  work^  I  left  her  asleep
and  catalepsed.

**  July  Ist.  There  has  been  no  return  of  the  convulsions.''

In  Dr.  Esdaile's  Mesmerism  in  India  are  some  medical  cases
not  published  anywhere  else^  and  I  therefore  extract  them.

"  Rheumatism  and  Nervousness. — Sept.  25th.  Mr.  Calder
(I  mention  his  name  at  his  own  request),  who  has  been  twenty
years  in  India,  came  to  me  to-day,  complaining  of  general
rheumatism,  nervousness,  and  debility,  lie  walks  with  great
difficulty,  with  the  help  of  a  stick,  and  cannot  ascend  a  stair.
His  nerves  are  shattered,  his  eye-sight  is  weak,  and  his  hands
tremble  when  writing ;  when  he  walks  on  smooth  ground,  he
fancies  that  it  slips  from  below  him,  and  the  effort  made  to
save  himself  nearly  throws  him  down :  of  late  he  has  not  been
able  to  drive  his  buggy,  from  a  feeling  that  it  is  impossible  for
him  to  prevent  his  horse  from  running  into  any  carriage  he
meets.  He  has  been  in  this  state  for  two  years  and  a  half-,
during  which  he  has  gone  a  tour  of  doctors,  and  swallowed  a
despensary  of  physic,  to  no  good  purpose  I  said  that  I  could
not  in  conscience  physic  him  more,  but  recommended
him  to  try  what  nature  would  do  for  him,  as,  upon  the  whole,
I  thought  his  case  adapted  for  mesmeric  treatment,  but  that
it  would  require  time  and  patience  to  do  him  any  good.  He
was  very  glad  of  any  untried  chance  of  relief,  and  I  desired
one  of  my  people  to  mesmerise  him  for  an  hour  in  bed,  every
night.

^'  Never  having  been  present  when  Mr.  Calder  was  mes-
merised, I  am  indebted  to  him  for  the  following  notes  of  his
case.

" '  On  the  25th  of  September  last,  your  native  assistants,
as  directed  by  you,  made  the  first  attempt  to  induce  the
mesmeric  sleep,  but  without  success :  the  trial  lasted  for  an
hour  and  a  hdf.

'  26th  and  27th  September,  ditto.
'  28th.  After  a  persevering  trial  for  the  same  length  of
time,  I  was  thrown  into  a  trance,  from  which  I  awoke  after
upwards  of  five  hours, — I  found  great  difficulty  in  raising  my
eyelids,  or  keeping  my  eyes  open.  I  left  the  couch  and
retired  to  bed,  and  had  my  natural  sleep  afterwards,  till  six
o'clock  next  morning.  For  a  week  afterwards,  the  efforts  to
mesmerise  me  were  repeated  for  an  hour  daily,  but  without
farther  effect  than  causing  a  sleep  of  a  few  minutes.  I  how-
ever continued  to  enjoy  my  natural  rest  at  night,  found  my


by  Dr.  Esdaile.  887

pains  abating  daily^  and  my  nerves  considerably  braced  up ;
so  much  so,  that  I  could  walk  up  and  down  stairs  wUhoui
assistance^  and  with  every  confidence  drive  out  in  a  buggy
alone,  which  I  could  not  have  attempted  for  two  years  and  a
Aa{^  previously.

'^ '  Up  to  the  17th  of  Oct.  I  was  thrown  into  a  sleep,
every  third  or  fourth  night,  for  about  two  hours ;  the  effect
of  which  you  may  judge  of,  from  my  being  able  to  walk
yesterday  morning  more  than  /otir,  and  this  morning,  more
than  six  miles.

'''(Signed)  J.  Caldeb.

"'Oct.  28th,  1845.'"

"  Rheumatism. — December  14th.  Podo,  a  Hindoo  woman,
a  beggar;  aged  40.  She  has  been  a  cripple  for  a  year  and  a
half,  from  rheumatism  in  her  shoulders  and  knees :  there  is
much  tenderness  about  the  joints,  and  her  knees  are  so  weak
that  she  cannot  sit  with  her  hams  bent,  and  is  obliged  to  obey
the  calls  of  nature  standing,  and  she  cannot  rise  from  the
ground  without  pushing  herself  up  with  her  hands:  to  be
mesmerised  an  hour  daily.

"December  16th.  Slept  half  an  hour  after  the  process
to-day.

"  December  17th.  Feels  much  better.

"  December  18th.  Slept  an  hour  to-day;  the  pain  about
the  joints  is  much  less;  she  can  rise  from  the  ground  without
aid,  and  walks  much  more  freely.

"December  19th.  Says  she  has  no  pain,  and  is  quite  well:
dismissed  cured,  at  her  own  request.'^

"  Complete  Palsy  of  all  the  left  ha\f. — August  9th.  Geeois,
a  husbandman ;  aged  22.  A  man  of  large  frame,  and  in  good
condition.  There  is  complete  palsy  of  the  whole  of  the  left
side;  the  arm  can  only  be  separated  from  the  side  for  a  few
inches.  He  has  taken  mercury  six  times,  in  four  years,  for
rheumatism :  the  paralysis  began  four  months  ago,  and  he
has  been  three  months  in  his  present  state : — ^to  be  mesmerised
for  half  an  hour  daily.

"August  18th.  He  sometimes  goes  to  sleep  during  the
process,  and  generally  sleeps  for  two  hours  after  it :  he  can
raise  the  arm  more,  and  there  is  a  little  resistance  in  the  left
side,  on  walking  between  two  persons.

"  August  20th.  He  began  to  walk  a  little  with  a  stick  to-
day.

"  August  25th.  Improves  daily ;  there  is  more  command
over  the  diseased  side ;  the  leg  is  stronger,  and  he  raises  the


888  MeMMrism  not  to  be  trifled  with.

arm  higher :  he  walked  to  the  end  of  the  room  to-day^  with
the  help  of  a  stick  only.

'^  Sept  8th.  Much  better ;  walks  across  the  compoundj
with  the  aid  of  a  stick ;  arm  also  improving.

"  Sept.  20th.  He  has  discarded  his  stick,  and  crosses  the
compound  unaided.

"  Sept  25th.  Daily  improving ;  he  can  hold  his  arm  nearly
perpendicular :  there  is  every  prospect  of  his  recovering^  and
he  was  allowed  to  go  home^  with  orders  to  his  friends  to
mesmerise  him  daily^  in  the  way  they  had  witnessed.''

Tic  Douloureux. — "  December  10th.  Horo^  a  Hindoo  wo-
man; aged  28.  She  has  suffered  for  three  years  from  tic
douloureux  in  the  right  eyebrow  and  temple^  especially  in  the
cold  weather :  it  is  very  intense  now^  and  comes  on  at  6  a.m.^
remaining  till  2  p.m. — to  be  mesmerised.  I  returned  after
an  hour^  and  found  her  asleep :  she  awoke  soon  after,  and
said  there  was  no  pain  whatever  in  the  part  now,  and  that
'  it  was  cold  as  water.'

*'  January  8th.  She  has  had  no  return  of  pain."


IX. Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with. By  Dr.  Elliotson.

When  persons  enquire  of  me  whether  mesmerism  is  not  a
dangerous  thing,  I  always  reply  that  I  am  happy  to  say  it  is.
They  look  astonished,  and  I  continue, — Because,  if  it  were  not
dangerous,  it  would  not  be  a  real  power  in  nature.  A  non-
entity, an  unreal,  though  alleged,  power  of  nature,  can  do
no  harm :  but  all  real  powers  of  nature  will  work  readily
for  evil  if  misapplied.  The  lights  in  our  houses,  the  fires
which  warm  us,  the  heat  without  which  we  could  not  exist
and  all  living  beings  would  be  a  dead  frozen  mass,  may
bum  up  our  bodies  to  a  cinder,  may  destroy  our  property,
nay,  whole  cities.  Yet  we  take  a  candle  to  go  to  bed,  and  we
light  fires  in  our  rooms.  The  knives  at  our  tables  could  be
plunged  into  our  breast  by  the  person  who  sits  next  us,  or  by
the  servant  behind  our  chair :  yet  our  tables  are  spread  daily
with  knives.  Mesmerism  may  be  abused,  like  anything  else :
like  medicine,  used  through  design  or  ignorance,  as  a  poison
or  in  too  violent  a  manner,  and  like  the  surgeon's  wounding
instruments  plunged  unskilfully  into  parts  and  perhaps  mak-
ing fatal  havoc.

The  following  cases  will  prove  the  danger  of  playing  with


By  Dr.  EUioUon.  889

mesmerism^  and  at  the  same  time  shew  to  those  who  regard
it  as  nothings  that  it  is  something.


1.  I  last  year  received  the  following  letter : —

**  Bridgwater^
''  Friday  night,  17th  January,  1845.

"  Dear  Sir, — I  have  been  frequently  urged  by  my  friend,
Mr.  King,  who  has  politely  given  me  a  note  of  introduction,
to  put  myself  in  communication  with  you  on  the  subject  of
mesmerism ;  but,  not  being  a  member  of  the  medical  pro-
fession, and  believing  that  certain  phenomena  which  appeared
to  me  new,  so  far  as  my  reading  has  extended,  might  have
been  long  known  to  yourself,  I  have  hitherto  refrained  from
trespassing  on  any  portion  of  your  time.

"  A  case  of  a  very  painful  nature  having  fallen  under  my
notice,  I  have  no  alternative  but  to  write  to  you,  which  I
now  do  with  the  concurrence,  indeed  at  the  request,  of  the
patient's  relatives,  and  of  their  medical  adviser,  Mr.  Haviland.

"  On  Wednesday  night  I  was  called  in  to  demesmerise  a
youth  of  thirteen  years  of  age,  who  had  been  thrown  into
the  mesmeric  trance  by  another  young  gentleman,  about  four
years  his  senior.  Upon  my  arrival  I  found  the  patient  appa-
rently awake,  but  in  a  frightfrd  state  of  phrensy  under  the
excitement  of  Destructiveness  and  Self-esteem.  Believing
him  to  be  in  the  state  of  sleep-waking,  I  was  desirous  of
making  counter  passes ;  but,  armed  with  the  poker,  he  defied
any  one  to  approach  him.

"  Subsequently,  he  being  secured  by  his  father  and  Mr.
Haviland,  I  made  the  demesmerising  passes,  and  got  th^
mesmeriser  to  assist  me  therein.  Under  these  he  became
more  tranquil,  and  said  that,  if  released,  he  would  ''  remain
still  and  submit  to  the  foolery.''  Immediately  afterwards  he
reclined  on  the  sofa,  and  fell  asleep,  and  awoke  in  twenty
minutes,  quite  calm  and  unconscious  of  anything  that  had
transpired  since  he  took  his  seat  to  be  mesmerised.

*^  He  slept  well  during  the  night,  and  appeared  quite
rational  yesterday  morning,  but  said  he  had  a  great  desire  to
fight  and  destroy  all  within  his  reach ;  and  he  was  obliged  to
be  watched  during  the  day  to  prevent  his  committing  actual
mischief.  In  the  evening  he  had  another  paroxysm  of  fury,
and  I  ventured  to  suggest  the  expediency  of  again  throwing
him  into  the  trance,  and  of  endeavouring  whilst  in  that  state
to  allay  the  destructive  propensity  and  to  excite  Benevolence,
Veneration,  &c. But  his  father  preferred  waiting  to  see  what

VOL.  IV.  E  E


890  MesmerUm  not  to  be  trifled  with,

relief  would  be  afforded  by  another  night's  natural  sleep.  This
morning  he  arose  more  mischievously  inclined  than  during
the  early  part  of  yesterday^  and  began  by  tearing  the  clothes
of  the  younger  children  and  breaking  a  portion  of  the  break-
fast service.  About  11  o'clock  he  again  became  quite  un-
manageable^ and  wanted  to  kill  one  of  the  servants  to  revenge
an  imaginary  annoyance.

"  He  is  this  evening  in  a  highly  excitable  state,  but  has
had  no  febrile  symptoms  throughout.  I  may  add  that  the
lad  is  naturally  of  an  amiable  and  harmless  disposition.

"  Having  submitted  the  above  portion  of  my  letter  to
Mr.  Haviland,  I  have  only  to  beg  the  favour  of  your  opinion
by  return  of  post  as  to  what  you  conceive  the  proper  course
to  adopt,  medical  or  mesmeric  treatment :  if  the  latter,  I
shall  feel  particularly  obliged  by  your  advice  as  to  the  excite-
ment of  the  antagonist  organs ;  whether  he  should  be  allowed
to  remain  in  the  sleep  or  be  awakened  out  of  it ;  and  by  any
other  suggestion  that  occurs  to  you.  Enclosed  I  beg  to  hand
you  the  customary  fee.

"  I  am,  dear  Sir,

"  Your  obedient  servant,
"  John  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.  "  Samusl  Selfe.''

Being  very  busy  on  the  day  this  letter  arrived,  and  receiv-
ing a  large  number  of  letters  that  morning,  as  soon  as,  open-
ing it,  I  saw  it  referred  to  mesmerism,  I  laid  it  aside  to  be
answered  when  I  should  be  at  leisure,  thinking  that  it  was
only  one  of  those  numerous  letters  which  I  receive  containing
enquiries  on  various  mesmeric  points,  and  therefore  not  of  a
pressing  nature.  In  the  evening  I  read  it,  and  wrote  the
following  answer : —

'^  London,
'^  Saturday  evening,  Jan.  18th.

"  Dear  Sir, — I  cannot  express  my  regret  that  you  will  not
receive  an  answer  by  return  of  post.  My  house  was  so  filled
with  patients  this  morning,  that  I  could  not  read  my  country
letters,  and  took  them  with  me  in  the  carriage :  receiving  so
many  every  day  asking  questions  about  mesmerism,  and  find-
ing your's  to  be  upon  the  subject,  I  laid  it  aside  to  read  it  at
leisure  in  the  evening,  not  suspecting  the  subject  of  its  con-
tents was  urgent;  and  I  did  not  get  home  till  after  post-time.
To-morrow  we  have  no  post,  so  that  I  can  only  send  this  before
breakfast  on  Monday,  and  I  trust  you  wiU  receive  it  in  the
afternoon.

'^  I  have  often  seen  a  state  of  delirium  of  various  kinds,


By  I>r.  Eaioison.  391

of  fatuity,  or  of  stupor,  induced  by  mesmerism,  if  this  was
overdone,  or  if  mesmerised  metals  or  water  had  been  too
freely  used,  or  if  anything  had  surprized  or  vexed  the  patient
in  the  mesmeric  state.  But  the  condition  has  always  subsided
sooner  or  later,  and  during  it  mesmerism  has  had  no  influence
whatever ;  at  least  till  it  was  subsiding  of  itself.

"  Various  mesmeric  local  effects,  such  as  closure  of  the
eyes,  or  of  the  jaws,  rigidity  of  an  extremity,  palsy  of  a
part,  and  other  such  elementary  phenomena,  occasionally
continue  when  the  general  mesmeric  state  is  over  and  the
person  is  awake.  But  they  all  subside :  and  usually  may  be
removed  by  friction,  breathing,  &c.

"  In  this  case  I  should  be  curious  to  learn  what  had  dis-
turbed the  patient,  or  whether  mesmerism  had  been  overdone,
for  such  an  excitement  of  certain  portions  of  the  brain  to
be  produced.  Either  something  of  this  kind  must  have
happened,  or  the  particular  portions  of  the  brain  must  be
remarkably  susceptible  in  the  person.

'^  You  suggested  the  proper  course.  The  patient  should
be  mesmerised  again :  and,  when  sleep  is  induced,  this  should
be  kept  up  and  deepened,  by  continued  passes,  or  by  keeping
the  points  of  the  forefingers  on  the  eyes  or  the  hand  on  the
forehead.  I  have  always  found  that,  when  patients  are  over
excited  on  waking,  the  only  plan  is  to  produce  a  deep  sleep ;
and  they  then  wake  well.  1  would  certainly  in  the  sleep  keep
the  fingers  on  Benevolence  and  Attachment.  If  in  this  pa-
tient breathing  upon  individual  cerebral  organs  takes  off  the
effect,  I  would  breathe  on  Combativeness  and  Destructive-
ness  at  the  same  time  I  touched  over  the  kind  organs.  Trans-
verse passes  with  contact  over  these  violent  organs  might  also
demesmerise  them.  But  certainly  get  the  patient  to  sleep,
and  keep  him  in  a  deep  sleep.  The  sleep  may  sometimes  be
deepened  by  touching  the  patient  with  mesmerised  gold  or
mesmerised  water.

*^  When  I  have  seen  harm  from  excess  of  mesmerism,  it
has  been  not  through  excess  of  sleep,  but  excess  of  the  active
sleep-waking  state.

"  Pray  let  me  know  all  you  can  learn  of  the  origin  of  the
case ;  and  all  the  future  progress :  and  consult  me,  every  post
if  you  please,  as  a  Jriend,  and  not  professionally.

"  I  remain,  your's  faithfully,

"  J.  Elliotson.''

On  Monday  morning,  I  received  a  second  letter,  dated
Sunday,  January  19,  and  written  the  day  before  my  letter
could  arrive,  firom  the  want  of  a  Sunday  post  in  London.

E  E  2


392  Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with.

After  stating  the  posting  of  the  first  letter^  Mr.  Selfe  con-
cludes thus : —

"  I  have  only  now  to  add^  that  there  has  been  no  allevia-
tion of  the  symptoms  since^  and  that  his  friends  as  well  as
myself  are  anxiously  waiting  your  opinion.

"lam.  Sir,

"  Your  most  obedient  servant,

"  Samuel  Selfe.
"  John  EUiotson,  Esq.,  M.D.*'

The  following  was  written  after  the  arrival  of  my  letter : —

"  Bridgwater,
"  Tuesday,  Jan.  21,  1845.

"  Dear  Sir, — ^You  will  please  to  accept  the  grateful  ac-
knowledgments of  the  friends  of  the  lad  of  whom  I  have
written,  also  my  own,  for  the  kind  interest  you  have  taken  in
his  case.  I  also  beg  to  thank  you  in  the  handsomest  manner
for  the  permission  you  have  given  me  to  address  you  other-
wise than  professionally.

"  On  Sunday  evening,  after  dispatching  my  second  letter,
it  was  thought  unadvisable  by  all  parties  here  interested  in
the  boy's  welfare  to  allow  him  to  remain  any  longer  without
trying  the  effects  of  re-mesmerisation.  I  accordingly  at-
tempted it,  and  succeeded  so  far  as  to  induce  a  state  in  which
the  eyelids  closed  without  the  power  of  the  patient's  reopen-
ing them ;  but  he  conversed  with  and  knew  all  around  him.
Being  unable  to  deepen  the  sleep,  I  breathed  upon  the  too
highly-excited  organs,  but  not  so  slowly  nor  for  so  long  a
time  as  I  am  instructed  to  do  by  your  letter  which  came  to
hand  this  morning.

"  I  also  touched  Benevolence  and  got  him  into  kindly  con-
versation. He  did  not  remain  in  this  state  quite  ten  minutes,
but  opened  his  eyes  by  rubbing  them,  and  I  am  happy  to  say
has  attempted  no  act  of  violence  since.

"  I  mesmerised  him  again  last  evening,  and  this  morning
upon  receipt  of  your  letters,  but  without  producing  a  deeper
state  of  somnolencv  than  that  above  described.

"  This  evening  Lis  mesmeric  slumber  was  deepened  a  little
by  placing  my  hand  on  his  forehead.  At  present  he  seems
more  excitable  by  pleasurable  or  painful  emotions,  but  is,  I
am  inclined  to  think,  nearly  well.

**  In  compliance  with  your  wishes  to  know  the  cause  of
this  cerebral  disturbance,  I  beg  to  inform  you  that  the  mes-
merisation  took  place  at  a  juvenile  evening  party ;  that  I  am
informed  that  some  of  his  organs  were  excited  by  contact ;


By  Dr.  EUioism.  398

that  the  lad  was  much  annoyed  by  his  companions,  surround-
ing and  tickling  him;  still  more  irritated  by  other  means
attempted  to  rouse  him^  and  exasperated  into  perfect  fury  by
having  a  quantity  of  cold  water  thrown  over  his  face  and
person^  in  which  highly-excited  state  he  raged  for  nearly  two
hours,  and  during  which  I  first  saw  him  on  the  evening  in
question.  The  late  hour  at  which  I  write  this  precludes  my
saying  more  than  that  I  am,

"  Dear  Sir,
''  Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant,

''  Samuel  Sblfe.
''  John  EUiotson,  Esq.,  M.D.''

''  London,  Jan.  28.

"  Dear  Sir, — ^With  all  my  patients  but  one,  whose  indi-
vidual cerebral  organs  I  can  excite,  slow  breathing  over  an
organ  puts  an  end  to  its  excitement,  just  as  it  does  to  rigidity
of  a  limb,  contraction  of  the  eyelids  or  of  the  muscles  of
the  lower  jaw,  or  other  local  effects.  Whether  you  succeed
in  getting  the  patient  to  sleep  or  not,  pray  breathe  slowly  and
perseveringly  over  Destructiveness  and  Combativeness  (and
Self-esteem  also  if  you  think  it  is  excited).  If  you  breathe
slowly y  the  breath  comes  out  fully  charged  with  mesmerism :
and  it  may  be  necessary  to  breathe  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour
or  more.  Should  it  happen  that  breathing  thus  does  not  de-
mesmerise,  transverse  passes,  with  contact,  over  the  respective
organs,  with  the  ends  of  the  fingers,  will  probably  succeed.
The  local  demesmerisation  I  would  employ  two  or  three  times
daily.

''When  I  wrote  *  surprized,^  I  meant  suddenly  startled,
and  might  have  added,  irritated.

"  Pray  write  again  every  day,  as  a  friend.

"  I  remain,  dear  Sir,

"  Tour's  faithfully,

'*  J.  Elliotson.**

"  Bridgwater,
'' 24th  January,  1845.

''  Dear  Sir. — In  acknowledging  the  receipt  of  your  favour
of  yesterday's  date,  I  have  much  pleasure  in  stating  that,  with
the  exception  of  a  slight  head-ache  complained  of  to-day,  our
patient  continues  quite  well.

"  He  has  been  regularly  mesmerised  and  treated  as  nearly
as  possible  in  strict  accordance  with  your  kind  instructions.
This  morning  he  was  in  the  trance  rather  more  than  an  hour,
but  both  Mr.  Haviland  and  myself  concur  in  opinion  that  any


394  Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with,

further  mesmerisation  is  now  quite  unnecessary.  Should  how-
ever any  relapse  take  place^  which  I  see  no  reason  to  fear,  I
will  immediately  apprize  you  of  it.

"  The  lateness  of  the  hour  at  which  I  wrote  on  Tuesday,
prevented  my  going  quite  so  much  into  detail  as  I  otherwise
should  have  done,  or  I  should  then  have  said,  that  dturing  the
mesmeric  sleep  of  Sunday  evening  I  breathed  only  on  Des-
tructiveness  and  Combativeness ;  the  lad  being  seated  in  a
high-backed  easy  chair,  I  could  not  readily  get  at  Self-esteem,
and  he  awoke  before  I  attempted  any  local  demesmerisation
of  that  organ.  It  is  a  singular  fact,  and  a  kind  of  negative
proof  of  the  truth  of  pAreno-mesmerism,  that  on  the  follow-
ing day  he  showed  no  disposition  to  acts  of  violence,  but  at
intervals  manifested  the  most  supercilious  contempt  of  and
haughtiness  towards  even  those  whom  he  had  been  accustomed
to  love  and  venerate.  His  parents  informed  me  that  not-
withstanding their  painful  state  of  anxiety  on  his  behalf,  his
consequential  arrogance  was  even  to  them  ludicrous  in  the
extreme.  At  his  next  mesmerisation  I  breathed  on  this  organ,
and  these  manifestations  thenceforth  ceased.

''  I  shall  feel  great  pleasure  in  complying  with  your  wishes
as  to  drawing  up  a  matter  of  fact  statement  of  the  case  for
The  Zoist;  but  as  science  will  be  much  more  effectually  served
by  your  gleaning  from  my  letters  such  portions  as  you  mav
think  of  any  importance  and  interspersing  the  account  with
comments  by  your  own  more  able  pen,  I  should  prefer  plac-
ing  this  letter  and  my  former  ones  entirely  at  70^  dismal,
and  shall  have  great  pleasure  in  answering  any  further  ques-
tions on  the  subject.

'^  I  have  ascertained  that  no  member  of  either  branch  of
his  family  have  been  subject  to  any  serious  derangement  of
the  nervous  system.

^*  Respecting  the  development  of  his  cerebral  organiza-
tion I  will  write  shortly. — Meantime,

"  I  am.  Dear  Sir,

''  Your  most  obedient  servant,

''Samuel  Selfe.
"  John  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.
"  London.''

"  Bridgewater,

"27th  January,  1846,

''  Dear  Sir, — ^Yesterday  morning  I  found  the  patient  in

good  health,  spirits,  and  temper;  but,  during  my  interview

with  his  father,  he  retired  to  the  nursery  where  he  found  the

nursemaid  improperly  correcting  one  of  the  younger  children.


By  Dr.  ElUotstm.  395

This  aroused  his  ire  and  he  gave  her  a  box  in  the  ear^  and  an
unpleasant  scuffle  ensued.  During  this  scene^  I  feel  confi-
dent that  he  was  not  under  mesmeric  excitement^  as  a  few
kind  words  pacified  him^  and  he  had  a  perfect  recollection  of
the  whole  afterwards.

"  His  father  informed  me  that  there  had  been  on  the  pre-
ceding evening  a  considerable  ebullition  of  temper  in  what
he  beUeves  to  have  been  a  state  of  mesmerism.  These  have
been  the  only  outbreaks  of  anger  since  I  first  mesmerised  him
on  Sunday  the  19th  instant^  and  his  general  health  has  been
good  with  the  exception  of  slight  head-ache  arising  probably
from  insufficient  exercise  in  the  open  air.

"  About  eight  o'clock  last  evening  I  again  called  and  seated
myself  beside  him,  taking  his  hand  in  my  own,  whilst  I  con-
versed with  the  other  parties  present  on  subjects  foreign  to
mesmerism.

"  In  a  very  few  minutes  I  found  he  was  in  a  profound  sleep,
from  which,  upon  my  addressing  him,  he  aroused  into  sleep-
waking,  talked  coherently  and  walked  to  the  easy  chair  on
the  opposite  side  of  the  room  and  then  went  into  a  deeper
slumber,  from  which  he  awoke  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.

"  This  sleep  I  should  say  was  induced  without  any  volition
of  mine.  Having  requested  his  friends  not  to  speak  to  me  in
his  presence  of  anything  relating  to  his  mesmeric  existence.
I  did  not  learn  till  afterwards  that  he  had,  earlier  in  the  even-
ing, faUen  into  the  mesmeric  sleep,  during  the  sermon  at
evening  service,  whilst  sitting  in  the  same  pew  with  and  next
to  the  young  gentleman  who  first  mesmerised  him.  Had  I
been  previously  aware  of  this  circumstance,  I  might  have
thought  that  some  involuntary  cerebral  action  of  my  own
consequent  upon  that  knowledge  had  conduced  to  the  second
result.

"  The  fiact  is  that  I  was  not  thinking  of  the  boy,  and  was
scarcely  conscious  that  I  was  retaining  his  hand  in  mine.  The
question  now  appears  to  be  whether  the  sleep  was  spontaneous

or  whether  it  was  induced  by  Master ^'s  and  my  own

proximity  and  contact.

'^The  parents  of  the  youth,  Mr.  Haviland,  and  myself,
will  feel  particularly  obliged  by  your  kind  advice,  as  to  what
further  course  you  think  proper  should  be  pursued.  Is  it  ad-
visable that  he  should  be  further  mesmerised  considering  his
high  susceptibility  of  the  influence  7  Change  of  air  and  scene
have  been  thought  of,  but  they  have  no  country  friends  who
are  not  either  ignorant  of,  or  disbelievers  in,  mesmerism,  and
therefore  highly  improper  to  take  charge  of  him  in  his  present
condition. Mr.  Haviland  wishes  me  to  suggest  whether  the


896  Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with.

shower-bath  might  not  be  beneficial^  provided  its  use  be  not
forced  on  the  boy.

"  Mr.  Haviland^  at  whose  house  I  now  write,  wishes  me
further  to  ask  whether  again  endeavouring  to  throw  him  into
deep  mesmeric  sleep  might  not  be  beneficial.  The  state  into
which  I  have  hitherto  been  able  to  bring  him  being  that  of
highly  active  sleep- waking  only^  or  at  least  very  little  slumber
of  a  deeper  character.

''Mr.  Haviland  also  desires  me  to  say,  that  he  should  have
been  most  happy  to  have  entered  into  correspondence  with
you  on  the  subject  had  the  boy's  general  health  been  at  all
impaired  by  the  mesmeric  influence ;  but,  that  happily  not
having  been  the  case,  and  as  he  has  not  given  his  time  to
the  subject  of  mesmerism,  he  prefers  that  I  should  continue
to  communicate  with  you  on  the  matter.  At  the  same  time
he  will  feel  happy  to  give  you  any  medical  information  that
you  may  require.

''  I  am  again  requested  to  return  you  thanks  on  behalf  of
the  lad's  firiends,  and  to  express  their  regret  that  you  should
again  be  troubled  on  their  account.

''  I  beg  to  remain,  dear  Sir,

''  Your  obedient  servant.
''  John  EUiotson,  Esq.,  M.D.  ''  Samuel  Selfe.''

''  London,  January  28th.

''  Dear  Sir, — ^This  great  susceptibility  of  mesmerism  will
be  kept  up  by  mesmerising  him ;  still  it  would  not  be  right
for  him  to  be  away  from  your  superintendence.  Again  the
production  of  the  deepest  sleep  possible  in  the  case  of  mes-
merism will  be  the  best  means  of  subduing  the  excitability
of  the  cerebral  organs  which  have  been  excited,  if  they  are
well  breathed  upon  in  the  mesmeric  state.  I  think  I  should
advise  your  breathing  over  the  organs  of  Self-esteem,  and  the
two  organs  of  Destructiveness  well  twice  a  day,  in  his  waking
state,  without  attempting  to  mesmerise  him.  If  he  becomes
generally  mesmerised  by  this  breathing,  it  cannot  be  helped ;
I  would  breathe  on.  You  understand  that  the  only  objection
to  the  mesmeric  general  effect,  in  my  view,  is  the  inconvenient
excess  of  mesmeric  susceptibility  which  exists.

''  What  you  say  respecting  the  possibility  of  unconscious
volition  delights  me.

''  You  are  evidently  one  of  those  few  who  understand  the
true  philosophy  of  the  cerebral  functions  and  of  mesmerism.

''  I  remain,  dear  Sir,

"  Yours  very  truly,

''J.  Elliotson.


By  Dr.  ElHotsm.  S97

"  Pray  write  again.

"  My  best  thanks  and  compliments  to  Mr.  Haviland.
'^  I  should  approve  of  the  shower-bath,  if  the  boy  will  not
be  frightened  by  it.''


"  Bridgwater,
"4th  February,  1845.


''Dear  Sir, — All  extraordinary  cerebral  action  in  the
waking  state  had  ceased  prior  to  my  last  writing,  as  had  also
any  other  than  pleasurable  sporUaneoua  excitement  in  the
mesmeric  sleep.  The  breathing  on  the  organs  I  have  never-
theless continued  up  to  last  Saturday  morning,  when  the  boy
was  taken  out  of  town,  and  is  under  the  judicious  care  of  a
lady  who  has  seen,  and  read  considerably  of,  mesmerism;  and
I  am  glad  to  learn  by  a  friend  who  saw  him  this  morning,
that  he  has  not  fallen  into  the  trance  since  leaving  this  place.

''  On  the  preceding  Wednesday,  his  evening's  sleep-waking
I  deepened  by  breathing,  placing  my  hand  on  his  forehead,
&c.,  and  he  remained  in  a  profound  slumber  nearly  eight
hours :  since  that  the  mesmeric  susceptibility  has  decreased,
he  having  but  a  very  short  sleep  on  the  following  day,  and  no-
thing beyond  an  occasional  drowsiness  since.  I  should  have
written  earlier,  but  have  been  unwilling  to  trespass  on  your
valuable  time  by  giving  minute  details  of  daily  symptoms.

"  It  will,  I  am  sure,  be  gratifying  to  you  to  learn  that
your  kind  advice  in  the  case  has  probably  saved  the  poor  boy
from  the  dreadful  consequences  attendant  upon  the  '  hone-
whip^  straighi'foaistcoat,  and  iolitary  confinement  to  a  spare
room/  which  have  been  strongly  recommended  as  means  to
' bring  him  to  his  senses*^

''Trusting  that  I  shall  not  have  again  to  trouble  you  in
this  matter,  though  I  shall  take  the  liberty  of  again  address-
ing you  on  others  shortly,

"  I  remain,  dear  Sir,

"  Your  most  obedient  servant,

"Samuel  Sslf£.
"  John  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.*'

"  Bridgwater,  March  12th,  1846.
"  My  dear  Sir, — In  reply  to  your  kind  enquiries  of  yes-
terday's date,  it  affords  me  much  gratification  to  say  that  the
lad's  general  health  continues  good ;  that  his  cerebral  func-
tions are  unimpaired;  and  that  he  has  not  fallen  into  the
mesmeric  slumber  since  Sunday  the  9th  of  February.

fThe  plan  proposed  for  sleep-wakers  by  a  surgical  teacher  at  Gay's
Hospital.  Vol.  IV.,  p.  165,  Zoiai.


398  Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  wUh.

"  About  the  24tli  or  25th  of  January,  I  ventured  to  beg
the  favour  that  you  would  yourself  have  the  kindness  to  pre-
pare a  statement  of  the  case  for  Tke  Zaist  from  my  letters ;
this,  from  your  after  silence  on  that  head^  I  presumed  you
purposed  doing,  and  in  consequence  I  took  no  written  notes
of  the  case.  I  have  not  even  copies  of  my  letters  to  yourself,
so  that,  were  I  now  to  attempt  to  give  a  detailed  account  from
memory,  I  should  be  very  inaccurate,  at  least  as  to  dates.
If  you  particularly  wish  that  the  account  should  be  given  by
me  direct,  and  you  will  favour  me  with  a  sight  of  my  own
letters,  I  will  prepare  it  by  return  of  post,  but  shall  feel  par-
ticularly grateful  if  you  will  kindly  use  your  own  pen.

'^  Having  been  firom  home  till  a  late  hour  this  evening,  I
have  but  time  to  subscribe  myself,  my  dear  Sir,

"  Your  most  obedient  servant,

"  Samuel  Selfb.

"  John  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.,
"  London.*'


"  Bridgwater,
''  March  16th,  1845.

"  My  dear  Sir, — ^I  believe  I  have  from  time  to  time  in-
formed you  of  nearly  all  the  particulars  of  this  case  in  which  I
thought  you  will  feel  the  slightest  interest.  I  did,  however,
omit  to  mention,  that  one  evening,  whilst  in  the  mesmeric
state,  the  boy  commenced  singing  Jim  Crow.  I  then  placed
my  finger  and  thumb  on  the  two  organs  of  Tune,  and  he  sang
on  without  any  break  or  hesitation,  though  rather  better  than
before.  Upon  taking  off  my  fingers,  he  discontinued  singing
instantly,  but  resumed  again  in  a  few  seconds  from  what  I
call  spontaneous  sleep-waking  cerebral  excitement.  I  then
placed  my  finger  on  Veneration,  and  he  immediately  began
the  evening  hymn.  This  is  nothing  uncommon,  but  it  was
very  extraordinary  to  observe  the  manner  in  which  he  resumed
the  broken  air  of  the  two  airs,  recommencing  at  the  very
sound  of  the  letter  at  which  he  was  interrupted:  thus, — *  Jim
Crow's  sis' — '  Forgive  me.  Lord,  for* — '  ster  going  to  a  ball.'
Afterwards  placing  my  finger  again  on  Veneration,  he  re-
sumed the  devotional  song;  I  interrupted  him  by  saying,
'  No,  no ;  finish  the  other.'  '  What  other  V  '  Why  the  comic
song  which  you  were  just  singing.'  '  Pve  been  singing  no  comic
song*  *  Yes,  you  have — Jim  Crow.'  '  That  I  am  certain  I
have  not*

"  From  this  and  some  more  extraordinary  exhibitions  of
the  same  nature  in  others  of  my  patients,  it  would  appear  that


By  Dr.  EUiotson.  899

each  cerebral  organ  is  or  has  its  own  storehouse  of  memory.
I  feel  assured,  however,  that  I  am  only  troubling  you  with
the  recital  of  mesmeric  phenomena  with  which  you  have  been
long  acquainted ;  but  as  I  have  not  read  anything  bearing  on
this  point,  I  just  mention  it.

''  If  I  could  give  you  anything  new,  it  would  afford  me
very  great  pleasure.  There  are  very  few  I  know  who  take
greater  interest  in  these  wonderful  phenomena  than  they
would  in  an  exhibition  of  dancing  puppies.

**  Your  most  obedient  servant,

''Samvel  Selfe.
"  John  EUiotson,  Esq.,  M.D.''

The  origin  of  the  case  was  found  to  be  this.  A  number  of
children,  the  eldest  not  above  thirteen  years  of  age,  were
assembled  on  the  evening  of  January  17th,  1845,  for  merry-
making. A  conversation  took  place  upon  mesmerism  and
phrenology,  and  it  ended  in  a  proposal  to  mesmerise  one  of
them.  Accordingly  the  boy  in  question  took  a  seat  upon  the
sofa,  while  another  made  passes  before  him,  and  they  both
stared  at  each  other,  in  the  midst  of  a  good  deal  of  laughing
and  other  noise  in  the  room.  He  feU,  it  would  appear,  into
sleep-waking,  though  his  eyes  were  open,  and  was  led  from
the  noisy  party  to  the  landing-place.  There  the  passes  were
continued,  as  the  other  boy  did  not  know  the  effect  had
come.  But  that  it  had  come,  appears  from  the  patient  never
having  had  the  least  recollection  of  anything  which  took
place  after  he  sat  on  the  sofa  and  was  stared  at  and  manipu-
lated. After  the  passes  had  been  made  on  the  landing-place
for  ten  minutes,  the  operator  closed  his  eyes,  and  so  they
remained  for  a  few  minutes,  till  the  house-beU  rang,  when
they  opened  and  he  said  that  he  was  not  more  sleepy  than
before  mesmerism  was  begun.  They  then  returned  into  the
room ;  he  seated  himself  again  upon  the  sofa,  and,  the  ope-
rator's hand  being  laid  upon  his  head,  his  eyes  gradually
closed  and  he  went  to  sleep.

''  His  brothers  and  sisters  began  tickling  him,  as  they  said
he  was  shamming  and  that  it  would  be  sure  to  make  him  laugh
as  he  was  very  ticklish.  But,  instead  of  their  making  him
laugh,  he  only  slightly  endeavoured  to  get  away  from  them.
He  lay  quietly  on  the  sofa  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
during  which  time  his  mesmeriser  conversed  with  him  and
excited  Self-esteem,  when  he  began  to  rub  his  eyes  and
declared  he  would  do  it  as  they  pained  him  very  much.  His
operator  then  endeavoured  to  awake  him  by  blowing  in  his
eyes  and  making  a  current  of  air  before  his  face  with  his


400  Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with.

handkerchief^  when  he  opened  his  eyes  and  stood  up  ap-
parently angry  with  his  operator  for  touching  him.  They
then  threw  cold  water  in  his  face  to  wake  him.  But  this  only
exasperated  him  the  more^  and  he  armed  himself  with  the
poker^  and  endeavoured  to  strike  with  it^  but  did  not^  as  his
operator  held  him  fast  for  a  minute  until  there  was  a  chance
of  escaping;  andj  when  no  longer  held^  he  was  quite  frantic^
marching  up  and  down  the  room  for  about  two  hours^  occa-
sionally sitting  or  standing  still.''

The  mischief  here  arose  from  measures  being  taken  to
waken  him  while  Pride  was  in  a  high  state  of  excitement :
every  attempt  was  a  liberty  taken  with  him  and  enraged  him.
He  should  have  been  let  alone  for  the  artificial  excitement  to
subside;  or  the  organs  of  Self-esteem  demesmerised  by  breath-
ing or  transverse  passes  over  them;  or  the  opposing  organs  of
Benevolence,  Attachment,  or  Veneration  excited;  or  both
latter  measures  have  been  employed.

The  proper  administration  of  mesmerism  restored  the  boy
to  good  health,  though  nearly  half  the  wise  people  of  the
place  declared  that  he  would  die,  and  an  equal  number  pre-
dicted that  he  must  be  an  inmate  in  a  lunatic  asylum  for  life.
It  is  wonderful  that  they  do  not.  declare  he  is  at  present  in  a
lunatic  asylum,  as  so  many  medical  men  to  this  day,  in  pure
invention,  assure  their  patients  who  ask  their  opinion  of  mes-
merism that  the  Okeys  are.

The  family  surgeon  once  gave  a  little  aperient  medicine
and  put  a  few  leeches  behind  the  ears;  but  honorably  de-
clared that  the  medicine  did  no  good  whatever,  and  that  the
leeches  were  more  injurious  than  otherwise,  since  they  caused
great  annoyance  and  angry  excitement.


2.  The  following  is  a  more  recent  case : —

"  Plymouth.

''August  9th,  1846.

"  My  dear  Sir, — I  think  you  will  be  interested  in  the

following  particulars  of  a  case  which  has  excited  considerable

interest  in  this  town,  and  which  in  its  earlier  stages  brought

no  little  odium  upon  mesmerism. If  you  shoidd  think  it

worthy  of  publication  in  The  Zoist,  it  is  quite  at  your  service.

"  I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  with  much  respect,

"  Yours  very  faithfully,

"  Edmund  Fry.
"  To  Dr.  Elliotson."


By  Dr.  EUiotsan.  401

"  A  Christmas  party  had  assembled  in  the  winter  of  1844^
at  the  house  of  Mr.  Wootton,  residing  in  Woolster  Street^
Plymouth ;  and  after  tea  the  subject  of  mesmerism  (which  was
at  that  time  exciting  great  attention  in  the  town)  was  intro-
ducedy  and  it  was  proposed  that  some  young  ladies  of-the  party
should^  if  possible,  be  placed  under  the  influence.  This  was
strongly  objected  to  by  the  lady  of  the  house,  who  had  never
seen  any  experiments  tried,  but  who  had  a  great  dread  of  it
from  newspaper  reports  which  she  had  read.  Howeyer,  during
her  temporary  absence  from  the  room,  the  master  of  a  vessel
from  Scotland,  who  was  present,  induced  two  of  her  daugh-
ters to  allow  him  to  try  to  mesmerise  them.  He  knew  how
to  make  the  passes,  but  neither  he  nor  any  person  present
had  had  any  practical  experience  in  the  matter.  He  succeeded
however  in  inducing  the  mesmeric  sleep,  from  which  the
elder  sister  was  speedily  awakened;  but  the  younger.  Miss
Mary  Wootton,  aged  about  18  years,  having  passed  more
deeply  under  the  influence,  exhibited  some  of  the  usual
phenomena,  such  as  community  of  taste,  the  phrenological
developments,  &;c.  The  company  were  highly  diverted  for  a
while.  But,  when  the  mesmeriser  wished  to  dispel  the  influence,
he  found  himself  baffled ;  and,  not  succeeding  immediately  in
his  object,  he  became  alarmed  and  excited.  This  produced
corresponding  excitement  in  his  subject;  and,  as  his  presence
of  mind  became  entirely  destroyed,  the  poor  girl's  situation
became  more  and  more  alarming,  untU  convulsive  action
ensued  and  the  mesmeriser  was  totally  at  a  loss  what  mea-
sures to  adopt.  He  very  unwisely  allowed  other  persons  to
interfere,  and  handle  his  patient;  and  she  was  at  length
carried  to  bed  in  a  most  critical  condition.  She  became
gradually  more  composed,  and  after  several  hours  fell  into  a
lethargic  state,  in  which  she  remained  until  the  next  day ;
and  when  she  woke,  a  kind  of  stupor  appeared  to  have  settled
upon  her,  which  she  could  not  shake  off,  and  which  in  a  few
days  began  seriously  to  affect  her  general  health  and  spirits.
From  being  a  remarkably  healthy,  active,  and  cheerful  girl,
she  became  moody,  listless  and  indisposed  for  any  exertion :
her  appetite  failed,  and  her  sleep  was  much  disturbed.  Her
system  became  more  and  more  disordered,  until,  at  the  end
of  a  few  weeks,  she  became  subject  to  fits  of  a  very  violent
and  distressing  character.  It  should  be  remarked,  that  nei-
ther she  nor  any  member  of  the  family,  either  on  her  father's
or  mother's  side,  had  been  subject  to  fits  of  any  description.
She  was  now  placed  under  the  care  of  a  physician,  who  pre-
scribed various  remedies  for  her,  but  without  avail.  The  fits
continued  with  occasional  short  intervals  of  repose  for  eighteen


402  Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with.

months^  and  during  the  attacks  it  required  several  men  to
hold  her.  Her  screams  were  alarming  to  the  whole  neigh-
bourhood^  and  she  would  destroy  everything  that  came  within
her  reach.  Some  friends  suggested  to  her  parents  that  the
case  should  be  mentioned  to  an  experienced  mesmerist,  and
his  advice  taken  as  to  the  possibility  of  mesmerism  being
beneficially  employed  for  her  restoration.  This  was  mentioned
to  the  physician,  who  at  once  put  a  negative  upon  it,  saying,
that  he  thought  mesmerism  had  done  mischief  enough  already,
and  that  unless  they  wished  to  destroy  her  Ufe  at  once,  they
must  never  allow  her  to  be  mesmerised  again.  Acting  on
this  advice,  the  poor  girl  was  allowed  to  drag  on  a  miserable
existence  for  eighteen  months,  at  the  end  of  which  period  the
fits  had  increased  in  frequency  and  violence,  and  her  friends
had  begun  to  despair  of  her  recovery ;  when,  as  a  last  resource,
they  resolved  to  take  the  opinion  of  some  one  well  acquainted
with  mesmerism,  and  in  the  month  of  May,  18^,  they
consulted  Mr.  E.  Fry,  residing  in  Plymouth,  who  immedi-
ately expressed  his  conviction  that  mesmerism  might  be  em-
ployed most  beneficially,  and  that  no  other  remedy  was  likely
to  reach  the  peculiar  exigencies  of  the  case.  She  had  had
three  very  bad  fits  during  the  week  preceding  Mr.  Fry's  first
visit ;  and  on  Sunday,  the  24th  of  May,  he  mesmerised  her
for  the  first  time.  She  did  not  pass  into  the  deep  mesmeric
sleep,  but  described  certain  sensations  which  showed  that  a
beneficial  efl^ect  had  been  produced.  She  slept  well,  and  passed
a  quiet  and  comfortable  week.  She  was  not  mesmerised  again
till  the  following  Sunday  evening,  when  the  same  effects
were  produced,  and  the  same  results  followed.  She  was
mesmerised  every  Sunday  evening  (or  five  consecutive  weeks,
during  which  period  she  had  no  fit,  and  her  general  health
began  steadily  to  improve:  sleep  regular  and  sound,  and
appetite  good.  On  the  sixth  Sunday,  Mr.  Fry  saw  his  patient,
but  did  not  mesmerise  her.  She  did  not  sleep  well  that
night,  and  felt  restless  for  a  day  or  two,  but  had  no  fit.  On
the  seventh  Sunday  she  was  mesmerised  as  usual,  and  con-
tinued steadily  to  improve.  On  the  eighth  Sunday,  Mr.  Fry
did  not  call  to  see  her;  she  expected  him  as  usual,  and  missed
her  accustomed  stance  very  much ;  had  no  sleep  throughout
the  night,  and  was  very  uneasy  the  next  morning.  In  the
course  of  the  Monday,  some  circumstance  in  the  family
occurred  to  excite  her,  and  a  fit  was  the  result.  She  was
not  well  throughout  the  week ;  but,  after  being  mesmerised
again  the  following  Sunday,  she  speedily  regained  her  lost
ground,  and  up  to  the  present  time  has  had  no  further  symp-
tom of  a  fit. Her  health  continues  to  improve. She  has


By  Dr.  Elliotson.  403

regained  her  former  cheerfulness  and  activity^  and  both  herself
and  her  friends  consider  her  distressing  malady  now  completely
removed.  They  attribute  her  recovery  entirely  to  the  proper
application  of  mesmerism^  and  only  regret  that  the  pryudice
of  a  MEDICAL  PRACTITIONER  ahould  hove  prevented  their  deriv-
ing this  benefit  at  a  much  earlier  stage  of  the  case.

"  This  case  should  be  a  warning  of  the  danger  of  ignorant
and  inexperienced  persons  trifling  with  such  a  powerful  agent
as  mesmerism.  It  should  never  be  treated  as  a  matter  otfim.
It  is  no  subject  for  the  mere  idle  amusement  of  a  party;  but
should  be  confined  to  those  whose  experience  enables  them
properly  to  apply  its  powers,  and  to  explain  its  phenomena.^'

Here  again  was  the  usual  medical  game : — Injury  to  mes-
merism by  any  means.  The  medical  practitioner  knew
nothing  of  mesLrism,  and  yet  was  conscientious  enough  to
give  an  opinion ;  and  he  humanely  preferred  persevering  in
his  useless,  perhaps  injurious  measures,  to  allowing  the  poor
young  lady  the  benefits  of  mesmerism.  A  common  trick,
when  mesmerism  is  proposed  to  medical  men  for  any  obstinate
case  in  which  their  physic  has  been  fruitless,  is  to  say  that
it  is  a  very  dangerous  thing,  and,  that  though  no  ill  effects  may
appear  at  first,  they  may  come  in  after  life : — a  mere  inven-
tion, and,  were  this  the  fact,  they  have  had  no  opportunity
yet  of  ascertaining  it.  When  vaccination  was  first  recom-
mended, medical  men  asserted  that  the  most  dreadful  diseases
would  follow  its  employment,  if  not  at  once,  at  a  distant
period.  Within  these  few  months  a  snrgeon  in  Oxford-
shire told  the  mother  of  a  patient  of  mine  who  was  perma-
nently cured  of  fits  some  years  ago  by  mesmerism,  that
the  Okeys  were  then  confined  in  a  lunatic  asylum  through
having  been  mesmerised.  A  physician  lately  reported  that  a
highly  respectable  patient,  who  was  greatly  afflicted,  but  was
at  length  successfully  mesmerised  by  two  gentlemen,  wi^  kept
by  them.  They  traced  the  report  to  him,  and  he  denied  it :
I  remember  a  medical  student  who  reported  for  the  Lancet  at
a  London  hospital,  and  is  now  a  very  money-getting  pure
surgeon,  wrote  a  report  o£Pensive  to  the  surgical  staff,  who
taxed  him  with  it ;  when  asked  by  some  friends  some  time
afterwards  how  he  got  off,  he  laughed  and  replied,  *'  Oh  by
telling  a  good  lie  to  be  sure :  there  was  no  other  way.''

The  same  villany  was  faintly  attempted  in  reference  to
the  sister  Okeys  and  myself.  But  bad  medical  men  know
my  spirit  too  well  to  venture  far  against  me,  and  the  world
knows  that  I  have  always  regarded  mesmerism  as  a  most  holy
and  sacred  thing,  and  declared  that,  if  high  morality  is  de-


404  Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with.

manded  in  every  medical  practitioner^  the  very  highest,  even
to  the  purity  of  brothers  and  sisters,  is  demanded  in  every
mesmeriser,  and  have  endeavoured  to  impress  upon  all  persons
that  the  mesmeriser's  occupation  is  the  exercise  of  benevo-
lence and  that  he  is  in  the  holiest  trust.

The  late  Dr.  Johnson  spoke  of  females  who  were  mesmerised
as  ^'flatulent,  hysterical,  impudent  baggages/^*  and  of  those  who
believed  in  the  reality  of  the  cures  of  the  virtuous  Okeys  as
persons  who  **  will  believe  that  any  confident  strumpet  may
get  permission  from  heaven  to  exhibit  for  half-a-crown  a  head
vision  with  her  fingers  or  toes.''**  A  few  years  afterwards
the  two  sisters  might  read  in  the  newspapers  what  would  have
been  ample  satisfaction  to  the  most  revengeful  feelings,
though  I  trust  they  felt  none,  but  sincerely  grieved  for  his
parental  anguish.


3.  A  third  case  of  mischief  from  persons  ignorant  of  mes-
merism playing  with  it  has  just  come  to  my  knowledge.  I
advised  mesmerism  in  the  case  of  a  young  lady.  The  medical
attendant  has  a  superior  head,  and  was  willing  to  mesmerise
her.  He  did  so  most  diligently,  and  induced  sleep-waking,
mesmeric  attachment  to  the  mesmeriser  and  dread  of  others,
various  other  phenomena,  and  among  them  the  common  form
of  clairvoyance  in  which  patients  foresee  the  course  of  their
disease  and  direct  the  treatment.  She  was  greatly  improved ;
when  an  hospital  physician,  who  had  in  vain  attended  her,
wished  to  see  her  in  her  mesmeric  state.  She  was  very  pro-
perly consulted;  but  shrunk  from  the  interview  and  said  it
would  do  her  harm.  However,  the  physician  went  to  the
house,  and  with  an  assistant-physician  and  an  assistant-
surgeon  of  his  hospital,  both  strangers  to  her.  The  operator
was  urged  by  the  father  to  entreat  her  to  see  the  parties.
She  at  length  brought  herself  to  consent  to  see  the  physician,
but  declared  that  if  he  took  the  two  others  with  him,  the
effect  would  be  serious, — that  all  the  ground  gained  in  the
treatment  of  her  disease  would  be  lost,  that  her  state  would
be  frightful,  and  her  operator  would  lose  all  power  over  her
for  a  length  of  time.  In  spite  of  all  this,  in  the  pride  and
obstinacy  of  ignorance,  the  physician  insisted  upon  going  to
her  with  his  friends,  and,  not  contented  with  this,  took  with
him  a  magnet  to  make  some  of  Beichenbach's  experiments
upon  her,  laughing  no  doubt  at  the  idea  of  a  magnet  terrify-
ing or  producing  any  strong  effects  upon  a  person  in  so

g  Mtd.  Chir.  Review,  Oct.  1838,  p  635.  h  p.  96.


Use  of  Mesmerism  during  and  after  Labour. 405

unreal  and  fanciful  a  state  as  the  mesmeric.  So  in  he
marched  with  his  magnet  and  two  friends.  The  effect  was,
as  all  mesmerists  can  well  conceive,  terrible.  She  became
frantic,  has  been  frantic,  absolutely  maniacal,  every  day  since,
and  not  only  violent  and  dangerous,  but  agonized :  and,  though
weeks  have  now  passed,  there  is  no  improvement,  and  the
kind,  good,  persevering  mesmeriser  has  not  yet  gained  any
power  over  her.  No  doubt  he  will  recover  his  influence :  but
the  affair  is  most  lamentable,  and,  though  the  physician  is
very  sorry,  he  seems,  in  his  ignorance  of  the  whole  subject,
to  have  sagacious  doubts  as  to  the  real  nature  of  the  case.

John  Elliotson.


X. Benefit  of  Mesmerism  during  and  after  Labour. By
Mr.  Chandler,  Dr.  Esdaile,  and  Mr.  Pabkeb.

Mrs.  Fatne  (late  Holdsworth,  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  p.  189.)  set.
89,  pregnant  with  her  seventh  child,  having  for  a  long  time
been  very  susceptible  of  mesmerism,  I  determined,  with  her
consent,  to  attempt  delivery  during  the  mesmeric  coma,  or
rather  in  the  state  of  sleep- waking.  She  has  always  had  most
protracted  labours,  and  was  lingering  for  many  days  with
her  last  child.

Aug.  4th,  1846.  I  was  called  to  attend  her  at  half-past  1  a.m.
I  found  the  pains  quick,  and  rather  severe,  but  not  of  a
bearing  character.  After  remaining  with  her  a  few  minutes,
she  was  placed  on  the  bed,  and  I  mesmerised  her,  as  usual,
with  two  slow  passes.  The  spasmodic  action  went  on  as  before,
but  she  ceased  complaining ;  and,  on  asking  her  if  she  felt
pain,  she  said  (answering  my  whisper  as  usual)  no ;  but  com-
plained of  the  heat  (the  weather  being  very  hot)  and  thirst.
After  an  hour  and  a  half  I  awoke  her,  to  allow  her  to  change
her  position  and  take  some  drink ; — ^when  she  immediately
began  to  complain  of  pain. — I  put  her  to  sleep  again,  and,
finding  that  labour  was  not  advancing,  left  her  for  two  hours ;
at  the  end  of  which  time,  as  the  pains  had  nearly  ceased,  I
awoke  her  to  relieve  her  f^om  her  cramped  position,  and  left
her  awake,  finding  the  labour  was  likely  to  be  very  lingering.
She  continued  much  in  the  same  state,  with  occasional
slight  pains,  until  the  following  Thursday,  Aug.  6th,  when
I  was  summoned,  at  10  a.m.  !^nding  her  in  tolerably  active
labour,  I  placed  her  on  the  bed  and  mesmerised  her;  the
action  continued  very  strong,  and  labour  advanced  slowly  until
1,  when  there  was  again  an  almost  entire  cessation ;  so  that
I  deemed  it  advisable  to  awake  her,  fearing  it  would  be  yet

VOL.  IV.  p  p


406  Uie  of  Mesmerism  during  and  qfter  Labour,

many  hours. During  the  time  the  labour  continued^  the
bearing  down  was  very  heavy^  and  the  patient  appeared  to  be
suffering  the  usual  labour  pains;  but  she  continu^  to  declare,
in  answer  to  my  inquiries,  that  she  felt  no  pain. This  was
just  what  I  expected. I  had  indeed  expressed  an  opinion  to
several  persons,  who  doubted  whether  labour  would  go  on,^
that  she  would  appear  to  be  bearing  her  labour  very  patiently.
She  constantly  complained  of  heat  and  thirst,  and  said  once
or  twice  she  felt  ill,  but  could  not  tell  what  was  the  matter.
At  half-past  6,  I  was  again  sent  for,  and,  on  my  arrival,  found
her  in  strong  labour. I  immediately  placed  her  under  the
mesmeric  influence. Labour  appeared  still  to  advance,  but
slowly;  and  at  half-past  7,  the  distended  vesica  appearing
to  prevent  the  descent  of  the  head,  I  drew  off  the  fluid,  and
the  labour  terminated  very  favourably  both  to  mother  and
child  at  five  minutes  before  8,  without  the  former  being  in  the
slightest  degree  conscious  of  the  birth  of  the  child. I  left  her
in  the  mesmeric  sleep  an  hour  and  a  half,  and  then  awoke  her
to  be  got  comfortably  into  bed,  and  had  great  difficulty  in
persuading  her  that  she  was  delivered :  indeed,  several  times
during  the  night  she  awoke  (from  her  natural  sleep)  with
slight  after-pains,  and  expressed  to  her  nurse  a  wish  that  it
might  soon  be  over,  quite  forgetting,  for  the  time,  that  the
child  was  born,  and  imagining  the  pains  were  those  of  labour.
I  did  not  leave  her  mesmerised  during  the  night,  as  the  after-
pains  were  not  severe,  and  she  expressed  a  wish  to  have  the
power  of  moving. Though  in  her  former  labours  always  a
severe  sufferer  from  after-pains,  she  remained  tolerably  free
from  them  on  this occasion  until  28  hours  after  delivery,
when  they  came  on  with  great  severity ;  so  much  so,  that  I
was  sent  for  at  half-past  12  at  night,  and  found  her  com-
plaining very  loudly. I  immediately  mesmerised  her,  and,
her  complaints  ceased,^  though  the  appearance  of  pains  con-
tinued, but  became  gradually  weaker  and  less  frequent. On
awaking  her,  about  an  hour  after,  she  still  complained ;  and,
as  there  was  much  tenderness  of  the  abdomen,  I  thought  it
advisable  to  give  her  25  drops  of  laudanum. I  then  mes-
merised her  again,  and  left  her  in  the  sleep  seven  hours ;  at
the  end  of  which  time  I  awoke  her  quite  easy  and  refreshed.
During  the  sleep, she several times  conversed  with  her
attendant,  apparently  knowing  she  was  mesmerised— (as  she
always  has  done  in  her  sleep-waking  state),  and  telling  her  to
get  some  gruel  ready  against  my  waking  her :  she  also  sang

h  Would  the  Medical  and  Chirureical  Society  ha?e  said  that  she  was
indifferent  to  paio,  or  had  strong  resolution  not  to  show  it,  and  was  an  im-
postor 7^Zoist.


by  Mr.  Chandler.  4fn

seyeral  times^  and  appeared  much  excited.  This  was  of  course
to  be  attributed  to  the  laudanum^  which  I  might  as  well  have
omitted^  as  she  had  afterwards  no  recollection  of  suffering
pain  more  than  a  few  minutes^  and  this  was  evidently  before  I
arrived  and  mesmerised  her.  The  time  from  half-past  12  to
half-past  7  was  quite  lost  to  her.

A  medical  friend  who  was  present  during  a  part  of  the
time,  and  who  saw  the  patient  to  all  appearance  suffering  the
usual  pangs  of  labour^  observed  that  the  tooth-drawing  during
the  mesmeric  sleep  was,  to  his  mind,  more  conclusive  than
what  he  saw,  because  the  patients  did  not  show  any  signs  of
pain  whilst  having  their  teeth  extracted,  and  the  woman  showed
all  the  usual  external  signs  of  labour ;  and  he  consequently
contended  that  we  had  only  the  woman's  own  word  to  prove
that  she  felt  no  pain.^  Permit  me  to  point  out  to  many  who
may  reason  in  the  same  way,  that  the  cases  are  not  parallel.

The  tooth  is  extracted  by  a  second  person,  and  does  not
require  any  muscular  effort  of  the  patient  to  get  rid  of  it ;
whereas  the  expulsion  of  a  child  from  the  uterus  is  not  ac-
complished without  immense  muscular  action  of  the  whole
body,  which  action  is  however  perfectly  involuntary,  and  the
woman  has  in  her  ordinary  state,  little  or  no  control  over  it ;
indeed  no  more  than  she  has  over  the  muscles  engaged  in
respiration;  and,  as  respiration  always  goes  on  during  mesmeric
sleep,  I  reasoned  that  labour  would  do  the  same.  I  was
right  in  my  conjecture ;  if  it  had  not  been  so  the  case  must
have  been  a  failure.^

My  patient,  though  not  able  to  write  or  read,  was  quite  a
philosopher^  she  complained  of  heat  and  thirst  just  as  she
ought  to  have  done,  (for  mesmerised  persons  are  always  very
sensitive  to  heat  and  cold),  but  felt  nothing  of  the  pain.  If
she  had  been  an  impostor,  she  would  most  certainly  have  borne
the  heat  and  thirst  with  the  same  fortitude  as  the  pain.  This
very  circumstance  is  sufficient  proof  to  a  candid  mind  of  the
genuineness  of  the  case.

Had  I  known  that  the  labour  would  have  been  so  pro-

i  As  Dr.  Esdaile  cuttingly  says  {Z<nsty  vol.  iii.,  p.  35),  «Ae  knew  best.—Zoigi.

k  Mr.  Chandler  is  an  example  not  only  of  undaunted  perseTerance  with
mesmerism,  and  of  honor,  but  of  intelligence  and  soundness.  His  view  is
perfectly  correct.  Those  who  make  an  incessant  din  about  what  Boyle
pointed  out  in  1663,  Whytt  a  century  ago,  and  Prochaska  62  years  ago,
called  the  reflexion  of  sensory  impression  into  motor,— terms  now  varied  into
reflex  motory  function,  never  once  think  of  this  when  it  occurs  in  mes-
merised persons,  as  Dr.  EUiotson  has  already  said  (p.  313),  but  ascribe  it  all
to  sensation  and  volition.  Yet  old  writers  mention  that,  if  the  legs  of  kittens
were  made  insensible  by  cutting  off  the  head  or  dividing  the  spine,  and  a
wounding  instrument  or  hot  iron  was  applied  to  the  toes,  the  legs  moved
away.— See  Dr.  EHiotson's  Pamphlet,  p.  23.— Zoisf.

ff2


408  Benefit  of  Mesmerism  after  Labour,

tracted,  I  should  have  considered  it  an  unfavourable  case  for
the  experiment  I  contemplated^  it  being  out  of  the  question
that  a  patient  should  be  kept  mesmerised  for  several  days  in
succession  ;^  as  it  happened^  however^  it  operated  advantage-
ously^ for  the  alternations  of  the  ordinary  and  mesmeric  states
brought  out  the  absence  of  pain  in  the  latter  in  strong  relief.

I  descend  to  these  explanations  for  the  benefit  of  those
who  have  had  less  opportunity  of  witnessing  mesmeric  phe-
nomena. For  myself  I  unhesitatingly  declare  my  conviction^
that  the  case  from  first  to  last  was  perfectly  genuine^  and  I
regret  to  add  that  an  obstetric  physician  of  eminence^  who
had  expressed  a  desire  to  be  present,  was  prevented  by  Ulness
from  attending.

Sept.  3rd.  Both  mother  and  child  have  gone  on  re-
markably well  up  to  the  present  time.

Thomas  Chandler.
58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotherhithe.


Among  the  extracts  sent  us  by  Dr.  EUiotson  from  the
India  paper  of  May  29,  is  the  recital  of  great  benefit  from
mesmerism,  not  indeed  in  parturition  but  in  the  after-pains;
and  we  omitted  it  in  the  list  of  medical  cases  at  p.  380,  as  it
must  strike  so  much  more  forcibly  in  connection  with  Mr.
Chandler's  case,  and  one  sent  us  by  Dr.  EUiotson  from  Mr.
Parker  of  Exeter. — Sknst,

"  May  15th,  1846.  The  lady,''  whose  case  is  mentioned  at
p.  39,  ''was  delivered  at  10  o'clock  to-day;  I  saw  her  at  11
o'clock,  and  she  was  suffering  from  sharp  (rfter-pairu,  1  said,
that  as  I  could  extinguish  her  other  pains,  I  should  probably
be  able  to  subdue  this.  She  was  very  glad  of  the  proposal,
and  I  began  to  mesmerise  her.  For  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  the
contortions  of  her  countenance,  and  frequent  change  of  post*
tion,  showed  the  continuance  and  acuteness  of  her  sufferings.
In  about  twenty  minutes,  she  became  quite  tranquil,  and  I
pricked  her  nose  repeatedly  with  a  pin,  without  her  feeling  it,
and  left  her  sleeping.  As  I  was  passing  that  way  in  about
three  quarters  of  an  hour,  I  looked  in  to  see  her,  and  was
told  that  she  still  slept.  I  went  to  see  her,  and  on  touching
her,  she  opened  her  eyes,  and  said  that  she  had  awoke  of  her
own  accord,  and  had  had  a  comfortable  sleep.  I  pointed  at
her  eyes  for  a  minute  or  two,  and  she  again  slept  profoundly.
In  about  an  hour  after,  she  awoke  spontaneously,  perfectly
free  from  pain,  and  had  no  recollection  of  my  second  visit.

1  We  have  known  thii  done  with  great  advantage  in  diseaie.— Zoul.


Benefit  of  Mesmerism  during  Labour.  409

After  much  questionings  she  said  that  she  only  remembered
my  having  called  in  the  morning  and  asked  how  she  and  the
baby  were.

"  May  16th.  She  has  had  no  return  of  pain^  and  feels  much
refreshed  and  stronger:  her  husband  remarked^  as  I  did^  that
she  looked  better  than  before  her  delivery.  These  are  the
only  times  that  this  lady  has  been  mesmerised^  and  this  power
seems  to  be  sufficient  to  guard  her  against  most  of  the  ills
that  flesh  is  heir  to.  Would  that  we  are  all  equally  subject  to
it  I  But  we  may  hope  to  discover  more  effectual  means  of
affecting  mankind  in  the  mass.

''  James  Esdaile.^'


The  following  is  Mr.  Parker's  case : —

My  dear  Sir, — ^As  you  have  expressed  a  wish  to  have  an
account  of  the  case  where  the  after-pains  were  relieved  by
mesmerism,  I  will  now  give  it  to  you,  but  I  had  wished  to
have  furnished  you  with  more  cases.

June  30th,  1846,  Mrs.  T.  was  delivered  of  her  seventh
child ;  her  labours  have  been  always  very  difficult  from  her
being  very  short,  and  having  great  obliquity  of  the  uterus  for-
wards. She  had  very  strong  labour  pains,  with  very  short  in-
termissions, during  eight  hours.  The  placenta  was  delivered
by  natural  efforts  half  an  hour  after  the  child  was  bom.  There
was  so  much  tenderness  of  the  uterus,  that  immediately  after
the  delivery  I  gave  her  a  quarter  of  a  grain  of  morphine,  to
be  repeatea  in  an  hour  if  necessary ;  and  as  the  second  dose
did  not  relieve  her,  I  was  sent  for,  within  two  hours  of  the
delivery,  for  the  pains  were  insupportable ;  there  was  a  natural
quantity  of  fluid  blood,  but  no  coagula,  and  the  uterus  firmly
contracted.

I  then  gave  directions  for  long  mesmeric  passes  to  be
made  from  the  epigastrium  to  the  knees,  and  in  the  course  of
the  spine  to  the  hips.  The  effect  of  it  was  very  remarkable.
Wittdn  half  an  hour,  the  pains  had  quite  ceased,  and  on  their
threatened  return,  a  repetition  of  the  mesmeric  passes  com^
pletely  checked  them :  and  from  that  moment,  there  was  no
more  uneasiness,  and  her  convalescence  was  as  rapid  as  under
the  most  favorable  labour.

Believe  me.

My  dear  Sir,

Your's  faithfully,

John  B.  Parker.
Dr.  Elliotson.  Exeter,  Aug.  29th,  1846.


( 410 )
XI.  A  case  of  Spontaneous  Clairvoyance.

TO THE EDITOB OF THE ZOIST.

SiB^ — The  accompanying  curious  narrative  (quoted  from
Chambers's  Journal,  Vol.  lY.^N.S.)  is  one  of  those  interesting
cases  which  occur  from  time  to  time  of  the  spontaneous
development  during  the  natural  state  of  a  power^  analogous
in  character  to  one  we  see  manifested  during  the  mesmeric
trance^  and  with  regard  to  the  existence^  or,  even  possibility
of  which  the  greatest  scepticism  has  been  manifested,  and
certainly  rivalling  in  marvellousness  any  of  the  analogous
feats  recorded  of  somnambulists.

It  is,  I  think,  deserving  of  a  place  in  your  journal,  both
from  the  extraordinary  character  of  the  facts  detailed,  and
the  circumstance  that  it  comes  before  the  public  guaranteed
by  the  name  of  an  individual  whose  high  moral  character
and  unimpeachable  veracity  are  matters  of  European  notoriety.

I  am.  Sir,

Your  obedient  Servant,

T.  S.  Pbideaux.

**  We  must  not  conclude  our  notice  of  this  most  interesting  of
autobiographies  without  affording  an  account  of  a  remarkable  faculty
Zschokke  possesses,  and  which  he  calls  his  'inward  sight.'  'I  am,'
he  remarks,  '  almost  afraid  to  speak  of  this,  not  because  I  am  afraid
to  be  thought  superstitious,  but  that  I  may  thereby  strengthen  such
feelings  in  others.  And  yet  it  may  be  an  addition  to  our  stock  of
soul-experiences,  and  therefore  I  will  confess.'

"  It  has  happened  to  me  sometimes  on  my  first  meeting  with
strangers,  as  I  hstened  silently  to  their  discourse,  that  their  former
life,  with  many  trifling  circumstances  therewith  connected,  or  fre-
quently some  particular  scene  in  that  life,  has  passed  quite  involun-
tarily, and  as  it  were  dream-like,  yet  perfectlv  distinct,  before  me.

*'  During  this  time  I  usually  feel  so  entirely  absorbed  in  the  con-
templation of  the  stranger  life,  that  at  last  I  no  longer  see  clearly
the  face  of  the  unknown,  wherein  I  undesignedly  read,  nor  distinctly
hear  the  voices  of  the  speakers,  winch  before  served  in  some  mea-
sure as  a  commentary  to  the  text  of  their  features.  For  a  long
time  I  held  such  visions  as  delusions  of  the  fancy,  and  the  more  so
as  they  showed  me  even  the  dress  and  motions  of  the  actors,  rooms,
furniture,  and  other  accessories.  By  the  way  of  jest,  I  once/  in  a
familiar  circle  at  Kirchberg,  related  the  secret  history  of  a  semp-
stress, who  had  just  left  the  room  and  the  house.  I  had  never
seen  her  before  in  my  life;  people  were  astonished,  and  laughed,
but  were  not  to  be  persuaded  that  I  did  not  previously  know  the
relations  of  which  I  spoke;  for  what  I  had  uttered  was  the  literal
truth.


Case  of  Spontaneous  Clairvoyance,  411

"  I  on  my  part  was  no  less  astonished  that  mj  dream-pictures
were  confirmed  hy  the  reality.  I  became  more  attentive  to  the
subject,  and,  when  propriety  admitted  it,  I  would  relate  to  those
whose  life  thus  passed  before  me  the  subject  of  my  visions,  that  I
might  thereby  obtain  confirmation  or  refutation  of  it.  It  was  inva-
riably  ratified,  not  without  consternation  on  their  part."*  I  myself
had  less  confidence  than  any  one  in  this  mental  juggling.  So  often
as  I  revealed  my  visionary  gifts  to  any  new  person,  I  regularly  ex-
pected to  hear  the  answer — '  It  was  not  so.'

**  I  felt  a  secret  shudder  when  my  auditors  replied  that  it  was
true,  or  when  their  astonishment  betrayed  my  accuracy  before  they
spoke.  Instead  of  many,  I  will  mention  one  example,  which  pre-
eminently astounded  me.  One  fair  day,  in  the  city  of  Waldshut,
I  entered  an  inn  (the  Vine)  in  company  with  two  young  student-
foresters;  we  were  tired  with  rambling  through  the  woods.  We
supped  with  a  numerous  society  at  the  table-d'h6te,  where  the
guests  were  making  very  merry  with  the  peculiarities  and  eccentri-
cities of  the  Swiss,  with  Mesmer's  Magnetism,  Lavater's  Physiog-
nomy, &c.,  &c.  One  of  my  companions,  whose  national  pride  was
wounded  by  their  mockery,  begged  me  to  make  some  reply,  par-
ticularly to  a  handsome  young  man  who  sat  opposite  us,  and  who
had  allowed  himself  extraordinary  license.

"  This  man's  former  life  was  at  that  moment  presented  to  my
mind.  I  turned  to  him,  and  asked  whether  he  would  answer  me
candidly  if  I  related  to  him  some  of  the  most  secret  passages  of
his  life,  I  knowing  as  little  of  him  personally  as  he  did  of  me  ?
That  would  be  going  a  little  further,  I  thought,  than  Lavater  did
with  his  Physiognomy.  He  promised,  if  I  were  correct  in  my  in-
formation, to  admit  it  frankly.  I  then  related  what  my  vision  had
shown  me,  and  the  whole  company  were  made  acquainted  with  the
private  history  of  the  young  merchant :  his  school  years,  his  youth-
ful errors,  and  lastly,  with  a  fault  committed  in  reference  to  the
strong-box  of  his  principal.  I  described  to  him  the  uninhabited
room  with  whitened  walls,  where,  to  the  right  of  the  brown  door,
on  a  table,  stood  a  black  money-box,  &c.,  &c.  A  dead  silence  pre-
vailed during  the  whole  narration,  which  I  alone  occasionally  inter-
rupted, by  enauiring  whether  I  spoke  the  truth.  The  startled  young
man  confirmed  every  particular,  and  even,  what  I  had  scarcely
expected,  the  last-mentioned.

''  Touched  by  his  candour,  I  shook  hands  with  him  over  the
table,  and  said  no  more.  He  asked  my  name,  which  I  gave  him,
and  we  remained  together  talking  till  past  midnight.  He  is  pro-
bably still  living!

"*Any  explanation  of  this  phenomenon,  by  means  of  the  known
laws  of  the  human  mind,  would,  in  the  present  confined  state  of

m  « <  What  demon  inspires  you  ?  Must  I  again  believe  in  possession  T*
exclaimed  the  spiritaal  Johann  von  Riga,  when,  in  the  first  hour  of  our
acquaintance,  I  related  his  past  life  to  him  with  the  avowed  object  of
learning  whether  or  no  I  deceived  mjself.  We  speculated  long  on  the
enigma,  but  even  his  penetration  could  not  solve  it."


412  Still  more  Mesmeric  News  from  India,  IfC,

our  knowledge,  assuredly  fail.  We  therefore  simply  give  the  extra-
ordinary fact  as  we  find  it,  in  the  words  of  the  narrator,  leaving
the  puzzle  to  he  speculated  on  hy  our  readers.  Zschokke  adds,  that
he  had  met  with  others  who  possessed  a  similar  power.

*'  In  gentle  alteration  of  light  and  shade,  years  rolled  over  the
head  of  the  good  philosopher.  He  wrote  copiously,  and  his  works
have  enjoyed  a  degree  of  popularity  few  authors  can  boast  of.  He
was,  moreover,  intrusted  with  many  civil  offices  hy  the  Swiss  govern-
ment, only  one  of  which  he  consented  to  be  paid  for,  and  that
yielded  scarcely  £50  per  annum.

'*  Heinrich  Zschokke  still  lives  amidst  the  beautiAil  lawns  and
groves  of  Blumenhalde,  the  living  representative  of  a  sound,  bene-
volent, practical  philosophy.  No  one  can  read  his  autobiography
without  being  a  wiser,  perhaps  a  better  man.  The  lessons  of  wisdom
which  he  inculcates  win  their  way  to  the  mind,  because  they  are
not  formally  or  dictatorially  conveyed,  but  are  put  forth  with  a  playful
kindness,  and  a  graceful  ease,  which  are  more  impressive  than  the
haughty  solemnity  of  less  sympathizing  moralists.

Dr.  ElliotsoD  gave  as  notice  some  time  ago  of  a  paper  which  he  ispreparing
OD  appearances  of  distant  persons,  knowledge  of  past  eyents,  of  present
events  at  a  distance,  and  of  future  eyents,  not  explicable  by  our  received
notions,  &c.,  &c.,  and  begs  us  to  say  how  obliged  he  will  feel  for  authentic
accounts  of  such  phenomena. — Zoui.

XII. StUl  more  Mesmeric  News  from  India, and  Surgical
Operations, Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

"Where  is  tbla  celebrated  Bciencef  What  has  become  of  "  NiCKiLt"  Echo  aniwen —
"  Nihil  1"  In  the  whole  history  of  haman  delniion  there  is  hardly  a  parallel  to  the  rapid
riae,  and  ttiU  more  rapid  foil  of  animal  magnctUm  In  this  country  I  It  ii  aa  dead  as  Perklnism
or  ihe  ravings  of  Jobannah  Sonihootel  I  la  It  now  a  wandering,  disembodied  spirit— viewless
as  the  air,  and  silent  as  the  grave  ?  .  .  .  The  brief  career  and  tragic  tale  of  animal  magnetism
may  exercise  a  beneficial  Inflaenee  on  onr  profession,  which,  alas  I  has  proved  itself — at  least
a  portion  of  It — to  be  creduloos  as  the  ignorant  African  or  the  benighted  Hindoo  I  Half  a
century  hence,  when  the  periodicals  of  this  time  are  pored  over  by  some  book-worm  of  that
day,  the  investigator  will  rob  bis  eyes  and  wipe  his  spectacles,  on  turning  to  the  pages  of  the
JLancet  and  Gazette  for  1838.  He  will  scaicely  believe  that  men,  whose  names,  too,  may  go
down  the  stream  of  time,  with  credit  and  honour,  in  other  respects,  should  hare  been  ao
infatuated  as  to  give  a  moment's  credence  to  such  outrageous  ravings  as  those  of  animal  mag-
netism. .  .  .  But  he  will  learn  with  satisfaction,  that  an  oviRWMBLMiMe  MAiORiTT  or  thb

rROPBSSION 9BT THBIR  WkC%» AGAINST THB IMyOSTDRB AND aC«»DTBD THB  CaBDOLITT  OV

THBIR  DBLUDED  BRBTBRBN.  The  lestou  hss  b^cn  placed  on  record,  that  such  delusions  can-
Dot  be  participated  in,  or  even  countenanced  with  Impunity.  It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  advert
to  the  disastrous  u  consequences  which  have  followed  in  the  train  of  this  momentary  mania  I
They  will  serve  as  a  beacon  to  prevent  the  shipwreck  of  others."— Dr.  Jambs  Johnbon,  in
his  MediohChirwyieal  Review,  April,  1830. p.  030.

I  HAVE  received  more  letters  and  newspapers  from  India.

"  Calcutta,  July  4, 1846.
'^  My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — My  conscience  has  long  been

n  Dr.  Johnson  probably  alludes  to  my  practice  being  reduced  to
one-third  of  its  former  amount  by  Mr.  Wakley's  announcement  that  mes-
merism was  a  complete  imposture  and  extinguished  by  him  for  ever.  The
coroner,  however,  has  to  sit  upon  it  again  and  again  :  he  records  verdicts  in
vain :  it  perversely  will  not  be  murdered  long  together.  After  declaring
again  and  again  that  he  has  done  fur  it,  and  done  with  it,  for  ever,  in  his
Lancet,  up  it  comes  again  and  again,  and  he  again  and  again  throws  the
self-same  rubbish  at  it  with  which  he  fatally  knocked  it  down  in  1838 :  he  has
<*  thrice  to  slay  the  slain,"  and  still  it  lives  and  mocks  him  more  impudently
than  ever.


communicated  by  Dr,  ElUotsan.  413

upbraiding  me  for  not  having  written  to  report  to  you  the
great  progress  which  mesmerism  has  recently  been  making  in
this  distant  neighbourhood ;  but  in  truth  I  am  so  oppressed
by  public  duties,  as  to  have  been  compelled  to  abandon  all
private  correspondence  for  the  last  two  years.  I  recently,
however,  had  an  opportunity  of  visiting  Hooghly,  and  wit-
nessing some  of  Dr.  Esdaile's  operations,  which  I  cannot
refirain  from  mentioning  to  you,  as  they  completely  convinced
me  of  tAeir  perfect  freedom  from  pain  or  suffering  of  any  kind
to  the  patients  who  were  the  subjects  of  them.  I  wrote
Dr.  Esdaile  a  brief  note,  which  he  published  in  the  news-
papers here,  and  of  which  I  send  you  a  copy  by  the  present
mail.  The  surgical  details  of  the  cases  he  will  himself  pub-
lish. The  tumor  removed,  together  with  the  diseased  testes,
must  have  weighed  at  least  50  lbs. :  the  cancer  of  the  colis
was  a  dreadful  looking  mass  of  disease :  and  the  paring  of  the
ulcerated  heel,  about  as  painful  an  application  of  the  knife  as
could  be  resorted  to :  yet,  in  each  and  all,  there  was  entire
absence  of  every — even  the  slightest — indication  of  physical
suffering.  I  not  only  satisfied  myself  of  this,  but  car^Uy
watched  every  movement  of  the  patients,  to  discover  the  faintest
ray  of  feeling ,  but  withotU  success.  Dr.  Esdaile  has,  as  you
are  aware,  now  performed  more  than  one  hundred  mesmeric
operations ;  and  so  great  is  his  success,  as  weU  as  the  confi-
dence which  the  natives  far  and  wide  have  in  his  skill,  human-
ity, and  the  painless  nature  of  his  cures,  that  scarcely  a  case
of  elephantiasis  of  the  scrotum  is  now  to  be  met  with  in  a
Calcutta  hospital.^  People  of  all  classes,  and  with  every
species  of  ailments  are  resorting  to  him,  and  in  most  in-
stances with  benefit  to  themselves.  He  is  one  of  the  most
able,  well-read,  and  proficient  members  of  the  Bengal  Medical
Service,  and  I  am  quite  sure,  his  successful  pursuit  of  the
subject,  for  which  you  have  sacrificed  so  much,  will  be  a
great  and  true  source  of  delight  to  you.

"  With  every  sincere  wish  for  your  health  and  happiness,
believe  me,

"  Ever  your's  most  truly,  ,.

"  Fredebick  J.  MOUAT.
"  J.  Elliotson,  Esq.  M.D.,  &c.  &c.  &c."

Dr.  Mouat  is  one  of  the  medical  professors  at  Calcutta,
and  the  following  is  his  pubUc  letter,  accompanied  by  one
from  a  clergyman. A  friend  of  mine  saw  a  letter  from  the

o  Mr.  Rintours  olMervations  at  pp.  299,  3<K),  oow  appear  to  Btriking
advantage.  Patients  going  to  Hooghly  in  preference  to  the  great  hospitals
of  Calcotta !


414  Sim  mare  Mesmeric  News  from  India j  ^c.

Bishop  of  Calcutta^  describing  a  painless  terrific  operation
which  he  witnessed.  Dr.  Mouat  saw  all  my  mesmeric  phe-
nomena and  cures  at  University  College  Hospital :  and  had
too  much  sense  not  to  believe^  and  too  much  virtue  to  conceal
his  belief.

Englishman,  June  10,  1846.

'^  My  dear  Dr.  Esdaile. — I  consider  myself  much  indebted
to  7o»;  for  the  kipd  manner  in  which  you  permitted  me  to
witness  your  operations  on  Monday  last,  upon  five  patients,
who  had  been  subjected  to  the  mesmeric  influence,  before
being  submitted  to  the  knife.  It  would  be  needless  for  me  to
enter  into  any  detail  of  cases,  which  I  doubt  not  will  be  more
accurately  and  minutely  recorded  by  yourself;  at  the  same
time,  I  deem  it  to  be  only  fair  and  just  towards  you,  to  state
my  complete  conviction,  that  the  operations  in  question  were
tmattended  with  any  physical  suffering  to  the  individuals  who
were  the  subjects  of  them.

"  Two  of  the  patients  did  not  appear  to  be  in  a  perfect
state  of  mesmeric  coma,  and  yet,  even  in  these  cases,  beyond
a  tremulous  movement  of  the  upper  eye-lids,  and  spasmodic
action  of  the  muscles  of  the  £Ace  and  neck,  with  a  low  moan-
ing, all  of  which  may  and  did  exist  without  the  occurrence  of
pain  or  sensibility,  the  men  positively  declared  their  entire
freedom  from  suffering  of  any  kind.

^'  I  examined  the  state  of  the  ptdse  in  the  individual  from
whom  you  removed  the  scrotal  tumor,  both  during  and  imme-
diately after  the  operation,  and  found  it  to  be  soft,  full,  and
free  from  any  of  the  agitation,  or  other  effects,  usucMy  attend-
ant  upon  surgical  operations.

*'  The  complete  freedom  of  the  countenances  of  three  of
the  men  from  distress,  anxiety,  and  suffering,  both  during  the
mesmeric  state  and  immediately  on  waking,  was  partictdarly
striking,  and  attracted  the  attention  of  most  of  those  who
were  present.

"  I  shall  not  fail  to  relate  the  results  of  my  visit  to  my
friend  and  former  Professor,  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  will,  I  am
sure,  derive  the  liveliest  satisfaction  &om  your  successful  and
humane  exertions  in  the  alleviation  of  human  suffering.

"  I  remain,  my  dear  Dr.  Esdaile,

"  Yours  very  sincerely,

"Peed.  J.  Moctat.
'^  Medical  College,  Calcutta,

"  June  3rd,  1846."

*'  Being  accidentally  at  Chinsurah,  owing  to  the  dangerous


*'


eommunieaied  by  Dr.  ElUotstm.  415

illness  of  a  near  relative^  and  having  obtained  Dr.  fisdaile's
kind  permission,  I  proceeded  on  Monday  morning  last  to  the
Hooghly  Emambarrah  Hospital,  where  I  had  been  informed
several  surgical  operations  would  be  performed  on  patients
thrown  artificially  into  magnetic  or  mesmeric  sleep.

''  On  my  arrival  at  the  Hospital,  I  was  shewn  a  native
woman  whose  left  leg  had,  two  days  before,  been  amputated,
while  she  was  in  a  mesmeric  trance,  and  found  her  not  only
quite  easy,  but  absolutely  Uvely.  The  Bengalee  language  being
familiar  to  me,  I  spent  10  minutes  in  conversation  with  this
woman,  during  which  she  told  me  that  when  her  leg  was
taken  oflP,  she  did  not  feel  the  least  sensation  of  pain ;  indeed,
that  even  on  her  waking,  she  was  not  aware  that  the  opera-
tion had  been  performed,  and  could  only  believe  it  when  she
had  ocular  demonstration  of  it.  She  moreover  added,  that
since  the  operation,  she  had  experienced  no  unpleasant  feel-
ing, except  a  slight  heat  or  burning  at  the  end  of  the  stump.
I  was  quite  satisfied  that  she  spoke  the  truth,?  when  I  per-
ceived that  the  only  concern  she  seemed  to  have,  was  to  know
how  she  would  manage  to  move  about,  when  permitted  to
leave  her  bed ;  and  she  felt  not  a  little  comforted,  when  I
told  her  that  no  doubt  she  would  be  supplied  with  crutches,
which  would  render  locomotion  practicable  and  easy.

''At  11^,  the  operations  for  the  day  commenced.  These
were  five  in  number,  and  several  evidently  of  the  most  dan-
gerous description.  I  must  say,  that  in  my  opinion,  three  of
these  at  least  could  under  ordinary  circumstances  not  have
taken  place  without  violent  struggles,  shrieks,  and  other  ex-
pressions of  deep  anguish  being  elicited  £rom  the  patients ;
and  yet  all  five,  during  the  operations,  remained  perfectly
calm  and  passive,  and  apparently  in  the  soundest  sleep — ^no
movement  of  their  body  being  perceptible,  with  the  exception
of  the  usual  heaving  of  the  chest  when  breathing.  One  only
was  occasionally  slightly  groaning,  though,  as  will  appear  in
the  sequel,  unconsciously  to  himself.  A  medical  gentleman
present,  whom  I  requested  to  feel  the  pulse  of  the  patients,
declared  it  was  natural,  and  indicating  no  excitement  whatever,
Their  features,  all  the  time, were  composed  as  in  natural

p  How  different  the  treatment  experienced  by  this  poor  woman  at  the
hands  of  the  clergyman,  Dr.  Monat,  and  the  other  gentlemen,  from  that  of
the  poor  Nottinghamshire  man  at  the  hands  of  the  assembled  members  of  the
Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  of  London,  who  without  hesitation
or  reserve  denounced  him  as  a  well-trained  impostor,  and  scorned  to  have
the  invaluable  fact  recorded  in  their  minutes.  The  Society  stained  itself  for
ever,  like  University  College :  no  time  will  ever  erase  the  blot.  Mr.  Wakley's
day  of  victorious  insult  to  the  innocent  and  afflicted  on  the  one  hand,  and  to
the  humble  observer  of  nature  on  the  other,  is  past.


416  Still  mare  Mesmeric  News  from  India,  ^c.

sleep^  without  exhibiting  any  contractions  of  the  musclesj  or
any  other  external  sign  of  suffering.

''After  the  five  operations  had  been  successively  ended,
and  the  patients  had  recovered  their  consciousness,  I  went  to
the  bedside  of  each  of  them  with  a  number  of  the  gentlemen
present,  and  asked  all  separately  whether  they  had  felt  any
pain  during  the  operation.  Every  (me  for  himself  and  with-
out  having  heard  what  the  others  had  said,  replied,  he  had
experienced  no  pain  whatever,  and,  indeed,  had  no  idea  till
after  waking  that  anything  extraordinary  had  been  done  to
him.  I  further  enquired  of  them  whether  they  then  felt  any
pain :  two  answered  they  felt  none  at  all,  and  the  others  said
they  had  merely  a  sensation  of  unusual  heat  about  the  parts
operated  upon.  I  then  put  the  question  to  the  individual  who
had  occasionally  groaned  during  the  operation,  as  to  why
he  had  done  so  ?  He  replied,  that  he  was  not  at  all  aware
of  having  groaned,  and  that  all  he  knew  was  that  he  had  just
awoke  from  a  sound  sleep.

''  My  decided  opinion,  from  the  expressions  of  the  patients,
which  were  uttered  in  the  most  artless  and  unambiguous  man-
ner possible,  was,  that  they  had  not  experienced  the  slightest
pain  or  pang  while  the  operations  were  being  performed,  and,
afterwards,  that  the  burning  sensation  which  two  of  them
complained  of,  was  evidently  so  trifling  as  barely  to  deserve
the  name  of  pain.  My  own  eyes,^  moreover,  convinced  me
that  they  had  not  in  the  least  moved  or  shrunk  during  the
painful  operations,  and  that,  subsequently,  they  were  calm,
collected,  and  even  cheerful,  to  a  degree  I  would  have  thought
impossible  in  any  persons  placed  in  the  same  circumstances.
The  above  are  simple,  unvarnished  facts,  from  which  the
reader  of  this  statement  may  draw  his  own  conclusions.

"  Not  being  a  medical  man,  I  feel  incompetent  to  describe
the  operations  that  were  undertaken,  nor  do  I  deem  it  neces-
sary to  give  here  an  opinion  on  the  subject  of  mesmerism  in
general.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  after  witnessing  what  I  did,
I  do  consider  mesmerism  as  a  valuable  gift  of  God's  Provi-
dence,'' which,  when  seasonably  used,  may  prove  the  means

q  What  a  straDge  fancy  of  the  reTerend  gentleman  to  beliere  his  own
eyes,  when  Dr.  Johnson  declared  in  the  Medical  Society  that  he  would  not
hare  believed  the  facts  of  the  Nottinghamshire  amputation  had  he  witnessed
them,  (see  my  Pamphlet,  p.  19,)  and  so  have  many  other  medical  persons.

r  Here  again  it  is  impossible  not  to  think  of  Dr.  Copland  and  of  Mr.
Rintoul,  who  differ  so  widely  from  this  divine.  I  have  just  seen  a  letter
from  a  worthy  surgeon,  who  also  differs  as  widely  from  him.  After  read-
ing The  Zoist  he  begins  by  saying,  that  '*  the  cases  in  it  are  only  such  as  are
occasionally  presented  to  the  cognizance  of  an  enlightened  physician  in
extensive  practice."  But,  1.  the  medical  profession  deny  most  of  such  facts,
even  independent  of  mesmerism, as  are  related  in Th§  Zintt: and,  2.


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  417

of  alleviating  much  human  8n£Fering  and  misery^  and  which,
therefore,  ought  to  be  thankfully  received  and  acknowledged.
At  the  same  time,  I  cannot  but  express  my  deep  conviction,
gathered  from  what  I  saw,  that  mesmerism,  in  order  to  be
rendered  really  benejScial  and  safe  from  abuse,  should  on  no
account  be  practised  by  any  but  medical  men :  and  even  by
them,  for  medical  purposes  only.

"  A.  P.  Lacroix.
"  Missionary  of  the  London  Missionary  Society.
«  Chinsurah,  Thursday,  June  4th,  1846.'*

The  next  public  letter  was  written  by  Dr.  Webb,  another
Professor  in  the  Medical  College  of  Calcutta.

''  To  the  Editor  of  the  Bengal  Hurkaru.

"June  4th,  1846.

"  Sir, — There  is  now  no  MedicalJoumalst  this  presidency,
I  will  therefore  trouble  you  to  publish  this  narrative.  It  must
interest  all  men — for  all  are  liable  to  suffer.  But  although  I
give  you  my  name,  unless  you  think  it  requires  such  confir-
mation, I  would  rather  you  omitted  it.

"  I  heard  from  an  ex-student  of  the  Medical  College  that
Dr.  Esdaile  was  about  to  perform  some  operations  in  surgery
during  the  mesmeric  trance.  I  set  off,  thinking  that  no  medi-
cal  man  is  justified  in  neglecting  any  opportunities  that  may  ad-
vance  his  knowledge  in  medical  science,  and  of  the  best  method*
of  relieving  human  suffering.  I  found  on  arrival  at  the  famed
Imambarra  Hospital,  the  compound^  was  full  of  carriagesi^ —
and  that  I  was  not  the  only  disciple  of  Esculapius  who  thought
it  worth  while  to  go  fifty  miles  in  search  of  truth.  One  of  the
Presidency  Surgeons,  Dr.  Chalmers; the  Secretary  to  the

enlightened  pbysicmne  cannot  strictly  be  said  to  see  such  facts,  because  the
facts  related  are  related  as  the  effects  of  certain  processes  which  they  never
condescend  to  perform,  or  if  they  see  performed  deny  to  produce  any  such
effects.  He  concludes,  "  How  far  is  it  compatible  with  the  gift  of  healing
described  in  Scripture.  In  my  judgment  it  trenches  upon  Atheism  and
robs  God  of  his  glory  ;  and  therefore  it  is  a  science  I  am  not  anxious  to  dive
into."  This  jumble  of  thoughts  is  too  hard  for  me.  But  it  is  remarkable
how  many  persons  who  pass  most  admirably  in  society  prove  to  have  only  a
Jumble  of  thoughts  if  you  push  them  closely.

s  How  different  from  Sir  B.  Brodie,  Dr.  Chambers,  and  so  many  other
doctors  and  surgeons  of  all  grades  of  importance  in  Oreat  Britain  and
Ireland,  vrho  have  declared  over  and  over  again  that  they  would  not  go  and
see  mesmerism :  and  hitherto  have  kept  their  word.  Hut  they  will  not  al-
ways be  able  to  keep  it  They  will  be  pushed  in  by  the  pressure  from  with-
out like  my  worthy  country  friend  soon  to  be  mentioned  (p.  428).

t  This  name  of  the  ground  surrounding  a  building  in  Bengal  is,  I  under-
stand, a  corruption  of  the  Italian  word,  eampagnia.

a  One  cause  of  the  grumbling  and  misery  of  my  late  colleagues  at  Uni-
versity College  was  the  number  of  carriages  collected.


418  Still  more  Mesmeric  News  from  India f  8fC.

Council  of  Education,  Dr.  Mouat ;  another  professor  of  the
Medical  College^  Dr.  Allan  Webb ;  the  civil  surgeon  of  How-
rah,  Dr.  Green ;  besides  Dr.  Mc  Rae^  and  I  dare  say  many
others, — ^had  braved  the  terrors  of  a  burning  sun  to  arrive  at
Hooghly  by  11  o'clock.  But  there  were  others  besides  Medi-
cal spectators,  Reverend  Clergymen,  the  Venerable  the  Arch-
deacon and  the  Reverend  Mr.  Lacroix ;  besides  Judges,  Ma-
gistrates, and  other  Civilians,  as  Mr.  Russel,  Mr.  Samuels,
Mr.  Young.  Military  men  also  as  Major  Green ;  besides  mer-
chants and  men  of  science.  Mr.  Simms  appeared  to  be  an
observant  spectator  of  this  extraordinary  scene.

''On  passing  into  the  operating  room,  (an  open  place  on
one  side  of  a  square  open  court) — the  patients  to  be  operated
upon  were  seen  sleeping  profoundly ;  at  the  head  of  each  bed
— leaning  over  the  patients,  were  the  native  mesmerisers  in
full  operation — drawing  their  fingers  over  the  nose  to  the  top
of  the  head,  breathing  on  the  sleepers,  &c.

''At  a  signal  from  the  doctor,  the  first  man  was  brought
out  on  his  bed  for  the  removal  of  a  large  Elephantoid  tumour,
the  very  size  of  which  appeared  to  astonish  some  of  the  specta-
tors. Dr.  Esdaile  very  coolly  set  about  removing  it — his  mode
of  operating  was  peculiar — and  he  worked  with  a  leisurely
manner  that  convinced  me  he  had  the  most  certain  conviction
that  he  was'  giving  no  pain,  and,  therefore,  in  no  hurry.  The
man  never  awoke — but  with  the  exception  of  one  or  two  un-
easy starts — and  slight  groans,  such  as  one  sees  in  an  uneasy
dream,  at  which  times  the  native  mesmeriser  (who  quietly  con-
tinued his  operations  all  along) — seemed  to  redouble  his  breath-
ings and  passes,  with  the  effect  of  reducing  the  troubled  res-
piration, when  the  regular  pulse  and  reptUar  respiration  con-
tinued  to  the  end  of  the  operation,  in  which  were  removed
besides  the  mass  of  disease,  organs,  which  are  naturally  en-
dowed with  exquisite  sensibility.  Now  this  man  was  laid  on
one  side,  removed  with  his  bed  to  the  side  of  the  same  room.
The  Doctor  all  "  dabbled  with  blood,''  a  gory  spectacle  for
those  who  could  see,  stepped  into  the  other  back  apartment
(but  merely  separated  &om  the  operating  room  by  a  range  of
pillars),  and  ordered  out  another  man.  Now  this  is  so  con-
trary to  our  usual  managements  and  concealments,  as  to  be
very  striking.  The  same  nonchalance  was  evident  in  Dr.
Esdaile's  manner  of  handling  a  horrible  case  of  cancer,  and
even  striking  in  his  knife  just  to  ascertain  how  far  the  disease  ex^
tended.  This  mass  which  here  also  was  removed  included  the
same  parts,  and  was  equally  endowed  with  eiquisite  sensibility.
The  man  never  awoke — never  so  far  as  I  recollect  even  started
— and  slept  quietly  afterwards,  as  quietly  as  before  the  opera-


^  communicated  by  Dr,  EllioUon.  419

tioD.  He  and  his  bed  were  moved  to  the  other  comer  of  the
same  room.  The  Doctor  never^  it  was  clear^  thought  of  shock-
ing a  third  man^  for  he  and  his  mesmeriser  came  out^  unap-
palled  by  the  doctor's  shirt-sleeves  now  of  a  pretty  nniform
crimson.  A  large  deep  ragged  ulcer  upon  the  heel^  was
pared  down  as  coolly  as  a  farrier  pares  the  horse's  hoof.
He  never  stirred,  slept  like  a  child,  and  when  the  doctor
left  his  hoof  when  pared,  there  it  lay,  bleeding,  it  is  true,
but  a  very  respectable  looking  finish  given  to  it.  Had  the
man  been  sensible,  this  would  have  been  torture  so  excruciat-
ing that  I  have  heard  the  hospital  ring  with  the  shrieks  of
patients  for  whom  it  is  necessary.

''  Another  sleeper  was  brought  out  and  turned  over  to  the
sub-assistant  surgeon.  Tlie  operation  was  not  a  painful  one ;
but  the  man  slept  on,  and  I  observed  the  mesmeriser,  an
older  man  than  the  others,  without  being  ordered,  or  even
noticed  that  I  knew  of  by  any  but  myself,  blow  sharply  in
the  man's  face  and  make  one  or  two  reversed  passes;  the
man  awoke  looking  with  the  half  angry  look  of  a  disturbed
sleeper,  wide  awake; '  but  knowing  nothing  of  what  had  been
done  to  him  until  he  looked.  It  was  the  impression  on  my
mind  that  the  mesmeriser  was  heartily  tired  and  glad  to  get
away ;  hence  he  took  the  first  opportunity  to  be  off.

"By  and  bye  the  other  sleepers  awoke;  each' and  all  de-
clared publicly,  when  they  were  questioned  in  Bengallee  by
the  Rev.  Mr.  Lacroix,  that  they  knew  nothing  nor  felt  anything
whatever  of  the  operation.  1  have  seen  many  who  have  suf-
fered these  serious  mutilations  which  they  suffered  with  the
cold  sweat  of  agony  bubbling  up  for  hours  afterwards;  and
a  pulse  so  depressed  that  it  was  hazardous  to  move  them;

WHEREAS THESE WERE QUITE CHATTY AND LIVELY. Dr.

Esdaile  explained  the  reasons,  (very  weighty)  that  induced
him  not  to  delay  the  amputation  of  a  woman's  leg  whom  I
saw.  She  never  suffered  a  pang.  I  cannot  but  state  my  firm
conviction  after  having  seen  the  woman,  that  she  must  have
died  if  operated  upon  in  the  usual  manner.

"This  person,  and  the  large  Elephantoid  tumor  case,
were  not  only  saved  pain,  but  a  vast  amount  of  vital  depression,
which  might  in  either  case  have  proved  fatal.

"  Now  I  have  simply  stated  these  facts,  as  a  testimony  to
the  important  benefits  Dr.  Esdaile  is  conferring  upon  the
poor  and  wretched  natives.  He  does  not  mesmerise  these,
he  teaches  others ;  he  orders  others,  and  they  do  it  so  effec-
tually that  the  doctor  never  once  looked  at  any  of  his  patients
whilst  operating.  He  seems  perfectly  assured  that  they  are
spell-bound — nobody  holds  them  down. They  might  kick  as


420  StiU  more  Mesmeric  News  from  India,  ^c,

much  as  they  like — but  they  do  not  stir.  He  is  not  afraid  of
the  others  being  awoke  by  their  shrieks.  He  never  puts  them  in
different  rooms ;  they  who  are  to  be  operated  upon,  and  they
who  have  been  operated  upon,  are  all  in  the  same  room.  People
talk  as  loud  as  they  like — nay  even  laugh — and  that  awe  which
the  hardiest  usually  eoeperience,  which  the  sight  of  human  sufr
fering  naturally  inspires,  is  here  quite  banished.

"  In  fine^  that  which  makes  the  boldest  and  best  of  us
recoil  from  surgical  interference  so  long  as  we  possibly  can ;
and  alas^  sometimes  longer  than  we  ought  to  do ;  that  makes
almost  all  native  patients  resist,  until  life  and  limb  is  lost
together.  The  natural  dread  of  pain  is  entirely  removed ;
there  is  no  resistance  of  the  muscles ;  no  rebellious  starting^
at  the  most  critical  period.  It  is^  I  beheve,  quite  as  easy
with  mesmerism  to  operate  upon  the  living  as  upon  the  dead.

"  I  cannot  conceive,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  tell,  how  much
good  may  be  effected  by  those  whose  high  moral  conscien-
tiousness confines  the  operation  of  their  wonderful  power  to
an  use  which  we  cannot  look  upon  but  as  legitimate.  And
the  satisfaction  of  having  contributed  to  so  great  an  amount
of  aUeviation  to  human  pain  and  misery,  wiU.  I  cannot  donbt,
afford  higher  gratification  to  Dr.  Esdaile,  than  the  honor  even
of  introducing  into  India,  this  wonderful  improvement  in
operative  surgery.

"  June  2nd,  1846.  "  A.  W."

The  assemblage  of  crowds  both  of  and  not  of  the  pro-
fession at  the  Hooghly  hospital  reminds  me  of  what  was  the
case  in  1838  at  University  College  Hospital.  But  how  differ-
ent was  the  result  I  The  most  wonderful  and  exquisite  physio-
logical phenomena  were  demonstrated :''  and  a  surgical  ope-
ration,— the  introduction  of  a  seton  into  the  neck  of  the  elder
Okey,  was  performed  without  her  evincing  the  slightest  know-
ledge of  what  was  done,  till,  after  being  awakened,  on  turning
her  head  she  suddenly  felt  something  unusual,  and  put  her
hand  to  it,  saying  somebody  must  have  pinched  her  in  her
sleep.  My  colleagues  totally  disregarded  the  wonderful  facta
and  treated  the  painless  operation  with  sovereign  contempt :
in  India,  the  profession  go  and  witness  mesmerism,  and  then
nobly  publish  their  testimony.  I  make  the  following  extract
from  my  Letter  to  the  Students  on  my  resignation.

"At  length,  in  1837,  my  attention  became  directed  to  a  subject
which,  though  utterly  neglected  in  this  country,  was  receiving  great
attention  on  the  continent. Certain  wonderful  phenomena,  and  cer-

V  I  recollect  Mr.  Rintoul  witnessed  them.


cofnmunicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.  421

tain  modes  of  produdog  these  phenomena  and  of  curing  diseases
ill-understood  and  difficult  to  cure^  were  Touched  for  hj  men  of  the
highest  information  and  the  soundest  judgment;  and  I  felt  it  my
duty  to  investigate  the  matter. I  soon  found  that  there  was  a  fund
of  truth  in  what  I  had  heard  and  read, — that  an  agent  or  agency
existed  which  had  been  overlooked; and  my  enquiries  were  soon
attended  with  such  results  that  a  large  number  of  medical  men,  most
distinguished  Noblemen,  nay  Royality  itself.  Members  of  the  House
of  Commons,  some  of  the  first  men  of  science  in  the  country.  Pro-
fessors of  Oxford,  Cambridge,  King's  College,  and  Edinburgh,  the
Presidents  of  the  Royal  and  linneean  Societies,  and  Teachers  of  the
various  Hospitals,  nocked  to  witness  my  facts. Some  of  these
gentlemen  made  handsome  donations  to  the  Hospital  in  consequence,
and  others  expressed  their  intention  to  do  the  same,  but  have  de-
clined in  consequence  of  my  resignation. This  soon  excited  envy,
and  this  excited  a  commotion;  and  Mr.  Richard  Quain  advised  me  to
desist.  He  urged  that,  whether  the  wonderful  facts  were  true  or  not,
and  whether  great  benefit  in  the  treatment  of  diseases  would  result
or  not,  we  ought  to  consider  the  interests  of  the  School; — ^not  of
science  and  humanity,  observe — ^but  of  the  School : that,  if  the
public  did  not  regard  the  matter  as  true  and  the  benefits  as  real,  we
ought  not  to  persevere  and  risk  the  loss  of  public  favour  to  the
School;  that  I  was  rich,  and  could  afford  to  lose  my  practice  for
what  I  believed  the  truth,  but  that  others  were  not : — in  short,  his
argument  was  *rem — rem;^  and  *  virtus  post  nummos* I  replied  that
the  Institution  was  established  for  the  dissemination  and  discovery  of
truth  ;  that  all  other  considerations  were  secondary  to  this ;  that,  if
the  public  were  ignorant,  we  should  enlighten  them ;  that  we  should
lead  the  public,  and  not  the  public  us ;  and  that  the  sole  question
was,  whether  the  matter  were  a  truth  or  not. I  laughed  at  the  idea
of  injury  to  the  pecuniary  interests  of  the  School.

"  The  commotion  increased. My  demonstrations  were  debated
upon  at  meetings  of  the  Faculty,  and  discussions  went  on  between
members  of  the  Council,  and  Professors,  an  exquisite  Secretary,  and
other  more  humble  holders  of  office. At  one  meeting  of  the  medical
faculty.  Dr.  Davis  boasted  that  he  had  seen  none  of  my  experiments
and  should  have  considered  himself  disgraced  if  he  had;  that  animal
magnetism  had  been  proved  above  forty  years  ago  to  be  a  perfect
humbug  and  imposture ;  and  that  it  was  now  in  as  bad  repute  with  the
public  as  Christianity  had  been  at  its  first  promulgation. Dr.  A.  T.
Thompson  boasted  tliat  he  had  seen  none  of  the  facts,  and,  though
invited  by  my  clinical  clerk  to  observe  them  while  visiting  his  own  pa-
tients in  the  same  ward,  that  he  had  declined  the  invitation.  Dr.  Davis
declared  that  he  never  could  procure  a  vacant  bed  because  I  detained
my  patients  so  long  in  order  to  mesmerise  them:  and  Dr.  Thompson
that  patients  would  not  apply  for  admission,  lest  they  should  be  mes-
merised, and  that  others  left  the  Hospital,  to  avoid  mesmeric  treat-
ment. But,  when  I  enquired  of  the  officer  whom  I  understood  to  have
furnished  these  absurdities,  he  assured  me  that  he  was  blameless  and
made  the  general  scape-goat  of  the  place;  and  he  entreated  me  to

VOL.  IV.  G  a


422  Still  more  Mesmeric  News  from  India,  ifc.

accept  his  denial  without  an  enquiry  which  would  embroil  him  with
the  Professors.  Not  conceiving  that  anything  but  reputation  could
accrue  to  the  Hospital  from  the  demonstration  of  physiological  and
pathological  facts  to  crowds  of  the  first  men  in  the  country,  among
whom  were  characters  totally  opposed  in  politics  to  the  place  and  who
otherwise  never  would  have  entered  it,  I  persevered.  The  President
of  the  College — Lord  Brougham  and  five  other  members  of  the
Council  did  not  refuse  to  attend  the  demonstrations;  nor  did  the
Professors  of  the  Faculty  of  Arts;  nor  Dr.  Grant,  Dr.  Lindley,  nor
Mr.  Graham.  But,  with  the  exception  of  these  three  last  gentlemen,
whose  conduct  throughout  has  commanded  my  respect,  I  never  saw
any  of  the  medical  faculty:  if  any  ever  were  present,  it  could  have
been  only  to  reconnoitre  unobserved  by  me.  The  Irish,  the  Welsh,
and  four  of  the  six  Scotch  medical  Professors,  held  meeting  after
meeting  of  the  faculty  or  of  the  Hospital  committee,  which  my  di»-
gust  prevented  me  from  attending.  At  these  meetings  I  know  that
the  most  bitter  feelings  against  me  were  manifested,  and  matters  dis-
cussed which  were  perfectly  irrelevant,  but  the  introduction  of  which
showed  the  hostility  of  certain  parties.  I  have  always  acted  in  the
most  honourable  and  correct  manner;  and  dare  any  examination  of
my  conduct.  I  had,  however,  given  great  offence  by  urging,  with
the  senate  of  the  London  University,  the  hardship  and  inutility  of
compelling  attendance  upon  particular  courses  of  lectures,  and  ea-
pecially  upon  lectures  on  morbid  anatomy  because  the  morbid  anatomy
of  a  disease  is  as  much  a  part  of  the  disease,  and  as  much  to  be
explained  at  length  in  lectures  on  the  practice  of  medicine,  sui^ry,
and  midwifery,  as  the  symptoms  and  history;  and,  indeed,  cannot
be  taught  with  advantage  separately  from  the  symptoms.  Distinct
lectures  on  morbid  anatomy  must  be  superfluous,  if  professors  of
the  practice  of  medicine,  surgery,  and  midwifery  perform  their  duty:
and  the  London  Universi^  has  at  last  yielded  to  the  opinion  I  de-
fended. I  found  that  I  also  had  given  great  ofience  by  declaring  in
public  that  the  College  was  founded,  not  for  the  Professors,  but  for
the  diffusion  of  knowledge,  and  that  the  fees  of  the  Professors  were
but  a  secondary  consideration  and  established  solely  to  induce  them
to  diffuse  knowledge.

"Among  the  puerilities  talked  by  the  Professors,  both  at  these
meetings  and  out  of  them,  it  was  predicted  that  the  number  of
medical  students  would  be  seriously  reduced  the  ensuing  winter,  that
not  one  would  come  from  Bristol,  and  that  I  should  have  scarcely
any  class  at  all.

"  At  length  Dr.  Lindley  and  Mr.  Cooper  waited  upon  me  in  the
name  of  the  Medical  Committee  of  the  Hospital.  They  brought
the  following  acknowledgment  of  my  right  to  practise  mesmerism  in
the  Hospital: —


«


ResoWed — '  That  the  (Medical)  Committee  fully  recognize  Dr.  Elliot-
son's  andoubted  right  to  employ  animal  magnetism  as  a  remedial  agent  in  the
wards  of  the  Hospital,  when  he  considers  it  necessary  to  do  so.  But  that
the  Committee  are  anxious  to  know  whether  Dr.  Elliotson  has  been  correctly
understood  as  not  intending  to  continue  in  the  Hospital  the  exhibition  of  the
experiments  on  that  subject.'


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  423

"  Dr.  Lindley  and  Mr.  Cooper  confessed  to  me  that  they  could
not  imagine  that  my  demonstrations  would  hurt  the  hospital;  and
Dr.  Lindley,  in  his  own  noble  and  honest  manner,  declared  that  he
thought  the  facts  which  he  had  witnessed  were  very  curious  and  de-
served investigation.  The  feeling,  however,  for  what  reason  they
could  not  tell,  was  so  strong,  that  they  conceived  my  best  course
was  to  give  up  the  demonstrations.  Mr.  Cooper  suggested,  as  in-
deed Dr.  Davis  had  done,  that  I  should  show  the  patients  in  my
own  house,  or  some  house  in  the  neighbourhood.  Dr.  Davis
recommended  a  public-house.  But  I  declined  to  exhibit  hospital
patients  to  a  number  of  persons  anywhere  but  in  the  hospital.  For
the  sake  of  peace,  therefore,  I  consented  never  to  show  the  pheno-
mena again  in  the  theatre  of  the  Hospital,  unless  my  colleagues
approved  of  the  list  of  those  to  whom  I  vrished  to  demonstrate  them :
and  both  gentlemen  agreed  that  this  ought  to  content  the  party.  It,
however,  did  not  content  them.  They  still  refused  to  come  and  ex-
amine into  the  phenomena;  and,  when  I  sent  to  the  medical  com-
mittee a  list  of  many  of  the  highest  names  in  and  out  of  the  pro-
fession, who  had  applied  for  permission  to  witness  my  facts,  they
absolutely  refused  to  read  it.  The  following  are  the  words  of  the
official  answer  of  the  secretary: —

"«Jaly6, 1836.
*' '  Your  letter,  addressed  to  the  Medical  Committee  yesterday,  was  forth-
with laid  before  the  meeting  specially  summoned  for  its  consideration. The
Committee  determined  not  to  read  the  list  of  names  appended  thereto.'

"  I  had  proposed  that  a  committee  should  be  formed  to  investi-
gate my  observations.  It  was  to  consist  of  gentlemen  from  different
schools,  and  I  requested  Drs.  Grant,  Lindley,  and  Sharpey,  and
Mr.  Graham  to  be  upon  it.  Mr.  Graham  decuned  on  the  score  of
his  great  engagements,  but  Drs.  Grant  and  Lindley  consented.
From  Dr.  Sharpey  I  received  the  following  letter: —

<«  <  68,  Torrington  Square,
** '  Monday  Morning,  14th  May.

" '  My  dear  Sir, — I  was  all  yesterday  in  the  country,  and  arrived  in
town  at  a  very  late  hour,  otherwise  I  would  have  sooner  replied  to  your  note.

*<  *  From  what  I  have  read  and  seen  of  the  so-called  mesmeric  phenomena,
I  am  convinced  that  some  of  these  phenomena  really  are  what  they  $eem  to  be,
and  possess  a  very  high  degree  of  physiological  interest;  moreover,  I  know
that  there  are  other  effects  supposed  to  be  produced  by  mesmeric  operation,
of  a  much  more  extraordinary  character,  the  reality  of  which,  though  I
frankly  own  I  do  not  believe  in  it,  is  admitted  by  physicians  of  intelligence
and  experience,  and  which,  on  that  account,  are  entitled  to  a  fair  examina-
tion. These  being  my  sentiments,  which  I  have  never  hesitated  to  express,
you  cannot  suppose  me  indifferent  to  the  subject,  or  disposed  to  treat  with
neglect  or  disregard  your  experiments  in  the  Hospital,  but  I  have  refrained
from  participating  in  or  witnessing  these  experiments,  for  two  reasons.  First,
from  what  1  have  heard  of  these  exhibitions,  (I  use  the  word  respectfully)  I
am  inclined  to  think  that,  however  different  may  be  your  intention,  they  are
calculated  rather  to  minister  to  the  popular  love  of  the  marvellous  than  to  afford
an  advantageous  opportunity  of  testing  the  reality  of  the  effects  produced  as  to
the  alleged  efficacy  of  mesmerism  as  a  remedial  agent ;  and  secondly,  in  the
present  state  of  opinion  among  the  public  and  the  profession,  respecting
animal  magnetism,  (he  frequent  repetition  of  such  exhibitions  in  the  Hospital
has  appeared  to  me  not  altogether  Judicious.

oo2


424  Still  more  Mesmeric  News  from  India,  ifc.

'^'OfGourse,  I  am  far  from  finding  fault  with  you  for  entertaining  dif-
ferent opinions,  but  as  these  eihibitions  still  continue,  and  my  own  senti-
ments regarding  them  remain  unaltered,  I  trust  yon  will  pardon  me  for
declining  your  invitation,  however  flattering  it  may  be,  as  I  wish  to  avoid
connecting  myself,  even  indirectly,  with  proceedings  which  seem  to  me
objectionable.

"  *  I  am,  my  dear  Sir,

"  *  Very  truly  your's,

"*  W.  Shakpey.
*<  <  Dr.  Elliotson,  &c.  &c.

"The  public  exhibitions,  however,  as  they  were  termed,  were
discontinued;  but  Dr.  Sharpey  still  never  thought  proper  to  witness
the  facts,  which  it  surely  was  nis  duty,  as  a  teacher  of  physiology,
to  go  and  witness,  that  he  might  treat  the  subject  properly  in  his
lectures.  Entreated  on  all  sides  to  exhibit  the  phenomena,  I  requested
of  the  Council  permission  to  demonstrate  them  in  one  of  the  Uieatres
of  the  College,  when  this  was  not  in  use.  But  I  was  refused.  One
of  the  Council,  whose  goodness  and  liberality  render  him  an  ornament
to  the  Jewish  nation  and  to  England,  moved  the  reconsideration  of
the  refusal  or  made  a  motion  for  permission ;  but  in  vain.  I  hear
that  he  entreated  the  Council  to  witness  the  phenomena  and  iudge
for  themselves  as  he  had  done ;  but  in  vain.  Yes,  the  majonty  of
the  Council,  perfectly  ignorant  of  the  subject,  refused  to  go  to  learn
Anything  of  it  before  they  passed  judgment  upon  it;  and  among
these  were  legislators,  barristers,  and  one  physician.  Tet  this
same  Council  gave  permission  for  the  exhibition  of  a  calculating
boy  to  the  public,  at  so  much  a  head,  and  tickets  were  purchased
by  any  one,  as  for  a  concert."'

*'  On  December  27th,  I  received  a  resolution  of  council,  from
the  Hospital  Committee, —

<*  *That  they  be  instructed  to  take  steps,  forthwith,  for  the  discharge  of
Elizabeth  Okey  from  the  Hospital.'

"  I  immediately  showed  the  paper  to  the  apothecary,  who  said
that  he  had  known  of  the  resolution  several  days  before,  as  well  as
of  another,  which  I  had  not  yet  received  from  the  house  committee,
viz.,  that  the  practice  of  mesmerism  should  be  immediately  discon-
tinued. I  proceeded  to  the  house  of  the  Treasurer  of  the  College
and  Hospital,  and  he  informed  me  that  the  second  resolution  had
also  been  passed.  I,  therefore,  at  once  wrote  the  following  letter
to  the  secretary  of  the  Council.

X  <**  Ticket  of  Admission

to  the

Exhibition

of  the

Calculating  Powers

of  the

Sicilian  Boy,

Mangiamele !

in  the

Theatre  of  the  University  College,

On  Monday,  August  13th,  1838.

Admission  lOs. '  *'


comtnumcated  by  Dr,  Elliotson.  425


iC  <


'  Sir, — I  have  just  received  informatioii,  that  the  Coancil,  without  any
interview  or  communiaUion  with  me,  has  ordered  my  patient,  Elizabeth  Okey,
to  be  instantly  discharged,  and  forbidden  me  to  cure  my  patients  with  mes-
merism. I  onh  am  the  proper  person  to  jodge  when  my  patients  are  in  a  fit
state  to  be  discharged,  and  what  treatment  is  proper  for  their  cases.

'*  *  As  a  gentleman  in  the  first  place,  and  as  a  physician  in  the  next,  I
feel  myself  compelled  at  once  to  resign  my  office  of  Professor  of  the  principles
and  practice  of  medicine,  and  of  clinical  medicine  in  the  College,  and  of
Physician  to  the  Hospital ;  and  hereby  resign  them  all,  and  will  never  enter
either  building  again,

''  *  When  I  was  made  Professor,  I  received  a  class  of  90, — the  class  is
now  197, — even  13  more  than  at  Christmas  last  year;  and,  as  there  were  24
entries  after  Christmas  then,  the  whole  number  of  the  present  session  would,
no  doubt,  have  been  above  220.

"  *  I  have  not  received  my  fees  this  session.  It  is  my  wish  that  they  be
all  refunded  to  the  young  gentlemen,  who  are  perfectly  welcome  to  the
lectures  which  I  have  already  delivered.

*' '  I  have  the  honour,  &C.

'**  John  Elliotson.
***  Conduit  Street,  27th  December,  1838.'

"  You  will  agree  with  me,  gentlemen,  that,  to  hold  office  one
moment  on  such  terms,  and  under  men  capable  of  acting  in  a  manner
at  once  insulting  and  irrational,  would  have  been  impossible.  If  I
was  unfit  to  determine  when  my  patients  were  in  a  state  to  be  dis-
charged, and  how  thej  were  to  be  treated,  I  ought  to  have  been
dismissed.  But,  while  I  held  office,  I  was  to  be  considered  fit  to
judge  of  these  points.  Had  my  colleagues  in  the  hospital  possessed
a  becoming  spirit,  and  felt  what  was  due  to  themselves  and  the
profession,  they  would  have  resisted  this  infringement  of  their  gene-
ral rights,  whatever  their  opinion  of  mesmerism,  even  if  they  had
attended  to  it  sufficiently  to  justify  an  opinion.  Indeed  they  were
bound  to  act  thus,  since  they  had  resolved  months  before  in  com-
mittee, that  they  acknowledged  '  my  undoubted  right^  to  practice
mesmerism  in  the  Hospital.  But  this  I  could  hardly  expect,  since
they  were  so  forgetful  of  academic  propriety,  that,  in  their  lectures
Dr.  Thompson  designated  my  patient  Okev  '  an  impostor,'  and  Mr.
Liston,  the  bosom  friend  of  the  editor  of  the  Lancet,  called  mes-
merism '  the  most  impudent  of  modern  humbugs,'  and  indeed  pro-
nounced me  to  the  students,  in  a  public  room  of  the  Hospital,  to
be  *  a  tom-fool.'  The  insult  was  the  greater,  as  I  was  senior  phy-
sician, was  thought  to  have  greatly  raised  the  reputation  and  num-
bers of  the  school,  and  had  been  the  main  cause  of  the  establishment
of  the  Hospital,  although  I  gave  great  offence  at  the  time  to  some
of  the  Professors  for  honestly  pointing  out  that  the  Medical  School
was  inefficient  without  an  Hospital.  The  conduct  of  the  Council
was  irrational,  since  the  majority  refused  to  witness  the  experiments
upon  a  subject  of  which  they  were  utterly  ignorant,  and  to  have  an
interview  with  me  for  the  purpose  of  enquiring  into  the  business.
They  suspended  a  practice  which  was  perfectly  innocent,  simple,
and  devoid  of  expense,  and  had  worked  and  was  working  many
most  remarkable  cures,  even  in  cases  which  had  resisted. all  other
treatment  and  had  been  sent  out  of  other  Hospitals  as  incurable, —
all  which  they  well  knew. The  College  was  thriving  this  winter  as


426  Still  more  Mesmeric  News  from  India,  ^c.

much  as  last;  my  class  was  larger  than  ever  it  had  been  at  this
period  of  the  season;  and  the  Hospital  was  crowded  with  patients
and  pupils.  The  Council,  completely  unknown  in  science  or  litera-
ture, as  they  all  are,  with  two  or  three  exceptions,  proved  themselves
totally  unfit  to  conduct  a  place  of  education,  and  more  especially
one  which  boasted  to  be  founded  on  the  most  liberalprinciples  and
to  be  free  from  the  prejudices  of  old  Universities.  They  put  a  blot
upon  the  Institution  which  will  never  be  erased."

But  I  must  present  another  Indian  letter,  written  not  by
a  medical  man,  but  by  a  gentleman  sent  out  by  the  Court  of
Directors  to  make  a  railway  survey.

Another  Painless  Amputation. By  Dr.  Esdaile.
"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Englishman.

"  June  8rd,  1846.

"  Sir, — Being  on  a  visit  at  this  place,  it  was  my  intention
to  have  been  present  at  the  hospital  at  Hooghly  on  Monday
next^  to  witness  some  surgical  operations  by  Dr.  Esdaile^  upon
persons  in  a  mesmeric  trance,  which  were  to  be,  and  I  expect
will  be,  (with  the  exception  of  the  following  cases)  performed
in  the  presence  of  several  gentlemen  from  Calcutta.  This
morning  I  met  Dr.  Esdaile,  when  our  conversation  turned
upon  the  proposed  proceedings  of  Monday  next.  He  expressed
much  regret  that  he  should  be  unable  to  show  us  two  interest-
ing cases,  which  he  had  endeavoured  to  reserve  for  the  occasion;
the  one,  a  man  from  whom  he  was  to  have  removed  a  tumour
of  about  one  hundred  weight,  the  other  was  the  amputation
of  a  woman^s  leg.  His  disappointment  arose  from  the  follow-
ing causes : — These  two  persons,  with  some  others,  had  been
several  days  in  a  state  of  readiness  for  operating  upon,  being
under  complete  mesmeric  influence.  The  man  either  got  tired
of  waiting  day  after  day,  or  lost  his  resolution  and  quitted  the
hospital ;  and  the  woman  was  sinking :  she  had  been  attacked
with  fever,  and  had  become  less  susceptible  of  mesmeric  in-
fluence. She  was  this  morning,  however,  to  all  appearance,
in  a  perfect  trance,  and  he  felt  that  he  should  be  doing  her  a
great  injustice  to  delay  the  operation  any  longer,  as  he  con-
sidered that  her  life  would  be  endangered  thereby.  He  had
therefore  resolved  upon  amputating  the  limb  at  once.  I  ex-
pressed a  desire  to  be  present,  and  accompanied  Dr.  Esdaile
to  the  hospital ;  and  the  following  are  the  facts  of  the  case  as
I  observed  them  : —

'^  The  woman  was  lying  upon  a  charpoy,  and  one  of  the
assistants  waa  leaning  over  her  head  mesmerising  her ;  the
charpoy  was  then  removed,  and  placed  opposite  to  a  window


communicated  by  Dr.  EUiotson,  427

which  was  opened  to  admit  light ;  I  then  looked  attentively
at  the  patient  who^  to  all  appearance^  waa  in  a  most  tranquil
sleep.

''Dr.  Esdaile  prepared  for  the  operation,  and  I  placed
myself  so  as  both  to  see  what  the  doctor  did,  and  to  observe
the  countenance  and  movements  (if  any  should  take  place)  of
the  patient.  The  leg  was  taken  off  a  little  below  the  knee,  and
I  was  surprised  at  the  small  quantity  of  blood  that  flowed
from  the  wound,  being  not  more  than  two,  or  at  the  most
three,  table  spoonsfuU.  The  thigh  and  knee  from  whence  the
leg  had  been  taken,  were,  as  well  as  every  other  part  of  her
body,  perfectly  motionless,  and  the  only  evidence  that  existed
that  the  doctor  was  not  operating  upon  a  corpse,  was  the  heav-
ing of  her  chest  in  respiration ;  she  was  not  held,  or  tied  down
in  any  way,  and  during  the  whole  operation  not  the  least  move-
ment or  change  in  her  limbs,  body,^  or  countenance,  took
place;  she  continued  in  the  same  apparently  easy  repose  as
at  first,  and  I  have  no  reason  but  to  believe,  that  she  was  at
perfect  ease.

"After  the  operation.  Dr.  Esdaile  left  her  to  awake  na-
turally, which  she  did  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  As  soon
as  she  was  awake,  I  observed  the  stump  of  her  leg  begin  to
shake  or  quiver,  as  if  convulsively,  which  I  had  observed,  as
above  stated,  was  not  the  case  previously.

"  The  conversation  that  followed  between  the  patient,  the
doctor,  and  his  assistants,  was  in  Bengalee,  and  unintelligi-
ble to  myself ;  but  was  translated  to  me  as  it  proceeded.  It
was  to  the  following  effect : — That  the  burning  pain  was  gone
from  her  ankle,  (the  seat  of  the  disease  for  which  the  leg  was
amputated)  and  that  she  now  felt  a  sort  of  prickly  pain ;  that
she  had  had  a  good  and  undisturbed  sleep  without  dreams  or  pain ;
that  she  was  ready  to  have  her  leg  amputated,  whether  the
doctor  could  get  her  sufficiently  to  sleep  for  the  purpose  or  not,
as  she  was  so  desirous  of  recovering.  Upon  receiving  ocular  de-
monstration that  the  operation  had  been  performed,  her  coun-
tenance expressed  surprise  and  pleasure,  and,  as  if  doubtful  of
the  fact,  I  observed  her  hand  pass  over  the  stump,  apparently

y  What  will  Dr.  Marshall  Hall,  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  and  the  reflex-
moTement  party  say  to  this  woman,  and  all  the  other  patients  who  soffered
amputations  at  Hooghly,  for  not  moving  the  sound  limb  while  the  other  was
cutting  off?  See  my  Pamphlet,  pp.  19,  50.  Mr.  Wakley  assumes  a  scien-
tific air  to  the  members  of  the  House  of  Commons  who  question  him  about
the  man  in  Nottinghamshire,  and  tells  them  that  the  fellow  was  proved  to
be  an  impostor  by  a  tcientific  point  J  Because  he  did  not  move  the  other
leg  while  the  diseased  leg  was  cut,  Mr.  Walcley,  imitating  Dr.  M.  Hall,  says
he  had  shammed  well — had  not  been  sufficiently  well  trained.  Alas  for
the  characters  of  all  the  poor  '^  untutored  Indians."


428  Still  more  Mesmeric  News  from  India,  ifc.

to  test  the  reality  of  what  she  saw ;  she  then  said,  that  she
knew  not  how  it  had  been  done.

"  Shortly  afterwards,  I  quitted  the  hospital,  leaving  her
apparently  composed,  and  waving  a  punka  over  her  face.
"  Such  are  the  simple  facts  of  this  case.

"  I  am.  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

"  F.  W.  SiMMS,  C.  E."

Dr.  Esdaile,  like  myself,  has  found  the  advantage  of  shew-
ing his  facts  to  the  non-professional  world. It  is  they  who
will  compel  the  medical  world  to  attend  to  the  subject. The
week  before  last,  in  August,  1846,  a  country  practitioner  called
upon  me  to  thank  me,  he  said,  for  having  given  a  diagnosis
in  his  case  five  years  ago  which  proved  correct,  and  for  having
done  him  great  good. I  supposed  that  he  had  some  other
object  also ;  and  he  added  that  he  was  very  anxious  to  know
something  of  mesmerism,  for  his  patients  now  were  always
talking  of  it  and  asking  him  questions,  and  he  found  it  very
unpleasant  to  know  nothing  about  the  matter. ''But,''  I
replied,  ''  you  asked  me  no  questions  about  it  I  dare  say  when
you  were  with  me  five  years  ago.'' "No," he  answered.
Then  said  I,  "  You  believed  at  that  time  all  that  Mr.  Wakley
told  you. Mr.  Wakley  boldly  declared  that  he  had  proved  it
to  be  a  complete  humbug,  related  experiments  of  the  truth
of  which  you  could  know  nothing,  and  you  did  not  think  it
worth  while  to  listen  to  me  who  never  deceived  the  profession,
never  led  them  into  error,  never  made  a  medical  statement
which  time  did  not  prove  to  be  perfectly  accurate." "  Yes,
sir,"  he  confessed,  "  I  must  say  it  was  so. I  did  believe
him  and  on  his  authority  that  mesmerism  was  all  imposition.
But  now  I  hear  of  it  daily  from  aU  my  patients,  and  really
you  must  allow  it  is  unpleasant, very  unpleasant, to  be
unable  to  answer  any  question  about  it." I  begged  him  to
call  the  next  day :  and  I  then  showed  him  a  few  facts  which
satisfied  him  that  Mr.  Wakley  had  led  the  profession  all
astray. Like  an  honest  man  he  believed  his  eyes  and  owned
it,  and  assured  me  that  he  would  order  all  the  numbers  of  JTie
Zoist  and  attend  to  the  subject  with  all  the  diligence  in  his
power.

A  complete  revolution  must  now  take  place.  Those
who,  like  this  very  worthy  practitioner,  could  not  believe
that  Mr.  Wakley  could  be  so  cruel  as  to  make  fools  of  them,
but  wrote  in  earnest,  and  those  who  have  long  known
mesmerism  to  be  true,  but  dishonestly  assured  their  patients
it  was  not, — must  now  turn  round  without  loss  of  time.  I
should  not  be  surprized  if  Dr.  Forbes  were  to  have  an  article


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotsan.  429

favourable  to  Dr.  Esdaile'a  incontroyertible  proofs  of  its  tmth
in  his  next  number,  notwithstanding  he,  seven  years  ago/
and  a  few  months  ago/  denounced  it  as  an  imposition  and
delusion ;  and  notwithstanding  his  patron.  Sir  James  Clark,
to  whom,  with  a  small  number  of  his  firiends,  I  did  the  fiivour
of  shewing  the  phenomena  of  the  Okeys  eight  years  ago
and  who  must  know  all  the  astounding  facts  in  T%e  Zoiat,
had  the  silly  hardihood  since  the  last  number  appeared,  to
ask  a  nobleman  who  mentioned  the  great  benefit  he  had
received  from  mesmerism,  whether  he  really  did  believe  in
such  nonsense.


I  have  just  received  from  Mr.  Chandler  the  following
account  of  another  painless  tooth  extraction  effected  through
his  energy.  Painless  operations  have  now  been  performed  in
the  University  College  Hospital,  the  Middlesex,  and  the
London,  The  introduction  of  a  seton,  and  two  tooth  ex-
tractions.

Ca$e  of  Painless  Tooth  extraction  at  the  London  Hospital,

*^  58,  Paradise  Street,  Botherhithe,
"  August  27th,  1846.

"  My  dear  Sir, — ^Through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Luke,  I
was  enabled  yesterday  to  show  a  case  of  painless  mesmeric
tooth-drawing  at  the  London  Hospital  b^ore  about  eighty
persons ;  since  witnessing  the  two  exhibitions  at  Mr.  Bell's,
reported  in  the  last  Zoist,  he  has  been  very  anxious  to  show
a  case  at  the  Hospital,  for  the  benefit  of  the  students  and  a
few  sceptical  friends.

''  Finding  accidentally  that  my  patient  Payne  had  a  wise
tooth  very  tender  and  troublesome,  which  he  wished  to  be
relieved  of,  I  embraced  the  opportunity,  though  I  have  a  very
great  objection  to  anything  approaching  to  a  public  exhibition
where  mesmerism  is  concerned,  as  I  feel  persuaded  it  is  not
the  way  to  convince  sceptics — so  few  are  enabled  to  examine
the  cases  for  themselves  with  sufficient  closeness — so  that  the
greater  part  are  sure  to  leave  even  more  sceptically  than  they
came.  Such  I  feel  convinced  was  the  case  yesterday — ^many
expressed  themselves  perfectly  satisfied  of  the  genuineness  of
the  case — some  doubted,  not  being  able  to  examine  personally

>  He  thus  spoke  of  me, — that  '*  abo^e  all  we  lamented  to  see  the  great
delusion  supported  by  one  of  the  ablest  physicians  of  this  country,  filling  the
most  important  chair  in  the  largest  medical  school  of  the  kingdom." — British
and  Foreign  Medical  Review  for  April,  1839.  p.  304..

»  **  It  is  well  known  that  the  two  most  striking  and  attractite  delusions  of
recent  times  are  homoeopathy  and  meimerism" — Paper  by  him  in  the  Atha*
n4gum,  Feb.  28,  1846.


480  Still  more  Mesmeric  News  from  India,  ifc.

— and  there  were  I  believe  a  few  Keyitbs,  who  say  in  their
haste, '  all  men  are  liars/  Why  do  such  men  take  the  trouble
to  witness  our  beautiful  phenomena,  when  they  are  previously
determined  to  consider  it  all  collusion  ?  they  had  much  better
imitate  their  prototype,  and  say,  when  asked  to  witness  mes-
meric experiments,  'My  mind  is  di£Perently  constituted.  I
would  not  believe  them  if  they  would  swear  they  felt  no  pain.
I  know  human  kind  too  well  to  be  deceived.'

"  On  putting  my  patient  to  sleep,  he  was  of  course  sub-
jected to  the  usual  sceptical  tests,  such  as  pushing  a  pin
through  the  skin  of  the  back  of  the  hand  seaton-wise,**  tick-
ling his  nose  and  ears  with  a  straw,  &c. ;  none  of  which  dis-
turbed him,  until  the  drum  was  touched,  which  really  made
him  shrink;  indeed,  it  was  done  so  roughly  that  the  ear
was  made  to  bleed/^  and  he  came  to  me  in  the  evening  com-
plaining of  deep-seated  pain  in  the  ear.  A  few  passes  over
the  part  removed  it.  I  cannot  account  for  his  feeling  this,
unless  by  the  very  great  delicacy  of  the  membrane,  and  the
fact  that  his  hearing  is  always  particularly  acute  when  mes-
merised, as  he  hears — ^in  common  with  most  of  my  patients —
the  lowest  whisper,  though  not  sensible  to  loud  noises.*'

''  The  tooth  was  very  dexterously  extracted  by  one  of  the
senior  students;  and,  as  on  the  former  occasions,  his  mouth
remained  open  and  the  head  back  until  I  moved  him.  Nothing
could  have  been  more  satisfiactory  to  a  candid  mind,  though
so  few  of  those  present  were  able  to  see,  that  I  have  no
doubt  many  left  quite  as  sceptical  as  they  came :  persons
must  mesmerise  and  examine  the  matter  for  themselves  to
become  thoroughly  convinced.

"  If  you  think  this  account  worth  publishing,  please  to
send  it  on  to  the  editor  of  The  Zoist.

"  Believe  me,  yours  very  faithfully,

''  Thos.  Chanblbb.^'


I  am  happy  to  furnish  another  amputation  in  the  mesmeric
state,  and  to  say  that  the  operator  was,  Hke  Mr.  Chandler,  for-
merly a  pupil  of  mine  at  University  College.  Thus  some  of  the

b  By  Dr.  Pareira,  who  has  been  heard  to  call  mesmerism  d— d
humbug. — Zoiit.

c  By  Dr.  Little. There  is  some  fear  that  the  drum  is  injured. — ZoUi.

<i  The  annsthesia  or  loss  of  fseliog  is  not  always  unirersal,  or,  if  so,
not  of  equal  intensity  throughout  the  system.  I  have  had  three  patients  in
whom  it  did  not  occur  above  the  collar*bones,  but  was  complete  below  them :
I  have  had  some  insensible  patients  with  patches  of  sensibility,  and  when
a  person  has  been  insensible  to  pinching  and  cutting  of  the  surface,  I  have
known  her  start  and  even  be  awakened  by  dreadful  darts  of  pain  along  the
nerves.-^ J.  Elliotson.


camnmnicated  by  Dr.  Ettiotson.  431

seed  fell  upon  good  ground,  though  much  upon  stony  ground :
and  much  that  would  have  come  up  was  choked  by  the  thorns
of  my  colleagues  at  the  University  College,  the  medical  jour-
nalists, and  those  established  practitioners  whose  sole  motive
is  wordliness.

Case  of  Amputation  at  Bridgewater. By  Mr.  King.

"  About  the  month  of  April  last  I  was  requested  to  see
John  Pepperal,  aged  19  years,  who  had  been  suffering  for
some  time  before  from  inflammation  and  swelling  of  the
ankle  joint,  but  had  continued  his  work  up  to  the  present
date.  On  an  examination  of  the  part  I  found  that  an  abscess
had  formed  near  the  external  malleolus,  and  I  opened  it.
Then  other  abscesses  formed  around  the  joint,  and,  finding  his
constitution  giving  way,  I  proposed  to  remove  the  limb  in
May  last,  which  he  would  not  consent  to,  and  from  that  time
up  to  the  18th  of  August  it  was  my  painful  duty  to  visit  the
poor  fellow,  and  occasionally  during  that  time  to  open  ab-
scesses first  in  one  place,  then  in  another,  then  to  lay  open
sinuses,  &c.,  Sec,  for  even  slight  relief;  and  so  exquisitely
pair^  was  any  motum,  that  he  has  often  begged  of  me  not  to
move  him  when  I  visited  him,  as  it  was  hours  before  he  got
any  ease  again ;  even  touching  the  bedstead,  or  walking  across
his  bedroom,  gave  him  great  pain.  This  is  only  mentioned
as  a  proof  of  the  extraordinary  power  mesmerism  must  have
had  over  him,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel.

"  On  the  morning  of  the  18th  of  August  he  made  up  his
mind  to  have  the  leg  removed,  being  then  reduced  almost  to
a  skeleton.  The  pulse  was  180;  night  sweats  and  diarrhoea  were
present.  After  some  consideration  as  to  whether  he  would
bear  it,  I  resolved  to  try  the  effects  of  mesmerism,  and  called
the  same  day  on  Mr.  J.  S.  to  assist  me  by  putting  him  into  the
insensible  state  preparatory  to  the  operation,  who  kindly  con-
sented, and  visited  lum  three  times  a  day  for  the  two  days  before
the  operation.  It  was  only  on  the  evening  of  the  20th  that
insensibility  was  produced,  and  Mr.  J.  S.  wished  a  delay  of  a
few  days  to  take  place  even  then.  But  this  I  could  not  con-
sent to,  as  I  felt  that  my  patient's  state  required  promptitude,
and  resolved  on  operating  the  foUoyring  day  at  4  o'clock.  This
was  kept  to  ourselves,  and  it  was  determined  beforehand  that
Mr.  J.  S.  should  proceed  to  the  house  half  an  hour  before  and
inform  us  when  he  had  got  him  into  a  state  of  insensibility.
When  we  received  the  information  I  took  the  necessary  appa-
ratus up  stairs,  and  prepared  the  table  for  his  reception.  All
being  in  readiness,  we  removed  him  to  the  operating  table,


432  SHU  mare  Mesmeric  News  from  India,  ^c,

applied  the  tourniquet  and  arrested  the  circulation^  and  I  made
the  first  circular  incision  through  the  skin  unthout  the  sligthest
expression  of  pain  either  by  distortion  of  the  features  or  by
cries  and  moaning.  But  during  the  second  and  third  incision
through  the  superficial  and  deep  muscles,  he  roared  most
violently.  This  may  be  accounted  for  by  parties  entering  the
room  at  that  time  and  disturbing  the  influence  of  the  mes-
merism. But  a  few  passes  quieted  him  again  ]  and  sawing
the  bone,  taking  up  the  arteries  and  tying  them,  sponging
the  stump  and  allowing  it  to  be  exposed  for  some  time  after-
wards, dressing  the  stump,  and  removing  him  to  the  bed,
was  cM  done  withotU  any  apparent  suffering.  We  (that  is,
myself  and  friends,  the  surgeons)  left  the  room,  and  desired
to  be  called  when  he  awoke,  which  took  place  in  about  ten
minutes.  I  then  went  up  to  him  and  said,  'Well,  John,
how  are  ye  ?*  '  Oh,'  said  he,  '  then  you  be  come  to  do  it,
be  ye?'  '  What !'  was  my  reply.  He  raised  himself  a  little,
and,  looking  towards  the  stump,  removed  the  sheet  that  was
covering  it,  and  exclaimed,  '  Why  you  have  done  it ;  so  you've
got'n  off  then !  Thank  Ood.'  On  the  following  evening  I
asked  him  what  he  recollected  of  the  operation,  and  his
reply  was  that  he  felt  the  cutting ;  but  he  described  it  as  '  a
dull,  jagging  pain,  not  at  all  like  the  sharp  pain  of  lancing
my  ankle :'  recollected  the  feeling  of  cold  water  against  the
stump,  and  of  some  one  asking  for  a  probe,  and  says  that  he
has  often  suffered  much  greater  pain  before  the  operation
than  during  the  operation  itself.

"  Abraham  Kino."

A  gentleman  present,  Mr.  Haviland,  a  surgeon  of  Bridge-
water,  mentioned  by  me  in  my  last  paper,  honourably  ex-
pressed to  Mr.  S.  Selfe  his  conviction  that  mesmerism  had  been
eminently  successful  in  the  case,  and  had  saved  the  patient  a
vast  amount  of  suffering.

Here  was  a  striking  proof  of  the  reality  and  advantage
of  mesmerism.  This  poor  man  could  not  be  pronounced  in-
sensible to  pain,  nor  courageous,  nor  a  cunning  impostor.  The
pain  which  he  felt,  and  roared  out  from,  proves  all  this.  He
would  not  have  felt  any  pain  had  mesmerism  been  begun
much  earlier  (probably  indeed  he  would  have  been  cured  and
required  no  operation) ;  had  the  points  of  the  fingers  been
kept  on  the  eyes,  or  even  the  hand  on  the  forehead,  or  slow
breathing  upon  his  face  been  kept  up,  during  the  operation,  to
deepen  the  sleep  and  maintain  it.  The  entrance  of  persons
into  the  room  during  the  operation  was  a  thing  which  ought
not  to  have  happened. Great  honour  is  due  to  Mr.  King  for


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.  433

surpassing  in  nobleness  all  our  London  hospital  surgeons.  If
he  and  the  mesmeriser  had  been  previously  familiarized  with
mesmerism^  all  would  have  been  managed  to  perfection.  All
will  be  managed  to  perfection  by  the  profession  before  long.
That  mesmerism  was  not  in  full  play  years  ago^  managed  to
perfection  years  ago,  and  innumerable  poor  creatures  spared
dreadful  agony,  disease^  and  death,  is  the  effect  of  the  efforts
of  Mr.  Wakley  and  his  suite — Dr.  Forbes,  Dr.  Johnson,  and
the  hospital  teachers,  but  above  all  of  Mr.  Wakley,  to  prove
mesmerism  a  delusion  and  imposition.  Were  I  in  his  place,
or  in  any  of  their  places,  the  torments  of  reflection  would
make  me  say  unto  the  "  mountains  to  fall  upon  me  and  the
hiUs  to  cover  me."

I  began  with  a  quotation  from  Dr.  Johnson,  I  will  finish
with  one  from  Dr.  Forbes.

**  To  devote  an  article  to  the  consideratioD  of  animal  magnetiamf  now  that
the  EngUth  praetitUmeri  are,  one  and  all,  aahanud  qf  its  namtf  would  be  a
work  of  supererogation,  if  the  delunon,  unabashed,  were  not  yet  parading
itself  over  some  parts  of  the  contineat."«


•  Britiih  and  Foreign  Medical  Review. April,  1839.


434  Notice f  Books  received^  i^c,

NOTICE.

Dr.  EUtotoon's  Case  of  Spontaneous  Sleep-waking  in  our  next.


BOOX8  RECEIVED.

The  Brain  and  its  Physiology ;  a  Critical  Disquisition  on  the  methods  of
determining  the  relations  subsisting  between  the  Structure  aud  Functions  of
the  Encephalon.  By  Daniel  Noble,  Member  of  the  Royal  College  of
Surgeons  of  England.

Clinical  Illustrations  of  the  Diseases  of  India:  as  exhibited  in  the
Medical  History  of  a  body  of  European  Soldiers,  for  a  series  of  years  from
their  arriyal  in  that  country.  By  William  Geddes,  M.D.,  Member  of  the
Royal  Medical  Society  of  Edinburgh,  and  of  the  Medical  and  Physical
Society  of  Calcutta,  and  late  Surgeon  of  the  Madras  European  Regiment.

Commentary  on  the  Hindu  System  of  Medicine.  By  T.  A.  Wise,  M.D.,
Member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  and  of  the  Royal  Medical  and
Chirurgical  Society ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the  Zoological  Society  of
London,  and  of  the  Philomatic  Society  of  Paris. Calcutta.

Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal.


Errata.

Page  317,  note  2,  for  "  326 ''  read  328.
„ 346,  in  the  note,  for  **  she  "  read  like  young  lady.


436  Believers  and  Disbelievers ;

least  be  better  prepared  to  judge  in  what  direction  our  exer-
tions will  be  most  useful^  and  to  what  extent  they  are  likely
to  succeed.  Besides^  a  knowledge  beforehand  of  what  may
be  expected  to  occur^  together  with  the  fact  that  the  causes
of  such  results  are  beyond  our  control^  may  serve  to  enable
us  to  regard  with  contentment  and  complacency  what  might
have  been  otherwise  felt  as  a  disappointment.

Foremost  amongst  the  causes  of  the  slow  progress  of  mes-
merism^ in  common  with  that  of  other  discoveries  which
extensively  subvert  anterior  canons  of  belief,  is  the  circum-
stance that  nature,  in  accordance  with  her  design — that  the
majority  of  mankind  should  lead  a  life  of  action — has  be-
stowed on  the  great  bulk  a  strong  tendency  to  carry  out
and  act  upon  the  ideas  acquired  in  youth,  and  an  equally
great  indisposition  to  modify  and  reconsider  them.  To  use  i
comparison  of  Carlyle's,  the  clay  once  so  plastic  becomes
too  hard-baked  to  be  moulded  into  any  other  form ;  and  the
same  individuals  who  received  without  questioning,  and
adopted  without  examination,  aU  the  doctrines  of  their
teachers  in  early  life,  will  at  thirty  and  forty  at  once  reject
with  scorn  and  ridicule  irresistible  inferences  from  facts,  for
no  other  cause  than  because  contrary  to  these  early  precepts;
the  grounds  of  their  implicit  faith  in  which,  they  have  never
thought  of  investigating  and  are  unable  to  justify.  Low  in
the  scale  of  intelligence  as  it  necessarily  places  them,  it  is
nevertheless  true,  that  the  great  majority  of  the  opponents  of
mesmerism  have  no  better  ground  to  assign  for  their  disbelief.
Mere  passive  recipients  and  transmitters  of  the  opinions  of  the
teachers  of  their  youth, — they  believe  because  they  were  so
taught,  and  disbelieve  a  novelty  because  contrary  to  this  belief.
Like  lower  animals,  they  are  the  creatures  of  instinct  rather
than  reason,  and  the  cause  of  this  defect,  which  dooms  them
to  an  almost  total  incapability  of  forming  a  correct  judgment
on  novel  questions,  is  to  be  found  in  the  large  predominance
in  their  heads  of  the  organs  of  the  feelings  over  those  of  the
intellect.  It  is  natural  to  all  men  to  be  most  disposed  to
believe  what  is  most  in  accordance  and  best  harmonizes  with
their  previous  belief,  and  vice  versa ;  and  where  the  intellect
is  feeble,  or,  if  not  absolutely  feeble,  associated  with  dispro-
portionately powerful  feeUngs,  new  heterodox  truths  are  never
appreciated  by  it  with  sufficient  force  and  clearness  to  over-
come this  natural  tendency  to  their  rejection.  Little  success
can  be  expected  to  attend  any  endeavour  to  convert  parties
so  constituted.  Labour  is  thrown  away  upon  them,  and  we
must  be  content  to  leave  them  to  themselves,  hugging  the
chains  in  which  their  own  prejudices  have  bound  them,  and


or.  Who  are  the  Fools  f  487

remaining  stationary,  whilst  everything  around  is  progressing,
till  nature  in  her  due  course  replaces  them  by  a  new
generation.

To  preserve  through  life  a  mind  constantly  open  to  the
teachings  of  nature — a  capacity  to  weigh  and  examine  on  its
own  merits  all  evidence  that  comes  before  it,  and  form  a
purely  intellectual  decision,  unfettered  and  unbiassed  by
feelings  which  reverence  and  cleave  to  the  dogmas  of  the  day
and  the  prejudices  of  education,  is  perhaps  the  rarest  of  all
mental  endowments.

Nature  assigns  to  few  the  elevated  post  of  advancing  the
boundaries  of  human  knowledge  by  their  discoveries,  and  is
scarcely  more  prodigal  in  bestowing  those  organizations  which,
combining  good  intellectual  with  high  moral  endowments,
urge  forth  their  possessors  to  the  no  less  dignified  task  of
leading  the  crusade  of  truth  against  the  intrenchments  of
error,  deaf  to  the  petty  calls  of  self-interest  and  expediency,
and  unmoved  alike  by  the  envenomed  shafts  of  slander  or  the
lighter  artillery  of  ridicule.

Many — ^too  many  whose  intellect  is  sufficient  to  grasp  the
truth — ^love  the  safety  to  be  obtained  by  siding  with  the  ma*
jority,  and  barter  a  clear  conscience  and  the  interests  of
humanity  in  exchange  for  present  profit  and  professional
reputation.  And  then  it  is  so  philosophical  to  doubt — so
indicative  of  strength  of  mind.  Can  they  by  any  other
means  half  so  cheaply  procure  a  reputation  for  wisdom  ?  And
cannot  the  reputation  without  the  substance  be  turned  to  more
account  than  the  substance  without  the  reputation  ?  In  this
age  of  the  worship  of  shams,  the  cardinal  principle  of  whose
morality  is  that  the  first  duty  of  a  man  is  to  take  care  of
himself,  meaning  thereby  to  fill  his  purse,  all  sorts  of  hy-
pocrisies and  deceits  have  so  effectually  banded  themselves
together  to  keep  one  another  in  countenance,  and  bad  edu-
cation and  example  have  so  led  men  on  the  road  of  self-
deception,  that  they  appear  to  adopt  the  most  absorbing
selfishness  as  their  rule  of  conduct,  not  only  without  self-
reproach  but  with  self-laudation.

Although  it  may  appear  almost  a  truism  to  state  that,
when  evidence,  superabundant  in  quantity,  decisive  in  ten-
dency, and  unexceptionable  in  character,  establishing  certain
conclusions,  exists,  their  rejection  proves  a  mental  defect;
and  all  will  admit  that,  when  adequate  evidence  is  set  before
a  rightly  constituted  mind,  conviction  follows  as  a  necessary
consequence,  and  belief  or  disbelief  is  no  longer  a  matter  of
doubt  or  choice.  Many  circumstances  have  combined  to  pre-
vent this  great  and  influential  cause  of  scepticism  from  being

H  h2


438  Believers  and  Disbelievers ;

so  clearly  recognized  as  it  deserves.  Foremost  amongst  these
is  the  imperfect  diffusion  of  the  knowledge  of  cerebral  phy-
siology^ leading  the  public  to  blend  together  and  confound
under  the  general  and  vague  denomination  of  a  clever  man
various  distinct  kinds  of  intellectual  capacity,  instead  of  ana-
lyzing different  species  of  endowments  and  discriminating
the  widely  different  mental  powers  required  for  each.  It  is
not  yet  sufficiently  well  recognized  that  good  abilities  for  one
pursuit  are  often  associated  with  an  almost  total  incapacity
for  successfully  prosecuting  studies  of  a  different  character;
and,  consequently,  that  men  with  a  deservedly  scientific  repu-
tation in  some  departments  are  not  only  often  no  authorities
on  others,  but  that  it  may  be  difficult  to  find  amongst  the
most  illiterate  any  whose  judgment  would  be  of  less  value.

Besides,  so  extreme  is  the  subdivision  of  labour  at  present
amongst  our  cultivators  of  science,  that  the  most  mediocre
intellect,  if  he  be  ambitious  of  figuring  in  their  ranks,  and
possess  leisure  to  devote  to  this  object,  need  not  despair  of
success,  but  may,  by  counting  and  chronicling  the  spots  on
wings  of  butterflies,  or  the  number  of  stamens  of  a  flower,
or  by  dint  of  translating,  editing,  compiling,  &c.,  achieve
for  his  name  a  notoriety  which  for  the  day  and  hour  shall
cheat  the  public  out  of  reverence  and  throw  into  the  shade
that  of  some  less  bustling  contemporary  whose  original  mind,
imparting  new  light  to  every  subject  it  approaches,  shall  cause
the  name  of  its  possessor  to  live  in  a  futurity  as  long  as  that
of  one  of  the  chosen  few  who  have  imparted  new  principles
to  science.

The  pursuit  of  science,  however,  holds  out  too  few  external
advantages  to  its  followers  to  induce  me  to  wish  to  say  a
syllable  in  disparagement  of  those  who  seek  to  make  a  repu-
tation by  cultivating  the  humblest  of  its  walks,  for  such  an
ambition  is  a  thousand  fold  more  worthy  of  a  rational  being
than  the  objects  to  which  the  great  majority  of  mankind
devote  themselves.  But  at  the  same  time  when  we  hear  and
see  names  having  no  claims  to  deference  paraded  as  authori-
ties against  mesmerism,  and  made  stumbling  blocks  to  the
public,  we  should  be  neglecting  our  duty,  did  we  not  attempt
to  expose  the  delusion  and  show  the  emptiness  and  worth-
lessness  of  many  scientific  reputations.

It  is  not  difficult  to  conceive  that  men  who  achieve  scien-
tific reputations  by  becoming  mere  observers  of  facts  in  paths
struck  out  by  others,  and  often  by  the  expenditure  of  much
less  intellect  and  industry  than  would  suffice  for  successfully
conducting  a  mercantile  establishment,  may  yet  be  greatly
wanting  in  those  higher  faculties  of  reason  and  imagination


or.  Who  are  the  Fbob  ?  439

which  bestow  penetration  and  profundity  and  the  power  of
forming  conceptions  not  limited  by  the  narrow  field  of  pre-
vious observation.  Minds  thus  mutilated  by  nature  make
their  own  experience  the  criterion  of  the  poastbk,  and  cannot
raise  their  vision  to  that  point  of  view  from  which  the  causes
of  wonder  are  clearly  seen  to  be  only  relative.

That  man  should  have  a  faculty  which  gives  him  percep-
tions of  objects  at  millions  of  miles  distance  does  not  astonish
them  at  all^  and  passes  as  a  matter  of  course  upon  which  they
never  reflect;  but,  that  a  patient  in  the  mesmeric  trance
should,  by  some  occult  power  not  called  into  play  in  the
natural  state,  be  able  to  describe  what  is  passing  in  an
adjoining  apartment  separated  by  a  wall  a  foot  thick,  is
pronounced  to  be  not  only  quite  incredible,  but  an  absolute
impossibility.  Thus  is  ignorance  ever  ready  with  dogmatical
assertions  on  points  the  very  conditions  for  forming  a  correct
judgment  on  which  are  beyond  its  comprehension,  instead  of
perceiving  that  it  does  not  possess  the  materials  necessary
for  the  purpose.  When  man  can  satisfactorily  demonstrate
that  he  is  acquainted  with  every  property  of  matter,  then,  but
not  before,  will  be  {he  time  for  pronouncing  opinions  as  to
the  possibility  of  living  beings  acquiring  ideas  of  external
objects  in  some  other  way  than  the  usual  avenues  of  sense.
Meanwhile  one  single  recorded  fact  should  weigh  more
with  us  in  forming  our  judgment  than  the  united  dicta  of
a  hundred  smatterers  in  science ;  the  very  circumstance  of
whose  having  presumed  to  give  an  opinion  on  the  question  of
possibility  is  quite  sufficient  to  show  their  incapacity  for  the
consideration  of  the  subject.  Ignorance  and  presumption,
however,  go  hand  in  hand;  and  so  completely  are  these  parties
blinded  to  the  ridiculous  figure  their  dogmatic  assertions  pre-
sent in  the  eyes  of  all  persons  capable  of  estimating  their  real
value,  that,  finding  themselves  unable  to  allege  any  reasons
in  their  support,  they  adopt  the  usual  resource  of  obstinate
people  and  reassert  and  affirm,  with  a  pertinacity  proportionate
to  their  lack  of  arguments.  In  fact  it  might  be  supposed
they  were  ambitious  of  the  reputation  of  lunacy,  for,  consistent
in  folly,  they  loudly  proclaim  that  rather  than  admit  the  fal-
lability  of  their  judgment,  they  would  reject  the  evidence  of
their  own  senses.

Self-Esteem  contributes  in  adults  to  the  rejection  of  mes-
merism in  common  with  othjer  novelties,  by  imbuing  the
mind  with  a  sense  of  self  sufficiency,  which  indisposes  it  from
condescending  to  accept  the  position  of  a  learner;  and  Love  of
the  Fast  and  Veneration,  by  clinging  to  and  reverencing
early  associations,  the  dicta  of  teachers.  Sec.


440  Believers  and  Disbelievers ;

The  influence  of  these  feelings  in  retarding  the  reception
of  mesmerism  is^  as  might  be  expected,  very  mnch  greater
amongst  the  medical  profession  than  with  the  pnblic  at  large,
the  latter  not  being  afflicted  with  that  pride  of  knowledge,  to
struggle  against  the  abnegation  of  which  in  the  position  of
a  scholar  is  so  difficult  and  unpalatable  to  self-love.  It  might
be  supposed  that  upon  the  announcement  of  a  new  truth  it
would  be  first  received  by  those  whose  previous  study  of  the
science  to  which  it  referred  should  constitute  them  the  best
judges  of  its  value;  and  that  such  would  be  the  case,  were  our
judgments  dependent  upon  intellect  alone,  is  self-evident.
But  history  teaches  us  that  precisely  the  contrary  has  al-
ways taken  place ;  and  the  fact  certainly  presents  a  painful
and  humiliating  picture  of  human  nature.  There  was,  how-
ever, a  circumstance  which  might  have  excited  the  hope  that
the  reception  of  mesmerism  by  medical  physiologists  would
have  formed  a  pleasing  exception  to  this  general  rule,  a  dean
spot  on  a  dirty  page,  viz.,  the  fact  that  all  the  phenomena
produced  by  mesmeric  processes  are  occasionally  evolved
spontaneously  during  disease;  and  possibly  it  would  not
have  been  without  its  effect,  but  for  the  circumstance  that
the  new  agent  promised  to  cure  disease  with  greater  certainty
and  rapidity  than  medicine.  This  was  a  heresy  altogether
unpardonable,  and  treated  accordingly;  and,  greatly  as  it  is
to  their  discredit  as  a  body,  it  is  nevertheless  the  truth,  that
the  medical  profession  are  the  worst  authorities  that  can  be
applied  to  on  the  subject  of  mesmerism.

Another  species  of  mental  defect  operating  to  retard  the
progress  of  mesmerism  is  one  which  has  hitherto  almost  es-
caped observation.  Accident  rather  than  reasoning  first  re-
vealed its  existence,  and  since  this  period  my  opinion  of  its
frequency  and  influence  has  been  constantly  on  the  increase.
In  discussing  one  day  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  my  attention
was  arrested  by  the  very  little  store  our  opponent  seemed  to
place  on  the  value  of  testimony.  His  mind  seemed  instantly
to  dispose  of  any  quantity  of  it,  not  from  being  able  to  trace
or  imagine  any  avenue  for  mistake  or  self-deception,  but  by
the  suggestion  of  bad  faith  on  the  part  of  the  narrator.

When  the  conclusiveness  of  any  testimony  was  urged  upon
him,  and  he  was  called  upon  for  his  objections,  his  invariable
reply  would  be,  with  an  emphasis  that  showed  he  felt  his
query  to  be  most  cogent  and  appropriate, — How  do  we  know
this  man  has  stated  the  truth  and  not  been  trying  to  humbug
us  ?  No  matter  how  numerously  the  cases  might  be  attested,
or  how  unexceptionable  the  character  and  distinguished  the
attainments  of  the  witnesses,  or  how  completely  every  atten-


or,  fFho  are  the  Foob  ?  441

dant  circnmstance  conspired  to  imprint  anthentidty  on  the
statement, — nothing  made  an  impression.

Now,  although  perfectly  ready  to  admit  that  several  cir-
cumstances may  often  combine  to  produce  scepticism  to  tes-
timony, I  nevertheless  believe  that  the  most  frequent  and
influential  cause  of  a  low  estimate  of  the  veracity  of  others
is  a  low  sense  of  the  incumbency  of  truthfulness  in  the  indi-
vidual himself,  arising  from  a  deficient  development  of  the
organ  of  Conscientiousness.  Persons  with  this  unfortunate
oiganization  are  apt  too  readily  to  suppose  that  a  little  love
of  notoriety,  or  self-interest,  or  a  morbid  desire  of  deceiving,
or  as  it  is  termed  humbugging,  others,  is  sufficient  to  induce
a  man  to  forge  and  propagate  the  grossest  falsehoods.  Such
parties  deem  themselves  wise  in  their  generation,  and  pride
themselves  upon  their  acuteness  and  insight  into  human
nature;  but  the  fact  is,  none  make  such  gross  blunders  in
estimating  motives  and  character  when  the  object  of  their
observation  happens  to  be  an  honest  truth-loving  man,  a
phenomenon  quite  beyond  their  comprehension,  and  generally
ultimately  referred  by  them  after  some  little  perplexity  to  the
genus  fool.

Many  afflicted  with  this  moral  blindness,  whose  intellect
is  sufficiently  penetrating  to  ensure  their  reception  of  mes-
merism were  they  eye  witnesses  of  its  phenomena,  remain
all  their  lives  in  ignorance,  tmless  accident  throws  it  in  their
way,  from  testimony  failing  to  give  them  such  an  opinion
of  its  probability  as  would  lead  them  to  enquire  into  its
merits.  For  men  cannot  devote  time  to  the  consideration
of  every  novelty  which  presents  itself,  and  rarely  commence
the  task  of  examination,  except  in  the  case  of  an  object
of  whose  truth  they  previously  consider  a  strong  presumption
exists.

After  having  passed  in  review  the  various  mental  defects
which  render  individuals  blind  to  the  truth  of  mesmerism,
I  shall  conclude  with  a  brief  notice  of  those  which  induce
a  concealment  or  denial  of  belief,  the  great  source  of  which
is  palpably  a  deficient  conscientiousness,  allowing  itself  to  be
overpowered  by  fear  of  ridicule  or  loss  of  caste  on  the  one
hand,  or  fear  of  pecuniary  loss  on  the  other ;  and,  while  we
contemplate  the  degree  of  concealment,  falsehood,  and  self-
debasement  required  to  keep  up  such  a  deception,  we  forget,  in
the  comparison,  the  limited  intellect  and  dense  prejudices  of
one  class  of  disbelievers,  and  the  unfortunate  cause  which
perpetuates  the  scepticism  of  the  other,  and  remember  only
that  the  former  may  be  honest  men,  and  the  latter  unsoiled


442  BeUevers  and  Disbelievers ;

by  the  meanness  and  cowardice  of  habitual  hypocrisy  and
truckling  to  the  opinions  of  others.

The  extent  to  which  the  progress  of  mesmerism  is  retarded
by  this  unprincipled  suppression  of  belief  can  scarcely  be
overestimated,  thousands  being  fortified  in  their  prejudices
and  scepticism  by  supposing  themselves  support^  by  the
authority  of  some  favourite  medical  attendant,  who  in  reality
is  fully  convinced  of  its  truth,  but  deceives  them  as  to  his
opinions;  and  such  is  the  morality  of  the  day,  that  such
laches  are  looked  upon  not  only  without  reprobation,  but
applauded  as  prudential.

This  laxity  of  public  opinion,  that  appears  scarcely  to
recognize  that  it  is  the  duty  of  man  to  pay  homage  to  truth,
is  a  grave  evil,  since  that  powerful  and  necessary  incentive
to  inferior  minds  to  act  rightly — the  fear  of  incurring  public
odium — is  no  longer  enlisted  on  the  side  of  virtue ;  and  not
only  is  this  restraint  withdrawn,  but,  on  the  contrary,  breaches
of  duty  not  discountenanced  by  society  receive  a  species- of
sanction  that  deludes  many  into  the  belief  of  their  aUow*
ableness  and  confounds  all  distinctions  of  right  and  wrong.
As  long  as  wealth  rather  than  truth  is  the  object  of  our
worship,  and  success  in  obtaining  it  allowed  to  gild  over
the  mean  and  dirty  paths  by  which  it  has  been  won ;  as
long  as  the  profession  of  faith  in  sundry  dogmas  and  the
practice  of  certain  external  rites  of  worship  shsdl  be  deemed
to  extenuate  a  neglect  and  infringement  of  our  duty  to  truth
and  our  fellow  man,  at  which  heathens  might  blush ;  so  long
must  the  age  expect  to  pay  the  penalty  of  its  own  soul-de-
basing principles,  in  the  utter  prostration  of  everything  which
is  most  noble  and  dignified  in  man.

The  whole  duty  of  man,  as  taught  by  the  precept  and
example  of  their  elders  to  the  rising  generation,  in  the  year
of  grace,  1846,  may  be  thus  summed  up.

Go  to  church,  because  this  is  respectable.  Infringe  no
law,  because  this  will  make  you  amenable  to  punishment;  but,
whenever  you  can  with  safety,  make  self-interest  paramount
to  all  other  considerations.

Trouble  not  yourselves  to  ascertain  what  is  true,  but  care-
fully study  what  is  popular.

Thus  shall  you  glide  down  the  stream  of  life  easUy,  with
a  decent  reputation,  and  avoid  the  rocks  and  shoals  upon
which  those  impracticable  blockheads  who  attempt  to  stem
the  current  for  the  sake  of  some  truth  are  perpetually  getting
stranded.

Such  principles  produce  their  natural  fruits,  and  we  find


or.  Who  are  the  Fooh?  448

the  mass  exhibiting  in  their  daily  conduct  such  an  all-per-
vading, unmitigated  selfishness  and  disregard  for  the  rights
and  welfiEure  of  others,  that  we  are  lost  in  astonishment,  how
at  the  same  time  they  can  practise  so  complete  a  self-decep-
tion as  to  style  and  regard  themselves  the  followers  of  a
system  of  morality,  of  which  the  injunction,  'Mb  as  you
would  be  done  by,''  constitutes  the  comer  stone.  Indeed,
when  we  compare  their  actions  with  their  professions,  and
call  to  mind  the  assumption  of  piety  and  sanctimoniousness
made  by  many,  we  are  almost  tempted  to  conclude  that  they
consider  the  avowal  of  belief  in  a  creed  privileges  them  to
omit  the  practice  of  the  precepts  it  enjoins.

Contaminated  by  the  insidious  morality  of  the  day,  the
medical  profession  are  only  on  a  par  with  their  neighbours  in
the  unprincipled  line  of  conduct  they  have  pursued  with  re-
ference to  mesmerism.  A  friend  of  mine  once  asked  a  surgeon
of  celebrity,  whom  he  knew  to  be  a  believer  in  mesmerism,

whether  he  was  going  to ^'s  house,  to  witness  an  operation

on  a  patient  in  the  mesmeric  sleep, — when  the  individual
addressed,  with  surprise  depicted  in  his  visage  that  his  inter-
locuter  should  think  him  capable  of  such  folly,  almost  indig-
nantly exclaimed,  ''  Do  you  suppose  I'd  allow  my  name  to
be  connected  with  mesmerism?"  So  sensitive  to  anything
which  could  be  construed  into  an  imputation  on  his  prudence
— so  unconscious  of  there  being  anything  derogatory  to  his
character  in  suppressing  his  beUef  I  This  individual  may  be
taken  as  the  type  of  a  class,  and  I  fear  a  large  one,  with
whose  existence  the  public  cannot  be  too  fuUy  made  ac-
quainted, if  we  would  hasten  the  advent  of  the  day — when
the  community  at  large  will  reap  the  inestimable  benefit  of
the  free,  unrestricted,  and  general  use  of  mesmerism  as  a
remedy  for  disease — ^when  no  surgeon  will  dare  to  propose  to
perform  a  severe  operation  without  first  trjring  to  procure  for
his  patient  immunity  from  pain  by  the  mesmeric  process —
and  when  those  unfortunate  wretches  who  now  make  up  their
minds  to  death  as  an  alternative  preferable  to  the  terrors  of
the  knife,  will,  wrapt  in  a  total  oblivion,  pass  through  the
no-longer  dreaded  ordeal,  and  only  be  restored  to  conscious-
ness to  receive  the  congratulations  of  their  friends.

Such  is  the  criminality  of  those  who,  against  their  better
knowledge,  hesitate  not,  for  paltry  considerations  of  profes-
sional emolument,  to  contribute  their  quota  as  individuals  to
delay  the  universal  acceptation  of  this  great  truth ;  careless
if  by  so  doing  they  consign  to  sickness,  suffering,  and  a  pre-
mature grave,  thousands  of  their  fellow  creatores  who  might
have  found  in  mesmerism  an  alleviation  and  cure  for  their


44A  Believers  and  DMeUevere ;

maladies.  Let  them  weiffh  the  awful  responsibility  they  incur
and  consider  whether  such  conduct  will  form  a  pleasing  retro-
spect at  the  close  of  their  career.

Which  is  the  baser  character,  the  man  who  robs  another
of  a  purse  on  the  high  road — or  the  medical  peactitioner
who,  having  exhausted  the  Pharmacopoeia  in  yain,  calmly
watches  a  patient  sinking  into  the  tomb  from  some  affection
which  he  belieyes  in  the  privacy  of  his  own  thoughts  there  is
a  strong  presumption  that  mesmerism  would  cure,  and  yet
wiU  not  recommend  its  employment.

Would  that  such  cases  were  rare  instead  of  being,  as  there
is  every  reason  to  fear  at  the  present  moment,  of  almost  daily
occurrence,  whilst  the  perpetrators  of  these  crimes  against
humanity  pass  as  honourable  men  and  are  by  none  less  sus-
pected than  by  the  unfortunate  victims  whose  confidence  they
so  cruelly  abuse.  Contriving  by  a  judicious  worship  of  every
respectable  humbug  of  the  day  to  stand  well  with  the  world,
they  present  to  us  a  living  genus  of  that  class  to  whom  a
great  teacher  and  reformer  of  ancient  days  addressed  the
following  denunciation, — ^'Woe  unto  you  Scribes  and  Phari-
sees, hypocrites !  for  ye  pay  tithe  of  mint  and  anise  and
cummin,  and  have  omitted  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,
judgment,  mercy,  and  faith.''

Lest  it  should  be  supposed  that  we  have  exaggerated
the  timidity  or  misrepresented  the  opinions  and  motives  of
the  medical  profession  in  reference  to  mesmerism,  we  quote
the  foUowing  extract  from  a  letter  addressed  by  Dr.  Car-
penter to  the  Medical  Times,  *'I  may  commence  by  re-
marking that  there  is  a  very  natural  dislike,  on  the  part
of  medical  men — on  whom,  as  a  branch  of  physiology,  this
subject  has  a  natural  claim  for  attention,  to  enter  upon  an
examination  of  it.  So  long  as  public  opinion  is  such,  that
to  uphold  mesmerism  is  to  expose  oneself  to  the  imputa-
tion of  being  either  credulous  or  unprincipled,  it  cannot  be
expected  that  those  who  depend  for  their  livelihood  on  the
estimation  in  which  they  are  held,  should  be  very  ready  to
place  themselves  in  the  way  of  thus  '  losing  caste '  among
their  brethren  and  the  public.  A  highly  respectable  physi-
cian, to  whom  I  had  applied  for  information  as  to  the  cha-
racter of  Mr.  Brookes,  thus  writes  to  me : — '  I  sincerely
rejoice  that  the  subject  is  likely  to  be  taken  up  in  Bristol,
because  I  wish  to  see  it  in  good  hands,  and  really  have  the
expectation  of  obtaining  practical  residts  from  it.  But,  for
my  own  part,  I  cannot  afford  to  play  with  my  children's  pros-
pects ;  and  have,  therefore,  limited  myself  to  a  few  trials  of
its  efficacy  in  nervous  and  spasmodic  diseases  only. In  some


or.  Who  are  the  Fooh  ?  445

of  them  it  has  been  of  use,  but  how,  I  am  as  ignorant  as
every  other  person  appears  to  be/  "  Another  physician  in  a
position  of  high  eminence  and  influence  in  London,  thus
writes  to  me : — "  If  you  and  a  few  more  philosophical  doubters
will  investigate  the  thing  in  private  and  thoroughly,  you  will
do  great  service  to  science.^'  ''  I  believe''  resumes  Dr.  Carpen-
ter "  that  there  exists  in  the  mind  of  nearly  every  medical  man
who  has  fairly  and  impartially  examined  the  evidence  in  its
behalf,  a  general  desire  that  this  evidence  should  be  fully  en-
quired into;  but  unfortunately  from  the  cause  I  have  named,
there  has  been  an  individual  indisposition  to  do  so"

We  are  delighted  to  take  an  opportunity  of  placing  such
a  candid  avowal  before  the  pubUc,  convinced  that  the  in-
terests of  truth  and  the  cause  of  humanity  are  alike  served
by  such  facts  becoming  generally  known.  Dr.  Carpenter
cannot  be  deemed  an  unfavourable  specimen  of  his  class,  and
appears,  from  the  circumstance  of  his  having  published  such
a  letter,  to  be  possessed  of  too  much  self-respect  to  conceal
his  own  opinions ;  but  can  we  estimate  too  highly  the  per-
nicious influence  of  bad  example,  and  the  lax  morality  of
the  day,  when  a  man  of  his  superior  attainments,  and  one
whose  writings  are  often  pervaded  with  strains  of  piety  and
religious  admonition  to  an  extent  which,  though  very  edi-
fying, many  deem  out  of  keeping  in  works  of  science,  can
palliate  and  excuse,  almost  justify  and  commend,  the  sup-
pression of  an  acknowledgment  of  truth,  because  its  avowal
might  injure  the  pockets  of  the  individual.

For  ourselves  we  view  with  the  utmost  apprehension  and
disgust  all  attempts  to  defend  a  compromise  between  interest
and  duty ;  believing  that  if  it  be  once  deemed  allowable  to
depart  from  absolute  rectitude  as  a  rule  of  conduct,  man,
deprived  of  any  fixed  point  to  steer  by,  becomes  an  easy  prey
to  the  specious  but  fatal  logic  which  teaches  that  the  end  jus-
tifies the  means.  To  admit  the  dangerous  doctrine  that  duty
may  be  sacrificed  to  interest,  is  to  step  on  an  inclined  plane  of
ice  the  foot  of  which  reaches  to  the  lowest  point  of  degrada-
tion of  which  human  nature  is  susceptible.  In  my  estimation,
the  medical  practitioner  who,  believing  in  the  utility  of  mes-
merism, neglects  to  employ  it  for  his  patients  from  selfish
motives,  is  a  rogue,  and  guilty  of  what  is  a  great  aggravation
of  all  criminal  acts,  a  breach  of  confidence.  Let  those  who
will,  quarrel  with  the  appellation.  I  would  rather  by  calling
things  by  their  right  names  deter  men  from  evil  deeds  than,
by  glossing  them  over  in  words  indistinct  and  equivocal,  pave
the  way  for  their  commission ;  deeming  that  those,  who  by
such  phraseology  succeed  in  depriving  crime  of  a  portion  of
its  repulsiveness,  become  accessories  to  its  committal.


446  Believers  and  Disbelievers,  ^c.

I  have  now  completed  my  task  of  giving  an  outline  of
the  principal  classes  of  our  opponents,  and  the  mental  pecu-
liarities to  which  their  opposition  must  be  referred.  There
remain  a  small  body,  who,  though  deserving  to  be  so  desig-
nated, would  perhaps  protest  against  such  a  proceeding,  but
whom  I  must  not  forget  to  enumerate.  I  allude  to  the  trim-
mers, who,  uniting  the  want  of  conscientiousness  of  the  last
class  with  greater  intellect,  foresight,  and  cunning,  attempt  to
overreach  the  public  and  stand  well  with  all  parties.

These  men,  concealing  their  motives  under  a  well  assumed
mantle  of  philosophical  caution,  would  at  one  and  the  same
time  escape  the  risk  of  avowing  an  unpopular  truth,  and
reserve  to  themselves  the  power  of  changing  sides,  whenever
policy  may  render  such  a  course  desirable,  with  the  self-
glorifying  announcement — '^  we  have  never  denied  its  truth.''

Taking  up  the  eminently  safe  position  of  denying  nothing
to  be  possible,  and  admitting  nothing  as  proved — making
large  professions  of  candour  at  the  same  time  that  they  are
distorting  facts  and  endeavouring  by  ungenerous  implications
to  destroy  character,  they  wish  to  seize  all  the  present
popularity  and  pecuniary  advantages  to  be  gained  by  siding
with  and  advocating  the  cause  of  the  majority,  and  save  their
future  reputations  as  men  of  science  when  the  day  of  the
recognition  of  its  truth  arrives.

It  has  not  been  my  object  on  the  present  occasion  to
adduce  facts  in  support  of  mesmerism.  These  exist  already
in  great  superabundance  for  all  who  have  the  capacity  and
inclination  to  profit  by  them.  ^ \

Some  we  have  seen,  from  a  sad  deficiency  in  conscientious-
ness, debarred  by  nature  from  ever  being  able  to  form  a  cor-
rect estimate  of  the  value  of  testimony.

Others  are  afflicted  with  such  an  unfortunate  drowsiness
and  imbecility  of  intellect,  such  an  incapacity  of  grasping
necessary  consequences,  that  they  cannot  perceive  the  ne-
cessity of  admitting  conclusions  when  the  facts  from  which
these  are  the  irresistible  deductions  cannot  be  gainsayed.
But,  whenever  the  balance  of  probabilities  is  struckby  a  mind
competent  to  the  task,  the  truth  of  mesmerism  is  seen  to  be
a  thousand  fold  the  most  probable  solution  of  the  problem.

That  thousands  of  honest  and  truth -loving  individuals
should,  in  different  countries  and  at  different  periods,  without
plan  or  concert,  unite  in  endeavouring  to  deceive  their  fellow
men  by  solemnly  asseverating  the  grossest  falsehoods,  not  only
without  any  intelligible  motive,  but  often  manifestly  to  their
own  disadvantage,  is  a  proposition  so  utterly  at  variance  with
all  known  laws  of  human  action,  that  it  only  requires  to  be
stated  to  have  its  absurdity  revealed.


Chores  of  EpUepstf,  by  Dr.  Storer.  447

That  in  all  the  numerously  attested,  carefully  conducted,
and  a  thousand  times  corrobonted,  mesmeric  experiments  on
record,  the  operators  and  spectators  have  been  deceived  by
their  own  senses— simultaneously  the  victims  of  a  delusion —
is  a  supposition  which  if  any  man  adopt  as  a  more  probable
solution  of  the  question  than  the  admission  of  the  facts  re-
corded, all  that  can  be  said  is>  that  he  has  been  hopelessly
doomed  by  nature  to  remain  a  fool.

Just  in  proportion  to  a  mtxris  oum  truthfulness  wiU  be  his
disposition  (other  conditions  being  equal)  to  rely  upon  the  testi-
mony ofhisfeUow  men.

And  just  in  proportion  as  he  possesses  a  capacious,  profound^
and  penetrating  intellect^  wiU  he  rise  above  that  shallowness
which,  seeing  nothing  wonderful  in  the  familiar,  finds  the  impos-
sible in  what  is  strange,  and  will  the  difficulty  of  conceiving
the  existence  of  mesmeric  phenomena  vanish,  and  will  the
disbelief  in  their  possibility  appear  puerile.

I  hesitate  not  in  the  slightest  degree  to  record  my  con-
viction, that  no  man  of  decidedly  superior  moral  and  intel-
lectual endowments  can  examine  the  subject  of  mesmerism
without  being  convinced  of  its  truth.

With  arguments  so  triumphant,  and  a  case  so  clear,  I
shall  be  asked,  why  is  not  the  belief  in  mesmerism  more
extensive.  I  reply — because  the  apathetic  class  of  mankind  is
so  numerous, — ^those  of  whom  it  can  scarcely  be  said  that  they
embrace  a  new  truth  as  an  act  of  judgment  and  volition,  so
much  as  that  they  allow  it  to  be  hammered  into  them  by
repeated  blows.

X.  P.


II.  Three  Cures  of  Epilepsy. By  Dr.  Storer,  of  Bath.

"  People  we  u  fkce  to  bcUeTe  In  repeal  at  in  mcameiitm.  It  It  treated  as  a  dream,  which
eonccmt  none  bvt  the  dreamer."— Mr.  Alb4MT  Fonblamqub,  Esamtmr,  Nov.  99,  1840.
p.  rA4.«

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sir, — ^In  forwarding  the  enclosed  cases,  I  must  remark  that
next  in  importance  to  surgical  operations  without  pain,  of

*  Mr.  Albany  W.  Fonblanqne  sorely  knows  that  beliefers  in  mesmerism
are  so  **  free"  that  they  are  Tilifled  in  all  the  English  medical  Journals,  and  by
a  host  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  and  newspaper  and  magazine  writers,
who,  like  himself,  are  totally  ignorant  of  the  subject.  Surely  too,  when
cases  prcTiously  rebellious  to  art  are  cured,  and  torturing  operations  are
rendered  painless,  some  others  are  concerned  as  well  as  the  dreaming  mes-
merists who  effect  these  blessings.— Zotil.


448  Cur€8  of  Epilepsy,  by  Dr.  Storer,

which  your  journal  affords  abundant  examples,  stands  perhaps
the  cure  of  epilepsy,  so  truly  distressing  to  patients  and  their
friends.  The  long  continuance  of  the  attacks,  the  thorough
incapability  of  pursuing  regular  employment,  and  the  extreme
uncertainty  of  any  known  medical  means  in  the  shape  of
medicines,  are  too  well  known  to  need  comment.  I  will  not
pretend  that  mesmerism  is  a  specific  in  epileptic  cases,  but  I
do  say  that  what  it  has  already  accomplished  should  at  least
open  the  eyes  of  the  medical  public  and  procure  it  a  stiU
greater  trial.

Yours  obediently,
Henry  Stores,  M.D.
27,  Brock  Street,  Bath.
December,  1846.

Case  I. — Charlotte  Pearson,  23  years  of  age,  residing  at
33,  Milk  Street,  Bath,  was  sent  to  me  in  March,  1845,  by
General  White,  a  gentleman  who  takes  great  interest  in  mes-
merism. The  account  I  received  from  her  mother  was,  that
she  had  suffered  from  fits  for  the  last  three  or  four  years, —
that  they  occurred  as  frequently  as  five  or  six  times  a  week,
sometimes  as  often  as  to  this  amount  in  one  day,  and  so
violently  that  she  required  two  or  three  persons  to  hold  her;
and  that  she  had  frequently  injured  herself  during  the  attacks
by  falling  suddenly  against  the  wall,  down  the  stairs,  or  into
the  fire-place.

Up  to  the  very  time  of  my  seeing  her,  she  had  continued
to  have  these  fits.  The  last  was  a  most  severe  one,  and  her
fall  greatly  bruised  her  face  and  temple.  She  had  been
under  the  care  of  a  great  many  medical  men ;  amongst  others,
the  late  Dr.  Barlow,  who  pronounced  her  case  incurable :  and
so  extreme  did  I  regard  it,  that  I  told  her  friends  I  could
only  hope  to  relieve.

From  this  period  I  mesmerised  her  daily  for  three  weeks,
and  afterwards  three  times  a  week  for  the  same  time,  together
about  six  weeks.  The  results  have  been  as  follow.  During
the  first  fortnight  the  fits  were  as  frequent  as  previously,  but
not  so  severe.  After  the  first  fortnight  they  gradually  dimin-
.ished  in  number  and  became  mtich  less  violent.  This  state  of
improvement  continued  until  the  end  of  the  month.  Since
that  period  she  has  had  no  return,  now  above  a  year
AND  A  HALF.  Hcr  general  health  is  much  improved,  bodily
and  intellectually ;  for  she  was  becoming  fatuitous.  The  con-
trast in  her  daily  pursuits  is  striking  and  gratifying.  Her
mother  is  a  charwoman,  and  was  frequently  obliged  to  give
up  two  or  three  days  a  week  to  attend  on  her. The  mother


Curei  of  Epikpiy,  by  Dr.  Storer.  440

has  since  become  infirm^  and  the  daughter  is  now  able  to  go
out  and  earn  her  own  livings  and  to  assist  towards  the  sup-
port of  her  mother.

In  the  treatment  of  this  case,  simple  sleep  only  was
produced  or  sought  for.  She  would  remain  for  a  long  time
quite  passive,  but  could  easily  be  aroused.  The  only  marked
sensible  effect  in  her  case,  was  the  state  of  sleep  or  quiescence
which  followed  during  the  day.  She  has  been  seen  here  by
several  parties  who  have  kindly  interested  themselves  in  her
behalf,  and  the  results  in  all  respects  have  afforded  the  most
satisfactory  evidence  of  the  good  accomplished.

II. — Master  Chapman,  aged  13,  was  brought  to  me  by
his  mother,  residing  at  Primrose  Hill,  Bath,  February  5,
1846.  She  stated  that  he  had  suffered  from  fits  (apparently
epileptic),  more  or  less,  for  the  last  three  years;  that  the
attacks  had  sometimes  continued  for  many  months  together,
and  sometimes  returned  with  little  intermission  during  a
whole  day,  though  not  so  frequently  at  present,  but  still  he
generally  had  three  or  four  attacks  daily ;  and  that  he  had
been  under  the  care  of  several  medical  men  of  Bath,  amongst
others  the  late  Dr.  Barlow,  by  whom  and  as  well  as  by  the
rest,  his  case  had  been  pronounced  hopeless.

Previously  to  his  being  brought  to  me,  he  had  been  seen
by  Dr.  Carter  of  Bath,  who  adopted  mesmerism  in  his  case
for  about  three  weeks ;  but  as  that  gentleman  soon  afterwards
left  the  place,  the  treatment  was  given  up.

Just  before  my  being  consulted,  I  was  informed  that  he
had  several  fits,  though  not  quite  so  severe.  I  mesmerised  him
daily  for  the  first  fortnight,  then  three  times  a  week  for  about
two  months,  and  then  only  twice  a  week  for  a  month.  He
continued  to  improve  rapidly ;  and  has  had  no  beturn  what-
ever of  his  fits.  During  the  excessive  heat  of  this  summer,
he  complained  of  faintness,  but  this  feeling  was  soon  removed
by  mesmerising  him;  and  I  occasionally  mesmerised  him
during  the  warm  weather.

There  were  some  peculiarities  in  this  youtVs  case.  At
first,  when  mesmerised,  he  was  quite  taciturn ;  after  a  short
period  he  became  so  loquacious  that  it  was  with  difficulty  he
could  be  restrained.  He  was  at  times  perfectly  insensible  to
pain,  so  much  so,  that  he  had  a  tooth  extracted  without  sen-
sation, as  reported  in  your  last  number  but  one,  p.  214 ;  at
other  times  he  was  so  highly  sensitive  as  to  be  impressible
by  every  external  circumstance.  He  was  also  at  times  per-
fectly clairvoyant.  His  case  was  witnessed  by  a  great  number
of  individuals  here,  and,  after  the  most  rigid  testing,  they


450  Cures  of  Epilepsy ,  by  Dr.  Siorer,

have  been  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  reality  of  the  pheno-
mena.

The  states  of  catalepsy  and  rigidity  also  varied  in  this
case,  sometimes  the  one,  sometimes  the  other,  being  ex-
tremely well  developed.

The  most  important  point  in  the  case,  however,  is  the
COMPLETE  CESSATION  of  the  fits,  and  the  general  improvement,
bodUy  and  inteUeciuatty,  which  has  taken  place.  So  great  is
this  improvement,  that  he  has  resumed  his  school  studies,
which  for  three  years  had  been  completely  interrupted.

III. — ^As  a  sequel  to  these  cases,  I  will  now  add  the  out-
lines of  one,  which,  for  the  good  accomplished,  ought  to  rivet
the  attention  of  every  conscientious  practitioner.

A  respectable  mechanic,  a  printer,  was  seized  with  epi-
leptic fits  about  three  years  since.  They  continued  so  long
and  violently  as  to  compel  him  to  leave  his  occupation ;  and
himself,  his  wife,  and  three  children,  were  obliged  to  live  on
three  shillings  a  week  received  from  the  Bristol  Union.
About  this  period,  Mr.  Lundie,  a  lecturer  on  mesmerism,
sought  out  some  extreme  cases,  and  amongst  others  found
that  of  this  poor  man,  and  mesmerised  Um  for  about  a
month.  The  patient  was  afterwards  occasionally  mesmerised
by  a  volunteer,  and  by  myself;  and  the  effects  were  most
striking.

Far  the  last  eighteen  months  he  has  had  no  return  what-
ever of  his  fits;  and,  instead  of  being  the  recipient  of  three
shillings  a  week  from  the  Union,  he  has  been  enabled  to  earn
for  the  last  eighteen  months  eighteen  shillings  a  week  in  an  iron
factory,

I  should  not  report  this  case,  as  the  patient  was  not  my
own,  but  that  I  can  vouch  for  every  particular.


*:ic*  How  can  Mr.  Wakley  and  his  coadjutor  Dr.  Mar-
shall Hall,  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  Dr.  George  Burrows,  Dr.
Chambers,  &c.,  find  it  in  their  hearts  to  read  such  facts  as
these  and  continue  to  do  all  in  their  power  to  make  the  world
despise  mesmerism ! — Zoist.


< 451 )

III.  Cure  of  Dumbness  of  seven  years  and  a  half  standing^
with  great  improvement  of  Intetteci  and  HeaUh,  by
Mr.  Davet,  Bideford,  Devon.  Commumcated  from
Mr.  Harrison,  jun.,  of  Plymouth,  to  Dr.  Elliotson  ;
with  Remarks  by  the  latter.

**Tbe  minelcs  and  tlgiu  that  dlstingnbh  theac  andean  fpirits,  the  tplrlti  never  let  it  be
forgoilcn  of  devili,  are  Decoming  more  and  more  mantfett.  Mlat  M artlneaa'i  letters  raffi-
ciently  develop  the  character  of  m^amvrism.  I  am  eompeU«d  by  soch  and  limilar  atatemcnts,
to  Ticw  it  aa  poaaible  that  a  lopernataral,  and  therefore  diabolical,  power  may  bo  engaged  in
prodncina  tome  of  its  woodere»  and  I  woald  not  for  any  rappoacd  benefit  whatever  have  any
tiling  to  oo  with  If.  We  may  expect  to  hear  more  and  more  of  inch  clalrot  to  miracle*,  and
to  wiineaa  really  anpcmataral  and  diabolical  powera  fk«m  these  andean  spirits.  That  they
shoaid  come  first  in  a  healing  form*  as  a  mockery  of  oar  Savioar's  miracles  of  love,  was  to
be  expected  from  him  who  can  transform  himself  into  an  angel  of  light,  that  he  may  maintain
his  hatcfnl  tyranny."— 7%e  Sigiu  of  the  7%mea  in  tkt  BatH,  a  iVandng  to  th$  Wui,  by  the
Rev.  E.  BiCKBMTaTH,  Rector  of  Walton,  Heru.  p.  108.

Miss  Issell,  on  the  20th  of  November  or  December,  1839,
while  returning  from  a  place  of  worship,  was  struck  to  the
ground  by  lightning.  The  shock  rendered  her  dumb,  with
the  exception  of  the  ability  to  say  "  yes  **  or  "  no  '*  by  a  very
great  effort,  and  by  taking  a  deep  inspiration^  She  was  con-
fined to  her  bed  and  sofa  for  about  ten  weeks.

Medical  aid  was  employed,  but  to  little  or  no  purpose.

As  soon  as  she  could  be  removed,  she  was  taken  to  Fly-
mouth  to  consult  one  of  the  first  medical  men  there,  who,
before  the  mother  had  time  to  finish  her  account  of  the  case,
pronounced  the  poor  girl  to  be  an  impostor.  He  was  so  angry
as  to  swear,  and  told  her  to  go  home,  saying  she  could  speak
if  she  would,  and  that  it  was  her  wickedness  and  craft  that
made  her  seem  dumb.  There  is  a  man  there  who  has  treated
other  patients  in  the  same  way.  Notwithstanding  this  igno-
rant and  cruel  medical  opinion  of  this  '^  one  of  the  first  medi-
cal men  in  Plymouth,''  she  grew  worse  and  worse.  Her
intellect  deteriorated  so  much,  that  she  could  no  longer  write
her  own  name  or  calculate  any  numbers,  and  she  could  not
be  trusted  out  by  herself.  Her  sleep  became  so  unsound,
that  after  the  accident  no  one  ever  saw  her  asleep ;  whenever
her  mother  stole  into  her  bed-room,  she  was  always  awake,
the  slightest  sound  rousing  her,  I  presume,  as  it  does  a  bird.
She  lost  her  appetite,  and  her  strength  declined ;  her  extre-
mities became  cold  and  her  pulse  feeble.

She  was  placed  under  Mr.  Davey's  mesmerisation  on  the
11th  of  March,  1846,  at  Dartmouth,  where  he  had  been
lecturing;  and  after  her  cure  she  was  removed  from  thence
to  Plymouth,  and  brought  forward  at  his  lectures  as  a  proof
of  the  efficacy  of  mesmerism  in  such  cases.  She  remained  in
his  family  about  ten  weeks.

It  took  Mr.  Davey  fifteen  days  to  produce  sleep. From

VOL.  IV.  I  I


452  Cure  of  Dumbness,  by  Mr.  Davey.

this  time — after  the  first  mesmeric  sleep — her  health  im-
proved, she  began  to  grow  strong  and  look  well,  to  sleep
soundly,  to  eat  well;  she  recovered  her  intellect,  and  she
began  to  speak  intelligibly :  and  in  three  months  after  mesmer-
ism was  begun,  she  was  married,  at  St.  Andrew's  Church,  Ply-
mouth, by  the  vicar,  the  Rev.  John  Hatchard,  to  Mr.  Stabb,
to  whom  she  had  been  engaged  before  she  was  struck  with
lightning ;  but  her  distressing  state  had  for  seven  years  and  a
half  prevented  the  marriage.

I  am  happy  to  give  the  testimonial  of  a  clergyman,  not  of
the  diabolic  school  of  philosophy :


"  The  Rev.  Robert  A.  Knot  has  much  pleasure  in  inform-
ing Mr.  Davey  that  he  has  seen  Mrs.  Stabb,  formerly  Susan
Issel,  since  her  return  from  Plymouth,  and  has  heard  her
repeat  the  Lord's  Prayer  and  several  other  words;  when,
although  her  articulation  was  not  quite  perfect,  she  mani-
fested a  very  decided  improvement  in  her  power  of  speech,
not  having  been  able  during  the  time  that  Mr.  Knot  had
previously  known  her  to  make  even  an  attempt  to  pronounce
more  than  the  monosyllables  '  yes '  and  '  no.'

"Vicarage,  Stokenham,
"  To  Mr.  Wm.  Davey,  Lecturer,  July  6,  1846.

"  New  Street,  Bideford."

Newport  Street,  Tiverton.

a

Mr.  Harrison's  last  letter  to  me  was  dated  Sept.  17th.
I  have  just  written  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Stabb,  for  information  as
to  her  present  condition,  and  in  an  answer,  dated  Dec.  8th,
Mr.  Stabb  says  that  "  she  has  plenty  of  words,  and  can  speak
of  herself,  by  the  power  of  mesmerism  and  the  assistance  of
Almighty  God."  "  I  am  very  happy  to  write,"  he  continues^
''to  convince  all  who  are  opposed  to  the  powers  of  mes-
merism and  write  to  me  on  the  subject.  I  take  it  a  great
pleasure.  Sir.  I  know  not  whether  you  are  opposed  to  mes-
merism or  not,  but  I  can  assure,"  &c.

In  her  mesmeric  sleep  she  spoke,  and  exhibited  in  a  most
beautiful  manner  the  excitement  of  many  cerebral  organs —
Tune,  Wit,  Number,  and  Sense  of  Things.

"  One  of  the  first  medical  men  "  in  Plymouth,  who  swore
at  this  afflicted  girl  and  off-hand  pronounced  her  an  impostor,
did  only  as  too  many  of  his  brethren,  often  through  their  la-


fVUh  Remarks  by  Dr.  Elliotaon.  453

mentable  ignorance  of  the  phenomena  and  existence  of  a
curious  class  of  nervous  diseases,  are  in  the  habit  of  doing
when  speaking  of  such  cases,  and  especially  when  consulted
on  them  and  not  likely  to  obtain  much  profit  by  them,  as  in
this  instance,  or,  after  having  made  a  good  profit,  and
tried  all  things,  even  the  most  painful  and  distressing,  ex-
cept the  proper  remedy,  they  find  they  have  done  no  good.
Thus  the  two  Okeys,  who  were  cured  of  severe  epilepsy  many
years  ago,  and  are  alive  and  well,  were  pitilessly  cdled  by
Mr.  Wakley  impostors.  Thus  the  young  lady  who  had
laboured  under  chorea  and  distressing  spasm  for  years,  as
detailed  in  my  Pamphlet,^  was  so  pronounced  by  Dr.  Marshall
Hall.  After  having  cupped  her  every  five  days,  and  given  her
mercury  till  not  a  tooth  is  left;  sound  in  her  head,  he,  as  soon  as
he  heard  that  mesmerism  was  being  tried  in  her  case,  declared
himself  perfectly  certain  that  the  disease  was  feigned.  Un-
fortunately three  years  more  have  elapsed,  and  her  condition
is,  as  I  always  predicted  to  her  mesmeriser,  as  bad  as  before.
Had  she  recovered,  she  might  have  been  married.  One  was
ready  to  espouse  her,  and  she  him :  but  all  was  hopeless,  and
he  is  married  to  another.  Mighty  reasons  had  she,  and  has  she,
to  feign  I  Miss  Issell  had  as  good  reason  to  feign.  She  was
engaged  ;  but,  through  her  illness,  the  marriage  was  delayed
for  nearly  eight  years :  and,  as  soon  as  ever  mesmerism  put  an
end  to  it,  she  and  her  lover  were  united.  If  the  exciting  cause
of  her  loss  of  speech  was  not  evident  and  sufficient,  if  the  bad
state  of  her  intellect  and  general  health  was  not  evident  and
sufficient,  to  prove  her  no  impostor ;  the  delay  of  the  marriage,
to  which  no  other  obstacle  existed,  for  nearly  eight  years,
ought  to  be  proof  enough  of  reality.  I  never  heard  of  a
woman  who,  when  devoted  to  a  man,  all  anxious  for  the
marriage,  chose  for  no  reason  upon  earth  to  live  ununited  till
she  was  seven  or  eight  years  further  advanced  in  womanhood.
The  young  man  of  Tinsbury,  whose  beautiful  case  of  sleep-
waking  was  recorded  by  an  able  physician  in  the  Transactions
of  the  Royal  Society,  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,  and
whose  case  was  only  like  endless  others  recorded  in  books
and  seen  by  all  persons  of  extensive  practice,  respecting  the
genuineness  of  which  no  well-informed  physician  can  enter-
tain a  shadow  of  doubt,  as  I  have  pointed  out  at  full  length
in  my  Pamphlet,  into  which  the  whole  is  extracted,  was  as
boldly  as  ignorantly  pronounced  by  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  in
the  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  an  impostor ;  and,  with-
out any  notice  of  the  ample  proofs  I  gave  of  the  genuine-

b  Numenmi  Caaet  qf  Surgical  Operation$  without  pnin  in  the  Mesmeric  State,
p.  86|  8<|.

I  i2


454  Cure  of  Dmhbness,  by  Mr,  Davey,

ness  of  the  case/  has  been  lately  with  the  same  ignorance
and  boldness  so  pronounced  by  him  a  second  time.

Here  I  must  fulfil  a  promise  which  I  made  to  Dr.  Todd
of  King's  College  in  the  summer.  We  met  at  a  ball^  of  all
parties  in  the  worlds  in  Eaton  Square.  He  said  that  he  had  to
complain  of  me  for  having  stated  in  The  Zoist  (No.  III.)  that
the  deaf  and  dumb  boy,  whom  I  represented  to  have  been
cured  by  mesmerism,  after  he  had  been  treated  for  some  time
in  vain  in  King's  College  Hospital,  was  thought  an  impostor
by  him :  that  he  had  never  thought  the  case  to  be  one  of
imposition,  and  had  taken  great  interest  in  it  and  pointed  it
out  to  the  pupils.  I  replied  that  whenever  I  found  myself  to
have  made  an  erroneous  statement  respecting  any  person,  or
to  have  held  a  wrong  opinion  on  any  point,  I  would  make  a
point  of  retracting ;  and  that  I  would  declare  in  The  Zaist
that,  notwithstanding  the  boy  had  assured  me  that  he  was
throughout  treated  as  an  impostor  in  King's  College  Hospital,
and  been  made  game  of  by  physicians  and  pupils.  Dr.  Todd
had  never  for  an  instant  thought  him  an  impostor.  But
I  added  that  the  boy  was  watched  narrowly  by  myself  and
others  in  my  house,  and  satisfied  us  that  he  spoke  the  truth
whenever  we  could  judge  of  what  he  said ;  and  that  I  had
found  the  humbler  classes  just  as  truthful,  just  as  honest,
just  as  charitable,  just  as  virtuous  in  all  respects  as  those
above  them :  that  I  had  the  additional  reason  for  believing
his  assertion  that  Dr.  Todd,  like  Dr.  Budd  and  Dr.  Guy,  and
the  rest,  considered  him  to  be  an  impostor,  because  Dr.  Todd
treated  him  as  an  impostor.  "  Oh  yes,"  repUed  Dr.  Todd,
"  we  put  him  to  all  kinds  of  tests — some  of  them  pretty
severe  ones  I  assure  you :  he  was  pumped  upon,  blistered,
and  had  a  number  of  severe  things  done  which  I  forget.""*
'*  What,"  rejoined  I,  "  you  never  doubted  the  reality  of  his
case,  and  yet  you  treated  him  with  severity  as  an  impostor  I"

I  have  now  fulfilled  my  promise ;  but  fancy  it  would  have
been  better  for  us  to  have  believed  that  Dr.  Todd  mistakingly
thought  him  an  impostor,  than  that  Dr.  Todd  treated  him  as
an  impostor  without  ever  thinking  he  was  one. — ^After  all  I
did  not  once,  either  in  No.  III.  or  No.  XIV.,  say  that
Dr.  Todd  had  thought  him  an  impostor.  My  words  were
that  he  was  '^treated  as  an  impostor  by  Dr.  Todd  and
others,"*  and  this  it  appears  on  Dr.  Todd's  acknowledgment

e  NumerouB  Casea^  &c  ,  p.  45,  sq.  I  entreat  every  one,  who  cannot
think  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  would  so  commit  himself,  to  read  my  account.

d  Sttch  as  thrusting  pins  into  him,  burning  him  with  hot  spoons,  &c..
Vol.  I.,  p.  341.

•  No.  XIV.,  p.  167.


WUh  Remarks  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  455

was  the  truth.  All  this  I  recorded  in  The  Zoist  for  October^
1843,  p.  340. See  also  July,  1846,  p.  167.

Dr.  Todd  then  added  that  mesmerism  had  not  cured  him  :^
that  he  would  have  got  well  by  nature  at  last.  This  is  what
we  are  always  told  by  our  opponents  when  we  effect  a  cure.
But  why  did  not  the  patients  get  well  under  our  opponents^
who  had  all  the  opportunity  they  could  desire  of  putting
all  their  useless  plans  into  execution.  It  is  strange  that
nature  should  be  so  fond  of  us  mesmerists,  that,  after  ba£3ing
the  doctors  tied  ancieni  aviso  aut  bono  out  mauvaiso,  as  the
presiding  doctor  says  in  Moli^re,  she  so  often  cures  the
patients  either  as  soon  as  we  take  them  in  hand,  or  allows
the  cure  to  begin  to  shew  itself  soon  after  we  begin.  If
ever  patient  was  cured  by  art,  this  boy  was  by  mesmerism.
For  not  only  were  full  and  numerous  mesmeric  effects  pro-
duced, but,  finding  that  I  could  produce  great  pain  during
his  mesmeric  state  in  the  palsied  parts  by  pointing  my  fingers
on  them,  I  at  length  one  day,  having  an  hour  or  two  to
spare,  resolved  that  before  he  left  the  house  he  should,  if
possible,  be  cured.  I  began  pointing  my  fingers  in  his  ears  :
produced  dreadful  agony :  and  he  at  length  heard.  I  then
did  the  same  with  the  root  of  bis  tongue,  and  at  length  he
spoke.  To  say  that  mesmerism  did  not  cure  him,  is  tanta-
mount to  saying  that  when  the  blacksmith  hammers  his  red-
hot  iron,  he  does  not  fashion  it  into  the  shapes  it  takes.
I  entreat  every  medical  man  who  reads  this  page  to  read  also
the  passages  to  which  I  have  referred.  Possibly  the  lad
would  have  recovered  his  hearing  and  speech  at  last.  But
when?  he  might  have  remained  deaf  and  dumb  for  months
— ^for  years — ^for  ever.  I  have  seen  palsy  of  sensation  or  of
motion  in  various  situations  after  fits  remain  for  life.  Miss
Issell  was  dumb  and  fatuitous  too — ^her  intellectual  organs
palsied — seven  years  and  a  half :  and  lo  I  at  the  end  of  a
fortnight,  mesmerism  effected  the  commencement  of  her  cure.
Would  it  be  rational  to  doubt  that  mesmerism  effected  her
cure?  If  it  would  be,  then  let  sleep  after  opium,  and  vomit-
ing after  ipecacuanha,  be  doubted  and  pronounced  coinci-
dences and  effects  of  nature ;  both  which  of  course  they  oft;en
are  when  no  soporific,  no  emetic,  has  been  taken,  no  art  em-
ployed to  induce  them.

Dr.  Todd  remarked  to  me  that  it  was  a  very  striking
case,  and  that  he  had  pointed  it  out  as  such  to  the  students ;
that  it  was  an  instance  of  sudden  suspension  of  power  in  cer-
tain nervous  parts  without  any  other  symptom. I  replied

f  This  Dr.  Todd  actually  averted  to  the  boy  after  I  had  cured  him.
Vol.  I.,  p.  347.


456  Cure  of  Dumbness,  by  Mr.  Davey.

that  it  did  not  appear  to  me  wonderful^  that  is^  of  an  nn-
common  nature ;  that  it  was  simply  an  instance  of  a  very
common  fact^  the  loss  of  power  of  some  nervous  part  after  an
epileptic  fit.  Master  Salmon  lost  the  use  of  his  legs  after  a
fit/  and  not  many  months  pass  without  my  seeing  palsy  of
sensation  or  motion  in  some  part  or  other,  or  loss  of  memory,
or  even  fatuity,  after  a  fit :  and  the  loss  remains  sometimes  a
few  minutes,  sometimes  days,  weeks,  months,  and  sometimes
permanently.  Dr.  Todd  assured  me  he  had  never  heard  of
the  occurrence  of  any  fit  in  the  case.  But  the  diligent  inves-
tigation which  I  had  made  of  it  disclosed  that  the  palsy  of
speech  and  hearing  followed  a  violent  epileptic  fit,  that  he  was
taken  into  the  hospital  in  the  coma  of  this  fit,  and  that  several
other  epileptic  fits  had  occurred  previously.  Indeed  afterwards
he  had  an  epileptic  fit  on  being  frightened  at  hearing  while
waiting  at  table  a  conversation  about  deafness,  dumbness,  and
blindness.  So  imperfectly  was  Dr.  Todd  acquainted  with  the
case  and  its  cure.

I  beg  to  mention  in  reference  to  two  other  cases  of  Mr.
Davey,  recorded  at  p.  245,  that  I  am  informed  that  the
Christian  names  of  Mr.  Bell,  the  honest  surgeon  mentioned
at  p.  244,  are  Stephen  Bamfield  Lovering.

In  the  same  page  is  an  account  of  the  wonderfully  bene-
ficial effects  of  mesmerism  upon  Sarah  NichoUs,  finishing
with  these  words :  "  Mr.  Bell  having  left  that  part  of  the
country,  should  a  relapse  again  take  place,  there  is  no  good
Samaritan  near.  Proh  pudor.''  Relapses  have  taken  place,
but  after  none  has  her  speech  been  lost  as  formerly  was  the
case.  How  disgraceful  that  no  neighbouring  medical  man  has
condescended  to  learn  the  truth  of  mesmerism.  Her  friends
should  be  taught  to  mesmerise  her,  and  after  her  apparent
cure  mesmerism  should  be  long  continued.  The  early  relin-
quishment of  mesmerism  after  a  cure  is  often  just  as  injurious
as  the  early  relinquishment  of  medicines  and  particular  diet,
&c.,  after  cures  effected  by  them :  of  quinine  aft;er  the  cure
of  ague,  of  mercury  after  some  diseases,  and  of  abstemious
diet  after  the  cure  of  inflammatory  affections.

I  cannot  conclude  without  alluding  to  the  motto.  Its
words  are  those  of  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England ;
educated  in  the  University  of  Cambridge ;  and  brother  to
Lord  Langdale,  the  Master  of  the  Rolls.  ^'  Supernatural
and  therefore  diabolical!^'  According  to  this,  God,  being
supernatural,  must  be  diabolical :  and  the  devil  has  turned
round  and  cures  all  manner  of  diseases,  and  thus  patients

g  No.  III.,  p3l4.


With  Bemarks  by  Dr.  EUiotson.  457

and  their  fnenda  are  made  happy,  and  grateful  patients
return  thanks  both  in  private  and  in  the  churches'"  to  God,
when  it  should  be  to  the  devil.  This  is  the  old,  super-
stitious ignorance  or  malice  of  the  Pharisees,  who  endea-
voured to  make  the  people  believe  that  Christ  cured  dis-
eases by  Beelzebub.  Dr.  Stubbe,  in  his  work  published  at
Oxford,  and  quoted  by  me  in  Vol.  III.,  p.  99,  wisely  said
a  hundred  and  eighty  years  ago,  "  I  do  not  remember
that  ever  the  devil  did  cure  a  disease,  no,  not  when  his
glory  was  concerned  in  it.''  I  presume  that  the  Rev.  Mr.
Bickersteth  does ;  but  I  should  be  glad  to  know  where  such
a  case  is  to  be  found.  When  we  move  our  material,  natural
hands  downwards  before  another  man's  face  again  and  again,
the  devil  is  acting  I  and  yet  he  is  not  if  we  turn  a  cylinder  of
glass  round  against  silk  again  and  again,  and  sparks  are
excited  on  approaching  our  knuckles  to  the  electric  machine.
This  clergyman,  who  mistakes  a  natural  phenomenon  for  a  su-
pernatural one,  is  empowered  to  teach  the  people,  and  to  teach
them  that  Christianity  is  founded  on  miraculous  or  superna-
tural proofs :  he  who  cannot  distinguish  the  natural  from  the
supernatural,  and  considers  that  what  is  supernatural  must
be  diabolical !  Did  he  know  no  better  when  his  Bishop  or-
dained him  ?  or  has  he  fallen  from  his  youthful  intelligence
and  attainments?  Ought  not  the  Bishop  of  his  diocese  to
look  after  his  doings  ?  Can  he  and  the  party  in  the  church
to  which  he  belongs  declaim  against  ''the  ignorance  and
superstition  of  the  poor  benighted  Roman  Catholics  ?"

Another  of  the  evangelico-diabolical  school,  a  Mr.  Beamish,
a  great  ally  of  Mr.  Bickersteth  and  Mr.  M'Neile,  endea-
voured to  set  a  most  excellent  young  lady,  whom  I  mesmerised
assiduously  with  great  benefit,  against  both  mesmerism  and
myself,  and  ended  by  telling  her  that  she  could  never  ask
God's  blessing  upon  what  I  did.  ''  Yes,"  replied  she  honestly
and  fearlessly,  ''  I  can :  for  I  always  go  to  my  room  before
Dr.  Elliotson  comes  and  pray  to  God  to  bless  mesmerism  to
me."  She  was  too  disgusted  ever  to  attend  the  man's  church
again  with  her  family.

What  will  these  men  say  to  those  of  their  spiritual  brethren
who  so  diligently  and  kindly  mesmerise  the  suffering :  and
when  I  tell  them  that  dignitaries  of  their  church,  nay,  an
archbishop,  have  often  been  to  see  my  cases,  and  have  more
than  once  mesmerised  in  my  house  :  and  have  performed  ex-

^  Zoiatf  No.  VI.,  p.  247.  After  a  remarkable  cure  of  dambness  by  Mr.
Davey,  "  thanks  were  publicly  returned"  in  the  "  parish  church  of  Ilfra-
combe,  on  Sunday  last,  for  the  great  mercy  of  God  towards  the  girl,
Catherine  Brown,  on  her  restoration  of  speech  by  mesmerism,  through  the
instrumentality  of  Mr.  Pavey." — North  Devon  AdvertUer.


468  Speedy  cures  of  variow  Local  Affections.

cellent  cures?  Such  truly  good  men^  and  the  three  clergy-
men of  the  Church  of  England  who  have  written  books  in
flavour  of  mesmerism^  Mr.  Wakley,  in  a  recent  Lancet^  ele-
gantly terms  quack  parsons.  John  Elliotson.

IV.  Speedy  cures  of  various  Local  Affections.  By  Miss
Wallace,  of  Laurel  Lodge^  Cheltenham.  Communi-
cated by  Dr.  Elliotson.

<*  How  mneh  more  amiable  and  becoming  it  wonld  hare  been  if  this  lady  had  nnceatingly
'  minded  her  lEnittiog,*  Instead  of  bothering  her  brain  about  Mch  a  aabtlety  aa  meamcrisn.
EnoDgh  of  her.  She  (Min  Martlnean)  hai  i^one  to  mesmeriae  Mebemet  All;  bat  I  can  easily
fancy  the  old  file  saying,  'Won't  do,  Misa  Martlnean  I  Egyptian  darkneas  haa  beeomc
enlightenment.*  Tmly  this  la  a  qaackiag  and  mlracle-loviagag  e  I"  Mr.  F.  8.  Garuck^
Medical  Practitioner,  5,Cheapslde,  Halifaz. Nov.  10,  184«.— l7a/</!tf  GnonUon.

I  HAVE  received  the  following  cases  from  Miss  Wallace^  whose
undaunted  practice  and  defence  of  mesmerism  before  all  the
medical  and  satanical  scoflPers  of  her  neighbourhood  are
beyond  all  praise.

Such  cases  appear  to  me  of  the  highest  importance.  In
the  first  place,  they  prove  that  not  merely  diseases  of  the
nervous  system,  as  is  a  common  case,  but  inflammatory  and
other  kinds  of  a£Pections,  yield  to  mesmerism.  In  the  next
place,  they  prove  that  mankind  have  a  ready  help  in  their
Swu  kJJin  uumeroas  accideuta  and  ailmenl ;  nSre  ready
than  lotions  and  liniments  and  plasters  and  leeches  usually
are,  however  excellent  these  may  be.  Let  not  medical  men
say  that  their  well-established  methods  would  have  surpassed
the  easy  mesmeric  means  employed  by  Miss  Wallace.

CASES.

I  will  now  detail  the  cases  in  Miss  Wallace's  own  words.

I.  Inflammation  of  the  Eye.

July  5th,  1846.

Victoria  Harmen,  aged  8,  sufiering  from  an  inflamed  eye,
blood-shot,  and  having  a  sty  on  the  eyelid,  was  cured  by
mesmerism  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  The  sty,  the  redness,
and  the  pain,  which  the  child  compared  to  running  a  needle
into  her  eye,  had  all  entirely  disappeared,  and  the  eye  in  every
respect  looked  and  felt  as  well  as  the  other.  The  child  was
stated  by  her  mother  seldom  to  be  free  from  this  malady  for
a  fortnight  together,  and  sometimes  it  continued  several  weeks
without  intermission.  So  many  weeks  having  elapsed  without
any  return  of  the  complaint,  her  mother  hopes  the  cure  is
radical.

We,  the  undersigned,  were  present  and  witnessed  the
above  cure.

Elizabeth  Harmen,
2,  Pitville  Parade^  Aug.  27th.  Sarah  Tomlins.


by  Miss  fValhfce.  459

II.  Inflammation  of  the  Eye,

August  1,  1846.

Harriet  Oregory  was  attacked  last  January  with  inflam-
mation of  the  left  eye,  attended  with  great  pain  both  in  the
eye  and  over  the  brow.  When  I  first  saw  her^  the  eyelids
were  swollen,  the  eyeball  blood-shot,  and  the  usual  routine  of
leeching f  lotions,  fomentations,  Sec.,  prescribed  by  Dr.  Alerdice
and  Mr.  Hartley,  had  failed  entirely  in  giving  her  any  relief.
Dr.  Alerdice  recommended  salivation,  to  which  the  patient
refused  to  submit.  Harriet  Gregory  has  been  unable  to
remain  in  service  from  this  severe  faction.  When  she  came
to  me  on  the  1st  of  August,  she  was  suffering  under  all  the
symptoms  already  described.  Half  an  hour^s  mesmerising
relieved  the  pain,  but  effected  no  change  in  the  appearance  of
the  eye.  On  going  into  the  air,  she  suddenly  felt  as  if  a
great  weight  was  removed  from  the  forehead,  and  found  she
could  bear  the  light,  and  look  steadily  at  any  object  without
pain.  She  returned  to  tell  me  of  this  decided  improvement.
The  next  day,  the  eye  was  still  red,  but  the  pain  had  only
returned  over  the  eye-brow,  and  this  I  removed  in  a  few
minutes.  I  did  not  see  her  again  for  three  days,  when  her
eye  was  quite  well,  and  she  told  me  the  redness  and  inflam-
mation had  entirely  disappeared  in  the  evening  of  the  day  I
last  mesmerised  her.

We,  the  undersigned,  witnessed  this  cure.

(Signed) Harriet  Gregory,

Sarah  Tomlins.
August  5th.  Esther  Harington.

The  second  time  I  mesmerised  Harriet  Gregory,  I  ob-
served a  speck  on  the  eye,  which  I  privately  pointed  out  to  a
gentleman  present,  but  did  not  name  to  her,  as  she  had  not
mentioned  it.  Mrs.  Harmer  informs  me  she  had  shewn  this
speck  to  her,  and  they  both  saw  that  it  was  entirely  gone
after  the  third  mesmerising.'

Elizabeth  Harmer.

III.  Tooth-ache,

August  11th,  1846.

Harriet  Haynes,  cook  to  Mrs.  Brooke,  of  the  Aviary,

came  to  me  suffering  from  excruciating  tooth-ache,  which

t  Compare  the  cares  of  inflammation  of  the  eye  in  Vol.  II.,  p.  239 ;
Vol.  III.,  pp.  25,  32,  324.  For  the  power  of  mesmerism  over  inflammation
in  general,  see  Vol.  III.,  p.  512,  and  the  remarks  in  it.


460  Speedy  cures  of  various  Local  Affections,

had  deprived  her  of  all  rest. I  entirely  removed  the  pain  in
a  few  minutes  by  mesmerism.

A  day  or  two  after^  the  pain  returned  from  exposure  to
cold,  accompanied  by  swelling  in  the  cheeky  which  drew  the
mouth  and  eyelids  on  one  side.  In  a  few  minutes,  the  pain
and  swelling  were  entirely  gone,  and  the  mouth  and  eyelids
restored  to  their  usual  position.^

(Signed)  Harriet  Haynes,

A.  E.  Andrews,
August  28th.  A.  M.  Brooke.

IV.  Severe  Head-aches.

August  17th,  1846.
Elizabeth  Wakeley,^  aged  28,  su£fered  from  most  violent
head-aches  for  ten  years,  and  was  in  great  pain  in  her  head
when  she  came  to  me,  and  had  a  festered  breast.  I  mes-
merised her,  and  she  went  away  in  twenty  minutes  perfectly
relieved  from  all  suffering,  and  remains  quite  well  up  to  the
present  time.

Catherine  Wakeley,  her  mark x
As  witness, Mary  Ann  Williams.
August  28th.

V.  Severe  Rheumatic  Pain.

August  18th,  1846.
John  House,  butler  to  Mrs.  Brooke,  suffered  violent  pain
in  his  shoulder  from  rheumatism ;  was  unable  to  use  his  arm
or  work  for  two  days.  I  mesmerised  him :  all  pain  was  re-
moved and  the  free  use  of  his  arm  restored  in  about  twenty
minutes.  The  next  evening  much  rain  fell,  and  the  pain
returned  in  his  knee ;  but  I  again  succeeded  in  removing  it,
and  he  is  now  able  to  do  his  work.

John  House,
The  Aviary,  Cheltenham,  A.  M.  Brooke.

August  27th.

VI.  Tooth-ache.

August  18th,  1846.
Mary  Ann  Phillips,  suffering  from  distracting  tooth-ache,
was  quite  cured  by  half  an  hour's  mesmeric  sleep.

Mary  Ann  Phillips.
August  27th.

k  Compare  Vol.  III.,  p.  614,  for  a  similar  rapid  cure,  by  a  persoDAge  as
high  in  the  charch  as  in  literatare  aod  philosophy. — J.  E.

1  Mr.  Wakley  formerly  spelt  his  name  thus,  lilte  the  rest  of  his  Glouces-
tershire and  Somersetshire  relations ;  but  we  always  adopt  his  present  spell-
ing. We  have  old  lists  in  which  his  name  is  so  spelt.  Why  he  dashed  out
the  first  e  several  years  ago  we  know  not— Zow<.


by  Mm  Wallace.  461

VII.  Severe  Pain  from  a  fall.

August  26th,  1846.
Bichard  Phillips,  living  at  No.  8, St.  James's  Street,
aged  60,  fell  from  a  ladder  and  hurt  the  whole  left  side,  par-
ticularly the  shoulder,  so  severely,  that  he  could  not  be  moved
without  suffering  agony.

I  found  him  lying  on  his  back,  groaning  with  pain,  at-
tended by  Mr.  Heally,  of  the  hospital,  without  any  good
results.

The  slightest  touch  on  shoulder,  head,  or  foot,  caused
such  acute  suffering,  that  I  was  obliged  to  give  up  the  idea  of
having  him  moved  off  his  back  as  I  wished,  in  order  to  apply
local  mesmerism  over  the  injured  parts.  I  therefore  proceeded
to  make  long  passes  from  head  to  foot,  and  in  about  twenty
minutes  he  was  able  to  raise,  and  freely  use,  his  arms,  and
shortly  after  he  turned  on  his  side,  merely  taking  hold  of  his
wife's  hand.  I  left  him  free  from  pain,  and  the  catching  that
affected  his  breathing  was  also  removed.

On  returning  the  next  day,  he  met  me  at  the  door,  ex-
pressed his  warmest  gratitude  for  his  cure,  and  told  me  that
shortly  after  I  left  him  he  was  able  to  rise  from  his  bed,  sit
up  two  hours,  and  came  down  stairs  next  morning,  feeling  no
pain  beyond  tenderness  in  the  shoulder.  Two  days  after  he
resumed  his  work  as  a  gardener.

I  remarked  in  this  case,  as  in  almost  all  others,  that
though  the  patient  could  not  suffer  the  slightest  touch  from
any  other  person,  the  pressure  from  my  hand  gave  relief  in
place  of  pain.  I  first  noticed  this  singular  fact  three  years
ago,  in  a  very  bad  case  of  sciatica,  which  I  cured ;  and
almost  invariably  I  find  it  repeated  in  cases  of  tic,  tooth-
ache, rheumatism,  &c.,  &c.

We,  the  undersigned,  testify  to  the  truth  of  the  above
cure.

Richard  Phillips,
Mary  Phillips,
M.  Phillips,
C.  Haynes.

YIII.  Inflammation  of  the  Eye.

August  27th,  1846.

James  Smith  had  experienced  considerable  pain  for  several

days  from  an  inflamed  eye, accompanied  by  a  sty  on  the

upper  lid. AH  pain  and  inflammation  was  subdued  by  my

twice  mesmerising  him. A  hard  substance  still  remains.


462  Speedy  cures  of  vtxrious  Local  Affections,

arising,  I  conclude,  from  want  of  perseyerance  in  the  use  of

mesmerism  and  mesmerised  wetter.

James  Smith,
Avandale  House.

IX.  Tooth-ache,

August  11th,  1846.
Harriet  Haynes  relieved  of  a  violent  tooth-ache  in  a  few
minutes. It  returned  two  or  three  days  after  from  exposure
to  cold,  accompanied  by  a  swelled  face,  which  drew  the  mouth
and  eye  awry. In  a  few  minutes  the  swelling  and  pain  were
removed,  and  the  features  restored  to  their  usual  position.
(Signed) Annie  Elizabeth  Andrews,  9,  Horwood  Terrace,
Harriet  Haynes,  the  Aviair,
Ellen  Wallace,  Laurel  Lodge.

X.  Inflammation  of  the  Eye.

August
Sara  Phillipps  had  bad  eyes,  greatly  inflamed,  for  three
months :  was  quite  cured  by  seven  times  mesmerising.

Sara  Phillipps,  her  mark  x
Anne  Phillipps,  her  mark  x

XL  Liver  Complaint,

Anne  Phillipps  had,  as  the  doctors  said,  liver  complaint
from  the  age  of  7,  and  is  now  12.  Suffered  great  and  idmost
constant  pain  in  her  side,  which  had  been  much  swelled.
Had  been  a  dispensary  patient  for  years,  and  derived  no  be-
nefit from  the  remedies  prescribed*  Never  had  any  pain  from
the  first  time  she  was  mesmerised,  three  weeks  ago,  and
thinks  she  is  now  quite  cured.

(Signed) Sara  and  Anne  Phillipps.

Both  these  cases  continued  well  when  I  left  Cheltenham
at  the  end  of  October.

Xn.  Scalded  Arm.

We,  the  undersigned,  certify  that  Harriet  Haines  scalded
herself  so  severely,  that  she  compared  the  pain  she  endured
to  having  her  arm  "  from  the  shoulder  to  the  end  of  the
fingers  thrust  into  the  fire.^'  In  the  presence  of  Mrs.  Thomas,
Miss  Wallace  entirely  removed  the  pain,  leaving  little  re-


by  Miss  Wallace.  463

mains  of  the  redness  and  inflammation  that  followed  the
accident;  and  a  complete  cure  was  effected  in  about  three
minutes.  In  the  course  of  a  few  days^  the  skin  came  entirely
off  the  hand  and  arm^  leaving  a  new  skin  in  its  place.

Under  ordinary  medical  treatment,  the  patient  herself,  and
all  who  witnessed  the  accident,  feel  convinced  her  sufferings
would  have  been  severe  and  protracted.

Jane  Thomas,  Pittville  Villas,
Sarah  English,  9,  Northfield  Terrace,
Mary  Ann  Williams, )  t i  t j
EUen  Wallace,  J  ^""^  ^S«.

John  House, 1
Laurel  Lodge,  Harriet  Haines,  >  The  Aviary.

October  8th,  1846. Ann  Taylor, J

XIII.  Injkanmation  of  the  Eye.

Sept.  14th,  1846.

Caroline  Beeves  suffered  from  violent  inflammation  of  the
eve  for  four  years,  which  terminated  in  the  total  loss  of  the
sight  of  one  eye  about  four  months  ago.  She  had  consulted
Dr.  Selwyn,  Mr.  C!ook,  Mr.  Wright,  and  Mr.  Evans,  without
deriving  any  benefit ;  and  when  she  came  to  me,  she  feared
she  was  losing  the  sight  of  the  other  eye.  Some  of  the  me-
dical gentlemen  said  the  sight  never  could  be  restored,  as  the
nerve  of  the  eye  was  destroyed :  the  pupil  was  nearly  covered
with  a  speck,  that  appeared  deeply  indented.

After  the  first  mesmerising,  the  pain  was  much  subdued ;
and  after  the  third,  all  redness  and  inflammation  had  dis-
appeared, and  both  eyes  felt  stronger.  The  fourth  mesmer-
ising enabled  her  to  see  a  little  with  the  blind  eye,  and  in
three  days  more  she  read  a  newspaper  by  candle-light ;  and
her  eyes  have  now  remained  well  for  nearly  a  month,  and
every  day  they  appear  to  be  gaining  strength.  Three  weeks
before  Caroline  came  to  me,  she  applied  to  Miss  Kirkland  for
an  in-door  ticket  for  the  hospital,  as  she  was  told  that  the
only  chance  of  saving  her  remaining  eye  was  getting  absolute
rest  for  some  time ;  and,  she  being  a  friendless  orphan,  this
could  only  be  obtained  bv  admission  into  an  hospital.  Miss
Kirkland  kindly  tried,  but  without  success,  to  obtain  the
desired  admission  for  her.

Caroline  is  servant  to  Mrs.  Olive,  fishmonger.  High  Street,
who  has  been  very  kind  in  getting  medicd  advice  for  her,
and  sending  her  regularly  to  me  at  much  inconvenience  to
herself.


464  Speedy  cures  of  variotu  Local  Affections,

We,  the  undersigned,  certify  the  above  cure  to  have  been
effected  as  reported.

(Signed) Caroline  Beeves,  her  mark  x

Mary  Ann  Williams,  Laurel  Lodge,

Annie  Andrews,  9,  Noerwood  Terrace,

E.  Turtj,  Manchester  Walk,

Sarah  English,  9,  Northfield  Terrace,

Sam.  Baker,  Haynes  Cottage,  Wynchomb  St.

Ellen  Wallace,  Laurel  Lodge.

Mrs.  Olive  and  her  daughter  expressed  their  willingness
to  attest  Caroline's  restoration  to  sight,  and  I  left  the  case
for  their  signatures,  but  through  some  neglect  it  has  been
sent  to  me  without,  and  there  is  not  time  now  to  apply
for  them.

XIV.  Deafness.

Peter  Saker,  4  years  old,  became  deaf  from  cold.  At
the  request  of  his  father  I  mesmerised  him,  and  he  went  into
80  deep  a  sleep  that  he  was  carried  home  and  put  to  bed
without  awaking  j  and  the  next  day  his  hearing  was  much
better.

At  the  second  mesmerising  he  walked  about  the  room
without  awaking,  and  was  quite  insensible  to  the  prick  of  a
pin,  pinching,  &;c.,  and  his  hearing  was  entirely  restored.

Signed  by  the  father  and  mother  of  the  child,

Samuel  Baker,
Laurel  Lodge,  Ann  Baker.

Oct.,  1846.

XV. Pain  from  a  fall,  and  Scalded  Hand.

Mary  Bowyer  fell  down  a  flight  of  stairs  in  the  dark,
striking  her  side  and  back  with  great  force  against  a  project-
ing window-frame  on  the  landing.  When  telling  me  of  the
accident  next  day,  she  said  the  shock  she  received  was  tre-
mendous, and  the  bruises  were  very  black,  but  she  hoped
they  would  not  signify.

Two  days  after  she  told  me  she  greatly  feared  she  had
sustained  some  internal  injury,  and  that  the  spine  was  hurt,
for  every  time  she  came  up  stairs  or  drew  a  deep  breath,  she
felt  pain  in  her  back ;  adding  that  her  fellow-servant  assured
her  he  was  certain  I  could  cure  her,  which  I  did  completely,
by  a  few  minutes'  local  mesmerism.

About  a  fortnight  afterwards,  Mary  scalded  her  hand  very


by  Miss  fFallace.  465

severely,  and  came  to  me  ia  great  agonji  having  applied  flour
and  ink  to  her  hand,  which  formed  a  paste  :  over  this  I  put
some  cotton  wadding,  and  after  the  application  of  local  mes-
merism for  about  ten  minutes,  to  my  great  surprise  she  sunk
into  a  profound  sleep,  which  lasted  about  two  hours,  when
she  awoke  perfectly  free  from  pain.  Two  hours  after  the  pain
returned,  in  consequence  of  her  washing  off  the  ink  and  flour.
I  again  put  her  to  sleep  in  a  few  minutes,  and  on  rousing  her
up  in  about  half  an  hour,  she  declared  the  pain  entirely
cured ;  and  a  very  slight  redness  was  all  that  remained  of  this
serious  accident.  The  next  day  I  sent  her  in  to  Dr.  Elliotson,
who  expressed  much  satisfaction  with  both  the  cures.  The
skin  came  off  her  hand  very  gradually  in  the  course  of  the
following  week.

The  undersigned  witnessed  the  scald  and  its  cure.

Ellen  Walkce,
Samuel  Baker,
Kensington,  Mary  Bowyer,  her  mark  x

Dec.  7th,  1846.


At  the  termination  of  these  narratives  by  Miss  Wallace,
I  must  tell  the  medical  world,  that,  however  they  may  sneer,
no  means  which  they  would  have  employed  could  have  effected
speedier,  or  so  speedy,  cures.  No  disgreeable  drugs  had  to  be
swallowed :  no  painful  or  irksome  local  measures  had  to  be
borne.

When  in  Switzerland  lately,  I  met  that  excellent  man,  the
Bicv.  Mr.  Pyne.  He  told  me  that  his  driver  a  few  days  before
fell  off  the  box,  and  hurt  his  shoulder  and  arm  so  severely  that
he  could  not  hold  his  whip  or  move  the  limb.  Mr.  Pyne
mesmerised  the  part,  and  presently  the  man  was  astonished
to  find  he  could  move  the  arm  freely  and  hold  his  whip.  Sub-
sequently to  this,  he  met  a  gentleman  with  an  agonizing
tooth-ache.  Mr.  Pyne  said  he  thought  he  could  benefit  him,
and  in  a  very  short  time  the  gentleman  found  his  pain  gone
by  local  mesmerism.  Was  not  this  as  much  as  the  esta-
blished medical  means  would  have  effected?  If  the  devil  lent
his  hand  invisibly  to  Mr.  Pyne  and  Miss  Wallace,  I  can  only
say  it  was  very  good  of  him :  and  I  shall  begin  to  like  him.

John  Elliotson.


( 466 )
V. Cure  of  Fatuity ^  Insanity ^  ^T^.,  ifc. By  Dr.  Elliotson.

"  John  Elliotson,  M.D.,  has  Uboared  with  all  hii  might  to  rain  his  own  prospecfs,  and
bring  his  profession  into  disrepute.  Sorely  ha$  he  eufferett  for  the  part  he  has  played.  Uie
poritiom  i*  irretrienMy  JMf,  ATo  fiuM  now  earn  what  Dr.  Ettiotaon  mp§  or  doeg,"  Mr.
F.  S.  Garlics,  Medical  Practitioner,  6,  Cheapside,  Halifax.  Nov.  10,  1840.  --  Hal{fa*
Guardianja

In  November^  1842^  Mr.  Morgan^  Surgeon^  of  Bedford  BpOw^
called  upon  me  to  request  I  would  see  a  poor  child  whom  he
?iad  been  treating  for  four  months  urithotU  the  least  benefit,  and
in  whose  case  no  measures  of  the  ordinary  routine  of  medi-
cine now  suggested  themselves  to  him  as  calculated  to  be  of
any  use. The  mother  had  heard  of  the  wonderful  case  and
cure  of  Miss  Emma  Melhuish^  of  Bedford  Street^  opposite
the  Three  Cups  Yard^ in  which  she  livedo the  remark-
able and  most  instructive  details  of  whom  are  given  in  the
fourth  number  of  The  Zoist :°  and  had  told  him  that,  as  her
daughter  still  lay  in  the  most  wretched  state,  not  at  all  im-
proved, and  he  held  out  no  hopes  to  her  of  being  able  to  do
any  good,  she  should  be  thankful  if  he  would  go  to  me  and
ask  me  to  try  to  cure  the  poor  child with  mesmerism.
Mr.  Morgan  did  not  fall  in  a  passion  at  her  "  ignorance''  and
"  impudence  ;"  he  neither  "  swore'*  nor  "  bounced ;"  neither
did  he  '^  laugh  at  her  as  a  fool ;"  he  did  not  tell  her  that
mesmerism  was  a  ''complete  humbug,"  and  ''wonder  she
could  believe  in  such  nonsense ;"  he  did  not  tell  her  that  I
was  a  "  quack,"  "  a  very  clever  man  once,  but  now  a  lost
man,"  "mad,"  and  that  "nobody  now  cared  what  I  said;"
that  "  Mr.  Wakley  had  exposed  all  mesmerists  and  mesmeric
patients,  and  destroyed  mesmerism  years  ago,  for  ever;"  that
I  "  had  been  turned  out  of  University  College  and  its  Hos-
pital on  account  of  prescribing  mesmerism;"  that  Dr.  Forbes
had  killed  mesmerism  after  Mr.  Wakley  had  killed  it,  and
both  would  kill  it  several  times  yet ;  that  my  "  prospects  !<»
were ruined ;" that  I  "  was  ruined  and  going  to  leave
England  for  ever ;"  that  "  mesmerism  was  a  most  dangerous
thing,  and  persons  sometimes  could  not  be  awakened  again,
and  that  it  might  cause  apoplexy,  or  perhaps  insanity  for
life ;"  that  "  the  Okeys  are  both  in  lunatic  asylums  through
it;"  that  "the  coma  might  so  overpower  the  system  and
produce  such  a  shock,  that  the  system  might  never  rally ;"
that  "  if  the  child  was  mesmerised,  he,"  though  he  confessed

B  I  am  not  aware  of  having  done  anything  to  offend  Mr.  Garlick,  or
even  heard  of  his  existence  before,
n  Vol.  I.,  p.  429.
Q  «  Ood  bless  the  mark  I*'  after  being  in  practice  thirty  years  f


Cure  of  Fatuity,  Dumbness,  SfC,  467

he  could  do  nothing  for  it^  and  was  no  longer  attempting  to  do
anything  for  it,  "  would  never  attend  it  again ;"  nor,  ^'  should
the  mother  have  any  more  family,  that  he  would  not  attend
her  in  her  confinement,  if  mesmerism  were  allowed  to  enter
the  house ;" — all  which  deliberate  falsehoods  and  threats  have
come  to  my  knowledge  as  uttered  by  modern  practitioners  of
what  is  absurdly  called  high  standing  and  of  middle  standing,
royal  practitioners,  titled  practitioners,  graduates  of  English
universities,  fellows  of  colleges,  hospital  physicians  and  sur-
geons and  professors  and  teachers,  the  middle  orders  taking
courage  at  seeing  their  superiors  act  thus ;  and  also  by  the
most  miserable  distributors  of  physic.  He  did  not  say,  as  the
most  fashionable  physician  of  the  hour  did  to  a  baronet,  a
patient  of  mine,  who  consulted  him  in  my  absence,  on  find-
ing that  I  attended  him,  "  Oh  that  gentleman  who  has  always
got  some  crotchet  or  other :  and  has  now  got  hold  of  mes-
merism :"  and  on  being  then  asked  if  he  had  ever  witnessed
a  mesmeric  case,  replied,  "  No ;  and  nothing  shall  ever  induce
me/'  No;  Mr.  Morgan  immediately  called  upon  me,  and
made  the  request,  honestly  saying,  '^  certain  it  is  that  neither
myself  nor  others''  (I  use  the  words  of  a  letter  subsequently
written  to  me  by  him)  have  produced  the  least  benefit  upon  a
set  of  symptoms  as  strange  as  I  ever  witnessed,  and  as  diffi-
cult, to  me  at  least,  to  understand  or  describe.''

''  In  the  summer  of  1842,  (continues  his  letter,)  I  first
saw  her,  labouring  under  the  following  symptoms;  con-
stant pain  in  her  head ;  with  difficulty  roused  to  the  slightest
exertion;  bowels  obstinately  costive;  lying  for  weeks  in  a
semi-comatose  state,  sometimes  crying,  again  laughing;  pain-
fully susceptible  to  the  least  noise,  at  one  time  almost  re-
fusing food,  at  another  ravenous,  refusing  however  to  eat
before  any  one,  but  screaming  if  a  basket  kept  in  her  bed
was  not  constantly  supplied,  not  with  proper  food,  but  cakes
of  all  sorts,  jellies,  and  new  bread.  Her  appearance  pallid
in  the  extreme,  and  daily  wasting  away.  I  tried  in  vain,  in
their  turns,  stimulants,  cordials,  tonics,  local  bleeding,  purg-
ing, blistering,  constant  cold  applications  to  the  head.  Some
other  medicid  men  saw  her ;  I  don't  know  their  treatment,
but  when  I  was  again  called  in  I  was  at  a  loss  what  to  do,
and  sent  for  you."

On  the  4th  of  November,  1842,  at  four  o'clock  in  the
afternoon,  I  accordingly  went  to  see  the  child.  Her  name
was  Sarah  Wiltshire  :  and  her  age  eleven  years.  The  account
given  by  her  mother  was  the  following.  She  herself  had
been  attacked  in  the  mews  by  a  drunken  man,  who  abused
her  in  the  grossest  manner. The  child  was  terrified,  seized

VOL.  IV.  K  K


468  Cure  of  Fatuity ^  Dumbness,  ifc,

with  a  violent  tremor^  screamed  excessively  and  continued  to
do  so.  At  length  her  hands  became  clenched,  her  jaws
locked,  and  she  fell  into  insensibility  which  lasted  three  days ;
her  head  working  about  all  the  time ;  and  not  a  particle  of
food  or  drink  being  swallowed.  Her  sensibility  then  returned,
and  she  ate  voraciously,  lying  constantly  on  her  back,  moan-
ing, rolling  her  head,  and  working  her  hands :  and  a  fit  of
screaming  and  rage  took  place  every  hour  or  two,  in  which
she  attempted  to  bite  everybody ;  the  bowels  were  never  re-
lieved without  medicine :  and  she  had  also  a  violent  cough^
like  the  barking  of  a  dog.

In  this  state  I  now  beheld  the  child.  She  could  not  speak,
and  had  not  spoken  from  the  first,  and  the  bowels  had  not  acted
for  nine  days,  nor  had  she  slept  an  hour  at  a  time.  She
was  pale  and  looked  thin,  sickly  and  fatuitous.  She  could  not
even  sit  up  in  bed :  thus  there  was  extreme  general  debility,
and  the  greater  part  of  the  nervous  system  was  in  disorder.
She  was  fatuitous  and  maniacal;  had  great  excitement  of
some  of  the  portions  of  the  brain  concerned  with  emotion^
and  of  parts  concerned  with  muscular  action.

Finding  that  aperients,  like  all  other  medical  means,  had
failed,  and,  what  was  worse,  had  always  aggravated  the  symp-
toms, I  entreated  that  no  aperients,  nor  indeed  any  other
drugs,  should  be  given,  whatever  the  length  of  time  the
bowels  might  remain  torpid.  I  have  repeatedly  seen  the
cure  of  St.  Vitus's  dance  thrown  back  by  the  use  of  active
purgatives  or  by  diarrhoea  excited  by  eating  improper  things
while  the  disease  was  yielding  to  iron,  with  which  I  have
never  failed  to  cure  the  disease  when  I  superintended  its
use  myself.  Feeble,  nervous,  and  dyspeptic  persons  su£Per
exceedingly  from  similar  injudicious  treatment,  as  well  as
by  the  prevalent  use  of  mercury;  many  such  patients  are
the  better  for  habitual  action  but  once  every  second  or  third
day.

I  made  slow  and  long  passes  at  a  very  short  distance  from
her,  from  opposite  the  forehead  to  opposite  her  stomach,  as
she  lay.  At  first  she  continued  moving  her  head  about  and
away  from  me,  moaning,  and  very  cross,  and  she  never  fixed
her  eyes  upon  me  or  anything.  But  in  twenty  minutes  she
was  fast  asleep :  her  head  ceased  to  roll,  and  the  moaning
was  no  longer  heard.  On  my  speaking  to  her  she  was  roused
up,  but  a  repetition  of  the  passes  for  five  minutes  sent  her
back  into  sleep  as  sound  as  ever,  and  I  left  her  asleep,  silent
and  motionless.  It  was  now  twenty  minutes  to  five,  and  I
desired  that  she  might  be  undisturbed  and  allowed  to  wake
spontaneously,  and  she  slq}t  from  that  time  tiU  two  o^ clock  in


by  Dr.  EUiotsan.  469

the  morning — above  nine  hours  :  she  who  had  not  slept  one
hour  together  for  the  previous  ten  weeks  !

Was  all  this  sheer  imposture  ?  was  her  disease  imposture?
and  was  the  deep  trance,  the  stillness  of  head  and  hands,  and
the  silence  of  above  nine  hours,  the  result  of  imagination
in  this  poor  violent  and  fatuitous  object  ?  was  it  Manchester
fatigue  of  her  eyes  f  which  were  never  fixed  upon  me.

As  she  lived  too  far  off  for  my  convenience,  and  out  of
my  usual  course  of  visits,  Mr.  Wood  visited  her  daily  and
continued  what  I  had  begun.

Nov.  5th.  Sent  again  to  sleep,  and  left  sleepy.

She  has  not  screamed  from  the  time  she  was  mesmerised
yesterday;  and,  though  she  was  left  sleepy  only,  slept  well
all  night. She  is  altogether  better.

6th.  The  head  was  rolling  about  as  usual,  but  became
quiet  almost  as  soon  as  mesmerisation  was  begun,  and  she
was  soon  asleep.

7th.  Slept  from  the  time  she  was  mesmerised  yesterday,
at  6  o'clock  p.m.,  till  4  in  the  morning — ten  hours :  when
she  woke  for  a  few  minutes,  and  slept  again  till  6,  making
twelve  hours.  She  also  slept  on  her  side  for  the  first  time
since  her  seizure  four  months  before — the  cough,  which  had
been  very  troublesome,  was  also  greatly  reduced.  She  had
recovered  her  speech,  but  it  was  only  to  use  bad  and  violent
language  to  all  about  her  in  the  fits  of  frenzy  which  often  seized
her. She  was  mesmerised  in  the  afternoon  and  left  asleep.

8th.  She  slept  from  the  afternoon  of  yesterday  till  8  o'clock
to-day.  During  the  mesmerisation  to-day  the  cough  ceased,
she  turned  on  her  left  side,  went  to  sleep,  and  was  left
sleeping. Her  bowels  acted  to-day  spontaneously.

9th.  She  slept  from  6  o'clock  last  evening  till  7  this
morning — thirteen  hours.  She  has  no  cough  to-day;  is
stronger,  and  decidedly  better.

Soon  mesmerised  to  sleep,  and  left  sleeping.

The  daily  report  was  much  the  same,  till

15th.  She  had  slept  all  night  as  usual,  except  that  she
woke  about  4  o'clock  in  the  morning  for  a  few  minutes.  Sh^
was  much  improved:  but,  having  had  no  action  of  the  bowels
for  seven  days,  a  purgative  was  given,  contrary  to  my  express
orders,  because  I  felt  convinced  its  action  would  be  injurious,
and  that  the  bowels,  if  left  to  nature,  would  at  length  act
spontaneously.  The  purgative  acted  violently,  exhausted  her^
brought  back  the  cough,  and  intensely  aggravated  every
symptom.

The  mesmerisation  influenced  her  less ;  so  that  she  slept
from  4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  till  9  in  the  evening  only ;

KK  2


470  Cure  of  Fatidty,  Dumbness,  Sfc.

and  not  soundly  as  before.  The  fits  of  screaming  returned
frequently.

16th.  She  was  sent  to  sleep,  but  slept  only  for  an  hour
after  she  was  left,  and  has  not  slept  at  all  since.  Her  symp-
toms are  much  aggravated,  and  she  is  much  weaker.

I  often  observe  that  the  effects  of  causes  injurious  to
health  are  felt,  as  in  this  instance,  more  afterwards  than  im-
mediately, or  even  not  at  all  at  first.

17th.  Slept  for  a  short  time  only  after  she  was  left  asleep:
and  had  no  sleep  at  night.

She  is  nearly  as  bad  as  before  she  was  mesmerised.

Mesmerism  thus  had  far  less  power  over  her  now  she  was
reduced.  I  have  often  been  unable  to  produce  any  appre-
ciable effect  upon  extremely  weak  persons,  even  when  their
complaints  were  seated  in  the  nervous  system,  and  they  were
exceedingly  nervous.  So  far  is  the  fancy  of  uninformed  persons
incorrect  that  mesmerism  is  the  influence  of  merely  a  strong
person  over  one  less  strong.  The  irritable  condition  which
often  attends  extreme  weakness  probably  tends  to  prevent  the
mesmeric  influence.  At  any  rate  weakness  does  not  favour
mesmeric  susceptibility.

18th.  She  slept  longer  last  night,  and  is  much  stronger.

19th  to  Dec.  3rd.  Slept  well  at  night :  still  improving.

Dec.  10th.  Much  better :  but  still  rolls  her  head.

16th.  Stronger :  spasmodic  cough  gone.

Jan.  3rd.  Pretty  well.  Is  able  to  walk  across  the  room.
Will  now  be  mesmerised  every  other  day  only.

20th.  No  symptom  but  a  degree  of  debility.  Will  be
mesmerised  but  twice  a  week.

Feb.  1.  Perfectly  well :  and  walks  about  as  usual.  To  be
mesmerised  but  once  a  week.  Her  bowels  always  act  regularly.

20th.  Mesmerism  to  be  discontinued.

In  the  autumn,  seven  months  after  her  cure,  she  was  ter-
rified again  by  the  same  man  and  suffered  a  relapse ;  which,
however,  was  soon  removed  by  mesmerism.

Mr.  Morgan  wrote  to  me  about  Christmas  last  year.
'^  You  will  be  pleased  to  hear  she  continues  quite  well ;  has
all  her  faculties ;  has  assisted  in  teaching  in  a  Sunday  school,?
much  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  lady  patronesses.  Her  mother
thinks  her  quite  well,  and  attributes  her  return  to  health  to
your  advice  and  attention.'^

Her  mother  was  right :  and  nothing  but  the  most  perverse
prejudice  or  dulness  could  suggest  a  doubt  upon  the  point.

p  Satan  little  tboaf^ht  while  he  was  curiog  her,  that  this  ungrateful  return
would  be  made  to  him. — J.  E.


by  Dr.  EUiotson.  471

Unhappily^  after  being  well  nearly  three  years  she  was
terrified  a  third  time  on  the  14th  of  last  June^  and  saJBTered
another  relapse:  and  the  mother  herself  came  to  me  for
assistance.  There  was  some  mistake  in  taking  the  address
of  their  new  abode^  and  I  did  not  see  her  for  a  week.  She
remained  without  any  improvement  all  this  time,  and  nothing
had  been  done  for  her.  She  was  feeble,  almost  sleepless,
fiercely  outrageous,  after  having  been  sullen  for  the  first  three
days.  The  bowels  did  not  act  for  the  first  fifteen  days,  and
during  that  time  she  lived  upon  jeUy ;  they  had  acted  spon-
taneously, however,  before  my  arrival.  She  could  not  sit  up
in  bed ;  had  fits  of  insensibility  several  times  a  day ;  and  suf-
fered pain  in  her  head.

I  easily  sent  her,  who  had  been  so  long  nearly  sleepless,
into  a  sleep  which  lasted  from  four  that  afternoon  till  ten
the  next  morning.

I  desired  the  mother  to  make  the  passes  twice  a  day  just
as  she  saw  me  do.  She  followed  my  directions  and  regularly
produced  sleep,  which  lasted  very  many  hours  :  and  she  thus
soon  cured  the  child.  Nothing  else  was  done.  The  bowels
soon  became  regular ;  and  I  saw  the  girl  on  Friday  last,  De-
cember 11,  stout  and  in  perfect  health,  in  Three  Cups  Yard.

It  will  be  observed  that  when  she  was  asleep,  we  left  her.
In  a  former  number  I  stated  that  if  I  had  my  own  way — had
no  special  reason  for  deviating  &om  a  general  rule — /  would
never  wake  a  patients  The  longer  the  sleep,  the  greater  gene-
rally the  benefit.  Still  patients  in  their  sleep-waking  some-
times tell  us  that  they  should  sleep  only  a  certain  time ;  and
then  we  ought  always,  where  there  is  no  delirium,  to  follow
their  directions.  Without  such  instructions  we  may  discover
that  sleep  beyond  a  certain  time  does  not  leave  them  so  well.
This  is,  however,  very  seldom  the  case.  Sometimes  they
grow  uneasy  in  their  sleep,  and  it  is  well  to  wake  them  and
generally  to  send  them  to  sleep  again.  But  if  none  of  these
things  take  place,  I  should  never  wish  to  wake  a  patient ;  nor
do  I,  except  for  mere  convenience,  as  when  they  come  to
my  house  and  I  am  obliged  to  go  out  at  a  certain  hour,  or
when  their  avocations  will  not  allow  them  to  sleep  beyond  a
certain  time.

They  are  sure  to  wake  spontaneously  sooner  or  later ^ — as  sure
as  we  are  from  common  sleep  when  we  go  to  bed.  An  un-
founded fear  prevails  that  persons  may  never  wake  again  from
the  mesmeric  sleep,  because  it  has  appeared  in  the  papers
that  particular  patients  could  not  be  awakened.  We  some-
times cannot  wake  them  just  when  we  wish. But  if  we  wait,

qZoMf,  Vol.  III.,  p.  41.


472  Cure  of  Fatuity,  Dumbness,  jfc.

we  are  able  after  a  time ;  and^  if  we  wait  still  longer,  they  are
sure  to  wake  of  their  own  accord.  There  was  an  account  of
a  lad  at  Deptford  who  could  not  be  wakened.  In  his  sleep
he  said  he  could  not  be  awakened  till  the  next  or  following
day  at  a  certain  hour.  Nor  could  he.  But  at  the  hour  men-
tioned, he  awoke  spontaneously ;  and  is  well  and  thriving  at
this  moment.^

The  longer  the  sleep,  the  greater  usually  is  the  benefit.
Yet  patients  are  every  day  cured  without  sleep  or  any  other  sen-
sible effect :  so  that  mesmerism  should  have  an  ample  trial  of
many  months  in  every  case,  although  no  sleep  take  place.
I  have  never  yet  failed  of  curing  St.  Yitus^s  dance :  but  never
yet  sent  a  patient  in  that  disease  to  sleep.  On  the  other
Land,  sleep- waking  may  be  readily  induced^  and  endless  ex-
quisite phenomena  present  themselves,  and  yet  no  improve-
ment take  place.  I  mesmerised  three  cases  of  epilepsy  for
three  years  daily,  and  produced  nearly  all  phenomena  short
of  clairvoyance  and  sympathy  of  sensation,  and  did  not  cure
one  of  the  three.

Generally  the  more  experiments  are  made  with  traction,
rigidity,  &c.,  though  not  always  with  mesmerised  water  or
metals,  and  the  more  a  cheerful  conversation  is  carried  on  in
the  sleep,  the  better.

Generally  the  deeper  the  sleep  can  be  made,  by  breathing,
continued  passes,  laying  the  fingers  over  the  eyeballs,  or  the
hand  upon  the  head,  &c.,  &c.,  the  greater  the  good.  Not,
however,  always.  I  have  seen  a  few  patients,  who,  after
they  have  been  mesmerised  some  weeks  or  months,  suffered  if
the  sleep  was  made  so  deep  that  they  could  not  converse.
Some  suffer  at  last  if  they  are  mesmerised  often :  so  that
those  who  were  at  first  improTed  by  meamerUm  twice  a  day
are  the  better  for  having  it  only  once  a  day ;  then  for  having
it  every  other  day,  and  so  on.P  When  no  sleep  was  even
induced,  bat  passes  made  for  half  an  honr  with  no  gi^t
sensible  effect,  I  have  known  them  at  length  produce  dis-
comfort if  continued  as  long  as  at  first,  and  I  have  been
obliged  to  reduce  the  time,  till  at  length  I  made  them  for
only  a  minute  or  two,  and  less  and  less  frequently  in  the
week.  A  very  deep  sleep  produced  by  metals  or  water,  or  in
any  other  manner,  may  at  length  completely  overpower  the
system  and  greatly  exhaust  its  strength.

It  will  be  observed  that  this  little  girl  was  left  asleep.
When  this  can  be  done,  it  is  a  happy  circumstance,  and  we
ought  always  to  attempt  it  the  first  time.  But  when  it  is
found  that  the  patient  cannot  be  left  by  the  mesmeriser  with-
out distress,  we  must  remain. In  some  instances  this  will

o  Zoist,  Vol.  I.,  p.  472. p  ZoMf,  Vol.  I.,  p.  426.


The  British  Anodation  and  Cerebral  Physiology. 478

wear  off^  especially  if  others  in  the  mesmeric  state  are  present ;
for  persons  generally  become  agreeable  to  each  other  in  the
mesmeric  state.  We  ought  carefully  to  ascertain,  not  only
that  the  patient  may  be  left  by  us^  but  that  he  can  allow  the
presence  or  proximity  of  another.  If  he  cannot,  and  we
leave  him  in  charge  of  some  one^  great  mischief  may  be
occasioned.

John  Elliotson.


VI.  The  British  Association  and  Cerebral  Physiology,

TO THS editor OF THE ZOIST.

Sir, — ^The  accompanying  particulars  relative  to  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of
Science  at  their  annual  meeting  in  the  year  1846^  deserve^  I
think,  to  be  chronicled.

At  the  Ethnological  Section,  after  the  reading  of  a  paper
by  Dr.  Latham  "  on  the  distribution  of  round  and  elongated
crania/^  by  Prof.  Retzius,  I  exhibited  a  cast  from  a  skuU
(found  on  Portsdown  Hill  with  flint  celts  and  arrow-heads),
as  a  fine  specimen  of  unmixed  Celtic.  During  the  discussion
which  ensued,  Mr.  Ogilby,  a  member  of  the  committee,  ob-
served that  "  a  marked  difference  was  observable  in  the  skulls
discovered  in  ancient  tumuli  in  Britain,  according  as  they
were  found  associated  with  iron,  brass,  or  stone  weapons,  the
former  being  the  best  developed  in  the  forehead,  and  the
latter  the  least,  as  might  be  expected  from  their  barbarous
condition^*  On  this  latter  remark,  Mr.  Ogilby  was  imme-
diately called  to  order  by  the  chairman.  Dr.  Latham,  and
reminded  that  phrenology  was  a  prohibited  subject  1^

In  a  society,  one  of  the  avowed  objects  of  which  is  to
trace  the  cause  of  the  differences  amongst  mankind,  one
would  have  supposed  that  nothing  could  be  more  pertinent,
or  more  calculated  to  further  the  ends  for  which  this  society
professes  to  be  constituted,  than  facts  and  remarks  of  a
similar  character ;  but  it  seems  that  the  wiseacres  who  have
assumed  the  management  of  its  affairs  have  decided  differ-

q  The  physiology  of  the  brain  a  prohibited  subject !  Howerer,  we  can
conceive  it,  for  Dr.  Roget  manages  its  prohibition  at  the  Royal  Society,
and  has  for  years  exerted  himself  successfully  to  prevent  a  phrenologist  from
being  put  upon  the  council,  putting  others  on  it,  just  elected,  who  haye  never
contributed  to  the  Philosophical  Transactions,  nor  done  more  than  merely
compile,  or  not  even  that.  But  he  is  not  likely  to  hold  office  much  longer. —
Zoitt.


474 The  British  Association  and  Cerebral  Physiology.

ently.  The  sooner  a  little  common  sense  is  instilled  into
these  parties^  or  their  place  supplied  by  more  competent  men^
the  better  for  the  interests  of  the  body  they  misgovern.

I  could  not  learn  the  origin  of  this  strange  decree,  but  it
is  probably  a  sop  to  the  anti-phrenological  tendencies  of  their
president.  Dr.  Pritchard,  and  kindly  designed  to  protect  him
from  the  possibility  of  the  mortification  of  a  face  to  face  refu-
tation of  the  vast  deal  of  nonsense  he  has  written  on  the
subject.  However  this  may  be,  the  enactment  as  it  at  present
stands,  certainly  places  the  society  in  a  false  position,  and
makes  it  cut  a  very  ridiculous  figure.  It  would  be  curious  to
see  in  what  form  it  shews  its  face  to  daylight  in  their  minutes.
I  would  suggest  the  propriety  of  re-writing  the  **  Declaration
of  the  objects  of  the  Society .''  It  should  now  stand — "  TMs
society  is  instituted  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  differ-
ences  amongst  mankind,  together  with  their  causes,  except

SUCH AS ARISE FROM  VARIATIONS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF

THE  BRAiN.^'  lu  this  form  its  consistency  and  philosophic  cha-
racter could  scarcely  fail  to  penetrate  the  thickest  cranium.

Philology  appears  to  be  at  present  the  science  most  in
£Eivour  with  the  leaders  of  the  Ethnological  Society,  who
appear  to  entertain  the  most  absurd  and  preposterous  ideas
as  to  the  extent  and  accuracy  of  the  information  respecting
the  races  of  mankind  to  be  derived  from  this  source.  To  go
no  further  than  our  own  country  and  France,  how  deceptive
is  the  evidence  afibrded  by  the  languages  of  the  inhabitants
as  to  their  descent,  and  how  much  more  so  will  it  become  in
the  lapse  of  a  few  centuries,  when  in  France  (leaving  out  of
view  the  melange  of  races  in  the  south)  we  shall  have  the
nearly  pure  celts  of  Britany  speaking  French  as  the  nearly
pure  Teutons  of  Normandy  do  at  the  present  moment ;  whilst
in  England  there  can  be  little  doubt  but  that  English  will  be
the  tongue  spoken  by  the  Celtic  inhabitants  of  Wales,  the
Highlands,  and  Ireland.

The  Ethnological  Society  would  do  well  to  recollect  that
in  the  mixture  of  races,  the  physical  characteristics  that
ensue  are  evolved  by  fixed  and  unvarying  laws  from  those
that  were  inherent  in  the  progenitors,  whereas  the  language
that  results  is  determined  by  various  extraneous  political  and
social  considerations,  imposing  in  one  case  the  language  of
the  invading  race  on  the  people  subdued,  in  another  that  of
the  conquered  on  the  conquerors.

I  make  these  remarks  with  no  wish  to  disparage  philology,
which  I  regard  as  a  most  interesting  study  and  a  valuable
adjunct  to  others,  but  merely  to  shew  that  for  the  purpose  of
ethnology  the  evidence  it  affords  is  vague  and  uncertain  com-


The  British  Association  and  Cerebral  Physiology. 475

pared  with  that  which  phrenology  presents — subordinate  in
fact ;  for  plirenology  points  out  the  cause  of  the  various  pecu-
liarities which  characterize  the  languages  of  different  races,
in  certain  concomitant  peculiarities  of  cerebral  configuration ;
and  sheds  a  flood  of  light  on  the  whole  question  of  language.

To  give  merely  one  example, — how  extraordinary  to  Euro-
peans appears  the  want  of  inflection  in  the  monosyllabic  lan-
guages, and  the  vast  number  and  intricate  character  of  their
written  signs !  To  the  Chinese  and  other  nations  who  employ
them,  however,  this  intricacy  has  no  existence ;  the  symmetry
of  their  countenances  being  to  our  eyes  distorted  by  the
enormous  development  of  the  organ  of  Form,  whilst  the  part
of  the  brain  appropriated  to  the  cognizance  of  sound  is  very
defective/

Till  the  Ethnological  Society  is  led  by  men  sufficiently
intelligent  and  free  from  prejudice  to  discern  that  cerebral
physiology  lies  at  the  very  root  of  ethnological  enquiries,  it
is  easy  to  foresee  that  they  will  make  no  progress  towards  any
classification  of  races  of  a  philosophical  character.

In  connection  with  the  extreme  alacrity  manifested  by
Dr.  Latham  in  repressing  the  slightest  approach  towards
phrenology ;  his  own  head,  which  is  strikingly  illustrative  of
the  truth  of  its  doctrines,  somewhat  amused  me;  for  no
phrenologist,  after  viewing  his  enormous  eyes  Sl  fieur  de  tite^
could  be  at  a  loss  to  predict  to  what  department  of  philology
he  would  devote  himself;  and  the  lecture  he  delivered  on
'^Ethnological  Philology,^'  afforded  one  of  the  best  speci-
mens I  have  ever  heard  of  that  tiresome  verbose  style  which
results  from  the  organ  of  Language  in  excess,  and  parti-
cularly when  associated  with  large  Order,  Caution,  and  Self-
esteem.

On  Friday,  I  attended  the  physiological  section  to  hear  a
lecture  from  Dr.  Carpenter  on  the  '^  Physiology  of  the  £n-
cephalon.'^  Shortly  after  taking  my  seat  I  was  informed  by
Dr.  Forbes  that  Dr.  Carpenter  was  'Agoing  to  upset  phre-
nology altogether  '/*  to  which  I  replied  that  it  would  '^  cer-


r  Even  amongst  Europeans  a  very  correct  inference  of  the  size  of  their
organ  of  Form  may  generally  be  drawn  from  the  degree  to  which  they  avail
themselves  of  the  method  of  copying  on  paper  as  an  adjunct  to  memory  in
the  teaching  or  learning  of  a  foreign  language.  I  have  long  made  the  remark
that  teachers  who  insisted  strongly  on  the  advantages  of  the  use  of  the  pen
had  a  large  Form,  whilst  those  amongst  their  pupils  who  never  become  con-
verts to  the  doctrine  were  defective  in  this  organ.  The  fact  shows  the  im-
possibility of  any  universal— best  possible — t^ttem  being  discovered,  and
illustrates  the  folly  of  those  teachers  who  would  vigorously  impose  on  all
pupils  that  precise  method  for  which  their  own  organization  happens  to  have
the  most  aptitude.


476 The  British  Association  and  Cerebral  Physiohgy.

tainly  be  a  novelty  to  hear  an  inductive  science  npset  by  ar-
gument/' To  my  surprise,  however.  Dr.  Carpenter  never
alluded  to  the  subject  of  phrenology  in  his  lecture,  which
consisted  of  a  fresh  hash  up  of  his  old  doctrine  relative  to  the
functions  of  the  cerebral  ganglia.

After  he  sat  down,  I  rose  and  enquired  whether  he  drew
any  distinction  in  function  between  the  thalami  optici  and  the
corpora  striata;  or  whether  he  attributed  the  function  of
sensation — ^a  mediate  office  between  the  brain  and  the  rest
of  the  body — and  the  experiencing  of  emotions,  to  these
ganglia  in  common  ?  To  which  latter  query  he  replied  in
the  affirmative.

I  then  observed  that  I  could  not  help  expressing  my  sur-
prise that  any  one  in  the  year  1846  should  deliver  a  lectuie
on  the  ^'  Physiology  of  the  Encephalon,''  without  once  men-
tioning the  name  of  Gall  ;*  and  my  still  greater  wonder  that
after  he  had  spent  a  lifetime  in  amassing  facts  in  support  of
his  system,  and  cautiously  established  it  step  by  step  on  the
firmest  inductive  reasoning,  an  individual  should  be  found  to
come  forward  and  coolly  propose  to  substitute  in  its  stead  a
mere  speculative  theory  of  his  own,  to  corroborate  which  he
did  not  even  pretend  to  have  collected  a  single  fact.  That
convinced  as  I  was  from  personal  examinations  many  hundred
times  repeated,  that  the  emotions  were  seated  in  the  cerebral
convolutions,  I  of  course  regarded  Dr.  Carpenter's  localization
of  them  in  the  thalami  and  corpora  striata  to  be  a  gross
error ;  that  I  differed  from  him  equally  as  to  the  seat  of  feel-
ing, which  an  extensive  series  of  observations  induced  me  to
place  in  the  cerebellum,  but  agreed  with  him  in  his  opinion
that  these  ganglia  performed  a  mediate  office  between  the
brain-proper  and  the  rest  of  the  body. Finally,  I  stated


•  The  Association  is  just  where  it  was  in  1833.  Dr.  W.  C.  Henry
of  Manchester  was  appointed  to  draw  up  a  "  Report  qf  ike  Phynategtf
^  the  Nervous  Syetem"  in  order  to  put  the  members  in  possession  of  all
that  is  known  of  it ;  and  his  report  is  printed  in  the  Report  qf  the
Third  Meeting  <if  the  British  A$»ociatiom.  The  reporter  never  once  mem-
turned  GaWa  name,  though  he  detailed  the  barbarous  experiments  of  Dr.
Magendie  upon  living  animals;  and,  passing  over  Gall's  vast  discoveries,
called  the  discovery  of  certain  nerves  being  for  sensation  only  and  others
for  motion  only,  the  most  important  discovery  since  Harvey  discovered  the
circulation  f  Yet  no  new  principle  was  discovered.  **  We  knew  before
that  some  nerves,  as  the  optic  and  olfactory,  were  for  sensation  only,  and
some,  as  the  common  motor,  the  external  motor,  and  the  internal  motor  of
the  eye,  and  the  lingual,  for  motion  only.  The  only  discovery  was  that
two  individual  nerves  were,  one  for  the  first  function  and  the  other  for  the
second.  That  no  one  nerve  could  be  for  both  sensation  and  motion  had
always  been  evident  to  reflecting  minds.  Oalen  taught  his  cotemporaries
that  one  set  of  nerves  went  to  the  skin  for  sensation,  and  another  to  the
muscles  for  motion."— £tfiolsoii'«  Phyeiologif,  p.  465. — Zoist,


The  BrUish  Agsociatian  and  Cerebral  Physiology. 477

that  I  regarded  it  as  contrary  to  all  sound  physiological  prin-
ciples to  attribute  three  heterogeneous  functions  to  the  same
organ.

Dr.  Carpenter  in  his  reply  made  no  allusion  to  his  omission
of  the  name  of  Gall  in  a  lecture  on  the  functions  of  the  en-
cephalon^  but  warmly  denied  that  my  statement^  that  he  had
brought  forward  a  mere  speculative  theory  unsupported  by
facts,  was  a  correct  description  of  his  procedure.  He  next
proceeded  to  explain  that  emotions  were  compound,  consist-
ing of  two  parts,  one  of  which  he  located  in  the  ganglia,
whilst  the  other  was  probably  seated  as  described  by  Gall.
In  support  of  assigning  several  functions  to  one  organ  he
quoted  the  spinal  marrow,  which  both  received  impressions
through  its  afferent  nerves  and  propagated  motor  influences
through  its  efferent  nerves.

I  contended  in  reply  that  the  receiving  of  an  impression
of  a  specific  kind  and  responding  to  it  in  a  specific  manner
was  clearly  only  a  single  function.  One  was  dependent  upon
the  other,  in  fact,  included  in  it :  that  no  more  simple  func-
tion or  mode  of  action  was  even  conceivable,  and  that  the
illustration  Dr.  Carpenter  had  adduced,  far  from  supporting
his  argument,  told  against  it.  Dr.  Carpenter  made  no  re-
joinder, and  here  the  discussion  between  us  terminated.

I  am  sorry  to  have  to  record  my  belief  that  the  general
tone  and  character  of  the  proceedings  of  the  British  Associa-
tion at  Southampton,  and  the  bearing  of  its  members,  was
not  at;  all  calculated  to  increase  the  respect  of  the  public  for
the  character  of  scientific  men.  Instead  of  evincing  a  calm
reliance  on  the  dignity  and  utility  of  their  own  pursuits,  there
was  manifested  throughout  their  proceedings  a  certain  fidgetty
anxiety  to  be  appreciated,  the  betrayal  of  which  was  most
calculated  to  defeat  its  own  object — a  tendency  to  self-glorifi-
cation and  puffing,  which  to  say  the  least  overstepped  the
bounds  of  good  taste — and  none  of  that  forgetfulness  of  self
in  the  cause  of  science  which  would  have  at  once  commanded
that  respect  and  estimation  which  was  angled  for  in  vain.

The  president.  Sir  B.  Murchison,  has  shewn  himself  to
be  an  able  man,  and  appears  to  be  an  amiable  and  worthy
one :  but  his  eyes  seem  never  to  have  pierced  through  the  fogs
of  conventionality,  in  which  we  are  all  of  us  more  or  less
educated,  and  I  fear  he  is  grievously  afflicted  with  the  national
disease  which  our  friend  Punch  terms  snobbishness.*  Many
were  amused  at  the  evident  satisfaction  with  which,  refering

t  Perhaps  some  will  say  on  this  account  *'  all  the  fitter  to  preside  over  a
body  of  the  most  arrant  and  undoubted  snobs  in  England."  In  the  '*  Snob
Scientific,"  Punch  has  yet  in  reserve  the  richest  chapter  of  his  history.


478 The  British  Association  and  Cerebral  Physiology.

to  the  visit  of  Prince  Albert^  he  congratulated  himself  that
*^  science  was  honoured  (!)  by  the  sanction  (I)  of  royalty'*  at
the  anniversary  over  which  he  presided.  This  visit  of  the
Prince  was  a  subject  of  great  triumph  to  the  members^  but
to  bystanders,  the  hurrying  from  section  to  section,  and
spending  about  ten  minutes  in  each,  had  more  the  appear-
ance of  gratifying  curiosity,  than  a  compliment.  At  any  rate
none  but  the  magnifying  eyes  of  the  savans  could  discern  the
evidence  of  any  strong  predilection  for  science  in  such  a  pro-
ceeding, and  in  the  untruthful  eflfbrt  to  twist  it  into  some-
thing it  was  not,  they  made  themselves  ridiculous,  not  to  say
contemptible.  At  the  concluding  meeting.  Dr.  Robinson,  of
Armagh,  informed  the  assembly  that  "he  paid  particular
attention  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Prince  at  the  mechanical
section,  and  that  he  not  only  inspected  the  model  for  the
tubular  iron  bridge  over  the  Menai  Straits  with  great  atten-
tion, but  asked  Mr.  Fairbaim  a  question  relating  to  it,  which
was  decidedly  a  sensible  one/*  This  speech  was  doubtless  in-
tended as  a  compliment,  but  it  was  certainly  an  Irish  one.

I  have  often  heard  the  complaint  made  that  men  of  science
are  not  respected  in  England ;  but  when  they  themselves  set
the  example  of  the  most  fiilsome  adulation  of  rank  and
wealth,  and  instead  of  selecting  their  best  and  wisest  as  leaders,
bow  and  cringe  to  every  rich  aristocrat  around,  and  entreat
him  to  come  and  rule  over  them,  endeavouring  to  cage  him
as  their  lion,  that  they  may  borrow  from  his  mane  and  tail  a
little  of  that  dignity  which  it  is  apparent  in  their  opinion  the
pursuit  of  science  alone  is  incapable  of  bestowing, — when
even  their  honorary  titles  of  F.B.S.  and  F.L.S.  are  given
continually  to  persons  of  not  the  least  pretensions, — ^who  will
venture  to  say  they  are  not  respected  as  much  as  they  deserve
to  be?  When  was  it  ever  known  that  those  wanting  in
respect  to  themselves,  could  excite  this  feeling  in  others?"

It  is  truly  a  melancholy  spectacle,  that,  at  a  time  when  the
aspirations  of  the  multitude  rise  in  quest  of  some  fitter  object
of  reverence  than  the  standard  of  nobility  formed  in  a  bar-
barous age,  or  the  possession  of  riches,  those  who  ought  to  be
their  guides  to  a  purer  worship — that  of  intellect  working  in
the  service  of  charity  and  truth,  set  them  the  example  of  Uck-

u  A  German  Physician,  named  Ingenhonze,  who  behaved  in  the  blackest
manner  to  Mesmer,  was  an  F.R.S.  In  reference  to  which  Mesmer  remarks,
**Tbe  title  of  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London  ought  not  to  be  thoaght
much  of.  France  and  England  in  this  are  alike.  The  undeserved  and  pro-
digal bestowal  of  literary  distinctions  will  reduce  their  value  till  no  man  of
real  merit  will  desire  them."— Pr^m  HiHorique  des  faits  relatifa  au  Magnet-
tame  Aninud,  jfuque»  en  Avril^  1781.  Par  Mbsmer,  Docteur  en  M^decine  de
la  Faculty  de  Vienne,  ouvrage  traduit  de  TAilemand.  Londres,  1781.->Zou<


The  British  Association  and  Cerebral  Physiology. 479

ing  the  dust  before  the  idols  of  feudalism — a  thing  in  which
all  vitality  is  dead — a  dry  skeleton  devoid  of  blood  and  muscle.

All  haman  institutions  at  the  period  of  their  birth  supply
some  want  of  society^  and  there  was  common  sense  in  the
homage  the  vassal  paid  his  lord  when  he  received  in  return
protection  for  life  and  property.  Not  for  nothing  did  he  doff
his  cap  to  the  victorious  leader^  who^  bold  of  heart  and  strong
of  hand^  led  him  to  foray  amidst  the  fat  beeves  and  rich  flocks
of  some  neighbouring  chieftain.  But  in  the  present  day
these  relations  exist  no  longer,  all  is  changed,  and  the  worship
of  feudalism — the  child  of  anarchy,  ignorance,  and  barbarism
— ^is  no  longer  in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  the  age ;  the
nation  has  outgrown  it,  and  a  living  faith  in  it  is  as  impossi-
ble in  the  present  state  of  education  and  enlightenment,  as
the  belief  in  the  Jack  the  Giant-killer  and  the  Little  Ked
Riding-hood  tales  of  the  nursery  is  to  the  adult  man.

Who  can  calculate  the  injury  to  public  morality,  caused
by  the  erection  of  fabe  and  vicious  standards,  void  of  all
connection  with  merit,  for  homage  and  imitation?  Here-
ditary claims  to  reverence,  perfectly  intelligible  and  well
founded  in  the  conquerors  of  an  inferior  race,  as  long  as  by
avoiding  intermarriage  they  have  preserved  their  superiority,
become  absolutely  inane  and  senseless  when  distinctions  of  race
exist  no  longer ;  and  at  the  present  day  there  is  no  more  pitiful
sight  than  to  see  that  useful  social  instinct  of  reverence  in
the  multitude,  the  bond  of  society,  and  root  of  subordination,
law,  and  order,  perverted  from  its  proper  objects,  the  noble
by  nature,  and  directed  to  aristocracy,  which  often  owes  its
origin  to  a  system  of  government  by  corruption,  and  has  oflen
won  its  honours  by  the  possession  of  sufficient  talent  to  be
troublesome,  united  to  the  servility  and  want  of  principle  that
made  this  purchasable.  The  benighted  ignorant  savage  who
bows  down  before  the  black-faced  goggle-eyed  fetish  of  his
own  carving,  does  not  display  an  example  of  a  grosser,  more
misplaced,  and  more  absurd  perversion  of  the  venerative  ten-
dency, than  is  exhibited  in  the  conduct  of  our  men  of  science
at  the  present  day,  in  their  worship  of  mere  rank  and  wealth.

I  make  these  remarks  in  no  spirit  of  hostility  to  the  British
Association  and  our  other  scientific  bodies ;  on  the  contrary,
they  have  my  best  wishes  for  their  prosperity,  for  I  honour
and  reverence  science,  and  it  is  precisely  on  this  account  that
I  feel  indignant  to  see  it  degraded  by  the  conduct  of  its  vo-
taries. Equally  far  is  it  from  my  intentions  to  include  the
whole  of  the  members  of  these  societies  in  my  censure ;  on
the  contrary,  I  know  they  number  many  amongst  them  who.


480  ]>r.  Carpenter  and  the

as  much  as  myself^  loathe  the  spirit  of  sycophancy  which  at
present  soils  and  degrades  them^  and  are  equally  desirous
that  they  should  recognize  and  accept  their  true  position  in  the
era ;  and^  becoming  leaders  of  progress  to  what  is  good^ — ^the
foremost  to  forsake  what  is  worn  out  and  worthless, — set  a
worthy  example  for  their  countrymen  to  foUow.  Then  shall
they  be  respected,  aye,  and  not  grudgingly,  for  humanity
yearns  to  have  for  leaders  its  best  and  wisest — the  noble  by
nature,  instead  of  by  distinctions  which,  as  often  as  not,  are
ill-deserved  and  were  worse  acquired.

T.  S.  Pbideaux.
Southampton,  Nov.  1846.


YII.  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the  Antiphrenoloffical  Physiologists,

"A  Terye  foliashe  man  mtye  wryte  a  boke,
Ay«i  and  a  create  boke  too,  lytb  Ignorannce
AfFecteth  oft  more  wordet  than  wyadome  doib.
To  hyde  her  ignoranncc,  and  aprcde  oat  her  lemynge."

There  is  no  more  prevalent  error  at  the  present  day  com-
mitted by  the  simple  minded  public,  who  have  never  been
behind  the  scenes  and  had  a  peep  at  the  machinery  of  author-
ship, than  that  of  accepting  the  fact  of  a  man^s  name  being
appended  to  a  '' greate  boke''  as  a  credential  of  wisdom.  The
circumstance  pretty  surely  indicates  that  the  individual  pos-
sesses a  laudable  amount  of  industry  and  application,  and
affords  a  strong  presumption  of  the  existence  of  a  passably
good  opinion  of  self,  combined  with  a  considerable  desire  of
distinction  and  sufficient  command  of  language  to  render
the  process  of  composition  easy ;  but  as  to  its  affording  any
guarantee  of  the  possession  of  that  soundness  of  judgment
which  would  entitle  the  writer  to  be  regarded  as  an  authority,
nothing  can  be  further  from  the  fact.  We  defy  any  one  to
shew  that  the  circumstance  of  an  individual  assuming  the
office  of  guiding  the  public  mind  affords  the  slightest  evidence
of  his  being  well  qudified  for  the  post.  Often  men  of  genius,
the  discoverers  and  inventors  of  their  age,  from  a  deficiency
in  language,  abominate  the  drudgery  of  authorship  and  can
with  difficulty  be  induced  to  narrate  the  history  of  their  own
achievements ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the  most  barren
intellectual  soils,  as  far  as  self-production  is  concerned,  com-
pose with  such  facility  that  they  adopt  the  manufacture  of
books  as  a  means  of  livelihood.

It  is  by  this  latter  class  that  the  community  is  inundated
by  a  deluge  of  works  which  may  be  searched  through  and


Antiphrenohgical  Physiologists.  481

throngh,  and  searched  in  vain,  for  a  new  idea.  There  are,
however,  no  ideas  so  stale  and  hackneyed  as  not  to  meet  with
a  class  of  the  pnblic  whose  ignorance  keeps  pace  with  these
qualities,  whilst  a  still  larger  class  are  so  entirely  satisfied,
provided  their  ears  are  tickled  with  a  flow  of  loud-sounding,
well-balanced,  nicely-rounded  periods,  as  to  require  nothing
beyond, — and  by  such  parties  these  productions  are  regarded
as  revelations,  and  their  authors,  as  gifted  with  a  measure  of
inspiration  proportionate  to  the  size  of  their  volumes.  The
man  of  observation  and  profound  reflection,  the  student  of
nature,  who  gives  to  the  world  the  result  of  his  labours  in
some  unpretending  brochure,  every  line  of  which  is  sugges-
five,  whilst  every  page  enshrines  a  new  idea,  passes  for  no-
body ;  whilst  the  literary  joiner,  who  pilfers  one  of  his  ideas,
works  it  up  into  a  quarto  and  sends  it  forth  to  the  world  dis-
guised in  a  court  dress,  becomes  at  once  a  great  authority ;
and  although  to  value  ideas  according  to  the  size  of  the  volume
that  contains  them  is  every  whit  as  absurd  as  valuing  a  book
by  its  binding  or  a  picture  by  its  frame,  such  a  mode  of  ap-
preciation does  nevertheless  prevail  with  the  ignorant  and
superficial.

In  making  these  remarks,  nothing  can  be  further  firom  my
intention  than  to  disparage  in  any  way  the  labours  of  that
useful  class  whose  vocation  it  is  to  popularize  and  disseminate
knowledge.  No  man  I  think  can  be  more  laudably  employed ;
but  I  do  emphatically  protest  against  the  authorship  of  even
voluminous  writings  being  regarded  as  a  credential  of  wisdom
and  elevating  an  individual  into  an  authority.  A  retailer  of
knowledge  may  be,  and  often  is,  a  very  able  man,  but  he  is
not  necesarily  so.  He  may  deserve  to  rank  as  a  high  au-
thority, but  if  so  it  must  be  in  right  of  his  own  discoveries
and  original  reflections,  and  not  by  virtue  of  his  office.  In
matters  of  science,  the  way  to  test  what  a  man  really  is,  and
what  he  has  achieved,  is,  to  ask  the  question,  whether,  sup-
posing he  had  never  lived,  any  science  would  have  had  the
development  of  its  principles  retarded  in  consequence.  Tried
by  this  test  many  gigantic  mushrooms,  which  occupy  by  far
too  much  space  at  present,  would  su£Per  a  woeful  curtailment
of  their  dimensions  and  dwindle  into  insignificance.  Let  the
great  distinction  between  those  who  write  to  communicate
their  own  ideas,  and  those  who  merely  assume  the  pen  to  nar-
rate the  observations,  discoveries,  ideas,  and  sentiments  of
others,  never  be  lost  sight  of.  To  confound  the  mere  writer
with  the  man  of  genius  who  originates,  would  be  as  absurd
as  to  class  the  caster  of  plaster  images  with  the  great  sculp-
tor whose  immortal  inspirations  he  copies  and  vends.


482  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

The  preceding  reflections  have  been  excited  by  contem-
plating the  oft-recurring  spectacle  of  cerebral  physiology  being
assailed  by  a  reptUation.  On  such  occasions  we  hear  it  loudly
shouted  on  all  sides  that  Tiedemann,  or  Miiller,  or  Dr.  Car-
penter^ "  has  upset  phrenology ;''  but  if  one  should  listen  to
endeavour  to  catch  what  the  arguments  are^  only  an  inarticu-
late babbling  is  audible.  Shortly  after  the  publication  of  Dr.
Baly^s  Translation  of  Muller^s  Physiology,  I  remember  asking
several  who  seemed  to  be  exceedingly  well  informed  as  to  the
fact  of  the  work  containing  what  they  termed  a  refutation  of
phrenology^  in  what  the  argument  consisted,  but,  I  asked  in
vain.  With  the  majority  who  take  their  opinions  on  trust,
the  name  of  the  authority  is  the  all-important  point.  Satis-
fied on  this  head,  the  possessors  of  this  indolent  creed  deem
any  further  examination  of  the  ground  of  judgment  super-
fluous. It  is  to  the  author,  not  the  merits  of  his  case  they
bow  themselves, — to  the  man,  and  not  his  arguments,  their
reason  jrields  her  allegiance.  Unsuccessful  in  my  attempt  to
learn  in  what  Miiller's  attack  consisted,  from  those  who  never-
theless congratulated  themselves  on  being  supported  by  it  in
their  antiphrenological  tendencies,  I  resorted  to  the  book  it-
self, and  was  rewarded  by  a  rare  illustration  of  the  dense
dulness  with  which  great  erudition  may  be  associated.

The  enduring  nature  of  the  hostility  which  phrenology
has  encountered  from  anatomists  and  physiologists  has  some-
times excited  my  surprize.  It  might  have  been  supposed
that  when  the  first  crop  of  antagonism  excited  by  the  jealousy
of  contemporaries  began  to  fade,  all  would  have  united  to
reverence  the  memory  of  a  philosopher  whose  discoveries
reflected  such  an  honour  on  the  profession  to  which  he  be-
longed. Instead  of  this,  however,  their  hostility  seems  to
have  become  hereditary,  and  warfare  against  the  disciples  of
Gall  to  be  regarded  as  good  service  against  a  common  enemy.
One  circumstance  that  has  perhaps  perpetuated  this  feeling
has  been  the  di£Sculty  experienced  in  passing  from  their  old
methods  of  mangling  the  brain,  as  an  apology  for  dissection,
to  the  new  method  of  Gall.  In  the  eyes  of  a  pupil  who  had
been  accustomed  to  see  it  cut  up  slice  by  slice  like  a  round
of  beef,  the  exposure  of  previous  ignorance  involved  in  a
correct  demonstration  of  its  fibres,  must  certainly  have  been
most  complete,  and  not  a  little  unpalatable  to  the  self-love
of  the  egotistic  and  narrow  minded.

Dr.  Carpenter,  to  judge  from  his  writings,  was  so  unfor-
tunate as  to  imbibe  from  some  of  his  teachers  their  pre-pos-
sessions  against  phrenology,^  which  prepossessions  after  sundry

b  We  know  for  a  positive  fact  that  Dr.  Carpenter,  when  first  a  stadent,  and


Antipkrenoloffical  Physiologists.  48S

buddings  have  at  length  borne  fruit  in  the  shape  of  an  article
in  the  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review  on  Mr.  Noble's
work.  The  Brain  and  its  Physiology.  After  the  critical  re-
marks with  which  I  have  prefaced  my  observations.  Dr.
Carpenter  will  have  no  reason  to  complain  of  my  not  admit-
ting him  to  be  an  authority;  meaning  by  this  term,  an
individual  whose  previous  achievements  have  shewn  him  to
be  possessed  of  that  profound  penetrating  and  sagacious  mind,
which  takes  the  correct  view  of  every  question  presented  to
it,  and  whose  decision  can  safely  be  regarded  by  others  as
indicating  on  which  side  the  balance  of  probabilities  lies.

I  wish  to  avoid  all  personality  as  far  as  is  consistent  with
the  task  I  have  undertaken,  but,  the  position  of  Dr.  Carpenter,
as  the  oracle  of  Dr.  Forbes  in  the  British  and  Foreign  Medical
Review,  together  with  the  tone  of  assumption  and  authority
he  adopts,  make  it  incumbent  upon  me  to  examine  how  far
these  pretensions  are  well  founded.  In  my  opinion,  whatever
laurels  he  may  have  acquired  hitherto,  have  been  in  the  fields
of  scientific  literature  as  an  historian,  and  not  as  an  original
discoverer  or  profound  critic ;  and  on  those  occasions,  where
he  has  quitted  the  oflSce  of  narrator  to  bring  forward  some
doctrine  or  speculation  peculiar  to  himself,  he  has  rather
diminished  than  added  to  his  reputation.  All  must  admit
his  praiseworthy  industry  and  application,  for  no  one  will
think  of  denying  these  qualities  to  an  individual  who  sits
down  to  write  an  Encyclopsedia  single-handed,  and  I  am
equally  ready  to  concede  to  him  the  possession  of  a  conside-
rable amount  of  literary  talent ;  for  though  he  can  boast  of
no  graces  of  style,  and  the  structure  of  his  sentences  is  often
inaccurate,  these  defects  are  counterbalanced  by  a  happy
facility  in  communicating  his  ideas  to  his  readers,  which
generally  renders  his  meaning  clear  and  unmistakable,  when
his  own  conceptions  are  definite  and  distinct.

Possibly  I  may  be  but  imperfectly  acquainted  with  Dr.
Carpenter's  career,  but  in  my  mind  his  name  principally
stands  associated  with, —

1st.  A  critique  in  the  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review,
in  which  he  opposed  certain  portions  of  Dr.  Marshall  HalFs
doctrines  on  the  reflex  functions,  and  took  a  view  of  the
question  he  was  subsequently  obliged  to  retract.

2ndly.  With  the  maintenance  of  the  position  that  the
stimulus  of  the  blood  is  alone  sufficient  to  produce  the  heart's
action ; — since  also  retracted.

before  he  was  id  possession  of  sufScient  knowled^i^  to  enable  hind  to  fonn  a
correct  judgment,  stated  to  a  professor  at  University  College,  that  phreno-
logy was  in  his  opinion  untrue. — Zoist.

VOL.  IV.  L  L


484  Dr,  Carpenter  and  the

Srdly.  With  the  doctrine  that  no  nerrous  system  exists
in  vegetables ;  concerning  which^  I  shall  merely  observe  that
when  I  see  trees  project  their  roots  in  a  right  line  across  12
or  14  feet  of  barren  space  to  the  nearest  point  at  which  a
congenial  soil  may  be  found — that  poisons  which  act  on  the
nervous  system  of  animals  are  equally  deadly  to  plants^  and
lastly^  consider  the  motions  of  the  sensitive  plant  so  identical
with  reaex  action  in  animals— I  think  that  the  argument
from  analogy  in  favour  of  the  existence  of  a  nervous  system
in  vegetables^  greatly  preponderates  over  the  mere  negative
evidence  afforded  by  the  tskct  that  none  has  been  yet  dis-
covered.

4thly.  With  certain  doctrines  as  to  the  functions  of  the
cerebral  ganglia ;  the  unphilosophical  character  of  which  I
trust  satisfactorily  to  demonstrate  in  the  present  article.

If  Dr.  Carpenter  can  lay  claim  to  any  important  discovery
in  physiology,  or  any  oth«  achievement  wYich  can  entitle
him  to  assume  the  tone  of  superiority  and  authority  he  in-
dulges in^  (particularly  towards  that  benighted  class^  the
phrenological  physiologists,)  I  must  certainly  plead  my  entire
ignorance  of  them.

I  believe  it  often  occurs  that  phrenologists,  at  the  sight
of  the  propositions  of  their  opponents,  are  so  struck  with
their  absurdity  as  to  deem  any  serious  refutation  superfluous,
and  to  conclude  it  to  be  impossible  that  they  should  ever
command  the  assent  of  any  besides  their  authors.  Such  I
freely  confess  were  my  feelings  the  first  time  I  encountered
Dr.  Carpenter's  suggestions  as  to  the  emotions  being  seated
in  the  cerebral  ganglia.  I  regarded  them  much  in  the  same
light,  and  equally  as  gratuitous  and  improbable,  as  I  should
the  speculations  of  an  individual  who  should  propound  the
theory  that,  when  a  joint  of  meat  is  placed  before  the  fire,
the  cooking  is  effected  not  by  the  heat,  but  by  some  other
simple  element  disengaged  by  combustion,  which  had  hitherto
escaped  notice ;  and,  having  first  premised  that  this  element
was  always  evolved  in  the  same  ratio  as  heat,  should  next
proceed  to  support  his  theory  by  stating  that  this  was  strictly
in  harmony  with,  and  afforded  a  beautiful  explanation  of,
the  fact  that  cooking  is  accelerated  or  retarded  as  the  quantity
of  heat  is  increased  or  diminished.  Equally  flimsy  and  un*
substantial  with  the  preceding  is  the  circular  mode  of  argu-
ment adopted  by  Dr.  Carpenter  to  impart  an  air  of  plausibility
to  his  chimerical  notions.  Lest,  however,  any  simple  minded
individuals  who  labour  under  the  delusion,  that  the  oracle  of
Dr.  Forbes  and  the  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Betnew  must
necessarily  be  an  authority,  should  suffer  themselves  to  be


AfUiphrenohgical  Phyiiologists.  485

misled  by  them^  I  have  been  requested  to  offer  some  obser-
vations in  reply,  a  task  I  can  scarcely  flatter  myself  of  being
able  to  fulfil  without  taxing  the  patience  of  my  readers.

Phrenologists  having,  by  innumerable  observations  of  the  «
relationship  between  size  and  function,  established  on  a  basis
as  incontrovertible  as  that  of  any  fact  in  natural  history,  the
dependence  of  certain  instincts  or  feelings  upon  certain  por-
tions of  the  brain,  (say,  for  example,  of  Love  of  Offspring,
Attachment,  and  tendency  to  fight  upon  certain  portions  of
the  posterior  lobe,)  Dr.  Carpenter  acting  precisely  as  if  such
observations  had  never  been  made,  and  without  bringing
forward  any  counter  observations  of  his  own,  locates  these
feelings  in  the  optic  thalamus.  It  might  be  supposed  that
this  edict  was  intended  to  be  a  death  blow  to  phrenology.
Not  so,  however :  Dr.  Carpenter  not  only  grants  it  the  right
to  live,  but  even  undertakes  the  office  of  reconciling  it  with
his  own  system ;  a  task  he  achieves  entirely  to  his  own  satis-
faction by*  splitting  each  emotion  into  two  parts,  one  of
which  he  assigns  to  the  thalamus,  whilst  he  bestows  the
other  on  the  brain-proper. Dr.  Carpenter  maintains,

*'  That  the  offices  of  the  cerebrum  are  restricted  to  intellectual^
operations,"  and  observes,  **  the  first  and  chief  point  of  collision
between  these  views  and  the  ordinary  phrenological  system,  is  that
which  relates  to  the  localization  of  the  passions,  emotions,  &c.,  but
it  would  not  we  think  be  found  difficult  to  reconcile  the  two,  so  far
as  this  question  is  concerned.  For  it  may  freely  be  admitted,  that
there  are  such  classes  of  ideas  as  those  grouped  together  under  the
terms  Benevolence,  Combativeness,  Philoprogenitiveness,  or  De-
structiveness ;  although  the  pleasure  attending  the  act  of  entertain-
ing them,  which  causes  them  to  be  habitually  kept  before  the  view
of  the  miud,  and  thus  gives  them  the  character  of  propensities,  be
not  seated  in  the  cerebrum  but  elsewhere.  Now  if  we  find  reason
to  adopt  the  phrenological  system  as  a  whole,  the  only  modification
it  would  require,  woidd  be  to  regard  the  different  divisions  of  the
cerebrum,  commonly  termed  organs,  in  the  light  of  instruments
for  the  formation  of  the  several  cloMses  of  ideas,  instead  of  being
the  instruments  of  the  emotions  or  propensities  taken  as  a  whole
into  which  these  ideas  so  largely  enter."  .  .  .  **  We  have  no  d  priori
objection  to  make  to  the  doctrine  that  these  different  classes  of  ideas
may  be  formed  by  the  special  instrumentality  of  the  cerebrum. We

i  His  words  are,  "  That  the  tendency  to  the  recurrence  of  a  certain
class  of  ideas,  constantly  connected  with  feelings  of  pleasure  or  pain,  con-
stitutes what  is  known  as  an  emotion,  desire,  or  propensity ;  and  that
this  is  composite  in  its  nature,  involving  the  cerebrum  for  the  formation  of
the  ideas,  and  the  sensory  ganglia  for  the  feelings  with  which  they  are
associated."

^  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Dr.  Carpenter  has  not  defined  the  meaning  of
intellectual,  accoHing  to  bis  ideas.

LL2


486  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

freely  admit  too  that  there  is  a  general  correspondence  between  cer-
tain forms  of  the  cerebram,  arising  from  the  relative  development
of  its  different  portions,  and  certain  leading  diversities  of  character
which  might  not  unfairly  be  regarded  as  indicating  that  these  several
divisions  are  the  special  instruments  of  particular  groups  of  intel-
lectual or  moral  faculties."

Dr.  Carpenter,  whom  I  have  allowed,  and  shall  allow  aa
much  as  possible  to  speak  for  himself,  to  avoid  the  possibility
of  my  misstating  his  views,  observes  :

''The  rudiment  of  the  cerebrum  which  exists  in  fishes,  and
which  is  still  more  developed  in  reptiles  and  birds,  is  the  repre-
sentative of  the  anterior  lobe  alone  of  the  human  brain;  the  middle
iobe  being  first  developed  in  the  lower  mammalia ;  and  the  posterior
being  not  merely  restricted  to  the  higher,  but  being  more  developed
in  man  relatively  to  the  remainder  of  the  mass,  than  it  is  in  any
other  animal.  Now,  as  upon  the  usual  phrenological  allocation,
the  lower  or  animal  propensities  are  situated  in  the  posterior  lobe,
their  instrument  would  seem  altogether  undeveloped  in  the  beings
in  which  they  apparently  possess  the  greatest  force;  whilst  they
attain  their  most  complete  evolution  in  that  species  which  is  distin-
guished by  his  power  of  keeping  them  in  subjection."

After  placing  phrenologists  in  this  difficulty,  Br.  Carpenter
proceeds  to  offer  them  what  he  terms  **  a  feasible  method  of
extricating  themselves  from  this  very  awkward  dilemma,
without  abandoning  any  of  their  fundamental  positions,'^  as
follows :

*'  We  are  not  always  to  regard  those  actions  of  the  lower  animals
which  correspond  with  our  own  as  indications  of  the  existence  of
propensities  in  them,  corresponding  to  those  from  which  they  ema-
nate in  ourselves;  these  propensities  being  in  fact  the  states  inter-
vening between  the  exciting  sensations  and  the  resulting  will,  and
being  compounded  of  ideas  and  feelings.  Now  iv  beings  which  are
altogether  destitute  of  a  cerebrum,  the  actions  supposed  to  proceed
from  the  animal  propensities  must  be  really  consensual  in  their
nature;  and  it  may  be  questioned  whether  they  do  not  remain  so  in
those  vertebrata  which  have  no  posterior  lobe  to  their  cerebrum;
the  propensities,  that  is,  the  ideas  of  the  objects  to  which  they
relate,  and  the  feelings  connected  with  the  mental  consciousness  or
contemplation  of  them,  being  really  restricted  to  the  higher  mam-
malia, m  which  they  are  designed  to  work  upon  the  intellectual
powers  and  the  will  to  contrive  the  means  for  their  gratification.  On
this  hypothesis  toe  should  expect  to  find  the  posterior  lobe  attaining
by  far  its  highest  development  in  man,  since  in  the  weH-regulated
mind  the  animal  tendencies  never  act  othertcise  than  through  the
reason  and  unll,  that  is,  in  the  form  of  true  propensities."

What  are,  I  should  like  to  know,  "  those  fundamental
principles  without  abandoning  which,  phrenology  may  be  ex-


Antiphrenoloffical  Physiologists.  487

tricated  from  the  awkward  dilemma,''  in  wbich  (according  to
Dr.  Carpenter)  she  is  placed,  by  fraternizing  with  his  visionary
ideas  ?  Can  a  science  which  owes  its  development  to  the  ob-
servation that,  in  the  same  degree  that  particular  parts  of
the  brain  preponderate  in  size,  certain  feelings  predominate
in  energy,  till,  as  the  ratio  increases,  they  become  ungo-
vernable instincts  over  which  the  usual  restraints  of  reason
and  prudence  are  powerless;  ally  itself  with  the  doctrine  that
the  higher  the  development  of  the  posterior  lobe,  the  better
regulated  the  mind,  and  the  more  subservient  the  animal
tendencies,  to  reason  and  the  will  ?  Can  a  system  be  sup-
ported by  a  supposition  which  requires  all  the  inferences  on
which  it  was  originally  reared  to  have  been  fallacious,  and
the  doctrines  of  which  it  still  essentially  consists,  to  be  the
converse  of  truth  ?

Thus  then  phrenology  after  being  first  slain,  and  then
resuscitated  by  Dr.  Carpenter,  turns  out  at  last  to  be  the
doctrine,  that  the  larger  the  posterior  portion  of  the  brain
the  more  completely  will  the  instincts  and  propensities  be
under  the  guidance  and  control  of  reason,  and  vice  versd  !  !  !
Oh  I  shade  of  the  immortal  Gall,  how  profound  are  your
obligations  to  your  new  disciple !

What  the  precise  development  of  Dr.  Carpenter's  posterior
lobe  may  be,  I  will  not  undertake  to  aver,  but  certainly  he
aifords  a  rare  specimen  of  that  literaiy  Philoprogenitiveness,
which  is  so  smitten  with  the  graces  and  perfections  of  its
own  bantling,  as  to  overlook  the  most  glaring  inconsistencies
and  defects.  Never  have  I  before  seen  an  individual  so  com-
pletely ran  away  with  by  an  hypothesis,  and  ideas  so  alto-
gether incongruous  and  incompatible,  so  contradictory  and
self-destructive,  gravely  brought  forward  in  its  support  with
the  utmost  simplicity  and  good  faith.

So  far  as  Dr.  Carpenter  possesses  clear  ideas  himself,  I
find  that  he  is  generally  very  happy  in  conveying  a  clear
conception  of  them  to  the  minds  of  his  readers.  There  is
however  one  most  important  point  connected  with  the  present
discussion  in  which  he  has  so  altogether  failed  to  do  this —
which  he  has  so  altogether  slurred  over  without  attempting
its  elucidation,  that  the  conviction  is  forcibly  impressed  upon
me,  that  it  is  one  on  which  he  himself  possesses  no  clear  ideas.
Dr.  Carpenter  informs  us  that  an  emotion  "  is  composite  in
its  nature,  involving  the  cerebrum  for  the  formation  of  the
ideas,  and  the  sensory  ganglia  for  the  feelings  with  which
they  are  associated ;''  and  also  that  "  there  are  such  classes
of  ideas  as  those  grouped  together  under  the  terms  Benevo-
lence, Combativeness,  Philoprogenitiveness,  or  Destructive-


488  Dr,  Carpenter  and  the

ness/'  but  he  altogether  omits  to  enlighten  ns  as  to  in  what
such  classes  of  ideas  consist^  apart  from  their  emotional  sen*
sations.

By  a  class  of  benevolent  ideas,  I  presume  Dr.  Carpenter
means  the  ideas  connected  with  a  benevolent  act  or  intention ;
but  take  away  from  such  ideas  the  specific  emotional  sensaiiong
and  what  remains  besides  certain  attributes  of  time,  place,
form,  size,  weight,  number,  &c.,  for  which  we  have  special
intellectual  facidties  ?  Nothing  else  remains — ^and  therefore
the  sensation  being  already  declared  to  reside  in  the  thalamus
— ^no  alternative  is  left  but  to  conclude  that  Dr.  Carpenter's
doctrine  is,  that,  the  various  circumstances  of  time,  place,
form,  size,  &c.,  connected  with  a  benevolent  act  are  cognized
by  the  organ  of  Benevolence,  those  connected  with  fighting
by  Combativeness,  those  relating  to  a  nursery  by  Philopro-
genitiveness,  and  those  pertaining  to  a  murder  by  Destruc-
tiveness,  &c.  A  notion  which,  however  it  may  harmonize  with
his  declaration  that  '^  the  offices  of  the  cerebrum  are  restricted
to  intellectual  operations,^'  involves  a  perfect  chaos  of  ab«
surdities.

What  a  very  short  distance  will  common  sense  carry  a
man  in  the  paths  of  science  I The  illiterate,  who  can  boast
of  no  "  stores  of  knowledge  acquired  by  modes  of  investiga*
tion  totally  neglected  by  the  professed  followers  of  Gall  and
Spurzheim,''  allowing  themselves  to  be  led  by  this  guide,
have  iguorantly  concluded  that  objects  and  events  relating  to
totally  different  instincts,  nevertheless  possessed  such  a  great
similarity,  or  rather  identity,  in  all  the  simple  attributes  or
specific  qualities  of  which  they  consisted,  as  to  come  Under
the  cognizance  of  the  same  intellectual  faculties. The  cor-
rection of  this  radical  error  science  owes  to  Dr.  Carpenter,
and  henceforth  we  must  never  be  guilty  of  the  bStise  of  sup-
posing that  the  same  organ  is  sufficient  to  appreciate  the  form
of  a  sword,  carving  knife,  and  scalpel,  or,  the  size  of  a  phial
of  poison,  a  bottle  of  wine,  or  an  anodyne  draught,  these
various  objects  being  respectively  the  peculiar  property  of
Destructiveness,  Alimentiveness,  and  Benevolence. I  have
heard  it  asserted  that  a  living  sheep  had  two  more  legs  than  a
dead  one ;  may  not  the  fact  derive  some  explanation  from  the
views  of  Dr.  Carpenter,  according  to  whom  ideas  of  the  dead
animal  would  be  conceived  by  the  organ  of  Alimentiveness,
whilst  those  of  a  living  one,  would  have  their  seat  in  Acquisi-
tiveness, or  Individuality,  according  as  the  creature  formed
the  subject  of  the  contemplations  of  a  grazier  or  zoologist.

It  might  be  supposed  from  the  extreme  lengths  Dr.  Car-
penter seems  ready  to  go  in  defence  of  his  hypothesis,  that


Antiphrenologieol  Pkytiologiats.  489

he  was  prepared  with  some  very  cogent  and  powerful  reaaons
in  its  confirmation,  instead  of  which,  he  appears  to  be  able
to  adduce  in  its  support  nothing  but  arguments  of  the  most
lame  and  impotent  description.  The  following  seems  to  have
been  the  mode  in  which  he  was  led  to  its  adoption.

The  nerves  of  common  sensation  being  in  want  of  a  gan-
glion, and  the  optic  thalamus  being  in  want  of  a  function^
he  forthwith  resolved  to  consummate  a  union  between  the
two.  This  first  step  accomplished,  the  next  was  to  infer  that
as  sensations  of  pleasure  and  pain  were  seated  in  the  thala-
mus, and  as  the  emotions  were  attended  with  pleasurable  or
painful  feelings,  ergo,  the  thalamus  was  the  seat  of  the
emotions.  This  doctrine  being  at  variance  with  phrenology,
with  the  possible  truth  of  which  he  seems  to  be  unpleasantly
haunted,  an  attempt  was  made  to  reconcile  the  two  by  splitting
the  emotions,  (as  before  described)  and  allotting  a  portion  to
each.

The  mode  of  argument  adopted  by  Dr.  C.  to  arrive  at  the
conclusion  that  emotions  being  attended  with  pleasurable  or
painful  feelings  must  be  seated  in  the  great  ganglion  of  the
sensory  nerves,  is  one  of  the  most  unique  specimens  of  super-
ficiality I  have  ever  met  with,  and  quite  a  psychological  cu-
riosity.

*'A11  the  propensities,  emotions  and  moral  feelings,  between
which  and  the  intellectual  operations  phrenologists  would  establish
such  a  marked  distinction"  may  he  says  be  **  analyzed."  "  What  is
benevolence  for  example,  but  pleasure  in  the  contemplation  of  the
happiness  of  others  7  What  is  the  whole  class  of  selfish  propensi-
ties, on  the  other  hand,  but  the  feeling  of  pleasure  in  the  entertain-
ing of  various  ideas  connected  with  self  7  What  is  combativeness
but  the  pleasure  of  setting  one's  self  in  antagonism  with  others  ?
Or  what  is  veneration  but  the  pleasure  of  contemplating  rank  or
perfections  superior  to  our  own  7"

Oh  I  this  method  of  analysis  fl  What  is  taking  snuff,  for
example,  but  the  pleasure  of  tickling  the  nose?  What  is
eating  but  the  pleasure  of  filling  the  belly  ?  What  is  a  doctor
but  a  short  eared  animal  labelled  M.D.  ?  or.  What  is  an  ass
but  a  thick  skinned  animal  with  long  ears  ?  What  is  an  ani-
mal but  a  lump  of  flesh  and  blood?  and  what  is  a  lump  of
flesh  and  blood  but  an  aggregation  of  matter.  Can  any-
thing be  more  simple  ?  Oh  I  new  and  sublime  system  of
philosophy !  every  step  in  which  is  the  abandonment  of  some

i  Analysis,  a  term  once  used  to  express  the  separation  of  a  compound
into  its  elementary  parts,  but  now  employed  to  designate  the  process  of  ob-
literating all  distinctive  peculiarities  under  a  generic  term.


490  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

miserable  petty  detail  of  knowledge^  a  stride  towards  the
attainment  of  the  absolute  and  universale  Alas !  that  men
should  waste  so  much  time  and  labour  under  the  absurd  de-
lusion that  in  proportion  as  they  establish  specific  differences
between  objects,  their  knowledge  becomes  increased !  But
let  us  attend  again  to  our  instructor.

**  Attachment  and  dislike,  affection  and  rage,  joy  and  sorrow,
and  many  other  simple  and  elementary  feelings,  are  but  modificationM
or  phases  of  pleasure  and  pain  which  receive  their  different  desig*
nations  according  to  the  character  of  the  objects  which  excite  them,
the  ideas  which  they  arouse  and  the  mode  in  which  they  are  mani-
fested."

Let  me  try  my  hand  at  a  parody. — ^Taste  and  hearing,
sight  and  smelly  touch  and  resistance,  pleasure  and  pain,
and  many  other  simple  and  elementary  feelings,  are  but  modu
fications  or  phases  of  sensation,  which  receive  their  different
designations  according  to  the  character  of  the  objects  which
excite  them,  the  ideas  which  they  arouse,  and  the  mode  in
which  they  are  manifested  I — ^and  of  course  in  Dr.  CJs  esti*
mation  no  more  entitled  to  distinct  nervous  apparatuses  for
their  manifestation,  than  Benevolence,  Combativeness,  or
Philoprogenitiveness.

Like  the  dog  who  mistook  the  shadow  for  the  substance,
mankind  have  ever  deluded  themselves  by  mistaking  words
for  things.  Three-fourths  of  the  errors  and  disputes  which
have  occupied  them  have  had  no  deeper  origin  than  verbal
distinctions,  which  a  definition  would  have  strangled  at  birth.
The  use  of  general  terms  in  a  loose  and  indefinite  manner  has
ever  been  one  of  the  most  fruitful  sources  of  these  contro*
versies,  and  in  the  present  instance  it  would  appear  as  if  Dr.
C.  believed  that  the  circumstance  of  the  same  generic  name,
being  capable  of  being  applied  to  a  class  of  objects,  established
their  identity.

To  enter  into  a  serious  refutation  of  the  doctrine  that
emotions  of  pride  and  vanity,  compassion  and  reverence,
wonder  and  admiration,  &c.,  are  but  '^  modifications  or  phased*
of  physical  sensation,  would  be  absurd.  Irony  and  ridicule
are  the  only  appropriate  weapons  for  encountering  an  extra-
vagance from  which,  if  an  individual's  own  consciousness  is
not  able  to  preserve  him,  nothing  else  can.  Let  an  artist  try
the  experiment  whether  all  that  is  requisite  to  depict  the
natural  language  of  the  varied  emotions  be  to  place  his  figures
in  attitudes  indicating  different  modifications  of  physical  plea-
sure or  pain,  and  see  what  the  public  will  say  to  the  result.

j  Qy,  A  stride  towards  the  attainment  of  absolute  and  universal  igno-
rauce.— Prt«/cr'»  Detil.


Antiphrenohgical  Physiologists.  491

In  shorty  so  extraordinary  appears  to  me  the  illusion^
that  I  should  be  almost  ready  to  query  whether  Dr.  C.  could
belong  to  the  genus  homo^  had  not  previous  experience  con-
vinced me,  that  there  are  some  individuals  who,  from  a  defi-
ciency in  the  development  of  a  portion  of  bndn  lying  between
Eventuality  and  Comparison,  are  almost  totally  unable  to
hold  their  own  consciousness  before  their  minds  as  an  object
of  contemplation.  Such  persons  are  incapacitated  by  nature
for  elucidating  questions  bearing  on  the  metaphysics  of  the
mind ;  yet  in  this,  as  in  other  analogous  cases,  it  often  hap-
pens oddly  enough,  that  the  parties  themselves  labour  under
the  strange  delusion  of  believing,  that  the  particular  pursuit
for  which  they  are  disqualified  constitutes  their  peculiar  forte.
Thus  Dr.  Carpenter  says,  *'  on  this  last  point^'  (that  is  *'  the
mixed  character  of  the  emotions  and  propensities,  as  com-
pounded of  ideas  and  the  simple  feelings  of  pleasure and

pain'O*

**  We  venture  to  think  that  we  have  made  a  real  advance  in  psy-
chology, which  will  prove  to  be  important;  and  we  happen  to  know
that  several  intelligent  psychologists  are  well  prepared  to  receive  it,
as  fixiug  and  defining  views  which  had  been  previously  floating  in
their  own  minds.  It  seems  indeed  to  have  been  glimpsed  at  by  the
late  Mr.  James  Mill  in  his  valuable  Analysis  of  the  Human  Mind,
his  deficiency  consisting  in  connecting  the  feeling  too  much  with  the
sensation,  rather  than  with  the  intellectual  idea."

I  should  certainly  like  to  know  who  the  intelligent  psy-
chologists are,  who  have  been  waiting  for  the  advent  of  this
extraordinary  doctrine,  which,  only  dimly  revealed  to  Mr.
Mill,  has  been  manifested  to  Dr.  Carpenter  in  all  the  bright-
ness necessarily  pertaining  to  so  luminous  a  conception.

The  work  of  Mr.  James  Mill,  lauded  so  highly  by  Dr.
Carpenter,  who  has  adopted  his  views,  is  greatly  inferior
in  its  analysis  of  mental  phenomena  to  those  of  Lord  Kames
and  Dr.  Thomas  Brown.  According  to  Mr.  Mill  mankind
seek  wealth,  power,  dignity,  only  for  the  sake  of  the  com-
mand which  these  give  them  over  their  fellow-creatures, —
whose  services  may  thus  be  made  a  means  of  procuring  plea-
sure. On  this  theory  we  must  suppose,  that  an  unknown
criminal,  who  dresses  himself  as  a  dandy  for  the  scafibld,
and  with  his  last  accents  labours  to  convince  the  spectators
of  his  innocence,  does  so  from  having  come  to  the  conclusion
after  much  debate,  that  it  may  possibly  induce  the  execu-
tioner to  adjust  the  rope  round  his  neck  somewhat  more
tenderly.

Mr.  Mill,  in  conformity  with  his  doctrine, — that  all
mankind's  tendencies  are  merely  modes  of  mabifestation  of


40S  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

a  selfish  desire  for  pleasure^  proceeds  to  manufactare  parental
affection  as  follows.  ''A  facility  of  associating  the  ideas  of
his  own  pains  and  pleasures  with  those  of  the  child'' — **  the
looking  upon  his  child  as  a  cause  to  him  of  future  pains  or
pleasures^  much  more  certain  than  any  other  person/'  .  .  •
^*  Man  becomes  fond  of  that  on  which  he  bestows  benefits."
.  .  .  Oh !  ye  ignorant  vulgar^  bow  your  heads  with  humility
before  the  profound  wisdom  of  philosophy^  and  learn  for  the
future  that  when  a  man  blest  with  an  appetite  sits  down  and
makes  a  good  dinner^  he  eats — because  from  early  youth  he
has  associated  this  operation  with  the  time  of  day — ^from
sympathy  with  those  around — ^in  order  to  keep  up  his  strength
— from  in  short  anything  you  please  except  a  simple  instinct
to  take  food.

''The  pleasurable  associations"  Mr.  Mill  informs  us^  are
sometimes  carried  to  such  a  height  as  to  afford  an  exempli-
fication of  that  remarkable  state  of  mind  in  which  a  greater
value  is  set  upon  the  means  than  upon  the  end,  and  persons
have  been  found  the  one  of  whom  could  not  endure  to  live
without  the  other."  A  mere  error  in  calculation — ^man  being
transformed  from  a  creature  of  impulse  into  a  sort  of  calcu-
lating machine^  constantly  occupied  in  solving  the  problem
how  the  greatest  amount  of  pleasure  is  procurable — it  is  quite
in  keeping,  to  suppose  he  should  occasionally  produce  a  wrong
result.

Speculations  of  this  kind  can  only  be  regarded  in  the
light  of  aberrations  of  the  human  mind,  and  as  indicating
that  the  science  to  which  they  relate,  was,  at  the  epoch  which
gave  birth  to  them,  still  in  that  stage  of  barbarism  which
always  precedes  the  application  of  the  inductive  mode  of  cul-
tivation, and  the  consequent  rectification  of  a  priori  notions
by  a  rigorous  comparison  with  facts.*" Searching  for  final

1^  The  following  mode  of  argument  made  use  of  about  two  centtiries  ago,
when  chemistry  was  equally  as  undeserving  the  name  of  positive  science,
and  as  purely  speculative  as  metaphysics  at  the  era  of  Mr.  Mill's  publica-
tion, was  employed  by  a  writer  of  that  period  to  account  for  chemical  affi-
nity, and  is  at  the  present  day  quite  a  curiosity.  '*  The  reason  hereof  is  the
resemblance  and  sympathy  they  have  one  with  the  other.  If  I  should  not
explicate  wherein  this  resemblance  consisted,  I  should  expose  myself  to  the
same  censure  and  blame  as  that  which  I  taxed  at  the  beginning  of  my  dis-
course, touching  those  who  speak  but  lightly  and  vulgarly  of  the  powder  of
sympathy,  and  such  marvails  of  nature. . . .  The  first  resemblance  shall  be
touching  weight,  whereby  bodies  of  the  same  degree  of  heaviness  do  assem-
ble together,  and  keep  company  together  in  aquilibrio,  &c. .  .  .  The  second
resemblance  of  bodies  which  draw  one  another  and  unite,  is  among  them
which  are  of  the  same  degree  of  rarity  and  density ,  the  nature  and  effect  of
quantity^  being  to  reduce  to  unity  all  things  which  it  finds,  &c.  .  .  The  third
resemblance  of  bodies  which  unite  and  keep  themselves  strongly  together  is
that  of  figure,"  &c.,  &c.,  &c.


Aniiphrenologieal  Phytiohgists.  403

causes^  which  were  unnecessary^  superfluous^  and  beyond
their  reach,  has  ever  been  the  favourite  occupation  of  meta-
physicians. Nature  being  too  simple  to  content  themj  they
have  exercised  their  ingenuity  in  the  construction  of  a  piece
of  machinery.  But  what  avails  a  system  of  wheels  and
pulleys^  racks  and  pinions,  which  still  requires  b,  moving  power
to  put  it  in  action  r

To  endeavour  to  give  reasons  why  parental  attachment
and  benevolence  should  be  felt,  is  equally  as  ridiculous  an
employment  as  the  conjecturing  of  causes  for  gravitation.  As
in  the  one  case,  so  in  the  other ;  man's  vocation  is  restricted
to  studying  the  laws  of  phenomena,  and  ascertaining  the
conditions  under  which  they  take  place.  "Homo,  naturte
minister  et  interpres,  tantumfacit  et  intelligit  quantum  de  natune
ordine  re  vel mente  observaverit ;  nee  ampliua  scU,  out  potest"
All  we  can  ever  know  about  the  matter,  or  all  we  require  to
know,  is  comprized  in  the  fact,  that  certain  sensations  are
excited  by  certain  objects,  according  to  "  laws  unitten  upon
the  nervous  pulp"

Why  the  sensations  are  such  as  they  are,  or  why  they  are
not  different,  is  a  question  as  inappropriate  as  the  query,
why  we  are  not  inhabitants  of  Jupiter.  We  have  first  a  class
of  external  organs  (the  senses),  in  which  sensations  are  ex-
cited bv  certain  sensible  properties  of  matter ;  secondly,  a
class  of  internal  organs,  in  which  sensations  (perceptions'")
are  excited  by  impressions  transmitted  by  the  preceding;
thirdly,  a  class  of  internal  organs,  in  which  sensations  (con-
ceptions or  ideas^)  are  excited  by  sensations  derived  from  the
second  and  fourth;  fourthly,  a  class  of  internal  organs,  in
which  sensations  (emotions)  are  excited  by  impressions  from
the  ideas  conceived  by  the  third  class.^  An  organ  may  be
considered,  1st,  in  relation  to  the  objects,  which  excite  it  to
action;  2ndly,  in  relation  to  the  sensation  which  co-exists
with  its  activity ;  and  Srdly,  in  relation  to  the  acts  to  which
it  prompts.  The  sensation  cannot  be  defined,  but  must  be
felt ;  and  no  creature  destitute  of  an  organ  can  ever  attain  to
a  knowledge  of  the  sensation  it  produces.

In  the  case  of  Benevolence,  the  object  which  excites  it  to
action  is  the  pleasure  or  pain  of  other  sentient  beings.  When-
ever this  idea,  which  is  one  of  the  clearest  we  possess,  is  pre-


k  In  coDseqoeDce  of  the  Tagne  and  undefined  notions  which  have  hitherto
prevailed  in  this  department  of  science,  our  language  is  not  yet  provided
with  words,  the  use  of  which  being  restricted  to  one  class  of  sensations,
define  that  class  exclusively.

1  More  distinctions  might  be  drawn,  but  not  being  essential  to  my  argu-
ment, I  content  myself  with  the  foregoing.


494t  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

sented  to  it  by  the  intellect,  the  organ,  by  the  "law  writteu
on  its  nervous  pulp/^  becomes  active,  and  with  this  action  is
conjoined  a  specific  sensation,  pleasurable  or  the  reverse,  ac-
cording as  the  idea  conceived  by  the  intellect  relates  to  enjoy-
ment or  suffering.  Nothing  can  be  more  erroneous  than  the
notion  that  the  desire  which  ensues — so  to  act  as  to  prolong
or  heighten  the  enjoyment  of  others,  and  remove  or  lessen
their  suffering,  (and  wnich  constitutes  the  true  function  of  the
organ  in  the  same  way  as  a  reflex  action  constitutes  the  func-
tion of  the  spinal  cord),  is  produced  by  the  consideration  that
the  former  will  heighten  the  pleasurable  emotion  experienced
by  self,  and  the  latter  remove  the  painful  one.

Even  the  most  selfish  men  perform  occasionally  a  kind
action,  to  which  they  are  not  prompted  either  by  the  view  of
present  pleasure  or  future  advantage;  and  though  as  men
are  at  present  constituted  (with  the  basilar  region  of  the
brain  greatly  preponderating  in  size  over  the  coronal),  the
selfish  feelings  have  a  great  preponderance  over  the  philan-
thropic, nothing  is  easier  than  to  conceive  a  race  of  beings
with  the  proportions  of  these  parts  of  the  encephalon  re-
versed, and  the  relative  strength  of  the  two  classes  of  feelings
reversed  in  accordance.  The  metaphysicians  of  such  a  people,
if  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  guided  by  considerations
analogous  to  those  which  have  blinded  ours,  would  assert
that  man  took  care  of  himself  not  from  a  simple  selfish  in-
stinct, but  from  the  benevolent  consideration  that  if  evil
befel  him  the  circumstance  might  occasion  pain  to  others.

Dr.  Carpenter  expatiates  largely  on  the  value  of  compara-
tive anatomy,  and  the  comprehensive  and  profound  views  of
the  nervous  functions  to  be  obtained  by  its  study.  In  his
opinion  it  is  an  infallible  guide  by  which  results  obtained  by
other  methods  of  investigation  are  to  be  tested  and  valued,
and  to  the  authority  of  which  all  other  modes  of  research,
and  particularly  the  limited  one  of  comparing  size  with  energy
of  function  in  a  single  class,  must  succumb.  Dr.  Carpenter
can  pass  no  eulogium  on  comparative  anatomy  in  which  I  am
not  ready  to  concur,  for  no  one  is  more  impressed  with  the
uniformity  which  reigns  amidst  the  diversity  of  nature — ^the
profound  analogies  which  pervade  every  department  of  her
works.  I  cannot  however  acquiesce  in  assigning  that  exclu-
sive  authority  to  comparative  anatomy  which  he  does,  and
still  less  to  the  comparative  anatomy  of  the  present  day.  In
my  view,  as  every  fact  in  science  must  harmonize  with  every
other,  certain  knowledge  acquired  by  the  comparison  of  en-
ergy with  size  in  a  single  class,  may  quite  as  legitimately  be
used  to  check  the  inferences  of  comparative  anatomists,  as  the


Antipkrenological  Physiologists.  495

established  principles  of  their  scieBce  may  safely  be  employed
to  rectify  notions  too  hastily  adopted  from  observations  based
on  the  former  method  of  research.  As  Dr.  Carpenter  com-
plains of  phrenologists  discarding  the  authority  of  compara-
tive anatomy  when  it  interferes  with  their  doctrines^  so  I
complain  of  his  discarding  their  doctrines  where  they  are
opposed  by  the  dicta  of  comparative  anatomists.  The  whole
question  resolves  itself  into  one  of  balance  of  evidence,  and
where  it  appears  to  me  to  be  all  on  one  side,  Dr.  Carpenter
gives  the  preference  to  the  opposite  scale.

Did  we  possess  a  perfect  system  of  comparative  anatomy,
and  a  perfect  system  of  the  psychology  of  the  lower  orders  of
animated  beings,  we  should  have  ready  to  our  hands  a  mass
of  materials  from  which  a  stable  physiology  of  the  nervous
system  of  animal  life  might  be  easily  constructed.  Nothing
however  can  be  more  narrow  and  limited  than  our  informa-
tion on  these  particulars.  Of  comparative  psychology  our
utmost  knowledge  amounts  to  little  more  than  vague  con-
jectures founded  on  the  uncertain  basis  of  analogical  infer-
ences from  our  own  consciousness;  and  as  to  comparative
anatomy,  every  successive  writer  on  the  subject  overturns
propositions  stated  as  facts  by  his  predecessor.  If  the  nerv-
ous fibres  could  be  as  readily  and  surely  traced  and  identified
as  the  threads  in  a  mass  of  tangled  silk  made  up  of  skeins  of
different  colours,  then  Dr.  Carpenter's  implicit  reliance  on
the  assertions  of  comparative  anatomists  would  be  much  more
rational.  Is  it  not  however  notorious,  that  as  a  general  rule
every  writer  on  an  organ  gives  an  anatomy  which  agrees  with
his  own  theories  as  to  its  function  ?  Have  we  not  at  the  pre-
sent day  half  a  dozen  different  anatomies  of  such  a  prominent
subject  for  investigation  as  the  spinal  cord  ?  "  Of  the  por-
tions of  the  roots  which  are  continuous  with  the  fibrous
columns,^'  it  is  stated  by  Sir  C.  Bell  "  that  the  anterior  fasci-
culi pass  to  the  anterior  columns  only,  and  that  the  poste-
rior are  restricted  to  the  lateral  columns.  On  the  other  hand,
Mr.  Grainger  and  Mr.  Swan  maintain  that  both  sets  are  con-
nected with  the  lateral  columns  only ;  the  anterior  and  poste-
rior lateral  fissures  definitely  limiting  the  two  roots.  Perhaps
both  these  statements  are  rather  too  exclusive.  The  anterior
roots  would  seem  to  have  a  connection  with  both  the  anterior
and  lateral  columns ;  and  the  posterior  cannot  be  said  to  be
restricted  to  the  lateral  column,  some  of  their  fibres  entering
the  posterior  division  of  the  cord.'^  (Carpenter^s  Physiology y
p.  127.)  Nothing  certainly  can  be  cooler  than  the  mode  in
which  Dr.  C.  disposes  of  the  authority  of  Mr.  Grainger  and
Mr.  Swan  :  he  does  not  say  my  dissections  have  led  me  to  a


496  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

different  oonclosion^  but  simply^  ''the  anterior  root  wonld
seem  to  have  a  connection/'  &c. ;  which  means  (being  inter-
preted) my  physiological  notions  require  such  an  anatomical
connection.  It  is  only  phrenologists  then^  it  appears^  who
are  expected  to  bow  submissively  before  the  dicta  of  anato-
mists^ and  abjure  their  principles  the  moment  they  clash
with  the  former.  Dr.  C.  possesses  the  privilege  of  exemption
from  the  rule  he  imposes  on  others.

Serres  seems  to  be  a  favourite  authority  with  Dr.  Car-
penter^ and  he  would  doubtless  deem  a  statement  of  his  quite
sufficient  to  knock  down  a  phrenological  theory.  Literary
anatomists  and  physiologists  however  are  quite  at  the  mercy
of  the  authorities  they  consult,  and  having  no  other  means
of  judgment,  are  decided  by  the  plausible  tone  of  assumption
and  confidence  which  some  know  so  well  how  to  assume.

To  enable  my  readers  to  judge  of  the  very  little  reliance
which  can  be  placed  on  even  the  positive  statements  of  phy-
siological writers,  especially  the  antiphrenological  ones,  I
here  annex  a  fev^  of  the  anatomical  blunders  of  Serres,*"
noticed  and  refuted  by  Gall,  and  now  universally  exploded.


€<


That  the  functions  of  the  white  and  grey  nervous  substances
were  convertible,  either  being  capable  of  performing  all  the  functions
of  a  nervous  system.

**  That  in  the  invertebral  animals  there  is  no  grey  matter,  and
that  their  nervous  system  is  formed  exclnsivelj  of  white  substance.

^*  That  the  spinal  marrow  presented  no  swellings  formed  by  the
grey  matter  at  the  insertions  of  the  spinal  nerves.

"  That  the  external  root  of  the  olfactory  nerve  is  inserted  by  one
of  its  bundles  in  the  outer  rays  of  the  anterior  commissure.

'*  That  the  olfactory  nerves  and  fiflh  pair  increase  in  volume  as
that  of  the  brain  decreases.

*'  That  the  spinal  marrow  and  the  corpora  quadrigemina  are  so
rigorously  developed  in  the  ratio  of  each  other,  that  the  size  of  the
first  being  given  in  any  class  or  in  any  of  its  families,  the  volume  of
the  latter  may  be  determined  with  precision.

*'  That  in  all  classes  except  that  of  reptiles  the  median  lobe  of
the  cerebellum  is  developed  in  the  direct  ratio  of  the  quadrigeminal
bodies.

''That  the  mole  has  no  optic  nerve.

m  Ud  dea  ouyrages  qni  aurait  dtk  fixer  le  pi  as  Tattention  des  anatomistes,
puisqu'U  avait  pour  lui  rarantage  d'avoir  6i6  cooroDo^  par  rinatitut  de
France,  celai  de  M.  Serres,  est  de  tous  ceux  qui  ont  €te  pabli^s  sur  ce
sujet,  celui  qui  nous  parait  devoir  inspirer  le  moios  de  confiaDce.  L'anato-
miste  qui  a  ^tudi^  le  syst^me  oerveux  c^r^bral  sur  la  nature,  ne  sait,  en
lisant  cet  oovrage,  de  qui  il  doit  le  plus  s'^touner,  ou  de  Tassurance  de
Tauteur  dans  sa  maui^re  de  presenter  les  faits  anatomiques  servant  de  base
k  ses  propositions,  ou  de  la  fausset^  de  ces  m^mes  propositions  rapprocb^ea
de  la  nature  on  des  dessins  donnas  par  I'auteur  lui-m^me.  Traitd  de  Pkri-
t»logie  Humaine  et  Compar^e, Par  J,  Vimont,  p.  100.


Antipkrenological  Phtfiiologists.  497

*'  That  the  carpus  calhwm  is  proportionate  to  the  annular  pro-
tuberance."

If  the  antiphrenological  physiologists  could  but  light  upon
such  a  batch  of  blunders  made  by  a  phrenologist^  how  they
would  regale  themselves ;  what  a  crowing  of  exultation  and
trumpeting  forth  of  triumph  would  be  heard  on  all  sides.
After  the  preceding  sample  of  the  degree  of  dependance  to
be  placed  upon  the  statements  of  an  authority  (?) — statements
made  too^  it  must  be  remembered^  not  casually  nor  hastily,
but  deliberately  put  forth  in  opposition  to  those  of  Gall,  and
professedly  founded  on  personal  observation,  my  readers  will
be  better  prepared  to  judge  of  the  weight  that  should  be
attached  to  the  assertion  of  Dr.  Carpenter  founded  on  the
statements  of  Tiedemann  and  Betzius,  that  the  cerebrum  of
the  bird  is  the  representative  of  the  anterior  lobe  alone  of
the  human  brain ;  that  the  middle  lobe  is  first  developed  in
the  lower  mammalia,  and  the  posterior  lobe  restricted  to  the
higher.  Statements  of  this  extraordinary  character  put  forth
from  time  to  time  most  conclusively  demonstrate  that  some-
thing beyond  good  eyesight  is  required  to  see  correctly  in
anatomy,  and  that  no  amount  of  carefulness  in  observation  con-
stitutes an  individual  an  authority  in  matters  of  inference.

Such  is  the  deluding  influence  of  words,  that  prcAably  if
this  portion  of  the  brain  had  been  denominated  the  lobe  of
the  social  instincts,  and  the  term  posterior  never  connected
with  it,  the  present  controversy  would  never  have  arisen.
In  my  opinion,  there  never  was  a  more  rash  and  presump-
tuous assertion  made  than  the  preceding,  nor  one  which  be-
trayed a  greater  amount  of  superficiality  and  ignorance  on
the  part  of  its  authors.  Dr.  Carpenter,  after  a  sneer  at
*' phrenological  luminaries"  goes  on  to  observe,  "Now  al-
though there  is  no  external  line  of  separation  between  the
middle  and  posterior  lobes,  such  as  exists  between  the  ante-
rior and  middle,  there  are  two  points  of  internal  structure
which  afford  as  definite  an  indication  as  can  be  required :
these  are,  the  development  of  the  posterior  comua  of  the
lateral  ventricles,  and  the  situation  of  the  hippocampus
major."

Let  us  examine  the  amount  of  wisdom  displayed  by  the
physiological  luminary.  Granting,  for  the  sake  of  argument,
what  (since  the  posterior  lobes  may  extend  more  or  less  for-
ward laterally)  I  cannot  admit,  viz.,  that  the  posterior  cornua
indicate  their  inferior  boundary,  how  is  it  possible  that  Dr.  C.
can  predicate  their  size,  unless  he  be  able  (which  he  does  not
even  pretend  to  be)  to  determine  likewise  their  superior
boundary  ? Since  when  has  it  been  possible  to  ascertain  the


498  Br,  Carpenter  and  the

size  of  a  stracture  by  being  acquainted  with  the  position  of
one  end  of  it  ?  To  make  the  excessive  absurdity  involved  in
Dr.  Carpenter's  assertion  palpable  and  obvious  to  the  reader
most  ignorant  of  anatomy^  I  will  employ  the  following  illus-
tration. Suppose  the  hind-boot  of  a  coach  to  be  extended
over  the  roof  into  the  fore-boot ;  next  suppose  the  cavity  thus
formed  to  be  divided  within  into  three  compartments^  no
marks  of  such  division  being  visible  externally^  his  proposi-
tion^ is^  that  all  that  is  necessary  to  discover  the  size  of  the
hindmost  cavity^  is^  to  measure  how  far  it  projects  behind
the  body  of  the  coach.

Now  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  the  posterior  lobe  in  ani-
mals is  carried  further  forward  on  the  superior  surface  of  the
brain  than  in  man^  for  the  convolutions  in  which  their  brains
first  become  most  defective^  are  those  seated  in  the  central
portion  of  the  coronal  region^  and  the  absence  of  these  oc-
casions the  anterior  edge  of  the  posterior  lobe  to  be  advanced
further  forward  to  supply  the  deficiency.  Analogous  results,
but  minor  in  degree,  are  presented  in  different  individuals  of
the  human  race ;  the  superior  portion  of  the  anterior  lobe  is
often  carried  further  backward,  and  the  superior  portion  of
the  posterior  lobe  further  forward,  with  reference  to  their
respective  basilar  portions,  from  a  similar  cause.  These  are
points,  fiowever,  on  which  Dr.  C.  is  no  doubt  profoundly
ignorant.

The  fact  is  that  in  the  lower  vertebrata  the  cerebral  gan-
glia and  organs  of  sense  are  placed  in  a  right  line  with  the
spinal  marrow,  whereas,  in  man  they  are  placed  at  right
angles  with  it,  and  as  we  descend  the  animal  scale,  the  change
from  a  right  angle  to  a  straight  line,  is  gradually  effected  by
drawing  the  medulla  oblongata  and  other  cerebral  ganglia
gradually  downwards  and  backwards.  This  is  the  whole  mys-
tery of  the  matter,  and  the  reason  why  anatomists  attending
to  size,  form,  and  relative  position,  instead  of  anatomical  con-
nection and  function,  have  fallen  into  this  great  error.  Where
the  thalami  optici  and  corpora  striata,  the  ganglia  of  the
cerebral  lobes  are,  there  will  the  lobes  be  also.  A  bird  or
quadruped  with  its  intellectual  organs  in  the  poll,  would  be  as
great  a  monster  as  one  with  eyes  in  its  tail, — in  fact  just  a
similar  violation  of  the  harmony  of  nature.

Dr.  Carpenter,  finding  in  the  assertions  of  anatomists  with
regard  to  the  absence  of  the  middle  and  posterior  lobes  in  the
lower  animals,  countenance  for  his  doctrine  of  the  seat  of
the  instincts,  observes,

**  Now  the  cerebrum  of  a  bird  is  not  like  that  of  a  mammal  as
a  whole,  but  can  be  compared  only  to  its  anterior  lobe;  and  it  seems


Antiphrenological  Physiologists,  499

absard,  therefore,  to  be  looking  there  for  the  organs  of  Combative-
ness,  Philoprogenitireness,  or  Secretiyeness,  which  belong  to  the
posterior  and  middle  lobes.  What  then  becomes  of  all  snch  organs  7
We  reply  that  it  is  much  more  easy  to  conceive  of  their  having  no
existence  in  the  bird's  mind  as  propensities,  the  actions  refered  to
them  being  simply  consensual,  than  it  is  to  suppose  that  the  uni<-
formity  which  we  every  where  see  in  nature  is  so  egregiously  violated."

Egregiously  violated  indeed  !  if  there  be  a  shadow  of  truth
in  this  doctrine,  which,  however  easy  to  conceive,  appears
to  me  the  most  improbable  of  conceptions.

Having  shewn  the  reliance  or  rather  non-reliance  to  be
placed  on  the  assertions  of  anatomists  with  regard  to  the
middle  and  posterior  lobes  in  animals,.  I  may  safely  leave  the
superstructure  erected  by  Dr.  Carpenter  to  fall  with  the  foun-
dation. Before  I  quit  the  subject,  however,  I  must  bring
under  his  notice  a  personage  in  whom  he  will  doubtless  re-
cognize a  great  authority,  viz.,  the  celebrated  hen  of  Flou-
rens,  whose  martyrology  has  formed  such  an  inexhaustible
storehouse  of  anti-phrenological  arguments.  If  the  ganglia
could  not  bestow  on  this  unfortunate  hen  sufficient  instinct
to  preserve  her  own  life,  by  eating  when  food  was  placed
before  her,  is  it  probable  they  suffice  for  causing  birds  to  ful-
fil all  the  duties  of  paternity  ?

I  have  a  collection  of  between  seventy  and  eighty  casta
of  bird^s  brains  which  I  have  formed  gradually  during  the
last  two  years,  and,  after  attentively  examining  them,  I  have
come  to  the  conclusion  that  they  are  more  lobulated  than  the
human  brain,  and  thai  the  right  point  of  view  to  consider
them  in,  is,  as  presenting  an  example  of  that  tendency  of  the
coalesced  ganglia  of  the  higher  orders  of  animals  to  separate
into  distinct  parts  in  the  lower;  forming  in  fact,  in  this  respect,
a  link  between  mammalia  and  inferior  classes.  An  anterior
lobe  is  plainly  discoverable  in  each,  and  when  I  see  that  this
bears  a  relation  to  the  intelligence  of  the  birds,  being  strik-
ingly larger  for  instance  in  the  Corvidse  than  in  the  Falconidae,
I  can  scarcely  refrain  from  a  smile  at  the  assertions  of  the
anatomists  and  the  credulity  of  Dr.  Carpenter.

In  his  eagerness  to  make  the  thalami  and  corpora  striata
the  ganglia  of  the  sensory  nerves  and  the  seat  of  the  emo-
tions. Dr.  C.  altogether  overlooks  the  circumstance  that  their
development  always  bears  a  ratio  to  that  of  the  hemispheres,
a  circumstance  decisive  in  my  opinion  of  their  function  being
not  independent  but  mediate.  Any  opinions  passed  on  their
function,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  of  the  nerv-
ous system,  can  only  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  conjectures,
but  as  the  conjectures  of  one  individual,  even  when  erroneous,

VOL.  IV.  M  M


600  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

often  serve  to  suggest  a  valuable  idea  to  the  brain  of  another,
I  shall  make  no  apology  for  introducing  a  few  speculations  of
my  own^  premising  that  I  do  so  with  a  great  distrust  of  their
accuracy^  and  with  the  full  assurance  that  some  will  prove
unfoimded^  and  others  require  much  rectification.

I  have  never  yet  seen  generally  admitted  what  I  believe
to  be  a  uniform  and  most  important  law^ — ^viz.^  that  each
organ  performs  two  offices,  one  relating  to  animal,  the  other
to  vegetative  life.  Thus,  the  animal  function  of  the  tongue,
is  taste;  its  vegetative,  that  of  purveyor  to  the  muscles  of
deglutition ;  its  ganglia,  the  ganglion  of  the  lingual  branch
of  the  fifth  and  the  ganglion  of  the  glosso-pharyngeal.  The
animal  office  of  the  pituitary  membrane  is  smell;  its  vege-
tative, that  of  guardian  of  the  portals  of  respiration;  its
ganglia,  the  olfactory  and  the  vesicular  matter  at  the  termi-
nation of  that  branch  of  the  fifth  pair  distributed  to  it.

When  we  consider  the  facts  which  recent  researches  have
revealed  respecting  the  power  resident  in  light,  to  which  the
term  actinism  is  applied,  we  can  be  at  no  loss  to  conjecture
a  vegetative  function  for  the  eye,  viz.,  that  of  assisting  in
the  supply  of  this  element  needful  for  the  various  vital-che-
mical processes  of  organic  life.  The  posterior  pair  of  quadri-
geminal  bodies  are  not  improbably  the  ganglia  of  the  portion
of  the  optic  nerve  devoted  to  this  function,  and  whose  peri-
pheral organ  must  be  regarded  as  the  tunica  choroidea,  in
the  same  way  as  the  retina  is  the  peripheral  oi^n  of  the
portion  devoted  to  vision,  and  whose  ganglion  may  be  the
anterior  pair  of  quadrigeminal  bodies.  The  large  size  of  the
optic  tubercles  in  birds,  whose  covering,  feathers  is  scarcely
permeable  by  light,  and  their  small  size  in  man  whose  skin
is  more  accessible  to  its  rays,  and  more  highly  organized
than  that  of  any  other  animal,  are  curious  facts.

Nothing  to  my  mind  is  more  radically  vicious  in  principle
and  unsound  in  theory,  than  the  practice  which  has  lately
been  adopted,  and  is  now  become  universal,  of  designating
the  cerebral  hemispheres  a  ganglion.  Ganglions  are  central
organs,  and  the  cerebral  hemispheres  are  peripheral.  Gan-
glions have  their  vesicular  matter  in  the  centre,  and  their
exterior  composed  of  white  fibres.  The  cerebral  hemispheres
have  their  vesicular  matter  on  their  surface,  whilst  their  white
fibres  are  interior.  In  short,  I  view  the  hemispheres  as  the
analogues  of  the  senses,  and  not  as  ganglia ;  the  vesicular
matter  on  their  surfitce  as  analogous  to  the  vesicular  matter
at  the  peripheral  expansion  of  the  nerves  of  special  sense ;
and  their  white  fibres  as  the  analogues  of  the  white  fibres  of
the  latter. The  corpus  striatum  I  conjecture  to  be  the  gan*


Aniipkrenoloffical  Phyriologists.  501

glion  of  the  animal  function  of  the  hemispheres,  those  per-
formed with  consciousness;  and  the  thalamus  opticus,  the
ganglion  of  the  vegetative,  performed  without  consciousness;
whilst  I  regard  the  corpus  callosum  not  as  a  commissure,  but
as  a  decussation  formed  by  the  fibres  from  each  hemisphere
crossing  to  enter  the  ganglion  of  the  opposite  side.

The  necessity  of  a  most  intimate  connection  between  the
functions  of  vegetative  and  animal  life,  by  means  of  which
the  two  can  act  and  react  upon  each  other,  is  most  obvious.
The  principle  on  which  it  is  founded  seems  to  be,  that  the
activity  of  every  animal  organ  stimulates  the  action  of  those
vegetative  processes  subservient  to  it,°  or  which  minister  to
its  wants,  and  thus  contributes  to  the  realization  of  its  own
desires ;  whilst  the  vegetative  organs  have  the  power  of  re-
pressing the  activity  of  animal  ones  when  such  activity  would
be  prejudicial  to  their  operations,  and  of  stimulating  them  to
action  when  their  activity  is  necessary  for  the  conservation  of
the  species.  Disease  I  conceive,  except  in  the  case  of  poison,
arises  from  this  system  of  mutual  checks  being  out  of  order.
It  is  probable  that  no  portion  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres
enters  into  action  without  disch^ging  a  portion  of  nervous
fluid  or  vital  electricity  (of  a  specific  character,  varying  with
the  locality  of  the  surface  which  secretes  it),  which  is  distru
bated  by  the  portion  of  the  thalamus  receiving  it  to  the  organ
it  represents ;  and  that  thus  every  emotion  chronicles  its  ex-
istence in  an  efiect  on  the  organs  of  vegetative  life.  When
the  vesicular  matter  on  the  surface  of  the  hemispheres  acts
with  such  intensity  as  to  consume  vital  electricity  faster  than
it  is  formed  by  the  combustion  of  the  carbon  of  the  blood  in
the  capillaries,  the  action  of  the  heart  and  lungs  becomes
accelerated,  in  order  to  furnish  a  more  rapid  supply.  A
familiar  illustration  of  the  action  of  the  vegetative  system  on
the  animal  is  afforded  by  the  indisposition  to  exercise  after  a
full  meal.  The  most  remarkable  instance®  I  have  ever  heard
of  the  power  exercised  by  the  animal  functions  over  the  vege-
tative, is  the  case  of  an  Indian  man  who  suckled  an  infant
whose  mother  died  in  the  woods ;  the  intense  action  of  Philo-
progenitiveness  having  caused  the  mammary  glands  to  take
on  the  action  of  secretion.  Philoprogenitiveness,  sympathiz-
ing with  the  condition  of  the  uterus,  has  its  activity  increased
just  before  the  termination  of  gestation. I  have  seen  a  cat  at

n  Thus  Alimeotivencss  probably  stimulates  the  secretion  of  gastric  juice.
From  numerous  observations,  continued  now  through  a  period  of  many
years,  I  feel  warranted  in  stating  that  in  the  human  race,  when  this  organ
is  very  deficient,  the  digestive  powers  are  always  feeble.

o  See  many  cases  of  unusual  suckling  in  EUiotaon's  Pkytiologyy  p.  839—

M  M  2


502  Dr,  Carpenter  and  the

this  period  caress  the  kitten  of  another  that  she  had  pre-
Tiottsly  been  accustomed  to  beat^  and  I  believe  I  have  recog-
nized facts  of  an  analogous  character  in  the  human  female.

A  second  channel  through  which  a  portion  of  the  vital
electricity^  fluids  or  ether  generated  by  cerebral  action  un-
consciously flows  ofiP^  is  the  muscular  system^  producing  na-
tural language ;  and  the  ganglion  of  these  hemispheric  fibres
is  probably  the  anterior  portion  of  the  thalamus.  Belonging
to  the  class  which  perform  their  functions  without  conscious-
ness^ fatigue  is  of  course  not  experienced  from  the  action  of
this  system ;  in  which  particular  it  resembles  the  reflex  or
true  spinal^  a  resemblance  which  may  be  carried  further,  the
habitual  carnage  of  the  body  being  analogous  to  the  usual
state  oi  tonicity  of  the  muscles,  and  the  movements  of  the  head
and  body,  which  result  from  vivid  emotions,  to  reflex  actn.

The  third  channel  through  which  a  specific  species  of
nervous  fluid  or  ether  is  propelled  by  the  action  of  the  vesi-
cular superficies  of  the  hemispheres,  is  that  which  conveys
those  impressions  which  constitute  its  animal  function,  and
which  upon  reaching  the  central  organ  of  Consciousness,  abb
emotions  and  perceptions ;  and  the  ganglion  of  this  division
of  the  fibres  of  the  hemispheres  I  conjecture  to  be  the  corpus
striatum.  The  existence  of  a  central  organ  of  Consciousness
seems  to  me  an  absolute  necessity,  and  many  circumstances
concur  to  point  out  the  tuber  cinereum  as  its  seat.  It  gives
birth  to  the  sense  of  existence  and  feeling  of  personal  identity,
to  which  appears  always  to  be  attached  a  capacity  for  experi-
encing pleasure  and  pain.  Seated  in  the  centre  of  the  brain,
the  functions  of  the  ganglia  of  the  senses  (including  those  of
the  hemispheres)  may  be  deemed  to  consist  in  collecting  as
into  a  focus  the  sensations  (perceptions  and  emotions  inclu-
sive) which  it  is  the  peculiar  province  of  each  to  furnish,  and
holding  them  before  it ;  and  thus  rendering  it  omnipresent  as
regards  the  operations  of  each.  The  volitions  and  conse-
quent actions — proceeding  from — (gy.  co-existent  with)  the
impressions  made  on  Consciousness  by  the  emotions  and  per-
ceptions, are  as  certainly  determined  by  the  ''laws  written  on
the  nervous  pulp  ^'  as  a  reflex  act ;  the  only  difference  being,
that  whilst  the  latter  follows  immediately  on  the  reception  of
its  stimulus,  the  former  is  suspended — in  those  cases  where
the  desire  to  act  of  one  organ  is  opposed  by  the  desire  to
refrain  of  another — till  a  process  termed  deliberation  is  gone
through.  This  consists  in  an  examination  by  the  intellect,  at
the  c^  of  Caution,^  of  the  probable  consequences  which  will
accrue  from  the  contemplated  act  to  the  different  organs  in-
terested in  the  debate. Caution,  at  length  satisfied  on  this

o  More  properly,  Love  of  Security.


Ahtiphrenohffical  Phyriohgitts,  503

head^  removes  its  embargo^  and  a  decision  or  volition  comes
into  existence  of  an  energy  proportionate  to  the  degree  in
which  the  impulses  of  the  organs^  for  the  act,  preponderated
over  those,  against  the  act :  the  measure  of  its  power  being,  in
fact,  the  overplus  of  their  energy  remaining  after  having  neu-
tralized their  antagonists.  Thus  by  a  law  of  our  mental  being,
preponderating  desire  is  the  antecedent  to  volition,  and  voli-
tion the  necessary  sequent  to  preponderating  desire.  A  deci-
sion to  pursue  a  particular  line  of  action  once  made,  another
organ  (Firmness)  comes  into  play,  and  in  any  future  re-deli-
beration on  the  same  subject,  throws  all  its  weight  into  the
scale  in  favour  of  persisting  in  the  resolution  once  taken,  and
thus  prevents  vacillation.

The  numeroii9  patches  of  vesicular  matter  in  the  cerebral
crura  may  be  the  places  where  ideas  of  muscular  act8  are
translated  into  muscular  impulses.  Motions  requiring  the
combined  action  of  numerous  muscles  are  yet  regarded  by
the  mind  but  as  units  or  simple  acts,  and  hence  it  is  quite
certain  that  there  must  be  interposed  between  the  fibre  or
fibres  through  which  the  volition  is  first  issued,  and  those  by
which  it  eventually  reaches  the  muscle,  a  tract  of  vesicular
matter,  which,  receiving  from  the  mind  the  mandate  to  exe-
cute a  certain  action,  propels  in  obedience  a  stimulating
impulse  of  the  requisite  intensity  to  every  muscle  required
to  enter  into  play.  Only  a  limited  number  of  movements
specifically  distinct  can  be  made  by  the  muscles  of  the  human
body,  and  an  independent  portion  of  vesicular  matter  seems
necessary  for  each.  The  circumstance  that  the  actions  of
different  muscles,  after  being  repeatedly  performed  volunta-
rily, become  associated  together,  so  that  a  succession  of
regular  motions  can  follow  one  another  with  unerring  preci-
dsion  quite  automatically,  without  any  conscious  effort  on
our  part,  (as  in  playing  a  musical  instrument  for  instance,)  is
one  of  the  greatest  marvels  of  nervous  action.  The  mechan-
ism by  which  this  is  accomplished  will  most  likely  for  ever
remain  beyond  our  ken,  but  the  seat  of  the  phenomena  is
probably  either  the  crura  cerebri  or  corpora  striata.  The
association  of  different  classes  of  ideas  with  reference  to  con-
temporaneousness or  immediate  succession,  and  by  which  the
recurrence  of  one  of  an  assemblage  or  series  summons  up  the
rest,  is  a  phenomenon  of  a  similar  character,  and  not  to  be
referred  to  any  separate  faculty  or  organ  of  association,  as
was  done  by  the  old  metaphysicians,  but  to  laws  regulating
the  action  of  the  nervous  matter  in  which  the  ideas  are
formed,  by  virtue  of  which  those  changes  in  its  state  (consti-
tuting sensations)  which  have  once  occurred  together,  have  a


504  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

tendency  aftenrards  to  recall  each  other.  The  various  fields
of  view  contemplated  by  the  eye^  seem  to  form  series  of
daguerreotype  pictures  in  the  nervous  matter^  capable  of  being
recalled  as  wholes  by  an  appropriate  stimulus  transmitted  by
an  act  of  volition  directed  to  this  end.  In  this  way  we  are
able  to  reply  correctly  to  questions,  the  answers  to  which,
considered  as  facts,  we  were  before  ignorant  of.  Thus  we
may  be  asked  the  number  of  spots  on  the  back  of  an  absent
dog,  and  although  we  may  never  have  counted  them  or  thought
on  the  subject  before,  yet  by  summoning  his  image  before  the
mind's  eye  we  are  enabled  correctly  to  resolve  the  query  ad*
dressed  to  us.  This  species  of  mental  capacity  has  never  re-
ceived the  attention  it  deserves ;  by  means  of  it  various  kinds  of
knowledge  being  as  it  were  written  down  in  a  book,  and  stored
away  by  the  mind  to  be  made  use  of  when  occasion  demands.

The  science  we  call  chemistry,  is  the  body  of  laws  which
regulate  the  combinations  of  inorganic  matter.  Physiology
may  be  defined  to  be  vital  chemistry ^  or  the  body  of  laws
which  regulate  the  combinations  of  organic  matter.  As  aU
chemical  action  is  nothing  but  the  motions  which  produce
fresh  combinations  of  inorganic  matter,  so  all  vital  action  is
nothing  but  the  motions  which  produce  fresh  combinations  of
organic  matter.  The  step  from  the  inorganic  to  the  organic
world,  is  marked  by  the  simple  elements  of  matter  passing
under  the  dominion  of  a  new  force  more  powerful  than  che-
mical affinity,  by  virtue  of  which  they  enter  into  ternary  and
quaternary  combinations.  There  can  be  no  doubt  however
but  that  this  new  force  exhausts  itself  in  its  struggle  against
chemical  affinity,  so  as  to  require  to  be  constantly  renewed
by  nutritive  matter.  The  vital  principle  or  force  is  therefore
elaborated  by  a  certain  combination  of  the  simple  elements
of  matter.  The  essence  of  vitality  is  then  the  power  inherent
in  a  certain  form  and  arrangement  of  matter  when  placed
under  the  requisite  conditions  regarding  caloric,  light,  and
electricity,  of  elaborating  out  of  the  simple  elements  of  mat-
ter the  vital  principle,  that  is,  a  force  similar  to  itself.  Of
all  the  agents  which  influence  the  affinities  of  the  elements  of
matter  and  produce  changes  in  their  combinations,  none  is
so  powerful  as  caloric,  and  its  power  affects  the  organic
equally  with  the  inorganic  world.

At  a  very  low  stage  in  the  vegetable  kingdom  we  meet
with  a  contractile  tissue  (the  analogue  of  the  muscles  in
animals)  possessed  of  irritability,  that  is,  capable  of  being
excited  to  movements  by  stimuli.  As  long  as  bodies  are  ho*
mogeneous  in  structure,  or  only  such  outward  portions  as
external  Btimuli  impinge  upon  ab  required  to  respond  to  the


Antiphrenological  Physiologist*.  505

impression^  no  necessity  seems  to  exist  for  the  intervention  of
any  agent  of  distribution.  When  however  the  contractile
tissue  or  apparatus  of  motion  becomes  concentrated  and  local-
ized^  the  necessity  of  a  channel  of  communication  between
the  stimulus -receiving  surface,  and  the  tissue  whose  function
it  is  to  contract  in  answer,  becomes  obvious.  This  gives  us  a
clear  idea  of  the  functions  and  essential  parts  of  the  reflex  or
true  spinal  nervous  system ;  viz.,  a  surface  for  the  reception
of  physical  or  chemical  stimuli,  and  the  propagation  of  a  vital
stimulus  in  reply ;  fibres,  the  conveyors  of  this  stimulus  to  a
central  organ  or  ganglion  whose  office  it  is  to  arrange  and  dis-
tribute the  impressioAs  through  another  set  of  fibres  to  the
muscles  required  to  respond.  The  anatomical  distinctness  of
the  true  spinal  system,  the  centres  of  which  terminate  at  the
medulla  oblongata,  proclaim  that  a  line  of  demarcation  may
be  drawn  between  its  functions  and  that  of  the  various  organs
of  the  nervous  system  seated  above  it ;  and  its  peculiar  office,
the  production  of  motions  without  consciousness  in  obedience
to  external  stimuli,  finds  a  parallel  in  the  automatic  move-
ments of  plants.

The  passage  from  the  vegetable  to  the  animal  kingdom  is
marked  by  the  presence  of  nitrogen  in  the  organized  tissues
of  the  latter,  and  by  their  only  being  able  to  employ  as  food
organized  products  previously  elaborated  from  the  mineral
kingdom  by  vegetables.  Probably  the  transition  is  also  marked
by  the  birth  of  consciousness,  and  the  superaddition  to  the
true  spinal  or  unconscious  system,  of  a  sensi-motor  nervous
system,  in  which  sensations  are  the  exciting  causes  of  motion.

The  first  requisite  of  such  a  system  in  creatures  possessing
the  faculty  of  locomotion  is  the  sense  of  the  being  or  existence
of  the  different  parts  of  the  body,  accompanied  with  a  sense
of  their  gravity,  which  capacity  for  reasons  to  be  subsequently
assigned,  I  locate  in  the  central  portion  or  vermiform  process
of  the  cerebellum,  placing  in  the  anterior  lateral  portions  of
the  organ,  the  sense  of  temperature,  and  in  the  posterior
lateral  (which  constitute  the  large  cerebellar  lobes  in  man),
the  sense  of  touch.  The  ganglion  of  taste  and  the  auditory
and  optic  ganglia  must,  I  think,  be  regarded  as  an  advance
in  organization  upon  the  preceding.  It  may  be  asserted,
and  I  believe  must  be  admitted,  that  the  acts  we  term  con-
sensual are  no  proof  of  consciousness ;  it  seems,  however,  to
be  the  general  object  of  nature  to  bestow  sentience  on  matter,
and  the  fact  that  her  plan  appears  to  have  been  to  have  pro-
gressed to  the  higher  ranks  of  being,  by  almost  imperceptible
gradations,  is  in  favour  of  automatic  or  unconscious  acts  being
linked  to  volitional  by  an  intermediate  class.  Destitute  of
memory  or  any  power  of  retaining  or  comparing  sensations,


606  Dr,  Carpenter  and  the

the  consciousness  of  this  class  is  made  np  of  a  series  of  sen-
sations. Attracted  towards  certain  objects  which  chance
throws  in  their  reach^  they  make  certain  motions  to  attain
them  in  obedience  to  this  law  of  attraction^  and  pleasure
ensues ;  animals  endowed  with  a  brain^  on  the  other  hand^
seek  objects  in  consequence  of  having  an  idea  of  the  pleasure
to  be  procured  by  their  attainment.

All  our  divisions  of  nature  are  rather  arbitrary  than  real,
and  however  well  marked  may  be  the  distinction  between  the
lowest  objects  in  one  class,  and  the  highest  in  the  class  above,
we  shall  find  between  the  highest  in  the  former  division  and
the  lowest  in  the  latter,  the  closest  relationship.  This  many-
sidedness  of  the  rapprochements  of  nature,  is  nowhere  more
strikingly  apparent  than  where  attempts  are  made  to  classify
the  different  functions  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres  or  brain-
proper.  Nevertheless  I  am  of  opinion  that  without  descend-
ing to  a  minute  classification  they  may  be  advantageously
considered  under  three  divisions.?  First :  Perceptive  facul-
ties, whose  food  is  impressions  received  from  the  ganglia  of
the  external  senses,  which  impressions  are  analyzed  into  a
variety  of  qualities.  Light,  for  instance,  into  colour,  sound
into  music.  The  impressions  of  the  gustatory  ganglion,
which  probably  in  animals  without  a  cerebrum  give  rise
only  to  bland  or  acrid  sensations,  into  an  infinite  variety  of
flavours,  &c.  Form,  size,  distance,  relative  position,  number,
are  appreciated  and  remembered.

Secondly :  A  class  of  propensities,  desires,  or  emotions,
whose  stimulus  is  the  perceptions  of  the  first  class;  when
these  reach  them  they  excite  a  desire  to  act  in  a  certain
manner  accompanied  by  a  specific  feeling  or  emotion,  as  when
a  buffalo  takes  to  flight  at  the  sight  of  a  lion,  and  experiences
at  the  same  time  an  emotion  of  fear.  Such  an  action  is  pro-
perly termed  voluntary,  although  it  is  quite  certain  the  buffalo
could  not  act  otherwise  unless  its  nature  were  altered.  This
class  may  be  considered  under  two  heads ;  first,  selfish  organs,
whose  sole  object  is  the  preservation  of  the  individual;  se-
condly, social  organs,  which  cause  the  individual  to  contri-
bute to  the  welfare  of  others.  The  unanimous  feeling  of
mankind  assigns  to  the  higher  organs  of  this  latter  class,
which  occupy  the  coronal  surface  of  the  head,  a  rank  and
dignity  to  which  the  preceding  or  selfish  class  can  lay  no
claim.  The  lowest  organ  of  this  class  being  Philoprogenitive-
ness,  it  is  probable  that  the  class  as  a  whole  is  wanting  in
animals  which  do  not  nourish  their  young.


p  I  omit  any  analysis  of  the  higher  reflective  faculties,  as  being  radi'
mentary  in  animals,  and  non-essential  to  my  argument.


Antiphrenological  Physiologists.  507

By  far  the  greater  number  of  the  actions  prompted  even
by  the  brain-proper^  are  instinctive,  that  is  independent  of
experience^  association,  or  any  reasoning  process.  No  sooner
are  certain  specific  features  recognized  in  an  external  object
by  the  perceptive  faculties,  than  by  "  the  law  written  on  the
nervous  pulp  "  an  emotion  and  desire  to  act  is  excited.  Thus
the  fear  felt  by  a  rabbit  the  first  time  it  sees  a  weasel,  arises
from  no  conclusion  drawn  by  intellect  as  to  its  ferocity  from
the  structure  of  its  teeth  and  body — from  no  association  of
its  previous  appearance  with  the  cries  and  disappearance  of  a
comrade — ^from  no  experience  of  its  hostility.  Knowledge
and  habits  derived  from  reason  and  experience,  are  gradually
formed  by  association  into  instincts,  and  even  transmitted  to
offspring.  By  which  law  the  nature  of  animals  is  capable  of
being  changed  within  certain  limits,  and  they  enter  the  world
with  a  peculiar  adaptation  for  existing  under  the  same  cir-
cumstances as  their  parents.  The  instinct  inherited  by  the
offspring  of  well-trained  hunting  dogs  is  a  good  example  of
this  law.  Another  is  afforded  by  the  wildness  of  birds  in
districts  long  inhabited  by  man,  contrasted  with  their  abso-
lute indifference  to  his  approach  in  islands  where  he  has  never
taken  up  his  residence.  Old  birds  of  the  corvidse  genus  know
by  experience  the  danger  to  be  apprehended  firom  a  gun,  and
will  suffer  an  unarmed  individual  to  approach  much  nearer  to
them  than  they  will  permit  one  bearing  a  fowling-piece  to  do.
The  transmission  of  acquired  instincts  to  progeny  is  a  depart-
ment of  natural  history  which  has  not  hitherto  received  half
the  attention  it  deserves.")  Even  the  influence  of  one  vivid
impression  on  the  parent  during  gestation  is  often  manifested
in  the  offspring,  and  the  most  trivial  incident  or  rencontre
occurring  to  a  pregnant  woman  may  cause  the  child  all
through  life  to  experience  as  much  loathing  and  disgust  at
the  sight  of  a  mouse,  as  mankind  in  general  feel  towards  a
toad  or  a  serpent.^

In  concluding  this  very  brief  and  imperfect  survey  of  the
functions  of  the  nervous  system,  the  question  presents  itself,
in  what  way  is  the  pre-existcnce  of  the  lower  orders  necessary
to  the  advent  of  the  higher.  Vegetable  life  doubtless  existed
on  this  globe  millions  of  years  before  the  presence  of  even  the
lowest  animal,  and  from  the  commencement  of  animal  life
many  millions  of  years  probably  elapsed  before  the  lowest
vertebrata  made  their  appearance.  Countless  ages  must  have
intervened  from  this  period  before  the  advent  of  man,  whose
appearance  on  the  earth,  even  if  placed  a  million  of  years

q  See  striking  illustraiioDS  in  EUiotaoH* a  Physiology ^  p.  1129—1132. — Zoui,
r  See  the  same  Work,  p.  1117— 1124— Zot«<.


508  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

back^  is  of  most  recent  date  when  considered  in  relation  to
the  time  that  must  have  been  occupied  in  the  consolidation,
deposition^  and  arrangement  of  the  strata  on  the  earth's
surface.  The  earth  probably  receives  more  light  than  she
reflects,  and  thus  the  matter  on  her  surface  may  gradually
become  impregnated  or  combined  with  a  greater  quantity.
Solid  land  slowly  upheaves  its  head  above  the  deep,  by  the
combined  agency  of  the  volcano  and  the  continent-founding
coralline.  Soil  and  climate  gradually  become  changed  and
ameliorated,  and  fitted  for  supporting  the  existence  of  higher
races.  But  is  it  only  by  producing  physical  changes  that
the  pre-existence  of  lower  orders  is  a  necessary  preliminary
to  the  advent  of  higher.  As  the  lower  tribes  of  animals
require  for  their  assimilation  matter  previously  organized
by  vegetables,  may  not  the  higher  require  certain  sentient
principles,  products  of  the  organization  of  the  lower,  for  the
development  of  their  superior  intelligence.  Leaving  out  of
view  progress  by  the  appearance  of  new  races,  some  law  must
govern  the  unquestionable  increase  in  intellectuality  of  the
human  race.**  There  is  deep  philosophy  in  the  lines  of
Tennyson, —


'*  For  t  dottbt  not  through  the  ages  one  increasing  purpose  runs,
And  the  thoughts  of  men  are  widened  by  the  process  of  the  suns.


99


Though  I  am  fond  of  indulging  in  speculation  and  a  great
supporter  of  its  utility,  no  one  can  be  more  impressed  with  the
necessity  of  rigorously  preserving  a  broad  line  of  demarcation
between  the  conjectural  and  the  ascertained.  Within  these
two  years  I  have  examined  nearly  three  hundred  brains,  com-
prising those  of  most  of  the  vertebrata  resident  in  the  British
Isles,  and  ascertained  the  relative  weight  of  the  cerebrum
and  cerebellum  in  each,  with  a  view  to  determine  the  func-*
tion  of  the  latter  division  of  the  brain.  On  the  present  occa-
sion I  must  content  myself  with  giving  a  ver^  brief  outline  of
the  results  of  these  researches,  but  it  is  my  intention  to  take
an  early  opportunity  of  laying  them  more  in  detail  before  the
readers  of  The  Zoist,  accompanied  with  a  table  of  weights.

About  eight  years  ago  my  attention  was  arrested  by  the
extraordinary  sensibility  to  pain  manifested  by  an  individual
possessing  a  large  cerebellum ;  recalling  some  similar  cases,
the  possibility  of  a  connection  between  the  large  organ  and
the  acute  feeling  struck  me,  and  I  examined  the  opinions  of
physiologists  with  regard  to  the  function  of  this  part  of  the
brain. Finding  my  idea  discountenanced  by  their  writings,

q  Those  who  demur  to  this  proposition  are  requested  to  consider  the
indisputably  inferior  organization  of  numerous  sa?age  tribes  gradually
becoming  extinct.


Antiphrenolqgical  Physiologists,  S09

and  inflaenced  also  by  the  opinions  of  Gkdl^  and  still  more
by  the  cases  that  had  come  under  my  own  observation  indi-
cating the  connection  between  a  prominent  cerebellum  and
the  sexual  feeling,  I  concluded  that  the  co-existence  of  the
large  cerebellum  with  acute  sensibility  was  adventitious.  Six
years  elapsed^  when  another  case  fell  under  my  notice  which
induced  me  to  reconsider  the  subject,  and  it  now  occurred  to
me  that  the  sexual  instinct  was  so  entirely  an  affair  of  sensa-
tion, that  a  relation  between  its  intensity  and  the  size  of  the
central  ganglion  of  the  sensory  nerves  was  to  be  expected.
When  I  came  to  examine  the  brains  of  the  lower  animals,
and  found  the  cerebellum  to  consist  of  three  portions  anato-
mically distinct,  and  bearing  no  sort  of  ratio  in  size  to  each
other,  I  at  once  abandoned  the  idea  of  its  being  a  single
organ  having  only  one  special  function,  and  asked  myself  the
question,  to  which  division  tactile  sensation,  if  located  in  the
cerebellum,  most  probably  belonged.  My  first  ideas  on  the
subject  having  been  derived  from  observations  on  man,  in
whom  the  lateral  lobes  constitute  its  chief  bulk,  what  little
weight  attached  to  them  was  in  favour  of  this  division  being
the  seat  of  the  IFunction  in  question,  and  the  superior  sen-
sibility of  the  skin  in  man  seemed  corroborative  of  this
inference.

The  numerous  observations  I  have  since  made  on  the
brains  of  the  inferior  animals,  all  so  completely  concur  in
shewing  the  relation  between  the  size  of  the  great  lateral
lobes  of  the  cerebellum  and  the  development  of  the  cuticular
system  of  nerves,  that  I  consider  the  connection  between
them  quite  established.  Nature  has  kindly  presented  us  with
some  animals  which  seem  formed  for  the  solution  of  physi-
ological problems,  and  whoever  would  obtain  a  clear  insight
into  the  functions  of  the  cerebeUum  should  study  the  deve-
lopment of  this  organ  in  the  cetacea,  birds,  and  the  chei-
roptera.

The  cetacea  present,  of  all  animals,  the  greatest  develop-
ment of  the  cuticular  system  of  nerves,  which  more  or  less
pervade  the  whole  of  the  layer  of  blubber  interposed  in  this
family  between  the  skin  and  the  muscles,  and  form  a  net-
work of  extreme  minuteness  on  its  external  surface.  In
connection  with  this  organization  let  it  be  observed,  that  the
sense  of  feeling  in  these  animals  is  so  acute,  as  to  enable
them  to  communicate  with  each  other  at  long  distances  by
the  vibrations  of  the  water;  and  I  have  been  assured  by
an  individual  who  once  saw  an  embayed  porpoise  put  to
death  by  some  fishermen,  that  the  cries  of  the  animal  when
wounded  were  heart-rending,  and  conveyed  the  idea  of  most


510  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

acute  suffering.  In  the  porpoise  the  size  of  the  cerebellum/
as  compared  with  the  cerebrum,  is  as  1  to  2i,  and  its  unusual
bulk  is  entirely  occasioned  by  the  enormous  development  of
the  great  lateral  lobes,  which,  equal  in  absolute  size  to  those
of  man,  far  surpass  his  or  any  other  animal's  in  the  propor-
tion they  bear  to  the  other  nervous  centres.  Pursuing  a
living  prey,  and  obliged  to  seek  the  surface  at  short  intervals
for  air  and  thus  lose  sight  of  it,  without  this  extraordinary
development  of  cuticular  sensibility  to  give  it  cognizance  of
the  motions  of  the  object  of  its  chase,  it  would  lose  all  know-
ledge of  its  locality  at  each  breathing  time.

In  striking  contrast  to  the  cetacea  stand  the  class  of
birds ;  clothed  with  feathers,  any  extraordinary  development
of  sensibility  in  the  skin  would  be  superfluous;  thin  and
membranous,  it  presents  scarcely  a  trace  of  nerves,  and  in
conformity  we  find  that  the  development  of  the  lateral  lobes
is  quite  rudimentary.  The  median  lobe  or  vermiform  pro-
cess, however,  attains  in  this  class  to  an  unusual  magnitude,
so  much  so,  that  the  weight  of  the  cerebellum  as  a  whole,
compared  with  that  of  the  cerebrum,  is  not  inferior  to  that
of  mammalia,  and  varies  from  1  to  4,  to  1  to  12.  In  con-
sidering the  question  as  to  what  power  birds  possessed  in  a
degree  as  commensurately  greater  than  other  vertebrata,  as
the  median  lobe  of  their  cerebellum  surpassed  that  of  the
latter  in  size,  I  was  struck  with  the  important  fact  of  their
capacity  for  traversing  and  supporting  themselves  in  an  ele-
ment of  a  specific  gravity  so  much  less  than  their  bodies.
To  do  so  must  require  great  muscular  power,  and  an  ex-
tremely delicate  sense  of  resistance  when  the  ease  and  grace
of  motion  are  displayed,  which  characterize  the  flight  of  many
birds.  In  the  crow,  whose  motions  are  neither  rapid  nor
elegant,  the  weight  of  the  cerebellum  is  11^  grains,  and  that
of  the  cerebrum  129,  whilst  in  the  common  gull,  who  floats
through  the  air  in  graceful  curves,  skims  with  rapid  wing  the
surface  of  the  waves,  or  sports  with  the  wind  in  rapid  zigzag
starts,  the  weight  of  the  cerebellum  is  14  grains,  with  a  cere-
brum of  only  63.  The  swift  sparrow-hawk  possesses  a  cere-
bellum of  6^  grains,  and  a  cerebrum  of  36};  the  slow  grey
owl  a  cerebellum  of  9  grains,  and  a  cerebrum  of  120.  And
in  the  swallow  tribe,  who  live  on  the  wing,  the  cerebellum
reaches,  proportionately  to  the  cerebrum,  the  largest  develop-
ment to  be  found  in  the  class,  being  as  1  to  4.

In  man,  during  life,  it  may  not  be  easy  in  many  cases  to
determine  the  proportionate  development  of  the  median  lobe^
as  compared  with  the  lateral ;  when  however  the  whole  occi-
put is  narrow  and  contracted,  we  cannot  err  in  concluding  the


Antiphrenological  Physioloffisls.  511

median  lobe  to  be  deficient^  and  in  all  such  cases  I  believe
myself  to  have  detected  a  certain  ungainliness  and  angularity
of  motion. Such  individuals  cannot  dance  with  grace^  and
are  poor  equestrians^  skaters^  &c. These  and  various  other
considerations  which  I  will  not  now  detail^  have  led  me  to
the  belief^  that  the  median  lobe  of  the  cerebellum  is  the
ganglion  of  the  nerves  of  muscular  resistance^  conveying  a
sense  of  the  position  of  the  extremities  and  the  centre  of
gravity. The  centre  in  fact  of  a  system  of  sensi-motor  nerves^
playing  as  important  a  part  with  regard  to  the  function  of
locomotion,  as  the  true  spinal  or  reflex  plays  with  regard  to
the  functions  of  ingestion  and  egestion. Habit  renders  mus-
cular acts  so  automatic,  that  we  are  almost  totally  uncon-
scious of  the  great  extent  to  which  they  are  stimulated  by
the  sensation  of  resistance,  and  how  necessary  this  stimulus
is  to  their  long  continuance  without  fatigue. When  a  boy,
just  learning  to  swim,  I  was  very  much*  puzzled  by  the  fact
that  after  swimming  across  a  small  pond  which  I  could  cross
in  about  twenty  strokes,  I  felt  fatigued. The  expenditure  of
muscular  power  must,  I  felt  sure,  be  very  small,  yet  the  fact
of  exhaustion  being  felt  was  equally  undoubted. The  expla-
nation of  the  phenomenon  I never  knew  till  my  recent
researches  revealed  it. Some  little  allowance  must  be  made
for  the  motion  being  a  novel  one,  but  the  grand  source  of
the  fatigue  was,  that  the  sensi-motor  nervous  system  being
unused  to  respond  to  a  stimulus  offering  so  little  resistance
as  water,  the  whole  task  of  keeping  up  the  motion  fell  upon
the  volitional. If  a  strong  man  capable  of  walking  forty
miles  in  ten  hours  without  resting,  were  suspended  by  a  belt
placed  round  the  waist,  and  required  to  go  through  the  action
of  walking;  although  moved  forward  artificially  through  the
air  at  each  stride  so  as  to  keep  the  centre  of  gravity  in  a
proper  position  in  advance^  yet  I  am  convinced  he  would  be
thoroughly  fatigued  with  ten  minutes  of  this  exercise.

Had  any  doubts  remained  in  my  mind  of  the  correctness
of  my  view  of  the  functions  of  these  two  great  nervous
centres,  the  central  and  median  lobes  of  the  cerebellum,  they
would  have  been  dispelled  by  an  examination  of  this  organ  in
the  cheiroptera,  or  bat  family.  These  insectivora  combine  in
one,  the  large  lateral  lobes  of  the  cetacea,  and  the  large  me-
dian lobe  of  the  bird;  and  in  harmony  with  the  views  of
their  function  just  given,  display  the  acute  tactile  sensibility
of  the  former  class,  united  to  the  agility  and  delicate  sense
of  resistance  of  the  latter.  Spallanzani  found  that  bats  when
blinded  avoided  obstacles  in  their  flight  with  the  greatest  pre-
cision, and  this  in  places  to  which  they  were  strangers.  They


612  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

flew  with  rapidity  through  apertures  only  just  large  enough
to  allow  of  their  passage^  and  even  avoided  smidl  threads
stretched  across  the  apartment ;  thus  exhibiting  an  example
of  exquisite  tactile  sensibility^  the  only  parallel  to  which  is
among  the  cetacea.  The  cerebellum  in  the  bat  is,  proportion-
ately to  the  other  nervous  centres,  larger  than  in  any  other
animal.  In  the  common  pipistrelle,  the  average  (drawn  from
six)  is,  cerebellum  *96  of  a  grain,  cerebrum  1*78.

With  regard  to  the  vegetative  function  of  the  great  lateral
lobes,  various  considerations,  which  want  of  space  must  pre-
vent my  now  enumerating  and  explaining,  have  led  me  pretty
confidently  to  conclude  that  it  presides  over  the  secretion  of
the  sebaceous  glands,  and  probably  also  over  that  of  the
testes,  the  tubular  structure  of  which  proclaim  them  to  be
allied  to  the  sebaceous  system.  The  ganglion  of  the  nerves
of  temperature  I  conjecture  to  exercise  an  influence  over  the
secretion  of  the  sudoriferous  glands,  and  the  action  of  the
hair  follicles.  Every  ganglion  may  be  regarded  as  a  gland
secreting  the  appropriate  nervous  stimulus  for  the  system  of
nerves  over  which  it  presides.  The  median  lobe  of  the  cere-
bellum, besides  secreting  the  nervous  energy  which  is  ex-
pended by  its  nerves  in  producing  muscular  contraction,
doubtless  exercises  a  most  intimate  control  over  the  action  of
the  heart  and  lungs,  every  muscular  effort  necessitating  in-
creased action  of  these  organs  to  supply  the  waste  occasioned
by  it.

The  preceding  views,  if  well  founded,  are  evidently  capa-
ble of  many  important  applications  to  surgery,  pathology,
and  therapeutics.  The  great  power  to  be  exercised  over  dis-
ease by  acting  on  the  nervous  centres  through  the  cuticular
system  of  nerves,  is  not  yet  adequately  appreciated,  though
ultimately  destined  in  my  opinion  to  replace  to  a  great  extent
the  present  system  of  pouring  drags  into  the  stomach.  Every
one  must  be  familiar  with  the  fact  that  in  surgical  operations
the  shock  to  the  system  often  bears  little  proportion  either  to
the  importance  of  the  parts  wounded,  or  the  state  of  the
general  health.  In  such  cases  the  size  of  the  lateral  lobes  of
the  cerebellum  will  prove  a  most  valuable  adjunct  to  diag-
nosis. I  have  known  fine  athletic  men  faint  from  operations
that  I  have  seen  weakly  women  bear  with  comparative  in-
difference. In  such  parties  the  development  of  the  cerebellum
has  been  enormous ;  and  whenever  this  is  the  case,  I  would
suggest  the  application  of  pounded  ice  to  the  occiput,  and  a
warm  bath  to  the  feet,  previous  to,  and  during  an  operation.
The  same  treatment  might  be  advantageous  in  lock-jaw,
which  would  seem  to  arise  from  an  irritation  of  the  lateral


Antiphrenological  Physiologists,  518

lobes  of  the  cerebellum^  produced  by  pain  in  the  yicinity  of
the  origin  of  the  nerves  distributed  to  the  muscles  of  masti-
cation.

I  must  defer  till  another  opportunity  the  statement  of  the
views  I  have  been  led  to  form  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the
lateral  lobes  of  the  cerebellum  contribute  to  the  energy  of
the  sexual  feeling/  But  it  will  perhaps  be  expected  that  I
should  give  some  opinion  on  the  questio  vexata  of  the  influ-
ence of  emasculation  on  the  development  of  this  organ.  When
I  read  the  arguments  pro  and  con  of  Mr.  Noble  and  Dr.  Car-
penter on  this  subject,  I  was  forcibly  reminded  of  the  remark
of  Gall,  who  says  on  a  parallel  occasion,  "  It  would  be  diffi-
cult for  such  learned  men  to  have  recourse  to  so  laborious  a
source  of  true  knowledge  as  observation.^'  At  the  outset  of
my  inquiries  this  was  the  first  subject  that  attracted  my  atten-
tion. Believing  each  portion  of  the  surface  of  the  body  to
be  represented  by  a  separate  portion  of  the  vesicular  matter
of  the  great  lateral  lobes  of  the  cerebellum,  all  the  alteration
in  the  organ  which  I  should  anticipate  from  emasculation,
would  be  a  slight  diminution  of  the  portion  representing  the
generative  organs,  and  the  parts  with  which  they  closely  sym-
pathize ;  and  on  the  whole  the  result  of  my  inquiries  is  in
favour  of  this  conclusion.  The  diminution  however  being  so
trifling  as  not  to  counterbalance  the  congenital  variations  in
the  size  of  the  organ  which  occur  in  individuals,  the  point
can  only  be  satisfactorily  determined  by  taking  the  average
of  a  large  number  of  cases.  Having  procured  the  brains  of
six  capons,  I  found  the  average  proportion  of  the  cerebellum
and  cerebrum  to  be  6^  grains  to  45^.  Having  previously
found  the  average  of  six  cocks  to  be  7^  to  44,  this  appeared
to  be  a  very  decisive  result ;  but  finding,  as  I  extended  my
observations,  a  great  difference  in  the  size  of  the  parts  in
different  breeds  of  fowls.  I  procured  the  brains  of  five  cocks
of  the  same  breed  as  the  capons  through  the  same  London
poulterer,  and  from  the  same  town  in  Essex ;  these  gave  a
proportion  of  7  to  46^,  a  much  less  striking  difference,  but
yet  strongly  corroborative  of  a  certain  amount  of  change.
Having  removed  the  right  testis  from  a  kitten  three  days  old,
I  examined  the  cerebellum  at  the  age  of  1^  year,  and  could
detect  no  inequality  on  its  sides,  though  having  placed  it  in

r  Da  ich  glaabe,  daas  die  Entwickelung  der  Seiten-Flugel  des  cere-
bellums eine  auzeige  der  Einpfiodlichkeit  der  Oberflache  des  Korpers  ist,
80  erwage  ich,  dass  ceteris  paribus,  je  grosser  ihr  Umfang  ist,  desto  grosser
wird  das  VergoiigeD  seyn  welches  die  Ausiibung  der  Begattuog  gewahrt.
Ich  glaube  jedoch  an  das  Vorbandensein  eines  Organs  des  Zeugungstriebes
10  dem  cerebrum,  welches  das  Weib  zum  Gegenstande  der  Begierde  macht,
and  auf  der  unteren  Oberfliiche  des  Hintertheiles  desselben  liegt


514  Dr.  Carpenter  and  the

spirit  I  made  it  the  subject  of  repeated  obsenrations.  I  may
extend  the  same  remark  of  not  being  able  to  detect  any
inequality  in  the  halves  of  the  cerebellum  after  unilateral
emasculation^  to  the  cases  of  a  ram  and  a  hare.  The  result
of  my  researches  on  horses^  pigs  and  sheep,  is  in  favour  of
emasculation  producing  a  diminution  of  the  absolute  size  of
the  cerebellum,  but  not  of  its  relative  size  as  compared  with
the  cerebrum,  the  development  of  the  latter  organ  being  quite
as  much  interfered  with ;  which  is  what  I  should  be  quite
prepared  to  expect.

To  enter  into  a  detailed  refutation  of  the  arguments  by
which  it  is  sought  to  prove  that  the  cerebellum  is  a  sort  of
supplementary  addition  to  the  nervous  system,  an  organ  as
high  or  higher  in  the  ascending  scale  than  the  cerebrum,
whose  function  is  the  ''co-ordination  of  movements  re-
quiring the  united  action  of  many  muscles,^'  would  be  foreign
to  my  present  purpose,  and  perhaps  superfluous  after  what  I
have  already  stated.  Dr.  Carpenter  observes,  ''  In  proportion
as  the  extremities  acquire  the  power  of  prehension,  and  to-
gether with  this  a  power  of  application  to  a  great  variety  of
purposes, — ^still  more  in  proportion  as  the  animal  becomes
capable  of  maintaining  the  erect  posture,  in  which  a  constant
muscular  exertion,  consisting  of  a  number  of  most  elaborately
combined  parts,  is  required, — do  we  find  the  size  of  the  cere-
bellum and  the  complexity  of  its  structure  undergoing  a  rapid
increase.  .  .  .  Man  surpasses  all  other  animals  in  the  number
and  variety  of  the  combinations  which  be  is  capable  of  exe-
cuting, and  in  the  complexity  of  the  combinations  themselves.
Thus  if  we  attentively  consider  the  act  of  walking  in  man,  we
shall  find  that  there  is  scarcely  a  muscle  of  the  trunk  or  ex-
tremities which  is  not  actually  concerned  in  it ;  some  being
engaged  in  performing  the  necessary  movements,  and  others
in  maintaining  the  equilibrium  of  the  body,  which  is  disturbed
by  them.^'  Unfortunately  for  these  ingenious  speculations
there  is  such  an  animal  as  a  porpoise,  a  sort  of  animated
barrel,  which  minus  ''  prehensile  extremities  capable  of  being
applied  to  a  great  variety  of  purposes," — minus  "  the  capacity
of  maintaining  the  erect  posture," — minus  every  feature  enu-
merated by  Dr.  C.  as  connected  with  a  large  cerebellum,  yet
possesses  the  organ  more  largely  developed  than  any  other
animal,  the  bat  excepted.

Dr.  Carpenter  observes,  "  The  peculiar  connection  of  the
cerebellum  with  the  sensory  ganglia  was  supposed  by  Foville
to  indicate  that  it  is  the  actual  seat  of  sensation ;  an  idea  at
once  negatived  by  the  entire  absence  of  the  organ  in  inverte-
brated  animals :"  and  pray,  Dr.  C,  what  becomes  of  your


Aniiphrenological  Physiologisis.  515

idea  that  the  thalamus  opticus  is  the  seat  of  sensation?
Will  you  affirm,  or  rather  have  you  one  tittle  of  evidence  to
entitle  you  to  affirm,  that  the  thalamus  is  developed  in  a  lower
stage  of  being  than  the  cerebellum?  Such  a  notion  is  a  mere
piece  of  complacent  assumption,  and  in  the  present  state  of
our  knowledge,  or  rather  ignorance,  of  the  exact  functions
performed  by  the  nervous  centres  in  the  invertebrata,  for  any
one  to  undertake  to  assert  that  none  of  the  cephalic  or  tho-
racic ganglia  are  the  analogues  of  the  cerebellum  of  the  ver-
tebrata,  would  be  much  more  indicative  of  folly  and  presump-
tion than  wisdom.

The  purely  literary  scientific  man,  however  adroit  in  dis-
guising his  want  of  practical  acquaintance  with  the  subject
of  his  criticism,  rarely  succeeds  for  any  length  of  time  in  his
object;  his  ignorance  will  peep  out,  and  often  does  so  in  the
assertion  with  all  the  air  of  novelty  of  some  book-leamt  fact,
which  every  one  practically  acquainted  with  the  subject  knows
that  the  merest  tyro,  who  has  ever  observed  for  himself  at  all,
must  have  met  at  the  very  outset  of  his  observations.  Of
this  character  in  a  striking  degree  is  the  formal  announcement
by  Dr.  Carpenter,  that  ''the  observations  of  Professor  Betzius
upon  the  varieties  of  form  which  the  cranium  presents  in  dif-
ferent races,  have  indicated  this  among  other  facts, — that  the
position  of  the  cerebellum  may  vary  considerably,  being  much
more  horizontal  in  one  case,  and  more  vertical  in  another,  so
as  to  correspond  with  a  greater  or  less  posterior  protuberance,
without  any  corresponding  variation  in  the  size  of  Ihe  organ
itself.^'  Now  the  fact  is  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  take
twenty  English  skulls  from  amongst  the  population  at  ran-
dom without  seeing  this  fully  exemplified,  such  is  the  mixed
character  of  the  race ;  and  it  is  quite  as  ridiculous  and  indi-
cative of  ignorance  to  announce  this  fact  so  notorious  to
phrenologists  as  a  novelty,  as  it  would  be  to  give  out  as  a
new  discovery  just  made,  that  there  was  a  connection  between
emphysema  of  the  langs  and  diseased  heart,  or  between  dis-
organized liver  and  dropsy.

Had  Dr.  Carpenter  been  impressed  with  the  duty  of
making  himself  acquainted  with  subjects  before  he  undertook
to  criticize  them,  he  would  not  have  betrayed  the  disgraceful
ignorance  of  the  writings  of  Gall,  and  phrenological  princi-
ples generally,  which  characterizes  his  article.  He  says,
"  Scarcely  any  attempt  has  been  made  to  map  out  the  base  of
the  brain  into  organs,  and  no  attempt  whatever  has  been
made  to  shew  what  share  is  taken  by  the  internal  surface  of
the  hemispheres  in  the  psychical  operations  of  man  or  any
other  animal ;  so  that  we  are  scarcely  beyond  the  mark  in

VOL.  IV,  N  N


516  Dr,  Carpenter^  ifc.

ftsserting  tliat  nearly  (if  not  quite)  one  half  of  the  cerebral
surface  is  totally  unappropriated. .  .  .  No  external  examination
of  the  cranium^  such  as  alone  can  be  made  on  the  living  head
or  the  unopened  skull,  can  give  any  account  of  the  form  of
the  base  of  the  hemispheres/^  &c.  What  are  we  to  think  of
such  assertions  as  these,  when  the  £act  is,  that  the  convolu*
tion,  the  prominent  development  of  which  first  led  to  the  dis-
covery of  phrenology,  that  of  Language, — is  the  very  last  on  the
base  of  the  anterior  lobe — the  whole  under  surface  of  which
is  mapped  out.  That  Dr.  C.  does  not  know  how  to  give  any
account  of  the  form  of  the  base  of  the  hemispheres  from  an
examination  of  the  Uving  head,  no  one  will  dispute;  but
when  he  asserts  the  thing  cannot  be  done,  he  states  that
which  is  untrue,  and  exposes  his  own  ignorance.  Unfortu-
nately for  Dr.  C,  there  is  no  part  of  the  8ur£ace  of  the  brain
on  which  the  development  of  the  convolutions  can  be  more
exactly  determined  by  external  indication  than  the  base  of
the  anterior  lobe.  The  size,  prominence,  and  position  of  the
eyes — the  breadth  between  them — their  position  with  relation
to  the  superciliary  ridges — ^the  breadth,  prominence,  and  m-
fimtely  varied  curves  of  the  latter, — form  a  criterion  for  esti-
mating the  development  of  the  convolutions  seated  in'  the
fossa  on  each  side  of  the  crista  gaUi,  and  on  the  floor  of  the
orbit,  which  we  may  seek  for  in  vain  with  respect  to  other
parts  of  the  brain.  To  be  able  to  read  these  signs,  however,
requires  study,  personal  observation,  a  practical  acquaintance
with  the  subject, — qualifications,  in  short,  quite  the  reverse
of  those  which  form  the  critic,  the  sole  requisite  fcnr  the  prac*
tice  of  whose  art  would  appear  to  be  presumption.  With
regard  to  the  middle  and  posterior  lobes,  tiietB  are  external
indications,  such  as  the  breadth  of  the  head  in  the  basilar
region, — ^the  relative  position  of  the  floor  of  the  orbit,  meatus
auditorius,  and  occipital  spine, — the  protrusion  <Mr  retraction
of  the  cerebellum, — which  give  a  very  good  indication  of  their
general  size,  and  much  more  accurate  information  with  regard
to  the  development  of  particular  portions,  than  persons  not
conversant  with  the  subject  would  h  priori  have  supposed.
Observation  has  taught  me  that  the  prominence  of  the  por-
tion of  the  skull  immediately  below  Combativeness,  ahrays
produces  a  great  dread  of  physical  pain,  from  which  I  con-
jecture that  tiie  under  surface  of  the  brain  lying  immediately
above  the  cerebellum,  is  principally  devoted  to  the  analysis
and  memory  of  the  sensations  furmshed  by  this  organ*

After  stating  that  the  anterior  lobe  is  developed  in  the
embryo  before  the  middle  and  posterior.  Dr.  C.  exdaims,
''  Strange  as  this  assertion  may  be  to  phrenologiBts, &c.''


Ca$e  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  ifc.  517

Now  the  fact  ig,  that  the  prior  derebprnent  of  the  anterior
lobe  is  both  noted  and  commented  upon  in  GalPs  writings.
Considering  that  the  discoverer  of  phrenology  was  the  founder
of  the  anatomy  of  the  brain, — rouNDEB,  I  repeat,  is  the
word  to  employ,  and  the  one  which  the  unanimous  voice  of  a
grateful  posterity  will  one  day  bestow  upon  him, — sneers  at
the  anatomical  knowledge  of  phrenologists  from  a  man  like
Dr.  Carpenter,  who  has  done  nothing,  are  as  ludicrous  as
inappropriate.

Half  styling  himself  a  phrenologist,  with  an  ''  if  we  find
reason  to  adopt  the  phrenological  system  as  a  whole,"  Dr.  Car-
penter manifests  a  strong  and  deeply-rooted  hostility,  without
the  manliness  of  an  open  foe.  He  carps  and  cavils,  nibbles
a  little  here  and  a  little  there,  detracts,  depreciates,  and
shews  unmistakably  the  animus  which  governs  his  proceed-
ings. He  would  Uke  to  condemn  the  whole  system,  but
haunted  with  the  fear  of  its  truth,  he  condemns  with  a  re-
servation, critically,  judiciously,  that  is  to  say,  leaving  a  wide
margin,  to  hop  backwards  and  forwards  as  expediency  may
in  time  to  come  dictate.

Southampton,  Dec.  1846.  T.  S.  Pbideaux.


Yin.  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  Delirium,  Neuralgia,
Vomiting,  and  the  discharge  of  Arsenic  taken  long  previ-
ously,  successfully  treated  with  Mesmerism,  which  produced
intuitive  knowledge  of  the  internal  state,  tJie  future  course
of  the  Disease,  and  the  proper  treatment.  By  J.  C.  Luz-
ifoORB,  Esq.,  of  Alphington,  Devon.

I  SHALL  premise  an  account  of  the  case  before  I  saw  it,  by
Mr.  Parker,  surgeon,  at  Exeter.

''  In  1833  I  was  requested  by  Dr. to  attend  Mrs.  Bird

with  him.  She  was  then  suffering  daily  from  epileptic  fits,
varying  from  6  to  8  hours  in  duration,  and  they  have  continued
as  long  as  48  hours :  frequent  delirium :  paralysis  of  the  left  arm
and  left  leg :  the  left  hand  inverted,  so  that  the  fingers  could
not  be  separated  without  great  exertion:  vomt/t9^  of  nearly  all
her  food,  and  very  frequently  blood,  even  as  much  as  hdf  a
pint  at  a  time.  She  had  a  large  painful  tumor  in  the  left  iliac
fossa,  connected  with  the  uterus,  from  which  tumor  the  aura
epileptica  always  proceeded.  She  had  also  a  cough  resem-
bling hooping-cough  of  the  most  violent  character.

'^  The  above  sufferings  had  been  treated  by  one  bleeding,
one  cupping,  leeches,  and  repeated  salivations.  She  was  once
under  sijdiviUum  for  12  consecutive  months. The  materia

N  n2


518  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  IfC.,

medica  had  been  ransacked.  Electricity  and  galvanism  had
been  also  resorted  to.  But  no  beneficial  effects  attended  any  of
the  treatment,

''I  removed  the  tumor  by  the  application  of  leeches  to  the
08  uteri.  It  frequently  returned^  and  was  as  often  removed
by  the  same  means.  The  paralysis  of  nearly  three  years
duration  was  quite  cured  by  the  application  of  moxa^  and  has
remained  well  to  this  day,  now  nearly  14  years.  The  cough
was  much  relieved  by  the  same  means.  Tic  douloureux  was
also  added  to  her  other  ailments.

''All  other  means  having  failed  to  relieve  her  sufferings,  I
suggested  bleeding  her  from  the  arm,  which  was  attended
with  such  relief,  that  I  have  now  bled  her  nearly  six  hundred
times,  never  taking  less  than  half  a  pint,  and  more  frequently
more  than  a  pint,  each  time.  The  treatment  after  a  while
lessened  the  violence  of  the  fits,  shortened  the  duration  of
the  delirium,  stopped  the  vomiting  of  blood,  but  had  no  effect
on  the  tic  doidoureux  or  the  vomiting  of  food,

''  I  ceased  to  attend  Mrs.  Bird  for  some  time.  In  1834  I
was  selected  as  her  sole  medical  attendant,  when  I  found  her
with  her  face,  eyelids,  l^s  and  tongue  much  swollen;  scarcely
able  to  speak  or  swallow ;  the  inside  of  her  mouth  was  covered
with  black  pustules. She  had  been  taking  for  some  months

moderate  doses  of  the  solution  of  arsenic,  which  Dr.

had  prescribed  for  her  tic  douloureux,  and  which  is  a  very
ordinary  treatment  for  that  complaint.  She  was  at  the  same
time  taking  frequent  doses  of  lime  water.

"  I  have  never  given  her  a  single  dose  of  arsenic  or  mer-
cury. She  has  frequently  called  my  attention  to  a  watery
eruption  on  her  legs  and  feet,  arms  and  hands  -,  and  on  eat-
ing salt  or  salt  meat  has  complained  of  garlic  eructations.
Mrs.  Bird  kept  her  bed  for  seven  years,  and  then  gradually
gained  strength,  until  she  was  able  to  walk  short  distances ;
but  the  tic,  fits,  and  vomiting  of  food  were  never  subdued.

"  The  attendance  on  and  subsequent  death  of  her  husband,
in  1845,  again  increased  all  her  ailments.  The  fits  became
more  violent,  and  the  weakness  gradually  increased ;  the  tic
douloureux  attacked  every  part  of  the  system,  particularly
in  the  form  of  angina  pectoris,  which  I  have  frequently  wit-
nessed ;  and  expected  her  death  every  moment.

''  In  1845,  I  recommended  mesmerism,  but  she  would  not
consent  to  it  until  October  of  that  year.  She  was  now  in  a
deplorable  state,  violent  fits  occurring  daily,  or  rather  nightly :
tic  douloureux  without  intermission.  She  could  take  very
little  solid  nourishment,  and  even  that  little  was  nearly  aU

S'ected  within  a  few  minutes  of  its  having  been  taken.  From
these  symptoms  I  did  not  consider  she  woiUd  live  a  month.


by  Mr,  Luxmoore.  519

Mesmerism  was  now  had  recourse  to,  a  detailed  account  of
which  is  furnished  by  Mr.  Luxmoore  in  the  following  pages.

"I.  B.  Pabkbb.''

On  the  24th  of  October,  1845,  I,  in  company  with  Mr.
Parker,  visited  Mrs.  Bird,  whom  I  had  never  before  seen.
In  seven  minutes  I  succeeded  in  getting  her  into  mesmeric
sleepy  although  she  had,  on  my  arrival,  assured  me  she  did
not  think  mesmerism  toould  ever  affect  her,  I  aroused  her
at  the  end  of  half  an  hour.  During  sleep  the  left  hand  con-
tracted in  the  manner  described  by  Mr.  Parker :  blowing  upon
it  caused  relaxation.

Oct.  27th.  Asleep  in  three  minutes,  and  was  aroused  at
the  expiration  of  one  hour.

Oct.  29th.  Mesmerised  late  in  the  evening,  with  the  in-
tention of  leaving  her  asleep,  (she  gets  no  natural  sleep.)
She  soon  fell  into  sleep^waking,  mistaking  me  for  a  particular
friend  of  her  late  husband's.  Mesmeric  attachment  now  ma-
nifested itself,  so  as  to  oblige  me  to  give  up  the  idea  of  leav-
ing her  asleep.  CommunUy  of  taste  andfeeUng  were  also  very
marked. Slept  two  hours.

Nov.  1st.  Has  suffered  much  from  spasms,  rigidity,  and
palpitation  of  the  heart;  all  which  were  much  better  during
sleep-waking,  and  this  continued  two  hours.

Nov.  3rd.  Found  Mrs,  Bird  in  high  delirium,  declaring
neither  Mr.  Parker  nor  I  should  come  near  her ;  and  on  my
approach  she  attempted  to  bite  and  strike  me.  In  ten  minutes
she  was  in  quiet  sleep-waking.

At  the  expiration  of  two  hours  I  aroused  her,  but,  not
finding  her  collected,  I  again  put  her  to  sleep ;  shortly  after
which  she  awoke  quite  comfortable.

Previously  to  being  mesmerised,  these  fits  of  delirium
never  lasted  less  than  six  or  eight  hours,  and  have  continued
six  weeks,

Nov.  5th.  Feels  much  better.  In  mesmeric  sleep-waking
two  hours  and  a  quarter.

Nov.  6th.  All  day  threatened  with  a  fit,  conscious  of  its
coming  on  just  as  I  arrived.  Mesmerised,  and  immediately
had  the  fit,  with  slight  delirium  and  considerable  rigidity :
aroused  her  in  a  little  more  than  two  hours,  unconscious  of
what  had  taken  place.  She  hears  no  voice  but  her  mesmer^
iser^s,  nor  can  she  distinguish  the  loudest  mechanical  sounds,

Nov.  8th.  General  health  improved,  has  suffered  scarcely
any  pain  from  tic  since  first  mesmerised,  although  up  to  that
very  day  she  had  never  been  free  from  it  for  eleven  years,  and
has  been  in  the  habit  of  rubbing  half  an  ounce  of  creosote


620  Case  of  EpUepiic  and  other  Fits,  ifc,

into  her  face  and  head  every  fortnight.  Slept  two  honrs  and
a  half.

Nov.  10th.  Mesmerised  two  hours  and  a  quarter.  Rather
poorly.

Nov.  11th.  Mesmerised  two  hours^  during  which  she
suffered  from  a  slight  fit  of  rigidity.  While  Mrs.  Bird  was
in  sleep-wakings  I  silently  placed  the  kernel  of  a  nut  in  mjf
mouth ;  she  then  complained  of  a  '^  nasty  **  taste,  and  in  one
moment  began  retching  violently,  I  ascertained  she  had
lately  taken  a  dislike  to  nuts,  from  having  eaten  a  very  bad
one.

Nov.  14th.  Mesmerised  two  hours  and  a  quarter :  has  had
no  tic  nor  fit.

Unavoidable  circumstances  prevented  Mrs.  Bird's  being
again  mesmerised  until  the  22nd ;  in  the  interval  she  had
three  fits,  and  was  obliged  once  to  use  creosote  to  ease  a  slight
attack  of  tic.

Nov.  22nd.  Slept  two  hours,  during  which  she  had  a
slight  fit.  I  to-day  observed  that  in  sleep-waking  she  was
much  influenced  by  my  will.  She  pointed  a  finger,  opened  or
closed  her  hand,  placed  it  on  my  knee  or  took  it  off,  by  my
silently  willinff  her  to  do  so.

Nov.  24th.  The  old  distressing  cough,  resembling  hooping*
cough,  has  returned,  but  no  fit. Slept  three  hours.

Nov.  25th.  Much  more  cheerful,  and  seems  better,  but
had  a  violent  fit  during  mesmerism,  accompanied  with  ex*
treme  rigidity ;  the  head  and  heels  only  touching  the  so&^
the  spine  being  arched  backwards.  It  took  me  nearly  a
quarter  of  an  hour  to  relax  the  body.

Nov.  29th.  Has  suffered  slightly  from  tic,  cough  very
bad,  voice  weak,  slept  three  hours  and  forty  minutes.

Dec.  1st.  No  tic.  During  sleep-waking,  Mr.  Parker  burnt
moxa  on  the  spine  in  hope  of  relieving  the  cough ;  she  felt
the  pain  for  a  moment,  but  it  did  not  produce  a  fit,  as  was
the  case  before  mesmerism  was  resorted  to.  On  arousing  she
was  unconscious  of  having  been  burnt.  While  asleep  she
said  bleeding  would  do  her  good.

Dec.  2nd.  Bled  before  she  was  mesmerised ;  then  had  a
very  tranquil  sleep.  No  rigidity  even  of  the  left  hand.  Cir-
cumstances prevented  Mrs.  Bird's  being  again  mesmerised
until  the  16th ;  and,  although  a  very  exciting  circumstance
took  place,  she  had  but  two  fits  and  no  tic.

Dec.  16th.  Spirits  low;  slept  three  hours;  no  fit  nor  tie.
Mrs.  Bird^s  cerebral  organs  are  easily  excited  by  local  mes*
merism  :  I  however  scrupulously  avoid  touching  them,  unless
actually  necessary,  as  I  well  know  the  excitability  of  her  bndn.


by  Mr,  Luxmoore,  621

Dec  19th.  Slept  two  hours ;  bat  did  not  get  into  perfect
sleep- waking  until  after  a  fit  and  considerable  rigidity.  When
this  was  over,  she  said,  ''/  shcM  be  ill  on  Christmas-day,  and
have  a  very  severe  fit  on  the  last  day  of  the  year;  U  wiU  be  the
worst  I  have  ever  had;  but,  tf  I  survive  it,  I  shall  be  better
afterwards"

Dec.  20th.  Slept  two  hours  and  a  half;  during  which  sho
had  a  severe  fit.

Dec.  22nd.  Found  Mrs.  Bird  in  high  delirium,  beating
herself  on  the  floor.  Soon  mesmerised  her  into  sleep- waking,
and,  at  the  end  of  one  hour  and  three  quarters,  I  aroused  her,
quite  tranquil ;  she  had  been  much  irritated  during  the  daj,
which  may  account  for  her  uncomfortable  feelings.

Dec.  24th.  Slept  two  hours  and  a  half,  during  which
Mrs.  B.  had  two  fits,  but  very  little  delirium;  she  again
alluded  to  the  attack  on  Christmas-day,  and  said,  the  second
would  be  on  New  Yearns  Day,  (not  on  the  Sist  of  December,
as  she  had  before  stated:)  and  added,  "  I  shall  be  very  iU  all
day.  The  worst  wUl  commence  at  6 pjm.,  and,  tf  lam  alive,
at  12  o^ clock  at  night  I  shall  recover.

Dec.  25M.  Very  delirious,  and  has  been  so  all  the  morning^
I  mesmerised  her,  but  it  took  two  hours  to  overcome  the  delin
rium ;  at  the  end  of  three  hours,  I  aroused  her,  perfectly
tranquil.

Dec.  26th.  Much  better ;  slept  three  hours.

Dec.  27th.  In  a  very  confused  state  of  mind :  mesmerism
soon  reduced  the  delirium,  and  on  arousing  she  was  tranquil
and  collected.

Dec.  28th.  Feels  better,  slept  three  hours,  and  had  a
severe  fit.  During  sleep-waking  she  said,  *'  I  must,  on  the
1st  of  January,  be  bled  copiously  after  6  p.m.,  and  my  feet
kept  warm ;  give  me  a  little  coffee,  if  possible,  after  I  am  bled:
it  will  be  no  use  trying  to  mesmerise  me  until  after  5 p,m"

Dec.  29th.  Very  tranquil :  mesmerised  three  hours ;  no
fit,  nor  tic.

Dec.  80th.  Has  suffered  from  spasms ;  mesmerised ;  no
fit,  nor  tic.

Dec.  31st.  Mesmerised  four  hours;  suffered  from  tic,
owing  to  having  been  exposed  to  a  current  of  cold  air.

Jan.  1st,  1846.  Mr.  Parker  and  I  visited  Mrs.  Bird  in
the  forenoon,  and  found  her  very  restless  and  ill.  At  a  little
after  5  p.m.  we  found  her  qtute  delirious,  I  commenced  mes*
merising  her,  but  she  did  not  get  into  sleep-waking.  Soon
after  6  o'clock  a  very  severe  epileptic  fit  came  on ;  her  struggles
and  convulsions  were  frightful ;  she  would,  in  a  moment,  jump
from  the  reclining  position,  and  stand  on  her  toes  in  that
posture,  become  rigid,  then  fall  away  relaxed,  and  remain


522  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  ^c,

almost  inanimate.  Shortly  after  the  commenc6ment  of  the
fit^  Mr.  Parker  opened  a  vein  in  her  left  arm^  and^  although
the  orifice  was  large,  scarcely  any  blood  flowed,  and  what  did
come  was  more  like  treacle  than  ordinary  blood :  another
vein  in  the  same  arm  was  opened,  and  the  hand  placed  in  hot
water,  &c.,  but  not  more  than  half  a  pint  of  blood  could  be
obtained ;  the  other  arm  was  then  tried,  with,  for  some  time>
no  greater  success;  at  last,  the  blood  changed  colour  and
flowed  more  freely.  Still  the  fits  returned,  at  very  short  in-
tervals, for  nearly  six  hours.  At  three  different  times,  Mr.
Parker,  the  nurse,  and  myself,  all  thought  her  dying ;  and
at  one  moment  we  feared  she  had  ceased  to  exist.  The  dis-
turbance about  the  head  and  lungs  was  frightful.  Passes
over  both  afforded  relief.  I  had  during  the  whole  of  this
time  continued  to  mesmerise  her,  and  kept  one  hand  well
wetted  with  cold  water  on  her  forehead  when  her  struggles
would  admit.  At  12  o'clock  I  saw  her  lips  move;  she  said^
"  I  am  better  now ;  I  am  only  a  little  faint ;  I  shall  be  better
directly .''  She  then  took  a  cup  of  coffee,  remained  partially
faint  for  some  time,  but  quite  collected.  At  a  little  after
1  o'clock  I  aroused  her,  and  she  seemed  better  than  could
possibly  be  expected.

Jan.  2nd.  Very  sore  from  the  effects  of  the  fit ;  mesmer-
ised into  sleep-waking  in  two  minutes,  when  she  said,  "  I  told
you  I  should  be  very  ill  yesterday ;  you  see  I  was  right ;  /
shaU  not  fiave  another  fit  untU  the  9th  of  June  in  the  evening.
unless  I  am  greatly  excited  or  frightened.  I  must,  if  they
wish  me  to  get  better,  be  bled  every  Thursday  for  five  tveeks;
it  will  weaken  me,  but  I  shall  regain  my  appetite,  and  be
able  to  take  solids  :"  this  she  had  not  done  for  a  long  time.

Jan.  3rd.  Suffering  from  slight  head-ache ;  mesmerised
two  hours  and  a  half,  during  which  she  took  coffee  and  plain
cake ;  on  arousing  the  head-ache  had  vanished.

Jan.  4th.  A  little  confused,  but  not  delirious ;  mesmerised
three  hours.  During  her  sleep-waking  she  took  coffee  and  a
small  quantity  of  animal  food  for  the  first  time  for  many
weeks.  She  said,  "  I  should  have  been  better  if  they  had
taken  more  blood  on  the  first  of  the  month ;  it  would  have
drawn  off  more  of  the  black  blood  from  the  vessels  about
the  brain.  I  shall,  after  my  next  bleeding,  if  Mr.  (Luxmoore)
(it  must  be  remembered  that  she  does  not  know  me  in  her
sleep-waking)  puts  me  to  sleep,  be  able  to  eat  a  mutton-chop
for  supper.

Jan.  5th.  Better ;  had  two  hours  natural  sleep  during  the
night,  and  retained  her  breakfast.  During  sleep-waking,
which  continued  two  hours  and  a  half,  she  said,  *'  The  first
thing  that  injured  me  was  being  salivated. I  ought  not  to  have


by  Mr,  Luxmaore.  523

had  any  mercury.  My  then  medical  attendant  also  gave  me  a
solution  of  arsenic,  which  I  took  until  my  mouth  was  all  over
black  spots ;  it  created  inflammation  in  the  stomach,  which  has
never  subsided"^

Jan.  6th.  Looking  better;  mesmerised  one  hour  and
three  quarters ;  says^  "  A  cup  of  coffee  should  be  given  me
after  bleeding ;  I  will  tell  you  more  on  Friday  (Jan.  9.)'^  No
tic  for  some  dajrs.

Jan.  7th. Still  better ;  mesmerised  two  hours.

Jan.  8th.  Not  quite  so  well ;  was  bled  as  directed ;  then
mesmerised  more  than  two  hours^  and  on  arousing  felt  better.

Jan.  9th.  Soon  after  she  got  into  sleep-wakings  she  said,
'^ How  beautiful !  /  see  all  my  inside"  She  described  the
structure  of  her  foot,  and  then  went  through  many  other  por-
tions of  her  body  with  fin  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Parker,  who  was
present)  great  accuracy.

Jan.  lOth.  Mesmerised  one  hour  and  a  half,  and  aroused
spontaneously ;  says,  '^  Mesmerism  may  be  omitted  on  Sunday
without  injury.

'  Jan.  12th.  Side  (uterus)  very  painful;  has  a  headache  of
the  description  which  in  her  case  is  usually  followed  by  a  fit ;
soothing  mesmeric  passes  relieved  her  much.  Aroused  at  the
end  of  three  hours  by  my  silently  willing  her  to  be  so.  In  her
sleep  to-day  she  described  a  sort  of  coating  over  the  inside  of
her  stomach.

Jan.  13th.  Side  easy  for  some  hours  after  I  left  yesterday^
but  the  pain  has  since  returned.  Mesmeric  passes  again  gave
relief.  After  she  had  been  in  sleep-waking  some  time,  she,
quite  contrary  to  her  usual  custom,  became  violent,  attempt-
ing to  strike  me :  /  placed  my  finger  on  Benevolence  and  sub-

•  The  effects  OD  the  mouth  and  skin  (p.  518)  were  such  as  slowpoisoninc^  by
arsenic  sometimes  produces.  It  also  causes  inflammation  of  the  eyes  and  sto-
mach. In  a  Clinical  Lecture  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  reported  in  the  Lanc$t  for  May
6, 1832,  he  detailed  the  very  slow  poisoning  of  a  family  near  Chelsea  by  arse-
nic, one  having  died  before  he  was  called  in,  and  nobody  could  guess  why.  He
immediately  suspected  arsenic  was  the  cause  of  the  watery  eyes,  vomiting,
and  quickness  of  pulse.  On  a  diligent  search,  colours  containing  arsenic  and
copper  were  found  in  large  quantities  buried  in  the  damp  kitchen  and  garden
surrounding  the  house,  left  by  the  previous  occupier.  As  water  had  free
access  to  the  arsenite  of  copper,  an  eminent  chemist  had  no  doubt  thatarseni-
uretted  hydrogen  had  been  formed  and  had  vitiated  the  air  of  the  house.  They
all  recovered  by  bleeding.  After  arsenic  twaUowed  has  been  apparently  all
removed  from  the  stomach,  inflammation  may  remain  in  the  organ.  A  case  of
the  kind  is  recorded  by  Dr.  Roget  in  the  Transactions  of  ike  Med.  and  Chir.
Societjf  (vol.  ii.),  where  bleeding  and  other  anti-inflammatory  means  were
requisite  to  the  cure,  though  stimulants  also  were  required.  Conformable
to  all  that  we  observe  of  the  symptoms  and  to  all  we  know  of  appropriate
ultimate  treatment  in  poisoning  by  arsenic  is  the  present  wonderful  narra-
tive. Dr.  Elliotson  mentions  a  lady  who  had  spasm,  &c.,  of  her  stomach
and  pains  of  her  limbe  for  years  after  swallowing  arsenic. — Zoitt.


524  Ca»e  of  EpUeptic  and  other  Fits,  ^.,

dued  her,  but,  on  my  ceasing  to  act  on  that  orgmt,  her  aingry
feelinga  returned :  I  at  last  discovered  that  a  kerctd^she  wears
over  her  ears  had  slipped,  and  was  pressing  on  Destructiveness;
on  removing  it,  all  anger  ceased.  Her  left  hand  was,  as  usual
during  the  first  part  of  her  sleep,  contracted,  and  I  proceeded
to  release  it  by  blowing,  passes,  &c.,  when  she  said,  *^  If  you
place  your  fingers  just  by  the  side  of  Veneration,  and  draw
them  down  the  arm  and  beyond  the  fingers  two  or  three
times,  you  will  get  rid  of  the  contraction  much  better/'  This
proved  to  be  true,  but  in  most  cases  the  contrary  would  have
been  the  effect.

Jan.  14th.  Mesmerised  three  hours;  side  again  relieved
by  passes.

Jan.  15th.  Bled  as  directed ;  mesmerised  about  two  hours ;
aroused  refreshed.

Jan.  16th.  Better.  In  sleep-waking,  which  lasted  two
hours  and  a  half,  she  said,  "  The  black  blood  on  the  top  of
the  head  is  much  reduced  by  last  night's  bleeding.''  Appe-
tite tolerable,  and  she  retains  most  of  her  food. No  tic.

Jan.  17th.  Mesmerised  three  hours  and  forty  minutes;
breathing  difficult;  passes  with  the  flat  hand  gave  ease  to  the
lungs.  Breathing  over  the  chest  made  her  start,  and  gave
the  sensation  of  electric  sparks.  Had  two  hours  natural  sleep
during  the  previous  night.

Jan.  19th.  Has  again  had  two  hours  natural  sleep,  and
seems  better  than  I  have  ever  seen  her;  breathing  much
easier.  I  breathed  over  her  lungs,  then  on  my  own  fingers,
and  passed  them  (touching  the  dress)  from  the  top  of  the
shoulder,  over  the  lung,  and  off  by  the  waist.  This  pro-
duced  in  her  the  sensation  of  electricity,  following  my  fingers,
and  passing  off  like  sparks  as  they  left  her  body.  Her  hand
also  on  the  same  side  became  as  it  were  electrified,  so  that
the  tips  of  her  fingers  touching  any  part  of  her  body  or
mine  caused  the  feeling  of  sparks  having  been  drawn  through
them.

Jan.  22nd.  Has  thrown  no  food  from  her  stomach  for  ten
days.  Is  suffering  from  a  slight  cold,  with  difficulty  of
breathing.  Bled  as  directed.  Mesmerised,  and  was  better
on  arousing. Electric  phenomena  as  on  Monday  (19th.)

Jan.  23rd.  General  health  better,  but  side  painful.  Soon
after  sleep-waking  was  produced,  she  made  signs  that  her
jaw  was  locked ;  upon  which  I  enquired  how  I  could  relieve
it ;  she  took  my  hand  and  made  passes  from  the  ear  to  the
mouth,  which  soon  had  the  desired  effect.

Jan.  24th.  Side  still  painful,  otherwise  better ;  appetite
good,  and  retains  most  of  her  food ;  mesmerised,  and  said


by  Mr.  Luannoare.  526

the  next  two  bleedinffs  tatnUd  much  k$$en  the  black  blood  on  the
brain.

Jan.  26tli.  Annoying  drcumstanoes  caused  a  headache.
Mesmerised^  and  was  better  on  arousing.

Jan.  27th.  Mesmerised  two  hours^  side  and  head  still
painful ;  says  the  tumor  in  the  former  trill  be  relieved  by  a  die-'
charge  within  ttoenty-four  hours.

Jan.  29th.  Side  has  discharged.  Bled  as  directed.  Mes-
merised two  hours^  and  awoke  very  comfortable.

Jan.  Slst. Better. Mesmerised  two  hours  and  a  half.

Feb.  2nd.  Slight  headache.  Mesmerised^  and  said  she
would  give  further  directions  as  to  her  treatment  after  bleeding
on  Thursday.  (Feb.  5.)

Feb.  6th.  Has  suffered  from  rheumatism  since  Monday.
Bled,  and  then  put  to  sleep.  I  rendered  her  limbs  rigid,
and  on  relaxing  them  the  rheumatic  pains  had  left.  She,  as
promised,  now  gave  further  directions  as  to  her  treatment,
saying,  "  I  must  not  be  bled  again  for  a  month  or  three  weeks
at  the  earliest,  unless  I  have  a  fit.  The  coating  in  my  stomach,
which  I  mentioned  in  January,  is  rather  loosened;  my  food
should  be  nourishing.  If  this  treatment  is  followed,  I  shall  be
sometimes  better  and  sometimes  worse  until  the  9M  of  June,
when  IshaU  have  a  bad  fit;  but,  \f  proper  precautions  be  taken,
I  shall  recover.  I  shall  from  time  to  time  give  directions  as  to
my  treatment.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  I  shall  live  until  the  9th
of  June,  but,  if  I  do,  what  I  have  named  will  take  place :  l\fe
and  death  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Almighty**

Feb.  7th.  Rheumatism  has  not  returned,  but  she  again
rejects  most  of  her  food. Mesmerised  three  hours.

Feb.  9th.  Mesmerised  two  hours  and  a  quarter.  Appetite
indifferent.

Feb.  12th.  Better,  but  appetite  bad,  and  she  retains  but
little  food,  though  apparently  gaining  strength.

Feb.  14th.  Was  much  frightened  last  night  by  two
drunken  men  entering  her  garden  and  knocking  at  her  door;
this  produced  violent  palpitation,  and  shortly  her  legs  and  feet
began  to  swell,  assuming  a  dropsical  appearance.  Mesmerised.

Feb.  27th.  Absence  from  home  has  prevented  my  mes-
merising her  since  the  14th  instant.  She  has  suffered
slightly  from  tic,  but  nothing  like  she  did  before  being  mes^
merised ;  legs  still  swollen.  During  her  sleep- waking  to-day
she  suffered  from  rigidity  and  locked  jaw,  which  required
some  perseverance  to  overcome.  She  said,  ''  /  have  lost  some
ground  from  being  so  long  without  mesmerism.**  She  still
vomits  her  food,  and  says  she  shall  continue  to  do  so  until  the
coating  is  removed  from  the  stomach.


526  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  ^c.,

Feb.  28th.  Mesmerised  three  hours ;  at  first  she  suffered
from  lock-jaw  and  rigidity,  which  were  soon  overcome.  She
directed  that  small  quantities  of  laudanum  should  be  applied  to
the  stomach  externally ,  and  added,  "  I  shall  be  much  weaker
yet,  and  on  the  7th  of  March  delirious,  and  should  be  mes-
merised from  6  /o  8  o^lock"  I  to-day  rendered  the  ankles
and  legs  rigid  several  times^  and  this  reduced  the  swelling.

March  2nd.  Excessive  debility.  Mesmerised  into  sleep-
waking  ;  soon  after  which  she  had  a  most  violent  spasm  about
the  hearty  which  seemed  to  threaten  life.  After  it  had  ceased,
she  said,  "  I  shall  have  another  attack  in  about  ten  minutes,
and  another  between  7  and  8  in  the  evemng.  The  former  took
pUwe,  and  at  the  end  of  four  hours  I  aroused  her,  when  she
was  perfectly  unconscious  of  all  that  she  had  suffered.  At
half-past  6  p.m.,  I  found  her  rather  delirious,  but  soon  got
her  into  sleep-waking,  when  she  told  me  the  attack  would  last
on  and  off  for  an  hour.  This  proved  correct.  The  spasms  were
terrific;  her  screams  might  have  been  heard  a  long  way  off.
The  violence  of  the  attack  on  the  7th  will,  she  says,  commence
about  6  o'clock  p.m. ;  it  wUl  be  useless  for  me  to  persevere  in
mesmerising  her  for  more  than  three  hours  that  night.  The
swelling  of  the  legs  has  subsided,  but  the  water  is  gone  into
her  chest.  This,  I  fear,  was  caused  by  my  driving  it  from
the  feet  and  legs.  The  dropsical  manifestations  were,  she
thinks,  produced  by  the  fright  on  the  14th  of  February,
causing  interruption  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood.

March  3rd.  Rather  more  comfortable,  having  had  some
natural  sleep  during  the  night.  Mesmerised  four  hours,  and
suffered  from  slight  spasms.

March  4th.  Much  better,  but  has  felt  a  little  tic.  Mes-
merised three  hours,  and  said,  ''/  shall  throw  a  quart  or
three  pints  of  water  from  my  stomach  within  forty -eight  hours,
which  will  relieve  the  chest.  I  am  in  a  very  weak  state,  but  on
the  7  th  they  must  not  be  afraid  to  follow  my  directions,  which
will  prove  bendicial.  I  shall  be  in  a  high  state  of  delirium
from  inflammation  on  the  brain,  resulting  partly  from  over
anxiety  and  partly  from  want  of  free  circulation.  They  should
take  a  small  quantity  of  blood  from  the  temporal  artery,  but,
if  this  cannot  be  done,  more  must  be  taken  from  the  arm :
then  rub  the  chest  with  laudanum,  and  apply  mustard  plasters
to  it  and  the  feet.  If  they  follow  these  directions,  whatever  I
take  on  Saturday  night  and  Sunday  urill  remain  on  the  stomach.
On  Saturday  after  bleeding  I  may  have  a  wine-glass  of  sherry,
given  in  small  quantities  at  a  time ;  arrow  root  will  be  goodfrr
me.  I  should  be  mesmerised  at  6  p.m.,  and  bled  as  soon  as  I
am  asleep ;"  (she  often  talks  of  being  put  to  sleep,  but  never


by  Mr.  Luxmoore.  527

admits  that  she  is  so  when  mesmerised.)  ''Ze/  tne  be  kept  as
much  under  mesmeriem  as  possible  for  three  hours ;  I  should
also  have  a  dose  of  morphine  equal  to  twelve  drops  of  laudanum,
I  shall  then  have  a  better  night  than  for  some  time,  I  may
have  a  wine-glass  of  sherry  on  Sunday. Pat  no  attention

TO  ANT  DIRECTIONS  I  GIVE  RESPECTING  MTSBLF  ON  SaTURDAT

(March  7.) After  Sunday  I  shall  again  refect  my  food!^

March  6th.  Yesterday  she  vomited  nearly  two  quarts  of
water,  which  much  relieved  the  chest.  Mesmerised;  says^
''  The  tumor  in  my  side  (uterus)  will  discharge  on  Thursday  or
Friday.  I  shall  be  very  weak,  but  better  on  the  14ih.  The
day  before,  on  the  same  morning  I  vomit  the  coating  from  my
stomach,  I  shall  eject  a  little  blood.

March  7th.  Mr.  Parker  and  I  visited  her  rather  before
6  o'clock  p.m. ;  she  was  in  a  high  state  of  delirium,  declaring
she  would  destroy  herself.  I  placed  her  on  the  sofa  and  com-
menced mesmerising  her^  but  was  obliged  to  put  my  finger
on  Benevolence  before  she  would  allow  me  to  proceed.  Until
I  resorted  to  this  expedient^  she  attempted  to  strike  and
bite  me.  I  could  not  get  her  into  sleep  :  still  mesmerism  had
a  very  soothing  effect^  and  she  was  sufficiently  under  its
influence  to  object  to  the  touch  of  any  one  but  her  mesmer-
iser.  Mr.  Parker  attempted  to  open  the  temporal  artery,
but,  owing  to  its  being  in  her  case  very  deeply  seated,  he  did
not  succeed ;  she  was  therefore  bled  from  the  arm.  All  her
other  directions,  with  one  exception,  that  of  washing  the
chest  with  laudanum,  which  was  quite  unintentionally  omitted,
were  strictly  attended  to.

March  8th.  Found  Mrs.  Bird  in  a  sort  of  quiet  delirium,
and  was  informed  that,  during  the  night  and  since  she  arose,
she  had  been  constantly  falling  asleep  and  starting  up  again.
She  was  soon  mesmerised  into  sleep-waking,  and  the  delirium
passed  ofi^.  She  said,  '^  It  is  a  pity  they  forgot  the  laudanum,
but  it  is  no  wonder,  they  had  so  many  difficulties  to  contend
with.  I  should  have  had  a  better  night,  but  as  it  is  I  shall
be  weaker  for  it  all  the  week.  The  morphine  would  have
quieted  the  internal  nerves,  and  the  laudanum  the  external
ones;  but,  the  latter  being  omitted,  I  felt  sleepy,  but  was
continually  disturbed.  On  the  I2th,  in  the  morning,  I  shall
be  very  faint ;  I  shall  throw  from  my  stomach  more  than  a
quart  of  water.  There  will  be  no  delirium  after  to-morrow,
8  o'clock,  until  the  20th,  and  then  it  will  not  be  much.  On
Saturday  I  wUl  give  you  further  directions.

March  9th.  Just  as  yesterday.  Mesmerised  into  sleep-
waking,  and  the  delirium  ceased.  At  five  minutes  after
S  p.m.  I  aroused  her, quite  free  from  delirium;  but  she


528  CoH  of  EpUeptic  and  other  Fits,  ^c,

thought  it  waa  still  Saturday,  having  lost  the  time  during
which,  in  her  waking  state,  she  had  been  delirious.

March  10th.  Quite  collected ;  side  painful,  breathing  op*
pressed. Mesmerised.

March  11th.  Mesmerised  two  hours  and  a  half;  chest
more  uneasy.

March  12th.  Mesmerised  four  hours ;  feels  faint  and  has
thrown  from  her  stomach  two  quarts  and  half  a  pint  of  water.
During  sleep-waking,  she  said,  '^  /  shail  have  three  very  severe
spasms  about  the  heart  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  J*  They  took
place.  Mrs.  Bird  also  added,  '^  /  shall,  on  the  ^d  of  April,  have
a  very  severe  fit  of  tic,  but  I  will  teU  you  more  about  it  on
Saturday.  If,  when  I  throw  the  coating  from  my  stomach,
Mr.  Parker  wiU  analyze  it,  he  will  find  it  contains  arsenic.*'

March  13th.  7\imor  has  discharged,  and  Mrs.  Bird  has
thrown  nearly  a  pint  and  a  ha^  more  water  from  the  stomach.
Mesmerised,  and  said,  "  I  shall,  in  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,
have  three  severe  spasms  about  the  heart."  They  took  place;
her  screams  and  convulsions  were  frightful.  Mr.  Parker,  who
was  present,  said  he  never  saw  any  more  severe.  After  they
were  over,  she  said,  '^  There's  an  end  of  the  ill  effects  of  my
friend's  forgetting  to  put  laudanum  on  my  chest.''

March  14th.  Mesmerised,  and  seems  better.  During
the  sitting,  she  gave  the  following  directions :  '^  Let  me  have
as  much  mesmerism  as  possible  next  week,  any  time  any
day,  except  on  the  20th,  when  it  should  be  in  the  evening.
/  shall  wander  slightly  on  that  day ;  Saturday  be  exhausted  ^
Sunday  poorly,  but  better;  Monday  stUl  better;  Tuesday  a
severe  head-ache.  The  tic,  on  the  Srd  of  April,  will  com*
mence  at  10  o'clock  a.m.,  and  end  at  8  p.m. ;  from  2  to  3  it
will  be  at  the  worst.  After  the  tic,  siof  violent  spasms;  when
they  are  over,  let  two  teaspooftfids  of  laudanum  be  rubbed  on
the  chest  and  stomach."

March  16th  and  17th.  More  comfortable;  mesmerised
both  days.

March  20th.  Breathing  bad.  Mesmerised,  and  said,
'^  The  water  is  again  collected  on  my  chest.  I  must,  as  much
as  possible,  avoid  the  recumbent  position,  even  at  night,  and
have  some  medicine  to  promote  the  swelling  of  my  feet.  I  was
to  have  been  better  to-morrow,  Sunday  and  Monday,  and  so  I
shall,  except  the  breathing,  which  wiU  be  worse  on  these  days."

March  21st.  Breathing  still  bad.  Mesmerised,  and  said,
"  The  water  in  my  chest  is  increased ;  the  medicine  and  lini-
ment have  been  of  use;  without  them,  the  increase  would
have  been  greater.  Passes  down  the  back  and  chest  will  b^
beneficial." I  followed  her  directions.


by  Mr.  Liupmocnre.  529

March  28rd.  Breathing  very  bad.  Soon  after  she  was
under  the  influence  of  mesmerism^  very  distressing  attacks
of  difficult  breathing  commenced^  threatening  suffocation.  In
the  first  and  second  she  suffered  very  much^  starting  on  her
feet;  in  that  state  became  quite  rigid;  and  in  a  minute  or
two  relaxed^  and  was  left  perfectly  powerless.  She  then  said^
''You  must  keep  me  leaning  forwanl^  or  I  shall  die;  you  must
use  any  force  to  do  it.  I  shall  have  six  more  attacks ;  do  not
fear,  and  I  shall  be  safe!^  The  six  paroxysms  took  place,  and
I  had  to  use  great  pressure  to  prevent  her  rising.  After  this^
she  said,  '^  /  shall  throw  water  from  my  stomach  about  5  o^ clock
to-morrow  morning,  and  more  before  noon.  Mesmerism  will  not
takefuU  effect  on  me,  on  the  3rd  of  April,  until  3  o'clock."

March  23rd.  Threw  about  two  quarts  of  water  from  her
stomach  about  5  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  rather  more  than
apint  at  10.  Mesmerised  into  sleep-waking,  and  said,  "J
shall  throw  more  water  from  my  stomach  before  5  o'clock  this
evening."

March  24th.  A  pint  more  water  was  ejected  after  I  left
yesterday.  Feels  weak,  but  two  hours  and  a  half  mesmeris-
ing much  refreshed  her.

March  25th.  Bather  better,  but  suffers  from  not  being
able  to  lie  down ;  feet  swollen. Mesmerised  four  hours.

March  26th  and  27th.  Looks  better,  but  is  still  weak.
Mesmerised  both  days.

March  28th.  Mesmerised  two  hours  and  a  half;  has  a
watery  rash,  which  in  her  sleep- waking  she  says  is  on  the
inside  of  her  stomach,  as  well  as  on  the  external  parts  of  the
body.

March  29th.  Mesmerised  one  hour  and  three  quarters.
No  water  in  the  chest ;  feet  less  swollen.

March  30th.  Bash  still  bad.  Mesmerised,  and  said,
'^  My  stomach  is  very  much  irritated,  and  the  arsenic  acting
on  the  system  is  poisoning  the  blood,  and  also  the  water  that
is  floating  about  me ;  this  makes  the  rash  so  troublesome.'^

March  31st.  Bash  still  troublesome;  chest  and  stomach
painful. Mesmerised  two  hours.

April  1st.  Mesmerised.  Bash  has  partially  disappeared,
owing  to  a  slight  chill :  says  "  it  will  appear  again  before  the
8rd ;  it  is  now  looking  very  angry  in  the  stomach.^'

April  2nd.  Bash  a  little  more  out ;  slight  tic.  Mesmerised.

April  3rd.  Tic  came  on  this  morning,  in  exact  accordance
with  Mrs.  Bird's  prediction.  No  tongue  can  describe  what
she  appeared  to  suffer.  At  3  o'clock  p.m.  the  tic  ceased,  and
I  got  her  into  sleep^waking.  Previously  to  this,  although  I
hod  been  with  her  a  long  time,  all  my  endeavours  to  produce


580  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  tfc,

sleep  were  unavailing.  At  a  quarter  after  3  the  spasms  com-
menced; the  six  occupied  twenty-five  minutes,  at^  were  very
violent.  After  they  were  over^  she  said^  ''/  shall  get  on  tole-
rably until  the  16th  of  this  month,  when  I  shall  have  either
seven  or  eight  spasms  about  the  head  and  heart ;  they  will  last
nearly  an  hour.  On  the  \6th  I  should  be  under  mesmerism
from  12  to  2  o'clock.  After  this  I  shall  have  a  severe  head*
ache  for  three  days ;  if  it  lasts  to  the  fourth^  I  must  have
aperient  medicine ;  and  if  to  the  fifths  should  be  bled/'  On
arousing  she  was  quite  free  from  tic^  but  her  head  and  face
were  sore  from  the  effects  of  it.

April  4th.  Free  from  tic,  which  much  surprised  her,  and
quite  unconscious  of  haying  suffered  from  spasms.  Mesmer-
ised two  hours.

April  5th.  Mesmerised  one  hour  and  three  quarters,  and
said,  "  There  is  a  little  water  in  my  chest,  the  weather  is
much  against  me,''  (rain  has  fallen  and  there  is  great  damp-
ness in  the  air).  **  On  the  16th,  the  fifth  spasm  will  be  the
worst.  I  fear  Mr.  Luxmoore  will  require  assistance  to  hold
me,  but  no  one  but  himself  must  touch  my  forehead  or  over  my
heart;  it  would  be  dangerous." Chest  mesmerically  electrified.

April  6th.  Mesmerised.  Says,  ''The  water  in  my  chest
is  not  much  increased."  I  made,  by  her  direction,  passes
with  the  flat  hand  from  chest  to  feet :  this  produced  slight
swelling  of  the  feet.  Her  chest  was  again  mesmerically
electrified,  and  she  observed  yellow  fire  follow  the  tips  of  my
fingers.  The  electricity  of  yesterday,  she  says,  prevented  the
breathing  being  as  bad  as  it  otherwise  would  have  been.

April  7th.  Breathing  bad.  Mesmerised,  and  said  the
water  in  the  chest  will  be  thrown  off  on  Saturday  (April  11),  at
5  &  clock.  Chest  again  electrified,  and  she  saw  ribbons  of  fire
pass  through  the  water,  which  they  seemed  to  warm.

April  8th.  Breathing  still  bad ;  was  firightened  again  last
night  by  two  men  entering  her  garden.  Passes  with  the  flat
hand  made  her  feet  swell.

April  9th.  Breathing  bad.  Mesmerised  three  hours  and
a  half;  says,  ''  Whenever  the  coating  is  removed  from  the
stomach,  I  must  have  a  strong  dose  of  aperient  medicine,  to
prevent  any  portion  remaining  in  the  bowels."

April  10th.  Mesmerised  one  hour  and  three  quarters ;
feels  better,  except  the  breathing.

April  11th.  Threw  off  five  pints  of  water  this  morning.
Mesmerised,  and  said,  "  /  shall  throw  off  a  little  more  water
at  5  o'clock  to-morrow."

April  12th.  More  water  having  been  ejected,  the  breath-
ing is  much  better. Mesmerised  one  hour  and  forty  minutes.


by  Mr.  Luxmoore.  531

April  18th.  Breathing  still  better.  Mesmerised,  and  said,
'^  I  fear  I  must  be  bled  on  the  2l8t,  as  the  heacUiche  trill  not
pass  off  tvUhout  U"

April  14th  and  15th.  Slight  spasms  while  asleep,  other-
wise comfortable. Mesmerised  both  days.

April  16th.  Mr.  Parker  and  I  visited  Mrs.  Bird  at  ten
minutes  before  12  o'clock ;  we  found  her  on  the  floor  quite
delirious.  In  less  than  two  minutes  I  mesmerised  her  into
sleep-waking,  and  she  became  sane  and  tractable.  The  spasms
shortly  commenced,  and  increased  in  violence  to  the  fifth,
which  was  truly  frtghtfid;  and  during  which,  she,  notwith-
standing all  my  efforts,  assisted  by  Mr.  Parker,  threw  herself
on  the  floor,  carrying  me  with  her,  and  pulling  oat  her  hair
by  handfuls ;  the  next  two  spasms  were  not  so  bad,  and  the  last
was  very  slight.  Soon  after  the  spasms  had  ceased,  she  said,
"  Between  this  and  the  21st,  mesmerism  must,  on  no  account,
be  omitted  for  twenty-four  hours  together,  and,  on  that  day,
I  should  be  twice  under  its  influence.  /  shall  have  bad
spasms  on  the  1st  of  June.  Soon  after  arousing,  a  severe
head-ache  came  on,  as  she  had  said  would  be  the  case.

April  17th.  Head-ache  continues.  Mesmerised  four  hours;
says  she  shall  have  spasms  daily,  more  or  less,  until  the  9th
of  June.

April  18th.  Head  still  aches.  Mesmerised  two  hours ;
says  there  is  water  in  the  chest.

April  19th.  Head^ache  and  slight  spasms.  Mesmerised,
and  then  said,  "  I  shall  have  rather  a  severe  spasm  while
under  mesmerism  this  evening;  (she  was  correct).  They
must  not  attend  to  any  directions  I  may  give  on  the  21st,
however  plausible  they  may  appear  to  be.  I  should  be  bled
on  that  day  at  12  o'clock,  and  not  aroused  from  mesmerism
until  after  half-past  2.  Persons  subject  to  insanity  should
always  be  mesmerised  by  the  same  operator.  If  I  were  mes-
merised by  any  one  but  Mr.  Luxmoore,  I  should  be  insane
until  the  9th  of  June.  I  shall  be  iU  on  the  2nd  of  May,
and  should  be  mesmerised  in  the  evening.''

April  20th.  Took  a  strong  dose  of  medicine  as  directed.
Mesmerised,  and  said  the  medicine  has  had  the  desired  effect,
in  removing  an  obstruction.

April  21st.  At  11  a.m.,  I  found  Mrs.  Bird  delirious ;  she
had  been  rather  violent.  At  half-past  11,  I  commenced  mes-
merising her ;  in  two  minutes  she  was  iu  sleep- waking,  and  the
delirium  had  almost  ceased ;  she  might  wander  for  a  sentence
or  two,  but  soon  detected  herself.  At  twenty-five  minutes
after  12  she  was  bled,  and  at  the  end  of  four  hours  she
aroused  perfectly  collected,  and  free  from  head-ache. In  the

VOL.  IV.  o  o


632  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  tfc,

evening  I  again  sent  her  to  sleep  for  two  hours,  when  she
said,  '^  I  shall  throw  water  from  my  stomach  on  Saturday.^* '

April  22nd.  Mesmerised,  and  said,  ''  On  the  Ist  of  May
/  shall  throw  a  little  blood  from  my  stomach ;  on  the  2nd,  I
shall  be  very  ill,  particularly  towards  evening;  on  the  drd,
I  shall  throw  up  soinething  gritty,  it  will  contain  part  of  the
coating  of  the  stomach  I  have  before  spoken  of.  Immediately
after  I  have  thrown  up  the  gritty  substance,  I  must  have  a
dose  of  the  same  sort  of  medicine  I  had  on  the  20th  of  the
month.  I  shall  throw  off  three  pints  of  water  on  Saturday
newt  {25thJ,  at  five  minutes  before  6  in  the  morning.  After  the
3rd  of  May,  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  recline.^^  She  has  not  been
able  to  lie  down  night  nor  day  since  the  20/A  of  March.

April  23rd.  Mesmerised  two  hours  and  a  half;  had  one
bad  spasm.

April  24th.  Suffering  from  great  nausea,  and  is  very
weak.  Mesmerised,  had  a  bad  spasm,  and  the  nausea  pro-
duced retching.  She  said,  ^*  The  coating  is  almost  aU  fallen
from  the  stomach,  but  still  it  will  not  be  got  rid  of  until  the
3rd  of  May.  If  I  am  under  mesmerism  to-morrow  between
3  and  4  in  the  afternoon,  I  shall  be  able  to  give  better  direc-
tions about  the  9th  of  June  than  at  any  other  time.

April  25th.  Water  vomited  this  morning,  and  she  feels
very  languid.  Mesmerised  in  the  morning,  and  again  in
the  afternoon,  when  she  gave  the  following  directions  for
the  1st  and  9th  of  June.  '^  On  the  \st  of  June  the  spasms
will  commence  at  3  p.m.,  and  be  over  by  4 ;  mustard  should
be  applied  to  the  extremities  for  twenty  or  thirty  minutes.
To  be  mesmerised  at  2,  and  aroused  at  5  o'clock.  On  the
9th,  at  10  in  the  morning,  I  shall  be  delirious;  but  there
will  be  no  danger  of  my  injuring  myself  until  10  p.m.
No  cold  water  must  be  applied  to  the  head  on  account  of
tic.  After  10  at  night,  violent  spasms  of  the  head  and  heart,
which  will  continue  until  12  o'clock.  Head  and  heart  to
be  held  by  Mr.  Luxmoore.  From  12  to  2  violent  tic ;  during
which  let  me  have  hot  cloths  to  my  face.  From  2  to
4,  a  fit  in  great  violence ;  I  should  be  bled  as  soon  after  3  as
the  struggles  will  allow.  K  possible,  open  both  temporal
arteries ;  if  not,  bleed  from  both  arms.  If  one  temporal  ar-
tery is  opened,  and  not  the  other,  bleed  from  the  opposite
arm.  I  must  be  bled  until  I  yawn,  and  have  coffee  soon
after ;  then  two  teaspoonfuls  of  laudanum  to  be  applied  round
the  temples,  face,  and  chest.  From  4  to  6,  spasms,  and  the
effects  of  previous  suffering ;  during  which,  mustard  plasters
must  be  had  recourse  to,  and  kept  up  for  twenty-five  minutes;
I  shall  then  get  into  a  sort  of  half-stupor  until  9  o'clock.


by  Mr.  Lwemoore.  533

4ft^  ihis,  mesmerism  will  be  deeper  than  it  ever  has  been  in
my  case,  I  shall  know  Mr.  Luxmoore,  and  also  shall  be  asleep ;
(she  does  not  now  consider  herself  asleep  when  mesmerised).
I  must  not  be  allowed  to  put  mj  foot  to  the  ground  this  day,
nor  the  next.  I  may  be  aroused  at  10  o^clock,  but  should  be
under  mesmerism  again  in  two  hours/'

April  26th.  Has  unfortunately  given  her  head  a  blow,  which
caused  a  head-ache.  Mesmerised  three  hoars  and  a  quarter.

April  27th.  Tolerable  in  the  morning,  but  during  the  day
circumstances  occurred  causing  a  misunderstanding  betwixt
Mrs.  Bird  and  the  person  for  whom  she,  in  her  sleep-waking,
mistakes  me ;  this  caused  her  very  great  distress  of  mind ;
and  as  soon  as  I  mesmerised  her  into  sleep-waking,  she  be-
came very  uncomfortable  at  having  the  person  she  mistook
me  for  with  her.  I  took  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  quiet  her,
but  all  to  no  purpose  ,*  so  I  thought  it  best  to  arouse  her,  and
in  her  waking  state  assured  her  that  if  she  thought  any  one
was  near,  or  would  approach  her,  except  Mr.  Parker  and  my-
self, it  must  be  a  delusion,  and  I  begged  her  to  keep  this  idea
strongly  impressed  on  her  mind  while  passing  into  mesmerism.
I  had  however  to  arouse  her  several  times  before  I  could  suc-
ceed in  making  her  know  me  in  her  sleep-waking;  when
however  this  was  accomplished,  she  became  reconciled,  and
said  she  must  be  bled  immediately,  or  she  should  be  insane
for  lifsj  which  would  not,  in  that  case,  last  more  than  a  fort-
night. She  was  bled,  and  then  felt  better.

April  28th.  Very  ill  and  depressed ;  but  during  sleep-
waking  she  said,  "  With  due  care  you  will  yet  save  me.*''
Mesmerised  twice,  and  knows  me  in  her  sleep-waking.

April  29th.  Mesmerised  in  the  morning,  when  she  said,
"  If  you  wish  to  save  me,  you  must  be  with  me  from  half-
past  8  to  half-past  9  this  evening;  it  will  be  a  struggle  be^
tween  life  and  deathJ*  I  sent  her  to  sleep  at  7  p.m. ;  soon
after  which  a  spasm  came  on,  and  she  was  very  Ul.  I  kept
her  asleep  until  10  o'clock.

April  30th.  Mesmerised  in  the  evening,  and  was  very
comfortable  during  the  first  part  of  the  sitting,  but  ultimately
became  faint,  owing  (as  she  said)  to  the  contents  of  the  sto-
mach beginning  to  ferment.  She  also  directed  hot  jars  to  be
placed  at  her  feet,  and  sal  volatile,  tuH)  parts  water  and  one
part  spirit,  to  be  taken  at  12  o'clock  to-night,  5  to-morrow
morning,  12  at  noon,  and  5  in  the  afternoon ;  and  a  hot  jar
to  be  placed  at  her  side.

May  1st.  Mesmerised  three  hours;  said,  ''I  shall  be
ill  this  evening ;  keep  me  asleep  as  late  as  you  conveniently
can  to-morrow  evening." Mesmerised  again  in  the  evening ;

o  o  2


5S4  due  of  Epilepiic  and  other  Pits,  ifc,

$he  was  deUrions,  and  remained  so  for  an  hamr;  then  became
collected^  and  directed  sal  volatile,  of  the  same  strength  as
before,  between  5  and  6  o'clock  to-morrow  morning.  She
now  suffered  horribly  in  the  calves  of  her  legs  and  stomach ;
the  pain  could  scarcely  be  endnred.  She  has  vomiied  a  little
blood.  On  eating  salt  or  salt  meat  she  experiences  garhe
eructations.  All  this,  and  the  rash  she  has  suffered  firom,
are^  I  understand,  indications  of  the  presence  of  arsenic.

May  2nd«  Bather  wandering.  Mesmerised,  soon  became
collected,  and  said,  ^'  My  blood  is  fermenting,  as  if  I  were  in
a  state  of  salivation.  The  reason  I  have  heeu  obliged  to  be
so  often  bled,  is  owing  to  the  medicine  I  formerly  took.''
Mesmerised  again  in  the  evening,  and  Mrs.  Bird's  sufferings
in  the  legs,  head,  stomach,  back,  chest  and  arms,  were  per--
fectly  dreadful ;  three  times  did  she  fall  into  such  a  paroxysm,
as  Mr.  Parker,  who  was  present,  said  he  never  saw  a  person
recover  from;  her  gasping  for  breath  cannot  be  described.
After  a  time  she  became  easy,  and  on  arousins  was  uncon-
Knoas  of  anything  extraordink;7  having  taken  place.

May  3rd.  Mr.  Parker  and  I  called  on  Mrs.  Bird  between
1  and  2  o'clock  p.m.,  and  found  she  had  thrown  from  her
stomach  a  quantity  of  a  gritty  substance,  in  a  little  bloody
water,  at  6  a.m. ;  on  applying  the  established  tests,  the
presence  of  arsenic  was  indicated.  She  had  taken  the  ape-
rient medicine  as  directed.  Mesmerised  in  the  evening
for  two  hours,  and,  with  the  exception  of  great  weakness,
was  much  more  comfortable.  She  said,  ''I  must  not  be
allowed  to  fall  into  what  I  call  sleep,  during  mesmerism  for
some  time,  (this  is  a  drowsy  stupor,  quite  distinct  from  mes-
meric sleep,  both  body  and  mind  are  in  a  state  of  listless  in-
activity,) or  I  shall  awake  an  idiot."

May  4th.  Much  easier ;  continues  to  take  sal  volatile  of
the  same  strength  ;  says  the  system  is  so  paralyzed,  that  if  it
were  weaker  it  would  have  no  effect.  Mesmerised  two  hours.
In  the  evening  I  found  Mrs.  Bird  delirious,  but  soon  got  her
into  sane  sleep-waking;  when  she  said,  ''It  is  lucky  yon
came  to-night,  or  I  should  have  been  raving  mad  by  the
morning.  I  did  not  tell  you  of  it,  as  I  could  not  endure  the
notion  of  encroaching  so  much  on  your  time ;  but  I  see  I  was
wrong,  and  will  never  again  withhold  any  directions  I  con-
sider beneficial.  To-morrow  you  should  be  with  me  from  8
to  9  in  the  evening.  I  shall  have  three  severe  spasms  between
12  /o  1  01^ clock  to-morrow;  if  I  were  mesmerised,  it  would  be
better."

May  5th.  Mesmerised  two  hours;  had  the  three  spasms.
In  the  evening  found  Mrs.  Bird  delirious ;  mesmerised  from


by  Mr.  Luxmoore,  535

half-past  6  to  10  o'clock  p.in. ;  80on  got  her  into  siccp-waking.
She  said^  **  I  could  not  have  livedo  if  Mr.  Parker  had  not  bled
me  80  often/'

May  6th. Quite  collected ;  mesmerised  twice.

May  7th.  Oreat  tendency  to  the  stupor ;  mesmerised  two
hours  and  twenty  minutes  in  the  mornings  and  again  in  the
evening.

May  8th.  Very  weak.  Mesmerised  two  hours  and  a
quarter^  and  said^  '*  Very  shortly  after  I  am  mesmerised  this
evening  I  shall  cough^  and  shall  wipe  some  more  of  the  gritty
substance  from  my  mouth.  I  shall  have  a  spasm  between  7
and  8  o'clock  this  evening,  and  should  have  one  ounce  of
Epsom  salts  with  a  little  peppermint  between  4  and  5  to-
morrow morning.  I  shall  have  spasms  all  Monday"  In  the
evening  I  again  visited  Mrs.  Bird^  and^  after  having  talked  to
her  a  little  time^  sent  her  into  sleep-wakings  when  she  soon
coughed,  and  I  wiped  from  her  mouth  a  gritty  substance,  pre-
cisely similar  to  that  she  had  vomited  on  the  3rd ;  this  did
not  go  otU  of  my  sight  until  I  delivered  it  to  Mr.  Parker,  who,
on  testing,  found  it  contained  arsenic.  Had  a  very  bad
spasm  between  7  and  8  o'clock.

May  9th.  Tolerably  comfortable,  but  weak,  and  had  a
little  impediment  in  speaking.  Mesmerised  twice ;  said,  ''  I
shall  be  very  ill  Monday  and  Tuesday  (11th  and  12th),  and
have  spasms  between  7  and  8  p.m.  on  the  latter  day.  I  shall
be  very  faint. '^

May  10th.  Mesmerised,  and  said,  ''I  should  be  mesmer-
ised to-morrow  from  10  to  12,  3  to  4,  and  7  to  8  o'clock.  On
Tuesday,  from  10  to  12,  and  6  to  half-past  8.  When  I  faint,
rub  camphorated  spirits  into  the  upper  part  of  each  side  of
my  windpipe, — it  will  recover  me  sooner  than  anything  else  :
this  will  be  found  beneficial  in  all  cases  of  fainting.  /  shall
be  very  ill  on  the  Srd  of  July,  but  it  will  not  be  a  fit.  If  not
mesmerised,  I  shall  not  recover."

May  11th.  In  the  morning  was  tolerable,  except  the  ten-
dency  to  faint,  which  however  was  overcome  by  strictly  folloto^
ing  her  directions.  Mesmerised  two  hours.  In  the  afternoon
I  found  Mrs.  Bird  much  depressed;  a  distressing  message
had  been  delivered  to  her.  Mesmerised,  and  for  a  time  she
was  just  as  she  had  predicted ;  but  afterwards  became  raving
mad.  I  sent  for  Mr.  Parker,  who  applied  mustard  to  the
ankles ;  but  with  this  assistance,  and  all  the  mesmeric  means
I  could  think  of,  it  took  two  or  three  hours  to  get  her  toler-
ably calm;  when  she  exclaimed,  '^You  have  overcome  me
again;  if  you  wish  to  save  my  life,  bleed  me;  do  not  be
afraid." This  was  done,  and  before  11  o'clock  we  left  her


536  Case  of  EpUepiic  and  other  Fits,  ifc.^

perfectly  sane.  She  also  said  during  sleep-wakings  "  I  may
lie  down  to-night/'  This  she  has  not  been  able  to  do,  night
nor  day,  since  the  20th  of  March,

May  12th.  Better  than  could  be  expected.  Mesmerised
in  the  morning  three  hours  and  a  half;  said^  ^'The  spasm
will,  owing  to  my  being  bled  last  evening,  come  on  between
3  and  4,  instead  of  between  7  and  8  o'clock,  as  I  before
stated,  but  it  will  not  be  so  severe.  /  shall  wander  on  the
15th,  between  3  and  5  o'clock.  Mesmerised  again  in  the
afternoon  for  two  hours;  at  a  quarter  after  3  o'clock  the
spasm  came  on ;  after  which  she  said,  "  I  must  be  bled  again
on  the  18th.  I  shaU,  from  4  /o  9  in  the  evening,  be  as  raving
as  I  was  yesterday :  I  should  be  bled  at  a  quarter  after  8.  I
shall  then  be  tolerable  until  the  23rd ;  after  which,  I  shall
be  able  to  give  no  directions  about  anything  until  the  9th  of
June.  On  the  21  st,  I  will  give  you  all  the  necessary  direc-
tions until  the  9th.  Between  the  1st  and  the  9th  of  June  my
speech  will  be  very  bad."

May  13th.  Feels  better.  Mesmerised  twice,  two  hours
each  time.

May  14th.  Tolerably  comfortable.  Mesmerised  two  hours
in  the  morning,  and  the  same  time  in  the  evening;  said,
*'  To-morrow  I  shall  wander  slightly,  and  should  be  under
mesmerism  from  half-past  11  to  half-past  12  o'clock,  and
again  in  the  evening."

May  15th.  Mesmerised,  and  said,  "  I  threw  off  two
mouthfuls  of  blood  from  the  lungs  this  morning ;  the  right
lung  is  very  bad,  not  only  shrivelled,  but  in  spots  much  in-
flamed. /  shall  have  a  struggle  to-night,  soon  after  I  am  mes^
merised.  (This  proved  correct. J  If  I  were  not  mesmerised
it  would  take  place  at  1  in  the  morning,  and  then  I  should
be  violent.  To-morrow  I  must  be  mesmerised  from  10  to  1,
and  again  in  the  evening.  I  shall  have  a  spasm  about  7  p.m**
Slept  three  hours  in  the  morning,  and  two  in  the  evening.
Wandered  slightly  during  the  day.

May  16th.  Has  a  slight  cold.  Mesmerised,  and  said,  "  I
am  rather  out  of  order  from  the  cold ;  my  right  lung  is  still
inflamed,  and  will  be  more  so.  Mesmerised  persons  are  elec-
trified in  a  high  degree ;  they  should  never  sleep  on  iron  bed-
steads, or  spring  mattresses."  Mesmerised  again  in  the
evening,  and  the  spasm  was  violent  about  7  o'clock.

May  18th.  Found  Mrs.  Bird  tolerably  free  from  delirium^
but  was  told  she  Jtad  wandered  a  little  before  I  arrived.  Mes-
merised two  hours  and  a  half.  At  ten  minutes  before  4  p.m.
Mr.  Parker  and  I  found  Mrs.  Bird  delirious.  Mesmerised,
and  retched  violently,  but  soon  became  collected,  and  said  a


dy  Mr.  Luxmoore,  537

mustard  emetic  would  relieve  her  stomach.  It  was  adminis-
tered^ but  a  second  was  resorted  to  before  the  desired  effect
was  sufficiently  produced.  She  now  discovered  that  there  was
a  small  portion  of  the  gritty  substance  still  remaining  in  her
stomach,  which  would  be  thrown  off  within  three  days.  She
after  some  time  (as  she  had  predicted)  became  raving  mad;
screaming,  singing,  and  laughing  most  violently.  « I  still  had
great  influence  over  her,  although  I  cannot  say  she  was  asleep.
She  was  bled,  as  she  had  directed,  and  soon  after  became
collected,  and  remained  so  on  arousing.  If  during  the  ex*
treme  raving  I  took  off  my  attention  for  a  single  moment^
she  was  sure  to  commit  some  act  of  violence,  either  towards
me  or  herself;  but  while  I  kept  my  will  strongly  upon  her,
she  was  quite  tractable,  that  is,  I  could  prevent  violence.

May  19th.  Has  enjoyed  some  natural  sleep  during  the
night,  and  is  quite  free  from  delirium.  Mesmerised  twice,
and  said,  "  I  have  a  great  deal  of  water  in  the  chest ;  I  shall
throw  it  off  before  the  25th,  but  to-morrow  /  vnll  tell  you
the  exact  day.  I  shall  be  better  to-morrow  than  on  any  day
until  after  the  9th  of  June,  but  my  intellect  will  be  clearest
on  the  2lst."

May  20th.  Mesmerised  twice,  and  after  she  had  been
asleep  some  little  time,  she  coughed  and  threw  from  her  sto-
mach a  small  quantity  of  the  gritty  substance,  similar  to  what
had  been  before  ejected ;  this  also  contained  arsenic.  During
sleep  she  said,  "  The  sal  volatile  must  not  be,  for  a  few  hours,
more  than  half  as  strong  as  I  have  been  taking  it,  (up  to  this
time  it  has  been  two  parts  water  and  one  part  spirit,)  as  the
stomach  is  lacerated  at  the  parts  from  which  the  gritty  sub-
stance has  last  been  removed.  I  shall  have  rather  a  severe  spasm
about  noon  to-morrow;  when  it  is  over,  give  me  a  cup  of
coffee.  I  shall  throw  about  three  pints  of  water  from  my  sto-^
mach  between  2  and  3  o'clock  to-morrow  morning ;  after  which
I  may  lie  down,  but  before  that  I  must  keep  my  head  and
chest  up.*'

May  21st.  Water  has  been  vomited.  Spirits  not  so  good.
Mesmerised,  and  repeated  her  directions  for  the  9th  of
June,  in  no  particular  varying  from  what  she  had  before
said.  She  now  desired  that  a  poultice  (made  according
to  a  prescription  she  gave)  should  be  applied  to  the  side
to-night  and  to-morrow  night,  and  the  tumor  would  then
discharge  at  1  6* clock  on  the  morning  of  the  23rrf.  "/
shall  (she  said)  feel  ill  to-morrow,  and  have  a  spasm  at  7
o'clock  p.m. ;  it  will  be  over  by  8.  I  should  be  mesmerised
twice.  On  the  23rd,  I  should  have  a  dose  of  salts ;  on  the
24th,  I  should  be  mesmerised  in  the  evening,  and  not  awake
until  10  o'clock  p.m. On  the  25/A,  /  shall  have  spasms  and


538  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  ^c,

cramp  through  the  limbs  and  whole  system^  both  in  and  out
of  mesmerism :  26th  and  27th,  ditto :  28thy  severe  spasms ;
between  11  and  12  o'clock  in  the  day  I  shall  be  delirious,  bui
if  it  comes  to  madness,  bleed  me  sparingly.  I  should  be  mes-
merised at  10  a.m.  29th,  30th  and  31st^  spasms,  but  not
very  severe ;  times  of  mesmerism  immaterial.  To  this  date
let  me  go  out  as  often  as  the  weather  will  permit,  except  on
the  28th ;  but  after  the  31st,  I  should  not  go  out  until  after  the
9th  of  June.  For  directions  for  the  1st  of  June,  see  April  25th ;
2nd,  3rd,  4th  and  5th,  spasms ;  6th,  7th,  8th,  very  ill.''

May  22nd.  Last  night  the  poultice  was  applied  to  the
side,  which  caused  great  pain.  Mesmerised  twice.  Spasm
as  predicted.

May  23rd.  Application  to  side  repeated  last  night,  and
tumor  has  discharged.  Mesmerised  two  hours  in  the  morn-
ing, after  which  she  was  taken  into  the  open  air.  When  I
visited  Mrs.  Bird  in  the  afternoon  she  was  much  fatigued ;
this  caused  delirium,  which  it  took  some  time  to  overcome,
but  after  arousing  she  was  perfectly  collected.

May  24th.  Took  the  salts  yesterday  as  directed.  Mes-
merised twice.  I  aroused  her  at  a  quarter  after  10,  tolerably
comfortable.

May  25th.  Suffering  from  cramp  and  spasms.  Mesmer-
ised four  hours  and  a  half  in  the  morning,  and  had  a  long
sleep  in  the  evening.

May  26th  and  27th.  Just  as  yesterday.  Mesmerised
twice  on  each  of  these  days.  Internal  vision,  prevision,  and
clairvoyance  have  all  left  her ;  she  does  not  now  during  mes-
merism recoUect  a  word  she  has  said  during  lucid  sleep-wak-
ing, nor  has  she  since  the  21st  instant.

May  28th.  Found  Mrs.  Bird  in  her  garden  quite  delirious.
I  induced  her  to  go  into  the  house,  and  soon  mesmerised  her
into  sleep-waking,  in  which  for  a  time  she  was  collected,  but
from  half- past  10  to  11  o'clock  she  gradually  got  worse,  spasms
began,  and  then  she  became  perfectly  mad.  Mr.  Parker  bled
her,  I  having  placed  her  as  erect  as  possible  in  order  that  faint-
ness  might  be  felt  with  the  loss  of  little  blood,  and  consequently
half  a  pint  was  sufficient  to  produce  the  effect.  On  recover-
ing she  was  quite  collected.  I  kept  her  asleep  nearly  six  hours
at  the  first  sitting,  and  two  hours  more  in  the  evening.

May  29th,  30th  and  31st.  Weak,  but  quite  collected.
Mesmerised  twice  each  day,  and  I  had  great  difficulty  in
preventing  the  stupor :  slight  spasms.

June  1st.  Mesmerised  a  little  before  2  o'clock ;  at  a
quarter  before  3  she  became  restless ;  this  feeling  increased
to  3  o'clock,  when  the  spasm  commenced  with  great  violence ;
nothing  but  her  prevision,  and  what  we  had  before  witnessed


by  Mr.  Luxmoore,  539

in  her  case^  gave  Mr.  Parker  or  myself  any  hope  of  her  reco-
very. At  a  quarter  after  8  o^clock  the  mustard  was  applied^
and  before  4  she  was  quiie  tranquil.  At  6  I  aroused  her,  and
again  mesmerised  her  for  two  hours  in  the  evening.

June  2nd.  Very  languid.  Mesmerised,  and  soon  after
became  delirious  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  but  it  ap-
peared to  proceed  more  from  weakness  than  anything  else,
and  might  have  been  increased  by  the  excessive  heat  of  the
weather;  kept  her  asleep  four  hours,  and  mesmerised  her
again  for  two  hours  in  the  evening ;  suffered  slightly  from
tic  and  spasms.

June  3rd  and  4th.  Slight  spasms  and  a  very  little  tic.
Mesmerised  twice  each  day.

June  5th.  Spasms  rather  more  severe.  Mesmerised
twice ;  great  tendency  to  stupor.

June  6th.  Feels  Ul.  Mesmerised  at  a  quarter  before  10
o'clock,  when  a  severe  spasm  came  on,  causing  delirium,  rigi-
dity, and  an  involuntary  action  of  the  muscles.  Slept  three
hours  and  a  half;  was  again  mesmerised  two  hours  in  the
evening,  and  said,  '^I  think  a  dose  of  salts  would  do  me
good,  but  I  do  not  know.^*

June  7th.  Took  the  salts,  and  feels  they  have  been  bene-
ficial. Mesmerised  five  hours,  before  and  during  which  she
had  several  spasms,  producing  rigidity  and  violent  involuntary
action  of  the  muscles. Was  much  refreshed  on  awaking.

June  8th.  Very  ill,  and  slightly  delirious.  Soon  after  I
had  mesmerised  her  into  sleep-waking  a  spasm  came  on;  she
was  quite  insensible  and  unmanageable.  Having  read  Dr.
Gregory's  translation  of  Beichenbach's  Researches  on  Mag^
netism,  it  occurred  to  me  that  placing  Mrs.  Bird's  head  to  the
north  could  do  her  no  harm,  and  might  be  of  benefit.  I
therefore,  without  assigning  any  reason,  requested  the  sofa
might  be  so  turned  as  to  bring  her,  as  near  as  I  could  judge,
into  the  desired  position ;  and  in  less  than  two  minutes  a  sur-
prising change  took  place.  She  exclaimed,  ^'My  head  is
towards  the  north.  I  feel  much  more  comfortable.  I  am
suffering  great  pain,  but  my  spirits  are  better.  How  bright
things  appear  to  me  I  How  dcdl  I  have  been  I  but  now  I  see
clearly.  How  stupid  not  to  know  that  I  was  to  be  so  very  ill
to-day,  and  have  so  much  to  go  through  to-morrow.  You
have  done  very  well  for  me.  /  shall  remain  lucid  until  after
a  spasm,  which  will  take  place  about  7  this  evening,  when  all
will  again  be  dark  until  the  lOM."  She  also  said,  "  If  you
were  now  to  turn  my  head  to  the  west,  I  should  be  mad.  I
think  (she  added)  if  all  persons  subject  to  insanity  were  (pro-
vided they  do  not  lie  on  iron)  to  sleep  with  their  heads  to  the


540  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  ifc,

norths  it  would  be  better.  East  to  west,  or  south  to  north,  is
not  so  bad  as  west  to  east/'  I  am  convinced  Mrs.  Bird  bad
never  seen  Beichenbach's  book,  but  these  assertions  are,  I
consider,  borne  out  by  his  experiments.  "  I  am  (she  also
said)  influenced  as  the  compass,  being  full  of  a  mesmeric
electricity ;  it  is  similar  to  electricity  and  magnetism,  but  not
identical  with  them.  Some  persons  under  mesmerism  are
not  so  much  influenced  by  this  electricity  as  others/'

June  9th.  Although  Mrs.  Bird  was  not  to  be  mesmerised
until  10  o'clock  p.m.,  Mr.  Parker  and  I  visited  her  in  the
morning;  she  was  delirious  and  continued  so  through  the
day.  About  half-past  9  p.m.,  we  again  saw  Mrs.  Bird,  and  at
a  little  before  10  I  commenced  mesmerising  her  :  a  very  bad
spasm  came  on,  acting  on  her  head  and  heart ;  then  violent
delirium  with  continual  spasms,  lasting  until  12  o'clock,

June  10th.  At  12  o'clock  the  tic  commenced ;  her  ago-
nies were  most  distressing  to  witness;  she  threw  herself
about,  sometimes  on  the  floor,  and  was  quite  insane ;  singing,
laughing,  screaming,  and  groaning  alternately.  At  2  o'clock
the  tic  had  passed  ofiP,  and  the  fit  commenced  with  great
violence  :  her  spine  was  arched  forwards,  and  she  injured  it,
as  she  had  some  time  previously  predicted.  At  3  o'clock
a.m.,  on  Mr.  Parker's  attempting  to  open  her  temporal  arte-
ries,  she  became  very  violent,  and  for  twenty  minutes  re-
sisted all  our  efforts.  We  at  last  succeeded  in  opening  the
right  artery,  but  it  caused  for  an  instant  great  agony,  as  it
implicated  the  nerves,  which  were  suffering  from  the  effects
of  tic.  After  a  very  little  blood  had  flowed,  she  became  sane,
and  requested  to  be  bled  in  the  opposite  arm,  instead  of  the
other  artery,  as  the  nerves  were  in  such  an  irritable  condition ;
this  was  done :  the  artery  and  vein  were  kept  open  until
yawning  was  produced.  At  4  a.m.,  the  laudanum  was  applied,
slight  spasms  came  on  at  intervals,  and  she  suffered  much
from  the  effects  of  what  she  had  gone  through.  At  half-past
5  mustard  cataplasms  were  applied,  and  as  soon  as  they  were
taken  off,  she  fell  into  a  sort  of  half  stupor;  this  continued
until  9  o'clock,  when  she  got  into  a  high  state  of  mesmerism,
knotving  she  was  asleep,  &c. ;  and  said,  "  I  have  injured  the
spine  in  two  places :  my  side  will  never  gather  again,  unless
there  is  some  active  cause ;  but  this  would  not  have  been  the
case,  if  leeches  had  been  applied,  instead  of  the  poultice/'
Mrs.  Bird's  predictions  in  all  cases  have  been  fully  verified,
and  we  considered  ourselves  called  upon  to  carry  out  all  her
directions.  At  a  little  after  10  I  aroused  her.  Mesmerised
again  at  noon,  and  slept  three  hours.  Internal  vision  and  previ-
sion have  returned  in  full  splendour  (see  April  25  and  June  10).


by  Mr.  Luxmoore.  541

At  half-past  7  p.tn.^  I  again  sent  her  to  sleep  for  two  hours
and  a  half^  when  she  said^  "  I  must  be  bled  every  Wednesday
for  six  weeks ;  the  first  five  times  in  the  arm,  and  the  last  in
the  left  temporal  artery.  To-morrow  I  shonld  be  mesmerised
from  11  to  2,  and  7  to  9  o^clock/'  The  cough  has  come  on,
and  ivitt,  she  says,  last  six  weeks.  Mrs.  Bird,  between  the
14th  of  February  and  9th  of  June,  had  two  fits ;  but  it  must
be  recollected,  she  was  twice  frightened,  and  often  much
EXCITED. I  have  neglected  to  note  the  dates.

Jane  11th.  Better.  Mesmerised  three  hours  and  a  half
in  the  morning  and  two  hours  and  a  half  in  the  evening,
during  which  she  said,  ''  /  shall  be  very  unwell  on  the  Qrd  of
July ;  I  should  to-morrow  be  mesmerissd  twice,  but  the  time
is  not  important.

June  12th.  Mesmerised  three  hours,  and  prescribed  me-
dicine  for  Saturday.

June  13th.  Very  tolerable.  Mesmerised  twice.  In  the
afternoon,  and  after  she  had  got  into  sleep-waking,  a  gen-
tleman of  Exeter  came  to  see  Mrs.  Bird.  I  then  called  her
attention  to  his  knee,  which  had  been  seriously  injured  some
months  before  from  the  kick  of  a  horse.  After  a  time,  she
said,  ''  Your  knee  is  bandaged  too  tight,''  (this  no  one  in  the
room  knew  but  the  gentleman  himself,  who  instantly  ad-
mitted the  truth  of  what  she  stated.)  He  was  sitting  from
three  to  six  feet  from  Mrs.  Bird,  and  wore  loose  trousers.
She  was  now  silent  for  a  little  time,  appeared  puzzled,  and
requested  me  to  take  the  gentleman's  hand ;  on  my  doing
which,  she  started,  exclaiming,  **  He  has  steel  about  him,*'
She  for  a  few  moments  felt  uncomfortable.  When  Mrs.  Bird
recovered,  she  said,  '*  Steel  is  not  good  for  the  knee,  whale-
bone or  ivory  should  be  used  instead,  and  no  metal  except
silver  or  gold  be  introduced.''  She  recommended  bathing,
local  mesmerism,  and  a  liniment,  adding,  "  if  the  gentleman
follows  my  advice,  he  will  be  much  better  than  he  is  at
present."

June  14th.  Feels  sick  from  the  medicine.  Mesmerised
water  settled  her  stomach,  and  threw  her  into  a  very  deep  sleep,
in  which  she  did  not  hear  even  my  voice,  nor  could  I  get  her  to
pay  the  least  attention  to  me  in  any  way.  On  again  arousing  (if  I
may  use  such  a  term)  into  sleep-waking,  she  was  much  refreshed,
and  directed  that  she  should  be  mesmerised  on  the  16th  before
12  o'clock  in  the  day,  and  between  7  and  9  in  the  evening.
Slept  three  hours  and  a  half.

June  15th. Better. Mesmerised  and  slept  comfortably.

June  16th.  Still  improving  in  general  health,  but  the
cough^  which  exactly  resembles  hooping-cough,  is  very  trouble-


542  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  ifc.,

some.  Mesmerised  water  again  produced  what  she  calls  the
double  sleep.  In  the  afternoon  she  had  a  slight  attack  of
diarrhoea^  for  which  she  gave  a  prescription  in  case  it  con-
tinued. Mesmerised  twice.

June  17th.  Head  and  face  swollen ;  mesmerised  twice.
In  the  evening  all  the  symptoms  had  increased.  Bled  as  she
had  directed.  She  also  said^  ''  My  face  should  be  bathed
with  an  infusion  of  parsley,  marsh  mallow,  and  feverfew.^'

June  18th.  Diarrhoea  rather  violent.  Mesmerised  twice,
and  said,  "  It  will  be  necessary  to  use  the  prescription  I  gave
the  other  day,  and  to  have  my  face  bathed.''  All  this  was
attended  to.

June  19th.  Mesmerised  at  Mr.  Parker's,  when  a  few
gentlemen  and  ladies  were  admitted  to  see  Mrs.  Bird ;  she
aroused  at  the  end  of  five  hours.  Mesmerised  for  two  hours
in  the  afternoon,  and  aroused,  feeling  better.  Face  to  be
again  bathed.

June  20th.  Mesmerised  twice ;  cough  very  bad,  produc-
ing a  tendency  to  lock-jaw,  which  she  said  would  be  avoided
either  in  or  out  of  mesmerism  by  pressure  of  the  fingers  just
at  the  hinge  of  the  jaw.  Passes  down  the  spine  relieve  the
cough.

June  21st.  Health  improving.  Mesmerised  from  a  quarter
before  3  to  6  o'clock.  For  twenty  minutes  she  was  in  the
deep  sleep,  and,  on  again  getting  into  sleep-waking,  she  said,
"  I  have  been  examining  my  brain  to  see  in  what  state  it  will
be  after  the  last  bleeding  on  the  22nd  of  July  (Wednesday).  /
shall  be  very  ill  on  the  Monday  and  Tuesday  from  cramp  and  mo-
lent  cough.  Before  8  o* clock  on  Wednesday  evening  I  shall  be  quiie
mad ;  then  bleed  me  in  the  temporal  artery ;  this  will  get  rid
of  the  madness,  and  I  shall  get  into  mesmeric  sleep  :  I  shall
be  partially  under  its  influence  before,  but  not  asleep.  From
this  time  I  shall  get  better,  but  should  not  exert  myself  too
much,  nor  get  over-heated."

June  22nd.  Somewhat  depressed,  particularly  after  12
o'clock,  (there  was  much  thunder  in  the  air.)  Mesmerised
twice,  and  says  her  liver  is  out  of  order,  and  she  should  eat
water-cress,  lettuce,  and  very  young  onions. Cough  still  bad.

June  23rd.  A  severe  thunder  storm  took  place  last  even-
ing, during  which  Mrs.  Bird  felt  a  very  curious  sensation  in
the  head,  spine,  and  limbs,  such  as  she  had  never  before  ex-
perienced ;  there  seemed  to  be  slight  electric  shocks  passing
through  the  system. Mesmerised  twice,  and  slept  five  hours.

June  24th.  Mesmerised  morning  and  evening ;  during  the
latter  sitting  Mr.  Parker  attempted  to  bleed ;  the  first  trial
was  unsuccessful. There  is  now  some  difficulty  in  getting  at


by  Mr.  Luxmoore,  543

the  vein^  as  she  has  been  bled  more  than  four  hundred
times  in  the  arm  that  was  now  tried.  On  the  second  attempt,
Mr.  Parker^s  finger  unfortunately  touched  her  arm,  which
immediately  became  rigid,  and,  although  the  vein  was  opened,
scarcely  any  blood  would  flow.^  I  soon  relaxed  the  arm,  and
placed  her  hand  in  hot  water,  but  all  to  no  effect.  She  then
said  it  would  be  safer  after  a  short  time  to  arouse  her  and
open  a  vein  in  the  waking  state,  as,  if  a  similar  accident
occurred  to  the  other  arm,  we  should  not  be  able  to  bleed  her
for  the  night.  This  was  done,  and  sixteen  ounces  of  blood
taken ;  after  which  she  was  again  mesmerised  for  two  hours.

June  25th  and  26th.  Mesmerised  twice  each  day,  and  is
better.

June  27th.  The  thunder  weather  still  causes  uneasiness.
Mesmerised  twice,  and  said,  ^*  On  Monday,  the  29th  instant,
/  will  give  directions  for  the  following  day,  and  decide  whether
it  will  be  better  to  postpone  the  bleeding  from  Wednesday,
the  Ist  of  July,  to  Friday,  the  8rd,  as  it  would  be  of  great
benefit  to  me  on  that  day,  when  I  shall  be  so  ill*'

June  28th.  Felt  better  for  a  drive  she  took  last  evening.
Mesmerised  three  hours  and  fifty  minutes ;  said,  *^  I  have  not
quite  got  over  the  effects  of  the  stagnation  of  the  blood  on
Wednesday.  There  is  great  inflammation  all  up  the  spine,
but  particularly  at  the  lower  bone.'^

June  29th.  Feels  as  yesterday.  Mesmerised  two  hours  and
three  quarters  in  the  morning,  and  said,  ''  The  bleeding  can
be  put  off  until  Friday  (July  3),  if  you  will  mesmerise  me  every
evening  after  to-morrow  from  7  to  a  quarter  before  10  o'clock.
On  Fnday  I  shall  have  spasms  through  the  day ;  indeed  they
mil  commence  the  night  before,  but  the  worst  unit  be  between  7
and  8  p.m. ;  after  8,  bleed.  In  the  forepart  of  the  day  let
me  have  as  much  mesmerism  as  you  can.  /  shall  be  rather
delirious.  During  the  following  week  I  shall  be  weak  and
poorly  until  the  last  bleeding ;  a  few  days  after  which  I  shall
be  able  to  do  without  mesmerism  for  a  short  time.

June  30th.  Had  enjoyed  many  hours  natural  sleep  during
the  night  and  feels  better. Mesmerised  twice.

July  1st.  Slight  spasms. Mesmerised  as  yesterday.

July  2nd.  Spasms  increased,  but  it  must  be  remembered
she  was  to  have  been  bled  last  night :  the  operation  by  her
directions  was  postponed  to  to-morrow. Mesmerised  twice.

July  3rd.  Spasms  rather  worse.  Mesmerised  3  hours  in
the  morning. At  5  o'clock  in  the  evening  I  again  mesmerised

«  When  Mr.  Parker  has  bled  Mrs.  Bird  in  the  mesmeric  slate,  he  has
always  avoided  touching  her,  having  used  my  hand  as  a  rest.


644  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  ^c,

Mrs.  Bird,  spasms  still  continued,  and  between  7  and  8  three
very  severe  ones  came  on.  As  soon  as  she  became  collected
after  the  third  spasm  I  aroused  her,  and  Mr.  Parker  opened
a  vein  in  her  arm :  it  was  not  done  during  sleep  for  fear  of  a
repetition  of  what  took  place  when  she  was  last  bled.  When
the  arm  was  secured  I  again  sent  her  to  sleep  until  10  o'clock,
when  she  was  aroused  free  from  delirium.

July  4th.  Stt£Fering  from  reaction  after  the  blood  letting.
Mesmerised  3  hours  both  morning  and  evening.  Spine  also
locally  mesmerised  with  the  flat  hand  during  both  sittings ;
this  has  been  done  daily  for  some  time,  and  it  generally  throws
her  into  deep  sleep.

July  5th.  Mesmerised  more  than  three  hours.  To-day
she  could  bear  the  spine  and  chest  to  be  mesmerically  electrified
by  the  tips  of  my  fingers  and  then  soothed  down  with  the
flat  hand.

July  6th. Mesmerised  three  hours  and  three  quarters.

July  7th.  Spine  and  cough  better.  Mesmerised  twice ;
back  and  chest  electrified.

July  8th.  Suffering  from  head-ache.  Mesmerised  8  hours
in  the  forenoon.  In  the  evening  Mr.  Parker  and  I  visited
Mrs.  Bird,  and  found  her  much  excited,  a  report  having  reached
her  (promulgated  of  course  by  an  opposer  of  mesmerism,)
reflecting  on  her  character,  insinuating  that  Mr.  Parker  and
I  visited  her  for  immoral  purposes :  a  more  wicked  or  false
report  could  not  have  been  invented.  But  what  will  not  our
opponents  do  I  They  must  be  beaten  and  they  begin  to  know
it,  though  still  tryiug  to  ward  off  the  blow  for  a  time.  They
scruple  not  to  have  recourse  to  the  most  base  expedients,  set-
ting truth  utterly  at  defiance.  While  they  only  rant  about
Satanic  influence,  witchcraft,  humbug,  &c.,  &;c.,  their  con*
duct  produces  some  amusement:  but  when  they  are  base
enough  to  attack  the  character  of  a  female,  on  whom  a  word
of  reproach  on  that  point  has  never  before  been  breathed,  it
must,  I  think,  be  reprobated  by  all  respectable  persons,  be
their  opinion  of  mesmerism  what  it  may. — But  to  return  to
our  patient  who  was  bled  and  sent  to  sleep  for  three  hours.

tfuly  9th.  Head  much  relieved,  although  she  fr^ts  and
vexes  herself  much,  owing  to  the  report  alluded  to  yesterday.
Mesmerised  three  hours  in  the  morning  and  not  again  for  the
day,  owing  to  my  being  suddenly  called  to  see  a  sick  relation
some  miles  from  Exeter.

July  10th.  At  half  past  3  p.m.  I  found  Mrs.  Bird  suf-
fering from  head-ache.  Mesmerised  her,  when  she  said,
*'  If  mesmerised  gold  were  placed  on  my  forehead  where  the
pain  is,  I  think  it  would  produce  a  soothing  effect. It  may


by  Mr.  lAOmaore.  545

throw  me  into  a  deep  sleep ;  if  it  does,  you  had  better  remove
it  soon  after  that  takes  place/'  I  tried  the  experiment,  which
succeeded  admirably.  After  two  hours  and  a  half,  it  was
convenient  that  she  should  be  aroused ;  I  therefore  awoke
her,  and  she  took  tea ;  after  which  I  again  put  her  into  sleep-
waking  and  repeated  the  experiment  with  the  mesmerised
gold,  with  a  precisely  similar  result. Slept  three  hours.

July  11th.  The  excitement  respecting  the  report  is  much
increased.  Mesmerised  three  hours,  during  which  she  was
tolerably  composed.  In  the  evening,  when  Mr.  Parker  and
I  arrived,  we  found  Mrs.  Bird  suffering  much  in  her  head,
and  very  soon  after  I  got  her  asleep  a  convulsive  motion  of
the  eyes  commenced.  Then  came  several  violent  spasms,
flying  from  the  head  to  the  heart,  accompanied  with  great
rigidity  of  the  whole  body,  and  excessive  difiScal^  of  breath-
ing ;  indeed  such  were  the  symptoms,  that  had  1  not  known
the  power  mesmerism  had  over  her,  I  should  have  despaired
of  her  life.  She  was  very  delirious,  but  after  a  time  became
more  calm,  although  the  breathing  continued  painfully  diffi-
cult. I  now  placed  a  highly  mesmerised  sovereign  in  her
hand ;  she  grasped  it  tightly,  and  then  placed  it  on  the  pit
of  her  stomach,  and  fell  into  a  deep  sleep.  In  five  minutes
the  breathing  and  whole  frame  became  as  tranquil  as  can
well  be  imagined.  On  arousing  she  felt  exhausted,  but  was
quite  collected.

July  12th.  Spirits  still  much  depressed.  Mesmerised
twice,  and  said,  she  had  irritated  the  spine  during  last  even-
ing, which  made  the  cough  worse.

July  13th.  Spirits  low  and  feels  pressure  on  the  brain,
particularly  on  the  centre  of  the  forehead.  Mesmerised  three
hours  in  the  morning,  during  part  of  which  time  she  was  in
the  deep  sleep ;  on  coming  out  of  which  she  said,  **  After  the
bleeding  on  the  22nd  of  this  month,  I  shall  feel  weak  and  ill
for  a  few  days,  then,  ip  nothing  unexpected  occurs,  /
shall  gradually  get  better  until  the  16/ A  of  August,  on  which
day  I  shall  have  very  severe  spasmodic  affections :  both  hands
wUl  be  contracted,  particularly  the  left.  You  must  relieve
this  by  burning  moxa  on  the  nape  of  the  neck ;  let  the  arms
be  rubbed  with  camphorated  spirits  and  oil,  twice  a  day,  until
they  gain  strength.^'  Mesmerised  again  in  the  evening  for
three  hours,  when  she  directed  that  she  should  inhale  from
an  infusion  of  certain  herbs  twice  a  day.

July  14th.  Headache  rather  worse.  Mesmerised  twice ;
says,  "  The  spasms  which  will  take  place  on  the  16th  of  next
month,  are  entirely  caused  by  her  fretting  about  the  report
affecting  her  character.''


546  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  ^c.,

July  15th.  Head  still  bad.  Mesmerised  three  hours  in
the  mornings  when  she  said^  "  The  lungs  are  already  bene-
fitted by  the  inhaling.''  They  are  mesmerically  electrified
daily.  In  the  evening  she  was  bled^  then  mesmerised,  and
when  the  first  feeling  of  faintness  had  passed  off,  she  desired
me  to  throw  her  into  the  deep  sleep,  with  mesmerised  gold
on  her  forehead.  This  was  done,  and,  on  again  getting  into
sleep-waking,  she  alluded  to  the  16th  of  August,  saying,
''I  cannot  see  my  way  dear;  that  day  looks  very  dark  to
me.'' Slept  four  hours.

July  16th.  Very  weak,  but  head  better.  Mesmerised
twice,  and  said,  "  The  temporal  artery  must  not  be  opened
on  Wednesday  xmtil  about  8  o'clock  p.m.  I  shall  begin  to  be
very  delirious  between  5  and  6  p.m.

July  17th.  Much  mental  suffering  continues.  Mesmer-
ised three  hours  in  the  morning.  In  the  evening  I  found
Mrs.  Bird  considerably  excited,  having  heard  more  of  the
slanders  that  have  been  so  falsely  reported  respecting  her.
Mesmerised ;  soon  after  which  a  severe  spasm  came  on,  was
followed  by  others,  and  she  became  insane.  I  now  succeeded
in  getting  her  into  the  very  deep  state.  Slept  three  hours
and  twenty  minutes. On  arousing  she  was  calm.

July  18th.  Spirits  a  little  better,  but  the  spasms  continue.  Mes-
merised twice.

July  19th.  Still  poorly;  spasms  continue,  and  she  has  a  sUgki
attack  of  St.  Vitus's  dance.  Mesmerised  twice;  says  the  action  of
the  limbs  will  only  last  for  a  day  or  two.

July  20th.  Less  spasms,  but  great  debility. Mesmerised  3  hours
in  the  morning,  and  2\  hours  in  the  afternoon. Cramp  and  cough,

July  21  St.  Better,  with  the  exception  of  a  pain  in  her  head,
which  cannot  be  expected  to  be  removed  until  blood  has  been  taken
from  the  temporal  artery  to-morrow  evening.  Mesmerised  twice.  Still
unable  to  say  now  tb^  1 6th  will  terminate.  Cramp  &  cough  as  yesterday.

July  22nd.  Head  very  bad.  Mesmerised  three  hours  in
the  forenoon,  and  at  times  was  slightly  delirious.  A  little
before  6  p.m.,  Mr.  Parker  and  I  found  Mrs.  Bird  delirious,
and  she  soon  became  quite  mad,  attempting  to  strike  me  and
do  all  sorts  of  mischief.  I  could  not  get  her  to  sleep,  but
still  by  determination  and  a  strong  exercise  of  the  will,  I  kept
her  tolerably  quiet,  provided  I  did  not  take  my  eye  off  her.
At  8  o'clock  the  temporal  artery  was  opened,  and,  before
much  more  than  a  tablespoonful  of  blood  had  flowed,  she
was  quite  coUected  and  asked  what  we  had  done.  As  soon
as  the  bandage  was  adjusted,  I  mesmerised  her  into  sleep-
waking  and  then  into  the  deep  sleep  :  on  recovering  from  the
latter  she  said,  "  I  shall  only  have  one  more  fit  of  coughing


by  Mr.  Luxmoore.  547

which  will  be  on  Saturday  evening.  On  Friday  week  the  31  st
I  must  take  an  ounce  of  tincture  of  rhubarb,  and  on  Tuesday
week  I  should  be  bled.  I  shall  be  cheerful  while  away/*
(Mrs.  Bird  is  going  to  the  sea  side  for  a  fortnight),  "  but  my
spirits  will  flag  on  my  return.'^  She  again,  after  speaking
of  the  spasm  which  will  take  place  on  the  16th  of  August,
said,  '^  After  the  application  of  moxa  a  stupor  will  come  on,
during  which,  bleed  until  I  shew  some  signs  of  faintness ;
then  put  my  feet  into  warm  water  with  a  little  mustard  in  it
for  ten  minutes,  wipe  them  dry  and  put  them  on  the  sofa.
If  I  rally  from  the  stupor  I  shall  do  well ;  if  not,  one  hour
will  only  be  left  for  me.  The  sufferings  of  that  day  are  en-
tirely produced  by  the  unkind  reports.^^

July  23rd.  Better  in  every  respect,  but  weak  from  the  bleeding.
Mesmerised. St.  Vitus's  dance  has  qujite  lefl  her.

Julv  24th.  Appetite  improved,  and  is  altogether  better.  Mes-
merised three  hours  and  a  half  in  the  morning  and  two  hours  in  the
evening.

July  25th.  Still  better.  Mesmerised  twice.  During  the  morn-
ing sitting  a  thunder  storm  came  on  and  she  felt  slight  shocks  through
her  svstem.  She  heard  the  thunder  although  no  mechanical  noise
nor  tne  voice  of  any  one  but  that  of  her  mesmeriser  is  audible  to
her.  May  not  this  be  owing  to  electricity  ?  She  again  assured  me,
that  being  without  mesmerism  until  the  15th  of  August  would  not,
in  any  way,  affect  the  crisis  on  the  16th. Cough  as  predicted.

July  26th. Still  better. Mesmerised  two  hours  and  a  half.

Aug.  4th. Bled  to  sixteen  ounces  while  at  the  sea-side.

Aug.  14th.  Has  not  been  mesmerised  since  the  26th  ultimo.
Mrs.  Bird  took  the  tincture  of  rhubarb  on  the  31st  ultimo.  The
changeable  weather  has  given  her  very  slight  tic.  Mesmerised
three  hours  and  a  half,  and  said,  "My  chest  is  nearly  full  of
water,"  (her  breathing  is  very  difficult),  "I  have  a  slight  cold,
which  has  produced  a  little  inflammation  through  the  system  and  the
stomach  is  disordered  by  it.  I  can  give  you  no  further  directions  as
to  the  1 6th. The  spasms  will  commence  at  5  o'clock."

Aug.  15th.  Still  feeling  ill.  Mesmerised  three  hours  in  the
morning,  and  said,  "I  shidl  throw  the  water  from  my  stomach
before  to-morrow  morning ;  that  is  something  in  favor  of  my  re-
covery. Tour  taking  sal  volatile  or  wine  after  I  am  bled,  on  the
16th,  will  be  beneficial."  On  visiting  Mrs.  Bird  in  the  evening,  I
found  she  had  ejected  three  pints  of  water,  and  consequently  the
chest  was  much  relieved. Mesmerised  again  for  three  hours.

Aug.  16th.  Found  Mrs.  Bird  at  10  a.m.  very  ill.  Mes-
merised her  for  two  hours  and  a  half,  but  she  could  not  even
now  see  her  way  through  the  afternoon  attack  ,*  indeed  there
appeared  to  be  in  sleep-waking  a  very  strong  impression  that
she  should  not  recover ;  not  that  she  saw  that  would  be  the
case,  but  all  after  the  stupor  appeared  as  a  blank. At  twenty

VOL.  IV.  ?  p


548  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  4fc.,

minutes  after  3  p.m.,  Mr,  Parker  and  I  found  Mrs.  Bird
looking  and  feeling  as  ill  as  it  is  possible  to  imagine ;  Mr.
Parker's  impression  was  that  she  would  not  recover.  I  mes-
merised her  into  sleep-waking,  and  it  was  very  beautiful  to
observe  her  perfect  resignation,  and  touching  to  a  degree  to
hear  her  express  her  entire  forgiveness  of  all  who  had  injured
her.  The  gratitude  she  expressed  towards  Mr.  Parker  and
myself  for  the  attention  we  had  paid  her,  was  unbounded.  At
5  0^ clock  the  spasms  came  on,  her  screams  were  dreadful;
before  6,  both  hands  contracted,  and  Mr.  Parker  gave  me  a
moxa  to  burn  on  her  neck,  as  she  had  directed.  Soon  after
it  began  to  affect  the  skin,  the  hands  flew  open  and  were  re-
laxed. Her  other  directions  as  to  hot  water,  bleeding,  &c.,
were  attended  to.  She  fell  into  the  stupor,  and  was  to  all
appearance  dying.  I  persevered  in  keeping  her  as  much
under  the  influence  of  mesmerism  as  possible,  wetting  her
lips  with  wine,  aud  taking  some  myself,  as  well  as  several
doses  of  sal  volatile ;  this  recovered  her  for  a  moment,  but
her  tongue  was  convulsively  drawn  to  the  roof  of  her  mouth ;
lower  jaw  dropping,  limbs  extended,  and  she  was  to  all  ap-
pearance sinking.  This  continued  for  nearly  an  hour,  when
her  breathing  became  more  easy ;  and  she  told  me,  in  an
almost  inaudible  voice,  that  she  was  better,  but  that  as  the
reaction  of  blood-letting  took  place,  she  should  suffer  greatly.
I  proposed  keeping  her  under  mesmerism  the  whole  night.
This  at  first  she  was  unwilling  we  should  do,  as  it  would
fatigue  us.  However,  Mr.  Parker  and  I  remained  with  her
until  7  o'clock  the  next  morning.  She  awoke  spontaneously
twice  during  the  time,  but  I  soon  mesmerised  her  into  sleep-
waking.  At  7  a.m.  I  aroused  her.  At  1  p.m.  I  again  gave
her  three  hours  mesmerism,  and  kept  her  asleep  the  same
time  in  the  evening.

Aug.  18th.  Thunder  io  the  air,  which  causes  a  little  oppression
about  the  brain.  Mrs.  Bird  last  night  ejected  her  supper;  with  one
exception,  this  is  the  only  time  she  has  vomited  any  food  since  the
early  part  of  July,  and  on  each  occasion  she  had  exerted  herself
sooner  after  a  meal  than  is  desirable.  Before  being  mesmerised,  she
ejected  her  food  daily  for  nearly  thirteen  years.  Mesmerised
twice.

Aug.  19th.  Notwithstanding  the  weather,  which  is  very  damp,
Mrs.  Bird  gains  strength,  and  her  general  health  improves.  Mes-
merised twice,  and  said,  "  My  stomach  is  a  little  out  of  order;  liver
is  inflamed;  right  lung  dormant,  but  not  much  inflamed;  nerves  of
the  brain  rather  excited,  but  that  will  subside.  The  time  of  the  day
at  which  you  mesmerise  me  is  of  no  importance,  until  Tuesday,  the
25th.  At  4  p.m.  on  that  day  I  shall  suffer  from  cramp  in  the  bowels.
Soothing  passes  would  be  of  benefit. If  you  were  not  with  me  there


,  by  Mr,  Luxmoore.  549

would  be  no  danger,  only  I  should  suffer  more. I  must  haye  one
ounce  of  tincture  of  rhubarb  that  night."

Aug.  20th.  Mrs.  Bird's  cold  has  occasioned  slight  tooth-ache»
but  nothing  worth  the  name  of  tic.  Mesmerised  twice.  During  the
second  sitting,  she  said,  '*  Wild  sage  tea  would  do  me  good,  and  a
poultice  of  toast  and  yeast,  such  as  I  have  before  used.  The  general
inflammation  through  the  system  is  much  less."

Aug.  21st. Mesmerised  twice,  together  six  hours.

Aug.  22nd. Face  much  better. Mesmerised  three  hours.

Aug.  23rd.  Still  better;  appetite  good,  does  not  eject  her  food.
Mesmerised  each  day  for  some  hours.

Aug.  25th.  Mesmerised  in  the  morning,  and  a  little  before  4  in
the  afternoon,  with  the  cramp  present.

Aug.  26th  and  27th.  Took  rhubarb  on  the  night  of  the  25th.
Rather  weak ;  mesmerised  both  days  for  some  hours.

Aug.  29th,  30th,  and  31st.  Mesmerised  each  day  twice.  Health
improving.

Sept.  1st,  2nd,  and  3rd.  Mesmerised  each  day.  On  the  last,
she  said,  "  I  shall,  soon  after  I  am  mesmeriaed  to-morrow,  have  a
sharp  spasm,  which  will  leave  a  head-ache ;  with  this  exception  I
shall  get  on  tolerably  until  Tuesday,  which  day  I  do  not  see  clearly.*'

Sept.  4th.  Mesmerised  six  hours.  Spasm  came  on  as  predicted,
and  left  a  head-ache.

Sept.  5th.  Head-ache  continues.  Mesmerised  twice,  two  hours
each  time ;  says  Tuesday  will  be  an  uncomfortable  day.

Sept.  6th.  Head  worse,  (there  is  thunder  in  the  air,  and  this
always  a£fects  her.)  Mesmerised  once  four  hours ;  says  she  should
be  bled  on  Tuesday  the  8th,  or  a  severe  spasm  and  delirium  will  be
the  consequence.

Sept.  7th. Mesmerised  :  head  bad.

Sept.  8th.  Bled,  and  then  mesmerised  three  hours  in  the  fore-
noon, and  again  two  hours  in  the  afternoon.

Sept.  9th.  Head-ache  gone ;  feels  better,  but  weak.  Mesmerised
some  hours.

Sept.  10th.  Still  better:  sleeps  at  night.  Mesmerised  twice,
together  ^'^^  hours ;  says  the  heart  is  now  worse  than  any  other  part.

Sept.  11th. Mesmerised  twice,  together  five  hours.

Sept.  12th.  Mrs.  Bird  has  a  little  tendency  to  faint ;  the  heat
of  the  weather  is  intense. Mesmerised  twice,  two  hours  each  time.

Sept.  13th. Just  as  yesterday. Mesmerised  three  hours.

Sept.  14th.  Stronger,  and  able  to  sit  up  a  longer  time;  but
exertion  causes  palpitation.  Mesmerised  four  hours,  and  said,
"  To-morrow,  Wednesday  and  Thursday,  will  be  very  fair  days ;
Friday  and  Saturday  oppression  about  the  head ;  Sunday  I  shall  be
very  ill,  but  better  on  Monday.

Sept.  15th.  Mesmerised  five  hours;  says,  "There  is  pain  at
the  bottom  of  the  right  lung  :  I  must  rub  into  the  side,  just  over
that  part,  one-third  of  a  grain  of  opium  in  an  ointment,  twice  a
day;  and  the  inhalation  must  be  altered:"  (for  this  she  gave  a
prescription) ;  in  other  respects  comfortable.

pp  2


550  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  tgc,

Sept.  16th.  Not  tnesmerised.

Sept.  17tb.  Comfortable. Mesmerised  twice,  together  five  hours.

Sept.  18th.  Severe  head-ache^  and  feels  ill.  Mesmerised  twice;
spasm  in  the  head;  says  she  shall  require  bleeding  on  Sunday
afternoon.

Sept.  19th. As  yesterday. Mesmerised  twice.

Sept.  20th.  Mesmerised  two  hours  and  a  quarter  in  the  morn-
ing, and  appeared  as  usual.  At  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  Mr.
Parker  and  I  found  Mrs.  Bird  very  ill,  eyes  sunk,  and  appears  in  a
most  deplorable  state  ;  she  was  bled,  and  then  put  to  sleep.  She
first  got  into  sleep-waking,  and  then  into  the  deep  sleep;  remained
in  the  latter  one  hour  and  a  half,  and,  on  again  coming  into  sleep-
waking,  said,  "  The  disease  that  is  prevalent  is  not  diarrhoea,  but
Asiatic  cholera;  it  is  in  a  milder  form  than  it  was  some  years  since.
I  shall  have  an  attack  of  it  this  day  fortnight;  but  if  you  attend  to
my  directions,  I  shall  recover.  It  will  come  on  in  the  night.  I
should  drink  as  much  water  as  possible,  have  some  of  the  medicine
which  I  have  told  you  is  good  for  that  complaint,  and  be  bled  at  12
o'clock  at  noon."  I  kept  her  asleep  upwards  of  three  hours,  when
she  awoke  much  more  comfortable.

Sept.  21st  and  22nd. Better. Mesmerised  twice  each  day.

Sept.  23rd.  Has  had  a  slight  fall  in  rising  from  the  sofa,  and
sprained  her  arm  and  ankle,  both  of  which  were  eased  by  local  passes
after  she  was  put  into  sleep-waking.  The  spine  is  also  a  little  in-
jured, and  causes  a  slight  impediment  in  her  speech;  local  mesmer-
ism soon  relieved  it.

Sept.  24th.  Feels  the  shake,  but  is  otherwise  improving.  Mes-
merised twice.

Sept.  25th.  Mesmerised  three  hours.  Feels  tightness  on  the
chest;  said  during  sleep- waking,  "I  shall  on  Sunday  and  Monday
be  tolerable;  Tuesday  and  Wednesday,  a  sick  head-ache;  Thursday
and  Friday,  better;  Saturday,  not  so  well."

Sept.  26th  and  27th.  ^lesmerised  some  hours  each  day,  and
during  sleep-waking  coughed  up  a  considerable  portion  of  phlegm,
which  relieved  her  chest.

Sept.  26th,  27th,  28th,  29th,  and  30th.  Mesmerised  twice  on
each  day. Sick  head  ache  on  the  two  latter,

Oct.  1st. Much  easier. Mesmerised  three  hours  and  a  half.

Oct.  2nd.  Rather  uncomfortable.  Mesmerised  twice,  together  five
hours,  and  said,  ''  On  Sunday  (4thjt  as  I  have  told  you,  I  shall  be
very  ill :  I  must  be  bled  at  12  o'clock,  but  not  mesmerised  until
5  p.m.,  as  the  bowels  will  not  cease  to  act  until  that  time ;  I  must
take  a  dose  of  the  medicine  I  have  prescribed  every  two  hours  until
the  action  on  the  bowels  begins  to  subside.  I  may  have  a  little  wine
Monday  and  Tuesday.  I  shall  be  some  days  better  and  some  worse
until  the  following  Sunday,  when  I  must  be  again  bled.  I  shall
then  get  on  as  usual  until  the  21st;  bleed  me  in  the  evening  of  that
day.  On  the  28th,  I  shall  be  very  ill  from  spasms,  faintness,  and
delirium;  bleed  me  in  the  evening.  On  the  29th  and  30th  I  shall
feel  ill. On  the  3l8t,  a  change  wiU  take  place,  and  I  shall  improve


by  Mr,  Luxmoore,  551

daily  to  the  end  of  the  year,  that  is,  if  no  external  circamstance
occurs  to  throw  me  hack.  Let  me  take  every  third  day,  commencing
from  the  last  day  of  October  to  the  3l8t  of  December,  half  a  tea-
cupful  of  infusion  of  furze-blossom  and  sting-nettles,  with  a  quarter
of  a  glass  of  sherry,  and  ten  drops  of  essence  of  coriander  or  cam-
way  seeds;  it  must  be  taken  warm  on  going  to  bed.  After  the  last
day  of  November  I  shall  not  require  so  much  of  your  attention.

Oct.  3rd.  Feels  poorly.  Mesmerised  twice,  together  four  hours
and  three  quarters.

Oct.  4th.  Mr.  Parker  bled  Mrs.  Bird  at  12  o'clock;  she  was
suffering  from  Asiatic  cholera;  her  nails  were  blue  round  the  quick,
and  blood  glutinous.  The  attack  commenced  at  4  in  the  morning
(the  medicine  had  been  left  the  evening  before,  with  directions  to  be
taken  if  the  bowels  were  acted  on ;  Mrs.  Bird  was  of  course  not  told
what  would  take  place),  with  vomiting,  soon  after  a  violent  action
of  the  bowels  came  on,  accompanied  with  severe  cramp.  Evacuations
like  rice  water.  At  5  o'clock  p.m.,  I  mesmerised  her,  and  kept  her
asleep  five  hours.  It  will  be  recollected  she  had  predioied  this  attack
fourteen  days  before  it  came  on,

Oct.  5th,  6th,  and  7th.  Mesmerised  twice  each  day,  and  is
better,  but  weak.

Oct.  8th  and  9th. Better. Mesmerised  several  hours  each  day.

Oct.  1 0th. Not  so  well. Mesmerised  some  hours.

Oct.  1 1  th. Poorly. Mesmerised  twice,  and  bled.

Oct.  12th,  13th,  14th,  15th,  and  16th.  Some  days  a  little
better  than  others. Mesmerised  twice  each  day,  except  the  15th.

Oct.  1 7th.  Took  an  aperient  draught,  as  she  had  directed  on
the  14th.

Oct.  18th  and  19th.  Mesmerised  some  hours  each  day,  and  on
the  latter,  said,  "  I  should  not  eat  much  animal  food  for  the  present.
Bice  and  tapioca  are  good  for  me."

Oct.  20th.  Suffering  from  an  attack  on  the  bowels,  produced  by
a  slight  cold. Mesmerised  twice.

Oct.  21st.  Bowels  still  out  of  order.  Mesmerised  twice,  pre-
scribed for  herself,  and  took  the  medicine;  bled  in  the  evening.

Oct.  22nd. Bowels  much  quieter. Mesmerised  twice.

Oct.  23rd  and  24th.  Mesmerised  twice  each  day,  and  feels  better.

Oct.  25th. Just  as  yesterday. Mesmerised  once.

Oct.  26th.  Mesmerised  twice,  together  four  hours  and  a  half :
said,  '*  My  spirits  will  be  bad  up  to  Wednesday  night.  Bleed  me
as  soon  as  convenient  afler  6  o'clock  on  that  evening."  Has  a  little
head-ache.

Oct.  27th. Head-ache  increased. Mesmerised  twice.

Oct.  28th.  Found  Mrs.  B.  in  the  evening  suffering  much  from  head-
ache and  depression.  Mesmerised  two  hours  and  a  half.  In  the  after-
noon, about  -^past  4,  Mr.  Parker  and  I  visited  Mrs.  B. ;  she  was  look-
ing very  ill,  eyes  particularly  dull,  and  she  was  a  little  incoherent  in  her
conversation;  this  increased  until  she  became  quite  delirious.  Spasm
as  predicted.  At  6  o'clock  she  was  bled,  but  faintness  was  not  produced
until  twenty  ounces  of  blood  had  been  taken. Up  to  this  time  mes-


552  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  ffc,

merism  had  not  been  attempted,  Mrs.  Bird  having  told  me  it  would
not  produce  sleep.  As  soon  as  the  arm  was  secured  I  sent  her  into
sleep-waking,  and  she  said,  "  I  am  very  weak,  but  my  complaints
are  cured:  I  shall  after  a  day  or  two  gain  fast.  The  mechanical  in-
jury I  received  on  the  top  of  my  head,  when  young,  may  produce
occasional  delirium.

Oct.  29th.  Mesmerised  twice,  and  is  suffering  from  reaction  after
blood-letting.

Oct.  30th,  31st,  and  Nov.  1st.  Mesmerised  each  day,
and  is  better :  but  her  spirits  are  depressed,  owing  to  the  base
attacks  on  her  published  in  the  Exeter  papers,  where  she  is
week  after  week  branded  as  an  impostor,  because  some  of  the
opposers  of  mesmerism  cannot  understand  the  arsenic  affair;
and  they  have  not  the  fairness  to  wait  until  the  case  is  pub-
lished, but  take  hold  of  all  the  scraps  of  conversation,  whether
true  or  false,  that  are  reported  to  have  fallen  from  any  one
connected  with  the  case.  They  harp  a  great  deal  about
arsenic,  enough  to  kill  twenty  men,  and  say  there  is  a  writ-
ten statement  that  I  have  asserted  this  to  be  the  case.  I
can  only  say,  whoever  has  written  a  statement  to  this  effect,
must  have  mistaken  what  I  said,  as  I  never  even  thought
that  such  a  quantity  of  poison  had  been  vomited :  indeed,
how  much  arsenic  the  gritty  substance  contained  I  could  form
no  judgment  of,  until  I  received  Dr.  W.  Gregory's  analysis
in  the  middle  of  November.  It  may  seem  strange  for  me  to
speak  of  November  here,  but  this  part  of  the  case  had  not
been  transcribed  from  my  notes  when  Dr.  Gregory's  letter
arrived.

Nov.  2nd,  3rd,  and  4th.  Spirits  very  low.  Mesmerised  many
hours  each  day.

Nov.  5th.  Mesmerised  twice,  and  had  a  dreadfully  severe  spasm
through  the  head  through  fretting.

Nov.  6th.  Frightfully  ill  owing  to  the  effects  produced  by  the
continued  published  attacks  on  her  character.  Mesmerised  three
times,  two  hours  eadi;  says  there  will  be  a  change  one  way  or
another  before  half-past  5  o'clock  to-morrow  evening.

Nov.  7th.  Ill  all  day.  Mesmerised  twice.  At  a  little  after
5  p.m.,  a  most  severe  spasm  came  on;  her  convulsions  were  dreadful
to  witness.

Nov.  8th,  9th,  and  10th.  Rather  better,  but  the  spasm  of  the
7th  has  greatly  reduced  her  strength.

Nov.  11th.  Vomited  her  breakfast  this  mominff,  owing  to  again
exerting  herself  too  soon  after  eating. Mesmerised  twice.

Nov.  12th,  13th,  and  14th.  Mesmerised  some  hours  each  day,
and  is  gaining  strength,  although  slowly.

Nov.  15th,  16th,  17th,  and  18th.  Mesmerised  twice  each  day.
Not  much  change.

Nov.  19th. Mesmerised  twice,  and  said, *'The  circulation  of


by  Mr.  Lux  moor e.  553

blood  is  more  free;  I  should  take  warm  liquids,  but  no  wine.  The
tea  must  be  omitted  for  the  present.  I  should  have  three  frankin-
cence  pills  for  three  nights,  a  moderate  dose  of  squills  the  following
mornings,  and  some  magnesia  the  fourth  night.  Her  directions  were
followed,  as  on  every  other  occasion.

Nov.  20th. Mesmerised  twice,  gains  strength  slowly.

Nov.  21st.  Still  better  in  the  morning :  but^  after  seeing  a
letter  in  the  Western  Times,  declaring  her  to  be  an  impostor^
and  stating  some  direct  falsehoods  respecting  her^  the  brain
became  irritated.  In  the  afternoon  she  was  delirious^  and
very  ill.  I  mesmerised  her  three  times  to-day,  and  on  the
last  occasion,  after  having  been  some  time  in  the  deep  sleep^
she,  on  again  getting  into  sleep-waking,  said^  ^'You  must
soon  decide.  I  have  been  looking  at  myself;  if  you  do  not
bleed,  I  shall  be  insane  for  life ;  and  if  you  bleed,  I  do  not
know  that  you  will  be  able  to  recover  me  from  the  faintness.^'
Mr.  Parker,  who  was  present,  immediately  opened  a  vein  in
Mrs.  Bird^s  arm  (I  having  first  aroused  her),  and  bled  to  in-
dications of  faintness.  I  then  again  commenced  mesmerising
her,  but  had  very  great  difficulty  in  recovering  Mrs.  Bird
from  the  faintness ;  indeed  she  appeared,  both  to  Mr.  Parker
and  myself,  to  be  dying ;  her  tongue  was  convulsed,  breath-
ing scarcely  discernible,  and  in  the  midst  of  all  this  her  jaw
became  locked ;  but  I  soon  relieved  it  by  the  means  I  had
before  used.  After  about  half  an  hour  she  recovered  a  little,
and  was  able  to  swallow  small  quantities  of  wine.  My  taking
strong  doses  of  dilute  sal  volatile,  seemed  to  have  a  beneficial
effect  on  Mrs.  Bird.

Nov.  22nd,  23rd,  24th,  25th,  and  26th.  Mesmerised  twice  each
da^,  except  the  25th.  Very  ill  on  the  first  three  days,  but  has
gained  strength  since,  and  her  spirits  are  improving.

Nov.  27th  and  28th.  Mesmerised  twice  each  day;  is  suffering
from  tic,  but  not  nearlv  to  the  extent  she  did  before.  Mesmerised.
Mrs.  Bird  has  a  severe  attack  of  influenza.  On  the  latter  day  she
said,  "  I  shall  suffer  from  tic  during  the  night,  but  it  will  be  better
by  the  morning.  I  shall  have  a  spasm  in  the  kidneys  on  Tuesday
between  7  and  8  p.m."

Nov.  29th,  30th,  and  Dec.  1st.  Has  suffered  from  tic.  The
spasm  took  place  as  she  predicted.  The  influenza  has  caused
great  weakness. Spirits  better.

Mrs.  Bird  has,  during  sleep-waking,  the  power  not  only
of  looking  through  her  own  system,  but  also  that  of  any
persons  who  may  be  brought  before  her,  and  can  give  direc-
tions for  the  treatment  of  their  diseases.  In  no  one  instance
in  which  her  recommendations  have  been  fully  carried  out,
have  they,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  failed  to  procure  relief:  and


554  Case  of  Ejnleptic  and  other  Fits,  SfC,

I  am  authorized  by  Mr.  Parker  to  state^  that  she  has  most
successfully  prescribed  for  many  patients  by  his  merely  giving;
their  symptoms,  and  that  frequently  after  the  ordinary  me-
dical remedies  have  failed^  especially  in  violent  cases  of  typhus
fever,  diarrhoea,  external  inflammation,  consumption,  rheu-
matism, and  tic  douloureux.  Mrs.  Bird  can  also  give  the
phrenological  development  of  any  person^s  brain  who  may
be  present,  when  she  is  in  sleep-waking.  One  case  I  will
mention.  A  lady,  with  whom  Mrs.  Bird  was  not  previously
acquainted,  entered  the  room  after  Mrs.  B.  was  mesmerised,
and  the  lady  herself  declared  that  Mrs.  B.  had  given  as  cor-
rect a  description  of  her  character  as  if  she  had  known  her
twenty  years.  The  lady  wore  a  thick  dark  bonnet  the  whole
time  she  was  present.  There  have  been  several  other  equally
striking  instances,  but  space  forbids  my  entering  into  their
details.

It  may  now  be  asked,  what  benefit  has  Mrs.  Bird  herself
derived  from  mesmerism,  as  she  is  still  reported  to  be  a  great
invalid  ?  My  reply  is,  that  external  circumstances  weighing
on  her  mind  are  the  cause  of  her  present  bodily  sufferings,  as
I  venture  to  assert  (and  in  this  I  am  borne  out  by  Mr.
Parker's  opinion)  that  a  great  majority  of  the  spasmodic
affections  she  has  lately  suffered  from,  have  been  produced  by
mental  depression.  Even  conscious  innocence  cannot  bear  up
against  continued  public  detraction.  It  will  be  seen  by  refer-
ence to  Mr.  Parker's  statement,  that  Mrs.  B.  was  (previously
to  being  mesmerised)  suffering  daily  from  violent  epileptic
fits.  She  vomited  nearly  all  her  food,  and  her  agonies  from
tic  were  scarcely  to  be  endured.  She  has  not  had  a  fit  since
the  9th  of  June,  and  only  three  since  the  1st  of  January.
The  tic  has  been  in  comparison  (except  when  mentioned  in
the  previous  part  of  the  case)  next  to  nothing  since  the  first
day  she  was  mesmerised ;  and  she  has  vomited  food  but  three
or  four  times  since  the  early  part  of  July,  and  in  every  in-
stance has  this  been  occasioned  by  her  moving  too  soon  after
eating.  Mrs.  B.'s  side  (uterus)  now  causes  her  no  incon-
venience.

I,  in  conclusion,  hope  that  the  interest  of  the  case  will
be  sufficient  apology  for  my  giving  it  in  the  form  of  a  diary;
and  should  the  perusal  of  these  pages  induce  but  one  person
to  persevere  in  a  mesmeric  case,  notwithstanding  apparently
insurmountable  difficulties,  it  will  greatly  add  to  the  pleasure
I  have  received  during  the  progress  of  my  labours.  Many
cases  I  am  confident  fail  for  want  of  sufficient  time  being  devoted
to  them.


by  Mr.  Lucsmoore.  555

Much  has  been  said  respecting  the  substance  which  Mrs.
Bird  ejected  from  her  stomach,  and  of  course  the  antimes-
merists  in  the  neighbourhood  cannot  be  induced  to  believe
one  word  about  her  having  vomited  any  substance  containing
arsenic.  Some  report  that  we  assert  she  vomited  pure  ar-
senic :  others  insinuate  that  the  substance  which  I  say  she
vomited  did  not  come  from  her  stomach,  but  was  placed  in
her  mouth  and  from  thence  ejected  merely  for  the  purpose  of
deception ;  and  this  they  considered  proved,  when  it  was  dis-
covered that  Mrs.  B.  had  caused  arsenic  to  be  purchased
some  little  time  before  she  vomited  the  gritty  substance.  I
was  aware  of  this  months  before  they  said  a  word  about  it ;
Mr.  Parker  knew  it  at  the  time  it  was  procured;  and  who
will  it  be  supposed  was  our  informant?  Why  Mrs.  Bird
herself !  The  fact  is,  the  arsenic  was  never  in  her  possession,
but  was  brought  by  the  chemist  of  whom  she  purchased  it  for
the  purpose  of  his  using  it  in  her  garden,  mixed  with  salt,  to
destroy  slugs.  The  evening  proving  wet,  he  came  over  the
next  morning  and  buried  it  in  the  earth.  During  the  night
it  was  in  Mrs.  B.'s  house;  a  person  at  the  time  staying  with
her  had  it  locked  away  and  kept  ike  key,  so  that  Mrs.  Bird  did
not  know  where  it  was  placed ;  and  had  she,  there  was  no
means  of  her  getting  at  it.

As  I  am  one  of  those  foolish  people  who  condescend  to
believe  what  they  see,  my  opinion  on  the  subject  would  not
have  been  altered  if  Mrs.  Bird  had  kept  any  quantity  of
arsenic  in  her  possession.  I  assert  (and  I  flatter  myself  that
at  least  those  who  know  me,  and  whose  opinion  I  value,  will  not
doubt  my  word)  that  on  two  occasions  a  gritty  substance,
subsequently  found  to  contain  arsenic,  was  in  my  presence
ejected  from  Mrs.  Bird^s  stomach.  As  to  her  having  concealed
it  in  her  mouth,  that  is  quite  out  of  the  question,  for  she
could  not,  during  the'  time  I  was  with  her  before  it  was
ejected,  have  spoken  plainly  had  there  been  anything  in  her
mouth.  Besides  which,  how  was  she  to  get  it  into  the  state
in  which  it  is,  for  anything  to  all  appearance  less  like  arsenic
can  scarcely  be  conceived.  In  one  point  of  view  it  is  perhaps
unfortunate  that  Mrs.  B.  should  have  purchased  arsenic  at
this  particular  time,  as  it  enables  uncandid  people  to  insinuate
that  the  said  arsenic  has  been  used  for  the  purposes  of  decep-
tion. But  leaving  out  of  view  the  circumstance  of  both  Mr.
Parker  and  myself  knowing  all  about  her  having  procured
the  article,  Mrs.  B.'s  openly  sending  for  arsenic  is  I  think  a
clear  proof  that  no  trick  was  intended,  and  strongly  confirms
my  statement  that  she,  on  arousing,  recollects  nothing  that
has  taken  place  during  her  sleep-waking.  An  impostor  would


556  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  ^c,

not^  I  should  say^  do  what  would  lead  to  certain  detection.
Added  to  this^  the  watery  rash^  garlic  eructations^  and  pain
in  the  calves  of  the  legs^  are  indications  of  the  presence
of  ahenic  in  the  system.  All  these  she  experienced  and
complained  of  to  Mr.  Parker^  tong  before  mesmerism  was
even  named  in  this  neighbourhood.

Once  more ;  must  not  the  system  from  some  cause  have
been  much  paralyzed^  to  allow  of  very  good  sal  volatile  being
taken  with  only  two  parts  out  of  three  water  ?  and  I  have^  at
the  time  she  prescribed  it  for  herself^  often  seen  her  take  it
of  that  strength.  I  hope  I  shall  be  excused  this  digression,
as  I  feely  on  Mrs.  Bird's  account,  strongly  on  the  subject,
she  having  been  branded  as  an  impostor  by  those  who  can
know  nothing  of  her  case.

My  friend,  Mr.  Janson,  has  examined  the  ejected  sub-
stance under  a  powerful  microscope,  and  is  satisfied  it  is  not
a  mechanical  mixture,

Mr.  Herapath,  the  eminent  chemist,  has  published  the
following  letter  in  the  Western  Times : —

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Western  Times.

"Bristol,  Dec.  2nd,  1846.
"  Sir, — My  attention  has  been  caUed  to  a  controversy  which  has,
for  some  time,  been  carried  on  in  your  city,  upon  the  reality  of  cer-
tain exhibitions  and  statements  in  relation  to  mesmerism,  and  I  have
been  solicited  by  the  exhibitor  on  one  side,  and  opponents  on  the
other,  to  express  an  opinion  upon  the  possibility  of  a  lai^  quantity
of  arsenic  ('  enough  to  kill  20  men')  remaining  in  a  living  stomach
for  many  years,  and  then  of  having  been  thrown  up  during  mes-
meric clairvoyance.  Of  course  in  the  absence  of  more  definite  in-
formation I  could,  in  reply,  merely  state  that  no  such  case  had  ever
occurred  in  my  experience,  or  within  the  course  of  my  reading.
Since  then,  Mr.  Parker,  sureeon,  of  Exeter,  the  exhibitor  and  ad-
vocate of  mesmerism,  has  called  upon  me  with  the  matter  said  to  be
ejected,  and  having  expressed  a  wish  to  have  all  the  facts  enquired
into,  I  obtained  from  him  a  small  portion  of  each  of  the  two  packets,
one  of  which  he  said  had  been  caught  and  identified  by  a  gentleman
who  was  present  at  the  time  of  ejection,  and  the  other  which  had
not  been  so  identified.  I  have  submitted  those  to  chemical  enquiry,
and  I  find  them  to  be  nearly  alike  in  appearance  and  chemical  com-
position. They  are  pulverulent,  and  slightly  agglomerated,  the
colour  whitish — or  rather  white,  with  a  shade  of  brown.  The
microscope  shews  the  structure  to  be  crystalline,  and  capable  of  de-
polarizing light;  they  contain  one-twentieth  part  of  their  weight  of
arsenious  acid,  combined  with  lime  as  arsenite  of  lime;  the  re-
mainder is  crystalline  carbonate  of  lime,  with  a  little  organic  matter
of  animal  origin.  I  did  not  weigh  what  I  saw  in  Mr.  Parker's  pos-
session, nor  have  I  any  means  of  knowing  the  entire  weight  of  what


by  Mr,  Luxmoore.  557

was  said  to  be  ejected — ^what  I  receiyed  was  half  a  grain  of  the
identified,  and  four-tenths  of  a  grain  of  the  other,  and  I  should
judge  them  to  be  a  tenth  part  of  what  I  saw.  If  I  am  right  in  this,
the  total  quantity  of  arsenious  acid  in  it  would  be  under  half  a  grain
— a  quantity  certainly  not  enough  to  kill  an  adult  human  being,  and
especially  as  it  is  partly  neutralized  by  lime,  which,  to  a  certain
extent,  destroys  its  poisonous  quaUties.  The  smallest  quantity  of
uncombiued  arsenious  acid  which  is  recorded  as  destroying  hfe  from
its  action  on  the  stomach  is  six  grains,  and  that  was  in  the  case  of  a
child.

"  Such  a  compound  as  that  I  refer  to  might  be  formed  if  '  arsen-
ical solution,'  arsenite  of  potassa  and  lime  water,  were  mixed  to-
gether in  a  neutral  solution  containing  animal  matter;"  but  I  cannot
understand  how  it  could  remain  in  a  human  stomach  for  years,
knowing  as  I  do  that  the  contents  of  almost  every  stomach  ia  acid,
from  the  presence  of  free  hydrochloric  acid  and  biphosphate  of  lime,
both  of  which  would  constantly  tend  to  dissolve  and  decompose  it.

''  I  have  neither  the  time  nor  the  inclination  to  be  drawn  into  a
controversy  of  such  a  length  as  this  appears  to  be,  and  I  would  re-
spectfully recommend  the  beUigerents  to  abandon  the  mere  expres-
sion of  opinion,  and  to  resort  to  the  application  of  practical  teats
to  prove  or  disprove  the  possession  of  the  powers  claimed — thus
strangers  with  diseases  not  apparent  might  surely  be  subjected  to  the
clairvoyant  by  disinterested  persons.  If  she  judges  rightly  in  a
majority  of  cases,  a  favourable  opinion  would  follow,  and  in  the
Exeter  Infirmary  patients  about  to  submit  to  surgical  operations
could  be  mesmerised — if  only  two  or  three  of  them  underwent  the
operations  without  feeling  pain  more  would  be  done  to  estabUsh  mes-
merism than  by  writing  hundreds  of  columns  in  newspapers.

''  I  am.  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

"  William  Herapath.*'

It  will  be  observed  that  Mr.  Herapath  considers  both  the
specimens  given  to  him  by  Mr.  Parker  ''  nearly  alike  in  ap-
pearance and  chemical  composition.^'  Dr.  William  Gregory,
to  whose  report  I  shall  hereafter  refer,  coincides  in  this
opinion.  I  therefore  consider  it  proved  that  the  substance
ejected  in  my  presence,  and  what  was  before  vomited,  are
essentially  identical  in  their  contents.  With  regard  to  Mr.
Herapath's  assertion  that  he  cannot  understand  how  it  could
remain  in  the  human  stomach  so  many  years,  &c.,  it  must  be
taken  with  the  due  consideration  that,  although  a  most  emi-
nent chemist,  he  is  not,  I  believe,  a  medical  man ;  and  also
that  the  question  was  put  to  him,  as  to  arsenic  enough  to  kill
twenty  men.  I  should  before  have  stated  that  the  entire
quantity  of  gritty  substance  ejected  by  Mrs.  Bird  is  about

u  *<  The  patient  is  said  to  have  formerly  taken  these  as  medicines  at  the


same  time."


558  Case  of  Epilepiic  and  other  Fits,  8[C.,

one  drachm.  It  has  been  stated  that  Mrs.  B.  took  bat  a
single  half  ounce  of  liquor  arsenicalis^  which  would  contain
rather  more  than  two  grains  of  arsenic.  This  is  not  the  case,
as  Mr.  Parker  well  knows  from  statements  received  when  he
in  1834  became  her  sole  medical  attendant.  The  liquor  arse-
nicalis  was  sometimes  procured  by  her  late  husband^  and
sometimes  by  a  servant.  Mr.  Bird^  being  in  a  public  office,
was  in  Jthe  habit  of  purchasing  things  at  dififerent  chemists
who  frequented  the  office  in  which  he  was  engaged.  I  men-
tion this,  as  a  druggist  in  Exeter  has  stated  that  only  once
did  he  make  up  a  prescription  for  Mrs.  Bird  containing
arsenic.  Her  then  medical  attendant^  from  whom  Mrs.  B.
received  the  greatest  kindness  and  attention  while  under  his
care,  frequently  himself  brought  medicines  in  his  pocket  for
her;  but  whether  that  containing  liquor  arsenicalis  formed
any  part  of  them^  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining.

I  now  with  great  pleasure  come  to  the  analysis  and
opinion  of  Dr.  William  Gregory,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in
the  University  of  Edinburgh ;  but  before  doing  so,  I  confess
my  utter  want  of  language  adequately  to  express  my  sense  of
the  obligation  we  are  under  to  him  for  the  unremitted  atten-
tion he  has  paid,  and  trouble  he  has  taken,  to  determine  the
contents  of  the  substance  submitted  to  him,  and  also  for
allowing  us  to  publish  so  full  a  report  of  his  labours  and
opinions.  Dr.  Gregory,  it  will  be  recollected,  is  not  only  a
chemist,  but  also  an  eminent  physician,  and  the  translator
of  all  Liebig's  works  on  chemistry  known  in  this  country.

Dr.  GregoTkfs  Analysis,  extracted  from  a  letter  addressed  to

Mr.  Parker.

"  297  milligrammes  of  the  powder,  about  4*5  grains,  were  boiled
ten  times  in  succession,  each  time  with  about  30  grammes  of  distilled
water,  and  the  solutions  filtered,  united,  and  evaporated  to  dryness
in  the  vapour  bath.  The  liquid  when  very  concentrated  became
covered  with  a  film,  which  is  the  case  with  a  solution  of  arsenite  of
lime.  A  Uttle  organic  matter,  of  a  brown  colour,  separated  towards
the  end  of  the  evaporation,  but  when  dry  the  residue  was  nearly
white,  the  organic  matter  being  masked  by  the  arsenite  of  lime.  It
weighed,  after  beine  heated  for  a  long  time  at  212°,  45*5  milli-
grammes. This  dried  mass  had  all  the  characters  of  a  similar  one
obtained  by  boiling  arsenite  of  lime  with  water,  and  drying  up  the
solution.  In  both  cases  the  film  appeared,  and  if  any  crystallization
existed  in  the  dry  mass,  it  was  very  confused  in  both.

"  The  mass  was  dissolved  in  boiling  water  and  filtered  from  a
little  organic  matter  which  had  become  insoluble,  or  at  least  was  not
dissolved  by  this  smaller  quantity  of  boiling  water.  The  solution  in
both  cases  was  slightly  alkaline  to  very  delicate  test-paper,  indicating


by  Mr.  Luxmoore.  559

the  presence  of  basic  arsenite  of  lime.  It  gave  a  yellow  precipitate
with  nitrate  of  silver.  In  short,  the  solution  was  a  nearly  pure  solu-
tion of  arsenite  of  lime.  In  order  to  have  a  control  for  the  quantity
of  arsenic  present,  I  acidulated  the  hquid  with  hydrochloric  acid,  and
precipitated  the  arsenic  by  a  current  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  gas.
The  sulphuret  of  arsenic  was  formed  very  abundantly,  and  of  a
perfectly  pure  yellow  colour.  After  standing  in  a  warm  place  till  all
the  smell  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  was  gone,  the  liquid  was  thrown
on  a  filter,  and  the  sulphuret  of  arsenic  well  washed.  It  was  then
dissolved  in  ammonia,  the  solution  dried  up,  and  the  residue,  sul-
phuret of  arsenic,  with  a  trace  of  organic  matter,  after  being  heated
to  212^  for  half  an  hour,  that  is,  till  it  ceased  to  lose  weight,
weighed  30*0  milligrammes,  equivalent  to  24*1  milligrammes  of  arse-
nious  acid,  or  to  44*9  milligrammes  of  basic  arsenite  of  lime.

**  The  matter  dissolved  from  the  powder  by  boiling  water  there-
fore consisted  of,

Basic  arsenite  of  lime 44*9  miUigrammes.

Organic  matter  and  loss  .... 0*6  „

45*5

And  it  contained  24*1  milligrammes, or  about  0*372  of  a  grain
(•^  grain)  of  arsenious  acid.

"  That  portion  of  the  powder  which  had  not  been  dissolved  by
the  boiling  water  contained  the  carbonate  of  lime,  coloured  by  or-
ganic matter.  It  was  dissolved,  as  well  as  what  remained  on  the
filter  through  which  the  boiling  solutions  had  been  filtered,  in  dilute
hydrochloric  acid  ;  the  solution  neutralized  by  ammonia,  (which  was
added  in  slight  excess,  but  caused  no  precipitate,  indicating  the
entire  absence  of  phosphate  of  lime,)  and  precipitated  by  oxalate  of
ammonia.  The  precipitate  was  collected  on  a  filter,  well  washed
and  dried.  After  being  heated  to  212^,  till  its  weight  became  quite
constant,  it  weighed  340  mUligrammes,  equivalent  to  233  miUi-
grammes of  carbonate  of  lime.  I  should  have  said  that  the  greater
part  of  the  organic  matter  remained  undissolved  when  the  original
carbonate  was  acted  on  by  hydrochloric  acid,  but  its  quantity  was  so
small,  and  it  adhered  so  tenaciously  to  the  filter,  that  it  was  abso-
lutely impossible  to  make  a  determination  directly  of  its  weight.  It
gave  out  when  heated  on  platinum  a  smell  of  burnt  animal  matter,
and  no  doubt  contained  a  little  albuminous  or  gelatinous  matter.

"  The  result  of  the  whole  analysis,  therefore,  is  as  follows :

Carbonate  of  Hme 233  milligrammes, or  3*989  grains.

Basic  arsenite  of  hme  . . 44*9  „  0.372 „

Organic  matter  and  loss.  .19*1  „  0*  1 38 „

2970  „  4*500 „


560  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  Fits,  ifc,

Or  in  100  parts.

Carbonate  of  lime 78*45

Basic  arsenite  of  lime 15*1 1

Organic  matter  and  loss 6*44


100-00

The  proportion  of  arsenioas  add  in  100  parts  is  therefore  8*  1 1.

*'  Before  analyzing  the  powder,  I  again  examined  various  portions
of  it  under  the  microscope,  and  in  many  instances  I  perceived  some
irregular  fragments  having  a  decided  appearance  of  ciystaUization ;
but  the  mass  of  powder  is  amorphous,  under  the  weak  power  which
I  employed.  The  crystallized  portions  have  not  in  any  degree  the
aspect  of  the  powder  of  arsenious  acid;  they  much  more  resemble
grains  of  carbonate  of  lime;  and  the  observations  of  Mr.  Herapath,
made  with  a  higher  power,  shew,  I  have  no  doubt  correctly,  that  the
mass  of  the  powder  is  crystalline  carbonate  of  lime.

''From  all  these  observations,  joined  to  those  in  my  former
letters,  I  am  decidedly  of  opinion  that  the  arsenious  acid  present  in
the  powder  is  entirely  in  the  state  of  arsenite  of  lime,  and  that  it
consequentlv  has  not  been  introduced  into  the  stomach  or  into  the
powder  in  the  form  of  the  powder  of  arsenious  acid.

"  Considering  that  your  patient  took  the  arsenic  in  the  form  of
the  liquor  arsenicalis,  and  was  at  the  time  in  the  habit  of  taking
lime  water,  (a  very  unchemical  prescription,  by  the  way,)  it  is  quite
easy  to  see  how  arsenite  of  lime  should  be  formed  in  the  stomach
along  with  carbonate,  and  once  formed,  its  great  insolubility  would
not  onlv  account  for  its  being  found  there  after  so  long  a  time,  but
would  also  explain  how  so  considerable  an  amount  of  arsenic  should
remain  in  the  stomach  without  producing  dangerous  or  even  fatal
effects.  At  the  same  time  it  is  quite  possible  that  a  very  small
portion  might  occasionally  be  dissolved,  and  produce  some  of  the
toxioological  effects  of  arsenic  as  long  as  it  remained.  We  must  bear
in  mind,  too,  that  the  arsenite  of  lime,  besides  its  own  insolubility,
was  further  protected  by  the  presence  of  carbonate  of  lime  in  lai^
excess,  and  of  agglutinating  organic  matter,  which  must  have  de-
fended it  from  solvent  action.  That  it  must  have  been  agglutinated
is  obvious,  otherwise  it  could  not  have  remained  in  the  stomach ;
and  there  can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt  that,  from  the  verv  peculiarly
morbid  state  of  the  stomach  and  digestive  powers,  the  solvent  enei^
in  this  case  was  reduced  to  a  minimum,  and  that,  when  the  patient's
health  began  to  improve,  and  her  stomach  to  assume  in  a  greater
degree  its  normal  powers,  the  agglutinating  matter  was  absorbed,
and  the  insoluble  mass,  thus  disintegrated,  and  more  exposed  to
solvent  action  than  before,  may  have  excited  vomiting,  and  thus
caused  its  own  rejection.  The  physical  appearance  and  chemical
character  as  well  as  the  composition  of  the  powder,  indicate  very
clearly  that  it  has  been  the  result  of  slow  action,  the  organic  matter
being  equally  diffused  in  every  part.  It  is  out  of  the  question  to
suppose  that  the  powder  could  have  been  formed  artificially  by  mix-


by  Mr,  Luxmoore,  561

ing  arsenious  add  with  carbonate  of  lime;  for  the  arsenious  acid  has
certainly  not  been  introduced  as  a  powder.  I  should  say  it  has  been
precipitated  in  the  stomach  by  degrees,  carrying  with  it  some  organic
matter,  as  all  precipitates  do  in  animal  fluids;  and  I  look  on  the
characters  of  this  powder  as  demonstrative  evidence  that  it  has  been
formed  by  a  slow  process  in  the  stomach.

"  From  what  I  have  already  said,  you  will  perceive  that  I  do  not
see  any  reason  why  such  a  powder,  enveloped  no  doubt  in  organic
matter,  should  not  have  remained  in  the  stomach  for  any  length  of
time,  as  long  as  it  formed  a  coherent  mass,  and  that  without  destroy-
ing life.  The  arsenite  of  lime  is  so  insoluble  in  water,  and  above  all
in  cold  alkaline  solutions,  that  I  should  not  hesitate  to  take  a  consi-
derable dose  of  it.  I  should  think  a  very  large  quantity  would  be
required  to  destroy  an  animal,  and  the  experiment  might  be  made;
always  remembering  that  when  enveloped  in  a  large  excess  of  car-
bonate of  lime,  and  agglutinated  by  organic  matter,  it  is  still  more
insoluble  than  when  pure.  I  do  not  therefore  entertain  a  doubt,
that  60  grains  of  this  powder,  containing  9*06  grains  of  basic  arse-
nite of  lime,  equivalent  to  4 '86  grains  of  arsenious  acid,  might,
under  the  circumstances,  remain  for  any  length  of  time  in  the
stomach  without  producing  fatal  effects;  although  the  patient  might
suffer  in  some  degree  from  its  presence.  It  is  not  certam  that  4  or  5
grains  of  arsenious  acid  would  prove  fatal  even  if  pure  and  uncom-
bined,  although  it  might  probably  do  so.  But  it  is  probable  that
there  was  originally  much  more  of  the  powder^  and  that  it  has
gradually  yielded  to  the  solvent  actions  to  which  it  has  been  exposed.
The  symptoms  observed,  more  particularly  the  vomiting  and  the
garlic  eructations  occurring  afler  the  use  of  salt,  would  seem  to
indicate  that  some  portion,  no  doubt  a  very  minute  portion,  of  ar-
senic has  been  in  some  way  dissolved,  possibly  by  free  hydrochloric
acid,  and  has  then  acted  on  the  system  from  time  to  time;  and  it  is
probable  that,  had  no  marked  change  taken  place  in  the  health  of
the  patient,  the  same  slow  process  of  solution  might  have  continued
for  an  indefinite  time.  A  sudden  increase  in  the  action  of  the
absorbents  has  apparently  hastened  the  termination  of  the  process,
and  disintegrated  the  offending  mass  or  concretion,  so  that  the
residue  of  it  has  been  ejected  from  the  stomach.

''The  question  having  been  specifically  put  to  me,  whether  the  gritty
powder  had  the  appearance  of  a  mixture  recently  made  with  a  view  to
imposture,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  that  it  does  not  appear  to
me  to  possess  in  any  degree  the  characters  of  such  a  mixture.  The
crystalline  carbonate  of  lime,  I  think,  must  have  been  slowly  formed
in  a  solution  containing  organic  matter,  and  the  uniform  diffusion  of
the  organic  matter  in  the  powder  leads  to  the  same  conclusion.  It
seems  to  me  exceedingly  improbable  that  an  impostor  should  have
thought  of  converting  the  arsenious  add  into  arsenite  of  lime;  and,
had  the  powder  been  a  mixture  of  the  kind  suggested,  the  arsenious
acid  in  all  probabiUty  would  have  appeared  in  it  uncombined,  and  in
the  form  of  white  grains,  of  which  there  is  in  fact  no  appearance.
"  £ven  supposing  an  impostor  to  have  known  the  mode  of  forma-


562  Case  of  Epileptic  and  other  His,  ^c.

tion  and  the  chemical  characters  of  arsenite  of  lime,  I  consider  it  in
the  highest  degree  improbable  that  he  should  have  been  able  to  form
such  a  powder  as  that  which  I  have  examined.  I  am  sure  that  to
imitate  it  would  be  a  very  difficult  task  for  the  most  dexterous
chemist.

(Signed) "  William  Gregory."

Mrs.  Bird  has  for  years  had  an  insurmountable  dislike  to
salt  (first  engendered  by  the  unpleasant  eructations  previously
alluded  to)^  and  consequently  she  never  takes  any  with  her
food;  hence  it  is  more  than  probable  that  she  has  less
hydrochloric  acid  in  her  stomach  than  is  found  in  that  of
most  other  persons^  and  this  would  account  for  the  arsenite
of  lime  being  so  little  acted  on  by  the  gastric  juice.

J.  C.  LUXMOORE.

Bose  Mounts  Alphington^  Devon.


*^*  It  is  impossible  for  us  to  publish  this  case  without  express-
ing our  admiration  of  Mr.  Luxmoore's  indefatigable  kindness  to  the
afflicted  ladv.  He  resides  nearly  four  miles  from  her  house,  is  a
private  gentleman,  and  a  county  magistrate,  and  his  arduous  exer-
tions were  prompted  solely  by  benevolence  and  the  love  of  scientific
truth.  Mr.  Parker's  noble  conduct  is  likewise  above  all  praise,  sur-
rounded as  he  is  by  brother  medical  men  reviling  him  and  mesmerism
from  morning  to  night.  The  case  treated  so  perseveringly  by  Mr.
Janson,  and  detailed  in  our  last  number,  does  him  infinite  honour :
and  the  great  ability  and  untiring  unflinching  courage  with  which  he
has  long  castigated  the  ignorant  and  venomous  foes  of  mesmerism
in  the  Exeter  papers  lays  us  all  under  deep  obhgation  to  him.  He
has  compelled  them  to  know  and  speak  of  ThelZoist,  which  they
would  fam  not  know,  or  pretend  not  to  know.  The  medical  body  of
Exeter,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Parker,  as  far  as  we  are  aware,
have  acted  a  sad  part  by  despising  mesmerism,  which  properly  be-
longs to  the  profession,  and  by  allowing  two  gentlemen  not  of  the
profession  to  stand  forth  proudly  as  its  noble  champions,  cultivators,
and  propagators  in  their  sie&d.'—Zoist.


( 563 )

IX. More  painless  Surgical  Operations, Report  of  a  Com-
mittee  at  Calcutta  in  favour  of  the  truth  and  utility  of
Mesmerism. New  mode  of  inducing  Coma,  and  the  Con-
version OP  THE  Profession  to  the  duty  op  preventing
Pain  in  Operations. By  Dr.  Elliotson.

*'  On  Thartday  evening  Mr.  Romball  entered  ap«>n  an  elaborate,  and  most  lucid  and  loglcft^
exposition  of  tlie  fallacy  of  the  entire  syatem  onder  review.  Clairvoyance.  Somnolency,  Homo
nambolism,  Phreno-Mcsineritm,  Metallo-Mesmeriam,  Kigiditv  of  Limb,  Insensibility  to  Pain,
&c.,  &c.,  &c.,  all  fell  proHtrate  one  after  the  other  before  bis  almost  Inspired  ontlaoght.  Never
did  bclievfr  exert  himself  with  more  fervor,  more  tremendous  energy,  to  establish  a  faith,
than  did  Mr.  Raniball  on  Thursday  night  tu  destroy  one.  He  stood  like  a  Luther  before  the
hundreds  of  Intently-listening  believers  and  infidel*  present,  and  sratlered  Into  *lhin  air'  cloud
after  cloud  of  the  more  than  Romish  accredited  superstitions  and  miraclei  of  mesmerism.
Names,  placei,  dates,  ci  ream  stances,  facts,  were  adduced  with  the  utmost  minuteness  of  de-
tail, and  'case'  alter  'ca»e*  was  brought  under  the  searching  test  of  the  long  experience,  the
varied  knowledge,  the  extreme  logical  perspicacity,  of  the  lecturer;  and,  to  our  apprehensions
at  least,  the  total  and  almost  8ky>reaching  fabric  of  the  '  Science'  fell  to  the  ground  before
him,  tower  after  tower,  buttress  after  buttress,  till  at  last  the  very  basements  sank  into  nought,
•nd  of  all  the  edifice  bat  late  so  erect  and  aerial  the  merciless  disenchanting  axe  of  the  lecturer

'  Left  not  a  rack  behind.'

"Then,  apparently  excited  into  irresistible  truthful  passion  by  the  recurrence  to  this  part  of
his  subject,  he  went  on  to  denounce  Dr.  Elliotson  as  a  man  who  had  descended  from  the
pedestal  of  his  legitimate  professional  renown  to  disport  in  the  fields  not  only  of  *  blarney,'
bnt  of  quackery,  of  cheatitig;  and  had  there  continued  so  to  prank  it,  even  after  his  mesmeric
Tproiegeta,  the  notorious  girls  Okey,  had  been  demonstrated  by  Mr.  Wakley  to  the  whole
medical  and  scientific  world  to  be  nothing  belter  than  impostors  of  the  most  dusiplcable  order,
and  Dr.  Elliotson,  as  a  consequence,  to  be  either  their  accomp/ice  or  their  dupe.  But,  Mr.
Rnmball  did  not  stop  here:  in  language  of  extreme  power,  but  in  a  manner  as  veiled  and
delicate  as  the  presence  of  an  audience  of  which  the  belter  sex  constituted  the  larger  portion
rendered  decorous,  went  on  to  show,  in  Dr.  Eiliotsou's  own  words  (in  the  ZoUt)  bow  seduc-
tions and  debaneherirs  could  be  and  had  been  practised  under  the  specious  pretence*  and
jargon  of  mesmerism  ;*  and  reprobated  the  whole  as  not  only  an  imposture,  bnt  as  a  thing
dangeroos,  and  not  seldom /ofa/,  to  domestic  peace  and  virtue.*  As  for  ihe  Cherbourg  case,
Mr.  Rnmball  simply  refuted  his  assent  to  its  relative  veracity." — Account  of  a  Lecture  at
Jersey  against  Mesmerism,  by  Mr.  Rdhbaix,  Surokon.  Jeraey  and  Guem$ey  Military  and
Naoal  Gaaette,  May  Snd,  1840.

**  Being  then  the  Professor  of  Medicine  at  the  University  College,  Loudon,  and  Physi-
cian to  the  North  London  Hospital,  Dr.  Elliotson  was  4t  that  time  one  of  the  most  riring
physicians  in  the  metropolis,  and  enjoyed  a  very  extensive  practice.  His  publications  bad
gained  him  honour  and  esteem  in  the  medical  and  scientific  world,  and  he  was  universally  looked
on  as  one  of  the  shining  lights  of  our  profession,  &c.  With  the  ardour  of  an  active  mind,
the  perceptive  faculties  much  overbalanced  by  the  contemplative.t  he  rushed  headlong  and
blindfold  into  all  the  mysteries  of  mesmerism  in  its  mo.^t  extravagant  absurdities.  See,
Dr.  Elliotson  was  a  perfect  dupe;  his  love  of  the  marvellous  allowed  him  to  pass  beyond
the  bounds  of  the  possible,  ana  the  governors  to  save  their  hospital  and  school  from  ruin,
were  obliged  by  re^pteatinff  the  doctor'$  retianatUmt  lo  put  a  stop  to  the  disgraceful  scenes
daily  enacted."— iln  Anonymtnu  Swyeon, IVe$tem  Timet,  Exeter. Dec.  19,  1840.

I.  Painless  removal  of  a  JSimor  weighing  112  pounds.

By  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Ashburner  I  am  enabled  to  give  the
following  extract  from  the  Bombay  BUMonthly  Times,  of
Oct.  16— Nov.  1.

"  The  Committee  appointed  by  Government  to  report  on
the  value  of  mesmerism  in  surgical  operations^  have  handed

*  Shocking  untruths.— Zouf.

t  This  is  rather  amusing,  since  do  speculations  are  to  be  found  in  any  of
my  writings  or  lectures,  and  I  have  given  to  the  world  nothing  but  solid
facts  which  have  all  stood  the  test  of  experience:  and  I  have  been  considered
by  the  profession  as  so  acute  and  faithful  an  observer, — to  have  such  sharp
eyes,  ears,  and  finger-ends,  and  '*  perceptive  faculties,'*  that  my  diagnosis
of  cases  was  sought  for  from  all  parts  of  the  country.  Whether  deservedly
or  not,  I  will  not  pretend  to  say :  but  so  it  was.  Dr.  Simpson  of  York
told  me  that  Dr.  Locock  declared  to  him  that  my  diagnosis  was  con-
sidered all  but  superhuman. — J.  E.

I  This  is  an  entire  untruth* I  resigned  spontaneously,  and  took  the

VOL.  IV.  Q  Q


564  More  painless  Surgical  Operations^

up  their  opinion  to  the  authorities.  The  committee  had  met
fourteen  times^  each  sitting  being  of  two  hours^  duration.
Appended  to  their  report  were  minutes  of  all  proceedings,
and  details  of  the  different  cases  which  had  been  kept.  It  is
to  be  hoped  their  enquiries  have  tended  to  prove  the  value  of
the  science,  and  that  they  will  induce  Government  to  intro-
duce its  practice  into  general  use.  Of  the  value  of  mesmer-
ism in  surgical  operations.  Dr.  Esdaile  has  supplied  abundant
evidence.  The  Calcutta  Star,  of  the  15th  Oct.,  published
an  account  of  the  removal  of  a  tumor  the  day  previous  from
a  man's  body  which  weighed  seven  stone,  which  occupied  six
and  a  half  minutes  in  the  performance ; — ^the  patient  moved
neither  muscle  or  limb  during  the  time  it  was  being  removed,
and  did  not  awake  till  roused  with  a  view  of  being  given  some
wine  and  water  I  There  could  be  no  mistake  in  the  matter :
the  operation  was  performed  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Halliday,
Mr.  Beadon,  Mr.  Young,  Mr.  Hume,  Dr.  Mc  Pherson,  Dr.
Jackson,  Dr.  Stewart,  Dr.  Burt,  Dr.  R.  Stuart,  Dr.  Taylor,
and  Dr.  Huffnagle.

"  We  subjoin  the  report  of  the  operation  entire  from  the
Eastern  Star  of  the  16th  ult.  It  puts  the  question  of  the  ad-
vantages of  mesmerism  beyond  a  doubt : —

"  '  Report  of  Dr.  Esdaile's  last  Mesmeric  Operation  at  the
Native  Hospital, — Calcutta,  llth  October,  1846.  Hurromun-
doo  Laha,  aged  27,  hearing  that  I  was  in  Calcutta,  came  to
the  Native  Hospital  to-day  with  an  enormous  scrotal  tumor.
It  measures  seven  feet  in  circumference,  and  two  feet  round
its  neck.  The  disease  began  seven  years  ago  with  hydrocele,
and  its  progress  has  been  very  rapid  during  the  last  three
years.  He  has  monthly  attacks  of  fever,  when  the  tumor
swells,  and  discharges  water.  Although  the  tumor  is  actually
as  large  as  his  whole  body,  (he  appears  to  be  about  eight
stone  weight,)  his  person  is  in  tolerable  condition,  and  his
constitution  does  not  seem  much  broken.  10th.  He  was
mesmerised  to-day  for  the  first  time  for  two  hours.  He  slept
profoundly,  and  was  partially  cataleptic, llth.  No  mesmeric

whole  college  by  surprise;  and  such  was  the  universal  consternation,  (for  I
resigned  in  the  middle  of  my  course  of  lectures,  because  I  was  forbidden  to
give  my  patients  the  blessings  of  mesmerism),  that  neither  members  of  the
council  nor  professors  would  believe  my  resignation  at  first.  They  were  at
their  wit's  end  to  supply  my  place :  and  at  last  went  to  Dr.  Copland,  whom
they  prevailed  upon  to  fill  up  the  gap ;  but  applied  afterwards  to  another
whom  they  engaged  permanently.  The  writer  must  have  told  this  untruth
wilfully,  because  the  facts  are  notorious,  were  published,  even  in  the  last
Zoistj  p.  425,  to  which  I  refer  every  person.  Mr.  Ruroball  is  reported  in  the
Mirror  of  1845  to  have  made  the  same  assertion.  But  if  he  made  it,  he  made
it  barefacedly  :  the  present  cowardly  writer  hides  his  face  with  crape,  and
would  be  fit  for  Italy  were  he  not  an  Unitarian.^J.  E.


communicated  by  Dr.  EUioison,  565

effects  to-day,  on  account  of  his  system  being  deranged  by
fever.  12tb.  The  mesmeric  phenomena  are  less  striking  than
on  the  first  day.  He  is  still  feverish.  13th.  This  day  being
excessively  rainy^  I  did  not  go  to  hospital,  thinking  the  gen-
tlemen interested  in  the  progress  of  the  case  would  not  ven-
ture to  the  hospital  in  such  bad  weather.  At  2  o^clock  p.m.
I  received  a  note  from  an  amateur  who  had  gone  to  watch
the  progress,  informing  me  that  the  patient  had  that  day  ex-
hibited the  most  perfect  catalepsy,  and  might  have  been  made
into  "minced  meat"  without  knowing  it.  14th.  The  same
appearances  being  present  as  yesterday,  I  proceeded  to  ope-
rate on  hinu  The  tumor  had  daily  been  tied  up  in  a  sheet,
to  which  was  attached  a  rope  rove  through  a  pulley  in  a  rafter.
The  first  part  of  the  operation  was  performed  without  dis-
turbing him,  as  he  lay ;  the  mattress  was  then  hauled  down
till  his  pelvis  rested  on  the  end  of  the  bed ;  his  legs  were
held  asunder,  and  the  pulley  put  in  motion  to  develop  the
neck  of  the  mass.  It  was  transfixed  with  a  long  two-edged
knife,  and  removed  by  circular  incisions,  right  and  left.  The
flow  of  venous  blood  was  appalling,  but  soon  moderated  under
general  pressure  of  the  operator's  hand.  The  arterial  bleed-
ing was  not  formidable,  and  was  not  a  source  of  danger.
The  mass,  half  an  hour  after  its  removal,  weighed  103  lbs.,
and  with  the  blood  and  fluid  contained  in  it,  must  have  been
upwards  of  eight  stone  weight.  During  the  whole  operation,
/  was  not  sensible  of  a  quiver  of  the  flesh  or  the  slightest
movement  of  his  limbs  or  body.  Dr.  Duncan  Stewart  held
his  pulse  all  the  time,  and  had  the  best  opportunities  of  ob-
servation; he  has  kindly  furnished  me  with  the  following
notes. — Jas.  Esuaile,  M.D.'

"  '  The  time  occupied  in  the  operation  was  six  minutes,
including  the  application  of  ligatures  to  the  spermatic  arte-
ries, and  three  or  four  other  vessels  that  spouted.  The  arte-
rial hemorrhage  was  veir  small  indeed,  but  the  welling  of
blood  at  the  movement  of  each  transverse  incision  was  appal-
ling. The  loss  could  not  have  been  less  than  10  or  12  lbs.
The  patient  remained  throughout  most  perfectly  still  and  mo»
tionless.  I  held  his  pulse  the  whole  time,  and  counted  it
carefully.  Immediately  on  the  removal  of  the  tumor  it  sank
to  zero ;  his  face  became  pale  and  cold,  sweat  bedewed  his
forehead,  and  it  was  not  till  his  head  was  lowered  by  the
withdrawal  of  one  or  two  pillows  that  he  recovered  from  the
collapse  caused  by  so  sudden  and  great  a  withdrawal  of  vital
stimulus  from  the  heart  and  brain.  The  pulse  gradually
returned,  and  was  foi;ind,  when  first  counted,  to  be  120,  very

Q  Q  2


566  More  painless  Surgical  Operations,

small^  compressible^  and  intermitting,  but  there  was  noi
the  slightest  evidence  of  consciousness  or  pain.  It  was  now
deemed  necessary  by  Dr.  Taylor  and  myself  to  pour  some
wine  and  hartshorn  down  his  throat;  but  as  he  could  not
swallow  in  this  state^  it  was  allowed  us  to  dash  cold  water  in
his  face,  blow  in  his  eyes,  and  fan  him,  by  which  means  he
awoke  from  his  trance,  recovered  sufficient  sensibility  to  drink
some  brandy  and  water,  and  presently  subsided  into  perfect
repose ;  the  pulse  however  remaining  very  weak^  and  settling
at  100.  No  active  hemorrhage  ensued  with  this  reaction,
but  two  or  three  more  small  arteries  were  tied,  cold  cloths  were
applied  to  the  raw  surface,  and  the  patient  was  then  care-
fully removed  to  a  clean  bed.  In  the  course  of  the  afternoon,
as  I  was  informed,  some  symptoms  of  collapse  occurred,  such
as  vomiting  and  restlessness,  and  some  seven  or  eight  more
vessels  were  successively  secured  by  the  assistants,  who  re-
mained in  watchful  charge  of  him.  He  passed  a  good  night ;
the  wound  was  stitched  and  strapped  the  following  day,  and
on  visiting  him  this  morning  I  found  him  looking  composed
and  sleeping  soundly  :  the  parts  looking  well,  and  with  every
promise  of  a  most  successful  cure. — D.  Stewart,  M.D.,
Presidency  Surgeon. — Calcutta,  Oct.  16/A,  1846.*  "

On  reading  this,  I  wrote  to  Dr.  Esdaile's  excellent  brother,
the  Rev.  David  Esdaile,  in  Scotland,  requesting  the  latest
professional  news  he  had  received  from  the  doctor.  The  fol-
lowing is  the  reply  : —

"  Manse  of  Rescobie,  Forfar,
« 18th  Dec,  1846.
"Dear  Sir, — In  compliance  with  your  request,  I  have
much  pleasure  in  communicating  the  latest  intelligence  re-
garding my  brother  and  his  mesmeric  doings.  I  have  a
letter  from  him,  dated  Calcutta,  18th  October,  in  which  he
tells  me  that  he  has  come  successfully  through  the  ordeal  of
the  Mesmeric  Committee,  appointed  by  the  (Jovemment  of
Bengal.  Two  members  of  the  seven  composing  this  Com-
mittee were  selected  on  account  of  their  notorious  opposition
to  mesmerism ;  '  yet,*  observes  my  brother,  '  they  have  signed
a  report  to  Government,  confessing  to  have  witnessed  seven
painless  operations  in  a  fortnight,  I  have  not  seen  the  re-
port, but  it  is  favourable,  with  some  attempts  at  damaging
with  faint  praise,  and  doubts  of  its  general  applicability ;
mere  grimaces  and  helpless  kickings  against  the  pricks  of  the
doctor-craft,  which  will  be  duly  disposed  of  when  the  report
is  printed. I  am  now  waiting  for  orders  from  Government,


communicated  by  Dr.  EHiotson,  567

The  Governor  of  Bengal  tells  me  that  he  wishes  me  to  prose-
cute the  matter  into  all  its  practical  details^  and  I  have  asked
for  an  experimental  hospital  for  this  purpose^  but  have  no
idea  how  it  will  end.

"  *  Having  finished  with  the  Committee,  I  gave  a  public
entertainment,  three  days  ago,  to  some  of  the  leading  officials
here, when I abstracted a scrotal  tumor, eight stone

WEIGHT (the weight OF  THE MAN's  WHOLE  BODy), without

its  owner  knoiving  anything  aboui  it,  and  he  is  doing  very
well.  Pray  tell  Dr.  Elliotson  that  the  tumor  has  been  voted
to  him  by  acclamation,  and  is  in  rum,  waiting  his  acceptance.
It  was  proposed  to  send  it  to  Dr.  Forbes,  but,  on  the  prin-
ciple of  " detur  digniori*^  Dr.  Elliotson  was  preferred.  I  am
glad  that  he  has  lived  to  defile  the  graves  of  his  enemies/

"  In  the  conclusion  of  the  letter  my  brother  complains  bit-
terly of  a  sentence  of  '  cruel  nonsense,'  published  in  his  book.
As  the  only  remedy,  I  beg  you  will  be  so  kind  as  publish  what
he  says  in  The  Zoist.  *  What  I  wrote  was — "  And  may  it  not
be  the  nervous  energy  passing  oflF  by  the  organs  of  sense,  the
lungs,  and  periphery  of  the  body,  retaining  its  vital  proper-
ties, and  remaining  under  the  direction  of  the  will  for  a  time,
even  beyond  the  surface  of  the  body."  There  is  meaning,  if
not  truth,  in  this :  as  it  stands,  it  is  mere  verbiage.  Could  it
not  be  corrected  ?  I  become  every  day  better  satisfied  with
my  theory,  and  am  vexed  to  see  it  so  mauled.'

"  Trusting  to  hear  of  your  gracious  acceptance  of  the  rare
gift  presented  as  a  homage  to  your  talents  and  noble  exer-
tions in  the  cause  of  science  and  humanity,

"  I  am,  dear  Sir,

"  Yours  sincerely,

''David  Esdaile.
"  John  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.''

As  soon  as  the  mass  arrives,  I  shall  have  great  pleasure
in  shewing  it  to  any  gentleman  who  may  call  at  my  house
in  Conduit  Street.

II.  Removal  of  a  Tumor  from  the  Neck.

M.  Durand,  Professor  of  Philosophy  in  the  College  of
France,  has  sent  me  the  following  account  of  another  painless
operation  in  France : —

''  We,  the  undersigned,  inhabitants  of  Cherbourg,  having
witnessed  on  this  19th  September,  1846,  at  half-past  three
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  an  operation  just  terminated,  with
the  greatest  success,  by  Dr.  Loysell,  assisted  by  Dr.  Gibon,


568  More  painless  Surgical  Operations,

upon  Miss  Anne  Le  Marchand^  of  Portbail,  thirty  years  of
age,  placed  in  a  state  of  mesmeric  sleep  and  perfect  insenH^
bility,  in  our  presence,  we  attest  and  certify  to  the  following
facts : —

"  At  forty  minutes  past  two  o'clock  the  patient  was  mes-
merised to  sleep  by  Professor  Durand,  at  the  distance  of  two
metres  (about  80  inches)  and  in  less  than  three  seconds.  The
surgeon,  then,  in  order  to  satisfy  himself  of  the  insensibility
of  his  subject,  plunged  a  long  stilette,  such  as  used  by  dis-
sectors, several  times  abruptly  into  her  neck;  a  bottle  of
concentrated  ammonia  was  also  placed  under  her  nose.  She
continued  in  a  state  of  immobility;  no  sensation  was  per-
ceived ;  no  alteration  was  visible  in  her  features :  not  a  single
external  impression  was  manifested.

"  At  the  end  of  five  or  six  minutes  of  sleep,  the  patient
was  awaked  by  her  mesmeriser,  in  a  second.  After  a  few
moments  she  was  re-mesmerised,  as  at  first,  but  at  a  still
greater  distance.  The  physicians  were  immediately  informed
by  Professor  Durand  that  the  operation  might  be  commenced
with  perfect  safety,  and  that  they  might  freely  converse  aloud
as  to  the  state  of  the  patient  without  fear  of  being  heard, — ^so
deep  and  perfect  was  her  insensibility.

"  At  ten  minutes  before  three  o'clock,  the  operator  made
straight  downwards,  behind  and  above  the  mastoid  process^
an  incision  eight  centimetres  in  length  (above  3  inches).  A
layer  of  muscles  presented  itself  first.  Then  a  large  gland
came  into  view,  which  was  carefully  dissected  away  in  four
minutes  and  a  half,

"  The  wound  was  washed.  It  was  now  discovered,  what
it  was  difficult  to  foresee,  that  there  were  two  other  glands ;
the  superior  extending  its  roots  deep  into  the  tissues,  and  in
immediate  contact  with  the  carotid,  the  principal  artery  of
the  neck  :  the  other,  less  difficult  to  isolate,  in  consequence
of  its  connexion,  and  lying  among  the  muscles  situated  in
the  side  of  the  neck.  These  two  latter  glands  were  extracted
in  three  minutes.

"  In  dissecting  the  glands,  a  vein  of  large  capacity  was
wounded.  The  surgeon  tried  to  stop  the  flow  of  blood  by
causing  the  patient  to  respire,  so  as  to  strongly  dilate  the
chest.  She  instantly  did  this  at  the  request  of  her  mesmer-
iser ;  but,  the  effort  being  insufficient,  it  became  necessary  to
apply  a  ligature.

"  The  greater  part  of  the  spectators  now  approached  the
patient ;  several  medical  men  introduced  their  fingers  into  the
gaping  wound,  which  was  more  than  eight  centimetres  in
depth,  and  distinctly  felt  the  pulsation  of  the  carotid  artery.


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliot  son.  5G9

"  During  the  whole  of  the  operation,  Miss  Le  Marchand
remained  calm  and  impassible;  no  emotion  agitated  her;  no
mtiscular  contraction  took  place^  not  even  while  the  knife
was  penetrating  deeply  into  the  flesh ;  she  in  fact  appeared
like  a  statue;  for  insensibility  bad  become  perfect.  No
change  appeared  in  her  frame ;  there  was  no  sign  of  uneasi-
ness, no  syncope,  no  lethargy ;  indeed  the  young  lady  spoke
several  times.  As  often  as  she  was  interrogated,  she  replied
that  she  felt  exceedingly  well,  and  had  no  pain  whatever.  At
the  invitation  of  M.  Durand,  once  we  even  saw  her  raise  her-
self, and  resume  her  former  position.

^'  The  wound  was  cleansed  again.  Some  minutes  after-
wards, the  edges  were  united  with  several  pins^  between
which  were  placed  strips  of  adhesive  plaster,  and  above  these
perforated  linen  lint  compresses,  an  external  supporting  ban-
dage, and  the  other  dressings  necessary  in  such  cases.

''At  this  period  several  other  persons  approached  the
patient.  For  a  moment,  isolation  was  destroyed  by  her  mes-
meriser,  and  she  was  enabled  to  hear  the  various  questions
addressed  to  her.  Her  replies  were  given  with  perfect  ease
and  remarkable  calmness.

"  When  everything  was  complete,  the  patient  was  restored
to  consciousness  in  two  or  three  seconds.  She  smiled,  by
degrees  recognized  her  position,  and  perceived  that  the  ope-
ration had  been  performed.  To  the  questions  put  to  her,  she
replied  with  lively  interest,  that  she  had  not  suffered  at  all;
that  she  had  not  experienced  the  least  pain,  and  had  no  recol-
lection of  what  had  taken  place.  Afterwards  she  retired,  and
every  one  present  could  clearly  see  in  her  physiognomy  tran-
quillity and  unaffected  cheerfolness.

"  An  extremely  remarkable  phenomenon  occurred  in  this
case.  She  had  only  been  mesmerised  nine  times ;  yet  the
rapidity  with  which  her  mesmeriser  was  able  to  pass  her^
several  times  in  our  presence  and  immediately  before  the
operation,  from  ordinary  life  into  the  most  absolute  and  in-
sensible mesmeric  sleep,  was  almost  incredible.  At  several
metres  distance  from  her,  even  a  glance  of  the  eye,  a  single
look  accompanied  by  a  firm  will^  was  sufficient  to  plunge
her  into  this  extraordinary  state,  which  is  at  present  so  in-
teresting to  science,  extinguishing  as  it  does  all  possibility  of
sensibility  to  pain.  Her  isolation  from  the  external  world
became  so  complete  that  she  heard  no  one,  not  even  her
mesmeriser,  when  he  did  not  touch  her.  This  isolation  was
promoted  to  the  utmost,  so  that  the  operator  and  the  medical
men  and  other  numerous  spectators  were  at  liberty  to  talk  at
their  ease  as  much  and  as  loudly  as  they  chose  about  what


570  More  painless  Surgical  Operations,

was  going  on^  without  any  fear  of  being  heard  by  her,  even
at  the  height  of  the  operation.

^'In  conclusion,  the  undersigned  declare  that  they  are
fully  convinced,  after  witnessing  such  a  result,  that  the  mes-
meric sleep  is  sufficient,  even  in  a  few  sittings,  to  produce
the  most  perfect  insensibility  in  the  organs ;  and  that  it  is  of
high  value  in  surgical  operations  of  every  kind,  by  sparing  to
the  unfortunate  patient  cruel  suffering  ;y  and  what  is,  perhaps,
still  more  formidable,  the  distressing  sight  of  preparations,
and  anticipated  terrors  of  the  operation.

"  Dr.  Obet  remained  constantly  close  to  the  patient,  in
order  repeatedly  and  attentively  to  examine  this  interesting
phenomenon,  and  observe  the  state  of  the  pulse  and  respvra--
tion,  which  underwent  scarcely  any  alteration.

"  The  present  report  has  been  compared  with  notes,  taken
with  scrupulous  exactness,  by  M.  Chevrel,  Member  of  the
Council  of  the  Arondissement  and  of  the  Municipal  Council
of  Cherbourg,  who  noted  down  with  the  greatest  minuteness
all  the  circumstances  of  the  operation  as  they  occurred.

"  [Here  follow  the  names  of  upwards  of  fifty  of  the  most
respectable  citizens  of  Cherbourg,  out  of  which  we  select
the  following : — ]

"  Messrs.  Lemaistre,  Receiver  of  the  Public  Taxes,  and

formerly  Under-Prefect  of  Cherbourg.
Obet,  M.D.  of  Paris,  Corresponding  Member  of

the  Royal  Academy  of  Medicine.
Gibon,  M.D.  of  Paris.

Fossey,  King's  Attorney-General,  at  Cherbourg.
Le  Seigneurial,  Judge  of  Instruction  to  the  Civil

Tribunal,  Member  of  the  Arrondissement

Council.
Des  Rives,  Military  Superintendent  at  Cherbourg.
Henry,  Merchant,  Commander  of  the  National

Guard,  &  Member  of  the  Municipal  Council.
L'abbe  Fafin,  Chaplin  to  the  Civil  Hospital.
Professor  Darrington. — &c.,  &c.,  &c.''

''On  the  23rd  of  Sept.  the  wound  resulting  from  the
operation  was  completely  cicatrised.  Yesterday  mornings
the  pins  and  the  bandages  which  surrounded  it  were  removed,
aud  the  young  lady  was  able  to  walk  about  part  of  the  after-
noon.'^

y  What  will  Sir  B.  Brodie,  Dr.  Copland,  and  their  Exeter  and  Halifax
friends  think  of  these  French  blockheads  i—Zoiat,


communicated  by  Dr.  Ettiotson,  571

The  following  accounts  were  furnished  me  by  Mr.
Chandler.

III.  Removal  of  a  Tonsil  by  Mr,  Aston  Key.

"X CONTRAST.

"  My  next  case  may,  I  think,  with  great  propriety,  be
headed  as  above. — In  The  Zoist  for  October  is  inserted  a
letter  written  by  me  to  Dr.  Elliotson  describing  the  removal
of  a  tonsil  from  the  throat  of  a  little  girl  three  years  and  a
half  old  by  Mr.  Key,  he  having  promised  to  permit  me  to
mesmerise  her  prior  to  the  operation,  but  proceeding  with  it
without  fulfilling  that  promise,  although  I  was  present  for  the
purpose  and  could  have  got  her  asleep  in  four  or  five  minutes.

"  I  need  not  again  describe  the  sufferings  and  fright  of  the
little  patient.*  Suffice  it  to  say  that  she  has  not  ceased  to
talk  of  them  to  the  present  time,  and,  the  other  tonsil  increas-
ing in  size,  till  its  removal  was  quite  necessary,  all  her  friends
considered  that  she  would  not  permit  Mr.  Key  even  to  ap-
proach her.  He  however  appointed  Wednesday,  Oct.  21st
to  make  the  attempt.

"  Now  mark  the  contrast ! — I  had  but  three  days  to  renew
the  influence  of  mesmerism  over  her  as  she  had  been  at  Mar«
gate  since  the  last  operation.  Nevertheless  I  resolved  to  try^
and  accordingly  commenced  on  the  Monday.  She  slept  in  ten
minutes  and  remained  asleep  an  hour  and  a  half;  Tuesday
she  was  asleep  in  eight  minutes  and  remained  above  an  hour
when  she  was  awoke.  On  the  Wednesday,  as  Mr.  Key^s  ap-
pointment was  for  twenty  minutes  past  three,  I  mesmerised
her  at  three  o^clock :  she  slept  in  four  minutes,  and  on  his
arrival  she  was  very  profound  and  every  thing  appeared  quite
favourable.

''  With  a  bone  spatula  I  made  several  attempts  to  open  the
mouth  and  depress  the  tongue,  the  little  patient  partially  awak-
ing each  time  but  quickly  falling  into  profound  sleep  again.
At  length  by  using  a  little  more  force  and  asking  her  at  the
same  time  in  a  whisper  to  open  her  mouth,  (to  which  request
she  partially  acceded),  the  tonsil  was  exposed  fairly  to  view,  and
Mr.  Key  seized  it  with  the  double  hooks,  and  with  a  bistoury
very  expertly  removed  the  greater  portion  of  it.  The  little  girl
of  course  partially  awoke,  but  did  not  struggle ;  nor  was  she
aware  that  anything  beyond  a  mere  examination  of  the  throat
had  taken  place.  She  displayed  no  fear  or  surprise.  She  was
allowed  to  swallow  all  the  blood,  as  she  has  a  great  horror  at
its  appearance,  and  she  permitted  me  to  examine  the  mouth
immediately  after  the  operation,  evidently  showing  that  she


573  More  painless  Surgical  Operations,

was  quite  unconscious  of  what  had  taken  place.  After  Mr.
Key  was  gonc^  she  observed  that  "  she  did  not  dislike  him
this  time  as  he  had  not  hurt  her.  Finding  her  throat  rather
sore  some  hours  after^  and  having  seen  the  piece  of  tonsil  on
the  table^  she  became  suspicious,  and  said^ ''  she  was  sure  Mr.
Key  had  been  cutting  her  again/' — but  was  quite  satisfied
when  told  that  he  had  only  applied  something  to  it.

"  Mr.  Key  very  candidly  acknowledged  that  mesmerism  had
been  the  means  of  soothing  the  little  patient  and  quieting  her
fears ;  and  I  think  he  will  admit  that  he  could  not  have  re<
moved  the  tonsil  without  its  aid^  for  he  told  me  on  our  way
to  the  house^  that  he  did  not  expect  to  succeed  in  removing
it.

''The  contrast  between  the  two  operations  was  most  striking;
the  first  was  all  noise,  fright,  and  blood,  with  a  deep  cut  on
the  tongue,  which  was  very  sore  for  a  week ;  whilst  the  second
was  all  sleep,  sleep,  sleep,  and  not  a  spot  of  blood  outside
the  mouth.

''  What  a  triumph  for  mesmerism  1

"  I  have  yet  another  case  to  relate  of  great  interest  on  ac-
count of  its  novelty.  It  is  a  case  of  mesmeric  tooth  extraction
in  which  the  patient  appeared  to  feel  at  the  time,  but,  when
awoke  a  few  seconds  after  the  operation^  was  evidently  not
aware  of  having  done  so.

"  Mrs.  MosSj  set.  25,  applied  to  me  on  the  19th  of  No-
vember to  have  three  teeth  extracted,  asking  at  the  same
time  if  it  could  not  be  done  in  the  mesmeric  sleep.  I  im-
mediately commenced  making  passes,  and,  finding  her  very
susceptible,  (the  eyes  following  the  hand  at  the  very  first  pass),
I  continued,  and  in  25  minutes  she  slept,  though  not  soundly,
as  she  did  not  lose  her  recollection.

"  The  next  day  she  slept  in  12  minutes,  and  after  a  few
minutes  more  became  quite  profound.

"  21st.  Asleep  in  8  minutes.  Loss  of  sensation  in  the  hands
and  feet,  gradually  extending  to  the  shoulders,  which  it  did
not  pass ;  the  line  of  demarcation  being  accurately  defined
(not  visibly  of  course).  After  awaking  her,  the  loss  of  sen-
sation remained  to  the  same  point,  and  was  removed  by  blow-
ing or  transverse  passes,  and  was  instantly  renewed  by  lon-
gitudinal ones.  I  tested  the  genuineness  of  the  case  very
beautifully  to-day.  After  blowing  to  restore  the  sensation  in
the  hands  without  making  any  remark,  I  restored  it  to  the
foot  by  a  transverse  pass.  This  was  the  first  time  I  used  the
pass  for  that  purpose,  and  I  may  observe  that  my  patient  had
never  seen  mesmerism.

''  28th.  She  now  goes  to  sleep  in  two  or  three  minutes,


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.  578

and  the  sensation  (though  still  lost  gradnally  from  the  hands
and  feet  upwards)  disappears  entirely  in  about  a  quarter  of  an
hour^  the  last  portion  being  the  top  of  the  head.  She  has
for  the  last  two  or  three  days  shown  perfect  catalepsy^  which
also  remains  after  she  is  awake.

''  She  is  also  re-mesmerised  by  one  pass^  a  nod^  or  even  a
wink ;  and  when  awakened  again^  is  quite  puzzled  to  know
why  she  again  fell  asleep/'

IV.  Removal  of  a  Tooth  by  Mr.  Bell.

"  Dec.  2nd.  As  Mr.  Bell  very  kindly  offered  to  draw  her
toothy  and  arranged  this  day  for  the  operation^  I  took  my
patient  to  his  house  at  three  o'clock;  but  the  day  was  so
dark  that  before  Mr.  Bell  was  ready  to  attend  to  us  the  light
became  insufficient^  and  he  was  obliged  to  postpone  the  ex-
traction until  another  time ;  having  however  first  tested  her
insensibility  by  probing  the  tooth.  To  my  astonishment  she
felt  it^  though  afterwards  she  did  not  remember  doing  so.  This*
led  me  to  examine  more  closely  into  the  phenomena  of  the  case,
when  I  found  that  she  could  bear  the  mucous  membrane  of
her  nose  pricked  with  a  pin,  but  could  not  bear  it  tickled  with
a  bit  of  thread ;  and  says,  in  the  sleep,  that  she  is  quite  con-
fident that  she  shall  not  feel  the  tooth  drawn,  though  she
cannot  bear  it  probed.  The  sequel  will  shew  that  she  was
only  partially  correct  in  her  prediction.

"  On  the  8th,  I  again  took  her  to  Mr.  Bell,  and  in  a  few
minutes  (although  she  had  been  rather  uncertain  for  the  last
day  or  two)  produced  the  full  effect,  and  one  tooth,  a  supe-
rior molar  much  decayed,  was  extracted,  accompanied  by  a
start  and  a  slight  exclamation  from  'the  patient,  though  on
awaking  her  a  few  seconds  after,  she  declared  she  had  felt
nothing,  and  Mr.  Bell  and  myself  were  quite  satisfied  that
she  spoke  the  truth.  The  loss  of  sensation  remained  only
about  five  minutes  instead  of  half  an  hour,  as  is  usual  with
her,  and  the  first  indication  of  its  returning  was  a  slight
pain  in  the  injured  gum,  from  which  the  tooth  had  been
extracted.  I  found  I  could  not  mesmerise  her  to  have  the
other  teeth  extracted  on  this  occasion.

"  Sceptics  will,  no  doubt,  cavil  at  this  case ;  and  some  per-
haps will  be  bold  enough  to  say,  "  they  will  not  believe  either
me  or  my  patient  on  our  oaths.''  But  the  case  is  too  inter-
esting to  mesmerists  to  be  withheld  on  that  account :  it  is
not  to  be  expected  that  all  cases  will  be  equally  perfect,  in-
deed it  appears  to  be  a  rule  in  mesmerism  that  no  two  cases
shall  be  exactly  alike. I  have  mesmerised  some  scores  of


574  More  painless  Surgical  Operations,

persons^  and^  though  all  the  cases  have  been  so  similar  that
no  one  could  doubt  their  genuineness^  yet  no  two  have  shown
precisely  the  same  phenomena.  For  this  reason  nothing  can
be  more  unsatisfactory  than  showing  beautiful  cases  to  carp-
ing sceptics ;  if  everything  does  not  go  off  just  as  they  may
please  to  dictate,  (for  they  will  often  go  this  length,)  they
write  down  both  the  patient  and  operator  liars  and  impostors.
An  animal  of  this  sort  once  refused  to  be  convinced  that  a
patient  of  mine  could  hear  a  whisper  from  one  end  of  a  long
room  to  the  other^  because  I  would  not  whisper  to  her  from
the  next  room.

*'  But  we  have  no  right  to  complain ;  there  are  other  classes
of  the  genus  sceptic  besides  mesmero-sceptics.  A  friend  of
mine  was  solicitor  to  a  watch-tnaking  company,  and  endea-
voured  to  get  a  bill  through  Parliament,  that,  if  carried,
would  have  secured  eventually  the  greater  portion  of  the
watch  trade  of  the  world  to  this  country.  But  no ;  our  very
wise  legislators  were  sceptical,  although  there  was  evidence
brought  before  them  from  some  of  the  first  mechanics  of  the
age.  They  rejected  the  bill ;  but,  can  it  be  believed,  on  the
very  same  night,  passed  the  bill  for  that  most  ridiculous  pro-
ject, the  Flying  Machine.

"  Mesmerism  may  occasionally  be  very  useful  like  opiates,
in  relieving  pain  and  procuring  rest  in  painful  and  lingering
diseases,  where  there  can  be  no  chance  of  ultimate  recovery.
Several  cases  have  been  reported,  and  I  think  the  following
a  very  striking  one  : —

"  An  old  lady,  above  70,  has  been  suffering  from  chronic
disease  of  the  liver,  having  on  several  occasions  passed  biliary
calculi;  the  pain  in  the  back  and  shoulders  is  often  most
distressing,  lasting  for  many  hours  together.  It  was  found
that  rubbing  the  part  gave  a  certain  degree  of  relief.  On
hearing  this,  I  recommended  her  daughter  to  mesmerise  her
generally  :  the  effect  was  magical ;  the  very  first  time  it  was
tried  the  pain  was  relieved  in  a  few  minutes,  and  she  fell
into  a  beautiful  sleep,  which  lasted  several  hours,  and  pro-
duced a  most  beneficial  effect.  This  was  often  repeated,  and
with  the  same  results;  and  when,  on  several  occasions,  I
operated,  the  effect  was  still  more  striking,  and  the  old
lady,  who  before  had  considered  mesmerism  diabolical,  now
whenever  she  is  in  pain  quite  longs  for  the  arrival  of  her
daughter  (who  is  married  and  does  not  live  very  near  her)  to
mesmerise  her.

"  A  member  of  my  own  family  occasionally  suffers  from
most  distressing  hiccup,  which  a  few  mesmeric  passes  in-
stantly stops ;  indeed  there  is  invariably  but  one  more  hiccup


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  675

after  the  first  pass. I  have  also^  on  two  or  three  occasions^
experienced  the  same  good  effect  in  my  own  person.

"  In  conclusion,  allow  me  to  ask  if  The  Times  could  not
be  induced  to  rectify  an  error  which  has  arisen  from  a  state*
ment  appearing  in  its  columns  relative  to  that  curious  case  at
Deptford.  It  was  stated  that  the  boy  was  mesmerised  and
slept  three  days,  and  as  The  Times  never  awoke  him,  he  has
been  dead  to  the  world  ever  since ;  indeed  I  have  often  been
told  that  the  boy  never  awoke^  and  many  object  to  be  mes-
merised on  that  account.  Now  it  would  be  but  justice  for
The  Times  to  state  (what  I  will  give  them  good  evidence  of
if  they  like)  that  the  boy  not  only  awoke^  but  even  derived
benefit  from  mesmerism.

"  I  remain,  yours  faithfully,

"Thomas  Chandler.

"  58,  Paradise  Street,  Botherhithe,
"December  11th,  1846.^'

V.  Amputation  of  a  Leg.

"  On  Friday  last,  a  young  man  named  Allan  Drew,  who
had  got  a  leg  severely  crushed  on  one  of  the  Flengarnock
Iron  Company^s  line  of  railway,  a  few  weeks  ago,  submitted
to  have  the  limb  amputated.  Dr.  Alexander  MUler  suggested
mesmerising  the  patient.  This  the  doctor  succeeded  in  doing
in  a  few  minutes ;  and  the  patient  remained  in  an  unconscious
state  until  the  operators  were  sawing  the  bone,  when  he
awoke.  Dr.  Miller  averred  that  if  he  had  mesmerised  the
patient  for  a  few  days  previous,  he  could  have  kept  him  in
the  sleep  until  the  operation  had  been  finished.^' — Kilmamoch
Herald.

YI.  Tooth  extraction.

"  We  witnessed  the  other  day,  the  extraction  of  a  tooth
from  a  young  woman,  who  underwent  the  operation  while  in
a  mesmeric  sleep.  The  toothy  which  was  a  large  one,  and
its  lower  part  quite  fresh,  did  not  yield  until  after  a  wrench
which  would  have  caused  most  intense  agony  to  a  waking  sub-
ject.  The  girPs  countenance,  however^  did  not  undergo  the
slightest  change,  and  no  indication  of  sensibility  was  given.
She  slept  on  after  the  operation  was  concluded,  and  when
awakened  in  a  few  minutes,  did  not  seem  to  be  for  some
time  aware  that  the  tooth  had  been  extracted.'^ — Northern
fVarder,


576  Cofwersian  of  the  Medical  World  to  the

The  patient^  the  amputation  of  whose  1^  at  Bridgewater
was  recorded  in  the  last  Zoiat^  died  afterwards  of  consomp-
tioDi  and  Mr.  King  has  obliged  me  with  the  following  farther
particulars: —

^'  In  my  former  report  I  omitted  to  say  that  the  original
disease  was  necrosis  of  the  tibia  and  fibula  near  the  ankle^
the  whole  of  which  joint  had  become  extensively  diseased
before  the  patient  would  submit  to  the  operation.

''  Subsequently  to  the  amputation  I  frequently  urged  him
to  be  mesmerised  for  the  purpose  of  dressing  the  stump  during
the  state  of  insensibility;  but  he  invariably  refused.

''For  several  weeks^  however^  the  cure  went  on  most
satisfactorily;  his  appetite  improved,  the  diarrhoea  and  night
sweats  ceased,  and  he  so  far  gained  strength  as  to  be  able  to
sit  up  for  a  short  time  during  the  day.  I  much  regret  to  add
that  in  about  a  month  after  the  operation  there  was  a  return
of  all  the  bad  sjnnptoms,  and  he  sunk  in  fact  from  consump-
tion; his  death  taking  place  on  the  20th  October,  just  two
months  after  the  amputation.^'

If  this  poor  rustic  had  not  from  some  stupid  prejudice
refused  to  be  mesmerised  again,  he  might  have  been  spared
the  suffering  of  dressing  his  stump,  and  perhaps  would  not
have  fallen  into  a  consumption.


CONVERSION OF THE MEDICAL PROFESSION TO THE SOLEMN
DUTY  OF  FREVBNTINO  THE  AOONT  OF  SURGICAL OPERATIONS.

Dr.  Ashbumer  has  favoured  me  with  the  following  extract
from  a  letter  written  in  America  to  Miss  Edgeworth,  who
communicated  it  to  him : —

''  With  us  here  in  Boston  a  new  adaptation  of  gas  from
ether  removes  all  sensibility  to  pain  from  the  most  fearful
surgical  operations.  It  is  a  blessing  to  the  human  race
unequalled  since  the  first  application  of  vaccination.  I  speak
decidedly,  for  it  has  within  the  last  month  been  so  repeatedly
tested  without  failure  in  our  admirable  hospital  by  skilful
surgeons,  that  it  is  an  accredited  fact.  It  is  gas  from  ether,
inhaled  through  the  mouth,  which  produces  a  tranquil  dreamy
state,  an  entire  inaction  of  the  muscular  system,  a  total  in-
sensibility to  pain,  but  a  slight  perception  of  sound,  which
enters  into  this  sort  of  dream  that  is  passing  through  the


duty  of  preventing  Surgical  Pain,  577

mind.  It  being  necessaiy  to  take  out  two  of  Lizzie's  large
double  teeth  three  weeks  since^  I  asked  to  have  this  gas  ap-
plied firsts  haying  heard  of  its  power  only  a  few  days  before.
They  were  both  taken  out  with  an  interval  of  only  five
minutes^  and  she  was  conscious  of  nothing  but  the  placing  of
the  instrument  and  the  sound  of  her  father's  steps  as  he
walked  up  and  down  the  room.  She  suffered  no  pain  at  the
time  or  afterwards.  It  leaves  no  effect  except  a  sort  of  drow-
siness^ which  passes  off  in  a  few  moments.  At  the  hospital
large  tumors  have  been  removed^  limbs  have  been  amputated,
the  patient  perfectly  unconscious,  the  flesh  and  muscles  per-
fectly still,  no  twitching,  no  contracting.  In  one  case  of
amputation,  the  woman  began  to  rouse  at  the  tying  of  the
last  artery,  and  said  she  felt  something  pinch  her.  Another,
waking  when  all  was  done,  asked  impatiently  why  they  did
not  begin — what  they  were  waiting  for.

^'  It  was  first  applied  in  this  manner  by  a  practical  and
very  skilful  chemist  in  this  town  of  the  name  of  Jackson,
and  explained  by  him  to  a  young  dentist,  who  applied  for
some  means  to  manage  a  refractory  patient.  He  tried  it  on
himself  first,  and  was  so  delighted  with  its  effects,  that  he
sent  out  to  hire  some  one  to  have  a  tooth  drawn  after  taking
it,  for  five  dollars. Since  then  his  room  has  been  crowded.''

I  understand  that  sulphuric  ether  is  employed :  a  piece  of
sponge  soaked  in  it  is  placed  in  an  opening  of  a  bottle  with
two  openings,  and  the  patient  inhales  through  the  other
opening,  so  that  the  air  drawn  into  the  bottle  and  thence
into  the  lungs  is  necessarily  charged  with  ether.  Insensibility
is  said  to  occur  generally  in  about  three  minutes.  If  this
plan  produces  insensibility  to  pain  in  more  instances  than
mesmerism,  and  quite  as  innocently  and  easily  as  when  mes-
merism succeeds,  it  will  indeed  be  a  blessing,  and  none  will
hail  it  more  joyously  than  we  mesmerists,  who  have  no  other
object  than  the  good  of  mankind.  It  is  this  consciousness,
indeed,  and  the  noble  self-respect  which  this  produces,  that
enables  us  with  all  humility  and  thankfulness  to  disregard  the
fiendish  malice  of  our  opponents.

In  my  Pamphlet  On  Painless  Surgical  Operations  in  the
Mesmeric  State,  I,  in  1843,  recorded  1  amputation,  1  re-
moval of  a  cancerous  breast,  1  division  of  the  ham-strings,  1
introduction  of  a  seton,  1  removal  of  an  excrescence,  1  open-
ing of  an  abscess,  2  severe  operations  on  the  jaw,  &c.,  and  32
tooth  extractions — -forty  painless  operations.

In  Tfie  Zoisi  are  recorded  16  amputations,  the  removal  of
28  tumors — some  enormous;  19  various  operations  by  inci-


678  Conversion  of  the  Medical  World  to  the

sions  of  greater  or  less  lengthy  8  applications  of  fire  or  caustic
substances,  8  cuttings  away  of  cancer  of  the  breast,  67  tooth
extractions,  8  cuttings  out  of  nails,  1  operation  for  cataract,
8  for  hydrocele,  1  for  polypus,  1  for  squinting,  8  venesections,
4  introductions  of  setons  and  issues — a  hundred  and  fifty'
two  painless  operations.

This  overwhelming  amount  of  facts  in  all  quarters  of  the
globe  has  made  no  impression  upon  the  medical  world.  Not
one  of  these  operations  has  been  copied  into  the  medical
journals  from  7%«  Zoist,  nor  even  the  name  of  The  Zoist
allowed  to  sully  their  pages.7  This  circumstance  will  never
cease  to  be  the  most  astounding  in  the  history  of  our  pro-
fession when  studied  by  posterity,  not  only  by  the  medical,
but  by  the  whole  reading  public.  It  will  be  referred  to
as  an  illustration  of  the  character  of  human  nature  in  this
century.

Yet,  though  this  mighty  mass  of  prevention  of  agony  has
been  as  disregarded  by  the  profession  as  the  treasures  of  the
British  Museum  are  by  the  horses  of  the  cab-stands  in  all  the
surrounding  streets,  I  felt  certain  that,  as  soon  as  it  was
announced  that  the  same  thing  could  be  effected  by  inhaling
ether,  all  the  medical  world  would  be  alive  to  the  import-
ance of  preventing  the  agony  of  operations :  that  the  various
poor  patients  who  shewed  no  pain  in  the  ethereal  stupor,  and
declared  afterwards  that  they  had  felt  none,  would  not  be
cruelly  reviled  as  impostors,  but  that  their  undisturbed  state
would  be  considered  yi^/7ro(/ of  the  absence  of  suffering,  not
of  concealment  of  steering :  that  their  word  would  be  impli'^
citly  respected  as  truth,  not  scorned  as  falsehood :  that,  if
they  did  not  shake  their  left  leg  whUe  their  right  was  cutting
off,  this  would  not  be  urged  against  them  as  unphysiologicid
by  Mr.  Wakley,  Dr.  Marshall  Hall,  Sir  B.  Brodie,  and  a
host  of  uninformed  disciples :'  that  the  operators  who  pub-
lished their  painless  operations  would  not  be  styled  dupes,
mountebanks,  quacks,  impostors,  deserving  to  be  scouted  by
medical  colleges,  and  met  in  consultation  by  no  respectable
medical  man  :  nay,  that  the  most  stupid  and  dogged  opposers
of  mesmerism  would  be  the  first  to  desire  to  alleviate  pain
by  the  new  method,  each  hospital  straining  hard  to  be  the

y  The  French  case  of  painless  operation  in  Tke  ZoUi  for  July,  p.  199,
was  copied  by  the  Medical  Gazette  from  the  Ttmet,  and  in  the  very  same
number,  June  19,  the  editor  consistently  expresses  his  surprise  and  regret
that  I  was  appointed  to  deliver  the  Harveian  Oration.  '*  Considering  the
notoriety  which  the  orator  elect  has  acquired  as  a  patron  of  meemerum^  we
should  have  supposed  that  a  more  appropriate  selection  might  have  been
made."  p.  1088.

■  See  my  Pamphlet  On  Operations  without  Pain,  p.p.  19,  50.


duty  of  preventing  Surgical  Pain,  579

earliest  in  the  race.  Such  is  beginning  to  be  the  case.  The
London  Medical  Gazette  which^  not  only  has  not  noticed  one
painless  mesmeric  operation  from  The  Zoist,  but  declares  that
no  one  reads — not  The  Zoist,  hated  word! — the  mesmeric
magazine,  except  the  impostors  who  send  their  cases  to  it/  an-
nounced on  Dec.  I8th^  p.  1085^  the  new  fact,  merrily  heading
the  article^  "  Animal  Magnetism  superseded,"  Its  authority
was  not^  like  us,  unworthy  of  respect,  but  "  respectable ;"
the  stupor  was  not  a  sham,  but  was  ''  the  most  profound
sleep;''  and  the  patient  really  went  through  all  '^ without
being  sensible  to  pain,  or  having  any  knowledge  of  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  operator.''  It  considers  that  the  process
''must  be  regarded  as  producing  a  state  of  temporary  poison-
ing," by  which  "  sensibility  may  be  so  destroyed  that  that
which  in  the  healthy  state  would  occasion  severe  pain,  may
be  performed  without  any  consciousness  on  the  part  of  the
patient.  The  respectability  of  the  source  from  which  we
derive  our  information,  prevents  us  from  doubting  that  the
writer  has  accurately  described  what  he  saw."  Truly,  the
house  of  Longman  &  Co.,  and  their  reputed  editor,  Dr.  Alfred
Taylor,  are  very  complimentary  to  us  mesmerists.

Then  the  Lancet  has  no  hesitation  (in  the  number  for
Dec.  26,  p.  704)  to  announce  the  matter :  is  now  struck  with
the  propriety  of  preventing  agony,  and  protests  that  such  a
discovery,  if  it  stand  the  test  of  experience,  will  be  an  invalu^
able  boon;  in  the  same  number  inveighing  against  and  abus-
ing the  mesmeric  method  with  all  the  distinguishing  charac-
teristics of  the  Wakleyan  tongue.  Mr.  Wakley  will  not  hear
of  a  patent  being  taken  out  to  limit  the  benefits  of  the  plan,
as  the  Americans  propose  on  account  of  the  possible  abuse  of  it.
He  sees  no  danger,  makes  no  indecent  objections.^

The  Medical  Times,  which  has  not  presented  to  its  readers
one  of  the  operations  recorded  in  The  Zoist,  though  the
editor  reads  it,  is  fully  convinced  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism,
and  extracts  so  largely  from  other  journals  that  a  fruitless
attempt  was  lately  made  by  Messrs.  Longman  to  arrest  its
extractions,  announces  that  Mr.  Listen!  yes,  Mr.  Listen!
has  taken  off  a  thigh  and  torn  away  a  diseased  toe-nail  in  the
ethereal  insensibility,  and  the  editor  "  hopes  to  have  further
particulars  on  this  very  interesting  subject."  We  hear  from
a  gentleman  present  that  after  the  amputation  Mr.  Listen
said  to  the  students,  ''  You  see  just  what  it's  worth.  At  any
rate  it's  better  than  mesmerism."  Certainly  it  is,  and  greatly
better  in  some  respects, — that  is  if  more  generally  successful,

a  Medical  Gazette,  April  12,  1845 See  Zoint,  Vol.  III.,  p.  201.
b  See  Dr.  Engledue  farther  on,  p.  600.— 2ot«l.

VOL,  IV.  B  a


580  Conversion  of  the  Medical  World  to  the

as  innocent,  and  as  capable  of  repetition,  after  the  operation,
to  procure  ease.  When  mesmerism  takes,  it  has  this  advan-
tage, that  it  may  be  easily  repeated  whenever  pain  comes
on  or  the  wound  has  to  be  meddled  with ;  that  the  insen-
sibility may  be  continued  for  a  length  of  time ;  and  that
nights  of  good  repose  may  be  procured.  The  poor  creature
whose  leg  Mr.  Liston  removed  painlessly,  shrieked  fearfully
with  agony  afterwards  when  something  was  done  to  him.
Besides,  mesmerism  greatly  restores  the  health  and  is  pro-
ductive of  the  highest  benefit  before  the  operation  and  aft;er
it,  and  will  sometimes  prevent  the  necessity  of  an  operation.**

Mr.  Liston  did  not  scoff  at  the  poor  man :  he  did  not
wonder,  as  he  did  in  the  Medical  Society  in  regard  to  the
Nottinghamshire  man,  whether  "  the  interesting  patient  was
advanced  enough  in  his  education  to  read  with  his  belly  /'^
— no,  he  felt,  in  common  with  other  medical  men,  that  the
world  is  now  beginning  to  see  it  no  longer  doubtful  that
operations  may  often  be,  and  ought  to  be  if  possible,  per-
formed painlessly  in  the  mesmeric  state ;  and  he  and  they
jump  at  any  other  method  of  effecting  the  same  thing.  To
mesmerism  and  mcsmerisers  all  this  is  really  owing.  The
idea  of  procuring  insensibility  for  operations  had,  through  mes-
merism, laid  such  hold  on  men  that  the  trial  of  inhaling  ether
was  made  :  and  the  success  of  mesmerism  will  drive  the  pro-
fession headlong  to  try  the  new  method,  and  too  generally,
as  evidently  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Liston,  out  of  "a  desire  to
"superseded'  mesmerism.  We  will  contribute  all  in  our  power
to  the  success  of  the  new  method;  for  we  prove  all  things
and  cleave  to  that  which  is  good.  But,  in  cases  of  operation,
mesmerism,  when  it  succeeds,  will  have  the  advantages  which
we  have  just  mentioned ;  and  might  properly  be  added  before
and  after  the  operation  for  their  sake.  The  mighty,  the  in-
estimable blessings  of  mesmerism  in  the  cure  and  alleviation
of  diseases  are  of  greater  extent  than  its  application  in  ope-
rations, and  we  see  no  reason  to  imagine  that  the  stupefaction
by  ether  will  be  found  to  possess  its  remedial  powers.

After  all  this  was  written,  there  appears  in  The  Times,
to-day,  Dec.  28,  an  extract  from  Dr.  Forbes^s  forthcoming
number,  containing  accounts  just  received  from  America  of
the  new  discovery.

One  patient,  it  is  declared,

"  Knew  what  the  operator  was  doing;  perceived  him,  for  example,
take  hold  of  the  tooth  and  draw  it  out,  felt  the  grating  of  the  instru-
ments, but  still  felt  no  pain."

t>  See  Pamphlet,  p.  6, 13. c  Pamphlet,  p.  56.


duty  of  preventing  Surgical  Pain.  581

la  another^

"  The  features  assumed  an  expression  of  pain,  and  the  hand  was
raised.'*

Another^

**  Flinched  and  frowned,  and  raised  his  hand  to  his  mouth/'

But  all^  on  coming  out  of  the  stupor^  declared  they  had
felt  no  pain.  Dr.  Forbes  was  present  at  the  amputation  of
the  thigh  by  Mr.  Liston^  and  says  that  the  man  seemed  par-
tially conscious  and  declared  that  in  his  sleep  he  had  heard
some  words  and  felt  something  was  being  done  to  his  limb  :
but  that  he  had  felt  no  pain.  Some  have  known  all  that  was
going  on^  some  have  talked^  and  some  have  recollected  much
or  all  afterwards.

What  was  the.  conduct  of  the  Medical  and  Chirurgical
Society  and  of  writers  in  medical  journals  and  newspapers,
because  the  poor  man,  whose  leg  was  amputated  without
pain  by  Mr.  Ward  in  Nottinghamshire,  moaned,  as  in  a
disturbed  dream,  after  the  leg  was  off,  and  on  waking  said  he
thought  he  had  once  heard  a  kind  of  crunching,  but  had
felt  no  pain  and  knew  nothing  that  had  passed  ?  Why,  he
was  violently  and  coarsely  pronounced  by  acclamation  a
trained  impostor,  and  his  case  not  allowed  to  remain  on  the
minutes.  I  beg  the  world  to  read  pages  10,  11,  33,  34,  55,
of  my  Pamphlet.

The  truth,  unsuspected  by  Messrs.  Listen,  Wakley,
Boott,  and  the  rest  of  the  eager  antimesmerists,  is,  that  the
state  induced  by  ether  is  somnambulism — the  very  same  state
as  the  mesmeric — which  varies  from  deep  coma  to  more  or
less  partial  activity  of  brain."*  In  both  instances  it  is  induced
artificially ;  but  in  mesmerism  it  is  induced  by  a  living  frame,
in  inhalation  it  is  induced  by  an  inanimate  compound.'

My  triumph  has  now  arrived.  The  first  operation  in  the
sleep-waking  state  thus  artificially  induced  has  been  per-
formed in  the  hospital  from  which  mesmerism  was  banished^
and  by  the  surgeon  who  was  the  most  violent  against  it  and
leagued  with  Mr.  Wakley.

In  the  Morning  Chronicle  of  to-day,  Dec.  28,  is  a  letter
from  Dr.  Boott,  announcing  the  American  fact  to  the  public,
and  saying  that  a  young  lady  had  gone  through  the  e^Ltrac-
tion  of  a  tooth  in  his  house  in  Gower  Street  without  being
conscious  of  it :  that  six  persons  had  gone  through  the  same
at  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Law-
rence,— who  behaved  so  unjustifiably  at  the  time  of  the  Okeys

^  I  refer  to  my  Pamphlet,  p.  41,  sq.
e  Palpable  matter  and  a  drug.

R  r2


582  Conversion  of  the  Medical  World  to  the

and  has  sneered  at  mesmerism  from  that  period  on  all  occa-
sions. Dr.  Boott  says^

*'  I  hope  the  facts  will  induce  surgeons  to  make  trial  of  inha-
lation,"

and  that  the  insertion  of  his  letter  in  the  Morning  Chronicle
may

"  encourage  dentists  and  surgeons  to  attempt  the  alleviation  of  human
suflFering,"

He  assures  us  that  he  immediately  sent  the  whole  American
report  to  Mr.  Wakley  and  to  several  distinguished  surgeons^
and  is  quite  grieved  to  find  it  will  not  appear  in  the  Lancet  for
a  week,  on  account  of  this  delay  "  leading  to  the  infliction  of
unnecessary  pain"  This  is  very  proper  feeling  :  most  com-
mendable. But  reflect  a  moment,  Dr.  Boott,  on  the  vast
amount  of  surgical  pain  and  of  unrelieved  human  suffering
to  which  you  have  been  accessory.  You  are  a  physician :  and
you  were  on  the  Council  of  University  College*^  at  the  time
of  the  genuine  cases  of  the  innocent  Okeys :  when  diseases
were  cured  beautifully  by  mesmerism,  and  when  a  painless
operation  was  performed  on  one  of  my  patients  in  the  mesmeric
insensibility  in  your  hospital  by  my  clerk  under  my  directions.
You  were  one  of  the  Council  who  forbad  the  use  of  mesmer-
ism in  the  hospital,  and  have  been  on  the  Council,  I  believe,
ever  since.  You  obstinately  refused  to  witness  even  one  of
the  wonderful  facts,  though  it  was  your  duty  to  investigate
them.  The  clear  and  indisputable  operations  recorded  in
The  Zoist  have  taken  place  since  then,  and  yet  the  prevention
of  mesmerism  in  the  hospital,  in  which  prevention  you  took  an
active  part  with  Mr.  Quain  and  Dr.  Sharpey,  has  continued
under  your  auspices :  you  have  allowed  agony  to  be  inflicted
on  the  patients  who  came  under  the  surgeon^s  knife,  and  have
felt  not  for  them  during  eight  long  years :  and  now,  suddenly,
you  think  a  week  is  too  long  (and  I  also  say  it  is  too  long)  for
surgeons  to  continue  to  inflict  pain  !  !  !  When  your  old
anxiety  to  oppose  and  injure  mesmerism,  and  the  part  you
played  against  it  and  ma  as  a  member  of  the  Council,  are
remembered,  your  present  lively  humanity  and  your  alacrity
respecting  ether,  with  your  instant  communication  of  the
new  facts  to  Mr.  Wakley  above  all  other  journalists,  would  be
laughable,  were  it  not  melancholy.^

c  ZoUt,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  2.

d  I'amphlet,  p.  65.  The  feeling  which  animates  all  these  worthies  to
such  sudden  and  active  benevolence  was  absolutely  confessed  by  some  of  the
oflScers  of  St. Thomas's  hospital.  They  called  on  a  friend  of  mine,  and  actually
said  they  liked  the  new  invention  because  it  would  knock  up  nuesmerisni.

At  Bartholomew's,  one  of  the  surgeons  said  last  week  to  a  man  who


duty  of  preventing  Surgical  Pain.  583

What  will  Dr.  Copland  say  to  this  terrible  innovation  of
preventing  so  useful  a  things  *'so  wise  a  provision^**  as  pain
in  operations  ? — "patients  being  all  the  better  for  it.***  What
will  Sir  B.  Brodie  say,  who  told  the  Society  and  recently
told  the  students  of  St.  Oeorge's  Hospital^  in  his  anxiety  to
crush  all  attempts  at  preventing  surgical  agony  by  mesmer-
ism, that  patients  who  appear  not  to  feel  in  what  is  called  the
mesmeric  state,  do  feel ;  that  a  large  proportion  in  ordinary
circumstances  scarcely  complain  of  pain  !  that  it  is  not  very
uncommon  for  them  to  appear  like  indifferent  spectators !  and
that  it  is  in  the  power  of  almost  every  one  to  sustain  pain  with-
out any  outward  manifestation  !  ^

I  see  clearly  that  the  profession  will  now  admit  the  truth
of  mesmerism.  The  performance  of  operations  without  pain
through  mesmerism  caused  men's  thoughts  to  be  occupied
with  the  point,  and  this  new  mode  was  devised.  The  possi-
bility of  artificial  insensibility  by  the  new  method  being  be-
lieved practicable,  men  will  be  led  to  think  more  calmly  of  the
mesmeric  method,  and  of  its  many  advantages  in  soothing
and  strengthening,  as  well  as  in  causing  insensibility  in  sur-
gical cases.  Mesmerism  at  large  will  then  be  calmly  consi-
dered, and  all  the  good  which  it  can  give  in  states  of  disease
will  be  sought  after.  The  rapid  progress  of  mesmerism  is
now  secured.

The  great  want  of  knowledge  of  the  character  of  sleep-
waking  in  all  its  modifications,  and  even  of  common  sleep  and
dreaming,  will  pass  away  ;b  for  the  patients  stnpified  by  ether
are  evidently  in  a  state  of  sleep-waking  or  somnambulism,  and
this  state  will  become  familiar:  and  such  nonsense  as  was
spoken  in  the  Medical  Society  and  has  been  written  in  medical
journals  and  newspapers,  will  cease.  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  will
not  commit  himself  much  longer  by  mistaking  for  a  piece  of
deception  the  exquisite  and  genuine  case  of  sleep-waking  near
Bath  that  is  recorded  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions.^

John  Elltotson.

wished  to  have  a  tooth  out,  '*  Well,  do  yoa  wish  to  have  it  with  pain  or
without?"  "Without,"  wa8  the  answer.  **  Well  then,  breathe  this."
After  all  was  over,  the  man  was  not  mocked  and  insulted,  but  directed  to  go
and  tell  every  body  that  they  perform  operations  there  without  pain.  This  is
all  right :  but  why  not  have  attempted  it  by  mesmerism  long  ago  ?

e  My  Pamphlet,  p.  59. Zoist^  Vol.  IV.,  p.  3.

f  I  must  refer  to  pp.  36  and  37  of  my  Pamphlet,  for  Sir  B.  B.'s  inability
to  distinguish  between  endurance  of  pain  and  insensibility,  and  his  strange
argument  that  the  Nottinghamshire  man,  who  when  awake  was  most  sensible
of  pain,  WHS  perhaps  by  nature  insusceptible  of  pain,  &c.
K  Zoigt,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  17.
h  Pamphlet,  p.  38.


( 584 )


X.  Messrs.  Forbes,  fVakley,  and  Co.,  the  Aniimesrneric

Crusaders.

"  I  would  rather  stand  on  the  ridge  of  Etna  than  lower  my  head  in  the  Grotto  del  Cane.
By  the  one  I  may  share  the  fate  of  a  phUo»opber»  by  the  other  I  matt  aoffer  ihe  death  of  a
cur."— If.  J)\  Landor,

Every  well-told  tale  has  its  point  or  moral  from  which  in-
struction is  to  be  obtained.  And  so  the  life  of  every  man
affords  materials  for  reflection.  Whether  he  be  elevated  or
depressed  in  the  social  scale — whether  he  be  rich  or  poor,
philosopher  or  peasant,  a  careful  survey  of  his  career  affords
some  point  or  moral,  which,  all  who  care  for  the  welfare  of
the  young  should  point  to  as  a  beacon,  indicating  some  fault
to  be  avoided,  or  some  virtuous  action  to  be  applauded  and
copied.

With  this  object  in  view  we  shall  make  some  observations
on  the  course  pursued  by  certain  individuals  regarding  mes-
merism. We  shall  not  collect  our  information  from  any
doubtful  source,  but  draw  from  the  fountain  head,  from  the
written  words  of  the  men  themselves.  It  may  be  urged  by
some  that  we  should  direct  our  attention  solely  to  the  advance-
ment of  mesmeric  science,  and  that  we  should  cease  to  bestow
attention  on  the  actions  of  individuals ;  but,  we  think,  that
there  is  another  duty  to  be  performed,  and  that  when  the
progress  of  a  science  has  been  checked  by  the  frequent  dis-
play of  ignorance  and  by  the  most  shameful  perversion  of
facts — when  the  existence  of  the  most  beautiful  and  inex-
plicable physiological  phenomena  has  been  denied,  and  the
discoverers  and  experimenters  have  been  denounced  as  fools
and  visionaries,  rank  impostors,  and  detestable  quacks,  and
by  these  means  a  cry  raised  throughout  the  length  and  breadth
of  the  land  which  has  caused  the  honest  investigator  to  pass
through  a  species  of  martyrdom, — when  all  this  has  been
done  in  our  own  time,  in  a  few  years,  and  when  the  men
who  have  accomplished  this  have  lived  not  only  to  see  the
error  of  their  way,  but  in  one  instance,  to  confess  it,  albeit
in  a  Jesuitical  manner,  we  ask,  is  there  not  some  moral  to  be
learned  ?  Is  the  self-elected  critic  not  to  be  informed  of  his
fallibilitv  ?  Is  the  wilful  perverter  of  truth  not  to  be  told,
and  to  be  convinced  from  his  own  writings,  while  yet  aUve,
that  the  opinions  of  the  sciolist  must  give  way  before  the  ac-
cumulation of  facts  ?  Is  the  man  who  has  spent  his  life  in
the  endeavour  to  mislead  his  brethren  not  to  be  shewn  his
iniquity  ?  And  are  we  not  to  point  out  to  all  men  the  utter
irrationality  and  absurdity  of  surrendering  their  reason  to
the  commands  of  authority,  and  of  neglecting  to  investigate


Messrs,  Forbes,  Wakley,  and  Co,,  tjc.  585

a  new  truth  because  a  few  may  sneer^  ridicule^  and  denounce?
Is  this  not,  we  ask,  a  public  duty  ?  It  is  the  neglect  of  this
duty  which  makes  men  so  bold  in  advancing  their  superficial
opinions,  but,  let  it  be  once  understood  that  all  those  who
publish  absurd  and  fallacious  doctrines  shall  submit  to  the
most  free  and  searching  exposure,  and  we  have  applied  a
complete  check  to  an  evil  of  the  most  serious  magnitude.
The  example  which  we  are  about  to  expose  is  perhaps  the
most  shameful  on  record.  What  do  we  behold  ?  The  man
whose  position  demanded  the  practice  of  the  strictest  impar-
tiality and  integrity,  forgetting  his  high  duty,  and  leading
astray  all  those  who  naturally  looked  up  to  him  for  informa-
tion,— neglecting  to  inform  himself  of  the  rights  and  merits
of  the  question  under  discussion,  and  because  the  popular
voice  at  the  moment  seemed  to  demand  an  anathema,  seeking
the  unscrupulous  pen  of  some  ready  but  needy  fool,  and  forth-
with issuing  it.  Because  a  violent  and  virulent  hebdomadal
publication,  edited  by  Mr.  Wakley,  had  succeeded  in  creating
"  a  blaze"  in  the  medical  profession ;  the  would-be  respectable
quarterly,  edited  by  Dr.  Forbes,  descended  to  the  same  course,
pandered  to  the  depraved  tastes  of  those  it  should  have  striven
to  elevate  and  enlighten,  and  ever  since  has  watched  the  pro-
gress of  events,  changing  the  tone  of  its  communications
just  in  proportion  as  the  money-risk  became  less  and  less,
and  the  profession  were  inclined  to  receive  bit-by-bit  truth.

Many  of  our  readers  will  remember  the  injurious  effect
on  the  public  feeling  which  this  immoral  course  produced.
So  great  was  the  outcry  that  men  were  afraid  to  speak  of  the
subject,  and  the  title  of  mesmeriser  became  a  term  of  re-
proach, and  the  signal  for  the  pity  of  some  and  the  abuse  of
others.  Men  band  themselves  together  for  the  purpose  of
releasing  the  slave  from  his  chains  and  the  torturc-lash,  but
thought-slavery  is  still  a  predominant  feature  of  modern  civil-
ization,— men  are  still  tied  down  to  the  prescriptions  of  their
forefathers,  and  in  this  boasted  age  of  freedom,  this  vaunted
land  of  liberty,  perhaps  there  never  was  a  period  when  tougue-
persecution  was  more  vindictive  in  its  outpourings,  or,  when
the  honest  man  had  more  need  of  caution  in  promulgating
his  views,  unless,  perchance,  they  chime  in,  to  a  certain  ex-
tent, with  the  recognized  doctrines  of  society.  But  some
will  say,  why,  there  never  was  a  period  when  men  enjoyed
such  liberty  of  speech,  or,  when  the  press  was  so  unshackled.
This  is  true,  but  this  is  not  the  whole  of  the  picture.  Take
for  example  the  career  of  any  scientific  innovator.  It  is  true
that  he  has  liberty  of  speech — it  is  true  that  lie  may  employ
the  printiug-press  for  the  purpose  of  disseminating  his  doc-


586  Messrs.  Forbes,  fVakley,  and  Co.,

trines^  but  look  at  the  penalty.  No  sooner  are  his  views
promulgated  than  all  those  who  consider  themselves  interested
in  "  things  as  they  are/'  commence,  not  to  reason  with  him,
not  to  disprove  his  facts,  or  to  refute  his  arguments,  but  to
damage  his  character,  to  propagate  slanders,  to  impute  im-
proper motives,  to  make  use  of  '^scientific  capital/'*  which
being  interpreted  means  the  adoption  of  all  measures  cal-
culated to  work  on  the  prejudices  of  the  vulgar  and  illiterate,
and  thus  to  injure  the  party  to  be  "ptU  down.'^  In  a  late  in-
stance to  such  an  extent  was  this  system  carried,  that  not
only  did  the  whole  periodical  literature  of  the  day,  with  very
few  exceptions,  lend  their  aid  to  crush  the  scientific  truth-
seeker,  but  men  with  large  boards  were  sent  through  the
streets  of  the  modern  Babylon,  on  which  was  affixed  an
absurd  and  disgusting  print,  tempting  the  curious  and  those
afflicted  with  prurient  imaginations,  to  purchase  a  small  pam-
phlet containing  the  most  abominable  and  wicked  slanders.

Can  we  as  a  people  boast  of  our  liberty  of  speech  and  of  our
perfect  freedom,  when  we  have  not  yet  learned  to  respect  the
most  sacred  right  of  our  neighbour,  the  right  of  thought  ?
Can  we  as  a  people  boast  of  the  power  of  our  printing  press,
when  we  permit  that  power  to  be  in  the  hands  of  men  who
prostitute  it  for  the  most  base  and  wicked  purposes  ?  It  is
useless  to  say,  that  rational  men  pay  no  attention  to  such
proceedings,  and  that  only  dishonest  individuals  would  wield
the  power  entrusted  to  them  for  an  improper  purpose.  Dis-
honest enough  they  are  in  all  conscience,  but  they  are  the
men  society  permits  to  deceive  and  mislead  them.  To  our
view  there  is  something  more  than  dishonesty  of  purpose,
there  is  a  display  of  the  most  rampant  animalism  in  the  en-
deavour to  ''  write  down"^  an  individual  who  is  investigating
a  new  truth  and  therefore  helping  forward  his  fellow  men; —
there  is  something  more  than  laxity  of  morals,  there  is  the
manifestation  of  a  low,  vulgar  criminality,  when  the  editors
of  "  Quarterlies"  again  and  again  sneer  at  that  which  they
do  not  understand,  and  abuse  and  vilify  men  who  deserve
our  respect  and  esteem. Such  conduct  makes  manifest  the


»»


^  The  Americans  at  the  period  of  an  election  speak  of**  politicKl  capital
which  in  plain  English  means  the  invention  of  the  most  abominable  false-
hoods, and  the  circulation  of  the  most  exaggerated  statements,  for  the  par-
pose  of  damaging  in  public  estimation  the  man,  or  the  party,  another  party
may  be  opposing.

b  What  will  not  men  attempt  to  write  down  ?  Perhaps  the  only  ancient
attempt  to  write  down  a  natural  truth  which  at  all  equals  in  absurdity  the
efforts  of  the  modern  mesmeric  obstructors,  was  that  memorable  moverornt
on  the  part  of  the  followers  of  Aristotle,  who  not  only  refused  to  look  through
Galileo's  telescope  to  see  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  but  positively  attempted
to  write  down!  these  unwelcome  additions  to  the  solar  system.


the  Aniimesmeric  Crusaders.  587

absence  of  those  high  moral  and  intellectual  qualities  which
characterize  and  adorn  the  perfect  man.  We  write  strongly
on  this  point  because  we  have  to  expose  a  great  public  abuse,
we  have  to  shew  that  editors  trust  to  the  short  memories  of
their  readers,  and  thinking  that  their  productions  are. not
read  a  second  time,  presume  that  they  may  change  their
opinions  as  often  as  they  please  and  still  keep  their  character
for  wisdom.

When  a  scientific  novelty  is  broached,  to  reasonable  and
conscientious  men,  this  course  appears  to  be  the  only  one
which  can  be  followed  by  the  individual  conducting  a  philoso-
phical publication : — to  announce  the  novelty — to  call  upon
scientific  men  to  investigate  the  subject,  and  to  report  to  the
recognized  channels  for  the  reception  and  diffusion  of  informa-
tion. During  this  period  the  editor  should  not  be  idle.  He
should  investigate  for  himself,  when  this  is  possible,  and  when
it  is  not,  he  should  endeavour  to  ally  himself  with  those  who
have  done  their  utmost  to  do  so,  and  by  these  means  to  use
every  effort  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  cautious  and  philo-
sophical report — one,  calculated  to  advance  and  not  to  retard
genuine  science.  Every  one  must  agree  in  the  opinion  that
the  system  pursued  with  regard  to  mesmerism  has  been  the
reverse  of  this.  That  the  man  who  attempts  to  instruct
others  should  first  instruct  himself,  seems  to  us  a  course,  the
rationality  of  which  is  so  self-evident,  as  to  require  but  little
discussion.  And  yet  how  frequent  are  the  examples  of  men
raising  themselves  to  the  rank  of  master  without  the  necessary
intellectual  qualifications,  and  without  bestowing  one  thought
on  the  moral  law  which  they  break  through,  or,  the  amount
of  misery  which  they  produce  by  the  improper  bias  they  give
their  confiding  disciples.  It  is  strange,  too,  that  these  super-
ficial men  are  always  carried  away  with  the  belief  that  they
are  performing  a  great  public  good,  when  they  advance  their
ill-matured  opinions  on  a  disputed  point;  in  fact,  they  become
so  inflated  with  the  importance  of  their  self-imposed  power,
as  to  be  utterly  regardless  of  the  obligations  they  incur.  To
become  a  public  instructor  without  passing  through  the  pre-
liminary stage  of  laborious  study  to  ascertain  the  truth,  is  in
its  practical  results  the  same  as  putting  out  the  eyes  of  those
it  is  wished  to  enlighten.  We  have  always  endeavoured  to
expose  such  men,  not  from  any  feeling  of  ill-will,  or  spirit
of  revenge,  for  the  great  wrong  they  have  committed,  but
because  it  is  right  and  just  to  draw  a  strong  line  of  demarca-
tion between  the  man  of  science  and  the  superficial  babbler
— between  the  real  worker  and  his  counterfeit  and  noisy
opponent. The  writer  who  fairly  states  his  facts  and  his


588  Messrs.  Forbes,  tVakley,  and  Co.,

arguments^  even  if  they  be  opposed  to  our  own  views,  shall
always  receive  our  most  respectful  attention, — but  the  self-
elected  judge,  the  man  who  disseminates  error,  who  perverts
facts,  who  deals  in  assertions  without  proof,  and  supports  his
opinions  by  the  most  flimsy  and  fallacious  arguments,  shall
be  exposed  with  an  unsparing  pen.

**  Soft  and  easy  touch  a  nettle,
And  it  stings  you  for  your  pains ;
Grasp  it  like  a  man  of  mettle,
And  it  soft  as  silk  remains."

On  such  an  occasion  we  shall  not  permit  ourselves  to  be  in-
fluenced by  mere  feelings  of  humanity, — justice  is  our  motto,
and  those  kindlier  promptings  which  on  less  important  occa-
sions would  have  full  sway,  must  here  be  utterly  discarded.""
"  Is  it,^'  asks  Mr.  Stewart,  "  more  criminal  to  misrepreseut
a  fact,  than  to  impose  on  the  world  by  what  we  know  to  be
an  unsound  or  a  fallacious  argument  ?  Is  it  in  a  moral  view
more  criminal,  or  is  it  more  inconsistent  with  the  dignity  of  a
man  of  true  honour,  to  defraud  men  in  a  private  transaction
by  an  incorrect  or  erroneous  statement  of  circumstances,  than
to  mislead  the  public  to  their  own  ruin  by  those  wilful  devia-
tions from  truth,  into  which  we  see  men  daily  led  by  views  of
interest  or  ambition,  or  by  the  spirit  of  political  faction  ?"

Such  then  being  our  opinion  of  the  duty  of  those  indi-
viduals who  conduct  our  periodical  literature,  we  simply  ask,
has  Mr.  Waklcy,  the  editor  of  the  Lancet,  qualified  himself
for  the  office  of  judge?


a  man  must  serve  his  time  to  every  trade


Save  censure :  critics  all  are  ready  made.'

Has  Dr.  Forbes,  the  editor  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Medical
Review,  done  this?  (we  beg  pardon,  but  we  always  place
Dr.  F.  next  to  the  former  sage,  because  he  is  but  a  follower
in  the  antimesmeric  Crusade,  the  former  gave  the  cue,  the
latter  was  too  eager  to  follow.  De  gustibus  non  est  disputan-
dum.  Verily,  they  shall  have  their  reward.)  Did  the  late
Dr.  James  Johnson  do  this  ?  Has  the  editor  of  the  Medical
Gazette  done  this  ?  In  fact,  is  there  one  British  medical  journal
whose  pages  have  been  open  to  the  insertion  of  authenticated

c  W^e  cannot  forbear  from  again  quoting  an  anecdote  we  related  on  a  former
occasion  (vide  Zoist^  Vol.  II.,  p.  276.)  We  are  in  a  position  to  vouch  for  the
truth  of  it.  ''  A  gentleman  who  was  on  intimate  terms  with  Dr.  Forbes,
and  who  resided  in  the  country,  commenced  the  investigation  of  mesmerism
in  1841,  and  after  convincing  himself  of  the  truth  of  the  science,  wrote  to
Dr.  Forbes  to  inform  him  of  the  fact,  and  to  offer  to  exhibit  to  him  several
cases.  For  this  purpose  he  offered  to  take  him,  if  he  could  spare  the  time,
to  three  separate  towns,  to  witness  the  experiments  of  three  different  mes-
merisers. Two  letters  were  written  in  afortnight^  but  no  answer  iras  rcceiteiiJ*'


the  Antimesmeric  Crusaders.  589

cases,  or  the  discussion  of  questions  bearing  on  a  subject  of
80  much  importance  ?  The  editor  of  the  Medical  Times  has
to  a  certain  extent  done  his  duty,  but  his  advocacy  of  mes-
merism is  not  of  that  decided  character  which  would  authorize
us  to  consider  him  a  bold  and  uncompromising  assertor  of
what  he  knows  to  be  true.

We  have  not  space,  if  we  had  the  inclination,  to  refer  to
all  the  absurdities,  slanders,  falsehoods,  base  insinuations,
grovelling  conceptions,  vulgar  and  slang  inuendoes,  &c.,  which
we  could  cull  from  the  pages  of  the  journals  above  enume-
rated ;  to  say  nothing  of  the  perverted  facts,  suppressed  facts,
and  the  publication  of  facts  which  never  had  an  existence,-^
we  shall  leave  all  this,  to  us,  unprofitable  work,  to  some
future  collector  of  the  absurdities  of  the  would-be  scientific,
and  at  present  satisfy  ourselves  with  placing  before  our  readers
in  a  succinct  form  the  sayings,  doings,  and  writings  of  the
most  notorious, — we  cannot  say  while  Mr.  Wakley  is  in  this
'  vale  of  tears,'  the  most  unscrupulous,— of  the  party  of  truth-
opposers.  Dr.  J.  Forbes.

There  have  been  three  articles  published  in  the  British  and
Foreign  Medical  Review.  One  in  April,  1839,  another  in
April,  1845,  and  another  in  October,  1846.  We  select  a
few  specimens.

''To  devote  an  article  to  the  "We  propose  to  ourselves  a
consideration  of  animal  magnet-  brief  investigation  of  the  exist-
ism,  now  that  the  English  prac-  ing  pretensions  of  animal  mag-
titioners  are  one  and  all  ashamed  netism,  or  mesmerism.  In  pro-
of its  name,  would  be  a  work  of  ceeding  to  prosecute  this  task,  we
supereroffation,  if  the  delusion,  shall,  in  the  first  place,  advance
unabashed,  were  not  yet  parad-  the  reasons  which,  in  our  judg-
ing  itself  over  some  parts  of  the  menty  urge  a  dispassionate  exa-
eontinent;  and  if  its  return  to  mination  of  the  subject;  second-
tbese  shores,  and  to  our  own  ly,  we  shall  point  out  the  kind
hospitals  and  colleges,  at  any  of  evidence  we  deem  necessarr
future  period  were  quite  out  of  for  the  establishment  of  each
the  question." — British  and  Fo-  class  of  the  alleged  phenomena;
reign  Medical  Review.  April,  and  we  shall  then  proceed  to  dis-
1839. p.  305.  cuss  the  question  of  their  valid-

ity."— British  and  Foreign  Me-
dical Review .  Apr.  1 845 .  p.  4 2  9.
"We  hold  ourselves  in  readi-
ness to  witness  and  candidly  to
examine  any  novel  fact  that  may
come  in  our  way,  as  we  believe
our  minds  to  be  open  to  convic-
tion on  satisfactory  evidence  being
adduced; and  whilst  we  have  at


590


Messrs.  Forbes,  fVakley,  and  Co.,


"  If  we  can  quicken  its  decline
where  it  now  reigns  in  the  hearts
of  nervous  proselytes  and  dream-
ing physicians,  or  can  assist  in
forming  a  barrier  against  a  pro-
bable revisitation  of  it,  we  shall
not  think  the  otherwise  more
than  due  attention  we  have  given
to  the  wild  productions  which
treat  of  it  entirely  thrown  away."
—April,  1839. p.  305.


"  Considering  the  high  sanc-
tion which  even  a  temporary  be-
hef  in  the  powers  of  animal  mag-
netism has  obtained  in  this  coun-
try, we  look  upon  its  recent  rise
and  progress,  and  its  abrupt  and
shameful  fall,  as  powerfully  cal-
culated to  degrade  a  profession
which  is  certainly,  for  other  rea-
sons, not  rising  in  public  estima-
tion."—April, 1839. p.  305.


all  times  pursued  this  method
ourselves,  it  is  the  one  we  would,
in  conclusion,  earnestly  recom-
mend to  our  readers."  April,
1845. p.  485.

"We  think  that  mesmerism
has  hardly  received  fair  play  at
the  hands  of  many  of  our  pro-
fessional brethren,  or  in  the
pages  of  some  of  our  contemn
poraries.  Its  pretensions,  to
some  extent,  however,  are  too
well  supported  both  by  the  num-
ber and  respectability  of  the  wit-
nesses to  justify  an  opposition
made  up  almost  exclusively  of  ri-
dicule and  contempt." — April,
1845. p.  430.

'*  We  conceive,  then,  that  the
evidence  attesting  the  fact  of  cer-
tain abnormal  states  being  in-
duced by  mesmerism,  is  now  of
such  a  character  that  it  can  no
longer  be  philosophically  disre-
garded by  the  members  of  our
profession,  but  that  they  are
bound  to  meet  it  in  the  only  way
in  which  alleged  facts  can  satis-
factorily be  either  verified  or
confuted,  —  by  observation  and
experiment."  —  October,  1 846.
p.  484.

"  In  how  much  better  a  posi-
tion shall  we  be  after  investiga-
tion for  confuting  the  imposture,
if  such  it  shall  turn  out  ultimately
to  be,  than  in  continuing  to  treat
the  subject  with  contemptuous
disregard !  Of  one  thing  let  us
rest  assured,  not  only  the  public,
but  the  more  sober-thinking  of
the  profession  will,  ere  long,  hold
those  at  a  disadvantage,  who,  in
opposition  to  facts,  apparently
well  authenticated,  can  or  will
but  adduce  mere  unsupported  ar-
gument, or  ridicule." — October,
1846. p.  485.


the  Aniimesmeric  Crusaders.


591


"  There  must  surely  be  a  suf-
ficLent  number  of  persons  of  sarie
mind  in  the  profession  who  have
thought  M  we  have  thought y  to
exempt  us  from  the  suspicion  of
affecting  wisdom  after  the  fact,
when  we  say  that,  from  the  first
daum  of  these  diverting  but  de-
grading scenes  to  the  last,  from
the  first  burst  of  blank  surprise
in  the  good  unscientific  public  of
this  country,  through  all  the
phases  of  advancing  credulity
among  the  more  scientific,  down
to  the  last  complete  and  melan-
choly explosion,  we  have  never
varied  from  a  most  hearty,  entire,
and  unconcealed  disbelief  of  very
nearly  all  the  phenomena  exhi-
bited  by  all  the  patients,  and  re-
lated by  all  the  practitioners,
without  exception."  April,  1839.
p.  304.

**  That  there  was  gross  decep-
tion somewhere,  we  were  always
sure;  the  only  doubt  we  had
was  as  to  the  precise  point  where
the  deception  began."  —  April,
1839. p.  304.


"When  it  is  considered  that
men  like  Cuvier,  La  Place,  Hufe-
land,  and  Treviranus,  have  not
refused  their  testimony  as  to  the
reality  of  some  of  the  facts  of
mesmerism,  we  hardly  think  it
right  to  dispose  of  the  whole
Question,  unexamined,  by  the
facile  process  of  a  self-complacent
poo-poo r^k^riXy  1845.  p.  430.

"  From  the  curious  and  ex-
traordinary accumulation  of  re-
cords amassed  by  the  animal  mag-
netizers,  we  have  from  the  begin-
ning been  very  much  persuaded
that,  at  the  foundation  of  all  the
extravagances  of  the  mesmeric
disquisitions,  there  would  ulti-
mately be  discovered  some  truth."
—October, 1846. p.  487.


"  We  observed  with  some  little
disgust,  here  and  there  a  practi-
tioner willing  to  become  the  pro-
vincial wonder,  and  only  restrain-
ed by  his  prudence  from  declar-
ing what  a  mixture  of  ignorance
and  cupidity  prepared  him  to
assert  and  to  do." — April,  1839,
p.  304.

"  But  above  all  we  lament  to
see  the  great  delusion  supported
by  one  of  the  ablest  physicians
of  this  country,  filling  the  most
important  chair  in  the  largest
medical  school  of  the  kingdom."
—April,  1839. p.  304.


"  That  our  author  and  his  as-
sociates should  have  conspired  to
delude,  and  to  mystify  their
friends  and  their  countrymen  at
home,  without  any  conceivable
motive,  we  hold,  indeed,  to  be
too  ridiculous  to  imagine  for  a
moment."— Oct.  1846.  p.  479.

"  But  when  an  honest  and  in-
telligent witness  circumstantially
relates,  as  having  occurred,  what
is  already  admitted  to  be  neither
impossible  nor  improbable,  the
presumption,  h  priori,  is  certain-
ly altogether  in  his  favour." —
October, 1846. p.  479.


**  Now  we  maintain  that  we  are
not  entitled,  in  reason,  to  reject
the  facts,  or  alleged  facts,  above
stated  without  at  least  a  fair  ex-
amination. It  were  very  easy  for
us  to  chime  in  with  the  ordinary
professional^ridicule  in  relation  to


592


Messrs,  Forbes,  Wakley,  and  Co.,


**  Pass  a  few  short  months^  and
the  delasion  stands  exposed;  the
actors  are  declared  to  he  deceivers
or  deceived,  the  facts  so  lately
boasted  of  are  trampled  upon
with  contempt,  and  the  aoc-
trines  built  upon  them  are  laughed
to  scorn."— April,  1839.  p.  303.


**  The  fashionable  crowd  flock
to  a  new  prima  donna  or  to  a
watering-place  doctor;  and  the
half-converted  physicians  and  sur-
geons never  mention  the  subject
more;  for,  although  the  folly
will  rise  again,  it  will  scarce-
ly be  in  their  time." — April,
1839. p.  303.


such  statements;  but,  in  com-
mon honesty  we  conceive  that  we
are  bound  to  take  a  different
course."— Oct.,  1846. p.  479.

"  Indeed  we  hesitate  not  to
assert,  that  the  testimony  is  now
of  so  varied  and  extensive  a  kind,
so  strong,  and  in  a  certain  pro-
portion of  cases  so  seemingly  un-
exceptionable, as  to  authorize  us,
nay,  in  honesty,  to  compel  us  to
recommend  that  an  immediate
and  complete  trial  of  the  practice
be  made  in  surgical  cases." —
October,  1846. p.  485.

*'We  ourselves  entertain  not
the  slightest  bias  or  prejudice
upon  either  side  of  the  question.
We  have  at  no  time  resolved  that
the  thing  could  not,  or  should
not,  be  so." — Apr.,  1845.  p.  430.

"Again,  we  say,  let  it  be
tried  upon  patients  abont  to  be
submitted  to  the  knife." — Oct.,
1846. p.  486.


FINALE.

THE LATEST BULLETIN ISSUED, ot  present.

Letter  from  Dr.  Forbes  to  Dr.  Elliot, of  Exeter.

"  Old  Burlington  Street,
''  Nov.  28th,  1846.

"  Dear  Sir, — I  had  never  heard  of  your  mesmeric  contro-
versy before  your  letter  arrived,  and  at  this  moment  I  have
not  time  to  look  any  further  into  the  matter  than  to  read  the
letter  signed  '  H.  U.  Janson,'  in  the  Western  Times  of  this
day's  date.  The  statements  therein  made  relative  to  myself
are  altogether  untrue, — I  mean,  as  to  my  having  changed  my
opinion  of  mesmerism  (I  I)  Since  the  period  when  I  began  to
pay  some  attention  to  it  personally,  it  so  happens  that  I  have

NOT  ALTERED  MY  VIEWS  IN  ANY  RESPECT,  AS  YOU  WILL  BEE
BY  LOOKING  INTO  THE  VARIOUS  ARTICLES  ON  THE  SUBJECT
OF MESMERISM IN MY JOURNAL,^' &C., &C. (!  !  I)


LUera  scripta  manet. Can  any  unprejudiced  person  read


the  Antimesmeric  Crusaders.  593

and  compare  the  above  extracts^  and  say  that  the  editor  of  the
journal  in  which  they  are  to  be  found  has  been  influenced  by
a  genuine  love  for  science  ?  Is  it  possible  for  one  moment  to
suppose,  that  when  the  first  article  was  written  the  editor  was
anxious  to  discover  by  examination  the  truth  or  falsehood  of
mesmeric  doctrine  ?  Had  he  not  decided  the  point  without
examination,  and  did  he  not  therefore  mislead  the  medical
practitioners  of  the  United  Kingdom,  and  thus  retard  scien-
tific truth  ?  ''  //  so  happens  that  I  have  not  altered  my  views
in  any  respect.^'  Proh  pudor  !  Is  there  not  something  humi-
liating to  be  compelled  to  record  such  tergiversation,  and  to
proclaim  that  this  disingenuous  and  unphilosophical  indivi-
dual is  a  member  of  our  own  profession  ?  No  man  who  is
influenced  by  pure  and  lofty  motives  could  inflict  a  blow  for
the  express  purpose  of  damaging  the  reputation  of  his  com-
peers ;  much  less  could  he  permit  his  injurious  opinions  to
remain  on  record,  without  some  attempt  to  undo  the  mis-
chief he  has  produced,  and  to  explain  away  the  unfair  advan-
tage he  took  at  a  period  of  professional  and  popular  excite-
ment.

Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  we  advocate  the  absurd  doc-
trine, that  because  a  man  has  once  expressed  an  opinion,  he
is  to  be  servilely  bound  to  its  advocacy.  On  the  contrary,
we  esteem  the  man  who  conscientiously  changes  his  views,  of
whatever  character  they  may  be ;  but  we  expect  to  be  fur-
nished with  proof  that  the  change  is  the  result  of  sincere
conviction,  brought  about  by  a  careful  survey  of  facts  and
arguments,  and  not  from  a  timorous  subserviency  to  popular
impressions.  The  man  who  is  not  emancipated  from  the  con-
trol of  mere  interest  or  passion,  is  surely  not  justified  in
arbitrating  on  a  disputed  point  in  philosophy ;  and  if,  as  in
the  present  instance,  he  has  elevated  himself  into  the  office
of  judge,  we  should  be  still  less  justified  in  countenancing
for  an  instant  the  belief  that  his  opinions  are  worthy  of
record,  or  in  the  remotest  degree  to  be  considered  as  the
dicta  of  a  sage.

We  trust  that  this  exposure  will  not  only  be  of  service  to
Dr.  Forbes  in  his  editorial  capacity,  but  also  to  his  profes-
sional brethren,  who  appear  to  us  on  many  occasions  to  exalt
the  conductors  of  their  periodical  literature  into  standards  of
truth.  The  editor  of  a  journal  is  as  prone  to  error  as  his
numerous  readers ;  and  that  past  experience  does  not  warrant
us  in  removing  Dr.  Forbes  or  his  coadjutors  from  the  cata-
logue of  fallible  men,  this  number  of  our  journal  abundantly
proves.

If  we  are  asked,  how  is  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  a  dis-


594  Messrs.  Forbes,  Wakley,  and  Co.,

puted  point  in  medical  philosophy  to  be  ascertained,  we
answer,  by  free  and  unfettered  examination  and  discussion.
Enlist  all  men  in  the  cause — neither  forbid  nor  denounce.
Let  not  the  examination  be  commenced  by  drawling  forth
misereres  on  the  past  weaknesses  of  men ;  by  publishing  a
declaration  that  "the  empire  of  medicine  has  just  passed
through  an  unaccountable  paroxysm  of  credulity/' — that  it
is  determined  "  to  quicken  the  decline  '^  of  the  new.  truth,
and  "  to  assist  in  forming  a  barrier  against  a  probable  revi-
sitation  of  it,'' — that  it  is  lamentable  "  to  see  the  great  delu-
sion supported  by  one  of  the  ablest  physicians  of  this  country,
filling  the  most  important  chair  in  the  largest  medical  school  in  the
kingdom;""^  but,  rather  let  it  be  commenced  by  shewing  men
the  true  method  of  investigation,  and  the  uses  and  merits  of
an  inductive  philosophy, — by  raising  a  hue  and  cry  which
shall  bring  to  our  aid  all  thinkers,  being  impressed  with  the
opinion  that  if  the  question  is  one  to  be  solved  by  an  appeal
to  reason,  that  the  probability  of  the  desired  end  being  ac-
complished is  increased  in  the  exact  ratio  that  we  multiply
the  number  of  inquirers.  Let  argument  be  opposed  to  argu-
ment, let  opinions  clash,  and  from  the  wordy  turmoil  good
must  result,  for  erroneous  doctrines  can  only  be  uprooted  by
proving  their  fallacy,  and  this  is  an  appeal  to  reason.

We  contend  that  it  is  even  now  impossible  to  estimate
the  amount  of  mischief  which  the  article  published  in  1839
produced.  The  aim  was  deadly.  Men  appealed  to  it  on  all
sides.  So  triumphant  was  the  editor,  that  the  article  was
made  a  means  for  advertizing  his  journal,  and  where  this  did
not  reach,  it  was  acutely  perceived  that  a  sixpenny  pamphlet
would,  and  forthwith  it  appeared  in  a  separate  form ;  it  was
circulated  in  all  quarters — advertized  in  every  journal— read
by  every  body — quoted  by  every  body — and  every  body,  in-
cluding his  confrhre  Mr.  Wakley,  sang  the  praises  of  Forbes
of  the  "  British  and  Foreign."  A  host  of  scribblers  imme-
diatsly  followed  the  great  authority.  It  is  strange  that  time
has  not  abated  their  fury  nor  diminished  their  numbers,  and
still  more  strange,  that  they  apparently  do  not  perceive  that
they  are  now  engaged  in  combatting  the  general  who  mar-
shalled and  drilled  them  for  the  fight.  With  characteristic
cunning  he  interspersed  a  few  sentences  in  the  article  which
enables  him  to  refer  thereto,  and  to  say  when  in  a  difficulty,

d  We  beg  our  readers  to  remember  that  these  are  Dr.  Forbes's  own
words.  *'  The  great  delusion  "  refers  to  mesmerism,  and  "  the  ablest  phy-
sician of  this  country"  refers  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  whom  he  was  endeavouring
to  write  down.  But  the  attempt  has  failed.  What  is  the  moral  to  be
learned  7  It  is  this :  '*  Let  the  man  who  is  in  possession  of  a  truth  take  Atf
itnnd  upon  U,  and  the  opposing  world  will  come  over  to  his  opinion."


tke  Antimesmeric  Crusaders.  595


^'O I  but  I  never  contended  that/'  ftc. — "  I  never  said  this
was  impossible/' — ''  I  always  acknowledged  the  probability/'
fee. ;  and  in  this  way,  if  we  did  not  take  care  of  his  reputa-
tion and  place  his  deserts  on  record,  he  would  sail  smoothly
on  like  a  genuine  expediency-monger — one  of  the  mere
worldly  wise — ^turning  each  event  to  his  purpose,  and  by  each
pettifogging  trick  trying  to  exalt  his  own  character  for
wisdom.

The  number  of  medical  men  who  continue  to  denounce
mesmerism,  and  to  vilify  and  abuse  mesmerisers,  is  won-
derful. Every  town  seems  to  possess  "  a  little  man,"  who,  as
Dr.  Forbes  insinuates,  is  willing  ^'  to  become  the  provincial
wonder,"  and  whose  ambition  is  satisfied  if  he  can  perpetuate
)na  name  by  recording  it  in  the  columns  of  a  local  newspaper.
The  last  two  months  have  given  us  some  very  curious  spe-
cimens. We  take  one  or  two  promiscuously,  and  first  on  the
list  we  have  Mr.  Garlick,  surgeon,  who,  from  the  offensive
style  of  his  writing,  appears  to  be  a  veritable  personification
of  the  sweet-scented  vegetable,  enlightening  the  inhabitants
of  Halifax,  on  the  10th  of  November,  1846,  and  concluding
in  the  following  strain  :--

''  The  eminent  physician,  John  EUiotson,  M.D.,  who  has
laboured  with  all  his  might  to  ruin  his  own  prospects  and
bring  his  profession  into  disrepute.  Sorelv  has  he  suffered
for  the  part  he  has  played.  His  position  is  Irretrievably  lost
— ^no  man  now  cares  what  l3r.  E.  says  or  does,"  &c.,  &c.
Verily,  Mr.  Oarlick,  you  are  "  a  provincial  wonder,"  and  we
are  too  happy  to  embalm  you  in  the  pages  of  The  Zoist.

Then  we  have  a  Dr.  Elliot,*  of  Exeter,  taking  charge  of
the  education  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  western  division  of
the  United  Kingdom,  and  preserving  them  from  the  mon-
strous doctrines  of  the  mesmerisers,  by  dealing  in  whole-
sale abuse  and  slander.  His  letters  in  the  Western  Times  are
certainly  far  from  creditable  to  him.  On  a  late  occasion,  our
friend,  Mr.  Janson,  informed  him  that  Dr.  Forbes  had  been
converted.  On  the  receipt  of  this  information  he  is  exceed-
ingly indignant,  and  forthwith  writes  to  Dr.  Forbes,  who
returns  an  answer,  a  portion  of  which  we  published  in  a  pre-
ceding page.  Dr.  Elliot  is  so  elated  (!)  that  he  introduces  it
to  the  good  people  of  Exeter,  with  the  following  prefatory
flourish. ''  Hear ! O  Exeter  I  Dr.  Forbes,  Physician  to  the

e  Late  Mr.  Elliot,  of  16,  Romney  Terrace,  Horseferry  Road,  a  poor
Deighboarbood  t>ehiDd  Westminster  Abbey.  Tbe  practice  and  druggist's
shop  are  now  carried  on  by  a  Mr.  Atkinson.  Yet  all  good  men  will  consider
that  he  then  stood  far,  far  higher  than  he  does  now,  after  his  an  wise  effu-
sions against  a  mighty  truth  and  fellow -creatures  who  never  did  him  harm.-*

VOL.  IV.  8  S


596  Messrs.  Forbes^  Wakky,  and  Co.,

Queeii;  is  not  a  convert  to  mesmerism^  is  not  the  '  Queen's
maniac/  but  is  still  an  unbeliever^  and  one  of  the  brightest
ornaments  of  the  antimesmeric  party/'  Dr.  Forbes  we  have
no  doubt  says^  "  save  me  from  my  friend  f*  and  we  say  it  is
fortunate  that  our  cause  does  not  require  ** ornaments**  of
such  a  dazzling  lustre.

Sir  B.  Brodie  is  engaged  in  watching  over  the  welfare  of
the  students  of  St.  George's  Hospital,  and  Dr.  Elliot  has
published,  in  the  Exeter  paper,  a  second  edition  of  his  anti-
mesmeric  opinions.  The  latter  individual  is  so  oppressed  by
his  own  exertions  and  the  castigations  of  Mr.  Janson,  that
he  seeks  the  protection  of  the  surgical  baronet,  for  the  same
reason  that  the  eastern  traveller,  overcome  by  the  scorching
beat  of  the  tropical  sun,  courts  the  friendly  shade  of  some
gigantic  palm.  Sir  B.  Brodie  is  not  an  authority  in  mes-
merism. When  he  has  attempted  to  perform  an  operation
while  the  patient  is  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  then,  and  not  till
then,  is  he  qualified  to  give  an  opinion  as  to  the  possibility  of
such  an  occurrence.  It  is  a  question  of  fetct  and  not  of  mere
opinion.  In  a  recent  lecture,  reported  in  the  Medical  Gazette,
Sir  B.  Brodie  is  reported  to  have  said  : —

*'  In  the  public  journals  of  the  last  month  I  have  seen  an  adver-
tisement relating  to  the  establishment  of  a  mesmeric  hospital,  in
which  patients  are  to  be  mesmerised,  in  order  that  they  may  be  sub-
jected to  surgical  operations  without  suffering  pain,  and  the  names
of  several  noblemen  and  gentlemen— one  of  them  a  cabinet  minister
— are  to  be  found  in  the  list  of  patrons  of  this  new  institution.  It
would  be  well  to  inquire,  have  these  individuals  been  themselves
present  at  such  a  number  of  operations  performed  under  what  is
called  the  mesmeric  influence,  as  would  furnish  the  data  requisite
for  the  adoption  of  a  new  principle  in  pathology?  Have  they  had
the  assistance  of  competent  persons  in  the  investigation  of  matters
with  which  they  are  not  themselves  familiar?  Are  they  aware  that
a  large  proportion  of  those  who  undergo  surgical  operations  without
being  mesmerised  scarcely  complain  of  pain,  whatever  they  may  feel:
it  is  not  very  uncommon  for  them  to  converse  at  the  time  as  if  they
were  indifferent  spectators,  and  that  it  seems  to  be  in  the  power  of
almost  any  one  under  the  influence  of  excitement  or  a  strong  moral
determination  to  sustain  bodily  suffering  without  any  outward  expres-
sion of  what  he  suffers^

For  a  complete  answer  to  these  extraordinary  observations,
we  must  refer  our  readers  to  Dr.  EUiotson's  pamphlet.  Surgical
Operations  without  pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State.  The  only
other  comment  we  shall  make,  is  to  refer  Sir  B.  Brodie  to  the
convert  Dr.  Forbes,  who  says,  *'  If  the  statements  be  corro-
borated, and  if  insensibility  can  be  produced  artificially,


the  Antimesmeric  Crv^aders.  597

surely  the  immense  acquisition  both  to  operator  and
PATIENT  IS  obvious  AT  ONCE.  We  hesitatc  not  to  assert^
that  the  testimony  is  now  of  so  varied  and  extensive  a  kind^
so  strong,  and  in  a  certain  proportion  of  cases  so  seemingly
unexceptionable,  as  to  authorize  us,  nay,  in  honesty,  to
COMPEL  us  to  recommend  that  an  immediate  and  complete

TRIAL OF the PRACTICE BE MADE IN SURGICAL CAS£S/'<^

We  grieve  to  be  compelled  to  refer  to  such  sad  specimens
of  professional  ignorance  and  prejudice,  and  yet  this  is  not  a
tithe  of  what  we  could  quote  if  we  had  the  space,  or  if  it
were  important  for  the  advancement  of  mesmerism  to  do  so.
Messrs.  Wakley  and  Forbes,  ye  are  the  men  who  have  misled
your  brethren.  Ye  are  the  boasted  reformers  ii^tjuedicine,
and  yet  how  miserably  deficient  ye  have  proved  yourselves  to
be  in  intellectual  acumen  and  the  first  principles  of  justice  I
Gibbon,  with  grave  sarcasm,  said,  ''  It  is  the  first  care  of  a
reformer  to  prevent  any  future  reformation.'^  With  regard
to  one  branch  of  medical  science,  your  conduct  proves  the
truth  and  justice  of  his  remark,  and  yet,  cunning  as  ye  are,
truth  has  been  more  than  a  match  for  your  efforts.  As  re-
gards the  amount  of  cunning  displayed.  Dr.  Forbes  has  cer-
tainly beaten  his  friend,  Mr.  Wakley.  The  fugleman  has
been  out-manoeuvred  by  the  recruit.  Dr.  Forbes  has  an-
nounced his  conversion  in  the  most  Jesuitical  manner,  and  if
we  did  not  give  proof,  no  person  could  believe  the  truth  of
our  statements.  Mr.  Wakley  is  attempting  the  same  course,
but  he  fails.  We  would  suggest  to  him  the  propriety  of
holding  a  consultation  with  Dr.  Forbes — between  brothers
there  can  be  no  occasion  to  pay  the  fee — and  to  propose  to
him  the  following  problem :  "  Which  is  the  best  way  to  ex-
tricate my  journid  from  its  difficulty,  and  at  the  same  time  to
avoid  compromising  its  character  for  consistency  ?''  That
Mr.  Wakley  is  now  in  a  transition  state — in  the  "  agony  of
change '^ — we  can  give  proof.  Only  three  years  since  he
addressed  the  following  note  to  Colonel  Davidson,  who  had
forwarded  to  him  a  mesmeric  communication  'J —

''  Mr.  Wakley  presents  his  compliments  to  Col.  Davidson,
and  begs  to  say  that  he  has  carefully  read  the  inclosed  com-
munication, but  that  since  he  (Mr.  W.)  is  npt  prepared — ^for

e  BriiUh  and  Foreign  Medical  Review, October,  1846. p.  485.

f  On  May  10th  of  last  year  he  wrote  as  follows  in  his  Lancet:  **  We  are
much  obliged  to  Mr.  W.  B.  Rogers  for  the  case  he  has  forwarded  to  as,  but
do  not  mean  to  pubRnh  anything  further  on  meemerismf  and  cannot  therefore
insert  it."  And  now  he  actually  feels  himself  compelled  to  attack  mes-
merism every  Saturday.

On  Oct.  27th,  1838,  '*  We  cannot  undertake  to  give  publicity  to  any
communication  on  animal  magnetism/'  were  his  words.— Zowl.

s  s  2


598  Messrs.  Forbes,  Wakley,  and  Co,,

the  size  of  his  journal  prevents  him — ^to  open  his  pages  to  all
correspondents  who  advocate  or  deny  the  proceedings  of  the
'  mesmerists/  he  cannot  make  a  deviation  £rom  a  rule  which
he  laid  down  in  the  Lancet  some  years  since,  namely,  to  let
the  questions  be  discussed  elsewhere,  without  devoting  the  pages
of  the  Lancet  to  recording  them.  This  regulation  he  has  main-
tained since  the  time  when  the  imposture  of  two  notorious
'  mesmeric '  patients  was  manifested  in  Bedford  Square,  and
made  known  to  the  public  in  that  periodical.  Mr.  Wakley
therefore  begs  leave — complying  with  the  wish  in  that  case
made  by  Col.  Davidson — ^to  return  to  the  Colonel  his  letter  of
the  3rd  instant.

"  85,  Bedford  Square,
"  November  22nd,  1843.^'

In  the  meantime,  "  the  pressure  from  without "'  became
more  and  more  insupportable,  and  Mr.  Wakley  became  pro-
portionably  outrageous.

*<  When  a  fill'd  kettle,  or  a  pot,
Is  very  nearly  boiling  hot,
'Tis  then  a  bit  of  flaming  stick
Will  caase  it  to  boil  o'er ;
Effecting  that  which  twenty  sticks
Had  faii'd  to  do  before."

Accordingly,  "  the  pages  of  the  Lancet "  were  opened,  and
Mr.  Wakley  did  "  mdke  a  deviation  from  a  rule  which  he
laid  down."  Within  a  twelvemonth  he  employed  Dr.  C.  R.
Hall  to  write  a  series  of  half-and-half  antimesmeric  articles,
and  this  movement  was  announced  to  the  profession  in  the
following  style : —

'^  In  consequence  of  some  recent  publications,  the  Lancet
will  contain  a  complete  Critical  History  of  the  Rise,  Progress,
and  Mock  Marvels  of  that  Hallucinating  Fraud,  known  by
the  term.  Mesmerism.''

As  may  be  supposed,  there  was  a  vast  deal  of  nonsense
written  by  Dr.  Hall,  but  he  admitted  a  sufficient  number  of
facts  and  statements,  to  enable  Mr.  Wakley,  when  he  shortly
commences  to  record  the  operations  of  Dr.  Esdaile  at  Calcutta,

I  This  "pressure  from  without"  possesses  extraordinary  power.  It
sometimes  makes  people  go  mad,  according  to  their  own  d^niium  of  insanity.
Thus  Sir  R.  Peel,  on  the  16th  of  March,  1839,  said  the  man  **  must  be  mad
who  would  permit  an  open  trade  in  corn.''  In  1846,  Sir  R.  Peel,  according
to  his  own  definition,  went  mad  und  proposed  the  measure.  Lord  Melboarne
(the  House  of  Lords  not  being  snmcient  witness  of  his  decided  opinions)
'*  declared  before  God  that  he  thought  the  repeal  of  the  corn  laws  the  wild-
est and  maddest  proposition  he  ever  heard  in  his  life ;"  and  yet,  in  doe
time,  he  voted  for  this  same  "  wildest  and  maddest  proposition."  Dr.  Forbea
has  already  displayed  similar  consistency.  We  are  on  the  tip-toe  of  expec«
tation  for  Mr.  Wakley's  Jim  Crow  oTolution.


the  Antimeimeric  Crusaders.


589


and  the  favourable  report  of  the  Government  investigation
thereon,  to  refer  to  these  articles,  and  to  adopt  **  the  artfal
dodge''  which  Dr.  Forbes  found  so  pre-eminently  nseful.
However,  we  shall  narrowly  watch  this  nnscrupulons  indivi-
dual's editorial  movements  and  gyrations,  and  we  do  not
think  our  pen  will  refuse  to  perform  its  office.

We  have  already  had  some  very  singular  specimens  of
antithesis  taken  from  Dr.  Forbes's  journal,  and  we  must  now
give,  for  the  purpose  of  shewing  the  temper  and  judgment
with  which  Mr.  Wakley  writes,  two  specimens  of  the  same
character  from  editorial  articles  in  the  Lancet.  We  beg  our
readers  to  remark  that  these  specimens  are  taken  from  the
same  page  of  one  number  only.


''The  medical  profession  the
only  authority  to  aecide  in  ques-
tions of  mesmerism."  —  Lancet^
July  4th,  1846. p.  17.


"The  medical  profession  in-
competent to  decide  disputed  me-
dical questions." — Lancet,  July
4th,  1846. p.  17.


"  Look  at  the  chosen  audience
and  instruments  of  this  mesmeric
leader — his  allies  and  assistants,
taken  from  the  pert  folly  of  the
nobility,  the  weakest  among  the
literary  people,  high  and  low
ladies,  quack  clergymen,  itine-
rant lecturers  and  exhibiting  buf-
foons."

"Tins  pseudo-science  is  a  thing
of  the  orawing.room,  and  the
gossip  of  the  tea-table,  rather
than  of  the  study  and  the  labo-
ratory."

''Many  of  the  most  distin-
guished among  the  fellows  mark-
ed their  dUapproval  by  their  ab-
aence  from  the  (Harveian)  Oro"
tion.  Of  these  were  Dr.  Cham-
bers, Dr.  Marshall  Hall,  Sir
James  Clark,  Dr.  Lee,  Dr.  Web-
ster, of  Brook  Street,  and  many
others."*


"  It  is  a  singular  anomaly,  but
it  is  no  less  true,  that  a  court  of
law,  or  rather  Uie  discussions  in
the  medical  journals  which  follow
a  trial  are  the  only  means  we  in
England  possess  of  deciding  dis-
puted medical  questions, — 'Is
this  or  that  the  best  test  for
arsenic?^ — 'Is  it  proper  to  tie
the  iliac  artery  in  wounds  of  its
smaller  branches  V — 'Are  second-
ary symptoms  in  the  child  capa-
ble of  infecting  the  nurse?  —
would  tfi  vain  have  occupied  the
pages  of  a  journal  or  the  evenings
of  a  society ;  in  the  former  case
probably  they  would  not  have
been  read ;  in  the  latter  instance
colleagues  would  have  purposely
absented  themselves**

"A  trial,  we  repeat,  is  the
usual  mode  of  solvmg  any  dis-
puted medical  question."


g  Who  Dr.  Webster  is  I  know  not  Bot  I  hear  that  Sir  James  Clark  is
never  seen  within  the  college  tcalU  at  an  Harveian  Oration;  indeed,  he  is  not
a  fellow :  that  Dr.  Marshall  Hall  has  rarely  entered  the  building :  that
Dr.  Chambers  has  seldom  of  late  been  seen  at  the  Harveian  Oration  :  and
that  Dr.  Lee  was  there.  So  large  a  collection  of  fellows  has  not  of  late
years  been  seen  at  the  oration  ;  several  came  up  from  the  couBtry,  and  not


600  Messrs.  Forbes,  Wakley,  and  Co.,  ifc.

After  this^  we  shall  not  devote  further  space  to  notice  his
more  recent  attacks  upon  Dr.  Elliotson.  Suffice  it  to  say  that
they  occur  weekly,  and  are  sometimes  of  a  most  disgraceful
character.  For  a  recent  specimen  of  refined  taste,  we  beg
to  refer  to  the  number  of  the  Lancet  bearing  date  Dec.  12th,
1846.  We  really  feel  pity  for  the  man  who  is  so  lost  to  all
sense  of  decency  as  to  copy  into  his  journal  whatever  it  may
please  any  scoundrel  to  write.  Is  this  a  proof  of  the  respecta-
bility of  modem  medical  literature?  And  is  this  the  well
from  which  professional  men  are  drinking  their  weekly  supply
of  scientific  nourishment  ?  Is  the  man  who  chooses  to  com-
mit his  impure  thoughts  to  paper  to  be  permitted  to  do  so
with  impunity  ?  And  is  our  profession  so  debased  as  to  sanc-
tion the  promulgation  of  such  disgusting  and  filthy  trash?

We  appeal  to  professional  men  to  be  on  their  guard.  We  ask
them  to  investigate  the  subject  of  mesmerism — each  man  for
himself.  We  say,  go  to  nature ;  but  above  all  things,  avoid
the  polluting  pages  of  the  Lancet.  We  deplore  the  fact  that
medical  men  continue  to  purchase  this  periodical,  but  the
tone  of  society  in  general  is  so  undignified  and  so  deficient  in
morality  of  purpose  and  high  resolves,  that  we  are  perhaps
in  error  to  expect  just  now  more  exalted  notions  in  one  parti-
cular class.  It  has  been  beautifully  remarked  by  a  late
writer, — "  Nowhere  is  that  conduct  which  is  really  virtuous
regarded  with  approbation^ — nowhere  is  that  which  is  really
vicious  condemned :  there  is  no  well-directed  sensibility :  no
nice  discemment;  no  correct  appreciation  of  merit;  no  con-
sistent  adherence  even  to  admitted  principles:  honesty  of
inquiry  is  subverted  by  temptation,  or  overwhelmed  with  dis-
grace and  persecution ;  while  unenlightened  or  criminal  ac-
quiescence is  fostered  and  recompensed.^'

We  feel  assured  that  all  will  agree  with  us  in  the  opinion
that  Dr.  Elliotson's  career  illustrates  the  truth  of  the  above
remarks.  Through  good  report  and  evil  report — ^in  spite  of
persecutions  the  most  vindictive,  and  calumnies  the  most  base
and  degrading,  he  has  laboured  on,  animated  by  one  feeling
only, — the  ascertainment  of  truth.  He  works  not  for  ap-
plause,— his  aim  is  higher  and  more  becoming  a  rational
being. He  can  say  with  the  great  Sydenham,  who  suffered

twenty  of  those  resident  in  town  were  absent.  The  assemblage  of  fellows,
licentiates,  and  visitors,  exceeded  by  many  timeM  what  was  ever  witnessed
within  the  memory  of  my  informant :  and  many  of  the  most  distinguished
men  in  the  law  and  church  were  there.  Applause  was  never  before  heard
before  or  after  an  Hanreian  Oration  in  the  memory  of  the  oldest  fellow.
But  at  the  end  there  were  distinct  rounds  of  applause ;  and  Dr.  Elliotson's
health  was  received  after  dinner  with  the  same  cordiality.— W.  C.  E.


Notices  to  Correspondents,  ^c.  601

from  similar  persecutions,  "  I  find  that  it  is  better  to  assist
mankind  than  to  be  commended  by  them,  and  highly  conducive
to  tranquillity  of  mind ;  for  popular  applause  is  lighter  than
a  feather — a  bubble — and  less  substantial  than  a  dream/'

W.  C.  Enoledue.


BOOKS  RECEnrSD.

The  Stars  and  the  Earth  ;  or,  Thoughts  upon  Space,  Time,  and  Eternity.
The  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal. October.

The  Principles  of  the  Chrono-thermal  System  of  Medicine,  with  the
Fallacies  of  the  Faculty,  in  a  Series  of  Lectures.  By  Samuel  Dickson, M.D.

&c. &c. &c.


NOTICEB  TO  OOBRESFONDEim.

The  communications  of  Dr.  Engledue,  Dr.  Storer,  Mr.  O.  Smith,  Mr.
Holland,  &c.,  in  our  next.

We  have  shewn  Dr.  Dickson's  letter  to  Dr.  Ashburner,  who  requests
us  to  say  that  he  was  ignorant  of  Dr.  Dickson's  opinion  upon  sleep,
when  he  wrote  his  paper  for  The  Z&ist  and  supported  ideas  which  he  had
heard  expressed  by  the  late  Mr.  Carmichael  of  Dublin,  and  others.

Professor  Bush  of  America,  begs  us  to  announce  a  work  by  him  uiK>n
the  Doctrines  and  Disclosures  of  Swedenborg,  and  another  upon  the  higher
Phenomena  of  Mesmerism.

Mr.  Balby's  letter  is  an  advertisement  of  himself  and  his  friend.

Dr.  Eiliotson  requests  us  to  say  that  a  letter  enclosing  a  fee  arrived  for  him
in  the  autumn,  during  his  absence  in  Switzerland,  desiring  an  opinion  by
mesmeric  means ;  and  that  he  returned  an  answer,  that  he  neither  was  a
clairvoyant  nor  employed  clairvoyants,  together  with  the  fee,  to  the  Devon-
shire post-office,  to  be  called  for  as  directed.  Answer  and  enclosure  have
not  been  called  for,  but  have  been  returned  to  him.  If  the  writer  sees  this,
he  is  earnestly  requested  to  enable  Dr.  Eiliotson  to  return  him  the  fee.

Mr,  Garlick. — What  this  sweet  writer  will  do,  we  cannot  guess.  He
has  told  all  good  people  in  the  Halifax  papers  that  he  likes  patients  to  feel
pain  while  he  operates  on  them, — **  he  prefers  his  patient  in  a  natural  state,"
— au  natunl,  though  Oarlick  be  there.

We  see  by  the  last  Jersey  paper  that  a  tooth  has  been  extracted  pain-
lessly in  public  from  a  patient  mesmerised  by  Dr.  Collyer.
