THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. II (April 1844 to January 1845).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/s1id13659900).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  ZOIST:

A  JOURNAL


CEREBRAL  PHYSIOLOGY  &  MESMERISM,

AND

THEIR  APPLICATIONS  TO  HUMAN  WELFARE.


“This  is  Truth,  though  opposed  to  the  Philosophy  of  Ages.”—  Gall.


VOL.  II.

APRIL,  1844,  to  JANUARY,  1845.


LONDON :

HIPPOLYTE  BAILLIERE,  PUBLISHER,

219,  REGENT  STREET;

PARIS:  J.  B.  BAILLIERE,  RUE  DE  L’ECOLE  BE  MEDECINE;

LEIPSIZ:  T.  O.  WEIGEL.


M  DCCC  XL V.


LONDON :


PRINTED  BY  WALTON  AND  MITCHELL,

24,  Wardour-st.  Oxford-st.


MAG.  ^3


INDEX.


page

Anderson,  Captain,  Spinal  Affection,  cured  by . .  82

Atkinson,  Mr.,  on  a  Family  of  Idiots  .  163

- •  Cure  of  Ophthalmia  with  Mesmerism .  239

Ashburner,  Dr.,  Tooth  Extraction  without  pain .  107

Amputation  without  pain . 114,  115,  119,  390,  531

Amativeness,  Mr.  H.  Spencer,  on  Organ  of . . . .  186

Alexis  Didier  .  393

Auldjo,  Mr.,  Report  on  Alexis  .  521

Adare,  Lord,  Reports  on  Alexis  . 500,  510

Asthma  cured  by  Mesmerism  .  465

Bingham,  Mr.,  Review  of  his  work  on  giving  Religious  Instruction  to

the  Insane . . . . . . .  36

Butler,  Mr.,  on  Cast-making  .  39

Baldock,  Mr.,  Cures  by  Mesmerism . . .  89

Brindley,  Mr.,  Cures  by  Mesmerism . 128,  355,  473

Breast,  pain  of,  cured  by  Mesmerism  . . .  264

Community  of  Feeling  .  269

Cast-making,  Mr.  Butler,  on  . . . . .  39

Catalepsy  and  Rigidity,  different  . . .  67

Case,  Mr.,  Tooth  Extraction  without  pain .  107

Chest,  Affection  of,  cured  by  Mesmerism .  134

Clairvoyance  . . .  138,  269,  478

Carpenter,  Dr .  285

Castle,  Dr.,  on  head  of  Dr.  Strauss .  326

Chandler,  Mr.,  Cures  by  Mesmerism  .  373

D’Orsay,  Count,  Report  on  Alexis  .  512

Deseret,  Mr.,  on  the  Function  of  the  Organ  of  Language  .  21

- on  the  Organ  of  Marvellousness  . . .  31

Deafness  cured  by  Mesmerism .  135

Death,  Punishment  of  . 295

Delirium,  Sleep  in,  by  Mesmerism .  378

Engledue,  Dr.,  Cases  of  Clairvoyance  and  Sympathy .  269

Education  .  1

Estlin,  Mr . 282


IV


INDEX.


page

Elliotson,  Dr.,  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism  .  42

- Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism . . . 74,  194

- on  the  murderer  Lawrence  .  443

- Crouch  .  449

- Clairvoyance . . .  478

Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism .  74,  80,  194,  355,  373

Fossati,  Dr.,  on  Education  . . .  154

Forbes,  Dr .  274,  393

Gall,  Anecdotes  of .  455

Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism  . . . . .  42

Headache  cured  by  Mesmerism . 88,  89,  266

Hollings,  Mr,,  Mesmerism  for  Surgical  Operations  . .  531

Healey,  Mr.,  Report  on  Alexis  . . .  504

Holds  worth,  Rev.  R.,  Cure  of  Asthma  by  Mesmerism .  465

Instinct . 143

Idiots,  a  Family  of . . . . . . .  163

Insane,  Religious  Instruction  of . 36,  190

Johnson,  Dr.  James  . 278

Johnson,  Dr.  E.,  Report  on  Alexis  .  514

Knee,  diseased,  cured  with  Mesmersm  .  84,  129,  266

- -  agony  of,  relieved  by  Mesmerism  .  383

Language,  Mr.  Deseret  on  the  Function  of  the  Organ  of .  21

Labour  in  the  Mesmeric  State . . .  121

Lynel,  Mr.,  Labour  in  the  Mesmeric  State .  121

Lewis,  Mr.,  on  Constructiveness  .  162

Medical  Men  and  Journals  .  273

Marvellousness,  Mr.  Deseret  on  the  Organ  of .  31

Moral  Benefits  of  Mesmerism . 33


Melancholia  cured  by  Mesmerism . . . .133,  267

Mechanical  Injuries  cured  by  Mesmerism .  357

Nervousness  cured  by  Mesmerism  . 80,  357

Neuralgia  cured  by  Mesmerism  .  256

Noel,  Mr.,  Letters  on  Gall  .  455

Operations  without  pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State  . 90,  247,  388,  529

Owens,  Dr.,  Amputation  without  pain .  114

Ophthalmia  cured  by  Mesmerism .  239

Opinion,  Right  of  Freedom  of . . .  431

Punishment  of  Death . 295

Phrenological  Society  . 21,  162,  443

Phrenology,  Mesmeric . . .  61,  125,  140,  225,  362

Palpitation  cured  by  Mesmerism .  258

Pyne,  Rev.  T.,  Cures  by  Mesmerism  .  535

Quinsey  cured  by  Mesmerism  . . .  125,  240

Rheumatism  cured  with  Mesmerism . 86,  87,  124,  255,  257,  360,  384


INDEX.


V


page

Reason  and  Instinct  .  143

Robertson,  Rev.  T.,  Report  on  Alexis .  518

Symes,  Mr.,  Seton  inserted  in  the  Mesmeric  State  .  109

• - on  Head  of  Lieut. -Colonel  Davidson  and  his  Son .  443

- Strictures  on  Dr.  Prichard  .  448

Speech  recovered  by  Mesmerism . 244

Scarlet  Fever,  Sleep  in,  by  Mesmerism . 379

Spencer,  Mr.  H.,  on  Organ  of  Amativeness  . 186

- - on  Organ  of  Wonder  .  316

Spooner,  Mr.  E.  O.  converted  to  Mesmerism  . . . .  79

Spinal  Affection  cured  by  Mesmerism  .  82

Strauss,  Dr.,  Cerebral  Development  of .  326

Shaw,  Sir  James,  Head  of  . . . .  30

Sims,  Rev.  Mr.,  Report  on  Alexis .  516

Sussex,  Duke  of,  Head  of  . . .  30

Stanhope,  Lord,  Cures  by  Mesmerism . .  80

Seton  placed  without  pain,  by  Mr.  Symes . . 109

Senses,  Occult  . .  .  213

Sandby,  Rev.  G.,  Rheumatism  cured  with  Mesmerism .  380

- Report  on  Alexis  . .  507

Tosswill,  Mr.,  Operation  in  the  Mesmeric  State .  537

Theft,  Head  of  Boy  addicted  to .  33

Thompson,  Mr.  H.  S.,  Cures  by  Mesmerism  .  83

Teeth  extracted  without  pain . . . 247,  388

Tubbs,  Mr.,  Operations  without  pain . 116,  367

- Cures  by  Mesmerism . 124,  254,  255

Tic  Douloureux  cured  by  Mesmerism  . 263,  371

Tumor  removed  without  pain  . . . Ill,  113

Uwins,  Mr.,  Case  of  Moral  Benefits  of  Mesmerism .  33

Valiant,  Capt.,  Cures  by  Mesmerism .  .  . . . .  241

Wound  cured  by  Mesmerism  .  137

Wakley,  Mr . 42,  90,  123,  288

Weir,  Dr.  .  286


THE  ZOIST.


No.  V.


APRIL ,  1844.


I.  Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  he.

The  rapid  glance  at  “  Education  as  it  is/'  in  our  last  num¬
ber,  must  have  shewn  to  our  readers,  that,  miserable  and
humiliating  as  we  found  the  survey,  we  might  have  enlarged
and  painted  in  still  more  glowing  colors  the  description.
Facts  presented  themselves  on  all  sides.  The  statistics  of
every  city  and  town,  and  the  most  cursory  inspection  of  every
village  population,  proclaim  the  momentous  truth,  that
the  people  are  enveloped  in  the  deepest  ignorance.  The
nightly  fires  consuming  the  sustenance  of  the  incendiaries, —
the  daily  meetings  of  oppressed  thousands  to  demand  relief
from  their  oppressors, — the  repeated  "strikes”  of  miners
and  colliers,  factory  operatives,  and  others, — the  physical
wretchedness  and  the  general  demoralization  of  the  inhabit¬
ants  of  the  “  city  of  palaces,” — and  the  cry  of  the  starving
millions  from  all  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom, — an  enquiry
into  the  reality  of  the  existence  of  all  this,  the  causes  of  all
this,  and  the  remedies  for  all  this,  would  have  furnished  us
with  matter  sufficient  to  fill  several  consecutive  numbers  of
our  journal.

Strongly  and  truly  was  it  declared  in  Parliament,  a  few
weeks  ago,  by  Mr.  Wyse,  the  eloquent  and  unwearied  cham¬
pion  of  moral  and  intellectual  training,  that  “  England  has
just  claims  to  be  in  the  front  rank  in  the  cause  of  civilization
and  humanity  ;  but  she  wants  one  thing,  which  wanting,  she
wants  everything,  that  is,  domestic  peace, — and  without
which,  neither  her  wealth  nor  prosperity  can  long  endure.
She  may  obtain  this  essential  ingredient  to  her  permanent
VOL.  II.  B


2


Education  as  it  is ,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


glory ;  but  it  is  not  through  violence,  dread,  and  apprehen¬
sion,  but  through  the  talismanic  rule — simple  but  strong —
of  f  doing  unto  others  as  she  would  be  done  by/  This  is
the  inflexible  law  of  human  nature.  It  was  not  made  for
Ireland  or  England ;  it  governs  the  past  as  well  as  the  time
to  come.  To  this  must  the  pride  of  England  succumb  at
last.”  We  need  not  say  much  on  the  sad  reflections  which
the  facts  we  have  recounted  must  necessarily  induce.  We
have  already  declared  that  our  vaunted  civilization  is  worth
but  little  whilst  our  population  is  so. ignorant,  so  oppressed,
and  so  distressed.  True,  there  is  cause  for  joy;  that  in  the
classification  of  nations  and  empires,  our  own  father-land
stands  foremost,  the  chief  and  the  most  powerful ;  but  this
knowledge  brings  regret,  for  we  cannot  avoid  the  reflection
that  we  have  neglected  that  power  and  disregarded  the  im¬
portant  means  it  places  at  our  disposal  for  the  promotion  of
internal  improvement  and  prosperity.  We  may  dictate  to
the  world ;  our  men  of  “  intellectual  might”  may  challenge
competition  with  the  great  and  the  learned  of  all  nations ;
and  we  may  fancy  that  our  poets  and  philosophers,  our  mo¬
ralists  and  statesmen,  are  unrivalled :  but  weigh  in  the
balance  all  these  glorious  advantages,  and  to  this  conclusion
wre  are  compelled  to  come — that  civilization  is  not  alone  to
be  measured  by  the  progress  which  a  nation  has  made  in
intellectual  achievements,  but  it  is  to  be  measured  by  the
moral  power  displayed, — by  the  external  manifestations  of
justice,  greatness,  and  grandeur  in  its  examples  of  national
intercourse, — and  by  the  internal  proofs  of  freedom,  intel¬
ligence,  and  happiness  amongst  the  people.  Moral  power
we  repeat  is  the  great  test  of  civilized  progress.  The  really
civilized  man  listens  with  feelings  of  pity  to  the  pompous
boastings  of  him  who,  regardless  of  other  considerations,
recounts  the  wealth,  the  power,  and  the  enormous  terri¬
tory  which  his  country  possesses, — he  does  not  estimate  the
power  of  “  the  empire  upon  which  the  sun  never  sets,”  by
the  number  of  its  inhabitants,  the  number  of  its  square  miles,
the  influx  or  efflux  of  its  mineral  and  vegetable  produc¬
tions,  or  the  beauty,  extent,  and  importance  of  its  manu¬
factures  ; — but  he  surveys  and  appreciates  the  progress  made
in  those  refinements  and  improvements  of  social  intercourse
which  are  the  results  of  a  progressively  increasing  accession
of  moral  power,  by  the  attempts  made  to  raise  higher  and
higher  the  national  character  and  to  adopt  means  for  real¬
izing  that  great  and  lofty  principle  which  justice  and  be¬
nevolence  conjointly  proclaim  to  be  the  goal  to  which  hu¬
manity  must  aim — “The  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest
number.”


3


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.

The  monster-evil  selfishness,  whether  displayed  in  na¬
tional  movements  or  in  individual  actions,  must  be  denounced
— the  present  evils  and  their  tendencies  must  be  alike  ex¬
posed — the  loud,  just,  and  universal  cry  of  the  million  must
be  recognized — the  rich  man  must  give  up  some  of  his  riches,
think  less  of  his  petty  artificial  distinctions,  and  more  of  the
wants,  the  miseries,  and  the  patient  endurance  of  his  brethren.
The  people  must  be  educated  and  elevated.  The  education
they  require,  is  to  be  taught  their  duty  as  individuals  and
as  members  of  the  great  human  family, — to  be  taught  the
best  means  of  remedying  their  condition,  of  increasing  their
happiness  and  comforts,  and  of  attaining  some  portion  of
those  enjoyments  which  they  perceive  are  so  lavishly  obtained
by  a  few.  This  is  not  to  be  done  by  telling  the  child  to  lisp
“  Be  content  with  that  state  of  life  in  which  it  has  pleased
God  to  place  you it  is  not  to  be  done  by  cunningly  teach¬
ing  that  the  wealthy  drones  are  the  chosen  few, — when  per¬
chance  that  wealth  has  been  accumulated  by  the  most  glaring
departure  from  the  commands  of  the  moral  code ;  it  is  not
to  be  done  by  the  stingy  and  contracted  exertions  of  the
merely  monied  man,  who  in  his  post-prandial  speeches  com¬
pliments  his  starving  laborers,  and  calls  them  “  The  bold
peasantry — their  country’s  pride, ”  when,  revelling  in  the
luxuries  obtained  by  i^lO, 000  a  year,  he  condescendingly
lauds  the  patriotism  discovered  in  the  mud  cottage,  and  nur¬
tured  by  the  Saturday-night’s  earnings  of  nine  shillings.
But  it  is  to  be  accomplished  by  following  the  dictates  of
wisdom  and  justice, — by  placing  the  necessaries  and  comforts
of  life  within  the  reach  of  all  through  the  removal  of  restrictions
and  assisting  the  development  instead  of  retarding  the  growth
of  that  natural  longing  for  elevation  inherent  in  all, — in  one
word,  by  strenuously  endeavoring  to  obtain  for  those  less
happily  situated  what  we  should  wish  to  possess  ourselves,  if
in  a  similar  situation.  Whisper  not  to  the  poor  man  then,
“  Be  content  with  your  lot  rather  struggle  with  him  to
improve  his  lot,  and  to  bring  him  nearer  yourself.  Wrestle
with  injustice  wherever  it  is  found,  and  strive  to  make  the
poor  the  improvers  of  their  own  condition,  by  promoting
their  intelligence  and  freedom.  Attempt  this,  and  we  should
fondly  hope  that

-  “  Hoary-headed  selfishness  has  felt

Its  death-blow,  and  is  tottering  to  the  grave :

A  brighter  morn  awaits  the  human  day,

When  every  transfer  of  earth’s  natural  gifts
Shall  be  a  commerce  of  good  words  and  works  ;

When  poverty  and  wealth,  the  thirst  of  fame,

The  fear  of  infamy,  disease,  and  woe,


4


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


War,  with  its  million  horrors  and  fierce  hell,
Shall  live  but  in  the  memory  of  time, —

Who,  like  a  penitent  libertine,  shall  start,

Look  back,  and  shudder  at  his  younger  years.”


In  our  last  number  we  referred  in  a  cursory  manner  to
the  fact,  that  the  want  of  education  is  one  of  the  most  mani¬
fest  causes  of  crime.  In  England  and  Wales  the  number  of
persons  committed  for  trial  is  now  five  times  as  great  as  it
was  forty-four  years  ago.  In  Scotland  the  number  is  six
times  as  great  as  it  was  twenty-four  years  ago.  In  Ireland,
seven  times  as  great  as  it  was  thirty-four  years  ago.*  The
lesson  conveyed  by  the  following  table  is  well  worthy  of  deep
consideration.  It  gives  the  actual  number  of  children  under
sixteen  years  of  age  who  were  committed  for  trial  from  1835
to  1841.


Males.

Females.

Total,

1835  . .  .

.  .  .  2,002  .  .  .

...  354  ... .

..  2,356

1836  ..  .

.  . .  2,057  .  .  .

...  366  ...  .

..  2,423

1837  .  .  .

.  . .  2,265  . .  .

.  ..  389  ..  ..

..  2,654

1838  . .  .

.  . .  2,250  .  .  .

...  407  ...  .

..  2,657

1839  .  .  .

.  . .  2,425  . .  .

...  463  ... .

..  2,888

1840  . .  .

.  . .  2,586  . .  .

...  557  ... .

..  3,143

1841  . .  .

.  . .  2,656  . .  .

.  ..  556  ..  ..

..  3,212

Here  is  an  alarming  fact, — a  steady  and  progressive  increase
in  the  number  of  juvenile  delinquents.  One  thousand  more
children  committed  for  trial  in  1841  than  there  were  in  1835  !
Is  not  this  a  reflection  on  our  national  efforts,  our  national
morality,  and  our  national  justice  ?  What  training  had  these
children  received  ?  Absolutely  none.  We  contend  that  it  is
not  sufficient  for  the  executive  to  seize  these  children  after
they  have  committed  an  offence,  and  consign  them  to  the
reformatory.  They  should  have  been  trained  in  infant  schools
supported  by  the  state,  and  attendance  at  these  schools  en¬
forced  by  the  state,  long  before  there  was  any  possibility  of
their  actions  being  considered  criminal.  This  is  a  truth
meeting  us  on  the  very  threshold  of  investigation,  and  yet
sectarian  morality  quietly  and  unblushingly  proposes  that
these  children  should  now  be  reared  by  eleemosynary  assist¬
ance  ;  and  if  this  should  not  be  sufficient  to  meet  the  national
exigencies, — and  it  cannot  be,  for  our  population  increases  at
the  rate  of  one  thousand  a-day, — why  then  we  shall  hear
sectarians  quoting  again  and  again  at  their  annual  meetings
the  proofs  of  our  country's  shame ;  deploring  the  ignorance

*  For  these  and  the  following  statistical  facts  we  are  indebted  to  Mr.
Porter’s  invaluable  work,  The  Prog  ress  of  the  Nation.


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


5


and  demoralization,  and  yet  making  no  united,  national,  effort
for  its  removal.

The  apathy  with  which  rival  sects,  professing  to  consider
all  men  brethren,  can  look  on  the  nations  distress,  and  their
own  glaring  sinfulness,  is  truly  marvellous.  If  we  are  to
judge  by  actions,  we  are  almost  led  to  conclude  that  the  ig¬
norance  and  consequent  ruin  of  thousands  is  trifling  compared
with  the  necessity  of  making  proselytes.  Each  party  collects
money  to  support  its  own  cause.  Each  party  exclaims, —
“  Believe  with  us.  Come  over  to  our  form  of  worship,  and
we  will  then  endeavour  to  prevent  your  physical  and  moral
degradation refuse  to  do  this,  and  we  leave  you  to  struggle
with  your  difficulties  and  to  reap  the  reward  of  your  ob¬
stinacy.”  This  is  essentially  the  doctrine  of  the  moralists
par  excellence  in  the  year  1844  !

If  this  view  of  the  case  be  considered  untrue,  we  say  con¬
vince  us  of  its  falsity,  by  discontinuing  your  fractional  and
comparatively  trivial  efforts,  by  discarding  your  differences,
and  by  combining  to  carry  out  a  more  comprehensive  plan.
You  all  admit  the  surrounding  ignorance,  misery,  and  ruin.
You  know  the  remedy,  but  your  suspicions  of  each  other’s  in¬
tegrity,  the  result  of  your  sectarian  idiosyncracies,  fearfully
diminish  the  amount  of  benefit  you  might  otherwise  bestow.
Cease  then  disputing  about  words  and  forms  of  faith,  if  your
intentions  and  your  wishes  are  the  same.  Unite,  and  with
one  unanimous  voice  declare  your  object,  and  the  means  you
will  use.  Declare  that  you  will,  for  you  can,  change  the
aspect  of  your  country,  by  calling  order,  beauty,  and  uni¬
versal  happiness  out  of  confusion,  moral  darkness,  and  general
misery.

The  Government,  perceiving  that  juvenile  delinquency
was  rapidly  increasing,  have  made  attempts  within  these  few
years  to  remove  convicted  youths  from  all  intercourse  with
more  mature  criminals.  This  is  an  important  step  in  the
right  direction.  Till  lately,  the  child  convicted  for  some  petty
theft  finished  the  education  of  his  morbid  Acquisitiveness  by
associating  with  the  expert  robber;  and  he,  who  after  the  first
offence,  might  have  become,  by  care  and  attention,  honest
and  industrious,  was  soon  converted  into  a  hardened  and
degraded  villain  by  daily  intercourse  with  the  most  immoral
and  desperate  characters.  The  reforming  tendency  of  a  New¬
gate  imprisonment  is  well  displayed  in  the  following  case
described  by  Mr.  Wakefield  :  —

“  One  little  boy  I  remember,  who,  though  only  twelve
years  old,  was  a  notorious  thief,  and  on  the  point  of  leaving
the  prison  for  want  of  prosecution.  I  asked  him  what  he  in-


6


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


tended  to  do  ?  ‘  Go  to  work/  was  his  only  answer.  He  was

committed  again  some  months  after,  for  picking  the  pocket  of
a  police  magistrate.  When  he  was  re-committed  I  asked  him
what  he  had  done  on  leaving  the  prison  ?  He  answered —
and  I  have  no  doubt  truly — that  he  had  walked  through  the
Old  Bailey,  Ludgate-liill,  and  Fleet-street,  followed  by  two
city  officers,  who  knew  him ;  but,  f  once  through  the  Bar/
said  he,  ‘  I  went  to  work,  and  got  twelve  handkerchiefs  be¬
tween  St.  Clement's  church  and  Charing  Cross.'  "*

Can  any  one  doubt  that  this  boy  might  have  been  im¬
proved,  if  he  had  been  removed  from  temptation,  and  a  ju¬
dicious  course  of  training  adopted  ?  Even  the  attainments  of
the  first  elements  of  education  has  a  restraining  tendency .  Would
not  good  moral  and  intellectual  training  be  productive  of  still
more  beneficial  results  ?  One  glance  at  the  following  details
must  prove  the  truth  of  this  supposition.  From  the  year
1836  to  the  year  1841  the  degree  of  instruction  of  persons
charged  with  offences  in  England  and  Wales  was  obtained
under  the  following  heads  : —


Year.

Neither  read  nor
write.

Read  only,  or
read  and  write
imperfectly.

Read  and  write
well.

Superior

Instruction.

Instruction  not
ascertained.

1836

. .  7,033  . .

..  10,983..

..  2,215  ..

..  191  ..

..  562  ..

1837

. .  8,464  . .

..  12,298..

. .  2,234  . .

..  101  ..

..  515  ..

1838

. .  7,943  . .

.  .  12,334.  .

..  2,257  ..

..  79  ..

..  481  ..

1839

. .  8,196  . .

. .  13,071  •  .

..  2,462  ..

. .  78  . .

..  636  ..

1840

. .  9,058  . .

..  15,109..

..  2,253  ..

..  101  ..

..  666  . .

1841

. .  9,220  . .

..  15,732..

. .  2,053  . .

..  126  ..

..  629  ..

We  thus  see  that  out  of  143,591  persons  committed,
there  were  49,914  wholly  uninstructed,  and  79,527  imperfectly
instructed,  together  129,441  ! — 676  who  had  enjoyed  the  ad¬
vantages  of  instruction  beyond  the  elementary  degree ;  and
only  13,474  who  had  mastered,  without  advancing  beyond
the  arts  of  reading  and  writing.

The  proportions  in  each  10,000  persons  accused  that  were
furnished  by  the  males  and  females  of  these  several  classes,
were  as  follow :

*  Wakefield  on  Punishment  of  Death,  pp.  13,  14.

A  gentleman  lately  crossed  to  the  Isle  of  Wight  with  a  party  of  boys,  on
their  way  to  the  Packhurst  Reformatory.  He  entered  into  conversation  with
them,  and  they  all  seemed  to  regret  that  they  had  done  “so  little. ”  One
had  committed  a  simple  theft,  another  had  broken  into  a  house,  a  third  had
done  something  else;  but  they  all  seemed  to  think  that  they  had  not  done
enough  to  shew  their  dexterity,  and  wished  that  they  had  committed  offences
more  calculated  to  raise  them  in  the  estimation  of  their  companions.


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  he.


7


Males.

Females.

Total.

Those  wholly  uniustructed,
and  those  who  could  read
only,  or  read  and  write
imperfectly .

..  7,250  ..

. .  1,764  . .

..  9,014..  ..

Those  who  could  read  and
write  well .

..  850  ..

89  ..

939 _

Those  superiorly  instructed

45  ..

2  ..

47 -

We  perceive  then  that  there  were  only  45  males  and  2
females  in  every  10,000  persons  accused,  who  were  superiorly
educated.

By  another  analysis  of  these  returns,  we  learn  that  in
six  years  throughout  England  and  Wales  there  were  28  in¬
structed  females  accused  of  crime  :  in  1836,  fifteen ;  in  1837,
three;  1838,  five;  1839,  four;  1840,  one;  1841,  none.
Not  one  educated  female  was  committed  for  trial
among  7,67 3,633  females  then  living  in  that  part  of  the
united  kingdom !

A  reference  to  the  preceding  table  will  prove  that  in  1840
there  were  100  males  and  1  female,  who  had  received  instruc¬
tion  beyond  reading  and  writing,  committed  for  trial  in  the
various  counties  of  England  and  Wales.  Of  this  number
only  59  (58  males  and  1  female)  were  convicted,  being  under
59  per  cent,  of  the  number  accused.  Mr.  Porter  says,  “In
twenty  counties  of  England  and  Wales,  with  a  population  of
8,724,338  persons,  there  were  convicted  59  instructed  per¬
sons,  or  one  to  every  147,870  inhabitants  ;  while  the  remain¬
ing  thirty-two  counties,  with  a  population  of  7,182,491,  did
not  furnish  one  convict  who  had  received  more  than  the
rudest  elements  of  instruction.  It  is  even  more  worthy  of
remark,  that  Middlesex,  the  metropolitan  county,  with  its
1,576,616  inhabitants,  among  whom  the  proportion  of  in¬
structed  persons  is  at  least  equal  to  that  in  every  other  county,
did  not  furnish  one  educated  convict, — a  fact  which,  con¬
sidering  the  diversity  of  conditions  and  occupations  and  the
amount  of  temptations  that  assail  its  inhabitants,  it  would
be  most  difficult  to  believe  upon  any  testimony  less  certain
than  that  of  official  returns.”  (vol.  for  1843,  pp.  204  and
205.)  Again,  Mr.  Porter  says,  “  Lest  it  should  be  thought
that  the  experience  of  one  year  is  insufficient  to  warrant  the


8


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


conclusions  which  would  follow  from  the  establishment  of  the
facts  just  exhibited,  the  following  analysis  of  the  convic¬
tions  of  instructed  persons  in  1841  has  also  been  obtained.
In  fifteen  English  counties,  with  a  population  of  9,569,064,
there  were  convicted  74  instructed  persons,  or  one  to  every
129,311  inhabitants ;  while  the  twenty -five  remaining  coun¬
ties  of  England  and  the  whole  of  Wales,  with  a  population
of  6,342,661,  did  not  among  them  furnish  one  conviction  of  a
person  icho  had  received  more  than  the  mere  elements  of  in¬
struction.  It  will  be  remembered  as  a  most  interesting  fact,
one  which  speaks  irresistibly  in  favour  of  a  general  system  of
education,  that  not  one  of  them  was  a  female  \”  (pp.  207
and  208.)

The  whole  of  these  returns  prove  the  great  and  vital  im¬
portance  of  education.  To  the  philanthropist  and  moralist
these  tables  are  the  heralds  of  joy  and  regret, — joy,  in  the
prospect  that  in  their  efforts  to  advance  the  education  of  the
people  they  are  doing  their  utmost  to  destroy  the  tendency
to  crime ;  and  regret,  that  the  Government  of  this  country
is  so  surrounded  by  bigotry  and  selfishness  that  their  efforts
are  cut  short  and  the  little  which  they  would  do  is  prevented.
The  official  returns  prove  that  thousands  are  sinking  deeper
and  deeper  in  misery  and  wretchedness  every  year,

“  Yet  every  heart  contains  perfection’s  germ.”

O  !  that  our  legislators  were  endowed  with  moral  courage
sufficient  to  bid  defiance  to  the  dictation  of  those  who  con¬
sider  that  their  duty  consists  in  devoting  their  energies  to  the
“  salvation  of  souls,”  but  who  leave  the  bodies  to  be  gathered
into  gaols  and  hulks  and  transported  to  populate  our  colonial
possessions, — who  can  look  on  and  behold  the  surrounding
misery  and  degradation,  and  refuse  the  required  supply  of
moral  and  intellectual  food,  because  they  are  not  allowed  to
appoint ,  and  to  exercise  controul  over  the  national  schoolmasters ;
or,  in  other  words,  because  they  are  not  permitted  to  carry  out
by  legislatorial  authority  their  scheme  of  proselytism

People  of  England  !  how  long  will  you  suffer  this  injus¬
tice  to  continue  ?  Legislators  !  when  will  you  perceive  the
only  true  path  by  which  you  can  increase  the  glory  of  your
country  ?  If  you  had  been  influenced  by  just  and  wise  prin¬
ciples,  the  moral  progress  of  the  nation  would  have  been


*  The  effort  made  in  1839  by  the  Government,  “aimed,  in  truth,  at
detaching  religious  from  secular  instruction  ;  committing  this  last  to  the  care
of  the  state,  and  leaving  the  former  to  the  various  classes  of  religionists.
The  church  protested  firmly  against  the  introduction  of  so  neiv  and  fatal  a  prin¬
ciple  /” — A  Charge  by  Archdeacon  Wilberforce ,  1843  ;  pp.  6  and  18.


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


9


equal  to  its  great  advancement  in  wealth  and  luxury.  The
national  wealth  is  accumulating  in  an  increasing  ratio  year
after  year,  but  the  working  millions — the  wealth  producers —
are  pressed  down  by  physical  wretchedness  and  intellectual
barrenness — the  parents  of  deep-seated  and  wide-spread  de¬
moralization,  and  you,  who  should  be  the  pioneers  in  civili¬
zation,  the  guardians  of  the  people,  and  the  conservators  of
morality,  have  decreed  that  this  state  shall  continue ;  “  you
have  perpetuated  ignorance  and  all  the  vices  which  it  engen¬
ders,  rather  than  infringe  on  the  sacerdotal  prerogative  of
your  establishment,  which  claims  the  tutelage  of  the  nation’s
mind.”*

This  is  a  humiliating  statement ;  but  it  is  true.  The  cun¬
ning  displayed  in  1843  we  have  already  portrayed  :  let  us  for
a  moment  consider  the  opposition  of  1839.  In  1839  the
Government  appointed  a  Board  of  Education.  They  pro¬
posed  to  place  J03O,OOO  at  the  disposal  of  this  board.  A
motion  to  this  effect  was  brought  forward  in  the  House  of
Commons,  and,  after  three  days  debate,  it  was  carried  by  a
majority  of  two,  the  house  containing  548  members  !  In
the  House  of  Lords  one  of  the  bishops  moved  a  hostile
address,  which  was  carried  against  the  Government  by  a
majority  of  229  to  118!  At  this  period  it  was  clearly  proved
that  there  were  between  50  and  60  thousand  children  under
16  years  of  age  in  the  workhouses  of  England  and  Wales,  re¬
ceiving  it  may  be  almost  said  no  educational  training.*]*
With  this  fact  presented  to  them,  with  the  fact  also  that  the
juvenile  population,  not  yet  reduced  to  the  stage  of  absolute
pauperism,  were  in  a  similar  neglected  condition, — with  the
knowledge  that  in  the  preceding  ten  years  the  population  of
the  United  Kingdom  had  increased  between  three  and  four
millions, — in  the  face  of  all  this,  we  repeat,  the  recognized
protectors  of  the  people  opposed  this  paltry  boon  of  the  Go¬
vernment,  and  were  led  on  by  a  prelate,  who  should  have
been  engaged  in  teaching  his  coadjutors  to  love  their  brethren
and  to  assist  in  elevating  by  every  possible  legitimate  method
their  moral  and  social  condition.!

*  Mr.  Shell's  Speech  in  the  House  of  Commons,  February,  1844.

t  The  consequences  of  a  neglect  of  training  in  the  old  workhouses  may
be  ascertained  by  such  enquiries  as  were  conducted  by  Mr.  Hickson  in  the
gaols,  at  the  request  of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners,  where  he  found  that
crime  had  recruited  its  ranks,  to  a  large  extent,  from  the  workhouses  under
former  management.  In  Tothill-Fields  prison,  25  boys  were  at  the  tread¬
mill,  13  of  whom  were  workhouse  boys.  In  the  Euryalus  convict  ship  25
boys  out  of  150  had  lived  in  workhouses. — Reports  on  the  Training  of  Pauper
Children.

f  Let  our  readers  consider  well  the  causes  which  have  led  to  the  over¬
throw  of  the  two  Government  schemes  in  1839  and  1843.  And  then  we  wish


10


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


“  Life  lies  behind  us  as  the  quarry  from  whence  we  get
the  tiles  and  cope-stones  for  the  masonry  of  to-day.”  Let
us  look  to  the  exertions  of  our  colonists,  and  see  what  they
have  accomplished, — let  us  see  whether  we  can  reap  a  little
wisdom  and  enlighten  our  rulers  regarding  the  powers  they
possess  and  the  opportunity  they  have  lost.  Can  we  quote
experience  in  proof  of  the  truth  of  our  position?  We  can.
“The  early  settlers  of  the  province  of  Nova  Scotia  were  so
fully  impressed  with  the  necessity  of  imparting  instruction  to
the  people,  that  ample  provision  was  made  by  them,  and  has
been  continued  by  their  descendants  to  the  present  day,  for
the  support  of  schools,  so  that  not  a  child  is  brought  up  in
the  province  without  receiving  a  considerable  amount  of  in¬
struction  combined  with  moral  training.  The  result  has  been
most  gratifying.  When  conversing  with  a  gentleman  from
Halifax,  a  barrister  and  member  of  the  provincial  parliament,
and  a  most  intelligent  man,  concerning  the  condition  in  va¬
rious  respects  of  the  Nova  Scotian  population,  a  question
was  put  to  him  on  the  state  of  crime  within  the  province,  to
which  he  gave  this  striking  answer, — f  Crime  !  we  have  no
crime/  When  urged  to  explain  how  far  this  reply  was  to  be
received  in  a  literal  sense,  he  added,  ‘  I  do  not  mean  that
people  never  quarrel  in  Nova  Scotia;  brawls  do  sometimes
occur,  although  not  very  frequently ;  but  as  to  crime,  under¬
standing  by  the  term  offences  for  which  men  are  brought  to
the  bar  of  justice  in  England,  I  repeat  that  it  does  not  exist/
The  cause  of  this  truly  enviable  state  of  society  was  made
apparent  when  he  described  the  means  employed  for  impart¬
ing  universal  education,  and  added,  as  a  consequence  of  the
high  degree  of  intelligence  thereby  developed,  that  every  per¬
son  could  find  employment  and  could  support  himself  and  his
family  upon  the  fruits  of  industry.  Nor  do  these  facts  rest
upon  individual  or  private  testimony  only.  The  return  made
to  the  Colonial  Office  in  London  of  the  condition  in  various
respects  of  the  province,  in  the  year  1841,  the  latest  yet  ac¬
cessible,  has  been  examined,  and  fully  bears  out  the  above
description.  In  that  portion  of  the  volume  (known  officially
as  the  ‘  Blue-boolC)  in  which  forms  are  given  for  returns
under  the  head  of  gaols  and  prisoners,  all  that  appears  is  the
following  note  : —

“No  account  is  kept  under  the  heads  of  this  return,  which

them  to  listen  to  the  calmness  of  Archdeacon  Wilberforce  in  drawing  a  con¬
clusion  to  suit  his  own  views.  “  We  cannot  have  any  system  of  state
education.  This  question  is  plainly  set  at  rest.  We  are,  as  a  people,  too
free  and  too  divided  for  such  treatment.  All  attempts  at  coercive  education
would  fail  utterly!!” — Charge,  p.  24.


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


11


are  wholly  inapplicable  to  the  gaols  in  Nova  Scotia,  where
crimes  are  of  rare  occurrence  and  imprisonment  for  debt  in¬
frequent.  There  is  at  least  one  gaol  in  each  county,  under
the  jurisdiction  of  the  superior  court,  superintended  by  the
high  sheriff  or  his  gaoler,  but  there  are  not  any  officers  of
prisons  appointed  .”  The  population  of  Nova  Scotia,  accord¬
ing  to  a  census  taken  in  1838,  amounted  to  178,237  souls.
There  were  in  1841,  in  public  schools,  chiefly  in  Halifax,
1902  scholars,  in  colleges  138 ;  but  in  addition  to  these  there
were  more  than  600  common  schools,  and  thirty  combined
common  and  grammar  schools,  at  which  upwards  of  20,000
children  were  instructed.  These  schools  are  supported  partly
by  grants  of  the  legislature  and  partly  by  the  subscriptions  of
the  inhabitants.  The  total  amount  contributed  by  the  province
in  1841  in  promoting  education  exceeded  £6000:  the  revenue
of  the  province  in  that  year  amounted  to  £93,882  :  18  :  2.”


Population.  Revenue.  Grant  for  Education.

Great  Britain. .  27,000,000. .  . .  £50,000,000. .  . .  £30,000

Nova  Scotia  .. .  178,237. .  . .  £93,882  .  . .  £6,000

But  let  us  look  to  another  people,  speaking  a  different
language  and  surrounded  by  different  circumstances.  Do  the
same  causes  produce  like  effects  ?  Is  the  same  educational
machinery  productive  of  the  same  happy  results  ?

“  In  the  island  of  Iceland  there  is  no  such  thing  to  be
found  as  a  man  or  woman — not  decidedly  deficient  in  mental
capacity — who  cannot  read  and  wrrite  well ;  while  the  greater
part  of  all  classes  of  the  inhabitants  have  mastered  several
of  the  higher  branches  of  education,  including  a  knowledge
of  modern  languages  and  an  acquaintance  with  classical  lite¬
rature.  Every  account  of  these  people  that  has  been  pub¬
lished  agrees  in  describing  them  as  gentle  and  peaceable  in
their  dispositions,  sober,  moral,  and  religious  in  their  habits.
Crimes  among  them  are  harldly  known.  The  house  of  cor¬
rection  at  Reickiavich,  the  capital  of  the  island,  after  having
stood  empty  for  years,  was  at  length  converted  into  a  residence
for  the  governor,  by  whom  it  has  since  been  occupied.  There
have  been  only  three  or  four  capital  convictions  during  the
last  twro  centuries  ;  and  it  was  not  possible  on  the  last  occasion
to  find  an  executioner,  and  the  man  was  sent  to  Norway,  that
the  sentence  might  be  carried  into  effect.”*

In  the  island  of  Iceland  “  there  is  no  such  thing  to  be
found  as  a  man  or  woman  who  cannot  read  and  write  well.”

*  Porter’s  Progress  of  the  Nation,  1843,  pp.  260 — 4.


12


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


In  the  colony  of  Nova  Scotia  “not  a  child  is  brought  up  in
the  province  without  receiving  a  considerable  amount  of
instruction  combined  with  moral  training.”

Behold  !  happy,  civilized  England  !  There  are  1,014,193
children  who  do  not  receive  the  least  education  !  And  “  in
the  whole  of  England  and  Wales,  among  367,894  couples
married  during  three  years,  it  appears  that  there  were
122,458  men  and  181,378  women,  who  either  could  not  write
at  all,  or  who  had  attained  so  little  proficiency  in  penmanship
that  they  were  averse  to  the  exposure  of  their  deficiency  !”

If  we  unite  with  these  the  millions  who  have  received
what  is  designated  education,  but  which  is  by  no  means  to
be  considered  an  approach  towards  a  rational  attempt,  we
shall  perceive  an  immense  mass  of  human  beings  reared  with¬
out  being  supplied  with  the  means  of  protection  against  the
host  of  evils  by  which  they  are  surrounded.  From  sad  expe¬
rience  we  all  know  the  termination.  What  a  different  result
might  have  been  obtained  !  A  duty  devolves  upon  us  then
to  adopt  a  system  of  education  which  shall  mould  the  brains,
and  thus  elevate  and  purify  the  actions  and  thoughts  of  future
generations.

We  have  now  recognized  the  evil,  we  have  ascertained  the
chief  cause  producing  it.  We  have  discovered  the  remedy,
and  the  result  of  its  application  in  merely  an  imperfect  form
in  other  countries,  and  we  have  described  the  parties  which
prevent  a  vigorous  attempt  being  made  in  our  own.  Passing
events  prove  the  danger  of  delay.  Each  succeeding  year
furnishes  a  new  agitation  or  a  new  political  movement,  and
plainly  indicates  the  vast  amount  of  ignorance  which  prevails
on  matters  involving  man’s  dearest  interests.  Every  parlia¬
mentary  committee  publishes  the  most  horrible  statements
regarding  the  state  of  our  population ;  and,  to  the  thinking
man,  these  returns  convey  the  most  alarming  intelligence.
“  The  thin  crust  of  the  great  abyss  whereon  rests  the  whole
framework  of  our  social  life  already  ominously  heaves  and
groans  with  the  tumult  of  the  boiling  surges  which  it  scarcely
represses.  If  we  will  breed  up  a  nation  of  heathens  and  of
savages,  heathen  manners  and  savage  violence  must  be  our
recompense.”  Listen,  fellow  countrymen,  to  your  own  pro¬
clamations.  Listen  to  the  evidence  of  those  who  live  in  our
most  populous  districts,  and  who,  horrified  at  the  scenes  by
which  they  are  surrounded,  thus  speak  of  the  neglected  and
wretched  inhabitants:  “  Moral  feelings  and  sentiments  do  not
exist  among  them.”  “  They  are  sunk  below  the  consciousness
of  the  misery  of  their  condition.”  “  Their  education  is  an
education  in  filthy  habits  and  immoral  conduct,  and  gaming


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.  13

and  drinking  !”* * * §  “  Their  horrid  words,  their  ferocious  ges¬

tures,  their  hideous  laughter,  their  brutal,  bloated,  mindless
faces,  appal  and  amaze  the  stranger.”  “  They  are  decayed  in
their  bodies ;  the  whole  race  is  rapidly  decreasing  in  size.”
“  The  women  are  becoming  similar  to  the  female  followers  of
an  army :  wearing  the  garb  of  women,  but  actuated  by  the
worst  passions  of  men.  In  every  riot  or  outbreak  in  the
manufacturing  districts  the  women  are  the  leaders  and  exciters
of  the  young  men  to  violence.  The  language  they  indulge  in
is  of  the  most  horrid  description.  In  short,  while  they  are
demoralized  themselves,  they  demoralize  all  that  come  within

their  reach  !”+  “  The  condition  of  the  lower  classes  is  dailv

1  %/

becoming  worse  in  regard  to  education ;  and  it  is  telling  every
day  upon  the  moral  and  economic  condition  of  the  adult  po¬
pulation.”  “  The  country  will  be  inevitably  ruined,  unless
some  steps  are  taken  by  the  Legislature  to  secure  education
to  the  children  of  the  working  classes.”;);  “  A  great  propor¬
tion  of  the  working  classes  are  ignorant  and  profligate .

the  morals  of  their  children  exceedingly  depraved  and  cor¬
rupt  . given,  at  a  very  early  age,  to  petty  theft,  swear¬

ing,  and  lying,  during  minority  to  drunkenness,  debauchery,
idleness,  dog  and  prize  fighting.”  “  There  are  many  beer-
shops  which  are  frequented  by  boys  only,  as  early  as  thirteen
years  of  age.  The  girls  are  many  of  them  loose  in  their  con¬
duct,  and  accompany  the  boys.”§

And  is  this  state  to  continue?  Are  we  to  look  calmly
on  this  moral  chaos — this  degraded  and  polluted  scene  ?  Are
we  to  possess  the  remedy  and  neglect  its  application  ?  Are
we  to  perceive  the  faults  and  crimes  of  others  and  not  to
denounce  them  ?  Are  we  to  continue  to  witness  generation
after  generation  of  our  fellow-creatures  swept  like  insects
from  off  earths  surface  into  earth^s  bosom,  and  raise  not
our  voice  to  protest  against  the  continuance  of  such  apathetic
indifference  ?  Are  surrounding  nations  to  still  surpass  us
in  educational  exertions,  and  then  to  point  with  the  finger
of  scorn  or  of  pity  at  the  proofs  which  we  ourselves  publish
of  our  internal  moral  decrepitude  ?  Alas  !  we  have  a  blot  on
this  fair  land  of  our's,  but  it  must  be  removed, — let  then  the
cries  of  the  injured  and  oppressed  rouse  us  to  exertion.  Let
us  “  be  up  and  doing,”  and  as  a  nation  redeem  our  cha¬
racter.  Our  country  is  beautiful,  nature  has  been  lavish  of
her  riches ;  but  O  man  !  thou  hast  hitherto  been  the  plague-

*  Report  of  Factory  Commissioners.

t  Lord  Ashley's  Speech  in  the  House  of  Commons.

J  Children’s  Employment  Commission.

§  Report  from  Sheffield.


14


Education  as  it  is ,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


spot  of  this  creation  :  thy  ignorance,  thy  fondly-cherished
falsehoods,  and  thy  selfishness  sadly  destroy  the  harmony
which  should  prevail — “  the  marring  is  man’s  doing ,  and  can
be  changed ;  the  beauty  is  nature’s ,  and  is  unchangeable.”

“  Yes  !  crime  and  misery  are  in  yonder  earth,

Falsehood,  mistake,  and  lust;

But  the  eternal  world
Contains  at  once  the  evil  and  the  cure.

Some  eminent  in  virtue  shall  start  up,

Even  in  perversest  time  :

The  truths  of  their  pure  lips,  that  never  die,

Shall  bind  the  scorpion  falsehood  with  a  wreath
Of  everlasting  flame,

Until  the  monster  sting  itself  to  death.”

Such  men  now  begin  to  appear.  Here  and  there  we
behold  some  start  forth  who  will  think  for  themselves ;  who
refuse  to  be  bound  by  custom  and  the  dictation  of  those  in
authority ;  who  are  dissatisfied  with  the  monotonous  routine
of  erroneous  thought  with  which  the  world  moves  on,  and
who,  from  the  purest  motives,  would  strive  to  remedy  the
evils  which  each  succeeding  year  proclaims  to  be  increasing.
There  are  men  who,  although  not  clothed  in  official  power,
have  nevertheless  the  power  to  remedy  the  present  insecure
state  of  the  social  system.  These  are  not,  however,  the  sur¬
face  characters  of  every-day  life,  but  men  influenced  and
governed  by  principle ;  the  determined  opponents  of  the  doc¬
trine  of  expediency  and  of  its  necessary  accompaniment,  bit-
by-bit  legislation :  far-seeing  men,  and  lookers  beyond  and
below  the  pseudo-morality  of  the  age,  which,  with  its  tin¬
selled  dress,  encircles  vice  and  virtue  with  the  same  colours.
They  perceive  that  a  crisis  is  approaching,  and  that  the  pre¬
sent  period  requires  the  union  of  all  who  care  for  the  welfare
of  humanity  and  of  their  own  countrymen  in  particular.
They  all  agree  that  “  something  is  fundamentally  wrong”  but
much  as  they  may  differ  regarding  the  practicability  and  the
propriety  of  various  measures  imagined  to  be  capable  of  alle¬
viating  the  people’s  distress,  they  are  all  agreed  on  this  one
point, — that  a  great  effort  is  required  to  increase  the  national
intelligence,  and  to  raise  the  moral  standard  of  the  people :
in  fact,  they  all  recognize  the  wisdom  of  Lycurgus  the  Spartan,
who  “  resolved  the  whole  business  of  legislation  into  the  bring¬
ing-up  of  youth.”

But  we  are  told  by  some  that  education  is  prospering
under  the  present  arrangements,  and  one  writer  on  this  all-
important  but  much-neglected  subject,  and  who  is  opposed  to
governmental  interference,  states  that  the  present  system  (?)
will  do  very  well  if  left  to  its  “  original  unfettered  simplicity  \”


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


15


In  our  last  number  we  gave  details  sufficient  to  prove  the
kind  of  prosperity  enjoyed,  and  assuredly  the  mass  of  addi¬
tional  facts  recorded  in  the  present  article  would  prompt  us
to  advocate  with  much  more  energy  the  adoption  of  measures
emanating  from,  and  supported  by,  the  Executive.  But
our  rulers  are  not  prepared  to  take  this  step ;  they  dare
not  move  in  this  direction,  for  reasons  which  we  have  before
referred  to.  This  is  a  sad  truth.  Legislators  should  look
beyond  the  present  wants  of  their  country ;  beyond  the  party
bickerings  and  party  influences  which  surround  them ;  be¬
yond  the  questionable  eclat  attendant  on  the  passage  or  re¬
fusal  of  a  public  enactment.  They  should  be  guided  by  great,
just,  and  therefore  unchangeable,  principles.  Principles  which
will  enable  them  to  appeal  to  the  judgment  of  posterity,  and
to  move  on  totally  regardless  of  the  promptings  and  interested
verdicts  of  a  selfish  and  class-supporting  minority.

At  the  present  moment  it  is  absolutely  essential  to  re¬
member  and  to  apply  in  all  its  bearings  this  great  truism,
that  we  have  to  educate  human  beings — men  and  women ;
and  if  we  honestly  mean  anything  by  a  national  system  of
education, — if  we  would  rear  rational  beings,  beings  capable
of  assuming  their  proper  position,  and  of  advancing  their
own  and  therefore  their  country's  welfare, — we  must  make
the  attempt  in  a  spirit  of  liberality,  with  a  determination  to
press  onwards  with  all  our  strength  and  with  all  our  powers,
till  we  have  nurtured  and  made  to  fructify  into  moral  and
intellectual  beauty  the  discordant  and  neglected  elements
around  us.  If  we  are  animated  thus, — if  we  have  a  fixed
determination  to  try  what  can  be  accomplished, — if  we  believe
that  “  knowledge  is  power,"  then  let  us  commence  the  task
forthwith.  But  are  we  really  moved  by  these  wishes  and
aspirations  ?  Test  the  recent  legislatorial  exertions,  and  can
honest  and  unprejudiced  men  declare  that  the  late  movement
was  a  disinterested  one  ?  What  made  it  the  reverse?  Whence
the  rancor  and  ill  feeling  ?  Was  not  the  cause  apparent
upon  the  very  surface?  Was  not  the  cunning  and  intrigue
of  one  sect  the  cause  of  the  unjust  and  immoral  features  of
the  late  measure,  and  the  opposition  of  numerous  sects  the
cause  of  its  total  rejection  ?  Would  legislators  for  humanity
— men  influenced  by  an  all-absorbing  wish  for  the  elevation
of  their  race — for  their  progressive  advancement  in  virtue
and  happiness — would  they  have  listened  to  either  party?
The  question  as  to  who  should  be  the  recognized  promulgators
of  a  religion  which  it  is  declared  is  to  be  universal,  produced
sectarian  quarrels  and  political  duplicity.  True  wisdom  would
have  dictated  the  necessity  of  discarding  the  question  alto-


1G  Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.

gether,  knowing  that  the  elevation  of  the  people  in  intelli¬
gence  and  morality,  and  the  insisting  on  the  acquisition  of  real
knowledge,  would  place  in  the  course  of  a  few  generations
the  disputed  points  on  their  proper  bases.  Teach  the  people
to  think,  and  you  have  aimed  the  death-blow  at  the  secta¬
rianism  of  the  day.  Teach  the  people  to  think,  and  you
may  safely  leave  the  settlement  of  religious  differences  to  the
vigorous  and  well-trained  brains  of  future  generations.

But  some  parties  imagine  that  the  adoption  of  a  uniform
system  of  moral  and  intellectual  training  would  destroy  that
variety  of  character  so  essential  to  national  activity, — that  it
would  take  away  the  grand  stimulus  to  exertion  and  improve¬
ment  on  the  part  of  the  teacher, — and  that  it  would  be  used
by  a  Government  as  a  means  of  binding  the  people,  of  re¬
pressing  all  aspirations  after  better  things,  and  of  keeping
them  in  a  state  of  subserviency.  What  amount  of  truth  is
there  in  these  suppositions  ?  As  regards  the  uniformity  of
moral  and  intellectual  training,  is  not  the  method  which
boasts  of  its  “  original  and  unfettered  simplicity/’  the  very
method  which  employs  this  uniform  method  of  teaching  ?
Take  the  great  schools  of  Eton  and  Winchester  again,  and
are  not  all  the  pupils  compelled  to  pass  through  the  same
course  of  study — are  they  not  all  bound  down  to  the  same
routine,  even  to  the  barbarous  and  immoral  fagging  system  ?
The  absence  of  all  attention  to  the  career  which  the  pupil  is  ulti¬
mately  to  pursue,  is  one  of  the  grand  objections  which  cere¬
bral  physiologists  have  always  advanced  against  the  education
of  the  schools.  But  granting  for  a  moment  that  a  national
system  of  education  was  adopted  involving  the  present  irra¬
tional  methods,  would  this  not  be  preferable  to  our  present
position,  with  the  monstrous  and  alarming  fact  before  us,
that  there  are  upwards  of  one  million  children  under  13  years
of  age  receiving  no  instruction,  and  perhaps  as  many  more
receiving  only  the  rudiments — reading  and  writing  ?  This
state  is  surely  not  to  continue.  Give  us  a  national  system
with  all  its  errors,  rather  than  this ;  and  we  will  wait  for
time  to  remove  the  evils,  for  we  have  faith  in  the  progressive,
expansive,  and  remedial  power  of  intelligence,  however  it
may  be  obtained.

“  To  irradiate  with  intelligence,  that  is  to  say  with  order,
arrangement,  and  all-blessedness,  the  chaotic,  unintelligent;
how,  except  by  educating,  can  you  accomplish  this  ?  That
thought,  reflection,  articulate  utterance  and  understanding,
be  awakened  in  these  individual  million  heads,  which  are  the
atoms  of  your  chaos  :  there  is  no  other  way  of  illuminating
anv  chaos  V3


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


17


But  surely  a  uniform  amount  of  moral  and  intellectual
training  is  desirable.  Would  not  our  gaols  be  less  thickly
peopled  if  the  million  we  have  referred  to  had  been  uni¬
formly  taught  to  know*  and  to  write  their  own  names, — to
respect  the  property  of  their  neighbours, — to  understand  that
honest  industry  brings  its  reward,  and  that  idleness  is  the
sure  precursor  of  ruin,  misery,  and  degradation  ?  Will  any
one  state  that  this  amount  of  instruction  does  not  confer  a
saving  power  on  the  recipient  ?  After  character  has  been
formed  and  crime  committed  you  adopt  this  course  in  your
modern  reformatories  ;  how  much  more  rational  to  effect  this
by  a  national  effort  and  by  a  compulsory  system  !  Which  is
the  most  just  and  benevolent  course,  to  compel  a  child  to  re¬
ceive  instruction  which  is  to  make  him  wiser  and  happier,
and  consequently  to  prevent  the  committal  of  crime ;  or  to
permit  him  to  remain  ignorant,  commit  crime,  and  then  to
send  him  to  the  treadmill,  the  hulks,  and  the  penal  settle¬
ments  ?

At  present,  we  would  contemplate  no  compulsory  inter¬
ference  with  the  established  educational  system ;  we  merely
wish  for  the  power  to  ask  the  question,  “  Do  you  educate
your  children  ?”  “  Are  they  receiving  a  certain  amount  of

moral  and  intellectual  nourishment  ?”  If  the  reply  should
be  in  the  negative,  we  ask  for  the  power  to  enforce  attend¬
ance  at  the  national  school.  Are  we  “  as  a  people  too  free
and  too  divided  for  such  treatment  ?”  It  has  been  well  re¬
marked  by  Professor  Pillans,  “A  man  may  plead  his  civil
right  to  have  a  nest  of  vipers  in  his  house,  or  to  rear  a  brood
of  young  tigers  ;  but  the  police  is  at  least  entitled  to  take
precautions  that  he  shall  not  let  them  loose  upon  the  neigh¬
bourhood.  On  the  same  principle  that  a  man  is  compelled
to  muzzle  a  ferocious  dog,  it  seems  but  fair  to  insist  upon
precautions  being  taken  that  his  children  shall  not  become  a
public  nuisance.”

It  appears  to  us  that  the  plan  we  suggest  would  soon
banish  the  dame’s  schools  and  the  common  day-schools,
where  so  many  thousands  obtain  a  mock  education.  The
result  of  a  rational  and  national  system  of  education  on
this  portion  of  our  population  would  soon  become  manifest ;
and  this  novel  effect  would  be  produced, — the  poor  would  be¬
come  the  patterns  to  the  rich,  and  the  children  of  the  higher
classes  would  soon  be  taught  on  the  same  principles.  So  far
then  from  the  stimulus  to  exertion  and  improvement  on  the


*  We  stated  in  our  last  number  that  there  were  1,000  labourers  at  Dar-
laston  who  did  not  know  their  own  names,  only  their  nicknames  !

VOL.  II.  C


18  Education  as  it  is ,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.

part  of  the  teacher  being  removed,  there  would  manifestly  be
a  much  greater  struggle  for  superiority,  an  equal  effort  both
to  excel  and  obtain  patronage,  for  no  present  arrangement
would  be  altered  except  by  the  force  of  example.

But  it  is  said,  perhaps,  you  wish  to  introduce  “the  odious
Prussian  drill”  into  this  country.  It  is  stated  that  since  the
Prussian  government  is  despotic,  and  educational  power  has
been  used  for  the  purpose  of  rendering  still  more  powerful
that  despotism,  we  ought  to  look  with  suspicion  on  all  at¬
tempts  to  introduce  into  our  own  country  a  measure  bearing
any  similitude.  It  is  quite  true  that  in  Prussia  civil  and
religious  freedom  is  permitted,  not  enjoyed,  by  the  power  of
a  single  will,  and  that  this  will  necessarily  so  controuls  and
uses  a  national  system  of  education,  as  to  make  it  a  model¬
ling  and  formative  power  to  suit  its  own  designs  and  purposes.
The  attempt  will  fail.  But  can  anything  of  the  kind  occur
in  this  country  ?  This  is  a  country  enjoying  free  institutions ;
the  voice  of  the  people  possesses  some  power,  and  this  power
is  increasing  and  must  increase.  We  hold  then  that  it  would
be  quite  impossible  for  our  Government  to  use  education  with
sinister  designs ;  for  the  assertion  is  synonymous  with  saying
that  the  people  would  designedly  sanction  a  measure  calcu¬
lated  to  destroy  their  own  liberties.  We  are  the  determined
opponents  of  despotism  and  tyranny  in  all  shapes,  and  if  we
could  see  that  the  measure,  which  we  are  advocating  a  resort
to,  could  by  any  means  be  productive  of  an  approach  to
arbitrary  power,  meaning  by  this  expression,  the  rule  of  a
party  opposed  to  the  national  will  and  subversive  of  natural
rights,  we  should  be  the  last  to  advocate  its  adoption.  What  !
advocate  the  establishment  of  a  system  which  would  make
men  slaves  !  The  muscles,  bones  and  various  organs  in  the
form  of  what  we  call  a  man,  are  not  a  real  man,  except  pos¬
sessing  and  giving  forth  all  the  qualities  appertaining  to  hu¬
manity.  Liberty  of  thought  and  freedom  of  expression  we
hold  to  be  a  man’s  natural  birthright.  The  despot,  the
aristocrat  and  the  democrat,  the  lord  and  the  slave,  the  rich
man  and  the  poor  man,  claim  precisely  the  same  amount.

We  do  not  wish  this  country,  then,  to  follow  the  example
of  Prussia,  as  regards  the  aim  or  character  of  the  instruction
she  gives  her  people,  but  we  wish  to  see  the  great  scheme,
the  education  of  the  people,  carried  out,  not  as  a  means  of
governmental  oppression,  but  to  increase  popular  intelligence
and  freedom.  This  is  in  direct  opposition  to  Prussian  policy,
but  it  is  the  policy  which  prompts  us  to  ask  for  the  interfer¬
ence  of  the  Legislature.  We  wish  to  have  a  practical  and
substantial  recognition  of  man’s  nature,  and  to  witness  the


Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  be.


19


establishment  of  machinery  for  the  purpose  of  universally
diffusing  real  knowledge,  but  by  no  means  with  the  object  of
making  men  slaves,  or  of  teaching  a  cowardly  and  unmanly
submission  to  the  ruling  powers.

But  we  must  conclude.  We  are  conscious  that  we  have
even  now  done  little  more  than  indicate  the  want  under  which
our  country  is  famishing, — that  we  have  done  little  more  than
lay  bare  the  disease  and  point  out  the  nature  of  the  remedy.
Our  labour  is  by  no  means  over — our  task  is  by  no  means
accomplished.  We  have  still  to  enter  upon  most  important
considerations.  We  have  merely  discussed  the  important
fact, — the  necessity  for  universal  education,  but  we  must
leave  for  another  occasion  the  enunciation  of  our  opinions
regarding  the  course  to  be  pursued,  and  the  arrangements
which  should  be  made,  to  carry  this  scheme  out.  Here  we
shall  find  our  science  of  the  greatest  importance.  A  being
endowed  with  certain  faculties  is  to  be  educated ;  is  it  not
manifest  that  the  instructor  should  possess  a  knowledge  of
these  faculties, — of  their  number,  power,  use,  and  abuse, —
of  the  means  to  be  used  to  call  them  into  activity,  and  to
direct  each  to  its  legitimate  sphere  ?  Is  it  not  owing  to  the
absence  of  this  knowledge  that  attention  has  been  chiefly
directed  to  a  few  of  the  intellectual  faculties,  whilst  the  train¬
ing  of  those  forming  the  moral  character  has  been  left  to
chance,  and  the  pupil  permitted  to  reach  maturity  without
the  attempt  to  make  him  a  good  as  well  as  a  useful  man  ?
Wisdom  cannot  have  directed  educational  efforts  when  the
instructor  knows  not  the  nature  of  the  being  to  be  trained.
Wisdom  cannot  have  presided  over  the  course  pursued  when
the  most  important  portion  of  that  nature  has  been  left  un¬
cultivated.

We  trust  that  the  little  we  have  said  will  aid  the  exertions
of  others  who  are  labouring  in  the  same  field,  and  who  are
endeavouring  to  arouse  our  Government  to  activity.  “  One
conclusion  surely  we  have  now  worked  distinctly  out.  We
cannot  have  any  system  of  state  education.”  We  cannot
— we  will  not  believe  this.  Legislators  !  awake  from  the
lethargy  which  the  blindness  of  party  zeal  and  the  bigotry  of
sectarian  domination  has  imposed  upon  you.  Survey  your
position  and  remember  the  task  which  you  have  to  accomplish.
You  are  placed  at  the  head  of  the  mightiest  and  wealthiest
nation,  use  then  the  power  delegated  to  you — banish  igno¬
rance  from  our  land — raise  the  moral  character  of  our  people.
Let  your  aim  be  to  make  this  country  the  model-school  for
the  world.  Purify  your  institutions  and  your  laws,  and  pro¬
claim  to  the  tyrant  and  the  despot  by  the  peaceful  grandeur  of


20  Education  as  it  is,  and  as  it  ought  to  he.

your  examples,  that  the  only  use  you,  as  legislators  and
governors,  make  of  your  power  is  to  increase  the  happiness
and  freedom  of  your  people.  Let  all  nations,  as  they  move
on  in  the  great  struggle  of  human  improvement,  quote
England  as  an  authority  for  the  course  they  should  pursue, —
as  the  pattern  to  which  they  would  conform, — as  typical  of
the  enjoyments  they  would  wish  to  realize.

Would  not  this  be  an  enviable  position  ?  Alas  !  how  far
are  you  from  assisting  to  obtain  it  for  your  country  !  This
then  is  the  theme  on  which  we  write.  This,  legislators  of
Britain !  is  the  work  you  have  to  perform.  To  cease  to  be
the  ruthless  conquerors  of  uncivilized  tribes,  and  to  become
the  moral  dictators  to  humanity.  To  proclaim  peace  to  the
nations  of  the  earth,  and  to  point  out  by  your  own  example
the  benefits  which  accrue  from  its  realization.  To  prove  that
knowledge  and  liberty,  the  grand  characteristics  of  civilized
men,  must  produce  their  reward — virtue  and  happiness.  To
declare  that  moral  power  is  the  engine  to  be  used  to  civilize
men,  and  that  you  discard  all  means  calculated  to  excite
envy,  hatred  and  malice,  and  patronize  and  foster  all  measures
having  for  their  object  the  cultivation  of  those  kindlier  feel¬
ings  which  elevate  and  purify  your  race.  Reason — persuasion
— kindness — these  are  the  monarchs  to  govern  men  and  to
rule  the  world.

Philanthropists  and  moralists — statesmen  and  philosophers
— ye  learned  and  powerful  amongst  all  nations,  act  upon  this
great  and  all  important  truth,  that  men  are  born  free  and
great  as  regards  their  natural  rights ,  and  consequently  that
there  should  be  no  selfish  interference  to  prevent  all  from
partaking  of  the  same  rights  and  privileges.  Men  of  every
country  and  every  clime,  unite, — join  in  this  great  and  good
work.  Let  reason,  justice  and  benevolence  constantly  guide
you.  Forget  not  that  ye  have  your  people  to  elevate, — that
ye  have  a  world  to  reform.  Away  then  for  ever  with  national
feuds,  meet  on  the  neutral  ground — the  world  and  humanity
— and  hasten  the  realization  of  our  most  ardent  aspirations,
“  the  consolidation  of  mankind  into  one  universal  brother¬
hood  !”


L.  E.  G.  E.


(  21  )


II.  Phrenological  Society,  17,  Edwards  Street,  Portman  Square.

December  §th,  1843.

George  Bird,  Esq.,  having  been  duly  proposed  and  ballotted
for,  was  elected  an  ordinary  member  of  the  Society.

A  paper  was  read  by  Phineas  Deseret,  Esq.,  of  Edinburgh,
on  the  Function  of  the  Organ  of  Language,  of  which  the
following  is  an  abstract.

It  is  admitted  by  Dr.  Spurzlieim  and  Mr.  Combe,  that
there  is  no  natural  connection  between  things  and  the  arti¬
ficial  language  used  to  express  their  existence  or  the  relations
they  stand  in  to  each  other.  A  word  written  or  spoken  is
only  a  sign  invented  or  agreed  upon  among  the  natives  of  a
particular  country  or  district  by  which  to  give  expression  to
a  particular  object,  thought,  or  emotion.  Accordingly  the
language  of  one  country  is  not  understood  by  the  inhabitants
of  another.  The  natives  of  Britain  could  never  intuitively
discover  the  signs  of  ideas  in  the  language  of  Prance  or
Germany.  Like  every  other  elementary  principle  of  the
human  mind,  the  faculty  called  language  must  have  reference
to  some  class  of  natural  perceptions ;  for  everything  that  is
artificial,  or  in  other  words,  not  common  to  the  whole  human
race,  is  only  a  superstructure  raised  by  art  in  imitation  of
some  class  of  perceptions  that  are  observed  by  us  in  nature.
It  is  the  object  of  these  observations  to  investigate  the  nature
of  this  class  of  natural  perceptions  with  the  view  of  unfold¬
ing  the  primitive  function  of  the  organ  called  Language.

It  is  undeniable  that  persons  largely  endowed  with  this
organ  are  generally  distinguished  for  facility  of  expression.
Poets,  orators,  and  novel  writers,  generally  speaking,  pos¬
sess  it  largely  developed ;  and  accordingly  in  the  phreno¬
logical  works  its  function  is  said  to  be  established.  A  larger
range  of  observation  however  will,  we  think,  convince  every
candid  enquirer  that  its  precise  function  has  not  been  ascer¬
tained,  for  it  will  be  found  largely  developed  in  persons  not
manifesting  strikingly  this  characteristic,  although  evincing
the  possession  of  faculties  no  less  distinguished  and  of  capa¬
bilities  calculated  as  much  to  influence  and  affect  the  social
condition  and  happiness  of  man.  In  submitting  a  statement
of  facts  to  the  consideration  of  phrenologists,  I  do  not  re¬
quire  of  them  to  believe  implicitly  in  the  inferences  deduced,
but  I  would  simply  suggest  that  these  inferences  are  author¬
ized  by  reflection  on  our  own  consciousness,  and  appear  to
account  for  all  the  known  observations  with  relation  to  the
organ  called  Language,  as  well  as  for  those  given  in  the


Phrenological  Society.


22


sequel,  and  in  this  may  embrace  an  infinitely  larger  range  of
phenomena  than  the  function  at  present  attributed  to  it.

I  have  observed  in  children  at  an  early  age,  a  great
diversity  in  their  capacity  for  giving  expression  to  their  feel¬
ings  by  natural  signs ;  that  their  capacity  for  imparting  such
expression  did  not  always  depend  upon  the  force  or  power  of
the  elements  of  character  desiring  expression,  but  varied
extremely  in  different  individuals  possessing  propensities,
sentiments,  and  intellect,  closely  assimilated  in  their  nature.
I  have  observed  two  children  possessed  of  large  Benevolence,
Veneration,  Hope,  Conscientiousness,  and  Firmness,  with
the  propensities  and  intellect  in  full  development  in  both.
The  one  possessed  an  ease  and  quickness  of  natural  expression
not  evinced  by  the  other.  The  one  had  a  gay,  hilarious,
highly  excited  expression,  while  the  feelings  of  the  other,
evidently  of  the  same  tone,  seemed  to  struggle  for  expression
in  every  feature  of  the  countenance.  You  could  read  the
feelings  of  the  one  at  a  glance,  while  those  of  the  other,  al¬
though  anxiously  desiring  to  be  unfolded,  appeared  to  be
crushed  in  the  bud,  and  forbidden  their  natural  manifestation.
I  could  remark  no  sufficiently  distinct  difference  of  organiza¬
tion  to  account  for  the  difference  of  manifestation,  excepting
that  the  one  possessed  the  organ  of  Language  largely  deve¬
loped,  and  the  other  had  it  rather  small.

I  am  at  present  acquainted  with  a  boy  of  about  three
years  of  age,  with  a  good  physical,  moral  and  intellectual
development,  who  shews  a  great  deficiency  of  natural  expres¬
sion.  He  evinces  the  utmost  difficulty  in  giving  natural
expression  to  any  of  his  feelings,  and  an  equal  incapacity  in
recognizing  the  natural  signs  used  by  others.  Even  when
highly  excited  with  joy,  his  very  laugh  gurgles  in  his  throat,
and  the  expression  of  his  face  for  a  child  of  so  much  natural
intelligence  is  comparatively  dull  and  stolid.  He  is  remark¬
ably  deficient  in  the  organ  of  Language.  I  have  observed  in
persons  largely  endowed  with  the  organ  of  Language,  that
their  very  bodies  seemed  fraught  with  expression,  and  the
most  delicate  trains  of  thought  and  feeling  were  expressed  in
their  features.  Shelley  the  poet  was  a  remarkable  example
of  this  characteristic.  One  of  his  critics  says  of  him,  that
his  very  body  seemed  endowed  with  thought,  so  full  was  he
of  fine  delicate  expression  in  his  external  manner.  Shelley
had  the  organ  of  Language  large.  I  have  known  numerous
examples  of  the  reverse  of  this  picture  in  persons  deficient  in
the  organ  of  Language.

I  have  further  noticed  that  persons  who  are  notable  for
their  skill  in  physiognomy,  are  largely  endowed  with  the


Phrenological  Society.


23


organ  called  Language.  They  possess  a  quickness  and  apti¬
tude  for  picking  up  the  characters  of  persons  they  meet  with¬
out  apparent  effort  or  study.  The  dispositions  and  tendencies
of  others  seem  to  fall  upon  such  minds  like  shadows.  Phy¬
siognomists  are  likewise  generally  well  endowed  with  the
organs  of  observant  intellect.  On  this  point  it  may  be  ob¬
served,  that  poets  and  novelists  generally  have  the  organ  of
Language  large,  and  they  manifest  similar  capacities  with
physiognomists  in  catching  and  depicting  the  nice  shades  of
expression,  by  which  the  characters  unfolded  by  them  are
distinguished.

The  first-rate  actor  possesses  large  Language  combined
with  large  Imitation,  the  former  being  necessary  to  give  him
a  knowledge  of  the  natural  language  or  expression  of  the
feelings  and  sentiments  he  may  be  called  upon  to  imitate.
Kean  (the  elder)  had  the  organ  large,  combined  with  large
observant  and  reflective  intellect  and  Imitation.  Hence  the
key  to  his  success  as  an  actor.  Hence  the  deep  bursts  of  na¬
tural  expression  and  the  concentrated  looks  of  intense  emo¬
tion  which  characterized  this  great  performer.  He  could  call
up  not  only  the  emotions  required  to  be  portrayed,  but  un¬
fold  them  outwardly  in  all  the  richness  of  natural  expression.
Mrs.  Siddons  possessed  the  organ  called  Language  very  large,
and  although  not  very  highly  endowed  either  with  sentiment
or  reflective  intellect,  was  admittedly  the  most  accomplished
actress  that  has  appeared  on  the  British  stage.  The  heads  of
John  Kemble,  Young,  and  Macready  are  distinguished  for
the  organ  of  Language  being  largely  developed,  and  are  all
fine  examples  of  the  manifestation  of  it  in  giving  power  of
observing,  and  with  Imitation  of  imitating  natural  expression.
The  organ  is  large  in  the  portraits  of  Garrick,  Miss  O’Neil,
and  Cook,  and  in  all  the  tragic  performers  distinguished  for
expression  in  the  Garrick  Club.  The  organ  called  Language
is  equally  possessed  and  manifested  by  the  comic  actor,  but
only  in  combination  with  a  different  organization  from  that
of  the  tragic  or  melo-dramatic  performer.  In  the  comic
actor  it  unites  more  with  Wit  and  the  propensities,  than  with
Ideality  and  the  sentiments.  Hence  the  grotesque  repre¬
sentation  of  the  propensities  as  exhibited  by  our  best  comic
actors.  I  have  been  told  by  several  performers  in  this  de¬
partment  that  they  are  in  the  habit  of  watching  groups  of
persons  in  the  streets  belonging  to  the  lowest  walks  of  life,  in
order  to  catch  the  ludicrous  expression  of  the  various  propen¬
sities  of  our  nature,  to  enable  them  to  unfold  more  effectively
some  characteristic  piece  of  humour.  Performers  term  this
line  of  observation  the  study  of  dramatic  effect.  All  comic


24


Phrenological  Society.


actors  of  distinguished  merit  are  largely  endowed  with  the
organ  of  Language.  It  is  large  in  the  portraits  of  Munden,
Yates,  Liston,  Knight,  Emery,  Matthews,  and  Meadows, — all
in  the  London  Garrick  Club.  I  examined  the  head  of  the
late  Mr.  Wrench,  the  comic  performer,  a  few  weeks  before
his  death,  and  the  organ  of  Language  was  very  largely  deve¬
loped.  The  organ  is  large  too  in  the  portraits  of  Charles
Kemble,  Johnson,  Power,  and  Farren,  to  be  seen  at  the
Garrick.

I  have  further  observed  that  the  organ  called  Language
is  large  in  the  heads  of  all  great  musical  composers  and
singers,  which  is  sufficiently  well  accounted  for,  when  we
consider  that  music  is  nothing  more  than  a  generalized  natu¬
ral  language  of  our  emotions  and  intellectual  perceptions.
Hence  different  countries  have  different  national  airs  charac¬
teristic  of  the  national  peculiarities.  The  music  of  a  warlike
nation  is  loud,  bold,  and  boisterous,  implying  defiance  in
every  note ;  while  that  of  another,  of  a  more  peaceful  cha¬
racter,  is  purely  sentimental,  being  soft  and  pleasing,  and
calculated  only  to  awaken  the  finer  impulses  of  our  nature.
We  sometimes  too  find  warlike  music  blended  with  sentiment,
as  exemplified  in  that  of  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  and  like¬
wise  in  a  few  Lowland  airs,  borrowed  probably  from  the  High¬
lands.  The  organ  called  Language  as  well  as  Time  is  indeed
large  in  all  eminent  composers  and  musicians.  In  the  por¬
traits  of  Handel,  whose  soul  teemed  with  expression,  the
organ  is  very  large.  It  is  large  too  in  Mrs.  Billington,  Miss
Stephens,  Braham,  Miss  Kemble,  and  Mrs.  Alfred  Shaw,
and  in  all  singers  possessed  of  the  power  of  imparting  expres¬
sion.  In  the  Garrick  Club  alone  there  are  upwards  of  two
hundred  portraits  of  tragic  and  comic  actors  and  singers  with
the  organ  of  Language  in  the  least  well,  and  in  most  largely,
developed.  In  the  more  distinguished  performers  it  is  larger
than  in  those  less  distinguished.

All  the  great  masters  in  painting,  sculpture,  and  en¬
graving,  likewise  possess  the  organ  called  Language  largely
developed.  It  is  large  in  the  portraits  of  Michael  Angelo,
Raphael,  Titian,  Rubens,  Guido,  Leonardo  Da  Vinci,  Mu¬
rillo,  &c.  It  is  not  confined  to  figure  or  historical  painters,
but  it  is  large  too  in  landscape  painters  of  the  first  class.  It
is  large  in  the  portraits  of  Salvator  Rosa,  Poussin,  and
Claude ;  likewise  in  those  of  the  Dutch  school,  combined
with  a  different  organization  from  that  which  distinguishes
the  Italian.  I  have  observed  too  in  some  living  artists,  whose
heads,  according  to  phrenological  works,  indicated  high  ca¬
pabilities  for  painting,  a  decided  lack  of  expression  in  their


Phrenological  Society.


pictures,  which  was  uniformly  accompanied  with  a  deficiency
in  the  organ  of  language.  They  possessed  all  the  other  or¬
gans  of  propensity,  sentiment,  and  intellect,  with  Imitation
well  developed,  calculated  to  impart  excellence  in  the  art ;
but  the  deficiency  in  this  single  facility  seemed  to  eclipse
their  power  and  mar  the  manifestation  of  their  other  facul¬
ties.  All  the  great  masters  of  modern  times  too  are  largely
endowed  with  the  organ  called  Language.  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬
nolds,  Richard  Wilson,  Gainsborough,  Hogarth,  Sir  Henry
Raeburn,  and  Sir  Thomas  Lawrence,  were  possessed  of  the
organ  large.  It  is  even  large  in  the  head  of  George  More¬
land.  It  is  large  in  the  portraits  of  John  Opie  and  Louther-
bourg,  in  the  Dulwich  Gallery;  likewise  large  in  the  portraits
of  Joseph  Nollekens  the  sculptor,  Benjamin  West,  and  Sir
David  Wilkie,  in  the  National  Gallery ;  and  in  the  busts
and  portraits  of  all  the  great  masters  in  the  arts  which  I  have
seen.

But  the  possession  of  this  organ  in  a  high  degree  of
development  is  not  limited  to  those  who  have  excelled  in  the
fine  arts,  but  appears  equally  to  be  possessed  by  persons  who
have  excelled  in  totally  different  departments.  The  organ  is
large  in  the  heads  of  all  the  discoverers  in  chemistry  and  na¬
tural  philosophy.  It  is  large  in  the  heads  of  Black,  Frank¬
lin,  Lavorsier,  Leslie,  Sir  Humphrey  Davy,  Faraday,  Kemp,
Reid,  &c.  The  organ  is  large  too  in  the  heads  of  great  ar¬
chitects;  Bernini,  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  Batcheler,  Sir  John
Soane,  &c.  It  is  large  likewise  in  the  heads  of  distinguished
warriors,  generals  and  admirals.  It  is  large  in  the  heads  of
Cromwell,  Marlborough,  Nelson,  Wolfe,  Washington,  Buona¬
parte,  Wellington,  &c.

The  organ  called  Language  was  first  observed  by  Gall
to  be  large  in  the  heads  of  his  companions  at  school,  remark¬
able  for  their  verbal  memory,  and  hence  he  attributed  to  it
the  function  of  the  memory  of  words.  It  was  further  ob¬
served  to  be  large  in  the  heads  of  poets  and  orators,  and  in
persons  distinguished  for  their  knowledge  of  languages,  and
hence  it  was  subsequently  termed  the  organ  of  Language.
This  latter  class  of  facts  appears  to  have  limited  all  future
observation  on  the  subject,  and  phrenologists  seemed  to  rest
satisfied  that  the  primitive  function  of  the  organ  was  ascer¬
tained.  The  objection  however  that  artificial  language  is  not
a  class  of  natural  perceptions  at  all,  but  mere  arbitrary
signs  invented  by  man  in  imitation  of  some  class  of  natural
perceptions,  at  once  suggests  that  the  term  language  bears
no  reference  to  a  simple  element  of  mind,  and  that  the  mani¬
festation  of  the  power  attributed  to  it  must  arise  from  some


26


Phrenological  Society.


faculty  upon  which  we  are  dependent  for  a  class  of  natural
perceptions.  This  view  of  the  enquiry  is  confirmed  too  by
the  fact  that  the  organ  called  Language  is  large  in  the  heads
of  persons  not  manifesting  any  striking  power  for  acquiring
languages,  and  evincing  capacities  totally  different  from  each
other,  dependent  in  some  measure  on  other  portions  of  their
organization.  The  organ  called  Language  is  accordingly
large  in  the  physiognomist,  the  tragic  and  comic  actor,  the
musical  composer,  the  singer,  the  painter,  the  sculptor,  the
chemist,  the  natural  philosopher,  the  architect,  the  general,
the  admiral,  &c.,  who  have  distinguished  themselves  as  such,
and  many  of  whom  were  not  remarkable  for  their  knowledge
of  languages.  These  facts  would  appear  then  to  be  confirm¬
atory  of  the  view  that  our  power  of  inventing  artificial  lan¬
guage  is  dependent  upon  some  principle  of  the  mind  possessed
in  a  high  degree  by  these  widely  different  classes  of  persons ;
in  fact,  that  the  element  of  mind  in  question  is  common  to
these  various  classes  with  individuals  distinguished  for  their
capacity  of  acquiring  languages ; — and  the  question  therefore
that  occurs  for  solution  is,  in  what  does  this  elementary  prin¬
ciple  consist  ?  At  first  view  there  is  apparently  no  principle
of  mind  common  to  these  various  classes,  with  the  exception
of  the  general  powers  of  intellect  possessed  by  all  men  who
have  evinced  the  possession  of  genius  in  any  department  of
science  ;  but  a  more  accurate  examination  of  the  facts  sug¬
gests  an  element  common  to  the  whole,  and  which  distin¬
guishes  them  from  the  rest  of  mankind.

The  element  of  mind  in  question,  may  be  described  in
a  general  way  to  be  the  capacity  of  taking  cognizance  of
every  species  of  outward  manifestation,  and  hence  of  mani¬
festing  outwardly  our  feelings,  thoughts,  and  opinions ;  and
the  metaphysical  principle,  upon  which  this  is  dependent,
appears  to  me  to  resolve  itself  into  the  power  possessed  by
the  human  mind  of  recognizing  the  externality  of  our  per¬
ceptions,  and  consequently  the  existence  of  a  material  world
beyond  us.  It  must  be  kept  in  view,  that  the  organs  of
Form,  Size,  Weight,  Color,  &c.,  merely  originate  their  re¬
spective  perceptions  in  the  mind,  and  that  of  themselves
there  is  no  idea  or  relation  of  externality  connected  with
them.  They  are  just  so  many  internal  perceptions  of  the
mind,  that  arise  we  know  not  how  but  for  the  faculty  in
question,  which  recognizes  their  externality,  and  imparts  to
us  a  knowledge  of  the  distinction  between  the  internal  and
external.  The  same  faculty  recognizes  too  the  externality  of
the  relations  which  are  observed  by  us  among  external  ob¬
jects,  although  reflection  upon  our  own  consciousness  informs


Phrenological  Society.


27


us  that  these  relations  are  merely  external  operations  of  the
mind.  The  situation  of  the  organ  behind  the  orbitar  plate,
and  below  the  range  of  the  perceptive  faculties,  of  itself
favors  this  view,  although  we  found  nothing  upon  this  cir¬
cumstance.  It  is  sufficiently  easy  to  perceive  the  influence
which  this  faculty  must  exert  over  the  manifestation  of  our
whole  physical,  moral,  and  intellectual  nature.  Being  de¬
ficient  in  the  power  of  recognizing  the  externality  of  our
perceptions,  it  is  plain  that  these  cannot  exert  the  same  in¬
fluence  upon  our  propensities  and  sentiments  as  when  the
faculty  in  question  is  largely  developed.  There  would  neces¬
sarily  be  a  dulness  in  the  particular  class  of  emotion  ad¬
dressed,  and  a  consequent  feebleness  in  the  manifestation  of
it.  The  faculties  which  originate  our  emotions  might  be
large,  and  the  observant  faculties  well  developed,  but  without
the  powTer  of  recognizing  vividly  the  externality  of  the  latter,
the  former  would  be  but  imperfectly  affected,  and  the  mani¬
festation  consequently  inadequate  to  the  development  of  the
propensities  and  sentiments  possessed.  On  the  contrary,
when  the  idea  of  externality  was  distinct  and  vivid,  the  feel¬
ings  and  sentiments  addressed  by  the  particular  perceptions
would  originate  more  lively  and  vigorous  emotion,  and  conse¬
quently  give  occasion  to  greater  energy  of  manifestation.
Having  manifested  our  feelings  and  thoughts  outwardly,  this
same  element  of  mind  recognizes  the  external  manifestation
as  connected  with  the  internal,  and  thus  a  circle  of  relation
between  the  internal  and  external  is  maintained,  causing
greater  energy  of  feeling  and  manifestation  than  could  other¬
wise  exist.  Hence  it  is  that  the  organ  called  Language  is
large  in  all  men  who  have  evinced  original  powers  of  obser¬
vation  in  chemistry  or  natural  philosophy,  or  whose  know¬
ledge  of  the  external  enabled  them  to  manifest  outwardly
plans  of  great  extent,  which  they  had  previously  conceived  in¬
wardly  ;  the  character  of  their  respective  manifestations  being
dependant  upon  the  other  elements  of  their  nature.  Hence
the  organ  is  large  in  those  who  have  been  distinguished  in
the  various  pursuits  above-mentioned.  It  is  a  singular  fact
illustrative  of  the  view  stated,  that  all  the  idiots  I  have  ob¬
served,  possess  the  organ  called  Language  largely  developed,
which  is  evidently  a  wise  provision  of  nature  to  enable  them
to  give  outward  manifestation  to  the  feeble  impulses  with
which  they  are  endowed,  and  to  fit  them  for  the  more  easy
recognition  of  the  manifestations  of  others.

Let  us  suppose  a  case  then  illustrative  of  these  views  in
their  broadest  aspect.  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  in  the  year
1664,  say,  conceived  the  plan  of  re-building  St.  Paul's  Ca-


28


Phrenological  Society.


tliedral.  The  real  genuine  ideas  lie  deeply  imbedded  in  his
intellectual  nature,  not  known  to  any  one  else,  but  quite
familiar  to  his  own  spiritual  being  (to  speak  figuratively)  :
but  being  anxious  to  learn  what  others,  cunning  in  the  matter
of  architecture,  might  say  of  his  design,  he  writes  out  and
publishes  in  the  English  language  an  account  of  it ;  giving  a
detailed  statement  of  all  the  particulars,  and  circulates  it
among  the  learned  in  this  class  of  subject  throughout  Eng¬
land.  But  no  one  thinks  proper  to  whisper  back  to  him  a
syllable  concerning  it,  which  he  takes  for  a  sign  that  no  one
in  England  is  able  to  recognize  in  the  description  the  plan
that  he  has  made  out  in  his  own  mind.  He  next  translates
his  description  into  Latin,  and  circulates  it  among  the  learned
throughout  the  world,  and  after  waiting  many  months  no  re¬
marks  return  to  him  ;  which  he  still — bold  spirit — persists  in
thinking  is  not  the  defect  of  his  plan,  but  probably  his  defec¬
tive  mode  of  describing  it  in  printed  language.  He  is  now
quite  puzzled,  and  does  not  know  well  what  to  do  till  he  be¬
thinks  himself  of  constructing  a  St.  Paul's  upon  a  small
scale,  and  of  sending  this  for  exhibition  among  the  learned
in  the  different  cities  throughout  Europe.  He  constructs  his
model,  and  after  carefully  comparing  it  with  his  conception,
sends  it  into  the  world.  It  is  exhibited  first  in  London,  next
at  Paris,  then  at  Borne,  and  so  forth ;  and  remarks  by  the
learned  pour  in  upon  him  from  all  quarters.  He  has  at  last
found  a  language  by  which  his  thoughts  are  rendered  intelli¬
gible  to  others ;  and  it  is  neither  English  nor  Latin,  nor  the
language  of  any  other  country,  but  that  of  the  human  race,
viz. :  the  actual  outward  manifestation  of  the  conception  of
his  own  mind.  It  is  not  the  inward  conception  of  the  mind
itself,  for  it  remains  there  for  ever,  but  it  is  the  outward
semblance  of  it,  by  which  he  renders  his  thoughts,  design,
or  what  you  may  please  to  call  it,  intelligible  to  the  whole
world.  The  language  of  England  and  ancient  Borne  availed
him  nothing  in  the  matter,  and  he  had  to  fall  back  upon  the
language  of  a  naked  savage  for  the  communication  of  his
idea  to  the  rest  of  mankind.  Let  us  sift  a  little  farther  into
the  reason  of  this  apparently  singular  enigma.  We,  in  Eng¬
land,  term  that  fine  structure,  erected  under  the  direction  of
Sir  Christopher  Wren,  “  St.  Paul's  Cathedral."  It  is  not
the  inward  thought  or  design  of  Sir  Christopher  which
we  call  so,  for  nobody  yet  knew  or  understood  that,  so  long
as  it  was  safely  locked  up  in  Sir  Christopher's  brain.  It  is
the  outward  development  of  what  was  so  confined  that  we
term  “  St.  Paul's  Cathedral.  But  these  few  crooked  Hiero-
glyphical  forms  themselves  bear  no  relation  or  resemblance


Phrenological  Society.


29


to  that  complicated  structure  which  would  require  something
like  the  life-time  of  a  practised  architect  thoroughly  to  under¬
stand.  These  crooked  forms  are  but  the  veriest  short-hand
mode  on  the  part  of  the  mind  of  indicating  as  by  a  sort  of
finger-post,  where  to  go  and  see  and  examine  the  real  out¬
ward  sign  of  Sir  Christopher’s  inward  conception.  The  real
sign  of  Sir  Christopher’s  thought,  indeed,  exists  nowhere
excepting  in  St.  Paul’s  Churchyard,  London.  Here  is  the
only  real  sign  of  it,  to  Sir  Christopher  himself,  to  his  friends,
the  philosophers,  and  to  the  wandering  savage.  It  is  the
only  class  of  perceptions  in  nature  which  signify  or  really  in¬
dicate  Sir  Christopher’s  thought.  Let  the  reader  turn  this
view  in  his  mind  how  he  may,  he  will  find  its  longitude  and
latitude  to  be  pretty  much  where  I  have  fixed  them.

Thus  every  perception,  emotion,  or  relation  of  our  com¬
plex  being  has  its  outward  symbol  by  which  its  inward  ex¬
istence  is  to  be  recognized.  Each  of  these  must  have  its
existence  in  the  mind  before  it  can  be  observed  as  symbolized
or  manifested  outwardly.  After  it  has  existed  inwardly,  its
outward  manifestation  follows,  which  in  the  case  of  third
persons  is  the  only  sign  to  us  of  its  inward  formation.  This
outward  symbolism  therefore  is  the  only  real  language  ex¬
tant.  It  is  the  outward  manifestation  of  something  that
arises  in  the  mind  within,  and  constitutes  the  only  intelligible
language  of  its  state  of  being.  If  the  organ  called  Lan¬
guage  does  not  take  cognizance  of  the  relation  between  the
internal  feeling  or  other  element  of  mind  and  its  outward
symbolism  or  manifestation,  it  can  have  no  function  con¬
nected  with  our  mental  operations  to  perform,  for  there  is
no  other  common  language  extant  among  mankind.  Out¬
ward  manifestation,  action,  or  conduct  on  the  part  of  others
therefore  constitutes  the  only  language  which  we  are  capable
of  understanding.  We  may  describe  it  in  any  short-hand
method  we  choose  for  our  own  convenience,  but  our  descrip¬
tions  point  to  the  real  language  itself,  which  is  the  manifes¬
tation  referred  to.  The  works  of  Oliver  Cromwell  and
Napoleon  Buonaparte  are  not  bound  up  and  lying  snugly  in
the  libraries  of  the  learned,  but  they  exist  or  have  existed
elsewhere  ;  and  I  pity  the  man  who  cannot  read  and  under¬
stand  every  word  of  them.  These  works  were  but  the  out¬
ward  manifestation,  signs,  language,  or  what  you  please  of
certain  inward  thoughts  and  feelings  that  could  not  otherwise
be  made  manifest.  These  outward  signs  or  symbols  of  thought
and  feeling  do  not  and  cannot  exist  in  any  history  of  France
and  England,  for  we  only  find  there  a  few  straggling  finger¬
posts  pointing  backwards  in  their  direction.


30


Phrenological  Society.


In  these  observations  I  have  endeavoured  to  shew,  1st.
That  the  function  of  the  organ  called  Language  originates  a
class  of  relations,  viz.  the  relation  between  our  perceptions,
emotions,  or  reflections  which  lie  inward,  and  the  actual
manifestations  of  those  which  lie  outward;  or  in  other  wrords,
the  relation  between  our  spiritual  being,  as  it  has  been  termed,
and  the  external  world,  the  nerves  of  common  and  special
sensation  and  motion  constituting  the  mere  media  of  com¬
munication.  2nd.  That  there  are  only  two  classes  of  phe¬
nomena  in  nature — the  internal  and  external,  the  latter
forming  the  only  indices,  signs,  symbols,  manifestations,  or
what  you  may  please  to  call  them,  of  the  former,  that  exist
in  the  universe.  And  I  have  only  to  add,  3rdly,  that  artifi¬
cial  language,  or  arbitrary  signs  (which  is  nothing  but  so
many  forms,  sounds,  &c.  perceived  inwardly  by  the  organs
of  form,  &c.)  is  originated  by  these  being  thrown  outwardly
for  the  purpose  of  imitating  or  representing  the  real  symbols
or  manifestations  of  the  various  faculties  of  our  complex
being,  in  order  to  save  man  the  inconvenience,  or  rather  if
I  may  use  the  phrase,  the  impossibility,  of  carrying  about
with  him  all  the  genuine  original  signs  or  manifestations  of
his  perceptions,  emotions,  and  reflections.


December  20 th.

Dr.  Elliotson  laid  before  the  Society  for  examination  a
cast  of  the  head  of  the  late  Sir  James  Shaw,  Bart.,  Cham¬
berlain  of  the  city  of  London ;  and  afterwards  a  cast  of  the
head  of  the  late  Duke  of  Sussex.

The  former  head  presented  a  fair,  but  not  remarkable,  de¬
velopment  of  forehead ;  with  an  excellent  moral  surface ;  a
very  large  development  of  the  organs  of  Love  of  Offspring
and  of  Attachment;  with  a  very  moderate  development  of
Amativeness,  Cautiousness,  Destructiveness,  Acquisitiveness,
Combativeness,  and  Self-esteem.  It  betokened  a  most  amia¬
ble,  mild,  affectionate,  and  truly  respectable  character.

The  cast  of  the  head  of  the  Duke  of  Sussex  presented  a
large  development  of  the  lower  organs  of  the  brow.


Jan.  VI th ,  1844.

Joseph  Hands,  Esq.,  Wm.  D.  Saul,  Esq.,  and  Edward  H.
Bentall,  Esq.,  having  been  severally  proposed  and  ballotted
for,  were  elected  ordinary  members  of  the  Society.

A  paper  was  then  read  by  P.  Deseret,  Esq.,  on  the  Organ


Phrenological  Society.  31

of  Marvellousness  or  Wonder,  of  which  the  following  is  an
epitome  : —

That  the  invention  and  use  of  names  not  expressive  of
the  function  of  a  faculty  have  a  tendency  to  retard  our  know¬
ledge  concerning  it,  by  shutting  out  enquiry.  That  words
invented  in  a  semi-barbarous  state  of  society  to  express  iso¬
lated  manifestations  either  of  our  intellectual  or  moral  nature,
are  far  from  being  philosophically  applicable  to  these,  the  fa¬
culties  not  having  been  investigated  nor  analyzed  at  the  time
of  their  invention.  That  the  terms  marvellousness  and  won¬
der  are  both  words  invented  under  such  circumstances,  and
are  only  applicable  to  certain  obvious  manifestations  of  the
faculty  in  question,  and  are  not  even  stated  to  embrace  a  de¬
scriptive  outline  of  its  function ;  for  this,  according  to  Mr.
Combe,  has  not  yet  been  analyzed.  Let  us  consider  this
faculty  therefore  in  connection  severally  with  our  intellectual,
moral,  and  physical  nature ;  and  in  this  way  detect  the  ele¬
ment  of  feeling  which  is  common  to  the  whole.  That  this
organ  is  peculiar  to  man ;  for  the  lower  animals  evince  no
manifestations  of  it.  Let  us  likewise  therefore  observe  the
particular  points  of  view  in  which  man  is  distinguished  from
the  lower  animals  by  the  possession  of  this  faculty.

That  from  an  extensive  view  of  facts  both  with  relation
to  man  and  the  lower  animals,  the  function  of  the  faculty  in
question  seems  to  resolve  itself  simply  into  a  desire  to  know
the  unknown.  This  is  possessed  by  man,  but  not  by  the
lower  animals.  Hence  it  is  that  man  experiments  and  dis¬
covers  new  relations,  and  the  lower  animals  remain  stationary,
having  no  desire  to  become  acquainted  with  relations  beyond
their  peculiar  desires.  Hence  it  is  too  that  both  individuals
and  races  of  men  manifest  a  deficiency  in  the  desire  to  inves¬
tigate  or  to  progress  in  knowledge.  The  black  and  coloured
races  of  mankind  deficient ;  the  white  races  distinguished  for
manifestations  of  the  faculty.  This  faculty  too  enables  us  to
throw  our  reasoning  faculties  into  the  nature  of  other  beings,
and  to  investigate  their  impulses ;  consequently  imparts  a
diffusiveness  to  the  sentiments  of  our  nature  not  possessed  by
the  other  faculties  of  sentiment  themselves.  Hence  numer¬
ous  murderers  possess  well-developed  Benevolence,  but  are
almost  uniformly  deficient  in  the  organ  of  Wonder.  It  gives
in  fact  a  diffusiveness  and  extent  to  the  whole  impulses  of  our
nature.

Conclusions:  —  1.  Words  mislead  us  with  respect  to
function.  2.  That  the  lower  animals  are  not  possessed  of  the
desire  to  know  the  unknown,  and  consequently  can  only  ob¬
serve  relations  between  external  nature  and  their  own  desires.


32


Phrenological  Society.


3.  That  this  faculty  (Wonder)  is  possessed  by  man ;  and  by
means  of  it  he  is  enabled  to  observe  relations  beyond  the
range  of  his  own  impulses.  It  is  by  means  of  it  that  he  is
led  to  experiment  and  discover  the  new  relations ;  likewise  to
reason  from  the  known  to  the  unknown.  He  not  only  per¬
ceives  the  relations  in  which  he  himself  stands  to  external
objects,  but  by  means  of  this  faculty  is  likewise  enabled  to
perceive  the  relations  in  which  external  objects  stand  to  each
other;  or,  as  the  Germans  express  it,  to  reason  both  sub¬
jectively  and  objectively.  4.  That  the  lower  animals,  from
not  possessing  the  faculty  in  question,  are  unable  to  perceive
moral  relations,  being  only  capable  of  observing  the  relations
between  other  animals  and  their  own  natures ;  and  thus  can¬
not  extend  the  knowledge  thus  acquired  to  contemplate  and
generalize  the  dispositions  and  tendencies  of  other  animals  as
exhibited  in  their  manifestations.  5.  That  man  possessing
Wonder,  or  a  desire  to  know  the  unknown,  is  not  only  en¬
abled  to  observe  the  relations  in  which  he  stands  to  other
beings  around  him,  but  likewise  to  infer  the  existence  of  si¬
milar  impulses  in  other  beings  ;  and  thus  to  form  a  code  of
morality  based  upon  an  enlarged  extent  of  observation,  and
suited  to  the  condition  and  relations  of  society.


February  7th.

Hr.  Elliotson  exhibited  a  cast  of  the  head  of  a  boy  for  the
opinion  of  the  members.

Mr.  Hudson  Lowe  and  other  members  observed  that
there  was  a  very  fair  intellectual  development,  with  large  At¬
tachment  and  Love  of  Notice,  but  that  the  sides  were  so  very
large  that  it  was  decidedly  a  criminal  development,  Cunning
and  Love  of  Property  being  very  large ;  and,  from  the  very
large  size  also  of  the  organ  predisposing  to  violence,  it  was
suggested  that  he  was  probably  of  a  passionate  disposition.

Dr.  Elliotson  perfectly  coincided  in  this  estimate  of  the
development,  but  said  that  the  following  was  the  account
which  he  had  received  from  the  officers  of  the  charitable  in¬
stitution  of  which  the  boy  was  an  inmate.

“  R.  P.,  set.  13|,  steals  everything  he  dares.  If  eatables,
he  eats  them  entirely  or  conceals  them;  or  throws  away,
where  there  is  no  risk  of  detection,  the  parts  which  cannot
be  eaten.  Is  always  lying  and  using  bad  language.  He  steals
from  his  nurse,  who  is  particularly  kind  to  him  and  likes
him  ;  prying  into  all  her  boxes  and  drawers,  as  he  does  into
every  other  place,  and  is  constantly  where  he  has  no  business


Phrenological  Society.


33


to  be.  He  formerly  stole  from  all  the  boys,  but  latterly  lias
ceased  to  rob  them.  He  has  been  flogged  innumerable  times
in  vain.  When  punished,  he  calls  out  “Forgive  me  l”  Never
reproaches,  but  declares  he  will  not  steal  again ;  and  steals
again  directly.  He  is  otherwise  very  obedient  and  well  be¬
haved  ;  not  quarrelsome,  mischievous,  or  passionate ;  so  that
the  nurses,  till  lately,  would  not  believe  that  he  stole  of  his
own  accord,  but  that  he  was  the  tool  of  others.  He  never
shews  gratitude  or  attachment  even  to  the  nurse,  who  is  as
kind  to  him  as  a  mother.”

Dr.  Elliotson  said  he  had  advised  them  never  to  beat  him,
but  to  punish  him  otherwise ;  to  reason  with  him,  and  work
upon  his  kindly  feelings  :  and  was  informed  that  kindness
succeeded  best  with  him.  After  giving  him  some  money  and
obtaining  a  promise  from  him  that  he  would  not  steal  again,
Dr.  E.  called  again  in  a  month,  and  found  that  he  had  stolen
twice, — taken  a  rule  from  one  boy,  and  kept  a  penny  which
it  was  his  business  to  give  to  another.

The  boy^s  conduct  therefore  agreed  with  the  development
of  Cunning  and  Love  of  Property.  The  disagreement  be¬
tween  it  and  the  development  of  Attachment  and  of  Destruc¬
tiveness  was  possibly  to  be  explained  by  the  more  tardy
activity  of  these  organs  than  of  the  two  former,  and  pro¬
bably  their  manifestations  will  at  length  be  equally  strong.


February  21  st.

J.  Milton,  Esq.,  and  B.  H.  Church,  Esq.,  having  severally
been  duly  proposed  and  ballotted  for,  were  elected  ordinary
members  of  the  Society.

An  address  was  read  by  Thomas  Uwins,  Esq.,  containing
some  remarks  upon  the  case  of  the  boy,  the  cast  of  whose
head  was  exhibited  at  the  preceding  meeting.

“  Sir, — The  interesting  case  of  the  boy,  a  cast  of  whose  skull
was  exhibited  at  our  last  meeting,  who  with  many  good  dis¬
positions  had  an  unfortunate  propensity  to  stealing,  indicated
by  the  large  development  of  the  organ  of  Acquisitiveness,
led  us  all  to  reflect  on  the  possibility  of  correcting  this  pro¬
pensity  by  some  course  of  moral  treatment.  Experience  has
abundantly  shown  that  punishment  will  do  no  good,  and  it
was  quite  consistent  with  your  character,  sir,  as  a  phrenolo¬
gist,  to  recommend  leniency  instead  of  rigour,  and  kindness  in
preference  to  coercion.  But  is  this  all  ?  Can  nothing  be

n


34


Phrenological  Society.


done  to  save  such  a  child  from  crime  and  its  dreadful  conse¬
quences?  Is  he  to  grow  up  to  be  rather  a  curse  than  a  bless¬
ing  to  society  ?  I  waited  most  anxiously  for  some  member  to
suggest  the  process  by  which  this  good  was  to  be  effected.
One  worthy  member  was  right,  as  far  as  the  caution  went,
in  recommending  his  friend  not  to  take  as  a  servant  a  girl  of
pleasing  appearance,  in  whom  he  discovered  a  large  develop¬
ment  of  the  organ  of  Acquisitiveness.  But  Phrenology  has
done  little  good  in  the  world  if  it  only  teaches  cautiousness
and  leads  to  suspicion.  Benevolence  sighs  to  accomplish
greater  things  by  an  agency  so  powerful,  and  looks  to  educa¬
tion  as  the  point  of  all  its  hopes.  Before  the  brain  has
attained  its  full  growth  may  not  the  better  portions  be  stim¬
ulated  to  increased  activity?  This  accords  with  all  the
improvements  of  natural  culture,  and  falls  in  with  all  the
aphorisms  applied  to  mental  and  moral  character.  “  Train
up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go,  and  when  he  is  old  he
will  not  depart  from  it.”  “  Just  as  the  twig  is  bent,  the
tree’s  inclined,”  &c.  These  are  truisms  to  which  all  will
assent ;  but  my  present  object  is  to  go  a  step  farther.  And
here  I  would  ask  those  members  of  the  Society  who  have
connected  Mesmerism  with  their  Phrenological  studies,  whe¬
ther  some  light  is  not  thrown  on  the  capabilities  of  moral
culture  by  the  discoveries  that  are  rapidly  brought  under  our
notice  in  this  wide  field  of  new  speculation  ?  It  is  with  this
investigation  in  view  that  I  now  venture  to  lay  before  the
meeting  some  results  I  have  recently  obtained  from  experi¬
ments  made  on  the  same  individual  whose  case  your  indulg¬
ence  allowed  me  once  before  to  offer  to  your  notice.  I  stated
formerly  that  I  had  relieved  this  person  by  mesmerism  from
the  effects  of  a  disorder  of  the  stomach,  to  which  she  had
been  long  a  martyr.  It  happened  however  that  her  friends,
some  of  whom  are  medical,  laughed  her  to  scorn  for  suppos¬
ing  any  amelioration  of  her  suffering  could  be  consequent  on
measures  so  ridiculous ;  and  when  her  disorder  again  returned,
she  was  persuaded  to  consult  a  young  surgeon  from  the  north,
whose  charges  for  attendance  proved  greater  than  her  purse
would  bear,  or  than  her  condition  in  life  warranted.  The
doctor’s  bill  brought  her  back  to  me  in  spite  of  the  derision
of  her  family  and  friends.  Regular  practice  demanded  regu¬
lar  payment,  but  my  quackery  cost  her  nothing.  I  had  not
seen  her  for  a  long  time,  when  she  came  looking  very  pale
and  ill.  She  complained  of  sickness,  loss  of  appetite,  and,
what  alarmed  her  most,  she  could  not  draw  a  long  inspira¬
tion  without  a  catching  pain,  that  reminded  her  of  a  friend


Phrenological  Society.  35

who  had  died  of  consumption.  I  put  her  into  the  mesmeric
trance,  and  kept  her  in  deep  sleep  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
during  which  time  I  used  the  ordinary  methods  for  her  relief.
I  then  brought  her  into  the  sleep-waking  state,  and  found
that  her  pain  had  entirely  left  her.  I  had  all  along  suspected
that  some  mental  uneasiness  was  at  the  root  of  her  bodily
malady ;  and  on  questioning  her  while  she  was  still  asleep,  I
found  she  had  been  suffering  from  some  cruel  reports  and
misrepresentations  which  she  had  no  immediate  means  of
counteracting,  and  waiting  for  the  slowly  unveiling  of  truth
was  too  much  for  her  patience.  Of  these  things  I  had  heard
nothing  till  mesmerism  produced  the  exposure.  I  had  now
to  ‘  minister  to  a  mind  diseased/  ‘  to  pluck  from  the  memory
a  rooted  sorrow/  and  to  ‘  cleanse  the  stuffed  bosom  of  that
perilous  matter  that  weighs  about  the  heart/  To  this  busi¬
ness  I  applied  myself.  I  brought  into  great  activity  the  or¬
gans  of  Hope  and  Benevolence,  going  from  time  to  time  to
Veneration  and  Conscientiousness,  but  always  coming  back
especially  on  Benevolence.  After  some  time  I  got  her  again
into  conversation  on  her  troubles.  My  end  was  attained.
She  became  perfectly  indifferent  about  things  that  had  before
afflicted  her.  She  assured  me  of  her  entire  tranquillity,  and
seemed  anxious  to  have  an  opportunity  of  doing  good  to  the
very  persons  she  had  before  named  as  her  detractors  and
enemies.  After  keeping  her  some  time  in  this  excited  state
of  active  Benevolence,  I  put  her  back  again  into  deep  sleep ;
from  which  I  at  length  awakened  her.  On  coming  to  herself,
she  tried  the  various  tests  of  her  malady,  but  could  find  no
traces  of  the  deadly  disorder  that  had  so  much  alarmed  her.
It  was  quite  ridiculous  to  see  the  determined  energy  with
which  she  drew  in  a  long  inspiration, — resolving  if  possible
to  get  at  the  pain;  but  pain  there  was  none.  Against  her
prejudices,  against  her  doubts,  almost  against  her  will,  she
was  convinced  !  Her  malady  was  gone  however,  and  away
she  went  full  of  delight.  I  told  her  to  let  me  know  if  her
disorder  returned,  but  I  purposely  avoided  telling  her  that  I
had  directed  my  attention,  during  her  trance,  to  relieving
her  mental  uneasiness.  It  was  a  fortnight  after  this  before  I
again  saw  her,  and  then  accidentally.  She  was  now  an  ex¬
ample  of  cheerful  health.  No  return — not  the  smallest
symptom — of  her  malady  had  come  back  upon  her ;  and
what  was  more  extraordinary,  she  said,  her  mind,  which  had
before  been  depressed  almost  to  madness,  was  calm  and
serene.  She  now  first  told  me  that  she  had  come  to  me
smarting  under  supposed  injuries,  and  secretly  wishing  for
revenge  on  those  she  considered  her  enemies :  but  on  leaving

d  2


36


Religious  Treatment  of  the  Insane.


my  house,  things  that  had  before  assumed  a  serious  character
became  trifles  light  as  air ;  and  so  far  from  visiting  evil  for
evil,  she  was  anxious  contrariwise  to  confer  blessing.  You
will  judge,  sir,  of  my  astonishment  at  this  moral  effect  of
mesmerism.  This  could  be  no  delusion.  The  patient  knew
nothing  before  or  after  her  sleep  of  my  intentions  or  my
object.  If  it  is  demoniac  agency  (as  some  good  men  say),
the  devil  must  have  changed  his  character.  He  must  be
going  about  seeking  to  do  good  instead  of  to  destroy  and  to
devour.  To  my  mind  the  result  of  the  experiment  is  a  clear
proof  of  a  decided  change  in  moral  condition  produced  by
mesmerism,  or  rather  by  phrenological  experience  acting  in
conjunction  with  the  mesmeric  influence.

“  You,  sir,  will  perceive  the  inference  I  am  about  to  draw
from  these,  to  me,  most  interesting  facts.  Could  not  the
child  whose  cast  you  presented  to  us  last  meeting  be  so  ope¬
rated  on  ?  Will  not  repeated  transient  effects  become  per¬
manent  ?  Is  not  this  the  treatment  indicated  ?  Might  not
mesmerism  be  brought  in  medically  to  assist  other  courses  of
education  and  training  ?  For  answers  to  these  questions  I
look  to  you,  sir,  and  to  other  gentlemen  whose  profession
leads  to  the  consideration  of  such  cases.  My  time  is  occupied
in  other  pursuits.  I  wish  it  always  to  be  understood  that  I
come  to  these  meetings  not  to  teach,  but  to  learn.”


III.  Review  of  u  Observations  on  the  Religious  Delusions  of
Insane  Persons ,  and  on  the  practicability ,  safety,  and  ex¬
pediency  of  imparting  to  them  Christian  Instruction,  fyc.
JBy  Nathaniel  Bingham,  Surgeon.”

If  there  be  one  thing  more  requisite  than  another  in  an
author,  it  is  that  he  should  divest  himself  of  all  superfluous
enthusiasm  and  feeling,  retaining  a  sufficiency  only  to  give  a
due  effect  to  his  arguments.  Mr.  Bingham  may  be  assured,
that  “  those  ministers”  who  can  speak  of  nothing  else  but
“the  love  of  Christ,  free  grace,  and  the  privileges  of  the
gospel”  to  the  insane,  are  wholly  unfit  to  hold  communion
with  them,  and  must  be  regarded  as  “  ministers”  only  of  evil.
To  expect  “ judgment  and  discrimination”  from  such  men,  is
too  lofty  a  flight  of  imagination,  for  even  Mr.  Bingham  him¬
self,  we  should  presume.  We  are  disposed  to  look  on  all
kinds  of  religious  advice  or  instruction  in  reference  to  the


Religious  Treatment  of  the  Insane.


37


insane,  and  regarded  as  a  curative  means,  as  a  remedy  of  too
potent  a  nature  to  be  administered  except  under  tbe  direction
of  the  medical  attendant.  He  can  best  “  minister  to  the
mind  diseased,”  or  understand  the  kind  of  sedatives  or  ex¬
citants  required  by  an  abnormal  portion  of  cerebral  matter.
He  can  alone  judge  of  the  dose  to  be  administered,  and  of
the  propriety  of  its  repetition.  For  our  own  parts,  we  should
as  soon  think  of  putting  a  lancet  or  a  bottle  of  morphia  into
the  hands  of  the  chaplain  of  a  lunatic  asylum,  as  of  allowing
him  a  free  and  unrestrained  intercourse  with  its  patients.
Discrimination  in  a  matter  of  this  kind  can  hardly  be  ex¬
pected  in  him.  All  those  whose  education  has  been  unhappily
confined  to  mere  words  and  not  things,  whose  religion  is
based  on  feelings  and  not  philosophy, — and,  at  the  present
day,  such  is  rather  the  rule  than  the  exception, — may  be  not
inaptly  compared  to  the  well-known  tanner,  who,  when  the
city  was  threatened  by  the  enemy,  earnestly  recommended  to
the  authorities  a  fortification  of  leather.  The  desires,  nc  less
than  the  pursuits,  of  such  individuals  partake  for  the  most
part  of  too  monomaniacal  a  character,  to  prove  useful  to  a
class  of  patients  who  require  at  our  hands  every  possible  va¬
riety  of  treatment, — whether  medical,  moral,  or  general, — to
meet  the  endless  modifications  of  change  to  which  they  are
subject.

Contrary  to  the  opinions  of  Mr.  Bingham,  we  not  only
feel  sure  that  very  many  insane  persons  owe  their  affliction
to  religious  fanaticism,  but  that  moreover  it  is  among  the
most  fertile  causes  of  the  disease  :  at  the  same  time,  we  are
ever  ready  to  admit  that  in  many  instances  the  religious  ex¬
citement  occurs  in  the  progress  of  insanity.  We  have  patients
at  this  moment  under  our  care  answering  to  both  descriptions
of  cases.  In  many  we  consider  it  absolutely  necessary  to
“  forbid  all  religious  reading,”  prefering  rather  to  substitute
agreeable  occupations  and  amusements,  wherewith  to  call
into  health  and  activity  the  varied  powers  of  the  intellect
and  feelings,  and  thus  imperceptibly  to  consign  the  patient’s
religious  extravagancies  to  that  oblivion  so  much  to  be  de¬
sired.  It  has  been  observed  by  us,  in  a  few  well-marked
cases,  that  an  improvement  of  the  general  health  has  been
quite  sufficient  in  itself  to  banish  the  fanatical  fancies  of  the
insane.  The  physical  condition  of  the  brain  under  such
circumstances  of  course  partakes  of  the  general  improve¬
ment  of  the  body,  of  which  it  is  a  part  only,  and  as  a  conse¬
quence  the  feelings  become  subservient  to  the  intellect.

It  is  sometimes  not  only  necessary  to  “interdict  for  a
time  all  such  things  as  have  any  connexion  with  the  patient’s


38


Religious  Treatment  of  the  Insane.


disorder,”  but  to  do  so  for  ever ;  or,  at  any  rate,  until  the
cultivation  of  the  perceptive  and  reflective  faculties — which
are  commonly  found  inactive,  and  enfeebled  by  neglect  and
prejudice — have  exerted  their  benign  and  wholesome  influ¬
ence  on  the  sentiments  and  propensities.  And  here  we  may
observe,  that  one  of  the  most  effectual  means  of  limiting  the
number  of  insane  persons  consists  in  the  adoption  amongst
other  people  of  a  proper  system  of  education ;  that  is,  one
which  provides  wholesome  and  agreeable  stimuli  for  all  the
powers  of  our  nature,  whether  they  relate  to  the  intellect  or
moral  feelings.  Education,  in  this  sense,  is  among  the  most
valuable  means,  for  not  only  preventing,  but  curing  insanity.
Whereas,  in  any  other ,  it  must  become  a  curse  and  not  a
blessing.

In  the  moral,  no  less  than  in  the  strictly  medical,  manage¬
ment  of  the  insane,  all  must  depend  on  the  peculiarities  of
individual  cases.  No  routine  course  can  ever  be  adopted
with  advantage  to  the  suffering  party.  To  prescribe  excessive
attention  to  religious  duties,  would  be  in  many  cases  to  ag¬
gravate  all  the  symptoms  of  the  disease,  and  oftentimes  to
convert  the  curable  maniac  into  the  pitiable  idiot.  In  the
religious  instruction  of  the  lunatic,  it  is  most  important  to
consider  well  the  circumstances  of  his  past  life :  they  will
oftentimes  afford  the  very  best  criteria  whereby  to  direct  or
modify  our  proceedings.  The  cerebral  organization  also  must
be  attended  to.

There  are  doubtless  a  large  number  of  insane  persons  who
would  receive  mental  comfort  and  composure  from  the  reli¬
gious  conversations  of  a  judicious  chaplain  :  such  cases,  how¬
ever,  are  of  course  best  known  to  the  medical  attendant,  and
therefore  he  alone  should  prescribe  the  remedy.  So  long  as
the  well-being  of  a  patient  is  in  the  hands  of  the  physician
or  surgeon,  so  long  will  the  insane  be  protected  from  the
visits  of  clergymen  who  would  dare  venture  on  the  conversion
of  one  disinclined  to  tenets  at  variance  with  those  originally
conceived  and  credited  by  him.  If  this  point  were  once  con¬
ceded,  farewell,  and  a  long  farewell  too,  to  the  now  accus¬
tomed  peace  and  order  of  the  well-regulated  asylum.

Melancholic  patients  are  doubtless  more  likely  than  others
to  receive  benefit  from  religious  exercises  and  advice ;  and  we
have  known  a  few  very  satisfactory  instances  of  the  kind.
Great  care,  however,  must  be  exercised  by  the  chaplain.  He
is  required  only  to  give  assurance  and  hope  and  faith ;  and  by
the  confidence  so  gained  to  uproot  the  delusory  fears  and  sus¬
picions  of  the  patient.  He  is  not  required,  as  Mr.  Bingham
would  persuade  his  readers,  to  excite  him  or  her  to  any,  even


j Directions  for  taking  Plaster  Casts.


39


the  slightest,  consideration  of  “  awful  realities.”  We  have
known  this  done,  and  marked  the  sad  consequences.  The
slightest  knowledge  of  cerebral  physiology  would  of  course
point  out  how  inseparable  the  ordinary  cerebral  development
of  the  melancholic  is  with  such  “  sad  consequences.”

Apart  from  the  immediate  and  particular  effects  of  reli¬
gious  exercises  on  the  insane,  there  are  other  and  in  many
instances  additional  advantages  gained.  The  meetings  at
chapel  tend  in  a  very  great  degree  to  the  extension  and  sup¬
port  of  that  general  order  and  precision  which  should  obtain
in  every  lunatic  asylum  :  they  therefore  promote  self-controul,
and  encourage  habits  of  regularity  among  the  patients ;  and
in  this  way  minister,  in  an  eminent  degree,  to  their  com¬
fort  and  well-being.

We  fear  the  publication  of  Mr.  Bingham’s  book  will  not
produce  much  good.  It  savours  very,  very  strongly  of  a
party,  a  sectarian,  spirit.  Should  the  book  unhappily  reach
a  second  edition,  we  should  recommend  its  fanciful  author
to  take  for  his  motto,  “Aut  Caesar,  aut  Nullus.”  Mr.  Bing¬
ham,  unlike  most  empirics,  has  not  chosen  his  nostrum  from
the  pharmacopoeia — <e physic  to  the  dogs  !”  He  has  felt
the  pulse  of  society,  and  believing  it  to  be  anything  but
“  res  fallacissima,”  has  taken  no  little  pains  to  prescribe  for
one  of  its  prominent  functional  derangements.  What  is  good
for  the  goose,  is  good  also  for  the  gander, — ergo,  what  is
good  (?)  for  the  sane,  must  be  so  for  the  in  sane.  One  thing
now-a-days  is  certain, — a  man  may  be  a  member  of  the  Col-
-  lege  of  Surgeons  and  an  associate  of  the  Linnsean  Society,
and  yet  be  no  physiologist  or  philosopher ;  and  certainly
the  work  before  us  does  not  give  evidence  of  any  such  qua¬
lities  in  Mr.  Nathaniel  Bingham,  of  whose  monomania  we
hope  to  hear  no  more.

Y.


IV.

We  received  the  following  note  :  —

“  To  the  Editor  of  The  Zoist.

“  Sir, — Concise  directions  for  the  simplest  mode  of  taking  plaster  casts
would  oblige  many  young  phrenologists,  and,  among  others,

“  An  Admirer  of  your  Journal."

We  requested  a  friend  to  apply  to  the  modest  and  ex¬
cellent  young  sculptor,  Mr.  Butler  of  Gower  Place,  hard  by
University  College,  and  he  has  obliged  us  with  the  following
directions.


40


Directions  for  taking  Piaster  Casts.


In  taking  casts  from  the  life  every  precaution  is  necessary
to  prevent  the  adhesion  of  the  plaster ;  for  which  purpose  a
strong  lather  of  soap  and  water  is  employed,  of  a  consistency
similar  to  that  used  in  shaving,  or  even  stronger.  With  this
the  hair  must  be  saturated  and  combed  or  brushed  down  close
to  the  head,  after  which  the  soap  and  water  is  again  applied
abundantly  to  the  smoothed  surface  of  the  hair,  and  some¬
times  if  any  doubt  exist  of  perfect  security  against  adhesion,
the  lather  may  be  applied  even  a  third  time.

In  mixing  the  plaster  any  earthen  vessel  may  be  used  :  a
large  wash-hand  basin  will  answer  well  for  ordinary  purposes.
Let  the  basin  be  nearly  filled  with  water,  and  the  plaster
carefully  and  gradually  but  quickly  scattered  in  with  the
hand  until  it  rise  to  the  surface,  when  it  may  be  stirred  with
a  common  iron  spoon.  Much  care  is  necessary  in  scattering
in  the  plaster  in  order  to  prevent  the  formation  of  lumps.

It  will  be  understood  that  the  mould  must  be  removed
from  the  head  in  sections.  The  simplest  form  of  division  is
in  two  parts  ;  the  line  of  separation  running  from  the  throat
to  the  back  of  the  head,  so  dividing  the  whole  into  two  equal
portions.  For  this  purpose,  and  before  the  application  of  the
plaster,  a  thin  string  is  passed  over  the  face,  dividing  it  down
the  centre  of  the  nose  and  again  passing  over  the  head  down
to  the  nape  of  the  neck.  This  string  will  be  arranged  before
the  plaster  is  laid  on.  Divide  the  plaster  into  two  portions ;
one  of  which  place  in  any  earthen  vessel  approaching  in  shape
the  back  of  the  head,  and  sufficiently  large  to  admit  of  im¬
mersion  for  the  greater  facility  of  applying  the  plaster.  The
person  should  be  placed  in  a  recumbent  position,  and  the
back  of  the  head  immersed  in  the  vessel  provided  for  the
purpose,  while  the  other  portion  is  to  be  gently  but  quickly
laved  over  the  face,  previously  moistened  with  a  little  sweet
oil.  The  eyebrows  it  will  be  necessary  to  moisten  with  the
soap  lather,  as  also  the  whiskers  and  the  eyelashes  with  a
little  oil.  The  whole  of  the  head  is  thus  covered,  the  nostrils
of  course  being  left  open  ;  it  would  however  be  advisable  that
novices  should  place  quills  just  within  the  nostrils  to  avoid
inconvenience  from  want  of  practice.  The  mould  will  be
consolidated  by  the  repeated  addition  of  plaster  until  it  is  of
the  thickness  of  about  half  an  inch,  when  it  may  be  divided
by  drawing  up  the  string,  which  must  be  done  before  the
plaster  acquires  too  great  a  degree  of  induration ;  after  which
the  mould  may  be  removed  without  difficulty.

The  greatest  care  must  be  observed  in  casting  the  ears  in
order  to  prevent  the  plaster  from  adhering  internally  or  even
externally.  Let  the  whole  of  the  crevices  be  well  stopped


Directions  for  taking  Plaster  Casts.


41


with  a  mixture  composed  of  soap  and  oil_,  of  about  the  con¬
sistency  of  thick  paste ;  and  it  may  be  well  to  observe  to  the
inexperienced  operator,  that  should  any  of  the  plaster  form
internally  it  would  be  productive  of  at  least  extreme  incon¬
venience.


To  take  Casts  from  the  Mould.

Immediately  after  the  removal  of  the  mould,  tie  it  to¬
gether  and  saturate  it  with  water  by  steeping  it  during  three
or  four  minutes;  and  before  the  moisture  has  disappeared  from
the  surface,  pour  in  at  the  opening  at  the  throat  a  quantity
of  plaster  of  the  consistency  as  before,  which  by  turning  the
mould  round  must  be  made  to  flow  into  every  part  of  it.
The  plaster  will  be  thus  added  until  the  cast  be  of  the  thick¬
ness  of  about  half  an  inch.  When  this  substance  has  been
acquired,  let  the  whole  stand  for  a  few  hours,  after  which  the
mould  may  be  removed  from  the  cast  by  the  careful  use  of  a
mallet  and  chisel.


The  Multiplication  of  Casts.

Dry  the  original  cast  thoroughly ;  then  with  a  brush  and
some  boiled  oil  go  over  the  surface  two  or  three  times,  after
which  the  cast  must  stand  for  a  day  or  two  to  allow  of  its
drying,  when  it  will  be  in  a  fit  condition  for  the  formation
of  the  mould.  For  ordinary  purposes  the  mould  may  be
made  in  three  pieces,  of  which  the  back  of  the  head  as  far  as
the  ears,  but  not  including  them,  constitutes  one,  and  the
face  equally  divided  as  before,  affording  the  other  two,  an  ear
of  course  attaching  to  each.  This  operation  is  performed
piecemeal.  The  part  receiving  the  plaster  must  first  be  thinly
coated  with  a  mixture  of  oil  and  grease  (hogs-lard  or  tallow)
to  prevent  adhesion.  When  the  piece  is  of  the  necessary
thickness,  remove  it  and  trim  the  edges  with  a  sharp  knife,
after  which  replace  it  on  the  cast,  and  having  greased  the
edges  proceed  to  the  formation  of  another  portion,  which  of
course  will  adapt  itself  to  the  edge  already  prepared.  When
the  mould  is  made,  put  it  together,  dry  it  perfectly,  then  oil
it  in  the  manner  before  described  with  reference  to  the  cast,
and  in  the  course  of  two  or  three  days  it  will  be  in  a  fit  state
for  casting,  taking  care  to  coat  it  with  oil  and  grease  before
taking  each  cast.


(  42  )


Y.  An  account  of  two  Cases  of  severe  and  obstinate  Diseases
perfectly  cured  with  Mesmerism ;  both  of  them  exhibiting
remarkable  mesmeric  phenomena.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.


“  Careful  investigation  and  consideration  of  all  the  experiments  have  convinced  us  that
the  phenomena  are  not  real,  and  that  amimal  magnetism  is  a  delusion:  we  shall,  therefore,
lose  no  opportunity  of  extirpating  an  error,  which  in  its  nature,  application,  and  conse¬
quences,  is  pernicious.”  MR.  THOMAS  WAKLEY,  Lancet,  Sept.  8th,  1838  ;  p.  835.

“  That  great  moral  authority,  Mr.  WAKLEY.” — Examiner,  Feb.  24,  1844.

I.  The  case  which  I  am  now  about  to  relate  was  one  of
decided  and  perfect  cure  with  mesmerism,  after  the  failure  of
various  other  means  actively  and  perseveringly  pursued  dur¬
ing  eight  weeks  all  but  a  day,  in  a  hiccup  of  intense  and
agonizing  severity :  and  it  was  not  less  remarkable  for  the
phenomena  which  mesmerism  excited.

I  have  seen  only  one  exactly  similar  case  of  mesmeric
effects.  This  other,  however,  was  so  similar  in  every  parti¬
cular  of  its  phenomena,  that,  though  deserving  to  be  recorded
on  this  account  simply,  it  ought  from  its  perfect  parallelism
to  be  detailed  with  the  first.  It  too  was  no  less  remarkable
for  its  cure,  than  for  its  phenomena,  as  an  epilepsy  of  fifteen
years*  duration  was  permanently  put  an  end  to  ;  and  this  very
fact  demands  for  it  a  place  in  the  annals  of  medicine.  It
did  not  occur  in  my  own  practice ;  but,  as  no  account  at  all
worthy  of  it  has  been  published  and  I  myself  have  repeatedly
mesmerised  the  patient,  and  produced  all  the  phenomena,
many  of  which  the  original  mesmeriser  never  drew  forth,  I
shall  delight  in  laying  it  fully  before  the  public.

On  the  evening  of  Friday,  January  4th,  1839,  a  fortnight
after  I  had  resigned  my  office  of  Professor  in  University  Col¬
lege,  London,  because  the  council,  at  the  instigation  of  the
medical  professors  in  co-operation  with  Mr.  Wakley,  forbad
that  any  cures  should  be  effected  with  mesmerism  in  the  hos¬
pital,  I  was  called  by  Mr.  Johnston,  of  22,  Saville  Bow,  to  a
young  lady,  rather  above  twenty  years  of  age,  who  had  been
seized  that  very  evening  with  the  severest  hiccup  I  ever  wit¬
nessed.

On  the  22nd  of  December,  some  friend  fired  off  a  pistol
for  fun  in  the  room  where  she  was ;  and,  from  a  young  man
having  a  short  time  previously  said  that  he  would  shoot  her
through  the  window,  she  at  the  moment  supposed  she  was
shot.  Immediately  she  wns  seized  with  a  violent,  hard,  dry,
barking,  ringing  cough.  It  grew  worse  and  worse,  and,  on
the  25th,  Mr.  Johnston  was  called  in.  He  bled  her  twice
in  the  arm,  blistered  her  chest,  and  gave  her  various  medi-


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


43


cines :  but  the  cough  continued  to  grow  worse  and  worse,
and  on  January  4th,  after  she  had  complained  of  sickness  all
day,  it  suddenly  changed  in  the  evening  to  an  equally  severe
hiccup,  and  never  returned.

I  shall  be  pardoned  for  making  two  remarks  here.  The
first,  that,  of  all  cruel  absurdities,  to  frighten  others  unne¬
cessarily  is  the  worst.  I  have  attended  so  many  cases  of  St.
Vituses  dance,  epilepsy,  insanity,  fatuity,  palsy,  &c.,  &c.,
from  terror  in  sport,  that  the  danger  of  terror  cannot  be  too
generally  known,  nor  the  duty  too  strongly  inculcated,  of
abstaining  from  tricks  intended  to  produce  it,  and  from  sup¬
plying  children  with  the  superstitious,  and  therefore  detest¬
able,  ideas  of  the  existence  of  goblins,  evil  spirits,  and  the
reality  of  the  mythos  of  the  devil.  The  second,  that  the  spas¬
modic  nervous  cough  which  preceded  the  hiccup  in  this  case,
and  is  so  rebellious  to  all  the  established!  modes  of  treatment,
usually  yields  to  mesmerism  as  its  proper  remedy.

Not  knowing  at  that  time  the  superiority  of  Mr.  John¬
ston’s  character,  but  knowing  the  complete  ignorance  and
the  irrational  and  coarse  feeling  of  the  medical  profession  at
large  in  reference  to  mesmerism,  and  well  aware  of  the
equally  gross  ignorance  and  prejudice  of  the  public,  fostered
so  assiduously  by  medical  men,  I  did  not  mention  mesmerism;
presuming  it  would  be  rejected.  However,  without  any  re¬
mark,  I  proceeded  as  if  to  press  the  pit  of  the  stomach  in
the  ordinary  way  under  the  bed-clothes  with  one  hand :  but
I  took  the  opportunity  of  pointing  my  fingers  upon  it,  and
keeping  them  there  for  some  minutes.  The  effect  of  this  little
mesmeric  proceeding  was  that  the  hiccup  ceased  for  an  hour.
This  I  learnt  at  my  visit  the  next  morning ;  when,  however,
she  was  as  bad  as  ever.  I  could  not  refrain  now  from  telling
Mr.  Johnston  what  I  had  done :  but  it  appears  that  I  men¬
tioned  merely  having  placed  my  hand  upon  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  or  Mr.  Johnston  did  not  understand  me  to  have
done  more.  He  very  liberally  tried  the  plan,  but  with  no
advantage.  The  patient  long  afterwards  told  us  that  I
pointed  my  fingers  and  she  felt  great  relief ;  but  that  Mr.
Johnston  applied  his  hand  flat,  and  she  felt  no  relief.  This
little  incident  is  well  worthy  of  attention.  She  had  not  any
idea  of  mesmerism,  or  the  meaning  of  the  word;  and,  if  ima¬
gination  had  produced  the  relief,  the  flat  parts  of  the  fingers
would  have  answered  as  well  as  their  points.  I  prescribed
hydroacynic  acid  and  creosote,  with  either  of  which  I  had
frequently  relieved  or  cured  violent  or  continued  hiccup ;  and
at  the  same  time  cajeput  oil,  as  there  was  great  flatulence.

I  did  not  see  her  after  my  second  visit  on  the  following


44


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of


morning.  Mr.  Johnston  pushed  on  the  remedies  as  far  as
they  were  borne  without  inconvenience,  and  employed  opium,
morphine,  and  camphor  in  full  quantities,  several  blisters,
and  almost  daily  mustard  poultices.  But  all  in  vain.

He  now  gave  the  compound  iron  mixture  with  no  benefit.
In  conversation  I  advised  him  next  to  try  the  carbonate  (ses-
quioxyd)  of  iron,  which  I  had  found  to  have  so  much  power
over  chorea  and  tetanus,  and  had  seen  useful  in  chronic
hiccup.  But,  though  given  in  large  quantities,  and  for  some
time,  it  also  failed.

In  February,  six  weeks  after  I  had  seen  her,  Dr.  Chowne
of  Charing  Cross  Hospital  was  called  in.  He  prescribed  the
compound  iron  mixture,  ammonia,  camphor,  and  tincture  of
cantharides.*

The  disease  went  on  increasing  all  this  time,  reducing  her
strength  more  and  more  Those  who  have  experienced  a  very
strong  hiccup  for  an  hour  or  two,  after  dinner,  know  how
distressing  and  painful  it  is  :  but  still  can  form  no  idea  of
the  violence  and  agony  of  this  case.  The  straining  was  as  if
she  were  being  torn  asunder,  and  always  ended  in  vomiting,
which  would  bring  up  things  taken  twelve  hours  before :  it
rolled  her  in  her  bed,  and  raised  her,  so  that  but  for  her
attendants  she  would  have  been  thrown  off  and  she  entreated
them  to  hold  her  down.  The  gulping  noise  of  the  spasms,
when  the  streets  were  quiet,  was  heard  even  in  Begent  Street,
her  house  being  near  the  opening  of  her  street  into  this.  Her
only  respite  was  obtained  by  lying  perfectly  flat  and  perfectly
still,  all  noise  in  the  room  being  at  the  same  time  avoided.  If
she  was  raised  a  single  inch  from  the  perfectly  flat  position,
it  came  on.  Nay,  if  she  raised  her  arm  to  feed  herself,  it
came  on.  An  invalid  couch  was  provided  for  her,  that  she
might  be  raised  and  fed  with  the  more  ease.  The  attempt  to
remove  her  from  her  bed  to  this  excited  the  hiccup  so  dreadfully
that  an  hour  was  consumed  in  drawing  her  flat  upon  her  back
downwards  to  the  foot  of  the  bed,  and  she  could  be  got  no  far¬
ther,  so  that  a  chair  was  placed  beyond  the  foot  to  support  her
legs,  while  her  trunk  and  head  lay  upon  the  bed :  and  thus
she  remained  from  Sunday  till  Tuesday,  exhausted  from  the

*  I  do  not  know  whether  medical  men  are  aware  of  the  uncertain  strength
of  this  preparation.  Patients  will  take  drachms  of  some  specimens  of  it,
without  any,  or  with  scarcely  any,  effect.  I  recollect  that  a  patient  took
six  drachms  three  times  a  day  regularly  at  St.  Thomas’  Hospital,  with  no
sensible  effect.  Having  recovered,  and  falling  into  the  same  state  again,
some  time  afterwards,  he  came  under  my  care  a  second  time,  and  begged  to
have  the  same  medicine  as  before,  which  he  told  me  was  “  as  well  as  he
could  recollect,  called  tincture  of  litany,”  (Lytta.)  Of  the  powder  more
than  a  grain  twice  a  day  can  seldom  be  borne  long,  and  not  often  so  much.


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


45


frightful  effects  of  drawing  so  far,  and  unable  to  speak  except
in  a  faint  whisper.

Another  attempt  to  remove  her  from  this  position  was
now  ventured  upon;  and,  with  intense  agony,  she  was  slowly
drawn  off  the  foot  of  the  bed  on  to  the  couch,  from  which
she  never  stirred  till  she  was  well.  It  proved,  however,  of
no  use,  for  the  upper  part  could  not  be  put  to  its  purpose  of
raising  her,  since  raising  her  a  single  inch  brought  on  the
attack.

And  there  she  lav  flat,  and  unable  to  turn  or  move  in  the

*/  *

least  without  an  attack.  She  has  lain  four  days  absolutely
without  moving  even  hand  or  foot,  to  escape  the  attack :  fed
by  others  with  a  tea  spoon  on  pulpy  food  like  a  baby.  But
even  the  mere  act  of  swallowing  always  soon  brought  on  the
hiccup  more  or  less ;  and  therefore  she  seldom  took  food,  and
only  in  very  small  quantities.  However  motionless  she  re¬
mained,  a  knock  at  the  door,  the  least  noise  in  the  room,
nay,  the  presence  of  more  than  two  persons  in  the  room,
brought  on  the  attack  :  and  during  the  hiccup,  however
many  hours  it  lasted,  to  take  food  was  impossible.  After  a
severe  attack,  she  would  be  unable  to  speak  for  hours,  or
even  to  swallow,  and  could  not  bear  the  weight  of  the  bed¬
clothes.

She  was  always  cold,  whatever  number  of  blankets  were
heaped  upon  her,  and  though  she  always  wore  thick  worsted
stockings.

No  action  occurred  without  aperients.

It  was  feared  that  nature  could  not  hold  out  much  longer  :
when  three  different  friends  mentioned  mesmerism,  and  Mr.
Johnston  was  asked  his  opinion  of  it.  The  patient  and  her
family  did  not  know  exactly  what  was  meant  by  mesmerism ;
and  Mr.  Johnston,  very  greatly  to  his  credit,  while  he  con¬
fessed  that  he  knew  almost  nothing  of  it,  though  he  had
seen  singular  effects  apparently  produced  by  it,  and  had
laughed  at  it  like  others,  said  that,  everything  else  having
failed, — medicine  being  completely  at  fault,  he  saw  no  ob¬
jection  to  a  trial  of  it,  and  offered  to  consult  me  upon  the
point.  How  different  was  this  conduct  from  that  of  many
who  fancy  themselves  great  doctors  and  surgeons,  and  “  li¬
beral,”  “  intellectual,”  “  philosophical,”  “enlightened”  mem¬
bers  of  an  "  honourable”  profession,  with  a  “  high  tone  of
moral  feeling  !”

Accordingly  on  the  morning  of  February  the  27th  (1839),
I  seated  myself  by  the  side  of  her  couch  and  began  to  make
slow  passes  downward  before  her  face.  She  had  no  idea  of
what  I  was  going  to  do,  or  what  effect  could  possibly  be  ex-


46


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of


pected.  But,  after  twenty  minutes ,  her  eyes  closed  and  could
not  be  opened  till  at  the  end  of  the  sitting  I  rubbed  my
thumbs  outwards  upon  the  eyebrows.  Her  mouth  nearly
closed,  and  her  speech  became  indistinct.  The  hiccup  which
the  idea  of  being  mesmerised  and  the  presence  of  four  or
five  persons  together  had  excited,  gradually  subsided  as  I  went
on.  At  the  end  of  half  an  hour,  the  door-bell  suddenly  rang,
but  produced  no  hiccup  as  it  invariably  had  up  to  that  time.
I  now  tried  the  effect  of  raising  her  by  winding  up  the
moveable  part  of  the  couch,  and  thus  brought  on  the  hiccup,
which,  however,  ceased  as  soon  as  she  was  lowered  again  and
mesmerised  afresh.  This  second  mesmerisation  produced  the
same  effects  as  the  first.  I  rubbed  her  eyebrows  as  before,
her  eyes  opened,  and  I  left  her.

She  had  no  other  attack  the  rest  of  the  day,  and  was  quite
cheerful.

28th.  Her  eyes  closed  in  a  few  minutes;  and  could  not  be  opened
by  any  other  person  than  myself  rubbing  the  eyebrows  outwards.
At  the  end  of  half  an  hour,  besides  the  rigid  closure  of  the  eyes
and  stiffness  of  the  jaw  of  the  day  before,  there  was  a  certain  stiff¬
ness  of  the  whole  body  ;  with  a  feeling  of  stupidity  and  of  constric¬
tion  of  the  chest.  The  hiccup,  which,  as  on  the  day  before,  had
begun  from  the  idea  of  being  mesmerised,  soon  subsided;  and  I
actually  raised  her  and  moved  her  up  and  down  several  times  without
producing  the  hiccup.  She  now  felt  warm  and  comfortable,  which
she  never  had  done  before.

March  1st.  Her  eyes  and  mouth  closed,  and  her  whole  body
stiffened:  her  arms  became  rather  stiff.  She  felt  stupid,  but  did
not  lose  herself.  I  raised  her  again  and  again  without  producing
hiccup:  and  she  had  suffered  no  hiccup  all  day.  After  I  was  gone,
she  was  kept  raised  for  twenty  minutes ,  and  only  a  slight  hiccup
was  occasioned,  which,  however,  ceased  as  soon  as  she  was  laid
down  again.  She  was  better  all  the  evening.  Mr.  Johnston  tried
to  mesmerise  her,  but  could  not  produce  any  effect.

2nd.  She  sat  reclining  while  I  mesmerised  her;  and  the  same
effects  were  produced.  After  the  mesmerisation ,  she  sat  quite  up¬
right,  and  had  no  hiccup.  The  tenderness  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
from  the  little  hiccup  produced  yesterday  by  her  sitting  up  for
twenty  minutes,  ceased  upon  my  mesmerising  her,  though  I  did  not
direct  my  hand  at  all  to  the  epigastrium.  Her  health  was  better  in
every  respect.  I  mesmerised  her  for  half  an  hour  with  the  same
effects.

She  now  informs  me,  and  cannot  help  laughing  while
doing  so,  that  she  at  this  period  of  my  mesmerising  her  fan¬
cied  I  had  some  medicine  under  my  thumb,  and  actually
believed  she  saw  something  there.  People  have  all  along
often  told  her  that  I  carried  something  about  me  to  make  my


Ins  tense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


47


mesmerised  patients  sleep.  Many  have  asked  me  if  I  had
not  something  under  my  sleeve  :  and  I  have  been  assured
that  some  declared  they  knew  this  to  be  the  case.  A  New
Zealand  chief,  who  was  taken  to  University  College  Hospital
by  Mr.  Gibbon  Wakefield  to  see  the  Okeys,  told  Mr.  Wake¬
field  on  his  return  that  he  “  knew  how  Dr.  Elliotson  did  it :
Dr.  Elliotson  had  medicine  up  his  sleeve.”  These  people  may
perhaps  blush  when  they  find  that  their  knowledge  and  opi¬
nions  are  no  better  than  those  of  a  poor  savage,  but  exactly
the  same.

Silly  as  such  people  are,  how  much  less  irrational  are
they  not  than  those  who,  like  certain  Fellows  of  the  Royal
Medical  Society,  declare  they  would  not  believe  the  facts  if
they  saw  the  facts,  and  those  who  have  often  witnessed  the
facts  of  mesmerism  and  like  boors  deny  them.  Indeed,  boors
would  not  deny  them.  The  Zealand  savage  did  not  deny
them :  he  believed  his  senses.  The  cunning  but  shameless
mountebanks  who  go  about  the  country  lecturing  on  the
fallacies  of  mesmerism,  wishing  merely  to  make  a  penny  for
subsistence,  excite  our  ridicule  and  compassion  :  but  those  who
deny  what  they  see,  from  sheer  conceit  and  obstinacy,  ought,  I
think,  to  pluck  out  their  organs  of  sense  and  fling  them  in  the
Almighty’s  face,  since  they  so  despise  the  organs  which  they
profess  to  believe  he  has  given  them  wherewith  to  learn  the
wonders  of  his  creation.  Yet  how  much  more  charitable  are
they  not  than  the  pious  and  tolerant  Mr.  MfNeil  and  many
other  wise  divines,  and  Dr.  Roe  of  Hanover  Square,  and
many  profound  religious  ladies,  who  say  we  mesmerise  by  the
devil’s  assistance.  Two  ignorant  fanatical  ladies  in  Manches¬
ter  Street  insisted  upon  their  sister  substituting  Sir  James
Clark  for  me,  while  attending  her  in  an  attack  of  asthma  and
she  was  going  on  perfectly  well,  and  mesmerism  had  never
been  mentioned,  because  I  must  be  in  league  with  the  devil  to
mesmerise :  and  this  stuff  had  been  put  into  their  heads  by
an  evangelical  divine  of  the  church  of  England.  One  lady
harping  on  the  devil,  hearing  that  a  young  man,  who  hap¬
pening  to  be  very  fair,  was  mesmerising  a  patient,  asked
if  he  was  not  a  very  dark  young  man  :  and  another,  who  was
permitted  by  me  to  see  some  mesmerism  at  my  house,  de¬
clared  afterwards  to  her  friends  that  she  smelt  brimstone  in
my  drawing-room.  Such  is  the  lamentable  state  of  education
in  this  country  at  this  day,  with  our  colleges  and  all  our
schools,  and  all  the  hundred  thousands  of  sermons  which  are
preached  all  over  the  kingdom  every  week.

I  continued  to  mesmerise  this  patient  every  day.  The
eyes  always  firmly  closed ;  and  at  length  the  jaw.  The  body


48


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of


became  more  and  more  rigid,  and  the  arms  and  legs  became
rigid  likewise ;  but  the  legs  grew  rigid  the  last.  Just  as  at
each  mesmerisation  the  effects  began  in  the  eyes  and  gradu¬
ally  descended :  so  the  degree  of  the  effects  increased  in  the
course  of  the  mesmeric  treatment  more  quickly  as  each  part
was  situated  higher  up,  and  her  feet  were  long  flexible.  But,
although  they  were  too  weak  to  support  her  and  for  unas¬
sisted  walking,  she  could  walk,  or  rather  drag  and  slide  for¬
wards,  in  her  sleep,  even  across  the  room,  if  supported  on
each  side,  at  the  end  of  a  fortnight.  Indeed,  at  the  end  of
ten  days  she  thus  walked  six  steps,  with  the  effect  of  only  a
very  slight  hiccup.  She  thus  slid  forwards  in  obedience  to
tractive  movements  made  before  her,  at  various  distances  ;
and  also  by  the  impulse  of  attraction  to  me  her  mesmeriser
standing  before  her,  whom  she  had  an  irresistible  impulse  to
approach.  At  length  the  rigidity  extended  to  her  legs ;  and,
though  on  the  30th  of  March  they  were  strong  enough  to
support  her  in  her  sleep-waking  state  without  assistance,  they
were  incapable  of  walking  or  advancing  a  hair^s  breadth.
The  stupidity  went  on  to  perfect  sleep,  and  the  disease
presently  ceased.  In  a  fortnight  from  the  commencement  of
the  mesmerism ,  she  could  bear  to  be  dressed.  She  slept  well
without  narcotics ,  which  previously  had  been  required  every
night.  She  was  warm ,  whereas  before  during  the  whole  of  her
illness  she  had  been  distressingly  cold.  She  could  eat  and  did
eat  well,  and  recovered  her  strength  and  plumpness,  and  aston¬
ished  all  her  friends :  and  this  without  a  particle  of  medicine.
On  the  24<th  of  March — less  than  a  month — she  went  to  chapel
in  a  carriage,  and  bore  the  exertion  so  well  that  the  next  day
she  took  a  walk :  though  in  the  sleep- waking  state  her  legs  had
not  yet  power  to  support  her.  It  is  remarkable  that  in  the
sleep-waking  state  there  is  often  relaxation  and  apparent  ex¬
treme  muscular  debility,  and  yet  by  passes,  &c.,  rigidity  and
strength  far  beyond  what  occurs  at  any  time  in  the  natural
state  are  produced.  After  a  time  Mr.  Johnston  found  he
could  mesmerise  her ;  and,  as  she  was  always  greatly  refreshed
by  it,  he  was  kind  enough  to  mesmerise  her  for  me  after  I
had  discontinued  regular  visits.

Never  was  there  performed  a  more  decided,  a  more  grati¬
fying,  a  more  astounding  cure.  The  very  first  mesmerisation
made  an  impression  upon  the  complaint :  and  her  improve¬
ment  was  invariable  and  rapid  from  that  day  forwards.  Each
mesmerisation  advanced  her  sensibly  on  the  road  to  health.
But  if  the  benefit  was  striking,  no  less  so  were  the  mesmeric
phenomena,  which  from  moderate  beginnings  were  in  a  few
weeks  fully  developed.  I  found  that  pointing  the  fingers  to-


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


49


wards  the  eyes  at  the  distance  of  an  inch  or  two  had  more
effect  than  making  passes.  They  soon  began  to  look  watery,
and  sometimes  did  water,  and  pricked.  The  upper  eyelid
slightly  descended,  and  then  very  gradually  more  and  more,
and  at  length  the  under  lid  ascended  till  they  met  and
then  firmly  closed.  The  descent  was  exquisitely  gradual,
and  winking  very  seldom  took  place  during  the  process.
The  lid  became  more  and  more  rigid,  as  far  as  it  descended :
and  at  length  no  effort  of  her's  would  raise  or  depress  it.
When  all  but  closed,  the  lids  began  to  quiver,  and  the  qui¬
vering  continued  to  the  end.  While  this  was  going  on,  a
slight  stiffness  took  place  in  the  muscles  of  the  lower  jaw,  so
that  she  could  not  fully  open  her  mouth.  This  too  went  on
steadily  increasing,  till  her  jaws  were  firmly  closed.  Till  this
occurred,  she  would  answer  me  that  she  was  not  asleep,
though  her  eyes  were  shut.  As  soon  as  speech  was  thus  ren¬
dered  impossible,  she  would  reply  to  enquiries  that  she  was
still  awake  by  a  slight  movement  of  her  lips ;  and  so  slight  at
last,  as  scarcely  to  be  noticeable.  While  these  changes  were
proceeding,  first  the  neck,  then  the  arms,  and  lastly  the  legs,
wrere  found,  on  our  attempting  to  move  them,  to  lose  some¬
what  of  their  flexibility ;  and,  as  the  neck  became  rigid,  the
head  in  the  same  proportion  gradually  inclined  to  one  side.
Still,  by  the  faint  movements  of  her  lips,  in  reply,  she  would
let  us  know  that  she  was  conscious.

Suddenly  then  her  breathing  would  grow  loud  ;  her  head
be  drawn  down  very  forcibly  to  one  side  or  the  other,  without
reference  to  the  side  on  which  I  stood,  and  even  if  I  stood
before  her;  her  arms  project  forwards,  though  not  raised;
and  her  fingers  and  thumbs  all  become  rigidly  fixed  in  the  re¬
spective  positions  in  which  they  happened  to  be.  Her  head
and  neck,  her  trunk  and  arms,  arrived  in  a  moment  at  the
height  of  their  rigidity,  and  she  was  all  one  piece,  so  that  by
pushing  her  head  you  moved  the  whole  of  her.  If  you  forci¬
bly  raised  an  arm  from  her  lap,  on  which  it  firmly  pressed,  it
descended  again  with  violence  the  moment  you  let  it  go,  as
if  acted  upon  by  a  strong  spring.  Her  legs  were  not  so  forci¬
bly  rigid  for  some  time ;  and  indeed  never  became  so  rigid  as
the  arms ;  and  this  I  have  noticed  in  other  cases.  The  ri¬
gidity  evidently  corresponded  with  the  height  of  the  parts  of
the  frame.  She  no  longer  made  any  motion  of  her  lips  in
reply  to  the  question, — was  she  asleep.  In  truth,  she  had
suddenly  entered  into  a  deep  mesmeric  sleep.

The  sight  was  wonderful,  if  sight  ever  was ;  and  the  va¬
rious  phenomena,  which  I  will  describe,  such  as  no  one  could
feign.  And  yet  this  rigid  state  would  continue  for  hours ;

VOL.  II.  e


50


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


— till  she  was  taken  out  of  it  mesmerically.  Any  sceptic  who
sees  her  may  try  his  powers  of  imitating  her,  and  I  will  wait
with  patience  till  he  has  finished.

But  the  rigidity  and  stupor  were  not  all.  Though  unable
to  give  any  voluntary  sign  of  hearing  or  seeing,  or  to  utter
the  faintest  voluntary  sound,  or  indeed  to  make  any  volun¬
tary  motion,  as  is  ordinarily  done  by  us,  she  was  not  many
moments  in  a  deep  impenetrable  sleep,  but,  as  we  often  ob¬
serve  after  a  short  time,  her  brain  became  to  a  degree  active,
and  she  passed  from  the  stupor  into  what  is  commonly  called
somnambulism  or,  more  properly,  sleep-waking.  After  the
state  had  continued  some  time,  the  eyelids  would  cease  to  be
constantly  closed,  and  the  cornea  might  be  seen  occasionally
between  them.  In  some,  when  thrown  into  sleep-waking  with
complete  closure  of  the  lids  at  first,  the  lids  remain  perma¬
nently  a  little  open,  except  at  moments  of  deep  sleep.  If  I
forcibly  opened  one  of  her  eyes,  the  organ  turned  up,  or
down,  or  to  one  side.  I  have  a  patient  whose  eye  in  his
sleep-waking  so  turns  up  on  raising  the  upper  lid,  that  only
the  white  below  the  cornea  can  be  seen,  however  long  you
hold  up  the  lid.  In  one  of  my  patients,  whose  eye-lids
as  the  sleep- waking  state  comes  on  do  not  gradually  or
suddenly  close  as  the  first  effect,  but  whose  eyes  first  turn  up
so  that  only  the  white  below  the  cornea  is  seen,  and,  the  eye
remaining  thus  rolled  up,  the  upper  lid  at  length  very  slowly
descends,  and  finally  the  lower  lid  rises  to  meet  it ;  the  eye
after  a  time  descends,  and  the  cornea  is  seen  through  the
small  fissure  of  the  lids :  this  patient  sees,  and,  except  at
moments  in  which  the  sleep  predominates  over  the  waking
and  she  is  in  deep  coma,  declares  in  her  sleep-waking  she
sees  in  the  ordinary  way,  though  her  range  of  vision  is  evi¬
dently  limited.  Yet  I  have  another  who  talks  as  rationally  as
in  her  waking  state,  but  always  mistaking  the  person  and
time,  and  almost  always  the  place,  and  whose  eyes  open
slightly  after  the  sleep-waking  has  continued  some  time,
except  at  the  moments  of  deep  coma ;  and  I  cannot  discover
that  she  sees  at  all, — at  least,  anything  placed  before  her ;
and,  fancying  the  place,  persons,  and  time  different  from
what  they  are,  she  answers  all  questions  as  if  she  saw  only
in  her  mind^s  eye,  declaring  she  sees  me  distinctly,  though
she  declares  at  the  same  time  I  am  her  sister,  or  father,  &c.,
as  the  dreamy  state  may  be ;  and,  if  I  close  or  cover  her
lids,  she  professes  to  see  me,  that  is,  her  sister,  father,  &c.,
just  the  same :  so  that  her  vision  is  an  imagination,  and
not  a  visual  impression.  I  am  therefore  unable  to  say,  from
inability  on  her  part  to  make  manifestations,  and  from  the


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


51


analogy  of  the  cases,  whether  the  patient  whose  case  forms
the  subject  of  the  present  narration  sees  or  not ;  though
perhaps  she  does  when  the  eyelids  are  not  perfectly  closed.
But  I  have  no  proof  that  she  does.  Neither  can  I  assert
that  she  hears,  beyond  that  low  degree  which  occurs  in
common  sleep ;  and  that  she  possesses,  for,  as  in  common
sleep,  her  eyelids  act  on  clapping  the  hands  near  her  ears,
and  in  certain  volitions  she  has  appeared  guided  by  sounds.
I  could  relax  her  mouth,  but  still,  on  calling  to  her  and
begging  her  to  make  some  sound,  she  never  made  the  faint¬
est.  Nor  did  she  ever  make  the  faint  movement  of  her  lips
in  reply,  from  the  moment  she  entered  into  sleep,  although
up  to  that  moment,  when  asked  if  she  was  asleep,  she  re¬
plied  instantly  always  in  the  negative.  She  appears  quite
insensible  to  pain  from  mechanical  causes.  I  recollect  that
one  day,  having  promised  to  allow  me  to  show  her  to  some
friends,  she  had  sprained  her  ankle,  and  was  sadly  afraid
she  would  not  be  able  to  stand  as  she  hears  from  us  she  is

made  to  do  for  a  verv  considerable  time  in  the  mesmeric

«/

state.  Yet,  though  her  ankle  was  very  painful  and  bruised
before  she  was  mesmerised,  she  stood  in  her  sleep  for  two
hours,  without  manifesting  any  pain ;  and  I  may  add  that
when  her  mesmeric  state  was  over,  her  ankle  was  perfectly
free  from  pain  for  ten  minutes  and  afterwards  none  the  worse;
and,  on  taking  off  her  stocking  at  night,  the  discolouration  had
vanished.  I  have  no  reason  to  suppose  she  had  any  of  the
external  senses  unless  in  the  lowest  degree.  She  might  be
percipient  simply  of  noise  and  simply  of  light ;  but  that  was
all :  she  never  gave  the  common  signs  of  volition,  even  when
I  had  removed  the  rigidity  of  any  part.

Yet  was  her  brain  active :  sleep -wakingly  active.  She
could  distinguish  the  mesmeriser  from  others :  she  moved
towards  him,  and  withdrew  from  the  proximity  of  others.
She  imitated  him  in  standing  or  sitting,  or  stooping,  and
placing  herself  as  near  as  possible  on  a  level  with  him.
She  also  obeyed  tractive  movements,  whether  made  by  her
mesmeriser  or  others.  These  phenomena  soon  commenced
after  she  was  first  mesmerised,  and  gradually  developed  them¬
selves  in  perfection.

The  sensation  given  her  by  the  proximity,  without  contact,
of  the  mesmeriser  and  of  others,  was  independent  of  all  the
common  forms  of  sensibility.  It  took  place  when  her  eyes
were  carefully  covered,  and  the  proximity  was  behind  her,  as
well  as  when  the  parties  were  before  her  and  her  eyes  left  to
themselves.  This  is  a  common  occurrence  in  the  mesmeric
state.  Patients,  in  whom  the  phenomenon  takes  place  and

e  2


52


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


who  can  talk,  describe  the  sensation  from  the  mesmeriser
as  exceedingly  pleasant,  and  that  from  others  as  exceed¬
ingly  unpleasant.  Generally  the  former  is  described  as
warm,  and  the  latter  as  cold.  One  of  my  patients,  however,
describes  the  sensation  from  others  than  the  mesmeriser  as
a  sort  of  roughness  :  “  very  disagreeable, — she  can  hardly
tell  what :  not  cold,  but  a  sort  of  roughness.”  The  distress
occasioned  by  the  contact  of  others,  in  cases  where  this
attraction  and  repulsion  happen,  is  often  extreme  :  and,  for
want  of  ascertaining  whether  the  attraction  and  repulsion
exists,  great  temporary  disturbance,  convulsions  and  even
delirium,  have  often  been  produced  by  strangers  touching
the  patient.  I  have  a  patient  in  whom  the  momentary  touch
of  even  a  sister  or  her  father,  on  whom  she  doats,  agonizes
her  and  causes  her  to  cry  out,  “  cruel,  cruel.”  In  her,
proximity  of  another  within  two  yards,  even  behind  her,
gradually  induces  this  sensation  of  coldness,  till  it  can  be
borne  no  longer ;  and,  when  two  others  besides  the  mesme¬
riser  are  in  the  room  at  even  a  greater  distance,  the  result
is  the  same,  and  the  effect  increases  according  to  the  num¬
ber  present :  and  yet  she,  being  unconscious  of  the  presence
of  any  one  but  the  mesmeriser,  has  no  idea  of  the  cause  of
the  sensation  and  blames  him  for  it.  Not  only  will  mischief
thus  arise  in  these  cases,  but  from  the  mere  departure  of  the
mesmeriser.  I  have  a  patient  who  dashes  violently  after  me
if  I  attempt  to  go  to  another  part  of  the  room  :  another
holds  one  or  both  of  my  hands  all  the  time  I  am  with  her,
and  cannot  be  prevailed  upon  to  let  me  retire  a  quarter  of
a  yard  from  her :  two  others  who  have  no  power  to  rise,
but  become  gradually  more  and  more  agitated  if  I  sit  at  a
little  distance  from  them,  and  one  had  fits  whenever  I  retired
from  her  in  the  early  stage  of  my  mesmeric  knowledge.
But  the  latter  and  another,  who  is  a  youth  of  nineteen,
grasp  my  hand  firmly  to  prevent  my  leaving  them,  and  he  so
firmly  as  often  to  pain  me.  If  I  leave  him  he  grows  colder
and  colder,  shuddering  as  he  sits  in  silent  sleep,  till  at  last
his  wretched  coldness  wakes  him ;  if  it  does  not  wake  him
soon,  it  continues  long  after  he  is  awake.

It  sometimes  happens  that  the  patient,  though  capable  of
being  mesmerised  by  another,  may  not  feel  comfortable  on
going  into  the  mesmeric  state  at  finding  his  original  mes¬
meriser  not  present  with  him  :  and  the  same  disagreeable
results  have  ensued  from  this  case.  In  general,  perhaps,  in
this  kind  of  cases,  the  new  mesmeriser  contents  the  pa¬
tient  at  last  by  perseverance  in  the  mesmeric  process,  or
even  without  it.


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism .


53


The  youth  of  whom  I  have  just  spoken,  distinguishes  not
only  the  touch  of  the  point  of  the  finger  of  the  mesmeriser
from  that  of  any  other  person,  but  if,  while  he  is  grasping
the  hand  of  his  mesmeriser,  another  person  touches  not
him  but  the  mesmeriser,  he  instantly  drops  his  mesme-
riser’s  hand,  becoming  perfectly  indifferent  to  his  mesme¬
riser,  though  his  closed  eyes  be  effectually  covered  or
the  stranger’s  touch  be  made  behind  him.  I  only  yes¬
terday  (March  17th)  made  decisive  experiments  of  this  kind
upon  him.  I  stood  behind  his  high  chair,  while  he  was
asleep  with  his  eyes  perfectly  closed,  and  laid  my  forefingers
carefully  and  closely  all  along  the  edge  of  his  eyelids,  so
that  ordinary  vision  was  absolutely  impossible.  Before  he
was  mesmerised  he  had  gone  up  and  taken  the  hand  of  a
patient  asleep,  who  has  an  attraction  to  me  and  aversion  to
strangers,  but  who  occasionally  has  no  aversion  to  some  par¬
ticular  individual,  male  or  female,  and,  instead  of  repelling
his  hand,  she  took  it.  Whether  this  was  the  reason  or  not,  I
cannot  say  :  but  when  she,  being  now  restored  to  her  natural
state,  took  his  hand,  he  was  not  annoyed, — shewed  no  re¬
pulsion  to  her.  She  stood  with  three  other  ladies  and  his
brother  close  to  him ;  and  each  in  all  varieties  of  succession
in  perfect  silence  touched  with  the  end  of  a  finger  only  the
back  of  his  hand  as  it  lay  in  his  lap.  Invariably,  in  not  less
than  thirty  trials,  when  any  of  the  others  touched  him  thus
he  withdrew  his  hand,  and,  when  she  touched  him,  he  made
no  signs  of  uneasiness,  but  kept  his  hand  perfectly  still  as  if
I  had  touched  him.  I  then  put  my  right  hand  into  his  right
hand,  and  he  grasped  it  firmly :  I  drew  up  my  hand  with
his  to  the  back  of  his  high  easy  chair,  and  continued  stand¬
ing  behind  him.  His  brother  stood  at  my  side  also  behind
the  chair.  The  youth  was  sunk  low  in  the  chair,  so  that  had
his  eyes  been  open  he  could  not  by  any  possibility  have  seen
our  hands.  Whenever  I  touched  the  brother’s  right  hand  with
my  left,  the  youth  relaxed  his  grasp  of  my  right  hand  :  and
when  I  ceased  to  touch  the  brother’s  hand,  grasped  my  right
hand  again.  This  was  repeated  so  often  and  with  such  varia¬
tions  as  to  duration  and  succession  of  touching  and  not
touching,  that  fallacy  was  impossible.

Yet  patients  in  sleep-waking  sometimes,  probably  often,
except  at  the  moments  of  deep  coma,  use  their  eyes,  however
slightly  open,  and  their  ears,  however  insensible  they  may  be,
probably  through  abstraction,  to  what  is  presented  to  their
eyes  and  ears  :  and,  just  as,  besides  an  occult  power  of  learning
the  attitudes,  grimaces,  &c.,  of  those  they  imitate,  they  some¬
times  employ  their  eyes  (see  vol.  i.,  pp.  178,  190,  317,  322,


54-


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of


323,  421),  to  learn  what  they  have  a  propensity  to  imitate, —
are  sometimes  more  or  less  directed  by  their  eyes  and  ears,
in  addition  to  an  occult  sensibility  in  distinguishing  their
mesmeriser  from  others.  As  all  the  occult  mesmeric  faculties,
and  all  the  mesmeric  susceptibilities,  fluctuate  greatly,  they  at
certain  moments  may  allow  themselves,  at  least  in  some  cases,
to  be  guided  by  their  common  external  senses,  and  by  mere
supposition,  fancying  their  mesmeriser  to  be  in  this  situation
or  that,  and  to  touch  them,  when  it  is  really  somebody  else.
They  will  consequently  sometimes  move  in  the  direction  of
another  person  than  their  mesmeriser,  and  sometimes  fancy
the  touch  of  another  is  the  touch  of  their  mesmeriser.  Were
they  never  to  trust  to  their  common  external  senses  or  their
suppositions,  they  would  always  be  right  or  neutral.  The
mere  attraction  and  repulsion  are  marvel  enough  to  rivet  our
thoughts:  for  they  are  as  irresistible  as  any  monomania  of  the
feelings.  I  have  mesmerised  a  gentleman  whose  eyes  close
fixedly,  and  who  expresses  great  attraction  to  his  mesmeriser,
and  horror  of  all  others,  though  he  never  goes  to  sleep  at  all,
and  remembers  everything  afterwards.  We  have  here  the
fact  of  attraction  and  repulsion  almost  insulated ;  united  only
with  sleep  of  the  eyelids.

This  young  lady  displayed  attraction  to  her  mesmeriser.
While  she  sat  reclined  in  the  chair  or  on  the  sofa,  perfectly
stiff,  if  her  mesmeriser  placed  himself  at  her  side,  she  would
after  a  little  while  give  a  frown  and  screw  her  lips,  make  a
slight  straining  noise,  and  move  her  head  and  shoulders  a
little  as  if  suddenly  displeased,  and  then  in  the  slowest  pos¬
sible  manner  incline  more  and  more  towards  him,  till  she  was
very  close  to  him ;  and,  when  this  was  accomplished,  her
brow  became  perfectly  smooth  again,  and  she  remained  in  her
new  position.  See  above,  p.  178.

All  the  time  she  was  moving,  as  well  as  after  she  had
ceased  to  move,  her  rigidity  continued  undiminished,  so  that
she  was  moved  all  in  a  piece  in  any  direction  by  pushing  the
hand  against  her  head,  shoulders,  or  other  parts.  When
pushed,  she  always  returned  to  her  former  position,  and  never
fell  over.  If  an  arm  was  pushed  down  or  up,  it  returned  to
its  exact  situation.

It  was  remarkable  that,  however  close  she  came  to  her
mesmeriser,  she  never  touched  him.  The  accuracy  of  her
movements  in  this  respect  was  astonishing.  She  would  ap¬
pear  steadily  going  on  to  contact ;  but  at  the  distance  of  per¬
haps  half  an  inch  of  him  she  invariably  stopped  short.  If  he
now  moved  to  the  other  side,  the  frown,  the  screwing  of  the
mouth,  and  the  little  movement  of  the  head  and  shoulders,


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


55


and  the  straining,  after  the  lapse  of  a  portion  of  a  minute,
began  again ;  and  she  slowly  moved  to  the  other  side  as  she
had  originally  moved  to  this.  In  her  the  important  fact
(see  above,  pp.  423-4)  was  most  distinctly  marked,  that,  when
we  give  an  impulse  to  a  mesmeric  patient  to  move  in  any  di¬
rection,  the  result  is  not  instantaneous.  The  interval  was
one  might  say  considerable  in  this  case ;  and  the  fact  was
clearly  seen,  not  only  that  the  movement  was  not  instantane¬
ous,  but  the  effect  on  the  patients  will  not  instantaneous.
There  was  always  an  interval  not  only  between  the  mes-
meriser’s  change  of  place  and  the  commencement  of  her
movement ;  but  between  his  change  of  place  and  her  frown,
&c. ;  and  after  these  had  begun  her  movements  began.  She
always  for  an  interval  after  my  change  of  place  seemed  in¬
different  and  in  undisturbed  sleep ;  and,  as  soon  as  the  frown,
&c.,  occurred,  I  knew  she  was  about  to  begin  her  movements.
Either  the  impression  was  never  felt  at  first ;  or  it  was  felt,
but  she  did  not  at  first  begin  the  annoyance  of  moving  her¬
self,  and  frowned  only  when  she  resolved  on  so  annoying
herself.  But  I  should  suppose  that  she  did  not  feel  the  new
position  of  her  mesmeriser  immediately,  and  that  she  frowned
only  as  soon  as  she  did.  Because  it  was  this  which  was  the
more  likely  to  annoy  her,  and  by  its  annoyance  to  induce  her
to  change  her  position, — it  was  sure  to  annoy  her;  is  very
likely  not  to  have  been  perceived  at  first,  as  there  was  no
contact,  just  as  other  patients  who  can  talk,  only  gradually
express  coldness  and  miserable  sensations  from  the  presence  of
strangers  behind  them  who  do  not  touch  them ;  and  because
she  was  likely  to  give,  as  all  others  do,  signs  of  her  annoy¬
ance  at  the  mesmerised  change  of  place  the  very  moment  it
was  felt.

After  taking  a  new  position,  I  have  changed  it  for  another
before  she  had  time  to  begin  moving  towards  it,  and  some¬
times  before,  sometimes  after,  her  frown  and  other  signs  of
annoyance  had  shewn  themselves.  Yet  she  moved  towards
the  first  new  position,  and  not  to  my  actual  position.  This
is  a  strong  proof  of  the  facility  of  erroneous  conclusions
when  experiments  are  hurried  and  time  is  not  given  for  the
results.  And  this  is  the  common  fault  of  those  who  are
ignorant  of  the  subject  and  interfere  in  experiments  with
their  opinions  already  formed  against  it.

She  always  reminded  me  of  the  automaton  chess-player
exhibited  formerly  in  London.  You  made  a  move  upon  the
board.  An  interval  of  silence  occurred.  The  springing
noises  of  the  machinery  began  to  be  heard;  and  then  the
figure  began  also  to  move,  and  the  noise  and  motion  con-


56


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of


tinued  till  the  move  in  view  was  accomplished,  and  now  all
was  silent  and  fixed  again.

If  a  stranger  took  my  place,  the  frown,  &c.,  began,  and
then  she  moved  away  from  him.  And,  if  I  moved  to  her  other
side  and  he  took  my  first  place,  she  would  return  from  him
and  incline  away  to  my  new  situation,  sooner  than  if  merely
he  had  taken  my  place,  or  if  merely  I  had  gone  to  my  new
situation, — his  repulsion  and  my  attraction  thus  co-operating.
If  I  seated  myself  before  her,  she  would,  after  the  prelimi¬
nary  frown,  &c.,  gradually  incline  forward,  and  bend  towards
me.  If  I  stood  up,  she  would  slowly  rise ;  and  this  was  a
most  extraordinary  sight.  Were  she  in  a  reclining  chair,
with  the  back  depressed  as  far  as  possible,  so  that  she  was
rather  lying  than  sitting,  she  slowly  rose  into  the  upright
sitting  posture  without  any  assistance  from  her  arms.  These
were,  it  must  be  remembered,  quite  rigid  and  extended  in
her  lap  :  her  feet  might  not  be  touching  the  ground,  because
I  often  depressed  the  back  of  the  chair  after  she  had  become
rigid,  so  that  on  her  falling  back  with  it  her  heels  rose  from
the  ground.  Yet  thus  placed,  and  rigid  in  one  piece,  she
would  on  my  standing  before  her  slowly  rise  into  the  sitting
posture,  her  arms  not  touching  the  arms  of  the  chair;  perhaps
not  touching  even  her  lap,  but  extended  an  inch  or  two  above
it.  This  must  have  required  enormous  strength,  from  her
having  no  means  of  bending  her  head  forwards,  and  being  all
in  one  piece.  After  attaining  the  sitting  posture,  however,
her  task  was  only  half  accomplished  :  she  felt  still  an  impulse
to  have  her  head  and  trunk  as  nearly  as  possible  on  a  level
with  mine  from  attraction  or  rather,  probably,  imitation  of
me.  She  was  never  satisfied  till  she  stood  as  I  stood.  But  her
roundabout  method  of  getting  into  the  standing  posture  was
most  extraordinary.  She  would  stoop  forwards,  her  arms  still
always  rigid  and  extended,  and  touching  no  part  of  her  and
nothing;  and  she  would  lower  her  head  forwards  till  it  nearly
touched  the  ground,  though  it  never  did  touch.  In  doing
this  she  detached  herself  from  the  chair  or  sofa,  so  that  it
might  be  removed  and  yet  she  never  missed  it.  Having  thus
cleared  herself,  she  gradually  began  to  rise  again,  till  she
stood  erect.  Her  head  all  this  time  continued  to  incline  to
one  side,  as  when  she  originally  went  olf,  though  perhaps  not
now  to  the  same  side,  because,  if  I  had  sat  on  the  opposite
side,  it  would  have  turned  to  this  and  so  remained ;  for  it  had
always  a  strong  propensity  to  incline  to  one  side.  If  I  stood
at  a  great  distance  from  her,  she  inclined  forwards  as  far  as
possible  while  she  stood,  for  she  had  no  other  means  of  ap¬
proaching  me,  and  extended  her  arms  towards  me,  and  so  re-


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


57


mained  as  long  as  I  stood  there.  She  could  never  walk  or
move  her  feet  the  breadth  of  a  hair,  after  the  first  few  minutes
when  the  rigidity  became  established.  As  they  were  when
she  first  went  off,  so  they  remained, — on  the  very  same  spot
of  the  carpet.

If,  while  she  was  standing,  I  moved  to  one  side,  she  after
some  seconds  would  frown,  &c.,  and  then  begin  to  turn  in
the  direction  in  which  I  now  was.  If  I  went  behind  her,  she
turned  still  more, — turned  as  far  round  as  she  could  without
moving  her  feet :  and  it  was  a  strange  sight  to  any  one  to
observe  them  retaining  the  exact  situation  they  had  from  the
beginning ;  her  toes  pointing  forwards,  while  her  trunk  was
.turned  to  one  side  or  as  far  as  possible  backwards.  And
yet,  however  long  I  stood  behind  her  or  at  her  side,  she
would  maintain  this  position.  If  in  this  situation  I  stooped,
or  sat  on  the  ground,  she  would  soon  frown,  make  the  strain¬
ing  noise,  &c.,  and  begin  to  descend  to  my  level ;  taking  my
sitting  posture  within  an  inch  of  the  floor,  but  never  touch¬
ing  it ;  her  trunk  still  bent  also  to  one  side  upon  her  motion¬
less  legs  and  feet, — to  the  side  where  I  was.  If  I  rose,  she
would,  after  the  preliminary  frown,  &c.,  slowly  rise  to  my
level.  If  I  did  not  rise,  but  merely  shifted  to  the  other
side,  she  would  turn  to  that  side.  This,  however,  like  rising
from  her  seat,  was  a  tedious  business.  She  would  first  rise,
and  then  descend  again,  bending  her  head  down  till  her  fore¬
head  nearly  touched  the  ground,  and  so  slowly  that  all
strangers  thought  her  in  danger  of  apoplexy ;  and  turn  at
the  same  time  to  the  other  side,  and  then  rise  to  my  level.
She  would  sometimes  fail,  and  be  obliged  to  rise  twice  or
thrice  before  she  could  descend  and  at  the  same  time  turn  to
the  other  side.  Till  her  object  was  accomplished,  whatever
position  or  direction  it  might  be,  she  frowned  and  twisted  her
head  and  shoulders  till  she  had  accomplished  it ;  and,  as
soon  as  it  was  accomplished,  her  brow  was  completely  smooth
again.  After  passing  from  before  her  to  one  side  and  be¬
hind  her,  and  thus  giving  her  an  impulse  in  that  direction,
I  have  sometimes  moved  behind  her  very  slowly  far  towards
the  opposite  side.  She  has  continued  to  turn  as  far  as  was
possible  with  her  legs  and  feet  fixed ;  but,  finding  no  pos¬
sibility  of  getting  nearer  to  me  that  way,  and  knowing  she
could  by  the  other  side,  she  has  actually  turned  back  again
from  the  side  where  I  was  behind  her,  forwards  and  round
on  the  other  side.  When  I  placed  myself  exactly  behind  her,
so  that  it  was  impossible  for  her  to  turn  till  she  was  opposite
to  me,  she  would  turn  as  far  as  she  could,  and  then  bend  her
head  and  body  back  to  me,  and  so  remain  as  long  as  I  stood


58


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


there.  At  whatever  level  I  placed  myself  at  her  side,  stand¬
ing,  sitting  on  a  chair,  or  sitting  on  the  floor,  she  inclined
to  that  side  with  her  head  as  nearly  as  possible  at  my  level.
When  further  approach  to  me  was  impossible,  she  desisted
from  her  attempts  and  continued  motionless  and  no  longer
frowning.

The  feeling  of  attraction  began  before  she  went  to  sleep,
for  she  lately  told  her  sister  that,  though  she  never  liked  to
mention  it  before,  she  always  felt  distressed  while  I  was  mes¬
merising  her,  if  she  heard  me  talk  to  others  before  she  was
asleep.

I  could,  however,  bring  her  still  nearer  to  the  ground
than  my  own  head,  by  making  tractive  passes  from  her  head
to  the  floor ;  and  bring  her  head  and  retain  it  nearly  in  con¬
tact  with  the  carpet,  by  laying  my  palm  upon  the  floor  under
her  face,  and  raising  and  depressing  my  fingers.  This  was  ac¬
complished  by  another  tendency  in  her — the  tendency  proba¬
bly  to  obey  such  signs.  By  making  these  tractive  movements
while  standing  in  any  situation,  before  her,  to  one  side,
or  behind  her,  or  at  any  elevation,  while  thus  attracting  her —
thus  acting  upon  her  desire  to  be  near  me,  I  always  greatly
increased  the  rate  of  her  movement  towards  me  and  my
elevation.  By  these  tractive  movements  I  could,  while  stand¬
ing  still,  draw  her  head,  trunk,  or  either  arm  or  her  fingers
in  any  direction ;  and  any  other  person  could  do  the  same.
Such  movements  she  inevitably  followed,  whoever  made  them ;
yet  the  mere  approach  of  the  whole  person,  the  head,  the
hand,  of  another  than  myself,  repelled  her  head,  trunk,  arm,
or  hand,  to  whichever  it  approached.  This  is  precisely  what
occurs  in  other  patients.  In  the  next  number  I  shall  describe
a  beautiful  case  of  the  cure  of  intense  and  hereditary  fits,  in
which  there  was  this  attraction  to  the  mesmeriser  and  disgust
of  others,  but  in  which  any  other  person  could  draw  a  part
or  the  whole  of  the  patient ;  even  better  than  I  could,  if  I
tried  to  draw  on  the  left  side  and  the  stranger  to  draw
on  the  right,  which  was  the  more  susceptible  side.  This
patient  was  obliged  to  move  in  the  direction  of  the  tractive
passes,  yet  frowned  all  the  time  with  anger  at  the  stranger's
doings.  Like  the  attraction  to  me  and  the  repulsion  of
strangers,  the  tractive  passes  never  produced  an  immediate
effect,  perhaps  none  till  I  had  ceased  to  make  any,  and  their
first  effect  was  always  a  frown,  in  the  subject  of  this  narrative.
The  frown  showed  the  motions  from  traction  to  be  volitions,
though  compulsory.  The  result  was  probably  through  the
necessity  of  obedience.

Once,  when  her  eyes  and  mouth  had  closed  but  she  was


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


59


not  yet  asleep,  I  began  the  tractive  passes  before  her  head ;
the  sleep  presently  came  on,  and  in  due  time  I  awoke  her.
She  then  remarked  that,  after  her  eyes  had  closed  and  before
she  lost  herself,  she  had  felt  a  violent  desire  to  move  for¬
wards,  but  had  resisted  it, — having,  however,  no  idea  that  I
was  trying  to  draw  her.  Another  patient,  of  equal  truth  and
of  high  rank,  when  asked  in  her  sleep-waking  state,  with  her
eyes  closed,  why  she  moves  this  way  or  that,  replies  that  she
must,  because  I  am  drawing  her.  Another,  in  the  same
state,  but  who  invariably  mistakes  the  person  and  time,
always  denies  while  being  drawn  that  she  is  moving  at  all.
I  suspect  that  the  effect  results  from  an  impulse  to  obey  what
is  conceived  an  order ;  though  the  patient  may  be  little  or  not
at  all  conscious  of  this.  It  is  not  an  impulse  to  imitate,  be¬
cause  a  movement  of  a  hand  or  finger,  and  the  elevation  or
inclination  of  the  body  are  not  the  same  actions.  It  is  not
attraction,  because  you  may  draw  the  patient  by  the  hand  in
a  direction  opposite  to  yourself,  and  the  excitement  of  the
organ  of  Attachment  by  the  finger,  while  it  promotes  attrac¬
tion,  does  not  in  the  least  increase  the  facility  of  traction.
It  all  looks  like  a  beckoning  and  following.  Two  patients,
who  rise  and  follow  in  this  manner,  declare  they  do  so  be¬
cause  I  call  them,  though  I  have  not  spoken ;  and  they  in¬
sist  that  I  did  not  beckon  to  them,  and  indeed  their  eyes
are  firmly  closed  and  they  stumble  against  everything.  They
feel  ordered,  though  they  mistake  the  mode ;  and  they  equally
obey  the  sceptic  who  draws  and  does  not  will  any  effect.

After  a  while  her  eyelids  would  slightly  separate,  and  the
cornea  become  visible.  But  the  influence  of  her  mesmeriser’s
presence,  the  repulsion  of  a  stranger,  and  the  power  of  trac¬
tive  passes,  were  all  frequently  independent  of  sight,  as  well
as  of  hearing  and  touch.  If  her  eyes  were  well  bandaged,  the
effect  was  the  same.  If  others  and  myself  changed  our  posi¬
tions  under  these  circumstances,  without  any  noise,  she  still
was  attracted  in  my  direction  and  repulsed  in  the  direction
of  the  stranger.  If  the  stranger  and  I  stood  behind  her,  and
either  made  the  tractive  passes  out  of  what  would  have  been
her  sphere  of  vision,  had  her  eyes  been  wide  open,  the  effect
was  the  same.  If  he  held  his  hand  still,  and  I  mine,  near
her,  where  she  could  not  see  them,  his  repelled  her  and  mine
attracted  her.  Such  facts  have  been  noticed  in  so  many
cases  that  they  are  established.  Her  movements  and  posi¬
tions,  and  fixedness  in  the  standing  posture,  her  legs  and
feet  never  moving  a  hair’s  breadth  for  hours,  aye  for  three
hours,  till  I  was  exhausted  and  could  go  on  experimenting
upon  her  no  longer,  she  proceeding  with  the  phenomena  and


60


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


as  likely  to  go  on  for  three  times  three  hours  longer  as  well
as  at  first,  were  proof  sufficient  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism
and  the  truth  of  her  case.

Another  circumstance  struck  every  body,  that,  as  soon  as
she  had  placed  herself  in  a  new  position  to  which  I  impelled
her,  and  her  frown — her  sign  of  displeasure  (for  it  was  not  at
all  an  expression  of  effort) — had  ceased,  and  she  was  remaining
an  indefinite  time  in  apparently  the  most  painful  attitudes,
her  countenance  exhibited  not  the  least  sign  of  exertion,  but
the  most  beautiful  repose  and  placidity.  The  powerful  mus¬
cular  contractions  necessarily  had  the  mechanical  effect  of
quickening  the  pulse,  and  to  a  great  amount, — in  summer  to
a  hundred  and  sixty  or  seventy,  and  the  heat  of  the  room
would  then  cause  her  face  to  be  bedewed  with  perspiration.
And,  as  if  this  wonder  were  not  enough,  there  was  another ;
— for,  after  all  this  rigidity  and  marvellous  muscular  exertion,
on  being  awakened,  she  never  looked  or  felt  exhausted,  but,
on  the  contrary,  far  stronger  than  previously,  and  ready  to
skip  and  run  from  very  strength  and  exuberance  of  spirits.

I  will  defy  any  man,  however  strong,  who,  after  seeing
her,  is  blockhead  or  knave  enough  to  express  a  doubt  upon
the  case,  to  come  and  do  likewise.  He  shall  see  her,  and  I
will  patiently  wait  with  any  witnesses,  and  see  him  attempt
the  same.  While  amusing  myself  with  witnessing  his  fruit¬
less  attempts,  I  shall  be  able  to  laugh  and  say,  “  Multum
sudat,  ausus  idem.”  He  may  like  to  know  that  many  of  the
most  able  men  of  the  age  have  seen  the  case,  and  all  been
satisfied  and  astonished.  Lord  Brougham  sat  patiently  for
some  hours  in  my  drawing  room  beholding  her,  and  never
had  a  doubt  of  the  reality  and  perfect  truth  of  what  he  saw ;
talked  afterwards  at  great  length  with  her  medical  attendant,
Mr.  Johnston,  told  his  friends  what  he  saw,  and  became
convinced  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism.

Others  could  mesmerise  her :  but  all  others  were  much
longer  in  sending  her  to  sleep,  and  much  longer  in  awaken¬
ing  her  to  her  ordinary  state.  Though  she  was  attracted  to
her  mesmeriser,  whoever  he  might  be,  the  attraction  to  me,
who  had  mesmerised  her  so  often,  remained  when  I  did  not
mesmerise.  That  excellent  man,  Mr.  Moffat,  the  missionary,
one  night  mesmerised  her  at  her  own  house,  and  I  called
when  she  was  asleep  and  sitting  inclined  towards  him.  I
placed  myself  upon  her  other  side,  and  she  ceased  to  incline
towards  him,  but  sat  upright,  exactly  half  way  between  us.

It  may  appear  singular,  that,  being  so  rigid, — being  one
piece,  so  that  you  might  push  her  altogether  by  the  hand  or
any  other  part  and,  on  your  withdrawing  your  force,  the  arms,


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


61


head,  and  whole  body  returned  to  its  former  position,  she
still  could  move.  Yet  such  is  the  fact.  Her  movements  were
exceedingly  slow :  but  the  rigidity  yielded,  though  in  this
remarkably  slow  manner,  to  her  will,  when  she  was  impelled
to  any  movement.  I  have  witnessed  the  same  in  other  in¬
stances  of  rigidity.  I  have  a  patient  whose  arms  in  her  sleep¬
waking  rigidly  maintain  the  position  in  which  they  are  first
placed,  and,  though  they  can  easily  be  relaxed  by  mesmeric
means,  they  remain  fixed  in  spite  of  her  desire  to  put  them
down,  if  by  chance  I  have  elevated  them.  Yet,  though  she
cannot  will  them  down,  by  mere  wishing  to  have  them  down :
a  violent  impulse  given  to  her  to  move  them  for  any  particular
purpose  enables  her  to  move  them.  If  she  is  made  cross  by
plaguing  her,  or  by  touching  over  Destructiveness  or  Com¬
bativeness,  she  moves  them  to  strike  at  me ;  or,  if  I  touch
over  Veneration,  and  she  is  calm  and  pious  and  desires  to
pray,  she  puts  them  together  in  the  position  of  prayer,  though
this  is  very  slowly  accomplished,  whereas  rage  enables  her  to
accomplish  it  at  once.

To  see  her  stand  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  breathing
heavily,  her  eyes  closed  or  nearly  so,  her  jaws  and  lips
closed,  her  head  bent  down  on  one  side,  her  arms  rigidly  ex¬
tended  and  unsupported,  her  fingers  and  thumbs  drawn  firmly
together,  like  a  living  statue,  and  under  the  spell  of  the  mes-
meriser,  turning  always  to  him  and  obeying  his  movements,
so  as  to  be  brought  into  the  most  difficult  and  apparently
painful  attitudes,  and  retaining  them  or  changing  them  at
his  pleasure,  gave  the  idea  of  enchantment.  In  truth  it  was
enchantment — perfect  enchantment — a  form  of  the  enchant¬
ment  of  ancient  times,  strangely  forgotten,  lost,  and  denied
as  deception  and  imposition  by  the  moderns  in  their  fancied
wisdom.

And  then  to  see  the  rigidity  of  any  part  entirely  removed,
changed  to  perfect  flaccidity,  the  firmly  locked  jaw  open  in
almost  an  instant,  not  by  mechanical  force,  but  by  purely
mesmeric  means,  added  to  the  wonder.

But,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  wonder  was  crowned
by  seeing  the  whole  state  removed  by  the  mesmeriser,  and
her  waking  and  natural  condition  completely  restored,  and  by
finding  to  an  undoubted  certainty  that  she  not  only  felt  no
fatigue  from  all  these  strong  muscular  actions,  however  long
continued,  possibly  for  three  hours,  if  the  observer  had  the
patience  to  watch  her  so  long,  but  actually  was  greatly  re¬
freshed  and  greatly  strengthened  by  what  had  passed.

Whoever  put  the  natural  question  to  her  on  her  restoration,
whether  she  was  fatigued,  invariably  received  for  answer,


62


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


“  No, — not  at  all :  on  the  contrary,  quite  refreshed.”  And
her  appearance  proved  the  truth  of  her  answer.  For,  so  far
from  fatigue  appearing  in  her  countenance,  her  eye  now
sparkled,  and  her  complexion  and  expression  were  those  of
health,  strength,  and  happiness.  She  was  animated,  and  would
stand  as  long  as  parties  crowded  round  her  to  make  enquiries,
and  went  down  stairs  and  home  again  with  more  alacrity  than
her  sisters  who  accompanied  her.  Before  strangers  she  often
came  into  the  room  pale,  and  always  timidly  and  nervously ;
and,  while  I  wras  pointing  my  fingers  to  her  eyes,  sat  with  an
expression  of  languor  and  apprehension  :  and  this  sudden
change,  after  all  the  muscular  exertion  had  been  made,  to  that
of  energy,  high  spirits,  and  strength,  as  soon  as  she  was  re¬
stored,  was  itself  a  proof  of  reality  to  every  rational  person,
and  certainly  completed  the  winder  of  the  case.

No  one  ever  overcame  the  rigidity  of  any  part  of  her  by
the  utmost  force  he  ventured  to  use.  I  recollect  that  once  a
•writer  of  Mr.  Wakley’s,  who  however  declines  to  own  the  con¬
nection,  whispered  to  a  medical  man  at  his  side,  that  he  would
prove  her  to  be  a  humbug  and  would  bend  her  arm  for  her,
and  tried  and  tried  in  vain  to  make  good  his  word, — and
scores  have  also  tried  in  vain.  Of  course  there  is  a  force
which  will  overcome  any  muscular  contraction ;  for  the  limbs
are  but  bone,  and  flesh,  and  gristle,  and  may  be  broken  and
torn ;  but  a  force  short  of  danger  never  yet  produced  the
least  effect  upon  her.  And  yet  a  child  could  at  once  relax
her  ironly-rigid  jaw,  or  limbs,  by  breathing  upon  the  part, —
by  making  transverse  passes  over  or  before  it  without  con¬
tact, — by  touching  it,  though  without  the  least  pressure, —
and  by  putting  anything  whatever  in  contact  with  it.  If  the
breathing,  the  application  of  the  hand,  &c.,  were  made
directly  upon  a  bare  part,  the  relaxation  ensued  much  more
quickly  than  if  applied  with  the  intervention  of  clothes  or
any  other  substance.  I  have  often  quietly  allowed  sceptics
to  amuse  me,  who,  fancying  themselves  too  wise  to  be  imposed
upon  like  me  by  such  manifest  deception,  have  gone  up  to  the
patient,  and,  grasping  her  arm  and  hand  with  both  their  bare
hands  and  forcing  it,  found  the  rigidity  give  way,  and  have
looked  round  triumphantly  and  knowingly  at  the  by-standers
and  myself.  And  then  I  have  shewn  that  by  putting  on
gloves,  and  not  touching  the  bare  hand  but  the  covered  arm,
they  might  force  as  violently  as  before,  and  still  longer,  with
no  effect ;  whereas  if  they  bared  the  patient’s  arm,  took  off
their  own  gloves,  and  merely  applied  their  hands  without  the
least  pressure,  aye  to  the  hand  or  fingers  only,  the  relaxation
would  as  fully  ensue  and  much  more  quickly.  This  shews


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.  63

the  absurdity  of  persons  unacquainted  with  a  subject  pre¬
suming  to  make  experiments  and  settle  points  in  it.  Not
knowing  that  their  hand,  like  their  breath,  had  a  power  of
relaxing,  not  of  a  mechanical  nature,  but  occult,  they  fancied
they  were  acting  quite  mechanically, — just  as  in  cutting  off
an  arm, — their  thoughts  could  range  no  higher, — they  could
imagine  no  other  power  than  mechanical  surgical  force,  and
were  in  perfect  ignorance  (even  medical  men  act  as  if  they
were,)  that  their  hands  were  more  than  wooden  hands  and  in¬
stinct  with  subtle  powers.  Yes,  the  contact  of  a  child’s
hand,  the  breath  of  a  child,  would  relax  the  part,  when  the
muscular  force  of  a  strong  man  could  not,  if  gloves  and  other
substances  impeded  other  influence  than  the  mechanical ;  nay,
the  continued  vicinity  only  of  the  hand  of  myself  or  another
person  relaxed  any  part.

Such  was  the  tendency  to  rigidity,  that  no  sooner  was
a  part  relaxed,  and  the  cause  of  its  relaxation  withdrawn,
than  it  at  once  grew  rigid  again, — as  rigid  as  ever.  By  relaxing
her  arms,  and  then  placing  them  in  any  direction  we  chose,
they  would  immediately  stiffen  in  this  position,  shooting  forth
suddenly  and  strongly.  Any  person  infatuated  enough  not  to
see  the  impossibility  of  shamming  all  this  must  have  been  a
little  astonished  at  finding  not  only  that  no  relaxation  for  a
moment’s  ease  occurred,  but  that,  if  it  were  produced  artifi¬
cially,  so  far  from  its  being  continued  for  ease,  it  in  a  very  few
moments  ceased.  The  parts  set  again,  like  anything  melted
by  heat  and  immediately  again  exposed  to  intense  cold.  No¬
thing  but  uninterrupted  breathing  or  contact,  or  transverse
passes,  preserved  the  relaxation.

If  the  term  congelation  given  by  the  Latins,  is  appropriate
to  catalepsy,  it  is  far  more  appropriate  to  rigidity ;  and  the
phenomena  of  this  patient  at  once  brought  the  act  of  freezing
to  one’s  mind.

To  awaken  her  was  a  great  difficulty,  even  at  the  end  of
three  hours.  When  by  mesmeric  means  she  seemed  waking
and  relaxation  declining,  her  arms  and  trunk  would  become
rigid  again  and  again.  The  rigid  closure  of  her  eyelids  from
the  earliest  periods  of  my  mesmerising  her  would  continue  long
after  she  was  otherwise  awake;  and  would  require  long
breathing  or  contact  of  the  ends  of  the  fingers  for  its  com¬
plete  removal  within  a  moderate  time.

Muscular  rigidity  is  a  common  phenomenon  of  mesmerism.
In  some  cases  it  never  takes  place ;  the  limbs  and  body  always
remaining  limp  and  powerless,  or  the  patient  having  full
voluntary  power  over  his  muscles,  which  are  in  their  natural
state.  In  some  it  occurs  only  by  art :  as  by  longitudinal


64


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of


passes  along  the  limbs,  perhaps  without  contact,  but  occa¬
sionally  contact  in  the  passes  is  required,  and  occasionally
strong  contact,  in  fact  hard  longitudinal  rubbing  along  the
part ;  or  by  darting  the  fingers  towards  the  part.  In  some  it
may,  when  once  induced  in  the  mesmeric  state,  be  as  fully  in¬
duced  in  the  natural  state  by  local  mesmeric  means,  such  as
longitudinal  passes  or  darting  the  hand  towards  the  part :
just  as  many  other  partial,  local,  mesmeric  effects,  even  on  the
cerebral  organs,  may  be  induced  in  the  natural  state  in  those
in  whom  they  have  been  effected  in  the  mesmeric.  In  some  it
occurs  merely  by  inducing  the  mesmeric  coma.  Thus,  when
the  Okevs  were  in  their  mesmeric  delirium, — that  wild  state
into  which  they  came  on  starting  into  activity  from  the  coma
induced  by  mesmerising  them, — the  pass  which  stupified  them
again,  if  not  too  rapidly  made  or  repeated,  also  rendered
them  perfectly  rigid.  It  was  indeed  a  sight  to  behold  them
suddenly  sent  to  sleep  and  made  motionless  and  stiff  by  a
pass  in  the  midst  of  their  prattle,  their  fun,  their  dancing,
or  whatever  they  were  doing ;  and  so  remain  for  a  minute  or
more,  till,  the  force  being  spent,  they  as  suddenly  opened
their  eyes  again,  ceased  to  be  rigid,  fetched  a  deep  breath,
looked  round  astonished,  and  were  precisely  as  if  nothing  had
happened.  The  passes  might  be  made  behind  them,  at  the
distance  of  many  yards,  or  through  glass,  with  the  same
results,  though  not  so  rapid.  Whatever  position  they  were
in  at  the  very  moment  the  effect  was  produced,  this  was  the
position  retained.  How  any  one  could  doubt  the  reality  of
this  enchantment,  I  cannot  understand.  To  doubt  it,  I  must
give  up  the  reliance  upon  my  external  senses  and  upon  my
common  sense  ;  in  short,  I  must  cease  to  believe  anything,
even  my  own  existence.  Yet  such  is  the  epidemic  loss  of
reason  on  the  matter  among  medical  men,  that  they  have
chosen  to  have  eyes  and  see  not,  ears  and  hear  not ;  and  to
be  fully  as  absurd  and  unreasonable  as  the  insane  who,  be¬
lieving  themselves  kings  and  in  palaces  and  rich  robes,  will
not  see  that  their  house  is  the  unadorned  madhouse,  their
attendants  keepers,  and  their  dress  coarse  cloth.  These
beautiful  experiments  were  shewn  on  two  different  days  in
endless  repetition  to  Mr.  Wakley;  who,  after  stipulating,  for
what  good  purpose  I  do  not  know,  that  Mr.  Wood,  my  clini¬
cal  clerk,  should  be  absent,  and  that  only  two  or  three  per¬
sons  should  be  present  of  his  own  selection,  collected  to  my
astonishment  a  room  full  of  persons,  male  and  female,  not
only  the  subservient  creatures  who  got  up  the  Lancet  and  were
dependent  upon  him  for  their  bread,  but  numerous  others  not
medical ;  and,  though  he  had  nothing  to  say  against  these


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.  G5

experiments, — could  and  did  offer  not  a  single  objection,  lie
seemed,  like  any  uneducated  Somersetshire  peasant,  to  regard
it  as  merely  capital  fun,  not  a  philosophic  matter  of  deep  in¬
terest,  to  hear  the  sisters  talk  wildly  though  with  great  face¬
tiousness  and  waggery  and  mimicry,  and  was  totally  unable,
or  probably  pretended  to  be  unable,  to  appreciate  the  wonder
of  the  sudden  change  to  the  stillness  and  rigidity  of  a  statue,
by  a  pass  made  behind  them,  perhaps  while  they  were  danc¬
ing  or  laying  hold  of  somebody  or  looking  out  of  the  window,
and  of  their  legs  and  arms  remaining  fixed  in  the  attitude  in
which  at  the  very  moment  they  happened  to  be.

These  results  convinced  numbers  of  persons  who  them¬
selves  made  passes  behind  them  unobserved,  and  without
mentioning  their  intention  to  any  one,  while  the  children
were  engaged  in  walking  along,  looking  over  the  balusters  of
the  staircase  or  out  of  the  window,  or  chattering  to  me  or
others.  For  about  a  fortnight,  and  no  longer,  nor  ever  after¬
wards,  the  younger  was  so  susceptible,  that  an  intense  look
behind  her  at  the  distance  of  many  yards  would  arrest,  stu-
pify,  and  fix  her  rigid,  perhaps  as  she  was  running  up  stairs.
For  a  short  time,  I  could  make  the  elder  sister’s  hand  close
rigidly,  by  merely  looking  at  it  intently.  I  shewed  this  de¬
cisive  experiment  to  Mr.  Wakley, — a  large  thick  paste-board
was  placed  before  her  face,  so  that  it  was  absolutely  impossible
she  could  see  my  face ;  sitting  at  some  distance  before  her,  I
looked  intently  at  the  hand  he  chose,  and  that  which  I  stared
at  closed  firmly.  Afterwards  a  brown  paper  bag,  made  of
two  sheets  of  strong  brown  paper  pasted  together,  was  put
over  her  head  and  drawn  down  to  her  chest.  Here  there
was  no  result;  for  Mr.  Wakley,  in  his  ignorance,  had  amused
himself  by  putting  the  bag  upon  different  people,  thus  tho¬
roughly  mesmerising  it,  and  of  course  when  it  was  put  upon
her  head  it  threw  her,  as  it  invariably  had  done  under  such
circumstances,  into  a  deep  unimpressible  sleep.

Mesmerised  gold  or  silver  or  other  metals,  mesmerised
water,  or  other  substances  mesmerised  by  being  breathed
upon,  will  often  stiffen  parts,  and  violently  too,  to  which  they
are  applied.  The  most  commonly  efficient  is  mesmerised
gold ;  and,  when  placed  on  the  hand  of  this  patient  a  few
evenings  ago,  it  caused  a  most  violent  and  continued  flexure
of  the  arm,  and  the  rigidity  of  the  whole  body  was  such
that  I  could  relax  no  part  by  a  continuance  of  the  means
which  at  all  other  times  relaxed  any  parts  in  a  few  seconds,
and  the  sleep  grew  so  deep  that  I  could  not  wake  her  or
rouse  her  in  any  degree  for  a  long  while.  At  length  she
fetched  a  deep  sigh,  and  was  accessible  to  my  measures  of
VOL.  II.  f


66


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


relaxing  and  rousing.  This  was  precisely  a  repetition  of
the  phenomena  of  the  Okeys  from  gold.  But  with  the
elder  Okey,  and  her  only,  mesmerised  water  had  this  power.
Mr.  Wakley  himself  made,  by  my  instruction,  most  deci¬
sive  experiments  of  this  kind,  and  without  a  single  failure :
and  these  very  experiments  were  once  made  by  the  present
Attorney- General,  Sir  F.  Pollock,  at  my  house,  and  by  very
many  others,  and  almost  always  with  success  so  perfect  as
to  convince  the  most  sceptical.  Two  glasses  of  water  were
placed  behind  a  screen,  behind  her.  One  was  mesmerised ;
the  other  not.  A  brush  was  put  into  each ;  whichever  fin¬
ger  was  touched  with  the  mesmerised  water,  stiffened ;  and
whichever  finger  was  touched  with  the  plain  water,  re¬
mained  as  it  was.  Of  course  care  was  required  not  to  let  the
mesmerised  water  touch  the  fingers  which  were  to  be  sub¬
jected  to  the  plain  water.  Time  was  often  required  for  the
effect,  and  sometimes  a  good  deal  of  water.  But  these  expe¬
riments  were  made  carefully  and  repeatedly  by  Mr.  Wakley
himself;  and  I  boldly  appealed  to  him  for  their  truth  and
decisiveness,  and  he  ventured  to  make  no  objection,  nor  any
remark,  but  bit  his  nails  and  passed  on  to  something  else,  and
omitted  all  allusion  to  them  in  his  most  unfair,  most  imperfect,
most  misrepresenting  report,  in  which  a  complete  mess  is  ob¬
vious  to  every  one  acquainted  with  the  subject,  from  his  hav¬
ing,  in  his  inordinate  vanity,  presumed  to  make  experiments
behind  my  back,  undirected,  on  a  subject  of  which  he  was
as  ignorant  as  a  maid  of  all  work.  But  his  day  of  triumph
has  passed ;  and  he  is  glad  to  sell  his  Lancet  for  its  original
price,  and  obliged  to  see  mesmerism,  which  he  boasted  in  his
Lancet  to  have  extinguished  for  ever, — yes,  for  ever, — pervad¬
ing  the  whole  country  and  the  whole  of  Europe.  Wretched
man  !  You  have  taken  the  wrong  course  to  true  reputation
and  to  happiness.  You  have  been  merciless  and  felt  not  for
others, — for  the  poor  and  young  and  innocent :  nor  for  those
to  whom  you  were  bound  to  shew  gratitude,  and  whom  you
in  your  heart  did  and  do  respect.  Yet  the  character  of  the
Okeys  stands  far,  far  above  yours  :  and,  though  you  succeeded
in  turning  all  the  profession  clamorously  against  me,  from
the  royal  physicians  and  surgeons  to  the  humblest  druggist-
apothecary  in  a  by-street,  and  would  have  utterly  ruined  me
but  that  I  had  a  solid  rock  to  rest  upon,  I  am  happy  in  the
consciousness  of  having  done  all  in  truth  and  for  truth,  and
in  seeing  all  that  I  so  carefully  proved,  now  established  on
all  sides,  and  you  justly  attacked  and  ridiculed  on  all  sides
and  glad  to  sell  your  Lancet  for  sixpence  again.

Bigidity  is  sometimes  produced  by  drawing  with  tractive


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


67


passes ;  the  arm,  for  example,  when  drawn  up,  becoming
rigid  in  its  ascent.  This  patient,  I  have  mentioned,  could
be  drawn  in  any  direction,  and  frequently  so  can  her  arms.
Originally,  before  the  stiffness  was  established,  I  drew  her
limp  legs,  and  they  rose  and  fell  in  the  attempts,  having  very
little  power :  but  now  her  arms  and  legs  do  not  obey  tractive
passes  so  much,  though  her  whole  frame  does  readily,  even
when  made  by  strangers.  If  another  and  myself  made  trac¬
tive  passes,  one  on  each  side  of  her,  I  always  beat.  Sometimes
on  placing  a  patients  arm,  &c.,  in  any  position,  it  at  once
retains  it  and  grows  rigid  :  though  perhaps  it  requires  to  be
held  up  a  few  moments  before  the  rigidity  begins.  While
some  cases  are  characterized  by  such  a  tendency  to  rigidity
that  nothing  but  incessant  relaxing  means  preserves  flexibil¬
ity  ;  others  show  no  rigidity,  whatever  attempts  are  made  to
induce  it.  In  some  only  one  part  or  more  grows  rigid  or
can  be  made  rigid.  Some  mesmerisers  are  able  to  effect  ri¬
gidity,  they  say,  by  the  will.  A  sudden  noise,  such  as  clap¬
ping  the  hands,  would  stupify  the  elder  Obey,  and  render  her
a  rigid  mass,  doubled  up  in  the  attitude  of  terror,  in  a  mo¬
ment.  In  some  cases  rigidity  or  the  possibility  of  inducing
it  occurs  at  one  time  and  not  at  another,  either  at  large  or  in
some  particular  part  or  parts.  Its  production  in  the  mesmeric
state  always  tends  to  induce  or  deepen  the  coma :  and,  when
the  coma  arrives  at  its  deepest  point,  the  rigidity  generally
ceases  and  the  part  drops  relaxed ;  though  not  in  cases  where
the  tendency  to  rigidity  is  extreme,  as  it  wras  in  the  present.
The  production  of  rigidity  by  various  means  was  first  observed
by  me  to  induce  heaviness  and  sleep  in  the  Okeys :  and  al¬
most  every  one  of  their  phenomena  with  all  its  niceties  of
production  and  variation  have  received  ample  confirmation
by  my  subsequent  experience  in  endless  other  cases.

And  here  I  must  remark  upon  the  misconception  of  the
term  catalepsy.  Persons  ignorant  of  medicine  apply  the
word  to  simple  rigidity,  and  I  have  heard  not  a  few  medical
men  do  the  same.  But  its  medical  meaning  is  that  diseased
condition  in  which  each  part  is  perfectly  moveable,  but  re¬
tains  any  position  in  which  you  choose  to  place  it.*  This  phe-

*  Dr.  Copland,  in  his  Medical  Dictionary,  thus  defines  catalepsy  : — “A
sudden  deprivation  of  sense,  intelligence,  and  voluntary  motion,  the  patient
retaining  the  same  position,  during  the  paroxysm,  in  which  he  was  at  the
time  of  attack,  or  in  which  he  may  be  placed  during  its  continuance,  the
pulse  and  respiration  being  but  little  affected.”

He  proceeds  : — “  This  disease  is  very  rare  ;  so  much  so  that  its  existence
has  been  doubted  by  many  writers,  who  consider  it  to  have  been  feigned.
Its  occasional  occurrence,  however,  is  well  ascertained.  I  have  seen  one
case  of  it  in  my  own  practice,  and  been  consulted  by  letter  respecting  a

F  2


68


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


nomenon  is  one  of  the  results  of  mesmerism.  But  plain  rigidity
is  far  more  common ;  and  in  rigidity,  so  far  from  the  part

second.”  (The  doctor’s  prescription  would  be  interesting.)  “  I  recollect  also
an  undoubted  example  of  it  in  an  hospital,  the  practice  of  which  I  attended
when  a  student.”  I  have  heard  medical  men  deny  its  existence,  because
they  had  not  seen  it  and  fancied  it  improbable.  Let  the  public,  who  have
seen  an  abundance  of  mesmeric  catalepsy,  ponder  on  the  fact  that,  on
Dr.  Copland’s  confession,  the  disease  under  any  circumstances  has  been
denied  by  medical  men  ;  and  the  less  reliance  will  be  placed  upon  their
judgment  in  denying  that  by  mesmerism  it  may  be  produced  artificially.
Let  Dr.  Copland  reflect  upon  this,  who  so  violently,  violently ,  denies  mes¬
merism,  that  he  will  not  condescend  to  see  it,  nor  even  with  patience  to
hear  it  mentioned,  preferring,  as  he  has  always  done,  books  to  observation.
I  never  saw  a  case  till  1  had  been  thirty  years  in  the  profession  ;  but  I  did
not,  on  that  account,  presume  to  deny  its  occurrence,  any  more  than  I  ever
did  the  mesmeric  phenomena.  Dr.  Copland  admits  the  occurrence  of  cata¬
lepsy  and  he  admits  and  describes  anaethesiaor  loss  of  the  sense  of  touch — of
common  feeling,  and  they  of  course  are  produced  by  certain  causes.  We
mesmerists  only  assert  that  among  those  causes  are  certain  artificial  means,
termed  mesmeric.  What  reason  have  Dr.  Copland  and  the  rest  of  the  pro¬
fession  to  deny  this  ?  It  is  a  question  of  simple  experiment.  The  catalepsy
and  loss  of  feeling  which  occur  from  internal  or  common  causes  they  now
allow'  to  be  real  :  but,  whenever  such  diseased  states  are  produced  by  mes¬
meric  means,  these  are  unreal,  and  the  virtuous,  honest  patient  is  a  vile  im¬
postor.  I  really  blush  at  the  gross  absurdity  of  the  profession  to  which  I
belong  :  the  want  of  common  sense  and  judgment,  and  the  want  of  common
feeling  and  even  decency,  which  they  publicly  exhibit  upon  the  subject.

In  the  5th  vol.  of  the  Transactions  of  the  London  College  of  Physicians  7
a  case  of  catalepsy  is  detailed  by  Dr.  Gooch  well  worth  reading,  like
the  whole  of  the  paper  :  and  the  general  reader  will  not  object  to  the  follow-
ing  quotation

“Dr.  Sutherland,  with  whom  I  attended  this  case,  related  to  me  several
others,  similar,  but  far  more  extraordinary,  for  the  time  which  they  lasted.
One  was  a  young  lady  who  continued  in  this  state  for  several  months,  and
was  preserved  only  by  great  vigilance  and  management  in  feeding  her.  The
other  was  a  male  hospital  patient ;  being  suspected  of  imposture  he  was  one
day  placed  upright  at  the  edge  of  the  cold  bath,  and  at  length  gently  pushed
in  ;  he  fell  to  the  bottom  like  a  stone,  and  continued  there  without  the
slightest  effort  to  save  himself,  till  it  seemed  no  longer  safe  to  continue  the
experiment;  after  remaining  in  a  cataleptic  state  for  several  months,  he
recovered.

“  In  the  descriptions  of  catalepsy  to  be  found  in  medical  writers  of
eminence,  we  are  told  that  the  ‘  patient  remains  in  the  same  posture  which
he  was  in  when  he  was  first  seized,’  but  that  if  a  by-stander  puts  him  into  a
new  attitude,  *  the  joints  yield  with  a  waxen  flexibility  and  remain  in  the
posture  into  which  they  are  put.’  (Van  Swieten,  vol.  v.  §  1037.)  Those,
therefore,  who  have  witnessed  and  believed  in  the  reality  of  this  strange
affection,  have  concluded,  that  the  power  which  keeps  the  voluntary  mus¬
cles  contracted  remains,  but  that  the  power  of  changing  and  directing  these
contractions  is  taken  away.

“  There  is  something  so  marvellous  in  these  appearances,  and  such  sin¬
gular  instances  of  fraud  are  sometimes  detected  in  our  intercourse  with  the
sick,  that  some  have  believed  catalepsy  to  be  a  fabulous  disease.  When  Mr.
Abernethy  delivered  his  Hunterian  oration  at  the  College  of  Surgeons,  (a
singular  instance  of  the  power  of  genius  over  a  threadbare  subject,)  he
related  the  following  anecdote  of  Mr.  Hunter.  ‘  A  patient  in  the  hospital
feigned  to  be  afflicted  with  catalepsy,  in  which  disorder,  it  is  said,  a  person
loses  all  consciousness  and  volition,  yet  remains  in  the  very  attitude  in  which
they  were  suddenly  seized  with  this  temporary  suspension  of  the  intellectual


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism .


69


retaining  any  position  in  which  you  place  it  at  a  moment
when  the  rigidity  will  allow  of  its  being  slightly  forced  from
its  position,  it,  as  soon  as  you  cease  to  force,  returns  to  the

functions.  Mr.  Hunter  began  to  comment  before  the  surrounding  students
on  the  strangeness  of  the  latter  circumstance,  and  as  the  man  stood  with  his
hand  a  little  extended  and  elevated,  he  said,  you  see,  gentlemen,  that  the
hand  is  supported,  merely  in  consequence  of  the  muscles  persevering  in
that  action  to  which  volition  had  excited  them  prior  to  the  cataleptic  seizure.
I  wonder,  continued  he,  what  additional  weight  they  would  support,  and
so  saying,  he  slipped  the  noose  of  a  cord  round  the  wrist,  and  hung  to  the
other  end  a  small  weight,  which  produced  no  alteration  in  the  position  of
the  hand.  Then,  after  a  short  time,  with  a  pair  of  scissors  he  imperceptibly
snipped  the  chord.  The  weight  fell  to  the  ground,  and  the  hand  was  as
suddenly  raised  in  the  air  by  the  increased  effort  which  volition  had  excited
for  the  support  of  the  additional  weight;  thus  was  it  manifested  that  the
man  was  possessed  with  consciousness  and  volition,  and  the  imposture  stood
revealed.’  (Abernethy’s  Hunterian  Oration,  p.  56.)

“  That  in  this  case  the  patient  was  convicted  of  imposture  I  do  not  doubt ;
the  only  question  is  about  the  principle  on  which  the  conviction  was  effected.
Mr.  Hunter  detects  some  remains  of  consciousness  and  volition,  and  thence
infers  the  perfect  possession  of  these  faculties  ;  but  because  we  find  that  they
are  not  completely  extinguished,  is  it  right  to  conclude  that  they  must  be  com¬
pletely  unimpaired  ?  Catalepsy  is  defined  to  be  a  loss  of  consciousness  and
volition,  but  medical  definitions  are  only  general  descriptions ,  and  seldom  admit
of  rigid  application.  It  may  be  said  that  voluntary  movements  are  impossible
without  consciousness,  and  that  where  these  movements  occur  there  cannot
be  a  loss  of  consciousness ;  but  the  loss  of  this  faculty  may  be  total,  or  may
be  partial ;  though  volition  is  impossible  in  the  former  it  is  not  so  in  the
latter,  and  who  has  ever  said,  for  who  could  tell  that  in  catalepsy,  conscious¬
ness  was  utterly  extinguished  ?  Sleep  is  said  to  be  a  suspension  of  sensation,
volition,  and  the  intellectual  faculties  ;  yet  if  the  sleeper  moves,  or  mani¬
fests  signs  of  outward  sensibility,  do  we  consequently  deny  the  sincerity  of
his  sleep?  when  we  are  tired  of  sleeping  on  one  side,  do  we  not  turn  to  the
other  without  waking  ?  Sleep-walking  is  a  still  more  remarkable  instance
of  the  kind  ;  nay  further,  not  only  are  voluntary  movements  compatible  with
a  considerable  loss  of  consciousness,  but  these  movements  are  capable  of
being  influenced  by  external  impressions.  If  a  person  is  tickled  during
sleep  he  will  often  put  his  hand  to  the  part  without  waking  ;  those  who  talk
in  their  sleep  often  answer  questions  ;  the  answer  it  is  true  may  be  absurd,
but  it  relates  to  the  question,  and  has  been  obviously  influenced  by  it.  Now
as  some  slight  remains  of  consciousness  and  voluntary  motion  does  not  lead
us  to  conclude  that  a  person  is  feigning  sleep,  so  from  these  appearances
alone  we  should  not  hastily  conclude  that  a  person  is  feigning  catalepsy.
Catalepsy  like  sleep  may  be  more  or  less  sound.”

I  will  add  that  catalepsy  and  rigidity  sometimes  are  blended  or  inter¬
changed  in  cataleptic  cases :  and  that  the  sagacious  remarks  of  Dr.  Gooch
about  a  degree  of  volition  sometimes  remaining  in  catalepsy  are  perfectly
true.  There  is  sometimes  a  desire  to  resist  external  force  in  the  sleep-wakiug
of  catalepsy  (for  it  really  is  a  state  of  sleep-waking  with  the  addition  of
catalepsy)  and  the  arm  cannot  readily  be  pushed  about  to  new  situations;
and  sometimes  the  resistance  engendered  prevents  the  change  of  situation
we  attempt,  rigidity  coming  on  and  a  voluntary  effort  being  evidently
made  and  even  anger  displayed.  I  have  no  doubt  that  sometimes  a  weight
might  be  appended  to  a  catalepsed  arm,  and  resistance  and  rigidity  engen¬
dered  sufficient  to  support  the  weight ;  and  that,  on  this  being  unexpectedly
withdrawn,  the  arm  would  suddenly  rise  from  the  superabundant  force  it
had  been  exerting  still  continuing.  But  this  would  no  more  shew  imposition
— the  unreality  of  the  sleep-waking — than  the  cunning  of  a  madman  proves
him  to  be  sane.


70


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


same  spot,  quite  or  nearly,  from  which  you  forced  it.  If
you  force  the  whole  rigid  body  from  its  position,  it  returns
to  it  in  the  same  manner  as  an  arm.

This  was  seen  in  the  present  case  and  also  beautifully  in
the  Okeys  as  they  were  standing  rigid  and  asleep.  Push
such  a  patient  all  but  over,  twist  him  almost  round,  he
returns  to  his  place  and  position  as  soon  as  you  cease
your  force,  just  as  the  arm,  after  being  forced  down,  rises
again.

The  rigidity  and  catalepsy  of  muscles  appear  totally  differ¬
ent  from  the  movements  induced  by  tractive  passes.  These
movements  appear  the  results  of  volition,  though  the  patient
is  compelled  to  will  them ;  just  as  when  tickled  we  cannot
help  writhing  and  turning,  if  possible,  away.  He  may  be
half  unconscious  of  his  situation,  just  as  when  tickled  in
sleep  a  person  evidently  by  his  will  grunts  and  turns  about,
though  half  unconscious.  It  seems  to  me  certain,  from
great  observation  in  the  mesmeric  coma,  as  well  as  in  ordi¬
nary  sleep  and  the  waking  state,  that  the  brain  can  and
does  act  often  involuntarily,  and  can  and  does  act  often  half
unconsciously ;  that  is,  that  we  may  not  be  able  to  resist
a  desire  to  order  or  to  will  a  motion,  and  that  willing  may
occur  with  such  wonderful  readiness,  such  instant  prompti¬
tude,  on  our  feeling  anything  to  excite  it,  that  we  are  quite
unconscious  of  willing  at  all, — of  any  effort, — of  doing  any¬
thing  at  all.*

Some  patients  will  deny  that  their  limbs  are  moving,  so
unconscious  is  this  effort ;  and  yet  the  character  of  the
movement,  especially  of  rising,  is  evidently  calculated  and
the  result  of  will.  But  the  wonderful  movements  of  trac¬
tion,  when  we  often  cannot  conceive  how  the  patient  be¬
comes  cognizant  of  the  tractive  movements,  are  different
from  rigidity  or  catalepsy.  Here  no  movement  necessarily
occurs ;  only  rigiditv  and  fulness  of  the  muscle.  Patients
will  say,  “  Oh,  you  are  making  my  arm  stiff ;  you  are
putting  strength  into  my  arm.”  Indeed  it  is  sometimes
necessary  first  to  do  this,  in  order  to  strengthen  the  muscles,
before  tractive  passes  will  take  effect,  or  before  the  patient
can  involuntarily  imitate  your  movements  or  positions.

I  could  not  stiffen  her  by  longitudinal  passes  with  con¬
tact  or  any  other  means  when  not  in  the  mesmeric  state.

*  See  my  Human  Physiology,  p.  484,  note  c.  I  believe  that  any  animal
faculty,  intellectual  or  affective,  that  even  mere  sensation  and  will,  are  of
all  degrees,  and  at  the  lowest  scarcely  if  at  all  discernible  ;  and  thus  that
will  may  really  run  down  insensibly  into  merely  automatic  motions,  so  that
it  may  be  indistinguishable  from  them.


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


71


She  shewed  insensibility  to  pinching  or  temperature :  nor
did  the  approximation  of  a  candle  to  her  eyes  appear  to  affect
her.

The  phenomena  of  the  muscles  in  mesmerism  now  described
are  beautiful;  but  no  less  surprising  are  the  modes  of  putting
an  end  to  them.  Transverse  passes  over  the  stiffened  limbs  of
this  patient :  touching  her  immediately  with  anything :  but
especially  breathing  upon  her  and  touching  her  with  the  hand
•or  the  person,  instantly  relaxed  her.  In  breathing  upon  her  or
touching  her  with  the  hand,  or  any  inanimate  and  even  un¬
mesmerised  object,  metal,  wood,  glass,  a  book,  cloth,  &c.,
it  was  not  necessary  that  this  should  be  immediately  applied —
that  no  covering  should  intervene  :  though  breathing  upon  her
and  touching  her  with  an  inanimate  substance  immediately
had  a  more  rapid  effect  than  if  a  covering  intervened ;  and,
when  anything  was  interposed,  the  hand  a  much  quicker  effect
than  inanimate  bodies.  If  I  pressed  any  inanimate  substance
upon  one  forearm,  and  the  points  of  my  fingers  on  the  other,
this  other  always  relaxed  the  sooner.  Even  to  hold  the  hand
near  her  without  immediate  contact  was  sufficient ;  and  espe¬
cially  to  point  at  the  part.  Darting  the  fingers  at  a  part,
without  touching  it,  quickly  drove  it  down  and  relaxed  it.
I  have  had  cases  in  which  relaxation  could  be  produced  by
making  passes  in  the  opposite  direction  to  those  which  had  or
might  have  produced  the  rigidity.  For  example,  when  the
arm  was  extended,  by  making  passes  upwards  along  the  inside,
as  if  to  bend  it, — when  it  would  all  relax,  and  then  a  continu¬
ance  of  the  passes  would  cause  opposite  contraction  and  bend
it  freely :  or  when  bent,  it  might  be  unbent  and  relaxed  by
longitudinal  passes  made  along  its  outside,  as  if  to  unbend  it.

The  rigidity  and  relaxation  some  declare  they  can  effect
by  the  will ;  and  I  do  not  doubt  the  great  power  of  the  will
without  any  external  indications  of  its  exertion,  though  up  to
this  moment  I  am  not  aware  of  ever  having  produced  a  single
mesmeric  effect  by  its  means.

Like  all  other  mesmeric  patients,  the  capability  of  dis¬
playing  different  phenomena  varies  from  time  to  time.  Though
always  exhibiting  sleep,  rigidity,  and  relaxation,  attraction
to  the  mesmeriser  and  repulsion  to  others,  and  the  phreno¬
logical  changes,  her  arms’  sometimes  cannot  be  drawn,  some¬
times  they  do  not  descend  on  being  darted  at ;  sometimes
mesmerised  gold  produces  no  effect.

After  I  had  learnt  the  possibility  of  mesmerising  indi¬
vidual  cerebral  organs,  I  tried  her  susceptibility  in  this
respect,  knowing  that  she  was  perfectly  ignorant  of  phreno¬
logy,  and  not  touching  her,  but  standing  as  far  behind  her


72


Dr.  Elliotsorvs  Case  of


as  I  could,  while  her  eyes  were  perfectly  closed.  Whenever
I  pointed  to  Self-esteem,  she  withdrew  her  head  from  me  and
raised  it  as  high  as  possible  and  frowned  :  if  I  pointed  to  Des¬
tructiveness,  the  effect  was  greater, — she  withdrew  her  head
violently  as  far  as  possible  and  frowned :  when  I  pointed  to
Benevolence,  she  moved  towards  me  and  her  brow  relaxed  :
and,  if  I  pointed  to  Attachment  or  Friendship,  she  moved  and
bent  her  head  as  closely  as  possible  to  me  without  coming  into
actual  contact.  If  I  touched  over  any  of  those  organs  the  effect
was  quicker :  but  it  was  always  quick.  I  could  never  affect
any  other  cerebral  organ  than  those  four :  and  in  my  present
experience  these  are  the  organs  which  are  the  most  commonly
mesmerisable.  The  effect  of  exciting  them  lasted  a  longer  or
shorter  time  after  the  pointing  or  touching  was  discontinued,
but  immediately  ceased  on  breathing  or  transverse  passes.

After  how  many  hours  this  patient  would  wake  sponta¬
neously,  I  cannot  tell,  as  I  have  never  left  her  asleep.
The  process  of  waking  consisted  in  transverse  passes  with  or
without  contact, — and  blowing  upon  her,  but  especially  by
darting  the  fingers  at  her.  Till  I  adopted  the  latter  plan,  I
found  waking  very  troublesome :  and,  indeed,  with  it,  the
affair  has  been  for  the  last  two  years  a  very  troublesome  busi¬
ness.  On  darting  the  hands  at  her  she  would  frown,  screw
up  her  mouth  and  nose,  turn  her  head  to  one  side  and  writhe
the  corresponding  shoulder  about,  and  drop  relaxed,  and
blowing  in  her  face  now  would  increase  all  these  effects :  but
presently  she  would  be  still  and  stiffen  again,  and  darting
and  blowing  have  no  effect  for  a  time.  Long  contact  by
holding  her  hands,  placing  one’s  own  hands  on  her  forehead,
&c.,  would  relax  her  peaceably,  but  no  further  effect  resulted,
and  on  withdrawing  the  contact  she  stiffened  again.  After
some  seconds  of  impenetrability,  fresh  darting  and  blowing
would  rouse  and  relax  her  again ;  and  so,  by  perseverance,  she
would  at  last  rub  her  eyes  with  her  knuckles,  screwing  up
her  face  and  twisting  her  head  about  at  the  same  time  :  but
again  she  would  be  still  and  impenetrable,  and  her  hands  and
arms  fix  rigidly  while  rubbing.  Till  lately,  though  not  ori¬
ginally,  she  would  roll  violently  on  the  floor,  in  spite  of  the
restraint  attempted  by  half  a  dozen  persons  while  this  was
going  on.  After  many  repetitions  of  all  this,  she  would  say,
“  Oh  dear,”  or  something  similar,  and  smile  and  hear  us,  and
jump  up  into  a  sitting  posture  :  but  still  could  not  open  her
eyes.  The  eyelids  from  the  very  first  were  the  last  parts  to
relax  :  and  long  contact  of  the  points  of  the  fingers  upon  them,
and  breathing  upon  them,  were  required  to  open  them.  The
left,  too,  generally  opened  much  before  the  right,  even  if  I


Intense  Hiccup  cured  by  Mesmerism.


73


breathed  upon  the  right  only,  so  that  she  would  stand  with  it
as  wide  open  as  eye  can  be,  while  the  right  was  as  closely
shut  as  eye  can  be, — so  closely  that  not  a  ray  of  light  was
ever  seen  by  her,  however  near  we  held  the  candle,  unless  of
course  through  the  substance  of  the  upper  eyelid.  Yet  under
ordinary  circumstances,  she  never  can  hold  one  eye  open  with¬
out  the  other.  The  left  generally  completely  closes  later  than
the  right,  when  I  begin  to  mesmerise  her.  Just  as  others
mesmerise  her  more  slowly  than  myself;  others  wake  her  more
slowly,  whether  they  have  mesmerised  her  or  I  have.  In
general,  others  relax  individual  parts  by  breathing,  contact,
&c.,  as  quickly  as  I  do.  I  recollect  that  five  years  ago,  when
her  strength  had  not  advanced  far  enough  for  her  to  stand
alone,  after  I  had  drawn  her  up  by  upward  passes  without
contact,  her  sister’s  husband  put  his  arms  round  her  waist  to
support  her,  and  thus  completely  relaxed  her  whole  frame.

She  is  now  just  as  susceptible  as  ever.  Almost  the  instant
I  direct  my  fingers  to  her  eyes,  the  upper  lid  is  fixed,  and  then
very  slowly  descends,  rigid  as  it  goes,  and  all  the  phenomena
above  described  supervene,  even  if  I  withdraw  my  finger  and
do  nothing  more  after  the  moment  of  the  first  little  effect  on
the  lid.  She  always,  however,  requests  me  to  continue  to
point,  because  that  hastens  the  progress  of  the  changes,  and
otherwise  her  eyes  remain  open  without,  or  almost  without,
the  power  of  winking,  and  thus  smart  distressingly.

Formerly,  when  I  had  not  mesmerised  her  for  some
months  the  effect  was  slow ;  once  indeed  for  several  sittings
I  almost  began  to  despair  of  renewing  it  again  to  any  amount.
Two  years  ago,  not  having  mesmerised  her  for  eight  months,
I  could  not  affect  her  at  all  for  twenty -two  minutes,  nor  bring
her  eyes  to  close  for  forty-five  minutes,  the  first  time.  She
however  had  a  cold  at  the  time ;  and  even  such  a  slight  fever¬
ish  illness  as  this  lessens  the  susceptibility  :  but  again,  at  the
end  of  a  month,  when  this  had  subsided,  the  mesmeric  effects
came  on  very  slowly.  Ever  since,  however,  she  has  always
proved  fully  susceptible,  though  not  mesmerised  for  a  few
months.

Although  generally  in  excellent  health,  she  occasionally
has  had  a  pain  in  her  left  side,  felt  languid,  slept  badly,  lost
her  appetite,  grown  thirsty  and  looked  pale,  sallow,  and  dull,
like  many  other  young  women.  For  all  this,  three  years
ago,  Mr.  Johnston  applied  leeches  and  blisters,  and  gave  her
hydrocyanic  acid,  alteratives  and  tonics,  employing  the  most
suitable  treatment :  but  perfectly  in  vain.  He  honestly  told
her  that  he  did  not  like  to  trouble  her  with  further  treat¬
ment,  and  advised  her  to  request  me  to  mesmerise  her.  I


74


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Account  of  a  Case  of


did  so :  and,  without  any  medicine,  she  was  almost  imme¬
diately  well, — very  sensibly  better  the  first  day.

Whenever  these  symptoms  have  since  come  on,  I  have
therefore  mesmerised  her  once  or  twice,  and  her  face  becomes
clear,  her  whole  look  changes,  she  becomes  strong  and  merry,
and  all  people  ask  her  what  she  has  been  doing  to  look  so
hearty.  She  goes  home  from  being  mesmerised  at  my  house
merry  and  hungry,  and  has  a  good  night,  and  continues  to
have  good  nights.  Every  mesmerisation  is  as  good  to  her  as
a  week  of  the  best  country  air.  Under  mesmerism,  that  be¬
comes  punctual  which  without  it  is  always  delayed  for  six
weeks.  In  truth,  mesmerism  is  by  far  the  best  remedy  for
all  those  languors  and  pains,  and  disturbances  of  the  diges¬
tive  organs,  and  of  the  spirits  and  tempers,  to  which  young
females  are  so  liable.*

Mr.  Johnston  now  invariably  desires  her  to  go  and  be
mesmerised,  instead  of  prescribing  for  her ;  telling  her  with
truth  that  medicine  does  her  no  good.  If  all  the  profession
shewed  the  same  disinterested  honest  preference  for  their
patients*  good  to  their  own,  and  the  same  liberality  of  feeling,
our  professional  lives  would  be  far  more  happy  and  we
should  be  more  honoured.

Any  suggestion  of  deception  in  this  case  I  scout  uncere¬
moniously,  adding  that  of  all  impudent  impostures,  the  vulgar
and  barefaced  accusation  of  deception  is,  in  most  mesmeric
cases,  the  most  impudent.  Not  only  because  deception  in
this  case  is  absolutely  impossible,  but  because  the  patient  is
an  example  of  everything  that  is  admirable  in  a  female, —  all
straightforward  truth,  all  integrity,  all  kindness,  all  independ¬
ence  and  nobleness,  unaffectedness  and  disinterestedness.  She
lives  with  her  sisters,  one  of  whom  has  lately  lost  her  husband ;
and  I  do  not  know  a  family  more  respectable,  or  whose  lives
I  contemplate  with  more  pleasure.  They  are  an  example  for
the  highest  in  the  land,  and  in  my  eyes  superior  to  one  half
of  the  rich  and  titled,  and  the  well-born,  as  they  are  ab¬
surdly  called.

II.  The  other  case  occurred  in  a  young  lady  a  few  years
older :  and  was  an  epilepsy  of  fifteen  years  standing,  cured,
not  by  me,  but  by  M.  Dupotet,  six  years  ago.

This  patient  when  eleven  years  old,  at  Shadwell,  had  what
was  called  a  severe  typhus  fever,  which  affected  the  head  es¬
pecially,  so  that  she  was  delirious  for  three  weeks;  and  she  was
not  convalescent  for  three  months.  When  recovered,  while


*  I  described  a  similar  improvement  in  a  young  lady,  at  p.  435,  vol.  i.


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


75


standing  in  her  room  before  she  had  ever  left  it,  she  one  day,
with  no  other  warning  than  a  momentary  strange  sensation
at  the  back  of  the  head,  fell  senseless,  before  she  could  cry
out,  and  remained  so  for  fifteen  minutes  without  struggling.
A  similar  attack  returned  almost  every  nine  months,  then
oftener,  and  at  length  every  two  or  three  weeks.  It  was
some  years  before  convulsions  took  place.  But  at  length
every  attack  was  marked  with  violent  convulsions  as  well  as
insensibility ;  and,  after  an  issue  had  been  made  in  her  arm,
she  always  cried  out  very  loudly.  She  was  never  seized  in
the  night ;  but  frequently  was  roused  up  by  the  peculiar  sen¬
sation  at  the  back  of  her  head  without  a  fit.

If  she  could  succeed  in  attempting  to  walk  when  the
sensation  came  upon  her,  she  did  not  fall,  and  kept  off  the
attack.  Twice,  experiencing  it  in  the  street,  she  succeeded
in  persevering  to  walk  fast  till  she  got  home,  feeling  it  all  the
way,  and  knowing  that  if  she  stopped  she  should  be  seized ;
but  forgetting  everything  from  moment  to  moment  as  she
passed  along,  absorbed  in  the  sensation  and  the  abstracted  in¬
stinctive  attempt  to  hurry  home.  Each  time  the  fit  com¬
menced  as  soon  as  she  arrived  at  the  house.  I  have  heard
other  epileptics  say  that,  whenever  they  could  succeed  in  their
efforts  to  resist  the  stupor  which  came  over  them,  they  could
prevent  an  attack.  Children  in  St.  Vitus’s  dance  by  strong
effort  can  often  suspend  their  irregular  movements  for  a  few
moments.  Yet,  as  these  diseases  are  defined  to  be  involuntary
irregular  actions  of  muscles,  merciless  anti-mesmeric  doctors
ought  to  feel  inclined  to  consider  such  facts  as  proofs  of  im¬
posture;  as  well  as  the  arrest  of  convulsions  by  the  affusion  of
pails  of  cold  water,  and  of  hiccup  by  holding  the  breath :  for
signs  of  volition  or  consciousness  in  the  mesmeric  states,  no
less  than  fluctuations  of  other  phenomena,  they  at  once  de¬
clare  to  be  positive  proofs  of  cheating.

When  the  fit  was  over,  she  very  soon  felt  as  well  as  be¬
fore.  She  sometimes  experienced  a  sinking  sensation,  and  a
fit  always  cleared  this  off.  The  attacks  came  on  especially
when  she  felt  well  and  strong ;  so  that,  when  she  felt  unusu¬
ally  well,  she  was  sure  one  was  at  hand.  She  applied  to  a
number  of  medical  men,  who  all  pronounced  her  disease  to
be  epilepsy.

She  frequently  consulted  Dr.  Ashwell,  but  her  fits  conti¬
nued  unabated  :  was  under  Mr.  Gosset,  who  bled,  cupped,
leeched,  and  blistered  her  again  and  again  and  again,  made
her  an  issue,  and  gave  her  all  sorts  of  medicine,  without  the
least  benefit :  then  under  Mr.  Bees,  of  Finsbury  Square,  for
four  months  in  vain,  though  she  grew  strong  and  her  func-


76


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Account  of  a  Case  of


tions  resumed  regularity  under  him,  from  the  discontinuance
of  the  exhausting  measures  of  the  preceding  practitioner :  and
under  Dr.  Culverwell  for  five  months,  who  cupped  her,  gave
her  medicine  and  his  warm  baths  for  a  month,  and  afterwards
the  cold  shower  bath  and  abundance  of  iron  for  four  months.
As  soon  as  she  was  cupped,  she  had  an  uncommonly  severe
fit ;  while  she  was  using  the  cold  shower  baths,  no  fit  oc¬
curred  for  four  months,  but  instead  of  her  fits  she  had  con¬
stantly  extreme  sinking,  pain  at  the  chest  which  went  through
to  the  back,  at  the  right  side  and  at  the  heart,  with  difficulty
of  breathing,  all  which  a  fit  would  have  removed,  as  it  had
invariably,  for  a  time ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  four  months
her  fits  were  as  frequent  and  severe  as  ever.

Feeling  herself  thus  the  mere  despair  of  physic,  and  hav¬
ing  at  least  one  fit  every  week,  she  applied  to  M.  Dupotet,
in  1837,  who  mesmerised  her  daily.  For  three  weeks  she
had  a  fit  almost  as  soon  as  the  process  was  commenced ;  and,
when  the  fit  was  over,  the  process  was  recommenced,  and  so
on  several  times  at  each  sitting.  The  process  then  produced
only  a  shaking  for  a  month.  She  next  was  sent  to  sleep,  but
with  her  eyes  open,  and  was  insensible  to  tickling  with  a
feather  up  her  nostrils  and  other  slight  modes  of  irritation.  In
three  months  from  the  first,  she  slept  with  her  eyes  closed.

She  has  had  but  one  fit  after  the  first  three  weeks  she
was  mesmerised,  and  that  was  occasioned  by  hearing  of  the
sudden  death  of  a  friend.  From  being  thin  and  muddy  look¬
ing,  she  became  plump,  clear,  and  healthy.  She  continued
to  be  mesmerised  for  a  twelvemonth,  and  has  not  had  a  fit
now  for  above  six  years.

She  resided  in  Grenada  Terrace,  Commercial  Road,  on
the  eastern  side  of  London,  and  M.  Dupotet  near  Portman
Square,  on  the  western.  At  first  she  was  compelled  to  ride
both  ways :  but,  without  any  other  means  than  mesmerism,
she  was  at  length  able  to  walk  both  ways — a  distance  of  about
eight  miles.

I  had  never  seen  or  heard  of  her,  when  in  1839  she  called
to  ask  me  a  question,  and  gave  me  her  history,  telling  me
that  she  understood  the  sensible  effects  of  mesmerism  upon
her  were  very  remarkable  :  but  she  declined  allowing  me  to
mesmerise  her  and  see  them,  because  the  process  of  waking
her  required  the  greater  part  of  half  an  hour.  She  brought
a  sister  to  me  on  account  of  another  severe  nervous  affection,
but  still  for  a  year  would  not  allow  me  to  mesmerise  her.  At
last,  being  rather  poorly,  and  assured  by  me  that  it  would  do
her  more  service  than  medicines,  she  consented,  and  to  mv
astonishment  I  found  the  effects  the  very  same  as  in  the  case

V


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


77


already  described.  She  had  never  heard  of  the  other  case  ;
but  they  were  nearly  identical : — profound  sleep,  universal
rigidity  yielding  to  all  the  same  means  but  one,  obedience  to
tractive  movements,  attraction  to  her  mesmeriser,  ability  to
stand  but  not  to  stir  the  feet,  and  all  this  continuing  an  in¬
definite  time.

The  rigidity  was  extreme,  though  not  as  constantly  intense
as  in  the  former  patient;  but  the  full  effects  were  immediate.
The  very  instant  that  I  pointed  my  fingers  towards  her  eyes,
or  fixed  my  eyes  upon  her;s,  a  change  came  over  her  counte¬
nance,  her  eyes  converged  downwards  and  were  fixed,  her
brow  corrugated,  and  her  mouth  was  strongly  screwed  up,
her  jaw  locked,  her  head  began  to  work  backwards  and  for¬
wards,  and  she  was  presently  stiff  from  head  to  foot.  The
rigidity  of  the  jaw,  neck,  trunk,  and  upper  extremities  to
the  very  points  of  the  fingers,  which  were  drawn  together,  was
intense,  but  as  in  the  other  case,  not  so  great  in  the  lower
extremities,  and  her  eyes  never  closed,  though  immovable.
The  left  foot  was  always  a  little  advanced  and  turned  on  its
side.  Her  attraction  would  bring  her  head  or  hands  in  con¬
tact  with  her  mesmeriser.  The  expression  of  her  open,  con¬
verging,  and  depressed  eyes,  and  her  frowning  brow,  and
screwed-up  mouth,  was  very  disagreeable.  She  says  that,  at
the  moment  of  going  off,  her  brain  seems  forced  forward,
and  that  she  longs  to  strike  at  me  :  the  other  patient  has
merely  a  fainting  sensation.  In  her  sleep  she,  like  the  other,
has  no  sensibility  to  pinching,  &c.,  nor  to  heat  or  cold :  and,
like  the  other,  she  ceases  to  attempt  to  move  towards  me,
when  I  leave  her  entirely, — she  gives  it  up.

M.  Dupotet  has  described  the  case  in  a  very  poor  book
published  by  him  at  Paris  in  1840,  absurdly  entitled  Le
Magnetisme  oppose  d  la  Medecine,  as  if  mesmerism  could  cure
all  diseases,  or  was  to  displace  all  other  medical  means,  in¬
stead  of  being  a  great  adjunct  to  them.  Though  he  mesme¬
rised  the  patient  daily  for  a  year,  shewing  her  at  his  half-
crown  exhibitions,  he  did  not  fully  observe  her  phenomena.
In  truth  his  whole  knowledge  of  mesmerism  seemed  very  su¬
perficial,  and  his  intellect  very  weak.  He  mentions  the  rigidity,
the  obedience  to  tractive  general  movements,  and  the  attrac¬
tion  to  him,  and  says  that  the  rigidity  instantly  declined  when
he  “  magnetized  the  head,  and  especially  the  jaws but  he
seems  not  to  have  observed  that  individual  parts  obeyed
tractive  movements,  and  whether  made  by  others  or  the  mes¬
meriser  ;  that  breathing  upon  any  part,  touching  any  part  for
a  short  time,  or  darting  at  it,  presently  relaxed  it  completely,
to  fix  again  as  soon  as  the  means  of  relaxation  were  discon-


78  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Account  of  a  Case,  fyc.

tinued.  He  ascertained  only  that  blowing  on  the  back  of
the  neck  produced  relaxation,  as  if  he  had  never  tried  this
upon  other  parts.  He  does  not  mention  her  want  of  feeling,
nor  her  repulsion  from,  or  rather  indifference  to,  strangers,
as  well  as  her  attraction  to  her  mesmeriser,  even  when  her
eyes  were  covered  :  nor  that  to  hold  up  anything  before  her
and  say  you  will  mesmerise  her  through  it,  though  noth¬
ing  was  done,  instantly  mesmerises  her,  as  well  as  merely
to  stare,  or  point  a  finger  at  her,  for  a  moment,  at  a  very
great  distance.  Nor  does  he  seem  to  have  observed  that,
without  any  tractive  passes  at  all,  she  still  inclined  herself
as  much  as  possible  to  her  mesmeriser.  He  had  no  idea  of
the  proper  mode  of  waking  her,  and  was  perfectly  ignorant
of  the  effect  of  darting  movements  at  a  patient.  Seeing
the  effect  of  this  in  causing  the  relaxation  of  the  cataleptic
and  rigid  arms  of  the  Okeys,  I  tried  it  towards  the  face  of  the
other  rigid  patient,  and  found  it  wake  her  whom  otherwise  it
was  no  easy  matter  to  awake.  I  therefore  practised  upon  the
present  patient,  and  she  at  once  awoke  without  any  trouble.
She  informs  me  that  she  understands  he  made  transverse
passes  with  and  without  contact,  and  breathed  and  blew  again
and  again ;  and  after  all  he  seems  to  have  only  half  awa¬
kened  her,  and  allowed  the  process  to  complete  itself  slowly.
“  It  was  not  easy  to  put  an  end  to  this  singular  state ;  mag¬
netizing  (demagnetizing)  at  the  plexuses  (pit  of  the  stomach)
increased  it ;  passes  at  the  root  of  the  nose,  which  generally
put  an  end  to  somnambulism,  failed.”  His  usual  plan  was
breathing  upon  the  back  of  the  neck  to  relax  her,  and  letting
her  recover  gradually  in  a  room  by  herself.  By  darting
movements,  to  awake  her  completely  is  the  business  of  less
than  a  minute.  I  find  that  the  same  cerebral  organs  may  be
excited  by  mere  pointing,  and  stupified  by  breathing,  as  in
the  other  patient, — Destructiveness,  Self-esteem,  Benevolence,
and  Attachment.  She  is  perfectly  unacquainted  with  phren¬
ology,  and  ignorant  that  I  produce  these  effects  on  her.  They,
as  well  as  the  effects  of  attraction  and  traction,  are  more
rapid  than  in  the  other  case, — almost  instantaneous.  She  is
as  susceptible  as  ever ;  and,  when  she  loses  her  appetite,  feels
sinking  and  weak,  and  generally  ill,  mesmerism  recruits  her
at  once,  though  medicine  has  but  very  little  effect.  She  lives
with  several  sisters,  and  her  worth  and  respectability  are
equal  to  those  of  the  other  patient.

Having  prefixed  a  quotation  from  Mr.  Wakley  to  this  com¬
munication,  I  beg  to  conclude  with  the  following  letter,  which
shews  a  candour  and  love  of  truth  worthy  of  all  imitation.


79


Testimonies  of  the  Efficacy  of  Mesmerism,  fyc.

“  Dec.  23,  1843.

“  Dear  Dr.  Elliotson, —

“  Though  quite  unknown  to  you,  I  beg  to  enclose  a  copy  of  a  little  brochure
which  was  published  in  1842,  and  which  I  dare  say  you  never  saw.  I  do
not  send  it  on  account  of  any  real  or  supposed  merits,  though  it  has  been
favourably  noticed  in  Forbes’s  Quarterly.  I  enclose  it  that  you  may  have
an  opportunity  of  reading  the  cursory  critique  I  penned  in  it,  on  the  subject
of  animal  magnetism  and  in  reference  to  yourself.  At  the  time  of  writing
that  notice  I  had  been  entirely  misled  by  Wakley’s  report  of  the  experiments
at  your  house,  which  he  published  in  the  Lancet.  I  had  never  witnessed  at
that  time  any  decided  mesmeric  phenomena.  Within  the  last  four  or  five
months,  however,  1  have  been  making  experiments  myself  as  well  as  wit¬
nessing  those  of  others,  and  I  can  delay  no  longer  making  you  the  “  amende
honorable ”  for  my  detracting  notice  of  you,  by  expressing  unhesitatingly  my
entire  conviction  of  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  of  animal  magnetism,  for
which  you  contend.  I  shall  continue  my  experiments  in  the  pursuit  of  some
new  facts  which  I  have  lately  observed,  which  I  will  publish  in  some  shape
or  other ;  but  in  the  mean  time  allow  me  to  express  my  regret  that  I  for  one
misled  by  the  Journalists  of  the  day,  in  the  midst  of  the  dust  of  prejudice
which  they  succeeded  in  raising,  should  have  failed  to  appreciate  the
acute  observation,  the  indomitable  perseverance,  and  the  unflinching  love  of
truth  with  which  you  have  threaded  the  mazes  of  a  new  science.  I  will
some  day  endeavour  to  write  more  at  large  the  circumstances  which  have  led
me  to  a  conversion  to  most  of  your  views;  which,  though  still  ridiculed,
doubted,  and  rejected,  will  soon  command  the  belief  and  respect  of  all  men
of  real  intelligence.

“  It  may  afford  you  some  gratification  to  receive  this  hasty  tribute  from
even  so  humble  and  unknown  an  individual  as  myself;  at  any  rate  I  feel  it
an  act  of  duty  to  pay  this  homage  to  truth,  and  to  one  who  has  sacrificed  so
much  in  avowing  it.

u 1  am,  my  dear  Doctor,

“  Yours,  with  much  respect,

“Edward  Oke  Spooner.

“  Surgeon,  Blandford.

“  P.S.  You  may  make  whatever  public  use  you  please  of  this  hasty
scrawl,  which,  in  the  midst  of  the  pressing  avocations  of  an  extensive
country  practice,  I  have  stolen  a  few  minutes  to  accomplish.”


VI.  Testimonies  of  the  Efficacy  of  Mesmerism  in  the  Cure  of
Disease,  with  brief  accounts  of  various  cases.

“  Life,  Adventures,  and  Death  of  Animal  Magnetism.

“  Are  the  delnsions,  produced  by  the  tricks  of  woman,  to  be  called  a  science  V’ —
MR.  THOMAS  WAKLEY.  Contents  of  Lancet,  Sept.  8th,  1838.

To  the  Editor  of  The  Zoist.

Sir, — The  following  gentlemen,  none  of  whom  are  in
the  medical  profession,  have  obligingly  sent  me  short  accounts
of  some  of  their  experience  of  mesmerism  as  a  remedy,  and
allowed  me  to  make  any  use  of  them  I  please.  I  therefore
transmit  the  statements  to  you.

I  remain,  yours,  &c.

John  Elliotson.


London,  March  20 th,  1844.


80


Lord  Stanhope’s  Testimony  of


From  Earl  Stanhope  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Chevenirtg ,  near  Sevenoaks,  Dec.  4th,  1843.

“  My  dear  Sir, — I  have  no  objection  whatever  to  the  use  of  my  name  in
the  new  edition  of  Mr.  Sandby’s  work,  but  on  the  contrary,  I  consider  it  an
honour  upon  this,  as  upon  every  other  occasion,  to  appear  as  the  advocate
of  truth;  and  I  am  not  deterred  by  popular  prejudice,  or  by  the  ridicule
which  some  newspapers  have  endeavoured  to  cast  upon  me  as  a  humble,  but
zealous,  disciple  of  mesmerism.  Few  persons  have  made  such  sacrifices  in
that  cause  and  have  exhibited  such  moral  courage  as  yourself,  and  few  per¬
sons  are  therefore  so  much  entitled  to  the  gratitude  of  the  public  which  may
be  shewn  hereafter  more  than  can  at  present  be  expected.  Suumcuique  decus
postei'itas  rependit.  I  intend  to  have  as  soon  as  possible  the  pleasure  of  send¬
ing  to  you  a  short  statement  of  the  different  cases  in  which  I  have  mesmer¬
ised,  but  I  fear  I  shall  not  be  able  to  do  so  by  this  post,  as  I  expect  every
moment  a  person  wrho  comes  to  me  from  Ireland  upon  business.

“  I  am,  dear  Sir,

“  Very  faithfully  yours,

“To  Dr.  Elliotson.”  “Stanhope.

“  Notes  by  Earl  Stanhope  on  some  Mesmeric  Cases.

“  A  young  man,  aged  about  27,  who  had  been  a  servant,
was  obliged  to  leave  his  place  on  account  of  a  nervous  affection,
which  when  a  very  trifling  excitement  occurred  produced
syncope.  After  being  mesmerised  by  me  only  a  few  times,
he  found  his  nerves  much  strengthened,  and  he  now  consi¬
ders  himself  to  be  perfectly  cured.

“  An  unmarried  woman,  aged  22,  the  daughter  of  a  day
labourer,  had  been  afflicted  with  frequent  and  violent  epi¬
leptic  fits ;  and  shewed,  even  when  I  first  mesmerised  her,
an  extreme  susceptibility,  as  she  fell  asleep  in  less  than  a
minute.  She  was  on  that  occasion  accidentally  disturbed  by
a  person  who  spoke  to  her  while  she  was  under  the  mesmeric
influence,  and  on  her  returning  to  her  home,  which  was  at  the
distance  of  some  miles,  she  was  seized  with  an  attack  of  her
disorder.  I  learned  in  the  evening  that  the  fit  had  continued
four  hours,  and  with  such  violence  that  several  robust  persons

had  been  unable  to  hold  her.  I  went  immediately  to  see

«/

her,  and  found  her  in  one  of  my  cottages  suffering  from
trismus,  and  she  forced  her  jaws  open  by  placing  between
them  a  blunt,  or  what  is  called  a  ripping,  chisel,  and  using  it
as  a  lever.  This  produced  only  a  momentary  relief,  for  the
jaws  were  again  clenched;  but  after  I  had  made  a  few  mes¬
meric  passes  along  them,  she  opened  them  without  difficulty,
and  exclaimed,  ‘  No  doctor  could  have  done  this/  Her  arms
became  rigid,  as  if  by  a  spasmodic  attack,  and  they  became
immediately  relaxed  by  some  mesmeric  passes.  From  the
violence  and  long  continuance  of  the  fit  she  was  very  ex¬
hausted,  and  had  a  bad  night,  and  I  sent  her  home  the  next
morning  in  a  carriage.  She  was  afterwards  always  accompa-


the  Efficacy  of  Mesmerism.


81


nied  by  a  female  friend,  as  it  was  considered  dangerous  for
her  to  be  quite  alone.  When  I  next  mesmerised  her  she
slept  for  about  an  hour,  and  soon  after  she  awoke  I  repeated
the  operation,  which  did  not  produce  sleep  as  soon  or  of  as
long  continuance  as  it  had  done  before ;  but  I  had  reason,  as
I  shall  next  mention,  to  consider  this  mode  of  practice  very
beneficial.  I  had  not  an  opportunity  of  mesmerising  her  fre¬
quently,  as  I  was  obliged  to  be  long  absent  from  this  place ;
but  she  called  here  lately  to  inform  me  that  she  had  subse¬
quently  experienced  only  a  very  slight  attack ;  that  she
thought  herself  quite  well ;  and  was  therefore  about  to  return
to  the  service  of  her  former  master.

“  A  wheelwright’s  apprentice,  aged  20,  who  was  accus¬
tomed  to  have  always  two,  and  sometimes  more,  epileptic
fits  in  the  course  of  every  week,  came  to  me  from  the  dis¬
tance  of  eighteen  miles  to  be  mesmerised,  and  remained  at
first  a  week  in  this  neighbourhood,  and  after  an  interval  he
returned  for  a  fortnight.  He  appeared  to  be  of  a  very  robust
frame  of  body,  and  had  a  dull,  heavy  look,  as  if  his  intellect
had  been  affected  by  his  complaint.  When  he  was  first  mes¬
merised  the  operation  was  continued  for  half  an  hour  before
he  went  to  sleep,  but  subsequently  the  effect  was  produced  in
less  than  five  minutes.  When  he  was  here  for  a  fortnight  he
was  mesmerised  every  day,  and  he  had  during  the  first  week
two  fits  as  usual ;  but  in  the  second  week,  when  I  repeated
the  operation  soon  after  he  woke,  he  had  no  fit.  I  could
not  continue  to  mesmerise  him,  as  he  resided  at  a  consider¬
able  distance  and  could  not  be  long  absent  from  his  master :
and  the  offer  which  I  made  of  shewing  the  process  to  any  in¬
telligent  person  who  resided  near  him  was  not  accepted.

“  A  gardener’s  daughter,  aged  20,  who  was  epileptic,  and
was  in  consequence  obliged  to  leave  the  service  of  one  of  my
tenants,  was  so  susceptible  of  the  mesmeric  influence,  that
after  the  operation  had  been  performed  a  few  times  she  went
to  sleep  in  a  quarter  of  a  minute.  She  experienced  at  first
great  relief  as  the  fits  were  less  frequent  and  less  violent ;  but
the  operation  was  interrupted  by  my  long  absence,  and  she
has  since  relapsed.  I  intend  to  renew  the  mesmeric  practice
with  her  when  the  state  of  the  weather  allows  her  to  come
from  her  residence,  which  is  at  the  distance  of  four  or  five
miles.

“None  of  the  above  patients  exhibited  any  remarkable
phenomena,  but  all  of  them  appeared  perfectly  insensible
when  I  moved  their  limbs  ;  and  the  woman  mentioned  in  the
second  case  did  not  awake  when  she  struck  her  head  with
great  force  on  a  table,  by  falling  on  it  in  her  sleep.”

VOL.  II.  g


82


Testimonies  of  the  Efficacy  of  Mesmerism.


From  Captain  Anderson,  Chelmsford,  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Dec.  23rd,  1843.

“Sir, — Captain  Valiant  having  informed  me  that  you  are  anxious  to  have
the  particulars  of  my  experiments  in  mesmerism,  I  have  obtained  a  promise
from  the  lady  I  last  mesmerised  to  furnish  you  with  a  statement  of  her  case,
considering  it  would  be  more  satisfactory  to  you  to  have  it  from  herself.

“  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir,

“  Your  obedient  servant,

“Alex.  Anderson,  Captain  Royal  Marines."

“  Since  the  beginning  of  June,  1834,  I  have  suffered
from  a  spinal  complaint  and  lost  my  voice,  &c.  I  have  been
attended  by  the  most  eminent  physicians  and  medical  prac¬
titioners  in  the  place,  undergone  all  the  various  operations
usually  prescribed  in  such  cases,  and  during  the  nine  years
of  my  confinement  I  have  had  for  months  together  two  setons :
also  two  large  caustic  issues  up  each  side  of  the  spine,  with
five  horse-beans  in  each  issue :  also  repeated  blisters  along  the
spine  for  ten  weeks,  five  or  six  caustic  plaisters,  leeches,  blis¬
ters  and  liniments  out  of  number,  medicines  of  all  descrip¬
tions  ;  indeed  I  completely  tired  the  doctors,  and  nothing
did  me  any  substantial  good  :  for  a  time  I  felt  easier,  but  it
was  but  transient.

“  During  the  nine  years  I  was  unable  to  be  moved  from
my  sofa  night  or  day.  I  was  once  placed  upon  my  feet  by
my  medical  man,  and  it  caused  me  to  faint,  and  I  was  insen¬
sible  for  hours  after.  I  was  never  free  from  pain,  and  some¬
times  the  agony  was  indescribable ;  so  much  so  that  I  never
had  during  the  nine  years  a  sound  sleep.  The  last  three
years  I  have  been  entirely  speechless.  I  had  given  up  all
hope  of  recovery,  and  almost  prayed  for  death  to  release  me ;
for  however  painful  the  remedies  prescribed  by  my  medical
advisers,  I  never  objected,  feeling  it  my  duty  patiently  to
submit,  and  pray  that  God  would  bless  them  with  success  :
but  at  length  I  grew  tired,  and  resigned  myself  to  my  fate,
praying  that  my  sufferings  might  soon  be  ended.  God  how¬
ever,  in  his  great  mercy,  at  the  very  time  I  began  to  despair,
made  me  acquainted  with  Capt.  Anderson,  who  saw  me  and
pitied  my  sufferings,  and  kindly  offered  to  try  and  effect  my
cure  by  mesmerism.  Like  many  others  I  laughed  at  the  idea ;
but  from  his  accounts  of  cures  performed,  and  being  anxious
to  grasp  at  anything  which  might  do  me  good,  I  complied,
and  now  feel  thankful  to  God  and  grateful  to  Capt.  Anderson
for  what  has  been  accomplished.  He  first  mesmerised  me  in
March,  1843.  I  had  then  been  confined  nine  years  within
three  months,  and  never  neglected  taking  medicine  nightly.
He  desired  me  to  discontinue  mv  medicine,  which  I  did.  I


Captain  Anderson’s  and  Mr.  Thompson’s  Cases.  83

have  not  taken  a  drop  of  either  aperient  or  strengthening
medicine  since  May,  since  which  he  continued  to  mesmerise
me  daily,  and  I  found  myself  better  every  time  I  was  mes¬
merised.  I  began  to  regain  a  sense  of  feeling  in  my  lower
extremities,  which  I  had  lost  for  years  :  I  reposed  soundly
and  quietly  at  night,  and  in  the  morning  felt  refreshed.  In
April,  not  a  month  after  commencing  my  mesmeric  treat¬
ment,  I  was  able  to  sit  in  an  inclined  chair :  in  May,  my
mesmeriser  stood  me  upon  my  feet  for  five  minutes ;  I  was
much  fatigued,  but  felt  no  further  inconvenience,  and  did
not  lose  my  senses  as  before.  The  same  month  I  was  able  to
ride  in  a  Bath  chair,  and  so  strange  and  rapid  is  the  improve¬
ment  I  have  made,  that  I  am  now  able  to  walk  out  daily
alone  and  unassisted ;  although  when  first  I  began  to  stand
I  was  like  a  child,  not  knowing  where  my  feet  were  going,
tottering  when  they  were  put  on  the  ground  ;  and  it  was  some
time  ere  I  could  trust  myself  to  stand,  leaning  on  a  chair
without  the  support  of  my  mesmeriser.  The  relation  of  all
would  fill  a  volume,  but  it  is  sufficient  here  to  say  I  am  re¬
gaining  my  speech,  and  hope  soon  to  say  I  have  entirely
recovered  it ;  I  am  free  from  pain,  sleep  soundly  and  take  no
medicine,  and  am  now  seldom  mesmerised.

“  It  will  be  unnecessary  to  resort  to  the  common  method
of  signatures,  my  past  suffering  and  present  happiness  are
well  known  to  a  large  circle  of  acquaintance ;  and  being
daily  seen  walking,  after  so  long  a  confinement  and  intense
suffering,  is  a  subject  generally  spoken  of  here,  that  were  it
necessary  a  hundred  signatures  might  be  attached;  but  I
flatter  myself  the  respectability  of  my  own  signature  will
prove  a  sufficient  testimony.

“  Louisa  Raymond.

“  Chelmsford ,  Esssex,  Dec.  24dh,  1843.”


From  H.  S.  Thompson ,  Esq.,  Fairfield  House ,  near  York ,

to  Dr.  Elliot  son.

“  My  dear  Sir, —

“  Most  happy  am  I  to  add  my  testimony  to  the  truth  of  mesmerism,  and
to  declare  my  conviction  of  its  utility,  and  the  benefit  that  may  be  derived
from  it.  I  will  describe  as  briefly  as  possible  a  few  cases  that  have  been
successfully  treated,  and  which  you  are  quite  at  liberty  to  publish,  if  you
think  they  can  add  any  weight  to  the  mass  of  facts  that  can  now  be  brought
forward  (in  this  country)  to  prove  that  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  mes¬
merism  are  not  merely  chimerical.

“  Believe  me,  my  dear  Sir,

“  Yours  very  truly  and  obliged

“  Fairfield,  near  York ,  Dec.  15th.  “  H.  Stafford  Thompson.

“  I  will  send  you  a  few  cases  of  mesmerism  in  a  few  days.”

a  2


Hi  Testimonies  of  the  Efficacy  of  Mesmerism.

“  I  may  as  well  state  that  for  some  time  I  had  taken  every
opportunity  in  my  power  of  witnessing  the  different  pheno¬
mena  of  mesmerism,  and  of  testing  them  myself ;  and  con¬
trary  to  my  preconceived  opinion  (and  the  opinions  of  many
at  this  day)  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  there  was  something
more  in  mesmerism  than  the  mere  power  of  producing  som¬
nambulism  or  trance,  by  an  effect  of  the  imagination,  or  by
the  continued  fatigue  or  wearying  of  any  sense  or  nerve  :  and
also  that  there  were  other  benefits  to  be  derived  directly  from
mesmerism,  besides  the  mere  repose  afforded  to  the  nervous
system  by  the  state  of  somnambulism  or  trance :  and  that  we
all  more  or  less  possessed  a  peculiar  power,  which,  if  properly
applied,  was  capable  of  mitigating  in  many  cases,  and  often
of  entirely  removing  in  others,  acute  pains  without  even  pro¬
ducing  sleep.  I  have  tested  this  in  very  many  slight  cases,
and  with  almost  invariable  success ;  mitigating,  and  very  often
altogether  removing,  tooth-ache,  head-ache,  rheumatic  pains,
and  pains  occasioned  by  contusions,  burns  and  any  inflamma¬
tion  ;  and  in  some  few  cases  of  a  severer  character  have  been
able  to  afford  great  relief.  The  first  case  that  I  shall  describe
is  an  instance  of  this.

“  John  Bradley,  the  son  of  Mark  Bradley,  a  labourer,  re¬
siding  at  Raweliffe,  near  York,  aged  nine  years,  had  suffered
for  fifteen  months  from  a  diseased  knee.  It  was  said  that
originally  it  came  on  from  an  accident,  but  I  understood  that
it  was  pronounced  to  be  of  a  scrofulous  nature  by  the  medical
man  who  attended  him  (Mr.  Hopps,  of  York).  Every  means
had  been  used  which  this  gentleman  could  suggest ;  still  the
disease  steadily  progressed  :  and  Mr.  Hopps  declared  his  in¬
ability  to  do  more  for  him.  The  poor  father’s  purse  and
patience  were  exhausted,  and  the  doctor  was  dismissed.  He
had  had  no  medical  attendant  for  some  time.  I  cannot  say
what  state  the  knee  was  in  when  Mr.  Hopps  left  him.  When  I
saw  him,  the  child  had  been  suffering  intense  agony,  unable  to
rest  day  or  night,  there  w  as  total  want  of  appetite,  great  inflam¬
mation  extending  above  the  knee,  the  knee  altogether  enor¬
mously  enlarged ;  and  it  was  evident  that  extensive  suppura¬
tion  had  taken  place  in  the  inside  of  the  knee,  though  the
skin  had  not  burst.  The  child  was  in  a  high  state  of  fever ;
a  deep  hectic  flush  on  his  cheeks,  attended  with  quickness  of
breathing  and  a  short  cough.  The  father  had  brought  him
in  a  cart  to  my  house,  with  a  view  of  obtaining  a  ticket  for
his  admission  into  the  York  County  Hospital.  I  persuaded
him  not  to  think  of  that  on  account  of  the  child’s  age,  and
deeming  the  case  hopeless ;  and  said  that  my  own  medical
man  should  see  him,  and  give  his  opinion  at  all  events  first.


Mr.  Thompson’s  Cases.


85


In  the  meantime,  with  the  father’s  consent,  I  determined  to
try  whether  I  could  afford  him  temporary  relief  by  mesmeris¬
ing  him.

“  In  a  quarter  of  an  hour  I  had  produced  no  appreciable
effect  on  him  by  mesmerising  his  head ;  but  as  I  had  been  so
successful  in  removing  slighter  cases  of  pain,  I  determined
to  try  the  experiment  of  making  passes  over  the  knee  for
half  an  hour.  Before  the  time  had  nearly  expired,  the  child
became  calm  and  still,  then  began  to  smile,  and  said  he  felt
a  warm  heat  come  out  of  my  fingers,  which  had  taken  away
the  pain.  He  seemed  a  little  drowsy,  but  no  sleep  was  pro¬
duced.  I  sent  him  home;  the  fever  appeared  considerably
abated,  the  child  beginning  to  perspire :  his  appetite  re¬
turned  :  he  had  two  good  nights  rest  consecutively,  and  the
days  free  from  pain.

“  The  pain  returned,  when  I  again  mesmerised  him  with
the  same  success.  I  continued  to  mesmerise  him  at  intervals,
as  often  as  I  was  able.  The  child’s  health  rapidly  improved ;
inflammation  of  the  knee  quickly  subsided  ;  absorption  of  the
matter  took  place ;  and  in  a  month  he  was  able  to  put  his
toe  to  the  ground.  I  then  persuaded  the  mother  to  assist
me,  and  she  was  of  great  service.  But  the  child  at  that  time
met  with  an  accident,  by  falling  on  his  knee  whilst  at  play
with  some  children,  and  was  brought  to  me  on  the  following
day,  suffering  much  pain  attended  with  considerable  inflam¬
mation  :  however,  mesmerising  the  knee  completely  relieved
him  of  pain  in  a  few  minutes,  and  the  inflammation  subsided
in  a  day  or  two.  From  this  time  the  child  gradually  im¬
proved  ;  but  the  muscles  of  the  thigh  seemed  contracted,  so
that  he  could  only  touch  the  ground  with  his  toes.  I  deter¬
mined  to  try  whether  I  could  at  all  extend  them  ;  and  after
mesmerising  his  leg,  which  always  for  a  time  produced  a  de¬
gree  of  insensibility,  pressed  the  knee  down  until  he  complained
of  its  giving  him  a  little  pain,  and  then  mesmerised  him  again.
I  was  pleased  to  find  that  after  this  operation,  he  could  place
the  sole  of  his  foot  flat  on  the  ground.  It  was  early  in  May
last  that  I  commenced  mesmerising  this  child,  by  the  latter
end  of  August  the  recovery  was  as  complete  as  I  thought  it
possible  for  a  knee,  so  deformed  from  long-standing  disease,
could  be,  and  left  off  mesmerising  him.  He  has  much  greater
use  of  the  limb  than  I  imagined  he  possibly  could  have,
being  able  to  move  the  leg  backwards  ;  but  of  course  lie  is
not  able  to  straighten  it  entirely,  and  in  consequence  it  ap¬
pears  somewhat  shorter  than  the  other ;  he  is  able  however
to  walk  about  very  well,  suffers  not  the  slightest  pain  or
inconvenience  from  it,  and  his  health  has  been  very  good


86


Testimonies  of  the  Efficacy  of  Mesmerism.

since.  He  had  no  medicine  after  I  commenced  with  him,
(except  one  fortnight  that  I  was  absent  I  recommended  a
little  opening  medicine,  if  he  required  it,  when  not  mesmerised ,
and  which  he  did,)  though  previously  they  found  great  diffi¬
culty  in  keeping  the  bowels  open.  During  the  process  of
recovery,  he  never  but  once  went  to  sleep  under  the  operation
of  mesmerism,  and  that  only  for  a  few  minutes,  apparently
into  a  natural  sleep ;  the  effects  experienced  were  a  feeling  of
a  warm  glow  all  over  him,  perfect  ease  from  pain,  generally
at  first  a  slight  perspiration,  considerable  insensibility  to  ex¬
ternal  injury,  particularly  in  any  part  over  which  mesmeric
passes  were  made  for  any  length  of  time,  rarely  exhibiting
any  sort  of  drowsiness  or  stupor,  nor  were  the  limbs  ever
rigid  or  cataleptic, — a  feeling  of  extraordinary  strength  and
vigour  when  the  operation  was  over.

“I  have  described  this  case  at  great  length,  as  I  thought  it
might  be  interesting  to  you.  Mr.  Sandby  can  curtail  it  if  he
thinks  it  worth  noticing  in  his  pamphlet.

“  Fairfield,  December  16th.

“  This  is  to  certify  that  this  statement  is  quite  correct.

“Mark  Bradley.”

[This  is  signed  by  the  father  himself.]

“  I  send  you  a  copy  of  a  letter  of  a  friend  of  mine,  whom
I  mesmerised  when  in  a  severe  rheumatic  fever : —

“  Hanby}  near  York,  Dec.  1  Q>th,  1843,

“  My  dear  Thompson, —

“  It  would  be  impossible  for  me  (were  I  so  inclined)  to
refuse  my  testimony  to  the  truth  and  usefulness  of  mesmer¬
ism,  since  I  myself  have  derived  so  much  benefit  from  it.
On  Friday,  the  24th  of  November,  when  you  came  to  see
me,  I  had  suffered  for  nine  consecutive  days  unceasing  pain.
I  had  never  been  able  to  get  ten  minutes  sleep  together :  my
appetite  was  quite  gone :  I  had  eaten  nothing  during  that
time  but  a  little  toast  and  tea.  I  was  suffering  acute  pain  in
my  shoulders,  arms,  hands,  loins  and  legs,  to  my  knees  :  my
feet  were  not  so  painful,  but  powerless,  and  no  means  seemed
capable  of  restoring  warmth  to  them.  My  fever  was  exces¬
sive,  though  I  had  most  profuse  night  sweats, — caused  I  be¬
lieve  by  the  agony  of  pain.  In  less  than  twenty  minutes,
you  had  nearly  charmed  away  all  the  pain,  and  restored
warmth  and  feeling  to  my  feet.  You  then  put  me  to  sleep.
The  delightful  sensation  of  that  sleep,  after  such  extreme
pain,  I  can  scarcely  describe.  When  you  awakened  me,  I


Mr.  Tfiompson’s  Cases.


87


felt  like  another  person.  The  fever  was  reduced, — the  pain
was  gone, — and  I  scarcely  felt  any  languor.  In  four  days,
under  your  treatment,  I  was  down  stairs.  Every  time  you
mesmerised  me  I  felt  as  it  were  new  life :  any  pain  I  had
about  me  was  removed :  my  appetite  was  good  :  and  in  short
at  the  end  of  a  week,  though  I  was  still  reduced  to  a  skele¬
ton,  I  had  not  felt  so  well  as  I  did  then  even  for  some  weeks
before  my  attack.  You  warned  me  against  trespassing  with
the  almost  unnatural  strength  I  felt  in  so  short  a  time,  and
cautioned  me  against  exposing  myself  to  cold.  My  feelings
made  me  careless :  I  caught  fresh  cold,  and  all  my  old  symp¬
toms  returned,  though  not  so  violent ;  but  I  had  an  additional
one  of  pain  in  my  chest.  You  were  kind  enough  to  come
again ;  in  four  days  I  was  again  entirely  freed  from  every
pain,  and  I  now  feel  unusually  well, — I  should  say  extraordi¬
narily  and  unnaturally  so  for  the  state  to  which  I  am  reduced.
I  have  taken  no  medicine  except  those  two  or  three  draughts
that  you  left  me  in  case  I  felt  restless  at  night,  and  a  little
opening  medicine  two  or  three  times  as  a  precaution,  as  you
allowed  me  to  eat  what  I  liked,  and  my  appetite  is  very  good.
I  mean  to  be  very  careful ;  but  hope  in  a  day  or  two  to  return
you  my  thanks  in  propria  persona.

“  Yours,  very  sincerely  and  obliged,

“  Stephen  Croet.”

“  Another  very  similar  case,  but  not  quite  so  severe  as  the
former,  was  that  of  a  young  woman  of  the  name  of  Kaye,
in  the  service  of  a  family  in  the  neighbourhood  of  York.  The
family  are  not  at  home  at  present,  but  I  can  procure  her  sig¬
nature  to  my  statement  if  required.  Her  symptoms  were
somewhat  similar  to  the  former  case,  though  not  so  severe ;
but  she  had  suffered  and  been  under  medical  treatment  for
three  years.  I  mesmerised  her  in  March  last,  four  times  :
she  was  entirely  relieved,  and  has  enjoyed  good  health  ever
since.  She  had  been  medically  treated  by  Dr.  Belcombe  of
York,  I  believe  during  the  whole  of  the  three  years.  I  re¬
quested  her  to  state  the  benefit  she  had  derived  from  mes¬
merism  to  Dr.  Belcombe,  which  I  think  she  has  done  twice
since  I  saw  her,  about  a  month  ago :  and  she  said  that  she
had  not  suffered  any  return  of  the  complaint,  and  that  her
health  had  been  quite  good  ever  since.

“  Another  young  person,  the  daughter  of  one  of  the  porters
at  Long’s  Hotel,  Bond  Street,  who  had  been  unable  to  re¬
main  in  any  situation  for  three  years,  in  consequence  of  se-


88


Testimonies  of  the  Efficacy  of  Mesmerism.


vere  head-ache,  attended  with  rather  different  circumstances
to  the  former  cases,  was  entirely  relieved  by  mesmerism.  I
mesmerised  her  Avhile  in  London  in  May  last,  when  she  found
great  relief.  I  recommended  her  father  to  continue  mesmer¬
ising  her,  until  her  health  seemed  established.  He  told  me
the  other  day  that  he  succeeded  in  mesmerising  her  two  or
three  times  after  I  saw  her,  and  her  health  had  been  good
ever  since.

“  I  have  been  fortunate  enough  to  entirely  relieve  three
persons  of  severe  and  long-standing  neuralgic  pains  of  the
head.

“I  send  you  a  certificate  of  one  case,  signed  by  the  person
herself,  which,  as  I  could  procure  it,  I  thought  would  be  more
satisfactory.

“  This  is  to  certify,  that  for  four  years  I  suffered  from  very
severe  head-aches,  at  times  so  violent  as  to  entirely  incapacitate
me  for  any  exertion,  and  which  were  attended  with  pain  in
my  eyes,  dimness  of  sight,  and  great  soreness  of  the  head.
I  had  consulted  many  medical  men,  amongst  whom  were  Dr.
Locock,  Dr.  Chambers,  and  Mr.  Sampson,  in  London ;  and
in  the  country,  Mr.  Allen  of  York,  who  called  the  complaint
I  suffered  from  neuralgia.  I  am  35  years  of  age  :  had  been
bled,  cupped,  leeched,  blistered,  and  taken  all  sorts  of  pre¬
scriptions,  and  scarcely  ever  deriving  even  temporary  relief
from  these  means.  I  found  my  memory  much  impaired,  and
suffered  much  from  lowness  of  spirits  and  general  ill-health,
and  found  I  should  not  long  be  able  to  retain  my  situation.
Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  whose  service  I  am  in,  recommended
mesmerism.  I  had  a  great  horror  of  it,  nor  had  I  the  least
faith  in  its  curing  me.  However,  one  day  when  worse  than
usual,  I  asked  him  to  try  it.  In  less  than  ten  minutes  I  felt
relieved,  and  then  went  to  sleep,  and  was  told  I  slept  an
hour  when  Mr.  Thompson  awakened  me.  I  was  refreshed
and  entirely  free  from  pain.  I  was  mesmerised  four  times,
and  was  entirely  restored  ;  nor  have  I  had  a  head-ache  of  the
same  nature  since.  This  Avas  in  June  last.

“  Sarah  Parkin.

“Dated  this  18//*  day  of  December ,  1843.

“  Fairfield.

“  P.S.  My  general  health  has  been  very  good  ever  since.”


Mr.  Baldock’s  Cases.


89


From  Thomas  Baldock,  Esq.,  7  Terrace,  Dock-yard,  Chatham.

“  December  6th,  1843.

“  Sir, — It  is  with  much  pleasure  that  I  learn  the  intention
of  the  reverend  gentleman,  that  published  the  reply  to  the
Rev.  H.  M‘Neil,  again  to  take  up  the  powerful  pen  that  he
handles  with  so  much  tact.  And  that  he  purposes  to  collect
data  from  parties  of  such  respectability  that  their  standing  in
society  shall  be  a  guarantee  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  infor¬
mation  contributed  by  each.

“  I  most  willingly  therefore  bear  my  strong  testimony  as
to  the  truth  of  mesmerism,  and  am  happy  to  say  that  several
cases  have  presented  themselves  to  me  in  which  relief  has
been  given  to  the  parties.  It  is  now  about  thirteen  months
since  I  became  a  mesmeriser,  and  my  practice  has  been  to
journalize  every  case  at  length,  and  to  state  the  several  per¬
sons  present  when  the  parties  were  mesmerised,  and  to  read
over  the  journal  to  the  spectators ;  so  that  all  and  e^ery  of
my  statements  can  be  corroborated  if  requisite.  Palpitations
of  the  heart  I  have  invariably  succeeded  in  relieving.  Pains
in  the  head  have  generally  yielded  to  mesmerism  :  and  in  the
case  of  Robert  Flood,  now  residing  at  Caiston  in  Lincolnshire.
He  had  for  several  years  suffered  most  severely  from  disease
in  one  of  his  kidneys.  He  had  been  under  the  care  of  several
medical  men :  had  been  in  a  London  hospital,  and  his  pains
were  so  acute  that  he  could  not  leave  his  bed  until  the  day
was  advanced,  and  it  was  frequently  necessary  for  him  to
recline  several  times  in  the  day  :  and  this  he  had  endured  for
some  years.  He  came  to  me  three  evenings  in  the  week  for
a  few  weeks,  then  twice,  and  afterwards  only  once  in  about
three  months.  He  was  perfectly  restored  to  health.  He  has
since  that  time  removed  to  where  he  now  resides,  and  occa¬
sionally  writes  to  me  to  say  that  he  is  and  has  been  in  such
robust  health  ever  since  that  he  can  throw  a  quoit ;  and  that
he  owes  his  recovery  entirely  to  mesmerism.  His  was  a  sin¬
gular  case.  He  would  play  the  violin  capitally  when  in  the
mesmeric  state ;  and  without  touching  him  I  could  stop  his
playing  by  making  passes  down  his  arm.  I  could  place  his
wife  en  rapport  with  him,  and  he  and  she  would  sing  together
in  admirable  tune.

“  I  have  had  very  many  capital  cases.  But  as  I  do  not
know  what  you  wish  in  the  shape  of  evidence,  I  have  for¬
warded  this  sketch,  but  shall  be  most  happy  to  furnish  you
any  cases  you  may  think  proper.  Perhaps  when  I  run  up  to
town  I  ha(j|  better  bring  my  journals.  Will  you  drop  me
three  lines  to  sav  what  dav  and'  hour  I  should,  the  latter  end.


90


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations


of  this  week  or  the  early  part  of  next,  be  most  likely  to  sec
a  little  mesmerism  at  your  house  ?  I  would  recommend  you
to  write  to  Mr.  Weekes,  surgeon,  at  Sandwich;  he  has  three
splendid  cases.  And  rejoicing  that  you  have  had  moral
courage  to  stem  the  tide  of  public  opinion,

“  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  Sir,

“  Yours  very  truly,
l<  Thomas  Baldock,  Store  Receiver  ”


VII.  A  Collection  of  more  instances  of  Surgical  Operations
rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  The  science  of  mesmerism,  like  the  science  of  fortune-telling,  will  always  carry  on  a
precarious  existence,  wherever  there  are  clever  girls,  philosophic  Bohemians,  weak  women,
weaker  men:  but  it  can  no  longer  affront  the  common  sense  of  the  medical  profession ,  or  dare
to  show  its  face  in  the  scientific  societies  after  the  last  exposure.”  MR.  THOMAS  WAKLEY,
Lancet,  Sept.  15 th,  1838;  p.  873.

“  Mr.  Wakley  declared  that  in  his  opinion  the  effects  which  were  said  to  arise  from  what
had  been  denominated  animal  magnetism,  constituted  one  of  the  completest  delusions  that
the  human  mind  ever  entertained.'’  MR.  THOMAS  WAKLEY,  Lancet,  Sept.  1st,  1838;

p.  811.

To  the  Editor  of  The  Zoist.

Sir, — A  year  has  elapsed  since  the  publication  of  my
Numerous  Cases  of  Surgical  Operations  without  pain  in  the
Mesmeric  State ;  and,  as  many  more  have  subsequently  oc¬
curred,  I  send  you  a  second  collection.

Yours,  &c.

John  Elliotson.

Venesection.

I.  The  patient,  the  painless  extraction  of  whose  tooth  is
detailed  at  p.  66  of  my  pamphlet,  and  the  account  of  whose
case  and  phenomena  will  be  forwarded  for  your  Midsummer
number,  required  bleeding  for  a  severe  headache  last  year,
after  her  complete  recovery  from  the  fits.

I  determined  on  bleeding  her  -without  her  knowledge  :
and  threw  her  into  her  mesmeric  state,  in  which  she  has  no
sensibility  to  mechanical  injury  except  at  the  surface  of  her
head  and  face,  and  is  perfectly  rational,  except  that  she  usu¬
ally  fancies  the  place,  and  always  the  time  and  bystanders,
and  other  circumstances  of  the  moment,  to  be  different  from
what  they  are,  and  declares  herself  to  be  awake  and  seeing,
though  she  sees  nothing,  and  cannot  raise  herself  from  her
chair.  She  mistook  me  for  her  favourite  sister,  and  laughed
at  the  idea  of  my  saying  I  would  bleed  her.  Without  her
knowledge,  while  conversing  with  her,  I  bound  up  her  arm
and  bled  her.  I  asked,  after  the  incision,  if  she  did  not  feel  me


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism,.


91


pressing  my  hand  along  her  arm  to  make  the  blood  flow  into
the  basin,  but  she  only  laughed  at  me  again.  Having  an  attrac¬
tion  to  me,  though  mistaking  me  for  her  sister,  she  readily
squeezed  my  hand  at  my  request;  and,  when  I  had  withdrawn
mine,  she  moved  her  fingers  about,  saying,  when  I  asked
her  what  she  was  doing,  that  she  was  getting  on  her  thimble.
At  length  she  felt  very  faint  and  sick,  and  was  falling  off  her
chair,  and  I  laid  her  on  the  floor.  She  asked  for  toast  and
water ;  and,  when  she  was  recovered  and  her  arm  bound  up,
I  replaced  her  in  her  chair,  and  at  length  she  awoke  free
from  head-ache,  and  greatly  amused  and  pleased  at  finding  I
had  bled  her.

II.  Some  months  afterwards,  having  a  return  of  head¬
ache,  Mr.  Symes  bled  her  for  me,  equally  without  her  know¬
ledge  ;  she  mistaking  him  for  some  body  else,  and  me  for
her  favourite  sister.  I  stood  by  and  she  talked  all  the  time  to
me,  but  could  not  be  made  to  know  she  was  being  bled.  The
blood  not  coming  freely,  I  got  her  to  squeeze  my  hand
strongly  with  her^s,  by  touching  over  Attachment  on  the  same
side  as  the  arm.  She  at  last  remarked  with  surprise  that  her
head-ache  was  gone,  and  the  arm  was  accordingly  bound  up
before  she  felt  faint ;  and  as  we  were  in  a  hurry,  we  left  her
asleep.  When  she  woke  she  was  greatly  amused,  as  on
the  former  occasion,  and  free  from  head-ache.

III.  Her  aunt  has  a  cancer  in  her  breast,  and  has  been
mesmerised  some  time  by  me,  with  the  effect  of  a  light  simple
sleep  and  insensibility  of  the  surface.  She  was  lately  seized
with  pleurisy.  I  sent  her  off  with  three  passes,  and  Mr.
Symes’s  late  pupil,  Mr.  Ebsworth,  bled  her  for  me  to  faint¬
ness  without  her  feeling  it.  Before  the  arm  was  bound  up,
she  opened  her  eyes ;  but,  before  she  could  speak,  two  more
passes  sent  her  back  into  sleep,  and  she  did  not  wake  again
till  the  arm  was  bound  up ;  and  I  then  sent  her  to  sleep  a
third  time  and  left  her.  The  advantage  of  mesmerism  was
striking  and  most  gratifying.  Any  one  sends  her  to  sleep
and  with  very  little  trouble  :  some  of  us  with  two  or  three
passes,  though  she  seldom  sleeps  much  longer  than  half  an
hour.  During  this  illness  she  was  sent  to  sleep  by  those
around  her  continually  in  the  day  and  night,  so  that  she  had
abundance  of  the  sweetest  repose  without  any  narcotic.  Ex¬
cept  the  bleeding,  two  blisters,  and  four  doses  of  calomel,
and  some  syrup,  which  was  soon  left  off,  for  her  cough,  she
took  no  medicine.  As  soon  as  ever  she  coughed  upon  awak¬
ing,  they  sent  her  to  sleep  :  >  and,  dangerous  as  the  illness  was,


9  3


Distances  of  Surgical  Operations


she  says  that  to  her  utter  astonishment  she  never  recovered  so
quickly  from  an}r  illness,  and  had  always  previously  taken
many  dozens  of  bottles  before  she  was  out  of  the  doctor's
hands.  She  cannot  cease  wondering  at  it.

Extraction  of  Teeth.

IV.  The  patient  whose  remarkable  case  was  the  third  de¬
tailed  by  me  in  your  last  number  suffered  lately  severe  pain
from  a  decayed  double  tooth;  which  she  was  anxious  to  lose.
I  told  her  that  she  might  as  well  have  it  extracted  in  the
mesmeric  sleep,  and  accordingly  met  her  at  Mr.  Nicholles's  in
Bruton  Street,  who,  as  I  have  mentioned  at  p.  66  of  my  pam¬
phlet,  obligingly  extracted  the  tooth  of  the  patient  whose  two
bleedings  I  have  just  detailed.  I  sent  her  with  about  twenty
passes  into  her  sleep -waking  state,  in  which,  though  insensi¬
ble  to  mechanical  causes  of  pain,  she  talks  as  rationally  as
when  awake,  and  is  not  in  a  dreamy  state  like  the  other  pa¬
tient,  but  cognizant  of  the  time,  place  and  persons.  She
opened  her  mouth  at  my  request,  and  was  fully  aware  of
what  was  doing  though  she  felt  nothing.  Her  pulse  quick¬
ened  a  few  beats  each  time  the  instrument  was  put  into  her
mouth,  and  I  presume  from  apprehension,  as  she  went  to
the  house  in  extreme  fear  and  could  not  believe  she  should
suffer  no  pain.  The  operation  was  severe ;  and  in  the  midst
of  it  Mr.  Nicholles  desisted  and  looked  at  me,  finding  great
care  was  requisite  to  prevent  injury  to  the  surrounding  bone.
She  gave  no  expression  of  pain  in  her  countenance,  or  in
her  hand  which  I  held  loosely  in  my  own  :  and  when  it  was
over  she  had  no  appearance  of  having  felt  pain,  and  went
home  well  and  lively,  and  played  her  piano ;  whereas  she
never  had  a  tooth  drawn  before  without,  from  her  delicacy
and  nervousness,  being  ill  all  the  rest  of  the  day,  and  faint¬
ing  within  a  few  hours.  The  following  is  Mr.  Nicliolles's
account  in  the  Medical  Times  for  the  10th  of  last  February  : —

“To  the  Editor  of  the  Medical  Times.

“  Sir, — As  I  am  no  party  to  any  of  the  angry  disputes  on  mes¬
merism,  and  as  the  sliiboleth  of  my  actions  is  truth,  perhaps  you
will  excuse  the  trouble  this  little  communication  may  occasion  you.
My  friend,  Dr.  Elliotson,  brought  me  yesterday  a  young  lady,  a
patient  of  his,  who  had  been  long  suffering  from  a  “  raging  tooth,”
(frhe  inferior  anterior  molar  of  the  sinister  side) ;  and  who  had  ex¬
pressed  a  wish  to  have  it  removed  while  under  the  influence  of  mes¬
merism;  she  was  placed  in  a  chair,  I  examined  the  tooth,  and  Dr.
Elliotson  in  a  few  minutes  put  her  in  the  mesmeric  delirium,  during
which  state  I  performed  the  operation  (and  it  was  one  which  would
have  been  more  than  usually  painful  from  the  great  resistance  of  the


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.  93

alveolus)  without  the  young  lady  evincing  the  slightest  consciousness
or  flinch.

“The  pulse  was  108  under  the  mesmeric  influence,  and  rose  a
little  during  the  operation.  On  being  awakened  she  expressed  the
most  lively  gratitude  and  delight  at  having  lost  her  troublesome
companion.

“  I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

“John  Nicholles.

“34,  Bruton  Street ,  Feb.  1  st,  1844.”


V.  Mr.  Charles  Childs,  of  Bungay,  who  has  practised
and  supported  mesmerism  from  the  time  I  shewed  him  the
Okeys  and  the  case  of  hiccup  detailed  some  pages  back,  con¬
verted  Mr.  Webb,  a  medical  gentleman  in  his  neighbourhood,
to  the  truth  of  mesmerism,  who  honestly  proclaims  his  con¬
version  freely.  I  extract  the  following  from  the  Medical
Times : —

“To  the  Editor  of  the  Medical  Times.

“  Sir, — Knowing  there  are  many  persons  of  candour  and  intel¬
ligence,  who  are  sceptical  as  to  the  existence  of  that  peculiar  agent
or  influence  now  commonly  called  mesmerism,  and  having  seen  the
subject  unworthily  treated  by  many  who  wish  to  be  considered
rational  beings,  but  are  evidently  more  disposed  to  enjoy  a  burlesque
representation  than  to  institute  an  honest  search  for  truth,  I  am
induced  to  make  known  the  following  cases,  that  the  former  class
may  be  made  acquainted  with  some  indubitable  facts  connected  with
the  subject,  and  the  latter  may  see  how  pointless  are  expressions  of
ridicule  and  contempt  when  employed  in  such  a  controversy.

“I  have  the  pleasure  of  being  acquainted  with  Mr.  Charles
Childs,  who  resides  in  this  place,  and  who  has  for  several  years
privately  practised  the  science,  as  a  subject  of  legitimate  investiga¬
tion,  and  a  means  of  effecting  much  good.  By  him  I  have  been
invited  during  the  past  year  to  witness  many  facts  undoubtedly
mysterious,  but  yet  so  palpable,  so  consistent,  and  so  faithful,  that
they  have  produced  in  my  mind  entire  conviction  of  the  existence  of
some  element  or  attribute  of  our  common  nature,  which,  like  the
electric  and  galvanic  fluids,  is  discoverable  only  by  its  effects,  or
during  its  action.

“  My  present  object  is  to  communicate  only  two  cases  in  which
I  was  myself  concerned,  and  which,  had  any  doubt  lingered  in  my
mind,  would  have  entirely  dispelled  it. — Two  young  women,  mes¬
meric  patients  of  my  friend  Mr.  Childs,  who  had  suffered  from
toothache  for  some  time  past,  consented  to  have  their  teeth  extrac¬
ted  while  in  mesmeric  somnolency,  but  were  not  apprized  of  the
time  at  which  this  was  to  be  done.  That  they  might  have  no  reason
to  suspect  what  was  about  to  take  place,  I  was  not  sent  for  until
Mr.  Childs  had  put  them  into  the  mesmeric  condition,  when  I  went
and  extracted,  in  the  afternoon,  for  one  a  very  troublesome  stump.


94


Instances  of  Surgical  operations


and  in  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  for  the  other,  a  double  tooth
in  the  upper  jaw.  I  am  morally  certain  that  no  means  were  em¬
ployed  to  produce  this  state  of  unconsciousness,  except  the  mesmeric
— indeed,  there  are  no  others  capable  of  inducing  such  a  condition
as  that  in  which  these  young  women  were  placed,  and  from  which
they  could  be  released  at  the  will  of  another.  Care  was  taken  to
remove  from  sight  whatever  might  afford  intimation  of  the  teeth
having  been  extracted;  after  a  short  time  they  were  awakened,  and
they  were  both  wholly  unconscious  of  all  that  had  taken  place.  I
do  not  testify,  as  I  might,  to  their  respectability  of  character,
because  their  perfectly  unaffected  demeanour  and  natural  surprise
afforded,  to  my  own  judgment,  the  best  evidence  that  they  had
been  as  entirely  ignorant  both  of  the  operation  itself  and  of  the  time
at  which  it  was  effected,  as  they  were  of  the  moment  of  their  birth.

“Nor  was  this  all;  for  neither  at  the  time  when  they  were
awakened,  nor  on  the  following  day,  did  they  experience  either  pain
in  the  jaw  or  tenderness  in  the  gum.

“I  have  given  a  simple  statement  of  the  truth,  and  whatever
may  be  said  by  some,  or  thought  by  others,  these  are  stubborn  in¬
disputable  facts,  and  are  not  to  be  disposed  of  as  the  fancies  of  a
heated  imagination.  The  proofs  which  I  have  witnessed  of  the
existence  of  this  subtle  agent,  are  so  numerous,  and  so  complete,
that  the  difficulty,  in  my  judgment,  does  not  lie  in  believing,  but
in  doubting;  and  were  it  even  possible  for  one  person  honestly  to
delude  himself  in  such  a  case,  it  is  utterly  improbable  that  another,
and  another,  would  follow  in  his  train.  To  refuse  the  testimony  of
my  own  senses  here,  is  to  assume  that  these,  which  for  years  have
furnished  the  data  for  thought  and  action,  suddenly  fail,  and  delude
my  understanding,  when  directed  to  the  subject  of  mesmerism.

“I  have  not  come  forward  to  suport  the  theory  of  any  man.  I
desire  only,  as  an  unprejudiced  observer,  to  record  facts  which  I
have  myself  tested;  and  I  do  so  with  an  earnest  hope  that  this
subject,  so  interesting  in  itself,  and  capable  of  exercising  so  bene¬
ficial  an  influence,  may,  by  a  fair  and  philosophical  investigation,
be  placed  in  the  rank  of  those  sciences  which  are  cherished  as  the
springs  of  blessing  to  mankind.

“  I  am,  Sir,  yours  respectfully,

“T.  E.  Webb,  M.R.C.S.L.

“ Bungay ,  Jan.  \2thy  1844.”

VI.  Since  then  I  received  the  following  account  from
Mr.  Childs  of  another  extraction  :

“  My  dear  Sir, — Again,  to-day,  I  have  had  a  tooth  drawn — an
enormous  tosh — with  perfect  success.  This  is  becoming  merely  vul¬
gar;  but  the  point  to  which  I  want  to  draw  your  attention  is,  that
by  retaining  the  patient  asleep  for  half  an  hour  or  thereabouts  after
the  operation,  the  increase  of  sensibility  in  the  wound  is  wholly  re¬
moved.  In  each  of  my  three  cases  I  have  done  this,  and  the  parties
have  not  felt  the  slightest  soreness  or  irritation.


rendered  'painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.  95

“  Mr.  Webb,  who  operated,  lias  remarked  in  each  the  very  small
amount  of  haemorrhage.  A  little  blood  was  wiped  from  the  mouth
with  a  napkin,  and  it  seemed  as  if  the  artery  contracted  almost  forth¬
with;  the  remainder  was  scarcely  sufficient  to  discolour  the  water  in
a  hand  basin.

“  My  dear  Sir,

“  Most  obediently  yours,

(( Bungay,  Feb.  \5th,  1844.”  “  Charles  Childs.

I  have  subsequently  been  favoured  with  the  following  par¬
ticulars  from  Mr.  Childs  : —

“The  insensibility  was,  during  the  prescribed  time,  complete;
the  return  to  sleeping  consciousness  took  place  at  the  very  instant
which  had  been  prescribed; — and  when,  at  the  end  of  a  considerable
time,  the  sleep  was  removed,  the  patient  was  entirely  unsuspicious
of  what  had  been  done,  and  there  was  so  total  an  absence  of  unusual
sensibility  in  the  jaw,  that  the  patient,  whose  appetite  had  for  some
time  failed  under  the  excessive  pain  which  had  been  endured,  imme¬
diately  ate  a  hearty  dinner,  drinking  cold  water,  &c.,  without  auy
sense  of  inconvenience,  or  conscious  need  of  carefulness  in  using
the  jaw.”

VII.  &  VIII.  Your  correspondent,  Mr.  Tubbs  of  Upwell,
sends  me  word  that  he  extracted  two  teeth  lately  from  a  wo¬
man  aged  35,  and  another  from  a  Mrs.  Foster,  in  the  mes¬
meric  state  without  pain.  The  following  is  an  account  of  one
of  these  operations  in  a  local  newspaper  : —

“Mesmerism. — The  sceptical  as  to  this  science  (so  far  as  the
following  operation  can  prove  its  truth)  may  have  their  doubts  re¬
moved  by  personal  application  to  a  patient  now  residing  at  Lake’s
End,  Cambs. — On  Tuesday  the  14th  ult.,  the  patient,  suffering
extremely  from  the  tooth-ache,  applied  to  Mr.  Tubbs,  surgeon,  of  Up¬
well,  to  have  it  extracted;  and  on  being  told  that  the  operation  could
be  performed  without  pain  or  consciousness  under  the  influence  of
the  mesmeric  sleep,  readily  consented  to  be  operated  upon.  In  a
few  minutes  unconsciousness  took  place,  attended  by  the  common
circumstance  of  the  mouth  becoming  closed ;  and  it  was  so  firmly
fixed  as  to  defy  any  known  means  (short  of  such  violence  as  might
endanger  the  safety  of  the  jaw)  to  open  it:  but  upon  being  breathed
on  by  Mr.  Tubbs,  it  instantly  dropped:  the  instrument  was  then
applied  to  the  tooth,  which  required  more  than  usual  force  to  re¬
move  it.  During  the  operation,  which  was  attended  by  several
witnesses,  (by  whom  the  strictest  and  most  scrupulous  attention  was
paid,)  not  a  change  of  feature  could  be  discovered  that  might  indi¬
cate  either  pleasurable  or  painful  sensation.  After  the  tooth  had
been  removed,  the  jaw  was  still  extended,  the  eyes  closed,  and  the
breathing  scarcely  perceptible.  The  patient  remained  motionless
for  twenty  minutes;  and  upon  being  demesmerised,  had  no  recollec¬
tion  of  what  had  passed  during  her  somnolency,  and  could  scarcely


96  Instances  of  Surgical  Operations

be  made  to  believe  that  her  tooth  was  extracted. — Those  of  the
public  who  are  willing  to  have  the  above  account  attested,  and  to
prove  the  veracity  of  the  operation,  would  do  well  to  make  a  personal
examination.  To  those  scientific  gentlemen  who  undertake  to  lead
the  minds  of  that  part  of  the  community  who  cannot  think  for
themselves,  and  who  pronounce  everything  ‘humbug’  which  does
not  suit  their  interest  or  stupidity,  these  facts  are  not  addressed —
they  must  continue  as  they  are. — (Correspondent .)”

IX.  In  Mr.  SpurrelPs  Rationale  of  Magnetism}  just  pub¬
lished,  is  the  following  account,  at  p.  68  : —

“  Mr.  Baldwin,  surgeon,  having  consented  to  perform  the  opera¬
tion,  I  (B.  Dann)  put  Edward  Wisenden  into  what  is  called  the
sleep-waking  state;  the  patient  in  this  state  being  sensible  of  who  is
about  him.  I  then  requested  him  to  open  his  mouth  wide,  and  to
keep  it  open:  he  did  so.  I  then  threw  him  into  the  deep  sleep;  a
state  in  which  the  patient  is  insensible  to  everything  about  him,  even
of  the  operator’s  voice  or  presence.  Mr.  B,  then  lanced  his  gum,
without  producing  the  appearance  of  any  unpleasant  sensation;  he
then  extracted  the  tooth,  which  was  very  firm  in  its  socket,  without
distorting  a  muscle  of  the  patient’s  face,  or  his  exhibiting  the  least
symptom  of  pain.  The  gum  which  had  been  lacerated  was  then
closed,  and  a  piece  of  rag  put  over  it.  (Mr.  B.  being  called  away)
I  then  restored  him  to  the  sleep-waking  state,  (noticed  above:)  he
then  exclaimed,  “  The  gentleman  is  gone !  why  did  he  not  take  out
my  tooth  first?  what  did  he  come  for?”  I  then  requested  him  to
look  at  the  tooth  he  wanted  out;  he  said,  “I  cannot  see  it,  there  is
a  rag  over  it.”  I  told  him  to  look  under  the  rag;  he  appeared  then
to  be  much  pleased,  and  said,  “  It  is  gone!  why  didn’t  he  take  the
other  out  opposite?”  Supposing  that  he  would  be  in  much  pain
when  woke  up,  I  kept  him  asleep  about  ten  minutes  more,  and  then
restored  him  to  his  normal  state;  when  he  was  agreeably  surprised
to  find  his  tooth  out,  but  was  not  aware  of  anything  that  had  taken
place,  and  was  not  in  the  least  pain;  nor  did  he  feel  any  tenderness
afterwards.”

X.  In  the  Leicester  Chronicle  of  last  June  is  a  letter
signed  J.  Dare,  and  dated  Hinckley,  June  24th,  1843,  giving
an  account  of  some  experiments  by  Mr.  George  Reddells,
occupied  in  Mr.  TilPs  warehouse,  and  of  the  extraction  of  a
tooth  : —

“  As  the  operator  pursued  his  experiments  merely  for  amusement,
he  exhibited  them  at  various  times  and  places  as  ‘  chance  or  time  de¬
termined,’  or  as  he  was  requested  by  his  friends.  Amongst  them,  a
young  man  named  James  Paul,  a  very  strong-built  and  muscular  in¬
dividual,  submitted  to  the  operation.  He  was  thrown  into  the  mes¬
meric  state  in  about  four  minutes,  and  various  organs  were  then
excited;  but  a  second  operation,  which  he  underwent  at  his  own
request,  was  attended  with  results  of  a  very  important  nature  in  a


Tendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.  97

surgical  point  of  view.  Having  the  tooth-ache  very  violently  two  or
three  days  after  his  first  somnolency,  he  wished  to  have  his  tooth
extracted  while  in  a  mesmerised  state,  in  order  to  prove  if  the  ope¬
ration  could  be  performed  without  pain  under  its  influence.  The
parties  accordingly  met  on  Tuesday  evening  last,  at  Mr.  Marshal’s,
New  Inn.  Nearly  twenty  persons  attended  to  witness  the  operation.
The  gum  had  been  lanced  previous  to  the  mesmerising;  somnolency
was  produced  in  about  nine  minutes,  at  the  end  of  which  short  space
he  was  in  a  profoundly  unconscious  state.  His  organs  were  then
tried  to  ascertain  that  he  was  ‘  quite  gone.’  Several  of  the  company
spoke  to  him  very  loudly,  but  he  made  no  reply.  His  organ  of
Firmness  was  then  manipulated,  together  with  that  of  Individuality.
The  operator  then  asked  him  if  he  had  the  tooth-ache?  He  an¬
swered,  ‘Yes.’  He  was  then  asked  if  he  would  have  his  tooth
drawn  out,  and  he  replied  in  the  affirmative.  Before  the  tooth  was
extracted,  however,  several  other  organs  were  touched,  and  the  finger
being  placed  upon  Tune  he  was  asked  to  sing.  He  answered,  he  had
never  learned,  but  on  being  pressed,  he  bawled  out,  ‘  O  see  what  a
beautiful  boy.’

“  As  the  company  were  now  fully  satisfied  that  the  mesmeric
influence  was  exerting  its  full  power,  the  tooth-drawing  commenced.

t(  The  operator,  again  touching  Firmness,  asked  him  a  second
time  if  he  would  have  his  tooth  pulled  out  ?  He  again  replied  in  the
affirmative;  he  was  then  requested  to  open  his  mouth,  which  he
did — at  first  partially — and,  on  being  ordered  to  extend  it  still  wider,
he  very  gravely  dropped  his  bottom  jaw  nearly  into  his  lap.  Bailey,
the  well-known  tooth-drawer,  then  set  to  work  to  perform  the  im¬
portant  operation  of  extracting  the  fated  ‘  grinder,’  which  he  did  in
very  good  style.  Master  Mesmeriser  still  holding  his  finger  upon  the
organ  of  Firmness.  The  tooth  had  three  fangs,  two  of  which  were
broken  off,  from  the  very  great  force  required  to  draw  it  out;  it  was
but  little  decayed.  In  order  that  Paul  might  not  be  suffocated  by
the  flow  of  blood  from  the  wound  the  tooth  had  made,  the  organ  of
Imitation  was  touched,  and  the  operator  began  spitting,  as  if  clean¬
ing  his  throat,  which,  curious  as  it  might  seem,  Paul  did  in  reality,
thereby  expectorating  the  blood  as  fast  as  it  flowed.  As  soon  as  it
was  thought  the  gum  was  a  little  stilled,  the  operator  began  to  de-
mesmerise  him,  which  was  rather  a  difficult  piece  of  business.  The
ordinary  means  hitherto  used  by  the  operator  not  appearing  to  pro¬
duce  the  accustomed  effect,  it  was  presumed  that  the  subject  had
been  cross-mesmerised  by  the  dentist;  this  seemed  to  be  soon  fully
proved,  as  the  operator  very  judiciously  requested  Bailey  to  assist
him  in  the  work  of  resuscitation,  and  then  it  was  effected  in  a  very
short  period,  but  not  fully  so  till  after  he  had  been  taken  into  the
open  air.  As  soon  as  he  was  ‘  wide  awake,’  he  complained  of  feeling
rather  sleepy ,  and  expressed  his  surprise  at  seeing  so  many  persons
about  him,  and  inquired  what  had  been  the  matter,  as  if  wholly  un¬
conscious  of  all  that  had  transpired  while  he  had  been  in  a  mesmeric
state.  In  a  few  minutes,  the  operator  said,  amongst  other  casual
remarks,  they  were  very  sorry  they  had  not  been  able  to  extract  his
VOL.  II.  h


98


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations


tooth,  when  with  the  utmost  naivete  he  put  his  finger  into  his  mouth
to  satisfy  himself  on  the  point,  and  suddenly  exclaimed,  f  It  is
out!’  After  various  remarks  and  conjectures  had  been  proposed  as
to  the  ‘  why’  and  (  wherefore’  of  this  mysterious  agency,  the  company
separated,  fully  convinced  of  the  power  and  truth  of  mesmerism.
Paul  seemed  delighted  at  the  manner  in  which  the  tooth  had  been
drawn  out,  declaring  he  had  suffered  no  pain.  The  truth  of  the
last  remark  was  confirmed  by  the  quiescence  he  manifested  during
the  operation; — not  a  muscle  or  limb  was  moved,  not  a  tone  uttered,
during  this  generally  very  painful  operation,  and  to  avoid  which  he
had  submitted  to  this  mode  of  extraction.”

XI.  The  following  is  from  the  Jamaica  Standard ,  the
3rd  of  March,  1843  : —

“  Reported  by  Richard  Tuthill ,  M.D. ,  2nd  W.  I.  Regiment.

i(  Spanish  Town,  Jamaica,  Feb.  22,  1843.

“  The  case  was  exhibited  in  presence  of  Alexander  N.  Macleod,
Esq.,  Inspector  General  of  Police;  Alexander  N.  Macleod,  Inspector
of  Police;  George  Thompson  and  Walter  Dayly,  Esqs.,  of  Spanish
Town;  James  Geddes,  Esq.,  of  St.  Mary’s;  and  myself,  which
form  an  addition  to  the  many  interesting  facts  already  published,  in
proof  of  the  truth  and  utility  of  the  service  of  animal  magnetism.

“  Miss - ,  a  respectable  young  lady,  at  my  request,  was

visited  for  the  first  time,  Monday  26th  inst.,  by  Mr.  Garrison,  the
practical  phrenologist  and  mesmerist;  and  in  presence  of  several  of
her  female  acquaintances,  and  a  few  gentlemen,  this  young  lady  and
a  young  gentleman,  were  placed  under  the  influence  of  animal  mag¬
netism,  and  kept  in  the  state  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  during
which  they  accompanied  Mr.  Garrison  in  singing  three  songs,  in
walking  about  the  room,  and  conversing  with  himself  or  any  one
with  whom  he  put  one  or  both  in  communication.  His  method  for
producing  such  an  astonishing  and  wonderful  effect  over  the  animal
system,  is  very  simple  and  perfectly  divested  of  everything  which
might  be  supposed  to  be  indelicate  or  improper;  so  much  that  the
most  delicate  and  virtuous  female  might,  with  as  much  propriety
submit  to  be  mesmerised  as  to  have  her  pulse  felt,  or  lungs  or  heart
examined  by  the  physician  or  surgeon.  When  operating,  he  held
both  hands  of  the  patient,  and  commanded  attention,  by  a  full  de¬
termination  of  mind  expressed  by  the  usual  corresponding  change  of
countenance;  and  after  a  few  minutes  he  placed  one  hand  upon  the
forehead,  pressed  gently  upon  the  supraorbital  nerves  and  eyelids,
and  by  the  magnetic  influence  produced  in  this  way,  the  patient  be¬
came  sleepy,  the  eyes  felt  a  burning  sensation;  he  then  increased
the  magnetic  effect,  by  passing  his  hands  gently  down  the  arms,
which  produced  artificial  catalepsy,  characterized  by  the  head  or
arms  remaining  in  any  position  in  which  they  were  placed,  and  over
which  the  patient  had  no  controul.  In  this  state  the  eyes  are  fixed,
yet  the  patient  cannot  distinguish  objects.  The  patient  can  hear  the


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.  99

operator’s  voice  alone,  or  that  of  any  one  with  whom  he  may  be  put
in  communication;  but  he  cannot  hear  the  noise  produced  by  the
knocking  of  two  books  together,  or  the  voices  of  several  people  talk¬
ing  quite  loud.  When  the  patient  is  being  perfectly  mesmerised,
the  breathing  becomes  quickened,  the  circulation  also  is  affected,  the
temperature  of  the  hands  is  lowered,  and  a  cold  clammy  perspiration
is  felt  upon  both  the  hands  and  face.  When  the  patient  is  about  to
be  awakened  out  of  the  mesmeric  state,  the  operator  rubs  the  eyelids
with  one  or  two  fingers,  from  the  external  angle  of  the  eye  towards
the  nose,  and  also  ‘the  supraorbital  nerves  in  an  inward  direction,
and  he  says  to  the  patient,  c  awake,’  and  almost  instantly  the  mes¬
meric  influence  ceases,  and  the  patient  awakes  with  an  expression  of
astonishment,  and  wonders  as  if  he  had  passed  into  another  world
into  a  transmigrified  state  of  existence.  When  the  patient  is  per¬
fectly  mesmerised,  his  voice  becomes  perfectly  low.

“The  young  lady  who  forms  the  principal  subject  of  this  article,
has  had  the  first  molar  tooth  on  the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw,  dis¬
eased  for  about  eight  or  ten  months,  and  almost  completely  destroyed,
leaving  only  a  narrow  and  fungous  tumor  sprung  through  this  hole  of
the  tooth  above  the  level  of  its  surface,  which  always  bled  when
touched  ever  so  slightly.  It  also  became  very  annoying  from  the
constant  irritation  felt  in  it,  so  that  she  often  expressed  a  strong-
desire  to  have  it  extracted,  but  was  prevented  by  the  ill-judged  advice
of  friends.  Tuesday  the  21st,  she  requested  to  be  mesmerised  in
order  to  have  her  tooth  removed;  Mr.  Garrison  appointed  to  meet
her  at  12  o’clock,  but  from  some  unforeseen  circumstances  was
unable  to  be  punctual  to  the  moment,  and  singular  to  observe,  a
little  after  the  hour  had  elapsed,  she  became  agitated,  and  said  to
several  she  was  frightened  and  could  not,  she  thought,  have  the
tooth  taken  out  that  day:  moreover  she  was  frequently  urged  by  a
professional  gentleman  present  not  to  have  the  tooth  drawn  if  she
felt  no  pain;  but  there  was  no  doubt  the  diseased  state  of  the  tooth,
and  the  existence  of  a  fungous  tumor,  demanded  the  operation;  as
by  leaving  it,  a  more  extensive  and  more  serious  disease  would  take
place,  which  might  have  had  some  influence  over  the  system.  A
number  of  young  ladies  who  were  present,  talked  rather  loudly  and
laughed  too  much.  Mr.  Garrison  came  in  about  half  an  hour  after
the  appointed  time,  when  he  tried  to  produce  the  mesmeric  state,
but  all  his  efforts  were  ineffectual.  But  to-day,  the  22nd  inst.,  at
2  o’clock  p.m.,  she  was  put  under  the  full  influence  of  magnetism,
and  in  this  state  she  accompanied  Mr.  Garrison  in  singing  three
songs,  two  of  which  she  had  not  sung  before,  except  when  magne¬
tized  on  the  20th  instant.  After  singing,  Mr.  Garrison  asked  her  if
she  were  sleepy.  *  Oh  yes,  rather  so.’  He  asked  her  if  she  would
have  her  tooth  drawn  without  feeling  any  pain.  ‘Yes,  indeed,  I
would,  if  I  thought  I  would  not  feel  pain.’  He  desired  her  to  open
her  mouth,  which  she  did,  and  Mr.  Garrison  rubbed  the  under  edge
of  the  lower  jaw  for  a  few  seconds,  and  the  muscles  of  the  jaw  be¬
came  so  rigid  that  when  she  was  desired  to  shut  her  mouth,  she
said,  (  But  I  can’t  do  so.’  I  then  extracted  the  tooth  and  cut  the

h  2


100


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations


fungus  aivay  in  every  direction  without  producing  a  single  impression
on  the  nervous  system ;  there  did  not  even  appear  the  most  distant
alteration  expressive  of  pain,  or  of  a  consciousness  as  to  ivhat  had
taken  place.  Mr.  Garrison  rubbed  the  edge  of  the  lower  jaw  from
the  chin  towards  the  angle  of  the  jaw,  and  the  nerves  became  relaxed,
and  the  mouth  closed  naturally:  she  was  handed  a  glass  of  warm
water  by  Mr.  Garrison,  and  desired  to  wash  her  mouth,  which  she
did,  and  spit  it  with  some  blood  into  a  basin.  She  again  was  asked
to  sing;  and  after  singing  three  songs,  she  was  asked  to  play  on  the
piano;  and  before  rising  from  her  chair  to  follow  Mr.  Garrison,  she
turned  herself  round  until  she  faced  him  directly.  She  then  rose
and  followed  him  into  another  room,  making  several  turns  before
she  reached  the  piano;  she  took  her  seat,  and  played  two  tunes  in
presence  of  the  ladies  and  gentlemen.  After  being  upwards  of  an
hour  in  a  mesmeric  state,  Mr.  Garrison  awoke  her  in  the  usual  way,
and  she  was  perfectly  unconscious  of  what  had  happened.  I  asked
her  if  she  would  allow  me  to  draw  the  tooth,  and  upon  searching  her
mouth  with  her  tongue  and  finger  for  the  tooth,  expressed  some
astonishment  at  not  finding  it;  and  when  it  was  shewn  her,  as  also
the  blood  she  spat  up  after  it  was  drawn,  her  astonishment  seemed
to  increase.  With  respect  to  the  application  of  animal  magnetism
to  the  science  of  phrenology,  I  will  state  the  following  facts  which
the  ladies  and  gentlemen  above  mentioned  had  also  seen:  when  Mr.
Garrison  excited  the  different  phrenological  organs,  the  person  acted
upon  evinced  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner  in  expression,  and
attidudes,  the  justification  of  the  several  faculties  as  laid  down  by
Drs.  Gall  and  Spurzheim.” — Jamaica  Standard,  March  3rd,  1843.

XII.  The  following  account  has  been  printed  and  circu¬
lated  : —

“  Extract  from  Minute  of  Meeting  of  a  Committee  of  Medical  and
other  Gentlemen,  held  at  Edinburgh,  on  May  ls£,  1843.

“  Present — Dr.  John  Scott,  Howe-street ;  Dr.  Glasgow,  22,
Athole-crescent ;  Mr.  William  Tait,  Surgeon,  8,  Hill-place;  Dr.
Francis  Farquharson,  Northumberland-street;  Mr.  James  Simpson,
Advocate;  Mr.  William  Chambers,  Publisher;  Mr.  James  Riach,
Surgeon,  25,  India-street;  Mr.  Robert  Nasmyth,  Surgeon-Dentist
to  the  Queen;  Mr.  E.  T.  Craig,  Lecturer  on  Phrenology  and  Mes¬
merism;  Mr.  Robert  Cox,  Editor  of  the  Phrenological  Journal.

“Mr.  Simpson  read  the  conditions  of  the  evening’s  proceedings.

“  Mr.  Riach  undertook  to  act  as  watchman  of  proceedings;  Mr.
Simpson,  as  giver  of  signals;  and  Mr.  Cox,  as  secretary.

“  William  Gill  was  brought  from  the  next  room  by  Mr.  Simpson.

“  At  a  quarter  past  8  o’clock,  p.m.,  Mr.  Craig  began  to  mes¬
merise  W.  Gill.

“At  18  minutes  past  8,  the  entrance  of  Dr.  Farquharson  caused
an  interruption;  but  the  process  was  immediately  afterwards  re¬
sumed.

“  At  20  minutes  past  8,  Gill  appeared  asleep;  he  was  pricked,


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.  101

and  his  nose  tickled  by  Mr.  Craig,  at  23  minutes  past  8,  without
shewing  any  sensibility.  Mr.  Craig  wrote  on  a  sheet  of  paper  on  the
table,  4  Not  so  profound  as  he  will  be  shortly.’

44  At  25  minutes  past  8,  Gill’s  pulse  was  felt  by  Mr.  Riach,  and
reported  to  be  ninety-two.

44  Mr.  Craig  wrote,  4  Pulse  should  have  been  examined  before.’

“The  pricking  instrument  (Mr.  Craig’s  breast  pin)  was  handed
to,  and  felt  by,  several  of  the  committee,  including  the  secretary,  and
found  to  be  pointed.

44  At  half-past  8,  Mr.  Nasmyth  examined  Gill’s  mouth,  and  re¬
ported  that  4  he  closes  it  very  firmly.’  Mr.  Craig  and  he  opened  the
mouth.

44  At  32  minutes  past  8,  Mr.  Nasmyth  extracted  a  molar  tooth;
a  minute  later  Gill  was  pricked  and  shewed  no  sign  of  sensibility.
Mr.  Nasmyth  remarked  that  he  seemed  perfectly  insensible.  Mr.
Riach  said  he  saw  no  symptoms  of  pain;  Gill’s  countenance  had
been  perfectly  tranquil.  Thought  Gill  was  partially  roused  by  the
operation,  as  the  appearance  of  the  eye  had  changed.

44  In  answer  to  questions  from  some  of  the  gentlemen,  Mr.
Nasmyth  said,  he  did  not  think  this  a  case  in  which  there  would
have,  in  ordinary  circumstances,  been  very  severe  pain,  as  the  tooth
came  out  without  great  difficulty ;  still  there  would  have  been  consi¬
derable  pain.

44  The  tooth  was  extracted  without  scarification.  It  had  troubled
the  patient,  and  Mr.  Craig  had  his  written  authority  for  its  extrac¬
tion.  Blood  flowed  from  the  mouth.

44  At  40  minutes  past  8,  Mr.  Craig  proceeded  to  restore  Gill  to  the
ordinary  state,  by  blowing  on  his  eyes  and  head  for  about  a  minute  and
a  half,  during  which  Gill  shifted  uneasily  the  position  of  his  head ;
on  awaking  he  declared  he  felt  very  well;  was  disturbed  by  some¬
thing  soon  after  he  fell  asleep;  was  confused  at  something  else;  does
not  recollect  anything  being  done  to  him;  misses  a  tooth  now,  but
had  no  feeling  when  it  was  extracted.  The  disturbance  was  4  irrita¬
ble,’  but  not  ‘painful;’  thinks  it  was  ‘feeling,’  not  ‘passion.’  Had
no  pain  in  his  mouth.  Is  glad  he  has  got  rid  of  the  tooth.  After
extraction,  the  tooth  was  seen  by  various  gentlemen  present.

44  At  50  minutes  past  8,  the  pulse  was  reported  by  Mr.  Riach  to
be  eighty.

44  At  51  minutes  past  8,  Mr.  Nasmyth  having  closed  the  sides  of
the  gums.  Gill  said  he  now  felt  pain,  and  left  the  room.

“Extracted  from  the  minutes  written  during  the  operation,  by

44  Robert  Cox.

“  Edinburgh ,  May  2nd,  1843.”

XIII.  &  XIY.  In  the  Newry  Telegraph  are  the  following
accounts  of  two  extractions  of  teeth  : —

44  Armagh,  January  19,  1843.

“I  certify  that  Sarah  Moffett  applied  to  me  to  have  two  molar
teeth  extracted,  having  first  applied  to  a  medical  friend  of  mine.


102


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations


who  transferred  her  to  me,  with  a  request  that  I  would  extract  them .
Having  become  considerably  interested  with  a  series  of  lectures  on
mesmerism,  delivered  here  by  Mr.  Robinson,  at  the  Tontine  Rooms,
I  requested  that  gentleman  to  mesmerise  her,  which  he  did;  and,
during  the  mesmeric  trance,  I  removed  both  teeth,  without  her
knowledge,  or  any  manifestation  of  suffering.

“Thomas  Grattan,

“  Surgeon  Dentist ,  Licentiate  Apothecary ,  $*c.”

(C  Blackwatertown,  20th  Jan. ,  1843.

“  Sir, — I  take  this  early  opportunity  of  thanking  you  for  so
kindly  and  promptly  attending  to  my  patient,  Sarah  Moffett,  on
Thursday  last,  whom  I  transferred  to  you  for  the  extraction  of  two
teeth,  being  anxious  she  should  have  the  advantage  of  your  skill  as
an  experienced  practising  dentist ,  as  the  last  time  she  underwent  a
similar  operation  she  suffered  intense  pain.  Being  informed  the  pa¬
tient  was  under  the  influence  of  mesmerism  when  you  were  operating,
I  beg  to  make  the  following  statement,  lest  it  might  be  imagined  she
was  in  any  way  acting  in  collusion  with  the  mesmeriser: — The  pa¬
tient  went  direct  from  the  Blackwatertown  Dispensary,  by  my  direc¬
tions,  to  you,  without  having  any  previous  knowledge  of  the  nature
of  mesmerism,  or  my  being  aware  that  Mr.  Robinson,  the  mesmeriser,
was  then  in  Armagh,  which  proves  that,  with  this  patient,  there
could  not  possibly  have  been  any  deception.  I  this  day,  with  Dr.
Cuming,  of  Armagh,  questioned  her  as  to  the  state  she  was  in  during
the  extraction  of  the  teeth,  when  she  stated,  ‘  She  did  not  suffer
the  slightest  pain,  •  nor  was  she  aware  the  extraction  had  taken  place
until,  when  awoke,  she  discovered  the  absence  of  the  teeth.’

“  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient,

“Francis  Clarke,

“  Medical  Superintendent  of  the  Blackwatertown  Dispensary.
“To  Mr.  Grattan,  Dentist,  Armagh.”

“We,  the  undersigned,  hereby  certify  that,  on  Thursday,  the
19th  of  January,  1843,  we  witnessed  Mr.  Grattan,  Surgeon-Dentist,
of  Armagh,  extract  two  molar  teeth  from  Sarah  Moffett,  while  she
was  in  mesmeric  trance,  into  which  she  had  been  thrown  by  Mr.
Robinson  (lecturer  on  mesmerism),  and  that  she  did  not  appear  cog¬
nizant  of  the  operation,  neither  did  she  manifest  the  slightest  ap¬
pearance  of  suffering.  “  M.  R.  Bell.

“  James  Burns.”

“  I  witnessed  the  second  operation,  having  been  too  late  for  the
first,  and  I  certify  that  Sarah  Moffett  did  not  exhibit  any  symptoms
of  pain  during  it,  and  that  she  afterwards  declared  that  she  had  not
suffered  any.  “Abraham  Matthews.”

“To  the  Editor  of  the  Newry  Telegraph.

“  Wednesday  Morning ,  6,  Sugar  Island.

“  Mr  dear  Sir, — As  mesmerism  seems  at  present  to  excite  so
much  public  attention,  I  consider  it  but  justice  to  Mr.  Robinson  to
state,  that  he  kindly  attended  at  my  house  this  morning,  and  put


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.  103

a  woman  into  a  mesmeric  trance,  from  whom,  whilst  in  that  state,

I  extracted  one  of  her  ‘  wisdom’  teeth  (which  from  its  situation  is
the  most  difficult  and  painful  to  extract)  without  her  appearing  con¬
scious  of  it.  After  its  removal  she  was  allowed  to  remain  in  the
sleep  for  a  few  seconds,  and  when  aroused  said  she  suffered  no  pain
from  the  operation,  which  I  performed  in  presence  of  Drs.  Erskine
and  Mollan;  John  Dally,  Hugh  Dalzel,  Michael  Smith,  James
Alex.  Henderson,  Esqrs.;  and  Major  Bailie.  I  shall  feel  obliged  by
your  giving  this  publicity,  and  remain  yours  truly,

“William  Alex.  Davis,

“  M.D.  and  Surgeon.”

XV.  XYI.  XVII.  XVIII.  Among  the  notes  to  the  second
edition  of  the  American  translation  of  Deleuze's  Practial  In¬
struction  in  Animal  Magnetism ,  is  the  following  (Note  29)  : —

“  Providence ,  Oct.  4th,  1837.

“  Dear  Sir, — I  cheerfully  comply  with  your  request. — Some  time
during  the  last  summer,  I  was  informed  by  Dr.  Brownell  that  one
of  his  patients  was  at  his  house  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  was  in¬
vited  to  call  and  see  her.  I  accepted  the  invitation,  and  found  the
lady  sleeping.  After  some  curious  experiments,  she  was  awakened.
She  requested  me  to  examine  her  teeth,  which  she  said  she  had  un¬
fortunately  broken  off  by  a  fall,  and  expressed  a  desire  to  have  some
new  ones  inserted.  Upon  examination,  I  found  her  teeth  badly
decayed  and  broken;  and  informed  her  that  it  would  be  necessary  to
have  the  roots  of  some  of  the  broken  teeth  extracted,  and  others
cut  off  to  a  level  with  the  gums,  before  she  could  have  artificial
ones  inserted.  It  was  accordingly  agreed  that  on  some  suitable
occasion  it  should  be  done,  while  she  was  asleep.  Several  weeks
after,  I  was  again  called  in  by  Dr.  B.,  and  found  the  lady  sleeping
very  comfortably  in  an  easy  chair.  I  immediately  extracted  the
roots  of  four  front  teeth,  which  had  been  broken  off,  without
awaking  her,  or  even  disturbing  her  repose.  The  case  was  rather
a  severe  one,  as  the  teeth  were  broken  down  so  low  that  I  could  not
take  hold  of  them  with  a  pair  of  forceps,  and  was  obliged  to  take
them  out  with  a  hook  which  I  use  for  such  a  purpose.  On  examin¬
ing  them  about  a  week  after,  I  found  it  to  be  necessary  to  remove
one  more.  She  was  put  asleep,  and  I  extracted  the  tooth.  She
appeared  not  to  know  what  I  was  doing,  and  manifested  no  signs
of  pain.  She  did  not  on  this,  or  on  the  former  occasion,  spit  the
blood  from  her  mouth.  It  was  removed  by  a  towel,  the  corner  of
which  was  laid  in  her  mouth.  After  I  had  extracted  this  last  tooth.
Dr.  B.  asked  her  whether  it  hurt  her.  She  replied  by  saying,  ‘Does
what  hurt  V  She  afterwards  came  to  my  office  with  Dr.  B.,  and
after  being  magnetized,  had  the  two  central  incisors  cut  off  to  a  level
with  the  gums,  and  holes  were  drilled  into  the  roots  of  them,  pre¬
paratory  to  inserting  artificial  ones.  She  afterwards  had  seven
artificial  teeth  inserted.  The  operation  was  not  all  performed  at  one
time,  but  at  two  or  three  different  sittings.  Every  part  of  the  work


104


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations

usually  attended  with  any  pain,  was  done  while  she  was  asleep;
and,  according  to  all  appearances,  and  her  own  testimony,  she  was
not  sensible  of  any  pain.

“She  was  several  times  asked  by  t)r.  Brownell,  during  the  most
painful  part  of  the  operation,  if  it  hurt  her  ;  she  always  replied  by
saying,  ‘  Does  what  hurt  ?i

“  W.  T.  Esten.

“Mr.  T.  C.  Hartshorn.”

“The  readers  of  the  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal  will
remember  a  similar  case  detailed  at  length  by  Dr.  Benjamin  H.
West,  in  the  twenty-second  number  of  the  fourteenth  volume  of  that
valuable  work.  The  operation  was  performed  by  Dr.  Harwood,
Surgeon  Dentist,  on  an  epileptic  patient  of  Monsieur  Bugard,  an
accomplished  French  teacher  of  that  city,  in  the  presence  of  Pro¬
fessor  Treadwell,  of  Harvard  University,  Doctors  Ware,  Lewis,
Lodge,  A.  D.  Parker,  Esq.,  and  Messrs.  Ware  and  West,  medical
students.  The  latter  gentleman,  the  writer  of  the  article,  had  pre¬
viously  extracted  a  molar  tooth  from  the  same  patient,  who  was  a
girl  of  nearly  thirteen  years  old,  without  producing  the  slightest
indication  of  feeling  on  her  part.

“The  Taunton  Whig ,  of  September  13th,  gives  an  account  of  a
similar  operation  by  Dr.  Nahum  Washburn,  upon  an  intelligent
young  gentleman,  now  a  medical  student  of  that  town.  The  cha¬
racter  of  the  witnesses  who  are  named,  precludes  the  possibility  of
a  doubt  in  regard  to  the  literal  correctness  of  the  relation.  It  is
somewhat  singular  that  in  Taunton  almost  all  the  somnambulists
are  men.

“  ‘  A  gentleman  who  had  a  carious  tooth,  wras  desirous  of  having
it  extracted  while  under  the  magnetic  influence,  and  seated  himself
for  that  purpose.  He  was  put  into  a  state  of  perfect  magnetic  sleep
in  the  course  of  five  minutes,  at  a  distance  of  eight  feet,  by  a  friend
who  had  magnetized  him  many  times  before.  In  that  state  he
remarked  that  the  room  was  too  light ,  and  a  silk  handkerchief  was
therefore  bound  over  his  already  closed  eyelids.  Being  then  asked
if  he  wished  to  have  his  tooth  extracted,  he  answered  that  he  did.
After  a  lapse  of  a  few  minutes,  the  magnetizer,  standing  at  a  dis¬
tance,  willed  him  to  open  his  mouth,  which  he  did,  asking  at  the
same  time  if  it  was  wide  enough.

“‘The  magnetizer  then  retired  to  an  adjoining  room,  and  the
operation  was  performed  during  his  absence.  I  was  near  the  patient,
watched  him  closely,  and  did  not  observe  any  sign  of  suffering.
There  was  not  the  slightest  contraction  of  a  muscle  either  of  his  face
or  limbs  during  the  operation;  no  change  of  the  countenance  or  of
the  respiration.  His  whole  body  remained  as  perfectly  composed  as
in  the  most  quiet  natural  sleep.  A  bowl  was  placed  under  his  chin,
but  he  made  no  effort  to  free  his  mouth  from  the  blood  which  flowed
out  between  his  lips,  until  the  magnetizer  returned,  and  willed  him
to  do  so.

“  ‘He  inquired,  “what  made  him  spit  so  much;”  and  shortly


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.


105


after  complained  of  the  “  stuff  running  down  his  throat.”  Being
asked  what  it  was,  he  replied,  after  tasting,  that  he  “  did  not  know.”

“  ‘  He  was  permitted  to  sleep  a  few  minutes  more,  when  the
magnetizer  went  into  an  adjoining  room,  and  willed  him  to  awake  in
ten  minutes.  In  precisely  that  time  there  was  a  considerable  move¬
ment  of  the  eyelids.  The  sleep  continued  three  minutes  longer.

“‘Soon  after  awaking,  he  observed  the  bowl  containing  the
blood,  in  a  chair  by  his  side,  and  immediately  placing  his  finger
upon  the  cavity,  asked  with  the  appearance  of  great  surprise  if  his
tooth  had  been  extracted.  He  declared  he  was  not  until  then  aware
that  the  operation  had  been  performed.

“  ‘  The  tooth  was  a  large  one,  had  two  stout  fangs,  and  came
out  unusually  hard.  It  was  one  of  the  molar  teeth  of  the  under  jaw.

“  ‘  I  have  shown  this  communication  to  Messrs.  C.  R.  Atwood,
Hiram  M.  Barney,  Samuel  C.  West,  Horatio  Gilbert,  Francis  S.
Munroe,  and  Jonathan  Hodges,  who  were  present,  and  to  Dr.
Nahum  Washburn,  who  operated,  and  have  their  authority  to  state
that  it  is  an  accurate  recital  of  the  incidents  of  the  scene.’

“G.”

The  35th  Note  is  also  a  letter  from  the  same  surgeon-
dentist  : —

“ Providence ,  Nov.  13 th,  1837.

“  Dear  Sir, — In  the  appendix  of  Deleuze,  I  find  it  given  in  the
notes  as  an  opinion,  that  the  somnambulist  always  appears  to  know
what  the  magnetizer  is  doing,  and  therefore  he  cannot  perform  a
surgical  operation  without  producing  pain.  I  am  led  by  the  experi¬
ments  which  I  have  tried  to  think  this  is  not  always  the  case.  I
think  the  patient  in  the  somnambulic  state  may  sometimes  know
what  the  magnetizer  is  doing,  even  while  lie  is  performing  a  surgical
operation,  and  may  assist  in  the  operation,  and  still  be  insensible  to
pain.  This,  perhaps,  depends  very  much  upon  the  degree  of  sym¬
pathy  which  the  operator  has  for  his  patient,  a  sympathy  that  induces
apprehensions  lest  the  patient  should  suffer  under  the  operation.

“  On  the  28th  of  October  ultimo,  a  lady,  in  company  with  a
friend  of  her’s,  called  on  me  to  have  some  teeth  filled.  One  in
particular  was  so  badly  decayed  and  so  sensitive  that  the  touch  of  an
instrument  produced  severe  pain,  so  much  so,  that  she  could  not
endure  to  have  it  filled  until  she  was  magnetized.  Knowing  that
she  had  been  frequently  magnetized,  I  obtained  permission  to  make
use  of  it  on  this  occasion,  to  ascertain  whether  I  could  or  could  not
perform  the  operation  without  producing  pain.  I  threw  her  into  the
magnetic  sleep  in  about  five  minutes.  I  then  removed  that  entire
portion  of  the  tooth  which  was  carious,  without  regarding  the  nerve
or  membrane,  and  filled  the  cavity.  During  the  whole  time,  she
showed  no  indications  of  pain.  She  appeared  to  know  everything  I
was  doing,  talked  about  the  operation,  opened  her  mouth  when  I
approached  her  with  an  instrument,  and  closed  it  again  when  I  with¬
drew  it.  I  asked  her  if  the  operation  was  painful,  and  she  said  it
was  not  in  the  least.


106


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations


“  The  pain  of  removing  the  carious  portion  of  a  tooth  where  the
nerve  and  membrane  are  exposed,  as  in  this  case,  is  greater  than
that  of  extracting  the  tooth.  I  should  not  have  filled  this  tooth,  on
account  of  the  insufferable  pain  that  would  have  naturally  attended
the  work,  and  which  would  have  followed  it,  had  the  patient  not
been  magnetized.

“  I  filled  two  or  three  other  teeth  while  the  patient  was  in  the
somnambulic  state;  but  the  one  to  which  particular  reference  has
been  made  above,  is  the  only  one  that  would  naturally  be  attended
with  much  pain.  Before  I  awoke  her,  I  inquired  if  the  tooth  ached;
she  said  it  did  not,  and  that  it  was  perfectly  easy.  On  being
awaked,  she  immediately  clapped  her  hand  to  her  face,  and  said  her
tooth  ached.  I  advised  her  to  keep  the  filling  in,  to  give  it  a  trial,
and  see  if  it  would  not  stop  aching.  The  next  evening  she  sent  for
me,  and  informed  me  that  her  tooth  had  continued  to  ache  ever  since
it  was  filled,  and  was  then  aching  violently.  I  removed  the  filling,
and  applied  some  creosote,  but  without  producing  the  desired  effect.
The  tooth  continued  to  ache  violently.  She  was  afterwards  magne¬
tized;  and  while  in  that  state,  she  asked  for  a  knitting  needle,  which
was  given  her.  She  heated  the  needle,  and  thrust  it  into  her  tooth
with  her  own  hand,  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  nerve.  In
this  she  was  successful.  The  operation  which  she  performed  with
her  own  hands,  she  said  did  not  produce  pain.

“For  further  satisfaction,  I  cut  around  one  of  her  teeth  with  a
gum  lancet  while  she  was  in  the  somnambulic  state,  and  placed  a
pair  of  extracting  instruments  upon  the  tooth,  and  pulled  quite  hard,
giving  it  a  rotary  motion  with  as  much  force  as  the  tooth  would  bear
without  starting  it.  I  asked  her  if  what  I  had  done  did  not  hurt.
She  said  she  did  not  feel  it,  for  I  had  not  pulled  any.  She  then
took  up  the  instrument  which  I  had  laid  down,  and  wished  to  extract
the  tooth  herself.  I  placed  the  instrument  upon  her  tooth,  when
she  seized  it  with  both  hands,  and  pulled  with  so  much  force  that  I
was  obliged  to  exert  my  strength  to  prevent  her  from  starting  it.
The  instrument  bore  so  hard  upon  the  tooth  and  gums  as  to  start
the  blood.  She  still  said  she  felt  no  pain,  and  she  certainly  showed
no  indications  of  it.  She  bore  the  whole  without  changing  coun¬
tenance  or  moving  a  muscle  that  indicated  pain.

“  I  think  I  could  have  extracted  either  of  her  teeth  without  her
being  sensible  of  pain,  but  did  not  wish  to  sacrifice  a  tooth  to  gratify
curiosity.

“When  she  was  in  my  office  the  first  time,  I  had  occasion  to
take  an  artificial  tooth  from  a  small  box  in  a  closet,  which  had  been
shut,  and  into  which  she  could  not  have  looked  had  she  been  awake,
and  in  the  chair  where  she  then  was.  She  immediately  told  me  that
I  had  taken  it  from  a  box  in  the  closet,  and  rising  up  she  carried  it
back  to  the  same  box,  although  there  were  several  others  filled  with
the  same  sort  of  teeth.

“Yours  respectfully,

“  W.  T.  Esten.”


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.  107

«

XIX.  &  XX.  Dr.  Ashburner  has  kindly  just  sent  me  the
following  letter  : —

“55,  Wimpole  Street,  March  25th,  1844.

“  My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — The  two  cases  you  require  to  be  in¬
formed  upon  occurred  in  the  Middlesex  Hospital,  in  July  last.  I
took  no  notes  of  them,  for  I  had  been  promised  by  the  surgeons  that
I  should  have  an  opportunity  of  hypnotising  subjects  for  more  im¬
portant  surgical  operations.  A  girl,  named  Eliza  Baldwin,  aged  13,
in  Northumberland  Ward,  had  muscular  contraction  of  the  left  leg.
Mr.  Arnott,  suspecting  that  erroneous  course  of  second  dentition
might  have  some  relation  to  the  cause  of  this  affection,  requested  me
to  see  the  patient  with  him.  It  was  found  that  the  girl  had  not
shed  her  eight  deciduous  molar  teeth:  they  were  still  very  firmly
rooted  in  their  sockets.  It  was  proposed  to  have  them  extracted;
but  the  patient  became  so  violently  unruly,  that  to  force  her  sub¬
mission,  considering  the  ignorant  prejudices  of  her  mother  and  her
own  violent  temper,  was  out  of  the  question.  Mr.  Tomes,  the  den¬
tist  of  the  hospital,  was  in  readiness,  and  Mr.  Arnott  was  kind
enough  to  leave  the  girl  in  our  hands,  while  he  took  the  pupils  into
another  ward.  I  coaxed  the  patient  to  submit  to  my  making  some
passes  and  to  allowing  me  to  hold  my  fingers  before  her  eyes  for
about  ten  minutes,  at  the  end  of  which  time  she  was  in  a  deep  sleep.
Mr.  Tomes  applied  the  forceps,  and  with  great  dexterity  extracted
the  eight  molar  teeth,  each  of  which  had  fangs.  When  the  opera¬
tion  was  over,  the  girl  was  awakened  with  great  ease;  and  upon
being  told  that  she  had  lost  eight  teeth,  said,  ‘  I  know  better  than
that;  you  don’t  gammon  me  so.’  The  nurse  of  the  ward  told  me
the  next  day,  that  it  was  nearly  two  hours  before  this  child  could  be
convinced  that  she  had  lost  eight  teeth  while  she  was  asleep.

“  The  other  case  occurred  in  the  Surgery  of  the  hospital.  I  had
brought  a  child,  named  Jane  Knowles,  1 2  years  of  age,  to  exhibit  to
the  pupils  of  the  hospital  as  an  interesting  case  of  sleep-waking.  In
her  sleep,  Mr.  Tomes  extracted  two  deciduous  teeth,  and  when  I
awoke  her,  she  was  quite  unconscious  that  any  operation  had  been
performed  upon  her  mouth.

“  With  the  expression  of  my  constant  respect  for  your  unwearied
and  courageous  exertions  in  the  cause  of  truth,

“  I  remain,  my  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

“  Yours  sincerely,

“  John  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.”  “John  Ashburner.

XXI.  My  friend  and  former  pupil,  Mr.  Case,  surgeon,  of
Fareham,  has  sent  me  the  following  remarkable  account : —

“  Sarah  Pink,  aged  20,  was  mesmerised  with  an  intention  of
having  a  tooth  removed.

“Effects  were  produced  in  about  twenty  minutes;  among  which
there  was  an  entire  insensibility.  She  answered  questions  readily;
but,  after  doing  so  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  she  suddenly  awoke.


108


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations


“  She  was  mesmerised  again  the  next  day  with  equal  effect;  but,
after  conversing  for  about  ten  minutes,  she  again  suddenly  awoke.

“  Long  continued  attempts  were  made  on  the  day  following  to
mesmerise  her,  but  without  producing  any  effect;  and  then  she  de¬
termined  to  have  her  tooth  extracted, — this  was  immediately  done.
As  soon  as  it  was  out,  she  arose  hastily  from  her  chair,  and  declared
that  she  had  felt  no  pain  whatever  during  the  operation,  and  this  she
again  and  again  positively  repeated.  Nor  did  she  certainly  express
any  sense  of  pain;  though  on  the  occasion  of  a  former  operation
without  mesmerisation,  her  expressions  of  pain  were  quite  excessive
and  vehement .”

Mr.  Case  in  a  letter  says,  “  I  think  some  peculiar  state
must  have  been  induced,  for  I  believe  she  felt  no  pain.”  I
agree  with  him ;  and  possibly  the  circumstances  were  similar
in  the  case  of  Ann  Ross,  from  whom  a  double  tooth  was  ex¬
tracted  in  University  College  Hospital  in  my  presence,  with  a
loud  crunching,  though  she  gave  no  sign  of  pain  or  resistance,
and  afterwards  declared  she  had  felt  almost  nothing.  She  was
epileptic,  and  mesmerised  for  the  disease  with  apparent  sleep.
Whether  this  was  not  sometimes  real,  I  cannot  say,  for  I
trusted  her  mesmerisations  to  my  clinical  clerk :  but  she
shammed  sleep  sometimes,  and  the  first  and  only  time  I  wit¬
nessed  her  sleep-waking  delirium,  I  saw  it  was  shammed,  and
accused  her  of  imposture,  which  she  confessed,  and  I  instantly
expelled  her  from  the  hospital.  She  allowed  that  she  had  not
been  asleep  when  her  tooth  was  extracted,  but  declared  she
felt  little  or  no  pain.  As  she  had  been  mesmerised  very  fre¬
quently,  she  might  have  been  influenced  like  Mr.  Case’s
patient.  At  any  rate,  as  she  fully  confessed  imposition,  I
see  no  probable  reason  for  her  declaring  falsely  that  she  had
felt  almost  no  pain.  Her  pulse  was  said  to  rise  eight  beats  at
the  moment  of  extraction,  but  apprehension  was  a  sufficient
explanation  of  this.

Establishment  of  Setons  and  Issues.

XXII.  A  patient,  cured  by  me  of  epilepsy,  walking  in  her
sleep,  and  severe  head-aclies,  whose  case  I  shall  send  for  your
Michaelmas  number,  is  thrown  by  me  into  a  perfectly  rational
sleep-waking,  with  her  eyes  firmly  closed,  and  the  whole  sur¬
face  of  the  body,  except  the  greater  part  of  her  face,  per¬
fectly  insensible,  and  told  me  last  summer,  in  her  sleep-waking,
that,  though  she  should  be  perfectly  cured  of  her  fits  and
sleep-walking  by  mesmerism,  her  head-aches  would  yield  to  a
seton  only,  kept  in  the  back  of  her  neck  for  four  or  five
months.  Mr.  Symes  was  so  kind  as  to  put  in  the  seton
for  me.


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.  109

I  held  her  hand  loosely  in  one  of  mine,  and  felt  her  pulse
with  the  other.  Before  I  sent  her  to  sleep,  her  pulse  was
120 ;  and,  when  the  seton  was  about  to  be  introduced,  it  rose
to  138, — and  no  doubt  from  apprehension,  as  she  was  per¬
fectly  conscious  and  intelligent,  though  asleep.  While  Mr.
Symes  pinched  up  the  back  of  her  neck,  and  suddenly  ran  in
the  broad  seton  needle,  she  continued  conversing  with  me,
without  the  slightest  change  of  voice  or  countenance,  or  the
slightest  pressure  or  movement  of  her  completely  relaxed
hand  or  fingers,  which  were  in  mine ;  and,  when  told  that  the
operation  was  over,  asked  with  surprise  if  it  really  was.
Scarcely  believing  this,  she  begged  me  to  restore  her  feeling
that  she  might  know  for  certain.  I  could  always  restore  her
feeling  by  mesmerising  with  the  point  of  my  finger  at  the
lowest  part  of  the  occiput  near  the  centre,  according  to  a
discovery  of  Mr.  Atkinson.  I  applied  my  finger  there,  and
as  long  as  it  remained  on  the  spot  she  felt  perfectly ;  and  she
put  up  her  hand  and  felt  the  seton,  and  indeed  presently  felt
it  in  the  part  itself  as  a  great  pressure.  I  then  withdrew  my
finger,  her  insensibility  recurred,  and  the  wound  was  done  up.
Yet  her  mother  informed  me  that  she  had  dreaded  the  opera¬
tion  greatly,  and  was  vexed  to  learn  she  had  prescribed  a
seton  in  her  sleep.  When  she  was  satisfied  that  the  operation
was  over,  her  pulse  fell  to  116.  Some  days  afterwards  the
seton  did  not  run,  and,  on  looking  at  it  as  she  sat  asleep,  I
found  the  threads  covered  with  rough,  dry,  and  hardened
blood  and  discharge.  These  I  pulled  backwards  and  forw  ards,
till  the  blood  ran  out  of  each  opening  and  streamed  down  her
back,  she  not  evincing  the  slightest  pain  and  ignorant  of
what  I  was  about.  I  then  covered  it  up,  saying  nothing  to
her,  and  in  due  time  awoke  her,  still  saying  nothing  to  her
as  to  what  I  had  done.  The  violence  used  without  her  know¬
ledge  caused  sharp  inflammation  in  the  course  of  the  night,

so  that  she  could  not  leave  her  home  for  a  few  davs  :  and  the

«/

seton  discharged  freely.  The  next  time  I  saw  her,  I  told  her
what  I  had  done,  and  she  informed  me  that  on  waking  that  day
she  had  felt  her  whole  back  wet  and  found  it  was  bloody  on
getting  home.  But,  after  a  time,  the  place  again  ceased  to  run,
and  I  repeated  the  same  violence  without  her  knowledge,  and
with  the  same  result  of  sharp  subsequent  inflammation  and
discharge  :  and  the  discharge  ever  after  continued  copious.

XXIII.  Mr.  Tubbs,  of  Upwell  Isle,  has  sent  me  the  fol¬
lowing  account  of  the  painless  formation  of  an  issue  : —

“  The  subject  of  this  operation  was  a  Thomas  Carter,  of
Upwell,  about  60  years  of  age,  and  who  had  suffered  for  36


110


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations


years  from  an  irritable  and  extensive  wound  in  the  leg,  every
means  to  cure  which  had  been  tried  a  long  time  without
effect.  The  wound  having  been  healed  through  mesmerism,
it  became  necessary  to  insert  an  issue  in  the  arm  as  a  safe¬
guard  to  his  health.  Mr.  Tubbs  (the  operator)  shewed  the
attractive  power  of  mesmerism,  by  drawing  up  the  patient’s
legs  while  standing  at  a  considerable  distance  from  him.  The
man  was  then  demesmerised,  and  again  operated  upon  by  one
of  the  company.  When  thrown  into  the  sleep  again,  the  left
arm  of  the  patient  being  raised  by  a  gentleman,  a  surgeon’s
instrument  with  two  hooks  was  thrust  into  the  arm,  and
which  was  allowed  to  drop  with  the  instrument  remaining  in
it.  The  operator  said  he  should  not  hurry  as  the  patient  had
no  feeling,  and  having  seized  the  hook  he  made  a  deep  inci¬
sion,  leaving  the  scalpel  in  the  wound,  and  requested  all  pre¬
sent  to  watch  attentively  the  appearance  of  the  patient ;  not
a  muscle,  however,  was  seen  to  move,  but  he  remained  as  a
statue.  The  operation  was  then  completed  by  a  circular  cut,
removing  a  piece  required  for  a  large  issue.  On  measuring
the  wound  it  was  found  to  be  1  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and
§  in  depth.  The  arm  being  dressed  and  bandaged,  Carter
was  allowed  to  remain  for  a  few  minutes  in  the  mesmeric
state,  his  legs  being  still  raised  and  rigid.  The  operator
having  stated  that  he  would  instantly  restore  him  to  his
original  state,  breathed  upon  his  eyes,  and  after  a  deep  in¬
spiration  Carter  gradually  awoke,  and  declared  in  the  pre¬
sence  of  the  company  that  he  had  no  knowledge  of  what
had  happened,  nor  felt  any  pain.  This  patient  is  proof
against  fire,  the  scalpel,  and  the  most  powerful  galvanic  bat¬
tery.  A  short  time  since  Mr.  Tubbs  applied  six  battery  jars
of  Smee,  connected  with  Golding  Bird’s  electro-magnetic
machine ;  the  wires  were  connected  to  each  leg,  and  remained
so  25  minutes  without  any  twitching  and  feeling  afterwards.”

The  truth  of  this  is  thus  attested  : —

[true  copy.]

We,  the  undersigned,  were  present  at  two  operations  per¬
formed  at  fThe  Bose  and  Crown  Hotel,’  Wisbech,  by  Wm.
John  Tubbs,  surgeon,  of  Up  well  Isle.

One — removing  a  large  piece  from  the  left  arm  ;  and  the
other — extracting  two  teeth ;  in  the  mesmeric  state  :  which
he  did  to  our  great  satisfaction,  proving  the  total  insensibility
of  the  patients.

Mrs.  Goddard,

The  two  Misses  Goddard,

Mrs.  Burgess,


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.


Ill


Mrs.  Baxter,

„  George  Hardy,

Miss  Burgess,

Mr.  Charles  Wooll,

,,  Beart,

„  William  Baxter,

„  George  Hardy,

„  Charles  Hardy,

„  Thomas  Philips.

February  15th,  1844.

Excision  of  Tumors.

The  following  is  from  the  Illinois  Telegraph  and  Review,
August  19,  1843  : —

^  Case  of  Excision  of  a  Wen ,  without  pain,  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

XXIV.  “  This  operation  was  performed  by  Dr.  Ben.  F.  Edwards,
at  his  residence  in  this  city,  on  Tuesday  morning  last,  in  the  pres¬
ence  of  a  number  of  spectators,  The  patient  is  a  young  lady  about

18  years  of  age,  the  daughter  of  Mr. - Eyres,  of  Upper  Alton.

The  wen  was  situated  upon  the  left  side  of  her  face;  the  base  of  it
was  one  inch  and  seven- eights  in  length  by  one  inch  and  five-eights
in  width;  the  upper  part  of  it  being  just  opposite  and  near  the
opening  of  the  ear.  It  commenced  forming  when  she  was  about  two
years  old,  aud  has  been  gradually  increasing.  Several  months  since,
she  applied  to  Dr.  Edwards  for  advice  in  regard  to  having  it  taken
out.  He  then  informed  her  that  if  he  could  succeed  in  placing  her
in  the  mesmeric  state,  he  could  remove  the  wen  without  pain.  A
few  subsequent  experiments  convinced  the  Doctor  that  Miss  E.  was
susceptible  of  the  mesmeric  influence  to  a  degree  sufficient  to  warrant
him  to  attempt  its  removal  in  this  state,  of  which  she  was  accord¬
ingly  informed.  Circumstances,  however,  prevented  her,  at  that
time,  from  submitting  to  the  operation,  and  for  some  months  past
she  has  been  residing  at  Springfield.  Her  great  desire  to  have  the
wen  removed,  and  from  the  fact  that  it  was  becoming  painful,  in¬
duced  her  to  return  for  the  purpose  of  having  it  taken  out.  The
patient  had  been  considerably  agitated  during  the  morning.  She
was  seated  in  a  room  in  which  there  were  a  number  of  gentlemen,
most  of  whom  were  strangers  to  her,  and  Dr.  E.  placed  her  under
mesmeric  influence  in  about  five  minutes.  After  ascertaining  that
she  was  in  a  profound  sleep,  an  incision  was  made  one  inch  and
three-eights  in  length,  and  the  tumor  was  removed.  Although  the
operation  was  necessarily  prolonged  to  nearly  fifteen  minutes — the
Doctor  not  being  able  to  use,  freely,  but  one  hand,  as  it  was  neces¬
sary  for  him  to  act  at  the  same  time  in  the  double  capacity  of
mesmeriser  and  operator — yet  the  patient  sat  with  her  hands  quietly
resting  in  the  lap,  the  countenance  was  placid  and  serene,  and  the
whole  attitude  that  of  repose;  not  the  slightest  trace  of  mental
emotion  was  perceptible,  not  a  twinge  or  movement  of  any  kind  was


112


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations


visible,  or  the  least  change  in  respiration.  She  was  kept  in  the
mesmeric  state  just  one  hour.  Previous  to  waking  her,  the  Doctor
excited  the  organs  of  tune  and  mirthfulness,  to  both  of  which  re¬
sponses  were  obtained.  She  was  also  put  in  communication  with
Mr.  G.,  whom  she  immediately  recognized,  and  in  answer  to  his
question,  whether  she  had  felt  any  pain  from  the  operation?  replied
that  she  had  not.  As  soon  as  she  was  awakened  she  placed  her
hand  upon  the  bandages  and  asked,  ‘  What  is  this  V  The  Doctor
fearing  that  she  might  disturb  them,  immediately  removed  her  hand,
and  replied,  ‘I  have  taken  out  your  wen.’  She  looked  about  in
perfect  astonishment,  and  interrogatingly  repeated,  ‘  Taken  out  my
wen  ?'  1  Yes,’  replied  the  Doctor,  f  you  know  that  I  told  you  I

would  take  it  out  without  your  feeling  it?’  ‘  I  know  that  you  told
me  you  could,’  she  laughingly  replied,  ‘but  I  did  not  believe  it.’
She  appeared  to  have  no  remembrance  of  any  thing  that  had  taken
place.  It  would  be  difficult  to  determine  which  party  evinced  the
most  delight  and  astonishment — the  one  having  witnessed  this  novel
and  most  astounding  phenomenon,  or  the  other  who  had  been  un¬
consciously  and  almost  magically  relieved  from  an  increasing  and
troublesome  tumor.

“Numerous  cases  of  surgical  operations  without  pain,  in  the
mesmeric  state,  have  been  reported  in  England;  several,  also,  have
been  reported  in  this  country,  but  this  is  believed  to  be  the  first
that  has  been  performed  west  of  the  Alleghanies.

“  Since  writing  the  above.  Dr.  E.  has  handed  us  the  following
note,  and  the  accompanying  documents,  with  permission  to  publish
the  same.

“  Note. — To  prevent  misapprehension,  it  may  be  proper  to  state  that  the
editor  of  this  paper  did  not  witness  the  surgical  operation  above  described,
but  that  it  was  witnessed  by  the  gentleman  who  has  the  temporary  charge  of
the  paper,  by  whom  the  above  article  was  written. — Publishers.

“  Mr.  Editor, — Being  desirous  to  contribute  to  the  accumulating
facts,  shewing  the  truth  and  utility  of  mesmerism,  I  herewith  send
you  for  publication,  the  communications  that  I  have  received  from
those  who  were  present  and  witnessed  the  operation  performed  by
me  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  instant.

“  Respectfully  yours,

“Alton,  Aug.  16,  1843.  “B.  F.  Edwards,  M.D.

“Alton,  Aug.  14,  1843.

“  Doctor  Edwards.

“  Dear  Sir, — Under  the  present  state  of  public  feeling,  in  regard
to  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  and  its  probable  results,  we  feel  it  our
duty  to  offer  our  testimony  to  the  establishment  of  the  truth  of  the
much  derided  phenomena  resulting  from  that  strange  influence.  It
cannot  better  be  done,  than  by  setting  forth  the  facts,  as  they  ap¬
peared  to  us  in  the  case  of  Miss  Eyres,  at  the  time  of,  and  during
the  extraction  by  you  of  the  wen  from  her  face,  which  we  witnessed
at  your  house  this  morning.  The  lady  was  aged  about  eighteen;
she  had,  on  the  left  side  of  the  face,  a  swelling,  supposed  to  be  a


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.


113


wen,  situated  just  in  front  of,  and  in  contact  with,  the  lower  half  of  the
ear.  It  measured  If  inches  across,  one  way,  and  If  inches  the  other.

“  We  were  informed  by  her,  that  it  had  been  forming  ever  since
she  was  two  years  of  age.  She  was  thrown  into  the  mesmeric  state
by  you,  after  which  an  incision  was  made  with  the  knife,  across  the
swelling,  If  inches  in  length.  From  this  incision  was  taken  a
whitish  spongy  substance,  after  which  you  cut  from  around  the
cavity,  in  the  interior  of  the  incision,  what  appeared  to  be  a  sort  of
sack  or  case  which  held  the  spongy  substance  above  alluded  to.  The
operation  occupied  fifteen  minutes,  and  under  ordinary  circumstances
must  have  been  very  painful  and  trying  to  the  feelings  of  any  one.
But,  from  the  closest  observation,  we  could  not  detect  the  slightest
evidence  of  pain.  She  was  apparently  in  a  sweet,  calm,  placid  sleep
during  the  whole  operation.  Not  a  muscle  twitched  or  moved.  Her
countenance  appeared  natural  and  uniform,  as  also  did  her  pulse
and  breathing,  throughout  the  whole.  She,  however,  appeared  con¬
scious  of  what  was  doing,  for  in  several  instances  she  audibly  gave
directions  to  you  in  regard  to  the  use  of  the  knife,  saying,  4  Be
careful  around  those  veins.’  This  was  said  as  composedly  as  if  it
had  been  in  regard  to  her  ordinary  occupation.  On  the  whole,  we
regard  the  appearances  as  affording  the  most  positive  testimony  of
what  you  have  often  told  us,  viz.:  ‘  That  a  person,  in  the  mesmeric
state,  is  insensible  to  pain  arising  from  wounds  inflicted  on  their
person.’  After  being  relieved  from  the  mesmeric  state,  she  was
wholly  unconscious  of  what  had  occurred,  and  appeared  much  sur¬
prised  when  told.  She  also  assured  us  that  she  had  not  the  slightest
recollection  of  any  of  the  circumstances  attending  the  operation.

“  You  are  at  liberty  to  make  such  use  of  this  communication  as
you  think  the  subject  demands.  With  much  respect,  we  are,  Sir,

“  Your  friends,  &c.,  “  S.  Griggs,  A.  S.  Barry,

“  L.  Kellenberger,  M.  G.  Atwood.”
“  O.  M.  Adams.

XXV.  Removal  of  a  Tumor  from  the  Shoulder .

The  following  is  from  the  Missouri  Republican,  Feb.  21,  1843 :

“  We  learn  from  the  Boston  Daily  Mail  that  a  young  woman  was
thrown  into  the  mesmeric  state  at  the  City  Hall,  Lowell,  Mass.,  on
Thursday  evening  last,  by  Dr.  W.  P.  Shattuck,  and  submitted  to
the  operation  of  extracting  a  tumor  on  the  shoulder,  without  mani¬
festing  the  slightest  pain.  An  incision  round  the  tumor  was  made
to  the  depth  of  nearly  two  inches,  and  the  operation  was  one  which,
under  ordinary  circumstances,  would  have  caused  acute  pain,  fainting,
&c.  On  being  brought  back  to  the  natural  state,  the  lady  was  en¬
tirely  free  from  pain,  and  was  not  aware  that  any  operation  had
been  performed.  The  experiment  was  performed  under  the  direct
personal  examination  of  Drs.  Holbrook,  Pillsbury,  and  Horn,  of
Lowell,  and  in  presence  of  a  very  large  and  respectable  audience.
A  full  and  scientific  report  of  the  case  will  soon  be  published.”

YOL.  II.  i


114


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations


Amputations.

From  Dr.  Owens  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Vide  Lancet.

“  My  dear  Sir, — It  is  indeed  with  great  pleasure  that  I
comply  with  your  request  to  have  the  following  case  for  pub¬
lication  in  your  list  of  mesmeric  operations  in  the  next  num¬
ber  of  The  Zoist — a  pleasure  arising  from  the  fact  that  I  am
enabled  to  add  an  unexceptionably-authenticated  case,  bear¬
ing  us  calmly  over  the  painful  perils  of  operative  surgery  and
so  far  adding  to  our  confidence  in  mesmeric  sleep  to  alleviate
much  agony,  and  accordingly  to  relieve  mankind  from  much
of  the  severest  kind  of  suffering.  But  even  this  great  plea¬
sure  is  much  exalted  in  my  feelings,  by  the  felicity  you
afford  me  of  associating  the  record  of  this  event  with  your
distinguished  name,  and  as  affording  me  an  opportunity  of
paying  my  humble  tribute  to  your  open,  genuine,  and  dis¬
interested  goodness — gracing  as  it  does  the  enviable  position
you  hold  in  the  temple  of  true  science  and  philanthropy — -
when  some  years  gone  by,  as  a  student,  the  organs  of  my
frame  had  sunk  under  the  poisonous  exhalations  of  pestiferous
dissections,  and  midnight  study  had  unstrung  the  wonted
energy  of  my  system — as  I  was  fast  journeying  to  f  that
bourne  from  whence  no  traveller  returns' — your  advice  and
kindness  day  after  day  gave  me  health  and  vigour  again,  and
my  poor  thanks  were  received  by  you  as  an  abundant  reward.
Yes,  indeed,  great  then  is  my  delight  to  be  able  to  bear  record
to  your  high  claims  on  public  esteem,  and  to  aid  in  turning  the
torrent  of  obloquy  and  contempt  that  you  have  so  successfully
resisted — back — back — overwhelming  your  enemies.  Time,
however,  is  rapidly  advancing,  and  a  little  time  onward  will
restore  you  and  mesmerism  to  a  just  station,  and  the  regard
of  the  great  and  good.  The  vine  tree  of  knowledge  may
teem  with  ripened  and  fructifying  juice,  and  its  stout  stem
be  studded  with  exudings  of  wisdom,  but  unless  the  bright
and  genial  sun  of  opportunity  and  encouragement,  permit  it
to  blossom  and  bear  fruit,  its  prolific  treasures  of  usefulness
will  be  lost  and  unknown  to  the  world.  So  with  yourself,  as
the  ardent  and  devoted  advocate  of  mesmeric  science — a
stubborn  and  unpropitious  generation  resists  the  spread  of
the  great  and  benign  truths  you  would  lay  before  them.
Nevertheless  mesmerism  will  yet  prevail;  and  the  f  wonder
will  be  that  it  ever  was  doubted.'  Happy  I  am  to  range
myself  beneath  the  joyous  banner,  a  cheerful  soldier  when
one  so  able  as  yourself  leads  the  forlorn  hope  of  victory  and


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.


115


conquest  over  blind  prejudices  and  pertinacious  ignorance,
whether  in  the  public  community,  or  around  the  cabal  of
self-styled  learned  societies.

“  I  remain,  my  dear  Sir,

“  Yours  most  truly,

“  J.  D.  Owens,  M.D.

“Member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons ,  London.
“  Wolverhampton ,  March  16,  1844.

XX YI.  “  Successful  Amputation  of  a  Finger  without  pain ,
during  Mesmeric  Sleep.

“  John  Marrien,  set.  45,  a  moulder  by  trade,  of  leuco-
phlegmatic  habit,  and  whose  health  had  been  otherwise
brought  into  a  low  state  from  reduced  circumstances,  living
at  Can  Lane,  Ledgley,  is  the  subject  of  the  following  inte¬
resting  case.  On  the  25th  of  January  last  he  received  an  ex¬
tensive  injury  of  the  middle  finger  of  the  right  hand,  which
disabled  him.  Being  a  club  patient,  he  had  the  immediate
and  regular  attendance  of  two  surgeons,  Messrs.  Thompson
and  Dunn,  of  this  town  ;  and  although  it  had  been  attended
with  much  care,  yet  it  was  found  impossible  to  prevent  the
necessity  of  an  amputation  of  the  finger.  As  he  was  of  a
timid  disposition,  the  operation  gave  him  much  uneasiness  in
mind  ;  but  being  informed  that  if  he  could  be  mesmerised  no
doubt  his  finger  would  be  removed  without  his  feeling  any
pain,  he  readily  consented  to  the  advice  of  his  attendants  to
place  himself  under  Dr.  Owens.

“  On  Sunday,  March  3rd,  he  was  mesmerised  the  first
time.  Being  brought  into  the  sitting-room  of  Mr.  Dunn,  he
was  placed  on  a  parlour-chair.  Dr.  Owens  sitting  close  and
also  above  him,  so  that  the  patient’s  eyes  had  to  converge
inwards  and  upwards  to  meet  his.  The  thumbs  were  held
something  like  a  pen  between  the  operator’s  fingers,  and  his
gaze  brought  to  bear  fixedly.  The  trembling  of  the  lids  and
the  involuntary  rotation  of  the  eye-balls  very  quickly  indi¬
cated  the  poor  fellow’s  susceptibility ;  and  in  four  minutes
and  twenty  seconds  he  was  asleep, — not  deep,  as  the  slightest
noise  or  a  word  would  arouse  him;  but  still  in  a  state  which
he  afterwards  described  as  most  delightful,  and  such  as  he
had  never  before  enjoyed.  Touching  the  organ  of  Firmness
had  the  effect  of  instantly  awaking  him.  Mr.  Thompson
and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dunn  were  present.

“March  4th.  Mesmerised  in  the  same  manner  by  Dr.
Owens  in  three  minutes  and  ten  seconds, — at  1  p.m.,  in  the
presence  of  W.  Mannix,  M.D.,  Mr.  Beckett,  Secretary  of  the

i  2


116


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations


Geological  Society,  Messrs.  Thompson  and  Dunn.  He  was
allowed  to  sleep  for  about  an  hour :  it  was  exceedingly  light,
as  the  least  noise  disturbed  him,  and  he  was  awoke  in
the  same  instantaneous  manner  by  touching  the  organ  of
Firmness.

“  March  5tli.  Mesmerised  at  11  p.m.,  in  the  presence  of
Mr.  Beckett,  Mr.  Mellar,  and  Messrs.  Thompson,  Dunn  and
Hadduck,  surgeons.  He  was  somnolent  in  three  minutes,
and  remained  so  for  about  half  an  hour.  On  this  occasion  he
awoke  voluntarily,  which  wras  caused  by  his  distresses :  he
had  a  daughter  very  ill  at  home,  and  being  unable  to  work,
he  had  the  additional  affliction  that  at  that  moment  the  over¬
seers  had  two  bailiffs  in  his  house  with  a  distraint  for  levies.
However,  Dr.  Owens  spoke  to  him  cheerfully  and  encourag¬
ingly,  and  he  was  thrown  off  again  in  about  a  minute.  It
was  matter  of  astonishment  that  the  mesmeric  power  could
tranquillize  a  mind  so  troubled,  and  give  quiet  and  repose  so
sweet  to  a  soul  so  disturbed.  Firmness  awoke  him  as  before,
and  he  instantly  burst  into  a  flood  of  tears  from  grief.

“At  5  p.m.  he  was  mesmerised  again  in  four  minutes ;
Dr.  Mannix,  the  Bev.  Mr.  Liston,  Messrs.  John  Fowke,
Thompson,  Dunn,  and  Hadduck,  surgeons,  Mr.  Mellar  and
Mr.  White,  being  present.  He  fell  into  deeper  sleep,  and
the  strapping  was  removed  from  his  finger.  The  injured  part
was  purposely  roughly  handled,  and  two  pins  were  stuck  into
the  back  of  the  hand  as  tests,  but  without  giving  him  the
least  uneasiness.  On  being  awoke  by  touching  Firmness,  he
broke  into  tears  at  the  thought  of  awaking  again  to  a  know¬
ledge  of  his  worldly  cares.

“6th.  At  11  a.m.,  mesmerised  in  about  two  minutes:
present  Messrs.  Thompson  and  Dunn,  Mr.  Mellar,  Mr.
Myatt,  Mrs.  and  Miss  Thompson,  and  Mrs.  Dunn.  After
about  half  an  hour’s  sleep,  and  whilst  still  sleeping,  Dr.
Owens  walked  him  round  the  room  several  times.  Fie  then
got  a  promise  from  him  that  in  two  minutes  after  awaking  he
would  ask  Mr.  Thompson  to  give  him  sixpence.  The  organ
of  Firmness  being  touched  he  awroke,  and  at  the  exact  time
put  the  question  as  he  had  promised.  In  answers  to  ques¬
tions,  it  was  evident  he  had  been  an  involuntary  agent,  and
he  had  no  remembrance  of  anything  that  had  happened  in
his  sleep.

“  7tli.  Mesmerised  in  two  minutes  and  forty  seconds,  at
12  o’clock,  in  the  presence  of  Major  Townshend  of  the  83rd,
Mr.  W.  Wright,  Mr.  Mellar,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dunn,  Mrs.
Banks  and  daughter.  He  slept  nearly  an  hour,  when  he  was
aroused  by  touching  Firmness.  On  this  occasion  Dr.  Owens


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.  117

succeeded  in  exciting  faintly  the  organs  of  Philoprogenitive¬
ness,  Benevolence,  Acquisitiveness,  Combativeness,  Language,
and  Imitation,  by  placing  his  finger  on  them  ;  and  having
put  Mr.  Dunn  in  conversation  with  the  patient,  and  Dr.
Owens  then  touching  his  head,  the  organs  of  Benevolence
and  Acquisitiveness  were  beautifully  manifested ;  all  else
failed.  Whilst  asleep  he  was  requested,  or  rather  solicited,
by  Dr.  Owens  to  ask  Major  Townshend  for  his  sash  in  two
minutes  after  being  awaked.  The  man  would  not  agree  to
do  so  until  assured  it  would  not  bring  him  into  trouble, —
shewing  that  caution  and  moral  right  were  active  in  their
work  of  protection  from  the  evil  application  of  the  otherwise
resistless  power  over  the  patient  by  the  operator.  He  was
awoke  in  the  usual  way,  and  fulfilled  his  mission  with  the
Major  at  the  appointed  time.  He  was  perfectly  oblivious  to
the  past.

“  8th.  To-day  there  were  in  the  room  Dr.  Maunix,  Mr.
Gough,  Mr.  W.  Fryer,  the  magistrate,  Messrs.  S.  and  J.
Underhill,  Thompson,  and  Dunn.  He  was  mesmerised  at
11  p.m.  in  two  minutes.  Not  an  organ  excited  yesterday
would  now  act,  although  Mirthfulness,  which  had  hitherto
resisted,  yielded  a  decided  manifestation,  which  was  kept  up
some  time.  At  Dr.  Owens’  request  he  begged,  at  the  expira¬
tion  of  two  minutes  after  awaking,  Mr.  W.  Fryer’s  stick  for
the  purpose  of  presenting  to  the  doctor.

“  9th.  It  was  appointed  yesterday  by  Dr.  Owens  that  the
operation  should  take  place  at  4p.m.  to-day.  The  interest
excited  was  very  great,  and  applications  for  permission  to
witness  the  operation  came  from  all  quarters ;  but  it  was  found
necessary  to  limit  the  number  of  visitors  :  however  the  room,
which  was  small,  was  still  rather  too  full.  At  about  half¬
past  4  o’clock  the  patient  was  brought  by  Mr.  Dunn  into  the
room.  The  number  of  strangers  before  him,  and  the  excite¬
ment  arising  from  the  part  he  had  to  take  on  the  occasion,
had  flushed  his  face  a  good  deal ;  otherwise  the  impression
wras  that  mesmerism  had  improved  his  health.  Dr.  Owens
engaged  him  in  chat,  and  having  recovered  in  him  a  com¬
posed  and  confident  mind,  placed  him  on  the  chair  and  in
two  minutes  and  a  half  he  was  in  deep  sleep.  Dr.  Mannix
found  his  pulse  beating  100.  Dr.  Owens  placing  his  finger
on  Language,  conversed  with  him  as  to  his  feelings,  which
he  declared  were  very  comfortable,  and  asking  whether  lie
thought  himself  sufficiently  asleep  to  bear  the  removal  of  his
finger,  he  stated  that  he  was.  Some  passes  were  then  made
with  a  view  to  keep  him  as  deep  as  possible,  and  Dr.  Owens
having  directed  his  fingers  pointing  diverging  to  each  eye,


118


Instances  of  Surgical  Operations


gave  the  signal  for  the  operation  to  be  commenced.  Mr.
Dunn  took  the  scalpel,  and  every  eye  was  directed  with
anxious  scrutiny  to  the  patient ;  and  in  one  minute  the  finger
was  removed — the  cutting  the  flaps  and  the  dividing  the  bone
by  the  nippers,  was  watched  with  breathless  suspense — but
there  was  not  a  muscled  quiver,  nor  did  a  sigh  escape,  or
a  finger  move  ;  nor  did  a  respiratory  movement  nor  anything
occur  to  betray  the  slightest  sensibility  to  the  work  going  on.
When  Dr.  Owens  exultingly  cried  out,  ‘  It  is  off,  and  it  was
unfelt/  the  intense  suspense  which  all  experienced  broke
forth  into  delighted  applause.  The  hand  was  then  dressed  in
the  usual  manner,  being  held  from  the  patient  by  a  cataleptic
power,  which  without  any  other  aid  kept  the  arm  extended
during  the  operation ;  and  two  minutes  having  elapsed,  Dr.
Mannix  found  the  pulse  still  100.

“Dr.  Owens  now  excited  laughter,  and  the  patient  laughed
happily,  evidently  quite  unconscious  of  the  painful  operation
he  had  just  undergone.  He  was  permitted  to  sleep  another
half  hour,  and  during  the  time  being  questioned  as  to  his
feelings  and  what  he  had  felt, — he  declared  himself  perfectly
comfortable;  and  being  asked  if  his  finger  should  be  removed,
he  extended  his  hand  to  have  it  done,  although  it  had  then
been  off  some  time.  So  another  time  Dr.  Owens  only  touched
the  organ  of  Firmness,  and  it  really  seemed  to  act  magically
— for  his  eyes  opened,  and  looking  to  his  arm  tied  up  in  a
sling,  he  ejaculated  ‘The  Lord  be  thanked  for  that;  it  is  off/
Each  person  anxiously  questioned  him,  and  his  answers  fully
assured  them  that  he  had  never  felt  anything  during  the
operation.  Thus  satisfactorily  ended  this  interesting  case,  a
triumph  of  nature’s  own  in  the  benevolent  work  of  alleviating
the  pains  and  sorrows  of  poor  human  nature.  The  minutes
which  had  been  kept  during  the  operation  by  Mr.  Gates,
surgeon,  are  signed  by  every  gentleman  present,  who  are
ready  at  any  time  to  attest  the  authority  of  any  particular  of
this  case,  viz. :

MEDICAL  MEN.  NON-MEDICAL.


W.  Mannix,  M.D.  (a  Magistrate)  Mr.  W.  F.  Fryer  (a  Magistrate )>


Mr.  Edwards,
Mr.  Thompson,
Mr.  Gates,

Mr.  Dunn,

Mr.  Haddwell,
Mr.  De  Londe.


Major  Townshend,  83 rd  Regt.
Mr.  R.  Gough,

Mr.  Beckett,

Mr.  Mellar,

Mr.  Neeve,

Mr.  Dudley  of  Bloxvich ,

Mr.  Fellowes,

Mr.  John  Underhill,

Mr.  Myatt,


Mr.  Daniel,

Mr.  Wood,  Editor  of  the  Chronicle.


rendered  painless  by  means  of  Mesmerism.


119


“  A  vote  of  thanks  was  then  passed  unanimously  to  Dr.
Owens,  and  he  was  most  warmly  congratulated  on  all  sides.
The  future  history  of  the  patient  is  highly  satisfactory  as  he
has  gone  on  remarkably  well,  and  he  feels  what  will  ere  long
be  felt  universally,  that  mesmerism  will  rank  among  the
highest  and  noblest  powers  in  the  service  of  man.”

The  following  is  from  the  Quebec  Mercury,  Februarv  15,
1844 : —

XXVII.  “  Amputation  of  a  Leg .

“  The  Bangor  Courier  gives  an  account  of  a  surgical  ope¬
ration  in  that  city,  the  patient  having  been  previously  thrown
into  the  magnetic  sleep.  The  operation  was  the  painful  one
of  amputating  a  leg,  upon  Luther  Carey,  whose  leg  from  in¬
fancy  had  been  deformed,  and  caused  him  much  pain  and
inconvenience.  The  Courier  says — f  During  the  operation,
the  patient  complained  of  a  sensation  in  the  bottom  of  his
foot,  as  though  some  one  was  pricking  it ;  and  at  one  time,
for  a  brief  period,  appeared  to  be  rousing  from  the  magnetic
state,  and  half  conscious,  by  suspicion  at  least,  that  the
operation  had  commenced,  and  at  this  time  there  was  quite
a  struggle  and  much  muscular  action,  but  he  was  soon  thrown
more  fully  into  the  magnetic  state,  and  was  then  quite  un¬
conscious  of  what  was  going  on :  entering  into  conversation
respecting  the  operation,  and  proposing  that  it  be  postponed
to  the  next  week,  &c.,  and  insisting,  even  after  the  leg  was
amputated,  that  he  would  not  have  it  done  until  it  was  fully
paralyzed,  at  the  same  time  expressing  some  doubt  whether
the  doctor  would  be  able  to  accomplish  this.

“  After  the  operation  had  been  performed  and  the  limb
dressed,  Mr.  Carey  was  placed  in  his  bed,  being  still  in  the
magnetic  state,  and  was  induced  to  sing.  His  aged  widowed
mother  was  called,  and  entered  the  room  just  as  he  was
singing  with  much  zeal,  which  greatly  affected  the  aged
woman,  and  she  burst  into  tears.  Mr.  Carey  was  now  taken
out  of  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  on  rousing  up  appeared  quite
startled  on  seeing  the  company  present ;  and  speaking  to  his
sister  and  his  mother,  a  shade  of  sadness  passed  over  his
countenance,  as  he  told  them  he  had  postponed  having  the
operation  performed  until  the  doctor  should  be  more  suc¬
cessful  in  paralyzing  his  leg.

“A  passing  smile  over  all  the  countenances  led  him  to
suspect  that  there  might  be  something  in  the  wind,  and  it
then  occurred  to  him  that  he  was  in  bed,  and  in  attempting
to  rise  he  was  cautioned  not  to  do  it,  upon  which  he  rc-


120


Labour  in  the  Mesmeric  State.


marked  that  perhaps  his  leg  was  off,  and  he  was  placed  in
bed.  Upon  being  assured  of  the  fact,  he  in  great  glee  cried
out,  ‘Good;  I  am  glad  the  old  leg  is  off!’  He  then  stated
that  the  only  sensation  he  had  experienced  was  like  that  of
some  one  pricking  the  bottom  of  his  feet.’  ”*

*  I  believe  I  can  record  another  case  of  painless  operation  through  mes¬
merism  ;  but  mesmerists  shall  judge.

Mr.  Parker,  of  No.  4,  Mercer-street,  Long  Acre,  whose  excellent  letter
was  printed  at  p.  273,  vol.  1,  and  whom  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  knowing
through  visiting  his  daughter,  eleven  years  old,  that  had  just  become  a  spon¬
taneous  somnambulist,  as  her  mother  was  at  the  same  age,  exhibiting  many
striking  phenomena  when  mesmerism  was  tried  upon  her,  has  given  me  the  fol¬
lowing  history.  The  poor  maid  of  all  work  of  his  landlord  severely  sprained
her  arm,  and  was  an  out-patient  at  a  hospital  for  six  weeks,  without  benefit,
and  told  she  would  not  be  better  till  she  lay  up.  Mr.  Parker,  seeing  her
suffering,  proposed  to  his  elder  daughter  to  mesmerise  her.  She  could  not
move  her  arm  or  do  her  work,  and  was  mesmerised  on  Friday  night.  The
next  morning  she  did  all  her  Saturday's  work,  cleaning  a  large  number  of
tins,  saucepans,  &c.,  &c.  and  at  night  was  again  unable  to  move  it.  She  was
again  mesmerised  before  she  went  to  bed,  and  was  able  on  Sunday  to  do  her
work  and  look  out  all  the  linen  for  the  wash  ;  but  at  night  again  could  not
move  it.  She  was  mesmerised  before  she  went  to  bed,  and  was  able  to  wash
all  Monday,  from  5  in  the  morning  till  10  at  night,  when  she  was  again  un¬
able  to  move  her  arm.  Mesmerism  however  restored  it  completely  after  a
few  more  repetitions  every  night.  The  arm  only  was  always  mesmerised,
but  she  went  to  sleep,  and  the  very  first  night  slept  three  quarters  of  an
hour,  and  on  waking  fancied  she  should  in  consequence  not  sleep  when  she
went  to  bed  ;  but  she  slept  all  night  and  beyond  her  usual  time.  The  mes¬
merism  always  gave  pain  at  the  time,  which  subsided  as  she  fell  asleep.
She  now  began  to  suffer  severely  in  her  jaw.  When  a  child,  she  had  been
tossed  by  a  bull,  and  her  jaw-hone  so  injured  that  it  had  become  diseased,
and  a  piece  of  bone  been  discharged  many  years  ago.  On  account  of  the
state  of  her  jaw,  she  wrent  back  to  the  hospital,  where  she  was  told  that  a
tooth  must  be  drawn  and  a  piece  of  bone  taken  away.  She  was  placed  in  a
chair:  a  young  surgeon  on  each  side  held  her  hands,  and  another  held  her
head,  placing  one  of  his  hands  at  the  back  and  top  of  her  head  and  the
other  at  the  right  side.  She  recollects  nothing  more  than  that  an  instrument
was  put  into  her  mouth.  When  she  awoke — for  she  went  to  sleep — she  found
the  operation  was  all  over,  and  the  surgeon  standing  at  her  side  holding  her
hand  and  arm;  and  he  remarked  to  her  “that  she  had  had  a  good  long
sleep  and,  when  she  called  some  time  afterwards  at  the  hospital,  that
“she  had  had  a  wonderful  cure.”

Mr.  Parker,  to  ascertain  whether  she  might  not  have  been  in  a  mesmeric
sleep  when  operated  upon,  suggested  to  his  daughter  to  take  some  opportu¬
nity  of  holding  her  head  with  her  hands,  as  had  been  done  at  the  hospital.
An  opportunity  was  found  when  the  two  were  alone,  without  the  reason
being  communicated  to  her.  In  a  few  minutes  she  wms  fast  asleep,  and
slept  five  and  thirty  minutes,  though  she  had  not  previously  been  mesmerised
for  a  considerable  period.

In  conversation  with  Mr.  Parker,  she  lately  said  that,  though  she  felt
nothing,  she  thinks  she  recollects  hearing  the  tooth  come  out :  a  remark  that  in¬
stantly  reminded  Mr.  Parker  of  the  expression  of  the  man  whose  leg  was
amputated  at  Wellow, — that  he  thought  he  heard  a  kind  of  crunching.  The
doctors  and  surgeons  in  the  Medical  Society,  who  thought  this  was  outrage¬
ous  nonsense  may  reflect  upon  the  girl’s  statement,  and  suspect  that  they
are  not  so  well  acquainted  with  their  science  as  they  imagine.


Labour  in  the  Mesmeric  State.


121


Labour  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

Mr.  Lynell  of  Manchester  has  favoured  me  with  the  fol¬
lowing  narration  : —

“  In  January  last,  I  was  requested  to  mesmerise  M.  K.,
a  young  Irishwoman,  22  years  of  age,  with  a  view  to  her
being  delivered  of  her  first  child  in  the  mesmeric  sleep ;  her
susceptibility  to  the  mesmeric  influence  having  been  ascer¬
tained  by  various  experiments.  The  patient  was  under  the
care  of  Mr.  Whitehead,  one  of  the  surgeons  to  the  Lying-in
Hospital,  who  attended  the  case  throughout,  and  who  is
agreed  that  my  notes  of  it  are  correct.  I  mesmerised  the
patient  on  the  evenings  of  Friday,  Jan.  19th  ;  Sunday,  the
21st ;  and  Friday,  the  23rd ;  and  the  general  effects  of  the
mesmerism  were  to  allay  a  nervous  irritability  from  which  she
was  suffering,  and  to  procure  for  her  sounder  and  more  re¬
freshing  sleep  than  she  had  had  for  some  weeks  previously.
On  the  first  night  of  mesmerising  she  said,  in  the  sleep-wak¬
ing  state,  that  she  should  not  be  delivered  before  Tuesday,
the  23rd ;  beyond  that  date  she  said  she  could  not  see.  On
the  second  night  she  said  she  should  be  taken  ill  between  10
and  12  on  Wednesday  night  the  22nd,  but  could  not  see
whether  or  not  she  should  be  delivered  at  that  time ;  she  how¬
ever  believed  not.  On  the  third  night  of  mesmerising  she
again  said  she  should  be  taken  ill  on  the  Wednesday  night,
and  restricted  the  time  to  between  10  and  11  o’clock;  but
again  said  she  believed  she  should  not  be  in  labour.  On
Thursday  morning,  at  4  o’clock,  I  was  sent  for,  and  found
her  in  strong  pains  of  labour, — her  hands  clenched,  her  teeth
grinding  together,  and  her  face  and  head  bathed  in  perspira¬
tion.  In  about  two  minutes  she  was  put  to  sleep,  and  in
less  than  five  minutes  she  was  in  the  sleep-waking  state,  ut¬
terly  insensible  to  pain,  and  conversing  freely  and  carelessly
with  any  one  who  was  placed  in  mesmeric  relation  with  her,
otherwise  she  was  not  conscious  of  any  one  speaking  to  her.
This  state  of  perfect  insensibility  lasted  about  an  hour  and  a
half,  during  which  time  the  action  of  labour  ivas  going  on  al¬
most  continually,  some  of  the  throes  being  very  violent,  so
much  so  as,  in  one  case,  to  rupture  one  of  the  membranes.
After  this  time,  sensibility  began  gradually  to  manifest  itself,
the  patient  at  first  feeling  the  pains  very  slightly,  afterwards
more  acutely,  but  never  so  acutely  as  in  the  waking  state.
Although  the  insensibility  was  less,  the  sleep-waking  state
still  continued ;  the  patient  however  begged  me  to  awaken
her,  but  on  being  asked  why  she  wished  to  be  awoke,  and


122  Labour  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

whether  she  should  suffer  less  pain  when  awake  than  as  she
then  was,  she  replied  that,  on  the  contrary,  she  should  suffer
more  pain,  hut  that  she  wished  to  be  awake, — she  could  not
tell  why.  As  Mr.  Whitehead  was  of  opinion  that  the  labour
might  continue  for  six  or  eight  hours  longer,  the  os  uteri
being  still  somewhat  rigid,  and  the  head  of  the  child  not
having  descended  below  the  upper  aperture  of  the  pelvis,  I
determined  on  awaking  her,  and,  if  possible,  on  being  with
her  during  the  last  hour  or  two  of  her  time.  She  was  awoke
soon  after  7,  when  the  sensibility  to  pain  was  found  to  be
very  much  greater  than  it  had  ever  been  in  the  sleep-waking
state.  I  was  unfortunate  in  not  being  able  to  see  her  again
before  her  delivery,  which  took  place  at  2  o’clock.  I  saw  her
in  the  evening  at  6,  and  mesmerised  her  for  twenty  minutes,
leaving  her  refreshed  and  comfortable ;  and  she  has  since  con¬
tinued  very  well.

“  The  insensibility,  during  an  hour  and  a  half,  was  com¬
plete  ;  I  believe  that  any  operation  might,  during  that  time,
have  been  performed  without  giving  her  the  least  pain.  Her
prediction  as  to  the  time  at  which  she  would  be  taken  ill  was
verified,  as  she  was  seized  soon  after  10  o’clock  on  the  AYed-
nesday  night ;  but  she  was  at  fault  in  supposing  her  illness
-would  not  be  labour.  She  also  gave  some  description  of  her
child,  which  proved,  on  its  birth,  to  be  incorrect.  In  her
waking  state,  up  to  time  of  her  seizure,  she  had  no  more  de¬
finite  notion  of  the  time  when  she  would  be  brought  to  bed
than  that  she  thought  it  would  be  somewhere  about  the  end
of  the  month.

“  The  child  was  born  alive,  and,  as  well  as  the  mother,
has  gone  on  very  well  since.

“  Feb.  23rd,  1844.  J.  P.  Lynell.”


Mr.  Lynell  adds  the  following  case  in  a  postscript  to  his
letter : —

“  S.  P.,  who  had  been  frequently  mesmerised,  and  who
was  so  susceptible  to  the  mesmeric  influence  that  I  on  three
different  occasions  put  her  to  sleep  from  another  room,  at
times  when  she  had  no  chance  of  knowing  I  wras  in  the  house,
and  once  demesmerised  her  from  a  considerable  distance,  had
the  misfortune  one  night  to  burn  her  hand  severely.  She
suffered  acute  pain,  and  was  unable  to  sleep  during  the  night.
The  following  morning  she  wrcnt  to  a  surgeon,  who  dressed
the  wound,  but  the  pain  continued  so  great  during  the  day
that  she  could  not  attend  to  her  business.  In  the  evening
she  came  to  me,  when  I  mesmerised  her,  and  she  passed  two


Labour  in  the  Mesmeric  State.


123


hours  in  mesmeric  sleep  free  from  pain.  On  being  awoke,
the  sensibility  returned,  and  the  pain  was  so  great  that  she
cried  at  the  thought  of  having  to  pass  another  sleepless  night.
It  now  occurred  to  me  to  mesmerise  the  arm  without  putting
her  to  sleep.  I  did  so,  during  ten  minutes,  and  succeeded
in  rendering  the  limb  rigid,  and  in  destroying  the  sensibility.
The  patient  went  home  and  slept,  but  during  the  night  the
insensibility  wore  off,  as  she  was  awake  in  the  morning  by
the  pain.  In  the  morning  I  again  rendered  the  limb  rigid
and  insensible,  and  the  patient  went  about  during  the  day  as
usual ;  the  insensibility  lasted  nearly  the  whole  day,  the  pain
gradually  returning  towards  evening.  I  repeated  the  mes¬
merism  morning  and  evening  for  ten  or  twelve  days,  until
it  was  no  longer  necessary ;  and  during  this  time  the  patient
carried  her  arm  about  like  a  dead  branch  upon  a  living  tree,
suffering  no  inconvenience  except  from  the  want  of  the  limb,
and  some  slight  pain  during  the  last  hour  before  the  time  for
mesmerising  arrived ;  which  pain  might  have  been  spared  her
had  she  been  mesmerised  three  times  in  the  twenty-four  hours
instead  of  twice.

“  Feb.  23rcl,  1844.  J.  P.  Lynell.”


Of  course  all  these  persons  in  America  and  the  West
Indies,  in  England,  Scotland  and  Ireland,  were  impostors ;
especially  those  who  suffered  amputation  without  wagging
their  other  leg  or  arm,  as  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  and  Dr.  Mar¬
shall  Hall  assure  us  they  ought,  if  they  felt  nothing.

Yours,  &c.

John  Elliotson.

P.S.  I  must  conclude  with  a  quotation  : — “  Mesmerism  is
too  gross  a  humbug  to  admit  of  any  further  serious  notice.
We  regard  its  abettors  as  quacks  and  impostors.  They  ought
to  be  hooted  out  of  professional  society.  Any  practitioner  who
sends  a  patient,  afflicted  with  any  disease,  to  consult  a  mes¬
meric  quack,  ought  to  be  without  patients  for  the  rest  of
his  days/’

Mr.  Thomas  Wakley,  Lancet,  Oct.  29,  1842.


(  124  )


VIII.  Cases  of  Cures  of  different  Diseases  by  W.  J.  Tubbs,  Esq.

Upwell  Isle,  Cambridgeshire.

We  have  received  a  variety  of  interesting  cures  by  mesmerism
of  different  diseases,  and  cases  in  which  the  phrenological
organs  were  developed,  without  contact,  from  Mr.  Tubbs,  at¬
tested  by  a  number  of  respectable  witnesses,  but  which  we
regret  that  we  cannot  insert  in  full.

I.  —  Ryley,  of  Upwell,  under  mesmeric  treatment  for
an  affection  of  the  'heart,  exhibited  some  interesting  pheno¬
mena.  Thus,  Mr.  T.  could  produce  pain  in  any  part  of  his
body  by  pointing  at  it  with  his  finger,  and  remove  the  pain
at  pleasure  by  transverse  passes  ;  and  the  patient  was  enabled
to  select  a  glass  of  mesmerised  water  from  amongst  several
other  glasses  of  water  placed  behind  him,  and  his  eyes  being
closed  the  whole  time.

II — VII.  —  Pears  was  cured  of  sciatica,  of  some  months’
standing,  in  five  mesmerisations.  This  and  five  other  cases
of  local  pains  removed  by  mesmerism,  are  detailed  at  length
by  Mr.  T.,  with  the  names  and  residences  of  the  patients.

VIII.  Miss  W.,  of  Lot  Bridge,  was  permanently  cured  of
a  nervous  contraction  of  the  arm  of  several  years’  standing,
at  one  sitting.

IX.  A  woman,  named  Ward,  was  mesmerised  for  an  en¬
largement  of  the  parotid  glands.  After  three  sittings,  at  in¬
tervals  of  a  week,  the  enlarged  glands  disappeared,  and  she
remained  well  for  four  months,  but  the  patient  is  of  a  scrofu¬
lous  habit,  and  Mr.  T.  adds,  “  I  am  told  that  she  now  has
three  or  four  ulcers  about  the  face.”

X.  Susan  Cater,  a  maid-servant,  aged  19,  applied  to  Mr.
T.  on  the  14tli  January,  1844.  She  had  been  ill  18  months,
under  medical  care,  but  had  been  in  service  till  a  fortnight
previously.  Attributed  her  illness  to  exposure  to  the  night
air  whilst  heated  with  dancing  in  a  hot  room.  Now  com¬
plained  of  constant  pain  in  the  left  side,  extending  from  the
sixth  rib  downwards  to  the  inguinal  region,  and  frequent  vo¬
miting  of  ingesta;  frequent  pain  also  in  the  region  of  the
liver,  at  the  top  of  the  shoulder  and  along  the  spine ;  violent
palpitation  of  the  heart,  pulse  106,  small  and  contracted,
intermitting  at  every  fourth  beat ;  respiration  hurried  and


Various  Diseases  cured  by  Mesmerism.


125


irregular ;  cannot  walk  far  or  ascend  a  hill  or  staircase  without
a  sense  of  suffocation ;  catamenia  scanty  but  regular ;  bowels
constipated.  As  she  had  not  derived  much  benefit  from
medicine,  Mr.  T.  proposed  mesmerism,  which  was  readily
acceded  to.

Jan.  17.  She  was  readily  affected  at  the  first  trial,  and
during  the  sleep  her  pulse  fell  to  92,  and  became  fuller.

18tli.  States  that  she  ate  a  hearty  supper  last  evening  and
retained  it,  which  she  had  not  previously  done.  Slept  well
and  feels  better.

19th.  Slept  soundly  last  night,  pains  diminished,  palpita¬
tion  less ;  pulse  80,  soft  and  full ;  spirits  better ;  sleep  induced
by  a  few  passes.

20th.  Better  in  every  respect.  Has  not  rejected  her  food
since  first  mesmerised ;  her  appetite  is  good  and  she  sleeps
soundly  at  night.

22nd.  Not  mesmerised  yesterday.  Free  from  pain  and
palpitation ;  pulse  74.  Says  she  is  quite  well,  and  proposes
returning  to  her  place  to-morrow.

Mr.  T.  performed  many  interesting  phrenological  experi¬
ments  upon  this  patient,  who  also  exhibited  indications  of
clairvoyance,  as  did  some  other  of  Mr.  TVs  patients,  but  we
have  not  space  for  them  at  present.

In  Robert  Beaver,  of  Wisbech,  a  common  gardener,  Mr.
T.  could  affect  all  the  organs  without  contact,  in  the  mes¬
meric  state.  “  His  best  were  the  intellectual,  more  particu¬
larly  Colour,  Weight,  and  Number.  For  example,  on  pointing
to  Number,  Language,  and  Causality,  and  asking  him  how
many  pounds  there  were  in  3000  times  7\d.,  he  instantly  re¬
plied  correctly ;  whilst,  in  the  waking  state,  wre  gave  him  the
same  sum  to  do,  and,  with  the  aid  of  pencil  and  paper,  he
could  not  complete  the  task,”  &c.  &c.  &c.

XI.  Margaret  Green,  had  long  been  subject  to  quinsey,
invariably  attacking  her  about  a  month  after  her  confinements,
and  generally  lasting  several  weeks,  under  the  ordinary  treat¬
ment  of  lancing,  blistering,  fomentations,  &c.  Altogether
she  had  had  ten  of  these  attacks.  A  month  after  her  last
confinement  the  glands  became  enlarged  as  usual,  and  when
“  as  large  as  nuts,”  she  was  mesmerised  by  Mr.  T. :  she
immediately  began  to  improve,  and  after  six  mesmerisations
was  quite  well.  Under  former  attacks  she  had  been  unable
to  swallow  more  than  a  teaspoonful  of  gruel  at  a  time,  and
from  her  experience  in  them  felt  sure  that  she  would  have
been  as  bad  then  but  for  the  treatment ;  indeed  she  had  never


126  Mr.  Tubb’s  Cases  of

before  missed  having  a  severe  attack  a  month  after  her  con-,
finements.

On  the  evening  of  the  21st  of  February,  after  mesmerising
a  young  female,  whose  thigh  he  proposes  shortly  to  amputate
in  the  mesmeric  state,  Mr.  Tubbs  called  accidentallv  at  the
house  of  a  friend,  where  he  met  a  young  lady  from  a  distance
(Miss  Forster,  of  Lincoln)  whom  he  had  never  seen  before.
Mesmerism  having  become  the  topic  of  conversation,  it  was
proposed  that  Miss  F.  who  had  for  some  days  been  complaining
of  pain  in  the  left  side,  should  be  operated  upon ;  and  the
young  lady  having  assented,  Mr.  T.,  who  was  sitting  on  the
opposite  side  of  the  fire-place  to  her,  pointed  with  his  two
fingers  towards  her  eyes.  The  eyelids  almost  immediately
began  to  quiver,  and  she  very  soon  dropped  off  into  the  mes¬
meric  sleep.  Mr.  T.  then  found  that  by  making  tractive
passes  he  could  draw  the  head,  arms,  legs,  &c.,  or  stiffen  any
part  at  pleasure,  by  pointing  to  it.  After  demesmerising  her,
Mr.  T.  mesmerised  a  glass  of  water,  which  the  lady  drank  at
his  request,  and  she  instantly  fell  again  into  the  mesmeric
state.  Mr.  T.  then  mesmerised  a  glass  of  water  and  placed  it
behind  the  lady,  amongst  several  other  glasses  of  water,  and
she  readily  selected  the  mesmerised  glass  from  the  others.
This  experiment  was  repeated  several  times  with  equal  success.
She  was  easily  awakened  by  a  few  transverse  passes,  when
the  pain  in  her  side  was  entirely  removed.

On  the  following  evening  Miss  Forster  and  several  friends
were  at  Mr.  Tubb’s  house,  when  Mr.  T.  mesmerised  her
through  the  door,  and  was  able,  through  the  door,  to  attract
any  limb  at  pleasure,  no  one  in  the  room  knowing  which  part
he  wished  to  affect.  About  half  an  hour  afterwards,  Miss  F.
having  been  awakened,  was  leaving  the  room,  when  Mr.  T.
standing  behind  her,  pointed,  without  her  knowledge,  to  the
back  of  her  head.  She  immediately  stopped,  and  Mr.  T.,  di¬
recting  his  fingers  down  in  the  course  of  the  spine,  the  whole
body  became  rigid,  and  remained  so  until  relieved  by  trans¬
verse  passes.

XII.  Jean  Beavers,  a  servant  girl,  at  the  Red  Lion  Inn,
Outwell,  went  limping  to  Mr.  T/s  house  during  his  absence
from  home,  to  consult  him  respecting  her  knee,  which  was  so
painful,  red,  and  swollen,  that  she  had  been  obliged  to  lay  it
up  for  two  days.  Finding  that  Mr.  T.  did  not  return  after  she
had  been  waiting  three  hours,  she  was  about  to  leave,  saying,
she  would  return  on  the  following  morning,  when  the  servant
said  to  her,  “  I  have  seen  my  master  mesmerise  people  who


Various  Diseases  cured  by  Mesmerism.  1.27

came  here  quite  lame,  and  they  were  able  to  walk  away  quite
well  afterwards.  Let  mistress  try  you.”  “  What  is  mesmeris¬
ing  ?”  said  the  girl.  “  Oh,  she  will  shew  you.”  Mr.  T/s
housekeeper,  aged  65,  a  powerful  mesmeriser,  who  occasion¬
ally  mesmerises  Mr.  T/s  patients,  then  came  in  and,  at  the
girPg  request,  commenced  mesmerising  her.  Suspending  her
watch  in  the  centre  of  her  own  chest,  she  took  hold  of  the
giiTs  two  thumbs  and  desired  her  to  fix  her  eyes  on  the  watch.
In  a  few  minutes  the  patient  became  unconscious.  The  mes¬
meriser,  then,  after  making  some  passes  for  a  time  over  the
knee,  allowed  her  to  sleep  for  an  hour.  On  awaking  her,  the
girl  rose  without  pain ;  the  redness  of  the  knee  had  subsided,
and  she  walked  home.

The  next  day  Mr.  T.  called  on  his  rounds  to  see  her,  and
found  her  at  work.  On  examining  the  knee  it  was  found
slightly  swollen,  but  without  any  tenderness  on  pressure.

A  week  has  now  elapsed  and  she  is  quite  well.


We  have  seen  a  letter  from  Mr.  Tubbs  to  a  gentleman  in
London,  which  does  him  so  much  credit,  that  we  must  pub¬
lish  a  part  of  it. — Editor.

“  The  Provincial  Medical  Journal  thought  fit  to  attack  me  as  a
mesmerist  (being  a  member),  and  hinted  as  much  as  to  say  they
would  expel  me:  not  liking  their  unbecoming  remarks,  I  immediately
forwarded  my  resignation,  a  copy  of  which  I  now  give  you.

“  Gentlemen, — I  am  happy  to  have  the  honour  of  applying  the
observations  in  th e  Provincial  Medical  Journal  to  myself,  but  I  must
reserve  the  right  of  judging  of  the  propriety  of  the  charge  ‘of being
guilty  of  so  gross  a  piece  of  quackery/

“  I  know  not  on  what  authority,  or  by  what  superiority  of  under¬
standing,  you  assume  to  yourselves  the  right  to  dictate  to  any  mem¬
ber  of  the  profession  what  course  he  ought  to  pursue.  I  never  yet
heard  that  you  possess  a  monopoly  of  knowledge  in  everything,
though  I  am  ready  to  admit  you  have  your  share  in  medical  science;
yet  I  am  afraid  you  assume  too  much,  when  you  wish  to  limit  the
extent  of  every  scientific  pursuit  within  the  boundary  of  your  narrow
circle.

“I  have  as  great  a  regard  for  the  honour  of  the  profession  as
any  of  the  gentlemen  that  compose  so  renowned  a  phalanx,  as  your¬
selves,  and  feel  honoured  at  being  associated  with  such  gentlemen  as
Drs.  Elliotson  and  Engledue  in  receiving  your  condemnation,  for  what
you  please  to  denominate  quackery.

“If  the  base  upon  which  the  profession  stands  is  to  be  injured
by  what  you  call  quackery  (mesmerism  I  mean),  then  I  am  sorry
to  say  it  will  be  shaken  indeed;  for  I  feel  perfectly  assured  that
mesmerism  will  continue  to  be  a  practical  science,  in  defiance  of


128


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of


any  opposition  it  may  meet  with  from  the  prejudice  of  any  class  of
men  whatever;  and  I  feel  perfectly  content  to  be  placed  by  your
unkind  and  ungrateful  behaviour,  on  that  proscribed  list,  on  which
is  numbered  that  justly-celebrated  and  much  injured  man  Dr.
Elliotson.

“I  beg  to  inform  you  that  I  am  equally  anxious  to  withdraw
my  name  from  the  society  as  the  society  is  ready  to  lose  me  as  a
member.

“  Yours,  respectfully,

“  W.  J.  Tubbs.”


IX.  Mr.  Brindley’s  Cures  of  various  Diseases  and  Cases  of

Clairvoyance — continued .

We  received  the  following  note.

To  the  Editor  of  The  Zoist.

Sir, — Having  seen  in  the  last  number  of  your  publica¬
tion  a  long  statement  from  Mr.  Brindley,  of  Stourbridge,
relating  to  some  cases  of  mesmerism,  in  which  he  has  most
unceremoniously  made  use  of  our  names  in  conjunction  with
several  others  in  the  neighbourhood,  we  beg  to  state  that  it
was  done  entirely  without  our  knowledge  or  consent ;  and
that  the  occurrences  therein  stated  to  have  taken  place  we
consider  very  much  exaggerated,  and  several  of  which,  we
think,  could  only  have  existed  in  his  own  ardent  imagina¬
tion.

We  do  not  here  wish  to  argue  upon  the  merits  or  other¬
wise  of  mesmerism,  though  we  shall  at  any  time  be  will¬
ing  to  contribute  in  any  way,  by  the  sanction  of  our  names
to  the  publication  of  any  such  cases,  if  free  from  suspicion,
and  when  done  for  the  sake  of  investigating  truth,  devoid  of
all  mercenary  motives.  By  such  means  alone  can  the  truth
and  utility  of  so  extraordinary  a  science  be  investigated.

Charles  Dudley,  M.B.

R.  L.  Freer,  M.R.C.S.L.

Stourbridge ,  Feb.  15 th,  1844.


P.S.  With  regard  to  Henrietta  Price,  I  may  add,  that
she  has  never  been  under  my  care  for  six  or  seven  years,
nor  could  I  ever  suppose  from  her  symptoms,  either  at  that
time  or  at  any  subsequent  period,  that  she  had  anything  more


various  Diseases  Cured  by  Mesmerism.


129


than  a  probable  functional  derangement  of  the  heart,  which
is  so  frequent  in  young  females  of  her  age  and  appearance.

I  beg  to  remain,  yours,  & c.,

Charles  Dudley,  M.B.

Stourbridge ,  Feb.  15 th,  1844.


This  was  instantly  sent  to  Mr.  Brindley,  that  it  and  his
reply  might  appear  together  in  the  same  number.  From  his
reply  we  insert  the  following  extracts,  and  regret  that  its
length  precludes  our  inserting  the  whole  of  his  answer.

Sir, — That  I  mentioned  the  names  of  Dr.  Dudley  and
Mr.  Freer  without  solicitation  I  admit ;  for  I  certainly  never
dreamt  of  asking  Mr.  Freer  whether  I  should  state  in  The
Zoist  that  he  witnessed  at  my  house  a  mesmeric  operation ;
and  with  saying  anything  else  he  cannot  charge  me.  His
name  only  occurs  once,  and  in  the  following  passage  : — “  On
the  5th  of  October,  1843,  I  magnetized  Henrietta  Price,  of
Stourbridge,  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Dudley,  B.  L.  Freer,
Esq.,  surgeon,  and  several  others.”  Neither  in  this  or  any
other  place,  have  I  stated  or  insinuated  that  Mr.  Freer  was
satisfied  by  the  cases  of  clairvoyance  he  witnessed.*  Indeed
his  vacillating  conduct  on  a  former  occasion,  when  he  wit¬
nessed  a  clairvoyant  case,  which  he  acknowledged  at  the
time,  “  was  satisfactory  and  convincing,”  before  several  gen¬
tlemen,  and  which  acknowledgment  a  week  after  he  denied
in  toto,  would  render  such  evidence,  in  my  opinion,  entirely
worthless  if  not  injurious  to  the  cause  of  mesmerism  or  any
other.

As  to  the  mention  of  Dr.  Dudley’s  name  in  connexion
with  the  cases  which  he  professed  had  made  a  convert  of  him,
I  thought  it  quite  unnecessary  to  ask  him,  as  he  had  publicly
stated  before  several  gentlemen,  in  my  hearing,  that  he  was
quite  convinced  of  the  clairvoyant  phenomena :  and  even  in

*  We,  the  undersigned,  being  present  at  a  mesmeric  operation  at  Mr.
Price’s,  conducted  by  Mr.  Brindley,  hereby  certify,  that  we  have  a  perfect
recollection  of  Mr.  R.  L.  Freer  acknowledging  that  he  was  quite  satisfied
with  the  clairvoyant  phenomena  then  and  there  educed.

Signed  by  W.  S.  Jones,

John  G.  Braund,

Ann  Price,

S.  Price,

M.  Price,

H.  Price,

Sarah  Price.

And  certified  by  — — - Esq.,  the  only  other  person  present,  but  who  has

not  signed  the  above  because  lie  objects  to  have  his  name  printed.

Mr.  Deeley,  a  patient  cured  with  mesmerism,  lately  waited  upon  his

VOL.  TI.  K


130


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of


the  Assembly  Room,  in  Stourbridge,  at  a  lecture  on  mes¬
merism,  he  not  only  appeared  on  the  platform  as  one  of  the
committee,  but  admitted  what  the  lecturer  stated ;  namely,
that  a  member  of  his  own  family,  a  lady,  had  been  mes¬
merised,  and  not  only  the  cerebral  organs  excited,  but  som¬
nambulic  and  other  phenomena  produced.

Relatively  to  Henrietta  Price,  I  stated  that  she  had  been
under  the  medical  treatment  of  several  physicians  (among
the  rest,  of  Dr.  Dudley)  during  the  last  seven  years.  That
she  was  under  his  treatment,  Dr.  Dudley  admits;  he  says
six  or  seven  years  ago.  But  I  did  not  state  directly  or  indi¬
rectly  that  Dr.  Dudley  pronounced  her  disease  to  be  an  en¬
largement  of  the  heart.  I  said  “  She  left  the”  (Birmingham)
“  Hospital,”  &c.,  “  her  disease  was  'pronounced ,”  &c.  That
I  had  proof  of  what  I  asserted,  the  following  statement  will
sufficiently  demonstrate.

Statement  of  Dr.  Baker  of  the  Birmingham  Hospital ,  nearly
three  years  ago,  to  Mrs.  Brice,  relatively  to  her  daughter,
Henrietta  Price.

“  When  she  was  leaving  the  hospital,  he  took  me  on  one
side,  and  in  answer  to  my  question  of,  1  Tell  me  now  really
what  you  think  is  her  complaint,  and  whether  she  will  ever
be  cured  V  said,  e  Mrs.  Price,  if  I  must  tell  you  the  real
state  of  the  case,  then,  her  disease  is  an  enlargement  of  the
heart;  it  is  too  large  for  the  socket,  and  if  it  once  slips,
(placing  his  hands  so  upon  each  other,  and  slipping  one  hand,
when  he  said  it,  off  the  other,)  it  is  all  over  with  her,  she
will  go  out  like  the  snuff  of  a  candle.  She  will  never  be  able
to  go  to  service,  and  if  she  is  not  very  careful,  will  some  day
die  suddenly.  She  is  perfectly  incurable  *

“  (Signed)  Ann  Price.”

Dr.  Baker  was  not  alone  in  his  opinion,  as  several  other
medical  gentlemen  gave  a  similar  one.

But  if  we  admit  that  it  was  not  an  organic  but  a  func¬
tional  derangement,*  what  then  ?  Would  this  admission

medical  attendant  (Mr.  Freer),  in  company  with  his  uncle,  to  pay  his  bill.
“  Well,”  said  the  doctor,  “  Is  it  possible  ;  how  well  you  look  !  Whatever
has  made  such  an  alteration  in  you  since  I  attended  you  ?”  (This  was  a
long  time  before.)  “  Mesmerism  and  Mr.  Brindley,”  replied  the  patient.
“  Bah  !  it’s  a  gross  humbug  !”  “  Perhaps  so,  sir,”  said  the  uncle,  “  but  it

has  done  that  for  my  nephew  which  your  medicine  could  not :  its  made  a
man  of  him.”  How  far  this  may  have  operated  to  have  produced  the  pre¬
sent  attack,  may  be  easily  decided.

*  The  disease  is  no  where  stated  in  The  Zoist  to  have  been  organic. —
Zoist.


various  Diseases  Cured  by  Mesmerism.


131


benefit  the  cause  of  the  Doctor  at  all  ?  The  disease,  what¬
ever  it  was,  was  cured  by  mesmerism,  and  that  after  it  had
exhausted  all  the  resources  of  medicine,  and  baffled  the  skill
of  a  host  of  physicians.

The  cases  of  clairvoyance  which  Dr.  Dudley  and  Mr.  Freer
think  much  exaggerated,  were  taken  down  immediately  after
their  occurrence,  and  from  the  notes  then  taken  they  have
been  transcribed  without  colouring  or  addition.*  These  notes
I  have  offered  to  shew  Dr.  Dudley,  and  challenged  him  this
morning  to  point  out  one  single  exaggeration,  but  he  refused
to  do  so,  (because  I  feel  confident  he  could  not;)  but  instead
he  made  the  following  remarks,  which  I  immediately  took
down,  and  which  I  now  give  you  verbatim.  “  Why  the  fact
is,  you  should  not  have  inserted  my  name ;  I  do  not  like  to
have  it  before  the  public  in  connexion  with  mesmerism.  As
to  the  cases  of  clairvoyance,  for  the  most  part,  I  admit
they  were  true ,  but  I  think,  I  fancy,  they  were  a  little  bit
coloured.”

Though  the  letter  of  Dr.  Dudley  and  Mr.  Freer  is  evi¬
dently  intended  to  weaken  the  evidence  in  favour  of  mes¬
merism,  and  especially  to  make  the  cases  in  question  seem
doubtful,  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  they  do  not  deny  the
reality  of  the  cases,  either  of  cures  or  clairvoyance;  but,
with  the  exception  of  what  they  call  a  little  colouring,  indi¬
rectly  admit  them.  My  cases,  so  far  from  being  suspicious,
or  pursued  from  mercenary  motives,  or  not  pursued  for  the
sake  of  investigating  truth,  were  witnessed  and  decided  upon
by  themselves  and  others  equally,  or  more,  capable  of  judg¬
ing,  and  possessed  of  as  great  a  love  of  truthful  investigation,
and  conducted  by  myself  with  fairness  and  impartiality,  and
without  fee  or  reward.  In  fact,  though  I  attended  upon
Henrietta  Price  and  her  sister  till  they  were  quite  well,  I
never  received,  or  expected  to  receive,  any  remuneration.
For  three  months  I  devoted  nearly  the  whole  of  my  time  to
mesmerising  the  poor  and  afflicted,  whom  I  attended  gra-
tuitously,  and  to  attending  private  parties  of  medical  and
other  gentlemen  of  Stourbridge,  who  met  at  my  own  or  my
patient's  house,  and  witnessed  my  operations  day  after  day,
without  the  slightest  expence  to  them  :  and  it  was  only  when

*  I  have  read  these  cases,  as  they  appeared  in  The  Zoist,  to  the  other
persons  present  when  these  phenomena  were  educed,  and  instead  of  exag¬
gerating  they  charge  me  with  extenuating  them ;  and  when  I  read  the
Doctor’s  letter  to  them,  they  were  not  a  little  surprised,  and  observed,  that
“  it  was  strange  and  passing  strange  ;  but  that  there  were  doubtless  persons
in  existence  sufficiently  clever  to  unravel  the  mystery,  and  who  would  com¬
mence  by  a  reference  to  Demetrius,  the  silversmith  of  Ephesus,  who  made
silver  shrines  for  Diana,  the  goddess  of  the  Ephesians.”

K  2


132


Mr.  Brindley's  Cases  of


the  applications  became  so  numerous,  that  my  time  was
wholly  taken  up  by  it,  that  I  adopted  mesmerism  as  a  pro¬
fession.  Then  indeed  I  began  to  make  a  mere  nominal
charge,  which  I  seldom  or  ever  received,  and  in  no  case
where  the  parties  are  not  in  good  circumstances,  and  then
only  to  pay  my  expences  in  the  country.  Since  I  have  ad¬
vocated  the  cause  of  mesmerism,  so  far  from  gaining  by  it,  I
have  lost  by  it,  in  lectures,  journeys  into  the  country,  &c.  little
less  than  <£100,  beside  sacrificing  my  time  for  eight  months,
and  severely  injuring  my  health,  by  mesmerising  upon  an  ave¬
rage  no  less  than  seven  patients  in  a  day,  for  months  together.
How  far  my  motives  have  been  mercenary  then,  I  leave  your
readers  to  determine.  But  I  have  no  doubt  your  readers
will  see  through  the  flimsy  pretensions,  and  indefinite  and
unsubstantial  charges  of  Dr.  Dudley  and  Mr.  Freer,  that
their  real  object  of  attack  is  the  science  which  I  am  proud
to  advocate.  But  they  cannot  injure  it ;  and  the  shafts  they
fling  against  it  will  rebound  from  its  impervious  and  heavenly
(because  truthful)  panoply  upon  themselves.  Snail-like  they
may  creep  over  the  surface  of  its  character,  and  leave  their
slime  behind  them ;  but  the  ever-flowing  stream  of  truth  will
speedily  cleanse  away  the  pollution.  As  soon  may  they
attempt  to  blow  away  the  sun  with  their  breath,  or  darken
the  moon  with  their  hands,  as  stop  the  progress  of  mes¬
merism,  or  prevent  its  advancement.  Truth  must  and  will
ultimately  triumph,  despite  the  petty  assaults  of  pretended
friends,  or  the  more  noble  ones  of  real  enemies.

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  dear  Sir,

Very  faithfully  yours,

•  T.  B.  Brindley.

Regent's  Place,  near  Stourbridge,

Feb.  22nd,  1844.


Mr.  Brindley  has  sent  us  the  following  additional  cases  :

VIII.  Nervous  Affection  of  three  years  standing  cured  by

Mesmerism  in  one  fortnight .

Miss  Parkes,  Bell-broughton,  aged  30,  had  suffered  from
a  nervous  attack  for  three  years.  She  had  been  attended  by
several  medical  men,  who  had  failed  to  cure  or  benefit  her.
She  sent  for  me  on  the  10th  of  November,  having  heard  of
a  case  of  nervous  affection  which  had  been  cured  by  mes¬
merism.  I  visited  her  on  the  12th  for  the  first  time.  She
was  looking  very  pale ;  her  eyes  were  sunk  deep  in  her  head,


various  Diseases  Cured  by  Mesmerism.


133


and  looked  very  dark  and  heavy;  she  was  continually  subject
to  violent  pains  in  the  head,  with  giddiness  and  heaviness,
“  as  though  a  great  weight  rested  upon  it,”  as  she  remarked
to  me.  She  had  an  extremely  low  pulse,  and  was  so  remark¬
ably  nervous,  that  it  was  with  difficulty  she  could  be  per¬
suaded  to  eat,  “  lest,”  as  she  said,  “  her  food  should  choke
her.”  She  constantly  fancied  some  one  was  calling  her,  and
was  not  only  fidgetty  in  consequence,  but  truly  unhappy.
Menstruation  had  not  taken  place  for  many  months.  I  mes¬
merised  her  for  the  first  time  on  the  12th :  she  was  in  the
mesmeric  sleep  in  five  minutes.  Slept  20  minutes  and  awoke
voluntarily.  Attended  her  on  the  13th;  found  her  playing
music  and  singing ;  understood  she  had  been  so  full  of  gaiety
the  evening  before,  that  she  had  literally  been  dancing  for
joy.  Sent  her  to  sleep  in  three  minutes ;  slept  half  an  hour,
and  awoke  of  herself.  Visited  her  on  the  14th ;  found  her
looking  much  better,  and  still  lively  as  on  the  13th.  On  the
15th  menstruation  returned ;  and  she  was  free  from  pain  in
the  head.  On  the  16th  she  was  free  from  giddiness  and  the
weight  she  used  to  complain  of  in  her  head,  and  could  eat
without  fear.  I  continued  the  mesmerisation  every  day  till
the  26th,  when  she  had  recovered  her  former  healthy  appear¬
ance,  and  in  every  respect  was  quite  well.  Thus  in  14  days,
without  a  single  dose  of  medicine  of  any  sort,  by  mesmerism
alone,  this  poor  young  woman,  who  had  been  a  miserably
afflicted  creature  for  three  years  was  perfectly  cured.

IX.  Melancholia  of  12  months  standing  cured  by  Mesmerism .

Sarah  West,  a  young  woman  residing  at  Hunnington,
through  losses  her  father  had  sustained,  and  the  poverty  she
endured  in  consequence,  fell  into  a  low  melancholy  way,  re¬
fusing  to  take  food,  and  shunning  every  person  with  whom
she  formerly  held  intercourse.  Medicine  produced  no  bene¬
ficial  effects,  and  she  gradually  grew  wrorse  and  worse.
Hearing  of  her  case,  I  determined  to  visit  her,  and  try  the
effects  of  mesmerism  upon  her.  But  the  question  was  how
to  get  at  her,  as  she  shunned  every  one  and  hid  herself  at
their  approach.  However,  I  succeeded  by  stratagem  in  seeing
her,  and  induced  her  by  coaxing  to  sit  upon  a  chair  and  let
me  look  at  her.  In  a  few  minutes  she  was  in  a  comatose
state ;  I  mesmerised  her  several  days  without  any  apparent
advantage ;  but  at  the  end  of  a  fortnight  she  became  more
cheerful  and  sociable,  and  occasionally  hummed  a  tune,  and
worked  with  her  needle.  I  continued  mesmerism  another
week,  at  the  expiration  of  which  period  she  was  quite  a  changed


134


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of


being,  in  fact  she  ivas  quite  well.  She  has  continued  so  up
till  the  present  time  (now  two  months  since  her  recovery),
and  obtains  her  livelihood  by  doing  plain  needlework.  Though
before  she  shunned  all  society,  and  was  not  permitted  to  go
out  alone,  she  now  mixes  in  company  with  real  pleasure,  and
goes  wherever  she  pleases  without  let  or  hindrance,  or  proba¬
bility  of  danger.  In  fact,  as  I  said  before,  she  continues  up
to  the  present  time  perfectly  well.  In  this  case,  as  in  the
former,  menstruation  had  been  suspended  for  many  months,
but  was  speedily  restored  by  mesmerism.

X.  Cure  of  apparent  Consumption  by  Mesmerism.

Thomas  Deeley,  Farmer,  Wharton,  had  been  the  subject
of  epilepsy  for  a  long  time.  At  length  his  fits  gradually  left
him,  till  he  was  entirely  free  from  them.  But  he  still  con¬
tinued  very  ill  after  the  fits  had  left  him,  suffering  violent
pains  in  the  head,  stomach  and  bowels,  with  great  giddiness,
and  being  constantly  subject  to  flatulence,  which  caused  him
much  pain,  as  it  was  very  violent  at  times.  Several  physi¬
cians  prescribed  for  his  complaint,  and  several  surgeons  at¬
tended  him,  but  he  gradually  grew  worse  every  day,  till  at
the  end  of  two  years  from  the  time  of  his  fits  ceasing,  he
was  supposed  to  be  consumptive  and  little  hopes  were  enter¬
tained  of  his  recovery.  I  saw  him  for  the  first  time  on  the
20th  of  October,  and  a  more  emaciated  and  miserable  looking
object  I  never  saw ;  he  did  certainly  look  past  all  human
aid.  However,  I  mesmerised  my  patient,  Serena  Price —
the  clairvoyant  patient  mentioned  in  my  last — and  bade  her
examine  the  poor  fellow.  After  a  few  minutes  examination,
her  head  having  been  raised  and  her  closed  eyes  fixed  oppo¬
site  the  patient,  she  observed,  “  Poor  fellow.  I'm  truly  sorry
for  him ;  his  stomach  is  very  bad,  there’s  a  large  lump  on
the  coat  of  the  stomach,  just  there,  and  another  there  and
there,”  said  she,  pointing  to  the  man’s  stomach.  “  Well,  do
you  see  anything  else  the  matter,  I  enquired  ?  “  Stop  a  bit.”
“Well?”  “Yes,  the  liver  is  spotted  with  green  spots,  and
on  one  side  it  is  quite  purple ;  and  the  lungs  are  very  bad ;
one  lung  is  spotted  and  streaked  with  a  whitish  colour,  and
looks  shrivelled,  and  the  other  is  ragged  towards  the  bottom.”
I  then  directed  her  to  look  at  the  head.  She  looked,  or
appeared  to  look  for  a  moment,  and  then  fainted  away.  I
excited  Alimentiveness,  and  taking  hold  of  her  hand  I  drank
a  little  water ;  I  then  excited  Wit,  and  in  two  minutes  she
was  laughing  immoderately.  I  then  allayed  Wit  and  directed
her  attention  to  the  patient,  whose  head  she  said  “  looked


various  Diseases  Cured  by  Mesmerism.


135


very  bad ;”  but  I  could  not  get  her  to  look  at  it  again.  I
said  to  her,  “  Well,  what  will  cure  him  ?”  She  replied,
“  Mesmerism, — if  he  is  mesmerised  every  day  for  two  months
he  will  be  as  well  as  ever  he  was  in  his  life.  He  must  take
three  tea-spoonfuls  of  rum  and  honey  though,  two  or  three
times  a  day,  and  15  drops  of  elixir  of  vitriol  every  morning
for  his  stomach.”

Believing  firmly  in  the  prescriptions  of  somnambulists,  I
followed  her  advice  to  the  letter,  and  after  mesmerising  him
for  two  months  he  was  quite  well ;  and  the  last  time  I  saw
him,  he  was  as  hard  at  work  “  as  a  thrasher  ,”  for  he  was
literally  in  the  barn  thrashing.  Both  this  and  the  last-men¬
tioned  patient  have  been  mesmerised  since  their  recovery,
before  several  medical  gentlemen,  some  of  whom  thought  it
"  rather  odd,”  but  others  I  am  happy  to  say  saw,  believed,
and  now  practice  mesmerism.  This  patient  I  can  attract
from  his  chair  by  merely  pointing  at  him  with  the  finger,
and  by  a  few  passes  produce  rigidity  of  all  the  limbs.  The
manifestations  of  the  cerebral  organs  in  this  case  can  also  be
partially  developed.

XI.  Cure  of  Deafness  of  two  years'  standing.

Elizabeth  Perry,  of  Manner  Lane  Wharf,  Halesowen,
had  two  years  ago,  a  violent  attack  of  typhus  fever,  which
left  her  in  a  state  of  almost  complete  deafness.  She  could
hear  anything  very  shrill  or  very  loud;  but  no  ordinary
sound,  such  as  anything  falling, — a  person  speaking  to  her, —
or  the  ticking  of  a  large  clock,  when  her  ear  was  close  to
the  case, — the  striking  of  the  clock,  &c.,  &c.  Having  been
invited  by  two  or  three  gentlemen  (particular  friends,  but
decided  sceptics  as  to  mesmerism)  to  give  a  course  of  lectures
on  the  subject  at  Halesowen,  I  accepted  the  invitation,  and
gave  a  course  of  five  lectures  in  the  magistrates*  public
room  at  the  above  place.  John  Meredith,  Esq.  of  Belle  Yue,
a  gentleman  in  every  sense  of  the  word  and  a  magistrate,
took  the  chair,  and  the  following  gentlemen  were  appointed
the  committee  to  investigate  the  subject,  and  test  the  reality
of  the  phenomena : — J.  Moore,  Esq.,  surgeon,  H.  Phillips,
Esq.,  surgeon,  J.  Humphrey,  Esq.,  E.  Fowell,  Esq.,  Thomas
Harris,  Esq.,  and  J.  Whitmore,  Esq.  At  the  conclusion  of
the  lectures,  the  following  was  their  decision,  given  through
the  talented  and  very  worthy  chairman : — “  That  it  is  the
opinion  of  the  committee  (though  before  sceptical),  that  mes¬
merism  is  true ;  that  Mr.  Brindley  has  succeeded  in  pro¬
ducing  mesmeric  sleep  in  all  the  patients  (viz.  two  of  his


136


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of  Clairvoyance.


own  and  17  of  the  town  and  its  vicinity) ;  that  the  pheno¬
mena  produced  are  genuine  and  cannot  be  controverted ;  and
that  the  thanks  of  this  meeting  be  given  to  Mr.  Brindley  for
the  very  able,  talented,  and  gentlemanly  manner  in  which
he  has  conducted  the  proceedings,  and  for  the  great  good
humour  and  patience  with  which  he  has  borne  our  scepticism,
controversy,  and  searching  investigation.”

It  is  supposed  that  there  are  now  three  hundred  persons
firm  believers  in,  and  many  of  them  staunch  advocates  of,
mesmerism  and  phrenology  in  Halesowen,  though  previous  to
my  visit  it  is  asserted  there  were  not  three.*  In  consequence
of  some  statements  made  in  my  lectures  relative  to  the  cura¬
tive  powers  of  mesmerism,  Elizabeth  Perry  called  upon  me,
and  solicited  me  to  mesmerise  her  for  her  deafness.  I  imme¬
diately  magnetized  her,  and  in  three  minutes  she  was  in  a
state  of  sleep-waking.  Mr.  Phillips  happened  to  come  into
the  house  and  room  quite  unexpectedly,  and  before  he  had
spoken,  she  said,  without  anything  having  been  said  to  her,
“  What  does  that  gentleman  want  ?”  “  I  cannot  say ;  how

do  you  know  it  is  a  gentleman  ?”  “  Think  I  cannot  see
him  ?”  “  No,  I  think  not,  for  your  back  is  towards  him,
and  you  have  not  opened  you  eyes.”  “Well,  I  do  not  care,
I  can  see  him,  and  he  has  got  a  white  hat  on.”  “  No,  he
has  not.”  “  No,  that's  true,  because  he  has  just  pulled  it  off
and  put  it  on  the  table.”  This  was  exactly  correct.  I  then
went  behind  her  and  placed  it  on  my  own  head,  continuing
to  talk  to  her  about  the  gentleman.  “  Pray  who  is  this  gen¬
tleman?”  “I  do  not  know.”  “Are  you  sure?”  “Yes.”
“  Look  again.”  “  Oh,  I  see  now  ;  I  make  him  out :  it's  Dr.


*  The  following  notice  of  the  lectures,  from  the  pen  of  Wm.  Harris,
Esq.,  author  of  The  History  of  Halesowen,  &c.  &c.,  appeared  in  the  Wor¬
cestershire  Chronicle,  of  the  3rd  instant.

u  Halesowen.

“  Mesmerism. — Mr.  T.  B.  Brindley  has  just  concluded  a  course  of  five
lectures  on  this  deeply  interesting  science  to  crowded  and  respectable  audi¬
ences.  At  the  commencement,  I  must  confess,  I  was  sceptical,  believing
that  a  collusion  existed  between  the  lecturer  and  his  subjects ;  but  when  I
saw  the  like  effects  produced  upon  my  friends  and  neighbours,  who  could
have  no  possible  motive  to  deceive  ;  when  l  witnessed  the  rigid  examination
into  the  phenomena  by  gentlemen  standing  high  in  the  medical  profession,
who,  although  they  disputed  every  point,  were  obliged  to  make  a  public
acknowledgment  of  the  facts  of  mesmeric  sleep,  rigidity  of  muscles  or  arti¬
ficial  catalepsy,  insensibility  to  pain,  mesmero-phrenology,  and  lucid  som¬
nambulism  ;  when  I  had  evidence  of  my  senses  that  such  things  were,  I
was  constrained  to  give  my  testimony,  that  mesmerism  is  true,  and  that
‘  truth  is  strange,  stranger  than  fiction.’  Mr.  Brindley,  as  a  lecturer,  pos¬
sesses  qualifications  of  no  mean  order  ;  a  fine  and  clear  delivery,  purity  and
elegance  of  language,  calmness  and  self-possession  to  combat  with  precon¬
ceived  opinions,  and  firmness  sufficient  to  ward  off  vulgar  observations  or
rude  jests.”


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of  Clairvoyance .


137


Phillips.”  “  And  he  has  got  a  white  hat  on,  has  he?”  “No,
but  you  have  though.”  In  all  this  she  was  perfectly  correct,
though  I  am  certain  she  never  once  opened  her  eyes,  or  turned
her  head.  Dr.  Phillips  was  certainly  astonished,  but  not
more  so  than  myself ;  for  I  had  not  the  slightest  expectation
of  meeting  with  a  lucid  somnambulist  in  this  patient.  Un¬
like  many  other  doctors,  by  the  bye,  he  was  not  only  aston¬
ished,  but  satisfied  of  the  genuineness  and  truth  of  the
phenomena,  and  of  mesmerism  of  course.  I  continued  to
mesmerise  the  girl  for  a  fortnight,  at  the  end  of  which  time,
she  could  hear  a  watch  tick  a  quarter  of  a  yard  from  her  head ,
and  catch  the  slightest  whisper  that  fell  from  my  lips.  She  con¬
tinues  up  to  the  present  time  perfectly  well.

XII.  Cure  of  a  wounded  Leg  by  Mesmerism.

In  October,  Mr.  T.  Brookes,  of  Bell-broughton,  being  in
Worcester  with  the  cavalry  on  permanent  duty,  he  being  a
member  of  that  corps,  fell  and  bruised  his  leg  badly,  which
subsequently  inflamed  very  much,  and  by  bad  treatment  be¬
came  a  wound.  Several  things  were  tried,  but  all  failed  to
heal  the  wounded  leg.  Calling  upon  him  one  morning  on  a
little  business,  he  mentioned  his  bad  leg  to  me,  and  undoing
the  bandages,  requested  me  to  look  at  it.  It  was  very  much
inflamed  and  swollen,  and  the  wound  discharged  a  watery
matter.  I  fomented  it  with  warm  water  and  washed  it  clean ;
passed  my  hand  over  it  for  five  minutes  ;  manipulated  over  it
and  used  slight  friction  for  ten  minutes ;  and,  in  conclusion,
breathed  upon  the  wound.  The  operation  caused  him  consi¬
derable  pain,  but  he  felt  easier  after  it  was  over.  After  I
left,  all  day  and  night  he  felt  very  great  pain,  and  as  he  has
since  informed  me,  “wished  me  and  mesmerism  at  a  place  un-
nameable  1  to  ears  polite  ;*  ”  but  the  next  morning  he  was
quite  easy ;  his  leg  looked  no  longer  angry  or  inflamed,  the
wound  was  closing  over,  and  seemed  “  getting  well  all  one
way.”  A  week  after  the  first  operation  I  visited  him  again,
and  found  the  leg  nearly  well.  I  repeated  the  operation,  and
on  the  Wednesday  following  I  saw  him  again,  and  he  said,
addressing  me,  “  Thank  goodness,  my  leg  is  quite  well ;  the
wound  is  healed,  the  inflammation  gone,  and  to-day  I  have
walked  twenty  miles  without  the  least  pain.”*

%

*  When  such  cures  are  effected  as  these,  and  those  of  Dr.  Elliotson  and
others,  by  the  influence  of  mesmerism, — cures  which  have  defied  the  powers
of  medicine,  is  it  fair,  or  consistent,  or  honest,  to  denounce  mesmerism  as
41  humbug,”  without  experiment  or  investigation  ;  or  wise  in  medical  men,
to  reject  its  agency  in  the  cure  of  diseases  ?  I  trow  not.  But  alas  !  the


138


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of  Clairvoyance.


These  cases  of  cures  shall  suffice  for  the  present  letter ;
and  in  conclusion  I  will  give  you  some  of  clairvoyance,  at¬
tested  by  the  parties  who  witnessed  them,  and  whose  names
are  inserted  below.

On  the  22nd  of  September,  1843, — in  the  presence  of  Paul
Matthews,  Esq.,  Mr.  J.  Matthews,  jun.,  Mr.  Gibson,  R.  L.
Freer,  Esq.,  surgeon,  Mr.  Major  Scott,  Mr.  Moody,  Mr.
Green,  and  Mr.  Trueman, — I  mesmerised  Miss  Henrietta
Price,  in  twenty-five  seconds  :  while  in  the  clairvoyant  state,
she  was  able  to  name  any  and  every  object  placed  behind
her  head.  P.  Matthews,  Esq.,  then  went  into  the  next  room,
and  shut  the  door  after  him.  I  then  said  to  the  patient,
“Henrietta,  who  is  in  the  back  room?”  “Mr.  Paul  Mat¬
thews.”  “What  is  he  doing?”  “Waving  his  hands  back¬
wards  and  forwards” — (right).  “What  is  he  doing  now?”
“  Whirling  something  bright  round  his  head” — (it  was  a  po¬
lished  tankard).  “Right;  and  now?”  “Writing  in  his
pocket-book  with  a  pencil” — (right).  The  parties  present
then  expressed  themselves  satisfied,  and  I  restored  her  in¬
stantly.

On  the  23rd,  I  mesmerised  Miss  Serena  Price ;  present,
Percival  Foster,  Esq.,  J.  Wragge,  Esq.,  H.  Taylor,  Esq.,
surgeon,  and  many  ladies  and  gentlemen  beside,  whose  names
I  do  not  recollect.  Sent  into  the  coma  in  twenty-three  se¬
conds.  When  clairvoyant,  told  the  time  by  the  clock  (which
was  behind  her)  to  a  moment.  Several  things  were  placed
behind  her  head,  her  face  being  covered  with  a  thick  hand¬
kerchief,  all  of  which  she  named  directly.  A  gold  watch  was
held  behind  her  head,  and  she  was  asked  what  it  was.  “  A
gold  watch,”  she  replied.  “  What  time  is  it  by  the  watch  ?”
“  Twenty -three  minutes  past  8” — (exactly  right).  Mr.  Taylor

spirit  of  prejudice  has  rendered  them  incapable  of  beholding  truth  as  it  is,
and  like  the  mole,  they  burrow  in  the  earth  of  their  own  preconceived  opi¬
nions,  and  look  but  occasionally  and  momentarily  on  its  light,  to  be  blinded
by  its  effulgence,  and  gladly  grope  their  way  back  to  their  former  shelter,
from  the  brilliance  of  its  beams.  The  opponents  of  mesmerism  had  better
look  to  themselves,  or  verily  they  will  be  justly  charged  with  having  im¬
bibed  the  spirit  of  the  Brahmin,  who  crushed  the  microscope  that  first  dis¬
covered  to  him  the  truth  as  it  is;  and  will  be  held  up  as  a  spectacle  of
ignorant  presumption  and  impertinent  incredulity  for  a  future  age  to  laugh
at  or  despise.  The  time  is  come  when  mesmerism  can  no  longer  be  doubted
by  any  man,  whose  organism  is  “  favourable”  to,  and  capable  of,  the  re¬
ception  of  truth.  A  mass  of  evidence  has  been  collected,  relative  to  mes¬
merism,  that  cannot  fail  to  convince  the  most  sceptical  of  its  truth,  if  they
will  give  it  their  attention  and  examine  it  with  candour.  To  doubt  mes¬
merism  at  the  present  day,  augurs  gross  ignorance,  or  blind  prejudice  ;  for
a  million  facts  have  demonstrated,  that  “  it  is  true ,  though  opposed  to  the
philosophy  of  ages.”


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of  Clairvoyance.


139


then  went  into  the  back  room,  and  shut  the  door.  Being
asked  what  he  was  doing,  she  replied,  “  Holding  a  tankard  in
his  hand.”  She  was  then  sent  (mentally)  to  Mr.  Wragge’s
house,  where  she  correctly  described  the  furniture  of  each
room, — the  paintings,  books,  and  their  several  positions,  &c.,
commenting  upon  their  beauty,  richness,  &c.,  &c.,  though
she  had  never  been  in  the  house  in  her  life.

On  the  25th  of  November,  1843,  I  took  with  me  Mr.  E.
Round,  artist,  (a  student  of  the  Royal  Academy,  and  then  a
most  decided  sceptic  as  to  mesmerism),  to  see  a  case  of  clair¬
voyance.  The  patient  was  Miss  Henrietta  Price.  Previous
to  mesmerising  her,  I  had  in  connection  with  Mr.  E.  Round
decided  upon  a  test ;  this  was  to  put  something  in  my  sitting
room  and  leave  it  there,  taking  care  to  lock  the  door,  and
carry  the  key  in  my  pocket.  This  being  done,  we  went  to
Mr.  Price’s  residence,  wrhere  I  mesmerised  the  girl,  without
saying  a  word  to  her  good  or  bad,  lest  Mr.  Round — who
took  good  care  to  watch  me  closely — should  imagine  I  was
giving  her  some  intimation  of  what  was  about  to  be  done
and  said.  In  twenty  seconds  she  was  asleep.  I  then  sent
her  mentally  to  my  house,  and  into  the  sitting  room,  and
asked  her  what  she  saw  ?  “  Why  I  see  that  poor  cat  tied  on

the  chair,  you  cruel  creature.”  “What  else?”  “Why  your
desk  on  the  table,  a  book  on  it  half  written  through,  with  a
pen  and  ink  by  the  side  of  it,  and  three  other  books  on  the
table,  nicely  bound.”  This  was  all  perfectly  correct ;  and
my  companion  was  staggered.  But  still  he  was  not  quite
satisfied.  So  to  convince  her  quite,  I  sent  her  (mentally)  to
his  house  in  Dudley,  five  miles  off ;  the  furniture  of  which,
and  the  family  residing  there,  she  accurately  described.  The
sister,  whom  she  described  as  perfectly  beautiful  (as  indeed
she  is),  she  said  was  a  blonde ;  in  addition  to  which,  she  said
she  had  been  weeping  through  a  nasty  old  woman  scolding
her,  whose  face  she  should  like  to  scratch.  She  then  said,
Miss  Round  was  sitting  on  the  sofa  reading  a  book.  Mr.
Round  took  notes  of  all  she  said,  and  the  next  day  sent  me
word  that  Henrietta  was  perfectly  right  in  every  particular,
and  that  now  he  was  a  sincere  believer  in  mesmerism.

On  the  20th  of  December  last,  at  a  private  party — pre¬
sent,  John  Meredith,  Esq.,  Belle  Vue;  T.  Atwood,  Esq.,
Birmingham,  (son  of  the  member  of  that  name ;)  J.  Hum¬
phrey,  Esq.,  J.  Moore,  Esq.,  (at  whose  residence  the  party
met,)  F.  Fowell,  Esq.,  J.  Adkins,  Esq.,  Rev.  H.  Clansey,
and  other  gentlemen.  I  mesmerised  Serena  Price,  through
a  wall  at  the  distance  of  twenty  yards.  Asleep  in  two


140  Mr.  Brindley's  Cases  of  Clairvoyance.

minutes.  Produced  beautiful  and  striking  manifestations  of
the  whole  of  the  phrenological  organs  marked  on  the  bust ;
this  was  done,  be  it  remembered,  without  suggestion,  and
without  the  patient  knowing  anything  of  the  names  or  posi¬
tions  of  the  organs.  We  were  also  careful  not  to  mention
the  organs,  but  had  them  written  on  paper,  and  instantly
excited  by  the  finger,  without  my  willing  at  all  that  such  an
organ  should  be  excited.  Once  having  mesmerised  this  pa¬
tient,  a  gentleman  not  satisfied  about  phreno-mesmerism,
spied  his  opportunity,  when  my  back  was  turned,  to  excite
Combativeness,  when  she  immediately  sprang  from  her  chair
and  knocked  down  a  medical  gentleman  that  was  feeling  her
pulse  at  the  time.  This  simple  circumstance  converted  both
himself  and  the  doctor.

Catalepsy  or  rigidity  of  the  limbs  was  then  produced,  and
the  patient  attracted  from  her  chair.  Her  eyes  were  then
bandaged,  and  several  things  held  behind  her  head,  all  which
she  named  instantly  in  the  most  correct  manner.  A  person
then  went  into  the  next  room,  and  when  she  was  asked  what
he  was  doing,  said,  “  He  had  a  large  book  in  his  hand,  and
a  bonnet  on  his  head,  with  a  shawl  about  his  shoulders.”
This  was  quite  correct.  Dr.  Moore,  thinking  that  she  was
mesmerised  by  the  power  of  imagination,  having  told  her
that  I  was  about  to  mesmerise  her,  when  I  went  into  the
other  room  for  that  purpose,  proposed  that  I  should  demes-
merise  her,  without  her  knowledge  of  my  intention  to  do  so,
at  a  given  signal  from  him.  Accordingly  when  the  signal
was  made,  I  left  the  room,  (which  I  had  done  several  times
before  that  evening,  while  she  was  in  the  sleep,)  and  com¬
menced  demesmerising  her  through  the  wall  at  twenty  yards
distance ;  in  about  a  minute  and  a  half  they  called  me  into
the  other  room,  informing  me  she  was  awake,  and  enquiring
for  me.  The  idea  of  imagination  being  the  primary  cause
of  the  mesmeric  sleep,  then,  is  exploded.  I  have  repeated
this  last  experiment  several  times  with  the  same  results ;  and
the  other  day  mesmerised  Dr.  Hudson's  cat,  which  could  not
be  supposed  to  be  under  the  influence  of  imagination.

On  the  22nd  of  December  last,  at  a  conversazione  given
by  me  to  30  or  40  ladies  and  gentlemen  in  Halesowen,
among  whom  were  J.  Meredith,  Esq.  and  family,  Dr.  Moore,
J.  Humphrey,  Esq.,  T.  Whitmore,  Esq.,  and  Mr.  Taylor,  I
mesmerised  Mr.  Granger's  servant  girl,  and  though  she  was
quite  ignorant  of  mesmerism  or  phrenology,  even  of  the
meaning  of  the  latter,  and  though  she  had  never  seen  a
person  mesmerised  in  her  life,  I  succeeded  in  exciting  about


Books  received ,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  §c.  141

20  of  the  phrenological  organs,  as  marked  in  the  bust,  and
producing  the  most  perfect  manifestations  I  have  ever  seen.
In  several  other  cases  I  have  during  the  first  sitting  succeeded
in  exciting  many  of  the  organs,  but  in  three  persons,  including
Mr.  Granger’s  servant  mentioned  above,  I  have  excited  every
organ  marked  on  the  bust  at  the  first  sitting,  though  neither
of  the  parties  knew  anything  of  phrenology.  Their  names
are — John  Braund  (mentioned  in  my  last),  Lucy  Griffin  (Mr.
Granger’s  servant),  and  Pamela  Price,  also  a  servant  girl.
After  demesmerising  this  patient,  I  mesmerised  Serena  Price,
who  told  repeatedly  what  was  placed  behind  her  head  in
the  most  correct  manner,  without  the  least  hesitation ;  after
which  J.  Meredith,  Esq.,  and  Dr.  Moore  left  the  room,  and
the  girl  being  asked  where  they  were  and  what  they  were
doing,  immediately  answered,  “In  the  small  room  yonder.
Dr.  Moore  with  a  glass  in  his  hand,  and  Mr.  Meredith  with
a  jug.”  This  was  perfectly  correct,  and  every  person  express¬
ing  complete  and  perfect  satisfaction,  with  high  gratification,
I  instantly  demesmerised  my  patient.  Similar  phenomena
have  been  gratuitously  displayed  night  after  night  at  my  own
residence  and  at  Mr.  Price’s,  to  upwards  of  five  hundred  of
the  most  respectable  inhabitants  of  the  town  and  neighbour¬
hood,  most  of  whom,  I  am  happy  to  say,  have  become  con¬
verts  to  mesmerism.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

The  Rationale  of  Magnetism,  Animal  and  Mental,  tested  by  Experiments
of  a  novel  kind,  and  established  by  Facts.  By  Samuel  Spurrell.  London.
Notice  sur  les  Experiences  de  Rabbi  Hirsch.  Metz.

Vegetable  Diet  defended.  By  Dr.  W.  A.  Alcott,  of  Boston.  London.
The  Phrenological  Journal.  January,  1844.


NOTICES.

“  An  admirer  of  your  Journal .”  Our  answer  is  at  p.  39.

“  J.  H.  H.”  Certainly  not :  but  she  should  be  mesmerised  every  day.

“  Non- Wist  and  Dr.  Von  Struve,”  in  our  next.

“  Mr.  Coster  and  Mr.  Mandley.”  We  have  not  since  heard  from  either  of
these  correspondents.

We  have,  as  on  other  occasions,  exceeded  our  regular  number  of  6  sheets,


142  Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  fyc.


and  actually  nearly  completed  the  9th,  and  yet  been  obliged  to  postpone
to  our  next  number  some  valuable  facts  in  community  of  sensation  and  in
clairvoyance  from  Dr.  Engledue,  in  the  prediction  of  changes  of  health  and
in  clairvoyance  from  Dr.  Elliotson,  in  clairvoyance  from  Mr.  Atkinson,
and  other  equally  important  communications  ;  as  well  as  extracts  from  the
Critic ,  Mrs.  Romer’s  last  work,  &c.,  &c.,  an  account  of  the  exertions  of
the  strenuous  friends  of  mesmerism  in  the  provinces,  and  of  the  doings  of
antimesmerists  there  and  in  London,  the  tumid  absurdity  and  injustice  of
Mr.  Fonblanque,  the  editor  of  the  Examiner ,  or  his  sub-editor  Mr.  Forster,
in  regard  to  the  Deptford  case,  &c.,  &c.

“  We  understand  that  some  London  mechanics  are  forming  an  emigration
society  on  the  co-operative  principle,  and  that  they  have  determined  none
shall  be  admitted  members  without  having  previously  undergone  an  exami¬
nation  with  respect  to  their  cerebral  organization.”


'


•

*

-■*  *


>


-

-

#


.


-


THE  ZOIST.


No.  VI.


JULY,  1844.


I.  Reason  and  Instinct.

What  is  the  distinction  between  reason  and  instinct?  This
is  a  question  which  has  puzzled  the  most  learned.  Till  the
discoveries  of  Gall,  the  philosopher  could  give  no  rational
explanation  of  the  cause  of  mam's  actions ;  and  an  examina¬
tion  of  works  written  expressly  for  the  purpose  of  recording
the  habits  and  actions  of  brutes,  furnishes  us  with  a  collec¬
tion  of  most  irrational  and  futile  attempts  to  explain  them.
How  numerous  the  volumes  written  to  prove  what  is  self-
evident,  the  great  difference  between  the  cerebral  manifesta¬
tions  of  man  and  the  lower  animals  !  But  when  the  cause  of
man’s  superiority  is  sought  for,  howr  fanciful  and  perplexing
the  theories  !  How  vague  and  indefinite  the  presumed  expla¬
nations  !  Men  have  only  just  now  commenced  the  rational
method  of  taking  an  extended  view  of  animated  nature,  and
cautiously  accepting  the  explanations  which  an  inductive  phi¬
losophy  forces  upon  them.  Many  are  still  alarmed  lest  their
favourite  theories  should  be  overthrown,  and  they  still  hold
fast  to  their  arrogant  assumption,  that  man  is  so  superior  to
the  most  intelligent  of  the  tribes  below  him  that  the  mate¬
rial  with  which  nature  has  accomplished  all  her  wonders  is
too  gross  and  therefore  not  calculated  for  the  production  of
his  more  exalted  manifestations.  They  say,  “  The  being
whom  we  have  been  taught  to  believe  has  been  created  only  a
little  lower  than  the  angels,  these  philosophers  would  per¬
suade  us  has  been  formed  only  a  little  above  the  brutes.”
Our  readers  will  remember  that  in  a  former  number  we  as¬
serted  that  we  were  not  in  possession  of  evidence  which  would
VOL.  II.  l


144


Reason  and  Instinct.


lead  us  to  accede  to  the  received  doctrine  that  man  possesses
“  something”  apart  from  his  organization  which  is  the  cause
of  his  actions.  As  cerebral  physiologists  we  consider  the  brain
to  be  the  organ  producing  the  phenomena,  of  man  and  brute,
called  mental,  so  that  we  would  term  them  cerebration.*  Our
opponents  hold  the  doctrine  that  the  brain  is  the  instrument
used  by  the  “mind”  for  the  purpose  of  manifesting  its  powers.
The  distinction  is  of  great  importance.  The  belief  in  the
latter  doctrine  involves  us  in  constant  metaphysical  discussion,
and  is  moreover  unpliilosophical,  because  it  is  an  attempt  to
enlist  an  unknown  cause  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  pheno¬
mena  which  are  capable  of  rational  explanation  without  it.

By  many  we  fear  that  the  term  instinct  is  used  in  relation
to  brutes,  in  the  same  way  that  the  term  mind  is  used  in
relation  to  man, — as  a  certain  power  superadded  to  matter
and  causing  it  to  manifest  certain  phenomena.  As  in  man  it
has  hitherto  been  considered  necessary  to  enlist  an  essence  to
explain  phenomena  which  remain  after  the  pretended  expla¬
nation  just  as  mysterious,  so  in  the  inferior  tribes  the  term
instinct  has  been  presumed  to  solve  all  difficulties, — the  dis¬
tinctive  characteristics  of  each  tribe,  as  regards  cerebral  ma¬
nifestations,  have  been  duly  recorded,  and  this  indefinable
because  unascertainable  power  has  been  considered  the  cause.
That  we  are  correct  in  this  statement  we  might  quote  a  va¬
riety  of  passages  from  several  recent  writers,  but  the  follow¬
ing  clear  and  explicit  recognition  of  the  doctrine  from  the  pen
of  Lord  Brougham  will  suit  our  purpose.  “  Instinct  is  one
and  indivisible,  whatever  we  may  hold  it  to  be  in  its  nature,
or  from  whatever  origin  we  may  derive  it.  The  thing,  or
being,  is  variously  applied  and  operates  variously.  There  are
not  different  instincts,  as  of  building ;  of  collecting  food  for
future  worms ;  of  emigrating  to  better  climates ;  but  one
instinct,  which  is  variously  employed  or  directed.”

The  peculiar  powers  put  forth  by  an  animal  are  the  neces¬
sary  result  of  its  peculiar  formation ;  and  to  assert  that  in¬
stinct  prompts  to  the  performance  of  a  certain  action,  seems
to  us  an  attempt  to  intrude  a  power  which  we  cannot  recog¬
nize,  of  the  existence  of  which  we  have  no  proof,  and  the
intrusion  of  which  into  scientific  discussions  is  opposed  to  all
sound  philosophy.  Instinct  is  not  a  power  producing  certain
phenomena,  but  instinctive  actions  are  the  result  of  the  acti¬
vity  of  peculiar  nervous  organisms.  We  cannot  tell  why  such
a  form  of  matter  manifests  such  peculiar  functions  :  it  is

*  We  adopt  this  term  notwithstanding  the  opposition  to  its  introduction,
because  it  enables  us  to  be  precise  in  our  language,  and  to  discard  the  use
of  terms  calculated  to  convey  a  false  impression.


Reason  and  Instinct.


145


quite  sufficient  for  us  to  ascertain  that  it  does  so :  beyond  this
we  may  never  go.  We  contend  then  that  an  animal  is  not
prompted  by  instinct  to  the  performance  of  a  certain  action,
but  that  being  endowed  with  a  peculiar  organism,  the  result¬
ant  activity  of  this  organism,  which  is  the  necessary  sequence
to  the  application  of  certain  stimuli,  is  the  performance  of
an  action,  which  we  call  an  instinctive  action,  in  contradis¬
tinction  to  a  rational  action,  because  the  former  is  performed
without  knowledge  or  experience  to  guide  it.

Thus,  in  the  infant,  the  act  of  sucking  is  a  very  good  il¬
lustration  of  an  instinctive  process.  Here  there  can  be  no
doubt,  because  the  act  has  been  successfully  performed  when
the  brain  has  been  absent,  and  we  may  therefore  doubt,  as
regards  this  action,  whether  consciousness  is  a  requisite  con¬
dition.  Broussais  considers  instinctive  actions  to  arise  always
from  “  sensations  which  solicit  a  living  being  to  execute  invo¬
luntarily,  and  often  unconsciously,  certain  acts  necessary  for
its  welfare.”  How  precisely  this  accords  with  the  actions  and
movements  of  young  animals,  for  instance,  with  the  result
of  Galen’s  experiment.  He  took  a  kid  from  its  mother’s
womb,  and  which  of  course  had  never  sucked,  when,  upon
many  shallow  pans  with  different  liquids  being  placed  near  it,
the  animal  preferred  at  once  the  pan  containing  goat’s  milk.

Dr.  Davy,  in  his  account  of  Ceylon,  mentions  a  remark¬
able  instinctive  movement  of  the  alligator.  He  saw  an  egg
in  the  sand  just  ready  to  crack,  and  broke  it  with  his  stick.
The  animal  came  out  and  made  at  once  for  the  river.  He
held  his  stick  before  it,  and  immediately  the  reptile  put  itself
in  a  posture  of  defence,  as  an  adult  aligator  would  have  done
in  like  circumstances.

A  fly-catcher,  just  come  out  of  its  shell,  has  been  seen
to  peck  at  an  insect,  with  an  aim  as  perfect  as  if  it  had  been
all  its  life  engaged  in  learning  the  art.

“  A  little  fish,  named  the  chcetodon  rostratus,  is  in  the
habit  of  ejecting  from  its  prolonged  snout  drops  of  fluid,
which  strike  insects  that  happen  to  be  near  the  surface  of  the
water,  and  cause  them  to  fall  into  it,  so  as  to  come  within  its
own  reach.  Now,  by  the  laws  of  refraction  of  light,  the
place  of  the  insect  in  the  air  will  not  really  be  what  it  ap¬
pears  to  be  to  the  fish  in  the  water ;  but  it  will  be  a  little
below  its  apparent  place,  and  to  this  point  the  aim  must  be
directed.  But  the  difference  between  the  real  and  apparent
place  will  not  be  constant ;  for  the  more  perpendicularly  the
rays  enter  the  water,  the  less  will  be  the  variation ;  and  on
the  other  hand,  the  more  oblique  is  the  direction,  the  greater
will  be  the  difference.  Now,  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  but

l  2


14G


Reason  mcl  Instinct.


that,  by  an  intuitive  perception,  the  real  place  of  the  insect
is  known  to  the  fish  in  every  instance,  as  perfectly  as  it  could
be  to  the  most  sagacious  human  mathematician,  or  to  a  clever
marksman  who  had  learned  the  requisite  allowance  in  each
case  by  a  long  experience.”

All  these  then  we  would  call  instinctive  actions,  because
they  are  perfect  from  the  first  and  cannot  be  improved  as  the
animal  advances  in  age.  If  we  are  asked  then  the  .difference
between  an  instinctive  and  a  rational  action,  we  would  say, —
An  instinctive  action  is  an  action  performed  by  a  being,  re¬
sulting  from  neither  observation  nor  experience — perfect  from
the  first  as  regards  the  means  used  and  the  end  to  be  obtained
— always  the  same  in  all  healthy  animals  of  the  same  species,
and  the  necessary  result  of  a  peculiar  organism.

A  rational  action  is  an  action  performed  by  a  being,  re¬
sulting  from  observation  and  experience,  and  therefore  capa¬
ble  of  being  improved — seldom  precisely  the  same  in  any  two
animals  of  the  same  species,  but  nevertheless  the  necessary
result  of  the  degree  of  development  and  exercise  of  a  pecu¬
liar  organism.

Such  being  the  broad  line  of  distinction  between  an  in¬
stinctive  and  a  rational  action,  we  are  furnished  with  a  key
to  the  solution  of  difficulties.  Without  entering  into  an
enumeration  or  a  classification  of  the  actions  of  animals,  we
at  once  perceive  that  instinctive  actions  are  not  peculiar  to
the  lower  orders  of  beings ;  and  that  rational  actions  are  not
characteristic  of  the  “  Lord  of  the  creation.”  The  fact  of  a
being  receiving  education  from  man,  or,  the  fact  of  a  being
adapting  its  actions  and  operations  to  certain  new  and  pecu¬
liar  circumstances  in  which  it  may  be  placed,  is  a  manifest
proof  of  intellectual  function,  and  all  such  actions  must  be
removed  from  the  class  of  instinctive  actions.  The  further
we  remove  from  the  class  of  beings  whose  actions  are  appa¬
rently  instinctive,  the  more  we  become  convinced  that  external
circumstances  exercise  great  controul  over  the  development
of  the  character  of  the  individual.  This  becomes  more  and
more  apparent  as  we  investigate  the  various  tribes  in  our
ascent  to  man,  and  when  we  arrive  here,  we  become  tho¬
roughly  convinced  that  his  character  is  the  result  of  his
organism  and  the  circumstances  which  surround  him.  The
superiority  of  one  tribe  over  another  may  be  estimated  by
the  facility  with  which  the  character  may  be  changed,  and
the  complexity  of  the  actions  performed  under  the  new
circumstances.

The  question  then  should  not  be,  is  a  certain  animal
prompted  by  instinct?  It  should  rather  be,  which  are  its


Reason  and  Instinct.


147


instinctive,  and  which  its  rational  actions  ?  Does  such  an
animal  accommodate  its  actions  to  new  circumstances  ?  If
it  does,  it  shews  proof  of  intellectual  function,  and  so  far
as  its  nervous  organism  will  permit  it  manifests  rational  ac¬
tions.  But  this  is  not  the  doctrine  commonly  received ; —
“  Instinct  guides  the  brute, — Reason  guides  man.”  It  is
believed  by  many  that  man  would  he  lowered  in  the  scale  of
creation  if  the  actions  of  brutes  were  to  he  considered  at
all  analogous,  or  produced  by  the  same  cause.  But  in  what
consists  the  difference  between  the  actions  of  Galenas  kid,
and  the  unconscious  acts  of  the  human  infant  ?  Between
the  ingenuity  of  certain  birds  which  change  their  mode  of
building  to  avoid  snakes,  hanging  their  nests  to  the  end  of
branches,  and  making  the  exit  in  the  bottom,  in  places
where  those  reptiles  abound ;  and  man  erecting  his  house  on
a  different  principle,  and  placing  his  door  in  another  position,
when  inhabiting  a  district  where  he  is  subjected  to  the  at¬
tacks  of  savage  brutes?  The  kid  and  the  infant  are  equally
unconscious  of  the  end  to  be  attained;  the  bird  and  the  man
both  alter  their  mode  of  procedure  to  avoid  the  attacks  of

an  enemy.

«/

It  appears  to  us  that  the  definition  we  have  attempted
is  much  more  precise  in  language  and  much  more  in  accord¬
ance  with  physiological  truth,  than  the  description  of  either
Dr.  Alison  or  Dr.  Muller.  The  former  says,  “The  most
correct  expression  of  the  difference  between  an  action
prompted  by  instinct  and  one  prompted  by  reason,  is,  that
in  the  first  case  the  will  acts  in  obedience  to  an  impulse
which  is  directly  consequent  upon  certain  sensations  or  emo¬
tions  felt  or  remembered ;  in  the  last  it  acts  in  obedience
to  an  impulse  which  results  from  acts  of  reasoning  and  ima¬
gination.”  The  latter  says,  “  Both  the  internal  impulse  and
the  external  organization  being  dependent  on  the  same  ori¬
ginal  cause,  the  form  of  the  animal  appears  in  complete
unison  with  its  impulses  to  action;  it  wills  to  do  nothing
which  its  organs  do  not  enable  it  to  effect,  and  its  organs  are
not  such  as  to  prompt  to  any  act  to  which  it  is  not  impelled
by  an  instinct.”  Again,  “  It  is  a  subject  full  of  wonder  to
observe  how  instinct  imparts  to  animals  faculties,  capabilities
and  instinctive  perceptions,  which  we  acquire  only  by  the
laborious  process  of  experience  and  education.”  Here  is
evidently  a  great  absence  of  precision.  In  the  first  place,
with  regard  to  Dr.  Alison’s  definition.  He  speaks  of  an
action  prompted  by  instinct  and  one  prompted  by  reason,
thereby  leading  us  to  suppose  that  he  recognizes  the  existence
of  two  separate  and  distinct  powers,  a  meaning  which  he


148


Reason  and  Instinct.


evidently  does  not  intend  to  convey.  And,  again,  in  wliat
possible  way  can  the  will  act  in  the  production  of  instinctive
actions,  if  by  the  will  we  mean  the  result  of  the  examina¬
tion  by  the  intellectual  faculties  of  the  several  desires  and
passions  prompting  an  individual  to  the  performance  of  a
certain  action  ?  How  can  this — a  purely  intellectual  func¬
tion — be  said  to  prompt  an  animal  to  the  performance  of
an  instinctive  action  ?  This  is  at  once  destroying  all  dis¬
tinction,  because  it  is  investing  all  animals  with  intellect,
which  is  presumed  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  prompting
them  to  the  performance  of  instinctive  actions.  In  the
movements  of  the  young  infant,  the  alligator,  and  the  kid,
the  will  surely  could  have  no  concern.  Dr.  Muller  not  only
commits  the  same  mistake  with  regard  to  the  will,  but  he
speaks  of  instinct  as  a  power  imparting  “  faculties,  capabili¬
ties,  and  intuitive  perceptions  •”  thus  confounding  the  effects
— the  results  of  organic  action  with  his  own  presumed  cause,
for  these  “ faculties  and  capabilities”  displayed  by  the  animal
are  the  functional  manifestations  of  their  peculiar  organism,
are  in  fact  their  instinctive  actions.  And  when  he  says,  that
the  animaks  “  organs  are  not  such  as  to  prompt  to  any  act
to  which  it  is  not  impelled  by  an  instinct,”  we  consider  the
statement  not  only  unphilosophical,  because  he  evidently
uses  instinct  as  a  moving  power,  but  really  nonsensical,  for
the  instinctive  actions  being  the  result  of  a  peculiar  organism
— how  can  this  same  organism  produce  ought  else  but  similar
actions  ?

We  do  not  expect  our  definition  to  be  universally  ac¬
ceded  to.  We  grant  that  many  apparent  contradictions  may
be  cited,  but  we  think  that,  after  a  little  inquiry,  the  broad
line  of  distinction  will  be  admitted,  and  future  investigations
facilitated.

If  we  were  to  investigate  the  development  of  the  nervous
system  in  the  various  tribes,  and  then  contrast  their  actions,
both  instinctive  and  rational,  we  should  find  that  their  com¬
plexity  and  perfectibility  bore  a  very  marked  proportion  to
the  development  of  the  nervous  system.  In  the  lowest
tribes,  where  nervous  matter  is  scarcely  cognizable,  we  have
the  simplest  function — mere  contractility.  But  as  we  as¬
cend,  we  find  nervous  matter  assuming  regular  and  determi¬
nate  forms,  and  we  observe  more  complicated  instinctive
movements.  We  perceive  ganglionic  centres  arranged  exactly
where  they  are  required.  If  great  locomotive  power  is  neces¬
sary,  ganglia  are  placed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  organs
destined  to  serve  the  purpose.  If  powerful  digestive  organs
are  required,  nervous  energy  is  supplied  by  an  assemblage  of


Reason  and  Instinct.


149


ganglia  around  the  digestive  apparatus.  In  some  a  consider¬
able  portion  of  nervous  matter  is  so  placed  that  it  may  be
considered  analogous  to  the  brains  of  the  higher  animals,
and  in  this  way  we  may  continue  till  we  arrive  at  the  verte¬
brate  classes,  where  we  find  cerebral  lobes  and  a  cerebellum.
Now  in  proportion  as  we  ascend  in  the  scale,  we  observe  in¬
creased  development  of  these  portions  and  a  greater  amount
of  intelligence ;  in  fact,  a  higher  order  of  cerebration.

In  reptiles  we  observe  a  considerable  development  in  the
cerebral  hemispheres,  and  a  proportional  diminution  of  those
portions  connected  with  the  nerves  of  sensation.

In  birds,  the  brain  and  spinal  cord  are  developed  after
one  uniform  type,  and  here  we  have  the  human  brain  in
miniature  :  of  course,  cerebration  is  found  to  bear  a  relation
to  this  development.  In  fishes,  the  several  portions  of  nerv¬
ous  matter  are  placed  one  after  the  other;  but  here  they
are  placed  one  over  the  other,  forming  one  mass,  the  cere¬
bral  hemispheres  covering  all  those  portions  supplying  the
organs  of  the  senses.  The  hemispheres  have  not  yet  assumed
the  convoluted  appearance,  but  in  the  interior  they  present
collections  of  cineritious  matter,  through  which  the  fibres  of
the  spinal  cord  pass.

In  mammalia,  the  most  perfect  specimen  of  which  class
is  man,  we  find  the  hemispheres  assuming  a  convoluted  ap¬
pearance,  and  the  number  and  depth  of  these  convolutions
increasing  as  we  ascend  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest.  They
are,  comparatively  speaking  absent  in  the  rat,  mouse,  and
rabbit ;  more  distinct  in  the  whale  and  dolphin ;  still  more
so  in  the  camel,  stag,  and  sheep ;  and  very  strongly  marked
in  the  tiger,  dog,  cat,  and  monkey  tribes.  Besides  this  pe¬
culiarity,  the  distribution  of  the  fibres  of  the  hemispheres
becomes  more  and  more  complicated ;  for,  in  addition  to  the
ascending  fibres  or  those  of  sensation,  and  the  descending  or
motory,  there  are  fibres  forming  the  commissures  connecting
the  two  hemispheres ;  and  to  add  to  the  complexity  there  are
those  which  bring  the  different  parts  of  the  same  hemisphere
into  connection  with  one  another.

From  the  lowest  and  simplest  of  organized  beings,  then,
to  the  highest  and  most  complicated,  there  is  nothing  more
than  a  gradual  addition  of  parts,  accompanied  by  concentra¬
tion  ;  and,  as  we  ascend  in  the  scale,  we  observe  that  the
purely  instinctive  actions  gradually  give  way,  and  become
subjected  to  the  control  of  the  intellectual  powers.  In  the
limited  space  which  we  intend  to  devote  to  this  paper,  we
cannot  enter  fully  into  the  consideration  of  the  actions  and
habits  of  the  various  classes  of  animals  and  show  how  they


150


Reason  and  Instinct.


bear  a  ratio  to  the  nervous  development ;  we  must  confine
ourselves  chiefly  to  the  class  immediately  below  man,  and  be
satisfied  with  proving  that  the  individuals  composing  this
class  display  many  powers  apparently  not  differing  in  kind
from  those  possessed  by  man,  but  merely  in  degree.  Compa¬
rative  cerebral  physiology  teaches  us  that  it  is  necessary  to
thoroughly  investigate  the  structure  and  formation  of  the
brains  of  the  lower  animals,  if  we  wish  to  possess  a  scientific
knowledge  of  man, — his  powers,  and  his  capabilities.  We
behold  the  human  brain  built  up  as  it  were  of  a  succession
of  parts — each  part  forming  a  distinctive  characteristic  of  an
inferior  tribe ;  but  in  addition  we  discover  portions  which
the  lower  tribes  do  not  possess,  and  an  arrangement  denoting
greater  concentration  and  complexity,  and  the  necessary  re¬
sult, — more  extended  cerebration.  And  when  we  remember
the  fact,  which  modern  science  has  so  beautifully  demon¬
strated,  that  man’s  brain  does  not  reach  its  perfection  by
the  slow  growth  and  enlargement  of  a  perfect  form  from  the
commencement,  but  that  certain  portions  temporarily  assume
forms,  which  the  brains  of  the  lower  orders  permanently
retain,  we  become  acquainted  with  other  and  more  important
reasons  for  studying  with  great  care  and  attention  this  divi¬
sion  of  our  science.

In  the  class  mammalia,  where  we  meet  with  the  most
complex  organism,  we  observe  the  number  and  great  variety
of  the  actions  performed,  and  the  intelligence  displayed  dur¬
ing  the  performance.  It  is  wonderful,  as  Muller  remarks,
to  behold  the  precision  with  which  brutes  perform  actions,
which  we  are  only  capable  of  performing  after  great  labour
and  education.  But  it  is  this  which  marks  the  elevation.
It  is  by  taking  a  general  survey  of  our  actions  and  our  capa¬
bilities  that  we  recognize  our  superior^.  We  advance  from
one  discovery  to  another,  and  each  addition  to  our  knowledge
enables  us  to  open  up  still  more  important  truths — to  wield
with  still  greater  power  the  means  at  our  disposal, — and  to
prove,  if  proof  be  required,  that  we  are  engaged  in  an  end¬
less  progression.  With  brutes  there  is  no  great  difficulty
in  marking  the  extent  of  their  capabilities  and  the  limits
within  which  they  are  confined  ; — but  as  regards  man,  all
our  facts  and  all  our  experience  prove  that  he  is  a  progressive
being,  and  the  limits  within  which  he  is  confined  no  man
can  define.

The  work  accomplished  by  insects  is  astounding,  whether
we  consider  the  amount  performed,  or  the  manner  in  which
it  is  carried  out;  but  their  operations  are  limited,  and  are
not  to  be  compared  to  the  actions  of  the  higher  order  of


Reason  and  Instinct.


151


beings,  which  prove  the  possession  of  great  intelligence — the
adaptation  of  means  to  ends,  and  the  power  of  varying  their
operations  according  to  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  which
they  are  placed.  The  elephant,  horse,  dog,  and  monkey,  to
take  the  most  familiar  examples,  are  susceptible  of  education ;
their  habits  can  be  changed,  and  they  can  be  made  to  per¬
form  duties  with  far  more  intelligence  than  many  who  pride
themselves  on  their  natural  superiority.  It  is  quite  unneces¬
sary  to  relate  instances  confirmatory  of  this  position ;  every
person  must  have  witnessed  examples.  We  shall  prefer  se¬
lecting  a  few  anecdotes  which  tend  to  prove  that  the  animals
were  capable  of  short  processes  of  reasoning  when  left  to  the
controul  of  their  own  powers,  unaided  by  man.  The  following
is  from  the  work  of  Mrs.  Postans,  on  British  India.  The
fact  was  communicated  to  this  lady  by  the  owner  of  the  ani¬
mal,  an  officer  in  the  Bengal  service.  This  gentleman  “  pos¬
sessed  a  handsome  elephant  which  he  was  accustomed  to  see
fed  with  a  certain  allowance  of  grain  daily.  Business  requir¬
ing  his  absence,  he  confided  the  care  of  his  favourite  to  a
worthless  keeper,  who,  in  the  interim,  stole  and  appropriated
a  large  portion  of  the  grain  intended  for  the  elephants  use.
The  poor  animal  daily  grew  more  spare  and  feeble,  missing
at  his  us^ial  feeding-time  the  abundant  feast  supplied  by  his
kind  and  generous  master.  My  friend  returned,  hastened  to
his  stable,  observed  the  emaciated  state  of  his  favourite,  and
having  had  no  previous  reason  to  suspect  the  honesty  of  the
servant,  was  at  a  loss  to  discover  the  cause  of  the  evident  al¬
teration.  The  poor  elephant,  delighted  at  his  masters  return,
trumpeted  his  welcome,  raised  his  trunk  as  a  salaam,  and
moved  about,  affording,  in  his  mute  but  expressive  manner,
every  demonstration  of  joy.  His  feeding-time  approached,
and  the  full  allowance  of  grain  was  placed  at  his  feet  by  his
dishonest  and  cruel  keeper.  The  elephant,  satisfied  of  his
master’s  attention,  industriously  separated  it  into  two  distinct
heaps,  and  having  eagerly  devoured  the  one,  left  that  which
remained  and  walked  quietly  to  the  opposite  side  of  the
stable.  The  truth,  thus  conveyed  by  the  gestures  of  the
intelligent  brute,  flashed  upon  the  mind  of  his  master.  The
keeper  on  being  accused  of  the  theft,  and  finding  his  un¬
worthiness  exposed,  fell  at  the  feet  of  his  employer  acknow¬
ledging  the  aggression.”

Dr.  Davy  relates  the  instance  of  an  elephant  who  had  an
abscess  in  his  back  which  it  was  necessary  to  lay  open  in
order  to  effect  a  cure.  “  He  was  kneeling  down  for  the  con¬
venience  of  the  operator,  not  tied,  his  keeper  was  at  his  head.
He  did  not  flinch,  but  rather  inclined  towards  the  surgeon,


152


Reason  and  Instinct.


uttering  a  low  suppressed  groan.  He  seemed  conscious  that
what  was  doing  was  intended  for  his  good ;  no  human  being
similarly  situated  could  have  behaved  better.  I  think  it  right
to  record  this  instance  which  I  witnessed  myself,  of  this
animal's  (may  I  call  it)  reflecting  power  and  conduct,  which
it  is  difficult  to  consider  otherwise  than  rational.  And  so
confident  were  the  natives  that  he  would  behave  as  he  did,
that  they  never  thought  of  tying  him."

The  following  is  from  an  anonymous  writer  in  the  British
and  Foreign  Medical  Review.  “  Some  horses  kept  in  a  pad-
dock  were  supplied  with  water  by  a  trough  which  was  occa¬
sionally  filled  from  a  pump, — not,  however,  as  often  as  the
horses  seemed  to  have  wished ;  for  one  of  them  learned  (sua
sponte)  to  supply  himself  and  his  companions  by  taking  the
pump-handle  between  his  teeth  and  working  it  with  his  head.
The  others,  however,  appear  to  have  been  less  clever  or  more
lazy,  and  finding  that  this  one  had  the  power  of  supplying
their  wants,  they  would  teaze  him,  by  biting,  kicking,  &c.,
until  he  had  pumped  for  them,  and  would  not  allow  him  to
drink  until  they  were  satisfied.  We  can  scarcely  avoid  the
belief  that  this  clever  horse  had  formed  a  general  notion  that
the  action  of  working  the  pump-handle  up  and  down  would
cause  the  flow  of  water  into  the  trough,  and  that  he  adapted
his  means  to  the  end  in  view  with  a  sagacity  which  would
have  done  credit  to  many  a  human  being."  We  were  relating
this  to  an  intelligent  friend,  and  he  informed  us  that  he  had
witnessed  a  cow  make  similar  attempts.  But  the  feat  was
never  accomplished,  the  animal  merely  rubbed  and  pulled
the  pump-handle,  but  seemed  not  to  have  the  power  to  make
the  necessary  movement.  However,  the  little  that  was  ac¬
complished  was  considered  so  remarkable,  that  it  was  “  a
sight"  in  the  neighbourhood.

We  can  vouch  for  the  authenticity  of  the  following  ex¬
ample.  A  friend  had  two  dogs  and  a  cat  in  his  house,  and
the  cook,  having  occasion  to  leave  the  kitchen  whilst  making
some  culinary  preparations,  drove  them  into  the  garden  and
shut  the  door.  When  she  returned  to  the  kitchen,  after  a
short  period,  she  was  astonished  to  find  the  three  animals
there,  and  concluded  that  one  of  the  other  servants  had
opened  the  door  and  admitted  the  intruders.  In  a  few  days,
however,  the  same  thing  was  repeated  under  similar  circum¬
stances.  Curiosity  was  excited,  and  the  propriety  of  watch¬
ing  was  suggested,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  in  what
way  the  animals  effected  their  entrance.  Accordingly,  they
Avere  turned  out,  and  a  watch  set,  when  the  following  scene
was  witnessed.  The  recess  of  a  window  was  close  to  the


Reason  and  Instinct .


153


door,  upon  which  the  cat  jumped,  and  with  her  foot  kept
pressing  on  the  latch  of  the  door,  till  it  was  lifted.  The
dogs  appeared  to  be  wratching  the  movements  of  the  cat,  for
the  moment  the  latch  permitted  the  door  to  open  a  little
way  they  all  rushed  in.

“  A  wren  built  its  nest  in  rather  a  dangerous  situation  in
the  quarries  of  Penrhyn,  so  as  to  be  liable  to  great  disturb¬
ance  from  the  occasional  explosions.  It  soon  learned,  how¬
ever,  to  quit  its  nest  and  fly  to  a  little  distance,  on  the
ringing  of  the  bell  which  warned  the  workmen.  This  was
noticed  and  demonstrated  to  visitors,  so  that  the  poor  wren
suffered  many  needless  alarms.  It  at  last  learned,  however,
that  the  first  general  notion  it  had  formed — of  the  ringing
of  the  bell  being  followed  by  an  explosion — was  liable  to
exceptions,  and  it  formed  another  more  correct.  For  it  was
observed  after  a  time  that  the  wren  did  not  leave  its  nest
unless  the  ringing  of  the  bell  was  followed  by  the  moving
away  of  the  workmen.”

We  could  select  many  more  examples  equally  convincing,
but  we  have  given  sufficient  to  prove  that  rational  actions
are  not  confined  to  man.  What  then  is  the  grand  charac¬
teristic  of  humanity?  It  is  the  possession  of  the  higher  moral
and  intellectual  faculties;  it  is  these  which  develope  the
human  character.  We  have  here  another  illustration  of  the
same  general  law  previously  referred  to — an  addition  of  parts
and  an  increase  of  size  producing  superior  results.  What
are  these  results  ?  Man  possesses  the  power  to  search  into  the
causes  of  phenomena, — the  power  of  communicating  his
advances  to  his  companions,  and  of  leaving  behind  him  the
records  of  his  knowledge  to  be  studied  and  applied  by  future
generations, — the  power  to  recognize  the  workings  of  those
general  laws  to  which  himself  and  all  nature  are  alike  sub¬
ject, — and  above  all  the  power  to  discover  and  expound  those
moral  laws  which  regulate  the  conduct  of  all  his  kind.  Con¬
trast  the  head  of  the  most  intelligent  of  the  mammalia  with
the  head  of  man,  and  in  the  lofty  and  capacious  anterior
and  middle  lobes  of  the  brain  we  see  the  cause  of  his  supe¬
riority,  and  recognize  the  vast  gap  which  separates  the  man
from  the  brute.  And  this  separation  must  continue.  Why
do  we  say  this  ?  Because  in  the  last  publication*  on  this
subject  which  we  have  met  with,  we  find  the  following  igno¬
rant  and  impertinent  effusion.  After  indulging  in  remarks
on  the  mind  and  the  soul — on  immateriality  and  immortality,
we  are  favoured  with  this  specimen  of  reality. —


*  The  Distinction  between  Instinct  and  Reason,  by  J.  Strang,  M.D.


154


Dr.  Fossati  on  Education  and  the  Contest


“  I  am  tlie  more  anxious  to  put  this  matter  in  a  proper
light,  as  there  appears  to  be  a  disposition  amongst  some  phi¬
losophers  to  lower  man’s  intellectual  nature  as  much  as  pos¬
sible,  by  advancing  the  doctrine  that  all  living  beings  are  of
the  same  species — that  there  is  a  chain  of  existence  extending
from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  form  of  vital  manifestation —
from  a  maggot  to  a  Shakespeare — linked  together  by  one
common  origin,  and  only  distinguished  by  different  degrees
of  development, — that  man  has  reached  his  present  position
by  an  earlier  advance — but  that  other  classes  of  animals  are
making  progress  in  the  same  direction  !>}

What  region  of  the  earth  the  promulgation  of  such  ma¬
terialistic  views  inhabited,  we  are  not  informed.  We  should
like  to  be  furnished  with  the  name  of  the  modern  physiologist
who  has  stated  that  “  all  living  beings  are  of  the  same  species  ”
or,  who  having  placed  man  at  the  head  of  organized  beings
has  come  to  the  conclusion  “  that  other  classes  of  animals  are
making  progress  in  the  same  direction  !”  We  are  almost
tempted  to  declare  this  to  be  a  wilful  misrepresentation — a
clap-trap  statement,  advanced  for  the  purpose  of  raising  a
laugh  amongst  the  boys  in  the  gallery  of  the  institution  in
which  this  lecture  was  delivered.  That  a  member  of  the
medical  profession  should  have  advanced  this  monstrous
twaddle,  is  almost  past  belief.  The  educability  and  perfec¬
tibility  of  all  animals,  including  man,  is  confined  within  the
limits  of  their  organisms.  Let  man  take  one  of  the  lower
animals  and  bestow  on  the  progeny  all  the  care  and  attention
which  experience  and  enlightened  observation  can  suggest,
and  let  these  efforts  be  carried  on  for  a  few  generations,  and
the  result  will  be  a  perfect  animal — it  will  be  advanced  as
far  as  the  type  of  its  organism  will  permit.  Let  man  pursue
the  same  course  with  his  own  species,  and  the  same  result
will  ensue.

L.  E.  G.  E.


II.  On  Instruction  and  Education,  and  the  Contest  between  the
Clergy  and  the  University,  in  a  Phrenological  point  of
view.  An  Address  delivered  on  the  8 th  of  January ,  1844,
in  the  Royal  Athenaeum,  at  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the
Phrenological  Society  of  Paris,  by  Dr.  Fossati,  President.

Gentlemen. — The  slightest  reflection  on  what  is  passing  in
the  world  will  soon  convince  us  that  we  are  living  at  a  period
of  transition, — at  one  of  those  great  epochs  in  which  the
human  species  is  permitted  to  make  an  advance.  It  seems


between  the  French  Clergy  and  the  University.  155

that  humanity  remains  stationary  for  ages,  revolving  in  the
same  circle  of  ideas,  struggling  in  the  midst  of  restraints,
straining  to  free  itself  from  the  abuses  of  the  institutions
which  govern  it,  and  seeking  for  a  better  future, — a  blessing
dimly  seen  but  not  to  be  attained.  Some  few  choice  spirits —
a  few  of  those  privileged  beings  whom  nature  chooses  as  her
interpreters — a  few  philosophers,  put  forth  into  the  world
new  ideas,  calculated  to  bring  general  reforms  into  all  human
institutions.  But  their  conceptions  are  not  widely  com¬
prehended,  and  are  but  very  slowly  instilled  into  the  minds
of  their  fellows,  until,  being  universally  felt,  and  arrived  in
some  sort  at  their  maturity,  they  manifest  themselves  on  all
sides,  and  are  unfolded  like  the  blossoms  in  the  spring.  Then
the  ideas,  the  conceptions,  of  philosophers,  at  first  regarded
as  chimerical,  become  realities,  are  transformed  into  facts,
and  pass  from  the  abstract  to  the  positive.  Such  is  what  agi¬
tates  the  world  at  present :  the  realization  of  the  grand  and
beautiful  conceptions  of  our  forefathers.

In  this  work  of  humanity,  which  nature  works  out  inde¬
pendently  of  us,  and  which  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  any  one
to  arrest,  new  interests  demand  to  be  satisfied,  and  old  inte¬
rests  are  destroyed  by  the  loss  of  their  privileges.  This,  Gen¬
tlemen,  is  a  very  positive  and  evident  fact ;  and  you  well
know,  without  any  explanation  from  me,  what  are  the  inte¬
rests  destroyed  and  where  is  the  progress.

I,  who  am  out  of  the  contest  and  belong  to  the  advanced
guards  of  progress,  must  present  to  you  the  data  of
science  to  throw  a  light  upon  the  question,  or,  rather,  to
solve  it.  I  know  very  well  that  my  voice  cannot  make  any
great  noise,  and  that  even  the  men  of  progress,  ignorant  of
the  importance  of  our  labours,  scoff  at  us  with  inconceivable
levity.  But  we  must  do  our  duty  notwithstanding.  I  will,
therefore,  put  forth  my  opinion  upon  the  contest  raised  be¬
tween  the  Clergy  and  the  University ,  and  I  will  do  it  with  all
the  candour  that  becomes  me.  Unhappily  there  is  already  so
much  cowardice  amongst  the  learned,  and  amongst  the  con¬
vinced,*  that  they  scarcely  dare  any  longer  say  what  they
think ;  and  it  will  be  proper  to  shew  that  all  are  not  like
them.  Besides,  I  am  personally  in  a  condition  to  do  this,

*  Cowardice  is  the  curse  of  England  as  well  as  of  other  countries.  Men
of  all  ranks,  and  especially  the  well  educated,  profess  all  day  and  all  the
year  what  they  utterly  disbelieve,  and  pretend  to  disbelieve  what  they  know
to  be  true,  in  religion,  politics,  and  science :  and  speak  the  truth  at  church
on  Sundays,  when  they  declare  aloud  to  God  in  the  hearing  of  all  men  that
“  there  is  no  health  in  them.”  There  is  mutual  humbug  ;  each  humbugging
and  being  humbugged, — if  our  readers  will  pardon  a  forcible  expression,  in¬
elegant  enough,  but  now  received  into  the  most  aristocratic  society. — Zoist.


156


Dr.  Fossati  on  Education  and  the  Contest


for  I  have  no  ambition  for  place,  for  honorary  distinctions,
or  for  fortune.  I  am  contented  with  the  esteem  of  my  fel¬
low-citizens  and  of  enlightened  and  virtuous  men.

To  enter  at  once  upon  the  question.  Gentlemen,  I  must
first  observe  that  the  ideas  attached  to  the  words  instruction
and  education  are  vague  and  indefinite,  and  that  two  things
very  distinct  from  each  other  are  easily  confounded.  Phre¬
nology,  having  established  in  a  precise  manner  the  nature  of
the  fundamental  faculties  of  man,  puts  us  in  a  position  to
avoid  vagueness,  and,  moreover,  to  determine  what  ought  to
be  done  for  the  instruction  and  education  of  each  of  the
faculties  whose  aggregate  constitutes  the  human  race.

There  are  in  the  nature  of  man  faculties  of  an  inferior
order,  propensities  and  instincts  which  we  possess  in  common
with  brutes ;  there  are  faculties  which  are  higher  feelings, —
moral  sentiments ;  and  there  are  the  faculties  of  the  intellect,
the  faculties  of  perception  and  reflection.  All  these  faculties
require  to  be  directed,  to  be  turned  to  a  praiseworthy  ac¬
count,  both  individually  and  in  their  aggregate,  in  order  to
attain  their  proper  purpose.  For,  above  all,  it  must  be  re¬
membered  that  every  human  faculty,  without  exception,  is
given  with  a  view  to  utility  and  satisfaction,  and  that  there
is  not  one  essentially  bad.  It  is,  therefore,  very  absurd  and
senseless  for  moralists  to  strive  to  annihilate  a  natural  faculty
as  some  do,  by  condemning  it  to  absolute  inaction,  because
there  may  be  excess  or  abuse  in  its  action.

Now  to  whom  belongs  the  regulation  and  direction  of  all
the  human  faculties  ?  That  is  the  question.  The  Catholic
clergy  believe  themselves  exclusively  called  to  this  office ;
because  of  the  corruption  and  immorality  diffused  in  the
social  mass,  and  of  the  disregard  of  religious  belief  and  faith.
Before  proceeding  farther,  let  us  reflect  that  the  men  of  pro¬
gress,  that  is  to  say,  the  superior  men  of  our  epoch,  have
recognized  the  fact  that  the  relations  between  man  and  God
which  constitute  the  capital  point  of  religious  faith  must
be  free,  and  they  have  inscribed  this  maxim  in  the  funda¬
mental  compact  of  our  new  social  order, — Belief  and  the  wor¬
ship  derived  from  it  are  and  ought  to  be  free.  In  fact,  who
would  dare  to  maintain  that  God  is  impotent  ?  And,  if  he
is  not  impotent,  how  can  we  believe  that  he  requires  from
man  an  exclusive  worship  ?  If  man  on  the  earth  adores  and
venerates  God  with  different  forms  of  worship,  it  is  because
God  wills  it,  and  because  it  enters  into  his  impenetrable  views
that  things  should  be  so*  Do  we  not  see  that  the  same  God
who  sees  it  good  to  be  worshiped  according  to  the  forms  of  the
Israelites,  raised  up  amongst  them  another  faith  which  is  esta-


157


between  the  French  Clergy  and  the  University.

blislied  upon  the  ruins  of  the  former  ?  And  who  shall  say
that  in  the  great  course  of  progress  upon  which  we  are  en¬
tered  it  does  not  form  part  of  his  plan  to  establish  a  new  one
upon  the  ruins  of  that  which  exists  ?  The  symptoms  of  such
transformation  have  already  manifested  themselves  clearly  to
the  reflecting  observer.  For  Christianity  such  as  it  has  been
made  for  us  at  the  present  day  is  very  different  from  what  it
was  at  its  origin,  and  no  longer  resembles  in  any  respect
what  it  was  in  the  first  ages  of  its  institution  !

But  suppose  that  the  Catholic  clergy  were  charged  with
the  instruction  and  education  of  youth,  what  would  be  their
plan  ?  What  is  their  title, — what  their  qualities  for  the  task  ?
I  do  not  hesitate  to  maintain  that  they  are  incompetent  for
it,  and  for  this  reason  : — It  is  requisite  that  all  the  faculties
of  man,  as  I  have  already  said,  should  receive  an  appropriate
education, — all.  Let  us  begin  then  by  examining  what  exer¬
cise  and  direction  should  be  given  to  the  intellectual  faculties.
It  is  to  these  faculties  that  the  word  instruction  should  be
specially  applied.  Instruction  is  the  transmission  of  know¬
ledge  acquired  by  one  person  to  another.  It  is  the  exclusive
privilege  of  humanity  to  be  enabled  to  transmit  the  know¬
ledge  acquired  by  one  generation  to  another  generation  ;  to
perpetuate  to  the  human  species  discoveries  and  useful  in¬
ventions,  and  the  improvements  we  have  been  enabled  to
make.

Hence  what  was  believed  when  mankind  was  plunged  in
ignorance  and  slavery,  will  not  go  down  in  our  days.  Hence
also  are  efforts  made  to  extend  a  thick  veil  over  the  under¬
standings  of  our  admirable  youth,  in  the  hope  probably  of
thus  turning  their  ignorance  to  account  at  a  future  day.  Ig¬
norant  men,  organized  in  a  particular  manner,  easily  become
fanatics ;  and  the  cunning  then  make  tools  of  them  for  their
own  purposes.

But  let  us  look  at  the  matter  a  little  more  in  detail.  Do
the  ministers  of  any  religion  whatever,  aspire  to  be  charged
with  the  instruction  of  the  intellectual  faculties  ?  Is  it  their
business  to  create  for  us  artists,  painters,  musicians,  poets  ?
Certainly  not.  Will  they,  then,  take  the  charge  of  making
for  us  linguists,  calculators,  mathematicians,  travellers,  na¬
vigators,  geographers,  naturalists,  physicians  ?  Certainly
not.  This  is  neither  their  ministry  nor  their  mission ;  nor
ought  it  to  be.  Perhaps  they  will  make  philosophers  for  us  ?
Oh,  yes !  After  their  own  manner, — they  who  have  perse¬
cuted  philosophers  at  all  times.  How  in  truth  could  they
make  philosophers,  after  beginning  by  denying  the  most
precious  gift  bestowed  upon  man — reason.  They  tell  us


158


Dr.  Fossati  on  Educution  and  the  Contest


that  we  must  not  reason,  that  reason  is  our  bane,  that  be¬
fore  all  things  we  must  believe  without  asking  the  why  and
the  how,  and  that  this  is  man’s  greatest  merit  in  the  sight
of  God  !  With  such  maxims  you  cannot  make  philosophers,
because  the  basis  of  all  philosophy  is  examination.  Instead,
of  philosophers  you  make  chatterers,  sophists,  casuists,  me¬
taphysicians,  a  kind  of  artificial  madmen,  whom  one  cannot
hear  without  pity.

Let  us  pass  on  to  the  affective  faculties  of  man, — to  the
instinctive  propensities,  and  consider  some  of  the  most  im¬
portant.  No  one  will  contend,  I  suppose,  that  it  pertains  to
the  minister  of  any  faith  to  direct  the  instinct  of  increase.
The  Catholics  have  made  chastity  so  essential  a  virtue,  that
if  we  could  bring  this  pretended  virtue  into  general  practice,
the  human  species  would  be  extinct  in  one  generation.  It
is  right  to  know  in  regard  to  this  propensity,  and  to  all  the
others,  that  they  have  been  given  to  man  in  order  that  he
might  satisfy  them,  and  with  them  reason  in  order  that  he
may  direct  them  in  a  manner  conformable  to  social  order.

Let  us  then  strengthen  reason  by  proper  instruction,  and
not  listen  to  those  moralists  who  are  incessantly  repeating
that  we  ought  to  extinguish  all  the  passions  which  are  in  the
heart  of  man.  Science  obliges  us  to  admit  that  they  exist,
and  always  will  exist,  because  they  are  in  the  order  of  crea¬
tion,  but  that  they  must  be  directed  to  a  good  end.  This
constitutes  morality.

Will  the  clergy  take  the  charge,  the  education  of  the
sentiment  of  paternal  and  maternal  love  ?  But  the  Catholic
clergy  are  debarred  from  the  exercise  of  that  faculty ;  they
cannot  understand  it,  and  are  therefore  incompetent.  The
sentiment  of  attachment  and  of  friendship  is  absolutely  con¬
fiscated  in  them  to  the  profit  of  their  order.  For,  when  a  man
has  entered  into  the  priesthood,  he  ceases  in  some  sort  to  be
the  son  of  his  father,  the  brother  of  his  sister,  the  citizen
of  his  country  :  he  devotes  himself  to  his  God  and  to  the
chiefs  of  his  hierarchy.

Perhaps  they  will  properly  direct  the  sentiment  of  self¬
esteem  or  of  personal  independence  ?  Let  us  see.  They
will  begin  by  telling  you  that  humility  is  one  of  the  virtues
most  pleasing  to  God ;  that  if  any  give  you  a  blow  on  one
side,  you  must  turn  your  cheek  to  receive  one  upon  the  other;
that  you  must  be  submissive,  docile,  patient,  obedient  to  all
those  who  are  placed  above  you ;  and  that  you  must  pray  to
God  instead  of  considering  whether  those  who  injure  you  have
justice  on  their  side  or  not.  This  is  an  excellent  maxim  for
establishing  and  perpetuating  despotism  and  tyranny,  but


between  the  French  Clergy  and  the  University .  159

it  will  not  stand  in  onr  da}^s.  At  present  man  in  society
should  know  why  he  ought  to  obey,  and  whence  comes  the
authority  of  those  who  govern  him.  The  maxims  of  former
times,  I  repeat,  are  no  longer  applicable  to  our  times  in
France.  Every  injustice  exercised  against  us,  or  our  fellows,
revolts  us  and  fills  us  with  indignation.

Perhaps  the  education  of  the  sentiment  of  property  would
suit  them  ?  Observe,  Gentlemen,  that  I  am  passing  in  review
only  a  few  of  our  fundamental  faculties.  It  would  occupy  us
too  long  to  consider  them  all,  and  I  will  not  abuse  your  kind
attention.  I  maintain  that  neither  ought  the  sentiment  of
property  to  be  confided  to  them.  They  would  turn  it  to  their
own  account.  Is  it  not  true  that,  after  preaching  poverty
and  contempt  for  the  things  of  this  world,  they  have  built
magnificent  palaces,  and  possessed  themselves  of  equipages,
servants,  and  all  the  luxuries  of  worldly  life  ?  Do  they  not
obtain  possession  of  numerous  freeholds  and  wealth  under  a
thousand  forms  and  a  thousand  different  pretexts  ?  The
churches  have  positively  become  market-places;  everything
is  paid  for,  everything  is  tariffed,  even  down  to  the  space  we
occupy  in  praying  to  God.

There  is  indeed  one  propensity,  Gentlemen,  which  a
branch  of  the  sacerdotal  tree  educates  wonderfully — that  of
Cunning.  This  faculty  is  put  into  admirable  cultivation  by
the  Jesuits.  They  have  established  for  this  faculty  maxims
and  principles  which  tend  to  accomplish  the  ends  of  those
who  practise  them  in  the  quickest  and  most  certain  manner.
They  choose  for  their  scholars  those  whom  nature  has  already
organized  favourably  for  this  propensity ;  then  they  instruct
them  in  the  most  peculiar  way,  and  distribute  amongst  them
the  parts  they  are  to  play  in  the  world,  and  ingeniously  turn
to  profit  their  long  experience  of  human  affairs.  This  special
education  of  the  organ  of  Cunning,  this  association  for  exer¬
cising  it  in  common,  is  the  more  to  be  regretted  because
there  exists  nothing  in  society  to  counterbalance  its  influence.
The  men  in  power,  partly  dupes,  and  partly  accomplices,
leave  society  totally  unprotected  before  them,  unless  God  by
some  great  popular  event  should  interfere  to  make  them  dis¬
appear  for  ever.  It  is  not  therefore  for  the  education  of  this
faculty  that  we  will  confide  to  them  the  education  of  our
children.

However,  some  will  say,  To  what  will  you  reduce  the  in¬
fluence  of  the  clergy  in  this  world  ?  What  is  the  mission
which  they  have  to  fulfil  in  terrestrial  affairs  ?

There  is  oertainly  one  human  faculty  whose  education  de¬
volves  upon  them;  the  sentiment  of  Veneration,  which  is  the

VOL.  II.  M


1G0


Dr.  Fossati  on  Education  and  the  Contest


basis  of  all  religions,  and  innate  in  man  like  all  our  other  sen¬
timents  and  faculties.  The  mission  of  the  priesthood  is  very-
grand,  very  beautiful,  if  it  confine  itself  to  its  true  purposes.
The  priest  ought  to  practise  theology ;  he  should  occupy  him¬
self  with  human  souls  ;  make  known  the  relations  existing  be¬
tween  them  and  God ;  he  ought  to  prepare  them  for  and  lead
them  to  eternal  happiness,  by  respecting  and  leaving  in  re¬
pose  the  bodies  which  are  upon  the  earth.  But  the  education
which  establishes  the  relation  between  man  and  man  ought
not  to  be  confided  to  them.  Not  only  are  churchmen  incom¬
petent  to  this  task,  unless  they  are  willing  to  leave  the  sphere
of  their  functions,  but  they  are  incapable.  They  live  in  a
state  of  isolation  from  society ;  they  know  little,  or  nothing,
of  what  constitutes  our  social  life ;  they  necessarily  become
misanthropical,  fanatic,  and  intolerant.  The  compulsory  vio¬
lation  of  the  rights  of  nature  contributes  to  render  them
such.

It  is  to  the  University,  therefore,  that  we  should  entirely
confide  the  education  of  youth, — to  the  University,  according
to  the  modifications  and  ameliorations  which  liberty  calls  for.
For  it  is  she  who  represents  progress  and  to  whom  is  confided
that  future  which  must  inevitably  effect  a  reform  in  all  social
institutions.  The  University  represents  the  state  in  this  mis¬
sion,  and  it  is  for  the  state,  the  aggregate  of  the  citizens,
for  us  all,  carefully  to  consider  matters.

The  professors  of  the  University  are  therefore  our  repre¬
sentatives  for  instruction  and  education,  as  the  judges  of  the
tribunals  are  the  representatives  of  the  state  for  the  adminis¬
tration  of  justice,  and  the  deputies  of  the  departments  for
legislation.

It  remains  for  us  to  examine  one  part  of  the  question
which  we  have  entered  upon,  that  of  learning  how  we  are  to
put  an  end  to  the  immorality  and  corruption  which  positively
do  exist  in  society  and  which  spread  in  every  direction  among
all  ranks.  I  have  already  shewn  you  that  education  com¬
mitted  to  the  clergy  as  they  are  at  present  will  not  procure
us  this  reform.  We  should  have  nearly  the  same  disorders,
and  also  stupid,  hypocritical  beings,  incapable  of  living  in  the
world  such  as  the  progress  of  intelligence  has  now  made  it.
I  allow,  however,  that  a  genuine  reform  of  our  morals  is  ne¬
cessary  and  even  pressing.

Though  the  intellectual  faculties,  as  I  have  said  above,  can
receive  by  transmission  the  knowledge  acquired  in  times
passed,  and  preserve  and  appropriate  it,  the  same  does  not
hold  good  in  the  case  of  the  moral  faculties.  These  require
to  be  constantly  exercised  in  a  determinate  sense ;  that  is  to


161


between  the  French  Clergy  and  the  University.

say,  by  the  constant  practice  of  virtuous  actions  and  absti¬
nence  from  everything  acknowledged  to  be  vicious.  The
moral  maxims  which  are  laid  down  and  to  which  great  im¬
portance  is  attached,  arrive  and  stop  at  the  intellectual  facul¬
ties,  fortify  the  reason  and  content  good  men  :  but  change
neither  the  nature  nor  the  activity  of  the  inclinations.  This
is  so  true,  that  a  man,  badly  brought  up,  who  has  learnt  these
moral  maxims  by  art,  will  reason  very  well  when  he  has  to
speak  of  morality ;  but  will  conduct  himself  very  ill  and  will
be  vicious,  because  precepts  do  not  change  habits.

It  is,  therefore,  by  good  examples  and  the  constant  prac¬
tice  of  virtue  that  moral  beings  are  formed.  We  must  take
care,  however,  not  to  confound,  as  is  generally  done,  moral¬
ity  with  religious  belief,  virtuous  conduct  with  the  practice  of
devotion.  These  are  very  distinct  things ;  morality  regards
the  duties  and  relations  of  man  to  man ;  religious  belief  re¬
gards  the  relations  and  duties  between  the  human  soul  and
God.  Morality  is  the  same  for  all  people  and  in  all  ages  :
the  forms  of  worship  vary  infinitely  and  change  with  time.

Examples  and  the  practice  of  virtue,  then,  are  the  means
by  which  moral  beings  must  be  made.  Here  it  is,  gentlemen,
that  I  feel  the  difficulty  of  my  task.  The  social  evil  which
we  experience,  and  which  I  have  pointed  out,  comes,  through
a  frightful  fatality,  from  above.  How  can  the  people  become
moral,  when  they  see  fortune  and  honors  bestowed  upon  the
most  immoral  men  ?  When  they  observe  that  the  greatest
favours  are  granted  to  the  perjured,  to  those  who  have  em¬
ployed  the  sanctity  of  an  oath  to  make  dupes,  and  to  arrive
at - .  When  they  observe  that  hypocrisy,  vileness,  base¬

ness,  and  servility  are  the  qualities  which  are  fostered,  and
that  independent  men,  conscious  of  their  own  worth,  incor¬
ruptible  and  virtuous,  are  repulsed  and  set  aside ;  when  they
observe  the  greatest  social  vices  rewarded  instead  of  being  pu¬
nished,  Gentlemen,  I  do  not  clearly  see  whence  reform  is  to
come  in  a  society  thus  organized ;  but  come  it  will.  As  to
us,  our  mission  is  all  traced.  Let  the  men  of  progress,  the
virtuous,  and  the  independent,  raise  their  voices  and  declare
to  the  world  the  vices  and  turpitudes  of  corruption.  Let
publicity  blast  both  the  corrupters  and  the  corrupted  :  let
contempt  reach  them  in  the  midst  of  their  riches  and  the  en¬
joyments  with  which  they  are  gorged.

The  voice  of  the  virtuous  will  be  echoed  by  the  people,  for
the  masses  are  better  than  they  are  generally  supposed.  But
the  example  must  be  set  by  the  men  of  the  University.  For
this  they  are  constituted  and  organized.  Let  them  raise

m  2


162


Phrenological  Society.


their  voices ;  let  them  not  be  intimidated  by  the  clamours  of
the  clergy.  The  future  belongs  to  us ;  and,  instead  of  wag¬
ing  war  with  us  phrenologists,  let  them  come  and  derive  from
our  doctrines  the  means  of  moralizing  men  and  rendering
them  happier.


We  understand  that  this  discourse  drew  forth  repeated  applause  and  elec¬
trified  the  audience,  which  was  both  numerous  and  select.

In  a  note  which  accompanied  the  copy  of  it,  Dr.  Fossati  remarks  that  the
liberty  of  discussion  ceases  to  exist  in  a  country  where  crimes  are  created,
as  at  present  in  France,  for  the  press  :  and  that  therefore  he  has  not  said  all
that  ii  would  have  been  good  to  say.  u  He  resigns  himself  to  the  times  in
which  he  lives,  contented  to  lament  that  poor  humanity  is  given  up  to  the
caprices  of  hypocrites,  intriguers,  fanatics,  and  the  ignorant.” — Zoist.


III.  Phrenological  Society ,  17  Edwards  Street ,  Portman  Square.

March  6th,  1844.

Mr.  Hands  brought  a  cast  for  the  inspection  of  the  Society
of  a  very  remarkable  individual,  Mr.  Robert  Owen.  The
head  was  examined  by  various  members,  who  pronounced
that  the  moral  and  social  groups  of  organs  were  largely  de¬
veloped,  the  intellect  fair.  The  largest  organs  were  those  of
Firmness,  Self-esteem,  Love  of  Approbation,  Love  of  Off¬
spring,  and  Attachment :  and  various  persons  present  gave
illustrations  fully  substantiating  the  views  taken  of  the  cha¬
racter  by  the  Society.


March  20th.

A  paper  was  read  by  G.  R.  Lewis,  Esq.  on  the  organ  of
Constructiveness,  urging  the  necessity  of  a  due  cultivation
of  the  faculty  in  question,  and  its  importance  more  particu¬
larly  in  all  the  manufacturing  departments,  as  well  as  to  the
artist,  architect,  builder,  &c.  &c.  He  stated  it  as  the  re¬
sult  of  his  observations,  that  the  particular  kind  of  activity
of  the  faculty  is  modified  by  the  particular  form  of  develop¬
ment  of  the  organ;  thus,  when  its  size  increases  towards
Tune,  Mr.  Lewis  is  of  opinion  that  it  prefers  exercising  itself
in  making  musical  instruments,  and  so  on.


Phrenological  Society.


163


Annual  General  Meeting,  April  1st.

The  following  members  were  elected  officers  and  other
members  of  the  council  for  the  ensuing  year : —


President.

John  Elliotson,  M.D.,  F.R.S.

Vice  Presidents.

George  Coode,  Esq.  Professor  Wheatstone,  F.R.S.

R.  C.  Kirby,  Esq.  T.  L.  Murray,  Esq.

Treasurer — T.  R.  Eearnside,  Esq.

Librarian — J.  B.  Sedgwick,  Esq.

Curator — George  R.  Lewis,  Esq.

Secretary — E.  S.  Symes,  Esq.


Other  Members  of  the  Council.


B.  Bernasconi,  Esq.
William  Kingdom,  Esq.
William  Hering,  Esq.
William  Topham,  Esq.
Thomas  Uwins,  Esq.  R.A.
William  Wood,  Esq.


H.  G.  Atkinson,  Esq.,  F.G.S.
J.  G.  Graelf,  Esq.

Archibald  Billing,  M.D.
Richard  Edwards,  Esq.

T.  C.  Granger,  Esq.

Hudson  Lowe,  Esq.


April  3rd.

Major  Bulkley,  having  been  duly  proposed  and  balloted
for,  was  elected  an  ordinary  member  of  the  Society.

H.  G.  Atkinson,  Esq.,  exhibited  a  most  important  group
of  heads,  being  the  casts  of  a  whole  family  of  idiots  at
Downham  in  Norfolk,  and  said, —

It  is  a  grand  thing,  and  should  be  our  first  consideration
to  seek  to  place  ourselves  in  harmony  with  nature,  and  thence
in  the  certainty  of  truth,  to  watch  as  from  a  tower  the  glo¬
rious  event  of  knowledge  making  its  way  over  the  earth,
gently  moving  through  the  stream  which  is  opposed,  diffusing
light  and  life  to  all  around,  for  it  would  indeed  be  a  miracle
if  the  world  should  rise  at  once  superior  to  itself,  and  receive
without  question  or  delay  novel  truths  for  which  as  yet  it  has
neither  the  eye  to  see,  the  understanding  to  conceive,  or  the
heart  to  feel.  Thought  arises  in  the  action  of  matter,  and
the  vis  inertia  of  matter  and  its  accustomed  course  can  only
be  overcome  by  the  continuous  bearing  down  of  the  new
force,  and  thus  in  advancing  any  truth  without  proceeding


164


Phrenological  Society.


with  that  haste  to  cause  a  great  reaction,  let  us  steadily,  but
with  determination,  continue  our  exertions  to  the  end.

The  exaltations  of  genius,  and  the  depression  of  those
powers  in  disease  or  advanced  age,  arrest  our  attention,  and
make  us  pause  to  consider  our  position,  but  few  circumstances
are  more  calculated  to  impress  a  thoughtful  mind,  than  to
observe  the  wretched  condition  of  a  poor  idiot,  or  the  fearful
and  deeply  humiliating  consequence  of  insanity ;  here  the
intellect  staggers  back  upon  itself,  perplexed  to  comprehend
the  course  of  nature,  or  how  to  measure  out  the  power  and
liberty  of  man — but  for  the  want  of  that  knowledge  which
alone  can  lead  to  any  correct  inference,  we  are  glad  to  be
relieved  from  the  difficulty,  and  fall  back  again  into  our  old
habits  of  thought.  We  have  seen  and  could  not  comprehend,
our  ears  were  deaf  to  the  clear  voice  and  melody  of  nature,
the  good  which  is  in  evil,  the  lesson  of  wisdom  has  never
reached  our  understanding,  and  we  move  on  mingling  with
those  worldly  interests,  those  hopes  and  fears,  those  systems
and  ceremonies  the  mere  fashion  of  a  day,  and  thus  do  we
live  and  linger  out  a  poor  existence, — denying  to  the  last
those  glorious  truths  of  cerebral  physiology,  which  are  the
true  philosophy  of  man ;  whilst  many  misled  by  the  learned
conceit  and  orthodoxy  of  colleges,  will  go  to  their  graves  ig¬
norant  of  all  those  blessed  effects  developed  in  the  most
interesting  feature  of  that  varied  and  wondrous  power,  which
running  through  all  creation,  is  at  once  the  link,  the  life,
and  liberty  of  being, — the  principle  of  health  and  disease,
the  element  of  sympathy  and  love,  that  same  vital  magnetic
force  which  in  a  simpler  form  impels  the  myriad  worlds  round
worlds  in  boundless  space,  and  every  atom  its  appointed
place.  But  thought  moves  on,  and  the  time  arrives  when
men  shall  no  longer  be  persecuted  on  account  of  their  opi¬
nions,  when  bigotry  and  intolerance  will  cease,  and  every
individual  shall  be  trained  to  receive  and  appreciate  truth
from  whatever  quarter  it  may  appear ;  and  this  will  be  true
freedom,  the  real  emancipation  from  slavery,  the  commence¬
ment  of  a  glorious  era  of  high  and  elevated  existence,  an
era  of  pure  reason,  piety  and  love,  brightly  shining  above
all  selfish  considerations,  and  which  the  gifted  few  stand¬
ing  out  before  their  race,  living  in  advance  of  their  age,
even  now  do  they  receive  the  hallowed  influence,  in  the
effects  of  those  mighty  truths  which  are  dawning  upon  the
world ;  and  of  all  truths,  what  can  be  so  interesting  or  im¬
portant  to  man,  as  a  knowledge  of  himself, — of  those  laws
by  which  he  lives,  and  thinks,  and  acts, — of  those  causes  in
the  chain  of  events  which  control  his  being, — of  those  facts


Phrenological  Society.


165


in  nature  which  constitute  the  very  principles  of  thought
and  action,  and  by  which  alone  we  shall  be  enabled  to  regu¬
late  our  understanding  that  it  may  become  a  secure  and  true
guide  to  happiness  and  virtue,  a  knowledge  in  which  consists
the  elements  of  all  good  laws  and  institutions,  and  ought  to
constitute  the  foundation  of  every  system  of  education,  reli¬
gious,  moral,  and  intellectual.  Yes,  most  truly  did  Lord
Bacon  declare  that  the  knowledge  of  man  to  man  was  the  most
important  of  all  knowledge;  but  a  new  light  has  shone  in  the
world  since  Bacon — a  Gall,  following  out  the  true  principles
of  inductive  philosophy  by  observation  and  experiment,  has
pointed  out  the  channel  through  which  we  may  at  last  obtain
a  correct  and  scientific  acquaintance  with  man,  by  which  to
attain  to  a  true  and  practical  philosophy  founded  on  the
physiology  of  the  brain,  and  phrenology  is  established, — to
phrenology  must  we  appeal  on  every  occasion,  for  a  light  is
now  set  up  in  the  obscurity  of  philosophy,  which  will  guide
the  world  in  all  after  ages.  The  science  of  the  brain  will
evermore  constitute  the  philosophy  of  material  man,  and
henceforth  be  appealed  to  as  to  the  highest  authority ;  and
who  shall  deny  the  philosophy  of  man  to  be  the  noblest
pursuit  which  can  engage  the  attention  of  man,  as  leading
to  the  most  important  results  ?  And  what  are  our  facts  ?

I  have  here  the  casts  of  the  heads  of  an  idiot  family  to
exhibit,  which  together  form  perhaps  one  of  the  most  re¬
markable  examples  of  the  truth  of  Gaiks  philosophy  to  be
found  on  record ;  and  to  such  examples  do  phrenologists
continually  refer  in  proof  of  the  principle  which  they  main¬
tain, — in  the  conviction  of  truth  we  come  boldly  forward
with  our  facts,  and  appeal  to  all  who  have  not  yet  embraced
our  doctrines  to  approach  and  examine  for  themselves ;  but
men  are  for  the  most  part  so  bound  up  in  worldly  interest,
prejudice,  and  superstition,  they  will  not,  for  they  dare  not,
be  honest  and  true  to  themselves  and  their  convictions,
that  growing  in  prejudice  every  day,  it  is  difficult  to  find  any
weak  point  of  common  sense  or  disencumbered  virtue  through
which  to  reach  their  understanding ;  and  it  is  only  by  some
startling  example  standing  out  almost  in  the  shape  of  an
alarm  that  we  can  arrest  attention,  to  induce  a  further  en¬
quiry  into  the  more  minute,  and  what  would  at  first  appear
more  doubtful,  bearings  of  the  science ; — but  all  is  working
to  good,  for  as  the  most  beautiful  flowers  and  fruits  grow  up
from  out  of  corruption,  so  shall  it  be  seen  how  the  greatest
happiness  and  virtue  will  rise  up  and  expand  from  amidst  the
ashes  of  iniquity,  shaped  out  of  the  deformity  of  sin.  And
the  world  shall  be  forced  from  its  lethargy,  out  from  the  dull


160


Phrenological  Society.


habits  of  pride,  and  indolence,  and  of  fashion, — to  observe
and  to  reflect  on  nature's  laws,  and  my  idiot  family  and
similar  examples,  though  not  so  attractive  as  a  new  dancer
at  the  opera,  or  a  popular  preacher  denouncing  hell  fire,  shall
not  be  passed  by  unnoticed ;  men  shall  be  forced  to  give  at¬
tention  ;  and  those  who  have  denounced  as  falsehood  the
most  glorious  truths  of  cerebral  physiology  shall  be  fixed
down  to  the  fact ;  the  ignorant-learned  shall  no  longer  reign
supreme ;  whilst  the  bigot  shall  be  dragged  from  his  vain¬
glorious  position,  and  held  there  face  to  face  with  suffering
depressed  human  nature,  till  his  reason  set  him  forth  with
some  clear  conviction  and  plain  confession  of  the  truth ;  the
hot  zeal  of  sectarian  prejudice,  denouncing  philosophy  and
reason  as  infidelity,  shall  meet  its  match ;  and  the  science  of
the  eternal  laws  of  nature  shall  at  length  assert  a  supremacy
over  all  the  combined  fallacies  arising  in  the  cumbrous  meta¬
physics  and  fanciful  dogmas  of  the  colleges  and  schools,  and
men  shall  be  taught  that  heaven,  or  the  happiness  of  virtuous
intellectual  life,  is  not  won  by  clamour  and  hard  words,  but
in  the  harmony  of  knowledge  and  gentle  ministering  to  those
bright  and  peaceful  virtues  which  lie  dormant  in  the  man
till  some  genial  warmth  in  the  sunshine  of  intelligence  call
them  forth  :  and  though  the  mistaken  and  most  pitiable  expe¬
diency  of  those  in  brief  authority  may  cry  down  the  plainest
fact,  however  clearly  demonstrated,  and  for  a  time  may  suc¬
ceed,  the  truth  will  shine  out  in  the  end,  and  that  which
one  age  has  denounced  as  blasphemy,  another  and  a  wiser
will  uphold  as  all-beautiful  truth,  leading  only  to  the  highest
morality, — the  sun  will  rise  each  morning  in  the  east,  and
the  birds  rise  up  aloft  to  sing  their  glad  song  through  the
day,  though  men  should  deny  the  fact,  and  dig  for  themselves
deep  holes  in  the  earth,  and  hide  away  in  caves  ;  but  alas  !
that  the  good  and  the  wise  should  have  ever  been  made  to
suffer  in  the  cause  of  humanity  and  truth.

Poor  Windsor,  who  turned  the  dreary  night  into  day,
and  lit  the  world  with  a  new  and  beautiful  light,  was  actually
stoned  by  the  mob  and  obliged  to  seek  refuge,  narrowly  es¬
caped  with  his  life,  and  died  abroad  in  wretchedness  and
poverty.  Such  is  the  conduct  of  the  ignorant  world,  and
such  the  reward  of  merit ;  but  who  now  passing  at  night
along  the  streets  safely  to  his  home,  shall  arrive  and  not
bless  the  name  of  Windsor,- — though  on  the  morrow  they
may  rise  ready  in  their  turn  to  stone  to  death  the  next  auda¬
cious  spirit  who  may  dare  to  insult  the  wisdom  of  his  ances¬
tors,  and  the  living  fathers  and  authorities  of  the  age,  and
by  the  innovations  of  superior  knowledge  in  the  true  spirit


Phrenological  Society.


167


of  reform,  endeavour  to  set  up  a  brighter  light,  that  may
guide  us  on  our  way  through  all  the  rocks  and  shoals  which
beset  our  path  on  every  side,  and  by  which,  wanting  the
correct  chart  and  believing  themselves  guided  by  a  light  from
heaven,  so  many  have  been  wrecked  ?

In  describing  this  idiot  family,  I  may  observe  that  idiotcy
is  so  closely  allied  to  insanity,  that  it  is  impossible  to  draw
any  distinct  line  of  demarcation,  or  to  say  where  insanity  ends
and  idiotcy  commences ;  the  two  states  are  often  blended  to¬
gether,  and  the  phenomena  in  many  points  very  nearly  resem¬
ble,  though  arising  in  a  different  cause.  The  insane  equally
with  the  idiots  are  creatures  of  imperfectly  organized  brains, —
insanity  proceeding  from  an  unhealthy  condition  in  the  undue
excitement  of  one  or  more  sets  of  nerves  or  organs,  or  from
some  local,  or  more  or  less  general  paralysis,  disunion  of  parts,
unusual  association,  or  fixedness  of  any  deranged  action,  pro¬
ducing  by  such  and  similar  irregular  conditions,  those  effects
which  we  confuse  together  under  the  general  term  insanity.
When  the  action  of  the  brain  is  deranged,  or  there  is  want  of
harmony  and  proper  restraint  among  the  faculties,  the  man
hobbles,  he  is  not  in  his  senses,  which  is  to  say  that  all  his  senses
are  not  acting  in  their  usual  and  healthy  condition,  the  music
is  more  or  less  discordant,  according  as  this  or  that  particular
note  or  set  of  notes  be  out  of  tune  ;  and  as  we  mostly  judge,
particularly  under  any  undue  excitement,  according  as  we
feel  or  perceive,  for  a  judgment  is  but  a  more  enlarged  per¬
ception,  the  individual  is  seldom  fully  aware  of  the  precise
state  of  his  own  imperfections, — hence  the  constant  delusion
of  the  insane  that  they  are  well  and  may  be  released.  In¬
sanity  is  often  so  strongly  blended  with  the  most  exalted
intellect  and  genius,  that  we  cannot  wonder  at  Shakespeare,
who  observing  so  many  apparently  strange  contradictions
should  exclaim,  and  with  more  truth  than  may  be  found  in
the  combined  wisdom  of  our  twelve  judges,  “  That  to  define
true  madness,  what  is  it,  but  to  be  nothing  else  but  mad.”
However,  with  our  present  knowledge,  we  may  at  least  shew
some  little  method  in  our  madness ;  and  effect  something  by
our  efforts  in  ministering  to  a  mind  diseased,  with  more  cer¬
tainty  and  satisfaction ;  here  at  least  we  may  see  how  that  know¬
ledge  which  is  power  is  the  power  of  goodness  and  of  mercy.

Idiotcy  is  a  deficiency  of  power  arising  from  the  small
size,  inferior  quality,  or  other  imperfect  and  depressing  con¬
dition  of  the  brain  or  some  of  its  parts.  Idiotcy  is  any  local
or  more  or  less  general  weakness,  either  constitutional,  or
the  result  of  some  temporary  cause.  Insanity  an  undue
excitement,  or  irregular  and  unhealthy  tendency.  In  idiotcy


168


Phrenological  Society .


the  brain  may  be  well  developed,  excepting  in  one  organ ;  or
the  brain  may  be  deficient  with  the  exception  of  one  or  two
faculties,  or  more  as  the  case  may  be,  and  which  faculties
may  even  be  in  excess, — as  a  man  may  lose  bis  arms  and
retain  bis  legs,  and  which  may  gain  in  strength  by  the  loss
of  the  arms.  George  Combe  is  deficient  in  the  organ  of
Number.  I  have  seen  an  idiot  woman  with  this  faculty  in
excess,  that  her  only  delight  when  alone  was  to  be  occupied
with  questions  of  numbers.  George  Bidder,  when  a  child,
could  perform  in  a  few  minutes  the  most  difficult  calculations
in  his  head  which  were  a  puzzle  to  the  best  mathematicians ;
he  could  not  explain  how  he  worked,  it  was  an  instinctive
perception,  as  difficult  to  comprehend  as  those  stranger  phe¬
nomena  exhibited  during  the  condition  of  sleep-waking.
There  are  idiots  of  every  degree ;  some  are  violent,  others
affectionate,  some  will  manifest  the  religious  faculties,  some
are  just  and  truthful,  others  liars  and  thieves,  one  may  be
kind,  another  selfish,  meek,  or  obstinate  and  violent ;  others
are  cunning  and  sharp-witted ;  indeed  any  particular  faculties
or  talents  may  predominate  and  shine  forth  in  unrestrained
excess ;  and  there  are  few  so  bad  as  not  to  possess  some  virtue
or  talent,  or  so  elevated  as  not  to  exhibit  some  peculiar  and
marked  deficiency.*

Thus  are  there  idiots  of  every  class  and  grade;  for  an
idiot  simply  means  a  creature  more  or  less  defective,  and
below  the  average  condition ;  and  by  imperceptible  steps  we
rise  from  the  lowest  conceivable  condition  up  to  the  most
exalted  being.  We  are  all  of  us,  therefore,  more  or  less
idiots ;  and  as  there  are  no  brains,  even  the  most  superior,
which  have  not  some  irregular  action  or  undue  excitement
going  on,  some  fixed  prejudice  or  habit  of  thought,  some
antipathy  or  superstition,  none  who  are  entirely  free  to
think  and  to  feel  correctly  on  every  subject, — so  are  we  all
more  or  less  insane,  down  by  imperceptible  degrees  to  the
most  grotesque  and  degraded  condition.  And  thus  finding
that  we  cannot  reason  correctly  on  the  one  side,  or  see  or
feel  correctly  on  the  other,  how  much  is  there  to  humble
our  pride ;  that  we  are  but  elevated  little  by  little,  according
to  the  state  of  the  brain,  from  the  condition  of  the  infant
and  the  idiot  to  the  worm  which  crawls  upon  the  ground.
Nothing  can  be  clearer  than  the  evidence  of  this  chain  of
gradation,  that  there  is  no  very  observable  or  essential  line

*  I  know  several  glaring  instances  at  this  moment  of  gentlemen  of  high
standing  in  society,  miserably  deficient  in  the  organ  of  Conscientiousness,
and  yet  they  are  agreeable,  kind,  and  intelligent,  but  at  the  same  time  guilty
of  the  grossest  acts  of  injustice.  These  men  are  blind  or  idiots  in  the  sense
of  justice.


Phrenological  Society .


169


of  distinction  between  the  sentient  condition  of  the  lower
animals  and  the  idiotic  and  the  insane.  And  again,  between
these  and  the  more  sane  and  exalted.  A  cerebral  condition
was  a  Bacon, — the  cerebral  condition  made  the  idiot, — the
cerebral  condition  the  dog  and  the  worm.  The  physical  con¬
dition  is  the  creature  from  high  to  low.  We  are  all  alike
in  the  results  of  our  organization,  more  or  less  favourably
influenced  by  the  circumstances  around  us ;  and  were  the
brain  indeed  but  a  single  organ,  manifesting  the  different
properties  which  are  mind,  if  such  were  possible,  still  should
we  rise  by  imperceptible  degrees  from  weakness  to  strength,
from  every  shade  of  irregular  action  to  the  most  perfect
condition ;  but  since  the  brain  is  proved  to  be  a  congeries  of
organs,  each  having  its  special  action  or  function,  and  which
organs  are  found  associated  in  endless  variety  of  proportions
in  different  individuals ;  there  is  no  type  of  perfection,  and
no  two  are  alike  ;  each  has  his  particular  gift  or  genius  and
his  defects,  his  duties  to  perform,  his  place  in  the  scale  of
intelligence,  and  appropriate  field  for  exertion ;  and  such
must  ever  be  the  case,  however  much  we  may  be  enabled  on
the  whole  to  elevate  the  race  in  the  general  progression  of
social  improvement  arising  in  the  advance  of  knowledge,
and  pain  and  misery,  good  and  evil,  beauty  and  deformity,
will  more  or  less  ever  continue  to  be  the  lot  of  man.  The
plan  of  nature  is  unjust  and  cruel  to  individuals,  but  ever
working  for  the  general  good  ;  a  little  enquiry  into  nature’s
ways  would  shew  the  absurdity  of  any  visionary  notions  of
perfectibility,  and  bring  us  down  again  to  earth  with  a  more
wholesome  condition  of  mind  to  labour  on  for  the  great
reward  which  there  exists  in  the  charms  of  truth  and
beauty,  and  the  joy  of  seeing  others  made  happy  through
our  exertions.

This  idiot  family  are  residents  of  Downham,  in  Norfolk,
and  the  account  which  I  receive  from  Mr.  Brown,  a  farmer
in  the  neighbourhood,  is  as  follows  :  “  Of  this  family  there
are  three  sisters  and  two  brothers ;  their  names  are  Susan,
Mary,  Maria,  Thomas,  and  John  Franklin.  The  parents
kept  a  low  public  house ;  the  moral  character  of  the  man
was  not  good,  he  was  a  drunkard,  and  of  very  inferior  intel¬
lect  ;  the  woman  was  inoffensive  and  of  weak  intellect.  The
father  died  at  72,  the  mother  at  50 ;  of  the  children,  John
died  at  47,  Thomas  at  40  ;  the  sisters  are  still  living,  Susan
aged  60,  Mary  55,  and  Maria  50.  Susan  and  Maria,  like  John,
are  not  much  more  than  brutes,  except  that  they  can  talk :
Mary  can  read  a  little  and  sew,  and  is  willing  to  do  as  much
as  she  is  able  :  Susan  and  Maria  could  never  be  induced  to


170


Phrenological  Society.


do  anything  whatsoever.  Of  the  brothers,  Thomas  was  a
curious  character;  was  fond  of  being  with  horses  and  of
riding,  and  he  could  groom  a  horse  well ;  was  fond  of  sol¬
diers  and  of  going  to  see  the  players,  and  he  would  imitate
what  he  had  seen ;  but  you  could  not  depend  on  the  truth  of
a  word  he  said,  and  he  would  pilfer  whatever  came  in  his
way.  John  was  also  fond  of  seeing  the  players,  but  never
attempted  to  imitate,  and  when  you  met  him  always  said
that  he  expected  the  players  next  week ;  but  with  a  careful
person  with  him,  would  work  at  common  labour  tolerably
well.”

To  make  the  matter  clearer,  I  have  taken  a  few  general
measurements  of  the  heads  of  this  idiot  family,  compared
with  those  of  an  ordinary,  or  rather  full  development  of
brain,  (which  is  generally  the  most  powerful,)  sufficient  to
shew  the  frightful  deficiency  in  these  instances ;  and  it  is  cu¬
rious,  that  although  the  heads  differ  in  certain  points  corre¬
sponding  with  the  characters  of  the  individuals,  yet  in  the
whole  five  there  is  not  a  quarter  of  an  inch  difference  in  any
of  the  measurements  I  have  taken.  The  length  of  these
idiot  heads  is  precisely  the  width  of  one  of  ordinary  power.


Idiot  Family.

Full  average  development.

Lengths  from  the  organ  of  the

Sense  of  Things  to  the  Pa-

rental  feeling

<5*

inches  .

.  .  8  inches

Width  above  the  ears

} y  •

•  •  u  2  y  y

Opening  of  the  ear  to  Firmness

4*

D  •

•  6-2-  „

Ditto  to  Comparison

4*

yy

.  6  „

Tape  measurement  round  above

the  ears  ....

19

yy  •

.  24  „

Over  the  head  from  opening  of

ear  to  ear

10*

>>  •

14i

•  •  l^2  >>

The  account  which  I

have

received

of  this  singular

family,  though  not  so  full  and  explanatory  as  could  be
wished,  yet  affords  ample  evidence  of  the  broad  features  of
the  case ;  shewing  that  the  offspring  of  defective  and  immoral
parents  have  all  been  born  idiots, — an  interesting  example  of
the  law  of  hereditary  descent,  and  one  too  marked  to  be  mis¬
understood  ;  presenting  a  striking  illustration  of  the  fact  that
the  peculiarities  of  the  children  depend  on  the  condition  of
the  parents.  The  child  is  the  impress  or  effect  of  the  condi¬
tions  which  exist  in  the  parents ;  these  conditions  are  some¬
times  latent  and  pass  over  one  generation,  but  appear  in  full
force  in  the  second,  or  from  peculiar  attendant  circumstances
it  is  only  then  brought  out;  shewing  that  the  impression


Phrenological  Society.


171


must  have  been  made  in  the  first  instance,  and  laid  dormant.
Again,  the  child  partakes  more  or  less  of  the  condition  of
both  parents,  and  of  the  peculiar  state  of  each,  during  the
time  of  conception,  and  of  the  mother  until  birth ;  and  by
sympathy  and  otherwise,  even  after  this ;  so  that  the  children
seldom  appear  as  a  copy  of  either  parent,  or  what  might  be
supposed  to  be  a  result  of  the  union  to  the  two.  The  children
of  great  geniuses  seldom  inherit  the  talents  of  the  parents ;
who  having  neglected  the  laws  of  nature,  their  genius  only
comes  on  in  flashes,  and  perhaps  requiring  stimulants  to  bring
it  forth,  exercise  is  neglected,  and  the  more  physical  condition
(so  to  speak)  suffers,  and  the  children  partaking  of  such  condi¬
tion  are  of  inferior  make.  But  how  much  better  these  laws
are  understood  and  attended  to  with  regard  to  the  rearing  of
cattle,  horses,  dogs,  or  even  plants ;  whilst  man  neglects
himself.  His  spiritual  wanderings  have  led  him  astray  from
the  study  of  simple  nature.  Unions  of  the  sexes  are  formed
by  chance,  the  laws  of  nature  are  neglected,  and  the  result
is  defective  offspring,  untimely  death  and  misery.  The  rights
of  love  and  nature’s  laws  are  violated,  and  it  is  thought
highly  moral  that  man  and  woman  should  live  on  together
though  the  greatest  antipathy  exist,  because  they  have  been
joined  in  “  holy  matrimony,”  whilst  they  were  yet  in  igno¬
rance  of  each  others  dispositions,  and  how  they  would  sym¬
pathize  and  be  happy  together.  But  we  are  told  that  “  what
God  has  joined,  let  no  man  put  asunder,”  and  it  were  indeed
a  wise  thing  to  follow  such  injunction ;  but  when  individuals
are  unsuited  to  each  other,  it  is  not  God  who  put  them  toge¬
ther,  but  their  own  ignorance  and  perversion ;  and  a  religious
ceremony  performed  by  an  ignorant  priest  does  not  alter  na¬
ture’s  laws.  Wedded  life  without  love  and  harmony  is  a  de¬
gradation  and  a  sin,  but  nature  keeps  a  strict  account  and
we  pay  the  penalty;  but  if  a  union  without  affection,  an
unlucky  union  of  unhappy  disunion,  a  match  of  convenience,
or  from  some  baser  motive  of  aggrandizement,— if  such  be  a
hateful  disfigurement  of  one  of  the  brightest  and  the  noblest
features  in  the  fair  face  of  nature,  and  meet  its  reward,  and
in  the  end  prove  indeed  but  a  sad  and  losing  game,  what
shall  we  say  of  those  who,  inheriting  on  account  of  the  sins
of  their  parents  consumption  and  other  frightful  diseases,  con¬
senting  to  join  in  “  holy  matrimony,”  and  so  entail  a  further
misery  upon  the  world  to  future  generations? — what  but
that  they  have  committed  a  most  unholy  offence  against  the
laws  of  humanity  and  nature,  and  should  be  restrained  by
the  general  voice  of  society.  How  many  thousands  abstain
from  marriage  because  they  are  not  wealthy  enough  to  sup-


172


Phrenological  Society.


port  a  family  in  the  station  they  aspire  to.  But  so  blind  and
ignorant  is  the  world  of  some  of  the  simplest  laws  of  nature,
that  few,  even  whilst  they  are  conscious  of  disease  deeply
seated  in  their  breasts,  will  abstain  from  marrying  on  that
account,  if  their  inclinations  so  dispose  them.

But  this  and  other  questions  I  have  touched  upon  in  this
paper  require  a  full  and  clear  elucidation,  and  I  only  notice
them  here  as  necessarily  arising  from  the  contemplation  of
this  poor  idiot  family  :  and  be  it  understood  that  I  have  no
wish  to  render  more  unhappy  those  who  feel  conscious  of  the
truth  of  what  I  have  said,  that  it  applies  to  their  case,  but
cannot  help  themselves  or  alter  their  condition;  for  it  is
ever  incumbent  on  them  to  strive  to  make  the  best  of  cir¬
cumstances  as  they  are,  and  be  content  to  assist  in  restrain¬
ing  others  from  the  like  offence.  But  I  have  no  wish  to  has¬
tily  remodel  existing  systems.  We  must  educate  society  up
to  the  change,  and  never  form  institutions  in  advance  of  the
times ;  for  we  should  surely  fail,  and  that  failure  bring  dis¬
credit  on  the  principle.  And  though  it  may  be  difficult  in  every
individual  case  to  trace  all  the  circumstances  which  have  ope¬
rated  in  the  formation  of  any  character,  it  is  most  important
that  these  laws  be  as  clearly  defined  as  possible  and  generally
taught.

If  we  survey  the  different  races  of  men,  the  English,  the
French,  the  Hottentot,  the  jew,  the  gipsy,  we  shall  have  no
doubt  of  the  universal  law  of  hereditary  descent,  and  in  the
end  shall  possibly  come  to  the  opinion  that  a  knowledge  of
those  laws  which  determine  the  birth  of  a  good  man,  are  at
least  as  important  as  those  which  decide  the  merit  of  a  tulip
or  a  spaniel  dog.  This  idiot  family  afford  a  glaring  instance
of  the  fact  which  I  wish  to  impress ;  and  though  this  is  an
extreme  case,  still  in  a  lesser  degree  all  are  suffering  from
similar  errors,  that  it  is  impossible  to  say  to  what  degrees  of
exaltation  the  human  race  may  one  day  attain  to  by  attention
and  strict  obedience  to  nature's  laws.  Try  to  estimate  what
the  effect  may  be  in  some  thousands  of  years  to  come,  and
who  shall  presume  to  limit  the  results  of  what  may  arise  ?  In
the  development  of  natural  inherent  capabilities,  why  may
not  those  wondrous  powers  developed  during  somnambulism
be  one  day  the  ordinary  perception  of  men,  whilst  others  may
appear,  but  of  which  as  yet  we  can  form  no  conception.

But  beyond  the  mere  question  of  hereditary  taint  to  good
or  evil,  of  the  sins  of  the  parents  falling  on  the  children,
these  idiots  present  an  example  of  the  fruth  of  phrenology.
Here  are  a  set  of  miserable  defective  brains,  with  mental
powers  corresponding.  In  each  head  we  may  observe,  notwith-


Phrenological  Society .


173


standing  their  singular  resemblance,  some  slight  difference
and  peculiar  development  accompanied  by  traits  of  character
confirming  in  every  point  the  observations  of  phrenologists  :  an
example  almost  sufficient  of  itself  to  set  any  question  of  the  truth
of  phrenology  at  rest,  and  by  which  we  observe  that  man  is  the
effect  of  his  organization  acted  upon  by  the  exciting  causes
which  surround  him,  his  mental  endowments  being  the  con¬
sequence  of  the  size,  quality,  and  proportions  of  the  brain  ;
each  organ  or  distinct  portion  of  which  having  a  special  ac¬
tion,  function,  or  property,  which,  combining  in  an  endless
variety  of  ways,  we  term  mind,  just  as  we  term  that  music
which  arises  in  the  vibrations  of  the  strings  of  an  instrument,
each  string  having  a  peculiar  sound  and  influence  in  every
combination  of  which  it  forms  a  part.  At  the  first  glance  at
these  miserable  beings  we  must  be  struck  by  the  unusual
smallness  of  the  heads,  and  the  expressions  which  convey  to
us  a  sense  of  their  imbecility.  Size,  through  all  nature,  is  a
measure  of  quantity,  and  quantity  of  power,  or  the  property
of  any  mass, — always  remembering  that  the  conditions  be
equal.  For  who  shall  doubt  but  that  two  ounces  of  gun¬
powder  will  give  twice  the  force  of  one  ?  And  following  the
same  law,  two  ounces  of  the  organ  of  Benevolence  will  give
double  the  amount  of  generosity ;  and  in  each  case  let  the
appropriate  stimulus  be  applied,  and  the  result  will  be  as
certain.  The  sight  of  suffering  to  the  benevolent  faculty  is
just  what  a  lucifer-match  is  to  the  gunpowder, — in  each  case
the  vigour  of  the  peculiar  property  of  a  certain  quantity  of
matter  will  be  called  into  action ;  and  there  is  no  more  inde¬
pendent  power  of  restraint  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other  ;
for  that  which  restrains  is  itself  restrained,  and  the  conse¬
quence  of  determined  laws.  A  certain  amount  of  damp  will
modify  the  action  of  the  powder,  and  so  will  it  affect  the
action  of  the  nervous  mass,  and  the  action  will  be  less  ener¬
getic,  the  coexistence  of  the  reasoning  faculties,  with  a  cer¬
tain  amount  of  the  selfish  passions,  will  likewise  restrain
the  action  of  the  benevolent  organ ;  but  nevertheless,  the
conditions  being  equal,  size  is  a  measure  of  power.  So  much
matter  of  a  given  quality  under  like  influences,  so  much
power  is  a  universal  law ;  and  together  with  the  fact  that
every  peculiar  and  distinct  manifestation  in  nature  is  the  pro¬
perty  of  a  particular  mass,  constitute  the  foundation  of  the
science  of  phrenology.

A  phrenologist  at  a  glance  at  the  head  may  discover  the
chief  points  in  any  character,  to  the  astonishment  of  those
who  are  ignorant  of  the  facts  from  which  he  draws  his  infer¬
ences.  In  strongly -marked  cases  there  can  be  little  chance  of


174


Phrenological  Society.


mistake  with  regard  to  the  general  disposition,  and  had  we
a  still  more  complete  knowledge,  our  predictions  of  course
would  be  more  certain  and  more  full ;  and  could  we  suppose
a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  brain  and  its  functions,  with  all
the  external  circumstances  given,  and  granting  a  sufficient
power  of  perception,  it  is  clear  that  we  could  not  only  predict
the  general  character,  but  every  particular  act  and  thought
from  childhood  to  the  grave,  and  thence  in  the  chain  of  cor¬
rect  and  rigid  induction  to  other  individuals  to  all  eternity ;
supposing  of  course  an  entire  knowledge  of  all  the  facts  to
start  with,  for  if  mind  is  the  function  of  brain,  and  this  be
influenced  by  external  circumstances,  and  from  point  to  point
within  itself,  of  course  there  is  the  same  discernible  relation
of  cause  and  effect  as  with  regard  to  any  other  phenomena.
But  the  ignorance  and  conceit  of  man  shrinks  from  this  truth,
it  so  levels  us  with  the  dust,  it  so  degrades,  it  makes  us  such
mere  machines,  say  they, — and  which  is  very  true,  beautifully
true,  ‘  But  I  am  not  answrerable  for  nature  ;  I  hold  no  power
to  change  the  laws  of  that  nature  of  which  I  am  but  a  part
and  parcel or  to  accommodate  each  after  his  own  parti¬
cular  fashion  of  thought,  because  that  amen  would  be  angels,
and  angels  would  be  gods.”  But  let  no  one  quarrel  with
phrenology, — the  mere  exposition  of  nature's  laws  which  are
eternal, — and  like  the  Brahmin  who  dashed  the  microscope
to  the  ground  which  shewed  him  life  in  the  water  which  he
drank,  turn  away  and  sicken  at  the  truth.

The  phrenologist  did  not  contrive  the  laws  of  nature ;  all
he  does  is  to  observe  and  note  down  his  observations  as  he
goes  along.  And  for  myself,  I  care  not  wrhat  is  true  ;  I  have
no  interest  or  desire  whatsoever  that  one  thing  should  be  true
in  preference  to  another ;  it  is  sufficient  for  me  in  all  humi¬
lity  and  good  faith  to  believe  that  all  is  working  the  best  that
it  can,  and  what  is  possibly  to  a  good  end;  and  so  to  rejoice  in
nature  as  I  find  her.  And  if  I  do  not  see  clearly,  I  shall  ever
be  most  grateful  to  any  one  who  will  correct  my  views,  and
put  me  in  the  right  road ;  for  we  are  all  liable  to  error,  and
let  none  presume  over  much,  but  support  every  opinion  which
he  maintains  with  facts  and  the  inferences  to  be  clearly  de¬
ducted  from  such :  and  this  brings  me  to  the  question  of  neces¬
sity,  and  in  which  is  entailed  the  doctrine  of  responsibility.

Now  if  phrenology  be  indeed  a  fact,  and  not  a  fallacy, — a
real  thing,  and  not  a  delusion, — why  it  follows  to  my  appre¬
hension  as  clearly  as  that  two  and  two  make  four,  that  man
is  a  creature  of  his  organization,  and  the  effect  of  this  under
any  stimulus  ;  and  could  not  be  otherwise  than  just  what  he
is,  a  creature  of  necessity,  and  consequently  neither  deserv-


Phrenological  Society.


175


mg  of  reward  or  of  punishment.  Nothing  can  be  more
clearly  demonstrated  than  this  :  and  who  could  doubt  it,  and
reflect  at  all,  but  for  that  blindness  arising  in  those  precon¬
ceived  ideas  which  they  have  imbibed  and  adopted  in  place  of
fact.  But  the  chief  source  of  error  lies  in  the  notion  that
there  is  a  line  of  distinction  between  sanity  and  insanity,  how¬
ever  difficult  to  define ;  and  secondly,  that  the  insane  are  not
answerable  for  what  they  do  because  they  could  not  help  it,  but
that  others  whom  we  call  sane  are  answerable  because  they
could  have  done  otherwise, — opinions  which  are  equally  un¬
sound  ;  for  each  are  alike  impelled  in  every  minute  point  accord¬
ing  to  their  condition, — the  creatures  of  their  particular  nature,
the  effect  of  their  organization  acted  upon  by  surrounding
circumstances.  We  are  impelled  by  motives,  moved  like  pup¬
pets  at  every  turn;  but  that  we  can  and  do  will  and  war
against  our  motives  is  most  true,  supposing  always  that  a
stronger  opposing  motive  exists  which  will  assuredly  over¬
power  the  weaker.*  Will  is  the  disposition  or  impulse  to  act
upon  the  stronger  motive,  and  the  stronger  must  and  will
predominate.  By  reflection  a  weaker  impulse  may  grow  into
a  stronger  motive  in  the  perception  of  its  value ;  but  there  is
nothing  in  nature  like  an  ungoverned  will,  a  distinct,  super¬
intending,  independent  power,  a  power  without  a  law,  which
would  be  a  clear  absurdity.  For  even  granting  the  existence
of  a  something,  a  spiritual  guiding  power,  a  will,  a  soul,  call
our  fancy  by  whatever  fancy  may  suggest,  do  we  escape  from
the  difficulty  ?  No ;  we  have  only  removed  it  a  step  farther
off  to  the  other  side  of  the  hedge ;  for  this  spirit,  this  will,  this
soul  must  have  a  fixed  nature  of  some  kind, — must  be  con¬
trolled  by  the  laws  of  its  constitution  to  act  in  one  way  in
preference  to  another, — must  act  by  motives, — must  be  the
effect  in  the  chain  of  consequences,  and  be  itself  impelled
though  it  were  the  moving  cause — the  antecedent  and  father
to  our  thoughts.  Still,  imagine  what  we  will,  we  cannot  es¬
cape  through  the  regions  of  the  most  ingenious  fancy,  from
the  very  principle  and  property  of  law  which  is  necessity,  and
what  is  a  necessary  consequence  cannot  do  otherwise  than  it


*  In  fact  will  is  nothing  more  than  the  active  impulse  accompanying  any
desire,  not  producing  or  directing,  but  induced  by  the  desire,  whether  that
desire  arise  in  a  simple  single  instinct  (if  such  is  possible)  be  the  result  fol¬
lowing  after  the  action  of  the  intellectual  powers  or  otherwise,  with  con¬
tending  motives  desire  opposes  desire,  will  opposes  will,  which  desire  and
will  may  exist  with  or  without  consciousness  which  I  shall  hereafter  show
to  be  a  distinct  faculty  having  a  special  organ  ;  but  I  am  aware  that  this
explanation  is  opposed  to  the  general  opinion  of  phrenologists,  Mr.  Combe
said  that  the  intellectual  faculties  “  are  subject  to  the  will,  or  rather  con¬
stitute  will  themselves,”  which  appears  to  me  to  be  absolute  nonsense.

VOL.  II.  N


176


Phrenological  Society.


does.  Is  totally  dependant,  a  thing  moved  and  not  moving  ?
not  a  first  cause,  but  a  result  ?  And  hence  a  man,  be  he
sane  or  insane,  an  idiot,  or  a  philosopher,  is  alike  a  creature
of  the  laws  and  circumstances  of  his  being  every  moment  of
his  existence,  in  every  thought  or  action,  and  is  as  much  the
creature  of  his  nature,  and  hence  as  irresponsible  (except  to
take  the  consequences  of  his  acts  in  the  chain  of  events)  as
the  poor  beetle  that  we  tread  upon,  or  the  clouds  which  float
before  the  wind  wheresoever  it  listeth.  We  follow  our  strong¬
est  impulse,  and  cannot  will  which  shall  be  the  stronger ;  we
may  do  that  which  we  will,  but  cannot  will  what  we  shall
do :  for  we  have  no  power  of  ourselves, — all  is  done  for  us,
and  not  by  us.

I  am  formed  of  different  parts,  each  having  its  special
power  or  property,  and  according  as  circumstances  (which  is
but  the  effect  of  one  mass  upon  another)  call  them  into  action
so  do  I  move,  and  act,  and  think,  and  the  whole  in  conjunc¬
tion  constitutes  the  pronoun  / — the  individual  /.  For  there
is  nothing  in  mental  phenomena  beyond  the  different  powers
which  are  the  properties  of  the  brain ;  therefore  by  saying
that  I  love,  or  I  choose,  I  simply  mean  that  there  exists  a
sense  or  power  to  perceive  certain  excitements  of  brain,
which  we  designate  love  and  choice ;  choice  being  the  power
to  follow  of  necessity  that  which  in  perceiving  becomes  the
stronger  impulse.  How  often  do  we  feel  that  we  stagger
between  two  or  more  contending  motives,  until  some  addi¬
tional  force  be  added  to  the  one,  or  the  power  of  habit  or  of
longer  endurance  in  the  other  prevails.  It  is  from  these  con¬
tending  motives  to  what  we  naturally  or  by  conventional
habit  of  thought  feel  to  be  right  or  wrong, — that  plants  in
all  religious  systems,  savage  or  civilized,  the  idea  of  a  good
and  evil  spirit  contending  within,  moving  us  to  virtue  or
vice,  whilst  at  other  times  we  turn  so  smoothly  on  the  pivot,
that  we  are  deceived  to  fancy  that  we  move  freely,  and  by
the  force  of  an  ungoverned  will,  a  force  itself  ungoverned
whilst  governing  all  the  rest,  a  creative  cause  within  ourselves;
even  a  man  in  a  passion  will  imagine  that  he  acts  and  feels
freely,  and  that  he  has  cause  for  anger,  and  a  will  to  revenge
an  insult,  whilst  all  others  acknowledge  the  impulse  to  be
involuntary.  Even  the  Calvinist  Predestinarian  deludes  him¬
self  with  the  impossible  notion  of  a  co-existing  freedom  of
action  and  responsibility,  and  many  ignorant  of  the  principles
of  that  faith  which  they  profess  to  hold  in  so  much  reverence
and  esteem,  deny  the  doctrine  of  philosophical  necessity  be¬
cause  it  is  so  shocking  to  deny  free  will.  Poor  silly  creatures,
whilst  their  own  religious  creed  maintains  the  same  prin-


Phrenological  Society.


177


eiple,  however  inconsistently  and  erroneously  explained.
But  what  we  deny  in  principle  we  all  adopt  in  practice ;  for
whilst  we  deny  necessity,  we  still  endeavour  by  every  possible
means  to  impel  from  evil  by  the  force  of  better  motives,  and
to  train  up  the  child  in  the  way  he  should  go,  that  when  he
is  old  he  should  not  depart  from  it  should  be  the  first  prin¬
ciple  of  education, — to  train  more  to  good  habits,  and  teach
less  of  the  absurd  and  useless  nonsense  which  is  now  the
custom  and  pride  of  the  learned  mis-educated  classes.

How  surely  did  Iago  calculate  the  effects  of  the  handker¬
chief  on  the  jealous  mind  of  Othello,  the  laws  of  mind  being
equally  fixed  and  certain  as  those  of  the  magnet ;  and  hence
the  power  to  elevate  the  race,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  fact
will  impel  us  to  the  act  to  strive  to  develope  the  good  which
is  in  man,  who  is  the  highest  in  the  scale,  though  not  so
always,  for  it  is  only  in  his  greatest  perfection,  in  full  deve¬
lopment,  and  under  high  excitement,  that  he  can  be  thus
considered.  A  new-born  baby  has  no  more  intelligence  than
a  blind  kitten, — but  the  frame  expands,  the  nerves  increase
in  size  and  power,  and  ripen  their  properties ;  and  mind,
which  is  the  function  of  these  nerves,  increases  in  energy
till  a  certain  period  when  it  again  diminishes  in  vigor ;  decay
commences,  and  second  childhood  or  mere  oblivion  follows,
to  end  in  gradual  extinction  ;  and  death,  which  is  the  sepa¬
ration  of  the  mass,  resolving  itself  again  into  simple  ele¬
ments  ready  for  new  combinations  in  that  eternal  change,
which  is  the  life  of  all  creation,  for  nothing  really  perishes,
nothing  is  lost,  but  only  reformed  into  similar  combinations,
producing  similar  effects,  and  so  following  on  in  the  chain,
but  of  the  beginning  and  end  we  know  nothing.

Yes  !  the  state  of  his  organization  is  the  man,  in  health
or  disease,  in  youth,  through  all  the  stages  of  life  until  sepa¬
ration  in  death ;  drunken  or  sober,  sleeping  or  waking,  in
laughter  or  in  tears,  it  is  the  same ;  or  when  under  the  in  ¬
fluence  of  mesmerism,  seeing  through  brick  walls,  reading
with  closed  eyes,  perceiving  distant  occurrences,  and  future
events,  proclaiming  the  secret  thoughts  of  men,  speaking
with  the  tongue  of  prophecy ;  still  under  these  circumstances
we  have  only  set  up  a  brighter  light  in  the  chambers  of  the
brain,  by  concentrated  power  in  particular  directions,  the
nerves  in  altered  condition  giving  forth  their  peculiar  pro¬
perties  which  are  the  effect  of  that  state  we  have  superin¬
duced.*  We  play  upon  the  head,  touching  or  pointing  to  the

*  And  how  essential  to  shew  this  to  be  the  case  to  arrest  the  progress  of
much  which  is  at  this  time  in  our  own  days,  so  close  at  hand,  going  on  and
supposed  to  be  miraculous  revelations,  by  which  many  weak  or  deluded

N  2


178


Phrenological  Society.


different  organs,  as  though  actually  playing  upon  the  keys  of
an  instrument,  and  each  note  gives  forth  its  appropriate
sound.  So  that  those  who  talk  about  mind,  which  is  but  a
term  like  the  I  of  individuality,  signifying  the  aggregate  of
the  different  impulses,  just  as  music  is  to  the  sounds  of  the
piano,  of  the  mind  using  the  brain  as  an  instrument  to
shew  forth  its  powers,  talk  only  so  much  nonsense,  since  it
no  more  does  this  than  the  music  uses  the  piano  to  produce
itself.  There  is  not  one  particle  more  of  independent  con¬
trol  or  free-will  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other ;  and  yet
we  find  this  folly,  this  absurdity  of  mind  the  action  or  func¬
tion  of  the  brain,  using  the  brain  to  produce  itself,  repeated
in  almost  every  book  of  mesmerism  and  phrenology,  and  for
this  reason  it  is  essential  to  bring  the  question  prominently
forward.  Some  imagine  that  during  a  dream,  and  the
effects  of  ultra  vision,  a  mind  or  soul  goes  wandering  over
the  earth  in  search  of  intelligence,  and  only  because  they
cannot  see  how  the  perception  exactly  comes  about,  and  a
something  which  means  nothing ;  a  spirit  is  always  a  conve¬
nient  cloak  for  ignorance  to  escape  through,  when  men  are
too  proud  to  receive  the  simple  fact  and  confess  their  igno¬
rance  ;  but  we  might  as  reasonably  imagine  that  we  go  off
to  the  sun,  and  bring  back  the  intelligence  of  light  in  place
of  the  light  coming  thence,  and  making  an  impression  on
our  organs ;  but  we  must  expect  such  follies  as  these  to  arise
in  the  first  entrance  from  darkness  to  light  and  from  igno¬
rance  to  knowledge,  and  go  on  persevering  steadily,  but
fearlessly,  to  the  end,  for  nothing  but  what  is  good  can  pos¬
sibly  come  out  of  what  is  true,  however  blind  we  may  be  to
the  results  at  first.  But  let  no  one  suppose  for  a  moment
that  because  I  assert  freely  what  I  conceive  to  be  true  in
nature,  that  I  wish  to  oppose  what  may  be  true  in  any
religion ;  I  have  no  desire  whatever  to  interfere  with  any
religious  persuasion  further  than  the  opinions  of  such  may
prove  to  be  founded  on  error,  and  consequently  require  to  be
modified  in  accordance  with  the  clear  dictates  of  our  present
enlightened  philosophy.  Religion  and  this  philosophy  of
spiritualism  have  failed  to  reform  the  world.  Let  us  see
what  may  now  be  accomplished  by  a  true  philosophy,  founded
on  the  physiology  of  man.  The  old  systems  have  mostly
been  intolerant,  inhuman,  and  inconsistent,  whilst  our  ma¬
terial  philosophy,  a  simple  exposition  of  the  laws  of  nature,
is  perfect  charity ;  of  course  any  idea  of  a  recreation  after


persons  are  induced  to  believe  the  mere  effect  of  an  exalted  condition  of  the
brain  induced  by  mesmerism — to  be  a  divine  inspiration.


Phrenological  Society.


179


death  must  rest  on  distinct  evidence  independent  of  philoso¬
phy.  The  supernatural  can  begin  only  where  nature  ends.*
But  I  am  told  that  all  this  fact,  this  philosophical  neces¬
sity,  may  be  very  fine  truth,  all  beautifully  true,  but  that  the
world  is  not  prepared  to  receive  it ;  it  would  be  dangerous  to
proclaim  it  openly  in  society ;  it  would  at  once  remove  the  re¬
straints  which  curb  the  excesses  of  evil  in  ordinary  minds.
What  blind  folly  is  this  !  What,  shall  we  hide  away  the
light  under  a  bushel?  (to  speak  after  the  manner  of  the
Scriptures)  and  seek  to  do  the  will  of  the  Father  on  earth  as
it  is  in  heaven,  by  denying  what  we  know  to  be  his  will  and
ways  ?  What,  shall  the  law  which  is  written  on  the  face  of
nature, — shall  the  great  Bible  of  natural  truth  be  cut  up  and
parcelled  out  by  the  blind  conceit  and  bigotry  of  a  few  de¬
luded  short-sighted  mortals  ?  But  is  not  this,  alas  !  the  same
spirit  which  has  built  up  a  great  blank  wall  before  the  light
of  truth  in  all  ages  ? — the  same  spirit  which  has  kindled  the
fire  at  the  stake,  which  has  kept  the  world  in  ignorance  and
in  sin,  and  in  misery  through  countless  ages  :  and  the  unfor¬
tunate  are  blamed  for  those  errors  which  are  but  the  sins  of
that  false  and  blind  spirit  of  expediency  which  has  prevailed,
and  the  guilt  and  folly  of  making  men  answerable  for  nature,
by  which  the  rising  generation  is  trained  up  in  hypocrisy,
believing  one  thing  and  proclaiming  another.  What,  shall
we  cover  over  the  shining  light  of  heavenly  truth  with  a
flimsy  cloak  of  expediency?  Are  not  the  evils  of  ignorance
sufficiently  apparent  that  we  still  imagine  now  in  these  far-
seeing  days,  when  all  are  on  the  quick  march  of  knowledge,
that  it  is  good  to  be  silent,  and  send  forth  our  half-truths
into  the  opposing  stream  ? — those  turbid  waters  of  corrupt
thought,  but  from  which  the  clear  stream  is  to  be  dammed  out.
Is  this  the  way  to  regenerate  mankind  ?  Is  this  the  dicta¬
tion  of  enlightened  conscience  ?  Is  this  all  that  Christianity
has  taught  us  ?  Is  this  our  faith  and  hope  and  trust  ?  Is
this  to  try  all  things,  and  hold  fast  that  which  is  good  ?  No ;
let  the  truth  shine  out  upon  the  world  like  a  strange  meteor
light  to  confound  the  ignorant  and  confuse  the  wise  !  But
the  mist  will  soon  pass  away,  and  this  strange  light  shall  ap¬
pear  no  other  than  the  glorious  sun  seen  through  the  dis¬
coloured  medium  of  a  confused  sense.  What,  can  there  be  a
question  as  to  the  value  of  knowledge,  of  fact  and  nature's

*  Science  has  purified  religion  of  much  that  was  most  disgusting  and  de¬
grading,  whilst  religion  as  it  has  yet  existed  has  done  nothing  in  return  for
science  but  to  hinder  and  to  persecute ;  the  creeds  of  religions  are  the  cause
of  intolerance,  persecution,  and  hypocrisy,  whilst  science  sets  men  free
from  bondage — intelligent,  virtuous  and  happy.


180


Phrenological  Society.


laws, — shall  men  be  content  with  any  pious  fraud,  and  turn
away  from  truth  acknowledging  it  to  be  such  ?  And  if  what
is  asserted  be  not  truth,  the  simplest  way  to  settle  the  ques¬
tion  will  be  to  disprove  it.  But  shall  men  because  they  have
been  accustomed  to  falsehood,  be  allowed  to  interfere  with
the  promulgation  of  truth  ?  Shall  the  cripple  who  crawls
along  through  life  on  crutches,  on  account  of  the  ignorance
existing  in  his  day,  prevent  the  advance  of  intelligence,  and
a  future  generation  being  able  to  walk  upright  and  strong
without  any  such  helps  at  all  ?  Shall  we  not  advocate  tem¬
perance,  because  many  will  find  it  uncomfortable  at  first  to
leave  off  drinking,  and  some  may  even  be  destroyed  in  the
attempt  ?  For  it  is  true  that  in  the  progress  of  knowledge
many  evils  arise.  The  emancipation  of  the  slaves  of  Africa
was  not  without  its  immediate  evil  consequences :  and  how
much  injury  did  the  railway  entail  upon  those  established  on
the  old  roads  ?  And  so  may  the  feelings  of  many,  being
tight-laced  and  established  in  the  errors  of  ignorance  and
priestcraft,  be  sorely  vexed  at  the  introduction  of  novel  and
more  wholesome  views.  But  shall  we  keep  back  the  truth,
shall  we  desist  on  this  account,  and  hide  away  the  light  which
is  to  reform  the  world  ?  Bather  is  this  not  an  additional
motive  to  our  exertions,  if  the  world  is  so  bad  that  it  pre¬
fers  to  live  on  in  a  lie  than  admit  the  truth,  and  natural
truth  cannot  interfere  with  any  miraculous  revelation  and
true  faith,  for  such  faith  and  revelation  can  only  begin  where
science  ends.  So  that  I  speak  at  all  times  freely  of  nature
as  I  find  her,  not  caring  who  I  offend,  so  that  I  offend  not
my  own  conscience,  which  is  of  more  consequence  to  me
than  the  world's  opinion.  I  shall  never  therefore  endeavour
to  make  the  facts  of  natural  science  fit  in  with  any  religious
opinion,  for  if  those  opinions  are  opposed  to  fact  and  to
reason,  it  is  very  clear  to  see  which  must  give  way ;  for  the
interpretations  of  men  are  fallible  and  full  of  contradiction,
but  the  laws  of  nature  are  eternal.  But  none  are  so  easily
offended  as  those  who  are  not  very  sure  of  their  own  position,
who  hold  certain  opinions  from  a  blind  impulse,  and  have  but
little  reason  for  that  which  they  believe,  and  so  tenaciously
adhere  to ;  which  is  the  case  with  nine  out  of  every  ten,  with
ninety-nine  perhaps  out  of  every  hundred.  But  truth  is  pow¬
erful  and  will  prevail,  though  at  first  we  may  regard  it  as  no
other  than  the  serpent  which  is  to  bruise  our  heel ;  and  igno¬
rant  men  will  oppose  and  ridicule,  and  bluster  about  on  all
sides,  ready  to  accuse  and  vilify  on  every  occasion,  as  though
you  were  about  to  deprive  them  in  a  moment  of  all  that  they
have  held  most  dear, — health,  wealth,  love,  life,  and  that  hope


Phrenological  Society.


181


of  a  future  existence,  which  they  have  fixed  to  a  blind  opinion  ;
and  they  go  on  in  this  insane  and  idiot  fashion  to  the  end,
nor  ever  appeal  to  fact,  or  investigate  in  the  spirit  of  fair  and
free  enquiry.  For  how  few  there  are,  even  among  the  best
spirits  of  reform,  who  will  calmly  rest  their  thoughts  on
science,  and  restrain  their  pregnant  fancy  within  the  strict
bounds  of  reason !  How  few  indeed  with  sufficient  love  of
knowledge  or  intellect  to  appreciate  the  great  ends  of  science,
to  listen  with  interest  to  the  dry  details  of  facts  in  the  pa¬
tient,  careful,  and  sober  investigation  through  all  the  slow
and  vacillating  steps  in  the  progress  of  truth.  For  after  years
of  labour,  and  after  facts  have  accumulated  upon  facts,  it
often  becomes  a  most  laborious  matter  to  sift  out  the  corn
from  the  chaff*,  and  to  shew  the  simple  bearing  of  any  true
position.  But  there  are  some  matters  which  are  plain  enough;
and  now  that  we  have  brought  to  our  aid  the  power  of  animal
magnetism,  how  much  more  interesting  is  the  enquiry  into
the  laws  of  man’s  nature  !  What  an  opening  has  been  dis¬
covered  through  the  thick  walls  of  darkness  which  surrounded
us  on  every  side,  with  regard  to  that  strange  anomaly — man  !
What  a  blaze  of  light  comes  pouring  down  upon  us  all  at
once !  Mystery  and  confusion  break  away  on  every  side,
whilst  wonder  follows  upon  wonder  in  quick  succession;  so
that  many  will  be  led  away  by  the  delusion  of  vain  specula¬
tion — from  false  induction  arising  from  preconceived  notions,
or  imperfect  enquiry.  Whilst  the  ignorant  deny  the  fact,  the
timid  cry  danger,  and  a  ranting  bigot  who  should  guide  only
to  truth,  enslaves  the  trembling  “  spirits”  of  his  deluded
flock,  exclaims  blasphemy,  and  talks  of  Satanic  agency  and
the  lying  wonders  of  these  latter  days.  But  the  wise  man
meditates  aside,  indifferent  to  all  the  noise  and  cant  of  igno¬
rance  and  hypocrisy,  steadily  pursuing  his  course,  loving
truth  better  than  the  world’s  opinion  ;  and  he  will  only  smile
at  the  necessary  effects  of  imperfect  knowledge,  and  endea¬
vour  to  give  instruction  to  all.  And  oh !  it  is  a  glorious  thing
to  contemplate  the  progress  of  all  the  wondrous  truths  of
phrenology  and  of  mesmerism,  fraught  as  they  are  with  such
infinite  benefits  to  society.  And  what  higher  privilege  should
an  honest  man  desire  than  to  press  forward  in  the  great
cause  of  truth, — of  that  which  is  and  must  ever  be  the  foun¬
dation  of  all  that  is  truly  good  and  virtuous,  and  most
noble !

And  necessity  is  the  first  law  of  nature ;  it  is  the  law  of
laws,  the  truth  of  truths,  the  reason  of  reasons ;  that  prin¬
ciple  on  which  true  morality,  religion,  and  intellect  are
founded.  But  grasp  this  simple,  logical,  abstract  truth  firmly


182


Phrenological  Society.


in  your  intellect, — see  it  clearly,  build  it  well  into  your  un¬
derstanding,  and  we  shall  have  no  more  war,  no  more  reli¬
gious  disputations,  no  more  punishments ;  but  all  offenders
will  henceforth  be  treated  as  moral  patients  to  the  amount  of
their  imperfections — be  restrained  from  evil  to  submit  accord¬
ingly  to  the  process  of  reform.  Our  hearts  will  become  soft¬
ened,  in  charity  and  with  humbled  pride  confess  our  depend-
ance,  and  seek  to  know  the  laws  which  regulate  and  controul
our  nature,  and  impel  us  to  good  or  evil,  happiness  or  misery,
according  as  we  are  induced  to  obey  them.  The  nurse  shall
no  longer  beat  the  child  in  anger,  and,  more  irrational  still,
teach  the  child  to  beat  the  table  against  which  it  has  fallen ;
and  the  child  grow  up  trained  in  hatred,  malice,  and  revenge,
to  persecute  all  who  may  give  it  the  least  offence.  And
trained  in  such  absurdity,  how  is  it  possible  that  we  shall  ra¬
tionally  love  our  neighbours  as  ourselves,  or  curb  the  excesses
of  temper  ?  But  it  was  equally  rational  to  feel  anger  towards
the  table  on  account  of  its  sharp  angles,  as  against  any  liv¬
ing  creatures  on  account  of  their  peculiar  nature,  opinions,
thoughts,  or  conduct.  But  I  hear  a  hundred  voices  exclaim
at  once,  ‘  Then  if  I  am  not  answerable  and  cannot  help  what
I  do,  if  I  commit  murder,  or  in  any  way  invade  your  rights,
I  am  not  to  be  punished,  I  am  to  be  pitied  and  forgiven/  I
answer,  Most  assuredly  you  are.  The  word  punishment  should
be  blotted  out  from  the  language,  or  its  signification  be  en¬
tirely  changed.  You  are  to  be  forgiven,  you  are  to  be  pitied  ;
and  in  all  love  and  charity,  if  your  nature  is  so  bad  as  to
desire  and  perpetrate  what  interferes  with  the  rights  and  hap¬
piness  of  others,  or  endangers  society,  you  must  for  your  own
sake,  as  well  as  for  society,  be  restrained  as  though  you  were
afflicted  with  any  other  dangerous  disease,  and  a  cure  must
be  attempted :  but  all  should  be  done  in  kindness  and  hu¬
manity.  No,  you  could  not  help  what  you  did ;  but  for  your
own  sake,  and  for  the  sake  of  others,  you  must  submit  to  be
cured.  If  you  are  a  drunkard,  exciting  drink  shall  be  kept
from  you.  Are  you  destructive,  or  a  thief? — then  must  you
be  restrained  as  any  other  insane  being,  and  be  forced  to  un¬
dergo  medical  and  moral  treatment  to  impress  and  alter  your
condition  as  far  as  possible,  and  to  force  you  into  a  better
shape  and  temper.  And  love  and  justice  can  desire  no  other
course  to  be  adopted ;  for  to  punish  as  punishment,  or  to  hang
offenders,  is  as  cruel  as  it  is  ineffectual.  The  more  you  use
the  lower  feelings  and  preach  eternal  and  infernal  torture,  the
more  harsh  the  treatment  towards  offenders,  the  more  you
hold  out  an  example  of  evil  and  supply  the  lowest  motives  to
those  who  are  criminally  disposed :  you  induce  crime,  you


Phrenological  Society.


183


brutalize  society,  you  degrade  human  nature,  and  outrage
common  sense  and  common  humanity.  Is  it  not  far  prefer¬
able  to  train  and  educate  living  beings  from  their  earliest  in¬
fancy  to  good  habits,  so  that  they  may  become  a  law  unto
themselves,  than  to  leave  them  as  they  are  at  present  with  a
vague  notion  about  free-will,  free-grace,  and  responsibility ;
to  be  born  in  ignorance  and  in  sin,  to  inherit  the  imperfec¬
tions  of  their  parents ;  and  then  left  ill-trained  to  imbibe  all
kinds  of  false  notions  and  evil  dispositions,  and  these  to  be
checked  only  by  cruel  and  harsh  laws,  and  the  fears  arising
from  yet  more  inhuman  dogmas  ?  Will  any  criminal  code,
enforced  by  a  whole  legion  of  police,  raise  these  poor  idiot
creatures  one  step  from  their  degraded  position  ?  Will  any  reli¬
gious  persuasion  elevate  their  “  souls”  to  feel  and  to  practise
all  the  virtues  of  superior  brains  ?  No  !  they  are  born  to  lie
and  to  thieve,  as  a  warning  to  the  world ;  and  are  they  to  be
considered  answerable  for  what  nature  made  them,  as  though
they  had  a  power  of  restraint,  and  the  good  disposition  of  a
Howard  or  a  Washington  ?  Could  the  Howard  or  the  Wash¬
ington  be  otherwise  than  what  they  were — noble  and  gen¬
erous  ?  They  were  creatures  of  their  organization,  just  as  we
clearly  perceive  that  these  poor  creatures  were  of  theirs  ;  and
the  former  could  no  more  descend  to  what  these  imperfect
idiot  beings  are,  than  these  rise  to  be  creatures  of  a  superior
state.

It  is  quite  shocking  to  hear  the  opinions  of  society  on  the
punishment  of  criminals.  I  have  heard  a  whole  party  cry
out  at  once,  “  He  should  be  hanged  twice ;  nothing  is  bad
enough  for  him.”  And  my  heart  has  grown  sick  within  me  ;
and  I  have  said,  the  time  will  come  when  this  shall  not  be,
and  I  will  work  on  in  the  cause  ;  and  even  though  I  meet
with  persecution  for  the  truth's  sake,  shall  I  not  smile,  and
push  on  again  regardless  of  all  opposition,  and  those  silly  ad¬
monitions  of  mistaken  friends  who  know  not  what  they  do.
Here  is  a  set  of  miserable  creatures,  the  consequence  of
the  low  and  vitiated  condition  of  the  parents;  creatures
hardly  one  step  in  advance  from  the  brutes,  and  in  some  re¬
spects  inferior ;  and  where  is  the  choice,  the  determining  will,
the  governing  principle,  the  freedom,  the  responsibility  in  this
case?  Where  does  the  influence  of  spirit  begin,  and  the  effects
of  matter  and  its  properties  end  ?  Who  has  ever  shown  the
limits  and  precise  sphere  of  action  of  this  spirit  power,  and
how  it  can  be  recognized  ?  Is  there  any  one  sense  or  power
which  we  do  not  trace  to  natural  causes  inherent  in  the  con¬
stitution  of  the  individual — the  function  of  his  organism
directed  to  good  or  to  evil  by  the  education  and  training  of


184


Phrenological  Society.


surrounding  influences — one  being  a  law  unto  himself,  his
power  to  good  so  great,  that  he  rises  without  an  effort  supe¬
rior  to  the  herd  about  him,  whilst  another  is  the  mere  crea¬
ture  of  circumstance  and  imitation,  and  a  third  the  veriest
imbecile,  a  stock,  a  stone,  a  worse  than  senseless  thing,  ac¬
cording  as  he  is  formed,  and  shall  all  this  exist  ?  The  fact
before  us  every  hour  of  our  existence,  and  yet  be  lost  in  that
fondness  for  ease,  that  no  one  is  to  be  disturbed  in  their  con¬
victions.  Why,  how  can  you  possibly  give  health  without
first  rooting  out  the  disease,  and  seldom  without  giving  pain ;
but  at  least  let  it  be  considered  the  duty  of  every  philosopher,
moralist,  and  divine  to  enquire  fully  into  this  question  of
such  paramount  importance  and  surpassing  interest, — to  meet
the  evidence  freely  and  dispassionately,  and  so  to  dispose  of
it  in  all  sincerity,  to  the  best  of  their  judgment ;  and  may
we  all  be  found  striving  honestly  and  earnestly  in  this  en¬
quiry,  approaching  the  subject  with  all  the  simplicity  of  a
child  willing  to  be  instructed,  and  loving  truth  better  than
our  own  opinions,  else  will  our  love  be  impure  and  only  the
prostitute  of  love.  And  what  power  and  delight  there  is  in
the  knowledge  of  human  nature  founded  on  the  true  princi¬
ples  of  inductive  philosophy  in  experiment  and  observation,
stringing  fact  to  fact  in  the  endless  chain  of  causation,  admit¬
ting  nothing  without  the  clearest  evidence ;  and  as  there  is
no  child  without  a  parent  from  which  it  has  proceeded,  so
there  is  no  effect  without  a  cause,  and  this  is  what  we  mean
by  natural  law.  Causation  necessarily  implies  necessity,  and
necessity,  security,  confidence,  faith,  hope,  and  charity ;  and
if  I  may  be  permitted  to  allude  to  my  own  feelings,  I  can
joyfully  assert  that  since  I  have  become  fully  impressed  with
this  philosophy,  the  clouds  seem  to  be  removed  from  the  sky,
and  I  breathe  only  fresh  air ;  I  have  no  fear  of  death,  or
anxiety  about  life,  or  the  future ;  this  I  leave  to  Providence ;
whatever  be  my  fate  I  am  resigned.  I  can  have  no  idea  of
praiseworthiness  nor  of  ill  feeling  towards  any ;  others  may
be  offensive,  but  at  least  I  will  not  offend  myself  by  any
anger  or  ill  will ;  but  pity  all,  and  striving  to  the  love  of  ex¬
cellence  rather  than  to  excel,  look  to  do  the  little  good  I  am
able,  and  seek  delight  to  watch  the  world  advance  in  intelli¬
gence  and  comfort,  every  day  adding  something  to  its  store
of  knowledge,  which  is  the  only  foundation  of  wisdom,  and
wisdom  the  only  safe  road  to  happiness, — so  that  I  may  sing
the  song  of  old  Milton  from  my  heart,  who  declared  that
“  Philosophy  is  not  harsh  and  crabbed  as  dull  fools  suppose,
but  musical  as  Apollons  lute,  and  a  perpetual  feast  of  nec-
tared  sweets  where  no  crude  surfeit  reigns.”  And  be  it  ever


Phrenological  Society.


185


remembered  that  every  truth  illustrated  or  made  known  is  a
valuable  acquisition  to  society,  and  cannot  possibly  hurt  or
obstruct  the  good  effect  of  any  other  truth  whatsoever,  but
must  in  the  end  conduce  to  the  welfare  of  man  and  to  the
happiness  of  all ;  and  the  philosophy  of  man  is  the  most  im¬
portant  and  that  which  should  first  engage  our  attention,
that  we  may  know  the  nature  of  that  which  we  would  govern,
and  the  bias  of  our  nature  by  which  we  are  likely  to  be  de¬
luded  from  the  truth.

But  to  facts  we  must  appeal,  nor  ever  fear  of  pushing  the
enquiry  too  far,  let  our  foolish  notions  of  evil  consequences
be  what  they  may.  Truth  and  nature  take  care  of  them¬
selves,  and  will  not  be  caught  tripping ;  but  ignorance  ever
cries  (  Danger/  like  the  coward  child  in  the  dark.  When  gas¬
light  was  first  introduced,  people  imagined  the  flag-stones
would  be  blown  up  in  their  faces  as  they  walked  along.  If
the  facts  of  phrenology  and  of  mesmerism  are  false  and  not
facts,  then  it  is  our  duty  to  show  them  to  be  such;  but  if  they
shall  be  found  to  be  true,  we  are  bound  by  every  worthy
principle  in  our  nature  to  receive  them  and  to  apply  them.
And  true  they  are ;  and  it  is  in  vain  that  old  prejudices  cling
about  us,  like  the  ivy  which  saps  away  the  strength  of  the
building  and  yet  supports  the  ruin.  Error,  when  clearly  dis¬
covered,  cannot  long  face  the  light  of  truth ;  and  it  is  the
solemn  duty  of  all,  without  exception,  to  assure  themselves
by  every  means  in  their  power  that  they  hold  no  opinion
which  does  not  clearly  represent  fact,  being  well  advised  of
the  peculiar  predominating  feelings  which  are  likely  to  have
discolored  their  judgment,  and  how  they  have  been  influenced
by  the  various  circumstances  of  their  birth  and  position,
reading  and  instruction,  to  adopt  certain  opinions  in  prefer¬
ence  to  others ;  and  until  the  truth  be  confirmed  to  all,  let
us  each,  both  in  justice  to  ourselves  and  others,  maintain  with
all  the  charity  at  our  disposal,  the  rights  of  conscience  and
that  entire  liberty  of  thought  and  speech  so  essential  to  the
growth  of  pure  and  uncontaminated  impressions  of  fact,  till
the  spirit  of  perfect  tolerance  reigns  throughout,  and  that
cruel,  bigot,  sectarian,  proselyting,  conceited  spirit  of  dog¬
matism  is  at  an  end.  And  no  longer  let  it  be  said,  as  so
beautifully  expressed  by  St.  Augustine  in  his  Confessions,  that
“  men  go  abroad  to  admire  the  height  of  mountains,  and
mighty  billows  of  the  sea,  the  broad  tides  of  rivers,  the  com¬
pass  of  the  ocean,  and  the  circuits  of  the  stars,  and  pass
themselves  by,” — to  perish  for  lack  of  knowledge.


(  186  )


IV.  On  the  situation  of  the  Organ  of  Amativeness.

By  Herbert  Spencer.

Considerable  doubt  has  long  been  entertained  by  phrenolo¬
gists  respecting  the  real  function  of  the  cerebellum.  Amongst
other  arguments  that  militate  against  the  commonly  received
opinion  that  it  is  the  organ  of  Amativeness,  are  these : —

1.  It  has  been  in  several  cases  the  seat  of  extensive
lesions,  without  there  being  any  corresponding  disorder  of  its
supposed  function.  We  have  one  instance  on  record  where
disorganization  had  been  so  complete,  as  to  transform  this
portion  of  the  brain  into  a  mere  sack  of  fluid,  and  yet  there
was  no  apparent  diminution  of  the  propensity  assigned  to  it.

2.  An  a  priori  view  of  the  case  is  unfavourable  to  the
supposition  that  the  sexual  instinct  is  thus  located.  Any
mental  power  resident  in  a  part  of  the  brain  mechanically  se¬
parate  from  that  occupied  by  the  others,  might  be  fairly  as¬
sumed  to  be  generically  distinct  from  them.  If  therefore  the
cerebellum  be  the  organ  of  Amativeness,  it  must  be  presumed
that  this  passion  is  not  only  specifically  different  from  all  the
rest,  but  that  it  is  absolutely  of  another  genus.  There  ap¬
pears  however  to  be  quite  as  strong  a  contrast  between  Gus-
tativeness  and  Conscientiousness,  as  between  Amativeness  and
Adhesiveness;  and  yet  Gustativeness  and  Conscientiousness
are  situated  in  the  same  cerebral  mass.

3.  The  theory  seems  to  be  irreconcilable  with  the  pheno¬
mena  of  communicated  action.  Phrenologists  have  taught  that
any  portion  of  the  brain  when  in  a  state  of  activity  tends  to
arouse  the  organs  located  in  its  neighbourhood,  and  amongst
other  illustrations  it  is  shewn  that  excited  Amativeness  fre¬
quently  awakens  the  adjacent  propensities.  Mr.  Sydney
Smith  quotes  the  saying —

Nippin’  and  scar-tin’  is  Scots’  folks  wooin,’

as  bearing  evidence  of  the  activity  of  Destructiveness  thus
induced,  and  various  examples  are  given  where  other  animal
propensities  have  been  similarly  influenced.  But  to  render
such  an  explanation  consistent,  it  is  necessary  that  the  organs
influenced  by  this  diffusion  of  excitement  should  form  part  of
the  same  cerebral  mass  with  the  one  stimulating  them,  seeing
that  the  effect  in  question  is  considered  as  arising  from  the
increased  circulation  in  the  acting  organ,  spreading  itself
through  the  anastomosing  blood-vessels  into  the  neighbour¬
ing  parts  of  the  brain.  How  then  can  it  happen  that  an  ex¬
cited  cerebellum  should  awaken  the  adjacent  parts  of  the


The  situation  of  the  Organ  of  Amativeness.


187


cerebrum,  when  the  two  are  separated  from  each  other  by  the
tentorium ,  and  a  double  thickness  of  the  pia  mater  and  arach¬
noid  membranes  ?

4.  It  is  well  known  that  the  cerebellum  in  some  way  or
other  presides  over  the  action  of  the  muscles,  although  the
specific  nature  of  its  influence  has  not  as  yet  been  satisfacto¬
rily  determined.  To  suppose  that  at  the  same  time  that  it
exercises  this  control  over  the  motive  powers  of  the  body,  it
likewise  serves  as  the  seat  of  a  mental  emotion  such  as  that
attributed  to  it,  is  subversive  of  one  of  the  essential  doc¬
trines  of  phrenology.  It  is  a  fundamental  axiom  of  the
science  that  one  organ  can  have  but  one  function,  and  not
only  do  the  observations  of  phrenologists  go  to  prove  this,
but  every  fresh  investigation  into  the  physiology  of  the  nerv¬
ous  system  tends  still  more  clearly  to  demonstrate  the  univer¬
sality  of  the  principle.  If  however  it  be  admitted  that  the
sexual  impulse,  and  the  superintendence  of  muscular  motion
may  co-exist  in  the  same  portion  of  brain — that  is,  if  it  be
conceded  that  one  organ  can  have  two  functions — then  it
must  also  be  conceded  that  it  can  have  three,  or  four,  or  any
greater  number,  and  thence  we  may  be  gradually  led  to  the
admission  of  the  unphilosophical  dogma,  that  “  the  brain  is  a
unit.”

In  answer  to  these  several  objections  it  will  perhaps  be
urged,  that  the  question  must  be  ultimately  determined  by
observation;  and  that  as  the  majority  of  known  facts  counte¬
nance  the  generally  acknowledged  doctrine,  that  doctrine
must  be  received  notwithstanding  the  apparent  inconsistencies
involved.  It  is  replied,  that  an  explanation  may  be  given,
which,  at  the  same  time  that  it  avoids  the  above-mentioned
discrepancies,  is  fully  as  much  in  accordance  with  the  results
of  experience  as  the  old  one.  The  theory  alluded  to,  as  ful¬
filling  these  conditions,  is  this, — that  the  amative  propensity
is  located  in  those  convolutions  of  the  cerebrum  that  are  situ¬
ated  upon  the  under  side  of  its  posterior  lobe,  next  in  contact
with  the  cerebellum.

The  reader  will  at  once  see,  that  such  an  arrangement
must  give  rise  to  external  appearances  very  similar  to  those
which  are  supposed  to  favour  the  commonly  received  'opinion.
For,  assuming  the  organ  of  Amativeness  to  be  large,  that  is,
assuming  the  under  side  of  the  cerebrum  to  be  unusually
convex,  (or  it  should  perhaps  be  said,  less  than  usually  con¬
cave),  it  must  follow  that  the  cerebellum  will,  in  relation  to
the  rest  of  the  brain,  be  depressed  below  its  ordinary  position,
thus  occasioning  that  thickness  of  neck  commonly  observed
in  such  cases.  A  careful  examination  will,  it  is  believed,  shew


188


The  situation  of  the  Organ  of  Amativeness.


that  the  appearance  in  question  does  result,  not  from  the
greater  magnitude  of  the  cerebellum,  but  from  the  inferiority
of  its  position.  My  own  observations  have  hitherto  clearly
indicated  this.  In  all  cases  of  large  Amativeness  that  I  have
met  with,  the  horizontal  depression  that  traverses  the  occiput
from  ear  to  ear,  coinciding  with  the  lateral  space  that  inter¬
venes  between  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum,  has  been  much
more  marked  than  common ,  giving  to  the  hand  an  unusually
distinct  impression  of  the  separateness  of  the  two  internal
masses.  This  is  evidently  the  appearance  that  would  result
were  the  organ  situated  as  here  supposed,  seeing  that  any  in¬
crease  in  the  convexity  of  the  under  side  of  the  cerebrum
must  necessarily  he  accompanied  by  an  enlargement  of  the
lateral  space  between  it  and  the  cerebellum.

It  will  scarcely  be  expected  that  any  generally  known  ex¬
amples  can  be  cited  in  support  of  this  view,  because  the
structural  peculiarity  here  pointed  out  as  the  index  of  large
Amativeness  has  not  been  phrenologically  observed.  There
is  however  one  illustration  open  to  general  reference.  I  al¬
lude  to  the  case  of  Mr.  B.,  related  in  the  8th  volume  of  the
Phrenological  Journal.  The  character  deduced  from  the  de¬
velopment  of  this  gentleman  is  admitted  by  himself  to  be  in
the  main  remarkablv  correct,  but  he  considers  it  in  one  re-
spect  erroneous.  It  was  predicated  from  his  large  cerebellum
that  he  possessed  strong  amatory  feelings ; — this  he  denies.
In  the  endeavour  to  account  for  the  disagreement,  it  is  how¬
ever  remarked  that  the  cerebellum  might  not  perhaps  be  so
large  as  it  at  first  sight  appeared,  for  that  though  broad  it
was  not  deep.  Viewing  this  in  connexion  with  the  preceding
remarks,  it  appears  probable  that  the  cerebellum  was  situated
high  up  in  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  brain ; — that  is,  the
under  side  of  the  cerebrum  was  not  more  than  usually  con¬
vex  ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  supposed  organ  of  Amativeness
was  not  large.  An  accompanying  diagram  of  the  head  quite
bears  out  this  view.

The  proposed  theory,  then,  avoids  the  several  objections
to  which  the  old  one  is  liable, — necessarily  infers  external
appearances  similar  to  those  involved  by  it, — and  will,  it  is
believed,  be  ultimately  found  to  accord  still  more  satisfactorily
with  the  results  of  observation.

Derby ,  7th  June,  1844.


It  has  always  been  considered  that  Gall’s  facts  shewing  the  feeling  of
sexual  love  to  be  seated  in  the  cerebellum  are  more  numerous  and  diversi¬
fied  than  his  proofs  of  the  situation  of  any  other  cerebral  organ,  and  true
cerebral  physiologists  have  all  regarded  the  cerebellum  as  the  organ  of  the


The  situation  of  the  Organ  of  Amativeness .


189


sexual  feeling,  though  many  have  supposed  with  other  writers,  old  and
recent,  that  it  is  also  greatly  concerned  with  sensation  and  motion.  Even
Gall  says,  “The  cerebellum  may  participate  in  the  vital  function  of  the
medulla  oblongata  and  spinalis,  may  give  rise  to  disturbed  motion  when
injured,  and  yet  have  its  own  particular  animal  function/’  (8vo.,  vol.  iii.,
p.  385.)  Mesmeric  excitement  and  depression  of  the  corresponding  portion
of  the  head  in  the  experiments  of  Mr.  Atkinson,  repeated  by  others,  have
produced  and  removed  common  sensation  and  muscular  power  at  pleasure.
From  his  experiments  this  gentleman  regards  voluntary  motion  to  be  con¬
nected  with  the  outer  portions  of  the  cerebellum,  sensation  with  the  more
central,  and  the  sexual  feeling  with  the  central.

1.  It  may  be  objected  to  Mr.  Spencer’s  first  argument,  that  the  cerebrum
has  often  been  extensively  injured  without  evident  lesion  of  the  function  of
the  part  injured — sufficient  remaining  for  a  high  degree  of  function  ;  just  as
very  diseased  stomachs  will  sometimes  digest  large  quantities  of  food,  and
very  diseased  livers  secrete  an  apparently  due  quantity  of  bile.  The  case
of  totally  destroyed  cerebellum  with  sexual  desire  avails  nothing.  “The
sac  of  fluid  was  cerebellum  so  reduced  by  continued  inflammatory  irritation
as  to  resemble  a  gelatinous  membrane.  During  this  process  there  might
have  been  sexual  irritation  enough  before  the  cerebellum  was  liquified.”
(See  Mr.  Combe’s  Translation  of  Gall  on  the  Function  of  the  Cerebellum ,  <Sfc.
4*c.,  p.  171.)  Again  the  same  argument  would  tell  against  the  doctrine  of
the  cerebellum  presiding  over  the  action  of  muscles  ;  for  the  patient  to  the
last  had  voluntary  motion  sufficient  for  her  wants  and  even  for  progression.
The  tender  Dr.  Magendie  declares  he  has  over  and  over  again  seen  animals
perform  very  regular  movements  after  he  had  disburthened  them  of  the
whole  of  their  cerebellum,  (PrUis  de  Physiologie ,  vol.  i.,  p.  408);  and
after  having  robbed  hedgehogs  and  guinea-pigs  of  their  whole  brains — cere¬
brum  and  cerebellum,  and  kindly  held  a  bottle  of  aromatic  vinegar  to  their
nostrils,  they  actually  rubbed  their  little  noses  with  their  paws.

2,  3.  Amativeness  and  Adhesiveness  have  no  necessary  affinity.  In  many
animals  the  former  is  never  associated  with  the  latter  :  even  in  man  either  of
these  may  be  excited  in  the  highest  degree  without  any  excitement  of  the  other.
But  Amativeness  produces  and  requires  the  most  exquisite  excitement  of  the
sense  of  common  feeling,  and  an  almost  epileptic  excitement  of  the  volun¬
tary  muscles.  There  is  therefore  the  strongest  reason  for  its  being  situated
in  the  cerebellum,  which  appears  essentially  concerned  with  sensibility  and,
voluntary  muscular  motion.  These  are  so  indispensable  to  Amativeness,  that,
wherever  their  organs  be,  the  organ  of  Amativeness  ought  to  be.  Destruc¬
tiveness  and  Adhesiveness  are  not  necessary  to  its  action,  though  they  may
sometimes  be  associated  with  it.

4.  This  argument  drops  to  the  ground  if  the  cerebellum  is  regarded  not
as  one  organ,  but,  like  the  cerebrum,  a  compound  of  organs.

Mr.  Spencer  has  overlooked  the  mass  of  examples  of  correspondence
between  the  degree  of  the  sexual  feeling  and,  not  the  external  form  of  the
skull  but,  the  positive  size  of  the  cerebellum  itself ;  as  well  as  the  mass
of  pathological  facts  which  support  the  received  doctrine.  In  animals
emasculated  or  equivalently  injured  when  young,  the  cerebellum  does  not
attain  its  due  growth  :  and  Gall  adduces  many  facts  to  shew  that  the
effect  takes  place  upon  the  opposite  lobe  to  that  where  the  injury  is.  He
also  presents  us  with  a  large  number  of  cases  of  injury,  inflammation,
and  apoplexy  of  the  cerebellum,  characterized  by  remarkable  disturbance
of  the  genital  organs ;  and  similar  cases  most  medical  men  are  acquainted
with. — Zoist.


(  190  )


Y.  Religious  Treatment  of  Lunatics.

Our  attention  has  been  directed  to  an  article  “  On  the
Religious  Treatment  of  Lunatics,”  contained  in  a  late
number  of  The  British  Magazine.  The  writer,  who  is  evi¬
dently  of  the  evangelical  order,  cannot  we  perceive  be  con¬
tent  to  leave  the  instruction  and  management  of  the  insane
in  the  hands  of  the  physician  only,  but  prefers  the  employ¬
ment  “  of  the  hallowing  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost.”  Be¬
cause  “  the  Son  of  God  has  been  sent”  “to  destroy  the  works
of  the  devil,”  and  because  “every  thought  is  to  be”  “brought
into  subjection  to  the  obedience  of  Christ,”  we  are  told  that
the  responsibility  for  the  subjugation  of  the  insane  rests  with
the  church.  WITH  THE  CHURCH  !  !  !

There  is,  we  fear,  too  much  reason  to  believe  that  did  the
“  subjugation  of  the  insane”  rest  only  with  the  religious  en¬
thusiast,  humanity  would  again  blush  for  its  transgressions ;
and  chains  and  manacles  once  more  tear  open  the  wounds
which  the  skill  of  the  physician  has  already  healed.  The
great  advance  of  physiological  science  has  we  doubt  not  too
surely  annihilated,  and  for  ever,  the  ignorant  and  blasphem¬
ous  belief,  that  the  insane  are  “  delivered  into  the  power  of
Satan  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh.”  We  would  ask  the
impartial  and  considerate  reader,  if  it  be  likely  that  the  case
of  the  unfortunate  lunatic  would  be  safe  in  the  hands  of  such
as  give  credence  to  a  theory  so  monstrous,  so  full  of  igno¬
rance,  and  so  derogatory  to  the  present  advanced  state  of
cerebral  science.

It  is  with  extreme  regret  that  we  find  it  at  all  necessary
to  assert  that  “ prayer ,  and  faith,  and  the  sacraments”  can
seldom  be  of  more  than  partial  and  temporary  benefit  to  the
insane.  “  Grace,  by  whatever  means  conveyed,”  is  indeed
little  calculated  to  alter  that  particular  pathological  condition
of  the  brain  and  membranes  which  is  the  cause  of  insanity,
and  is  therefore  a  poor  substitute  for  other  means  of  cure  or
relief.  Though  we  may  be  sometimes  disposed  to  indulge
the  sickly  and  fantastic  appetite  of  either  the  spoiled  child  or
the  pampered  glutton,  yet  we  could  hardly  expect  that  such
indulgence  should  be  attended  by  more  than  a  temporary
and  delusive  relief  of  the  urgent  symptoms.  As  a  specimen
of  the  bigotry  and  puritanical  flummery  which  characterize
the  production  we  are  considering,  we  may  add  that  it  is  as¬
serted  with  all  the  logical  precision  of  a  Bacon,  that  because
“  the  due  administration  of  baptism  to  infants  is  accompanied
by  a  change  in  the  spiritual  condition  of  the  wholly  uncon-


Religious  Treatment  of  Lunatics.


191


scious  recipients  of  grace,”  it  follows  that  “  similar  means
of  grace  are  applicable  to  the  lunatic,  and  are”  not  less  effi¬
cacious  in  him  !  !  !  A  pretty  piece  of  reasoning  this  for  the
nineteenth  century  !  It  is,  however,  valuable,  as  showing
the  low  condition  of  intellect  yet  among  us  ;  which  needs
only  be  contemplated  to  excite  our  best  endeavours  to  awaken
the  slumbering  faculties  of  our  oppressed  and  priest-ridden
people.

The  observations  of  “  Presbyter”  “  on  the  religious  treat¬
ment  of  lunatics”  irresistibly  remind  us  of  the  horrible
spirit  of  sectarianism  which  the  church  takes  so  much
pains  to  infuse  into  the  question  of  education .  We  certainly
are  not  of  those  who  believe  that  a  concurrence  with  the  doc¬
trines  of  the  established  church  is  indispensable  to  the
culture  and  improvement  of  either  the  sane  or  the  insane.

The  really  permanent  and  good  effects  which  “Presbyter”
would  claim  for  “  grace,”  or  “the  hallowing  influences
of  the  Holy  Ghost,”  are  rather  to  be  considered  as  refer-
rible  to  the  exercise  on  the  part  of  the  attendants — medical
and  others — of  that  kind  and  discriminate  attention  which
is  calculated  to  call  into  activity  the  higher  feelings,  affec¬
tions,  and  sympathies  on  the  part  of  the  patient ;  and  to
develop  by  a  judicious  training  those  intellectual  powers,
which  together  may  be  made  the  happy  instrument  of  relief,
or  perhaps  cure.

In  insanity  we  have  evidence  of  a  want  of  due  function
in  the  brain.  The  morbid  state  may  be  restricted  to  either
the  anterior,  the  middle,  or  the  inferior  lobes  of  the  cerebral
mass,  and  may  be  therefore  indicated  by  a  derangement  either
of  the  intellectual  faculties,  the  moral  powers  or  affections,  or
the  propensities.  The  morbid  state,  moreover,  may  be  limited
to  only  one  faculty,  or  feeling  or  desire ;  which,  in  any  case,
will  be  found  either  excessive,  or  enfeebled,  or  depraved.
The  object  then  must  be  in  the  treatment  of  the  insane  to
restore  this  lost  health  of  the  brain :  to  give  tone  and  energy
to  the  weakened  and  languid  portions  of  this  organ ;  and  to
diminish  the  inordinate  activity  of  the  excited  parts  of  the
cerebral  mass,  by  the  judicious  and  discriminate  application
or  abstraction  of  certain  known  stimuli.  It  is  thus  seen  that
“grace,”  or  “the  hallowing  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost,”
or,  to  speak  in  more  moderate  language,  religious  instruction,
can  only  be  applicable  to  certain  forms,  and  under  particular
circumstances,  of  diseased  cerebration.  To  talk  on  religious
subjects  to  one  who  is  labouring  under  an  inflammatory  or
irritable  condition  of  the  organs  of  Veneration,  would  be
indeed  to  add  fuel  to  fire.  If  “  Presbyter”  were  called  on
VOL.  ii.  o


192  Religious  Treatment  of  Lunatics.

for  his  defence,  he  probably  would  reply,  “similia  similibus
curantur.”  We  ask  if  he  would  adopt  the  dose  of  the  ho-
moeopathist,  as  well  as  his  motto  ?  Until  “Presbyter”  shall
have  added  the  knowledge  and  experience  of  the  accom¬
plished  physician  to  his  theological  forwardness,  we  wrould
advise  him  to  employ  his  time  a  little  more  profitably  than
in  attempting  the  dissemination  of  opinions  so  prejudiced,  so
fantastic,  and  so  irrational.  The  medical  philosopher  alone
should  venture  to  discuss  a  subject  so  important  as  that
which  involves  the  treatment  of  the  insane  ;  who  are  not
“  delivered  into  the  power  of  Satan  for  the  destruction  of
the  flesh,”  but  are  the  subjects  of  a  physical  and  abnormal
change  of  a  portion  of  cerebral  matter.  In  former  times  it
was  believed  that  St.  Vitus's  dance  was  the  work  of  demons,
and  the  appearance  of  the  convulsionnaires  in  Prance,  in  1731,
begat  a  dispute  as  to  whether  their  wild  fanatical  pranks  were
to  be  considered  as  the  work  of  Satan,  or  ascribed  to  a  divine
influence.  But  let  us  hope  that  a  better  state  of  things  exists
at  the  present  day,  and  that  a  more  correct  knowledge  of
pathological  science  has  to  a  great  extent  consigned  to  ob¬
livion  the  wild  and  extravagant  chimeras  of  the  deluded  and
ignorant  enthusiast,  who,  enamoured  of  “  grace”  and  capti¬
vated  by  his  darling  “spirit,”  prefers  his  feelings  to  his
reason.

Of  all  enthusiastic  infatuations,  that  of  religion  is  the
most  fertile  in  disorders  of  the  brain,  and  spreads  with  the
greatest  facility  by  sympathy.  We  read  in  Dr.  Babington’s
translation  of  Hecker's  Epidemics  of  the  Middle  Ages,  that
“  in  a  Methodist  chapel  at  Redruth,  a  man  during  divine
service  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  f  What  shall  I  do  to  be
saved  V — at  the  same  time  manifesting  the  greatest  uneasi¬
ness  and  solicitude  respecting  the  condition  of  his  soul.  Some
other  members  of  the  congregation,  following  his  example,
cried  out  in  the  same  form  of  words,  and  seemed  shortly
after  to  suffer  the  most  excruciating  bodily  pain.  This  mo¬
nomania  continued  for  some  time,  and  spread  itself  ( with
the  rapidity  of  lightning '  through  the  greater  part  of  the
county.  The  clergy,  when  in  the  course  of  their  sermons
they  perceived  that  persons  were  thus  seized,  earnestly  ex¬
horted  them  to  confess  their  sins,  and  zealously  endeavoured
to  convince  them  that  they  were  by  nature  enemies  to  Christ ;
that  the  anger  of  God  had  therefore  fallen  upon  them ;  and
that  if  death  should  surprise  them  in  the  midst  of  their  sins,
the  eternal  torments  of  hell  would  be  their  portion.  The  over¬
excited  congregation,  upon  this,  repeated  their  words,  which
naturally  encreased  the  fury  of  their  convulsive  attacks.


Religious  Treatment  of  Lunatics.


193


When  the  discourse  had  produced  its  full  effect,  the  preacher
changed  his  subject ;  reminded  those  who  were  suffering  of
the  power  of  the  Saviour,  as  well  as  of  the  grace  of  God ;
and  represented  to  them  in  glowing  colours  the  joys  of  hea¬
ven.  Upon  this  a  remarkable  reaction  sooner  or  later  took
place.”  It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  with  the  corre¬
spondence  between  the  mad  conduct  of  the  clergy  on  this
occasion  and  the  opinions  of  “  Presbyter.”  Had  the  man
above  mentioned  as  the  cause  of  so  much  extravagance  of
feeling  and  behaviour  been  immediately  removed  from  the
chapel  and  subjected  to  judicious  moral  treatment,  all  the
subsequent  mischief  would  have  been  avoided.  The  conduct
of  the  clergy,  too,  in  the  above  instance,  equally  with  the
views  of  our  misguided  and  credulous  friend  and  the  morbid
susceptibility  of  the  afflicted  party,  must  prove  a  very  serious
source  of  regret.  No  philanthropist  possessed  of  common
sense  can  reflect  on  such  things  without  very  deeply  feeling
for  the  cause  of  humanity  and  reason.  On  the  extension  of  a
knowledge  of  cerebral  physiology,  and  on  the  general  adoption
in  schools  and  in  hospitals  for  the  insane  of  its  principles,
must  be  founded  our  hope  of  a  remedy  for  preventing  and
curing  a  disease  so  distressing  in  its  nature  and  so  serious
in  its  effects,  as  superstition  in  any  shape, —


“  This  hard  decree,

This  uneradicable  taint  of  sin,

This  boundless  upas,  this  all-blasting  tree,

Whose  root  is  earth,  whose  leaves  and  branches  be
The  skies  which  rain  their  plagues  on  man  like  dew —
Disease,  death,  bondage — all  the  woes  we  see —

And  worse,  the  woes  we  see  not — which  throb  through
The  immedicable  soul,  with  heart-aches  ever  new."


Y.


o  2


(  194  )


VI.  Case  of  Epilepsy  cured  with  Mesmerism.

By  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  That  mesmerism  is  at  best  a  delusion,  is  clear,  for  it  is  adopted  by  no  respectable
practitioner  of  the  medical  profession,  the  only  man  of  respectability  that  has  adopted  it
being  on  this  subject  supposed  by  his  brethren  to  be  insane.  It  is  a  monomania,  that  has
caused  him  the  loss  of  his  extensive  practice,  and  it  has  converted  the  esteem  of  his  friends
into  pity.  The  North  London  Hospital  shewed  its  good  sense  by  compelling  this  unfor¬
tunate  physician  to  cease  to  lecture,  and  to  vacate  his  offices.  No  public  establishment  has
adopted  mesmerism.  It  has  not  appeared  in  our  colleges,  halls,  universities,  or  other  places
of  science  of  any  description  ;  or  where  it  has  appeared,  it  has  only  been  either  to  die  a
natural  death,  or  to  be  scouted  at  by  all  honest  and  respectable  people.”* — Weekly  Dispatch.
May  14  th,  1844.

On  Tuesday  the  10th  of  August,  1841,  a  mother  called  upon
me  with  a  sweet  looking  little  daughter,  sixteen  years  of  age,
of  blooming  face  and  dark  blue  eyes,  who  she  said  was  sub¬
ject  to  violent  epileptic  fits.  Her  first  fit  was  in  January,
nine  years  before,  while  she  was  sickening  with  scarlet  fever.
Her  brother  and  six  sisters  had  also  the  scarlet  fever  at  the
same  time,  but  none  had  at  any  time  experienced  any  kind
of  fit.  Her  paternal  grandfather ,  however,  had  epilepsy
for  seven  years,  from  his  fiftieth  year  till  his  death ;  and  a
little  brother  had  become  epileptic  when  three  months  old,
and  died  of  the  disease  after  its  continuance  for  a  year  and
a  half.

After  this  fit,  she  suffered  three  weeks,  several  times  in
the  day  and  night,  from  a  sort  of  catching,  choking,  and
and  shaking,  with  such  coldness  that  her  medical  attendant
considered  she  had  the  ague ;  and,  at  the  end  of  a  month
after  the  first  fit,  another  occurred  from  six  till  ten  o'clock  one
evening,  the  convulsions  being  very  violent  and  lasting  four
hours,  with  perfect  subsequent  insensibility  for  a  week,  to¬
wards  the  end  of  which  her  screaming  was  terrific.  Leeches,
blisters,  and  medicines  were  employed.  She  remained  poorly,
having  a  fit  every  day,  week,  or  fortnight,  for  four  months,  at
the  end  of  which  time  she  expelled  a  long  round  worm,

*  I  should  not  have  quoted  the  Dispatch,  but  that  the  most  fashionable
physician  of  the  present  hour  does  not  hesitate  to  act  in  the  same  way,  and
tells  his  patients  that  in  regard  to  mesmerism  I  am  “  mad,  stark  mad.”  How¬
ever,  I  console  myself  with  reflecting  that  he  formerly  told  his  pupils  and
others  that  he  had  never  heard  a  sensible  man  speak  favourably  of  the  stethoscope
and  that  it  was  just  the  thing  for  Elliotson  to  rave  about,  and  above  twenty
years  ago  asserted  in  the  College  of  Physicians  that  the  name  of  quinine,  in
proof  of  the  virtues  of  which  I  had  just  written  abundant  facts,  would  not  be
known  in  a  twelvemonth :  and  yet  he  now  prescribes  quinine  every  hour  of  the
day,  and  uses  the  stethoscope  nearly  as  often  as  he  feels  the  pulse.  He  has  so
committed  himself  in  regard  to  mesmerism,  now  that  he  is  of  some  standing
and  made  an  authority  of  by  patients,  that  his  condition  will  be  interesting
when  the  period  arrives  that  he  must  cease  to  persecute  me  for  advocating
mesmerism,  and  must  prescribe  it  for  his  patients.  I  smiled  at  his  turning
round  upon  other  points,  and  shall  probably  soon  more  than  smile  at  him  for
another  turn  about.


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


195


and  in  ten  days  absolutely  a  mass  of  worms,  enough  to  fill  a
small  basin,  all  alive,  hundreds  of  them  thread-worms,  the
rest  larger  and  of  various  sizes  as  if  round  worms  of  various
ages,  looking  altogether  like  a  bunch  of  young  onions,  and
all  alive.  She  was  allowed  no  other  food  than  one  biscuit  and
a  little  milk  daily  for  a  fortnight,  and  took  every  other  morn¬
ing  a  table-spoonful  of  oil  of  turpentine,  and  the  next  a  dose
of  castor  oil.  All  this  time  these  medicines  acted  violently
on  the  stomach  and  bowels,  and  she  was  better  :  no  worms
making  their  appearance,  and  no  fit  taking  place  till  two  and
twenty  months  more  had  elapsed.

A  violent  fit  now  seized  her  again,  from  no  evident  cause.
She  was  again  treated  with  oil  of  turpentine,  and  expelled  a
tape  worm,  three  yards  long ;  her  head  was  shaved,  blisters
put  upon  the  back  of  her  neck,  and,  after  a  succession  of
fits  every  day  for  five  months,  she  remained  perfectly  well
for  a  year  and  a  half.

She  had  now  two  fits,  and,  without  medical  advice,  her
mother  applied  leeches  and  gave  her  calomel,  and  a  tape
worm  came  away  in  many  pieces.  She  had  no  other  fit  for
six  months ;  and  no  worm  has  since  made  its  appearance,  nor
has  she  had  symptoms  of  worms.

But,  at  the  end  of  six  months,  she  had  a  fit  daily  for  a
fortnight ;  and  afterwards  fits  about  every  six  months.  They
became  very  violent  in  1839,  and  continued  so  as  well  as  very
frequent  up  to  the  time  she  was  brought  to  me,  when  for  several
months  they  had  come  on  almost  every  day.

She  saw  an  accoucheur  physician  in  the  city  once,  whose
medicine  only  gave  her  violent  pain  in  the  head.  She  went
under  a  second  general  practitioner,  who  cupped  her,  leeched
her,  blistered  her,  and  gave  her  abundance  of  strong  ca¬
thartics,  and  allowed  her  no  meat.  The  only  effect  of  this
treatment  was  extreme  exhaustion.  She  ultimately  was
under  a  third  from  February  till  I  saw  her  in  August,  and
indeed  for  three  months  after  I  saw  her,  though  I  was  not
aware  of  this  and  she  swallowed  none  of  his  medicines  after
she  first  came  to  me.  He  applied  two  blisters,  numerous
leeches,  gave  her  very  strong  purgatives,  allowed  her  no
meat  and  very  little  vegetable,  with  water  only  to  drink.

All  the  medical  men  had  pronounced  the  disease  epilepsy.
After  being  poorly  a  few  days,  she  would  fall  suddenly  with¬
out  the  least  warning  perfectly  senseless,  violently  convulsed
and  rigid>  and  her  jaws  closed,  and  she  foamed  and  bled  at
the  mouth.  She  always  at  first  turned  deadly  pale,  and
afterwards  became  very  red.  Sometimes  she  recovered  sud¬
denly  in  the  midst  of  the  convulsions ;  sometimes  she  re-


196


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


mained  still  aud  senseless  for  a  time,  and  recovered  suddenly
from  this  state  ;  and  sometimes  the  convulsions  were  renewed
after  a  period  of  stillness  and  insensibility,  and  the  longer
their  period,  the  more  violent  always  was  the  next  fit.  If  she
came  round  slowly,  she  occasionally  talked,  and  perhaps
screamed  and  hallooed  so  as  to  alarm  the  neighbourhood  and
collect  the  police,  and,  whoever  took  her  hand,  she  felt  for  the
warts  on  the  hand  of  one  who  was  generally  with  her.  After
each  attack  she  had  no  recollection  of  anything  that  had
passed,  so  that  she  was  long  kept  in  ignorance  that  she  had
fits,  and  always  remained  exhausted  and  ill  for  some  time,
not  being  able  to  leave  her  bed  for  a  week  if  several  had
taken  place,  and  sometimes  there  were  several  in  a  day  for
some  days.  She  told  her  favourite  sister*  that  she  “  always
knew  some  days  before  they  came,”  but  would  not  say  what,
because  she  could  not  bear  any  allusion  to  them.

During  the  whole  period  of  her  disease,  she  suffered  se¬
verely  from  a  constant  pain  in  the  situation  of  the  heart,  and
from  head-ache,  chiefly  at  the  posterior  part  of  the  top,  and
this  part  always  looked  more  or  less  blue  when  it  was  brought
into  view  by  shaving  the  head ;  and  just  before  a  fit  her
temples  were  often  swollen  and  her  head  could  not  bear  the
jolting  of  a  carriage.  The  bowels  had  always  been  very
torpid ;  but  the  catamenial  function  had  begun  at  the  proper
age  and  was  never  in  the  least  disturbed.

The  father  had  desired  the  mother  to  bring  her  to  me,  in
consequence  of  having  read  on  the  previous  Sunday,  in  the
Examiner ,  an  extract  from  the  Morning  Chronicle ,  containing

*  If  mesmerism  has  been  the  occasion  of  such  folly  and  depravity,  es¬
pecially  in  my  own  profession,  as  to  have  lowered  human  nature  in  my  eyes
still  more  than  much  of  other  experience  had  forced  me,  against  all  my  pre¬
possessions,  to  estimate  it,  mesmerism  has  at  the  same  time  exalted  it  in  my
eyes  beyond  all  my  previous  most  favourable  opinions,  by  displaying  the
most  exquisite  beauty  of  general  character  in  several  of  my  mesmeric  patients,
whose  lives  and  thoughts  have  been  fully  laid  open  to  me,  and  the  most
beautiful  attachment  of  children  to  each  other.  Two  of  my  young  female
and  one  of  my  male  epileptic  patients  have  each  of  the  former  a  sister
and  the  latter  a  brother  absolutely  devoted  to  them,  sleeping  with  them,
accompanying  them  all  day,  and  relinquishing  all  pleasure  which  cannot  be
participated  in  by  them,  so  as  to  be  ready  w  henever  a  fit  happens.  One  of
these  three  pair  was  the  present  patient  and  her  so  deservedly  favourite
sister.  These  sights  are  as  delightful  morally,  as  the  contemplation  of  the
scientific  phenomena  of  the  cases  is  intellectually.  Mesmerism  has  also
brought  me  to  the  friendship  of  many  charming  characters,  pure-minded,
disinterested,  unwearied  and  fearless  lovers  of  truth,  and  full  of  the  desire
of  doing  good.  I  would  cheerfully  bear  double  what  I  have  borne  from  my
profession  and  others  rather  than  lose  the  elevated  happiness  which  I  thus
owe  daily  to  mesmerism,  and  of  which  the  wretched  scoffers  at  the  facts
and  traducers  of  the  suffering  patients  are  not  at  all  aware.  It  has  im¬
proved  my  own  character,  by  habituating  me  to  work  for  others  disin-
restedly,  and  by  greatly  withdrawing  me  from  the  world.


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


197


an  account  of  some  mesmeric  phenomena  and  cures  exhibited
by  me  in  my  own  house  to  a  party,  at  which  two  or  three
gentlemen  of  the  press  were  present.  She  had  accompa¬
nied  her  mother  in  obedience  to  her  father;  but  had  made
up  her  mind  that  mesmerism  was  a  piece  of  perfect  non¬
sense,  though  she  had  never  heard  of  its  name  till  two  days
before ;  and  was  certain  it  could  do  her  no  more  good  than  all
the  violent  medicines,  starvation,  leeches,  and  blisters,  to
which  she  had  already  submitted.  The  last  fits  had  taken
place  four  days  previously,  and  there  had  been  five  or  six.

I  said  nothing,  but  began  to  point  towards  her  eyes  as  she  sat
in  a  common  chair.  In  five  minutes  she  was  asleep,  and  her  head
descended  lower  and  lower  till  it  rested  on  her  bosom.  I  made
tractive  movements  outwards  with  my  right  hand,  without  contact,
from  her  left  hand ;  and  her  left  hand followed  mine  outwards.  She
awoke  spontaneously  after  sleeping  fifteen  minutes.

The  rain  prevented  her  from  coming  the  next  day,  but
the  severe  head-ache  and  a  fit  at  night  were  milder  than  usual.

On  the  following  day,  Thursday,  the  12th,  she  came  complain¬
ing  of  her  usual  pain  at  the  heart  and  head-ache;  there  had  been
no  fit.  I  pointed  without  producing  the  least  drowsiness.  After
a  time  she  trembled;  and  at  the  end  of  five  and  twenty  minutes  was
insensible,  her  eyes  turned  deeply  down,  the  right  towards  the  nose,
the  left  outwards,  her  legs  grew  stiff,  her  hands  became  clenched,
and  her  body  was  bent  firmly  back,  and  I  could  not  control  the
fit  by  making  passes,  indeed  they  seemed  to  excite  tremor,  and,
after  continuing  in  it  for  half  an  hour ,  she  was  perfectly  herself
again.

On  Friday,  the  13th,  I  pointed  for  five  and  twenty  minutes  with¬
out  produciny  the  least  drowsiness.  I  left  off  for  a  short  time  and
then  began  again,  and  while  I  was  standing  close  to  her  the  same  fit
occurred.  It  lasted  half  an  hour,  she  beating  herself  and  turning
her  head  from  side  to  side.

On  Saturday,  the  14th,  I  mesmerised  her  again,  not  at  all  dis¬
couraged  because  on  the  two  last  occasions  I  had  failed  to  produce
sleep  or  if  I  did  succeed  it  had  instantly  been  lost  in  a  fit.

I  once  mesmerised  a  young  lady  for  four  months  half  an
hour  daily,  with  the  exception  of  two  periods  making  toge¬
ther  thirteen  days,  before  I  could  send  her  to  sleep  for  more
than  a  minute  or  two,  and  indeed  the  sleep  seldom  lasted
more  than  a  few  seconds  and  generally  did  not  take  place
at  all.  I  began  early  in  December  and  she  was  not  fairly
asleep  till  April.  At  length  she  was  sent  to  sleep  by  three
passes,  and  could  not  be  awakened  sometimes  for  many
hours.  After  this  extreme  susceptibility,  she  once  ceased  to
be  in  the  least  susceptible  for  three  weeks ; — once  for  nearly


198


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of


three  weeks  after  I  had  omitted  for  two  months,  and  once
for  above  a  month  after  a  similar  intermission,  through
my  absence  on  the  continent ;  but  on  each  occasion  I
persevered  daily,  and  she  became  as  susceptible  as  ever. —
I  once  rendered  a  youth  very  susceptible  and  brought  out
wonderful  phenomena  for  some  months,  and  he  then  gra¬
dually  became  less  and  less  susceptible,  so  that  for  nearly
a  year  there  was  very  little  effect,  and  that  very  little  effect
only  for  two  very  short  periods.  Yet  I  persevered  whenever
he  would  come  to  my  house ;  and,  at  the  expiration  of  a  year
and  a  half,  when  he  was  quite  insusceptible,  I  prevailed
upon  him  to  come  regularly  again,  and  at  length,  as  I  was
anxious  to  cure  him  of  severe  epilepsy,  rendered  him  suscep¬
tible,  and  am  now  producing  in  him  phenomena  absolutely
astounding.  If  it  be  an  object  to  mesmerise  a  particular
person,  I  should  not  desist  even  till  I  had  mesmerised  him
daily  for  half  an  hour  during  a  twelvemonth.  It  would  have
been  absurd  to  allow  absence  of  sleepiness  in  my  present
patient  on  the  second  and  third  day  to  dishearten  me.  In¬
deed  there  was  some  effect,  for  on  every  occasion  her  eyes
smarted  and  watered  profusely, — a  common  effect  of  mesme¬
rising  them  by  passes,  pointing,  or  staring.

I  had  not  mesmerised  her  more  than  seven  minutes  before  she  was
fast  asleep.  I  drew  her  hand  by  tractive  movements  as  upon  the
first  day.  She  then  had  a  fit  in  her  mesmeric  sleep,  and  seemed
the  more  agitated  if  I  began  to  make  passes;  her  hands  were
clenched,  her  arms  and  legs  rigid,  and  she  made  a  whining  noise,
but  the  fit  soon  ceased,  and  ended  in  the  waking  state.  She  had
a  fit  at  night,  but  it  was  very  mild,  and  single,  merely  one  strug¬
gling  and  stupor.

Sunday,  15th.  She  was  asleep  in  eight  minutes  and  a  half,  and
instantly  had  a  slight  and  short  fit,  ending  in  the  waking  state.  As
soon  as  this  was  over,  I  mesmerised  her  again,  and  she  went  to
sleep  in  about  eight  minutes,  and  presently  had  another  fit,  but  it
was  short,  both  together  not  exceeding  the  usual  length  of  one,
and  it  ended  in  the  waking  state.

Monday,  16th.  Mr.  Symes  kindly  mesmerised  her  as  I  happened
to  he  sent  for  to  Blenheim  Palace,  and  she  went  to  sleep,  and  had  a
mild  fit.

Tuesday,  1 7th,  the  beginning  of  the  second  week.  The  catamenia
were  present,  and,  as  usual  at  this  period,  she  had  head-ache,  and
was  depressed,  and  had  a  little  loss  of  recollection  on  going  to  bed
last  night.

I  began  to  point,  but,  before  sleepiness  began,  a  fit  took  place
in  three  minutes.  It  lasted  half  an  hour,  but  was  very  mild,  and
without  struggling  or  noise.

I  continued  to  mesmerise  her  daily,  with  the  effect  of  sleep  in


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


199


ten  minutes  and  no  fit.  Independently  of  the  mesmeric  process  or
state,  she  had,  when  away  from  me,  a  very  slight  fit  on  the  ‘20th, —
second  Friday;  another,  but  slight,  on  the  28th, — second  Satur¬
day,  while  walking  from  my  house;  and  one  again  at  night,  ex¬
ceedingly  slight ,  indeed  mere  stupor  without  convulsions.

The  immediate  and  great  power  of  mesmerism  over  her
disease  was  very  striking.  When  she  came  to  me  her  fits  were
violent,  and  recurred  many  times  a  week.  The  last  fits  before  I
saw  her  were  four  days  previously,  but  they  were  five  or  six  in
number,  and  violent,  and  these  circumstances  generally  pro¬
tracted  the  interval  of  the  fits.  She  had  one  on  the  second  day
after  I  saw  her,  one  in  three  days,  and  a  third  in  six  days,  and
a  fourth  in  eight  days ;  the  very  first  of  these  milder  than  usual,
the  second  absolutely  slight,  the  third  very  mild  and  single, —
one  set  of  convulsions  and  one  stupor,  and  the  fourth  so  slight
that  there  were  no  convulsions,  but  insensibility  only.

She  had  continued  to  come  to  me  in  obedience  to  her
father,  but,  as  she  has  since  told  me,  still  regarded  the  affair
as  a  piece  of  folly,  not  believing  that  I  ever  sent  her  to  sleep,
and  determined  not  to  sleep.  She  found,  however,  that  her  fits
were  much  less  frequent,  and  that  she  suffered  much  less  after
they  were  over,  and  this  made  her  begin  to  think  there  was
something  in  it :  and  no  wonder,  for  she  had,  independently  of
the  mesmeric  process  and  state,  but  three  in  eighteen  days,  each
milder  than  the  preceding,  and  the  last  without  a  struggle.  The
ignorant  argument  of  mesmeric  effects  being  all  the  result  of
imagination  was  absolutely  ridiculous  in  her  case.  She  both
despised  mesmerism,  and  defied  it ;  and  her  intelligence  and
resolution  are  of  no  ordinary  amount.  But  she  could  resist  no
longer,  and  is  now  as  disgusted  with  those  who  talk  their  child¬
ish  nonsense  against  the  reality  and  utility  of  mesmerism,  as
she  was  originally  with  those  who  believed  its  truth.  Even  a
little  sister  who  used  to  run  out  of  the  room  when  her  fit
began,  remarked  the  improvement  in  the  violence  and  number
of  her  fits,  and  said  in  a  week,  “  Mother,  what  a  good  thing
it  is  you  took  Rosina  to  that  new  doctor.”  The  excitement  of
an  attack  by  the  mesmeric  process  gradually  declined.

It  occasionally  happens  at  first  that  the  process  either
excites  a  fit  instead  of  the  mesmeric  state,  or  a  fit  which
passes  into  the  mesmeric  state ;  or  that  the  mesmeric  state
so  favors  the  disposition  to  an  attack  that  it  is  interrupted  by
one,  and  sometimes  continues  when  the  fit  is  over,  sometimes
is  perfectly  broken  up  by  the  fit,  and  sometimes  the  process
of  waking  a  patient  excites  a  fit.  But,  if  the  process  is  re¬
peated,  such  a  result  ceases,  as  was  strikingly  exemplified  in
one  of  the  rigid  cases  described  by  me  in  the  last  number


200


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


(p.  76).  This  is  all  analogous  to  the  relation  of  epilepsy
with  common  sleep.  Some  epileptics  always,  others  for  a
period  only,  have  their  fits  in  their  sleep  ;  some  while  going
off  to  sleep ;  some  while  waking  :  while  others  are  attacked
in  their  waking  state  and  not  in  bed:  and  others  have  no  rule
for  their  attacks.  The  mesmeric  process  may  sometimes  excite
a  fit  by  exciting  nervousness :  but  it  begins  to  produce  the  mes¬
meric  state  before  this  is  noticed  by  the  patient,  or  even  by  the
mesmeriser  unless  he  is  very  experienced  and  attentive.  This
I  have  ascertained  by  some  singular  experiments,  which  I
hope  to  publish  next  year.  It  is  remarkable  that  at  the  first
mesmerisation  there  was  no  attack  during  the  process,  or
during  the  mesmeric  state.  The  process  at  the  second,  third,
and  seventh  sittings,  excited  a  fit  and  did  not  induce  the
mesmeric  state :  and  at  the  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  mesmer-
isations  a  fit  took  place  in  the  sleep.  The  reason  that  it  ex¬
cited  one  at  the  seventh  sitting,  after  having  excited  none  at
the  fourth,  fifth,  or  sixth,  is  probably  that  the  catamenia
were  commencing.  This  attack  too  was  longer  than  any  for
several  days,  shewing  an  increased  predisposition.  Recurrent
diseases  are  often  observed  to  be  more  active  at  the  com¬
mencement,  or  during  the  presence,  or  at  the  end,  of  this
function.  The  full  mesmeric  influence,  sufficient  to  produce
sleep,  was  required  to  excite  a  fit  on  the  three  previous  days.
This  effect,  however,  declined.  The  first  and  second  such  fits
(on  the  12th  and  13th)  were  violent,  and  lasted  half  an  hour
each  :  the  third  fit  (on  the  14th)  “  soon  ceased  the  fourth
and  fifth  (on  the  15th),  though  together,  were  short :  the
sixth  (on  the  17th),  “mild:”  the  seventh,  though,  probably
from  the  presence  of  the  catamenia,  it  lasted,  like  the  first
and  second,  half  an  hour,  was  “very  mild,  without  strug¬
gling  or  noise  and  she  had  no  fits  during  the  process  or  in
the  mesmeric  state  afterwards  till  the  fifth  day  (the  22nd),
when  they  were  excited  by  my  bad  management  through  want
of  knowledge,  and  but  for  this  might  never  have  occurred  again.
The  reason  of  there  being  no  fit  the  first  time  I  mesmerised
her,  was  perhaps  that  it  was  the  period  of  the  least  predisposi¬
tion  ;  for  there  had  been  five  or  six  fits  four  days  before  and
none  since,  nor  was  there  another  till  the  next  night.

When  attacks  occur  from  the  mesmeric  process  or  state,
they,  as  I  have  already  observed,  decline  after  a  time,  and  at
length  cease,  as  in  the  present  case,  if  the  course  of  mesmer¬
ism  is  persevered  with.  If  a  continuance  of  the  passes  during
the  fit  clearly  aggravates,  it  may  be  proper  to  desist  till  this  is
over ;  but  in  general  the  fit  yields  the  sooner  to  a  steady
continuance  of  the  passes,  or  to  passes  down  the  chest  and


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


201


back  with  contact,  transverse  passes  before  and  behind  the
trunk,  or  to,  what  is  often  better,  breathing  very  slowly  and
assiduously  upon  the  eyes,  nose,  and  mouth,  or  the  bosom,  and
holding  the  patient's  hands  in  our  own ;  and  the  mesmeric
state  may  manifest  itself  in  proportion  as  the  fit  is  subdued.

On  the  fifth  day,  as  I  have  said,  (Sunday,  August  22nd),  after
I  had  thrown  her  into  a  calm  mesmeric  sleep  in  ten  minutes,  as  was
usual,  a  succession  of  severe  fits  took  place.  Half  a  dozen  ladies  and
gentlemen  were  present,  who  all  touched  her.  I  conversed  freely
with  them,  and  I  did  not  remain  at  her  side.

As  all  my  previous  patients,  besides  being  mesmerisable
and  demesmerisable  by  others  as  well  as  by  myself,  had,  with
the  exception  of  the  rigid  patients  described  in  the  last  num¬
ber  who  bent  towards  their  mesmeriser  and  from  others,  shewn
not  the  least  attachment  to  me  or  dislike  of  others,  nor  been
affected  by  my  absence  or  my  attention  to  others,  I  did  not
suspect  the  cause  of  these  attacks.  Possibly  the  attachment
to  me  and  horror  of  others  did  not  exist  before ;  for  I  have
known  them  not  manifest  themselves  till  sleep  and  sleep¬
waking  had  been  produced  for  a  considerable  time.  A  young
lady  was  mesmerised,  with  the  effect  of  sleep,  by  myself  daily
for  a  fortnight  and  by  another  person  for  several  months,  and
got  tolerably  well,  when  mesmerism  was  improperly  left  off
before  the  cure  could  have  been  established,  and  she  relapsed ;
she  was  mesmerised  again,  with  the  effect  of  sleep,  by  myself
for  a  month,  by  others  for  two  months,  and  then  by  myself
again  for  above  a  month ;  and  not  till  then  did  she  suffer  any
distress  at  my  leaving  her  asleep  to  wake  spontaneously  as  I
often  had  done.  The  attachment  to  me  and  repulsion  of
others  in  her  mesmeric  state  are  now’  exquisite. — Whatever
the  phenomena  developed  in  the  mesmeric  sleep-waking,  I
have  observed  no  rule  for  either  the  period  or  order  of  their
occurrence,  or  for  their  duration,  nor  any  great  relation  among
them.

Till  the  fifth  subsequent  day,  (Friday,  August  27th,)  only  one  or
two  persons  were  in  the  room,  and  but  for  short  periods,  so  that  I
had  but  little  conversation  with  them,  and  I  remained  close  to  her.
But  on  this  day  I  had  several  visitors,  and  necessarily  talked  to
them,  and  at  length  turned  my  back  to  her  and  mesmerised  ano¬
ther  patient.  While  thus  engaged  I  heard  a  noise,  looked  round,
and  saw  her  in  a  violent  fit.  I  immediately  went  to  her,  relaxed  her
clenched  hands  and  rigid  arms  by  holding  the  former  and  rubbing
down  the  latter,  and  relaxed  her  rigid  and  bent-back  trunk  (opis¬
thotonos)*  by  passes  down  the  back  and  down  the  front  of  the  chest,

*  In  dangerous  tetanus  (commonly  called  lock-jaw),  even  from  wounds,
medical  writers  remark  that  the  body  is  more  frequently  bent  backwards


202


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


as  I  had  successfully  done  the  Sunday  before.  On  both  these  occa¬
sions,  when  the  fit  was  over,  she  was  still  in  the  mesmeric  state.
The  fits  which  were  excited  in  the  mesmeric  state,  not  by  an  accident,
but  evidently  by  the  mesmeric  process  or  state,  had  always  termi¬
nated  in  the  ordinary  waking  state.  I  was  obliged  to  go  out  at  half¬
past  one,  and  left  her  in  a  calm  mesmeric  sleep,  with  her  sister  only
in  the  room.  At  five  I  returned,  and  found  her  still  there  in  fits.
Her  sister  only  had  been  with  her,  and  three  long  fits  had  taken  place.
On  coming  out  of  each  she  had  appeared  in  the  mesmeric  state,
turning  round,  opening  her  eyes,  and  closing  them  as  if  about  to
sleep,  and  then  seized  with  another.  Being  satisfied  that  my  ab¬
sence  and  the  proximity  of  another  had  caused  all  the  disturbance,

I  begged  her  sister  to  withdraw  from  her,  seated  myself  at  her  side,
and  took  her  hand.  She  thus  gradually  grew  calm,  and  awoke  per¬
fectly  well  in  an  hour.

28.  Several  persons  were  present,  and  everything  went  on  well
till  I  left  the  room  for  two  minutes  to  speak  to  a  medical  man.  All
the  time  I  was  absent  she  frowned,  and  was  just  seized  with  a  slight
fit  as  I  entered  the  room.  I  immediately  tranquillized  her  by  sitting
at  her  side  and  taking  her  hand,  and  she  gradually  awoke.

29.  No  one  was  present  besides  her  sister,  and  she  sat  in  the
farther  room  with  the  door  open.  There  was  no  fit,  no  frowning,
except  when  her  sister  at  my  request  approached  behind  her  high
chair.

From  the  second  week  she  thus  frowned  if  I  retired  to  a
little  distance  from  her,  if  I  touched  others,  or  spoke  many
sentences  to  them,  or  they  approached  her ;  and  when  I  ap¬
proached  her  again,  or  ceased  to  touch  them  or  speak  to
them,  she  smiled,  and  sometimes  with  a  little  noise  of  grati¬
fication,  and  once  even  laughed  with  joy.

Her  mesmeric  state  was  one  of  extreme  diminution  of
muscular  power.  If  her  arm  or  foot  was  raised,  it  dropped
like  inanimate  matter  the  moment  I  let  it  go ;  she  could  not
support  herself  in  the  least,  but  lay  back  in  the  easy  chair
with  her  head  fallen  to  one  side.  By  tractive  movements  I  *
could  draw  up  her  hand  and  arm,  but  they  almost  immedi¬
ately  fell  again,  though  I  continued  to  draw ;  and  several
repetitions  were  requisite  before  the  arm  rose  to  any  height.

I  could  in  the  same  way  draw  her  head  and  body  forwards,
but  they  almost  immediately  fell  back.  Her  feet  shewed  less


than  forwards  :  they  say,  and  with  truth,  that  opisthotonos  is  more  frequent
than  emprosthotonos.  This  is  also  true  of  the  tetanus  of  epilepsy  and  hysteria,
and  is  seen  in  the  tetanus  excited  by  untoward  accidents  in  mesmerism,  such
as  the  contact  of  others  than  the  mesmeriser  when  there  is  strong  attachment
and  consequently  repulsion.  It  was  also  this  form  of  tetanus  which  occurred
so  frightfully  in  Elizabeth  Okey  from  mesmerised  nickel,  as  well  as  trismus,
or  lockjaw  properly  so  called,  which  is  the  most  common  of  all  tetanic
symptoms,  in  all  kinds  of  tetanus.


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


203


power  than  her  arms,  exactly  as  I  remarked  in  the  two  rigid
cases,  detailed  in  the  last  number,  (pp.  48,  77).

In  those  cases,  I  gave  reasons  for  considering  the  effects  of
traction  to  result  from  volition,  though  compelled  volition, —
an  irresistible  desire  to  obey  what  was  conceived  to  be  an
order,  (pp.  58,  59.)  This  view  was  corroborated  in  the
present  case ;  for,  when  the  forward  tractive  movements
had  drawn  her  forward  and  she  had  fallen  backwards  two  or
three  times,  and  I  repeated  the  traction,  she  would  shake
her  head  slightly  in  coming  forward,  as  if  with  determination
and  effort  to  do  the  thing,  and,  when  she  fell  back  again  pow¬
erless,  she  frowned  very  angrily,  and  once  actually  had  a  slight
fit  through  vexation,  just  as  she  had  from  vexation  at  my
leaving  or  neglecting  her  for  others,  or  at  others  touching  her.

The  evident  volition  in  the  effect  of  tractive  movements
shows  that  those  persons  are  wrong  who,  on  seeing  the  traction,
consider  that  the  term  animal  magnetism  is  thereby  proved  to
be  proper ;  for  they  erroneously  suppose  it  is  a  mere  attrac¬
tion  of  living  substance,  independent  of  feeling  and  will.

Others,  on  seeing  the  attachment  to  the  mesmeriser
make  the  patient  remain  close  to  him  and  run  after  him  if
he  removes,  regard  this  as  a  justification  of  the  term,  though
they  cannot  doubt  the  whole  of  this  to  be  an  affair  of  feeling
and  will.  The  involuntary  imitation  of  the  actions  of  the
mesmeriser  has  been  regarded  as  another  justification  of  the
term,  though  it  is  volition  through  the  irresistible  excite¬
ment  of  the  feeling  of  imitation.  Whether  vital  property,
the  power  called  galvanism,  magnetism,  and  electricity,  the
power  of  gravitation,  chemical  affinity,  heat,  light,  &c.,  may
not  one  day  be  shewn  to  be  modifications  of  the  same  power
of  matter,  and  all  substances  to  be  modifications  of  the  same
matter,  I  shall  not  at  present  consider.  I  mean  only  that
the  phenomena  of  traction,  attachment,  and  imitation,  in
the  mesmeric  state,  are  no  argument  that  mesmerism  is  a
form  of  magnetic  attraction.

My  power  of  traction  increased,  as  is  usual,  with  every
attempt  at  the  same  sitting,  and  also  at  every  sitting,  for  a
time,  as  is  also  usual ;  so  that  at  last  I  could  draw  her  up¬
right  in  her  chair.  But  it  went  no  farther.  By  tractive  passes
from  the  top  of  her  head,  I  raised  her  head,  but,  by  the
longest  continuation  of  them  from  her  head  and  shoulders,  I
never  succeeded  in  drawing  her  up  from  her  chair  as  I  had
done  with  the  Okeys,  Master  Salmon,  and  others.  I  could
not  by  any  perseverance  with  traction  cause  her  feet  to  rise
above  a  few  inches,  her  arm  above  a  dozen,  or  raise  her  from
the  sitting  position,  though  I  made  her  sit  quite  upright.  Nor


204


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


could  tlie  parts  maintain  their  new  situation  a  minute.  I  had
hardly  drawn  up  her  feet  or  arms  than  they  suddenly  dropped;
or  her  person  forwards  from  the  back  of  the  chair,  than  her
head  would  begin  to  tremble,  then  balance  itself  in  all  direc¬
tions  more  and  more,  and  she  would  fall  suddenly  back  again
perfectly  powerless.  There  was  no  want  of  perception  on  her
part  of  what  I  was  attempting, — ordering  (see  No.  Y.  pp.  58,
59),  nor  of  disposition  to  obey :  but  the  muscular  power  was
deficient.  If  I  lifted  her  off  her  chair,  she  tried  to  feel  the
ground  with  her  feet,  and  made  every  effort  to  stand  as  I
held  her  up,  but  her  legs  bent  and  gave  way,  like  broken
reeds,  and  her  hands,  arms,  and  trunk  fell  about  in  all  direc¬
tions,  as  if  she  were  a  corpse.  This  smaller  power  of  the  feet
and  legs,  before  and  after  the  use  of  the  mesmeric  means,
agrees  with  what  I  observed  in  the  two  cases  described  by
me  in  No.  Y.  pp.  49,  77 ;  and  with  the  fact  of  the  palsy  of  both
legs  being  very  much  more  common  than  that  of  both  arms,
and  of  the  comparative  rareness  of  the  cure  or  cessation  of
palsy  of  the  two  legs.

As  the  mesmeric  state  went  on,  the  muscles  acquired  more
power,  up  to  a  certain  point.  She  at  length  sat  with  her
head  pretty  well  up  against  the  back  of  the  chair,  moved  her
arms  in  her  lap,  and  crossed  her  knees ;  and  even  could  sup¬
port  her  head  upon  the  back  of  her  hand  with  her  elbow  on
the  arm  of  the  chair.  But  the  muscular  power  went  no  far¬
ther  than  this  degree,  and  when  she  could  do  all  this  her
waking  was  sure  to  be  near  at  hand.

Some  persons  unacquainted  with  mesmerism  accused  her
of  imposition,  because  they  observed  her  try  to  feel  with  her
feet  when  I  raised  her.  They  expected  that  in  mesmerism
there  must  be  death-like  sleep,  distinguishable  from  death  by
only  warmth  and  breathing ;  whereas  in  common  sleep  there
is  a  degree  of  sense  and  volition,  and  even  in  apoplexy  unless
at  the  very  approach  of  death  (see  No.  Y.  p.  69)  :  they  forgot
that  she  openly  made  great  efforts  to  feel  with  her  feet,  that
the  mesmeric  sleep  is  one  of  sleep-waking,  except  at  moments
of  the  deepest  repose,  and  that  in  mesmerism,  and  in  sponta¬
neous  sleep-waking, — the  somnambulism  of  disease, — the  pa¬
tient  may  possess  the  full  power  of  standing  and  of  walking,
and  of  running  too.  Her  peculiarity  was  want  of  muscular
power,  and  I  have  frequently  placed  her  for  demonstration  in
a  chair  by  the  side  of  the  rigid  patients  described  in  the  last
number,  whose  cases  were  in  this  respect  the  very  opposite
of  hers ;  for,  while  her  muscular  power  was  reduced  to  the
lowest  point,  their’ s  was  enormously  heightened.  Yet  could
her  muscular  power  be  increased  in  the  extensor  muscles  mo-


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


205


derately  and  for  a  short  time,  and  in  the  flexors  enormously
and  continuously.  By  long  passes  made  firmly  upon  the  arms,
these  could  be  stiffened  for  a  short  time :  by  holding  her  up¬
right  with  one  arm  and  making  similar  passes  down  her  trunk,
either  before  or  behind,  and  especially  both,  and  still  more
if  several  persons  made  them  at  the  same  time  down  her
back  that  I  continued  them  down  her  chest,  she  was  enabled
gradually  to  support  herself  better,  till  at  last  she  would  for
nearly  a  minute  stand  alone,  if  the  downward  passes,  before
and  behind,  were  continued,  now  even  at  the  distance  of  two
or  three  inches;  but  the  power  could  not  be  maintained,
and  she  soon  fell  powerless  and  required  to  be  caught.  If  I
stood  by  the  side  of  her  chair  as  she  lay  back,  I  could  by
tractive  passes  outwards  draw  her  forcibly  to  that  side  :  first
her  head  came,  then  her  shoulders,  and  at  last  the  whole
trunk,  and  she  would  come  over  the  arm  of  the  chair,  and
constant  attention  was  requisite  to  prevent  her  head  being  in¬
jured  by  falling  violently  against  the  wooden  frame  of  the  back,
for  it  fell  as  soon  as  it  was  drawn  from  its  support  against
the  back  of  the  chair.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the
action  of  holding  up  the  head  belongs  to  extensor  muscles,  and
that  of  bending  to  one  side  to  flexor  muscles,  which  in  her,
as  in  all  people,  possessed  so  much  less  force  than  the  exten¬
sor.  If  the  passes  were  made  along  the  inside  of  the  arm
upwards  from  the  palm  to  the  shoulder,  it  would  bend,  and
the  hand  be  tucked  in  the  arm-pit,  the  back  of  it  against  the
side,  and  very  great  force  would  not  pull  it  down,  short  of
what  was  likely  to  do  injury,  till,  by  the  mesmeric  influence
of  the  grasping  hand  upon  her  arm  penetrating  through  the
sleeve,  which  influence  was  independent  of  all  mechanical
force,  relaxation  took  place.  She  could  be  lifted  from  her
chair  and  suspended  by  the  bent  forearm  thus.  While  her
arms  were  thus  bent  up,  tractive  movements  of  my  hands
towards  each  other,  between  her  elbows,  would  draw  the
elbows  forcibly  towards  each  other,  the  hands  being  still
bent  up  in  the  arm  pits.  If  a  person  on  each  side  held  up
her  arms  perpendicularly  by  the  sleeves  at  the  wrists,  and  I
made  the  passes  between  the  fore-arms,  these  would  approach
each  other,  and  two  strong  men,  one  at  each  side  grasping
a  fore-arm,  would  sometimes  be  unable  to  prevent  them  com¬
ing  together,  and  the  elbows  would  come  into  absolute  con¬
tact.  The  wrists  and  central  portion  of  the  fore-arms  came
first  into  contact,  the  elbows  last,  and  it  was  necessary,
while  these  still  remained  at  a  little  distance  from  each
other,  to  continue  the  passes  between  them  with  the  points
of  the  fingers,  in  order  to  bring  the  very  elbows  them-


206


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of


selves  together ;  so  local  frequently  is  the  effect  of  tractive
passes.  If  the  passes  were  not  made  between  the  hands  as
well  as  between  the  fore-arms,  the  fingers  would  remain
flexible,  not  drawn  together ;  though  perhaps  but  partially
flexible,  if  a  few  passes  happened  to  have  been  made  between
the  hands.  I  recollect  that  once  while  I  was  shewing  this
experiment,  a  gentleman,  looking  very  dull  and,  though  the
son  of  one  of  the  very  highest  dignitaries  of  the  church,  proud
and  sneering,  tried  in  vain  to  separate  her  fore-arms,  and
then  took  hold  of  her  hands,  and  because  he  found  the  fingers
very  flexible,  looked  contemptuously,  turned  away,  and  pro¬
nounced  the  whole  to  be  humbug  at  a  fashionable  dinner
party  the  next  day.  In  his  ignorance,  he  did  not  consider
that  I  had  made  no  passes  to  draw  the  hands  together;  and
that,  from  those  which  I  had  made,  he  might  as  well  have
expected  the  feet  to  have  been  drawn  together.  Such  is  the
way  with  men  of  prejudice  and  conceit ;  they  will  not  attend
fully,  like  rational  beings,  to  the  matter  before  them,  but
conclude  as  soon  as  they  begin,  or  rather  before  they  begin.
By  making  passes  between  the  hands  these  were  always  drawn
as  forcibly  together  as  the  fore-arms  ;  and,  if  the  fingers  were
placed  not  opposite  each  other,  but  opposite  the  spaces  of
each  other,  so  that  they  could  go  between  each  other,  the
hands  became  clasped  and  absolutely  rivetted  together.
This  could  of  course  be  done  alone,  if  no  passes  were  made
between  the  fore-arms.

If,  when  her  fore-arms  had  been  drawn  together  in  the
perpendicular  position,  I  made  tractive  passes  outwards,
calculated  to  separate  them,  a  strong  man  on  each  side  en¬
deavouring  to  retain  them  together  in  their  situation  would
not  succeed ; — the  force  of  traction  was  too  strong  for  their
united  efforts.  To  shew  these  experiments  to  perfection,  those
who  grasped  her  arms  had  to  put  on  thick  gloves,  for  the
mesmeric  agency  of  any  person  is  usually  sufficient  to  relax
the  most  violent  mesmeric  contraction,  if  the  hand  or  any
part  of  the  surface  is  brought  in  contact  with  the  contracted
part.  Her  long  sleeves  impeded  the  influence  somewhat :
but  the  experiments  required  that  those  who  grasped  should
wear  gloves  :  and  her  strength  was  the  better  shewn  the
thicker  the  gloves,  so  as  to  impose  as  much  obstacle  as  pos¬
sible  to  the  transmission  of  the  influence.  All  the  time  that
force  is  used  by  any  one  upon  a  contracted  limb,  an  occult
agency  is  passing  from  the  grasping  hand  and  tending  to
relax  the  muscles,  so  that,  as  I  pointed  out  in  the  last  num¬
ber,  p.  62,  the  contact  of  the  bare  hand  of  a  baby  will
effect  in  a  few  seconds  what  the  greatest  force  of  a  well


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


207


covered  strong  hand  will  be  long  in  effecting,  if  it  succeed  at
all.  When  her  hands  have  been  clasped  together  by  mesmeric
contraction,  it  is  amusing  to  pull  them  asunder  as  the  influ¬
ence  dies  away,  and  observe  how  strong  pulling  gradually
succeeds  more  and  more,  the  fingers  becoming  extended  as
we  pull,  still  adhering  well  together  from  the  closeness  of  the
contact  of  those  of  the  two  hands  side  by  side.  Of  course  the
strongest  contraction  could  be  permanently  relaxed  by  breath¬
ing  no  less  than  by  continued  contact  without  pressure,  by
transverse  passes  even  without  contact,  or  by  longitudinal
passes  in  the  direction  opposite  to  the  contraction,  (vol.  i.,
p.  71,)  and  the  arms,  however  strongly  drawn  together,  and
the  fingers,  however  strongly  interlaced,  could  presently  be
separated  by  tractive  passes  made  outwards  in  the  direction
of  separation.  The  forcible  contraction  of  the  bent  fore-arm
necessarily  exhausted  itself  at  last ;  but  not  for  perhaps  a  quar¬
ter  of  an  hour  or  more.  Persons  would  find  it  very  painful
to  have  the  hand  bent  upon  the  arm  to  the  utmost,  so  that
the  outer  part  of  the  wrist  shall  be  rendered  as  convex  as  pos¬
sible,  even  for  a  few  minutes.  Ligaments  and  tendons  have
extreme  sensibility  of  tension  ;  and  the  difficulty  of  imitating
the  muscular  contraction  of  mesmerism  is  equalled  by  that
of  supporting  the  pain  of  many  of  its  positions.  An  aunt  of
this  patient  has  a  cancer  of  her  breast,  and  I  have  succeeded
in  becoming  able  by  a  single  pass  to  throw  her  into  a  pro¬
found  sleep,  which  lasts  for  hours,  and  in  which  there  is  no
sensation  from  pinching,  cutting,  pricking,  &c.  Now  the
arms  can  be  stiffened  by  longitudinal  passes,  so  that  they  will
lie  rigid  like  two  wooden  cylinders  at  her  sides,  and  remain
thus  rigid  long  after  she  is  awake.  I  can  bend  up  her  arms
like  her  niece's,  and  leave  the  fore-arms  half  bent  and  the
hands  bent  upon  the  fore-arms  :  and  they  will  remain  in  this
position  for  hours,  which  every  one  who  attempts  finds  insup¬
portable  for  very,  very  far  short  of  that  time.  Again,  so  far
from  fatigue  coming  on  and  lessening  these  effects,  the  longer
all  these  experiments  are  repeated  the  more  readily  do  the
effects  ensue,  and  the  more  energetic  are  they.  Other  people
in  their  attempts  to  imitate  the  actions  of  the  mesmeric
state  grow  more  and  more  fatigued.  But  the  very  reverse
happens  in  mesmerism :  and  I  have  been  exhausted  and  ob¬
liged  to  leave  off  experimenting  while  the  phenomena  con¬
tinued  to  go  on  with  more  and  more  readiness  and  energy.
After  any  length  of  these  experiments,  she  always  wakes  not
in  the  least  fatigued,  though  she  walks  to  my  house  and  home
again,  a  distance  of  three  miles  each  way,  and  finds  herself
far  stronger  and  livelier  in  the  evening.

VOL.  II.


p


208


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


In  making  hard  passes  in  contact  for  the  purpose  of  bend¬
ing  up  the  arm  or  any  other  part,  we  are  doing  two  things, —
employing  a  mesmeric  process  which  imparts  muscular  strength,
and  making  tractive  movements — we  give  an  impulse  to  a
certain  motion  and  the  power  to  obey  the  impulse.  In  simply
making  tractive  movements  we  give  the  impulse  only,  and
the  power  may  be  too  feeble  for  much  effect.

The  effects  of  traction  upon  the  muscles  of  the  face  were
very  interesting.  By  making  a  drawing  or  beckoning  move¬
ment  with  the  point  of  a  finger  at  a  corner  of  the  mouth,
this  could  be  drawn  outwards ;  and,  by  doing  so  at  each
corner  alternately,  the  corners  went  from  side  to  side  very
amusingly.  By  doing  so  upwards  from  the  upper  lip,  this
moved  upwards  and  forwards ;  by  doing  so  downwards  from
the  lower  lip,  this  went  downwards,  and,  by  doing  so  still  lower,
the  lip  and  whole  skin  beneath  it  were  drawn  down ;  by  doing
so  forwards  before  either,  either  could  be  drawn  forwards,
and,  if  it  was  done  forwards  before  both,  both  extended  for¬
wards  like  a  purse ;  by  doing  so  at  the  wing  of  the  nose,  this
expanded ;  and  by  drawing  rather  nearer  to  the  cheek  and
upwards,  a  twitching  took  place,  so  that  the  side  of  the  nose
and  corresponding  part  of  the  cheek  up  to  the  lower  eye-lid
went  upwards  at  several  rapid  successions,  and  even  the
shoulder  moved  upwards,  and  the  whole  of  that  side  of  the
body,  and  even  the  leg,  moved  as  if  electrified,  and  these  more
distant  effects  sometimes  returned,  if  I  continued  my  traction,
without  any  effect  on  the  face.  I  could  occasionally  move  her
ear  by  traction.  By  placing  the  points  of  the  fingers  of  my
two  hands  together  before  her  mouth  and  separating  them,
I  caused  her  mouth  to  open,  and  this  was  always  accompanied
by  a  deep  inspiration.  By  making  tractive  movements  from
her  chest,  this  would  rise  and  a  deep  inspiration  take  place.
By  pointing  a  finger  before  each  closed  eye,  and  raising  it  a
number  of  times,  the  upper  eye-lid  would  begin  to  open,
and,  after  closing  and  opening  a  little  more  and  more  several
times,  it  would  open  wide,  and  at  last  remain  so  for  a  short
time,  especially  if  the  finger,  or  all  the  fingers,  now  made
ascending  movements  before  the  eyes  and  even  beyond  the
eye-brows  :  and  this  would  often  cause  the  whole  face  to  turn
up, — much  to  the  surprise  of  the  experimenter,  who  not  only
was  not  willing  this,  but  was  unprepared  for  it.

In  general,  however,  the  upper  lid  soon  dropped  again
and  firmly  closed,  and  I  had  to  wait  some  seconds  before  I
could  make  it  ascend  again  ;  not  indeed  till  its  close  contact
was  over,  and  it  had  lost  all  its  puckered  state.  On  the  eyes
being  seen,  they  were  always  observed  converging,  like  those


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


209


of  the  second  case  described  by  me  in  the  last  number,  p.  77 ;

I  never  saw  them  otherwise  when  her  lids  were  mesmerically
opened.  When  her  eyes  were  open,  if  I  moved  my  fingers
from  side  to  side  before  them,  they  also  went  from  side  to
side,  as  rapidly  as  my  fingers.  This  result  always  ensued,
till  one  day  in  December,  1842;  and  from  that  time  the
eyes  have  never  followed  the  movements  of  my  fingers.  They
would  also  follow  the  movements  of  my  fingers  upwards  and
downwards.  When  left  to  themselves  her  eves  were  some-
times  quite  closed,  even  during  the  whole  of  a  mesmerisation  ;
sometimes  not  perfectly  so ;  and  sometimes  the  eyes  were  dis¬
tinctly  seen  as  she  lay,  though  never  directed  to  any  object,
and  might  converge  or  lie  in  the  outer  and  inner  corners.
This  varied  condition  of  the  lids,  the  eye  sometimes  being
open,  sometimes  closed,  occurred  in  the  first  of  the  cases  re¬
lated  by  me  in  the  last  number ;  they  were  generally  open
about  one  third  in  the  second  case.  I  have  some  patients
whom  I  have  mesmerised  almost  daily  for  above  a  year,  and
in  whom  I  have  never  known  the  eyes  in  the  least  open  yet,
though  one  of  them  talks  fluently  and  walks  about  in  her
mesmeric  state.  Her  jaws  were  sometimes  open,  sometimes
closed.

Such  were  the  features  of  this  case  in  regard  to  the  organs
of  motion.

The  phenomena  of  common  sensation  were  interesting.
There  was  no  feeling  to  pricking,  cutting,  pinching,  below
the  ridge  of  the  lower  jaw  and  a  line  continued  from  this
around  the  back  of  the  neck  some  little  way  down  the  trunk,
and  all  the  way  down  the  upper  extremities,  except  at  the
points  of  the  fingers  and  thumbs ;  but  above  this  limit  and
all  over  the  head,  the  sensibility  was  not  at  all  diminished, —
she  felt  the  slightest  touch.  I  have  had  other  patients  in  whom
there  was  insensibility  below  the  face  and  head,  and  yet  perfect
sensibility  in  them :  and  in  some  the  extent  and  situation
of  the  insensibility  will  vary  at  different  times  (vol.  i.  p.  413).
She  was  four  times  bled,  and  once  had  a  tooth  extracted
without  the  slightest  sensation.  The  extraction  of  the  tooth
I  recorded  in  my  pamphlet  on  Surgical  Operations  without
Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State,  p.  66;  and  two  of  the  venesections
in  the  last  number  of  this  work,  (pp.  90,  91.)  During  the
latter  operations  she  was  talking  freely.  Although  all  the  ex¬
ternal  parts  of  the  head  and  face  were  fully  sensible,  the
gums  had  no  feeling.  If  I  push  a  pencil-case  against  them
she  is  not  aware  of  it,  but  she  feels  it  as  soon  as  it  is
pushed  against  the  inside  of  the  cheeks  or  lips.  Yet,  though
she  never  gave  the  least  sign  of  sensation,  however  mechani-


210


Dr.  E Matson’s  Case  of


cally  injured  witliin  the  limits  mentioned,  she  had  an  exqui¬
site  sense  of  temperature  throughout  her  frame,  but  not  more
in  the  face  than  in  her  arms  and  hands.  Not  merely  did
cold  or  hot  substances,  when  applied  to  her  hands  for  example,
give  an  immediate  sensation;  but  even  when  held  at  a  small
distance,  so  that  nothing  could  be  ascribed  to  contact.  Her
sensibility  to  cold  was  indeed  extreme :  if  the  weather  wras
cool,  she  would  shudder  as  soon  as  she  was  asleep,  and  re¬
quire  a  shawl,  though  previously  she  had  not  complained  of
cold ;  and  contact  of  anything  cold  made  her  shudder  dis¬
tressingly.  And  this  I  have  noticed  in  other  cases,  in  which
the  loss  of  common  feeling  ( anaesthesia :)  existed.  The  same
peculiarity  may  exist  in  ordinary  palsy,  but  it  is  not  noticed,
because  not  examined  into ; — a  part  is  pinched  and  does  not
feel,  and  therefore  is  presumed  to  have  no  kind  of  feeling.
Yet  she  had  the  feeling  of  resistance,  like  many  others  who  do
not  feel  mechanical  injury.  On  being  told  by  me  to  grasp  my
hand,  or  anything  else,  she  would  do  so.  Elizabeth  Okey,  when
insensible  to  cutting  and  burning,  could  walk  and  hold  things.

Neither  was  there  any  diminution  of  the  other  four  senses
as  far  as  I  could  observe.  She  smelt  and  tasted,  and,  though
from  time  to  time  in  too  deep  a  sleep  to  hear,  or  so  ab¬
stracted  that  she  was  lost  to  the  conversation  around  her,  she
could  be  roused  to  hear  and  answer  any  one,  and  would  hold
a  conversation  from  time  to  time.  She  noticed  nothing  that
was  around  her  with  her  eyes  which  were  often  firmly  closed,
but  generally  a  little  open  [supra,  p.  50),  and  she  distin¬
guished  no  one,  nor  any  object  whatever,  being  invariably
in  a  dream  and  recognizing  nothing,  not  even  her  own  hands.
Even  when  her  eyes  were  opened  by  passes  upwards  before
them,  and  remained  widely  so  for  some  part  of  a  minute,
they  appeared  not  to  see.  But  this  might  not  be  from  want  of
visual  power  in  the  nerves  of  sight,  but  from  abstraction  and
consequent  delusion ;  for  she  always  fancied  herself  in  some
other  place  than  where  she  was,  and  otherwise  engaged  than
she  was.  She  possibly  saw  without  knowing  that  she  saw ;
just  as  many  exert  will,  both  in  the  mesmeric  sleep-waking  and
in  other  sleep-waking,  common  dreaming,  and  even  in  any
form  of  abstraction  when  awake,  without  knowing  that  they
are  doing  what  they  do.  I  have  a  patient  in  whose  mesmeric
sleep  there  is  a  powerful  attraction  to  me,  and  he  grasps  my
hands  firmly.  Before  he  is  asleep,  while  still  wide  awake,
looking  at  me  as  I  look  at  him  and  hold  one  of  his  hands  in
mine  while  the  other  is  on  his  forehead,  this  attraction  will
come  on,  so  that  his  hand  grasps  mine.  On  my  telling  him
of  this  the  first  time,  he  looked  down  and  saw  that  it  wras


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


211


so ;  but  he  did  not  know  it  before,  and  assured  me  he  had
not  consciously  grasped  my  hand.  On  subsequent  occasions
the  same  has  often  happened, — the  mesmeric  effect  in  the
feeling  of  friendship  taking  place  before  there  was  any  very
great  advance  towards  sleep ;  but  he,  now  suspecting  the  matter
and  therefore  attending  to  the  point,  would  say,  “  Sir,  I  feel  my
fingers  curling  round  your  hand,  but  I  can't  help  it ;  I  don't
curl  them  round."  However,  before  he  is  quite  asleep,  his  hand
is  firmly  grasping  mine,  nor  is  he  able  to  relax  it.  And  as  a
farther  illustration  that  this  was  the  emotion  of  attachment  and
an  unconscious  exertion  of  volition,  I  must  remark  that  when
squeezing  my  hands  with  painful  tightness  in  the  moments  of
deep  sleep,  he  would  frown  and  let  them  go  if  I  conversed  with
others,  and  would  not  take  them  again  while  I  continued
conversing.  I  am  certain  that  persons,  that  is,  the  brain,
can  unconsciously  receive  external  impressions,  and  uncon¬
sciously  act  upon  these  impressions ;  so  unconsciously  as  to
deny,  with  no  falsehood  on  their  part,  that  they  received  the
impression  or  did  the  act  (supra,  p.  70) ;  and  this  while  awake,
— while  apparently  awake,  but,  I  should  say,  in  a  waking
state  with  a  dash  of  sleep  on  certain  feelings  and  exertions  of
what  we  call  will.  The  materialist  only,  who  is  the  only
true  cerebral  physiologist,  sees  the  simple  explanation  of  all
this ;  sees  that  all  is  ascribable  to  partial  cerebral  activity,
— that  one  portion,  or  some  portions,  of  the  brain  are  active
independently  of  the  rest,  without  the  knowledge  of  the  rest,
just  as  one  portion  of  the  surface  of  the  body  may  be  active
in  secreting,  and  the  rest  not,  and  partial  perspiration  is  the
result.

The  only  arguments  for  her  seeing  were  that  her  eyes  were
very  often  observed  to  remain  slightly  open.  But  the  tractive
movements  succeeded  perfectly  when  her  eyes  were  completely
covered,  which  never  annoyed  her  at  all  and  on  which  she
never  made  any  remark.  If  a  shawl  four  times  doubled  was
put  over  her  head  and  chest,  so  that  her  hands  only  were  visible,
and  no  one  could  pretend  she  might  see,  I  have  drawn  either  up
at  pleasure,  after  perseverance.  Either  foot  was  drawn  back  or
to  one  side  at  pleasure,  as  she  sat  with  her  head  turned  away
and  hanging  over  the  other  side  of  the  chair,  and  when  she
could  not  have  seen  had  her  eyes  been  open,  though  in  fact
they  were  closed.  The  experiments  upon  the  various  parts  of
the  face  succeeded  perfectly  when  Professor  Wheatstone  com¬
pletely  held  down  the  closed  eyelids  and  I  drew ;  and  when  I
held  them  down  and  he  drew ;  and  when  each  closed  eye  was
pressed  all  the  time  with  a  handkerchief  crumpled  together.
I  have  held  up  her  hand  and  arm  by  the  sleeve  above  and  be-


212


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of


liind  her  head,  as  she  lay  asleep  with  her  head  hanging  down
and  her  eyes  bandaged,  and  drawn  up  any  finger  at  pleasure  ;
at  first  all  the  fingers  would  rise,  next  her  hand  would  close,
and  then  different  fingers  would  come  up ;  and  at  last  the
right  finger  would  remain  up  alone.  When  this  experiment
was  over,  I  have  tried  to  draw  another  finger,  but  the  finger
that  extended  fixedly  in  the  first  experiment  would  come  up
before  the  proper  one.  When  she  has  been  lying  with  her
eyes  perfectly  closed,  so  that  two  of  us  watching  her  saw  the
upper  lid  so  low  that  it  had  to  be  forced  up  a  good  deal  be¬
fore  the  eye  could  be  seen,  and  then  only  the  white  was  dis¬
cernible,  and  indeed  without  doing  this  the  prominence  of
the  cornea  was  evidently  far  above  the  juncture  of  the  lids,
so  that  vision  was  again  unquestionably  impossible, — I  have
laid  a  handkerchief  four  times  double  over  her  hands  as  they
lay  close  together  in  her  lap,  and  drawn  up  either  at  plea¬
sure  :  there  being  thus  no  possibility  of  either  sight,  or  of
hints  from  currents  of  air,  or  any  impression  upon  any  one
of  the  five  senses.  But  whenever  the  eyes  were  left  unco¬
vered,  so  that,  if  she  would,  she  was  at  liberty  to  see  all  I
did,  and  I  made  the  experiments  upon  the  various  parts  of
the  face  mentioned  at  page  208,  or  attempted  to  draw  up
the  hands  or  the  feet,  there  was  the  same  slowness  of  effect
and  the  same  repetition  of  effect  as  I  pointed  out  in  vol.  i.,
pp.  320,  422,  423,  424,  (supra,  p.  55.)  For  example :  a  pre¬
vious  movement  which  had  been  effected  would  continue  to
come  out  while  a  new  movement  was  attempted,  and  a  move¬
ment  which  from  not  coming  out  soon  had  been  no  longer
attempted  would  begin  just  as  when  the  eyes  were  covered.
When  I  have  been  drawing  one  of  her  hands  in  one  direction,
and  a  second  person  (her  sister  for  instance)  in  another,  I
have  of  course  beaten ;  if  we  reversed  our  positions,  the  second
person  would  beat  for  a  time,  through  the  propensity  to  con¬
tinue  the  previous  action.

She  shewed  no  disposition  to  imitate,  except  the  con¬
dition  of  my  hand.  I  grimaced  or  assumed  attitudes  in  vain,
however  long  I  remained  quietly  before  her ;  but,  if  I  opened
my  hand  widely,  by  the  side  of  her’s,  she  very  slowly  and  after
many  attempts  opened  her’s,  and  kept  it  extended  :  and,  if  I
clenched  mine,  she  very  slowly  clenched  her?s,  but  she  in¬
variably  opened  her’s  more  or  less  repeatedly  first ;  and
even  did  this  after  more  or  less  closing  it  before  she  finally
closed  it.  This  was  from  my  having  originally  opened  mine
in  this  experiment  and  not  clenched  it,  and  done  this  very
many  times  on  that  occasion,  so  that  this  first  action  comes
out  first  even  now,  beyond  the  end  of  two  years  (vol.  i.,  p.  320).


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


213


Now  she  imitates  my  condition  of  hand  just  as  well  when  her
eyes  are  completely  covered  as  when  uncovered  :  and  she  ex¬
tends  her  hand  in  the  first  instance,  and  after  attempting  to
close  it  she  extends  it,  as  repeatedly  when  her  eyes  are  open
as  when  they  are  covered.

Like  many  sleep-wakers,  she  disliked  a  loud  noise  and  a
strong  light.  She  would  frown  at  the  former,  and  turn  from
the  latter.  I  have  a  patient  who  knows  no  person's  voice  but
mine,  and  hears  no  noise,  however  loud  and  disagreeable,  made
by  any  other  person  than  myself,  and  yet  is  greatly  annoyed
by  much  light.  The  present  patient's  eyes  always  smarted
while  I  was  sending  her  off,  and,  if  sleep  was  not  soon  pro¬
duced,  they  watered  very  painfully  :  and  after  she  awoke  she
always  complained  of  uneasiness  in  them,  and  indeed  they
often  watered  as  she  slept.

She  had  occult  senses, — senses  which  in  her  waking  state
she  had  not.  However  blindfolded,  even  if  a  large  doubled
cloth  was  thrown  over  her  head  and  chest,  she  could  readily
distinguish  the  point  of  my  finger  upon  her  hand  from  that  of
any  other  person;  or  my  breath  from  that  of  any  person  upon
her  hand :  and  even  the  proximity  of  any  other  person's  hand  :
nay,  anything  first  held  in  the  hand  of  another  was  disagree¬
able  to  her.  My  breath,  touch,  and  anything  I  had  touched,
were  agreeable  and  warm  to  her,  but  the  breath,  contact,
proximity,  or  anything  from  the  hand  of  any  other  person
gave  her  the  sensation  of  coldness.

If  others  stood  close  to  her,  she  began  to  shudder ;  and
the  proximity  of  several  was  distressingly  cold  to  her.  All
this  was  constant  at  the  beginning  of  her  state ;  but,  after  she
had  been  in  it  some  time,  her  face  generally  became  flushed,
and  she  would  allow  persons  to  be  near  her,  and  frowned  but
little,  at  last  not  at  all,  on  my  leaving  her.  She  would  bear
them  much  better  behind  her  high-backed  chair  and  at  her
side  than  in  front.  What  was  very  striking,  a  stranger
could  draw  her  almost  as  well  as  I  could.  Tractive  passes
by  a  stranger  would  draw  her  arms  or  her  feet  up  or  side¬
ways,  and  draw  her  head  and  whole  body  over  the  side  of  the
chair,  she  frowning  all  the  time  most  angrily  at  the  proximity
of  the  stranger  or  his  power  to  make  her  obey,  but  compelled
to  follow  his  movements.  When  I  drew  her  there  was  no
frown.  When  a  stranger  had  drawn  her  foot  outwards,  she
frowning  all  the  time  it  followed  his  tractive  movements,
she  would  retract  it  very  angrily  the  moment  he  desisted
from  drawing  it.  Any  one  could  draw  her  eye-lids  open,
and  draw  her  eyes  from  side  to  side  and  up  and  down.
Nay,  a  stranger  could  draw  her  more  powerfully  than  myself,


214


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


if  liis  efforts  were  on  her  right  side,  and  mine  upon  the  left ;
even  if  he  stood  at  some  distance  from  her  and  I  close  to
her.  If  he  and  I  began  drawing  at  the  same  time,  he  would
draw  her  over  the  right  side  of  the  chair,  while  I  was  at¬
tempting  to  the  utmost  to  draw  her  to  the  left.  He  would
effect  his  purpose  more  slowly  for  my  efforts  in  the  opposite
direction ;  but  he  invariably  beat  me.  Every  phenomenon,
stiffening,  contraction,  &c.,  was  more  ready  and  more  pow¬
erful  upon  her  right  side  than  upon  her  left ;  even  the  excite¬
ment  of  her  cerebral  organs  is  more  ready  in  the  right  half
of  the  brain.  This  is  striking,  but  in  harmony  with  common
facts.  We  are  a  compound  of  two  halves,  made  very  similar,
but  often  not  perfectly  so.  Jewellers  tell  me  that  rings  often
are  tight  to  the  right  fingers  which  are  pleasant  on  the  left.
Cerebral  physiologists  continually  observe  the  cranium  to  be
different  on  the  two  sides.  One  eye  is  sometimes  lower  than
the  other,  and  the  nose  is  sometimes  awry.  There  may  in¬
deed  be  visible  differences  in  any  part  of  the  two  halves  of  the
frame :  and  a  difference  somewhere  or  other  is  very  common,
if  not  almost  universal.  I  have  at  this  moment,  besides  the
present  patient,  an  aunt  of  her’s,  whose  right  arm  can  be
stiffened  far  more  readily  than  the  left.  I  mesmerise  a  young
lady  and  also  a  young  gentleman  in  whom  the  left  side  is
more  readily  stiffened  and  drawn  ;  and  yet  these  two  are,  like
the  former  two,  right  handed.

Nothing  could  be  more  amusing  than  to  see  her  obey  the
tractive  movements  of  a  stranger,  frowning  and  scowling  as
she  obeyed  them,  and  violently  withdrawing  her  leg,  for  in¬
stance,  to  its  place  as  soon  as  he  ceased  to  draw.  Yet  she
never  shewed  resistance,  although,  when  pulled,  she  made
her  utmost  efforts  to  resist.  A  tractive  movement  with  one
finger  would  signify  the  wish  of  the  experimenter  often  just
as  well  as  one  with  the  whole  hand  or  both  hands.  The  re¬
sult  would  equally  ensue  whether  he  wrore  gloves  or  not :  nay,
if  tractive  movements  were  made  with  a  pencil-case,  a  paper-
cutter,  &c.,  she  obeyed,  provided  care  was  taken  to  make  it
evident  that  it  was  moved  by  the  experimenter.  If  the
pencil-case,  &c.,  was  moved  with  a  careful  concealment  of
all  motion  of  the  hand,  or  an  empty  loose  glove  was  em¬
ployed  for  traction  with  the  same  care,  no  effect  followed.
It  was  just  the  same  with  the  Okeys.  The  power  of  traction
with  them  was  intense  even  at  a  great  distance.  One  of  them
has  been  placed  with  her  back  against  a  board,  and  I  have
concealed  myself  behind  it,  and  put  forth  one  hand  and  made
tractive  movements  outwards  near  one  of  her  hands,  and  her
hand  moved  outwards :  but,  when  afterwards  I  kept  my  hand


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


215


behind  the  board,  and  made  the  tractive  movements  with  a
piece  of  wood,  &c.,  her  hand  was  unaffected, — there  being
no  reason  for  her  to  believe  that  any  one  was  ordering  a
movement  from  her.

It  was  not  the  will  of  the  stranger  that  irresistibly  ef¬
fected  her  obedience  :  but  a  knowledge  by  some  occult  exter¬
nal  sense  of  what  he  was  attempting.  For,  while  I  was  not
attending,  strangers  often  drew  her  who  did  not  believe  they
should  be  able  and  hoped  the  effect  would  not  come :  and
when  I  have  intended  to  make  longitudinal  tractive  passes
along  the  outside  of  her  arms  upwards  to  extend  them,  I
have  sometimes  from  inattention  made  them  in  her  and
others  rather  over  the  inside,  and  thus  gave  the  idea  of  bend¬
ing  the  arm ;  and  it  has  bent  instead  of  extending  according
to  m3'  intention.

And  if  a  stranger  willed  ever  so  much  to  relax  her  clenched
hand  or  bent  arm  by  breathing  on  it,  the  hand  did  not  relax :
she  having  no  idea  what  he  was  attempting,  and  his  breath
being  intensely  disagreeable  to  her :  whereas  my  breath
relaxed  it  instantly.  In  cases  where  there  is  not  attraction
to  the  mesmeriser  nor  repulsion  of  others,  relaxation  is
usually  induced  as  readily  by  the  breath  or  touch  of  others
as  of  the  mesmeriser.  When  she  was  squeezing  my  hand,
both  the  breath  and  touch  of  a  stranger,  even  of  her  mother
and  favourite  sister,  only  made  her  squeeze  my  hand  the
harder,  just  as  the  unkindness  of  any  one  makes  us  cleave
the  more  to  those  we  love.  Yet  they  and  all  others  could
draw  her  hand  when  it  was  squeezing  mine — knowing  what
they  were  attempting  she  could  not  refrain  from  obeying
them — but  she  squeezed  my  hand  the  more,  and  drew  it
with  her  own,  unless  at  moments  of  deeper  sleep  and  less
activity  of  attachment  to  me,  and  then  her  hand  would  be
drawn  up  from  mine.  If,  however,  I  made  tractive  passes
while  her  hand  was  squeezing  my  other  hand,  it  opened  and
rose. — If  I  drew,  her  arm  for  instance,  in  one  direction,  and
another  placed  his  hand  near  it  on  the  opposite  side,  the
traction  was  much  more  rapid,  being  thus  aided  by  repulsion
from  the  stranger  (supray  p.  56).

As  a  further  illustration  of  occult  property  in  the  mes¬
meric  state,  I  have  a  patient  who,  in  his  silent  sleep,  with
his  eyes  perfectly  closed,  and  any  thickness  of  cloth  thrown
over  his  head  and  chest  and  drawn  close  round  him,  is  in¬
stantly  distressed  beyond  a  measure  by  a  piece  of  gold  placed
upon  the  back  of  his  hand  after  lying  in  the  hand  of  another
person,  but  not  at  all  if  it  has  been  taken  from  my  hand.
Any  one  with  gloves  on  makes  the  experiment,  placing  the


216


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of


sovereign  first  on  my  hand  or  the  hand  of  another  at  pleasure,
in  every  succession  and  with  as  many  repetitions  as  are  thought
proper.  Nay,  if  the  gold  is  taken  off  my  right  hand  and
placed  upon  his  left,  or  off  my  left  and  placed  upon  his  right,
he  is  distressed,  and  shakes  it  off,  and,  if  it  is  placed  in  his
palm,  violent  spasm  of  the  hand  occurs ;  though  he  expresses
no  uneasiness  when  it  is  taken  from  my  right  and  placed  on
his  right,  or  from  my  left  and  placed  upon  his  left.  Neither
temperature  nor  anything  but  occult  property  can  explain
these  wonderful  facts.  The  silliness  of  those  people  who
pronounced  that  the  Okeys  were  impostors,  and  knew  what
metals  had  been  mesmerised  by  their  warmth,  moisture,  &c.,
does  indeed  appear  preposterous  to  me,  now  that  every  class
of  facts  in  those  two  sisters  have  been  carefully  verified  by
me  in  so  many  other  patients.

This  youth,  like  the  present  patient,  can  distinguish  the
touch  of  the  point  of  my  finger  from  that  of  any  other  per¬
son,  though  his  eyes  are  always  firmly  closed  and  turned  up,
and  however  much  his  head  is  covered ;  and  the  touch  of
every  one  else  makes  him  withdraw  his  hand,  unless  indeed
they  are  under  the  influence  of  mesmerism,  and  he  then  is
never  annoyed  by  them.  The  present  patient  disliked  the  touch
of  others  in  even  their  mesmeric  state,  always  frowning,  but
did  not  find  their  touch  cold  she  said,  in  answer  to  our  enqui¬
ries  when  we  placed  the  hand  of  others  asleep  upon  her ;  yet
she  could  not  by  any  possibility  see  whose  hands  touched  her.
Her  attachment  to  me  was  only  to  me  as  her  mesmeriser ;
since,  last  Sunday,  June  23,  for  nearly  three  years,  another
person  than  myself  tried  to  mesmerise  her.  Mr.  Atkinson  sent
her,  by  pointing  and  looking,  to  sleep  in  ten  minutes.  She
then  smiled  when  he  touched  her  hand,  and  frowned  when  I
did,  sight  being  impossible.  She  awoke  in  a  few  minutes
suddenly,  without  precursory  symptoms.  I  then  sent  her  to
sleep  in  one  minute,  and  she  smiled  on  my  taking  her  hand ;
but  the  relation  to  him  that  had  existed  just  before  continued
in  some  degree,  for  she  allowed  him  to  touch  her,  and  was
pleased,  though  her  smile  was  faint  and  she  did  not  grasp
his  hand.  As  soon  as  I  put  my  hand  upon  his,  while  it  lay
upon  her's,  she  smiled ;  my  impression  actually  being  con¬
veyed  through  his  hand.  We  repeated  these  trials  again
and  again,  with  the  same  results  invariably,  vision  being
impossible.

I  have  another  patient  who  dislikes  the  touch  of  no  one,
and  has  but  a  moderate  attachment  to  me,  shewing  itself  only
by  occasionally  asking  me  to  speak  to  her,  and  obeying  my
tractive  movements  towards  mvself  rather  than  those  of  an-


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


217


other,  if  I  and  another  draw  her  at  the  same  time.  Now  if  her
hand  is  brought  upon  the  hand  of  any  one  who  is  in  the  mes¬
meric  state,  it  invariably  has  a  tendency  to  adhere  to  this,  and
in  exact  proportion  to  the  intensity  of  the  other’s  mesmeric
state ;  if  the  state  is  deep,  I  cannot  tear  her  hand  away  without
the  greatest  difficulty,  and  she  fancies  that  some  strong  adhe¬
sive  matter  binds  her  to  the  other,  and  the  sensation  to  her
is  agreeable  in  exact  proportion  to  the  intensity  of  the  adhe¬
sion.  Even  before  persons  are  perfectly  sent  off  she  feels
this  sensation  and  this  adhesive  propensity,  and  for  some  time
after  they  are  awake.  The  youth  also  is  not  annoyed  by
others  for  some  little  time  after  they  have  come  out  of  their
mesmeric  state.  I  have  placed  the  hand  of  a  mesmerised
patient  asleep  upon  his,  and  have  then  awakened  the  other,
and  he  has  allowed  the  hand  still  to  lie  upon  his ;  but,  after
the  same  length  of  time  after  which  the  female  patient,  just
mentioned,  no  longer  fancies  the  existence  of  a  pleasant  ad¬
hesive  substance  in  others  who  have  been  awakened,  he  sud¬
denly  threw  off  the  other’s  hand  with  great  distress.  In  all
the  experiments  of  this  kind  vision  was  absolutely  impossible.

Occasionally  she  would  not  repel  another,  but  then  she
generally  in  this  case  fancied  the  stranger  was  some  one  she
liked.  She  might  declare  that  no  one  touched  her.

Strong  as  the  power  of  attraction  to  the  mesmeriser  is  in
the  case  which  forms  the  subject  of  this  paper,  the  disposi¬
tion  to  obey  is  greater;  for,  by  making  tractive  movements
on  the  other  side  than  that  on  which  I  stand,  her  hand  held
in  mine,  or  her  whole  person,  if  I  direct  the  passes  to  it,
will  recede  from  me  in  the  direction  in  which  I  draw ;  and
this  is  the  invariable  result  in  all  other  cases  I  have  had  of
attraction  to  me  and  susceptibility  of  traction.

She  had  no  susceptibility  of  peculiar  impression  from  mes¬
merised  inanimate  substances, — gold,  silver,  nickel,  water,  &c.
as  so  many  have.  I  have  made  trials  at  all  periods  of  treat¬
ment  of  her,  with  no  result.

If  the  reader  turns  back,  he  will  find  my  report  of  each
sitting  from  the  first  not  continued  beyond  the  29th  of  Sep¬
tember,  1841.  I  mesmerised  her  almost  daily  up  to  August
the  5th,  and  left  England  the  next  day.  On  my  return
from  Lombardy  at  the  end  of  October,  I  expected  her  daily,
but,  from  the  house  on  one  side  of  mine  and  the  chapel  on
the  other  being  under  repair  and  a  hoard  erected  before
each,  she  fancied  in  walking  down  the  street  that  mine  was
under  repair  and  I  had  not  yet  returned,  so  that  I  did  not
see  her  till  the  13th  of  December,  when  I  drove  to  Islington,
and  found  that  she  had  remained  free  from  all  signs  of  a  fit


218


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


for  a  good  three  weeks  after  my  departure,  so  that  not  only
had  her  fits  greatly  declined  from  the  very  first  time  I  mes¬
merised  her ,  but  had  actually  ceased  for  a  whole  month.  I
have  no  doubt  this  would  have  been  an  example  of  almost
immediate  cure,  as  it  was  of  immediate  effect,  had  I  not
discontinued  to  mesmerise  her,  and  had  not  a  dreadful  mental
shock  completely  upset  her  frame.  But  these  two  untoward
circumstances  united  brought  back  her  attacks  severely  at
the  beginning  of  October.  A  medical  man  was  employed,
who  put  leeches  upon  her  temples,  a  blister  at  the  back  of
the  neck ,  so  long  that  it  nearly  touched  in  front,  and  three
more  in  succession  down  the  spine ,  lower  and  lower,  each  six
inches  long  and  four  broad,  all  in  one  week,  and  he  wished
this  treatment  to  be  continued  for  a  month,  and  sent  her  in
a  large  quantity  of  pills,  powders,  and  mixtures,  and  forbad
her  beer,  wine,  and  flesh  food.  The  blisters  could  but
increase  her  irritation,  and  her  brain  was  in  the  highest  state
of  moral  irritation,  and  she  declined  carrying  out  these  sharp
measures  as  he  wished ;  but  the  moral  shock  expended  itself,
and  at  the  end  of  three  weeks,  she  was  free  from  the  fits
again,  and  had  no  more  up  to  the  time  of  my  seeing  her  on
December  13th,  when  I  began  to  mesmerise  her  again.  She
did  not  go  off  in  less  than  fifteen  minutes.  I  happened  to
enter  into  conversation  with  her  mother  and  sisters  at  a  short
distance  from  her,  and  this  so  displeased  her  that  her  arms
became  extended  and  her  hands  clenched,  and  so  remained,
but  without  any  more  sign  of  a  fit,  for  a  considerable  time,
though  the  parties  removed  to  an  inner  room,  and  I  ceased
to  converse  with  them,  and  from  the  first  held  her  by  the
hand.  I  placed  a  parrot  on  her  and  talked  to  it  without  in¬
creasing  her  signs  of  annoyance,  though  she  frowned  when  it
made  a  shrill  noise.

So  early  as  the  27th  of  August  she  made  an  effort  to
speak  :  on  the  28th  a  still  greater,  and  even  uttered  something,
though  too  faintly  for  me  to  distinguish  more  than  the  word
“  Yes.”  She  was  evidently  talking  to  herself,  or  some  fancied
person,  and  she  smiled  as  she  spoke.  I  have  now  no  doubt  the
activity  of  her  brain  had  so  advanced  that  she  was  then  in  the
dreamy  condition  which  afterwards  characterized  her  sleep¬
waking.  But  I  noticed  nothing  more  of  the  kind  till  she
sat  reclining  in  the  mesmeric  sleep  on  Sunday  the  26th
of  December,  when  she  suddenly  said,  “Do  you  like  the
Rover,  father  ?”  After  a  short  time  she  spoke  again,  “  Shall
I  sing  the  Hover,  father?”  After  a  second  pause  she  re¬
peated  the  question  ;  and  after  a  third  she  began  to  sing  the
Rover,  but  got  through  a  line  only.  She  now  paused  again
and  then  sang  a  whole  verse,  when  she  suddenly  left  off,  say-


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


219


ing  she  could  not  sing ;  and  she  was  greatly  dissatisfied  with
herself  for  not  being  able  to  sing  it  so  well  as  she  wished.

For  many  months  I  mesmerised  her  four  times  a  week  :
she  coming  twice  a  week  to  my  house,  and  I  going  twice  a
wreek  to  her  mother’s.  She  did  not  speak  again  till  January
the  4th  :  and  was  still  so  weak  from  what  she  had  gone
through  in  my  absence,  that  this  was  the  first  day  I  could
enable  her  to  stand  up  in  her  mesmeric  state  ever  so  little,
though  she  walked  pretty  well  when  awake.  But  on  that
day  she  suddenly  said,  “  I  think  I’ll  sing  that  song  that  John
likes and  I  got  her  into  conversation,  and  have  succeeded
ever  since  not  only  to  make  her  converse  but  to  sing.

I  invariably  have  found  her  in  a  dream.  She  never  knows
who  or  where  she  is,  what  time  it  is,  or  to  whom  she  is  speaking.
Though  attracted  to  me,  she  never  recognizes  me,  but  mis¬
takes  me  for  some  one  whom  she  likes, — her  father,  mother,
&c.,  but  far  more  frequently  for  her  favourite  sister.  Her
conversation  is  perfectly  rational,  and  as  full  of  intelligence
as  in  her  waking  state,  with  every  power  and  feeling  of  its
degree  habitual  to  her  waking  state ;  and  she  says  exactly
what  she  would  say  under  the  circumstance  in  which  she
mistakes  herself  to  be.  Whoever  she  fancies  me  to  be,  her
conversation  with  me  is  precisely  what  it  would  be  to  that
person.  When,  for  instance,  she  considers  me  her  sister,
she  tells  me  things  and  makes  remarks  which  she  would  utter
to  none  but  her  sister.  Fancying  no  one  present  but  the
person  she  addresses,  she  will  tell  things  in  the  presence  of
those  whom  she  begs  may  never  be  informed  of  what  she
tells.  Wherever  she  fancies  herself,  any  impression  you
attempt  to  make  upon  her,  if  the  circumstance  would  be  im¬
possible  there,  she  misapprehends  it.  If  my  parrot  or  cock¬
atoo  makes  a  noise  while  she  fancies  herself  at  home  where
there  is  no  bird,  and  I  tell  her  the  bird  makes  a  noise,  she  will
declare  it  not  to  be  the  noise  of  a  bird  but  something  else.
When  she  fancies  me  her  sister,  she  persists  that  mine  is  a
female  voice  :  and,  if  I  speak  very  gruffly  and  pretend  to
be  a  stranger,  she  will  laugh  at  me  (her  sister)  for  imitating
so  charming  a  person  with  my  voice.  She  has  fancied  her¬
self  at  home  with  her  sister  and  taking  tea  and  reading,
while  squeezing  one  of  my  hands  in  each  of  her’s :  and  de¬
clared  she  held  a  cup  in  her  right  hand  and  a  book  in  her
left.  I  told  her  to  give  me  the  cup,  still  keeping  my  hand
in  her’s  :  she  replied  that  I  would  not  take  it.  I  withdrew
both  my  hands,  and  she  then  said  she  had  given  me  the  cup.
I  replaced  my  hand  in  her  left,  and  she  said  I  had  given
her  the  book  back  after  having  taken  it  awav.  I  withdrew

O  v


220


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


my  hand,  and  she  said  there  was  nothing  in  her  hand  and
that  she  had  put  the  book  in  her  pocket.  When  she  was
again  squeezing  my  hands  with  this  same  fancy,  I  caused  her
to  relax  them  by  breathing,  and  she  then  said  she  had  put
both  cup  and  book  down.  When  imagining  me  her  mother,
and  both  of  us  at  tea,  her  sister  touched  her,  she  instantly
withdrew  her  hand  complaining  that  I — her  mother — had
put  the  cold  bread  and  butter  upon  it.  She  has  fancied  her¬
self  at  work,  putting  a  cord  through  a  cape ;  and  then  de¬
clared  she  had  the  scissors  in  her  hand.  Her  sleep-waking
was  always  a  beautiful  display  of  rational  dreaming  :  the  in¬
ternal  activity  of  her  faculties  representing  everything  to  her
with  the  vividness  of  external  impression  so  as  to  be  mistaken
for  reality,  and  all  external  impressions  being  mistaken  for
circumstances  in  perfect  harmony  with  her  current  of  fancy.

Her  fancy  could  be  directed :  her  judgment  led  en¬
tirely  by  her  feeling.  She  could  be  made  to  fancy  herself
with  a  sister  or  some  other  person  she  liked  by  my  speak¬
ing  to  her :  and  with  some  one  she  disliked  by  another
speaking  to  her :  and  the  rest  of  the  circumstances  which  she
fancied,  would  all  harmonize  with  the  circumstances  of  the
relation  of  herself  and  the  favoured  party.  While  she  fancied
me  her  sister  and  squeezed  my  hand  affectionately,  she  re¬
pelled  this  very  sister's  touch,  fancying  her  some  one  she  dis¬
liked  :  because  the  touch  of  every  other  person  than  myself
was  usually  disagreeable  to  her,  and  gave  her  a  fancy  that  it
was  some  one  she  disliked.  If  she  fancied  herself  at  home
with  none  but  those  she  loved,  and  any  one  but  myself  (for
instance,  her  sister)  touched  her,  she  did  not  fancy  any  dis¬
agreeable  acquaintance  had  touched  her,  this  being  impos¬
sible  in  her  view,  but  that  a  cold  wet  towel  had  been  put
upon  her.

Her  fancy  often  changed.  One  moment  she  fancied  me
her  sister,  and  then  her  father,  and  then  some  friend,  or  her
sister  again.  She  would  talk  to  me  immediately  in  each
fresh  view  of  persons,  place,  and  time,  exactly  as  she  would
have  done  to  the  fresh  fancied  person ;  forgetting  what  she
had  just  said  to  me  as  the  other  imaginary  person,  if  the  time
of  that  fancied  interview  had  been  posterior  to  the  time  of
the  present  fancy.  Otherwise  she  could  be  brought  to  re¬
member.  She  sometimes  mistook  another  person's  voice,  not
touch,  for  mine,  and,  having  fancied  me  her  sister,  con¬
tinued  speaking,  but  to  the  fresh  person,  still  as  her  sister.

She  recollected  no  occurrence  beyond  the  time  at  which
she  fancied  herself ;  and  her  imaginary  situation  always  re¬
ferred  to  something  recent, — to  something  on  which  her  brain


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


221


might  be  supposed  to  be  active  about  that  time.  Thus  she
generally  fancied  it  some  period  of  the  same  day ;  frequently
the  period  of  waiting  for  me  till  I  was  ready  to  receive  her.
Very  often  she  fancied  an  immediately  subsequent  period — a
later  hour  of  the  same  day ;  and  would  tell  me  (as  some  one
she  saw  upon  her  return  home)  of  her  visit  to  my  house,  and
fancy  circumstances  subsequent  to  her  waking  which  were  all
likely  :  mention  the  time  she  left,  where  she  went  afterwards,
and  who  was  with  her,  &c.,  &c.

She  never  knew  that  her  arms,  &c.,  were  drawn :  and
sometimes  denied  she  was  holding  my  hand,  (fancying  me  of
course  her  sister,)  &c.,  or  had  anything  in  her  hands,  though
she  was  squeezing  my  hands  tightly, — all  which  was  analogous
to  what  I  have  mentioned  in  regard  to  a  youth.  She  always
declared  of  course  that  she  was  awake,  and  saw  all  she  fan¬
cied, — the  cup  and  saucer,  for  example,  which  she  said  she
was  holding.  She  once,  fancying  herself  at  home,  begged  me
(her  sister)  to  give  her  the  newspaper ;  but  she  did  not  take  it,
and,  on  my  asking  her,  why,  said  she  had  laid  it  down  and
should  not  read  it  now.  Her  conversation  was  most  amusing,
full  of  acuteness  and  humour ;  and  her  whole  character  was
displayed,  since  she  talked  unceremoniously  to  those  about
her,  and,  as  she  fancied  generally  when  I  was  addressing
her,  to  her  favourite  sister.  No  character  could  be  more
charming;  for  sincere  affection,  great  kindness  of  heart,  ster¬
ling  integrity,  and  the  most  noble  high-mindedness  and  in¬
dependence,  always  shone  forth.  When  there  was  a  natural
pause  in  the  conversation,  the  sleep  of  the  state  prevailed,
and  her  head  would  droop  and  all  the  signs  of  deep  sleep
come  on  for  a  short  time,  except  that,  like  all  others  in  attach¬
ment,  she  still  grasped  my  hand.  In  almost  the  very  deepest
point  of  sleep  the  grasping  continued,  and  the  least  attempt
to  withdraw  my  hand  caused  it  instantly  to  be  grasped  the
more.  When  the  topic  was  very  interesting  to  her,  she  would
talk  on  very  long  without  sleeping ;  and,  when  she  could  be
prevailed  upon  to  sing,  she  was  so  excited  in  general  as  to
continue  singing  a  considerable  time.  When  sleepiness  invaded
her,  the  sight  was  beautful.  It  could  be  brought  on  by
drawing  or  stiffening  her :  and  the  tendency  of  stiffening
and  traction  was  I  found  in  the  Okeys  to  cause  sleep.  As
with  them,  so  with  her,  when  engaged  in  conversation  or
singing,  traction  was  possible.  In  the  midst  of  the  excitement
she  would  incline  to  the  side  of  the  chair,  her  voice  grow
fainter,  and  at  last  she  sank  far  to  the  side,  was  silent,  and  in
deep  repose.  No  one  of  any  intellect  and  feeling  who  saw  such
experiments  with  the  Okeys,  and  recollects  their  dying  notes


222


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of


as  the  sleep  increased,  will  ever  forget  them,  or  can  ever  doubt
the  reality  of  what  he  saw.  While  she  was  singing  I  often
placed  myself  before  her,  and  with  tractive  movements  of  the
points  of  my  fingers  drew  her  eyes  open  and  moved  them
from  side  to  side,  she  still  singing  at  first,  and  then  drop¬
ping  her  head,  closing  her  eyes  and  becoming  silent.  Her
silence  was  rather  sudden ;  that  of  the  Okeys  gradual.  But
we  could  bring  on  deep  sleep  instantaneously  in  them  by
one  vigorous  pass.

On  July  10th,  1841,  eleven  months  after  I  had  first
mesmerised  her,  Mr.  Gardiner  happened  to  be  with  me,  and
accidentally  asked  me  to  try  to  mesmerise  her  cerebral  organs.
I  had  never  thought  of  doing  so,  and  indeed  had  never  made
the  attempt  on  any  of  my  patients.  One  of  my  hands  was
in  her's,  but  she  was  not  holding  it.  I,  without  any  remark,
put  the  point  of  a  finger  upon  Attachment,  and  she  instantly
began  squeezing  my  hand  and  smiled.  I  removed  my  finger
to  Destructiveness,  and  she  instantly  let  go  my  hand  and
withdrew  her’s  far  away  from  it,  frowning.  I  repeated  this
many  times,  and  the  effect  was  invariably  the  same, — to
my  utter  astonishment  and  delight,  for  I  really  had  not  sup¬
posed  there  would  be  any  effect  when  I  complied  with  Mr.
Gardiner’s  wish.  The  result  as  greatly  astonished  me  as
the  sleep  of  a  patient  so  susceptible  as  to  go  off  with  one
pass  or  two,  or  the  traction  of  a  limb  by  tractive  passes,  or
the  relaxation  of  a  contracted  part  by  transverse  passes  or
by  breathing,  astonish  a  man  who  does  all  this  himself,  for
the  first  time,  at  the  desire  of  a  mesmeriser,  and  sees  what
he  has  done  ;  certainly  not  willing  the  effect,  perhaps  smiling
at  the  idea  of  his  being  requested  to  make  the  attempt.

I  should  have  mentioned  that  her  repulsion  of  others  was
always  in  proportion  to  her  attachment  to  me  at  the  moment.
When  I  was  not  touching  her  or  speaking  to  her,  and  not
extremely  close  to  her,  she  was  sometimes  indifferent  to
others ;  but  as  soon  as  I  took  her  hand  she  grasped  it,  and
repelled  all  others  forcibly.  The  youth,  to  whom  I  have  al¬
ready  alluded,  does  not  withdraw  his  right  hand,  for  exam¬
ple,  when  others  touch  it,  or  when  a  piece  of  gold  mesmerised
by  others,  or  by  my  left  hand,  is  placed  upon  it,  or  when  his
own  left  hand  touches  it  (for  his  two  hands  repel  each  other),
so  quickly,  or  forcibly,  not  at  all  perhaps  for  a  considerable
time,  if  his  right  hand  is  neglected  by  me ;  but  the  effects
come  instantly  and  forcibly  if  at  the  time  my  right  hand  is
in  his  right  hand  and  squeezed  by  it.

It  chanced  at  the  moment,  that,  as  her  anger  and  dislike
to  me  had  been  excited  and  I  had  not  touched  her  since,  the


E pi/epsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


223


attachment  to  me  had  not  returned  strongly,  and  she  did  not
repel  Mr.  Gardiner,  but  still  his  hand  placed  in  her's  was  in¬
different  to  her, — she  took  no  notice  of  it.  I  put  my  finger
upon  Attachment  again,  supposing  it  would  unquestionably
cause  her  to  grasp  his  hand.  But  it  had  the  opposite  effect.
She  withdrew  her  hand  far  from  his  and  frowned.  And
this  is  the  course  the  excitement  of  Attachment  has  taken  ever
since.  The  attachment  was  to  me  her  mesmeriser,  and  it
made  her  dislike  all  others  the  more  it  was  excited.  If  she
by  chance  liked  a  person  and  was  squeezing  his  hand,  the
mesmerisation  of  Attachment  made  her  quit  his  hand  and
dislike  him,  for  the  excitement  of  Attachment  was  always  to
me,  whoever  she  fancied  I  was,  and  whoever  mesmerised  the
organ,  and  then  she  squeezed  my  hand  and  smiled.  I  had
always  previously  heightened  her  attachment  to  me  at  pleasure,
by  rubbing  her  hand  or  squeezing  it,  or  talking  very  kindly  to
her,  and  by  this  same  excitement  made  her  repel  others  and
frown  if  they  touched  her  at  the  time :  and  she  was  rendered
less  repulsive  of  others  by  my  avoiding  everything  which  could
excite  her  attachment  to  me.  All  the  feelings  may  be  excited
indirectly  by  external  impressions  derived  from  the  organs  of
the  external  senses ;  and  again  they  may  be  excited  directly  by
their  inherent  activity,  and  display  themselves  in  their  effect
on  the  various  organs  of  the  frame.  Up  to  this  moment,  I
had  been  able  to  employ  the  former  indirect  mode  only,  in
causing  a  high  degree  of  affection  to  myself,  and  indifference
to  and  intense  dislike  of  others.  But  now  I  found  myself
possessed  of  a  new  power, — that  I  could  excite  the  cerebral
organs  themselves  directly,  independently  of  the  external
senses, — heighten  their  inherent  activity,  so  to  speak,  in  a
direct  manner,  without  the  conveyance  of  any  exciting  im¬
pression  by  the  nerves  of  any  of  the  five  senses.  I  was  now
for  the  first  time  possessed  of  the  power  which  Smellie  con¬
ceived  might  be  possessed  by  “a  superior  being  so  thoroughly
acquainted  with  the  human  frame,  so  perfectly  skilled  in  the
connexion  and  mutual  dependence  which  subsist  between  our
intellect  and  our  sensitive  organs,  as  to  be  able,  by  titillating
in  various  modes  and  directions  particular  combinations
of  nerves,  to  excite  in  the  mind  what  ideas  he  may  think
proper.  I  can,”  continues  he,  “  likewise  conceive  the  possi¬
bility  of  suggesting  any  particular  idea,  or  species  of  ideas,
by  affecting  the  nerves  in  the  same  manner  as  those  ideas
affect  them  when  excited  by  any  other  cause.”  In  quoting
this  passage  I  added  in  my  letter  appended  to  Dr.  Engledue's
Address ,  “  By  the  discoveries  of  Gall  we  know  the  individual
portions  of  the  nervous  system  which  serve  for  particular

VOL.  II.  *  Q


224


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


ideas,  and  by  the  late  progress  of  mesmerism  we  know  how
to  excite  these  individual  portions, — we  are  now,  so  far,  those
superiorly  endowed  beings  fancied  by  Smellie.”  We  know
the  cerebral  organs  of  the  faculties,  called  by  him  nerves  or
particular  branches  of  nerves.

The  only  other  cerebral  organs  which  I  have  ever  been
able  to  affect  are  Benevolence  and  Pride  :  and  it  is  re¬
markable  that  these  four,  Benevolence  and  Attachment  on
the  one  hand,  and  Pride  and  Violence  (Destructiveness)  on  the
other,  are  all  susceptible  in  every  one  of  my  patients  whose
cerebral  organs  I  can  mesmerise :  and  in  two  others,  the
rigid  patients  of  the  last  number,  there  is  no  evidence  of
action  upon  any  others,  and  in  three  I  can  excite  Veneration
only  in  addition,  except  that  in  one  Combativeness  and  Des¬
tructiveness  seem  to  run  into  each  other.  Music  might  once
seem  excited  after  touching  over  it  for  a  long  while  :  I  had
pointed  to  Benevolence  and  she  began  talking  of  giving  money
to  a  poor  match  boy ;  but  on  touching  Benevolence  and  Music
for  a  considerable  time,  she  began  to  talk  of  buying  her  sis¬
ter  a  new  song.

Whenever  I  mesmerised  Benevolence  or  Attachment  she
mistook  me  as  usual  for  some  one  she  loved  :  but  when  I
mesmerised  Pride  or  Violence  she  mistook  me  for  some  one
she  disliked ;  and  when  she  was  made  proud  or  violent,  and
therefore  fancied  me  some  one  she  disliked,  my  hand  felt
cold  to  her ;  though  she  often  thought  something  else  cold,
or  wet  and  cold,  was  put  upon  her  by  the  fancied  person.

If  I  mesmerised  Benevolence  while  she  was  repelling  the
hand  of  a  stranger,  she  no  longer  mistook  him  for  some  one
she  disliked,  but  for  some  one  she  liked,  and  was  contented
with  him  :  just  as  without  mesmerising  the  organs,  if  I
offended  her  by  having  left  her  a  little  and  talked  to  others,
she  moved  her  hand  as  if  to  repel,  though  fancying  me  her
favourite  sister,  and  would  tell  me  I  had  put  something
cold  upon  her  hand,  perhaps  would  say  a  wet  towel,  though
I  had  not  touched  her  hand.

The  other  day  I  mesmerised  Pride  and  Attachment  of  the
same  side;  she  did  not  smile  with  affection,  nor  did  she  scowl,
but  was  serious  and  cool ;  and  on  asking  her  if  she  liked  me,
whom  she  fancied  to  be  some  friend,  she  replied  that  she  did
and  she  did  not,  she  neither  liked  nor  disliked  me.  At  an¬
other  time  she  fancied  I  was  one  whom,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,
she  thinks  more  about  at  present  than  her  sister :  she  could
not  be  so  cool  as  to  “  neither  like  nor  dislike  me,”  and  so  she
then  fancied  two  persons — one  him  whom  she  likes  so  much,
and  another  whom  she  dislikes.  This  working  of  the  circum¬
stances  wras  charming.


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


225


If  I  spoke  gruffly  and  unkindly  to  her,  she  would  taker
me  for  some  person  she  disliked ;  but  if  1  mesmerised  Af¬
fection,  no  unkindness  of  behaviour  would  make  her  fancy
me  another  than  one  she  loved,  or  make  her  return  my  un¬
kindness.

On  the  22nd  of  the  same  month,  I  took  Mr.  James
Simpson,  of  Edinburgh,  to  witness  these  experiments.  After
he  had  been  astounded,  he  suggested  to  me  to  attempt  them
without  contact, — by  mere  pointing.  I  confess  I  had  not
the  slightest  hopes  of  obtaining  any  result.  But  to  my  in¬
expressible  delight  and  surprise  they  all  succeeded,  though
not  with  the  same  rapidity.  No  matter  who  stands  behind
her  and  points  to  the  organ,  the  effect  is  the  same,  even  in
degree,  as  when  I  point.  Her  eyes  may  be  covered  by  a
handkerchief  crumpled  up  and  pressed  down  upon  them  or
in  any  other  way.  Not  a  word  need  be  spoken.  The  bene¬
volence  is  shewn  by  a  smile  and  a  slight  squeeze  of  the  hand  ;
the  attachment  by  a  greater  smile  of  delight,  and  her  hand
not  only  squeezes  mine  but  presses  it  against  her  bosom  :
pride  and  violence  are  both  shewn  by  the  frown  and  the
rejection  of  the  hand  and  determination  in  repelling  every
attempt  to  take  it.  The  tone  of  her  voice  is  in  perfect  cor¬
respondence — gentle  in  the  case  of  benevolence,  most  endear¬
ing  in  that  of  attachment,  loud  and  strong  in  the  case  of
pride  and  violence.

I  observed  on  the  16th,  about  a  week  before  I  found  that
I  could  excite  the  cerebral  organs  by  pointing,  that  the  effect
did  not  come  on  both  sides  ;  that  if  I  held  both  hands,  while
I  touched  over  Pride,  for  instance,  on  one  side  only,  the  corre¬
sponding  hand  only  repelled  mine  ;  and  I  soon  discovered  that
an  organ  on  one  side  could  be  mesmerised  alone,  and  that
its  state  gave  evidence  of  itself  on  one  half  only  of  the  rest  of
the  system.  “  For  instance,”  (I  quote  from  my  letter,  p.  34,)
“  if  I  place  my  fingers  in  her  right  hand  and  mesmerise  At¬
tachment  on  her  right  side,  she  squeezes  them  and  mistakes
me  for  a  dear  friend ;  if  then  I  mesmerise  Self-esteem  on  the
left  side,  she  still  speaks  to  me  kindly,  and  squeezes  my  fin¬
gers  with  her  right  hand  as  much  as  ever.  But  if  I  place  my
fingers  in  her  left  hand,  she  repels  them,  and  speaks  scorn¬
fully  to  me,  mistaking  me  for  some  one  she  dislikes.  If  I
take  hold  of  both  her  hands  with  one  of  mine,  I  can  at  plea¬
sure  make  her  repel  with  both,  by  pointing  over  each  organ
of  Self-esteem  or  Destructiveness ;  squeeze  with  both  by
pointing  over  each  organ  of  Attachment ;  or  repel  with  one
and  squeeze  with  the  other,  right  or  left,  accordingly  as  I
point  over  the  organs  of  Self-esteem  or  Destructiveness  on

q  2


226  Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of

the  one  side  and  that  of  Attachment  on  the  other,  at  the  same
time.”

This  distinction  of  the  two  sides  did  indeed  astonish  me.
I  had  forgotten  that  above  two  years  before  I  had  been
able  to  mesmerise  either  half  only  of  the  brain  at  pleasure  in
Master  Salmon  (vol.  i.,  p.  327),  so  that  he  could  hear  and  see
with  one  eye  only,  and  support  one  arm  only,  &c.  In  the
youth  so  often  alluded  to,  I  can  mesmerise  one  half  only  when
I  please,  so  that  he  cannot  open  one  eye,  feels  stupid  in  the
corresponding  half  of  his  forehead's  brain,  finds  one  side  of
his  jaw  stiff,  and  has  less  sensation  and  less  muscular  power
in  that  half  of  his  frame  throughout.

If  I  put  a  hand  in  each  of  her's,  and  some  other  person
pointed  to  an  opposing  organ  on  each  side,  for  instance  to
Pride  on  one  side  and  Attachment  on  the  other,  she  not  only
squeezed  one  of  my  hands  and  repelled  the  other,  but  would
fancy  me,  who  was  speaking  in  the  same  tone  of  voice  and
saying  still  the  same  things,  one  person  whom  she  liked  as  I
spoke  while  pressing  one  of  her  hands,  and  another  person
whom  she  disliked  as  I  spoke  while  pressing  the  other ;  and
she  would  tell  me  as  one  she  likes  of  the  presence  at  the  time
of  the  other  whom  she  dislikes, — as  any  one  might  touch  or
point  with  success.  These  results  equally  ensued  when  I
pointed  to  one  organ  and  another  person  to  another.

Each  feeling  grows  stronger  and  stronger  the  longer  the
organ  is  mesmerised,  and  she  may  be  worked  up  into  a  frenzy,
or  to  such  pride  as  to  say  she  looks  upon  me  (some  fancied
person)  as  dirt,  simply  by  continuing  to  point  at  Violence
or  Pride.

If  it  is  overwhelming  to  see  her  pass  from  the  intensity
of  affection  to  the  absence  of  it,  and  to  the  intensity  of  pride
or  anger,  or  to  mark  the  opposite  transition,  when  the  finger
leaves  one  organ  for  another.  The  effect  is  amusing  if  the
finger  points  over  Pride  or  Violence  while  she  is  singing.  She
leaves  off  in  silence,  as  the  pointing  is  continued,  or,  if  asked
why,  she  declares  either  with  scorn  or  anger  that  she  will
sing  no  more.  The  surest  way,  indeed  it  has  never  failed,
of  prevailing  upon  her  to  sing,  is  to  mesmerise  Attachment,
and  thus  lead  her  in  an  indirect  way  to  sing.  However  she
may  refuse  at  first,  perseverance  in  mesmerising  Attachment
will  induce  her  at  last :  but  I  never  have  succeeded  by  at¬
tempting  to  excite  Music.

The  joint  influence  of  Attachment  and  Benevolence  is
necessarily  greater;  and,  when  Attachment  has  been  long
excited  and  is  very  strong,  I  have  known  it  impossible  to
overcome  it  and  to  detach  her  hand  from  mine  by  mesmer-


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


227


ising  Pride  merely,  but  succeeded  as  soon  as  I  mesmerised
Pride  and  Violence  together.

The  induced  state  of  any  organ  increased  the  longer  this
was  mesmerised,  and,  after  being  long  mesmerised,  an  organ
continued  long  excited  after  the  finger  was  withdrawn.

The  effect  was  speedily  removed  by  transverse  passes  over
the  organ,  and  instantly  by  breathing  upon  it ;  just  like  the
effects  upon  other  organs  than  the  brain, — the  rigid  hand
for  instance.

It  was  requisite  to  be  careful  to  produce  no  other  excite¬
ment  of  the  organs  than  the  mesmeric,  or  the  effects  would
be  confused  and  the  experiment  spoiled.  For  instance,  if
others  stood  close  at  her  side  or  in  front,  or  I  spoke  much  to
others,  Anger  would  be  excited  while  I  was  trying  to  mes¬
merise  Attachment,  and  Attachment  and  Anger  would  come
forth  in  successive  changes.  The  previous  excitement  of  one
organ  will  sometimes  return  before  subsequent  excitement
of  another  takes  place,  just  as  a  previous  movement  of  the
hand  will  be  repeated ;  whence  care  must  be  taken  to  allow
time  for  the  first  organ  to  fall  into  repose,  or  this  should  be
secured  by  transverse  passes  or  breathing.  Every  experiment
in  mesmerism  requires  care, — not  only  improper  manage¬
ment,  but  the  prevention  of  disturbing  causes,  which  those
who  are  ignorant  of  the  subject  and  do  not  reflect  never
think  of  and  often  cannot  be  prevailed  upon  to  understand.
Whatever  inaccuracy  of  result  has  arisen  from  disturbing
causes,  the  proper  result  invariably  comes  by  perseverance
with  pointing  and  the  care  just  mentioned.

Touching  is  always  more  powerful  than  pointing,  because
all  mesmeric  power  usually  lessens  with  distance ;  and  there¬
fore  the  contact  of  an  antagonist  organ  generally  puts  a  stop
in  a  very  short  time  to  the  highest  excitement  maintained
by  pointing.

The  thicker  the  hair  the  slower  the  effect ;  and  pointing
over  the  organs  with  thick  gloves  on  the  fingers  prevents  all
effect ;  nor  does  any  effect  come  if  the  parts  are  pointed  at
with  anything  else,  as  a  paper-cutter,  the  corner  of  a  book,
&c. ;  but  touching  over  them  with  any  substance  sometimes
excited  them.  Neither  can  I  excite  them  by  breathing  over
them.  I  had  a  patient  in  whom  this  was  a  sure  mode  of  ex¬
citing  them;  and  I  consequently  thought  I  should  succeed
equally  in  her,  and  breathed  till  I  was  tired,  but  always  in
vain,  often  willing  as  hard  as  possible :  but  it  turned  out  that
breathing  was  a  certain  mode  of  instantly  stupifying  them,
however  great  their  excitement.  Neither  could  I  ever  ex-


228  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of

cite  them  by  gazing  with  the  utmost  intensity  over  their
situation.

The  mesmeric  excitement  of  distinct  cerebral  organs  pro¬
longed  her  sleep  just  as  mesmeric  operations  on  the  muscles
always  did.

Now  and  then  when  I  pointed  only,  the  organ  of  the
other  side  only  was  momentarily  affected  first :  but  the  effect
invariably  died  away,  and  the  proper  side  became  fully  and
permanently  affected.  Before  the  mesmeric  excitement  of
an  organ  was  established  an  antagonist  organ  would  some¬
times  fall  into  excitement  from  the  mere  current  of  her
thoughts,  but  the  mesmeric  influence  of  the  finger  soon  ren¬
dered  the  first  organ  predominant.

The  right  cerebral  organs  were  always  more  easily  affected
than  the  left.  I  have  been  unable  to  excite  the  left  even  by
contact  any  longer,  and  yet  the  right  have  instantly  obeyed
the  finger. — The  point  of  the  nose  instantly  affected  these
organs :  in  the  Okeys  and  others  I  have  often  observed  its
power  to  be  very  great,  and  I  may  add  its  susceptibility  in
the  patient.

I  never  observed  the  excitement  of  the  organ  of  one  side
spread  to  that  of  the  opposite  side,  in  the  case  of  centrally
placed  organs,  as  might  have  been  expected.

On  the  20th  August  of  last  year  it  struck  me  that  I  would
try  whether  this  case  gave  any  countenance  to  Mr.  Atkinson’s
views  respecting  touch, — common  sensation,  and  voluntary
muscular  action  being  closely  connected  with  the  cerebellum.
I  therefore  put  my  finger  over  that  part  of  the  occiput  which
he  considers  the  great  seat  of  common  sensation, — low  down
and  at  a  short  distance  from  the  centre.  Almost  instantly,
to  my  great  astonishment,  she  had  perfect  feeling  in  every
part  which  I  had  previously  always  found  insensible.  I
found  also  that  mesmerising  the  organ  of  one  side  gave  sen¬
sibility  to  the  system  only  on  the  same  side.

I  then  put  the  points  of  several  fingers  on  the  occiput
rather  more  outwardly,  and,  immediately  that  I  pressed  them
rather  forwards  and  upwards,  so  as  to  give  her  an  impulsion
to  rise,  she  did  rise  and  was  able  to  walk  about  the  room
without  any  support,  a  thing  I  never  witnessed  in  her  before.
I  withdrew  the  points  of  my  fingers  and  she  instantly  dropped
powerless.  She  was  again  seated  in  her  chair,  and  I  was
obliged  to  leave  the  room.  In  my  absence  she  made  several
attempts,  her  sister  said,  to  rise  and  follow  me,  and  at  length
did  stand  up,  and  fell  head  foremost  with  her  forehead  against


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


229


the  floor.  The  previous  circumstance  of  finding  herself  able
to  stand  gave  her  probably  a  very  strong  impulse  to  renew
the  attempt,  and  gratify  her  wish  to  be  with  me ;  but  the
muscular  organs  were  not  strong  enough  without  local  artifi¬
cial  excitement  of  them  to  enable  her  to  accomplish  her
purpose.

In  a  week  I  repeated  these  experiments  with  perfect  success.
By  pressing  on  the  muscular  organs  of  one  side  only  with  the
point  of  a  finger,  without  attempting  to  make  her  rise,  the
corresponding  arm  grew  stiff,  and  I  could  stiffen  it  fully  and
perfectly  by  the  usual  means  at  once,  without  the  long  per¬
severance  which  was  usually  required ;  and  I  could  relax  it
by  transverse  passes  or  breathing.

She  was  able  to  sustain  her  arm  if  I  raised  it,  as  long  as
I  pressed  over  the  organs  of  muscular  action  of  the  same
side ;  and  no  longer,  whether  I  removed  my  fingers  or  only
shifted  their  situation.  It  was  amusing  to  hear  her  denying
that  her  arm  was  up  :  the  position  being  inconsistent  with
the  dream  in  which  she  was.  On  this  occasion  also  after  I
had  touched  over  the  muscular  organs,  she  made  attempts
to  rise,  and  rather  successfully  when  I  was  not  touching  her ;
the  strength  of  her  efforts  making  up  a  little  for  the  deficiency
of  muscular  power.  But  for  want  of  my  mesmerising  the
organ,  her  power  was  small.

I  pressed  over  the  organs  of  sensibility  and  muscular
action  with  the  end  of  the  thick  round  handle  of  an  ivory
paper  cutter,  in  vain ;  but  my  finger  instantly  affected  them.

I  repeated  these  experiments  with  equal  success  in  a  few
days.  But  did  not  try  them  again  for  three  months,  nor
indeed  mesmerise  her  for  two  months,  as  I  went  to  the
Pyrennees.

On  December  the  2nd,  I  went  to  another  part  of  the
room  while  she  was  asleep ;  and  after  a  short  time  she  got
up  from  her  chair  and  went  a  short  distance  towards  me,  but
would  have  fallen  had  not  her  father  and  sister  caught  her.
They  told  me  she  had  made  a  similar  attempt  when  my  back
was  turned,  a  week  before,  when  I  last  mesmerised  her.  The
next  time,  at  the  end  of  a  week,  she  actually  ran  some  way
across  the  room  before  she  fell.  All  this  arose  I  have  no
doubt  from  my  having  once  or  twice  acted  upon  the  cerebral
organs  of  muscular  action.  However,  as  I  did  not  act  upon
them  again,  having  no  time,  this  disposition  has  never  shewn
itself  again.  None  but  her  family  had  witnessed  the  new
experiments,  and  they  had  been  all  made  by  me  without
a  remark,  so  that  it  was  impossible  for  suggestion  or  imagi¬
nation  to  have  anv  share  in  the  matter.  Tliev  were  the

€>  *


230  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of

result  of  direct  local  influence  from  without  upon  the  portions
of  the  brain.

The  next  time  these  organs  were  mesmerised  was  last
week,  when  Mr.  Atkinson,  after  I  had  thrown  her  to  sleep,
gave  her  sensibility  on  either  side,  and  enabled  either  arm
to  remain  elevated  at  pleasure,  as  he  touched  over  the  re¬
spective  organs  of  either  side.

I  may  mention  that  one  day  in  last  January  she  had  a
severe  cold.  We  all  know  how  dull  our  brains  are  in  a  cold.
I  sent  her  into  sleep- waking  in  the  usual  time  (about  seven
minutes),  and  she  conversed  spontaneously.  But  I  could  not
mesmerise  a  single  cerebral  organ,  nor  could  I  stiffen  a  single
muscle,  or  draw  a  single  part.  Mr.  Rogers,  the  poet,  had
come  to  see  her.

Three  weeks  ago  she  had  lost  blood  on  account  of  fulness
of  the  head  and  a  fall,  and  was  very  weak.  I  could  not  stiffen
a  single  muscle  or  draw  a  single  part,  except  the  lips  and
nose,  but  I  mesmerised  her  cerebral  organs  with  perfect  suc¬
cess  by  pointing.

The  excitement  of  the  distinct  cerebral  organs  is  a  most
striking  circumstance.  In  the  present  patient,  just  as  in  so
many  others  of  my  own,  there  was  no  knowledge  of  the
situation  of  the  organs  to  explain  the  matter  originally.
When  a  person  knows  the  situation  of  an  organ,  the  mere
suggestion  of  the  excitement  of  the  faculty  may  be  enough
in  the  mesmeric  state  to  induce  the  excitement — the  patient
being  involuntarily  set  off  in  a  particular  line  of  thought  or
action,  or  stimulated  to  shew  off.  This  suggestion  of  excite¬
ment  proves  not  the  existence  of  any  organ.  To  touch  the
nose  or  chin  might  by  association  be  equally  efficient.  I
know  a  little  girl  who  is  truth  itself,  but  who,  in  the  mes¬
meric  state,  is  so  excitable  that  by  an  established  association
I  can  put  her  into  a  cheerful  or  a  cross  humor,  and  make  her
believe  herself  possessed  of  one  sum  of  money  or  of  another
by  merely  touching  the  chair  or  table  so  many  times,  which
number  of  times  with  the  chair  or  table  is  associated  by  me
in  her  mind  with  the  fancy  and  feeling  (vol.  i.,  p.  230) ;  and
you  may  excite  a  person  to  any  set  of  movements  you  please.
Experiments  by  touch  go  for  nothing,  unless  it  is  an  absolute
certainty  that  the  patient  is  unacquainted  with  phrenology,
and  has  no  artificial  associations.  Experiments  with  touch
may  prove  a  thing,  but,  after  they  have  been  once  made
upon  a  patient,  they  prove  nothing.  Exhibitions  which
I  have  seen  have  been  absolutely  ridiculous.  A  part  was


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


231


touched,  and  instantly  some  manifestation  came  out.  Often
have  I  seen  a  part  touched  below  the  cranium,  where  there
was  no  organ  at  all.  Here  all  was  association — imagina¬
tion — and  you  might  thus  establish  an  organ  for  chess,  an
organ  for  long  whist,  and  one  for  short  whist,  an  organ  for
dancing  the  polka ,  and  another  for  the  minuet  de  la  cour
(vol.  i.,  p.  ^39).

The  fact  that  in  the  most  genuine  cases  the  contact  of  any
substance  whatever  over  an  organ  may  excite  it,  proves  either
that  wherever  an  external  sensation  has  become  associated
with  an  internal  state,  this  sensation  alone  may  be  sufficient
to  excite  it,  or  that  the  internal  and  external  parts  so  sym¬
pathize  that  common  external  unfelt  irritation  spreads  to  the
internal  parts.  In  favour  of  the  latter  opinion  it  may  be
urged :  1.  That  there  are  patients  whose  heads  are  insensible
externally,  and  who  are  certainly  not  conscious  of  having
their  hands  touched,  but  in  whom  the  contact  of  anything
over  an  organ  excites  it,  contact  of  the  finger  having  orginally
excited  it.  2.  That  accidental  pressure  even  in  resting  the
head  has  appeared  to  excite  an  organ.  When  the  experiment
is  made  by  pointing,  I  do  not  see  how  there  can  be  anything
but  mesmeric  influence  upon  the  cerebral  organs.  Neither  the
present  patient  nor  any  other  of  mine  can  be  excited  by
pointing  anything  but  a  part  of  the  living  body.  I  do  not
see  how  there  can  be  any  suggestion  in  pointing  the  finger :
how  it  can  be  felt.  It  is  of  the  same  temperature  as  the  pa¬
tient’s  head,  which  head  is  covered  by  hair ;  and  on  pointing
it  to  any  part  of  the  neck,  the  most  truthful  patient  can  never
tell  whether  you  are  pointing  or  not :  and  if  you  warm  any¬
thing  so  that  it  shall  be  undistinguishable  from  the  finger  by
temperature,  of  the  same  size  and  shape,  and  point  it,  no  effect
ensues.  Besides,  the  effect  should  come  at  once  if  tempera¬
ture  was  the  cause,  for  this  would  be  felt  at  first  and  not
after  a  time.  I  have  frequently  touched  over  her  organs  for
a  long  while  with  an  indifferent  substance  with  no  effect ;  and
then  by  mere  pointing  all  the  effects  have  ensued.  This
shews  that  true  mesmeric  influence  is  often  required.  I  could
sometimes  stiffen  the  Okeys  merely  by  clapping  my  hands
suddenly ;  but  usually  mesmeric  passes  or  dartings  only
answered.  Breathing  over  an  organ  must  be  felt,  and  yet  I
have  said  that  no  length  of  breathing  ever  excited  Pride  or
Affection,  Anger  or  Benevolence,  in  the  present  patient.

As  to  universal  explanation  by  the  will,  it  is  altogether
absurd.  I  am  certain  I  never  produced  any  effect  by  my  will ;
and  very  many  active  mesmerisers  say  the  same  of  themselves.
Not  but  that  will  does  act  in  some  cases.  But  it  is  only  one


232


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


mode  of  affecting  patients,  and  only  some  and  those  only
sometimes  are  susceptible  of  its  influence.  In  experiments
of  all  sorts  and  on  all  parts  I  have  willed  most  intensely  and
most  perseveringly,  and  done  nothing  else,  and  no  effect  ever
came.  I  have  willed  most  intensely  and  at  the  same  time
stared  at  the  situation  of  a  cerebral  organ  or  breathed  two
hundred  times  over  a  cerebral  organ,  and  all  in  vain ;  whereas
an  accidental  pointing  at  it  has  excited  it.  I  have  pointed,
or  made  passes,  or  gazed,  willing  most  intensely  and  perse-
veringly,  and  not  willing  at  all  but  thinking  of  anything  ex¬
cept  the  matter  before  me,  and  the  effects  have  come  as  soon
in  the  latter  case  as  in  the  former.  Perfect  sceptics  and  ene¬
mies  of  mesmerism  every  day  produce  effects  by  passes,  point¬
ing,  &c.,  against  their  will ;  and  persons  often  produce  effects
without  thinking  of  mesmerism  at  all.  The  Okeys  were  so
susceptible  in  their  mesmeric  state,  that  unintentional  passes
of  bystanders  in  conversation  sometimes  made  them  sense¬
less.  Nay,  accidentally  mesmerised  substances  from  the
hands  of  strangers,  or  water  in  which  another  had  washed,
would  affect  them  powerfully.

I  have  often,  while  talking  to  others,  removed  my  finger
unconsciously  from  over  one  organ  to  another  of  the  present
patient,  and  been  astonished  to  find  an  effect  come  which  I
had  not  intended;  but  I  found  the  explanation  on  observing
that  the  point  of  my  finger  had  shifted.  I  once  intended  to
mesmerise  her  Self-esteem  on  the  right,  but  my  finger  with¬
out  my  knowledge  had  got  over  the  left  organ,  and  I  won¬
dered  to  see  Pride  manifested  on  the  left  side,  till  I  discovered
the  reason.  When  I  have  told  persons  ignorant  of  phrenology
the  situation  of  any  one  organ  and  they  have  begun  to  point,
no  effect,  or  an  unexpected  effect,  has  come ;  and,  on  my
looking  to  see  how  their  fingers  were  placed,  I  have  found
these  shifted  to  a  place  where  there  was  no  susceptible  organ,
or  on  another  organ,  or  the  other  half  of  the  organ.

When  Dr.  Engledue  was  with  me  one  day,  and  she  in
mesmeric  sleep  with  her  eyes  closed  in  a  high  chair,  I  took
her  hands  and  sat  looking  at  them  only:  he  stood  behind  her
chair,  looked  the  other  way,  and  pointed  at  random  to  what
he  guessed  might  be  the  situation  of  one  organ  of  Pride.
Presently,  both  her  hands  were  violently  withdrawn  from
mine.  We  looked  at  her  head,  and  found  that  Dr.  Engledue
who,  it  turned  out,  had  pointed  with  two  fingers,  had  by  a
strange  chance  pointed  exactly  over  the  middle  line,  so  that
a  point  of  a  finger  was  over  each  organ  of  Pride.

We  put  a  minute  piece  of  paper  over  each  organ  of  Pride,
and  I  desired  a  man-servant,  who  was  perfectly  ignorant  of


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


233


phrenology,  to  come  into  the  room,  stand  behind  her  chair,
and  point  with  one  finger  over  either  of  the  pieces  of  paper  he
chose.  I  took  both  her  hands  in  mine,  and  Dr.  Engledue
and  myself  looked  aside,  carefully  avoiding  to  see  to  which
organ  of  Pride  the  man  was  pointing.  At  length  one  of  her
hands  withdrew  forcibly  from  mine ;  we  looked  at  her  head,
and  found  the  man  pointing  to  the  organ  of  the  same  side.
The  experiment  was  repeated  with  the  same  result.  The  man
does  not  to  this  hour  know  why  he  was  desired  to  point.

Will  cannot  explain  the  affections  of  the  cerebral  organs
any  more  than  of  the  rest  of  the  body.  Whatever  holds  of
one,  holds  of  the  other.  A  sound  cerebral  physiologist
knows  that  the  brain  follows  all  the  same  general  laws  with
every  other  portion  of  the  body,  both  in  health  and  disease.
It  is  compounded  and  organized  differently,  so  as  to  think ;
just  as  the  muscles  are  compounded  and  organized  so  as  to
contract  and  relax,  and  the  glands  to  secrete  :  but  it  has  cir¬
culation,  nutrition,  absorption,  and  is  but  a  mass  of  living
substance,  affected  by  heat  and  cold,  food  and  poisons,  and
subject  to  the  same  diseases  as  the  rest.  The  facts  of  mes¬
merism  regarding  all  other  organs  are  all  facts  in  regard  to
it.  The  same  processes  excite  and  calm  it  which  excite  and
calm  a  muscle  or  any  other  organ.  A  fault  of  medical  men
in  all  ages  has  been  not  to  regard  the  brain  as  an  organ  simi¬
lar  in  all  things  to  all  other  organs,  though  with  a  composi¬
tion  and  organization  of  its  own,  just  as  is  true  of  a  muscle
or  the  lungs  or  liver,  (vol.  i.,  p.  240.)  If  other  organs  can
be  affected  by  mesmerism,  so  we  should  think  might  the
brain ;  and,  if  portions  of  those  organs  can  be  affected  sepa¬
rately,  as  a  finger  of  the  hand,  so  beforehand  should  we  pre¬
sume  that  separate  portions  of  the  brain  could  be  mesmerised.
However,  all  this  I  urged  in  the  Phrenological  Association
last  year,  and  it  was  published  in  the  last  volume ;  and  yet
the  greater  part  of  the  arguments  have  not  been  even  al¬
luded  to  by  those  who  ascribe  all  to  suggestion  or  will.

The  mode  in  which  I  mesmerised  was  by  pointing  at  her
eyes,  looking  at  them  at  the  same  time.  Passes  had  much
less  effect  upon  her,  and  have  sometimes  given  her  great  pain
in  the  eye-balls.  Once  I  made  them  at  her  own  house,  when
only  her  mother  and  sister  were  present,  and  all  was  quiet
and  favourable  to  sleep,  and  yet  she  was  not  off  till  the  end
of  eight  and  twenty  minutes;  while  with  pointing  I  sent
her  to  sleep  generally  in  four  or  five  minutes,  when  no
strangers  were  present.  At  my  house,  before  strangers,  she
was  generally  from  ten  to  twenty  minutes  in  going  off.


234


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


Breathing  had  little  or  no  effect  upon  her  in  her  natural
state :  I  once  breathed  gently  two  hundred  times  upon  her
forehead,  with  no  effect.

When  mesmerism  begins  to  affect  her,  her  eyes  grow
watery  and  red ;  then  the  upper  lid  very  slightly  lowers,  so
as  to  give  an  appearance  of  heaviness ;  the  lid  then  descends
much  more  ;  her  head  inclines  somewhat  forwards,  and  either
suddenly  drops  back  and  to  one  side  fast  asleep,  or  her  eye¬
lid  recovers  itself  as  well  as  her  head,  rising  either  fully  or
but  partially ;  and  probably  the  same  thing  recurs  two  or
three  times  before  she  drops  quite  off,  the  lid  and  head  gene¬
rally  rising  less  and  less  every  time.  They  sometimes  quite
recover  themselves.  There  is  no  quivering  of  the  lid  at  any
period  after  the  lid  has  once  lowered,  the  ordinary  winking
of  the  lids  becoming  less  and  less  frequent.

When  she  drops  off,  the  transition  is  fully  made ;  she  is
in  an  instant  perfectly  insensible,  and  goes  into  a  state,  not  one
circumstance  of  which,  she  knows  a  tittle  of  when  awake  again.
The  profundity,  however,  lasts  but  a  short  time.  She  emerges
from  it  to  literal  sleep-waking, — to  a  certain  cerebral  activity ;
and  this  activity  of  brain  and  her  muscular  power  increase,
so  that  she  sits  up,  till  at  length  she  suddenly  awakes.  The
waking,  though  so  sudden  as  often  to  startle  one,  and  in
an  instant  complete,  is  preceded  by  her  placing  her  arms  to¬
gether  in  her  lap,  and  crossing  her  knees,  and  thus  she  sits
leaning  against  the  back  of  her  chair  ;  then  she  will  rest  her
head  upon  her  hand,  this  being  supported  by  the  arm  of  the
chair ;  then  she  gapes,  yawns,  and  stretches  her  arms  forth,
her  hands  being  clasped  together,  a  few  times ;  and  she  talks
less  and  less,  caring  less  and  less  about  the  proximity  of  others,
and  with  perfect  indifference  allows  me  to  leave  her.  Her  eyes,
when  they  remain  open,  are  more  open,  and  converge  less  and
less,  and  sometimes,  but  not  often,  they  become  very  open,
though  directed  to  nothing.  Sometimes  she  loses  ground
and  relapses  into  deep  sleep.  Her  attitudes  of  repose  are
beautiful,  and  her  yawning  before  a  company  of  strangers
most  amusing,  both  which  she  could  not  for  very  shame  go
through  if  conscious  of  the  place.  At  one  time  there  was  a
regular  order  of  few  or  many  of  these  actions  ;  but  they  now
occur  with  slight  variations  on  most  days,  and  from  time  to
time  there  has  been  a  change  in  them,  some  being  added
which  were  not  at  first  seen,  and  some  which  were  invariably
seen  being  omitted.  At  one  time  she  always  made  a  few
fruitless  efforts  to  rise  before  she  awoke,  and  almost  seemed
to  look  about.  Each  patient  has  his  own  phenomena  of
waking  as  well  as  of  going  to  sleep ;  and  it  is  common  for  a


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


235


change  to  take  place  at  different  periods  in  them.  Some  go
off  sudddenly,  others  not  so  suddenly  but  that  they  have
time  to  act  voluntarily.  I  have  an  excellent  youth  who,  from
being  always  mesmerised  at  one  end  of  a  sofa,  when  he
found  himself  going,  always  threw  himself  towards  the
right,  where  a  cushion  was  placed  on  the  end  of  the  sofa
for  him,  and  yet  was  never  aware  of  this  on  waking.  A
young  woman,  equally  excellent,  who  is  sent  to  sleep  at  the
side  of  a  book-case,  though  she  goes  off  with  one  pass,  al¬
ways  places  her  hand  gently  against  the  book-case  as  she
goes  off ;  and  what  is  remarkable,  one  of  her  hands,  that
which  is  next  to  the  side  of  the  book-case,  turns  at  the  same
moment  over  outwards  as  it  lies  in  her  lap.  Persons  seeing
patients  thus  arrange  their  heads  in  dropping  off,  some¬
times  cry  out  "Impostor,  she  ought  to  have  struck  her
head.”  They  forget  that  when  sleep  is  induced  suddenly,
patients  do  hit  their  heads,  and  severely,  and  fall  down,  as
often  happened  to  the  Okeys  when  any  person  chose  to  mes¬
merise  them  without  their  knowledge  behind  their  backs,
while  walking  or  standing.  But  the  change  may  not  be
sudden ;  an  interval  may  occur,  very  short,  but  sufficient  to
allow  an  instinctive  action.  Persons  seized  with  fits  may  fall
against  a  sharp  body,  or  into  the  fire  or  water ;  but  they
may  have  time  to  manage  their  fall  a  little  {supra,  p.  75),
and  yet  recollect  nothing  of  this  afterwards,  it  having  been
done  so  closely  upon  the  invasion  of  sleep.

I  never  could  wake  her  though  I  could  accelerate  her
waking.  The  sleep  lasted  usually  for  from  half  an  hour  to  an
hour  or  two.  It  was  common  for  her  to  place  her  arms  side
by  side  in  her  lap  and  cross  her  knees  very  soon  after  going
to  sleep,  and  awake  in  five  or  ten  minutes  unless  I  deepened
her  sleep  : — a  thing  done  by  holding  her  hands,  or  especially
by  placing  the  points  of  the  fingers  upon  her  eyes.  Her  arms
would  then  slowly  relax,  separate,  and  drop  at  her  sides,  and
the  knee  which  was  upon  the  other  would  fall  off.  There
is  usually  no  surer  mode  of  deepening  sleep  than  to  establish
contact  with  the  patient.  Laying  the  hand  upon  the  fore¬
head  or  any  other  part,  placing  the  points  of  the  fingers  on
the  eyes,  or  the  tip  of  the  nose,  or  the  points  of  the  fingers
upon  the  points  of  his  fingers,  all  are  powerful  in  deepening
and  producing  sleep.  The  more  extensive  the  contact  the
greater  in  general  the  effect.  An  occult  soporific  power
over  others  exists  clearly  in  the  animal  frame.  In  the  excite¬
ment  of  active  sleep-waking,  contact  gradually  reduces  the
excitement  and  deep  sleep  comes  on.  The  Okeys  in  their
delirious  sleep-waking  were  often  so  susceptible  that,  if  they


236


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of


laid  a  hand  upon  my  shoulder,  or  if  sitting  on  the  ground
they  rested  their  head  against  my  leg  while  I  was  writing,
they  were  presently  lost  in  sleep.  Generally  the  pointed
parts  of  the  body,  as  the  bent  knuckles  and  still  more  the
tips  of  the  fingers,  the  chin  and  still  more  the  point  of  the
nose,  are  more  efficacious  than  an  equal  portion  of  flat  sur¬
face.  There  may  be  for  a  time  a  peculiar  susceptibility  of  a
certain  part.  I  have  often  known  touching  the  point  of
the  patient’s  nose  with  the  top  of  my  finger  produce  instant
sleep  for  a  period :  and  then  have  no  particular  effect  for  a
period.  The  phenomena  of  this  kind  in  the  Okeys  were
endless,  and  all  have  presented  themselves  to  me  again  and
again  in  other  cases.  The  absurdity  of  trying  to  explain
mesmeric  sleep  by  monotonous  impression  on  the  senses,  or
by  fatigue  or  over  straining,  and  of  not  seeing  clearly  that
there  are  occult  powers  not  recognized  by  the  medical  world,
is  glaring  (supra,  p.  53),  no  less  so  than  the  attempt  to
explain  certain  phenomena  by  currents  of  air  and  other  com¬
mon  impressions  on  ordinary  sense.  Water,  mesmerised  by
passes  over  it,  and  even  by  pointing  at  it,  is  often  powerfully
soporific,  and  produces  as  it  did  in  the  Okeys,  instant  depth
of  sleep  in  the  mesmeric  state.

So  strong  is  the  occult  soporific  power  in  the  animal  frame,
that  I  find  it  sometimes  impossible  to  wake  some  patients
who  have  a  propensity  to  grasp  my  hand,  unless  I  prevent
this,  and  even  keep  them  at  as  great  a  distance  from  me  as
possible.  The  present  patient  could  not  be  awakened  by  any
means  I  ever  adopted  :  my  only  method  was  to  remove  as  far
from  her  as  she  would  allow  me,  and  retire  more  and  more
accordingly  as  she  bore  my  absence  better  :  and  not  only
this,  but  to  keep  all  others  as  far  from  her  as  possible.  At
one  period  she  was  no  sooner  asleep  than  she  awoke,  even
though  my  finger  points  were  on  her  eyes ;  and  required  to
be  sent  off  repeatedly  before  the  sleep  acquired  any  depth  :
occasionally  she  wrould  sleep  for  many  hours.

After  waking  she  did  not  feel  the  benefit  immediately,
but  after  some  hours  found  herself  in  great  strength  and
spirits  :  and  slept  soundly  all  night.  It  is  usual  for  persons
to  sleep  at  night  in  proportion  to  the  mesmeric  sleep  they
have  had  in  the  day :  the  explanation  of  which  is  I  presume
that  all  morbid  excitement  is  reduced.  Common  sleep  in  the
day  generally  prevents  sleep  at  night  in  proportion  to  its
length.

When  patients  cannot  be  awakened,  the  best  mode  is  to
allow  them  to  sleep  longer,  and  then  try  again.  I  never
would  awaken  them,  however,  if  I  had  my  choice,  but  let


Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.


23  7


them  have  the  fullest  benefit  of  repose,  and  I  am  sure  it
must  be  injurious  to  harass  them  as  we  often  do  to  wake
them.  The  awakening  measures  of  course  are  more  likely  to
succeed  the  more  nearly  the  sleep  has  expended  itself.

Her  waking  was  always  complete,  for  it  was  not  by  artifi¬
cial  means,  but  from  the  absolute  expenditure  of  the  sleep.
When  waking  is  forced  by  ordinary  or  mesmeric  means,  re¬
lapse  is  common ;  and  care  should  always  be  taken  that  the
patients  be  fully  awakened,  or  sleep  may  overtake  them
after  they  and  their  mesmeriser  have  parted.  One  afternoon
the  mesmeric  power  was  shewn  in  her  falling  fast  asleep  after
I  had  left  her  completely  awake,  through  sitting  with  several
others  very  closely  together  round  the  fire,  which  was  small,
while  the  weather  was  very  cold,  and  then  not  being  able  to
wake  for  a  considerable  time.  Nothing  like  a  return  of  sleep
ever  happened  on  any  other  occasion,  nor  was  she  on  any
other  occasion  thus  exposed  to  the  joint  influence  of  others ;
so  that  I  do  not  doubt  it  was  no  relapse  of  the  mesmeric
state,  but  a  fresh  sleep  from  strong  united  mesmeric  influ¬
ence.  Both  she  and  they  were  taken  by  surprise.  She  could
give  me  no  instructions  how  to  wake  her,  because  she  never
knew  she  was  asleep  or  in  a  mesmeric  state,  or  who  I  was, —
being  satisfied  she  was  wide  awake  and  at  her  customary
occupations.

I  will  now  conclude  with  her  cure.  The  return  of  her  fits
in  October,  three  weeks  after  the  omission  of  mesmerism,  at
the  end  of  the  first  month,  has  been  mentioned.

In  the  next  April,  1842,  while  I  was  mesmerising  her  four
times  a  week,  a  return  of  her  annoyance  occasioned  catch  -
ings,  especially  in  her  sleep,  such  as  she  had  before  I  first
mesmerised  her,  but  which  had  all  ceased  before  I  left  town.
These  made  her  fear  she  should  have  a  fit,  and  she  had  one
in  her  sleep,  but  does  not  know  it.

In  July,  she  was  much  distressed  in  her  feelings  again,
and  had  a  fit  at  my  house  from  my  being  obliged  to  leave  her
in  the  mesmeric  state  for  an  hour,  and  a  fit  at  home  that
evening,  and  another  in  a  few  days.  My  absence  in  Switz¬
erland  during  September  and  October,  was  followed  by  a  re¬
newal  of  her  head-aches  and  by  three  fits  soon  after  my  re¬
turn,  and  one  very  moderate,  on  the  31st  of  January,  1843.

I  have  mesmerised  her  two  or  three  weeks  ever  since,
except  during  my  absence  in  the  Pyrennees  last  September
and  October ;  which  absence  produced  no  inconvenience,  as
each  of  the  former  intermissions  did,  and  she  has  now  been
perfectly  free  from  her  disease  for  nearly  a  year  and  a  half.


238  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism

From  the  first  I  have  never  given  her  medicine.  She
had  required  domestic  aperients  for  years,  but  tells  me  she
has  taken  none  for  the  last  year  or  two.  All  that  I  have
done  besides  mesmerising  her  was  to  bleed  her  four  times  in
the  period  of  nearly  three  years  on  account  of  fulness  of  the
head.

Conduit  Street,  June  1844.


VII.  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism  by  different

Gentlemen.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — I  send  you  the  following  accounts  of  the  utility  of
mesmerism  in  diseases  treated  not  by  myself.  The  first  is
written  by  myself :  the  other  by  the  gentlemen  who  did  the
good.  I  remain,  yours,  &c.,

London,  June  26th,  1844.  John  Elliotson.

Allow  me  to  quote  the  following  passage  from  Mrs.  Romer'a
charming  work,  called  the  Rhone ,  Darro ,  and  Guadalquiver : —

“  Shall  I  not  be  hailed  with  a  shout  of  derision  when  I  declare,
that  I  verily  believe  Petrarch  to  have  been  (all  unknown  to  himself,
and,  as  innocently  ignorant  of  his  powers  as  Moliere’s  Bourgeois
Gentilhomme  was,  who  had  been  making  prose  all  his  life  sans  s'en
douter)  a  most  expert  magnetizer  ?  I  ground  my  belief  upon  a  pas¬
sage  in  his  life,  which  has  been  dwelt  upon  by  one  of  his  biographers
as  demonstrating  the  errors  into  which  a  romantic  imagination  will
hurry  even  a  mind  like  Petrarch’s,  and  the  fond  credulity  with  which
he  made  complete  abnegation  of  his  powers  of  reasoning  whenever
any  chance  incident  occurred  of  a  nature  to  corroborate  his  assertions
of  a  mystical  sympathy  existing  between  himself  and  her  to  whom
his  affections  were  exclusively  devoted.

“  The  anecdote  sets  forth,  that,  one  day  at  Avignon,  Petrarch,
who  was  in  the  habit  of  reciting  his  compositions  to  Laura,  read  to
her  a  poem,  in  which,  under  supposititious  names,  the  history  of
his  passion,  and  the  misery  which  the  inflexible  virtue  of  its  fair
object  had  inflicted  upon  him,  were  described  with  a  truth  and
pathos  which  left  no  possibility  of  misapprehension  in  the  mind  of
his  listener.  Laura  understood  him  but  too  well,  yet  she  abstained
from  uttering  any  remark  to  that  effect.  When  the  poem  was
finished,  a  long  silence  ensued;  during  which  the  eyes  of  each  were
fixed  upon  the  other  with  an  expression  of  tenderness  so  intense
that  their  very  souls  appeared  to  have  become  transfused  in  that  ab¬
sorbing  glance.  At  that  time  Laura  was  suffering  from  a  slight
ophthalmia;  and  it  so  chanced,  says  the  biographer,  that,  on  the
following  day,  her  eyes  were  completely  restored  to  a  healthy  state,
while,  by  an  extraordinary  coincidence,  those  of  Petrarch  were  pain-


by  different  Gentlemen


239


fully  attacked  by  the  distressing  malady  under  which  she  had  suf¬
fered.  Her  lover,  however,  firmly  believed  that  the  force  of  sym¬
pathy,  and,  more  especially,  the  ardent  desire  he  had  felt,  while
gazing  upon  her  the  preceding  day,  to  relieve  her  from  her  sufferings,
had  given  him  the  power  to  transfer  them  from  her  to  himself;  for
such  was  his  faith  in  the  strength  and  purity  of  his  love  for  her,
that  he  believed  it  capable  of  performing  miracles  in  her  favour.

“  Was  not  this  miracle,  however,  the  simple  agency  of  animal
magnetism,  directed  by  those  two  most  powerful  engines  the  eye  and
the  will  ?  I  have  no  doubt  in  my  own  mind  on  the  subject;  and  I
have  so  frequently  seen  magnetizers  affected  by  the  identical  symp¬
toms  from  which  they  had  relieved  their  patients,  that  the  circum¬
stance  of  Petrarch  having  gained  the  ophthalmia  of  which  Laura
had  so  suddenly  been  cured  is  to  me  an  additional  and  convincing
proof,  that  the  occurrence  which  he  had  fancied  to  be  a  miracle,
and  which  his  historian  has  attributed  to  the  delusions  of  an  over¬
wrought  imagination,  was  neither  more  nor  less  than  one  of  those
physical  phenomena  of  which  I  have  seen  more  than  one  example
in  the  practice  of  animal  magnetism,  and  which  form  the  most
extraordinary  and  perhaps  inexplicable  characteristics  of  magnetic
attraction  and  sympathy  in  the  human  frame.”

Let  those  who  are  inclined  to  smile  at  the  opinion  of  this
accomplished  lady,  read  the  following  narration.

I  have  just  been  attending  a  young  lady  for  an  affection
of  her  lungs, ~  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Ashburner.  The  outer
half  of  the  white  of  the  right  eye  became  slightly  inflamed,
and  grew  very  gradually  worse  for  a  fortnight.  It  then  got
much  worse  in  three  days,  the  aching  being  changed  into
sharp  pains  both  in  the  eye  and  the  temple ;  and  the  in¬
flamed  portion  became  of  an  intense  and  uniform  red,  with  a
palish  elevation  at  one  spot  as  though  a  pustule  would  form.
We  had  been  anxious  to  distress  and  weaken  her  as  little  as
possible,  but  were  now  compelled  to  take  some  measure  for
arresting  the  disease,  and  prescribed  a  blister  and  mercurial
medicine.

She  was  so  agitated  at  hearing  of  our  prescription,  that
neither  the  blister  was  put  on  nor  the  mercurial  taken.  Mr.
Atkinson,  being  a  friend  who  was  frequently  at  the  house,
mesmerised  the  eye  the  same  night,  (Friday,  June  21st.)  In
the  morning  I  found  she  had  for  the  first  time  during  three
days  been  free  from  the  darting  pains,  had  slept  all  night — a
thing  she  had  not  done  for  a  considerable  time,  and  that  the
eye  was  to  my  view  less  inflamed.  He  mesmerised  it  the
next  night,  and  on  Sunday  she  was  still  free  from  all  the
darting  pains,  and  had  slept  all  night,  and  the  eye  was  de¬
cidedly  better.  He  mesmerised  it  again  with  all  the  same

VOL.  II.  r


240


Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism


results,  and  on  Monday  she  had  lost  even  the  aching  which
she  suffered  for  a  fortnight  before  the  darting  pains.  On
Tuesday,  the  last  night's  mesmerisation  had  almost  dissipated
the  inflammation;  and  to-day  (Wednesday)  all  I  see  is  that
the  eye  has  been  inflamed — there  is  just  a  vestige  left.  This
is  as  decided  a  cure  by  mesmerism  as  ever  I  have  witnessed.
No  means  but  mesmerism  were  employed ;  the  disease  was
severe,  and  had  increased  up  to  the  moment  of  mesmerisa¬
tion  ;  and  declined  immediately  after  the  first  mesmerisation,
and  cleared  off  with  a  rapidity  which  was  astonishing :  and
the  instantaneous  relief  of  the  pain  was  what  could  not  have
been  accomplished  by  any  other  means  so  admirably,  for  the
remedy,  unlike  others,  neither  caused  pain,  inconvenience,
or  weakness.  If  the  case  of  diseased  finger  cured  with  mes¬
merism  by  Mr.  Case,  and  described  in  my  pamphlet,  is  consi¬
dered  side  by  side  with  this,  we  shall  be  convinced  that
mesmerism  possesses  remedial  powers  of  a  nature  which  the
public  does  not  imagine,  though  I  believe  that  mesmeric  re¬
cords  contain  abundant  similar  facts  disregarded  by  the  pro¬
fession.  There  was  no  general  effect,  no  mesmeric  state  in¬
duced.

The  following  is  from  a  friend  whose  name  I  am  not  at
liberty  to  mention  : —

“  My  dear  Sir, — On  my  return  to - ,  I  found  one  of  my

patients  had  been  suffering  much  with  pain  in  the  jaw,  face,  and
head  generally.

“  As  soon  as  I  had  mesmerised  her,  she  said  she  had  been  suf¬
fering  from  rheumatism,  the  consequence  of  cold  caught  three  weeks
before,  but  would  be  well  by  the  end  of  this  week.

“  On  Saturday  she  said  there  was  a  swelling  on  her  throat,  result¬
ing  from  the  same  cause,  which  had  been  coming  for  a  fortnight,
but  she  had  observed  it  only  that  morning:  that  it  would  go  on  in¬
creasing  till  Tuesday  night,  and  then  ‘  go  away  ’  and  she  would  soon
be  well.  It  was  at  this  time  distinctly  visible  on  the  left  side  of  the
throat.

“  On  Monday,  speaking  of  the  same  thing,  she  spoke  of  its
*  breaking ’  on  Tuesday  night,  when  I  found  for  the  first  time  it  was
of  the  nature  of  quinsey.

“  From  this  time  it  rapidly  increased  in  size,  and  of  course  pro¬
duced  increasing  pain.  I  asked  at  what  hour  it  would  break;  and
she  replied  that  depended  on  the  time  she  should  sleep  (mesmerice)
in  the  meantime:  and  in  answer  to  my  enquiry  what  this  meant,
she  said,  ‘  It  gathered  as  much  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour’s  sleep  as  it
would  in  half  a  day  without  sleep.’

“  I  gave  her  no  information  on  the  subject  when  awake,  but  on
Tuesday  she  was  aware  that  she  had  not  only  a  sore  throat,  but  *  a


by  different  Gentlemen.


241


sore  gathering .*  Earty  in  the  evening  yesterday  she  slept  for  ten
minutes,  and  then  said  it  would  break  at  half-past  nine.

“  She  is  a  domestic  servant;  and  a  few  minutes  before  the  time,
her  mistress,  who  had  been  made  acquainted  with  the  case,  took
occasion  to  be  in  the  kitchen.  She  found  the  patient  in  the  utmost
distress,  and  about  to  go  to  bed;  but  she  found  some  reason  for  pre¬
venting  this  and,  at  the  very  minute ,  the  girl  rushed  choking  to  a
basin,  and  the  discharge  had  taken  place.

“  She  is  now  quite  relieved,  and  I  have  no  doubt  will,  by  the  end
of  the  week,  be  as  well  as  she  promises.

“  I  suppose  here  could  be  no  allegation  that  fancy  had  produced
the  phenomena;  and  I  presume  no  one  will  pretend  that  the  minute
at  which  an  invisible  abscess  shall  discharge  itself  can  be  predicated
by  common  sagacity.”

The  following  is  part  of  a  second  letter  : —

“  My  family  and  myself  were  suffering  so  severely  with  influenza,
that  I  could  not  invite  Mr.  W.  to  watch  the  case  of  quinsey.  The
patient  was  one  of  my  own  servants,  and  her  fellow-servant,  my
wife,  and  myself  were  the  only  witnesses.

“  If  you  think  proper  to  publish  the  case  anonymously,  stating
either  that  you  are  not  authorized  to  give  the  names,  or  the  plain
reason  which  I  have  given  for  withholding  it,  and  adding  whatever
you  think  proper  as  to  the  credibility  of  your  informant,  I  have  not
the  slightest  objection.

“I  don’t  think  I  mentioned  that  although  I  told  the  patient  not
a  word  as  to  the  nature  or  issue  of  her  complaint,  she  said  on  the
morning  of  the  last  day,  she  was  almost  sure  she  was  going  to  have
a  quinsey,  and  expressed  the  utmost  alarm,  because  five  years  ago
she  had  one,  and  was  compelled  to  be  nursed  at  home  for  nearly  a
month,  during  the  latter  portion  of  which  she  suffered  dreadfully,
and  was  able  to  take  only  liquid  food,  a  drop  at  a  time.  Asleep  she
directed  me  that  after  the  discharge  she  should  frequently  rub  the
external  tumor,  and  it  would  be  wholly  dispersed  by  Saturday
(to-day).  To-day  I  find  it  has  entirely  disappeared,  although  a
considerable  tumor  remains  from  the  one  five  years  ago.”

The  following  is  from  CaptainValiant,  through  me,  to  the
Rev.  Mr.  Sandby  : —

“Chatham,  Dec.  7th,  1843.

“  Dear  Sir, — I  have  much  pleasure  in  complying  with  your  re¬
quest,  in  adding  my  testimony  to  the  truth  of  mesmerism,  and
giving  you  a  slight  sketch  of  my  success  and  experience  therein.
My  acquaintance  with  the  art  commenced  in  the  spring  of  the  year
1840,  when  Mr.  Wood  kindly  allowed  me  to  see  him  mesmerise
Elizabeth  Okey,  the  celebrated  and  shamefully-abused  patient  of  Dr.
Elliotson.  I  was,  as  every  one  who  has  not  been  an  eye-witness  to
its  wonders  must  be,  a  thorough  sceptic,  but  could  not  withhold  my
belief  in  the  truth  of  mesmerism  after  having  several  times  witnessed

r  2


242  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism

Mr.  Wood’s  experiments  on  the  artless  girl.  I  practised  it  however
myself  very  little  till  the  autumn  of  the  following  year,  when  meet¬
ing  an  old  acquaintance,  an  experienced  mesmerist.  Sir  Thomas
Wiltshire,  and  talking  the  subject  over,  we  determined  to  try  the
effects  of  mesmerism  on  a  servant  of  mine,  Catherine  Cocks,  aged
20,  who  was  very  ill  with  a  pulmonary  complaint  that  had  affected
her  for  years.  Sir  Thomas  was  the  operator,  and  in  a  short  time
threw  her  into  the  mesmeric  trance;  and,  by  her  directions  in  that
state,  continued  to  mesmerise  her  daily  for  a  week,  at  the  end  of
which  time  she  was  perfectly  restored  to  health  and  strength,  as  she
predicted  the  first  time  she  was  mesmerised.  She  is  still  in  my
service,  robust  and  well:  though  the  medical  gentleman  who  had
attended  her  for  some  years  had,  previously  to  the  mesmeric  opera¬
tion,  assured  her  parents  that  the  girl  could  not  survive  the  ensuing
winter.

“  I  saw  Sir  Thomas  Wiltshire  also  succeed  with  Mrs.  Gregory,  a
nurse  in  my  family.  He  threw  her  into  the  sleep  in  seven  or  eight
minutes  before  a  large  roomful  of  people,  merely  for  experiment;
though  she  afterwards  reaped  some  benefit  from  mesmerism,  when,
having  to  undergo  a  very  severe  operation  on  her  jaw,  it  was  per¬
formed  during  mesmeric  trance  without  her  suffering  the  slightest
pain.  An  account  of  this  case  was  published  by  Dr.  Elliotson  in  the
Medical  Times,  No.  144,  vol.  vi.

“  Since  that  period  I  have  myself  mesmerised  many  persons  of
both  sexes,  and  have  seen  others  succeed  with  a  great  many  more.
I  have  also  in  many  cases,  without  putting  the  patient  to  sleep,  re¬
moved  head-aches,  tooth-aches,  sore  throats,  and  several  other  pains,
not  only  in  women,  but  in  strong  men,  merely  by  manipulating  the
parts  affected  and  powerfully  willing  the  cure.  I  will  give  one  in¬
stance  of  this.  A  young  woman,  Ann  Bryant,  who  had  repeatedly
refused  to  be  mesmerised  (fancying  I  suppose  with  Mr.  McNeile  that
it  was  somewhat  allied  to  witchcraft),  was  afflicted  with  a  bad  face-
ache,  one  side  of  which  was  much  swollen.  The  agony  she  suffered
at  length  induced  her  to  beg  me  to  see  what  I  could  do  to  cure  her,
making  me  promise  at  the  same  time  not  to  put  her  to  sleep.  I
made  the  passes  up  the  side  of  the  face,  over  her  head  and  down
the  back,  for  some  minutes  without  any  effect.  In  about  a  quarter
of  an  hour  she  declared  that  she  felt  better;  and  continuing  the  ma¬
nipulations  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  longer,  that  she  was  perfectly
relieved  from  all  pain.  In  a  few  hours,  too,  the  swelling  quite  sub¬
sided.  In  this  patient  I  have  also  removed  head-aches  and  once  a
tooth-ache  without  putting  her  to  sleep.

“  I  have  never  failed  in  a  single  case  (where  I  had  once  succeeded
in  producing  mesmeric  sleep)  to  remove  any  pain  with  which  a
patient  may  have  been  afflicted.  The  girl,  I  have  before  mentioned,
Catherine  Cocks,  is  very  susceptible  of  colds,  particularly  after
getting  her  feet  wet.  On  one  occasion  she  had  a  severe  sore  throat
and  a  swelling  of  the  glands  as  large  as  an  egg,  for  which  her  fellow-
servant  had  rubbed  in  some  liniment  for  a  couple  of  days  without
doing  any  good.  Finding  the  throat  getting  worse  and  that  she


by  different  Gentlemen.


243


could  scarcely  swallow  anything,  she  asked  me  to  mesmerise  her.
I  did  so,  and  manipulated  her  throat,  making  the  passes  towards
her  feet.  In  about  half  an  hour  she  said  all  pain  had  left  her.  I
allowed  her  to  remain  in  the  sleep  an  hour  and  a  half  longer,  and
on  awaking  her  she  said  she  felt  quite  well.  The  swelling  had
entirely  disappeared,  and  she  ate  a  hearty  supper.  A  few  days
ago  I  mesmerised  the  same  woman  to  allay  a  painful  swelling  in  her
wrist,  which  had  extended  up  to  her  elbow.  She  did  not  know  the
cause  of  the  swelling,  but  imagined  she  had  strained  her  wrist
during  the  night.  After  making  the  passes  from  the  elbow  to  the
fingers  for  about  twenty  minutes,  all  pain  had  departed,  and  in  an
hour  afterwards  no  swelling  was  perceptible.  In  March  last  on
returning  home  after  an  absence  of  a  month,  I  found  Catherine
laid  up  with  a  very  bad  cold  and  severe  pain  in  the  throat  and  chest,
caught  some  time  before  by  getting  her  feet  wet.  I  mesmerised  her,
and  after  making  the  passes  down  the  throat  and  chest  for  about  an
hour,  she  declared  the  pain  gone.  I  then  allowed  her  to  sleep
'  quietly  for  another  hour,  when,  on  attempting  to  speak,  her  voice
was  gone, — she  could  not  even  whisper.  I  was  unable  to  account
for  this,  but  continued  the  manipulations  in  every  manner  I  could
think  of  to  relieve  her  for  an  hour  more,  to  no  purpose.  I  then
awoke  her,  but  to  my  horror  the  voice  was  not  forthcoming.  I  put
her  to  sleep  again,  and  after  a  time  again  awoke  her.  I  repeated
this  more  than  once.  At  length  when  awake  she  made  signs  for
some  water,  and  on  drinking  a  little  she  was  enabled  to  whisper.
I  desired  her  to  go  and  lie  down,  which  she  did,  and  in  a  little
while  she  vomited  fully  half  a  pint  of  matter  and  blood,  when  her
voice  returned.  The  next  morning  I  again  mesmerised  her  for  two
hours,  and  woke  her  up  perfectly  well.  I  leave  others  better  ac¬
quainted  with  the  subject  to  explain  this  case, — I  merely  vouch  for
the  facts.  I  have  seen  many  beautiful  developments  of  the  func¬
tions  of  the  phrenological  organs  in  persons  mesmerically  acted
upon.  I  had  heard  of,  but  never  witnessed,  mesmero-phrenology
before  May  or  June  last  year,  when  Dr.  Elliotson  kindly  invited  me
to  see  it  at  his  house.  I  was  delighted  with  what  was  exhibited  to
me,  and  marking  the  situations  of  as  many  organs  as  I  could
remember,  I  returned  home,  and  immediately  put  Mrs.  Gregory,
the  nurse,  into  the  mesmeric  trance,  and  to  my  astonishment  she
manifested  all  the  organs  I  endeavoured  to  elicit.  A  day  or  two
afterwards  I  took  her  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  was  much  pleased  with
her,  and  who  excited  almost  all  the  known  organs  in  her  head.  At
that  time,  I  should  mention,  I  knew  nothing  of  phrenology,  and  I
verily  believe  the  nurse,  who  is  a  simple  woman  of  her  class,  had
never  even  heard  the  name  before.

“  In  my  practice  of  mesmerism,  I  have  met  with  two  curious  cases
which  perhaps  may  be  worth  mentioning.  In  both  of  these  my
subjects  were  powerful  men,  brother  captains  in  the  army,  whom  I
had  repeatedly  tried  to  mesmerise,  but  could  only  succeed  in  closing
their  eyes,  without  being  able  to  put  them  to  sleep,  so  that  they


244


Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism


could  not  possibly  open  them  till  I  demesmerised  them.  1  could
close  their  eyes  in  about  two  minutes,  even  by  giving  them  a  glass
of  magnetized  water.  I  had  also  the  power  of  catalepsing  the  limbs
of  one  of  them  by  making  passes  over  them.

“  I  think  I  must  now  have  tired  your  patience,  but  before  I  con¬
clude  let  me  tell  you  an  anecdote  that  occurred  to  me  a  short  time
ago.  A  young  gentleman  was  most  strenuously  abusing  freemasonry,

styling  it  great  nonsense,  d - d  humbug,  &c.  I  asked  him  how

long  he  had  been  initiated?  He  replied,  ‘Thank  God!  I  am
not  a  mason.’  ‘You  have  probably  read  some  work  on  the  sub¬
ject?’  *  No.’  ‘  Some  mason  then  has  explained  its  secrets  to  you?’
‘No, — but  it  is  all  nonsense;  I  am  sure  it  is.’  The  gentleman’s
tirade  reminded  me  of  Mr.  Me  Neile’s  sermon  against  mesmerism.
The  reverend  gentleman,  on  his  own  acknowledgment,  being  equally
as  well  informed  on  his  subject  as  my  silly  friend  on  freemasonry.

“  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  faithfully,

“Thomas  Valiant.”

The  following  is  from  a  gentleman  who,  I  am  proud  to
say,  was  once  my  pupil : —

“Barnstaple,  June  17th,  1844.

“Dear  Sir, — Among  a  few  things  which  I  forgot  to  mention
during  my  visit  to  you,  is  a  remarkable  case  of  recovery  of  speech,
which  was  effected  on  a  deaf  and  dumb  girl  at  Ilfracombe,  about  ten
miles  from  this.  I  have  enclosed  the  particulars,  which  were  in¬
serted  by  an  Ilfracombe  gentleman  in  one  of  our  papers.  The  case
has  excited  great  interest  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  the  account  I
have  sent  you  may  be  relied  on  as  being  quite  correct.

“  Believe  me,  dear  Sir,

“  Yours  sincerely,

“  J.  Elliotson,  Esq.,  &c.  &c.”  “  Henry  Weekes.


“  Extraordinary  Case  of  Recovery  of  Speech  by  Mesmerism

or  Vital-magnetism.

“To  the  Editor  of  the  North  Devon  Advertiser.

“  Sir, — A  case  of  the  above  description  has  recently  occurred  in
Ilfracombe,  which,  as  you  may  readily  suppose,  forms  the  topic  of
conversation  among  all  classes  of  society.  Mr.  Davey,  who  lec¬
tured  some  time  ago  in  Barnstaple  and  neighbouring  towns,  has
recently  visited  this  place,  for  the  purpose  of  displaying  the  astonish¬
ing  phenomena  of  ‘  Vital  Magnetism ,’  commonly  called  ‘  Mesmerism .’
Two  meetings  have  already  been  held  in  Mr.  Nash’s  school-room  ;
but,  as  your  readers  doubtless  will  be  impatient  to  hear  a  recital  of
the  circumstances  of  the  case  referred  to  above,  I  shall  forbear  to  des¬
cant  upon  them  (the  lectures)  previous  to  my  satisfying  their  natural
curiosity.  It  will  be  necessary  for  me  here  to  premise  that,  in  con¬
sequence  of  the  violent,  and  in  many  instances  disgraceful ,  opposition,


by  different  Gentlemen.


245


and  uncourteous  behaviour  of  many  persons  towards  Mr.  Davey,  a
natural  wish  to  exonerate  himself  from  the  crime  of  duplicity,  and
intent  to  humbug  the  natives,  has  induced  him  to  prolong  his  visit
here,  in  order  to  bring  under  the  influence  of  magnetism  some  three
or  four  inhabitants  of  the  town,  between  him  and  whom  there  can
be  no  suspicion  of  collusion.  These  preparatory  steps  have  been
taken  publicly  in  Mr.  Nash’s  school-room,  and  I  am  warranted  in
saying  that  he  has  so  far  succeeded  as  to  be  able  to  announce  his  in¬
tention  of  again  appearing  before  the  public  on  Friday  evening  next,
when  the  girl  who  has  experienced  so  signal  a  benefit  from  God,
through  the  hands  of  Mr.  Davey,  will  appear  on  the  platform.

“  Since  the  recovery  of  her  speech  I  have  visited  the  girl  at  her
home,  and  had  an  opportunity  of  questioning  her  mother  as  to  the
cause  of  her  loss  of  speech,  and  the  time  which  has  elapsed  since
that  event;  I  have  likewise  been  at  the  house  of  the  person  where  she
was  mesmerised,  and  made  inquiries  of  those  who  were  present  when
Mr.  Davey  operated  on  her;  and  have  likewise  seen  Mr.  Davey
himself  on  the  subject.  The  information,  therefore,  which  I  am
about  to  give,  you  may  regard  as  authentic,  both  as  it  regards  the
cause  of  her  dumbness,  as  well  as  in  some  measure  the  ‘  modus
operandi’  made  use  of,  which  has  been  crowned  with  such  signal  and
triumphant  success.

“The  girl  is  in  her  15th  year;  her  name  Catherine  Brown;  and
is  the  daughter  of  a  mechanic  living  on  Compass-hill,  Ilfracombe.
Her  mother  states  that  she  was  taken  alarmingly  ill  in  the  month  of
October,  1841,  her  complaint  lying  in  the  head,  side,  and  stomach  :
— at  this  time  she  presented  a  most  deplorable  picture  of  human
wretchedness  and  suffering,  and  her  screams,  which  were  terrific,
could  be  heard  at  a  very  considerable  distance — she  could  never  be
left  for  a  moment,  as,  during  the  absence  of  the  attendants,  she
would  beat  her  head  against  a  wall  most  unmercifully,  so  as  to  leave
wounds  as  well  as  bruises ;  she  was  likewise  often  convulsed,  during
which  paroxysms  it  was  as  much  as  two  could  do  to  hold  her — many
medical  gentlemen  of  the  town  visited  her,  and  gave  her  medicine,
in  fact  she  was  an  object  of  general  charity,  and  I  believe  there  was
not  even  an  occasional  medical  visitor  in  the  town  who  did  not  pre¬
scribe  for  her.  After  a  lengthened  period  of  duration  and  suffering,
the  violence  of  her  complaint  gradually  subsided,  and  at  length
totally  left  her,  but  left  her  dumb  !  From  that  period  up  to  the
hour  of  being  mesmerised,  she  has  never  spoken  a  single  syllable,
although  bribes  have  been  offered  her  in  order  to  induce  her  to  try
to  do  so  :  she  has  still  continued  the  object  of  charitable  visits  from
the  gentry  of  the  town,  among  whom  was  —  Lee,  Esq.,  Magistrate,
who  used  to  offer  her  a  shilling  to  pronounce  his  name,  but  even
this  simple  monosyllable  she  has  never  been  able  to  articulate.

“  On  Wednesday,  the  8th  instant,  she  was  first  operated  on  by
Mr.  Davey,  and  thrown  into  a  mesmeric  stupor,  but  no  other
manifestation  was  produced  which  could  be  considered  as  the  result
of  magnetism.

“  The  following  day,  Thursday,  the  9th  instant,  she  was  again


246  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism

subjected  to  mesmeric  influence,  when  there  was  only  a  slight  moving
of  the  tongue  to  and  fro,  but  consciousness  was  not  wholly  destroyed,
or,  in  other  words,  she  was  not  sufficiently  under  magnetic  influence
to  be  further  operated  on.

“  Saturday  the  1 1  th  she  was  magnetised  a  third  time,  and  con¬
tinued  in  a  comatose  state  for  above  half  an  hour  before  the  influence
of  vital  magnetism  began  fully  to  exemplify  itself :  it  was  then  evident
that  consciousness  was  wholly  destroyed ,  and,  of  course,  in  a  proper
state  to  have  the  phrenological  organs  operated  on,  which  was  ac¬
cordingly  done,  and,  as  the  different  organs  were  excited  by  the
touch  of  the  operator,  they  were  accurately  responded  to  by  the  girl.
It  now  became  time  to  commence  operations  for  the  attainment  of  the
desired  object — the  recovery  of  her  speech.  The  proper  organs  were
therefore  excited  by  Mr.  Davey,  and  after  the  lapse  of  about  ten
minutes  she  was  able  to  speak.  At  first  her  speech  was  slow,  and  she
dwelt  on  the  first  letter  of  the  word  just  as  those  persons  who  have
an  impediment  in  their  speech,  commonly  known  as  stammering —
thus,  on  pronouncing  the  word  cat,  she  dwelt  on  the  c,  as  c-c-c  at :
dog,  d-d-d-og,  &c.,  &c.,  and  in  a  similar  manner  was  her  pronun¬
ciation  of  other  monosyllables.  She  was  then  asked  her  name,  when,
dwelling  on  each  syllable,  she  replied  Cath-e-rine  Brown.  From
this  it  was  evident  that  her  speech  was  improving,  and  a  further
trial  elicited  a  quick  reply,  ‘  Catherine  Brown  after  a  short  time
she  was  demesmerised,  and  those  who  were  present  will  not  soon
forget  the  countenance  of  the  child,  when,  rising  from  her  chair,  she
ran  towards  a  little  girl  in  the  room,  crying  out  in  joyous  accents
‘  Oh,  Mary  Ann,  I  can  speak  again  now  !’  A  fear  I  believe  was
entertained  lest  the  faculty  of  speech  would  again  leave  her  on  being
demesmerised,  but  the  fear  was  groundless,  and  wholly  dissipated,
on  hearing  her  thus  address  her  little  friend.  It  must  have  been  a
touching  scene  indeed,  to  have  witnessed  tears  of  gratitude  and  joy
moisten  the  eyes  of  the  beholders  ;  and  the  joy  of  her  mother  must
have  been  ecstatic  when  told  of  what  had  been  brought  about  on  her
daughter,  after  an  awful  silence  of  two  years  and  a  half  to  use  her
own  words  to  me,  she  said  ‘  I  thought  I  should  have  fainted  when
I  was  first  told  of  it  on  the  quay,  and  I  hardly  know  how  I  got  home,’
(she  was  not  present  when  the  girl  was  mesmerised.)  As  soon  as  the
girl  got  home,  she  called  on  a  neighbour,  Mrs.  Nicholls,  to  inquire
for  her  mother,  but  the  surprise  of  hearing  her  speak  who  had  been
so  long  dumb  was  almost  too  much  for  the  poor  woman  ;  she  could
not  answer  her  directly,  and  almost  fainted — her  school  mistress,
Mrs.  Wade,  says  that  she  has  frequently  seen  the  girl  annoyed  with
other  children,  and  noticed  by  the  muscles  of  her  face  the  inward
workings  of  her  mind  towards  them,  to  wffiich  she  was  unable  to
give  utterance,  except  in  the  low  gutterel  sound  usually  made  by
persons  in  her  condition.

“  On  Sunday  she  was  again  mesmerised,  in  order  to  remove  any
impediment  which  may  arise  in  pronouncing  very  long  words  ;  in
about  ten  minutes  she  was  in  a  perfect  state  of  coma ,  and,  the  proper
organs  being  excited,  she  was  bid  to  repeat  after  the  operator  a  short


by  different  Gentlemen.


247


prayer,  expressive  of  thankfulness  to  the  Almighty  for  the  restoration
of  her  speech,  which  she  did  fluently  and  distinctly.  Words  of  some
length  were  then  tried,  which  she  pronounced  without  hesitation.
She  was  then  awoke  by  the  operator,  and  dismissed  with  the  in¬
junction  never  to  forget,  morning  and  evening,  to  thank  the  Almighty
for  so  signal  a  manifestation  towards  her,  which  she  promised  to
attend  to.”

“  Perhaps  the  following  may  interest  you:  —

“  Speech  restored  by  Mesmerism.  A  writer  in  the  North  Devon
Advertiser  says,  ‘  Many  of  your  readers  will  be  gratified  to  know
that  thanks  were  publicly  returned  in  the  parish  church  of  Ilfra¬
combe  on  Sunday  last,  for  the  signal  mercy  of  God  towards  the  girl,
Catherine  Brown,  in  her  restoration  of  speech  by  mesmerism,
through  the  instrumentality  of  Mr.  Davey,  who  so  lately  lectured
here.’  ” — Cheltenham  Free  Press ,  June  1  5  th,  1844.


VIII.  Extraction  of  Teeth  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — I  send  you  a  few  more  instances  of  extraction  of
teeth  in  the  mesmeric  state.

Yours,  &c.

June  26th,  1844.  J.  Elliotson.

A  mesmeric  patient  who  in  her  sleep-waking  has  no  feel¬
ing  below  the  head,  came  to  me  one  morning  agonized  with
the  pain  of  a  decayed  stump  of  a  large  double  tooth.  I  took
her  to  Mr.  Nicholles  in  Bruton  Street,  who  had  so  kindly
removed  teeth  from  three  other  patients  of  mine  in  the  mes¬
meric  state.  I  made  one  pass  and  she  was  in  the  mesmeric
sleep.  Unluckily  I  found  that,  unlike  the  patient  whose  case
I  have  narrated  at  such  length  in  this  number,  her  gums
wrere  as  perfectly  sensible  as  her  cheeks  and  lips.  It  occurred
to  me  that  possibly  I  might  suspend  their  sensibility  by  lon¬
gitudinal  passes  down  the  cheeks.  I  tried  and  succeeded  to
a  very  great  extent.  We  were  all  in  a  hurry,  and  I  could  not
encroach  upon  Mr.  Nicholles*  time  sufficiently  to  remove  the
sensibility  entirely :  but  it  was  presently  so  deadened,  that
the  extraction  of  the  three  tight  fangs,  each  separately,  so
that  the  affair  was  very  tedious,  was  accomplished  with  no
more  pain  than  amounted  to  a  sense  of  pressure,  for  which
she  said  she  cared  nothing.  Nor  did  she  appear  to  feel
except  in  a  trifling  degree  what  would  otherwise  have  been
most  painful,  and  what  she  had  always  dreaded  exceedingly.


248


Cases  of  painless  Extraction  of  Teeth


I  awoke  her,  and  told  her  in  joke  that  Mr.  Nicholles  had
only  stopped  her  tooth  as  she  would  find,  and  she  believed
me,  and  was  greatly  surprised  on  finding  with  her  tongue
that  it  had  been  extracted.


A  tooth  was  extracted  lately,  at  Cheltenham : — and  the
following  is  the  letter  of  the  dentist  to  Miss  Wallace.

“  Madam, — As  you  are  anxious  to  know  my  opinion  of  the  state
of  the  young  girl,  at  the  time  I  extracted  the  fang  at  Mr.  Lundy’s
lecture,  I  feel  much  pleasure  in  complying  with  your  request.

“I  watched  her  attentively  at  the  time  Mr.  Alex  broke  the
crown  off,  and  could  not  perceive  the  slightest  movement,  or  alter¬
ation  of  the  countenance ;  but  that  not  being  attended  with  ynuch  pain ,
it  being  a  front  tooth,  I  did  not  consider  at  all  convincing ;  and
that  was  the  reason  I  volunteered  to  take  out  the  fang,  well  knowing
it  to  be  a  most  painful  operation ,  and  would  be  an  undeniable  proof
of  mesmerism.

“I  extracted  the  fang  with  some  difficulty,  and  it  must  have
been  attended  with  excruciating  pain ,  and  I  am  fully  satisfied  that
she  did  not  feel  the  slightest  suffering ;  and  it  is  my  firm  belief  that
while  she  continued  under  the  mesmeric  influence,  I  might  have
taken  all  her  teeth  out,  without  the  least  inconvenience  to  her.

“  I  am,  Madam,

“yours  respectfully,

“  15,  Rodney  Terrace,  Cheltenham,  “George  Shew.

“April  5th,  1844.”


This  benevolent  and  high-minded  lady  has  also  favoured
me  with  the  following  : —


“Friday,  31st  May,  1844.

“At  a  meeting  at  Miss  Wallace’s,  at  the  Aviary,  Cheltenham,
a  child  aged  1 2  years  was  introduced,  and  speedily  put  into  the
mesmeric  state  by  Miss  Wallace.  It  was  then  proposed  to  extract
a  tooth  while  under  the  mesmeric  influence,  and  one  of  the  tem¬
porary  lateral  incisors  was  selected  for  the  purpose.  The  operation
was  performed  by  Mr.  Shew.  The  tooth  on  being  examined  after
extraction  was  found  to  have  little  fang  attached  to  it,  about  half
having  been  absorbed.  The  patient  exhibited  during  the  operation
not  the  slightest  symptom  of  pain,  and  appeared  afterwards  totally
unconscious  of  its  having  been  performed.

“  S.  Osborne  Gibbes,  Bart.

“  Richard  Beamish.

“  James  Armitage.

“  E.  Wallace.

“  D.  Hartley.

“  William  Smith.

“  S.  D.  Robinson,  M.D.

“  George  Shew.

“  Collings  Robinson,  M.D.”


in  the  Mesmeric  State.


249


For  the  following  accounts  I  am  indebted  to  my  excellent
friend  Mr.  Pettit,  of  Allsop  Terrace : —

“  Teeth  Extraction  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

“The  first  was  on  February  27th,  1844,  a  young  person  in
the  family  of  a  gentleman,  No.  5,  St.  John’s  Wood  Grove,  when
two  teeth  were  removed  without  the  patient  awaking,  and  who  ex¬
pressed  surprise  at  the  presence  of  the  operator  when  she  was  de-
mesmerised.  In  this  case  the  patient  was  alarmed  at  the  thought
of  the  operation,  and  was  not  told  that  it  would  take  place  during
that  mesmeric  sleep.  Both  teeth  were  difficult  of  extraction.

“  The  second  case  was  on  February  29th,  1844,  that  of  a  highly
accomplished  and  literary  lady,  an  intimate  friend  of  the  mesme-
riser,  at  whose  house  it  was  removed.

“  In  about  two  minutes  she  was  placed  in  a  deep  mesmeric  sleep,
and  the  tooth  was  removed  without  the  least  change  of  countenance
or  sign  of  uneasiness.  Before  she  was  demesmerised,  Benevolence
and  Wit  were  acted  upon,  and  she  exhibited  a  most  cheerful  and
happy  expression.  It  was  somewhat  difficult  to  convince  her  that
the  operation  had  really  been  performed.  She  had  suffered  greatly
previously,  and  it  was  discovered  that  an  abscess  had  been  forming
at  the  root  of  the  tooth.

“The  third  case  was  that  of  a  young  person  (May  3rd,  1844)
who  was  operated  upon  at  the  house  of  the  dentist.  In  this  in¬
stance,  mesmeric  influence  was  employed  for  twenty  minutes  before
she  was  deemed  fit  for  the  operation.  In  this  patient’s  case,  the
application  of  the  steel  instruments  seemed  to  excite  disagreeable
sensations;  but  the  operation  being  quickly  performed,  it  was  evi¬
dent  that  she  suffered  scarcely  anything  of  the  usual  pain  of  tooth
extraction;  and  did  not  awake  out  of  the  mesmeric  state.

In  each  of  these  cases  the  Rev.  J.  Burns,  of  3,  St.  John’s  Wood
Grove  was  the  mesmeriser,  and  the  dentist  was  Mr.  II.  B.  T.
Heath,  123,  Edgware  Road.”

For  the  following  cases  I  am  indebted  again  to  Mr.  Weekes  :

“  Barnstaple,  April  26th.

“  Dear  Sir, — It  may  be  satisfactory  to  you  to  learn  the  progress
mesmerism  has  made  here  since  I  wrote  you  respecting  the  report
which  circulated  here  of  your  having  become  a  ‘  seceder.’  Notwith¬
standing  a  violent  opposition  from  persons  of  all  parties  and  sects,
the  belief  in  its  truth  and  efficacy  has  rapidly  gained  ground.  Two
meetings  at  the  theatre,  convened  by  invitation  and  entirely  com¬
posed  of  the  educated  classes,  amounting  each  night  to  between  two
and  three  hundred  persons,  have  done  much  to  convince  the  rational.
Nearly  twenty  have  already  been  magnetized  sufficiently  to  produce
a  decided  phrenological  manifestation,  and  one  has  astonished  us
with  clairvoyance  in  the  most  unequivocal  manner.  Mr.  Bridle,
jun.,  gunsmith  of  this  town,  had  a  large  molar  tooth  extracted  last
week,  during  the  mesmeric  sleep,  in  the  presence  of  twenty  wit¬
nesses.  He  did  not  exhibit  the  slightest  movement  expressive  of
pain,  not  a  shade  came  over  the  countenance.


250


Cases  of  painless  Extraction  of  Teeth


“  Miss  Huxtable  has  been  completely  cured  of  an  habitual  nerv¬
ous  head-ache  by  mesmerism.

“  One  or  two  of  the  ‘  ultras’  here  have  said  that  should  they  see
a  case  (which  they  will  not),  they  would  not  believe  their  own
senses.  I  rather  startled  a  ‘  holy’  man  who  had  thus  expressed  him¬
self  by  asking  him  if  he  was  a  Christian.  You  cannot  be  so,  I
said,  for  had  you  lived  in  the  time  of  Christ,  you,  on  witnessing
the  miracles,  would  not  of  course  have  believed  your  own  senses.

“We  have  had  down  all  the  numbers  of  The  Zoist ,  and  are  as¬
tonished  and  gratified  at  the  cases,  &c.

“  I  am,  dear  Sir,

“  Yours  respectfully,

“Henry  Weekes.”

“  Mr. - ,  jun.,  of  Barnstaple,  had  suffered  for  some  time

past  from  a  carious  tooth,  which,  however,  he  had  not  sufficient  re¬
solution  to  have  extracted  ;  but  being  satisfied  with  some  of  the
experiments  made  on  persons  while  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  he  deter¬
mined  to  submit  to  the  operation  while  under  its  influence.  He  was
accordingly  magnetized  by  Mr.  Chanter,  solicitor  of  this  town ;  and
after  being  allowed  to  remain  under  the  influence  for  about  twenty
minutes,  Mr.  Torr,  surgeon,  proceeded  to  lance  the  gum,  and  ex¬
tract  the  tooth  by  one  powerful  wrench.  The  tooth  was  a  large
molar  one  with  four  fangs,  and  brought  out  with  it  a  piece  of  alveolar
process.  During  this  painful  operation,  not  a  muscle  of  his  counte¬
nance  moved,  and  his  hands  rested  quietly  on  his  knees.  Several
persons  were  close  to  him,  and  carefully  watched  him  during  the
operation,  but  did  not  discern  the  slightest  appearance  of  sensibility.

Mr. - was  allowed  to  remain  in  the  comatose  state  for  about  a

quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  operation.  On  being  awoke  he  was  per¬
fectly  ignorant  of  the  tooth  having  been  extracted  until  he  felt  the
vacant  place  in  his  mouth.  About  twenty  respectable  persons  were
present.

“Miss - ,  niece  of  Mrs. - ,  of  the  ‘White  Hart,’

not  possessing  sufficient  nerve  to  have  a  painful  tooth  extracted,  ap¬
plied  to  me  to  have  it  done  during  the  mesmeric  sleep.  Accordingly,
in  the  presence  of  her  friends,  I  mesmerised  her  and  extracted  a
very  firm  molar  tooth.  The  particulars  are  so  similar  to  those  given
above,  that  it  is  needless  to  recount  them.  She  however  on  being
asked  immediately  after  the  operation,  if  she  would  like  to  have
the  tooth  extracted  now,  said  smilingly  that  it  was  out.  On  being
awoke  she  had  no  recollection  of  anything  that  had  passed,  and  felt
very  thankful  and  in  high  spirits.  What  is  very  singular,  no  pain
whatever  has  been  felt  since  the  operation  by  either  of  the  above
individuals.”

“Last  week  Miss  Huxtable  of  Braunton  applied  to  me  to  have
a  tooth  extracted.  Having  been  cured  of  a  severe  nervous  head¬
ache  by  mesmerism,  she  wished  to  undergo  the  operation  during  its


in  the  Mesmeric  State .


251


sleep.  In  about  five  minutes  her  eyes  closed  and  I  was  about  to
proceed  with  the  extraction  of  the  tooth,  but  she  interrupted  me
by  stating  that  she  was  not  asleep,  and  that  she  wished  to  be  awoke
and  again  sent  off  more  decidedly.  Although,  however,  she  per¬
sisted  that  she  was  not  asleep,  she  could  neither  open  her  eyes  or
walk  when  requested,  nor  feel  the  prick  of  a  pin.

“  Being  awoke  and  remesmerised,  she  stated  that  she  was  now
in  a  comatose  state.  The  operation  was  performed  with  the  same
evidences  of  total  insensibility  to  pain  as  related  in  the  other  cases.
On  being  demesmerised,  one  of  the  party  made  it  appear  to  her
that  the  tooth  was  not  extracted,  at  which  she  felt  vexed;  indeed
more  than  five  minutes  elapsed  before  she  became  conscious  of  its
loss,  the  discovery  being  made  by  seeing  the  basin  behind  her  with
bloody  water  in  it,  which  induced  her  to  put  her  finger  in  the  cavity
left  in  the  mouth,  exclaiming  ‘Oh!  it  is  out!’  ”


I  have  to  thank  two  gentlemen,  who  were  strangers  to
me,  for  the  next  narration  : —

“  148,  Sloane  Street,  Chelsea,
“  June,  1844.

“  Sir, — I  hear  from  Mr.  Cooper  that  you  wish  to  have  the  particulars  of  a
case  of  mesmerism  in  which  I  was  concerned,  for  insertion  in  The  Zoist.  I
supply  them  with  much  pleasure,  and  have  the  honor  to  be,

“  Sir,  your  obedient  Servant,

“  Robert  C.  May.

“  To  Dr.  Elliotson.”

f(  On  the  24th  of  last  May,  a  young  lady  whom  I  had  mesmerised
on  a  former  occasion,  called  at  the  residence  of  some  members  of  my
family  in  Sloane  Street.  She  was  suffering  with  tooth-ache,  and  was
on  her  way  to  a  dentist’s,  to  have  the  tooth  extracted.  As  I  hap¬
pened  to  be  present  at  the  time,  I  advised  her  to  defer  the  operation
and  let  me  try  to  relieve  her,  as  I  had  been  very  successful  in  a  si¬
milar  case.  To  this  she  consented.  I  put  her  into  the  mesmeric
sleep  in  about  eight  minutes,  when  I  commenced  making  passes  over
the  affected  side  of  the  face,  with  the  intention  of  allaying  the  pain,
which  produced  the  desired  effect  in  about  two  minutes.  On  awak¬
ing  she  was  quite  at  ease.  On  the  following  day,  however,  she
called  again:  the  pain  had  returned,  and  she  had  determined  on
having  the  tooth  extracted.  I  then  advised  her  to  have  the  opera¬
tion  performed  during  the  mesmeric  sleep,  and  offered  my  services
as  mesmeriser.  Having  agreed  to  this,  she  sat  down,  in  order  that
I  might  try  some  preliminary  experiments,  with  the  view  of  ascer¬
taining  in  what  degree  she  could  be  rendered  insensible  to  pain.  On
this  occasion  the  tooth-ache  left  her  as  it  did  the  day  before,  but  I
did  not  entirely  succeed  in  making  her  unconscious  of  pain.

“  The  28th  was  appointed  for  renewing  our  experiments.  On
this  day  we  were  much  more  successful.  I  found  that  by  pressing
my  fingers  just  in  front  of  the  ear,  and  drawing  them  rather  roughly
along  the  lower  jaw,  in  which  the  diseased  tooth  was  situated,  that


252


Cases  of  painless  Extraction  of  Teeth


the  part  subjected  to  this  action  became  gradually  more  and  more
insensible.  I  satisfied  myself  of  this  in  the  following  manner:  —
Having  learned  from  her  that  cold  water  applied  to  the  tooth  gave
her  intolerable  pain,  I  dropped  a  little  on  it  after  I  had  made  a  few
of  the  passes  above  mentioned.  She  uttered  a  slight  exclamation  of
pain.  I  then  made  a  few  more  passes,  after  which  I  repeated  the
experiment.  This  time  there  was  no  exclamation.  I  asked  her  if
she  felt  anything?  She  answered  “Yes;  I  feel  it  a  little.”  I  con¬
tinued  the  passes  and  tried  the  cold  water  again:  she  felt  nothing,
although  I  poured  a  tea-spoonful  over  the  tooth.

“  This  was  very  satisfactory,  but  still  I  thought  it  would  he  bet¬
ter  to  repeat  the  experiment  once  more  before  we  ventured  on  the
operation,  which  I  did  on  the  following  day.  I  poured  cold  water
over  the  tooth  and  she  felt  no  pain.  I  then,  with  my  pen-knife,
made  two  deep  incisions  Across  the  gum,  one  on  each  side  of  the,
decayed  tooth,  still  she  felt  nothing.

“  Being  now  quite  satisfied  with  the  result  of  our  experiments,
the  next  day,  the  30th,  was  fixed  for  the  operation.  Mr.  Lintot,
Dentist,  of  Welbeck-street,  Cavendish-square,  was  to  extract  the
tooth.  The  party  present  consisted  of  the  patient,  my  sister,  Miss
E.  May,  Mr.  Willisford,  Surgeon,  of  Cadogan-place,  who  very  much
wished  to  witness  the  experiment,  and  myself.  We  were  shewn  by
Mr.  Lintot  into  a  room  which  he  had  kindly  set  apart  for  our  use.
He  then  left  us  to  attend  to  another  patient,  promising  to  come  when
we  rang  the  bell.  In  exactly  thirteen  minutes  my  patient  was  asleep.
Having  assured  myself  of  her  insensibility,  as  on  former  occasions,

I  rang  the  bell  for  Mr.  Lintot.

When  he  entered  the  room,  she  moved  her  right  hand  with  an
expression  of  uneasiness  and  complained  of  feeling  cold.  This  is
common  with  her  during  the  mesmeric  sleep,  on  the  approach  of
strangers,  and  I  knew  how  to  remedy  it,  which  I  did  by  taking  his
(Mr.  Lintot’ s)  hand,  when  she  immediately  became  calm.  Every
thing  being  in  readiness,  I  spoke  to  her.

“  ‘  Are  you  quite  comfortable  ?’

“  ‘  Yes.’

“  ‘Will  you  have  your  tooth  taken  out  V

“  ‘  Yes.’

“  ‘  Open  your  mouth  then.’

“  She  did  so.  The  gum  was  lanced.  ( Did  you  feel  that  ?’

"  ‘  No.’

“  Mr.  Lintot  then  applied  the  forceps.  It  was  an  anxious  mo¬
ment  to  me.  I  watched  her  face  intently  during  the  extraction  of
the  tooth,  (which  operation,  although  performed  in  the  most  skilful
manner  possible,  seemed  to  require  considerable  effort  on  the  part  of
the  operator,)  but  could  discover  no  indication  of  pain.  There  was
a  slight  frown,  a  knitting  of  the  brows,  expressive  of  annoyance  at
being  violently  disturbed,  but  no  sign  of  pain.

“  The  instant  the  tooth  was  out,  I  said —

“  ‘  Did  you  feel  anything  V

“  ‘No.’


in  the  Mesmeric  State.


253


“  f  Nothing  at  all  V
“  ‘  No/

“  Neither  did  she.  Her  face  was  quite  calm,  her  mouth  remained
open,  and  she  had  quite  the  appearance  of  a  person  in  a  comfortable
sleep.

“  Mr.  Lintot  proposed  that  I  should  immediately  rouse  her  to
wash  her  mouth,  but  I  remembered  reading  in  The  Zoist  the  account
of  a  very  ingenious  expedient  which  had  been  resorted  to  on  a  similar
occasion.  I  proceeded  to  put  it  in  practice.  I  held  a  basin  under
her  mouth  and  touched  the  organ  of  Imitation.  I  then  made  a  noise
as  if  spitting;  she  did  the  same,  and  in  this  manner  I  succeeded  in
making  her  clear  her  mouth.  This  part  of  the  proceedings  was
very  diverting.

“  Mr.  Willisford,  who  was  rather  sceptical  as  regards  Phrenology,
beckoned  me  out  of  the  room  and  asked  me  to  touch  Wit,  and  then
see  if  she  would  imitate  me.  I  did  so;  but  though  she  laughed
heartily  she  made  no  attempt  to  imitate  me;  but  on  my  again  touch¬
ing  Imitation  she  immediately  imitated  my  spitting.

“  When  the  bleeding  had  stopped,  I  allowed  her  to  sleep  quietly
for  about  ten  minutes,  and  then  proceeded  to  awaken  her.  After
a  few  transverse  passes  she  opened  her  eyes  and  laughed;  she  then
put  her  fingers  to  her  mouth,  and  with  a  look  of  great  surprise  ex¬
claimed,  ‘  It  is  out;  Oh!  I  am  very  glad.’

“  I  asked  her  if  she  felt  any  pain  in  the  part  ?  She  replied,  that
she  felt  none  at  all.  After  this  she  walked  to  Sloane-street,  without
feeling  the  least  inconvenience,  nor  has  she  felt  any  since — not  even
the  slightest  soreness.

“  I  should  have  said  that  during  the  operation  no  one  held  her
hands,  which  were  resting  on  her  lap;  and  Mr.  Willisford,  who  had
been  attentively  watching  them,  declared  that  there  was  not  the
smallest  twitching  of  the  muscles,  which  must  have  been  the  case
had  she  felt  pain.”

“  My  dear  Sir, — I  was  present  during  the  extraction  of - ’s

tooth,  while  in  the  mesmeric  sleep  and  watched  all  the  circumstances
with  the  eye  of  a  sceptic.  The  case  was  so  evidently  conclusive  and
so  full  of  interest,  that  I  cannot  withhold  this  testimony  of  its  genu¬
ineness.

“  I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  yours,  faithfully,

“  F.  W.  Willisford,  Surgeon.

“  76,  Cadogan-place,

“  June  17th,  1844.

“  To  Dr.  Elliotson,  &c.  &c.  &c.”

“  69,  Welbeck  Street,

“  17th  June,  1844.

“  Dear  Sir, — Called  on  by  you  to  give  my  testimony  as  to  the
occurrences  of  the  30th  ultimo,  when  in  your  presence  I  extracted

a  tooth  for  Miss - ,  I  cannot  refuse  to  state,  that  none  of

the  ordinary  indications  of  suffering  were  present  during  the  opera-


254  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism,

tion;  and  that  appearances  led  me  to  suppose  then,  and  now,  that
my  patient  was  unconscious  of  my  proceedings;  but,  as  I  was  not
present  during  the  preparatory  process,  nor  after  the  removal  of
the  tooth  had  been  effected;  and  confess  myself  utterly  incompetent
to  form  any  conclusion  upon  this  subject,  you  must  permit  me  to
confine  my  statement  to  the  facts  above  related.

“  I  regret  much  that  I  was  not  advised  of  your  intention  to
make  this  matter  public,  as  in  that  case  I  would  have  endea¬
voured  to  secure  the  presence  of  individuals  whose  evidence,  either
way,  would  have  carried  more  weight  than  that  of

“  Your  humble  Servant,

“  W.  Lintot.

Cf  R.  C.  May,  Esq.”


VIII.  Cases  of  Cures  of  different  Diseases  by  W.J.  Tubbs,  Esq.

Upwell  Isle,  Cambridgeshire.

%

True  copy  of  part  of  Dr.  WhitsecPs  note  to  Mr.  Tubbs,  written
December,  5th,  1843  : —

“  I  am  glad  to  find  you  mean  to  relinquish  your  mesmeric  amusements.
You  were  deeply  injuring  yourself,  as  indeed  every  man  does  who  is  caught
by  such  illusory  and  visionary  imposture.

“  The  whole  of  the  phenomena  are  explicable  without  the  least  alliance
to  magnetic  operation.

“  I  have  witnessed  trials  of  it,  and  therefore  speak  from  actual  observation.
I  deem  it  not  only  folly,  but  sinful,  to  lend  oneself  to  such  delusion.  I  by
no  means  wish  to  hurt  your  feelings,  but  as  you  have  opened  the  subject,  I
feel  it  my  duty  to  deal  towards  you  with  honesty  and  frankness.

“  Yours  very  truly,

“J.  Whitsed.”

True  copy  of  the  answer  sent  by  W.  J.  Tubbs  to  the  learned
Doctor.

“  Dear  Sir, — We  are  always  glad  to  have  the  sympathy  of  our  fellow
man,  when  we  feel  convinced  that  much  sympathy  is  properly  applied,  but
in  my  case  on  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  I  beg  most  respectfully  to  refuse  it.

“  You  say  you  are  glad  to  find  I  have  relinquished  my  mesmeric  amuse¬
ments,  that  I  was  deeply  injuring  myself  by  it;  though  I  feel  the  latter  may
have  been  the  case,  it  is  only  the  common  result,  which  has  and  will  always
continue  to  accompany  those  who  are  bold  enough  to  depart  from  the  beaten
track,  and  I  would  with  all  kind  feelings,  recommend  you  by  no  means  to
advocate  anything  new  until  such  has  been  approved  of  by  that  society  in
which  you  more  particularly  move  in.  For  my  part  I  never  once  thought  of
giving  offence,  or  losing  the  good  opinion  of  any,  but  the  prejudiced  part  of
mankind;  and  though  I  might  have  a  better  chance  of  success  by  so  pander¬
ing  to  their  prejudices,  I  disdain  such  motives,  and  would  rather  take  my
chance  in  honesty,  searching  after  science  by  whatever  name  such  science
may  be  denominated  :  though  I  may  decline  to  practise  it,  I  still  remain  a
disciple.

“That  you,  Sir,  taking  the  lead  in,  and  presiding  over  what  are  called
learned  societies,  should  condemn  mesmerism  as  an  illusion,  folly,  and
sinful,  is  not  to  me  a  matter  of  surprise ;  for  the  progress  of  science  has


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


255


frequently  met  with  the  greatest  obstacles  from  bodies  instituted  for  its  pro¬
motion.  Reserving  to  myself  the  privilege  of  a  free  exercise  of  mind,

“  I  remain,

“  Yours  respectfully,

“  Upwell  Isle,  Dec.  8th,  1843,”  “  W.  J.  Tubbs.

Rheumatism.

Ann  English,  aged  28,  living  on  the  Norfolk  Upwell  side,
was  attacked  with  influenza  about  ten  weeks  since,  leaving
her  with  rheumatic  pains  and  general  debility  :  for  the  latter,
colchicum,  quinine,  and  the  usual  adjuncts  were  employed
for  a  length  of  time  writh  no  avail.  The  pain  in  the  lumbar
region  was  excruciating,  and  extended  down  the  left  leg.
She  was  at  times  unable  to  walk  across  the  room,  and  fre¬
quently  obliged  to  get  a  neighbour  to  wash  for  her.  She
was  tired  of  taking  medicine,  and  I  equally  so  of  administer¬
ing  it.  I  visited  her  day  after  day,  and  at  last  wished  her  to
try  wdiat  I  could  do  for  her  by  mesmerism.

I  operated  for  the  first  time  on  the  8th  of  April,  in  her
husband's  presence.  She  was  easily  sent  into  the  unconscious
state,  with  her  arms  cataleptic.  She  did  not  hear  her  child
(7  months  old)  crying,  although  she  answered  me  any  question
I  put  to  her;  and  out  of  the  sleep  did  not  recollect  anything.
Her  pain  was  quite  gone, — she  got  up  and  walked.  Pulse
before  sleep  66,  after  sleep  90.  She  moaned  much  while
asleep.

9th.  The  pain  returned  in  two  hours,  and  she  has  had  a
restless  night,  and  still  walks  lame.  In  the  sleep  in  a  minute,
by  pointing  my  two  fingers  obliquely  over  the  frontal  bone ;
placed  the  arms  in  a  flexed  position,  and  requested  her  to  keep
them  in  that  position ;  found  them  rigid  and  cold  after  induc¬
ing  the  mesmeric  state.  She  awakes  by  blowing  in  the  eyes.

10th.  Mesmerised  by  my  housekeeper.  Pain  did  not  re¬
turn  for  three  hours ;  feels  better,  but  disturbed  by  the  child
crying  for  the  breast.  Slept  an  hour  by  pointing  at  the
occiput,  she  fell  asleep  in  a  few  minutes,  the  spine  and  legs
rigid,  unable  to  rise  from  the  chair  after  waking  her,  until
transverse  passes  are  made.  Pain  returned  in  five  hours,
feels  stronger.

12th.  Operated  on  by  my  housekeeper,  pain  less  and  did
not  return  till  3  o'clock  this  morning,  absenting  itself  seven
hours.

13th.  Operated  on  by  my  housekeeper,  (Mrs.  Jerry),  much
the  same,  pain  now  most  in  the  leg,  and  returned  in  six  hours,
but  left  the  back.

14th.  Mesmerised  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  George  Melbourn,
pain  less  in  the  legs  and  returned  about  the  same  time,

VOL.  II.  s


256


Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism ,


15th.  The  pain  in  the  back  returned  in  five  hours,  but
lasted  only  a  short  time,  left  her  asleep,  requesting  her  hus¬
band  to  awake  her  in  an  hour’s  time.

16th.  Mesmerised  by  Mrs.  Jerry,  pain  did  not  return  till
9  o’clock  this  morning,  feels  stronger.

17th.  18th.  19th.  Not  mesmerised.

20th.  The  pain  has  returned  nearly  as  badly  as  ever,  had
but  little  rest  the  last  two  nights,  walks  lame.  Operated
locally,  and  drew  the  pain  down  the  leg  to  the  toe,  and  re¬
moved  the  pain  from  her  back:  she  then  produced  the  sleep  by
holding  the  thumbs  and  standing  behind  her  looking  at  the
vertex ;  she  slept  two  hours.

22nd.  Rested  better;  mesmerised  by  my  standing  behind
her,  merely  holding  the  thumbs  without  looking  at  the  head ;
was  asleep  in  a  few  minutes.

Mesmerised  daily  by  my  housekeeper.  12 th  May ,  quite
well.

Neuralgia.

Monday,  April  8th,  1844,  while  attending  an  infant  of
Mr.  Wm.  Hodson,  living  in  the  colony  Manea-fen,  I  was
called  in  to  bleed  Mrs.  Marreit,  residing  next  door,  whom  I
found  with  her  head  resting  on  a  pillow  sitting  near  the  fire.
She  was  of  a  nervous  bilious  temperament ;  and  was  suffer¬
ing  dreadfully  with  neuralgia  of  the  head,  the  pain  situated
at  the  back  part  and  over  the  eyebrows.  As  she  had  been
bled  on  a  former  occasion  with  benefit,  the  basin,  bandage,
and  towel,  were  all  laid  out  for  the  operation.  Finding  her
pulse  only  74  and  feeble,  the  tongue  white  and  tremulous,
the  pupils  dilated,  I  said,  “  You  had  better  not  lose  any
blood,  but  allow  me  to  mesmerise  you.”  Her  husband  stand¬
ing  by,  said,  “  My  dear,  Mr.  Tubbs  knows  best,  let  it  be
done.”  Accordingly  I  placed  myself  in  the  proper  position
and  commenced  by  pointing  my  fingers  as  I  now  usually  do.
In  a  short  time  the  quivering  eyelids  closed  with  a  violent  agi¬
tation  of  the  whole  frame,  she  falling  on  her  left  side  with  her
head  against  a  door,  which  had  been  left  partly  open.  Her
husband  and  others  present  becoming  alarmed,  I  had  to  de-
mesmerise  her.  The  pain  was  still  much  the  same  and  rather
increased,  till  towards  evening  when  she  felt  better.  The  fol¬
lowing  day  I  called  again  on  Mrs.  M.,  she  expressed  herself
quite  satisfied  that  mesmerism  had  relieved  her,  and  now  most
willingly  consented  to  my  operating,  which  I  did  in  the  pre¬
sence  of  Mr.  Wm.  Hodson,  Mr.  Pope,  and  others.  I  threw  her
this  time  into  a  deeper  sleep,  the  jaw  was  rigid,  the  left  pupil
contracted  and  converging  upwards  towards  the  nose,  the
ball  of  the  eve  in  violent  motion.  Pulse  118.  Breathing


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


257


stertorous.  I  requested  her  to  walk  to  a  chair  near  the  door.
In  rising  she  fell  forwards  and  struck  her  nose  violently  against
the  bed-post ,  still  it  did  not  alter  the  features  of  the  deep
sleep.  I  now  pressed  (sharply  too)  with  each  forefinger  on
Combativeness ,  and  felt  my  fingers  slip  over  the  raw  surface
induced  by  two  blisters  she  had  applied.  Her  legs  were  easily
made  rigid  by  longitudinal  passes.  She  also  shewed  the
attractive  power  for  her  mesmeriser  and  repulsion  towards
strangers.  It  took  some  time  to  demesmerise  her,  and  what¬
ever  position  she  was  in  she  would  be  cataleptic.  She  got  up
and  walked  towards  the  door  and  told  us  she  should  do,  and
while  rubbing  her  eyes  instantly  fell  asleep,  and  we  had  no
power  to  pull  them  from  her  face.

10th.  Mr.  Hodson  mesmerised  her  through  the  door
without  her  knowledge.  The  pain  has  not  returned  since  I
operated  the  second  time.

13th.  Met  Mr.  Hodson  at  a  friend^s  to-day  the  other  side
of  Wisbech,  says  Mrs.  Marreit  is  quite  well,  her  spirits  better
than  they  have  been  a  long  time.

Mr.  Hodson  has  mesmerised  this  patient  many  times,  and
can  produce  the  sleep  in  the  next  room  even  while  others  are
in  conversation  with  her.  On  the  13th  of  May,  I  was  at  the
colony,  when  Mr.  Hodson  went  out  and  mesmerised  her
through  the  wall ;  on  his  return  he  catalepsed  the  extremi¬
ties,  and  applied  a  piece  of  burning  charcoal  to  her  hand
without  any  indication  of  pain  :  this  was  in  the  presence  of
Mr.  Raper,  farmer  of  Cone,  near  St.  Ives,  and  his  friend,
Mr.  Butcher,  who  accompanied  him.  I  then  took  the  sub¬
ject,  and  speaking  to  her  through  the  epigastrum  told  her  to
get  up  and  go  to  the  wash  tub,  (she  being  at  the  tub  when
we  asked  her  to  be  mesmerised.)  She  got  up  and  felt  for  the
soap  and  continued  her  hands  in  the  water,  always  leaving
off  when  I  withdrew  my  mouth  from  the  epigastrum.  She
then  followed  me  through  a  passage  into  the  yard,  and  on
her  return  I  gave  her  a  needle  and  thread  to  sew ;  she  tried
to  sew  but  felt  fatigued.  All  this  time  the  breathing  was
stertorous,  as  it  was  the  first  time  I  mesmerised  her.

Acute  Rheumatism.

William  Strickel,  aged  nine  years,  brother  to  the  boy  I
cured  of  paralysis,  whose  case  is  recorded  in  The  Zoist  for
January,  1844,  was  the  subject  of  rheumatism,  brought  on
by  cold.  On  the  27th  of  March  I  was  sent  for.  The  pulse  was
quick ;  tongue  furred,  but  moist ;  the  ankles  swollen  and  red,
as  well  as  the  wrist  and  left  knee  ;  the  left  arm  was  swollen
and  oedematous  (which  I  attributed  to  his  lying  on  that  side).

s  2


258  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism.

As  I  had  performed  such  a  miracle  upon  his  brother,  this
little  fellow  asked  me  to  mesmerise  him  and  promised  to  go
to  sleep.  I  very  soon  produced  the  sleep,  and  continued  my
passes  for  some  time  over  the  painful  joints.  Miss  Copeman,
living  opposite,  came  in  to  see  him,  and  can  bear  witness  to
the  state  he  was  in,  and  the  progress  and  cure  I  made  in  the
short  space  of  four  days,  in  her  presence.  I  raised  the  ex¬
tremities,  which  fell  without  any  manifestation  of  pain.  He
slept  an  hour  and  could  move  the  arm  he  had  not  been  able
to  move  for  some  few  days.  I  daily  operated,  and  on  the  4<tli
day  he  got  up  and  was  out  of  doors ;  and  on  the  6th  day  was
enabled  to  join  liis  playmates.  I  was  at  the  house  yesterday,
(April  14th):  he  is  quite  well.

Lumbago.

John  Roper,  of  Outrill,  Norfolk,  came  to  me  on  the  2nd
of  April,  complaining  of  pain  and  weakness  in  the  lumbar
region :  it  comes  on  him  about  an  hour  after  going  to  bed
so  that  he  is  obliged  to  get  up  and  walk  about ;  he  has  con¬
tinued  so  now  eight  nights  :  I  operated  locally  and  instantly
relieved  him.

3rd.  The  pain  did  not  come  on  till  four  hours  after  he  was
in  bed.  I  operated  and  removed  the  pain.

4th.  Has  had  no  return  of  pain.

5th.  Quite  well  when  I  saw  him  to  day.

Chlorosis ,  stated  by  an  M.  D.  to  be  diseased  Heart.

Ellen  Miller,  aged  seventeen,  living  near  my  house,
Upwell  Isle,  has  had  ill  health  from  the  age  of  fifteen.  Cata¬
menia  appeared  but  twice  since  September,  1843 :  the  last
time  in  the  middle  of  January,  but  scanty  and  pale :  she  has
general  anasarca,  tumidity  of  the  abdomen,  and  great  oedema
of  the  legs,  tongue  clean  and  pale,  pupils  greatly  dilated,
complains  of  pain  and  weight  about  the  centre  of  the  sternum
as  far  as  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  great  palpitation,  hurried  respi¬
ration  and  faintness  on  any  exertion,  bowels  generally  confined
and  great  flatulence  of  the  stomach  :  her  nights  are  very
restless,  complains  every  morning  of  head-ache  and  sickness,
and  rejects  her  food  :  she  has  taken  medicine  the  last  ten
weeks  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Garrard,  has  had  several  places
but  obliged  to  leave  them  owing  to  her  ill  state  of  health  :
has  lived  in  the  service  of  Mrs.  Hawkins  and  Mrs.  J.  Feach.
Last  Saturday  her  mother  went  with  her  to  Dr.  Whitsed^s  of
Wisbech,  who  after  writing  a  prescription  entered  at  the
bottom  morbus  cordis.  Her  father  and  mother  being  tired  of


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


259


her  taking  medicine  sent  for  me,  and  at  their  wish  I  mesme¬
rised  her  on  Saturday  evening  (nine  o’clock),  April  13th.  I
had  scarcely  pointed  my  fingers  when  she  was  gone  into  the
unconscious  state;  I  did  not  feel  her  pulse  before  sending
her  off,  but  counted  them  ten  minutes  after  and  found  them
110,  feeble  and  jerking,  and  very  irregular,  (I  was  not  her
usual  medical  attendant) ;  she  slept  an  hour,  when  I  returned
and  brought  with  me  my  friend  Mr.  George  Melbourn ;  the
pulse  was  now  only  106.  I  awoke  her  in  a  little  time  by
pressure  outwards  with  my  thumbs  over  the  eye-lids,  and
after  mesmerising  a  glass  of  water  we  left  the  house.

Sunday  morning,  11  o’clock,  Mr.  G.  Melbourn  accompa¬
nied  me  again  to  see  our  patient ;  she  was  sitting  on  a  chair
looking  deadly  pale  with  a  violent  head-ache,  and  a  hand¬
kerchief  bound  tightly  round  the  head ;  she  was  the  picture
of  misery.  I  requested  her  mother  to  let  her  go  to  bed,  and
soon  put  her  to  sleep ;  took  her  out  of  the  sleep  at  2  o’clock  ;
previously  to  doing  so  found  the  pulse  only  96,  and  fuller.
At  4  o’clock,  p.m.  in  the  natural  state,  the  pulse  106.  Kept
her  dinner  down,  feels  better.  Half-past  9  o’clock,  evening,
out  of  the  sleep ;  pulse  96,  fuller  and  vibrating ;  has  retained
on  her  stomach  everything  taken  to-day,  less  pain  in  the
chest  and  palpitation  of  the  heart ;  sleep  induced  by  merely
pointing ;  pulse,  five  minutes  after  being  asleep,  86,  soft  and
full ;  bowels  relieved  twice  since  my  last  visit ;  sleeps  easy,  to
remain  asleep  till  breakfast  time  to-morrow  morning.

Eight  o’clock  Monday  morning.  I  ordered  her  mother  to
awake  her  if  she  appeared  uneasy,  and  from  her  moaning  so
at  7  o’clock,  the  mother  blew  into  the  eyes,  after  which  she
soon  awoke,  expressed  herself  refreshed  and  wanted  her
breakfast.  I  went  in  about  half  an  hour  after  she  had  eaten
a  mutton  chop  and  drank  some  coffee ;  her  pulse  was  now
only  80;  tranquil,  no  pain  in  the  chest,  has  retained  every
thing  since  first  mesmerised.

Ten  o’clock,  a.m.,  pulse  100,  vibrating.

Twelve  o’clock,  pulse  100,  not  so  vibrating ;  seems  un¬
easy  in  the  sleep,  (I  put  her  in  the  sleep  now  to  prepare
her  for  her  dinner) ;  at  half-past  1  o’clock  awoke  her ;  came
smiling  out,  and  wanted  something  to  eat.  Diet  to  consist
of  grilled  mutton,  beef,  egg  pudding,  sago,  and  rice  at  will.
Ten  minutes  after  waking,  her  pulse  80  and  not  so  full,  but
more  vibrating.  To  have  a  mutton  chop  and  remain  awake
till  9  o’clock,  and  then  to  be  sent  off  for  the  night.

Three  o’clock,  p.m.  Found  her  sitting  up  in  bed,  with
much  pain  over  the  left  eye-brow  ;  pulse  110  and  vibrating  ;


260  Cures  of  various  Diseases  ivith  Mesmerism ,

sent  her  to  sleep  and  applied  cold  cloths  to  the  part ;  her
mother  to  awake  her  at  half-past  6  o'clock  for  tea.

Four  o'clock,  p.m.  Violent  return  of  the  pain  in  the
head ;  bowels  not  been  opened  since  yesterday  morning ;
gave  five  grains  calomel,  and  sent  her  to  sleep ;  her  mother
finding  her  moaning  awoke  her  at  10  o'clock ;  I  found  her
much  the  same,  she  appeared  more  like  dying  than  living ;
pulse  weak,  130, — did  not  send  her  to  sleep.

Ten  o'clock,  Tuesday  morning.  Feels  better;  bowels  not
opened,  gave  her  an  enema  of  turpentine,  oil,  and  salt.

Four  o'clock,  p.m.  Feels  better;  enema  brought  away  a
great  quantity  of  hard  fseces  ;  sent  her  to  sleep  till  tea  time.

Nine  o'clock,  evening.  Her  mother  awoke  her  in  conse¬
quence  of  the  relieving  officer  calling  to  see  her  (I  not  being
surgeon  to  the  side  she  lives  on,  he  refused  her  her  weekly
pay) ;  has  not  had  any  return  of  the  pain  in  the  head,  and
feels  much  better,  does  not  wish  to  be  sent  to  sleep ;  pulse
110,  and  with  great  heat  of  surface;  kept  everything  down
to-day.

17th.  9  o'clock,  a.m.  Has  had  a  good  natural  night's
rest ;  bowels  opened  early  this  morning,  and  assume  a  healthy
appearance ;  pulse  soft,  84 ;  pupils  not  so  dilated ;  spirits
better,  and  countenance  not  so  cedematous,  tongue  clean;
introduced  my  finger  to  the  os  uteri  with  warm  turpentine  ;
intend  to  adopt  the  plan  every  morning.  Is  coming  down
stairs,  and  going  into  her  sleep  two  hours  before  dinner.

Ten  o'clock,  night.  No  pain  of  the  head,  kept  everything
down,  bowels  opened  twice,  pulse  100,  vibrating ;  sent  her
to  sleep  for  the  night.

Nine  o'clock  morning,  April  18th.  Slept  till  ten  minutes
past  7  o'clock ;  her  mother  awoke  her ;  feels  much  better ;
pulse  100.

Four  o'clock,  p.m.,  is  sitting  up  in  bed  cheerful ;  has  not
had  any  pain  in  the  head  now  for  three  days ;  no  return  of
pain  in  the  chest ;  pulse  86  soft ;  bowels  not  opened  since
yesterday.  To  have  an  enema  just  before  sending  her  to
sleep  for  the  night.

10  o'clock.  Fretted  much  at  my  suggestion  of  the  enema;
I  threw  up  a  similar  one  to  last ;  and  an  hour  after  went
in  and  found  it  had  brought  away  knotty  evacuations  :  she
was  faint  and  pulse  feeble,  90.  I  sent  her  to  sleep  for  the
night.

4  o'clock  p.m.  Complains  of  pain  in  the  head.  To  sleep
till  6  o'clock.

10  o'clock,  night.  Has  had  a  purging  since  last  visit,  feels
feverish ;  pulse  100,  weak.  Sent  her  to  sleep  for  the  night.
Nothing  rejected  since  the  third  time  being  affected.


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


261


19th.  Slept  till  8  o’clock,  complains  of  pain  in  the  back
and  side  ;  no  head-ache,  sickness,  or  thirst :  pulse  soft,  90.

2  o’clock.  Just  eaten  egg  pudding.  Sent  her  to  sleep  till
5  o’clock.

10  o’clock  night.  Sent  her  to  sleep  for  the  night.

20th.  Awoke  by  herself  this  morning,  pulse  100,  feels  better.

21st.  Slept  till  8  o’clock,  feels  better  in  every  respect.
Tranquil  pulse  of  80.

4  o’clock.  Sitting  up  ;  been  up  two  hours ;  has  no  faint¬
ness,  palpitation,  or  giddiness ;  pulse  84 ;  countenance  more
colour  and  not  so  swollen  :  keeps  everything  down.

11  o’clock.  Pulse  88.  Sent  her  to  sleep,  to  remain  asleep
until  I  call  in  the  morning :  bowels  opened  once  in  the
morning.

Diet  the  last  few  days.  Coffee  and  bread  and  butter  for
breakfast;  mutton  and  egg  pudding  for  dinner;  nothing
after  tea  till  next  morning.  There  has  not  been  any  heat  of
surface, — the  pupils  are  now  contracted  :  no  occasion  for  the
enema  since  the  18th.

22nd.  Slept  till  half-past  7  o’clock ;  pulse  84  ;  sitting  up,
feels  better.

10  o’clock,  night.  Pulse  84 ;  complains  of  her  legs  ting¬
ling  very  oedematous.  Sent  her  to  sleep.

23rd.  12  o’clock.  Awoke  by  herself ;  is  up,  cheerful  and
hungry ;  pulse  84,  feeble.  At  4  o’clock  sent  her  to  sleep ;
bowels  not  opened  since  yesterday  morning.

10  o’clock.  Bowels  opened  since  noon ;  pulse  80.  Sent
her  to  sleep.

24th.  11  o’clock,  a.m.  Slept  till  7  o’clock;  now  in  a
natural  sleep ;  pulse  86,  feeble ;  bowels  relieved  three  times
since  last  evening.

25th.  Not  mesmerised.

26th.  Found  her  cleaning  candlesticks ;  slept  well  last
night;  has  neither  ache  or  pain,  and  no  sickness;  bowels
open,  no  fever,  tongue  red  and  shining;  pulse,  weak,  88.

Having  written  to  Dr.  Elliotson  respecting  the  case,  he
says  he  has  never  seen  the  blood  restored  by  mesmerism  in
chlorosis  without  giving  iron,  and  refers  me  to  a  case  of  his
of  restoration  of  the  voice  (see  Zoist ,  No.  III).  Accord¬
ingly  I  commenced  with  the  iron  to-day.  12  o’clock,  she
walked  to  my  house  for  her  medicine.  I  threw  her  into  the
sleep  on  the  sofa  (three  others  in  the  somnambulist  state  in
the  same  room)  in  fifteen  minutes :  the  pulse  90,  weak.
10  o’clock,  night,  found  her  in  a  natural  sleep  ;  pulse  full  82;
made  a  few  passes  and  left.

27th.  Better,  had  a  good  night ;  bowels  opened ;  pulse


262  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism,

88.  Coming  to  my  house  to  dine  to-day,  sent  her  to  sleep
till  then.

28th.  Mesmerised  at  11  o’clock  a.m.,  slept  till  half-past
1  o’clock ;  eat  a  hearty  dinner ;  pulse,  regular,  84 ;  bowels
regular.  Had  natural  sleep  each  night.

29th.  Mesmerised  at  11  o’clock,  to  come  out  of  her  sleep
at  1  o’clock.  The  iron  seems  to  suit  her;  no  return  of  head¬
ache,  sickness,  pain  in  the  chest,  or  palpitations ;  can  walk
now  without  faintness  or  difficulty  of  breathing,  swelling  in
face  and  extremities  gradually  subsiding.

30th.  Mesmerised  by  Mrs.  Jerry,  a  little  colour  in  the
cheeks.

May  1st.  Was  sent  to  sleep  by  me  last  night  at  10  o’clock
and  slept  till  8  o’clock  this  morning ;  enjoyed  her  breakfast,
feels  much  stronger.  Instead  of  my  mesmerising  her  at  her
own  house,  she  is  able  to  walk  up  and  be  operated  upon  at
my  house.  The  colour  is  in  the  face,  and  last  night  she
had  a  good  deal  of  pain  in  her  back ;  has  taken  the  iron
regularly  three  times  a  day.  Diet  the  same.

11  o’clock.  Now  going  into  the  sleep  till  dinner  time  ;  no
need  for  aperient  medicine  ;  tells  me  she  has  neither  ache  or
pain.  Pulse  86.

2nd.  Mesmerised  at  my  house ;  slept  till  7  o’clock  this
morning ;  was  put  to  sleep  at  10  o’clock  last  night.  Her  mother
just  from  the  Wisbech  Union ;  the  board  will  not  allow,  be¬
cause  the  other  medical  man  should  attend  her.  No  return
of  the  catamenia ;  still  complains  of  pain  in  the  serai  region.

3rd,  4th,  5th.  Operated  on  at  my  house.

6th.  Pulse  now  strong,  full  86,  no  pain,  eats  heartily.

7th,  8th,  9th,  10th.  Mesmerised  at  my  house  by  my
housekeeper.  Has  now  a  beautiful  colour ;  bowels  quite
regular ;  eats,  sleeps,  and  quite  free  from  pain  •  pulse  84 ;
no  return  of  menses.

12th  and  13th.  Mesmerised  at  my  house.

14th.  Not  operated  on.

15th.  Mesmerised  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Culledge,  sur¬
geon,  of  March ;  is  quite  well,  but  no  return  of  menses.

16tli.  Violent  head-ache  this  morning  and  pain  in  the
loins  ;  at  10  o’clock  at  night  catamenia  returned.

17th.  Pain  in  the  head  less,  feels  better.

18th.  Mesmerised ;  menses  continue.

19th.  Not  mesmerised  ;  to  take  the  iron  only  twice  a  day.

20th.  Not  mesmerised ;  menses  about  leaving.

22nd.  Peels  so  well  that  she  wishes  to  go  into  the  fields
to  work.


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


263


23rd.  Her  father  tells  me  she  is  at  work  five  miles  off,
quite  well.

24th.  Visited  her  at  her  own  house,  had  had  her  supper,
and  was  gone  to  bed,  went  up  stairs ;  she  tells  me  she  walks
to  Mr.  Smith's,  farmer,  near  Bedlam  Bridge  (five  miles  off),
commences  work  in  the  field  (weeding)  at  8  o'clock  till
1  o'clock ;  dines,  and  at  work  at  2  o'clock  till  6  o'clock,  then
walks  her  five  miles  back,  for  lOd.  per  day.  She  works  as
well  as  any  in  the  field ;  has  a  good  pulse,  neither  ache  or
pain,  can  eat  and  sleep,  her  colour  is  quite  restored,  bowels
quite  regular.

Sunday,  June  2nd,  dined  at  my  house  to-day,  looking
remarkably  well,  her  face  rosy  and  sun-burnt.  Tells  me
she  has  had  no  return  of  pain  or  sickness,  sleeps  well,  her
bowels  regular.  When  very  tired,  her  mother  sends  her  to
sleep  by  merely  pointing  with  her  fingers,  and  on  those  nights
she  feels  better  than  when  she  has  not  slept  through  the  mes¬
meric  influence.  Pulse  84,  strong  and  full ;  next  week  ex¬
pects  a  return  of  her  menses.

June  12th.  Was  at  a  lecture  delivered  by  me  on  mes¬
merism  at  Chatteris,  quite  well,  no  return  of  the  catamenia,
goes  on  with  the  iron  twice  a  day.

Tic  Douleureux.

Sarah  Robinson,  wife  of  a  veterinary  surgeon  residing  in
this  place,  has  suffered  much  from  rheumatic  pains  of  the
left  side  of  the  face  the  most  part  of  the  winter,  being  obliged
to  have  recourse  to  hot  flannels,  &c. ;  the  attacks  are  most
severe  while  the  easterly  winds  prevail.  She  applied  to  me
about  three  weeks  since  with  marked  tic  douleureux.  The  pain
would  come  on  suddenly  shooting  in  the  course  of  the  supra¬
orbital,  and  superior  and  inferior  maxillary  nerves,  lasting
from  ten  minutes  to  an  hour,  disappearing  as  suddenly  as  it
came  on.  Knowing  that  she  had  a  great  objection  to  being
mesmerised,  I  gave  the  carbonate  of  iron  in  half  a  drachm  to
two  drachm  doses,  three  times  a  day,  with  three  grains  of  rhu¬
barb  in  each  dose,  the  bowels  being  constipated ;  she  took
the  iron  some  time,  but  each  paroxysm  became  more  severe
and  lasted  sometimes  two  hours,  coming  on  two  or  three
times  in  the  course  of  the  twenty-four  hours.  On  the  14th
of  May,  I  was  summoned  to  her  at  1  p.m.,  and  found  her
labouring  under  a  severe  paroxysm  which  had  then  lasted  an
hour  and  a  half.  She  was  resting  her  head  against  a  chair
with  a  distorted  face  and  in  the  greatest  agony.  I  now  asked
her  to  let  me  mesmerise  her,  her  reply  was  “  Anything,  sir,


264  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism ,

to  ease  me”  I  produced  a  faintness  by  a  few  passes,  her
head  fell  back  in  the  first  sleep  ;  she  replied  to  my  question
of  how  the  pain  was,  “  Better.”  I  left  her  asleep,  and  on
my  return  from  the  Colony  at  9  o’clock  at  night  she  met  me
at  the  door,  said  she  was  quite  free  from  pain,  and  believed
in  mesmerism  ;  she  slept  three  quarters  of  an  hour.  I  now
threw  her  into  the  sleep,  and  requested  her  to  come  up  to
my  house  the  following  morning.

15th.  At  9  o’clock  she  made  her  appearance,  had  no  re¬
turn  of  pain ;  mesmerised  her  again,  she  slept  an  hour,  roll¬
ing  her  head  from  side  to  side ;  the  pulse  in  this  case  was  not
altered  while  asleep.  She  stated  her  case  to  Mr.  Culledge,
who  with  several  other  gentlemen  were  then  seeing  my  mes¬
meric  experiments.  On  her  return  home  in  the  evening,  she
had  a  slight  attack,  which  lasted  only  half  an  hour.

16th.  Mesmerised.  No  return  since  last  night.

17th.  Mesmerised.  No  return  of  pain.

18th.  Mesmerised  by  me  at  her  house.

19th.  Not  mesmerised.

20th.  Gone  to  March  to  see  a  friend ;  has  had  no  return
since  15th.

23rd.  Had  a  slight  return  while  at  March,  being  out  in
the  evening  and  cold  night.

25th.  Came  home  from  March ;  pain  returned  at  12
o’clock  at  night,  and  lasted  half  an  hour.

26th.  Mesmerised  daily  up  to  the  30th.

June  3rd.  Has  not  had  a  return  of  pain  since  the  25th  ;
feels  quite  well.

27th.  Extracted  a  carious  tooth  of  the  left  upper  maxillary,
which  seems  to  be  the  exciting  cause  of  the  pain  returning.


Nervous  Affection  of  the  Breast  from  Suckling  cured  by

Mesmerism.

Ann  Turner,  aged  26,  was  confined  by  me  on  the  16th
April,  1844,  with  her  second  child ;  her  labour  was  natural
and  easy.  She  had  milk  fever,  which  ended  in  a  violent  pain
in  the  left  breast  every  time  the  child  was  applied.  I  was
called  in  again  on  the  30th ;  the  pain  was  so  severe  as  to
make  her  faint  away,  it  pierced  through  under  the  scapula
to  the  third  and  fourth  dorsal  vertebrae,  and  then  down  the
inner  part  of  the  arm,  as  far  as  the  inner  condyle  of  the
humerus,  lasting  from  ten  minutes  to  an  hour,  and  then
gradually  abating  and  leaving  a  numbness ;  there  was  no
tenderness  in  the  breast  or  spine ;  the  child  had  been  taken


.  by  Mr.  Tubbs.


265


from  the  breast  the  last  two  days,  but  the  pain  instantly
came  on  when  she  lay  down,  therefore  she  was  obliged  to  be
propped  up  in  bed.  I  ordered  the  breast  to  be  supported,
and  tried  to  mesmerise  her ;  after  nearly  an  hour’s  pointing,
I  was  obliged  to  leave  her  without  producing  the  mesmeric
state.

The  following  day  at  1  o’clock,  I  tried  to  affect  her  again ;
tired  of  staring  and  pointing ,  I  was  about  to  leave  off,  when
I  closed  the  lids,  and  pressed  with  each  fore-finger  upon  the
ball  of  the  eyes,  and  seeing  her  hand  drop  from  the  table  on
her  lap,  I  was  struck  on  removing  my  fingers  to  find  she  had
gone  into  the  deep  sleep ;  she  soon  turned  pale,  her  hands
cold,  her  breathing  scarcely  perceptible,  pulse  90,  the  pupils
contracted,  but  not  turned  upwards  and  inwards  as  I  have
seen  them,  I  placed  a  lighted  candle  close  to  the  eyes  (the
lid  being  raised)  which  did  not  stimulate  the  eye  to  action.
I  now  pressed  rather  hard  upon  the  balls  of  the  eyes  with  no
visible  change.  I  left  her,  she  awoke  by  herself  in  three
hours,  with  stiffness  of  the  eyes.  I  forgot  to  state  that  she
had  had  a  very  restless  night,  the  pain  worse  than  the  night
previous.

May  2nd.  The  milk  coagulated  each  time  it  was  drawn
by  glasses  from  the  breast,  but  to-day  it  does  not.  She  feels
a  warmth  in  the  spine  and  arm,  which  before  felt  benumbed
and  cold ;  still  she  cannot  lie  down  without  feeling  the  pain,
but  it  has  left  the  arm  and  she  has  no  pain  when  the  glass  is
used  to  remove  the  milk ;  the  child  continues  to  take  the
other  breast.

3rd.  Mesmerised  by  pressure  on  the  balls  of  the  eyes ;
in  the  unconscious  state  in  fifteen  minutes.  I  had  the  child
applied  to  the  breast  while  in  the  sleep ;  the  little  fellow
sucked  well ;  the  mother  had  no  knowledge  of  its  having
been  applied ;  rested  better  and  was  able  to  lie  down,  feeling
only  a  soreness.

4th.  Is  quite  free  from  pain,  slept  well  last  night ;  after
producing  the  sleep  the  child  was  applied  to  the  breast.

5th.  Mesmerised;  slept  well,  no  pain,  child  applied  to
the  breast.

6th.  Mesmerised ;  no  return  of  pain,  child  applied.  The
next  time  I  mesmerised  her  was  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Geo.
Wool,  farmer,  Mr.  Charles  Wool,  and  Mr.  Heffer,  veterinary
surgeon  of  Downham  ;  her  child  now  sucks  at  the  breast  out
of  the  sleep ,  and  both  mother  and  child  are  quite  well.  I
called  yesterday  at  the  house  and  saw  them  both.

Dated  the  2nd  day  of  June,  1844.

I  did  not  give  a  drop  of  physic  in  the  above  case.


266  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism ,

Head-ache.

Harriet  Gilbert,  aged  29,  living  at  Up  well,  Norfolk,  ap¬
plied  to  me  with  nervous  head-ache,  which  she  had  laboured
under  several  days.  I  mesmerised  her,  and  instantly  she
was  relieved,  walking  home  quite  well.  It  is  now  six  weeks
since  she  has  not  had  a  return  of  the  pain.

Injury  of  the  Knee .

Rebecca  Hovell,  aged  18,  living  on  Exmore  Drove,  in
Upwell  Isle,  on  Wednesday,  April  17th,  having  lain  down  on
the  bed  to  rest  herself,  her  mother  called  her  to  supper,  and
jumping  off  the  bed  in  haste  she  injured  her  knee,  which  be¬
came  instantly  painful,  and  she  walked  lame  to  the  supper-
table.  The  following  day  she  was  obliged  to  make  use  of  a
brush-stick  under  the  arm-pit  for  support.  She  remained  so
till  Friday,  when  her  mother  came  up  with  her  in  a  waggon
to  my  house ;  but  I  not  being  at  home,  she  returned,  and
continued  much  the  same  till  Sunday  (21st),  when  I  called
upon  her.  She  was  in  bed  with  the  knee  flexed,  the  limb
painful  and  knee  swollen  :  the  slightest  pressure  on  the  limb
caused  pain.  After  only  a  few  passes  over  the  painful  part,
a  twitching  of  the  patella  was  visible.  I  now  continued  mes¬
merising  the  limb  for  ten  minutes,  and  convulsed  the  limb  :
I  breathed  upon  it  and  instantly  it  remained  quiet.  I  now
stood  at  a  distance,  and  by  only  pointing  it  instantly  twitched.
I  then  made  transverse  passes,  and  the  knee  fell.  I  said,  “  I
think  you  can  get  up  and  walk ;  try  and  do  so.”  She  got  up
and  walked  out  of  doors  without  any  pain.

As  I  was  attending  for  Mr.  Garrard,  the  other  surgeon,
and  his  servant  driving  me,  and  knowing  his  master  was  a
sceptic,  I  made  the  girl  walk  to  the  gig  and  state  the  circum¬
stances  to  him.

On  the  following  day  I  met  Mr.  Leeder  (a  highly  respect¬
able  farmer  living  near  this  poor  girl,  whose  parents  work  on
the  farm)  at  the  house,  and  operated  on  the  limb,  and  in  his
presence  produced  the  same  effects.  There  has  not  been  any
return  of  her  lameness.

I  afterwards  attended  her  for  an  inflammatory  attack  on
the  chest.  Called  to  see  her  to-day,  May  2nd  ;  is  quite  well,
and  is  also  cured  of  tarsal  inflammation :  the  eyelashes  are
gone  :  she  had  been  afflicted  with  conjunctival  inflammation
for  months.  I  mesmerised  her  to-day ;  there  is  not  the  slight¬
est  appearance  of  redness  of  the  tarsus.  Given  up  seeing  her.

May  20th.  This  week  she  came  up  to  be  mesmerised  again,
as  the  tarsal  inflammation  has  returned.


267


by  Mr.  Tubbs.

Melancholia.

Elizabeth  Flag,  aged  35,  living  at  Friday  Bridge,  near
Wisbech,  about  four  years  since  had  a  premature  labour,  from
which  she  was  confined  to  her  bed  twenty-one  weeks.  Daily
during  that  period  had  menorrhagia ;  been  attended  by  Mr.
Lilley  and  then  by  Messrs.  Wallis,  surgeons  of  Wisbech,
but  she  was  not  better  until  she  went  to  consult  an  M.D.  of
Wisbech.  It  was  three  weeks  before  the  hemorrhage  was
stopped ;  her  catamenia  have  ever  since  been  scanty  and  irre¬
gular.  She  has  felt  low-spirited  for  some  time ;  and  in  con¬
sequence  of  a  cousin  hanging  herself  on  the  3rd  of  April,  and
her  being  present  when  the  cousin  was  cut  down,*  she  be¬
came  so  affected,  that  she  was  unable  to  sleep  at  nights,  fre¬
quently  getting  up  and  disturbing  the  neighbours.  She
could  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  eat  any  food,  but  was  fretting
night  and  day,  constantly  seeing  before  her  her  cousin  hang¬
ing.  Daily  her  mind  seemed  more  disturbed.  At  last  a
neighbour  told  her  to  come  up  to  me  to  be  mesmerised,  (it
having  been  stated  by  a  patient  who  resides  in  that  neigh¬
bourhood,  and  who  daily  attends  here  to  be  mesmerised,  that
I  could  have  prevented  her  cousin  from  committing  suicide  if
she  had  been  mesmerised.)

On  the  14th  she  applied  to  me,  and  said,  “  Sir,  I  am
come  up  for  you  to  cure  me  of  my  mind,  or  I  shall  make
away  with  myself.  I  have  felt  as  if  I  must  do  it,  and  have


*  Ann  Murphy,  aged  33;  light  hair,  florid  countenance,  tall,  rather  stout,
long  neck.  Been  married  about  eleven  years  ;  has  not  had  any  family.  For
the  last  year  and  a  half  her  manners  have  been  eccentric  ;  never  talkative,
generally  preferred  being  by  herself.  She  was  a  Baptist  and  regularly  at¬
tended  chapel.  Had  books  from  the  preacher  to  read,  and  of  late  one  in
particular  was  lent  her  about  the  devil,  and  how  sinful  it  was  to  be  his  friend,
and  how  we  ought  to  serve  God  and  shun  the  former.  On  the  Thursday
previous  to  her  committing  suicide  she  attended  a  missionary  meeting  in
Wisbech,  and  on  her  return  with  her  husband,  on  arriving  at  Goshen  Lane,
she  said,  “  John  dont  you  see  the  devil  standing  there  ?  Cant  you  hear
something  rattle?  My  gown  seems  as  if  there  were  chains  making  a  noise. ”
The  following  day  she  appeared  very  wretched,  but  was  always  cheerful  in  her
husband’s  presence.  On  the  morning  she  hung  herself,  she  had  risen  as  usual.
Her  husband  went  to  work,  and  returned  at  five  p.m.,  bringing  some  beer
for  her  from  the  public  house  on  his  way  home.  At  one  o’clock  she  was
walking  in  her  garden,  and  seeing  a  bird  picking  up  some  seed,  said,  “  you
pretty  bird,  you  are  picking  up  this  seed  that  I  should  pick  up,  but  never
shall.”  She  shortly  after  this  must  have  locked  the  front  door  and  put  the
key  into  her  pocket,  and  was  never  more  seen  after,  until  Mrs.  Robinson  (a
neighbour  whom  she  was  much  attached  to),  finding  the  front  door  locked,
went  to  the  back  door  which  was  also  locked,  as  well  as  the  window  blocked
up,  which  being  unusual,  she  instantly  gave  alarm.  On  breaking  open  the
door,  the  poor  woman  was  found  hanging  behind  the  door  quite  dead.  She
was  not  destitute,  having  a  good  house,  food  and  money.  Her  husband  is  a
pensioner,  receiving  9 d.  per  day.  She  was  not  fond  of  children.  She  was
living  at  Friday  Bridge,  near  Wisbech.


268  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism,

twice  got  up  with  the  intention  of  destroying  myself ;  and
then  when  I  have  collected  my  thoughts,  I  have  fretted  to
think  I  should  do  so,  when  I  fell  melancholy :  I  felt  dizzy
and  an  aching  all  over.  (I  do  not  accustom  myself  to  take
laudanum).  Present  state,  —  dark  hair;  emaciated  and
gloomy  countenance;  pulse  weak  and  thready,  96.  I  took
her  into  the  dining  room,  and  by  pointing  my  fingers  pro¬
duced  the  sleep  in  about  twenty  minutes.  She  slept  half  an
hour  and  awoke.  I  made  passes  over  the  head  and  face,  and
she  slept  until  I  returned  from  seeing  a  patient,  which  must
have  been  nearly  an  hour.

15th.  She  was  sent  to  sleep  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Cul-
ledge,  surgeon  of  March,  and  other  gentlemen,  who  were
seeing  my  cases  :  she  stated  her  case  to  Mr.  Culledge, — says
she  slept  better  last  night.

16th.  Mesmerised;  asleep  an  hour;  feels  better.

17th.  As  she  did  not  come  at  her  time,  I  took  my  horse
and  rode  down,  and  affected  her  at  her  own  house.  Left  her
asleep,  ordering  a  neighbour  to  awake  her.

18th.  Went  again  to  her  house  and  operated  :  is  certainly
better ;  has  eaten  her  dinner  and  enjoyed  it ;  slept  well  last
night.

20th.  Could  not  get  up  to  day.

22nd.  Mesmerised  by  my  housekeeper;  is  much  better :
cheerful.

24th.  Mesmerised  by  my  housekeeper ;  slept  two  hours.

28th.  Mesmerised  by  me ;  slept  five  hours.

She  is  so  much  better ;  I  do  not  think  it  needful  to  go  on
operating :  her  spirits  cheerful :  has  no  dread  of  committing
suicide.

After-labour  in  the  Mesmeric  State .

Mrs.  Green  (the  patient  recorded  in  The  Zoist,  who  had
been  the  subject  of  sore  throats  for  years)  was  delivered  last
week,  and  on  my  arrival  the  child  was  born,  but  the  cord
not  separated,  and  the  woman  in  attendance  found  it  difficult
to  do  so  in  consequence  of  its  shortness.  Having  separated
the  umbilical  cord  I  found  partial  hour-glass  contraction  of
the  uterus.  I  pointed  to  the  eyes,  and  when  in  the  mesmeric
state  introduced  my  hand  and  separated  the  placenta,  which
was  firmly  adherent  to  the  fundus  uteri.  On  my  breathing
on  the  eyes  she  had  no  recollection  of  my  having  removed
the  placenta.  She  is  going  on  remarkably  well.  This  woman
had  always  been  under  the  necessity  of  taking  opiates,  but
this  time  her  nurse  or  myself  quiet  her  by  the  mesmeric
sleep.


(  269  )


X.  Cases  of  Mesmeric  Clairvoyance  and  Sympathy  of  Feeling .

By  Dr.  Engledue.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — I  beg  to  forward  the  following  cases  for  insertion  in
your  journal.  After  the  very  minute  and  interesting  reports
of  cases  which  Dr.  Elliotson  has  published,  it  will  be  unne¬
cessary  for  me  to  detail  all  the  phenomena  which  the  cases
presented  :  I  am  only  anxious  to  direct  attention  to  a  few  ex¬
periments,  illustrating  extraordinary  and  inexplicable  pheno¬
mena,  and  some  of  which  I  have  no  doubt  will  be  familiar  to
those  who  are  engaged  in  mesmeric  investigations.

J.  W.,  aged  18,  had  suffered  from  epilepsy  for  eleven
years.  The  attacks  were  severe,  and  on  several  occasions
injuries  had  been  inflicted.  This  patient  had  been  under  the
care  of  several  medical  gentlemen,  and  had  passed  through
the  usual  course  of  treatment,  but  without  benefit.

I  mesmerised  her  on  four  consecutive  nights  for  one  hour
and  a  quarter  each  night,  but  without  the  least  effect.  On
the  fifth  night  I  requested  her  to  take  the  hand  of  her  sister,
and  I  commenced  mesmerising  the  latter.  In  twenty  minutes
my  first  patient  was  entranced,  but  no  effect  was  produced  on
the  sister.  She  was  awaked  with  some  difficulty.  From  this
period,  the  time  occupied  in  producing  the  sleep  diminished
daily,  till,  in  about  three  weeks,  five  or  ten  seconds  were
sufficient.  I  continued  to  mesmerise  her  almost  daily  for
eighteen  months,  and  with  a  most  marked  effect.  There  was
a  great  improvement  in  the  general  health ;  the  number  of
fits  diminished  from  an  average  of  from  forty  to  fifty  every
month,  to  three  or  two,  and  once  she  passed  through  the
month  without  a  fit.  The  following  are  the  experiments  re¬
ferred  to.

In  a  drawing-room  containing  forty  persons,  this  experi¬
ment  was  performed,  and  I  select  and  relate  it  here  because
it  was  not  pre-arranged.  After  the  patient  had  been  en¬
tranced,  a  gentleman  requested  to  speak  to  me  at  the  other
end  of  the  room.  He  engaged  me  in  conversation,  and  whilst
I  was  standing  with  my  hands  behind  me,  one  of  his  com¬
panions  suddenly  pushed  the  point  of  a  penknife  into  my
thumb.  Immediately  the  patient  cried  out,  and  rubbed  the
exact  spot  on  her  own  hand  which  had  been  injured  in
mine.

Another  gentleman  requested  me  to  accompany  him  into
the  library,  which  adjoined  the  drawing-room.  He  closed  the
doors,  and  then  said,  “  I  wish  to  tickle  your  ear  with  the  end


270  Mesmeric  Clairvoyance  and  Sympathy  of  Feeling,

of  a  pen.”  I  requested  him  not  to  do  so  for  a  few  minutes,
for  I  have  almost  always  noticed  that  if  experiments  are  per¬
formed  in  too  rapid  succession,  the  expected  result  does  not
take  place ;  nay  more,  I  have  frequently  noticed  that  if  ex¬
periments  are  too  much  crowded  together,  several  minutes
may  elapse  and  the  experiment  be  considered  a  failure,  but
after  all  the  expected  result  may  come  out.  My  right  ear  was
tickled  for  one  minute.  We  then  entered  the  drawing-room,
and  found  the  patient  rubbing  her  left  ear  upon  her  shoulder,
and  shuddering  in  the  same  manner  that  I  had,  and  as  every
person  does  when  the  same  stimulus  is  applied.  Will  it  be
believed  that  this  experiment  was  considered  a  failure  by  the
originator,  because  the  patient  did  not  exhibit  sympathetic
sensation  in  the  right  ear  ?  This  is  merely  another  instance
of  the  ignorance  displayed  by  parties  pretending  to  investi¬
gate  this  subject.  The  individual  was  evidently  a  student  of
the  J ohnsonian  school, — “  I  cannot  understand,  therefore  I
will  not  believe  my  own  senses  !”

When  my  hair  was  combed  in  another  room,  my  patient
expressed  great  dissatisfaction,  and  complained  that  somebody
was  teazing  her  and  pulling  her  hair.

When  I  used  a  toothpick,  she  picked  her  teeth  with  a
pin,  and  generally  she  did  this  on  the  same  side  and  inserted
the  pin  between  the  same  two  teeth  that  I  did.  This,  how¬
ever,  was  not  invariable.

Sometimes  the  precision  with  which  she  named  the  various
articles  I  was  eating  was  quite  extraordinary.  At  other  times
it  was  the  reverse.  At  one  period,  suddenly,  for  several  con¬
secutive  days,  she  failed  at  every  attempt.  This  has  frequently
occurred  since,  but  after  the  closest  investigation  I  am  not
able  to  furnish  the  least  explanation.  She  was  not  out  of
health ;  in  fact  both  in  the  trance  and  out  of  the  trance  she
presented  precisely  the  same  appearance,  and  with  this  excep¬
tion,  manifested  the  same  phenomena.  I  am  aware  that  this
must  accord  with  the  observations  of  others, — all  agree  that
a  patient  may  be  particularly  acute  at  one  period  and  at
another  very  dull.  With  regard  to  the  higher  phenomena  of
clairvoyance,  this  is  constantly  the  case.  These  are  diffi-
cnlties.  These  apparent  anomalies  are  part  and  parcel  of  the
science,  and  are  always  seized  with  avidity  by  the  sciolists,
who  fancy  that  they  know  everything,  but  who  in  their  at¬
tempts  to  shew  their  knowledge ,  proclaim  that  they  know
nothing.

I  shall  not  attempt  to  detail  the  innumerable  experiments
which  I  have  performed,  but  merely  record  the  following.  A
gentleman,  who  had  never  witnessed  any  mesmeric  experi-


by  Dr.  Engledue .


271


ments,  proposed  the  following  course.  He  drew  up  a  list
containing  the  names  of  twelve  articles  of  diet.  He  then
pointed  with  his  finger  to  the  name  of  a  particular  article.
I  commenced  eating,  and  immediately  my  patient  performed
the  processes  of  mastication  and  deglutition,  and  evidently
relished  the  taste  very  much.  I  then  asked  her  what  she  was
eating.  She  replied,  “  Fig.”  This  was  correct,  and  she  was
equally  correct  in  seven  other  experiments.  On  this  day  she
did  not  once  fail.

There  is  a  curious  modification  of  this  experiment  which
I  have  not  seen  noticed  elsewhere.  The  patient  while  in  the
trance  is  requested  to  eat  an  apple — an  orange — a  fig,  or  any
other  article  of  diet;  and  when  she  has  half  eaten  it  and  is
evidently  enjoying  the  flavour,  I  commence  eating  a  mint
drop — a  ginger  lozenge — some  cayenne  pepper — salt,  or  some
equally  pungent  article.  Immediately  she  rejects  what  she  is
eating,  expresses  great  dissatisfaction,  declares  that  her  mouth
is  burning,  and  that  she  will  not  eat  anything  more.  I  con¬
sider  this  result  most  extraordinary,  because  the  sympathetic
taste  clearly  overpowers  the  real  taste  of  the  patient ;  and  to
those  present  at  the  experiment,  is  a  most  manifest  and  con¬
vincing  proof  of  that  peculiar  and  inexplicable  relationship
existing  between  the  mesmeriser  and  the  mesmerisee.

On  two  occasions  I  have  left  this  patient  in  the  trance,
visited  London  and  remained  absent  two  days.  On  my  return
she  was  still  asleep,  but  exhibited  signs  of  restlessness  and
wished  to  be  awaked.

The  other  case,  is  that  of  a  young  lady  who  manifested
almost  all  the  phenomena  above  detailed,  and  on  whom  I
performed,  in  August  1842,  ivithout  her  knowledge ,  the  ope¬
ration  of  dividing  the  ham-string  muscles  for  contraction  of
the  knee-joint.  I  shall  confine  my  narrative  to  the  details  of
experiments  differing  from  those  in  the  previous  case.

On  one  occasion,  my  patient  being  in  bed  and  in  the
trance,  I  retired  to  a  table  at  the  other  end  of  the  room  for
the  purpose  of  writing,  when  her  sister  directed  my  attention
to  her  movements.  She  was  writing  with  her  finger  on  the
sheet  of  the  bed  and  apparently  following  every  motion  of
my  hand.  She  made  a  full  stop,  crossed  the  letters,  &c.
I  placed  a  piece  of  paper  under  her  hand  and  gave  her  a
pencil,  and  although  she  ceased  moving  the  pencil  at  the  end
of  a  word  when  I  did,  still  the  writing  was  not  intelligible, —
but  there  were  the  same  number  of  divisions  in  a  line,  and
the  same  number  of  stops,  & c.

I  went  down  stairs  and  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  house,

VOL.  II.  T


272  Mesmeric  Clairvoyance  and  Sympathy  of  Feeling.

but  without  mentioning  my  intention  to  the  attendants.  I  then
asked  a  question,  moving  my  lips  but  without  articulating.
When  I  returned  to  the  room,  I  was  told  that  she  had  distinctly
uttered  the  monosyllable,  “  No.”

I  requested  her  sister  to  give  me  a  piece  of  paper  with
some  large  letters  printed  upon  it,  but  to  give  it  to  me  folded
up.  I  placed  it  across  her  forehead  and  quite  out  of  the  line
of  vision, — she  read,  “  The  Evening  Mail,  February  1842.”
When  I  looked  at  the  paper,  it  was  “The  Evening  Mail,
February  11,  1842.”

This  patient  had  been  confined  to  bed  for  eighteen  months,
when  the  following  experiment  was  performed.  The  house  of
a  relation  who  lived  fourteen  miles  off  was  broken  into  and
several  articles  stolen.  This  was  not  communicated  to  her,
but  I  received  a  note  mentioning  the  circumstance,  not  how¬
ever  detailing  any  of  the  particulars.  When  I  entranced  her,
I  directed  her  to  go  to  the  house  and  to  ascertain  what  the
family  was  about.  After  a  few  minutes  her  countenance

changed  its  colour,  and  she  exclaimed,  “Why - has  been

robbed.  The  door  of  the  house  has  been  cut.  The  desk  has
been  moved,  and  all  the  papers  thrown  about.  (They  were
carried  into  the  meadow.)  He  has  lost  six  pounds.  (This
was  quite  true  ;  at  first  it  was  supposed  that  only  four  or  five
pounds  had  been  taken,  but  a  subsequent  investigation  proved
that  there  must  have  been  six  pounds  in  the  desk.)  I  know
who  did  it.  It  was - and - ;  they  used  a  car¬

penter's  tool.  It  was  done  on  Monday  night,  when  the  wind
was  so  high  that  they  could  not  be  heard.  (The  robbers  broke
into  an  out-house  and  obtained  a  centre-bit,  and  cut  through
the  door-panel  with  it.)  Why  they  gave  old  Peter  something

in  some  food  that  he  should  not  bark.  P - gave  it  to

him.  (The  terrier  dog,  Peter,  was  dull  and  stupid  for  two  or
three  days  from  the  effects  of  the  drug  which  had  been  given
to  him.)  Why,  how  foolish !  What  are  they  doing  to  the
doors, — they  are  putting  bits  of  iron  all  over  them.  (The
back  doors  of  the  house  were  then  being  nailed  to  prevent  the
application  of  the  centre-bit  again.)”

On  another  occasion  I  was  told  that  something  important
had  occurred  at  the  same  house.  I  entranced  her  and  sent

her  to  look.  After  a  little  time  she  said,  “  Why  one  of -

sheep  has  been  killed.  It  was  killed  in  the  front  of  the  house
by  two  men, — there  were  four,  only  two  went  to  the  house
and  two  stood  by  the  lawn-gate.  They  would  have  killed
some  pigs  but  they  heard  the  great  gates. - is  so  dis¬

tressed  because  he  has  lost  his  best  sheep.”  After  a  consi¬
derable  interval,  “Well,  I  declare,  if  he  has  not  sent  down


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


273


for  me  to  find  out  if  I  can.  I  hope  I  shall.  And  they  sent

for  you  ;  and - is  here  to  take  back  word.  (Quite  true).

Why  it  is  the  sheep - offered  J01OO  for.  The  idea  of

their  not  telling  me,  as  if  I  should  not  know  !  One  held  the
sheep  whilst  the  other  killed  it  with  a  knife.  They  took
away  part  of  the  side :  they  left  part  at  the  barn  and  part  on
the  lawn.  O  !  they  had  a  lantern  and  looked  it  out,  for  they
know  about  animals,  and  knew  it  would  distress  him  so  to
kill  that  sheep.”  (The  sheep  was  divided  and  distributed  as
she  said).

Much  more  was  said,  but  this  I  consider  sufficient  to
prove  the  peculiar  and  extraordinary  nature  of  these  expe¬
riments.

I  am,  Sir,

Your  obedient  servant,

W.  C.  Engledue,  M.D.

Southsea ,  March  4<th,  1844.


XI.  The  Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.

Since  the  proceedings  at  University  College  in  1839,  when
the  Professor  of  the  Practice  of  Medicine  acted  like  a  philo¬
sopher,  and  his  coadjutors,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  pro¬
claimed  themselves  to  be  the  tools  of  a  faction  and  the  slaves
of  the  ignorant  and  superstitious,  we  have  watched  with  va¬
ried  feelings  of  contempt  and  pity  the  proceedings  of  medical
men  and  their  literary  organs,  the  medical  journals.  For  six
years  the  startling  and  inexplicable  facts  published  by  Dr.
Elliotson  and  his  determined  band  of  truth-seekers,  have  been
unnoticed  by  some  of  these  journals — by  others  they  have
been  denounced  as  impositions — the  chroniclers  called  fools
and  knaves,  and  the  patients  hysterical  girls,  requiring  the
occasional  application  of  the  birch  to  cure  their  depraved  sen¬
sations  and  to  remove  their  mendacious  qualifications.  Sad
indeed  have  been  our  reflections  after  reading  the  numerous
periodicals,  containing  proofs  of  our  ignorance  regarding
some  of  the  most  distressing  and  formidable  diseases  to  which
our  race  is  subjected,  to  find  the  very  next  page  blotted  with
ill-timed  wit,  and  sometimes  with  the  grossest  scurrility,  in¬
tended  to  lower  the  character  of  scientific  investigations,  and
to  stop  for  a  time  the  further  investigation  of  a  great  truth —
a  truth  which  would  remove  some  of  the  evils  so  constantly
deplored.

It  is  just  five  years  since  the  journal  which  is  presumed
to  have  the  largest  circulation,  condescended  to  notice  our

t  2


274


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


science ;  we  mean,  the  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review.
And  at  that  time  how  was  the  task  accomplished  ?  A  subject
confessedly  difficult  required  some  notice.  For  many  years
it  had  been  the  cause  of  lengthened  discussions,  during
which  passion  instead  of  reason,  and  preconceived  fancies  in¬
stead  of  calm  and  philosophic  research,  were  the  dominant
manifestations.  The  editor  of  that  journal  knowing  the  feel¬
ing  of  the  profession,  and  being  profoundly  ignorant  of  the
science,  inserted  an  article  much  more  calculated  to  damage
truth  and  to  prevent  research,  than  to  awaken  enquiry  and
to  establish  facts.  The  profession  required  enlightenment ;
surely  it  was  of  the  first  importance  for  the  editor  to  be  con¬
vinced  by  personal  investigation  of  the  truth  or  falsehood  of
the  statements  advanced.  We  are  almost  ashamed  to  make
this  remark,  but  we  are  compelled,  because  we  have  to  record
the  fact  that  Dr.  Forbes  knew  nothing  about  the  subject,  and
that  the  gentleman  who  wrote  the  article,  spiced  to  suit  the
palate  of  the  profession,  had  never  witnessed  an  experiment !
Yes,  such  an  article  was  concocted  and  inserted  in  the  British
and  Foreign  Medical  Review  for  April,  1839,  and  the  editor  of
that  journal,  and  the  author  of  that  article,  were  both  unac¬
quainted  with  the  science  of  mesmerism.  From  that  period
to  the  present  not  a  word  has  been  inserted ;  and  as  far  as
this  journal  is  concerned,  the  profession  might  have  remained
uninformed  of  our  progress.

The  first  sentences  of  the  article  alluded  to  read  thus  : —

“  The  empire  of  medicine  has  just  passed  through  one  of  those
unaccountable  paroxysms  of  credulity  to  which,  from  time  to  time,
it  seems  ever  to  have  been  subject.  Circumstances  so  plainly  suspi¬
cious,  and  doctrines  so  obviously  wild,  that  they  seem  only  to  require
to  be  presented  to  any  reasonable  mind  to  be  detected  and  rejected,
are  found  after  certain  or  uncertain  intervals  to  excite  the  feelings
and  to  mislead  the  judgment  of  a  very  considerable  proportion  of  the
profession.”

So  that  the  editor  and  his  literary  coadjutor,  both  unini¬
tiated,  could  inform  the  profession  that  a  medical  revolution
had  taken  place,  but  there  they  stopped.  They  gave  a  his¬
tory  of  Mesmer  and  his  numerous  disciples — they  reprinted
all  those  passages  in  the  various  publications  in  French  and
German  which  they  imagined  would  suit  their  purpose,  but
we  look  in  vain  for  the  details  of  a  single  experiment  made
by  themselves — the  record  of  a  single  fact  observed  by  them¬
selves, — or  an  attempt  to  write  a  sentence  in  a  truly  philoso¬
phic  spirit.  They  wrote  as  if  mesmerism  had  been  proved
to  be  a  bugbear — as  if  the  ink  from  their  pens  could  prevent
the  further  investigation  of  natural  facts.  Dr.  Forbes  became


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


275


Wakley  secundus,  (Dr.  Forbes  must  forgive  us,  but  be  se¬
lected  his  own  company ;)  he  quoted  from  Wakley Js  ridicu¬
lous  and  mendacious  report,  and  upon  this  information  de¬
nounced  a  science,  and  proclaimed  to  the  profession  that  the
empire  of  medicine  had  been  shaken  to  its  foundation,  but
that  it  would  pass  through  the  convulsion  without  injury ;
for,  said  the  writer, —

“Nevertheless  there  is  comfort.  The  world  is  round,  saith  the
proverb,  and  all  things  come  to  an  end.  Pass  a  few  short  months
and  the  delusion  stands  exposed;  the  actors  are  declared  to  he  de¬
ceivers  or  deceived;  the  facts  so  lately  boasted  of  are  trampled  upon
ivith  contempt ,  and  the  doctrines  built  upon  them  are  laughed  to
scorn.  The  fashionable  crowd  flock  to  a  new  prima  donna  or  to  a
watering-place  doctor;  and  the  half-converted  physicians  and  sur¬
geons  never  mention  the  subject  more ;  for,  although  the  folly  will
rise  again,  it  will  scarcely  be  in  their  time.”

Prophet  Forbes  !  How  stands  the  fact  ?  The  world  is
round,  most  true ;  the  few  short  months  have  passed,  but
each  succeeding  month  has  demonstrated  more  clearly  that
the  facts  of  1839  are  still  facts  in  1844,  that  the  men
who  advanced  them  at  that  period  were  truth-seekers  and
truth-speakers,  and  that  the  men  who  denounced  them  were,
and  are  still,  deceivers  and  false  prophets.  The  world  is
round,  most  true ;  but  there  is  another  truism  much  more
applicable  to  our  present  purpose,  and  it  is  this, —

“  The  whirligig  of  time  brings  about  its  revenges.”

And  assuredly  “  the  few  short  months”  which  you  prognosti¬
cated  were  to  expose  the  delusions  of  mesmerists,  have  dis¬
played,  in  the  most  manifest  and  complete  manner,  the
impropriety,  the  dishonesty,  and  the  utter  worthlessness  of
your  opinions.

But  Dr.  Forbes  may  say,  “Was  I  not  compelled  to  make
use  of  published  evidence  ?”  No,  we  say  you  were  not.  The
investigation  of  this  interesting  science  requires  no  expensive
apparatus,  no  outlay  of  capital,  no  previous  lengthened  edu¬
cation,  but  the  inmates  of  your  own  household  would  furnish
you  with  a  case ;  and  if  your  time  is  fully  occupied,  surely
some  judicious  friend  might  have  been  requested  to  pursue
the  subject  under  your  own  superintendence,  and  thus  furnish
you  with  evidence  for  publication  in  your  journal.  We  sug¬
gest  this  as  the  course  you  should  have  pursued,  and  even
now,  as  the  course  you  should  pursue,  if  you  are  anxious  to
obtain  the  character  of  a  just  and  scientific  investigator.  To
take  the  evidence  of  another,  whose  qualifications  you  do  not
know,  regarding  the  inexplicable  phenomena  presented  by  all


276  Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.

mesmeric  cases,  is  as  irrational  as  if  you  were  to  prescribe
for  a  patient  labouring  under  some  internal  and  ill-understood
disease,  without  the  benefit  of  a  consultation.  The  Brahmin
crushed  the  microscope  which  developed  to  him  natural  facts.
You,  like  the  Brahmin,  influenced  by  the  same  cause — igno¬
rance, — attempted  to  crush  men  who  were  devoting  their  at¬
tention  to  natural  phenomena,  and  developing  truths,  which  in
some  jesuitical  article  you  will  soon  be  compelled  to  acknowledge .*

We  must  quote  a  few  more  passages  from  this  article,  be¬
cause  we  know  that  many  of  our  readers  never  see  the  medical
periodicals,  and  because  we  think  it  right  to  place  them  in
possession  of  the  difficulties  with  which  those  medical  men
have  had  to  contend,  who  have  declared  the  truth  in  defiance
of  the  ignorant  and  the  selfish.

“  There  must  surely  be  a  sufficient  number  of  persons  of  sane
mind  in  the  profession,  who  have  thought  as  we  have  thought,  to
exempt  us  from  the  suspicion  of  affecting  wisdom  after  the  fact,
when  we  say  that,  from  the  first  dawn  of  these  diverting  but  degrad¬
ing  scenes  to  the  last,  from  the  first  burst  of  blank  surprise  in  the
good  unscientific  public  of  this  country,  through  all  the  phases  of
advancing  credulity  among  the  more  scientific,  down  to  the  last  com¬
plete  and  melancholy  explosion,  we  have  never  varied  from  a  most
hearty,  entire,  and  unconcealed  disbelief  of  very  nearly  all  the  phe¬
nomena  exhibited  by  all  the  patients,  and  related  by  all  the  practi¬
tioners  without  exception.’*

“We  beheld,  always  with  astonishment,  sometimes  with  concern,
and  sometimes  with  contempt,  the  credulity,  real  or  pretended,  of
the  magnetizers.  We  observed,  with  some  little  disgust,  here  and
there  a  practitioner  willing  to  become  the  provincial  wonder,  and
only  restrained  by  his  prudence  from  declaring  what  a  mixture  of
ignorance  and  cupidity  prepared  him  to  assert  and  to  do.  But,  above
all,  we  lamented  to  see  the  great  delusion  supported  by  one  of  the
ablest  physicians  of  this  country,  filling  the  most  important  chair  in
the  largest  medical  school  of  the  kingdom.”

“  Considering  the  high  sanction  which  even  a  temporary  belief
in  the  powers  of  animal  magnetism  has  obtained  in  this  country,  we
look  upon  its  recent  rise  and  progress,  and  its  abrupt  and  shame¬
ful  fall,  as  powerfully  calculated  to  degrade  a  profession  which  is
certainly,  for  other  reasons,  not  rising  in  public  estimation .”

*  Our  readers  will  not  be  astonished  to  read  the  following  anecdote,  and
which  we  remember  hearing  in  1842,  just  three  years  after  the  publication
of  the  article  in  the  Review.  A  gentleman  who  was  on  intimate  terms  with
Dr.  Forbes,  and  who  resided  in  the  country,  commenced  the  investigation
of  mesmerism,  and  after  convincing  himself  of  the  truth  of  the  science,  wrote
to  Dr.  Forbes  to  inform  him  of  the  fact,  and  to  offer  to  exhibit  to  him  several
cases.  For  this  purpose  he  offered  to  take  him,  if  he  could  spare  the  time,
to  three  separate  towns,  to  witness  the  experiments  of  three  different  mes-
merisers.  Two  letters  were  wrttten  in  a  fortnight ,  but  no  answer  was  received.
The  priests  would  not  look  through  Galileo’s  telescope  lest  they  should  see
the  moons  of  Jupiter  ! !


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.  2 77

“  To  devote  an  article  to  the  consideration  of  animal  magnetism,
now  that  the  English  practitioners  are  one  and  all  ashamed  of  its
name ,  would  be  a  work  of  supererogation,  if  the  delusion,  unabashed,
were  not  yet  parading  itself  over  some  parts  of  the  continent;  (!) —
and  if  its  return  to  these  shores,  and  to  our  own  hospitals  and  colleges,
at  any  future  period,  were  quite  out  of  the  question.  But  if  we  can
quicken  its  decline  where  it  now  reigns  in  the  hearts  of  nervous  pro¬
selytes  and  dreaming  physicians ,  or,  can  assist  in  forming  a  barrier
against  a  probable  revisitation  of  it,  we  shall  not  think  the  otherwise
more  than  due  attention  we  have  given  to  the  wild  productions  which
treat  of  it,  entirely  thrown  away.”

“  The  cool  effrontery  and  undoubted  skill  of  some  of  the  mag-
netizers,  and  the  bonhomie  of  others;  the  subjugation  of  the  bodies
and  souls  of  the  magnetized;  the  puzzled  attitude  of  learned  societies;
the  vain  authority  of  the  police ,  and  the  gradual  dissipation  of  the
whole  subject  again  and  again  from  the  public  mind,  magnetizers  and
magnetizees  disappearing  like  the  actors  in  a  play,  are  of  a  nature
highly  to  amuse ,  and  not  a  little  to  instruct,  all  those  who  love  to  re¬
gard  human  beings  (who  advance  high  claims  to  the  profession  of
reason),  in  various  points  of  view.”

“We  need  not  we  presume,  dwell  on  the  experiments  by  which
Mr.  Wakley  proved  (!)  that  the  pretended  magnetic  phenomena  ob¬
served  in  the  Okeys  were  developed  by  these  girls  at  will,  or  at  any
rate  were  not  the  result  of  any  mesmeric  influence  or  agent,  but  oc¬
curred  as  well  without  as  with  the  manipulations  which  are  supposed
to  communicate  the  latter.”

Such  was  Dr.  Forbes  in  1839  ! — such  is  Dr.  Forbes  in  1844!
Hail !  prophet  and  physician  of  the  19th  century  !  You
thought  that,  by  means  of  the  power  you  possessed  in  your
editorial  capacity,  you  could  arrest  the  progress  of  science  and
bury  in  oblivion  the  exertions  of  a  medical  brother,  one,  to
whom  you  are  indebted  for  many  of  the  appliances  you  are
daily  and  hourly  using.  You  fancied  that  the  separate  pub¬
lication  at  a  low  rate*  of  your  “  melancholy  explosion ”  would
enlighten  the  public  on  this  interesting  question,  and  thus
proclaim  to  all  who  could  read  that  u  the  dreaming  physician”
was  in  his  dotage.  You  knew  that  you  did  not  possess  the
qualifications  to  enable  you  to  give  the  necessary  information
— you  knew  that  you  were  afraid  to  witness  an  experiment,
and  yet  you  dared  to  prostitute  the  little  power  you  possessed,
and  to  publish  to  the  world  that  you,  the  editor  of  the  leading
medical  journal,  denounced  mesmeric  investigations,  and
considered  the  experiments  at  University  College  “  diverting
but  degrading  scenes  ”  Can  we  add  anything  to  paint  in  col¬
ours  of  a  deeper  dye  our  detestation  of  such  a  course  of  con¬
duct?  We  could  enlarge  on  the  moral  qualifications  which


*  It  was  published  in  a  separate  form,  price  bd.


278


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


we  consider  essential  for  the  individual  who  occupies  the  edi¬
torial  chair,  and  we  could  then,  from  the  evidence  before  us,
indicate  how  very  seriously  Dr.  Forbes  has  departed  from
such  a  standard.  We  must,  however,  leave  our  readers  to
form  their  own  conclusions,  and  hasten  to  the  consideration
of  the  great  exertions  of  another  physician  in  the  cause  of
truth.

Dr.  J.  Johnson  is  the  editor  of  the  Medico- Chirurgical
Review.  It  is  a  quarterly  journal  and  ranks  next  in  import¬
ance.  Dr.  Johnson  has  rendered  himself  somewhat  notorious,
having  declared  on  the  22nd  day  of  November,  1842,  that  in
the  examination  of  mesmeric  experiments  “  he  would  not  be¬
lieve  the  evidence  of  his  own  senses .”  Beattie,  in  his  essay  On
the  pursuit  of  Truth  saj^s,  “  A  human  creature  born  with  a
propensity  to  disbelieve  his  own  senses,  would  be  as  helpless
as  if  he  wanted  them.  After  ages  of  being  he  would  remain
as  destitute  of  knowledge  and  experience  as  when  he  began
to  be.”  Unhappy  Dr.  Johnson  !  You  are  truly  in  a  lamenta¬
ble  position.  Perhaps  our  readers  will  agree  with  us^  that  in
the  consideration  of  mesmeric  experiments,  it  is  a  matter  of
very  little  importance  what  opinions  Dr.  Johnson  entertains.
However,  we  are  anxious  to  preserve  a  few  of  the  elegant
selections  from  this  journal.

“A  marriage  extraordinary  has  lately  taken  place  between
phrenology  and  mesmerism,  to  the  great  scandal  and  indignation  of
the  rational  and  sober  advocates  of  the  former  science.  If  mother
Mesmer  prove  as  prolific  of  her  after-birth  as  she  has  been  in  this
her  first  litter,  we  shall  soon  have  such  a  swarm  of  hybrid  monsters
as  would  have  frightened  Deucalion  and  Pyrrha  out  of  their  seven
senses.

Terruit  Gentes  grave  ne  rediret
Saeculurn  Pyrrha},  Nova  Monstra.

We  shall  exhibit  one  or  two  specimens  of  the  unhallowed  brood
which  this  unnatural  alliance  has  already  given  birth  to.  The  pro¬
fession  may  well  be  characterized  as  in  a  state  of  anarchy,  or  rather
insanity,  when  such  examples  of  mental  obliquity,  infantile  credulity,
and  astounding  self-delusion  are  exhibited  to  the  world !”

“  The  mesmero-mania  has  nearly  dwindled,  in  the  metropolis,
into  anile  fatuity  ;  but  lingers  in  some  of  the  provinces,  with  the
gobe-mouches  and  chaw-bacons,  who,  after  gulping  down  a  pound  of
fat  pork,  would,  with  well-greased  gullets,  swallow  such  a  lot  of
mesmeric  mummery  as  would  choke  an  alligator  ora  boa  constrictor .”

“  Mesmerists  may  now  appeal  to  the  gobe-mouches  of  the  public;
but  they  will  not  soon  try  their  mountebank  tricks  again  before  the
profession  !”

With  regard  to  the  amputation  in  the  hospital  at  Wellow,
Dr.  Johnson  says, —


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


279


“  He  was  mesmerised  daily — and  perhaps  *  something  more,9
with  improvement  of  general  health.  Here  we  ask  the  barrister  and
his  dupes,  why  he  did  not  cure  the  disease  of  the  knee-joint  ?  Was
it  more  difficult  to  anchylose  that  said  joint,  than  to  change  an
umbilicus  into  an  eye,  or  an  olecranum  into  an  ear  ?  But  the  mes-
merisers  well  knew  it  was  far  easier  to  induce  a  peasant  to  feign  a
sleep ,  than  to  feign  the  cure  of  a  disease  whose  existence  would  still
be  potent  to  the  world.  They  therefore  determined  to  operate 99

“  When  such  transcendental  absurdities  are  published  as  proofs
of  mesmeric  truths,  we  give  up  all  argument  in  despair.  We  might
as  well  expostulate  with  the  waves  that  chafe  upon  the  solid  rocks
or  idle  sands.”

“  The  Zoist  is  ornamented  with  a  neat  vignette  representing  a
venerable  man,  intended  no  doubt  for  Dr.  Elliotson,  poring  over  a
volume  opened  on  his  knee,  while  two  females  of  prepossessing  mien,
but  remarkably  loose  habits,  support  the  Doctor  upon  either  side,
and  compose  a  striking  and  interesting  group.  The  ladies,  of  course,
are  the  Okeys,  and  though  we  are  aware  that  such  gifted  individuals
are  far  above  what  are  vulgarly  considered  the  decencies  of  life,  yet
we  would  venture,  with  great  diffidence,  to  hint  that  their  petticoats
are  rather  scant.”

“  We  laugh  at  the  folly,  we  pity  the  madness  of  the  mesmerists.
Many  of  them  are  neither  better  nor  worse  than  arrant  charlatans —
more  are  weak  dupes  of  knaves  or  of  themselves — and  a  few  are  sin¬
cere,  high-principled  fanatics ,  led  away  by  a  love  of  the  extravagant
and  marvellous,  and  trying  very  earnestly,  but  with  small  success
to  hold  the  eel  of  philosophy  by  the  tail.”

“  For  our  parts,  we  view  mesmerism  as  a  ludicrous,  if  not  a
mischievous  delusion ,  and  without  regard  to  persons,  it  should  be
laughed  at  and  put  down99

Here  then,  is  another  editor  of  a  quarterly  journal  not
only  denouncing  our  science,  but  using  the  most  vulgar  and
insulting  language, — advancing  the  most  disgraceful  and
ungentlemanly  insinuations  and  statements,  and  declaring
that  mesmerism  “  should  be  laughed  at  and  put  down.”  Laugh
on  Dr.  Johnson.  But  we  pray  you  after  you  have  enjoyed
your  laugh  to  take  into  your  consideration  the  propriety  of
furnishing  us  in  a  future  number  of  your  journal,  with  a
few  of  your  experiments  and  anti-mesmeric  facts ;  these
would  be  far  more  acceptable  to  us  and  to  the  members  of
your  own  profession.  It  is  truly  laughable  to  witness  the
consternation — the  evasions — and  the  ignorance  and  selfish¬
ness  displayed  by  these  “  antiques.”  One  old  medical  gen¬
tleman,  Dr.  Johnson  to  wit,  is  for  laughing  natural  facts  out
of  existence!  What  a  funny  fellow  this  Dr.  Johnson  is.
Another  recommends  every  body  to  avoid  the  company  of
mesmerists, — another  calls  on  Government  to  interfere  by


280


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


the  imposition  of  pains  and  penalties,* — another  becomes
suddenly  pugnacious,  and  declares  that  the  flexor  and  ex¬
tensor  muscles  of  his  leg  shall  supersede  all  argument,-)* * § —
another  finding  argument  useless  comes  to  the  charitable
conclusion  that  a  learned  physician  is  mad,J — another  cannot
afford  to  lose  time  by  witnessing  mesmeric  experiments, § —
another  is  so  outrageously  in  love  with  his  own  opinions,
that  he  refuses  to  be  enlightened,  and  actually  will  not
accept  a  work  on  mesmerism,  which  was  presented  to  him,|| —
another  under  the  influence  of  secretiveness  and  caution,
stipulates  that  his  name  shall  not  be  mentioned  when  he
arrives  to  witness  experiments,^ — another  when  hard  pushed
by  his  patients,  refuses  to  converse  on  the  subject,  and  de¬
clares  the  whole  affair  to  be  “ nonsense  and  humbug  ;”**  and  so
we  might  go  on  enumerating  all  the  absurdities  uttered  by
these  medical  worthies,  till  we  had  filled  sheet  after  sheet  of
our  journal,  and  still  our  collection  would  not  be  exhausted.
Some  busy  themselves  by  visiting  the  friends  of  patients
who  are  under  mesmeric  treatment,  abusing  the  mesmeriser
and  insulting  the  patient, ft — others  resort  to  the  shop  of  our
publisher,  and  in  the  most  feeling  manner  ask  whether  “  The

*  Mr.  Turner,  of  Manchester,  says,  “  We  ought  to  demand  at  once  that
Government  interfere  most  imperiously  to  protect  the  morals  of  the  people,
by  putting  an  instrument  of  such  weight  and  power  within  proper  hands
only  to  execute  it.”  “  I  would  have  the  legislative  measure  without  wait¬
ing  for  any  investigation  into  the  extravagancies  of  mesmerism.”

t  Dr.  Watson,  of  London,  told  Dr.  Ashburner,  that  if  a  man  proposed
to  him  to  mesmerise  his  daughter,  he  would  kick  him  out  of  his  house.

J  Dr.  Chambers,  to  wit.  We  remember  hearing  Dr.  Elliotson  say  that  this
same  Dr.  Chambers  said  in  his  hearing  some  years  ago,  that  quinine  would
be  forgotten  in  twelve  months!  A  Mr.  Powel  was  requested  to  meet  Dr.
Elliotson  in  consultation  ;  he  said,  “  Do  you  mean  the  man  about  whom  and
some  girl  there  was  a  disturbance  in  University  College  Hospital  ?”  A
Mr.  Peregrine  under  similar  circumstances,  said,  “  Do  you  mean  that
gentleman  who  is  touched  in  the  head?”  at  the  same  time  tapping  his
forehead.

§  Sir  James  Clark  says  he  cannot  afford  time  to  go  and  see  mesmeric
experiments.  Query?  Would  Sir  J.  Clarke  afford  time  to  receive  a  few
more  fees  ?

||  Mr.  Bulteel,  son-in-law  of  Lord  Gray,  sent  a  pamphlet  on  mesmerism
to  Dr.  Budd  of  Plymouth.  He  returned  it  unopened.  This  gentleman
boasted  lately,  that  he  would  have  done  the  same  if  Dr.  Elliotson  had  sent
him  a  pamphlet.

IF  Dr.  Willis,  of  London,  consented  to  go  and  see  cases,  provided  his
name  was  not  mentioned.

Dr.  Sharpey  said  he  would  not  go  to  see  the  experiments  at  University
College,  lest  he  should  be  thought  to  believe  in  them.

**  Dr.  Pareira  said  last  week  that  mesmerism  was  “  all  humbug .”  Yet
this  same  gentleman,  a  month  ago,  requested  Dr.  Elliotson  to  shew  him
some  cases,  because  Dr.  Billing  had  informed  him  they  were  so  wonderful.
Dr.  Holland  tells  his  patients  that  it  is  “  all  humbug  and  nonsejise.”

ft  This  course  has  been  pursued  to  a  great  extent  in  all  quarters.  At
Northampton,  more  than  one  medical  man  have  been  notoriously  active.


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


281


Zoist  is  still  in  existence  ?” — some  state  that  Dr.  Elliotson
“  has  been  gulled  ” — others  that  he  knows  it  is  all  nonsense,
but  that  he  is  ashamed  to  confess  it,  and  therefore  carries  on
the  deception  :*  but  we  will  not  extend  our  list.  We  are
quite  sure  that  our  readers  will  laugh  as  heartily  as  Dr.
Johnson,  but  from  a  very  different  cause  and  in  a  very  dif¬
ferent  spirit.  Laugh  we  must, —

“  When  in  the  same  dull  round  we  see  them  creep,

Profoundly  trifling,  profitlessly  deep,

Treading  the  steps  their  sires  before  them  trod,

The  past  their  heaven,  antiquity  their  god, —

Like  mouldering  mammoths,  who  unmoved  have  stood,

Sealed  in  some  muddy  cavern  since  the  flood ;

When  we  see  those,  who  ought  the  lead  to  take,

Strangling  improvement  like  a  pois’nous  snake,

The  grain  rejecting,  to  be  gorged  with  chaff ; —

Shade  of  Democritus !  who  would  not  laugh  ?”

Our  space  will  not  permit  us  to  visit  with  our  wrath  all
the  culprits  we  have  marked  for  castigation.  There  is  one,
however,  who  stands  forth  in  choice  array,  Mr.  Estlin  of
Bristol.  He  has  ventured  to  lecture  his  medical  brethren,
and  to  caution  them  regarding  the  dangers  of  mesmeric
investigations.  At  a  meeting  of  the  Provincial  Medical  and
Surgical  Association,  this  gentleman  read  a  paper,  entitled
“An  Address  on  Mesmerism.”  It  excited  some  attention
and  has  been  frequently  quoted.  The  following  specimens
will  shew  its  character,  and  the  qualifications  of  the  author.

“  Yet  when  I  see  a  man  of  Dr.  Elliotson’ s  powerful  mind,  among
other  extraordinary  admissions,  declaring  ‘  that  he  had  witnessed
vision  when  the  eyes  were  indisputably  bandaged,  so  that  the  pa¬
tients,  in  their  ordinary  state,  could  not  have  discerned  the  faintest
glimmer  of  light,’  and  reproaching  his  brethren  for  not  investigating
into  the  truth  of  these  asserted  facts, — I  am  compelled  to  regard
his  late  production  as  a  moral  phenomenon,  alike  puzzling  one’s  me¬
taphysics,  and  perplexing  common  sense.”

“  In  reference  to  the  power  of  the  operator  to  attract  the  mes¬
merized  party  towards  him,  while  the  latter  is  unconscious  of  his
being  near,  or  of  his  desiring  to  produce  such  an  effect, — the  com¬
munity  of  sensation ,  by  which  the  sensations  of  the  operator,  even
those  of  taste ,  are  communicated  to  the  patient, — the  power  of  de¬
tecting  diseases  by  the  hand,  together  with  what  is  fantastically
termed  phreno-mesmerism,  or  ‘the  higher  phenomena*  of  animal
magnetism, — I  can  but  express  my  entire  disbelief  in  them.”

“  When  I  perceive  that  to  buoy  up  the  failing  interest  of  the
public  in  mesmerism,  it  is  now  conjoined  with  phrenology — a  union,
I  presume,  not  consented  to  by  those  who  believe  in  phrenology,  and

*  Dr.  Jones,  of  Chester,  said  that  Dr.  Elliotson  “had  been  gulled  and
would  go  down  fast.”  An  itinerant  lecturer  of  the  name  of  Rumball,  also
a  medical  man,  is  at  present  engaged  in  propagating  these  slanders.


282


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


one  which  to  those  who  with  myself  think  'phrenology  has  still  less
foundation  than  mesmerism,  renders  both  the  so-called  sciences  more
absurd.”

“No  medical  man  could  employ  himself  in  the  investigation  of
mesmerism,  without  lowering  himself  (and  as  I  think  deservedly)  in
public  estimation.”

“  A  writer  laments  over  the  hard  fate  of  a  physician  who  had
tried  mesmerism  on  his  patients,  and  would  be  glad  to  try  it  more
frequently,  but  feared  he  was  in  danger  of  losing  caste,  and  losing
practice  by  so  doing :  the  example  appears  to  me  to  be  one  compli¬
mentary  to  the  good  sense  of  the  patients  and  the  public ,  if  not  to
that  of  the  physician .”

“  It  seems  to  me  impossible  for  a  medical  man  to  engage  in  the
practice  of  animal  magnetism  without  resorting  to  expedients,  and
allying  himself  with  persons,  not  altogether  congenial  to  a  refined
taste  and  cultivated  mind.”

We  think  by  this  time  that  Mr.  Estlin  is  ashamed  of  the
paper  he  read  on  the  29th  of  June,  1843;  indeed,  from  a
letter  we  have  lately  perused,  which  he  sent  to  a  medical
mesmerist,  we  are  sure  he  is,  although  he  will  not  own  it.
What  are  we  to  say  to  a  surgeon  and  a  F.L.S.,  who  dared  to
stand  in  the  presence  of  a  large  number  of  his  own  profession
and  to  dictate  to  them  the  observance  of  his  own  weak  pre¬
judices  ?  On  any  other  subject,  so  great  an  insult  offered  to
a  body  of  professed  physiologists,  would  have  placed  the  ag¬
gressor  in  a  very  awkward  and  unenviable  position ;  but  on
this,  medical  men  have  been  so  accustomed  to  look  through  .
a  distorted  medium,  that  they  absolutely  listened  to  and  ap¬
plauded  what  they  ought  to  have  exposed  and  ridiculed.  We
can  see  nothing  so  very  “  puzzling”  in  a  physician  advancing
his  opinions  regarding  a  natural  fact, — nor  anything  so  very
“  perplexing  to  common  sense”  in  his  calling  on  his  medical
brethren  to  investigate  it ;  on  the  contrary,  we  consider  it  a
very  humiliating  fact  that  a  gentleman  should  be  found  capa¬
ble  of  contradicting  the  statements  of  others,  without  ad¬
vancing  counter  experiments  and  observations,  but  merely
asserting,  “  this  I  believe  to  be  an  unfounded  assumption,”
and  as  regards  these,  “  I  can  but  express  my  entire  disbelief
in  them.”  What  rational  being  cares  for  your  opinion,  Mr.
Estlin,  when  your  own  words  demonstrate  that  you  are  not
practically  acquainted  with  the  science  you  are  denouncing  ?
How  different  should  be  your  course  !  Investigate  for  two  or
three  months  by  means  of  careful  experiments  carried  on  by
yourself,  and  then,  possibly,  you  may  be  in  a  position  to  en¬
lighten  your  medical  brethren.  But  you  say  that  you  have
not  time,  and  you  tell  your  brethren  that  you  think  they
might  be  much  better  employed.  You  say  that  the  course


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


283


we  suggest  cannot  be  followed  out  by  any  medical  man,
“  without  lowering  himself,  and  deservedly,  in  public  estima¬
tion ”  What !  do  you  recommend  all  men  to  follow  your
dishonest  course — to  abuse  what  they  do  not  understand,  and
will  not  investigate — to  leave,  coward-like,  the  study  of  a
branch  of  their  own  profession,  because,  forsooth,  a  few  ig¬
norant  and  deluded  men  raised  a  popular  yell  against  the
philosopher  who  was  advancing  science,  and  teaching  our
medical  youth  new  and  important  methods  of  cure  ?*  Proh  !
pudor  !  Mr.  Estlin.  If  we  were  to  take  you  as  the  medical
moralist  of  the  year  1843,  sad  indeed  would  be  our  hopes  for
progressive  improvement.  You  boldly  told  your  auditors  that
they  were  to  consider  the  loaves  and  fishes — truth  being  quite
a  secondary  consideration.  You  would,  then,  fig-leaf  truth
for  the  sake  of  a  few  paltry  guineas,  and  accordingly  we  will
place  you  by  the  side  of  the  other  professor  of  mammonism,
Mr.  Quain  of  University  College,  who  said,  “  We  must  consider
our  pecuniary  interests,  whether  we  can  afford  to  be  martyred
We  consider  Mr.  Quain  and  Mr.  Estlin  types  of  one  class  of
medical  neglecters  of  mesmerism.  How  miserable  and  de¬
grading  the  position  they  occupy !  Professors  of  a  liberal
art,  who  ought  to  lead  the  opinions  of  their  patients  on  scien¬
tific  questions,  succumbing  to  their  prejudices,  and  by  their
silence  tacitly  confirming  error, — pretended  cultivators  of
physiology,  shutting  their  eyes  in  wilful  blindness  to  the
most  rare  and  surpassing  phenomena  ever  developed  within
the  domain  of  science, — practitioners  of  the  art  of  healing,
neglecting  the  employment  of  a  new  remedial  means  of
proved  and  vast  efficacy,  thus  abusing  the  confidence  re¬
posed  in  them,  and  sacrificing  their  duty  to  suffering  human-

*  Mr.  Liston,  in  1839,  went  about  asking  whether  Dr.  Elliotson  had
not  disappeared  ?  He  told  Dr.  Wilson  that  the  Okeys  were  trained.  And

to  another  he  said  that  a  person  would  go  to  sleep  if  you - in  his

face.  We  leave  the  filling  up  of  this  small  blank  to  those  who  are  acquainted
with  this  gentleman’s  elegant  phraseology;  for  our  own  part,  we  cannot
help  them  by  even  placing  the  first  and  last  letters.

He  said  that  he  would  resign  his  professorship  “if  that  tom-fool  (Dr.
Elliotson)  returned  to  the  hospital.”

Dr.  A.  T.  Thompson  said,  “  Thank  God  we  have  got  rid  of  him.”  He
boasted  to  his  class,  that  although  mesmeric  cases  were  to  be  seen  in  the
same  ward  with  his  own  patients,  he  had  never  looked  at  one  of  them.  We
remember  that  this  professor  was  hissed  by  his  students,  for  speaking  ill  of
Dr.  Elliotson  after  he  had  resigned.

He  was  in  the  habit  of  calling  all  kinds  of  impositions  “  Okeyism,”  and
his  nephew  wrote  on  a  card  at  the  head  of  a  patient’s  bed,  whose  case  was
not  clearly  understood,  and  therefore  supposed  to  be  feigned  “Okeyism!”

Dr  Tweedie  said  to  a  patient  who  wished  to  see  Dr.  Elliotson,  “Oh,
we  must  not  have  him,  he  is  a  lost  man,  sir,  a  lost  man  ;  he  was  a  very
clever  man  once  !”  And  on  another  occasion  did  his  best,  on  the  same
ground,  to  orevent  Dr.  Elliotson  from  being  called  in.


284


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


ity  at  the  shrine  of  a  pitiful  expediency.  This  may  be  what
the  world  terms  prudence,  but  it  testifies  to  us  of  a  lamenta¬
ble  lack  of  principle .  When  a  large  bulk  of  society  are  not
conscientious  in  the  advocacy  of  truth,  the  standard  of  mo¬
rality  is  low,  if,  indeed,  the  term  morality  can  be  at  all  applied
to  a  code  of  conventionalism  which  identifies  respectability
with  “  being  well  to  do  in  the  world,”  and  dignifies  with  the
name  of  prudence  the  exaltation  of  self-interest  over  every
other  consideration  provided  no  written  law  be  infringed.
The  world  looks  on  without  reproof  whilst  a  man  barters  his
political  principles,  and  votes  for  the  prospect  of  personal
advantage* — a  more  debased  and  degrading  act  in  our  eyes
than  taking  a  purse  in  the  highways, — well  then  may  its  low
morality  wink  at  those  who  prefer  silence  and  their  fees,  to
the  advocacy  of  a  much-abused  science,  with  the  risk  of  their
loss.

We  have  quoted  enough  of  Mr.  Estlin’s  paper,  and  said
enough  regarding  his  conduct  to  indicate  the  estimation  in
which  we  hold  him  and  all  who  act  on  similar  principles.
This  paper  was  published  in  the  Provincial  Medical  and  Sur¬
gical  Journal.  It  was  very  acceptable  to  the  editor,  as  the
following  quotations  will  prove.

“  Far  be  it  from  our  purpose  to  attempt  the  renewal  of  any  dis¬
cussions  on  the  presumed  merits  of  mesmerism,  or  the  reputation
of  mesmerisers;  with  the  science  itself  her  disciples  have  also  fallen,
and  we  see  both  it  and  them  placed  in  the  same  group  of  absurdity
and  imposture/’

“  On  every  occasion  that  the  alleged  phenomena  of  animal  mag¬
netism  have  been  carefully  examined  and  tested  by  scientific  men,
they  have  been  proved  to  be  delusions' ’

“  The  subject  of  phreno-mesmerism,  *  in  which  the  mesmeriser
professes  to  be  able  to  direct  the  patient’s  train  of  thought,  by  simply
pointing  with  his  fingers  to  the  several  organs,  in  such  a  manner
that  the  patient  is  not  conscious  which  is  the  one  to  be  excited,’  is
a  matter  of  still  more  serious  import,  and  the  claim  which  it  makes
to  a  mental — an  unconscious  mental  influence — savours  as  much  of
impiety ’  as  the  ordinary  manifestations  of  mesmerism  do  of  folly."

“The  pretensions  of  mesmerism,  if  put  into  plain  language,
amount  to  this,  that  one  person  shall  be  able  at  will  to  assume  a
power  over  another,  by  the  agency  of  which  all  individuality  is  for
the  time  destroyed,  and  the  physical  and  moral  faculties  of  the
person  acted  upon,  placed  completely  and  irresistibly  at  the  disposal
of  a  fellow-mortal,  who  may  use  them  as  he  pleases,  and  did  the
power  really  exist,  would  often  pervert  them  to  the  worst  of
purposes.”

*  Dr.  Roots,  a  tory,  declared  that  he  thought  he  should  vote  for  Mr.
Wakley,  a  radical,  at  the  Finsbury  election,  because  “he  had  exposed
the  Okeys  and  Dr.  Elliotson.”


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


285


“  The  subject  then  becomes  too  serious,  and  it  is  time  that  the
delusion  should  be  so  exposed  that  the  public  mind  may  be  set  at
rest,  and  the  ignorant  and  unwary  no  longer  led  astray.”

The  last  three  paragraphs  we  extract  from  the  number  of
the  journal  for  June  12th,  1844.  We  have  looked  in  vain
for  any  exposure  of  the  delusion.  Experiments  which  every¬
body  is  enabled  to  perform,  and  which  hundreds  are  perform¬
ing  every  day  in  all  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom,  are  said
“  to  savour  of  impiety  .”  We  congratulate  ourselves  that  we
do  not  live  in  danger  of  a  roast  at  Smithfield.  Dr.  Streeten,
you  are  the  author  of  this  silly  article,  and  you  really  must
be  a  bigot  of  the  most  exalted  order.  But  you  must  not
claim  originality,  because  the  Kev.  Hugh  M'Neile  presented
you  with  this  idea.  He  said  it  was  impious  in  the  extreme
to  investigate  mesmerism,  albeit  he  had  never  seen  an  expe¬
riment,  “  neither  would  he  tempt  Almighty  God  by  going  to
look  at  one.”  We  shall  look  into  the  future  numbers  of  the
journal  in  question,  for  the  express  pleasure  of  perusing  other
specimens  of  the  thoughts  and  opinions  of  Dr.  Streeten,  the
holy  and  orthodox  physician  of  Worcester.

Dr.  Carpenter,  of  Bristol,  has  lately  published  two  let¬
ters  in  the  Medical  Times ,  bearing  the  signature  of  “In¬
quirer.”  These  contain  some  excellent  observations,  but
their  force  is  lost  because  Dr.  C.  has  written  anonymously.
They  appeared  first  in  the  Bristol  Mercury,  and  if  the  signa¬
ture  had  proclaimed  that  Dr.  C.  was  their  author,  we  think
that  they  would  have  prevented  a  great  deal  of  the  opposition
indulged  in  by  his  medical  brethren  in  that  city.

We  must  not  omit  to  record  the  fact,  that  the  Medical
Times  is  the  only  medical  journal  which  has  advocated  our
cause.  On  several  occasions  articles  have  appeared,  written
in  a  very  philosophic  and  candid  strain,  and  they  stand  forth
in  strong  opposing  contrast  to  the  absurdities  of  Drs.  Forbes,
Johnson,  and  Streeten.  If  we  could  spare  the  room,  we
should  like  to  extract  several  passages,  but  we  must  content
ourselves  by  inserting  the  last  paragraph  of  a  leading  article,
published  July  22nd,  1843.

“  To  our  medical  brethren  we  say  then,  on  mesmerism,  as  on
every  novelty  in  science,  let  us  doubt  till  we  know, — let  us  nurse
suspense  of  judgment  till  enquiry  remove  it.  It  is  only  by  acting
thus,  that  medical  men  can  be  worthy  of  their  profession,  or  main¬
tain  its  respect  in  the  eyes  of  discerning  and  unprejudiced  society, —
or  that  any  generation  of  us  can  pass  into  the  tomb  without  being
eternally  stained ,  like  those  who ,  preceding  us,  witnessed  and  op¬
posed  the  innovations  of  a  Harvey,  a  Jenner,  a  Hunter,  and  so
many  other  ‘  marvel-mongers.’  ”


286


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


In  the  Phrenological  Journal  for  January,  1844,  there  is
a  review  of  Mr.  Lang's  work  on  mesmerism.  We  know  that
the  article  was  written  by  a  medical  man,  or  we  should  have
permitted  it  to  pass  unnoticed.  Mr.  Lang,  referring  to  the
conduct  of  medical  opponents,  denounces  the  system  of  per¬
secution  which  has  been  adopted,  at  which  the  reviewer  is
very  much  displeased.

“  Dr.  Elliotson  has  surely  been  persecuted  by  his  medical  breth¬
ren  for  espousing  mesmerism!  If,  as  one  author  states,  the  doctor
lost  a  great  part  of  his  practice  in  London,  is  the  medical  profession
to  blame  for  this  ?  It  surely  shews  that  the  public  at  large  had
something  to  do  with  the  persecution,  when  they  withdrew  their
patronage  from  him.  The  truth  probably  is,  that  even  mesmerism
was  only  indirectly  the  cause  of  the  diminution  in  his  practice,  if
such  really  took  place.  From  paying  so  much  attention  to  phreno¬
logy  and  mesmerism,  he  could  not,  it  may  have  been  inferred,  at¬
tend  closely  to  his  professional  duties.  Practice  would  soon  be
found  to  decline  by  any  medical  man  who  should  direct  his  attention
almost  exclusively  to  one  subject,  whatever  that  subject  might  happen
to  be.

“We  were  not  a  little  amused  on  reading  Mr.  Lang’s  defence  of
the  genuineness  of  the  manifestations  given  by  the  young  girls,
Okey — the  first  mesmeric  patients  Dr.  Elliotson  exhibited  in  London
several  years  ago.  It  seems  some  one  had  the  audacity  to  state  that
these  girls  were  impostors;  a  fact,  we  may  remark,  proved  to  de¬
monstration,  if  ever  there  was  any  individual  fact  proved  in  this
world,  and  known  to  have  been  so  by  every  impartial  man  acquainted
with  the  particulars.  But  our  champion  of  mesmerism  and  of  Dr.
Elliotson  says  no;  and  gives  proof  of  it.  ‘Listen,’  he  says,  ‘to
what  Dr.  E.  states  in  his  Numerous  Cases,  published  in  1843;’  and
then  follows  a  quotation  from  the  doctor,  finishing  with — *  every
thing  stated  or  ever  printed  to  their  disadvantage,  was  an  absolute
falsehood;  I  repeat  these  words  emphatically,  an  absolute  falsehood .*
Verily,  Mr.  Lang  is  no  lawyer,  if  he  supposes  that  Dr.  Elliotson
will  be  taken  by  the  public  as  a  witness  in  his  own  cause.  Did  any
one  ever  expect,  after  the  scenes  exhibited,  and  the  discoveries  de¬
tailed  in  the  Lancet  respecting  these  girls,  that  Dr.  E.  would  ever
admit  the  imposition,  and  confess  that  he  was  himself  deceived  ?
Our  author  evidently  knows  nothing  of  the  circumstances,  except
through  the  medium  of  Dr.  E.  himself,  otherwise  he  would  be
aware  that  the  doctor’s  evidence  on  the  subject  is  not  worth  a  straw.
That  Dr.  E.  himself  is  firmly  convinced  of  the  sincerity  of  these
girls,  is  a  circumstance  of  no  weight  with  those  who  think  them¬
selves  as  able  to  estimate  the  value  of  evidence  as  he;  and  who,  at
all  events,  are  more  likely  to  form  an  unbiassed  judgment  on  the
question.”

This  was  written  by  Dr.  Weir  of  Glasgow !  We  do  not
think  that  we  could  close  this  paper  more  appropriately  than  by


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


287


making  this  selection.  The  whole  article  is  written  in  the  same
strain.  We  regret  that  the  editor  of  our  northern  contemporary-
should  have  inserted  such  a  production.  A  regard  for  com¬
mon  decency  should  have  suggested  the  propriety  of  expung¬
ing  the  offensive  parts,  and  thus  teaching  Dr.  Weir  a  little
caution  when  speaking  of  a  member  of  his  own  profession.
The  profession  not  the  cause  of  Dr.  Elliotson's  losing  a  por¬
tion  of  his  practice  !  We  think  that  our  Journal  furnishes
sufficient  evidence  now  to  contradict  this  statement.  Did  not
a  professor  threaten  to  resign  his  chair?  Was  there  not  a
cry  raised  by  medical  men  from  one  end  of  the  kingdom  to
the  other  ?  Humbug  and  nonsense,  imposition  and  decep¬
tion, — were  not  these  the  words  paraded  in  the  medical  jour¬
nals  ?  Did  not  one  editor  call  upon  medical  men  not  to  meet
Dr.  Elliotson  in  consultation  ?  And  did  not  the  poor,  deluded,
slavish  creatures  act  upon  the  recommendation?  Were  not
hundreds  of  them  afraid  to  mention  his  name  ?  Did  they
not  say  he  was  mad  ?  Were  not  the  grossest  slanders  pro¬
mulgated  ?  Did  not  the  medical  societies  send  forth  their
anathemas  ?  Were  not  medical  pupils  taught  within  the  walls
of  the  liberal  university,  to  consider  him  a  visionary,  an  en¬
thusiast,  an  impostor,  a  fool,  and  a  quack  ?  And  have  not
you.  Dr.  Weir,  declared  that  his  patients  were  impostors,
and  that  he  would  not  confess  that  he  had  been  deceived  ?

The  result  of  all  this  horrible  conduct  was  soon  apparent.
Dr.  E.  says, — “I  was  all  at  once  considered  destitute  of  all
my  previous  knowledge  and  skill,  incapable  of  observation
and  investigation,  and  unworthy  of  practice ;  and  I  am  now
some  .£10,000  less  rich  than  I  should  have  been.”  Innocent
Dr.  Weir  !  The  medical  profession  is  not  to  blame  for  this  !
We  tell  you  that  the  medical  profession  were  the  sole  cause
of  what  every  honest  and  upright  man  must  deplore.  The
people  were  led  on  by  the  medical  men.  They  displayed  their
animalism,  and  the  million  copied  the  proceedings  of  their
masters.  Why  every  lecture  delivered  on  the  subject  through¬
out  the  country  was  interrupted  by  “  the  medical  chartists ,”
who  appealed  to  the  ignorance  and  prejudices  of  the  auditory,
and  denounced  the  science  as  unworthy  of  a  moment's  con¬
sideration  ;  forgetting  all  candour  and  all  decency,  and  by
their  hootings  and  yellings  converting  the  “Halls  of  Science”
into  temporary  menageries.  Verily  !  Dr.  Weir,  your  breth¬
ren  are  now  reaping  their  reward ;  and  if  you  have  a  particle
of  honesty  or  manliness  remaining,  declare  forthwith  the
injustice  of  your  remarks,  and  wipe  away  some  of  the  disgrace
which  is  now  attached  to  you.

We  cannot  avoid  suspecting  that  in  many  instances  the
vot.  ii.  u


288


Medical  Journals  and  Medical  Men.


key  to  mucli  of  the  un gentlemanlike  and  insulting  charge  of
imposture  and  deception,  when  everything  in  the  character
of  the  operators  and  the  conduct  of  the  experiments  belied
such  imputations,  may  be  found  in  the  old  proverb,  “  measure
your  neighbour's  corn  by  your  own  peck," — for  the  dishonest
will  ever  be  the  most  suspicious,  and  the  man  most  capable
of  practising  fraud  most  disposed  to  suspect  it,  without  reason,
in  others.  And  we  fear  not  a  few  medical  men  in  London
have  laboured  hard  to  oppose  mesmerism,  as  the  climax  of
absurdity,  with  the  view  of  injuring  a  professional  rival,  with
whose  name  it  was  identified,  and  whose  well-founded  repu¬
tation  they  were  hopeless  by  more  legitimate  means  to  impair.
The  condition  of  these  envious  mortals  is  really  to  be  pitied ;
for  under  the  expenditure  of  a  whole  armoury  of  coarse
ribaldry — insufferable  twaddle,  and  wholesale  mis-statements,
— the  object  of  their  attacks  has  flourished  apace,  and  gradu¬
ally  attained  a  position  and  importance  it  never  before  enjoyed.

And  now  medical  men  and  medical  journalists  !  Do  you
think  posterity  will  say  that  the  conduct  of  your  party  has
added  to  the  laurels  of  the  profession  ?  Could  the  coroner,
if  he  were  to  pack  a  jury,  obtain  a  favourable  verdict  ?

We  have  lately  met  with  the  following  : —

“Mr.  Wakley,  jun.,  attended  with  the  announced  design  of
repeating  his  father’s  achievement  of  crushing  mesmerism.  He
came  ready  equipped  with  a  resolution,  declaring  in  advance  the
whole  thing  “humbug,"  &c.;  but  when,  after  the  experiments,
he  attempted  to  put  it  to  the  meeting,  he  was  met  with  a  shower
of  hisses  that  surprised  if  they  did  not  disconcert  him.  An
unfortunate  allusion  by  him  to  the  Lancet  raised  a  hurricane  of
condemnatory  uproar, — its  very  name  was  met  by  expressions  of  the
strongest  disapprobation.  He  was  completely  silenced." — Medical
Times ,  April  2  7th,  1844.

Alas  !  poor  Mr.  Wakley  !


E.  W.  C.  N.


(  289  )


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents,  with  a  Narrative  of  Cases.  By  George
Sandby,  jun.,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  Flixton,  Suffolk.

It  gives  us  great  delight  to  observe  that  a  large  number,  both  of  clergy¬
men  of  the  Church  of  England  and  dissenting  ministers,  have  put  the  medical
profession  to  shame,  by  acting  the  part  of  sensible  and  honest  men  on  the
subject  of  mesmerism.  We  noticed  with  much  pleasure  the  first  edition  (if
such  it  may  be  regarded)  of  this  work,  when  anonymous,  and  entitled
“  Mesmerism  the  Gift  of  God,”  in  our  first  volume,  p.  217.

The  present  work  contains  almost  300  pages,  and  displays  all  the  excel¬
lent  qualities  we  were  delighted  with  in  the  former.  That  vain  and  pre¬
sumptuous,  silly  and  uninformed  pourer  forth  of  wrnrds,  the  Rev.  Hugh
Me  Neile,  who  has  not  yet  had  the  manliness  to  publicly  retract  what  he
notoriously  said  in  two  sermons  on  one  Sunday,  however  meanly  he  may
attempt  to  have  it  supposed  he  did  not,  receives  such  a  castigation  as  will
make  him  hide  his  face  if  he  has  proper  feelings.  “  To  speak  of  the  boun¬
ties  of  Providence,”  says  Mr.  Sandby,  “  as  the  temptings  of  the  evil  one, —
to  treat  a  blessing  as  if  it  were  a  curse, —  to  condemn  a  benefit  before  it  be
examined,  as  is  the  wont  of  the  religious  opponents  of  mesmerism, — seems
to  me  the  conduct  of  a  thoughtless  unthankful  spirit.”  “  Shame  then  on
Christians  who  can  so  neglect  it.”  The  same  right-mindedness  which  dic¬
tated  these  passages,  called  forth  the  following  defence  of  mesmerism  against
those  uncharitable  pretenders  to  angelic  purity  who  condemn  others  whose
objects  are  the  truths  of  nature  and  the  benefit  of  mankind  : — “  Many  there
are  amongst  them  (the  mesmerists)  whom  no  Christian  community  need
blush  to  own  ;  many,  who  by  faith  and  practice  adorn  the  doctrine  they  pro¬
fess  ;  some  with  whom  I  have  walked  to  the  house  of  God  in  company  :  and
all  of  them,  with  whom  I  am  acquainted ,  are  not  less  deficient  in  that  most  excellent
gift  of  charity,  the  very  bond  of  peace  and  of  all  virtues ,  than  those  of  their  im-
pugners ,  by  whom  the  wanton  cry  is  raised  of  infidelity  and  enthusiasm.”  Would
that  all  teachers  of  religion  were  like  Mr.  Sandby, — firm  and  consci¬
entious  in  the  doctrines  of  the  church  to  which  they  belong,  yet  allowing
all  men  the  right  of  private  judgment  in  all  religious  matters  ;  not  thinking
the  worse  of  any  man  for  his  conscientious  opinions,  but  the  wrorse  of  men
of  all  opinions,  even  at  the  height  of  orthodoxy,  whose  conduct  is  not  marked
by  charity,  and  humility,  and  a  disinterested  desire  of  truth.  The  work  will
do  incalculable  good.

The  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal  for  April.

Thoughts  on  Physical  Education  and  the  true  mode  of  Improving  the
Condition  of  Man.  By  Charles  Caldwell,  M.D.

Six  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  Mesmerism,  delivered  in  the  Marlbro’
Chapel.  By  John  Bovee  Dods,  of  Boston,  U.S.

Dissertation  Historique  et  Scientifique  sur  la  Trinity  Egyptienne,  pr6ced6
d’un  coup-d’oeil  historique  sur  l’histoire,  et  de  documens  pour  servir  k  l’his-
torique  du  magn^tisme  animal,  et  d’un  essai  de  bibliographie  magn^tique.,
Par  B.  Victor  Idjiez.  Bruxelles  et  Paris,  1844.

An  Essay  on  the  Constitution  of  the  Earth.  London,  1844.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

In  our  anxiety  not  to  lay  blame  on  an  innocent  party,  we  said  “  editor
or  sub-editor”  of  the  Examiner  in  our  last  number.  We  are  happy  to  state
that  we  have  it  on  good  authority  that  we  may  now  leave  out  the  words,
“  or  sub-editor.”


290


Notices  to  Correspondents.


We  have  again  so  exceeded  our  proper  number  of  sheets,  (there  are  nine
.  and  a  half)  that  the  correspondents  who  were  not  replied  to  last  quarter
must  pardon  us  for  again  delaying  to  notice  their  communications.

Mr.  Brindley’s  cases  are  under  consideration  :  and  we  regret  that  Mr.
Charton’s  letter  and  various  other  new  matters  must  be  deferred,  for  want  of
time  and  space.

DR.  DAVEY.

Our  readers  are  familiar  with  the  name  of  Dr.  Davey.  We  understand
that  he  has  been  appointed  by  Lord  Stanley  to  superintend  the  erection,  and
to  take  the  medical  charge  of,  a  hospital  for  the  insane  in  the  island  of
Ceylon.  The  hospital  is  to  be  erected  at  Colombo.  We  hear  that  the  insane
in  that  island  are  in  a  most  deplorable  condition — that  they  are  confined  in
dungeons  and  chained  to  the  walls  in  the  same  way  as  they  were  a  few  years
ago  in  our  own  country.  W  e  are  pleased  that  Lord  Stanley  has  selected  a
gentleman  in  every  respect  so  well  qualified  to  carry  out  those  humane  and
scientific  plans  which  have  been  proved  to  be  so  efficacious  at  Hanwell.


ERRATUM.

Page  169,  beginning  of  the  7th  line,  for  “  in  the  results  of  our  organi¬
zation,”  read  “  the  results  of  our  organization.”


(  291  )


ALEXIS.


TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — I  was  much  gratified  at  witnessing  some  of  the  highest  pheno¬
mena  of  mesmerism  at  the  residence  of  Dr.  Elliotson  on  Monday  last,  in  the
case  of  M.  Alexis,  and  conceiving  that  your  readers  would  be  interested
with  a  description  of  them,  I  forward  a  short  account  of  what  I  saw  for
insertion  in  your  journal.

M.  Alexis,  probably  18  or  19  years  of  age,  was  placed  in  a  reclining
chair,  and  his  mesmeriser,  M.  Marcillet,  stood  at  a  distance  of  a  yard  from
him,  and  gazed  intently  at  his  eyes.  In  about  a  minute  the  patient  began
to  exhibit  twitchings  of  the  whole  body  and  slight  convulsive  movements  of
the  face,  and  then  gradually  fell  off  into  the  mesmeric  state,  which  was
deepened  by  the  operator  making  a  few  longitudinal  passes  from  the  head
downwards  over  the  body.  Before  the  state  of  clairvoyance  came  on — for
this  appears  to  come  on  gradually,  and  to  increase  in  power  the  longer  it
continues — M.  Marcillet  produced  a  stiffening  of  the  different  extremities,
and  removed  it  at  pleasure.  So  powerful  was  this,  that  as  the  youth  sat  in
his  chair  with  the  legs  extended  horizontally,  a  gentleman  present  stood
upon  his  unsupported  thighs  apparently  without  inconveniencing  him.  After
a  very  few  minutes,  the  operator  having  declared  his  patient  to  be  in  a  state
of  clairvoyance,  two  of  the  visitors  proceeded  to  bandage  his  eyes  ;  first
placing  a  quantity  of  wadding  over  each  eye,  they  tied  a  handkerchief
tightly  round  his  head,  two  other  handkerchiefs  were  then  tied  diagonally
one  over  each  eye,  and  different  visitors  having  satisfied  themselves  that
vision  in  the  ordinary  way  was  impossible,  it  was  proposed  that  he  should
play  a  game  of  6cart£.  Dr.  Elliotson  having  sent  out  for  a  new  pack  of
cards,  the  youth  opened  them  and  began  discarding  the  small  cards  ;  this
he  did  as  quickly  as  if  his  eyes  had  been  uncovered.  I  observed  that  he
discarded  two  sevens ,  but  these  were  his  only  mistakes.  Captain  Daniell
was  his  opponent,  and  he  played  a  game  with  perfect  correctness.  I  next
sat  down  myself  and  played  a  game  with  him,  but  by  this  time  his  powers
seemed  to  have  increased,  for  he  frequently  played  without  turning  his
cards,  merely  spreading  them  before  him  on  the  table  with  the  backs  up¬
wards,  and  I  detected  only  one  mistake,  such  as  might  have  occurred  to
any  one — he  discarded  a  trump  card.  Mr.  Jerdan  next  took  the  cards,  and
now  the  youth  showed  that  he  could  tell  cards  in  his  opponent’s  hand  as
well  as  his  own.  A  large  folio  book  was  then  placed  upright  on  the  table,
so  as  to  form  a  screen  between  the  players.  Mr.  Jerdan  dealt,  and  played
his  cards  behind  this  screen,  so  that  it  would  be  quite  impossible  for  any


292


Alexis.


one  in  their  relative  positions  to  see  the  card  played  in  the  ordinary  manner.
Alexis,  however,  played  to  him  without  a  single  error.

Some  books  having  been  brought  up  out  of  the  Doctor’s  library,  a  vo¬
lume  of  Montaigne  was  placed  in  Alexis’s  hand,  which  he  opened  at  random,
and  after  holding  it  for  a  few  seconds  before  his  face,  placed  the  book  in
the  hands  of  a  bystander,  and  read  correctly  a  line  which  he  pointed  at.  A
large  book  of  plates,  &c.,  was  then  opened  before  him.  Alexis  described
correctly  one  of  the  plates,  and  then  taking  a  handkerchief  from  the  table,
as  he  turned  over  the  leaf  with  one  hand  he  with  the  other  drew  the  hand¬
kerchief  across  the  page  in  a  heap,  so  as  to  cover  a  great  portion  of  the
letter-press,  and  asked  the  bystanders  which  part  he  should  read.  I  myself
pointed  to  a  spot  which  was  covered  with  several  folds  of  the  handkerchief,
and  immediately,  without  any  hesitation,  he  read  a  whole  line  correctly.

M.  Marcillet  next  proposed  that  he  should  describe  some  plates  held  at
the  back  of  his  head,  but  these  experiments  were  only  partially  successful,  as
was  afterwards  the  case  when  he  attempted  to  point  out  the  situation  of  the
hands  of  watches  by  turning  only  the  backs  of  them  towards  his  eyes.

Captain  Daniell  took  his  hand  and  requested  Alexis  to  go  mentally  with
him  into  the  drawing  room  of  his  father’s  house  and  describe  it.  Alexis  de¬
scribed  correctly  the  situation  of  the  door,  windows,  fire-place,  &c.,  the
colour  of  the  curtains,  the  number  of  ornaments  over  the  chimney-piece,  the
number  and  situations  of  the  pictures,  &c.,  &c.,  and  his  attention  having
been  directed  to  a  particular  picture,  he  described  the  subject  of  it.  Captain
Daniell  thought  him  wrong  at  the  time  as  to  the  colour  of  the  curtains,  but
I  have  seen  a  note  from  Captain  Daniell,  stating  that  on  returning  home  he
found  that  Alexis  was  right.

The  Hon.  Edmund  Phipps  afterwards  tried  a  similar  experiment,  but  I
understood  Mr.  Phipps  to  say  that  he  was  not  equally  successful.

Colonel  Gurwood  took  Alexis’s  hand,  and  after  reminding  him  of  some
information  he  had  received  from  him  relative  to  a  French  officer,  whose
life  the  Colonel  had  saved  at  the  siege  of  Badajos,  asked  Alexis  if  that  in¬
formation  had  enabled  him  to  find  the  office^.  Alexis  replied  in  the  affirma¬
tive  ;  but  added,  “  You  have  not  seen  hini.”  This  was  correct.  Colonel
G.  asked  Alexis  where  the  officer  now  was  ;  he  replied,  “  In  the  South  of
France/’  This  was  correct.  Alexis  went  on  to  describe  the  person  of  the
officer,  but  as  Colonel  G.  had  never  seen  him  since,  the  accuracy  of  his  replies
cannot  yet  be  tested.  Colonel  G.  asked  him  the  name  of  the  officer  ;  he  did
not  know.  The  Colonel  put  a  completely  folded  letter  into  his  hand,  and  on
being  told  that  it  contained  the  signature  of  an  officer,  he  demanded  a  pencil
and  paper.  On  being  supplied  with  these,  he  said  he  would  write  the  name.
He  wrote  B,  and  then  waited  as  if  to  hear  whether  this  was  correct ;  Colonel
G.  said  “  Yes.”  He  then  wrote  a;  “  No  he  instantly  corrected  himself,  and
said,  “  Oh,  no,  it  is  o.”  “Yes.”  He  went  on  to  write,  n,/,  i,  l ,  l,  e.  The
name  was  Bonjilh ,  so  that  there  was  a  slight  mistake  in  the  final  letter,  but
such  a  mistake  as  might  easily  have  been  made  by  any  one,  after  an  imper¬
fect  view  of  a  name  ;  and  to  me  afforded  the  greater  proof  of  the  genuineness
of  the  experiment ;  he  had  never  opened  the  letter.

I  send  you  simply  a  statement  of  facts,  the  truth  of  which  I  can  vouch


Alexis.


293


for  ;  and  I  may  add  that  from  the  way  in  which  the  experiments  were  per¬
formed,  there  was  no  possible  room  for  collusion  or  deception  of  any  kind.

I  am,  Sir,  faithfully,  &c.,

Edmond  Sheppard  Symes.

38,  Hill  Street,  Berkeley  Square,

June  28th,  1844.

Mr.  Atkinson  was  in  the  evening  with  Mr.  Phipps,  and  wrote  the
following  account  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  which  we  are  allowed  to  publish.

“The  Hon.  Edmund  Phipps,  brother  to  the  Marquess  of  Normanby,  took
hold  of  the  hand  of  Alexis,  who  described  his  house  in  Park  Lane  in  many
points  with  singular  correctness;  but  what  was  most  remarkable,  he  said,
among  other  things,  that  he  saw  a  picture  of  a  battle  opposite  the  fire-place
in  the  drawing  room, — he  saw  men  on  horseback  with  spears  and  helmets,
describing  the  whole  very  distinctly  and  correctly,  and  particularly  insisted
that  there  was  a  figure  in  the  centre  of  the  picture  with  a  crown  on  the
head  and  a  truncheon  in  his  hand  leading  on  the  battle,  which  Mr.  Phipps
denied,  but  the  boy  insisted  that  he  was  right,  and  that  if  Mr.  P.  would
look  when  he  went  home,  he  would  find  it,  for  that  he  saw  it  distinctly.  I
dined  with  Mr.  Phipps  that  evening,  and  we  examined  the  picture  together,
and  found  that  the  somnambulist  was  quite  correct,  as  well  as  with  respect
to  some  curious  points  described  in  another  picture,  which  Mr.  Phipps  had
never  remarked  before,  but  of  too  striking  and  curious  a  nature  to  be  the
effects  of  a  lucky  guess.  Mr.  Phipps  was  a  sceptic,  but  is  now  satisfied  of
the  lad’s  extraordinary  powers  of  clairvoyance.”

We  are  enabled,  from  the  account  of  eye  witnesses,  to  make  the  fol¬
lowing  statement.

Alexis  was  mesmerised  at  the  house  of  a  nobleman  on  Thursday ;  and  any
one  of  the  company  who  compared  what  he  did  then  with  what  he  did  at
Dr.  Elliotson’s,  will  see  additional  reason  to  be  satisfied  of  the  integrity  of
him  and  M.  Marcillet.  His  eyes  were  not  satisfactorily  bandaged  in  our
opinion  ;  the  bandages  were  well  placed  but  not  firmly,  so  that  after  a  while
perhaps  he  might  have  seen  if  he  would.  But  he  played  badly  ;  doing  what
nobody  else  could  have  done  who  did  not  see,  but  making  blunders  every  now
and  then,  not  one  of  which  he  would  have  made  had  he  seen  like  other  people
and  been  an  impostor.  A  word  was  written  on  paper  and  then  so  carefully
folded  that  to  see  it  was  impossible.  He  after  great  difficulty  made  it  all
out.  He  first  made  out  d  and  a,  and  was  long  divided  between  m  and  n  ;
twice  he  pronounced  the  whole  word,  and  twice  doubted  ;  but  at  last  felt
sure  and  fixed  on  Danton, — which  it  was.  The  gentleman  who  wrote  the
word  was  the  only  person  who  knew  it.

The  power  was  on  Alexis  at  times  only;  coming  in  gushes  or  flashes,  as
forced  states  of  the  living  body  do ; — pain,  convulsions,  flashes  of  light,
noise  in  the  ears,  emotion,  and  even  the  inspirations  of  genius.  This  should
be  carefully  remembered.  The  state  is  a  forced  state  :  and  though,  if  strong,
it  is  more  uniform ;  if  weak,  it  will  flicker.  It  must  also  be  remembered,
that  he  unfortunately  thinks  aloud  ;  names  each  appearance  and  thought  as
it  presents  itself  to  him,  and  therefore  seems  to  guess ;  whereas  he  is  like


294


Alexis.


a  man  reading  an  ill-written  letter,  or  looking  at  very  distant  objects, — who
fancies  one  word  or  object  and  then  another,  till  at  last  he  is  satisfied  what
the  real  one  is.  He,  therefore,  is  often  apparently  in  great  error  when  he
first  speaks;  and,  though  nothing  be  said  by  others,  he  goes  on  correcting
himself.  It  would  be  well  if  clairvoyants  said  nothing  and  had  nothing  said
to  them,  till  they  felt  themselves  certain.

Another  point  to  be  attended  to  is,  that  these  effects  come  slowly  like
the  movements  excited  mesmerically  beyond  the  patient’s  sight,  and  which
also  are  often  incorrect  at  first,  like  clairvoyant  thoughts,  as  Dr.  Elliotson
has  remarked  (supra,  pp.  55  and  212,  and  vol.  i.,  p.  423)  ;  and  therefore  full
time  should  always  be  allowed  for  the  results,  as  Dr.  Engledue  says  in  the
account  of  his  equally  wonderful  case  of  clairvoyance  (supra,  p.  269) ;  and
Dr.  Elliotson  in  regard  to  movements,  in  vol.  i.,  p.  423,  and  supra,  p.  55.

A  drawing  of  a  house  was  placed  behind  him,  and  he  at  last  correctly
described  it  as  a  house  of  two  floors  and  four  windows.  The  half-length  por¬
trait  of  a  preacher  in  a  gown  was  placed  behind  him,  and  at  last  he  correctly
stated  that  it  was  a  half-length  portrait  of  a  man  with  a  strange  tunic,  and  his
hair  drawn  down  at  the  sides,  though  he  once  fancied  he  saw  a  crown  upon
the  head.  When  asked  what  sort  of  eyes  they  were,  he  instantly  replied,
“  There  are  spectacles  and  large  ones  too  and  this  was  all  correct.  Another
drawing  was  placed  behind  him,  and  he  at  once  correctly  said  that  there  were
two  lines  of  words  beneath  it.  With  two  drawings  he  failed,  and  would  not
consider  them  long  enough  to  judge  accurately.  A  large  portfolio  was
placed  before  him,  and  he  said  it  contained  only  a  piece  of  paper  doubled
together,  and  of  a  certain  size,  and  placed  in  a  certain  part, — in  all  which
he  was  perfectly  correct.  But  the  following  trial  astonished  every  one.  Two
lines  were  enclosed  between  two  leaves  of  paper,  and  these  were  put  into
an  envelope.  He  did  not  read  the  whole,  as  he  did  two  lines  through
a  doubled  pocket  handkerchief  at  Dr.  Elliotson’s,  but  he  named  two  words
of  the  whole,  and  declared  he  would  stick  three  pins  into  each.  On
taking  the  leaves  out  of  the  envelope  and  opening  them,  it  was  actually
found  that  he  had  named  the  right  words,  and  stuck  three  pins  accurately
into  each.  Lastly,  a  book  was  presented  to  him,  enclosed  in  three  sheets
of  paper,  and  he  read  aloud  the  words  Le  chemin  de  fer,  which  were  upon
the  cover.  The  words  were  not  at  all  discernible  through  the  envelopes,
and  the  sensation  in  the  company  was  extraordinary.

This  we  will  firmly  vouch  for  to  our  readers,  that  there  is  not  the  least
attempt  at  deception  or  unfairness:  and  we  beg  them  to  compare  Dr.  En-
gledue’s  case  of  clairvoyance  recorded  in  this  very  number.


THE  ZOIST.


No.  VII.


OCTOBER,  1844.


I.  The  Punishment  of  Death.

Great  and  important  have  been  the  changes  in  our  criminal
law  during  the  past  thirty  years.  But  how  numerous  the
struggles  ere  humane  and  enlightened  principles  obtained  an
ascendancy  !  Till  the  year  1812  a  law  existed,  constituting
it  a  capital  offence  for  soldiers  and  sailors  to  be  found  begging
in  the  streets.  Ten  years  were  occupied  by  Sir  S.  Bomilly
in  attempts  to  abolish  capital  punishment  for  the  crime  of
shop-lifting,  notwithstanding  he  brought  forward  the  fact
that  in  the  year  1785  there  were  ninety-seven  executions  for
this  offence  in  London  alone.  There  was  a  time  when  the
common  pickpocket — the  man  who  filched  from  his  neigh¬
bour's  pocket  property  to  the  amount  of  five  shillings — was
hanged ;  and  this  law  was  not  repealed  till  the  year  1808,
when  Sir  S.  Bomilly  brought  forward  his  first  motion  for  the
reform  of  the  criminal  laws.  Again  and  again,  year  after
year,  did  this  humane  statesman,  prompted  and  assisted  by
that  great  and  good  man,  Mr.  B.  Montagu,  introduce  mea¬
sures  for  the  purpose  of  blotting  from  the  statute  book  those
bloody  and  inhuman  laws  which  had  so  long  disgraced  it.
He  met  with  constant  opposition.  Lords  Eldon,  Liverpool,
and  Ellenborough  were  the  peers  who  most  strenuously  re¬
sisted  all  attempts  to  improve  the  system  of  criminal  legisla¬
tion.  They  opposed  his  efforts  because  they  introduced  “  an
innovating  spirit  into  the  criminal  legislation."  On  one
occasion,*  in  the  year  1811,  when  four  bills  were  introduced
for  the  abolition  of  capital  punishment  for  stealing  to  the
value  of  five  shillings  in  shops, — for  stealing  to  the  value  of

*  Porter’s  Progress  of  the  Nation,  volume  for  1843.

VOL.  II.  X


296


The  Punishment  of  Death.


forty  shillings  in  a  dwelling  house,  or  on  navigable  rivers, —
and  for  stealing  from  bleaching  grounds :  Lord  Ellenborough
said,  “  These  bills  went  to  alter  laws,  which  a  century  had
proved  necessary,  and  which  were  now  to  be  overturned  by
speculation  and  modern  philosophy;”  and  again,  “He  trusted
that  laws,  which  a  century  had  proved  to  be  beneficial,  would
not  be  changed  for  the  illusory  opinions  of  speculatists.”
Lord  Eldon  said,  “  Hang  them !  hang  them !  for  it  is  so
nominated  in  the  bond.”  The  Christian  bishops  supported
the  same  views.  These  bills  were  consequently  lost.

Even  in  the  year  1819,  when  Sir  J.  Mackintosh,  after
the  death  of  his  friend,  Sir  S.  Romilly,  moved  the  appoint¬
ment  of  a  committee  “  to  consider  so  much  of  the  criminal
law  as  related  to  capital  punishments,  and  to  report  their
observations  and  opinions  to  the  house,” — the  motion  was
only  carried  by  a  majority  of  19  in  a  house  of  275  members !
On  the  report  of  this  committee  similar  bills  to  those  just
now  referred  to  were  introduced,  but  they  were  lost ;  and  it
was  not  till  several  years  after,  that  the  punishment  of  death
was  abolished  in  these  cases.  At  this  period  petitions  were
pouring  in  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  praying  that  con¬
sideration  might  be  given  to  the  subject, — public  feeling  was
loudly  expressed, — and  juries  seemed  determined  to  resist  by
their  verdicts  the  severe  enactments  of  the  laws.  Influenced
by  the  pressure  from  without,  and  by  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  and
his  friends  from  within,  Sir  R.  Peel  in  1823  introduced  seve¬
ral  bills  for  the  purpose  of  abolishing  capital  punishments  in
fifteen  distinct  offences.  This  statesman  has  received  consi¬
derable  praise  for  his  exertions  in  this  direction,  but  it  should
be  remembered  that  his  efforts  were  not  original — they  were
not  the  result  of  a  philanthropic  impulse,  but  like  all  the
other  measures  he  has  brought  forward  during  his  senatorial
career,  they  were  forced  upon  him  by  others,  and  he  merely
caught  the  “  spirit  of  the  age,”  and  lent  his  little  aid  towards
the  embodiment  of  the  wishes  of  the  million.  For  with  re¬
gard  to  those  bills  how  stood  the  fact  ?  Behold  the  humanity
of  Sir  R.  Peel !  Behold  a  specimen  of  high,  lofty,  and  be¬
nevolent  statesmanship  !  The  punishment  of  death  was  to
be  abolished  in  fifteen  offences, — but  the  offences  were  obso¬
lete,  or  of  so  unfrequent  occurrence  that  these  bills  did  not
tend  much  to  ameliorate  the  severity  of  the  criminal  code.
For  two  years  preceding  the  passing  of  these  bills  there  were
only  four  convictions  under  their  enactments  !  What  a  boon
then  was  this  !  In  the  three  years  preceding  this  legislative
effort  there  had  been  153  executions,  and  in  the  three  years
following  this  legislative  effort  there  were  223  executions.


The  Punishment  of  Death.


297


At  this  period,  1826  and  the  two  following  years,  Sir  R.
Peel  carried  several  important  bills.  So  that  there  were  223
human  beings  hanged  according  to  law  in  the  interval  between
the  first  and  second  attempt  of  Sir  R.  Peel  to  ameliorate  our
criminal  code.  From  the  year  1820  to  1830,  there  were
between  7  and  800  executions ;  and  yet  about  the  year  1828,
Sir  R.  Peel  “  made  it  a  matter  of  boast  that  he  did  not  con¬
stitute  any  new  capital  felonies ,  and  pointed  out  an  instance
in  which  he  had  abated  the  capital  punishment  by  increasing
the  sum  constituting  it  a  capital  offence  to  steal  in  a  dwelling
house,  from  forty  shillings  to  five  pounds,  and  by  widening
the  technical  description  of  a  dwelling l”  Let  it  be  remembered
that  this  was  said  in  the  British  House  of  Commons,  eighteen
years  after  the  speeches  and  efforts  of  Sir  S.  Romilly  in  the
same  place ;  between  twenty  and  thirty  years  after  the  first
glorious  and  memorable  exertions  of  Mr.  Montagu ;  and  five
years  after  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  proposed,  in  a  series  of  reso¬
lutions,  that  it  was  expedient  to  abolish  the  punishment  of
death  in  cases  of  larceny  from  shops,  from  dwelling  houses, —
for  horse,  sheep,  and  cattle  stealing, — for  forgery,  &c. ;  all
of  which  proposals  Sir  R.  Peel  opposed,  and  in  contradistinc¬
tion  brought  in  his  bills  referring  to  obsolete  offences !  Let
not  the  men  of  expediency  be  classified  with  the  great,  the
good,  and  the  wise.  Let  not  the  upholders  of  a  bloody  penal
code  be  confounded  with  the  men  who  advocated  through  a
long  life  the  adoption  of  measures  prompted  by  benevolence
and  justice.  Let  not  history  place  Sir  R.  Peel  by  the  side
of  Montagu,  Romilly,  Mackintosh,  Wilberforce,  &c.  Let
him  not  be  considered  the  “  great  improver  of  our  criminal
code” — but  rather  to  a  limited  extent  the  expounder  of
other  men’s  opinions  and  benevolent  aspirations — in  fact,  a
labourer  in  the  vineyard  which  other  men  had  planted,  and
which,  but  for  his  opposition,  they  would  have  brought  to
perfection.*

*  And  yet  Sir  Robert  Peel  estimates  his  own  labours  so  highly,  that
he  says —

“  I  think  I  may  claim  some  credit  to  myself  for  having  done  more  towards
the  great  and  important  object  of  improving  and  consolidating  the  criminal
statutes  of  this  country,  than  any  other  individual  who  has  gone  before  me.”
Criminal  Law  Consolidation  Bill ,  February  22,  1827.

In  1823,  he  introduced  several  bills  for  the  purpose  of  abolishing  the
punishment  of  death  in  fifteen  obsolete  offences !

In  the  previous  year,  1822,  he  declared  that  our  criminal  law  “  ivas  the
most  perfect  in  the  world.”  u  The  fact  that  the  system  of  this  country  is  the
most  perfect  system  of  jurisprudence  in  the  world,  imposes  upon  us  the
necessity  of  observing  great  caution  in  approaching  it  for  the  purpose  of
making  any  change.”  March  27,  1822.

In  the  following  year,  1823,  the  Criminal  Law  is  not  perfect.  “I  am
ready  to  allow  that  the  Criminal  Law  is  not  perfect.”  May  21,  1823.

x  2


298


The  Punishment  of  Death.


In  1830,  Sir  R.  Peel  brought  in  his  Forgery  Bill.  Again
that  horrid  word  “  death”  occupied  a  prominent  position.  In
the  three  preceding  years  there  were  no  less  than  fifteen
persons  executed  for  this  offence.  Again  did  the  friend  of
humanity,  Sir  J.  Mackintosh,  move  that  the  capital  punish¬
ments  be  struck  out  of  the  bill.  Sir  R.  Peel  opposed  the
motion.

In  1832,  Mr.  Ewart  carried  a  bill  abolishing  the  punish¬
ment  of  death  in  cases  of  horse-stealing,  sheep  and  cattle¬
stealing,  and  larceny  in  a  dwelling  house.  Sir  R.  Peel
opposed  the  bill.  And  yet  in  the  three  years  preceding  the
passage  of  this  bill,  there  were  executed  for —

Horse-stealing . 22  persons.

Sheep-stealing . 9  ,,

Larceny  in  a  dwelling  house  6  „

In  1833  and  1834  other  bills  were  passed  abolishing
capital  punishment,  and  soon  after  this  Lord  John  Russell
introduced  bills  which  placed  our  criminal  law  on  a  much
more  humane  basis ;  so  that  the  crime  of  murder  is  now
almost  the  only  crime  for  which  the  death-punishment  is
awarded.  Mr.  Redgrave  says  :  “  The  magnitude  of  the  re¬
cent  changes  in  the  criminal  law  will  be  strongly  exemplified
when  it  is  stated,  that  had  the  offences  tried  in  1841  been
tried  under  the  laws  of  1831,  the  eighty  capital  sentences
passed  would  have  been  increased  to  2,172.”

The  number  of  persons  executed  in  England  and  Wales
only,  from  the  year  1805  to  the  year  1841,  was  2,190, — and
of  this  number  only  384  were  executed  for  murder.  So  that
in  thirty-seven  years  there  were  1,806  persons  executed  for
offences,  for  which  we  now  imprison  for  a  few  months,  or  trans¬
port  to  the  penal  colonies  for  a  few  years.

On  a  former  occasion  we  directed  attention  to  the  irra¬
tional  course  pursued  by  the  criminal  jurists  of  the  present
day.  We  are  again  anxious  to  refer  to  the  subject,  because
it  is  only  by  constantly  enforcing  the  consideration  and  ap¬
plication  of  correct  principles  that  we  can  hope  for  the  ulti¬
mate  removal  of  this  blot  from  our  criminal  code.  During
the  last  twelve  months  several  criminal  cases  have  occurred,
and  several  judicial  murders  have  been  perpetrated ;  and  in
accordance  with  our  previous  declaration  we  shall  select  one
or  two  cases  for  the  purpose  of  illustrating  the  practical  im¬
portance  of  our  science — its  civilizing  and  humanizing  ten-

In  1826,  he  said  a  man  was  not  to  be  hanged  if  he  stole  forty  shillings
from  a  dwelling  house, — but  he  was  to  be  hanged  if  he  stole  five  pounds ;
and  he  lessened  the  number  of  executions  by  “widening  the  technical
description  of  a  dwelling. ”  Original  and  humane  lawgiver!


The  Punishment  of  Death.


299


dencies.  Year  after  year  rolls  on,  and  each  succeeding  year
adds  fresh  victims  to  our  catalogue  of  executions.  Judges
and  juries  assemble  at  stated  intervals,  and  pass  through  the
usual  monotonous  routine,  commencing  their  proceedings
with  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  and  terminating  them  by
hanging  one  or  more  of  their  brethren.  Senators  and  mo¬
ralists  sanction  the  course  pursued,  and  the  people  still  rush
in  thousands  to  witness  the  display  of  legalized  destructive¬
ness,  with  as  much,  if  not  more,  avidity,  than  they  formerly
manifested  to  behold  a  bull-fight,  or  the  struggles  of  the
boxing-ring.*  In  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  after
the  promulgation  for  1844  years  of  a  moral  code,  which  for¬
bids  the  practice  of  retaliation,  we  perceive  the  recognized
and  paid  expounders  of  this  code  sanctioning  the  existence
of  a  law  directly  at  variance  with  their  own  doctrines.  Say

*  “  The  crowd  at  the  execution  was  immense ;  it  was  wonderful  to  see
what  countless  thousands  were  packed  on  the  pavement,  as  far  as  the  eye
could  reach,  nothing  but  the  heads  of  men  and  women  could  be  seen.  Oc¬
casionally  a  cry  was  made  that  a  man,  woman,  or  child  was  fainting,  or
being  crushed  to  death,  and  if  the  individual  was  fortunate  enough  to  have
strength  left,  he  or  she  was  lifted  up  and  allowed  to  walk  to  the  extremities
of  the  crowd  on  the  shoulders  of  the  people.  At  a  very  early  hour,  before
five  o’clock,  persons  began  to  take  up  a  position  in  front  of  the  drop,  and
before  seven  the  crushing  became  excessive.  It  was  grievous  to  hear  the
language  used  by  the  spectators  and  to  observe  the  little  effect  the  awful  spec¬
tacle  had  on  their  minds.  Many  hats  were  thrown  about  the  heads  of  the
mob,  which  were  destroyed,  and  great  numbers  had  their  clothes  stripped
off  and  were  left  almost  naked.  The  coarsest  language  was  freely  used ,  the
ribald  jest ,  followed  by  brutal  language  and  rude  laughter ,  might  be  heard  on  every
side  during  the  whole  of  the  morning.  Soon  after  the  criminal  had  dropped,  the
immense  crowd  burst  in  the  middle.  The  greater  portion  having  been
standing  for  hours  packed  like  herrings  in  a  barrel,  they  were  anxious  to
escape  from  their  uncomfortable  position,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  fresh
air,  and  a  great  rush  was  made  from  the  centre,  opposite  the  drop  ;  like  a
gun  heavily  charged  and  closely  rammed,  the  explosion  was  tremendous
and  deadly.  The  greater  portion  of  the  doors  of  the  houses  were  closed,
and  those  who  were  crushed  by  the  flow  of  the  immense  tide  of  human
beings  had  no  means  of  escape.  The  effect  of  the  crush  was  the  most  fatal
near  Malin  Hill,  down  which  hundreds  were  hurled  one  on  the  top  of  the
other.  The  consequence  of  this  was  that  twelve  human  beings  were  killed
and  more  than  one  hundred  received  serious  injuries.”  A  scene  at  an  execution
at  Nottingham ,  August,  1844. — The  Yorkshireman.

Mark  Sherwood  was  executed  at  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  on  the  23rd  day
of  August,  1844.  “  On  arriving  at  the  drop,  he  for  a  moment  looked  down

on  the  mass  that  were  assembled,  there  being  upwards  of  20,000  persons
present.”

At  the  execution  of  three  men  at  Derby,  a  short  time  ago,  there  were
35,000  or  40,000  persons  present.  “We  were  exceedingly  sorry  to  observe
placards  in  various  parts  of  the  town,  announcing  that  the  theatre  would  be
opened  at  two  o’clock,  to  accommodate  the  country  people.” — Derby  Mercury.

At  the  execution  of  Crouch,  a  few  months  since,  for  the  murder  of  his
wife,  we  are  informed  by  an  eye-witness,  that  the  game  of  pitch  and  toss
was  very  general  in  the  outskirts  of  the  crowd.  When  the  poor  wretch
appeared  on  the  scaffold,  a  voice  exclaimed,  “  Keep  up  your  pluck,  my
kiddy  !”


300


The  Punishment  of  Death.


what  we  will,  it  is  the  principle  of  revenge  which  prompts
men  to  take  the  life  of  a  criminal.  It  is  doing  that  which
they  profess  not  to  do, — returning  evil  for  evil.  “  Let  not
the  sun  go  down  upon  thy  wrath.”  “  Have  mercy  and  not
sacrifice.”  “  Forgive  one  another.”  These  precepts  are
uttered  day  after  day  by  ten  thousand  priests  throughout
civilized  England,  and  re-echoed  by  the  millions  who  with
their  lip-service  lisp  what  they  are  told,  without  for  one
moment  considering  that  the  moral  precept  is  broken,  and
that  at  every  execution  for  murder,  a  second  murder  is  com¬
mitted.

Some  say,  “  We  deplore  the  necessity,  but  the  effect  is
good, — offended  justice  calls  for  the  sacrifice,  &c.”  But  how
stands  the  fact  ?  At  the  execution  of  Blakesley  the  following
disgraceful  proceedings  occurred.  We  quote  from  the  Morn¬
ing  Chronicle.  “  The  windows  and  leads  of  the  houses  front¬
ing  Newgate  were  crowded,  as  usual,  with  those  willing  and
able  to  pay  for  such  accommodation.  The  mob,  which  con¬
sisted  principally  of  the  very  lowest  order ,  and  which  evidently
regarded  the  whole  affair  in  the  light  of  an  amusing  spectacle ,
was  noisy,  and  inclined  to  be  unruly  to  a  considerable  degree.
Jests  and  gibes,  and  sometimes  more  tangible  matters,  were  as
usual  bandied  about  among  the  crowd ;  and  when  the  execu¬
tioner  appeared  to  make  the  usual  preparations,  he  was
assailed  by  a  torrent  of  hootings  and  hisses ;  less,  however,
it  appeared  from  any  antipathy  to  his  person  or  office,  than
from  the  fact  that  he  furnished  a  conspicuous  object  for  the
croiod  to  amuse  themselves  by  hooting  at.”  The  appearance  of
the  prisoner  on  the  scaffold  is  thus  described  :  “  A  storm  of
hooting  and  yelling  saluted  his  appearance  on  the  scaffold,
but  he  seemed  perfectly  unmoved,  and  took  his  station  on
the  drop  with  the  most  perfect  coolness.”

What  portend  the  groans,  the  yellings  and  hootings,
which  unite  with  the  toll  of  the  prison  bell,  and  usher  the
poor  wretch  to  his  doom  ?  Are  these  fiendish  sounds  the
natural  manifestations  of  wounded  Benevolence  and  Consci¬
entiousness  ?  Are  they  the  expressions  which  should  ema¬
nate  from  beings  impressed  with  the  thought  that  the  scene
they  behold  is  intended  for  their  benefit,  and  to  warn  them
of  the  termination  of  a  vicious  and  depraved  course  of  con¬
duct  ?  Far  more  like  the  sounds  which  we  may  suppose
emanated  from  the  inhabitants  of  uncivilized  Borne,  and
accompanied  the  exhibition  of  the  down-turned  thumb,
which  proclaimed  to  the  vanquished  gladiator  that  he  was
to  die.  They  indicate  a  thirst  for  blood, — they  are  the
promptings  of  excited  Destructiveness,  and  are  analogous


The  Punishment  of  Death.


301


to  the  war-whoop  of  the  Indian,  or  the  roar  of  the  wild
beasts  of  the  forest  before  they  rush  on  their  prey.  But  the
example  !  Can  it  be  supposed  that  the  destruction  of  a  fellow
creature  will  produce  any  moral  effect  upon  those  who  could
witness  such  a  sight  ?  Mr.  Ewart,  in  the  House  of  Commons,
stated  that  out  of  167  persons  who  had  been  executed,  164
had  been  present  at  executions  ;  and  the  ordinaries  of  New¬
gate  affirm,  that  it  is  very  rarely  that  any  one  suffers  at  the
Old  Bailey  who  has  not  previously  been  a  witness  at  a  similar
scene.  With  these  facts  before  us  then,  how  can  it  be  said
that  the  punishment  of  death  carries  terror  to  those  who  wit¬
ness  it  ?  It  is  clear  that  we  should  draw  exactly  the  reverse
conclusion.  The  punishment  of  death  we  have  before  de¬
clared  is  an  immoral  and  unjust  proceeding,  and  should  be
forthwith  abolished.  Of  course  the  execution  of  a  criminal
is  a  sure  way  to  prevent  further  trouble, — it  relieves  a  com¬
munity  of  a  rebellious  and  dangerous  member;  but  whilst
it  does  this,  it  proclaims  the  deep  ignorance  pervading  men
concerning  their  own  nature,  and  displays  the  recklessness
with  which  they  continue  to  persevere  in  a  certain  line
of  conduct,  after  its  irrationality  and  its  cruelty  have  been
fully  and  convincingly  proven.

The  case  which  we  are  about  to  relate  is  perhaps  one  of
the  most  instructive  on  record.  We  have  a  criminal  of  the
worst  class — defended  by  a  gentleman  on  the  most  enlight¬
ened  principles, — and  condemned  by  a  judge,  who  propounded
to  the  jury  the  most  absurd  and  irrational  doctrines.

John  Knatchbull  was  tried  at  the  Surrey  assizes  for  being
concerned  in  the  robbery  of  a  gentleman  at  Yauxhall  Gar¬
dens.  He  was  found  guilty,  and  sentenced  to  be  transported
for  fourteen  years.  At  a  very  early  age,  he  evinced  a  temper  of
extreme  violence;  at  times  almost  beyond  the  power  of  control.
When  very  young  he  entered  the  navy.  Under  Lord  Cochrane
he  served  in  the  Spanish  Main;  his  promotion  was  very  rapid,
and  he  soon  obtained  the  command  of  a  ship.  In  this  respon¬
sible  situation  his  violent  temper  became  very  conspicuous,
and  his  conduct  was  marked  by  so  much  tyranny,  that  he
was  brought  to  a  court-martial,  cashiered,  and  declared
henceforward  incompetent  to  hold  any  commission  in  His
Majesty's  service.  Thus  disgraced  he  became  the  associate
of  the  most  profligate  of  the  day,  and  the  frequenter  of  the
hells  of  the  metropolis.  At  this  period  the  daughter  of  a
wealthy  merchant  of  Old  Broad  Street,  City,  met  his  path,  she
became  his  victim,  and  was  married  to  him  by  a  pretended
clergyman.  She  afterwards  died  the  inmate  of  a  lunatic
asylum.  He  had  previously  made  similar  victims  at  Bermuda,


302


The  Punishment  of  Death.


Halifax,  and  New  York.  Closely  following  this  event,  he
committed  the  act  for  which  he  was  transported  to  the  penal
settlements.  In  August  1824,  he  was  on  board  the  Leviathan
hulk  in  Portsmouth  harbour,  and  employed  in  the  gangs
working  in  the  dock-yard.  In  this  capacity  he  was  recognized
by  many  seamen  who  had  felt  his  tyranny.  To  such  an  ex¬
tent  was  the  feeling  against  him  carried,  that  the  authorities
were  compelled  to  confine  him  to  the  hulk.  He  had  so  little
shame  that  he  did  not  scruple  to  hail  his  former  messmates.
He  was  removed  to  the  Asia  for  passage  to  New  South  Wales,
and  whilst  on  board  this  ship  a  man  died,  and  his  death  was
attributed  to  the  improper  treatment  he  had  received  from
Knatchbull.  In  April,  1825,  he  arrived  at  Sydney,  and  soon
obtained  a  ticket  of  leave,  having  apprehended  several  runa¬
ways,  who  from  information  subsequently  received  were  no
doubt  instigated  to  the  crime  by  himself.  In  1831,  he  was
apprehended  on  a  charge  of  forgery,  and  which  was  not  the
first  offence  of  the  kind,  tried  and  convicted,  and  sentence  of
death  was  recorded  against  him,  which  was  afterwards  com¬
muted  to  transportation  to  Norfolk  Island  for  seven  years.
Here  again  in  a  short  time  his  good  fortune  served  him.  He
was,  through  the  instrumentality  of  Capt.  Lambert,  of  H.M.S.
Crocodile,  admitted  approver  in  a  case  of  mutiny,  no  doubt
concocted  by  himself.  Having  served  a  portion  of  his  time
of  banishment  he  returned  to  Sydney,  where  he  had  resided
up  to  the  committal  of  the  offence  for  which  he  forfeited  his
life.  He  was  indicted  for  the  wilful  murder  of  one  Ellen
Jamieson,  by  striking  her  on  the  head  with  a  tomahawk.

“The  facts  were  that  the  prisoner  was  seen  lurking  about  the
door  of  deceased’s  house,  at  the  corner  of  Kent  Street  and  Margaret
Place,  for  upwards  of  an  hour  and  a  half,  by  Mr.  Shalles,  the  builder,
and  was  finally  seen  by  the  same  party  to  enter  the  house,  when,
suspecting  the  evil  nature  of  his  intentions,  Mr.  Shalles  ran  up  to  the
door  and  listened — hearing  no  sound  except  a  noise  like  that  of  some
one  breaking  a  cocoa-nut  with  a  hammer,  he  suspected  foul  play,  and
procured  the  assistance  of  a  Mr.  Jaques  and  others,  by  whom  the
house  was  forcibly  entered  and  the  prisoner  secured.  On  entering
the  house,  the  deceased  was  found  lying  insensible,  with  her  head
dreadfully  cut,  but  the  instrument  with  which  these  injuries  had
been  inflicted  was  not  discovered  until  the  next  day,  when  Mrs.
Jaques,  who  was  attending  the  deceased,  found  a  tomahawk  spotted
with  blood  concealed  between  the  mattress  and  battens  under  the
bed  whereon  Mrs.  Jamieson  was  then  lying,  which  tomahawk  was
proved  afterwards  to  be  the  property  of  one  Charles  Hollowell,  with
whom  the  prisoner  was  then  lodging,  and  in  whose  yard  it  had  been
openly  lying  for  several  years  past,  so  that  it  might  easily  have  been


The  Punishment  of  Death.


303


removed  by  the  prisoner.  The  prisoner  was  also  seen  by  two  of  the
witnesses  while  up-stairs,  and  was  observed  to  push  aside  the  blind
and  look  out  upon  them  when  the  alarm  had  been  given.  On  getting
the  prisoner  to  the  watch-house,  and  searching  him,  a  woman’s
pocket  was  found  upon  him,  containing  ten  shillings  and  eighteen
sixpences,  and  apparently  torn  by  force  from  her  person;  they  also
found  a  bag  containing  £4  2s.  8d.  in  silver,  £1  Is.  also  in  silver,  six
£1  notes,  and  one  £5,  the  whole  of  which  money  had  been  concealed
on  various  parts  of  his  person.  Besides  this  money  they  found  six
bank  bills,  three  of  which  were  filled  up  for  £50  each,  signed  by  the
prisoner,  and  addressed  to  Sir  Edward  Knatchbull,  and  the  other
left  blank  as  far  as  the  amount  and  signature  were  concerned,  but
addressed  to  the  same  party.  Upon  examining  the  prisoner’s  trousers,
they  were  found  to  be  spotted  with  blood,  and  they  were  accordingly
taken  from  him  for  production  at  the  trial.  The  trousers  were
accordingly  produced  and  sworn  to,  and  the  tomahawk  and  pocket
were  also  produced,  but  neither  of  them  could  be  proved  by  the  police
to  be  the  identical  ones  procured  in  the  manner  above  stated.  The
tomahawk,  however,  was  sworn  to  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jaques  as  the
one  which  was  found  on  the  premises,  and  Inspector  Molloy,  although
he  could  not  swear  positively  that  the  pocket  produced  was  the  one
which  was  found  upon  the  prisoner,  stated  he  believed  that  it  was
so,  inasmuch  as  it  every  way  resembled  that  article.  The  pocket
was  likewise  sworn  to  by  a  Mrs.  Brown  as  having  belonged  to  the
deceased.  To  prove  that  the  deceased  had  lost  her  life  from  the
injuries  she  had  received,  Mr.  Jones,  of  Jamison  Street,  the  surgeon
who  had  been  first  called  to  the  unfortunate  woman,  was  examined,
and  after  describing  the  nature  of  the  wounds,  and  the  probability
of  their  having  been  inflicted  by  such  an  instrument  as  the  tomahawk
produced,  gave  it  as  his  decided  opinion  that  her  death  had  been  pro¬
duced  by  those  wounds.

“  After  the  case  for  the  crown  had  been  closed,

“Mr.  Lowe  rose  to  address  the  jury  on  behalf  of  the  prisoner.
After  the  shocking  details  which  had  been  laid  before  them  by  the
witnesses  called  on  behalf  of  the  crown,  it  must  (he  said)  be  a  relief
to  their  minds  to  know  that  it  was  not  his  intention  to  shock  their
feelings  by  a  recapitulation  of  those  harrowing  circumstances.  To
lay  that  evidence  impartially  before  them,  and  to  comment  upon  its
various  bearings,  was  constitutionally  the  duty  of  the  judge,  and  he
should  leave  that  evidence,  accompanied  by  the  prisoner’s  denial  of
guilt,  in  the  hands  of  his  Honor,  confident  that,  in  addressing  them
upon  it,  he  would  not  fail  to  lay  the  case  before  them  in  as  merciful
a  light  towards  the  unfortunate  prisoner  at  the  bar  as  consistently
with  his  duty  he  could  do.  His  Honor  would  tell  them  that  if  the
slightest  doubt  should  arise  in  their  minds  as  to  the  prisoner’s  guilt,
they  would  be  bound  to  throw  all  the  benefit  of  that  doubt  into  the
scale  of  mercy.  But  as  he  had  before  said,  it  was  not  his  intention
to  enter  into  a  circumstantial  detail,  for  the  duty  which  devolved
upon  him  that  day  was  of  a  very  different  kind;  and  he  should
endeavour  to  show  that,  even  supposing  for  the  sake  of  argument


304


The  Punishment  of  Death.


the  statements  of  all  the  preceding  witnesses  had  been  true,  the
prisoner  was  still  one  of  those  persons  for  whom  laws  had  not  been
made ,  and  who,  although  for  the  peace  and  welfare  of  society  he
ought  to  be  placed  under  the  most  severe  restraint ,  ought  not  to  be
held  responsible  for  his  actions.  It  was  not  for  the  good  of  society
that  the  life  of  any  man  who  could  not  be  held  legally  responsible  for
his  actions  should  be  taken;  and  he  must  most  earnestly  impress  it
upon  the  minds  of  the  jury  that  they  did  not  sit  there  merely  as  the
avengers  of  blood.  It  was  not  because  a  murder  had  been  committed,
with  the  terrible  particulars  of  which  the  evidence  for  the  crown  had
rendered  them  so  familiar,  that  they  necessarily  were  called  upon
to  avenge  that  murder  by  delivering  a  verdict  which  should  deprive
another  fellow  creature  of  life:  for  if  any  circumstances  should  have
arisen  which  might  reasonably  lead  them  to  the  conclusion  that  the
prisoner,  provided  he  committed  the  crime  at  all,  had  laboured  at
the  time  under  a  condition  of  mind  which  rendered  him  unable  to
control  his  own  actions — had  acted  under  an  invincible  and  unavoid¬
able  necessity — they  would  be  doing  justice  to  their  country  by  at
once  acquitting  him,  upon  that  ground,  of  the  crime  laid  to  his  charge.
He  would  briefly  state  his  own  views  as  to  the  state  of  the  prisoner’s
mind,  and  would  leave  it  to  the  jury  to  determine  whether,  being  so
circumstanced,  he  ought  to  be  held  accountable  for  his  actions.  The
human  mind  was  so  divided  in  its  various  faculties  that  it  was  not
necessary,  to  constitute  insanity,  for  the  person  labouring  under
that  misfortune  to  betray  a  loss  of  all  his  intellect;  for  one  faculty
might  become  impaired,  vitiated,  or,  indeed,  totally  destroyed,
without  affecting  the  strength  of  the  others,  and  it  was  very  common
to  find  that  a  person  who  was  perfectly  insane  in  some  points,  was
in  most  others  fully  possessed  of  his  mental  powers.  Insanity  was
generally  accompanied  with  a  delusion  of  some  kind  or  another,  but
there  wras  still  a  species  of  insanity  which  was  unaccompanied  by
such  a  delusion.  Thus  an  insanity  affecting  the  intellect  of  the
patient  was  invariably  attended  by  the  frenzied  delusions  which  the
disordered  state  of  the  intellect  could  not  fail  to  produce,  while  an
insanity  of  the  will — the  other  grand  division  of  the  human  mind,
might  be  unattended  by  any  such  outward  symptoms  of  frenzy,  and
yet  might  urge  on  the  unhappy  person  labouring  under  its  in¬
fluence,  with  an  irresistible  and  overwhelming  influence  to  the
commission  of  crimes  which  in  themselves  were  of  the  most  atro¬
cious  nature,  but  which,  under  such  circumstances,  could  not  be
said  to  entail  any  actual  guilt  upon  the  unfortunate  perpetrator.
It  had  been  the  declared  opinion  of  the  most  competent  enquirers
into  the  nature  of  the  human  mind  that  the  mind  could  only  be
affected  by  the  existence  of  disease  in  the  brain,  and  if  disease
existed  in  that  portion  of  the  brain  wherein  the  human  will  held  its
seat,  while  the  other  portion  of  the  brain  in  which  the  intellect  of
the  patient  was  contained  was  free  from  any  such  disease,  it  naturally
followed  that  the  person  so  circumstanced  might,  with  a  full  knowledge
of  what  he  was  doing,  feel  compelled — irresistibly  compelled,  to
crimes  which  if  a  perfectly  free  agent  he  would  be  the  last  to  commit.


The  Punishment  of  Death.


305


Such  was  the  unhappy  state  of  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  and  if  he
had  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  postponement  of  trial  for  which  he
had  applied  in  an  earlier  period  of  the  day,  he  was  not  without  a
hope  that  he  should  have  been  enabled  to  procure  evidence  showing
from  the  annals  of  the  noble  family  with  which  the  prisoner  was
unfortunately  connected,  that  the  existence  of  this  disease  had  been
already  their  bane.  They  were  doubtless  well  informed  as  to  the
past  history  of  the  unfortunate  man  then  upon  his  trial,  and  he  trusted
he  should  have  the  indulgence  of  the  court  on  referring  to  that  history
in  support  of  his  argument.  The  prisoner  was  of  a  noble  family,
and  began  life  with  such  fair  prospects  that  he  was  promoted  to  a
high  station,  to  the  rank  of  a  Commander  in  the  British  Navy,  for
his  gallantry  in  the  service  of  his  country,  and  it  could  hardly  be
credited  that  with  these  fair  prospects,  with  the  high  parliamentary
interest  which  the  prisoner  undoubtedly  possessed,  with  every  motive
in  short  to  induce  a  continuance  and  probity  of  action,  he  should  be
plunged  into  such  self-created  vicissitudes,  unless  labouring  under
some  mental  infirmity  which  paralysed  his  better  nature.  The
impulse  under  which  the  prisoner  had  acted,  if  really  guilty  of  the
crime  laid  to  his  charge,  might  be  almost  designated  as  one  of  a
childish  nature,  for  no  man  in  possession  of  his  faculties  would  have
perpetrated  such  an  offence  as  this,  with  almost  a  certainty  of  imme¬
diate  detection;  which  certainty,  it  was  clear  from  the  nature  of  the
evidence  adduced  on  behalf  of  the  crown,  the  prisoner  must  have
been  fully  conscious  of.  It  was  clear  that  a  man  who  had  acted  so
must  have  been  under  the  influence  of  an  uncontrollable  desire  to  do
the  deed  alluded  to,  for  it  was  easy  to  conceive  that  if  any  determined
and  more  experienced  ruffian  had  been  bent  upon  the  crime,  he  would
have  taken  much  better  care  to  secure  himself  from  detection.  He
might  state,  although  it  had  not  come  out  in  evidence,  that  the
prisoner  was  about  to  be  married  on  the  following  morning;  and  it
would  be  for  the  jury  to  determine,  whether,  under  all  these  peculiar
circumstances,  the  act  he  had  been  alleged  to  have  committed  was
such  as  might  have  been  expected  from  a  sane  or  reasonable  person.
Whether  this  was  the  way  of  preparing  to  clasp  the  hand  of  his
bride  at  the  altar,  by  embruing  his  own  in  the  blood  of  another
female;  and  whether  if  a  want  of  money  was  supposed  to  be  the
motive  which  actuated  him,  he  had  not  a  much  readier  mode  of
supplying  that  want  by  discounting  some  of  the  bills  upon  Sir  Ed¬
ward  Knatchbull  which,  they  had  it  in  evidence,  were  found  upon
his  person.  The  subject  of  mental  delusion  had  been  of  late  much
canvassed  in  England,  and  particularly  in  the  cases  of  M‘Naughten,
Oxford,  and  Francis.  In  the  case  of  M‘Naughten,  particularly,
no  doubt  whatever  existed  that  he  had  committed  the  crime  laid  to
his  charge,  but  upon  evidence  being  produced  of  his  insanity,  the
judges  did  not  hesitate  to  direct  the  jury  to  return  a  verdict  of
acquittal  in  his  favour.  He  regretted  that  he  was  not,  as  in  the
case  of  M‘Naugliten,  in  a  position  to  call  any  witnesses  to  prove
the  state  of  the  prisoner’s  mind  to  be  as  he  had  described  it,  but
he  must  leave  it  to  the  jury  to  give  the  prisoner  the  benefit  of  their


306


The  Punishment  of  Death.


own  construction  of  his  conduct,  and  of  the  inferences  to  be  ga¬
thered  from  it.  It  was  no  great  boon  which  he  asked  in  this,  for
even  if  acquitted  upon  the  ground  of  insanity  he  must  be  confined
for  life  in  a  lunatic  asylum,  to  avoid  his  being  again  let  loose  upon
society  with  so  dangerous  a  disposition.  He  was  aware  of  the
narrow  imaginations  of  our  forefathers,  which  would  confine  the
attention  of  a  jury  to  the  simple  fact  of  whether  a  person  charged
did  or  did  not  commit  the  crime  of  which  he  was  accused;  but  he
could  only  hope  for  the  dawning  of  a  brighter  day,  when  their  at¬
tention  might  be  extended  also  to  a  full  enquiry  into  the  motives
which  had  led  to  that  crime.  In  conclusion,  he  might  tell  them
that,  while  holding  in  their  hands  two  of  the  attributes  of  God —
the  power  of  giving  life  or  awarding  death,  they  should  take  upon
themselves  two  others  of  those  heavenly  attributes — justice  and
mercy;  and  tempering  the  one  with  the  other,  should  determine
whether,  after  a  careful  consideration,  they  could  believe  that  a  man
ivith  the  great  advantages  originally  possessed  by  the  prisoner ,  could
have  fallen,  step  by  step ,  into  the  lowest  depths  of  disgrace ,  unless
urged  on  by  some  resistless  demon  of  insanity — by  whom ,  if  guilty
of  the  crime  now  laid  to  his  charge ,  he  had  been  incited  to  its  per¬
petration.  The  existence  of  this  internal  impulse  to  evil ,  although
dangerous  in  its  operation  to  society  at  large ,  should  not  subject  the
possessor  of  it  to  the  most  dreadful  punishment  of  all,  for  a  crime
which  he  could  hardly  be  held  answerable  for ,  and  it  could  not  be
contended  that  the  ends  of  justice  would  be  more  answered  by  allow¬
ing  a  person  of  this  description  to  expiate  his  offence  on  the  scaffold,
than  by  the  public  execution  of  any  savage  animal  which  had  done
an  act  of  cruelty  with  similar  want  of  a  controlling  power  over  its
actions.  He  would  with  these  remarks  leave  the  case  in  the  hands
of  the  jury,  confident  that  they  would  divest  themselves  of  any  im¬
pressions  which  they  might  have  received  out  of  doors,  and  would
return  a  fair  and  impartial  verdict.  If  they  found  the  prisoner
guilty  of  the  fact,  and  yet  believed  him  to  be  impelled  to  the  crime
he  had  committed  by  an  irresistible  impulse  of  the  mind,  they  would
be  running  counter  to  the  decisions  of  the  juries  in  England  in  si¬
milar  cases  if  they  did  not  give  him  the  benefit  of  that  opinion.  He
trusted,  however,  that  a  jury  of  the  colony  would  be  fully  capable
of  coming  to  an  impartial  judgment  upon  the  intention  of  a  person
so  circumstanced  as  the  prisoner,  and  would  not  award  to  him  that
severe  punishment  which  the  law  still  retained  for  persons  who  had
committed  crime  in  full  knowledge  of  its  nature,  and  not  from  impulse
or  necessity.

“  After  the  evidence  of  two  witnesses  had  been  received  for  the
defence,  Mr.  Justice  Burton  addressed  the  jury.  He  told  them
that  they  would  have  to  determine,  in  the  first  instance,  whether
the  deceased  actually  came  to  her  end  by  the  injuries  described  in
the  information;  secondly — whether  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  was
the  person  who  had  inflicted  those  injuries;  and  thirdly — whether,
if  such  was  the  case,  he  was  at  the  time  of  committing  the  act  in
such  a  state  of  mind  as  to  be  accountable  to  the  law  for  his  actions.


The  Punishment  of  Death .


307


As  this  last  question  was  beyond  doubt  the  most  material  one  in  the
present  case,  he  should  feel  it  his  duty  to  offer  a  few  observations
upon  that  point.  It  had  been  suggested  in  the  prisoner’s  defence,
that  he  was  of  a  character  likely  to  commit  crime  through  the  influ¬
ence  of  an  overpowering  internal  impulse,  and  that  on  this  ground
he  was  not  to  be  held  accountable  for  his  actions,  but  it  was  the
first  time  he  (the  judge)  had  ever  heard  a  doctrine  of  this  kind
broached  in  a  Court  of  Justice.  It  was  indeed  a  material  ingredient
to  constitute  a  crime  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  that  the  person  who
committed  that  crime  should  be  in  possession  of  his  mental  faculties,
for  if  he  had  no  mind  he  was  without  responsibility.  To  place  a
person  in  this  position,  however,  it  was  not  merely  necessary  that
he  should  be  a  lunatic,  but  that  he  should  have  been  a  lunatic  at  the
time  he  committed  the  crime,  for  even  if  he  was  without  his  senses
at  times,  and  had  committed  the  crime  of  which  he  stood  charged
during  a  lucid  interval,  he  would  be  liable  to  such  punishment  as
that  crime  might  be  deemed  to  merit.  The  protection  however,
which  the  law  thus  extended  to  lunatics,  or  persons  who  were  not
in  possession  of  their  powers  of  reasoning  between  right  and  wrong,
did  not  extend  itself  to  those  whose  will  was  so  depraved  as  to  lead
them  to  the  commission  of  crimes  for  which  no  other  excuse  than
that  depraved  will  could  be  found.  The  only  excuse  for  crime  was
that  of  an  actually  unsound  mind  at  the  time  of  its  perpetration  ;
and  whatever  attention  so  abstruse  a  question  as  the  formation  of  the
human  mind  might  have  created  among  the  philosophers  of  Europe ,
he  apprehended  that  a  simple  question  of  facts  propounded  to  twelve
reasonable  men  might  be  very  easily  determined  upon  without  resort¬
ing  to  any  such  abstract  reasoning .  The  fact  for  them  to  determine
was,  whether  the  prisoner,  if  he  committed  the  murder,  was,  at  the
time  he  did  so,  of  sound  mind,  and  if  the  slightest  doubt  upon  this
subject  existed  they  would  of  course  lean  to  the  side  of  mercy,  and
give  the  prisoner  the  benefit  of  that  doubt.  They  must  however  be
careful  to  throw  far  from  their  consideration  any  question  of  justifi¬
cation  on  the  ground  that  the  prisoner  was  impelled  to  the  commis¬
sion  of  the  crime  by  the  existence  of  an  innate  desire,  or  as  it  was
argued,  a  necessity  for  so  doing,  for  if  it  was  held  that  this  was  to
be  a  palliation  for  crimes  of  the  most  dreadful  nature,  that  all  men
who  suffered  themselves  to  be  led  away  by  the  temptations  of  the
evil  one  were  to  find  an  excuse  in  the  fact  of  their  having  yielded  to
those  temptations — a  man  would  only  have  to  be  bad  enough  to
listen  to  every  evil  suggestion  thus  prompted,  to  commit  offences  of
the  most  grave  nature  with  perfect  impunity.  The  very  terms  of  the
information  which  they  had  heard  read  was ,  that  the  prisoner  <e  not
having  the  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes ,  but  being  moved  and  seduced
by  the  instigation  of  the  devil,”  had  committed  the  crime  laid  to  his
charge ,  and  it  could  not ,  therefore ,  be  contended  that  the  offender
was  to  be  exonerated  from  the  consequences  of  his  offence  by  the  very
reasons  which  were  alleged  to  have  actuated  him  in  committing  it.
It  had  been  urged  that  the  prisoner  must  have  been  impelled  by
insanity  to  commit  the  fatal  act,  or  he  would  not  have  done  so  with


308


The  Punishment  of  Death.


the  certainty  of  detection  from  the  watch  which  had  been  kept  upon
his  movements;  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  there  was  no
evidence  of  the  prisoner  having  been  conscious  that  he  was  watched
by  Mr.  Shalles,  or  that  but  for  the  watchfulness  and  promptitude  of
that  person  he  would  have  been  detected  at  all,  unless  by  some  of
those  mysterious  occurrences  by  which  Providence  usually  brought
about  the  detection  of  the  most  grave  and  apparently  secret  offences.
Whatever  place  the  argument  which  had  been  adduced  in  defence  of
the  prisoner  might  have  in  the  theories  of  philosophers ,  it  had  no
place  in  the  law  of  England ,  nor  (he  was  bound  to  add)  had  it  a
place  either  in  common  sense  or  morality ,  and  he  was  sorry ,  therefore
to  hear  it  urged  for  the  first  time  in  a  court  of  justice.  He  could
scarcely  suppose,  however,  that  the  jury  would  suffer  themselves  to
be  led  away  by  a  doctrine  like  that,  so  monstrously  injurious  in  its
tendency  ;  and  the  only  question  for  them  to  determine,  in  the  event
of  their  believing  the  prisoner  guilty  of  the  attack  upon  the  deceased,
being,  whether  he  was  or  was  not  insane,  in  the  true  sense  of  the
term,  at  the  time  he  did  so,  they  would  have  to  draw  their  con¬
clusions  upon  this  point  from  the  facts  stated  in  the  evidence.  The
fact  of  the  money  found  on  the  prisoner’s  person  would,  if  they
believed  that  money  to  have  been  taken  from  the  house  and  person
of  the  deceased,  furnish  them  with  a  probable  motive  for  his  conduct;
and,  with  the  view  of  determining  whether  that  motive  was  the  true
one,  they  would  have  to  look  at  his  conduct  in  the  locking  of  the
door,  and  other  particulars.  If  the  plea  of  insanity  was  intended  to
be  relied  on,  and  witnesses  were  by  any  means  obtainable  in  support
of  that  plea,  that  fact  could  have  been  stated  upon  affidavit,  and
the  trial,  if  sufficient  grounds  were  made  out,  would  have  been
postponed  for  that  purpose;  but  at  present  there  was  no  evidence  in
support  of  the  argument,  and  the  jury  must  determine  upon  that
which  had  been  laid  before  them  during  the  present  trial.  His
Honor  then  read  over  his  notes  of  the  evidence,  and  commented
briefly  upon  the  leading  points  in  the  testimony  of  each  witness.

c<  The  jury  without  leaving  the  box  returned  a  verdict  of  Guilty;
and  the  Attorney-General  having  prayed  the  judgment  of  the
Court  in  the  usual  way,  the  prisoner  was  asked  if  he  had  anything
to  say  why  such  judgment  should  not  be  passed  upon  him:  —

“  The  prisoner  said,  that  if  the  witness  Tattersal,  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  procuring  whom  he  had  applied  for  a  postponement,  had
been  there  to  give  evidence,  he  should  have  been  able  to  contradict
a  great  portion  of  Mr.  Shades’ s  statement,  by  proving  a  complete
alibi  up  to  eleven  or  twelve  o’clock  at  night,  and  having  satisfied
the  Court  upon  that  point,  he  had  no  doubt  he  should  have  been
able  to  prove  his  innocence  in  other  respects.  It  was  true,  however,
that  he  had  been  found  guilty  by  a  jury  of  his  countrymen,  and  as
they  had  acted  to  the  best  of  their  judgment  upon  the  evidence  pro¬
duced,  he  could  not  complain.  He  appealed  however  to  the  Court,
whether  it  was  probable  that  a  man  like  him,  educated  in  the  lap  of
affluence,  and  brought  up  to  an  honorable  profession — one  who  had
been  in  twenty-two  general  engagements,  and  had  received  eleven


The  Punishment  of  Death.


309


wounds  in  the  services  of  his  country,  would  he  guilty  of  so  base —
so  vile,  and  so  disgraceful  an  action,  as  to  murder  a  defenceless
woman? — the  heart  of  a  British  seaman  was  always  mild  and  averse
to  any  such  disgraceful  conduct.  He  submitted  also,  that  he  had
not  had  sufficient  time  to  prepare  himself  properly  for  his  trial,  as
he  had  only  had  three  clear  day’s  notice  of  its  approach,  and  ex¬
pressed  a  hope  that  his  Honor  would  deal  as  leniently  with  him  as
was  consistent  with  his  duty.

“  After  a  short  pause  the  proclamation  of  silence  was  made  by
order  of  the  judge  in  the  usual  manner.

“  His  Honor  proceeded  in  a  most  solemn  and  impressive
manner  to  pronounce  sentence  of  death  upon  the  prisoner,  and  in
addressing  him  previous  to  passing  such  sentence,  remarked,  that
from  the  prisoner’s  innate  knowledge  of  his  own  guilt,  he  must,
from  the  very  first,  have  contemplated  the  probability  of  receiving
this  sentence  as  a  well-merited  reward  for  so  heinous  an  offence  as
that  which  he  had  committed.  He  must  own  he  was  somewhat
astonished  at  hearing  an  application  to  postpone  the  trial  on  the
ground  that  a  witness  was  absent  who  could  prove  an  alibi,  for  it
must  be  quite  plain  to  all  who  had  heard  the  evidence  which  had
been  given  that  day,  that  there  could  be  no  such  witness,  and  that
the  guilt  of  the  prisoner  had  been  established  beyond  a  doubt,  even
of  the  slightest  nature,  as  to  its  truth.  The  counsel  for  the  defence,
in  his  zeal  for  the  cause  he  had  undertaken,  endeavoured  to  secure
the  prisoner  from  the  consequences  of  his  crime  upon  the  ground
that  he  had  been  at  the  time  labouring  under  an  impulse  so  powerful
as  to  leave  him  no  resource  but  to  follow  its  vicious  dictates;  but  let
it  not  be  imagined  that  any  such  excuse  as  this,  could  be  admissible.
It  was  indeed  a  direct  impeachment  upon  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of
Providence,  by  declaring  that  the  Almighty  power  had  created  beings
whom  He  exposed  wilfully  to  temptations  without  giving  them  power
of  self  control.  If  wickedly  disposed  men  would  yield  step  by  step
to  the  approaches  of  the  evil  one ,  they  must  expect  to  be  led  at  last
by  the  tempter  to  that  precipice  down  which  it  was  his  desire  to  cast
them,  but  in  order  to  avoid  this  they  must  resist  the  temptation  in
its  infancy,  and  they  would  resist  it  successfully.  Like  one  of  the
witnesses,  it  had  been  his  (the  judge’s)  lot  to  know  the  prisoner  at
Norfolk  Island,  at  which  time  he  was  applying  for  permission  to
occupy  a  solitary  cell,  in  order  to  guard  himself  from  the  resentment
of  the  others  prisoners  on  the  island,  who  accused  him  of  betraying
a  conspiracy  in  which  they  said  he  had  previously  joined.  He  was
sent  there  upon  a  charge  of  forgery,  an  offence  at  that  time  capital;
but  since  then  he  had  been  brought  to  Sydney  under  the  operation
of  some  of  the  local  acts,  and  had  received  indulgences.  The  time
was  probably  not  very  far  distant  when  he  might  have  been  pardoned
altogether,  when  he  might  have  spent  the  remainder  of  his  days  in
freedom  and  comfort;  but  by  his  adherence  to  his  evil  courses,  and
his  total  disregard  of  all  the  warnings  he  had  received,  he  had  cut
himself  off  from  all  hope,  and  brought  dishonour  upon  an  illustrious
name.  The  prisoner  complained  that  he  had  not  had  sufficient  time


310


The  Punishment  of  Death.


allowed  him  to  prepare  for  his  earthly  trial,  but,  with  the  full  know¬
ledge  of  what  he  was  about,  he  had  given  the  unfortunate  deceased
far  less  time  to  prepare  for  the  more  awful  arraignment  before  the
bar  of  her  Maker:  and  he  must  make  a  good  use  of  the  time  still
left  him,  as  his  days  were  now  numbered.  It  was  not  for  him  to
stop  the  source  of  mercy,  but  he  could  see  no  possible  reason  for
extending  it  to  so  aggravated  a  case  as  that  of  the  prisoner.  His
Honor  then  proceeded  to  pass  upon  the  prisoner  the  final  sentence
of  the  court.

“  The  demeanour  of  the  prisoner  throughout  the  trial  was  very
firm,  and  although  evidently  affected,  particularly  at  its  conclusion,
he  exhibited  but  little  symptoms  of  agitation,  except  in  the  tremulous
tones  of  his  voice  while  addressing  the  court,  previous  to  the  passing
of  the  sentence.  He  left  the  court  with  a  firm  step.” — From  the
Sydney  Morning  Herald.

There  are  three  points  for  consideration  in  this  case.  The
history  and  treatment  of  the  prisoner;  the  speecli  of  the
counsel  and  defence  of  the  prisoner;  and  the  charge  and
sentence  of  the  judge.

It  appears  that  the  prisoner,  from  his  earliest  years,  was
remarkable  for  the  manifestation  of  the  usual  signs  of  a  large
animal  region  to  his  brain,  and  the  various  acts  of  tyranny
with  which  we  have  become  acquainted,  and  which  he  ex¬
hibited  while  an  officer  in  the  navy,  united  with  his  innume¬
rable  immoral  acts  during  his  future  career,  proclaim  that
his  brain  must  have  been  of  a  very  inferior  type.*  If  men
were  acquainted  with  the  laws  governing  their  actions, —
if  parents  knew  that  their  children  when  possessing  brains
of  an  inferior  character  were  not  fitted  for  a  profession  where
the  comfort  and  happiness,  it  may  be  the  lives,  of  hundreds
were  subject  to  their  control, — if  men  in  authority  would
use  the  means  science  has  placed  at  their  disposal,  and  not
appoint  to  situations  of  trust  individuals  physically,  and
therefore  morally,  inefficient, — in  a  word,  if  the  truths  of
cerebral  physiology  were  recognized  and  practically  enforced,
there  would  be  an  end  of  cases  of  the  distressing  character
we  are  now  considering.  In  the  present  unsatisfactory  state
of  society,  the  naval  authorities  could  not  have  done  more
than  remove  him  from  his  responsible  situation,  and  render
him  unfit  for  further  employment.  After  his  discharge  from
the  navy  the  civil  law  could  not  be  appealed  to,  because  he
had  not  committed  an  act  which  this  law  would  recognize
as  a  proof  of  insanity.  His  family,  as  is  too  often  the  case
when  one  of  its  members  is  disgraced,  disregarded  him;  and

*  A  cast  of  the  head  was  taken,  but  a  copy  has  not  yet  reached  England.
We  shall  give  a  lithograph  drawing  in  one  of  our  future  numbers.


The  Punishment  of  Death.


311


society  had  thrown  upon  it  an  individual  much  more  fitted
for  the  seclusion  and  treatment  of  a  moral  infirmary,  than
formed  to  struggle  with  the  temptations  and  facilities  for  the
commission  of  crime,  which  surrounded  him.  The  tragical
result  we  are  now  familiar  with.  From  bad  to  worse — from
crime  to  crime,  he  rushed  recklessly  and  blindly  on.  From
the  hells  and  sinks  of  the  metropolis  to  the  common  gaol —
the  hulks  and  the  penal  settlements,  the  course  was  rapid
and  certain.  Arrived  there,  he  soon  obtained  his  liberty,  by
acting  the  part  of  a  spy, — inducing  others  to  do  what  he
would  not  do  himself  and  then  giving  information ;  thus
securing  their  conviction,  and  after  a  time  his  own  release
from  bondage.

But  how  could  such  a  brain  keep  its  possessor  free  ?
Liberty  should  have  been  the  last  thing  thought  of.  We
have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  the  government  is  respon¬
sible  for  this  man’s  crimes.  His  past  career  proved  that  he
was  an  unfortunate  being — the  victim  of  an  organism  so
unfairly  balanced  that  the  ordinary  temptations  of  life  could
not  be  withstood ;  nay  more,  the  victim  of  an  organism
which  prompted  him  to  shed  blood,  if  more  than  ordinary
difficulty  presented  to  prevent  him  from  gaining  his  ends.
Is  it  then  a  mark  of  enlightenment  and  civilization  to  destroy
such  a  being, — a  being  not  only  neglected,  but  absolutely
placed  by  authority  in  a  position  where  his  animal  impulses
could  run  riot  ?  Is  it  just  to  take  away  life  for  an  offence
committed  through  the  carelessness  and  ignorance  of  those
in  authority  ?  Is  it  right  to  take  revenge  upon  a  being  who,
under  certain  circumstances,  has  acted  in  accordance  with
the  promptings  of  his  organism,  over  the  formation  of  which
organism  he  exercised  no  control,  and  of  the  due  regulation
of  which  the  community,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of
his  course,  was  perfectly  regardless  ?  Yes,  it  is  declared  to
be  so.  “  Hang  them  !  Hang  them  \”  is  still  the  cry  of  the
nineteenth,  as  it  was  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Blood !
Blood  !  it  is  this  and  this  only  that  can  wash  away  the  injury
the  poor  wretch  has  committed — it  is  this  only  that  can  ap¬
pease  the  excitement  of  a  Christianized  and  civilized  people !

We  felt  great  pleasure  while  perusing  the  speech  of  Mr.
Lowe.  It  is  consolatory  to  find  one  voice  held  up  on  the
side  of  mercy,  in  a  colony  where  crime  is  so  frequent,  and
where  there  is  a  constant  arrival  of  the  worst  characters  from
the  mother  country.  Mr.  Lowe  did  not  attempt  to  deny
the  guilt  of  the  prisoner,  or  ingeniously  explain  away  what
was  clear  and  self-evident.  He  met  the  case  boldly,  and
with  a  courage  which  cannot  be  too  much  admired,  dared  in

VOL.  II.  v


312


The  Punishment  of  Death.


a  court  of  justice  to  speak  what  he  conceived  to  be  truth,
regardless  of  all  minor  considerations.

“  Sincerity  will  not  yield  to  expediency,  if  we  calculate
correctly.  The  best  mode  of  attacking  error  is  by  speaking
truth;  or,  at  least,  what  appears  to  us  after  sufficiently
careful  examination,  to  be  truth  :  but  whatever  may  be  the
convictions  at  which  we  may  arrive,  and  whatever  may  be
the  opinion  of  society  with  respect  to  such  convictions,  we
are  bound  to  state  them  when  called  upon.  Without  forcing
them  upon  society  unseasonably  and  uncalled  for,  they  must
not  be  dissembled  or  concealed ;  otherwise  the  interests  of
truth,  and  consequently  the  cause  of  human  improvement
and  happiness,  must  suffer.”

It  was  these  considerations  which  prompted  Mr.  Lowe ;
and  although  the  newspaper  report  is  very  much  condensed,
we  nevertheless  possess  enough  to  prove  that  the  arguments
were  drawn  from  our  science;  and  that  he  no  doubt  laid
down  the  doctrine  of  philosophical  necessity  with  clearness
and  precision.  He  could  not  have  chosen  a  more  fitting
opportunity ;  and  we  heartily  wish  that  the  same  truths  may
soon  be  advanced  before  all  the  judicial  benches  of  our  own
country.

Our  judges  are  perfectly  ignorant  of  the  causes  which
produce  crime.  They  are  uninformed,  and  we  are  sorry  to
add  unreflecting.  They  act  upon  the  assumption  that  a  man
can  be  a  moral  or  immoral  character  just  as  he  pleases.  This
doctrine  is  an  offshoot  of  the  religion  of  the  day.  The  laws
are  founded  on  these  views,  and  the  clergy  declare  that  the
views  are  correct.  Fatal  error.  Fatal  to  the  rapid  advance¬
ment  of  humanity,  and  fatal  to  the  progressive  amelioration
of  the  evils  we  are  deploring.  This  fundamental  error  must
be  removed,  because  it  strikes  at  the  root  of  all  the  rational
means  to  be  used  for  the  improvement  of  the  race.  Before,
however,  this  is  accomplished,  there  is  a  great  deal  to  be
done  to  overcome  bigotry  and  prejudice.  Such  views  as  we
are  here  advancing  are  considered  injurious  in  their  conse¬
quences,  and  men  are  afraid  to  entertain  them.

“  Men  grow  pale,

Lest  their  own  judgments  should  become  too  bright,

And  their  free  thoughts  be  crimes,  and  earth  have  too  much  ligli t.’'


The  irrational  opinions  generally  embraced  regarding  the
freedoip  of  the  will,  are  advanced  and  supported  by  the  reli¬
gious  teachers  of  the  people.  They  tell  their  pupils  that
they  are  free  agents,  and  that  by  “  faith”  and  “  the  grace  of
God”  they  can  lead  a  virtuous  life.


They  denounce  crime


The  Punishment  of  Death.


313


and  immorality,  but  declare  that  punishment  must  visit  the
offender,  because  by  his  own  wilfulness  he  has  arrived  at  his
present  state.  How  can  such  doctrines  improve  a  people  ?
How  widely  different  the  doctrines  of  philosophy?  Philosophy
clearly  proves  that  the  character  of  every  being  is  a  compound
product — the  result  of  a  peculiar  cerebral  organism  and  of
the  innumerable  circumstances  which  have  acted,  and  are
still  acting  upon  it.  We  therefore  say,  that  the  actions  of
a  man  necessarily  result  from  his  organic  constitution,  and
the  circumstances  which  surround  him  at  any  stated  period.
This  is  a  law,  and  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  man  to  resist.
The  conduct  of  Knatchbull  was  inevitable,  and  we  have  no
doubt  might  have  been  predicted.  An  inferior  organism,
throughout  life  under  unfavourable  circumstances,  was  cer¬
tain  to  produce  a  vicious  course  of  conduct.  There  are
beings,  and  the  daily  press  teems  with  accounts  of  their
misdeeds,  whose  propensities  are  so  energetic,  and  so  little
under  the  control  of  their  feeble  intellectual  and  moral  fa¬
culties,  that  their  lives  are  one  continued  scene  of  profligacy.
They  carry  their  mark  with  them,  and  yet  society  will  not
take  heed ; — they  proclaim  by  their  daily  actions  that  they
require  confinement  and  benevolent  care,  and  yet  we  leave
them  till  that  catastrophe  occurs  which  could  have  been  fore¬
seen  and  ought  to  have  been  prevented,  and  then  as  a  climax
to  our  insane  proceedings,  we  hang  them  to  prevent  further
trouble,  and  for  the  purpose  of  warning  future  evil-doers.*
How  well  Mr.  Lowe  placed  this  before  the  jury.  He  said,


*  The  female  to  whom  Knatchbull  was  to  have  been  married  the  day-
after  he  committed  the  murder,  attended  his  execution  dressed  in  widow’s
attire  !  And  as  another  specimen  of  the  good  effect  of  an  execution  on  those
w'ho  witness  it,  we  give  the  following  on  the  authority  of  an  eye-witness
and  a  friend,  and  one  on  whom  we  can  place  the  greatest  reliance.  This
scene  occurred  in  one  of  our  penal  colonies  not  long  ago  :

When  the  body  of  the  criminal  was  cut  down  and  brought  within  the
precincts  of  the  gaol,  the  governor  said  to  the  hangman,  “  You  have  not
done  your  duty,  sir.”

Hangman. — “I  am  sorry  for  that,  sir;  1  always  try  to  do  so.  What
did  I  do  wrong  ?”

Governor. — “  You  did  nothing  right;  the  noose  instead  of  being  under
the  ear  was  quite  at  the  back  of  the  neck  ;  moreover,  the  rope  was  not  tight
enough.”

Hangman. — “  Why,  sir,  the  rope  was  so  tight  that  I  saw  his  face  chok¬
ing, — as  red  as  fire  ;  and  as  for  the  knot  (appealing  to  a  gentleman,  a
bystander),  don’t  you  see,  sir,  that  its  the  drop  as  makes  it  almost  impossible
to  hit  it  fine  ;  it  will  slip  back  in  the  best  hands,  when  there  is  a  long  drop.
I’ve  been  here  twelve  years,  and  it’s  a  hard  case  that  I  can’t  after  all  give
satisfaction.”

Governor. — “  I  shall  send  you  a  week  to  the  cells.”

Hangman. — “  I  hope  not,  sir.”

Governor. — “  Where  is  the  rope  ?”

Hangman. — “  I’ve  sold  it  to  a  gentleman  for  a  guinea.”

v  2


314


The  Punishment  of  Death.


“  The  prisoner  is  one  of  those  persons  for  whom  laws  had
not  been  made  ;  and  who,  although  for  the  peace  and  welfare
of  society,  he  ought  to  be  placed  under  the  most  severe
restraint,  ought  not  to  be  held  responsible  for  his  actions.”
And  again  :  “Could  they  believe  that  a  man  with  the  great
advantages  originally  possessed  by  the  prisoner  could  have
fallen,  step  by  step,  into  the  lowest  depths  of  disgrace,  un¬
less  urged  on  by  some  resistless  demon  of  insanity  ? — by
whom,  if  guilty  of  the  crime  now  laid  to  his  charge,  he  had
been  incited  to  its  perpetration.  The  existence  of  this  in¬
ternal  impulse  to  evil,  although  dangerous  in  its  operation  to
society  at  large,  should  not  subject  the  possessor  of  it  to  the
most  dreadful  punishment  of  all,  for  a  crime  which  he  could
hardly  be  held  answerable  for,  and  it  could  not  be  contended
that  the  ends  of  justice  would  be  more  answered  by  allowing
a  person  of  this  description  to  expiate  his  offence  on  the
scaffold,  than  by  the  public  execution  of  any  savage  animal,
which  had  done  an  act  of  cruelty  with  similar  wrant  of  con¬
trolling  power  over  its  actions.”

We  fully  agree  with  this ;  but  what  said  the  judge?  Can
any  one  suppose  that  he  had  ever  reflected  on  the  causes  of
crime — on  the  means  of  preventing  it — on  the  nature  of  his
own  constitution,  and  of  the  beings  surrounding  him  ?  Had
he  ever  reflected  on  the  responsibility  attached  to  his  office  ?
He  was  not  sitting  in  judgment,  as  Mr.  Lowre  told  him,
“merely  as  the  avenger  of  blood.”  How  little  such  subjects
had  troubled  him  wTe  may  gather  from  the  following  portion
of  his  charge.  “  The  only  excuse  for  crime  was  that  of  an
actually  unsound  mind  at  the  time  of  its  perpetration ;  and
whatever  attention  so  abstruse  a  question  as  the  formation
of  the  human  mind  might  have  created  among  the  philoso¬
phers  of  Europe,  he  apprehended  that  a  simple  question  of
facts,  propounded  to  twelve  reasonable  men,  might  be  very
easily  determined  upon  without  resorting  to  any  such  abstract
reasoning.”  A  simple  question  of  facts  presented  to  twelve
men  w  ould  most  probably  enable  them  to  ascertain  w'hether
the  prisoner  on  trial  was,  or  was  not,  guilty  of  murder ;  but
surely  something  more  than  this  is  required.  Surely  hu¬
manity  demands  something  more  than  the  ascertainment  of
the  fact,  to  be  succeeded  by  the  common-place  proceeding  of
demanding  punishment  and  passing  sentence.  Surely,  the
destruction  of  a  fellow-creature  is  a  matter  of  some  wreight
and  consideration ;  and,  to  take  the  lowest  ground,  should
not  follow  the  committal  of  a  crime,  without  an  inquiry  into
the  cause  producing  it.  Such  barbarism  is  a  reflection  on
the  age;  but,  alas!  when  will  it  be  removed?  Our  judges


The  Punishment  of  Death.


315


it  is  clear  are  not  the  men  to  move,  for  they  declare  the  pu¬
nishment  of  death  to  be  “  well-merited/’ — our  senators,  with
a  few  exceptions,  entertain  destructive  views, — and  the  people,
as  a  mass,  are  not  yet  sufficiently  enlightened  with  regard  to
their  own  structure,  and  the  formation  of  their  own  cha¬
racter,  to  entertain  rational  and  benevolent  views  concerning
one  wTho  has  offended  them.  It  is  left  then  for  the  few  to
struggle  for  the  many, — for  the  rational  to  instruct  the  irra¬
tional, — for  the  humane  to  soften  and  enlighten  the  inhuman,
and  on  all  occasions  to  enforce  the  views  our  science  teaches,
and  thus  hasten  the  period  when  our  system  of  criminal  ju¬
risprudence  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  dictates  of  reason
and  justice.

But  we  are  told  that  these  views  have  no  place  “  in  the
law  of  England,  common  sense,  or  morality .”  We  have
looked  in  vain  for  common  sense  or  morality  in  the  charge
of  Judge  Burton.  It  is  a  perfect  piece  of  absurdity — full  of
twaddle — and  contains  statements  which  no  rational  being
can  receive.

“  If  wickedly-disposed  men  will  yield  step  by  step  to  the
approaches  of  the  evil  one,  they  must  expect  to  be  led  at
last  by  the  tempter  to  that  precipice,  down  which  it  was  his
desire  to  cast  them  !

“  The  very  term  of  the  information  was,  that  the  prisoner
‘  not  having  the  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes,  but  being  moved
and  seduced  by  the  instigations  of  the  devil/  had  committed
the  crime  laid  to  his  charge ;  and  it  could  not  therefore  be
contended  that  the  offender  was  to  be  exonerated  from  the
consequences  of  his  offence,  by  the  very  reasons  which  were
alleged  to  have  actuated  him  in  committing  it.”

What  an  appeal  to  reason !  What  logic !  Now,  we
confess  that  we  should  draw  a  different  conclusion.  It  appears
to  us,  that  if  a  being  is  seduced  by  a  power  which  he  did
not  call  into  existence,  and  over  which  he  has  no  control,
then  there  is  a  very  urgent  reason  presented,  why  he  should
be  exonerated  from  the  consequences  of  his  offence.  By
Judge  Burton’s  own  shewing — by  his  own  doctrine — it  is
clear  that  the  prisoner  could  not  avoid  acting  as  he  did.
Little  children  are  sometimes  frightened  by  fanatical  teach¬
ers,  who  tell  them  that  the  devil  moves  about  “like  a  roaring
lion,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour  ;” — but  that  an  educated
man,  and  that  man  a  judge  sixty  years  of  age,  should  delibe¬
rately  advance  such  an  insane  dogma,  and  tell  a  poor  wretch
he  is  about  to  sentence  to  death,  that  he  brought  himself  to
his  present  state,  because  he  would  yield  to  the  approaches  of
the  “  evil  one,”  and  that  he  ought  to  have  resisted  the  advance


316  A  Theory  concerning  the  Organ  of  Wonder.

of  the  “  tempter,”  is  really  almost  past  belief.  When  the
judicial  bench  is  made  the  rostrum  from  which  is  promul¬
gated  such  ignorant  and  superstitious  views,  it  is  melancholy
to  contemplate  the  injury  which  must  be  inflicted.

We  had  prepared  some  remarks  on  the  two  recent  cases
of  murder  committed  by  Crouch  and  D almas,  but  we  must
defer  them  till  our  next  number.

L.E.G.E.


II.  A  Theory  concerning  the  Organ  of  Wonder.

By  Herbert  Spencer.

By  way  of  apology  for  opposing  a  received  phrenological
doctrine,  it  may  be  urged  that  considering  the  comparatively
short  time  that  has  elapsed  since  the  discovery  of  a  true
system  of  mental  philosophy,  it  is  extremely  improbable  that
the  details  of  that  system  should  be  all  of  them,  or  nearly
all  of  them,  correct.  No  science  has  at  once  attained  to  the
fulness  of  truth  ;  and  as  in  the  earlier  days  of  chemistry,
many  of  the  simple  bodies  were  unknown  and  many  of  the
compound  ones  were  believed  to  be  simple ;  so  in  the  present
stage  of  phrenology,  there  are  doubtless  some  of  the  primary
faculties  yet  unrevealed,  and  some  of  their  combinations
that  are  taken  to  be  elementary.  We  may,  moreover,  con¬
clude  that  each  of  the  several  mental  powers  will  be  ulti¬
mately  found — simple  in  quality, — easily  comprehensible, —
and  capable  of  exact  definition.

If,  admitting  these  positions,  we  find  attributed  to  a
certain  portion  of  brain,  a  function  of  confused  indefinite
character, — a  function  explicable  only  by  a  circuitous  de¬
scription  presenting  to  the  mind  no  distinct  idea,  but  serving
rather  to  exhibit  the  clue  to  something  than  the  thing  itself
we  have  reason  to  doubt  the  fundamental  nature  of  the
implied  power,  and  may  prudently  enquire  whether  the  true
duty  of  the  organ  has  been  determined.  Perhaps  we  have
in  the  case  of  Wonder,  otherwise  styled  Marvellousness,  and
Faith,  the  strongest  reasons  for  such  scepticism.  The  exist¬
ence  of  a  difference  of  opinion  respecting  the  name  properly
assignable  to  the  sentiment,  is  a  sufficient  cause  for  suspecting
that  its  true  character  has  not  yet  been  discovered ;  and  the
fact  that  its  several  names  seem  to  indicate  the  collateral
results  of  a  mental  power,  rather  than  the  power  itself  pre¬
sents  further  stimulus  to  examination.

Proceeding  systematically,  however,  the  definite  objec¬
tions  that  may  be  raised  against  the  existing  theory  are  these.


A  Theory  concerning  the  Organ  of  Wonder.  317

1.  Observation  has  shewn  that  a  large  development  of
Wonder  is  accompanied  by  a  liability  to  mental  illusions.  The
seer  of  visions  and  apparitions  is  said  to  owe  his  peculiarities
to  its  agency ;  and  the  spectral  appearances  by  which  men
are  annoyed  or  alarmed  during  certain  unhealthy  states  of
body,  have  been  traced  to  its  diseased  excitement.  These
phenomena  imply  that  the  organ  is  capable,  under  certain
circumstances,  of  producing  illusive  images.  But  how  does
this  consist  with  the  currently  received  doctrine  ?  A  love  of
the  marvellous  and  a  tendency  to  believe,  both  indicate  a
faculty  that  bears  as  it  were  a  passive  relation  to  the  do¬
ings  of  the  rest  of  the  mind — a  something  playing  the
part  of  a  spectator  that  is  gratified  when  the  intellect  pre¬
sents  to  it  anything  new  or  strange.  How  then  can  it  be
supposed  to  take  upon  itself  the  active  function  of  creating
mental  spectra  ?  If  we  assume  that  the  organ  originating
the  love  of  the  marvellous  is  in  itself  capable  of  producing
marvellous  appearances,  we  may  with  equal  propriety  consider
Causality  as  a  love  of  reasoning,  and  thence  conclude  that
it  is  capable  of  perceiving  the  relation  between  cause  and
effect !

2.  The  fact  that  the  organ  is  large  in  men  of  genius,
does  not  satisfactorily  accord  with  the  existing  notions  of  its
function.  Considered  either  as  faith  or  as  a  love  of  the
wonderful,  we  find  it  more  strongly  manifested  by  shallow
and  ignorant  minds  than  by  profound  and  enlightened  ones.
A  bigoted  belief,  a  ready  credulity,  and  a  delight  in  the
incomprehensible  and  mysterious  are  characteristics  exhibited
by  man  in  his  lowest  rather  than  in  his  highest  phases  of
cultivation.  Nay,  such  sentiments  are  from  their  very  nature
connected  with  an  unintellectual,  inactive  state  of  mind.  The
love  of  the  marvellous  derives  its  gratification  from  the  con¬
templation  of  something  which  the  reflective  faculties  cannot
fathom.  Place  before  the  intellect  the  rationale  of  that  some¬
thing  and  the  sentiment  ceases  in  a  great  measure  to  exist.
Hence  it  is  that  those  endowed  with  a  superabundance  of
the  feeling,  not  only  never  seek  explanations  of  mysterious
phenomena,  but  are  actually  annoyed  by  having  reduced  to
the  level  of  their  comprehension  things  which  they  had
looked  upon  as  supernatural.  Such  a  state  of  mind  is  any¬
thing  but  characteristic  of  the  genius.

3.  Paith  may  be  shown  to  proceed  in  great  measure  from
Veneration.  Confidence  in  the  instruction  or  guidance  of
some  other  being,  either  human  or  divine,  cannot  exist  un¬
less  that  being  be  venerated.  Without  respect,  faith  can
have  no  foundation.  Its  very  nature  implies  dependence,


318  A  Theory  concerning  the  Organ  of  Wonder.

and  dependence  necessarily  presupposes  reverence  for  a  power
believed  to  possess  higher  attributes.  It  may  be  observed
too  that  the  artificial  excitement  of  V eneration  will  induce
faith.  The  grandeur  of  a  cathedral  and  the  solemnities  of
its  service  are  frequently  productive  of  an  emotion  clearly
evincing  the  connexion  between  these  two  sentiments,  as  the
writer  can  himself  testify.  Into  so  credulous  a  state  is  the
mind  betrayed  by  its  reverential  feelings  when  subject  to
such  influences,  that  for  the  time  it  seems  scarcely  possible
to  believe  state-churchism  and  its  ceremonies,  other  than
just  what  they  should  be,  although  the  whole  system  may
in  calmer  moments  meet  with  unqualified  condemnation.
Similarly  also  it  might  be  shown  that  magnificent  temples,
processions,  and  sacrifices,  have  in  past  time  been  potent
agents  in  the  hands  of  heathen  priests,  for  sustaining  the
faith  of  the  people,  and  that  this  end  has  been  secured
by  working  upon  their  Veneration.  The  doctrine  that  faith
emanates  solely  from  the  organ  of  Wonder  is  contradicted
too  by  the  fact,  that  there  exist  nations  (the  Nomadic  tribes
of  central  and  northern  Asia  for  example)  having  but  a  very
moderate  development  of  that  organ,  who  nevertheless  possess
as  much  faith  as  we  do — probably  more ;  seeing  that  they
who  believe  in  a  religion,  that  it  is  wholly  discountenanced
by  reason,  must  have  greater  faith  than  they  who  require  a
creed  more  in  accordance  with  it.  Hence  also  might  be
drawn  the  general  inference  that  all  idol  worshippers  must
have  a  greater  tendency  to  believe  than  ourselves, — or,  if  the
common  theory  be  true,  must  have  larger  organs  of  Wonder.
We  do  not  find,  however,  that  they  are  so  distinguished.

4.  In  like  manner,  the  love  of  the  marvellous  may  be
traced  mainly  to  the  sentiment  of  Veneration.  Mysteries
and  incomprehensible  occurrences  naturally  suggest  the
agency  of  a  higher  power.  It  is  chiefly  the  str'ong  evidence
which  they  afford  of  the  existence  and  activity  of  such  power
that  gives  rise  to  the  feeling  with  which  they  are  regarded ;
and  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  Veneration  possessed
will  be  the  pleasure  taken  in  contemplating  what  are  con¬
ceived  to  be  supernatural  phenomena, — that  is,  phenomena
bearing  the  impress  of  something  superhuman.*

These  considerations  may  not  of  themselves  appear  suffi¬
ciently  forcible  to  warrant  the  reader  in  the  rejection  of  the


*  These  arguments  must  not  be  considered  as  equivalent  to  the  assertion
that  the  organ  of  Wonder  has  no  agency  in  producing  the  sentiments  attri¬
buted  to  it.  It  is  only  maintained  that  it  is  of  itself  insufficient  for  such
purpose.  In  what  manner  it  probably  aids  in  their  production  will  be
pointed  out  hereafter.


A  Theory  concerning  the  Organ  of  Wonder.  319

existing  theory.  If,  however,  it  can  be  shown  that  the  pro¬
duction  of  faith  and  marvellousness  is  more  satisfactorily
explicable  upon  another  hypothesis  open  to  none  of  these
objections, — an  hypothesis  too  that  affords  a  more  distinct
explanation  of  other  mental  operations,  the  evidence  will
perhaps  be  considered  conclusive.

The  theory  is  this ;  that  the  organ  at  present  entitled
Wonder,  has  for  its  ultimate  function  the  revival  of  all  intel¬
lectual  impressions, — that  it  is  the  chief  agent  of  imagina¬
tion, — and  that  it  is  the  basis  of  memory.

As  a  first  step  in  the  argument,  it  may  perhaps  be  neces¬
sary  to  prove  the  existence  of  such  a  power  as  the  one  assumed;
seeing  that  phrenologists  have  not  hitherto  recognized  it  as
an  independent  faculty.  It  appears  to  have  been  commonly
understood,  that  the  perceptive  faculties  alone  are  competent
to  recall  ideas,  and  that  the  act  of  recollection  is  completed
by  them  without  the  intervention  of  any  other  agency.  Were
this  assumption  true,  however,  we  should  have  to  relinquish
the  principle  that  one  organ  can  perform  but  one  function.
The  primary  duty  of  the  perceptive  faculties  is  to  receive
impressions ;  the  revival  of  those  impressions  is  an  entirely
distinct  action,  in  no  way  related  to  that  of  reception ;  and  it
is  inconsistent  to  suppose  it  effected  without  the  aid  of  some
special  mechanism.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the  impressions
require  no  recalling,  for  this  would  imply  that  all  images  that
have  been  received  into  the  mind  exist  visibly  before  it,  and
our  daily  experience  proves  that  this  is  not  the  case;  we  know
that  our  perceptions  become  dormant, — that  they  are  capable
of  being  separately  called  up,  and  hence  we  must  infer  the
existence  of  a  power  for  their  revival.  The  fact  that  different
persons  recall  impressions  with  such  different  degrees  of  vivid¬
ness  countenances  this  conclusion.  Place  any  object  before
a  Landseer,  and  he  will  be  able  to  make  a  representation  of
it  after  it  has  been  removed  with  nearly  as  much  precision  as
if  it  were  before  him ;  whilst  another  individual  with  equally
large  observing  faculties  will  scarcely  be  able  to  make  a  toler¬
able  outline  of  it.  Persons  are  now  and  then  met  with  who
will  repeat  verbatim,  after  a  single  perusal,  a  long  document
which  the  generality  of  men  could  barely  remember  with  a
score  readings.  Such  extreme  differences  are  hardly  ascrib-
able  to  variations  in  the  vividness  of  perception.  We  may
fairly  assume  that  objects  are  seen  by  both  parties  with  nearly
equal  distinctness,  or  in  other  words  that  the  perceptive
faculties  receive  similar  impressions ;  and  if  so  the  cause  of
the  discrepancy  must  be  sought  for  in  the  different  degrees
of  efficiency  in  the  recalling  power.


320  A  Theory  concerning  the  Organ  of  Wonder.

The  will  may  perhaps  be  pointed  out  as  the  agent  of  which
we  are  in  search.  Philosophically  speaking,  however,  the
will  is  nothing  more  than  the  preponderance  of  any  one
impulse,  or  set  of  impulses  over  any  other  or  others ;  and
being  merely  the  expression  of  desire,  it  may  not  be  considered
as  a  positive  independent  faculty,  and  cannot  therefore  be
supposed  to  perform  the  function  in  question.  Moreover,
did  it  really  perform  such  function,  the  power  of  recalling
impressions  would  be  proportionate  to  the  intensity  of  the
desire,  and  this  we  know  to  be  contrary  to  experience.  Lastly,
the  fact  that  scenes  are  often  vividly  pictured  to  the  mind,  in
direct  opposition  to  the  will,  as  must  have  been  observed  by
every  one  who  knows  what  it  is  to  have  a  sleepless  night,
may  in  itself  be  considered  as  sufficient  proof  that  the  revival
of  ideas  is  due  to  some  other  agency  than  that  of  mere
volition.

What  name  is  most  applicable  to  the  supposed  faculty  it
is  not  easy  to  determine.  “  Imagination”  is  objectionable,
because  involving  as  it  does  the  rearrangement  of  impres¬
sions  :  it  requires  the  aid  of  Constructiveness.  Neither  will
“  Memory”  do,  for  it  likewise  implies  the  assistance  of  other
faculties.  Perhaps  the  term  Reviviscence  is  the  most  descrip¬
tive  ;  it  is  an  awkward  title  but  may  serve  the  purpose  until
a  better  can  be  found.

Granting  then  the  existence  of  the  assumed  agency,  the
supposition  that  it  is  situated  in  what  is  at  present  considered
as  the  organ  of  Wonder,  will,  it  is  believed,  afford  an  explana¬
tion  of  the  phenomena  accompanying  the  developement  of
that  portion  of  the  brain.

The  reader  will  at  once  see  that  the  liability  to  be  deceived
by  spectral  appearances,  must,  other  things  being  the  same,
vary  as  the  power  of  the  proposed  faculty.  The  more  efficient
the  instrument,  for  the  revivification  of  impressions,  the  more
nearly  will  the  images  produced  approach  in  appearance  to
realities.  Celebrated  painters  have  possessed  the  power  of
calling  up  objects  so  distinctly  before  the  mind's  eye  as  to
render  the  process  of  depicting  them  little  more  than  copying
from  nature.  One  such  now  living,  has  been  already  alluded
to.  If,  then,  the  faculty  be  capable  of  effecting  so  much
under  the  influence  of  its  ordinary  stimulus,  we  may  reason¬
ably  assume  that  its  unnatural  activity  will  be  accompanied
by  a  difficulty  in  distinguishing  revived  impressions  from  real
perceptions.  We  have  in  works  on  psychology  numerous
cases  of  mental  illusions  resulting  from  a  slightly  disordered
state  of  the  brain,  which  might  be  quoted  as  so  many  ex¬
amples  of  an  unhealthy  excitement  of  the  reviving  agent ;


A  Theory  concerning  the  Organ  of  Wonder.  321

and  a  case  has  come  under  the  writer’s  own  observation  where
from  injudicious  application  a  cerebral  disorder  was  produced,
characterized  by  this  same  exaltation  in  the  activity  of  the
imagination,  accompanied  by  pain  in  the  organs  in  question.

Similarly  may  be  explained  the  mental  action  that  gives
rise  to  the  seeing  of  ghosts  and  apparitions.  During  the
gloom  of  night,  and  under  the  influence  of  appropriate  feeling,
every  dimly-distinguished  object  calls  up  in  the  mind  some
pre-existing  impression  to  which  it  may  chance  to  bear  a
faint  resemblance,  and  amid  the  excitement  resulting  from
extreme  fear,  the  mental  image  is  rendered  so  vivid  as  to  be
mistaken  for  the  thing  seen.  Persons  will  of  course  be  subject
to  such  illusions  in  the  ratio  of  their  endowment  of  the  faculty
of  Reviviscence.

The  love  of  the  marvellous  although  proceeding  funda¬
mentally  from  Veneration,  may  nevertheless  be  augmented
by  the  presence  of  large  Reviviscence.  From  the  common
phrenological  principle,  that  organs  are  prone  to  action  in
proportion  to  their  size,  it  may  be  inferred  that  a  powerful
agent  for  the  reproduction  of  impressions  will  be  accompanied
by  unusual  pleasure  in  the  creation  of  mental  imagery ;  if
conjoined  with  this  there  be  a  full  development  of  Venera¬
tion,  the  objects  contemplated  will  be  of  such  character  as  to
minister  to  its  gratification ;  and  hence  will  arise  the  love  of
ghost  stories,  and  tales  of  witchcraft,  which  at  the  same  time
that  they  afford  abundant  scope  for  the  imagination,  excite
likewise  feelings  of  astonishment  and  awe.  Where,  on  the
other  hand,  a  deficiency  of  the  supposed  faculty  exists,  there
cannot  be  that  same  delight  in  mentally  portraying  the
scenes  described;  and  although  Veneration  may  as  before
solicit  gratification  from  such  narrations,  the  other  power
concerned  will  be  either  adverse  or  indifferent,  and  con¬
sequently  the  incentive  to  listen  will  be  less.

In  like  manner,  may  the  sentiment  of  Faith  be  in  a  con¬
siderable  degree  exalted  by  a  similar  combination.  Things
are  believed  partly  in  proportion  to  the  distinctness  with
which  they  are  perceived.  We  never  doubt  the  existence  of
an  object  seen  and  felt;  and  the  strength  of  our  belief  is
proportionate  to  the  vividness  of  our  perception.  Hence  it
may  be  reasonably  assumed  that  with  things  unseen, — ideas
conveyed  to  the  mind  by  spoken  or  written  testimony,  the
amount  of  faith  will,  cceter is  paribus,  depend  upon  the  dis¬
tinctness  with  which  such  ideas  are  realized.  As,  however,
belief  in  the  information  directly  received  by  the  senses  is
mainly  produced  by  our  confidence  in  their  trustworthiness  ;
so,  in  the  case  of  facts  and  doctrines  dependent  upon  testi-


322  A  Theory  concerning  the  Organ  of  Wonder.

mony,  our  faith  is  chiefly  determined  by  the  degree  of  reverence
entertained  for  the  authority  bearing  witness  to  them ;  and
therefore  as  previously  observed,  the  tendency  to  believe  will
accompany  the  tendency  to  venerate.  Nevertheless  belief
will  increase,  the  more  perfectly  the  thing  described  or  asserted
can  be  imagined,  and  where  the  mind  is  unable  to  picture
to  itself  new  and  strange  ideas  there  may  perhaps  be  a  leaning
towards  scepticism,  despite  the  influence  of  Veneration.

It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  the  several  peculiarities
commonly  accompanying  a  large  development  of  Wonder  are
explicable  upon  the  newr  hypothesis.

The  harmony  existing  between  the  theory  now  proposed,
and  that  some  time  since  set  forth  respecting  the  functions  of
Imitation  and  Benevolence*  may  be  pointed  out  as  an  evidence
of  the  truth  of  both.  It  was  maintained  that  it  is  the  primary
office  of  the  organ  entitled  Imitation,  to  excite  in  the  mind
of  one  being  the  feelings  exhibited  by  another;  and  it  is  the
aim  of  the  present  essay  to  show  that  the  true  duty  of  the
adjoining  organ,  hitherto  called  Wonder,  is  the  revival  of
intellectual  perceptions.  The  two  faculties  then,  are  nearly
related.  It  is  the  object  of  both  to  bring  certain  other  facul¬
ties  into  activity.  By  the  one,  feelings  are  recalled ;  by  the
other,  impressions.  The  first  acts  independently  of  the  will ;
the  second  in  conjunction  with  it.  Whilst,  therefore,  the
two  functions  have  such  distinctness  as  to  demand  separate
agents  for  their  performance,  they  have  that  degree  of  analogy
which  renders  the  juxta-position  of  their  organs  natural.

There  is,  moreover,  an  important  end  secured  by  the
adjacency  of  these  organs.  Were  the  arrangement  other
than  it  is,  the  spectator,  who,  being  sympathetically  affected
by  the  sufferings  of  a  fellow-being,  desired  to  rid  himself  of
the  pain  thereby  produced,  would  at  once  be  able  to  do  so  by
getting  out  of  sight  and  hearing,  so  as  to  render  the  natural
language  by  which  his  sympathy  had  been  aroused,  inopera¬
tive;  and  thus  the  end  for  which  the  sentiment  had  been
implanted  would  be  defeated.  But,  assuming  the  faculty
for  the  revival  of  impressions  to  be  situated  as  here  supposed,
and  bearing  in  mind  the  influence  of  communicated  action,
it  will  be  seen  that  this  difficulty  is  provided  against.  Under
such  circumstances  as  those  above  detailed  awakened  Sym¬
pathy  stimulates  its  neighbour  Reviviscence  to  unusual  ac¬
tivity  ;  but  this  faculty,  when  strongly  excited,  continues  to
act  independently  of  the  will,  and  reproduces  images  contrary
to  its  dictates;  hence  the  spectator,  who  has  a  full  endowment


*


See  The  Zoist,  No.  IV.,  for  January,  1844.


A  Theory  concerning  the  Organ  of  Wonder.  323

of  it,  cannot  escape  from  liis  own  uncomfortable  sensations
by  turning  away  from  the  object  of  his  commiseration,  because
the  scene  by  which  he  has  been  affected  will  be  perpetually
presented  to  him,  and  his  feelings  will  continue  to  be  wrought
upon,  despite  his  endeavour  to  direct  his  thoughts  into  other
channels.  Thus  it  appears  that  the  juxta-position  of  Revi-
viscence  and  Sympathy  is  not  only  requisite  on  the  ground  of
analogy,  but  that  it  is  sometimes  essential  to  the  completion
of  benevolent  actions.

Before  bringing  forward  the  illustrations  that  may  be
quoted  in  support  of  the  proposed  theory,  it  will  be  well  to
advert  to  one  or  two  objections  that  may  be  raised  against  it.
It  will  possibly  be  said  that  in  assigning  to  the  organ  of  Revi-
viscence  so  important  a  part  in  the  production  of  imagination
we  are  verging  upon  the  province  of  Ideality.  It  may  be
asked  in  reply,  what  is  Ideality  ?  If  it  be  considered  simply
as  a  sense  of  the  beautiful,  there  is  no  foundation  for  the
objection ;  but  if,  as  appears  to  be  the  case,  it  is  likewise
partially  identified  with  the  power  of  producing  ideal  images,
the  discrepancy  is  chargeable  not  to  the  theory  now  set
forth,  but  to  the  inconsistency  of  giving  two  functions  to
one  organ.  The  sense  of  the  beautiful,  and  the  power  of
imagining,  are  utterly  distinct  from  each  other,  and  have  no
claim  whatever  to  be  considered  as  arising  from  modified
actions  of  the  same  agent.  Ideality  may  indeed  for  its  own
gratification  direct  the  imaginative  faculty  to  the  contempla¬
tion  of  the  pure  and  the  elegant;  but  that  faculty  has  of  itself
no  tendency  in  that  direction,  and  is  ready  to  realize  the
most  prosaic  as  well  as  the  most  poetical  ideas.  The  new
theory  then,  serves  rather  to  define  and  simplify  our  notions
of  Ideality ;  and  in  the  contiguity  of  Ideality  and  Reviviscence
suggests  the  reason  why  our  imaginations  commonly  partake
of  the  beautiful.

To  the  doctrine  that  the  supposed  faculty  performs  a  part
so  essential  to  the  existence  of  memory,  it  may  be  objected
that  observations  prove  Individuality  and  Eventuality  to  be
the  especial  agents  of  that  attribute.  It  is  answered  that  the
admission  of  the  proposed  theory  does  not  involve  the  denial
of  their  instrumentality.  Memory  implies  three  actions :
1.  The  reception  of  impressions.  2.  The  revival  of  them;
and  3.  The  association  of  those  that  require  connecting,  such
as  names  with  things  and  persons,  objects  with  places,  events
with  times,  and  so  on.  The  first  action  is  compassed  by  the
perceptive  organs  generally;  the  second  by  the  supposed
faculty,  Reviviscence;  and  the  third,  by  Individuality  and
Eventuality.  Each  of  the  three  being  a  party  to  distinct


324  A  Theory  concerning  the  Organ  of  Wonder.

recollection,  it  follows  that  if  the  efficiency  of  any  one  be
increased,  an  enhanced  power  of  remembrance  will  be  the
result,  and  hence  other  things  being  the  same,  the  existence
of  large  Individuality  and  Eventuality  will  be  indicative  of
memory.  That  the  development  of  these  two  organs  is  alone
the  measure  of  memory  will  scarcely  be  asserted  by  those  who
have  paid  much  attention  to  the  matter.  Lord  Bacon  appears
to  have  had  but  an  ordinary  endowment  of  them,  and  yet
how  few  have  possessed  so  capacious  a  memory.

We  come  now  to  the  illustrations.  It  has  been  maintained
that  Reviviscence  is  the  parent  of  Imagination, — that  Imagi¬
nation  is  but  a  revival  and  a  putting  together  of  impressions
previously  received  by  the  perceptive  faculties,  and  that  upon
the  efficiency  of  the  reviving  agent  must  mainly  depend  the
vividness  of  ideal  images.  Poets  therefore  who  are  in  great
measure  distinguished  by  their  powers  of  imagination  may
be  naturally  expected  to  possess  a  large  endowment  of  Revi-
viscence.  That  such  is  the  fact  may  be  seen  by  reference  to
the  heads  of  Milton,  Shakspeare,  Spenser,  Dryden,  Beau¬
mont  and  Fletcher  (dramatists),  Drummond,  G.  Buchanan,
Otway,  Malherbe,  Tasso,  Young,  Bunyan,*  Cowper,  Darwin,
Scott,  Byron,  Wordsworth,  and  Hogg.  In  all  of  them  the
organ  is  large ;  in  some  very  large.  The  names  of  other  poets
might  doubtless  have  been  added  to  the  list  had  likenesses  of
them  been  attainable.

In  proof  that  strength  of  memory  results  from  a  large
development  of  the  same  organ,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  quote
the  cases  of  Milton,  Shakspeare,  Tasso,  Scott,  Swedenborg,
Lord  Bacon,  Melancthon,  R.  Sanderson,  R.  Hooker,  Raleigh,
W.  Tyndale,  G.  Buchanan,  Gibbon,  Sterne,  Wesley,  and
Dr.  Parr ;  all  of  whom  bear  witness,  either  by  the  amount  of
their  erudition  or  by  the  anecdotes  related  of  them,  or  by
both,  to  the  truth  of  the  theory.!

Further  evidence  is  deducible  from  the  fact,  that  so  many
men  of  powerful  memory,  or  brilliant  imagination  have  been
subject  to  mental  illusions.  Tasso  held  conversation  with  a
spirit  gliding  on  a  sunbeam.  Malebranch  heard  the  voice  of
God  distinctly  within  him.  Pascal  often  started  from  his
chair  at  the  appearance  of  a  fiery  gulf  opening  by  his  side.
Luther  conversed  with  demons.  Descartes  was  followed  by
an  invisible  person  calling  on  him  to  pursue  the  search  of
truth.  Swedenborg  describes  heaven  and  hell.  Benevenuto

*  Bunyan  was  a  true  poet,  philosophically  speaking,  though  not  con¬
ventionally  recognized  as  such.

t  If  the  writer  had  had  access  to  likenesses  of  Pascal,  Crichton,  Dr.
Wallis,  and  other  such  men,  he  believes  that  still  more  numerous  examples
might  have  been  given.


A  Theory  concerning  the  Organ  of  Wonder.  325

Cellini  was  accustomed  to  behold  a  resplendent  light  hovering
over  his  own  shadow.  Dante  talked  with  spirits.  And  Cow-
per  was  haunted  with  spiritual  sounds.  Inasmuch  as  these
cases  favour  the  conclusion,  that  the  power  of  reviving  im¬
pressions,  either  as  manifested  in  memory  or  imagination,
frequently  coexists  with  the  liability  to  spectral  illusions,
they  gave  collateral  support  to  the  proposed  theory ;  for  they
show  that  these  several  traits  emanate  from  the  same  pecu¬
liarity  of  organization.

A  summary  of  the  preceding  matter  may  help  the  reader
to  a  decision.  It  is  argued  in  bar  of  the  present  theory —

1.  That  an  organ,  whose  function  is  to  produce  a  love  of
the  marvellous,  cannot  be  reasonably  supposed  capable  of
creating  mental  spectra.

2.  That  men  of  genius  are  neither  noted  for  faith  nor
marvellousness,  although  they  usually  possess  a  more  than
ordinary  development  of  the  organ  of  Wonder.

3.  That  Veneration  is  the  chief  agent  in  the  production
of  these  sentiments,  as  may  be  seen  by  their  analysis.

4.  That  some  nations  having  but  a  very  moderate  endow¬
ment  of  Wonder,  nevertheless  possess  abundant  faith.

It  is  argued  in  favour  of  the  proposed  theory —

1.  That  it  avoids  these  objections.

2.  That  it  affords  a  tangible  explanation  of  mental  illu¬
sions,  either  when  due  to  disordered  states  of  the  brain,  or
to  unusual  excitement.

3.  That  it  indicates  the  mode  in  which  Veneration  may
be  aided  by  the  supposed  faculty  in  the  production  of  both
faith  and  marvellousness.

4.  That  it  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  theory  of  Sym¬
pathy,  as  regards  the  juxta-position  of  the  organs,  and  by
pointing  out  their  associated  action  affords  a  still  clearer  view
of  the  philosophy  of  Benevolence.

5.  That  it  gives  greater  definiteness  to  Ideality,  by  re¬
lieving  it  of  a  superabundance  of  function.

6.  That  it  does  not  conflict  with  the  doctrine  that  Indi¬
viduality  and  Eventuality  are  indicative  of  memory,  but
implies  that  they  are  not  the  only  essentials.

7.  That  it  receives  strong  confirmation  from  its  agree¬
ment  with  so  great  a  number  of  observable  facts.

Derby,  August ,  1844.


(  32G  )


III.  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.,  (the
author  of  the  celebrated  Life  of  Jesus,  which  has  gone
through  so  many  editions,  and  caused  such  a  sensation
throughout  Germany),  with  general  Phrenological  and  Phi¬
losophical  Observations.  By  M.  Castle,  M.D,  of  Milan.*

The  school  of  Gall  is  evidently  divided  into  two  great  sec¬
tions  ;  the  first  composed  of  those  who  admit  not  only  the
fundamental  principles  of  phrenology,  but  also  its  practical
application  by  means  of  cranioscopy ;  the  second  section  of
those  who  either  do  not  admit,  or  do  not  refer  to  the  divi¬
sions  of  the  brain  and  the  location  of  the  organs,  but  who
accept  phrenology  as  the  best  system  of  mental  philosophy
yet  known,  and  the  one  most  adapted  to  explain  the  moral
and  the  intellectual  nature  of  man.

Hence  it  follows,  that  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  to
contemplate  phrenology  in  a  cranioscopical  and  practical
point  of  view  in  order  to  profit  by  the  light  it  throws  upon
human  nature.  The  recognition  of  the  various  primitive
qualities  detailed  in  phrenology,  and  of  their  combinations
in  producing  general  feelings,  is  all-sufficient  to  give  the
philosophical  thinker  the  explanation  of  his  own,  as  well
as  the  mental  phenomena  of  others.  The  philosophers  of
the  schools,  from  Aristotle  to  Brown,  (although  the  latter
author  was  the  clearest  and  most  minute  of  all  metaphysical
writers)  have  not  succeeded  in  doing  this.  The  greater  part
of  philosophers  have  generalized  the  faculties  of  the  mind
into  two  great  classes,  Understanding  and  Will ;  or  those
who  have  appeared  to  be  more  special,  have  still  laid  down
nothing  but  generalities, — such  as  Perception,  Attention,
Comparison,  Judgment,  Desire,  &c.

It  is  upon  comparing  the  specialities  of  phrenology  with
these  generalities  of  metaphysics,  that  the  philosophical
reader  perceives  the  superior  merit  of  the  former  system,  and
recognises  it  alone  as  capable  of  explaining  the  various  moral
and  intellectual  peculiarities  of  men.

It  was  the  observation  of  the  inefficiency  of  such  general
classifications  of  mental  phenomena  for  the  explanation  of
the  diverse  feelings  and  intellectual  capacities  of  man,  that,

*  Dr.  Castle  is  a  native  of  Canada,  but  has  resided  a  long  while  in
Italy;  and  writes  and  speaks  English  a  little  imperfectly.  He  was  intro¬
duced  to  Dr.  Strauss  at  a  supper  given  to  the  pianist,  Listz,  at  Heilbrun,
and  made  an  examination  of  the  doctor’s  head,  which  gave  such  satisfaction
that  he  was  afterwards  induced  to  write  the  notes.  He  states  that  at  the
time  he  made  the  examination  he  was  ignorant  of  Dr.  Strauss’s  religious
opinions.


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.D.  32 7

more  than  any  other  consideration,  made  Gall  confident  of
the  necessity  of  a  more  detailed,  or  rather  a  more  special
division  of  the  faculties.

It  is  true  that  Gall  mistook,  in  many  cases,  the  modifica¬
tion  of  faculties,  or  their  morbid  manifestations  for  pure
primitive  impulses ;  but  this  was  the  error  of  judgment  and
of  observation,  not  of  the  principle  which  directed  his  re¬
search,  viz.,  that  feelings  and  faculties,  which  are  essentially
different  from  one  another,  must  be  considered  as  primitive.
It  was  upon  this  principle,  that  he  triumphed  in  shewing
that  the  general  classifications  above  alluded  to, — such  as
Desire,  Perception,  Judgment,  &c., — were  only  qualities  of
primitive  faculties,  not  primitive  faculties  themselves.

The  preceding  observations  upon  the  superiority  of  phre¬
nology,  as  a  theory  of  mental  philosophy,  over  the  metaphy¬
sics  of  the  schools,  will  surely  be  admitted  by  the  majority
of  readers.  It  is  to  such  then,  as  well  as  to  phrenologists,
properly  so  called,  that  the  following  analysis  of  Dr.  Strauss
is  submitted.  By  the  one  I  require  it  to  be  judged  only  in
its  philosophical  bearing  (without  considering  its  merits  or  de¬
merits  as  a  practical  result) ;  by  the  other  I  wish  it  to  be
considered  as  an  illustration  of  my  theory  and  study  of  mental
associations.

To  those  who  cannot  readily  conceive  the  possibility  of
the  minute  analysis  of  character,  such  as  I  profess  to  make,
I  have  but  to  pray  them  to  reflect  upon  the  notes  appended
to  the  present  analysis,  and  to  study  my  theory  of  mental
associations  and  practical  application  ;*  and  it  is  more  than
probable  that  they  will  find  that,  such  knowledge  is  all-
sufficient  to  guarantee  a  result,  which  at  first  sight  may
appear  so  marvellous,  and  to  many  so  improbable.

Organography  of  Dr.  David  Strauss,  set.  35.  Tempera¬
ment,  nervous-sanguine.  Head,  rather  large.

Amativeness . a  little  more  than  moderate.

Philoprogenitiveness.  .  .  .  large.

Concentrativeness . rather  large

Adhesiveness  . rather  large

Combativeness . more  than  large

Destructiveness  . full,  or  rather  large

Secretiveness  . full,  or  rather  large

Acquisitiveness . full,  or  rather  large

Constructiveness  ......  a  little  more  than  moderate

Self-esteem  . large

Approbativeness  . rather  large,  or  large

i

*  A  work  now  diligently  preparing  for  publication,  and  edited  by
Mr.  Krabbe,  at  Stuttgard.

YOL.  II.


Z


328  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.


Cautiousness .

Benevolence .

Veneration  .

Firmness .

Conscientiousness .  .

Hope  .

Marvellousness .  .  .  .

Ideality  .

Imitation .

Wit .

Individuality  ....

. .  .  .  rather  large

Form  .

Size .

Weight .

Colour .

Calculation  .

. .  . .  full,  or  rather  large

Tune.  . .

Time .

Order  .

Locality  .

Eventuality .

. .  . .  large

Language  .

.  .  . .  large

Comparison .

. .  . .  large

Causality .

The  preceding  organography  presents  some  difficulty,  not
only  in  the  development  of  the  details  of  the  character,  but
even  in  finding  a  point  of  departure.  (l)  This  difficulty  de¬
pends  upon  the  regularity  or  harmony  which  exists  among
the  different  regions  of  the  head ;  regions  corresponding  with
the  three  great  divisions  of  the  mind,  viz. :  1st.  The  animal
region*  (least  developed).  2nd.  The  moral  region  (more
fully  developed) ;  and  3rdly.  The  intellectual  region  (greatly
predominating  over  the  preceding).  From  a  superficial  view
of  the  degrees  of  development  presented  in  the  organography,
this  regularity  may  not  be  very  evident :  the  following  classi¬
fication  however,  cannot  fail  to  render  it  so.


I.

1.  Philoprogenitiveness . large /Give  a  strong  tendency  to  enjoy

2.  Adhesiveness . rather  large  Vfriendly  and  affectionate  intercourse.

(and  in  some  degree)  i  They  immediately  produce  the  de-

Concentrativeness . rather  large  J  sire  of  domestic  life.


II.

Veneration .

Conscientiousness  . . .

Hope  .

Marvellousness  .

Ideality  . . .


rather  large

. large

rather  large
rather  large
. .  v  .large


Produce  a  natural  sentiment  of
respect  for  things  of  a  superior  na¬
ture, — a  particularly  strong  senti¬
ment  of  justice, — a  sentiment  of
hope, — and  a  love  of,  and  a  longing
,  for,  the  sublime.


*  See  my  work  on  Dr.  Kerner.


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.  329


III.  /  Which  gives  a  philanthropic  feeling

Benevolence . large  kfor  all  mankind,  and  adds  a  certain

1  feeling  of  kindness  to  the  other
J  affections.


IV.  /  Give  to  this  character  a  certain  de-

Self-esteeni . large  kgree  of  (but  not  predominating)

Approbativeness .  .rather  large,  or  large  1  ambition,  and  a  good  deal  of  confi-

Jdence  in  self.

V‘  ^

Causality . very  large  f  G  iving  besides  a  strong  general  ten-

Comparison  . large  fdency  to  reflection,  a  peculiar  talent

Jand  love  for  analytical  reasoning.


VI.

Eventuality  . .


Language


VII.


large


large


}

}


Giving  a  great  appreciation  of  events
and  facts.

Giving  a  memory  of  words — rich¬
ness  of  language.


The  preceding  classification  brings  us  to  the  simple  and
evident  conclusion,  that  this  organization,  when  fulfilling  its
destination,  must  necessarily  produce  a  predominancy  of
intellect  over  feeling,  and  of  moral  sentiment  over  instincts,
rendering,  if  I  may  so  speak,  intellectual  life  much  greater
than  instinctive,  (2)  and  thus  producing  the  independent,  just,
unprejudiced,  and  calm  reasoner.  (3)

The  period  of  boyhood  is  not  that  to  which  we  should
look  for  the  predominancy  of  intelligence  over  the  instinctive
part  of  the  mind;  even  when,  as  in  the  present  case,  the
intellectual  region  of  the  brain  is  so  greatly  predominant
over  the  others — the  intellect,  more  than  the  feelings,  requires
the  hand  of  time  to  awaken  it  into  activity.  The  exceptions
to  this  rule  are,  however,  numerous ;  and  not  only  do  we
find  intellect  developed  simultaneously  with  the  feelings,  but
sometimes  even  anteriorly  to  them,  presenting  to  us  the  won¬
derful  phenomenon  of  native  intelligence  outvying  others, —
all  aided  as  they  may  have  been  by  time,  experience,  and
education.  It  is  difficult  for  the  phrenologist  (nor  can  he
pretend  to  do  so  from  any  rule  of  science)  to  recognize  the
degree  of  intelligence,  not  only  in  the  very  young,  but  also
in  the  old.  All  that  he  can  hope  to  do  from  the  rules  of  his
system,  is  to  discover  the  nature  or  quality  of  the  intelligence
with  an  approximative  idea  of  its  quantity  and  vigour.  What¬
ever  is  advanced  beyond  this  is  hazarded  and  hypothetic,  and
rests  only  upon  the  personal  sagacity  or  perception  of  the
phrenologist  himself.

Wishing  to  keep  myself  entirely  within  the  bounds  of
what  I  believe  to  be  certain  and  positive  induction,  I  shall  in

z  2


330  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.

this  analysis  offer  no  conclusion  which  might  he  attributable
to  the  intuition  which  long  and  diversified  experience  inva¬
riably  affords.  Confining  myself  within  these  rigid  limits,
I  still  have  every  right  to  declare  that  the  ensemble  of  this
organography  presents  indices,  not  particularly  of  any  indi¬
vidual  precocious  talent  having  existed,  hut  of  precocity  of
general  intelligence ;  or  in  other  words,  that  Dr.  Strauss,
while  still  very  young,  must  have  manifested  the  commence¬
ment  of  a  profound,  vigorous,  and  reflective  mind.  His
memory  was  good,  and  he  understood  and  learnt  with  fa¬
cility.  (4)  He  expressed  himself  clearly  and  precisely  upon
the  subjects  of  his  early  studies ;  and  above  all,  was  charac¬
terized  by  a  certain  confidence  in  his  own  powers,  not  so
much  evident  in  his  manners,  as  conscious  to  himself.  (5)  His
moral  character  was  strongly  developed;  he  felt  the  influence
of  moral  instruction,  and  had  an  equal  susceptibility  of
proving  religious  impressions.*  His  affections  were  strong,
and  he  became  attached  in  proportion  as  his  intimacy  with
a  person  continued. f  A  word  of  kindness  was  a  talisman
by  which  one  could  mould  his  will  according  to  pleasure  ;J
while  severity  excited  his  anger  and  roused  one  of  his  strongest
instincts,  viz.,  that  of  Resistance.  He  was  capable  of  retain¬
ing  anger,  however,  only  as  long  as  he  was  opposed ;  opposi¬
tion  ended, — his  anger  passed.  (6)

The  preceding  brief  analysis  of  the  infantile  character  of
Dr.  Strauss,  may  be  accepted  as  the  faithful  type  of  that
which  is  peculiar  to  him  at  his  present  age.  The  only  influ¬
ence  that  I  conceive  time  and  ordinary  circumstances  to  have
had  upon  his  native  character,  is  to  have  rendered  his  feelings
still  more  calm  than  they  were  in  his  earlier  years,  and  to
have  concentrated  the  great  part  of  his  nervous  energy  upon
his  intelligence.


Precise  View  of  what  I  conceive  to  be  the  Moral  and  Intellectual
nature  of  Dr.  Strauss,  at  his  present  age.  (7)

Domestic  and  social  tendencies  are  strong  in  Dr.  Strauss;
in  the  hours  not  devoted  to  reflection  he  feels  a  great  need
of  affectionate  and  friendly  intercourse.  His  affections  are
not  quickly  awakened  nor  easily  excited  to  enthusiasm,  but
are  gradually  developed  and  are  constant.  (8)  In  domestic  life

*  Benevolence,  Conscientiousness,  and  Veneration,
t  Adhesiveness;  Conscientiousness  (the  latter  sentiment  producing  gra¬
titude  for  the  affection  of  another),  and  Concentrativeness.
f  Predominancy  of  the  affections  over  the  selfish  feelings.


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.  331

it  is  easy  to  live  with  him  in  harmony,  peace,  and  love.*  He
greatly  appreciates  affection  and  kindness  bestowed  npon
him;  and  he  pays  it  in  return,  not  under  the  form  of  passion,
but  under  that  of  sweetness  of  temper  and  tenderness  of
manner, f  which,  if  it  express  not  a  turbulent  and  excited
sentiment,  is  the  truest  interpretation  of  affections  securely
rooted  and  durable.

He  possesses  greatly  what  is  called  firm  will ;  but  it  is  a
power  of  which  he  avails  himself  only  on  greater  or  important
occasions ;  in  things  of  trifling  import  he  is  contented  to
yield,  rather  than  to  dispute.  It  is  this  peculiarity,  the  re¬
sult  of  the  gentleness  and  nobleness  of  his  disposition,  which
renders  him  greatly  capable  of  living  happily  in  domestic
life.  Not  only  his  predominating  love  of  tranquillity,  but
also  his  predominating  feelings  of  delicacy  would  be  shocked
at  those  trifling,  mean,  and  selfish  disputes,  which  throw  a
cloud  upon  many  a  fireside.

Predominating  as  is  in  him  thought  over  feeling,  (9)  he
is  by  no  means  inclined  to  seek  out  that  society,  ycleped
savante ;  for,  on  the  contrary,  he  is  pleased  with  a  cheerful
and  friendly  intercourse.  Rarely  gay,  at  least  in  his  man¬
ners,  he  takes  pleasure  in,  and  tacitly  enjoys,  the  gaiety  of
others.  Music  forms  his  delight,  whilst  the  dance  and  even
the  social  board,  though  not  desired  by  him,  are  not  avoided.

In  conversation  he  is  simple,  and  never  intrudes  upon
others  the  subjects  of  his  studies  and  researches ;  and  even
in  discourses  of  the  latter  nature,  one  can  never  recognize
in  him  the  pedantry  of  learning.  (10)  This  peculiarity  must
render  his  manners  not  reserved  and  retiring,  but  simple,
gentle,  and  particularly  suited  for  the  ordinary  intercourse
of  society.

Children  generally  interest  him ;  had  he  any  of  his
own,  his  paternal  love  would  be  very  great ;  indeed,  greater
than  his  affections  either  of  love  or  friendship.  (n)


Moral  Sentiments.

All  feelings  classed  by  the  phrenologists  as  moral,  and
recognized  as  such  by  philosophers  in  general,  are  strongly
active  in  Dr.  Strauss.  Those  feelings  are,  1st.  The  senti¬
ment  of  duty  from  man  towards  man ;  or,  the  feelings  of


*  Benevolence  and  Conscientiousness, — giving  the  feelings  of  kindness
and  a  sense  of  the  rights  of  others  ;  and  Self-esteem  and  a  superior  intelli¬
gence  rendering  him  indifferent  about  trifles.

t  This  manner  is  to  be  attributed  in  part  to  the  general  calmness  of  his
disposition  and  to  Benevolence.


332  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.

conscience  and  of  justice.  2nd.  The  sentiment  of  respect
for  what  is  conceived  to  be  of  a  superior  nature.  3rd.
Religious  sentiment  comprised  in  the  feeling  of  confidence
and  trust  in  the  providence  and  justice  of  God.

As  coincident  with  the  preceding,  there  is  an  absence  of
all  ignorant  bigotry  and  ungenerous  intolerance,  as  also  of
the  grovelling  feelings  of  jealousy  and  envy.  (12)

From  his  predominating  sentiment  of  truth  he  unhesitat¬
ingly  condemns  error,  wherever  he  believes  he  perceives  it ;
and  from  the  same  invincible  principle  he  accords  the  expres¬
sion  of  his  admiration  for  whatever  he  recognizes  as  superior.
In  both  these  cases  no  consideration,  whether  of  friendship
or  enmity,  for  another,  or  his  own  personal  interest,  would
modify  his  judgment,  lessen  his  praise,  or  embitter  his  cen¬
sure.  His  actions  rest  upon  the  threefold  solid  base  of
superior  intelligence,  sentiment  of  justice,  and  of  personal
dignity.

Add  to  the  preceding  qualities  a  high  degree  of  benevo¬
lent  feeling,  which  makes  him  abhor  all  acts  of  violence  and
cruelty, — makes  him  recognize  the  natural  law  of  indepen¬
dence  as  the  birth-right  of  all  men, — which  makes  him  com¬
passionate  the  sufferings  of  others,  and  gives  him  a  general
sentiment  of  philanthropy  for  his  fellow-creatures, —  and
lastly,  disposes  him  greatly  to  that  cosmopolitan  sentiment,
which  removes  entirely  all  prejudice  with  regard  to  birth,
station,  country,  &c.

Ambition  to  please — if  the  word  be  taken  in  its  general
sense — is  by  no  means  characteristic  of  him;  he  manifests  the
desire  only  for  those  who  are  united  to  him  in  intimate  affection
and  friendship ;  praise  and  flattering  attention  coming  from
those  he  loves,  awake  in  him  a  vivid  pleasure ;  but  with  regard
to  the  world  in  general,  he  is  but  little  susceptible  of  either  the
pleasure  or  the  pain  that  its  approbation  or  its  blame  might
be  presumed  to  give  rise :  (13)  its  blame  might  indeed  have
the  effect  of  irritating  and  rousing  him  to  attack,  were  his
anger  not  neutralized  by  his  indifference.  (14)

Ambition,  however,  is  not  wanting  in  Dr.  Strauss ;  but
it  is  a  feeling  which  can  with  difficulty  be  recognized  in  its
whole  extent  even  by  its  possessor  himself.  It  would  become
more  evident  were  it  seriously  frustrated,  for  it  consists  in
the  desire  of  owning  no  superior,  and  of  being  alone  and
independent  in  a  chosen  career.  (15)  This  feeling  is  based  not
upon  the  wish  to  control  or  to  lead  others,  but  upon  a
sentiment  of  personal  dignity  or  pride.  It  is  for  this  reason
that  Dr.  Strauss  can  rarely  occupy  himself  with  trifles ;  he
feels  a  pleasure  in  undertaking  things  that  are  not  only  of


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.  D.  333

an  important  nature,  but  which  require  also  both  courage
and  perseverance  to  vanquish.  (l6)

He  is  by  no  means  communicative  of  his  intentions  ;* * * §
but,  upon  the  other  hand,  he  is  careless  of  hiding  them.  If
he  were  watched  in  the  prosecution  of  an  enterprise,  he  would
work  calmly  on,  indifferent  whether  he  were  observed  or  not.f
After  what  has  been  said,  it  is  almost  superfluous  to  add,
that  the  tendency  to  falsehood  and  to  make  inventions  of  any
kind  (tendencies  peculiar  almost  to  all  men)  enter  for  little
in  his  character.  Under  ordinary  circumstances  he  is  veridical
without  being  particularly  frank  ;J  but  in  affairs  of  import¬
ance,  when  he  is  vis-a-vis  with  the  public,  he  knows  no  re¬
straint — no  reserve.  §


Intellectual  Endowments.

The  three  grand  divisions  of  the  intellect :  1st.  The
reflective  :  2nd.  The  perceptive  :  and,  3rdly.  The  imaginative
faculties,  are  well  developed  in  Dr.  Strauss;  the  reflective
faculties  being  greatly  predominating  over  the  other  two.  The
three  regions  taken  together  present  indices  of  the  existence
of  a  profound  and  sound  understanding,  by  which  is  under¬
stood  deep  thought  and  superior  judgment.  There  is  in  this
intellect  neither  an  absolute  scepticism  nor  absolute  credu¬
lity.  (l6a)  The  natural  tendency  to  the  latter  (which  is  some¬
what  predominant),  is  corrected  by  the  master-influence  of  the
reasoning  faculties ;  the  which  always  require  that  the  under¬
standing  be  satisfied  before  belief  be  established.  This  produces
not  so  much  doubt ,  as  the  desire  of  proof  and  conviction .

Dr.  Strauss  is  by  no  means  to  be  classed  among  the  soi-
disant  positivists;  severe  in  his  analysis  and  difficult  of  perfect
conviction,  he  by  no  means  has  the  tendency  to  reject  as
absurd  a  new  proposition,  because  its  proofs  are  not  sufficient
to  convince  him  of  its  correctness.  On  the  contrary,  he  is
ever  ready  to  conceive  the  possibility  of  most  things,  and
indeed  must  take  interest  in  certain  questions  of  the  day,

*  A  sufficiently  developed  Secretiveness,  aided  by  the  common  sense  of
a  good  intelligence.

t  Not  sufficient  Secretiveness  to  give  a  great  tendency  to  secrecy ;  and
the  feeling  of  independence  derived  from  Self-esteem  and  Courage.

$  The  same  explanation  as  at  *,  and  the  influence  of  Self-esteem  and
Conscientiousness  in  producing  personal  dignity  and  moral  integrity,  for  the
words — “  he  is  veridical .”

§  Self-esteem,  Combativeness,  and  Destructiveness  giving  courage,
energy,  and  independence;  and  the  intelligence  giving  the  predominating
love  of  scientific  truth,  and  thus  rendering  the  mind  indifferent  to  inferior
things.


334  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.D.

which  by  many  are  stigmatized  as  Utopian, — as  transcen¬
dental  or  absurd.  (i6b)

The  great  pivot  of  a  mind  such  as  I  am  examining,  must
necessarily  be  analysis,  (and  if  you  will,  also  synthesis) ;  (17)
for  they  both  depend  upon  the  same  power — a  power  which
must  have  predominated  in  this  intellect  from  very  early
youth.  We  may  then  recognize  in  Dr.  Strauss  a  predomi¬
nating  tendency  and  taste  for  all  exact  reasonings, — that
reasoning  where  the  order  of  causation  is  clearly  evident ;
hence  his  decided  talent  in  philosophical  research.  (18)  A
necessary  conclusion  from  the  preceding  observations  is,  that
whatever  the  subject  that  occupies  the  attention  of  Dr.
Strauss,  whether  it  be  of  general  or  political  science,  or  a
question  of  social  or  religious  interest,  it  must  wear  the  pro¬
found  impression  of  his  investigation.  His  mind  is  eminently
adapted  for  criticism ;  but  he  is  never  guilty  of  animadver¬
sion  or  unjust  censure.  (19)  As  a  writer,  Dr.  Strauss  must  be
equally  concise  and  eloquent,*  as  he  is  profound  in  thought.
His  talent  for  demonstration  predominates  over  that  of  illus¬
tration;  the  latter  power  in  him,  however,  must  be  con¬
spicuous  :  in  fact  the  two  powers  must  unite  together  har¬
moniously,  rendering  their  possessor  profound  in  his  analysis,
without  being  abstruse  or  metaphysical.  (20)

If  Dr.  Strauss  were  to  abandon  himself  to  literary  writ¬
ings  (whether  this  be  the  case  I  am  ignorant),  it  is  then  that
his  talent  of  illustration  would  most  develope  itself,  and  one
would  find  such  illustration  characterized  by  great  brilliancy,
and  even  by  the  sallies  of  Wit.f

The  imagination  of  Dr.  Strauss  is  extremely  active ;  and
I  conceive  that  it  is  only  the  counteracting  influence  of  his
philosophical  tendency,  which  could  prevent  the  full  develop¬
ment  of  a  poetical  mind.  In  any  case,  that  which  is  under¬
stood  by  the  sublime  and  beautiful — such  as  the  higher
works  of  poetry,  the  beauties  of  nature,  &c. — have  a  strong
and  agreeable  effect  upon  his  mind.

Dr.  Strauss  possesses  more  talent  for  satirical  writing
than  the  desire  to  employ  it.  (21)  This  talent,  however,  must
become  evident  from  time  to  time  under  the  form  of  a  pithy
and  bitter  satire,  when  he  is  irritated  in  polemical  writing
or  in  excited  discussion.  In  his  ordinary  writings  and  con¬
versations,  however,  irony  and  satire  can  be  little  evident.

Notwithstanding  Dr.  StraussJ  general  peaceful  disposition
he  must  feel  a  decided  pleasure  in  polemics ;  in  which,  under
the  mask  of  calmness,  he  must  display  a  good  deal  of  energy

*  Concentrativeness,  Causality,  Comparison,  Eventuality,  and  Language,
t  Ideality,  Imitation,  Comparison,  Eventuality,  Wit,  and  Language.


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.D.  335

of  feeling  and  activity  of  intellect.  It  must  be  observed  also
that  he  possesses  the  most  decided  advantages  for  controversy
of  any  kind;  in  the  first  place,  he  never  decidedly  maintains
the  truth  of  a  subject  which  he  has  not  calmly  and  closely
investigated :  secondly,  he  is  never  governed  by  prejudice,
nor  esprit  de  partie ;  the  only  influence  that  his  feelings  exer¬
cise  upon  his  intellect,  is  to  give  a  certain  energy  derived
from  a  sentiment  and  consciousness  of  personal  force.  Hence
his  intellect  is  left,  unfettered  by  the  feelings,  to  work  its
reasoning  in  a  calm  and  passionless  manner.  Add  to  this,  a
particular  easy  use  of  words, — an  exquisite  perception  or
penetration  into  the  ideas  of  others,  with  a  very  faithful
memory,  and  you  have  an  ensemble  of  intellectual  powers
that  will  render  eloquent  almost  any  subject.

I  will  not  dwell  here  upon  the  influence  of  the  other  facul¬
ties  in  producing  minor  talents,  such  as  for  painting,  the
study  of  languages,  &c.,*  the  object  of  this  paper  being  to
give  the  most  striking  traits  alone  of  the  character  analysed.


General  View.

Devoid  of  great  passions,  with  the  exception  of  the  com¬
pound  one  of  independence  of  thought  and  love  of  truth, —
generally  peaceful  and  of  calm  disposition, — rarely  irritable,
but  still  capable  of  showing  a  firm  will  and  energetic  resist¬
ance,  but  never  obstinate.  (22)  Firm  in  his  own  opinion ;  but
neither  proud,  haughty,  nor  vain.  (23)

Eminently  adapted  for  social  and  domestic  life;  being
calm,  and  unchangeable  in  his  affection.  He  is  endowed
with  strong  moral  feeling ;  strong  natural  tendency  to  reli¬
gion;  possessing  feelings,  which  awaken  in  him  the  desire
of  peace,  the  conception  of  consummate  justice  and  love.
He  possesses  no  sentiment  which  corresponds  with  the  idea
of  an  angry  and  revengeful  Deity.  Added  to  this  state  of
feeling  is  an  intelligence,  in  which  a  curiosity  for  knowing
exact  truths, — the  causes  of  effects  and  the  modus  operandi
of  things,  is  the  strong  and  predominating  feature.  This  fact
renders  clearly  evident  that  faith  (unreasoning  credulity)
must,  notwithstanding  his  religious  tendencies,  exert  but  little
influence  in  constituting  his  religious  belief.  Whatever  may
be  the  opinions  of  Dr.  Strauss  upon  religious  doctrines,
without  doubt  religious  sentiment,  however  modified  by
thought,  is  active  in  him.


*  See  note  first — “  Eighth  group  of  organs,”  &c.


336  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.D.

Energy  and  independence,  derived  from  sentiment  and
strong  love  of  truth,  with  passion  for  research,  derived  from
superior  intelligence,  harmoniously,  or  in  due  proportion,
united  in  one  person,  is  an  extremely  rare  case.  Such  I  be¬
lieve,  however,  that  the  individuality  of  Dr.  Strauss  presents.

It  is  difficult  to  choose  the  qualitive  term  for  this  intelli¬
gence  ;  it  is  both  inventive  and  practical, — it  possesses  the
elements  of  talent,  and  apparently  that  degree  of  'power  which
is  called  genius.  Whatever  may  be  its  exact  merited  title,
one  thing  is  certain  that  it  must  be  considered  as  very
superior.  (24)


General  Phrenological  and  Philosophical  Notes}  explanatory

of  the  preceding  Analysis.

(1)  “  But  even  in  finding  a  point  of  departure.”  It  frequently
happens  from  a  great  uniformity  existing  in  the  conformation  of  the
head,  or  from  the  want  of  predominancy  of  some  organ  or  organs,
that  the  phrenologist  cannot  decide  upon  any  characteristic  of  the
individuals.  The  rule  generally  followed  by  phrenologists,  under
such  circumstances,  is  to  regard  the  character  of  the  individual  as
vacillating,  according  to  the  circumstances  which  may  act  upon  it.
While  it  is  true  that  this  rule  is  applicable  to  some  very  uniform
cerebral  confirmations;  it  is  also  easily  misapplied,  in  cases  where
the  mental  uniformity  is  more  apparent  than  real ,  it  being  destroyed
by  that  natural  affinity  which  certain  faculties  have  for  each  other;
affinity,  which  causes  many  faculties  to  associate  in  activity  and
thus  produce  strong  tendencies,  feelings,  and  passions,  which  could
not  be  suspected  to  exist  in  the  individual  from  the  sole  consideration
of  his  cerebral  organs  in  their  isolated  condition.  In  order  to  remedy
this  difficulty,  and  to  give  some  assistance  by  which,  in  doubtful
cases,  the  general  bearing  or  tendencies  of  the  character  might  be
recognised,  I  have  proposed  to  those  who  have  studied  with  me,
the  division  of  the  organography,  1st, — Into  two  grand  classes;  and,
lastly,  into  ten  sub-classes.  The  first  corresponding  with  those
faculties  whose  action  renders  the  character  of  man  expansive ,  or
open  and  candid,  and  those  which  render  it  reserved  and  selfish.
The  division  of  these  faculties  is  into  the  expansive  and  retentivet
and  in  proportion  as  the  faculties  of  one  or  other  of  these  classes
predominate  in  an  individual,  can  be  inferred  the  general  nature  of
his  character.  It  must  be  observed  that  the  talented  and  experienced
phrenologist  will  rarely  find  it  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  these
rules ;  the  young  investigator,  however,  will  do  well  to  study  and
apply  them,  as  (though  it  is  true  he  cannot  by  their  means  penetrate
into  the  nuances  of  character)  they  are  methodic  and  to  a  great
extent  sure,  and  will  permit  him  to  determine,  what  might  be
called,  the  general  physiognomy  of  the  character  analysed.


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.D.  337


Preliminary  Study.


Division  of  the  organography  into  two  great  classes;  first ,  the
Expansive  faculties:  second,  the  Retentive.

The  first  class  of  expansive  faculties  in  the  first  degree,  or  those
whose  action  embraces  the  greatest  number  of  external  objects,  are,
Sentiments* * * § —

Hope  .  rather  large.

Benevolence .  large.

Love  of  Approbation .  rather  large,  or  large.

Veneration .  rather  large.

Conscientiousness  . large.

Second  group,  or  the  expansive  faculties  in  the  second  degree;
or  those,  which  are  in  a  more  limited  relation  with  external  objects
than  the  preceding,  Affective  Faculties ,  or  Instincts,  j* —

Amativeness  . .  a  little  more  than  moderate.

Philoprogenitiveness .  large.

Adhesiveness  . rather  large.


Third  group,  or  auxiliary  faculties,  which  according  to  circum¬
stances  augment  the  degree  of  activity  of  the  expansive  faculties  in
general^ —

Combativeness . more  than  large.

Destructiveness .  full,  or  rather  large.

Second  class, — first  group  of  retentive  faculties  in  the  first
degree § —

Secretiveness  . . full,  or  rather  large.

Cautiousness  . full,  or  rather  large.


Second  group  of  faculties,  or  those  retentive  in  the  second
degree  || —

Concentrativeness  . .  rather  large.

Love  of  Life  (?) .

Acquisitiveness  . .  full,  or  rather  large.

Self-esteem . large.


*  Hope  is  the  most  expansive  feeling  of  all,  being  limited  only  by  thought.
Benevolence  comes  next ;  it  being  a  feeling  which  brings  man  in  relation  with
all  his  fellow-creatures,  and  even  with  the  inferior  animals.  Veneration
comes  next,  as  uniting  man  to  man  by  the  feeling  of  respect.  Love  of
Approbation  unites  man  to  his  fellow-creatures  in  the  desire  he  has  of  their
praise ;  and  lastly  ,  Conscientiousness  is  expansive,  at  least  in  an  auxiliary
manner,  from  its  influence  in  drawing  man’s  attention  to  the  rights  of  his
fellow-creatures.

t  Amativeness  unites  in  sympathy  only  to  one  half  of  humanity,  viz.,
to  the  opposite  sex.  Philoprogenitiveness  unites  man  only  to  children.
Adhesiveness  unites  only  to  individuals,  but  is  expansive,  inasmuch  as
it  gives  birth  to  the  desire  of  associating  with  others.

$  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness  are  expansive  inasmuch  that  their
immediate  manifestation  is  energy,  which  they  infuse  into  other  faculties
associating  with  them.

§  Secretiveness  is  retentive  in  the  highest  degree ;  its  immediate  essence
being  to  hide  from  others.  Cautiousness  is  greatly  so,  inasmuch  as  its
immediate  influence  is  to  restrain  the  expansion  of  the  other  faculties.

||  Concentrativeness  may  act  in  an  auxiliary  manner  upon  the  retentive
faculties  generally.  Love  of  Life  from  its  influence  in  concentrating  thought
upon  self,  and  Acquisitiveness  and  Self-esteem  are  upon  the  same  principle
retentive.


338  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.D.


Single  faculty,  which  appears  neither  expansive  nor  retentive,  but
which  acts  as  auxiliary  to  both  classes  according  to  circumstances* * * § —
Firmness . . . large.


First  class,  or  expansive  faculties  in  the  intellectual  regionf —


Ideality  ....  ,
Marvellousness

Imitation .

Wit .

Language  . . .


large.

rather  large,
large,
large,
large.


Second  group,  or  those  expansive  in  the  second  degree^ —

Individuality  .  rather  large.

Form  .  moderate.

Locality  .  large.

Eventuality .  large.

&c.,  &c.


Third  class,  or  those  which  under  certain  circumstances  add  to
the  expansion  of  the  feelings  § —


Time  . full,  or  rather  large.

Tune . . .  large.


Reflective  faculty, — expansive|| —

Comparison . . .  large.

Chief  reflective  faculty, — retentive, —

Causality .  very  large.


In  the  preceding  classification  we  find  the  predominance  of
development  to  be  in  the  expansive  faculties.  Among  the  retentive
faculties  we  have  but  Self-esteem  large  (retentive  in  the  second  degree)
and  Causality  very  large  (retentive-intellectual.)

The  general  conclusion  to  be  drawn,  then,  is,  that  this  character
is  more  expansive  than  retentive,  or,  in  other  words,  it  is  peculiar,
more  for  generosity,  sociability  and  energy,  than  for  reserve  and
selfishness.

After  having  thus  determined  the  first  trait  of  this  character,  by
means  of  the  preceding  classifications,  we  can  advance  the  analysis
more  in  detail  by  the  aid  of  the  following  classifications,  the  result


*  Firmness  is  expansive  when  it  gives  perseverance  to  the  expansive
faculties,  and  retentive,  when  it  gives  perseverance  to  the  retentive.

t  Ideality  and  Marvellousness  are  expansive,  as  elements  of  the  imagina¬
tion,  particularly  the  second,  from  its  influence  in  opposing  Doubt.  Imitation
is  expansive  from  its  great  relation  to  all  exterior  objects  and  interior  sensa¬
tions.  Wit,  in  the  sense  that  it  gives  mirth,  is  expansive.  (Perhaps  for
this  reason  it  should  be  classified  with  the  affective  faculties).  Language
is  expansive,  at  least  in  an  auxiliary  manner,  from  the  facility  which  it
affords  to  the  other  faculties  to  interpret  their  feeling  in  words.

X  These  are  expansive  from  their  relation  to  external  objects  and  ac¬
tions.  They  constitute  the  observing  and  memoralive  powers.

§  Music  has  the  power,  from  association,  to  excite  the  feelings, — to  recall
past  ideas, — and  stimulate  the  imagination.  The  faculty  of  Time,  in  aiding
the  memory  of  the  past,  may  also  be  considered  as  expansive-intellectual.

||  Comparison  is  expansive  from  its  office  in  searching  for  analogies  and
differences  among  things  of  every  kind.  It  draws  the  attention  to  generali¬
ties,  not  to  abstractions.  —  Causality  on  the  contrary  is  the  essence  of
abstraction.


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.  339


of  which  will  give  us  ten  of  the  principal  peculiarities  of  the  character
analysed.

First  group  of  organs,  relative  to  those  affections  which  pro¬
duce  general,  family,  and  social  habits.  Instinctive  or  Affective
Region —

Inhabitiveness  (? ) .

Amativeness  . . . . a  little  more  than  moderate.

Philoprogenitiveness .  large.

Adhesiveness  , . . rather  large.

Approbativeness .  rather  large  or  large.

Benevolence  . large.

Second  group  of  organs,  which  relate  to  those  feelings  that
produce  passions,  such  as  ambition,  love  of  fame,  and  interest —


Approbativeness . . .  rather  large,  or  large

Self-esteem .  large.

Acquisitiveness  .  moderate,  or  rather  large.

Hope  .  rather  large.

Imitation .  large.


Third  group  of  organs,  which  produce  animal  or  physical  energy —

C 'ombativeness .  more  than  large.

Destructiveness  .  full,  or  rather  large.


Fourth  group  of  organs  (neither  directly  expansive  nor  retentive),
which  aid  the  perseverance  of  the  other  faculties,  and  give  rise  to
moral  courage  and  force  of  character —

Firmness .  large.

Concentrativeness  . .  rather  large

Conscientiousness  .  large.


Fifth  group  of  organs,  (retentive  par  excellence) —


Cautiousness  .  full,  or  rather  large

Secretiveness . .  full,  or  rather  large


Sixth  group  of  organs,  relative  to  the  superior  sentiments,  pro¬
ducing  moral  integrity  and  religious  sentiment —


Benevolence .  large.

Conscientiousness  .  large

Veneration .  rather  large

Hope  . . .  rather  large

Ideality  .  large

Marvellousness  .  rather  large

( Imitation ,  auxiliary  faculty) . large


Seventh  group  of  organs,  corresponding  to  faculties  which  are
intermediate  between  the  instinctive,  moral  and  intellectual;  being
elements  of  the  imagination,  exercising,  on  the  one  hand,  their  in¬
fluence  on  the  feelings  generally,  and  on  the  other  hand  influencing
the  intellectual  faculties.

Ideality  . . .  large.

Marvellousness  .  rather  large.

Imitation.. .  large.*


*  The  part  that  Ideality  takes  in  producing  imagination  is  but  little
known  ;  its  influence,  however,  in  producing  that  faculty  is  evident  from
the  fact,  that  all  persons  greatly  endowed  with  imagination  possess  also  the
portion  of  the  brain,  corresponding  with  Ideality,  greatly  developed.  Thus
we  find  the  conception  of  musical  sounds  becomes  musical  imagination  if
Tune  and  Ideality  are  well  developed.  When  Colour  and  Ideality  are


340  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.D.


First  division  of  the  eighth  group  of  organs,  in  the  intellectual
region,  corresponding  to  the  perceptive  faculties —


Individuality  . .  rather  large

Configuration .  moderate.

Size . . . rather  large

Colour . . . moderate.

Weight  .  full,  or  rather  large

Order . . .  rather  large


Second  division  of  the  eighth  group,  or  organs  which  correspond
to  the  memorative  faculties  par  excellence —


Eventuality . . .  large

Locality . . . large

Number . . . full,  or  rather  large

Time  .  full,  or  rather  large


Third  division  of  the  seventh  group  of  organs,  corresponding  to
faculties  which  give  manual  excellence  in  the  arts —


Constructiveness . .  a  little  more  than  moderate.

Weight  .  full,  or  rather  large.

Size .  rather  large.


Ninth  group  of  organs  corresponding  with  the  faculties  which  give
reflection,  judgment,  and  reason — source  of  scientific  knowledge —

Causality .  very  large.

Comparison . .  large.

(  Order ,  auxiliary  to  the  reflective  in  giving  the  spirit  of  classification
and  distribution.*)


Tenth  group  of  organs  corresponding  with  faculties  eminently
auxiliary  to  the  general  intelligence, — faculties  for  the  communication
and  transmission  of  ideas  and  knowledge —


Language  .  large,  (interpretative  par  excellence').

Imitation  .  large,  auxiliary  to  natural  language.


In  order  to  render  complete,  in  a  psychological  point  of  view,
the  present  classification  of  faculties,  it  is  necessary  to  introduce
those  faculties  whose  cerebral  organs  are  still  considered  as  doubtful,
instituted  for  the  growth,  perfecting,  and  conservation  of  the  hu¬
man  frame —

Alimentiveness  .

Love  of  Life  .


largely  developed,  there  is  greater  imagination  for  colours  than  is  found  when
colour  exists  alone.  Ideality  appears  to  have  the  same  effect  upon  the  feel¬
ings,  that  it  has  upon  the  intellectual  faculties,  viz.,  to  vivify  them,  or  to
extend  their  action.

With  regard  to  Marvellousness  and  Imitation,  though  perhaps  less  im¬
portant  than  Ideality  in  producing  imagination,  their  influence  is  the  more
complete  in  proportion,  as  it  is  accompanied  with  a  perfect  belief  in  the
reality  of  what  is  imagined,  or  in  other  words,  in  proportion  as  illusion
is  profound.  Imitation  from  its  influence  in  exaggerating  the  natural  lan¬
guage  of  the  faculties  -would  appear  to  influence  the  imagination,  by  render¬
ing  more  complete  the  images  conceived.  Gall  observed  the  part  of  the
brain  corresponding  with  the  three  organs  in  question,  largely  developed  in
many  who  saw  spirits,  ghosts,  &c.

*  The  power  of  association  or  the  affinity  of  Order  with  the  reflective
faculties  is  not  well  ascertained.  There  are  reasons  for  believing  that
Order  can  be  associated  only  with  the  faculties  which  perceive  physical
existences.


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.  341


The  immediate  auxiliaries  to  these  faculties  are  Destructiveness,
Combativeness,  Cautiousness,  and  Acquisitiveness.


Simple  inductions  embracing  the  results  of  the  preceding  Groups

of  Organs.

First  group. — Moderate  sexual  desire;  great  love  of  children;
attachment  in  friendship  and  general  affection;  desire  to  please  and
to  oblige  others;  love  of  family  and  of  social  life.

Second  group. — Confidence  in  self;  confidence  of  success  in
enterprises;  ambition.  (The  ensemble  of  this  group  is  less  powerful
than  the  preceding.)

Third  group. — Courage;  spirit  of  resistance;  energy  in  action.

Fourth  group. — Firmness,  perseverance;  sense  of  justice.

Fifth  group. — Moderate  caution;  prudence  and  reserve.

Sixth  group. — Moral  integrity;  marked  religious  tendency;  con¬
fidence  in  God  and  in  the  future.

Seventh  group,' — Essential  elements  of  the  imagination,  giving
strong  presumptive  evidence  of  its  existence.

Eighth  group. — Part  I.,  giving  a  moderate  memory  of  physical
objects,  a  sense  of  symmetry  and  moderate  judgment  of  colours.

Part  II.,  good  memory  of  events  and  localities,  moderately  good
memory  for  chronology.

Part  III.,  moderate  mechanical  ability.

Ninth  group. — Philosophical  spirit;  strong  analytic  powers;
spirit  of  research.

Tenth  group. — Great  facility  in  the  use  of  words;  talent  for
literary  composition.

I  must  repeat,  that  the  preceding  classifications  do  not  give  the
entire  character  of  the  individual  analysed,  but  only  its  general
bearing ;  to  enter  into  all  the  details  of  character,  it  would  be  neces¬
sary  to  combine  the  preceding  groups  together,  in  order  to  arrive  at
their  compound  results,  the  theory  of  which  proceeding  is  too  long
and  too  complicated  to  be  given  here.  I  refer  the  reader  for  this
theory,  to  my  large  work  now  in  the  press.

(2)  “ Intellectual  life  much  greater  than  Instinctive.”  I  presume
no  reasonable  objection  will  be  found  against  the  expressions  of
intellectual  and  instinctive  life,  which  correspond  so  well  to  the
striking  phenomena  presented  in  those  minds  where  intellect  pre¬
dominates  greatly  over  instinct.

The  generality  of  men  possess  a  comparative  equilibrium  between
the  instinctive  and  intellectual  faculties  (except  under  certain  circum¬
stances  where  the  former  are  transiently  strongly  excited),  from
which  they  may  be  said  neither  to  be  the  slaves  of  their  feelings,  nor
entirely  subjected  to  the  guidance  of  their  reflections.

Two  other  classes  of  men  may  be  found  among  those:  1st — who
feel  little,  but  think  greatly:  and,  2nd — they  who  feel  profoundly
and  think  moderately.  Among  the  greater  philosophers  we  find  men
of  the  first  class,  and  among  the  greater  poets,  men  of  the  second.


342  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.


In  fact  in  many  studies  of  pure  intellectual  nature  the  feelings  enter
for  nothing;  hence  their  activity  could  not  avoid  being  injurious
to  the  intelligence,  upon  the  principle  that  in  proportion  as  the
feelings  are  active,  they  partake  of  the  nervous  influence  that  other¬
wise  would  be  enjoyed  by  the  intellect  alone.

In  poets,  on  the  contrary,  whose  office  it  is  to  develop  new  and
brilliant  imaginings  adapted  to  excite  the  feelings  by  sympathy  more
than  by  understanding,  and  make  the  reader  retire  within  himself,
in  the  concentration  of  new  awakened  emotions,  the  intellect  must
necessarily  play  but  an  inferior  part;  and  in  fact,  in  such  poets
where  it  does  the  contrary,  we  have  more  philosophy  in  rhyme  than
poetry.

The  question  now  naturally  presents  itself,  whether  the  happier
endowment  be  that  of  the  intellectual  or  the  instinctive  life.  There
is  no  doubt  that  the  preference  must  be  given  to  the  former,  and
where,  as  in  the  case  in  question,  the  activity  is  gradual  from  the
lower  to  the  higher  feelings,  up  to  the  intellectual  faculties,  the
greatest  energy  and  power  resting  in  the  intellect  itself,  you  have
the  type  of  the  clearest,  profoundest,  and  most  impartial  thinkers.
The  intellectual  has  this  great  advantage  over  instinctive  life,  viz.,
it  knows  or  understands  its  own  powers,  whereas  the  second  is  the
subject  of  unknown  and  inexplicable  impulses.  It  may  be  observed
that  instinct  is  the  immediate  voice  of  nature  and  hence  does  not
deceive,  whereas  intelligence,  mixed  as  it  is  with  acquired  knowledge,
is  ever  liable  to  error.  This  preference  for  instinct  is  just  only  when
the  two  principles  are  regarded  in  their  isolated  nature.  The  un¬
reasoning  instinct  of  animals  never  deceives,  but  serves  them  to  the
utmost  degree  of  their  wants;  but  in  man  the  case  is  different,  his
instincts  being  modified  by  the  influence  of  his  intellectual  faculties
and  that  of  external  circumstances.  In  man  then  they  are  no  longer
pure,  hence  cannot  be  regarded  as  giving  impulses  that  do  not
deceive.  In  man  as  in  animals,  his  instincts  tend  to  happiness,  but
his  intelligence  must  work  upon  them  in  order  to  ensure  this  effect.
The  wants  of  the  lower  animals  are  few,  but  those  of  man  are  ever
increasing,  and  this  from  the  reason  that  his  higher  faculties  have
the  power  to  modify  his  instincts — thus  to  the  instinct  of  self-pre¬
servation,  a  single  feeling  in  animals,  is  added  in  man  a  thousand
desires  which,  as  soon  as  satisfied,  give  rise  to  others. — Animals
are  apparently  perfect  in  the  sphere  in  which  they  are  destined  to
act,  not  so  man.  Progress  is  ever  with  him  and  before  him,  and  to
this  does  his  intelligence  correspond.

The  highest  and  most  sublime  part  of  the  mind  then  is  the
Intellect ,  also  it  will  develop  itself  to  its  highest  action,  when  stimu¬
lated,  or  if  I  may  so  speak,  when  warmed  by  the  feelings,  without
being  guided  by  them.

(3)  “  The  independent ,  just ,  and  calm  reasoner.”  This  induction,
as  is  evident  in  the  text,  is  principally  drawn  from  the  predominance
of  the  intellectual  faculties  over  the  feelings,  but  still  Self-esteem,
Conscientiousness,  and  Combativeness  all  exercise  their  influence  in
producing  the  effect  in  question.  There  are  two  kinds  of  indepen-


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.  343


dence,  even  as  there  are  two  kinds  of  patience:  the  one  may  be
called  active,  the  other  passive, — for  the  reason,  that  the  first  is  an
evident  contempt  of  opposition,  while  the  second  is  an  indifference
to  it; — it  is  thus,  that  the  greatly  proud  man  is  frequently  indepen¬
dent  of  the  opinion  of  the  world,  because  he  returns  censure  for
censure,  contempt  for  contempt;  whereas  the  greatly  modest  man
does  not  suffer  from  neglect,  because  he  neither  desires  nor  believes
himself  to  merit  attention.  The  first  of  these  modifications  of  the
same  feeling  is  greatly  active  in  Dr.  Strauss — his  Self-esteem  gives
him  a  sufficient  opinion  of,  and  confidence  in  his  own  powers;  this
confidence  is  sustained  by  more  than  a  sufficient  degree  of  courage
to  oppose  difficulties; — while  his  passion  for  intellectual  and  scientific
truth  (depending  upon  the  great  predominance  of  his  intellectual
faculties,  and  the  full  development  of  his  Conscientiousness)  makes
him  regard  as  secondary  everything  which  is  not  in  relation  to  it.

(4)  “His  memory  was  good ,  $*c.”  The  word  memory  is  here
employed  in  its  general  sense,  viz.,  the  memory  of  things  observed,
and  the  memory  of  ideas;  the  first  memory  depends  upon  the
observing  faculties  generally,  Eventuality,  Individuality,  &c.;  the
second  upon  the  reflective  faculties.  Causality  and  Comparison.
Many  children  and  adults  possess  all  the  memorative  faculties  well
developed,  without  a  proportionate  degree  of  memory.  This  defect
is  not  to  be  attributed  to  any  want  of  activity  in  the  memorative
faculties  themselves,  but  to  a  want  of  a  sufficient  degree  of  Attention
and  Concentration  in  order  to  impress  subjects  and  objects  upon  the
faculties  of  memory.  This  depends  in  a  great  measure  upon  a  want
of  Concentrativeness,  producing  a  vacillating  mind  and  ever-changing
and  restless  thought.  In  Dr.  Strauss  the  general  memory  was  and
is  enforced  by  the  auxiliary  aid  of  Concentrativeness.  Children
generally  learn  with  facility  the  tasks  suitable  to  their  age,  in  pro¬
portion  to  the  development  of  the  observing  faculties.  Language
greatly  adds  to  this  effect,  in  facilitating  the  verbal  interpretation  of
ideas;  and  in  the  study  of  the  arts,  Imitation  is  powerfully  auxiliary.
It  is  needless  to  mention,  that  where  the  reflective  faculties  are  well
developed,  they  greatly  add  to  the  general  comprehension.

(5)  “  Was  characterized  by  a  certain  confidence  in  his  own
powers,  not  so  much  evident  from  his  manners  as  conscious  to  himself.”
There  exists  the  most  decided  difference  between  the  consciousness
and  the  sentiment  of  superiority.  The  first  may  exist  without  the
aid  of  Self-esteem,  it  being  an  intellectual  valuation  of  one’s  own
mental  and  even  moral  superiority.

The  most  modest  man,  who  from  the  pure  influence  of  his  in¬
tellect  advances  greatly  the  march  of  science,  must  necessarily  have
the  consciousness  that  he  has  done  more  than  others.  For  this
reason  the  word  vanity  is  inapplicable  to  the  good  opinion  entertained
of  self  when  that  opinion  is  merited.

The  sentiment  of  Superiority,  or  Self-esteem,  is  a  feeling  pos¬
sessing  no  reasoned  consciousness,  and  frequently  deceives  the  intel¬
lect  into  the  belief  of  the  possession  of  personal  acquirements  and
superiority,  which  really  do  not  exist.  It  is  this  state  of  things
VOL.  II.  A  A


344  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.


which  may  be  called  real  vanity,  and  where  Conscientiousness  and
Benevolence  are  weak  it  is  accompanied  with  insolence  and  haugh¬
tiness.

In  Dr.  Strauss  both  the  sentiment  and  consciousness  of  supe¬
riority  are  greatly  active — the  latter  having  increased  with  the  power
the  intellect  has  acquired  from  education.  The  reason  why  this
good  opinion  of  himself  is  not  accompanied  with  arrogance,  is,  1st —
that  the  consciousness  of  intellectual  superiority  is  shown  only  in  the
operations  of  the  intellect,  giving  a  certain  independence  of  the
opinions  of  others;  and,  2ndly — that  the  sentiment  of  Superiority,
or  Self-esteem,  is  restrained  in  its  manifestation  by  the  united  influ¬
ence  of  Love  of  Approbation,  Veneration,  Conscientiousness,  and
Benevolence.

Love  of  Approbation  (which  is  more  active  in  boyhood)  opposes
Self-esteem  by  the  desire  of  pleasing;  Veneration  is  the  direct  an¬
tithesis  of  Self-esteem,  in  producing  that  respect  for  others  which
Self-esteem  causes  for  self;  Conscientiousness  gives  the  instinctive
tendency  to  consider  the  merits  of  others,  and,  lastly,  the  kindness
of  Benevolence  opposes  the  selfishness  of  Self-esteem.  A  marked
difference  between  the  consciousness  of  superior  power  arising  from
superior  intelligence  and  a  sentiment  of  superiority  springing  from
Self-esteem,  is,  that  the  former  is  limited  to  the  intellectual  appre¬
ciation  of  the  difference  of  one’s  own  intellect  and  that  of  others;
whereas  the  latter  is  the  feeling  of  superiority  without  the  slightest
idea  of  the  possibility  of  rivalry.

The  two  sources  of  self-opinion,  combined  as  they  are  in  Dr.
Strauss,  give  the  most  desirable  kind  of  self-opinion,*  viz.,  confi¬
dence  in  one’s  own  powers,  and  independence  of  thought,  but  not
contempt  of  the  merits  of  others,  nor  arrogance  of  manners.

(6)  “ He  was  capable  of  retaining  anger”  &c.  Anger  is  not  a
primitive  feeling,  but  the  compound  result  of  some  unpleasantly
excited  feeling  and  Destructiveness.  Where  Benevolence  is  active
anger  can  be  but  of  short  duration,  as  the  instigation  of  that  feeling
is  to  tranquillize  all  ungenerous  emotions.  In  the  case  in  question,
where  the  generous  feelings  predominate  greatly  over  the  more
selfish,  it  is  evident  that  anger  ends  with  opposition.

(7)  Gall  observes,  in  some  parts  of  his  works,  something  to
this  effect,  that  the  character  of  the  child  is  always  the  type  of
that  which  is  destined  to  be  developed  in  the  adult.  This  observa¬
tion  must  undoubtedly  be  attributed  to  Gall’s  habit  of  founding

*  The  most  perfect  sentiment  of  Superiority  reposes  less  upon  the  idea
of  personal  merit  than  upon  the  dignity  acquired  from  increased  knowledge.
It  is  thus,  that  a  superior  intellectual  man  is  independent  alike  of  the  opin¬
ions  of  his  predecessors  and  of  his  contemporaries,  while  he  is  humble
when  he  compares  his  own  powers  with  the  vast  truths  yet  to  be  acquired.
A  real  independence  of  intelligence  consists  in  being  entirely  free  from  pre¬
judices,  and  having  the  courage  to  contemplate  a  given  subject  by  the  light
of  one’s  own  investigations,  and  judging  for  oneself  without  being  biassed  pro
or  con  by  the  opinions  of  others.  Just  the  contrary  of  this  kind  of  spirit  is
the  most  predominating  among  men  ;  hence  in  many  arts  and  sciences,  and
particularly  in  moral  science,  a  misplaced  veneration  for  the  past  prevents
the  idea  of  the  possibility  of  ameliorating  ivhat  is.


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.  D.  345

his  judgments  of  character  upon  cases  of  extreme  development
alone;  hence,  generally  in  the  history  of  his  cases,  he  could
trace  great  talents,  vices,  &c.  to  a  very  early  age  of  the  individuals
who  were  thus  characterized.

The  invariable  continuance,  however,  of  the  primitive  manifes¬
tation  of  character,  can  never  be  received  as  the  rule  of  the  order
of  mental  development.  Character  may  change  entirely,  even  seve¬
ral  times  during  a  life.  We  may  have  the  child  wanting  the  ordinary
intelligence  usual  at  his  age;  at  twenty  years,  his  imagination  taking
the  lead  of  his  intellectual  faculties,  he  may  become  a  poet;  and  at
forty  years,  the  passions  which  formerly  stimulated  his  imagination,
being  calmed,  his  tardy  reflective  faculties  develop  themselves  with
a  vigour  proportioned  to  their  long  inactivity.

Nothing  is  more  common  than  cruelty  in  boyhood,  followed  by
the  most  compassionate  disposition  in  the  adult.  Also,  the  spend¬
thrift  becomes  a  miser;  the  religious  man  becomes  irreligious,  and
the  irreligious  religious.  These  changes  are  easily  explained  when
the  laws  of  the  consecutive  development  of  the  faculties,  and  the
influence  of  external  circumstances  upon  them  are  understood.

Children  are  cruel  because  the  energy  of  Destructiveness  must
necessarily  manifest  itself;  and  in  them  Benevolence  (which  is  the
natural  antagonist  of  cruelty)  does  not  awaken  pity,  because  their
intellect  does  not  recognize  the  pain  inflicted.

Religious  boys  frequently  prove  irreligious  men,  from  the  influ¬
ence  of  passions  which  become  energetic  only  at  adult  age;  or  from
the  efforts  of  reasoning,  which  make  them  deny  many  articles  of
their  primitive  faith.

Time,  accompanied  by  various  incidents,  such  as  moral  misfor¬
tune,  &c.,  may  also  act  in  restraining  and  enfeebling  primitive
passions,  thus  removing  a  counterbalancing  influence  to  the  mani¬
festation  of  moral  and  religious  feeling.  In  this  manner  may  be
explained  all  the  unexpected  changes  which  take  place  in  the  human
character  from  infancy  to  old  age.

Gall’s  observation,  however,  is  to  be  rejected  only  in  its  general
application,  for  there  are  frequent  cases  where  it  is  strictly  appli¬
cable,  as  for  instance  in  the  character  of  Dr.  Strauss.  His  general
tranquillity,  moral  tendency,  and  superior  intelligence  are  but  the
continuation  of  those  characteristics  which  were  peculiar  to  his
younger  years.  This  permanence  of  the  same  character  in  Dr.
Strauss  may  be  attributed  to  the  stronger  harmony  which  exists
between  his  instincts,  moral  feelings,  and  intellectual  faculties.

(8)  “  His  affections  not  easily  awakened ,”  &c.  In  adult  age
there  is  no  feeling  manifested  in  an  isolated  action  (at  least  such
is  the  general  rule),  and  no  one  of  them  is  more  influenced  by  the
exigencies  of  the  other  faculties  than  Adhesiveness.

It  is  for  this  reason,  that  in  a  mental  constitution  like  that  of
Dr.  Strauss,  where  sympathy  for  an  individual  requires  always
something  superior  in  intelligence  and  morality — the  organ  of  affec¬
tion  may  be  strongly  developed  without  enjoying  an  equal  facility
of  being  excited.  That  general  good  feeling  which  Dr.  Strauss,

A  A  2


346  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.D.


with  all  benevolent  persons,  shows  men  generally,  must  not  be
mistaken  for  the  manifestation  of  Adhesiveness.  The  great  differ¬
ence  between  the  affection  springing  from  Benevolence  and  that
which  is  derived  from  Adhesiveness,  is  that  the  first  gives  and  re¬
quires  no  return,  and  is  active  as  well  for  persons  never  seen  as  for
them  who  are  present.  Adhesiveness  on  the  contrary  is  exigent,
requiring  affection  for  affection,  and  is  active  only  for  the  few.

Constancy  in  affection  depends  1st,  upon  the  degree  of  develop¬
ment  of  Adhesiveness;  2ndly,  upon  the  activity  of  other  faculties
associated  with  it;  and,  lastly,  (at  least  in  some  degree)  upon
Concentrativeness.

Enthusiasm  in  affection  requires  a  predominancy  of  Adhesive¬
ness,  Veneration,  Love  of  Approbation,  and  the  imaginative  facul¬
ties  over  Self-esteem  and  the  intellectual  faculties.  The  organography
of  Dr.  Strauss  presents  the  opposite  case.

From  the  preceding  it  must  not  be  inferred  that  superior  intel¬
lectual  or  very  proud  men  cannot  become  enthusiasts  in  affection,
but  only  that  that  degree  of  feeling  is  rare  in  them.*

(9)  cc  Predominating  as  is  in  him  thought  over  feeling ,”  &c.
This  induction  is  founded  upon  the  principle,  that  an  active  and
powerful  intellect  is  contented  with  its  own  resources;  and  glad,
after  the  fatigue  of  study  is  over,  of  an  hour  of  relaxation.  In
Dr.  Strauss  there  are  also  other  faculties,  besides  the  intellectual,
which  are  ever  ready  to  enter  into  activity,  viz.,  his  sense  of  music
and  of  poetry;  an  animated  jovial  conversation  also  would  call  in
requisition  his  faculty  of  Wit;  and  lastly,  as  before  said,  he  is  so¬
cially  disposed.

(10)  The  pedantry  of  learning  characterizes  for  the  most  part
those  whose  knowledge  exists  more  in  the  memory  of  words  than
in  the  sense  of  things.  Pedantry  and  genius  I  have  never  met  with
together.

(11)  (C  His  paternal  love  would  be  very  great  f  &c.  The  love
of  offspring  in  men  more  easily  draws  tribute  from  the  other  facul¬
ties  than  it  does  in  women.  It  is  true  that  women,  equally  with
men,  are  proud  of  the  qualities  of  their  children,  feeling  for  them
that  vanity  which  before  they  felt  for  themselves;  still  every  feeling,
in  them,  associated  with  maternal  love,  is  secondary  to  the  love  of
offspring  itself;  with  few  exceptions,  even  when  the  organ  of  love
of  children  is  equally  developed  in  the  father  as  in  the  mother, —
the  feeling  accompanying  it  is  less  powerful  in  the  former;  and  it  is
only  when  the  child  advances  in  age  that  strong  paternal  love  exists.

*  The  following  extract  from  Dr.  Kerner’s  Examination  will  illustrate
the  subject  in  question  :  “  Later  affections  are  more  difficult  to  be  excited
than  earlier,  but  have  more  time  to  take  deep  and  firm  root ;  they  are  also
stronger  because  they  are  more  complicated.  One’s  affection  at  thirty  years
of  age  is  rarely  the  immediate  impulse  of  Adhesiveness,  or  of  Adhesiveness
and  Amativeness  alone.  Many  other  feelings  and  faculties  join  their  influ¬
ence  with  Adhesiveness.  In  the  ambitious  man  his  pride  and  vanity  must
be  satisfied  with  his  love.  He  is  probably  not  aware  that  other  feelings  than
that  of  love  is  active,  when  he  is  miserable,  or  overjoyed  with  the  object  of
his  passion.  The  religious  man  must  find  sympathy  for  his  devotional
feelings ;  the  poet  for  his  high  imaginings.”


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.  347


The  reason  of  this  in  part  is,  that  in  men  there  are  a  greater
number  of  feelings  active  than  in  women — particularly  love  of  gain,
ambition,  intellectual  pursuits,  &c.;  also  they  have  various  amuse¬
ments  for  which  women  have  no  tendency,  and  which  are  greatly
active  in  counterbalancing  strong  affections,  but  particularly  one  of
so  tender  a  nature  as  the  love  of  offspring.  Hence  the  later  interest
which  the  father  feels  for  his  child  may  be  attributed  to  the  associa¬
tion  of  ulterior  views  with  Philoprogenitiveness  itself.  The  rich
man  regards  his  son  as  the  inheritor  of  his  name  and  fortune, — his
daughter  he  loves  from  the  association  with  the  affection  he  bears
for  the  mother;  and  both  his  children  interest  in  some  degree  his
Adhesiveness.

Another  reason  why  the  love  of  offspring  is  greater  in  women
than  in  men,  is,  that  the  woman,  almost  from  the  first  month  of
gestation,  feels  that  she  is  a  mother, — this  feeling  becomes  stronger
as  her  time  advances,  and  when  her  child  is  at  length  born,  he  is
not  for  her  as  for  the  father — a  stranger.  Moreover,  the  mother
feels  that  it  is  her  life  that  has  given  being  to  her  infant, — that  it  is
her  cares  alone  that  must  watch  over  its  feebleness, — and  even  the
memory  of  the  pains  she  has  endured  adds  vigour  to  her  love.

It  must  not  be  forgotten  also,  that  the  organ  of  love  of  children
is  generally  less  developed  in  men  than  in  women.

In  Dr.  Strauss,  from  a  certain  association  of  feelings  with  Phi¬
loprogenitiveness,  there  is  reason  to  infer  that  love  of  children
would  be  one  of  the  most  active  feelings  in  him.

In  the  first  place,  the  organ  is  larger  than  either  Amativeness
or  Adhesiveness,  and  is  greatly  sustained  by  Benevolence,  Consci¬
entiousness,  and  Self-esteem — the  first  supporting  the  natural  ten¬
derness  of  love  of  children;  the  2nd  giving  a  sense  of  duty  towards
so  feeble  and  entirely  dependant  being  as  is  a  child, — the  3rd  asso¬
ciating  the  strong  feeling  of  personality  in  the  sentiment  or  idea,
that  the  child  is  an  emanation  from  self.

(12)  "  There  is  an  absence  of  all  ignorant  bigotry ,”  &c.  Bigotry
is  a  blind  adhesion  to  some  belief,  without  an  effort  of  the  intellect
to  judge  of  the  real  merits  of  the  thing  venerated  or  worshipped.
Intolerance  may  be  joined  with  bigotry,  and  may  exist  without  it.

The  first  is  principally  the  result  of  great  Veneration  and  Mar¬
vellousness,  unsustained  by  well-developed  intellectual  faculties, —
the  second  is  the  immediate  result  of  Self-esteem,  the  selfishness  of
which  is  uncorrected  by  Benevolence,  and  generally  is  accompanied
by  an  unenlightened  intelligence.  One  must  be  religious  in  order
to  be  bigoted;  not  so  in  order  to  be  intolerant;  intolerance  being
the  sentiment  of  party  spirit  and  hatred  against  what  is  not  maintained
by,  or  what  does  not  belong  to  self.  The  well-developed  intelligence,
Benevolence,  and  Conscientiousness  of  Dr.  Strauss  are  guarantees
against  either  bigotry  or  intolerance,  even  as  they  are  against  jea¬
lousy  and  envy.

In  order  to  be  of  a  jealous  disposition,  (I  do  not  speak  of  the
well-founded  jealousy  of  betrayed  affections,  &c.,)  Love  of  Appro¬
bation  must  predominate  over  Self-Esteem;  to  be  of  an  envious  dis-


348  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.


position,  Love  of  Approbation  with  or  without  Self-Esteem  must
predominate  over  Benevolence  and  Conscientiousness.

(13)  “ Praise  and  flattering  attention  coming  from  them  he
loves,”  &c.  This  depends  upon  a  natural  association  between  Ad¬
hesiveness  and  Love  of  Approbation.  His  little  susceptibility  of
being  excited  by  the  opinion  of  the  world  depends  upon  the  pre¬
dominancy  of  his  intellectual  powers,  his  Self-Esteem  and  Con¬
scientiousness;  the  combined  action  of  the  two  latter  produces  not
only  a  sense  of  personal  superiority,  but  also  the  consciousness  of
meriting  one’s  proper  approbation,  while  the  intellect  tends  to
appreciate  the  exact  value  of  the  opinion  of  men.

There  is  nothing  more  true  than  that  the  moral  and  superiorly
intellectual  man  cannot  greatly  desire  the  praise  of  the  world,  when
at  each  moment  his  ideas  of  honour,  dignity,  justice,  and  goodness,
are  shocked  by  vileness,  selfishness,  and  injustice,  and  where,  with
few  exceptions,  his  inspired  truths  and  fatiguing  researches  not  only
do  not  obtain  the  appreciation  they  merit,  but  meet  with  ignorance
and  presumption.  A  superior-minded  man  has  absolutely  no  alter¬
native  but  to  work,  and  be  satisfied  with  the  idea  that  his  labours
will  be  appreciated  and  profited  by  in  years  to  come.  I  hold  it  as  a
maxim,  that  the  best  guarantee  against  the  undue  ambition  to  acquire
the  approbation  of  the  world,  is,  the  sober  appreciation  of  what  it
is  worth.

The  real  intellectual  man  has  but  one  incentive  to  labour,  viz.,
the  love  of  knowledge  ;  and  but  one  reward,  the  good  which  that
knowledge  yields !

(14)  “  If  his  anger  were  not  neutralized  by  his  indifference.”
In  characters  such  as  we  are  considering,  in  which  kindness  and
gentleness  predominate  over  other  feelings,  but  where  also  there
exists  sources  of  great  energy  and  courage,  anger  is  with  difficulty
excited,  but  once  being  so,  is  intense.

It  is  very  difficult  in  the  organization  under  consideration  to  esti¬
mate  the  precise  influence  of  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness,
opposed  as  they  are  by  several  equally  developed  organs.  It  is
almost  certain,  however,  that  the  above  observation  is  correct,  viz.,
that  Dr.  Strauss  is  rarely  angry,  but  when  he  is  so,  the  feeling
is  violent.  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness  however  must  exert
a  constant  influence,  not  upon  his  feelings,  but  upon  his  intellectual
tastes;  whilst  his  intellect  gives  the  sole  tendency  to  investigation,
it  is  naturally  influenced  by  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness  to
analyze  the  opinions  of  others;  or  in  other  words,  the  intellect
always  predominating  and  guiding,  is  still  influenced  in  the  choice
of  mental  application  by  the  pleasure  derived  from  Combativeness
and  Destructiveness  in  overcoming  difficulties  or  in  a  righteous
warfare.

(15)  “  Ambition  however  is  not  wanting  in  Dr.  Strauss,”  &c.
The  observation  in  the  text  is  based  upon  the  principle  exposed  in
note  13,  viz.,  that  men  of  superior  moral  and  intellectual  character,
esteem  the  world  in  general  too  little  to  be  greatly  ambitious  of  its
applause,  and  partly  upon  the  natural  influence  of  Self-Esteem,


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.  I).  319


which  in  proportion  to  its  activity  desires  to  be  isolated  in  merit
from  others,  or  out  of  the  reach  of  competition.

If  Love  of  Approbation  were  predominant  in  this  organization,
I  should  not  have  inferred  an  indifference  to  the  acquirement  of  the
world’s  opinion.  For  Love  of  Approbation  is  ever  desirous  of  praise,
and  fearful  of  not  acquiring  it;  whereas  Self-Esteem  is  certain  of
possessing  it,  and  becomes  aware  of  its  strong  desire  in  this  respect
only  when  it  is  evidently  and  undeniably  wounded:  hence  the  in¬
duction  in  question,  that  ambition  would  become  more  evident  in
Dr.  Strauss  were  it  seriously  frustrated.

The  following  observations  on  ambition  will  illustrate  the  pre¬
ceding.

The  feeling  of  ambition  can  evidently  be  traced  to  two  faculties,
which,  though  generally  combined  in  action  are  sometimes  mani¬
fested  distinct  the  one  from  the  other.  The  first  of  these  faculties
is  Love  of  Approbation,  which  in  simple  terms  is  the  desire  to  be
thought  well  of.  Corresponding  to  this  feeling  we  find  every  where
those  who  are  ambitious  only  to  please  without  having  any  predilec¬
tion  with  regard  to  the  means  of  doing  so.  This  is  particularly  the
case  where  the  faculty  in  question  predominates  over  every  other;
it  generally  acts  however  with  that  which  is  nearest  in  activity  with
itself.  Thus,  if  Adhesiveness  be  very  active,  Love  of  Approbation
is  associated  with  it,  and  produces  the  strong  desire  of  individual
approbation.  Associated  with  Adhesiveness  and  Amativeness,  or
the  latter  feeling  alone,  Love  of  Approbation  produces  the  desire  to
he  agreeable  in  female  society,  and  is  the  base  of  gallantry.  Asso¬
ciated  with  one  or  the  other  of  the  intellectual  faculties,  it  will  give
the  ambition  to  succeed  in  some  art  or  science.  Associated  with
many  faculties  at  once,  as  in  the  soldier,  with  Combativeness  and
Destructiveness,  Hope  and  Veneration,  it  gives  birth  to  the  am¬
bition  of  being  recognised  by  his  superior  officers  as  brave  and  loyal.

Self-Esteem  gives  rise  to  the  desire  of  superiority  with  the  sole
view  to  gratify  the  consciousness  of  self-worth.  This  ambition  is
proud,  and  if  not  corrected  by  the  superior  feelings  of  benevolence
and  conscience,  is  also  arrogant  and  reserved,  or  inexpansive,  as  the
other  is  the  contrary.  It  is  also  always  accompanied  with  a  con¬
tempt  of  those  who  are  in  superior  position,  which  relieves  greatly
the  pain  that  otherwise  the  contrast  with  self  would  produce.  It
does  not  suffer  from  contrariety  so  easily  as  does  the  first,  but  on
the  other  hand  writhes  longer  under  the  sting  of  disappointment.

Love  of  Approbation  and  Self-Esteem,  when  greatly  developed,
form  the  base  of  the  most  powerful  passion  of  ambition.  It  is
immediately  sustained  by  the  feelings  of  courage,  hope,  and  cre¬
dulity.  The  first  adds  to  it  energy  of  action;  the  second  and  third
encourages  it  with  the  belief  of  success.  In  order  however  that
ambition  exist  under  the  form  of  a  predominating  passion,  Bene¬
volence,  Conscientiousness,  and  Adhesiveness,  must  be  of  moderate
development  only.  0?ie  cannot  be  greatly  ambitious  without  being
greatly  selfish  !

(16  a  b)  “  There  is  in  this  intellect  neither  an  absolute  seep-


350  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.


ticism  nor  absolute  credulity.  The  natural  tendency  of  the  latter ,
which  is  somewhat  predominant ,”  &c.  The  organography  of  Dr.
Strauss  presents  Marvellousness  rather  large,  Ideality,  large,  Com¬
parison,  large,  Causality,  large.  The  two  first  faculties  give  a
decided  tendency  to  enjoy  works  of  fiction,  and  to  general  credulity;
the  influence  however  of  these  faculties  are  lessened  and  modified
by  the  two  latter,  which  require  proof  before  belief  can  exist.  The
mutual  influence  of  the  four  faculties  is  to  produce,  not  doubt ,  but
a  desire  of  proof  and  conviction.

The  following  remarks  upon  scepticism  will  illustrate  the  pre¬
ceding.

Scepticism  is  the  opposite  to  credulity;  when  it  is  a  predomi¬
nating  characteristic  of  the  mind,  it  is  always  a  sign  of  moderate
intellect.  Great  minds,  while  they  do  not  admit  nor  believe  in  the
existence  of  something  without  understanding  it,  are  well  on  their
guard  before  rejecting  anything  as  impossible.  Intellects  endowed
with  limited  perceptions  and  imagination  and  incapable  of  profound
and  continued  reasoning,  refuse  to  admit  the  probability  of  what
they  have  not  proved,  not  by  reasoning  but  by  fact;  and  when  even
they  clearly  see  the  fact,  they  appreciate  but  little  its  value  for  want
of  understanding  the  causes  which  have  produced  it.

Mr.  Combe  well  observes,  speaking  of  superficial  intellects,
“  that  they  are  blind  to  remote  consequences;  that  they  stigmatize
as  visionary  all  intellectual  perceptions  which  their  own  minds  cannot
reach.  They  reject  principle  as  vain  theory.”

Where  Ideality  and  Marvellousness  are  predominating,  there  is
a  tendency  to  believe  without  examining  the  subject  of  belief.
Where  the  reflective  faculties  greatly  predominate,  there  is  a  ten¬
dency  to  deny  everything  not  immediately  subject  to  proof.  Where
the  imaginative  and  reflective  region  harmonize  in  development,  the
intellect  is  neither  sceptical  nor  credulous, — it  is  neutral.*

(17)  “Analysis,  Synthesis.”  Analysis  is  the  solution  of  any¬
thing,  whether  material  or  mental  to  its  first  elements.  Synthesis
is  the  composition  from  elements  already  known.  Causality  is  the
immediate  instrument  of  both  processes  of  reasoning.  The  tracing
cause  from  effect  is  the  first;  the  tracing  effect  from  cause  is  the
second.

(18)  “  We  may,  then,  recognize  in  Dr.  Strauss  a  predominating
tendency  and  taste  for  all  exact  reasonings.”  This  is  by  no  means
in  contradiction  with  the  above  observation,  that  f<  Dr.  Strauss  must
take  an  interest  in  certain  questions  of  the  day,”  &c.

A  great  intelligence  must  necessarily  arrive  at  a  point  in  reasoning,
where  it  meets  with  only  hypotheses  and  probability;  but  because
satisfactory  comprehension  does  not  accompany  plausible  supposi-

*  It  is  necessary  to  remark,  that  there  are  persons  who  pretend  to  a
scepticism  which  they  do  not  feel,  and  this  on  account  of  the  predominating
influence  of  self-esteem  over  that  of  conscience.  Such  persons  use  their
intellect  only  for  the  satisfaction  of  their  pride.  It  is  their  principle  to
maintain  what  belongs  to  them  or  what  they  belong  to;  hence  they  condemn
everything  which  is  not  within  the  circle  of  their  own  interests.


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.D.  351


tion,  or  even  indistinct  conceptions,  he  does  not  believe  that  he  has
reached  the  end  of  possible  research  and  truth.  On  the  contrary,
the  obscurity  which  he  encounters  stimulates  his  passion  for  inquiry,
and  he  believes  more  truth  to  exist  behind  the  darkness  than  has
yet  been  developed  to  his  view.

Intelligences  that  are  not  thus  characterized,  are  unadapted
either  to  advance  science,  or  even  appreciate  those  who  do.

(19)  “  His  mind  is  eminently  adapted  for  criticism ,”  &c.  Cri¬
ticism  is  a  result  of  the  intellect,  but  Conscientiousness  and  Benevo¬
lence  excite  the  feelings  of  generosity  and  of  justice.  Unjust  censure
or  animadversion  is  the  result  of  Combativeness,  Destructiveness,
and  Self-esteem  with  the  intellect,  while  Conscience  and  Benevolence
are  inactive.

The  following  observations  on  criticism  and  animadversion  will
illustrate  the  passage  in  the  text.

By  criticism  is  generally  erroneously  understood  the  severe  and
unfavourable  analysis  of  the  works  and  opinions  of  another.  Criti¬
cism,  however,  is  impartial.  It  means  the  exposing  of  the  beauties
as  well  as  the  errors  of  the  subject  criticised;  it  is  in  fact  the  un¬
prejudiced  intellectual  analysis  of  it.

Warton  observes,  that  just  criticism  demands,  not  only  that  every
beauty  or  every  blemish  be  minutely  pointed  out  in  its  different
degree  and  kind,  but  also  that  the  reason  and  foundation  of  ex¬
cellencies  and  faults  be  accurately  ascertained.  Criticism  being
purely  an  intellectual  analysis,  it  follows  that  each  intellect  will
have,  to  a  certain  degree,  the  capacity  and  the  tendency  to  criticise
any  subject  that  it  understands  or  believes  that  it  understands.
He  who  has  a  talent  for  music  or  for  painting,  &c.,  will  naturally
give  his  judgment  upon  musical  compositions,  paintings,  &c.,
according  as  he  is  affected  by  those  subjects.

Animadversion. — Some  men  are  said  to  have  a  tendency  to  criti¬
cise  everything  which  is  new.  The  word  animadversion  corresponds
better  with  this  tendency;  for  those,  who  criticise  with  the  view  to
find  faults,  or  with  so  little  generosity  that  they  expose  only  what
they  believe  to  be  the  error  of  the  subject,  are  incited  to  criticise
more  by  envy  than  the  desire  to  make  an  intellectual  analysis.  Such
persons  are  more  selfish  than  the  purely  sceptical,  as  they  are  influ¬
enced  by  party  spirit.  The  sceptic  does  not  attack  nor  do  injustice,
but  the  unjust  and  prejudiced  critic  injures  either  by  disfiguring  the
real  nature  of  the  subject  he  analyses,  or  by  exposing  only  the  less
advantageous  part  of  it.  Crabbe  observes:  ‘‘Animadversions  are
too  personal  to  be  impartial;  consequently  they  are  seldom  just;
they  are  mostly  resorted  to  by  those  who  want  to  build  up  one
system  on  the  ruins  of  another.”

True  criticism  is  always  calm.  When  expressed  in  severe  terms,
it  approaches  more  to  what  I  have  termed  animadversion;  for  then
the  intellectual  analysis  is  joined  with  a  feeling  of  irritability  and
opposition.  Those  who  have  great  Destructiveness,  Combativeness,
and  Self-Esteem,  with  capacious  intellects  are  generally  inclined  to
make  animadversions;  if,  however,  they  are  also  greatly  conscientious.


352  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.D.


while  they  are  severe,  upon  errors,  they  make  known  also  the  merits
of  the  subject.

(20)  “  His  talent  for  demonstration  'predominated  over  that  of
illustration ,  &e.”  Demonstration  is  the  giving  of  deducible  evidence
upon  a  subject;  it  is  both  analysis  and  synthesis,  and  depends
immediately  upon  Causality;  illustration  is  the  explanation  of  a
subject  by  examples  and  depends  immediately  upon  comparison.

Where  Causality  is  very  large,  and  Comparison  of  very  inferior
development,  there  is  a  necessary  tendency  to  penetrate  into  the
abstract  nature  of  things  without  a  sufficient  regard  to  those  relations
which  the  subject  investigated  bears  to  others.  All  things,  alike  in
moral  as  in  physical  nature,  are  associated  together,  and  for  this
reason  an  isolated  train  of  reasoning  must  be  imperfect.  Causality
can  only  penetrate  into  the  abstract  nature  of  things,  while  Com¬
parison  discovers  the  relations  and  differences  between  them.  The
activity  of  the  one,  unaccompanied  by  that  of  the  other,  necessarily
leaves  an  investigation,  not  so  much  incorrect  as  imperfect.  Caus¬
ality  is,  however,  the  highest  faculty,  because  its  office  is  to  discover,
— to  penetrate  from  the  known  unto  the  unknown ,  whereas  Comparison
only  adapts  and  generalizes.  It  follows  from  the  preceding  that  the
highest  evidence  consists,  not  alone  in  demonstration,  but  in  demon¬
stration  and  illustration  conjoined,  and  corresponds  with  what  is
understood  by  an  a  priori  and  an  a  posteriori  reasoning  conjoint;
or  in  other  words,  it  is  a  reasoning,  which  at  the  same  time  analyses
a  subject  and  shows  its  application.

It  happens  frequently  that  an  author  in  his  writings  is  more
illustrative  than  demonstrative,  and  from  this  it  may  be  inferred,
that  he  obeys  his  prevailing  mental  tendency.  This,  however,  is
not  necessarily  the  case.  In  the  first  place  the  exposition  of  a  subject
may  require  more  illustration  than  demonstration,  or  the  author  may
prefer  this  manner  of  exposition,  though  previously  he  may  have
pursued  his  investigation  by  analysis  alone.  Generally,  however,
the  manner  of  exposition  corresponds  with  that  of  the  investigation.

The  observation  in  the  text  is  derived  from  the  relative  degree  of
development  of  the  organs  of  Causality  and  Comparison.  It  must
not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  the  latter  is  powerfully  aided  by
Eventuality,  which  greatly  supports  illustration;  for  while  on  the
one  hand.  Comparison  generalizes  the  results  brought  to  light  by
Causality,  on  the  other,  it  associates  or  compares  them  with  facts
recognized  by  Eventuality.

(21)  “Dr.  Strauss  possesses  more  talent  for  satirical  writing ,
than  the  desire  to  employ  it.”  Satire  is  a  mixture  of  Wit  and
Reasoning,  and  depends  chiefly  upon  the  faculties  of  Comparison
and  Wit.  It  frequently  accompanies  profound  philosophical  reason¬
ing;  but  it  is  nevertheless  a  sign  of  the  influence  of  irritated  feelings,
or  the  desire  to  humiliate  an  author  or  to  ridicule  his  ideas.  Irony
and  sarcasm  are,  so  to  speak,  a  more  condensed  expression  of  satire,
and  manifest  in  great  evidence  the  influence  of  Destructiveness.  The
dignity  of  a  polemic-critic,  or  any  kind  of  reasoning,  is  always  injured
by  the  admission  of  satire,  which  is  at  best  nothing  else  than  the


Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss,  D.D.  353


attempt  to  place  the  ideas  of  another  in  an  unfair  light,  and  to  impose
by  words  instead  of  convincing  by  reasoning .*

Benevolence  in  its  desire  to  avoid  giving  offence  opposes  satire,
and  Conscientiousness  forbids  it  as  an  unfair  mode  of  argument;
it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  strictly  conscientious  man  should  limit
himself  in  important  discussions  to  reasoning  alone.

(22)  “  But  is  never  obstinate By  obstinacy  is  understood  an
unwavering  firmness  in  an  opinion  or  in  an  act  without  any  reference
to  what  is  right  or  wrong.

Obstinacy  results  from  Combativeness  and  Firmness,  unguided
by  the  intelligence,  or  unmodified  by  other  feelings.

Adhesiveness,  Love  of  Approbation,  Veneration,  Conscientious¬
ness,  Benevolence,  and  the  intellect  oppose  obstinacy,  because  they
produce  the  desire  to  yield  to  others  and  to  embrace  opinions  which
are  conceived  to  be  the  most  correct,  or  to  act  in  a  manner  which  is
believed  to  be  most  worthy.

(23)  (i  Firm  in  his  own  opinion;  but  neither  proud,  haughty ,  nor
vain.”  The  first  part  of  this  sentence  has  already  been  explained.
Pride  and  haughtiness,  particularly  the  latter,  being  incompatible
with  a  generous  nature,  the  organography  of  Dr.  Strauss  and  the
following  remarks  upon  pride  and  vanity  will  testify  to  the  truth  of
the  observation  in  the  text.

Pride  is  the  immediate  and  pure  result  of  Self-Esteem.  It  is  a
word  which  expresses  the  abstract  idea  of  self-appreciation.  Vanity
is  a  compound  effect  proceeding  from  Love  of  Approbation  and
Self-Esteem  combined.  The  proud  man  is  contented  with  himself
and  indifferent  to  the  opinions  of  others,  whereas  the  vain  man  is
contented  with  himself,  but  ambitious  of  the  constant  good  opinion
of  others.

Haughtiness  is  less  than  pride,  more  than  vanity.  The  haughty
man  contented  with  himself,  fears  to  be  debased  by  the  contact  of
his  inferiors,  and  to  be  humbled  by  patronage  of  his  superiors.
Love  of  Approbation  excites  in  him  the  desire  of  consideration  of
others,  while  Self-Esteem  makes  him  feel  independent  of  it.

For  this  reason  it  is  that  the  haughty  man  disgusts  and  excites
antipathy  more  than  either  the  proud  or  the  vain  man.

The  proud  man  reserved  within  himself,  shocks  only  inasmuch
as  he  refuses  our  sympathy  or  protection.  The  vain  man  excites

*  If  the  reader  would  have  an  excellent  specimen  of  this  kind  of  argument,
I  refer  him  to  the  recent  critique,  or  rather  attack,  upon  phrenology,  by
L61ut.  I  do  more  for  Dr.  L£lut  than  his  conscience  has  permitted  him  to  do
for  Gall  and  other  phrenologists, — 1  admit  that  his  work  has  some  merit  as  a
critic  ;  but  I  censure  him  greatly,  as  must  do  every  one  who  really  loves
truth  more  than  words,  for  having  carefully  avoided  to  notice  whatever  lie
may  have  thought  favourable  to  phrenology,  and  in  every  case,  where  he
felt  that  argument  would  be  weak,  to  have  served  himself  by  a  most  undig¬
nified  (it  is  too  much  to  say  satire)  humour.

One  cannot  avoid  laughing  and  being  amused  on  reading  Dr.  L^lut’s
essay.  If  to  produce  such  an  effect  were  the  object  of  his  ambition,  it
would  have  been  more  generally  satisfied,  had  he,  in  imitation  of  Kotzebue,
have  written  a  farce  for  the  Theatre  de  Vaudeville;  for  with  some  exceptions,
the  work  in  question  merits  no  other  title  than  that  of  an  excellent  comedy.


354  Phrenological  Analysis  of  Daniel  Strauss ,  D.D.


our  contempt  for  what  we  consider  to  be  the  littleness  of  his  ambi¬
tion,  but  the  haughty  man  awakens  our  antipathy,  because  he  will
command  our  deference  as  a  right,  receive  from  all,  and  give  to  and
thank  none.

Pride  and  vanity  may  exist  with  Benevolence,  not  so  haughtiness.
Pride  and  vanity  with  Combativeness  are,  the  first  unyielding,  the
second  ever  ready  to  resent  an  offence;  but  haughtiness  and  Com¬
bativeness  produce  a  fearless  tyrant.

(24)  “  It  possesses  the  elements  of  talent,  and  apparently  that
degree  of  power  which  is  called  genius .”  Crabbe  observes,  c<  that
talents  are  either  natural  or  acquired,  or  in  some  measure  of  a  mixed
nature;  they  denote  powers  without  specifying  the  source  from
which  they  proceed.  A  man  may  have  a  talent  for  music,  for
drawing,  for  mimicry,  and  the  like;  but  this  talent  may  be  the  fruit
of  practice,  as  much  as  of  nature.”

I  believe  that  we  cannot  speak  of  an  acquired  talent.  We  say
a  man  has  acquired  an  ability  in  such  or  such  an  art;  but  not  that
he  has  acquired  a  talent  for  it.  We  speak  of  a  talent  as  a  peculiar
and  original  gift,  and  say  that  habit  or  education  develops,  not  pro¬
duces,  it.  I  make  these  observations  only  for  the  sake  of  perspicuity
of  language,  for  strictly  talent  and  genius  are  but  degrees  of  the
development  of  one  or  more  faculties  of  the  degree  of  their  activity.
For  instance,  a  man  is  endowed  with  sufficient  imitation  and  percep¬
tion  of  Form,  Colour,  &c.,  to  give  him  the  capacity  of  acquiring
the  art  of  drawing  or  painting.  He  practises  and  acquires  an  ability
for  either  when  another  possesses  the  faculties  which  give  this  capa¬
city  in  a  greater  degree  of  activity  and  power,  in  the  manner  that
he  paints  and  draws  without  instruction.  We  call  this  second  degree
of  capacity  talent;  if  the  faculties  are  still  more  vigorous  and  are
accompanied  with  imagination  genius  is  said  to  exist.

The  word  talent  is  used  generally  to  denote  a  high  capacity  for
the  imitative  arts, — genius  for  original  conceptions  and  creations.

We  may  easily  recognize  phrenologically  the  existence  of  talent
in  an  individual;  but  with  regard  to  genius  the  case  is  otherwise.
We  can  do  no  more  than  presume  the  existence  of  genius,  or  at  best
we  have  no  means  of  judging  of  the  degree  in  which  it  exists.

I  speak  of  talent  when  I  find  a  certain  combination  of  faculties,
and  in  particular  one  assisted  greatly  or  harmoniously  by  the  rest.
I  presume  genius  to  exist,  when  I  find  the  same  state  of  things  ex¬
isting,  accompanied  with  extraordinary  size  in  the  organs,  and  a
high  development  of  temperament.

The  appreciable  difference  then,  between  cerebral  conformations
producing  genius  and  those  which  give  rise  to  talent  is  only  in  the
size  of  the  organs  and  the  activity  of  the  brain.

For  instance — a  good  endowment  of  the  perceptive  faculties,  a
large  Imitation,  Concentrativeness,  and  Secretiveness,  with  a  mode¬
rate  development  of  Ideality  and  the  affective  powers,  form  sufficient
data  from  which  to  declare  a  talent  for  acting;  add  to  these  a  large
Ideality,  Language,  and  affective  powers,  and  one  may  deduce  the
existence  of  a  genius  for  the  dramatic  art.  But  one  dares  not  say


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of  Cures  by  Mesmerism.


355


how  great  is  that  genius;  whether  it  he  that  of  a  Talma,  a  Siddons,
or  a  genius  inferior  to  those.  Genius  is  not  to  be  explained  in
words,  nor  appreciated  from  the  development  of  the  brain.


IY.  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism.

By  T.  B.  Brindley.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Dear  Sir, — I  beg  to  forward  you  the  following  cases  of
cures  with  mesmerism,  in  continuation  of  the  series,  for
insertion  in  The  Zoist.

I  am,  dear  Sir,  truly  your’s,

T.  B.  Brindley.

Regent’s  Place,  near  Stourbridge,

April  9th,  1844.

XIII.  Cure  of  Epilepsy.

Mr. - ,  a  gentleman  residing  near  Stourbridge,  who

had  been  subject  to  epilepsy  of  a  most  violent  nature  for
five  years,  from  a  severe  blow  on  the  head  from  the  falling
of  a  piece  of  tile,  and  who  had  tried  in  vain  all  the  medical
men  of  any  eminence  in  the  neighbourhood,  applied  to  me
on  the  17th  of  October,  1843,  to  be  mesmerised.  He  was
sent  into  the  coma  in  four  minutes.  I  passed  my  hand  over
his  head  for  several  minutes,  commencing  at  the  anterior
lobe,  and  continuing  over  the  middle  and  posterior  lobes,
and  for  some  short  distance  along  the  spine.  I  then  breathed
on  every  part  of  the  head,  and  let  him  sleep  on  for  a  quarter
of  an  hour.  I  then,  at  the  urgent  request  of  some  of  the
patient’s  friends,  but  decidedly  against  my  inclination  and
conviction  (the  latter  being,  that  attempting  to  excite  the
brain  of  an  epileptic  patient  is  not  unattended  with  unplea¬
sant  consequences,  and,  in  some  instances,  with  danger),
proceeded  to  excite  one  or  two  of  the  cerebral  organs,  by
contact,  which  instantly  brought  on  a  very  severe  fit.  The
patient  struggled  from  his  chair,  and  rolled  about  in  dreadful
convulsions,  the  foam  issuing  from  his  mouth;  the  whole
presenting  a  picture  of  the  disease  in  its  most  terrible  form.
Several  persons  attempted  to  hold  him,  while  others  were
about  to  apply  water  to  his  face,  and  slap  it  with  their  hands,
&c.  I  begged  of  them,  however,  to  let  him  alone,  as  he
was  on  the  floor,  with  something  beneath  his  head,  and  could
not  hurt  himself ;  and  standing  over  him  I  commenced  pass¬
ing  my  hand  over  his  body,  breathing  hard  upon  him,  and


356


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of


willing  at  the  same  time  that  the  fit  should  cease.  I  had
scarcely  done  this  a  minute  before  he  lay  quite  still ;  the  fit
having  passed  off,  though  usually  his  fits  continued  half  an
hour, — an  hour, — and  sometimes  even  two  and  three  hours.
When  restored  from  his  fit  he  still  remained  in  the  mesmeric
sleep,  which  I  permitted  to  continue  some  time  longer.  I
then  commenced  demesmerising  him,  by  transverse  passes,
and  fanning  with  a  handkerchief;  this  was  tried  for  ten
minutes  without  any  effect.  I  next  tried  simple  volition  for
five  minutes  without  success.  Then  drawing  the  fingers  and
thumbs  over  the  eye-lids  and  eye-brows  outward,  but  still
without  effect.  I  now  passed  my  hands  upwards  from  the
feet  to  the  head,  before  the  face  ;  blew  upon  his  eyes  with
my  breath,  and  darted  my  fingers  towards  him ;  but  he  still
remained  as  deep  in  the  mesmeric  trance  as  ever.  Thinking
it  useless  to  try  any  other  process  of  demesmerising  at  that
time,  I  requested  his  friends  to  put  him  to  bed  for  six  or
seven  hours,  when,  if  he  did  not  wake  in  that  time  sponta¬
neously,  I  promised  to  return  and  then  demesmerise  him,  as
I  had  done  several  of  my  patients  after  sleeping  a  consider¬
able  time.  This  proposal,  however,  they  by  no  means  re¬
lished,  and  strongly  urged  me  to  try  some  other  process  to
awaken  him.  Thinking  that  by  this  time  he  must  be  in  a
state  of  somnambulism,  or  clairvoyance,  if  he  chanced  to  be
a  somnambulist,  or  a  clairvoyant,  I  demesmerised  Hearing
and  excited  Language,  and  asked  him  how  he  felt.  His  reply
instantly  was,  “  Very  well,  thank  you,  my  dear  sir.”  “  How
long  shall  you  sleep?”  “Half  an  hour.”  “What  do  you
think  of  mesmerism?”  “That  it  will  cure  me,  as  it  has
Miss  Price.”  “  When  ?”  “  In  three  weeks.”  “  How  often

must  I  mesmerise  you  ?”  “  Every  day  for  three  weeks.”

“Will  your  fits  cease  then  ?”  “  Not  then,  but  ten  days  be¬
fore.”  “  How  do  you  know  ?”  “  I  can  see.”  I  then  placed

at  the  request  of  some  parties  present,  several  things  behind
his  head,  all  of  which  he  named  at  once,  saying  “  IPs  a  box,
(is  it  not  ?)”  as  if  asking,  but  in  reality  naming  them  each
time  correctly.  He  then  told  us  the  names  of  every  person
present,  the  number  having  increased  since  the  commence¬
ment  of  the  operation.  I  then,  a  second  time,  asked  my
patient  if  he  could  name  the  persons  present  one  after  the
other,  as  they  stood  behind  him,  which  he  did  instantly  in
the  most  correct  and  unhesitating  manner.  He  then  awoke
spontaneously,  the  half  hour  being  up  which  he  had  indicated.
He  had  not  the  slightest  recollection  when  awake  of  the  fit
having  seized  him,  or  of  anything  that  had  transpired  during
his  sleep-waking.


various  Diseases  cured  by  Mesmerism.  357

I  visited  him  again  the  next  day,  mesmerised  him  as
before,  using  the  same  process  of  passing,  &c.,  but  avoiding
all  contact  with  the  head.  He  slept  half  an  hour,  and  was
demesmerised  by  the  usual  means  without  a  fit  being  pro¬
duced.  He  had  only  had  two  fits  since  the  last  mesmerisa-
tion,  though  he  usually  had  from  seven  to  twelve  in  the
twenty -four  hours.

I  continued  the  sittings  every  day,  and  mesmerised  and
demesmerised  without  inducing  any  fits.  In  his  waking
hours  the  fits  gradually  decreased  in  number  and  intensity
till  October  28th,  when  he  had  the  most  severe  fit  I  ever
witnessed  (which  was  removed  as  the  former  one),  during
the  process  of  demesmerising,  which  occupied  some  three
quarters  of  an  hour.  This  was,  however,  the  last  attack,
for  though  I  continued  the  mesmerisation,  for  ten  days
longer,  the  fits  had  entirely  ceased ,  and  he  so  rapidly  re¬
gained  strength,  that  on  the  8th  of  November,  the  day  he
had  foretold  in  his  mesmeric  trance,  he  was  sufficiently  con¬
valescent  to  attend  to  the  duties  of  his  profession.

XIV.  Cure  of  Affection  of  the  Ney'vous  System,  fyc.,  fyc.

Mrs.  Guthridge,  Halesowen,  aged  50,  had  been  subject
to  fits  of  melancholy,  attended  with  great  weakness,  nervous
debility,  expectoration,  suspension  of  the  female  function,
and  other  symptoms  incident  to  her  peculiar  age.  I  mes¬
merised  her  on  the  5th  of  December,  1843,  in  five  minutes;
while  in  the  imperfect  coma,  she  complained  of  pain  in  the
chest,  & c.  I  placed  my  hand  upon,  and  pointed  my  fingers
towards,  the  places  indicated,  with  the  intention  of  removing
the  pain,  when  the  patient  fainted.  I  passed  my  hand  over
the  chest,  which  seemed  to  give  her  relief ;  moistened  her  lips
with  water  on  my  finger,  and  then  demesmerised  her,  restoring
her  from  her  sleep  and  her  fainting  fit  together.

She  felt  better  after  the  operation  was  over,  and  the  next
day  considerably  better.  I  continued  the  sittings  every  day
for  a  fortnight,  when  she  was  quite  well,  and  able  to  attend  to
her  business,  which  is  laborious  enough.

XV.  Cure  of  an  Injured  Arm.

Mrs.  Worral,  a  poor  woman  residing  in  the  neighbour¬
hood  of  Stourbridge,  who  obtained  a  livelihood  by  making
nails,  had  the  misfortune  to  injure  the  muscles  of  her  right
arm  by  working  with  hollow  tools ;  in  consequence  of  which
misfortune,  she  was  prevented  working  for  the  maintenance
of  herself  and  family  of  small  children,  who  depended  on  her
for  support.  After  dancing  attendance  for  some  time  on  her


358


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of


medical  man,  without  benefit,  she  applied  to  me,  when,
without  mesmerising  her,  I  proceeded  at  once  to  render  the
arm  rigid,  which  by  a  few  passes  and  volition  I  accomplished.
It  remained  extended  in  a  horizontal  position,  for  a  consider¬
able  time,  without  pain  to  the  patient.  She  could  not  put  it
down,  and  remarked  with  some  little  uneasiness,  “That  I
had  done  it  up,  and  could  not  get  it  down  again;  and  now
she  should  be  fit  for  nothing  but  a  finger-post.”  But  I
speedily  reassured  her ;  and,  blowing  upon  it  with  my  breath,
soon  caused  it  to  descend.  At  this  she  was  as  much  surprised
as  at  the  production  of  the  rigidity.  It  is  worthy  of  remark
here,  that  the  woman  had  never  seen  a  person's  arm  made
rigid,  neither  did  she  know  what  my  passes  were  made  for ;
which  is  a  sufficient  answer  to  those  persons  who  would  refer
all  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  to  the  influence  of  imagina¬
tion.  The  next  day  I  saw  her  again,  when  she  was  much
better ;  I  again  catalepsed  her  arm,  and  let  it  remain  so,  for
a  longer  time  than  the  day  before.  After  the  operation,  the
arm  was  quite  strong,  and  the  poor  woman  returned  home,
rejoicing  that  she  could  now  get  bread  for  herself  and  family.

XYI.  A  Dislocated  Arm  restored  by  Attraction,  fyc.

On  December  6th,  I  mesmerised  Miss  Henrietta  Price,  in
the  presence  of  several  ladies  and  gentlemen.  While  in  the
mesmeric  sleep,  the  arm  was  catalepsed,  and  the  rigidity  of
the  muscles  was  admitted  to  be  a  real  and  genuine  phenomenon
by  all  present,  with  the  exception  of  one  person  (I  had  nearly
said  gentleman,  but  if  I  had,  I  should  have  sadly  misapplied
the  term),  formerly  a  member  of  the  medical  profession,  who,
in  order  to  display  his  medical  sagacity,  attempted  to  expose
the  imposture  (as  he  was  pleased  to  designate  the  phenomenon
of  mesmeric  catalepsy),  by  taking  the  arm  of  the  patient,  and
endeavouring  to  bend  it  by  main  force.  He  did  not  succeed
though,  and  seeing  the  laugh  was  raised  against  him,  he  took
hold  of  the  arm,  before  I  could  prevent  him,  and  by  a  sudden
twist  dislocated  it.  “There,”  said  he,  triumphantly,  “Ive
done  it,  you  see.”  “True,”  I  replied,  “You  have;”  and  raising
the  arm,  that  now  fell  useless  to  her  side,  I  repeated  “  You
have  indeed  done  it.”  His  face  changed  immediately  to  ashy
pale,  and  every  lady  left  the  room  in  a  perfect  fright.  Though
the  patient’s  palm  was  turned  completely  round,  it  being
where  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  hand  is  situate,  and  though
the  elbow  was  decidedly  dislocated,  she  did  not  seem  to  feel
the  least  pain.  She  retained  the  same  placid  look  as  before,
and  seemed  unconscious  of  her  misfortune.  From  this  fact,
the  brute  (I  can  afford  him  scarcely  so  good  a  name)  who


various  Diseases  cured  by  Mesmerism.  359

had  dislocated  it,  when  his  fright  was  somewhat  calmed,  took
occasion  to  remark  that  he  believed  she  was  shamming  even
that.  “  Good  God  !”  exclaimed  the  gentlemen  present,  “  how
can  yon  make  such  an  assertion ;  could  you  turn  your  hand
in  that  way,  backwards,  upwards,  and  round,  and  not  under,
downwards,  and  round,  as  you  are  thinking  of?”  “The  arm
also  hangs  completely  useless,  and  is  decidedly  dislocated,”
exclaimed  a  professional  gentleman  who  was  present.  The
last  named  gentleman  and  myself  then  endeavoured  to  restore
the  arm  to  its  natural  state,  but  failed.  After  several  attempts
had  been  made,  which  ended  in  no  better  result  than  the  first,
I  demesmerised  her,  and,  immediately  that  sensibility  was  re¬
stored,  she  cried  out,  “  Oh  my  God  !  I  have  hurt  my  arm,”
and  at  once  fainted  with  the  violence  of  the  pain.  She  was
carried  from  the  parlour  into  the  larger  room,  where  there
was  a  little  breeze  of  air,  which  speedily  revived  her.  When
she  recovered,  she  looked  at  her  arm,  and  found  it  hanging  by
her  side  helpless;  and  was  ready  to  faint  again.  I  told  her  I
could  soon  restore  it,  I  hoped,  if  she  would  suffer  me  to  cata-
lepse  it.  I  said  this  to  encourage  her,  and  because  I  knew  that
if  I  could  render  the  arm  rigid  she  would  not  feel  the  pain,
while  we  sent  for  medical  attendants.  I  succeeded  in  cata-
lepsing  it,  and  a  thought  suddenly  struck  me,  that,  if  I  could
attract  her  arm  up  or  down,  with  my  fingers  and  with  the
magnet,*  as  I  had  repeatedly  done,  it  was  just  possible  that  I
might  restore  the  arm  by  attracting  it  into  its  place.  This
was  no  sooner  thought  of  than  attempted.  At  first  no  motion
was  discernible,  but  in  a  few  minutes  it  began  to  turn  towards
my  fingers,  a  very  little,  and  then  a  little  more,  and  so  on ;
as  I  continued  the  attraction  with  my  fingers,  it  came  round
a  little  and  little,  till  it  was  again  in  its  proper  place.  At
this  I  was  not  a  little  overjoyed;  and  all  present  congratulated
me  upon  the  successful  termination  of  so  unpleasant  a  cir¬
cumstance.  When  decatalepsed  the  elbow  remained  dreadfully
swollen  and  inflamed ;  this  was  reduced  by  the  next  evening,
by  repeatedly  catalepsing  the  arm.  When  the  arm  was  re¬
stored,  she  said  she  felt  nothing  at  all  of  the  pain  till  de¬
mesmerised.


XVII.  Cure  of  a  Sprained  Wrist.

Mr.  Thomas  Webb,  Stourbridge,  whom  I  met  accidently
at  his  friend’s  house  one  evening  that  he  had  sprained  his
wrist,  requested  me  to  mesmerise  him,  for  the  sprained  wrist.

*  We  have  no  doubt  that  the  magnet  had  no  effect  as  a  magnet.  See
supra,  page  203.  The  term  catalepsy  is  used  popularly,  but  not  medically,
to  signify  rigidity.  See  supra,  page  67. — Zoist.

YOL.  II.


B  B


360


Mr.  Brindley's  Cases  of


Accordingly  I  complied  with  his  request,  and,  applying  my
hands  to  the  wrist,  the  swelling  was  soon  reduced  and  the
pain  speedily  removed  by  passes.

XVIII.  Cure  of  Rheumatism  in  every  part  of  the  Body.

On  the  25th  of  November,  1843,  I  called  to  see  Mrs.
Thomas,  near  Stourbridge,  and  found  her  suffering  from
rheumatic  pains  in  every  part  of  her  body.  She  was  suffering
excruciating  agony,  and  was  about  to  apply  hot  cloths  and
fomentations.  I  told  her  I  believed  I  could  cure  her  with¬
out  ;  and,  with  her  consent,  immediately  began  to  make
passes  over  her  head,  breast,  and  stomach,  to  the  feet ;  then
from  the  back  of  the  head  to  the  feet.  I  then  used  the  hori¬
zontal  pass,  and  afterwards  placed  my  fingers  to  the  parts
most  affected;  and,  at  the  expiration  of  half  an  hour,  she
declared  herself  quite  free  from  pain ,  ordered  the  water,  &c.,
for  the  fomentation  to  be  removed,  and,  rising  from  her  chair,
walked  nimbly  about  the  house,  with  a  pleasure  she  had  not
experienced  for  a  considerable  period.

XIX.  Cure  of  Rheumatic  Pains  in  the  Back.

Mrs.  B - ,  cured  of  rheumatic  pains  in  her  back,  to

which  she  had  been  a  martyr  for  many  years,  by  the  usual
mesmeric  process.

At  a  subsequent  period  (nearly  twelve  months  after),  she
had  an  attack  of  sciatica,  which,  after  bidding  defiance  to
medicine,  yielded  at  once  to  mesmerism.

XX.  Cure  of  Rheumatic  Pains  in  the  Head  and  Face.

Attended  Miss  C - ,  a  young  lady  residing  at  Clent ;

found  her  suffering  acutely  from  rheumatic  pains  in  her  head
and  face;  wished  to  mesmerise  her,  but  she  could  not  sit  still.
Placed  my  hands  on  the  face  and  head ;  made  the  transverse
passes,  with  longitudinal  ones,  and  tremulous  motions  over
the  parts  affected.  In  five  minutes  she  was  quite  easy ;  the
pains  were  removed,  and  have  not  since  returned.

XXL

Mr.  Potter,  farmer,  Arely,  was  mesmerised  for  rheumatism
in  his  left  leg  and  side,  which  compelled  him  to  use  two  sticks
to  walk  with.  When  asleep  I  passed  my  hand  over  and  ma¬
nipulated  upon  the  parts  affected,  and  then  restored  him.
When  demesmerised,  he  rose  from  his  chair,  and  throwing
aside  his  sticks,  walked  twice  across  the  kitchen  without  them,
declaring  he  was  free  from  pain,  and  could  do  now  without
sticks.


various  Diseases  cured  by  Mesmerism.


361


XXII.  XXIII.  XXIV.  XXV.  XXYI.  XXVII.  XXVIII.

XXIX.  and  XXX.  Cures  of  Rheumatic  Pains.

Mr.  Higgs,  Mrs.  Brookes,  Mr.  C.  Bound,  Mr.  T.  Wilson,
Miss  H.  Price,  Mrs.  Brindley,  Mr.  H.  L.  Brindley,  Miss

Sarah - ,  and  Miss  Anne  D - ,  were  cured  of  rheumatic

pains  in  the  head  and  face,  by  manipulations  and  passes.

A  Friend  of  mine,  Mr.  B — ,  (whose  case  will  shortly  be  sent
you,  I  expect,  for  insertion  in  TheZoist ),  has  been  mesmerised
for  epilepsy,  by  his  brother ;  and  the  last  time  I  saw  him,  he
informed  me  that  he  had  had  no  fits  for  three  months,  though,
before  he  tried  mesmerism,  he  had  them  three  times  a  fortnight.

There  are  also  several  persons  residing  in  Stourbridge  and
its  vicinity,  who  have  been  cured  with  mesmerism,  by  amateur
operators,  of  hysteric  and  epileptic  fits,  whose  cases,  I  trust,
will  be  sent  you  shortly  for  insertion  in  your  valuable  journal.
I  shall  conclude  the  present  letter  with  the  following  cases  of
phreno-mesmerism  and  clairvoyance.

On  the  14th  of  September,  1843,  I  mesmerised  Mr.
Gilbert,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Charles  Lester,  Miss  Lester,
Mrs.  Lester,  Mr.  G.  Bound,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Horley,  and
other  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  Dudley.  When  in  the  mesmeric
sleep  (which  was  induced  in  half  a  minute,  though  the  patient
was  a  powerfully -built  man,  standing  upwards  of  6  feet  high),
I  proceeded  to  excite  Time,  Tune,  Veneration,  Benevolence,
Acquisitiveness,  and  most  of  the  other  organs,  with  decided
success.  A  bonnet  being  placed  behind  his  head,  he  instantly
named  it,  when  asked  what  it  was.  A  goblet,  a  watch,  and
several  other  things  were  then  placed  at  the  back  of  his  head,
all  of  which  he  named  directly.  Several  watches  were  then
held  to  the  back  of  his  head,  one  after  the  other,  and  the
exact  time  by  each  he  correctly  indicated.  His  arms  and  legs
were  then  rendered  rigid,  and  several  gentlemen  tried  to
bend  them,  but  in  vain.  The  rigidity  was  then  reduced  by
blowing  with  the  breath ;  and  the  organ  of  Firmness  being
excited,  he  immediately  jumped  from  his  chair  and  stood
upright  with  a  look  of  fierce  determination,  firmness,  and
decision,  not  to  be  misunderstood ;  Combativeness  was  then
touched,  and  he  placed  himself  in  a  favourite  pugilistic  atti¬
tude  ;  Destructiveness  being  added,  he  became  very  violent,
and  it  required  some  little  exertion  to  restrain  him.  I  de-
mesmerised  the  three  organs  excited,  by  blowing  on  them.
The  party  present  was  not  a  little  amused,  when,  Acquisitiveness
being  excited,  he  attempted  to  force  a  large  dining  table  into  his
waistcoat  pocket.  Several  things  were  then  tasted,  all  of  which
he  named,  without  hesitation.  He  was  then  demesmerised.

b  b  2


362


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of

On  the  26th  of  December,  1843,  before  300  or  400  persons,
in  the  magistrate's  room,  Halesowen,  at  a  public  lecture,  I
mesmerised  Mr.  J.  Williams,  of  Halesowen,  who  was  a  com¬
plete  stranger  to  me.  Tune  was  the  first  organ  excited ;  he
began  to  hum  a  popular  air,  and  then,  breaking  off  suddenly,
asked  for  his  bugle.  This  was  instantly  sent  for,  and,  when
it  arrived,  he  played  in  the  most  graceful  and  scientific  manner,
several  beautiful  airs,  to  the  delight  of  all  present.  (Time
had  been  added,  I  should  have  said).  It  was  asserted  by
several  persons  in  the  company,  that  he  could  not  play  any¬
thing  like  so  well  in  his  natural  state.  The  other  organs,
with  one  or  two  exceptions,  were  then  excited,  and  manifes¬
tations  equally  successful  and  pleasing  evolved.

On  the  19th  of  September,  1843,  I  mesmerised  Henrietta
Price,  in  the  presence  of  several  friends.  While  she  wras  in  a
state  of  complete  isolation,  I  demesmerised  Hearing  and
excited  Language.  I  then  said  to  her,  “  How  do  you  do  ?”
“Oh,  very  well  thank  you,  sir.”  “ Are  you  asleep?”  “No,
sir.”  “  I  thought  you  had  been  ?”  “  Oh,  no,  I  am  not ;  if  I
were  asleep,  how  could  I  see  that  you  have  my  sisters  bon¬
net  on  your  head,  and  her  boa  on  your  shoulders?”  “Well,
I  may  be  mistaken,  but  I  thought  you  were  asleep.”  “  You
certainly  must  have  been  mistaken  if  you  thought  that.”
This  patient  would  never  own  she  was  asleep,  neither  would
her  sister  Serena.  I  then  excited  Benevolence ,  when  she  im¬
mediately  took  off  her  shawl  and  gave  it  to  me.  I  then
asked  her  for  a  curl,  and  walking  across  the  room,  she  took
up  the  scissors  to  cut  one  off,  but  of  course  I  prevented  her.
Acquisitiveness  being  touched,  she  held  out  her  hand,  and
said,  when  asked  what  she  did  that  for,  “  That  she  wanted
something.”  “What?”  “Oh,  anything.”  “What  for?”
“To  keep  to  be  sure.”  Several  things  were  then  given  her,
which  she  snatched  at  eagerly,  and  held  firmly  in  her  hands.
I  then  tried  to  wheedle  and  coax  her  out  of  them,  and  finding
her  in  a  keeping  mood,  I  snatched  at  them,  and  endeavoured
to  take  them  from  her  per  force;  but  she  clung  to  them  with
desperate  tenacity.  Benevolence  being  again  touched,  she
gave  up  all  the  articles,  each  one  to  its  right  owner.  I  then
excited  Wit,  when  she  laughed  immoderately.  When  ques¬
tioned  about  the  cause  of  her  mirth,  she  replied,  “I  am
laughing  at  Serena”  (her  sister).  “Why  what  is  she  doing?”
“  Cannot  you  see  ?”  “No;  tell  me,  will  you?”  “Making
a  fool  of  herself.”  “  As  how  ?”  “  Why  singing  that  foolish

song  she  heard  at  the  theatre,  and  cutting  her  capers  to  it ;
ha  !  ha  !  ha  !  how  ridiculous  it  is.”  I  then  excited  Com-


various  Diseases  cured  by  Mesmerism.  3 Go

bativencss,  when  she  got  into  a  towering  passion,  and  or¬
dered  me  to  leave  the  house,  or  she  would  put  me  out  if  her
brother  would  not.  Putting  my  fingers  on  Amativeness,  and
placing  my  hand  in  her  right  hand,  she  pressed  it  affection¬
ately,  observing  at  the  same  time,  “  I  do  like  you.”  But
when  I  placed  my  hand  in  her  left  hand  she  instantly  repelled
it,  and  said,  shuddering  as  she  spoke,  “  Oh,  do  not  touch
me;  I  cannot  bear  you.”  “  Why,  Henrietta,  a  minute  ago
you  said  you  liked  me.”  “  I  never  did ;  for  I  always  hated
you,  you  horrid  wretch.”  Again  placing  my  hand  in  her
right  hand,  I  said  to  her,  “  So  you  hate  me,  do  you  ?”  “  No,
I  like  you.”  “  Why,  a  moment  since,  you  said  that  I  was  a
horrid  wretch,  and  that  you  hated  me.”  Bursting  into  tears
she  exclaimed,  “  Oh,  I  never  could  have  said  so,  at  least  I
hope  not ;  for  I  have  indeed  reason  to  like  you,  for  you  have
cured  my  heart.  This  experiment  (made  in  the  first  instance
by  Dr.  Elliotson)  I  tried  repeatedly  with  precisely  the  same
results.  I  then  placed  my  left  hand  in  her  left  hand,  and
held  my  right  hand  behind  me,  for  a  person  to  prick  it  with
a  pin  or  pinch  it ;  immediately  I  felt  the  pin  her  left  arm
twitched  violently,  and  she  cried  out,  “Oh,  some  one  is  run¬
ning  pins  into  my  hand.”  But  when  I  pricked  her  own
hand,  she  was  perfectly  insensible  of  the  pain.  I  then
placed  my  right  hand  in  her  right  hand,  and  tasted  several
kinds  of  liquors,  food,  &c.,  all  which  she  named  correctly,  com¬
menting  on  their  flavour,  &c.  Her  arms  were  then  catalepsed.
This  could  be  effected  whether  she  was  sleeping  or  waking.
When  they  were  decatalepsed,  several  pieces  of  money  were
produced,  one  of  which  was  mesmerised,  and  marked,  and
then  mixed  amongst  the  others.  She  was  then  asked  to  pick
out  the  mesmerised  coin,  which  she  did  instantly.  This  was
successfully  repeated  many  times.  A  mesmerised  shilling
was  then  held  near  her  forehead,  which  attracted  her  from
her  chair,  and  all  over  the  room.  She  then  picked  out  of
several  glasses  of  water  the  one  that  was  mesmerised.  Her
face  was  then  covered  with  a  large  bandage  folded  into  four
thicknesses  (which  no  person  present  could  see  through),  and
a  book  held  before  her,  which  she  was  asked  to  remark.
“Well,  I  see  it,”  said  she;  “it  is  a  book.”  She  was  then
placed  opposite  a  wall  three  feet  thick,  and  asked  if  she
could  tell  what  the  persons  were  doing  on  the  other  side  ?

She  immediately  answered,  “  Yes,  they  are  Miss - and

Miss - ;  they  have  their  hands  in  a  basin  of  water.”

This  was  quite  correct.  Mr.  M - ,  a  gentleman  present,

said,  “  He  had  a  complaint  upon  him,  for  which  he  was
taking  a  course  of  medicine,  and  if  she  could  see  through  a


364


Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of


wall,  surely  she  could  see  his  inside.  He  should  be  glad
therefore,  if  she  would  tell  him  where  the  disease  lay.”  I  at
once  consented  for  her  to  try,  believing  that  she  was  able  to

discover  it.  Mr.  M - was  then  placed  en  rapport  with  the

patient,  who  at  once  examined  the  liver  and  pronounced  it  to

be  diseased.  Mr.  M - then  said  she  was  perfectly  right,

for  he  was  treated  for  a  liver  complaint  by  his  medical  attend¬
ant.  She  was  then  demesmerised.

On  the  first  of  October,  1843,  I  mesmerised  Serena
Price  (sister  to  the  last-named  patient),  in  our  large  dining
room,  in  the  presence  of  forty  or  fifty  ladies  and  gentlemen.
Mesmerised  her  in  twenty  seconds.  Benevolence  being  excited
produced  unbounded  generosity ;  Acquisitiveness  a  desire  to
hoard  up  and  take  care  of  every  thing  ;  Veneration  led  her  to
fall  upon  her  knees  in  profound  reverence  and  adoration ;
Firmness  to  rise  from  her  knees  and  stand  in  a  determined
and  expressive  manner ;  Self-esteem  to  pass  across  the  room
with  great  dignity  to  the  looking  glass,  where  she  appeared
to  view  herself  with  great  self-complacency.  She  then  untied
her  hair,  and  it  fell  loosely  over  her  shoulders ;  then  began
to  twirl  the  ringlets  round  her  fingers,  and  play  with  them
in  a  coquettish  manner,  which  she  seemed  to  think  “  mighty
killing,”  for  she  smiled  in  evident  self-conceit.  A  question
being  raised,  as  to  whether  she  could  see  herself  in  the  glass,
something  was  placed  before  her  eyes,  but  she  continued
curling  and  playing  with  her  hair  as  before,  exclaiming,
“  Beautiful  indeed  !  very  beautiful!”  This  trial  not  being
deemed  satisfactory  by  several  persons,  in  order  to  prove  that
she  could  perceive  her  figure  in  the  glass,  with  her  eyes  closed,
I  requested  several  persons  to  look  over  her  shoulder  into
the  glass,  one  at  a  time.  They  accordingly  did  so,  and  she
named  the  figures  as  they  appeared  in  the  glass  without  hesi¬
tation.  This  was  quite  decisive.  Conscientiousness  excited,
led  to  questions  about  herself.  Did  I  think  she  had  done
wrong  in  feeling  proud,  and  in  coveting  riches,  &c.  ?  Love
of  Approbation  led  her  to  ask,  “  Whether  I  thought  Miss

- pretty?”  And  on  my  answering  “  Yes,”  she  pouted

her  lip  and  said,  she  “  pitied  my  taste.”  “She  is  very  much
older  than  I  am,”  she  resumed.  “  Is  she  ?”  “  Yes ;  and

rather  stouter.”  “Oh.”  “  She  is  very  short,  too.”  “Yes/’

“  And  dreadful  dark.”  “  Rather.”  “  She  is  very  pale,  too.”
“  Well  ?”  “  And  has  not  long  hair.”  “  Well  ?”  “  Well  ?”

said  she,  mocking  me,  and  losing  all  patience  at  having  fished
for  compliments  in  vain,  “  Well?  Is  that  all  you  can  say  to  a
pretty  girl,  you  stupid  creature;  is  there  no  one  good  looking


various  Diseases  cured  by  Mesmerism.


365


but  that  odious  blackamoor  ?”  “  Oh,  I  beg  your  pardon  ;  of

course  I  never  thought  of  comparing  her  with  such  an  angel
as  yourself.”  This  instantly  restored  her  good  humour;  and
I  proceeded  to  excite  Alimentiveness,  and  taste  several  kinds
of  food,  wine,  spice,  fruit,  &c.,  all  which  she  named  cor¬
rectly.  Adhesiveness  being  excited,  she  clasped  my  hand,
and  told  me  I  should  not  leave  her.  She  imagined  me  to  be
a  very  different  person  (one  standing  in  a  much  dearer  rela¬
tion  to  a  lady  than  a  friend)  and  I  proceeded  to  act  accord¬
ingly,  assuming  the  character  of  a  lover  for  the  nonce.  I
told  her  that  I  must  leave  her,  as  I  had  an  intention  of  visit¬
ing  the  continent,  where  a  fair  lady  had  won  my  heart,  to
whom  I  was  about  to  be  united  on  mv  arrival.  To  this  she
replied,  by  (woman’s  most  powerful  argument)  a  passionate
burst  of  tears  and  sobs,  which  shook  her  delicate  frame  con¬
vulsively.  This  the  ladies  of  course  could  not  bear.  “  It  was
too  bad,”  said  one  ;  “  Oh  !  do  not,”  said  another ;  “  Stop  it,”
said  a  third.  Their  request  was  gladly  complied  with,  by
exciting  Wit,  which  instantly  produced  the  most  hearty
laughter,  while  the  tears  still  sparkled  on  her  cheek.  Time
being  touched,  she  beat  time  perfectly,  to  a  most  difficult
piece  of  music,  played  on  the  flute.  Tune  excited  produced
a  happy,  joyous  song,  executed  with  infinite  grace  and  sweet¬
ness.  Order,  Colour,  Size,  Weight,  Number,  Locality,  and
the  whole  of  the  perceptive  and  reflective  faculties  were  then
excited,  and  equally  successful  and  decisive  manifestations
evolved.  Her  arms  were  then  made  rigid,  and  she  herself
attracted  gradually  from  her  chair,  with  her  arms  extended.
When  upon  her  feet,  she  was  only  supported  by  the  attrac¬
tion  of  my  hand.  That  being  removed  for  a  moment,  she
fell  towards  me  instantly.  Placing  my  hand  before  her,  I
attracted  her  over  every  part  of  the  house,  turning  in  every
imaginable  way  to  prove  the  reality  of  the  influence.  A  ques¬
tion  was  then  given  me,  written  on  paper,  “  If  you  will  that
she  shall  hear  me  when  I  speak  to  her,  will  she  hear  me,  and
vice  versa  ?33  I  immediately  passed  to  the  other  end  of  the
room,  and  at  a  given  signal,  willed  (without  speaking)  that  she
should  hear  the  person  speak.  He  spoke ;  she  answered.  The
signal  for  the  reverse  was  then  made.  I  willed  that  she  should
not  hear  him.  He  spoke;  she  did  not  answer.  The  same
signal  repeated,  I  willed,  and  the  same  effects  followed.  These
signals  were  repeated,  and,  at  the  volition  of  the  operator,  the
same  results  were  obtained  ten  times.  I  was  then  requested
to  ask  her  what  I  was  thinking  of,  a  subject  having  been
supplied  by  a  person  present.  She  answered  directly,  “  That
I  was  thinking  of  the  funeral  that  had  just  passed  by.”  She


366  Mr.  Brindley’s  Cases  of  Cure  by  Mesmerism.

was  quite  correct.  “Did  you  see  it  pass  then?”  “Yes.”
“Which  way  ?”  “  From  the  church.”  Right.  She  was  then
again  requested  to  say  what  I  was  thinking  of.  She  gave  the
exact  reply.  This  was  repeated  with  the  same  success  several
times ;  persons,  each  time,  finding  me  the  subject  of  thought.

Several  persons  subject  to  different  complaints  were  then
put  en  rapport  with  the  patient,  who  described  the  disease  each
person  laboured  under,  writh  minute  exactness,  to  the  great
surprise  of  the  parties  afflicted,  who  were  perfect  strangers
to  her.  She  prescribed  for  several,  and  those  who  followed
her  advice  were  greatly  benefited.  Several  articles  were  then
held  behind  her  head,  which  she  named  as  fast  as  placed  there,
asking  with  great  simplicity  why  I  asked  her  if  she  could  see
them.  Some  individuals  present  then  went  into  a  room
below,  and  the  patient  was  asked,  “  If  she  could  see  them,
who  they  wTere,  and  what  they  were  doing  ?”  “  Yes,”  replied
she,  “  I  can  see  them  and  I  know  who  they  are ;  there  is

Mr.  H - ,  Mr.  W - ,  Mr.  L - ,  and  Mr.  B - ;  and

they  have  got  a  cup  passing  from  one  to  the  other,  and  Mr.

W - ,  has  got  an  old  shoe  in  his  hand,  looking  at  it  quite

melancholy,  as  if  he  were  moralizing  over  it.”  She  was  per¬
fectly  right.  She  was  then  requested  to  tell  us  “  Who  was  in

Mr.  H - ^s  parlour  ?”  She  replied,  “  Two  ladies,  Mrs.

H - ,  and  an  elderly  lady.”  “  That  cannot  be,”  said  Mr.

H - ,  “  For  I  left  my  wife  alone.”  “  Depend  upon  it,  she

is  right,”  I  replied,  “  Send  and  see.”  A  person  was  accord¬
ingly  sent,  and  speedily  returned  to  confirm  what  Serena  had
said.  Before  demesmerising  her,  I  requested  her  in  five
minutes  time  to  get  up  off  her  chair,  and  blow  all  the  candles
out  in  the  room.  After  restoring  her,  at  the  time  specified
she  rose  from  her  chair,  and  blew  out  all  the  candles.  When
asked  wrhy  she  did  that,  she  said  she  could  not  tell,  but  that
she  felt  unhappy  till  she  had  done  it,  and  that  the  impulse
was  irresistible.  When  asked  if  she  recollected  my  telling
her  to  blow  out  the  candles,  she  said  “No;  and  thought  I
should  not  tell  her  anything  of  that  sort,  it  made  her  look  so
foolish.”  Of  everything  else  that  had  transpired  during  her
sleep-waking,  she  was  equally  oblivious.

P.S.  In  looking  over  my  notes,  I  have  found  the  following:

Mesmerised  Mrs.  Are,  (who  was  visiting  at  Mr.  Halks,
Clent),  on  the  20th  of  November  for  a  glandular  enlargement,
of  some  years  standing ;  reduced  it  by  the  first  operation  one-
half  inch;  repeated  the  operation  on  the  21st  and  22nd  of
November,  and  reduced  it  one  inch  and  a  half.  Unfortunately
she  was  then  obliged  to  return  home,  so  I  had  no  opportunity
of  repeating  the  operation.


(  367  )


V.  Cases  of  Surgical  Operations  rendered  painless,  and  Cures
of  Diseases,  with  Mesmerism.  By  W.  J.  Tubbs,  Esq.,
Surgeon,  Upwell  Isle,  Cambridgeshire.

Teeth  extracted  without  pain.

A  number  of  gentlemen,  from  Downham  and  its  vicinity,
never  having  seen  a  mesmeric  case,  expressed  a  wish  through
our  post  office  for  my  showing  them  some  of  the  phenomena.
On  the  25tli  of  last  March,  they  came,  bringing  with  them
Mr.  O’Connor,  of  March.  The  doctor  having  examined  closely
and  minutely  several  patients,  I  asked  him  to  extract  a  firm
molar  tooth  of  the  right  lower  jaw,  from  a  young  man  about
twenty-three  years  of  age,  which  he  did,  being  obliged  to
exert  more  than  usual  strength  and  bringing  with  it  a  large
portion  of  the  alveolar  process,  without  the  patient  manifesting
pain  or  muscular  contraction.  On  Imitation  being  touched,
and  the  operator  spitting,  he  did  so;  the  phrenological  organs
were  elicited,  without  contact,  by  Mr.  O’Connor.  Suffice  it
to  say,  every  facility  was  given  to  detect  imposition ;  the  fol¬
lowing  ladies  and  gentlemen  (to  the  best  of  my  recollection)
were  present,  and  remained  witnessing  my  cases  for  four  hours:
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reed,  of  Grovemore  Hall,  near  March.

Mr.  Reed,  Solicitor,  Downham ;  also  his  brother

Mr. - ,  Downham.

Mr.  Samuel  Smith,  Merchant,  March.

Mr.  Hodson,  Ylanca  Fen.

Mrs.  O’Connor,  March.

The  Misses  Whatby,  Upwell.

Miss  Dew,  Upwell.

Mrs.  and  the  Misses  Palmer,  Upwell.

At  a  meeting  held  at  Chatteris,  on  the  12th  instant,  where
I  was  very  disrespectfully  treated  by  the  medical  faculty,  one
of  the  surgeons  present  threw  a  boy  into  the  mesmeric  state.
Before  he  was  demesmerised,  the  chairman  (Mr.  Wright,
surgeon,  of  that  place)  extracted  one  of  his  teeth ;  he  being
during  the  operation  most  clearly  unconscious  of  what  was
done.  It  happened,  however,  that,  in  course  of  demesme-
rising  him,  he  became  nearly  choaked  with  blood.  Appre¬
hensions  being  then  awakened  for  the  boy’s  safety,  the
medical  gentlemen  present  assisted  me  in  resorting  to  means
for  his  restoration,  and,  that  having  been  accomplished,  in¬
stead  of  ascribing  the  credit  of  extracting  the  tooth  without
the  boy’s  consciousness  to  mesmeric  influence,  some  of  them
attributed  it  to  an  epileptic  fit.


368


Mr.  Tubb’s  Cases  of


Seton  put  into  the  Nape  of  the  Neck  of  William  Flower dy,  by

Mr.  Culledge.

Having  occasion  to  put  a  seton  into  the  nape  of  the  neck,
I  invited  Mr.  Culledge  to  be  present,  also  Mr.  Frier,  jun.,  of
Chatteris.  They  reached  my  house  on  the  15th  of  May,
and  witnessed  the  phenomena  in  ten  cases  which  I  sub¬
mitted  for  their  examination.  Amongst  that  number  five
were  in  the  proper  state  for  any  painful  operation  to  be  per¬
formed.  Now  came  in  Flowerdy,  who  had  no  knowledge  that
the  seton  was  to  be  put  in  until  next  week,  which  I  told  him
as  a  blind.  I  requested  Mr.  C.  not  to  hurry,  as  I  wished  to
convince  him  the  boy  was  quite  unconscious  to  all  feeling
during  the  operations.  Mr.  Culledge,  having  pushed  the  needle
in  a  short  way,  stopped.  I  now  irritated  the  compressor
narium  and  levator  labii  and  anguli  oris,  and  he  snuffed  and
laughed ;  then  Mr.  C.  passed  another  inch,  and  I  acted  upon
one  of  the  organs ;  he  was  then  asked  if  he  felt  any  pain  ?
“No.”  Mr.  C.  then  completed  the  operation,  through  two
inches  of  integument,  which  was  accurately  measured  by  a
rule  taken  from  the  pocket  of  one  of  the  sons  of  Daniel  Frier,
Esq.,  magistrate  of  Chatteris.  His  other  son  stood  by  me  in
front,  watching  with  an  eagle's  eye  the  countenance,  which
betrayed  not  the  least  sign  of  suffering.  Four  minutes  and
a  half  were  occupied  in  passing  the  needle  through  the  two
inches  of  integument.  On  the  third  day,  while  in  the  sleep,
a  gentleman  drew  the  silk,  which  was  not  felt,  but  caused
much  pain  after  the  sleep.

Withered  Arm  from  Rheumatic  Pains  in  the  Shoulder,  of  Tivo
Year’s  standing,  cured  by  Mesmerism.

In  the  month  of  September,  1842,  Sarah  Means,  aged
twelve,  of  sanguineous  temperament,  a  pretty  interesting
little  girl,  daughter  of  a  very  industrious  little  farmer,  residing
in  the  parish  of  Upwell,  was  seized  suddenly  with  pain  in
the  back  part  of  the  right  shoulder,  which  caused  her  a  restless
night.  The  following  day  the  pain  extended  down  on  the
inner  side  of  the  arm  to  the  elbow,  and  then  to  the  wrist.  The
shoulder  increased  in  size  while  the  arm  seemed  diminished.
She  could  not  sleep  from  the  heat  and  tingling  sensations  she
experienced  while  in  bed  compelling  her  to  sit  up  and  support
the  arm.  She  always  laid  it  out  of  bed  to  go  to  sleep ;  the
only  easy  position  was  hanging  the  arm  by  her  side.

Her  parents  fearing  there  might  be  some  dislocation,  or
fracture,  took  her  to  Mr.  Mason,  of  Wisbeach  (professed  bone-
setter,  not  a  medical  man).  The  arm  having  undergone


various  Diseases  cured  by  Mesmerism.  369

•

rotatory  motion  some  three  or  four  times,  was  pronounced  all
right ;  she  suffered  a  great  deal  of  pain  from  the  manipulations
and  was  recommended  to  leech  the  part ;  she  went  again  in
the  course  of  nine  days  when  he  said  he  could  not  do  any
more  for  her.  On  the  Saturday  following  application  was
made  to  Dr.  Whitsed,  who  ordered  a  repetition  of  leeches,
poultices,  lotions,  and  medicine ;  he  saw  the  case  again  that
day  fortnight,  and  requested  the  mother  to  apply  more  leeches.
The  arm  had  now  become  weaker  and  there  was  a  greater
want  of  motive  and  sensitive  power,  which  was  evident  from
the  difficulty  she  had  of  raising  the  fore  arm  to  the  chin,  and
the  numbness  :  her  health  was  very  much  impaired.  She
now  remained  at  home  a  month,  and  was  urged  by  a  friend
to  seek  the  advice  of  Mr.  Smith,  of  Diss  in  Norfolk,  who
attends  every  month  at  the  Rose  and  Crown  Inn,  Wisbeach,
and  professes  to  have  a  specific  for  scrofulous  diseases.  An
embrocation  was  recommended  to  be  applied  twice  a  day  and
restoratives  given  internally,  for  which  a  demand  of  twenty-
three  shillings  was  paid.  The  medicine  lasted  a  month,  but
no  improvement  having  taken  place  in  the  skeleton  arm,  her
parents  gave  up  going  to  consult  Mr.  Smith.  All  hopes  were
now  lost  of  the  poor  girl’s  arm  being  restored,  and  she  re¬
mained  at  home  some  length  of  time,  until  another  persua¬
sion  from  a  patient  of  mine,  who  had  derived  such  marked
benefit  from  my  operations,  brought  her  to  me  on  the  29th
of  June,  1844.  I  was  requested  to  operate  privately,  and  by
no  means  to  let  her  father  know  of  it,  being  so  opposed  to
mesmerism.  Having  read  Mr.  Braid’s  excellent  little  work
on  hypnotism,  I  considered  this  a  fair  case  to  try  his  method
of  operating.  This  was  her  present  state.  On  examining
the  part,  the  affected  shoulder  was  tilted  and  drawn  forwards
by  the  rigid  state  of  the  pectoral  muscle ;  the  muscles  about
the  shoulder  flattened  and  those  of  the  arm  wasted  and  flabby.
The  measurement  round  the  sound  arm  was  7\  inches,  that
of  the  withered  one  5  inches ;  this  was  taken  round  the  in¬
sertion  of  the  deltoid  muscle.

It  gave  great  pain  to  raise  the  fore-arm,  which  seemed  to  be
spasmodically  fixed  to  the  side.  The  limb  was  semi-paralysed,
though  there  was  power  of  the  extensors  and  flexors ;  if  she
grasped  anything  long,  it  gave  her  so  much  pain  in  the  elbow
and  up  the  arm  as  to  cause  her  to  drop  it.  She  was  able  to
touch  her  chin  with  her  fingers,  and  nothing  relieved  the
pain  when  it  came  on  but  holding  her  elbow  close  to  her
side.  Her  general  health  was  bad,  and  from  her  restless  nights
she  looked  haggard.  I  operated  upon  her  in  the  presence  of
my  brother  and  the  person  who  accompanied  her,  and  found


370


Mr.  Tubb’s  Cases  of  Cure  by  Mesmerism.


her  very  susceptible,  and  in  a  few  minutes  she  was  in  the
state  of  somnolency  with  her  head  forwards  on  her  chest.
As  the  main  object  (according  to  Mr.  Braid’s  theory,  of  Man¬
chester)  was  to  increase  th e  force  of  the  circulation  and  sen¬
sibility  in  the  affected  part,  I  left  that  limber ,  and  raised  the
arm  and  lower  extremities,  and  left  her  to  attend  to  two  other
patients  waiting  for  medicine  in  the  surgery.  On  my  return,
in  the  course  of  twenty  minutes,  I  found  the  arm  rigid, —
the  legs  I  had  rested  on  a  chair.  I  now  suddenly  awoke  her,
when  she  seemed  alarmed  and  began  rubbing  her  eyes  and
the  limber  arm.  Before  she  left  the  room  she  felt  more
power  of  motion  and  could  raise  it  higher.

30th. — Operated.

July  2nd — Operated.  Slept  all  night;  much  tingling

during  the  day,  brushed  her  hair  with  that  hand.

5th. — Operated;  slept  four  hours.

9th. —  „  „  half  an  hour.

10th. —  ,,  ,,  an  hour.

11th. —  ,,  ,,  five  minutes.

13th. —  „  can  raise  the  arm  over  her  head;  been

washing  the  things  up ;  shoulder  reduced  in  size ;  always
feels  heat  and  tingling  in  the  centre  of  the  arm  as  soon  as
out  of  the  sleep,  until  she  rubs  it.

14th. — Operated;  slept  10  minutes;  the  sleep  deeper;
does  not  answer  questions,  and  has  no  recollection  of  any¬
thing  out  of  the  sleep.

19th. — Operated;  the  muscles  have  lost  their  flaccid  ap¬
pearance,  and  there  is  great  improvement  in  her  looks ;  eats
and  sleeps  well.

20th. — Gone  to  work  pulling  peas  for  Mr.  Goodman,  of
Up  well.

21st. —  Arm  weak  from  yesterday’s  work.

August  3rd. — Operated;  surprised  to  see  the  improved
state  of  the  arm.

5th. — Operated  ;  quite  well.

10th. — Saw  her  at  her  father’s  house ;  been  reaping
wheat  the  last  two  days  ;  has  perfect  use  of  the  arm.  Every
time  I  operated  as  I  did  the  first  time,  by  letting  the  affected
arm  hang  down.  There  had  always  been  some  degree  of  mo¬
tion,  allowing  her  to  raise  the  fore-arm,  and  by  depressing
the  chin  she  had  been  enabled  to  feed  herself,  but  not  to
raise  the  upper  arm  from  the  side.

22nd. — The  girl  came  up  this  morning,  and  I  took  the
following  measurement  of  both  arms  : — sound  arm  7£  inches,
withered  arm  6|  inches  round  the  insertion  of  the  deltoid
muscle.


Mr.  Ry land’s  Cases  of  Cure  by  Mesmerism.  371

A  female  applied  to  me  three  or  four  months  since  to  he
mesmerised,  with  pain  in  the  knee  and  great  weakness,  caus¬
ing  her  to  walk  lame ;  had  been  so  the  last  two  years,  it  first
commenced  in  the  hip,  and  I  considered  it  a  chronic  case  of
sciatica.  After  inducing  the  sleep,  she  felt  the  knee  stronger,
had  less  pain  and  walked  home  much  better ;  she  daily  at¬
tended  (walking  from  Nordelph,  joining  the  parish  of  Den¬
ver,  near  Downham,  to  my  house,  3|  miles,)  and  on  the
fifth  day  went  home  cured  and  has  remained  so  ever  since ;
I  saw  her  a  short  time  since  at  my  house  with  a  couple  of
ducks  as  a  present  to  me  for  curing  her.  Her  name  is  Mrs.
Otty,  aged  about  36,  of  Nordelph.


VI.  Cure  of  Tic  Douloureux  with  Mesmerism.  By  D.  Brainerd

Ryland,  Esq.,  Surgeon,  Ryde,  Isle  of  Wight,  Aug.  6th,

1844.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

In  May  last,  Miss - ,  a  lady  whom  I  had  previously

mesmerised  for  a  very  distressing  disease,* *  was  attacked  with
violent  tic  douloureux  in  the  hip,  from  which  she  suffered  ex¬
cruciating  pain  night  and  day.

She  could  not  remain  in  bed  for  any  length  of  time,  find¬
ing  the  pain  increased  by  the  recumbent  posture,  and  was
only  able  occasionally,  when  exhausted  by  pain,  to  doze  for  a
few  minutes  in  a  large  easy  chair.

Medicine  she  had  taken  with  very  little  effect.  Colchicum
was  the  most  beneficial,  but  the  relief  afforded  by  that  remedy
was  very  slight.

She  wished  to  try  mesmerism.  I  therefore  mesmerised
her  several  times,  and  invariably  found  that  the  pain  was
much  abated  after  each  sitting;  so  much  so,  that  she  was
able  to  lie  down,  and  get  some  hours  rest  free  from  pain,
which  was  no  slight  comfort  to  her,  and  could  walk  about  the
room,  without  leaning  on  the  chairs  and  tables  for  support,


*  Menorrhagia, — from  which  she  had  suffered,  most  severely ,  for  nearly
four  years,  and  was,  as  she  assures  rne,  completely  cured  by  mesmerism
alone,  after  having  been  given  up  by  her  medical  attendants.  A  more  aston¬
ishing  cure  I  never  met  with.  The  particulars  of  the  case  are  most  interesting,
but,  unfortunately,  I  am  unable  to  supply  them,  as  the  lady,  previously  to
her  residing  in  my  neighbourhood,  was  for  some  months  under  the  care  of
another  mesmeriser,  and  my  operations  merely  put  the  finishing  stroke  to
the  disease,  which  his  persevering  efforts  had  almost  eradicated.  I  shall,
however,  request  him  to  draw  up  a  statement  for  future  publication,  as  a
more  striking  proof  of  the  efficacy  of  mesmerism,  as  a  remedial  agent,  could
not  be  adduced.


372  Mr.  Ry land’s  Cases  of  Cure  by  Mesmerism.

as  previously  she  had  been  compelled  to  do  if  she  had
occasion  to  cross  the  apartment.

After  three  or  four  sittings,  she  was  able  to  pass  the  night
comfortably  in  bed,  sleeping  soundly  for  six  or  eight  hours,
and  during  the  day  the  pain  was  much  less  intense.

The  malady,  however,  though  checked,  was  not  entirely
subdued.  One  evening  I  found  the  whole  of  the  hip  excessively

painful,  and  so  tender  as  to  cause  Miss - to  shrink  from

the  slightest  touch.  I  for  some  time  therefore  avoided  contact,
and  confined  myself  to  making  passes,  from  just  above  the
hip-joint  to  the  knee.  But,  thinking  it  probable  that  more
effectual  relief  might  be  afforded  by  contact  (having  found  it
to  be  the  case  in  other  instances),  I  considered  it  advisable
to  make  the  attempt.  I  accordingly  placed  the  ends  of  my
fingers  on  the  hip  joint,  using  considerable  pressure,  which
produced  the  most  excruciating  pain,  and  caused  first  faintness
and  then  slight  hysteria.  I  however  continued  the  pressure
with  one  hand,  and  with  the  other  made  calming  passes  from
the  head  downwards.  But  finding  the  pain  become  insupport¬
able,  for  she  absolutely  writhed  with  agony,  I  thought  it
necessary  to  desist,  and  was  about  to  withdraw  my  fingers,
when  suddenly  she  became  quiet.  I  enquired  how  she  felt,
and  to  my  unbounded  astonishment  and  delight  she  said  that
all  pain  had  ceased.  In  one  instant  she  had  become  entirely  free
from  pain !  The  most  astonishing  circumstance,  however,
remains  to  be  told,  viz.,  no  tenderness  remained  in  any  part  of
the  hip.  I  could  scarcely  bring  myself  to  believe  that  the
morbid  sensibility,  as  well  as  the  neuralgic  pain,  had  vanished,
(seeing  that,  but  a  minute  before,  the  part  was  excessively
sensitive,)  and  I  took  no  slight  pains  to  test  the  fact.  But
my  efforts  were  unavailing, — no  tender  spot  could  I  discover.
A  perfect  cure  was  effected  !

I  mesmerised  her  two  or  three  times  afterwards,  in  order
to  prevent  a  relapse,  and  she  has  had  no  return  of  the  disorder.
It  is  perhaps  as  well  to  mention  that  sleep  was  not  induced.

Miss - was  similarly  affected  nine  or  ten  years  ago,

and  after  taking  an  endless  variety  of  the  most  powerful
medicines  and  trying  (by  the  advice  of  her  medical  man)
leeches,  blisters,  sinapisms,  hot  fomentations,  vapour  baths,
&c.,  &c.,  without  effect;  she  applied  to  the  late  Mr.  Abernethy,
thinking  the  neuralgic  pains  she  suffered  might  have  been
occasioned  by  a  blow  on  the  hip  she  had  received  when  a  child,
which  had  produced  slight  lameness  but  never  any  very  serious
inconvenience.  Mr.  Abernethy  pronounced  it  to  be  “an  affec¬
tion  of  the  nerve  combined,  perhaps,  with  a  little  rheuma-


Mr.  Chandler’s  Cases  of  Cure  by  Mesmerism.  373

tism,”  but  perfectly  distinct  from  the  lameness.  He  pre¬
scribed  for  her,  but  without  doing  her  much  good,  and  the
pain  continued  for  some  months  afterwards,  when  she  went
to  France  for  change  of  air,  and  then  it  gradually  ceased  of
itself.

Had  she  at  that  time  known  of  mesmerism,  how  many
months  of  intense  suffering  would  she  have  escaped  !  What
an  inestimable  blessing  would  it  have  proved  to  her,  as  she
herself  has  many  times  since  declared  !

She  has  also  informed  me  of  another  cure  performed  on
her  by  mesmerism  before  I  became  acquainted  with  her,
(neuralgia  in  the  head  and  face)  besides  having  experienced  a
surprising  increase,  and  renewal  of  general  strength,  after  hav¬
ing  been  some  years  in  a  debilitated  state.  She  finds  likewise
after  mesmerisation,  an  immense  increase  of  power  and  com¬
pass  in  her  voice  while  singing.


VII. — Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism.

By  Thomas  Chandler,  Esq.,  Botherhithe.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — I  received  the  first  of  the  following  letters  from  Mr.  Chandler,
whose  interesting  cure  of  Insanity  with  Mesmerism  was  published  in  your
second  number,  and  whose  early  unhesitating  practice  and  public  advocacy
of  mesmerism  cannot  be  too  much  praised,  (see  p.  174,  Vol.  I.)  I  requested
permission  to  send  it  you  for  publication,  and  the  other  letters  followed.

Yours  faithfully,

37,  Conduit  Street.  John  Elliotson.

58,  Paradise  Street,  Botherhithe,
August  14th,  1844.

My  dear  Sir, — I  have  been  tolerably  active  with  mesmer¬
ism  since  I  last  saw  you,  but  have  not  communicated  the
cases  to  you,  hoping  always  to  have  something  to  add  by
waiting.

The  first  case  occurred  before  last  Christmas,  it  was  severe
hysteria  in  a  youth  of  19,  almost  amounting  to  epilepsy  as
he  began  to  become  insensible  ;  it  had  lasted  about  three
months.  He  improved  from  the  time  he  was  first  mesmerised,
and  had  no  further  attack  after  about  a  month ;  the  only  cu¬
rious  symptom  that  occurred  was  that  whilst  in  the  sleep,  I
dared  not  cough  in  the  slightest  degree,  as  it  invariably
brought  on  a  paroxysm ;  this  ceased  when  he  got  better  :  no
other  noise  disturbed  him  except  a  cinder  falling  from  the
grate,  which  had  the  same  effect.  Any  other  persons  might
cough  as  loud  as  they  pleased.


374


Mr.  Chandler’s  Cases  of


The  next  case  was  a  youth  who  has  had  epilepsjr  1 0  years,
from  a  blow  on  the  head ;  he  was  most  decidedly  benefited
but  has  neglected  to  attend  for  these  last  two  months.

The  next  case  will  I  think  interest  you  very  much.  It  was

a  brother  of  the  young  Mr.  D - ,  whose  case  you  published

so  fully  in  the  2nd  number  of  The  Zoist.  He  had  attacks  of
precisely  the  same  nature,  though  not  quite  so  violent,  being
modified  by  constitution.  He  came  readily  under  the  influence
and  was  cured  in  about  ten  days,  without  showing  any  very
striking  phenomena,  except  that  he  would  suddenly  fall
asleep,  and  then  awake  and  declare  that  he  had  not  been
affected.  He  afterwards,  however,  became  convinced  of  the
fact,  though,  like  his  brother,  he  does  not  care  to  talk  about
it.  During  the  sleep,  when  he  began  to  talk,  he  would  sit
up,  and  if  I  was  near  him  he  would  always  say  he  smelt  fish,
and  the  moment  I  cast  a  glance  at  him  he  would  fall  back  as
though  he  had  been  shot.  He  has  been  quite  well  now  for
about  four  months.

I  have  at  present  two  cases  in  hand,  one  of  epilepsy,  which
has  existed  twelve  years,  this  of  course  making  but  slow  pro¬
gress.  I  have  made  the  family  read  your  case  in  the  last
Zoist,  to  give  them  encouragement.  Sire  goes  to  sleep  in  25
minutes,  and  remains  like  a  log  for  two  or  three  hours.  I
always  let  her  sleep  it  out  and  she  awakes  refreshed.

The  other  case  is  a  very  interesting  one,  being  a  case  of
pure  Hysteria,  in  a  girl  set.  20,  extremely  susceptible.  The
first  time  she  went  to  sleep  after  about  a  dozen  passes,  and
now,  about  the  14th  time,  I  have  only  to  look  at  her  for  a
few  seconds.  The  fifth  time  she  raised  her  hands  and  feet  at
my  will,  and  the  eighth  she  stood  up  and  walked  after  me
with  her  eyes  closed.  She  had  a  pain  in  her  left  side,  also  in
the  back ;  this  I  have  drawn  down  gradually  to  the  great-toe
nail,  where  it  still  remains  in  a  slight  degree.  It  arrived
there  by  easy  stages,  remaining  first  in  the  upper  half  of  the
thigh,  then  in  the  lower  half,  then  in  the  knee,  then  in  the
ankle,  &c.  Yesterday  I  tried  the  effect  of  mesmerised  water,
and  performed  some  very  satisfactory  experiments.  In  hand¬
ing  her  a  glass  of  water  I  merely  put  the  point  of  my  finger
in  contact  with  the  surface  of  it,  and  she  could  not  get  any
of  it  to  pass  the  lips.  It  tickled  her,  she  said.  I  then  told
her  mother  to  give  her  a  glass,  which  she  swallowed  readily.

I  told  the  mother  to  put  water  in  two  glasses  and  take  them
out  of  the  room.  I  went  out  saying  I  would  touch  one  of
them,  but  did  not  touch  either.  She  drank  some  of  each.

I  sent  same  more  out  and  went  and  touched  both,  when  she
found  it  impossible  to  take  any  from  either  glass.


various  Diseases  cured  by  Mesmerism.  375

She  wakes  up  apparently  in  her  proper  senses,  talking
quite  rationally  :  seeing,  hearing,  &c.,  but  on  careful  exa¬
mination  she  is  found  to  he  in  a  state  of  sleep-waking,  as
proved  by  the  experiments  with  the  water.  She  also  follows
me  when  I  draw  her,  and  complains  of  pricking  if  I  point
my  finger  towards  her,  even  from  the  other  side  of  the  room
and  behind  her.  This  has  occurred  in  several  of  my  cases.
I  hope  to  find  her  clairvoyant  soon,  but  as  I  have  not  seen
any  I  do  not  know  how  to  produce  it  in  the  first  instance.

Independent  of  all  this  her  health  has  been  greatly  bene¬
fited.  I  fear  I  shall  be  taking  up  too  much  of  your  valuable
time  if  I  prolong  my  letter,  but  will  write  again  should  any¬
thing  extraordinary  occur.  I  expect  to  begin  on  a  case  of
tic  in  a  few  days.

I  should  have  told  you  that  the  case  of  epilepsy  in  hand
has  been  pronounced  incurable  by  the  very  gentlemanly  and
polite  editor  of  the  Medico-Chirurgical.  I  shall  spare  no
pains  to  benefit  it.

I  remain,  yours,  very  truly,

Thos.  Chandler.

58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotlierhithe,
August  15th.

My  dear  Sir, — I  can  have  no  objection  to  your  publishing
my  letter,  and  shall  be  always  happy  to  lend  my  humble  aid
in  support  of  the  great  truths  of  mesmerism.  I  think  I
forgot  to  say,  that  in  the  last  case  detailed,  and  the  one  of
most  interest,  the  patient  is  quite  insensible  to  pain,  until
she  gets  into  the  sleep-waking  state,  which  she  does  in  about
twenty  or  twenty-five  minutes  after  going  to  sleep.  I  can
prick  her  with  a  pin  on  the  back  of  the  hand  or  foot,  tickle
her  with  a  feather  up  the  nose,  or  in  the  ear,  &c.,  and  she
does  not  move  a  muscle.  This  morning  I  have  been  trying
community  of  taste,  and  succeeded  in  a  great  degree;  when
I  put  a  bit  of  Spanish  juice  into  my  mouth  she  immediately
began  to  smack  her  lips,  and  appeared  to  be  sucking  some¬
thing,  which  was  first  observed  by  a  bystander.  She  then
said  she  tasted  something  nasty — coppery.  This  left  when  I
had  swallowed  the  liquorice,  and  occurred  again  afterwards
when  I  took  another  piece.  I  put  her  thimble  into  her  hand
and  it  gave  her  such  severe  pain  that  I  could  not  get  her  to
take  it  again ;  when  she  took  it  up  herself,  it  had  not  the
same  effect.  Should  anything  very  curious  happen  within
the  next  two  or  three  weeks  I  will  communicate  it.

Yours,  very  truly,

Thomas  Chandler.
c  c


VOL.  II.


376


Utility  of  Mesmerism  in  various  Diseases


58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotherhithe,
September  3rd.

My  dear  Sir, — I  hasten  to  add  some  very  interesting  par¬
ticulars  of  my  best  case,  in  order  that  you  may  append  them
to  your  report.  Her  name  is  Ann  Revely,  and  may  be  pub¬
lished  if  you  like.

She  has  on  every  occasion  since  my  last  report  shown
community  of  taste,  but  cannot  name  the  substance  I  am
tasting.  On  Friday  last,  without  any  previous  allusion  to
the  subject,  I  began  touching  some  of  the  organs.  I  com¬
menced  with  Music  ;  she  sang  part  of  a  favourite  song,  the
instant  I  put  my  finger  on  Tune.  I  then  touched  Benevo¬
lence — she  immediately  smiled.  Then  Veneration — she  put
her  hand  to  her  face  and  remained  in  an  attitude  of  prayer.
I  then  touched  Philoprogenitiveness,  and  she  began  moving
her  knee  as  though  she  were  dancing  a  child  on  it.  Not
having  looked  on  a  Phrenological  head  for  some  time,  I  could
not  remember  any  more  of  the  organs,  therefore  left  it  until
Sunday,  when  I  again  mesmerised  her  in  the  presence  of  two
sceptics,  who  were  rather  astonished.  The  different  organs
answered  to  the  touch  almost  as  quickly  as  the  notes  of  a
piano.  Besides  the  organs  touched  on  Friday,  I  excited
Firmness,  Self-esteem,  Combativeness,  which  set  her  wrang¬
ling,  and  several  others,  with  the  most  marked  result.

I  then  touched  Veneration  and  Tune  at  the  same  time,
and  she  immediately  sang  a  hymn  tune.  After  a  time,  re¬
peating  the  experiment,  the  same  result  occurred,  and  on
this  occasion  the  tune  was  “  Vital  spark.”  On  returning  to
it  a  minute  or  two  after,  she  continued  with  the  second  part,
“Lend,  lend  your  wings.”  In  addition  to  all  these  curious
phenomena,  she  is  getting  rapidly  well  of  her  disease.

I  remain,  in  haste,  yours  truly,

Thos.  Chandler.


VIII.  Utility  of  Mesmerism  in  various  Diseases  treated  by

different  Gentlemen.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

September,  1844.

Sir, — I  beg  to  forward  you  the  following  communications,  exemplifying
the  advantage  of  mesmerism  in  other  diseases  than  those  of  the  nervous
system.

Yours  faithfully,

John  Elliotson.

In  reference  to  the  case  of  inflammation  of  the  eye  cured
with  mesmerism  by  Mr.  Atkinson,  and  related  by  me  in  the


treated  by  different  Gentlemen.  3 77

last  number,  pp.  239,  240,  I  have  received  the  following  ac¬
count  from  that  gentleman.

“  In  the  account  which  you  have  given,  in  the  last  number
of  The  Zoist,  of  the  remarkable  cure,  by  me,  of  an  inflamed
eye,  from  which  most  serious  evil  was  to  be  apprehended ;
and  as  an  illustration  of  the  singular  effect  produced  by  Pe¬
trarch,  in  the  case  of  his  beloved  Laura,  you  were  not  aware
of  a  circumstance  in  the  cure,  which  makes  the  analogy  still
more  striking.  Petrarch  removed  the  Ophthalmia  from  Laura,
by  gazing  in  her  eyes,  with  the  faith  that  he  had  the  power
to  relieve  her  sufferings,  and  he  succeeded.  But  his  own  eye
became  affected  by  that  which  he  had  removed  from  the
other.  The  facts  of  the  case  are  clearly  recorded,  nor  will
any  supposed  imagination  on  the  part  of  Petrarch  explain  so
singular  an  effect  occurring  in  the  physical  condition  of  two
individuals,  for  Laura  is  not  supposed  to  be  aware  of  the  in¬
tention  of  Petrarch,  nor  he  of  the  effect  which  would  occur
on  himself.  In  the  case  of  the  young  lady  in  question,  in¬
stead  of  gazing  into  her  eye,  I  merely  held  the  points  of  my
fingers  before  the  inflamed  part  for  five  minutes  each  day,
without  any  intention  of  affecting  her  in  the  ordinary  way  of
mesmerising,  by  throwing  forth  as  it  were  a  nervous  force  to
produce  sleep.  My  desire  was  not  so  much  to  convey  a
healthy  power  to  the  part  affected,  as  to  abstract  the  disease,
and  from  experience  of  my  power  to  relieve  pain  and  inflam¬
mation  in  this  way,  I  was  confident  that  I  should  succeed.
And  just  as  the  disease  relieved  by  Petrarch  influenced  his
own  eye,  so  in  like  manner  did  I  experience  pain  and  heat
passing,  as  it  were,  into  my  fingers,  whilst  I  removed  it  from
the  eye  of  my  suffering  patient.  When  the  pain  was  entirely
removed,  I  experienced  only  a  sensation  of  heat  when  mes¬
merising  until  the  cure  was  complete.  But  had  I  used  my
eye  or  any  other  portion  of  the  frame  to  mesmerise  from,  the
influence  would  have  been  felt  in  that  part ;  and  in  using  the
eye  to  influence  the  eye,  where  a  greater  sympathy  would
probably  exist,  I  might  possibly  have  contracted  a  similar
inflammation.  But  the  effect  produced  upon  the  hand,  I  am
enabled  to  throw  off  by  the  most  simple  means,  to  be  ex¬
plained  when  I  shall  communicate  my  full  experience,  upon
this  curious  and  important  point.  Many  find  it  difficult  to
comprehend  how  you  can  affect  your  hand,  at  one  time  to  throw
forth  an  influence  to  produce  sleep,  and  at  another  only  to  draw
forth  pain  or  inflammation.  It  may  be  best  illustrated  perhaps
in  the  intention  to  receive  or  draw  forth  heat  from  a  warm
body,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  impart  warmth  to  a  cold  one.

c  c  2


378


Utility  of  Mesmerism  in  various  Diseases


“  When  I  mesmerise  with  a  strong  will  to  influence  the
patient,  by  subduing  their  vital  condition,  I  receive  no  in¬
fluence  from  them  ;  but  if  I  am  passive,  or  willing  to  receive,
and  lay  my  hand  on  any  part  where  there  is  pain,  I  am  im¬
mediately  influenced  and  the  patient  is  relieved.  And  thus
I  have  often  detected  pain  existing,  when  the  patient,  from
a  wish  to  conceal,  has  positively  declared  that  there  was
none,  and  I  can  say  with  certainty  where  the  pain  is,  when
it  begins  to  be  lessened  in  the  patient,  and  the  moment  it  is
all  removed.  But  I  shall  enlarge  upon  this  singular  power
at  some  future  occasion.  But  it  is  important  to  add,  what
you  know  to  be  the  case,  that  after  the  lapse  of  more  than
two  months,  on  the  occasion  of  a  considerable  increase  of
inflammation  of  the  lung  in  the  patient  whose  case  you  have
given,  the  eye  became  again  affected  in  a  precisely  similar
manner,  accompanied  by  considerable  pain  and  irritation,
and  was  again  relieved  by  the  same  simple  means,  though
much  more  rapidly  than  before.  On  the  second  day  every
symptom  and  appearance  of  disease  was  removed,  the  cure
commencing  from  the  moment  of  applying  my  hand  to  the
part.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  to  suppose  that  any  lucky
accident  could  account  for  this  second  cure — though  igno¬
rance  is  ever  inclined  to  attribute  that  to  chance,  which  it
cannot  or  will  not  comprehend.”

“P.S.  I  have  written  this  with  the  intention  of  your  send¬
ing  it  to  The  Zoist,  if  you  think  proper  :  there  is  not  the  least
objection  to  the  young  lady's  name  being  mentioned.”


In  all  diseases,  acute  and  chronic,  mesmerism  may  power¬
fully  assist  in  procuring  repose.

A  lady,  to  whom  we  are  all  indebted  for  the  amputation
of  the  leg  by  Mr.  Ward,  in  the  mesmeric  state,  in  Notting¬
hamshire,  and  who  nobly  mesmerises  the  poor  in  her  neigh¬
bourhood  with  great  benefit,  has  proved  the  utility  of  mes¬
merism  in  fever.  She  first  tried  it  on  a  child,  seven  years
old,  labouring  under  low  fever,  unable  to  sleep,  delirious,
and  constantly  tossing  about  in  a  bed  on  the  floor,  scarcely
quiet  for  a  minute.  She  mesmerised  it  to  sleep  in  a  few
minutes,  and  it  passed  an  excellent  night,  and  the  same  re¬
sult  was  obtained  every  day,  and  it  soon  got  well.  She  found
the  mother,  who  had  been  complaining  for  a  few  days,  ill
in  bed  with  the  same  disease  the  second  morning.  She  mes¬
merised  her  also  to  sleep  in  a  few  minutes,  and  repeated  the
process  daily,  and  from  that  day  the  mother,  equally  with


treated  by  different  Gentlemen .


379


the  child,  steadily  recovered;  so  that  the  mother’s  case  never
was  severe.  Neither  saw  any  medical  man  from  the  day  they
were  mesmerised,  or  if  they  did  it  was  only  once.

In  another  case  of  fever,  the  patient,  a  woman,  was  much
more  severely  ill  than  either  of  those  two,  and  was  at  a
more  advanced  stage  of  the  disease,  and  delirious.  Refresh¬
ing  sleep  was  procured  by  mesmerism  in  it,  and  under  a  daily
repetition  of  the  process  the  poor  woman  recovered,  though
not  so  rapidly,  and  has  frequently  said  since  that  “  being  put
to  sleep  did  her  more  good  than  all  the  medicine  she  had
taken.”


I  attended  my  friend  Mr.  Wilkinson,  surgeon,  of  Store
Street,  Bedford  Square,  a  few  years  ago,  under  scarlatina.
He  was  in  a  dangerous  state  of  exhaustion  when  I  first  saw
him,  and  had  not  slept  for  many  nights.  The  ordinary  suit¬
able  treatment  was  carefully  adopted,  and  he  recovered  ;  but
in  addition,  another  friend,  Mr.  Decimus  Hands,  of  Thayer
Street,  Manchester  Square,  who,  like  Mr.  Wilkinson,  was
as  convinced  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism  as  myself,  and  has
steadily  and  boldly  advocated  and  practised  it  for  six  years,
mesmerised  him.  The  following  is  Mr.  Hands’s  account :

“  The  following,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  are  the
facts  which  occurred  in  the  case  of  my  friend  Mr.  Wilkinson,
surgeon,  of  13,  Store  Street,  Bedford  Square,  and  formerly
my  fellow-student.

“In  the  latter  end  of  March,  1838,  I  was  requested  by
his  brother  to  see  Mr.  W.  I  found  him  labouring  under
scarlet  fever.  The  symptoms  were  unusually  violent,  and
required  more  active  measures  than  are  resorted  to  in  ordinary
cases.  Restlessness  and  sleeplessness  were  among  the  most
distressing  features  of  the  disease.  Soporifics  were  as  largely
and  repeatedly  administered  as  we  deemed  prudent,  but  with
no  satisfactory  result.  Seven  nights  passed  over  without  any¬
thing  like  composure  supervening.  During  this  time  I  con¬
versed  with  my  patient  on  various  subjects.  Among  other
things  we  spoke  of  mesmerism,  and  the  very  curious  change
it  produced  in  the  appearance  as  well  as  the  condition  of
Elizabeth  Okey,  upon  whom  we  had  seen  Baron  Dupotet
operate  in  the  theatre  of  the  North  London  Hospital.  What
we  had  seen  in  this  case  had  induced  us  both  to  try  it  our¬
selves  on  some  of  our  own  patients,  and  this  with  good
effect.

“  Mr.  W.  therefore  proposed  that  I  should  mesmerise
him.  I  readily  complied,  and  commenced  making  vertical


380


Utility  of  Mesmerism  in  various  Diseases


?  asses.  In  a  few  minutes,  say  five,  he  began  to  be  affected;

never  have  witnessed  a  precisely  similar  case.  He  began
by  taking  in  a  very  long  and  deep  inspiration,  which  was
expired  heavily,  and  followed  by  a  considerable  interval  of
from  twenty  to  thirty  seconds ;  then  another  inspiration  re¬
sembling  the  former,  but  not  quite  so  deep  or  heavy,  and  the
pause  was  not  quite  so  marked.  This  sort  of  breathing  gradu¬
ally  shortened,  became  quicker  and  quicker  until  the  chest
seemed  quite  to  flutter,  succeeded  altogether  by  a  profound
pause,  and  all  this  was  repeated  two  or  three  times,  after
which  he  fell  into  a  beautifully  tranquil  sleep,  which  lasted
for  about  the  space  of  an  hour.  When  he  woke  up  I  sent
him  off  again,  and  continued  the  employment  of  mesmerism
during  the  remainder  of  his  illness.  So  great  was  the  benefit
derived  and  enjoyment  experienced,  that  in  my  absence  he
requested  another  person,  whom  he  had  formerly  mesmerised,
to  pursue  the  treatment.”

I  have  just  received  the  following  letter  from  the  reverend
author  of  Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents,  and  whose  daughter,
I  am  allowed  to  say,  was  the  patient  cured  of  ophthalmia  by
Mr.  Atkinson  : —

“  Flixton,  September  9th,  1844.

“  My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

“I  mentioned  to  you,  some  little  time  back,  the  striking
mesmeric  benefit  that  I  had  produced  with  one  of  my
parishioners ;  since  then,  a  second,  and  perhaps  still  more
remarkable  case,  has  occurred :  and  as  they  both  refute,  in  an
unequivocal  way,  the  anti-mesmeric  theory  of  Imagination,
I  should  like  to  place  them  on  paper  for  your  consideration.

“  Harriet  Barnard,  aged  20  years,  the  daughter  of  a  la¬
bourer  in  Flixton,  was  obliged  to  return  from  service  last
year  on  account  of  ill  health,  and  early  this  spring  was  attacked
with  rheumatic  inflammation  and  swelling  in  one  of  the  knee-
joints.  She  is  of  a  scrofulous  habit,  and  the  family  are  con¬
stitutionally  subject  to  rheumatism.  Her  sufferings  were  in¬
tense,  and  the  inflammation  and  the  pain  encreased  almost
daily.  The  usual  remedies,  leeches,  cupping,  blisters,  were
in  vain  applied.  Opiates  were  administered,  but  with  no
effect.  I  often  went  to  read  and  pray  with  her ;  and  in  my
whole  ministerial  experience  have  never  seen  a  human  being
enduring  such  frightful  and  continued  agony.  The  neigh¬
bours  in  the  adjoining  cottage  were  unable  to  sleep  at  night
from  the  screams  and  cries  of  the  poor  girl.  When  she  was
moved  in  bed,  her  shrieks  were  as  if  she  were  stretched  on
the  rack.  Her  miseries  had  now  lasted  for  three  or  four


treated  by  different  Gentlemen .


381


weeks  :  she  slept  neither  night  nor  day :  and  at  last  the  able
and  kind  surgeon  who  attended  her  began  to  think  that  am¬
putation  of  the  limb  would  be  inevitable,  to  lessen  the  torture
and  save  her  life.

“  One  morning  in  April,  I  went  to  pay  her  my  usual  visit.
As  I  drew  near  the  garden  gate  I  heard  the  fearful  cries  of
the  poor  sufferer  most  audibly.  A  lodger,  who  lived  next
door,  said  to  me  as  I  was  walking  in,  “  Sir,  this  has  been
going  on  all  night,  and  we  have  not  been  able  to  close  our
eyes.”  I  walked  up  stairs  to  the  bedside,  and  what  a  sight
was  before  me  !  The  miserable  creature  was  writhing  about
under  the  intolerable  agony, — screaming,  and  almost  shriek¬
ing  out, — her  face  frightfully  flushed  by  fever  and  distorted
by  the  pain ;  and  this,  the  mother  said,  had  continued  for
several  hours.  Her  daughter,  she  said,  had  not  slept  for  a
week ;  and  the  paroxysms  of  pain  had  been  often  as  excru¬
ciating  as  what  I  was  then  witnessing.  I  attempted  to  ad¬
dress  and  comfort  her,  but  of  course  fruitlessly.  She  was  in
too  excruciating  agony  to  heed  what  was  said.  I  sat  down
by  the  bed-side  in  silent  horror.  The  spectacle  was  oppres¬
sive.  Here  was  a  fellow-creature  in  a  helpless  extremity  of
torture,  and  not  a  prospect  of  alleviation  !

“  Suddenly  the  thought  struck  me  that  I  would  try  mes¬
merism.  I  had  never  attempted  it  as  yet  beyond  the  walls
of  my  own  house,  partly  from  having  no  great  faith  in  my
own  power,  partly  from  an  unwillingness  to  perplex  my  pa¬
rishioners  with  an  unpopular  novelty ;  but  as  I  had  known
some  cases  of  great  success  in  its  alleviation  of  severe  pain,  I
thought  that  I  would  make  a  quiet  experiment.  I  said  no¬
thing,  therefore,  to  the  mother  or  the  sufferer  on  the  subject,
(they  had  never  even  heard  of  such  a  thing  before;)  but  stand¬
ing  up  by  the  bedside,  and  addressing  and  comforting  the
afflicted  parent  all  the  time,  I  moved  my  right-hand  gently  be¬
fore  the  patient's  face.  I  continued  to  speak  to  Mrs.  Barnard
during  the  process,  for  this  reason,  that  as  I  had  no  great
hopes  of  success,  my  wish  was,  that  if  I  failed,  they  should
not  remark  the  action,  but  simply  think  that  I  was  a  little
more  emphatic  and  earnest  than  usual.  This  is  the  noticeable
point  in  the  story;  because  the  parties  have  both  stated  since,
that  when  I  began  they  were  quite  unconscious  of  anything
uncommon  in  what  I  was  doing.

“  At  the  end  of  about  four  minutes  I  was  almost  certain
that  there  was  an  effect.  The  writhing  on  the  bed  seemed
less  violent, — the  cries  had  settled  into  groans,  and  there  was
somewhat  more  of  composure  in  the  face.  I  left  off  speaking,
— begged  the  mother  to  be  still, — and  pointed  the  fingers  of


382


Utility  of  Mesmerism  in  various  Diseases


both  hands  steadily  before  the  face.  In  less  than  ten  mi¬
nutes  from  the  time  that  I  first  commenced,  the  poor  suffer¬
ing  girl  was  in  a  deep  sleep  !

“  Here,  then,  was  a  sudden  change  from  the  late  horrible
exhibition  !  Here  was,  indeed,  a  present  mercy  for  which
we  had  to  bless  God  !  The  room  was  now  silent ;  the  groans
had  ceased,  only  an  occasional  moan  being  slightly  heard ;
the  limbs  so  lately  tossed  to  and  fro  in  anguish  lay  perfectly
still;  the  face  was  gradually  becoming  less  flushed  and  looking
more  tranquil;  and  the  distracted  mother,  who  had  been
wiping  her  tears  and  wringing  her  hands,  stood  looking  at
me  speechless  and  amazed.  I  was  thunderstruck  at  my  own
success.  Much  as  I  had  known,  and  seen,  and  read  of  the
healing  virtues  of  mesmerism,  here  was  an  actual  living  fact
which  appeared  to  equal  them  all.

“  Where  was  imagination  here  ?  The  poor  ignorant  mother
and  daughter,  in  their  humble  cottage,  had  never  heard  of
mesmerism.  It  was  in  consequence  of  a  sudden  thought
that  I  commenced  the  manipulations ;  and  while  I  was  pro¬
ceeding  with  them,  they  did  not  even  know  what  I  was  doing,
or,  in  fact,  that  I  was  doing  anything ;  and  in  less  than  four
minutes  there  was  a  decided  effect.

“  I  continued  the  passes  for  about  an  hour.  She  now  and
then  started,  and  cried  out  from  a  sudden  pain,  but  she  did
not  awake ;  the  face  had  gradually  become  tranquil ;  the
whole  frame  seemed  comfortable,  and  I  left  her  asleep.  In
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  my  departure  she  awoke ;
and  though  the  pain  soon  became  again  extremely  severe
and  the  fever  high ;  yet  there  was  a  decided  mitigation  of
suffering  as  compared  to  what  it  had  been,  she  no  longer
screamed  out  from  the  agony;  her  night  was  better,  and  she
had  a  little  sleep.

“  The  next  day  I  put  her  into  a  deep  sleep  in  five  minutes  :
in  less  than  a  week,  by  the  surgeon's  own  admission,  she
went  to  sleep  in  two  minutes  and  a  half ;  for  he  occasionally
attended  with  me  to  watch  the  process  (of  which  he  had
hitherto  seen  and  known  nothing) ;  the  severity  of  the  pains
also  greatly  abated,  and  she  began  to  enjoy  a  refreshing
night's  rest.  In  fact,  from  the  time  of  the  first  mesmeric
visit,  there  commenced  a  gradual,  though  slow,  amelioration;
after  each  seance  she  was  the  stronger  and  better,  and  the
idea  of  amputation  was  abandoned ;  but  inasmuch  as  medical
treatment  was  going  on  cotemporaneously,  I  must  not  attri¬
bute  the  whole  benefit  to  the  magnetic  power.  But  this  fact
is  undeniable,  that  as  I  was  often  called  from  home  at  that
period,  at  each  interval  of  my  absence  the  poor  girl  relapsed,


treated  by  different  Gentlemen.


383


and  gave  me  great  additional  labour  on  my  return.  However,
be  the  present  far  happier  state  of  the  patient  owing  to  what
it  may,  my  medical  friend  most  candidly  admits,  that  a  great
amount  of  suffering  has  been  spared  to  her  by  this  sleep, —
that  mesmerism  was  so  far  an  auxiliary  to  him,  and  that
probably  the  improvement  in  her  health  has  been  greatly  ac¬
celerated  by  its  means.  This  is  taking  very  low  and  inade¬
quate  ground  ;  but  even  with  this  admission,  what  a  blessing
has  mesmerism  proved  to  the  unhappy  sufferer !

“  Though  her  general  health  has  since  very  greatly  ad¬
vanced,  and  she  is  able  to  walk  about  on  crutches,  it  is
doubtful  if  she  will  ever  recover  the  complete  use  of  the
limb,  for  it  is  feared  that  anchylosis,  or  a  union  of  the  upper
and  lower  surfaces  of  the  bones  forming  the  knee-joint,  may
have  supervened.

“  One  point  in  the  treatment  is  deserving  of  notice.  She
was  generally  mesmerised  for  half  an  hour,  and  would  then
continue  to  sleep  about  an  hour  longer.  Occasionally,  how¬
ever,  my  time  would  be  so  limited,  that  I  was  only  able  to
put  her  into  the  sleep  and  continue  the  passes  for  a  short
period,  and  she  then  always  awoke  in  about  ten  minutes  after
my  departure.  One  might  infer  from  this,  that  the  merely
putting  into  a  deep  sleep  in  the  first  instance  was  not  enough
— that  the  battery  required  to  be  well  charged — and  that
without  a  sufficient  amount  of  power  communicated,  the
effect  would  be  but  transitory.  If  this  fact  be  observed  in
other  cases,  it  would  go  far  to  confirm  the  theory  of  a  fluid.

“  I  shall  not  weary  you  with  the  phenomena  that  were
manifested  in  the  case, — such  as  the  touch  of  gold  causing  a
strong  rigidity  in  the  arms ;  the  application  of  a  sovereign
on  either  side  of  the  knee  acting,  like  a  galvanic  battery,  by
moving  the  limb,  and  relaxing  apparently  the  sinews  and
muscles :  all  these  results  are  familiar  to  you.  The  important
point  in  this  case  is,  the  utter  absence  of  all  aid  from  the
imagination ,  as  the  party  was  not  only  in  an  extremity  of
agony,  but  absolutely  unaware  that  any  process  was  going  on.

“  And  now,  what  do  you  suppose  that  our  would-be  philo¬
sophers  reply  to  these  facts  ?  What  is  the  class  of  objections
with  which  the  Suffolk  sceptics  meet  this  plain  statement?
They  say  that  the  patient  is  a  woman  !  A  poor  nervous  hy¬
sterical  woman !  And  instead  of  praising  Providence  for
placing  within  the  reach  of  the  sufferer  such  a  merciful  gift,
they  magisterially  pronounce,  that  ‘  These  girls  are  always
up  to  such  tricks,  that  there  is  no  trusting  them/  and  then
dismiss  the  subject  as  unworthy  of  enquiry !  Come  we,
therefore,  to  the  other  sex ;  and  let  us  learn  how  the  ever-


384  Utility  of  Mesmerism  in  various  Diseases

lasting  1  hysteria*  of  the  opponents  is  to  explain  the  follow¬
ing  fact :

“  It  was  on  Monday,  the  26th  of  last  August,  that  I  rode
to  enquire  after  the  health  of  an  old  couple,  whom  I  had
missed  the  day  before  at  their  accustomed  place  in  church.
This  is  merely  mentioned  to  show  that  what  occurred  after¬
wards  happened  without  design.  On  reaching  the  cottage
I  found  the  old  people  well,  but  one  of  their  sons  was  very
ill  in  bed,  and  had  been  suffering  dreadfully  for  more  than  a
week.  I  proceeded  at  once  to  the  bed-side.

“James  Page,  the  patient,  is  a  strong  stout  man,  of  the
age  of  thirty-three,  partly  a  fisherman  and  partly  a  farm
labourer,  and  as  little  likely  to  be  a  subject  for  the  imagina¬
tion  to  play  with,  as  a  president  of  the  College  of  Surgeons
himself.  About  twenty  years  ago,  he  had  a  sharp  attack  of
rheumatic  fever,  which  lasted  more  than  four  weeks  and  con¬
fined  him  to  his  bed  still  longer.  About  thirteen  years  back
he  had  a  second  attack  of  similar  duration ;  but  his  health
since  that  period  has  been  robust  and  vigorous,  and  he  is  a
good  specimen  of  a  hardy  English  peasant.  He  was  engaged
in  the  mackarel  fishery  in  the  summer,  and  had  returned  to
his  village  for  the  harvest ;  but  during  the  first  days  of  reap¬
ing  had  caught  cold  from  the  heavy  rains  that  set  in,  and
had  returned  to  his  father's  cottage  seriously  ill.

“The  poor  fellow  was  now  stretched  on  his  pallet  in  a  severe
state  of  suffering.  It  was  an  attack  of  his  old  complaint —
acute  rheumatic  fever  with  a  swelling  of  the  joints.  Large
drops  of  perspiration  were  standing  upon  his  face.  He  was
evidently  enduring  great  agony,  hardly  bearing  the  bed¬
clothes  to  touch  him  ;  and  though  he  did  his  utmost  to  sup¬
press  what  he  suffered,  the  enemy  was  too  strong  for  him,
and  he  groaned  out  occasionally  from  the  intolerable  anguish.
His  mother  said,  that  all  the  sleep  that  he  had  had  for  the
last  week  put  together,  scarcely  amounted  to  an  hour's
length.  He  himself  said,  that  the  sleeping  draughts  that
he  had  taken  had  done  him  more  harm  than  good ;  for  if  he
went  to  sleep  for  ten  minutes  from  the  effect,  he  awoke  up
afterwards  feeling  worse  than  before.  It  was  a  distressing
scene ;  and  had  I  not  made  a  successful  trial  of  my  mesmeric
powers  with  the  other  patient,  I  should  have  taken  leave  of
poor  Page  after  the  usual  conversation  was  over.

“  As  it  was,  I  determined  to  make  another  experiment ;
and  saying  nothing  whatever  to  the  patient,  I  held  my  hand
before  his  face,  and  in  less  than  five  minutes  he  was  fast
asleep !  You  shall  not  be  wearied  with  an  account  of  the
mother's  astonishment,  or  of  my  own  gratification.  Here


treated  by  different  Gentlemen.


385


was  a  sturdy  unimaginative  labourer,  who  a  few  minutes  back
had  been  in  too  great  agony  to  converse,  cast  into  a  deep
composing  slumber,  through  the  simple  agency  of  our  vitupe¬
rated  art !  As  the  poet  so  beautifully  expresses  it,  f  that
sweet  sleep  which  medicines  all  pain/  had  steeped  his  senses
in  forgetfulness  of  this  world's  miseries.  He  was,  compara¬
tively  speaking,  in  Elysium, — and  all  the  work  of  a  few  mi¬
nutes.  I  continued  to  make  passes  down  his  limbs  for  half
an  hour.  Once  he  woke  up  suddenly,  from  pain ;  but  in¬
stantly  fell  off  to  sleep  again.  After  I  left  him,  he  slept  the
greater  part  of  the  afternoon,  waking  at  times  from  a  sudden
pain,  and  then  again  dropping  off.  And  he  had  the  best
night  since  his  attack.

“  When  I  called  to  see  him  the  next  day,  he  told  me  that
though  he  was  still  very  full  of  pain,  the  violent  intolerable
agony  had  quite  subsided  since  that  first  sleep ;  and  it  may
be  as  well  to  mention,  that  it  has  never  returned  since.  He
has  had  a  good  deal  of  suffering,  of  course,  but  different  al¬
together  in  degree.  In  fact,  the  acute  anguish  of  the  rheu¬
matic  fever  seemed  to  be  cut  short  at  once.  I  asked  him  now
how  he  felt  as  I  was  beginning.  He  said,  f  It  fared  (seemed)
as  if  something  cold  was  walking  over  his  brain.'  He  has
described  the  same  sensation  several  times  in  almost  the  same
words.  I  then  put  him  to  sleep  in  three  minutes ;  and  when
I  pressed  his  forehead  with  my  fingers,  he  snored  out.  I  have
since  generally  put  him  to  sleep  in  a  minute  and  a  half ;  the
last  time  he  went  off  in  half  a  minute.  He  says  that  when  I
begin,  ‘  he  cannot  possibly  keep  awake.'  It  is  unnecessary
to  add,  that  he  never  heard  of  mesmerism.

“  The  touch  of  gold  or  silver  seemed  to  give  him  pain,  and
he  instantly  awoke.  The  movement  of  my  fingers  near  his
hand  would  set  his  own  fingers  in  a  slight  magnetic  move¬
ment,  causing  a  sort  of  twitching.

“  As  medical  treatment  has  been  going  on  at  the  same
time,  I  do  not  place  the  whole  abatement  of  the  fever  to  mes¬
merism.  Page  was  greatly  benefitted  by  bleeding.  But  the
surgeon,  hitherto  an  unbeliever,  in  spite  of  what  he  had  wit¬
nessed  with  our  former  patient,  was  astonished  at  the  result,
and  admits  that  the  way  in  which  sleep  was  induced  and  pain
overpowered,  is  something  quite  beyond  the  customary  means
of  the  Esculapean  art.  To  which  of  the  two  systems,  the
mesmeric  or  the  medical,  the  main  improvement  be  owing,  I
do  not  decide,  though  I  have  my  opinion^  I  rather  wish
mesmerism  to  be  regarded,  not  as  an  isolated  panacea,  that
holds  no  communion  with  other  remedies, — but  an  adjunct,
an  auxiliary ;  one  out  of  many  means,  only  simpler  and  less


386  Utility  of  Mesmerism  in  various  Diseases

injurious  than  the  usual  narcotics.  But  the  point  in  this  case,
as  in  that  of  Harriet  Barnard,  is  this,  that  imagination  could
have  no  part  in  the  matter  :  the  patients  were  both  ignorant
of  what  was  taking  place,  and  their  faith  or  their  fancy  gave
no  assistance  whatsoever.

“How  the  learned  of  your  profession  will  explain  the  above,
I  pretend  not  to  guess.  They  must  find  some  other  theory
than  that  of  imagination.  They  have  ridden  that  horse  to
death,  and  it  will  carry  them  no  longer.  Neither  does  the
system  of  Mr.  Braid  meet  the  difficulty.  The  patients  did
not  stare  at  me.  They  did  not  fix  their  eyes  stedfastly  at  my
fingers,  and  so  drop  off  to  sleep  :  they  did  not  even  look  at
me, — or  know  that  anything  was  going  on.  I  therefore  send
these  two  cases  up  to  you,  not  as  proofs  of  the  curative  influ¬
ence  of  mesmerism,  (for  of  that  there  is  already  abundant
evidence,)  but  as  an  unequivocal,  undeniable  illustration  of
the  wondrous  sympathy  that  exists  between  man  and  man.
They  prove  that  a  sympathetic  union  does  exist, — be  the  con¬
necting  chain  either  a  fluid,  or  electricity,  or  any  other  un¬
discovered  agent :  and  again  I  call  upon  our  antagonists  in
your  profession  to  enter  upon  the  subject  in  a  calm,  philo¬
sophic  tone.  Let  them  discard  their  vulgar  jokes,  and  their
affected  silence,  and  meet  the  question  openly  like  men.  It
is  really  sad  to  see  the  shifts  and  the  interpretations  that  they
employ;  to  see  the  rapture  with  which  they  pounce  on  a
failure,  and  the  smooth  plausibility  with  which  they  forget  a
fact.  It  is  melancholy  to  see  this,  and  remember,  that  the
enquiry  is  not  about  some  unreal  point  in  abstract  science, —
but  whether  there  be  a  provision  in  Nature’s  storehouse, — the
soothing  gift  of  a  merciful  Creator, — by  which  a  vast  amount
of  human  suffering  may  be  spared,  and  even  the  duration  of
human  life  occasionally  prolonged.

“  In  my  little  work  on  mesmerism,  $ith  which  you  are
familiar,  I  have  examined  all  the  popular  explanations  on  the
subject,  and  refuted  them  in  detail  one  by  one.  To  this
refutation  I  have  as  yet  seen  no  attempt  at  a  reply ;  and  as  a
lover  of  truth,  I  am  anxious  to  learn  how  it  can  be  met.
One  theory,  however,  I  left  untouched ;  it  is  a  theory,  that
we  must  admit,  is  an  important  one ;  and  if  it  can  once  be
proved,  will  tear  up  the  reality  of  mesmerism  root  and  branch.
It  is  the  only  theory  that  enters  into  the  marrow  of  the
question ;  and  as  such  we  must  presume  it  is  the  real  foun¬
dation  of  the  medical  scepticism  that  is  afloat.  The  theory,
I  mean,  is  one  mentioned  in  George  Borrow’s  incomparable
work,  i  The  Bible  in  Spain it  is  a  gipsy  theory,  and  as
a  curiosity  shall  be  quoted  for  your  instruction.  “  Long


treated  by  different  Gentlemen.


387


since/  says  Antonio,  ‘I  knew  an  old  Caloro;  lie  was  old,
very  old,  upwards  of  a  hundred  years  ;  and  I  heard  him  once
say,  that  all  we  thought  we  saw  was  a  lie ;  that  there  was  no
world,  no  men  nor  women,  no  horses  nor  mules,  no  olive
trees/  Startling  as  this  theory  is,  it  must  be  confessed,
that  it  is  a  decisive  one.  If  true,  there  is  an  end  of  the
argument.  The  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  must  then
be  in  the  ascendant.  An  unreal  magnetiser  cannot  act  on
an  unreal  patient.  Mesmerism  is  a  phantom.  For,  as  the
gipsy  says,  there  is  no  such  a  thing  as  pain, — no  amputation
of  a  thigh, — no  inflammation  of  the  knee, — no  rheumatic
fever, — no  sleep ;  all  is  ‘  a  lie  /  the  disease  and  the  cure  are
alike  imaginary  :

Solventur  risu  tabulas,

and  the  question  is  finished.

“  I  really  see  no  other  solution,  but  this  of  the  Spanish
gipsy,  by  which  our  unnumbered  facts  can  at  all  be  an¬
swered.

“  You  know,  my  dear  friend,  how  much  I  owe  to  mes¬
merism, — and  how  grateful  I  am  and  ought  to  be  for  its
discovery.  To  see  the  sufferings  of  two  beloved  relatives  so
greatly  lessened  by  its  power,  is  enough  to  create  an  enthu¬
siast  out  of  a  stoic.  And  how  deeply  I  am  indebted  to  our
mutual  and  invaluable  friend,  you,  from  your  long  and  un¬
wearied  attendance  at  my  house,  alone  are  competent  to
judge.  You  know  that  I  have  not  become  a  neophyte  in  the
science  on  light  and  insufficient  grounds.  And  it  is  pecu¬
liarly  gratifying  to  feel,  that  having  benefitted  so  largely  in
my  own  family  by  its  power,  I  have  been  enabled  to  extend
its  blessings  to  other  homes,  to  those  of  my  own  parish,  who
have  so  strong  a  claim  on  my  assistance.  And  what  a  proud
day  it  is  for  you  to  see  this  flood  of  facts  pouring  in  on  every
side  !  What  a  still  prouder  day  for  your  friends  to  observe
the  accuracy  of  your  physiological  researches  tested  so  surely
by  experiments  without  end  !  Your  almost  instinctive  power
in  the  detection  of  disease, — your  command  of  nature^s  mul¬
tiplied  resources, — your  success  in  treatment, — all  this,  and
more,  were,  by  common  consent,  admitted.  But  there  was
one  thing,  it  was  said,  which  neutralized  everything :  one
thing  which  weakened  the  value  of  your  opinion,  and  raised
a  prejudice  that  was  detrimental  to  your  otherwise  high  name.
You  were  smitten  with  mesmerism.  In  an  evil  hour,  you
had  been  caught  by  that  unreal,  delusive  fancy.  Your  rivals
triumphed,  and  a  cloud  passed  over.  But,  in  the  course  of
time,  the  day  is  again  your  own.  The  one  thing  wanting  is
found  to  be  there.  The  unreal  is  proved  to  be  true.  Your


388  Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

hasty  opinion  is  now  seen  to  have  been  cautious  investigation.
Mesmerism  is  established.  Fact  upon  fact  confirms  its  effi¬
cacy  and  its  use.  Your  name  is  rising  higher  every  day.
And  the  opponents  are  reeling  and  staggering  under  the
blow,  waiting  the  end  in  silent  uneasiness,  or  betraying  their
malice  in  disappointed  anger.

“  You  are  at  full  liberty  to  make  what  use  you  wish  of
my  facts  and  opinions.  In  the  meantime,  permit  me  to  sub¬
scribe  myself,

“  My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

“  Your  grateful  and  much  obliged  friend,

“George  Sandby,  Jun.

“  To  John  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.”


IX.  Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

/  .  .

Sir, — I  send  you  some  more  examples  of  operations  without
pain  in  the  mesmeric  state.  In  a  communication  sent  me  for
you  by  Mr.  Tubbs,  of  Upwell,  whose  honesty  and  fearless
zeal  in  advocating  and  practising  mesmerism  in  the  midst  of
great  professional  opposition  in  Cambridgeshire  are  most  me¬
ritorious,  I  see  there  are  two  instances  of  painless  extraction
of  teeth,  and  one  of  the  painless  introduction  of  a  seton ;
but  those  I  presume  you  will  publish  with  the  rest  of  his
cases.

The  patient  from  whom  the  stump  of  a  double  tooth  was
extracted  by  Mr.  Nicholles,  recorded  by  me  in  your  last  num¬
ber  at  pp.  247-8,  suffered  lately  from  the  stump  of  another
decayed  large  double  tooth.  I  took  her  to  Mr.  Nicholles,
who  so  kindly  extracted  the  other  for  her.  The  readers  of
The  Zoist  will  remember  that  in  her  mesmeric  state,  though
insensible  throughout  her  surface  below  the  head  and  face,
these  preserved  their  sensibility,  and  the  interior  of  the  mouth
also.  Before  the  former  stump  was  extracted,  I  previously  to
the  operation  greatly  reduced  the  sensibility  of  the  gums  by
longitudinal  passes  down  the  cheeks ;  but  as  we  were  all  in  a
hurry,  I  had  not  time  to  deaden  it  completely,  but  enough
for  the  extraction  of  three  tight  fangs  to  be  removed  sepa¬
rately  with  no  more  pain  than  a  sense  of  pressure  for  which
she  cared  nothing.  On  this  second  occasion,  however,  we
had  all  time,  and  I  resolved  to  prevent  all  suffering.  I  threw
her  into  mesmeric  sleep-waking  by  one  or  two  passes.  On
touching  her  cheek  and  gums,  I  found  them  perfectly  sen-


Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State.  389

sible.  Then  I  made  perhaps  thirty  passes  with  contact  on
her  cheek,  and  found  the  part  scarcely  sensible,  but  her  gums
as  sensible  as  ever.  I  made  about  thirty  more  upon  the
cheek,  and  it  was  now  perfectly  insensible,  but  the  gum  still
sensible  in  some  degree.  I  repeated  about  thirty  more,  and
then  the  gum  became  insensible,  so  that  the  edge  of  my  nail
produced  no  sensation  in  it.  The  operation  was  now  com¬
menced  and  three  tight  fangs  removed,  each  separately,  and
with  some  trouble  ;  but  without  the  slightest  pain.  Her  hands
lay  completely  relaxed  before  her,  and  her  pulse  did  not  rise
a  beat,  for  she  had  no  fear  of  feeling  any  pain.  The  case  is
very  instructive,  as  shewing  how  sensibility  may  be  sometimes
removed  in  a  part  at  pleasure :  and  the  fact  of  the  gradual
diminution  of  sensibility  from  without  inwards  as  the  passes
were  continued  upon  the  cheek  is  as  important  as  it  is  in¬
teresting.


I  have  received  the  following  letter  and  document  from  a
gentleman  not  known  to  me  : —

“  Dr.  M.  Arnott  to  Dr.  Elliot  son.

“  25,  South  Castle  Street,  Edinburgh,
“  28th  June,  1844.

“Dear  Sir, — Having  been  for  several  years  engaged  in  mesmeric
experiments,  I  have  established  to  my  own  satisfaction,  and  that  of
many  friends  here  as  well  as  elsewhere,  the  truth  and  value  of  mes¬
merism  as  a  science.  I  have  on  several  occasions  proved  its  efficacy
as  a  pain-alleviating  and  curative  agent,  in  cases  where,  until  lately,
no  hope  for  such  results  existed,  and  where  none  in  all  likelihood
could  have  been  entertained,  but  for  the  active  and  disinterested
manner  you  investigated  and  advocated  this  great  truth,  and  which
in  a  medical  point  of  view,  whether  by  animal  magnetism  or  other
name  known,  I  gratefully  esteem  as  a  principle  among  the  many  of
heaven’s  inestimable  gifts  to  man.

“The  boy,  aged  14  years,  referred  to  in  the  enclosed  case,  is  of
nervous  sanguine  temperament  and  strumous  habit.  His  parents
have  been  both  dead  six  or  seven  years.  He  had  been  always  list¬
less  and  ailing  up  to  the  time  of  my  first  seeing  him:  when  I  left,
27th  May,  his  aunt  told  me  that  she  considered  his  general  health
better  now  than  she  had  ever  known  it;  and  his  altered  look  bore
evidence  to  the  fact.

“  I  send  you  the  original,  not  having  time  to  make  a  copy.
Make  what  use  you  please  of  it.  Should  it  not  prove  too  late  for
the  forthcoming  number  of  The  Zoist ,  by  sending  it  to  that  excellent
publication,  you  will  much  oblige,

“  Dear  Sir,

“  Most  respectfully  yours,

“  J.  Montgomery  Arnott,  M.D.”


390  Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State.


Mrs.  Nesbit,  of  Clayport  Street,  Alnwick,  applied  to
Dr.  M.  Arnott,  on  the  9th  of  May,  1844,  on  behalf  of  her
nephew  Thomas  James  Call,  who  had  been  deaf  for  seven
years  from  having  got  wet  and  not  being  changed  in  time.
He  had  abscess  in  one  ear,  and  often  severe  pain  in  both
ears  and  also  in  the  jaws.  He  was  mesmerised  morning  and
evening  by  Dr.  M.  Arnott,  from  the  9th  until  the  27th  of
May,  except  from  the  14th  till  the  20th,  during  which  time
he  was  mesmerised  each  morning  by  Dr.  Bow.  He  heard  so
badly  when  he  came  to  Dr.  M.  Arnott,  that  one  in  the  street
might  have  heard  him  bawled  out  to.  He  was  much  better
after  the  first  sitting,  and  is  now  perfectly  cured ;  hears  while
spoken  to  in  a  faint  whisper ;  the  stupid  look  so  common  to
deaf  people  is  quite  gone,  and  his  general  health  greatly
improved.  Dr.  M.  Arnott  drew  one  of  his  teeth  while  he
was  in  the  mesmeric  state,  on  the  morning  of  the  27th  of
May ;  it  was  a  large  buck  or  eye-tooth,  projecting  from  the
dental  circle,  and  he  did  not  evince  the  slightest  appearance
of  pain.  He  awoke  of  himself,  in  less  than  five  minutes
after  the  operation,  and  could  not  at  first  be  convinced  that
he  had  lost  his  tooth,  and  was  only  assured  of  the  fact  on
seeing  the  tooth  and  the  blood,  when  he  declared  that  he  had
not  felt  it  in  the  least,  and  all  in  the  room  could  not  see  a
muscle  move  although  watching  closely.  Present — Mr.  and
Mrs.  Thomas  Robertson,  Mr.  Wm.  Thew,  and  Mrs.  Nesbit.

Signatures  of  those  who  witnessed  the  tooth-drawing  and
the  cure  :


William  Smith.
Richardson  Nesbit.
Matthew  Williamson.
J.  Lambert.

B.  Selby.

M.  Wilson.

John  Nairn.

George  Snowdon.


Thomas  Robertson.
William  Tiiew.

Margaret  Nesbit.
Margaret  Robertson.

D.  F.  Bow  (witness  as  to  the
cure  of  deafness).

Henry  B.  Carr  (witness  as
to  the  cure  of  deafness).


But  the  following  account  is  really  glorious, — a  second
amputation  of  a  lower  extremity  without  pain  in  the  mes¬
meric  state !  It  was  forwarded  to  me  with  the  following
letter  to  you  : —


to  the  editor  of  the  zoist.

Hinckley,  2nd  Sept.  1844.
Sir, — I  have  forwarded,  per  this  day's  post,  to  the  address


Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State.  391

of  Dr.  Elliotson,  the  Leicestershire  Mercury  of  August  31st,
containing  (fol.  iii.  col.  3)  an  account  of  the  amputation  of
one  of  the  lower  extremities,  by  Mr.  Tosswill,  surgeon,  of
Leicester.  The  case  is  interesting,  and  well  worthy  your
notice,  in  as  far  as  there  is  much  uphill  work  yet  to  be  done
by  the  advocates  of  mesmerism,  to  neutralize  the  secret  and
open  opposition  which  this  grand  science  is  destined,  and  its
advocates  too,  to  meet  with.

The  young  woman  operated  on,  has  an  aunt,  living  in
this  town,  to  whom  she  wrote  a  letter  a  day  or  two  after  the
limb  was  amputated.  I  have  made  application  for  this  letter
with  the  view  of  forwarding  it  for  your  notice,  but  the  old
lady  is  not  willing  to  part  with  it.

I  beg  to  remain,  Sir,

Your  obedient  servant,

H.  P.  T.

“  The  wonders  of  mesmerism  are  not  altogether  unknown  to  the
people  of  Leicester,  but  a  case  has  occurred  this  week  which  has
eclipsed  all  previous  facts,  either  here  or  at  a  distance.  We  allude
to  that  of  the  amputation  of  a  limb  on  Thursday  last.  The  patient
is  a  young  woman  of  the  name  of  Mary  Ann  Lakin,  1 6,  Fleet  Street,
in  this  town,  who  had  been  afflicted  with  a  disease  of  the  knee-joint
for  four  years.  The  precise  nature  of  the  disease  we  do  not  know,
but  it  was  attended  with  enormous  swelling  of  the  limb,  and  with
such  excruciating  pain  as  to  prevent  anything  like  consecutive  rest
for  a  long  period.  By  these  pains  and  want  of  sleep  she  had  become
reduced  to  a  mere  skeleton,  and  there  was  every  probability  that  her
life  must  be  sacrificed  or  the  limb  amputated.  In  this  critical  state
of  the  case,  about  a  month  ago,  it  was  suggested  that  mesmerism
should  be  tried  on  the  patient,  and  it  was  found  that  its  influence
was  of  the  most  beneficial  and  soothing  nature.  Under  its  influence
pain  would  cease,  and  the  patient  would  sink  into  perfect  and  re¬
freshing  repose.  As  amputation  of  the  deceased’s  joint  was  deemed
essential  by  her  medical  attendant,  it  was  decided  that  the  operation
should  be  performed  while  in  the  mesmeric  state.  Accordingly
twelve  o’clock  on  Thursday  morning  was  fixed  upon  for  the  opera¬
tion  to  take  place.  Mr.  Hollings  was  the  mesmeriser,  and  Mr.
Tosswill,  the  operator,  besides  whom  there  were  present.  Dr.  Shaw,
and  Messrs.  Paget,  Seddon,  jun.,  Downing,  &c.  Mr.  Hollings  hav¬
ing  mesmerised  the  patient,  which  was  accomplished  in  about  nine
minutes,  Mr.  Tosswill  proceeded  to  perform  the  operation.  The
limb  was  taken  off  within  about  five  inches  of  the  hip  joint,  the
spot  measuring  thirty- three  inches  in  circumference  where  the  am¬
putation  took  place,  and  which  was  effected  in  two  minutes  and  a
half.  During  the  operation  an  all  but  inaudible  moaning  was  heard,
and  a  slight  movement  of  the  body  was  perceptible,  but  as  far  as
could  be  judged  there  was  an  entire  absence  of  pain.  This  was
evinced  by  the  countenance  preserving  throughout  the  greatest  pla-

VOL.  II.  D  D


392  Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

cidity,  not  a  single  motion  of  a  muscle  indicating  such  sensation.
On  being  demesmerised,  the  patient  was  not  aware  what  had  taken
place,  till  informed  by  those  in  attendance.  In  the  afternoon  great
pains  were  felt  in  the  loins,  attended  with  considerable  writhing  of
the  body  from  the  contraction  of  the  muscles,  but  on  resorting  to
the  mesmeric  influence  these  gradually  ceased,  the  patient  falling
into  a  calm  sleep  which  lasted  an  hour  and  forty  minutes,  and  when
aroused  all  pain  had  entirely  left  her,  and  has  not  been  felt  since.
When  facts  like  these  have  occurred  at  a  distance,  some  degree  of
discredit  has  been  attached  to  them  from  a  suspicion  that  they  were
not  well  authenticated.  In  this  case,  we  do  not  pretend  to  decide
anything  about  the  nature  of  mesmerism,  but  the  proceedings  are
altogether  so  astonishing,  and  at  the  same  time  so  well  attested  by
the  presence  of  several  distinguished  members  of  the  medical  pro¬
fession,  that  no  reasonable  mind  can  reject  them.  One  thing  seems
established  by  this  case,  that  whatever  the  mesmeric  state  may  arise
from,  it  is  capable  of  being  made  available  for  important  medical
and  surgical  purposes.

( Further  particulars ,  as  received  by  us,  from  Mrs.  Lakin ,  the
mother  of  the  patient) . — The  knee  of  her  daughter  Mary  Ann,  who
is  now  twenty-two  years  of  age,  was  first  affected  with  stiffness  in
September,  1840,  and  which  continued  to  get  worse,  and  increase
in  size  until  the  commencement  of  the  year  1841,  when  she  was
taken  to  the  infirmary.  Here  she  underwent  a  series  of  operations,
the  affected  part  being  repeatedly  cupped,  and  blistered  on  alternate
days  not  fewer  than  seven  times;  the  last  blister  being  kept  open  for
three  wreeks.  At  the  end  of  thirteen  weeks  she  was  discharged  from
the  Infirmary,  nothing  relieved  by  the  treatment  received  in  that
institution.  At  intervals,  and  particularly  during  windy  weather
and  atmospheric  changes,  she  experienced  the  most  excrutiating
pain,  which  may  easily  be  conceived,  when  the  frightful  enlargement
of  the  knee  is  considered,  it  measuring  at  one  time  little  less  than  a
yard  round.  The  poor  girl  was  almost  literally  reduced  to  a  skeleton,
the  bones  of  her  limbs  and  various  parts  of  the  body  protruding
through  the  skin,  and  her  suffering  from  this  source  had  to  be
assuaged  by  plastering.  Such  was  the  racking  nature  of  the  com¬
plaint,  that  during  twelve  months  before  application  of  magnetism,
she  had  not  had  half  an  hour’s  continuous  sleep; — but  under  the
mesmeric  influence,  the  effect  produced  was  most  astonishing.  From
the  first  experiment  all  pain  was  entirely  removed,  and  at  night  she
slept  soundly, — falling  asleep  at  the  time  commanded  by  her  magne-
tiser,  and  awaking  at  the  hour  he  directed.  From  this  time  an
entire  change  was  observable  in  her  general  health;  the  cough  and
the  violent  perspirations  with  which  she  had  been  afflicted,  forsook
her  at  the  will  of  the  operator;' — she  recovered  her  flesh,  and  was
getting  fat,  so  that  the  amputation  which  at  one  time  was  considered
necessary  should  take  place  within  seven  days,  was,  after  the  com¬
mencement  of  the  mesmeric  experiments  deferred  for  a  month.

The  appearance  of  the  young  woman  we  are  informed,  while


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


393


under  the  operation,  was  that  of  a  person  in  a  troubled  sleep,  but
there  were  no  indications  of  suffering, — not  the  slightest  compression
of  the  lips  or  distortion  of  the  features; — and  after  being  removed  to
her  bed,  and  restored  to  consciousness,  she  said  she  had  an  indis¬
tinct  recollection  of  dreaming  that  something  was  being  tied  round
her  leg.  It  may,  perhaps,  help  to  remove  from  the  minds  of  the
sceptical,  any  doubts  they  may  entertain  of  the  young  woman’s
honesty,  under  the  trying  circumstances  through  which  she  has
passed,  to  state  that  we  have  been  favoured  with  the  testimony  of  a
gentleman  of  the  highest  respectability  occupying  an  important
situation  in  the  town,  as  to  her  artlessness  and  integrity,  he  having
had  repeated  opportunities,  since  the  application  of  the  mesmeric
agency  in  her  case,  of  noting  her  character  and  manners,  which  he
describes  as  modest  and  intelligent, — and  considers  her  a  person
whom  it  would  be  impossible  to  suspect  of  simulation  under  the
circumstances.”

I  was  going  to  comment  at  length  upon  this  great  fact ;
but  I  will  not.  The  Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society
of  London,  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  Dr.  Marshall  Hall,  Dr.
Copland,  the  professors  of  University  College,  London,  and
the  lecturers  of  all  the  medical  schools,  the  physicians  and
surgeons  of  all  the  hospitals,  the  fashionable  physicians  and
the  unknown,  but  worldly-wise,  practitioners  who  go  their
daily  rounds  gossiping  their  ignorant  nonsense  against  mes¬
merism,  together  with  Mr.  Wakley  and  his  poor  imitator  and
successor  Dr.  Forbes,  will  comment  upon  it  for  themselves,
and  will  feel  their  own  humiliating  position.

I  remain,

Yours  faithfully,

Sept.  1844.  John  Elliotson.


X.  Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.

In  our  last  number  we  criticised  the  conduct  of  Dr.  Forbes
during  the  preceding  five  years.  In  our  present  number  we
shall  review  some  portion  of  his  conduct  during  the  last  few
weeks.  On  a  former  occasion  we  did  not  hesitate  to  affirm
that  the  course  he  had  pursued  was  unscientific — nay,  disho¬
nest,  and  we  gave  our  reasons,  not  be  it  remembered  founded
on  the  opinions  of  others,  but  on  the  written  opinions  of  Dr.
Forbes  himself.  Recent  events  have  not  caused  us  to  alter
our  views.  We  are  sorry  that  Dr.  Forbes  did  not  follow  the
advice  we  honestly  tendered.  How  different  would  have  been
his  position  !  Perfectly  reckless,  and  profoundly  ignorant
of  the  science,  he  has  rushed  to  witness  a  display  of  mesmeric

I)  d  2


394


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


wonders,  and  without  a  knowledge  of  the  facts  connected
with  mesmeric  sympathy — without  preparing  beforehand  the
course  which  he  intended  to  pursue — for  he  in  the  most  bare¬
faced  manner  explained  away  the  success  of  his  own  experi¬
ments, — without  seeking  the  advice  of  those  who  could  have
given  him  information  on  the  subject,  he  associated  himself
with  men  who  were  opposed  most  violently  to  the  reception
of  mesmerism,  men  like  himself,  who  were  committed  by
writing  against  what  they  had  not  investigated.  The  whole
party  went  not  for  the  purpose  of  learning,  but  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  finding  fault — not  with  the  scientific  object  of  inves¬
tigating  a  difficult  and  perplexing  subject,  but  for  the  purpose
of  pronouncing  a  patient  an  impostor,*  if  he  failed;  when
any  one  at  all  conversant  with  mesmeric  research  could  have
told  them  that  for  days  together  patients  will  fail,  and  that  the
cause  of  such  failure  may  be  by  no  means  apparent.

In  our  previous  article  we  hailed  Dr.  Forbes  as  “  Wakley
secundus ” — little  did  we  think  that  he  would  so  soon  furnish
us  with  evidence  to  again  prove  how  correct  we  were  in  our
designation.  One  short  month,  and  lo  !  he  presents  his
compliments  to  his  prototype  and  requests  the  insertion  of
his  discoveries  in  the  Lancet !

“  Dr.  Forbes  presents  his  compliments  to  the  editor  of
the  Lancet  and  will  be  obliged  by  his  giving  a  place  in  his
journal  to  the  accompanying  paper. — Old  Burlington  Street,
July  27th,  1844.”

The  editor  of  a  quarterly  journal  himself,  he  could  not
wait  to  insert  in  his  own  pages  the  great  discovery  that  Alexis
was  an  impostor,  but  axious  to  blazon  to  the  world  his  exer¬
tions,  he  solicited  the  assistance  of  a  weekly  journal,  and
thus  proclaimed  the  result  of  his  experiments.  The  daily
press  contained  advertisements  announcing  the  stupendous
fact,  that  the  next  number  of  the  Lancet  would  contain  a
second  complete  and  fatal  explosion  against  mesmerism,  by
Dr.  Forbes.  The  Medical  Gazette  published  the  same  an¬
nouncement,  and  thus  a  powerful  machinery  was  put  into
motion,  in  our  opinion,  to  prove  that  Dr.  Forbes  had  again
committed  himself,  not  only  by  denouncing  what  he  did  not
understand,  but  by  unfairly  reporting  experiments  which  he
himself  originated.  The  Medical  Gazette,  in  a  leading  article,
said  “Dr.  Forbes  has  the  honour  upon  this  occasion  of  having

*  “That,  consequently,  this  exhibition  not  only  affords  not  one  tittle  of
evidence  in  favour  of  the  existence  of  this  faculty  in  the  man  Alexis,  but
presents  extremely  strong  grounds  for  believing  that  the  pretended  power  in
him  is  feigned,  and  that  he  is  consequently  an  impostor.”  Dr.  Forbes'  Letter
to  the  Medical  Gazette.


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


395


stripped  off  the  flimsy  veil  of  imposition,  under  cover  of
which  these  mountebanks  attempted  to  deceive  the  public.
There  never  was  exhibition  so  pitiful — never  exposure  so
luminous — never  defeat  so  complete,  as  that  to  which  the
notes  of  a  second  exhibition  published  in  this  day’s  Gazette
refer.”  To  us  who  have  seen  Alexis  and  thoroughly  inves¬
tigated  the  case,  who  have  cases  of  our  own,  and  who  have
so  frequently  witnessed  the  extraordinary  results  obtained  by
fellow-labourers,  such  language  raises  a  smile,  and  causes  us
to  pity  the  men  who  are  led  away  by  the  opinions  expressed
in  the  medical  journals,  and  who,  thinking  that  the  writers
have  the  best  possible  means  of  acquiring  information,  retail
the  absurdities  in  all  directions.

A  friend  of  ours  after  perusing  the  papers  by  Dr.  Forbes,
immediately  said,  “  I  have  derived  from  these  letters  a  most
profound  conviction  that  Dr.  F.  believes  in  the  power,  the
evidence  of  which  he  so  much  racks  his  ingenuity  to  disprove  ;”
and  in  corroboration  of  the  justness  of  our  friend’s  conclu¬
sion,  we  may  mention  that  from  information  which  has
reached  us  we  know  that  Dr.  Forbes  believes  that  there  is
“  something”  in  mesmerism ;  but  we  ask  any  one  who  has
read  his  two  reports,  whether  they  could  by  his  admission,
ascertain  this  fact  ?  We  know  that  on  several  occasions  he
has  admitted  that  there  must  be  a  good  deal  of  truth  in  the
science — why  then,  we  ask,  has  he  not  stated  the  same  pub¬
licly  ?  If  he  had  done  so  in  his  note  to  the  editor  of  the
Lancet,  it  is  clear  that  the  exposure  of  Alexis  would  not  have
found  admission  in  that  quarter,  and  thus  one  of  the  avenues
by  which  he  was

“  To  climb  the  steep  ascent  that  leads  to  fame’s  proud  temple,”

would  have  been  closed.

He  says  :  “  I  require  no  other  proofs  of  its  existence  than
are  deemed  essential  in  every  other  department  of  natural
science  ;  but  while  these  are  denied  me,  it  is  no  fault  of  mine
that  I  remain  a  sceptic.”  Who  denies  him  the  proofs  ?  Is
not  nature  free  to  him  ?  Can  he  not  work  out  a  course  of
experiments  for  himself?  Why  go  to  see  the  cases  of  other
men  ?  Why  not  obtain  a  case  for  himself  ?  Such  conduct
is  disgraceful.  Apply  his  argument  to  the  common  affairs  of
life — to  a  discovery  in  his  own  profession,  for  instance.  A
medical  man  in  India  discovers  that  a  certain  medicine  given
in  a  certain  manner,  and  in  a  peculiar  combination,  produces
beneficial  and  extraordinary  effects  in  a  peculiar  disease  ; —
Dr.  Forbes  does  not  try  it ;  he  does  not  investigate  the  mat¬
ter.  Oh  !  no,  he  exclaims,  “  If  he  will  not  come  home  from


390


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


India  and  show  me  how  to  use  it,  it  is  no  fault  of  mine  that  I
remain  a  sceptic /”  In  the  course  he  has  thought  proper  to
follow  we  discover  the  proceedings  of  the  professional  trick¬
ster,  and  not  the  endeavours  of  a  scentific  man  to  enlighten
his  own  profession.  We  see  a  manifestation  of  secretiveness,
an  impulse  which  the  members  of  a  liberal  profession  should
endeavour  to  suppress  when  engaged  in  the  investigation  of  a
subject  said  to  be,  and  which  we  say  is,  of  the  greatest  im¬
portance.

We  are  advocates  for  the  adoption  of  great  prudence  be¬
fore  a  man  gives  his  opinion  regarding  a  disputed  point,
and  Dr.  Forbes  may  consider  that  he  has  been  particularly
“  canny,”  but  we  warn  him,  for  we  have  no  hesitation  in
saying  that  he  will  live  to  regret  the  use  of  the  language  in
regard  to  Alexis,  and  if  he  has  the  feelings  of  a  gentleman
he  will  be  too  glad  to  retract  it.

But  how  is  it  that  Dr.  Forbes  should  be  the  only  one  to
detect  the  legerdemain  of  Alexis  ?  How  is  it  that  amongst
the  hundreds  that  have  seen  him,  the  convicted  “  false  pro¬
phet”  should  be  the  only  man  who  could  detect  such  glaring
deception?  How  is  it  that  the  physician  who,  in  1839,  de¬
clared  that  the  whole  affair  was  nonsense, — “  that  from  the
first  dawn  of  these  diverting  but  degrading  scenes  to  the  last,”
he  had  expressed  “  his  hearty,  entire,  and  unconcealed  disbe¬
lief”  of  the  phenomena, — how  is  it,  we  say,  that  five  years
after,  this  self-same  physician  should  stealthily  creep  out  and
attend  one  of  these  “  diverting  but  degrading  scenes  ?”  What
can  have  been  the  motive  power  that  caused  this  “  dreaming
physician”  to  move?  What  ?  We  could  give  a  guess,  and  we
could  depict  the  motive  by  the  use  of  a  very  expressive  word,
but  we  will  merely  suggest  a  query.  Can  fees  have  anything
to  do  with  it  ?  The  editor  of  the  Lancet  told  the  thousand  sons
of  Esculapius  in  Modern  Babylon  not  to  meet  Dr.  Elliotson  in
consultation,  and  the  poor  things  obeyed  the  orders  of  their
master.  Dr.  Forbes  “  presents  his  compliments”  to  the  same
authority,  tells  him  he  has  proved  Alexis  to  be  an  impostor,
and  thus  insinuates  in  the  most  quiet  manner  that  the  editor
of  the  Lancet  will  perhaps  tell  the  medical  men  to  reward
him  for  the  labour  bestowed,  and  the  acumen  !  displayed  on
the  late  memorable  occasion.  A  physician  to  royalty  allied
with  the  coroner  for  Middlesex,  for  the  express  purpose  of
retarding  the  reception  of  a  great  truth,  is  a  subject  to  which
we  cannot  do  justice,  without  condescending  to  use  language
with  which  we  should  be  sorry  to  blot  the  pages  of  our  journal.

But  Dr.  Forbes  shall  speak  for  himself,  and  so  shall  M.
Mareillet.  We  wish  our  readers  to  understand  that  the  letter


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


397


of  the  latter  gentleman  in  the  Medical  Times  has  never  been
answered  !

Dr.  Forbes  says :

“  A  gentleman  (I  believe  Colonel  Gurwood)  presented  to  him
something  very  loosely  wrapped  in  paper.  He  felt  it,  and  said  it
was  a  box  (boite).  He  then  himself  removed  the  paper,  and  laid
the  apparent  box  (a  small  octagonal  body,  with  gilt  top)  down  on
the  table.  He  was  then  asked  what  it  contained,  he  said,  “  Some
characters  in  writing.”  While  he  was  saying  this  (or  previously,  I
don’t  now  recollect  which),  he  had  perfect  opportunity ,  as  the  object
lay  before  him,  and  was  touched  by  him,  and  was  constantly  looked
at  by  him — I  say,  he  had  a  perfect  opportunity  of  opening  the  book
(for  such  it  was),  so  that  he  might  see  the  characters  within  it.  I
cannot  say  positively  that  he  did  open  it;  but  anybody,  not  a  juggler,
might  have  done  so  unobserved.  He  then  announced  that  it  was
some  writing  in  characters  he  did  not  understand.  The  book  proved
to  be  a  copy  of  the  Koran,  in  Arabic.  This  experiment  was  clearly
a  failure;  first,  because,  while  covered ,  he  declared  the  book  to  be  a
box  ;  and,  second,  when  the  paper  was  removed,  there  was —  to  say
the  least — no  impossibility  of  seeing  the  contents  in  the  natural  way.”

To  this  M.  Marcillet  returns  the  following  answer  :

“  The  only  question  of  great  importance  here,  is,  whether  there
was  this  f  perfect  opportunity.’  Alexis  was  watched  by  several  per¬
sons.  Dr.  Forbes,  with  his  eyes,  his  spectacles,  and  his  prejudices,
was  watching:  the  book,  or  box,  was  obvious:  the  youth  was  under
every  one’s  eyes:  how  then  could  there  have  been  a  ‘ perfect  oppor¬
tunity  ?’  And  if  there  could  have  been  a  ‘  perfect  opportunity’ —
how  could  it  have  been  made  use  of  without  observation  ?  And  if
made  use  of,  how  happens  it  that  neither  Dr.  Forbes,  nor  anybody
present,  witnessed  it?  These  are  plain,  common  sense  questions;
and,  if  not  answered  satisfactorily,  it  follows  that  Dr.  Forbes  is  so
‘  philosophic ’  in  his  judgment  about  clairvoyance,  that  he  asks  people
to  give  up  their  common  sense  (he  can’t  give  up  his  own)  rather
than  believe  it.  But,  Sir,  the  statement  is  not  wholly  true,  as  Co¬
lonel  Gurwood  (no  worse  in  judgment,  surely,  than  the  Doctor)  will
prove.  The  MS.,  in  truth,  from  the  peculiarity  of  its  covering,
might  strictly  be  said  to  be  in  a  box;  and  Alexis,  in  the  eyes  of  all,
and  without  any  opening  (a  thing  obvious  enough  if  done),  declared
that  it  was  a  curious  kind  of  book — not  in  English  or  French,  but
f  Arabic — and  in  gold  letters ;  and  Colonel  Gurwood,  an  old  sol¬
dier,  of  no  mean  literary  ability  or  shrewdness,  declared  that  the
description  was  correct  to  the  letter.  The  book,  he  added,  had  just
been  presented  him  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington.”

Again,  Dr.  Forbes  reports  the  following  experiment :

“  A  lady  (evidently  a  strong  believer,  and  very  friendly  to  Alexis)
put  herself  in  rapport  with  him,  and  produced  a  large  box,  like  an
overgrown  book,  card-case,  or  a  case  for  holding  a  small  prayer-


398


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


book,  (opening  like  a  card-case  in  the  middle.)  He  took  it  in  his
hands  and  felt  it,  and  turned  it  about.  He  was  asked  what  it  con¬
tained;  he  said,  after  a  brief  pause,  something  gilded  (dor6),  and
then  said,  a  watch  (montre),  and  added,  that,  ‘  what  was  curious,
the  glass  was  broken/  The  lady  was  surprised  at  this,  and  said  it
was  not  broken  when  she  gave  it  him.  On  opening  the  box  by
drawing  off  the  top,  sure  enough  there  was  a  watch  on  one  side,
with  the  glass  next  the  outside ,  and  the  glass  was  broken!  Nothing
could  be  clearer  than  that  he  might  have  broken  the  glass  through
the  yielding  case,  or  felt  the  broken  glass,  or  heard  or  felt  the  watch
tick,  and  thus  come  at  once  to  know  that  it  was  a  watch,  and  a  watch
with  a  broken  glass!  I  believe  this  was  the  fact,  but,  at  any  rate,
it  must  be  admitted  that  such  a  clear-seeing  as  this  might  have  been
accomplished  by  anybody,  and  therefore  the  experiment  goes  for
nothing/’

But  now  for  his  honesty  and  his  great  discrimination.
M.  Marcillet  says :

“  Now,  first,  as  Dr.  Forbes  elsewhere  insinuates  that  this  lady
with  others  formed  a  band  of  confederates,  I  may  briefly  say,  that
she  was  an  English  lady  of  title,  and  that  another  lady,  declared  by
Dr.  Forbes  to  be  a  French  lady,  and  insinuated  to  be  another  confe¬
derate,  was  equally  a  native  of  England,  and  perfectly  a  stranger  to
me.  The  Countess,  for  such  she  was,  presented  a  stout  case,  like
a  large  octavo  volume,  and  the  watch  was  exceedingly  small — was
not  going,  and  was  covered  with  cards.  It  was  under  these  circum¬
stances,  that  first,  it  was  declared  to  be  gold — then  a  watch,  and
then  to  have  its  glass  slightly  cracked  (fele )y  not  broken.  To  the
surprise  of  the  lady,  on  closely  examining  the  watch  that  had  been
so  carefully  hidden,  an  almost  imperceptible  crack  or  scratch  could
be  discovered.  And  this,  says  this  clairvoyant  doctor,  was  ‘the
clear-seeing  that  might  have  been  accomplished  by  anybody.’  ”

We  must  give  one  more  of  Dr.  Forbes’  experiments :

“  At  length,  after  many  attempts,  I  succeeded  in  getting  a  lady
(a  friend  of  Alexis,  and  favoured  by  him)  to  take  one  of  my  boxes 3
and  put  him  to  the  test  in  my  own  way.  She  was  put  en  rapport
with  him,  but  he  would  not  attempt  to  read  the  word  written  within
upon  finding  that  she  did  not  know  what  it  was.  She  then  went  to
one  side  of  the  room  to  examine  the  word,  and  I  just  arrived  near
her  in  time  to  see  her  take  from  the  box  the  word,  and  look  at  it,
surrounded  by  many  of  the  company.  This  was  done  openly,  and
though  I  at  once  felt  that  this  circumstance  was  sufficient  to  vitiate
the  experiment,  as  it  was  quite  possible,  and  indeed,  extremely  pro¬
bable,  that  some  of  Alexis’s  friends  might  see  it  wholly  or  partially,
and  make  him  acquainted  with  it.  However,  I  begged  the  lady  to
allow  me  to  replace  the  word  in  such  a  manner  that  it  could  not
easily  be  seen,  even  if  the  top  of  the  box  (a  small  paper  wafer-box)
were  removed.  Well,  she  returned  to  Alexis,  and  gave  him  the
box.  He  looked  at  it  long,  and  at  last  said  inquisitively,  “  Un  mot


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


399


de  cinq  lettres  !”  then  seven,  then  eight,  and  at  last  Jive  again,
adding,  “  I  am  now  sure  it  is  five.”  I  begged  her  not  to  tell,  and
partly  succeeded,  though  it  was  obvious  she  was  desirous  of  helping
him  all  she  could.  At  last  he  said  that  the  word  ends  with  the
letters  ion,  and  tried  hard  to  get  the  lady  to  help  him  out  with  the
rest.  If  I  had  not  constantly  interfered,  I  saw  clearly  that  he  would
have  bothered  or  bamboozled  her  out  of  them.  He  then  wrote  on
a  paper  ion ,  then  tried  several  prefixes  to  suit,  and  at  last  seemed
to  settle  on  motion,  or  some  word  like  this,  but  one  certainly  ending
in  tion.  Two  o’clock  having  now  arrived,  I  was  obliged  to  depart
before  the  box  was  opened,  but  I  was  thoroughly  satisfied  that  some
one  of  his  friends  had  had  a  glimpse  of  my  word  (it  was  in  large
print),  and  had  told  this  to  him.  It  was,  however,  a  word  not  of
five,  or  six,  or  eight  letters,  but  one  of  ten ,  viz.,  *  Discussion .’  ”

And  now  for  the  answer.  M.  Marcillet  says  :

“The  facts  of  the  case  are  these.  Feeling  that  there  was  a
want  of  sympathy  between  Alexis  and  the  doctor — a  natural  repul¬
siveness,  which  no  practical  mesmerist  has  not  often  met  with — it
was  agreed,  on  both  sides,  that  the  English  Countess  should  be
placed  en  rapport  with  Alexis.  If  the  doctor  be  not  a  greater  fool
than  he  thinks  himself,  no  communication  could,  by  any  means,
have  been  made  to  Alexis,  and  he  certainly  watched  his  cherished
box  with  no  little  vigilance;  yet  the  youth  fixed  the  four  last  letters
( non — not  ion )  of  the  word  enclosed  in  the  box — no  very  ordinary
feat,  surely.  He  was  then  going  on  to  name  the  other  letters,  when
the  doctor,  having  had  too  much  of  it,  retreated  behind  the  front
bench  of  spectators;  u,  s,  followed,  and  now  the  doctor  beat  his
retreat;  the  whole  word  ( discussion*  was  then  given.  Now,  this
was  the  doctor’s  own  experiment;  it  was  most  decisive;  yet  he  had
not  the  courage,  or  good-will,  to  sit  it  out.”

It  is  unnecessary  to  review  the  whole  of  the  experiments,
for  we  consider  these  three  sufficient  to  prove  the  great  care
with  which  Dr.  Forbes  chronicles  facts  ; — the  great  candour
with  which  he  works  them  up  for  publication,  and  the  great
value  that  is  to  be  placed  on  the  results  of  his  anti-mesmeric
crusade.  The  result  of  his  investigations  is  exactly  what  we
should  have  predicted.  When  Alexis  is  successful,  Dr.  F.  is
constantly  suggesting  the  possibility  of  his  seeing  in  the  ordi¬
nary  way, — of  his  looking  sideways  into  books, — of  his  reading
books  in  an  ante-room,  before  the  experiments  commenced,  and
so  on.  But  the  question  is,  did  he  or  did  he  not  adopt  these
means  ?  It  is  perfectly  ridiculous,  after  suggesting  a  series  of
experiments,  and  when  some  are  successful,  to  declare  them
unsatisfactory.  The  fact  is  Dr.  Forbes  labours  under  a  na¬
tural  defect  which  prevents  him  from  becoming  an  acute
observer.  If  there  is  any  truth  in  cerebral  physiology,  we  will


400


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


hazard  the  assertion  that  Dr.  Forbes  experiences  great  diffi¬
culty  in  recognizing  his  patients,  and  the  greatest  difficulty
in  ascertaining  by  external  appearances  the  diseases  under
which  they  are  labouring.  We  feel  convinced  that  he  might
have  twenty  or  thirty  sick  in  the  wards  of  an  hospital,  and
that  it  would  be  a  work  of  very  great  labour  for  him  to  become
acquainted  with  the  history  of  each  case,  so  as  to  recall  it  and
attach  it  satisfactorily  to  the  individual  before  him,  at  his
daily  visit.  And  in  confirmation  of  our  opinion,  we  have
heard  it  stated  that  when  he  was  secretary  to  the  Mineralo-
gical  Society  of  Cornwall,  he  was  never  able  to  detect  the
different  characters  of  minerals,  and  that  he  has  frequently
referred  to  the  want  of  this  power,  as  being  a  great  peculiarity
in  his  character.

“  They  who  on  public  stage  uncalled  appear,

Must  take  the  fortune  of  the  theatre.”

Now,  surely,  Dr.  Forbes  is  not  the  individual  we  should
select  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  a  doubtful  and  intricate
physiological  question.  When  a  man  gratuitously  advances
liis  opinion,  and  proclaims  that  all  who  have  preceded  him
in  witnessing,  and  believing  in,  the  powers  of  Alexis,  are
enthusiasts  and  fools,  it  surely  becomes  us  to  enquire  into  the
power  possessed  by  the  individual  to  enable  him  to  come  to
such  a  sweeping  conclusion.  And  when  we  find  that  he  is
unfortunately,  by  nature,  incapacitated  from  becoming  an
acute  observer,  and  when  to  this  decided  want  of  qualifica¬
tion,  we  add  the  fact,  that  facts  have  not  been  recorded,  we
cannot  refrain  from  stating  that  the  two  papers  published  by
Dr.  Forbes  are  perfectly  valueless  in  a  scientific  point  of  view,
and  perfectly  harmless  as  regards  the  effect  they  will  have  on
intelligent  and  inquiring  men.

But  Dr.  F.  is  a  philosopher.  Who  will  dare  to  say  he  is
not  after  the  following  specimen  ?

“  In  concluding  these  hurried  notes,  I  think  it  right  to
state  that,  even  now,  I  only  avow  myself  a  sceptical  doubter
— not  an  utter  disbeliever,  as  to  mesmerism.  I  am  still  open
to  conviction  when  such  evidence  of  its  truth  is  afforded  me
as  is  deemed  necessary  in  any  other  scientific  inquiries.  The
things  I  have  myself  seen  most  assuredly  increase  very  mate¬
rially  the  doubts  before  entertained ;  still  I  do  not  regard
them  as  sufficient  to  prove  the  utter  falseness  of  mesmerism  :
they  prove  nothing  more  than  their  utter  insufficiency  to
prove  its  truth.  Even  the  positive  truth  of  trickery  and  col¬
lusion  on  the  part  of  its  professors,  however,  would  afford
no  sound  reason  for  declaring  it  to  be  false.  Like  medicine.


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


401


or  any  other  branch  of  natural  science,  it  may  be  true,
although  it  be  professed  and  practised  by  charlatans,  cheats,
and  rogues.  Give  me  the  same  kind  of  proof  of  clairvoyance
that  I  have  of  other  scientific  truths,  and  I  will  believe  it.”

Bravo  !  Dr.  Forbes.  By  and  bye  when  the  tide  turns,
and  you  publish  your  “  jesuitical  article ”  recommending  mes¬
merism  to  the  consideration  of  vour  brethren  in  a  future

t /

number  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Review ,  print  in  large
type  the  above  extract,  proclaim  with  editorial  trumpet  that
you  always  said  there  was  “  something”  in  it ; — that  although
you  said  Alexis  was  an  impostor,  you  were  not  “  an  utter  dis¬
believer ■,” — that  although  you  said  Marcillet  was  a  trickster
and  an  abettor  of  collusion,  you  had  “  no  sound  reason  for
declaring  it  to  be  false”  To  this  place  the  date,  July  11th,
1844.  But  do  not  forget  to  insert  the  following  extract  from
another  of  your  articles,  bearing  date  April  1st,  1839.

“  To  devote  an  article  to  the  consideration  of  animal
magnetism,  now  that  the  English  'practitioners  are  one  and  all
ashamed  of  its  name ,  would  be  a  work  of  supererogation,  if
the  delusion,  unabashed,  were  not  yet  parading  itself  over
some  parts  of  the  continent ;  and  if  its  return  to  these  shores,
and  to  our  own  hospitals  and  colleges,  at  any  future  period,
were  quite  out  of  the  question.  But  if  we  can  quicken  its
decline ,  where  it  now  reigns  in  the  hearts  of  nervous  prose¬
lytes  and  dreaming  physicians,  or,  can  assist  in  forming  a
barrier  against  a  probable  revisitation  of  it,  we  shall  not
think  the  otherwise  more  than  due  attention  we  have  given
to  the  wild  productions  which  treat  of  it,  entirely  thrown
away.”

Exactly  five  years  appear  to  be  required  to  enlighten  you
a  little  bit.  We  will  indulge  in  a  prophecy  : — you  will  move
a  little  faster  during  the  next  five  years  Dr.  Forbes.

E.  W.  C.  N.


We  subjoin  the  following  answer  to  Dr.  Forbes  by  an
eye-witness,  who  is  evidently  as  honest  as  he  is  sensible,  and
declares  himself  not  to  be  a  mesmeriser.  It  was  intended
for  the  Lancet ,  but  upon  second  thoughts  sent  to  the  Lei¬
cester  Journal,  which  had  printed  Dr.  Forbes’s  rubbish,  and
published  on  the  30th  of  August.

I  was  present  at  the  Seance  in  Mortimer-street;  I  followed
most  closely  the  experiments  there  performed,  and,  with  most  of
the  spectators,  I  came  to  a  very  different  conclusion  to  that  of  Dr.
Forbes.  He  may  be  more  clever  than  we  are  in  detecting  imposture;
let  it  be  so,  for  the  sake  of  hypothesis.  But  how  is  it  that  he  is  not


402


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


clever  enough  to  convince  us  of  our  error?  Because,  influenced  as
he  was  by  strong  prejudice,  and  a  full  determination  to  oppose
animal  magnetism,  against  which,  it  will  be  remembered,  he  had
previously  written,  he  misrepresented  almost  every  fact  that  took
place.  However,  granting  to  Dr.  Forbes  honesty  of  purpose,  in  the
hope  that  he  will  make  the  same  concession  to  us,  I  proceed  to  my
task.

Nos.  1  and  2  refer  to  the  tetanic  state  of  the  somnambulist.
Of  this  I  shall  take  no  particular  notice,  as  it  was  not  presented,
at  the  time ,  as  being  of  very  great  importance,  and,  consequently,
no  experiments  were  proposed  to  prove  the  insensibility  of  the
subject.

It  should,  however,  be  observed,  that  this  state  is  a  most
interesting  one  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  as  it  is  during  its  continuance
that  the  most  painful  operations  may  be  performed  without  the
patient’s  knowledge;  it  proves,  in  fact,  the  use  and  merit  of  mes¬
merism.

I  begin  in  earnest  with  No.  3.

“  He  seemed  to  play  readily  and  well,  winning  the  game,”  &c.
Why  not  have  said — He  played  readily,  &c.?  Because  Dr.  Forbes
thinks  there  was  a  “  possibility”  (Mark  this  expression,  if  you
please,  which  is  the  pivot  on  which  the  account  is  constantly  re¬
volving)  “  of  sight  being  exercised  in  the  ordinary  way.”  This  I
beg  to  deny.  Supposing,  as  he  is  represented  to  have  done,  that
Alexis  did  repeatedly  touch  and  shift  the  bandages,  still,  as  the
handkerchiefs  decidedly  remained  over  the  eyes,  he  could  not  have
seen  in  the  ordinary  way,  on  the  other  side  of  the  table.  Dr.
Forbes  should  have  candidly  stated  how  the  eyes  had  been  bandaged:

I  must  rectify  the  omission.  A  piece  of  wash-leather  was  gummed
over  each  eye,  a  handkerchief  being  bound  across  to  keep  it  firm ;
besides  which,  the  eyes  were  separately  covered  by  another  hand¬
kerchief  transversally  tied,  and  over  them  all,  a  fourth  one  was
made  fast;  and,  in  spite  of  all  these  precautionary  measures,  Alexis
played  readily,  and  won  every  game.  On  being  requested  to  find  a
given  card  from  a  pack  scattered  on  the  table,  with  the  figures  down,
he  repeatedly,  in  my  presence,  turned  at  once  the  required  one.  I
have  myself,  several  times,  taken  a  card  from  a  pack  bought  a
moment  before,  and  the  card  thus  taken,  has  been  instantly  named,
without  one  single  failure.

No.  3  concludes  by — “At  any  rate,  the  evident  (to  me)  possi¬
bility  of  sight  being  exercised  in  the  ordinary  way,  totally  vitiates
this  card  playing  as  an  experiment.”

I  have  proved  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  sight  when  Alexis
named  the  cards  with  the  figures  down,  told  those  in  his  adversary’s
hands  on  the  other  side  of  the  table,  and,  again,  those  which  I
myself,  and  others,  took  promiscuously  from  a  pack  just  bought;
and  I  am,  therefore,  entitled  to  say,  that  I  have  fairly  dislodged
Dr.  Forbes  from  his  third  position.  But,  before  I  allow  him  to  take
refuge  in  No.  4,  I  must  beg  of  him  to  remark,  that  he  had  assumed


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis .


403


this  pretended  strong  position  upon  the  mere  suspicion  of  a  possi¬
bility — not  a  shadow  of  detection  is  there.

In  answer  to  No.  4,  reading  in  a  book  through  a  certain  number
of  pages,  I  call  Dr.  F.’s  attention  to  the  fact  that  Alexis,  on  that
occasion,  read  several  words  through  a  gentleman’s  hand  placed
over  the  page,  and  that  this  gentleman  was,  to  all  intents  and  pur¬
poses,  a  very  strong  unbeliever  and  opponent,  for  his  rude  behaviour
drew  forth  the  hisses  of  the  company.  If  I  am  not  much  mistaken.
Dr.  F.  was  close  to  him  at  the  time.  Why  does  he  leave  out  this
successful  experiment,  which  completely  confutes  the  notes  a.  b.
appended  to  No.  4,  in  which  he  says  that  “Alexis  hunted  over
many  pages,  and  was  satisfied  if  he  found  the  word  named  any¬
where,”  since,  in  the  experiment  I  mention,  he  could  not  turn  one
single  page,  as  he  was  required  to  read  through  the  hand  in  a  book
placed  at  once  before  him.

Here,  according  to  Dr.  F.  the  result  was  inconclusive;  but  he
does  not  say  that  it  was  conclusive  with  regard  to  the  supposed
imposture.  Still  no  detection.  Let  us,  then,  pass  to  No.  5.

“  The  next  set  of  experiments  referred  to  his  power  of  reading
words  wrapped  in  paper,  placed  in  a  box,  &c.”

Under  letter  a}  Dr.  F.  says — -“A  gentleman,  I  believe  Colonel
Gurwood” — (It  was,  in  fact,  Colonel  Gurwood  who  permitted  me  to
examine  the  book  presented  to  Alexis,  and  to  unfold  and  refold  the
paper  in  which  it  was  wrapped) — “presented  to  him  something  very
loosely  wrapped  in  paper.  Alexis,  after  having  at  first  said  it  was  a
box,  declared  it  to  be  a  book,  containing  some  writing  in  characters
he  could  not  understand.  The  book  proved  to  be  a  copy  of  the
Koran  in  Arabic.”  “And,”  adds  Dr.  F.,  “Alexis  had  a  perfect
opportunity  of  opening  the  book,  so  that  he  might  see  the  characters
within  it.  I  cannot  say  that  he  did  open  it,  but,”  &c.  &c.

Dr.  Aliquis  has  had  a  perfect  opportunity  of  killing  a  great
number  of  his  patients;  I  cannot  say  positively  that  he  did  kill  them,
but,  &c.

M.  Quidam,  a  gentleman  well  known  for  his  respectability  and
honesty,  had  lately  a  perfect  opportunity  of  stealing  some  objects  of
virtu  of  great  value;  I  cannot  say  positively  that  he  did  steal  them,
but,  &c.

Where  did  Dr.  F.  learn  this  kind  of  syllogism?  Surely  not  in
Locke’s  school?

M.  Marcillet,  who,  in  the  Medical  Times  of  July  27th,  passes  a
few  remarks,  perhaps  in  too  severe  a  style,  on  the  misrepresentations
contained  in  this  account,  says,  with  respect  to  this  perfect  oppor¬
tunity. —

See  this  already  quoted  at  p.  397,  supra , — “The  only  question,”  &c.

And  on  the  strength  of  this  perfect  opportunity.  Dr.  F.  would
condemn,  or  at  least  accuse,  a  man  of  having  picked  a  pocket — not
because  any  one  saw  him  guilty  of  the  act,  but  because  he  had  a
perfect  opportunity  of  so  doing  !

How  can  you,  doubters  and  unbelievers  of  mesmerism,  allow
your  sense  and  understanding  to  be  obscured  by  such  sophistical
reasoning?


404


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


No  detection  yet !

“b.  A  slip  of  folded  paper  was  given  him;  he  fairly  said,  after
many  attempts,  he  could  not  read  what  it  contained.”

“  c.  Another  paper,  (it  might  be  the  same,)  &c.;  he  returned
it  to  the  lady  that  it  might  be  unfolded,”  &c.

“  d.  One  of  these  packets,  (I  now  recollect  it  was  the  one
I  saw  opened  bv  the  lady,)”  &c.

h.  c.  d.  evidently  refer  to  one  and' the  same  paper,  which  Alexis
could  not  read.  Why  the  Doctor  wishes  to  make  it  appear  three
different  failures,  is  best  known  to  himself.  But,  as  it  is  not  pre¬
tended  that  Alexis  reads  every  word  that  is  presented  to  him,  I  need
not  insist  upon  this.

“  e.  A  lady  (evidently  a  strong  believer  and  very  friendly  to
Alexis)  produced  a  large  box,  like  a  case  for  holding  a  small  Prayer
Book.  Alexis  said  at  first  that  it  contained  something  gilded,  and
then  said  it  was  a  watch,  and  added,  that,  what  was  curious,  the
glass  was  broken,”  &c.

Dr.  Forbes  remarks  here,  that  “  Alexis  might  have  broken  the
glass  through  the  case,  or  felt  it,  or  heard  the  watch  tick,  (if  it  was
going,  which  he  cannot  assert.)”

I  positively  affirm  in  answer,  that  the  watch  was  not  going  at
the  time,  and  that  Alexis  did  not  say  that  the  glass  was  “  casse ,”
broken,  but  only  “fete?'  cracked.  On  closely  examining  the  watch,
a  very  small  crack  was  observed,  to  the  surprise  of  the  lady  herself,
who  was  not  aware  of  it.  This  lady,  whom  the  Doctor  wishes  to
represent  as  one  of  the  confederates,  was,  according  to  the  informa¬
tion  I  received,  a  young  countess,  a  native  of  England,  who  then
saw  Alexis  for  the  very  first  time.  To  accuse  her,  and  so  many
others,  of  ee  comperage,”  is  to  suppose,  either  that  M.  Marcillet
can  dispose  at  will  of  all  the  riches  of  Peru,  or  that  these  compeers
are  bought  at  a  very  cheap  rate  indeed;  for  their  number  is  increas¬
ing  every  day,  and  they  are  to  be  met  with  among  the  highest
classes  of  society  in  England  and  France.  And  I  pray  Dr.  Forbes
to  pay  particular  attention  to  this  remark:  not  one  of  them  has  yet
turned  against  the  briber  and  declared  the  imposture !

No  detection, — I  should  call  this,  on  the  contrary,  a  decided
success.

“f.  A  gentleman  came  forward  with  his  two  hands  closed,  and
requested  to  be  informed  what  they  contained.  Alexis  took  the
hands,  turned  them  round,  and  I  saw  him  distinctly  separate  them
a  little,”  &c.

At  last  we  have  something  which  Dr.  Forbes  positively  saw.
But  to  his  assertion,  I  might  answer  in  his  own  style,  that  as  there
is  a  possibility  of  his  having  been  mistaken,  he  did  mistake,  and
saw  nothing.  However,  not  to  forget  for  one  moment  the  temperate
tone  I  have  prescribed  to  myself  in  writing  this  letter,  I  shall  only
remark,  that  Alexis  must  have  used  some  pretty  considerable  force
to  succeed  in  opening  the  hands,  ever  so  little,  or  else,  that  the
gentleman  was  another  of  those  innumerable  confederates;  and  if
Alexis  used  force,  how  is  it  that  the  inquirer  did  not  immediately


Dr.  Forbes  and  Aleocis.


405


complain  of  it?  But  I  submit,  that  the  experiment  is  not  fairly
stated.  To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  it  proceeded  thus:  first,  Alexis
declared  the  colour  of  the  object  to  be  reddish,  which  it  was;  then,
he  said  it  might  be  a  pocket-book,  and  added,  that  there  was  some
printing  in  it,  with  a  word  of  five  letters  above  two  lines  in  smaller
characters.  On  this,  the  gentleman  said  that  there  was  nothing  in
print  or  writing  in  the  book.  Alexis  maintained  his  point,  and  the
gentleman  put  the  book  in  his  pocket,  expressing,  at  the  same  time,
some  kind  of  regret  at  the  mistake.  However,  on  some  of  the
company  requesting  him  to  look  inside,  he  found  in  it  one  of  his
visiting  cards,  which  circumstance  he  had  really  forgotten,  as  ap¬
peared  from  his  surprise  at  the  correctness  of  Alexis.  The  card
bore  effectively  the  name  of  this  gentleman,  printed  in  larger  letters
than  the  address,  which  was  underneath,  and  in  two  lines  as  de¬
scribed  by  Alexis.  The  success  of  this  experiment  elicited  a  burst
of  applause  from  the  company.  But  Dr.  Forbes,  passing  of  course
over  this  little  incident,  says  that  it  was  possibly  a  guess;  a  possi¬
bility  again — a  suspicion  expressed  about  a  fact  acknowledged  and
applauded  by  all  present.

“  g.  At  length,  I  succeeded  in  getting  a  lady  to  take  one  of  my
boxes,  and  put  him  to  the  test  in  my  own  way,”  &c. — “Two  o’clock
having  now  arrived,  I  was  obliged  to  depart  before  the  box  was
opened;  but  I  was  thoroughly  satisfied  that  some  one  of  his  friends
had  had  a  glimpse  of  my  word,  and  had  told  this  to  him.  It  was,
however,  a  word  not  of  five,  or  six,  or  eight  letters,  but  one  of  ten,
viz.,  discussion.”

I  beg  to  borrow  here  the  answer  of  M.  Marcillet  to  the  above
misstatement,  from  the  Medical  Times,  July  27.

See  this  quotation  at  p.  399,  supra, — “  The  facts  of  the
case,”  &c.

I  know  he  says,  that  he  had  an  engagement  that  obliged  him  to
depart  at  two;  but  the  engagement  was  not  very  pressing,  and  was
certainly  not  kept,  for  elsewhere  he  says,  “  that  his  very  long  nar¬
rative  was  written  immediately  after  the  meeting.”  Dr.  Forbes  him¬
self  writing  the  word  immediately  in  italics.

I  have  gone  through  every  paragraph  of  the  account,  and  we
shall  now  see  what  are  the  conclusions  drawn  by  Dr.  Forbes  from  all
these  possibilities.  I  find  them  summed  up  in  No.  7,  as  follows:  —

“  It  must  be  admitted,  that  this  exhibition  presents  extremely
strong  grounds  for  believing  that  the  pretended  power  in  Alexis  is
feigned,  and  that  he  is  consequently  an  impostor.”

Although  Dr.  Forbes  has  not  been  able,  in  one  single  instance,
to  detect  the  pretended  imposture,  and  has  no  other  “extremely
strong  grounds  for  believing  that  the  power  is  feigned,”  than  mere
possibilities,  yet  he  has  the  assurance  to  call  impostors,  cheats,  and
rogues,  (as  may  be  seen  in  the  concluding  part  of  his  paper,)  men
of  honour  and  respectability,  many  of  whom,  having  in  view  no
pecuniary  reward  whatever,  have  produced  the  very  same  phenomena
in  the  course  of  their  investigation  of  the  science  of  animal  mag¬
netism.  Well,  indeed,  may  M.  Marcillet  and  others  feel  indignant


406


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


at  the  ungenerous  treatment  they  receive  from  such  men  as  Dr.
Forbes,  and  well  may  a  writer  in  the  Phreno  Magnet  Vindicator  be
excused  for  giving  vent  to  his  feelings  in  the  following  strain:  —

“  Suspicion  always  haunts  the  guilty  mind.  Have  you  ever  seen
a  man  skulking  through  society,  imputing  bad  motives  to  every  one,
always  suspecting  others,  and  insinuating  his  whispered  slanders
against  them,  seeing  every  one  through  a  dark  and  selfish  medium,
be  sure  that  man  is  a  rascal.  Don’t  talk  to  us  of  his  superior  dis¬
cernment,  his  knowledge  of  the  world,  his  experience  in  character,
you  may  be  sure  he  is  none  of  these;  it  is,  that  he  thinks  he  sees
in  every  one  else  the  reflection  of  himself.  You  may  rest  assured
of  this,  you  never  knew  a  man  who  had  a  low  opinion  of  others,
who  professed  to  talk  of  the  badness  of  human  nature,  but  he  was
himself  destitute  of  those  generous  impulses  which  give  energy  and
beauty  to  character.”

Dr.  Forbes  may  there  see  how  easy  it  is  to  return  an  ill  compli¬
ment,  and  will,  perhaps,  after  having  read  the  above,  remain  well
convinced,  that  by  the  very  same  reason  that  the  preceding  “  tirade”
does  not  prove  all  those  who  suspect  others  of  acting  a  deceitful
part,  to  be  themselves  guilty  of  the  like  conduct;  so  Dr.  Forbes
does  not  prove  Mr.  M.,  Dr.  E.,  and  so  many  highly  respectable
and  talented  individuals  to  be  cheats,  rogues,  and  impostors,  on  the
mere  possibility  of  their  being  so.

I  am,  Sir,  yours,  &c.

Such,  Sir,  is  the  letter  I  intended  to  address  to  the  editor  of
the  Lancet.  I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  allowing  me  to  present
it,  with  all  its  imperfections,  to  the  readers  of  the  Journal.

Permit  me  to  trespass  a  few  moments  longer  on  your  time,  to
add  a  word  or  two  respecting  M.  Marcillet’s  departure  from  London.
It  has  been  stated,  that  he  left  suddenly,  in  consequence  of  the
failure  of  the  experiments  in  Mortimer  Street.  In  answer  to  this
charge,  I  will  relate  the  substance  of  a  conversation  which  took
place  between  us  a  fortnight  before  the  Seance  in  Mortimer  Street.
On  my  requesting  M.  Marcillet  to  visit  this  town,  he  replied,  that
it  was  not  his  intention  to  go  into  the  provinces  this  summer;  that
he  should  return  to  France  in  two  or  three  weeks,  as  his  business
there  would  require  his  presence.  However,  on  my  pressing  him
to  come  to  Leicester,  he  consented  to  make  it  an  exception,  provided
I  could  secure  an  audience  for  him.  Unfortunately,  the  two  or
three  weeks  fixed  by  him,  had  elapsed  before  my  answer  could  be
ready,  and  he  left  London  at  the  time  he  had  intended.  The  pre¬
cipitate  flight  of  M.  Marcillet  is  then,  in  my  opinion,  only  one
more  of  the  Doctor’s  possibilities.


The  Critic,  an  able  and  honest  literary  periodical,  which
appears  every  other  Saturday,  and  should  be  taken  in  by  all
friends  of  mesmerism  on  account  of  the  talent  and  zeal  with


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


407


which  it  regularly  supports  the  science,  has  the  following
account  in  its  number  for  August  the  15th  : —

1 .  Dr.  Forbes  first  admits  the  extraordinary  rigidity  of  the  mus¬
cles.  But,  he  adds,  that  anybody  could  do  this  with  practice.  Has
he  tried?  If  not,  is  it  fair  to  meet  a  fact  by  a  bare  assertion?

2.  He  admits  that  Alexis  ‘‘played  an  ecarte  with  his  eyes  ban¬
daged.  He  seemed  to  play  readily  and  well,  winning  the  game.
He  also  told  the  cards,  at  times,  in  the  partners’  hands;  but  he  also
repeatedly  failed,  and  made  glaring  mistakes  in  his  guesses.”

These  are  the  doctor’s  very  words.  Would  not  these  admissions
seem  to  establish  the  facts  lie  denies?  And  how  does  he  answer
them?  By  the  shabby  evasion  of  expressing  a  doubt  whether  he
could  not  see  under  the  bandages.  If  he  thought  thus,  why  did  not
Dr.  Forbes,  as  he  was  in  duty  bound  to  do,  examine  the  bandage
and  satisfy  himself.  Or  why,  before  he  thus  tried  to  answer  a  fact
by  a  conjecture,  did  he  not  tie  a  similar  bandage  over  his  own  eyes
and  try  if  he  could  play  cards  with  rapidity  and  win  the  game,  and
tell  the  cards  in  his  adversary’s  hands?  Then,  and  not  till  then,
would  Dr.  Forbes  have  been  justified  in  saying  that  thus  the  wonder
was  performed.

He  omits  altogether  the  fact  that  Alexis  named  the  cards  with
equal  readiness,  though  a  book  was  placed  as  a  screen  between  him¬
self  and  his  opponent,  and  that  he  played  his  own  cards  correctly  as
they  lay  upon  the  table  with  their  backs  upwards.

4.  The  next  experiment  was  reading  in  a  book  through  a  certain
number  of  pages.  Dr.  Forbes  does  not  assert  that  this  was  not  done
by  Alexis,  he  only  says  vaguely  that  the  result  was  altogether  incon¬
clusive.  1st,  because  the  words  were  not  always  immediately  below
the  point;  and,  2nd,  that  he  turned  over  the  leaves  before  the
question  was  asked,  and  could  have  seen  sideways.

Now  what  wretched  trifling  is  this.  Again,  the  best  test  would
be  a  trial  by  Dr.  Forbes  himself.  Let  him  turn  twenty  leaves  as
slowly  as  he  pleases,  and  not  sideways,  but  opened  flat  before  him,
and  then  let  a  spectator  point  to  any  spot,  and  we  would  wager  fifty
to  one  that  the  doctor  would  not  name  the  words  under  that  spot
once  in  a  hundred  times.

5.  He  details  various  experiments  referring  to  the  power  of  reading
words  wrapped  up  in  paper,  in  boxes,  &c.

Colonel  Gurwood  produced  a  parcel;  Alexis  said  it  was  a  box.
But  it  was  a  book.  On  being  asked  what  it  contained,  he  said  some
characters  in  writing.  Dr.  Forbes  says  he  may  have  seen  this.  But
here  again  is  an  attempt  to  answer  a  fact  by  a  conjecture.  That  he
answered 'rightly  is  certain;  that  he  peeped  is  a  vague  assertion  of  a
mere  possibility.  We  ask  if  this  be  a  philosophical  mode  of  inves¬
tigation.

A  folded  paper  he  did  not  read,  and  he  offered  to  prick  the  dot
of  the  i  of  one  which  contained  no  such  letter.  But  these  occasional
failures  give  the  best  assurance  of  the  reality  of  those  which  suc¬
ceeded.  Had  there  been  imposture  or  collusion,  there  would  have
VOL.  II.  E  E


♦


408


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


been  no  such  failure,  for  he  could  have  accomplished  these  expe¬
riments  as  easily  as  the  others.

The  next  experiment  exhibits  the  doctor’s  unfairness  most
glaringly.  A  lady  produced  a  box,  and  asked  Alexis  what  it  con¬
tained.  He  first  said  something  gilded;  then  that  it  was  a  watch,
with  the  glass  broken.  The  lady  said  that  could  not  be,  for  it  was
not  broken  when  she  put  it  in.  On  opening  the  box,  the  glass  was
found  to  be  as  Alexis  had  said.  Dr.  Forbes  explains  this  by  con¬
jecturing  that  Alexis  must  have  broken  the  glass  himself!  !

A  gentleman  then  put  a  red  morocco  pocket-book  between  his
two  hands.  Alexis  told  him  it  was  a  small  thing,  reddish,  with
white  inside,  that  he  so  held.  Cards  were  in  it.  The  doctor  admits
there  was  some  “  small  success”  in  this,  but  that  it  was  “  possibly
a  guess.”  Again  a  possibility  set  up  against  a  fact.

Dr.  Forbes  then  tried  a  box  he  had  himself  brought.  He  admits
that  Alexis  told  him  there  was  in  it  a  word  that  ended  in  ion;  but
he  was  unable  to  make  out  the  rest.  The  word  was  “  discussion.”
But  before  this  is  pronounced  a  failure  it  is  necessary  to  know
whether  the  word  was  so  plainly  written  that  a  foreigner  would  be
likely  to  distinguish  the  spelling,  and  it  is  to  be  remembered  that,
whatever  the  modus  operand! ,  certain  it  is  that  the  perceptions  of
objects  invisible  to  the  eye  in  its  ordinary  state  are  dim  in  proportion
to  the  density  of  the  media  through  which  they  are  seen.  Hence
the  hesitations  and  occasional  mistakes  of  the  patient.

But  the  doctor  concludes  this  report  with  a  candid  remark,  that
“even  now  I  only  avow  myself  a  sceptic  or  doubter,  not  an  utter
disbeliever — as  to  mesmerism.”  This  is  all  that  can  be  required  of
anybody.  A  minute  report  is  added  in  the  Lancet  of  a  second
exhibition.  On  this  occasion,  Alexis  was  not  blind-folded.  A  large
music-book  was  placed  between  him  and  his  adversary  at  6carte,  and
this  is  the  doctor’s  report  of  the  results:  —

“  First  Game. — Alexis  made  a  mistake  in  commencing  the  first  hand,  by
desiring  his  opponent  to  play  a  spade,  and  he  stated  that  his  opponent  had
four  trumps  in  his  hand,  when  he  had  not  one.  In  the  second  hand,  Alexis
said  that  his  opponent  had  the  ten ,  which  he  had  not;  but  he  stated,  also,
that  he  had  two  trumps,  which  was  correct;  and  also  that  he  had  the  seven,
which  again  was  correct.  In  the  third  hand  he  was  again  mistaken  with
regard  to  the  trump  card,  which  he  said  was  a  diamond,  when  it  was  a  spade ;
but  although  he  was  wrong  in  regard  to  the  trumps,  the  cards  afterwards  fell
as  he  had  previously  said  they  would  fall.  In  the  next  hand  the  trump
turned  up  he  said  was  a  heart  when  it  was  a  spade.  He  then  asked  for  Jive
cards,  when  he  only  required  three.  In  the  next  hand  Alexis  was  correct
in  statements  four  times,  but  was  wrong  in  three.

“  Second  Game. — In  commencing  the  next  game,  Alexis  was  mistaken  in
the  trump,  and  also  in  the  number  of  cards  wanted  ;  and,  on  the  whole  hand,
he  was  twice  correct  and  twice  in  error.  In  the  second  hand  the  cards  wrere
played  with  their  faces  downwards,  when  Alexis  was  again  mistaken  in  the
trump.  In  the  third  hand  he  was  mistaken  in  the  number  of  cards  wanted,
and  he  stated  he  had  played  a  red  card  when  he  had  played  a  black  one.  He
now  threw  up  his  hand  on  the  supposition  that  his  opponent  had  the  best
cards,  when,  in  fact,  he  himself  had  the  means  of  winning  the  game,  having
the  odd  trick  in  his  own  hand.”

Again,  we  say,  that  no  guessing  could  accomplish  this.  Let  any


Dr.  Forbes  and  Alexis.


409


person  who  questions  it  try  if  by  mere  guess  lie  would  be  as  often
right  as  Alexis  was  admitted  to  be.  The  mistakes  are  obviously
those  which  would  be  made  by  a  person  who  perceived  imperfectly ,
not  by  a  mere  guesser  at  truth.

On  this  occasion  many  experiments  were  tried  upon  the  alleged
power  of  naming  words  in  books  at  a  point  touched.  Some  of
these  failed;  but  others  succeeded,  and  one  of  them  in  a  remarkable
manner.

On  this  occasion  he  failed  also  to  read  some  papers  inclosed  in
boxes.

But  these  are  no  proofs  of  a  fraud.  All  who  have  seen  mes¬
merism  are  aware  that  its  powers  vary  vastly,  not  only  at  different
seasons,  but  almost  from  moment  to  moment,  and  the  perceptions
are  sometimes  as  dull  as  they  are  at  other  times  acute.  Enough  of
its  rationale  is  not  known  to  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  conditions
under  which  it  operates,  and  therefore  to  judge  it  fairly.  Any
number  of  failures  do  not  affect  its  truth,  provided  any  one  of  its
phenomena  be  real,  and  it  is  by  what  it  does,  and  not  by  what  it
fails  to  do,  that  the  science,  if  we  may  so  term  it,  is  to  be  tried.
Dr.  Forbes  fairly  admits  this  in  his  concluding  comments.

“  In  several  cases,  both  on  the  present  and  former  occasions,  his  guesses
(if  such  they  were),  even  when  not  correct,  came  curiously  near  the  truth, —
as,  for  instance,  when  he  named  the  exact  number  of  letters  in  the  word  in
the  envelope.  The  failures  and  blunders,  however,  were  so  egregious,  and
so  unaccountable,  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  existence  of  a  through-seeing
faculty,  that  they  must  stagger  the  most  credulous  when  fairly  examined.
Still,  as  was  observed  on  the  former  occasion,  the  results  being  only  negative,
prove  nothing  more  than  that  nothing  was  proved.  It  only  remains  for  the
mesmerists  to  adduce  one  or  two  positive  unequivocal  proofs,  to  put  aside  all
our  negative  ones.  Such  proof  however,  is,  I  believe,  yet  to  be  exhibited  ;
and  until  it  is  exhibited  unequivocally, — that  is,  under  similar  guards  and
precautions  as  the  failures  now  recorded  took  place, — I,  for  one,  must  still
remain  a  doubter  at  the  very  least.”

The  number  of  the  Lancet  containing  Dr.  Forbes’s  at¬
tack  was  advertized  in  all  the  papers  as  distinguished  for
this  article,  and  the  editor  boldly  told  the  world  it  was  “  a
complete  exposure  of  M.  M.  Marcillet  and  Alexis,”  and  that
their  two  exhibitions  which  it  reported  had  put  them  to  flight.

This  was  perfect  untruth.  The  youth  was  overworked  by
M.  Marcillet,  and  his  health  so  impaired  that  he  was  losing
his  clairvoyance,  and  there  was  no  chance  for  him  unless
taken  back  to  France  without  delay.

If  Dr.  Forbes  had  no  share  in  this  false  announcement,
it  would  have  been  to  his  credit  to  tell  the  world  as  soon  as
he  saw  it,  either  that  there  was  no  truth  in  it  or  that  he
had  no  share  in  it.  For  his  comfort,  and  that  of  his  allies,
we  have  the  pleasure  to  inform  Dr.  Forbes,  that  Alexis  will
be  here  again  in  the  spring.


E  E


(  410  )


Postscript  by  Dr.  Elliotson  to  the  Account  of  the  late  Amputa¬
tion  at  Leicester ,  described  at  p.  390.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Conduit  Street,  Sept.  18.

Sir, — Since  I  sent  you  tlie  account  of  the  amputation
lately  performed  in  the  mesmeric  state,  two  of  the  medical
eye-witnesses  have  endeavoured  to  throw  doubts  upon  the
reality  of  the  mesmeric  insensibility.

Dr.  Shaw  has  published  a  letter,  stating  that  the  poor
girl  “  exhibited  strong  marks  of  sensibility  to  pain  during
the  operation ;  in  fact,”  he  continues,  “  I  do  not  consider
that  it  was  borne  with  more  fortitude  than  is  frequently  dis¬
played  under  equally  trying  circumstances  and  without  any
adventitious  aid.  At  the  same  time  it  is  only  justice  to  say,
that  the  eyes  wrere  closed  during  the  whole  time,  and  the
features  scarcely  disturbed ;  and  we  have  the  solemn  assur¬
ance  of  the  girl  that  she  felt  no  pain  during  the  operation —
no  suffering  during  the  last  half-hour.”

Now  as  the  girl  said  she  felt  nothing,  I  ask  why  is  she
not  to  be  believed  ?  Every  virtue  shines  as  strongly  in  the
humble  as  in  the  rich.  I  have  always  found  the  same  gene¬
ral  amount  of  truth,  and  of  integrity,  and  of  charity,  in
the  humble  classes  as  in  the  middling  and  the  higher.  I
would  believe  this  poor  afflicted  young  creature  as  implicitly
as  a  peeress.  And  what  object  could  she  have  to  deceive  ?
As  she  declared  she  felt  nothing,  she  deserved  and  coveted
no  praise.  If  she  had  acknowledged  suffering,  but  made
light  of  it,  it  might  have  been  contended  that  she  told  an
untruth  from  vanity.  But  with  perfect  simplicity  she  said
she  had  felt  nothing.  In  my  pamphlet,*  I  remarked  that
the  poor  countryman  whose  leg  was  amputated  in  Notting¬
hamshire  “made  no  boast  that  the  pain  had  been  nothing
— a  very  trifle  to  bear ;  but  declared  he  had  felt  no  pain  at
all,  for  he  had  not  known  that  the  operation  was  performing.”
(p.  18.)  Yet  his  exposed  and  cut  sciatic  nerve  had  been  poked
with  the  points  of  a  forceps ;  and  up  to  the  moment  of  the
mesmeric  state  he  had  shown  himself  a  very  bad  hand  at
bearing  pain.

Dr.  Shaw  gives  no  reason  for  our  believing  that  the  poor
girl  exerted  a  strong  resolution.  When  pain  is  felt  and
braved,  some  sign  of  determination  must  always  be  notic-

*  Numerous  Cases  of  Surgical  Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric
State.  Bailliere,  219,  Regent  Street.


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.


411


able.  The  signs  of  indifference, — of  insensibility,  to  pain  are
passiveness;  the  signs  of  fortitude  during  pain  are  those  of
an  effort.  I  beg  to  quote  my  pamphlet  again  (p.  15).

“  Another  young  surgeon,  named  Alcock,  followed  in  the  same  line  of
argument;  not  thinking  that  the  absence  of  pain  ever  admitted  of  evidence,
and  discrediting  the  reality  of  the  case  because  he  had  often  seen  persons
in  an  ordinary  state  bear  severe  operations  without  manifesting  the  slightest
pain.  Now  I  do  not  believe  it.  No  doubt  Mr.  Alcock  thinks  he  witnessed
such  self-command ;  but  I  do  not  believe  he  observed  with  sufficient  mi¬
nuteness.  I,  during  a  period  equal  to  three  years,  while  a  student  at  the
two  hospitals  of  St.  Thomas  and  Guy,  saw  a  very  large  number  of  operations,
as  these  were  both  great  establishments  and  close  to  the  river  and  in  a  very
crowded  district,  as  operations  were  then  far  more  frequently  resorted  to
than  at  present,  and  as  Sir  Astley  Cooper  was  surgeon  to  one  of  them  and
his  glory  was  to  operate,  and  I  do  not  know  that  I  was  absent  from  a  single
operation.  Yet  I  never  witnessed  such  a  prodigy  as  apparent  total  indiffer¬
ence  to  pain.  I  recollect  a  sailor  astonishing  Sir  Astley  Cooper  by  not
uttering  the  faintest  sound  while  his  leg  was  taken  off :  but  the  man  folded
his  arms  firmly  together  and  his  lips  were  firmly  compressed.  No  one  will
doubt  the  high  courage  of  the  Marquess  of  Anglesey.  While  his  leg  was
amputated  he  uttered  not  a  sound.  A  bystander  might  have  supposed  that
he  felt  no  pain.  But  the  brother  officer,  whose  hand  he  held  all  the  time,
told  a  clergyman,  a  friend  of  mine,  that  he  never  had  such  a  squeeze  in  his
life.  Some  who  have  uttered  no  sound  have  held  their  own  thigh  during  an
amputation  of  the  leg  :  but  then  they  could  give  silent  vent  to  their  suffer¬
ings  by  squeezing  the  limb.  Some,  when  under  the  surgeon’s  hand,  keep
their  jaws  or  lips  firmly  closed,  some  sing,  whistle,  chatter,  laugh,  or
smoke,  all  the  time,  and  thus  find  relief.  I  knew  an  old  clergyman  who
had  senile  gangrene  of  a  toe,  to  which  Sir  Astley  Cooper  frequently  applied
nitric  acid,  and  he  told  me  that,  not  liking  to  cry  out  and  not  being  able  to
swear,  he  always  relieved  himself  in  his  agony  by  spouting  a  sentence  of
the  Philippics, —  a  av$f£$  ’ A9yivouoi,  &c.  Savages,  criminals,  and  martyrs
in  different  causes,  have  in  all  ages  borne  torture  bravely,  defying  pain.
But  then  they  have  laughed,  prayed,  sung,  talked,  or  performed  some  other
muscular  motion  :  or,  although  silent  and  still,  would,  I  have  no  doubt,
betrayed  to  a  good  observer  some  sign  of  suffering  or  determination  in  their
breathing,  lips,  closed  jaws,  or  fixed  look, — in  acting  strongly  with  some
part  of  their  body.  If  a  man  has  held  his  hand  in  the  fire,  he  has  held  it
firmly.  Dr.  Barnes,  of  Tavis-tock  Place,  who  was  acting  surgeon  at  Mac¬
quarie  Harbour  during  1826  and  1827,  for  nineteen  months,  informs  me  that
he  saw  in  all  17,000  lashes  given  in  that  penal  settlement.  The  whip  had  a
wooden  handle  a  foot  in  length,  and  nine  lashes,  each  composed  of  two
layers  of  whip-cord  about  a  yard  and  a  quarter  long,  with  nine  post-boy’s
knots  towards  the  end,  and  about  two  inches  apart;  the  extreme  point  of
each  lash  was  made  firm  with  waxed  thread.  The  culprit  was  bound  arms
and  legs  to  a  post,  and  the  number  of  each  stroke  called  out  by  the  chief
constable  before  the  lash  fell,  and  about  three  per  minute  were  given,  so
that  a  hundred  lashes  occupied  a  considerable  time.  Dr.  Barnes  assures
me  of  what  every  rational  man  would  anticipate, — that  no  good  ever  resulted
from  these  disgusting,  disgraceful  barbarities.  The  spirit  of  the  tortured
person  was  broken,  and  he  was  rendered  reckless  for  ever.  As  it  is  a  point
of  reputation  with  the  convicts  to  appear  to  despise  the  torture,  and  numbers
of  them  are  the  most  daring,  determined,  and  courageous  of  men,  he  con¬
tinually  witnessed  the  absence  of  all  exclamation  :  but  in  every  instance
something  was  noticeable  which  disclosed  suffering  or  determination, — the
shoulders  were  generally  kept  raised,  showing  the  strong  action  of  the  sur¬
rounding  muscles, — or  perhaps  a  bullet  in  the  mouth  was  found  afterwards
flattened  out  to  the  thinness  of  a  wafer  by  the  action  of  the  jaw.

“  In  an  account  which  Dr.  Barnes  has  kindly  written  for  me  of  some  of


412


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.


these  cases,  he  remarks:  ‘  Although  those  men,  by  a  species  of  false  pride,
would  endeavour  to  shew  what  they  termed  a  manly  spirit,  and  bear  un¬
flinchingly  that  most  dreadful  torture,  without  calling  out  or  making  any
demonstration  of  bodily  suffering  by  the  writhing  of  the  trunk,  limbs,  or
muscles  of  the  countenance, — yet  in  every  instance  when  punishment  was
inflicted,  the  culprit  evidently  prepared  himself  to  bear  up  against  it,  by
placing  himself  in  a  particular  position  ;  for  instance,  the  hands  grasped
firmly  the  halberts,  the  back  was  curved  and  the  shoulders  were  raised,  the  chest
was  emptied  and  the  abdomen  was  drawn  inwards,  the  breathing  was  short  and
the  pulse  quickened .”


Dr.  Shaw  does  not  mention  a  single  sign  of  the  exertion
of  fortitude  on  the  part  of  the  patient.

If  medical  men  would  make  a  few  experiments  themselves,
they  would  soon  know  that  insensibility  to  mechanical  injury
is  one  of  the  most  common  and  elementary  effects  of  mes¬
merism.  They  know  that  this  condition  occurs  in  a  disease
under  the  name  of  anaesthesia ;  and  those  who  have  practised
mesmerism  know  that  this  state — this  anaesthesia — may  be
frequently  induced  artificially  by  the  processes  called  mes¬
meric.

Mr.  Paget,  a  surgeon,  has  also  sent  a  letter  to  the
same  Leicester  Chronicle ,  in  which  he  affirms  that  “  during
the  operation  there  was  considerable  groaning,  writhing,  and
an  approach  to  screaming and  that  but  for  her  assertion
that  she  had  felt  no  pain,  he  should  have  concluded  that  she
“  exerted  no  unusual  fortitude.”  Like  Dr.  Shaw,  however,
he  gives  no  sign  of  the  exertion  of  fortitude ;  and  as  to  the
groaning,  &c.,  we  happily  have  letters  in  both  the  Leicester
Chronicle  and  the  Leicestershire  Mercury  from  Mr.  Hollings
and  Mr.  Tosswill  which  throw  full  light  upon  the  truth.  These
I  forward  to  you,  and  trust  you  will  insert  them  at  full  length.
I  leave  England  on  a  tour  to-morrow,  and  on  my  return  will
send  you  whatever  may  have  been  published  on  the  case  in
my  absence.

I  am,  yours  faithfully,

John  Elliotson.


“THE  LATE  SURGICAL  OPERATION  UNDER

MESMERISM.

“  To  the  Editor  of  the  Leicestershire  Mercury.

“On  the  30th  of  July  last,  I  was  informed  by  my  friend,
Mr.  Tosswill,  with  whom  I  had  frequently,  on  previous  occasions,
conversed  upon  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  and  the  possibility  of  its
beneficial  application  as  a  therapeutic  agent,  that  he  had  been  for
some  time  in  attendance  upon  a  young  person  labouring  under  a  ma¬
lignant  disease  of  the  knee-joint,  of  so  serious  a  character,  as  to


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.


413


render  an  early  amputation  of  the  limb  affected,  the  only  remaining
chance  of  preserving  her  life.  He  at  the  same  time  expressed  a  wish
that  mesmerism  should  in  this  instance  be  tried,  with  a  view  to
mitigating,  if  not  of  wholly  counteracting,  the  pain  and  apprehen¬
sion  necessarily  attendant  upon  so  formidable  an  operation.  To  his
further  request,  that  I  would  lend  my  assistance  personally  towards
ensuring  this  desirable  result,  I  very  readily  acceded.  I  had  long
been  convinced,  both  by  observation  and  numerous  experiments,
conducted  privately,  and  under  circumstances  in  which  neither
motive  nor  opportunity  for  deception  could  exist,  that  the  phenomena
classed  under  the  conventional  title  of  animal  magnetism  were  real ;
and  although  I  had  for  some  time  ceased  to  give  particular  attention
to  the  subject,  I  felt  that  I  could  not,  on  this  occasion,  consistently
with  common  humanity,  withhold  any  efforts  on  my  part  which
might  be  conducive,  in  whatever  degree,  to  the  relief  of  acute  and
unavoidable  suffering.  Accordingly,  on  the  following  day,  I  accom¬
panied  him  to  the  house  at  which  his  patient,  a  girl  of  the  name  of
Mary  Anne  Lakin,  about  23  years  of  age,  was,  at  the  time,  resid¬
ing  with  her  parents.  I  found  her  seated  upon  the  sofa,  from  which,
on  account  of  the  enormous  size  and  weight  of  her  diseased  leg,
she  scarcely  ever  arose  during  the  day,  evidently  much  reduced  in
strength,  as  well  as  wasted  in  person,  and  with  a  pale  and  emaciated
countenance,  wearing  the  peculiar  expressiou  of  distress  and  anxiety
attendant  upon  severe  and  long-continued  disease.  Upon  entering
into  conversation  with  her,  she  appeared  to  me  of  quiet  and  unob¬
trusive  manners,  and  possessed  of  a  degree  of  intelligence,  which
shewed  that  she  had  not  been  without  the  advantages  of  a  some¬
what  better  than  ordinary  education.  She  stated  that  she  had,  for
the  last  four  years,  been  subject  to  paroxysms  of  the  most  intense
agony  from  a  rapidly-increasing  tumour  which  had,  by  this  time,
attained  such  a  size,  as  to  measure  at  least  33  inches  in  circumfer¬
ence,  (the  swelling  extending  a  considerable  distance  both  above  and
below  the  knee,)  and  for  which  she  had  some  time  since  been
received  as  a  patient  into  the  Leicester  Infirmary,  although  without
receiving  any  permanent  benefit  from  the  treatment  pursued  in  her
case  at  that  institution.  She  had  been  made  aware  by  Mr.  Tosswill
of  the  object  of  my  visit,  and,  as  I  afterwards  found,  had  expressed
considerable  unwillingness  to  submit  to  the  new  method  of  treatment
proposed,  since  she  had  received,  some  years  before,  so  severe  a
shock  from  a  Leyden  jar,  at  the  Leicester  Exhibition,  as  to  render
her  hand  useless  for  several  days;  and  having  heard  onty  some
general  and  indefinite  accounts  of  animal  magnetism,  in  which  she
had  never  witnessed  a  single  experiment,  she  had  conceived  the  idea
that  it  would  be  necessary  to  make  use  of  some  kind  of  electrical
or  galvanic  apparatus  for  the  purpose  of  producing  its  effects.  She
now,  however,  expressed  herself  willing  to  submit  to  any  plan  that
might  be  proposed  by  her  medical  attendant  for  her  benefit,  and  her
parents  having,  at  the  same  time,  given  their  full  and  unqualified
assent,  I  proceeded  to  adopt  the  usual  means  for  inducing  the  mes¬
meric  coma,  according  to  the  method  recommended  by  De  Luz,


414  Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.


For  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour  no  effect  was  visible,  but  at  the
end  of  that  time,  after  the  usual  precursive  signs  of  quickened
respiration  and  quivering  eyelids,  she  seemed  reduced  to  a  state  of
complete  insensibility.  While  in  this  condition,  we  found  that  the
arms  continued  motionless,  in  whatever  position  they  might  be
placed,  and  that  they  could  be  easily  rendered  rigid,  or  relaxed  at
will,  by  the  ordinary  direct  and  transverse  passes.  There  was,  at
the  same  time,  to  all  appearance,  a  suspension  of  the  natural  power
of  acknowledging  or  appreciating  pain.  The  condition  of  insen¬
sibility  was  suffered  to  continue  about  twenty  minutes,  after  which
it  wTas  easily  and  gradually  dissipated  by  the  common  method  of
manipulation.  The  patient  then  declared  herself  free  from  any  kind
of  uneasiness,  and  stated  that  she  had  for  some  time  been  wholly
unaware  of  what  was  passing  around  her.  Encouraged  by  this  pro¬
mise  of  success,  I  now  mentioned  my  intention  of  visiting  her
regularly,  until  the  time  of  the  operation,  of  the  absolute  necessity
of  which  she  was  well  aware,  and  took  my  leave,  after  making  an
appointment  to  return  at  the  same  hour  on  the  following  day.

“  On  my  next  visit,  I  was  agreeably  surprised  to  find  that  she
had  passed  a  comparatively  tranquil  night.  She  had  not  experienced,
her  mother  assured  me,  so  much  relief  from  suffering  during  the
last  two  years,  tier  knee  was  now  totally  without  pain.  The  mes¬
meric  sleep  was  this  day  induced  in  about  twenty-five  minutes,  and
I  also  ascertained,  that  even  in  a  state  of  consciousness,  either  arm
might  be  made  rigidly  cataleptic  by  longitudinal  passes,  after  which
the  patient  positively  asserted  that  all  feeling  seemed  to  be  lost  in
the  stiffened  and  extended  limb,  although  it  was  several  times  very
severely  pinched  by  Mr.  Tosswill.  At  the  suggestion  of  this  gentle¬
man,  I  took  the  opportunity  of  desiring  her,  while  under  the  mes¬
meric  influence,  to  sleep  for  a  given  time  during  the  ensuing  night.
This  Avas  done  simply  as  an  experiment,  from  which  I  myself  scarcely
ventured  to  anticipate  any  favourable  result;  yet  it  was  one  which,
for  the  space  of  more  than  four  weeks,  never  failed  of  the  desired
effect,  although  the  times  of  sleeping  and  waking  were  often  varied
at  the  request  of  the  patient,  whose  business  (that  of  a  dress-maker)
not  unfrequently  compelled  her,  notwithstanding  her  ill  health,  to
remain  employed  at  her  needle  until  considerably  past  midnight.
As  the  appointed  hour  drew  near,  its  approach  was  accompanied  with
a  feeling  of  somnolency,  which,  strengthening  by  degrees,  became
at  length  wholly  irresistible.  Nor  was  the  slumber  which  ensued
less  remarkable  for  soundness  than  for  its  correspondence  in  duration
with  the  exact  period  assigned  for  its  continuance.  For  many  nights
successively,  the  subject  of  this  singular  influence  slept,  as  far  as
could  be  judged  by  appearances,  without  once  turning  in  her  bed,
although  for  several  months  previously,  such  troubled  rest  as  she
was  able  to  obtain,  had  been  so  constantly  interrupted  by  the  return
of  pain  to  her  knee,  that  her  mother  had  removed  the  window  cur¬
tains  from  her  room,  in  order  that  she  might  derive  some  slight
amusement  and  relief  from  the  weariness  and  monotony  attendant
upon  continual  wakefulness,  by  observing  the  changes  passing  over
the  sky,  or  the  gradual  breaking  of  the  morning.


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.


415


“The  phenomena  which  presented  themselves  to  my  notice  on
subsequent  occasions,  varied  in  no  material  degree  from  those,  which
I  had  observed  before  in  at  least  a  hundred  different  instances;  or,
in  other  words,  from  what  might  be  called  the  normal  condition  of
mesmerism.  The  eyelids  of  the  patient,  after  she  had  been  confronted
with  me  for  a  few  minutes,  gradually  appeared  to  become  turgid,
stiff,  and  heavy,  and  the  eyes,  as  they  more  or  less  rapidly  closed,
evidently  changing  from  their  ordinary  expression,  to  assume  a  dull
and  unmeaning  character.  Her  pulse  almost  invariably  rose  as  soon
as  she  had  been  rendered  insensible.  Her  respiration,  for  the  most
part  tranquil,  was  yet  from  time  to  time,  and  more  especially  when
she  had  previously  complained  of  slight  indisposition,  interrupted
by  heavy  sighs.  The  countenance  was  often  flushed,  and  although
generally  calm  and  placid,  not  unfrequently  impressed  with  a  character
of  anxiety,  attended  with  a  very  marked  and  distinct  corrugation  of
the  eyebrows.  Deglutition  was  constantly,  and,  as  it  seemed,  me¬
chanically  performed.  A  perfect  insensibility  to  pain  continued  to
be  at  all  times  manifested,  notwithstanding  that  it  was  subjected  to
the  severest  tests  that  could  be  devised;  among  which  I  may  par¬
ticularly  mention,  that  the  diseased  foot,  swollen  to  at  least  twice
its  ordinary  dimensions,  and  so  exquisitely  sensitive,  that  the  careless
approach  of  any  person  was  viewed  with  the  greatest  apprehension,
while  the  accidental  fall  of  the  most  trifling  article  upon  it  produced
a  sense  of  suffering  almost  amounting  to  fainting,  might  now  be
suddenly  and  forcibly  compressed,  without  producing  the  slightest
alteration  in  the  features  or  attitude  of  the  sleeper.

“  I  may  further  state,  as  an  additional  evidence,  that  the  mes¬
meric  insensibility  was  not  in  this  instance  simulated,  that  the  head,
which  continued  rigidly  erect  during  the  induced  slumber,  a  space  of
time  often  amounting  to  a  full  hour,  invariably  drooped  and  fell  for¬
ward  upon  the  chest  as  soon  as  the  demesmering  passes  had  been
commenced.  Mr.  Tosswill  also  frequently  pointed  out  to  me  the
peculiar  character  of  the  pronation  of  the  hand,  when  caused  to  de¬
scend  slowly  from  its  catalepsed  condition,  by  transverse  passes,  as
fully  evincing  to  his  mind,  that  the  limb  was  in  no  respect  under
the  influence  of  volition.  But  the  best  and  most  satisfactory  proof
that  the  state  in  question  was  both  real  and  beneficial,  was  to  be
found  in  the  rapid  improvement  in  the  patient’s  health,  wrhieh  speedily
became  evident  to  her  medical  attendants.  The  uninterrupted  sleep
she  now  experienced  nightly,  and  the  total  cessation  of  pain  in  the
diseased  knee,  over  which  I  never  failed  to  make  frequent  passes  at
each  attendance,  were  followed  by  a  return  of  its  natural  complexion
to  her  countenance,  and  an  improvement  both  in  her  appetite  and
spirits.  Although  she  had  for  some  weeks  been  subject  to  nightly
perspirations,  and  harassed  by  a  distressing  cough,  she  was  before
long  almost  entirely  relieved  from  these  causes  of  uneasiness.  Mr.
Tosswill,  indeed,  expressed  it  as  his  conviction,  that  she  had  actually
gained  considerably  in  flesh,  after  a  fortnight’s  mesmeric  treatment.
Still,  however,  the  disease  was  of  too  formidable  a  nature  to  allow  of
any  deviation  from  his  original  resolution  of  having  recourse  to  am-


416


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh,


putation,  as  soon  as  such  a  proceeding  appeared  warranted  by  the
improved  condition  of  his  patient.

“  As  the  time  which  had  been  provisionally  determined  for  this
decisive  step,  approached,  I  expressed  to  Mr.  Tosswdll  a  wish,  that
the  plan  upon  which  it  was  intended  to  proceed,  should  be  submitted
to  the  approbation  of  Dr.  Shaw  and  Mr.  Thomas  Paget,  conceiving
that  without  the  sanction  of  additional,  and  high  medical  authority,
it  would  be  unadvisable  to  incur  the  serious  responsibility  of  taking
an  almost  entirely  new  course  in  the  conduct  of  an  operation,  which,
under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  could  not  be  considered
wholly  free  from  hazard,  and  might,  in  the  present  instance,  be  at¬
tended  with  peculiar  and  unexpected  difficulties.  To  this  proposal
he  at  once  assented,  stating  that  his  opinion  upon  the  subject  was
strictly  in  accordance  with  my  own,  and  that  I  had  only  just  antici¬
pated  him  in  the  expression  of  a  similar  wish.  I  accordingly  waited
upon  both  the  gentlemen  above-mentioned,  who,  with  their  usual
courtesy,  at  once  acceded  to  our  request,  and  in  the  course  of  a  day
or  two  visited  the  patient  separately  at  her  own  residence.  In  their
presence,  additional  means  were  used  for  ascertaining  her  insuscep¬
tibility  of  suffering  while  in  mesmeric  sleep.  Mr.  Tosswill,  in  the
presence  of  Mr.  Paget,  after  placing  the  edge  of  his  thumb  nail  upon
the  origin  of  one  of  the  finger  nails  of  her  right  hand,  compressed  it
with  the  full  force  of  both  hands  united  for  the  space  of  more  than
two  minutes,  but  without  exciting  a  movement  indicative  of  even
transient  inconvenience.  During  the  visit  of  Dr.  Shaw,  a  ligature
was  tied  round  one  of  her  forefingers,  and  pulled  as  tightly  as  his
strength  would  allow,  but  with  no  difference  whatever  in  the  result.
Both  of  these  gentlemen  gave  it  as  their  opinion,  that  mesmerism,  if
inefficacious,  would  at  least  be  productive  of  no  injury  in  the  case
upon  which  they  had  been  consulted,  and  further  consented  to  be
present  at  the  operation,  which  it  was  definitely  determined  should
take  place  on  Thursday,  the  29th  of  August.

“  At  about  one  o’clock  on  the  day  in  question,  I  met  by  appoint¬
ment,  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Lakin,  Mr.  Tosswill,  and  the  gentlemen
who  had  undertaken  to  assist  him.  I  had,  however,  previously
mesmerised  his  patient  at  eight  o’clock  on  the  same  morning,  in  the
hope  of  increasing  her  susceptibility.  iVfter  the  usual  preparations
had  been  completed,  I  requested  all  present  to  leave  the  room,  pre¬
vious  to  the  introduction  of  the  patient,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.
Downey,  assistant  to  Mr.  Tosswill,  and  the  mother  of  the  sufferer,
who  remained  behind  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  to  place  her  on
the  operation  table,  and  of  adjusting  the  pillows  laid  beneath  her
head.  The  latter,  after  she  had  completed  this  painful  task,  with¬
drew  in  natural  and  visible  emotion,  and  I  proceeded,  without  further
delay,  to  use  the  means  I  had  hitherto  found  successful  in  inducing
the  comatose  condition  of  mesmerism.  At  this  time,  I  was  in  a
state  of  much  greater  agitation  than  the  individual  I  was  endeavour¬
ing  to  compose  to  rest.  A  few  minutes  previously,  she  had  un¬
dressed  herself  in  the  adjoining  room  for  the  operation,  with  an
unfaltering  hand,  and  had  shown  no  perceptible  sign  of  emotion.


417


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.

upon  being  lifted  on  the  table.  Her  pulse  was  now  evenly  beating
at  the  rate  of  about  94  in  the  minute,  while  my  own  I  had  shortly
before  ascertained  to  be  nearly  120.  Nor  was  this  to  be  wondered
at,  under  the  circumstances.  I  had  never  in  the  course  of  my  life
witnessed,  nor  desired  to  witness,  a  surgical  operation;  and  the
horror,  felt  to  a  greater  or  less  degree  by  all  who  are  present,  for
the  first  time,  on  such  an  occasion,  was,  in  this  instance,  united
with  a  painfully  oppressive  sense  of  my  own  responsibility,  (since  I
was  well  aware,  that  had  any  untoward  accident  happened,  I  should
have  had  my  full  share  of  obloquy,)  blended  with  a  natural  feeling
of  sympathy  with  the  sufferer,  and  a  distressing  degree  of  uncer¬
tainty  as  to  the  entire  efficacy  of  the  means  used  for  the  temporary
suspension  of  her  consciousness.  Under  these  difficulties,  it  was
nearly  ten  minutes  before  the  patient’s  eyelids,  becoming  more  and
more  rigid,  were  at  length  slowly  closed,  (the  average  time  for  pro¬
ducing  this  effect  having  for  some  days  been  about  four  minutes  and
a  half,)  or  the  usual  deep  inspiration  gave  me  reason  to  believe  that
the  stage  of  insensibility  had  been  attained.  Although  she  had
sunk  into  this  condition  quietly,  and  without  any  signs  of  perturba¬
tion,  I  remarked,  that  as  the  mesmeric  coma  appeared  to  deepen,
she  seemed  proportionally  to  sympathize  with  the  emotion  under
which  I  was  at  the  time  labouring,  a  circumstance  not  difficult
of  explanation,  if,  as  it  has  been  often  asserted,  and  in  my
opinion  to  a  certain  extent  proved,  the  subject  of  mesmerism  par¬
takes,  to  a  greater  or  less  degree,  of  the  sensations  of  the  ope¬
rator.  Her  respirations  became  sensibly  more  deep  and  rapid,
and  her  fingers,  when  accidentally  touched,  closed  spasmodically
upon  my  own.  The  state  of  partial  agitation  I  endeavoured  to  calm,
by  placing  my  left  hand  across  her  forehead,  and  having  ascertained
that  her  right  arm,  when  extended  from  her  body,  might  be  rendered
cataleptic,  I  desired  the  medical  gentlemen  who  were  waiting  without,
consisting  of  Dr.  Shaw,  Mr.  Paget,  Mr.  Tosswill,  and  Mr.  William
Seddon  (of  the  Leicester  Infirmary)  to  enter.  Of  the  operation
which  followed,  which  was  performed  by  Mr.  Tosswill,  within  five
inches  of  the  hip,  by  the  circular  method,  I  saw  nothing,  my  eyes
being,  during  the  whole  time,  intently  fixed  upon  the  countenance
of  the  patient.  As  it  proceeded,  the  respirations  were  rendered  still
more  frequent,  and  appeared  to  be  attended  with  greater  effort,  as
well  as  with  moaning,  and  an  occasional  movement  of  the  head  from
side  to  side.  Her  fingers  also  continued  tightly  to  grasp  my  hand,
but  beyond  this  I  observed  no  indications  of  suffering;  nothing,  in
short,  at  any  given  moment,  inconsistent  with  the  character  of  deep,
but  very  troubled  slumber.  Her  eyelids,  which  were  constantly,
quivering,  as  had  been  more  or  less  the  case  whenever  the  same
condition  was  induced,  remained,  without  the  slightest  alteration,
in  the  same  relative  position  as  at  first,  and  it  was  remarked  by  Dr.
Shaw,  that  they  were  at  no  time  absolutely  shut,  but  separated  by
an  interval  of  about  the  tenth  of  an  inch.  Her  lips  also  continued
partially  open,  and  were  wholly  uncompressed ,  (this,  too,  was  at
the  time  noticed  by  Dr.  Shaw  as  a  most  curious  feature  in  the  case,)


418  Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.


nor  did  a  single  exclamation  escape  them,  from  the  commencement
to  the  end  of  the  operation.  In  no  instance  was  there  either  starting,
or  an  attempt  to  raise  her  head  from  the  pillow  on  which  it  reclined.
Further  particulars  will  be  found  in  the  notes  furnished  by  Dr.
Shaw.  It  may  be  as  well,  however,  to  add,  that  while  Mr.  Tosswill
was  engaged  in  removing  the  diseased  leg,  Mr.  Paget  undertook  to
support  the  limb,  and  attended  to  the  tourniquet,  in  addition  to
assisting  in  the  after  tying  of  the  arteries.  The  right  foot  was  lightly
sustained  by  Mr.  Downey,  whose  notes,  taken  four  hours  afterwards,
I  am,  by  the  kindness  of  that  gentleman,  enabled  to  subjoin  to
those  of  Dr.  Shaw.  The  left  foot  was  held,  and  the  dressings  and
bandages  afterwards  supplied  by  Mr.  Wm.  Seddon,  while  Dr.  Shaw,
with  his  watch  and  note-book  in  hand,  closely  observed  and  com¬
mented  upon  the  proceedings.  I,  myself,  was  therefore  the  only
person  stationed  constantly  at  the  upper  part  of  the  body  of  the
patient,  and  I  can  most  unreservedly  assert,  that  with  the  ex¬
ception  of  the  mere  weight  of  my  left  hand  upon  her  forehead,  no
force  whatever  was  used  to  keep  her  in  a  recumbent  position.  The
amputation  of  the  limb  was  effected  in  about  two  minutes  and  a
half;  the  tying  of  the  arteries,  and  of  the  femoral  vein,  which  it
was  also  thought  necessary  to  secure  with  a  ligature,  together  with
the  subsequent  application  and  adjustment  of  the  bandages  occupied
nearly  twenty-five  minutes  more.  The  patient  was  then  lifted  from
the  table  by  Mr.  Paget  and  myself,  and  placed  in  her  bed.  After
the  instruments  and  materials  used  during  the  operation  had  been
removed,  and  the  room  restored  to  its  usual  state  of  order,  I  poured
a  small  quantity  of  wine  and  water  from  the  spout  of  a  teapot  into
her  mouth,  which  she  swallowed  mechanically — an  action  considered
as  I  believe,  by  physiologists,  to  be  perfectly  compatible  with  a
state  of  unconsciousness.  She  was  then,  by  the  direction  of  the
medical  gentlemen  present,  awakened  quietly  and  gradually,  by
passes  along  the  eyelids,  and  gently  blowing  upon  her  forehead.
On  being  questioned  as  to  her  present  feelings,  and  what  she  had
experienced  during  the  last  half-hour,  she  replied  that  she  was
exceedingly  faint,  and  now  felt  pain  in  the  left  foot;  but  that,  during
the  time  mentioned  in  the  inquiry,  she  had  been  conscious  of  no
pain,  nor  suffering  of  any  description,  except  that  she  had  dreamed
some  one  was  tying  a  string  tightly  round  her  right  leg.*  I  should


*  I  cannot  refrain  from  calling  particular  attention  to  this  assertion  of
an  individual  to  whom  the  first  principles  of  mental  philosophy  may,  as  I
conceive,  be  very  readily  presumed  to  be  unknown,  as  affording  a  curious
and  natural  illustration  of  a  law,  long  laid  down  by  psychologists,  in  con¬
nection  with  the  mysterious  state  of  dreaming,  I  mean  that  by  which  the
imagination  supplies  at  once  a  cause  almost  always  erroneous,  and  frequently
extravagant  for  existing  feelings.  Thus  Dugald  Stewart  (Philosophy  of  the
Human  Mind,  chap.  v.  part  1) —

“  Our  dreams  are  frequently  suggested  to  us  by  bodily  sensations,  and
with  these  it  is  well  known  from  what  we  experience  while  awake,  that
particular  ideas  are  very  strongly  associated.  I  have  been  told  by  a  friend,
that  having  occasion,  in  consequence  of  an  indisposition,  to  apply  a  bottle
of  hot  water  to  his  feet  when  he  went  to  bed,  he  dreamed  that  he  was


419


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.

observe,  however,  that  the  latter  circumstance  was  mentioned,  not
of  her  own  accord,  but  in  answer  to  a  question  put  by  myself,  for
the  purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  she  had  imagined  anything  in
particular  while  in  the  state  from  which  she  had  just  been  aroused.
She  afterwards  added  to  this  account,  that  she  had  thought  in  her
dream,  that  she  had  felt  irritated  with  the  person  who  was  tying  the
string,  and  had  given  him  a  severe  kick.  On  attending  the  same
evening,  by  Mr.  Tosswill’s  desire,  for  the  purpose  of  ensuring  her,
if  possible,  a  tranquil  repose  during  the  night,  she  again  solemnly
assured  me,  in  answer  to  my  renewed  enquiries,  that  she  had  been
perfectly  unconscious  of  the  whole  operation,  asserting  that  had  she
the  same  trial  to  experience  on  the  following  morning,  it  would  not
give  her  the  least  uneasiness,  providing  she  could  be  certain  of  pass¬
ing  through  it  with  as  little  sensibility.  She  had  suffered  more,  she
added,  in  very  many  dreams.

“  This  latter  conversation  occurred  about  six  hours  after  the  ope¬
ration,  when  the  patient  appeared  composed  and  cheerful;  and  was,
moreover,  exempt,  as  she  affirmed,  from  all  distressing  sensations.
During  the  afternoon,  however,  she  had  given,  by  her  movements,
as  well  as  by  her  exclamations,  unequivocal  signs  of  intense  anguish;
the  result,  as  it  was  supposed,  of  a  spasmodic  action  of  the  muscles
of  the  back  and  loins,  and  to  which  an  anodyne  of  forty  drops  of
the  tincture  of  opium,  administered  shortly  after  the  operation,  ap¬
peared  to  afford  no  relief.  Mr.  Downey,  who  had  been  left  in
attendance  with  her,  having  sent  intelligence  of  this  state  of  things
to  Mr.  Tosswill,  that  gentleman  lost  no  time  in  returning  to  the
patient’s  bedside,  and  having  in  vain  attempted  to  mitigate  her
sufferings,  by  several  times  shifting  her  posture,  was  at  length
moved  by  her  earnest  and  repeated  entreaties,  and  the  expressions
indicative  of  excruciating  suffering  which  were  constantly  escaping
her,  to  have  once  more  recourse  to  the  aid  of  mesmerism.  In  a
minute  and  a  half  he  had  succeeded  in  inducing  the  comatose  state,
and  it  was  remarkable  that,  for  the  space  of  half  an  hour  afterwards,
the  moanings  of  the  sufferer  were  louder,  the  respirations  deeper,


making  a  journey  to  Mount  .ZEtna,  and  that  he  found  the  heat  of  the  ground
almost  insupportable.  Another  person,  having  a  blister  applied  to  his  head,
dreamed  that  he  was  scalped  by  a  party  of  Indians.  I  believe  every  one
who  is  in  the  habit  of  dreaming  will  recollect  instances  in  his  own  case  of  a
similar  nature.”

A  passage  to  much  the  same  effect  occurs  in  Sir  Walter  Scott’s  Letters
on  Demonology  and  Witchcraft —

“The  phantom  with  the  crutch  was  only  a  species  of  machinery,  such
as  that  with  which  fancy  is  found  to  supply  the  disorder  called  Ephialtes,
or  Nightmare  ;  or  indeed,  any  other  external  impression  upon  our  organs  in
sleep,  which  the  patient’s  morbid  imagination  may  introduce  into  the  dream
preceding  the  swoon.  In  the  nightmare,  an  oppression  and  suffocation  is
felt,  and  our  fancy  instantly  conjures  up  a  spectre  to  lie  on  our  bosom.  In
like  manner,  it  may  be  remarked,  that  any  sudden  noise  which  the  slumberer
hears  without  being  actually  awakened  by  it,  any  casual  touch  of  his  person,
occurring  in  the  same  manner,  becomes  instantly  adopted  in  his  dream,  and
accommodated  to  the  tenour  of  the  current  train  of  thought,  whatever  that
may  happen  to  be,”  &c. — Letter  I.


420


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh .


and  the  clutching  of  her  hands  much  more  violent,  than  during  any
period  of  the  late  operation.  By  degrees,  however,  all  these  ap¬
pearances  of  agitation  subsided,  and  were  succeeded  by  a  sound
slumber  of  two  hour’s  duration,  from  which  she  awoke  naturally,
and  entirely  relieved  from  the  torturing  pain  she  had  recently  felt.
Since  that  time  the  stump  of  the  amputated  limb  has  given  her  no
annoyance.  Her  rest  has,  each  succeeding  night,  been  sound  and
uninterrupted,  although  it  has  not  yet  been  thought  advisable  to
discontinue  the  usual  mesmeric  sleep  daily.  She  has  suffered  neither
from  thirst  nor  fever,  has  been  allowed  a  generous  diet,  and  is,  I
trust,  rapidly  progressing  to  a  perfect  recovery;  about  four-fifths  of
the  incipient  cicatrix  of  the  stump  being  already  formed  by  the  first
intention.  By  Mr.  Toss  will’s  express  wish,  I  was  present  for  the
purpose  of  inducing  mesmeric  insensibility  during  the  first  dressing.
On  this  occasion,  in  consequence  of  Mr.  Paget’s  letter,  which  had
just  appeared  in  the  Journal,  I  was  most  particularly  attentive  to  all
that  was  passing,  and  I  unhesitatingly  affirm,  that  while  the  band¬
ages  and  dressings,  necessarily  stiff,  and  requiring  no  slight  force
for  their  removal,  were  being  withdrawn  from  the  wound,  the  am¬
putated  thigh  being  at  the  same  time  not  unfrequently  handled, —
not  a  single  muscle  of  the  face  or  body  of  the  patient,  with  the
exception  of  those  concerned  in  respiration,  varied  to  the  extent  of
the  eighth  of  an  inch;  while  the  left  hand,  which  lay  within  a  short
distance  of  the  mutilated  limb,  in  what  I  conceived  to  he  a  very
cramped  and  constrained  position,  continued  from  beginning  to  end
of  the  painful  process  in  question,  absolutely  motionless.

“  These  are  the  principal  circumstances,  so  far  as  they  have
come  under  my  own  observation,  of  a  case  which  I  cannot  but  con¬
sider  as  one  not  only  deserving,  but  demanding,  in  no  ordinary
degree,  the  most  serious  and  unprejudiced  attention.  I  regret  to
find  that,  in  some  respects,  the  impressions  made  upon  my  own
mind,  appear  to  have  been  altogether  different  from  those  conveyed
to  that  of  a  gentleman  whose  friendship  I  very  highly  value,  and  to
whose  sound  judgment  I  am  most  willing,  on  all  points  connected,
however  remotely,  with  the  honourable  profession  he  follows,  un¬
reservedly  to  submit  my  own.  Yet,  on  deliberately  revising  my
statement,  I  see  nothing  which  I  can  conscientiously  alter, — a  cir¬
cumstance  which  I  the  less  lament,  as  I  am  well  aware  that  the
ancient  dogma  of  the  schools,  f  that  all  things  are  received  accord¬
ing  to  the  quality  of  the  recipient,’  is  as  true  of  appeals  to  the
senses,  as  of  those  made  more  directly  to  the  understanding;  and
that  of  any  number  of  witnesses  to  a  remarkable  event,  each  accord¬
ing  to  his  peculiar  temperament,  or  previously  existing  opinions,
will,  although  in  perfect  good  faith,  and  without  the  slightest  inten¬
tion  to  misrepresent  or  mislead,  give  an  account  more  or  less  different
of  the  whole  transaction.  Under  these  circumstances,  if  the  majo¬
rity  of  those  present  is  rejected  as  inconclusive,  I  am  contented  to
rest  the  merits  of  the  case,  so  far  as  the  operation  is  concerned,
upon  the  notes  of  Dr.  Shaw,  taken  during  its  continuance,  and  to
the  correctness  of  which  all  parties  fully  assented  before  quitting  the
room  in  which  it  had  been  performed.


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.


421


“  Without  dwelling  further,  however,  upon  the  question  as  to
how  far  my  own  claims  to  be  received  as  a  witness  are  admissible, —
a  point  on  which  my  convictions  are  certainly  not  altogether  in
accordance  with  those  of  Mr.  Paget,  for  I  may  safely  assert  that  I
was  only  too  painfully  alive  to  every  sound  and  motion  presented  to
my  cognizance, — I  pass  on  to  call  attention  to  one  or  two  general
propositions,  contained  either  directly  or  by  implication,  in  his
letter,  against  which  I  must  be  allowed  most  respectfully,  but  most
unreservedly  to  protest.  The  first  is  the  assumption  that  an  opinion
unfavourable  to  the  reality  of  the  mesmeric  state  is  fairly  warranted
by  the  circumstance,  that  for  the  space  of  six  thousand  years  its
characteristic  phenomena  have  continued  unnoticed,  and,  by  conse¬
quence,  unexamined.  The  very  basis  on  which  such  an  argument
is  advanced  is,  as  I  conceive, — and  I  ground  my  belief  on  the  tes¬
timony  of  more  than  one  ancient  authority, — liable  to  be  most
seriously  assailed;  but,  allowing  the  premises  from  which  the  objec¬
tion  is  deduced  to  be  in  themselves  correct,  what,  I  would  ask,
without  reference  to  the  comparatively  recent  existence  of  experi¬
mental  science  in  general,  is  on  this  showing  to  be  said  of  the  whole
modern  school  of  physiology?  For  six  thousand  years  the  hearts
of  men  have  been  pulsating,  and  the  nerves  performing  their  myste¬
rious  office  in  subserviency  to  sensation  and  volition.  Long  before
the  days  of  Celsus  and  Aristotle  laborious  anatomists  were  found  in
multitudes,  intent  upon  their  investigations,  not  only  of  the  dead,
hut  what  is  more,  of  the  living  subject;  with  a  scientific  zeal,  and,
as  it  would  appear,  an  indifference  to  every  torture  they  might
inflict,  which  left  but  little  room  for  improvement  even  in  the  days
of  Cooper  and  Majendie.  One  might  have  imagined  that,  in  such
cases,  the  design  and  purpose  of  the  circulatory  system,  with  its
exquisitely  constructed  series  of  valves  and  reservoirs,  would  at
once  have  become  palpable  to  observers,  skilled,  as  we  have  now
every  reason  to  believe,  in  the  most  recondite  laws  and  principles  of
hydraulics;  and  that  the  cessation  of  feeling  or  motion  following
the  division,  whether  intentional  or  accidental,  of  various  nervous
chords,  would  have  been  as  little  likely  to  escape  their  notice:  yet
how  long  is  it  since  the  nerves  were  gravely  maintained  to  be  mere
hollow  channels  for  the  conveyance  of  the  animal  spirits,  the  chief
seat  of  which  was  supposed  to  be  in  the  ventricles  of  the  brain,*
and  the  circulation  of  the  blood  syllogistically  proved  to  be  impos¬
sible,  in  half  the  universities  of  Europe?

The  readiness  assumed  in  Mr.  Paget’s  letter,  to  exist  on  the
part  of  the  medical  profession,  as  a  body,  to  appreciate  the  real
worth  of  new  agents  in  the  healing  art,  and  to  catch  at  any  chance
of  adding  to  their  means  of  curing  or  relieving,  is  also  a  position
which  I  fear  will  hardly  be  thought  tenable,  after  a  moment’s  refe¬
rence  to  existing  testimony.  Would  indeed  that  it  were  so!  The
well-known  and  distinguished  professional  career  of  the  author  of
the  statement,  and  the  witness  of  those  who  have  benefited  by  his


*  Lord  Bacon.  Historia  Vitoe  et  Mortis.  Canon  IV.


422


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.


skill,  will,  I  know  be  readily  received  as  a  proof  that  he  at  least  is
not  to  be  cited  as  illustrating  a  rule  to  which  there  are  numerous  and
most  honourable  exceptions;  but,  alas!  what  are  the  records  of  me¬
dical  science  for  the  last  hundred  years,  but  melancholy  comments
upon  the  limited  existence  of  that  very  feeling  of  which  he  has  in¬
ferred  the  universal  prevalence!  From  the  days  of  Jenner,  when
vaccination  was  forced  into  general  adoption,  not  by  a  rescript  of  the
College  of  Physicians,  but  by  express  authority  of  act  of  parliament,
to  those  of  Laennec,  the  discovery  of  a  new  remedial  agent  has  en¬
countered  nearly  the  same  kind  of  treatment;  and  the  most  strictly
impirical  of  all  sciences  has  incurred,  wherever  professed,  the  disgrace
of  being  at  the  same  time  most  fiercely,  and  obstinately  opposed  to
every  kind  of  innovation.  With  respect  to  this  very  mesmerism
holding  out,  (with  what  degree  of  probability  it  is  not  now  necessary
for  the  merits  of  the  question  to  consider,)  a  prospect  of  affording  relief
from  suffering  and  terror,  to  an  extent  which  we  might  presume
would  induce  men  to  err  rather  on  the  side  of  too  great  credulity,
than  of  immoderate  scepticism,  in  their  judgment  of  its  merits,  who
have  been  at  all  times  the  most  forward  and  prejudiced  opponents
of  its  claims  to  public  notice  ?  Before  what  medical  tribunal  has  it
obtained  an  impartial  hearing,  or,  indeed,  a  hearing  of  any  descrip¬
tion  whatever  ?  How  great  has  been  the  number  of  those  who  have
condescended  to  inquire  before  they  have  assumed  the  confidence  to
condemn  ?  It  is  but  a  few  years  ago  that  Dr.  Elliotson,  an  eminent
physiologist,  and  a  man  of  undoubted  integrity  of  purpose,  was,
simply  in  consequence  of  his  public  investigations  upon  the  subject,
driven  from  an  institution  of  which  he  was  a  distinguished  ornament.
Not  two  years  from  the  present  time,  an  account  of  an  operation
performed  without  the  consciousness  of  the  patient,  presented  by  Mr.
W.  Squires  Ward,  the  operating  surgeon,  and  a  member  of  their  own
body,  to  the  Medico-Chirurgical  Society  of  London,  was  received
with  derision  and  insult — one  of  the  auditors  declaring  in  the  true
spirit  of  philosophical  candour  “  that  he  would  not  believe  the  parti¬
culars  stated  in  the  paper,  if  he  had  seen  them  with  his  own  eyes
while  another  enquired  whether  the  parties  concerned  in  the  trans¬
action  had  been  duly  sworn  before  a  magistrate!  Lastly,  it  is  not
quite  fourteen  days  since, —

- “  So  to  compare

Great  things  with  small,” —

a  resolution  was  moved  and  seconded  in  the  Medical  Society  of  Lei¬
cester,  by  which  the  facts  narrated  in  the  present  letter  were  charac¬
terised  as  “  the  late  disgraceful  and  disreputable  proceedings  of  mes¬
merism, — a  compliment,  for  which,  whether  intended  to  bear  upon
the  common  sense,  or  veracity,  or  both,  of  the  parties  implicated  in
its  censure,  I,  as  an  humble  individual  of  the  number,  willingly
take  this  opportunity  of  presenting  that  learned  body  with  my  best
acknowledgments.  The  realities,  however,  of  Animal  Magnetism
(a  term  which  I  use  simply  for  want  of  a  better)  are,  at  this  time,
by  far  too  numerous,  and  too  well  attested,  to  be  put  down  by  con-


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.  423

tumely,  or  even  by  indifference;  nor  do  I  doubt  that,  to  the  number
of  authentic  instances  of  its  applicability  to  the  alleviation  of  disease,
or  suspension  of  pain,  others  will  continue  to  be  added,  until  an
amount  of  evidence  shall  have  accumulated  sufficient  to  shake  the
unbelief  of  the  most  inveterately  sceptical.  It  is  a  consolation  to
those  engaged  in  the  investigation  of  truth,  in  whatever  form,  to
remember,  that  the  illustrations  of  its  principles  are  never  insulated,
and  that,  however  one  manifestation  of  its  presence  may  be  kept  from
receiving  general  acceptance  by  the  efforts  of  prejudice  for  its  sup¬
pression,  others  will  continue  to  present  themselves  with  a  constancy
which  shall  at  length  make  their  distinctive  character  as  incontro¬
vertible  as  their  real  existence.  As  in  the  case  of  the  mystical  tree
of  the  poet —

- -  “  uno  avulso,  non  deficit  alter

Aureus  et  simili  frondescit  virga  metallo.”

“  I  have  only,  in  conclusion,  to  add,  by  way  of  reply  to  the
indirect  and  not  ungentle  censure,  conveyed  in  Mr.  Paget’s  letter,
upon  my  interference  with  a  subject,  in  which  I  am  in  no  way  pro¬
fessionally  concerned,  first,  that  in  the  present  case  I  have  been
merely  a  subordinate  agent,  acting  throughout  under  express  medical
direction;  and  secondly,  that  I  have  personally  anything  but  a  wish
to  stand  forward  as  the  public  champion  of  mesmerism — far  less,  to
obtain  notoriety  as  a  proficient  in  its  mysteries.  I  fully  and  very
readily  concede,  that  the  investigation  and  application  of  this  sin¬
gular  agent — of  the  nature,  extent,  and  tendency  of  which  so  little
is  at  present  known — should  be  entrusted  to  students  in  that  depart¬
ment  of  science,  of  which  it  appears  to  form  a  natural  province.  But
so  long  as  those  who  ought  to  take  the  lead  in  the  investigation,  or
to  be  the  first  to  ascertain  the  truth  of  the  assertions  of  others  who
have  preceded  them  in  observations  or  experiment  in  connection  with
this  specific  subject  shall  refuse  to  do  either  the  one  or  the  other,
and  remain  content  with  denying,  where  they  are  under  a  direct
responsibility  to  examine, — so  long  will  more  candid  enquirers,  how¬
ever  indifferently  qualified  for  the  task,  endeavour  to  supply  the
place  thus  left  unfilled; — for  it  is  neither  consistent  with  reason  nor
humanity,  that  the  generality  of  mankind  should  look  on  with  in¬
difference,  while  propositions  affecting  the  general  welfare  are  re¬
ceived,  in  the  place  of  a  calm  and  unprejudiced  investigation,  with
obloquy,  ridicule,  and  contempt;  or  refrain  from  employing  their
own  individual  exertion,  in  the  event  of  the  inactivity  of  others,
towards  promoting  the  more  common  adoption  of  a  sanative  agency,
which,  in  some  cases,  if  not  universally,  bids  fair  to  alleviate  con¬
tinual  anguish,  and  frequently  to  disarm  the  surgeon’s  steel  of  at
least  one  half  its  horrors.

“  I  am,  Sir,

“  Yours  very  obediently,

“  James  Francis  Rollings.”


f  F


VOL.  II.


424


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.


“  To  the  Editor  of  the  Leicestershire  Mercury.

“  Sir, — May  I  request  you  will  give  insertion  to  tlie  accompany¬
ing  remarks,  lest  I  be  mistaken  as  yielding  my  assent  to  the  opinions
expressed  either  by  Dr.  Shaw  or  Mr.  Paget  in  the  public  papers  of
last  week.

“  The  post  assigned  to  Dr.  Shaw  previous  to,  during  and  after
the  operation,  was  that  of  noting  every  incident  which  might  occur,
by  committing  it  to  writing,  and  this  arrangement  was  the  more  sa¬
tisfactory  as  Mr.  Paget  having,  at  my  solicitation,  taken  charge  of
the  tourniquet  and  upper  part  of  the  diseased  limb,  and  having  con¬
sequently  his  back  to  the  patient,  was  unable  to  see  what  was  going
on.  I  was  therefore  desirous  of  securing  the  assistance  of  a  gentle¬
man  so  disinterested  and  strictly  honourable  as  Dr.  Shaw.

“  To  every  circumstance  mentioned  in  the  notes  taken  by  him  I
yield  my  willing  assent,  and  all  present  (at  the  time)  acknowledged
their  correctness.  It  is  to  these  notes  (taken  on  the  spot,  and  during
the  occurrence  of  the  facts  they  substantiate)  that  I  wish  reference  to
be  made  and  inferences  drawn,  and  not  from  any  subsequent  reflec¬
tions.  During  the  act  of  amputation  I  was  too  much  occupied  to
mark  what  might  be  occurring  elsewhere,  but  I  distinctly  assert  that
the  diseased  limb  never  moved  or  winced,  but  remained  perfectly
motionless.

“  Admitting  the  facts  mentioned  by  Dr.  Shaw,  I  arrive  at  a  different
conclusion  respecting  the  evidences  in  favour  of  mesmerism  than
does  either  that  gentleman  or  Mr.  Paget,  and  I  do  so  on  admitted
and  recognised  phisiological  grounds.

“  The  day  on  which  the  operation  took  place  was  intensely  hot,
and  the  room  small  and  crowded;  it  is  not  therefore  surprising  to
find  it  stated  in  notes  4,  5,  9,  and  15,  that  the  patient’s  countenance
was  flushed,  and  that  large  drops  of  perspiration  stood  on  her  face,
circumstances  which  I  believe  were  participated  in  by  every  one  pre¬
sent,  at  least  I  can  answer  for  myself.

(t  At  note  13  the  patient  is  represented  as  having  loaned,’  a
fact  which  all  present  will  allow,  but  this  occurrence  is  common  in
diseases  where  effusion  on  the  brain  exists,  and  where — from  the
amount  of  pressure — perfect  insensibility  to  pain  is  admitted.  Moan¬
ing  occurs,  likewise,  in  simple  congestion  of  that  organ,  as  is  wit¬
nessed  in  cases  of  intoxication;  since  then  mesmerism  has  been
represented  to  operate  by  inducing  a  congested  state  of  the  vessels  of
the  brain,  the  moaning  may  be  inferred  as  an  evidence  of  the  mes¬
merised  condition,  and  not  of  pain.

“  Secondly,  note  6  represents  the  respirations  to  have  been  fre¬
quent  and  ‘  deep,’ — ‘  30’  in  the  minute, — nor  should  this  excite
surprise  when  we  remark  at  note  8  that  the  pulse  was  at  that  time
beating  ‘  130’  in  the  minute.  By  this  rapid  contractile  action  of  the
heart,  the  blood  was  sent  in  increased  quantity  and  accelerated  acti¬
vity  to  the  lungs,  which  could  only  relieve  their  congested  condition
by  the  involuntary  act  of  frequent  and  deep  inspiration.

“  Thirdly, — It  has  been  asserted  that  there  was  ‘  considerable


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh .


425


groaning,  writhing,  and  an  approach  to  screaming  during  the  opera¬
tion.  On  referring  to  note  6,  the  number  of  respirations  under  the
mesmeric  condition  are  stated  to  be  *  30  in  the  minute,  and  deep,’
a  number  nearly  double  that  which  is  usual,  the  reason  of  which  I
have  previously  explained.  Now,  if  the  notes  are  correct,  which  I  do
not  doubt,  ‘  groaning’  was  impossible,  for  this  phenomenon  can  only
be  produced  by  prolonging  the  act  of  respiration.  No,  moaning
should  have  been  the  expression,  and  moaning  is  the  word  mentioned
in  the  13th  note,  a  term  of  very  different  signification  from  groaning,
which  I  again  assert  could  not  have  occurred  with  a  respiration  ‘  30’
in  the  minute.  I  find  no  mention  made  in  Dr.  Shaw’s  notes  of  ‘  an
approach  to  screaming,’  and  in  my  opinion  it  would  be  as  difficult  to
conceive  as  to  define  the  exact  condition  inferred  by  the  word  ‘ap¬
proach’  as  applied  to  a  sudden  exclamation.

“Fourthly, — The  patient  is  said  to  have  ‘writhed’  considerably
during  the  operation.  Dr.  Shaw  has  merely  observed  in  note  12
that  there  wTas  a  ‘  slight  movement  of  the  sound  leg  and  toes,  leg
once  contracted,’  and,  in  note  14,  ‘grasping  of  the  hand  tightly
when  touched ,  is  remarked.  Neither  the  notes  nor  the  accompany¬
ing  circumstances  can  reconcile  the  belief  of  any  ‘  writhing.’

“  The  table  on  which  the  patient  reclined  during  the  operation
was  only  fifteen  inches  wide.  Her  arms  were  elevated  and  loosely
supported  over  the  chest  by  one  roll  of  bandage,  to  prevent  their
hanging  like  those  of  a  lifeless  person  over  the  sides,  so  that  having
no  support  from  her  elbows,  nor  from  any  individual  present,  being
neither  tied  down  to  the  table  nor  held  down,  the  slightest  struggle
must  inevitably  have  thrown  her  over.

“  Fifthly, — I  admit  the  contraction  of  the  sound  leg,  and  clasp¬
ing  of  the  hands  when  ‘  touched?  sensibility  to  the  compression  of
the  tourniquet,  and  frequent  deglutition,  mentioned  in  notes  11,  12,
14,  and  16,  but  it  is  singular  that  these  facts  should  be  presented,
as  examples  unfavourable  to  the  veracity  of  the  patient.  Dr.  Mar¬
shall  Hall  (perhaps  the  greatest  living  authority  on  the  functions  of
the  nervous  system,)  withdrew  his  allegiance  to  mesmerism  on  a
former  occasion,  and  for  a  similar  operation,  because  such  movement
did  not  occur,  *  Because  the  man’s  sound  leg  did  not  start,  or  con¬
tract,  when  the  diseased  one  was  cut.’  I  quote  his  own  words;

‘  the  case,’  he  said,  ‘  proved  too  much,  for’  continues  he  ‘  even  in  a
decapitated  animal,  when  all  volition  and  sensation  has  been  de¬
stroyed,  irritation  applied  to  one  leg  will  invariably  induce  contrac¬
tion  in  the  other,’  a  phenomenon  he  terms  ‘  Reflex  motion,’  and
which  he  discovered  to  have  its  seat  in  the  spinal  column  and  to  be
entirely  independent  of  sensation  or  volition.  So  it  was  with  this
suffering  girl.  Rendered  insensible  to  pain  and  incapable  of  volun¬
tary  effort  by  mesmerism,  she  still  enacted  the  reflex  motions  of  the
spinal  cord.  The  same  cause  which  produced  contraction  of  the
sound  leg  under  the  irritation  of  amputation  in  the  diseased  limb,
induced  frequent  deglutition  from  the  presence  of  saliva  in  the  pha¬
rynx  and  produced  contraction  and  grasping  of  the  hands  when
‘  touched and  apparent  sensibility  to  the  compression  of  the  tour-


426


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.


niquet,  the  highly-excited  state  of  the  nervous  system  induced  by
previous  apprehension,  by  an  accelerated  pulse  and,  by  increased
respiration  (see  notes  6  and  8),  causing  such  *  touch ’  to  be  a  power¬
ful  irritant  precisely  as  in  the  case  of  an  individual  suffering  the
agonies  of  hydrophobia,  violent  spasm  of  the  whole  body,  the  result
of  reflex  action  of  the  spinal  cord,  is  produced  by  the  irritation  of
the  slightest  breath  of  air  imperceptible  to  others  in  a  state  of  health.

44  No,  this  poor  girl  who  has  been  represented  as  deceiving,  and
as  having  refrained  from  crying  out,  by  a  voluntary  effort,  could
also,  had  she  been  conscious,  by  a  voluntary  effort,  have  restrained
these  motions  and  ( proved  too  much,*  but  being  in  an  unconscious
condition,  dead  to  sensibility  and  volition,  like  the  decapitated
animal,  she  obeyed  the  laws  of  physiology.

44  Such  are  my  reasons  for  considering  this  operation  satisfactory
as  regards  the  truth  of  mesmerism,  and  its  application  to  the  relief
of  suffering  humanity,  and  certainly  satisfactory  as  regards  the
patient,  who,  with  the  exception  of  the  two  hours  immediately  fol¬
lowing  the  operation,  when  she  suffered  intense  pain  and  gave
utterance  to  her  feelings  by  cries,  (not  being  then  under  the  influ¬
ence  of  mesmerism,)  has  since  undergone  no  suffering  whatever,
has  had  no  fever,  Jias  slept  soundly  the  nights  through,  and  has
hitherto  progressed  rapidly  and  favourably  towards  recovery,  without
the  aid  or  necessity  of  a  single  dose  of  medicine.  Most  fortunate
has  it  proved  for  her  that  the  amputation  was  not  deferred,  for  on  a
subsequent  examination  at  the  Infirmary,  the  tumour  was  found  to
be  near  the  point  of  bursting,  when  certain  death  must  have  been
the  result,  and  that  result  probably  ere  this.

44  I  am.  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

“J.  H.  Tosswill.

14  Halford  Street,  9th  September.”


“NOTES  TAKEN  BY  DR.  SHAW  DURING  THE

OPERATION.

“Notel. — Pulse  before  mesmerism,  94.  Small.

“ - 2. — Mesmerised — time,  nine  minutes.

“ - 3. — Pulse  under  mesmerism,  120.

“ - 4. — Countenance  flushed.

“ - 5. — Perspiration.

“ - 6. — Respiration,  30  under  mesmerism,  and  deep.

“  OPERATION.

“ - 7. — Time  of  half-past  one,  first  cut;  limb  off  two  and  a

half  minutes.

44 - 8. — Pulse  under  130  small.

44 - 9. — Countenance  flushed.

44 -  10. — Blood  lost  moderate  for  the  great  size  of  the  tumour,

though  a  large  quantity. — Vinous.

44 - -  11. — Sensible  to  the  compression  of  the  tourniquet.


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh.


427


“Note  12. — More  or  less  appearance  of  sensibility,  slight  move¬
ment  of  the  sound  leg  and  toes;  leg  once  contracted;  movement
of  the  limb  and  eyelids  (quivering).

“ -  13. — Expression  of  pain;  moaning.  Eyes  closed  alt  the

time.

“ -  14. — Grasping  the  hand  tightly  when  touched.  Expres¬

sion  of  pain  in  the  contraction  of  the  eyebrows.

“ - 15. — Large  drops  of  perspiration.

“ - 16. — Frequent  efforts  at  deglutition.

“ -  17. — The  patient  put  to  bed  exactly  at  two  o’clock,  ap¬

parently  in  profound  sleep;  pulse,  96,  feeble;  calm.

“ - 18. — Awoke  out  of  sleep  at  2\  p.m.,  gradually  and

naturally.

“ - 19. — Says  she  felt  no  pain  during  the  operation,  no  suf¬

fering  during  the  last  half-hour.

“ - -  20. — Now  feels  pain  in  her  left  foot;  feels  faint;  says

she  dreamt  some  one  was  tying  a  string  round  the  right  leg.

“ - 21. — When  awoke  up  pulse  108;  complains  of  faintness.

“ - 22. — Says  she  feels  no  pain  now  in  the  stump.

“The  above  is  a  correct  copy  of  the  notes  taken  by  Dr.  Shaw,
with  the  underlinings  he  made  at  the  time.”


“NOTES  TAKEN  BY  Mr.  DOWNEY.

“Leicester,  Sep.  10,  1844.

“  Mary  Ann  Lakin,  24,  temperament  sanguineous,  complexion
clear,  countenance  sad,  but  cheerful  when  spoken  to,  pulse  80,  and
irritable.  She  states  that  she  is  suffering  from  a  large  tumour,  on
looking  to  which  it  presented  the  following  appearances,  and  dimen¬
sions — It  engages  the  knee-joint,  upper  fourth  of  the  leg,  and  the
inferior  two-thirds  of  the  thigh;  measuring  33  inches  in  circumference,
11  inches  in  length  anteriorly,  12  inches  internally,  and  9  and  a  half
inches  externally.  It  is  irregular  on  its  surface,  but  smooth,  on
which  are  a  number  of  distended  veins,  colour  rather  paler  than
natural,  except  at  the  inner  part  below  the  inner  condyle  of  the
tibia  which  is  of  a  dusky  red  colour,  softer  and  more  undulating
than  in  other  parts,  as  this  feeling  is  evident  in  all  parts  of  the
diseased  mass.  This  discoloured  portion  is  about  the  size  of  the
palm  of  the  hand,  and  from  the  near  fluctuation  of  fluid  being  con¬
veyed  to  the  fingers  at  this  part,  it  was  apprehended  that  ulceration
would  shortly  have  taken  place,  and  give  the  patient  but  little  chance
from  any  remedial  agents.  There  is  no  affection  of  glands  in  the
neighbourhood,  but  a  slight  puftiness  for  two  inches  along  the  saphena
vein  is  manifest.

“  There  is  great  aduna  of  the  leg  and  foot,  the  latter  does  not
reach  the  ground  when  she  stands  erect  by  the  aid  of  crutches;  the
toes  barely  touch  it.  She  complains  of  loss  of  appetite,  flesh,  and
sleep,  occasioned  by  pain  of  a  dull  aching  character,  and  starting


428  Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh .

in  the  tumour.  She  has  partial  night  sweats,  suffers  from  the  weight
of  the  part,  and  is  in  constant  apprehension  of  injury,  as  the
slightest  jar  causes  her  intense  pain.

PREVIOUS  HISTORY.

“  About  four  years  ago  she  first  noticed  a  lump,  about  the  size  of
a  hazel  nut,  which  was  moveable,  and  situated  on  the  outer  side  of
the  knee-joint.  It  was  very  painful  when  she  walked;  not  so  when
it  was  touched;  particularly  painful  when  she  put  her  heel  to  the
ground,  and  of  a  darting  character.  It  gradually  increased  in  size.

“On  the  15th  September,  1842,  she  walked  to  the  Leicester  In¬
firmary,  and  was  admitted.  The  part  was  cupped,  lotions  applied;
and  afterwards  a  dark-coloured  ointment.  She  remained  thirteen
weeks,  and  left  without  any  benefit.  On  the  contrary,  her  general
health  suffered,  and  she  had  lost  flesh  considerably.  Since  then  the
tumour  has  increased  till  it  attained  its  present  size.  When  amputa¬
tion  of  the  thigh  was  recommended  as  the  only  resource  to  prolong
her  existence,  tonics  and  occasional  anodynes  were  made  use  of  with
slight  benefit,  when  it  was  resolved  to  try  the  effect  of  mesmerism.
She  was  shortly  afterwards  mesmerised  daily;  her  health  continued
to  improve.  She  passed  good  nights,  free  from  pain,  and  also  during
the  day.  On  the  29th  of  August  the  thigh  was  amputated,  she
being  in  the  mesmeric  coma.

“  August  29,  1844,
“Half-past  4  o’clock,  p.m.

“  Having  been  present  as  assistant  to  Mr.  Tosswill,  at  the  ampu¬
tation  of  the  thigh  of  Mary  Ann  Lakin,  during  a  mesmeric  coma  in¬
duced  by  Mr.  Hollings,  I  noticed  the  following  facts: — On  the  tour¬
niquet  of  modern  invention  being  applied,  so  as  to  stop  the  current
of  blood  in  the  femoral  artery,  the  patient  moaned  faintly  and  took
some  deep  inspirations :  the  corrugation  of  the  eyebrows  were  slightly
contracted,  so  as  to  approximate  them,  and  give  to  her  countenance
an  expression  of  sorrow  more  than  present  pain.  The  eyes  were
closed,  and  the  countenance  remained  at  rest  during  the  operation,
which  was  proceeded  with  in  the  manner  recommended  by  the  first
Mr.  Hey,  of  Leeds.  During  its  continuance  she  moaned  as  if  in  a
troubled  dream,  but  remained  almost  motionless,  so  that  there  was
not  any  occasion  to  support  her  on  the  table,  as  is  usual  in  opera¬
tions.  After  the  operation,  being  placed  on  the  bed,  demesmerised
by  Mr.  Hollings,  and  asked  what  she  had  felt,  she  said  she  ‘  had
been  dreaming  that  a  person  had  tyed  something  tightly  round
her  sound  leg,  and  that  she  felt  angry  and  gave  him  a  kick  to  make
him  desist.’  Having  served  an  apprenticeship  to  the  late  Dr.
M‘Dowel,  one  of  the  surgeons  to  the  Richmond  Hospital,  Dublin,
I  had,  during  that  time,  and  have  since  had,  many  opportunities  of
seeing  surgical  operations.  I  do  not  recollect  any  similar  case  wherein
so  little  evidence  of  suffering  was  given.  They  were  all  accompanied
with  more  expression  of  pain  in  the  countenance,  and  the  patients
expressed  by  exclamations  how  acutely  they  felt;  but  Mary  Ann
Lakin  was  calm,  as  her  features  did  not  change  from  the  first  ex-


429


Postscript  on  the  Amputation  of  the  Thigh .

pression  noted,  and  she  repeatedly  declared  afterwards  she  had  felt
no  pain.  There  was  comparatively  little  motion  of  the  body.

“  I  candidly  state  I  believe  and  feel  assured  that  the  girl,  by
mesmerism,  has  evaded  the  horrors  of  the  operation.

“P.  Downey,

“M.  R.  C.  S.  J.

“  49,  Humberstone-gate.”


The  Editor  of  the  Leicester  Chronicle  makes  the  following
gratifying  remarks  : — ■

The  recent  Case  of  Mesmerism .

“  There  is  nothing  like  a  little  controversy  sometimes  in
bringing  out  the  truth.  The  letter  of  Mr.  Paget,  in  last
week's  Chronicle,  has  served  as  a  kind  of  filip  to  draw  from
the  pen  of  Mr.  Hollings  one  of  the  most  gentlemanly,  mas¬
terly,  and  scholar-like  productions  we  have  read  for  a  long
time;  and  from  Mr.  Tosswill  a  clear,  skilful,  and  effective
vindication  of  the  recent  experiment  from  the  doubt,  and
something  worse  than  doubt,  that  has  been  cast  thereupon.
We  feel  certain  the  great  majority  of  the  public  will  have
their  faith  in  the  truth  and  efficacy  of  mesmerism,  as  an  im¬
portant  agent  in  surgical  operations,  strengthened  by  the  two
letters,  and  Dr.  Shaw's  notes.  Not  a  word  of  comment
could  add  to  the  force  of  either  or  any  of  the  communica¬
tions  :  they  deserve  a  careful  and  candid  perusal  from  every
one.  Not  a  person  breathing,  who  has  a  spark  of  humanity
or  kind  feeling  in  his  breast,  can  fail  to  feel  interested  in  the
subject.

“  If  any  confirmation  were  wanting  as  to  the  beneficial
operation  of  mesmerism  in  the  case  of  Mary  Ann  Lakin,  we
could  add  our  own  humble  testimony  to  it,  from  personal  ob¬
servation  of  her  appearance  since  the  loss  of  her  limb  and  of
the  genuine  character  of  the  mesmeric  sleep ;  and  could  also
proffer  our  full  conviction  of  the  honesty  of  the  whole  pro¬
ceeding.  But  such  additional  evidence  is  not  needed,  although
it  affords  us  pleasure  to  offer  it,  by  way  of  spare  subsidiary
testimony."


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.


“  A  Spiritualist  Seceder from  the  Phrenological  Association /’  It  is  really
true  that  Dr.  Engledue’s  Address  to  the  Association  has  been  translated  and
published  in  Germany.

“  James  T.”  We  do  not  believe  that  any  such  effect  would  arise  under
all  the  circumstances.

We  have  again  exceeded  our  proper  number  of  sheets  (instead  of  six
there  are  eight  and  a  half),  and  regret  being  consequently  compelled  to
defer  certain  communications.

We  have  a  rich  collection  of  the  clairvoyant  wonders  of  Alexis  in  London,
which  are  beyond  all  dispute,  but  must  defer  them  all  till  our  next  number.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

The  Phrenological  Journal,  No.  27.

The  Leicestershire  Mercury  for  August  31.

The  American  Journal  of  Insanity,  No.  1.


THE  ZOIST.


No.  VIII.


JANUARY,  1845.


I.  Intellectual  Freedom — its  Advocates  and  Opponents.

Teach  the  people  to  think.  How  difficult  the  task  !  The
mass  of  men  are  the  slaves  of  prejudice ;  they  are  afraid  to
think.  In  these  days  of  boasted  intelligence  and  vaunted
intellectual  progress  such  a  change  may  almost  assume  the
nature  of  a  paradox,  but  strange  as  it  may  appear  to  the
superficial  observer — it  is  nevertheless  true.  It  is  really
lamentable  to  reflect  on  the  ignorance  which  prevails  on  the
most  important  topics.  Few,  indeed,  recognize  their  own
position  in  the  scale  of  creation,  or  appreciate  any  of  the
objects  which  they  ought  to  fulfil  during  their  existence.
The  search  after  truth  the  majority  neglect,  and  yet  they
suffer  severely  from  the  want  of  that  knowledge  which  would
result  from  free  and  accurate  investigation.

We  have  said  that  men  are  afraid  to  think.  Of  what  are
they  afraid  ?  Afraid  of  the  workings  of  their  own  cerebral
organism — of  the  honest  accumulation  of  facts,  and  of  the
conscientious  conclusions  to  which  they  necessarily  lead  !
Why  do  they  fear  ?  It  is  ignorance  that  makes  cowards  of
them — it  is  ignorance  that  leads  them  to  mistrust  their  own
powers,  and  causes  them  to  consider  the  honest  investigator
in  the  light  of  a  criminal.  No  man  is  justified  in  neglecting
the  investigation  of  any  subject  bearing  on  his  own  or  his
neighbour’s  freedom  and  happiness.  To  teach  the  truth,
meaning  by  that  expression,  not  merely  the  fashionable  so¬
phisms  and  orthodox  opinions  of  the  fleeting  moment,  but
that  which  a  free,  careful,  and  laborious  research  convinces
us  is  truth,  is  the  highest  duty  of  man.  Let  reason  on  all
occasions  have  full  sway.  “Truth  can  bear  the  light,  and
error  must  learn  to  bear  it.”


VOL.  II.


G  G


432


Intellectual  Freedom,


Man  should  investigate  everything.  He  cannot  err  by
prosecuting  careful  research,  but  he  does  err  most  seriously
by  neglecting  it.  He  may  arrive  at  irrational  conclusions,
but  these  are  to  be  corrected  by  renewed  research,  by  a
larger  collection  of  facts,  and  by  a  more  cautious  and  philo¬
sophic  generalization.  He  should  place  no  barriers,  for  they
do  but  mark  the  limits  to  which  the  abettors  of  sloth  and
cowardice  would  confine  men.  The  pigmy  in  science  may
endeavour  to  check  the  career  of  the  philosopher,  by  exclaim¬
ing,  i(  Hitherto  slialt  thou  go,  but  no  farther and  this
motto  men  of  confined  views  may  adopt,  but  the  achieve¬
ments  of  the  next  day  or  the  following  year  prove  the  folly
of  erecting  an  intellectual  cordon,  because  one  resting  spot
after  another  must  be  yielded  to  the  steady  and  progressive
advancement  of  thought.  Reflect  ye  who  would  dictate  the
course  which  your  neighbour  should  pursue, — ye,  who  con¬
sider  your  own  narrow  and  ill-matured  views  as  the  standard
to  which  all  should  conform, — ye,  who,  therefore,  arrogate
to  yourselves  that  which  ye  refuse  to  others,  and  claim  the
power  to  do  that  which  in  the  next  breath  ye  state  man
cannot  perform.  What  is  the  result  of  your  efforts  ?  What
is  the  doctrine  ye  preach  ?  Ye  declare  that  the  future  is  to
be  impregnated  with  the  errors  of  the  past, — that  the  follies
and  weaknesses  of  bygone  days  are  to  be  esteemed  and  nur¬
tured,  and  that  the  light  of  knowledge,  which  nature  intends
to  shine  with  increasing  effulgence,  is  to  a  certain  extent  to
be  extinguished  by  the  dicta  of  antiquity  and  the  ignorance
and  tyranny  of  authority.  With  ductile  youth  how  com¬
mence  ye  your  task  ?  Ye  teach  opinions  when  ye  should  be
engaged  in  teaching  facts,  and  then  ye  practically  say,  “  it
is  virtuous  to  believe  this ;  it  is  impious  to  doubt  that and
thus  the  very  portal  through  which  all  knowledge  is  said  to
creep,  ye  close,  and  guard  by  a  band  of  beings  who  cry
down  the  daring  intruder,  and  yell  forth  epithets  which  too
frequently  scare  even  those  who  have  ventured  to  stand  erect.
Thus  ye  cultivate  fear ;  ye  reduce  men  to  the  state  of  slaves ;
ye  order  them  to  bow  down  and  tremble  ;  whereas  jmur  duty
is  to  call  forth  all  their  intellectual  faculties  and  to  bid  them
arise  and  examine.  Does  it  not  behove,  then,  the  enlightened
few  to  endeavour  to  remove  the  hood  with  which  the  many
are  enshrined, — to  point  out  the  incubus  which  is  so  oppres¬
sive  and  destructive,  and  to  be  always  prepared  by  reason
and  argument  to  meet  the  enslaving  cry,  “  Bow  down,  bow
down,”  by  the  invigorating  and  humanity-stirring  command,
Awake  !  arise  !  examine  !  and  claim  your  independence  !

But  those  who  advocate  this  right  to  investigate  all  things,


its  Advocates  and  Opponents.


433


and  to  dare  to  grapple  even  with  presumed  “  mysteries,”  are
often  met  with  a  sneer,  are  told  to  “  beware  of  reason,”  “the
pride  of  intellect,”  &c.,  and  rather  to  copy  the  example  of
the  “  faithful  follower,”  who,  with  that  meekness  which  is
the  usual  characteristic  of  an  imbecile,  accepts  other  men's
views  and  interpretations,  and  plumes  himself  on  his  humi¬
lity.  By  this  party,  blind  acquiescence  is  considered  a  virtue,
honest  and  manly  investigation  is  construed  into  a  vice,  and
thus  the  philosophic  doubter  is  made  to  rank  in  the  estima¬
tion  of  the  world  far  below  the  ignorant  conformer.  What
perversion  of  principle  !  What  disregard  of  justice  !  We
can  see  no  proof  of  humility  in  blindly  bowing  the  head  to
the  opinions  of  any  party,  and  so  far  from  considering  this
qualification  a  virtue,  we  hold  it  to  be  a  vice  which  should
be  exposed  and  denounced  whenever  or  wdierever  detected.
But  the  weakness  of  this  party  is  surpassed  by  the  knavery
of  another  ;  we  refer  to  the  expediency-mongers.  There  are
many,  who  with  the  external  demeanour  of  meekness  and
submission,  merely  pretend  to  embrace  certain  opinions  and
doctrines, — men,  who  take  advantage  of  the  intellectual
feebleness  of  their  neighbour  to  gain  a  certain  end,  and  who
willingly  prostituted  their  birthright  at  the  shrine  of  a  pitiful,
grovelling,  and  worldly  expediency.  Such  examples  are  de¬
testable  and  degrading.  Yet  such  is  the  course  too  fre¬
quently  pursued, — such,  alas  !  is  the  pattern  which  our  youth
have  constantly  placed  before  them.  A  low  morality  is
practically  instilled  into  them,  and  consequently,  precepts
of  the  greatest  beauty  and  purity  exercise  no  beneficial
influence.*  Fearless,  honest  inquiry,  conviction,  and  the
hardihood  to  assert  it  on  all  occasions,  is  not  the  plan  to  be
followed  by  the  place-seeker,  or  the  popularity-hunter.  Such
a  man  must  pretend  to  be  humble  and  meek,  timorous  and
yielding,  in  a  word,  unreflecting ;  and  if  he  unite  to  these
qualifications  a  little  worldly  shrewdness,  he  has  entered  the


*  The  following  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  disgusting  examples  to  be
met  with.  Dr.  Arnold,  late  Head  Master  of  Rugby  School,  found  his  reli¬
gious  faith  assailed  by  harassing  doubts  and  difficulties.  He  communicated
them  to  an  orthodox  friend,  and  this  teacher  of  moral  truth  thus  writes  on  the
subject: — “The  subject  of  them  (Dr.  Arnold’s  doubts)  is  that  most  awful
one,  on  which  all  very  inquisitive  reasoning  minds  are,  I  believe,  most
liable  to  such  temptations, — I  mean  the  doctrine  of  the  blessed  Trinity.  Do
not  start,  my  dear  Coleridge  ;  I  do  not  believe  that  Arnold  has  any  serious
scruples  of  the  understanding  about  it,  but  it  is  a  defect  of  his  mind  that  he
cannot  get  rid  of  a  certain  feeling  of  objections, — and  particularly  when,  as
he  fancies,  the  bias  is  so  strong  upon  him  to  decide  one  way  from  interest ;
he  scruples  doing  what  I  advise  him ,  which  is  to  put  down  the  objections  by
main  force  whenever  they  arise  in  his  mind ,  fearful  that  in  so  doing,  he  shall
be  violating  his  conscience  for  a  maintenance  sake.”


G  G  2


434


Intellect ual  Freedo m,


path  in  which  his  desires  may  be  satisfied, — amidst  the  de¬
teriorating  influences  which  will  surround  him  he  may  reach
the  goal  he  seeks ;  but  it  is  by  the  sacrifice  of  all  that  should
render  life  dear — for  he  is  become  a  slave.

Emerson  says,  “  Man  is  timid  and  apologetic.  He  is  no
longer  upright.  He  dares  not  say,  *  I  think/  ‘  I  am/  but
quotes  some  saint  or  sage.”  This  is  true.  This  is  the  fault
with  the  intellect  of  the  day — it  appears  to  be  prostrated.
On  subjects  of  the  greatest  importance,  men  seem  inclined  to
remain  satisfied  with  the  prevalent  opinions, — they  are  afraid
to  individualize  themselves  by  thought.  We  contend  that
there  should  be  no  limits  to  inquiry,  but  such  as  our  organ¬
ism  imposes.  And  how  are  these  limits  to  be  ascertained  ?
By  the  multiplicity  and  paucity  of  facts,  and  the  strength  or
weakness  of  the  arguments  and  conclusions  founded  on  them,
nature  has  given  to  every  man  a  sure  test  of  the  extent  to
which  he  should  or  can  proceed.  All  thoughts,  then,  should
be  freely  disseminated,  for  no  one  can  predict  the  effects  they
may  exercise  on  the  development  of  new  truths,  and  the  con¬
sequent  advancement  of  human  happiness  and  enjoyment.
But  how  opposite  is  the  course  pursued.  Let  us  inquire — let
us  doubt.  Where  is  the  educator  of  youth  who  ventures  upon
this  path,  and  who,  while  training  the  juvenile  brain,  applies
to  all  branches  of  knowledge,  these  two  all-important  preli¬
minaries  ?  The  intellectual  faculties,  which  are  progressive  in
their  attainments,  are  “  cabin'd,  cribb'd,  confin'd  /'  they  are
surrounded  by  difficulties,  the  erections  of  arbitrary  power
and  blind  selfishness ;  and  to  overstep  these  is  the  sure  pre¬
cursor  of  ruin  and  worldly  degradation.  Let  the  attempt  be
made,  and  forthwith  the  conservators  of  morality,  forgetting
their  first  duty,  the  encouragement  and  enforcement  of  li¬
berty  of  thought,  denounce  the  intruder,  and  by  their  con¬
servative  and  insane  proceedings  virtually  declare,  that  men
have  no  prejudices  to  uproot — no  opinions  to  be  investigated
or  changed — no  moral  or  physical  truths  to  receive ;  and  that
such  attempts  are  dangerous  to  public  morals  and  the  popular
weal.*  And  the  many  yield — they  declare  the  risk  to  be  too
great — they  worship  the  great  monster-evil,  expediency ;  and
amidst  the  host  of  imitators  that  surround  them,  they  rush
on,  alike  forgetting  their  own  dignity  and  their  neighbour's
welfare.  We  see,  then,  that  fashion  and  self-interest  prompt
some  to  the  course  they  pursue,  but  we  are  convinced  that
with  a  vast  number,  an  original  defect  in  their  moral  and  in-

*  A  clergyman  lately  denounced  geological  investigations  as  not  “  sub¬
jects  of  lawful  inquiry” — “  shrouded  from  us  by  a  higher  power” — u  to  be
reckoned  as  a  dark  art,  dangerous  and  disreputable.”


its  Advocates  and  Opponents.


435


tellectual  training,  renders  them  predisposed  to  receive  the
opinions  of  their  own  time  as  a  collection  of  truisms,  which
brighter  intellects  have  propounded,  which  the  lapse  of  time
has  encircled  with  an  authority, — but  with  an  inquiry  into
the  truth  of  which  they  are  not  fitted  to  grapple.  It  is  thus
that  the  hefid  settles  down,  and  men  degenerate  and  become
mere  automata.  It  is  thus  that  the  existence  of  many  abuses
is  prolonged,  and  it  is  thus  that  the  tameness,  sameness,  and
want  of  originality,  which  is  so  often  deplored,  is  to  be  ex¬
plained.  u  There  are  a  numerous  class  of  people  found  play¬
ing  the  game  of  ‘  follow  the  leader/ — men,  who  look  not  at
principles,  but  persons;  pinning  their  faith  upon  the  sleeve
of  some  individual  who  has  managed  to  ingratiate  himself
with  them;  who  denounce  what  he  denounces,  and  praise
what  he  praises ;  who  look  up  to  this  one  person  as  a  kind
of  f  ugleman,  by  whom  it  must  be  determined  whether  they
shall  shout  or  remain  silent,  whether  they  shall  clamour  for
this  or  that ;  who  investigate  not  any  principles  upon  which
measures  are  founded  by  their  consequences  upon  individuals
and  society,  or  the  results  to  which  they  may  tend,  but  who
think  it  enough  that  the  master  has  said  that  such  measures
must  be  adopted ;  thus  making  themselves  the  f  tools*  in  the
very  worst  sense  of  that  word, — following  him  wherever  he
may  choose  to  lead,  and  elevating  him  upon  their  shoulders,
it  may  be  into  the  possession  of  an  authority  from  which,
when  attained,  he  will  look  down  with  scorn  upon  those  who
have  placed  him  there,  and  becoming  a  far  greater  tyrant
than  those  whom  they  have  enabled  him  to  supersede  and
displace/’*

In  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  it  seems  strange
that  we  are  compelled  to  discuss  the  question  of  intellectual
freedom ;  but  so  long  as  persecution  for  opinion  continues,  it
behoves  the  cerebral  physiologist  to  declare  the  immorality
and  injustice  of  such  proceedings.  As  regards  the  past,  the
most  superficial  reader  of  his  country’s  history — the  most
common  observer  of  the  facts  which  indicate  the  moral  and
intellectual  advancement  of  his  race,  cannot  avoid  some  re¬
flections  on  the  horrors  which  are  so  continuously  chronicled.
At  one  period  a  fierce  and  uncompromising  animalism  de¬
stroyed  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands,  because  their  opi¬
nions  on  disputed  topics  did  not  accord  with  the  opinions  of
the  dominant  party.  Tortures  the  most  severe,  and  dungeons
the  most  loathsome — constant  suffering  and  continuous  woe,
such  was  the  lot  of  those  who  dared  to  assert  their  intellectual


*  W.  J.  Fox.


436


Intellectual  Freedom ,


freedom  and  propound  new  truths.  For  nearly  two  thousand
years  the  battle  has  been  severe  and  bloody — the  oppressors
have  been  strong  and  the  martyrs  have  been  many;  but  the
blood  which  was  shed  marked  in  fadeless  characters  the  gra¬
dual  transition  from  a  barbarous  and  ruthless  ignorance  to  a
civilizing  and  humanizing  knowledge.*  We  will  not,  how¬
ever,  enter  into  historical  detail,  but  we  simply  ask,  in  our
own  day,  has  persecution  for  opinion  ceased?  Is  man’s  freedom
clearly  recognized,  and  authoritatively  proclaimed  ?  We
should  rejoice  if  we  could  say,  yea ;  but  alas  !  we  must  still
consider  it  one  of  the  blots  on  our  civilization.

Recent  events  prove,  that  although  a  few  individuals  may
be  perfectly  convinced  of  the  injustice  and  irrational  tendency
of  religious  prosecutions,  there  are  a  vast  number  who  still
think  that  the  treatment  of  the  felon  is  the  best  prescription
for  a  doubting  brother,  and  who  practically  declare  that  the
hypocrite  and  cringing  slave  is  to  be  preferred  to  the  sincere,
upright,  and  honest  thinker.  What  infatuation  !  They  ab¬
solutely  believe  that  they  are  promoting  the  advancement  of
truth,  by  preventing  the  free  utterance  of  thought,  and  the
certain  result,  interchange  of  knowledge.  We  refer  more
particularly  to  the  cases  which  have  lately  occurred  in  the
northern  metropolis.  Four  numbers  of  the  Edinburgh  Phre¬
nological  Journal  have  appeared  since  two  individuals  were
sentenced  to  imprisonment  and  the  usual  criminal  routine,
for  promulgating  opinions  which  did  not  square  with  the  or¬
thodox  opinions  of  the  day.  This  is  a  question  which  deeply
concerns  cerebral  physiologists.  If  their  science  is  capable  of
placing  any  question  on  a  clear  and  satisfactory  basis,  it  is
this ;  and  yet  the  journal  published  in  the  city  where  these
iniquitous  transactions  occurred — the  journal,  whose  editor
must  daily  pass  the  court  where  these  trials  took  place,  and
who  is  a  member  of  the  profession  more  particularly  engaged
in  perpetrating  these  gross  acts  of  injustice, — contains  not
one  word  which  could  authorize  the  belief  that  the  proceed¬
ings  were  disapproved  of — chronicles  not  one  fact  or  argu¬
ment  which  could  lead  one  to  suppose  that  the  principles  it

*  “  The  world  has  ever,  we  fear,  shewn  but  small  favour  to  its  teachers  :
hunger  and  nakedness,  perils  and  revilings,  the  prison,  the  cross,  the
poison-chalice,  have,  in  most  times  and  countries,  been  the  market-price
it  has  offered  for  wisdom — the  welcome  with  which  it  has  greeted  those  who
have  come  to  enlighten  and  purify  it.  Homer  and  Socrates,  and  the  Chris¬
tian  apostles,  belong  to  old  days  ;  but  the  world's  martyrology  was  not  com¬
pleted  with  these ;  Roger  Bacon  and  Galileo  languish  in  priestly  dungeons,
Tasso  pinesJn  the  cell  of  a  madhouse,  Camoens  dies  begging  on  the  streets
of  Lisbon.  So  neglected,  so  ‘persecuted  they  the  prophets,'  not  in  Judea
only,  but  in  all  places  where  men  have  been." — Carlyle's  Miscellanies,  \ ol.  i.,
p.  341.


its  Advocates  and  Opponents.


437


lias  been  engaged  in  enforcing  for  the  past  twenty  years,  have
in  the  slightest  degree  been  infringed.  Why  is  this  ?  Is  our
science  to  continue  a  mere  record  of  interesting  physiological
facts,  and  not  to  be  made  to  impress  on  our  laws  a  more  just
and  humanizing  spirit?  Are  the  disciples  of  Gall  still  to
continue  to  collect  the  proofs  of  natural  signs  and  symbols,
and  not  to  insist  with  energy  on  the  adoption  of  measures  in
accordance  with  man^s  nature  ?  Is  science  to  succumb  at  the
bid  of  authority,  and  a  blind  conformity  to  take  the  place  of
rational  conviction  ?  Is  this  the  morality  which  is  to  be
shamelessly  paraded  by  our  judges,  and  the  “  magazine  of
moral  science,”  published  in  modern  Athens,  not  to  record  a
single  protest  ?  Shame  on  the  men  who  claim  humanity  for
their  theme,  and  who,  when  that  humanity  is  crushed,  quietly
allow  the  injustice  to  be  perpetrated  without  advancing  to  the
rescue.  Shame  on  the  men  who  claim  the  title  of  philoso¬
phers,  and  are  yet  wanting  the  courage  to  meet  the  frown  of
power  or  the  prejudices  of  the  million.  Shame,  everlasting
shame,  on  the  men  who  knowr  better,  yet  tremble  to  avow  it
— who  privately  raise  their  fronts  and  declaim  on  the  human¬
izing  and  civilizing  tendency  of  their  principles,  but  who  pub¬
licly  permit  these  principles  to  be  invaded,  without  uttering  a
sound  which  can  support  the  dignity  of  reason  or  the  right  of
freedom.

We  are  not  about  to  discuss  the  doctrines  for  the  promul¬
gation  of  which  these  individuals  were  imprisoned,  but  wre
take  our  stand  on  this  fundamental  truism,  that  opinions  are
not  voluntary,  and  therefore,  that  the  entertainment  of  cer¬
tain  opinions  cannot  be  considered  a  legal  offence.  We
claim,  moreover,  the  right  which  every  individual  naturally
possesses,  but  which  authority,  supported  by  ^superstition  and
ignorance,  has  frequently  endeavoured  to  alienate, — the  right
to  discuss  every  question  and  every  topic,  and  to  support  cer¬
tain  views  by  such  arguments  as  may  appear  to  be  correct
and  forcible.  We  have  frequently  referred  to  this  subject  in
an  incidental  manner,  while  contending  for  the  recognition  of
those  laws  which  govern  maifs  actions ;  we  wish  now  to  enter
more  fully  into  its  consideration.

The  infliction  of  punishment  for  the  possession  of  certain
opinions,  presupposes  the  belief  that  the  opinions  which  the
individual  entertains  are  the  result  of  his  volition,  and  that
by  the  dread  of  death,  imprisonment,  fine,  &c.,  these  opi¬
nions  can  be  changed ;  in  fact,  that  by  the  aid  of  fear  the
infidel  can  be  metamorphosed  into  the  saint.  To  this  belief,
in  the  voluntary  reception  and  adoption  of  opinions,  we  are
to  attribute  all  the  miseries  of  religious  and  political  persecu-


438


hitellectual  Freedom ,


tions,  from  tlie  wholesale  murders  of  bygone  days,  to  the
latest  attempts  of  our  own  Attorney-General  and  of  the  Scot¬
tish  judges  to  interfere  with  individual  liberty.  This  subject
has  not  been  treated  in  a  satisfactory  manner  by  cerebral
physiologists.  It  appears  to  us  to  be  simple  and  capable  of
easy  demonstration.  We  know  that  man  cannot  resist  the
necessity  which  governs  all  his  functions.  The  formation  of
an  opinion  is  one  species  of  cerebration — it  is  the  result  of  a
compound  movement,  involving  : —

1st.  The  presentation  of  certain  facts  or  arguments  to  the
intellectual  faculties,  and

2nd.  The  working  of  these  faculties  preparatory  to  the
formation  of  the  product,  which  is  the  opinion.

Now  the  effect  produced  by  the  first  step  in  the  process,
and  the  result  obtained  in  the  second  stage,  depend  entirely
on  certain  combinations  of  cerebral  structure,  and  it  is  not
in  the  power  of  any  individual  to  will  a  certain  result — the
whole  process  is  presided  over  by  invariable  and  immutable
laws.  Man  is  not  free  to  think  or  not  to  think — he  is  not
free  to  feel  or  not  to  feel — neither  is  he  free  to  believe  or  to
disbelieve.  We  observe,  then,  that  the  amount  of  belief  or
disbelief  must  depend  on  the  amount  of  evidence  produced,
and  also  on  the  peculiar  cerebral  conformation  of  the  indivi¬
dual  receiving  the  evidence.  Locke  says,  "  It  is  impossible
for  you,  or  me,  or  any  man  to  know  whether  another  has
done  his  duty  in  examining  the  evidence  on  both  sides,  when
he  embraces  that  side  of  the  question,  which  we  perhaps  upon
other  views  judge  false ;  and  therefore  we  can  have  no  right
to  punish  or  persecute  him  for  it.”

An  opinion  is  not  a  voluntary  act ,  but  an  involuntary  effect.
One  man  is  satisfied  with  a  certain  amount  of  evidence,  ano¬
ther  will  scrutinize  much  more  rigidly,  and  will  withhold  his
opinion  for  a  much  longer  period,  and  perhaps  come  to  an
adverse  conclusion  :  the  very  same  arguments  may  produce
different  effects,  or,  in  other  words,  different  opinions  ;  and
thus,  if  the  question  under  discussion  be  theological,  we  have
the  believer  and  the  disbeliever,  the  Christian  and  the  infidel.
Can  these  two  men  resist  the  necessity  which  governs  their
proceedings  ?  Can  either  will  to  be  more  or  less  satisfied  ?
By  the  organic  laws  they  were  formed  differently,  and  the
processes  which  they  individually  adopt  are  the  necessary
result  of  such  formation.  The  judges  of  our  land,  then,
have  just  as  much  right  to  summon  the  halt,  the  lame,  and
the  blind,  and  to  imprison  them  for  their  physical  imperfec¬
tions,  as  they  have  to  interfere  with  the  peculiar  views  of
certain  individuals,  and  to  punish  them  for  the  means  they


its  Advocates  and  Opponents.


439


adopt  to  ensure  their  promulgation  ;  or,  as  Mr.  Bailey  more
tersely  expresses  it,  “  To  apply  rewards  and  punishments  to
opinion,  is  as  absurd  as  to  raise  men  to  the  peerage  for  their
ruddy  complexions — to  whip  them  for  the  gout  and  hang
them  for  the  scrofula.”

Punishment  then  is  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  men
from  professing  certain  opinions.  We  have  seen  that  such  a
course  is  unphilosophical,  that  it  is  unjust,  and  we  know  that
it  has  always  failed.  Thought  cannot  be  fettered.  The  pro¬
mulgation  of  an  opinion  can  be  prevented  to  a  certain  extent,
and  for  a  time,  by  resorting  to  brute  force, — but  to  arrest
the  inward  thought  by  the  fear  of  pains  and  penalties,  or
indeed  by  any  means,  is  quite  impossible.  An  open  en¬
counter  elicits  truth.  Oppose  argument  to  argument,  let
opinions  clash,  and  from  the  wordy  turmoil  good  must  result.
Prevent  the  free  expression  of  opinion — persecute  the  coura¬
geous  and  conscientious  thinker,  and  the  most  dire  results
must  ensue  from  the  prevalence  of  hypocrisy,  falsehood,  and
cowardice.  Hypocritical  professions  and  verbal  renunciations,
these  are  the  necessary  results  of  all  attempts  at  interference
with  the  freedom  of  thought.  The  public  renunciation  of
Galileo  in  former  days,  and  of  Lawrence  in  modern  times,
are  two  of  the  most  memorable  examples.

Society  encourages  insincerity.  We  repeat  society  en¬
courages  it,  for  even  now,  a  man  may  fulfil  all  his  social
duties, — he  may  be  a  pattern  to  the  circle  in  which  he  moves,
— he  may  be  consistent  and  conscientious  in  all  his  actions,
but  if  lie  dare  to  think,  or  rather  to  promulgate  his  thoughts
on  religious  questions,  if  they  should  be  heterodox, — he
is  denounced,  the  finger  of  scorn  is  pointed  at  him,  he  is
avoided;  and  the  many  in  their  criticisms  do  not  consider  him
an  object  for  the  exercise  of  that  charity  which  they  are  for
ever  professing  and  disputantly  enforcing,  except  in  the  most
legitimate  and  powerful  manner, — by  example.  A  moral
man,  if  he  be  not  a  believer,  is  outwardly  pitied,  but  in¬
wardly  detested  :  notwithstanding  his  virtue  he  is  persecuted,
— but  the  believer,  for  his  belief  alone,  is  caressed  and
recompensed.

A  man’s  opinions  should  be  the  result  of  conviction  :  that
which  he  believes  he  should  know  and  understand ;  but  we
have  already  shewn  that  this  conviction  is  not  under  his  con-
troul.  The  judge,  punishing  a  man  for  his  opinions,  prac¬
tically  says,  “You  should  believe  what  the  laws  of  your
country  declare  to  be  right  and  true,”  but  the  natural  laws
prevent  this  ;  and  the  philosopher  who  attempts  their  inter¬
pretation,  declares  that  such  an  object  is  irrational,  unjust,


410


Intellectual  Freedom,


and  consequently  can  never  be  attained.  Truth,  riglit,  and
justice,  should  be  the  presiding  monitors  of  every  country,
and  the  latitude  and  longitude  of  a  given  spot  should  not  be
made  the  test  of  the  value  of  a  moral  precept.  But  alas  !
how  often  does  a  lofty  mountain  ridge,  or  perchance,  a  purl¬
ing  stream,  convert  truth  into  falsehood,  right  into  wrong,
and  banish  the  commands  of  justice  from  the  moral  code  of
a  people  !  The  recognition,  as  a  truism,  of  the  law  as  lately
interpreted,  would  prevent  these  anomalies  from  ever  being
removed.  The  presumptive  dicta  of  arbitrary  power  and  un¬
enlightened  intellect,  are  productive  of  the  most  deplorable
and  ridiculous  results.  To  command  a  man  to  believe,  or  to
punish  him  for  disbelieving,  what  the  laws  of  his  country
“  declare  to  be  right  and  true,”  is  on  the  one  hand  a  direct
infringement  of  the  liberty  of  thought — a  sure  means  to  pre¬
vent  the  rapid  progress  of  truth ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  an
act  of  injustice  of  the  deepest  dye.  The  laws  of  his  country
should  simply  decree  him  freedom,  and  leave  him  to  decide
by  reason  whether  the  enactments  he  is  called  upon  to  obey
are  in  accordance  with  its  dictates ;  and  if  he  thinks  a  change
is  required,  he  should  have  free  liberty  to  discuss  the  errors
he  has  discovered,  and  to  promulgate  the  remedies  he  would
apply.  Such,  in  our  opinion,  is  the  course  which  should  be
pursued ;  but  if  it  were,  even  now  it  would  have  to  be  accom¬
plished  at  great  risk — it  may  be  in  fear  and  trembling,  and
too  often  has  been  under  the  infliction  of  pains  and  penalties.
The  original  thinker — the  moral  innovator — and  hitherto,  for
such  has  been  the  insanity  of  men,  that  we  may  add  the  dis¬
coverer  in  physical  science,  are  sure  to  be  martyrized  by  the
generation  they  enlighten ;  but  the  thoughts  they  have  ori¬
ginated,  and  the  views  they  have  propounded,  bear  seed  to
the  generations  which  succeed.

If  men  cannot  agree  regarding  the  most  common  and
simple  features  of  social  intercourse,  how  is  it  possible  to  pro¬
duce  uniformity  of  thought  on  a  purely  speculative  subject  ?
Man's  cerebral  conformation  decrees  an  endless  combination
of  ideas,  and  consequently  a  great  diversity  of  opinion  on
every  subject  which  cannot  be  brought  to  the  rigid  test  of
mathematical  demonstration.  When  therefore  we  reflect  on
the  varied  structure  of  the  brain,  and  the  numerous,  peculiar,
rational  and  irrational  ways  in  which  that  structure  is  trained,
we  can  at  once  perceive  the  cause  of  the  innumerable  combi¬
nations  of  thought,  and  recognize  the  truism  in  all  its  im¬
portant  features,  “  that  man  is  the  compound  of  his  organism
and  of  the  circumstances  which  surround  him.”  A  distin¬
guished  writer*  says,  “  In  general,  the  casualty  of  being

*  Mr.  Bailey.


its  Advocates  and  Opponents.


441


brought  into  the  world  in  a  particular  country  inevitably  de¬
termines  the  greater  part  of  a  man's  opinions,  and  of  the  rest
there  are  few  which  do  not  owe  their  origin  to  the  rank  and
family  in  which  he  happens  to  be  born,  and  to  the  characters
of  the  other  beings  by  whom  he  is  surrounded.  A  great  por¬
tion  of  the  opinions  of  mankind  are  notoriously  propagated
by  transmission  from  one  generation  to  another,  without  any
possible  option  on  the  part  of  those  into  whose  minds  they
are  instilled.  A  child  regards  as  true  whatever  his  teachers
choose  to  inculcate,  and  whatever  he  discovers  to  be  believed
by  those  around  him.  His  creed  is  thus  insensibly  formed,
and  he  will  continue  in  after  life  to  believe  the  same  things,
without  any  proof,  provided  his  knowledge  and  experience  do
not  happen  to  infringe  on  their  falsehood.  Mere  instillation
is  sufficient  to  make  him  believe  any  proposition,  although  he
should  be  utterly  ignorant  of  the  foundation  on  which  it
rests,  or  the  evidence  by  which  it  is  supported.  It  may
create  in  his  mind  a  belief  of  the  most  palpable  absurdities ;
things,  as  it  appears  to  others,  not  only  contradicted  by  his
reason,  but  at  variance  with  the  testimony  of  his  senses ;  and
in  the  boundless  field  which  the  senses  do  not  reach,  there  is
nothing  too  preposterous  to  be  palmed  on  his  credulity.  The
religious  opinions  of  the  majority  of  mankind  are  necessarily
acquired  in  this  way ;  from  the  nature  of  the  case  they  can¬
not  be  otherwise  than  derivative,  and  they  are  as  firmly  be¬
lieved,  without  the  least  particle  of  evidence,  as  the  theorems
of  Euclid  by  those  who  understand  the  demonstrations."

How  is  it  possible  then  to  produce  uniformity  of  thought
on  religious  questions  ?

“  Thy  creed,  like  country,  is  thy  birth’s,  not  thine  ;

The  unconscious  baptism  of  some  frontier  line  ;

Swathed  round  thee  by  yon  sweep  of  mountain  ridge,

Swerved  by  a  rivulet,  changing  at  a  bridge.

On  this  side  or  on  that  by  hazard  thrown,

For  regal  rights  we  battle  or  our  own  ;

And  here  or  there,  as  first  we  draw  our  breath,

Theology  decrees  us  Life  or  Death.

Such,  where  thou  partest  with  thy  ten-yards’  span,

Of  polity  and  faith  the  various  man.

Such  thoughts,  St.  Maurice  !  to  thy  bridge  will  cling  A
Around  its  antique  arches  clustering,  5

Calvin  and  Leo,  Laudaman  and  King  ;  j

Or  e’er  old  Pagan  Jove,  who  first  saw  throwm
Those  arches  o’er  thy  waters,  rapid  Rhone.*”


*  The  gates  on  the  bridge  of  St.  Maurice  was,  a  few  years  since,  the
meeting  point  of  three  forms  of  government, — the  republic  of  the  Valais,  the
oligarchy  of  Berne,  and  the  despotism  of  Savoy  ;  and  of  two  religions, — a
bigotted  Popery,  and  a  Calvinism,  not,  perhaps,  less  bigotted.  Thus  a  few
yards,  here  or  there,  made  all  the  difference  for  life,  and,  as  many  no  doubt
believed  and  believe,  for  eternity  !  —  Rhymed  Plea  for  Tolerance  by  John  Kenyon.


442


Intellectual  Freedom,  tyc.

Even  the  presumed  fountains  of  orthodoxy,  our  Universi¬
ties,  are  the  centres  from  which  spread  the  most  ridiculous
and  antique  opinions,  and  at  the  present  moment  hundreds
of  the  recognized  guardians  of  morality,  and  even  the  Right
Reverend  Fathers  of  the  people,  are  engaged  in  an  attempt
to  prevent  Reason  from  assuming  her  seat,  and  to  excite  the
feelings,  by  the  introduction  of  a  formal  and  seductive  man¬
nerism.  We  cannot  believe  that  this  attempt  will  be  success¬
ful, — we  cannot  have  faith  in  the  regenerating  and  vivifying
power  of  education,  and  at  the  same  time  believe  that  the
mummery  of  external  forms,  of  fanciful  decorations,  and  a
return  to  the  observance  of  superstitious  rituals,  can  stop  the
progress  of  thought,  or  permanently  enslave  the  intellect  of  a
people.  There  will,  there  must,  be  a  reaction,  and  it  is  not
difficult  to  predict  the  direction  which  healthy  and  vigorous
thought  will  take.  At  any  rate,  whatever  may  be  the  course
of  events,  it  behoves  every  enlightened  man  to  speak  out
plainly  and  unreservedly  regarding  the  freedom  of  thought,
and  to  denounce  all  attempts  at  persecution.

Persecution  is  the  offspring  of  ignorance  and  superstition.
Liberality  of  sentiment  and  tolerance  are  the  companions  of
knowledge  and  freedom.  A  persecutor  is  a  man  who  has
never  inquired  into  the  foundation  of  his  own  opinions;  he
invades  the  domain  of  thought  with  a  club,  and  bids  his
neighbour  conform  to  his  views  and  embrace  his  doctrines,  or
dread  the  result.  A  liberal  man,  on  the  contrary,  treats  the
opinions  of  his  neighbour  with  respect,  if  they  are  the  result
of  conviction;  and  if  they  arise  from  prejudice,  although  he
cannot  yield  respect,  he  by  rational  arguments  points  out  the
cause  of  their  difference,  and  the  course  which  should  be  pur¬
sued  to  produce  the  desired  uniformity.  Erroneous  opinions
can  only  be  uprooted  by  proving  their  fallacy,  and  this  is  an
appeal  to  reason.  Imprisonment  and  the  felon's  fare  is  an
appeal  to  the  passions,  and  can  never  produce  conviction,  or
that  equanimity  of  temper  which  is  essential  to  impartial  in¬
vestigation.  By  bestowing  judicious  care  on  the  training  of
the  moral  and  intellectual  faculties  of  youth,  we  enable  them
to  curb  their  passions  and  to  bring  their  opinions  to  the  test
of  reason,  and  the  natural  result  will  be  seen  in  their  social
career  ;  they  will  adopt  liberal  and  enlightened  principles,
and  denounce  all  attempts  at  coercion,  whether  resulting
from  political  or  religious  tyranny.  This  is  the  true  course
to  pursue — this  is  the  only  course  which  can  lead  man  to  the
enjoyment  of  that  happiness,  to  which  his  moral  and  intel¬
lectual  nature  evidently  tend.


L.  E.  G.  E.


(  443  )


II.  Phrenological  Society,  17,  Edwards  Street,  Portman  Square.

April  1 7  th,  1844.

Dr.  Elliotson  exhibited  a  cast  of  the  head  of  John  Law¬
rence,  21  years  of  age,  lately  executed  at  Horsham,  Sussex,
for  the  murder  of  a  police  officer,  named  Henry  Solomans,
on  the  21st  of  March.  “  He  had  just  been  apprehended  on  a
charge  of  felony — a  robbery,  and,  in  the  station-house,  struck
Solomans,  who  had  not  captured  him  and  was  talking,  on
the  head  with  the  poker,  and  Solomans  almost  instantly  died.
No  personal  motive  was  therefore  apparent.  He  immediately
exclaimed  that  he  hoped  Solomans  would  die,  was  glad  he
had  done  it,  and  hoped  he  should  be  hanged.  The  act  seemed
the  result  of  a  sudden  impulse.  His  counsel  urged  that  he
had  not  been  responsible  at  the  moment :  but  the  Chief
Justice  assured  the  jury  that  there  was  no  extenuating  cir¬
cumstance,  and  that  he  merited  the  highest  punishment  of
the  law.  The  poor  creature  was  carried  from  the  dock  almost
insensible.

“  The  cast  presented  a  fair  average  development  of  the
intellectual  and  moral  regions.  It  was  not  the  cast  of  the
head  of  a  being  low  in  the  human  scale,  with  little  intellect
and  ideality  and  moral  feeling.  But  the  sides  at  Covetivc-
ness,  or  love  of  property,  and  at  Destructiveness,  or  the
disposition  to  violence,  especially  at  the  latter,  were  very
large.  A  brain,  so  organized,  must  have  been  subject  to
fierce  outbreaks  of  rage.  Had  this  man  been  trained  by  a
sound  education,  not  by  such  as  generally  passes  under  that
name,  and  been  taught  to  abstain  from  fermented  and  dis¬
tilled  fluids,  and  had  the  regulations  of  society  been  such
that  every  honestly-disposed  person  could  gain  a  livelihood,
or  had  he  been  placed  in  different  circumstances,  he  might
have  been  free  from  crime  and  respectable.  If  capital  pun¬
ishment  is  ever  justifiable,  it  certainly  is  not  in  a  case  of
sudden  phrenzy,  without  premeditation  or  personal  feeling ;
and  though  society  has  a  right  to  security  from  every  one  who
has  thus  acted,  the  destruction  of  life  under  such  circum¬
stances  seems  wrong.*

*  The  following  extracts  are  from  the  Sunday  Times,  of  last  April  7th  : —
“  Although  the  prisoner  admitted  the  justice  of  his  sentence,  yet  up  to  the
very  last  moment  he  persisted  in  declaring  that  he  was  not  actuated  by  any
malicious  feeling  towards  the  unfortunate  deceased  ;  but  he  says  that  at  the
moment  a  sudden  and  uncontrollable  impulse  impelled  him  to  seize  the  poker
and  give  the  deadly  blow  ;  and  he  said  that  if  he  had  considered  but  one
moment  he  should  not  have  committed  the  act.  He  has  all  along  declared
that  he  could  not  tell  what  possessed  him  at  the  moment,  but  the  thought  to


444  Phrenological  Society.

Mr.  Symes  read  the  following  letter,  which  he  had  re¬
ceived  from  Lieut.  Colonel  Davidson  : —

“  13,  Park  Road,  Stockwell.
“  Dear  Sir, — My  object  in  now  addressing  you  is  to  ascer¬
tain  whether  or  not  you  could  oblige  me  by  inspecting  the
head  of  one  of  my  sons,  a  boy  of  10,  who,  from  four  years  of
age  has  shewn  a  most  extraordinary  talent,  which  continues
to  astonish  those  placed  in  contact  with  him.

“I  shall  faithfully  detail  my  opinions  on  his  character,
which  from  his  infancy  I  have  studied  with  great  interest,
and  shall  deliver  it  to  you  in  writing  in  a  sealed  paper,  to  he
opened  and  read  by  you  when  and  where  you  may  please ;

kill  the  deceased  suddenly  came  across  his  mind,  and  he  could  not  resist  it.
The  Rev.  Mr.  Allen,  the  chaplain  of  the  gaol,  who  has  been  constantly  with
the  prisoner  since  he  has  been  at  Horsham,  repeatedly  asked  him  whether
he  was  actuated  by  any  feeling  of  malice  towards  the  deceased,  and  the
culprit  in  the  most  solemn  manner  always  made  the  same  statement  relative
to  the  melancholy  transaction,  and  also  said  that  at  the  time  he  struck  the
blow  he  could  hardly  tell  whether  it  was  aimed  at  Solomans  or  any  other
person.

“  Very  shortly  after  the  culprit’s  condemnation  his  fortitude  returned  to
him,  and  he  expressed  an  anxious  and  apparently  sincere  desire  to  atone  for
his  past  crimes  by  a  full  and  sincere  repentance,  and  on  Friday  he  expressed
a  strong  wish  to  receive  the  holy  sacrament.  The  chaplain  at  first  rather
dissuaded  him  from  so  doing,  but  at  length,  believing  him  to  be  sincere  and
truly  penitent,  he  acceded  to  the  prisoner’s  desire.  It  was  after  this  that
the  prisoner’s  uncle  and  brother  called,  but  the  culprit  not  being  then  in  a
state  of  mind  to  receive  them,  requested,  through  the  governor,  that  they
should  not  disturb  him  at  that  moment,  but  come  to  him  in  the  morning.

“  When  not  engaged  with  the  chaplain,  the  culprit  has  almost  inces¬
santly  occupied  himself  in  writing,  and  he  has  sent  letters  to  nearly  all  his
old  abandoned  associates,  earnestly  entreating  them  to  avoid  their  present
course  of  life,  and  to  refrain  from  the  conduct  that  led  to  his  destruction.

“Yesterday  morning  the  prisoner’s  uncle  and  his  brother  came  to  take
their  last  leave  of  him  in  this  world.  The  culprit  bore  the  scene  with  great
firmness,  and  he  appeared  more  concerned  on  account  of  his  brother  than
for  himself,  and  he  entreated  him  in  the  most  solemn  manner  to  alter  his
course  of  life,  and  avoid  the  miserable  condition  to  which  he  had  reduced
himself  by  his  misconduct.  The  brother  appeared  very  much  affected,  and
he  promised  to  reform  his  evil  way  of  life  and  go  home  with  his  uncle,  who,
at  the  dying  request  of  the  culprit,  promised  to  provide  for  him.  From  this
time  the  culprit  prepared  himself  for  the  fatal  moment,  and  he  repeatedly
expressed  his  desire  that  it  had  arrived,  as  he  said  he  was  quite  ready  to  die,
and  he  trusted  he  should  be  forgiven  his  sins.

“  The  officers  of  the  sheriff  arrived  at  the  gaol  soon  after  eleven  o’clock,
and  about  a  quarter  to  twelve  the  culprit  was  pinioned,  and  he  was  shortly
afterwards  led  along  the  passages  of  the  gaol  to  the  drop,  which  was  erected
upon  the  temporary  platform  made  for  that  purpose.  He  walked  with  a  firm
step,  and  mounted  the  ladder  leading  to  the  scaffold  without  any  assistance,
and  then  gazed  calmly  round  among  the  crowd.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Allen  asked
the  miserable  man  whether  he  had  anything  he  wished  to  say,  and  he  replied
that  he  had  not,  and  at  the  same  time  again  declared  that  although  he  suf¬
fered  justly  for  killing  a  fellow-creature,  that  he  had  no  enmity  against  the
deceased,  and  that  ne  was  not  conscious  of  what  he  wras  doing  when  he
struck  him  with  the  poker.”


Phrenological  Society.


445


and  I  feel  no  doubt  but  that  your  judgment  will  furnish  an
additional  proof  of  the  truth  of  phrenological  science,  in
which  I  have  the  firmest  belief.

“  Some  time  since  I  had  a  cast  made  of  my  own  head,
which  is  at  your  service  if  you  think  it  could  prove  of  the
slightest  use.  &c.  &c.

“  I  am,  dear  Sir,

“  Yours  faithfully,

“To  E.  S.  Svmes,  Esq.,  “C.  J.  C.  Davidson.

“Hon.  Sec.  Phren.  Soc.”

Mr.  Symes  had  replied,  that  if  Colonel  Davidson  would
have  a  cast  taken  of  his  son's  head,  he  should  be  happy  to
draw  up  an  estimate  of  the  character  from  the  cerebral  or¬
gans,  and  to  compare  it  with  Col.  Davidson's  account.  Col.
Davidson  having  complied,  he  appointed  to  meet  him  and
compare  the  two  at  this  meeting  of  the  Society.  Mr.  Symes
now  made  some  remarks  upon  the  cast  of  the  colonel’s  head,
which  was  upon  the  table ;  and  Col.  D.  having  then  handed  to
the  President  a  sealed  packet  containing  his  own  estimate  of
his  son's  character,  Mr.  Symes  exhibited  a  cast  of  the  boy's
head,  and  read  the  following  estimate  of  the  cerebral  deve¬
lopment  and  character  : —

“A  large  head,  measuring  21 J  inches  in  circumference.
Temperament  nervous.


Amativeness,  may  be  esti¬
mated  as .

Love  of  Offspring  .

Attachment .

Inhabitiveness .

Courage .

Disposition  to  Violence  ....

Cunning .

Love  of  Property .

Constructiveness .

Self-Esteem .

Love  of  Approbation .

Circumspection  .

Benevolence .

Veneration .

Firmness .

Conscientiousness .


5

3
5
5
5
5
5

4

5
5
5
5
5

4

5


Hope .

Marvellousness .

Ideality .

Imitation .

Sense  of  Things
Form  ........

Size .

Weight .

Colour .

Number .

Order .

Time .

Melody .

Language .

Comparison.  .  .  .

Causality .

Wit .


5

5

5

5

4

5
5
3

3

4

3

o

4

4

5
5
5


“  The  principal  size  is  before  and  above  the  ears ;  it  ex¬
hibits  a  fine  broad  coronal  surface, — the  moral  region.  The
superior  part  of  the  forehead — the  higher  intellectual  region
is  also  particularly  large.

“  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  the  two  hemispheres  do  not


446


Phrenological  Society.


quite  correspond ;  there  is  a  considerable  difference  in  the
development  of  some  of  the  organs  on  the  two  sides ;  and
moreover  some  of  the  organs  are  situated  higher  on  the  one
side  than  the  other,  making  the  head  what  has  been  termed
lop-sided.

“  From  this  development,”  Mr.  Symes  said,  “  there  could
be  no  difficulty  in  saying  what  such  a  head  might  be  capable
of,  the  difficulty  would  be  rather  to  determine  what  it  might
not  be  capable  of;  and  it  would  probably  be  rather  a  matter
of  chance  than  otherwise  what  particular  faculty  should  pre¬
dominate  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  might  be  decided  in  a  great
measure  by  extraneous  adventitious  circumstances.

“  When  a  head  is  presented  to  a  practical  cerebral  phy¬
siologist,  with  but  a  moderate  organization  generally,  and
some  one  faculty  largely  developed,  he  would  readily  discover
the  predominant  faculty  from  the  large  relative  size  of  the
organ  upon  which  it  depends ;  but  in  this  head  nearly  all  of
the  intellectual  organs  are  of  the  largest  size ;  and  with  such
an  active  temperament,  and  such  a  large  development  also  of
the  organs  of  qualities  which  would  impel  the  individual  to
seek  distinction  in  some  way,  he  must  indeed  be  doing ;  but
having  so  many  faculties  in  nearly  equal  proportion,  it  would
be  impossible  to  predicate  from  the  organization  alone  with
any  degree  of  certainty  which  he  might  adopt.  Again,  many
of  the  faculties  in  so  young  a  child  could  not  of  course  be
expected  to  have  manifested  themselves,  but  it  is  probable
that  he  would  be  highly  intelligent  and  acute,  of  a  most
kind-hearted  and  affectionate  disposition,  but  bold  and  dar¬
ing,  mischievous,  and  passionate,  by  no  means  shy  or  retiring,
but  on  the  contrary,  having  a  high  opinion  of  himself  and
of  everything  belonging  to  him,  and  very  desirous  of  the
good  opinion  of  others.  The  organ  of  Love  of  Approbation
is  indeed  so  predominant,  that  it  would  be  likely  to  dege¬
nerate  into  vanity  unless  carefully  repressed ;  and  he  might
fall  into  a  constant  state  of  uneasiness  unless  when  attracting
notice,  and  be  liable  to  take  offence  at  the  slightest  apparent
neglect.  He  might  be  cautious  and  cunning,  (using  the
word  cunning  not  in  a  bad  sense,  for  with  such  a  fine  moral
region  he  could  not  stoop  to  any  baseness.)  The  French
expression  savoir  faire  perhaps  best  expresses  the  implied
quality.  Very  firm,  especially  when  any  coercive  measures
were  employed ;  these  would  probably  render  him  violent ;
he  would  yield  much  more  readily  to  reasoning  or  an  appeal
to  his  sense  of  justice,  attachment,  or  benevolence,  and
above  all  to  flattery.  He  would  stand  up  firmly  and  boldly
for  his  rights,  or  what  he  considered  such ;  he  might  evince


Phrenological  Society.


44  7


a  great  love  of  the  marvellous,  and  delight  in  poetry,  mimicry,
and  sarcasm.  It  would  be  almost  dangerous  to  hazard  an
opinion  as  to  the  talent  more  particularly  manifested  by  him,
but  the  Constructiveness  is  so  large,  and  combined  with  such
large  Form  and  Imitation,  that  it  is  highly  probable  that  he
may  have  evinced  great  mechanical  ingenuity  of  some  kind  ;  he
might  also  be  fond  of  drawing,  but  the  deficiency  of  Colour
would  prevent  his  ever  becoming  a  distinguished  painter.
Music  also  is  rather  large;  Time  moderate;  Number  and
Language  pretty  large.  The  higher  intellectual  faculties  may
be  expected  to  be  of  the  very  highest  order,  when  their  ac¬
tivity  becomes  fully  developed ;  he  would  be  always  enquiring
into  the  causes  of  things,  very  acute,  and  fond  of  argument
and  disputation,  and  abounding  in  ingenious  speculations.”

The  President,  then  opened  and  read  Colonel  Davidsoids
communication  as  follows  : —

“  Character  of  Cyril  Theodore  Davidson  by  his  father.
Cjnfil  is  now  nearly  10  years  of  age.  Affectionate  in  a  very
high  degree,  speedily  forgetting  trifling  chastisements,  and
returning  to  caress  his  mother.

“  Has  an  excellent  memory,  and  learns  hymns  to  any
number  at  a  halfpenny  a-piece.

“  Strictly  conscientious  and  considerate,  and  possessed  of
great  courage  and  strong  determination.

“  Fond  of  music,  and  always  endeavouring  to  sing  what
he  hears ;  but  seems  unable  to  give  utterance  to  his  con¬
ceptions.

“  From  the  early  age  of  four,  up  to  the  present  period,
he  has  been  almost  incessantly  occupied  in  modelling  animals
(and  articles  connected  with  them,  such  as  carts,  carriages,
&c.)  in  wax,  and  has  succeeded  in  a  most  astonishing  manner.

“  In  like  manner  he  draws,  coarsely  it  is  true,  but  with
surprising  effect  and  spirit,  various  animals,  coaches  and  four
at  gallop,  &c.

“  A  year  ago,  I  saw  him  cast  a  horse  on  the  ground  with
the  most  savage  bitterness,  exclaiming,  1 1  canT  put  any  life
into  that  bruted

“  Uses  many  phrases  of  artists  that  he  has  never  heard,
and  speaks  of  his  own  performances  with  great  jealousy.

“  Has  determined  to  become  either  a  sculptor  or  a  farmer,
in  the  hope  that  he  may  always  be  associated  with  animals,
and  thus  be  able  to  model  them  from  nature  !

“  Fond  of  praise  and  easily  stimulated  to  exertion.

“Exceedingly  jealous  of  ridicule,  and  very  watchful  to
avoid  incurring  it.


VOL.  II.


it  n


448


Phrenological  Society.


“  Occasionally  irritable.

“  Shows  symptoms  of  personal  vanity,  but  no  meanness
of  spirit  in  any  shape.

“  C.  J.  C.  Davidson.”

“  Mr.  Atkinson  remarked  that  from  the  very  large  size  of
the  organs  of  muscular  action,  muscular  power,  and  mus¬
cular  sense,  (organs  which  he  had  been  fortunate  enough  to
discover  by  means  of  mesmerism,)  he  should  suppose  the
boy  would  be  fond  of  great  muscular  exertion  :  to  which
Col.  D.  replied  that  he  took  extremely  active  exercise,  so  that
it  was  difficult  to  restrain  him ;  and  in  reply  to  different
members.  Col.  D.  added  that  the  boy  was  remarkably  face¬
tious,  but  any  attempt  at  mimicry  was  instantly  checked  by
his  parents ;  and  that  he  was  of  a  most  enquiring  mind,  and
would  often  keep  up  an  argument  with  his  mother  for  hours
together.

“  Col.  D.  also  exhibited  a  horse  beautifully  modelled  by
the  boy  in  wax.”


May  1st ,  1844.

Edmond  S.  Symes,  Esq.,  exhibited  a  skull  said  to  have
been  that  of  an  “  old  miser.”  The  only  remarkable  points
about  it  were,  that  while  every  other  portion  was  particularly
thick  and  dense,  the  inferior  lateral  region,  and  especially  at
the  organ  of  Love  of  Property,  was  remarkably  thin  and
translucent.

Mr.  Symes  afterwards  read  an  address  containing  some
strictures  upon  an  article  recently  published  in  the  Provincial
Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  and  copied  into  the  last  num¬
ber  of  the  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal,  by  J.  Cowles
Prichard,  M.D.,  E.R.S.

The  object  of  the  article  was  to  show,  “  that  the  principle
and  fundamental  cause  of  insanity  is  in  many  instances  to  be
sought  not  in  the  brain,  but  in  some  other  region  of  the
body the  author  arguing,  that  “  effects  produced  upon  the
sensorium  and  the  mind  through  the  medium  of  the  stomach,
or  any  of  the  viscera  of  physical  life,  are  not  less  immediately
brought  about  by  the  action  of  the  natural  organism  or  the
intellectual  or  sensitive  power,  than  impressions  produced  in
the  mind  by  a  blow  on  the  head  or  by  any  powerful  agency
exerted  immediately  on  the  brain,”  &c.  &c.  This  position  is
attempted  to  be  illustrated  by  what  the  author  terms  “  a
striking  and  decided  example,  that  may  carry  strong  convic¬
tion  on  the  subject,”  of  a  case  of  presumed  insanity,  in


Phrenological  Society.  449

which  after  death  there  were  found  the  following  morbid
appearances.

The  cranium  remarkably  light  and  thin  and  permeable  to
light.

Between  the  layers  of  the  arachnoid  was  much  fluid ;
this  membrane  was  opaque  where  it  covers  the  posterior  lobes
of  the  cerebrum,  and  raised  by  fluid  effused  between  it  and
the  pia  mater  separating  the  convolutions :  ventricles  full  of
perfectly  colourless  serum.  The  brain  and  dura  mater  were
very  exsangueous.  Altogether  the  fluid  effused  amounted
to  five  ounces.

But  because  in  addition  to  the  above  there  were  evidences
of  extensive  disease  in  the  lungs  and  intestinal  canal,  the
author  considered  the  “  insanity  mainly  dependant  on  a
diseased  state  of  organs  very  remote  from  the  brain.”

Mr.  Symes  pointed  out  the  fallacy  of  the  author’s  posi¬
tion,  arguing  that  disordered  intellect  is  in  truth  an  affection
of  the  brain ;  that  in  the  great  majority  of  long-standing
insanity  we  do  find  very  palpable  evidences  of  disease  of  the
brain ;  and  that  if  in  some  instances  there  are  no  evidences
of  morbid  change  so  gross  as  to  be  appreciable  to  our  unas¬
sisted  senses,  with  our  present  knowledge  and  our  present
means  of  investigation,  that  is  only  what  occurs  in  func¬
tional  derangement  of  other  organs,  and  should  only  stimu¬
late  us  to  improve  our  means  of  investigation.

Mr.  Symes  also  made  some  remarks  in  opposition  to  the
hypothesis  incidentally  introduced  by  Dr.  Prichard,  of  the
existence  of  mind  as  a  separate  something  independently  of
matter :  Mr.  Symes  arguing,  that  we  have  no  more  right  to
assume  such  a  position  to  account  for  the  phenomena  of  life
and  thought  in  man,  than  in  brutes ;  and  as  regards  certain
phenomena  of  automatic  life,  than  for  analogous  phenomena
in  the  vegetable  kingdom.


May  15  th,  1844.

Dr.  Elliotson  made  the  following  observations  on  the  case
of  William  Crouch.

“  I  have,  both  in  this  society*  and  in  print, f  expressed
not  only  my  horror  of  capital  punishments  in  all  cases,  but
my  conviction  of  their  inutility,  and,  what  is  more,  their
injurious  tendency.

*  Nov.  21,  1842.  See  Zoist,  No.  I.,  pp.  49—54

t  Illustrations  of  Phrenology ,  by  G.  R.  Lewis.  No.  I.  Courvoisier.  pp.
42,  43.  Highley,  Fleet  Street,  1841.


II  H  2


450


Phrenological  Society.


“  Tliose  who  have  not  yet  reflected  enough  upon  the  sub¬
ject,  and  examined  how  far  habit  has  blinded  them  to  the
savage  and  brutal  character  and  ill  effects  of  capital  punish¬
ments,  to  condemn  them  universally,  will  still  allow  that
they  are  utterly  indefensible  in  cases  of  cerebral  disease, —
where  insanity  or  fatuity  exists,  or  where  the  brain  labours
under  inflammation,  acute  or  chronic,  or  any  structural  affec¬
tion  to  which  the  other  organs  of  the  body  are  liable,  or  has
suffered  palpable  injury  from  a  known  cause.

“  My  present  purpose  is  to  shew  that  William  Crouch,
who  has  been  convicted  of  the  murder  of  his  wife  in  Mary-
lebone  Lane,  on  the  30th  of  last  March,  ought  on  account
of  cerebral  injury  not  to  be  hanged.

“  They  had  been  married  about  two  years,  had  a  baby,
and  lived  separate,  but  they  habitually  visited  each  other.
“  On  the  morning  of  the  day  of  the  murder,  he  said  to  a
woman,  named  Mary  Lynes,  who  resided  in  the  same  house
with  her,  that  his  wife  had  not  been  to  see  him  that  morn¬
ing,  and  he  thought  she  had  cut  him.  The  woman  replied
that  his  wife  was  at  work.  The  following  is  the  rest  of  Mary
Lynes^s  deposition  : — ‘  The  same  evening  Mrs.  Crouch  was  in
my  room  suckling  her  baby,  and  I  was  cleaning  the  stairs.
The  prisoner  came  up.  There  was  a  little  girl  named  Sarah
Simpson  in  the  room  with  Mrs.  Crouch.  He  said,  “  Oh,  is
my  missis  above  ?”  I  said  yes.  He  then  passed  me  up.  I
noticed  nothing  particular  about  him.  I  heard  his  wife  sing¬
ing,  “  Tare  thee  well,  love,  I  am  going/'’  As  soon  as  he  got
up  to  the  room  the  song  ceased,  and  the  little  girl  cried  out.
I  instantly  went  into  the  room.  The  prisoner  was  standing,
with  his  left  arm  resting  on  my  chest  of  drawers,  wiping  a
razor.  The  woman  was  lying  against  the  wainscoting,  dead.
She  was  bleeding  from  the  neck.  I  took  the  prisoner  by  the
shoulders  and  asked  him  how  he  dared  to  treat  his  wife  in
that  manner  ?  He  made  no  answer.  The  child  was,  I
believe,  lying  under  the  woman.  The  prisoner  said,  as  I
thought  to  the  corpse,  “  If  one  man  wasn't  enough,  twenty
was  not  too  much.”  He  then  walked  as  quick  as  he  could
down  stairs.  He  was  brought  again  to  my  room,  in  custody,
and  he  said,  “  Is  she  dead  ?”  I  said,  “  Yes,  she  is,  you
villain.”  He  said,  “Well,  well,  I  did  it,  and  I  could  not
help  it/  Cross-examined  :  f  The  deceased  was  a  woman  of
most  excellent  character  and  unexceptionable  conduct.  No
words  passed  between  the  deceased  and  the  prisoner  before
the  child  called  out  to  me/  After  some  immaterial  evidence,
Mr.  Baron  Alderson  agreed  with  the  learned  counsel  for  the
defence,  that  it  was  unnecessary  to  offer  further  evidence  for


Phrenological  Society.


451


the  prosecution.  ‘  The  facts  were/  said  his  lordship,  f  as
clear  as  that  two  and  two  make  four/

“This  couple  lived  apart  simply  because  he  was  out  of
work,  and  they  had  not  the  means  of  support  when  living
together  :  and  she  worked  for  her  own  and  even  for  his  living.
He  was  fond  of  her,  and  had  no  reason  to  complain  of  her.

“  Mr.  T.  J.  Tuffnell,  Assistant- Surgeon  of  the  3rd  Dra¬
goon  Guards,  deposed  that  in  December,  1838,  Crouch  had
been  thrown  from  a  horse  in  Devonshire,  with  his  right
temple  against  a  stone  wall,  so  violently  that  he  was  per¬
fectly  senseless  for  several  days,  and  confined  to  the  hospital  for
a  month  ;  and  Mr.  Tuffnell  had  concluded  that  he  would  become
of  unsound  mind.

“  This  surgeon’s  opinion  proved  correct.  Mr.  Henry
Sibley  deposed  that  Crouch,  after  leaving  the  hospital,

‘  was  quite  a  changed  man — very  dull  and  altogether  different.
His  eyes  were  dull  and  his  conversation  strange.  He  would
talk  and  laugh  strangely  without  reason. J  In  fact,  so  soon  as
the  following  February  (1840),  he  was  obliged  to  be  placed  a
second  time  under  medical  care ;  and  Mr.  W.  Collins,  his
surgeon,  deposed  that  he  at  that  time  was  f  labouring  under
the  effects  of  concussion  of  the  brain,  and  shewed  great  weak¬
ness  of  mind  :’  and  most  justly  said  that  he  should  never  be
surprised  at  hearing  of  a  man  who  had  suffered  from  such  an
injury  committing  a  violent  act.

“  Crouch  did  not  return  to  the  service  of  Sir  Lawrence
Palk,  with  whom  he  was  living  at  the  time  of  the  accident.

“  Many  other  witnesses  spoke  to  the  altered  demeanour  of
the  prisoner  after  his  accident.  A  valet  in  the  service  of  Lord
Falmouth,  with  whom  the  prisoner  lived,  said  that  his  strange
conduct  gained  him  the  name  of  ‘  the  half-cracked  man.}

“  But  the  poor  creature’s  brain  was  destined  to  receive
farther  injury ;  for  a  witness  declared  that  in  1840  he  fell
from  a  ladder  arid  sustained  a  severe  injury  in  the  temple.
The  diseased  state  of  his  brain  from  the  first  injury  possibly
occasioned  unsteadiness  and  this  fall  from  the  ladder  and
second  injury  to  the  head,  and,  as  it  appears,  to  the  temple  again.

“Afterwards,  in  the  January  of  the  present  year,  his  cere¬
bral  faculties  seem  to  have  been  greatly  deteriorated.  For
the  keeper  of  the  Crown  and  Thistle,  Thomas  Street,  Oxford
Street,  said  :  ‘  The  prisoner  came  into  my  service  last  Ja¬
nuary.  He  engaged  as  waiter  and  potboy.  He  was  quite
unfit  for  that  situation.  I  always  took  him  to  be  a  person
totally  unfit  for  any  situation.  I  considered  him  a  man  of
weak  intellect .’  Another  person  in  the  same  line,  named
William  White,  said  :  ‘  The  prisoner  came  to  my  service.


452


Phrenological  Society.


He  stayed  but  a  week  with  me,  and  I  dismissed  him.  He
was  incapable  of  understanding.  If  one  person  gave  him  an
order  in  the  parlour,  and  another  called  him  at  the  same  time
and  gave  him  another,  he  would  forget  both/

“  Here  is  a  case  in  which  the  brain  had  twice  sustained  me¬
chanical  injury  enough  to  make  the  faulty  performance  of  its
functions  a  probable  result :  and  the  injury  moreover  on  each
occasion  was  about  the  part  of  the  brain  in  which  we  know
positively  that  the  organ  destined  to  the  disposition  to  vio¬
lence  is  placed.  Here  is  a  case  in  which  the  injuries  had
produced  the  faulty  performance  of  function ;  so  that  the
eyes  became  dull,  the  conduct  strange, — that  of  a  half-
cracked  man, — the  intellect  weak,  and  he  was  unfit  for  any
situation.

“  Can  it  be  wondered  that  for  no  reason  whatever,  and  in
the  midst  of  affection,  he  one  day  cut  his  wife's  throat  ?
While  under  sentence  of  death,  he  told  the  clergyman  that
he  had  murdered  his  wife  because  a  woman  named  Cousins
had  said  she  was  unfaithful.  Supposing  this  had  been  said
to  him,  he  had  no  reason  whatever  to  believe  it,  and  does  not
seem  to  have  inquired  at  all  into  its  truth ;  but  to  have  at
once  taken  it  for  granted  and  cut  his  wife's  throat,  like  an
imbecile  person,  such  as  so  many  witnesses  proved  him  to
be.  Could  the  interior  of  his  head  have  been  seen,  I  am
certain  there  would  have  been  descried  the  redness  of  inflam¬
mation  or  congestion,  and  adhesion,  effusion,  hardening,  soft¬
ening,  or  other  such  marks  and  results  of  slow  inflammation.

“  The  publican  who  found  him  unfit  for  the  office  of  pot¬
boy,  farther  deposed  that,  ‘  On  the  day  of  the  murder  he
came  to  my  house.  I  do  not  know  what  drink  he  had.  He
spoke  affectionately  that  day  about  his  wife  and  child.  That
was  between  two  and  three  in  the  afternoon.  He  came  to  ask
for  a  pint  of  porter,  which  he  got,  but  I  don't  know  what
other  drink.  He  was  in  the  tap-room  about  an  hour  and  a
half.'

“  A  brain  so  injured  would  be  upset  in  its  functions  by  a
quantity  of  fermented  or  distilled  fluids  which  in  health  might
have  been  taken  with  no  obvious  detriment.  I  have  had
many  patients  who  were  furiously  delirious  on  taking  a  single
glass  of  gin,  one  furiously  delirious  from  common  rheumatism
of  the  side  of  the  head,  because  they  had  years  before  sus¬
tained  a  severe  injury  of  the  head.  If  the  man  was  at  all
irresponsible  before,  he  certainly  must  have  been  completely
so  after  alcoholic  drink  :  and  if  it  is  contended  that  he  was
not  irresponsible  before,  no  medical  man  could  doubt  his  ir¬
responsibility  then.  The  judge,  one  of  the  soundest  lawyers,


Phrenological  Society.


453


I  hear,  and  most  humane  men,  of  the  many  sound  lawyers
and  humane  men  now  upon  the  bench,  Baron  Alderson,

( summed  up  the  evidence,  premising,  that  when  a  plea  of
insanity  was  set  up  in  defence  of  a  crime,  it  was  necessary  to
shew  that  the  insanity  was  produced  by  a  form  of  disease
contained  involuntarily  within  the  afflicted  person,  and  not
produced  by  the  voluntary  act  of  the  individual.  If  a  person
by  drinking  deprived  himself  of  his  senses,  and  whilst  in  that
state  committed  a  crime,  he  could  not  plead  the  insanity  of
drunkenness  in  justification,  because  he  voluntarily  deprived
himself  of  the  power  over  his  own  actions.  In  the  present
case,  the  jury  should  consider  whether  it  had  been  proved
that  the  prisoner  committed  the  act  with  which  he  was
charged,  whilst  under  the  influence  of  excitement  produced
by  disease  of  his  brain,  and  not  voluntarily  from  other  causes.
His  lordship  then  read  over  the  entire  of  the  evidence,  com¬
menting  upon  such  parts  as  tended  to  shew  an  aberration  of
the  prisoner’s  mind,  and  observing  that  there  was  no  proof  of
his  having  drank  anything  more  than  a  pint  of  beer  on  the
day  of  the  murder.  He  also  remarked  that  it  was  proved  by
the  evidence  for  the  prosecution  that  the  prisoner  was  in  a
state  of  stupor  both  before  and  immediately  after  the  com¬
mission  of  the  deed.’

“  Hoav  contrary  to  all  medical  science  are  these  observa¬
tions.  The  diseased  condition  of  the  man’s  brain  prevented
him  from  possessing,  or  putting  into  practice,  the  wisdom  of
abstinence,  so  necessary  to  his  welfare.  His  drinking  was
as  venial  as  the  murder.

“  Instead  of  hanging  this  unfortunate  fellow-creature,  the
Government  should  have  him  treated  for  chronic  inflamma¬
tion  of  his  brain.  He  should  be  kept  in  repose  and  upon  low
diet,  and  leeches  and  other  anti-inflammatory  measures  be
steadily  employed  according  to  circumstances,  till  he  is  well :
and  then  he  should  always  be  more  or  less  looked  after,  be¬
cause  the  morbid  excitability  once  induced  in  the  brain  by  a
mechanical  injury  often  lasts  in  some  degree  or  other  through
a  long  life.  I  have  known  mischief  take  place  at  the  very
spot  of  an  injury  above  thirty  years  after  the  accident.  Per¬
sons,  after  an  injury  of  the  head,  are  seldom  perfectly  safe
afterwards,  unless  they  become  rigid  water-drinkers.

“  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  suppose  that  this  patient  will
be  executed  for  a  deed  resulting  from  the  chronic  inflam¬
mation  of  his  brain.  The  punishment  would  be  as  unjustifi¬
able  as  to  hang  a  patient  labouring  under  acute  inflammation
of  his  brain  in  fever  for  any  fatal  violence  he  may  have  com¬
mitted  upon  his  attendant :  as  irrational  and  cruel  as  to


454


Phrenological  Society.


punish  a  courtier  for  tumbling  over  the  queen  in  a  fit  of  gid¬
diness  occasioned  by  a  previous  injury  of  his  skull,  or  a  boy
whose  stomach  is  diseased  from  a  blow  for  vomiting  over  his
mother.

“  It  is  gratifying  to  me  to  be  able  to  communicate  to  the
society  at  this  moment  the  following  case,  which  has  just  oc¬
curred  to  Dr.  Engledue  and  been  transmitted  to  me.  It  is  in
all  respects  parallel,  even  to  the  situation  of  the  part  of  the
skull  struck.

“ 1  Gr.  W.,  12  years  old,  received  a  blow  on  the  temple  from
a  cricket-ball,  on  the  5th  day  of  April  last.  He  was  knocked
down  and  remained  insensible  for  several  hours,  but,  from  the
poverty  of  his  parents,  medical  advice  was  not  requested.
Three  weeks  after  the  receipt  of  the  injury  he  was  brought  to
me,  and  his  mother  related  the  following  history.  For  several
days  after  the  injury,  he  remained  dull  and  stupid,  manifest¬
ing  a  great  disinclination  to  exert  himself,  or  even  to  join  in
the  usual  games  of  play  with  his  brothers.  Slight  spasmodic
twitchings  of  the  leg  and  arm  were  noticed  on  the  opposite
side  to  that  injured,  and  at  the  same  period  a  daily  and  in¬
creasing  change  of  character.  Before  the  accident  he  was
kind  and  affectionate  in  his  manner,  and  particularly  atten¬
tive  to  the  commands  and  wishes  of  his  parents,  but  now  he
is  spiteful,  revengeful,  and  perfectly  reckless.  He  is  now
constantly  quarrelling  with  his  brothers  and  sisters,  and  does
not  attend  to  the  orders  of  his  parents.  If  he  is  requested  to
perform  a  duty,  he  is  impertinent,  and  if  checked  in  the
least,  he  swears  and  uses  the  grossest  language.  He  was
never  known  to  swear  before  the  accident,  but  now,  his  mother
says  that  his  language  is  very  bad,  and  that  he  uses  words
which  till  now,  she  supposed  he  had  never  heard.  He  is  ex¬
tremely  mischievous.  He  destroys  the  furniture  whenever  he
has  the  opportunity,  and  does  not  confine  himself  to  these
actions,  but  annoys  his  younger  brothers  and  sisters  by  spit¬
ting  at  them,  throwing  water  at  them,  and  breaking  their
playthings.  He  was  detected  in  an  attempt  to  fire  a  quantity
of  chips  in  the  cellar  of  his  father’s  house.  He  has  attempted
self-destruction  by  tying  a  piece  of  rope  round  his  neck  and
fastening  it  to  a  nail  in  the  wall  of  the  garden.  He  speaks
of  butchering  the  whole  of  his  family  with  a  mallet  as  soon
as  he  can  obtain  the  opportunity,  and  seems  to  enjoy  the  ter¬
ror  of  his  mother  and  his  relations,  when  they  become  alarmed
at  the  destructive  nature  of  his  actions.

“  He  complains  of  no  pain  in  his  head,  and  states  that  he
is  quite  well.  He  answers  questions  during  his  interviews
with  me  with  the  greatest  composure  and  intelligence,  but


Some  particulars  respecting  Gall.


455


the  moment  he  returns  to  his  own  house,  and  is  left  uncon-
troulled,  his  actions  become  violent  in  the  extreme/

“  The  only  difference  between  these  cases  is,  that  Crouch
has  committed  murder ;  the  boy  has  not  yet  committed  mur¬
der  :  that  Crouch  after  leaving  the  hospital  was  abandoned  to
his  own  guidance ;  and  the  boy,  because  a  child,  has  been
placed  by  his  mother  under  able  medical  care,  and  probably
will  be  saved  from  crime  and  cruelty.”


There  have  been  other  differences  in  these  two  cases  since  Dr.  Elliotson
read  his  paper.  Crouch  has  been  hanged :  the  boy  has  gradually  improved
under  Dr.  Engledue’s  treatment.

Dr,  Elliotson,  we  know,  felt  deeply  in  Crouch’s  fate;  and  sent  his  de¬
cided  medical  opinion,  together  with  the  details  of  Dr.  Engledue’s  patient,
to  Sir  James  Graham.  The  letter  was  simply  acknowledged,  and  the  man
was  hanged  immediately  afterwards.  For  some  years  past  the  surgeon  has
examined  the  brains  of  those  executed  at  Newgate,  and  casts  have  been
taken  of  their  heads ;  but  neither  cast  nor  anatomical  examination  was
allowed  in  the  present  instance.  Posterity  will  remark  that  all  this  was
so  late  as  1844. — Zoist.


III.  Some  particulars  respecting  Gall.

The  following  letter  appeared  in  the  Edinburgh  Phreno¬
logical  Journal  for  last  April : —

<f  Rosawitz,  near  Bodenbach,  Bohemia,
24  th  November,  1843.

Dear  Sir, — I  forward  you  translations  of  extracts  from  two
letters  written  by  Dr.  Gall.  These  extracts  are  in  a  book,  now  in
my  possession,  which  formerly  belonged  to  the  late  celebrated  archae¬
ologist  Dr.  Bottiger.  It  consists  of  the  pamphlet  by  Von  Selpert,
Gall’s  Lectures  on  the  Functions  of  the  Brain ,  &c.,  Berlin,  1805,
hound  up  with  writing  paper  between  each  leaf,  on  which  Bottiger,
who  was  well  acquainted  with  Gall,  and  had  attended  a  course  of  his
lectures,  has  made  numerous  notes  and  remarks,  many  of  them  of
much  interest.  Having  mentioned  these  extracts  from  Gall’s  letters
to  Mr.  Combe,  during  the  visit  I  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  from
him  last  August,  I  was  asked  by  him  to  translate  and  send  them  to
you  for  publication.  The  translation  is  as  literal  as  possible,  perhaps
too  much  so  to  read  well  in  English.

“  I.  Extract  of  a  letter  from  Gall  to  the  Oberhofprediger  (the  head  court
preacher)  Reinhard  ;  June  1st,  1805. — ‘At  the  Court  of  Vienna  the  sus¬
picion  of  materialism  has  long  been  given  up.  All  the  publications  on  my
science  (Lehre)  are  allowed,  if  the  authors  abstain  from  all  offensive  insinu¬
ations  against  the  court  itself  or  the  government.  The  only  reason  why
public  lectures  are  not  allowed  in  Vienna,  is  because  the  Emperor  has
been  made  to  look  with  suspicion  on  every  public  discussion  of  scientific
subjects.  It  is  on  this  account  that  extraordinary  (extra)  lectures,  even


456


Some  particulars  respecting  Gall.


within  the  walls  of  the  University,  are  extremely  circumscribed,  whilst
they  are  forbidden  altogether  in  private  houses,  as  are  likewise  private
theatricals.  However,  I  know  for  certain,  that  the  Emperor  wishes  he
had  not  given  out  the  celebrated  “  Hand  Billet.”  I  have  nevertheless
remained  faithful  to  my  investigations,  and  hope  that  you  too  will  approve
of  my  steadfastness.  My  course  of  lectures  consists  of  8  to  10;  but  each  of
two  hours’  duration,  since  it  is  not  good  to  break  off  the  connection.  It
will  cause  much  pleasure  to  admit  free  all  whose  means  are  limited,  young
medical  men,  students,  preachers,  schoolmasters,  &c.  Nothing  whatever
takes  place  that  can  shock,  in  the  least,  the  feelings  of  the  female  sex.  I
beg  them  only,  in  general,  to  slip  away  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  the  ter¬
mination  of  my  lectures.  In  fact,  I  wish  everywhere  to  have  many  mothers
amongst  my  auditors,  since  these  have  the  most  important  influence  on  edu¬
cation  in  the  earliest  years,  and  my  doctrines  throw  much  light  on  this  sub¬
ject.  However,  I  willingly  accommodate  myself  to  circumstances/

“II.  Extract  of  a  letter  from  Gall  to  Geheim-Rath  Loder ;  June  1st,
1805. — ‘  It  is  of  the  highest  importance  to  me  to  be  able  to  enjoy  the  society
of  a  man  of  your  reputation,  and,  what  is  still  more,  of  your  noble  charac¬
ter,  to  my  heart’s  content,  and  as  leisure  will  allow.  Whatever  I  know
more  than  you  do,  I  will  instruct  you  in.  But  how  much  will  you  not  have
to  teach  me  ?  We  will  love  one  another,  and  be  sincere  in  our  devotion  to
science.  If  I  can  rejoice  in  your  instruction  and  approbation,  I  shall  in
every  case  participate  in  your  merits.  What  I  particularly  wish  to  learn
and  to  see  with  you,  is  the  spinal-marrow  with  all  the  nerves,  which  latter,
however,  must  not  be  cut  off  too  short.  That  which  I  imagined  must  be  the
case,  according  to  the  laws  which  I  have  pointed  out  in  the  structure  of  the
brain,  I  have  already  found  to  be  confirmed.  We  are  now  working  at  the
spinal-marrow  of  several  cats  and  dogs.  These  investigations  are  to  give  a
clear  view  of  the  whole  nerves  (nervenlehre).  In  Halle  I  intend  to  act  as
I  have  done  elsewhere ;  to  admit  poor  students,  young  medical  men,
preachers,  schoolmasters,  &c.,  free  of  expense.  At  present  the  propaga¬
tion  of  my  science  (Lehre)  is  my  first  object;  but  whenever  I  go  into  a
foreign  land,  I  shall  endeavour  to  combine  with  it  another.  *  *  *  The

‘  pauper’  Aristotle  can  have  no  attractions  for  a  man  who  feels  so  little  in¬
demnification  in  so-styled  philosophy/

“The  following  remarks  and  anecdotes,  by  Dr.  Bottiger,  are
taken  from  the  same  book  : —

“  ‘  Gall  derives  the  greatest  enjoyment  from  imparting  his  knowledge  to
others.  He  compares  himself,  wdien  lecturing,  to  a  girl  who  delights  in
singing  or  dancing.  When  a  boy,  he  wished  to  become  a  clergyman,  owing
to  the  pleasure  which  it  gave  him  to  discourse  before  others/

“  ‘  Gall  dreams  incessantly  and  agreeably,  and  if  he  were  to  die  to-day
(he  is  41  years  of  age)  he  might  be  said  to  have  lived  80  years  ;  for  he  never
sleeps  without  dreaming.  Disagreeable  dreams  he  is  able  to  banish  ;  his
plan  is  to  think  disagreeable  subjects  well  over  before  going  to  sleep.  This
satisfies  the  mind/

“  ‘  Upon  the  burning  down  of  the  building  appointed  for  the  combat  of
wild  animals,  &c.,  in  Vienna  (der  Hetzhof),  the  only  animals  which  es¬
caped  were  the  bison,  which  ran  into  a  butcher’s  yard,  and  a  fox,  which
in  all  haste  burrowed  into  the  earth,  and  was  dug  out  alive  after  the  expi¬
ration  of  eight  days.  All  the  lions,  bears,  hyaenas,  &c.,  were  burnt  to
death  and  cast  into  a  deep  pit,  into  which  all  the  dead  horses  and  dogs,  and
even  many  of  the  latter  alive,  which  had  been  given  to  a  veterinary  surgeon
to  cure,  were  likewise  thrown.  Gall  procured  a  ladder  and  descended  into
this  pit,  wandering  about  amidst  the  foul  carrion,  stirring  up  the  bodies
with  a  proper  instrument,  and  cutting  off  the  heads  of  the  lions,  bears,
hymnas,  &c.,  which  he  carried  away/

“‘Count  Saurau  enabled  Gall  to  procure  the  head  of  Frere  David.
Gall  descended  the  vault  in  which  the  corpse  had  been  lying  eight  days.
With  the  aid  of  his  assistants,  he  moved  the  coffin  into  a  draught  of  air,


Some  particulars  respecting  Gall.


45  7


and,  half  averting  his  face,  he  himself  cut  off  the  head  from  David’s  putrid
body.  Gall  has  never  stolen  a  single  head  or  skull.’

“  ‘  Gall  is  of  opinion,  that  in  perfect  dreamless  sleep  all  is  suspended,
and  that  the  thinking  (power)  in  us  ceases.  This  alone  proves  his  mate¬
rialism.*  He,  therefore,  considers  the  whole  of  what  is  taught  about
indistinct  conceptions,  whereby  there  is  no  ‘  apperception,’  pure  nonsense.
Nevertheless,  he  cannot  deny  the  free-will  with  which  I  change  one  con¬
ception  for  another — one  impression  on  my  senses  for  another.  This  is  the
yiyegovittov  of  the  ancient  philosophers.’

“  ‘  All  popular  orators,  &c.,  speak  in  fables,  parables,  proverbs  ;  and
Gall  himself,  whose  lectures  are  a  pattern  of  a  true  popular  style,  imme¬
diately  has  recourse  to  examples,  comparisons,  &c.  It  is  a  good  remark,
why  comparisons  and  proverbs  are  so  generally  liked  :  owing  to  their  ab¬
sence  of  precision,  each  person  interprets  them  in  a  manner  directly  flatter¬
ing  to  his  own  understanding.’

“I  have  particular  pleasure  in  communicating  this  last  memo¬
randum  of  Bottiger’s,  as  it  may  assist  in  removing  an  erroneous
impression  of  Gall’s  powers  as  a  teacher,  which  seems  to  have  been
formed  by  certain  persons  in  England;  for  one  instance,  see  Phre¬
nological  Journal ,  July  1842,  vol.  xv.,  p.  287.  Since  I  have
resided  in  Germany,  I  have  had  opportunities  of  conversing  with
many  persons  who  were  acquainted  with  Gall,  and  had  attended
his  lectures  in  Vienna  or  Paris.  I  will  only  enumerate  Princes
Metternich  and  Drietrichstein,  Professors  or  Drs.  Froriep,  Bottiger,
Hammer,  Seiler,  Weigel,  Herr  Niklas,  &c.  From  these  persons
I|  have  never  received  but  one,  the  most  favourable,  opinion  of
Gall’s  powers,  both  as  regards  his  indefatigable  search  for  facts,
and  his  capacity  to  digest  and  arrange  the  knowledge  which  he
acquired.  Prince  Metternich,  in  one  of  the  numerous  conversations
I  had  with  him  in  the  winter  1834-5,  on  Gall  and  his  doctrines,
made  the  following  remarks,  which  I  noted  at  the  time: — ‘Gall/
he  said,  ‘  was  the  greatest  observer  and  thinker  he  had  ever  known,
a  most  indefatigable  investigator,  and  true  philosophic  mind.’  On
another  occasion,  he  styled  him  f  a  man  of  facts,  and  a  lover  of
truth — a  hater  of  all  theories.’  ‘  He  (Gall)  would  never  dispute
with  ideologians’  (disciples  of  the  transcendental  schools).  ‘His
views  were  always  to  the  purpose,  but  his  manner  of  expressing
them  not  always  good.  He  was  deficient  in  tact ,’  and  was  often
*  warned  by  the  Prince  to  be  more  prudent  in  this  respect.’  The
latter  said  it  was  Gall’s  want  of  tact  (query,  uncompromising  love
of  truth?)  which  had  drawn  upon  him  the  enmity  of  the  priests  in
Vienna.

“The  following  is  one  of  the  anecdotes  which  the  Prince  re¬
lated  to  me,  as  shewing  Gall’s  deficiency  in  tact: — The  Prince  was
present  one  day  in  Gall’s  house  at  Paris,  when  he  had  collected  a
large  party  of  savans  to  witness  the  dissection  of  the  brain  of  a
girl  just  executed.  Gall  continued  a  long  time  regarding  the  head
on  the  table  before  him,  and  calling  the  attention  of  the  company

*  “We  do  not  think  that  Bottiger’s  inferences  here  is  warranted  by  the
premises.  Gall,  who  in  his  works  strongly  disclaims  materialism,  must
have  meant  simply  that  in  perfect  sleep  the  action  of  the  mind  is  suspended. —
Editor.”


458


Some  particulars  respecting  Gall.


to  the  striking  resemblance  which  he  found  between  it  and  the
features  of  Napoleon,  although  the  physician  of  the  latter  was  pre¬
sent.  All  the  hints  which  the  Prince  gave  him  to  put  a  stop  to  these
remarks  were  in  vain.

“  Spurzheim,  whom  Prince  Metternich  had  likewise  known,  he
considered  very  inferior  to  Gall,  though  he  granted  that  Spurzheim
had  improved  the  nomenclature  and  classification  of  the  faculties.
Indeed,  amongst  the  considerable  number  of  distinguished  Germans
with  whom  I  have  conversed  on  both  Gall  and  Spurzheim,  with  the
exception  of  Herr  Von  K.  (mentioned  by  Mr.  Combe  in  your  Journal,
vol.  xvi.  p.  351),  who  was  acquainted  with  the  latter  in  London,  I
have  not  met  with  one  who  had  formed  a  favourable  opinion  of
Spurzheim’ s  powers,  either  for  original  investigation  or  logical
thinking.  On  this  account,  and  more  particularly  in  consequence
of  having  studied  attentively  nearly  all  the  writings  which  were
published  on  Gall’s  discoveries  in  Germany  before  the  year  1807, —
which  have  taught  me  how  much  Gall  alone  has  done  to  establish
the  science  of  cerebral  physiology, — I  must  consider  that  the  merits
of  Spurzheim  have  been  much  overrated  in  England  and  America.
On  this  head,  I  think  at  some  future  day  to  make  a  fuller  commu¬
nication  to  vour  Journal;  for  I  have  collected  several  facts  which
ought  to  be  put  on  record,  in  case  a  biography  of  Gall  should  ever
be  undertaken.  I  confess  I  cannot  now  look  into  Spurzheim’s  work,
Phrenology ,  or  the  Doctrine  of  the  Mind,  or  read  his  notes  to
Chenevix’s  article  in  the  Foreign  Quarterly  Review ,  without  the
disagreeable  impression  being  made  upon  me,  that  Spurzheim,  to
say  the  very  least,  was  not  forward  in  acknowledging  the  genius  of
Gall,  whilst  he  was  always  careful — sometimes,  I  have  reason  to
believe,  unduly — in  putting  forward  his  own  merits  as  one  of  the
founders  of  Phrenology.  In  fact,  where  is  there  one  passage  in
Spurzheim’s  writings  expressive  of  a  true  and  generous  spirit  of
admiration  of  the  genius  and  character  of  his  great  master?  I  trust
you  will  not  object  to  state  the  above  anecdotes  and  this  my  mature
opinion;  for  the  exaggerated  views  of  Mr.  Carmichael  and  others  of
Spurzheim’s  claims  to  rank  high  as  a  cerebral  physiologist  and
psychologist,  have  been  inserted  in  the  Phrenological  Journal.

To  fill  up  the  sheet,  I  add  a  translation  of  a  passage  from  the
text  of  Selpert’s  book  on  Gall’s  lectures,  which  the  author  affirms
in  the  preface  to  be  a  faithful  transcript  of  the  words  of  Gall.  On
page  33,  after  valuable  remarks  on  dreaming,  somnambulency,  clair¬
voyance,  &c.,  is  the  following:  —

“  ‘Can  it  not  easily  be  imagined,  that  if  there  be  a  peculiar  magnetic
or  galvanic  essence  (stoff)  which  could  be  discharged  as  something  dis¬
tinctly  material  on  the  separate  organs  of  the  brain,  and  could  be  so  directed
that  one  organ  only  at  a  time  might  be  excited  by  it  to  the  highest  degree,
whilst  all  the  others  remained  in  sleep, — persons  thus  excited  would  be  able
to  discover  things  in  nature  (naturliche  verhaltnisse)  otherwise  unknown
to  us  ?'

“That  Gall  at  this  time  (1805)  did  not  disbelieve  in  Mesmerism
or  Animal  Magnetism,  clairvoyance,  &c.,  Bottiger  testifies  in  one
of  his  notes.  Iam,  &c.  It.  R.  Noel.


Some  particulars  respecting  Gall.


459


“  Additional  Anecdotes  communicated  by  Mr.  Gustav  Von

Struve,  Editor  of  the  German  Phrenological  Journal.

“  Mannheim,  10 th  Feb.,  1844.

“At  Tiefenbrunn,  where  one  of  Gall’s  brothers,  and  several
nephews,  grandnephews,  and  nieces  are  still  living,  they  preserve
some  interesting  memorials  of  their  illustrious  relation,  such  as
medals  presented  to  him  in  acknowledgment  of  cures  which  he
effected,  portraits,  &c.  The  homely  dwelling  in  which  he  was  born
still  exists  in  its  primeval  state.  I  lately  made  a  pilgrimage  to  the
place,  hoping  to  discover  some  letters  of  Gall  to  his  parents  and
other  relations,  but  all  these  precious  papers  seem  to  have  been  lost
in  the  course  of  time.  However,  several  little  anecdotes  that  I  heard
from  his  relations  rewarded  me  for  the  trouble  I  took  in  searching
for  memorials  of  our  great  discoverer.  So  early  as  at  the  age  of  six,
he  displayed  a  strong  disposition  to  observe  nature.  He  always
wanted  to  see  how  things  looked  inside;  and,  to  satisfy  his  curiosity,
used  to  cut  open  everything,  and  especially  all  animals,  he  could
get  hold  of — cats,  mice,  toads,  and  so  on.  He  was  often  scolded
for  soiling  the  house  by  these  operations,  and  for  spending  his  money
in  that  way.  His  mother  gave  him,  on  this  account,  the  name  of
Batzenschmelzer  (spendthrift).  When  on  his  travels  through  Ger¬
many,  he  was  offered  a  large  sum  by  the  inhabitants  of  Pforzheim,
five  miles  distant  from  Tiefenbrunn,  to  lecture  there;  but  he  declined,
saying  that  the  Pforzheim  people  might  come  to  his  native  town,
where  he  delivered  gratis  a  course  of  lectures  in  the  Rath-haus-Saale
or  town-hall,  to  which  auditors  flocked  from  all  the  neighbouring
towns.  He  seems  to  have  been  a  very  dutiful  son.  When  his
mother  was  dangerously  ill,  he  was  called  for,  and  immediately
came  from  Vienna.  He  preserved  her  life;  for  if  the  medical  course
which  had  been  resorted  to  had  been  continued  one  or  two  days
longer,  he  declared  she  could  not  have  been  saved.  In  the  year
1809,  when  his  father  became  dangerously  ill,  he  came  from  the  me¬
tropolis  of  France  to  his  little  native  town.  He  arrived,  however,
too  late,  and  found  only  the  corpse  of  his  father.”

We  have  received  the  following  note  from  Mr.  Noel  in
reference  to  the  remark  of  the  Edinburgh  editor  at  p.  456.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

“  Dear  Sir, — Understanding  that  the  anecdotes,  &c.,  of
Dr.  Gall,  published  in  the  Phrenological  Journal  of  last
April,  are  about  to  be  printed  in  The  Zoist,  it  may  be  in¬
teresting  to  you  to  know,  in  confirmation  of  Bottiger’s  opi¬
nion  of  GalPs  materialism,  that  Prince  Metternich,  who
was  the  early  and  intimate  friend  of  Gall,  stated  to  me  in
the  conversation  which  I  had  with  him  the  winter  1834-35,
more  than  once  most  distinctly,  his  conviction  that  Gall  was
a  materialist.  “  I  remain,  yours  most  truly,

“  B.  R.  Noel.


“  Rosaioitz,  Oct.  14 th,  1844.”


460


Some  particulars  respecting  Gall.


All  those  who  were  acquainted  with  Gall,  Drs.  Fossati,
Dannecy,  Elliotson,  & c.,  &c.,  know  perfectly  well  that  he  was
a  materialist.  And  what  is  the  disgrace  of  being  a  materialist?
Dr.  Elliotson  years  ago  avowed  himself  in  his  Physiology  to
be  a  materialist.  Most  people  imagine  that  a  materialist
must  be  a  most  abominable  person ;  not  only  without  moral
principle,  but  believing  in  neither  a  future  state  nor  a  God.
There  is  no  more  striking  example  of  the  power  of  a  word  to
lead  people  away,  and  to  enable  the  unprincipled  to  injure
another,  perhaps  a  very  far  superior  being  to  themselves,  by
giving  him  a  name.

A  materialist  is  one  who,  on  the  evidence  of  experience, —
of  his  external  senses,  from  which  he  learns  all  he  knows  of
nature,  believes  that  the  universe  is  matter  and  properties  of
matter.  What  matter  is  he  pretends  not  to  know  :  but  what
he  touches  and  sees,  he  cannot  help  referring  to  real  sub¬
stance — to  matter.  There  is  no  fancy  or  reasoning  in  this.
He  cannot  help  feeling  certain  that  all  which  surrounds  him,
and  that  he  himself,  is  material  substance,  possessed  of  cer¬
tain  properties,  wonderful  and  various :  he  is  satisfied  with
this  positive  fact,  and  does  not  childishly  fancy  the  unprova-
ble,  improbable,  and  unintelligible  existence  of  something
else  called  spirit,  in  order  to  explain  those  properties, — he
frames  no  hypothesis  of  spirit,  which  explains  nothing  that  it
is  intended  to  explain.

The  most  wonderful  form  of  matter  is  the  brain,  and  he
sees  clearly  that  it  possesses  the  properties  of  feeling  and
thinking.  It  is  fruitless  to  say  that  matter  cannot  think :
that  it  is  brute  and  inert,  and  cannot,  in  any  form  of  compo¬
sition  or  organization,  feel  and  think.  He  observes  most
certainly  that  it  does.  But  this  does  not  prevent  him  from
believing  in  a  future  state,  if  he  is  satisfied  that  a  revelation
from  a  being  beyond  nature — a  supernatural  being, — declares
that  we  shall  live  again.  If  satisfied  of  this,  he  does  not  at¬
tempt  to  make  the  announcement  probable  by  fancying  the
existence  of  an  airy  nothing,  a  spirit,  a  soul, — but  he  firmly
believes  that  the  being  which  made  him  originally,  will,  how
he  knows  not  nor  troubles  himself  to  enquire,  reproduce  him
and  restore  him  to  existence.  He  views  a  future  existence  as  a
miracle — an  occurrence  not  in  the  order  of  nature ;  a  super¬
natural  occurrence,  past  discovery  by  investigating  nature,
but  not  the  less  certain,  because  revealed  by  God.

Should  the  materialist  not  be  satisfied  that  there  is  such
a  revelation,  still  he  may  believe  in  the  existence  of  God ;  of
a  mighty  being  beyond  the  universe — beyond  nature;  who
has  made  and  fashioned  all,  and  disposes  of  all  things  at  his


Some  particulars  respecting  Gall.


461


pleasure.  He,  however,  has  no  opinion  of  the  nature  of  this
sovereign  being,  who  is  not  a  part  of  nature,  but  outside  and  be¬
yond  nature,  and  to  whom  he  cannot  compare  his  own  nature.
He  enquires  not  whether  God  is  matter  or  not  matter:  he  says
only  that  he  considers  that  he  beholds  proofs  of  the  existence
of  such  a  being ;  but  that  the  essence  of  such  a  being  is  past
finding  out.  He  says  that  this  being  has  created  matter,
and  given  it  all  the  properties  which  we  see  in  the  inanimate
kingdom  and  in  the  animate,  including  the  vegetable,  the
brute,  and  the  human  kingdoms.  He  would  consider  it  im¬
pious  to  suppose  that  this  being — God — could  not  make  mat¬
ter  think  if  he  chose  :  and  he  does  not  revile  and  despise
matter — the  work  of  God,  as  a  low  contemptible  thing.  He
asserts  that  he  sees  the  universe  with  all  its  wonders  and  its
glories  to  be  matter  and  matter  only,  possessed  of  properties  of
which  he  yet  knows  but  a  few.  Be  it  therefore  remembered
by  all  our  readers,  that  a  materialist  may  be  an  infidel : — may
be  an  atheist,  but  not  of  necessity ;  may  be  a  deist,  but  not
of  necessity :  and  that  he  may  be  a  sincere  Christian,  and  a
trinitarian  Christian  too.

To  those  who  immediately  say  that  the  word  spirit  is
constantly  employed  in  the  Bible,  and  shews  that  we  have  a
something  distinct  from  body,  the  Christian  materialist  re¬
plies, — The  whole  of  mam’s  nature,  intellectual  and  moral,
as  well  as  corporeal,  is  a  part  of  natural  knowledge ;  to  be
learnt,  like  everything  else  in  nature,  by  observation,  just  as
much  as  the  nature  of  a  mineral  or  of  a  plant :  that  the
Scriptures  are  to  supply  us  with  knowledge  supernatural, —
knowledge  of  things  not  ascertainable  by  observation  or  rea¬
son  :  that  human  reason  and  observation  are  as  little  our  own
and  as  much  the  gift  of  God  as  revelation  is :  that  if  rea¬
son  and  observation  are  fallible,  so  is  the  interpretation  of
Scripture :  and  that  where  observation  clearly  shews  a  natural
fact,  any  scriptural  statement  apparently  in  opposition  to  it
must  be  received  with  limitation,  because  the  words  and  the
works  of  an  almighty  Creator  are  to  be  reverenced  the  one
equally  with  the  other,  and  cannot  be  in  opposition  to  each
other.  Divines  see  that  the  earth  must  have  existed  for  hun¬
dreds  of  thousands  of  years  ;  that  the  sun  does  not  go  round
the  earth ;  that  the  earth  is  round,  and  has  not  four  corners,
&c.,  &c.  ;  and  they  allow  an  interpretation  of  Scripture  in
conformity  with  these  truths  of  science.  So  must  it  be  in  re¬
gard  to  the  word  soul,  spirit,  &c.

That  we  are  quite  safe  in  what  we  say,  appears  from  the
following  passage  : —


462


Some  particulars  respecting  Gall .


“  Well  indeed,”  says  the  indisputably  orthodox  Quarterly  Re¬
view  on  the  subject  of  Geology,  (April,  1823,  p.  163),  “Well
indeed  is  it  for  us  that  the  cause  of  revelation  does  not  depend  upon
questions  such  as  these :  for  it  is  remarkable  that  in  every  instance
the  controversy  has  ended  in  the  gradual  surrender  of  those  very
points  which  were  at  one  time  represented  as  involving  the  vital  in¬
terests  of  religion.  Truth,  it  is  certain,  cannot  be  opposed  to  truth.
How  inconsiderable  a  risk,  then,  do  those  adversaries  run,  who  de¬
clare  that  the  whole  cause  is  at  issue  in  a  single  dispute,  and  that
the  substance  of  our  faith  hangs  upon  a  thread, — upon  the  literal
interpretation  of  some  word  or  phrase,  against  which  fresh  argu¬
ments  are  springing  up  from  day  to  day.”

Those  who  have  not  thought  upon  these  points  (and  we
find  few  Christians  who  have)  would  do  well  to  read  Dr.
Elliotson’s  Physiology,  p.  38 — 48,  p.  360 — 366,  p.  1104-5.

When  Gall  terms  the  brain  the  organ  of  the  soul,  he  means
only  the  organ  of  those  properties  which  are  termed  mental.
He  was  obliged  to  express  himself  very  cautiously,  for  he  lec¬
tured  and  wrote  almost  half  a  century  ago,  when  bigotry
was  still  more  active  than  at  present,  and  he  was  assailed  on
all  sides  for  his  discoveries.  He  could  not  have  written  with
any  chance  of  being  listened  to  had  he  not  used  the  language
of  his  time,  and  hoped  that  the  wiser  part  of  mankind  would
understand  a  large  number  of  his  terms  in  a  figurative  or
poetic  sense.  Those  who  were  in  the  habit  of  free  converse
with  him,  knew  how  large  was  the  number  of  such  words.
This  was  justifiable  prudence ;  for  no  man  is  called  upon  to
be  a  martyr,  beyond  the  point  he  thinks  proper,  to  the  igno¬
rance  and  bad  feelings  of  his  contemporaries.

Indeed,  Gaiks  materialism  is  plain  enough  in  the  first
volume  of  his  octavo  work,  p.  62 — 76,  especially  at  p.  67 ;
and  vol.  vi.,  p.  142,  where  is  a  facetious  antispiritual  banter¬
ing  of  Hudolphi,  beginning,  “  L’ame  me  paroit  moins  spiri-
tualiste  que  les  spiritualistes  eux  mimes  P

Prince  Metternich  and  Gall  were  so  intimate  that  they
passed  a  great  deal  of  time  together,  not  only  in  conversation,
but  in  visiting  prisons  and  various  other  establishments ;  so
that  the  Prince  has  for  a  great  part  of  his  life  been  a  firm
disciple  of  Gall, — a  true  cerebral  physiologist.

Every  one  who  knew  Gall,  is  as  certain  as  the  Prince  that
Gall  was  an  ardent  lover  of  all  truth,  and  for  its  own  sake.
Yet  in  Sir  George  Lefevre’s  flippant  and  superficial  Life  of  a
Travelling  Physician ,  published  last  year,  we  find  the  follow¬
ing  passages : —

“As  to  the  countenance  of  Gall,  I  should  say  that  it  indicated
that  feeling  had  been  absorbed  in  interest,  and  that  it  betrayed  a


Some  particulars  respecting  Gall.


463


disbelief  in  everything,  and  even  in  his  own  system ;  and  if  the
world  judges  rightly,  such  was  really  the  case.  In  conversing  with
several  of  the  French  professors  upon  this  subject,  I  found  them
unanimously  of  this  opinion.

“  ( Spurzheim  croit  au  moins  a  tout  ce  quit  dit,  comme  un  bon
enfant.  Gall  n’y  croit  pas  un  mot .’  Such  was  the  opinion  in
Paris.”

Now  greater  error  was  never  penned,  Gaiks  expression
of  countenance  was  that  of  profound  thought,  the  greatest
calmness,  sincerity,  and  benignity.  We  never  heard  any  one
doubt  his  sincerity ;  and,  if  any  ever  did,  it  must  have  been
some  of  those  shallow  and  conceited  persons  who  abound
in  the  medical  profession,  knowing  nothing  but  the  routine
of  ordering  drugs  and  the  way  to  do  the  little  mechanical
things  of  the  humblest  surgery,  and  as  ignorant  of  cerebral
physiology  as  they  are  of  all  novelties  beyond  the  medical  prattle
of  the  moment,  though  wishing  to  pass  for  savans,  oracularly
giving  their  opinions  in  complete  ignorance  of  the  things
they  talk  of,  just  as  the  mass  of  the  English  medical  world
do  at  this  moment  in  respect  of  mesmerism.

Sir  George  Lefevre^s  knowledge  and  wisdom  shine  forth
remarkably  in  the  following  passages  : —

“  The  tomb  has  now  closed  over  both,  and  tlieir  systems  will
probably,  ere  long,  find  repose  in  the  vault*  of  the  founders .f

“  When  the  pleasure  of  novelty  has  ceased,  and  when  the  en¬
thusiasm  which  it  inspires  has  sunk  down  into  a  calm :  when  more¬
over  any  personal  feelings  towards  the  founders  of  systems  can  have
no  more  influence  in  biassing  our  judgments  for  or  against  the
systems  themselves;  then  we  look  upon  things  in  a  very  different
light.  We  sift  the  materials  more  and  more,  and  often  look  in  vain
for  those  gems  which  seemed  at  first  to  spangle  the  surface  of  the
mass.

“  Such  is  now  the  case  with  that  system  which  from  its  novelty
and  plausibility  engrossed  so  much  of  the  public  attention  and
counted  so  many  votaries.  In  spite  of  ridicule — the  most  deadly
of  all  antagonists;  in  spite  of  facts — more  stubborn  even  than  ridi¬
cule,  in  opposing  its  claim  to  belief — still  this  system  had  many
followers.

“The  modern  Athens  boasted  a  Phrenological  Society  within
her  walls,  which  Athens  would  have  repudiated  even  in  her  decline.
One  man,  and  he  was  of  himself  enough  to  save  a  city  from  disgrace,
opposed  with  all  his  eloquence  this  monstrous  abortion  of  human
conception.  .  .  .  Dr.  Gordon  might,  perhaps,  had  he  lived,  have
prevented  the  disgrace  which  now  sullies  the  once  famed  school  of

*  Gall  lies  in  Paris  :  Spurzheim  in  America.

f  This  is  pardonable  in  Sir  G.  Lefevre,  since  Mr.  Combe  and  Mr.  Simp¬
son  as  absurdly  spoke  of  the  founders  of  what  Gall  alone  founded.

YOL.  II.  II


464


Some  particulars  respecting  Gall.


Edinburgh.  Some  few,  indeed,  have  retraced  their  steps,  nay,
denounced  a  system  which  is  at  variance  with  GocVs  most  inestimable
gift ,  common  sense ;  and  the  time,  perhaps,  is  not  far  distant ,
tv  hen  the  bubble  will  burst  and  dissipate  itself  in  air

This  knighted  doctor  is  ever  advertising  a  book  to  attract
nervous  ladies  and  gentlemen,  under  the  title  of  An  Apology
for  the  Nerves.  It  would  be  well  if  he  would  write  an
apology  for  his  own  cerebrum.  Can  he,  yes,  we  suppose  his
occupations  are  so  great  that  he  can,  be  ignorant  that  Gaiks
mighty  discoveries  are  rapidly  pervading  the  whole  civilized
world  :  and  that,  though  the  mass  of  medical  men,  educated
fifteen  and  twenty  years  ago,  are  unacquainted  with  cerebral
physiology,  and  endeavour  to  persuade  the  rising  generation
to  be  as  ignorant  as  themselves,  there  are  hundreds  of  thou¬
sands  of  phrenologists  now  in  Great  Britain,  France,  Ger¬
many,  Italy,  and  America, -^-in  truth,  that  except  in  medical
schools  it  is  a  received  science.

Every  body  is  aware  that  long  after  Gall  had  made  his
great  discoveries,  and  begun  to  write  and  lecture,  Dr.  Spurz-
heim  became  his  pupil,  learnt  cerebral  physiology  from  him,
and  worked  under  him  :  differing  (separating)  at  length  from
his  master  in  some  few  individual  points.  Yet  so  great  is
Sir  G.  If  s  ignorance  of  what  he  presumes  to  write,  that  lie
actually  says  :

“  They  (Gall  and  Spurzheim)  set  to  work  at  a  distance,  and
pursued  the  same  train  of  thought;  they  approached  each  other  by
degrees,  till  they  came  with  their  heads  in  actual  contact,  ‘  ex  fumo
dare  lucem,’  and  they  commenced  carefully  examining  each  other’s
skulls,  and  they  found  that  both  possessed  the  organs  of  system  in
no  inconsiderable  degree.”

The  rest  of  the  paragraph  is  too  ridiculous  for  us  to  trans¬
cribe.

Sir  G.  L.  would  have  been  about  as  correct  had  he  writ¬
ten  that  Galileo  lived  in  America  and  invited  Columbus  to
breakfast  on  his  arrival  in  the  new  world.

We  have  an  anecdote  illustrative  of  Gaiks  want  of  tact
to  relate.  Mr.  H.  Crabb  Bobinson,  of  Bussell  Square,
related  in  our  hearing  that  he  attended  Gaiks  lectures  at
Jena,  in  1805,  and  that  when  Gall  lectured  at  Weimar,  the
Grand  Duchess  and  the  rest  of  the  court  were  present.  Gall
was  in  the  habit  of  examining  his  auditors  after  lecture  to  as¬
certain  whether  they  had  understood  him  :  and  to  the  dismay
of  all  the  courtiers  began  to  catechize  the  Grand  Duchess.
Signs  of  all  kinds  to  desist  were  made  to  him  in  vain ;  and


Asthma  cured  with  Mesmerism.


465


her  highness  of  course  declined  to  answer.  We  confess  this
was  ill  judged :  but  we  are  such  plain  men  as  not  to  discern
the  impropriety  of  remarking  the  likeness  of  the  executed
girl  to  Napoleon  before  one  of  the  imperial  doctors.

Gall  valued  no  one  but  for  his  intrinsic  merits  :  and,  though
affable  and  elegant,  did  not  study  to  conceal  his  opinion  of
any  man.  We  fear  that  he  was  not  remarkably  struck  with
Sir  G.  Lefevre.

Mr.  C.  Robinson  also  stated  that,  so  far  from  Dr.  Spurz-
heim  lecturing  with  Gall,  he  was  only  the  famulus ,  handing
the  casts,  skulls,  &c.,  to  Gall,  without  opening  his  mouth.
It  is  usual  for  professors  in  Germany  to  be  attended  by  a
poor  student,  who  perform  the  duties  of  an  assistant  for  a
small  gratuity,  and  is  termed  famulus.  When  Gall  had  taught
Dr.  Spurzlieim  the  anatomy  of  the  brain  sufficiently,  he  de¬
puted  to  his  pupil  the  task  of  demonstrating  it  to  the
audience.


IV.  A  case  of  Asthma  cured  with  Mesmerism.

Plymouth,  November  6th,  1844,
Octagon  Place.

Dear  Sir, — I  have  much  pleasure  in  sending  you  for  The
Zoist  Mr.  HoldswortlPs  notes  on  the  cure  of  spasmodic
asthma,  having  obtained  permission  to  publish  them,  and
I  enclose  the  patient’s  statement  of  her  case.  Mr.  H.  is
one  of  the  prebends  of  Exeter  and  Vicar  of  Brixham  in  the
same  diocese,  and  it  is  presumed  that  the  case  is  sufficiently
authenticated.  The  patient  is  a  female  above  the  middle  age
of  life,  whose  sufferings  for  many  years  have  been  intense,
but  by  the  simple  application  of  mesmerism  she  was  restored
to  perfect  health  in  the  course  of  five  days.  It  should  here
be  mentioned  that  about  six  weeks  after  the  time  of  her
mesmeric  slumbers  she  caught  cold  and  the  symptoms  of  her
disease  made  their  appearance,  but  her  altered  constitution
evidently  did  not  seem  to  admit  of  any  intrusion  of  her
former  complaint ;  in  a  letter  to  me  respecting  it  she  says, —
“  It  came  on  in  the  morning,  but  I  did  not  get  ill  until
between  11  and  12  in  the  forenoon;  in  the  evening  there
was  preparations  made  as  usual  and  a  person  sent  for  to  stop
the  night,  but  to  my  great  surprise  and  utter  astonishment
of  all  I  got  better  before  night,  and  did  not  require  any  as-

i  i  2


466  A  case  of  Asthma  cured  with  Mesmerism.

sistance  during  the  night,  but  slept  soundly,  and  had  but
one  spasm  during  the  day ;  before  now  in  that  time  I  may
have  had  a  dozen.”  About  three  weeks  after  this  I  saw  her
and  mesmerised  her  for  several  days,  during  which  time  the
faculty  of  clairvoyance  was  often  spontaneously  developed.
A  year  has  now  elapsed,  and  she  has  uniformly  enjoyed  her
existence.  When  seeing  her  lately,  she  said  to  me  in  her
simplicity,  that  frequently  when  sitting  by  herself  she  would
look  back  to  former  years  and  fancy  she  could  not  be  the
same  person.  A  fact  worthy  of  being  stated  for  the  informa¬
tion  of  those  opponents  who  attribute  all  mesmeric  pheno¬
mena  and  the  cure  of  diseases  to  the  influence  of  imagination,
is,  that  this  patient  from  beginning  to  end  manifested  a  most
extraordinary  degree  of  scepticism ;  she  never  would  believe
that  she  had  been  to  sleep ;  and  when  aware  of  her  improved
state  of  health,  she  constantly  imagined  she  would  have  a
return  of  her  illness ;  and  I  strongly  believe  that,  even  at
this  moment,  she  is  not  free  from  that  apprehension.  But
considering  the  time,  and  her  having  had  some  severe  colds,
which  generally  brought  on  violent  attacks,  reason  and  facts
combine  to  decide  in  favor  of  the  cure  being  a  perfect  one;
and  I  have  only  to  add  had  this  been  the  only  case  in  which
I  have  been  to  accomplish  a  cure,  I  should  consider  myself
amply  rewarded  for  the  leisure  hours  I  have  bestowed  in  the
cultivation  of  mesmerism.

I  remain,  dear  Sir,  yours  very  faithfully,

J.  Adolphe  Kiste.

To  John  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.

Brixham  Vicarage,  Feb.  5,  1844.

Dear  Sir, — According  to  your  wish  I  send  you  a  copy  of
the  notes  taken  at  the  time  when  you  favoured  us  with  your
company  and  mesmerised  the  wife  of  my  footman — an  ope¬
ration  which  so  far  has  been  of  most  essential  service  to  her.
The  asthma  under  which  she  has  so  long  suffered  was  of  a
most  distressing  character ;  so  much  so,  that  her  neighbour
who  inhabits  a  part  of  the  house,  I  am  informed,  was  afraid
to  remain  with  her  alone  in  the  house,  unless  her  husband  or
some  friend  of  her’s  was  there  also,  so  frightful  was  her  ap¬
pearance  when  under  the  attack.  You  know  already  that
for  six  weeks  after  she  was  put  under  mesmeric  influence  she
had  no  attack ;  then  a  slight  one,  brought  on,  she  says,  by  her
own  imprudence,  and  from  that  time,  now  six  weeks  more,
she  has  had  no  return  of  her  complaint ;  her  general  health
is  improved,  and  she  is  gaining  more  solid  flesh.  I  hope


A  case  of  Asthma  cured  with  Mesmerism.  -JLG7

that  in  time  the  beneficial  effects  arising  from  mesmerism
will  be  better  understood  and  better  appreciated.  Nothing
can  be  more  unphilosophical  than  the  manner  in  which  the
faculty  and  others  treat  this  subject,  as  well  as  the  prejudices
that  have  been  evinced  instead  of  the  patient  investigation
which  such  a  subject  requires.

If  doubt  leads  us  to  neglect  investigation  and  prejudice
prevents  enquiry,  how  is  knowledge  in  any  new  science  or
subject  to  be  acquired  ?

Dear  Sir,  yours  very  truly,

Robert  Holdsworth.

To  Adolphe  Kiste,  Esq.,

Octagon  Place,  Plymouth.

The  following  account  is  written  to  shew  the  beneficial
effects  arising  from  mesmerism  (whatever  it  may  be)  and  to
describe  some  of  the  phenomena  that  occurred  in  the  presence
of  the  writer  and  fourteen  members  of  his  family.

The  subject  was  a  married  woman,  of  weak  habit,  subject
to  asthma.  She  was  the  wife  of  the  footman  in  the  family,
but  had  little  or  no  communication  with  it,  and  was  entirely
ignorant  of  mesmerism  and  its  effects.

It  was  in  consequence  of  her  distressing  state  being  told
to  Mr.  Kiste  that  he  said  he  thought  she  might  be  benefitted
by  mesmerism,  and  that  if  she  liked  he  would  give  up  some
days  during  his  stay  to  try  its  effects.

The  first  day — November  2nd,  1843,  Elizabeth  Spurdens
saw  Mr.  Kiste.  She  was  thrown  into  a  quiet  mesmeric  sleep
for  about  two  hours,  and  when  awakened  from  it,  she  denied
having  been  asleep,  and  was  quite  unconscious  of  all  that  had
happened.

On  the  second  day — November  3rd,  she  was  more  quickly
affected,  and  when  asked  by  Mr.  K.  how  she  felt,  said  she
was  very  well, — very  comfortable ;  she  appeared  not  to  hear
any  other  person  that  spoke  to  her  or  that  spoke  in  the  room ;
— her  eyes  were  fast  closed,  and  when  the  lids  were  forcibly
lifted  the  eyes  appeared  glazed  and  insensible  to  light  or  touch.
Mr.  K.  mesmerised  her  right  arm  by  drawing  his  fingers  pa¬
rallel  with  the  nerves  from  the  elbow  to  the  fingers,  when  the
arm  became  stiff  as  iron,  and  capable  of  bearing  a  heavy  weight
without  giving  way,  although  it  was  extended  in  a  horizontal
position.  Mr.  K.  did  not  on  the  second  day  press  her  much
to  speak,  as  she  answered  reluctantly  and  desired  to  be  left
alone ;  and  although  she  heard  and  replied  to  all  Mr.  Kiste
said,  she  took  no  notice  of  what  other  persons  said  unless
urged  to  do  so  by  Mr.  K.  She  remained  in  a  trance  nearly


468  A  case  of  Asthma  cured  with  Mesmerism .

three  hours ;  and  when  demesmerised,  which  was  done  in
less  than  a  minute,  as  on  the  day  before,  she  would  not  be¬
lieve  that  she  had  been  asleep.

On  the  third  day — November  4th,  she  was  much  sooner
affected,  and  allowed  to  remain  in  a  trance  for  six  hours;
during  which  time  her  state  frequently  changed.  Her  limbs
and  body  became  heavy  and  listless  ;  her  arms,  wThen  lifted
up  or  moved,  falling  heavily  and  swinging  as  if  they  did  not
belong  to  a  living  subject,  and  were  subject  to  no  sort  of
nervous  volition  or  muscular  control.  They  again  became
quite  stiff  like  wood  or  iron,  when  mesmerised  by  Mr.  K.
passing  his  hand  from  the  shoulder  to  the  fingers  two  or  three
times.  In  this  state,  upon  Mr.  K.  moderating  the  mesmeric
influence  by  merely  quickly  moving  his  hand  or  fingers  trans¬
versely,  or  across  the  nerves  of  the  arm,  it  immediately  re¬
laxed  and  returned  to  its  former  state.  On  this  day  she  spoke
and  answered  more  freely.  Her  eyes  were  closed,  and  a  thick
cotton  handkerchief  placed  over  her  face;  yet  she  named
every  person  who  was  in  the  room :  eleven,  and  sometimes
twelve,  persons  came  in  to  see  her,  and  when  any  one  touched
her  hand  she  told  by  name  who  touched  her;  and  when  spoken
to,  who  it  was  that  spoke.  After  three  hours  sleep,  she  was
asked  what  time  it  was?  She  replied  “It  struck  two  last,
and  it  is  now  half-past  two  which  proved  upon  examination
to  be  the  exact  time  by  the  parish  clock,  by  which  she  is
always  guided.  Mr.  Kiste  mesmerised  her  right  arm,  when
it  was  extended  in  a  horizontal  position,  on  which  he  placed
a  heavy  music  stool  which  it  supported  without  giving  way  in
the  slightest  degree.  Mr.  K.  pricked  her  hand  with  a  large
gold  breast  pin,  with  great  force,  leaving  punctured  wounds
and  drawing  blood,  but  she  did  not  start  or  take  the  least
notice  of  it,  and  said,  when  asked  by  Mr.  K.  how  she  felt,
that  she  was  very  comfortable,  but  when  Mr.  K.  pricked  his
own  left  hand,  although  less  sharply,  she  started,  and  writhed
her  left  hand,  as  if  she  acutely  felt  the  pain.  She  was  then
moved  into  a  large  easy  chair,  where  Mr.  K.  left  her  for  an
hour  to  take  a  walk,  and  during  his  absence  she  remained  in
a  quiet  composed  state,  and  only  once  slightly  moved.  She
was  sitting  in  a  room  on  the  upper  story,  and  the  moment
Mr.  K.  entered  the  house,  on  his  return  from  his  walk,  she
became  restless  and  uneasy,  and  frequently  yawned;  when
Mr.  K.  awoke  her,  at  the  end  of  six  hours,  it  was  dark  and
candle-light;  she  was  astonished,  and  said  she  fancied  she
had  come  there  in  the  morning,  but  was  sure  she  must  be
mistaken,  so  unconscious  was  she  of  all  that  had  passed.
When  only  partially  demesmerised,  she  answered  questions-


A  case  of  Asthma  cured  with  Mesmerism.  469

indistinctly ;  saying,  when  asked,  she  thought  it  might  be
dinner  time ;  but  during  her  trance,  she  had  told  the  exact
time  to  a  minute — for  just  before,  having  been  asked  the
time,  she  said  it  is  six ,  then  stopping  a  moment,  as  in
thought,  she  eagerly  said  no,  seven  minutes  past  six,  which
was  the  time  to  a  second.

On  the  fourth  day — November  5th,  she  was  sound  asleep
in  a  few  minutes.  She  was  sitting  on  the  edge  of  her  chair,
and  after  she  had  remained  quiet  for  a  littfie  time,  Mr.  K.
caused  her  to  straighten  both  her  legs  and  arms  in  a  horizon¬
tal  position,  her  body  and  limbs  appeared  as  stiff  as  iron,  and
in  this  extraordinary  position  on  the  edge  of  her  chair  she
remained  thirty-five  minutes  by  watch;  when  she  was  slightly
touched,  she  moved  backwards  and  forwards  like  a  rocking-
horse.  On  this  day  she  spoke  much  more  freely ;  she  was
quite  deaf  to  every  one  but  to  Mr.  K. ;  her  eyes  were  closed
tightly,  and  when  the  lids  were  lifted  and  a  candle  placed  as
close  to  them  as  possible,  without  burning  the  eyelashes,  she
never  moved  them  or  blinked  in  the  slightest  degree.  Mr.
K.  placed  a  small  feather  in  her  nostrils  and  tickled  them,
but  it  never  occasioned  the  slightest  sensation.  In  this  state
she  told  distinctly  who  was  in  the  room,  who  besides  was  in
the  house ;  when  asked  who  was  in  the  kitchen,  she  said  Ann
(the  house  maid) ;  when  asked  what  she  was  doing,  she  said
she  is  doing  nothing.  Upon  sending  immediately  to  ascertain
the  fact,  Ann  was  found  alone  in  the  kitchen,  as  she  had  de¬
scribed  her,  standing  still  with  her  hand  to  her  head  or  face,
in  an  attitude  of  thought.  A  clergyman  unconnected  with
the  family  came  to  the  house  during  the  time ;  he  went  up
stairs  to  see  her,  and  when  he  touched  her  hand,  she  imme¬
diately  told  Mr.  K.  who  it  was.  She  told  where  her  little
daughter  had  been,  and  what  she  had  been  doing  during  the
day.  When  Mr.  K.  left  the  room  to  take  some  refreshments,
three  servants  remained  with  her,  and  with  great  difficulty
kept  her  on  her  seat ;  and  although  a  very  little  woman  of  a
thin  light  figure,  they  could  with  difficulty  hold  her;  she  was
so  strongly  inclined  to  lean  forward  and  follow  Mr.  K.,  that
she  sunk  towards  the  floor.  Mr.  K.  was  immediately  called,
but  before  he  could  enter  the  room,  she  slipped  from  her  chair
towards  him,  so  powerful  appeared  to  be  the  attraction.  If
he  walked  round  the  chair  on  which  she  sat,  or  placed  himself
on  the  floor  at  some  distance  from  her,  she  gradually  inclined
towards  him,  constantly  moving  her  head  and  person  slowly
as  he  changed  his  position.  When  Mr.  K.  allowed  her  eyes
to  open,  they  assumed  an  earnest  and  peculiar  expression  not
natural  to  her.  She  looked  at  no  one  but  Mr.  K.,  appeared


470


A  case  of  Asthma  cured  with  Mesmerism.


not  to  see  any  one  else,  or  to  hear  any  sound  or  [voice  but

his.  Mr.  S - clapped  his  hands  and  made  the  shrillest

whistle  in  her  ear,  but  she  heard  it  not.  The  writer  tried
also  to  be  heard  by  her,  but  in  vain.  When  any  one  held
her  hand  she  could  hear  nothing  they  said,  but  the  moment
Mr.  K.  drew  his  hand  two  or  three  times  across  the  hands  and
arms  of  the  person  and  patient,  she  heard  and  replied ;  the
moment  he  let  go  her  hand  she  became  completely  deaf  to  all
sounds  or  voices  except  the  voice  of  Mr.  K.  On  this  evening
the  writer  whilst  sitting  alone  in  his  library  down  stairs,  sud¬
denly,  without  communicating  his  intention  to  any  one,  left

the  house  to  visit  Mr.  C - ,  who  lives  about  a  quarter  of  a

mile  from  his  house.  It  happened  that  Mr.  K.  desired  he
might  be  sent  for  to  see  the  patient  at  that  particular  period,
but  the  servant  returned  to  the  party  and  said,  “Master
could  not  be  found.”  It  was  dark  at  the  time.  Mr.  K.
asked  the  patient  where  Mr.  H.  was,  she  replied,  “  He  is
gone  out.”  “Where?”  “Up  the  lane  to  a  gentlemans

house.”  “Whose  house?”  answer,  “Mr.  C - *s.”  “Is

Mr.  H.  arrived  at  the  house  ?”  “  Yes,  but  he  has  not  yet  sat

down.”  “Do  you  see  Mr.  C -  with  him?”  “Yes  I  see

him  and  now  he  is  not  looking  very  pleasant.”  (N.B.  Mr.
C - and  the  writer  were  in  a  warm  discussion  about  mes¬

merism  !  soon  after  the  writer  arrived).  She  then  became
excited  and  screamed,  Mr.  K.  composed  her  and  suffered  her
to  remain  silent  ten  minutes.  He  then  asked  her  if  she  still

saw  them.  “Yes  !  Mr.  C - is  drinking  tea;  and  I  think

he  is  sitting  so.”  She  then  by  an  effort  crossed  her  legs  and

placed  herself  in  the  chair  precisely  as  Mr.  C - is  in  the

habit  of  sitting,  though  she  had  never  in  her  life  seen  him  in
a  room.  Mr.  K.  asked  how  Mr.  H.  was  sitting,  she  replied,
“  Straight  in  his  chair  A  “  Are  they  setting  near  the  fire  ?”
“  Yes,  but  I  dont  think  their  feet  are  on  the  rug.”  She  then
started  from  her  seat  and  screamed  more  violently,  and  the
subject  was  not  again  recurred  to,  but  it  is  omitted  that  after
she  had  described  how  they  were  sitting,  she  was  asked  what
they  were  talking  about.  Answer, — “They  are  talking  but  not
about  reading.”  (It  was  Sunday  night,  and  probably  this
might  refer  to  their  reading  the  Bible  on  that  night).  Air.

K.  then  said,  “  Mr.  C - says  mesmerism  is  all  humbug.”

Answer, — “  Does  he,  Sir  ?  He  would  not  say  so  if  he  felt
what  I  do.”  Mr.  K.,  “  He  says  it  is  all  trickery.”  Answer,
-—“Then  I  must  have  had  many  lessons.  Sir.”  Many  other
curious  facts  wTere  developed  during  the  time  the  patient  was
under  mesmeric  influence.  At  one  time  Mr.  K.  with  one
hand  mesmerised  one  eye,  causing  the  right  eye  to  continue


A  case  of  Asthma  cured  with  Mesmerism.  471

closed  ;  and  by  a  different  motion  with  his  left  hand  he  caused
her  to  open  the  left  eye.  Mr.  K.  desired  her  to  stand  up  and
placed  her  on  her  feet ;  in  this  position,  as  he  receded  from
her,  she  followed  and  bent  towards  him,  and  would  have
fallen  had  he  not  supported  her.  She  had  been  seven  hours
in  the  trance  when  she  was  awakened,  and  if  it  had  been  pos¬
sible  for  her  to  doubt,  what  those  around  related  to  her,  she
would  have  denied  that  anything  had  happened  to  her.

On  the  following  morning — November  6th,  Mr.  K.  having
an  hour  to  spare  previous  to  his  departure,  sent  for  his  patient.
In  five  minutes  she  was  in  a  trance ;  in  which  he  allowed  her
to  remain  undisturbed,  and  no  new  feature  was  drawn  forth.
Before  she  left  the  room,  after  having  been  demesmerised,
Mr.  K.  told  her  he  would  shew  her  what  had  been  done  to
her ;  he  told  her  to  extend  her  arm,  which  with  two  passes  of
his  hand  over  it,  became  stiff  in  an  horizontal  position ;  when
the  patient  exclaimed,  “  I  would  rather  be  put  to  sleep,  I
cannot  bear  to  look  at  it.”  He  then  told  her  as  she  sat  in
her  chair  to  place  her  hand  on  the  table,  which  she  did  He
passed  his  hand  over  it,  and  it  remained  in  appearance  as  fixed
to  the  table,  as  if  a  large  nail  had  been  driven  through  it ;  and
although  her  body  was  at  liberty,  and  she  rose  up  and  twisted
about  to  liberate  her  hand,  it  remained  immoveable  until
Mr.  K.  passed  his  hand  transversely,  when  the  arm  and  hand
relaxed  and  she  drew  it  to  her  side.  The  patient’s  astonish¬
ment  and  alarm  at  seeing  her  hand  and  arm  in  that  state,
was  a  proof  (if  we  were  not  certain  of  the  fact  from  other
reasons)  that  the  patient  was  unacquainted  with  mesmerism,
and  had  made  no  collusion  with  the  operator.

Brixham,  Nov.  17th,  43.

Sir, — -Respecting  my  health,  I  was  never  strong,  but  not
subject  to  any  complaint  till  about  sixteen  years  ago  I  had
the  small  pox,  ever  since  that  time  I  have  been  subject  to  a
stomach  complaint ;  at  the  least  cold  feel  a  very  great  oppres¬
sion  on  my  chest  with  great  difficulty  of  breathing,  and
would  frequently  faint  away.  Should  be  obliged  to  sit  for
many  days  with  a  pillow  on  m}^  lap  to  support  my  stomach ;
it  would  generally  leave  a  bad  cough,  but  at  times  I  should
feel  as  well  as  any  one.  I  had  many  medicial  men  to  see
me,  and  went  on  just  in  one  way  for  I  think  twelve  years.
The  first  medicial  man  was  the  old  Dr.  Hunt ;  he  gave  me
good  encouragement  as  I  got  so  well  between  times ;  he
thought  I  should  wear  it  out,  and  said  I  was  not  asthmatical.
Some  time  after  Dr.  Shatli  attended  me,  and  at  one  time  the
fit  was  so  violent  that  he  did  not  think  I  should  recover,  and


472  A  case  of  Asthma  cured  with  Mesmerism .

said  he  had  lost  a  daughter  in  the  same  complaint ;  he  con¬
sidered  it  was  on  the  lights.  He  cupped  my  back  three  times,
and  ordred  a  blister  to  be  perpetual  for  many  days,  and
medisien  to  be  taken  evry  half  hour  whenever  I  was  ill.  It
seemed  the  same  thing,  only  much  worse  sometimes  then  at
others ;  always  a  very  bad  pain  on  my  chest  with  great  diffi¬
culty  of  breathing.  A  year  or  two  after  this,  Mr.  H.  Hunt
attended  me.  I  dont  know  his  opinion :  I  took  medisiens
from  him,  and  he  ordered  a  plaster  between  my  shoulders
down  my  back.  Since  that  I  have  had  differant  surgeons —
Mr.  Calley  for  two  years ;  and  the  last  year  he  attended  me
it  returned  regularly  every  month,  and  the  last  three  months
he  ordred  a  hot  bath  for  me  to  be  put  into  a  week  preced¬
ing  each  month,  which  was  done  six  successive  nights  each
month,  but  as  soon  as  it  was  discontinued  the  fit  came
on  each  time.  Mr.  C.  always  said  he  was  subject  to  the  same
complaint,  but  that  I  was  a  thousand  times  worse  then  he
ever  was,  but  from  his  being  exposed  to  the  night  air  he
caught  an  inflammation  on  the  lungs  and  died.  I  then  had
Mr.  Underhay,  successor  to  Mr.  C.  Soon  after  I  had  him  I
caught  a  fever  and  inflammation  on  my  chest ;  this  is  about
three  years  ago.  Since  that  the  returns  of  my  old  complaint
have  been  much  more  frequent  and  much  worse,  particularly
the  last  year  the  paroxysm  have  been  so  violent,  that  Ive
been  obliged  to  sit  on  the  floor  for  four  and  twenty  hours  at
a  time.  To  describe  half  my  sufferings  is  impossible ;  when
the  spasmodic  breathing  comes  on,  the  spasms  on  my  lungs
are  so  violent  that  evry  one  around  me  gets  alarmed,  and
think  it  impossible  for  me  to  breath  another  breath,  the  ex¬
tremity  I  am  in  is  past  describing.  Mr.  Paul,  successor  to
Mr.  Underhay,  now  attends  me,  and  they  all  say  it  is  the
most  alarming  case  of  spasmodic  asthma  they  ever  met  with.
I  remarked  to  Mr.  Paul,  it  was  very  strange  every  surgeon
that  had  seen  me  said  it  was  the  worse  case  they  had  ever
seen ;  and  his  reply  was,  that  he  would  be  bound  if  I  had
forty  differant  surgeons  they  would  all  say  the  same.  As  to
comfortable  sleep  I  had  not  known  for  years )  at  the  best  of
times  I  never  slept  well,  and  can  say  with  all  propriety  that
I  have  not  had  three  good  nights  in  a  month  for  years  past :
always  starting,  jumping,  and  moaning,  and  laying  hours
awaked.  But  now,  sir,  I  am  thankful  to  say,  since  I  was
fortunate  enough  to  be  mizmorized,  I  have  had  a  fortnights
good  sound  sleep, — so  sound  that  I  have  known  nothing  of
the  nights,  for  I  have  not  awaked  either  night  from  the  time
of  going  to  bed  till  seven  or  eight  in  the  morning,  which  is
a  most  extraordinary  change.  For  the  last  six  months  the


Mr.  Brindley’s  cases  of  Cures  by  Mesmerism.  473

fits  of  spasms  have  returned  every  fortnight,  and  the  time
was  up,  and  even  the  symptoms  come  of  its  returning,  and  I
trembled  to  think  when  the  mizmorizem  was  discontinued
the  spasms  would  come  on  as  it  did  when  the  bath  was  dis¬
continued  ;  but,  sir,  I  am  truly  grateful  and  thank  to  say  it
did  not,  or  have  I  felt  the  slightest  symptom  since.  And  to
you,  sir,  I  must  be  indebted  for  this  sudden  change,  now  the
second  fortnight  is  up  and  I  still  feel  well.  My  doctor  has
just  called  to  see  me,  and  said  he  was  very  happy  to  see  me
looking  so  well,  and  must  say  he  had  never  seen  me  look  so
well  since  he  knew  me ;  he  hoped  it  would  continue,  as  he
must  say  he  realy  had  no  desier  to  visit  me  in  the  extremity
he  had  seen  me  in.  After  some  time  I  asked  him  if  he  knew
I  had  been  mizmorized  :  the  reply  was,  “  What  V*  “  No.”
“  When  V’  “  Where  ?”  I  cannot  write  you,  sir,  how  sur¬
prised  he  looked,  and  asked  me  many  questions ;  I  could  not
give  him  many  direct  answers,  more  then  I  had  slept  well,
and  felt  quite  well  ever  since ;  and  the  first  time  it  was  per¬
formed  I  had  every  symptom  of  its  returning,  but  it  com-
pleatly  passed  off.  He  said  he  should  much  liked  to  have
been  witness  to  it,  or  to  have  seen  you,  sir ;  or  he  should
like  to  see  Mr.  H.  to  know  particulars.  I  do  not  think  he
feels  as  Mr.  C.  does,  as  he  again  said  I  must  say  you  look
much  better ;  even  your  geting  good  rest  must  be  a  good
thing  for  you,  and  then  said  how  much  I  should  like  to
know  from  Mr.  H.  the  particulars,  and  I  should  also  like
Mr.  Kiste  to  see  you  as  I  have  seen  you.  I  told  him  I  only
wished  it  had  been  performed  years  ago,  I  had  every  reason
to  believe  I  should  not  be  what  I  now  am,  and  he  said  he
was  affraid  it  was  become  to  habitual  for  anything  to  do  me
good  for  any  length  of  time.  Now,  sir,  ever  feeling  grateful
for  your  trouble  and  kindness  to  me,

I  remain  your  very  humble  Servant,

E.  Spurdens.


Y.  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism.

By  T.  B.  Brindley.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

RegenPs  Place,  near  Stourbridge,
Oct.  17th,  1844.

Dear  Sir, — In  conclusion  of  the  series ,  I  beg  to  send  you
the  following  cases  of  cures  with  mesmerism,  for  insertion  in
your  January  number,


474


Mr.  Brindley’s  cases  of


XXXI.  Cure  of  Chronic  Rheumatism.

Elizabeth  Williams,  Pensnett,  carried  to  me  to  be  mes¬
merised  for  chronic  rheumatism  in  her  legs  and  feet,  which
prevented  her  from  walking,  getting  any  rest,  or  obtaining
a  livelihood.  Had  been  subject  to  it  for  many  years,  and
was  very  much  enervated  and  reduced  in  consequence.  Mes¬
merised  her  every  day  for  a  fortnight,  when  her  pains  were
entirely  removed ;  she  could  obtain  her  natural  rest ,  and  could
ivalk  to  my  house  and  back ,  a  distance  of  10  miles.  It  is
almost  unnecessary  to  add,  that  the  sittings  were  then  dis¬
continued,  the  patient  being  completely  cured.

XXXII.  Cure  of  Dyspepsia  and  partial  Cure  of  Deafness.

Mr.  Keeble,  Halesowen,  mesmerised  for  deafness,  and
dyspepsia,  to  which  complaints  he  had  been  subject  for  several
years.  The  sittings  were  continued  for  seven  consecutive
days,  at  the  expiration  of  which  period  he  was  entirely  cured
of  the  latter,  and  his  hearing  was  very  considerably  improved.
The  sittings  were  discontinued  in  consequence  of  his  removal
to  a  distance.

XXXIII.  Partial  cure  of  an  Inflamed  Leg.

James  Walker,  a  little  boy  residing  in  Stourbridge,  set.  5
years,  was  mesmerised  for  a  violently  swelled  and  inflamed
leg,  the  cause  of  which  was  unascertained.  The  skin  was
glazed,  and  distended  almost  to  bursting,  and  the  pain  so
great  that  he  could  obtain  no  rest.  His  medical  attendant
could  not  relieve  him,  and  I  was  called  in  to  mesmerise  him.
He  was  sent  into  the  coma  in  a  few  minutes,  and  slept  all
night.  Mesmerised  the  second  day,  and  slept  all  night  again.
On  the  third  day  he  was  considerably  improved,  his  leg  being
free  from  pain,  the  inflammation  and  swelling  reduced,  and
his  natural  healthy  appearance  returned.  He  was  then  left
to  the  medical  attendant,  who  completed  his  cure  in  a
few  days.

XXXIV.  Attempt  to  mesmerise  a  person  for  Madness.

William  Cooper,  Clent,  who  had  been  deranged  for  many
years,  and  had  been  to  several  asylums  without  obtaining  any
relief,  was  operated  upon  by  his  father’s  desire.  He  sat  in  a
large  chair,  dressed  in  a  flannel  suit,  rolling  his  eyes  wildly,
howling,  and  swaying  his  head  and  body  from  side  to  side.
As  he  had  no  lucid  intervals,  and  in  consequence  of  his
almost  incessant  motion,  I  saw  the  necessity  of  employing
something  to  effect  his  mesmerisation,  beside  the  passes,
and  the  fixed  stare,  I  therefore  gave  him  mesmerised  water,


various  Diseases  cured  by  Mesmerism.


475


which  he  swallowed  greedily.  I  then  placed  my  hands  on
his  shoulders,  and  gazed  at  him  intensely  for  several  minutes.
His  eyes  at  first  rolled  about  fearfully,  and  he  became  very
violent,  howling,  swearing,  and  moving  about  with  great
rapidity ;  but  by  blowing  upon  him,  he  became  tranquillized
and  calm.  Continuing  the  gaze,  his  eyes  at  length  became
fixed,  his  eyelids  drooped  and  fell,  and  he  dropped  into  the
state  of  incipient  coma,  from  which  he  awoke  in  about  ten
minutes  spontaneously.  I  was  never  able  to  affect  him  sub¬
sequently,  in  consequence  of  his  disease  progressing  rapidly,
which  finally  terminated  his  life.  His  madness  originated  in
the  melancholy  circumstance  of  the  loss  of  his  wife,  who  was
burnt  to  death.  He  was  a  fine  powerful  young  man,  about
30  years  of  age.


The  following  cases  of  idiocy,  and  peculiar  cerebral  deve¬
lopment,  which  I  met  with  in  the  course  of  my  manipulating,
may  perhaps  prove  interesting  to  your  readers.

I.  William  W - ,  a  young  man  of  healthy  and  ro¬

bust  appearance,  and  sanguine  temperament  with  a  dash  of
the  bilious,  though  an  idiot,  has  a  very  good  development
of  the  intellectual  organs  of  the  brain,  and  a  well-formed,
good-sized  head,  not  at  all  deformed  as  in  hydrocephalus.
His  head  measures  23  inches  in  circumference,  measuring
under  Caution,  Comparison,  and  Self-esteem ;  and  14|  inches
over  Firmness,  from  the  opening  of  one  ear  to  the  other.  He
has  never  been  the  subject  of  any  evident  disease ;  his  parents
move  in  a  respectable  sphere  of  life,  have  no  hereditary  dis¬
ease  in  their  family,  have  well-developed  heads,  are  not  of
intemperate  habits,  and  can  assign  no  reason  for  their  son’s
idiocy.

II.  &  III.  Two  idiot  boys,  the  children  of  industrious  and
respectable,  though  poor  parents,  that  inherit  no  hereditary
disease,  have  not  been  given  to  habits  of  intemperance,  and
the  conformation  of  whose  heads  is  very  favourable.  The
one  boy  has  the  animal  region  very  largely  developed,  and  is
consequently  violent,  pugnacious,  fond  of  low  language  and
of  gratifying  his  animal  propensities.  The  other  has  a  small
posterior  lobe,  and  a  better  developed  moral  region  than  his
brother,  and  he  is  of  a  quiet,  inoffensive,  and  mild  dispo¬
sition.

IV.  A  boy,  that  has  had  the  left  portion  of  his  brain.


476  Mr.  Brindley’s  cases  of  cures  by  Mesmerism.

corresponding  to  the  locality  of  the  organ  of  Time  injured
and  probed  with  the  needle,  but  who  has  received  no  last¬
ing  injury,  being  a  very  good  timist,  and  having  a  good
knowledge  and  remembrance  of  periods  of  events,  important
epochs,  &c.  The  right  portion  of  the  brain,  and  of  the
organ  of  course,  remained  uninjured.

Y.  A  lad,  12  years  of  age,  who  received  a  kick  from  a
horse,  forming  an  indentation  of  that  portion  of  the  skull,
where  the  left  organ  of  Combativeness  is  placed,  that  would
have  held  three  penny-pieces,  laid  flat  upon  each  other.  It
produced  insensibility  for  a  time,  but  no  serious  injury.  The
brain  gradually  pushing  out  the  skull,  till  the  indentation  is
now,  at  20  years  of  age,  not  large  enough  to  contain  a  half¬
penny  piece.  His  combative  propensities  have  neither  suf¬
fered  diminution  nor  increase,  by  this  accident,  as  he  neither
seeks  occasion  for  quarrel,  nor  shrinks  from  defending  him¬
self  when  insulted.

With  these  cases,  I  beg  to  conclude,  and  to  subscribe
myself,  Dear  Sir,

Yours  very  truly  obliged,

T.  B.  Brindley.

P.S.  In  Mr.  Braid’s  work  on  hypnotism,  he  states,  that
the  hypnotic  sleep  is  produced  by  “  a  derangement  of  the
state  of  the  cerebro-spinal  centres,  and  of  the  circulatory,
and  respiratory,  and  muscular  systems,  induced  by  a  fixed
stare,  absolute  repose  of  body,  fixed  attention,  and  sup¬
pressed  respiration,  concomitant  with  that  fixity  of  attention.”
If,  however,  Dr.  Playfair’s  theory  be  true,  that  natural  sleep
is  produced,  by  the  causes  of  waste  being  diminished,  in
consequence  of  the  deficient  supply  of  oxygen ,  or  of  arterial
blood,  to  the  brain,  and  the  retarded  circulation  of  that
which  exists  in  the  cavity  of  the  skull ;  I  would  suggest,  that
probably  the  cause  of  hypnotic  sleep  may  be  found  in  the
diminished  supply  of  oxygen,  or  imperfectly  arterialized  blood,
to  the  brain,  the  retarded  circulation,  and  the  diminished  action
of  the  lungs  in  suppressed  respiration,  consequent  on  the
fixity  of  attention,  sitting  posture,  perfect  repose,  and  in¬
tense  expectation  of  the  hypnotic  patient  submitting  to  the
operation.  If  this  be  true,  it  will  in  no  way  militate  against
the  idea  of  a  specific  power  or  influence  in  the  production  of
mesmeric  sleep ;  as  persons  may  be  mesmerised  at  a  distance,
without  the  passes,  or  their  knowledge  of  the  operation,
while  walking,  and  by  simple  volition.  It  will  also  shew  the
vast  distinction  between  hypnotic  and  mesmeric  sleep.


(  477  )


VI.  Reports  of  various  trials  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis

Didier,  last  Summer ,  in  London.

Collected  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

In  the  fourth  edition  of  my  translation  of  Blumenbach’s
Physiology,  published  in  1828,  I  devoted  three  pages  to  a  very
faint  sketch  of  mesmerism,  not  professing  any  belief  in  its
wonders,  but  saying  that  some  of  the  elementary  results  were
very  probable  and  supported  by  good  testimony,  but  remarking
that  one  would  at  once  ascribe  them  to  imagination,  and,  as
to  the  higher  phenomena,  I  must  examine  them  myself  before
I  believed,  “  Having  never  seen  the  magnetic  phenomena,  I
have  no  right  to  pronounce  judgment ;  but  before  I  can  be¬
lieve  these  wonders,  I  must  see  them”  (p.  292).  Yet  in  a
review  of  the  work,  I  forget  in  what  journal,  but  it  was  a
monthly  journal,  and  not  medical,  and  I  saw  it  at  the  United
University  Club,  the  writer  expressed  his  surprise  that  a  sen¬
sible  man  could  believe  such  nonsense.

When  I  had  seen  enough  of  mesmerism  to  assert  it  was
true,  but  up  to  1837  not  more  than  to  speak  of  the  produc¬
tion  of  sleep,  sleep-waking,  rigidity,  & e.,  and  the  prediction  of
changes  in  the  patienVs  own  complaint, — the  Athenaeum  as¬
serted  that  I  had  jumped  all  at  once  to  a  belief  in  all  the
wondrous  assertions  of  mesmerists.  It  was  not  till  1841,  that  I
saw,  or  ventured  to  assert,  the  occurrence  of  vision  with  the
eyes  firmly  closed :  nor  was  it  till  the  present  year,  1844,  that
I  witnessed,  or  ventured  to  assert,  the  fact  of  that  highest
degree  of  clairvoyance,  in  which  a  person  knows,  as  by  vision,
what  is  going  on  at  a  great  distance,  or  can  tell  what  has
taken  place  or  will  take  place  in  matters  not  relating  to  his
own  health  or  own  affairs,  but  to  various  events  in  the  lives
of  others.

In  my  Physiology  in  1838,  I  said  that  “I  should  despise
myself  if  I  hesitated  to  declare  my  decided  conviction  of  the
truth  of  mesmerism,”  meaning  the  more  elementary  phe¬
nomena;  and  that  I  would  stand  ridicule  with  firmness  and
silent  pity  or  contempt,  till  I  should  see,  as  I  should,  the
truth  of  mesmerism  established,  p.  656.

In  the  same  work  at  p.  1633,  in  1840,  my  words  were,
“  I  not  only  repeat  my  firm  conviction  of  the  truth  of  mes¬
merism,  but  of  the  truth  of  many  facts  in  it  upon  which  I
formerly  gave  no  opinion,  because  I  had  not  then  witnessed
them,  and  was  determined  to  remain  neutral  upon  any  point
upon  which  I  myself  did  not  witness  facts.”


478


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


This  year  I  have  met  with  exquisite  clairvoyance  of  the
highest  kind  for  the  first  time,  and  its  truth  I  will  now  as
fearlessly  maintain  as  I  originally  did  the  production  of
simple  sleep.

For  six  years  I  have  made  repeated  trials  with  numerous
patients  of  my  own  :  but  never  have  found  one  who  I  was  satis¬
fied  could  even  see  the  objects  about  them  with  the  eyes
closed,  or  look  into  the  interior  of  the  bodies  of  others  and
state  their  condition  and  prescribe  for  them.  But  among  my
searches  after  clairvoyance  I  have  at  length  found  one  example
of  the  highest  kind,  just  mentioned  in  the  last  paragraph,
though  she  disclaims  all  clairvoyance  of  the  inferior  kind
mentioned  in  the  present  paragraph.  This  patient  is  the  per¬
fection  of  integrity  and  every  other  moral  excellence.  Her
word  is  a  fact :  and  her  truth  is  not  less  absolute  than  her
freedom  from  vanity.  She  dislikes  to  exert  her  clairvoyance,
and  though,  I  have  no  doubt,  long  possessed  of  it,  never  men¬
tioned  it  till  I  tried  and  urged  her  to  exert  it :  nor  would  she
ever  exert  it  but  from  a  desire  to  oblige  me,  nor  does  she  if
aware  of  the  presence  of  others.

She  will  accurately  describe  who  are  in  a  particular  room
at  her  father's  house  at  a  particular  moment,  and  the  ar¬
rangement  of  the  furniture,  &c.— a  distance  of  above  fifty  miles :
or  she  will  search  for  and  see  a  member  of  her  family,  and
describe  the  place  in  which  he  or  she  is,  and  the  others  also
present.  I  at  length  succeeded  in  prevailing  upon  her  to  see
some  others,  not  members  of  her  family,  or  known  to  them
or  to  herself,  and  whose  names  even  I  did  not  mention,  but
only  a  very  few  particulars  about  them.  She  has  described
their  persons  most  accurately,  the  places  in  which  they  were,
their  occupations  at  the  moment ;  and  told  what  others  were
in  the  same  room  with  them :  and  all  this  when  I  knew  no¬
thing  of  the  truth  at  the  time,  and  had  to  verify  it  afterwards.
Far  more  than  this  she  would  tell :  and  tell  with  perfect
accuracy  :  and  predict  numerous  things  relating  to  others
which  have  since  exactly  taken  place.  But  I  will  not  ven¬
ture  to  add  more  at  present.  I  am  anything  but  super¬
stitious;  am  indeed  very  sceptical  of  human  testimony  on
all  matters  of  a  wonderful  nature :  but  these  points  I  have
laboriously  and  rigidly  looked  into,  and  can  speak  posi¬
tively.  In  exerting  this  power,  she  knits  her  brows  and
wrinkles  her  forehead  vertically,  evidently  making  a  great
cerebral  exertion.  The  part  at  which  she  says  she  sees,  so  to
speak,  clairvoyantly,  is  the  centre  of  the  forehead,  midway
between  the  temples,  but  a  little  lower  than  half-way  between
the  root  of  the  nose  and  the  top  of  the  forehead, — exactly  at


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


479


the  spot  called  by  some  cerebral  physiologists  the  organ  of
Eventuality.  Gall  discovered  an  organ  about  this  part,  the
function  of  which  he  termed  the  Sense  of  Things  :  Dr.  Spurz-
heim  split  it  into  two  horizontally ;  the  lower  for  the  know¬
ledge  of  individual  existences,  calling  it  Individuality  :  the
other  for  occurrences,  calling  it  Eventuality.  Whether  eventu¬
ality  is  legitimately  made  from  event,  and  not  rather  from
eventual,  which  refers  not  to  bare  events,  but  ultimate  results,
I  will  not  now  enquire :  his  sesquipedalian  coinage  of  Philo¬
progenitiveness  certainly  does  not  signify  love  of  offspring,  as
he  intended,  but  the  love  of  begetting  offspring.  But  I  have
never  seen  any  grounds  for  his  division  of  Gaiks  organ  of  the
Sense  of  Things  into  a  faculty  for  individual  existences  and
another  for  occurrences,  any  more  than  I  have  seen  reason
for  some  other  of  his  alleged  discoveries,  although  most  of
those  who  adopt  phrenology  from  observing  its  general  truth
and  some  particular  truths,  adopt  all  the  organs  and  faculties
talked  of  by  the  book-makers  and  bust-makers,  who  all
follow  him :  just  as  most  persons  who  adopt  the  Bible  from
being  satisfied  of  its  general  truth,  would  adopt  a  few  more
chapters  or  verses  here  and  there,  if  they  were  interpolated,
without  ever  thinking  to  doubt.  The  fact  of  this  patient  seeing
all  the  things  which  she  inwardly  sees  at  the  higher  part  of
the  organ  of  the  Sense  of  Things  adds  to  my  doubts  of  the
accuracy  of  the  lower  part  of  the  organ  being  destined  for  the
knowledge  of  individual  existences  as  distinct  from  occur¬
rences.  She  describes  the  representation  of  objects  to  be
mainly  at  the  seat  of  the  so-called  Eventuality  ;  but  as  faintly
running  a  little  upward  and  a  little  to  each  side  beyond  its  ad¬
mitted  seat  :  and  indeed  nothing  can  be  more  absurd  than  to
draw  lines  round  the  seats  of  the  organs.  The  centre  only  of
each  organ  should  be  marked,  and  its  general  course  or  shape
may  be  shadowed  out :  but  lines  of  demarcation  are  calcu¬
lated  to  give  very  wrong  ideas  of  limit.  Though  I  could
excite  the  organ  of  Friendship  in  her  by  touching  over  it,
even  when  she  was  in  attacks  of  insensibility  and  perfect  ig¬
norance  of  my  person,  I  never  could  in  any  circumstances
affect  any  other  organ  :  and  never  assisted  her  Clairvoyance
by  placing  my  finger  upon  any  part  of  the  organ  of  the  Sense
of  Things :  nor  could  I  enable  her  to  perceive  absent  persons
when  the  power  was  inactive,  or  increase  its  strength  when
active,  by  putting  the  point  of  a  finger  upon  the  Sense  of  Per¬
sons  :  nor  enable  her  to  judge  better  of  the  period  at  which
the  events  she  predicted  would  come  to  pass,  or  those  which
she  stated  to  have  happened  had  taken  place,  by  placing  my

YOL.  II.  K  K


480  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

finger  upon  Time.  Her  power  of  judging  of  the  period  of
the  various  results  is  slight.

I  need  hardly  say  that  in  perceiving  absent  and  distant
persons  and  things,  it  makes  no  difference  what  may  be  the
direction  of  her  face.  Her  seat  may  be  placed  against  any  of
the  walls  of  the  room  without  altering  her  ability.

A  remarkable  peculiarity  in  this  case  is,  that  the  percep¬
tion  of  absent  objects  scarcely  occurs  unless  I  hold  her  hands
in  mine.  If  I  hold  but  one  hand  in  one  of  mine,  the  faculty
is  by  no  means  so  strong  as  if  I  hold  one  in  each  of  mine.
This  I  discovered  accidentally.  Sometimes  while  distinctly
seeing  a  person  in  a  distant  county,  her  father  for  instance,
she  suddenly  would  cry  out,  “  Oh  papa’s  gone ;  I  can’t  see
him  now.”  On  taking  hold  of  her  hands  again,  merely  with
the  view  of  encouraging  her,  she  would  say,  “  There  now'  I
see  him  again.”  It  was  some  time  before  the  real  fact  struck
me.  But  I  was  so  often  in  the  habit  of  holding  her  hands,
one  in  each  of  mine,  to  encourage  her  to  exert  the  power
and  to  increase  her  general  mesmeric  state,  that  at  length  the
vanishing  of  the  objects  when  I  let  go  her  hands,  and  their
returning  on  my  holding  her  hands  again,  struck  me  :  and  I
proved  the  thing  fully  and  made  further  experiments.  The
difference  between  holding  one  or  both  hands  I  have  men¬
tioned.  But  I  further  found  that  I  must  hold  her  right  in
my  right  and  her  left  in  my  left.  If  I  hold  her  right  in  my
left,  or  her  left  in  my  right,  she  sees  objects  double :  if  I
hold  her  right  in  my  left,  and  her  left  in  my  right,  at  the
same  time,  objects  are  quadrupled ;  and  this  terrifies  her
exceedingly.  These  observations  and  experiments  I  made  in
silence,  without  a  single  remark  to  her ;  and  she  was  long  in
ignorance  of  them ;  nor  did  she  know  them  till  after  satisfy¬
ing  myself  of  their  truth  I  mentioned  them  to  her.  She  was
surprised,  and  observed  for  herself  and  found  my  observa¬
tions  true.

Even  the  power  of  telling  past  and  future  events  in
reference  to  others,  is  greatly  increased  by  my  holding  her
hands  each  in  the  corresponding  one  of  my  own.

Whether  from  her  being  in  a  very  delicate  state  of  health
or  not,  she  exerts  the  power  with  great  effort,  and  often
requires  repeated  efforts  in  the  same  direction  at  successive
sittings  before  she  sees  what  I  desire  her  to  see.  Any  tempo¬
rary  increase  of  debility,  any  headache,  or  other  distressing
sensation,  or  the  slightest  uncomfortable  emotion,  prevents
its  exertion  to  much  purpose  or  altogether.  Before  she  could
discern  persons  who  are  strangers  to  her,  many  attempts  for
very  many  days  were  required.  She  then  saw  them  more


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


481


clearly  every  day.  Sometimes  she  can  see  persons  but  for  an
instant  at  a  time  :  and  sometimes  not  more  than  once  in  this
momentary  manner  during  my  visit.  She  seldom  saw  the
the  whole  of  a  room  at  once.

All  this  shews  how  unreasonable  it  was  to  suppose  Alexis
could  succeed  on  every  occasion  and  off  hand.  He  was  in
good  health  and  strong :  but  his  master  worked  him  two,
three,  and  even  four  times  a  day,  in  spite  of  the  remonstrances
of  those  who  understood  mesmerism,  of  which  he,  like  too
many  exhibitors,  knew  but  little.  People  expected  that  this
delicate  and  exquisite  power  was  always  present  in  the  same
full  force,  and  he  could  do  all  at  command  as  a  boy  can  tumble
over  head  and  ears  or  make  a  somerset.  They  forgot  that  far
less  delicate  powers  are  disturbed  and  annulled  by  annoy¬
ances.  A  fine  vocal  or  instrumental  performer,  an  actor,  or
orator,  is  likely  to  fail,  if  persons  surround  him  who  let  him
know  by  their  remarks  and  treatment  that  they  consider  him
a  fool  or  impudent  pretender  and  worry  him.  Can  a  mathe¬
matician  calculate,  or  a  poet  compose,  amidst  persons  wor¬
rying  and  disgusting  him  ?  These  things  should  be  shewn
only  to  a  few  at  a  time,  and  in  a  private  room ;  and  the  least
signs  of  such  discreditable  and  inexcusable  conduct,  as  that
to  which  poor  Alexis  was  often  exposed,  should  be  firmly  sup¬
pressed  by  the  sensible  and  right-minded  of  the  party.  At
the  house  of  Mr.  Robinson,  and  at  the  British  Institute,  and
some  other  places,  I  am  informed  that  a  medical  man  treated
him  very  improperly :  but  other  persons,  and  even  ladies,
behaved  as  shamefully  sometimes.  A  large  number  of  per¬
sons,  on  the  occasion  of  mesmeric  experiments,  consider  it
a  privileged  time  for  the  exhibition  of  their  own  ignorance,
folly,  and  unfairness.  If  Alexis  on  his  return  is  to  be  exhi¬
bited  in  public,  as  some  English  individuals  were  exhibited
in  London  last  summer,  I  trust  that  the  friends  of  mesmerism
will  stand  aloof  from  him  and  M.  Marcillet.

The  wonder  is  that  Alexis  did  not  fail  far  more  frequently
than  he  did  :  and  not  that  he  latterly  began  to  fail  very  much.
He  became  more  and  more  exhausted,  and  more  and  more
felt  the  unfairness  which  accumulated  towards  him.

The  first  I  heard  of  Alexis  was  Colonel  Gurwood’s  inter¬
views  with  him  at  Paris.  The  Colonel  at  his  own  house  one
day  read  to  me  his  notes  of  various  interviews  with  Alexis,
written  the  same  evening  or  the  next  morning  after  each  inter¬
view.  If  the  Colonel  was  astounded  and  satisfied  so  was  I :  be¬
cause  he  is  known  to  all  the  world  as  a  man  of  perfect  probity,
a  plain  and  straightforward  soldier  and  gentleman,  without
any  freaks  of  fancy  or  hastiness  of  opinion.  He  had  never

Iv  k  2


482  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

accompanied  his  family  to  my  house  to  witness  my  mesmeric
experiments,  and  he  doubted  the  truth  of  mesmerism  alto¬
gether,  when  he  at  length  gave  way  to  the  entreaties  of  a
friend  in  Paris  to  visit  Alexis.  I  do  not  hesitate  to  mention
briefly  some  particulars  of  the  many  he  read  to  me,  because
the  reports  are  in  the  mouth  of  all  the  fashionable  world,  and
I  heard  nothing  from  him  that  I  have  not  since  heard  from
others  in  general  society.  Alexis  was  led  by  him  to  his  house
in  Lowndes  Square;  and  the  character  of  the  roads  and  houses
on  landing  in  England,  the  statue  at  Charing  Cross,  the
Queen’s  palace,  and  the  situation  and  number  of  the  Colonel’s
house,  then  the  interior,  the  stairs,  landing-place,  drawing
rooms,  and  the  persons  actually  in  it  at  the  time,  as  was  proved
afterwards  by  a  letter  received  from  Mrs.  Gurwood,  he  des¬
cribed  admirably.  He  described  the  Colonel’s  own  room,  the
number  of  engravings  hanging  on  the  wall,  maintaining  there
were  seven,  whereas  the  Colonel  declared  they  were  but  six
and  found  himself  wrong  on  returning  to  England  :  the  sub¬
ject  of  the  engraving  over  the  fire-place  :  a  box  in  the  room,
and  a  very  handsomely-bound  volume  in  it,  wrapped  up,  with
French  words  upon  the  cover — (a  volume  of  the  Duke’s  De¬
spatches,  bound  in  green  morocco  and  gilt,  with  the  garter
and  French  motto  on  the  cover)  :  the  book  closets  on  each
side  of  the  fire-place,  and  the  very  confused  state  of  the  books
in  one  :  an  inner  room,  with  a  closet  at  the  further  end,  and
two  swords  hanging  in  it,  one  from  a  very  distant  country,
the  point  of  one  rusty  :  an  eastern  inscription  upon  one  (a
Damascus  blade  with  Persian  or  Arabic  characters)  :  the  rela¬
tion  of  the  Colonel’s  apartment  in  the  Tower  to  other  rooms  :
a  Hebrew  inscription  on  one  of  the  walls  of  one  of  the  rooms  :
the  relations  between  the  Duke  and  the  Colonel,  and  many
particulars  respecting  them  and  others,  which  could  not  be
generally  known,  and  which  he  of  course  did  not  read  to  me,
wrere  exact.  He  was  taken  to  periods  of  the  Colonel’s  life
in  the  Peninsula  :  and  saw  him  save  a  Frenchman’s  life  after
battle  ;  saw  him  disinterring  the  corpse  of  a  friend ;  and  ena¬
bled  him  to  trace  out  persons  afterwards,  who  supplied  him
with  testimony  which  he  had  long  been  in  want  of.  The
Colonel  had  prevented  the  murder  of  a  French  officer  after
battle :  and,  on  a  subsequent  visit  to  Spain,  disinterred  the
body  of  a  dear  friend  who  had  been  thrown  into  the  earth
with  others,  and  given  him  honourable  burial.  I  cannot  re¬
member  half  or  a  quarter :  nor  do  I  pretend  to  perfect  accu¬
racy.  He  told  the  Colonel  that  the  latter  was  going  to  dine
in  such  a  street  and  would  go  to  the  opera  in  the  evening.
The  Colonel  was  going  to  dine  in  that  street  with  Lord  Cow-


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  483

ley ;  but  had  no  idea  of  going  to  the  opera :  however  in  the
evening  Lord  Cowley  proposed  their  going,  and  they  went.

The  Colonel  promised  to  furnish  me  with  the  whole  account
for  The  Zoist,  except  what  related  to  private  matters,  but  he
afterwards  declined,  writing  to  me  that  “  the  publicity  already
given  to  these  communications  had  given  him  much  trouble
and  subjected  him  to  much  misrepresentation,  and  that  an
authorized  publication  would  add  to  both.”  I  thought  of
Lady  Macbeth's  words — “  A  soldier,  and  afeard  !''  I  find  an
excuse  for  some  medical  men  who  have  families  dependent
for  bread  upon  their  professional  success,  and  conceal  their
belief  in  mesmerism  :  but  when  mere  bantering  and  jeering
can  be  the  utmost  mischief,  I  think  every  person  is  bound  to
come  forward  and  declare  the  truth,  for  the  good  of  science,
the  good  of  the  afflicted,  and  the  support  of  those  whom  the
world  persecute.  Misrepresentation  would  be  at  an  end  if
the  precise  truth  were  published.

A  gentleman,  who  was  a  member  of  the  last  House  of
Commons,  and  was  at  the  University  of  Cambridge  at  the
same  time  with  myself,  and  had  been  converted  in  my  house
to  the  belief  in  mesmerism  by  the  case  of  Rosina  and  Miss
Critchly  (described  in  Nos.  Y.  and  YI.  of  The  Zoist )  called
upon  me,  and,  after  hearing  what  Colonel  Gurwood  had  re¬
lated  to  me,  related  in  his  turn  the  following  particulars  of
some  interviews  he  had  just  had  in  Paris  with  Alexis  : —

“  Every  one  knows,  I  presume,  that  the  Memnon  steamer
bringing  mails  from  India  was  wrecked  off  Cape  Guardaful,
on  the  African  coast  of  the  Red  Sea.  If  the  reader  does
not  know,  perhaps  the  shareholders  in  the  great  Royal  Steam
Packet  Company  will  have  the  pleasure  to  inform  him.  Was
there  ever  any  sentence  comprising  so  many  magical  roman¬
tic  ideas  as  are  conveyed  by  Memnon  (an  enchanted  musical
statue),  India,  Africa,  lands  of  magic,  and  the  Red  Sea,
where,  I  believe,  uneasy  demons  are  or  used  to  be  laid.  Mrs.  B.
had  been  in  India,  at  Madras,  some  years  with  her  husband,
wrho  holds  an  official  situation  there ;  but  her  own  health,  and
that  of  her  children,  induced  her,  two  or  three  years  since,
to  return  to  Europe,  and  she  resided  at  Paris  with  her  father-
in-law.  She  received  a  letter  there  from  Mr.  B.,  saying  that
he  should  take  the  steamer  to  Suez,  pass  from  Alexandria  by
Gibraltar  by  sea,  to  Southampton,  where  he  fixed  to  meet
her  in  September.  She  had  no  reason  to  doubt,  and  pre¬
pared  to  join  him  as  appointed.  Previous  to  leaving  Paris
she  determined  to  see  a  certain  lad,  by  name  Alexis
Didier,  who  was  reported  to  her  to  be  a  wonderful  per¬
son,  a  real  demon  for  knowing  “  what  should  ne'er  be


484  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

known ;”  and  she  went  with  a  friend,  and  found  him  en¬
tranced,  surrounded  with  twenty  persons,  all  asking  ques¬
tions.  His  eyes  were  bandaged,  and  yet  he  answered  them,
read,  played  at  cards,  and  did  many  feats.  She  approached
him,  holding  out  her  hand  which  had  a  glove  on.  “  Alexis,”
she  said,  “  what  is  under  my  glove  ?”  “  There  is  a  ring  on

the  third  finger.”  “  Describe  the  ring,  and  its  materials  and
shape.”  Alexis  did  so,  rapidly  and  accurately.  “  What  is
written  on  it  inside?”  He  told  her  precisely.  “Now  I
wish,”  said  she,  “  you  would  travel  writh  me  in  idea.”
“  Whither  ?”  “  To  India,  to  the  part  I  landed  at.  What

sort  of  a  ship  did  I  go  in  ?”  He  described  it,  her  getting
into  the  boat ;  he  made  out  the  letters  h  o  m  a  s  perfectly,
but  not  much  more,  out  of  the  “  Thomas  Coutts ;”  the  view
of  the  place,  and  the  catamarans  the  natives  use,  although
he  could  not  give  them  a  name.  (They  are  three  logs  of
wood  fastened  together,  on  which  they  brave  the  highest
waves.)  “  Describe  my  husband.”  He  did  so.  “  Where  is
he  now  ?”  After  some  pause  he  said,  “  I  see  him ;  he  is  on
board  a  ship;  the  ship  is  under  full  sail.”  Stop,”  said
Mrs.  B.,  “you  are  mistaken;  Alexis,  look  again.”  “I  do,”
said  Alexis,  “  I  repeat  it.”  “  Oh,  surely,”  exclaimed  Mrs.
B.,  who  had  Mr.  B.’s  letter  stating  his  return  in  a  steamer,
“  you  have  perhaps  mistaken  the  chimney  for  a  mast.”  Alexis
replied,  “  There  is  a  mast,  but  there  is  no  chimney.  It  is  a
sailing  vessel.”  Mrs.  B.  left  Alexis,  certain  he  was  wrong.
Her  anxiety  was  great  when  the  Memnon  was  lost.  Within
the  last  month  she  has  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  B.,  stating
that  he  had  altered  his  mind,  and  was  coming  home  in  a  sail¬
ing  vessel,  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ;  and  is  at  this
moment  in  England,  arrived  in  a  sailing  vessel.  Alexis  per¬
sisted  that  the  vessel  had  only  two  masts.  Truth  compels  me
to  say  it  had  three.

“  Mrs.  B.  wrote  this  to  her  sister,  and  recited  it  herself  to
me  in  London  on  the  3rd  of  this  month  (November).  I  went
to  Paris  next  day,  and  before  a  week  had  passed,  got  a  card
of  the  mesmeriser,  Mons.  Marcillet,  who  has  a  large  Office
de  Boulage  (Waggons),  but  lives  at  No.  21,  Bue  Neuve
Coquenard.  Thither  I  repaired  about  two  o’clock,  p.m.,  was
admitted,  and  ushered  into  a  small  drawing-room,  in  which
might  be  assembled  some  twenty  or  thirty  ladies  and  gen¬
tlemen,  and  several  of  the  labouring  class.  They  were  crowd¬
ing  round  a  small  round  card-table.  I  could  not  for  some
time  see  the  chief  actor.  At  length  I  made  my  way  round,
and  managed  to  get  so  near  as  to  touch  the  table.  Here  I
found  a  lad  of  about  seventeen  or  eighteen,  with  his  eyes


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  485

very  thickly  bandaged,  sitting  and  talking  shortly  and  nerv¬
ously,  rather  low  sometimes.  He  seemed  oppressed  from  the
heat  of  the  room,  and  every  one  talking  to  him  at  once.  At
length  a  sort  of  order  was  restored,  and  a  window  opened.
I  saw  a  lady  present  him  a  letter,  very  closely  written,  in  an
envelope.  He  took  it.  “  I  want  to  know,”  said  she,  “  what
are  the  four  words  at  the  top  of  the  third  page  ?”  He  twisted
the  letter  between  his  thumbs,  applied  it  to  his  stomach,  put
it  down  on  the  table,  and  in  a  minute  said,  “  Decidedly  !  The

four  first  words  at  the  top  of  the  third  page  are -

- .”  The  lady  opened  the  letter,  unfolded  it,  and

read  the  very  four  words  he  had  mentioned  !  Another
lady  then  said,  “  Alexis,  will  you  travel  with  me  ?”  “  Yes  ;

give  me  your  hand.”  She  did.  He  then  just  passed  his  own
over  it,  slightly  clasping  it,  but  let  it  go  immediately.
“Well,  I  am  ready;  which  way  do  you  go?”  “Towards
Fontainbleau,  (forty  miles  from  Paris)  ;  are  you  there  ?”
“  Yes.”  “  Pray  describe  my  house  near  there.”  Alexis  then
rapidly  described  the  approach,  the  appearance,  the  number
of  stories,  and  the  windows,  very  minutely,  and,  as  the  lady
allowed,  very  correctly.  She  then  proposed  to  him  to  go
indoors,  to  tell  her  the  plan  of  the  house,  &c.,  and  then  her
room,  and  the  windows,  &c.,  and  furniture,  and  how  ar¬
ranged.  This  he  did  as  perfectly !  She  then  said,  “  You
have  told  us,  Alexis,  that  there  is  a  secretaire,  and  which
wall  of  the  room  it  is  placed  against ;  is  there  anything  upon
it  ?”  After  a  pause,  “  Yes  there  is ;  I  see  something.”
“  What  is  it  ?”  “  I  canY  tell ;”  and  after  a  moment,  “  It  is

something  which  is  not  natural.”  The  lady  nodded  assent.
“  But  what  is  it  ?”  “  Oh  !  I  donY  know  ;  I  canY  say ;  I

give  it  up ;  I  canY  tell  you,”  said  he,  in  an  irritated  tone.
“  Courage,  courage,  Alexis !”  cried  Mons.  Marcillet,  the
mesmeriser,  who  came  near  him,  and  threw  his  hands  and
fingers  at  him  as  if  sprinkling  water,  “  Madame  is  anxious
to  know ;  you  must  try  and  tell  her.”  A  pause.  “  But  I
canY  tell  Madame.”  “Well  then,”  cried  the  mesmeriser,
“  touch  it,  as  you  see  it ;  feel  it.”  On  this  he  passed  his
fingers  very  very  rapidly  on  the  green  cloth  half  a  dozen
times.  “  Oh  !”  said  he,  “  I  feel  it ;  it  is  full  of  small  holes.”
“True,”  said  the  lady.  “Courage,  Alexis!”  We  were  all
in  wonder.  “  It  lies,”  said  Alexis,  “  in  a  slanting  position,
thus,”  describing  with  his  hand  an  angle.  Presently,  “  Oh  !
it  is  horrible  to  look  at,”  with  a  shrinking  action.  The  lady
assented.  “  Oh  !  said  Alexis,  “  there  is  a  large  hole  in  it.
I  can  put  my  fingers  in,  and  I  feel,  I  feel — oh  !  it  is  teeth  I
feel.”  The  lady  nodded  assent,  expressing  wonder,  and  im-


486  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

mediately  Alexis  shewed  great  terror,  and  trembling,  cried,
“  Oh ,  mon  Dieu  !  c’est  la  tete  a’un  mort  .” — “  It  is  the  head  of
a  dead  man  !”  “  Alexis  is  quite  right, ”  said  the  lady;  “it

is  so,  and  lying  just  as  he  describes  it.”  The  confusion
was  so  great  at  this  moment  that  I  could  not  make  out,
among  the  chattering,  whether  it  was  a  skull,  or  the  head  of
a  mummy,  or  New  Zealander,  but  it  was  as  he  said,  la  tete
d’un  mort,  and  a  curiosity.  A  gentleman  close  to  me,  handed
from  a  lady  across  the  table  a  card-case  of  green  velvet,  very
richly  filagreed  with  gold.  “  This  lady,”  said  he  to  Alexis,
“  wants  to  know  what  is  inside  this  case.”  “  Oh !”  said
Alexis,  handling  it ;  “  that  is  difficult ;  there  is  so  much  gold
about  it,  I  can't  do  it.”  “Pray  try.”  Well,  after  a  minute,
and  putting  it  to  his  stomach,  and  smelling  at  it  :  “  In  this
card-case  there  are  three  visiting  cards.  On  one  are  such
letters,”  giving  letter  by  letter  very  slowly,  and  apparently
stumbling,  as  if  they  were  in  a  mist ;  but  at  length  he  men¬
tioned  the  letters  composing  the  names  and  address  on  each
card.  Alexis  then  gave  the  case  back.  He  appeared  fatigued
with  this  exertion.

“  I  addressed  myself  to  his  mesmeriser,  Mons.  Marcillet,
to  know  what  I  had  to  pay.  He  replied,  nothing.  I  then
asked  if  he  came  to  private  parties,  and  the  price.  He  re¬
plied,  “  Yes,  with  pleasure,  on  payment  of  thirty  francs,”
about  24s.

“  Such  was  my  first  interview  with  a  clairvoyant.  I  was  pe¬
trified  with  astonishment.  Two  or  three  days  after  I  called  on
M.  Marcillet,  who  was  then  shaving,  but  nevertheless  kindly
asked  me  to  come  in,  and  gave  me  a  variety  of  papers  to  read.
He  showed  me  several  of  Colonel  Gurwood's  letters,  who  can
better  than  any  one,  perhaps,  attest  the  wonder  of  Alexis'
power,  with  regard  to  himself  and  Colonel  Husson,  of  the
French  artillery,  &c.  They  were  thrown  about  at  random,  but
I  entreated  Mons.  Marcillet  to  preserve  them  carefully.  He
told  me  many  curious  anecdotes  of  Alexis.  That  he  (M.  M.)
himself  had  no  idea  how  he  had  the  power  to  mesmerise,  and
never  felt  the  worse  for  doing  it.  He  told  me  that  he  mes¬
merised  Alexis's  brother,  who  was  also  a  good  clairvoyant,
but  that  his  stupid  country  bonne  (or  housekeeper)  was  the
most  wonderful  of  all,  and  predicted,  with  awful  accuracy,
when  in  a  mesmerised  trance.  I  saw  neither  of  these,  as
the  younger  Didier  went  to  Orleans  and  Bordeaux  next  day.

“Next  day  came  to  my  hotel  Mons.  Marcillet  and  Alexis,
in  the  morning,  and  stayed  two  or  three  hours.  Alexis
looked  at  the  prints  in  Punch  of  the  Queen's  trip  to  Cam¬
bridge  with  pleasure.  He  seemed  modest,  unassuming,  like


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  487

any  other  lad  of  that  age.  He  did  not  seem  to  relish  being
interrupted  by  Marcillet’s  summons  to  sit  down,  and  reso¬
lutely  persisted  in  taking  his  time,  and  finishing  the  prints
in  Punch.  I  mention  this  as  it  contrasts  so  completely  with
his  spaniel-like  affection  to  his  mesmeriser,  when  entranced,
when  he  did  nothing  but  write  over  a  sheet  of  paper,  now
by  me, — “  Marcillet,  Marcillet,  Marcillet.”  He  seemed  heart
and  soul  occupied  by  him.  When  unmesmerised,  Marcillet
laments  that  he  is  obstinate,  and  will  not  follow  good  advice.
At  length  Alexis  sat  himself  down  in  a  chair,  looking  stead¬
fastly  in  the  mesmeriser’s  eyes,  who  sat  opposite,  and  after  a
time  passed  his  hands  as  usual.  In  three  minutes  he  dropped
off.  His  face  seemed  to  be  drawn  together  convulsively.  He
yawned,  and  occasionally  shivered.  We  now  bandaged  his
eyes  three  times  over.  We  were  three  gentlemen  and  four
ladies.  We  sent  to  buy  a  pack  of  cards.  He  is  always  most
eagerly  impetuous  to  play  at  ecarte.  He  told  every  card,
before  turned ,  in  his  own,  and  all  those  of  his  adversary.
He  was  delighted,  but  excessively  impatient.  He  was  very
rarely  wrong  in  naming  the  cards.  After  several  games  he
played  with  his  back  to  the  table,  bandaged,  but  as  easily  as
if  he  were  wide  awake.  After  twenty  minutes’  play,  a  lady
asked  him  where  a  certain  book  was,  which  she  had  purposely
concealed  before  he  arrived.  “  It  is  under  that  sofa  cushion
it  is  on  such  and  such  a  subject.  He  was  right,  and  he  was
as  merry  as  possible.  You  could  not  go  fast  enough  for  him.
He  could  see  everything,  and  seemed  to  answer  before  you
could  get  the  question  uttered.

“  I  had  a  few  days  before  bought  at  a  bookseller’s  the  sus¬
pension-bridge  of  Roche  Bernard,  in  Bretagne,  (for  they  have
many  of  them  as  wide  as  Clifton  erected  in  every  direction  on
the  continent,  of  wire ,  without  three  Acts  of  Parliament,  and
for  less  than  70,000/.,  which  do  stand ,  and  answer  perfectly
well),  with  its  description,  and  the  description  of  the  Friburg
one, — in  all  three  books,  for  which  I  had  paid  the  bill.  They
were  sent  packed  up  in  a  large  paper,  tied  with  string,  and
knowing  their  contents  (as  I  thought)  I  did  not  undo  it,  but
placed  it  on  the  top  of  a  bureau.  I  took  the  parcel  down,
exactly  as  it  was,  and  laying  it  before  Alexis, — “  What  is  in
this  ?”  “  Books.”  “  On  what  subject  ?”  “  Oh,  there  are

subjects  with  scales  and  measurements;  it  is  something —
quelque  chose  aerienne.”  Thinking  he  alluded  to  the  aerial
machine,  I  said,  “No,”  but  he  was  positive,  and  though  I
did  not  yield,  I  must  admit  that  a  suspension-bridge  is  aerial,
and  that  he  was  therefore  right.  He  was  evidently  annoyed,
but  his  politeness  seemed  to  restrain  further  comment.  “  How


488  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

many  books  are  there  in  this  parcel  V ’  “  Four.”  “  No,  Alexis,
there  are  assuredly  but  three.”  “  But  there  are  four.”  “  I
think,”  replied  I,  “  I  ought  to  know,  as  I  ordered  them,  and
paid  for  them.  Here  is  the  bill,  and  there  are  but  three.”
He  then,  in  a  nervous  agitation,  pounced  upon  the  parcel,
trying  to  tear  the  books  out,  crying  “There  are  four,”  to
prove  what  he  said.  I  said  “  Patience,”  and  untied  it,  and,
to !  there  were  four !  The  bookseller  had,  unknown  to  me,
enclosed  “  a  catalogue  of  works  sold  by  him  !”  This  triumph
put  him  in  high  force.  “Now,  Alexis,  let  us  travel.  Whi¬
ther?  To  England.  First,  we  will  go  to  London.”  “Well
where  then?”  “Towards  the  West  by  railway.”  Ah  !  there
we  are.  “  It  is  a  city,”  said  I,  “  about  forty  leagues  west  of
London.  There  is  a  river  near  it,  and  something  I  want  you
to  describe  near  the  city.”  “  It  is,”  he  said,  “  three  leagues
(about  nine  miles)  from  the  mouth  of  the  river.”  “  Yes,  here
it  is,”  said  I,  putting  the  print  of  the  Clifton  Suspension
Bridge,  as  represented  in  cruel  mockery  finished.  My  hand
covered  the  word  Clifton.  “  What  is  the  name  of  the  place  ?”
“  It  is  CLIFTON — Clivdon.”  Placing  his  finger  on  the
middle  part  of  the  bridge,  he  said,  “There  is  nothing  here,
here;  the  two  sides  are  there”  “Yes;  but  look  again,  Alexis.
Are  you  sure  there  is  nothing  there  ?”  “  Oh  !  yes ;  there  are
two  ropes — I  see  them  now  quite  distinctly :  and  I  see,  I  see
a  basket.  Oh  !  there  it  goes,”  and  he  made  the  motion  and
the  noise  of  the  basket  rushing  down,  and  then  imitated  the
slow  motion  of  winding  it  up  on  the  other  side  most  admir¬
ably.  Well,  Alexis,  you  must  really  come  and  see  it  when
awake.  “  I  will  tell  you,  then,”  said  he,  “  how  far  you  live
from  it.  Aye,”  said  he,  perceiving  the  doubt  in  my  mind,
“I  will  tell  you,  and  tell  you  precisely .”  “  Flow  far  then?”

“Why  nine  kilometres.”  That  is  English  measure  in  a
straight  line  five-and-a-half  miles  as  near  as  possible.  He  told
me  my  house  was  on  a  hill,  the  staircase  opposite  the  door,
the  billiard  table  and  the  piece  of  wood  on  one  end  of  it.  But
he  got  very  confused  after,  although  he  told  what  I  believed
the  number  of  horses  in  the  stable.

“  Let  us  travel  again,  Alexis.”  “  Where  ?  To  England  ?”
“No.”  “  To  Scotland  ?”  “Oh,  but  that  is  England.”  “I

beg  your  pardon,  Alexis,  it  is  not.”  “  Oh,  but  all  beyond
the  sea  is  England  to  me.”  “Well  I  have  a  friend  there  in

the  North,  near - .”  “Oh  !  I  know.”  “Well,  if  you  do,

tell  me  about  him.”  “  He  is  in  a  countrv  house.”  “  I  believe

c /

so.  What  age  ?”  Instantly  “  Twenty-eight — he  is  tolerably
tall — he  is  very  pale — he  has  dark  brown  hair.”  He  then
described  the  face  and  colour  of  the  eye  perfectly.  “  He  can


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis,  489

sing — has  not  a  bass,  but  a  baritone  voice — he  has  mat  de
poitrine,  illness  of  the  chest— -he  coughs.”  “  What  is  he
doing  ?”  “  He  is  reading  a  newspaper.”  “  What  paper  ?”

“  The  Edinburg  Journal .”  “  Is  it  this  size  ?”  said  I  taking  a

large  Morning  Chronicle,  and  giving  it  to  him.  He  burst  out
laughing,  saying,  “  Oh,  what  immense  newspapers  your  Eng¬
lish  ones  are.”  No,  it  is  this  sort  of  size,  folding  the  Chronicle
neatly  up  on  both  sides  lengthways  and  breadthways  to  shew
the  size.  A  person  present  observed  Alexis  was  right  as  to
the  size  of  The  Edinburgh  Journal.  He  said  lightly,  “  This  is
your  second  English  Journal,  the  Morning  Chronicle .”

“  Look  again,  Alexis,  at  my  friend^s  face ;  do  you  observe
anything  ?”  Pausing  a  little,  “No,  I  do  not :”  then  in¬
stantly,  “Yes,  I  do;  over  his  eye  is  a  scar,  thus — and,  stop
—  oh,  yes,  I  see  he  has  lost  the  sight  of  it.”  “Which  eye,
Alexis  ?”  “  The  right  eye.”  My  friend  had  had  it  blown  by

gunpowder  when  a  boy,  and  it  is  very  difficult  to  find  out
that  he  has  lost  it.  “  What  is  good  for  his  complaint  ?”  “  I

know,  and  could  tell  you.”  “  Are  you  not  interested  in  him
very  deeply  ?”  “  Yes,  I  know  it,”  said  he,  “  I  could  tell  you

now,  but  might  make  a  mistake.  Write  to  him  for  a  lock  of
his  hair;  let  me  have  that,  and  I  shall  be  able  to  tell  you  to
a  certainty  !”  “  Where  is  it  to  be  cut  from  !”  “  Oh,  any¬

where;  but  if  you  please,  to  take  it  from  the  back  of  the
head.”  The  kindness  of  heart  he  displayed  was  quite  affecting;
and  in  another  case  also  of  health  he  entered  into  it  with  in¬
tense  feeling.  He  certainly  is  a  very  benevolent  Demon  !
At  our  request,  he  eagerly  complied  with  our  wishes  that  he
should  write  down  what  he  had  so  astonishingly  told  us  about
our  friend  in  the  North ;  he  seized  a  pen  and  wrote  down
vigorously  (as  follows)  and  rapidly.  Here  it  lies  by  me  now
and  I  copy  it : — ■

“  f  28  ans.,  brune,  pale,  grand,  assez  mat  a  la  poitrine,  (Eil
Droit,  il  tousse  a  une  tres  belle  voix  barritone’

“  A  lady  had  a  particular  question  to  ask,  which  she  had
determined  upon  when  first  she  heard  of  Alexis,  and  had
never  imparted  to  any  one.  He  was  withdrawn  a  little  from
the  table ;  he  was  in  high  spirits,  chuckling  away  as  she  wrote
on  a  bit  of  paper  concealed  from  him  these  words — “  He
always  manages  best  with  women  interrogators.  Let  me  ask
him  ?”  “  Oh  !  that  I  do,”  he  said,  and  they  sat  apart.  What
the  question  was  we  know  not,  but  the  lady  asserted  that  as  she
was  preparing  to  put  it,  before  she  had  uttered  two  words,
as  if  seeing  into  her  mind,  he  told  her  exactly  what  she  was
going  to  ask,  and  answered  it  in  a  moment.  He  now  jumps
up,  and  going  to  the  piano-forte,  stand  and  plays  a  tune


490


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


upon  it,  rather  in  a  thumping  stuccato  style,  and  no  very
good  music,  but  it  was  a  tune  both  bass  and  treble.  One
can  hardly  believe  he  is  asleep,  but  he  is  completely  so.  Well
he  sits  down  again.  “  I  feel  tired,”  he  said.  “  Will  you
have  anything  ?”  “  Yes,  a  glass  of  wine?”  “  Yes.  “Well

here’s  a  glass  of  sherry.”  “Well,  pour  it  out.”  He  drinks
it,  and  a  second.  “Will  you  eat?”  “If  you  please.”  “There
is  hardly  anything  but  the  remains  of  what  is  in  this  round
deal  case.”  “What  is  in  it,  Alexis?”  Pate  de  foie  gras ,”
(a  liver  pie.)  True.  It  was  put  before  him.  “  See,”  said  he,
gravely  thrusting  the  fork  among  the  truffles,  “  how  well  a
man  asleep  can  find  them  out.”  He  helped  himself  largely
and  ate  with  a  good  appetite.  I  turned  to  a  lady  who  sat
near,  and  inquired  of  her  whether  she  would  eat  anything  ?
I  could  not  finish  this  short  question,  before,  like  lightning,
he  addressed  her,  saying,  “You  breakfasted  at  twenty-five
minutes  past  ten  o’clock,  and  I  see  you  do  not  want  any¬
thing  !  You  are  not  hungry,  I  am  sure.”  The  lady  acknow¬
ledged  he  was  quite  right,  but  we  enjoyed  a  hearty  laugh  at
his  penetration.  I  may  add  that  the  lady  had  breakfasted  in
a  house  several  streets  off.  He  seemed  to  see  my  mind,  and
the  lady’s  appetite  at  the  same  glance.  “  Well  now,  Alexis,
as  you  have  done  justice  to  this  pie,  pray  let  us  know  where
it  came  from.”  We  supposed  he  might  have  said  Strasburg,
so  famous  for  them,  or  at  least  Paris,  where  we  were  sitting.
Who  would  have  guessed  going  out  of  Paris,  to  purchase  such
a  delicacy  in  a  country  place  ?  to  bring  it  into  Paris  ?  But
Alexis  instantly  answered,  “  You  bought  it  at  St.  Germain
two  days  ago  !  at  such  a  shop,  in  such  a  place  !”  “  But  you

do  not  describe  it  sufficiently,  Alexis.”  “  Oh,  I  see,  it  is
near  the  prison.”  He  was  quite  right.  While  he  was  talking
to  us,  the  footman  came  in  and  said,  “There  is  a  person,
Sir,  in  the  next  room  waiting  for  you  ?”  Who  is  it  ?”  I  said,

.  or  rather  would  have  said,  for  Alexis  instantly  imitated  the
action  of  a  woman  who  sews,  a  little  exaggerated,  and  said,
“  qui  coude ”  without  other  interruption  of  his  sentence  or
tone.  “  Open  the  door,”  said  I,  “  of  the  bedroom,”  and  lo  !
there  stood  the  sempstress.  In  the  course  of  the  visit  he
would  take  a  dozen  letters,  and  reject  all  but  that  you  desired
to  find,  but  without  seeing  the  name  of  the  writer,  and  in  the
most  rapid  and  decided  manner.  Now  and  then  he  made  a
mistake  in  other  points.  The  mesmeriser  treated  him  as  a
pointer,  with  “  Have  a  care  there  !  So  !  so  !”  Courage  !
applauding  him  warmly  when  he  did  well.  He  told  a  lady  all
about  her  brother  in  India,  what  he  was  doing  in  many
respects,  but  when  he  touched  upon  his  native  female  ac-


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  491

quaintances  lie  shewed  the  greatest  tact  and  delicacy  in
dealing  with  them.

“  Well,  at  length,  after  nearly  three  hours’  trance,  he  was
unmesmerised,  and  awoke  with  very  little  difficulty.  All  his
liveliness  and  freedom  and  laughter  was  gone.  He  was  very
civil  and  rather  shy,  bowing,  amazed  at  our  questions.  “Well,
how  do  you  feel  Alexis  ?”  “  Hungry  ?”  “  Rather.”  “  And

yet  you  made  a  good  inroad  in  the  Pate  de  foie  gras  just
now.”  “What  pate?”  “When?”  with  the  most  naive  sim¬
plicity.  “  Why,  Alexis,  don’t  you  see  it  and  the  plates,  and
knives  and  forks.”  “  Mons.  Marcillet,”  said  he,  in  a  plain¬
tive  tone,  “  have  I  been  eating  ?”  “  To  be  sure  you  have,”

and  we  could  not  help  laughing.  Poor  youth  !  whatever  his
sleeping  moments  may  be  to  them,  his  waking  ones  cannot
be  the  most  agreeable  to  himself.  For  all  his  knowledge  he
gets  sadly  laughed  at.

“  I  had  them  a  second  time  in  private.  He  did  some  won¬
derful  things,  but  as  we  did  not  begin  with  cards  and  get
well  into  train,  he  made  many  mistakes.  He  told  me  he  saw
from  his  stomach  and  £rom  his  great  toe,  and  certainly  every
thing  he  was  in  doubt  hbout  he  applied  to  his  stomach,  as  he
did  to  his  eyes  when  awake !  Mons.  Marcillet  told  me  he
shot  well  putting  his  gun  to  his  stomach,  while  mesmerised
and  his  eyes  bandaged,  and  in  that  manner  played  very  well
at  billiards.

“  I  saw  him  at  a  public  seance  again  with  Mr.  P.,  on  his
way  to  Italy.  Mr.  P.  was  a  member  for  the  borough,  where
M.  Marcillet’s  son  was  staying  with  a  private  tutor  for  three
months  in  England,  and  Mr.  P.  was  most  anxious  to  see
Alexis.  On  the  way  there  he  told  me  that  he  had  heard  of
him  in  England,  from  a  gentleman  resident  near  T — n,  whose
son  had  written  to  him  from  Paris,  stating  that  Alexis  had
given  him  a  complete  description  of  his  country-house,  and
particularly  of  the  library.  That  there  were  two  prints,  one
of  Napoleon,  the  other  of  the  Queen,  hung  up,  and  between
them  an  oil  painting  of  a  lady,  with  a  fan,  which  was  correct.

“  At  the  very  opening  of  this  public  sitting,  however,  an
English  medical  man  avowed  openly  his  strong  disbelief  of
Alexis’  powers,  and  seemed  embittered  with  a  hostile  spirit.
If  he  could  do  this,  why  not  that  ?  If  he  could  see  through
paper,  why  not  through  metals  ?  Why  make  any  mistake,
&c.,  &c.  Mons.  Marcillet  immediately  predicted  that  Alexis,
with  such  a  person  at  hand,  would  not  succeed.  Such  his
invariable  experience  shewed,  although  he  allowed  he  could
not  account  for  it.  Alexis  was  mesmerised.  He  was  still
wonderful  in  his  play,  but  still  he  was  very  often  wrong,  and


492  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

lie  seemed  chilled  and  disgusted.  He  described  tolerably  well
to  a  gentleman  his  family  circle  at  dinner,  but  saw  nothing
remarkable  about  one  daughter  who  was  said  to  have  a  tumor
on  her  neck,  and  wore  a  large  white  bandage  over  it.  Our
sceptic  chuckled,  and  Alexis  bungled  and  was  mortified.  I
felt  for  Alexis,  having  seen  him  so  splendid  and  joyous,  and
knowing  what  he  could  do  :  but  there  was  our  sceptic  like  an
iceberg,  “  chilling  the  genial  current  of  the  soul.”  At  last
he  gives  him,  after  a  little  skirmish  between  himself  and
Marcillet,  a  packet,  sealed.  “  What  is  inside,  Alexis  ?”
“  Writing.”  “  Is  it  a  name  or  a  word?”  asks  Alexis.  Scep¬
tic — “  If  you  can  read  it,  Alexis,  what  is  that  to  either  of
us  ?  tell  me  what  it  is.”  Alexis  turning  it  in  vain,  at  last
tears  the  seal.  “  That  is  not  fair,”  quoth  sceptic  :  and  in  that
we  agreed  with  him.  However,  it  was  rescued  in  time  :  Mar¬
cillet  mesmerises  with  all  his  might.  At  last  Alexis  says,  “  It
is  not  French  or  English  :  it  is  Latin.”  “No,”  says  sceptic,
“  it  is  not  Latin.”  “  I  cannot  do  it,”  says  Alexis,  “  I  give  it
up.  What  is  it,  Sir  ?”  “  The  word  is  written  by  myself :  it

is  French ;  it  is  cadavre ,  a  corpse.”  Alexis  certainly  failed  ;
and  yet  cadaver ,  a  corpse,  the  Latin,  is  with  the  transposition
of  one  vowel  only,  and  the  identical  pronunciation  certainly
not  very  distant  from  the  French  cadavre.  Alexis,  however
repulsed,  was  not  subdued.  Marcillet  fluidised  him

“  With  might  and  main,

Till  the  toil  drops  fell  from  his  brows  like  rain.”

Seven  of  us  encircled  the  devoted  youth.  “Tell  us,”  we
cried,  “  the  exact  time  each  of  our  watches  now  in  our  pockets
is.”  He  did  :  one  after  another,  as  he  spoke  the  time,  took
out  his  watch,  and  as  he  spake  so  it  was,  to  the  minute ,  and
sometimes  to  the  second  !  Before  I  took  out  mine,  I  said,
“  What  is  there  about  my  watch  ?”  “  The  glass  is  broken,”

he  said,  “  and  you  have  lost  the  little  hand  that  goes  tic  tac,
tic  tac,  in  a  little  circle.”  I  knew  it  was  so.  I  drew  it  out,
and  the  time  was  right  to  a  minute :  the  glass  was  broken,
and  the  second-hand  gone.  There  was  a  universal  applause,
but  sceptic  had  crossed  the  room,  and  was  standing  in  the
further  window,  “  chewing  the  cud  of  his  bitter  fancy,”  and
his  “  cadavre  au  supreme .”  I  could  not  help  thinking,  by
Alexis’s  manner,  that  the  sceptic’s  proximity  to  him  felt,  like
the  magic  book  of  Michael  Scott  to  William  of  Deloraine,
“  a  load  upon  his  breast and  when  sceptic  moved  a  few
yards,  Alexis,  like  the  moss-trooper,  “  breathed  free  in  the
morning  wind,  and  strove  his  hardihood  to  find.”  “  And
pray,  Alexis,  now,”  said  a  gentleman,  “  what  time  is  my


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


493


watch.”  “  You,  Sir,  stopped  your  watch  exactly  twenty  mi¬
nutes  after  twelve,  and  on  purpose,  too.”  You  are  quite  right
there,  Alexis ;  and  so  saying,  he  drew  it  out  and  shewed  it  to
us, — twenty  minutes  after  twelve,  and  no  go.  I  left  Alexis  in
glee,  as  it  was  growing  dusk.

“  I  observed  to  Monsieur  Marcillet  that  Alexis  had  done
wonders,  but  that  the  last  two  sittings  were  very  inferior  to
the  first,  and  that  Alexis  was  very  unequal.  He  agreed  to  it.
I  conjured  him  to  keep  his  subject  under  good  government
when  awake,  as  his  health,  perhaps,  suffered  from  his  gaieties
in  Paris.  I  inquired  how  Alexis  was  first  found,  and  learnt
that  he  was  attending  a  chance  meeting,  when  the  mesmer-
iser  requested  any  one  present  to  mount  the  platform.  Alexis
did  so,  and  being  mesmerised  turned  out  so  clairvoyant  as  to
induce  Monsieur  Marcillet  to  take  him  in  hand.  He  observed
Alexis  had  always  been  a  walker  in  his  sleep  before  he  was
mesmerised.

“  M.  Marcillet  alluded  to  a  similar  failure  after  similar  tri¬
umph  at  Rouen.  The  account  of  it  had  struck  me  also  very
forcibly ;  on  going  away  I  crossed  the  sceptic,  and  we  had
some  conversation.  I  wished  to  refer  to  the  Rouen  failure  of
Brache,  but  he  exclaimed,  “  Sir,”  in  a  way  un  peu  brusque ,
considering  we  were  unknown  to  each  other,  “  what  care  I
for  the  statement  in  the  Rouen  Journal?  I  have  been  here
five  times :  I  believe  nothing.  Monsieur  Lecomte,  at  the
theatre,  does  every  night  as  extraordinary  things,  conveying
pieces  of  money  into  peopled  pockets.  Why  should  my  pre¬
sence  affect  him  ?  What  has  my  belief  or  disbelief  to  do  with
the  matter  ?”  I  replied,  Sir,  you  preclude  my  troubling  you
with  the  proceedings  at  Rouen,  as  you  refuse  to  hear  it ;
although  it  might  assist  your  argument  as  shewing  another
failure  of  Alexis.  But  why  it  is  or  is  not  so,  who  can  tell  ?
but  so  it  is,  and  it  would  be  just  as  easy  to  tell  why  he  can
tell  me  what  time  my  watch  is  when  you  are  away,  as  that
he  cannot  when  you  are  near.  I  have  seen  him  four  times,
and  do  believe  he  possesses  wonderful  clairvoyance ,  in  spite  of
mistakes,  and  very  unequal  powers.

“  I  have  now  mentioned  some  of  Alexis’s  doings;  his  name
is  most  renowned  in  Paris,  and  spreading  over  the  whole
world.  I  have  to  thank  him  for  clearing  up  to  me  many  a
puzzled,  obscure  suspicion,  many  an  historic  doubt.  In
1843,  Alexis  can  eat  his  pate  de  foie  gras,  drink  his  sherry,
play  at  ecarte  or  billiards,  and  knock  down  his  pheasants,
nay,  even  play  and  waltz  awake  or  asleep  with  his  eyes  ban¬
daged  ;  and  Mons.  Marcillet  roll  his  heavy  waggons  along  the
French  roads,  and  mesmerise  in  the  interval,  without  being


494  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Aleocis.

poisoned,  impaled,  crucified,  or  burnt.  I  hope  ere  long  to
go  shooting  with  this  demon ;  but  poor  Socrates  could  not
do  so  with  his,  without  a  potage  of  hemlock ;  nor  Apollonius
Tyanaeus  see  Domitian  killed  by  Stephanus  from  Ephesus  to
Rome,  without  suddenly  disappearing  himself,  and  being
called  an  impudent  fellow,  because  he  said  he  could  tell  lan¬
guages  and  the  very  thoughts  of  persons ;  nor  poor  Joan  of
Arc,  that  simple,  that  patriotic,  that  atrociously  used  girl,
with  her  “  voices”  point  out  her  king  at  once,  notwithstand¬
ing  his  denial,  at  Chinon  Castle  Hall,  and  strike  terror  into
her  and  her  country’s  enemies,  and  crown  him  at  Rheims,
and  be  clairvoyante,  without  being  burnt  as  a  witch  in  a.d.
1431.  Let  us  be  thankful  that  we  live  in  times  when  we  can
speak  freely,  and  when  the  progress  of  science  enables  us  to
remove  the  veil  of  what  have  been  hitherto  deemed  super¬
human  mysteries.

“  Mons.  M.  confirmed  the  following  history  to  me,  which
having  heard  from  another  quarter,  I  questioned  him  about :
— A  medical  man,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Paris,  was  sent
for  some  years  ago  by  a  patient  who  required  immediate  at¬
tention.  By  mistake  he  went  into  the  court-yard  of  another
house,  where  a  very  large  dog  fell  upon  him,  and  bit  him
severely  near  the  hip.  He  escaped,  and  found  the  house  of
the  patient  he  was  sent  for  to.  As  he  returned  home  he
foresaw  the  grief  and  alarm  his  wife  and  family  would  expe¬
rience  if  he  told  them  that  he  had  been  bitten  by  a  dog,  and
he  determined  never  to  communicate  the  fact  to  any  one.  In
time  he  got  well ;  the  scar  still  remained,  but  he  was  not  the
worse  for  it.  Years  past  away,  when  a  few  months  since  a
neighbour  of  his  a  military  man,  called  upon  him,  and  pro¬
posed  to  take  a  run  up  to  Paris,  to  see  Alexis  Didier.  “  I
think,”  said  the  soldier,  “  he  will  be  puzzled  to  find  out
where  I  have  been  wounded.”  It  was  agreed  to.  They  arrive,
and  find  Alexis  sitting  in  due,  blind  bandaged  state.  “  I
have  a  question  to  put  to  you,  Alexis.”  “  Give  me  your  hand,
Sir.”  He  felt  it  a  moment.  “  I  am  a  military  man.”  “  I
know  that.”  “  Have  I  been  ever  wounded  ?”  “  You  have.”

“  How  often  ?”  “  Three  times.”  “  Where  ?”  “  There,  there,
and  theref”  touching  the  three  wounds.  “Were  they  made
by  ball  or  by  sword  ?”  “  This  was  by  sword,  those  two  by

musket  balls,”  fixing  his  fingers  on  them  !  “  Pardieu,  Mons.
Alexis,”  cried  the  astonished  soldier ;  “  you  are  quite  right.
It  is  as  you  say  !”

“  On  this  our  medical  man  thought  he  might  puzzle  him.
Have  I  ever  been  wounded,  Alexis  ?  A  long  pause.  “  Yes,
you  have.”  “  Where  ?”  Upon  this  Alexis  touches  his  own


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis .  495

body  rapidly  all  over,  and  pointing  on  the  hip,  exclaims,
“  Here,  exactly  here.”  “  By  ball  or  by  sword  ?”  “  By

neither.”  “By  bayonet  ?”  “No,  but  it  is  not  unlike  ;  it  is
thus,  ,”  describing  its  shape  with  his  thumb  nail.  “  If  not
by  ball,  sword,  or  bayonet,  how  was  it  done  ?”  A  long,  very
long  pause.  At  length  a  sudden  light  appears  to  stream  in
upon  him.  He  begins  in  a  low  tone,  as  if  muttering  to
himself.  “  Oh,  I  see ;  yes,  you  get  off  your  horse ;  you  open
the  yard  gate ;  the  house  is  so  and  so ;  you  cross  the  yard ;
you  go  to  ring  at  the  bell — (he  becomes  quite  excited) — Oh  !
there  it  is.  It  comes  jumping  and  barking  towards  you ;  it  is
such  a  colour;  it  jumps  on  you;  it  seizes  you;  it  bites  you
here,”  pointing  to  the  hip  !  imitating  the  dog  and  all  its
movements ;  “  it  is,  it  is,  (he  is  so  agitated  with  the  vivid
scene  that  he  cannot  get  at  the  word,  or  he  sees  obscurely,  at
last  he  gets  out)  it  is  a  great  dog !”

And  must' I  pass  over  Colonel  G.'s  sword,  described  as
hanging  in  his  room  in  England,  covered  with  rust,  and  the
inscription  on  it,  totidem  verbis ; — his  describing  the  room  in
the  Tower  of  London ; — his  describing  him  entering  the
Thames  in  a  calm,  at  a  certain  hour,  and  all  the  minutiae  of
his  whole  journey ; — his  opening  and  writing  his  letters ;  the
hotel,  and  its  room  he  went  into :  which  was  confirmed  by
the  Colonel ;  the  observation  made  by  Col.  G.  at  the  moment
being  that,  the  sea  was  as  smooth  as  oil,  &c.  &c.

P.S.  Nov.  27. — I  have  this  moment  received  a  letter  from
Paris,  dated  Nov.  24. — “As  Alexis  is  evidently  no  prophet
as  to  time,  I  doubt  his  being  so  in  anything  relating  to  the
future.  I  received  an  account  of  a  private  seance,  yesterday,
at  Mons.  Charles  Ledru  (a  great  friend  of  Lord  Brougham's),
a  celebrated  French  lawyer.  An  English  lady  travelled  Alexis
to  her  house  in  idea.  He  said  I  see  a  locket  lying  on  your
table ;  it  contains  the  hair  of  three  persons — one  is  of  Napo¬
leon,  the  other  of  Wellington,  and  then  added,  the  other
person's  name  I  do  not  know.  He  was  even  greater  than
Wellington,  but  not  so  highly  in  rank  (situated.)  The  lady
confessed  it  was  the  hair  of  Nelson.

“  There  were  two  priests  present,  one  a  Cardinal  from
Rome,  and  to  him  Alexis  described  his  own  apartments  at
Rome,  and  then  the  various  beauties  of  the  Y atican.”

After  this  Alexis  made  his  appearance  in  London  at  my
house,  and  an  account  of  the  sitting  was  printed  in  No.  VI.
of  The  Zoist.  He  next  appeared  at  Lord  Adare's,  and  in  the
same  number  is  an  account  of  that  sitting.  He  came  a  se¬
cond  time  to  my  house,  and  the  following  is  the  account,
drawn  up  for  a  newspaper  : —

VOL.  II.  L  L


496


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis .


Sir, — Since  the  account  of  the  phenomena  of  clairvoyance,
exhibited  by  Mr.  Alexis,  appeared  in  your  columns  of  last
week,  another  private  party  have  witnessed  a  similar  exhibi¬
tion  at  the  house  of  Dr.  Elliotson,  at  which  I  had  the  honour
of  being  present ;  and  the  following  plain  statement  of  what
I  then  saw  will,  I  think,  be  interesting  to  your  readers.  I
must  premise,  that  I  had  never  before  seen  any  experiments
whatever  in  animal  magnetism,  &c. ;  that  I  was  totally  unac¬
quainted  with  Dr.  Elliotson,  Mr.  Marcillet,  and  Mr.  Alexis ;
and  that  I  went,  note-book  in  hand,  prepared  to  watch  and
observe  as  accurately  as  possible,  and  that  this  account  is
drawn  up  from  the  notes  I  then  made.  Alexis  having  seated
himself  in  a  large  easy  chair,  Mr.  Marcillet  stood  in  front  of
him,  and  after  fixing  his  eyes  upon  him  for  about  four  mi¬
nutes,  the  magnetic  sleep  was  produced.  During  this  opera¬
tion  there  were  convulsive  motions  of  the  limbs  and  muscles
of  the  face,  and  every  now  and  then  Alexis  turned  his  eyes
towards  the  operator,  as  it  seemed  to  me,  with  an  expression
of  pain,  and  almost  entreaty  to  desist.  The  convulsive  mo¬
tions  subsided  after  a  few  passes  by  the  operator,  and  then
the  phenomena  of  catalepsy  were  shewn.  His  hands  were
extended,  and  became  quite  rigid,  and  were  again  relaxed  by
Mr.  Marcillet  passing  his  hand  once  or  twice  over  them.  His
legs  were  then  stretched  out,  and,  to  test  their  rigidity,  a
gentleman,  weighing  at  least  14  stone,  stood  upright  upon
them,  Alexis*  body  being  kept  balanced  by  two  gentlemen
pressing  on  his  shoulders.  Alexis  is  by  no  means  strong  in
appearance ;  but  I  apprehend  the  strongest  man  would  find
the  above  feat  difficult.  It  was  then  proposed  to  bandage  his
eyes.  A  quantity  of  cotton  wool  was  placed  over  them,  and
kept  down  by  three  handkerchiefs,  one  encircling  the  head,
the  other  two  placed  diagonally.  The  gentleman — a  visitor,
like  myself — who  undertook  the  tying,  did  not  seem  to  do  it
to  Alexis*  satisfaction,  for  he  said,  u  Serrez  fort,  serrez  fort”
(tie  it  tight),  and,  still  being  dissatisfied,  he  seized  the  ends
of  the  handkerchief,  and  tied  them  himself.  The  visitors
were  then  asked  to  examine  the  handkerchiefs,  and  each  per¬
son  who  did  so  was  satisfied  that  vision  was  impossible.  A
pack  of  cards  was  then  brought,  which,  it  should  be  re¬
marked,  had  glazed  and  ornamented  backs,  so  that  it  would
have  been  more  than  ordinarily  difficult  to  see  through  them,
even  with  a  strong  light  behind.  A  visitor  came  forward  to
play,  and  Alexis  seated  himself  at  the  table  which  was  in  the
middle  of  the  room,  so  that  there  was  a  cross  light.  He
seized  the  cards,  a  full  pack,  in  a  quick,  hurried  manner,  and
sorted  them  for  ecarte.  He  did  this  with  great  rapidity,  and
made  but  one  mistake.  Several  games  were  played,  during


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  497

which  he  frequently  told  his  adversary  what  cards  he  had  in
his  hand,  as  on  one  occasion  that  he  had  three  tens,  on  ano¬
ther  that  he  had  four  trumps ;  and  again  he  called  for  the
cards  seriatim  which  his  adversary  was  to  play.  Once  or
twice  he  made  mistakes,  as  saying  the  nine  of  hearts  instead
of  the  seven,  but  in  the  great  majority  of  instances  was  right.
Another  person  then  took  the  cards,  and  the  same  wonders
were  repeated.  He  then  moved  away  from  the  table,  and
played  at  a  distance  of  about  four  yards  from  his  adversary,
but  he  still  told  the  cards  as  before,  and  played  his  own  fre¬
quently  without  looking  at  their  faces.  During  the  whole  of
this  time  Mr.  Marcillet  stood  at  some  little  distance,  and  from
time  to  time  repeated  the  passes.  Dr.  Elliotson  took  no  part
in  the  proceedings.  Alexis  was  then  asked  to  read,  and  a
volume  of  Le  Moyen,  Aye  Pittoresque,  was  placed  before  him.
The  wool  and  bandages  were  still  unmoved,  but  he  read  off
from  the  page  wherever  he  was  told  by  any  of  the  visitors,
and  by  myself  amongst  the  rest.  On  one  occasion  he  conti¬
nued  to  do  so,  although  two  hands  were  placed  before  his  face
and  the  type.  He  seemed,  however,  to  find  this  somewhat
more  difficult.  He  was  very  animated,  and  talked  rapidly  as
he  turned  over  the  pages,  as  if  pleased  with  his  own  exploits.
Whilst  doing  this,  and  just  as  he  had  said,  in  answer  to  a
question,  that  the  picture  was  a  cathedral,  I  interrupted  him
hastily  with,  u  Mais  quelle  cathedr ale?”  He  replied,  “  C’est
une  bonne  question  ”  and,  placing  his  hand  upon  the  letter-
press,  instantly  said,  “  Notre  Dame  de  Chalon,”  which  was
quite  correct.  He  also  accurately  described  some  figures  in
armour.  He  then,  of  his  own  accord,  offered  to  read  a  line
five  pages  off;  but  in  this  he  failed.  A  volume  of  Bossuet
was  then  brought  from  Dr.  Elliotson's  library,  no  visitor  hav¬
ing  brought  one.  He  took  my  hand  and  asked  me  to  shew
him  what  to  read,  and  read  several  times  correctly.  In  one
instance  he  read  the  two  following  lines, — “  C’est  encore  pour
eux  un  grand  embarras  de  voir  que  (le)  prophete  fasse  aller  le
temps  du  Christ  (Jesus).”  He  however  insisted  that  it  was
“  le”  and  not  “  ce,”  and  read  “  Jesus  Christ”  instead  of
“Christ”  only.  On  this  part  of  the  experiments  no  great
stress  can  be  laid,  as  after  the  Bossuet  was  brought  he  com¬
plained  of  the  great  heat  and  threw  off  the  handkerchiefs,  so
that  his  eyes  were  only  closed  as  in  sleep.  He  then  said,  se¬
parating  about  150  pages  of  the  volume,  and  holding  them
firmly  together,  that  he  would  read  some  words  on  whichever
side  and  whatever  part  of  the  page  I  pleased,  but  would  not
undertake  to  say  how  far  off  the  words  were.  I  then  pointed
out  the  side  and  part  of  the  page  that  I  wished,  and  he  gave

l  l  2


498


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


the  words  “  Tite-Live”  and  “  Romulus saying  that  each
commenced  a  paragraph.  This  was  not  done  immediately,
but  the  leaves  were  not  opened  at  all.  I  examined  the  hook,
and  found  about  80  pages  on  the  words  “  Tite-Live  ,"  and
about  150  the  word  “Romulus  ”  each  in  the  place  and  posi¬
tion  required  by  me,  and  each  commencing  a  paragraph.  He
then  seated  himself  in  the  large  chair  once  more,  and  a
stranger  (I  believe.  Dr.  Castle  of  Milan)  sat  down  by  him,
and  put  himself  en  rapport  with  him.  I  did  not  hear  the
conversation,  but  Dr.  Castle  afterwards  stated  to  those  pre¬
sent,  that  Alexis  had  described  to  him  accurately  how  he  (Dr.
Castle)  had  passed  the  preceding  night,  and  the  nature  and
seat  of  the  pain  that  he  had  suffered  from.  But  further  and
more  satisfactory  proofs  of  clairvoyance  were  given.  Alexis
read  a  word  (content)  that  was  enclosed  in  a  card-board  box,
and  presented  to  him  for  that  purpose  by  a  visitor.  He  made
out  the  letters  o  n  first,  and  the  others  after  some  difficulty.
But  in  a  case  of  this  kind,  every  one  naturally  distrusts  every
experiment  not  made  by  himself.  I  therefore  took  out  my
pocket-book  and  wrote  three  words ;  but  being  asked  to  put
one  only,  I  wrote  in  another  place  “  ami  ."  I  shewed  this
to  no  one,  but  turning  a  leaf  over  it,  said  I  had  written  a
word  which  I  wished  him  to  read.  It  was  one  of  Penny's
metallic  pocket-books,  so  that  any  of  your  readers  may  test
the  practicability  of  seeing  a  light  pencil-mark  through.  I
kept  the  leaf  pressed  firmly  over  the  word,  and  upon  the  body
of  the  book,  and  held  it  in  his  hand.  Directly  lie  placed  his
hand  in  my  other  hand,  he  said,  merrily,  “  Que  vous  etes  bon  !
II  n’y  a  que  trois  lettres "  (How  kind  you  are — there  are  but
three  letters).  I  assented.  He  then  wrote  nearly,  but  not
exactly,  over  it,  the  letter  a,  then  turned  to  me,  and  said,
“  That  is  right."  I  assented.  He  then  wrote  m ,  and  in¬
quired  in  the  same  way.  I  said  nothing.  He  repeated  the
question.  I  remained  silent.  He  then  said  in  a  jocose  half-
bantering  tone — (to  this  effect) — “  You  may  just  as  well  say
so,  because  you  know  it  is."  I  then  said,  “  Oui.”  He  re¬
peated  it  after  me  in  high  glee,  and  added  instantly  the  i,
scratching  a  fine  flourish  underneath  to  shew  that  he  had
succeeded.  I  shewed  the  pocket-book  to  those  present,  and
all  were  satisfied  that  they  could  not  have  read  it.  It  is  now
in  my  possession,  and  I  would  shew  it  to  any  one  who  might
wish  to  see  it.

I  make  no  comments  on  the  above  facts,  I  attempt  no  ex¬
planation  ;  but  it  is  right  to  add,  that  all  present,  and  among
them  were  several  medical  men,  were  perfectly  satisfied  of  the
fairness  of  the  experiments.  No  one  would  suggest  any  pos-


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  499

4*

sible  plan  of  collusion.  I  can  be  surprised  at  no  one  being
incredulous  until  he  has  seen  the  experiments  with  his  own
eyes.  For  even  now,  without  again  scrutinizing  another
series  of  experiments,  I  could  not  honestly  say  that  I  was  al¬
together  convinced.  I  only  say,  that  if  there  be  deception,
the  deception  would  be  almost  more  wonderful  than  the  re¬
ality.  I  send  you  my  name  and  address,  and  remain.

Sir,  your  obedient  servant.

An  Inquirer  after  Truth.

P.S.  After  having  drawn  up  the  above,  I  read  the  article
in  the  Chronicle  of  this  day  (July  2).  I  certainly  regret  that
the  reporter  did  not  remain  when  asked  to  do  so  by  Dr.  El-
liotson,  although  I  cannot  but  say  that  the  impression  of  all
who  heard  what  passed  was  anything  but  favourable  to  the
gentlemanly  feeling  and  conduct  of  the  reporter;  and  also
that  Dr.  Elliotson  could  hardly  have  acted  otherwise.  I  re¬
gret  the  absence  of  the  reporter,  because  the  one  word  writ¬
ten  by  me,  and  in  almost  exact  accordance  with  the  requisi¬
tions  made  in  the  article  above  mentioned,  was  read  fairly
and  honestly  by  Mr.  Alexis,  without  having  been  seen  by  any
one  else.  I  may  further  add,  that  the  following  gentlemen,
having  witnessed — some,  indeed,  having  tested — the  above
experiments,  voluntarily  subscribed  their  names  to  a  paper
expressive  of  their  conviction  of  the  integrity  of  this  extraor¬
dinary  exhibition : —

The  Viscount  Adare,  76,  Eaton-square.

John  Elliotson,  M.D.,  Conduit-street.

John  Ashburner,  M.D.,  55,  Wimpole-street.

H.  Storer,  M.D.,  Granville-street,  Brunswick-square.

James  George  Davey,  M.D.,  Hanwell  Asylum.

W.  C.  Engledue,  M.D.,  Portsmouth.

M.  Castle,  M.D.,  Milan.

Dr.  Bitterbandt.

Edmond  Sheppard  Symes,  38,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-sq.

T.  G.  Margary.

Nathaniel  Ogle.

Daniel  Thomas  Evans,  Temple.

John  James,  Captain,  Dover.

Henry  U.  Janson,  President  of  the  Exeter  Literary  and
Philosophical  Society.

W.  Topham,  Temple.

Henry  G.  Atkinson,  G.S.,  18,  Upper  Gloucester-place.

Edward  Wise,  Temple.

H.  Bailliere,  219,  Begent-street.

John  Hulme,  Exeter.

—  Thompson,  H.  S.,  Fairfield.


500  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

%

Lord  Adare  has  permitted  me  to  publish  the  following
particulars  of  a  second  visit  to  Eaton  Square,  from  his  lord¬
ship’s  note-book : —

Alexis’  eyes  were  bandaged.  Lord  L.  took  up  a  card,
and  Alexis  told  it  after  thinking  a  few  seconds.  He  then  ex¬
tracted  one  from  the  pack ;  and  after  one  mistake  Alexis  told
it  correctly.

Lord  Adare  then  gave  him  Villemain’s  Cours  de  Literature
to  read,  (opening  a  page ;)  he  held  it  nearly  on  a  level  with
his  eyes ;  so  that  it  was  impossible  for  ordinary  vision  to  act ;
there  being  an  inch  thick  of  cotton  and  three  handkerchiefs
between  his  eyes  and  the  object.  He  began  by  spelling  the
first  word :  and  then  read  more  easily,  reading  a  line  or  two.
He  then  turned  to  another  page,  and  read  quite  rapidly,  the
book  being  about  tiventy  degrees  below  the  level  of  his  eyes.
Lord  Adare  asked  him  to  read  through  several  pages ;  and
turned  to  another  place  and  pointed  to  the  right  side,  in
which  he  had  seen  nothing :  he  told  three  words.  The  party
looked  over  the  pages,  but  could  not  find  the  words.  The
same  happened  again.  We  tried  again  :  he  said,  “  I  see  two
lines — on  one  Francais,  and  below  Albigeois”  This  was
right,  four  leaves  off,  and  near  the  inside  of  the  page.  We
turned  to  another  place,  and  he  read,  “  descendants  les  anti -
quites  mysterieux :”  which  was  right.  He  was  asked  to  read
at  four  pages ;  and  this  was  four  pages.  Again,  he  said,  “  I
see  a  curious  word — ’tis  my  own  name  and  so  it  was,  and
four  pages  off.  He  had  no  opportunity  of  turning  over  a
leaf  of  this  book.  Lord  L.  put  a  small  box  into  his  hand.
He  was  puzzled  ;  but  said  it  was  something  wrapped  up  in
grey  paper,  and  was  a  black  thing  like  gum.  He  had  no
help  or  encouragement :  he  could  make  out  no  more.  It
was  Indian  rubber.  Some  one  gave  him  a  folded  paper  with
a  word.  He  made  it  out  with  only  one  or  two  mistakes.  It
was  “  Horacie.”  Lady  P.  was  put  in  rapport  with  him,  and
asked  him  to  go  to  a  house  in  the  country.  He  said  he  saw
water  near  the  house,  (yes)  :  a  riviere,  (no)  :  a  large  pond,
(yes)  :  to  the  left,  (yes) :  five  steps  to  the  house,  (no).  She
then  said,  “  Describe  the  room  I  am  thinking  of.”  “  It  has
two  windows,  (yes) :  books,  (no)  :  a  bed,  (yes) ;  two  doors,
(yes)  :  chimney  to  the  left  of  the  bed,  (yes).”

In  answer  to  one  question,  in  which  he  made  a  mistake,
he  said,  “  but  it  may  be  differently  arranged  since  you  were
there — it  is  some  time  since  you  were  there.”  “  Not  long,”
she  replied.  “  About  three  weeks”  (yes).  She  then  asked
him  to  tell  her  who  lived  in  the  room.  “A  child”  (yes):
“  a  boy”  (yes) :  “  a  relation  and  a  near  one”  (yes).  He  was


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


501


then  wrong  about  age ;  and  he  said  that  some  how  he*  had
become  confused.  We  were  going  to  try  something  else,
when,  after  two  or  three  minutes,  he  said.  “  Ah,  he  is  nine
years  old,  (yes) :  son  of  the  owner  of  the  house,  (yes).”  She
then  asked  him  to  describe  another  room.  I  only  heard  part
of  the  description.  “ Three  windows,  (yes).  Near  the  win¬
dow  a  piano,  (yes).  A  portrait  opposite  the  chimney-piece,
(yes).  A  full-length  one,  (no).  Well,  nearly  so,  (yes).  Some¬
thing  on  it — not  a  coat,  (yes).  To  the  right  a  picture  of  a
lady,  (yes).  Not  a  portrait,  (yes).  In  white,  (the  lady  seemed
doubtful).  Pale,  and  curious  looking,  (yes).  I  have  seen  it
often,  have  I  not?  (yes).  The  Virgin,  (yes).  With  the  child,
(yes).  The  paper  of  the  room  is  rouge  fonce,  (yes).  The
pond  is  to  the  right ;  but  there  is  a  wall  between,  which  pre¬
vents  you  seeing  it,  (yes).”

Lord  L.  gave  him  a  word  folded  up  in  paper.  He  seemed
tired.  I  knew  the  word  and  gave  him  my  hand,  which
helped  him  to  make  it  out  thus, — “  Second  letter  o,  (yes) ;
end  ne ,  (yes) ;  i  before  n,  (yes).”  The  l  puzzled  him  a  little :
the  j  more.  He  made  but  few  guesses,  however,  and  got
them  all  out  right.  The  word  was  Joceline.

Miss -  placed  herself  en  rapport.  “  How  many  bro¬
thers  have  I  ?”  “  Three”  (yes) .  Alexis  had  complained  of

fatigue  before  this  began.  “  One  older  and  two  younger  than
you,  (yes).  The  eldest  handsome,  (yes).  In  London,  (no).
Not  in  London,  c’est  curieux.”  He  then  said  he  was  tired  :
and  being  engaged  to  another  seance,  he  was  not  pressed.

Dr.  Costello  it  appears  was  present  on  this  occasion,  and
he  sent  the  following  account  to  the  Medical  Times : —

Sir, — Presenting  myself  with  Mr.  MarcillePs  card,  I  was
admitted  to  a  private  seance  in  a  house  in  Eaton  Square ;  I
had  never  till  this  morning  seen  either  M.  M.,  or  his  subject,
M.  Alexis.  My  introduction,  through  his  means,  into  an
exalted  private  circle,  (unfortunately  I  could  not  obtain  any
other,)  had,  I  soon  felt,  produced  an  unfavourable  impres¬
sion.  Alexis  was  on  my  arrival  in  a  state  of  catalepsy — the
inferior  extremities,  completely  rigid,  were  stretched  out  and
raised  a  foot  or  more  from  the  ground.  At  the  mesmeriser’s
request,  I  got  up  and  stood  upon  the  shins  of  the  sleeper
without  producing  any  change  beyond  that  of  forcing  the
limbs  down  a  little  by  my  weight  (13  stone).

The  rigidity  was  removed  by  a  few  passes,  when  a  bandage
was  applied  over  his  eyes,  and  a  pack  of  cards  was  given
him ;  he  began  as  for  the  game  of  ecarte,  by  culling  out  the
lower  cards  rapidly  until  the  pack  was  reduced.  He  made
no  mistake  in  this  process;  but  in  once  throwing  over  a


502  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

seven,  and,  subsequently,  an  ace,  both  of  which  he  recalled
immediately.  He  played  a  few  games,  in  which  he  exhibited
very  great  mastery,  I  had  almost  said,  a  perfect  knowledge
of  the  cards  in  his  hand.  He  did  not  always  take  the  cards
in  his  hand,  but  sometimes  played  them  from  the  table  on
which  they  lay,  backs  upwards.

He  announced  his  having  the  king,  proposed  for  cards
also  without  disturbing  them  from  the  position  in  'which  the
dealer  had  put  them  out;  once  or  twice  he  was  asked  what
cards  his  adversary  had  ?  On  one  occasion  he  said  the  adver¬
sary  held  four  red  cards  ;  but  he  failed  to  name  them  correctly;
but  he  was  right  as  to  the  number  of  red  cards.  Having
mentioned  in  the  house  of  a  gentleman  where  I  had  been
spending  the  previous  evening,  that  it  was  probable  I  should
have  an  opportunity  of  being  present  next  day  at  one  of  M.
Alexis*  mesmeric  sittings,  my  friend  left  the  room,  and  soon
returned  with  a  sealed  packet,  which  he  delivered  to  me,  in
order  that  I  should  try  if  he  could  describe  its  contents,  and
authorized  me  to  open  it  only  after  the  description  was  given.
He  abstained  from  making  me  acquainted  with  its  contents.
I  was  thus  prepared  with  an  experiment  of  my  own,  which  I
proposed  to  the  gentleman  of  the  house.  The  proposition
was  at  once  refused,  and  I  think  properly  so,  as  it  was  open
to  the  suspicion  of  collusion.  The  lady  of  the  mansion  now
placing  herself  near  Alexis,  and  informing  him  that  she  had
passed  five  or  six  years  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Geneva,
asked  him  to  describe  the  house  in  which  she  had  resided.
This  he  did  in  the  main  correctly,  stating  that  there  was  a
garden  with  flowers,  and  another  with  vines,  and  that  it  was
near  water,  not  a  lake,  but  a  river  falling  into  a  lake — that
she  lived  with  two  other  persons,  and  also  in  another  house
for  a  shorter  period.  But  in  this  description  the  gentleman
affirmed,  that  there  were  some  mistakes,  and  continuing  to
question  him,  the  answers  of  Alexis  did  not  seem  to  give  him
more  satisfaction.  Mr.  Marcillet  seemed  a  good  deal  cha¬
grined  at  this,  and  declared  that  the  gentleman* s  incredulity
had  a  disturbing  influence,  which  greatly  impaired  the  powers
of  his  subject.

Another  gentleman  now  put  himself  en  rapport  with
Alexis.  He  wished  him  to  follow  him  in  mind  into  Lincoln¬
shire,  and  describe  the  house  he  lived  in  there.  Alexis  said,
“  I  am  with  you  :  but  this  house  is  too  large  for  me  to  de¬
scribe.  Let  us  fix  on  some  of  its  rooms.**  He  then  described
a  library — a  small  room  in  which  there  was  a  bust — not  mar¬
ble,  but  plaster  on  a  pedestal ;  and  lastly,  a  very  large  room,
lighted  by  a  dome  raised  from  the  centre  of  the  ceiling ;  he


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  503

said  there  were  two  fire-places  with  white  marble  chimney-
pieces,  and  spoke  in  terms  of  admiration  of  the  varied  colours
of  the  light  admitted  into  this  noble  apartment.  All  these
points  were  assented  to  as  correct.  He  then  followed  the  ques¬
tioner,  and  described  a  terrace  upon  which  the  last  room
opened.  The  gentleman  of  the  house  then  put  some  questions
as  to  the  terrace,  and  the  objects  adjacent,  the  answers  to
which  he  stated  were  incorrect.  He  next  tried  to  declare  the
objects  contained  in  a  bracelet  handed  to  him  by  the  lady —
his  efforts  were  unsatisfactory.

The  sitting  was  now  drawing  to  a  close,  and  having  been
denied  the  opportunity  of  satisfying  myself  in  regard  to  my
friend^s  sealed  packet,  I  asked  permission  of  M.  Marcillet  to
put  a  question  as  to  a  fact  in  which  I  was  engaged  early  on
Monday  morning.  I  said  I  was  aware  that  coming  there
under  the  auspices  of  the  mesmeriser,  and,  moreover,  labour¬
ing  under  the  disadvantage  of  not  being  known  to  himself,  I
could  well  understand  that  if  the  answer  was  satisfactory,  it
could  be  so  only  to  myself ;  but  if  it  were  otherwise,  I  should
state  it  to  be  so  without  hesitation.  Permission  having  been
courteously  granted,  I  took  Alexis  by  the  hand,  and  asked
him  to  describe  the  persons,  the  room,  and  the  act  in  which
I  was  engaged  on  Monday  morning.  He  answered,  after
brief  musing,  “  you  are  in  a  room  with  a  person,  not  on  a
bed,  but  a  couchette ;  this  person  has  suffered  a  great  deal ;
you  have  been  doing  something  to  his  head — there  is  another
person  also — there  are  instruments  with  screws  laid  out  on
the  table  fetes  objects  mecaniques  et  a  vis).”  While  speaking,
he  kept  moving  his  hands  over  the  front  of  his  person,  till
he  reached  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  when  he  exclaimed
suddenly,  “  Tiens,  vous  Voperez  aussi  au  bas  ventre ,  vous
operez  pour  la  pierre.”  I  was  astonished  at  the  minuteness
and  truthfulness  of  his  description.  I  asked  him  if  the  pa¬
tient  was  old  or  young  ?  he  answered,  young.  The  truth  was,
that  I  was  performing  the  operation  of  lithotrity  on  a  gen¬
tleman — not  young,  but  80  years  of  age, — at  Clifton,  on  the
morning  of  that  day,  and  the  room,  sofa,  and  position  of  the
table  on  which  my  instruments  lay,  were  as  correctly  described
as  if  he  had  been  present.  It  is  moreover  not  a  little  singular
that  the  patient  has  an  ulceration  behind  the  ear,  which  his
servant  dresses  for  him.  This  closed  the  sitting.  Of  course
the  correctness  of  Alexis'  answers  to  me  had  no  influence  on

the  mind  of  Mr. - .  It  might,  however,  have  puzzled  him,

as  it  has  me,  had  I  been  known  to  him  as  I  trust  I  am  to  the
members  of  my  own  profession.

I  remain,  &c.,

Golden  Square,  July  24.  W.  B.  Costello.


504


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


The  Medical  Times  contains  an  account  also  of  an  inter¬
view  ordered  by  Lord  Adare  at  Mr.  Bailliere’s,  at  which  I
was  present.

Sir, — I  take  leave  to  submit  to  your  readers  an  outline  of
some  extraordinary  mesmeric  proceedings,  which  took  place
on  Monday  last  at  a  seance  in  the  drawing-room  of  Mr.
Bailliere,  the  medical  publisher.  The  principal  performer  was
the  celebrated  youth  Alexis.  The  reunion  was  private,  formed
at  the  instance  of  a  noble  lord,  and  composed  of  some  mem¬
bers  of  his  family,  with  a  few  visitors,  members  of  the  three
learned  professions.

The  magnetic  sleep  was  induced  in  about  five  minutes.
M.  Marcillet  operated.  The  process  was  simply  a  fixed  gaze
of  much  earnestness.  A  few  convulsive  movements  of  the
youth’s  face  were  the  only  phenomena,  preceding  sleep,  which
excited  my  notice.  After  a  moment’s  repose,  he  appeared  to
recover  himself;  and,  though  I  thought  I  saw  a  changed  ex¬
pression  of  countenance,  his  appearance  by  no  means  indi¬
cated  that  he  was  not  in  a  natural  state :  but  his  eyelids  were
closed.  The  task  of  bandaging  his  eyes  was  mine.  I  first
fitted  small  layers  of  wadding  exactly  over  the  eyelids — suc¬
cessively  overlayed  these  with  larger — covered  all  over  with
two  thick  blankets  of  wadding : — finally,  fastened  three  silk
handkerchiefs  in  a  way  likely  to  make  vision  impossible.
Alexis,  far  from  “  hesitating  dislike/’  or  suggesting  objec¬
tions,  as  I  have  seen  others  who  have  endeavoured  to  sustain
similar  pretensions,  shewed  an  apparent  anxiety  for  every  pre¬
caution.  The  day  was  warm,  and  the  room  of  not  large  pro¬
portions;  but  he  assured  me  he  did  not  care  for  the  heat
caused  by  the  wadding,  desired  me  to  add  more,  and  insisted
on  drawing  the  handkerchiefs  tighter  than  I  had  deemed  ne¬
cessary  ;  allowed  me  again  to  add  wadding  by  the  side  of  the
nose,  to  close  any  possible  channel  of  sight.  He  advanced
in  high  spirits  to  a  card-table  to  play  ecarte.  This  game  re¬
quires  the  small  cards  to  be  picked  out  and  thrown  aside :
Alexis  accomplished  this  with  all  the  rapidity,  and  almost  all
the  accuracy,  of  a  skilled  player  unbandaged.  When  he  made
a  blunder,  he  usually  at  once  corrected  it ;  he  never  failed  to
do  so  when  his  attention  was  thither  directed.  At  times  he
made  the  most  *  extraordinary  discoveries  or  guesses.  Thus,
with  the  backs  of  the  cards  turned  towards  him,  he  would
single  one  almost  in  the  centre  of  the  pack,  correctly  naming
and  discarding  it  before  the  card’s  face  could  have  come  in
contact  with  ocular  vision,  supposing  him  to  have  after  all  en¬
joyed  it.  He  more  than  once  distinctly  named  the  cards  in
his  opponent’s  hand,  and  seemed  to  play  throughout  with  a
tolerably  correct  sense  of  the  cards  he  had  dealt  both  sides.


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


505


He  occasionally  mistook — but  speedily  saw  his  error;  and
though  bandaged,  as  I  have  said,  he  saw  his  opponents  cards
when  played ,  and  his  own  when  in  hand,  with  exactly  the  same
ease  and  unvarying  accuracy  as  would  be  possible  with  his
eyes  entirely  free.  There  was  no  straining  of  the  face  ;  no
attempt  to  see  from  any  point  above,  below,  or  beside  the
bandage.  He  is  one  of  the  most  expeditious  players  I  have
seen.  Whatever  the  secret  of  his  astonishing  readiness  with
the  cards,  I  am  quite  sure  it  was  no  ordinary  ocular  vision.

The  marvels  did  not  end  here :  he  desired  the  table  to  be
removed  to  the  furthest  part  of  the  dining-room,  remaining
himself  in  his  old  position.  There  was  the  same  clairvoyance
and  success.  He  suddenly  took  off  the  bandages  and  wad¬
ding,  offered  to  do  the  same  thing  with  his  back  turned,  and
still  there  was  the  same  result.  His  explanation  was,  that
there  was  a  general  power  of  sight  about  his  body,  and  that
distant  objects  appeared  close  to  him.  During  these  experi¬
ments  he  seemed  in  a  state  of  extreme  nervous  excitement,
evidenced  at  times  by  much  oscillation  of  the  body,  accompa¬
nied  by  short  exhibitions  of  impatience.  There  was  no  trace
of  anxiety ;  there  was  mental  exaltation  to  excess ;  yet  appa¬
rently  pleasurable.

A  book  was  brought :  the  Regne  Animale  of  Cuvier.  He
spelt  slowly  and  with  difficulty  a  word  in  the  page  below  that
which  was  open  before  him.  The  paper  was  equal  to  very
stout  letter-paper.  Though  but  the  first ,  he  supposed  it  to
have  been  the  fifth  page  below.  He  took  about  ten  pages  be¬
tween  his  hands  :  holding  them  up  perpendicularly,  under  his
eyes,  he  spelt  a  word  in  the  centre  of  one  of  the  central
pages, — on  reference,  correctly.  He  was  taken  to  the  title-
page,  between  which  and  sight  three  pages  of  thick  paper  in¬
terposed:  he  described  an  engraving,  and  fixed  the  date
printed  as  1842.  On  reference,  a  medallion  portrait  of  Cuvier
was  there,  but  no  date.  The  nervous  excitement  I  had  no¬
ticed,  while  he  was  card -playing,  seemed  about  this  time
much  lessened.

A  card  pill-box,  enclosing  some  writing,  was  given.  He
made  several  attempts  to  decipher  the  MS.,  but  was  declared
to  have  failed.  The  word  written  was  “  Rouen  ”  given  in  a
pointed,  lady^s  hand,  by  which  the  letter  u  was  not  very  dis¬
tinguishable  from  n ;  and  the  whole  it  must  be  confessed,
was  not  very  legible  to  a  French  youth.  I  put  a  word,  in
large  round  letters,  in  the  box  :  he  asked  for  my  hand  :  I  was
desired  to  will  that  he  might  know  the  word :  he  asked  if
there  was  an  a  in  it  ?  I  answered,  “  yes an  s  ?  I  answered,
“  yes  he  said  it  consisted  of  five  letters  ? — again,  “  yes


506  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

he  called  for  a  pencil,  and  immediately  wrote,  “  Paris  .”  The
same  experiment  was  tried  by  another  gentleman,  with  the
word,  “  France  ,”  with  a  similar  result.

His  travelling  powers  were  next  essayed.  He  gave  to  a
lady  a  description  of  a  country  residence ;  true  in  many  sin¬
gular  particulars,  incorrect  in  others.  One  of  the  truths  was,
— that  a  certain  lady,  whose  age  he  accurately  named,  was
in  a  certain  room  (which  was  partially  well  described) — she
was  neither  sitting  nor  standing — she  was  unwell  in  bed  :  the
cause  of  illness  was  named.  To  the  noble  lord  he  spoke  with
general  accuracy  of  a  gallery  of  paintings  in  his  country-house
— described  two  painted  windows — spoke  of  the  sun  as  shining
on  one  of  them,  and  accurately  fixed  which  of  the  two.  His
lordship  wrongly  called  it  a  cellar,  but  the  youth  insisted  that
it  was  a  gallery.  The  look-out  from  the  house  was  also  des¬
cribed  truly,  except  that  a  river  before  it  was  declared  covered
with  boats.  He  was  told  that  there  were  no  boats — he  went
from  “  bateaux”  to  “  canards .”  A  lady  thought  that,  seen  at
a  distance,  sailing  boats  and  white-winged  fowl  might  be
confounded.

A  lady,  who  had  lost  a  bracelet  enquired  about  it.  He
said,  that  she  had  had  it  about  four  years  ;  first  fact ; — that
she  was  accustomed  to  twirl  it  round  her  wrist ;  second  fact ;
— that  a  fat  lady,  whose  name  he  partially  syllabled,  had
found  it.  This  was  doubtful ;  but  such  a  name  was  known  to
the  loser  as  possessed  by  a  neighbour.

A  more  satisfactory  statement  concluded  the  experiments.
A  lady,  related  to  the  noble  lord  present,  asked  the  number
of  her  children  ?  “  One — a  boy.”  “  Where  was  he  ?”  “  In  a
country-house,  twenty  miles  from  London  ?”  “  With  whom  ?”
“  His  aunt.”  A  mistake.  He  guessed  again  :  “  It  was  the
lady’s  mother!”  So  it  was.  He  added :  “  It  rained  where
the  boy  was — he  was,  therefore,  in  the  house  :  his  name  was

D - .”  Everything  true  but  the  rain;  and,  in  Regent-

street,  though  the  day  was  very  fine  then,  in  half  an  hour,
we  had  violent  showers  of  rain.

Alexis  was  now  aroused.

Though  I  went  to  these  experiments  without  prepossession,
watched  them  without  favour,  and  narrate  them  with  my
utmost  fairness  and  good  faith,  I  know  I  risk  some  character
for  common  sense  in  making  them  known.  It  is  dangerous
to  tell  an  extraordinary  truth  :  still  more,  to  affirm  extraor¬
dinary  things,  whose  demonstration  falsifies  opinions  which
have  been  held  for  ages  demonstrated.  But  be  it  recollected
that  the  farthest  liberty  I  take  is  to  say  what  I  think  I  have
seen.  I  do  not  expect  any  one  to  give  up  their  reasons  for


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  507

ray  impressions ;  and  few,  of  course,  will  not  sooner  believe
my  impressions  false  than  these  marvels  true.  But,  in  any
case,  there  are  marvels  to  be  believed.  Whatever  side  taken,
we  must  be  credulous.  M.  Marcillet  was  the  only  person  who
could  help  a  collusion.  He  was  in  a  strange  room,  among
strangers ;  no  mechanical  aids,  possible  of  appliance.  He  was
watched :  he  was  separated  from  the  patient :  his  voice  was
was  the  only  thing  that  could  guide  the  youth ;  and  he  spoke
little,  and  then  but  mere  words  of  very  natural  encouragement.
How  could  any  aid  of  M.  Marcillet  help  Alexis  to  deal  with
such  ready  and  instantaneous  judgment  with  the  hundred
unforeseen  and  complicated  contingencies  arising  in  the  shuf¬
fling,  cutting,  and  playing  a  pack  of  cards  ?  By  what  chance
were  his  guesses  so  right  ?  By  what  ingenuity  of  contrivance
was  he  tutored  that  a  box  impenetrable  to  sight,  contained  a
specific  word  out  of  so  many  thousands — a  word  unknown  to
myself  one  minute  before  writing — and  only  to  myself  when
written  ?  Supposing  one  deceived  on  so  many  successive  and
plain  matters  of  obvious  fact,  how  could  so  many  others  ?
But  it  is  useless  to  expand  on  the  difficulties  which  surround
the  hypothesis  of  fraud  and  collusion.  If  it  be,  a  priori ,
improbable  that  Alexis  has  the  power  he  pretends  to — it  is,  a
priori ,  improbable  that  under  such  circumstances  he  could
achieve  such  tricks  with  ordinary  capabilities.  A  moral  is  just
as  difficult  of  achievement  as  a  physical  impossibility;  and
there  is  just  this  to  be  said  of  the  first,  that  we  know  much
more  about  the  laws  constituting  or  governing  it,  than  we  do
of  the  second.  All  may  feel  the  difficulty  of  fully  believing
these  phenomena  :  only  those  who  have  seen  Alexis  under
such  favourable  circumstances  as  myself,  can  feel  the  diffi¬
culty  of  fully  resisting  them.

I  am,  Sir,

Very  faithfully  yours,

T.  Piers  Healey.

2,  Elm  Court,  Temple — July  1.


The  following  was  sent  to  the  Medical  Times  by  the  Bev.
Mr.  Sandby  : —

Sir, — I  have  read  with  much  interest  the  letter  of  Mr.
Healey,  that  appeared  in  the  last  No.  of  the  Medical  Times,
narrating  what  took  place  with  Alexis,  at  M.  Bailliere’s,  the
well-known  publisher  of  Begent  Street.  Having  been  pre¬
sent  during  part  of  the  seance ,  I  can  attest  the  general  accu¬
racy  of  his  statement.  Where,  however,  Mr.  H.  says,  that
the  noble  lord,  to  whom  he  refers,  “  wrongly  called  a  place


508


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


in  his  country-house  a  cellar ,  while  the  youth  insisted  that  it
was  a  gallery  ,”  he  misunderstood  cellar  for  salon,  thereby
weakening  the  effect  of  the  correct  description  which  the
clairvoyant  gave.

As  you  are  not  unwilling  to  receive  facts,  perhaps  you
will  permit  me  to  state  a  few  striking  circumstances  that
occurred  on  Tuesday,  the  2nd  inst.,  at  a  private  reunion,  in
Welbeck  Street.

Alexis  was  bandaged  most  carefully :  cotton-wool  and
handkerchiefs  were  not  merely  placed  over  and  below  the
eyes,  but  over  and  below  the  nose :  and,  in  this  state,  he  read
six  or  seven  lines,  out  of  a  French  book,  opened  at  random,
with  an  ease  and  a  rapidity  of  utterance  that  I  could  scarcely
imitate  in  my  own  language.  He  repeated  the  experiment
with  another  passage,  when  the  hand  of  a  gentleman  was  in¬
terposed  between  the  face  and  the  volume,  and  he  succeeded
completely.  He  read  a  few  words,  through  five  or  six  thick
pages  of  the  same  volume ;  and  this  he  did  two  or  three  times,
not  failing  once.

The  room  was  rather  full,  and  Alexis,  being  greatly  op¬
pressed  by  the  heat,  threw  off  the  bandages,  and  remained
the  rest  of  the  morning  with  his  eyes  unfettered  :  and  now
came  the  more  astounding  occurrences.

A  lady,  of  my  acquaintance,  wrote  the  word  “Alexis,”
and  placed  the  paper  in  a  tortoise-shell  card-case ;  and  in  a
short  time  the  youth  read  the  word  through  the  card-case.
The  card  was  torn,  and  he  said  it  was  dechire.  The  card-
case  was  never  out  of  the  lady^s  sight,  till  he  gave  the  name.

A  gentleman  placed  a  thick  envelope,  sealed  up,  with  the
word  “  Marie,”  written  upon  a  slip  of  paper  inserted  in  it :
Alexis  was  not  long  before  he  detected  what  the  word  was.

But  it  is  to  the  following  striking  fact  that  I  more  par¬
ticularly  direct  your  attention.

An  officer,  of  long  standing  in  the  army,  who  was  severely
wounded  at  Waterloo,  and  is  well  known  in  the  highest  mili¬
tary  circles,  was  one  of  the  company  present.  He  was  an
unbeliever,  and  knew  nothing  of  mesmerism,  and  had  never
seen  or  scarcely  heard  of  Alexis, — but  having  been  accident¬
ally  invited  to  join  the  party,  and  been  told  that  the  young
man  had  the  power  of  reading  through  opaque  objects,  he
determined  to  bring  his  talent  rigidly  to  the  test.

He  produced  a  morocco  case,  eight  inches  long,  and  an
inch  and  a  half  thick,  looking  like  a  surgical  instrument  case,
or  a  small  jewel-case.  It  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  Alexis,
who  held  it  for  a  short  time  in  silence,  and  then  gradually
and  slowly  gave  the  following  description  : —


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


509


“  The  object  within  the  case  is  a  hard  substance.”

“  It  is  folded  in  an  envelope.”

“  The  envelope  is  whiter  than  the  thing  itself.”  (The  en¬
velope  was  a  piece  of  silver-paper.)

“  It  is  a  kind  of  ivory.”

“It  has  a  point  (pique)  at  one  end”  (which  is  the  case).

“  It  is  a  bone.”

“  Taken  from  a  body” —

“  From  a  human  body” —

“  From  your  body.”

“  The  bone  lias  been  separated  and  cut,  so  as  to  leave  a
flat  side”

This  was  true  :  the  bone,  which  was  a  piece  of  the  colo¬
nel’s  leg,  and  sawed  off  after  the  wound,  is  flat  towards  the
part  that  enclosed  the  marrow.

Here,  Alexis  removed  the  piece  of  bone  from  the  case,
and  placed  his  finger  on  a  part,  and  said,  “  The  ball  struck
here”  (True.)

“  It  was  an  extraordinary  ball,  as  to  its  effect.”

“You  received  three  separate  injuries  at  the  same  mo¬
ment.”  (Which  was  the  case,  for  the  ball  broke  or  burst
into  three  pieces,  and  injured  the  colonel  in  three  places  in
the  same  leg.)

“  You  were  wounded  in  the  early  part  of  the  day,  whilst
charging  the  enemy.”  (Which  was  the  fact.)

Here  the  description  ended  :  and  what  does  the  sceptic
reply  to  our  statement  ?  That  M.  Marcillet,  as  a  colleague,
was  assisting  Alexis  ?  M.  Marcillet,  in  common  with  every
other  person  in  the  room,  was  himself  ignorant  of  what  the
case  contained. — That  the  gallant  officer  was  in  collusion  ?  It
were  a  waste  of  time  to  meet  so  monstrous  a  suggestion. —
That  Alexis  had  learned  by  accident,  and  before-hand,  what
the  case  contained  ?  The  thing  was  impossible  :  no  one  in
the  room  was  aware  of  the  contents  :  only  two  or  three  per¬
sons  present  were  acquainted  with  the  colonel,  and  he  and
Alexis  had  never  before  met.

There  is  but  one  answer  to  the  whole  transaction,  viz. :
that  Clairvoyance  is  a  fact  in  Nature — a  real  existing
fact  in  philosophy — be  the  explanation  what  it  may.

At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  said,  that  the  power  is  not
always  on  Alexis  :  it  varies  greatly — many  things  act  with  a
disturbing  effect — he  guesses — he  makes  mistakes — he  is
sometimes  wholly  wrong :  this  must  be  admitted.  But  a
hundred  failures  cannot  upset  four  or  five  positive  facts  :  those
facts  are  certain  :  yet  still  it  must  be  owned  that  this  singular
power  is  not  always  upon  the  young  man.


510  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

It  is  easy  to  say,  that  the  thing  is  an  impossibility — that
it  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of  Nature  :  the  question  recurs
— What  are  the  laws  of  Nature  ? — and  what  is  an  impos¬
sibility  ?

One  thing  certainly  seems  an  impossibility ;  where  a  man
has  committed  himself  to  the  opinion,  that  “  mesmerism  shall
not  be  true,”  it  seems  impossible,  even  by  the  strongest  and
most  unequivocal  evidence,  to  bring  him  to  a  candid  and  will¬
ing  confession  of  his  error.

The  facts,  above  stated,  can  be  corroborated  by  several
gentlemen  who  were  present.

I  enclose  you  my  own  card  and  address,  and  the  name  of
the  gallant  officer  who  produced  the  morocco  case,  and  beg
to  subscribe  myself,

Your  humble  servant,

July  8th,  1844.  Clericus.

Lord  Adare  has  obliged  me  with  his  notes  of  this  in¬
terview  : —

July  2. — I  saw  Alexis  at  the  house  of  M.  Dupuis.  He
was  bandaged  as  usual.  After  various  performances  with
cards,  a  book  was  opened  and  held  upright  before  him,  which
he  read  with  great  rapidity.  He  was  then  asked  to  read
some  words  through  several  pages,  and  a  book  was  opened ;
he  felt  about  on  the  page  with  his  fingers,  and  said  “  Literature
Espagnol.”  We  found  these  words  ^twenty-seven  leaves  off.
He  then  read  words  enclosed  in  envelopes  and  in  a  visiting
case,  given  him  by  different  persons.  One  gentleman  de¬
clared  he  would  believe  nothing  unless  Alexis  could  read  a
word  that  he  would  give  him,  and  he  handed  him  an  enve¬
lope.  Alexis  turned  it  about,  and  said  “This  contains  a
visiting  card ;  I  cannot  clearly  read  the  English  word,  but  I
will  run  a  pin  through  the  letter  h  which  I  see,  and  also
through  the  centre  of  the  address.”  This  he  did  quite  accu¬
rately.  A  lady  gave  him  a  letter ;  he  took  her  hand ;  she
asked  how  long  the  letter  had  been  written  :  “  About  two
months.”  It  was  two  and  a  half.  He  then  said  it  was
written  by  a  relation, — a  brother,  (yes),  who  was  very  very
far  off,  beyond  the  sea,  (He  is  in  India) ;  he  wears  a  costume
“  ires  curieux.”  He  then  described  his  face  and  appearance,
and  the  lady  said  she  could  not  have  described  him  better
herself.

Col.  Llewellyn,  who  was  I  believe  rather  sceptical,  pro¬
duced  a  morocco  case,  something  like  a  surgical  instrument
case.  Alexis  took  it,  placed  it  to  his  stomach,  and  said  “  The
object  is  a  hard  substance,  not  white,  enclosed  in  something


Reports  on  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  511

more  white  than  itself.  It  is  a  bone,  taken  from  a  greater
body ;  a  human  bone, — yours ;  it  has  been  separated,  and
cut  so  as  to  leave  a  flat  side.”  Alexis  opened  the  case,  took
out  a  piece  of  bone  wrapped  in  silver-paper,  and  said,  u  The
ball  struck  here ;  it  was  an  extraordinary  ball  in  effect ;  you
received  three  separate  injuries  at  the  same  moment;  the
bone  was  broken  into  three  pieces ;  you  were  wounded  early
in  the  day,  whilst  engaged  in  charging  the  enemy.”  He
also  described  the  dress  of  the  soldiers,  and  was  right  in  all
these  particulars.  This  excited  the  astonishment  of  all  the
bystanders,  especially  the  gallant  Colonel.

This  account  is  drawn  up  not  only  from  my  own  notes,
but  from  Col.  Llewellyn^s  statement  made  after  the  seance,
and  from  a  written  account  given  me  by  a  lady  who  was  sit¬
ting  close  by.

The  following  was  given  me  by  a  lady  who  was  present  at
a  private  exhibition  of  Alexis  in  Welbeclc  Street.

Alexis  took  a  letter  I  offered  to  him,  concerning  the
writer  of  which  M.  Marcillet  informed  him  I  was  anxious  to
learn  all  the  information  he  could  afford  me.  He  took  hold
of  my  hand,  and  looking  at  the  letter  for  a  moment,  he  told
me  I  had  received  the  letter  more  than  a  fortnight  since,
— nearly  a  month  indeed  had  elapsed  since  it  had  reached
me  ;  that  it  came  d’ontre  mer ,  a  very  long  way,  and  had  been
written  two  months.  The  writer  was  a  gentleman — some
connexion — nearly  related — in  fact  he  was  my  brother.  I  then
asked  Alexis  whether  the  gentleman  was  in  good  health,  and
whether  he  could  describe  him  to  me.  He  at  once  replied,
after  looking  intently  as  if  he  saw  some  object  in  front  of
him,  “  I  see  him  very  plain ;  he  is  about  35.”  To  which  I
objected,  saying  he  was  very  much  younger.  “  Then  he  is
at  least  28  or  30  ;  he  certainly  looks  as  old, — older  than  you.
I  added  he  was  still  wrong,  but  that  the  gentleman  certainly
looked  that  age ;  had  always  been  considered  to  have  the
appearance  of  being  eight  or  ten  years  older  than  he  in  reality
was ;  (a  remark  which  has  been  most  frequently  and  forcibly
made  by  the  greater  part  of  his  acquaintance).  Alexis  pro¬
ceeded  to  say  he  was  neither  short  nor  tall,  fgrosj,  with  dark
eyes,  very  long  hair  (fonee)  which  he  continually  cast  off  his
face  by  throwing  back  his  head,  an  action  which  he  imitated
as  he  spoke,  and  which  was  a  most  fixed  and  continual  habit
with  my  brother  in  reading.  He  in  reply  to  an  enquiry
whether  he  was  pale  or  not,  said  “  Oh,  non ;  Cest  un  beau
teint .”  He  described  him  to  be  living  in  a  house,  and  not
very  far  from  an  island ;  and  that  he  had  been  very  lately  on
VOL.  II.  M  M


512  Reports  on  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

board  some  vessel.  His  dress  lie  said  was  white,  but  something
green  he  had  which  he  could  not  discover.  “  Mats  que  c’est
dr  ole,  dites  mor  done  et  que  c’est”  I  was  unable  to  assist  him
with  the  solution  of  the  enigma,  which  seemed  to  have  made
so  great  an  impression  that  he  twice  returned  to  the  subject,
after  having  made  other  remarks,  with  the  observation,  “Mais
que  cela  en  embairasse  c’est  une  chose  si  drole  que  peut  etre.”
Alexis,  after  repeating  that  the  person  had  been  at  sea,  told
me  I  had  not  seen  my  brother  for  some  time, — that  it  was
full  two  years  and  a  half  since  we  parted ;  that  I  might  rest
satisfied  he  was  in  perfect  health,  and  that  he  wished  I  could
tell  him  what  the  green  colour  which  embarrassed  him  in  the
dress  was ;  returned  me  my  letter,  with  the  assurance  that
he  would  be  happy  to  give  me  further  information  to-morrow.
In  addition,  I  can  only  say  that  in  every  assertion  that
Alexis  made  he  was  borne  out  by  the  facts ;  the  time  of  de¬
parture  and  arrival  of  the  letter  was  quite  correct.  The
position  of  my  brother's  residence  being  singularly  true :
he  being  about  100  miles  from  the  Island  of  Bombay.  It
was  but  little  more  than  two  years  and  a  half  since  my
brother  and  myself  had  separated ;  and  if  I  had  wished  to
describe  him  I  could  not  have  used  any  language  more  ap¬
propriate,  even  to  the  peculiarity  which  he  had  of  continually
shaking  from  off  his  face  his  very  long  hair.  Concerning
Alexis'  assertion,  that  he  had  been  lately  “  Sur  un  navire,”
I  can  only  say,  I  have  every  reason  to  believe,  that  about
the  time  specified  by  Alexis — the  end  of  June  or  beginning
of  July — my  brother  did  cross  from  the  main  land  to  Bombay.

The  following  is  an  account  of  what  occurred  at  Lady
Blessington's,  and  was  given  me  by  Count  d'Orsay  : —

Alexis,  having  been  put  in  a  state  of  somnambulism,  had
a  large  piece  of  cotton  wool  placed  over  each  eye,  after  which
three  handkerchiefs  were  closely  bound  on;  he  then  rose
from  his  chair,  and  placing  himself  at  the  table,  proceeded
to  open  a  new  pack  of  cards,  which  he  shuffled  and  arranged
with  greater  rapidity  than  his  antagonist ;  he  played  two  or
three  games  of  ecarte,  winning  each  time,  and  telling,  not
only  his  own  cards,  but  those  of  the  other  person.

One  of  the  guests  took  from  the  shelf  the  first  book  that
presented  itself;  Alexis,  then,  with  his  eyes  bandaged  and
his  outspread  hand  placed  on  the  page,  read  the  passage
which  the  hand  covered.  It  was  then  proposed  that  he  should,
without  turning  the  leaf,  read  what  was  printed  four  pages
beyond  the  one  before  him.  He  agreed,  but  said  he  would
prefer  taking  off  the  bandages,  as  the  heat  greatly  incom-


Reports  on  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


513


moded  him.  This  being  done,  he,  still  looking  at  the  page
before  him,  read  slowly,  but  correctly,  two  lines  of  verse,
which  were  indeed  found  on  the  fifth  page  from  the  one  open.

A  gentleman  then  placing  himself  en  rapport  with  him,
by  taking  his  hand,  asked  him  to  describe  his  room ;  but  in
this  he  failed,  evidently  guessing  at  random  instead  of  em¬
ploying  clairvoyance.  A  folded  paper  containing  the  word
“  Marguerite”  was  then  given  him,  and  another  with  a  sketch
of  a  fox  :  the  first  he  said  contained  a  word  with  ten  letters,
but  he  could  not  read  it ;  the  second  he  described  as  an
animal — he  believed  a  dog — sitting  down.

Another  person  then  took  his  hand,  and  pointing  to  a
gentleman,  (whose  name  Alexis  did  not  know,)  asked  him  to
describe  a  certain  picture  in  his  apartment.  He  said  he  saw
a  very  large  picture  without  a  frame ;  at  one  side  was  a  great
building,  from  the  windows  of  which  men  were  firing ;  in
the  centre  was  a  man  on  horseback — an  dese  de  Vecole  Poly -
tecnique,  and  round  him  were  a  number  of  men.  The  build¬
ing  was  the  Louvre,  and  the  scene  represented  the  French
Revolution  of  1830.  All  these  particulars  were  correct  to
the  letter,  and  he  described  some  others,  which  I  do  not  at
this  moment  recollect,  but  which  were  equally  true.  He  was
then  asked  by  the  same  person  to  describe  another  picture.
He  said  it  was  large,  but  not  so  large  as  the  preceding  one  :
it  was  a  portrait  representing  a  man  in  a  very  singular  cos¬
tume, — full  length.  He  could  not  exactly  describe  the  cos¬
tume,  but  it  was  dark,  with  a  great  deal  of  white  in  front,
and  a  white  stiff  ruff  round  the  neck :  the  wearer  was  fair,
with  the  hair  thrown  back  from  the  temples,  and  with  large
whiskers  : — this  was  equally  correct.  Upon  being  asked
whether  the  original  of  the  picture  was  in  the  room,  and  if
he  could  point  him  out ;  he  replied  that  he  was,  and  that  if
all  the  persons  present  would  come  and  take  his  hand,  he
could  tell  which  it  was  ;  this  he  did  without  hesitation.  He
then  described  the  adjoining  room,  the  pictures,  their  posi¬
tion,  dress,  &c.

A  lady,  of  whose  name  he  was  ignorant,  then  took  his
hand,  and  at  her  request  he  described  with  tolerable  accuracy
the  position  of  her  house,  its  proximity  to  the  sea,  its  dis¬
tance  from  London,  &c.  He  said  there  were  five  young
ladies  in  the  house,  four  of  them  her  daughters ;  the  name  of
the  eldest  was  spelt  with  five  letters,  but  he  then  corrected
himself,  and  said  in  English  it  had  only  four;  that  it  was
Marie,  or  Mary  in  English.  He  then  told  the  names  of  the
other  three  according  to  their  ages,  which  was  the  more  ex¬
traordinary,  as  two  of  the  three  were  English  names  which

m  m  2


514


Reports  on  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis .


he  had  never  heard  before.  He  then  read  the  word  “  Mar¬
guerite, which  had  at  first  puzzled  him,  made  out  a  second
word,  and  also  a  playing  card  closely  enveloped  in  paper,
describing  not  only  the  face,  but  the  colour  or  pattern  of
the  back.


I  received  the  following  account  from  Dr.  Edward
Johnson  :


Stanstead  Bury  House,
July  24th,  1844.


Dear  Sir, — I  am  requested  by  M.  Marcillet,  and  by  several
ladies  and  gentlemen,  to  write  to  yon  on  the  subject  of  an  ex¬
hibition  of  his  peculiar  powers  lately  made  by  Alexis  (17thinst.)
before  a  large  and  highly  respectable  party,  at  which  I  was
present ;  the  motive  for  writing  to  you  being  simply  the  per¬
formance  of  an  act  of  justice  to  the  exhibitor,  and  to  those
who  do  not  consider  him  an  impostor.  Immediately  after  he
had  been  thrown  into  the  mesmeric  condition,  I  applied  a
large  roll  of  cotton-wool  over  each  eye,  fixing  the  rolls  in
their  position  by  means  of  two  folded  handkerchiefs  bound
tightly  round  the  head  and  over  the  eyes,  their  lower  edge
extending  down  to  the  tip  of  the  nose.  He  then  took  his
place  at  a  card  table,  opposite  to  a  sceptical  friend  of  mine,
who  had  agreed  to  play  a  game  of  ecarte  with  him.  As  yet
there  were  no  cards.  These  I  had  in  my  own  pocket — a  new
pack  which  had  never  yet  been  unsealed.  I  had  bought  them
in  London  the  day  before,  and  they  had  never  left  my  pocket
until  the  moment  that  they  were  called  for.  I  now  tore  off
the  sealed  envelope,  and  placed  them  on  the  table.  Alexis
immediately  took  them  up,  and  rapidly  prepared  them  for
ecarte ,  by  discarding  all  the  two^s,  three^s,  &c.  He  did  this
rapidly  and  without  any  hesitation.  Once  he  threw  out  a
wrong  card,  but  immediately  discovered  the  mistake  and
picked  it  up  again,  and  replaced  it  in  the  pack.  He  told  his
adversary  every  card  he  held  in  his  hand.  A  gentleman,
after  the  game  was  over,  took  a  card  secretly  from  the  pack,
and  placed  it  on  the  table,  the  blank  side  upwards.  Alexis
immediately  told  him  it  was  the  nine  of  hearts,  and  it  was  so.
A  gentleman  (the  same  who  had  played  at  ecarte)  now  pro¬
duced  from  his  pocket  a  sealed  packet,  and  said,  “  This  sealed
envelope  contains  another  sealed  envelope,  and  this  second
contains  a  third  also  sealed,  and  the  third  contains  a  piece  of
paper  on  which  I  have  written  one  word,  which  no  eye  has
seen  but  my  own.  I  have  had  it  in  my  pocket  ever  since  I
sealed  it,  and  I  now  desire  to  know  from  Alexis  what  is  the


Reports  on  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  515

word  which  I  have  written.”  Alexis  took  the  packet  in  his
hand,  and  with  the  other  grasped  the  hand  of  the  gentleman.
Within  a  minute  and  a  half,  or,  at  most,  two  minutes,  he  said,
“  The  word  is  Hellene.”  It  was  so.  A  lady  in  the  company
had  given  to  a  gentleman  a  small  nosegay,  before  Alexis  ar¬
rived,  saying,  “  This  I  send  by  you  to  Alexis — wear  it  in  your
button-hole  till  he  comes ;  take  an  opportunity  of  giving  it  to
him  when  we  are  all  assembled,  and  request  him  to  discover,  if
he  can,  from  which  of  the  company  it  has  been  sent.”  When
the  exhibition  was  about  half  over,  the  gentleman  suddenly
presented  the  nosegay  to  Alexis,  and  made  the  desired  request.
Alexis  immediately  rose,  and  went  round  the  circle,  taking
hold  of  the  hand  of  each  for  a  moment  or  so,  and  then  letting
it  go.  No  person  in  the  room,  except  the  lady  and  the  gentle¬
man  above  mentioned,  knew  anything  of  the  matter.  When
he  came  to  the  lady  who  really  sent  it,  he  hesitated,  and  held
her  hand  a  long  time — then  took  the  hand  of  the  next  lady,
and  hesitated  again — then  recurred  to  the  real  lady — then
went  and  sat  down  apparently  disappointed.  It  was  remarked
that  these  two  ladies  were  sitting  hand  in  hand,  and  when
this  observation  was  made  they  separated  their  hands — and
instantly,  with  a  slight  exclamation,  Alexis  rose  and  walked
rapidly  over  straight  to  the  true  lady,  and  thanked  her  for
having  given  him  the  flowers.  Several  similar  experiments
were  now  made  by  others ;  pins,  brooches,  rings,  &c.,  were
secretly  sent  him,  and  he  never  once  failed  to  discover,  merely
by  feeling  the  hands  of  the  company,  from  whom  each  article
had  come.  He  did  this  quickly,  and  with  great  precision.
He  astonished  one  lady  by  telling  her  that  “  the  ring  which
she  had  sent  him,  was  a  joint  present  from  tivo  persons — that
these  two  persons  were  her  sister  and  brother-in-law — that  it
was  given  to  her  in  South  America,  and  in  the  town  of  Rio
Janeiro,” — and  it  was  so.  These  are  a  few  of  the  very  extra¬
ordinary  things  which  he  did,  to  which  I  have  nothing  to  add
except  that  I  am  perfectly  sure  he  could  not  see  with  his  eyes,
and  that  any  kind  of  collusion  was  utterly  impossible.  For
my  own  part,  I  do  not  find  it  a  whit  more  difficult  to  believe
that  the  brain  may  be  occasionally  endowed  with  an  extra
faculty  or  sense,  just  as  easily  as  the  foot  with  an  extra  toe,
the  hand  with  an  extra  finger,  or  the  breast  with  an  extra
nipple — which  we  know  occasionally  happens.  But  of  the
nature  of  this  extra  sense  we  can  no  more  conceive  than  a
blind  man  can  conceive  of  colours,  or  deaf  men  of  sounds.

I  am,  dear  Sir,

Very  truly  yours,
Edward  Johnson.


516


Reports  on  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


This  letter  was  afterwards  sent  me  by  the  Rev.  H.  B.  Sims.

My  Dear  Sir, — I  have  to  thank  yon  for  the  opportunity
you  kindly  afforded  me  of  perusing  Dr.  Johnson's  letter,  con¬
taining  an  account  of  some  mesmeric  phenomena,  exhibited
by  Alexis  at  Stanstead  Bury.  Having  been  present,  I  have
great  pleasure  in  adding  my  testimony  to  that  of  Dr.  J olinson,
as  to  the  complete  success  of  Alexis  on  this  occasion,  and  I
can  also  bear  witness  to  the  fidelity  and  accuracy  with  which
the  various  instances  of  clairvoyance  are  detailed.  But  one
case,  which  as  it  is  not  mentioned  by  that  gentleman,  did  not
I  presume  fall  under  his  immediate  cognizance,  is  I  think  too
curious  and  too  conclusive  to  remain  unrecorded.  A  lady,
residing  in  this  neighbourhood,  who  had  never  before  wit¬
nessed  any  mesmeric  experiments,  brought  with  her  a  casket
which  she  had  enveloped  in  a  piece  of  printed  paper  and
carefully  sealed  up.  She  presented  it  to  Alexis,  and  asked
him  what  it  contained.  He  said,  “  Something  white  and
hard  :  that  it  was  metallic,  but  not  of  the  precious  metals ;
had  two  faces  (figures)  upon  it,  one  of  a  man,  the  other  a
female  face ;  and  that  he  saw  on  the  other  side  something
entrelassee .”  He  added  that  it  had  been  made  about  a  year.
The  paper  was  then  taken  off,  and  the  casket  opened.  It
proved  to  contain  a  medal  struck  on  occasion  of  the  launch
of  the  Great  Britain  steam-ship,  which  took  place,  within  six
or  seven  days,  just  a  year  before.  It  had  on  one  side  heads
of  the  Queen  and  Prince  Albert,  on  the  reverse  a  representa¬
tion  of  the  steam-ship,  which  with  its  shrouds  and  rigging,
was  well  described  bv  the  term,  entrelassee.  He  also  wrote
down,  before  the  seal  was  broken,  two  English  words,  which
on  opening  the  paper  were  found  to  form  part  of  what  was
printed  upon  it.

The  seance  lasted  nearly  three  hours,  during  which  time
Alexis  had  been  exercising  his  power  of  clairvoyance,  in  a
great  variety  of  ways,  without,  as  I  believe,  a  single  failure :
though  he  made  a  few  unimportant  mistakes  while  playing  at
cards.  The  company  present,  about  forty  in  number,  were
so  satisfied  that  they  would  not  allow  him  to  continue  his
exhibition,  though  he  was  perfectly  willing  to  have  done  so,
the  mesmeric  influence  appearing  unimpaired.

You  asked  me  for  some  details  of  an  interview  I  had  with
Alexis  last  year  in  Paris,  where  I  first  became  acquainted
with  him.  I  was,  previously,  an  obstinate  unbeliever  in  the
clairvoyant  wonders  of  mesmerism ;  but  having  one  evening
heard  some  very  startling  facts  related  by  a  person  whose
veracity  I  could  not  question,  I  resolved  to  pay  Alexis  a  visit
the  following  morning,  that  I  might,  from  personal  experience.


Reports  on  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis .


517


form  an  opinion  on  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  what  I  had  so
long  disbelieved.  I  was  accompanied  by  a  friend,  and  we  had
a  private  seance.  Alexis  was  in  a  very  few  minutes  placed  in
the  mesmeric  trance,  and  having  had  his  eyes  carefully  band¬
aged,  played  at  ecarte,  read  from  a  book,  &c.  &c.,  with  great
success  and  facility.  I  then  sat  down  by  him,  and  asked
to  have  some  conversation  with  him.  He  took  my  hand.  I
asked  him  if  he  could  tell  me  where  I  lived.  After  a  good
deal  of  hesitation  he  said,  “  North-east  of  London and
gave  the  distance  very  correctly  in  leagues.  •  He  then  said,
“  There  is  a  railroad  which  leads  to  your  part  of  the  country.
There  are  two  branches  to  this  railroad,  and  your  house  is
situated  on  the  left  branch ;  and  on  the  right  side  of  that
branch — ”  He  then  called  for  a  sheet  of  paper,  and  began
to  draw  a  map  of  the  part  of  the  country  he  was  describing.
He  delineated  the  railway  with  great  correctness,  marking  the
branch  which  turns  off  eastward  at  Stratford,  and  continuing
the  other  to  a  point  where  he  said  there  was  a  station.  He
gave  a  very  minute  account  of  the  position  of  this  station,
answering  in  all  points  to  that  of  Roydon  ;  the  river  running
nearly  parallel  to  it,  and  the  bridge  immediately  in  front :
and  he  also  described  with  much  truth  the  general  character
and  appearance  of  the  surrounding  country,  and  said  that  the
railroad  extended  only  three  or  four  leagues  from  this  point,
which  is  the  fact.  He  then  marked  on  his  chart  another
station,  a  few  miles  farther  on,  and  gave  exactly  the  relative
distant  and  position  of  my  house  with  these  two  stations.  He
then  said,  “  Now  let  us  go  to  your  house/'’  and  proceeded  to
give  a  sketch  of  the  road  with  its  various  turnings.  As  he
approached  the  house  he  was  more  minute,  and  described
with  singular  correctness  the  sudden  descent ;  the  brook
about  half  as  wide  as  the  room,  the  steep  ascent  on  the  other
side,  and  the  gateway  on  the  right  hand  of  the  road.  He
gave  the  distance  of  the  house  from  the  gateway  very  exactly,
mentioned  a  piece  of  water  on  the  right  with  ducks  upon  it,
(I  keep  a  few  wild-ducks,)  and  described  the  position  of  the
stables,  &c.  The  perfect  accuracy  of  the  whole  of  this  minute
description  was  truly  astonishing.

I  then  asked  him  if  there  was  any  one  living  in  the  house
during  my  absence  from  home.  He  said,  “  Yes  ;  there  was
only  one  person — a  gentleman,”  (which  was  the  fact);  and
he  then  proceeded  to  state  his  age  and  describe  his  character
and  appearance,  as  correctly  as  if  he  had  been  well  and  per¬
sonally  known  to  him.  I  should  mention  that  the  gentleman
wrho  accompanied  me  was  entirely  unacquainted  with  this  part
of  England ;  that  I  had  not  mentioned  to  him  the  subject  on


518  Reports  on  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

which  I  proposed  to  question  Alexis, ;  and,  in  fact,  that
neither  to  him  nor  to  any  soul  in  Paris  but  myself,  were  the
foregoing  particulars  known.  The  seance  had  now  lasted
nearly  an  hour ;  and  the  mesmeric  influence  appeared  to
he  on  the  wane.  He  began  to  make  mistakes,  and  I  would
not  suffer  him  to  proceed,  being  perfectly  satisfied  with  what
he  had  already  done,  and  entertaining  a  firm  conviction,
which  has  been  strengthened  by  subsequent  experience  that
he  really  possesses  the  power  he  professes  to  exercise.

I  am  no  mesmerist :  till  I  myself  witnessed  these  things
no  one  could  be  more  incredulous  on  the  subject ;  but  I  should
not  be  doing  justice  either  to  Alexis  or  M.  Marcillet,  who
have  been  unfairly  stigmatized  as  cheats  and  impostors,  if  I
hesitated  to  declare  my  firm  belief  that  the  former  is  endowed
with  a  most  wonderful  and  mysterious  faculty,  extending  far
beyond  what  we  have  hitherto  considered  the  limits  of  those
powers  which  have  been  granted  by  providence  to  the  human
race.

I  am,  ‘my  dear  Sir,

faithfully  Yours,

Parndon,  Dec.  20,  1844.  Henry  B.  Sims.

The  following  is  an  account  of  what  occurred  at  the  house
of  my  friend  the  Rev.  Thos.  Robertson,  of  Blandford  Square,
and  was  drawn  up  by  another  friend,  Mr.  Kirby  of  Blandford
Square,  and  approved  by  Mr.  Robertson : —

On  the  9th  of  J uly  last,  Alexis  exhibited  his  extraordinary
powers  at  the  house  of  a  gentleman  in  Blandford  Square,
before  a  party  of  about  thirty  ladies  and  gentlemen,  at  eight
in  the  evening.

Being  placed  in  an  easy  chair  M.  Marcillet,  the  operator,
put  Alexis  into  the  mesmeric  sleep,  by  what  appeared  to  be  a
strong  effort  of  the  will,  communicated  by  a  fixed  look,  with¬
out  any  passes  whatever.  This  was  effected  in  about  ten
minutes,  after  many  convulsions  of  the  face,  which  were  any¬
thing  but  agreeable  to  look  upon.

The  business  of  the  evening  began  with  the  usual  experi¬
ments  of  rendering  rigid  the  muscles  of  the  arms  and  legs, —
the  legs  being  made  to  support  the  weight  of  another  person,
&c.

In  the  act  of  bandaging  the  eyes,  preparatory  to  playing
at  cards,  the  anxiety  on  the  part  of  some  of  the  company  to
make  assurance  doubly  sure,  was  so  great  as  to  annoy  Alexis ;
and  after  many  efforts  to  satisfy  the  most  sceptical,  the  ban¬
dages  were  thrown  off  altogether,  Alexis  refusing  to  have  any,
and  he  sat  down  to  ecarte,  his  eyes  closed  but  unbound,  and


Reports  on  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  519

played  two  or  three  games,  his  own  cards  with  their  faces
turned  down  upon  the  table ;  he  every  time  selected  the  card
to  be  played  correctly,  with  one  exception,  and  only  once  or
twice  held  his  cards  with  their  faces  towards  him,  as  a  player
would  do  in  the  natural  state.  The  game  abruptly  terminated
by  his  adversary  desiring  to  increase  the  difficulty  by  covering
his  own  cards  with  an  additional  row  of  cards ;  this  greatly
irritated  Alexis,  who,  as  interpreted  by  M.  Marcillet,  was
annoyed  at  this  additional  proof  of  a  predetermination  to
believe  that  the  whole  was  a  trick  or  wilful  deception.

One  of  the  company  put  into  his  hands  a  sheet  of  paper
folded  several  times,  so  as  to  prevent  a  knowledge  of  what  was
written  within  by  an  effort  of  ordinary  vision :  the  words
written  were  “  Vin  de  Champagne  ”  After  turning  the  paper
about  in  his  hands  for  some  time,  putting  it  to  his  chest,  &c.,
he  said  the  first  word  began  with  V  and  contained  three  let¬
ters,  by  degrees  he  declared  the  whole  correctly.  A  box  and
other  packets  were  produced  of  which  he  did  not  succeed  in
declaring  the  contents,  but  a  watch  case  being  put  into  his
hand  by  the  lady  of  the  house,  he  proceeded  to  state  that  it
contained  a  small  thing  enclosing  some  hair  which  was  grey,
and  that  round  a  circle  of  gold  were  engraved  the  names  of  a
lady  and  gentleman  with  a  date,  the  year  being  1808,  and  the
month  abbreviated,  ending  with  y  “  (y  grec).”  When  told
he  was  wrong  in  the  year,  he  corrected  himself  by  saying  it
was  1809,  and  in  this  he  was  right.  He  was  then  told  the
hair  was  not  grey,  being  that  of  a  young  person,  but  he  per¬
sisted  in  saying  that  the  hair  was  grey,  and  when  the  case
was  opened  it  was  found  to  enclose  a  very  small  locket  con¬
taining  hair  of  a  greyish  appearance  from  having  become
mildewed ;  a  very  small  inscription  engraved  on  the  rim  of
the  locket,  difficult  for  any  one  to  read,  contained  the  names
of  a  lady  and  gentleman  with  the  date  of  January,  1809.
This  must  be  considered  a  very  successful  experiment,  the
object  having  been  in  possession  of  the  gentleman  of  the
house,  immediately  before  it  was  put  into  his  hand,  and  the
apparent  errors  having  been  satisfactorily  explained.

But  the  most  interesting  and  valuable  experiment  was
the  following,  because  the  gentleman  who  applied  it,  one  of
the  most  sceptical,  had  declared  that  he  should  be  perfectly
satisfied  of  the  genuine  clairvoyance  of  Alexis  if  it  succeeded.
This  gentleman  took  from  his  pocket  a  small  French  book,
entitled,  “  Le  petit  Careme  de  Massillon  ”  and  desired  Alexis
to  read  the  title  page,  over  which  he  had  placed  firmly  a  sheet
of  writing  paper  doubled  so  as  effectually  to  conceal  the  print
from  ordinary  vision.  Alexis  applied  the  book  to  his  chest.


520  Reports  on  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis .

afterwards  to  the  back  of  his  head;  and  in  a  very  gradual
manner;  but  in  a  short  time;  read  the  title  correctly.

The  master  of  the  house  put  himself  en  rapport  with  Alexis,
by  taking  his  hand  and  then  desired  him  to  tell  him  what  he
found  in  his  dining  room,  the  seance  being  in  the  drawing
room  above.  Alexis  described  most  accurately  the  position  of
the  door,  windows,  &c.,  and  then  said  “  Il-y-a  trois  tables ,  une
grande  et  cleus  p  elites f  this  was  correct.  He  mentioned  cor¬
rectly  also  the  pictures,  &c.,  he  said  there  was  a  bust  of  a
gentleman  in  one  corner,  which  looked  like  the  bust  of  a
dead  rather  than  a  living  man ;  that  there  was  a  table  between
the  windows,  on  which  were  three  books,  one  without  a  cover.
The  room  had  been  arranged  in  these  particulars  by  the  gen¬
tleman  of  the  house  for  the  purpose  of  the  experiment,  and
to  guard  against  the  accidental  entry  into  that  room  of  Alexis
on  his  arrival,  he  had  locked  the  door  and  pocketed  the  key.
The  description  was  most  accurate  throughout,  the  peculiar
appearance  of  the  bust  being  accounted  for  by  its  being  a
plaster  cast  from  life  with  the  eyes  closed.  Another  gentleman
asked  Alexis  to  accompany  him  to  his  house  (in  the  same
Square  but  this  was  not  told  him),  he  immediately  said  there
were  trees  in  front — a  park ;  and  when  desired  to  describe  the
dining  room,  he  said  there  were  two  windows,  &c.  He  erred
in  the  colour  of  the  curtains,  but  told  the  gentleman  that
there  was  a  picture  containing  two  figures — lovers ;  the  lady
with  something  in  her  hand — roses,  picking  them  to  pieces
and  throwing  them  down  (describing  the  manner  by  gesture) .
All  this  is  a  most  accurate  description  of  the  last  Art  Union
print,  and  what  is  curious  the  gentleman  denied  at  first  there
was  such  an  article,  having  only  lately  placed  it  there.  The
erroneous  part  of  his  description  was  that  the  man  had  a
poignard  in  a  belt — a  belt  there  is  but  no  poignard.  At  first
he  declared  the  dresses  were  those  of  savages,  when  told  he
was  wrong,  he  said  they  were  Spanish  or  Italian.  He  was
then  told  there  was  a  piece  of  art  over  the  fire-place  in  the
same  room,  when  he  said  “  Oui  c’est  en  platre — il-y-a  deux
figures ,  une  femme  et  un  petit  amour ,  il-y-a  encore  une  autre
figure ,  c’est  un  animal  fabuleux,  pas  tout  visible  Now  this  is
so  near  the  fact  as  to  be  quite  astonishing  considering  that
Alexis  had  never  been  in  the  house  referred  to,  and  received
not  the  smallest  hint  except  that  above  mentioned.  The
object  referred  to  is  a  group  in  plaster,  by  Davis,  expressive
of  maternal  affection, — a  female  in  great  horror  endeavours
to  crush  a  serpent  with  her  foot,  while  a  little  boy  entirely
naked  with  its  back  to  the  spectator  clings  to  her.  When
he  was  told  the  third  figure  was  not  that  of  a  fabulous  animal,


Reports  on  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


521


lie  said,  “  c'est  un  viseau,”  and  finally  “  c’est  un  serpent .”  The
serpent  is  not  wholly  visible,  and  with  the  exception  of  a  wrong
notion  of  it,  which  he  at  length  corrected,  the  description  was
strikingly  correct.

The  experiments  concluded  by  his  telling  the  Christian
names  of  several  ladies  present,  which  he  did  accurately  with
more  or  less  labour ;  the  name  of  one  gentleman  he  failed  to
give,  apparently  because  the  name  was  different  in  English
than  in  French.  Towards  the  close  of  the  evening  a  young
lady  placed  in  his  hands  a  piece  of  paper,  doubled  up  several
times,  in  which  she  had  written  in  pencil,  “  Vous  etes  gent  it
he  did  not  declare  this,  not  apparently  because  he  could  not,
but  waived  it  by  saying,  “  Ce  la  ne  vaut  pas  la  peine”

On  the  one  hand,  though  it  cannot  be  asserted  that  he
did  not  fail  in  several  matters  put  before  him,  he  succeeded
in  others  to  a  surprising  extent,  not  to  be  accounted  for  as  the
act  of  a  conjuror,  as  sleight-of-hand,  or  fraud,  or  by  collusion
with  others, — founded  in  either  of  these  it  might  fairly  be
expected  that  the  tricks  would  have  been  better  performed.
The  vision  obtained  though  out  of  ordinary  course  appears  to
be  limited  and  imperfect ;  the  answers  are  more  clearly  given
to  those  who  are  en  rapport  with  him,  and  who  fix  their  own
minds  exclusively  on  the  things  or  ideas  treated  of.


Report  of  an  Interview  with  Alexis,  July  19,  1844,  at  the  house  of
John  Auldjo ,  Escp,  F.R.S.  Drawn  up  by  that  Gentleman
himself ;  and  published  first  in  the  Medical  Times,  and  now
with  his  permission  republished,  with  some  emendations  by
Mr.  Auldjo.


“  Multa  suut  Naturae  miracula  incompertae  rationis,  et  in  Naturae  majestate  penitus  abdita.”

“ - and  art  thou  shocked  at  mysteries

The  greatest — thou — ”

“ - Truths —

By  truths  enlighten’d  and  sustain'd,  afford
An  arch  like,  strong  foundation,  to  support
Tire  incumbent  weight  of  absolute,  complete
Conviction  ;  here,  the  more  we  press,  we  stand
More  firm  ;  who  most  examine,  most  believe.

Parts,  like  half  sentences,  confound,  the  whole
Conveys  the  sense.”

[The  following  report  was  written  immediately  after  the
interview,  and  has  been  corrected  by  most  of  the  party  who
were  present.  Of  that  party,  consisting  of  twenty-eight,
seven  ladies  and  eleven  gentlemen  were  perfect  unbelievers  in
the  powers  of  mesmerism,  and  particularly  in  those  of  clair¬
voyance.  The  remaining  ten,  six  ladies  and  four  gentlemen,
were  not  sceptical,  some  having  seen  cases  of  mesmerism,


522  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

and  two  or  three  having  witnessed  successful  exhibitions  of
clairvoyance.

Fair  and  courteous  means  were  resorted  to  by  the  unbe¬
lievers  to  test  the  powers  of  Alexis  as  a  clairvoyant,  and
detect  what  they  believed  to  be  imposture.  The  success  of
the  greater  part  of  the  tests  he  was  subjected  to,  was  not  only
extraordinary  but  convincing — every  one  was  satisfied,  that
there  was  no  imposture,  no  collusion ;  but  that  there  did  exist
a  very  wonderful,  though  inexplicable  power;  and  as  was
observed  by  one  of  the  gentlemen  present,  “  it  would  be
irrational  to  set  down  as  imposture  everything  which  we  can¬
not  account  for ;  this  principle  would  stifle  all  discovery.”]

An  arrangement  having  been  made  for  Alexis  to  exhibit
his  powers  of  clairvoyance  to  a  party  of  ladies  and  gentlemen,
on  the  afternoon  of  the  19th  of  July,  a  piece  of  fine  chamois
leather  was  procured,  some  cotton,  such  as  is  used  for  the
wadding  of  ladies*  dresses,  three  large  silk  handkerchiefs  were
got  ready,'  and  a  very  strong  solution  of  gum  was  prepared.
Neither  Alexis  nor  Monsieur  Marcillet  had  ever  been  in  the
house,  or  had  been  seen  by  any  of  the  party,  except  two,  and
that  only  in  public,  at  one  of  the  exhibitions  in  Mortimer-
street.  The  party,  in  the  drawing-room,  having  assembled,
to  the  number  of  twenty-eight,  Alexis  was  introduced,  and
having  been  put  into  a  state  of  lucid  somnambulism  by  Mon¬
sieur  Marcillet,  his  eyes  were  covered  with  two  circular  pieces
of  the  chamois  leather,  well  moistened  with  the  gum.  The
leather  was  so  placed  as  to  cover  the  ball  of  the  eye  (the  upper
eyelid  being  closed  over  the  ball),  the  eyebrows,  and  the
cheek  down  to  the  edge  of  the  nostril ;  over  the  leather  was
placed  a  quantity  of  cotton,  covering  the  whole,  and  extend¬
ing  to  the  mouth.  The  silk  handkerchiefs  were  then  tied
over,  so  that  two  were  across  the  eyes  transversely,  coming
on  each  side  below  the  nose,  and  by  the  corners  of  the  mouth,
and  under  the  ears.  The  third  was  bound  round  the  head
horizontally  over  the  other,  covering  the  top  of  the  nose,  and
was  tied  over  the  ears,  keeping  the  other  two  in  their  position.
There  was  thus  left  only  space  sufficient  for  respiration,  and
every  one  in  the  room  felt  certain  that  his  eyes  were  covered
in  such  a  manner  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  see  by
any  movements  or  contortions  of  the  cheek  ;  he  did  not  make
any,  nor  did  he  attempt  to  displace  the  bandaging,  and  par¬
ticular  care  was  taken  to  prevent  his  interfering  with  it.

Being  seated  at  a  card  table,  a  pack  of  cards  were  taken
at  hazard  from  among  several  other  packs,  in  a  card-box,
belonging  to  the  house,  each  pack  being  still  in  its  stamped
cover,  so  that  the  possibility  of  the  cards  having  been  tarn-


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  523

pered  with,  or  even  seen  by  Alexis,  or  Monsier  Marcillet,  is
out  of  the  question.  The  cards  had  coloured  backs,  and  were
of  the  ordinary  thickness  of  English  playing  cards.  The
cover  being  taken  off  and  the  pack  placed  on  the  table,  Alexis
observed,  “they  were  not  ecarte  cards,"  and  proceeded  to
separate  with  rapidity  the  small  cards,  which  were  unnecessary
for  that  game,  (all  under  seven,  except  the  ace)  from  the  rest,
making  two  mistakes  in  his  haste,  which  he  himself  observed
and  corrected.  He  then  cut  for  deal  with  the  gentleman  who
had  sat  down  to  play  with  him  ;  he  played  four  games,  naming
the  cards  in  his  adversary's  hands,  choosing  cards  from  the
whole  pack  when  he  required  a  few  more  cards,  selecting  trump
cards  for  himself,  and  low  ones  of  other  suits  for  his  adversary,
naming  the  cards  of  both  hands,  those  of  his  own  having  their
faces  to  the  table  and  unturned,  and,  in  fact,  satisfying  the
most  sceptical,  that  the  whole  pack,  with  its  back  towards
him,  was  as  visible  to  him  blindfolded,  as  if  the  faces  of  the
cards  were  exposed  to  his  common  sight.  He  then  played
three  games  with  another  gentleman,  and  made  two  or  three
mistakes,  such  as  selecting  three  spades  from  the  pack,  when
he  had  thrown  away  three  cards,  believing  spades  to  be
trumps,  when  clubs  were,  and  finding  out  his  error,  acknow¬
ledged  he  had  mistaken  the  turned-up  card.  He  then  named
cards  in  his  adversary's  hands,  mistaking,  however,  the  knave
of  hearts  for  the  queen  on  one  occasion.  He  also  named  cards
with  their  faces  on  the  table,  selecting  particular  cards  from
the  pack,  and  played  his  game,  naming  his  cards  without
touching  them.

No  one  else  being  desirous  of  playing  with  him,  a  book
wras  taken  at  hazard  off  a  table  near  at  hand,  which  book  it
was  impossible  that  Alexis  or  Marcillet  could  have  examined
previously.  It  was  about  to  be  opened  by  a  gentleman,  and
given  to  him,  but  Alexis  said,  as  soon  as  the  book  was  brought
near  him,  “  nous  sommes  dans  le  Department  des  Landes ,"  and
putting  it  open  on  the  top  of  his  head,  immediately  said  there
was  a  picture  of  two  men  on  stilts,  and  that  they  were  les
habitants  des  Landes,  and  that  this  was,  also,  the  title  of  the
descriptive  part  on  the  next  page.  This  was  so,  and  the  work
Les  Francois  peint  par  eux  memes.

Several  sheets  of  letter  paper,  doubly  folded,  were  then
thrust  into  the  closed  volume,  and  opened  at  the  part  where
the  paper  was  inserted,  the  paper  completely  covering  the
letter-press;  he  then,  with  a  pencil,  wrote  a  line,  which,  he  said,
contained  the  words  of  a  line  of  the  printed  page  underneath  ;
on  removing  the  paper,  it  proved  to  be  correct.  He,  also,
pierced  the  writing  paper  with  a  pin,  so  as  to  transfix  two  or


524  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

three  of  the  words  which  he  previously  mentioned,  correctly.
During*  the  whole  of  the  exhibition,  up  to  this  time,  it  is  to
be  recollected  that  the  bandages  were  over  the  eyes.

The  handkerchiefs  were  now  removed;  the  gum  having
flowed  a  little  from  underneath  the  leather,  the  cotton  was
found  gummed  to  the  skin  of  the  cheek,  near  the  nose,  and
the  leather  adhered  firmly  in  every  part  over  the  eye,  so  that
there  was  not  the  slightest  possibility  of  his  seeing  in  any  way
from  under  it.  One  leather  was  removed  with  much  trouble
by  a  sponge  and  hot  water,  at  the  same  time,  giving  him  pain.
Calling  Monsieur  Marcillet  to  him,  he  desired  him  to  mag¬
netise  the  other  eye  to  a  state  of  insensibility,  which,  being
done,  the  remaining  leather  was  torn  from  the  eye-lash,  brow,
and  cheek,  without  his  flinching  or  showing  any  feeling  of
pain,  though  the  lids,  lashes,  and  brows  were  much  raised  in
the  operation,  and  one  or  two  of  the  lashes  and  some  hairs
of  the  eyebrow  were  torn  away.

His  eyes  were  now  open,  and  after  a  few  minutes*  delay
a  sealed  envelope  was  given  him  by  a  gentleman  who  had
brought  it  with  him,  and  could  not  divulge  to  any  one  pre¬
sent  what  it  contained ;  after  examining  it  some  time,  he  said
there  were  two  words,  but  they  might,  also,  pass  for  one;
that  they  were  French ;  he  said  if  the  gentleman  who  wrote
it,  and  who,  he  said,  was  so  firm  an  unbeliever  that  his  influ¬
ence  affected  him,  would  go  into  the  next  room,  and  whisper
it  to  the  lady  of  the  house,  and  she  would  come  and  give  him
her  hand  he  would  be  able  to  write  the  word  for  her.  This
being  done,  he  wrote  the  word  clairvoyance ;  she  said  he  was
wrong.  “True/*  said  he,  “I  ought  to  have  written  it  on
the  envelope,  clairvoyant ,**  and  so  corrected  it.  On  opening
the  envelope,  the  word  was  found  to  be  correct,  w*ritten  on  a
sheet  of  note  paper,  folded  up.

Another  envelope,  brought  to  the  house  as  the  others
had  been  ready  sealed,  containing  a  sheet  of  note  paper,
was  presented  to  him,  containing  three  words,  one  of  which
he  was  requested  to  read ;  after  some  time,  he  said  he  would
take  the  last  one.  He  held  the  hand  of  the  lady  who  wrote
the  words,  asking,  “  Est-ce  vous,  est-ce  vous-meme  qui  Vavez
ecrit  ?”  and  then  wrote  down  the  word  “  Rossini,**  and  said,
“  Vous  voyez  que  je  fais  I’fs  comme  la  votre .**  A  foreigner
would  generally  have  written  it  so,  ss.  He  then  said  he
would  put  a  pin  through  the  four  first  letters.  On  breaking
the  seal,  and  opening  the  envelope,  the  last  of  the  three
words  was  Rossini,  and  he  had  put  a  pin  through  the  first
four  letters.

Other  envelopes,  containing  paper,  written  upon,  were


Reports  of.  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.  525

shown  him,  but  he  made  an  excuse  for  not  reading  them,
that  there  were  too  many  words.  Monsieur  Marcillet  ex¬
plained,  and  said,  if  a  line  of  writing  happened  to  he  folded
in  the  middle,  the  letters  would  cross  over  each  other  in  so
intricate  a  manner,  that  it  wrould  be  difficult  if  not  impossible
for  Alexis  to  decypher  them,  or  in  fact  any  one  else,  and
is  a  difficulty  not  likely  to  occur  in  a  printed  book.  An
instance  of  this  occurred  to  a  gentleman  present,  who  had
been  at  one  of  the  public  exhibitions.  He  had,  on  that
occasion,  written  three  words  on  a  sheet  of  note-paper,
and  placed  them  in  an  envelope,  and  then  examined  it
with  a  strong  light,  but  no  part  of  the  writing  was  visible.
It  was  submitted  to  Alexis.  After  a  few  moments,  he  said,
(not  knowing,  nor  ever  having  seen  the  gentleman  before),
it  is  not  English,  nor  French,  but  Italian,  and  said  there
were  three  words,  the  first  beginning  with  a  “  C.”  He  was
desired  to  write  down,  and  he  wrote  “  Che,”  and  then  said,
that  it  was  impossible  to  make  out  the  other  two,  but  it
looked  like  “  ra — rasa  •”  that  they  were  u  plies  Vun  sur  V autre”
and  he  could  not  make  them  out ;  he  was  requested  to  stick
a  pin  through  them,  which  he  did,  and  on  opening  the  en¬
velope  it  was  found  that  the  two  words  “sara  sara,”  were
folded  over  each  other,  so  that  they  made  “  ra  sa  rasa,”  the
sentence  being,  “  Che  sara,  sara”  To  return  from  this  di¬
gression  :  Alexis  made  several  guesses  at  one  or  two  unsuc¬
cessfully,  and  then  gave  them  up.  In  reading  from  the  book,
he  asked  no  questions;  from  the  owners  of  the  sealed  packets,
various  questions,  as  to  number  of  letters,  &c.,  and  the  sug¬
gestion  naturally  arose,  and  was  put  by  one  of  the  party,  if
he  really  can  mentally  see,  why  ask  leading  questions  ?  To
which  it  may  be  answered  that  he  does  not  see  with  that
facility  which  the  natural  common  sight  possesses,  but  only
by  a  great  effort  of  that  second  spirit,  or  power,  whatever  it
may  be,  which  he  has,  and  which  is  not  under  the  perfect
controul  of  his  own  will,  but  is  directed  to  the  effort  in  obe¬
dience  to  a  superior  and  overruling  influence — that  of  the
magnetizer  :  for  instance,  one  of  the  sealed  packets  given
him  contained  the  word  “  L? Imagination  ”  After  some  time,
and  asking  if  it  was  not  a  word  of  seven  letters,  then  of  ten,
he  wrote  on  the  packet  “  Cr  dul,”  perhaps  meaning  the  word
“  Ulncredule,”  which  does  not  resemble  it.  He  was  told  the
letters  were  not  correct,  but  the  packet  was  put  aside,  without
a  further  attempt  to  decypher  it,  although  Monsieur  Mar¬
cillet  was  very  anxious  that  he  should  persevere.

The  next  questions  put  to  Alexis  were  with  the  object  of
testing  his  power  of  visiting  and  describing  different  localities.


526  Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.

He  was  asked  to  describe  the  room  of  a  lady  present.  After
some  hesitation,  he  pointed  out  the  position  of  the  fire-place,
and  that  of  the  bed  with  regard  to  it,  and  made  an  attempt
to  describe  some  paintings  on  the  chimney-piece.  He  said
one  was  the  portrait  of  a  soldier,  which  was  wrong,  though
one  answering  to  his  description  was  in  the  room  beneath.
Baffled  in  his  efforts,  and  making  several  wrong  descriptions,
he  said  he  would  leave  the  room  and  return  to  it  again  later.
An  opera-glass  case  was  then  given  him,  containing  some
article,  not  a  glass.  After  examining  it  some  time,  he  saw
it  was  something  that  was  of  two  metals,  something  red  and
yellow,  it  was  something  wrapped  up,  but  he  could  not  say
exactly  what  it  was.  It  was  wrapped  in  paper,  and  the  paper
was  then  removed,  but  it  did  not  facilitate  his  saying  what  it
was.  This  was  an  instance  of  complete  failure ;  it  was  a  gold
ring  with  a  gold  hand,  the  two  exterior  fingers  extended,  the
middle  ones  and  thumb  closed  upon  the  palm — a  Neapolitan
charm  againt  the  Evil  Eye.  It  was  suggested  by  one  of  the
ladies  that  the  influence  attributed  to  this  charm  counteracted
his  power  also,  and  prevented  his  seeing  the  ring,  and  shewed
the  efficacy  of  that  protection  so  carefully  used  by  the  Nea¬
politans.

Deh  guardiamci  in  tutte  Pore

Da  chi  mal  segno  il  Fattore.

He  was  then  asked  by  another  lady  to  describe  her  room ;
he  said,  after  some  reflection,  that  she  was  a  Bomanist,  and
describing  her  room  correctly,  said  there  was  a  thing  on  the
chimney-piece  which  was  black,  of  metal — it  was  iron,  and
proceeded  to  describe  such  particulars  of  it,  that  all  present,
though  few  knew  the  lady  to  be  a  Catholic,  concluded  it  was
a  crucifix.  He  did  not  at  first  discover  it,  seeming  to  have  a
difficulty  in  finding  a  name  for  it,  but  at  last  said  what  it  was
— and  that  there  was  a  figure  in  white  on  it,  very  small,  and
that  a  chaplet  of  flowers,  or  leaves,  was  on  it ;  it  was  a  cru¬
cifix,  and  the  lady  had  that  morning  put  a  chaplet  of  flowers
upon  it.

He  was  now  requested  to  return  to  the  first  lady^s  room :
and  on  this  second  attempt  to  describe  the  picture  he  had
been  asked  about,  he  told  the  lady  to  sit  down  by  him,  and
took  her  hand.  M.  Marcillet  desired  her  to  fix  her  thoughts
firmly  upon  it.  “  Pensez-y  bien,  fixez  bien  vos  idees  sur  le  Por¬
trait.”  Alexis  said.  “  C’est  brun,  Pest  noir  et  blanc,  ce  Pest
pas  colore,  Pest  une  Lithographe.  La  Lithographe  Pest  pas
Anglaise.”  This  was  correct.  “  Elle  est  Franqaise.”  Non.
u  Mais  oui,  Pest  a  dire  faite  pas  an  Franqais.”  Bight.


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


527


“II  y  a  cles  lettres  en  has,  ce  n’est  pas  Franc  ais” — right
— “  Rest  tie  V Anglais,  non,  non  c’est  du  Latin,  c’est  son  nom
All  this  was  right.  He  then  described  exactly  hair,  beard,
and  moustache,  admired  the  countenance,  repeating  several
times,  “  C’est  une  belle  tete,  il  est  beau,  le  front  est  beau
said  he  was  not  alive,  but  made  some  mistakes  as  to  the
length  of  time  he  had  ceased  to  exist,  saying  100  or  200
years,  or  more.  He  then  suddenly  exclaimed,  “  II  est  id
the  lady  looked  round  the  room,  which  was  hung  with  pic¬
tures,  but  said  “  No.”  Alexis  insisted.  “  M ais  oui,  je  vous
dis  qu’il  est  id,”  pointing  through  the  floor,  “  II  est  dans  la
Chambre  en  bas,  je  le  vois.”  The  lady  proposed  going  down
to  see,  she  alone  knowing  what  picture  it  was  ;  but  he  would
not  let  her  draw  away  her  hand,  and  said,  “  Non,  non,  n’allez
pas,  attendez,  je  vais  vous  dire,”  and  then  with  a  strong  ex¬
pression  of  reverence  and  solemnity,  he  said,  “  C’est  le  Christ”
The  plate  is  a  lithograph  published  at  Naples,  representing  the
head  of  our  Saviour,  from  a  portrait  which  was  supposed  to
have  been  taken  from  the  life,  and  sent  to  the  King  of  the
Abagari,  by  order  of  Tiberius.  It  has  only  the  head,  has
neither  neck  nor  hands ;  has  moustache,  a  beard,  and  flowing
locks,  and  three  rays  of  glory  proceeding  from  the  temples
and  upper  part  of  the  head.  The  description  below  it,  is  in
Latin,  and  is,  vera  imago  salvatoris  dni  nri  iesus  xti  ad
regem  abagarum  missa,  and  this  copy  in  the  lady’s  possession
was  given  to  her  several  years  ago  in  Naples.  After  Alexis
had  finished  his  seance,  it  was  asked  if  there  was  one,  such  as
he  described,  in  the  house,  and  it  was  believed  there  was  not.
The  lady,  however,  accompanied  by  another  and  the  gentlmen
of  the  house,  left  the  room  to  go  down  to  the  library  in  search
of  it,  and  in  a  portfolio  which  had  not  been  opened  for  a  long
time,  was  found  the  copy  indicated  by  Alexis,  among  some  litho¬
graphs,  the  existence  of  which  had  been  quite  forgotten.  The
lady,  to  whom  the  print  described  by  Alexis  belonged,  was
not  present  when  this  duplicate  was  found,  having  turned
back,  after  going  half-way  down  stairs,  to  ask  Alexis  not  to
go  away  before  it  had  been  ascertained  whether  there  was  a
copy  of  the  lithograph  in  the  room  below.

An  old  sandal-wood  fan,  closed,  and  tied  with  a  pocket-
handkerchief,  was  then  given  him,  and  he  was  asked  if  there
was  anything  particular  in  it.  After  some  time,  he  said  there
was  a  figure  in  the  centre  in  black  and  white ;  it  was  in  an
old  costume  something  like  an  Abbe,  with  hair  curled  up —
costume  about  the  time  of  Louis  XV. — robe  with  a  collar
open  at  the  neck.  There  were  stars  above  it  in  the  wood  of
the  fan.  It  was  then  spread  out;  in  the  centre,  in  an  oval,

YOL.  II.  N  N


528


Reports  of  the  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis.


was  an  engraved  figure  of  Mirabeau,  and  the  sandal-wood
was  pierced  with  stars.  He  said  it  belonged  to  a  lady  present,
and  he  would,  if  required,  point  her  out  and  give  her  the
fan  :  this  was  not  done.  He  was  asked  to  describe  the  draw¬
ing-room  of  this  lady,  and  said  there  was  a  small  clock ;  but
here  is  her  own  account :  “  I  imagined  that  the  ladies,  whose
crucifix  and  whose  picture  he  had  seen  and  described,  had  as¬
sisted  him  unintentionally  by  answering  him,  and  thus  giving
him  hints.  I  gave  him  none.  We  have  on  our  drawing¬
room  chimney-piece  a  remarkably  small  clock,  placed  upon  a
wooden  pedestal  covered  with  velvet.  I  asked  Alexis  con¬
cerning  it ;  he  said,  it  was  an  object  which  could  be  divided
into  two  parts,  the  lower  part  of  wood,  and  the  upper  part  of
steel,  iron,  or  metal.  He  then  said,  1  Qu’il  y  avait  une  tete’
I  told  him  that  there  certainly  was  not,  fancying  he  meant
to  describe  a  bronze  bust.  He  said,  f  Oui,  oui — il  y  a  une
tete,  il  se  pent  que  ce  ne  soil  pas  une  tete  d’homme,  ni  de  femme,
mais  il  y  a  une  figure  ’  I  was  as  positive  against  the  head  as
he  was  for  it,  so  I  said  I  would  not  teaze  him  with  any  fur¬
ther  questions,  as  I  feared  I  might  fatigue  him.  In  talking
matters  over  at  home,  we  settled  that  his  having  placed  ‘  une
tete’  on  our  mantel-piece  was  an  instance  of  failure.  Imagine
our  amazement !  in  discovering  engraven  on  the  back  of  the
clock — a  Grinagog  of  a  face  !  !  which,  though  ni  une  tete
d’homme — ni  une  tete  de  femme,  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes
— une  Figure  !”  Alexis  fulfilled  his  promise  of  discovering
the  owner  of  the  fan ;  when  this  lady  allowed  him  to  hold  her
hand,  in  order  to  make  inquiries  concerning  the  clock,  he
observed,  unasked,  that  it  was  the  lady  to  whom  the  fan  be¬
longed.  She  asked  him  if  he  recognized  her  by  her  voice ;
he  told  her  “  No,”  and  she  then  remembered  that  she  had
not  spoken  to  him  previously.

A  lady  put  her  watch  into  his  hands,  asking  him  the
name  of  the  maker,  which  was  engraved  on  the  works  in  the
usual  manner :  he  made  one  or  two  attempts,  but  it  was  a
total  failure.

After  this  he  begged  to  be  unmesmerised  or  awakened,  as
he  was  very  much  fatigued  :  this  was  quite  evident,  for  he
seemed  faint  and  exhausted.  The  persons  present  were  quite
satisfied  with  what  he  had  done,  and  joined  their  requests  to
M.  Marcillet  to  awaken  him  from  a  sleep,  which,  to  all  ap¬
pearance,  was  not  different  from  the  waking  state  of  all  pre¬
sent,  for  he  saw  and  conversed  freely  with  every  one.  M.
Marcillet,  by  some  passes,  jerking  his  arms,  and  making  the
joints  of  his  fingers  crack,  awakened  him,  when  he  yawned  and
gave  every  indication  of  being  awakened  from  a  disturbed  sleep.


Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  state.  529

The  picture  of  Christ  was  shewn  to  him  afterwards,  but
he  did  not  seem  to  know  anything  about  it ;  and  on  several
questions  being  put  with  regard  to  things  he  had  done  in  his
state  of  somnambulism,  he  shewed  complete  ignorance,  not
seeming  to  know  what  had  occurred,  and  this  without  betray¬
ing  any  appearance  of  attempting  to  conceal  a  previous  know¬
ledge,  but  asking,  with  natural  curiosity  and  open  manner,
what  he  had  done  that  was  curious  or  astonishing.  And  truly
much  that  he  did  was  most  curious  and  astonishing.  How  to
be  explained  ?

No  one  present  at  this  interview  could  doubt  the  facts
presented,  though  some  among  the  party  might  say,  we  can¬
not  understand — we  are  still  incredulous  ?  And  they  might
ask,  what  is  the  cause  ? — what  the  power  ? — how  can  these
things  be  ?  A  French  writer  has  it,  “  On  sait  que  dans
V esprit  de  la  plupart  des  hommes,  des  choses,  les  plus  reeles,
passent  pour  de  chimeres ,  des  qu’elles  mortifient  leur  amour
propre,  ou  qu}ils  n’en  connoissent  pas  les  principes  ni  les  causes  .”
How  many  of  the  phenomena  which  are  ever  occurring  around
us,  we  cannot  satisfactorily  explain,  and  yet  we  dare  not  say
we  disbelieve  in  them.  And  in  the  case  of  clairvoyance,  how
many  ask,  is  this  a  power  of  good  or  evil  ?  forgetting  that  the
same  question  can  be  put  with  regard  to  any  power  we  pos¬
sess.  Others  ask,  are  we  all  included  with  it  ?  Probably  it
does  exist,  to  a  certain  degree  in  all  persons,  being  more
developed  in  some,  as  in  Alexis,  than  in  others.  It  is  only
by  the  accumulation  of  facts  that  much  which  we  require  to
satisfy  ourselves  can  be  learnt,  but  even  then  it  may  be  said
with  Virgil,  “  Felix  qui  potuit  rerum  cognoscere  causas”


VII.  Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  state.

I.  TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

47,  Prince  George  St.,  Portsea,
Dec.  6th,  1844.

Sir, — The  following,  though  almost  too  insignificant  for
the  pages  of  a  public  journal,  may,  when  thrown  into  the
scale,  assist  in  establishing  the  truths  of  mesmerism.

On  Saturday,  Nov.  23,  1844,  I,  for  the  first  time,  mes¬
merised  E.  K.,  residing  at  Portsea.  Whilst  in  this  state,  her
mother  expressed  a  wish  for  me  to  extract  a  splinter  from

N  N  2


530  Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  state.

under  the  nail  of  the  ring  finger  of  the  right  hand,  which  had
been  there  for  three  days,  giving  her  extreme  pain.  Accord¬
ingly  I  took  her  hand,  and  with  a  probe  tried  to  touch  the
splinter,  but  from  having  been  broken  off  deep  under  the
nail,  I  could  not  reach  it :  I  therefore  cut  the  upper  surface
of  the  nail  and  came  to  the  splinter,  which  I  extracted.  It
measured  nearly  half  an  inch.  During  the  whole  of  the  time
there  was  not  the  slightest  expression  of  pain  either  in  the
face,  voice,  or  fingers.  After  demesmerising  her,  she  was
not  aware  of  the  operation  till  I  pointed  to  the  finger,  when
you  may  imagine  she  was  well  pleased.

If  the  foregoing  is  worth  recording,  you  have  full  liberty
to  use  my  name ;  but  perhaps,  though  poor,  the  parties  them¬
selves  may  not  like  such  publicity,  but  it  can  be  known  from
me  at  any  time.

Yours,  very  truly,

E.  Smith.

II.  Incision  of  an  Abscess  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

“  On  Wednesday  last  an  operation,  simple  enough  in
itself,  but  exceedingly  satisfactory  in  its  results,  as  regards
the  application  of  mesmerism  to  more  important  cases,  was
performed  by  Dr.  Mason,  of  this  town,  upon  a  boy  named
Sturdy,  residing  in  College-street,  Maxwelltown.  His  dis¬
ease  was  a  rather  large  abscess  on  the  neck,  in  a  tender  part,
almost  directly  under  his  right  ear  :  and,  an  assistant  having
thrown  him  asleep  by  the  usual  process,  Dr.  Mason  made  a
longitudinal  incision  in  the  abscess,  about  an  inch  and  a  half
in  length.  While  undergoing  the  operation,  not  a  muscle  of
the  boy’s  face  was  observed  to  quiver,  although  subjected  to
the  most  minute  and  scrutinising  inspection  by  parties  suffi¬
ciently  sceptical.  He  appeared,  during  the  whole  time,  in  a
deep  and  placid  sleep,  and  when  the  organ  of  Language  was
excited,  and  the  question  put,  he  declared  that  he  felt  no
pain,  that  he  was  not  aware  of  any  person  touching  him.
When  taken  out  of  the  sleep,  and  the  wound  dressed.  Sturdy
appeared  to  feel  acutely  the  introduction  of  a  tent,  and  his
powers  of  enduring  pain  were  also  further  tested  by  a  person
going  behind  him,  and  pricking  his  neck  with  a  needle ;  but
of  the  operation  he  did  not  appear,  when  awake,  to  have  the
slightest  recollection.  Indeed,  when  newly  awoke,  it  was
proposed  to  him  to  strip  for  the  purpose  of  having  it  done,
and  it  was  not  till  he  had  taken  off  his  neckcloth,  and  ob¬
served  blood  upon  it,  that  he  became  fully  aware  of  the  state
of  matters  ;  and  it  was  only  when,  pouring  water  on  his  hand.


Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  state.  531

lie  had  become  fairly  aroused,  that  he  complained  of  the
smarting  of  the  incision.  The  wound  is  now  completely
healed." — Dumfries  Courier.

Leicester  Chronicle,  Nov.  9,  1844.

Before  commencing  our  account  of  two  Surgical  Opera¬
tions  which  have  been  performed  this  week  in  Leicester — and
in  both  of  which  mesmerism  has  again  been  brought  to  bear
most  successfully  as  a  “  very  present  help  in  time  of  trouble"
to  suffering  humanity — it  may  be  as  well  to  premise  that  our
information,  though  obtained  from  what  we  deem  trustworthy
sources,  is  but  second-hand ;  that  none  of  it  has  been  fur¬
nished  either  by  Mr.  J.  F.  Hollings — a  party  concerned  in
one  case,  or  by  Mr.  Tosswill,  the  operator  in  the  other. — It
may  also  be  as  well  to  state  the  reasons  assigned  by  these
gentlemen — both  so  courteous  and  competent  to  furnish  our
reporter  with  correct  particulars — for  declining  to  do  so  in
either  case.  They  were,  as  respects  Mr.  Hollings — that  he
had  promised  Mr.  T.  Paget  that  he  would  not  send  any  report
of  the  operation  to  the  papers,  and  therefore  he  would  not
practically  violate  that  promise  by  furnishing  particulars  to
our  reporter ;  as  respects  Mr.  Tosswill — that  he  had  made  a
similar  promise,  or  had  been  asked  to  do  so,  concerning  all
that  he  saw  or  should  see  of  the  operation  which  he  was  to
witness ;  that  he  must  therefore  decline  communicating  parti¬
culars  of  what  he  had  seen — more  especially  as  he  had  been
subjected  to  so  much  “talking-at"  about  the  former  case,
notwithstanding  his  repeated  denials  of  having  been  a  party
to  any  of  the  reports  first  published  in  the  newspapers ;  and
that  he  must  decline,  also,  giving  any  account  of  the  opera¬
tion  he  had  performed  this  week,  lest  his  so  doing  should  be
misconstrued  or  misrepresented. — It  is  to  be  hoped  this  ex¬
planation  will  satisfy  those  gentlemen  who  are  so  frightened
at  the  idea  of  such  things  “  getting  in  the  papers."

III.  The  Amputation  Case

to  which  attention  will  be  drawrn  is  that  of  Elizabeth - ,

a  young  woman  who  comes  from  Ibstock,  and  who  had  been
in  the  Infirmary  for  some  time  with  some  complaint  which
rendered  amputation  necessary.  From  the  various  accounts
we  have  heard  (people  will  talk,  and  reporters  will  listen) —
it  appears  that  the  parents  of  the  young  woman  had  been
long  known  to  Mr.  Paget,  that  he  had  attended  both  them
and  her  professionally,  and  that  he  looked  upon  her  as  a
simple-hearted  girl  who  was  incapable  of  deceit.  In  the  case
of  Mary  Ann  Lakin,  Mr.  Paget,  as  will  be  recollected,  was


532  Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  state.

very  sceptical  as  to  the  veritable  insensibility  of  the  patient
during  the  operation :  after-thought  upon  the  merits  of  the
case,  and  the  discussion  which  ensued,  may  have  shaken  his
doubts : — at  any  rate,  from  some  cause  or  other,  Mr.  Paget
expressed  his  readiness  or  a  wish  that  a  further  trial  of  the
power  of  mesmerism  or  animal  magnetism,  to  render  a  patient
insensible  to  pain  during  surgical  operations,  should  be  made;
and  should  be  made  upon  this  patient  for  the  reasons  above¬
given.  Mr.  Hollings,  with  his  usual  kindness,  consented  to
act  as  the  magnetizer,  and  he  succeeded  in  throwing  the  poor
girl  into  the  mesmeric  slumber.  His  visits  were  continued
for  some  time;  but,  owing  to  bodily  indisposition,  want  of
sufficient  leisure,  and  anxiety  for  the  patient  on  his  part,  it
was  found  that  the  patient's  sleep  partook  of  the  operator's
nervousness  and  was  of  a  disturbed  character.  The  operation
was  therefore  postponed  for  a  time,  and  Mr.  Hollings — not
liking  to  be  the  means  of  the  patient's  running  any  risk  on
account  of  his  ill-health — endeavoured  to  induce  some  prac¬
tised  magnetizer  to  take  his  place.  In  this  he  happily  suc¬
ceeded.

It  should  be  mentioned,  however,  before  proceeding  fur¬
ther,  that  while  the  patient  was  undergoing  the  daily  process
of  magnetising  by  Mr.  Hollings,  she  was  visited  by  most  of
the  medical  men  of  the  town,  and  various  means  were  resorted
to  of  testing  the  reality  of  her  somnolent  or  cataleptic  state.
The  frequency  of  these  visits  and  the  questioning  she  would
undergo,  while  in  a  waking  condition,  there  is  little  doubt,
had  a  tendency  to  increase  her  nervousness  and  unfit  her  for
undergoing  the  operation  while  in  the  mesmeric  condition.

The  gentleman  who  came  to  supply  Mr.  Hollings'  place
as  mesmeriser  was  Mr.  Atkinson,  of  London,  a  friend  of
Dr.  Elliotson,  and,  we  believe,  a  disinterested,  because  un¬
professional  mesmerist.  He  arrived  in  Leicester  on  Friday
or  Saturday  last  week,  and  almost  immediately  paid  a  visit  to
the  patient  at  the  infirmary.  The  mesmeric  sleep  was  soon
superinduced  in  her,  but  it  was  still  found  to  be  of  the  same
disturbed  character  as  referred  to  above.  But,  notwithstand¬
ing  this,  and  that  both  Mr.  Hollings  and  Mr.  Atkinson
doubted  whether — owing  to  this  condition  of  the  patient — she
was  one  on  whom  the  operation  could  thus  be  successfully
performed,  it  was  resolved  to  have  the  amputation  take  place
on  Monday,  the  4th  inst.

Several,  if  not  most,  of  the  principal  medical  men  in  the
town  were  invited  to  be  present ;  and  a  certain  hour  was
named  for  the  operation.  Mr.  Atkinson  was  ready,  before
the  appointed  time,  and  succeeded,  as  before,  in  throwing


Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  state.  533

the  patient  into  the  necessary  condition  ;  but  one  of  the  sur¬
geons  invited  was  not  present,  and  the  operation  was  there¬
fore  delayed  for  some  time — waiting  for  him.  When  at  length
he  came,  and  the  operation  was  about  to  be  performed,  the
mesmeric  influence  had  passed  off,  and  the  young  woman
awoke ;  and  there  was  an  end  of  the  matter  for  that  day.

Mr.  Atkinson,  it  is  said,  was  not  altogether  pleased  at
this  delay,  or  satisfied  that  the  experiment  was  meant  to  be
fairly  made ;  he  also  saw  that  the  suspense  and  thoughts  of
the  amputation  had  terrified  the  patient  to  such  a  degree  as
to  render  it  improbable  that  she  could  be  reduced  to  such  a
state  as  to  render  her  unconscious  of  the  operation ; — and  he
therefore  declined  any  further  interference  in  the  matter.

On  the  following  morning,  however,  when  it  had  been  re¬
solved  to  proceed  with  the  amputation  in  the  usual  way,  and
when  the  young  woman  was  preparing  to  undergo  it,  Mr.  Paget
— anxious  that  the  question  should  be  tested,  and  the  patient
spared  pain  if  possible — appealed  to  Mr.  Atkinson  to  make
one  more  trial  of  the  mesmeric  influence,  and,  Mr.  Hollings
seconding  the  request,  Mr.  Atkinson  consented — though  by
no  means  sure  of  success.  He  succeeded  in  what  appeared
to  be  only  partially  magnetising  her ;  for  she  continued  to
“  maunder,”  or  talk,  as  persons  do  in  their  dreams,  of  that
which  has  engaged  their  “  waking  thoughts  :”  that  is,  she
kept  muttering  something  or  other  about  the  amputation — she
“  hoped  it  would  not  hurt  her  much,”  that,  if  done,  “  Mr.
Paget  would  do  it,”  and  “  that  the  Lord  would  support  her”
or  give  her  fortitude  to  bear  up  under  the  trial,  &c.  Mr.
Paget,  however,  having  applied  a  forceps  to  the  limb  to  be
operated  upon,  and  found  that  she  evinced  no  signs  of  sen¬
sibility  to  pain,  resolved  to  proceed ;  the  tourniquet  was
applied,  and  the  limb  quickly  taken  off,  without  her  evincing
any  of  the  usual  symptoms  of  suffering.  Indeed,  it  is  a  sin¬
gular  circumstance,  that  while  the  limb  was  being  taken  off,
the  young  woman  continued  to  “  maunder  on”  just  as  she
had  done  while  Mr.  Atkinson  was  magnetising  her.  When
demesmerised,  she  said  she  was  unconscious  of  having  under¬
gone  the  operation,  and  that  she  had  felt  no  pain. — Mr.
Atkinson  left  the  town  highly  pleased  with  the  result  and
also  with  Mr.  PagePs  fair  and  candid  dealing  in  the  matter.

Here  we  leave  this  case.  If  it  has  not  been  quite  accu¬
rately  stated,  the  fault  rests  with  those  who  bound  down  the
parties  concerned  in  any  way,  not  to  furnish  reports  to  the
papers,  or  enable  ihe  papers  to  furnish  reports.


534  Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  state.

IV.  Operation  for  Squinting.

The  case  is  that  of  Martha  Clark,  a  young  girl  of  about
twelve  years  of  age :  she  was  labouring  under  strabismus
or  obliquity  of  vision —  in  common  parlance,  she  squinted  in
one  eye.  Our  authority  for  the  following  particulars  is  Mr.
Joseph  Biggs,  who  was  present  at  the  operation:  three  sur¬
geons  and  another  gentleman  were  also  present.  The  opera¬
tion  was  performed  in  Mr.  To  s  swill's  surgery  on  Tuesday
morning.

The  patient  was  seated  in  a  chair,  and  having  been
speedily  mesmerised  by  Mr.  T.,  her  arms  were  rendered  cata¬
leptic  or  rigid,  and  were  extended  during  nearly  the  whole  of
the  operation — sinking  gradually  as  the  arms  do  after  having
been  for  some  time  in  this  condition.  She  had  been  placed
quite  upright  in  the  chair,  but  was  not  fastened  to  it.  Mr.
Spencer  then  hooked  up  the  lid  as  is  usual  in  these  operations,
and  Mr.  Tosswill  turned  the  eye  out  of  its  socket — divided
the  part  which  caused  the  obliquity — performed  all  the  re¬
quisite  dressings  and  put  the  eye  in  its  proper  place  again ;
and  during  all  this  she  uttered  no  exclamation  or  moved  a
muscle.  He  then  awoke  her,  and  put  two  or  three  questions
to  her  before  she  was  aware  that  the  operation  had  been
performed.

After  the  operation  was  over,  Mr.  Biggs  wrote  the  fol¬
lowing  note,  to  which  he,  as  well  as  Captain  Jackson,  signed
his  name  : — “  November  5tli,  1844, — I,  having  witnessed  an
operation,  for  Strabismus  performed  upon  Martha  Clark,
while  in  the  mesmeric  state,  by  Mr.  Tosswill,  consider  that
she  evinced  no  consciousness  of  pain.  There  was  a  painful
expression  in  the  features,  and,  as  it  seemed  to  me,  a  quick¬
ened  breathing ;  but  I  feel  certain  there  was  entire  want  of
consciousness.  Upon  being  awoke,  she  had  clearly  no  know¬
ledge  that  the  operation  had  been  performed.” — In  explana¬
tion  of  the  “  painful  expression”  of  the  countenance,  Mr.  B.
said  it  was  no  more  than  was  often  to  be  perceived  in  the
countenances  of  sleeping  and  dreaming  children.  The  girl
was  not  aware  till  she  felt  the  bandage  over  her  eye,  and  was
told  all  was  over,  that  such  was  the  case.  She  was  questioned
as  to  whether  she  had  been  dreaming,  and,  if  so,  of  ivhat.
Her  reply  was  that  she  had  been  at  Ann  Clayton  or  Colton's,
blowing  the  fire  to  make  a  pan  or  pot  boil :  not  a  word  as  to
having  felt  anything  like  cutting.

Mr.  Tosswill  said,  “Well,  Martha,  the  operation  is  over.”
“  Is  it  ?”  the  patient  replied  in  a  tone  of  surprise.


Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  State.


535


The  following  is  extracted  from  the  Medical  Times ,  of
November  9th,  1844  : —

To  the  Editor  of  the  Medical  Times.

Sir, — I  beg  to  acquaint  you  with  the  result  of  the  second  operation,
under  the  mesmeric  condition,  in  which  I  have  been  engaged,  and  to  fur¬
nish  you  with  copies  of  the  certificates  of  those  who  were  present.

I  am,  Sir,

Your  obedient  Servant,

November  5th,  1844.  J.  H.  Tosswill.

t{  Martha  Clarke,  aged  10  years,  was  brought  by  her  mo¬
ther  to  my  house,  on  the  30th  of  October,  to  know  if  I  would
consent  to  operate  upon  the  child  for  strabismus.  I  desired
them  to  call  again  on  the  following  morning.  On  explaining
the  difficulty  which  attended  such  operations,  from  the  ina¬
bility  to  keep  so  young  a  person  quiet,  and  upon  suggesting
that  mesmerism  should  be  tried,  in  order  that  this  indispen¬
sable  end  should  be  obtained,  the  mother  readily  acceded  to
my  request.  I,  therefore,  immediately  commenced  the  usual
manipulations,  and  at  the  expiration  of  sixteen  minutes  suc¬
ceeded  in  inducing  the  mesmeric  insensibility.  On  being
awakened,  my  little  patients  astonishment  was  expressed  by
her  look  of  extreme  wonder  and  surprise.  Having  daily  con¬
tinued  the  induction  of  the  mesmeric  coma,  until  I  had  pro¬
duced  perfect  insensibility  to  powerful  impressions  applied  as
tests,  and  induced  the  most  beautiful  manifestations  of  a  ca¬
taleptic  condition  of  the  limbs,  I  determined  upon  operating
this  day.  Having  given  no  intimation  of  my  intention  either
to  the  mother  or  the  child,  I  placed  the  latter  in  a  chair,  and
succeeded  in  rendering  her  mesmeric  in  a  few  minutes.  I
then  induced  a  cataleptic  condition  of  both  arms,  and  ex¬
tended  them  at  right  angles  from  the  body.  Having  obtained
the  assistance  of  Mr.  Spencer,  that  gentleman  raised  the
upper  lid  with  the  elevator,  while  he  depressed  the  under
eyelid  with  the  hand,  in  doing  which  he  caused  the  patient
to  fall  backwards  against  the  back  of  the  chair,  traction  being
used  in  that  direction.  With  the  forceps,  I  then  seized  the
conjunctiva  of  the  right  eye,  and  divided  it  with  the  scissors,
subsequently  introducing  the  hook  and  cutting  through  the
internal  rectus  muscle ;  the  operation  occupied  two  minutes
and  a  half,  there  being  much  condensed  cellular  tissue  to  clear
away,  but,  during  the  whole  time,  I  saw  but  one  indication
which  might  lead  to  the  supposition  of  pain,  which  was,  that,
upon  pinching  the  conjunctiva  with  the  forceps,  there  was  one
spasmodic  contraction  of  the  orbicularis  muscle ;  the  sound
eye  was  uncovered,  and  remained  closed  during  the  whole


536


Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

time,  the  lips  motionless,  and  the  entire  body  free  from  the
slightest  movement.  The  arms,  which  had  been  rendered  cata¬
leptic,  gradually  and  slowly  fell,  in  the  same  manner  as  is
usual  when  no  pain  has  been  experienced.  On  being  awak¬
ened,  and  informed  that  the  operation  had  taken  place,  her
reply  was,  “  has  it  ?”  On  being  questioned  if  she  had  felt  any¬
thing,  she  asserted,  and  has  repeated  the  assertion,  that  she
had  felt  nothing.  On  being  asked,  had  she  dreamed,  and
what  was  the  nature  of  her  dream,  her  answer  was :  “  That
she  thought  she  was  at  Hannah  Colton’s,  a-blowing  the  fire
to  make  the  pan  boil.”  This  dream  would  at  first  appear
unconnected  with  her  actual  condition,  but  it  is  in  reality  an
instance  confirmatory  of  it.  It  is  well  known  that  irritation,
applied  to  the  organs  of  sense,  produces  in  each  the  sense
peculiar  to  it ;  that  whilst  the  electric  shock,  applied  to  the
ear,  will  produce  the  idea  of  sound,  applied  to  the  mouth  the
sense  of  taste  is  excited,  whilst,  acting  on  the  eye,  a  vivid
flash  of  light  is  the  result :  so,  in  this  instance,  I  conceive  the
irritation  of  the  operation  may  have  given  rise  to  the  idea  of
fire,  and  have  originated  the  train  of  ideas  embodied  in  the
dream.

(Certificates.)

“  I.  Nov.  5th,  1844.  Having  witnessed  an  operation  for
strabismus,  performed  upon  Martha  Clarke  by  Mr.  Tosswill,
while  in  the  mesmeric  state,  we  consider  that  she  evinced  no
consciousness  of  pain ;  there  was  a  painful  expression  in  the
features,  and,  as  it  seemed  to  us,  a  quickened  breathing,  but
we  feel  certain  there  was  entire  want  of  consciousness ;  upon
being  awakened,  she  had  clearly  no  knowledge  that  the  opera¬
tion  had  been  performed.

“  (Signed)  Joseph  Biggs.

John  Jackson.

P.  Downey,  M.R.C.S.I.

“  II.  I  believe  the  child,  Martha  Clarke,  was  not  rendered
so  comatose  by  mesmerism,  as  to  be  insensible  to  the  pain  of
the  operation ;  that  the  muscles  of  the  face  were  contracted ;
that  she  used  considerable  muscular  exertion  to  recede  from
the  operator;  and  that  the  breathing  was  indicative  of  suffering.

“  (Signed)  J.  H.  Spencer.

“  III.  I  believe  this  to  have  been  a  beautiful  case  of  mes¬
meric  cataleptic  sleep.  The  arms  were  extended,  but  very
gradually  fell  during  the  operation,  but  not  entirely  so,  one
remaining  without  support  to  the  end.  I  observed  a  slight  re-


The  Rev.  T.  Pyne  on  Vital  Magnetism .


537


ceding  and  flushing  of  the  face,  on  commencing  the  operation,
but  I  cannot  say  if  such  arose  from  consciousness,  or  from  an
involuntary  effort,  such  as  occurs  continually  in  patients  un¬
der  the  mesmeric  influence,  and  which  is  likely  to  have  been
the  case,  as  the  sense  of  pain,  or  consciousness  of  an  opera¬
tion  being  performed,  would  certainly  have  influenced  the
dream.  There  was  no  sound  uttered,  or  other  expression  of
pain  whatsoever ;  at  all  events,  the  anticipation  of  a  painful
operation  and  the  after  consequences,  with  much  of  the  actual
pain,  were  clearly  saved  by  the  mesmeric  sleep.  It  should  be
known,  that  the  eye  is  the  last  part  to  lose  sensibility  under
mesmerism,  and  even  the  whole  face  often  continues  sensitive
when  the  rest  of  the  body  is  unimpressible.  The  operation
occupied  two  minutes  and  a  half.

“  (Signed)  Henry  G.  Atkinson.”


VIII.  Vital  Magnetism ;  a  remedy.  By  the  Bev.  Thomas
Pyne,  A.M.,  Incumbent  of  Hook,  Surrey.  Highley,
Fleet  Street,  1844.

It  was  with  joy  unfeigned  that  we  saw  the  advertisement  of
this  little  book.  No  fewer  than  three  English  clergymen  have
now  published  works  in  favour  of  mesmerism.  The  Bev.  C.  H.
Townsend^s  came  forth  when  mesmerism  was  utterly  despised
in  this  country,  and  did  and  does  great  good.  The  Bev.  G.
Sandby’s  pamphlet  and  subsequent  volume  came  forth,  when
indeed  mesmerism  was  raising  its  head  a  little,  but  the  igno¬
rant  and  besotted  cry  of  satanic  agency,  uttered  first  by  a
superficial,  vain,  unscientific  and  bigotted  popular  preacher,
was  resounding  through  the  land.  The  present  little  contri¬
bution  will  aid  the  cause  of  truth  and  humanity :  for  it  is
evidently  written  by  a  good  man,  of  cultivated  understanding,
sentiments  and  taste.  How  charming  it  is  to  see  minis¬
ters  of  what  professes  to  be  the  gospel  of  peace  and  good¬
will  employ  themselves  not  in  such  trumpery  as  considering
whether  sermons  shall  be  preached  in  one  coloured  dress  or
another,  or  prayer  shall  be  said  with  or  without  candles,
and  with  the  face  in  this  direction  or  that,  and  with  so
many  bowings  down,  and  other  formalities.  Christ  taught
us  the  simplest  of  religions — to  love  one  another  and  be  as
little  children — to  be  benevolent,  sincere,  unselfish,  single-
minded  :  and  set  his  face  against  what  the  high  priests  and


538


The  Rev.  T.  Pyne  on  Vital  Magnetism.

tlie  pliarisees  made  the  business  of  their  lives.  While  Christ
went  about  preaching  his  simple  mountain  sermons,  he  also
healed  the  sick  :  and  we  have  the  delightful  spectacle  of  cler¬
gymen  at  length  imitating  him  in  this  particular  also.  Let
our  readers  turn  back  to  the  communication  of  Mr:  Sandby  in
our  last  number  :  and  read  the  following  extracts  from  Mr.
Pyne’s  good  little  book  : —

“An  infant  was  brought  to  me  aged  seven  weeks.  Her  symptoms:
— ‘  She  does  not  grow,  screams  much,  always  craving,  never  sleeps
by  day,  little  by  night.’  I  magnetised  her  for  three  minutes.  After
eight  days  the  nurse  again  called,  and  signed  this  declaration:  —
‘The  infant  is  much  improved  since  Mr.  Pyne  saw  her;  she  slept
three  hours-and-a-half  immediately,  and  has  slept  well  since;  her
appetite  is  returned,  and  she  grows.  The  parents  are  very  thankful,
and  I.’

“A  child,  aged  about  five  years,  was  brought  to  me  afflicted
with  deafness.  I  saw  her  three  times.  The  mother  wrote  me  this

certificate: — ‘Mrs. - feels  greatly  obliged  to  Mr.  Pyne  for  the

benefit  her  daughter  has  received.  She  has  been  quite  cured  by  him
of  her  deafness.  Thanks  be  to  the  Almighty  for  it.’

“  I  was  requested  to  call  on  a  family  to  see  their  daughter,  a
child  of  about  four  years  old.  I  did  so,  and  found  her  very  ill  with
an  abscess  on  the  saurus  muscle.  I  only  magnetised  her  for  a  few
minutes,  but  saw  some  change;  the  next  day  I  did  it  more  perfectly;
it  was  evidently  better.  By  the  fourth  day  it  had  dispersed.  I  give

the  parents’  certificate: — ‘My  child,  - ,  has  been  afflicted  with

an  abscess  in  the  loin  for  two  months.  A  medical  gentleman  at¬
tended  her  throughout  the  time  but  without  relief.  It  was  very  bad,
and  it  was  feared  she  would  not  get  over  it,  when  the  Rev.  Mr.  Pyne
called,  and  in  treating  her  in  four  days  she  became  quite  well;  for
which  we  feel  very  grateful.  Her  appetite  is  returned,  she  runs
about,  sleeps  well,  and  her  spirits  are  excellent.  The  medical  man
said  if  ever  she  did  get  over  it,  most  likely  she  would  be  a  cripple.
Her  limbs  are  quite  free.  (Signed  by  the  Father  and  Mother).’

“In  passing  through  my  parish,  I  observed  the  horse  of  a  me¬
dical  officer  at  the  door  of  a  cottage.  I,  therefore,  went  in,  suppos¬
ing  that  sickness  must  be  there.  I  saw  a  poor  woman  lying  on  her
bed,  and  the  worthy  practitioner  standing  by  her.  The  woman,
who  had  had  an  internal  abscess,  connected  with  child-bearing,  of
some  continuance,  was  suffering  much  from  a  pain  in  her  side.  The
medical  man  in  my  presence  ordered  her  a  blister  and  some  further
remedies.  I  said  to  him,  ‘  I  think,  Sir,  if  you  would  pardon  the
liberty  I  take,  I  could  remove  that  pain.’  ‘Oh!  certainly,  if  you
can,’  he  replied.  I  magnetised  her  for  a  few  minutes  locally,  and
seeing  her  countenance  brighten,  I  said,  ‘  How  do  you  feel?’  ‘  I  have
no  pain  in  my  side  now,’  she  answered;  ‘it  is  gone  to  my  leg  and
foot.’  I  made  some  passes  there,  and  again  asked  her  how  she  was.
She  said,  ‘I  am  easy  now.’  I  said,  ‘  What  do  you  mean?  that  you  are


The  Rev.  T.  Pyne  on  Vital  Magnetism.


539


free  from  pain?’  ‘  Yes,’  she  replied,  ‘quite  free,  and  quite  comfort¬
able.’  I  turned  to  the  medical  man,  and  said,  ‘  I  trust  you  will  excuse
my  doing  this  in  your  presence.’  ‘ Most  surely,’  he  candidly  answered ;

‘  I  only  wish  I  could  remove  pain  so  easily.’  He  left  the  house,  and
the  woman  fell  into  a  gentle  slumber.  No  blister  was  needed,  nor
other  remedy.  She  was  well;  better,  as  she  informed  me  two
months  afterwards,  than  she  had  been  for  fifteen  years,  and  she
continued  cured.  The  following  is  her  simple  certificate: — ‘Dear
Sir, — I  return  you  great  thanks  that  I  found  so  much  ease  from  that
blessing  that  I  received.  I  thank  God  for  it,  as  I  was  in  great  pain.
Seven  years  afflicted;  found  ease  in  five  minutes.’

“  I  need  scarcely  add,  that  the  medical  man’s  conduct  was  here
as  philosophical  as  it  was  Christian.

“The  following  may  shew  the  charm  which  magnetism  has  had
for  me.  I  mean,  that  the  happiness  imparted  by  its  curative  pro¬
perty  has  rendered  me  unmindful  of  ridicule  or  censure :  — A  woman,
aged  sixty-seven,  having  dislocated  her  right  hip  four  years  since,
and  the  dislocation  having  never  been  reduced,  the  weight  of  her
body  in  walking  fell  upon  her  left  leg,  which  in  consequence  had
become  weak,  and  dreadfully  painful.  ‘  It  is  now,’  she  said,  as
with  evident  anguish  she  sat  down,  ‘  like  knives  sticking  into  it
through  agony.  I  cannot  get  any  help  from  the  doctors.  I  cannot
sleep.  I  have  come  to  you  through  the  wonderful  cures  I  hear  you
have  performed.  The  thigh  is  worst,  and  the  chief  seat  of  the
pain;  the  whole  leg  stiff.  I  have  had  the  pain  all  the  blessed  win¬
ter;  worse  for  the  last  three  months,  now  terrible!’  In  ten
minutes,  she  said,  “  I  feel  in  heaven  now,  thank  the  dear  Lord,
and  thank  the  gentleman ;  God  bless  you,  Sir !  Oh,  how  comfort¬
able  !  I  have  not  had  such  ease  for  many  months.  I  can  put  my
leg  up  now,  and  the  stiffness  is  gone.  I  shall  go  home  quite  dif¬
ferent.  I  can  walk  well,  and  had  a  hard  matter  indeed  to  get  here.’

“  The  following  account  I  received  from  the  lady  of  an  officer,
at  whose  request  I  magnetised  both  her  daughter  and  herself.  I
confine  myself  to  the  remedial  effects  in  the  description:  —

“  ‘  My  dear  Sir, — It  will  give  me  much  pleasure  to  give  you  in
writing  a  statement,  as  far  as  I  can  remember,  of  the  effects  of
mesmerism  on  my  daughter ;  for  let  me  assure  you  both  she  and  I
feel  most  grateful  for  your  kind  attention,  and  feel  convinced  that
you  were,  under  Providence,  the  means  of  restoring  her  to  health,
when,  although  there  was  no  serious  formed  disorder,  her  medical
attendant  expressed  considerable  anxiety  about  her  state  of  health.
She  was  suffering  from  influenza,  which  had  left  great  debility,  pain
in  the  back  and  side,  which  had  caused  her  for  several  days  pre¬
viously  to  walk  quite  lame;  there  was  swelling  about  the  under  part
of  the  face  and  total  disinclination  to  all  exertion  either  of  mind
or  body.  You  were  kind  enough  to  mesmerise  her.  Neither
myself  nor  my  daughter  had  ever  seen  it  tried  on  any  one,  or
had  it  tried  on  ourselves.  In  a  very  short  space  of  time  she
fell  into  a  quiet  slumber,  sighing  very  frequently,  and  appearing
perfectly  happy.  She  had  her  eyes  quite  closed ;  when  spoken  to,


540


The  Rev.  T.  Pyne  on  Vital  Magnetism.


she  answered  readily.  You  asked  her  if  she  was  comfortable,
she  replied,  “O  yes!”  At  one  time  she  frowned  and  seemed
in  pain.  You  asked  if  she  was  so,  she  said,  “Yes  in  my  side,”
and  pointed  to  the  spot;  you  asked  if  you  should  remove  it,  she
answered,  “O,  yes;”  and  after  a  few  passes  made  by  you,  she
seemed  quite  comfortable  and  happy.  After  an  hour  you  asked  if
she  wished  to  be  awakened,  she  replied,  “No,  no!”  You  awoke
her,  however.  She  sat  up  and  said,  “  She  had  enjoyed  a  delightful
sleep.”  No  one  made  any  remark  to  her  on  the  subject  for  some
hours;  but  we  were  astonished  to  observe  her  set  about  various  do¬
mestic  arrangements,  wish  for  tea,  and  play  with  the  children,
having  evidently  shaken  off  all  those  listless  feelings  she  had  pre¬
viously  felt.  She  had  no  pain ,  and  the  lameness  when  she  awoke
was  quite  gone,  and  has  never  returned.  She  slept  soundly  and
comfortably  all  night,  and,  although  not  strong,  continued  free
from  pain,  and  recovered  every  day  after.

“  ‘  I  can  also  testify  to  the  power  of  mesmerism  in  my  own  per¬
son  when  suffering  from  violent  cold,  which  had  caused  pain  in  every
bone,  so  that  I  had  been  two  nights  and  days  without  sleep ;  but  in
a  few  minutes  you  removed  all  pain,  and  I  enjoyed  a  night  of  re¬
freshing  slumber,  certainly,  I  can  safely  say,  the  most  delightful
sleep  I  ever  enjoyed.  Trusting  that  this  very  truly  valuable  gift
may,  through  Divine  aid,  be  the  means  of  soothing  the  afflictions  of
many,  and  hoping  you  may  long  enjoy  health  to  render  you  a  bless¬
ing  to  those  around  you,  I  wish  you  every  happiness.’

“In  one  of  the  first  cases  of  magnetism  I  had,  the  following
were  the  circumstances: — I  called  on  a  person,  whom  I  found  very
ill,  unrelieved  by  medical  remedies,  and  apparently  sinking.  The
chief  seat  of  her  malady  appeared  to  be  the  liver.  When  I  visited
her  she  said,  ‘O  that  I  could  sleep!  I  have  not  slept  day  or
night  for  three  weeks.’  I  said,  ‘I  think  I  could  procure  sleep  for
you.’  ‘Could  you?’  she  said,  ‘how  grateful  I  should  be;  but  I
cannot  take  opiates;  they  have  been  tried,  but  only  produce  greater
uneasiness.’  I  said,  ‘Give  me  your  hands,  and  look  at  me.’  In
three  minutes  her  eyes  gently  turned  upwards  with  a  slight  convul¬
sionary  movement,  and  her  hand  quivered.  I  spoke  to  her,  and  she
said,  she  felt  a  rapid  pulsation  of  the  heart.  It  was  an  anxious
moment  to  my  inexperienced  mind,  but  the  fluttering  ceased  on  my
passing  my  hand  near  the  region.  She  slept  a  few  minutes,  and  I
awoke  her,  she  smiled  delighted,  and  said,  ‘  O,  I  feel  heavenly !  as
much  refreshed  as  by  a  night’s  slumber.’  Her  pain  in  her  side  was
gone;  but  a  stiffness  in  the  knee,  which  for  about  six  weeks  had
been  contracted,  remained.  I  made  a  few  passes,  and  the  leg  re¬
laxed.  The  medical  attendant  expressed  his  surprise  at  her  unex¬
pected  improvement;  and  though  she  was  not  cured,  convalescence,
according  to  her  view,  then  began.  On  one  occasion,  afterwards,
when  reclining  on  a  couch,  I  asked  her  why  she  did  not  sit  up.
She  said,  she  had  a  drawing  of  the  knees  to  the  body,  and  of  the
head  towards  the  chest.  She  thus  then  sat  with  her  chin  and  knees
very  nearly  together;  on  making  a  few  passes  locally,  she  put  her


541


The  Rev.  T.  Pyne  on  Vital  Magnetism.

knees  down,  and  then  her  head  back,  and  thus  I  left  her.  Good
medical  advice  was  pursued  in  this  case.  I,  therefore,  take  no  ex¬
clusive  credit  to  magnetism;  but  it  interested  me  much,  and  being
among  my  first  essays  excited  me,  with  thankfulness,  to  attempt
others.

“  A  woman  who  had  been  confined  was  suffering  much  pain,  and,
after  six  weeks’  illness,  was  getting  no  better,  but  rather  worse.
I  magnetised  her  twice — she  was  well.

“  Again,  A - •,  aged  about  50,  was  suffering  from  excruciat¬

ing  face-ache,  apparently  tic  doloreux.  She  was  very  averse  to
magnetism  being  attempted,  and  was  altogether  thankless.  The
pain  left  before  I  quitted  the  house,  the  next  day  she  was  very  easy,
and  she  has  had  no  return  of  attacks,  though  before  she  was  con¬
stantly  subject  to  them.

“  Another  writes,  4 1  cannot  omit  to  thank  you  for  your  kind¬
ness  in  meeting  me,  and,  as  I  truly  believe,  in  having  made  a  cure
of  the  pain  in  my  chest,  which  I  have  been  suffering  with  for  some
years  past.  May  God  bless  you  for  your  kindness  to  me  a  perfect
stranger.’  I  saw  this  person  three  times.  Her  constitution  seemed
generally  renovated.

“Another,  aged  about  twenty-two:  ‘Sir, — I  was  seized  with
insensibility  and  loss  of  sight  three  years  since.  In  about  half  an
hour  by  the  use  of  stimulants  my  senses  returned,  but  I  had  para¬
lysis  in  my  right  arm  and  side,  which,  and  my  tongue  also,  would
become  quite  dead,  my  arms  would  be  quite  rigid,  and  this  was
followed  by  great  pain.  I  had  good  medical  advice,  and  by  the  use
of  very  powerful  medicines  had  some  intermission;  but  for  the  last
six  months  it  had  returned,  and  for  three  weeks  before  I  saw  you  the
attacks  came  on  several  times  every  day.  You  have  been  so  good  as
to  magnetise  me  four  times,  which  has  effected  in  all  respects  a  per¬
fect  cure.’

“  Another  says,  *  I  have  been  suffering  for  thirteen  years  with  a
violent  pain  in  the  chest,  stomach,  and  left  side,  for  which  I  have
been  leeched  aud  blistered,  and  taken  much  medicine.  I  have  been
magnetised  once.  I  feel  a  different  person  altogether.  I  have  had
no  pain  since,  can  place  my  hands  firmly  on  my  chest,  and  no  one
can  believe  the  relief  I  have  found.  I  am  well ;  and  Mr.  Pyne’s
care  has  cured  me  at  once.  (Signed) - .’

“  Another:  f  I  much  regret  not  being  able  to  see  you  again  before
I  left  to  thank  you  for  your  kindness,  and  the  trouble  you  took  about
me.  I  must  ever  consider  that  I  am  greatly  indebted  to  you,  as  it
is  the  opinion  of  myself  and  friends  that  through  you  God’s  mercy
was  manifested  and  my  life  saved.  I  know  that  this  testimony  can
be  of  little  consequence  to  you,  but  it  may  be  pleasing  to  find  I  have
a  grateful  knowledge  of  it.’

“Another:  ‘My  eyes  have  been  failing  for  the  last  six  years;  I
have  not  been  able  to  read  a  chapter  in  the  Bible  for  three  years,  or
to  work  by  candle-light,  nor,  indeed,  to  see  well  when  the  sun  shone.
You  have  been  good  enough  to  magnetise  me  three  times,  and  have
quite  restored  my  sight.  I  can  see  with  perfect  comfort  by  candle-


542


The  Rev.  T.  Pyne  on  Vital  Magnetism.


light  as  well  as  by  day  to  read,  work,  &c. ;  and  I  am  very  much
obliged  to  you.’

“  Another:  ‘Rev.  Sir, — I  am  happy  to  inform  you  that  I  am
quite  well  after  thirteen  years’  labouring  under  a  disease  of  a  pain  in
the  breast  and  side  and  shortness  of  breath.  I,  therefore,  Rev.
Sir,  send  you  my  most  sincere  thanks  for  the  kind  office  you  have
done  me.’

“  I  might  multiply  these  instances,  but  hasten  to  another  class.
I  have  not  myself  magnetised  any  one  for  operations;  but  in  the
coma  I  have,  in  some  instances,  pinched  the  hand  severely,  but  not
so  as  to  bruise  the  flesh,  without  the  patient  betraying  any  con¬
sciousness;  and  a  young  medical  friend  assured  me  that  he  had  had
a  tooth  extracted  without  feeling.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  this
power.

“  I  have  now  to  speak  of  exterior  ailments  or  wounds.  The  fol¬
lowing  needs  no  comment: — c - duty  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Pyne,  and

begs  him  to  accept  her  sincere  thanks  for  the  excellent  cure  he  has

performed  for  her  in  curing  her  broken  breast.  Signed - .”  I

saw  this  party  three  times.

cc  A  boy,  aged  about  nine,  was  brought  to  me,  having  a  protru¬
ding  spine,  weak  and  suffering,  and  with  a  scrofulous  sore  on  the
hand.  I  saw  him  once.  The  father  wrote  me  this  letter: — ‘  Sir,  it
gives  me  much  satisfaction  by  informing  you  my  little  boy  is  very
much  improved  in  health  and  strength.  His  hand  is  quite  well,  and
he  is  altogether  better.  Remaining,  much  obliged  by  your  kindness.
(Signed)  - .’

“The  following  testimony  has  also  been  given  me: — ‘I  have
been  afflicted  for  five  years,  with  a  surfeit  covering  the  chief  part  of
my  face,  and  especially  my  nose  and  ears,  with  malignant  sores.
No  medical  remedies  could  remove  it.  It  was  growing  worse.  Mr.
Pyne  called  upon  me  a  few  times  and  treated  me.  He  has  cured
me.  I  thank  him  greatly.’  The  father  adds,  ‘The  above  is  correct,
and  my  son  has  now  got  employment.’

“  I  called  on  a  poor  parishioner,  aged  twenty-six,  confined  for  a
month  with  a  sore  foot.  The  chief  seat  being  the  back  of  the  heel.
He  had  not  slept  the  previous  night  for  agony;  the  medical  man
had  lanced  it  in  the  morning;  but  still  it  was  very  tender  and  full  of
pain.  On  magnetising  him,  in  two  minutes  he  declared  the  pain
gone,  and  putting  his  bad  heel  (so  bad  that  he  could  not  bear  me  to
touch  it)  firmly  on  the  ground,  he  stood  on  it  alone ,  exclaiming  to
his  wife,  ‘See,  I  am  well!’  He  was  well  from  that  time.  I  put
him  into  coma  for  twenty  minutes  (in  the  meantime  calling  at  another
cottage,  and  being  permitted  to  relieve  a  poor  woman  of  serious  pain
in  the  face),  then  awoke  him.  Once  more  he  slept  for  three  hours
after  I  left  the  house ;  then  arose  and  played  with  his  child ;  and
the  medical  man,  I  understood,  pronounced  it  a  cure.

“The  following  entry  also  occurs  in  my  book.  I  transcribe  it,
and  the  certificate  of  a  most  respectable  gentleman.  I  have  heard
nothing  to  cause  me  to  doubt  of  the  man’s  sincerity  in  the  description
of  his  feelings.  He  was,  however,  a  stranger :  —


The  Rev.  T.  Pyne  on  Vital  Magnetism.


543


“ - ran  a  rusty  edging  iron  through  his  shoe,  and  into

his  foot.  A  surgeon  told  him  it  had  gone  to  the  bone,  and  he  feared
he  would  be  obliged  to  lay  up  a  week  or  a  fortnight.  The  accident
caused  sweating  and  faintness,  but  little  haemorrhage.  It  had
occurred  three  days  before  I  saw  him,  and  he  came  to  me  in  evi¬
dently  great  pain,  leaning  on  a  crutch  and  a  stick,  and  unable  to
put  his  foot  to  the  ground  with  his  shoe  on.  In  a  few  minutes  he
was  well,  and  signed  his  name  to  these  words: — ‘  I  feel  cured,  I  thank
God.  I  shall  carry  my  crutch  and  stick,  for  I  shall  run  home  or  a
part  of  the  way/

“Then  follows  the  gentleman’s  testimony: — ‘I  came  into  Mr.

Pyne’s  house  on  a  visit,  and  found - seated  on  a  chair,

Mr.  Pyne  having  attended  to  him.  The  man  was  rather  somniferous,
but  shortly  recovered  himself.  He  gave  Mr.  Pyne  the  above  descrip¬
tion,  which  was  read  over  to  him  in  my  presence,  and  I  saw  him
affix  his  name  to  it,  jump  about  the  room  on  the  wounded  place  of
the  injured  foot,  and  take  a  running  departure  from  the  house  across
the  gravelled  road,  carrying  his  crutch  and  stick.  (Signed  —  — .’)

“  The  man  after  this  at  once  returned  to  his  accustomed  habits,
the  cure  having  been  complete.

“The  last  instance  I  shall  state  is  this:  —

“  The  wife  of  a  party,  who  had  had  a  remarkable  cure,  in  grati¬
tude  for  it,  took  me  to  a  man, - ,  aged  sixty,  lying  ill  with

a  most  seriously  bad  leg.  He  had  pains  in  the  knee,  where  a  thorn
had  run  in;  and  two  wounds  on  the  external  side  of  the  tibia,  one
two  inches  long  by  one-and-a-half  inches  wide,  the  other  an  inch
each  way;  great  discharges,  and  black  round  the  leg  for  a  hand’s
length.  The  woman,  who  begged  me  to  go,  said,  that  the  medical
man  feared  it  would  mortify,  and  would  require  amputation,  and  that
there  was  great  danger  of  its  occasioning  the  patient’s  death.  The
disease  seemed  scrofulous.  His  mother  had  been  in  like  manner
afflicted.  On  magnetising  him,  I  saw  it  improve.  The  next  day  I
again  called,  and  put  him  into  coma.  He  had  scarcely  slept  before.
He  now  slept  generally  well.  The  hue  of  health  returned.  It  was
Sunday  evening  when  I  first  saw  him.  On  Friday  he  was  down
stairs,  and  said  he  did  not  think  such  a  change  could  have  passed
on  any  one.  He  was  free  from  pain,  and  his  wounds  closing  in
health.  He  gave  me  the  following  declaration: — ‘The  Rev.  Mr.
Pyne  has  read  the  above  account  to  me.  It  is  very  correct,  and  my
leg,  through  his  care,  is  quite  well.  (Signed - ).’

“  The  cure  was  about  three  weeks  in  completing.  I  saw  him  six
or  seven  times.”

S.  I.  T.  O.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

The  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal.

Vital  Magnetism,  by  the  Rev.  T.  Pyne.

Revue  Magnetique,  Journal  des  cures  et  des  facts  Magn^tiques  et  som-
munbuliques.

VOL.  II.


O  O


(  544  )


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

Miss  Martineau.  Every  body  has  read  this  lady’s  admirable  papers  upon
her  own  case  and  mesmerism  in  the  Atherueum.  They  are  now  published  as
a  pamphlet  with  a  preface.  The  surgeon  who  attended  her  is  also  about  to
publish  her  case,  and  she  probably  will  then  publish  something  more.  In
our  next  number  we  shall  review  the  whole  affair,  contented  at  present  with
expressing  our  admiration  of  her  noble  courage,  which  ought  to  put  so  many
of  our  own  sex  to  shame.  Obedience  to  her  feelings  of  conscience  and  be¬
nevolence  must  have  cost  her  much  :  and  the  conduct  of  part  of  the  medical
press  towards  her  fills  us  with  regret.  She — a  woman,  issuing  forth  alone
to  battle  for  the  truth,  has  in  a  brief  space  of  time  scattered  a  host  of  the
enemy.

Non  Wist.  We  are  deeply  obliged  for  all  his  communications.  Had
they  been  sent  as  essays,  and  not  hints,  they  should  have  been  published
forthwith.  But  being  merely  suggestions,  we  can  make  use  of  them  only
when  we  come  to  the  investigation  of  particular  points  in  mesmerism  :  and
the  points  to  which  they  refer  require  more  study  than  wre  have  yet  been  able
to  bestow.  He  will  find  justice  done  to  him  in  an  early  number.

A  Student  in  Mesmerism  is  referred  to  No.  V.,  p.  33.


END  OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME.


WALTON  AND  MITCHELL,  PRINTERS,  WARDOIIR  STREET,  SOHO.


December ,  1844.


SUPPLEMENT  AU  CATALOGUE
