THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. VIII (March 1850 to January 1851).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/s1id13659960).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  ZOIST:

A  JOURNAL

OK

CEREBRAL  PHYSIOLOGY  &  MESMERISM


AND


THEIR  APPLICATIONS  TO  HUMAN  WELFARE.


“  This  is  Truth,  though  opposed  to  the  Philosophy  of  Ages.”—  Gall.


VOL.  VIII.

MARCH,  1850,  to  JANUARY,  1851.


LONDON :

HIPPOLYTE  BAILLIERE,  PUBLISHER,

219,  REGENT  STREET;

PARIS:  J.  B.  BAILLIERE,  RUE  DE  L’ECOLE  DU  MEDECINE ;

LEIPSIZ  :  T.  O.  WEIGEL.


MDCCC  LI.


LONDON:


r

WALTON  AND  MITCHELL,  PRINTERS,  W ARDOUR-STREET,  OXFORD- STREET.


-4- 5


INDEX.


page

Abscess  of  Ear,  cured  . .  183

Addison,  Dr.  W.,  his  ignorance  of  Mesmerism  .  363

Amor,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  Scrofulous  Ophthalmia .  363

Arnold,  Rev.  Dr.,  on  Mankind’s  indifference  to  mere  truth  .  1

- —  on  Mesmerism  . . .  370

Athenaeum,  its  sad  conduct .  74,  335,  338,  341

Attraction  to  Mesmeriser’s  right  hand  only . . .  19

Badeley,  Dr.,  his  silly  verses . * .  273

Barth,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  Insanity .  94

Bartlett,  Rev.  T.,  Mesmerisation  of  a  Bull .  298

Bayley,  Mr.,  his  operations  in  a  wonderful  Cure  of  Hysteria .  22

Bear,  Mesmerisation  of  a  .  298

Bladder,  Inflammation  of,  cured  .  189

- Weakness  of,  cured .  168

Bleeding  from  the  Lungs,  cured  . . -  •  •  •  33

Blindness  from  Opacity  of  the  Cornea . .  169

Boyle,  Hon.  C.  C.,  Cure  of  Hysteria  . - .  12

Brain,  researches  in  its  Development  .  396

Brutes,  Mesmerised .  166,  295,  300

Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute  .  211

Buckland,  Mr.,  Mesmerisation  of  a  Bear .  293

Buckley,  Major,  fine  conduct  of  .  227

- Cases  of  Clairvoyance  .  265

Bull,  Mesmerisation  of  a  .  298

Cahagnet,  Mr.  Hockley  on  .  64

Capern,  Mr.,  his  Cures .  38,  164

Carpenter,  Dr.,  his  sad  conduct  . .  314

Cattell,  Mr.,  on  the  Will  .  - . *  •  •  •

Chandler,  Mr.,  his  Cases  .  393

Chapman,  Master,  experiments  on  .  79

Chlorosis,  cured . ^6,  373


IV


INDEX.


page

Clairvoyance .  57,  &c.,  265,  328,  391,  395

Clairvoyance  as  to  Disease .  46

College  of  Physicians,  its  remarkable  conduct .  281

Condemned  Case,  cured . * .  75

Conolly,  Dr.,  his  sad  conduct  .  267

Costiveness,  cured- .  48,  97,  182

Consumption,  cured .  71,  264

- threatening,  cured .  186,  187

Cow,  Cure  of  a  .  300

Cow-doctor’s  fury  .  334

Cramp  of  Stomach,  cured . . .  44

- Chest,  cured .  175

Critic,  its  sins .  103

Davey,  Dr.,  Contributions  to  Mental  Pathology .  106

- Cure  of  Palsy  .  309

- Case  of  Clairvoyance  in  Sleep .  328

Davidson,  Lieut.-Col.,  his  Cases  .  267

Deafness,  cured  or  relieved .  35,  175,  176,  267

Death,  Punishment  of. . .  295

m

Delirium  Tremens,  cured  . 177

Delirium  of  Typhus,  cured .  186

Dogs,  Mesmerisation  of .  207

Dropsy,  cured  .  39,  175,  196,  378

Druitt,  Mr.,  his  sad  ignorance  and  conduct .  189

Dumbness,  cured  . 231

Dunn,  Mr.,  his  Case  similar  to  some  Mesmeric  effects  .  252

Edwards’s,  Mr.  D.  O.,  absurdity .  12

Elliotson,  Dr.,  his  remarks  on  Dr.  Guisan’s  Case  .  24

- on  Clairvoyance .  68

- refutation  of  Dr.  Todd .  237

- on  Mesmerisation  of  Brutes .  295

- on  Sleep-waking  .  348

Elliott,  Mr.,  his  Cures  .  74,  395

Engledue,  Dr.,  his  castigation  of  Mr.  R.  Hunt,  the  Critic ,  and  Medical

Times .  230

Epilepsy,  cured .  36,  338,  339,  341

Erysipelas,  cured  .  42,  263

Esdaile,  Dr.,  his  Hospital  .  190,  371

Ether  and  Mesmerism  united  . . . .  327

Evelyn,  curious  case  seen  by .  226

Eyes,  Inflammation,  &c.,  of,  cured .  42,  89,  175,  194,  325,  363,  396

Finger,  agonized,  at  once  relieved  by  Mesmerism  .  337

Forbes,  Dr.,  his  sad  conduct . 267


INDEX.


V


page

Fradelle,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  Chlorosis  and  Dropsy  .  378

Gall,  his  wise  remarks  .  33,  38,  45

Gout,  cured  .  187

Greeks,  Ancient,  Mesmerism  of  .  81

Guisan,  Dr.,  his  good  conduct .  27

Harley,  Mr.,  his  Cures .  45

Hare,  Lieut.,  his  Cure  . 77

Harvey,  his  wise  remarks . .• .  33,  77,  279

Hayman,  Mr.,  his  Case  of  Clairvoyance . . .  391

Hazard,  Mr.,  his  Cures . * .  52,  382

Headache,  cured .  52,  77,  168,  199

Heart,  Disease  of,  relieved  .  40,  270

Hindoos,  Ancient,  their  knowledge  of  Mesmerism .  371

Hockley,  Mr.,  his  defence  of  Cahagnet’s  book . .  51

Hunt,  Mr.  Robert,  his  weakness  .  105,  342

Humboldt  on  absurd  Scepticism  .  82

Hysteria,  Cure  of  .  12,  74,  188,  393

Idiosyncracies,  Mesmeric  . 80,345

India,  Mesmerism  in . . .  49,  189,  230,  371

Infirmary,  Mesmeric . . .  108,  203,  331

Inflammation  of  Elbow,  cured . . .  177,  199

- Leg .  386

- Knee  387

Insanity,  cured  .  94,  99,  109,  174,  396

Insanity  mistaken  for  Crime .  303

Institute ,  a  medical  journal,  its  sad  conduct .  367,  371

Jobard,  M.,  his  remarks  on  Discoverers . .  49

Kenny,  Dr.,  his  Cure  of  Epilepsy  .  341.

Knowledge,  natural,  to  be  all  learnt  by  natural  means  .  68

Laycock,  Dr.,  his  sad  conduct  . , .  314

Light,  Mesmeric .  46,  47,  372

Liver,  enlarged,  cured  .  196

Lloyd,  Mr.  W.  W.,  on  Cahagnet .  66

— - on  the  Mesmerism  of  the  Ancient  Greeks  .  81

Maitland,  Rev.  Dr.,  answered  .  1

Marlborough,  Duke  of,  Mesmerisation  of  Dogs  .  297

Martineau’s,  Miss  H.,  Cure  of  a  Cow .  300

- : —  account  of  a  Cow-doctor’s  fury .  333

Materialism  .  69

Materialism,  references  for  the  right  understanding  of  .  294,  356

Mayhew,  Mr.,  his  Cui’es  .  71

Moffat,  Rev.  R.,  striking  quotation  from  . . .  295

Mott,  Mr.,  his  Cures  .  174,  375


VI


INDEX.


page

Nervousness,  cured .  48,  390

Neuralgia,  cured  or  relieved .  43,  106,  167,  185,  263

Noel,  Mr.  R.  R.,  on  German  Psychological  Physiologists  .  283,  355

Palpitation,  cured  .  181,  383

Palsy,  cured  . . .  309

Pain  of  Abdomen,  cured  .  38

Painless  Operations  ....  54,  87,  89,  92,  93,  178,  179,  182,  230,  325,  327,  394

Parker,  Mr.,  his  Cases  . •...., .  178

Parturition,  nearly  painless  .  179

Paschond,  Madame,  her  interesting  Case .  12

Pate,  Robert,  his  Insanity  mistaken  for  Crime .  303

Phrenology,  Mesmeric  .  34

Polypus,  Uterine,  disappeared  under  Mesmerism  .  376

Rawe,  Mr.,  his  Cures  of  Epilepsy  . .  338

Rheumatism,  cured  or  relieved .  41,  43,  85,  &c.,  164,  184,  198,  200,  262,

382,  383,  395.

Reichenbach,  Baron,  new  edition  of  his  Researches  .  430

Repulsion  of  Mesmeriser’s  left  hand  only  . .  . . .  19

Sandby,  Rev.  George,  answer  to  Dr.  Maitland  .  1

- reply  to  Mr.  Hockley  .  64

- Cure  of  Insanity  .  109

- on  the  dishonesty  of  the  Medical  Times .  171

Sanders,  Mr.,  his  Cures . 29

Shelley,  his  verses  to  a  Mesmerised  Lady  . . .  133

Sleep-waking  .  345

- case  of  spontaneous  . .  261

Smith,  Rev.  Sydney,  exhortation  to  discoverers  .  391

Sores,  cured  .  39,  89,  166

Spine,  Weakness  or  Irritation  of,  &c.,  cured .  36,  37,  49,  268

- Curvatures  of,  cured .  176

Sprain,  cured .  171

St.  Vitus’s  dance,  cured  .  53,  183

Stanhope,  Earl,  testimony  to  Clairvoyance  .  265

Steer’s  foot  cured  with  Mesmerism  .  335

Stilling,  Jung,  a  tale  by .  62

Stomach,  Cramp  of,  cured .  44

Straton,  Mr.,  Researches  in  Cerebral  Development  .  396

Sympathy .  46,  80,  126,  158,  198,  269,  345

- great  use  of  .  22

Thompson,  Mr.  H.  S.,  on  the  Will  and  Sympathy  of  Brains  .  126

Times,  Medical,  its  sad  conduct .  20,  100,  126,  140,  163,  171,  229,  311,

378,  382,  385.

Todd,  Dr.,  his  sad  conduct  . . . .  257


INDEX.  Vll

page

Trant,  Miss,  her  Case  .  45

Truth  to  be  pursued  for  its  own  sake  .  G8

Tubbs,  Mr.  his  Cures  .  82,  194,  324,  385

- Lecture  .  387

Uterine  Haemorrhage .  181,  385

Uterus,  ulcerated,  cured  .  176,  178

Voice,  Loss  of,  cured  .  40,  187,  394

Vomiting,  cured  .  382

Von  der  Heyde,  Mrs.,  her  Cure  of  a  Steer’s  foot  .  335

Wakley,  Mr.,  his  sad  conduct .  52,  267,  300,  393

Wasting,  cured  .  39

Watkins,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  Spinal  Irritation  .  49

Webb,  Dr.,  his  Introductory  Lecture  at  Calcutta  .  367

Will,  silent  power  of  .  126,  140

Wilson,  Dr.  John,  Mesmerisation  of  Brutes  . . .  299

Wilson,  Dr.  James  Arthur,  his  terrible  Oration  .  276

Wry  Neck,  cured . . .  174,  201

Zschokke,  his  natural  Clairvoyance  .  61


THE  ZOIST.


No.  XXIX


APRIL ,  1850.


I.  Observations  on  Dr.  Maitland’s  Opinion  that  Clairvoyance
is  forbidden  in  the  Old  Testament.  By  the  Rev.  George
Sandby,  Vicar  of  Flixton,  Suffolk.

“  Truth  abstractedly,  and  because  it  is  truth ,  is  to  the  mass  of  mankind  a  thing
indifferent.  .  .  .  We  have  got,  they  say,  what  we  want,  and  we  are  well  contented
with  it ;  why  should  we  be  kept  in  perpetual  restlessness,  because  you  are  searching
after  some  new  truths ,  which,  when  found,  will  compel  us  to  derange  the  state
of  our  minds  in  order  to  make  room  for  them.” — Dr.  Arnold.  Lectures ,  p.  293.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Flixton,  February,  1850.

Sir, — In  the  masterly  refutation  of  Dr.  Maitland’s  book,
which  appeared  in  your  last  number,  the  distinguished  writer
introduced  an  important  argument,  upon  which,  from  the
evident  purpose  of  brevity,  he  dwelt  far  less  than  all  his
readers  could  desire.  It  is  almost  presumptuous  on  my  part
to  attempt  to  follow  so  powerful  a  pen :  still  it  appears  de¬
sirable  to  pursue  the  subject  a  little  further,  and  fill  the  out¬
line  which  he  furnished  more  fully  and  more  in  detail.  Many
persons,  who  are  not  competent  to  enter  into  the  learning
and  reasonings  of  the  question,  still  cry  out  with  Dr.  Mait¬
land,  that  “  clairvovance  is  forbidden  in  the  Old  Testament/7
'  »/  *

on  whom,  perhaps,  the  following  plain  observations  may  not
be  without  their  weight.

After  a  thorough  sifting  of  Dr.  Maitland’s  etymological
theory,  the  reviewer  concludes,  at  p.  399,  with  saying  : —

“  However,  let  us,  for  argument’s  sake,  suppose  this  hypothesis
to  be  established  ;  let  it  be  supposed  that  this  puzzling  word  aub
was  understood  by  the  ancient  Hebrews  as  applicable  to  persons  who
were  in  reality  mesmeric  clairvoyants  or  their  mesmerisers:  what  is
the  inference?  Is  this  law  binding  on  us?  ..  .  It  would  be  absurd
YOL.  VIII.  B


2  Review  of  Dr.  Maitland’s  Opinion  of  Clairvoyance ,

to  suppose  that  each  Mosaic  ordinance  is  binding  on  us,  till  we  can
shew  both  what  were  the  reasons  for  the  enactment,  and  that  those
reasons  no  longer  exist.  But  in  the  present  instance  there  seems  no
reason  to  doubt  that  the  persons  who  practised  ‘witchcraft/  ‘magic/
or  ‘aub/  did  consider  themselves  as  employing  the  agency  of  demons
— of  beings  called  gods — and  worshipped  by  the  heathen /’  &c.  &c.

A  conclusive  answer  to  Dr.  Maitland’s  elaborate  reason¬
ings  is  at  once  found  in  the  above  extract.  In  fact,  our
learned  opponent  stopped  short  in  the  middle  of  his  demon¬
stration,  forgetting  that  a  malum  prohibitum  may  not  be  a
malum  in  se,  and  that  a  prohibition  may  only  extend  to  a
particular  purpose ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  even  if  modern
clairvoyance  be  identical  with  the  ancient  aub,  still  that  the
relative  circumstances  may  be  different ;  and  that  the  question
yet  remains,  whether  it  were  not  the  circumstances,  and  not
the  quality  of  the  action,  that  rendered  the  practice  criminal  ?
“  Is  it  the  whole  truth  ?”  asks  Dr.  Maitland,  somewhat  in  a
tone  of  condemnation  and  suspicion,  when  speaking  of  certain
writers  on  mesmerism  ;  and  the  very  same  question  may  fairly
be  retorted  on  the  excellent  doctor  himself.  Has  he,  in  fact,
given  the  whole  statement  of  the  case,  context  and  all  ?  Is
there  no  <{  reserve,”  to  quote  his  own  quotation  ?  or  rather,  no
forgetfulness  of  an  essential  point  ?  Granted,  as  the  reviewer
says,  that  the  use  of  “  familiar  spirits 33  was  forbidden  to  the
Israelites,  and  that  “  familiar  spirits  ”  are  now  proved  to  be
extatic  clairvoyants,  still  what  was  the  object  of  the  prohibi¬
tion?  Simply  because  the  practice  was  connected  with  the
usages  of  idolatry.  Idolatry,  we  know,  was  the  besetting  sin
of  the  Israelites.  Idolatry  was  the  temptation  under  which
they  most  readily  fell.  Against  the  fascinations  of  idolatry
the  peculiarities  of  the  Mosaic  ordinances  wrere  especially  di¬
rected.  The  principal  aim  of  each  established  law,  and  of
each  threatening  and  judgment,  was  to  mark  to  his  people
Jehovah’s  hatred  of  idolatry.  And  if  we  consult  the  context
of  those  chapters  in  which  this  prohibition  of  “  familiar  spirits”
is  expressly  introduced,  we  shall  find  that  the  whole  bearing
of  the  injunction  had  reference  to  a  connection  with  idolatry.
This  point  Dr.  M.  altogether  ignores.  I  can  scarcely  find  any
allusion  to  it ;  and  yet  it  is  the  essential  point, — the  point
which  gives  a  clue  to  a  right  understanding  of  the  interdict.
And  as  every  Christian  reader,  whose  sympathies  are  with
mesmerism,  has  an  interest  in  the  explanation,  I  will  proceed
to  prove  in  detail  the  correctness  of  the  assertion.

If  we  turn,  then,  to  the  19th  and  20th  chapters  of  Levi¬
ticus,  where  the  first  prohibition  of  “  familiar  spirits  33  is  re¬
corded,  it  is  clear  from  the  whole  context  that  the  interdict


by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


3


had  reference  to  the  absurd  and  idolatrous  customs  of  the
people  around.  Many  of  the  things  forbidden  in  those  chap¬
ters  had  confessedly  nothing  in  them  intrinsically  wrong ;  they
might  be  very  silly,  but  they  were  not  per  se  sinful ;  the  evil
consisted  in  the  interpretation  attached  to  them.  The  differ¬
ence  to  be  observed  between  clean  and  unclean  beasts,  a  dif¬
ference  which,  as  we  are  now  taught,  is  of  no  value,  is  intro¬
duced  only  a  verse  or  two  before  that  very  passage  which
Dr.  M.  expressly  quotes  with  some  alarm,  about  a  “man  or
woman  having  a  familiar  spirit,”  and  being  put  to  death.
Again,  though  men  were  not  to  use  “  enchantments,”  they
were  also  not  to  “  round  the  corners  of  their  heads,  nor  to
mar  or  shave  the  corners  of  their  beards,  nor  to  make  them¬
selves  bald,  nor  to  cut  their  flesh,”  &c.  It  is  impossible  to
disunite  these  trifling  ordinances  from  commandments  that
appear  to  partake  of  a  more  serious  character.  They  run  into
each  other,  as  it  were,  and  all  refer  to  the  same  principle;
and  it  is  marvellous  that  a  candid  writer  like  Dr.  Maitland
should  overlook  their  connection.  True  it  is,  that  along  with
these  trivial  prohibitions  are  intermingled  various  injunctions
of  a  strictly  moral  and  permanent  tendency ;  and  the  reason
is  obvious.  The  Canaanitish  people,  amongst  whom  the
Israelites  had  arrived,  were  as  eminently  immoral  as  they
were  idolatrous ;  and  the  two  offences  were  often  so  mixed  up
together,  that  the  one  class  of  sins  was  supposed  to  lead  on
to  the  other,  and  to  create  an  assimilation  between  them.
Consequently,  to  read  these  prohibitions  aright,  we  must  re¬
gard  the  object  which  was  in  view,  and  that  was  the  avoidance
of  idolatry.  And  “  therefore  ”  it  was,  as  Moses  himself  says
(chap.  xx.  25),  that  the  “  difference  ”  was  enforced,  and  that
the  Israelites  were  not  to  <c  walk  in  the  manners  of  these  peo¬
ple,”  (ver.  23),  and  that  they  were  “  separated  from  them.”
And  thus  it  is,  that  in  the  very  verse  antecedent  to  the  one  in
which  a  “  familiar  or  clairvoyant  spirit  is  ordered  to  be  stoned,”
it  is  strongly  stated  that  the  Israelites  “  were  to  be  severed
from  other  people,”  as  clearly  indicating  thereby,  as  words  can
express  it,  that  the  condemnation  of  this  particular  practice,
whatever  it  was,  was  with  the  purpose  of  rendering  the  Jewish
people  as  unlike  as  possible  to  their  neighbours.  And  yet  of
all  these  tendencies  to  idolatry,  Dr.  M.  observes  nothing  :  it
seems  a  strange  omission  in  his  argument.  But,  to  quote  his
own  words,  “  I  mention  the  reserve,  not  to  blame  it,  but  sim¬
ply  as  a  matter  of  fact  which  ought  to  be  known,”  as  throw¬
ing  light  upon  those  passages  which  are  referred  to.

The  next  important  passage,  from  which  our  author’s
scruples  have  arisen,  is  found  in  the  eighteenth  chapter  of

b  2


4  Review  of  Dr.  Maitland’s  Opinion  of  Clairvoyance ,

Deuteronomy,  in  which  “  witches  find  necromancers  and
observers  of  times,  and  consulters  of  familiar  spirits,  & c.”
are  forbidden ;  but  here  again,  the  purport  of  the  prohibition
has  an  undoubted  reference  to  the  connection  of  these  usages
with  idolatry,  but  here  also  the  Lambeth  librarian  is  silent
as  before.  It  is  true,  that  Dr.  M.  observes  that  the  “restric¬
tion  related  expressly  to  things  which  had  been  practised  by
those  without  the  law,  to  the  abominations  of  the  nations,  the
sins  of  the  heathens,  for  which  they  were  to  be  destroyed,”
implying  by  that,  that  they  were  abominations  in  themselves,
(which  is  the  very  question  at  issue,)  for  he  forgets  to  add,
what  the  context  clearly  proves,  that  these  particular  abomina¬
tions  had  become  abominations  from  their  being  part  and  par¬
cel  of  idolatrous  superstitions.  They  were  abominations  rela¬
tively.  Is  the  “observance”  of  particular  times  or  days  an
abomination  in  itself?  Is  a  statue  an  abomination  in  itself?  Is
sculpture  unlawful  for  a  Christian?  Is  the  planting  a  grove  of
any  trees  near  unto  the  altar  (or  house)  of  the  Lord,  an  abo¬
mination  in  itself?  (chap,  xvi.,  21.)  If  the  reader  but  turn  to
the  12th  chapter,  v.  30  and  31,  and  to  the  20th  chapter,  v.  18.,
and  to  sundry  other  kindred  passages,  he  cannot  but  see  that
all  these  “  abominations  were  done  unto  (or  for)  their  gods ;”
that  the  nations  provoked  the  Lord  to  anger  with  strange
gods,  and  with  their  abominations,  and  sacrificed  unto  devils
and  not  to  God.  This  was  the  whole  gist  of  the  prohibition.
The  charge  was  anti-idolatrous.  In  all  probability,  the
attendant  circumstances  of  all  these  charms  and  divinations
were  as  nonsensical  and  harmless  in  themselves,  as  some  of
the  fetish  rites  of  the  modern  African,  or  the  ceremonial
absurdities  of  the  Polynesian  priesthood.  It  was  the  inten¬
tion  that  alone  gave  them  importance  or  significance.  Whe¬
ther  the  things  were  in  themselves  real  or  false,  or  what  is
more  probable,  partly  true,  and  partly  wedded  to  imposture,
matters  not  for  the  argument  :  the  point  that  rendered  them
a  sin  and  abomination  was,  that  they  were  mixed  up  with
the  usages  of  heathenish  worship.  That  this  is  the  bearing
of  the  whole  passage  must  be  clear  to  any  one,  who  will  care¬
fully  read  through  the  three  or  four  chapters  preceding  the
one  in  question ;  and  yet  I  am  almost  certain,  that  the  word
“  idolatry”  is  not  named,  if  it  be  even  alluded  to,  in  the
course  of  our  author's  reasonings.  The  fact  is,  our  commen¬
tator  had  so  overlaid  his  mind  with  “  much  learning”  and
with  devotion  to  a  theory,  that  the  simplest  point  in  the
question  slipped  from  his  memory.

And  the  more  we  pursue  the  inquiry,  the  more  shall  we  be
satisfied  of  the  correctness  of  this  explanation  :  for  example.


5


by  the  Rev.  Georye  Sandby.

if  we  examine  two  instances  which  Dr.  Maitland  expressly
brings  forward  “as  being  peculiarly  worthy  of  attention.”

First  he  refers  to  the  conduct  of  king  Manasseli,  who,
amongst  his  other  evil  acts,  “  dealt  with  familiar  spirits.”
Now  whether  these  familiar  spirits  were  “  willers”  and  clair¬
voyant^  or,  on  the  contrary,  connected  with  practices  utterly
foreign  to  mesmerism  is  unimportant.  Manasseh  is  signalized
for  his  wickedness ;  and  his  wickedness  is  pre-eminently  cha¬
racterized  for  its  ultra-idolatry.  The  very  little  that  is  said
of  this  king  relates  to  that  topic;  and  it  is  clear  that  he
merely  dealt  with  wizards  and  familiar  spirits  in  subservience
to  his  besetting  propensity  of  idol -worship.  Now  there  is  no
abstract  harm  in  making  a  circle  on  the  ground,  and  putting
some  herbs  into  a  caldron,  and  burning  some  charcoal  in  the
middle  of  a  wood :  but  these  acts  become  a  sin,  if  they  be
done  with  a  sinful  purpose:  and  so  with  mesmerism  and  clair¬
voyance,  it  is  the  abuse  and  not  the  use  that  condemns  them.

Secondly,  Dr.  M.  refers  to  the  good  king  Josiah,  who,
amongst  his  good  actions,  “  put  away  familiar  spirits.”  But
why  did  he  put  them  away  ?  His  history  explains  it ;  his
whole  reign  was  one  uninterrupted  protest  against  idolatry
and  idolatrous  usages.  He  was  a  root  and  branch  destroyer.
Whatever  had  any  connection  with  the  abominations  of  hea¬
thenism  found  no  mercy  in  his  eyes  :  and  he  swept  the  whole
tribe  of  its  satellites  out  of  the  land  of  Judea;  and  amongst
them,  the  unlucky  clairvoyants,  if  such  they  were,  suffered
the  same  fate.  But  what  argument  is  that  ?  If  men  will
pervert  a  good  thing  to  bad  purposes,  they  must  take  the
consequences  :  evil  communications  corrupt  the  purest  and
most  lawful  of  usages,  and  clairvoyance  is  no  exception.  But
verily.  Dr.  Maitland’s  two  instances  that  are  so  “  peculiarly
worthy  of  attention,”  tell  most  provokingly  against  him.

The  only  possible  argument,  as  it  appears  to  me,  that  Dr.
Maitland  can  advance  against  this  view  of  the  subject,  is
this, — that  the  prohibition  of  all  these  usages  is  not  stated  in
direct  terms  to  be  in  consideration  of  their  connection  with
idolatrous  customs.  No  copulative  conjunctions  are  intro¬
duced  into  the  sentences,  broadly  affirming  that  “  on  account
of,”  and  “  in  consequence  of,”  their  idolatrous  tendencies,
these  particular  practices  were  interdicted.  And  this  must
be  admitted.  Our  conclusion  is  derived  from  the  context,
and  from  its  general  harmony  with  other  passages.  But
there  is  nothing  unusual  in  this ;  it  is  rather  in  strictest
keeping  with  the  whole  style  of  the  Mosaic  books.  No  one
knows  better  than  the  learned  librarian  of  Lambeth,  that  an
elliptical  form  of  composition  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of


6  Review  of  Dr.  Maitland’s  Opinion  of  Clairvoyance,

these  very  antient  writings.  Let  us  take  as  an  example,
what  every  school  boy  is  familiar  with,  the  language  of  the
Second  Commandment.  It  is  a  precise  casein  point;  and
by  its  grammatical  and  conventional  interpretation  the  matter
at  issue  can  be  decided.  Take  the  first  sentence,  as  Dr.
Maitland  takes  his  sentences,  abstractedly  and  by  itself.
“  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,  or  any
likeness  of  any  thing ,  that  is  in  heaven,  &c.”  What  can  be,
primd  facie,  more  peremptory  than  this  ordinance  ?  There
can  be  no  evasion  from  its  most  direct  language.  Nothing
must  be  constructed  by  human  fingers  that  has  the  slightest
similitude  to  any  object  existing  on  our  earth.  The  words
are  positive.  Dr.  M.  must  not  say,  that  this  restriction  has
reference  to  the  worship  of  idol-images,  and  that  a  literal
obedience  to  its  injunctions  is  no  longer  a  point  of  universal
obligation.  Instructed  by  his  casuistry,  we  must  proceed
more  scrupulously.  If  clairvoyance  be  really  alluded  to  in
Leviticus  and  Deuteronomy,  and  its  practice  forbidden,  and
if  no  respect  is  to  be  paid  to  the  context  and  to  the  sense  of
the  adjoining  chapters, — then  on  the  very  same  grammatical
principles,  every  young  lady,  who  now  designs  a  spaniel  on
her  worsted  work,  every  astronomer  with  his  orrery,  every
botanist  with  his  painted  “  flora,”  are  alike  guilty  of  the  sin
of  disobedience.  The  one  act  is  as  much  interdicted  as  the
other  :  “  Thou  shalt  not  make  to  thyself  the  likeness  of  any
thing.”  Nor  will  the  subsequent  sentence  remove  the  diffi¬
culty.  Taken  literally  and  by  itself,  and  without  the  admis¬
sion  of  an  elliptical  construction,  it  rather  adds  a  fresh
injunction,  instead  of  explaining  the  former  away.  “  Thou
shalt  not  bow  down,  &c.”  That  is,  first,  we  are  not  to  make
the  likeness  of  any  thing,  and  then  we  are  not  to  worship  it ;
but  if  we  stop  short  of  the  second  offence,  it  by  no  means
follows  that  we  are  at  liberty  to  commit  the  first  one.  Now,
does  Dr.  Maitland  take  this  passage  in  this  literal  way  ?  If,
on  the  contrary,  he  claims  the  conventional  interpretation  of
this  commandment,  as  applied  to  a  Christian  people,  on  the
ground  that  the  genius  of  the  Hebrew  language  dispenses
with  those  conjunctive  particles,  which  would  convert  the
sense  of  the  two  sentences  into  one  harmonious  whole ;  then
must  the  interpreter  be  consistent  with  his  own  interpreta¬
tions,  and  all  his  anti-clairvoyant  texts  must  be  explained  by
the  same  rules  of  exposition,  and  his  hypothesis  and  its  con¬
sequences  fall  to  the  ground.  In  common  honesty,  there  is  no
alternative  :  there  must  be  no  playing  fast  and  loose  in  matters
of  this  serious  nature :  a  man  must  abide  by  his  construction
in  one  place,  or  not  hold  by  it  in  the  other.  Dr.  Maitland,


by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


7


it  should  be  remembered,  is  starting  unexpected  scruples  for
tender  consciences  :  he  e<  particularly  addresses  himself  to  his
clerical  brethren,”  (p.  48,)  not  forgetting  among  them  some
“  most  zealous  mesmerists,”  to  whose  humble  pages  he  does
not  disdain  to  allude.  For  myself,  I  will  simply  observe,  that
I  have  no  wish  to  meddle  with  a  forbidden  practice.  Let  the
prohibition  of  clairvoyance  be  clearly  established  on  prin¬
ciples  which  will  apply  to  other  passages  of  the  Old  Testa¬
ment,  and  I  am  content  to  obey  :  but  let  us  not  be  frightened
from  the  study  of  nature  by  the  conjurations  of  an  illogical
erudition  :  nor  let  great  truths  be  held  forth  as  a  subject  for
suspicion  and  avoidance  on  evidence  at  the  best  of  a  merely
conjectural  interpretation,  and  on  canons  of  criticism  which
are  not  equally  adopted  in  homogeneous  passages.

The  religious  mesmeriser,  in  whose  mind  doubts  have
been  raised  by  Dr.  Maitland’s  enquiries,  will  understand  my
argument  better  by  an  illustration  taken  from  modern  his¬
tory.  When  Columbus,  in  his  fourth  voyage,  was  stationed
off  Jamaica,  he  was  fearfully  distressed  by  a  scarcity  of  provi¬
sions.  From  his  knowledge  of  astronomy,  he  was  aware  that
within  three  days  there  would  be  a  total  eclipse  of  the  moon ;
and,  to  induce  the  Indians  to  bring  food  to  his  ships,  he
asserted  that  the  Deity  was  angry  with  them,  and  would
shew  his  anger  by  a  complete  obscuration  of  that  luminary.
The  stratagem  answered.  When  the  darkness  commenced,
the  ignorant  natives  hurried  down  to  the  shore  with  provi¬
sions  ;  and  Columbus,  by  the  success  of  his  prediction,  ob¬
tained  a  permanent  influence  over  their  minds.  Now  let  us
suppose  that,  on  the  arrival  of  the  Israelites  in  Canaan,  an
acquaintance  with  astronomy  was  confined  to  the  heathenish
priesthood,  and  that  they  annually  availed  themselves  of  this
study,  for  the  purpose  of  swaying  their  superstitious  follow¬
ers.*  Should  we  not  then  have  read  in  Moses,  of  the  “  abo¬
minations  of  eclipse-prophets,”  and  of  threatenings  against
those  who  imitated  them?  But  would  the  prohibition  be
now  in  force,  and  the  compilation  of  an  almanack  be  a  thing
sinful  in  itself?  And  yet  there  is  no  difference.  The  study
of  eclipses  and  the  study  of  clairvoyance  are  equally  but  the
studies  of  nature — of  nature  in  some  dark  phase ;  and  they
are  both  alike  sinful  or  innocent,  according  to  the  spirit  with
which  they  are  undertaken.  One  difference,  indeed,  there
is  :  in  our  own  days,  clairvoyance  is  a  novelty,  while  the  an¬
nouncement  of  an  eclipse  is  a  familiar  sound.  And  in  mat¬
ters  of  science,  let  it  ever  be  remembered,  it  is  the  novelty
that  favours  the  cry  of  “  irreligion.”

The  whole  point,  then,  of  our  author’s  argument  resolves


8  Review  of  Dr.  Maitland’s  Opinion  of  Clairvoyance ,

itself  into  this,  that  clairvoyance  has  been  abused,  and  is  con¬
sequently  unlawful.  An  awkward. inference  !  for  if  Dr.  Mait¬
land  will  but  apply  it  to  his  own  actions,  he  will  find  himself
marvellously  circumscribed  in  his  movements  and  will.  In
every  twenty -four  hours  there  is  scarcely  a  single  action  upon
which  our  scrupulous  opponent  enters,  that  may  not  be  per¬
verted  from  its  rightful  purposes  into  an  offence.  Nay,  let
us  hear  his  own  words  :

“  Nothing  can  be  more  innocent  than  dipping  a  pen  in  ink,  and
writing  a  few  words,  but  this  does  not  make  it  lawful  for  one  man  to
sign  another’s  name  to  a  deed.” — p.  69.

And  so  of  clairvoyance.  Nothing  can  be  more  innocent
or  useful  than  the  practice  of  introvision,  by  which  a  som-
nambule  might  descry  the  internal  condition  of  a  sick  man,
and  thereby  enable  a  fatal  disease  to  be  arrested  ;  but  it  does
not  thereby  follow  that  all  we  wicked  writers  in  the  Zoist
deem  ourselves  privileged  to  use  the  faculty  of  our  clairvoy¬
ants  for  the  purpose  of  prying  into  matters  that  do  not  con¬
cern  us,  and  that  we  shall  peep  “  into  the  banker's  shop  or
pawnbroker's  cellar"  (p.  70),  to  see  if  our  best  friend  has
overdrawn  his  account,  or  deposited  his  wife's  jewels  for  an
accommodation.

The  strangest  point,  however  (with  all  deference  be  it
said),  in  Dr.  Maitland's  book,  is  his  last  question,  viz.,  “is
mesmerism  divisible?"  In  other  words,  our  author,  who  is  a
man  of  humanity,  is  naturally  well  inclined  towards  the  thera¬
peutic  departments  of  our  science,  and  would  be  glad  to  “  see
a  mesmeric  hospital  well  supported  and  well  filled but  he
entertains  objections  against  clairvoyance  and  the  “  higher
phenomena,"  and  is  desirous  of  learning  whether  the  mere
mesmeric  treatment  can  be  obtained  apart  from  and  inde¬
pendent  of  the  other?  Of  course  we  cannot  but  respect  the
scruples  of  a  conscientious  man;  but  surely,  that  any  one,
with  the  acquirements  of  Dr.  Maitland,  should  gravely  propose
this  last  interrogatory,  seems  (I  really  mean  nothing  uncivil)
almost  an  absurdity.  “  Is  mesmerism  divisible?"  In  other
words,  is  nature  divisible  ?  Is  nature  under  our  control  ?
Can  wre  stop,  or  propel,  or  guide  or  moderate  the  invisible
workings  of  a  sentient  animal  like  man,  whose  composite
constitution  is  an  enigma,  and  of 'the  immediate  causes  of
wrhose  vitality  and  action  not  the  profoundest  physiologists
are  yet  agreed  ?  All  that  we  are  taught  is,  that  “  God
breathed  into  man's  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,"  and  that
“  man  is  a  living  soul,"  “  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,"
but  beyond  this  we  are  in  darkness.  We  can  map  out  the


by  the  Rev.  Georye  Sandby.


9


brain,  indeed,  and  we  can  classify  the  nerves ;  but  to  what
extent  the  powers  of  the. brain  or  of  the  nerves  may  yet
reach,  we  know  not.  And  to  suppose  that  the  movements  of
the  brain  or  of  the  nerves  when  in  an  abnormal  condition,  can
be  regulated  like  those  of  a  locomotive  steam-engine,  whose
speed  is  arrested  by  the  finger  of  a  conductor,  is  to  transform
our  mysterious  being  into  a  mere  piece  of  human  workmanship,
and  to  regard  man  as  more  of  a  machine  than  the  most  ultra¬
materialist  ever  described  him.  Mesmerism  must  be  accepted,
as  we  accept  all  other  gifts  of  God’s  providence,  as  a  whole,
and  not  in  chosen  and  special  parts ;  we  must  take  nature  as
we  find  her ;  we  cannot  refuse  what  we  do  not  chance  to
value  ;  we  must  follow  truth,  where  truth,  perforce,  may  lead
us.  We  cannot  say  to  nature,  in  any  one  of  her  departments,
“  Thus  far  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  farther.”  We  cannot  raise
up  some  scientific  Canute,  who  shall  sit  in  his  professorial
chair,  and  bid  the  waves  of  human  knowledge  roll  backward
and  fye  still.  Do  we  divide  astronomy?  Do  we  divide  geo-
logy,  chemistry,  or  optics  ?  Do  we  bid  Lord  Posse  rest  con¬
tented  with  the  eyes  that  Providence  has  given  him,  and  not
pry  into  worlds  that  were  never  meant  for  man’s  inspection,
by  the  aid  of  “  unlawful  ”  and  presumptuous  telescopes  ?  Do
we  warn  the  Dean  of  Westminster  against  pre-Adamite  theo¬
ries,  and  require  a  line  of  demarcation  between  a  permissible
or  forbidden  geology  ?  Or  do  we  tell  the  accomplished  Pro¬
fessor  Wheatstone  that  it  was  never  intended  for  finite  beings
to  imitate  the  lightning’s  velocity  of  action,  by  the  uses  of  a
too  adventurous  electricity  ?  No  :  we  do  nothing  of  the
kind.  And  why,  then,  are  we  to  employ  this  language  in
mesmerism,  more  than  in  any  other  study  ?  I  can  only  ima¬
gine,  because  that  it  is  comparatively  a  new  study,  because  we
are  not  familiar  with  its  results  and  its  marvels.  It  is,  indeed,
surprising  that  Dr.  Maitland,  who  has  read  so  much  on  the
subject,  does  not  perceive  that  the  various  phenomena  are
often  so  mixed  up  together,  that  an  interruption  of  their
union  would  be  impossible ;  that  the  therapeutic  processes
spontaneously  develop  the  clairvoyant  powers,  and  that  the
clairvoyant  powers  are  actually  ancillary  to  the  therapeutic
processes ;  and  that  while  many  mesmerists,  during  their
whole  practice,  in  spite  of  all  their  efforts  and  their  “  will-
ings,”  can  induce  little*  beyond  the  cure  or  mitigation  of
disease  (results,  indeed,  sufficiently  valuable  of  themselves),
other  practitioners  seem  hardly  able  to  enter  upon  a  case
without  eliciting  indications  of  the  highest  classes  of  mag¬
netic  phenomena.  In  fact,  there  is  but  one  division  to  be
dreamt  of,  the  division  between  the  use  and  abuse  of  the


10  j Review  of  Dr.  Maitland’s  Opinion  of  Clairvoyance ,

practice; — the  division  between  the  benevolent,  the  truth-
loving  practitioner,  and  the  man  who  degrades  the  secrets  of
nature  to  his  own  selfish  purposes,  and  to  the  charlatan  tricks
of  simulation  and  fraud.

One  consideration  raises  a  smile.  Dr.  Maitland’s  scruples,
it  is  seen,  have  respect  to  clairvoyance ;  but  mesmerism,  in
its  ordinary  application  to  surgery  or  sickness,  he  estimates
as  highly  as  any  of  us  could  wish.  He  has  known  mesmerism,
he  says,  to  be  true  “  for  more  than  twenty  years,”  and  he
thinks  that  “  every  person  of  common  humanity  must  earnestly
desire  to  promote,  by  all  lawful  means,  a  method  which  offers
such  benefits.”  This  is  the  language  of  a  Christian  and  a
philosopher;  and  I  thank  the  excellent  writer  for  his  out¬
spoken  benevolence  and  honesty.  But  is  he  aware  that  for
such  language  he  will  assuredly  be  denounced  in  certain
quarters,  as  being  “ little  better  than  one  of  the  wicked?”
He  takes,  indeed,  a  high  tone  with  us ;  but  how  will  he  stand
with  more  precise  and  more  timorous  consciences  ?  Nothing,
let  it  be  observed  by  the  way,  more  evinces  the  improved  po¬
sition  of  mesmerism  in  this  country,  than  the  language  and
the  scruples  of  Dr.  Maitland.  When,  in  April,  1842,  not  quite
eight  years  back,  Dr.  M'Neile  preached  at  Liverpool  that  un¬
lucky  sermon  of  his  on  “  satanic  agency,”  not  a  syllable  fell
from  his  lips  respecting  clairvoyance.  Clairvoyance  was  not
even  alluded  to.  Clairvoyance  was  in  that  day  too  preposterous
a  question  to  be  even  mooted  for  a  moment.  The  whole  drift

of  the  Liverpool  argument  was  upon - what  ? — aye,  what  ?

Insensibility  to  pain !  Mark  this,  Dr.  Maitland  !  The  ex¬
treme  sinfulness  of  a  condition  in  which  a  painless  and  for¬
midable  operation  could  be  performed,  and  in  which  a  wound
could  be  dressed,  and  cleaned,  and  dressed  again,  without  the
patient  knowing  anything  whatsoever  of  the  process ;  this
was  the  sole  burden  of  Dr.  MNTeile’s  discourse,  and  this  his
sole  incontrovertible  proof  that  mesmerism  was  little  else
than  the  “  mystery  of  iniquity.”  “  Is  mesmerism  divisible  ?”
was  the  question  asked  in  those  days  also.  The  mere  sleep,
with  its  soothing  properties,  was  not  objected  to ;  “  we  know
what  sleep  is,”  said  the  sermon ;  but  we  were  not  to  venture
beyond  the  realms  of  Somnus  into  the  forbidden  ground  of
unconsciousness  to  pain.  Thanks,  a  thousand  thanks  to
chloroform  !  we  have  escaped  that  nonsense.  We  have  es¬
caped  the  taunts  of  the  sceptical  surgeon,  on  the  one  side,
and  we  have  escaped  the  reproofs  of  the  superstitious  reli¬
gionist  on  the  other — for  an  anaesthetic  operation  is  an  every¬
day  occurrence.  Still,  in  the  eyes  of  the  popular  preacher  at
St.  Jude’s  (unless  he  has  written  his  recantation),  Dr.  Mait-


by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.  1 1

land  will  be  regarded  as  not  far  superior  to  “  a  writer  in  The
Zoist and  all  his  scruples  respecting  clairvoyance  will  not
compensate  for  his  adhesion  to  surgical  mesmerism.  In  fact.
Dr.  Maitland  patronizes  the  black  art  only  in  a  subordinate
degree.  What  is  lawful  at  Lambeth  is  licentious  at  Liver¬
pool  ;  and  time  and  accidental  circumstances  make  the  only
difference  between  him  and  one  of  ourselves.  And  eight
years  back,  had  our  learned  librarian,  who  wishes  to  see  a
“  mesmeric  hospital  well  supported  and  well  filled,”  but  tra¬
velled  to  the  great  mart  of  commerce,  he  would  have  had  to
pay  the  penalty  of  his  rash  benevolence,  and  our  anti-clair¬
voyant  would  have  been  pointed  at  as  one  that  was  leagued
with  “  familiar  spirits  — not,  indeed,  the  great  spirits  that
govern  the  higher  phenomena,  but  those  inferior  sprites  that
simply  preside  over  mesmeric  insensibility,  and  bring  human
and  Christian  victims  into  an  awful  condition  of  unconscious¬
ness  and  ease  !  Does  not  this  fact  offer  a  lesson  to  those
who  raise  hasty  scruples  about  matters  of  science  ?  Or  rather
might  it  not  furnish  an  amusing  chapter  for  the  second  part
of  our  author’s  Illustrations  and  inquiries  relating  to  Mesmer¬
ism  ?”*

We  have,  however,  to  thank  Dr.  Maitland  for  his  honor¬
able  testimony.  He  broadly  declares  that  he  has  long  been
persuaded  of  the  reality  of  mesmerism,  in  its  common  pheno¬
mena  ;  and,  respecting  clairvoyance  itself,  he  regards  the
evidence  to  it  as  so  overwhelming,  that  any  discussion  on
the  subject  is  no  longer  needful.  With  a  lover  of  the  truth
like  this,  is  it  too  much  to  hope,  that  we  may  still  enlist  him
on  our  side  ?

I  remain,  Mr.  Editor,

Your  humble  servant,

George  Sandby.


\


*  Dr.  M‘Neile,  in  his  sermon  (p.  147),  expressly  raised  the  charge  of  “  deal¬
ing  with  familiar  spirits on  the  ground  of  an  induced  and  painless  sleep  ;  re¬
ferring,  in  fact,  to  the  identical  passages  of  Scripture,  which  Dr.  M.  himself  uses.


(  12  )


II.  Cure  of  a  severe  and  remarkable  case  of  Hysteria  ivith
mesmerism.  Written  by  Dr.  Guisan  of  Vevey,  Switzer¬
land,  and  communicated  by  the  Honourable  Carolina
Courtenay  Boyle,  Maid  of  Honor  to  the  late  Queen  Dow¬
ager,  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  translated  by  him  from  the
Drench,  for  The  Zoist.

“  5,  Sydney  Place,  Brompton.

“  5th  February,  1850.

“  My  dear - .  I  have  to  thank  you  for  your  cheque.  I  regret  to  hear  of

Mrs.  - ’s  malady  being  confirmed  ovarian  tumor.  Of  course  medicine  is

entirely  useless,  for  it  is  quite  irremovable  by  the  action  of  the  system  itself,
through  which  only  medicine  can  act.  For  the  same  reason,  mesmerism,  suppos¬
ing  it  were  true  ( which  is  not  the  case )  must  be  useless.

“  Acting,  however,  as  it  does,  on  the  nervous  system,  it  becomes  injurious
by  its  depressing  influence.  Nonprofessional  persons  may  be  excused  for  believ¬
ing  in  its  remedial  powers  ;  but  any  medical  man  so  convinced  can  only  be  fit  for
Bedlam,  or  to  be  ivritten  down  1  the  long-eared  animald

“  The  only  cure  is  the  removal  of  the  tumor,  and  that  may  be  done  without
excessive  risk,  provided  the  constitution  of  the  patient  be  strengthened  and  fortified
in  every  possible  manner.

“  Ovarian  disease  is  made  a  peculiar  study  by  some  practitioners  in  this  me¬
tropolis,  and  is  much  more  tractable  than  it  was  long  thought  to  be.  The  first
of  these,  in  point  of  ability  and  prudence,  is  Mr.  Walne,  of  No.  72,  Guildford
Street,  Russell  Square.  If  I  were  you,  I  would  take  his  opinion  on  Mrs. - ’s

case.

“  How  came  you  to  know  the  tumor  is  steatomatous  ?  Somebody  must  have
been  meddlesome,  if  the  tumor  has  been  punctured.

“  I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  yours  truly,

“  D.  O.  Edwards.”*

Millard's  Hill  House,  Frome,  Somerset,
February  28th,  1850.

To  Dr.  Elliotson,

Dear  Sir, — I  beg  leave  to  offer  you  an  authentic  account
of  a  case  of  hysteria,  in  its  most  complicated  form,  cured  by
mesmerism.  The  cure  was  performed  by  a  gentleman  of  my
acquaintance,  whose  benevolent  exertions  in  behalf  of  the

*  The  writer  of  this  note,  so  exquisite  in  truth  of  statement  and  in  reasoning,
to  the  husband  of  a  lady,  is  a  general  medical  practitioner,  a  conspicuous  writer
in  the  Lancet,  a  great  friend  of  Mr.  Wakley,  and  one  of  those  chosen  by  him  to
be  present  when  I  foolishly  demonstrated  the  beautiful,  unquestionable,  and — to
all  philosophic  heads — deeply  important,  mesmeric  phenomena  of  the  Okeys,  to
that  person,  who,  with  his  little  knot  of  companions,  was  totally  unqualified  to
appreciate  them.  Mr.  Edwards  said,  in  a  magazine,  and  still  wisely  says,  that
all  the  mesmeric  effects,  even  the  sleep,  were  impositions.  •

This  Mr.  D.  O.  Edwards  attended  the  lady,  and  persisted  in  declaring  that
she  was  some  months  gone  in  the  family-way.  I  then  saw  her,  and  pronounced
the  case  to  be  one  of  ovarian  tumor ;  and  this  has  turned  out  to  be  the  fact.
After  me  another  practitioner  saw  her,  who  said  he  could  cure  her  by  a  peculiar
method,  punctured  the  tumor,  let  out  a  teacupful  of  pus,  and  of  course  left  her
no  better  for  the  operation  or  his  agonizing  bandages,  but  charged  twenty  guineas
for  his  tapping.

She  is  now  mesmerised  by  her  husband  and  myself,  and  receiving  very  great
benefit. — John  Elliotson.


/


Cure  of  a  remarkable  Case  of  Hysteria.  13

poor  sufferer  came  very  much  under  my  ken,  during  my  seri¬
ous  illness  at  Vevey,  in  Switzerland,  in  the  summer  of  1848.

Madame  Paschond  had  been  brought  up  under  the  eye
of  the  physician  who  attended  me.  I  felt  much  interested  in
her,  on  account  of  his  description  of  her  rare  piety  and  pa¬
tient  suffering.  Dr.  Guisan  is  the  writer  of  the  manuscript
which  I  enclose,  a  man  who  has  numbered  some  sixty  years.
He  wept  for  joy  when,  through  my  theory  and  Mr.  Bayley’s
practice,  his  young  friend  was  saved  from  starvation.  She
had  already  passed  eight  days  and  nights  without  food  of
any  kind  whatsoever,  having  entirely  lost  the  power  of  swal¬
lowing.  I  saw  her  at  work,  for  her  hands  were  no  longer
collapsed ;  but  her  teeth,  even  then,  were  set  firmly  together.
She  was  waiting  for  Mr.  Baylev  to  come  and  open  her  mouth,
to  feed  her.

To  you,  who  have  seen  so  many  cases,  this  one  will  not
appear  incredible.  The  circumstances  of  the  cure  were  so  well
known  at  Yevey,  that  the  proprietor  of  the  Trois  Couronnes,
a  connection  of  the  Invalid’s,  came  to  thank  me,  to  whom
thanks  were  scarcely  due.  Mr.  Bayley’s  benevolence  will
never  be  forgotten.  He  has  more  cases,  which  Dr.  Guisan
has  lately  sent  over,  thinking  I  should  like  to  offer  them  for
The  Zoist.

With  every  good  wish,  dear  Sir,  believe  me  very  truly
your  obliged  and  faithful  co-disciple,

Carolina  Courtenay  Boyle.

“  Yelle  est  agere.”

In  reading  the  discussions  of  the  Boyal  Academy  of  Medicine
during  1826,  we  are  struck  with  the  excitement  produced  by
the  simple  question,  whether  a  committee  should  be  appointed
to  ascertain  the  reality  of  the  mesmeric  phenomena.  Two
distinguished  members,  MM.  Bostan  and  Georget,  asserted
their  reality,  but  a  large  number  doubted  or  denied,  and,
from  fear  of  being  considered  dupes,  declared  both  mesmer-
isers  and  the  mesmerised  to  be  cheats  The  members  for
the  most  part  regarded  this  question  as  unimportant,  because
a  cure  by  mesmerism,  they  asserted,  was  merely  the  addition  of
one  disease  to  another.  However,  a  committee  was  appointed,
but  without  any  result :  and  so  will  it  always  happen  when
the  enquiry  is  conducted  with  the  aid  of  professional  mes-
merisers  and  somnambulists — of  cheats  who  know  how  to
exhibit  phenomena  which  are  a  mixture  of  truth  and  trick
that  are  not  readily  distinguished  from  each  other  and  dis¬
gust  every  honest  enquirer.

I  conceive  that  physicians  who  have  attended  to  the  sub-


14


Cure  of  a  remarkable  Case  of  Hysteria,


ject  will  feel  an  interest  in  a  case  published  by  myself,  as  I
am  not  a  mesmeriser,  and  was  a  witness  only  of  the  cure.

Madame  P.,  20  years  of  age,  tall,  strong,  of  a  nervous
and  sanguine  temperament,  and  born  of  a  very  nervous
mother,  was  seized,  when  14  years  of  age,  with  severe  inflam¬
mation  of  the  brain.

Some  years  afterwards,  while  boarding  at  Zurich,  she  fell
into  the  lake,  and  wras  taken  out  senseless  and  restored  with
great  difficulty.  Soon  after  this,  she  had  a  cough  and  spat
blood;  was  treated  with  repeated  bleedings,  but  was  not
cured  till  she  had  regularly  used  a  cold  bath  during  the
whole  winter,  by  the  bold  direction  of  Dr.  Locher  Balber.

On  her  return  to  Yevey,  she  complained  a  little  of  her
stomach ;  but  soon  got  married,  and,  in  a  few  months — in  the
autumn  of  1846 — sent  for  me.

She  was  complaining  of  a  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  lower
part  of  the  abdomen  (the  left  iliac  fossa],  and  the  spot  was
tender,  tense,  and  swollen.  I  prescribed  leeches,  poultices,
and  a  mixture  containing  extract  of  henbane  and  laurel  water.

The  complaint  yielded ;  but  re-appeared  on  the  right  side,
and  was  treated  as  at  first.  An  internal  examination,  by  a
midwife  disclosed  irritation,  heat,  and  tenderness  of  the  vagina;
but  the  patient  would  not  allow  any  accuracy  of  examination.

In  about  a  fortnight  the  pains  had  ceased  ;  but  there  was
obstinate  constipation,  and  as  much  enlargement  of  the  abdo¬
men  as  ordinarily  occurs  at  the  seventh  month  of  pregnancy.

In  February,  1845,  she  was  suddenly  seized  with  hysteric
spasms.  Her  neck  was  so  constricted  that  strangulation  seemed
not  unlikely  ;*  an  insurmountable  lock-jaw  prevented  any
remedy  from  being  put  into  her  mouth ;  a  powerful  constric¬
tion  of  the  sphincter  ani  prevented  the  introduction  of  a  tube,
and  moreover  the  legs  were  as  rigid  as  iron  bars,  and  so  drawn
together  as  to  render  such  an  operation  very  difficult.  I  bled
her  in  the  right  arm,  and  the  result  was  universal  relaxation
of  the  muscles  ;  but  in  a  few  days  all  the  symptoms  returned:
and,  in  addition,  the  right  arm  was  bent  so  rigidly  that  no
effort  could  extend  it :  the  circular  muscles  of  the  eyelids
were  contracted,  and  to  the  loss  of  sight  from  this  cause  was
added  complete  deafness.  As  tepid  baths,  continued  for  many
hours,  and  repeated — first  consisting  of  plain  water,  and  then
containing  two  pints  of  a  decoction  of  poppy-heads,  four
pounds  of  the  skins  of  bitter  almonds,  and  four  ounces  of
caustic  potass — did  no  good,  I  practised  cold  affusion  upon  her

*  I  was  always  formerly  of  the  common  opinion  that  hysteria  never  produces
strangulation  ;  but  more  lately  I  have  learnt  to  a  certainty  that  life  has  been  occa¬
sionally  destroyed  in  this  manner.


in  Switzerland.


15


head  with  water  of  the  temperature  of  15°  Reaumur.*  She
screamed  violently,  and  exclaimed  that  stones  were  being
thrown  upon  her  head.  But  from  this  time  the  spasms  de¬
clined,  and  soon  ceased  entirely.  As  soon  as  the  season  per¬
mitted  she  went  to  Clarens,  in  the  hope  of  regaining  strength
from  the  country  air  and  bathing  in  the  lake.  She  derived
less  advantage  than  was  expected.  Congestion  frequently
occurred  in  the  head,  and  rendered  the  application  of  leeches
and  cold  water  to  that  part  necessary.  Cold  foot-baths,  such
as  are  recommended  by  Scoutetten,  succeeded  in  giving
warmth  to  her  feet,  which  were  habitually  cold.  Sometimes
her  eyes  shut  suddenly  without  any  apparent  cause,  and
opened  again  after  some  hours.  The  right  ear  remained  deaf ;
the  right  arm  long  remained  rigid,  and  did  not  recover  its
natural  state  till  after  the  use  of  cold  douches ;  the  abdomen
subsided  gradually;  the  catamenia  had  always  been  regular.

She  was  very  far  from  well  during  the  winter  of  1845-6.
The  least  emotion,  the  firing  of  cannon,  so  frequent  at  that
period,  produced  hysteric  paroxysms ;  the  neck  and  the  jaw
were  contracted ;  the  muscles  of  the  eyes,  face,  nose,  ears,  limbs,
trunk,  &c.,  acted  convulsively ;  the  thorax,  especially  its  left
half,  rose  and  acquired  an  extraordinary  extent,  and  in  con¬
sequence  there  were  sharp  pains  in  it ;  the  heart  palpitated ;
respiration  was  very  difficult ;  when  the  diaphragm  partici¬
pated  in  the  spasms,  suffocation  seemed  imminent.  The  only
means  of  relieving  these  spasms  of  the  chest  was  to  put  a
leathern  bandage  tightly  around  it,  so  as  to  resist  the  inor¬
dinate  elevation  of  the  ribs.  In  a  paroxysm  of  this  kind,  I
applied  a  napkin  wetted  with  cold  water  upon  the  region  of
the  heart,  where  an  acute  pain  was  felt ;  but  the  agony  be¬
came  instantly  much  more  intense,  and  the  patient  could
never  afterwards  endure  the  contact  of  water  at  this  spot,
whether  as  a  local  application  or  a  general  bath,  for  strangu¬
lation  immediately  took  place,  and,  if  the  contact  of  the
water  was  continued,  general  convulsions  presently  followed.

There  was  often  unconsciousness,  and  a  delirium  which
would  last  many  days.

At  length  these  various  symptoms  occurred  pretty  regu¬
larly  at  the  catamenial  periods.

When  the  paroxysm  was  over,  the  normal  condition  nearly
returned ;  but  the  appetite  continued  irregular,  was  occasion¬
ally  lost,  and  generally  inconsiderable :  there  was  a  marked
dislike  of  animal  food.  Sometimes,  after  a  complete  fast  of
several  days,  the  desire  of  food  would  become  intense,  and
then  an  hysterical  paroxysm  was  sure  to  happen.

*  Equal  to  about  66°  Farenheit,


1 6  Cure  of  a  remarkable  Case  of  Hysteria,

A  very  troublesome  symptom  was  constipation,  which
arose  from  spasms  of  the  intestines.  I  found  that  the  best
remedy  was  calomel  combined  with  extract  of  henbane  or  of
belladonna;  the  largest  doses  of  Glauber's  salt  (sulphate  of
soda),  senna,  and  aloes,  were  perfectly  inert.

During  the  whole  of  this  winter  and  the  following  summer,
I  tried  several  remedies,  which  are  usually  employed  in  ner¬
vous  diseases, — such  as  valerian,  zinc,  the  valerianate  of  zinc,
the  foetid  gums,  castor,  copper,  narcotics,  all  singly  and  va¬
riously  combined.  The  effect  was  either  nugatory  or  injurious.
Zinc  and  henbane  were  the  only  drugs  productive  of  a  little
benefit.

Amidst  all  this  disturbance,  Mad.  P.  did  not  lose  the  ap¬
pearance  of  good  health,  nor  did  her  spirits  often  flag.

Towards  the  month  of  August,  after  a  long  paroxysm,  she
completely  lost  her  appetite  for  a  fortnight,  and  took  nothing
but  water  and  a  little  milk.  She  became  very  weak  :  she
dragged  her  right  leg  as  if  it  was  half  paralyzed,  and  could
not  walk  a  few  steps  without  the  support  of  another  person.
After  she  had  taken  a  few  drives  to  try  her  strength  for  tra¬
velling,  I  sent  her  to  the  cold  baths  of  Brettiege,  where  she
was  treated  with  care  and  talent  by  M.  Schneider,  the  physi¬
cian-director  of  the  establishment.

The  cold  water  treatment  was  rendered  imperfect  by  her
not  being  able  to  bear  the  contact  of  water  at  the  region  of
the  heart,  and  was  frequently  quite  interrupted  by  various
fresh  accidents.  However,  in  ten  weeks  she  returned  home
completely  cured,  and  with  the  look  of  the  finest  health.

The  winter  of  1846-7  passed  very  favourably,  but  she  had
occasional  spasms  from  emotion,  and  there  were  frequent  con¬
stipation  and  tumefaction  of  the  abdomen.

As  spring  approached,  she  completely  lost  her  appetite,
and  the  little  food  she  took  was  rejected  in  a  few  minutes.
She  every  day  vomited  two  or  three  ounces  of  black  and  foetid
blood.  This  discharge  relieved  her  of  a  sense  of  weight  at
the  stomach,  and  of  burning  in  the  chest.  It  ceased  in  a  few
weeks,  but  still  her  food  was  rejected,  and  so  were  all  medi¬
cines.  After  the  continuance  of  these  symptoms  for  two
months,  she  was  exceedingly  weak,  and  resolved  to  try  Bret¬
tiege  again.  But  the  success  was  imperfect,  and  the  treat¬
ment  was  again  often  interrupted  by  hysterical  attacks.  She
returned  in  six  weeks,  free  from  vomiting,  but  with  her  left
eye  closed,  and  her  right  hand  so  firmly  clenched,  the  fingers
so  forcibly  bent,  that  a  little  cylinder  of  wood  was  with  the
greatest  difficulty  slipped  under  them  for  the  purpose  of  pro¬
tecting  the  palms  from  the  sharp  edges  of  the  nails.


in  Switzerland.


17


She  could  now  bear  a  close  room;  whereas  for  a  year
she  had  required  the  windows  to  be  open  day  and  night,  ex¬
cept  during  a  few  weeks  of  the  most  intense  cold.  The  eye
opened  during  her  journey  home,  then  closed  again,  then
opened  again  in  consequence  of  a  blow  on  her  forehead,  and
closed  afresh.  I  caused  it  to  open  by  applying  upon  the  eye¬
brow,  for  some  minutes,  a  hammer  heated  in  boiling  water.
But  it  closed  after  this,  and  did  not  open  again  till  her  cure
was  complete.

Two  months  later — in  September — she  sent  for  me,  and
said  she  had,  for  many  weeks,  felt  ill,  melancholy,  and  ex¬
hausted  :  that,  since  the  vomiting  of  blood  had  ceased,  she
had  felt  a  want  of  being  bled :  that  her  head  was  confused
and  she  found  her  intellect  going.  Her  face  was  red  and
congested,  her  head  heavy,  her  pulse  full.  I  bled  her  to
12  ounces,  but  she  insisted  upon  losing  24.

The  next  day  she  had  convulsions  for  24  hours.  She  was
then  still ;  but  the  right  leg  and  arm  were  bent  fixedly,  the
closed  hand  was  forced  upon  the  shoulder,  the  heel  against
the  buttock,  and  both  right  extremities  were  insensible.  The
lower  part  of  the  dorsal  spine  was  very  painful,  and  I  applied
two  pieces  of  caustic  potass  upon  it.  In  two  months  the
hand  had  regained  a  little  suppleness  and  sensibility;  but  the
leg  was  extended,  rigid,  and  insensible.  There  was  conges¬
tion  in  the  head;  the  catamenial  period  was  coming;  and  a
paroxysm  threatened.  I  yielded  to  her  entreaties,  and  bled
her  to  8  ounces.  The  catamenia  appeared  the  following  day,
and  continued  24  hours  without  any  disturbance ;  but  the
following  day  an  hysterical  paroxysm  took  place.  She  lay  in
bed  insensible,  as  rigid  as  a  bar  of  iron,  without  any  sign  of
life.  At  intervals  of  from  half  an  hour  to  two  hours,  she
shrieked  frightfully,  terrified  by  the  spectre  of  the  bloody
corpse  of  a  man  who  had  destroyed  himself  the  day  before.
She  wept,  and  entreated  those  around  her  to  remove  the  hor¬
rible  apparition ;  was  willing  to  die,  but  not  to  be  shut  up  in
the  same  coffin  with  this  frightful  spectre.  “  There  is  not
room  for  two,”  she  exclaimed  in  a  voice  of  distraction.  Her
countenance,  her  every  feature,  had  the  character  of  the  ex-
tremest  terror,  and  was  so  changed  that  positively  no  one
could  recognize  her.

After  three  days  passed  thus,  she  became  calm ;  but  her
right  arm  and  leg  remained  cold,  insensible,  and  fixedly  bent.
The  left  leg  was  insensible,  but  not  bent.  Sensibility  returned
in  the  two  legs  above  the  knees.  I  applied  a  blister  of  the
size  of  a  batz*  upon  the  right  arm  every  day,  and,  having

*  A  batz  is  a  small  copper  coin. — J.  E.


VOL.  VIII.


C


18


Cure  of  a  remarkable  Case  of  Hysteria,


removed  the  cuticle,  sprinkled  of  a  grain  of  strychnine
upon  it.  In  10  days  sensibility  began  to  return ;  but  the
bladder  became  inflamed,  and  micturition  so  painful  that
convulsions  returned.  I  again  placed  pieces  of  caustic  on  the
sides  of  the  most  pained  vertebrae.

From  this  time,  every  catamenial  period  was  accompanied
by  convulsions,  and  at  every  period  fresh  muscles  became
rigid  and  involuntary.

In  December,  1847,  her  left  eye  was  closed,  and  turned
upwards  and  inwards,  and  the  pupil  contracted ;  the  right
ear  was  deaf;  the  left  arm  sensible,  but,  except  the  thumb
and  forefinger,  the  fingers  were  firmly  bent.  The  right  arm
had  regained  its  suppleness  and  sensibility,  but  the  fingers
were  bent,  and  the  whole  limb  was  wasted.  Both  legs  were
insensible  and  cold  below  the  knees,  and,  as  well  as  the  feet,
strongly  drawn  towards  each  other :  the  toes  were  bent.  The
most  distressing  symptom  was  the  fixed  closure  of  the  lower
jaw,  rendering  a  more  or  less  violent  effort  necessary  to  open
the  mouth  and  introduce  food — an  operation  which  I  was
obliged  to  repeat  twice  every  day.  Sometimes  I  readily  in¬
troduced  my  fingers  between  the  teeth ;  at  others,  a  lever
was  required ;  and  sometimes  I  could  not  overcome  the  con¬
traction  of  the  muscles,  and  she  was  reduced  to  complete  ab¬
stinence,  for  she  always  refused  to  allow  any  teeth  to  be  ex¬
tracted  or  sawn  for  the  purpose  of  an  opening.  There  was
almost  complete  absence  of  sleep.

Still  later,  what  I  had  long  dreaded  took  place.  The
muscles  of  the  neck  and  pharynx  became  rigid,  as  well  as
those  of  the  lower  jaw,  and  deglutition  became  more  and  more
difficult,  and  sometimes  impossible.  The  dorsal  spine  became
exquisitely  sensitive,  so  that  the  slightest  touch  produced
great  agony :  the  supine  position  was  insupportable,  and  to
lie  upon  the  sides  was  as  difficult  on  account  of  the  suffocation
which  it  produced.  She  was  too  weak  to  sit,  and  this  posi¬
tion  caused  her  to  faint :  she  thus  had  not  an  instant  of  repose.
The  only  position  supportable  for  a  few  moments  was  lying
with  her  back  upon  bladders  filled  with  air,  or  upon  her  closed
hands  placed  at  her  sides  where  the  most  tender  points  of  the
spine  were.  I  had  employed  all  the  external  means — plasters,
liniments,  &c.,  &c.,  that  I  could  think  of,  or  that  were  sug¬
gested  by  my  medical  friends,  Drs.  Burnier  and  Perey  of
Lausanne,  De  Montet  and  Curchod  of  Yevey.  Injections
were  impossible,  from  the  inability  of  the  patient  to  be  suita¬
bly  placed.

I  had  recourse  to  mesmerism,  and  procured  her  some
moments  of  repose.  By  degrees,  the  pain  of  the  back  went


in  Sioitzerland.


19


higher — from  the  seventh  cervical  vertebra  to  the  occipital
foramen,  and  then  the  supine  position  became  more  easy.
While  mesmerising  her,  I  observed  a  singular  circumstance —
that  my  left  hand  exerted  a  repulsive  influence  over  her  when
asleep — she  avoided  it  with  an  expression  of  pain  ;  and  that ,
when  I  presented  my  right  hand  to  her ,  she  laid  her  head  upon
it  and  would  not  quit  it}  and  if  I  withdrew  it  she  screamed  and
was  convulsed.

All  those  around  her — relations  and  friends  whom  she
loved — were  repulsive  to  her,  during  both  her  paroxysms  and
her  mesmeric  sleep.  If  they  were  in  an  adjoining  room,  no
sooner  did  they  approach  the  communicating  door,  without
opening  it,  than  she  was  agitated  and  screamed.  On  the
other  hand,  a  medical  man,  whom  she  likes  during  her  sleep,
and  who  had  tranquillized  her  writh  mesmerism  in  a  nervous
illness,  cannot  approach  her  in  her  ordinary  state  without
giving  her  a  disagreeable  sensation.

All  these  phenomena  recurred  in  the  paroxysms  at  the
catamenial  periods,  even  before  mesmerism  was  employed,
and  I  did  not  have  recourse  to  it  lest  I  should  keep  up  her
morbid  excitability  :  the  violence  of  the  pain  occasionally
made  its  employment  necessary.  I  wished,  however,  to  try
its  effect  upon  the  lower  jaw,  which  I  had  such  difficulty  in
opening ;  and  I  effected  a  mesmeric  sleep ,  in  which  I  opened  it
with  ease ,  but  the  food  introduced  into  her  mouth  passed  no
farther,  for  all  the  muscles  of  deglutition  were  insensible  and
uninfluenced  by  her  will.  I  attempted  to  introduce  an  oeso¬
phagus  bougie,  but  it  caused  violent  pain,  which  awoke  her,
and  the  pharynx  contracted  forcibly :  on  my  continuing  the
attempt,  blood  flowed ;  and,  as  the  same  results  occurred  at
every  repitition  of  it,  I  was  obliged  to  give  it  up.

I  had  remarked  that  when  the  contracted  muscles  gave
the  limbs  a  position  exceedingly  painful  or  inconvenient — for
instance,  when  the  arms  forced  upon  the  back  drove  the
clenched  hands  against  the  shoulders,  or  the  heels  were
against  the  buttocks — the  only  mode  of  relaxing  them  was  to
grasp  them  up,  knead  and  squeeze  them  strongly.  I  did  the
same  with  the  muscles  of  the  neck  and  lower  jaw.  When  I
had  opened  the  jaw,  I  grasped  the  muscles  of  the  neck  strongly
with  my  hands,  dwelling  most  upon  those  which  were  the  most
rigid.  In  this  manner  deglutition  became  possible,  and  a  few
spoonfuls  of  milk  were  got  down  every  day.

Sometimes  this  operation  was  easy,  and  a  quarter  of  a  pint
of  milk  taken  between  morning  and  evening  :  at  others,  the
efforts  requisite  were  so  violent,  and  the  pain  of  the  neck  so
great,  that  general  rigidity  and  convulsions  were  produced.  I

c  2


20  Cure  of  a  remarkable  Case  of  Hysteria ,

have  seen  her  make  seventy-two  attempts  before  she  has
swallowed  three  tablespoonfuls  of  milk.  Sometimes  she  had
not  courage  enough  to  undergo  this  torment,  as  all  her  efforts
and  my  own  could  not  overcome  the  constriction  of  the  jaw
and  pharynx  :  and  frequently  from  one  to  nine  days  passed
without  a  particle  of  food  or  drink  being  taken.

In  February,  by  the  advice  of  M.  Burnier,  I  gave  her
daily  an  injection  containing  some  grains  of  extract  of  stram¬
onium  and  lactuca  virosa.  I  persevered  for  a  fortnight,  in
spite  of  the  painful  tumefaction  of  the  abdomen  that  resulted
from  every  kind  of  injection.  At  the  end  of  this  time,  her
sight  was  affected  by  the  narcotic  injections,  yet  her  jaw  re¬
mained  in  the  same  state.  I  applied  over  the  masseter  mus¬
cles  of  her  lower  jaw  water  containing  20  grains  of  sulphate
of  morphia  to  6  ounces  ;  water  containing  20  grains  of  hydro-
cyanate  of  potass  to  3  ounces;  pure  extract  of  belladonna;
ointment  of  veratrine.  The  brain  was  narcotized  by  most  of
these  drugs,  but  ihejaw  did  not  relax.

About  this  time,  Madame  P.  sent  for  me  in  the  middle  of
the  night.  Her  head  and  tongue  were  so  heavy  that  she
could  scarcely  articulate  a  word ;  a  spasm  of  the  chest  inter¬
rupted  respiration.  She  could  scarcely  pronounce  the  word
bleeding .  I  could  not  attribute  this  state  to  the  narcotics,
because  they  had  been  left  off  several  days.  For  a  long  time
I  had  resisted  her  entreaties  to  be  bled ;  and  what  good  had
been  gained  ?  I  yielded,  and  bled  her  to  twelve  ounces.  The
jaw  immediately  relaxed;  she  gaped  deeply,  recovered  the  use
of  her  hands,  the  respiration  became  free,  the  slightest  pres¬
sure  was  sufficient  to  open  her  mouth,  the  pharynx  was  re¬
laxed,  and  she  made  a  good  meal.

This  state  lasted  eight  days,  gradually  declined,  and  ended
in  one  of  her  common  paroxyms  of  spasms.  I  bled  her  again
to  some  ounces :  she  became  tranquil  immediately,  and  the
relaxation  of  the  muscles  enabled  me  to  feed  her.  Such  occur¬
rences  continued  to  take  place  at  shorter  and  shorter  intervals,
and  five  times  I  bled  her  with  the  same  success.  But  this  plan
could  not  be  proceeded  with  for  ever  in  a  patient  who  ate  so
little  ;  and  yet  I  knew  no  other  mode  of  effecting  the  relaxa¬
tion  which  was  necessary  to  her  taking  food.  The  inhalation
of  chloroform  was  practised,  but  with  the  effect  of  universal
convulsions  which  lasted  many  hours,  and  were  followed  by
universal  rigidity  rendering  her  a  statue,  and  then  by  suffoca¬
tion  of  such  duration  that  I  was  compelled  to  put  an  end  to  it
by  taking  away  a  few  ounces  of  nearly  colourless  blood.

I  tried  a  tepid  bath  again;  but  scarcely  had  the  water
touched  her  chest  than  a  paroxysm  of  convulsions  and  deli-


in  Switzerland .


<v  .L

riiun  began.  A  few  days  afterwards  I  ordered  her  cold  affu¬
sions.  After  this  treatment  had  been  continued  for  ten  days,
I  found  that  I  could  open  her  mouth  more  easily,  and  make
her  swallow.  Unfortunately  she  was  one  day  allowed  to  be
chilled  after  the  affusion,  and  the  consequence  was  rheumatic
pains  of  the  chest  and  teeth,  and  all  my  hopes  were  destroyed.

These  repeated  bleedings,  which  I  practised  against  my  will,
had  completely  blanched  her :  but,  on  the  other  hand,  they
had  diminished  the  intensity  of  the  catamenial  paroxysms,
which  were  now  reduced  to  a  few  spasms  without  delirium ;
and  they  had  been  the  only  means  of  producing  sufficient  re¬
laxation  of  the  muscles  to  permit  swallowing,  and  one  bleeding
gave  some  degree  of  this  facility  for  a  week  or  a  fortnight.
I  endeavoured  to  substitute  opiate  injections  for  the  bleeding,
but  unsuccessfully;  they  produced  stupefaction ,  and  some¬
times  excitement  of  the  brain,  but  never  relaxation  of  the
jaws,  and  rarely  sleep.  Occasionally  they  caused  convulsions ,
which  could  be  arrested  by  nothing  but  bleeding.  In  order
to  support  her  system  I  tried  injections  of  beef-tea  and  milk;
but  they  returned  immediately,  and  left  severe  pain  in  the
abdomen.

It  would  be  uninteresting  and  useless  to  continue  the
details  of  her  disease,  which  ran  the  same  course  for  many
months,  with  intermissions  of  calm,  ending  after  some  weeks
in  an  explosion  of  spasms,  which  became  weaker  and  weaker.
We  were  chiefly  occupied  with  the  possibility  or  impossibility
of  giving  her  nourishment ;  the  impossibility  becoming  more
and  more  frequent,  long,  and  intractable,  and  the  patient
growing  weaker  and  weaker.  We  thus  arrived  at  the  end  of
June,  and  now  every  attempt  to  introduce  nourishment  be¬
came  impossible.  Even  if  we  were  able  to  get  into  her  mouth
some  spoonfuls  of  water  or  milk,  the  liquid,  especially  milk,
had  no  sooner  arrived  at  the  pharynx  than  it  excited  a  sharp
pain  and  insurmountable  contraction  :  the  oesophagus  bougie
could  not  obtain  a  passage  for  it.  The  patient  cried  with
hunger  and  still  more  with  thirst :  her  despair  was  redoubled
when  she  saw  me,  as  she  felt  that  I  could  do  no  more  for  her.
During  nine  days  she  had  swallowed  almost  nothing ;  and  for
some  weeks  the  little  milk  she  had  been  able  to  take  had  only
irritated  her  stomach,  which  was  now  unaccustomed  to  receive
aliment,  and  this,  instead  of  comforting  her,  produced  disten¬
sion,  weight,  and  often  severe  pain.  Her  weakness  increased
rapidly;  her  sight  became  dim;  she  fainted  on  making  the
least  movement.  We  expected — what  do  I  say? — we  hoped,
for  her  death ,  as  the  only  possible  termination  of  such  long
and  dreadful  suffering.


22


Cure  of  a  remarkable  Case  of  Hysteria,

At  this  time  I  heard  that  Mr.  Bayley,  an  English  gentle-
man,  who  for  several  years  had  passed  the  summer  near  Ve-
vey,  had  arrived  at  his  usual  residence,  and  brought  with  him
a  neice  who  suffered  from  headaches,  for  which  a  London
physician  had  recommended  mesmerism,  and  that  he  had
learnt  the  mode  of  performing  it  and  had  succeeded.

I  had  always  been  of  opinion  that  Mad.  P.  had  no  struc¬
tural  disease,  but  a  deranged  action  only,  of  her  nervous  sys¬
tem,  and  that  mesmerism  was  the  only  agent  which  could  do
any  good.  It  was  true  that  I  had  not  succeeded  with  mes¬
merism,  but  this  I  ascribed  to  my  want  of  experience.  I  re¬
quested  Mr.  Bayley  to  mesmerise  my  patient.  He  at  once
consented,  and  from  that  moment  devoted  himself  to  her  treat¬
ment  with  a  perseverance  and  kindness  above  all  praise.  At
the  very  first  trials,  he  succeeded  in  putting  her  to  sleep,  and
in  opening  her  hands,  the  right  of  which  had  been  closed  for  a
twelvemonth .  He  next  opened  her  mouth,  but  deglutition
continued  impossible,  and  without  this  there  was  no  hope
of  recovering  a  person  who  was  dying  from  inanition.  Mr.
Bayley  was,  at  this  time,  seeing  and  mesmerising  an  English
lady  whom  I  was  attending,  and  to  whom  I  had  spoken  of
Mad.  P.,  as  I  was  always  thinking  of  her.  We  thus  learnt
that  this  lady — the  Honorable  Carolina  Courtenay  Boyle —
distinguished  equally  by  her  birth,  her  intelligence,  and
her  goodness  of  heart — had  studied  mesmerism  a  great  deal,
had  known  many  eminent  mesmerisers,  and,  in  fact,  had
seen  in  London  cases  cured  of  the  same  kind  as  that  of  my
patient.  She  advised  Mr.  Bayley  to  take  advantage  of  the
sympathy  which  exists  between  the  mesmeriser  and  the  mes-
merisee,  and  said,  “  When  you  touch  the  piano  in  the  presence
of  your  niece  in  her  mesmeric  sleep,  she  repeats  with  her  fin¬
gers  the  same  notes  which  you  struck.  Do  the  same  with
your  patient :  swallow  before  her,  make  a  violent  attempt  to
swallow  before  her,  and  she  will  imitate  you.  From  the  phe¬
nomena  presented  by  his  niece,  Mr.  Bayley  perceived  the
soundness  of  this  advice,  and  instantly  followed  it.  He  went
to  Mad.  P/s  house,  and  mesmerised  her  jaws,  neck,  and
teeth ;  breathed  into  her  mouth  to  mesmerise  her  tongue,  and
then  poured  in  some  milk.  He  placed  his  thumbs  upon  those
of  the  patient,  and  immediately  swallowed  some  water  which
he  had  in  his  mouth.  Mad.  P.  immediately  made  an  effort  to
swallow ,  and  gulped  doivn  at  once  all  the  milk  in  her  mouth .
I  was  present.  From  this  time,  Mr.  Bayley  bestowed  the
most  assiduous  care  upon  my  patient.  I  cannot  detail  his
treatment,  which  can  interest  mesmerisers  only.  What  ought
to  satisfy  medical  men  is  the  positive  result.  To-day,  August


in  Switzerland.


23


16th,  Mad.  P.  is  almost  completely  cured.  Both  her  eyes
are  open ;  the  left  ear  is  still  deaf ;  her  mouth  opens  freely
and  easily ;  her  powers  of  mastication  and  deglutition  are  per¬
fect  ;  her  appetite  is  excellent ;  all  her  functions  are  regular,
and  she  has  no  attacks  at  her  period.  The  arms  and  legs
have  regained  their  suppleness.  She  works,  walks,  goes  up
and  down  stairs,  and  her  healthy  complexion  is  returning
rapidly.  From  the  repeated  bleedings  she  is  still  pale.  Her
ankles  swell,  and  she  is  still  weak,  so  that  she  cannot  take
long  walks.  She  never  sleeps  but  by  means  of  mesmeric
passes.  She  is  aroused  from  her  sleep  by  any  loud  noise,  and
then  has  convulsions ;  but  when  awake,  she  bears  the  loudest
thunder  and  the  most  vivid  lightning  without  annoyance.

I  am  satisfied  that  this  patient,  who  engaged  my  attention
so  painfully  for  three  years,  will  now  obtain  a  perfect  cure,
and  that,  though  we  may  not  understand  the  operation  or  na¬
ture  of  mesmerism,  we  cannot  deny  its  beneficial  influence.
We  admit  the  existence  and  action  of  the  imponderable  agents,
the  laws  of  v/hich  are  made  known  to  us  by  physics,  chemis¬
try,  and  astronomy.  Why  then  refuse  to  admit  the  existence
of  a  new  imponderable,  the  effects  of  which  are  not  more
marvellous  than  those  of  other  agents  of  the  same  nature  ?
Time,  experience,  observation,  will  enable  us  to  enunciate  the
laws  of  that  mesmeric  fluid  which  is  not  yet  received ;  and
then  every  person  will  readily  admit  it.

My  patient  will,  of  course,  be  spoken  of  as  only  an  hys¬
terical  female  cured  by  imagination.  People  may  say  what
they  please :  but  they  cannot  destroy  the  truth  of  the  fact  which
I  have  narrated .  Is  it  not  the  same  with  all  the  phenomena,
with  all  the  wonders  of  nature,  that  we  daily  witness  ?  Can
we  comprehend  them  ?  Do  we  explain  them  by  anything  but
more  or  less  probable  hypotheses  ?  And  have  we  physicians
any  right  to  be  so  difficult  in  regard  to  explanation  ?  If  we
are  asked  the  cause  of  the  action  of  a  remedy,  as  why  opium
produces  sleep,  are  we  not  reduced  to  answer  in  the  words  of
the  immortal  Moliere —

u  Quia  est  in  eo
Virtus  dormitiva.”

Yevey.  Guisin,  M.D.


In  a  note  just  forwarded  to  me  by  Miss  Boyle,  and  ad¬
dressed  to  her  by  Mr.  Bayley  on  the  1st  of  March,  1850,
that  gentleman  says,  “  The  case  is  one  in  which  there  is  no
exaggeration — a  fault  but  too  frequent  in  histories  of  the  kind.
Dr.  Guisan  has  so  much  sobriety  of  character  that  his  ve¬
racity  cannot  be  doubted,  and  I  myself  was  witness  of  the  de-


24


Cure  of  a  remarkable  Case  of  Hysteria ,

plorable  state  in  which  his  patient  was  when  all  means  em¬
ployed  for  her  recovery  failed  to  effect  any  benefit.”

John  Elliotson.


NOTE  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON.

This  narrative  is  full  of  medical,  mesmeric,  and  moral
instruction,  and  I  cannot  communicate  it  to  The  Zoist  with¬
out  a  few  observations  in  the  manner  of  my  clinical  lectures
delivered  at  St.  Thomases  and  University  College  Hospitals.

The  case  was  one  which  passes  under  the  common  name  of
hysteria, — a  term  which,  though  in  common  cases  significant
of  well-known  symptoms,  and  so  far  convenient,  is  productive
of  false  notions  respecting  the  source,  and  therefore  of  the
extent,  of  the  disease,  and  is  both  a  cloak  for  ignorance  and
an  excuse  for  not  carefully  investigating,  and  even  for  not
bestowing  rational  attention  upon,  very  wonderful  circum¬
stances  which  occasionally  occur,  either  with  or  without  few
or  more  of  the  ordinary  symptoms  of  the  disease.

The  ordinary  symptoms  of  hysteria  are  spasms,  convul¬
sions,  pain,  tenderness,  delirium,  sobbing,  laughing,  crying,
choking,  on  the  one  hand  ;  and  palsy  of  sensation  or  motion,
or  of  both,  insensibility,  lowness  of  spirits,  and  debility,  oil
the  other.  They  were  supposed  to  arise  necessarily  from  a
something  wrong  about  the  uterus  (ysrepa,  liystera ),  and  there¬
fore  not  to  extend  beyond  the  female  sex ; — two  suppositions
perfectly  unfounded.  We  see  it  frequently  in  boys,  occasion¬
ally  in  men,  and  continually  without  any,  or  without  more
than  incidental,  uterine  affection  in  women.  The  disease  is
more  common  in  women,  because  the  female  fabric — the  body
at  large  and  the  brain — is  far  more  sensitive  and  excitable
than  the  male ;  and  this  circumstance  probably  caused  the
frequent  symptom  of  the  sudden  swelling  of  the  abdomen  and
choking  to  be  ascribed  to  the  rising  of  the  womb,  and  the
whole  disease  therefore  to  be  fancied  an  effect  of  uterine  de¬
rangement,  whereas  the  uterus  is  affected  in  common  only
with  the  rest  of  the  system.*

Frequently  there  is  no  hysterical  paroxysm,  and  little  or
no  choking  and  flatulence,  but  morbid  sensibility  of  certain

*  The  maddened  and  choking  Lear  exclaims —

“  O,  how  this  mother  (uterus)  swells  up  toward  my  heart !

Hysterica  passio  !  down,  thou  climbing  sorrow,

Thy  element’s  below  !” — Act  ii.,  Scene  iv.

A  commentator  apologizes  for  Shakespeare’s  making  Lear  hysterical;  and
remarks  that  in  the  poet’s  time  the  disease  called  the  mother,  or  hysterica  passio ,
was  not  thought  peculiar  to  women.  As  doctors  increased  in  wisdom  they  thought
it  was  :  and  now  we  know  again  it  is  not.  So  ages  ago  it  was  supposed  that  there


in  Switzerland .


25


parts,  chiefly  of  the  spine,  and  either  at  certain  spots,  or
through  a  longer  or  shorter  track  of  it,  often  at  the  very  low¬
est  point.  But  any  part  of  the  trunk,  or  head,  or  extremities
may  acquire  this  morbid  sensibility,  so  that  the  least  pressure
is  painful.  There  may  be  morbid  sensibility  within,  giving  rise
to  vomiting,  diarrhoea,*  sneezing,  asthma,  and  cough,  perhaps
barking,  from  the  slightest  causes  ;  palpitation ;  and  not  only
pain,  dull  or  acute,  but  every  kind  of  sensation  may  be  expe¬
rienced  that  external  causes  produce  in  us  all,  burning,  smart¬
ing;  pricking,  crawling,  dragging,  distension,  coldness,  &c.
Loss  of  sensibility  of  any  part  or  spot;  even  of  one  or  both
legs,  or  arms,  eyes,  ears,  &c.  Catchings  of  any  part,  tremor,
permanent  contraction  of  a  leg  or  arm,  lock-jaw,  want  of
sleep,  deep  and  continued  sleep,  dreaming,  sneezing,  hiccup,
barking,  harsh  cough,  perhaps  every  minute,  without  evi¬
dent  exciting  causes ;  waywardness,  delirium,  monomania,  es¬
pecially  a  tendency  to  deceive  and  interest  and  give  trouble
to  even  those  they  love,  or  downright  general  insanity.  But
it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  this  is  purely  a  nervous  dis¬
ease.  The  tongue  and  breath  may  be  foul  :  the  kidneys,
bowels,  or  uterus  over  excited,  or  amazingly  torpid  :  their  se¬
cretions  more  or  less  vitiated.  There  may  be  copious  colour¬
less  discharges  from  the  ear,  nose,  &c. ;  blood  may  flow  from
the  air  passages,  stomach,  bowels,  or  other  organs ;  even  from
the  skin.  This  blood  is  generally  unhealthy;  sometimes  very
vitiated.  There  may  be  diseased  secretion  on  the  skin,  so
that  portions  of  this  shall  be  blackened,  as  though  charcoal
had  been  rubbed  upon  them,  and  then  imposition  is  immedi¬
ately  cried  out  by  those  doctors  who  pride  themselves  upon
being  very  sharp.  There  may  be  copious  black  stuff  vomited,
or  discharged  from  the  bowels  or  kidneys,  apparently  like  the
black  vomit  of  yellow  fever.  There  may  be  indurated  ele¬
vations  upon  the  bones  of  the  fingers,  &c.,  or  upon  the  spine ;
or  enlargement  of  joints.  There  may  be  an  excess  as  well  as
defect  of  appetite,  a  craving  for  strange  articles,  or  a  disgust
for  what  are  usually  agreeable.  A  dislike  of  flesh  food  is  very
common  in  females  afflicted  with  diseases  of  the  nervous  sys¬
tem.  I  have  known  sickness  from  beef  tea  when  administered
not  by  the  mouth.  The  small  quantity  of  food  that  supports

were  nerves  distinct  for  sense  and  for  motion.  This  truth  was  afterwards  scouted  :
and  now  it  is  admitted  universally.  So  lemon  juice  was  300  years  ago  known  to
be  excellent  against  scurvy.  But  the  London  College  of  Physicians  in  the  last
century  assured  Government  that  vinegar  was  the  thing  :  and  now  we  all  believe
that  lemon  juice  is  the  thing,  and  vinegar  of  little  use.

*  There  is  a  nervous  diarrhoea  in  men  as  well  as  in  females  ;  it  is  very  obsti¬
nate,  yet  wears  a  person  down  but  little ;  and  is  at  first  not  easily  distinguished
from  common  diarrhoea.


20  Cure  of  a  remarkable  Case  of  Hysteria,

existence  is  often  astonishing ;  and  to  force  food  against  the
wish  may  be  prejudicial.  The  degree  and  the  amount  of
combination  of  the  symptoms  is  indefinite.

The  duration  of  the  disease  is  various ;  from  part  of  an
hour  to  months,  years,  and  even  occasionally  a  very  long  pe¬
riod  of  life.  There  is  usually  no  danger.  The  most  violent
muscular  action,  the  deepest  coma,  the  most  violent  pain,
nay,  the  bleedings,  the  signs  of  congestion  of  blood  and  of
inflammation,  the  longest  abstinence,  the  utmost  torpidity  of
secreting  organs,  do  not  in  general  prove  fatal.  Still  there
are  exceptions.  Apoplexy  or  stupor,  strangulation,  excite¬
ment,  exhaustion,  occasionally  terminate  in  death,  and  take
the  medical  attendant  by  surprise.  The  changing  of  the  symp¬
toms  of  hysterical  affections  is  often  very  striking,  whether
ordinary  or  such  as  we  so  often  observe  in  the  mesmeric
state.  For,  besides  these  ordinary  symptoms,  extraordinary
symptoms  sometimes  take  place,  precisely  such  as  we  wit¬
ness  in  the  state  of  mesmeric  patients.  Sleep-waking,  with
every  shade  of  mental  activity  and  inaction  ;  catalepsy : —
feelings  of  attraction  or  repulsion  in  regard  to  particular
persons  or  inanimate  objects ;  peculiar  effects  from  the  con¬
tact  of  certain  metals,  &c. ;  extraordinary  acutenes  for  cer¬
tain  feelings  : — sympathy  of  sensation  and  thought ;  and,  in
rare  cases,  the  several  varieties  of  clairvoyance,  may  occur.
The  last  class  of  phenomena  is  always  regarded  as  decep¬
tion  :*  those  mentioned  before  this  are  either  doubted  or  fail
to  excite  more  than  a  superficial  wonder,  as  something  strange
or  “  funny and  even  those  first  mentioned,  as  sleep -waking
and  even  catalepsy,  are  often  laughed  at.  Witness  the  sneers
of  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  received  with  satisfaction  in  the

*  When  such  symptoms  occur,  medical  men,  if  they  bestow  any  attention  at
all  upon  them,  generally  say  little  about  the  matter;  and  are  justified  in  not
exposing  themselves  to  vulgar  persecution.  A  case  of  spontaneous  clairvoyance
occurred  in  the  person  of  a  Miss  Me  Avoy  at  Liverpool,  about  thirty  years  ago.
Dr.  Renwick  published  a  faithful  account  of  it,  but  was  so  persecuted  by  his
brethren  that  he  lost  his  practice  and  died  broken  hearted.  Besides  genuine
clairvoyance,  there  was  possibly  superstition  and  pretence.  But  the  portion  of
solid  truth  was  flung  to  the  winds.  A  practitioner  had  an  hysterical  case  in
which  the  patient  read  every  letter — not  every  word  in  mass — backwards ;  and  he
mentioned  it  to  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  who  anxiously  advised  him  as  a  friend  not  to
mention  the  fact,  as  it  would  do  him  harm.  Sir  Astley  Cooper  was  right  as  far
as  kindness  and  prudence  were  concerned.  But  after  all  this  is  worldly  wisdom,
the  wisdom  of  serpents :  not  the  wisdom  of  a  high  and  noble  nature,  which
men  of  the  world  too  seldom  appreciate.

A  lady  in  Devonshire  exhibited  lately  most  extraordinary  nervous  symptoms,
which  were  mentioned  to  many  of  us,  and  were  the  same  as  we  are  familiar  with
in  mesmerism ;  but  the  case  was  never  published,  though  so  important  to  all
philosophical  medical  men.  Mesmerism  is  a  sealed  book  to  her  physician,  and
unhappily  was  not  employed.


in  Switzerland.


27


Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society,*  at  the  remarkable,  but  far
from  solitary,  instance  of  sleep-waking  near  Bath,  recorded  by
an  eminent  physician,  Dr.  Oliver,  a  fellow  of  both  the  College
of  Physicians  and  Royal  Society,  in  the  Philosophical  Trans¬
actions,  1706.  Even  the  ordinary  symptoms,  when  occurring
in  a  rather  unusual  manner,  are  doubted.  An  eminent  phy¬
sician,  Dr.  Musgrave,  also  a  fellow  of  the  College  of  Physicians
and  Royal  Society,  recorded  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions ,
1698,  a  case  of  hysterical  periodical  palsy,  and  tells  us  that
“  some  thought  her  bewitched  ;  others  that  she  counterfeited.”
But  he  adds,  “  the  favourers  of  one  and  the  other  of  these  opi¬
nions  were  equally  strangers  to  her  case.”  How  just  is  this
remark !  We  who  know  the  truth  of  all  the  mesmeric  phe¬
nomena,  from  having  studied  them  earnestly  as  philosophers,
know  well  that  those  who  scoff  at  our  truths  are  all  strangers
to  the  case;  in  fact,  are  as  ignorant  and  as  unqualified  to
open  their  lips  upon  the  subject,  as  Caffres  are  to  favour
Europeans  with  their  doubts  about  the  electric  telegraph.

Many  of  these  patients  are  highly  susceptible  of  mesmer¬
ism,  and  immediately  exhibit  its  effects.

The  present  case  exhibits  the  ordinary  and  a  large  number
of  the  more  remarkable  symptoms,  and  interchanging  in  a
remarkable  manner ;  and,  as  is  often  observed,  the  symptoms
of  something  more  than  a  diseased  condition  of  the  nervous
system,  for  the  blood  was  morbid,  the  abdomen  tumified.

The  case  illustrates  the  inefficiency  of  the  established  treat¬
ment  of  these  diseases.  No  hysterical  case  was  ever  treated
better  in  the  established  method.  Nothing  good  was  omitted
or  done  imperfectly :  nothing  was  done  wrong.  Dr.  Guisan
proved  himself  an  admirable  practitioner.  Yet  was  the  result
merely  alleviation  of  symptoms,  and  temporary  benefit.  And
do  not  English  medical  men  know,  and  do  not  the  friends  of
patients  in  England  with  nervous  diseases  know,  that  such
is  the  result  of  all  our  ordinary  treatment  ?  that  attendance
goes  on  month  after  month,  and  often  year  after  year,  and
hundred  after  hundred  pounds  are  spent  on  doctors,  with  very
little  advantage  ?  Are  not  medical  men  tired  out,  and  sick
of  everything  but  the  profit  ?  And  yet  mesmerism  would
cure  nearly  all :  and  does  usually  cure  them  when  well  em¬
ployed  ; — not  if  employed  for  a  short  time,  and  by  halves,  but
employed  perseveringly,  even  though  no  good,  or  no  effect
at  all,  or  even  a  little  inconvenience,  should  at  first  result.

If  Dr.  Guisan  sets  his  brethren  an  excellent  example  as  a
practitioner  in  the  ordinary  course,  he  sets  them  an  excellent


*  See  ray  pamphlet  on  Surgical  Operations  without  Pam,  p.  45.


28


Cure  of  a  remarkable  Case  of  Hysteria.

example  in  information  :  for  he  did  not  make  himself  ridicu¬
lous  by  doubting  the  reality  of  the  patient's  symptoms,  he
did  not  for  a  moment  absurdly  think  of  imposition.  He  was
informed  enough  to  know  the  truth  and  efficacy  of  mesmerism,
and  felt,  in  the  midst  of  his  unsuccessful  treatment,  that  it
was  the  proper  remedy ;  and,  when  he  found  it  fail,  he  can¬
didly  ascribed  his  failure  to  his  imperfect  acquaintance  with
the  practice.  Not  having  had  the  advantage  which  all  En¬
glish  practitions  have  in  the  regular  publication  of  The  Zoist ,
in  my  willingness,  till  lately,  to  demonstrate  and  teach  mes¬
merism  to  any  medical  man,  first  in  University  College  Hos¬
pital,  and  afterwards  in  my  own  house,  his  want  of  practical
skill  was,  unlike  the  ignorance  of  the  English  medical  body,
perfectly  excusable.  Mesmerism  saved  the  lady’s  life  and  cured
her.  And  yet  the  rural  and  the  metropolitan,  the  humble,
and  the  fashionable,  and  royal  practitioners  of  England,  allow
their  patients  to  go  on  month  after  month,  and  year  after
year,  little  or  not  at  all  benefitted  by  drugs — many  of  them
violent  and  injurious;  nor  by  painful  measures  :  and,  if  mes¬
merism  is  proposed  by  a  friend  of  the  family,  wickedly  declare
that  it  is  dangerous,  drives  the  blood  to  the  head,  causes  fits
for  life,  fatuity,  insanity,  and  tell  other  disgraceful  untruths,
and  tell  them  for  the  worst  of  reasons — for  the  indulgence  of
pride,  obstinacy,  and  selfishness,  being  too  weak  to  see  that
they  must  all  yield  and  very  soon  too.

The  case  shews  the  inutility  of  marriage  as  a  remedy.
The  young  lady  continued  ill,  and  indeed  was  at  length  worse
than  ever,  after  her  marriage ;  and  this  I  have  witnessed  in
numerous  instances.  Yet  medical  men  are  too  much  in  the
habit  of  saying  that  marriage  is  the  remedy,  as  though  the
disease  had  any  necessary  relation  to  sexual  feeling,  and  as
though  young  women  were  as  prurient  as  gay  men  heartlessly
fancy  that  they  are.  This,  I  am  certain,  is  a  vulgar  medical
error,  suited  to  coarse  natures  and  shallow  observers ;  though,
of  course,  disappointed  affection,  or  disappointment  of  any
kind,  is  one  of  the  very  numerous  causes  of  the  disease.

The  moral  instruction  of  this  case  is  great.  Dr.  Gruisan,
finding  he  did  no  good,  conscientiously  desired  other  means
to  be  used ;  and  he  did  not  prefer  his  patient's  suffering  and
death  and  his  own  supremacy  to  her  cure  by  mesmerism.  He
did  not  tell  the  friends  that  mesmerism  had  been  tried  and
had  failed ;  he  honestly  told  them  that  it  was  the  remedy,
that  it  had  not  been  fairly  tried,  and  that  he  was  incompetent
to  apply  it.  He  did  not  scorn  to  avail  himself  of  the  asssist-
ance  of  a  foreigner — an  Englishman,  of  one  who  was  not  of
the  medical  profession,  but  who  was  acquainted  with  the  use


Cures  of  various  Diseases.


29


of  a  mighty  curative  agency ;  and  neither  he  nor  Mr.  Bayley
was  above  listening  to  the  sagacious  and  important  recommen¬
dation  of  an  English  lady.  This  devotion  to  truth  and  hu¬
manity  in  all  simplicity  it  is  delightful  to  contemplate,  and
English  medical  men  would  do  well  to  take  Dr.  Guisan  for
their  example,  before  the  indignation  of  the  public  rises  much
higher  at  their  conduct.*

When  she  was  cured,  he  did  not  go  about  declaring  that
he  had  always  said  she  would  get  well,  as  is  said  by  medical
men  respecting  Miss  Bernal  and  other  patients  whose  mes¬
meric  cures  are  detailed  in  The  Zoist.  The  great  fact  is,  that
the  patients  cured  by  mesmerism  were  treated  in  vain  year
after  year,  till  mesmerism  was  used,  and  then  began  to  re¬
cover,  and  did  recover.  Our  facts  are  too  striking  and  too
abundant  for  us  not  to  pity  and  laugh  at  those  who  talk  thus
of  our  cures.  And  when  mesmerism  has  not  cured,  the  relief
of  suffering  has  been  great  and  such  as  no  other  remedy  ac¬
complished.  Neither  did  Dr.  Guisan,  when  she  was  cured,
assert  that  she  had  shammed,  as  is  the  heartless  custom  in
England  to  say  of  patients  cured  mesmerically.j*


III.  Cures  of  repeated  Bleeding  from  the  Lungs,  of  Epilepsy,
of  Deafness  from  childhood,  and  of  Pain,  Debility,  fyc.,
of  the  Spine,  and  Abscess  in  the  Hip.  By  Mr.  Saunders,

Bristol.

“  The  history  of  mankind  clearly  proves  that  there  have,  in  different  ages,  ex¬
isted  epidemics  of  the  mind  as  well  as  of  the  body,  popular  superstitions,  which
have  strangely  obscured  the  understanding  and  perverted  the  judgment.  The
weak  in  intellect  have  always  been  most  liable  to  be  affected  by  the  evil  influence
of  credulity,  for  which  reason  Lord  Bacon  truly  observed  that,  ‘  in  the  opinion  of
the  ignorant  multitude,  witches  and  impostors  have  always  held  a  competition  with
physicians.'  Unhappily,  however,  physicians  have  sometimes  not  disdained  to
change  places  with  impostors ;  hence  Paulus  JEgineta  tells  us  that  the  Arabian
physician  Rhases  dedicated  an  entire  chapter  to  ‘  professional  impostors,’  with
the  view  of  exposing  their  frauds,  and  cautioning  their  misguided  disciples  against
their  crafty  counsels.  The  portrait  of  Thessalus,  the  Roman  empiric,  as  drawn
by  Galen,  is  recognized  by  Dr.  Paris  to  be  the  very  prototype  of  the  charlatans
who,  in  the  present  day,  practise  homoeopathy,  hydropathy,  and  animal  magnet¬
ism,  which  is  now  covertly  mystified  under  the  designation  of  *  mesmerism’  and
*  cerebral  physiology,’  the  latter  title  being  an  impertinent  assumption,  and  aim¬
ing  at  insidiously  engrafting  a  repudiated  fiction  upon  a  recognized  branch  of


*  I  was  staying  at  Vevey  in  the  Autumn  of  1846,  and  had  I  known  of  the  case
could  have  saved  Mad.  Paschond  all  her  subsequent  suffering,  and  Dr.  Guisan  his
anxiety,  for  he  would  willingly  have  learnt  how  to  treat  her  mesmerically,  and  1
should  have  been  happy  indeed  to  have  shewn  him.

■f-  Those  who  make  this  case  a  study  would  do  well  to  read  my  cases  of  El.
Hunter,  No.  III.,  p.  309  ;  Master  Salmon,  No.  III.,  p.  314  ;  Maria  Pearsey,
No.  IV.,  p.  427;  and  Miss  Emma  Melluish,  No.  IV.,  p.  429.


30


Opinions  of  the  Medical  Times

legitimate  science.  The  love  of  dealing  with  the  supernatural — the  principle
which  suggested  to  Goethe  the  compact  between  Faust  and  Mephistopheles — has
constantly  urged  the  curious  in  futurity  to  transcend  the  boundaries  of  ordinary
experience.  Not  more  than  a  couple  of  centuries  ago,  one-half  of  the  potentates
and  philosophers  in  Europe  believed  in  magic  and  astrology.  Next  came  the
wonders  of  witchcraft  and  sorcery  ;  and,  although  we  plume  ourselves  upon  the
advancement  of  science,  and  flatter  ourselves  that  we  are  living  in  a  more  en¬
lightened  age,  we  are  surrounded  by  superstitions  as  absurd  and  incongruous  as
any  which  called  forth  the  reprobation  of  the  Roman  satirist.  It  may  well  be
said  of  us,  ‘  mutato  nomine  tie  te  fabula  narratur Instead  of  consulting  the
stars,  and  asking  the  astrologer  to  cast  our  nativity,  the  modern  metoposcopist
fingers  our  phrenological  organs,  and  reports  the  cranial  indications  of  our  des¬
tiny  ;  instead  of  consulting  the  priests  who  officiated  in  the  temple  of  iEsculapius,
the  susceptible  votary  of  modern  witchcraft  permits  the  mesmeric  oracle  to  per¬
form  the  mystic  ceremony  of  ‘  manipulation/  as  it  is  called,  and  consisting  in  the
operator  passing  his  extended  digital  extremities  downwards  and  upwards,  at  a
little  distance  before  the  eyes,  nose,  and  mouth,  until  the  most  marvellous  effects
are  produced.  These,  instead  of  being  registered  on  tablets  of  marble,  are  re¬
corded  in  The  Zoist — a  quarterly  journal,  the  history  and  objects  of  which  de¬
mand  special  attention.

“  The  quarterly  and  monthly  journals  which  appear,  are,  for  the  most  part,
presumed  to  represent,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  the  interests  and  progress  of  legiti¬
mate  science.  A  new  era,  however,  has  arrived  in  periodical  literature.  Instead
of  its  fields  being  set  apart,  and  dedicated  to  the  cultivation  of  knowledge ;  and
instead  of  our  deriving  from  them  information  respecting  such  new  discoveries  as
may  be  revealed  to  us  in  the  pursuit  of  truth  ;  the  arena  is  now  invaded  by  a
host  of  self-advertising  charlatans,  who  aim  only  at  disseminating  particular  doc¬
trines  which  they  have  an  interest — a  personal  and  worldly  interest — in  dissemi¬
nating.  The  charlatanerie  of  this  new  self- advertising  system  is  very  obvious,
although  it  may,  to  a  certain  extent,  impose  upon  the  public.  It  is  well  known
that  the  facilities  which  are  afforded  by  the  means  of  public  advertisements  are
so  great,  that  every  impostor  who  wishes  to  palm  upon  the  world  his  belief  in
any  new  discovery  to  which  he  may  pretend,  has  only  to  pay  a  steady  advertise¬
ment  duty  and  charge  for  a  given  period,  and  he  may,  with  impunity,  trumpet
forth  the  infallible  remedies  he  possesses,  and  the  wonderful  cures  he  has  per¬
formed  ;  and,  by  persisting  in  this  course,  it  is  notorious  that  he  will  succeed  in
imposing  upon  the  credulity  of  ignorant  people,  and  greatly  promote  his  own
pecuniary  interests.  A  more  ingenious  method,  however,  of  entrapping  such
disciples  is  at  present  adopted.  Instead  of  honestly  and  boldly  advertising  their
pretensions,  the  founders  and  apostles  of  every  pseudo  science  now-a-days,  start
a  quarterly  or  monthly  journal,  under  the  prestige  of  which,  a  tone  of  authority
is  usurped,  which  appears  to  give  a  specious  weight  to  the  apocryphal  facts  and
sophistical  principles  thus  surreptitiously  enunciated.  Hence  we  have  mesmeric,
homoeopathic,  and  hydropathic  journals.  Nor  is  this  novel  mode  of  appealing  to
public  credulity  so  expensive  as  might  appear ;  nay,  it  is  an  economy  rather  than
otherwise.  Take,  for  example,  a  quarterly  journal  consisting  of  five  sheets
pica,  with  an  impression  of  750  copies.  We  may,  at  a  rough  guess,  say  that
each  number  will  cost  .^30,  or  ^120  per  annum  ;  and  even  supposing  not  a
single  copy  sold,  nor  an  advertisement  paid  for,  we  have  a  very  moderate  outlay,
compared  with  the  enormous  suras  which  such  orthodox  practitioners  as  Messrs.
Morrison,  Curtis,  Solomon,  Holloway,  et  hoc  genus  omne ,  spend  daily  in  adver¬
tisements.  Such  journals  as  these  we  denounce.  They  are  not  legitimate  con¬
tributions  to  scientific  literature ;  and  their  object  is  as  palpable  and  as  noto¬
rious  as  the  monster  advertisement  vans  which  perambulate  Fleet  Street  and  the
Strand.

“  The  Zoist  is  one  of  those  empirical  quarterly  journals  which  emphatically
belongs  to  this  class.  It  is  put  forth  solely  to  advertise  mesmerism.  It  is
an  amusing  record  of  pretended  miracles,  which  only  tend  to  show  how  far
human  assurance  will  go  in  attempting  to  impose  upon  human  credulity.  It
contains  fictions  so  palpable,  that  the  very  extravagance  of  their  details  nullifies


of  Mesmerism  and  Phrenology .


31


their  effect.  But  a  journal  established  upon  the  advertising  principle  we  have
above  explained,  does  not  depend  for  its  support  upon  public  opinion.  The
proprietor  or  editor,  independently  of  subscribers,  pays  all  expenses,  and  may
perform  before  the  mirror  of  his  own  self-complacency  any  vagaries  he  pleases,
resembling,  in  a  striking  manner,  the  madman  described  by  Horace,  who  imper¬
sonated  at  once  actor  and  audience : —

‘  Fuit  haud  ignobilis  Argis,

Q,ui  se  credebat  miros  audire  Tragsedos
In  vacuo  loetus  sessor  plausorque  theatro.’

Epist.  ii.  128.

“  As  the  members  of  our  profession  generally,  we  presume,  have  never  seen
The  Zoist,  and  are  unacquainted  with  its  physiognomy,  we  may,  by  way  of
further  preliminary,  add,  that  it  is  a  goodly-sized  8vo.  journal,  printed  on  good
paper  and  in  a  clear  type.  It  is  stitched  in  a  sort  of  whity-brown  Mackintosh  wrap¬
per,  and  adorned  with  a  striking  wood-cut  representing  Dr.  Elliotson,  disguised  as
a  bearded  sage,  sitting  down  between  the  two  Okeys,  pondering  upon  the  Book  of
Fate.  The  design  is  beautifully  executed,  and  reminds  us  of  some  of  the  choicest
hieroglyphics  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  Vox  Stellarum ,  or  Moore’s  Prophetic
Almanac.  Nor  is  this  all.  The  conception  of  the  picture  indicates  admirably
the  contents  of  the  journal.  It  is  characteristic  of  a  combination  between  Elliot-
sonism  and  Okeyism  ;  between  the  mesmeriser  and  the  mesmerised  ;  between
professional  sagacity  and  subjective  inspiration.  We  must,  however,  here  pause,
and  request  Dr.  Elliotson  to  descend  for  a  few  moments  from  the  empyrean
(query,  empirical)  heights  of  his  philosophy,  in  order  that  he  may  meet  us  on
terra  firma,  for  we  would  fain  have  ‘  a  few  words  with  this  learned  Theban/

“  The  Zoist  for  January,  1850,  opens  with  an  article  on  *  Capital  Punish¬
ment,’  or  *  Killing  according  to  Law and  which,  as  the  title  may  indicate,  is
conceived  in  an  extremely  ribald  and  vulgar  spirit,  evincing  a  profound  ignorance
of  the  subject ‘in  all  its  bearings.  It  is,  indeed,  ludicrous  and  pitiable,  to  find
Dr.  Elliotson  arraigning  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department,  the
judges  of  the  land,  and  the  usually  constituted  juries  of  the  country,  for  being
ignorant  of  the  physiology  of  the  brain,  and  not  apportioning  the  sentence  upon
condemned  criminals  according  to  the  measure  of  their  guilt  —  weighing  the
same  in  the  visionary  scales  of  phreno-mesmerism.  The  article  before  us  treats
the  question  physiologically,  psychologically,  phrenologically,  and  mesmerically  ;
in  short,  views  it  in  every  light  excepting  the  one  under  which  it  ought  to  be
considered — viz.,  the  social  policy  of  exacting  the  ultimum  supplicium  as  a  warn¬
ing  to  deter  others  from  the  commission  of  the  like  offences.  If  Dr.  Elliotson  will
take  the  trouble  to  inform  himself  upon  the  subject,  he  will  find  that  the  statistics
of  crime  irrefragably  prove  that  the  diminution  of  capital  punishments  has  been
invariably  followed  by  a  very  large  increase  of  the  offences  previously  punishable
with  death.  The  question  is  purely  one  of  social  policy ;  and  to  select  it  as  a  peg
upon  which  to  hang  a  ragged  disquisition  upon  phreno-mesmerism,  is  a  mere  ruse  to
append  a  subject  of  popular  interest  to  one  which  Dr.  Elliotson  has  great  diffi¬
culty  in  keeping  alive  at  any  cost.  We,  however,  at  once  proceed  to  the  grand
coup  of  the  present  number — an  attack,  by  Dr.  Elliotson  himself,  on  those  pro¬
fessional  men  who  persist  in  disbelieving  mesmerism  ;  and  here,  we  must  say,  we
regret  to  find  Dr.  Elliotson  losing  that  sweet  equanimity  of  temper  which  be¬
comes  his  serener  nature.  ‘  Anger  !  ’  exclaims  Brutus,  ‘  What’s  anger  ?  ’Twere
a  brave  passion  in  a  better  cause  !  ’  But  Dr.  Elliotson  is  inconsolable,  and  re¬
fuses  to  be  comforted.  He  therefore  gives  vent  to  his  agony  in  the  following
exclamations  : — ‘  The  editors  of  the  medical  journals  preserve  a  dead  silence  upon

all  the  mighty  mesmeric  facts . their  hearts  are  hardened,  and  they  care

not  for  the  welfare  of  their  fellow-creatures . I  feel  shame  that  I  belong

to  the  medical  profession .’  (p.  368.)  Poor  Dr.  Elliotson,  repudiating  his  Alma
Mater — eschewing  his  diploma — ashamed  that  he  belongs  to  the  medical  profes¬
sion,  because  he  has  entered  the  cloudy  sanctuary  of  mesmerism  !  Time  was
when  Dr.  Elliotson  was  respected,  and  honoured,  and  esteemed  ;  time  was  when
he  devoted  the  great  and  commanding  talents  he  possesses  to  the  pursuit  of  a  high


32


Opinion  of  the  Medical  Times.


and  honourable  profession.  But  he  swerved  from  the  straightforward  course
which  was  before  him.  He  was  tempted,  with  gipsy-like  credulity,  to  wander
into  paths  of  darkness,  which  so  sadly  obscured  his  vision,  that  he  mistook  even
his  duty  as  a  professor.  He  converted  the  wards  of  the  London  Hospital,  where
lay  the  sick  and  the  dying,  into  an  arena  for  the  exhibition  of  the  Okeys  and  a
set  of  impostors,  whose  mountebank  tricks  distressed  the  patients,  shocked  the
spectators,  and  called  forth  only  one  feeling  of  common  indignation  against  the
repetition  of  the  grossest  outrage  that  ever  was  perpetrated  within  the  walls  of  a
charitable  institution.  Dr.  Elliotson  was  consequently  called  upon  to  lay  aside
his  professor’s  gown,  and  resign  the  chair  he  no  longer  dignified.  When,  there¬
fore,  he  has  the  presumption  to  talk  of  his  being  ashamed  of  the  profession,  we
are  provoked  into  the  retort,  that  the  profession  has  much  greater  reason  to  be
ashamed  of  him.

44  We  next,  in  the  article  entitled  4  Medical  Anti-Mesmerists,’  meet  with  a
curious  example  of  Dr.  Elliotson’s  perversity  of  reasoning.  He  insists  upon
taking  a  false  position,  and  having  usurped  the  very  ground  of  his  adversaries,
forthwith  he  pretends  to  have  achieved  a  victory  in  maintaining  it.  Thus,
with  something  of  a  savage  exultation,  he  draws  a  comparison  between  some
two  hundred  and  fifty  mesmeric  cases  which  were  attended  with  no  fatal  conse¬
quences,  and  twenty-five  cases  which,  unhappily,  proved  fatal  under  the  adminis¬
tration  of  ether  and  chloroform.  Now,  this  is  exactly  what  his  adversaries  would
have  predicated  :  they  do  not  accuse  mesmerism  of  being  a  sthenic  or  an  anses-
thenic  agent.  They  do  not  suppose  it  ever  cured  or  killed  any  person,  but
allege  that  the  confederated  patients  of  Dr.  Elliotson’s  sconces  pretend  to  sleep,
and  talk,  and  walk  about,  and  writhe  their  limbs  into  all  manner  of  contortions  ;
but,  like  Puff  in  the  Critic ,  they  are  said  to  have  a  strong  objection  to  be  kept
4  dying  all  day  they  therefore  return  home,  eat  a  good  dinner,  enjoy  their  half-
and-half  (being  in  a  mystical  state),  and  are  always  ready  for  their  work  next
morning.  Die  of  mesmerism  S  Who  ever  heard  of  anybody  being  suddenly
killed  by  a  flash  of  clairvoyance  ?  Were  such  an  4  untoward  6vent  ’  ever  to
happen,  we  think  the  very  magistrates  of  Middlesex,  even,  would  order  a
4  crowner’s  quest,’  or  (what  is  called)  4  sit  on  the  body.’  No,  we  have  no  fear
of  mesmerism — whatever  may  be  its  ansesthenic  effects — albeit  we  may  meet
mesmerisers  with  their  nervous  systems  surcharged  with  the  mystic  fluid.  They
have  never  yet,  as  the  Lord  Chief  Baron  would  observe,  proved  to  be  4  dangerous
either  to  themselves  ’  or  4  dangerous  to  others  therefore  they  are  permitted  to
go  abroad  without  proper  conductors.  Accordingly,  Dr.  Elliotson,  in  contend¬
ing  for  the  negative  effects  of  mesmerism,  is  arguing,  we  presume  unwittingly,
the  very  case  of  his  opponents.  After  abusing  the  medical  press  generally,  which
we  hope  may  have  given  Dr.  Elliotson  some  relief,  he  records,  we  think  very
unwisely  for  his  case,  the  verdict  which  has  been  given  against  mesmerism  by
professional  men,  whose  opinions  are  entitled  to  our  respect,  and  will  always
deservedly  have  great  weight  in  society.  Thus,  Dr.  Elliotson  informs  the  public
that  Sir  James  Clarke  did  not  appreciate  the  4  wonders  of  the  Okeys,’  and
4  smiles  with  pity  on  those  who  believe  in  mesmerism.’  Dr.  H.  Holland  4  considers
it  folly.’  Dr.  Bright  4  tells  those  patients  who  ask  his  opinion  upon  mesmerism
that  it  is  all  chicanery.’  Dr.  Ferguson  4  continually  discourages  its  use.’  Sir  Ben¬
jamin  Brodie,  seeing  a  lady  being  mesmerised,  declared  his  opinion  that  it  was  4  all
nonsense.’  Dr.  Chambers  told  Baron  de  Goldsmid  he  considered  it  4  all  humbug.’
Professor  Christison,  of  Edinburgh,  also  4  considers  mesmerism  quackery.’  Hence
it  appears,  according  to  the  evidence  which  Dr.  Elliotson  has  himself  placed  upon
record,  that  the  most  intelligent,  scientific,  and  experienced  professional  men  in
this  country  repudiate  the  doctrines  of  mesmerism  ;  and,  although  Dr.  Elliotson
may  feel  very  sore  that  such  is  their  verdict,  from  it  he  cannot  in  any  way  escape.

44  A  falcon  towering  in  its  pride  of  place,

Was,  by  a  mousing  owl,  hawked  at  and  killed,” —
but  no  obscure  writer  in  The  Zoist,  with  all  the  vituperation  which  this  journal
has  at  its  command,  will  ever  tarnish  the  reputation  or  shake  the  authority  of  men
who  are  an  honour  to  the  profession.

44  Dr.  Elliotson  loudly  complains  that  no  medical  periodical  will  notice  him.


33


Cures  of  various  Diseases  by  Mr.  Saunders.

Dr.  Elliotson  may  find,  perhaps,  that  it  is  wise  at  all  times  to  let  sleeping  dogs
lie.  We  will,  however,  gratify  his  ambition,  and  take  occasion,  time  and  oppor¬
tunity  permitting,  to  examine  the  so-called  science  of  mesmerism.” — Medical
Times ,  Feb.  16,  1850.


“To  return  abuse  with  abuse  I  consider  unworthy  of  a  philosopher  and  of
an  enquirer  into  truth ;  and  it  seems  to  me  better  and  more  prudent  to  dissipate
such  evidences  of  bad  feeling  by  the  light  of  true  and  satisfactory  observation.
Dogs  must  bark  and  vomit  forth  what  is  in  them,  and  cynics  will  be  found
among  philosophers :  but  we  must  prevent  them  from  biting  or  infecting  with
their  maddening  venom,  or  gnawing  the  bones  and  foundations  of  truth.  I
resolved  never  to  read,  much  more  never  to  condescend  to  answer,  detractors ,
idle  carpers,  and  writers  tainted  with  scurrility,  from  ivhom  nothing  solid,
nothing  but  abuse,  could  be  expected .-  Let  them  indulge  their  depraved  desires  :
I  cannot  think  they  will  find  many  respectable  readers  ;  nor  does  the  Almighty
bestow  upon  the  bad  the  most  excellent  and  highly  to  be  desired  gift  of  wisdom.
Let  them  continue  to  revile  till,  if  they  are  not  ashamed,  they  at  least  are  sick
and  tired.” — Harvey.  Second  letter  to  his  opponent  Riolanus.


“  Universally,  nature  treats  new  truths  and  their  discoverers,  in  a  singular,
but  uniform  manner.  With  what  indignation  and  animosity  have  not  the  greatest
benefits  been  rejected  ?  For  instance,  potatoes,  Peruvian  bark,  vaccination,  &c.
As  soon  as  Yarolius  made  his  anatomical  discoveries,  he  was  decried  by  Sylvius
as  the  most  infamous  and  ignorant  madman.  Vesanum,  litlerarum  imperitis-
simum,  arrogantissimum,  calumniatorem  maledicentissimum,  rerum  omnium
ignarissimum ,  transfugam,  impium,  ingratum,  monstrum  ignorantice,  impietatis
exemplar  perniciosissimum,  quod  pestilentiali  halitu  Europam  venenat,  fyc.
Varolius  was  reproached  with  dazzling  his  auditors  by  a  seductive  eloquence,  and
artificially  effecting  the  prolongation  of  the  optic  nerves  as  far  as  the  thalami.
Harvey  for  maintaining  the  circulation  of  the  blood  was  treated  as  a  visionary ;
and  depravity  went  so  far  as  to  attempt  his  ruin  with  James  and  Charles  the
First.  When  it  was  no  longer  possible  to  shorten  the  optic  nerve,  or  arrest  the
course  of  the  blood  in  its  vessels,  the  honor  of  these  discoveries  was  all  at  once
given  to  Hippocrates.  The  physical  truths  announced  by  Linnaeus,  Buffon,  the
pious  philosopher  Bonnet,  by  George  Le  Roy,  were  represented  as  impieties
likely  to  ruin  religion  and  morality.  Even  the  virtuous  and  generous  Lavater
was  treated  as  a  fatalist  and  materialist.  Every  where  do  fatalism  and  materialism,
placed  before  the  sanctuary  of  truth,  make  the  world  retire.  Every  where  do
those,  upon  whose  judgment  the  public  relies,  not  merely  ascribe  to  the  author
of  a  discovery  the  absurdities  of  their  own  prejudices,  but  even  renounce
established  truths  if  contrary  to  their  purposes,  and  revive  ancient  errors  if
calculated  to  ruin  the  man  who  is  in  their  way.” — Gall.  Sur  les  fonctions  du
Cerveau,  t.  i.,  p.  221.

Repeated  discharges  of  Blood  from  the  Lungs.

In  the  month  of  November,  1844,  I  was  requested  to
try  the  effects  of  mesmerism  upon  a  young  person,  by  the
name  of  Anne  Vaughan.  She  had  been  suffering  for  the  last
six  months  from  what  was  termed  a  broken  blood-vessel  in
the  chest.  During  that  time,  she  had  been  under  the  treat¬
ment  of  four  or  five  of  the  leading  physicians  and  surgeons  of
Bath,  where  I  was  then  residing.  She  had  sometimes  spit
nearly  half  a  pint  of  blood  in  a  day,  and  when  I  called  on  her
she  was  scarcely  able  to  walk  across  her  room.  She  had  also
a  bad  cough,  and  was  getting  extremely  thin.  Her  spirits

VOL.  VIII.  n


34  Cures  of  various  Diseases

were  very  low,  for  she  felt  that  the  medicines  which  she  had
been  taking,  though  they  had  been  frequently  changed,  af¬
forded  her  no  relief,  and  she  was  satisfied  that  she  was  sink¬
ing  fast.  I  asked  her  if  I  should  mesmerise  her,  and,  after
consulting  with  the  lady  in  whose  house  she  was  living,  she
consented.  But,  never  having  seen  anything  of  mesmerism,
she  did  not  think  it  would  be  possible  to  put  her  to  sleep.
However,  in  about  three  minutes,  I  sent  her  into  a  sound
mesmeric  sleep.  Her  head  hanging  rather  forwards,  I  raised
it  with  the  finger  and  thumb  of  my  left  hand,  and,  as  I  in  so
doing  had  touched  the  organ  of  Mirth,  she  burst  out  laughing.
I  then  applied  myself  to  making  passes  over  the  chest,  and  in
a  few  minutes  she  told  me  that  she  felt  quite  well.  I  woke
her  in  about  half  an  hour,  and  she  said  she  had  been  perfectly
unconscious,  and  now  felt,  comparatively  speaking,  quite  well.
I  mesmerised  her  once  or  twice  more,  and  her  health  was
completely  restored.  Soon  after  this,  she  went  to  her  mother's
in  Wales,  and  I  entirely  lost  sight  of  her  till  May  30,  1849,
when  she  called  on  us  in  Bristol,  having  come  here  to  settle
some  business.  She  was  looking  very  well,  and  told  us  that  she
had  not  had  the  slightest  return  of  her  disease  since  I  had
cured  her  in  Bath  :  and,  to  prove  that  she  was  not  very  weak ,
she  added  that  she  had  on  the  Monday,  in  consequence  of
missing  the  coach,  walked  from  Bryw-Mawr  to  Newport —
a  distance  of  24  miles,  and  only  felt  the  next  day  a  little  stiff.
She  feels  greatly  indebted  to  mesmerism,  and  will  be  most
happy  to  give  any  information  relative  to  her  cure  to  any  one
who  may  feel  disposed  to  inquire.  She  lives  with  her  mother
in  Orchard  Street,  Bryw-Mawr,  near  Newport,  Monmouth¬
shire.  Her  case  was  exceedingly  interesting,  inasmuch  as
rigidity,  catalepsy,  phreno-mesmerism,  and  mental  travelling
could  be  induced.  Some  persons,  who  now  see  her,  insist
that  she  could  not  have  broken  a  blood  vessel.  Whether  she
had  or  had  not,  I  cannot  possibly  say,  but  the  medical  men
who  attended  her  at  the  time,  said  so,  and  treated  her  ac¬
cordingly;  and  she  continually  brought  up  blood,  could
scarcely  walk  across  the  room,  and  was  no  better  for  the  me¬
dicines  she  was  taking.  I  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  the
doctors  were  mistaken.  There  is  this  one  fact  staring  us  in
the  face — she  was  very  ill,  the  doctors  couldn't  cure  her,  but
I  did.


Epilepsy.

About  the  same  time,  or  the  beginning  of  1845,  a  friend
of  mine,  Mr.  John  Lewis,  living  in  the  same  parish  with  me
in  Bath,  asked  me  to  test  the  virtue  of  mesmerism  in  the


by  Mr.  Saunders.


35


person  of  his  brother-in-law,  David  Fennell.  He  was  about  30
years  of  age,  and  had  been  subject  for  the  last  10  years  to  fits ;
the  attacks  occurred  generally  every  fortnight,  and  sometimes
four  or  five  times  a  day.  He  had  a  severe  fit  the  day  previous
to  my  seeing  him.  I  mesmerised  him  the  first  time  for  about
half  an  hour  without  sending  him  into  the  sleep,  but  he  said
he  felt  warm  all  over,  had  a  slight  tingling  in  his  right  arm,
a  heaviness  in  his  feet,  and  a  weight  upon  his  head.  I  was
only  able  to  attend  him  about  six  or  seven  times,  and,  though
he  never  went  into  the  sleep,  still  the  effect  was  very  great,
for  his  fits  entirely  left  him  from  that  time,  and  his  brother-
in-law,  Mr.  Lewis,  sent  me  the  following  note  : —

“4,  Holloway,  Bath.

“  Sept.  10,  1849.

“  Dear  Sir. — I  am  happy  to  say  that  my  brother-in-law,  David
Fennell,  has  not  had  a  single  fit  since  you  mesmerised  him  four  years
ago.

“  I  remain,

“Yours  faithfully,

-  “John  Lewis.

“  To  Mr.  S.  D.  Saunders,  Bristol.”

Deafness  from  childhood.

In  May,  1845,  Charles  Chiffinch  of  Combe  Down,  near
Bath,  a  lad  about  14  years  of  age,  was  sent  to  me  for  the
purpose  of  being  mesmerised  for  a  severe  deafness  of  both
ears  from  childhood.  His  parents  being  poor,  he  earned  his
livelihood  by  breaking  stones  upon  the  parish  road,  but  some
of  his  relations  told  me  that,  if  I  could  restore  his  hearing,
they  would  endeavour  to  apprentice  him  to  some  trade.  I  ac¬
cordingly  tried  to  send  him  into  the  sleep ;  but,  finding  no
susceptibility,  I  (as  I  usually  do)  at  once  attacked  the  disease
by  breathing  into  the  ears,  not  as  is  frequently  done  through
a  glass  tube — a  mode  which  I  think  from  experience  has  but
little  effect — but  with  the  open  mouth,  as  close  as  possible  to
the  ear,  and  in  such  a  manner  as  to  prevent  the  external  air
from  penetrating  the  passage.  I  made,  also,  many  passes
from  the  ear  to  the  shoulder ;  and,  after  treating  him  in  this
manner  every  other  day  for  about  six  weeks,  his  hearing  be¬
came  perfectly  restored.  His  friends  apprenticed  him  to  a
shoemaker  near  Castle  Cary,  and  last  September  some  parties
from  Combe  Down  called  upon  me  to  inform  me  (having
themselves  received  great  benefit  from  mesmerism)  that
Charles  Chiffinch  had  lately  been  on  a  visit  to  them,  was  get¬
ting  on  very  well  with  his  trade,  and  had  no  return  of  his
deafness  since  I  mesmerised  him  four  years  ago.  During

d  2


36


Cures  of  various  Diseases

the  time  I  was  mesmerising  this  lad,  a  somewhat  singular  oc¬
currence  took  place.  Mrs.  Saunders  was  sitting  one  day  be¬
hind  my  patient,  and,  being  very  susceptible,  went  into  the
mesmeric  sleep  with  one  of  her  feet  resting  upon  the  rong  of
his  chair.  When  I  had  finished  the  sitting,  he  left  me,  stat¬
ing  that  his  hearing  was  more  improved  that  day  than  any
other  on  which  I  had  operated  upon  him.  I  then  woke  up
Mrs.  Saunders,  and  to  my  astonishment  found  she  was  com-  *
pletely  deaf  in  both  ears.  I,  however,  by  making  reverse
passes,  and  blowing  strongly  into  the  ears,  succeeded,  in  a
few  minutes,  in  completely  restoring  her  hearing.  I  merely
mention  this  latter  fact  to  shew  the  necessity  of  very  suscep¬
tible  persons  not  going  too  near  or  touching  parties  who  are
being  mesmerised  for  any  particular  disease.

Pain,  Debility,  fyc.,  of  the  Spine,  and  Abscess  of  the  Hip.

Last  August,  Mrs.  S.  of  Berkeley  Square  in  this  city,  call¬
ed  upon  me,  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Trotman,  Surgeon,  r.n.,
to  speak  to  me  respecting  her  daughter’s  illness,  who  had  been
ill  for  ten  or  twelve  years,  and  had  tried  various  eminent
medical  practitioners  without  any  benefit,  and  had  recourse
to  the  water  establishment  at  Malvern,  where  she  slightly  im¬
proved,  but  only  for  a  very  short  time,  falling  back  again  to
her  almost  helpless  state.  She  was  then  attended  by  Mr.
Trotman,  who  follows  the  homoeopathic  system ;  and,  though
she  found  greater  benefit  from  the  homoeopathic  treatment  than
from  any  other  she  had  tried,  still  she  remained  dreadfully
ill,  and  I  was  requested  to  try  mesmerism  as  the  last  resource,
merely,  as  both  Mr.  Trotman  and  her  mother  expressed  it,
to  soothe  and  quiet  her,  and  not  with  the  idea  of  acting  upon
her  disease,  as  this  was  of  too  long  and  rooted  a  character  to
allow  the  slightest  hopes  of  a  recovery.  I  accordingly  called
the  next  day  to  see  her,  and  found  her  in  bed,  lying  upon  her
right  side.  She  had  great  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  back,
which  was  curved,  an  abscess  in  the  left  hip,  and  considerable
lowness  of  spirits.  As  she  was  lying  on  the  right  side  of  the
bed,  I  asked  her  to  turn  on  her  other  side,  in  order  that  I
might  be  able  to  make  the  passes  down  the  back.  But  her
mother  told  me  she  could  not  turn  of  herself,  and  that  she
should  be  placed  upon  her  other  side  by  the  next  time  I  came.

I  then  endeavoured  to  produce  sleep,  but  caused  only  a  very
slight  drowsiness.  As  she  was  exceedingly  low  spirited,  and
satisfied  that  she  could  not  recover,  I  acted  upon  her  organs
of  Hope,  Firmness,  and  Mirth.  Upon  paying  her  my  second
visit,  I  found  her  much  less  depressed,  and  she  had  experi-


by  Mr.  Saunders.


37


enced  a  good  nights  sleep.  I  continued  to  mesmerise  her
three  or  four  times  a  week, — never  able  to  send  her  into  a
sound  sleep,  though  she  generally  slept  some  time  after  I  left
her,  till  one  day,  whilst  waiting  in  the  drawing  room,  I  was
surprised  to  see  her  open  the  door  and  walk  in  without  assist¬
ance  ;  and  one  fine  warm  day  she  actually  surprised  her  rela¬
tions  and  friends  by  walking  round  the  square.  Her  maid
was  the  first  to  remark  how  much  straighter  her  back  was  be¬
coming;  and  soon  the  assistance  of  the  maid,  both  in  dressing,
undressing,  and  taking  her  bath,  was  totally  dispensed  with.
She  frequently  applied  mesmerised  water  to  her  back,  if  she
felt  it  at  all  weak,  as  this  instantaneously  imparted  strength  to
a  most  extraordinary  extent.  The  abscess  in  the  thigh  was
once  or  twice  inconvenient,  and  seemed  to  swell,  but  I  was
each  time  enabled  to  arrest  its  further  progress  by  making
strong  passes  over  it.  I  continued  to  mesmerise  her  for  some
time,  till,  in  fact,  to  use  her  own  words,  she  “  felt  in  perfect
health.”  She  is  quite  the  astonishment  of  all  her  friends —
many  of  whom  considered  that  she  must  die  of  consumption.
However,  the  first  time  I  saw  her,  I  was  -convinced  that  by
acting  according  to  my  own  judgment,  as  I  was  allowed  to  do
by  Mr.  Trotman,  I  should  be  able  to  effect  a  cure.

Weakness  of  the  Spine ,  with  general  debility.

About  the  latter  end  of  the  year,  a  lady  whom  I  had  mes¬
merised  for  a  tumor  in  the  breast,  requested  me  to  mesmerise

a  friend  of  hers,  a  Mrs.  C - ,  of  Clifton,  who  was  suffering

from  a  severe  weakness  in  the  spine,  with  great  general  de¬
bility.  A  very  short  walk  would  cause  her  the  greatest  fatigue
and  pain,  and  she  was  unable  to  stand  above  two  or  three
minutes  together  without  being  completely  exhausted.  Her
sleep  at  night,  too,  was  very  indifferent.  The  first  time  I.
mesmerised  her,  I  produced  but  little  effect.  However,  after
a  few  times,  though  I  could  never  produce  sleep,  I  succeeded
in  closing  the  eyes,  and  could,  by  the  will  alone,  cause  her
to  get  up  from  her  chair  and  walk  towards  me — no  matter
whether  I  was  before,  behind,  or  at  her  side.  She  would
also  raise  her  arms  and  make  them  become  straight  by  my
will ;  and  yet  I  could  only  make  them  rigid  to  a  slight  extent
by  the  passes.  I  could  excite  her  organs  of  Mirth  by  contact,
though  not  exceedingly  visibly ;  but  after  I  left  her  she  would
feel  more  lively,  happy,  and  comfortable,  than  before  the
mesmerisation.  On  one  occasion,  I  left  her  in  the  mesmeric
state,  and  when  I  got  outside  of  the  room  willed  her  to  come
to  the  door,  and  when  I  left  the  house  willed  her  to  come  to
the  window.  When  I  went  the  next  time,  her  sister  informed


38


More  of  Mr.  Capern’ s  Cures.


me  that  she  had  walked  towards  the  door,  but  suddenly  turned
round  and  went  to  the  window,  and  then  woke  up.  After  she
had  been  mesmerised  about  two  months  three  times  a  week,
she  felt  herself  so  much  better  that  the  treatment  was  discon¬
tinued.  She  now  feels  no  weakness  in  the  spine,  her  general
health  is  good,  and  she  feels  altogether  quite  another  person.
I  need  scarcely  add,  that  my  chief  attention  wras  paid  to  strong
passes  down  the  spine,  with  occasional  excitation  of  the  organs
of  Firmness.


IY.  More  of  Mr.  Capern  s  Cures, — Abdominal  Pain,  Wasting,
Dropsy,  Sore  Neck,  Loss  of  Voice,  Diseased  Heart ,  Rheu¬
matism,  Ophthalmia,  Erysipelas,  Neuralgia.

“There  is  a  certain  number  of  men  endowed  with  such  strength  of  mind  and
nobleness  of  soul,  so  thoroughly  sensible  of  their  own  worth,  and  so  passionately
fond  of  independence,  that  they  resist  every  external  influence  calculated  to  subject
them.  They  endeavour,  as  much  as  possible,  to  establish  themselves  in  countries
where  there  is  the  most  liberty ;  they  follow  a  pursuit  which  renders  them  inde¬
pendent,  which  exempts  them  from  the  favours  and  the  caprices  of  the  great.
Dominion  over  their  inferiors,  which  would  lead  on  to  slavery  under  an  absolute
master,  to  them  would  be  insupportable.  Honours  and  distinctions  intended  for
merit,  when  lavished  on  men  of  no  pretensions,  are  in  their  eyes  only  degradations.
If  they  prosper,  it  is  through  their  own  exertions.  Like  the  oak,  they  sustain
themselves ;  and,  for  whatever  they  are,  they  consent  to  be  indebted  to  no  one.
This  is  a  pride  which  has  not  degenerated  into  haughtiness  ;  which  is  often  the
companion  of  great  virtues,  is  the  enemy  of  all  baseness,  and  the  support  of  cou¬
rage  in  adversity." — Gall,  Fonctions  du  Cerveau ,  t.  iv.,  254.

Abdominal  Pain,  supposed  by  medical  men  to  arise  from  a

tumor.

Mrs.  Gibbins,  aged  32  years,  suffered  for  many  years  from
severe  pain  in  the  right  side,  supposed  to  be  caused  by  an  in¬
ternal  tumor.  She  was  confined  to  her  bed  at  Plymouth,
where  she  resided  before  coming  to  Tiverton;  and  she  con¬
sulted  several  medical  men,  but  without  benefit.  They  all
considered  her  in  a  declining  state,  and  despaired  of  doing
her  any  good.  Shortly  after  her  arrival  at  Tiverton  she  ap¬
plied  to  Mr.  Capern,  who  made  mesmeric  passes  on  the  side
affected.  She  experienced  immediate  relief,  and  at  the  end
of  two  months  was  completely  cured.  When  Mr.  C.  first  saw
her  she  was  advanced  in  pregnancy,  and  the  child  proved  the
healthiest  of  all  her  children.  This  cure  took  place  nearly
two  years  since;  and,  although  she  has  had  two  or  three
slight  returns  of  the  pain,  it  has  always  yielded  at  once  to  a
few  passes  from  Mr.  Capern.

Wasting.

John  Gibbins,  aged  nearly  5  years,  when  first  seen  by
Mr.  Capern  was  very  weak  and  emaciated.  His  shoulder


More  of  Mr.  Capern’s  Cures.


39


blades  protruded  greatly,  and  he  was  unable  to  stand  alone,
and  passed  the  whole  of  the  day  either  in  his  cradle  or  propped
up  in  a  chair.  Before  removing  to  Tiverton  his  parents  had
resided  at  Plymouth,  and  the  child  had  been  attended  by  three
of  the  first  physicians  at  that  place  since  he  was  twelve  months
old,  but  without  benefit.  They  all  concurred  in  saying  he
was  in  a  decline.  He  was  also  under  the  care  of  different
surgeons  at  Tiverton.  Mr.  Capern,  commiserating  the  poor
child’s  case,  resolved  on  trying  the  effects  of  mesmerism,  and
the  following  is  the  satisfactory  result.

A  slight  improvement  in  the  child’s  health  was  observable
after  the  third  or  fourth  operation.  At  the  end  of  five  weeks
he  was  able  to  walk.  Mr.  C.  continued  his  mesmeric  opera¬
tions  daily  for  two  months  longer,  and  then  saw  him  less  fre¬
quently  ;  and  at  the  end  of  seven  or  eight  months  his  health
was  perfectly  restored,  and  he  is  now  a  fine  healthy  spirited
little  fellow.

At  one  time  this  child  was  so  ill  that  the  nurse  called  his
mother  to  close  his  eyes,  as  she  supposed  him  dying.

Dropsy.

Bichard  Thorne,  aged  3^  years,  had  been  very  weak  and
sickly  from  his  birth.  His  body  was  much  swollen,  particu¬
larly  on  the  left  side  :  his  appetite  was  very  great.  His  mo¬
ther  consulted  a  surgeon  and  a  physician  of  Tiverton,  but
without  any  beneficial  result.  They  gave  her  no  hope  of  im¬
provement,  and  considered  him  dropsical.  Just  before  com¬
pleting  his  second  year,  he  became  weaker  than  ever;  was
unable  to  stand,  and  with  difficulty  sat  in  a  chair  supported
by  pillows,  and  only  felt  ease  when  lying  on  his  back.  This
was  his  state  when  Mr.  Capern  first  operated  upon  him.  After
the  first  mesmerisation  he  began  to  improve,  and  was  able  to
stand  alone  at  the  end  of  a  week.  Mr.  C.  continued  his
attendance  for  about  a  month,  operating  two  or  three  times  a
week;  and,  at  the  expiration  of  six  weeks,  he  could  walk
alone,  and  is  now  to  all  appearance  a  strong  healthy  child,  a
year  and  a  half  having  passed  since  he  was  first  treated  by
Mr.  C.

Sore  Neck.

- Hoare,  aged  5  years,  had  suffered  for  about  twelve

months  from  a  painful  sore  on  the  neck  and  bosom,  following
an  attack  of  measles;  and,  although  only  once  mesmerised
by  Mr.  Capern,  yet  there  was  an  immediate  improvement,
and  in  less  than  a  fortnight  the  sore  had  entirely  disappeared.
A  physician  had  occasionally  been  consulted,  but  without
benefit.


40


More  of  Mr.  Capern1  s  Cures ,

A  Family  Group.

Jemima  Ackland,  aged  73 ;  Elizabeth  Zelly,  her  daugh¬
ter,  aged  51 ;  and  William  Zelly,  her  grandson.

Loss  of  Voice.

Jemima  Ackland,  of  the  town  of  Tiverton,  had  been
poorly  for  a  few  days,  about  two  months  ago,  when  she
suddenly  lost  her  voice,  and  could  not  speak  above  a  whis¬
per.  At  the  end  of  six  weeks  she  was  advised  by  her
daughter  to  send  for  Mr.  Capern  and  be  mesmerised,  as  she
(the  daughter)  had  had  her  voice  restored  by  that  gentleman
when  lost  in  a  similar  manner ;  and,  on  his  making  a  few
passes  on  her  throat  and  chest,  her  voice  was  quite  restored  in
less  than  five  minutes,  and  her  general  health  was  also  much
improved.

Loss  of  Voice.

Elizabeth  Zelly,  daughter  of  the  above,  caught  a  severe
cold,  and  in  consequence  lost  her  voice,  and  had  a  great  diffi¬
culty  in  making  herself  heard.  At  the  end  of  about  eight
weeks  she  was  advised  by  a  neighbour  to  apply  to  Mr.  Capern.
This  she  did  the  more  readily,  in  consequence  of  the  wonder¬
ful  cure  performed  by  that  gentleman  on  her  own  son ;  but
she  had  no  idea,  until  her  neighbour  mentioned  it,  that  mes¬
merism  could  be  useful  in  her  case.  Happening  accordingly
to  meet  Mr.  Capern  when  on  her  way  to  his  house,  he  desired
her  to  accompany  him  into  a  neighbouring  public  house  (the
Swan),  and  then,  making  a  few  mesmeric  passes  over  the
throat  and  breast,  completely  restored  her  voice,  much  to  the
astonishment  of  all  present.

Diseased  Heart.

William  Zelly,  son  of  the  above,  now  in  his  tenth  year,
came  home  from  play,  about  two  years  ago,  complaining  of
pains  in  the  side  and  difficulty  in  breathing,  accompanied
with  faintness.  His  father  put  his  hand  on  the  boy's  heart,
and  found  it  was  palpitating  fast  and  strongly.  The  child
continued  getting  worse  for  a  week,  when  his  mother  sent  for

Hr. - ,  who  attended  him  for  a  month,  but  without  any

beneficial  result.  Dr. - was  next  consulted,  who  prescribed

medicine,  which  he  took  for  nearly  three  months,  but  he  still
continued  getting  worse,  and  had  become  very  pale  and  ema¬
ciated,  and  scarce  able  to  walk  across  the  room :  indeed,  so  ill
was  he  at  this  time  that  the  doctors  ordered  him  to  be  carried
whenever  it  was  necessary  to  move  him.  The  palpitation  of
the  heart  was  frequently  so  great  as  to  cause  the  bed  on
which  he  lay  to  vibrate,  and  its  motion  was  visible  to  any  one


More  of  Mr.  Capern’ s  Cures.


41


in  the  room.  At  this  time  his  mother  was  influenced  by
Mrs.  Taylor  and  Mrs.  Turner,  two  neighbours  who  had  both
been  cured  by  Mr.  Capern,  to  apply  to  that  gentleman  to
mesmerise  her  boy.  She  did  so,  and  he  was  mesmerised  for
ten  minutes  daily  for  a  month,  and  about  three  times  a  week
for  another  month.  He  improved  from  the  first  visit  of  Mr.  C.,
and  at  the  end  of  the  two  months  the  palpitation  of  the  heart
had  entirely  ceased,  and  he  walked  a  distance  of  four  miles
and  a  half  and  back  without  experiencing  any  bad  effects  from
it.  This  boy  remains  so  susceptible  to  the  mesmeric  influ¬
ence  that  a  look  from  his  mesmeriser  will  send  him  to  sleep.

Rheumatism.

James  Webber,  Bampton  Down,  agricultural  labourer,
aged  52  years,  had  severe  rheumatism,  first  in  the  back,
then  over  the  whole  body,  for  twenty-two  years.  The  first
attack  lasted  fifteen  months,  during  the  whole  of  which  time
he  was  entirely  incapable  of  labour.  He  then  got  better,  and
for  a  few  months  was  able  to  do  a  little  light  work.  He
could  not,  however,  walk  without  the  assistance  of  two  sticks.
After  some  time  he  became  an  in-patient  of  Exeter  Hospital
for  four  weeks,  and  then  an  out-patient  for  one  week  more.
He  derived  considerable  benefit  from  the  remedies  applied  at
the  institution,  but  the  relief  was  only  temporary ;  for  after
a  few  months  he  relapsed,  was  again  entirely  incapable  of
labour,  and  became  so  helpless  that  he  was  even  unable  to
raise  food  to  his  mouth.  The  neighbouring  farmers,  taking
compassion  on  him,  raised  a  sum  by  subscription  and  bought
him  a  donkey-cart,  and  for  about  six  years  he  earned  his  sub¬
sistence  by  travelling  about  the  country,  when  he  was  able,
collecting  rags  and  old  metal.  He  was  constantly  obliged  to
make  use  of  two  sticks  to  assist  him  in  walking.  During  the
whole  period  of  his  illness  he  never  received  full  wages.
About  Christmas,  1847,  he  happened  to  meet  Mr.  Capern  in
Newport  Street,  Tiverton.  Mr.  C.,  having  heard  his  state¬
ment,  invited  him  into  the  stable-yard  of  an  adjoining  house,
and  made  the  usual  passes  over  the  parts  most  affected,  com¬
mencing  at  the  back.  Great  and  almost  immediate  benefit
was  experienced  by  the  patient,  and  after  two  or  three  more
operations  he  was  completely  cured.  In  two  or  three  weeks
he  was  in  full  work,  and  in  receipt  of  the  usual  labourer's
wages.  In  the  early  part  of  last  summer  he  cut  two  acres  of
grass  in  one  day.  Occasionally,  during  changes  of  weather,
he  suffers  slightly  from  rheumatic  pains.  Some  weeks  ago,
having  strained  himself  while  at  work,  he  came  into  Tiverton
to  see  Mr.  Capern,  who  by  a  few  passes  afforded  him  com-


42


More  of  Mr.  Capern1  s  Cures.


plete  relief.  With  this  exception,  he  has  continued  up  to  the
present  day  well  and  strong.

Inflammation  of  the  Eyes.

Eliza  Quick,  Bampton  Street,  Tiverton,  aged  14  years,
was  subject  from  her  sixth  year  to  frequent  attacks  of  inflam¬
mation  of  the  eyes,  attended  by  great  pain  and  injury  to  the
sight.  She  seldom  passed  a  month  without  an  attack,  and
these  attacks  often  lasted  six  weeks  ;  sometimes  more  than  a
fortnight  of  that  time  would  be  spent  in  one  position,  her  eyes
completely  covered,  as  she  could  not  bear  the  least  light.
Many  medical  men  were  consulted,  both  in  Tiverton  and
Exeter,  but  without  benefit :  and  at  the  Eye  Infirmary  of  the
latter  place  her  mother  was  told  that  her  daughter’s  case  was
quite  hopeless  at  present,  but  that  a  change  for  the  better
might  take  place  in  her  fifteenth  year.  At  length  Mr.  Capern
was  applied  to,  and,  after  the  very  first  operation,  there  was  a
decided  improvement  and  great  alleviation  of  the  pain,  and  she
was  completely  cured  by  four  or  five  applications.  About
two  years  have  elapsed  since  her  cure;  there  has  been  no
return  of  the  complaint,  and  she  is  now  apprenticed  to  a
dress-maker.

Erysipelas.

Benjamin  Grater,  aged  1J  year,  son  of  James  and  Mary
Grater  of  Barton’s  Causeway,  Tiverton,  became  very  ill  about
nine  weeks  ago  in  consequence  of  teething,  and  was  seized
with  very  severe  erysipelas  of  the  head  and  face,  accompanied
with  much  fever.  His  mother,  being  alarmed  for  his  life,
sent  first  for  Dr. - ,  and  then  for  Dr. - ,  two  practi¬

tioners  of  Tiverton.  But  the  child  became  much  worse  under
their  treatment.  His  head  and  face  were  one  continued  sore,
very  painful  and  greatly  inflamed,  and  also  so  much  swollen
that  his  features  could  not  be  distinguished.  In  the  third
week  of  the  child’s  illness,  his  father  (who  had  been  himself
much  benefitted  by  Mr.  Capern,  when  in  a  state  of  great  suf¬
fering)  requested  that  gentleman’s  attendance,  in  consequence
of  which  the  doctors  refused  to  see  the  child  again.  He  was,
therefore,  put  solely  under  the  care  of  Mr.  C.,  who,  from  this
time,  attended  him  with  care,  and  punctually  mesmerised  him
three  times  a  day  for  the  first  week,  and  twice  a  day  after¬
wards,  directing  that  he  should  drink  mesmerised  tea  fre¬
quently  during  the  day.  From  the  first  mesmeric  operation,
the  most  rapid  improvement  took  place :  the  swelling  of  the
head  and  face  gradually  subsided,  and  the  sores  healed  of
their  own  accord,  no  dressing  having  been  applied.  The  child
was  much  pleased  with  the  mesmeric  operation,  and  shewed


More  of  Mr.  Capern’ s  Cures.


43


great  delight  on  seeing  Mr.  C.,  and  he  is  now  as  well  as  ever
he  was  in  his  life.  The  father  and  mother  express  the  greatest
gratitude  to  Mr.  Capern,  and  believe  that,  under  Providence,
he  was  the  means  of  saving  their  child’s  life.

Rheumatism.

Mrs.  Mitchell,  wife  of  Mr.  Mitchell,  postmaster,  Cul-
lompton.  Mrs.  Mitchell,  aged  65  years,  a  married  woman
with  six  children,  states  that  at  the  age  of  7  years  she  was
attacked  with  rheumatism,  which  prevented  any  motion  in
the  hip  joint.  She  has  never  from  that  time,  until  a  fortnight
since — a  period  of  forty -nine  years ,  been  able  to  walk,  except
with  the  greatest  difficulty  and  invariable  pain.  She  has  con¬
stantly  been  under  medical  treatment,  but  without  deriving
any  permanent  benefit.  Fourteen  days  since,  Mr.  Capern
began  mesmerising  her  hip  and  leg.  She  describes  her  sen¬
sation  as  very  peculiar,  and  causing  a  feeling  of  dread  lest
the  hand  of  the  operator  should  too  suddenly  be  removed.
She  can  now  walk  with  scarcely  any  perceptible  lameness,  and
without  the  slightest  pain  whatever  in  walking  up  and  down
stairs.

“  The  above  statement  of  facts  was  related  to  me  by  the
patient  herself,  who  appears  to  be  a  person  of  truth  and  re¬
spectability.

“  Joseph  Hopgood.”*
Neuralgia  of  a  Stump.

Samuel  Britton,  agricultural  laborer,  Bampton  Street,
Tiverton,  aged  50  years,  about  six  years  since,  when  descend¬
ing  a  well  70  feet  deep,  was  precipitated  more  than  60  feet  to
the  bottom,  in  consequence  of  the  handle  of  the  windlass  slip¬
ping  through  the  hands  of  the  person  holding  it.  His  left
leg  was  broken  into  three  pieces,  and  he  was  otherwise  much
bruised  and  hurt.  He  was  obliged  to  submit  to  amputation
of  the  limb.  For  three  years  he  was  able  to  do  but  little  work,
and  he  no  sooner  returned  to  full  employment  than  he  had
frequent  attacks  of  excruciating  pain  in  the  stump.  He  was
able  to  obtain  but  little  rest  and  was  often  obliged  to  leave
his  bed  and  walk  about  the  room  on  crutches  the  whole  night
from  his  agonies.  About  two  years  ago,  Mr.  Capern,  hap¬
pening  to  see  him  walking  past  his  garden  gate,  and,  observ¬
ing  that  it  was  with  difficulty  and  apparently  from  pain,  in¬
quired  what  was  the  matter  with  him,  and,  after  hearing  his
statement,  invited  him  into  his  house.  This  was  in  the  fore¬
noon.  The  man  had  gone  to  his  work  in  the  morning,  but

*  Mr.  Hopgood  has  been  a  surgeon,  and  is  retired  from  practice.


44


More  of  Mr.  Capern’ s  Cures.


had  been  compelled  to  leave  it  in  consequence  of  his  sufferings,
and  was  then  on  his  way  home.  He  had  never  heard  of  mes¬
merism  or  of  Mr.  Capern’s  cures  before.  The  usual  passes
were  made  over  the  limb,  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  pain  flew
from  the  stump  to  the  right  shoulder,  and  then  disappeared
altogether.  It  has  never  resumed  from  that  time :  but  the
patient  has  been  subject  to  occasional  formation  of  abscesses
in  the  stump  that  confined  him  to  his  house  for  weeks  toge¬
ther,  and  caused  considerable  pain.  He  never  mentioned
this  to  Mr.  Capern  until  lately.  A  few  passes  being  made
on  Jan.  6,  1850,  down  the  stump,  a  strong  sensation  of  warmth
was  felt  which  gradually  descended  till  it  appeared  to  the  pa¬
tient  to  reach  the  calf  of  the  leg  and  thence  go  down  to  the
extremities  of  the  toes.  He  felt  precisely  the  same  sensations
on  the  left  side  when  the  passes  were  made  over  the  stump
as  he  experienced  in  the  right  limb  when  the  passes  were  made
over  the  thigh  on  that  side.  A  piece  of  rock  crystal  being
drawn  lengthwise  over  the  hand  without  contact,  a  pricking
or  tingling  sensation  was  felt  (see  case  of  John  Croote),  and
shortly  afterwards  severe  pain  and  cramp  in  the  elbow  and
shoulder  joints.  These  sensations  disappeared  after  a  few  re¬
verse  passes  up  the  arms  by  Mr.  C.

Cramp  of  the  Stomach.

Mr.  Henry  Baker,  of  Hay  Park,  Tiverton,  timber  drawer,
40  years  of  age,  became  subject,  about  three  years  since,  to
severe  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  by  which,  for  the  last
twelve  months,  he  was  disabled  from  labour.  He  applied  to
many  medical  men,  had  recourse  to  a  variety  of  remedies,  and
was  for  some  time  at  the  Exeter  Hospital,  and  also  under  the
treatment  of  an  eminent  physician  of  that  city  ;  but  all  with¬
out  the  least  relief.  He  was  brought  very  low  by  the  reme¬
dies  applied,  and  was  reduced  to  so  weak  a  state  that  he  was
hardly  able  to  go  about  at  all  even  in  the  house.  His  debility
and  emaciation  were  so  great  that  he  was  considered  by  his
friends,  as  well  as  himself,  to  be  in  a  decline.  In  this  condi¬
tion  he  was  advised  to  apply  to  Mr.  Capern.  He  found  im¬
mediate  relief  from  contact  passes  with  the  flat  of  the  hand
down  the  front  of  the  body.  After  three  operations  of  ten
minutes  each,  he  was  free  from  pain.  This  was  about  two
years  since.  Two  months  after  the  last  operation  had  been
performed,  Mr.  Capern  met  him  in  the  street,  and,  finding
that  he  was  suffering  from  the  "old  complaint  in  consequence,
as  he  believed,  of  his  having  overreached  himself  whilst  en¬
gaged  in  his  laborious  employment,  which  requires  at  times  a
very  great  muscular  force,  offered  to  operate  upon  him,  and


Cases  by  Mr.  Harley.


45


with  a  few  passes  entirely  removed  the  pain.  Since  then  it
has  never  returned.  He  is  now  well  and  strong,  attends
regularly  to  his  employment,  and  is  capable  of  performing  a
good  day's  work  without  fatigue  or  inconvenience.  His  ex¬
penses  for  medicine,  &c.,  previously  to  applying  to  Mr.  C.
were  above  ^630.

Tiverton,  February,  1850.


Y.  Cases  by  Mr.  Harley ,  Kingsbridge,  Devon.

“  I  have  always  been  conscious  of  the  dignity  of  my  researches,  and  of  the
extensive  influence  which  my  doctrine  will  one  day  exert  upon  human  knowledge ;
for  which  reason  I  have  remained  indifferent  to  all  the  good  or  evil  which  might
be  said  of  my  labours.  They  were  too  far  removed  from  received  opinions  to  be
liked  and  approved  at  first.  A  knowledge  of  them  required  deep  and  continued
study  :  but  every  one  was  anxious  to  pronounce  upon  them,  and  every  one  came
with  opinions  and  views  according  to  the  measure  of  his  intelligence.  All  the
doctrine  is  now  consecrated  to  the  public.  Judgment  cannot  long  remain  doubtful.
Personal  feeling  will  disappear :  the  passions  will  calm,  and  criticism  will  have  only
its  due  weight.  Posterity  will  not  fail  to  contrast  the  point  from  which  J  started
with  that  at  which  I  stopped.  My  adversaries  have  but  too  distinctly  displayed
the  state  in  which  the  various  objects  of  my  labours  were,  for  it  to  be  difficult  to
know  what  improvement  these  have  derived  and  will  derive  from  my  discoveries. ”
— Gall,  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  t.  vi.,  p.  8.

Continuation  of  Miss  TranC  s  case.  (S  eeZoist,  No.  XXII.  p.191.)

Flora  Place,  Dodbrook,  Kingsbridge,  May  25,  1849.

I  doubt  not  that  the  friends  of  mesmerism  are  desirous  to
know  more  concerning  Miss  Eleanor  Scott  Trant,  whose
case  is  reported  in  the  22nd  number  of  The  Zoist.  The  pro¬
gress  she  has  made  has  far  exceeded  my  most  sanguine  ex¬
pectations.  When  I  began  to  mesmerise  her,  I  had  never
entertained  the  most  distant  idea  that  she  would  ever  stand
on  her  feet  again.  I  thought  the  pains  arising  from  the  tic
might  be  alleviated  or  cured,  but  anything  further  seemed  to
me  as  well  as  herself  and  friends  altogether  out  of  the  ques¬
tion.  Both  her  legs  were  contracted,  but  gradually  relaxed
every  time  she  was  mesmerised.  She  shortly  passed  into  the
sleep-waking  state,  and  was  rendered  perfectly  rigid  by  firm
contact  passes.  As  she  disliked  being  left  asleep,  I  generally
mesmerised  her  for  an  hour  and  then  awoke  her  by  transverse
passes.  But  she  would  remain  perfectly  rigid  for  some  time
after.  The  most  easy,  and  I  think  that  by  far  the  best,  plan —
it  particularly  was  in  her  case — is  to  tell  the  patient  to  prepare
for  waking,  and  to  awake  quite  freely,  and  she  always  does
in  two  or  three  minutes.  One  day,  being  left  alone  knitting,
the  ball  of  cotton  fell  from  off  her  lap,  and  in  attempting  to
reach  it  she  fell  forward  and  sprained  her  ancle  very  much.
I  now  experienced  some  difficulty  in  rendering  the  foot  rigid,


46


Cases  by  Mr .  Harley.


ancl  Mr.  Saunders’s  remarks  were  fully  justified.  She  suffered
much  for  several  days.  One  evening,  when  asleep,  she  said,
“  Oh,  I  never  !  I  see  a  light  blue  flame  passing  through  me;
it  is  stretching  the  nerves.  You  must  mesmerise  the  insteps
of  my  feet  strongly.  I  shall  get  over  the  injury  sustained  by
the  fall.  I  shall  be  able  to  walk  across  the  room  and  open
the  door  to  you  in  a  fortnight’s  time.”  And  this  was  fully  veri¬
fied  at  the  expiration  of  the  time  she  named,  and  on  the  11th
of  July,  1848,  she  walked  out  of  doors  for  the  first  time  with
assistance.  On  another  evening,  she  said,  “  My  stomach
looks  very  weak  and  soft  as  a  jelly.  I  see  the  blue  flame  pass¬
ing  down  over  it,  like  a  soft,  gentle  breeze.  It  is  this  which
does  me  good.  I  see  the  disease  passing  off  the  feet  like  a
cloud  or  dark,  thick,  mist — the  light  is  driving  it,  I  mean  the
sparks  and  streams  of  light  which  pass  from  your  fingers.”  I
applied  a  magnet  some  time  on  the  outside  of  the  shoe,  when
a  violent  shaking  of  the  leg  and  foot  took  place.  “  Oh,”  she
said,  “  it  is  going ;  I  mean  the  disease.”  Although  this  pro¬
duced  a  more  sudden  effect  than  the  passes,  its  frequent  ap¬
plication  rendered  her  weak,  so  that  I  discontinued  its  use,
and  employed  the  strong  slow  passes  instead,  and  with  more
benefit.  The  application  of  a  crystal  of  quartz  with  a  perfect
point,  about  three  inches  in  length  and  four  and  a  half  in  cir¬
cumference,  had  a  similar  effect,  but  would  make  her  per¬
fectly  rigid.  If  any  one  enters  the  room  during  the  sleep  she
always  starts,  unless  I  inform  her  that  some  person  is  about
to  enter.

On  one  occasion  I  put  her  to  sleep,  and  left  her,  giving
her  friends  a  caution  not  to  approach  too  near  during  my  ab¬
sence.  A  niece  of  hers  very  incautiously  went  too  near,  and
distressed  her  so  much  that  her  mother  said  she  would  wake
her.  The  mother  was  going  to  make  the  attempt,  when  she
charged  her  not,  but  to  leave  her  alone.  When  I  arrived
she  had  become  more  calm.  She  began  at  once  telling  me
what  had  occurred.  A  few  passes  set  her  all  right  again;
and,  before  I  awoke  her,  I  charged  her  to  forget  everything
which  had  occurred,  and  to  wake  up  comfortable — which  she
did,  without  having  any  knowledge  of  what  had  happened.
Sympathy  of  sensation  with  her  mesmeriser  is  very  strong.
I  have  tasted  different  kinds  of  fruit,  and  she  has  told  me
what  I  was  tasting,  saying  she  liked  it,  for  she  was  exceed¬
ingly  fond  of  fruit.  I  have  also  taken  up  a  glass  of  water,
and  drunk  from  it,  when  she  appeared  to  be  drinking  the
same,  saying  it  was  very  refreshing.  I  have  said,  ff  Do  you
know  what  it  is  ?”  “  Yes,  water.”  The  rigidity  of  the  limbs

is  very  marked.  Her  jaws  lock  instantly  on  her  going  to


Cases  by  Mr.  Harley.


47


sleep,  and  then  I  generally  relax  them,  to  enable  her  to  con¬
verse.  The  cerebral  organs  give  striking  manifestations  when
excited.  Her  poetic  strains  are  of  a  most  interesting  and
instructive  character.  Certain  individuals  have  been  placed  in
relation  with  her,  when  she  very  accurately  describes  the
nature  of  their  complaints,  and  their  symptoms.  One  even¬
ing,  being  unwell,  having  caught  a  cold,  she  said  there  were
several  small  ulcers  on  the  stomach,  which  were  soon  emptied,
and  the  stomach,  she  said,  was  much  better.  For  several
years  there  had  been  no  discharge  of  mucus  from  the  nose,
except  when  she  was  labouring  under  a  cold,  and  then  a  thin,
watery  fluid  would  escape.  I  asked  her  if  I  could  at  all
benefit  her  in  this  respect.  She  said,  “Yes,  put  one  hand
across  the  middle  of  the  head,  and  the  other  across  the  top
part  of  the  nose.”  This  had  the  desired  effect :  a  change
commenced  immediately  from  that  time.  Previously  to  her
being  mesmerised  there  had  been  an  entire  cessation  of  the
catamenia  for  upwards  of  three  years,  with  but  a  few  excep¬
tions.  Mesmerism  has  exerted  a  powerfully  beneficial  influ¬
ence  on  her  whole  system.

One  evening,  when  entranced,  she  was  suffering  from  severe
toothache,  which  was  speedily  removed.  On  another  occasion
it  was  taken  away  by  local  mesmerism  when  awake  in  three
minutes,  and  never  returned.  Mesmerised  water  affects  her
greatly,  and  will  send  her  to  sleep  without  my  making  a  sin¬
gle  pass.  When  I  mesmerise  the  water  she  sees  sparks  of
fire  in  appearance  pass  from  my  fingers  into  it;  and,  if  she
looks  at  it  when  I  mesmerise  it,  she  becomes  very  drowsy  at
once.  When  awake,  if  I  look  towards  her  hand,  it  rises  and
maintains  that  position  in  a  very  rigid  state,  but  not  unless
she  sees  I  am  looking  towards  it.  I  have  tried  this  repeatedly,
and  the  arm  does  not  drop  until  I  no  longer  allow  the  will  to
control  it.  The  power  of  traction  is  so  striking  that  I  can
draw  her  and  chair  together.  I  have  repeatedly  mesmerised
one  of  her  hands  around  the  wrist  of  the  other,  and  they  be¬
come  inseparable  until  they  are  demesmerised.  I  have  occa¬
sionally  made  a  few  passes  across  the  room  on  the  floor  with¬
out  her  knowing  where  the  line  was  made :  I  have  then
requested  her  to  walk  across  the  room,  and,  as  soon  as  she  ar¬
rived  at  the  place,  she  has  become  completely  fixed  in  a  rigid
state,  not  being  able  to  move  in  either  direction  until  relieved.

She  is  now  enjoying  the  spring  season  by  walking  and
riding  in  the  open  air,  thus  proving  that  she  has  not  relapsed
into  her  former  state  of  suffering.  She  says  mesmerism  has
succeeded  in  doing  for  her  what  everything  else  has  failed  to
do.


48


Cases  by  Mr.  Harley.

Nervousness.

Mr.  J.  Philips,  sawyer,  Kingsb  ridge,  had  suffered  most
distressingly  in  the  head  for  several  years  :  his  nerves  appeared
to  be  in  a  shocking  state,  and  he  was  unable  to  attend  to  his
employment,  at  times  imagining  he  must  inflict  some  injury
upon  himself.  1  advised  him  to  call,  as  I  was  confident  I
could  do  him  good.  I  mesmerised  him  a  few  times.  He
never  experienced  anything  but  a  little  drowsiness  and  a  sense
of  heat  on  the  top  of  his  head ;  but,  after  a  few  passes  were
made,  the  head  became  cool  and  the  feet  very  hot.  During
one  of  these  sittings,  his  head  nodded  or  bent  forward  and
backward  violently.  He  informed  me  that  he  sleeps  much  better
at  night  than  formerly.  Shortly  after,  I  met  him,  and  asked
him  how  he  was :  he  told  me  that  he  was  as  well  as  myself,
and  had  not  had  any  return  since.  He  long  suffered  severely
from  constipation :  but  not  once  since  he  was  mesmerised.

Rheumatism.

Mrs.  Ryder,  of  middle  age,  had  been  a  great  sufferer  for
several  years  in  her  limbs,  so  that  she  was  confined  to  her
house.  Hearing  of  the  good  effects  of  mesmerism,  she  applied
to  me,  in  1848,  in  a  most  distressed  state  of  suffering — com¬
pletely  crippled.  There  was  a  great  swelling  from  the  hip  to
the  knee,  which  was  very  painful  and  tender ;  and  both  legs
were  contracted,  so  that  she  hobbled  about  on  a  crutch  and
stick :  three  of  her  fingers  were  much  contracted,  looking  very
purple  about  the  joints,  and  much  swollen.  The  nerves  were
in  a  most  shocking  state,  and  she  looked  exceedingly  delicate.
At  the  first  sitting  the  eyes  closed  in  a  few  minutes.  She
always  heard  everything,  but  could  not  speak.  Contact  passes
produced  rigidity  of  the  limbs,  and  caused  her  much  pain.
The  contraction  soon  gave  way,  and  the  legs  became  straight.
She  suffered  much  in  her  shoulders  and  spine.  Breathing  on
the  top  of  the  head  would  cause,  first  one  arm  to  ascend,  then
the  other,  and  maintain  a  rigid  position  for  a  few  minutes,
and  then  descend,  sometimes  partially,  and  at  other  times
resume  their  original  position.  Tractive  passes  with  a  crystal
or  with  the  hand  rendered  them  rigid.  The  swelling  of  the
joints  in  a  great  measure  disappeared,  and  two  of  the  fingers
became  somewhat  more  straight.  She  was  mesmerised  for
several  months,  when  she  was  enabled  to  dispense  with  her
crutch  and  stick,  and  returned  home  to  see  her  friends  at
Salcombe,  where  she  resided,  which  is  five  miles  from  this
place ;  and,  on  returning  to  follow  out  the  treatment  a  short
time  longer,  she  walked  the  distance  of  two  miles  without
crutch  or  stick.  From  a  thin,  skeleton-like  appearance,  she


Cure  of  intense  Spinal  Irritation  in  India.  49

gained  considerably,  looking  more  healthy  and  ruddy  than
she  had  for  a  long  time  before.  By  resting  the  hands  gently
on  her  feet  for  a  minute  or  so,  I  invariably  found  she  would
awake.  I  doubt  not,  had  she  continued  it  longer,  she  would
have  improved  even  more,  but  it  was  inconvenient  to  be  ab¬
sent  from  her  family  so  long ;  consequently,  she  went  home
with  the  improvement  made,  feeling  exceedingly  grateful  to  the
Giver  of  all  good  for  the  benefit  received  through  mesmerism.

Flora  Place,  Dodbrook,  Kingsbridge,

Devon.

February,  1850.


"VI.  Cure  of  intense  Spinal  Irritation  in  India.  By  Mr.  C.

T.  Watkins.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Galileo,  Newton,  Salomon  de  Caus,  Volta,  Fulton,  Windsor,  Arkright,
Gall,  and  all  others  who  have  presented  themselves  at  the  door  of  the  vast  mad¬
house  called  the  world,  have  been  pelted  or  hissed.” — Jobard.

To  Dr.  Elliotson.

Dear  Sir. — I  send  you  the  accompanying  case  for  The  Zoist ,
if  you  think  it  worthy  of  being  forwarded,  as  a  cure  was  ef¬
fected,  and  the  patient's  frame  strengthened,  in  a  permanent
degree,  which  no  other  treatment  had  been  able  to  effect.

My  patient  was  a  young  lady  about  16  years  of  age,  her
health  very  delicate,  her  spine  curved  from  her  seventh  year,
and  occasionally  affected  with  great  pain  and,  as  the  medical
men  said,  inflammation,  along  its  whole  region.  She  was
likewise  subject,  as  is  her  whole  family,  to  violent  constitu¬
tional  head-aches.

As  an  intimate  friend  of  the  family,  I  had  often  related
the  wonders  effected  in  the  cure  of  diseases  by  the  most  na¬
tural  agency  that  we  have — mesmerism,  and  induced  its  mem¬
bers,  ivith  the  consent  and  advice  of  their  physician,  to  accept
my  services  on  the  behalf  of  one  in  whom  I  took  so  warm  an
interest.

I  shall  at  once  plunge  in  medias  res,  and  begin  with  my
first  day's  work — first  of  all  mentioning  that  I  was  indebted
in  no  small  degree  to  my  friend  Dr.  Esdaile  for  his  advice
during  the  treatment  of  my  patient ;  and  I  shall  here  take  the
liberty  of  doing  him  that  justice  which  he  so  well  merits,  in
mentioning  the  fact  of  his  being  always  anxious  to  explain  and
give  every  assistance  in  his  power  to  persons  who  come  to  him
for  instruction  and  not  through  idle  curiosity.

Aug.  15th.  Patient  suffers  great  pain  along  the  spine.
Adjacent  parts  much  inflamed.  Has  been  using  a  counter-
irritant  ointment  and  tonic  pills  without  any  manifest  im-

VOL.  VIII.  e


50


Cure  of  intense  Spinal  Irritation  in  India ,


provement :  was  seized  with  hysterical  fits  a  short  time  since,
which  added  much  to  her  general  debility.  Cannot  bear  the
slightest  pressure  on  the  parts  affected.

I,  in  the  evening,  in  presence  of  the  family,  commenced
mesmerising  my  patient ;  but,  owing  to  the  annoyance  from
mosquitos,  and  my  own  health  being  in  rather  an  indifferent
state,  I  only  succeeded  in  producing  some  slight  indications
of  somnolence.

16th.  Patient  suffers  great  pain,  accompanied  by  violent
head-ache  and  universal  languor.  Mesmerised  her  again  in
the  evening,  and  with  more  success.  Did  not  succeed  in  pro¬
ducing  coma,  but  my  patient  arose  and  went  to  her  room ;
upon  reaching  which,  she  fell  asleep  before  being  undressed
— a  thing  she  had  not  done  before  for  years,  as  it  was  her  in¬
variable  rule  to  read  for  an  hour  a  book  which  we  should  not
have  specified  here,  except  for  the  benefit  of  Mr.  M'Neile
and  his  admirers — namely,  The  Bible.  She  slept  uninter¬
ruptedly  until  seven  the  next  morning,  and  awoke  much  re¬
freshed.

17th.  Before  commencing,  my  patient  said,  I  am  sure
you  will  not  send  me  to  sleep  to-night,  as  I  have  had  a  slight
nap  during  the  day,  and  am  suffering  from  a  head-ache.”  She,
however,  this  time  was  sent  into  a  state  of  perfect  coma,  and
did  not  awake  until  seven  the  next  morning.  During  all  the
course  pursued  it  is  rather  singular  that  the  patient  awoke
within  a  few  minutes  of,  if  not  exactly  at,  the  same  time,
quite  contrarily  to  her  usual  custom.

18th,  10  a.m.  Feels  some  degree  of  pain  along  the  spine.
Mesmerised,  and  left  sleeping.  Awoke  at  one  p.m.;  pain
relieved.

11  p.m.  Mesmerised  again  :  perfect  coma  induced  :  utterly
insensible  to  any  pain.  Made  long  passes  and  local  ones  along
the  spinal  region.  Patient  awoke  at  the  usual  hour  and  felt
very  much  relieved  by  her  slumber,  much  stronger,  and  in
better  spirits.

19th.  Ditto.  Same  results.

20th.  At  9  a.m.  I  mesmerised  a  glass  of  water,  and  or¬
dered  my  patient  to  take  it  when  she  felt  the  pain  returning ;
she  did  so  at  noon,  and  in  seven  minutes  exactly  fell  into  a
deep  sleep  which  lasted  until  four  p.m.  By  that  time  she
was  free  from  any  great  pain,  and  felt  stronger  than  in  the
morning.

From  this  until  the  29th  I  was  obliged  to  defer  mesmeris¬
ing  my  patient,  in  consequence  of  being  absent.  She  re¬
mained  during  this  time  in  statu  quo ,  with  the  exception  of
head-ache.


by  Mr.  C.  T.  Watkins.


51


29th.  Again  mesmerised  my  patient :  made  long  passes,
and  pressed  my  hands  on  the  spine  where  the  inflammation
was  greatest.  Awoke  next  morning  much  better,  appetite
improved,  step  firmer,  eye  clearer,  and  general  appearance
altogether  perceptibly  altered  for  the  better.

30th.  Ditto.  Ditto.

31st.  Absent.  Not  mesmerised.

Sept.  1st.  Again  mesmerised  my  patient,  who  now  walks
about,  and  says  that  the  pain  in  the  back  has  disappeared  as
if  by  magic.  In  reference  to  this  announcement,  the  worthy
family  physician  said,  “You  are  doing  good,  but  this  is  all
owing  to  my  tonic  pills  which ,  by  the  way ,  were  not  taken.
The  latter  fact,  however,  I  never  alluded  to.

2nd.  Ditto.  Ditto.

3rd.  This  evening,  I  was  determined  to  see  if  I  could  mes¬
merise  my  patient  by  the  power  of  the  will :  accordingly,  as
soon  as  she  was  in  bed  and  in  the  mosquito  curtain,  I  seated
myself  at  about  six  paces  distant,  with  my  arms  folded,  and
concentratiug  my  attention  on  the  patient  sent  her  asleep  in
seven  minutes,  totally  insensible  to  all  pain.  I  then  made
local  passes,  and  the  next  morning  she  awoke  refreshed  as
usual.

4th.  Mesmerised  again  by  the  power  of  the  will,  and  with
the  same  result.  Awoke,  as  usual,  at  seven  in  the  morning.

I  left  off  mesmerising  my  patient  about  this  time,  as  she
seemed  entirely  free  from  all  pain ;  her  general  health  was
good,  and  she  had  not  experienced  one  return  of  her  hysteri¬
cal  fits ;  her  appetite  was  good,  and  I  had  succeeded  far  be¬
yond  my  utmost  hopes.

I  was  thus  enabled  to  sooth  the  sufferings  of  one  whose
happiness  is  very  dear  to  me ;  and  I  think,  Sir,  that,  for  an
amateur  physician,  you  will  agree  with  me  that  my  fee  was
a  large  one.

I  shall  send  you  next  mail  an  account  of  some  curious  ex¬
periments  made  by  Dr.  Esdaile  with  crystals  on  a  highly  sen¬
sitive  subject  at  the  hospital.

Charles  Tyrrel  Watkins.

Calcutta,  Jan.  7,  1850.


(  52  )


VII.  Cures  of  Chronic  Head- aches,  and  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance ;
and  a  painless  Incision.  By  Mr.  Hazard,  Bristol.

11  We  only  wish  that  on  all  occasions  in  which  legitimate  medicine  needs  to
be  defended  and  quackery  attacked,  the  champion  may  be  equal  to  Dr.  Inglis  in
tact,  temper,  and  courage  :  we  should  than  not  have  our  provincial  cities  overrun,
as  they  now  are,  by  a  vagrant  pack  of  homoeopathists  and  mesmerists.” — Lancet ,
Oct.  13th,  1849.

Cure  of  severe  Head-aches  of  ten  years’  duration.

June  4th,  1849.  Eliza  Porter,  aged  15,  had  been  afflicted
from  the  age  of  5  years  with  constant  head-aches.  Her  suf¬
ferings  were  most  intense.  She  had  been  attended  by  medi¬
cal  gentlemen  who,  with  all  their  talent  and  attention,  had
failed  in  doing  her  any  good.  She  had  been  in  the  Infirmary
for  many  months,  and  in  that  excellent  institution  also  she
was  not  relieved.  Her  head  had  been  shaved,  and  she  had
taken  of  medicine  a  sufficient  quantity.

When  she  came  to  me,  her  forehead  and  eyebrows  were
contracted  and  the  eyes  half  open,  from  severe  pain.  I  mes¬
merised  her  with  passes  over  the  head,  face,  and  chest :  at
the  second  application,  sleep  came  upon  her  in  ten  minutes,
and  she  lost  consciousness.  She  was  mesmerised  four  times
a  week  with  the  most  beneficial  results.  The  head-aches  have
gradually  subsided ;  it  is  now  seven  months  since  she  had  one,
and  that  was  by  no  means  severe.  I  then  mesmerised  her
but  once  a  week.  The  bowels  are  now  regular,  as  was  far
from  being  the  case  before  mesmerism.

In  this  case,  most  of  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  ap¬
peared.  Rigidity  of  the  arms  with  loss  of  sensation,  induced
by  a  single  pass  and  dispelled  as  easily.  She  is  phreno-mes-
meric,  and  highly  clairvoyant ;  reads  with  the  greatest  facility,
and  I  cannot  gratify  her  more  than  by  giving  her  a  book  or
the  Illustrated  London  News,  which  she  delights  in,  and  will
read  out,  describing  the  plates.  The  description  she  has  given
of  several  internal  diseases  has  been  remarkably  correct,  as
testified  by  the  parties  themselves  and  medical  men.  She,  in
one  instance,  most  particularly  described  the  malady  from
which  a  young  lady  was  suffering,  said  it  was  occasioned  by
worms,  and  that  these  were  the  cause  of  her  fever.  The  phy¬
sician  was  attending  her  on  account  of  worms,  and  was  pre¬
sent  at  the  time.

Experiments. — Coma  is,  in  this  case,  induced  by  magnets,
electricity,  and  crystals.  A  large  rock  crystal,  twelve  inches
long  by  three  inches  at  the  base,  if  held  at  a  yard  distance
from  her  arms  or  legs,  renders  them  exceedingly  rigid.  The
same  effect  takes  place  by  holding  over  her,  or  desiring  her  to


Cure  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  fyc.,  by  Mr.  Hazard.  53

hold,  a  well  dried  hazel  stick.  The  influence  of  the  hazel  stick
on  many  of  my  patients  is  truly  astonishing  :  some  are  at¬
tracted  to  it,  others  repelled.  I  have  placed  the  stick  under
the  carpet  both  in  her  sleeping  and  waking  state,  and  she
would  not  pass  over  it.  Nor  could  she  move  until  the  influ¬
ence  was  dispelled  by  the  waving  of  a  silk  handkerchief.  If
a  magnet  or  crystal  is  put  into  a  tumbler  of  water  for  a  few
minutes,  and  she  then  drinks  some  of  the  water,  the  same
effect  results  as  from  mesmerised  water,  and  also  from  water
through  which  a  current  of  electricity  has  been  passed :  in¬
deed,  I  think  this  is  still  stronger.

Cure  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance  and  other  complaints.

July  5th,  1849.  Miss  F.,  a  young  lady  residing  at
Kingsdown,  Bristol,  had  been  severely  afflicted  for  five  years
with  St.  Vitus's  dance,  hysteria,  a  constant  pain  in  the  left
side,  an  incessant,  dry  cough,  sleepless  nights,  profuse  night
perspirations,  loss  of  appetite,  and  painful  nervousness.  She
has  had  the  first  medical  attendance  the  whole  of  the  time,
without  any  permanent  benefit :  has  taken  medicine,  upon  an
average,  three  times  a  day  for  four  years,  and  most  nights  20
grains  of  opium  pill.  She  was  advised  to  try  mesmerism  by  a
former  patient  of  mine.  When  she  first  came  to  me,  I  was
attending  other  patients  in  the  same  room.  My  attention,
however,  was  called  to  this  lady  :  she  had  fainted.  After  she
recovered,  she  begged  me  not  to  go  near  her.  I  continued
with  the  other  patients.  I  knew  this  would  be  of  more  ser¬
vice  to  her  than  persuasion.  As  she  became  more  interested
in  some  of  the  phenomena,  her  excitability  subsided,  and  soon
afterwards  she  allowed  me  to  act  upon  her.  No  apparent
effect  was  produced,  as  she  was  too  nervous  at  the  time.  At
the  third  seance,  her  eyes  closed  by  means  of  passes  from  the
head  downwards.  She  has  never  lost  consciousness.  I  mes¬
merised  her  three  times  a  week.  She  soon  felt  relief,  still  in¬
creasing  after  every  sitting,  and  now,  at  the  present  time  of
writing,  she  is  relieved  from  all  her  former  complaints,  has
refreshing  sleep  at  night,  no  perspirations,  a  good  appetite,  and
a  complexion  beaming  with  health,  and  remains  quite  well.

It  is  with  the  greatest  pleasure  I  here  state  the  honourable
and  candid  conduct  of  one  of  the  most  eminent  chemists  and
druggists  in  Bristol.  This  young  lady  was  personally  known
to  him,  and  he  well  knew  her  sufferings.  He  saw  the  effect
of  mesmerism  in  her  case,  and  has  since  recommended  pa¬
tients  suffering  under  nervous  disorders  to  try  mesmerism.
This  gentlemen,  as  yet,  only  knows  me  by  name.


54  Remarks  upon  the  Rev.  G.  Sandby’s  Review  of  Cahagnet’ s

Lancing  a  Finger  without  pain.

This  case,  although  so  trifling  in  itself,  proves  the  blessing

of  being  under  the  power  of  mesmerism.  Martha  - -  last

year  had  a  severe  toothache,  from  which  I  relieved  her  by
mesmerism.  Afterwards,  I  made  a  few  passes  over  the  arms
just  to  observe  the  effect :  they  became  slightly  rigid.  Until  a
short  time  since  I  had  not  seen  her,  when  I  met  her  with  her
arm  in  a  sling,  and  inquired  the  cause.  She  said  she  had  a
bad  finger.  I  found  the  first  and  second  joint  of  the  fore  fin¬
ger  of  the  right  hand  much  swollen  and  highly  inflamed.  She
could  not  sleep  from  the  anguish ;  had  been  poulticing.  I
saw  the  finger  was  coming  to  a  head,  and  told  her  to  call  on
me  in  the  evening.  She  came :  I  made,  for  ten  minutes,
contact  passes  on  the  arm,  and  pricked  her  without  sensation.
I  then,  with  a  lancet,  opened  the  finger  to  some  extent,  and
well  pressed  out  the  pus  and  blood  without  the  slightest  pain
to  her.  She  slept  well  that  night,  and,  in  a  few  days,  the  fin¬
ger  was  healed.

W.  Hazaru.

4,  Dowry  Parade,  Hotwells,  Bristol.

March,  1850.


VIII.  Remarks  upon  the  Rev.  George  Sandby’s  Review  of  M.
Alphonse  Cahagnet’ s  Ar canes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles ,
fyc.  By  Mr.  Hockley.

“  Many  rich  mysteries  are  lockt  up  in  the  nature  of  angels,  which,  by  degrees,
will  break  out.” — Rev.  R.  Dingley’s  Deputation  of  Angels.  London,  1654.

In  common,  I  doubt  not,  with  all  the  readers  of  The  Zoist ,
I  with  great  pleasure  perused  the  valuable  review  of  M.  Ca-
hagnet’s  Arcanes  in  the  last  number  of  The  Zoist :  and,  as  any
article  from  the  pen  of  the  learned  author  of  Mesmerism  and
its  Opponents  well  merits  the  earnest  consideration  of  the
magnetic  world,  both  from  the  very  liberal  and  truth-seeking
spirit  of  his  writings  and  his  position  as  a  clergyman  of  the
church  of  England,  I  have,  with  great  diffidence,  ventured  to
differ  from  that  gentleman  on  the  subject  of  his  review ;  but,
emboldened  by  his  admission  that,  although  “  many  would
probably  dissent  from  his  views,  still  some  portion  of  truth
might  be  elicited  from  the  enquiry,”  I  have,  after  a  careful
perusal  of  M.  Cahagnet’s  work,  come  to  the  conclusion  that
Mr.  Sandby  has  not  placed  before  his  readers  a  correct  analy¬
sis  of  his  author,  inasmuch  as  that  gentleman’s  objections
rest  more  upon  M.  CahagnePs  logic  than  his  facts ;  and  the


Ar canes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  by  Mr.  Hockley.  55

two  examples  selected  are  of  little  value  while  others  are
omitted  which  seem  perfectly  to  establish  his  book  as  “  a  step
farther  towards  the  unknown.”

The  Celestial  Telegraph  appears  to  me  to  prove  more  forci¬
bly  than  any  other  work  on  animal  magnetism,  with  the  ex¬
ception  of  I.  Hernrich  Jung's  (called  Stilling)  Theory  of  Pneu-
matology,  the  existence  of  guardian  angels,  of  Hades,  and
the  materiality  of  the  human  soul,  but  to  be  as  far  removed
from  Swedenborgianism  (by  which  term  I  mean  a  belief  in
the  doctrines  and  doxology  of  the  New  Jerusalem  Church,
and  particularly  articles  xxi.,  xxii.,  and  xxiii.,*)  as  from  Beh-
menism,  Mahometanism,  Buddhism,  or  Polytheism,  all,  there
is  little  doubt,  equally  indebted  to  the  hitherto  occult  but
ever  existent  law  of  nature  which  we  now  term  animal  mag¬
netism.  Mr.  Sandby  has  sufficiently  shewn  there  “  is  no  rea¬
son  to  question  either  the  good  faith  of  M.  Cahagnet  or  the
credibility  of  his  witnesses,”  and  “  that  the  work  is  written  in
an  earnest  and  truth-loving  spirit.”  This  opinion  I  readily
adopt,  as,  after  a  careful  reading,  I  do  not  perceive  in  the
work  or  correspondence  anything  new.  “  There  is  no  new
thing  under  the  sun ;”  and  scarcely  a  statement  but  to  which
a  parallel  can  be  readily  produced.

In  any  treatise  upon  ghosts,  the  oft-repeated,  but  much
to  be  esteemed,  advice  of  Mrs.  Glass,  as  to  cooking  a  hare,  oc¬
curs  on  the  very  threshold  as  a  startling  difficulty ;  for  in  these
dark  ages  a  (not  the )  sensible  majority  of  the  public  require,
upon  this  subject,  confirmation  a  vast  deal  stronger  than  Holy
Writ.  Fortunately,  the  ensuing  pages  are  addressed  solely
to  the  sensible  readers  of  The  Zoist — readers  who  have  arrived
at  the  conviction  that  there  are,  midst  nature's  laws,  opera¬
tions  whose  method  of  working,  though  beyond  our  finite
comprehension,  are  still  full  of  sublime  truths — readers  who
believe  that  the  phenomena  of  clairvoyance,  soul  travelling,
transference  of  thought,  taste,  and  feeling,  “  are  established
truths,  and  who  differ  only  as  to  questions  of  degree.”

Mr.  Sandby,  in  placing  before  his  readers  a  proof  that  M.

*  “  Art.  XXL — That  unless  a  new  church  be  established  by  the  Lord,  no  one
can  be  saved  ;  and  that  this  is  meant  by  these  words,  ‘Unless  those  days
should  be  shortened,  there  should  no  flesh  be  saved.'  Mat.  xxiv.,  22.

“  XXII. — That  the  opening  and  rejection  of  the  tenets  of  the  faith  of  the  present
church,  and  the  revelation  and  reception  of  the  tenets  of  the  faith  of  the
new  church  is  meant  by  these  words  in  the  Apocalypse,  ‘  He  that  sat  upon
the  throne  said,  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new  ;  and  he  said  unto  me,
Write,  for  these  words  are  true  and  faithful.’  Chap,  xxi.,  5.

XXIII. — That  the  new  church  about  to  be  established  by  the  Lord,  is  the  New
Jerusalem,  treated  of  in  the  Apocalypse,  chap.  xxi.  and  xxii.,  which  is
there  called  the  Bride  and  the  Wife  of  the  Lamb.’  ”


56  Remarks  upon  the  Rev.  G.  Sandhi/’ s  Review  of  Cahagnet’ s

Cahagnet*  s  revelations  are  the  result  of  transference  of  thought
and  not  a  connexion  with  the  spiritual  world,  has  selected
two  cases  of  clairvoyant  communication  with  persons  actually
declared  by  the  somnambulist  to  be  living ;  and  although,  in
stating  them,  that  gentleman  has  given  us  the  truth  (of  which
there  could  be  no  possible  doubt),  still,  if  he  had  not  most
ingeniously  disjointed  it,  I  think  very  few  of  his  readers  would
have  coincided  with  him  in  opinion ;  and  as  the  case  appears
to  me  a  very  strong  proof  of  soul  travelling,  and  remarkably
corroborative  of  the  very  singular  statement  given  by  Mr.
Hazard  in  No.  XXVI.  of  The  Zoist ,  I  must  crave  room  for
the  sitting  in  detail.

“  In  the  ninety-eighth  sitting,  M.  Lucas,  desirous  of  learning  the  fate  of  his
mother-in-law,  who  had  left  France  twelve  years  before,  in  consequence  of  an
altercation  with  his  father,  applied  to  M.  Cahagnet  for  a  sitting.

“  Scarcely  was  Adele  asleep,  than  she  asked  for  this  man  by  his  name,  as  she
usually  does  for  deceased  persons.  She  then  said  to  us,  ‘  I  see  him  :  he  is  not
dead  ;  he  is  on  the  earth,  and  not  in  the  spiritual  world/  She  then  gave  so  ex¬
act  a  description  of  him  to  M.  Lucas,  that  the  latter  declared  even  the  very  ges¬
tures  true  to  life.  A  few  days  after,  M.  Lucas  and  the  mother  of  the  man  had  a
second  sitting.  Adele  once  asleep,  said,  ‘  I  see  him/  Where  do  you  see  him  ?
‘  Here  present/  Give  us,  once  more,  a  description  of  him,  as  also  of  the  place
where  he  is.  ‘  He  is  a  fair  man,  browned  by  the  heat  of  the  sun  ;  very  corpulent,
features  pretty  regular,  hazel  eyes,  mouth  large ;  air  sombre  and  meditative.  He
is  in  the  garb  of  a  working  man — a  sort  of  small  blouse.  He  is  at  work,  gathering
seeds  like  peppercorns,  but  I  don’t  think  they  are,  as  they  seem  bigger.  This
seed  is  found  in  small  shrubs  about  three  feet  high.  I  see  a  negro  near  him,
who  is  doing  the  same  thing/  Try  and  obtain  an  answer  to-day  :  let  him  tell
you  the  name  of  the  country  where  you  see  him.  ‘  He  won’t  answer  me/  Tell
him  that  it  is  his  good  mother,  whom  he  was  so  fond  of,  who  bids  you  enquire
after  him.  ‘Oh!’  at  the  name  of  his  mother  he  turned  round  and  said  to  me,

‘  My  mother  !  I  shall  not  die  before  seeing  her  again  :  comfort  her,  and  tell  her
that  I  am  always  thinking  of  her,  that  I  am  not  dead/  Why  does  he  not  write
to  her  ?  ‘  He  has  written  to  her,  but  he  presumes  the  vessel  was  wrecked ,  as  he

received  no  answer.  He  tells  me  he  is  at  Mexico.  He  followed  the  emperor  Don
Pedro ;  was  five  years  a  prisoner,  suffered  much,  and  will  make  every  effort  to
return  to  France  :  they  will  see  him  again/  Can  he  name  the  place  he  lives  in  ?

‘  No,  it  is  far  up  in  the  country  :  such  places  have  no  names.’  Is  he  with  a  Eu¬
ropean  ?  ‘  No,  with  a  man  of  colour.’  Why  does  he  not  write  to  his  mother  ?

*  Because,  where  he  is,  no  vessels  come  ;  he  knows  not  to  whom  to  apply  :  then,
again,  he  scarcely  ever  knew  how  to  write,  and  now  less  than  ever.  No  one
near  him  can  render  him  that  service :  no  one  speaks  his  language.  He  has  much
difficulty  in  making  himself  understood  :  withal  he  never  was  of  a  communicative
disposition  ;  he  has  a  somewhat  unsociable  look.  It  is  a  hard  matter  to  get  a  word
out  of  him  ;  one  would  think  he  was  dumb.’  (In  short,  how  are  we  to  manage  to
write  to  him  or  hear  from  him  ?)  ‘He  can’t  tell :  all  he  can  say  is,  “I  am  in
Mexico  :  I  am  not  dead  :  they  will  see  me  again.”  ’

“  The  mother  melted  into  tears  as  she  recognized  the  truthfulness  of  each  de¬
tail  given  her  by  Adele.  She  had  not  a  word  to  retrench  from  this  description  ;
the  character,  the  instruction,  and  the  departure  of  her  son,  were  precisely  such
as  described  by  Adele  :  but  what  gives  an  air  of  greater  probability  to  the  clair¬
voyant’s  recital  as  to  the  country  he  lives  in  is,  that  some  of  his  relatives  enter¬
tained  the  idea  that  he  had  enlisted  into  Don  Pedro’s  army,  and  took  steps,  at
the  time,  to  acquire  a  certainty  of  it.  M.  Lucas  furnished  me  with  this  particular
some  time  after,  when  on  a  visit  to  Paris.  No  information,  however,  could  be
obtained  in  this  respect.  But  what  astonished  all  present  at  this  sitting  was  to


Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  by  Mr.  Hockley.  57


see  Adele,  who,  to  screen  herself  from  the  burning  rays  of  the  sun  of  these  coun¬
tries,  put  her  hand  up  to  the  left  side  of  her  face,  as  if  suffocating  with  heat.  But
the  most  marvellous  part  of  the  scene  was,  that  she  received  a  violent  coup-de-
soleil  that  rendered  all  this  side  of  her  face ,  from  the  forehead  to  the  shoulder ,  of
a  reddish  blue,  whilst  the  other  side  remained  perfectly  white  ;  and  full  twenty-
four  hours  elapsed  before  this  deep  colour  commenced  disappearing  :  the  heat  was
so  violent  there  for  a  moment,  that  it  was  impossible  to  keep  one's  hand  on  it.

“  M.  Haranzer  Pirot,  formerly  a  magnetizer,  and  honourably  known  for  more
than  thirty  years  in  the  magnetic  world,  was  present  at  this  sitting,  and  declared
he  had  never  seen  the  like.  The  good  woman  took  her  leave  quite  consoled,  un¬
able  to  account  to  herself  how  her  son  who  was  in  Mexico  could  be  between  her
and  Adele,  and  how  the  latter  could  have  received  a  coup-de-soleil  when  nobody
felt  the  heat,  the  weather  that  day  being  very  gloomy.”

Now  were  we  to  suppose  it  possible  that  any  sane  persons
could  sit  and  listen  to  their  own  thoughts  thus  revived  before
them  without  recognition,  still  the  coup-de-soleil  could  not  be
the  result  of  mental  transfer,  nor  could  the  circumstance  thus
minutely  particularized  be  mistaken.  It  is  either  true,  or  the
whole  work  is  indeed  a  scandalous  fabrication.  Fortunately,
in  p.  179,  Yol.  VII.  of  The  Zoist,  we  have  a  case  in  point,
thus  related  by  Mr.  W.  Hazard,  of  Ann  Bateman,  who,  sit¬
ting  in  a  mesmeric  state,  at  Bristol,  thus  described  the  con¬
dition  of  a  vessel,  then  (as  afterwards  proved  by  the  captain)
to  the  westward  of  Madeira.

“‘Ah,  there’s  the  ship  ;  but  oh  !  how  dark.  How  she  tumbles.  I  shall  be
sick .’  At  the  same  time  she  was  in  that  kind  of  unsteady  motion  so  usual  to
persons  unaccustomed  to  the  sea.  ‘  How  the  wind  roars,  and  the  sea  so  high  and
black:  it’s  dreadful!’  Do  you  see  Captain  C.  ?  ‘Yes,  there  he  is  on  a  high
deck,  calling  to  the  men  :  now  there’s  an  Irishwoman  at  the  cabin  door  asking
for  medicine;  others  saying  they  would  all  be  drowned:  now  there’s  Capt.  C.
leaning  over  a  rail,  saying,  “  Go  down,  my  good  women,  there’s  no  danger.”  ’
Now  she  said,  ‘  There’s  such  a  noise  down  stairs  :  there’s  a  man, — he  looks  like
a  parson  or  a  quaker — with  a  great  flat  hat  on,  talking  to  the  people  ;  now  he  has
put  a  large  tin  horn  to  his  ear,  and  is  lifting  up  his  hand.’  ”

Now  these, — may  I  say  facts? — are  thus  to  be  accounted
for,  according  to  Mr.  Sandby*s  hypothesis.  The  trees,  the  seed¬
gathering,  and  the  negro,  “love  of  the  marvellous;”  the  cor¬
rect  description  and  part  of  the  answers,  “thought  reading;”
a  part  of  the  description  and  a  portion  of  the  answers,  “  sug¬
gestive  dreaming ;”  the  coup-de-soleil  of  twenty-four  hours*
duration,  “  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  power  of  the  imagi¬
nation  over  the  body ;”  and  the  perception  of  the  circum¬
stances  taking  place  in  the  vessel  and  afterwards  proved  to  be
minutely  correct,  “  old  mesmeric  principles  of  thought  reading
and  clairvoyance.”  “  What*s  in  a  name  ?”

But  similar  objections  had  been  made  to  M.  Cahagnet
personally,  and  he  has  given  a  host  of  sittings — many  of  them
at  the  instance  of  experienced  magnetists — to  prove  their  utter
fallacy ;  and  in  support  of  M.  Cahagnet*s  views,  and  to  shew
how  far  relations  of  events,  which  have  taken  place  nearly  a


58  Remarks  upon  the  Rev.  G.  Sandby’ s  Review  of  Cahagnet’ s

century  apart,  confirm  each  other,  I  subjoin  the  following
anecdote  as  related  by  Jung.

“  A  respectable  man  in  Stockholm  bought  an  estate  of  another,  paid  for  it,
and  received  an  acknowledgment.  The  purchaser  died  soon  after,  and  a  long
time  had  not  elapsed  before  the  seller  demanded  payment  of  the  widow  for  the  es¬
tate,  threatening  her  that  he  would  otherwise  take  possession  of  it  again.  The
widow  was  terrified :  she  knew  that  her  husband  had  paid  for  the  estate,  and  made
search  for  the  receipt,  which,  however,  she  was  unable  to  find  anywhere.  This
greatly  increased  her  fright ;  and  as  her  deceased  husband  had  been  on  friendly
terms  with  the  Russian  ambassador,  she  had  recourse  to  him.

“  The  ambassador  knew  from  experience  what  assistance  Swedenborg  had  oc¬
casionally  afforded  in  such  cases  ;  and  as  the  widow  was  not  known  to  him,  the
ambassador  undertook  the  matter.  He  spoke,  therefore,  with  Swedenborg  ;  and
recommended  the  cause  of  the  widow  to  him.  Some  days  after,  Swedenborg  came
to  the  ambassador,  and  requested  him  to  tell  the  widow,  that  on  such  a  night  her
husband  would  appear  to  her  and  tell  her  where  the  receipt  lay.  However  terri¬
ble  this  might  appear  to  the  widow,  yet  she  was  obliged  to  consent  to  it,  because
the  paying  for  the  estate  a  second  time  would  have  rendered  her  poor,  or  even
been  impracticable  to  her.  She  therefore  resigned  herself  to  her  fate,  sat  up  on
the  night  appointed,  and  retained  a  maid  with  her,  who,  however,  soon  began  to
fall  asleep,  and  could  by  no  means  be  kept  awake.  At  12  o’clock  the  deceased
appeared.  He  looked  grave,  and  as  though  displeased,  and  then  pointed  out  to
the  widow  the  place  where  the  receipt  lay,  namely,  in  a  certain  room,  in  a  little
desk  attached  to  the  wall ;  on  which  he  disappeared.  The  widow  went  the  next
morning  to  the  place  he  had  indicated  and  found  the  receipt.”

Mr.  Sandby  observes  that  the  tendency  of  this  work,  as
well  as  those  of  Davis,  Kerner,  &c.,  is  to  support  the  doctrines
of  Emanuel  Swedenborg.  But  to  this  also  I  must,  with  due
deference,  object :  in  the  first  place,  it  is  plain  that  M.  Ca¬
hagnet  and  Davis  are  neither  of  them  believers  in  Sweden-
borgiamsw,  or  any  other  ism  but  pure  Theism,  although  their
revelations  strongly  confirm  a  multitude  of  statements  made
by  the  Swede.  That  Swedenborg  sincerely  believed  in  his
own  being  a  special  and  divine  commission,  it  would  be  a  libel
upon  humanity  to  deny ;  that  he  was,  though  ignorant  of  it
himself,  a  natural  somnambulist,  I  think  no  one,  conversant
with  animal  magnetism,  can  reasonably  doubt,  and  it  has
been  held  by  many  magnetizers,  whose  opinions  well  deserve
attention,  that  in  this  magnetic  state  he  became  possessed  of
the  faculty  of  clairvoyance,  fell  into  a  connexion  with  the
world  of  spirits,  and  also  possessed  the  power  (so  rare  in  mes¬
merised  persons)  of  evolving  the  ideas  thus  raised,  and  em¬
bodying  his  visions,  in  his  normal  state ;  endued,  also,  with  a
prodigious  amount  of  varied  knowledge,  which  he  brought,  by
his  peculiar  idiosyncracy,  to  bear  in  support  of  dogmas
founded  on  the  doctrine  of  Hades,  the  possibility  of  a  com¬
munion  with  the  souls  of  the  departed  and  the  spirit  world,
particularly  the  ministry  of  guardian  angels — doctrines  which
appeared  novel  to  the  great  body  of  the  Protestant  faith,
though  strictly  scriptural  and  strenuously  asserted  by  the  an-


Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  by  Mr.  Hockley.  59


cient  fathers  and  numerous  modern  authorities  of  the  Church
of  England.

The  claims  of  Mahomet,  Jacob  Behmen,  or  Swedenborg,
to  a  divine  mission  arose  from  their  cases  being  isolated,  though
exceedingly  elevated,  instances  of  spontaneous  somnambulism ;
but  surely  the  demonstration  of  the  existence  of  animal  mag¬
netism  by  Mesmer,  the  discovery  of  clairvoyance  by  De  Puv-
segur,  and  the  phenomena  since  elicited  by  an  almost  count¬
less  number  of  somnambulists,  tending  incontestibly  to  prove
that  the  Great  Disposer  of  all  things  has  thus  placed  the
the  same  powers  in  the  hands  of  every  man,  irrespectively  of
his  creed  or  station,  ought  to  be  deemed  sufficient  to  strip
from  their  revelations  every  particle  of  a  belief  in  their  being
the  result  of  a  special  interposition  of  the  divine  will,  but  leave
their  statements  as  to  the  spirit  world  to  be  attested  or  re¬
futed  by  subsequent  investigations.

In  M.  Cahagnet/s  theorem  “  that  the  soul  is  an  intelligent
being  or  fluid,  independent  in  that  (the  magnetic)  state  of
the  material  body,  and  able  to  see,  hear,  feel,  and  converse
with  another  being  at  a  distance,”  Mr.  Sandby  demurs  to
the  logical  accuracy  of  the  term  independent.  To  myself  it
appears  only  to  mean  that  when  the  body  is  in  a  magnetic,
cataleptic  state,  the  soul  is  loosened,  untrammelled,  and  no
longer  biased  or  controlled  by  the  material  body.  That  it  is
not  entirely  unconnected  with  the  body  is  shewn  by  M.  Ca-
hagnet  in  his  fifty-third  experiment,  when,  wishing  to  test
whether  (as  asserted  by  the  somnambules)  there  were  any
real  danger  in  leaving  the  soul  of  the  somnambulist  to  its  own
guidance,  he  states  that,  relying  on  Bruno, —

“  I  had  paid  little  attention  to  Adele,  whose  body,  in  the  mean  time,  had
grown  icy  cold  :  there  was  no  longer  any  pulse  or  respiration  ;  her  face  was  of  a
sallow  green,  her  lips  blue;  her  heart  gave  no  sign  of  life.  T  placed  before  her
lips  a  mirror,  and  it  remained  untarnished.  I  magnetized  her  powerfully  in  order
to  bring  back  her  soul  into  her  body,  but  for  five  minutes  my  labour  was  vain.  I
thought  for  a  moment  that  the  work  was  consummated,  and  that  the  soul  had  de¬
parted from  her  body.  Falling  on  my  knees,  I  asked  back  of  God,  in  my  prayer,
the  soul  that  I  had  in  my  doubts  suffered  to  depart.  I  seemed,  by  an  effect  of
intuition,  to  know  that  my  prayer  was  heard :  after  a  moment’s  farther  anguish
I  obtained  these  words,  *  Why  have  you  called  me  back.’  I  paid  but  little  atten¬
tion  to  her  complaints ;  I  was  only  too  happy  to  hear  her  speak.”

In  truth,  the  majority  of  the  magnetic  world  will  care  little
about  M.  Cahagnet/s  theory,  or  whether  his  logic  is  of  the
school  or  not,  any  more  than  for  the  theories  which  almost
every  new  aspirant  for  mesmeric  fame  seems  impressed  with
the  necessity  of  expounding,  and  which  generally  turn  out  as
valueless  as  the  '  wonderful’  experiments  of  Dr.  Scoresby,*

*  That  any  tyro  in  the  sciences  should  jot  down  the  (to  him)  surprizing  phe¬
nomena  elicited  would  be  most  commendable  ;  but  that  a  learned  D.D.,  an  F.R.S.,


60  Remarks  upon  the  Rev.  G.  Sandby’s  Review  of  CahagneVs

who  gravely  places  before  his  readers,  as  startling  discoveries*
of  his  own,  a  number  of  experiments,  common  as  household
words,  abounding  in  mesmeric  works  almost  to  nausea,  and
which,  after  all,  only  prove  that  the  eccentric  author  has,  in¬
deed,  caught  something  “  vastly  like  a  whale.”

As  Mr.  Sandby,  at  p.  428,  rather  summarily  disposes  of
all  those  “  who  may  still  have  a  leaning  towards  these  develop¬
ments  of  spiritualism,”  he  will,  perhaps,  in  proof  of  his  asser¬
tion  that  “in  revelations  to  be  credited,  there  should  be  a
complete  harmony  between  the  different  parts,”  oblige  us  by
pointing  out  an  example ;  for,  judging  from  the  discord,  to  use
the  mildest  term,  between  the  members  of  the  Christian  world,
we  might  be  afraid  of  seeking  it  even  in  the  Bible.  To  my¬
self,  “the  manifest  discrepancies”  in  the  works  of  H.  Werner,
Hauffe,  Davis,  and  Cahagnet,  are  the  greatest  proofs  that
they  are  written  with  a  truth  seeking  spirit,  and  even  those
discrepancies  may  be  referred  to  our  own  limited  information.
To  any  one  possessed  only  of  the  knowledge  of  the  attraction
of  iron  by  the  magnet,  the  fact  of  the  opposite  pole  repelling
it  would  be  “  a  discrepancy  equally  at  variance  with  his  com¬
mon  sense  and  reason.”  Mr.  Sandby  also  objects  that  de¬
parted  souls,  on  their  arrival  in  the  other  world,  retain  their
antecedent  habits  and  opinions ;  in  other  words,  “  a  Jew
seems  to  remain  a  Jew,  a  Catholic  a  Catholic,  and  a  miser  as
fond  of  his  gold  as  before.”  Exactly  so ;  and  what  idea  more
rational  than  the  soul,  which  I  presume  Mr.  S.  allows  to  be
the  reasoning  faculty  when  on  earth,  retaining  its  erratic
dogmas  for  a  short  period  (for  what  is  1000  years  or  so  to
eternity  ?),  and  when  it  becomes  illumed  by  the  divine  mind,
and  capable  of  solving  our  doubts,  being  placed  beyond  the
reach  of  mortals  however  magnetic.  Had  these  clairvoyants
affirmed  that  the  souls  of  the  defunct  became  immediate  con¬
verts  to  Romanism  or  even  orthodox  Church  of  England,  I
should  have  become  a  rationalist  at  once.  Notwithstanding,
Jung,  whose  Theory  of  Pneumalology f  I  conceive  to  be  the  best


and  a  member  of  the  Institutes  of  Paris  and  Philadelphia,  should  publish  such
crudities,  with  the  modest  avowal  (p.  53)  that  of  a  science  which  during  80  years
had  successively  engaged  the  attention  of  such  men  as  La  Fayette,  d’Espremenil,
De  Puysegur,  Deslon,  Gmelin,  Eschenmeyer,  Oken,  Deleuze,  and  Elliotson,  he,
to  a  considerable  extent,  had  refrained  from  reading ,  may  well  cause  us,  like
his  philosophic  friend,  Mr.  S.  (p.  19.),  to  “  throw  up  our  hands,  exclaiming.
Astonishing!  Wonderful!"

*  Amongst  other  ‘  discoveries,’  permit  me  to  say  that  the  very  curious  analogy
of  thought-reading  to  the  daguerreotype  did  not  originate  with  your  correspon¬
dent,  W.  F.  G.  of  Clifton,  but  belongs  to  Dr.  Collyer  of  Philadelphia,  and  forms
the  chief  feature  in  his  Psychography  or  Embodyment  of  Thought,  and  also  in
his  lectures,  which  he  delivered  at  Bristol  and  most  other  lai-ge  towns  in  England.

f  London.  12mo.  Longman  and  Co,  1834.  Translated  by  Samuel  Jackson.


Ar canes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles ,  by  Mr.  Hockley.  61

in  our  language,  has  the  following  for  the  35th  and  37th  the¬
orems  of  his  Brief  Summary.

“  35.  The  souls  of  all  such  as  have  only  led  a  decent,  civil  life,  and  who,
though  not  vicious,  are  still  no  true  Christians,  must  undergo  a  long  purification
in  the  waste  and  desert  Hades,  by  enduring  the  deprivation  of  all  that  is  dear  to
them,  and  of  every  enjoyment,  whilst  longing  most  painfully  after  that  earthly
life  which  has  for  ever  fled,  and  thus  be  gradually  prepared  for  the  lowest  degree
of  bliss.

“  37.  The  souls  of  true  Christians,  that  have  trodden  the  path  of  sanctification,
and  who  expired  in  the  exercise  of  true  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  grace  of  his
atonement,  and  in  complete  renunciation  of  everything  earthly,  are  received  im¬
mediately  on  awaking  from  the  sleep  of  death,  by  angels  without  delay,  conducted
upwards  to  the  pure  regions  of  light,  where  they  enjoy  the  fulness  of  bliss.’ ’

Doctrines  sucli  as  these  may  have  been  a  pleasant  con¬
templation  for  a  steadfast  Lutheran,  as  Jung  undoubtedly
was,  but  would  afford  cold  comfort  to  the  myriads  of  devout
Jews,  of  pious  Mussulmans,  and  truly  worthy  men  of  all  de¬
nominations.

I  have  long  been  of  the  opinion  that  the  soul  is  the  lumi¬
nous  material  atmosphere  which  surrounds  the  body,  des¬
cribed  by  many  somnambules  as  appearing  like  a  lambent
flame.  The  outer  and  not  the  inner  man,  and,  so  far  from  not
being  in  connection  with  the  spirit  world,  is,  in  fact,  never
out  of  it ;  and,  as  the  opposite  pole  of  a  magnet  repels  the
needle  which  the  other  attracts,  so  does  the  body,  when  in
its  normal  state,  by  overpowering  by  its  will  the  soul,  repel
all  other  soul  atmospheres :  but  in  the  magnetic  state,  the
body  being  rendered  inert,  the  soul  is  left  free  to  exert  itself,
and  in  that  state  exists,  irrespective  of  time  or  space,  and  en¬
dued  with  the  power  of  attenuating  or  expanding  itself  to
whatever  point  it  desires  to  be  in,  with  “  QUASi-electro-
telegraphic-wire-like  speed,”  and  of  acting  on  other  human
soul  atmospheres,  thus  becoming  cognizant  of  the  past  trans¬
actions  of  others  like  Heinrich  Zschokke — the  Swiss  histo¬
rian — of  the  present,  how  far  soever  distant,  like  the  American
solitaire *  and  Mr.  Hazards  patient ;  and,  in  like  manner,

*  Zschokke  in  his  Selbstschau  states  :  “  It  has  happened  to  me  occasionally,
at  the  first  meeting  with  a  total  stranger,  when  I  have  been  listening  in  silence  to
his  conversation,  that  his  past  life,  up  to  the  present  moment,  with  many  minute
circumstances  belonging  to  one  or  other  scene  in  it,  has  come  across  me  like  a
dream,  but  distinctly,  involuntarily  and  unsought.  Instead  of  recording  many
instances  I  will  give  one.  On  a  fair  day  at  Waldshut  we  went  into  an  inn  called
the  Vine ;  we  took  our  supper  with  a  numerous  company  at  the  public  table  :
when  it  happened  that  they  made  themselves  merry  over  the  peculiarities  of  the
Swiss,  in  connexion  with  the  belief  in  mesmerism  and  the  like.  One  of  my  com¬
panions  begged  me  to  make  some  reply,  particularly  in  answer  to  a  young  man
of  superior  appearance,  who  sat  opposite,  and  had  indulged  in  unrestrained  ridi¬
cule.  It  happened  that  the  events  of  this  very  person’s  life  had  just  previously
passed  before  my  mind.  I  turned  to  him  with  the  question,  whether  he  would
reply  to  me  with  truth  and  candour  if  I  narrated  to  him  the  most  secret  passages


62  Remarks  upon  the  Rev .  G.  Sandby’s  Review  of  Cahaynefs

becoming  possessed  by  an  intuitive  perception  of  the  floating
ideas  of  other  coexistent  souls,  thus  accounting  for  the  phe¬
nomenon  of  Jacob  Behmen — a  rude,  unlettered  shoemaker —
who,  falling,  like  his  predecessor — Mahomet,  and  his  suc¬
cessor — Swedenborg,  into  a  “  quasi-mesmeric  state, ”  produced
those  admirable  and  voluminous  works,  the  Teutonic  Philoso¬
phy,  which  thus  engendered  were  merely  the  reflex  of  the
Christianity  of  his  time  mixed  up  with  the  then  all-engrossing
theories  of  the  triune,  body,  soul,  and  spirit — the  sulphur,
salt,  and  mercury  of  the  magi-alchemical  philosophers,  and


of  his  history  ?  he  being  as  little  known  to  me  as  I  to  him.  He  promised  if  I
told  the  truth  to  admit  it  openly.  Then  I  narrated  the  events  with  which  my
dream -vision  had  furnished  me,  and  the  table  learnt  the  history  of  the  young
tradesman’s  life, — of  his  school  years,  his  peccadilloes,  and  finally  of  a  little  act
of  roguery  committed  by  him  on  the  strong  box  of  his  employer.  I  described
the  uninhabited  room  with  its  white  walls,  where  to  the  right  of  the  brown  door
there  had  stood  upon  the  table  the  small  black  money  chest,  &c.  A  dead  silence
reigned  during  this  recital,  interrupted  only  when  I  occasionally  asked  if  I  had
spoke  the  truth.  The  man,  much  struck,  admitted  the  correctness  of  each  cir¬
cumstance,  even,  which  I  could  not  expect,  of  the  last.  Touched  with  his  frank¬
ness,  I  reached  my  hand  to  him  across  the  table,  and  closed  the  narrative.  He
asked  my  name,  which  I  gave  him.  He  may  be  alive  yet.”

This  extraordinary  power  Zschokke  afterwards  found  also  possessed  by  a
beggar  man.

The  anecdote  of  the  Solitaire  is  thus  related  by  Jung,  Theory  of  Pneumatology,
p.  74  : —

“  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Philadelphia  there  dwelt  a  solitary  man  in  a  lonely
house.  He  was  very  benevolent,  but  extremely  retired  and  reserved  ;  and  strange
things  were  related  of  him,  amongst  which  were  his  being  able  to  tell  a  person
things  that  were  unknown  to  every  one  else.  Now  it  happened  that  a  captain
of  a  vessel  belonging  to  Philadelphia  was  about  to  sail  to  Africa  and  Europe.  He
promised  his  wife  that  he  would  return  again  in  a  certain  time,  and  also  that  he
would  write  to  her  frequently ;  she  waited  long,  but  no  letters  arrived  :  the  time
appointed  passed  over,  but  her  beloved  husband  did  not  return.  She  was  now
deeply  distressed,  and  knew  not  where  to  look  either  for  counsel  or  consolation  ;
at  length  a  friend  advised  her  to  go  to  the  pious  solitary,  and  tell  him  her  griefs  :
the  woman  followed  his  advice,  and  went  to  him.  After  she  had  told  him  all  her
troubles,  he  desired  her  to  wait  awhile  there  until  he  returned  and  brought  her
an  answer.  She  sat  down  to  wait,  and  the  man  opening  a  door,  went  into  his
closet.  But  the  woman  thinking  he  stayed  a  long  time,  rose  up,  went  to  the
window  in  the  door,  lifted  up  the  little  curtain,  and  looking  in,  saw  him  lying
on  a  couch  like  a  corpse ;  she  then  immediately  went  back  to  her  place.  At  length
he  came  and  told  her  that  her  husband  was  in  London,  in  a  coffee-house  which
he  named,  and  that  he  would  return  very  soon  :  he  then  told  her  also  the  reason
why  he  had  been  unable  to  write.  The  woman  went  home  pretty  much  at  ease.

“  What  the  solitary  told  her  was  minutely  fulfilled  ;  her  husband  returned,
and  the  reason  of  his  delay  and  his  not  writing  were  just  the  same  as  the  solitary
had  stated.  The  woman  was  now  curious  to  know  what  would  be  the  result  if
she  visited  the  friendly  solitary  in  company  with  her  husband.  The  visit  was
arranged,  but  when  the  captain  saw  the  man  he  was  struck  with  amazement.  He
afterwards  told  his  wife  that  he  had  seen  this  very  man,  on  such  a  day  (it  was  the
very  day  that  the  woman  had  been  with  him),  in  a  coffee-house  in  London,  and
that  he  had  told  him  that  his  wife  was  much  distressed  about  him  ;  that  he  had
then  stated  his  reason  why  his  return  was  delayed  and  of  his  not  writing,  and
that  he  would  shortly  come  back  ;  on  which  he  lost  sight  of  the  man  among  the
company.”


Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  by  Mr.  Hockley.  G3


expressed  in  their  peculiar  language  and  phraseology.  Thus
Swedenborg  anticipated,  in  his  revelations,

“  Much  science  of  the  nineteenth  century  ;  anticipated  in  astronomy,  the  dis¬
covery  of  the  seventh  planet,  but  unhappily  not  also  the  eighth  ;  anticipated  the
views  of  modem  astronomy  in  regard  to  the  generation  of  earths  by  the  sun  ;  in
magnetism,  some  important  experiments  and  conclusions  of  later  students  ;  in
chemistry,  the  atomic  theory  ;  in  anatomy,  the  discoveries  of  Schlichting,  Monro,
and  Wilson ;  and  first  demonstrated  the  office  of  the  lungs. ”*

Thus  also  enabling  Andrew  Jackson  Davis,  whose  educa¬
tion,  like  Behmen's,  “  scarcely  amounted  to  reading,  writing,
and  the  elements  of  arithmetic,”  in  his  magnetic  sleep,  mes-
merically  induced  to  pour  forth  a  mass  of  recondite  matter
(filling  800  closely  printed  octavo  pages),  explaining  the  laws
of  nature  and  giving  us  the  minutiae  of  her  operations  in  my¬
riads  of  by-gone  ages,  revelling  in  the  deepest  profundities  of
geologic  speculations  and  central-sun  systems  in  the  techni¬
cal  phraseology  of  the  day,  but  stopping  short  precisely  where
his  revelations  would  be  most  useful  and  most  convincing —
the  limits  of  our  present  knowledge  and  ideas, f — detailing  to
a  nicety  the  vegetation  of  the  planet  Saturn,  the  complexions
of  the  inhabitants  of  Jupiter,  and  the  very  forms  of  the  cere¬
brum  and  cerebellum  of  the  inhabitants  of  Mars,  but  unable
to  give  us  the  diameter  of  the  sun  to  within  114,000  miles —
"  its  diameter  has  not  been  as  yet  correctly  determined ;”  be¬
coming  dogmatical  upon  the  origin  of  the  asteroids,  but  stat¬
ing  “  Their  rotations  have  been  scarcely  decided  upon,  their
revolutions  have  beep.  nearly  correctly  calculated.”  But  the
(to  me)  most  convincing  proof  that  our  soul  atmosphere  has
the  faculty  of  receiving,  when  in  a  mesmeric  induced  sleep,
the  influx  of  all  the  floating,  though  unpublished,  ideas  of
the  time  is  Professor  Bush's  note,  at  p.  22 7.

u  What  is  here  said  of  the  dia-magnetic  principle  was  entirely  new  to  me  at
the  time,  having  never  heard  of  the  term.  On  subsequently  asking  the  speaker
(Davis)  for  a  more  particular  explanation,  he  replied,  in  substance,  that  an  im¬
ponderable  element  had  recently  been  discovered,  the  motion  of  which  intersected
the  current  producing  the  direction  of  the.  magnetic  needle.  On  my  enquiring  the
name  of  the  discoverer,  the  clairvoyant  passed  off  ( i.e .,  spiritually,  the  body  as¬
suming  the  inclined  position,  as  is  explained  on  p.  38),  and  on  returning,  he  re¬
marked,  ‘  It  sounds  like — he  is  known  as  Professor  Faraday.’  ”

In  conclusion,  it  must  still  depend  on  our  individual  idio-

*  Emerson’s  Representative  Men,  p.  51.  Bohn.

f  “  The  statement  here,  concerning  the  revolution  of  the  sun  as  a  planet
around  a  centre  in  the  depths  of  immensity,  is  verified  by  the  recent  discoveries  of
Maedler,  a  Russian  astronomer ;  of  which  discoveries  the  clairvoyant,  in  his  nor¬
mal  state,  had  no  knowledge,  neither  had  either  of  his  associates  until  many
months  after  this  was  delivered.”  p.  160.

“  Numerous  witnesses  can  testify  that  what  is  said  about  an  eighth  and  ninth
planet  was  in  manuscript  months  before  Le  Verrier’s  calculations  and  conclusions
had  been  announced  in  this  country.”  Ib.  161.


64  Remarks  upon  the  Rev.  G.  Sandhi/ s  Review  of  Cahagnet’ s

syncracy,  whether  we  believe  the  revelations  of  the  spiritual
world  thus  obtained  are  parallel  truths  or  mere  repetitions ;
but  M.  Cahagnet  has  promised  us  a  tangible  proof  in  a  volume
of  alchemical  revelations,  and  we  must  forewarn  him  that  in
these  sceptical  days  we  shall  expect  from  him,  with  such  a
goodly  host  of  defunct  Adepti,  “  real  sons  of  the  fire” — from
Synesius  to  Philalethes — for  interlocutors,  who,  if  judged  from
their  voluminous  writings,  must  doubtless  prove  most  loqua¬
cious  fellows,  and  who,  having  indulged  when  on  this  dull
earth  so  copiously  in  dark  and  mystical  enigmas,  will  now
throw  an  unerring  light  upon  the  first  matter,  will  truly  give
us  an  open  entrance  to  the  shut  palace  of  the  king,  a  lucid
explanation  of  the  Tabula  Smaragdina  of  Hermes,  the  sophic
fire  of  Pontanus,  the  doves  of  Diana,  the  fountain  of  Count
Turisan,  and  the  green  lion,  ?md  all  other  monsters  of  Paracel¬
sus,  Ripley,  Flamel,  and  Co., — not  omitting  the  assistance
to  be  derived  from  those  thrice  learned  ladies,  Miriam  the
prophetess,  Perrenelle,  and  Quercitan's  daughter.  Let  them
do  this,  M.  Alphonse  Cahagnet,  and  your  revived  art  of  pro¬
jection  will  make  more  converts  to  animal  magnetism  than
Anthony  Mesmer  and  the  whole  of  his  disciples.

I  remain,  Sir,

Your  obedient  servant,

London.  Fred.  Hockley.


***  Not  wishing  to  continue  a  controversy  in  another
number,  we  showed  Mr.  Hockley's  manuscript  to  Mr.  Sandby
and  to  a  philosophical  layman ;  and  the  following  are  their
remarks. — Zoist.

I.  Mr.  Sandby  begs  to  thank  the  editor  of  The  Zoist  for  the
perusal  of  Mr.  Hockley’s  manuscript,  and  at  the  same  time  he  thanks
Mr.  Hockley  for  his  friendly  observations;  and  in  reply  he  can  assure
him,  that  he  has  a  pleasure  in  meeting  so  well  informed  a  writer,
though  it  is  his  misfortune  still  to  dissent  from  his  conclusions.

There  are  many  questions  alluded  to  in  the  above  “  Remarks,”
on  which  Mr.  S.  would  be  glad  to  comment;  but  he  will  confine
himself  to  one  point,  where  his  argument  seems  misunderstood,  or
rather  is  altogether  overlooked  by  Mr.  Hockley,  and  it  is  the  argu¬
ment  by  which  the  fallaciousness  of  M.  Cahagnet’s  facts  is  attempted
to  be  proved.

This  argument  has  respect  to  the  conversation  maintained  between
Adele,  the  clairvoyante,  and  the  mother  of  M.  Lucas,  an  alleged
resident  in  Mexico.  Here  Mr.  Hockley  says,  that  “  Mr.  S.,  in
placing  before  his  readers  a  proof  that  M.  Cahagnet’s  revelations  are
not  a  connection  with  the  spiritual  world,  has  selected  two  cases  of
clairvoyant  communications  with  persons  actually  declared  by  the


Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  by  Mr.  Hockley.  65

somnambulist  to  be  living,  and,  although  in  stating  them  that  gentle¬
man  has  given  us  the  truth,  still  if  he  had  not  most  ingeniously  dis¬
jointed  it,  I  think  very  few  of  his  readers  would  have  coincided  with
him  in  opinion,”  &c.,  &c.

Now  the  reason  why  facts,  which  are  in  themselves  curious,  were
thus  “  ingeniously  disjointed,”  and  the  whole  story  not  given,  was
partly  the  desire  of  brevity,  but  mainly  the  fact  of  their  not  bearing
upon  the  actual  argument,  which  argument  related  solely  to  the
conversation  held  between  two  persons  some  hundred  miles  asunder.

The  case  is  this.  Ad&le,  in  addition  to  her  power  of  calling  up
and  conversing  with  the  souls  of  the  departed,  travels  in  spirit  to
Mexico,  and  professes  to  hold  a  dialogue  with  a  gentleman  dwelling
in  that  country.  Now  that  gentleman  was  either  dead,  or  he  was
living.  If  he  were  dead,  there  is  an  end  of  the  matter,  and  the  illu¬
sive  character  of  the  vision  is  at  once  demonstrated.  But  if  he  were
living  (as  Ad&le’s  powers  of  clairvoyance  would  lead  us  to  assume),
then  it  is  contended  that  that  gentleman’s  spirit  or  “  reasoning
faculty  ”  must  have  been  conscious  at  the  time  of  so  strange  a  trans¬
action  as  this  interesting  conference,  and  could,  if  he  had  been  ques¬
tioned,  have  given  much  the  same  version  of  the  interview  as  that
communicated  by  Madame  Adele;  for,  in  addition,  it  must  be  re¬
membered  that  he  was  not  asleep  mesmerically  or  otherwise,  but
engaged  at  work  with  a  negro  in  gathering  seeds  like  peppercorns.

Now,  according  to  Cahagnet,  Adele’ s  power  of  conversing  with
the  stranger  in  Mexico  was  as  easily  brought  into  action,  as  her
power  of  conversing  with  the  soul  of  Swedenborg  or  of  Louis  XVI.
The  fact  then  is  readily  tested.  Let  Cahagnet,  or  any  lady  or  gen¬
tleman  in  London,  who  has  the  same  faculty  of  raising  the  dead  by
the  aid  of  a  spiritualized  clairvoyant,  hold  a  conversation  after  the
same  fashion  with  some  third  party  resident  in  some  accessible  local¬
ity,  who  shall  be  quite  unprepared  for  the  conference ;  and  if  that
third  party  shall  subsequently  confirm  the  proces  verbal  of  the  dia¬
logue,  and  admit  that  his  “reasoning  faculty ”  did  really  feel  con¬
scious  of  the  same  spiritual  conversation ;  and  if  this  fact  be  well
established  by  repeated  trials,  then  Mr.  Sandby  will  admit  that  a
prima  facie  case  is  made  out  in  favour  of  M.  Cahagnet’s  statements,
and  he  will  be  prepared  to  reconsider  the  secrets  of  the  “  celestial
telegraph.”

But  if  this  communication  cannot  be  obtained  at  home  or  at
Paris,  and  the  distance  of  Mexico  is  required  to  “  lend  enchantment
to  the  interview  ”  then  it  is  contended  that  this  spiritual  intercourse
with  the  brother  of  M.  Lucas  was  simply  a  spectral  illusion  by  the
aid  of  clairvoyance,  and  the  dialogue  but  “a  coinage  of  the  brain;”
and  then  it  follows  next  that  the  faculty,  which  at  one  moment  could
thus  depicture  a  living  man,  could  with  equal  facility  raise  up  the
ideal  figures  of  a  whole  host  of  departed  beings,  and  hold  imaginary
colloquies  with  them  ;  and  thus  it  follows  next  that  the  large  army  of
Cahagnet’s  ghosts  may  be  little  else  than  airy  nothings,  or  that —

“  Bodiless  creation  ecstacy
Is  very  cunning  in."


VOL.  VIII.


F


66  On  the  Superstitions  of  Mesmerism ,

Tlie  cerebral  power  of  seeing  ghosts  at  will  is  the  great  point
established  and  explained  by  this  Mexican  dialogue:  and  though
there  may  be  several  other  facts  in  M.  Cahagnet’s  volumes  which  a
most  imperfect  acquaintance  with  the  extensibility  of  clairvoyance
renders  at  present  difficult  of  solution,  still  this  is  the  great  physio¬
logical  feature  in  the  subject,  while  all  the  other  perplexing  points
are  of  inferior  moment.

Flixton  Vicarage.

II.  If  we  apprehend  Mr.  Hockley  rightly,  his  purpose  in  giving
this  extended  extract  is  to  support  the  deduction  drawn  from  it  as
from  others  by  M.  Cahagnet,  and  which  is  combated  by  Mr.  Sandby
in  his  more  brief  citation.  The  facts,  cleared  of  inferences,  are  ad¬
mitted  or  assumed  by  the  several  parties  to  the  discussion,  but  the
deduction  from  them  “that  spirits  can  and  do  make  their  appearance
to  an  ecstatic  sleep-waker,  and  can  hold  conversations  with  him,”
Mr.  Sandby  demurs  to,  while  Mr.  Hockley,  wTe  presume,  supports.
The  text,  however,  furnishes  us  with  no  assistance  in  the  work  of
connecting  the  premises  and  the  conclusion,  and  we  can  find  none  for
ourselves  in  the  full  report  of  the  sitting,  least  of  all  in  the  italicized
passages.  Surely  the  anecdote  of  the  coup-de-soliel ,  however  inte¬
resting  in  itself,  in  no  way  elucidates  the  theory  of  conversing  appa¬
ritions.

At  the  same  time  we  are  bound  to  say  that  Mr.  Sandby  appears
to  narrow  his  own  ground  too  strictly.  At  page  421,  Zoist  XXVIII.,
he  well  states,  that  when  the  transference  of  thought  is  once  esta¬
blished  as  a  truth,  the  other  points, — can  a  brain  which  is  not  in
apparent  rapport  with  the  sleeper,  (a  brain  which  is  at  a  distance,  or
which  in  years  long  past  had  been  in  sympathetic  intercourse  with
some  person  that  is  present),  can  this  brain  conduct  its  impressions
to  the  brain  of  the  ecstatic, — are  only  questions  of  degree ;  additional
experience,  it  is  added,  tends  to  extend  our  notion  of  the  capabilities
of  the  human  brain  in  these  respects.  Now  why  should  we  deny  to
the  cases  of  M.  Cahagnet  the  character  of  evidence  on  the  question
of  degree  ?  and  if  they  are  attested,  authenticated,  admitted,  what
other  course  remains  for  us  ?  The  step  in  degree  may  be  so  vast —
from  transference  of  thought  at  the  interval  of  an  hour  and  a  street,
to  an  interval  of  a  hemisphere  and  half  a  century — that  we  may
withhold  assent,  waiting  an  example  more'  completely  exempt  from
all  chances  of  mistake,  misapprehension,  and  misreport;  but  a  ques¬
tion  of  degree  it  still  remains,  and  we  must  not  allow  the  enormity  of
the  application  to  frighten  us  out  of  recognition  of  the  principle.
What  view  then  may  we  form,  consistently  with  the  principle,  of  the
conversation  reported  between  Adele  in  France  and  the  stranger  in
Mexico  ?  If,  as  we  have  seen,  it  be  an  admitted  possibility  that  the
brain  of  a  person  at  a  distance,  at  Mexico,  may  conduct  its  impres.-
sions  to  the  brain  of  a  person,  in  this  case  a  brother,  which  in  years
long  past  had  been  in  sympathetic  intercourse  with  it,  another  link  in
the  mysterious  chain  conducts  those  impressions  to  the  brain  of  the
somnambule ;  and  it  is  quite  within  the  range  of  experience  in  these


by  Mr.  Sandby  and  Mr.  Lloyd.


67


matters  that  the  more  sensitive  organism  should  alone  have  distinct
perception  of  the  impressions  conveyed  to  it  through  an  unconscious
recipient.  The  particular  forms  in  which  the  impressions  are  enun¬
ciated  by  the  somnambule,  as  a  conversation,  a  vision,  &c.,  are  known
to  be  matters  of  casual  association  and  habit  and  predisposition,  and
the  liabilities  of  mixed  failures  and  success  are  also  notorious.

There  seems  then  no  impossibility,  according  to  the  conditions  of
the  argument,  in  a  positive  communication  of  thought  taking  place
between  a  brain  in  Mexico  and  a  brain  in  France  ;  nay,  if  we  suppose
the  brain  in  Mexico  as  sensitive  and  clairvoyant  as  the  French  one,
the  transference  of  thought  may  be  mutual,  and  there  may  be  con¬
sciousness  of  the  communication  on  either  side.  But  in  the  absence
of  such  coincident  sensitiveness  there  seems  no  reason,  under  the
assumptions,  for  requiring  that  the  absent  person  should  become
“  conscious  of  the  communication,  and  agree  in  the  accuracy  of  the
conversations  ascribed  to  them,”  and  to  which  they  did  in  fact  fur¬
nish  their  part,  and  in  default  of  this  for  concluding  that  the
“unreality  of  the  supposed  perception  is  at  once  obvious,  and  we
have  incontestable  proof  that  the  whole  is  a  mental  delusion.” —
Zoist,  p.  426.

But  furthermore,  if  any  one  chooses  to  claim  the  manifestation
thus  hypothetically  admitted, — the  perception  in  a  room  at  Paris  of
the  personal  condition  and  present  thoughts  of  a  person  in  Mexico, —
as  virtually  an  apparition,  as  something  much  more  to  the  purpose
of  a  profitable  apparition  than  is  often  to  be  had  in  the  market,  we
know  not  what  objection  can  be  made  on  the  part  of  those  who  have
brought  the  question  to  this  point.  The  sound  of  a  voice  is  as
much  an  apparition  as  a  face  and  form  seen,  and  what  are  externals
of  any  kind  to  actual  commnnication  of  mental  impressions  ?

The  differences,  however,  must  not  be  lost  sight  of  between
assenting  to  such  matters  as  theoretically  possible  and  actually  facts;
between  instances  again  that  are  authenticated  and  those  that  are
not;  and  in  authenticated  instances,  between  the  criticised  residuum
of  philosophical  truth  and  the  accretions  of  error  and  false  inferences
at  every  step,  from  the  somnambulist  in  chief  to  the  last  avoucher.
It  must  be  said  that  facts  of  this  class  recommend  themselves  too
often  to  those  who  are  so  fortunate  as  to  encounter  the  best  speci¬
mens,  not  by  their  proper  and  essential  value  and  significance,  but
by  their  supposed  bearing  in  illustration  and  furtherance  of  a  pre¬
adopted  theory,  not  to  say  superstition ;  and  painful  it  is  to  the
student  who  would  fain  be  the  minister  and  interpreter  of  nature,  to
see  her  choicest  productions  mangled  and  bleeding,  and  smoking  as
sacrifices  on  the  altars  of  every  idol  of  den  and  tribe  that  physiology
and  philosophy  have  reason  to  abhor.

For  the  rest,  after  the  exposition  by  Mr.  Sandby  of  the  “contra¬
dictions”  and  “  poverty  of  ideas”  exhibited  in  these  developments
of  spiritualism,  we  fancy  it  is  needless  to  enter  farther  into  their
claims  as  transcendental  and  authoritative  revelations  and  “unveil-
ments  of  the  secrets  of  future  existence.”

London.  W.  W.  Lloyd.

f  2


68


On  the  Superstitions  of  Mesmerism ,


Dr.  Elliotson  has  written  the  following  observations : —

III.  After  the  successive  teaching  of  so  many  master  brains,  we
no  longer  take  the  trouble  to  shew  that  every  natural  truth  is  impor¬
tant,  and  to  be  prized  for  its  own  sake,  as  a  source  of  high  intellec¬
tual  pleasure,  and  as  sure  to  be  applied  some  day  to  a  practical  pur¬
pose — all  nature  being  one  fabric,  the  minutest  particle  subject  to
universal  laws,  and  constituting  a  portion  of  the  universe  :  nor  to
shew  that  every  natural  truth  is  necessarily  as  harmless  as  it  is  im¬
portant, — that  we  must  never  think  of  asking  what  will  be  the  good
of  the  knowledge  of  any  natural  truth,  or  what  will  be  the  harm
of  knowing  it.  We  must  also  stand  up  boldly  to  assert  that  all  na¬
tural  truths,  physical  and  moral,  are  to  be  ascertained  by  our  own
observation  and  intellect ;  and  that  miraculous  revelation  is  solely
for  things  which  cannot  be  objects  of  our  observation  and  intellect.
No  intelligent  and  honest  Christian  would  now  look  into  the  Bible
for  information  in  astronomy,  geology,  or  geography,  nay,  not  even
for  history,  except  as  rigorously  as  he  would  into  any  other  book.*
As  to  morals,  the  New  Testament  teaches  us  what  many  exalted  and
pure  men  have  taught,  and  leaves  us  to  judge  what  constitutes  mur¬
der,  what  constitutes  theft,  f  and  leaves  us  to  employ  our  common
sense  and  not  present  ourselves  for  a  second  blow  to  a  man  who  has
already  struck  us  nor  offer  our  coat  to  a  boy  who  has  stolen  our
handkerchief.

They  are  founded  upon  our  various  cerebral  feelings  and  our  in¬
tellect.  One  of  the  most  acute  and  admirable  of  men,  Bishop  Butler,
allows,  as  we  cerebral  physiologists  do,  that  the  natural  tendency
of  all  our  united  faculties  and  feelings  is  to  virtue  and  the  greatest
happiness ;  J  and  that  “  moral  precepts  are  precepts  the  reason  of
which  we  see,  and  arise  out  of  the  nature  of  the  case  itself  prior  to
external  command  and  that  Christianity  as  regards  its  moral  pre¬
cepts,  is  a  republicationof  “natural  religion  in  its  genuine  simplicity. ”§

Now  all  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  are  a  part  of  natural
knowledge,  and  therefore  as  deserving  of  investigation  as  any  other
part.  To  doubt  this  in  regard  to  the  ordinary  mesmeric  phenomena,
shows  a  person  to  be  not  a  whit  superior  to  a  priest  of  the  middle
ages  or  a  peasant  of  an  Italian  village.  Our  business  is  only  to  ascer¬
tain  whether  each  point  is  true;  and  this  is  moreover  a  duty,  for  the
subject  far  transcends  all  the  sciences  of  inanimate  nature,  and  is  one
of  the  most  useful  arts.  Mesmeric  sleep-waking,  from  what  appears
profound  coma  to  high  activity;  rigidity,  lessened  and  heightened
sensibility;  peculiar  susceptibility  of  impressions  from  various  inani¬
mate  objects  and  from  living  beings;  mental  attractions  and  repul¬
sions;  the  excitement  of  individual  cerebral  organs,  &c.,  are  only
such  phenomena  as  are  at  present  too  generally  admitted  for  a  person

*  See  Zoist,  No.  XXVII.,  p.  252;  No.  XXVIII.,  p.  404.

f  Some  consider  capital  punishment  to  be  murder ;  some  consider  the  wanton
expenditure  of  a  sixpence  of  the  taxes  in  jobs  and  unjustifiable  wars  to  be  robbery.

%  Sermons  upon  the  Social  Nature  of  Men.  Sermons  ii.  and  iii.  upon  the
Natural  Supremacy  of  Conscience.

§  Analogy,  part  ii.,  chap.  x.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


69


to  deny  them  without  exposing  himself  to  ridicule.  Higher  pheno¬
mena  are  not  so  generally  admitted,  and  some  of  them  are  fancied
to  be  supernatural.  Cerebral  sympathy  of  sensation,  even  of  infor¬
mation  and  emotion,  may  be  admitted  and  thought  natural;  clairvoy¬
ance,  so  far  as  it  consists  of  an  intuitive  knowledge  of  the  course
of  a  disease  and  its  remedies,  in  the  patient  himself,  or  even  in
another  person;  of  knowing  present  objects  of  vision  without  the
eyes;  nay,  the  power  of  influencing  another  by  the  mere  will,  may
be  admitted.  But  the  higher  clairvoyance  which  perceives  the  ab¬
sent  and  distant,  the  past  and  the  future,  is  doubted,  and,  if  believed,
considered  preternatural.  If  these  things  are  true,  they  are  of  neces¬
sity  in  the  course  of  nature ;  and  the  mode  of  effecting  them  must
be  a  natural  process.  We  have  no  miraculous  faculties,  nor  can  any¬
thing  we  do  be  miraculous;  nor  can  it  or  any  thing  we  do  be  neces¬
sarily  wrong,  unless  it  never  can  be  done  with  good  results  and
without  mischief.  As  the  higher  varieties  of  clairvoyance,  if  true,
must  be  natural  facts,  the  whole  deserve  close  investigation.

But  we  must  investigate  with  knowledge,  and  not  fancy  and
superstition.  I  am  unable  to  conceive  anything  in  nature  but  matter
and  properties  of  matter.  The  mental  manifestations  of  men  and
all  other  animals  I  see  produced  by  certain  compositions  and  organ¬
izations  of  matter  placed  in  certain  circumstances.  I  know  and  can
conceive  nothing  more  :  and  all  that  relates  to  our  minds  being  a
part  of  nature,  is  to  be  observed  and  reasoned  upon  by  us,  not  learnt
from  revelation.

To  refer  the  mental  phenomena  to  some  imaginary  immaterial
substance  is  to  me  unintelligible ;  and  the  particular  language  of
Scripture  has  no  more  weight  in  cerebral  physiology  than  in  geo¬
logy  or  astronomy,  or  any  other  science.  But  the  fancies  of  igno¬
rant  ages  still  linger  in  the  civilized  world,  and  are  blindly  taken  for
facts.  Created  beings  are  accordingly  fancied  who  are  not  matter  or
properties,  and  called  spirits;  and  of  course  uninformed  or  delirious
persons  will  believe  illusions  of  any  of  the  senses — sight,  hearing,  or
touch — to  be  realities.  Every  impression  conveyed  from  any  of  the
five  senses  may  be  conjured  up  in  the  brain  without  external  excite¬
ment,  or  arise  when  the  brain  is  under  excitement  from  any  cause,
and  be  therefore  illusions.  Under  the  influence  of  narcotics  and
inflammatory  and  nervous  excitement  of  any  kind,  the  brain  fancies
it  sees,  hears,  feels,  smells,  and  tastes  realities  which  are  unreali¬
ties.  In  sleep-waking  a  degree  of  unsoundness  of  cerebral  function
is  very  common,  and  illusions  often  occur  mixed  up  with  intelli¬
gence  and  even  clairvoyance.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  one
brain  may  act  upon  another  at  a  distance,  as  one  heavenly  body
affects  others  at  immense  distances.  If  any  fact  is  well  established
it  is  that  of  persons  affecting  others  at  a  distance  when  thinking
intensely  of  them,  as  must  be  the  case  in  the  very  highest  degree  at
the  moment  of  dying.  The  appearance  of  an  absent  person  is  popu¬
larly  and  ignorantly  ascribed  to  the  imaginary  spirit  or  soul  present¬
ing  itself,  after  leaving  the  body,  just  before  it  departs  from  the
earth.  However,  I  have  known  the  same  phenomenon  when  the


70


On  the  Superstitions  of  Mesmerism.


party,  though  believing  himself  dying,  did  not  die;  and  I  know  one
instance  in  which  a  lady  appeared  in  a  white  dress  on  her  wedding
night  to  a  gentleman  in  his  sleep  no  fewer  than  three  times  in  the
early  part  of  the  night,  and  so  distinctly  that  he  awoke  each  time,  and
at  length  awoke  his  wife  to  see  her.  He  was  not  aware  of  her  mar¬
riage,  and  there  had  formerly  been  an  intimacy  between  them  that
ought  to  have  ended  in  marriage.  No  doubt  she  was  thinking  in¬
tensely  of  him.  I  have  a  friend  who  can  by  his  will  make  certain
patients  think  of  any  others  he  chooses,  and  fancy  they  see  those
persons : — he  silently  thinking  of  certain  persons,  the  brain  of  the
patient  sympathizes  with  his  brain.  Nay,  by  silently  willing  that
these  persons  shall  say  and  do  certain  things  which  he  chooses,  he
makes  the  patients  believe  they  see  these  imaginary  appearances
doing  and  uttering  those  very  things.

In  clairvoyance  of  the  distant,  the  distant  party  beheld  by  the
clairvoyant  is  usually  not  conscious  of  what  the  clairvoyant  is  doing :
but  certainly  if  his  so-called  spirit — his  person — appeared  to  the
somnambule,  it  ought  to  be  conscious;  and  therefore  Mr.  Sandby’s
test  is  sound, — that  the  experiment  ought  to  be  tried  with  an  absent
person  within  reach  :  and,  if  he  is  not  conscious  of  what  had  hap¬
pened,  his  spirit  could  not  have  appeared  and  talked  to  the  somnam¬
bule.  In  clairvoyance  this  consciousness  of  the  party  seen  has
generally  not  taken  place.  But,  even  if  it  took  place,  it  would  not
prove  the  presence  of  a  spirit,  but  be  referable  to  only  a  double
sympathy  between  the  two.  The  following  ghost  story  is  perfectly
authentic.  A  gentleman  was  poorly  one  night  and  lay  awake  in  bed.
Suddenly  his  absent  brother  appeared  to  him,  looked  at  him,  walked
past  the  bed,  went  to  a  desk  where  some  papers  lay  and  looked  at
them,  walked  back  past  the  bed  looking  again  at  him,  and  vanished.
In  a  few  hours  he  was  summoned  to  his  brother,  who  had  been  sud¬
denly  taken  ill.  On  arriving  his  brother  said,  “  You  have  seen  me
before  to-night,  and  you  know  it;”  and  then  expired.  So  that  this
visit  had  been  made  before  the  soul  had  left  the  body!  Here  the
dying  brother  had  thought  of  the  other  and  probably  of  the  papers,
and  produced  a  vision  in  him:  and  had  himself  sympathized  with
his  brother’s  brain,  and  become  conscious  of  what  was  passing  in  it.

When  clairvoyants  assure  us  of  their  cognizance  of  distant  things,
we  can  never  be  certain  that  their  ideas  are  not  illusions,  until  we
find  facts  and  their  ideas  to  coincide  :  and  when  their  ideas  relate
to  matters  beyond  this  world,  there  is  no  testing  them,  and  we
cannot  be  called  upon  to  give  credence,  knowing,  as  we  do,  the
strong  disposition  in  all  such  cases,  even  when  the  party  is  honest,
to  delirious  imaginings.  Mr.  Parsons’s
ceived  his  predictions

“To  be  communicated  to  him  by  a  book  in  which  they  were  written,  and  to
which  a  ghastly  being  in  black  pointed.”

The  following  observations  were  made  by  me  upon  this  point : —

“  Such  a  statement  is  likely  to  excite  the  ridicule  of  the  ignorant:  but  is  in
perfect  accordance  with  nature.  Certain  excitement  of  various  portions  of  the
brain,  if  not  of  other  divisions  of  the  nervous  system,  gives  the  appearance  of  un¬


truly  clairvoyant  boy  con-


Cure  of  Pulmonary  Consumption .


71


existing  or  absent  beings  and  inanimate  objects,  gives  the  impression  of  unreal
sounds,  tastes,  smells,  and  feelings,  to  use  the  term  feelings  in  the  signification
of  all  sensations  included  in  the  generic  word  touch.  Any  of  these  phenomena
may  occur  singly,  or  in  combination  with  one  or  more  of  the  others,  or  with  dif¬
ferent  diseases  of  the  nervous  system.  A  madman  may  believe  their  reality,  as  he
does  the  reality  of  all  his  fancies  ;  and  so  may  a  person  not  mad  but  ignorant — -
unacquainted  with  their  true  nature,  which  is  diseased  nervous  action.  The  igno¬
rant  suppose  such  appearances  of  beings  to  be  supernatural  beings  or  real  souls  of
terrestrial  men  separated  from  the  body  for  the  moment.  However,  the  appear¬
ance  of  their  clothes,  of  books,  and  of  all  the  other  inanimate  objects,  is  not  to
be  so  explained, — not  by  supernatural  clothes,  books,  trees,  &c.,  &c.,  nor  by
separated  souls  of  clothes,  of  books,  trees,  &c.  :  and  these  appearances  may  be
produced  by  narcotic  poisons,  blows  on  the  head,  indigestible  food,  &c.,  &c.,  and
be  dispelled  by  emetics,  bleeding,  &c.,  &c.  Clairvoyance  is  sometimes,  but  not
necessarily,  attended  by  this  sort  of  hallucination— by  an  appearance  or  impression
of  some  unreal  being  or  inanimate  object,  which  seems  to  make  the  communica¬
tion.  In  the  highest  form  of  the  sleep-waking  of  the  elder  Okey,  when  she  had
a  degree  of  clairvoyance  and  presented  such  an  extatic  appearance  as  no  one  could
assume,  she  fancied  her  communications,  whether  true  clairvoyance  or  illusion  is
not  the  present  question,  were  made  by  a  beautiful  negro.  If  a  question  were
asked  her,  she  was  observed  to  whisper  as  if  to  some  one  with  her — then  to  pause,
as  if  receiving  an  answer, — and  then  to  answer  the  question.  This  idea  I  traced
to  her  having  seen  a  handsome  young  New  Zealand  Chief,  brought  to  the  hospital
by  Mr.  Gibbon  Wakefield  to  witness  her  phenomena.  Her  sister  Jane  at  one  time
fell  into  an  analogous  state  without  any  true  clairvoyance,  and  she  fancied  she  saw
a  gentleman.  Subsequent  reading  informed  me  that  these  delirious  ideas  were
often  recorded  by  authors  who  have  described  the  cases  of  clairvoyants  that  fell
under  their  own  obsei’vation.  At  the  very  time  the  two  Okeys  were  in  University
College  Hospital,  a  young  lady  was  in  an  analogous  condition  at  Neufchatel  under
Dr.  Castell,  and  subsequently  at  Aix  in  Savoy,  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Despine,
senior,  who  has  detailed  her  interesting  case.  .  .  .  Her  clairvoyant  communications
were  generally  made  with  the  appeai’ance  of  a  good  angel  whose  name  was  Ange-
line.  Like  the  Okeys  she  would  address  the  imaginary  being  in  a  whisper,  wait
for  an  answrer,  and  after  appearing  to  receive  it,  speak  again  and  declare  it.” —
Zoist,  No.  XXIV.,  p,  372.

John  Elliotson.


IX.  Cure  of  Pulmonary  Consumption .  By  Mr.  John  Mayhew,
of  Earnham,  Surrey.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Credulity  argues  weakness  of  mind,  and  is  deservedly  attended  with  reproach.
It  is  offensive  in  philosophy ;  whose  venerable  records  it  interlines  with  false
stories  and  idle  tales.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  true  that  scepticism  is
not  less  faulty :  for  that  alone  renders  the  whole  book  of  nature  insignificant.
What  can  the  clearest  experiment  or  the  best  discovery  impart  to  him  who  will
not  hear,  who  will  not  see  ?” — Philosophical  Transactions ,  vol.  xx.,  p.  261,  1698.

Sarah  Hewitt,  aged  22  years,  of  scrofulous  constitution ;
consumption  fast  gaining  ground,  no  hope  entertained  of
her  recovery.  Symptoms,  pain  in  side  and  chest,  great  de¬
bility,  much  difficulty  in  breathing,  hollow  cough,  consider¬
able  quantity  of  mucus  raised  in  knots,  and  profuse  night
sweats.

Commenced  treatment  on  the  evening  of  May  7th ;  asleep
in  three  minutes ;  eyes  closed  under  third  pass ;  slept  about


72


Cure  of  Pulmonary  Consumption.


half  an  hour,  during  which  time  I  magnetized  the  chest
strongly,  ending  with  upward  passes,  for  the  purpose  of
clearing  the  chest  and  lungs  of  mucus,  she  having  complained
much  of  great  oppression  there.  At  the  close  of  sitting,  on
asking  if  she  slept,  she  awoke  with  a  start,  not  conscious  of
having  slept  so  long.

Shortly  after  I  left  her  she  felt  a  great  nausea,  and  in  her
own  words,  “  it  seemed  as  if  everything  in  her  stomach  turned
quite  over ;”  this  was  followed  by  vomiting,  repeated  three  or
four  times.  She  says  “it  flew  up  in  large  lumps.”

May  8th.  She  is  much  prostrated,  but  breathing  much
better ;  no  wheezing ;  pain  in  chest  relieved ;  chest  feels  very
comfortable :  feels  a  little  oppression  yet  at  the  upper  part  of
the  chest ;  slept  well  through  the  night,  better  than  for  some
time.  Magnetized  as  before,  with  intent  to  relieve  the  chest ;
slept  half  an  hour ;  woke  as  before  with  a  start.

May  9th.  Chest  entirely  relieved;  cough  gone;  pain  in
side  and  night  sweats  disappeared.  Magnetized  with  down¬
ward  passes  from  pit  of  stomach  with  intent,  by  purging,  to
remove  an  uncomfortable  sensation  “just  above  the  bowels;”
slept  as  usual,  but  rather  deeper  than  on  the  two  former
occasions.

May  10th.  The  bowels  have  been  copiously  moved.  Mag¬
netized  with  intent  to  decrease  the  purging,  and  gave  mag¬
netized  water,  which  she  said  was  “very  nourishing  to  her
whole  inside.”  Slept  as  before.  I  think  somnambulant,  but
difficult  to  develop;  do  not  intend  to  fatigue  her  by  questions,
preferring  that  she  should  take  the  full  benefit  of  undisturbed
repose.

May  11th.  The  bowels  quieted;  appetite  good;  all  symp¬
toms  of  disease  have  vanished;  still  very  weak,  though  not
so  weak  as  yesterday.

June  13th.  From  the  preceding  date  to  the  present  the
treatment  has  been  uniform,  and  she  is  progressing  well.
Nothing  worthy  of  notice  has  transpired,  excepting  that  her
system  sympathizes  so  entirely  with  my  own  that  medicine
taken  by  myself  affects  her  as  it  does  me.

Put  her  to  sleep  standing,  during  which  she  became  som¬
nambulant,  and  voluntarily  exclaimed,  in  a  clear  and  distinct
voice,  “Well !  they  may  say  what  they  like  about  magnetism
not  curing  me ;  I  know  it  will.”

Are  you  sure  it  will  cure  you  entirely  ? — Yes,  entirely.

Can  you  see  the  nature  of  your  disease  ? — Not  very  clearly.

So  far  as  you  can  see,  what  do  you  observe  ? — My  right
lung  is  affected,  but  not  much ;  my  chest  has  been  very  bad.

How  ? — It  has  been  full  of  ulcers,  but  they  are  now  all
healed.


by  Mr .  May  hew.


73


Are  there  any  more  forming? — No.

Do  I  treat  your  case  properly  ? — Yes.

Could  I  do  anything  better  for  you? — No.

She  then  desired  me  to  tell  her  to  wake.  I  did  so.  She
awoke  instantaneously,  very  much  refreshed,  and  perfectly
unconscious  of  all  that  had  transpired.

June  14th.  Again  somnambulant.  Having  suffered  from
pain  in  the  chest  during  the  day,  I  asked  her  whence  that
pain  ?  She  replied,  From  sitting ;  (she  is  a  dress-maker.)  She
directed  me  to  remove  the  pain  by  downward  passes  from  pit
of  stomach,  stating  that  they  would  relax  the  bowels  a  little ;
but  that  would  be  of  no  consequence.  I  magnetized  as  she
required  till  she  said,  “  That  is  sufficient.”

During  this  sleep  she  saw  distinctly  various  things  in  the
room,  and  described  them  with  accuracy.  A  watch  was  placed
in  her  hand,  and  she  was  asked  the  time  by  it ;  she  placed  it
on  the  pit  of  her  stomach  and  told  correctly.

June  27th.  From  the  last  date  she  has  not  been  somnam¬
bulant,  but  her  advance  towards  a  state  of  convalescence  has
been  very  decided  and  astonishing;  more  so  than  I  have  no¬
ticed  in  any  previous  case.  She  is  asleep  in  twenty-five  seconds,
and  after  careful  persevering  effort  for  more  than  one  hour
she  became  again  somnambulant  and  clairvoyant.  She  gave
some  general  directions  about  her  treatment,  and  prescribed
for  herself  a  quart  of  magnetized  water  daily.  She  has  taken
it  in  small  quantities  from  May  10th ;  declares  that  her  lung
will  be  quite  sound  in  about  three  weeks.

June  28th.  Clairvoyant ;  declares  she  could  not  be  doing
better,  and  that  she  will  be  well  in  three  weeks  or  rather
before.  Directed  me  to  place  a  piece  of  flannel  above  her
right  breast,  near  the  shoulder,  and  breathe  through  it  upon
the  lungs ;  directed  that  in  future  she  should  not  be  allowed
to  drink  beer.

June  30th.  Clairvoyant  as  usual;  will  be  clairvoyant  in
future.  This  evening  the  sympathy  of  Taste  is  developed,
and  she  sings  most  exquisitely.

July  16th.  All  has  been  progressing  well.  She  this  even¬
ing  declares  her  lung  to  be  quite  sound ;  she  says  she  never
was  better  in  her  life,  and  those  of  her  friends  who  are  un¬
willing  to  concede  to  magnetism  the  credit  to  which  it  is  enti¬
tled,  are  constrained  to  acknowledge  that  the  change  in  her
appearance — however  accomplished  in  so  short  a  time — is
altogether  astounding.

Sept.  1st.  She  continues  quite  well,  and  is  free  from  all
manner  of  pains  and  ailments  whatever.  Upon  being  asked
by  a  medical  gentleman  present  if  her  lung  was  healed,  and


74  Cure  of  inveterate  Hysteria ,  fyc.

how,  she  said  that  “  the  abscess  had  eaten  the  lung  away,”
and  that  in  healing  “  it  had  made  fresh  lung.”  It  was  asked,
Do  you  not  mean  that  the  part  where  the  abscess  had  been
contracted  together  and  so  healed?  She  replied,  No;  it  filled
up  with  new  lung.

This  young  person  is  one  of  the  best  medical  clairvoyants
I  have  ever  met  with.  She  has  examined  thirteen  cases  of
disease,  in  three  of  which  the  parties  were  medical  men,  and
in  two  others  the  sisters  of  medical  men ;  in  every  case  her
examinations  have  been  truthful,  and  verified  in  every  point.
Various  curious  phenomena  have  presented  themselves  in  the
course  of  her  treatment — attraction,  sympathy,  thought-read¬
ing,  distant  clairvoyance,  &c. ;  but  I  have  taken  no  pains  to
make  her  an  object  of  curiosity,  having  had  in  view  simply
her  own  benefit,  and  now  hoping  to  be  able  to  use  her  clair¬
voyant  powers  for  the  benefit  of  others.

John  Mayhew.

P.S.  I  shall  be  pleased  to  communicate  any  cases  of  im¬
portance  to  The  Zoist,  and  will  send  you  for  the  next  number
two  or  three  short  cases  of  my  American  experience.  Petty
cases,  such  as  local  rheumatic  affections,  head-ache,  tooth-ache,
sprains,  §c.,  I  take  no  note  of.


NOTE  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON.

I  was  favoured  with  a  visit  from  this  patient  to-day.  She
appeared  in  perfect  health;  and  she  informed  me  that  in  her
illness  she  spat  blood  every  morning  for  three  months ;  had
copious  expectorations,  abounding  in  thick  lumps,  which
sank  to  the  bottom  of  water ;  profuse  sweats ;  diarrhoea ;  and
was  greatly  emaciated.  The  gentleman  who  attended  her
used  to  examine  the  chest  with  the  stethoscope,  and  say  one
lung  was  nearly  all  gone :  his  name  was  Parker.

Conduit  Street,  March  18,  1850.


X.  A  Cure  of  inveterate  Hysteria,  and  one  of  intense  Debility.

By  Mr.  Elliot.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  The  details  of  many  of  these  cases  of  possession  are  so  like  the  wonders  of
mesmerism ,  that  they  may  be  penned  as  proof  that  there  is  no  folly  so  exposed,
but  that  it  has  a  chance  of  being  revived ;  that  there  have  been  fools  and
knaves  in  all  ages,  and  pretenders  to  imaginary  sciences,  whom  the  great  vulgar
and  the  small  are  always  ready  to  credit.” — Dr.  Taylor’s  Review  of  Romantic
Biography  of  the  Reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  Atlienceum,  Jan.  11,  1842.

29,  College  Street,  Dowgate  Hill,  1849.

Sir, — I  beg  your  acceptance  of  the  following  certificate,


Remarkable  Cure  of  a  condemned  case.  75

signed  by  the  person  herself,  who  had  been  a  great  sufferer
for  many  years,  but  is  now  in  perfect  health,  and  has  been
restored,  under  my  treatment,  by  that  most  valuable  and
blessed  gift  of  mesmerism,  which  God  has  given  to  man.

Sir,  yours  most  obediently.

To  Dr.  Elliotson.  Edward  Elliot.

“  This  is  to  certify  that  I  suffered,  from  my  childhood,  an
ill  state  of  health,  which,  at  the  age  of  19,  brought  on  hyste¬
rical  fits,  from  which  I  suffered  very  severely.  They  some¬
times  would  attack  me  twice  in  the  day,  and  were  attended
with  violent  convulsions.  I  had  extreme  weakness,  and  some¬
times  loss  of  speech ;  and  I  continued  thus  till  the  age  of  33,
when  my  health  became  so  much  impaired,  that  I  was  obliged
to  leave  my  situation.  At  this  time  I  heard  of  Mr.  Elliot,
and  of  several  important  cures  he  had  performed  by  mesmer¬
ism.  I  immediately  put  myself  under  Mr.  E/s  treatment.
I  soon  began  to  find  benefit ;  and  now  I  am  thankful  to  the
Lord,  who  hath  sent  me  a  remedy  for  my  recovery,  and  now
I  can  rejoice  and  say  I  am  in  perfect  health,  which  I  never
knew  till  I  received  the  blessing  of  mesmerism.

“  Lucy  Jemima  Crate.

il  No.  8,  Three  King  Court,

Lombard  Street;

Dated  26th  day  of  January,  1849.”

29,  College  Street,  Dowgate  Hill,
March  16,  1850.

Sir, — In  answer  to  your  request,  I  beg  leave  to  say  that  I
saw  Miss  Crate  yesterday,  and  am  happy  to  inform  you  that
I  found  her  in  excellent  health  and  spirits.  Miss  C.  tells  me
that  she  has  never  felt  any  symptoms  of  her  old  complaint
since  her  restoration  to  health  bv  mesmerism,  and  that  she
now  enjoys  a  better  state  of  health  than  she  ever  remembers
in  the  former  part  of  her  life.  Miss  Crate  says,  should  any
one  wish  to  speak  with  her  on  her  late  severe  affliction,  she
would  be  most  happy  to  see  them,  if  they  call  at  No.  8,
Three  King  Court,  Lombard  Street.

Sir,  I  remain  your  most  obedient  servant,

To  Dr.  Elliotson.  Edward  Elliot.

Remarkable  cure  of  a  condemned  case.

P.S.  A  remarkable  case  of  internal  complaint  of  the  chest,
to  which  no  name  was  given.  This  young  man  was  under  me¬
dical  treatment  for  eleven  months,  and  his  medical  attendants


76


Remarkable  Cure  of  a  condemned  case.


told  him  they  could  do  no  more  for  him,  that  there  was  no
hope  of  his  recovery,  that  his  wife  might  give  him  anything
that  he  thought  he  could  take,  as  they  could  do  no  more  for
him,  and  that  he  could  not  last  long.

This  man’s  name  is  William  Humphry,  of  the  parish  of
Down,  in  the  county  of  Kent.  I  happened  to  be  there  on  a
visit,  and  was  requested  to  go  and  see  him,  and  try  if  I  could
render  him  any  benefit  by  mesmerism.  I  found  him  sitting
in  a  chair  near  the  fire.  He  looked  very  ill,  and  complained
of  being  very  weak.  He  could  raise  his  hands  only  just  to
his  knees ;  and  they  had  a  cold,  damp  feel.  He  said  himself
that  he  thought  he  could  not  live  long.  I  first  gave  him
some  mesmerised  water,  and  then  proceeded  in  the  usual
way.  He  did  not  go  to  sleep,  but  in  about  ten  minutes,  he
said  he  was  getting  very  warm,  and  in  about  twenty  minutes
he  was  in  a  very  deep  state  of  perspiration  all  over  his  body.  In
this  state  he  remained  for  about  half  an  hour,  then  the  perspi¬
ration  went  off.  He  was  then  demesmerised,  and  immediately
found  himself  a  great  deal  better.  He  then  felt  a  healthy
warmth  throughout  the  body,  and  had  got  quite  a  fresh
colour  in  his  face,  and  said  he  felt  much  better.  He  got  up,
and  walked  about  the  house,  and  could  raise  his  hands  half
way  to  his  head.  The  next  morning  I  heard  he  was  able
to  dress  himself,  and  was  much  better.  Two  days  after,  I
treated  him  again  in  the  same  manner;  and  when  I  had
done  he  could  clap  his  hands  together  over  his  head.  I  did
not  treat  him  any  more ;  and  the  following  week  I  received  a
letter  that  this  young  man  was  well,  and  able  to  attend  to  his
business.  He  did  not  go  to  sleep.  He  is  now  a  strong,
healthy  man,  and  has  been  ever  since  he  was  restored  by
mesmerism,  which  is  not  less  than  three  years  since.

Yours  respectfully,

Edward  Elliot.


On  making  enquiries  of  Mr.  Elliot  respecting  this  case,
he  writes  to  me  that —

“  William  Humphry  had  no  cough ;  did  not  know  what
name  the  doctors  gave  to  his  complaint ;  thought  it  was  pro¬
duced  by  a  succession  of  violent  colds,  as  he  is  a  ploughman,
and  his  work  lies  in  the  fields ;  said  that  he  had  suffered  very
severely  from  internal  pains  across  the  chest,  which  had  de¬
prived  him  of  his  strength  and  the  use  of  his  arms  :  he  was
then  very  weak,  and  did  not  expect  to  live.  Two  working
men  that  were  laid  up  with  the  rheumatism  at  Down,  one  of
whom  was  on  his  club  and  the  other  on  the  parish,  were  cured
by  two  mesmerisations.


Great  benefit  in  a  case  of  Chronic  Headache ,  fyc.  77

“  When  I  left,  two  days  after,  they  were  both  attending  to
their  business  :  their  two  names  are  Thomas  Elliot  and  John
Percival.”

John  Elliotson.


XI.  Great  benefit  in  a  Case  of  Chronic  Headache  and  general
III  Health :  with  some  interesting  experiments  on  Master
Chapman.  By  Lieut.  Hare,  Bath.

“  Some  are  clamorous  with  groundless  and  fictitious  assertions  on  the  autho¬
rity  of  their  teachers,  plausible  suppositions,  or  empty  quibbles  :  and  some  rail
with  a  torrent  of  expressions  which  are  discreditable  to  them,  often  spiteful,
insolent,  and  abusive,  by  which  they  only  display  their  own  emptiness,  absurdity,
bad  habits,  and  want  of  argument  (which  results  from  sense)  and  show  themselves
mad  with  sophistries  opposed  to  reason.”  “  How  difficult  it  is  to  teach  those
who  have  no  experience  or  knowledge  derived  from  the  senses,  and  how  unfit  to
learn  true  science  are  the  unprepared  and  inexperienced,  is  shown  in  the  opinions
of  the  blind  concerning  colors  and  of  the  deaf  concerning  sounds.” — Harvey.

Miss  Taylor,  a  little  girl  aged  nine  years,  was  last  year  suf¬
fering  from  headache,  debility,  &c.  I  recommended  the
parents  to  send  her  to  a  mesmerist,  but  this  did  not  meet
their  views,  and  they  wished  me  to  try  if  she  were  susceptible
to  mesmeric  influence.

The  time  I  expected  to  remain  on  a  visit  was  so  short  that
I  could  hardly  expect  much  effect  to  be  produced,  but  I  con¬
sented  to  try  what  I  could  do.  I  saw  her  almost  daily  for
nearly  three  weeks.  I  always  began  with  passes  over  the
head,  which  removed  the  pain  in  a  few  minutes ;  I  then  placed
my  hand  on  the  stomach  or  side,  which  always  gave  relief ;
after  which  I  made  long  passes  from  the  head  downwards  for
about  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,  part  of  the  time  using  con¬
tact  passes  down  the  spinal  column.  I  gave  mesmerised  water
and  lozenges ;  the  latter  caused  drowsiness,  which  the  passes
never  induced.  The  little  girl  improved  in  health,  which  was
remarked  by  persons  who  were  ignorant  she  was  under  treat¬
ment.  All  her  symptoms  began  to  subside ;  during  my  at¬
tendance  her  bowels,  which  were  before  confined,  assumed  a
healthy  state,  so  that  medicine  became  unnecessary.  A  curious
circumstance  attending  this  case  is  that,  although  I  could
not  induce  sleep  in  the  little  girl,  the  mother  became  very
drowsy  even  when  at  some  yards'  distance  from  me.  I  tried
and  succeeded  in  removing  the  daughter's  headache  by  mak¬
ing  the  passes  over  the  mother's  head,  their  hands  being
joined.  Wishing  to  ascertain  if  the  drowsiness  produced  by
the  lozenges  were  the  effect  of  imagination,  I  sent  three
packets  of  them  by  post  from  Bath ;  the  first  I  numbered  1,
in  which  I  put  some  gelatine  lozenges  not  mesmerised,  wrap-


78  Great  benefit  in  a  case  of  Chronic  Headache ,  fyc.

ping  them  in  blue  paper ;  two  other  parcels  were  numbered
2  and  3,  folded  in  white  paper,  both  mesmerised  (No  2  when
I  was  insulated  by  glass,  and  No.  3  in  the  usual  manner).
I  gave  no  hint  to  Mrs.  Taylor,  but  asked  her  to  mark  the
effect  of  each  packet.  She  writes  :  No.  1  folded  in  blue  paper
had  no  effect;  No.  2  made  the  child  sleepy,  but  not  so  much
so  as  No.  3.  As  I  could  only  remain  about  twenty  days,  I
gave  directions  to  Mrs.  Taylor  to  pursue  the  same  course  with
her  daughter  that  I  did.  The  little  girl  complained  that  the
passes  her  mother  made  caused  sometimes  a  weight  on  the
head.  I  first  mesmerised  her  about  the  18th  of  September,
and  left  the  neighbourhood  the  8th  of  October.  On  the  27th
Mrs.  Taylor  wrote  to  me  : —

<c  Hambridge,  Oct.  27th,  1848.
“  Honoured  Sir, — Mr.  Taylor  and  myself  beg  to  acknow¬
ledge  our  sincere  thanks  for  your  disinterested  kindness  to
our  little  girl,  who  evidently  still  continues  to  improve  in  her
general  health  and  appearance,  never  having  had  occasion  to
take  any  medicine  since  you  first  mesmerised  her.  However,
I  must  confess  I  have  not  that  influence  over  her  that  you
had,  as  she  believes  I  cannot  do  her  any  good,  although  I
succeeded  once  in  removing  a  violent  pain  in  her  stomach ;
but  she  says  I  made  her  head  feel  heavy,  but  I  will  persevere,
as  she  goes  on  well.  The  lozenges  you  kindly  sent  made  her
very  sleepy,  and  she  also  said  she  was  stiff,  just  as  she  used
to  be  when  you  mesmerised  her.

“  I  am,  honoured  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

“  Richard  Hare,  Esq.,  “  Mary  Taylor.

“  5,  Somerset  Place,  Bath.”

“  Hambridge,  Langport,  Nov.  16th,  1848.
u  Mrs.  Taylor  is  truly  thankful  to  inform  Mr.  Hare  his
little  patient  still  continues  to  improve,  and  there  is  reason
to  hope  she  will  soon  get  quite  well.  She  has  not  been  well
since  she  had  the  scarlet  fever  four  years  ago ;  always  com¬
plaining,  with  pain  in  her  head  and  stomach,  attended  with
such  debility  as  rendered  the  least  exertion  troublesome;  her
appetite  was  very  bad,  her  temper  irritable ;  indeed  at  one
time  her  medical  man  feared  it  might  so  affect  her  brain  that
she  would  lose  her  senses.  She  was  then  sent  to  London  for
advice ;  the  excitement  certainly  did  her  good  ;  she  returned
much  better,  but  having  the  ague  last  spring  so  upset  her
nerves  from  weakness,  although  she  had  good  medical  advice,
and  had  been  for  change  of  air,  there  was  reason  to  fear  the
consequences,  as  she  daily  got  worse  until  Mr.  Hare  mes-


by  Lieutenant  Hare.


79


merised  her,  and  from  that  time  she  has  continued  to  get
better ;  indeed  she  seldom  complains  of  pain,  is  very  active
and  cheerful,  her  appetite  is  good,  and  Mrs.  Taylor  hopes  in
another  week  she  will  be  able  to  resume  her  studies.  As  she
continually  grew  worse  before  mesmerism,  and  has  improved
since  without  medicine  or  change  of  air,  or  any  advantage
more  than  usual,  the  cure  can  only  be  attributed  to  mesmer¬
ism.  Mrs.  Taylor  returns  her  sincere  thanks  for  Mr.  Hare’s
disinterested  kindness  to  her  little  girl,  also  for  the  lozenges.
No.  1  had  no  effect,  No.  2  made  her  sleepy,  but  not  so  much
so  as  No.  3.”

“Hambridge,  Nov.  29tli,  1848.

“  Honoured  Sir, — I  should  have  replied  earlier,  but  Lucy
has  not  been  quite  so  well  since  I  last  wrote,  having  suffered
from  toothache,  but  is  now  a  great  deal  better.  I  acknow¬
ledge  I  was  too  sanguine  as  to  the  time  of  her  recovery,  but
still  I  hope  she  will  soon  get  quite  well.  I  have  daily  used
the  passes  as  you  directed,  and  still  purpose  doing  so ;  I  can¬
not  say  whether  the  lozenges  produce  any  effect  but  drowsi¬
ness  on  the  system,  although  the  change  in  her  health  has
been  so  great,  it  has  been  imperceptibly  going  on ;  she  has
nearly  lost  all  her  silly  tricks,  and  is  regular  at  her  meals ;
indeed  she  is  not  like  the  same  child  as  when  you  first  mes¬
merised  her,  yet  I  can  give  no  distinct  account  of  the  change.
The  lozenges  sent  on  the  6th  November,  No.  1  contained
three  in  blue  paper,  folded  separately ;  No.  2  twelve  in  silver
paper,  folded  separately ;  No.  3  six  marked  £3.  Lucy  does
not  think  the  leather  has  any  effect.

“  I  now  subscribe  myself  your  humble  servant,

“Mam  Taylor.”

Mr.  Taylor,  her  husband,  who  died  a  few  months  since,
was  a  very  respectable  farmer,  a  tenant  of  my  friend  with
whom  I  am  on  a  visit,  and  his  house,  a  few  hundred  yards  from
his  grounds.  A  letter  addressed  to  Mrs.  Taylor,  Hambridge,
Langport,  would  find  her,  though  she  has  now  removed.

Some  Experiments  with  Master  Chapman ,  whose  case  is  de¬
tailed  in  No.  XVI.  p.  449,  XIX.  p.  308,  XXIII.  p.  290.

I  was  very  much  surprized  at  the  result  of  an  experiment
I  made  on  Saturday  last.  A  lady  and  gentleman  had  brought
their  little  deaf  and  dumb  boy  to  witness,  with  themselves,
for  the  first  time,  a  person  sent  into  the  mesmeric  sleep.  Af¬
ter  having  mesmerised  Chapman  by  passes,  upon  his  awaking
I  said  I  could  send  him  to  sleep  by  making  the  passes  over


80


Experiments  ivith  Master  Chapman.


the  little  deaf  boy,  if  Chapman  held  his  hand ;  which  I  did.
He  slept  a  short  time,  but  upon  awaking,  with  great  alarm
pictured  in  his  countenance  said  he  was  quite  deaf.  A  few
passes  and  breathing  into  the  ears  quickly  restored  his  hear¬
ing,  but  he  was  so  agitated  that  he  wished  to  be  sent  to  sleep
again  to  calm  his  nerves.  He,  during  sleep  the  first  time,
said,  upon  taking  the  boy's  hand  in  his,  he  was  sure  the  child
was  deaf,  for  he  felt  it  in  his  ears ;  and  he  said  that  holding
the  other  boy's  hand  made  his  heart  beat  quicker.

I  learned  subsequently  from  the  parents  who  had  seen  and
conversed  with  Chapman's  mother,  that  he  was  not  aware  of
their  son  being  deaf;  and  that  he  was  much  vexed  his  mo¬
ther  had  not  told  him,  as  he  feared  he  had  in  his  sleep  ex¬
pressed  himself  in  an  angry  manner  to  me,  for  he  generally
in  the  sleep-waking  state,  speaks  without  reserve.  His  mother
assured  Mrs.  B.  she  had  not  told  him  of  the  boy's  deafness,
and  if,  as  it  seems,  he  was  in  ignorance  of  it,  his  asserting
the  child  was  deaf  and  his  saying  he  felt  it  in  his  ears  is  a
curious  and  interesting  circumstance.  The  boy  Chapman  has
been  flurried  and  his  nerves  excited  by  some  cause  connected
with  holding  the  deaf  child's  hand,  and  he  is  coming,  I  un¬
derstand,  to  be  mesmerised  again  to  quiet  him.

When  in  the  sleep,  Master  Chapman  told  me  that  if  I
placed  a  piece  of  steel  in  the  right,  and  sealing  wax  in  his
left,  hand,  -it  would  induce  the  mesmeric  sleep ;  which,  upon
trial  proved  true  :  hut  the  sleep  was  more  deep,  produced
head-ache,  and  during  it  he  was  silent  even  when  urged  to
reply.  He  could,  at  all  times,  in  the  usual  mesmeric  sleep,
be  awakened  by  contact  with  sealing  wax,  which,  when  placed
near  him  caused  uneasiness.  If  I  placed  rulers  in  his  hands,
and  made  the  latter  rigid,  and  took  a  piece  of  sealing  wax  in
either  of  mine,  his  corresponding  hand  became  relaxed,  and
the  ruler  fell :  the  same  occurred  if  any  other  person  did  the
same.  The  like  effect  was  produced,  if  I  had  the  wax  in
either  hand,  when  I  was  in  a  room  above  him.  This  experi¬
ment  and  others  succeeded  quite  as  well  when  the  boy  was
awake, — indeed,  I  think  were  more  successful.  I  placed  the
steel  in  my  right  hand,  and  the  sealing  wax  in  my  left,  and
gazed  at  his  right  to  see  if  this  would  increase  my  power  to  re¬
lax  the  hand  in  which  was  a  ruler.  The  result,  to  my  surprize,
was  that  the  boy  fell  asleep.  Upon  one  occasion,  when  at
Weston-super-mare,  I  sent  some  mesmerised  gelatine  lozenges
to  Mrs.  Chapman,  desiring  her  to  give  her  son  two  or  three
without  acquainting  him  where  they  came  from.  When  he
had  taken  two  he  fell  asleep  and  his  arm  became  rigid.  About
that  time,  nine  o'clock,  I  was  making  passes  to  ascertain  if  I


Mesmmsm  among  the'  Ancients.


81


could  affect  him  at  the  distance  of  thirty  miles.  Unfortu¬
nately,  Mrs.  Chapman  received  the  letter  in  her  son's  presence,
which  rendered  the  experiment  unsatisfactory,  for  imagination
might  have  produced  the  sleep.

Richard  Hare.


6,  Somerset  Place,  Bath.


XII.  Mesmerism  among  the  Ancients.  By  Mr.  W.  W.  Lloyd.

Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

77,  Snow  Hill,  January  4th,  1850.
Dear  Dr.  Elliotson. — I  send  you  an  essay  of  mine  on  an  ode
of  Pindar.  Here  is  an  incident  from  the  biography  of  the
poet  that  seems  to  me  mesmeric.  Pausanias  relates  (ix.  23)
that  the  goddess  of  the  lower  world,  Persephone,  appeared  in
a  dream  to  the  aged  poet,  and  complaining  that  she  alone  of
all  the  goddesses  had  not  been  made  the  subject  of  one  of  his
hymns,  she  told  him  that  he  was  to  come  to  her  and  then
compose  a  poem  in  her  honour.  Within  ten  days  Pindar
died ;  but  he  had  at  Thebes  an  aged  female  relative,  who  had
had  much  practice  in  singing  his  poetry.  To  her  he  appeared
in  a  dream,  and  sang  the  hymn  to  Persephone,  which  was
written  down  by  the  old  woman  immediately  on  awaking,  and
was  inserted  in  his  works.

Assuming  the  reality  of  mental  sympathy  and  thought¬
reading,  it  is  merely  a  question  of  limit  in  degree,  whether  a
hymn  composed  mentally  by  Pindar  under  a  peculiar  impres¬
sion,  just  before  his  death,  may  not  have  been  communicated
to  the  brain  of  the  old  lady — his  friend  and  admirer ;  and  if
so,  whether  the  ideas  communicated  first  acquired  complete
distinctness  immediately  or  after  some  interval,  in  sleep  or
waking,  would  not  alter  the  case.  We  might  say  that  her
dream  of  Pindar  was  the  effect  of  the  stimulus  of  the  mental
impression  of  the  hymn,  and  not,  as  of  course  she  supposed,
the  hymn  the  result  of  her  dream.

Of  course,  it  is  possible  enough  that  the  whole  story  is  a
tale  of  a  tub ;  but  even  then,  the  colour  given  to  the  inven¬
tion  would  argue  a  foundation  of  fact  in  other  instances.

To  pass  from  one  Boeotian  to  another,  I  find  the  following
in  Hesiod,  and  should  be  glad  if  some  Bucolic  mesmerist
would  give  a  clue  to  the  explanation.  In  the  Works  and  Days,
ver.  795,  he  specifies  a  certain  day  of  the  month,  on  which
he  enjoins  the  farmer,  sheep,  oxen,  dogs,  and  mules,

Trpgiiveiv  iirl  Xefya  TiOefc

“  to  soothe  or  make  them  gentle  placing  his  hand  upon  them."

VOL.  VII.  g


82


Cures  of  Rheumatism,  §c.,

Van  Lennep’s  note  on  the  passage  is  “terga  eorum  attrectans
et  palpans.”  The  Latin  word  cicuro  seems  to  be  used  in  the
same  sense,  but  I  have  not  the  means  at  hand  of  tracing  its
derivation.  Columella,  vi.,  2,  Re  Bubus  Domandis ,  “  Deinde
nares  perfricato  ut  hominem  discant  odorari.  .  .  .  Mox  etiam
convenit  tota  tergora,  et  tractare  et  respergere  mero  quo  fa-
miliariores  bubulco  fiant,  ventri  quoque  et  sub  femina  manum
subjicere  ne  ad  ejusmodi  tactum  postmodum  pavescant.”
Palladius  iv.,  12,  has  like  theory  and  practice,  and,  like  Co¬
lumella,  perhaps  regards  the  process  too  much  as  one  of  mere
habituation.  I  think  I  have  heard  that  canary  birds  are
tamed,  and  nursery  kittens  ruined  for  mousers,  by  much
handling.

I  may  take  this  opportunity  of  adding  another  testimony
to  the  mesmerism  of  the  ancients  from  Sophocles,  ver.  1000,
Trachin.

rfc  yap  dotSo?,  tw  6  ^ecpore^VT]^

’  iar  op  ta$,  o?  ttjvB’  arrjv

Zrivo ?  KaraKTfXrjaeL  ;

They  are  words  of  Hercules  suffering  from  the  shirt  of
Nessus.  The  influence  ascribed  to  the  xeLP0T*XV7l<*  the
same  as  that  of  the  singer  who  charms  by  song.  The  verb  is
used  by  Plato  for  the  act  of  charming  serpents.

I  have  left  myself  to  say  last  what  I  ought  to  have  com¬
menced  with.  The  vital  energy  of  The  Zoist  tells  well  for
the  new  year.  Pope  promised  Bolingbroke,  that  “  sons  should
blush  whose  fathers  were  his  foes  truly  the  descendants  of
some  people  must  better  wonderfully  by  the  mother’s  side,  if
they  escape  a  congenital  disability  of  blushing  at  anything.

Believe  me  to  remain,  very  truly  yours,

Dr.  Elliotson.  W.  W.  Lloyd.

P.S.  The  Latin  mansuetus,  mansuefacio,  and  immansuetus,
may  be  connected  with  the  same  idea  of  rendering  gentle  by
the  hand,  which  the  words  of  Hesiod  express.  But  what  of
immanis  ?


XIII.  Cures  of  Rheumatism ,  Neuralgia ,  Ophthalmia,  and  pain¬
less  application  of  Caustic  to  an  inflamed  Eye .  By  Mr.

Tubbs,  Surgeon,  Upwell  Isle,  Cambridgeshire.

“  A  presumptuous  scepticism,  which  rejects  facts  without  examination  of  their
truth,  is,  in  some  respects,  even  more  injurious  than  an  unquestioning  credulity.
It  is  the  tendency  of  both  to  impede  accurate  investigation.  Although  for  up¬
wards  of  2,000  years  the  annals  of  different  nations  had  told  of  falls  of  stones,
which  in  many  instances  had  been  placed  beyond  doubt  by  the  testimony  of  irre¬
proachable  witnesses;  although  the  Bsetylia  formed  an  important  part  of  the
meteor-worship  of  the  ancients,  and  the  companions  of  Cortes  saw,  at  Cholula,


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


83


the  aerolite  which  had  fallen  on  the  neighbouring  pyramid  ;  although  caliphs  and
Mongolian  princes  had  had  swords  forged  of  fresh-fallen  meteoric  iron  ;  and  even
although  human  beings  had  been  killed  by  the  falling  stones,  (viz.,  a  friar  at
Crema  on  the  4th  of  September,  1511,  a  monk  at  Milan,  1650,  and  two  Swedish
sailors  on  board  a  ship  in  1674)  ;  yet,  until  the  time  of  Chladni  [he  wrote  in  1794] ,
who  had  already  earned  for  himself  imperishable  renown  in  physics  by  the  disco¬
very  of  his  figure-representation  of  sound,  this  great  cosmical  phenomenon  re¬
mained  almost  unheeded,  and  its  intimate  connection  with  the  planetary  system
remained  unknown.” — Humboldt’s  Cosmos.

Lumbago.

Being  called,  on  the  21st  of  January,  1850,  to  visit  a  woman
of  the  name  of  Haylett,  at  Outwell,  I  found  her  husband
by  her  side.  He  had  been  suffering  the  month  previous
with  pain  in  his  loins,  and  unable  to  follow  his  usual  employ¬
ment  of  trussing  hay.  As  he  had  been  attended  by  the
parish  surgeon  (Mr.  Coombe)  without  receiving  any  benefit,
he  asked  me  if  I  could  do  him  any  good.  I  made  a  few
passes  down  his  back ;  he  was  sensible  of  their  influence,  and
the  next  day  felt  better.  On  the  26th  of  January  he  managed
to  reach  my  house,  and  in  the  presence  of  a  few  persons  (who
have  kindly  signed  their  names  to  what  I  have  published)  I
successfully  removed  his  lumbago  by  the  mesmeric  passes.
He  slept  an  hour,  and,  on  being  restored  to  his  normal  state,
he  walked  out  of  the  room  quite  well.  On  the  27th  I  saw
him  run  past  my  window  after  a  waggon  loaded  with  hay.

29th.  Came  to  be  mesmerised  again,  having  sprained  his
back  by  lifting  the  trusses.  I  let  him  sleep  about  two  hours,
and  he  went  home  better.  He  was  mesmerised  daily  until
the  1st  of  February,  when  he  was  able  to  go  to  his  work.

March  6th.  He  is  still  quite  well.

This  man,  when  mesmerised,  was  in  a  fit  state  to  have  any
surgical  operation  performed  without  pain.

“  Up  well,  January  26,  1850.

“  We,  the  undersigned,  witnessed  a  man,  well  known  to
us  by  the  name  of  William  Haylett,  living  at  Outwell,  mes¬
merised  by  Mr.  Tubbs,  the  surgeon  residing  in  our  parish,  for
rheumatic  pains  in  the  loins  and  hip-joints,  which  he  had
long  suffered  from,  disabling  him  from  work,  &c.  The  man,
to  all  appearance,  seemed  quite  in  a  deadly  state.  Mr.  Tubbs
then  taking  him  from  his  sleep,  he  said  he  did  not  know  that
he  had  spoken  or  walked  about,  &c.  To  our  astonishment,
he  had  no  pain  and  felt  quite  well ;  whereas  he  came  into  the
room  supported  by  a  stick.

“  William  Whittlesey,

Robert  Whittlesey,  x  his  mark.
John  Whittlesey,

George  Crane.”

g  2


84  Cures  of  Rheumatism,  fyc.,

Chronic  Rheumatism,  of  long  standing,  greatly  relieved  by
mesmerism.

William  Waterfield,  aged  76,  has  suffered  great  pain  in
his  loins,  hips,  and  knees,  for  about  fifteen  years ;  sometimes
being  confined  to  his  bed  for  many  weeks,  and  at  all  times
unable  to  walk  without  a  stick.  He  came  to  me  to  be  mes¬
merised  on  the  23rd  of  January,  1850.  He  was  entranced  in
about  five  minutes  by  passes  over  the  cerebellum.  He  was
considerably  relieved  by  the  first  sleep,  and  came  to  me  the
next  day  without  his  stick,  and  stated  that  he  had  not  had  so
good  a  night’s  rest  for  many  years.

24th.  Slept  twenty  minutes.  Still  better.

25th.  Slept  twenty-six  minutes.  Felt  exceedingly  languid.

26th.  Slept  half  an  hour.  Yery  languid,  but  free  from
pain.

March  4th.  The  pain  had  returned,  but  half  an  hour’s
mesmeric  sleep  completely  relieved  him.  Has  remained  free
from  pain  to  this  time  (March  11),  and  sleeps  soundly.

\

Rheumatism.

William  Frusher,  of  Outwell,  22  years  of  age,  came  to  me
on  the  27th  February  to  be  mesmerised  for  pain  between  his
shoulders,  disabling  him  from  his  daily  work,  and  requested
me  to  write  him  a  certificate  for  his  club.

I  locally  mesmerised  him  forty  minutes,  and  drew  the
pain  out  at  the  fingers.  The  following  day  he  felt  quite  well,
and  walked  to  Guy  Flim,  a  distance  of  about  nine  miles.  I
saw  his  wife  on  Tuesday,  the  5th  of  March,  who  told  me  he
had  continued  well  from  that  time.

Acute  Rheumatism.

I  have  for  several  days  been  attending  a  Mr.  Jos.  Booth,
landlord  of  the  Swan  Inn,  Outwell  (the  head  inn),  with  acute
rheumatism.  This  evening  (Dec.  22,  1849),  while  on  the
point  of  leaving  his  bedside  and  giving  orders  for  the  night,
and  requesting  his  wife  to  send  up  to  my  house  for  a  night
draught,  Mr.  Booth  said,  “  Could  you  mesmerise  me  ?  for  I
am  in  such  pain  I  don’t  know  what  to  do.”  I  replied,  “  I
doubt  you  are  my  master;”  (weighing  about  14  stone — a  tall
athletic  man.)  “  You  may  try  if  you  like.”  "Well,  I  don’t
mind  attempting  you  for  half  an  hour.”  I  took  off  my  great
coat,  and  got  the  room  quiet :  his  wife  being  seated  on  one
side  of  the  fire,  and  Mrs.  Chapman  (the  nurse)  on  the  other.
Mr.  Booth  sat  up,  supported  by  a  bed-rest ;  and  in  a  few
moments,  by  pointing,  there  was  a  quivering  of  the  eyelids,


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


85


which  soon  closed.  I  then  well  mesmerised  every  joint,  and,
after  breathing  on  them,  I  asked  him  to  extend  the  limbs.
He  did  do  so.  I  said,  “Do  you  feel  any  pain ?”  “No.”

“Now  I  wish  you  to  get  out  of  bed.”  Gradually  he  then
first  moved  one  leg  and  then  the  other,  and  without  assist¬
ance  he  walked  nearly  to  the  fire-place,  when  he  awoke  and
seemed  surprised.  He  returned  to  his  uneasy  pallet,  sat  up,
and  enjoyed  his  tea.  In  the  course  of  an  hour  I  mesmerised
him  again,  and  he  slept  an  hour.  During  his  sleep  he  con¬
versed  with  me  in  a  firm  manner;  asked  where  Ginger  was
(meaning  his  groom),  and  said  he  wanted  to  see  him.  Nothing
would  do  but  Ginger  must  come  and  see  him.  So  a  sleepy
red-haired  stupid-looking  fellow  (named  Ginger  from  having
neither  whiskers  nor  beard)  soon  made  his  appearance.  After
conversing  with  him  twenty  minutes  about  his  stock  and
other  matters,  he  obeyed  his  master's  orders  and  left  the
room.  I  now  pinched  his  hand,  and  made  his  wife  do  the
same ;  threw  his  painful  joints  about,  and  made  him  wipe  his
mouth.  He  had  warm  linseed  poultices  on  the  wrists,  knees,
and  feet;  and  I  pulled  these  off,  enveloped  each  in  wadding
covered  with  oil  silk,  and  left  him  and  chatted  with  the  at¬
tendants  until  he  spontaneously  awoke.  His  wife  went  to
him,  and  he  said,  “  Mistress,  what  a  beautiful  sleep  I  have
had  !  I  feel  quite  easy.”  So  he  remained,  until  from  a  re¬
collection  of  the  past  pains  they  again  returned.  He  said,
“  I  should  like  to  sit  up  while  you  make  my  bed.”  Before
this  was  done  he  was  asked  if  he  remembered  Ginger  talking
with  him.  “No.”  So  Ginger  was  sent  for  to  assist  in  re¬
moving  him  to  the  chair.  After  having  done  so,  which  oc¬
cupied  some  time,  the  nurse  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  bed
gradually  pulling  his  legs,  and  one  on  each  side  raising  him,
with  every  now  and  then  a  “  O  dear !  for  God's  sake,  Ginger,
hold  me  up  ;  now,  mistress,  mind  that  toe!”  and  so  on.  At
last  he  was  placed  in  the  easy  chair,  when  master  and  man
argued  the  point  in  dispute.  At  last  Ginger  said,  “  Why,
master,  as  sure  as  you  are  there  I  have  been  in  the  room
before,  and  you  said  if  I  married  Mrs.  Chapman  and  did  your
work  well,  you  would  be  a  leg  of  mutton;  and  Mr.  Tubbs
said  to  me  I  must  not  take  notice  of  what  my  master  said,  for
he  was  light-headed  :*  and  so  I  thought,  for  you  run  on  such
stuff  as  I  never  heard  before.”  However,  nothing  could  con¬
vince  Mr.  Booth  that  he  had  been  out  of  bed,  or  his  man
Friday  had  been  in  the  room.

*  Ginger  not  knowing  that  his  master  had  been  mesmerised,  I  told  him  that
the  fever  was  raging  so  high  that  it  affected  his  head.


86


Cures  of  Rheumatism ,  §c.,


Chronic  Rheumatism.

My  dear  Sir, — I  beg  leave  to  return  jmu  my  sincere
thanks  for  your  kind  attention  in  sending  Fisher,*  who  mes¬
merised  me,  which  he  did  in  a  clever  manner,  so  much  so,
that  I  have  not  a  pain  left.

I  was  first  attacked  with  the  rheumatic  gout  on  the  coast
of  Africa  in  1821,  and  have  been  afflicted  by  it,  at  times,
ever  since.  I  was  compelled  to  go  on  crutches  the  whole  of
1829  and  part  of  1830;  and  at  other  times  I  have  been
obliged  to  have  one,  and  sometimes  both,  arms  in  a  sling.
I  have  not  been  able  to  get  my  regular  rest  for  the  last  five
months  until  Tuesday  night,  when  I  went  to  bed  at  ten  o^clock,
and  slept  well  till  seven  the  next  morning,  free  from  pain.
I  have  had  the  complaint  this  last  time  about  five  months
severely  in  my  right  arm,  hip,  thigh,  and  knee,  so  much  so,  that
I  was  unable  to  dress,  wash,  or  shave  myself  regularly,  nor
could  I  bear  my  elbow  to  touch  the  bed,  but  was  obliged  to
place  my  arm  across  my  body,  as  the  elbow-joint  was  so  much
swollen  and  contracted.  The  complaint  was  so  bad  at  times
that  I  could  not  walk  without  a  stick.  Fisher  operated  on
me  for  the  first  time  on  Monday,  the  4th  February,  1850,  by
mesmerising  my  right  arm,  and  in  about  half  an  hour  I  had
complete  relief,  and  the  contraction  and  swelling  much  re¬
duced.  I  was  unable  to  get  my  heel  on  the  ground,  or  my
foot  from  the  floor  (when  sitting)  without  applying  my  hands
to  my  knee  to  lift  it.  Thursday  and  Saturday  I  was  operated
upon  again ;  and  I  beg  to  say  that  I  am  at  present  free  from
every  pain,  and  can  walk  without  any  inconvenience.

Believe  me  your  very  obliged,

Nordelph  School,  Feb.  10,  1850.  George  Waudby.

Mr.  Tubbs,  Surgeon,  Upwell.

Mr.  Waudby  had  a  return  of  rheumatic  pains  in  the  leg
on  the  24th.  I  sent  Fisher  to  mesmerise  him ;  which  he  did
locally,  and  soon  got  him  right  again.  Last  week  he  dined
at  my  house.  A  magnet  laid  on  his  thigh  brings  on  violent
muscular  contraction ;  gold  mesmerised  and  drawn  over  the
limb  has  nearly  the  same  effect.  What  is  singular,  the  limb
is  in  constant  action  until  breathed  on  or  transverse  passes
made  over  it.  To-day  (March  10th)  I  spoke  to  him  after
church.  He  said,  “Mr.  Tubbs,  I  am  happy  to  tell  you  I
continue  well;”

•

*  The  man  Fisher  I  cured  of  inflamed  eyes,  and  now  find  him  (p.  87)  a  very
powerful  operator.  I  never  met  his  equal :  a  few  passes  over  my  head  almost
sends  me  off.  He  has  mesmerised  several ;  and  I  hope  ere  long  more  cures  will
be  done  by  his  strong  nervous  fluid.  I  am  obliged  to  allow  him  three  pints  of  ale
a  day  to  keep  his  vis  vita;  going. — W.  J.  Tubbs.


by  Mr.  Tubbs .


87


Painless  application  of  Caustic  to  Inflamed  Eyes.

William  Fisher,  aged  33,  a  strong,  healthy  young  man,  a
labourer  living  at  Welney,  near  Upwell,  brother  to  Thomas
Fisher,  of  Outwell,  whose  case  is  published  in  The  Zoist  for
January,  1844,  No.  IY.  p.  462.  His  wife  led  him  to  my
surgery  (a  distance  of  seven  miles)  on  the  6th  of  January,
1850.  There  was  considerable  tumefaction  of  both  evelids  :
the  eyes  highly  inflamed,  discharging  much  purulent  matter,
and  both  pupils  much  contracted ;  the  pain  and  heat  in  the
eyes  were  intense.  One  had  been  inflamed  a  fortnight,  the
other  a  week,  previous  to  his  applying  to  me.  I  was  about  to
treat  him  in  the  usual  wav,  when  he  asked  me  to  mesmerise
him,  as  I  had  done  his  brother.  I  quickly  threw  him  into
the  insensible  state,  when  I  cupped  him.  He  was  daily  mes¬
merised  until  the  13th  January,  and  the  caustic  lotion  (15  grs.
to  the  oz.)  applied  to  the  granulated  mucous  membrane  by
a  camel  hair  brush  at  each  operation,  during  which  time  he
was  perfectly  unconscious  of  pain.  He  left  me  perfectly
cured.  I  found  him  a  powerful  mesmeriser,  and  keep  him
to  operate  on  my  patients.  Already  he  has  done  some  excel¬
lent  cures.

February  25th.  The  following  singular  circumstance  I
have  observed  while  the  patient  was  under  the  mesmeric  in¬
fluence.  Yesterday  I  was  amusing  some  friends  in  the  sur¬
gery  with  shocks  through  water  from  my  electro-magnetic
machine,  placing  silver  (a  shilling)  in  the  water,  and  telling
the  bystanders  any  one  might  have  the  shilling  if  they  could
get  it.  Not  one  could  seize  the  shilling,  nor  free  the  hand
from  the  basin.  I  thought  I  would  try  if  a  mesmeric  subject
could  do  so.  I  put  the  young  woman  who  is  to  have  her  leg
amputated  into  the  mesmeric  state,  and  made  her  walk  to
the  table.  Seizing  one  wire,  I  said,  “  Margaret,  I  want  you
to  take  a  shilling  out  of  the  water  in  this  basin,  and  if  you
do  so  I  shall  give  it  to  you.”  She  put  the  left  hand  in  with
care.  The  necessary  contraction  was  evident,  and  her  power
not  to  remove  the  hand  was  clear.  It  struck  me  “  I  wonder
if  breathing  on  the  hand  will  relax  it  while  under  a  powerful
magnetic  machine.”  To  my  great  surprise  it  did  so,  and  by
breathing  some  little  time  she  was  able  to  seize  the  shilling
and  remove  it  to  terra  firma.  Thinking  this  may  add  a  link
to  the  mesmeric  chain,  which  is  daily  grappling  scepticism,
has  induced  me  to  give  you  the  above.

Benefit  in  Neuralgia.

One  morning  a  Mrs.  Fox,  aged  23,  pregnant,  formerly
living  at  Sporle  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Swaffham,  Suffolk,


88


Neglect  of  Mesmerism ,


came  with  her  head  and  face  covered  with  flannels  until  very
little  more  than  her  olfactory  organ  was  visible ;  states  she
has  been  subject  to  a  severe  tic  of  the  left  upper  side  of  the
face  the  last  four  months ;  the  pain  is  considerably  worse  in
bed,  obliging  her  very  often  to  sit  up.  When  she  applied  at
the  surgery,  I  was  about  starting  with  a  friend  for  a  day’s
snipe  shooting,  and  had  ordered  my  assistant  to  give  her  the
carbonate  of  iron ;  but  finding  my  friend  (Mr.  Goddard  from
Wisbeach)  had  not  finished  cleaning  his  gun,  I  got  the  patient
seated  on  the  surgery  chair  and  began  mesmerising  her  at  the
back  of  the  head  to  fill  up  the  time.  Before  I  had  fairly  mes¬
merised  her,  my  friend  came  blundering  into  the  surgery,
and  in  consequence,  I  had  to  do  my  work  over  again.  How¬
ever,  in  a  few  minutes,  off  she  wrent  with  one  deep  sigh,  with
her  head  falling  backwards,  into  the  strange  sleep.  I  asked
her  how  she  felt.  “  Quite  comfortable.”  Have  you  any  pain  ?
“  No.”  She  slept  fifteen  minutes,  and  on  being  restored  to
her  natural  state  declared  she  was  free  from  pain,  although
she  went  to  sleep  with  those  evils  “  flesh  is  heir  to.”  While
in  the  trance  her  arms  and  legs  were  rigid ;  she  did  not  feel
a  severe  nip  of  the  hand,  or  hear  any  of  us  talking.  At  seven
o’clock  in  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  she  was  mesmerised
by  Harriett  Bill  (she  being  asleep)  :  her  sleep  was  deeper  and
more  lasting.  I  requested  her  to  come  daily,  which  she  has
not  done,  therefore  here  ends  her  case,  as  I  never  take  the
trouble  to  go  out  of  my  door  after  them.

Neglect  of  Mesmerism.

A  poor  woman,  the  subject  of  dropsy,  came  to  consult
me  a  short  time  since  from  a  parish  near  Watlington;  she
had  twice  been  tapped  by  Mr.  Johnson,  surgeon,  in  that  lo¬
cality.  I  told  her  the  only  thing  I  could  do  for  her  was  to
prevent  her  feeling  the  next  operation  by  being  mesmerised.
She  readily  consented,  and  a  few  passes  threw  her  into  the
sleep-wraking  state.  She  did  not  feel  me  nip  her  face  or  hands ;
conversed  with  me  ;  said  her  liver  was  grown  to  her  side,  and
was  the  cause  of  the  dropsy.  The  young  person  who  accom¬
panied  her  promised  me  she  would  mesmerise  her  every  day
and  let  me  know  when  she  must  be  tapped  again.  I  told  her
to  be  sent  into  the  sleep,  and  then  get  her  surgeon  to  per¬
form  the  operation,  and  if  he  would  not  to  send  for  me.

Neglect  of  Mesmerism.

A  Mrs.  Shaw  from  London,  related  to  Mr.  Green  in  Up-
well  Fen,  came  for  me  to  extract  a  tooth  about  three  months
since.  She  was  distracted  from  a  neuralgia  of  the  facial,  left


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


89


upper  side ;  the  tooth  was  carious  and  snapped  level  with  the
gum,  obliging  her  to  leave  my  house  with  increased  pain.
She  suffered  daily  until  the  end  of  a  fortnight,  when  she  came
again  for  me  to  try  and  remove  the  stump.  I  found  the  gum
had  closed  upon  the  enemy,  and  after  several  attempts  I  ad¬
vised  her  to  try  and  let  me  mesmerise  her,  promising  to  re¬
move  it  without  her  feeling  pain.  She  said,  “  Oh,  sir,  any¬
thing  to  ease  me.”  She  followed  me  into  the  dining  room.
There  were  others  present  (Mrs.  Bath,  Mrs.  Towler,  and  my
wife) .  After  nearly  an  hour’s  spell,  and  while  even  telling  her
that  I  thought  I  should  not  succeed,  her  head  fell  back,  and  she
was  truly  asleep.  The  jaw  was  firmly  clenched,  and  she  en¬
joyed  a  profound,  easy  sleep  for  forty-five  minutes ;  when  she
woke  up,  stared  around  her,  and  was  quite  amazed  at  being
told  she  had  slept  so  long.  I  said,  “Now,  Mrs.  Shaw,  have
you  any  pain  ?”  “No  sir,  I  have  not  been  so  free  from  pain
a  long  while.”  She  took  her  seat  by  Mrs.  Bath,  and  re¬
mained  an  hour  to  see  other  cases  operated  on.  The  pain
returned  about  eight  the  same  evening,  but  telling  her  friends
that  she  had  been  mesmerised,  and  they  prejudicing  her  mind,
she  flapped  her  wings  and  fled.  Since  then,  I  have  been  told
she  has  had  the  stump  removed  at  one  of  the  London  hospitals.

I  extracted  a  firm  tooth  from  a  poor  woman’s  lower  jaw
(Mrs.  Wright  of  the  Bedford  Bank,  near  Wilney)  a  month
since  without  her  feeling  the  slightest  pain.

Cure  of  Ophthalmia ,  and  Opacity  of  the  Cornea.

Harriett  Bell  applied  to  me  on  the  10th  of  October  with
inflammation  of  both  eyes,  and  a  great  opacity  of  the  left  cor¬
nea.  She  was  unable  to  bear  the  light,  and  complained  of
much  heat  and  pricking  in  both  eyes.  As  she  had  been  cured
by  me  of  a  diseased  knee,  I  recommended  her  to  be  mesmer¬
ised  again.  I  threw  her  into  the  trance  in  a  few  moments,
and  kept  her  asleep  seven  hours,  now  and  then  making  trac¬
tive  passes  from  the  eyes.  The  following  day  there  was  a  de¬
cided  improvement  in  the  eyes.  She  was  mesmerised  daily
until  the  17th,  when  I  considered  her  perfectly  cured.

On  the  15th,  while  in  the  sleep,  I  requested  that  she
should  mesmerise  Mrs.  Towler,  who  had  come  in,  suffering
from  a  severe  attack  of  tic.  She  continued  making  passes
over  the  back  of  the  head  until  the  first  stage  of  the  sleep  was
induced.  I  then  attracted  her  to  the  sofa,  where  she  remained
until  I  demesmerised  her.  The  next  day  I  tested  her  voice
with  a  Mrs.  Bath,  who  came  in  with  Mrs.  Towler,  and  she
accurately  accompanied  her  in  some  songs — ‘The  Lass  of


90


Cure  of  a  Diseased  Finger ,  fyc.,


Richmond  Hill/  ‘  Jenny  Jones/  &c.  Her  knee  has  remained
perfectly  well ;  she  can  dance  and  walk  with  any  one.

One  singular  feature  in  her  case  I  have  found  out  which
might  deceive  a  stranger  to  the  science.  That  though  asleep
and  insensible  to  pricking,  if  requested  to  open  her  eyes,  she
does  so,  and  can  see  any  object  placed  before  her :  in  her  nor¬
mal  state  has  no  recollection  of  having  obeyed  the  operator's
wish  to  open  them  or  of  having  seen  anything.

Cure  of  a  Diseased  Finger  with  Mesmerism ,  employed  for  a

surgical  operation.

Jonas  Amis,  aged  20,  of  Up  well  Fen,  an  engineer,  re¬
ceived  an  injury  to  the  second  finger  on  the  right  hand  by  a
cross-head  of  an  engine  at  the  waterworks,  Trafalgar  Square,
Charing  Cross.  Was  admitted  into  the  Charing-Cross  Hospital
on  the  3rd  November,  1848.

The  finger  wTas  removed  at  the  second  phalanx  under  the
influence  of  chloroform.  He  inhaled  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
felt  the  operation  all  the  time,  and  did  not  get  over  the  effects
for  three  days.  He  left  the  hospital  half  an  hour  after  the
operation,  and  was  afterwards  attended  by  Mr. William  Wood
(Union  Street,  Borough)  nearly  a  month.  He  then  returned
home,  and  applied  to  me  about  the  end  of  January,  1849.
There  were  two  sinuses,  on  probing  which  I  found  diseased
bone.  I  put  a  tent  in,  and  after  ten  days  I  removed  two
pieces  of  bone.  The  sore  assumed  a  bad  appearance,  and  I,
fearing  disease  would  extend  to  the  joint,  recommended  re¬
moval  of  the  part,  for  which  purpose  his  father  drove  him  to
my  house  one  evening  to  be  mesmerised.  He  was  easily
affected ;  the  sleep  was  induced  several  times,  but  was  not
sufficiently  deep  for  the  operation  to  be  painless.  Mesmerised
i  gold  had  an  extraordinary  effect.  If  it  was  placed  on  the
back  of  the  hand  and  this  rested  on  the  knee,  it  would  con¬
vulse  the  muscles,  and  the  knee  and  hand  would  rise ;  if
placed  on  Combativeness,  his  legs  would  fly  out,  and  he  would
be  kicking ;  his  sleep  never  lasts  more  than  a  quarter  of  an
hour.  His  constitution  is  good ;  he  is  a  fine  athletic  subject.
He  afterwards  called  upon  me  to  say  his  finger  was  quite  well ,
and  he  was  going  to  return  to  London.  I  gave  him  a  letter
to  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  afterwards  wrote  me  word  that  he  saw
the  finger  quite  well.*

Great  benefit  in  a  case  of  Diseased  Ankle.

Aaron  Lister,  15  years  old,  suffered  from  inflammation  of

*  The  same  result  occurred  to  Mr.  Case,  of  Fareham,  when  he  mesmerised
a  woman  for  the  painless  amputation  of  a  thumb.  See  Surgical  Operations
without  pain,  p.  13.


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


91


the  right  ankle,  nine  months  standing ;  was  taking  the  Rev.  —
Townley’s  medicine  for  a  considerable  time  without  any  benefit
whatever.  Came  to  me  ;  I  tried  to  mesmerise  him ;  finding
him  susceptible  of  it,  I  hypnotized  him  first  and  then  mes¬
merised  him ;  during  the  sleep  I  made  him  walk  up  and  down
the  room  several  times  without  the  assistance  of  his  crutches,
merely  by  taking  hold  of  his  hand.  I  next  tried  to  work  the
ankle  about,  which  had  become  quite  stiff.  This  I  succeeded
in  doing.  When  he  awoke  he  was  much  better,  used  only
one  of  his  crutches  to  walk  home  with ;  came  the  following
day,  was  hypnotized  again  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Cautley,  could
walk  very  much  better ;  came  to  me  again  as  usual,  could  in
the  sleep  w'alk  up  and  down  the  room  without  any  assistance;
came  again  only  walking  with  a  stick,  was  mesmerised  again,
and  during  the  sleep  was  cross-magnetized  by  some  persons
being  too  near  him ;  through  this  cause  I  found  him  rather
difficult  to  wake ;  came  again  in  a  few  days,  was  mesmerised
by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.  Being  again  cross-magnetized
he  could  not  be  awoke,  was  put  to  bed,  and  slept  until  the
morning,  was  very  much  better,  could  walk  well,  and  was
very  cheerful.  Being  so  susceptible,  I  wished  him  not  to
some  so  often.  A  week  passed,  and  he  came  to  me  with
both  crutches  again,  begging  me  to  go  on  with  it  again,  as
he  was  sure  it  would  do  him  good,  since  he  always  felt  so
much  better  after  the  sleep.

This  case  is  a  remarkable  one.  I  was  obliged  to  give  him
up  because  he  was  so  troublesome.  He  would  be  influenced
by  a  few  passes  near  or  several  yards  off ;  the  eyes  first  had
a  fixed  stare  lasting  a  few  moments,  with  his  head  slightly
forwards,  then  the  eyelids  would  drop  instantly :  if  any  one
touched  him  (except  the  operator)  he  would  become  rigid  in
every  part.  If  I  now  tried  to  demesmerise  him,  he  would
become  convulsed,  sink  down  in  the  chair,  and  kick  until  he
rested  on  the  ground,  lying  still  for  a  few  seconds ;  then  the
most  frightful  facial  contractions  would  take  place,  so  as  to
alarm  every  spectator.  One  day  I  was  trying  to  demesmerise
him  by  the  bellows,  and  this  being  near  his  mouth,  not  much
relishing  the  puff,  he  snapped  at  them,  and  it  was  with  the
greatest  difficulty  I  could  remove  the  iron  part ;  Mr.  Robert
Bird,  of  Emmeth,  was  with  me;  his  teeth  bled.  When  he  came
out  of  the  sleep  he  had  no  knowledge  of  what  had  passed.  I  used
to  get  persons  to  be  constantly  with  him  while  asleep,  but  at  last
he  got  so  boisterous  they  dared  not  attend.  If  we  put  him  to
bed  he  would  soon  kill  his  companions  as  well  as  himself  on
the  boards.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Sandby  has  a  little  knowledge  of
this  curious  case,  having  laboured  nearly  a  whole  evening  in


92  An  Issue  made  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Patient ,

endeavouring  to  demesmerise  him,  and  nearly  lost  his  supper
as  well.  I  firmly  believe  if  I  had  persevered  daily  in  this
case  it  would  have  cured  him.  He  used  to  ride  a  donkey,
and  could  not  wear  a  shoe ;  he  now  walks  with  a  stick,  and
can  wear  a  shoe.

An  Issue  made  in  the  Arm  without  the  knowledge  of  the  patient.

Margaret  Frances,  who  has  suffered  for  twelve  years  with
an  irritable  and  sloughing  ulcer  of  the  leg,  and  death  of  a
portion  of  the  shin  bone,  wished  to  be  mesmerised,  in  order
that  she  might  lose  her  limb,  and  not  feel  the  operation.  I
took  lodgings  for  her  in  the  village,  and  she  boarded  at  my
house,  and  on  the  27th  of  April,  1849,  I  commenced  my
mesmeric  manipulations.  Merely  a  closure  of  the  eyelids
took  place  after  a  trial  of  forty  minutes.  She  was  daily  mes¬
merised  until  the  1st  of  May,  gradually  becoming  more  suscep¬
tible.  She  left,  and  returned  on  the  4th.  I  was  now  nearly
an  hour  before  I  produced  any  effect,  and  then  it  was  very
transient,  she  waking  up  instantly  I  discontinued  my  passes.
Mr.  Cheverton,  a  medical  pupil  of  the  London  University,
lecturing  on  ether  and  chloroform  in  the  neighbourhood,
having  expressed  a  desire  to  see  some  of  my  cases,  I  attended
his  lecture,  and  invited  him  to  my  house,  and  to  stay  a  few
days,  so  as  to  have  plenty  of  opportunity  for  thoroughly
investigating  the  subject  of  mesmerism.  He  accordingly
arrived  at  my  house  on  the  7th  of  May,  and  we  mesmerised
Margaret  Frances  several  times,  that  is,  every  five  or  ten
minutes  for  two  hours  and  a  half,  when  the  sleep  became
more  profound,  and  after  dinner  she  was  thrown  into  a  state
of  coma,  and  slept  an  hour  and  ten  minutes.  As  Dr.  Whitsed
had  ordered  an  issue  in  the  arm,  it  was  agreed  that  one
should  be  put  in  the  next  time  she  went  artificially  to  sleep.
After  tea,  the  bell  rang  for  Margaret  Frances  to  come  in,
only  knowing  that  she  was  to  be  mesmerised.  The  following
were  present : — Miss  Annie  Bird,  Mr.  William  Bird,  Mr.
Cheverton,  Mrs.  Tubbs,  and  myself.  In  a  very  short  time,
by  passes  at  the  back  of  the  head,  the  deep  slumber  was  in¬
duced,  the  eyeballs  rolling  from  side  to  side.  The  ladies
assisted  us  in  removing  the  dress,  and  exposing  the  deltoid
portion  of  the  arm.  Mr.  Cheverton  then  raised  the  integu¬
ment,  and  slowly  excised  a  portion.  The  arm  bled  freely.
Lint  and  a  bandage  applied,  the  dress  put  right  again,  she
quietly  continued  her  sleep  for  an  hour  or  more,  when  she  was
demesmerised,  walked  into  the  kitchen,  sat  down  to  tea  with
the  other  servants,  before  she  was  at  all  sensible  that  there
was  anything  amiss  in  the  arm  :  she  declared  she  did  not  feel


by  Mr.  Tubbs .


93


any  pain.  Her  sleep  is  now  from  one  to  seven  or  nine  hours,
and  she  can  easily  throw  herself  off  by  staring  at  the  ceiling.
The  arms  only  are  made  rigid.  The  following  evening  Mr.
Cheverton  gave  us  a  lecture  at  Outwell ;  and  when  speaking
of  chloroform,  publicly  acknowledged  his  belief  in  a  science
in  which,  but  a  few  days  prior  to  his  visiting  this  locality,  he
was  an  unbeliever.  And,  from  having  tested  with  the  knife
a  mesmeric  patient,  felt  himself  bound  to  place  mesmer¬
ism  with  those  agents  he  had  that  evening  been  lecturing
upon.

Painless  removal  of  a  Tooth  but  with  a  distressing  sense  of

coldness.

Miss  Harvey,  of  Outwell,  applied  to  me  in  May  last  to
have  a  tooth  extracted  under  mesmerism.  She  was  a  nervous,
hysterical  subject,  affected  in  a  very  short  time.  I  mesmerised
her  several  times,  and  extracted  the  tooth,  in  the  presence  of
Mr.  Burman,  surgeon,  of  Wisbeach ;  his  wife  and  Mrs.
Tubbs  were  also  present.  The  moment  I  touched  the  tooth
with  the  instruments  she  became  hysterical,  and  continued  so
after  its  removal,  and  evidently  seemed  to  have  perfect  know¬
ledge  of  the  pain.  But  in  questioning  her  after  its  removal,
she  said  it  was  not  pain,  but  a  coldness  she  felt.  When
ether  was  first  introduced  into  this  part,  I  gave  it  to  this
patient,  and  it  threw  her  into  a  low,  nervous,  and  desponding
state,  and  there  seemed  to  be  but  little  vis  vitae  left.  She
never  perfectly  rallied  until  she  had  been  mesmerised.  She
is  now  perfectly  well.

I  extracted  a  wisdom-tooth  of  the  right  upper  jaw,  a  few
weeks  since,  for  Miss  Palmer,  a  solicitor's  daughter.  Her
papa  had  kept  her  asleep  from  nine  o'clock  the  previous  even¬
ing  until  twelve  o'clock  the  next  day.  On  going  in  at  eleven
o'clock,  she  was  sitting  by  the  fire,  full  of  chat,  laughing,  and
her  pulse  was  regular.  She  had  retired  to  bed,  washed  her¬
self,  dressed,  and  breakfasted  with  the  family,  eaten  heartily,
and  in  fact  seemed  quite  happy.  The  reason  of  her  papa
sending  her  to  sleep  was  in  consequence  of  the  dreadful  pain
in  the  tooth.  Now,  in  the  sleep,  there  was  no  pain.  About
eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  I  was  sent  for  in  to  extract  the
tooth.  Dr.  Burt,  Mr.  Munday,  from  London,  and  the  family
were  present.  I  lanced  the  gum,  and,  with  much  force,  drew
an  immense  large  tooth.  She  said,  “  Oh !  you  hurt  me.
You  said  I  should  not  feel  it,  but  I  did."  We  allowed  her
to  keep  asleep  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour ;  and,  on  de-
mesmerising  her,  she  declared  she  did  not  know  it  was  out,
and  assured  us  she  felt  no  pain.


94


Cure  of  Insanity  after  eight  Mesmerisations,


About  a  fortnight  since  I  extracted  another  tooth  for  Miss
Palmer,  while  in  the  mesmeric  trance,  which  I  did  without
her  evincing  any  pain  or  knowledge ;  but,  owing  to  Mr.
Hard  assisting  me  in  throwing  her  into  a  deeper  sleep,  she
suffered  from  fainting  fits  for  some  days  after,  and  seemed  to
be  the  subject  of  hysteria.  We  ought  to  have  mesmerised
her  again.

Miller,  case  of  diseased  heart  (reported  in  The  Zoist,  No.  VI.
p.  258)  is  married,  looking  quite  well,  and  now  blessed  with
two  children.  About  two  months  since  she  called  at  my  house,
and  I  found  her  quite  as  susceptible  of  being  mesmerised  as
ever  :  merely  one  stare  threw  her  into  an  unconscious  state.
It  was  two  years  since  I  operated  before.


***  We  consider  it  a  duty  to  express  our  admiration  of
Mr.  Tubbs’s  conduct.  Some  years  ago,  a  young  practitioner
in  one  of  the  innumerable  prejudiced  spots  of  the  country,
without  enlightened  gentry,  without  enlightened  clergymen,
or  enlightened  medical  men,  he  had  intelligence  to  see  that
mesmerism  was  true,  and  honesty  to  defend  and  practise  it,
till  he  was  J03OO  the  poorer.  He  could  afford  no  more  and
held  his  tongue :  not  imitating  those  wdio  were  not  contented
with  declining  to  be  martyrs,  but  wickedly  set  about  reviling
it  with  conviction  of  its  truth  in  their  hearts.  The  time
came  round :  he  became  independent,  and,  finding  he  could
afford  to  smile  at  the  scoffers,  he  became  active  in  the  cause
again.  It  is  amusing  to  know  that  the  editor  of  the  Medical
Gazette  (Dr.  Alfred  Taylor)  has  corresponded  with  him  and
presented  him  with  his  book ;  though  Mr.  Tubbs  is  one  of
those  whom  Dr.  A.  Taylor  calls  the  impostors  who  send  their
own  cases  to  The  Zoist.


XIV.  A  Case  of  Insanity  cured  after  only  eight  mesmerisations.

By  Mr.  Barth.

“  We  beheld,  always  with  astonishment,  sometimes  with  concern,  and  some¬
times  with  contempt,  the  credulity,  real  or  pretended,  of  the  magnetizers.  We
observed,  with  some  little  disgust,  here  and  there  a  practitioner  willing  to  become
the  provincial  wonder,  and  only  restrained  by  his  prudence  from  declaring  what  a
mixture  of  ignorance  and  cupidity  prepared  him  to  assert  and  to  do.  But,  above
all,  we  lamented  to  see  the  great  delusion  supported  by  one  of  the  ablest  physi¬
cians  of  this  country,  filling  the  most  important  chair  in  the  largest  medical  school
of  the  kingdom.” — Drs.  Conolly  and  Forbes,  in  the  British  and  Foreign
Medical  Review,  April,  1839.

“  To  the  Editor  of  the  Bristol  Gazette. — Bath  Hotel,  Clifton,  Nov.  30, 1848. —


by  Mr.  Barth.


95


Sir, — Happening  to  read  your  paper  of  this  morning’s  date,  I  found  my  name
mentioned,  in  a  report  of  Dr.  Storer’s  Lectures  at  the  Albert  Rooms,  among  the
believers  in  mesmerism.  I  beg  you  to  do  me  the  favour  of  contradicting  this
assertion,  which  must  have  originated  in  mistake. — T  am,  Sir,  your  very  obedient
servant,  J.  Conolly,  M.D.,  Physician  to  the  Hanwell  Asylum.”

About  the  beginning  of  the  present  year,  Monsieur  Bott,  a
Frenchman  and  a  stranger  to  me,  called  to  request  assistance
for  his  daughter,  a  young  woman  18  years  of  age,  who  had
been  ill  for  five  or  six  weeks,  and  treated  according  to  routine
practice  without  benefit.  He  stated  that  he  had  great  confi¬
dence  in  the  curative  powers  of  mesmeric  treatment,  and  was
a  reader  of  The  Zoist.  On  my  enquiring  the  nature  of  his
daughter’s  malady,  he  informed  me,  that  she  “  was  not  right
in  her  head,  and  could  not  sleep  at  night;  that  she  had  been
an  amiable,  intelligent  girl,  and  most  useful  to  her  mother
as  an  assistant  in  the  school,  previously  to  her  illness ;  that
she  was  now  quite  incapable  of  attending  to  her  duties,  and
fancied  people  were  plotting  against  her,  and  that  she  would
be  taken  away  by  them.”  And  he  gave  such  other  particulars
as  satisfied  me  that  it  was  a  case  of  insanity,  and,  not  being
of  long  standing,  likely  to  be  speedily  cured  with  mesmerism.
I  consented  to  undertake  the  case,  and  he  arranged  to  bring
the  patient,  accompanied  by  her  mother,  in  the  evening.  I
saw  no  more  of  the  parties  for  a  fortnight  or  longer,  until  the
evening  of  January  '23,  when  Mr.  Bott  and  his  wife  visited
me  with  their  daughter.  The  parents  explained  that  they  had
not  been  able  to  bring  her  sooner,  as,  though  they  had  made
several  attempts,  she  was  so  alarmed  by  seeing  policemen  in
the  streets,  under  a  delusion  that  they  were  watching  for  her,
that  she  could  not  be  induced  to  proceed ;  and  that  they  had
much  difficulty  to  get  her  to  my  house  then.  I  understood
from  Mrs.  Bott  that  her  daughter’s  bowels  were  obstinately
constipated,  that  her  appetite  was  tolerably  good,  that  she
seldom  slept,  that  she  had  not  slept  at  all  for  the  past  six
nights,  or  if  she  had  it  was  only  for  very  brief  intervals ;  that
she  sat  listless  and  dejected  all  day,  and  was  generally  in  a
state  of  terror  from  some  delusive  idea  of  plots  against  her.
I  addressed  the  patient  kindly,  and  made  a  few  enquiries  as
to  her  health  that  she  did  not  seem  to  understand.  She  looked
vacantly  at  me,  and  made  no  reply.  She  presently  whispered
to  her  mother  that  there  were  five  policemen  waiting  outside
of  the  house  for  her.  I  took  her  gently  by  the  hand,  led  her
to  the  window,  and  desired  her  to  see  that  they  were  now
gone  away.  She  replied,  she  was  afraid  they  were  there  but
had  got  close  to  the  door,  so  that  she  could  not  see  them  from
the  window.  The  state  of  her  mind  was  too  apparent  to  be
mistaken.  She  seemed  very  tractable,  and  at  her  mother’s


96  Cure  of  Insanity  after  eight  Mesmerisations,

request  seated  herself  in  an  easy  chair.  I  mesmerised  her  in
the  usual  manner,  and  in  eight  minutes  her  eyes  closed,  and
remained  closed  whilst  I  made  passes  before  them.  At  the
end  of  half  an  hour  they  remained  closed,  when  the  passes
were  discontinued.  I  aroused  her  in  an  hour,  and  she  cer¬
tainly  seemed  rather  more  intelligent  than  before  her  sleep,
and  made  no  allusion  “  to  the  policemen  outside.”  She  was
brought  again  the  next  night.  Her  parents  fancied  she  was
a  little  better,  and  she  had  slept  better  the  previous  night  than
usual.  I  handed  her  over  to  the  care  of  a  lady  assistant,  who
mesmerised  her  Jan.  24,  25,  28,  29,  30,  Feb.  2,  Feb.  4;  so
that  she  was  eight  times  mesmerised.  I  have  not  seen  her
since  the  4th  of  February,  but  received  the  following  note
from  her  parents  on  the  9th  : —

“  No.  3,  Bath  Place,  Caledonian  Boad,
Islington.

“  Dear  Sir, — Words  are  inadequate  to  express  how  much
we  feel  indebted  to  you  for  the  cure  effected  by  mesmerism
on  Miss  Louisa  Bott,  daughter  of  Monsieur  Bott,  French
teacher.  She  is  now  enabled  to  resume  the  arduous  duties
of  a  school.  Before  she  was  under  your  judicious  treatment
she  was  incapable  of  any  exertion,  and  was  in  a  very  bad  state
of  health.  We  should  be  glad  to  have  this  surprising  cure  in
so  short  a  period,  made  universally  known,  that  other  suffer¬
ers  may  be  benefited.

“  Wishing  you  every  blessing  with  our  ever  grateful
acknowledgments,

“We  remain,  dear  sir,

“  Yours  very  respectfully,

“  Marianne  and  Thos.  Bott.

“  P.S. — Since  Louisa  is  so  restored,  we  have  been  fearful
to  have  her  go  out  whilst  the  high  winds  prevailed,  as  her  throat
was  sore,  with  a  slight  cough;  the  rain  also  prevented.  We
hope  to  see  you  in  a  few  days.”

I  have  not  seen  the  parties  since,  but  sent  a  few  days
ago  to  inquire  how  Louisa  was;  and  understand  that  she
continues  perfectly  well.

This  patient  continued  to  improve  rapidly  after  the  first
mesmerising.  She  was  put  to  sleep  by  my  assistant  (who  is
a  good  mesmeriser,  both  morally  and  as  an  operator)  on  each
occasion,  and  slept  soundly  until  designedly  awakened.  I
know  nothing  of  the  character  of  the  mesmeric  state  induced,
as  I  did  not  permit  myself  to  make  any  testing  experiments,
and  the  operator  is  too  conscientious  to  do  so  without  direct


by  Mr.  Barth .


9  7


instructions.  Our  business  was  to  cure  the  patient,  not  to
bring  out  extraordinary  phenomena.  The  bowels  at  once
began  to  act  regularly,  and  sound  natural  sleep  at  night  was
regularly  obtained ;  and  the  delusions  and  mental  vacancy
ceased  after  the  fourth  or  fifth  mesmerisation.  This  case  is
the  truth  just  as  I  have  given  it ;  and,  the  name  and  address
of  the  parents  being  furnished,  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in
applying  to  them  for  a  confirmation,  if  any  doubter  of  the
efficacy  of  mesmerism  in  insanity  chooses  to  take  the  trouble
to  satisfy  himself.

I  request  that  you  will  permit  me  to  add  a  few  lines  in
relation  to  the  case  of  Miss  Sarah  Newman,  given  in  No.
XXVII.  of  The  Zoist ,  for  October  last ;  as,  after  stating  that
there  had  been  a  relapse  in  the  case,  I  promised  to  commu-
.  nicate  the  eventual  result  of  the  treatment.  I  mesmerised
this  patient  into  deep  sleep,  and,  on  her  waking  from  it,  into
sleep- waking  on  the  20th  of  last  September.  Although  she
had  at  one  time  been  the  most  susceptible  subject  to  mes¬
meric  influence  that  I  had  ever  treated,  she  lost  her  suscepti¬
bility  as  her  cure  advanced.  Sometimes  I  mesmerised  her
immediately;  sometimes,  for  several  days  in  succession,  I
could  not  induce  any  mesmeric  state.  I  was  thoroughly
puzzled  to  account  for  this  unusual  circumstance  in  mesmeric
treatment.  This  day  I  ascertained  the  cause.  When  in  the
sleep-waking  she  was  in  a  very  tractable  and  amiable  mood,
and  I  therefore  tried  to  extract  a  mesmeric  promise  that  she
would  always  sleep  when  I  mesmerised  her.  She  then  ex¬
plained  that  she  could  always  sleep  if  she  pleased ;  but  she
did  not  generally  like  being  put  to  sleep,  as  she  wanted  to  be
at  home  playing  with  her  sisters  and  brother,  and  that  she
could  always  keep  awake  if  she  determined  to  do  so  before
being  mesmerised.  I  could  not  obtain  the  required  promise
from  her.

Next  day,  Sept.  21st,  she  visited  me,  and  was  mesmerised
for  an  hour  without  sleep  being  induced  ;  she  was  unwilling,
and  contrived  to  keep  awake.  I  saw  no  more  of  her  for  nearly
four  months ;  her  parents  having  sent  her  to  Southampton.
When  she  did  revisit  me,  she  came  with  a  request  from  her
mother  that  I  would  not  mesmerise  her.  She  had  then  re¬
lapsed  ;  the  disease  (St.  Vitus’s  dance)  was  very  evident  by  a
frequent  twitching  of  the  eyes  and  facial  muscles.  I  saw  her
a  month  later,  and  then  the  shaking  of  the  head  had  returned.
Thus  the  good  effects  of  all  my  mesmerising  had  been  lost
for  want  of  steady  perseverance.  The  case,  a  very  bad  one,
was  so  far  cured  that  no  person  watching  the  little  patient
for  hours  could  detect  any  signs  of  the  disease ;  a  relapse
VOL.  VIII.  h


98


Cure  of  Insanity  after  eight  Mesm erisa lions,


occurred  in  consequence  of  violent  excitement  caused  by  her
chastisement  at  school;  and,  mesmerism  being  discontinued,
the  relapse  has  become  a  permanent  disease  again.

I  took  this  patient  upon  very  equitable  terms.  I  told  her
father  that  I  believed  mesmerism  would  cure  it,  but  I  could
not  say  how  long  a  time  would  be  required ;  and  if  he  would
pay  me  a  moderate  remuneration  for  three  months,  I  would
give  the  next  three  months,  if  requisite,  without  remunera¬
tion.  I  so  far  kept  my  promise  that  I  mesmerised  her  for
the  term  of  nearly  nine  months  without  making  a  charge,  or
expecting  other  reward  than  the  pleasure  and  credit  of  curing
a  very  troublesome  case.

It  may  appear  surprizing  that  the  parents  should  volun¬
tarily  discontinue  the  mesmerism,  which  cost  nothing,  after
witnessing  its  beneficial  effects.  I  regret  it,  because  confident
of  my  power  of  making  a  permanent  cure ;  because  I  am  at¬
tached  to  the  child;  because  the  parents  are  worthy  persons ;
and  the  credit  of  mesmerism  is  involved  in  this  particular
case.  Those  who  have  read  the  particulars  of  this  interesting
case  in  No.  XXVII.  of  The  Zoist  may  wonder  why,  as  the
mesmerism  cost  them  nothing,  the  parents  discontinued  it  ?
I  will  tell  them.  They  were  persuaded  to  do  so  by  a  Dr.  G.,*
who  is  a  physician  to  a  national  institution,  and  -who  bought
a  house  from  Mr.  Newman,  and  resides  in  it  as  a  neighbour.
He  has  assured  them  that  mesmerism  could  not  cure  the  child,
and  that  they  had  better  not  allow  any  mesmerising,  or  any
physic  to  be  given,  or  anything  done,  as  the  child,  if  only
left  alone,  will  be  sure  to  get  well  of  her  own  accord  when
she  attains  the  age  of  14  years  or  thereabout ;  that  is,  arrives
at  the  period  of  puberty.  Time  will  shew  if  this  prophecy

*  We  have  no  doubt  that  Dr.  G.  was  the  Dr.  George  Gregory  who  thus
instructed  the  students  of  St.  Thomas’s  Hospital,  now  fallen,  as  a  school,  even
more  than  University  College  : —

“  Quacks  and  charlatans  still  abound,  and  in  the  disguise  of  homoeopathists
and  mesmerisers  have  even  intruded  on  the  legitimate  boundaries  of  science.  But
be  not  deceived  by  these  specious  appearances.  Men  of  this  stamp  start  for  a
time  into  notoriety  ;  but  track  their  course,  and  you  will  find  that  sooner  or  later
their  career  is  checked.  Knowledge  has  taken  no  root  in  them.  When  difficulties
occur  (and  occur  they  will  to  all  in  the  course  of  time),  they  wither,  like  the  corn
that  was  sown  on  dry  ground.  On  the  other  hand,  the  man  of  education  con-
.  tinues  his  even  course,  overcomes  the  difficulty,  and  gathers  experience  from  it.
With  experience  comes  self-confidence.  Self-confidence  brings  in  its  train  the
good  opinion  of  the  world.  Character,  wealth,  honours,  follow. — Dr.  George
Gregory’s  Introductory  Lecture  at  St.  Thomas’s  Hospital  this  winter,  in  the
chair  originally  filled  and  established  by  Dr.  Elliotson.” — Medical  Times,  Oct.  4,
1845.

Dr.  George  Gregory  did  not  11  overcome  the  difficulty”  of  Mr.  Barth’s  case,
nor  “  gather  experience  ”  from  it,  but  still  without  it  continues  to  possess  “  self-
confidence;”  whether  he  is  gaining  “  character,  wealth,  and  honours,”  we  know
not. — Zoist.


by  Mr.  Barth.


99


be  verified, — I  liope  it  may  for  the  dear  little  girFs  sake ;
should  it  not,  she  will  grow  to  maturity  an  object  to  be  pitied ;
and  a  large  share  of  blame  will  attach  to  a  physician  who  has
presumed  to  give  a  professional  opinion  on  a  subject  which
he  is  ignorant  of  or  prejudiced  against.

Your  obedient  servant,

7,  Eversholt  St.,  G.  H.  Barth.

Mornington  Crescent.


***  We  entreat  our  readers  to  refer  to  No.  II.  p.  185,
for  a  cure  of  insanity  under  Dr.  ElliotsoiFs  direction  exactly
twelve  years  ago,  in  University  College  Hospital,  some  months
before  the  council  issued  an  edict  that  no  cure  should  be
effected  by  mesmerism  in  that  establishment,  now  deservedly
fallen  into  decay.*  Further  interesting  cures  of  insanity  by

*  “  No  cure  was  ever  effected  in  an  hospital  more  satisfactorily.  There  was
no  expense  beyond  the  patient’s  food,  except  for  one  pill  and  one  draught  before
mesmerism  was  begun.  And  yet  my  colleagues — aye,  that  colleague  who  was
prescribing  the  whole  materia  medica  of  all  pharmacopoeias,  British  and  Conti¬
nental — in  almost  daily  change — almost  daily  ‘  quid  pro  quo  subslituendo,’  as
Lord  Bacon  says  in  his  censure  of  the  practice  of  physiognomy,  would  not  see  it
— would  not  hear  of  it :  and  they  intrigued  with  the  council  of  the  college,  till
this  body  of  men,  known,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  neither  in  science  nor
literature,  issued  an  edict  that  no  cures  should  be  effected  by  mesmerism,  though
the  wards  have  contained  cases,  as  the  wards  of  all  other  hospitals  contain  cases
innumerable,  physicked  and  tormented  to  no  purpose,  or  comparatively  little
purpose,  of  diseases  which  might  generally  be  effectually,  and  often  quickly
cured  by  mesmerism — mesmerism  never,  no,  not  in  a  single  instance,  being  em¬
ployed;  nay,  as  little  thought  of  as  steam  carriages,  electro -telegraphs,  the  penny
post,  or  Handel  or  Beethoven’s  music  among  the  Caffres  or  Calmucks.  And  they
glory  in  it.

“  The  treatment  of  the  chronically  insane  is  little  more  than  hygienic  and
moral.  Of  the  importance  of  preserving  the  general  health  of  the  system,  and
the  absolute  necessity  of  surrounding  such  patients  with  all  circumstances  calcu¬
lated  to  induce  and  maintain  a  natural  and  happy  exercise  of  the  cerebral  functions,
no  one  can  doubt.  The  benefit  that  results  is  incalculable.  Even  this,  however,
has  been  very  badly — very  imperfectly — put  in  practice  in  most  lunatic  asylums  ;
and  the  greater  part  of  those  insanity  doctors  who  thoroughly  enrich  themselves
by  these  diseases  are  little  more  than  boarding-house  keepers,  the  inmates  being
mad  instead  of  sane,  and  do  little  more  for  their  patients  than  a  boarding-house
keeper  does  ;  and  whenever  I  have  met  with  them  have  seemed  to  know  no  more
of  that  wonder  of  wonders,  the  brain,  in  its  healthy  or  diseased  functions,  than
the  most  ordinarily-informed  of  medical  men — being  not  only  ignorant  of  phre¬
nology,  but  of  what  it  really  means.  Were  it  not  so,  what  careful  and  valuable
intelligence  should  we  not  have  had  long  ago  from  the  physicians  of  great  asy¬
lums  !  What  collections  of  skulls,  what  casts,  what  drawings,  what  details,  what
general  views,  what  results  of  various'  modes  of  treatment,  what  noble  improve¬
ments  !  But  what  have  we  ?  Nothing.  But  those  doctors  amass,  as  the
country  people  say,  cruelly.  Even  some  insanity  doctors  who  have  the  credit  of
being  phrenologists,  and  doing  much  for  insanity,  know  nothing  of  it,  and  de¬
serve  not  half  the  credit  which  they  have.

“  Seeing  that  other  medical  treatment — bleeding,  blisters,  drugs — are  of  so
little  avail  in  the  majority  of  cases,  and  that  we  possess  so  powerful  an  instru¬
ment  in  mesmerism — shewn  not  only  by  its  general  influence,  as  in  the  case  just


100  On  the  conduct  of  the  Medical  Times,  fyc.,

Dr.  Elliotson  will  be  found  in  the  same  number ;  and  in  our

last  number  we  reported  the  recent  success  in  India  of  the

mesmeric  treatment  of  insanity,  and  the  equal  readiness  of

the  insane  to  be  influenced  by  mesmerism  as  the  sane.  The

«/

council  and  professors  of  University  College  ought  to  blush ;
and  so  ought  Dr.  Conolly  and  the  other  doctors  who  live  by
the  insane. — Zoist.


XY.  On  the  conduct  of  the  Medical  Times,  the  Critic,  and
Mr.  Robert  Hunt.  By  Dr.  Engledue.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — I  think  it  is  important  in  an  historical  point  of  view,
that  your  readers  should  be  informed  of  any  movement  on
the  part  of  the  medical  profession,  and  it  is  for  this  reason
that  I  wish  to  direct  their  attention  to  an  article  published
in  the  Medical  Times  of  February  16th,  1850.  The  sys¬
tematic  suppression  of  the  facts  which  The  Zoist  has  contained
for  so  many  years,  on  the  part  of  medical  journalists,  is  highly
derogatory  to  their  character  as  literary  men,  because  it  has
always  appeared  to  me  that  their  chief  duty  consists  in  placing
before  their  professional  brethren  such  novelties  as  their  po¬
sition  enables  them  to  obtain,  regardless  altogether  of  any
unfavourable  view  which  they  individually  may  be  inclined
to  take.  Facts  should  be  chronicled  as  facts,  or  presumed
facts,  and  the  attempts  at  ratiocination  on  the  part  of  editors
should  be  taken  by  their  readers  for  just  as  much  as  they  are
worth,  and  they  are  only  worthy  of  attention  when  they  are
in  accordance  with  sound  logic.  For  eight  years  the  con¬
ductors  of  the  Medical  Times  have  dishonestly  suppressed  all
mesmeric  facts;  but  on  the  16th  of  February,  1850,  thb
editor  furnishes  his  readers  with  a  professed  review  of  the
January  number  of  The  Zoist,  and  great  as  my  experience
has  been  of  the  ignorance  and  impudence  of  anti-mesmeric
crusaders,  this  article,  which  I  understand  is  currently  re¬
ported  to  have  been  written  by  Dr.  Bushnan,  certainly  far
surpasses  all  the  previous  attempts  of  Forbes,  Wakley,  and
Johnson.

Whether  Dr.  Bushnan  be  the  writer  or  not  of  this  article
it  is  quite  clear  that  the  author  sat  down  to  concoct  it  influ-

related,  but  in  acting  upon  the  individual  organs  of  the  brain,  according  to  dis¬
coveries  made  in  America  and  England,  and  as  I  have  seen  proved  beyond  all
dispute  in  four  cases  of  my  own — it  is  the  duty  now  of  all  who  treat  the  insane  and
fatuitous  to  give  these  unfortunate  beings  the  chance  of  benefit  from  mesmerism.
On  many  I  know  it  can  do  no  good ;  but  many,  I  am  persuaded  it  would  calm
and  improve,  and  many  it  would  cure.”


by  Dr.  Engledue.


101


enced  by  any  spirit  but  the  spirit  of  truth.  In  the  first  place,
ridicule  is  not  argument,  and  rational  beings  require  the
latter  even  if  they  permit  themselves  to  laugh  at  the  judi¬
cious  use  of  the  former.  It  is  ridiculous  enough  to  witness
an  editor  attempting  to  criticize  a  work  containing  nothing  but
facts,  without  mentioning,  one  of  those  facts — presuming  on
the  want  of  knowledge  on  the  part  of  his  readers,  which  he
has  carefully  fostered  for  so  many  years,  and  denouncing  the
laborious  investigator  of  truth  without  giving  any  reason  for
such  conduct,  but  leaving  us  to  deduce  our  own  conclusions
on  the  point  from  his  display  of  ignorance  and  insincerity.
In  this  article  misrepresentations  of  the  most  gross  kind
occur  again  and  again,  and  there  is  a  recklessness  of  asser¬
tion,  which  I  have  never  seen  surpassed  in  the  lowest  kind
of  penny-a-line  productions.  It  is  not  necessary  to  notice
the  personalities  in  which  this  article  abounds ;  your  space  is
far  too  valuable  to  be  occupied  with  remarks  on  such  con¬
temptible  trivialities.  Each  number  of  your  journal  contains
an  array  of  astounding  and  as  yet  inexplicable  facts,  and  they
require  on  the  part  of  all  careful  consideration  and  investiga¬
tion.  A  sneer  may  satisfy  the  vulgar  and  illiterate,  but  it
will  never  enlighten  them,  and  to  the  philosopher  nothing
can  be  more  annoying  than  an  attempt  to  laugh  down  what
cannot  be  explained.  What  possible  information  can  there
be  conveyed  to  medical  men  regarding  mesmeric  investiga¬
tions,  by  telling  them  that  the  editor  of  The  Zoist  ranks  in
the  same  category  “  as  Messrs.  Morrison,  Curtis,  Solomon,
and  Holloway ;”  that  the  object  for  which  the  facts  and  cogi¬
tations  of  your  contributors  are  inserted  in  your  pages  is
as  palpable  and  as  notorious  “  as  the  monster  advertisement-
vans  which  perambulate  Fleet  Street  and  the  Strand,” — that
£he  cover  of  your  journal  is  a  “  sort  of  whitey-brown  Macintosh
wrapper,” — and  that  the  vignette  on  your  title  page  is  on  a
par  with  the  “  choice  hieroglyphics  which  are  to  be  found  in
the  Vox  Stellarum ,  or  Moore’s  Prophetic  Almanack  ”  Are
the  medical  men  who  read  the  Medical  Times  taught  anything
by  such  insinuations  ?  Could  they  fancy  from  such  a  descrip¬
tion  that  the  journal  thus  designated  contained  some  of  the
most  important  physiological  facts  ever  communicated  to  the
profession ;  or,  that  upwards  of  four  hundred  surgical  opera¬
tions  performed  without  pain,  and  without  chloroform  or
ether,  are  chronicled  in  its  pages  ?  Or,  could  they  imagine
from  such  a  description  that  the  cases  are  recorded  by  some
of  the  most  enlightened  members  of  their  profession  ?  Would
any  man  believe  from  Dr.  Bushnan’s  insinuations  that  every
number  of  your  journal  for  the  last  two  years  contains  the


102


On  the  conduct  of  the  Medical  Times,  fyc.,


history  of  surgical  operations  performed  by  Dr.  Esdaile  of
Calcutta — operations  far  surpassing  in  boldness  and  dexterity
of  execution  anything  performed  in  the  hospitals  of  London,
and  which  cast  in  the  shade  all  that  Brodie  ever  did,  or  that
Miller  of  Edinburgh  ever  will  do?  Would  the  readers  of  the
Medical  Times  believe  that  the  “  soj*t  of  whitey-brown  Mack¬
intosh  wrapper”  contained  within  its  embrace  these  facts,
and  moreover  the  fact  that  an  hospital  has  been  opened  for
some  time  at  Calcutta  for  the  reception  of  patients,  who  come
from  all  parts  of  India  to  be  operated  on  in  a  state  of  mes¬
meric  insensibility,  and  that  this  hospital  is  supported  by
the  Government  of  India?  The  medical  men  of  England
are  not  aware  of  all  this.  Why?  Because  the  editors  of
the  journals,  which  profess  to  supply  them  with  information,
suppress  it  all,  and  with  a  species  of  infatuation  chuckle  over
the  apparent  success  of  their  short-sighted  policy,  and  still
consider  themselves  honest  men.  Alas  for  poor  human  na¬
ture,  if  these  individuals  are  to  be  taken  as  even  ordinary
specimens  of  the  race.  Alas  !  for  the  followers  of  Hippocrates
if  they  go  not  to  a  purer  fountain  for  their  mental  aliment
than  the  one  Dr.  Bushnan  presides  over.

The  man  who  publishes  the  scientific  statements  of  others,
and  from  want  of  sufficient  knowledge  suggests  a  false  ex¬
planation,  is  simply  contemptible,  we  pity  his  intellectual
barrenness  and  merely  refuse  to  consider  him  a  leader;  but
the  man  who  suppresses  statements  altogether,  who  does  not
record  in  the  journal  over  which  he  presides,  facts  bearing
powerfully  on  some  of  the  most  important  questions  which
interest  his  readers,  should  meet  not  only  with  the  reproba¬
tion  of  all  honest  men,  but  should  be  scouted  from  the  ranks
into  which  he  has  intruded  himself,  and  be  located  with  the
other  offenders,  who  are  considered  to  have  rendered  them¬
selves  amenable  to  the  penalties  of  our  criminal  law.

Perchance  a  stroke  of  the  pen  prostrates  the  intellect
which  intrudes  itself  feebly  and  unnecessarily  into  scientific
discussions,  but  a  vast  deal  of  labour  is  involved  in  the  at¬
tempt  to  enlighten  those  who  have  been  accustomed  to  hear  a
subject  mentioned  only  to  be  ridiculed,  and  from  whose  at¬
tention  all  the  important  facts  have  been  systematically  ex¬
cluded.  Ten  read  the  attack,  but  probably  only  one  of  this
number  meets  with  the  refutation.  This  is  a  safe  calculation,
and  right  well  Dr.  Bushnan  knows  it  to  be  so.

As  far  as  I  understand  the  principles  which  guide  the
conductors  of  your  journal,  and  the  correspondents  who  favour
you  with  their  contributions,  they  appear  to  be  influenced
by  a  strong  desire  not  to  give  merely  their  support  to  a  par-


by  Dr.  Engledue.


103


ticular  doctrine,  but  their  support  to  all  efforts  towards  the
attainment  of  truth,  regardless  of  the  effect  which  their  ex¬
ertions  may  have  on  established  systems.  In  a  subject  of
such  vast  importance,  and  involving  so  much  labour  and  in¬
vestigation,  as  mesmerism  undoubtedly  does,  the  co-operation
of  a  number  of  acute  thinkers  and  practised  observers  is
absolutely  necessary.  It'  is  only  by  such  a  combination  that
error  can  be  cast  aside  and  truth  ultimately  attained.  A
clear  stage  and  no  favour  is  emphatically  all  that  we  require,
for  we  know  that  perfect  freedom  of  discussion  is  an  essential
element  in  our  progress.  Why  then,  I  may  ask,  is  the  only
course  which  can  be  consistently  pursued,  resisted?  Why
does  Dr.  B.  rush  forward,  and  in  a  question  where  the  intel¬
lect  only  is  concerned,  wield  the  club  ?  Why  is  there  a  display
of  brute  force  wrhen  reason  and  candour  are  alone  required  ?
“  Established  opinions  are  so  interwoven  with  the  interests  of
individuals,  that  the  subversion  of  one  often  threatens  the
ruin  of  the  other.  Hence  the  energy  which  strains  every
nerve  in  their  support,  and  hence  much  of  the  rancour  with
which  the  slightest  deviation  is  pursued.”

I  have  noticed  the  article  in  the  Medical  Times  in  this
general  way,  because  it  was  utterly  impossible  and  unprofitable
to  bestow  more  time  upon  it.  I  turned  from  its  perusal  with
disgust,  and  knowing  from  many  years  of  investigation  that
mesmerism  is  true,  I  closed  the  number  of  the  journal,  and
cried,  “may  all  the  opponents  of  truth  be  equally  con¬
temptible.”

I  observe  in  a  notice  of  your  journal  in  The  Critic  of
February  1  st,  1850,  that  the  editor  is  not  pleased  with  the
exposure  of  the  conduct  of  the  medical  profession  by  Dr.
Elliotson  and  others.  He  says  that  “  the  usefulness  of  The
Zoist  is  not  a  little  curtailed  by  the  repulsive  and  unphilo-
sophical  temper  too  frequently  betrayed.”  For  my  own  part
I  can  see  nothing  “repulsive  or  unphilosophic”  in  exposing
the  ignorance  and  irrationality  of  a  body  of  individuals,  who
for  many  years  have  used  all  their  efforts  to  mislead  the
public  on  a  scientific  question.  Are  medical  men,  who  ought
from  their  education  to  act  far  otherwise,  to  promulgate  the
grossest  untruths  and  inconsistencies,  and  no  one  step  formed
to  expose  the  course  which  they  are  pursuing  ?  Men  of  edu¬
cation  and  high  position  are  daily  using  the  most  dishonest
means  for  the  purpose  of  retarding  the  progress  of  mes¬
merism, — such  proceedings  are  “repulsive  and  unphiloso¬
phic,”  but  surely  the  plain  statement  of  all  this  is  not  so.
When  the  scourge  is  applied  we  expect  the  recipient  to  wince,
(vide  Medical  Times,)  but  it  does  not  become  The  Critic,  a


104


On  the  conduct  of  the  Medical  Times ,  fyc.,

professed  supporter  of  mesmerism,  to  misrepresent  us,  and
to  tell  its  readers  that  “  we  abuse  the  whole  medical  profes¬
sion  for  not  believing  and  embracing  mesmerism  cum  salto
Those  members  of  the  medical  profession  have  been  exposed
who  misrepresent  facts,  and  give  an  opinion  without  previous
investigation — who,  through  life,  have  opposed  new  truths  as
long  as  it  was  safe  to  do  so,  but  who  invariably  alter  their
course  in  time,  and  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  keep  some  little
credit  for  consistency — who  are  worldly  wise,  but  not  “  honest
and  true” — who  persist  in  keeping  back  information,  because
the  publication  of  such  information  would  damage  their  own
reputation — who  denounce  the  laborious  investigator  of  phy¬
siological  phenomena  as  “a  charlatan,”  and  the  individual
who  loses  a  fourth  of  his  body  while  in  a  state  of  insensibility
as  “  an  impostor.”  These  are  the  individuals  who  have  been
exposed  to  the  gaze  of  the  world,  and  right  well  they  deserve
it ;  but  when  The  Critic  states  that  the  writers  in  your  journal
“  abuse  the  medical  profession  for  not  believing  and  embracing
mesmerism  cum  salto,”  all  I  can  say  is  that  the  statement  is
devoid  of  all  truth.

Before  closing  this  letter  there  is  another  individual  to
whom  I  would  direct  attention.  A  short  time  since,  Mr.
Hunt  published  a  work  entitled  Panthea,  the  Spirit  of  Nature,
and  which  was  reviewed  in  the  Athenaeum.  The  writer  of
this  review  introduced  the  following  remark:  “We  would
have  been  better  satisfied  to  have  seen  mesmerism  introduced
among  other  mental  delusions,  than  to  find  it  used  as  the
fly-wheel  to  carry  the  other  parts  of  the  machinery  round
the  f  dead  points’  of  the  work,  if  such  a  mechanical  phrase
be  permitted.”  This  was  quite  enough  to  frighten  Mr.
Hunt.  One  gentle  tap  from  the  editorial  wand  of  Mr.  Dilke,
and  forthwith  Mr.  Hunt  forgets  his  philosophy  and  prostrates
himself  with  becoming  submission  to  the  Lord  of  the  Athe¬
naeum.  In  fear  and  trembling  he  recants,  and  with  a  ser¬
vility  not  to  be  surpassed,  he  addresses  the  following  letter
to  the  editor,  which  appears  in  the  next  number.  The  italics
are  in  the  original.

“  Fearing  that  it  may  be  inferred  from  your  review  of  Panthea,
the  Spirit  of  Nature,  that  I  am  disposed  to  regard  mesmerism  as
a  fact,  since  I  have  not,  you  say,  included  it  4  among  other  mental
delusions ;  grant  me  the  privilege  of  explaining  that  I  have  used
the  manipulations  of  the  mesmeriser  only  as  an  adjunct  to  other
forms  of  incantation  employed  by  one  in  whom  I  intend  to  repre¬
sent  the  visionary  philosophy  of  some  of  the  continental  schools.

*  SaltO  !  Where  did  the  Critic  learn  Latin  ?  Even  CUM  saltu  would  be
bad  Latin  in  this  sentence. — Zoist.


by  Dr.  Engledue.


105


I  thought  that  it  would,  therefore,  necessarily  be  included  in  the
delusions  which  it  was  my  object  to  show  as  dangerous  to  the  young
and  ardent  investigator  of  natural  phenomena.  Admitting  that  there
are  some  physiological  phenomena  of  a  peculiar  character  connected
with  the  so-called  animal  magnetism,  which  may  be  embraced  among
those  matters  “  not  yet  dreamt  of  in  our  philosophy.”  I  cannot
but  regret  that  any  work  from  my  pen  should  be  supposed  to  favour
a  belief  in  its  mysteries.  After  a  long,  careful,  and,  I  hope,  un¬
prejudiced  examination  of  some  ‘  striking  instances'  of  mesmerism,

I  can  only  come  to  the  conclusion  that  its  very  few  real  phenomena
are  not  connected  with  any  physical  cause, — and  that  self-delusion,
and,  I  fear,  often  inexcusable  fraud,  mask  the  small  amount  of  truth
upon  which  it  lingers.

“Robert  Hunt.”

Oh,  Robert  Hunt,  how  art  thou  fallen  !  I  know  that  you
believe  in  mesmerism  :  I  know  the  individual  who  taught  you
to  mesmerise ;  and,  I  know  that  you  mesmerised  your  own
child  for  disease.  You  state  that  you  use  in  your  work  ‘*'the
manipulations  of  the  mesmeriser  as  an  adjunct  to  other  forms
of  incantation.”  What,  may  I  ask,  was  the  form  of  incanta¬
tion  which  you  used  over  your  own  child  ?  You  state  that
you  thought  mesmerism  would  “  necessarily  be  included  in
the  delusions  which  it  was  my  object  to  show  as  dangerous  to
the  young  and  ardent  investigator  of  natural  phenomena ;”
and  yet  you  admit,  in  the  next  sentence,  “  that  there  are  some
physiological  phenomena  of  a  peculiar  character  connected
with  it.”  Permit  me  to  ask  whether  “  physiological  pheno¬
mena”  are  to  be  considered  “  natural  phenomena or,  if  so,
whether  the  latter  are  “  delusions  ?”  You  regret  that  any
work  from  your  pen  “  should  be  supposed  to  favour  a  belief
in  its  mysteries.”  Permit  me  to  ask  whether  the  “  physio¬
logical  phenomena,”  which  you  do  admit,  are  not  mysteries.
They  are  so  to  me,  and  I  shrewdly  suspect  they  are  so  to  you,
and  if  so,  then  you  avowedly  favour  a  belief  in  the  mysteries
of  mesmerism — a  course  which,  in  obedience  to  the  commands
of  the  Athenaeum,  you  “  regret .”  You  admit  that  there  are
“  some  physiological  phenomena  of  a  peculiar  character,”  and
then  you  say  that  you  “  can  only  come  to  the  conclusion,  that
its  very  few  real  phenomena  are  not  connected  with  any  phy¬
sical  cause.”  You  have  written  two  works,*  in  which  you
show  that  all  the  phenomena  of  nature,  which  are  daily  pre¬
sented  to  us,  are  the  result  of  physical  causes,  and  yet  you
stultify  yourself  and  your  philosophy,  and  assert  that  the
“  very  few  real  phenomena,”  which  you  have  discovered  in
mesmerism,  are  not  connected  with  any  physical  cause.  You

*  The  Poetry  of  Science,  and  Panthea.


VOL.  VIII.


I


106


Books  received.


admit  that  the  “  very  few  real  phenomena”  are  "  physiological
phenomena.”  Permit  me,  therefore,  to  ask,  if  they  result
not  from  physical  causes,  what  they  do  result  from  ?  What
phenomena  are  there  which  are  not  connected  with  physical
causes  ?  But  I  am  really  lost  in  amazement.  Where  am  I  ?
Let  me  see  : —

Since  it  is  questionable  whether  “  physiological  pheno¬
mena”  are  “  natural  phenomena,”  and  whether  both  are  not
“  delusions” — since  it  is  questionable  whether  “  physiological
phenomena”  are  “  mysteries”  or  not — since  “  real  phenomena”
do  not  depend  on  “  physical  causes” — and  since  Robert  Hunt
regrets  that  his  pen  should  chronicle  his  belief  in  the  few
real  phenomena  he  has  discovered,  I  really  scarcely  know
how  to  conclude  my  remarks  on  this  extraordinary  recanta¬
tion.  It  is  certainly  without  parallel.  After  this  the  recan¬
tation  of  Galileo  before  the  Inquisition,  or  the  recantation
of  William  Lawrence  the  surgeon,  before  the  governors  of
Bridewell  and  Bethlem,  sink  into  perfect  insignificancy.

I  remain,  Sir,

Your  obedient  Servant,

Southsea.  W.  C.  Engledue,  M.D.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Contributions  to  Mental  Pathology.  With  Introductory  Observations,  con¬
taining  the  past  and  present  state  of  the  Insane  in  Ceylon,  &c.  By  James
George  Davey,  M.D.  London:  Churchill.  1850.

This  is  a  book  fraught  with  much  instruction.  In  the  first  place,  we  have
seldom  met  with  a  more  weighty  testimony  to  the  truth — now  for  the  first  time
beginning  to  be  generally  recognized — -that  the  mortality  of  human  beings  is  re¬
tarded  or  accelerated  in  direct  ratio  to  the  observance  or  neglect  of  a  few  simple
laws  which  prescribe  pure  air,  wholesome  and  sufficient  food,  exercise  and  cheerful
occupation,  as  the  necessary  condition  of  health;  clearly  shewing  the  grave  respon¬
sibility  which  rests  upon  those  to  whom  is  entrusted  the  care  of  those  deprived  of
liberty,  whether  through  crime  or  disease.  Seldom  have  we  met  with  ^  more
striking  example  of  the  fearful  facility  with  which  human  life  may  be  cut  short
and  a  frightful  artificial  mortality  created,  than  the  60  per  cent,  of  deaths  with
cures  0,  which  occurred  amongst  the  unfortunate  lunatics  immured  in  the  Lesser
Hospital  at  Hendelle,  in  1843.

In  the  second  place,  this  book  portrays  in  vivid  colours  the  extent  to  which
every  generous,  manly,  and  humane  emotion  becomes  stunted,  blighted,  and
depressed  by  little,  petty,  paltry,  official  jealousies,  and  a  state  of  mind  induced
so  miserably  narrow  and  selfish,  that  duty  and  humanity  are  alike  sacrificed  at
the  shrine  of  egoism.

The  state  of  the  insane  at  Ceylon  being  so  bad  as  to  force  itself  upon  general
attention,  and  the  more  intelligent  and  humane  of  the  colonists  being  convinced
that  filth  and  coercion  were  by  no  means  necessary  or  desirable  attendants  upon
the  treatment  of  lunatics,  an  application  was  made  to  Lord  Stanley  to  furnish  the
colony  with  an  individual  conversant  with  the  most  improved  mode  of  treatment
employed  in  the  mother  country,  and  competent  to  introduce  and  carry  out  the
same  system  at  Columbo.  Dr.  Davey,  who  had  been  for  four  years  one  of  the


Books  received .


107


medical  officers  at  Hanwell,  was  selected  by  his  lordship  for  this  task,  and  sent
out  as  superintendent  of  the  insane  at  Ceylon.

“  Never,  never  can  I  forget,”  says  Dr.  Davey,  “  the  impression  made  on
my  mind  on  first  visiting  the  lunatics  in  confinement  at  the  Lesser  Hospital  and
at  the  Hulsdorf  Jail.  Such  misery,  such  squalor,  such  neglect,  I  had  never  seen
before.  My  mind  naturally  reverted  to  my  past  experience,  and  my  imagination
recalled  certain  shadows  of  horror  and  dismay  I  had  some  six  years  previously
witnessed  in  the  discharge  of  certain  duties  belonging  to  my  office  as  surgeon
under  the  new  Poor  Law  Act.  But  the  scenes  then  presented  to  me  were  as
nothing  in  comparison  with  these  at  Columbo.  One  would  have  thought  the
wretched  inmates  of  the  miserable  hovels  or  cells  had  been  sentenced  to  die  by
the  falling  of  the  walls  and  roofs  about  them,  so  rotten  and  insecure  were  they  ;
that  is,  if  the  patients  ever  managed  to  survive  the  exaggerated  physical  discomfort
which  everywhere  surrounded  and  oppressed  them.”

Through  the  indefatigable  exertions  of  Dr.  Davey,  the  annual  mortality  was
diminished  from  33  per  cent,  to  23  per  cent.,  and  then  to  15  per  cent. ;  whilst
the  cures  were  contemporaneously  increased,  or  rather  brought  up  from  0  to
nearly  40  per  cent.

Unfortunately,  however,  the  greater  the  improvement  wrought  by  Dr.  Davey
in  the  condition  of  the  unfortunate  lunatic,  the  greater  was  shewn  to  have  been  the
supineness  and  neglect  of  those  under  whose  care  he  had  been  placed  prior  to  Dr.
Davey’s  arrival.  Every  additional  achievement  of  his  in  lessening  the  mortality
and  increasing  the  cures,  was  felt  to  be  an  additional  reproach  to  the  apathy  or
ignorance  of  his  predecessors.  From  the  first  moment  of  Dr.  Davey’s  arrival  he
appears  to  have  been  received  with  the  utmost  jealousy  by  Dr.  Rowe,  the  prin¬
cipal  civil  medical  officer  of  the  colony,  who  felt  his  authority  superseded,  and
the  mode  in  which  he  had  performed  his  duty  tacitly  censured,  by  the  new  ap¬
pointment.  Not  only  were  Dr.  Davey’s  efforts  to  ameliorate  and  improve  the
condition  of  the  lunatics  systematically  thwarted  and  obstructed  by  this  gentle¬
man  and  his  friends,  but  every  engine  of  dirty  intrigue  which  malice  and  jealousy
united  could  suggest  was  put  in  action  to  procure  his  removal  from  the  colony ;
and  after  labouring  for  three  years  they  induced  Lord  Torrington  to  recommend
the  cancelling  of  the  appointment  to  the  Home  Government,  on  the  plea  of  eco¬
nomy  ;  and  Lord  Stanley,  who  knew  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was  made,
being  no  longer  chief  of  the  Colonial  Office,  the  recommendation  was  listened  to
and  carried  out.

Dr.  Davey  has  certainly  been  very  ill-treated.  Induced  to  resign  a  decent
competence  for  life  in  his  native  land,  by  the  offer  of  a  permanent  appointment,
with  an  increased  income,  at  Ceylon — after  moving  his  wife  and  family  from
their  comfortable  home  at  Hanwell  to  this  distant  colony — at  the  expiration  of
three  years  he  is  unceremoniously  dismissed,  with  the  wretched  compensation  of
one  year’s  salary.  Certainly  the  Home  Government  have  broken  faith  with  Dr.
Davey,  and  perpetrated  a  great  and  glaring  injustice,  which  they  will  do  well  to
remedy.

Practical  Instruction  in  Animal  Magnetism.  By  J.  P.  F.  Deleuze.  Trans¬
lated  by  T.  C.  Hartshorn.  Fourth  Edition.  With  Notes,  and  a  Life,  by  Dr.
Foissac.  London.  1850.

Mr.  Bailliere  has  rendered  a  service  to  the  English  public  by  reprinting  the
American  translation  of  this  well-known  and  excellent  book.  We  think  Deleuze
occasionally  in  error ;  but  the  book  is  full  of  truth  and  wisdom,  and  is  the  work
of  one  of  the  best  of  men.  Everybody  should  read  it.

The  Mesmerist’s  Manual  of  Phenomena  and  Practice  ;  with  Directions  for
applying  Mesmerism  to  the  Cure  of  Diseases,  and  the  methods  of  producing
Mesmeric  Phenomena.  Intended  for  domestic  use  and  the  instruction  of  be¬
ginners.  By  George  H.  Barth.  London.  1850.

This  is  a  modestly  and  honestly  written  book,  full  of  important  information  ;
and  also  deserving  to  be  in  the  hands  of  everybody.

The  Celestial  Telegraph ;  or,  Secrets  of  the  Life  to  come  revealed  through


108


Books  received.


Magnetism :  wherein  the  existence,  the  form,  the  occupations,  of  the  Soul  after
its  separation  from  the  Body  are  proved  by  many  years’  experiments,  by  the
means  of  eight  Ecstatic  Somnambulists,  who  had  eighty  perceptions  of  thirty-six
Deceased  Persons  of  various  conditions.  A  description  of  them,  their  conversa¬
tion,  &c.,  with  proofs  of  their  existence  in  the  spiritual  world.  By  L.  Alph.
Cahagnet.  London.  1850.

Tracts  on  Christian  Socialism.  No.  1.

The  Chrono-Thermalist ;  or,  People’s  Medical  Enquirer.  London.  1850.

Woolmer’s  Exeter  and  Plymouth  Gazette.  January  19.

The  Morning  Chronicle.  March  11.

Medical  Repository,  February,  1816;  New  York  :  containing  an  account  of
a  case  of  Idiopathic  or  spontaneous  Double  Consciousness.

The  Principles  of  Punishment,  on  which  the  Mark  System  of  Prison  Disci¬
pline  is  advocated.  Respectfully  addressed  to  the  Committee  of  the  House  of
Commons  now  investigating  the  subject.  By  Captain  Maconochie,  R.N.,  K.H.
London :  Ollivier.  1850.


The  Editors  regret  the  unavoidable  postponement  of  the  communications  by
Mr.  Davey,  Mr.  Holland,  Dr.  Storer,  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  Mr.  Cattell,  and
Dr.  Davey.

***  All  communications  must  be  addressed  to  the  care  of  Mr.  Bailliere,  219,
Regent  Street ,  for  the  Editors :  and  it  is  earnestly  requested  that  they  be  sent  a
month  before  the  day  of  publication.


ERRATA.

No.  XXVIII.,  p.  431,  line  16,  for  “  disarming,”  read  “discerning.”

p.  375,  line  1  of  foot  note,  dele  the  first  word  “  as.”
p.  348,  foot  note,  line  10,  for  “  man”  read  “  men.”
p.  403,  line  22,  for  “  figures  and  half  women,”  read  “  figure  and  half
woman.”


iBrsmntc  Jnfirwari).

A  GENERAL  MEETING  OF  THE  SUBSCRIBERS

Will  be  held  at  the  Infirmary,

No.  9,  BEDFORD  STREET,  BEDFORD  SQUARE,

On  the  FIRST  MONDAY  in  MAY,  at  3  o’clock  precisely.


ZOIST.


THE

No.  XXX.


JULY ;  1850.


I.  Case  of  Insanity  cured  with  the  assistance  of  Mesmerism.

Communicated  by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby,  Vicar  of

Flixton,  Suffolk.

“  I  consider  the  direct  treatment  of  any  form  of  insanity  by  mere  medicinal
application  to  be  very  limited .” — Evidence  of  Dr.  Conolly.

“  Quod  petis,  hie  est.” — Horatii  Epist.,  lib.  i.,  xi.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Flixton,  April,  1850.
Sir.— I  was  lately  glancing  over  the  Report  of  the  Commis¬
sioners  on  Lunacy,  1847,  when  my  eye  fell  upon  that  instruc¬
tive  passage  in  Dr.  Conolly’s  evidence,  which  I  have  prefixed
as  a  motto  to  this  paper.  The  position  which  Dr.  Conolly
holds  in  Hanwell  Asylum,  the  experimental  knowledge  which
he  must  have  acquired,  and  the  reputation  he  enjoys  within
and  without  his  profession,  all  give  importance  to  his  opinions
on  the  mournful  topic  of  insanity,  and  I  therefore  examined
his  observations  with  attention.  They  are  short  but  cogent.
And  amongst  other  remarks,  he  states  that  "all  sedatives  are
of  uncertain  effect,  and  sometimes  of  none  “  sedatives,”  he
repeats  again  within  a  few  sentences,  “  are  occasionally  most
efficacious,  but  also  most  uncertain  in  their  effect”*

Now  one  of  my  first  feelings,  on  the  perusal  of  this  evi¬
dence,  was  that  of  surprise  (to  say  nothing  of  deep  regret),
that,  under  such  circumstances,  any  single  remedy,  however
unpopular  or  discredited,  could  be  set  aside  or  forgotten  as
not  worth  a  trial  or  not  requiring  a  thought.  Of  all  the  visi¬
tations,  with  which  God’s  providence  has  afflicted  man,  in¬
sanity  is,  perhaps,  the  most  appalling ;  and  for  the  treatment

*  Appendix  to  Report  of  Commissioners,  p.  444.

VOL.  VIII.  K


110  Insanity  cured  with  the  assistance  of  Mesmerism.

of  this  malady  “  under  any  form  ”  we  have  the  assertion  of
Dr.  Conolly  himself — the  most  competent  of  witnesses,  that
the  resources  of  medicine  “  are  very  limited”  and  that  “  seda¬
tives  are  sometimes  of  no  effect.”  If  that,  then,  be  the  case,
why  should  a  humane  man  decline  to  make  an  occasional  ex¬
periment 1  with  a  particular  system,  which  is  said  to  be  attended
with  successful  results  ?  Granted,  for  mere  argument's  sake,
that  an  exaggerated  estimate  of  its  value  may  have  been  en¬
tertained  by  some  of  its  advocates :  still,  why  should  the  very
existence  of  this  alleged  remedy  be  thus  practically  ignored  ?
To  me,  this  indifference  respecting  mesmerism, in  the  treatment
of  the  insane,  is  inexplicable,  unless  a  sense  of  what  we  owe  to  our
fellow  creatures  is  to  be  regarded  as  moonshine,  compared  with
the  ascendancy  of  our  own  opinions.  If,  indeed,  the  medical
art  were  lavishly  rich  in  its  means  and  appliances  for  the  re¬
storation  of  the  insane,  the  neglect  of  a  superfluous  novelty
would  be  intelligible  enough  :  or,  if  we  were  in  the  habit  of
exclaiming  to  practitioners  in  lunacy,  “  Alter  all  your  systems,
destroy  all  your  drugs,  burn  every  prescription,  and  trust  to
mesmerism,  and  mesmerism  only,”  such  self-magnifying  pre¬
sumption  might  be  very  naturally  met  with  silence ;  but  we
say  nothing  of  the  kind.  On  the  contrary,  the  language  of
all  true  cerebral  physiologists  is  that  of  cordial  approbation
and  support  of  those  moral  and  milder  methods  of  treatment
which  of  late  years  have  obtained  in  the  cure  of  the  insane  ;
and  all  that  we  say  is,  “ Add  mesmerism  to  them.”  “You
aim,”  we  observe  to  Dr.  Conolly  and  his  coadjutors,  “  at  calm¬
ing  and  soothing  your  patients,  and  mesmerism  is  peculiarly
calming  and  soothing  in  its  effects :  you  require  sleep  towards
the  repression  of  cerebral  activity,  and  mesmerism  is  emi¬
nently  efficacious  in  inducing  somnolency.  Give,  then,  your
patients  every  chance.  Try  mesmerism — if  you  so  prefer  it —
conjointly  with  your  narcotics,  and  as  an  adjuvant  to  them  :
try  it  occasionally  without  them  :  try  it  when  they  fail :  try
it  silently  and  by  yourselves,  if  a  fear  of  the  ‘  College'  makes
such  a  course  expedient :  only  try  it  at  some  time  or  by  some
means,  and  do  not,  in  the  name  of  humanity  do  not,  refuse  a
miserable  victim  even  the  faintest  prospect  of  restoration  from
the  heaviest  of  calamities,  because  your  own  prepossessions
and  education  run  so  counter  to  the  system.”

Happily,  these  words  of  ours  do  not  fall  unheeded  on  every
ear.  Happily,  there  is  a  kindly  physician  here  and  there
who  will  not  despise  the  auxiliary  hand  of  unprofessional  assist¬
ance  :  and  happily  there  are  a  few  good  and  gentle  hearts
ready  to  surrender  themselves  and  their  time  to  a  labour  of
Christian  love,  risking  on  the  one  hand  all  the  blame  and  bur-


Communicated  by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


Ill


den  of  a  failure,  and  reaping  on  the  other  none  of  the  credit
of  success.  And  it  is  a  tale  of  this  description  that  I  now
propose  to  tell.  I  have  received  permission  to  communicate
the  following  case,  that  the  example  it  affords  may  serve  as  a
stimulus  to  other  parties  similarly  circumstanced ;  though  I
am  not  the  less  anxious  to  narrate  it,  that  the  readers  of  The
Zoist  may  learn  what  benevolence  and  self-devotion  can  ac¬
complish  even  under  most  discouraging  circumstances.  Be¬
fore  mesmerism  was  tried  in  the  following  instance,  suicide
or  the  mad-house  seemed  the  only  alternatives.  Medical
treatment  had  failed  in  removing  the  symptoms ;  and,  though
medicinal  applications  were  not  laid  aside,  as  I  believe,  till  a
restoration  to  sanity  was  completed,  so  that,  consequently,  we
are  not  enabled  to  decide  to  which  of  the  different  systems
the  main  amount  of  the  benefit  received  is  really  to  be  ascribed ;
still  the  point  to  notice  in  this  case  (and,  let  it  be  added,  in
many  others  also),  is,  that,  coincidently  with  the  commencement
of  the  mesmeric  sittings,  the  alleviation  of  the  symptoms  set  in,
and  that,  in  proportion  to  the  labours  and  the  care  expended
by  the  mesmeriser,  in  that  same  proportion  the  recovery  of
the  patient  seemed  to  advance.  To  the  minds,  therefore,  of
many  persons,  the  strongest  presumption  will  exist,  that  to
the  mesmeric  treatment  exclusively  the  following  cure  may  be
attributed :  but  mesmerisers  can  afford  to  understate  their
case,  and  to  allow  to  other  attendant  systems  their  fair  share
of  credit.  Let  it  therefore  be  understood,  that,  in  bringing
forward  the  following  particulars,  I  am  simply  directing  the
attention  of  practitioners  in  lunacy  to  the  auxiliary  and  sooth¬
ing  powers  of  the  mesmeric  art ;  and,  though,  in  attempting
no  more  than  even  this,  I  fear  that,  as  “  only  a  clergyman,”  I
shall  stand  amenable  in  their  eyes  to  the  charge  of  imperti¬
nence  and  ignorance,  I  venture,  with  every  deference,  to
inform  them  that  the  following  is  no  isolated  case,  and  that,
interesting  and  important  as  it  is,  the  annals  of  mesmerism
can  yet  furnish  more  of  the  same  description.

It  was,  then,  at  the  latter  end  of  last  summer,  that  I
received  a  letter  from  a  lady,  with  whom  I  have  not  yet  the
honour  of  being  acquainted,  and  whose  name,  for  obvious
reasons,  it  is  not  necessary  to  publish :  neither  shall  I  state
the  part  of  England  in  which  she  resides ;  but  shall  admit  at
once  that  I  have  never  seen  the  patient  referred  to,  and  that
I  know  no  more  of  the  facts  hereafter  described  than  what
I  have  learnt  by  letter.  At  the  same  time  your  readers  may
rest  assured,  from  my  guarantee,  of  the  correctness  of  the
statement.  The  family  of  the  lady  herself  is  of  the  very
highest  respectability  in  their  own  countv ;  her  own  narrative

k  2


112  Insanity  cured  with  the  assistance  of  Mesmerism.

gives  internal  evidence  as  to  her  character ;  and  the  physician,
whose  letter  is  quoted  at  the  end,  and  who  was  consulted  in
the  case,  is  of  honourable  standing  in  his  profession.  More¬
over,  the  lady  herself  says,  “  that  any  one  desirous  of  knowing
more  of  the  details  of  the  case,  with  a  view  to  the  relief  of
the  like  misery ,  may  be  referred  to  me  by  letter,  and  will  re¬
ceive  all  the  information  and  encouragement  that  I  can  give.”
With  these  preliminary  remarks,  I  proceed  to  the  case.

“  To  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.

“  Sir, — A  deep  and  mutual  interest  in  the  great  cause  of
humanity  must  plead  my  apology  for  addressing  you.  I  am
just  reading  the  last  pages  of  your  work,  which  treats  of  the
powers  and  uses  of  mesmerism,  which  I  have  for  some  time
past  regarded  as  one  of  the  greatest  lights  and  most  signal
mercies  yet  vouchsafed  to  man.  In  your  work  you  advise
that  it  should  not  be  practised,  even  as  a  remedy,  without
the  superintendance  of  a  medical  man.  But  in  how  few  cases
is  this  possible !  The  medical  attendant  of  the  patient,  to
whose  case  I  am  about  to  refer,  like  many  who  have  come  under
your  lash,  scoffs  at  mesmerism ;  and  1  might  look  long  and
in  vain  in  this  part  of  the  world  for  support  or  guidance  from
the  ‘  faculty*  in  such  a  cause.  Will  you,  then,  forgive  me,
if,  not  knowing  where  to  turn,  I  venture  to  ask  you,  as  a
clergyman,  and  as  the  author  of  such  a  work  as  that  I  have
been  reading,  to  direct  me  under  the  following  circumstances.

“A  young  woman  in  our  village,  24  years  of  age,  has
been  suffering  for  more  than  a  month  under  great  nervous
excitement,  describing  herself  as  compelled  to  talk,  and  as
having  great  misery  at  her  heart,  with  a  sense  of  physical
deadness  there ,  but  with  fearful  thoughts  in  the  brain.  A
religious  tract,  embracing  certain  strong  opinions,  was  put
into  her  hands  some  seven  or  eight  years  since.  She  dis¬
believed  it — laughed  at  it — laid  it  aside — and  forgot  it  till
early  this  year,  when  it  was  recalled  to  her  by  a  passage  in
the  Bible,  and  she  has  ever  since  laboured  under  the  convic¬
tion  that  she  has,  without  knowing  it,  committed  the  sin
against  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  her  hope  in  eternity  is

quenched.  The  doctor,  whom  she  saw  in  - ,  said

that  it  was  ‘ religious  monomania,  and  might  end  in  suicide;*
and  advised  that  she  should  be  consigned  to  a  lunatic  asylum :
but  whilst  there  is  a  hope  of  her  recovery  by  other  treatment
I  cannot  bring  myself  to  follow  this  advice.  Her  sleep  fails
of  course ;  and  she  describes  herself  as  having  '  no  feeling  of
a  head.*  She  remains  sometimes  long  silent;  because,  as


Communicated  by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby*  113

her  sister  says,  she  would  rather  bite  out  her  tongue  than
speak  the  bad  thoughts  that  arise.  When  she  was  first  at¬
tacked,  she  spent  all  her  time  in  prayer,  never  being  without
her  prayer-book  or  hymns.  She  is  weaker  in  body  than  she
was.  May  I  ask,  then,  if  this  is  a  case  for  the  soothing
powers  which  we  both  feel  to  be  so  precious  ?  Is  this  the
sort  of  case  that  has  ever  been  cured  by  mesmerism  ?  Might
I  venture  to  attempt  it  for  her?  You  say  that  mesmerism
is  always  safe  in  its  results :  is  there,  then,  any  reason  which
should  deter  me  from  applying  it  in  her  case,  independently
of  whatever  medicine  she  may  be  taking;  and  of  course
without  mention  of  your  name  ?  If  ever  there  were  a  case
for  benevolent  exertion,  this  seems  to  be  one :  for  nothing
can  be  more  sad  than  the  thought  of  sending  this  poor  young
creature  to  an  asylum, — to  make  her,  perhaps,  a  confirmed
lunatic.  It  seems  to  me,  that,  if  she  could  have  the  sleep
which  you  describe  as  of  such  healing  powers,  all  might  be
well.  Knowing  you,  as  I  do,  through  your  work,  I  feel  that
perhaps  I  ought  not  to  offer  an  apology  for  seeking  your  di¬
rection  and  encouragement.  Let  me  hear  from  you,  I  entreat
you,  with  the  least  possible  delay,  for  days  are  most  precious
in  a  case  of  this  sort.

“  I  am.  Sir,

“Your  obedient  Servant,

(C  »

'  •

The  point  to  notice  in  the  above  interesting  letter,  is,
that  the  medical  attendant  thought  that  this  case  might  end
in  suicide ,  and  recommended  that  the  patient  should  be  sent
to  a  lunatic  asylum.  Sleep,  it  will  also  be  observed,  had
failed.  I  immediately  replied  to  my  correspondent,  recom¬
mending  that  mesmerism  should  be  at  once  employed,  and
in  conjunction  with  the  medicinal  prescriptions ;  urging  her
to  commence  the  case,  and  giving  her  instructions  for  the
treatment ;  and  authorizing  her,  if  it  could  be  of  service,  to
make  any  use  she  wished  of  my  name.  Though  I  consider
that  in  cases  of  severe  illness  medical  superintendence  is  al¬
ways  desirable  when  mesmerism  is  tried,  still  it  is  not  always
attainable ;  and  under  such  circumstances  the  mesmeriser
must  act  on  his  own  judgment,  not  superseding  the  “  doctor,”
but  simply  employing  the  power  as  a  useful  auxiliary.  I  very
shortly  received  the  following  reply : —

“  Dear  Sir, — To  say  that  I  thank  you  is  to  say  little.
You  have  lightened  my  burden  of  anxious  responsibility,  and


114  Insanity  cured  with  the  assistance  of  Mesmerism.

I  wish  gratefully  to  acknowledge  your  letter,  and  your  offer
of  farther  suggestions.  I  have  delayed  answering  you  till
after  the  first  sitting,  of  which  I  shall  now  give  you  an
account.

“  After  a  few  passes  I  bade  my  patient  close  her  eyes  lest
she  should  take  any  alarm,  and  in  about  ten  minutes  her
head  began  to  droop,  whether  from  natural  sleep  or  otherwise
I  cannot  tell.  A  sudden  noise  roused  her.  I  continued  the
passes  and  she  seemed  again  asleep,  when  some  one  came
loudly  and  quickly  into  the  room,  causing  a  second  disturb¬
ance  ;  but,  in  compliance  with  your  suggestions,  I  desisted
at  the  end  of  the  half-hour.  The  patient  was  not  then  asleep,
but  replied  to  my  question  of  what  she  felt,  ‘that  it  made
her  feel  very  sleepy,  and  took,  as  she  thought,  something
from  the  lightness  of  her  head/  I  told  her  to  put  on  her
bonnet,  and  return  home  with  her  sister,  and  go  to  bed  as
soon  as  she  could ;  and  she  left  me  still  feeling  very  drowsy,
and  slept  well  the  early  part  of  the  night,  which  however  is
not  the  only  instance.

“  I  remarked  that  my  fingers  trembled  slightly  at  first,
and  I  doubted  whether  I  was  a  fit  person  to  undertake  the
case.  I  was  alone,  and  unsupported  by  any  one  around  me ;
this,  and  the  seriousness  of  the  case,  might,  in  a  measure
account  for  the  trembling.  However,  I  remembered  that
calmness  was  insisted  upon,  and  as  I  commanded  myself,  and
threw  myself  into  my  work,  my  hands  grew  steady.  When  as
A.  B.  (as  I  shall  call  her)  seemed  to  sleep,  my  feeling  became
one  of  the  most  earnest  and  calm  joy.

“You  may  imagine  that  the  interruption  vexed  me;  but
still  more  the  consequences ;  for  I  have  been  remonstrated
with  as  ‘  doing  a  thing  upon  which  I  can  scarcely  ask  God's
blessing/ — as  ‘ practising  upon  an  unsuspecting  creature  who
relies  upon  me  with  almost  the  simplicity  of  childhood, — as
doing  this  without  medical  sanction,  and  tampering  with  new
means,  and  being  uncertain  whether  I  am  a  fit  person  to
undertake  the  case,  and  also  being  uncertain  of  what  amount
of  injury  I  may  inflict ,  or  may  myself  incur,  &c.,  &c.'  All
these  remarks,  coming  as  they  do  from  one  whose  feeling  of
right  I  have  every  reason  to  respect,  are  enough  to  shake  me,
being  all  alone  in  the  matter ;  however,  I  have  acted  simply
in  the  confidence  of  your  assurance  that  ‘mesmerism  was
safe /  ”

(My  fair  correspondent  next  put  a  variety  of  questions  to
me  respecting  sundry  difficulties  and  contingencies,  with  which,
like  most  young  mesmerisers,  she  had  been  perplexing  her-


Communicated  by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


115


self.  Could  I  guarantee  her  against  so  and  so  ?  What  was
to  be  done  in  such  a  case  ?  &c.,  &c.  Several  religious  scruples
were  also  adverted  to.)

“  But,  supposing  all  my  perplexities  to  be  groundless,  a
point,  in  which  you  might  yet  help  me,  is  this.  A.  B.  is  now
going  on  with  the  medical  treatment,  which  has  been  advised
for  her  as  a  temporary  remedy,  till  we  could  arrange  for  plac¬
ing  her  in  an  asylum  :  at  the  close  of  this  week,  we  shall  have
the  opportunity  of  seeing  a  physician,  who  has  the  care  of
lunatics,  and  from  whom  I  shall  be  able  to  obtain  an  opinion.
Perhaps,  if  he  could  be  assured  of  the  safety  of  mesmerism,
he  might  be  glad  of  so  good  an  occasion  of  seeing  it  tried ;
and,  his  concurrence  being  obtained,  my  friends  probably
would  no  longer  oppose  themselves  to  my  endeavours,  and  I
should  feel  justified  in  keeping  the  poor  girl  from  the  worst
of  imprisonments,  and  in  mesmerising  her  daily.  With  a
view  to  this,  may  I  ask  if  you  object  to  my  stating  on  your
authority  that  mesmerism  has  proved  beneficial  in  cases  of
this  description  ?

“  And  thus,  dear  Sir,  I  have  been  drawn  to  trespass  upon
your  time ;  but,  as  it  seems  to  me  that  the  fate  of  a  fellow-
creature  is  no  mean  thing  in  your  eyes,  I  am  sure  that
you  will  not  consider  it  a  trouble.  May  I  repeat  that  I  do
not  wish  my  name  mentioned,  for  whatever  good  a  woman
may  do  or  attempt  should  be  done  in  silence ;  besides  a  matter
of  this  sort,  if  known,  is  apt  to  be  much  and  unkindly  can¬
vassed.  Pray  pardon  this  trial  of  your  patience,  and  believe
me,  in  anxious  expectation  of  your  reply,  to  be,  dear  Sir,

“  Your’s  gratefullly,

“  To  Rev.  George  Sandby.”  “ - .

I  immediately  replied  to  the  above  letter,  expressing  an
opinion  that  the  first  trial,  as  far  as  it  went,  appeared  pro¬
mising,  especially  as  it  was  followed  by  sleep  at  night ;  and
I  gave,  as  far  as  it  was  possible,  an  answer  to  the  different
enquiries.  To  this  letter  came  a  reply,  from  which  the  fol¬
lowing  is  an  extract : —

“  August  29th,  1849.

“  Dear  Sir, — If  you  have  thought  it  strange  that  j^our
letter,  so  full  and  satisfactory,  should  have  remained  thus
long  unacknowledged,  I  trust  that  my  silence  will  be  excused
when  I  tell  you  that  my  time  and  thoughts  have  been  absorbed
by  the  poor  patient,  who  has  kept  me  most  anxious.  My
hands  have  been  tied  by  the  circumstance  of  the  physician's
visit  being  delayed  from  day  to  day,  and  by  my  unwillingness
to  commence  mesmerism  regularly  till  I  had  received  his


116  Insanity  cured  with  the  assistance  of  Mesmerism.

sanction, — A.  B.  all  the  time  declaring  that  she  should  lose
her  senses  for  ever.  At  last,  yesterday,  finding  myself  alone
with  her,  and  seeing  her  suffering  so  much  misery  and  excite¬
ment,  I  asked  if  I  should  soothe  her,  as  I  had  done  before :
she  assented,  and  for  only  ten  short  minutes  I  could  work  :
when  she  became  evidently  soothed,  and  spoke  to  me  more
quietly  than  she  had  done  for  hours.  This  is  all  I  have  to

tell  you  on  this  head.  Dr. - ,  however,  arrived  yesterday

and  saw  her  in  the  evening :  I  have  not  myself  been  able  to

have  an  interview  with  him ;  but  the  Rev. -  brought  me

his  opinion  that  ‘  he  believes  her  curable, — and  that  the  des¬
pair  of  an  asylum  might  perhaps  render  her  case  hopeless/
.  .  .  My  difficulties  are  many,  and  I  must  be  guided  by  cir¬
cumstances  in  a  great  measure.  It  is  my  intention  to  sound
the  good  doctor,  as  soon  as  I  find  an  opportunity,  respecting
his  feelings  on  the  subject  of  mesmerism.  If  he  be  ignorant
of  it,  he  should  be  induced  to  inform  himself;  if  prejudiced,
the  oftener  that  his  prejudice  comes  into  collision  with  facts,
the  better :  for  the  important  charge  that  he  holds  in  the

asylum  of - makes  it  desirable  that  he  should  be  led

to  study  ‘  the  medicine  of  nature/. .  .  I  must  thank  you  again
and  again  for  the  advice  and  encouragement  you  have  so  freely
and  kindly  given,  and  for  your  reiterated  assurances  of  safety.
With  this  assistance,  though  from  motives  of  delicacy  I  may
delay  for  the  present,  I  shall  not  scruple  to  act,  as  the  case
may  require,  if  I  find  people  ^amenable  to  reason.  Kindly
as  you  have  expressed  yourself  relatively  to  the  subject  of  my
anxiety,  I  shall  feel  bound  to  write  again  a  little  while  hence
to  tell  you  what  has  been  done.  In  the  mean  while,  believe
me,  dear  Sir,

“  Faithfully  and  gratefully  yours,

iC _ J>

•

In  answer,  I  expressed  the  opinion  that  this  second  experi¬
ment,  short  as  it  was,  indicated  a  hopeful  state  of  things ; —
it  had  proved  “soothing  and  quieting and  I  earnestly  pressed
upon  my  correspondent  the  importance  of  giving  mesmerism
a  full  trial,  and  at  as  early  a  day  as  possible ;  and  I  offered
to  obtain  any  information,  that  was  in  my  power,  from  parties
more  competent  than  myself  to  furnish  it, — only  begging,  as
a  last  injunction,  that  the  poor  sufferer  should  have  every
chance.  To  this  letter  I  received  no  reply  :  and  I  feared  that
in  this  case — as  in  so  many  others — a  want  of  perseverance  on
the  part  of  the  mesmeriser,  or  some  untoward  circumstances
connected  with  the  medical  man  or  the  friends  of  the  patient,
had  stopped  proceedings,  and  that  there  was  an  end  of  the


Communicated  by  the  Rev .  George  Sandby.


117


treatment,  as  far  as  mesmerism  was  concerned.  What  injus¬
tice  I  did  to  my  correspondent  the  reader  will  now  see ; —
though  perhaps  her  silence  rendered  such  an  opinion  not  un¬
natural.  At  the  end  of  five  months, — when  I  had  nearly
forgotten  all  particulars, — to  my  great  surprize  and  gratifica¬
tion,  I  received  a  long  letter,  written  at  intervals,  containing
most  copious  details  as  to  all  that  had  been  taking  place,  and
concluding  with  the  delightful  intelligence  that  A.  B.  was
restored  to  health  and  to  reason,  and  that  mesmerism  had
been  one  of  the  means  employed  towards  her  restoration.
What  proportion  of  credit  the  mesmeric  treatment  is  entitled
to,  the  reader  will  now  judge.  I  shall  allow  my  correspondent
in  great  measure  to  tell  her  own  tale  in  her  own  words, —
extracts  being  given  from  her  letters  and  from  her  journal,
(which  I  have  been  permitted  to  read,  and  which  contains  a
most  interesting  account  of  the  treatment,)  in  the  order  that
the  case  proceeded.

“  It  would  be  ungrateful  any  longer  to  delay  writing  to
you  ;  for  who  will  better  share  my  satisfaction  than  one  who
so  largely  contributed  to  it  ?  You  will  remember  that  I  wrote
to  you  some  time  back  on  the  case  of  A.  B.,  then  under  sen¬
tence  of  an  ‘  asylum and  that  I  received  from  you  several
letters  of  encouragement  and  advice  by  which  you  endeavoured
to  remove  from  my  mind  the  doubts  which  some  pious  friends
had  raised  respecting  the  use  of  mesmerism.  I  have  been
silent,  but  not  forgetful ;  and  often  and  often  have  your  last
words  returned  upon  me,  bringing  strength  and  resolution
when  I  faltered.

“  Before  I  commence,  I  must  state  that  there  is  one  per¬
son  of  whom  I  would  make  most  honourable  mention,- — I

mean  Dr. - ,  the  physician  who  superintends  the  lunatic

asylum  at - .  I  spoke  to  him  without  disguise ;  asked

him  if  he  knew  anything  of  mesmerism, — if  he  had  tried  it,
if  he  thought  it  applicable  to  this  case  ?  His  answer  was  :
f  I  have  seen  it ;  I  have  never  used  it  professionally  :  you  can
try  it;  it  will  do  no  harm/  His  absence  of  all  prejudice, —
of  all  professional  jealousy,  combined  with  his  humane  and
constant  attendance,  whilst  it  was  in  his  power,  lead  me  to
hope  that  ere  long  he  may  be  prevailed  on  to  introduce  into
the - asylum  a  remedy  so  simple  and  so  availing.

“  It  was  not  long  subsequent,  then,  to  the  receipt  of  your
last  letter  that  I  began  to  act  regularly  upon  your  advice,  and
have  continued  almost  without  intermission  up  to  this  time.
It  is  impossible  for  me  to  know  how  much  or  how  little  of
the  poor  girl's  improvement  is  attributable  to  this  source ;  I


118  Insanity  cured  with  the  assistance  of  Mesmerism .

only  know  that  it  has  been  most  marked,  and  altogether  be¬
yond  the  expectations  of  three  out  of  four  of  the  faculty  who
have  prescribed  for  her.  But  I  should  tell  you  that  she  has
been  taking  medicine  daily,  and  for  many  weeks  constant
opiates.  Before  I  began  to  work  the  opiates  had  lost  their
power ,  though  given  in  increased  strength :  afterwards  I  ob¬
served  that  they  retained  their  influence,  and  for  four  nights
last  week,  as  well  as  three  nights  in  the  week  previous,  she
slept  well  ivithout  any  opiate ;  though  I  ought  to  add  that
there  was  a  change  in  the  medicine  on  this  occasion.  Be  the
cause,  however,  what  it  may,  the  result  is  all  satisfactory.
The  once  unceasing  plaint  is  never  heard; — she  seems  to
shrink  from  speaking  the  word  which  night  and  day  hung  on
her  lips  :  the  fearful  excitement  has  left  her  entirely ,  and  the
low  spirits  and  fitful  weeping  seem  gradually  yielding  before
means,  which  a  God  of  mercy  has  been  pleased  to  bless.

(i  She  seems  now  aware,  in  some  degree,  of  the  physical
nature  of  her  miseries,  but  turns  with  awe  and  shuddering
from  the  recollection  of  what  she  has  suffered  :  ‘  I  dare  not
think  of  the  state  I  have  been  in/  She  can  now  bear  to  sit
in  church,  which  was  formerly  insupportable  to  her;  she
speaks  of  her  amendment  with  gratitude  and  hope ,  (hope,
that  seemed  for  ever  banished  from  her  mind),  still,  how¬
ever,  reminding  me  of  her  inward  consciousness,  ‘  I  am  not
well  yet/  And  she  can  sit  to  any  work,  and  be  occupied
with  it  for  hours.  In  one  thing  I  have  been  surprized,  viz.,
that  my  power  has  not  encreased  in  the  way  that  I  expected.
I  had  imagined,  that,  when  sleep  had  once  been  induced,  it
would  have  followed  regularly  with  the  mesmerism,  and  with
diminishing  exertion  on  my  part :  but  that  has  not  been  the
case ;  actual  mesmeric  sleep  has  not  always  ensued,  and  the
longest  duration  of  it  has  been  two  hours ;  but  the  constant
soothing  by  the  passes  have  told,  though  coma  was  not
induced  :  and  at  the  same  time  her  rest  at  night  has  been
generally  and  plainly  influenced  by  the  length  of  the  sitting.
But  I  ought  to  tell  you  here,  that  for  some  time  I  was  myself
fearful,  and  used  to  suspend  my  will,  as  soon  as  A.  B.  said
that  she  felt  f  very  sleepy/  It  was  an  indescribable  feeling
of  which  perhaps  I  might  be  ashamed, — I  could  not  tell  how
she  might  be  affected ;  and  oppressed  by  my  loneliness  and
inexperience,  I  dreaded  beyond  all  things  to  see  her  f  hand
follow  mine  ’ — or  indeed  to  elicit  any  phenomena  connected
with  the  science.”  (It  ought  in  explanation  here  to  be  stated,
that,  in  one  of  her  first  letters,  my  correspondent  had  ex¬
pressed  great  dislike  of  mesmeric  phenomena,  and  a  fear  lest
her  patient  might  prove  ecstatic.  This  absence,  or  suspen-


Communicated  by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.  119

sion  of  “  willing”  during  the  first  part  of  the  treat ment,  is  a
material  point  to  notice).

My  correspondent  then  proceeded  to  mention  an  impor¬
tant  change  of  arrangements  and  circumstances,  under  which
she  was  glad  to  alter  her  feelings  in  the  above  respect.  The
circumstances  were  in  themselves  of  a  most  disheartening
nature,  causing,  in  fact,  a  fearful  relapse,  and  undoing  all
that  had  been  effected.  But  great  good  resulted  from  the
evil :  for  the  kind  mesmeriser  removed  the  patient  into  her
own  house,  where  she  had  her  constantly  under  her  care  :
and  though  in  the  first  instance  the  paroxysms  of  insanity
were  appalling  to  witness  and  difficult  of  treatment,  still  in  the
end  the  labours  of  mesmerism  were  greatly  lightened,  and
the  cure  brought  about  much  more  expeditiously.  It  appears,
that  the  poor  girl,  whose  madness  originally  took  a  religious
turn,  was  now  being  persecuted  by  a  “  Latter-day-Saint,”
with  superstitious  scruples  on  the  subject  of  her  baptism.  It
would  be  tedious  to  repeat  the  well  known  history  of  cases  of
this  description.  A.  B.  was  now  “crazy  to  be  with  the
Saint,” — uttering  words  of  despair  and  of  horror :  flinging
herself  frantically  here  and  there,  and  for  ever  exclaiming,
“  lost,  lost  to  all  eternity  ”  In  a  word,  the  mania  was  greatly
aggravated,  and  the  apprehension  of  suicide  returned ;  and
to  this  was  shortly  superadded  an  attack  of  jaundice.  Many
might  have  been  discouraged  at  all  this :  but  our  mesmeriser,
who  had  contrived  to  get  the  patient  under  her  protection,
and  away  from  the  religious  excitement,  shall  again  tell
her  own  tale.  “  It  was  not  till  after  she  came  to  this  house,
and  owing  to  a  severe  attack  of  jaundice,  and  the  absence
of  all  opiate,  she  became  so  fearfully  excited  that  suicide
seemed  impending,  that  I  truly  and  heartily  desired  that
she  should  sleep;  and  then  sleep  came,  or  at  least,  a  deep  still¬
ness  that  bore  its  semblance,  though  at  first  her  frantic
movements  were  so  rapid  that  I  could  scarcely  follow  them  as
she  flung  herself  from  side  to  side  in  the  bed.  It  was  a  fear¬
ful  night,  it  was  like  standing  in  the  presence  and  listening
to  the  wailings  of  the  lost ;  and  a  friend  who  sat  up  with  me
the  night  following,  assured  me  with  a  look  of  awe,  that  her
own  nerves  would  give  way  under  a  repetition  of  such  scenes.
There  are  many  things  which  I  cannot  account  for, — as  that  I
should  have  affected  her  then,  and  that  I  cannot  always  do  it
in  the  same  degree, — unless  by  the  supposition  that  my  own
earnestness  rises  higher  in  proportion  to  a  great  necessity.
There  are  times  again,  when  A.  B.  can  distinctly  feel  the
passes  of  my  hands,  and  there  are  others,  when  she  cannot.”

The  letter  here  suddenly  stopped ;  and  the  writer  did  not


120  Insanity  cured  with  the  assistance  of  Mesmerism.

again  take  up  the  narrative,  till  after  an  interval  of  about
seven  weeks,  when  she  resumed  her  pen,  for  the  purpose  of
communicating  to  me  the  conclusion  of  the  case,  and  the
joyful  intelligence  that  A.  B.  was  “well.”  Before,  however,
we  come  to  that  part,  I  think  that  your  readers  would  be
much  interested  in  returning  with  me  to  the  “Journal,”  and
in  perusing  a  few  of  the  passages  which  narrate  the  effects
of  the  earlier  sittings.  A  general  idea  of  the  case  has  been
already  given  by  the  letter:  and  it  must  be  remembered,  that
two  trials  of  mesmerism  had  taken  place  before  the  treat¬
ment  was  systematically  pursued  under  the  sanction  of  a
physician.  I  will  begin,  therefore,  with  brief  extracts  from
what  the  writer  calls  the  “  third  sitting,”  to  which  are  pre¬
fixed  the  following  observations.

Journal :

“  I  did  not  see  her  again  till  Sept.  18th.”  She  was  then
in  a  very  bad  state :  the  malady  beating  the  medicine,  and
the  nightly  opiate  had  lost  all  power.  “  My  eyes  are  always
wide  open ;  there  is  no  sleep  in  them  night  or  day.”  Her
mania  prevailed  through  all  the  hours.

Third  sitting  :  an  hour.  “  Sleepy  :”  after  some  minutes
“  quite  comfortable,” — “  suffering  at  her  heart  quiet.”  Did
not  sleep  I  think  :  though  at  times  the  appearance  of  it  both
by  breathing  and  slight  movement  of  the  hand.

Fourth  sitting :  twenty  minutes.  Had  slept  all  night
with  only  the  usual  dose  of  morphine,  woke  only  once  to  tell
her  mother  what  a  nice  sleep  she  had  had,  and  then  slept
again  till  morning :  she  told  me,  without  being  questioned,
she  thought  it  must  be  from  my  soothing  her.

At  the  end  of  seven  minutes,  “  felt  she  could  lie  down
and  go  to  sleep ;”  “  quite  curious,  she  had  never  heard  of
anything  of  that  sort.”  She  talked  a  good  deal,  though
drowsy :  I  did  not  stop  her :  her  mania,  in  short,  running  on
in  ceaseless  volubility.  At  the  end  of  twenty  minutes,  told
me  she  felt  quite  comfortable.

Fifth  sitting.  Had  not  slept,  but  lay  still.

Sixth  sitting.  Had  slept  from  12  till  8  in  the  morning.
She  had  felt,  when  lying  in  bed,  that  I  was  near  her.  She
had  read  to  her  father  in  the  evening  :  the  first  time  she  had
done  such  a  thing  since  her  illness.  A  visible  improvement
in  her  complexion  and  demeanour.  This  time  she  yawned
twice,  and  sighed  often.  “More  sleepy  than  yesterday;”
talked  less.

Seventh  sitting.  Found  her  very  bright :  greeted  me  with
a  fresh  smile.  Had  got  up  at  7,  and  attended  to  the  house.


Communicated  by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.  121

Had  slept  only  at  intervals  during  the  night,  but  “  lay  quite
still,  having  no  wish  to  stir.”  Had  thought  in  the  night,
how  sweet  to  be  with  me  in  heaven.  She  was  sure,  she  ought
never  to  forget  me  in  all  her  life.

After  twenty -five  minutes,  said,  “  she  felt  so  strange,
going  somewhere,  I  am  so  drowsy :”  here  continued  the
passes,  but  ceased  to  will.

Sunday,  no  sitting.  She  had  slept  all  night  ivithout  wak¬
ing,  from  11  to  quarter  past  8  :  quite  got  rid  of  heart-feeling.
Ate  meat  for  breakfast  (generally  eats  nothing)  and  went  to
church.

Eighth  sitting.  She  had  not  slept  at  all,  but  had  lain
still.  Remarked  that  her  “  spirits  were  much  better and  she
looked  bright  and  cheerful.  During  sitting,  mentioned  her
lost  state  but  once :  and  then  sat  serene  and  silent,  then
smiled  and  talked  playfully ;  but  I  have  lost  ground  by  the
omission  of  Sunday.”

The  reader  will  have  observed,  during  these  first  sittings,
the  condition  of  the  patient  improving  coincidently  with  the
adoption  of  mesmerism.  The  opiates  had  ceased  to  have
effect ;  but  now  the  mesmerism  seemed  to  give  assistance  to
them;  and  A.  B.  was  decidedly  better.  Just,  however,  as  mat¬
ters  were  thus  advancing  favourably,  a  slight  relapse  was
occasioned  by  some  friends  of  the  young  woman  taking  her  a
fatiguing  day's  journey  for  the  purpose  of  shopping  and  of
visiting  relations ;  all  which  caused  great  labour  to  the  mes-
meriser :  and  before  A.  B.  was  restored  to  her  previous  con¬
dition,  the  fatal  visit  of  the  “  preacher  ”  occurred.  The
journal  here  gives  a  long  but  painful  description  of  the  results
of  this  interview ;  but  it  is  unnecessary  to  publish  them  :
though,  without  their  perusal,  the  reader  can  scarcely  appre¬
ciate  to  their  full  extent  the  anxieties  and  the  exertion  that
my  correspondent  passed  through.  It  is  sufficient  to  say,
that  she  contrived  to  remove  her  into  her  own  house, — where
she  was  safe  from  the  attacks  of  the  “  Saint ;”  and  here  the
journal  says, —

“  Oct.  10th.  Violently  restless  and  despairing :  eyes  wild
and  glaring :  flung  herself  about  frantically,  with  words  of
despair.  .  .  .  Willed  sleep  most  intensely ;  end  of  ten  minutes,
she  sank  down  upon  her  pillow,  and  remained  still.  E.  came
in  and  roused  her :  she  rose  up  from  time  to  time  raving
wildly :  then  still  again.  After  a  time,  worked  only  when  she
roused ;  latterly  prevented  rousing  by  making  the  passes  the
instant  she  moved.”

About  this  time  a  sharp  attack  of  jaundice  supervened,
and  the  mesmerism  and  opiates  were  discontinued  for  a  cou-


122  Insanity  cured  with  the  assistance  of  Mesmerism.

pie  of  days.  The  journal  says,  “left  her  to  the  doctors  till
she  should  be  out  of  her  jaundice  :  perhaps  wrong — a  dread¬
ful  time.  She  would  tear  her  sister  to  pieces,  if  she  could  get
at  her.”

“  Oct.  23rd.  Again  under  opiates :  f  see,  if  you  can  put
me  to  sleep/  Began  again  to  mesmerise  her  :  in  the  night
she  slept  better.”

From  this  time,  with  a  slight  exception,  the  mesmerism
was  pursued  steadily,  till  the  cure  was  completed.  Now  and
then  the  patient  suffered  a  relapse;  but  on  the  whole  the
improvement  was  continuous  and  progressive,  the  unfavoura¬
ble  symptoms  one  by  one  abating  and  disappearing.  A  few
extracts  from  the  journal,  taken  here  and  there,  may  prove
not  uninteresting.

“  Oct.  25th.  Sitting  an  hour  :  said  she  felt  strange  :  ‘  I
feel  quite  different  from  what  I  did  an  hour  ago;5  slept
twenty  minutes  after  I  ceased.  Great  improvement  now
become  visible  :  the  raging  frenzy  which  had  been  through
all  the  hours,  then  in  the  nights  only ,  has  now  gathered  itself
into  the  beginning  of  the  morning.

“  Oct.  26th.  Had  intervals  of  good  spirits.

“  Oct.  27th.  Still  all  night,  look  less  wild,  movements  less
restless ;  had  not  waked  till  dawn :  good  sleep.

“  Nov.  3rd.  Sitting  half  arr  hour :  lay  very  tranquil :
looked  playful :  lay  in  a  kind  of  happy  way  such  as  I  had
never  seen  her  in :  not  one  word  about  e  souk  or  *  tract/

“  Nov.  4th.  Far  less  frenzied  then  I  have  ever  seen  her  in
the  morning.

“Nov.  7th.  Her  bad  fits  now  are  like  her  best  hours
formerly.

“Nov.  8th.  A  bad  day:  she  had  heard  something  unkind
said,  which  fastened  upon  her  mind,  making  her  restless  and
wretched,  and  anxious  to  go  home.  I  made  passes  with  my
back  to  the  door,  to  prevent  her  going  out  of  the  room.  End
of  half  an  hour  tranquil :  slept  and  woke  again,  slept  again,
and  woke :  asked  me  to  lay  my  hand  on  her  ear  (she  had
pain  there),  laid  both  hands  upon  her  head,  and  bent  my
own  down  close.  She  slept  sweetly :  when  she  woke  again  at
E/s  entrance,  she  said,  she  had  slept,  and  her  head  was  so
heavy  she  could  scarcely  stir :  and  said  no  more  about  her
soul  or  going  home.

“Nov.  18th.  Voice  on  waking  more  cheerful  than  I  have
ever  heard.  ‘  The  best  night  of  a  long  time/  Her  sleep  had
been  very  sound.  She  lay  perfectly  still  and  silent,  so  long
that  I  thought  she  would  sleep  without  speaking ;  but  at  last
she  spoke,  and  told  me  such  things  as  made  my  heart  glad.”


Communicated  by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.  123

We  then  come  to  a  succession  of  entries,  of  “  no  ano¬
dyne — “  a  mild  opiate,” — “  better,”  “  better,” — “  a  comfor¬
table  night :”  “  no  anodyne — asleep  in  less  than  twenty
minutes,  lying  in  a  most  simple  attitude,”  and  so  on,  with
constant  records  of  improvement,  and  of  the  departure  of
unfavourable  symptoms,  till  we  approach  Christmas.

I  shall  now  return  to  the  letter,  where  it  was  taken  up,
after  an  interval  of  seven  or  eight  weeks,  at  the  date  of  Feb.
14th,  1850,  with  a  note  prefixed,  stating  that  the  previous
part  had  been  “  written  some  time  in  December.”

“  Time  has  again  been  stealing  on,  my  dear  Sir,  since  the
above  was  written,  and  by  my  own  shewing  at  the  beginning,
I  stand  convicted  of  ingratitude  to  you  for  not  having  finished
and  despatched  my  letter, — but  perhaps  if  you  could  know
all  the  circumstances  by  which  our  patient  has  been  thrown
upon  my  hand  almost  every  hour  in  the  day  for  some  weeks
together,  your  good  nature  would  pardon  such  omission.

“  To  the  preceding  I  may  now  add  the  best  possible  con¬
clusion.  A.  B.  is  to  all  appearance  cured.  Excellent  medical
advice,  constant  watching,  united  to  the  means  which  you
prescribed  and  the  prayers  of  many  friends,  have  by  God's
mercy  been  effectual  to  this  end.  She  can  now  read  her  Bible
without  being  painfully  affected  by  it, — she  can  transcribe
from  it, — repeat  from  it,  and  dwell  upon  passages  which  speak
of  the  Christian's  hope.  What  need  I  say  more  than  that  she
has  received  the  Sacrament,  and  returned  public  thanksgiving
at  church  for  her  recovery  from  grievous  sickness  ?

“  She  is  no  longer  an  inmate  of  our  house,  but  gone  home
to  be  a  comfort  to  her  old  parents,  and  to  say,  ‘  If  ever  there
was  a  good  deed  done,  it  was  this.'  I  give  you  her  own  words ;
for  you,  who  have  had  so  large  a  share  in  her  recovery,  must
read  them  with  a  silent  but  deep  pleasure.  Neither  is  she  es¬
tranged  from  her  poor  sister, — which  estrangement  had  been
one  of  the  sad  symptoms  of  her  derangement.”  And  the
journal  concludes  in  saying,  that  from  December  29th  “  she
took  no  more  opiates :  but  I  continued  to  mesmerise  her  daily ;
and  the  sittings  were  marked  more  by  their  confidential  tone
than  by  sleepiness.  For  some  time  her  low  spirits  would  come
on  at  twilight,  but  they  would  be  subdued  by  a  sitting,  &c.”
And  my  latest  accounts  say,  that  A.  B.  “  feels  well,  and  looks
the  picture  of  health,  and  continues  on  the  most  friendly
terms  with  her  sister,  never  alluding  to  her  past  aversion,  or
seeming  to  remember  it.”

It  will  be  remembered,  that  the  sanction  of  a  physician
to  the  trial  of  mesmerism  was  given  before  that  treatment
was  regularly  entered  upon.  The  reader  will  now  be  anxious


124  Insanity  cured  ivith  the  assistance  of  Mesmerism.


to  learn,  what  was  his  opinion  of  its  effects,  after  the  cure
was  completed.  Before,  however,  that  we  record  his  judg¬
ment,  it  may  be  desirable  to  state  that  out  of  four  medical
men  who  saw  A.  B.,  one  declared  that  it  was  a  deplorable
case,  an  asylum  or  suicide  being  the  certain  alternatives.  The
second,  the  physician  referred  to,  that  by  a  long  and  careful
domestic  as  well  as  medical  treatment  the  case  might  possibly
terminate  in  a  cure  at  the  end  of  perhaps  four  or  five  years.
The  third  deemed  an  asylum  most  dangerous ;  and  the  fourth
believed  the  patient  “  incurable  ."  All  these  opinions  were
discouraging  enough :  and  we  will  now  turn  to  the  physician's
reply  to  my  correspondent's  question  respecting  his  judgment
on  the  assistance  given  by  mesmerism  in  the  case.  His  answer,
though  cautious,  as  it  well  became  him  to  be,  was  at  the  same
time  clear,  unprejudiced  and  truth-loving; — and  by  this  an¬
swer  alone  I  am  content  that  the  uses  of  mesmerism  should,
in  the  first  instance ,  be  estimated.

"  As  you  do  not  mention  the  results  produced  by  the  mes¬
merising  beyond  sleep  and  tranquillity,  I  assume  that  they
were  confined  to  producing  sleep  and  insensibility ,  and  I  have
no  hesitation  in  stating  my  belief  that  the  results  thus  pro¬
duced  must  have  aided  in  the  recovery.  I  also  think  that
there  was  present  functional  disorder  of  the  nervous  system
as  well  as  physical  disease,  and  that  the  mesmeric  sleep  acted
favorably  on  the  former."

It  has  been  already  stated,  that  the  case,  which  has  been
here  given,  interesting  as  it  appears,  is  by  no  means  an  iso¬
lated  one,  and  that  the  records  of  mesmerism  can  furnish
many  other  instances,  in  which  insanity  has  been  cured  or
kept  in  abeyance  by  its  means.  And  let  this  statement  be
repeated  again  and  again  for  the  guidance  and  information  of
the  medical  world.  The  pages  of  The  Zoist  abound  with  cases
of  the  kind,  showing  what  has  been  done  in  England  :  and  in
India,  Dr.  Strong  of  Calcutta  and  Dr.  Kean  of  Berhampore
have  pursued  a  mesmeric  treatment  for  insanity  with  marked
success.*  Dr.  Kean  says  that  in  his  institution  out  of  seventy-
four  insane  persons  sixty-four  were  discharged  cured ;  and  I
sometimes  am  half  inclined  to  think,  that,  efficacious  as  mes¬
merism  has  proved  to  be  in  neuralgic  and  rheumatic  disorders
and  as  an  agent  for  anaesthetic  operations,  its  greatest  triumphs


*  See  No.  II.,  pp.  161,  180,  186,  190,  191  ;  IV.,  p.  429 ;  V.,  p.  133 ;  VI.,
p.  267 ;  X.,  p.  193  ;  XIV.,  p.  238 ;  XV.,  p.  379  ;  XVIII.,  p.  142 ;  XIX.,  pp.
234,  300;  XX.,  p.364;  XXI.,  p.  40 ;  XXIV.,  p.  321,  390;  XXV.,  p.  9  ;
XXVI.,  pp.  135,  201,  360;  XXVIII.,  pp.  391,  392,  393  ;  XXIX.,  p.  94.—
Zoist,


Communicated  by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.  125

will  yet  be  obtained  through  its  alleviation  of  cerebral  excite¬
ment  and  by  its  introduction  into  all  hospitals  for  the  cure
of  the  insane.

I  remain,  Mr.  Editor,  your  humble  Servant,

George  Sandby.


***  It  appears,  in  a  quotation  at  p.  214,  215,  No.  XIX.,  from
Dr.  Wigan,  that,  as  to  blood-letting  in  insanity,

Dr.  Pinel  says  bleeding  is  always  injurious  :

Dr.  Cullen  approves  of  bleeding:

Dr.  Esquirol  condemns  it :

Dr.  Haslam  recommends  it:

Dr.  Rush  bleeds  to  the  extent  of  thirty  or  forty  ounces  at  a  time :

Dr.  Foville  doubts  about  it,  but  uses  it  in  the  intermittent  form :

Dr.  Joseph  Frank  has  a  high  opinion  of  it :

Dr.  Fodere,  I  think,  condemns  it:

Dr.  Pritchard  approves  it:

Dr.  Rush  took  away  200  ounces  from  a  man  sixty-eight  years  of
age  in  less  than  two  months,  and  from  another  man  470  ounces  in
the  course  of  seven  months.

Dr.  Wigan  declares  with  perfect  truth  that  “a  large  proportion
of  the  works  on  insanity  are  the  most  perfect  trash  that  ever  a  man
wasted  his  faculties  in  reading  :”  yet  in  this  state  of  things  Dr.
Conolly,  whom  many  must  have  seen  in  the  army  as  a  recruiting
officer  about  England  after  our  present  middle-aged  medical  men  were
already  in  practice,  glories  in  advertising  his  disbelief  of  mesmerism,
and  denies  his  patients  the  benefit  of  it.  See  No.  XXIX.,  pp.  94,
95;  also  XXVIII.,  pp.  383,  384,  392;  XXIV.,  p.  369.

In  the  very  first  volume.  No.  II.,  Dr.  Elliotson,  when  detailing
five  mesmeric  cures  of  insanity  and  giving  his  opinion  of  the  pre¬
sent  treatment  of  the  insane  by  insanity  doctors,  says,  p.  186,  ‘‘See¬
ing  that  other  medical  treatment,  bleeding,  blisters,  drugs,  are  of
so  little  avail  in  the  majority  of  cases,  and  that  we  possess  so  power¬
ful  an  instrument  in  mesmerism,  shewn  not  only  by  its  general  in¬
fluence  as  in  the  case  just  related,  but  in  acting  upon  the  individual
organs  of  the  brain,  according  to  discoveries  made  in  America  and
England,  and  as  I  have  seen  proved  beyond  all  dispute  in  four  cases
of  my  own, — it  is  the  duty  now  of  all  who  treat  the  insane  and  fatui-
tous  to  give  these  unfortunate  beings  the  chance  of  benefit  from  mes¬
merism.  On  many  I  know  it  can  do  no  good  :  but  many  I  am  per¬
suaded  it  would  calm  and  improve ;  and  many  it  would  cure.”

And  in  Vol.  VII.,  No.  XXVIII.,  p.  384,  he  says:  “The  im¬
mense  majority  of  cures  of  insanity  are  spontaneous :  and,  if  more
cures  take  place  now  than  formerly,  it  is  because  doctors  do  less  mis¬
chief  than  formerly.  All  who  have  friends  insane  should  insist  upon
an  ample  trial  being  made  of  mesmerism,  notwithstanding  Drs.  Co¬
nolly,  Munro,  Morrison,  and  nearly  the  whole  band  of  insanity
.  doctors,  childishly  sneer  at  the  mention  of  mesmerism.” — Zoist.


VOL.  Y 1 1 1 .


L


(  12C  )


II.  Illustrations  of  the  silent  power  of  the  Will  and  sympathy
of  Brains.  By  Mr.  Henry  Stafford  Thompson.

“  A  writer  in  The  Zoist  for  April  foams  with  indignation  on  account  of  the
article  on  that  journal  that  appeared  in  our  number  for  the  16th  of  February.  In
particular,  his  wrath  knows  no  bounds  when  he  touches  on  the  tender  subject  of
mesmeric  feats,  so  sorely  at  a  discount  in  our  pages.  He  suspects  Dr.  Bushnan
to  be  the  author  of  the  article  in  the  Medical  Times,  and  charges  him  with  igno¬
rance  and  impudence.  We  wonder  a  mesmerist  could  be  guilty  of  so  every-day  a
feeling  as  mere  suspicion.  Surely  he  had  an  Okey  at  hand  to  point  her  teles¬
copic  eye  into  the  midst  of  any  man’s  thoughts,  and  wrest  from  him  the  inmost
secret  of  his  bosom  !  Doubtless,  some  one  of  the  Okeys  of  Dr.  Engledue’s  or
Dr.  Elliotson’s  stances  might  have  pried  into  Dr.  Bushnan’s  breast  at  the  very
moment  he  was  said  to  be  concocting  his  sarcasm  on  the  vignette  of  the  cover  of
The  Zoist,  and  picturing  it  to  himself  as  representing  £  Dr.  Elliotson,  disguised
as  a  bearded  sage,  sitting  down  between  the  two  Okeys,  pondering  on  the  book  of
Fate !  ’

“  Dr.  Engledue  quotes  with  much  anger  most  of  the  sentence  in  which  the
passage  just  cited  occurs ;  but  his  courage  failed,  and  he  did  not  encounter  the
whole.  At  the  name  of  Okey  it  appears  that  the  audacity  even  of  a  mesmerist
evaporates.  Dr.  Engledue,  however,  is  right — though  he  cannot  boast  of  owing
his  knowledge  to  anything  superior  to  vulgar  rumour.  Dr.  Bushnan — the  last
man  who  would  desire  to  shelter  himself  under  the  protection  of  the  anonymous —
is  the  author  of  the  article  in  question  ;  and  we  further  inform  Dr.  Engledue  that
his  opponent  will  not  hesitate  to  enter  the  lists  with  him.  Unless  we  are  much
deceived.  Dr.  Bushnan  will  supply  him  with  facts  tougher  and  more  difficult  of
digestion  than  the  flimsy  and  tender  morsels  with  which  Dr.  Elliotson  and  his
friends  are  accustomed  to  feed  their  fancy.  In  the  meantime,  we  propose  to  afford
our  readers  a  specimen  of  the  kind  of  facts  which  grow  up  under  the  fostering
wing  of  The  Zoist ;  and  we  beg  to  ask  the  Diocesan  of  the  Vicar  of  Flixton,
whether  he  thinks  it  becoming  in  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  to  countenance  such
things  as  we  are  about  to  quote  ?  We  would,  also,  ask  the  Earl  of  Cai'lisle
whether  it  be  seemly  that  one  who,  like  him,  stands  high  in  the  councils  of  the
earthly  Head  of  the  Church,  should  have  his  name  employed  to  strengthen  such  a
cause  ?  Here  is  the  specimen  of  the  fruits  of  mesmerism  to  which  we  refer  : —

‘  Lately  published.  The  Celestial  Telegraph  ;  or,  Secrets  of  the  Life  to  Come,
revealed  through  Magnetism  ;  wherein  the  existence,  the  form,  the  occupations  of
the  soul  after  its  separation  from  the  body  are  proved  by  many  years’  experi¬
ments,  by  the  means  of  eight  ecstatic  somnambulists,  who  had  eighty  perceptions
of  thirty-six  deceased  persons  of  various  conditions.  A  description  of  them ;  their
conversation,  &c.  ;  with  proofs  of  their  existence  in  the  spiritual  world.’

“  This  work  was  favourably  reviewed  in  the  January  number  of  The  Zoist ,  by
the  Rev.  George  Sandby,  Vicar  of  Flixton,  Suffolk,  who,  at  page  417,  distinctly
states,  ‘I  can  see  no  reason  to  question  either  the  good  faith  of  the  author  or  the
credibility  of  his  witnesses.’’  ” — Medical  Times,  April  §ih,  1850.*

Fairfield,  near  York,
Nov.  1,  1849.

My  dear  Elliotson, — In  complying  with  your  request  that
I  would  communicate  to  you  the  observations  I  have  made  on
sympathy  and  the  power  of  the  will,  I  can  do  little  more  than
transcribe  my  notes  of  the  curious  phenomena  which  I  have
witnessed,  and  must  leave  explanation  to  those  who  are  more
skilled  in  the  occult  operations  of  the  brain.  Some  persons


*  See  Mr.  Sandby’s  reply  in  a  subsequent  part  of  the  present  number. — Zoist.


127


The  Silent  Power  of  the  Will ,  fyc.

will  no  doubt  ridicule  the  experiments  I  am  about  to  relate,
and  deem  the  results  the  mere  fancies  of  my  own  brain  :  but
they  will  prove  themselves  to  have  paid  not  the  slightest  at¬
tention  to  the  subject.  I  am  convinced  that  the  sympathy
which  has  been  believed  in  every  country  and  in  every  age,
though  denied  by  some  calling  themselves  philosophers,  is  to
be  attributed  to  neither  superstition  nor  deception,  but  is  a
law  of  nature  that  very  slight  observation  and  experiment  can
make  distinctly  manifest.

I  so  continually  observe  in  society  instances  of  sympathy
of  feeling  and  thought  occurring  spontaneously,  that  I  should
have  supposed  no  one  would  have  disputed  this  sympathetic
relation  between  human  beings,  except  indeed  those  philoso¬
phers  who  require  everything  to  be  mathematically  demon¬
strated  before  they  can  admit  it.

Whether  we  turn  to  the  page  of  history,  or  merely  consult
our  own  experience,  do  we  not  frequently  find  whole  masses
of  human  beings  propelled  by  a  simultaneous  feeling  or  idea,
too  often  indeed  when  there  is  little  of  truth  or  reason  to
recommend  it  ?  How  often  do  we  not  find  the  insanity,  the
delirious  folly,  of  the  few  infecting  all  around  them,  until
entire  nations  have  appeared  composed  of  little  else  than  of
frantic  madmen.  There  must  be  some  cause,  some  law  for
this ;  I  do  not  think  it  could  happen  among  us  if  a  silent
sympathetic  relation  did  not  exist  among  us.

Again,  does  it  not  continually  happen  that  persons  in  con¬
versation  are  simultaneously  impressed  with  the  self-same  sub¬
ject  or  a  similar  idea?  Do  we  not  sometimes  meet  in  society
persons  with  whom  we  immediately  and  instinctively  know
that  we  have  a  similarity  of  sentiment  and  feeling  ?  Indeed,
the  existence  of  this  sympathy  is  pretty  generally  admitted,
even  by  those  who  reject  the  idea  that  one  human  being  can
intentionally  influence  another  by  his  silent  will,  or  impress
him  at  pleasure  with  distinct  sensations.  However,  the  ex¬
periments  I  am  about  to  relate  are  within  the  compass  of
every  one  who  desires  to  obtain  conviction,  or  to  test  the
accuracy  of  what  I  state  :  for  there  are  everywhere  to  be  met
with  parties,  though  all  unconscious  of  it,  who  are  so  deli¬
cately  sensitive  that  their  brains  will  reflect  nearly  each
thought  and  idea  as  it  passes  through  your  own,  if  you
steadily  fix  your  attention  upon  them  and  they  are  not  en¬
grossed  with  any  absorbing  subject  at  the  time.  As  I  am
often  asked  what  effect  the  will  has  in  mesmeric  manipula¬
tions,  and  whether  it  is  not  sufficient  without  manipulations,  I
will,  as  far  as  I  can,  answer  this  question,  and  state  the  con¬
clusion  to  which  my  own  experiments  have  led  me.

l  2


128


The  Silent  Tower  of  the  Will


Some  mesmerisers  are  of  opinion  that  the  exercise  of  the
will  is  always  necessary  to  produce  an  effect  upon  another
person.  I  do  not  think  this  is  always  the  case ;  although  it
is  true  that  when  we  make  mesmeric  passes  over  a  patient,
even  while  our  minds  are  occupied  on  other  matters,  there
still  is  a  certain  amount  of  will  exerted,  or  else  we  should  not
continue  to  move  our  hands  even  mechanically  over  the  pa¬
tient.  Is  it  not  clear  that  the  will  is  capable  of  performing
several  functions  at  a  time  ?  My  will,  for  instance,  at  this  mo¬
ment  directs  my  thoughts,  recalls  to  my  memory  words  in
which  to  express  them,  and  the  forms  of  the  letters  of  which
these  words  are  composed,  and  guides  my  hand  in  tracing  them.
The  first  operation  is  the  only  one  which  seems  to  me  as  if
my  will  determined  it ;  the  other  two  appear  like  mere  me¬
chanical  and  involuntary  actions  :  and  yet  no  one,  I  should
think,  would  dispute  that  my  will  determined  and  carried
into  effect  the  last  operation  as  well  as  the  first.  Thus  when
an  operator  asserts  that  his  will  is  not  exerted  in  moving  his
hand  over  a  patient  while  his  thoughts  are  engaged  on  other
subjects,  he  errs.

But  that  an  effect  may  be  produced  on  individuals,  inde¬
pendent  of  the  will  or  intention  of  another  party,  I  feel  satis¬
fied.  For,  in  the  course  of  observations  which  have  now  con¬
tinued  for  some  years,  I  have  repeatedly  met  with  cases  in
which  one  person  has  affected  another  without  any  intention
on  the  one  side  or  expectation  on  the  other.  In  illustration
of  this,  I  will  mention  two  examples.

A  patient,  whom  I  had  been  mesmerising  for  a  neuralgic
pain  in  the  foot,  that  was  easily  removed  for  a  time  by  a  few
passes,  was  sitting  in  a  room  where  there  were  several  persons.
She  had  felt  her  foot  rather  uncomfortable  for  some  time,
when  one  of  my  children  accidentally  placed  himself  on  the
ground  by  the  foot  that  was  affected.  The  patient  was  en¬
gaged  in  conversation,  and  told  me  that  she  should  not  have
observed  where  the  child  was  had  she  not  felt  the  pain  en¬
tirely  cease.  After  this,  whenever  she  was  suffering  pain  in
the  foot,  the  child  could  invariably  remove  it  by  placing  his
hand  on  the  foot.  Apparently,  in  the  first  instance  of  the
removal  of  the  pain  there  was  neither  imagination  on  the
one  side  nor  intention  or  will  on  the  other  to  account  for  it.
Another  instance  I  knew  in  which  a  lady  was  attended  by
two  medical  men  for  a  neuralgic  affection ;  and  she  invariably
had  an  increase  of  pain  when  visited  by  the  one,  and  a  dimi¬
nution  of  it  when  attended  by  the  other,  though  their  opi¬
nions  and  treatment  were  exactly  the  same.  This  lady  after¬
wards  became  a  patient  of  mine,  and  we  frequently  found  that


and  Sympathy  of  Brains.


129


she  had  an  increase  or  diminution  of  pain  in  the  society  of
different  persons,  more  particularly  if  they  sat  near  her.  She
was  entirely  cured  by  mesmerism,  though  she  says  that  to
this  day  some  persons  make  her  feel  uncomfortable  when  they
are  near  her.  I  mention  these  two  examples  only,  and
think  every  practised  mesmerist  must  have  met  with  many
similar  instances,  in  which  the  will  or  intention  had  nothing
to  do  with  the  effect  produced.  Whilst  I  admit  thus  much,  I
nevertheless  am  convinced  of  the  powerful  agency  of  the  will ;
and,  with  few  exceptions,  I  have  found  success  in  the  removal
of  pain,  in  producing  sleep,  and  in  giving  strength  to  the
patient,  to  correspond  with  the  will  and  attention  that  was
employed,  and  that  less  effect  has  numberless  times  been  pro¬
duced  by  performing  the  operation  of  mesmerism  in  an  inat¬
tentive  manner  for  an  hour,  than  in  a  few  minutes  when  it
has  been  accompanied  by  the  concentration  of  the  thoughts
and  the  will  of  the  operator.

I  think,  then,  that  there  is  a  sympathetic  relation  exist¬
ing  between  individuals  entirely  independent  of  intention  on
one  side  or  expectation  on  the  other  :  and  I  am  fully  aware
that  pain  may  be  removed  by  the  imposition  of  the  hand,
gentle  friction,  or  even  in  some  cases  by  the  mere  presence
of  another  party  all  unconscious  of  this  influence,  without
any  expectation  on  either  side  of  the  relief  that  ensues.
But  in  the  generality  of  cases  I  think  that  the  passes
or  manipulations  of  a  mesmeriser  more  readily  produce  the
phenomena  of  sleep,  the  soothing  of  pain,  &c.  Yet  I  think,
with  those  who  call  themselves  psychomesmerists  or  magnet-
izers,  that  the  manipulations  are  not  absolutely  necessary ;
that,  when  there  is  the  power  of  concentrating  the  attention
for  a  length  of  time,  all  the  phenomena  may  be  produced
without  any  manipulations  whatever  and  that  the  simple  will
of  the  operator  is  sufficient.

Every  mesmerist  is  aware  that,  when  a  sympathetic  rela¬
tion  is  established  between  himself  and  his  patient,  the  latter
will  frequently  have  the  same  sensations  of  feeling,  hearing,
tasting,  and  smelling,  simultaneously  with  himself;  and  also
that  the  patient’s  thoughts  and  ideas  are  often  in  accordance
with  his  own ;  and,  by  the  experiments  which  I  am  about  to
relate,  I  think  it  will  be  clear  that  the  fixed  attention  of  one
party  upon  another  is  sufficient  to  establish  a  sympathetic  re¬
lation.  I  have  on  many  occasions  fixed  my  attention  upon
persons  whom  I  had  never  seen  before,  and  found  that  in  a
short  time  they  have  either  performed  some  trifling  act  I  have
thought  of,  or  have  been  impressed  with  ideas  similar  to  my
own.  For  example, —


130


The  Silent  Poiver  of  the  Will


I  met  a  gentleman  last  summer  at  Dr.  Ashburner's,  who
the  doctor  had  informed  me  was  very  sensitive.  Without  my
being  introduced  to  him,  I  fixed  my  attention  upon  him,  and
willed  him  to  come  and  speak  to  me.  In  a  few  minutes  he
did  so.  I  kept  my  attention  rivetted  upon  him,  willing  him
to  sleep.  In  a  minute  or  two  he  said,  “  You  must  be  power¬
fully  magnetic ;  I  have  been  mesmerised  a  few  times,  and
talking  with  you  gives  me  the  same  sensations  as  when  I  was
mesmerised,  namely,  a  tightness  across  the  brow,  and  a  feeling
of  extreme  drowsiness ;  you  must  excuse  me,  but  I  must  sit
down  at  the  other  end  of  the  room.”  This  he  did.  I  still
kept  my  attention  directed  towards  him,  though,  from  the  po¬
sition  in  which  I  stood,  I  think  he  could  not  have  observed  it.
In  a  few  minutes  he  went  to  sleep.  I  tried  several  curious
experiments  upon  him.  Perhaps  the  most  successful  and
striking  were  the  following.  When  I  thought  of  light,  he
said  his  sensations  were  delightful,  that  “  he  saw  everything
around  him;  ”  on  the  contrary,  when  I  thought  of  darkness,
he  complained  immediately  of  being  in  darkness,  and  of  not
being  able  to  see  anything.  I  awakened  him,  as  I  had  put
him  to  sleep,  by  will.  On  his  leaving  the  room  I  stopped
him  instantly  and  recalled  him,  by  will.  I  have  no  doubt
Dr.  Ashburner  will  recollect  what  I  have  related,  as  well  as
those  who  were  present  and  who  were  much  struck  with  what
they  saw  and  what  we  explained  to  them  at  the  time.

Some  months  ago  I  was  staying  at  a  house  where  few  of
the  persons  present  had  ever  witnessed  any  of  the  phenomena
of  mesmerism,  and  they  were  most  anxious  that  I  should  shew
them  some  experiments.  I  refused  this  unless  they  could
find  me  a  subject  upon  whom  the  experiment  might  be  bene¬
ficial.  I  object  to  making  experiments  for  mere  amuse¬
ment's  sake,  as  I  have  frequently  seen  very  uncomfortable
effects  produced,  and  as  experiments  generally  fail  to  con¬
vince  the  sceptical,  however  successful  they  may  be.  I  was
twitted  very  much  by  some  of  the  party  present  on  my  refusal,
particularly  by  the  lady  of  the  house,  who  at  once  decided
that  all  mesmeric  experiments  must  be  humbug;  especially
the  effects,  she  said,  which  she  had  heard  were  produced  by
the  will.  There  was  a  very  interesting  little  girl  present,  the
youngest  of  the  family,  and  I  said  to  the  lady,  “  Though  I
object  to  putting  any  person  into  a  mesmeric  state,  if  you
wish  very  much  to  witness  a  simple  experiment  of  the  will,  and
will  give  me  leave  to  try  an  experiment  on  your  child,  I  think
I  can  probably  convince  you  that  it  is  not  altogether  humbug.”
She  consented,  and  it  was  agreed  that,  without  the  child's
knowledge,  I  should  sit  on  a  sofa,  and  that  the  child  should


and  Sympathy  of  Brains.


131


come  to  me,  take  hold  of  my  hand  and  begin  to  ask  me  ques¬
tions  about  mesmerism ;  that  in  five  minutes  she  was  to  get
up,  sit  on  a  particular  chair  in  the  room,  come  back  again  and
sit  on  the  contrary  side  of  me  on  the  sofa  to  that  on  which
she  sat  formerly,  take  hold  of  my  hand  and  begin  to  talk
again  on  the  same  subject;  I  was  then  to  get  up  and  she  was
to  follow  me,  and  appear  to  interest  herself  in  whatever  I  was
occupied  in.  The  experiments  were  perfectly  successful.

I  will  give  an  example  of  another  kind,  in  which  the  will
only  has  been  employed  to  remove  pain,  and  I  will  then  pro¬
ceed  to  other  experiments.

I  was  at  a  theatre  with  a  party,  and  noticed  one  of  the
ladies  putting  her  hand  frequently  to  her  head,  as  if  she  was
suffering  from  headache.  I  observed  to  her  that  I  feared  she
had  a  headache.  She  said,  “Yes,  and  the  noise  and  heat
have  made  it  so  much  worse  that  I  think  I  shall  be  obliged
to  leave.”  I  was  sitting  immediately  behind  her.  I  said
nothing,  but  fixed  my  attention  upon  her  head ;  and  in  ten
minutes  she  said,  “  It  is  very  curious,  but  since  you  spoke  to
me  the  pain  has  left  my  forehead,  and  I  have  a  sensation  as
if  my  head  was  drawn  backwards  to  you.”

One  of  the  most  exquisitely  sensitive  and  interesting  sub¬
jects  I  have  ever  met  with  was  a  young  lady  suffering  from
an  affection  of  the  eyes,  brought  on  by  “  brain  fever.”  I  was
consulted  about  her  case.  At  our  first  interview,  without  an
attempt  to  mesmerise  her  or  an  idea  of  mesmerism  on  her  part,
I  willed  her  to  get  up,  come  across  the  room,  and  sit  upon  a
sofa  near  me.  I  then  by  will  put  her  to  sleep,  and  when  in
that  state  every  question  I  proposed  to  her  mentally  she  an¬
swered  aloud,  sometimes  saying,  “  Why  do  you  ask  me  that  ?”
On  one  occasion  I  willed  her  to  come  to  a  house  where  I  was
calling.  I  was  not  able  to  remain  to  see  the  result :  but  she
nevertheless  went,  and  her  mother  informed  me  afterwards
that  she  told  her  she  must  go  and  call  at  that  house,  for
she  knew  I  was  there  and  wanted  her.  On  another  occa¬
sion,  having  seen  her  in  a  crowded  ball-room  without  being
observed  by  her,  I  willed  her  to  come  to  me.  I  concealed
myself  and  avoided  her  in  the  crowd.  I  saw  her  walking
about  looking  anxiously  in  every  direction.  When  she  saw
me  she  exclaimed,  “  O  !  I  knew  you  were  here ;  if  I  had  not
found  you  soon,  I  think  I  should  have  gone  to  sleep  or  fallen
down ;  I  felt  something  draw  me  so  strongly  in  the  direction
I  found  you.”  One  day,  when  calling  upon  her,  I  willed  her
to  let  a  favourite  bird  out  of  its  cage  which  was  on  a  table
near  the  spot  where  we  were  sitting.  She  rose  and  stood
looking  at  the  bird  for  some  time ;  then  took  up  the  cage,  and


132


The  Silent  Power  of  the  Will


removed  it  to  another  table  at  the  end  of  the  room.  I  still
continued  to  will  her  to  take  the  bird  out  of  the  cage.  She
opened  the  door  and  put  her  hand  into  the  cage.  Upon  this
I  asked  her  what  she  was  going  to  do.  She  replied,  “  I
really  don't  know;  I  had  a  strange  fancy  to  take  my  bird  out
of  the  cage,  in  consequence  of  which  I  removed  it  to  the
other  end  of  the  room :  still  I  had  the  same  wish,  but  why  I
do  not  know."  The  last  time  I  saw  her  she  was  travelling
with  her  family  to  the  south.  I  called  upon  them  at  the
hotel  in  York  where  they  were  staying  for  the  night.  I  tried
some  experiments,  which  succeeded  as  usual  and  were  very
interesting ;  but  from  some  cause  or  other,  probably  from
persons  coming  into  the  room,  uncomfortable  effects  remained
upon  her.  When  she  reached  her  destination  she  wrote  to
me  that  she  had  been  most  uncomfortable  ever  since  she  had
seen  me,  feeling  exceedingly  cold  and  wretched,  and  in  a
half-dreaming  state,  in  which  she  could  not  bear  to  be  dis¬
turbed  by  any  one.  I  wrote  to  her  that,  at  11  o'clock  p.m.
of  the  day  she  would  receive  my  letter,  I  would  will  her  to
sleep,  and,  if  possible,  emancipate  her  from  the  uncomfortable
state  she  was  in.  I  did  so.  A  friend  of  mine,  to  whom  I
had  communicated  my  intention,  suggested  that  I  should
make  some  experiment  to  try  whether  my  thoughts  or  will
would  really  reach  her  at  that  distance,  or  whether  the  sleep
was  merely  the  effect  of  imagination.  I  agreed  to  try  whether
I  could  impress  her  with  a  desire  to  write  me  an  account  of
her  sleep  in  verse.  I  did  so ;  and  she  sent  me  by  the  next
day's  post  some  very  pretty  and  droll  lines  descriptive  of  her
sleep  and  her  sensations  and  imaginings  in  that  state.

I  have  frequently  met  with  patients  who,  though  they  did
not  possess  the  power  of  thought-reading  so  distinctly  and
perfectly  as  in  the  case  I  have  last  related,  have  unwittingly
displayed  great  sympathy,  and  in  whom  it  was  possible  by  the
will  to  alter  completely,  for  the  time,  their  thoughts  and  sen¬
timents.  On  one  occasion  when  I  asserted  this  to  be  my
opinion  to  some  persons,  amongst  whom  was  a  very  sensitive
patient  of  mine,  and  betwixt  whom  and  another  young  lady,
who  was  also  present,  there  existed  a  great  sympathy  and
attachment,  both  these  parties  said,  “  We  do  not  dispute  what
you  are  saying,  but  we  defy  you  to  change  our  feelings  and
sentiments  towards  each  other."  I  could  not  resist  this  chal¬
lenge,  though  at  the  hazard  of  making  them  temporarily  un¬
comfortable.  In  the  course  of  the  day,  they  had  quite  a
dislike  and  repugnance  to  each  other's  society,  nor  did  this
feeling  subside  for  some  days,  not  until  I  had  placed  the
young  lady  in  relation  with  my  patient  when  the  latter  was


and  Sympathy  of  Brains.


133


in  a  mesmeric  sleep.  The  varied  phenomena  in  this  patient
were  extraordinary.  She  displayed  on  various  occasions  per¬
fect  clairvoyance.  She  could  always  be  acted  upon  more  or
less  by  the  will.  I  have  frequently  taken  away  pains  from  the
chest  and  side  by  my  will,  both  *  when  she  was  awake  and
when  in  a  mesmeric  sleep.  In  both  states  she  always  said
that  she  felt  a  great  heat  in  her  chest  and  side  whenever  I
directed  my  attention  to  them.  I  think  pain  in  some  instances
was  relieved  more  rapidly  by  the  will  than  when  I  made  use
of  passes.  She  has  been  put  to  sleep  by  will,  both  by  myself
and  also  by  another  friend  who  used  to  mesmerise  her,  when
we  were  in  another  room  and  when  she  had  no  knowledge
of  our  intention.  Sometimes  she  was  unwilling  to  be  mes¬
merised,  but,  on  fixing  the  attention  upon  her  for  a  few
minutes,  this  repugnance  soon  vanished  and  she  would  request
to  be  mesmerised.  Though  I  have  never  been  able  to  get  a
distinct  answer  by  mentally  proposing  a  question  to  her,  yet
my  own  sentiments  and  feelings  were  beautifully  reflected.
When  watching  her  I  could  observe  an  immediate  change  in
her  countenance  as  my  thoughts  varied.  She  would  some¬
times  give  utterance  to  the  ideas  that  were  passing  in  my  own
mind.  On  one  occasion,  after  suffering  much  pain,  which  I
had  relieved  her  from,  and  falling  into  a  sleep  with  an  ex¬
pression  on  her  countenance  of  perfect  happiness  and  repose,
the  change  from  the  previous  one  of  anxiety  and  anguish  was
most  striking  and  at  the  moment  recalled  to  my  mind  the
very  beautiful  lines  of  Shelley,  entitled —

“THE  MAGNETIC  LADY  TO  HER  PATIENT.

“  ‘  Sleep  on  !  sleep  on  !  forget  thy  pain  :

My  hand  is  on  thy  brow,

My  spirit  on  thy  brain  ;

My  pity  on  thy  heart,  poor  friend  ;

And  from  my  fingers  flow
The  powers  of  life,  and  like  a  sign,

Seal  thee  from  thine  hour  of  woe ;

And  brood  on  thee  but  may  not  blend
With  thine.

“  ‘  Sleep  on !  sleep  on  !  I  love  thee  not ;

But  when  I  think  that  he
Who  made  and  makes  my  lot
As  full  of  flowers  as  thine  of  weeds,

Might  have  been  lost  like  thee ;

And  that  a  hand  which  was  not  mine,

Might  then  have  chased  his  agony
As  I  another’s — my  heart  bleeds
For  thine.

“  ‘  Sleep,  sleep,  and  with  the  slumbers  of
The  dead  and  the  unborn  ;

Forget  thy  life  and  woe ;

Forget  that  thou  must  wake  for  ever ;


134


The  Silent  Power  of  the  Will


Forget  the  world’s  dull  scorn  ;

Forget  lost  health,  and  the  divine

Feelings  that  die  in  youth’s  brief  morn  ;

And  forget  me,  for  I  can  never
Be  thine.

“  ‘  Like  a  cloud  big  with  a  May  shower.

My  soul  weeps  healing  rain,

On  thee,  thou  withered  flower  ;

It  breathes  mute  music  on  thy  sleep  ;

Its  odour  calms  thy  brain  !

Its  light  within  thy  gloomy  breast

Speaks  like  a  second  youth  again.

By  mine  thy  being  is  to  its  deep
Possest.’

“  The  spell  is  done.  ‘  How  feel  you  now  ?’

‘  Better — quite  well,’  replied
The  sleeper. — ‘  What  would  do
You  good  when  suffering  and  awake  ?

What  cure  your  heart  and  side  ? — ’

*  ’Twould  kill  me  what  would  cure  my  pain  ;

And  as  I  must  on  earth  abide
Awhile,  yet  tempt  me  not  to  break
My  chain.’  ”*

As  these  lines  passed  through  my  brain,  I  saw  her  lips
move,  and  a  moment  after  she  expressed  herself  as  nearly
as  I  can  recollect  in  the  following  terms.  “  How  happy  you
have  made  me  !  What  is  it  that  gives  me  such  pleasurable
feelings?  Every  thing  I  think  of  is  immediately  realized.
If  I  think  of  music ,  mute  music  (as  it  were)  falls  upon  my
ears ;  if  of  flowers,  I  see  the  most  beautiful,  and  smell  the
most  delicious  scents.  I  seem  surrounded  by  a  glorious  light.
I  now  view  every  thing  differently.  There  is  nothing  to  re¬
gret  in  the  past,  and  the  present  is  delightful,  for  it  seems
as  if  sickness  and  sorrow  could  touch  me  no  more.  If  you
do  not  see  and  feel  all  this,  how  do  I  feel  it  ?  or  am  I  really
in  another  state  of  existence?”  She  frequently  went  into
an  ecstatic  state,  and  then  would  express  the  greatest  happi-

*  Written  in  1822.  The  Poetical  Works  of  Percy  Bysshe  Shelley.  Edited
by  Mrs.  Shelley. — p.  304.

How  strange  and  humiliating  to  reflect  that  Shelley  wrote  these  sweet  lines
in  1822,  on  witnessing  mesmeric  effects,  having  no  idea  of  doubting  the  evidence
of  his  senses,  and  that  in  1850  the  medical  world,  the  attendants  of  royalty  and
aristocracy,  no  less  than  of  the  cottage,  cellar,  and  garret,  the  president,  fellow,
examiner,  lecturer,  the  journalist  and  medical  penny-a-liner,  consider  it  the
height  of  philosophic  sagacity  to  toss  up  their  heads  with  contempt  when  the
name  of  mesmerism  is  mentioned,  and  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost  to  keep
mankind  from  its  blessed  powers  of  healing  and  assuaging.  The  bright  and  just*
president  of  the  College  of  Physicians  of  the  present  moment,  Dr.  Paris,  in
speaking  of  Dr.  Thomas  Mayo’s  Treatise  on  Medical  Proof ,  in  which  such
observations  were  made  as  called  forth  reprobation,f  finds  great  fault  with  him
for  favouring  mesmerism,  of  which  Dr.  Paris  knows  as  much  as  he  does  of  the
stethoscope  which  he  laboriously  decried  for  twenty  years  and  does  still  whenever
he  dares. — Zoist.

*  See  No.  XXIV.,  p.  404.  t  No.  XXIV.,  p.  378;  XXV.,  p.  44;  XXVIII.,  p.  380.


and  Sympathy  of  Brains.


135


ness  and  pleasure.  She  thought  she  was  surrounded  by  those
who  had  long  been  dead  :  she  fancied  she  saw  her  own  friends,
and  described  them  to  me  most  accurately,  as  well  as  some  of
mine,  though  she  had  never  seen  these  when  alive,  and  said
they  looked  most  bright  and  happy.  However,  I  found  these
happy  phantoms  would  generally  communicate  what  I  wished
them ;  that  is,  whatever  I  strongly  thought  of  she  told  me  they
had  communicated  to  her :  and  therefore  I  have  every  reason
to  suppose  that  excitement  of  some  of  these  higher  organs  of
the  brain,  and  the  strong  sympathy  existing  between  her
brain  and  the  brains  of  those  who  were  en  rapport  with  her,
was  the  cause  of  these  hallucinations.  Besides,  when  I  ques¬
tioned  her  as  to  whether  she  really  saw  these  things  or  not,
she  always  said,  “  They  seem  real  to  me  now,  but  I  think
you  have  made  me  see  them ;  and  they  must  be  merely  the
effect  of  an  excited  imagination.”  I  have  not  time  to  enter
much  into  this  subject  at  present ;  but  all  the  ecstatics  who
have  been  my  patients,  or  have  come  under  my  own  notice,
have  expressed  themselves  pretty  nearly  alike ;  and,  from  my
observations  upon  the  ecstatic  patients  of  other  mesmerisers,
I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they  all,  from  sympa¬
thy,  adopt  more  or  less  the  thoughts  and  opinions  of  their
mesmerisers  or  of  those  by  whom  they  are  surrounded;  and
that  this,  in  addition  to  the  ecstatic  delusion  they  are  in,
will  in  a  great  measure  account  for  the  extraordinary  reve¬
lations  of  a  future  state  of  existence  that  some  sleep-wakers
have  professed  to  make.  I  will  here  also  make  a  brief
observation  upon  consulting -somnambulists.  I  have  availed
myself  of  every  opportunity  of  witnessing  their  performances
and  attending  to  their  prescriptions.  That  there  are  many
who  possess  great  clairvoyance  and  an  intuitive  perception  at
times  of  the  diseases  of  their  patients,  I  am  quite  convinced ;
but,  at  the  same  time,  I  feel  equally  certain  that  they  as
often  sympathize  with  the  thoughts  and  ideas  of  those  who
are  put  en  rapport  with  them  as  with  the  state  of  the  pa¬
tient,  and  that  it  is  often  impossible  for  them  to  distinguish
between  their  own  perceptions  and  the  impressions  of  those
en  rapport  with  them,  however  truthfully  they  may  be  in¬
clined.  I  am  sorry  to  see  this  branch  of  the  higher  pheno¬
mena  of  mesmerism  become  a  money-getting  matter,  because
it  is  thus  certain  to  stimulate  the  cupidity  of  many  impostors,
and  humbug  and  charlatanism  will  be  practised  and  tend  to
throw  discredit  on  this  most  curious  and  useful  faculty  of  some
sleep-wakers.  As  to  the  treatment  they  prescribe,  I  have
never  yet  seen  a  somnambulist  who  has  not  adopted  modes
of  treatment  according  to  his  own  previous  ideas  and  opinions,


136


The  Silent  Power  of  the  Will


or  those  of  his  mesmerisers  or  the  persons  with  whom  he  has
much  associated.*

I  think  I  have  succeeded  in  producing  by  will  all  the  phe¬
nomena  which  I  have  been  able  to  produce  by  manipulations.
I  have  induced  sleep :  and  in  both  the  sleeping  and  waking
state  stiffened  the  limbs,  made  muscles  of  the  limbs  and
body  by  concentrating  my  attention  upon  them  perform
the  most  extraordinary  convulsive  motions,  have  drawn  to
me  or  repelled  from  me  the  hand  or  foot,  without  the  person
having  any  knowledge  or  idea  of  my  intention,  and,  in  some
instances  where  the  person  was  awake  and  had  never  been  in
the  mesmeric  sleep,  his  own  volition  or  determination  has
not  been  able  to  control  the  action  of  the  limbs  or  the  motion
of  the  muscles  produced  by  my  will.  I  have  succeeded  in
arresting  spasms  and  taking  away  every  species  of  pain,  and  in
producing  intense  heat  and  perspiration,  by  the  will  only ;  and
in  many  instances  without  the  knowledge  of  the  patients,
who  have  been  all  unconscious  of  the  power  I  have  been  ex¬
erting  until  after  the  results  have  occurred.  On  several  occa¬
sions,  when  all  manipulations  to  produce  sleep  or  take  away
pain  have  been  unsuccessful,  I  have  succeeded  by  a  strong
and  continuous  effort  of  the  will.  At  the  same  time,  as  I
have  before  observed,  I  have  generally  found  that  the  passes
in  combination  with  the  will  or  attention  most  readily  produce
the  results  we  desire,  that  manipulations  are  much  less  fatigu¬
ing  to  the  operator  than  the  continuous  exercise  of  the  will,
and  that  I  have  often  succeeded  in  removing  pain  by  passes
or  laying  the  hand  on  the  affected  part  when  the  will  has
failed  or  even  produced  a  degree  of  irritation.  A  young  man
of  the  name  of  Fenwick,  who  had  lost  the  use  of  his  arm
from  a  cart  passing  over  him,  and  whose  case  I  will  send
separately  to  The  Zoist,  exhibited  some  of  the  most  striking
and  beautiful  phenomena.  By  the  will  I  could  put  him  to
sleep  or  awaken  him,  could  make  the  muscles  of  the  arm
vibrate  as  if  they  were  under  the  action  of  a  galvanic  battery,
without  any  effort  on  the  patient's  part,  and  with  little  or  no
motion  of  the  shoulder,  hand,  or  elbow ;  in  fact  the  muscles

*  Dr.  Elliotson,  in  his  long  article  on  mesmerism*  common  sleep,  dreaming,
sleep-waking,  &c.,  in  his  Human  Physiology ,  says,  “  I  observe  that  the  reme¬
dies  always  depend  upon  the  country  and  the  period, — that,  in  Paris,  leeches  to
the  anus  and  vulva,  ptisans,  baths  of  Bareges,  and  extract  of  nux  vomica  if  the
person  has  heard  of  Dr.  Fouquier’s  treatment  of  paralysis,  gummed  water  and
gummed  lemonade,  diet  drinks  of  borage,  and  M.  Dupuytren’s  remedy  of  mer¬
curialized  milk  procured  by  milking  a  goat  previously  rubbed  with  mercurial
ointment,  are  ordered  :  and  suppose  that  calomel,  sulphate  of  magnesia,  porter,
and  port  wine  would  be  called  for  in  England ;  and  that  neither  quinine  for  ague,
nor  iodine  for  bronchocele,  were  ever  commanded  before  Pelletan  and  Dr.  Coindet
had  made  known  their  virtues.”  p.  662. — Zoist.


and  Sympathy  of  Brains.


13  7


working  without  any  movement  in  the  position  of  the  arm.
When  he  was  asleep  I  could  make  him  come  to  me  or  go
from  me,  stand  up  or  sit  down,  by  the  will  alone.  The  at¬
tractive  power  of  the  will  over  him  was  extraordinary.  In
the  experiments  I  made  upon  him,  I  never  found  that  he  had
any  idea  of  what  I  willed  him  to  do,  or  inclination  to  perform
it.  He  very  frequently  denied  that  the  muscles  of  the  arm
were  moving  until  he  saw  them  himself,  and  said  that  he  had
no  wish  either  to  get  up  or  sit  down,  to  come  to  me  or  go
from  me,  but  that  he  felt  something  drawing  him  which  he
could  not  resist.  I  never  could  discover  that  there  was  any
difference  in  the  results,  whether  I  exercised  the  will  or  the
passes  upon  him.  He  seemed  equally  affected  by  either,
and  always  said  that  he  had  a  sensation  of  great  warmth.

A  gentleman  who  was  suffering  from  the  asthma,  and  used
to  be  speedily  affected  by  mesmerism,  though  rarely  going
into  an  unconscious  state,  was,  when  his  eyes  were  closed,
relieved  quite  as  readily  by  the  operator  fixing  his  attention
on  the  chest  as  by  passes.  He  used  to  say  that  the  warmth
he  felt  was  very  extraordinary,  and  the  relief  from  spasm  was
almost  instantaneous.  In  numerous  experiments  we  thought
that  the  effects  produced  by  the  will  only  were  more  powerful
than  those  by  the  passes.

A  woman  at  Fingall,  in  Yorkshire,  suffering  from  tumors
under  the  arms,  swelling  of  the  joints,  hectic  fever,  profuse
perspirations,  and  decided  consumptive  symptoms,  a  friend
of  mine  asked  me  to  visit,  in  the  hope  that  she  might  derive
temporary  relief  and  sleep,  which  had  long  been  denied  her.
I  did  so.  I  found  her  a  most  sensitive  subject.  A  few  passes
sent  her  to  sleep,  though  she  was  moaning  as  in  great  pain
and  scarcely  seemed  to  notice  what  I  was  doing.  After  sleep¬
ing  a  few  minutes  her  face  became  composed,  and  she  shewed
no  symptoms  of  pain ;  but,  as  I  could  not  get  her  to  speak
in  her  sleep,  I  awakened  >her.  She  looked  very  much  sur¬
prized,  and  said  that  she  felt  quite  comfortable  and  free  from
pain.  I  told  my  friend  that  she  was  so  sensitive  that  I  thought
she  might  be  put  to  sleep  by  the  will  in  a  few  minutes.  The
bed  curtains  were  drawn,  so  that  she  could  not  see  or  know
what  was  going  on.  I  fixed  my  attention  upon  her,  willing
her  to  sleep ;  when  we  looked  at  her  two  minutes  afterwards,
she  was  fast  asleep.  It  was  agreed  that  the  following  day,
though  I  should  be  thirty  miles  off,  the  experiment  should
be  tried  again.  A  lady  went  at  the  time  fixed  upon.  I  pur¬
posely  postponed  the  time  half  an  hour,  thinking  that  the
woman  might  become  acquainted  with  my  intention  and  go
to  sleep  through  the  power  of  her  imagination.  The  lady's
account  was,  that  she  called  upon  the  woman  at  the  time


138


The  Silent  Poiver  of  the  Will


agreed  upon,  and  at  first  thought  that  the  experiment  was
going  to  fail,  as  she  saw  no  symptoms  of  sleep :  but  that  in
half  an  hour  the  patient  went  into  a  deep  sleep,  which  lasted
some  time.  After  this  she  went  to  sleep  every  day  for  a
fortnight  at  the  same  time,  though  I  did  not  will  her  to
sleep.  She  says  that  she  felt  in  a  dreamy  and  happy  state
for  some  days  after.  I  have  mesmerised  her  four  or  five
times :  the  effects  were  always  very  lasting,  and  she  is  now
in  tolerable  health,  and  all  her  old  symptoms  are  gone :  yet
at  the  time  I  first  saw  her  she  was  thought  past  recovery.  It
is  eighteen  months  since  I  first  mesmerised  her.  I  might
bring  forward  many  cases  similar  to  these,  for  it  has  rarely
happened  to  me  of  late  not  to  have  a  patient  who  could
be  sent  to  sleep  as  readily  by  the  will  as  by  passes ;  and
in  some  cases  the  limbs  have  been  made  to  move  and  rigi¬
dity  been  produeed  by  will  in  the  same  way  as  by  passes.  A
rat-catcher  in  this  neighbourhood  had  a  terrier  which  was
very  sagacious,  and  almost  as  sensitive  to  the  will  as  any
human  being.  If  it  was  sleeping  before  the  fire,  and  any  one
fixed  his  attention  upon  it,  it  would  immediately  awake  up,
and  come  to  him,  or  go  to  some  other  part  of  the  room,  as
though  annoyed  at  the  disturbance.  If  it  were  ranging  at
some  distance,  I  have  seen  it  stop  instantly  on  its  master
fixing  his  attention  upon  it,  and  then  go  to  him ;  on  my
noticing  to  the  man  the  sensitiveness  of  his  dog,  he  said,  “  Oh
dear  !  he  is  cunniner  than  any  Christian,  for  if  I  looks  at  him
he  stops/’

I  shall  only  mention  one  other  phenomenon  of  the  will.  It
is  the  sensation  of  light  which  can  frequently  be  produced  by
the  will  upon  some  sleep-wakers.  Many  sleep-wakers  say
they  perceive  a  light  emanating  from  their  mesmeriser.*  If
the  passes  are  employed,  the  light  appears  streaming  from  his
fingers ;  if  the  will  only,  the  light  is  usually  observed  to  pro¬
ceed  most  strongly  from  his  head.  On  some  the  effect  of  the
will  is  very  singular  in  producing  these  phenomena.  I  have
frequently  by  will  produced  upon  a  patient  a  sense  either  of
darkness  or  light,  as  I  pleased.  Often,  when  I  have  been
intently  watching  or  willing  a  patient,  he  has  exclaimed,
“  What  a  bright  light  I  see  around  your  head,  and  how  bright
and  clear  I  begin  to  see  things  \”  I  have  sometimes  found
that,  by  looking  upon  any  object,  I  have  illuminated  it  for  the
patient,  and  enabled  him  to  see  it  though  he  could  distinguish
nothing  else.  This  may  be  attributed  in  many  cases  to  sym¬
pathy  of  brains,  and  the  patient  may  see  through  the  medium
of  the  mesmeriser’s  perceptions :  but  I  have  reason  to  think

*  See  Dr.  Ashburner,  No.  XIII.,  p.  127  ;  XIV.,  p,  262  ;  XXI.,  pp.  100,
106,  108;  Dr.  Elliotson,  No.  XXIII.,  p.  225. — Zoist.


and  Sympathy  of  Brains.


139


this  is  not  always  the  case,  for  I  met  with  the  following  very
curious  instance  in  a  blind  girl.  She  was  nearly  quite  blind
from  amaurosis  ;  the  sight  of  one  eye  was  entirely  gone,  and
that  of  the  other  nearly.  She  rapidly  recovered  the  sight  of
the  eye  which  was  least  affected,  but  it  was  by  slow  degrees
that  the  sight  of  the  other  eye  (in  which  she  had  been  blind
for  two  years,  I  believe)  was  restored.  During  the  progress
of  recovery,  I  frequently  had  to  test  the  improvement  in  her
sight  by  presenting  differently-sized  letters  to  the  eye.  I  ob¬
served  one  day  that  she  saw  some  letters  distinctly  which  I
had  been  holding  in  my  hand,  whilst  she  could  scarcely  see  the
form  of  such  as  I  had  not  touched.  I  then  found  that,  by
putting  my  finger  on  some  of  the  letters  in  a  large  handbill,
she  instantly  selected  those,  whilst  she  could  not  distinguish
the  others.  I  then  fixed  my  attention  only  on  a  particular
letter  or  word,  and  she  was  enabled  to  see  that  letter  or
word.  This  took  place  when  the  girl  was  awake.

I  have  witnessed  some  very  curious  and  similar  pheno¬
mena  produced  by  Dr.  Ashburner’s  will.  By  the  will  he
would  place  a  line  of  fire  on  any  part  of  the  floor  pointed  out
by  one  of  the  company.  The  patient,  on  being  requested  to
walk  across  the  room,  would,  on  reaching  the  place  where  he
had  willed  this  line  of  fire  to  be,  instantly  stop,  and  say  that
she  could  not  cross  the  bar  of  fire.  I  have  seen  him  also
surround  the  patient  by  a  circle  of  fire  by  will,  out  of  which
circle  she  could  not  move.

The  experiments  and  observations  on  the  will  and  sym¬
pathy  that  I  have  now  sent  you  are  only  a  small  portion  of
what  I  have  made  and  witnessed;  but  at  the  same  time  I
think  I  have  said  enough  to  direct  the  attention  of  others  to
this  very  interesting  subject.  If  any  persons  doubt  these
things,  and  wish  to  be  really  satisfied  whether  my  statements
are  accurate  or  not,  I  recommend  them  to  use  their  own  powers,
and  try  experiments  which  are  easily  within  the  reach  of  all.

If  this  sympathy  and  power  of  the  will  really  exists,  there
are  many  who,  though  the  utility  of  the  knowledge  of  the  fact
may  be  questioned  by  some,  will  think  that  every  natural
truth  is  worthy  of  attention  and  investigation.  If  it  does  not
exist,  is  not  a  fact,  as  I  have  stated,  I  will  thank  any  one  who
will  free  me  from  the  hallucination  which  I  at  present  labour
under.  Henry  Stafford  Thompson.

***  Observations  by  Mr.  Thompson  on  the  silent  power
of  the  will  may  be  found  in  No.  XI.,  p.  319 ;  XIV.,  p.  262 ;
XIX.,  p.  253 ;  and  by  Dr.  Ashburner  in  No.  XIX.,  p.  260. —
Zoist.


(  140  )


III.  Notes  on  the  Phenomena  of  the  Will.  By  Mr.  William

Cattell.


“  A  melancholy  spectacle  is  presented  on  the  publication  of  each  succeeding
number  of  The  Zoist ;  persons  grave  by  years,  by  position  in  society,  by  educa¬
tion,  by  profession,  vieing  with  one  another  which  shall  most  outrage  common
sense.  It  makes  the  heart  sick  to  see  men  who,  by  courtesy  at  least,  are  still
deemed  to  be  possessed  of  reason,  guilty  of  so  much  folly.  By  unanswerable
evidence,  mesmerism  has  been  proved,  again  and  again,  to  have  little  other  foun¬
dation,  in  all  its  most  striking  features,  but  trickery  and  delusion.  On  many
occasions  Mesmer  himself  was  convicted  of  imposture.  He  set  the  example  of
that  impudent  trick  which  has  so  often  been  imitated  by  his  followers,  namely,  a
collusion  with  parties  who  pretend  to  have  been  cured.  There  is,  in  particular,
one  early  memorable  instance,  in  which  he  miscalculated  his  power  of  imposing  on
the  public.  It  is  not  surprising:  that  it  required  some  experience  to  attain  the
necessary  dexterity  in  this  kind  of  deception.  The  less  hazardous  secret  of  getting
people  to  counterfeit  diseases  which  he  might  afterwards  represent  as  cured,  he
did  not  at  first  understand.  He  was,  in  consequence,  foolish  enough  to  choose
the  case  of  a  girl  known  to  the  public  of  Vienna  to  be  blind,  in  the  expectation
that  his  assertion  of  a  perfect  cure,  backed  by  the  suborned  testimony  of  the
patient,  would  escape  detection,  and  swell  the  roll  of  his  dupes.  This  is  the
famous  case  of  the  Vienna  musical  girl,  Mademoiselle  Paradis,  who  was  known  to
have  been  blind  for  a  number  of  years.  Apparently  with  her  own  consent,  she
was  pronounced  by  Mesmer  to  be  completely  cured  ;  and  when  a  public  exhibition
was  insisted  on,  he  rested  the  proof  of  his  success  on  her  being  able  to  name
different  colours  presented  to  her  in  succession.  At  first  she  succeeded ;  but  it
being  discovered  that  Mesmer,  in  the  meantime,  made  private  signals  to  her,  she
was  rescued  by  her  father  from  her  thraldom,  found  to  be  as  blind  as  ever,  and
wholly  unable  to  distinguish  colours.  Public  indignation  obliged  Mesmer  to
leave  Vienna  about  1778.  After  this  he  began  his  career  at  Paris,  where  he  had
the  address  to  persuade  a  person  of  some  note,  namely,  Count  de  Gibelin,  a  man
of  letters  and  a  savant,  that  he  had  been  cured  of  a  serious  disease,  and  this  gen¬
tleman  was  induced  to  put  forth  an  appeal  to  the  public  on  behalf  of  Mesmer’s
treatment.  Shortly  after,  however,  and  while  still  undergoing  a  course  of  mag¬
netism,  he  was  arrested  by  the  fell  serjeant,  Death,  who  took  the  cure  into  his
own  hands.  An  ardent  partisan  of  Mesmer,  at  Paris,  was  Monsieur  Campan,  a
gentleman  belonging  to  the  court.  Being  taken  ill,  he  was  removed  to  Mesmer’s
own  house  to  be  cured ;  and  Madame  Campan  tells  us,  in  her  Memoirs,  that  this
time,  her  husband  having  symptoms  of  pleurisy,  was  secretly  bled  and  blistered
by  Mesmer,  who  notwithstanding  received  a  certificate  from  the  patient  that  he
had  been  cured  by  magnetism.  Madame  Campan,  on  being  questioned  by  their
Majesties  as  to  her  husband’s  case,  declared  Mesmer  to  be  a  barefaced  quack,
adding  the  proof  just  mentioned,  and  henceforth  he  was  discountenanced  by  the
French  court.  Among  the  other  tricks  which  Mesmer  practised  at  Paris,  was  the
introduction  of  accomplices  among  his  patients — perhaps  the  first  ‘  thimble-rig  ’
on  record.  One  of  his  juggles  was  to  make  his  patients  stand  or  sit  in  a  circle,
sometimes  of  two  or  three  rows,  around  a  wooden  case  or  bucket  (baquet)  two
feet  high,  in  which  were  contained  vessels  of  magnetised  water.  It  was  covered
with  a  perforated  lid,  and  each  person  in  the  circle  was  furnished  with  a  polished
iron  rod,  alternately  long  and  short,  which  could  be  passed  through  one  of  the
apertures  into  the  bucket,  while  the  other  end  wTas  to  be  directed  towards  the
supposed  seat  of  the  disease  with  which  the  patient  was  affected.  There  was  also
a  cord,  which  seems  to  have  been  differently  arranged  at  different  times;  some¬
times  being  attached  to  the  extremity  of  the  rod  next  the  bucket  and  coiled  about
the  affected  part  of  the  body,  at  other  times  being  made  to  pass  round  the  whole
circle  of  patients,  encircling  once  or  oftener  the  person  of  each ;  sometimes  the


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


141


whole  company  also  joined  hands.  At  first  a  mysterious  silence  reigned  in  the
Hall,  and  the  light  was  feeble  ;  then,  from  time  to  time,  from  an  adjacent  chamber
arose  solemn  sounds  of  music,  vocal  and  instrumental — sudden  changes  being
made  on  their  character.  Sighs  and  suppressed  groans  began  to  prevail ;  the
patients  often  felt  oppressed  and  parched  with  thirst,  to  allay  which  they  were
supplied  with  copious  draughts  of  what  is  called  Imperial,  namely,  cream  of  tartar
water.  After  a  time  an  excitement  arose ;  the  patients  sought  to  embrace  each
other ;  rapid  involuntary  motions  of  the  extremities  and  trunk  occurred  ;  hic¬
cough,  starting,  immoderate  laughter,  piercing  cries,  wildness  of  the  eyes,  were
often  added  ;  and  then  followed  languor,  reverie,  dejection,  and  drowsiness.  At
the  beginning  Mesmer  did  not  appear  ;  but  he  had  secret  confederates  in  the
circle  who  directed  and  encouraged  the  necessary  degree  of  excitement  among  the
unfortunate  dupes.  When  he  did  appear,  it  was  in  an  imposing  robe,  and  holding
in  his  hand  a  rod,  which  he  waved  to  and  fro,  while  he  frequently  condescended
to  apply  his  hands  to  various  parts  of  the  person  in  particular  patients,  or  else
played  with  his  fingers  on  the  forehead  or  on  the  neck,  at  the  same  time  that  he
fixed  a  steady  gaze  on  the  patient,  who,  by  whatever  cause,  had  earned  his  atten¬
tion  for  the  moment.

“  I  will  not  say,  ‘  ex  uno  disce  omnes ,’  because  it  is  very  certain  that  many
partisans  of  mesmerism  are  sincere  and  conscientious  believers  in  its  power’s,  being
themselves  dupes ;  still  more  common  probably  it  is,  that,  having  first  suffered
themselves  to  be  deceived,  they  become  enthusiastically  desirous  to  seduce  others
to  the  same  idolatry.  I  do  however  affirm,  that  Mesmer  was,  beyond  all  doubt,
an  adventurer,  who,  like  many  other  unprincipled  men  before  and  since  his  time,
had  no  higher  motive  of  action  than  the  desire  to  render  the  easy  credulity  of  a
certain  proportion  of  mankind  the  means  of  his  own  aggrandisement.  With  this
settled  purpose  in  his  mind,  he  did  not  so  much  invent  a  system,  as  he  ransacked
the  mystical  writers  who  preceded  him,  to  extract  from  them  whatever  might  most
forward  his  design.  Whoever  is  acquainted  with  the  writings  of  Paracelsus,  Van
Helmont,  Wirdi,  Maxwell,  Kircher,  and  Santenelli,  as  well  as  with  the  several
publications  of  Mesmer  himself,  must  acknowledge  how  much  he  is  indebted  to
such  authorities  for  the  ideas  which  he  propagated.

“  It  is  true  that  mesmerism,  as  it  exists  at  present,  differs  considerably  from
mesmerism  in  the  hands  of  Mesmer  himself  and  his  immediate  followers,  in  the
last  century.  I  say  in  the  last  century,  because,  though  Mesmer  lived  to  the  year
1815,  he  and  his  system  fell  into  complete  obscurity  after  the  French  Revolution
broke  out.  The  country  of  his  refuge  seems  to  have  been  Switzerland.  Different,
however,  as  are  the  views  and  practices  of  the  present  day,  as  compared  with
those  of  Mesmer  and  his  immediate  followers,  it  is  not  too  much  to  assume,  that
the  Mesmerists  of  our  time — for  example,  of  The  Zoist — think  ‘  that  he  produced
real  effects,  though  he  was  ignorant  of  the  cause.’  These  are  the  words  of  Mesmer
himself, — the  words  he  employed  in  speaking  of  his  predecessor,  the  Cure  Gassner,
a  parish  priest,  near  Coire,  in  Switzerland.  Gassner,  just  before  Mesmer  rose  to
fame,  created  a  sensation  in  Switzerland  and  Germany,  by  the  reputation  which
he  acquired  for  the  cure  of  diseases  of  the  same  character  as  those  in  which  mes¬
merists  chiefly  boast  their  success.  Gassner  held,  that  human  diseases  in  general
result  from  the  agency  of  the  devil ;  and  his  method  of  cure  consisted  in  a  species
of  exorcism,  in  which,  by  the  appalling  use  of  the  name  of  Christ,  he  threw  his
patients  into  violent  convulsions,  and  produced  other  effects  on  weak  people,  not
unlike  those  with  which  mesmerists  are  familiar.  The  bishop  of  his  diocese  dis¬
missed  him  in  the  early  part  of  his  career,  as  employing  exorcisms  not  sanctioned
by  the  rules  of  the  Popish  Church  ;  but,  having  attracted  the  attention  and  favour
of  some  of  the  Bishop -Princes  of  Germany,  he  was  restored  to  his  parish.  It  was
in  consequence  of  the  sensation  produced  by  Gassner’s  alleged  success,  that  the
illustrious  De  Haen,  then  the  Imperial  Physician  at  Vienna,  was  led  to  publish
his  Inquiry  into  diseases  said  to  be  the  result  of  ‘possession.’  But  to  return  to
the  mesmerism  of  our  times  ;  it  should  never  be  forgotten  that  a  system,  the
beginnings  of  which  were  raised  with  the  unclean  hands  of  fraud  and  deception,
can  hardly  remain  free  in  its  superstructure  from  the  taint  of  the  like  disgraceful

VOL.  VIII.  M


142


Phenomena  of  the  Will .


instruments.  If  the  same  amount  of  deliberate  imposture  cannot  be  brought
home  to  the  mesmerists  of  our  time,  it  is  not  owing  to  there  being  a  greater
allowance  of  truth  in  their  system,  but  because  self-deception  exists  among  the
professors  to  a  greater  extent,  and  probably  because  the  dupes  being  the  very
Hite  of  human  weakness,  yield  their  belief  without  the  trouble  of  much  lying.

“  ‘  How  long,  ye  simple  ones,  will  ye  love  simplicity  !’

“This  subject  will  be  continued  next  week. - 7,  Nottingham-place,  Re-  <

gent’s-park.” — Medical  Times,  April  13,  1850.

It  is  not  ray  intention  to  advance  any  opinions  on  the  ab¬
stract  nature  of  volition ;  but  simply  to  view  its  relation  with
mesmerism  as  a  power  seen  only  in  certain  effects,  some  of
which  it  is  my  present  purpose  to  relate.  When  first  made
acquainted  with  this  agency  by  reading  the  experiments  of
Dupotet  at  the  Hotel  Dieu  in  Paris,  that  the  report  of  a  pri¬
vate  case  by  a  friend  tended  to  confirm,  I  resolved  to  avail
myself  of  the  first  opportunity  to  try  the  effect  of  my  own
will.  This  soon  presented  itself  in  the  person  of  Arthur  P.,
whom  I  had  mesmerised  but  once  previously,  and  failed  to
pass  into  the  sleep.  When  he  left  me  after  a  second  failure,

I  commenced  whiling  by  intensely  thinking  of  him  for  a  few
minutes,  by  which  time  I  concluded  he  would  have  arrived  at
home.  When  I  saw  him  at  eleven  o’clock  next  morning,  he
appeared  very  drowsy ;  and  complained  of  headache  and  stu¬
por,  unlike  anything  he  had  ever  experienced  before;  the
former  was  soon  removed  by  breathing,  and,  after  being  awak¬
ened  in  mesmeric  form,  he  felt  quite  well  and  comfortable
again,  though  for  some  time  he  had  a  horror  of  being  mes¬
merised.  His  relation  of  what  occurred  after  leaving  me  on
the  previous  evening  was  exceedingly  ludicrous.  The  weather
being  cold,  he  attempted  to  run ;  but  his  running  soon  sub¬
sided  into  a  walk,  for  there  came  over  him  a  tremor  which  he
could  not  control,  accompanied  by  a  dread  both  of  falling
down  and  having  his  jaw  locked.  As  the  agitation  increased
he  became  frightened,  and  thought  of  returning,  but  was
fearful  of  the  stupor  overcoming  him  by  the  way.  On  arriv¬
ing  home,  being  unable  either  to  sit  quietly  or  eat  any  supper,
he  was  accused  of  inebriation  or  some  terrible  fright,  and  in
this  state  then  retired  to  rest,  sleeping  soundly  till  late  in  the
morning — a  period  of  almost  twelve  hours,  when  he  was  with
difficulty  aroused.  This  case  fully  convinced  me  that  the
•  silent  will  could  exert  an  influence  over  persons  even  in  the
waking  state,  under  certain  conditions ;  for,  though  this  Sub¬
ject  has  never  slept  or  shewn  much  susceptibility  to  my  mani¬
pulations,  yet,  when  the  will  alone  was  concentrated  upon
him  immediately  after  the  demesmerising  process  and  whilst
walking  home,  he  was  conscious  of  my  endeavouring  to  throw


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


143


him  into  the  sleep,  and  felt  the  same  sensations  as  the  passes
had  before  induced,  but  in  a  greater  degree,  so  that  he  had
great  difficulty  in  resisting  the  stupor  which  was  creeping
over  him  and  wished  to  return  and  have  it  removed,  yet  dared
not  through  fear  of  falling  asleep  on  his  way.  The  space
through  which  the  will  here  acted  was  inconsiderable.  That
it  can  produce  effects  at  great  distances  is  now  an  established
fact,  but  what  the  boundaries  are  at  which  its  palpable  action
ceases — though  these  must  exist — will  for  some  time  remain
uncertain,  since  they  would  vary  with  both  the  operator  and
subject.  Frequently  when  Master  Tims  was  in  the  room  have
I  impressed  him  to  come  to  me  by  silently  willing,  when  he
did  not  suspect  it;  or  thrown  him  into  sleep-waking  though
busily  employed.  However,  if  he  had  any  suspicion,  his  own
will  was  usually  sufficiently  powerful  to  resist  me  with  success.

The  following  case  is  the  only  one  where  an  opportunity
has  presented  itself  of  using  the  independent  will  on  a  more
extensive  scale.  A  young  lady,  the  sister  of  a  surgeon,  had
long  been  the  subject  of  rheumatism,  and  was  compelled  to
keep  her  right  hand  constantly  covered  in  consequence  of  the
fingers  being  so  swollen  that  she  was  unable  to  use  it,  and  the
forefinger  was  rigid.  I  mesmerised  her  nine  times,  and  the
last  time  she  became  sleep-waking :  the  use  of  the  hand  was
restored  and  her  general  health  improved,  and  she  returned
into  the  country  to  her  residence,  about  ninety -five  miles  from
London ,  promising,  at  my  request,  to  compose  herself  upon
the  sofa  for  the  next  few  evenings  at  seven  o’clock,  when  I
would  endeavour  to  mesmerise  her.  A  week  afterwards,  her
brother  informed  me  that  my  patient  had  regularly  obeyed
these  instructions ,  without  feeling  the  slightest  effect  :  and,  in
fact ,  I  had  hitherto  been  unable  to  keep  my  engagement.  One
evening — a  fortnight  having  elapsed — it  was  suggested  that  I
should  attempt  to  mesmerise  my  absent  subject,  as  she  could
now  have  no  intimation  of  my  design ;  and,  it  being  then
seven  o’clock,  I  willed  her  intensely  for  ten  minutes.  Two
days  afterwards  her  brother  shewed  me  a  note  written  b}^  her
late  on  that  same  night,  saying,  “  I  felt  Mr.  Cattell  mesmer¬
ising  me  this  evening  :  I  was  writing  to  London,  but  was
obliged  to  put  down  my  pen,  and  then  asked  if  it  were  seven
o’clock ;  they  told  me  it  was  a  quarter  past,  so  I  went  to  lie
down,  but  did  not  sleep,  though  my  head  was  very  hot  and
painful.”*  This  case  was  thus  rendered  accidentally  very  con¬
clusive  ;  for,  when  the  lady  prepared  herself  night  after  night

*  See  Mr.  Thompson's  effect  upon  Miss  Collins  in  Fludyer-street,  West¬
minster,  while  he  was  at  Nerot’s  Hotel  in  Clifford-street,  No.  XII.,  p.  477. —
Zoist.

M  2


144


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


at  the  same  hour  in  expectation  of  being  sent  to  sleep,  as  the
result  of  an  operation  which  she  believed  I  was  at  that  mo¬
ment  performing  in  London,  there  was  no  effect ;  yet  when,
some  time  afterwards,  imagination  being  precluded  and  the
mind  engaged  in  correspondence,  I  did  operate  by  directing
the  will  upon  her,  a  visible  effect  which  made  her  conscious
of  being  mesmerised  was  the  result.

Latterly  my  attention  has  been  directed  to  series  of  what
I  once  termed  peculiarities,  which  accompany  my  dreaming
state.  It  is  always  associated  with  the  consciousness  of  being
in  a  state  of  existence  differing  from  the  normal  one,  and
which  I  can  withdraw  myself  from  and  exchange  for  some
other  similarly  dreaming  state  by  a  simple  energetic  act  of
volition,  usually  signified  by  apparent  self-destruction,  such  as
throwing  myself  from  a  precipice,  into  a  well,  &c.,  &c.,  which
acts  are  also  deprived  of  their  disagreeable  and  painful  sensa¬
tions  by  a  benumbing  influence  of  will.  If  the  dream  be  very
vivid  and  obscure  the  consciousness,  this  is  restored  in  any
emergency  or  danger ;  and,  when  nightmare  has  raised  me
in  the  air  and  I  am  falling,  the  will  deprives  the  contact  with
the  earth  of  any  sensibility  to  pain.  Again,  if  before  falling
asleep  the  mind  be  earnestly  directed  upon  certain  circum¬
stances  or  a  particular  train  of  thought,  my  dream,  if  any,
will  usually  correspond  with  and  be  moulded  upon  these ;  so
that  the  will  here  forms  the  dream.  It  is  not  unusual  for  a
person  who  wishes  to  awake  at  a  certain  hour,  to  fall  asleep
with  that  desire  existing  in  his  thought,*  and  I  know  two  or
three  who  signify  this  volition  by  marking  the  intended  time
upon  their  pillows,  and  the  expected  result  almost  invariably
follows.  This  power  of  volition  is  seen  where — especially  with
women  and  children — some  rare  event  is  about  to  occur  on
the  morrow  long  before  their  accustomed  hour  of  waking,  but
which  they  have  a  strong  desire  to  witness.  Who  does  not
remember  that  when  a  child  he,  on  such  a  morrow,  surprised
himself  and  falsified  the  predictions  of  his  nurse,  by  waking
in  time? — because  as  he  fell  asleep  the  desire  was  uppermost
in  his  mind.  There  is  an  evident  similarity  between  these
cases  and  the  obedience  of  a  subject  in  his  normal  state  to
commands  received  in  sleep-waking. t  In  both  there  exists  in
the  brain  an  idea  or  command  of  which  the  individual,  through
a  different  state  being  superinduced,  is  for  a  specified  time
unconscious,  and  which  comes  forward  and  imperatively  di¬
rects  him  at  a  certain  moment  prefixed.  The  following  cases

*  See  Dr.  Elliotson,  No.  XXII.,  p.  223. — Zoist.

f  See  Dr.  Elliotson,  No.  XI.,  pp.  361 — 379  ;  XXII.,  pp.  222 — 224. — Zoist.


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


145


are  selected  from  many  others  in  my  possession,  as  illustrative
of  this  power  of  sleep-waking  commands.

Robert  B.,  set.  19,  being  in  sleep-waking,  I  desired  him  to
come  at  half-past  one  (exactly  an  hour  after)  and  ask  a  parti¬
cular  question  which  was  specified  to  him  at  the  time,  first  of
myself  and  immediately  afterwards  of  a  Mr.  C.  whom  I  ex¬
pected  would  then  be  present.  I  awoke  him,  and,  as  usual,
he  replied  to  my  enquiries  that  he  did  not  recollect  anything
which  had  occurred  in  sleep-waking.  I  noted  the  time  ex¬
actly,  and  about  two  minutes  before  the  half-hour  Robert
came  and  entered  into  conversation  with  me,  saying  he  had  a
desire  at  that  moment  to  do  so.  As  I  recollected  the  com¬
mand,  a  smile  crossed  my  countenance,  which  he  remarked,

and  he  asked,  “  What  are  you - There  was  a  momentary

pause,  after  which  he  put  the  question  I  had  specified ;  but  I
failed  in  detecting  any  change  in  his  countenance,  and,  look¬
ing  immediately,  found  the  minute  hand  exactly  upon  the
half-hour.  Meanwhile  Robert  went  to  that  part  of  the  room
where  my  friend  Mr.  C.  had  been  lately  sitting,  and,  express¬
ing  regret  at  his  absence,  presently  entirely  forgot  the  circum¬
stances ,  though  he  always  remembered  it  in  sleep-waking .  One
morning,  about  twelve  o'clock,  I  requested  little  Tims,  who
was  then  in  sleep-waking,  to  convey  two  messages  at  five
minutes  past  two  in  the  afternoon,  and  shortly  afterwards
awoke  him.  The  gentlemen  who  were  to  be  the  recipients  of
these  commissions  being  warned  of  the  experiment,  in  order
that  they  should  not  express  any  surprise  or  anger  or  irritate
the  subject  by  a  laugh,  we  quietly  awaited  the  result.  As  we
expected,  he  delivered  the  messages  at  precisely  five  minutes
after  two  o’clock,  but  did  not  await  a  reply  to  either  or  stay
for  what  he  requested.  He  returned,  and  presently,  when
charged  with  his  folly  in  going  on  so  ridiculous  an  errand,
strenuously  denied  that  he  had  even  moved  from  his  chair  for
some  time  previously.  In  this  case  both  gentlemen  believed
the  boy  to  be  awake,  and  noticed  no  change  in  him  except  an
appearance  of  vacancy  about  the  eye,  which  did  not  seem  to
move  when  he  addressed  them.  In  his  succeeding  sleep-
wakings,  Tims  remembered  these  missions  perfectly,  but  de¬
clined  executing  any  similar  errand,  because  it  subjected  him
to  ridicule ;  so  that  when  at  another  time  he  was  commanded
to  come  to  me  at  fifteen  minutes  before  three  (it  being  then
twelve  o'clock),  he  positively  refused.  However,  as  the  time
approached,  our  hero  became  drowsy,  and  in  a  few  minutes
came  to  me  complaining  of  headache :  his  head  drooped  and
sleep-waking  supervened.  He  did  not  again  object  to  similar
experiments,  stipulating  that,  if  in  their  execution  there  was


146


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


anything  to  excite  a  laugh,  it  must  not  be  indulged  in  before
him,  as  he  was  keenly  sensitive  to  ridicule.  With  great  rea¬
diness,  therefore,  he  promised  to  request  the  presence  of  my
friend,  Mr.  Douglas,  after  the  expiration  of  three  hours  and
three  quarters  from  the  time  of  his  waking,  as  that  gentleman
would  probably  be  in  an  adjoining  room  at  that  hour,  though
it  was  necessary,  he  said,  for  him  to  be  told  the  precise  moment ,
which  I  accordingly  named.  On  this  occasion  I  confidently
expected  the  performance  of  the  promise,  and  was  therefore
not  surprised  when  at  the  appointed  minute  Tims  entered  the
next  room,  and,  finding  Mr.  Douglas  still  absent,  requested
he  might  be  informed  that  I  wanted  him  the  instant  he  arrived.
When  shortly  afterwards  Mr.  Douglas,  having  received  the
message,  came  and  was  confronted  with  Tims,  the  latter  ear¬
nestly  denied  that  he  had  left  the  room,  and  thought  it  ex¬
ceedingly  strange  that  we  had  a  second  time  combined  to
make  him  doubt  the  evidence  of  his  senses  !  In  this  case,  I
had  taken  the  precaution  to  occupy  him,  so  that  he  was  busily
engaged  when  the  expected  moment  arrived ;  but  this  in  no
way  interrupted  the  execution  of  the  command.

In  order  still  further  to  test  these  half-waking  phenomena,
I  one  day  desired  a  sleep-waker  to  deliver  three  messages  at
a  distance,  and  arranged  that  several  persons  should  meet  and
speak  to  him  on  the  way ;  while  I  placed  myself  so  as  to
obstruct  him  as  he  returned.  He  did  not  heed  or  seem  to
hear  them  speak,  but  passed  quickly  and  rapidly  by,  appa¬
rently  awake,  his  eyes  being  fixed,  and  looking  straight  before
him  with  a  vacant  gaze,  as  though  he  were  absorbed  in  urgent
business.  As  he  approached  I  addressed  him,  and,  suddenly
arousing  himself  as  if  from  a  reverie,  he  could  not  comprehend
how  he  came  there,  except  I  had  willed  him  to  sleep  and  just
awakened  him.  It  was  remarkable,  in  all  these  experiments,
that  the  sleep-wakers  invariably,  upon  receiving  the  answers  to
their  messages,  replied,  “  Very  well,”  but  did  not  deliver  them
to  me,  though  it  is  true  that  this  was  never  specified  in  the
command.  All  the  patients  in  sleep- waking  remembered
these  occurrences,  and  agreed  that  on  such  occasions  they
were  somnambulant,  though  any  command  which  had  for  its
object  the  special  induction  of  this  state  at  a  certain  time
invariably  failed,  and  caused  intense  and  peculiar  headache
which  only  my  breathing  on  the  head  removed.  I  once  ex¬
pressed  to  the  last  subject  in  a  succeeding  sleep-waking  my
wish  that  he  should  remember  the  above  journey  in  his  normal
state,  an  event  which  occurred  very  much  to  his  surprise.  Such
phenomena  are  occasionally  met  with  in  disease,  especially  if  a
blow  have  been  received  upon  the  brain,  as  Abercrombie  and


Phenomena  of  the  Will,


147


others  have  beautifully  illustrated,  and  an  instance  occurred
many  years  ago  in  my  own  person.*  Whilst  I  was  running
one  afternoon  with  a  companion,  my  foot  caught  in  a  tuft  of
grass  and  I  fell,  striking  the  back  of  my  head,  though  without
feeling  pain  at  the  time.  We  continued  our  walk  home,  a
distance  of  more  than  a  mile,  through  fields  in  which  there
were  fences  to  climb ;  but,  after  passing  through  a  postern
door,  not  many  yards  from  the  place  of  my  fall,  my  memory
forsook  me,  and  I  remained  in  this  state  of  want  of  recollec¬
tion  till  we  had  finished  supper,  which  it  seems  I  had  been
heartily  enjoying.  The  circumstance  so  alarmed  me  at  the
time  that  I  feared  to  mention  it;  and  next  morning,  observ¬
ing  with  surprise  that  a  dead  crow  was  hanging  on  one  of  the
cherry-trees,  I  asked  who  had  placed  it  there,  and  was  told  I
had  clone  so  myself,  having  brought  it  with  me  last  evening,
and  related  that  after  a  long  race  I  had  overtaken  and  killed
it.  The  circumstances  which  occurred  between  passing  through
the  postern  door  and  sitting  at  supper  remained  an  oblivious
blank  for  some  years,  though  I  was  conscious  that  so  much
time  had  elapsed  of  which  my  memory  could  recall  nothing ;
till  one  day,  as  I  was  wondering  over  the  anecdote  of  my  race
with  the  crow,  both  each  circumstance  which  they  told  me
and  several  others  gradually  seemed  to  identify  themselves
with  my  memory,  so  that  it  really  became  more  strange  that
I  ever  forgot  them.f

There  are  many  beautiful  effects  in  mesmerism  which  may
be  produced  by  the  silent  will.  I  have  often  suddenly  sus¬
pended  and  as  quickly  restored  the  hearing  and  speech  of  a
sleep-waker ;  either  isolating  him  completely,  or  only  in  refer¬
ence  to  a  certain  person.  In  like  manner  the  patient  would
be  unable  to  lift  a  chair,  or  book,  or  even  the  hat  on  his  head,
until  the  previous  act  of  volition  were  repealed.  I  used  some¬
times  to  awaken  my  sleep-wakers  by  the  silent  will,  or  by
command.  One  of  these  however  told  me  in  sleep-waking
that  the  influence  was  not  in  this  way  so  perfectly  removed  as
by  passes,  and  he  felt  stiff  and  uncomfortable  afterwards.
The  effect  of  pure  water  upon  patients,  that  has  been  sub¬
jected  to  an  impression  of  the  will  and  presented  as  some
other  substance,  is  too  notorious  to  require  more  than  a  pass¬
ing  notice.  The  numerous  examples  which  have  from  time  to
time  appeared  in  The  Zoist,  together  with  the  beautiful  expe¬
riments  so  often  shewn  by  Dr.  Ashburner,  require  no  confirma¬
tion,  and  fully  prove  that  the  will  can  so  powerfully  act  upon

*  See  Dr.  Elliotson,  No.  XII.,  p.  476. — Zoist.

f  When  persons  have  forgotten  events  or  acquirements  after  a  blow  or  disease,
the  whole  has  often  at  length  returned  to  the  memory. — Zoist.


148


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


the  sleep- waker  as  to  produce  in  him  all  the  ordinary  effects
of  a  similar  draught  of  whatever  the  water  represents.  And,
further,  by  a  sleep-waking  command,  he  will  also  take  water
for  wine,  milk  for  coffee,  or  be  deceived  as  to  the  individuality
of  any  person  or  object  according  to  the  will  of  the  operator.
These  facts  have  been  brought  forward  in  a  recent  work,*  as
suggestive  that  lycanthropy, — that  monstrous  effort  of  me¬
diaeval  magic  and  record  of  ancient  superstition  and  mytho¬
logy, — may  have  had  its  origin  and  chief  support  in  this  power
of  the  human  will,  in  certain  organizations,  to  change  the
personality  of  the  magician  or  witch  and  so  deceive  the  spec¬
tators  senses,  as  these  would  swear  they  had  witnessed  the
transformation  of  a  fellow-creature  into  the  dreaded  shape  of
a  cat  or  wolf.  I  have  many  times  been  present  when  a  sus¬
ceptible  subject  has  been  unable  to  identify  her  mesmeriser,
who  she  supposes  has  left  her  with  some  other  person;  and,
whenever  this  occurred,  he  acknowledged  that  he  was  think¬
ing  of  the  individual  with  whom  his  identity  was  for  the  mo¬
ment  exchanged.  A  frequent  immediate  cause  of  this  pheno¬
menon  was  the  absence  of  a  ring  which  the  operator  almost
always  wore ;  and,  on  this  being  replaced,  the  mistake  in  his
identity  would  not  be  discovered  by  the  sleep-waker,  who  on
the  contrary  believed  that  the  imaginary  individual  had  gone
away.  As  regards  lycanthropy,  the  stories  of  it  as  handed
down  to  us  are  by  no  means  to  be  received  either  as  credible
or  unvarnished;  else  why  reject  the  more  modern  freaks  of
certain  mvsterious  inhabitants  of  haunted  houses,  where  the
keenest  vigilance  has  failed  in  detecting  human  agency  or
trick  ?  However,  the  records  we  possess  of  the  existence  of
a  belief  so  astounding,  while  they  fail  in  carrying  conviction
to  the  mind,  still  leave  upon  us  a  strong  impression  that  it
did  not  strengthen  or  flourish  for  ages  upon  imposture,  though
much  of  this  may  have  been  reported  as  truth.  Ex  nihilo  nil
fit,  said  the  Latin  proverb,  and  no  great  or  widely  extended
belief  ever  existed  which  was  not  partially  true  and  founded
upon  truth ;  and  it  were  far  more  credulous  to  acknowledge
the  wide-spread  imposture  which  could  hold  its  terrors  alike
over  Europe  and  Asia,  America  and  the  Indies,  and  intimately
interwove  itself  with  the  myths  of  ancient  Greece  and  Rome,
than  accept  it  as  an  exaggerated  and  ignorant  account  of
certain  operations  of  the  human  will  or  some  similar  agency.
As  there  was  ignorance  of  the  nature  and  object  of  won¬
ders,  as  well  as  of  a  great  many  natural  laws  by  which  they
may  be  produced,  the  question  of  their  credibility  resolves


*  Night  Side  of  Nature,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  7.


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


149


itself  into  little  more  than  a  question  as  to  the  credibility
of  the  witnesses.  A  man  may  appear  ridiculous  if  he  ex¬
presses  his  belief  in  any  story  of  this  sort ;  and  yet,  to  say
that  all  such  wonders  are  false,  would  be  an  extravagant  bold¬
ness  of  assertion.  The  accounts  of  wonders,  then,  from  Livy’s
prodigies  downwards,  I  should  receive ,  according  to  Herodotus’s
expression  when  speaking  of  one  of  them  bore  dincrrecov,  ovre
Triarevcov  tl  \lclv  :  sometimes  considering  of  what  fact  they
were  an  exaggerated  or  corrupted  representation,  at  other
times  trying  to  remember  whether  any  and  how  many  other
notices  occur  of  the  same  thing ,  and  whether  they  are  of  force
enough  to  lead  us  to  search  for  some  law,  hitherto  undis¬
covered,  to  which  they  may  all  be  referred,  and  become  here¬
after  the  foundation  of  a  new  science.*  It  is  probable  that
these  wonders  of  lycanthropy  and  mediaeval  magic  were  liable
to  be  witnessed  more  readily  and  frequently  then,  than  could
ever  be  again ;  the  ages  in  which  they  flourished  were  those  of
ignorance  and  impressibility,  and  so  unsusceptible  are  the
present  generation  to  sudden  mesmeric  effects  that  we  are
led  to  infer  some  psychological  change  in  the  race.  We  know
that  when  a  state  has  once  been  induced  in  the  organism,  the
latter  is  liable  at  any  time  to  enter  into  it  again  by  the  excit¬
ing  influences  of  association  or  imagination, — a  word  of  many
meanings  and  comprehending  various  phases  of  mind.  Fear
predisposes  us  to  the  reception  of  external  impressions :  as
also  wonder,  the  excitement  of  novelty,  and  expectancy  of
something  strange  and  powerful,  whose  cause  is  moreover  in¬
visible.  These  all  operate  from  without,  and  act  with  in¬
creased  energy  as  habit  and  temperament  shew  a  preponder¬
ance  of  the  nervous  system.  Hence  few  among  the  possessors
of  witchcraft  were  males ;  and  their  victims  were  most  of  them
women.  The  more  educated  and  powerful  mind  of  the  man
led  him  to  the  higher  aspirations  of  alchemy  and  the  dawning
sciences ;  while  women  were  left  to  their  household  duties,
with  much  time  and  but  scanty  food  for  reflection  or  mental
exercise  beyond  the  reception  and  transmission  of  fables,
anecdotes,  and  occasionally  exaggerated  accounts  of  passing
great  events.  Knowledge  was  local  and  traditional,  books
scarce,  or,  if  known,  sealed  to  the  mass  of  the  people.  The
ignorance  of  mistaken  but  fervent  adoration  invested  natural
laws  with  the  importance  of  immediate  emanations  from  the
Deity  or  a  demon ;  tales  of  wonder  were  credulously  sought
after,  dreaded,  and  as  extensively  circulated,  forming  the  cur¬
rent  conversation  of  the  age.  How  then  can  we  wonder  that

'*  Arnold’s  Lectures,  p.  129.  The  whole  of  these  lectures  are  well  worthy  of
perusal,  and  their  lamented  author  was  deeply  interested  in  mesmerism.


150


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


the  nervous  excitability  of  woman,  aided  by  her  pure  and
cherished  faith,  itself  attested  by  numerous  miracles  and
relics,  should  fall  a  victim  to  the  spiteful  and  energetic  will.
The  Witch  of  Endor,  Roman  Yenefica,  and  all  the  Pythise,
were  female ;  and  Tacitus  records  of  the  Gothic  women  and
other  tribes  in  the  north,  the  Druidesses,  &c.,  that  they  were
the  great  instruments  of  such  arts  in  his  day.  In  Europe  all
the  decrees  were  directed  against  women,  who  were  not  per¬
mitted  to  be  present  at  the  coronation  of  Richard  Coeur  de
Lion.  The  witchcraft  of  Thessaly,  and  indeed  of  all  Greece,
was  attributed  to  women,  and  this  same  belief  in  the  femi-
nality  of  the  art  existed  among  the  negroes  of  Africa,  the
Scands  of  the  North,  and  the  North  American  Indians.

Erom  a  belief  in  the  power,  the  transition  was  easy  to  the
exercise  of  the  art ;  and  many  were  doubtless  taught  that  the
power  resided  in  them.  Thus  Elizabeth  Savage  complains  :

a  Some  call  me  witch,

And  being  ignorant  of  myself,  they  go

About  to  teach  me  how  to  be  one ;  urging

That  my  bad  tongue  (by  their  foul  usage  made  so)

Forespeaks  their  cattle,  doth  bewitch  their  corn,

Themselves,  their  servants,  and  their  babes  at  nurse.

This  they  enforce  upon  me,  and  in  part

Make  me  to  credit  it.” — Witch  of  Edmonton,  Act  ii.,  Scene  i.

This  faith  in  the  powers  of  a  reputed  witch,  while  it  in¬
creased  her  confidence,  induced  in  the  believer  that  state  of
susceptibility  on  which  she  may  readily  work.

Probably  many  recorded  transformations  were  the  result
of  cerebral  disease ;  we  find  in  modern  times  persons  who
will  assert  that  they  are  always  accompanied  by  some  animal,
as  a  dog,  and  even  by  a  human  being.

There  is  a  work  on  Incantations,  ascribed  doubtfully  to
Galen,  in  which  the  author,  alluding  to  the  then  prevalent
system  of  therapeutics,  says,  “  When  a  man’s  mind  is  pre¬
convinced  of  the  healing  power  of  magical  ceremonies  over
his  disease,  their  application  will  cure  him.”  Magic  and
physic  were  then  handmaidens ;  the  priest  or  seer  was  a  phy¬
sician;  and  Galen  tells  us  that  for  the  use  of  herbs,  their
formularies,  introduced  originally  from  Egypt,  were  magical,
thus  connecting  them  with  a  country  whose  priesthood  were
mesmerists  and  used  therapeutic  clairvoyance  in  the  subter¬
ranean  chambers  of  the  temples  of  their  brilliantly  illumined
Isis.  The  further  we  penetrate  their  history  and  push  our
research,  the  more  this  truth  becomes  confirmed ;  and  the
figures  in  their  hieroglyphical  paintings,  like  many  ancient
Indian  statues,  are  in  mesmeric  postures ;  the  three  first
fingers  are  extended,  and  the  others  bent  under  the  hand  or


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


151


broken  off ;  and  the  Isiac  table,  which  Champollion  thinks
was  executed  in  the  reign  of  Hadrian,  presents  a  group  in
mesmeric  attitudes.  Among  the  Nadvessis  and  Chippeways,
and  even  now  among  the  Osages,  the  offices  of  priest,  magician,
and  physician  are  inseparable ;  in  Mexico  the  physicians  were
also  priests,  and  the  Pegoodinavian  virgins  were  simultane¬
ously  instructed  in  magic,  physic,  and  surgery,  and  were  also
therapeutic  clairvoyantes.  In  the  lie  des  Saintes  were  for¬
merly  magicians,  who  were  healers  of  the  incurable,  according
to  the  fashionable  authority  of  the  day,  and  they  combined
other  arts,  whence  we  may  infer  that  clairvoyance  was  not
unknown  among  them.  (Pomp.  Mela ,  vol.  iii.,  chap,  vi.)

One  rather  curious  method  of  magical  therapeutics,  inti¬
mately  connected  with  our  subject,  was  the  healing  of  diseases
by  the  sound  of  musical  instruments.  Thus  Democritus  says
that  this  power  of  the  flute  and  the  trumpet  was  used  by
Asclepiades  to  cure  sciatica;  he  affirmed  that  its  continued
sound  made  the  nervous  fibres  palpitate  and  the  pain  vanish,
thus  recognising  also  the  immense  controlling  power  which
resides  in  the  nervous  system.  This  method  seems  closely
connected  with  the  traditionary  stories  of  Orpheus,  the  musi¬
cian  and  charmer,  soothsayer,  and  it  would  appear  physician
also,  since  it  is  recorded  that  he  made  many  discoveries
in  medicine.*  (Pliny,  N.H.  xxv.  2.)  Pie  is  considered  as
the  founder- of  the  Grecian  mysteries,  whose  import  is  sup¬
posed  to  have  been  explained  in  the  ancient  Orphic  poems.
He  moreover  received  his  mystical  knowledge  from  the  Dac-
tyli  (fingers  =  finger-men  possibly  =  hand-men)  of  Mount  Ida,
so  celebrated  as  magicians  and  such  skilful  physicians,  that
their  name  became  synonymous  with  that  of  healers ;  these
were  thought  to  be  connected  with  the  Corybantes,  or  priests
of  Cybele,  who,  like  the  modern  Turkish  dervishes,  induced
sleep-waking  delirium  by  frantic  gestures,  and  the  beating  of
cymbals  and  drums,  &c.  So  vast  was  the  application  of  this
magic, — comprehending  charms  and  ceremonies  appealing  to
the  cerebral  power  over  the  frame,  clairvoyance,  mesmeric
manipulations,  the  frictions,  and  gentle  touchings  or  stroking
of  the  diseased, — that  almost  the  whole  art  of  therapeutics
was  composed  of  its  formularies.  The  charms  have  some  of
them  descended  down  to  figure  as  curiosities  in  our  museums,
with  the  wonderful  crystal  of  Kelly  ;  they  consist  variously  of
artificial  substances,  as  scraps  of  writing,  rough  unpolished
stones,  amber  (of  electrical  notoriety),  jasper,  agate,  &c.,  or
wrought  into  beetles  and  reptiles,  into  eyes,  fingers,  &c.,  and

*  Among  the  works  ascribed  to  him  are  ’Iepot  \oyoi  (sacred  legends),  reXerai
(mysteries),  xPrl(rlJL01  (predictions),  and  a  book  on  the  magical  properties  of  stones.


152


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


quadrupeds.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  the  selection  of
stones  for  rings  and  other  ornaments  the  ancients  were  chiefly
guided  by  a  reference  to  their  magical  virtues  as  amulets.
The  ring,  indeed,  has  often  been  noticed  in  connexion  with,
mesmerism.  Above  I  have  related  a  case  of  loss  of  individual¬
ity  restored  by  one  which  the  operator  was  accustomed  to
wear ;  and,  in  a  former  number  of  The  Zoist,  I  mentioned  the
use  of  it  in  cross-mesmerism.*  In  ancient  history  we  find  it
reported  of  Prometheus,  the  purloiner  of  divinity  and  intelli¬
gence  from  the  gods, — who  taught  mankind  the  properties  of
medicinal  herbs,  the  method  of  divination  by  sacrifices,  as  it
was  called,  tepo/xavreia,  and  the  taming  of  animals,  (a  physi¬
cian  and  mesmerist,) — wore  a  ring  set  with  a  stone.f  Among
many  others  equally  celebrated,  was  that  of  Charicleia,  the
ring  which  Gyges  found  on  the  giant's  finger  in  the  earth,  by
the  powers  of  which  he  rendered  himself  invisible  at  pleasure;
and  the  iron  one  of  Eucrates,  mentioned  by  Lucian.  J  Whilst
upon  this  subject  of  rings,  I  will  relate  the  extraordinary
effects  of  an  emerald  which  a  clairvoyante  elected  in  sleep¬
waking.  The  lady  had  for  years  been  subject  to  morning
nausea  and  headache ;  and,  though  mesmerism  had  relieved,
it  had  not  cured  these  distressing  symptoms.  One  afternoon,
about  twelve  months  ago,  she  foresaw  a  serious  illness  which
she  should  shortly  suffer,  and,  so  far  as  her  present  know¬
ledge  extended,  there  appeared  no  hope  of  recovery.  About
six  o'clock  that  same  evening,  being  again  sleep-waking,  she
was  earnestly  requested  by  us  to  look  for  more  certain  in¬
formation  which  might  enable  us  to  prevent  or  palliate  this
approaching  malady.  She  for  some  time  positively  declined,
became  very  dejected  and  melancholy,  and  told  us  that  death
had  no  terrors  for  her ;  but,  after  a  while,  becoming  more
cheerful,  she  said  that  if  it  were  possible  to  obtain  an  emerald
ring  which,  when  presented  to  her  in  the  sleep-waking  state,
would  induce  coma,  three  months'  illness  might  be  prevented
and  her  life  saved  !  In  her  expressive  language,  “  Death  was
at  that  moment  standing  behind  her  chair  !"  At  our  request,
she  then  mentally  visited  several  jewellers'  shops,  in  succes¬
sion,  and  was  again  becoming  low-spirited  and  fatigued,  when
fortunately  she  discovered  such  a  ring  in  a  jeweller's  window
in  Oxford-street.  From  this  place  we  accordingly  procured
several  emeralds,  that  she  might  elect  the  proper  one.  By
her  express  directions  the  magnetizer  and  myself  joined  our
right  hands ;  and  each  ring,  being  taken  separately,  was  placed
so  as  to  rest  on  both  hands ,  and  thus  presented.  Neither  the

*  Zoist i  No.  XXVII.,  p.  229.  f  Zoist ,  No.  XIX.,  p.  278.

J  Philojjs.  xvii.


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


153


first  nor  second  produced  any  effect ;  and  our  anxiety  was  not
a  little  relieved,  when,  on  presenting  another,  the  sleep-waker
fell  back  in  a  deep  sleep.  This  same  result  followed  three
times  in  succession ;  but  the  other  rings  induced  no  effect  at
all.  This  ring,  she  joyfully  told  us,  would  be  the  means  of
saving  her  life.  It  was  a  fine  emerald,  of  a  pale  hue,  and  she
directed  that  it  should  be  placed  on  her  finger  daily  at  noon
precisely, — if  possible  a  minute  before,  but  on  no  account  later ;
at  night  it  must  be  mesmerised  and  laid  under  her  pillow,
and  during  her  sleep-waking  every  evening  removed,  but  re¬
placed  before  her  mesmerist  attempted  to  awaken  her.  How¬
ever,  notwithstanding  all  our  care,  she  was  one  night  awak¬
ened  before  the  emerald  had  been  put  on  her  finger  again,
and  there  resulted  a  continuous  sick  headache,  which  lasted
the  three  following  days.  At  another  time  we  removed  it
after  the  first  awakening  pass  was  made,  and  her  body  in¬
stantly  became  rigid, — in  this  case  an  extraordinary  and  very
rare  state,  which  her  mesmerist  had  not  the  power  to  induce.
One  night  the  magic  emerald  was  not  placed  beneath  her
pillow,  and  the  following  morning  it  was  forgotten  till  three
minutes  after  twelve.  On  the  two  succeeding  evenings,  in
sleep-waking,  her  usually  brilliant  clairvoyance  was  in  abey¬
ance,- — “all  was  dark,  and  a  black  veil  obscured  her  vision.”
When  these  two  days  and  their  darkness  were  over,  she
directed  that,  after  the  expiration  of  ten  days  from  the  first
application  of  her  emerald, — a  period  she  had  named  from  the
beginning,  it  must  be  mesmerised  across  each  way,  and  still
wrorn  daily  after  twelve  o-clock,  though  there  was  no  longer  a
necessity  for  her  mesmerist  himself  to  place  it  on  her  finger,
or  that  the  time  should  be  so  exact,  since  all  danger  had  now
disappeared.  During  her  sleep  every  evening  she  had  elected
the  presence  of  two  intimate  friends,  who  with  her  mesmerist
would  form  the  mystic  three, — a  number  just  now  essential  to
her  recovery.  Of  these  three  I  constituted  one,  and,  though
she  neither  saw,  nor  was  otherwise  conscious  of,  our  presence,
and  spoke  of  us  as  absent,  this  sleep  could  not  be  induced  in
the  absence  of  one  of  us ;  since,  when  only  two  were  present,
she  saw  and  heard  them  both,  but,  on  the  entrance  of  the
third,  coma  ensued,  and  she  awoke  unconscious  that  any
one  but  her  mesmerist  was  near.  One  evening  I  chanced
to  leave  the  room  for  a  few  minutes  immediately  that  she
fell  asleep,  and  it  was  found  that  the  ring  could  not  be
removed,  for  when  force  was  applied  her  fingers  closed  toge¬
ther,  became  rigid,  and  swelled  above  and  under  the  emerald,
which  ivas  rather  too  large  and  loose,  so  that  she  had  com¬
plained  of  being  fearful  of  losing  it.  No  sooner,  however,  did


154


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


I  enter  the  room,  and  the  mystic  number  thus  become  complete ,
than  the  rigidity  and  swelling  instantly  disappeared,  and  the
ring  was  easily  drawn  off.  The  effects  of  this  talismanic
emerald  would  appear  to  be  marked  and  beneficial,  since,
under  its  application,  not  only  was  the  three  months*  danger¬
ous  illness  prevented  and  her  life  saved,  but  there  entirely
disappeared  those  distressing  symptoms — morning  headache
and  nausea — which  had  afflicted  her  for  many  years,  notwith¬
standing  the  steady  and  continued  use  of  mesmerism.  Pier
general  health  has  since  been  better  than  she  had  experienced
for  a  period  of  thirteen  years,  so  that  I  trust  her  malady  has
been  effectually  removed.  In  another  case  a  ring  had  great
power,  for,  when  the  mesmerist  had  occasion  to  leave  his  pa¬
tient  sleeping  for  a  short  time,  she  requested  that  he  would
give  her  his  ring,  which  accordingly  she  wore;  and  on  his  return
declared  that  so  long  as  it  remained  on  her  finger  she  should
continue  asleep  !

The  majority  of  charms  were  used  by  the  ancients  nega¬
tively  as  prophylactics  against  the  evil  eye*  (ocfrdaXpos  ftacr-
kclvos),  whose  reputed  powers  of  fascination  were,  if  possible,
more  terrifying  than  in  Italy  and  Hindostan  at  the  present
day.  With  this  intent,  a  Roman  suspended  the  phallas  or
fascinum,  and  probably  also  the  bulla,  from  the  neck  of  his
child,  and  placed  it  in  his  garden  as  a  symbol  of  the  fertility
of  nature ;  while  Pisistratus,  the  Grecian,  in  front  of  the
Acropolis,  erected  the  figure  of  a  grasshopper.  Fascinus,  in
obedience  to  the  prevalent  custom  among  all  nations  of  pro¬
pitiating  that  which  they  dreaded,  became  a  deity,  and  was
worshipped  by  the  vestals  with  the  Roman  sacra.  Children
and  cattle  were,  and  still  are  in  the  East,  most  liable  to  the
impress  of  this  dreadful  influence.  Hence  the  Mantuan  poet,


“  Nescio  quid  teneros  oculis  mihi  fascinat  agnos.” — Virgil,  Eel.  iii.,  103.


And  Ovidf  relates  of  the  Telchins  fteXyetv,  to  soothe  with
magical  influence),  that  their  gaze  was  poisonous.  These
Telchins  were  also  capable  of  transformations,  and  exercised
other  magical  arts.  The  origin  of  their  name  is  well  shewn
in  these  lines  of  the  Iliad,


E'tXero  8e  pd(3Sov,  rrj  t  dvhpwv  oppara  AeA ,yei,

cov  eSeXec,  t«?  8'  avre  /cal  in tvooovtcls  iyelper

TTjv  perd  ^ epcrlv  e^cov  i rerero  tcpaTvs  ’ Apyei(J)6vT7),;.,>


Iliad,  xxiv.,  343.

cc  And  he  (Hermes)  wields  his  caduceus,  and  with  it  seals  the
eyes  of  men  in  sleep ;  and  of  those  who  are  sleeping,  re-


*  See  Zoist ,  No.  XI.,  p.  308.


f  Metamorphoses,  vii.,  365.


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


It*

oo


awakens  whom  he  pleases;  and,  carrying  this  wand  in  his
hand,  powerful  Hermes  flies  away.”  The  magic  wand  here
introduced  was  a  frequent  instrument,  as  in  this  case,  in  the
mystic  operations  of  antiquity:  the  renowned  enchantress
and  magician  Circe  employed  one  in  her  transformations :
the  blind  Tiresias  received  the  gift  of  foreknowledge,  and
with  it  a  staff  which  conducted  him  as  safely  as  though  his
natural  vision  had  not  been  destroyed,  from  Minerva,  who
herself  is  represented  with  a  wand,  (Odys.  xvi.,  172.)

According  to  John  of  Salisbury,  Mercurius  or  Hermes
Trismegistus,  an  early  Egyptian  magician,  discovered  the  art
of  fascinating  the  eyes  of  men,  so  as  either  to  render  persons
invisible,  or  cause  them  to  appear  as  beings  of  a  different  spe¬
cies.*  This  Hermes  was  chief  adviser  of  Isis  during  the
benevolent  expedition  of  Osiris  to  all  parts  of  the  earth,  and
was  therefore  contemporary  with  the  Exodus.  Hence  he  has
been  named  as  one  of  those  magi  who  performed  before  Moses.
Among  his  attributed  works  are  Asclepius,  a  dialogue  between
Hermes  and  this  grandson  of  iEsculapius,  an  astrological
production  on  disease ;  and  one  called  Curanides,  treating  of
the  medicinal  virtues  of  plants,  animals,  and  precious  stones.
The  historian  Manetho  chiefly  drew  upon  the  writings  of  this
Hermes,  who  became  in  time  a  deity,  and  was  worshipped  as
Thoth ;  and  Manetho  states  that  all  the  Egyptian  gods  had
once  been  mortal.  His  connexion  with  medicine  is  another
instance  of  the  intimate  association  of  divinity,  magic,  and
physic,  among  the  ancient  nations.

There  is  a  legend  which  attributes  to  the  great  Pythagoras
powers  of  fascination  similar  to  those  of  Orpheus,  so  that  he
thus  preserved  himself  from  the  most  dangerous  animals,
( Tamblic .  Vita,  cap.  xiv.  and  xviii.)  Among  the  negroes  of
Dutch  Guyana  are  female  diviners  who  fascinate  the  papa ;
and  the  jugglers  of  Cairo  make  their  asp  (viper a  naje)  rigid
like  a  rod,  and  restore  it  to  animation  by  throwing  it  upon
the  ground, — thus  explaining  the  tricks  of  the  ancient  Egyp¬
tian  magi.f  In  Italy,  during  the  16th  century,  men  claim¬
ing  descent  from  St.  Paul  braved  the  bites  of  serpents ;  and
the  frequent  accidents  which  happen  to  spectators  of  the  Indian
charmer,  together  with  the  multitude  of  deaths  which  fol¬
lowed  the  attack  of  those  snakes  set  at  liberty  in  the  Roman
circus,  by  command  of  Heliogabalus,  after  the  Marsii  had
fascinated  them,  fully  prove  that  some  powerful  influence  was
exerted  over  these  venomous  reptiles,  capable  of  controling
their  destructive  propensities,  which,  however,  were  not,  as


*  Polycraticon ,  i.,  chap.  9.


f  Eocodus  vii.


15G


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


has  been  asserted,  eradicated,  but  could  again  be  used  so
soon  as  they  were  released  from  the  influence  of  the  magician.
Hasselquist,  Bruce,  Lempriere,  and  many  others,  have  borne
witness  to  the  exercise  of  this  power  in  Africa,  Asia,  and
South  America.  Altogether  this  connexion  of  the  snake  with
fascination  seems  remarkable.  For  iEsculapius  held  a  rod
entwined  with  serpents  :  the  form  of  one  of  these  reptiles  was
figuratively  and  medicinally  erected  in  the  wilderness  :  it  was
this  which  betrayed  our  first  parent  into  a  knowledge  of  good
and  evil.  The  wand  of  Circe  who  presided  over  magic,  as
also  that  of  many  other  magicians,  is  represented  entwined
with  serpents,  who  were  sacred  to  the  god  of  medicine,  and
of  clairvoyance,  and  prophecy.

That  mesmerism  powerfully  affects  animals  has  been
proved  by  many  operators.*  I  have  heard  the  case  of  a  youth
who,  though  ignorant  of  mesmerism,  felt  that  there  resided
in  his  gaze  a  power  of  calming  enraged  animals.  My  in¬
formant  once  witnessed  this  effect  upon  a  large  dog,  which,
through  mistake  or  neglect,  was  unchained :  the  youth  ad¬
vanced  steadily  towards  it,  and  the  dreaded  animal,  cower¬
ing  beneath  his  powerful  gaze,  came  forward  and  licked  his
hand,  in  token  that  for  the  first  time  it  had  really  met  its
master.  The  dog  continued  fawning  and  obedient  so  long  as
this  youth  was  near,  or  fixed  his  eye  upon  it.  According
to  Lindencrantz,  the  Laplanders  exercise  a  similar  power  over
their  dogs.  A  young  nobleman  recently  induced  sleep  in  a
cat ;  and  the  renowned  feats  of  the  Irish  whisperer  and  many
other  horse-breakers,  together  with  the  control  maintained  by
Van  Amburgh,  &c.,  over  the  fiercest  beasts  in  their  collection
(which  they  always  keep  before  them  under  their  eye),  are  all
illustrative  of  the  immense  power  vested  in  man  over  the  fish
of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every  living
thing  that  moveth  upon  the  earth  !  An  interesting  account
has  lately  appeared  of  an  enraged  bear  that  was  subdued  to
sleep  by  mesmerism  before  some  members  of  the  British
Association  at  Oxford.!  I  was  once  enabled  to  fascinate  a
young  sparrow  by  intently  gazing  upon  it  for  a  few  minutes.
Until  our  eyes  met,  no  effect  seemed  produced;  afterwards  its
eyes  rolled  to  and  fro,  and  became  finally  dull  and  fixed  oppo¬
site  mine :  but  from  this  position  it  could  not  be  moved  by
noise,  intimidation,  or  enticement;  and  was  so  completely
paralysed  that  not  even  a  tremor  was  observable, — it  appeared
stiff  in  death.  In  this  way  the  little  creature  was  fixed  upon

*  See  Dr.  John  Wilson’s  Trials  of  Animal  Magnetism  on  the  Brute  Creation.
London.  1839.

t  Chambers’s  Edinburgh  Journal,  Oct.  27,  1849.


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


157


the  perch  and  wires  of  its  cage,  the  swinging  of  which  rapidly
about  did  not  make  it  tremble.  Being  placed  on  the  table
and  held  till  our  eyes  met,  it  became  rigid  as  before,  until
released  by  being  breathed  upon,  when  it  flew  away  through
the  opened  window.

Witches  not  unfrequently  employed  some  physical  embodi¬
ment  of  their  will,  to  increase  its  effect  by  sustaining  the  re¬
quisite  confidence  :  hence  waxen  images  of  the  victim  were
pricked,  tortured,  or  melted,  according  to  the  intentions  of
the  operators.  They  are  undoubtedly  not  a  modern  innova¬
tion  ;  Theocritus  mentions  them  [Idyl.  ii.  22),  and  Ovid  :

“  Devovet  absentes  ;  simulacraque  cereafigit ,

Et  miserum  tenues  in  jecur  urget  acus.” — Heroid,  vi.  91.

Duffus,  a  traditionary  king  of  Scotland,  was  thus  slain ;
as  also  Ferdinand  Earl  of  Derby  in  Elizabeth’s  reign,  though
other  accounts  infer  the  assistance  of  poison.*  Sometimes  a
glove  of  the  victim  was  obtained  and  buried  in  the  earth
with  the  wish  that  it  and  his  liver  might  simultaneously  rot
away,  and  other  physical  aids  to  give  force  to  the  will  were  at
times  invoked.  It  is  related  of  the  Marshal  d’Ancre’s  wife,
that  she  was  beheaded  as  a  witch  for  having  enchanted  the
queen  to  dote  upon  her  husband,  and  in  her  closet  was  found
an  image  of  the  young  king  in  virgin  wax,  with  one  leg
melted  away.  At  her  trial,  when  questioned  about  the  arts
she  had  employed  to  secure  so  great  an  influence,  she  replied,
“  That  ascendancy  only  which  strong  minds  gain  over  weak
ones.”f  Her  explanation  is  highly  truthful,  and  may  be
applied  to  many  similar  cases,  especially  where  a  blinded  ig¬
norance  invested  the  slightest  pretensions  to  learning  with
the  dreaded  attributes  of  magic.

The  fact  of  one  person  being  able  voluntarily,  that  is,  by
the  will,  to  convey  his  thoughts,  and  even  his  image  or  appa¬
rition,  to  another  at  a  distance,  was  known  in  very  early
times.  Here  then  is  the  germ  of  a  host  of  marvellous  pheno¬
mena  and  ghost  stories ; — that  an  earnest  volition  can  impress
a  bodily  image  with  the  power  of  reality  upon  the  susceptible
mind  of  a  person  at  a  distance.  This  mostly  occurs  at  the
moment  of  death ;  but  there  are  a  few  cases  where  the  same
has  occurred  during  life  and  health.  %  Far  from  pressing  such
an  explanation  to  the  solution  of  every  occurrence  of  this

*  Is  there  any  connexion  between  these  images  and  the  waxen  Osiris  which
was  given  by  Isis  to  every  priest  in  Egypt  ?

f  Seward’s  Anecdotes,  vol.  iii. ,  p.  215.

X  Night  Side  of  Nature,  vol.  i.,  pp.  229 — 240,  306 — 317,  &c.  See  a
remarkable  instance  in  a  friend  of  Dr.  Elliotson,  recorded  in  the  last  Zoist  (No.
XXIX.,  p.  70). — Zoist.

VOL.  VIII.


N


158


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


kind,  or  to  the  denial  of  spiritual  re-appearances  (compre¬
hending  those  that  occur  after  death),  still  I  am  inclined  to
believe  it  affords  a  satisfactory  theory  which  will  include  every
case  where  a  desire  or  earnest  longing,  on  the  part  of  a  dying
person,  impressed  his  thought  or  image  upon  an  absent  friend.
There  is  most  satisfactory  evidence  of  such  a  wish  existing,
and  being  expressed  by  the  person  seen,  at  the  moment  of
appearance ;  in  others  there  is  some  connecting  tie,  as  of  rela¬
tionship  or  intimate  friendship  (constituting  a  rapport),  that
occupied  the  mind  and  directed  the  thoughts.  Among  many
such  personally  known  to  me,  are  the  following  similar  illus¬
trative  cases  of  this  power  of  the  will.

Mr.  S.  was  lying  dangerously  ill  in  St.  Bartholomew's
Hospital,  being  almost  constantly  delirious.  His  children,
consisting  of  Mr.  William  (my  authority),  an  elder  sister,  and
little  brother,  were  staying  with  his  sister  at  Highgate.  In
the  evening,  at  6  o'clock,  candles  being  lighted  and  the  chil¬
dren  playing  about,  there  appeared  on  the  opposite  wall,  as
though  steadily  projected  from  a  magic  lantern,  the  dim
outline  of  their  father,  which  gradually  grew  more  distinct
and  the  face  became  vividly  luminous.  The  figure  lasted
scarcely  a  minute,  but  was  so  distinct  that  the  little  boy  ran
towards  it  with  open  arms,  crying,  u  Why,  there’s  father  !"
All  saw  it  except  Miss  S.,  but  her  brother  believes  she  refused
through  fear  to  turn  and  look  towards  the  wall.  The  aunt,
being  what  is  called  superstitious,  hastened  to  the  hospital,
and,  stating  the  fears  she  entertained,  was  allowed  admittance.
She  found  her  brother  delirious,  but  every  expression  that  had
fallen  from  him  during  the  afternoon  related  to  his  children.
In  a  few  days  he  died ;  and  he  is  remembered  as  a  fond  and  ex¬
cellent  father.  This  aunt  was  one  night  awakened  by  hearing
her  name  pronounced  in  the  well-known  voice  of  her  bosom
friend,  Miss  M.,  whom  she  beheld  dressed  in  her  ordinary
attire  and  standing  at  the  bedside.  She  instantly  awoke  her
husband,  who  at  once  recognised  the  figure,  and  this  imme¬
diately  vanished.  The  young  lady  was  lying  ill — but  not
seriously — at  an  opposite  house ;  and  the  aunt,  impressed  that
she  was  required,  hastily  dressed,  and  was  soon  at  the  bed¬
side.  The  invalid  was  much  worse,  and  had  been  earnestly
longing  to  see  her  friend,  having  expressed  such  a  wish  about
the  time  her  image  appeared.  She  sank  rapidly  from  that
night,  and  died  in  a  few  days.  At  another  time  the  shadow
of  a  relative  who  resided  in  a  neighbouring  town,  and  whom
she  believed  to  be  very  well,  passed  through  the  aunt's  room ;
and,  with  a  simlar  dread  of  mishap,  she  hurried  off  to  his
house,  and  found  that  he  had  died  at  the  time  of  this  appear-


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


159


ance  from  the  effects  of  a  sudden  accident,  of  which  there  was
not  time  to  inform  her,  and  had  thought  of  her  in  his  last  mo¬
ments.  Mr.  Allen  H.,  being  in  London  at  a  private  asylum,
in  consequence  of  mental  derangement  brought  on  by  an  un¬
successful  business  transaction,  was  one  day,  in  the  autumn
of  1848,  observed  to  be  more  than  usually  excited  when  his
keeper  entered  the  room,  and  he  presently  in  a  firm  voice  de¬
clared  to  the  man  that  his  mother,  then  residing  at  East
Sheen,  had  just  died.*  The  keeper  laughed  and  was  retiring,
when  Mr.  Allen  calmly  but  earnestly  asserted  that  “  he  had  a
feeling  his  mother  was  dead and  this  impression,  which  not
unfrequently  is  communicated  to  those  whom  delirium  or
some  insane  state  of  the  brain  renders  more  susceptible,  was
perfectly  true.  At  that  moment  his  mother  died  at  East
Sheen  !f

The  extraordinary  case  of  an  American  seer  entrancing
himself,  and  meanwhile  appearing  in  and  obtaining  certain
required  information  at  a  London  coffee-house,  which  Jung
StillingJ  has  related,  on  what  he  considered  satisfactory  tes¬
timony,  shews  a  still  more  extraordinary  power  of  the  human
will :  and  the  feats  of  Brahmins  who  rendered  themselves
somnolent  for  years ;  the  complaints  of  executioners  and  in¬
quisitorial  judges  that  sorcery  or  the  devil  made  their  victims
sleep  insensibly  through  agonies  of  torture  ;§  the  well-known
fact  that  the  excitement  of  battle  destroys  the  sensibility  of
wounds;  the  want  of  feeling  displayed  by  Ethiopians  to
wounds  and  torture ;  death  occasioned  without  physical  cause,
but  by  a  moral  influence — one  person  being  struck  across
the  neck  with  a  wet  cloth  on  his  way  to  the  scaffold,  on
which  he  would  have  been  pardoned,  according  to  Eienus,  and
another,  according  to  Charron ;  another,  by  the  trickling  of
water,  which  the  person  believed  was  his  own  blood,  in  one  of
our  hospitals;  ||  all  these  examples,  and  numerous  others  which
might  be  mentioned,  demonstrate  that  the  mind  concentrated
in  its  action  by  the  directing  power  of  the  will  can  overpower
and  suspend  the  senses.  There  is  a  remarkable  case  related
of  the  Hon.  Colonel  Townshend  in  Cheyne’s  English  Malady.
This  gentleman  was  greatly  emaciated  by  organic  disease  of
the  right  kidney.  One  day  he  discovered  that  by  an  “  odd
sensation  he  could  expire  and  reanimate  himself  at  pleasure ;”

*  As  the  insane  are  equally  mesmerisable  with  the  sane  (No.  XXVIII.,  p.
361),  and  the  insane  are  sometimes  clairvoyant  (No.  XVII.,  p.  30;  XIX.,  pp.
311,  347),  this  phenomenon  also  is  to  be  expected  in  them  as  in  the  sane. — Zoist.

f  See  Blackwood's  Magazine,  May,  1847,  pp.  541-2.

X  Theory  of  Pneumatology,  p.  74.

§  Fromaun  de  Fascin,  pp.  593,  810  ;  Nicholas  Eymeric  Directoire  des  Tn-
quisiteurs ,  part  iii.,  pp.  481-3.  ||  See  No.  IX.,  p.  47. — Zoist.

N  2


1G0


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


— a  feat  which  he  successfully  performed  in  presence  of  three
medical  attendants,  Drs.  Cheyne  and  Bavnard,  and  Mr.
Skrine.  “  All  three  felt  his  pulse  first ;  it  was  distinct,  though
small  and  thready,  and  his  heart  had  its  usual  beating.  He
composed  himself  on  his  back,  and  lay  in  a  still  posture  some
time.  I  found  his  pulse  sink  gradually,  till  at  last  I  could
not  feel  any  by  the  most  exact  and  nice  touch.  Dr.  Baynard
could  not  feel  the  least  motion  in  his  heart,  nor  Mr.  Skrine
the  least  soil  of  breath  on  the  bright  mirror  he  held  to  his
mouth ;  then  each  of  us  by  turns  examined  his  arm,  heart,
and  breath,  but  could  not  by  the  nicest  scrutiny  discover  the
least  symptom  of  life  in  him,.”  They  waited  some  time,  and,
the  body  continuing  in  the  same  state,  wrere  about  to  leave,
under  the  impression  that  the  colonel  was  actually  dead,  when
a  slight  motion  in  his  body  reassured  them  ;  upon  examination
the  pulse  and  heart  were  found  again  in  action,  and  he  gradu¬
ally  restored  himself.  His  death-like  state  lasted  half  an
hour,  and  occurred  at  nine  in  the  morning ;  after  which  he
transacted  business  with  his  attorney,  and  quietly  expired  at
six  o’clock  in  the  afternoon ;  and  the  body,  when  examined,
presented,  with  the  exception  of  its  right  kidney,  no  signs  of
disease.  Carden,  the  Italian  physician,  astrologer,  mathe¬
matician,  and  magician,  boasted  that  he  had  two  gifts, — the
power  of  separating  his  soul  from  the  body  and  senses,  similarly
to  the  priest  in  Celsus,  and  the  faculty  of  seeing  what  he
pleased  with  his  eyes,  “  non  vi  mentis.”  C.  Marius,  the  Roman
general,  when  suffering  from  a  swollen  leg,  was  advised  by
the  physician  to  have  it  taken  off ;  during  the  operation  he
shewed  no  susceptibility  to  the  pain,  and  not  a  muscle  of  his
face  moved,  or  a  groan  escaped  him ;  so  that  the  physician
requested  the  remaining  leg,  and  it  was  removed  under  the
same  composure.  Insensibility  to  pain  is  then  no  novel  or
modern  invention  or  discovery.  Like  all  other  mesmeric,  arti¬
ficial  phenomena,  it  has  existed  and  often  been  noticed  in  all
ages.  It  occurred  most  readily,  and  therefore  oftener,  among
the  African  negroes,  whose  natural  sensibility,  being  least
acute,  was  soonest  overcome ;  and  at  this  day  they  are  not
subject  to  nervous  diseases.*  Next  to  these  the  Romans
shewed  a  small  development  of  the  nervous  system,  which  in
the  Greek  became  highly  organized  and  nurtured  those  phi¬
losophic,  poetic,  artistic,  and  intellectual  endeavours  which
have  given  birth  to  the  thoughts  and  guided  the  taste  of  the
scholar,  the  poet,  orator,  and  sculptor  of  every  succeeding
age;  the  depth  of  whose  learning,  shrouded  in  mystic  phrases


*  Moseley’s  Tropical  Diseases.


Phenomena  of  the  Will .


161


and  double-meaning  words,  fully  comprehended  only  by  the
reXcrcu,  the  perfected,  initiated,  because  these  alone  held  the
key  (the  mesmerism  and  clairvoyance  of  their  inner  temples),
must  now  be  fathomed  in  a  new  spirit,  as  travellers  con  over
the  sacred  letters  of  Egypt,  convinced  that  their  language
conceals  a  profound  and  mystic  knowledge.

The  rationalistic  tendency  of  modern  science  has  thrown
undeserved  and  censurable  discredit  upon  whatever  it  cannot
understand  or  reduce  to  the  test  of  practical  experience.
However  credible  a  man  may  be,  no  sooner  does  he  transgress
the  limits  of  this  test,  than,  having  entered  on  superstitious
ground,  he  must  no  longer  be  believed.  Just  as  a  modem
philosopher,  whose  strength  of  mind  elevates  him  above  the
narrow  prejudices  of  the  schools,  observing  the  truth  which
these  wilfully  overlook,  and,  acknowledging  it,  becomes  the
mark  on  which  the  ridicule  of  his  age  is  exhausted ;  all  pre¬
vious  acquirements  are  forgotten ;  friends  call  him  infatuated
and  grow  ashamed  of  his  name;  the  imitators  and  enviers
denounce  him  to  their  own  level  as  an  impostor  :  and  it  re¬
mains  for  the  next  generation  calmly  to  award  him  that  palm
which  justice  demands  and  universal  gratitude  upholds.*  The
many  discredited  relations  of  olden  authors,  which  the  growth
of  modern  research  has  brought  within  the  pale  of  science,  or
rendered  probable,  ought  to  lead  us  patiently  to  await  that
evidence  which,  sooner  or  later,  must  arrive,  ere  our  prejudice
rashly  condemns  what  we  cannot  or  will  not  understand.
Science,  or  rather  the  overstretching  of  its  deductions,  has
fought  the  universal  belief  in  apparitions  with  little  success.
Time  after  time,  well-evidenced  facts,  whose  accumulation  not
even  Walter  Scott  was  able  to  resist,  are  presented,  and  all
learned  disproof  is  powerless  to  remove  the  conviction  of  their
truth.  So  the  existence  and  use  of  amulets  and  charms,  being
perpetuated  by  facts,  require  explanation  and  inquiry,  not
contemptuous  rejection,  at  our  hands.  From  the  days  of  the
great  Bacon  downwards,  children  have  had  warts  charmed
away,  or  transferred  from  one  to  another  at  command ;  and
these  are  not  easily  convinced  that  this  was  only  imposture
and  delusion.  Ferrarius  cured  the  ague  in  a  Spanish  lieute¬
nant  and  fifty  others  in  one  year,  by  giving  them  scraps  of
paper  on  which  were  written  the  words  fehrci  fuge  with  ,  the
command  or  will  that  as  they  daily  cut  off  a  letter  so  should
the  ague  disappear.  The  Spaniard  was  quite  cured  by  the
time  he  came  to  the  sixth  letter  !f  The  Pharmacologia  con¬
tains  similar  testimony  to  the  power  of  the  will  in  a  suffi-


*  See  Zoist,  No.  II.,  p.  102.


f  Skipton’s  Low  Countries.


162


Phenomena  of  the  Will.


ciently  susceptible  system,  and  there  is  one  by  no  other  than
Sir  H.  Davy.  The  talisman  in  this  case  was  a  thermometer
which  Davy  placed  under  the  patient's  tongue  to  shew  the
temperature  during  the  intended  application  of  nitrous  oxide,
with  which  he  hoped  to  effect  a  cure.  The  patient  was  a
paralytic,  and,  fully  impressed  that  he  was  about  to  receive
his  cure,  so  soon  as  he  felt  the  thermometer  touch  him  was
greatly  relieved,  and,  this  being  daily  repeated  for  a  fortnight,
he  was  dismissed  as  cured,  the  nitrous  oxide  never  having
been  required.  Every  one  has  read  the  account  which  Judge
Holt  gave  to  the  jury  sitting  upon  trial  of  a  witch,  that  the  slip
of  paper  in  their  hands  had  been  given  by  himself  to  cure  a  child
afflicted  with  ague,  and  that  the  disease  returned  no  more.  A
gentleman  recently  related  the  appropriate  case  of  his  brother,
who  used  as  a  boy  to  suffer  from  violent  and  frequent  tooth¬
ache,  a  disease  to  whieh  all  his  family  are  subject.  There  was
then  living  at  Kendall  a  professed  vendor  of  charms  for  this
complaint,  and  to  her  he  applied  ;  receiving  in  answer  a  letter
which  he  was  to  preserve  but  by  no  means  to  open.  The
toothache  disappeared  at  once,  and  never  returned ;  what  is
more  curious  still,  while  the  rest  of  his  family  have  suffered
from  decayed  teeth,  his,  after  a  lapse  of  twenty  years,  remain
as  sound  as  ever  !  At  the  instance  of  a  sleep- waker,  I  once
gave  him  mesmerised  wool  to  place  in  his  ears  at  night ;  hap¬
pening  to  apply  it  for  the  first  time  before  he  had  finished
undressing,  and  then  kneeling  to  prayer,  he  forgot  everything
that  occurred  afterwards, — in  fact,  sleep- waking  supervened.
During  its  use,  his  natural  sleep  was  always  prolonged,  and
he  could  not  easily  be  awakened.  Its  presence  occasioned,  as
he  had  predicted,  pains  similar  to  those  caused  by  tlie  approx¬
imation  of  my  fingers.  Before  this  application  he  did  not  fall
asleep  in  less  than  twenty  minutes  from  commencing  the
passes ;  afterwards  five  were  sufficient,  and  he  rapidly  became
very  susceptible.  The  occurrence  of  such  phenomena  in  mo¬
dern  mesmerism  is  but  an  application  of  the  charms  and
amulets  of  witchcraft,  and  the  relics  and  religious  talismans
of  the  Christian  ages  immediately  succeeding  paganism.  In
all  there  may  be  traced  the  same  curative  power ; — an  action
of  the  brain  over  the  general  system,  directed  and  concentrated
by  the  will.

W.  Cattell.

23,  Duke  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,

Feb.  1,  1850.


(  163  )


IV.  Cures  of  various  Diseases,  by  Mr.  Capern  of  Tiverton.

“  Simple  as  are  the  dupes  of  mesmerism,  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  even
they  could  be  long  deceived  by  a  system  altogether  destitute  of  truth.  It  must,
however,  be  freely  confessed,  that  there  is  some  sprinkling  of  truth  in  mesmerism ;
and  thereby  it  is  that  it  becomes  the  readier  snare  to  the  weak  and  inexperienced.
There  are  two  unquestionable  axioms,  which  should  be  ever  present  to  the  thoughts
of  those  who  feel  themselves  exposed  to  be  drawn  into  the  vortex  of  mesmeric
delusion :  the  one  is,  that  when  a  statement  false  in  the  main  is  mixed  up  with
one  or  two  propositions,  not  at  once  obvious,  yet  proved  at  the  moment  to  be
true,  a  man  is  in  danger  of  believing  the  whole  that  is  affirmed.  The  other  is,
that  strong  and  repeated  assertion,  even  by  a  person  of  the  smallest  possible  pre¬
tensions  to  authority,  can  hardly  be  resisted  by  the  human  mind,  when  it  turns  on
points  on  which  the  individual  addressed  has  no  previous  experience.  These  are
two  antidotes  to  mesmerism.  Let  the  first  be  adopted  as  a  guide  till  the  expe¬
rience  referred  to  in  the  second  be  attained — that  is,  till  some  knowledge  has  been
acquired  of  the  nature  of  the  phenomena  in  the  human  economy  over  which  mes¬
merism  pretends  to  hold  control.

ie  What,  then,  is  the  amount  of  truth  in  mesmerism  ?  It  is  true  that  there  are
some  mysterious  parts  in  the  mental  constitution  of  man  and  woman  kind  which
may  be  acted  on  by  various  causes,  often  in  appearance  of  no  great  power,  so  as
to  originate  effects  very  different  from  the  controlled  orderliness  of  thought  and
feeling  observed  in  the  minds  of  the  same  individuals  when  engaged  in  the  ordi¬
nary  intercourse  of  society.  These  mysterious  parts  of  the  human  mental  consti¬
tution  are  brought  into  operation  in  reverie,  trance,  dreaming,  nightmare,  sleep¬
walking  ;  in  the  alternate  bursts  of  sobbing  and  of  laughter,  and  in  the  mimotic
phenomena  in  general  of  hysteria;  in  the  leaping-ague,  in  the  aberrations  concom¬
itant  on  the  epileptic  paroxysm,  and  in  other  convulsive  and  imitative  diseases.
The  power  with  which  slight  causes  operate  on  a  susceptible  nervous  system,  to
the  production  of  powerful  effects,  is  illustrated  by  the  irresistible  fits  of  laughing
and  other  convulsive  movements  produced  by  tickling  some  of  the  more  sensible
parts  of  the  surface  of  the  body.  There  is,  perhaps,  nothing  more  wonderful  in
the  production  of  the  trance,  termed  *  mesmeric  sleep,’  in  susceptible  persons,  by
a  few  passes  made  before  the  eyes,  than  in  that  of  the  violent  state  of  excitement
sometimes  observed  by  so  slight  an  act  as  tickling  the  soles  of  the  feet.  But,  as
to  the  pretended  clairvoyance,  and  the  transference  of  sense,  there  is  nothing  more
in  them  than  what  results  from  chance  coincidences  between  real  circumstances  or
real  events  and  the  drowsy  fancies  excited  by  substantial  impressions  made  on  the
senses  in  the  mesmeric  trance,  analogous  to  the  well-known  accidental  coinci¬
dences — particularly  when  dreams  are  cultivated — and  the  actual  circumstances  or
events  with  which  the  individuals  concerned  are  familiar  when  awake.

“  The  only  important  admission,  then,  that  can  be  made  in  favour  of  mesmer¬
ism  is,  that  it  is  highly  probable  that  in  susceptible  individuals  a  state  of  insensi¬
bility  may  sometimes  be  produced  so  great,  that  even  the  pain  of  surgical
operations  is  not  felt.  Chloroform  produces  a  more  perfect  insensibility  to  pain,
with  greater  certainty,  and,  as  it  would  seem,  in  every  kind  of  constitution  ;  and,
while  it  is  entirely  safe  when  in  a  state  of  purity  and  rightly  administered,  it  has
this  advantage,  that  it  may  be  made  to  operate  at  once  on  the  nervous  system
without  the  excitement  of  such  mental  feelings  as  may  have  after  ill  consequences.
It  is  needless  to  raise  the  question,  whether  the  insensibility  produced  by  chloro¬
form  be  identical  with  that  of  the  mesmeric  trance.  It  is  at  least  certain  that  the
mesmeric  trance  is  not  natural  sleep,  and  that  the  mode  in  which  it  is  brought  on
is,  in  a  medical  point  of  view,  highly  objectionable.  Long  before  mesmerism
arose,  the  state  of  trance  was  known  as  a  morbid  condition.  It  plainly  is  allied
closely  to  nightmare  and  sleep-walking,  as  both  these  are  to  epilepsy, — one  of  the
most  dreadful  diseases  to  which  mankind  is  subject.  Epilepsy,  and  some  allied
diseases,  are  well  known  to  be  brought  on  by  mere  imitation,  and  to  be  perpe¬
tuated  by  habit.  Nor  is  there  any  precept  in  medicine  better  founded  than  the
injunction,  by  every  possible  precaution  to  protect  those  endowed  with  an  unusual


164


Cures  of  various  Diseases,


susceptibility  of  the  nervous  system  from  the  operation  of  all  those  causes  ot
excitement  by  which  morbid  habits  of  action,  as  readily  happens,  may  become
established  in  their  constitutions.  The  mesmeric  trance  is  not  merely  analogous
to  hysteria  ;  it  is,  in  fact,  a  form  of  hysteria  ;  and  it  is  well  known,  that  nothing
serves  so  much  to  increase  the  frequency  of  hysteria  as  indulgence  in  the  feelings
to  which  the  over-susceptible  are  unusually  prone,  and  the  neglect  of  those  efforts
of  self-control  which  every  woman  who  escapes  hysteria  must  have  so  often  exer¬
cised.  For  a  woman  to  subject  herself  to  the  passes  of  a  mesmerist,  is  to  reverse
this  precept.

“  So  much  of  truth,  then,  there  is  in  mesmerism  :  the  rest  is  all  delusion,
collusion,  fraud,  and  imbecility.

“  As  to  the  cure  of  diseases  by  mesmerism,  it  is  contemptible :  as  to  the  diag¬
nosis  by  the  same,  it  is  worse  than  contemptible.  The  latter  implies  a  supernatural
clairvoyance,  the  grossest  delusion  that  ever  entered  man’s  imagination ;  the
former,  in  its  most  limited  sphere,  namely,  as  a  means  of  exciting  the  imagination,
may  have  sometimes  a  temporary  success  in  mere  functional  paroxysms,  on  the
same  footing  as  the  swallowing  of  live  spiders,  millepedes,  or  mice, — remedies
not  unknown  in  former  ages.  But,  even  within  this  limited  range,  the  risk  is
greater  than  the  advantage.  And  no  one  who  knows  the  great  truth,  that  it  is
Nature  that  cures  diseases,  when  the  patient  happens  to  be,  or  is  designedly  placed,
in  circumstances  favourable  for  the  unembarrassed  exercise  of  the  healing  power
inherent  in  the  human  constitution,  need  be  at  any  loss  to  understand  the  slight
foundation  on  which  the  partizans  of  mesmerism  claim  credit  for  it  in  occasional
cases  of  recovery.

“  I  have  throughout  treated  clairvoyance — the  favourite  hobby  of  the  mesmer¬
ists — with  simple  contempt,  as  I  cannot  but  think  it  deserves.  If  they  complain
of  this  treatment  as  unphilosophical,  why  do  they  not  apply  their  pretended  illu¬
mination  to  some  case  which  the  public  can  understand  and  participate  in.  An
excellent  opportunity  exists,  at  present,  for  an  experimentum  crucis  on  the  sub¬
ject.  The  whole  country  trembles  with  interest  as  to  the  place  and  condition,  at
this  moment,  of  Sir  John  Franklin  and  his  companions,  as  well  as  for  the  success
of  the  several  expeditions  now  dispatched,  or  about  to  be  dispatched,  for  their
relief.  Let  the  mesmerists  publish  daily  or  weekly  accounts  of  the  proceedings
of  Sir  John  and  his  companions,  or,  if  unfortunately  they  are  no  more,  of  the
expeditions  now  in  search  of  them ;  and  surely,  if  their  boasted  clairvoyance  be
concentrated  on  this  one  point,  they  cannot  fail,  if  there  be  any  truth  in  their
so  oft-repeated  assertions,  to  mitigate  the  public  anxiety  in  the  meantime,  and  to
establish  their  doctrine  to  the  satisfaction  of  all,  when,  on  the  return  of  the  ancient
mariner,  or  those  in  search  of  him,  the  ship’s  log  shall  be  found  to  tally  to  the
letter  with  the  declarations  obtained  through  clairvoyance.

“  But  there  is  another  phase  in  which  it  behoves  us  to  regard  mesmerism,  as
advocated  by  its  professors  ;  and  I  propose  to  take  an  early  opportunity  of  con¬
sidering  the  infidel  and  impious  doctrines  propounded  with  so  much  unblushing
effrontery  in  The  Zoist. — 7,  Nottingham-place,  Regent’s-park.” — Medical  Times ,
April  27th,  1850,  p.  313.

Rheumatism.

Samuel  Chudleigh,  aged  68  years,  parish  of  Coleford,  near
Crediton,  was  suddenly  seized  five  years  ago  with  pains  all
over  his  body.  On  the  second  day  he  was  compelled  to  go  to
bed.  The  doctor  of  the  union  attended  him,  but  without
any  benefit.  In  a  fortnight,  being  much  worse,  he  was
removed  to  the  Exeter  Hospital.  While  there  he  continued
getting  worse,  and  at  the  end  of  a  fortnight  requested  to  be
sent  home,  as  he  thought  he  should  die  if  he  staid  any  longer.
He  was  conveyed  home  with  great  difficulty,  and  was  then
confined  to  his  bed  for  a  year  and  ten  months.  He  was  again


by  Mr.  Capern.


165


attended  by  the  union  surgeon,  who,  however,  did  him  no
good :  indeed  often  told  him  that  his  case  was  hopeless.
During  this  time  he  suffered  great  pain :  his  legs  and  arms
became  contracted,  and  he  felt  as  if  they  were  chained  to¬
gether  ;  and,  the  disease  attacking  his  eyes,  he  lost  the  sight
of  the  right.  At  the  end  of  that  time,  however,  he  improved
a  little  and  was  able  to  leave  his  bed.  His  legs  still  remained
contracted,  and  he  was  quite  unable  to  move  without  crutches.
In  that  state  he  remained  for  three  years  more ,  when  his  son,
who  resided  at  Tiverton,  advised  him  to  apply  to  Mr.  Capern.
He  accordingly  came  to  Tiverton,  a  distance  of  16  miles,  and
on  the  26th  February  Mr.  Capern  mesmerised  him  for  the
first  time.  He  felt  considerable  warmth  in  the  limbs  and
slept  better  that  night  than  he  had  ever  done  since  he  was  first
ill.  After  six  mesmerisations  he  was  able  to  walk  without
crutches  and  go  up  and  down  stairs  in  the  ordinary  manner,
which  he  had  not  been  able  to  do  for  five  years.  He  now
sleeps  well  and  feels  no  pain,  and,  though  the  limbs  are  still
contracted,  he  is  able  to  walk  without  any  inconvenience,  and
expresses  great  gratitude  to  Mr.  Capern  for  the  good  lie  has
done  him.

A  remarkable  fact  connected  with  this  patient  is  that  he
has  been  practising  “  mesmerism”  unconsciously  from  the  day
of  his  birth  up  to  the  present  time.  A  popular  superstition
exists  in  Devonshire  that  every  seventh  son  possesses  the
power  of  curing  disease  by  the  simple  application  of  the  hand.
So  firmly  is  this  believed,  that  persons  were  waiting  anxiously
for  his  birth  in  order  to  be  touched  by  the  new-born  infant,
should  it  be  a  boy,  for  the  cure  of  this  disease.  This  power
he  exercises  every  Sunday  only — the  day  of  the  week  on
which  he  was  born.  At  the  time  of  operating  he  mentally  re¬
peats  what  is  believed  to  be  a  portion  of  Scripture;  but  on
this  point  he  was  not  communicative.  He  commences  by
making  seven  passes  over  the  diseased  part  precisely  in  the
mode  adopted  by  mesmerists,  decreasing  the  number  of  passes
every  Sunday  by  one  until  he  comes  to  the  last,  always,
however,  taking  the  same  time  in  making  each  lesser  number
of  passes  that  he  had  previously  taken  in  making  the  seven,
so  that  the  one  pass  on  the  seventh  Sunday  occupies  as  much
time  as  the  seven  passes  did  on  the  first.  Should  the  cure
however  not  have  been  effected  at  the  termination  of  the
seventh  Sunday  when  the  last  pass  is  made,  a  second  course
is  commenced  the  Sunday  following,  seven  passes  being  again
made  and  the  number  decreased  each  Sunday  as  before.
During  his  stay  in  Tiverton,  whilst  under  Mr.  Capern,  he  was
visited  every  Sunday  by  persons  suffering  from  scrofula,  on


166


Cures  of  various  Diseases ,


whom  he  operated  in  his  usual  manner.  Two  of  these,  Mr.
Upton,  of  Bickleigh,  and  Mr.  Clarke,  declare  themselves
much  benefitted,  and  their  cases  are  hereto  appended  as  they
came  under  my  own  observation.  His  father,  being  also  a
seventh  son,  practised  the  cure  of  disease  in  the  same  man¬
ner:  and  my  patient  was  believed  to  possess  extraordinary
powers  of  healing  because  he  was  the  seventh  son  of  a  seventh
son.

In  addition  to  his  operation,  a  sixpence  or  other  piece  of
silver  is  sewn  into  a  small  bag,  and  that  again  into  another,
and  worn  round  the  operator’s  neck  during  the  last  of  the
seven  weeks.  It  is  then  given  to  the  patient,  who  wears  it
for  the  next  seven  weeks,  and  it  is  afterwards  deposited  in  a
box  to  be  carefully  preserved  from  wet  or  the  touch  of  a
needle.  Should  this  not  be  carefully  attended  to,  the  disease
will  return,  and  he  states  that  he  has  known  cases  where,  the
above  precautions  not  being  properly  attended  to,  the  disease
has  returned.


Enlarged  and  Suppurated  Glands.

James  King,  tea-dealer,  Tiverton,  received  a  blow  in  the
neck  about  eight  years  ago,  which  caused  the  glands  to  swell,
and  he  experienced  very  great  pains  in  consequence.  He
applied  to  surgeons  and  physicians  at  Tiverton,  Exeter,  Teign-
mouth,  and  Plymouth,  and  was  under  medical  treatment  for
eight  years.  From  one  surgeon  alone  he  took  no  less  than
eighteen  quart  bottles  of  medicine,  but  neither  this  nor  any
thing  that  was  done  for  him  by  the  doctors  was  of  the  slightest
service.  His  neck  had  become  frightfully  diseased,  there
being  as  many  as  eighteen  open  wounds  in  it  at  a  time ;  for
as  fast  as  one  wound  suppurated  another  formed.  There  was
a  constant  large  discharge  of  matter.  Happening  to  be  pre¬
sent  when  a  Mrs.  Teasdill  was  in  a  state  of  sleep-waking,  she
called  Mr.  Capern’s  attention  to  King’s  case,  and  informed
him  that  he  might  cure  King  by  mesmerism,  at  the  same
time  giving  directions  in  what  manner  the  passes  were  to  be
made.  Mr.  Capern  followed  her  instructions,  and  at  the  end
of  about  twenty  applications  of  about  five  minutes  each  the
wounds  closed  and  were  perfectly  healed,  and  have  remained
so  ever  since.


Tic  Douloureux.

Jannetta  Tout,  aged  45  years,  wife  of  James  Tout,  agri¬
cultural  labourer,  Manley,  Tiverton,  states  that  she  had  the
tic  douloureux  for  nearly  sixteen  years  :  she  consulted  at
various  times  eleven  surgeons  and  two  physicians,  and  was


by  Mr.  Capern.


167


for  sixteen  or  seventeen  days  an  in-patient  of  Barnstaple
Hospital,  but  without  the  least  benefit ;  and  grew  worse  and
worse,  the  attack  lasting  sometimes  twelve  or  thirteen  hours,
and  the  pain  being  extremely  severe.  In  September,  1849,  she
was  induced  to  apply  to  Mr.  Capern  to  be  mesmerised.  There
was  an  immediate  improvement  after  the  first  operation.  She
has  been  mesmerised  about  six  or  seven  times  since,  and  each
time  with  increased  benefit,  and  seldom  suffers  any  pain  now,
except  when  something  happens  that  worries  and  makes  her
anxious.  The  pain,  when  it  does  occur,  is  much  less  severe
than  formerly,  and  lasts  a  shorter  time.  She  was  also  subject
for  many  years  to  soreness  of  the  breast :  this  complaint  has
been  much  better  since  she  applied  to  Mr.  Capern.

Some  years  ago  she  injured  her  left  arm  and  shoulder,
and  subsequently  suffered  from  rheumatism  in  the  same  part,
and  for  the  last  three  years  she  has  been  unable  to  put  her
left  hand  behind  her,  or  even  to  get  it  so  far  back  as  to  put
it  in  her  pocket.  Until  the  5th  January  she  had  never  men¬
tioned  it  to  Mr.  C.,  who  had  therefore  almost  entirely  confined
his  passes  to  the  head.  A  rock  crystal  being  drawn  down
the  arm,  not  with  any  intention  of  benefitting  the  limb,  but
merely  by  way  of  experiment,  a  strong  sensation  of  warmth
was  produced,  and  in  a  few  minutes  she  was  able  to  place  her
hand  quite  behind  her,  and  move  the  fingers  and  arm  with
greater  ease.  She  also  experienced  powerful  effects  from  the
rock  crystal  being  placed  opposite  her  eyes  for  a  few  minutes,
— a  strong  sensation  of  warmth  in  the  temples,  with  a  feeling
of  greater  lightness  and  comfort.  At  the  first  mesmerism
she  swooned  completely  away ;  and  on  every  subsequent  oc¬
casion  she  experienced  great  faintness,  and  it  was  necessary
to  support  her  in  the  chair  or  she  would  most  certainly  have
fallen  to  the  ground.


Chronic  Tooth-ache.

John  Vickery,  hair-dresser,  West  Exe,  Tiverton,  had  suf¬
fered  for  about  five  years  from  severe  tooth-ache,  which  fre¬
quently  rendered  him  incapable  of  attending  to  his  occupation,
and  he  often  passed  several  nights  in  succession  without  any
sleep.  Various  attempts  had  been  made  by  different  surgeons
to  extract  the  tooth,  but  they  all  failed.  Having  heard  that
Mr.  Capern  had  cured  a  case  of  tooth-ache,  he  was  induced
to  apply  to  that  gentleman,  who,  meeting  him  accidentally  in
the  street  while  in  a  state  of  great  suffering,  took  him  into
the  shop  of  Mr.  Wellington,  a  druggist,  before  whom  Mr.  C.
in  about  two  or  three  minutes  relieved  him  from  all  pain  and
completely  cured  the  tooth-ache  by  merely  looking  at  him  at


108


Cures  of  various  Diseases ,


the  distance  of  three  feet.  This  occurred  nearly  three  years
ago,  and  he  has  not  had  the  slightest  return  of  it  since.

Mr.  Capern,  having  heard  of  cures  being  made  by  mes¬
merists  by  the  mere  will, .  without  passes,  was  desirous  of
making  the  experiment  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  their
truth,  and  from  the  success  of  this  experiment  is  convinced
that  with  sensitive  patients  a  cure  may  often  be  performed
in  this  way.

Head-aches  for  nearly  half  a  century.

Mary  Taylor,  West  Exe,  Tiverton,  aged  54,  had  been  sub¬
ject  to  severe  head-aches  ever  since  she  was  10  years  old.  For
some  time  previous  to  her  applying  to  Mr.  Capern  a  week
never  passed  without  their  occurring  two  or  three  times.  The
attack  usually  lasted  twenty  hours,  during  one  half  of  which
time  she  was  very  sick.  She  was  reduced  to  a  state  of  great
weakness,  and  almost  entirely  disabled  from  performing  any
household  work.  As  soon  as  the  attacks  came  on,  she  was
completely  prostrated,  and,  when  in  service,  was  often  (to  use
her  own  expression)  carried  to  bed  like  a  dead  person.  She
slept  little,  and  never  knew  what  it  was  to  awake  in  the
morning  without  a  pain  in  the  head.  About  two  years  ago
she  was  induced  to  apply  to  Mr.  Capern,  by  whom  she  was
mesmerised  about  forty  times.  She  has  derived  great  benefit.
She  does  not  now  suffer  from  head-ache  more  than  once  in
three  or  four  months.  At  the  present  time  she  has  been  six
or  seven  months  free  from  an  attack.  When  the  attacks  do
occur  they  are  of  a  short  duration,  and  less  severe  than  for¬
merly,  seldom  lasting  more  than  eleven  or  twelve  hours.  The
household  occupations,  for  which  she  was  formerly  obliged  to
employ  hired  help,  she  now  performs  with  her  own  hands.
She  sleeps  well.  During  the  last  two  years  she  has  several
times  sat  up  as  a  nurse  with  sick  persons.  On  one  occasion
for  ten  successive  nights,  on  another  for  eight,  on  another
for  eight,  and  on  a  fourth  for  six.  Only  on  the  first  of  those
occasions  did  she  suffer  from  head-ache :  even  then  the  attack
did  not  come  on  till  the  last  morning,  when  she  was  obliged
to  return  home.  She  declares  that  she  has  not  been  as  well
as  she  now  is  since  she  was  a  little  girl  10  years  old.*

Nocturnal  weakness  of  the  Bladder.

Copy  of  letter  received  from  Mr.  Colquhoun  : —

“  Tiverton,  May  3,  1850.

“  Sir, — My  son,  George  Arthur,  being  now  cured  of  his

*  The  cure  of  so  inveterate  a  case  as  this  might  demand  daily  mesmerism  for
a  twelvemonth  :  and  we  see  no  reason  why  a  perfect  cure  should  not  be  obtained
by  strenuous  perseverance. — Zoist.


by  Mr.  Capern.


1G9


troublesome  complaint,  viz.,  non-retention  of  urine  at  night,
(he  will  be  ten  years  his  next  birth-day,)  I  think  it  but  just
that  mesmerism  should  have  my  testimony  as  to  this  cure.
The  boy  had  previously  been  under  medical  treatment  by  the
most  eminent  surgeons  and  physicians  in  London.

“  On  my  return  from  India,  I  found  his  complaint  most
offensive,  and,  after  sea  bathing,  tonics,  and  sleeping  on  hard
mattresses  had  failed,  I  had  recourse  to  you,  knowing ,  from
what  I  had  seen  in  India  of  mesmerism  under  Dr.  Esdaile,  that
the  system  would  be  strengthened,  even  if  a  cure  was  not
effected.  The  result  has  been  a  perfect  cure  in  my  opinion,
no  return  of  the  complaint  having  occurred  for  three  months,
and  this  without  medicine  or  any  attention  to  diet  in  parti¬
cular,  except  mesmerised  water.

“  Pray  accept  my  sincere  thanks  for  the  trouble  you  have
had.  The  cure  was  effected  in  seventeen  days ,  operating  once
for  half  an  hour  daily.

“  I  remain,  dear  sir,  yours  faithfully  and  truly,

“  H.  CoLQUHOUN,*

“Mr.  Capern.”

Blindness  from  opacity  of  the  Cornea  for  many  years.

John  T.  Tindall,  a  native  of  Yorkshire,  but  now  a  settler
in  Somerset,  Niagara  County,  New  York,  had  the  misfortune
fourteen  years  ago  to  have  both  eyes  most  severely  injured
(more  particularly  the  left)  by  the  bursting  of  a  bottle  of  aqua
fortis,  a  part  of  which  entering  the  eyes  caused  the  most  ex¬
cruciating  pain  and  a  high  degree  of  inflammation.  He  was
attended  by  three  medical  men  at  the  same  time,  and  conti¬
nued  under  medical  treatment  for  a  period  of  eight  years :
they  were  in  constant  attendance  upon  him.  He  was  cupped
regularly  three  or  four  times  a  week  for  three  months,  and
had  seven  blisters  on  him  daily  for  a  like  period.  He  was
also  bled  from  the  arm  profusely  so  as  to  induce  fainting :  on
one  occasion  five  pints  of  blood  were  taken  from  him,  and
used  when  cold  as  a  poultice  to  the  eyes.  The  left  eye  was  in
so  deplorable  a  state,  that  the  doctors  never  gave  him  hope  of
sight  being  restored  to  it,  but  confined  their  attention  to  the
better  of  the  two  (the  right).

Amongst  the  remedies  used,  in  addition  to  the  above,
during  the  last  two  years  of  the  medical  treatment,  were  the
following ;  lunar  caustic,  corrosive  sublimate,  blue  and  white


*  Gentlemen  from  the  East  are  now  telling  all  over  England  the  cures  and
the  painless  surgical  operations  they  have  witnessed  in  India,  and  shaming  the
proud  medical  pi’ofession. — Zoist.


170


Cures  by  Mr.  Capern.


vitriol ;  he  had  also  snuff,  burnt  white  loaf  sugar,  and  pounded
glass  blown  into  the  eyes,  and  other  remedies ;  sometimes  the
glass  was  mixed  with  a  cerate  and  used  as  an  ointment.  He
was  under  the  treatment  of  no  less  than  seventy  medical  men,
visiting  the  following  places  in  order  to  consult  oculists  of
celebrity,  viz.,  Elycreek,  Copestown,  Vinstown,  Usaka,  Ge¬
neva,  Collodig,  Buffalo,  Albany,  Johnston,  Kingstown,  New
York,  Toronto,  Nidby,  Upper  Canada,  Candon,  Bourn,  Syra¬
cuse  Somerset,  but  he  derived  no  benefit  whatever ,  remaining
totally  blind :  the  right  eye  quite  destroyed  by  the  remedies
used,  and  the  lid  closed  on  an  empty  socket.  He  therefore,
for  the  last  six  years  previous  to  his  coming  to  England,  gave
up  doctors  and  treated  himself.

In  the  autnmn  of  1849,  he  returned  to  England  for  the
purpose  of  consulting  some  of  the  London  oculists,  but  first
went  into  Devonshire  to  visit  some  friends  from  whom  he  had
been  parted  for  more  than  twenty  years.  Early  in  the  month
of  November  last,  when  on  his  way  to  London,  he  stopped  at
an  inn  (Bed  Lion)  in  Tiverton,  and  the  landlady  informed
him  that  she  herself  had  suffered  from  bad  eyes,  but  had  been
cured  by  Mr.  Capern,  and  recommended  him  strongly  to  try
that  gentleman  before  he  proceeded  farther.  On  more  en¬
quiry  he  was  induced  to  place  himself  under  Mr.  C/s  care,
who  mesmerised  him  two  or  three  times  a  day  for  the  first
two  months,  and,  extraordinary  to  relate,  he  derived  benefit
the  very  first  mesmeric  operation,  though  this  was  only  of
about  five  minutes  duration.

Mr.  C.  took  him  to  Dr.  Jervis,  an  oculist  of  Tiverton,  who
told  him  it  was  in  vain  to  attempt  anything  with  his  eye ,  as  it
teas  beyond  the  power  of  mortal  man  to  restore  the  sight ,  nearly
the  whole  of  the  cornea  being  covered  with  a  thick  white  film .
Notwithstanding  this  damper  upon  their  hopes,  Mr.  C.  deter¬
mined  to  persevere :  and  his  success  has  been  beyond  their
utmost  expectations,  as  the  patient  can  now  read  the  signs
over  the  shop  doors,  distinguish  articles  in  the  windows,  and
walk  to  any  part  of  the  town  in  perfect  safety.  The  film  is
not  removed,  but  the  patient  feels  satisfied  that  it  will  be  so
eventually,  and  regrets  that  his  means  will  not  admit  of  his
staying  longer  in  this  country.  This  patient  is  a  man  of
Herculean  strength  and  stature  and  of  strong  nerves,  yet  has
become  so  susceptible  to  mesmeric  influence,  that  his  mes¬
merist  can  place  him  at  any  time  in  a  state  of  deep  coma  by
merely  holding  one  of  his  thumbs  for  less  than  ten  seconds.

This  case  being  altogether  so  extraordinary  and  incredi¬
ble,  Mr.  Capern  deemed  it  prudent  to  have  the  above  state¬
ment  verified  by  the  patient  upon  oath  before  Mr.  Coles,  a


Medical  Dishonesty  versus  Clerical  Credulity .  171

magistrate  of  the  borough  of  Tiverton,  as  the  patient,  being
about  to  return  to  America,  could  not  hereafter  be  referred  to.

Sprained  Ankle .

Betsy  Isaac,  wife  of  William  Isaac,  lives  in  West  Exe,
Tiverton.  Was  taken  giddy  about  seven  weeks  ago,  and,
losing  her  sight,  fell  down;  the  left  leg  turned  under  her,
and  the  ankle  became  strained,  so  that  she  could  scarcely
move  the  foot,  and  in  getting  up  stairs  had  to  go  upon  her
knee  for  several  days  for  the  first  fortnight.  She  suffered  a
great  deal  of  pain ;  since  that  time  the  pain  has  become  less
severe,  but  she  suffers  from  it  at  night  as  well  as  in  the  day.

She  met  Mr.  Capern  in  the  street  on  10th  June,  being  in
pain  and  limping  from  the  state  of  her  ankle,  and  requested
Mr.  Capern  to  try  if  he  could  help  her.  He  took  her  into
the  Three  Tuns  Inn,  and  commenced  making  passes  down
the  knee  and  ankle.  She  declared  she  felt  a  change  at  the
second  pass,  and  in  about  three  minutes  she  declared  the  pain
had  entirely  ceased,  and  she  could  walk  across  the  room  with
apparent  ease  and  without  any  suffering.

Mr.  Capern  had,  about  three  months  previously,  relieved
her  of  a  severe  toothache.

Betsy  Isaac  x  her  mark.

This  took  place  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Mowatt,  an  Ame¬
rican  gentleman,  who  was  on  a  visit  to  Tiverton  at  the  time,
and  made  a  memorandum  of  the  woman's  statement.


Y.  Medical  Dishonesty  versus  Clerical  Credulity ;  which  is  the
worse?  and  what  is  the  fact?  By  the  Rev.  George
Sandby.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

June  1st,  1850.

Sir, — My  attention  has  been  directed,  by  several  corre¬
spondents,  to  a  paragraph,  headed  “  Clerical  Credulity,"  that
has  appeared  in  a  few  London  and  provincial  newspapers,
being  founded  on  a  statement  which  was  made  by  an  anony¬
mous  writer  in  the  Medical  Times,  of  April  6th,*  and  in  which
my  name  was  brought  prominently  forward  by  that  journal.

The  paragraph  refers  to  a  review  which  was  written  by  me,
and  appeared  in  The  Zoist  for  last  January,  of  M.  Cahagnet's
Erench  book,  called  Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future,  which  work
has  been  since  translated  into  English  under  the  absurd  title

*  See  the  whole  article  as  our  motto  to  Art.  ii.,  p.  126. — Zoist.


172  Medical  Dishonesty  versus  Clerical  Credulity ,

of  the  “  Celestial  Telegraph  and  professes  to  give  a  descrip¬
tion  of  the  spiritual  world,  of  the  state  of  the  soul  after  death,
and  of  sundry  other  strange  particulars,  on  the  authority  of
several  deceased  persons,  whose  ghosts  are  said  to  have  ap¬
peared  to  some  ecstatic  somnambules,  and  to  have  held  con¬
versation  with  them.

Those  of  your  readers,  who  took  the  trouble  to  peruse  my
paper,  will  be  amazed  at  hearing  that  a  writer  in  the  Medical
Times  has  had  the  impudence  to  assert  that  I  wrote  a  “  favour¬
able  review  ”  of  Cahagnet,  and  that  he  implies,  moreover,
through  a  dexterous  separation  of  a  single  sentence  from  its
context,  that  I  expressed  my  belief  in  the  alleged  apparitions
and  revelations,  when  it  is  notorious  to  all  who  interested
themselves  on  the  subject,  that  I  did  the  very  opposite.

You  are  aware,  Mr.  Editor,  that  so  far  from  having  written
a  “favourable  ”  review  of  the  work,  I  wrote  a  most  unfavour¬
able  one,  and  enlarged  at  some  length  on  the  erroneous  con¬
clusions  which  the  author  had  arrived  at :  and  my  reason  for
noticing  the  work  at  all,  was  to  shew  to  the  pubic  that  the
students  of  mesmerism  in  its  scientific  relations  had  no  com¬
munion  with  the  wilder  and  less  philosophic  views  of  some  of
its  votaries,  and  that,  to  estimate  the  subject  rightly,  a  line  of
demarcation  ought  to  be  drawn  between  the  two  classes  of
opinions.

You  remember  also,  that  so  far  from  having  expressed  any
belief  in  the  apparitions  and  disclosures  of  the  soi-disant
spirits,  I  explained  their  character  and  nature  upon  certain
physiological  principles  with  which  mesmerists  are  familiar.
I  shewed  that  the  ghosts  in  question  were  sensorial,  or  rather
cerebral,  illusions  ;  that  the  mysterious  conversations  were  but
creations  of  an  excited  brain ;  and  that  the  divine  “  secrets  ”
which  were  thus  revealed,  were  little  else  than  the  transcripts
of  other  men’s  thoughts,  or,  in  other  words,  a  very  inferior
specimen  of  Swedenborgianism,  And  respecting  Emanuel
Swedenborg  himself,  the  great  founder,  as  he  may  be  called,
of  modern  psychology,  I  proceeded  to  offer  the  opinion,  that
mesmerism  presented  the  key  which  solved  his  condition,  for
that  all  his  heavenly  disclosures  were  evidently  little  else  than
the  dreamings  of  a  highly  superior  intellect,  when  placed  in
a  state  of  exaltation  under  the  action  of  a  self-induced
ecstaticism.

Now,  whether  I  were  right  or  wrong  in  my  argument,  is
another  question ;  and  upon  this  point  there  may  be  fairly  a
difference  of  opinion :  but  there  can  be  no  mistake  as  to  the
line  of  argument  that  I  took.  Either,  then,  the  writer  in  the
Medical  Times  never  read  my  review,  and  was  therefore  guilty


by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


173


of  a  most  dishonest  action  in  passing  a  judgment  upon  it ;  or,
if  he  did  read  it  to  any  extent,  he  must  have  seen  its  tendency,
and  is  in  that  case  guilty  of  a  wilful  misrepresentation  of  the
truth.  He  may  make  his  choice  between  the  two  offences.

One  thing,  however,  it  should  be  now  added,  I  did  not  do  :
and  for  this  omission,  as  it  would  appear,  I  have  incurred  the
displeasure  of  an  unscrupulous  writer.  I  did  not,  in  medico-
critical  jargon,  call  M.  Cahagnet  a  “  knave  and  a  liar,”  or  his
associates  “  impostors  and  tools  ;”  but  I  declared  (what  I  still
believe  to  be  correct)  that  the  author  appeared  a  conscientious
man,  and  that  “  I  saw  no  reason  to  question  his  good  faith  or
the  credibility  of  his  witnesses  ,”  though  their  alleged  facts
might  be  explicable  upon  a  very  different  hypothesis  to  that
which  the  book  maintained.  Upon  that  single  sentence — a
grain  of  praise  out  of  a  bushel  of  adverse  judgment — the
Medical  Times  fastened,  and,  printing  it  apart  and  alone,  and
with  a  total  suppression  of  the  decided  language  with  which  I
had  expressed  my  disbelief  of  the  apparitions  and  of  the  col¬
loquies,  had  the  audacity  to  assert  that  my  review  was  a
“favourable”  one;  or,  to  use  a  common  illustration,  that  I
had  called  a  thing  “black,”  when  the  whole  tenor  of  the
article  was  to  prove  that  it  was  “  white.”

Are  these  things  common  in  medical  journals  ?  Is  such
mendacity,  even  though  it  be  anonymous,  regarded  as  respect¬
able,  or  as  excusable,  or  as  a  good  joke  ?  Does  not  a  writer,
who  can  be  guilty  of  such  a  suppressio  veri,  lose  caste  in  his
profession  ?  Is  he  not  looked  at  with  suspicion,  if  his  name
oozes  out  ?  Is  not  an  editor  rather  shy  of  his  contributions  ?
And  is  not  the  journal  itself  which  receives  them  liable  to  sink
in  professional  estimation  ?  They  tell  me,  not ;  for  that  every¬
thing  is  considered  fair  against  a  mesmeriser ;  and  that,  though
a  man  will  not  perpetrate  such  a  falsehood  himself,  he  may
wink  with  an  obliging  good-nature  at  those  who  do.  I  sin¬
cerely  hope  that  such  is  not  the  case.  I  trust  that  in  a  highly-
educated  and  liberal  profession,  such  as  my  experience  has
found  the  medical  one  to  be,  a  wilful  misstatement,  like  the
one  described  above,  is  an  exceptional  instance,  and  that  high
feeling  and  an  honourable  bearing  are  still  the  characteristics
of  the  physician.  If  our  facts  be  false,  let  them  by  all  means
be  exposed ;  if  our  reasonings  be  erroneous,  let  them  be  cor¬
rected;  if  our  conclusions  be  hasty,  let  them  be  set  right  :
truth  is  our  motto  and  our  object,  and  for  truth  only  do  we
care,  be  the  issue  what  it  may  :  but  let  not  a  system  of  sup¬
pression  or  perversion  be  patronized  and  upheld  in  a  critical
journal  which  aims  at  respectability,  even  though  it  may  give
VOL.  viii.  o


174


Fuels  in  Vital  Magnetism ,


the  friends  of  mesmerism  a  temporary  blow  and  cause  a  suc¬
cessful  laugh  against  a  humble  writer  like  myself.

Of  course  it  is  so  very  unimportant  to  the  world  what  are
the  private  opinions  of  a  retired  clergyman,  living  in  a  distant
village  of  Suffolk,  on  the  subject  of  ghosts  and  mystic  revela¬
tions, — whether  I  believe  in  them  or  not,  that,  when  several
of  my  friends,  who  had  seen  or  heard  of  the  paragraph  about
my  “  credulity,”  asked  what  it  all  meant,  I  smiled  at  the
question  and  intended  to  take  no  notice  of  the  misstatement ;
but,  on  second  thoughts,  it  may  be  as  well  to  let  the  public
learn  the  way  in  which  mesmerism  is  generally  attacked,  and
see  the  weapons  with  which  its  promoters  have  been  perti¬
naciously  assailed.  The  above  is  but  a  sample  of  the  whole
system ;  ex  uno  disce  omnes :  and  I  would  suggest  to  the
editors  of  those  newspapers  who  inserted  the  misstatement  of
the  Medical  Times  and  added  their  comments  upon  it,  whether,
in  the  stead  of  “  Clerical  Credulity,”  the  more  appropriate
heading  of  their  paragraph  might  not  have  rather  been,
“  Medical  Dishonesty  and  Mesmerisers  Misrepresented  V3
I  remain.  Sir,  your  humble  servant,

George  Sandby.


VI.  A  few  Facts  in  Cases  successfully  treated  by  Vital  Mag¬
netism.  Extracted,  in  a  brief  form,  from  the  journal  of
W.  R.  Mott,  Surgeon,  10,  Devonshire-place,  Brighton,
and  formerly  Surgeon  2nd  Batt.  47th  Regt.  Foot.

Wry  Neck.

First  Case. — June,  1848.  A  youth,  about  16  years  of  age,
assistant  to  a  soda-water  manufacturer,  laboured  under  con¬
striction  of  the  muscles  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  inclining
his  head  to  the  right  shoulder  and  causing  great  agony.  By
making  passes  for  five  minutes  on  the  opposite  side  down¬
wards,  and  on  the  affected  side  upwards  and  backwards  to¬
wards  the  occiput,  he  was  effectually  relieved  and  all  pain
ceased  at  once.  No  return  of  the  affection  occurred.

Monomania.

Second  Case. — July,  1847.  Mrs.  R.,  the  wife  of  a  clergy¬
man,  68  years  of  age,  had  been  subject  to  periodical  attacks
of  monomania,  generally  in  the  month  of  June,  and  continu¬
ing  until  the  following  winter.  Was  brought  to  me  after
being  attacked  about  a  fortnight.  Medicine  was  given  to
relieve  constipation  of  bowels.  Magnetism  was  then  resorted


by  Mr.  Mott,  Surgeon.


175


to,  and  in  a  short  time  she  recovered.  This  patient  was  again
attacked  in  the  same  manner  the  following  summer,  about
the  same  period,  being  June,  1848;  when,  by  re-adopting
the  use  of  magnetism  alone,  she  perfectly  recovered,  and  has
had  no  attack  since.

Deafness.

Third  Case. — January,  1848.  Mrs.W.,  of  Ringmer;  com¬
pletely  deaf,  but  from  no  discoverable  cause,  and  therefore
probably  from  some  affection  of  the  auditory  nerve.  This
patient  went  to  sleep  in  two  minutes  at  the  first  sitting  :
slept  fifteen  minutes,  then  awoke  spontaneously,  as  I  supposed,
when  I  found  she  had  recovered  her  hearing  and  that  a  sud¬
den  noise  had  awakened  her.  She  was  afterwards  put  to  sleep
for  six  consecutive  mornings,  awaking  each  time  in  fifteen
minutes;  and  then  returned  home  with  her  hearing  perfectly
restored.  She  had  been  deaf  three  years.

June,  1850.  No  return  of  deafness  has  ensued  to  this
patient,  and  her  health  has  been  perfect  ever  since.

Spasms  of  the  Chest.

Fourth  Case. — Nov.  25,  1848.  Mrs.  W.,  housekeeper  to
Lady  B.,  was  seized  with  violent  spasms  which  brought  on
premature  labour,  after  which  the  spasms  returned  with
greater  violence  and  were  chiefly  confined  to  the  respiratory
muscles ;  and,  what  is  most  remarkable,  the  attack  returned
each  afternoon  about  five  o’clock.  The  usual  remedies  utterly
failed  to  give  relief.  Magnetism  was  then  resorted  to  with
complete  success,  the  patient  going  off  into  a  quiet  sleep  in
less  than  ten  minutes,  and  awaking  up  free  from  pain  or
spasm.  This  was  continued  for  about  a  fortnight,  and  she
left  Brighton  perfectly  well .


Dropsy.

Fifth  Case. — January,  1849.  Mrs.  P.,  wife  of  a  tradesman
in  this  town,  suffered  under  disordered  liver  with  dropsy  of  the
abdomen.  Was  so  sensitive  that  she  went  off  to  sleep  in  less
than  half  a  minute.  In  the  course  of  one  fortnight  she  com¬
pletely  recovered,  passing  the  fluid  away  by  the  kidneys.

Inflamed  Eyes.

Sixth  Case. — February,  1849.  Margaret  McD.,  nearly
70  years  old,  a  very  strong  Irish  charwoman ;  inflamed  eyes.
Magnetized  two  minutes  in  the  evening ;  came  next  morning,
eyes  so  much  better  could  see ;  went  to  sleep  again  in  two
minutes  and  a  half.  Slept  fifteen  minutes  ;  awoke  by  a  knock
at  the  door.  Her  sight  quite  restored ;  inflammation  all  gone.

o  2


Facts  in  Vital  Magnetism,


176


Ulcerated  Uterus.

Seventh  Case. — Mrs. - ,  had  been  an  invalid  for  three

years,  her  disease  not  having  been  discovered;  came  under
my  care  in  October.

I  found  she  had  diseased  uterus,  with  ulceration  of  the
neck  of  the  organ.  The  usual  caustic  applications  were  made
use  of  for  some  weeks,  producing  but  slight  benefit :  when,  on
the  23rd  Nov.  1848,  I  magnetized  her  for  the  first  time.  She
went  to  sleep  in  about  five  minutes,  and  slept  two  hours ;  on
awaking  felt  considerably  relieved,  but,  residing  thirteen  miles
from  Brighton,  she  could  only  be  visited  at  irregular  intervals
of  from  four  to  six  days  each.  Magnetized  each  time  with
sleep  from  one  to  two  hours.  At  the  end  of  four  months  the
disease  had  wholly  subsided ;  she  was  then  able  to  walk  two
miles,  viz.,  from  her  house  to  the  adjacent  village,  without
inconvenience ;  whereas,  prior  to  being  magnetized,  she  was  ut¬
terly  incapable  of  walking ,  even  from  the  sitting-room  to  her
bed-room .*

Deafness.

Eighth  Case. — John  Baker,  75  years  of  age,  completely
deaf,  was  made  to  hear  by  magnetizing  the  ears  with  point  of
forefinger  for  one  minute,  and  continued  to  hear  while  in  my
presence ;  when  absent,  his  deafness  invariably  returned.

Curved  Spines.

Ninth  and  tenth  Cases. — Miss  N.,  suffering  three  years
from  curvatures  of  the  spine :  the  dorsal  vertebrae  passing
under  the  right  scapula  in  a  curve  the  base  line  of  which  would
be  about  8  inches,  and  deviating  at  least  24  inches  from  the
normal  line  of  the  spine ;  and  the  lumbar  vertebrae  in  the  op¬
posite  direction  forming  a  sharp  curve  to  the  base  of  the
spine.

This  patient  was  unable  to  maintain  an  erect  position,  and
could  only  walk  without  assistance  by  placing  her  back  against
a  wall  and  thus  moving  with  great  difficulty  sideways.  She
was  placed  upon  a  couch  with  her  face  downwards,  and  mag¬
netized  along  the  spine.  I  commenced  at  the  occiput,  and
brought  my  hands  down  slowly  to  the  sacrum.

In  this  manner  she  was  manipulated  every  day  for  three

*  We  refer  our  readers  to  No.  IX.,  p.  82,  for  a  remarkable  mesmeric  cure
at  Brighton  of  ulceration  and  other  diseases.  Such  a  cure,  being  new,  surprised
us  ;  but  the  evidence  of  the  nature  of  the  disease  was  too  strong  to  resist,  and  we
published  the  narrative,  and  now  heartily  rejoice  that  we  did.  The  details  are
minute.  What  long  worry  and  disgusting  and  painful  applications  of  caustic
might  not  poor  women  be  spared,  if  ladies’  doctors  would  but  condescend  to
study  mesmerism.  Mr.  Mott  relates  another  striking  cure  of  this  kind  at  the
close  of  the  present  account. — Zoist.


by  Mr.  Mott ,  Surgeon.


1 77


months,  at  the  end  of  which  period,  15th  April,  1849,  the
spinal  column  had  become  perfectly  straight.

At  the  commencement  this  patients  pulse  ranged  to  104
in  a  minute,  but  was  soon  reduced  to  84,  and  ultimately  be¬
came  established  at  a  healthy  standard.

This  lady  was  about  40  years  of  age,  and  had  a  sister,
about  two  years  younger,  suffering  from  the  same  complaint,
the  curvatures  being  in  an  opposite  direction,  but  similar  in
character.  She  was  not  incapable  of  walking,  but  suffered
much  from  general  debility,  and  was  subject  to  great  nervous
excitement,  her  pulse  averaging  from  110  to  130  the  minute.
She  was  treated  in  the  same  way  as  her  sister,  when  the  pulse
invariably  became  reduced  and  strengthened,  generally  sub¬
siding  to  about  80  in  the  minute.

This  patient  also  quite  recovered  in  about  four  months,
July  15,  1849,  and  continues  perfectly  well.*

Inflammation  of  a  Dislocated  Elbow.

Eleventh  Case. — Miss  E.  C.,  about  38  years  of  age,  in
making  a  false  step  fell  backwards  and  fractured  the  left
elbow ;  the  joint,  although  not  dislocated,  was  so  much  injured
that  it  became  immoveable,  and  there  was  great  pain,  swell¬
ing,  and  inflammation  of  the  whole  joint.  The  part  injured
was  magnetized  every  day  for  about  a  fortnight,  with  instant
relief  and  speedy  recovery.

Delirium  Tremens.

Twelfth  Case . — J.  P.,  Esq.,  about  50  years  of  age,  occa¬
sionally  intemperate.  I  was  suddenly  called  to  him ;  found
him  labouring  under  delirium  tremens ;  he  was  very  violent ;
his  pulse  at  130.  After  some  trouble  I  induced  him  to  re¬
cline  on  a  sofa,  and  magnetized  him  for  half  an  hour,  when
the  pulse  fell  to  64  in  a  minute.  He  soon  became  perfectly

*  These  diseases  depend  upon  debility  and  give  occasion  to  most  tedious  and
troublesome  treatment  and  immense  expense :  and  thus  offer  as  fair  a  field  for
legitimate  quackery  as  uterine  affections.  Cases  of  mere  debility  are  constantly
treated  with  issues,  setons,  &c.,  as  if  there  was  diseased  bone;  and  exercise  and
fresh  air  are  denied  the  unfortunate  patients.  Apparatuses  are  often  employed
which  make  matters  worse  :  and  with  apparatuses  curvatures  take  place  which
might  be  prevented  by  well-regulated  exercise  of  the  various  muscles. — Where  the
spinal  bones  are  diseased,  and  a  point  of  bone  projects,  the  horizontal  posture
and  setons  and  issues  are  the  old  and  unsatisfactory  remedies,  though  many  of
the  best  living  surgeons  reject  these  drains,  which  formerly  were  never  omitted ;
abscess  often  takes  place,  and  then  almost  always  death.  Mesmerism  is  the
best  remedy  in  even  diseased  bone  :  and  a  beautiful  cure  is  recorded  in  No.  XXII.,
p.  201. — A  third  kind  of  spinal  affection  is  simply  morbid  sensitiveness  of  more
or  less  of  the  spine,  and  its  treatment  is  often  most  barbarous,  and  founded  on
a  mistake  of  its  nature.  Mesmerism  is  almost  a  certain  remedy  for  this.  See
cures  in  No.  V.,  p.  82  ;  XIII.,  p.  95  ;  XVII.,  p.  20  ;  see  also  XXVI.,  p.  171  ;
XXIX.,  p.  49. — Zoist.


178  A  selection  of  Cases  treated  with  Mesmerism,

tranquil  and  rational,  saying,  "  He  never  could  have  believed
it  possible  that  one  could  be  changed  in  so  short  a  time  by
such  means.”

Enlarged  and  Ulcerated  Uterus.

Thirteenth  Case. — Mrs.  H.,  a  lady  about  25  years  of  age,
mother  of  three  children,  applied  to  me  in  1849  to  be  mag¬
netized,  by  the  advice  of  a  clairvoyante  whom  she  had  pre¬
viously  consulted,  for  uterine  disease.  Upon  examination  with
the  speculum,  the  correctness  of  the  clairvoyante's  report  was
confirmed.  This  lady  had  been  under  the  treatment  of  a
celebrated  surgeon  in  Paris  for  a  considerable  time,  who,  with
other  remedies,  had  used  the  actual  cautery,  from  which  she
had  derived  but  little  benefit.  Magnetism  was  then  resorted
to,  in  compliance  with  her  clairvoyante  adviser's  instructions.
I  commenced  magnetizing  her  at  the  beginning  of  July,  1849,
every  day  at  12  morning,  by  passes  from  the  forehead  to  the
feet  for  fifteen  minutes ;  then  from  the  occiput  down  the
spine  to  the  heels  for  a  like  period.

In  the  course  of  a  few  weeks  the  ulceration  healed,  the  tume¬
faction  subsided,  and  by  the  end  of  September  she  was  able  to
walk  from  Kemp  Town  into  Brighton, — better  than  a  mile  !
She  subsequently  left  for  Paris;  continued  in  good  health;
and  has  written  me  two  notes  expressing  her  gratitude  for
being  cured ;  and,  to  use  her  own  words,  u  she  possesses  the
enjoyments  of  life  and  feels  as  well  as  ever  she  did.”


VII.  A  selection  of  thirty -one  Cases  treated  by  Mesmerism.
By  Mr.  John  Battisiiill  Parker,  Surgeon,  Exeter.
[Painless  extraction  of  3  teeth,  1  painless  bleeding,  1
accouchment,  1  expulsion  of  the  placenta  from  an  hour¬
glass  contraction  of  the  uterus,  1  case  of  great  benefit  after
amputation,  2  cases  of  severe  uterine  hsemorrhage,  1  apo¬
plectic  collapse,  1  removal  of  splinter  under  the  nail,  1
obstinate  constipation,  2  chorea,  1  abscess  of  the  ear,  1
sciatica  of  seven  years  duration,  2  rheumatic  fever,  1  nerv¬
ous  palpitation  of  the  heart,  3  cases  of  tic  douloureux,  1
case  of  chlorosis,  1  case  of  delirium  from  typhus  fever,  2
cases  of  threatening  phthisis,  2  cases  of  gout,  1  inflammation
of  the  bladder  of  6  years  duration,  2  cases  of  violent  hy¬
steria  quieted  in  less  than  a  minute,  1  case  of  loss  of  voice.]

Extraction  of  Tooth  with  appearance  of  pain,  but  no  conscious¬
ness  or  recollection  of  it.

Elizabeth  Long,  set.  13,  a  little  girl,  whom  I  had  frequently
mesmerised,  came  to  me  one  morning  to  have  a  molar  tooth


by  Mr .  Parker,  Surgeon.


179


extracted.  I  produced  mesmeric  sleep  in  less  than  a  minute,
and  within  three  minutes  proceeded  to  extract  the  tooth  with
the  forceps ;  but,  the  tooth  being  much  decayed  in  the  centre,
the  whole  of  the  crown  crumbled  to  pieces,  and  this  appeared
to  give  her  much  pain.  I  then  took  the  key  instrument  and
immediately  extracted  the  tooth.  I  then  produced  deeper
sleep  and  left  her  for  half  an  hour,  and  on  my  return  found
her  still  asleep.  I  then  awoke  her,  and  she  had  no  recollection
of  what  had  been  done*

Extraction  of  two  Teeth.

Mary  Hanger  came  to  my  house  a  few  days  since  to  have
two  teeth  extracted.  She  had  been  mesmerised  a  few  times
at  my  mesmeric  seances.  In  three  minutes  I  produced  mes¬
meric  sleep,  and  I  then  extracted  the  two  teeth.  During  the
operations  she  remained  perfectly  motionless  ;  and,  on  my
waking  her  ten  minutes  afterwards,  her  first  enquiry  was
whether  I  had  extracted  the  teeth.

Painless  Bleeding.

Mrs.  ft.,  having  been  suffering  from  considerable  tender¬
ness  of  the  bowels  for  some  time,  and  other  remedies  includ¬
ing  mesmerism  having  been  tried  without  much  relief,  I  sug¬
gested  bleeding  from  the  arm, — an  operation  which  I  had
practised  on  her  several  times  before,  but  not  during  mes¬
meric  sleep.  On  my  arrival  at  her  house  she  fainted  at  the
thought  of  it.  I  left  the  house,  requesting  the  husband  to
mesmerise  her,  as  he  had  been  accustomed  to.  At  a  time
agreed  upon  I  returned,  tied  up  the  arm,  removed  twenty
ounces  of  blood,  bound  up  the  arm,  and  left  her  before  she
became  acquainted  with  the  fact.

Accouchment  with  slight  consciousness  only.

Mrs. - ,  who  in  her  first  and  former  accouchment  had

convulsions  and  subsequent  mania,  was  again  pregnant,  and,
being  naturally  very  anxious  to  avoid  the  former  distressing
occurrences,  requested  me  to  attend  her  and  conduct  the
delivery  during  mesmeric  sleep.  With  this  intention  a  female
friend,  who  had  been  accustomed  to  mesmerise  her  previously

*  The  want  of  recollection  of  pain  is  of  course  no  proof  that  pain  was  not
felt.  But  when  there  are  signs  of  pain,  they  are  not  always  a  proof  that  pain  is
felt ;  because  they  may  arise  from  apprehension  solely,  the  patient  being  conscious
that  the  operation  is  to  be,  and  perhaps  that  it  is  being,  performed,  and  fearing
excessively,  but  suffering  no  pain.  In  the  present  case,  no  pain  might  have  been
felt  if  means  had  been  used  to  deepen  the  sleep,  such  as  keeping  the  points  of
the  fingers  upon  the  patient’s  eyes  for  a  long  while,  or  the  hand  on  the  forehead,
or  continuing  the  passes,  or  breathing  slowly  on  the  eyes,  or  into  the  nostrils  and
mouth. — Zoist.


180  A  selection  of  Cases  treated  with  Mesmerism ,

to  my  seeing  her,  was  engaged.  When  the  premonitory
symptoms  of  labour  began,  she  was  mesmerised ;  and,  in  the
course  of  half  an  hour,  was  delivered  of  a  fine  healthy  child,
being  slightly  conscious  only  of  three  pains ;  and  everything
afterwards  proceeded  as  in  the  most  favourable  accouchment.*

Expulsion  of  the  Placenta  from  an  hour-glass  contraction  of

the  Uterus.

William  Nichols,  for  whom  I  tied  the  radial  artery  during
mesmeric  sleep,  resumed  liis  work  within  a  few  weeks  from
the  date  of  my  former  communication  to  The  Zoist  A  The
nails  of  the  four  fingers  were  shot  off  by  the  injury  his  hand
sustained  from  the  sponge  having  remained  so  long  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  wounded  radial  artery.

In  January,  1849,  his  wife  was  delivered  of  her  first  child,
and,  after  waiting  an  hour  and  a  half  for  the  expulsion  of  the
placenta,  that  might  have  been  expected  from  the  repeated
vigorous  contractions  of  the  uterus,  and  no  portion  of  the
placenta  being  near  the  os  uteri,  I  concluded,  from  my  expe¬
rience  in  these  cases,  that  there  was  an  hour-glass  contraction
of  the  organ  or  an  adherent  placenta.  Mesmerism  continued
for  ten  minutes  caused  the  placenta  to  be  expelled.  I  have
now  attended  more  than  two  thousand  cases  of  midwifery,  and
have  lost  only  one  patient  from  the  effects  of  labour.  The
death  in  this  case  arose  from  adherent  placenta,  which  was
not  discharged  for  eight  days  and  produced  typhus  fever,
under  wrhich  my  patient  sank.  I  have  performed  every  ope¬
ration  in  midwifery,  except  the  Caesarian  and  symphysotomy,
with  perfect  success  to  my  patients;  and  for  several  years
during  the  beginning  of  my  career  performed  nearly  all  the
instrumental  deliveries  for  the  city  midwives  of  Exeter.  I
have  made  this  digression,  as  antimesmerisers  may  not  con¬
sider  me  qualified  to  give  an  opinion  in  such  a  case  as  the
present.

Benefit  from  Mesmerism  in  a  case  of  Amputation  of
the  Leg  below  the  knee.

Mr.  B.,  who  had  suffered  from  an  extensive  and  exces¬
sively  painful  ulcer  of  the  leg  for  many  years,  was  anxious  to
see  me ;  and,  on  my  first  visit,  it  was  evident  the  tibia  had
been  quite  severed  by  the  disease.  He  submitted  to  the  am¬
putation  in  May,  1849.  As  he  was  impatient  to  have  the  leg

*  See  similar  cases  in  No.  V.,  p.  121 ;  XV. ,  p.  415  ;  XXI.,  p.  59  ;  XXII.,
p.  208. — Zoist.

f  See  No.  XX.,  p.  389.  Nos.  XVIII.  and  XX.  contain  each  a  valuable
series  of  cases  of  mesmeric  benefit  by  Mr.  Parker,  whose  manliness  we  have
already  praised  (No.  XVI.,  p.  302)  but  not  enough. — Zoist.


by  Mr.  Parker,  Surgeon.


181


removed,  we  had  only  a  few  days  to  try  the  effects  of  mes¬
merism,  and  we  had  not  much  success.  But,  as  soon  as  the
stump  was  dressed,  local  mesmerism  was  had  recourse  to  with
great  benefit.  The  stump  healed  in  a  few  weeks  by  the  first
intention  without  the  slightest  inflammatory  symptom  or  sup¬
puration,  and  there  is  no  doubt  the  patient  was  spared  much
suffering  in  the  healing  of  the  stump.

Benefit  from  Mesmerism  in  a  case  of  severe  Uterine  Haemorrhage.

Mrs. - was  delivered  of  her  first  child  after  a  very

natural  labour ;  and,  as  I  was  about  to  leave  the  room,  full  an
hour  after  the  placenta  had  been  expelled,  she  was  suddenly
taken  faint,  and,  on  making  an  examination,  I  found  this  was
occasioned  by  hsemorrhage.  The  uterus  was  contracting  firmly;
considerable  pressure  was  applied ;  the  fainting  was  followed
by  vomiting,  then  by  a  renewal  of  the  haemorrhage ;  then  faint¬
ing  and  again  vomiting ;  all  which  continued  in  succession  for
nearly  three  hours.  It  was  then  necessary  to  give  brandy,
eggs,  broth,  &c.,  which  were  almost  immediately  rejected.  In
this  state  I  was  resolved  to  try  mesmerism  by  breathing  over
the  heart.  All  the  family  were  quite  prostrate  at  the  long-
continued  fainting,  followed  by  the  repeated  vomiting  and
haemorrhage.  But,  in  a  few  minutes  after  the  breathing,  my
patient  began  to  whisper  and  say  it  had  saved  her  life.  In
fact,  it  appeared  to  act  as  transfusion,  and  no  doubt  it  did,  of
the  vital  principle :  and  from  that  moment  we  had  no  further
trouble,  and  she  recovered  as  after  the  most  favourable  ac-
couchment.

A  case  of  Menorrhagia  that  was  much  relieved  by  Mesmerism.

M.,  having  left  her  drawing-room,  remained  absent  for  a
much  longer  time  than  was  expected.  Her  mother,  on  going
to  fetch  her,  found  her  daughter  dead  faint  from  the  loss  of
blood  ;  in  fact  her  whole  dress  was  saturated  with  blood.  On
my  arrival  I  found  her  quite  insensible,  and  as  soon  as  her
consciousness  returned  I  gave  her  some  Matico, — the  most
effectual  styptic  I  am  acquainted  with.  This  was  immediately
rejected,  and  there  was  a  repetition  of  the  haemorrhage,  faint¬
ness  and  vomiting,  which  nothing  appeared  to  relieve  until  I
breathed  over  the  heart  with  vigour.  My  patient  in  a  few
minutes  began  to  feel  the  effects  of  the  transfusion,  and  whis¬
pered  that  it  had  saved  her  life.  We  had  no  further  trouble.

A  case  of  Apoplectic  Collapse  completely  restored  by  Mesmerism.

A  little  girl,  aged  13  years,  of  very  poor  parents,  had  been
engaged  to  wash  the  floor  and  tables  of  a  small  shopkeeper ;


1 82  A  selection  of  Cases  treated  with  Mesmerism,

and,  no  doubt  having  a  great  appetite  from  living  badly  at
home,  ate  a  very  full  meal  of  sprats,  which  were  then  very
plentiful.  She  was  left  in  the  kitchen  at  her  work,  while  the
mistress  was  engaged  in  some  other  part  of  the  premises.  At
the  expiration  of  an  hour  her  mistress  went  into  the  kitchen
and  found  her  quite  prostrate  on  the  floor,  and  in  this  state  I
found  her  at  5  o’clock  p.m.,  quite  insenible,  with  her  pupils
dilated,  and  with  stertorous  breathing.  She  had  vomited  a
little;  the  whole  body  was  very  cold,  in  a  state  of  complete
collapse.  I  immediately  administered,  with  the  stomach  pump
and  a  tube  introduced  through  the  nostril,  a  tablespoonful  of
flour  of  mustard  in  a  quart  of  warm  water.  The  whole  of  this
operation  was  performed  without  the  slightest  consciousness.
In  the  course  of  twenty  minutes  she  vomited  a  little,  and  was
then  put  to  bed,  and  was  surrounded  with  jars  filled  with  hot
water.  At  the  end  of  an  hour  no  reaction  or  consciousness
had  taken  place.  I  then  had  her  mesmerised  most  vigorously
with  passes  through  the  whole  length  of  the  body,  and  within
half  an  hour  she  began  to  shew  symptoms  of  returning  con¬
sciousness.  The  mesmerism  was  continued  and  she  was  quite
restored  by  the  morning.*

Splinter  of  wood  under  the  Nail ;  all  the  pain  after  the
extraction  entirely  removed  by  Mesmerism.

Mr.  Reed  called  on  me  early  one  morning  to  extract  a
splinter  of  wood  which  had  penetrated  the  whole  length  under
the  centre  of  the  nail  of  the  second  finger.  There  was  excru¬
ciating  pain.  I  extracted  a  large  portion  of  the  splinter ;  but
a  portion,  being  separated,  still  remained  under  the  centre  of
the  nail.  I  then  advised  him  to  try  the  effect  of  mesmerism
for  an  hour.  He  returned  to  me  in  an  agony.  In  the  mean¬
while  he  had  nearly  scraped  a  hole  through  the  centre  of  the
nail,  that  I  completed,  and  I  then  extracted  the  remaining
portion  of  splinter.  He  was  in  an  agony  during  the  whole
of  the  operation.  After  its  completion,  I  advised  him  again
to  be  mesmerised.  This  was  done,  and  soon  gave  him  relief ;
and  in  the  evening  he  was  quite  free  from  pain  and  had  no
further  trouble.

Obstinate  Constipation  completely  relieved  by  Mesmerism.

Mrs.  B.  for  many  months  had  been  troubled  with  consti¬
pation,  which  disturbed  the  whole  system  and  appeared  likely
to  produce  some  organic  disease.  Having  been  under  my
care  for  many  months  without  much  benefit,  she  consulted
several  other  medical  men  with  no  better  result.  I  then  pro¬
posed  using  the  oesophagus  tube  of  the  stomach  pump,  as

*  See  Sydenham’s  Practice,  No.  XNIII.,  }).  260.


by  Mr.  Parker,  Surgeon.


183


there  seemed  to  be  a  contraction  or  stricture  with  a  very
•  •  _  *

great  dilation  above  it.  This  appeared  at  the  time  to  be  of
service,  and  was  repeated  on  many  occasions.  Eighteen
months  had  now  passed  without  any  permanent  benefit,  she
being  just  in  the  same  state  as  at  the  commencement.  She
now  consented  to  mesmerism,  and  it  was  practised  daily  by
her  husband  and  daughter :  and  at  the  end  of  a  month  she
was  restored  to  such  a  state  of  health  and  such  regular  action
of  the  bowels  as  she  had  never  before  experienced ;  and  now
nearly  two  years  have  elapsed  without  a  return  of  constipation.

St.  Vitus’s  Dance ,  with  'partial  Paralysis ,  completely  cured  by

Mesmerism.

J.,  aged  11,  was  walking  with  her  brother  and  another
little  boy  by  the  side  of  the  river,  when  the  two  boys  fell  into
it.  The  other  little  boy  was  drowned,  but  her  brother  was
taken  out  and  resuscitated.  The  shock  produced  such  an
effect  that  she  remained  insensible  for  some  time.  After  her
return  to  sensibility,  the  left  arm  and  left  leg  remained  in  a
great  measure  paralyzed,  and  her  whole  frame  was  inces¬
santly,  except  during  sleep,  agitated  by  involuntary  move¬
ments  to  such  an  extent  that  she  was  unable  to  hold  a  small
cup,  and  was  frequently  falling  down  if  allowed  to  walk
without  holding  some  person  by  the  hand.  The  parents,
having  tried  other  means  without  benefit,  were  recommended
to  try  mesmerism ;  and,  after  two  month's  mesmerism,  she
was  quite  restored  to  her  former  state  of  health.

St.  Vitus’s  Dance  completely  cured  by  Mesmerism.

T.,  a  little  girl,  10  years  of  age,  had  been  the  subject  of
St.  Vitus's  dance  for  several  months,  and  been  under  the  me¬
dical  man  of  the  family  without  any  benefit.  When  she
applied  to  me  she  could  scarcely  stand  or  even  sit  still  from
the  incessant  involuntary  action  of  the  whole  muscular  system.
She  was  mesmerised  daily,  and  at  the  end  of  two  months
was  quite  restored.

Abscess  of  the  Ear  preceded  by  discharge  of  7  years’  dura¬
tion,  with  very  considerable  dullness  of  hearing ;  completely
cured  by  Mesmerism  after  other  treatment  had  failed.

T.,  12  years  of  age,  had  been  subject  to  frequent  abscess
of  the  ears  followed  by  constant  discharge  upwards  of  seven
years.  Considerable  dullness  of  hearing  had  resulted ;  and,
at  my  first  seeing  him,  he  was  suffering  from  the  formation
of  a  fresh  abscess,  which  made  him  heavy,  dull,  and  stupid —
a  state  the  opposite  of  what  was  natural  to  him.  He  was


184  A  selection  of  Cases  treated  with  Mesmerism ,

mesmerised  for  one  week,  when  all  his  sufferings,  including
the  discharge,  were  removed,  and  his  hearing  was  quite  restored.

Acute  Rheumatism  most  successfully  treated  with  Mesmerism.

A  gentleman’s  servant,  three  years  previously  had  a
severe  attack  of  rheumatic  fever  which  quite  incapacitated
him  for  more  than  three  months,  and  he  was  able  but  slightly
to  move  his  limbs  at  the  end  of  two  months  more.  On  my
first  visit,  January,  1849,  I  found  him  quite  unable  to  move
either  hand  or  foot  from  an  attack  of  very  acute  rheumatism
of  several  days  duration.  I  procured  a  very  vigorous  man  to
mesmerise  him  twice  a  day.  Immediate  relief  was  obtained
after  a  few  passes,  and  at  the  end  of  ten  days  he  was  quite
convalescent.

Acute  Rheumatism  most  successfully  treated  with  Mesmerism.

A  fine  healthy  countryman,  who  had  come  from  the  north
of  Devon  to  work  at  the  early  harvest  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  Exeter,  felt  himself  on  the  third  day  of
his  work  unable  to  move  any  of  his  limbs,  and  in  this  state  I
found  him.  He  had  had  a  similar  attack  two  years  previously,
and  was  incapacited  for  above  three  months.  Other  treament
combined  with  mesmerism  on  this  occasion  continued  for  the
space  of  six  days  only  quite  restored  him,  so  as  to  enable  him
to  resume  the  very  laborious  work  of  reaping.

Distressing  Palpitation  of  the  Heart  of  three  years’  duration
completely  cured  by  Mesmerism  after  every  other  treatment
had  failed.

Mrs.  B - consulted  me  for  severe  palpitation  of  the

heart  that  had  been  produced  by  a  terrific  haemorrhage  after
her  confinement  three  years  previously.  Her  nervous  system
was  so  disturbed  that  she  could  not  remain  alone  in  a  room
even  by  day.  Change  of  air,  as  well  as  change  of  treatment
directed  by  various  medical  men,  had  all  failed  to  give  her
the  least  relief :  and  as  a  last  resource  she  was  advised  to  try
mesmerism.  This  was  persevered  in  for  three  months  by  her
maid-servant  with  complete  relief,  and  she  has  now  been
quite  well  for  nearly  two  years.

Sciatica  of  seven  years’  duration  cured  in  a  week.

- Beer,  a  mason,  aged  57,  had  left  the  Exeter  Hos¬
pital  the  week  before  he  applied  to  me.  Whilst  there  for
nineteen  weeks  he  was  treated  with  hot  baths,  &c.,  without
any  relief.  He  had  done  one  week’s  work  on
months,  and  had  not  been  free  from  pain  for  seven  years.


ly  for  sixteen


by  Mr.  Parker,  Surgeon.


185


The  continuance  of  the  pain  had  caused  a  shortening  of  the
limb.  After  four  days’  mesmerism  he  returned  to  me  almost
free  from  his  old  enemy ,  and  at  the  end  of  the  week  he  was
quite  well.

Tic  Douloureux  of  almost  every  part  of  the  body  of  fifteen
years’  duration  completely  cured  with  Mesmerism.

Mrs. - had  been  afflicted  with  tic  douloureux  in  almost

every  part  of  her  body  for  fifteen  years.  Iler  face  was  par¬
tially  paralyzed,  and  one  eyelid  drooped.  She  had  been  sub¬
mitted  to  various  plans  of  treatment  by  different  medical  men
without  any  permanent  benefit,  and,  in  consequence  of  her
disease  resisting  every  other  treatment,  she  was  driven,  being
an  unbeliever,  to  try  mesmerism  as  a  last  resource.  Although
no  mesmeric  sleep  was  ever  produced,  its  daily  continuance  for
three  months  restored  her  to  such  a  state  of  freedom  from
pain  as  she  had  never  experienced  under  any  former  treat¬
ment  :  in  fact  she  has  expressed  herself  quite  cured.

A  Case  of  Tic  Douloureux  of  fifteen  months’  duration  cured  by

Mesmerism  in  a  week.

Mrs. - ,  who  had  suffered  from  tic  douloureux  of  the

head  and  face  for  fifteen  months  under  the  care  of  several
violent  antimesmerisers,  sent  for  me  in  October,  1849,  when
I  found  she  had  been  delirious  from  pain  the  whole  of  the
night  and  was  then  in  agony.  A  quarter  of  an  hour’s  mes¬
merism  sent  her  to  sleep.  She  woke  up  quite  free  from  pain  :
the  mesmerism  was  continued  for  a  week  and  she  was  quite
cured.

Case  of  severe  Tic  Douloureux  of  the  Face  for  eleven  years  or
more,  that  had  resisted  every  other  kind  of  treatment,  quite
relieved  by  Mesmerism.

Mr. - who  had  suffered  martyrdom  from  tic  douloureux  of

the  face  for  eleven  years  or  more,  and  had  tried  every  remedy
which  could  be  suggested  by  a  multitude  of  medical  men,  as
well  as  by  non-medical  men  and  women  whose  nostrums  ac¬
cording  to  their  own  accounts  had  never  been  known  to  fail,
was  almost  compelled  by  his  family  to  give  a  trial  to  mes¬
merism,  in  which  he  had  no  faith  or  belief.  He  sent  for  me
in  March,  1846,  to  know  if  it  was  possible  for  him  to  be
relieved  with  mesmerism,  at  the  same  time  saying  he  had  no
belief  in  the  reality  of  such  an  agency.  The  whole  of  his
face  was  shining  and  of  a  deep  red ;  he  could  scarcely  speak
two  words  in  succession  without  the  greatest  pain ;  the  act  of
swallowing  was  positive  torture,  and  during  it  a  portion  of


18G  A  selection  of  Cases  treated  with  Mesmerism ,

food  appeared  frequently  to  lodge  near  the  glottis  or  opening
of  the  air  passage.  Even  when  he  was  at  all  relieved  from
pain  and  taking  a  short  walk,  he  would  rather  avoid  than  en¬
counter  his  nearest  relatives,  the  act  of  saying,  “  how  do  you
do  ?”  being  attended  with  agony.  Mesmerism  was  now  tried,
and  continued  daily  for  eighteen  months,  when  he  told  me
he  was  quite  free  from  pain,  and  had  no  further  necessity  for
mesmerism.  The  pain  in  a  less  degree  returned  at  times,  but
has  invariably  been  relieved  by  repeating  the  same  process.

Obstinate  Chlorosis  in  a  young  woman  22  years  of  age ,  com¬
pletely  cured  by  Mesmerism.

E.,  aged  22  years,  whose  system  had  never  been  periodi¬
cally  relieved,  was  in  a  very  languid  state.  Her  countenance
was  of  a  yellowish  white  :  there  was  frequent  palpitation  of
the  heart  and  almost  breathlessness  in  attempting  to  go  up
stairs  :  her  appetite  was  very  bad  :  and  she  was  quite  unfit  for
any  active  occupation.  She  had  tried  the  various  remedies
which  are  daily  prescribed  for  such  cases  without  the  least
effect.  She  wras  now  advised  to  try  mesmerism,  and  after  a
month's  trial  her  system  became  regular  and  all  the  other
sufferings  were  removed  :  and  now,  at  the  expiration  of  eight
months,  her  health  continues  very  good.*

Delirium  of  Typhus  Fever  completely  removed  by  Mesmerism ,
and  convalescence  soon  established.

A  little  girl,  aged  13  years,  was  put  under  my  care  one
evening,  when  I  found  her  in  a  state  of  delirium  with  typhus
fever.  She  had  been  ill  for  a  fortnight,  but  the  mother  sent
for  me  in  consequence  of  the  delirium.  Her  case  would  not
admit  of  bleeding  or  leeches.  She  was  soon  put  into  mes¬
meric  sleep,  and  woke  up  free  from  delirium.  The  mesmerism
was  continued  daily  with  appropriate  remedies,  and  her  con¬
valescence  was  as  rapid  as  under  the  most  favourable  case  of
simple  fever. t

A  Case  of  Chronic  Pneumonia  with  threatening  Phthisis ,  com¬
pletely  restored  by  Mesmerism.

August,  1849.  A  little  girl,  11  years  of  age,  had  been
suffering  considerable  pain  in  the  chest  for  two  months.  On

*  See  a  similar  cure  by  Mr.  Tubbs,  No.  VI.,  p.  258. — Zoist.
f  If  in  every  case  of  affection  of  the  head  in  the  fevers  of  children,  and  in
that  disease  called  water  of  the  head,  mesmerism  were  freely  used,  whether
alone  or  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  useful  means,  practitioners  would  be  astonished
at  the  result :  multitudes  of  leeches  and  blisters  and  loads  of  calomel  would  be
dispensed  with,  and  countless  children  would  be  saved  who  now  sink  under  their
diseases  or  are  killed  by  the  treatment.  In  truth,  there  is  no  disease  of  children
in  which  free  mesmerism  should  be  omitted. — Zoist.


187


by  Mr.  Parker ,  Surgeon.

my  arrival  I  found  her  much  emaciated,  with  frequent  cough,
and  expectoration  at  times  streaked  with  blood.  The  whole  of
the  chest  was  very  tender  on  percussion,  and  respiration  very
puerile :  the  pulse  120.  She  was  too  much  emaciated  for
any  active  treatment.  Mesmerism  combined  with  soothing
treatment  continued  for  six  weeks  has  quite  restored  her,  and
she  has  passed  through  this  winter  without  any  trouble.

A  case  of  Chronic  Pneumonia  with  threatening  Phthisis  com¬
pletely  cured  by  Mesmerism.

This  patient  was  a  little  girl  ten  years  of  age,  and  the
whole  of  her  case  resembled  the  preceding  as  much  as  pos¬
sible.  Having  witnessed  so  much  benefit  from  mesmerism  in
the  former  case,  I  adopted  the  same  treatment  with  the  same
happy  result.

A  case  of  Gout  in  a  Lady  82  years  of  age  much  relieved  by

Mesmerism.

Mrs. - ,  who  had  been  subject  to  attacks  of  gout  from

an  early  age,  and  been  accustomed  to  be  laid  up  for  two  or
three  months  at  a  time  almost  every  year,  was  now  attacked
with  gout  in  each  foot  and  hand.  Mesmerism  was  tried,  and
produced  almost  instant  relief.  Her  convalescence  was  as  far
advanced  at  the  end  of  a  fortnight  as  on  previous  occasions
at  the  end  of  two  or  even  three  months.

A  case  of  Gout,  from  which  the  patient  at  times  had  been  con¬
fined  to  his  bed  for  three  months ,  cured  in  five  days,  and  the
patient  able  to  take  a  long  journey  with  his  ordinary  shoes.

S - has  been  accustomed  to  attacks  of  gout  for  many

years,  and  at  times  has  been  confined  to  his  bed  for  months ;
he  was  now  attacked  very  severely,  his  left  foot  and  toe  being
extremely  painful  and  much  swollen.  A  quarter  of  an  hour’s
mesmerism  entirely  removed  the  pain.  The  following  day
the  other  hand  and  foot  encountered  the  attack.  Mesmerism
produced  a  similar  effect.  It  was  continued  several  times
daily,  and  at  the  end  of  five  days  he  was  able  to  put  on  his
ordinary  shoes  and  take  a  long  journey  without  any  more
inconvenience.

Loss  of  Voice  for  nearly  three  months  completely  restored  on  a

second  Mesmerisation.

Robert  Haydon,  joiner,  had  lost  his  voice  from  a  cold  for
nearly  three  months,  when  he  applied  to  me.  I  then  ordered
him  an  emetic  and  a  mustard  plaster  to  the  throat,  with  ape¬
rients  and  diaphoretics,  which  latter  were  continued  for  several


188  A  selection  of  Cases  treated  with  Mesmerism ,

days,  the  inhalation  of  warm  medicated  vapour,  and  the  in¬
sufflation  of  finely  powdered  burnt  alum.  All  the  above  were
tried  without  the  least  effect.  I  then  mesmerised  him  in  the
presence  of  more  than  forty  persons.  On  my  mesmerising
him  the  following  day,  in  the  presence  of  several  persons,  he
sang  the  16th  or  Devonshire  Psalm  in  a  very  audible  tone ;
and  on  my  demesmerising  him  he  was  astonished  to  find  his
voice  quite  restored.  It  has  remained  perfectly  well  ever  since.

Case  of  violent  Hysteria  without  the  least  consciousness  for
two  hours  relieved  by  Mesmerism  in  less  than  a  minute .

At  ten  in  the  morning  of  May  31,  1850,  I  was  requested
to  go  to  the  house  of  a  poor  woman  whose  daughter  had  been
in  violent  hysteria  for  nearly  two  hours.  She  had  beaten
herself  and  pulled  out  her  hair  most  violently,  and  even  the
united  efforts  of  three  of  her  friends  could  not  keep  her  still.
I  then  learnt  that  she  had  been  subject  to  such  attacks  ever
since  a  most  narrow  escape  from  drowning  six  weeks
previously.  She  having  been  mesmerised  at  my  evening
seances,  I  at  once  placed  my  hand  on  the  organ  of  Benevo¬
lence,  and  she  immediately  smiled  :  then  told  me  for  the  first
time  that  the  accident  had  happened  whilst  in  a  boat  on  the
canal  and  during  the  violent  struggle  she  had  bruised  herself
very  much.  By  her  instructions  mesmerism  relieved  her,  and
in  half  an  hour  I  woke  her  up  quite  well.  She  only  recog¬
nized  me  as  if  I  had  just  come  into  her  house.  She  has  had
no  return  since.

Case  of  violent  Hysteria  without  the  least  consciousness  for
nearly  two  hours  relieved  by  Mesmerism  in  less  than  a
mimite.

In  the  evening  of  the  31st  of  May,  1850,  I  was  called  to
my  carpenter’s  daughter,  who  had  been  subject  to  similar
attacks  of  hysteria  with  catalepsy  for  some  months  previous,
and  had  found  great  relief  from  mesmerism.  It  is  strange
that  two  such  cases  should  occur  in  one  day.  Her  father
about  five  in  the  evening  went  into  the  house  covered  with
blood.  The  daughter  was  the  first  who  saw  him,  and,  before
she  had  time  to  make  any  enquiry  fainted  away,  and  then
violent  hysteria  with  catalepsy  set  in.  She  lost  her  conscious¬
ness,  and  struggled  violently;  the  limbs  would  remain  where
they  were  placed.  At  the  expiration  of  two  hours  I  arrived.
I  placed  my  hand  on  the  organ  of  Benevolence,  when  she
immediately  recognized  my  mesmeric  influence ;  talked  to
me,  gave  me  a  description  of  her  sufferings — such  as  very
violent  headache,  pain  in  her  chest  and  sides;  and  gave  me


Mesmerism  in  India  in  1850.


189


instructions  how  to  relieve  her.  I  followed  her  instructions,
and,  when  she  expressed  herself  quite  free  from  pain,  I  put
on  my  hat  and  woke  her  up.  She  said  she  did  not  know  that
she  had  seen  me  during  the  day  before  that  instant.

A  case  of  Inflammation  of  the  Bladder ,  with  sufferings  of  the
most  distressing  character ,  of  six  years’  duration ,  completely
cured  by  Mesmerism  after  every  other  treatment  had  failed.

Mr.  Bey  non  applied  to  me  in  May,  1846.  From  a  cold
which  he  had  caught  six  years  previously,  he  had  very  severe
inflammation  of  the  eyes  for  two  months.  The  bladder  was
then  attacked,  and  he  had  excessive  pain  in  its  region,  with
a  very  frequent  desire  of  micturition,  which  gave  him  the  sen¬
sation  of  melted  lead  and  was  followed  by  a  discharge  of
matter.  From  the  complaint  proving  so  intractable,  he  con¬
sulted  various  medical  men ;  went  to  London,  and  remained
under  the  care  of  an  eminent  surgeon  for  two  months ;  re¬
turned  to  Exeter  in  the  same  wretched  condition,  but  more
emaciated.  When  he  consulted  me  he  was  obliged  to  walk
with  a  stick,  as  it  would  have  been  extremelv  difficult  for  a
man  to  walk  so  much  bent  forwards  without  one.  He  was  then
obliged  to  relieve  the  bladder  every  20  minutes,  and  only  a
table-spoonful  came  away  at  a  time;  and  such  a  state  of
suffering  and  want  of  refreshing  sleep  of  course  disturbed  his
general  health,  so  much  as  to  make  life  a  burthen  to  him.
Mesmerism  was  now  tried  daily  with  other  appropriate  reme¬
dies,  and  continued  for  three  months,  when  he  found  himself
quite  relieved.  The  bladder,  which  must  have  been  thickened
like  a  gizzard,  has  now  expanded  to  such  an  extent  as  to  con¬
tain  at  least  twelve  ounces  of  fluid.  He  walks  as  erect  as
any  man,  and  his  general  health  is  quite  restored.*


VIII.  Mesmerism,  in  India  in  1850.  Communicated  by

Dr.  Elliotson.

“  The  avoidance  of  pain. — This  we  need  scarcely  say,  is  an  object  of  the
highest  importance  ;  not  merely  in  order  to  lessen  the  amount  of  physical  suffer¬
ing  attending  operations,  but  also  because  severe  pain  has  a  most  serious  tendency
to  depress  the  nervous  system,  and  induce  death  from  exhaustion ;  and  because
many  patients  have  so  great  a  dread  of  the  knife  that  they  put  off  applying  to
the  surgeon  till  their  case  is  almost  hopeless.  Up  to  the  end  of  1846  we  knew
of  no  means  for  effecting  this  very  desirable  object  save  the  previons  administra¬
tion  of  narcotics  and  long-continued  compression  of  the  nerves  supplying  the
part  to  be  operated  on  ;  means  both  of  which  are  so  uncertain  and  inefficient
that  no  one  ever  thought  of  employing  them.  We  do  not  include  mesmerism  in
the  list,  because  this  so-called  science  is  so  intimately  connected  with  quackery ,

*  For  the  benefit  of  mesmerism  in  affections  of  the  bladder,  see  Mr.  Weddel’s
striking  cure,  No.  XIV.,  p.  187  ;  see  also  Mr.  Thompson’s  cases,  XVII.,  p.  81  ;
XIX.,  p.  289  ;  and  Mr.  Jacob’s  cure,  XXVIII.,  p.  437. — Zoisi.


VOL.  VIII.


P


190


Mesmerism  in  India  in  1850,


obscenity,  and  imposture,  that  very  few  respectable  persons  would  consent  to

meddle  with  it,  even  for  a  good  purpose . Whilst  this  work  was  being

printed,  there  arrived  from  Boston,  America,  the  account  of  a  method  of  render¬
ing  patients  insensible  to  pain  during  operations  by  means  of  the  vapour  of  ether,
invented  by  Drs.  Jackson  and  Morton  of  Boston,  first  promulgated  in  England
in  January,  1847,  by  Dr.  Boot  of  Gower  Street.’ ’ — From  the  fourth  edition  of
the  Surgeon's  Vade  Mecum,  by  Robert  Druitt,  F.R.C.S.,  p.  548.*

I  have  received  the  following  letter  from  Dr.  Esdaile : —

“  My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — Sir  J ohn  Littler,  the  Deputy  Go¬
vernor,  has  seen  three  mesmeric  operations  in  my  hospital  in
the  last  six  weeks,  and  has  always  expressed  himself  astonished
and  delighted.  On  the  last  occasion  he  brought  Sir  Frede¬
rick  Currie,  Brigadier  Eckford,  and  other  gentlemen  with  him,
and  I  presented  them  with  a  tumor  weighing  eighty  pounds  in
two  minutes  and  a  half,  the  man  being  as  passive  as  a  gourd
during  and  long  after  the  operation.  He  is  doing  perfectly
well,  and  I  expect  to  be  equally  successful  in  a  still  larger
case  to-morrow.  Brigadier  Eckford,  after  the  operation,  con¬
gratulated  me  on  ( being  the  honoured  instrument  in  God’s
hands  to  work  such  wonders.’  It  is  certainly  a  great  privi¬
lege,  for  which  I  am  very  thankful.  A  Government  hospital
and  dispensary  having  fallen  vacant,  Sir  John  has  made  them
over  to  me,  for  the  express  purpose  of  combining  mesmerism
with  the  common  practice  of  medicine.  I  did  not  consider
my  task  complete  till  mesmerism  was  fixed  in  the  Government
hospitals  of  Calcutta.  It  will  now  be  sufficiently  the  interest
of  many  to  be  my  successor.  It  only  now  remains  for  me  to
write  my  mesmeric  testament,  in  which  I  shall  leave  legacies
to  some  of  my  brethren  here  they  will  not  be  in  a  hurry  to
administer  to.

“  Yours,  very  sincerely,

“Calcutta,  8th  April,  1850.  “  James  Esdaile.

“P.S.  In  my  last  report,  the  summary  does  not  seem  to
be  clear.  There  were —

31  capital  mesmeric  operations,

1  ditto  non-mesmeric,

2  deaths,

362  minor  non-mesmeric  operations,  as  hydrocele,  &c.”

The  following  is  the  account  in  the  Calcutta  Star ,  of  Feb¬
ruary  27th  : —

“  We  paid  a  visit  yesterday  to  the  Mesmesic  Hospital  to  witness
an  operation,  in  which  Dr.  Esdaile  succeeded  in  removing,  in  the
most  successful  manner,  a  tumor  of  70  lbs.  in  weight.

“  The  patient,  who  had  come  all  the  way  from  Delhi,  attracted

*  The  moral  and  intellectual  state  of  the  medical  profession  may  be  appreciated
from  one  of  its  members  daring  to  publish  such  a  paragraph. — J.  Elliotson.


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliolson .


191


hither  by  the  fame  of  Dr.  Esdaile,  was  a  fine  hale  old  man  of  very
respectable  standing  in  native  society,  and  had  been  afflicted  with  his
disease  fourteen  years.  The  operation  was  performed  in  the  doctor’s
usually  skilful  manner.  He  was  kindly  assisted  by  Dr.  Webb.  It
occupied  exactly  minutes;  and,  a  short  time  after  the  tumor  was
removed,  the  patient  being  rather  faint  from  loss  of  a  large  quantity
of  blood,  he  was  demesmerised,  and  after  sipping  a  small  quantity  of
ammonia  became  quite  talkative,  and,  as  usual  in  these  cases,  was
perfectly  unaware  that  the  operation  had  taken  place  until  informed
of  it.

“  His  Honour  Sir  John  Littler,  the  Hon.  Sir  F.  Currie,  Brigadier
Eckford,  Major  Colebrooke,  Captain  Mayow,  Captain  Sayers,  and
Drs.  James  Thomson  and  Allan  Webb,  were  present,  all  of  whom
expressed  their  gratification  at  the  entire  success  of  the  operation.”

I  have  received  the  Calcutta  Star  of  January  1st,  and
make  the  following  extract : —

“We  understand  that  a  remarkable  and  very  successful
operation  was  performed  at  the  Mesmeric  Hospital  yesterday.
The  patient  was  a  young  woman  of  23,  one  of  whose  mammse
was  so  large  that  it  rested  on  her  thigh  when  she  sat  up.
The  disease  commenced  only  a  year  ago,  and  this  rapid  growth
produced  the  following  singular  results.  The  tumor,  larger
than  a  man's  head,  was  attached  to  the  body  by  an  isthmus,
a  foot  long,  and  it  was  evident  that  the  mammary  gland,  or
true  breast,  had  left  the  chest  altogether  and  was  lodged  in
the  tumor.  Dr.  Esdaile,  before  proceeding  to  operate,  pointed
this  out  to  the  spectators,  and  thus  accounted  for  it.  He
supposed  that  the  mass  was  a  fatty  tumor  that  had  involved
the  mammary  gland,  which  however  had  not  become  diseased
and  contracted  adhesions  to  the  neighbouring  parts,  but  by
the  sudden  and  great  growth  of  the  tumor  he  believed  that
the  mammary  gland  had  been  loosened  from  its  natural  con¬
nections,  and,  as  the  skin  was  lengthened  by  the  depending
weight,  it  altogether  left  the  body,  and  was  lodged  in  the
centre  of  the  tumor  at  the  distance  of  a  foot  from  the  chest.
This  woman  was  so  sensitive  to  the  mesmeric  influence,  that
she  was  fit  to  be  operated  upon  the  first  day,  in  a  quarter  of
an  hour.  Her  picture  was  taken  in  the  trance  the  second
day,  and  yesterday  the  tumor  was  removed  without  the  slight¬
est  disturbance  of  the  body  from  head  to  foot ;  and  at  the  end
of  an  hour,  when  our  informant  left  the  hospital,  she  was  still
sleeping  as  tranquilly  as  a  healthy  child.

“The  tumor  weighed  10  lbs.,  and  when  cut  open  was
found  to  correspond  very  exactly  with  Dr.  Esdaile' s  theoretic
description  of  it.  The  mammary  gland  was  enclosed  in  the

p  2


192


Mesmerism  in  India  in  1850,


centre  of  a  fatty  mass,  and  quite  healthy  in  structure,  but
considerably  enlarged.”

Also  the  Calcutta  Star  of  March  6th,  in  which  the  follow¬
ing  account  appears : —

“We  understand  that  one  of  the  first  objects  of  the  Mi¬
nister  of  NipaFs  curiosity  has  been  mesmerism,  whose  fame
had  reached  Nipal  even.  We  are  told  that  this  gentleman  is
actually  the  Prime  Minister,  and  leaves  the  country  to  be
governed  by  his  brothers  in  his  absence,  so  secure  is  he  of
his  influence.  He  is  described  as  a  slight,  active,  intelligent
looking  man  of  32,  and  of  pure  Hindoo  blood.

“At  his  desire,  Dr.  Esdaile  granted  him  a  private  mes¬
meric  demonstration,  taking  three  of  his  patients  who  had
been  operated  upon  along  with  him.  Two  of  these  were  Cal¬
cutta  Baboos,  and  the  third  was  a  woman  whose  breast,  weigh¬
ing  10  lbs.,  was  cut  off  about  six  weeks  ago.  The  people
having  all  told  the  Minister  the  same  tale  of  total  insensibility
to  the  operation,  he  desired  to  see  how  the  thing  was  done
that  he  might  be  the  means  of  introducing  so  wonderful  and
beneficial  a  power  into  his  own  country.  The  woman  was
thrown  into  a  state  of  insensibility  by  a  few  passes ;  fire  was
then  applied  to  her  knuckles,  and  a  pin  stuck  into  her  nose
without  a  sign  of  sensibility.  She  was  then  awoke  by  a  few
reverse  passes,  and  said  that  she  had  been  asleep,  and  that
nothing  had  annoyed  her.  One  of  the  Baboos  was  next  re¬
duced  to  the  same  state  as  easily,  and  any  part  or  the  whole
of  his  body  was  made  rigid,  as  desired.  Being  restored  to
his  senses,  Dr.  Esdaile  informed  the  Minister  that  any  limb
might  be  made  rigid  and  insensible,  or  any  organ  of  sense
rendered  insensible  in  this  man,  while  the  general  conscious¬
ness  remained  perfect.

“Dr.  E.  having  detached  his  watch  from  its  chain,  put  it
into  the  manJs  closed  fist,  and  having  made  a  few  passes  along
the  arm  and  hand,  he  desired  the  Minister  to  order  him  to
dash  it  on  the  ground,  or  to  bribe  him  to  do  so,  if  he  pleased.
Order  and  persuasion  were  equally  tried  in  vain,  and  at  last
he  was  offered  Bs.  1000  to  do  so  with  as  little  effect;  the
man  saying  that  a  lac  might  be  offered  him  safely,  as  ( his
arm  felt  like  a  stick.’  Being  blindfolded,  his  arm  was  pricked
all  over,  he  saying  all  the  time  that  he  felt  nothing ;  but  the
moment  the  pin  was  applied  to  any  other  part  of  the  body,
he  immediately  shrunk  and  cried  out.  Each  of  the  senses
was  torpified  in  succession  in  like  manner.  A  bottle  contain¬
ing  carbonate  of  ammonia  was  handed  to  the  Minister  and


communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.


193


liis  suite,  who  all  made  violent  contortions  on  applying  it  to
their  noses.  The  Baboo’s  nose  was  mesmerised,  and  his  eyes
blindfolded,  and  the  minister  was  requested  to  apply  the  bottle
to  his  nose.  That  there  might  be  no  mistake,  he  seized  the
patient  by  his  lips  and  held  them  closed,  so  that  he  could  only
breathe  through  the  nose.  He  continued  to  breathe  with
perfect  ease  however,  saying  that  he  smelt  nothing ;  but  the
moment  his  nose  was  demesmerised  he  showed  as  much  dis¬
gust  as  any  of  the  party.  His  ears  were  next  experimented
upon,  and  at  a  given  signal  he  was  desired  to  go  away,  and
talked  to  by  every  one  without  the  smallest  sign  of  intelligence.
Nipalese  cymbals,  most  clamorous  instruments,  were  clashed
at  his  ears  without  his  minding  them,  and  a  pistol  was  fired  off
behind  him  without  disturbing  him  in  the  least.  His  ears  being
freed,  he  said  that  he  had  heard  nothing  for  some  time  back.

“  The  Minister  then  asked  if  it  was  possible  for  him  to
learn  this  art,  and  was  told  that  any  healthy  willing  man
might  do  so  after  a  few  minutes’  instruction.  He  accordingly
attacked  the  Baboo,  and  in  a  few  minutes  threw  him  into  the
trance,  the  reality  of  which  he  very  effectually  tested  by
gouging  his  nose  unmercifully  with  a  pin.  He  expressed  him¬
self  perfectly  satisfied,  and  begged  to  see  the  first  operation
that  was  to  be  performed.

“  The  Minister  having  been  informed  of  the  opposition
Dr.  Esdaile  had  encountered  in  the  introduction  of  this  new
art,  exclaimed,  f  Opposition !  I  should  not  know  how  to  re¬
ward  such  a  man  sufficiently.’  Such  is  the  difference  between
civilized  and  uncivilized  men — wdiich  do  the  gentlemen  of  the
Medical  College  belong  to  ?”

Greatly  to  the  credit  of  the  editor  of  Woolmer’s  Exeter
and  Plymouth  Gazette  of  June  8th,  for  which  I  am  indebted
to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Janson,  the  following  information
appears  under  the  head  of  Foreign  Intelligence  : —

“  Mesmerism  in  India. — The  Englishman,  of  the  10th  of
April,  says  : — f  We  are  glad  to  learn  that  the  Government
has  at  last  decided  upon  supporting  the  Mesmeric  Hospital.
Dr.  Esdaile  has  requested  us  to  inform  the  subscribers  that
he  will  not  require  an  extension  of  their  liberality  beyond  the
present  month,  as  the  Sarkea’s  Lane  Hospital  and  Dispensary
has  been  put  at  his  disposal,  for  the  express  purpose  of  intro¬
ducing  mesmerism  into  regular  hospital  practice.’  Upon  this
the  Hurkaru  remarks  : — fWe  most  cordially  congratulate  Dr.
Esdaile,  and  all  those  who  have  so  constantly  supported  him
through  good  report  and  evil  report,  on  what  must  be  regarded
as  the  triumph  of  truth  and  humanity,  wrought  out  by  a
patient  continuance  in  well-doing.  Professional  incredulity


194


Cure  of  Scrofulous  Ophthalmia,


has  been  convinced, — professional  prejudice  has  been  over¬
come  or  shamed  away,  and  mesmerism,  alike  victorious  over
argument  and  sarcasm,  now  stands,  supported  by  an  impreg¬
nable  array  of  facts,  practically  acknowledged  by  a  cautious
Government  as  a  means  of  mitigating  human  suffering/  ”

Read  this,  all  ye  medical  practitioners  of  all  ranks,  ye
lecturers,  hospital  medical  officers,  journalists  and  writers  of
books  in  England,  Scotland  and  Ireland,  and  hide  your  faces
in  your  hands,  and,  when  your  contrition  is  complete,  lift  them
up  and  implore  forgiveness  for  your  misdoings !

John  Elliotson.

37,  Conduit  Street,  London,  June  21st,  1850.

IX.  Mesmeric  Cures  of  Scrofulous  Ophthalmia ,  Dropsy,  Con¬
tractions,  and  Rheumatism.  By  Mr.  Tubbs,  Surgeon,
Up  well  Isle,  Cambridgeshire.

Violent  strumous  Ophthalmia.

On  Saturday,  Mrs.  Bates,  a  farmer’s  wife,  of  Exmore  Drove,
called  upon  me  with  her  child,  Hannah  Bates,  between  5  and
6  years  of  age.  The  child’s  eye  was  covered  with  a  handker¬
chief.  There  were  infiltration  and  swelling  of  the  whole  left
eyelid.  The  stimulus  of  light  prevented  my  minutely  ex¬
amining  the  eyeball.  I  saw  the  cornea  had  a  haziness,  with  an
indentation  about  the  size  of  a  pin’s  head.  There  was  also
visible  lymph  between  the  laminated  texture  of  the  cornea
and  enlarged  congested  vessels  surrounding  the  cornea.  As
the  mother  said  she  was  going  to  Wisbeach,  I  recommended
her  shewing  the  case  to  Dr.  Whitshed.*  On  her  return  she
called  with  a  prescription,  from  which  any  medical  man  would
be  enabled  to  decide  that  the  most  active  treatment  was  neces¬
sary.  I  proposed  to  the  mother  to  delay  the  remedies  until
the  next  morning,  the  case  having  gone  on  a  fortnight  by
itself,  and  to  let  me  mesmerise  the  eye ;  and  then,  if  she  was  no
better,  to  have  recourse  to  the  doctor’s  prescription.  I  locally
mesmerised  the  eye,  and  after  a  short  time  the  little  patient
fell  asleep,  and  slept  nearly  an  hour.  I  saw  a  decided  im¬
provement,  and  said,  “Now,  Mrs.  Bates,  I  think  I  can  cure
your  little  girl’s  eyes  without  the  prescription.  The  next
morning  the  tumefaction  was  lessened,  the  eye  not  so  cloudy ,
less  painful,  and  the  light  caused  no  pain.  Either  the  mother
or  daughter  brought  the  child  to  me  every  day  afterwards.

To-day  (June  14th)  the  eye  is  as  clear  as  the  other,  the
nebula  gone,  and,  with  the  exception  of  a  slight  white  speck

*  Dr.  Whitshed  is  the  wise  old  gentleman  who  called  mesmerism  an  “  illusory
and  visionary  imposture”  and  “  sinful.”  His  ridiculous  letter  to  Mr.  Tubbs,
with  that  gentleman’s  high-minded  answer,  will  be  found  in  No.  VI.,  p.  254. —
Znist.


by  Mr.  W.  J.  Tubbs.


195


on  the  cornea,  she  is  well.  I  never  saw  a  case  do  so  well  in  so
short  a  time.  The  child  is  brought  four  miles  to  be  mesmer¬
ised.  I  shall  mesmerise  it  for  a  week  longer.  The  doctor's
prescription  I  value  as  a  memento,  because  of  my  success  in
the  case.

I  have  so  many  cases  now  in  hand  that  I  have  turned  a
part  of  my  coach-house  (the  granary)  into  an  infirmary,  after
the  Bristol  plan.*

*  Mr.  Tubbs  has  forwarded  to  us  Dr.  Whitshed’s  prescription.  We  trans¬
lated  it,  and  our  readers  will  see  that  the  case  was  considered  very  severe,  or
such  powerful  and  painful  measures  would  not  have  been  ordered.  Calomel  and
grey  mercurial  power  night  and  morning  ;  compound  tincture  of  iodine  twice  a
day ;  and  a  solution  of  lunar  caustic  and  wine  of  opium  to  be  dropt  into  the  eyes
every  other  day : — for  how  many  weeks  these  sharp  measures  were  expected
to  be  required,  we  know  not.  But  the  poor  little  child  was  spared  all  this  seve¬
rity  by  Mr.  Tubbs  having  the  intelligence,  honesty  and  moral  courage  to  simply
make  passes  before  it.

“  Take — Calomel,  10  grains,

Mercury  and  chalk,  15  grains.

“  Mix  thoroughly,  and  divide  into  10  powders  :  to  give  one  of  the  powders
every  night  and  morning  in  a  very  little  treacle.

“  Take — Compound  tincture  of  iodine,  3  drams,

“  Direct. — ‘  Drops.’

“  ‘  Give  5  drops  in  a  little  water  sweetened  with  a  little  sugar  every  forenoon
at  10  o’clock,  and  every  afternoon  at  4  o’clock.’

“  Take — Lunar  caustic,  2\  grains.

Rose  water,  half  an  ounce.

“  Dissolve  and  add —

Wine  of  opium,  half  an  ounce.

“  Direct. — *  Drops  for  the  eye.’*

“  ‘  One  or  two  drops  (not  more)  to  be  carefully  dropt  into  the  eye  every  other
day.’

‘  ‘  The  eye  to  be  bathed  twice  a  day  for  5  minutes  with  a  linen  rag  wet  with
water  just  warm.

f‘  Mary  Baker’s  child,  opthalmiaf  strumosa.

“J.  W.

“  I  have  not  time  to  write  to  Mr.  Tubbs.”

See  as  remarkable  cures  of  ophthalmia  in  a  patient  of  Dr.  Elliotson’s,  No.
VI.,  p.  239  ;  and  by  Mr.  Parker,  in  his  own  child,  No.  XVIII.,  p.  154  :  one
by  Mr.  Kiste,  No.  IX.,  pp.  24,  33-4 ;  four  by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  No,  XI.,
p.  326,  XIX.,  p.  290;  five  by  Miss  Wallace,  No.  XVI.,  pp.  458-9,  461-2-3  ;
one  by  Mr.  Hazard,  No.  XXVI.,  p.  179.

When  we  consider  the  suffering  of  this  disease,  and  the  suffering  caused  by
the  remedies  habitually  employed  by  medical  men,  we  have  a  right  to  demand
their  serious  attention  to  our  cases.  When  did  they  effect  such  a  cure  of  blind¬
ness  as  those  by  the  wife  of  the  Archbishop  of  Dublin,  No.  XXV.,  p.  81 ;  by  Mr.
H.  S.  Thompson,  No.  XI.,  p.  325,  XIX.,  p.  290;  and  by  Mr.  Capern  in  the
present  number,  p.  169  ?

We  shall  one  day  see  mesmerism  in  daily  use  in  eye  infirmaries  as  well  as  in
insane  establishments  :  and  we  hope  such  cases  as  our  present  number  furnishes
will  soon  put  an  end  to  the  twaddling  of  those  medical  men  who,  feeling  that
they  must  come  round,  and  hoping  to  lessen  their  disgrace,  are  so  kind  as  to  say
they  have  no  doubt  there  is  use  in  mesmerism,  but  this  is  in  nervous  diseases
only. — Zoist.

*  “  ‘  Gnttse  pro  oculo.”  ’

t  Dr.  Whitsherl  seems  not  to  be  a  learned  leech,  or  he  would  know  that  an  h  should
come  after  the  p  as  well  as  after  the  t.  The  omission  is  common  among  the  uneducated.


196


Case  of  enlarged  Liver  with  Dropsy,  fyc.

Case  of  enlarged  Liver  with  Dropsy  and  Rheumatic  Fever  with
total  loss  of  the  power  of  locomotion.

Thomas  Day  Wainwright,  aged  eleven  years,  has  been
afflicted  ever  since  he  was  three  months  old.  At  that  time  he
had  two  enlarged  glands  in  the  neck  about  the  size  of  a  hen’s
egg,  which  suppurated  and  left  him  very  weak ;  has  had  the
measles  and  hooping  cough.  After  that  he  had  five  sores
from  the  knee  to  the  groin  that  discharged  so  much  as  to  add
to  his  already  weakened  state.  Then  followed  dropsy  of  the
abdomen,  that  continued  up  to  the  time  of  his  coming  to  re¬
side  in  my  locality.  Here  he  had  an  attack  of  rheumatic
fever,  which  so  affected  his  joints  as  to  disable  his  lower  ex¬
tremities,  and  his  mother  had  on  every  occasion  to  carry  him
in  her  arms.  Having  attended  him  several  months  without
the  slightest  improvement,  I  told  the  mother  to  let  him  try
mesmerism.

On  the  28th  May,  1850,  he  was  brought  up  to  my  house
by  his  mother  in  a  small  carriage ;  and  mesmeric  passes  were
made  daily  until  the  4th  June,  when  his  mother  discontinued
coming,  thinking  it  was  of  no  use  as  he  could  not  be  sent  to
sleep.  As  I  was  passing  the  house  on  the  7th  of  June,  I  saw
the  mother,  and  urged  her  coming  again  with  the  child.  She
did  on  Monday  morning,  June  10th.  Two  of  my  mesmer-
isers  operated  without  inducing  the  sleep.  She  came  again
in  the  evening,  and  said  she  was  induced  to  do  so  in  conse¬
quence  of  seeing  Bates’s  child  operated  on  in  the  morning
and  so  much  better.  The  Irishman  operated  for  an  hour  and
succeeded  in  producing  the  state  of  coma.  I  was  much  de¬
lighted  on  reaching  home  from  Downham  in  the  isle  (sixteen
miles  off,  where  I  had  been  mesmerising  a  lady)  to  find  the
little  patient  with  stiffened  limbs  and  truly  asleep.  On  the
11th  his  mother  brought  him  up  in  her  arms,  not  being  able
to  procure  a  conveyance.  I  operated,  and  then  made  him
walk  from  the  parlour  into  the  kitchen,  where  he  soon  at¬
tacked  some  meat  and  bread,  saying  he  was  very  hungry.
He  had  not  been  on  his  legs  until  this  day  for  eight  weeks.
In  the  evening  the  mother  drew  him  up  in  the  carriage,  and
he  was  operated  on  by  the  Irishman  and  slept  an  hour ;  again
walked  from  one  room  to  the  other,  and  heard  my  daughter
play  on  the  piano.

12th.  Slept  well,  walked  alone  after  the  sleep  across  to  his
father ;  had  passed  a  great  quantity  of  water ;  is  always  call¬
ing  out  for  something  to  eat.  Mesmerised  by  Parker ;  slept
an  hour  and  a  half.

13th.  Operated  on  by  myself  with  four  others,  every  one
of  whom  was  in  a  fit  state  for  surgical  operations  without  pain,  .


by  Mr.  TV.  J.  Tubbs.


197


and  amongst  them  a  poor  old  lady  of  82,  who  has  quite  lost  a
rheumatic  affection  of  the  shoulder  by  mesmerism.  I  ought
to  have  stated  that,  at  the  time  the  mother  left  off  mesmerism,
she  observed  the  child  was  passing  a  great  deal  of  water
and  the  swelling  of  the  body  had  greatly  diminished.  This
was  not  from  the  sleep  but  the  passes.

14th.  Sent  to  sleep  by  May,  and  walked  while  in  that
state  quickly  up  and  down  the  room  in  the  presence  of  Mr.
John  Key,  our  butcher.  His  mother  says  he  sleeps  soundly,
and  is  better  in  every  respect.  It  being  a  rainy  day,  I  had
him  all  day  at  my  house,  and  he  amused  himself  by  walking
up  and  down  the  kitchen  after  the  parrot.

The  following  was  sent  to  a  local  newspaper,  with  a  pri¬
vate  note  to  the  editor : —

“  MESMERISM.

“  ‘  It  is  a  sleepy  language,  and  thou  speakest
Out  of  thy  sleep.  What  is  it  thou  didst  say  ?

This  is  a  strange  repose,  to  be  asleep

With  eyes  wide  open,  standing,  speaking,  moving,

And  yet  so  fast  asleep.’  Shakespeare.

“To  the  Editor  of  the  Independent.

“  Sir, — The  science  of  mesmerism  is  making  rapid  strides  in  this
locality,  notwithstanding  the  opposition  it  receives  from  many  influ¬
ential  individuals.  Whether  such  adverse  views  arise  from  prejudice
or  interest,  it  is  not  for  me  to  decide.  Either  of  them  singly  is,  in
some,  a  powerful  opponent;  but,  when  united,  they  become  almost
invincible.  It  is  from  those  who  possess  minds  capable  of  being
exercised  with  liberty,  and  from  those  who  have  witnessed  the  heal¬
ing  effects  of  mesmerism,  that  the  wrriter  of  this  article  expects
attention.

“  The  following  statement  is  a  fact  witnessed  by  myself.

“A  boy,  named  Thomas  Day  Wainwriglit,  living  at  Outwell,
about  eleven  years  old,  has  been  afflicted  from  his  infancy  with
general  prostration  of  the  system,  a  strong  tendency  to  dropsy,  and
for  the  last  two  months  complete  loss  of  the  power  of  locomotion,
his  mother  being  obliged  on  every  occasion  to  carry  him  in  her  arms.
During  the  present  week  he  has  been  operated  upon  by  W.  J.  Tubbs,
Esq.,  surgeon,  and  such  were  the  effects  of  the  mesmeric  influence
with  two  operations  only,  that  the  boy  is  now  able  to  walk  unassisted,
the  dropsy  has  disappeared,  and  there  is  every  apparent  prospect  of
a  speedy  return  to  good  health.  During  his  sleep  he  is  able  to
answer  questions  and  talk  on  any  subject  as  when  awake;  and,  how¬
ever  strange  this  statement  may  sound  upon  the  ears  of  the  sceptical
on  mesmerism,  ‘  it  is  no  less  strange  than  true.’  But  this  is  only
one  of  the  many  cases  where  affliction  has  been  relieved  by  the  bene¬
volent  disposition  of  Mr.  Tubbs.  If  you,  Mr.  Editor,  think  with
me  on  this  matter,  you  will  give  it  publicity  in  your  much  read  and


198  An  instance  where  Pain  was  communicated,  fyc.

intelligent  journal,  that  the  many  who  read  it  may  not  any  longer
remain  unacquainted  with  the  happy  effects  of  mesmerism.

c<  I  am,  Mr.  Editor,  yours  respectfully,

“Upwell,  13th  June,  1850.  An  Old  Correspondent.”

“  Sir, — This  is  and  must  become  known.  I  assure  you  there  is
no  high  colouring  in  this  statement,  and  I  hope  you  will  find  room
this  week,  if  not,  in  your  next.

“  Yours  frequently  obliged,

“W.  Hopkins.”

An  instance  in  which  pain  ivas  communicated  from  the  patient

to  the  operator.

Mrs.  Tubbs,  having  violently  sprained  the  muscles  of  the
right  side  of  the  neck  and  those  of  the  shoulder,  had  them  lo¬
cally  mesmerised  for  about  half  an  hour  by  Harriet  Bell  who
was  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  and  was  greatly  relieved.  In  a  few
hours  all  pain  was  gone.  Three  days  afterwards  Harriet  Bell
came  up,  and  said  she  had  been  suffering  from  pain  in  the
very  muscles  of  the  same  side  of  the  neck,  and  thought  that
she  had  caught  Mrs.  Tubbs's  complaint,  and  wished  that  Mrs.
Tubbs  would  take  it  from  her  by  mesmerising  her.  This
Mrs.  Tubbs  did.  Bell  was  in  the  trance  during  the  time,
and,  feeling  the  pain  leaving  her,  requested  Mrs.  Tubbs  to
shake  the  darkness  well  off  her  finger-ends  after  every  pass,
that  it  might  spread  about  the  room.  In  the  course  of  a
quarter  of  an  hour  Mrs.  Tubbs  awoke  her,  and  she  left  the
house  quite  free  from  pain.*

An  old  lady  of  82  years  relieved  of  a  Rheumatic  Pain  in  the

Shoulder  by  the  first  sleep.

Mrs.  Holborn,  aged  82,  who  has  been  a  noted  and  most
successful  midwife  in  the  parishes  of  Outwell  and  Upwell  for
fifty  years,  came  into  the  room  while  I  was  attending  to  my
operators,  on  the  11th  June,  1850.  to  be  mesmerised.  I  said,
“  What  for  ?”  “  This  here  shoulder ;  I  can't  get  my  hand
only  up  to  my  neck.  When  Ho  so  I  have  so  much  pain
down  the  arm.”  I  now  tried  to  raise  the  arm,  which  seemed
a  fixture,  and  made  the  poor  old  dame  call  out.  I  told  her
to  sit  down.  She  said,  “  You  have  put  that  girl  James's  neck
right,  which  made  me  come.”

I  affected  her  by  the  passes  instantly.  Her  head  fell
backwards,  and  her  wrinkled  features  changed  from  the  tawny
gipsy  hue  to  dead  paleness.  I  raised  her  head  and  spoke  to
her.  She  told  me  she  was  very  comfortable.  I  proceeded  to

*  Whenever  a  mesmeriser  has  contracted  the  pain,  &c.,  of  his  patient,  the
affection  is  readily  dissipated  by  mesmerism.  See  No.  XIX.,  p.  246. — Zoist.


by  Mr.  TV.  J.  Tubbs.


199


relieve  the  affected  arm,  and  then  requested  her  to  place  her
hand  on  the  top  of  her  head ;  and  she  did.  At  her  age  I
thought  it  better  now  to  wake  her,  when  she  had  perfect  use
of  the  arm  and  raised  it  as  high  as  the  other.

12th.  Mrs.  Wainwright  is  here,  and  states  that  Mrs.
Holborn^s  arm  is  well.*


Inflamed  Knee.

Sarah  Swan,  living  at  Lot  Bridge,  near  Welney,  came
limping  into  my  surgery  this  morning  (May  22nd,  1850).
She  said,  “  I  was  at  work  for  Mr.  Bates  on  Wednesday,
when  I  felt  a  stiffness  of  my  left  knee.  I  continued  my  work
until  I  was  so  full  of  pain  as  to  compel  me  to  return  home.
1  found  in  the  evening  that  there  was  a  redness  and  swelling
of  the  part.  The  next  two  days  I  kept  at  home  :  part  of  the
time  I  was  in  bed.  I  applied  brown  paper  soaked  in  vinegar.
Not  being  better  I  managed  to  get  to  my  home,  a  distance  of
five  miles.”  I  at  once  persuaded  her  to  be  mesmerised
locally,  for  which  purpose  she  followed  me  into  the  parlour,
where  two  mesmerisers  were  employed  on  two  obstinate  pa¬
tients.  Mr.  Waghorn  at  once  made  passes  over  the  knee,  and,
without  my  assistance,  in  about  twenty  minutes  she  got  up
perfectly  free  from  pain,  and  walked  into  the  adjoining  room
for  me  to  examine  the  knee.  On  my  viewing  it  she  declared
it  was  as  right  as  the  other.  In  the  course  of  the  day,  on  my
way  home,  I  met  her,  and  she  said,  “  Sir,  I  am  very  much
obliged  to  you ;  I  can  walk  now.”t

Severe  inflammatory  Headache.

On  Tuesday  (May  21st),  I  was  sent  for  to  attend  John
Holt,  aged  17,  of  Wellfen,  near  March,  labouring  under  severe
febrile  symptoms  and  dreadful  pain  in  the  head.  His  pulse
was  rapid  and  full;  skin  hot  and  dry.  He  took  saline  ape¬
rients  with  a  purgative  dose  of  calomel  and  colocynth.  The
following  day  when  I  called,  I  was  told  to  go  as  quietly  as
possible  into  the  room,  for  his  head  was  considerably  worse.
Such  I  found  to  be  the  case.  He  could  not  bear  the  stimulus
of  light,  had  a  tremulous  coated  tongue,  and  every  unfavour¬
able  symptom.  His  bowels  had  not  been  moved.  The  pain
of  the  head  was  confined  principally  to  the  temples  and  fore¬
head,  which  were  exceedingly  hot.  Cold  evaporating  lotion
had  been  constantly  applied.  His  mother  was  standing  at  the

*  That  age  is  no  impediment  to  mesmeric  susceptibility  was  shewn  in  No.
XI.,  p.  398. — Zoist.

f  See  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson’s  cure  of  a  diseased  knee,  No.  V.,  p.  84  ;  cures
of  inflamed  knees,  V.,  p.  126  ;  VI.,  p.  266,  in  patients  of  Mr.  Tubbs. — Zoist.


200  Cure  of  severe  Inflammatory  Headache ,  fyc.

foot  of  the  bed.  I  said  to  her,  “  I  have  often  relieved  pain  in
the  head  by  making  passes  over  it  with  my  hands.  I’ll  try
and  do  so  now.”  Silence  in  our  part  of  the  world  we  consider
gives  consent.  So  I  mesmerised  locally  for  a  short  time,
when  he  said,  “  I  feel  better.”  I  sat  down  by  the  side  of  the
bed  and  operated  for  some  time,  and,  on  breathing  over  the
eyes  and  temples,  he  was  quite  free  from  pain,  and  called  to
his  mother  to  pull  the  blind  up,  for  the  light  did  not  hurt  his
eyes.  At  8  o’clock  in  the  evening  the  servant  came  up  for
medicine,  and  stated  the  pain  had  not  returned  and  the  fever
had  left  him,  but  his  bowels  had  not  been  relieved.  On  visit¬
ing  him  to-day,  I  found  him  dressed,  in  another  room,  appa¬
rently  well.  I  said,  “  Well,  how  come  you  to  be  up  to-day?”
“  Oh,  Sir,  I  soon  got  better  after  you  cooled  my  head  with
your  hands.”  His  mother  asked,  “  Is  that  what  they  call
mesmerising?”  “  Yes,”  I  replied.  “  You  must  do  something
to  your  hand,”  she  said.  Having  Mr.  Barth’s  excellent  little
book  in  my  pocket,  I  left  it  for  the  family  to  peruse  and  took
my  departure.

The  following  was  written  by  the  father,  ’who  is  a  Welch¬
man,  and  a  contractor  for  an  immense  business  going  on  in
Cambridgeshire,  in  the  middle  level  draining : —

“  Up  well,  Norfolk,  24th  May,  1850.

“  Gentlemen, — My  son  was  afflicted  with  a  violent  fever  and  dis¬
tracted  with  pain  in  his  head.  I  called  Mr.  Tubbs  in  for  advice,  and
he  sent  a  bottle  of  medicine;  the  following  morning  my  son’s  head
was  no  better.  I  sent  for  Mr.  Tubbs  again,  and  he  came  imme¬
diately  and  moved  the  pain  out  of  his  head  into  his  leg,  and  out  of
his  leg  away  altogether,  by  the  motion  of  his  hand.  Shortly  after
he  parted  with  a  large  substance  that  was  collected  together  on  his
stomach  of  about  4\  inches  long  and  1|-  diameter  of  an  oval  shape,
and  another  one  about  2  inches  long.

“Gentlemen,  this  is  the  truth.

“  I  am  yours,  &c.,

“Charles  Holt.”


Acute  Rheumatism.

Mary  Stevens,  aged  17,  a  servant  living  in  Up  well,  called
me  in  on  the  28th  April,  1850,  complaining  of  pains  in  her
elbows  and  right  knee.  The  latter  had  a  rosaceous  and  tumid
appearance,  and  was  exceedingly  sensative  to  the  touch;  a
shower  had  taken  place  during  the  night,  and,  from  her  mother
being  a  martyr  to  rheumatism,  I  had  a  mind  to  nip  Master
Rheumatism  in  the  bud  bv  local  mesmerism.  In  some  few
minutes  my  patient  was  relieved  of  all  pain,  and  got  up  and


by  Mr.  W.  J.  Tubbs.


201


walked.  I  have  often  since  seen  her,  and  there  has  been  no
attack  of  rheumatism  up  to  this  day  (May  23rd,  1850).

Wry  Neck.

“  March,  June  9th,  1850.

“  My  dear  Sir, — I  have  been  so  much  occupied  (it  being
near  the  holidays),  and  have  had  so  many  interruptions,  that
I  have  been  prevented  from  giving  that  attention  to  your  re¬
markable  cure  of  wry  neck  which  it  deserved,  and  which  I
desired  to  give.  You  request  me  to  write  you  an  account  of
what  I  witnessed  in  the  case.  I  consider  it  a  fortunate  pri¬
vilege  for  me  that  I  happened  to  be  at  your  house  at  the  time.
I  was  trying  if  I  had  any  mesmeric  influence  over  a  man  in
your  parlour  when  you  called  me  into  the  surgery  to  see
Susannah  James  in  the  trance.  The  first  thing  I  saw  you  do
was  to  breathe  on  the  neck,  and  to  work  the  head  in  various
directions  to  exercise  the  muscles.  When  I  came  into  the
surgery  indeed  the  muscles  of  the  neck  had  been  already
relaxed.  On  your  trying  whether  she  was  a  subject  to  exhibit
phreno-mesmeric  phenomena,  she  awoke.  I  then  observed  a
very  remarkable  and  wonderful  occurrence.  When  asleep  she
sat  with  her  back  to  the  surgery  door,  but  on  her  awaking,
and  when  I  saw  her  countenance,  the  whole  left  side  of  the
face  was  higher  than  the  right,  the  mouth,  cheeks,  and  eye¬
brows  being  greatly  distorted  and  drawn  upwards.  But  im¬
mediately  I  noticed  that  the  distortion  was  becoming  less,
the  muscles  seemed  to  give  way,  and  the  features  of  the  left
side  to  descend  nearly  to  a  level  with  the  other.  The  change
in  the  appearance  was  sufficiently  astonishing,  and  the  next
morning  after  a  second  mesmerisation  I  should  not  have  no¬
ticed  anything  awry  either  in  the  head  or  face  if  I  had  not
looked  for  it.  Being  anxious  to  understand  the  whole  truth
of  the  matter,  I  on  Sunday,  May  26th  (the  day  after  your
first  trial  of  her),  waited  on  Susannah  Jameses  mother,  and
learnt  the  following  particulars.  The  mother  said  her  daugh¬
ter  was  born  September  15th,  1835,  and  seized  with  fever
May  10th,  1843,  which  left  her  nearly  deaf  and  wry  necked.
You  mesmerised  her  then,  but  did  not  succeed  for  a  week  or
so  in  producing  anything ;  but  after  that  you  produced  sleep,
and  then  raised  the  head  to  its  proper  place.  She  was  not
operated  on  any  more,  and  the  neck  soon  became  nearly  as
bad  as  before  through  the  mother’s  neglecting  to  send  the
child  to  be  again  acted  on.  The  head  was  about  45  degrees
out  of  the  perpendicular ;  any  effort  to  put  it  straight  caused
violent  pain,  and  even  the  little  motion  involuntarily  produced
in  washing  her  often  made  her  cry  out.  She  could  only  lie


202


Cure  of  Wry  Neck.


on  one  side,  and  was  obliged  to  have  her  head  supported  to
prevent  its  aching.  She  is  also  exceedingly  deaf.  Such  is
what  I  know  of  this  remarkable  affair,  Sir.  There  would  be
few  unbelievers  in  mesmerism  if  all  could  see,  as  I  did,  the
distortion  of  the  girl's  mouth,  which,  when  she  laughed,
seemed  set  diagonally  across  her  face,  gradually  disappear
and  the  symmetry  of  the  whole  countenance  perceptibly  re¬
turn.  Wishing  the  science  a  speedy  triumph  over  the  pre¬
judices  of  others  as  well  as  myself,

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  most  truly  your's,

“To  W.  J.  Tubbs,  Esq.  John  Worden.”

“We,  the  undersigned,  have  known  Susannah  James,  of
Outwell,  for  several  years  ;  she  has  had  a  twisted  neck,  with
her  face  much  out  of  order.  We  have  seen  her  the  last  few
days,  and  find  that  she  can  carry  her  neck  up  as  right  as  it
should  be,  and  her  face  is  greatly  improved  since  she  has
been  mesmerised  by  Mr.  Tubbs,  Surgeon,  Upwell.  She  was
very  deaf,  and  that  is  also  improved.

“  William  May,  farmer,  Outwell,

Hannah  Yallup,  grocer,

James  Hobourn,  gardener,  Outwell,

Robert  James,  the  girFs  father,  Outwell,

William  Hunt,  labourer,  Outwell,

Smith  Goddard,  baker,  Outwell,

Joseph  Booth,  innkeeper,  Outwell,

John  Hill,  farmer,  Outwell,

Richard  Andrews,  blacksmith,  Outwell,

John  Goddard,  farmer,  Outwell.”

The  girl  is  mesmerised  every  evening.  I  can  now  produce
a  rigid  state  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck  by  willing,  and  often
shew  her  as  a  wry  neck  case  artificially  produced,  which  has
astonished  many.  The  neck  keeps  perfectly  natural.  I  had
forgotten  that  years  ago  I  tried  to  mesmerise  her.

Painless  Extraction  of  a  Tooth.

I  extracted  a  firm  tooth  from  a  poor  woman's  jaw  (Mrs.
Wright,  off  the  Bedford  Bank,  near  Wilney)  some  time  since,
without  her  feeling  the  slightest  pain.


(  203  )


X.  Mesmeric  Infirmary.

The  FIRST  ANNUAL  MEETING  of  this  society  was  held  on
Monday,  May  the  6th,  at  the  Infirmary,  9,  Bedford  Street,  Bedford
Square.

Mr.  J.  A.  Gordon,  of  Bristol,  in  the  absence  of  the  Earl  of
Ducie  through  ill  health,  was  called  to  the  chair.

The  Chairman  said  that  it  was  a  subject  of  deep  regret  to  him
and  the  Committee  that  the  Earl  of  Ducie  was  unable  to  attend  that
meeting.  That  nobleman  was  one  of  the  best  friends  and  supporters
of  the  spread  of  mesmeric  science,  and  he  was  sure  would  share
with  them  the  regret  felt  at  his  being  unable  to  attend  on  that  occa¬
sion.  (Cries  of  hear,  hear.)  He  was  sorry  that  the  place  of  the
noble  earl  should  be  so  ill  supplied,  as  he  was  aware  he  was  unable
to  fill  it  so  well  as  the  noble  lord ;  but  he  trusted  to  their  kind
assistance  in  the  performance  of  its  duties.

The  Rev.  G.  Sandby  then  read  the  report  of  the  Committee  of
Management,  which  says  : —

“  A  few  friends  of  mesmerism,  considering  the  establishment  of
an  infirmary  for  the  treatment  of  disease  by  its  means  as  a  very
desirable  object,  met  at  the  Earl  of  Ducie’ s,  in  the  year  1846,  and
passed  some  preliminary  resolutions  to  that  effect.  Among  the  steps
taken  at  that  meeting  was  the  appointment  of  a  committee,  to  whom
was  entrusted  the  power  of  carrying  the  plan  into  operation.  Sundry
circumstances,  however,  delayed  its  immediate  execution.  But  in
the  course  of  last  year  it  was  felt  that  the  time  was  at  length  arrived,
when  any  further  delay  would  be  undesirable.  The  progress  that
mesmerism  had  made  in  public  opinion,  the  encreasing  number  of
its  advocates,  and  the  growing  demands  on  the  part  of  the  sick  and
the  suffering  for  assistance  and  advice,  all  led  to  the  conviction  that
the  Infirmary  could  be  at  once  opened  with  every  prospect  of  success.
Funds  for  this  purpose  were  not  wanting ;  for  the  liberal  donations
and  subscriptions  of  many  kind  friends  and  patrons  had  afforded
the  means  of  taking  the  necessary  initiatory  steps.  The  committee,
therefore,  met  on  the  24th  of  last  July,  and,  having  taken  some
communications  and  calculations,  that  were  placed  before  them,  into
consideration,  came  to  the  resolution  of  looking  out  for,  and  of
engaging,  a  house  suitable  to  the  purpose,  and  of  placing  it  under
the  superintendence  of  a  resident  Manager  or  Secretary.

“  In  the  course  of  the  month  of  January  the  Infirmary  came
into  operation ;  patients  have  been  attending  daily,  and  are  encreas¬
ing  in  number ;  and  an  additional  mesmeriser,  William  Fisher,  re¬
commended  by  Mr.  Tubbs,  Surgeon  of  Upwell  Isle,  Cambridgeshire,
was  appointed  at  a  salary  of  sixteen  shillings  per  week.

“  The  Committee  have  agreed  upon  several  rules  and  regulations
for  the  direction  and  management  of  the  Institution,  copies  of  which
have  been  sent  to  the  donors  and  subscribers,  and  which  are  sub¬
mitted  to  the  consideration  of  the  General  Meeting  for  approval  and
confirmation.

“  The  Committee  beg  to  state  that  a  sum,  amounting  to  £903 : 1 7,


204


Mesmeric  Infirmary.


in  donations  and  subscriptions,  has  been  paid  into  the  hands  of  the
Treasurer,  and  that  promises  of  still  further  assistance,  amounting
to  about  <£200  have  been  also  made ;  to  which  must  be  added  the
sum  of  £ 23  :  0  :  2,  for  interest  on  exchequer  bills,  making  a  total
of  £926  :  17  :  2  received.

“The  Committee  have  examined  and  paid  the  bills  incurred  for
the  furnishing  of  the  Infirmary,  and  have  also  paid  the  first  quarter’s
rent,  and  the  first  quarter’s  salary  of  the  Secretary,  amounting  in
all  to  the  sum  of  121:11:6,  consequently  leaving  a  balance  in  the
hands  of  the  Treasurer  of  £805  :  5  :  8,  of  which  £506  :  9  :  11,  has
been  invested  in  the  purchase  of  £500  in  exchequer  bills.

“  The  Committee  have  the  pleasure  of  announcing  that  they  have
received  from  P.  Baume,  Esq.,  the  donation  of  a  freehold  estate  at
Edmonton,  which  has  hitherto  been  let  for  a  rent  of  £40  a  year,
and  also  of  five  railway  arches  at  Stepney,  which  may  be  estimated
at  the  yearly  value  of  at  least  five  pounds  each.

“  The  Committee,  in  presenting  this  their  first  report  to  the
donors  and  subscribers  to  the  Infirmary,  cannot  but  congratulate
the  friends  of  mesmerism  generally  on  an  important  step  being  at
length  publicly  taken  for  the  progress  of  scientific  truth,  and  for
the  promotion  of  the  great  cause  of  humanity,  towards  the  support
of  which  good  and  useful  work  the  co-operation  of  every  philanthro¬
pist  is  earnestly  invited.  The  institution,  whose  recent  opening  is
herein  briefly  recorded,  already  shows  a  promise  of  growth, — and,
if  conducted  with  energy  and  judgment,  and  with  a  due  regard  to
those  important  considerations,  which  have  respect  to  the  choice  of
mesmerisers  and  to  the  management  of  its  internal  arrangements,
may  prove  a  source  of  inappreciable  blessings  to  numbers,  and  seems,
moreover,  as  an  example  of  practical  benevolence  to  other  and  older
societies,  of  which  it  is  impossible  at  this  early  day  to  calculate  the
full  results.  Doubtless,  there  are  always  difficulties  connected  with
the  first  establishment  of  every  hospital ;  and  there  are  some  to
which  a  mesmeric  hospital,  more  than  any  other,  is  peculiarly  liable  :
still,  if  encountered  steadily  as  well  as  zealously,  and  in  a  spirit  of
prudence,  union,  and  good-will,  these  difficulties  are  anything  but
insuperable;  and  if  the  regulations,  which  are  adopted  by  the
governors  for  the  daily  conduct  of  the  institution  be  but  carefully
and  uniformly  enforced,  the  success  of  the  Infirmary  may  be  pro¬
nounced  certain  and  permanent.  To  this  latter  point,  however,  the
Committee  attaches  considerable  weight ;  and  towards  a  due  observ¬
ance  of  which  they  strongly  request  the  assistance  of  every  true
friend  of  mesmerism.  By  these  means,  the  cavils  of  the  sceptic
will  be  silenced, — the  prejudices  of  the  scrupulous  be  removed, —
the  misrepresentations  of  the  calumniator  be  answered, — and  the
cause  of  truth  grow  stronger  and  stronger  every  hour.  With  these
observations  the  Committee  beg  to  close  their  report,  in  expressing
every  confidence  in  the  future  prospects  of  the  institution,  and  in
looking  forward  to  a  year  of  encreasing  activity  and  usefulness.”

Since  the  report  had  been  drawn,  an  addition  of  £\3 : 8  had  been
received.


Mesmeric  Infirmary .


205


Mr.  Janson  had  great  pleasure  in  moving  the  adoption  of  the
report,  having  come  a  distance  of  200  miles  to  attend  the  meeting —
(Cheers) — and  he  believed  that  had  all  their  friends  done  the  same
they  would  have  had  great  difficulty  in  accommodating  them.  One
principal  reason  of  his  attending  the  meeting  was  to  submit  to  the
subscribers  of  the  institution  a  manuscript,  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Capern,
of  Tiverton,  who  he  believed  was  the  most  successful  mesmerist
since  the  days  of  Greatrakes.  The  manuscript  contained  reports  of
upwards  of  100  cases,  and  would  be  extended  by  about  50  more,
when  he  hoped  it  would  be  published,  as  containing  most  surprising
and  convincing  proofs  of  the  truth  of  the  science.  (Cheers.)  He
would  now  merely  move  that  the  report  be  adopted  and  circulated
among  the  subscribers  to  the  institution.

Mr.  Luxmoore  seconded  the  resolution.  He  had  for  years  looked
with  anxiety  to  the  time  when  they  would  be  enabled  to  have  an
establishment  like  this  in  London,  feeling  convinced  that  this  was
all  that  was  wanted  to  prove  the  truth  of  mesmeric  science.  (Hear,
hear.)  He  believed  that  mesmerism  would  prove  of  great  assistance
to  medical  science,  though  he  did  not  mean  to  say  that  it  would
supersede  it.  He  had  himself  seen  the  beneficial  effects  produced
by  it  in  alleviating  the  sufferings  of  those  afflicted  with  rheumatism,
tic  douloureux,  paralysis,  &c.,  and  he  believed  that  no  philanthropist
who  examined  into  mesmerism  would  deny  that  it  was  a  great  addi¬
tion  to  the  science  of  alleviating  pain  and  curing  disease.  The  pro¬
fessors  of  the  science  had  been  met  with  derision  and  calumny,  but
he  felt  that  the  day  would  arrive  when  its  success  and  its  truth
would  be  universally  acknowledged  and  the  calumnies  of  its  oppo¬
nents  for  ever  silenced.  He  felt  that  they  were  under  a  deep  debt
of  gratitude  to  the  gentlemen  who  had  taken  an  active  part  in  pro¬
moting  the  establishment  of  this  institution,  and  he  had  therefore
great  pleasure  in  seconding  the  motion  for  the  adoption  of  the  report  .

The  motion  having  been  put  and  carried  unanimously.

The  Secretary  read  the  proposed  laws  of  the  institution,  to
which  the  following  is  the  preface : — “This  Infirmary  is  established
for  the  alleviation  and  cure  of  diseases,  and  for  the  relief  and  pre¬
vention  of  pain,  by  means  of  mesmerism.  It  is  supported  by  the
voluntary  contributions  of  those  persons  who,  having  faith  in  the
remedial  efficacy  of  mesmerism,  or  being  desirous  to  be  assured  of
the  truth  of  the  extraordinary  cures  alleged  to  have  been  effected  by
its  agency  in  the  hands  of  many  credible  and  respectable  persons,
are  anxious  that  the  poor  should  have  the  opportunity  of  availing
themselves  of  the  advantages  it  may  afford.  There  is  another  object
which  the  originators  of  this  new  establishment  have  in  view.  They
desire  to  extend  the  field  of  observation  in  the  science  of  mesmerism,
and  to  encourage  the  promulgation  as  well  as  the  cultivation  of  its
truths  without  favour  to  any  party  or  to  any  limited  or  individual
interests.”

[The  proposed  laws  for  the  management  of  the  institution  were
then  read.]

Mr.  Monckton  Milnes,  M.P.,  moved  the  adoption  of  the
VOL.  VIII.  Q


206


Mesmeric  Infirmary.


proposed  laws,  and  trusted  that  it  would  go  forth  to  the  public
that  the  friends  of  mesmeric  science  were  now  prepared  to  put  the
truth  of  their  principles  to  the  test  in  the  heart  of  the  metropolis,
through  the  agency  of  a  public  hospital.  He  believed  that,  through
the  agency  of  such  an  institution,  mesmerism  would  take  its  fair
position  as  a  branch  of  medical  science,  and  he  was  sure  that  this
was  all  its  real  friends  wished.  (Hear,  hear.)  They  all  knew  that
mesmerism  exhibited  some  most  extraordinary  psychological  pheno¬
mena,  and  perhaps  no  subject  could  be  of  greater  interest  to  philo¬
sophical  inquiries  than  those  phenomena ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  he
thought  it  most  important  that  this  institution  should  as  little  as
possible  interfere  with  those  inquiries,  and  confine  their  attention  as
much  as  possible  to  the  application  of  mesmerism  as  a  curative  agent
in  diseases  which  might  come  under  their  notice.  (Hear,  hear.)
He  thought  it  very  important  that  it  should  go  forth  to  the  public
what  were  the  real  objects  and  intentions  of  the  institution,  so  that
it  might  avoid  as  far  as  possible  any  imputation  of  quackery,  which,
no  doubt,  would  be  brought  against  it.  If,  however,  the  society
quietly  carried  on  its  operations  under  the  eye  of  the  public,  under
the  notice  of  the  press,  but  excluding  idle  curiosity  from  interfering
with  its  patients,  he  had  no  doubt  that  it  would  make  its  way  and
establish  itself  in  public  opinion.  (Hear,  hear.)  He  considered
that  nothing  could  more  clearly  show  the  progress  that  their  science
• — of  the  truth  of  which  he  had  long  been  convinced — was  making
than  the  fact  that  the  Edinburgh  Review ,  in  an  article  upon  Mr.
Cornewall  Lewis’s  work.  On  the  Influence  of  Authority  in  the  Forma¬
tion  of  Public  Opinion ,  had  devoted  three  or  four  pages  to  the  re¬
cognition  of  the  truth  of  mesmeric  science.  (Hear,  hear,  hear.)
It  was  most  important  to  the  spread  of  their  science  that  medical
men  had  recently  adopted  various  anaesthetic  agents  for  producing
insensibility  to  pain  during  the  performance  of  operations ;  and  he
did  not  think  they  need  look  upon  these  with  any  degree  of  jealousy
as  rivals  to  their  progress.  (Hear,  hear.)  Indeed,  mesmerism
might  be  found  peculiarly  adapted  to  some  constitutions,  while  other
anaesthetic  agents  might  be  adapted  to  other  constitutions.  He
could  not  help  feeling  that  they  ought  to  take  some  shame  to  them¬
selves  for  not  having  before  put  themselves  into  a  position  to  have
the  agency  of  mesmerism  acknowledged  by  the  medical  profession,
through  the  establishment  of  an  institution  of  this  description,  and
allowing  the  advantages  of  the  other  anaesthetic  agents  to  be  acknow¬
ledged  while  they  were  doing  nothing.  It  was  a  most  remarkable
circumstance  in  the  history  of  all  physiological  discoveries,  however
important,  that  they  were  ignored  for  years  until  their  importance
forced  them  upon  public  attention :  and  so  it  was  with  mesmerism —
it  was  undergoing  the  ordeal  to  which  all  great  and  valuable  truths
were  subjected,  and  he  considered  that  they  had  no  reason  to  com¬
plain  of  this,  as  the  importance  of  their  science  must  be  ultimately
acknowledged  and  the  truth  prevail.  (Cheers.)  After  again  urging
upon  the  company  the  necessity  of  the  institution  strictly  confining
themselves  to  the  use  of  mesmerism  as  a  curative  operation,  and


Mesmeric  Infirmary.


207


eschewing  experiments,  the  honourable  member  concluded  by  moving
the  adoption  of  the  rules.

The  Rev.  G.  Sandby  seconded  the  resolution,  agreeing  as  he
did  with  every  word  uttered,  and  the  recommendation  given,  by  Mr.
Monckton  Milnes.  He  had  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  with
his  own  eyes  the  soothing  effects  and  curative  influences  of  mes¬
merism,  and  he  felt  convinced  that  they  had  only  to  be  brought
prominently  under  the  notice  of  the  public,  through  the  means  of
an  hospital,  to  be  generally  and  fully  acknowledged.  (Cheers.)
It  was  a  most  remarkable  fact,  and  one  of  which  they  ought  to  be
ashamed,  that  a  Mesmeric  Hospital  had  not  been  established  in
civilized  Europe — had  not  been  established  in  the  centre  of  this
great  metropolis — had  not  been  fostered  in  scientific  society,  but
had  been  established  in  what  Shakespeare  called  “the  furthest
steppes  of  India.”  He  thought  all  honour  was  due  to  Dr.  Esdaile,
who  had  established  that  hospital,  and  to  the  Governor  General
and  other  Indian  authorities  who  had  fostered  it,  it  having  proved
eminently  successful  in  alleviating  human  pain.  He  perfectly  agreed
with  Mr.  Monckton  Milnes  in  his  observations  that  the  science  had
made  and  was  making  great  strides,  and  was  proved  by  its  being
acknowledged  as  a  science  by  so  important  and  cautious  an  authority
as  the  Edinburgh  Review.  That  journal  said  that,  after  inquiry,
no  doubt,  “  its  errors,  which  probably  are  many,  will  be  separated
from,  what  we  may  be  sure  are  also  many,  its  truths.”  No  doubt
they  might  have  errors,  as  other  sciences  had  in  their  infancy,  but
Mr.  Cornewall  Lewis  had  called  theirs  a  “mock”  science.  It  might
be  a  “mock”  science  in  one  respect,  but  this  was  that  it  “mocked”
all  the  ignorant  attempts  of  their  opponents  to  put  it  down.  (Cheers
and  laughter.)  But  the  editor  of  the  Edinburgh  Review  said,  in
speaking  of  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism — “No  one  can  doubt  that
phenomena  like  these  deserve  to  be  observed,  recorded,  and  encou¬
raged  ;  and  whether  we  call  by  the  name  of  mesmerism  or  by  any
other  name  the  science  which  proposes  to  do  this,  is  a  mere  question
of  nomenclature.  Among  those  who  profess  this  science  there  may
be  careless  observers,  prejudiced  recorders,  and  rash  systematisers ;
their  errors  and  defects  may  impede  the  progress  of  knowledge,  but
they  will  not  stop  it ;  and  we  have  no  doubt  that  before  the  end  of
the  century  the  wonders  which  now  perplex  almost  equally  those
who  accept  and  those  who  reject  modern  mesmerism  will  be  distri¬
buted  into  defined  classes  and  found  subject  to  ascertained  laws ;  in
other  words,  will  become  the  subject  of  a  science.”  Now,  that  was
just  what  they  had  been  saying  for  years,  and  it  was  to  prove  their
science  that  their  infirmary  had  been  established.  (Hear,  hear.)
They  wished  to  extend  the  advantages  of  mesmerism  to  the  very
poorest  of  their  fellow-subjects,  and  to  shew  to  the  world  the  truth
of  their  principles.  He  would  not  further  detain  them,  but  second
the  resolution  for  the  confirmation  of  the  rules  of  the  society.

The  resolution  was  carried  unanimously.

Mr.  Tubbs  proposed  that  certain  noblemen  and  gentlemen  should
be  officers  and  members  of  the  committee  for  the  ensuing  year;  and

Q  2


208


Mesmeric  Infirmary.


observed  that  he  felt  incompetent  to  give  expression  to  the  pleasur¬
able  sensations  he  experienced  in  having  the  honour  of  being  present
at  an  assemblage  of  gentlemen,  who  not  only  claimed  distinction  from
the  high  position  which  they  held  in  society,  but  from  the  great  talents
they  possessed  as  to  the  business  of  the  meeting,  and  as  to  every
other  subject  of  interest  which  related  to  the  well-being  of  mankind
generally,  or  to  the  pleasure  he  felt  on  being  spared  (through  all
his  trials)  to  visit  that  establishment  for  the  progress  of  a  science
so  long  abused  as  it  had  been.  He  (Mr.  Tubbs)  had  been  located
in  an  obscure  (as  he  might  call  it)  village  in  Cambridgeshire,  whose
leading  and  most  influential  members  had  not  been  celebrated  for
being  foremost  in  the  promotion  of  philosophical  enquiries,  and
wdiose  opinions  on  such  enquiries  had  been  sufficient  to  give  a  death¬
blow  to  everything  they  might  consider  to  be  in  opposition  to  their
prejudices.  He  could  assure  the  meeting  that  he  had  met  with
those  whom  the  world  called  educated  men,  abounding  with  the
strongest  and  most  invincible  prejudice,  and  not  to  succumb  to  them
would  be  thought  the  worst  of  heresy;  but  fortunately  for  him  and  the
cause  of  mesmerism  the  spot  contained  a  few  spirits  as  ardent  in  the
cause  as  himself,  some  as  deeply  metaphysical  and  as  capable  of
judging  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism  as  anywhere  existed;  and  though
they  could  not  rank  with  princes,  they  were,  he  was  happy  to  say,
justly  entitled  to  rank  with  men  of  genius;  aided  by  whose  encourage¬
ment,  the  pen  of  one  friend  and  his  own  convictions,  he  had,  under
all  the  frowns  of  the  rich,  the  sneers  of  the  vulgar  and  illiterate,  for
a  time  pursued  the  favoured  science  with  unabated  zeal.  But  such
were  the  effects  which  slander  had  upon  the  public  mind,  that  his
(Mr.  Tubbs’s)  practice  diminished,  his  enemies  were  triumphant,
his  best  f  riends  deserted  him,  and  even  his  sanity  was  questioned.
At  length  he  succumbed  to  their  prejudices,  and  like  the  apothecary
in  Romeo  and  Juliet  could  sav,

“  My  poverty,  and  not  my  will  consents.’’

But  as  time  rolled  on  and  more  auspicious  circumstances  surrounded
him,  he  was  enabled  to  defy  the  effects  of  that  public  venom  which
he  had  before  given  way  to.  He  again  entered  with  redoubled  vigour
into  the  pursuits  of  mesmerism,  and  had  the  gratification  of  stating
that  many  had  become  converts,  through  him,  who  had  strongly
denied  every  phenomenon  that  he  produced;  and  though  formerly
drones  in  the  hive,  were  now  become  industrious  bees  in  the  cause
of  mesmerism.  Supported  as  the  science  was  by  the  gentlemen  he
had  the  honor  of  addressing,  many  of  whom  were  in  themselves  a
host,  he  should  remain  in  future  a  dauntless  promoter  of  its  cause.
Mr.  Tubbs  then  expressed  a  hope  that  the  meeting  would  be  the
means  of  giving  to  mesmerism  a  local  habitation  and  a  name.  He
also  alluded  to  the  advantages  he  had  had  over  the  Devonshire
Greatrakes  (Mr.  Capern)  in  having  performed  minor  operations  in
the  sleep,  and  mentioned  the  case  of  Margaret  Francis  whose  leg  he
attempted  to  amputate,  but  was  prevented  by  the  interference  of  the
sister,  and  sooner  than  it  should  be  called  a  failure  under  mesmerism
he  took  it  off  under  chloroform,  but  after  the  operation  always  dressed


209


Mesmeric  Infirmary.

the  stump  under  mesmerism  without  her  knowledge.  Having  ex¬
pressed  his  determination  to  pursue  the  same  straightforward  course
for  years  to  come  that  he  had  hitherto  done,  and  wishing  success  to
the  establishment,  Mr.  Tubbs  resumed  his  seat.

Mr.  Capern  said  he  rose  with  considerable  diffidence  to  second
the  resolution,  from  a  conviction  that  the  assembly  was  composed  of
individuals  of  rank,  station,  and  high  attainments,  and  that  his  situ¬
ation  in  life  made  him  the  humblest  person  there ;  but  although  diffi¬
dent  and  inadequate  to  do  justice  to  so  important  a  science,  to  pro¬
pagate  which  was  the  object  of  the  meeting,  yet  he  had  confidence
because  of  its  value  and  importance.  He  had  therefore  great  pleasure
in  seconding  the  resolution  of  Mr.  Tubbs,  and  begged  respectfully
to  explain  what  first  influenced  him  to  pay  attention  to  the  mysterious
power  of  mesmerism  or  vital  magnetism.  About  four  years  since,
having  attended  a  lecture  given  by  the  talented  mesmerist  Mr.  Davey,
and  observing  the  great  phenomena  produced,  he  was  induced  on  his
third  lecture  to  ascend  the  platform  and  assist  in  the  operations  by
demesmerising  one  of  the  persons  who  had  been  placed  in  a  state  of
coma.  From  that  period  he  became  subject  to  severe  remarks  and
unjust  criticism.  On  further  investigating  the  subject,  and  after
some  suggestions  from  Mr.  Davey  as  to  the  application  of  mesmerism
as  curative,  he  commenced  his  operations,  and  was  pleased  with  some
cases  in  which  relief  from  pain  was  the  result.  The  first  case  of
importance  was  that  of  John  Rowden,  whom  he  met  accidentally  as
he  was  going  with  difficulty  to  his  labour.*  On  being  questioned  as
to  the  nature  of  his  disease,  Rowden  stated  that  the  limp  in  his  walk
was  occasioned  by  his  having  had  severe  rheumatism  for  thirteen
years,  and  that  he  was  never  free  from  pain.  Mr.  Capern  invited
Rowden  to  accompany  him  into  the  lodge  of  Mr.  Heathcoat’s  manu¬
factory,  and,  after  a  few  passes  made  on  his  leg,  he  felt  a  glow  of  heat,
much  more  so  than  he  had  for  a  long  time,  and  then  walked  with
him  nearly  to  the  residence  of  his  master,  Thos.  Talley,  Esq.,  on  the
road-side  a  few  more  passes  being  made  down  the  thigh  and  leg.  From
that  time  he  dates  his  cure,  although  he  occasionally  experienced
slight  pains  on  sudden  changes  of  weather,  or  after  exposure  to  heavy
rains.  Such  was  his  improvement  after  the  first  passes  that  Mr.
Capern  was  put  in  a  state  of  perspiration  in  walking  with  the  poor
labourer,  who  before  had  frequently  stopt  and  cried  from  his  inability
to  keep  pace  with  his  fellow  workmen.  Having  thus  succeeded,
Mr.  Capern  extended  his  operations,  and  has  devoted  nearly  the
whole  of  his  time  to  them,  and  been  instrumental  in  affording  relief
to  hundreds  of  persons.  In  so  doing  he  had  been  subject  to  misrepre¬
sentations,  abuse,  and  insult,  even  when  returning  from  visiting  the
sick  chamber.  He  had  been  pointed  at  with  a  sneer.  The  words
“  madman”  and  “maniac”  and  “humbug”  had  been  used,  and  most
frequently  by  persons  who  had  known  him  from  his  childhood.  As
to  the  terms  madman  and  maniac  he  was  careless  about  them,  for
the  brain  may  be  diseased  or  there  may  be  a  defect  in  the  organ iza-


*  See  No.  XXVI.,  p.  169. — Zoist.


210  Mesmeric  Infirmary.

tion ;  but  the  term  humbug  he  did  and  would  repudiate.  However,
he  was  determined  to  persevere,  knowing  that  the  science  was  based
on  eternal  truth,  and  would  prevail  when  its  calumniators  were  laid
low  and  forgotten.  To  find  his  nearest  relatives  determinedly  hostile
to  it  gave  him  very  great  pain  ;  but  nothing  would  prevent  him  from
proving  its  importance  ;  no  sacrifice  would  have  been  too  great.
Having  proved  this  at  Tiverton,  he  now  stated  it  in  the  metropolis,
amidst  two  and  a  half  millions  of  human  beings,  and  was  desirous
to  promulgate  that  such  a  power  existed.  Notwithstanding  so  many
proofs  were  adduced,  scepticism  prevailed,  and  in  order  to  furnish
the  public  with  information,  he  had  invited  the  whole  of  the  clergy
and  dissenting  ministers,  the  medical  and  professional  gentlemen,
the  authorities,  and  the  principal  families  of  Tiverton,  to  meet  at
the  mayoralty  room,  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  phenomena
of  mesmerism  as  a  remedial  agent.  Nearly  forty  persons  were
severally  introduced  and  proved  its  efficacy  to  the  satisfaction  of
that  very  respectable  assembly.  By  far  the  greater  number  had  been
under  medical  treatment,  and  they  had  all  been  cured  of  almost
every  variety  of  diseases  to  which  we  are  subjected.  Previously  to
this  explanation  many  of  those  present  would  not  have  allowed  the
word  “  mesmerism”  to  be  used  at  their  residences ;  and  one  gentle¬
man,  who  came  to  the  room  to  laugh  it  down,  stated  that  he  had
visited,  in  his  character  as  clergyman,  one  of  the  patients  who  had
been  cured  of  paralysis,  and  whom  he  believed  at  the  time  to  be  on
his  dying  bed ;  but  the  patient  was,  however,  there  to  tell  by  whose
instrumentality  he  was  restored.  Since  that  time  several  have  made
the  “  amende  honorable .”  The  cases  referred  to  will  appear  in  the
work,  the  manuscript  of  which  Mr.  Janson  had  kindly  introduced.
The  whole  would  amount  to  150  cases;  and,  had  it  been  necessary,
a  large  number  might  have  been  added,  say  hundreds :  he  had  never
kept  a  list.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  he  has  been  at  all  times  ready  to
assist  any  one,  and  frequently  does  not  know  the  parish  they  are
from.  The  statements  will  bear  any  investigation.*  He  should
have  no  objection  to  his  cases  being  examined  by  a  commission,  of
which  Mr.  Wakley  should  be  one.  His  patients  were  all  strong  and
healthy.  His  operations  were  not  confined  to  weak  enervated  persons.
A  great  number  were  muscular  agricultural  labourers  who  in  the  west
of  England,  particularly  in  Devonshire,  from  sudden  changes  of
temperature  are  subject  to  very  severe  rheumatic  pains,  and  these
generally  disappear  after  two  or  three  applications  of  the  sanatory
influence.  Some  of  them  have  walked  a  distance  of  sixteen  miles
in  order  to  have  a  sitting  of  about  ten  minutes.  He  has  more
pleasure  in  assisting  them  who  need  it  than  the  richest  baronet  in
Devonshire  has  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  estates.  Having  probably
been  rather  irregular,  he  said,  in  his  observations,  he  apologized  to
the  gentlemen  and  ladies  present  for  occupying  their  time :  but  it
afforded  him  infinite  pleasure  to  be  in  the  building  applied  to  such
holy  purposes,  and  see  persons  daily  engaged  in  diffusing  health
and  strength  to  those  who  need  it,  by  a  power  which  we  all  possess.

*  See  No.  XXVI.,  p.  1G5. — Zoist.


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


211


Mr.  Luxmoore  proposed  thanks  to  the  committee  and  medical
officers.

Mr,  W.  G.  Smith,  jun.,  of  Greenwich,  (who  will  be  remembered
as  the  mesmeriser  of  the  boy,  James  Cook,  of  Deptford,  some  six  years
since,)  seconded  it,  and  begged  to  add  his  testimony  to  the  truth  of
mesmerism.  He  said  he  was  not  a  professional  man,  but  an  amateur
in  mesmerism.  His  first  essay  was  the  result  of  accident.  Having
attended  a  lecture  and  seen  persons  he  knew  thrown  into  the  sleep,
he,  out  of  curiosity,  tried  his  father’s  shop  boy.  The  effect  pro¬
duced,  every  one  conversant  with  mesmerism  at  the  time  will  recollect.
The  patient  remained  in  the  mesmeric  state  for  three  days.  His
motive  for  now  mentioning  the  case  was  that  an  impression  had  got
abroad,  prejudicial  to  the  cause,  “  that  the  boy  James  Cook  was
dead.”  Mr.  S.  had  been  induced  some  three  years  since,  in  conse¬
quence  of  those  reports,  and  at  the  request  of  Dr.  Elliotson  and
Mr.  Chandler,  to  publish  the  case  in  The  Zoist.*  Mr.  Smith  was
happy  to  state  the  last  account  he  heard  of  James  Cook  was  that  he
was  well  and  hearty.  Mesmerism,  instead  of  injuring  him,  had
been  the  means  subsequently  of  greatly  improving  his  health.  Mr.
S.,  since  that  event,  had  ample  opportunities  of  testing  the  benefits
of  mesmerism.  A  case  of  St.  Vitus’s  dance  of  the  very  worst  de¬
scription,  where  the  patient  had  lost  his  speech  and  the  use  of  his
limbs,  and  after  trying  every  remedy  medical  aid  could  suggest,  was
at  the  present  time,  by  a  judicious  application  of  mesmerism,  quite
restored.  The  case  was  known  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  was  consulted
by  the  parents  of  the  child,  and  recommended  mesmerism.  Mr.  S.
wished  the  institution  success,  and  pledged  himself  to  use  all  his
influence  in  making  its  benefits  known.

Mr.  Heath,  Dr.  Macdonald,  and  several  other  gentlemen  ad¬
dressed  the  meeting,  and  adduced  instances  to  shew  the  advantages
of  mesmeric  science,  the  whole  of  them  stating  that  they  were  origin¬
ally  opposed  to  it  until  convinced  by  enquiry  of  its  truth;  and  also
detailed  the  difficulties  they  had  had  in  promulgating  it  among  society
generally.

Dr.  Ashburner  proposed  a  vote  of  thanks  to  the  chairman,  and
the  meeting  broke  up.


XI.  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.

The  second  Annual  Meeting  of  the  members  and  subscribers  of
the  above  Institute  was  held  on  Tuesday,  May  14,  at  the  room  of  the
Institute,  Park-street,  when,  in  the  unavoidable  absence  of  the  Pre¬
sident,  Earl  Ducie,  the  chair  was  taken  by  one  of  the  Vice-Presidents,
J.  A.  Gordon,  Esq.

The  Chairman,  in  opening  the  proceedings,  said,  doubtless
there  were  many  present  who  had  at  some  time  been  very  much
amused  at  the  idea  of  mesmerism,  who  had  laughed  at  it  and  been
most  sceptical  as  to  there  being  any  such  power.  He  frankly  con-

*  See  No.  XVII.,  p.  23;  XXVII.,  p.  242 .—Zoist.


212


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


fessed  that  he  had  himself  been  one  of  that  number,  and  that  he  had
considered  it  a  great  triumph  whenever  he  had  been  able  to  deride
and  ridicule  it.  It  happened,  however,  that  after  seeing  many
failures  he  attended  in  the  drawing-room  of  a  man  whose  name  would
be  ever  illustrious  in  the  annals  of  science,  and  held  in  unfading
regard  by  the  disciples  of  mesmerism — Dr.  Elliotson.  (Cheers.)
He  entered  the  room  perfectly  incredulous,  and  met  some  fifty  or
sixty  of  the  highest  society  in  London.  Among  several  cases  brought
forward  in  proof  of  mesmerism  was  one  of  a  young  girl,  between  12
and  13  years  of  age,  Rosina  Barber;  Dr.  Elliotson  put  her  into  a
state  of  trance  and  seated  her  in  a  chair  ;  he  then  excited  her  phreno¬
logical  organs,  and,  on  touching  that  inducing  devotion,  she  clasped
her  hands  firmly  together;  Dr.  Elliotson  then  invited  the  strongest
men  in  the  room  to  try  and  separate  her  hands,  and  several  of  the
stoutest  persons  present  made  the  attempt,  but  wholly  in  vain.  After
a  time  Dr.  Elliotson  said,  “  Now  I  will  go  and  stand  at  a  distance
from  her;  let  two  of  the  strongest  persons  here  stand  by  her,  one  on
one  side  and  one  on  the  other;  I  will  disengage  her  hands  by  the
force  of  my  will :  let  them  try  to  keep  them  in  their  present  position,
and  they  will  find  that  in  spite  of  all  their  force  she  will  unfold
them.”  The  challenge  was  accepted.  The  Duke  of  Marlborough,
a  man  of  strong  physical  power,  stood  on  one  side  of  the  girl,  and
Mr.  Atkinson  on  the  other ;  Dr.  Elliotson  went  on  the  other  side  of
the  drawing-room  and  made  certain  passes;  the  girl  began  gradually
to  disengage  her  fingers,  the  men  used  all  their  power  to  prevent  her,
but,  without  altering  a  muscle  of  her  countenance,  she  unfolded  her
arms  and  drove  those  two  strong  men  behind  her  chair.  (Hear.)
When  the  girl  was  awakened  she  was  wholly  unconscious  of  what  she
had  been  doing.  He  (Mr.  Gordon)  felt  that  at  that  time  he  could
not  resist  the  evidence  before  him;  but  he  afterwards  went  to  Paris
and  saw  Alexis — this  was  seven  years  ago — and  the  wonders  of  clair¬
voyance  which  he  then  saw  fully  confirmed  his  mind.  Blind  his  eyes
or  do  what  you  might  with  him,  Alexis  would  see.  He  could  see  into
parcels;  he  described  to  him  a  friend  of  his  at  Aberdeen,  the  suspen¬
sion-bridge,  Clifton,  and  many  other  matters.  He  also  saw  a  young
woman  who  was  clairvoyant,  who,  among  other  things,  told  him  to
what  street  he  was  going  in  London,  and  spelt  it  letter  by  letter,
and  who,  upon  his  asking  her  how  she  knew  it,  replied,  “  O,  I  see  it
written  up  at  the  corner  of  the  street.”  Last  year  he  was  in  Paris
with  a  relation  of  his,  who  had  great  scruples  (on  religious  grounds)
about  going  to  Alexis.  He  consented  at  last,  and  went  with  him
(the  Chairman)  and  a  captain  in  the  navy  :  Alexis  told  him  all  the
circumstances  of  his  family — where  they  lived,  what  was  taking  place
at  the  time  in  their  room,  how  many  pairs  of  boots  and  shoes  he  had,
and  described  all  the  furniture  of  his  bed-room  and  even  the  contents
of  his  drawers.  Before  going  to  see  him  this  gentleman  had  thrown
a  bit  of  chocolate  into  an  egg-cup  and  placed  it  in  his  drawer;  Alexis
could  not  state  what  it  was,  but  he  drew  the  shape  of  the  egg-cup
and  said  he  had  a  vessel  there  of  that  shape,  and  he  could  see  some
chocolate  in  it.  He  told  him  who  his  father  was,  and  in  whose  com-


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute .


213


pany  he  was  at  that  time  (a  fact  which  they  verified  on  coming  to
England)  ;  he  told  him  likewise  how  many  orders  his  father  had,  and
from  whom  he  received  them,  and  also  that  he  had  lost  one  eye.
He  was  asked  how  he  had  lost  it,  and  the  question  being  put  in
regard  to  a  distinguished  officer  in  the  navy,  one  would  have  expected
— had  there  been  any  guess-work  in  the  matter — that  he  would  have
replied,  in  battle  ;  he  however  said,  “  It  was  shot  out  by  accident
by  a  duke,  and  that  duke  was  of  the  blood  royal;”  which  was  the
fact,  it  having  been  shot  out  by  the  late  Duke  of  Gloucester.  (Hear.)
He  was  then  asked  to  write  his  (Mr.  Gordon’s)  friend’s  name;  he
tried  at  first  and  said  he  could  not  do  it,  but  then  said  he  could  write
it  backwards,  and  at  once  wrote  “  evargedlaW  ” — Waldegrave,  which
was  right.  (Hear.)  Many  believed  mesmerism  to  be  a  new  and
mysterious  power,  but  there  were  many  allusions  to  it  in  the  old
Greek  and  Latin  authors.  A  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  there  was
a  person  named  Greatrakes,  in  Ireland,  who  performed  many  won¬
derful  cures,  and  to  whom  the  greatest  philosophers  of  that  day — the
day  of  Newton,  and  Locke,  and  Boyle — sent  a  deputation  to  see  the
cures  he  effected.  Boyle,  who  was  celebrated  among  philosophers
for  his  strong  sense  of  religion,  went  over  and  saw  Greatrakes,  who
could  not  tell  him  however  how  the  cures  were  made,  but  only  that
they  did  take  place.  The  Chairman  having  referred  to  the  wonder¬
ful  powers  possessed  by  the  calculating  boy,  and  which  he  believed
were  allied  to  mesmerism,  contended  for  the  antiquity  of  the  science,
and  in  proof  that  many  things  now  considered  new  were  not  unknown
to  the  ancients,  he  referred  to  the  fact  that  the  electric  telegraph  was
described  in  a  Latin  poem,  written  in  1617,  and  was  mentioned  by
an  English  author,  Arthur  Young,  in  1687.  He  then  adverted  to
the  curative  powers  of  mesmerism,  and  said  a  gentleman  at  Tiverton,
named  Capern,  had  performed  more  than  450  wonderful  cures,  and,
after  Greatrakes,  must  be  considered  one  of  the  greatest  known  mes-
merisers.  It  is  very  gratifying,  in  looking  back  upon  the  past  history
of  mesmerism,  to  find  those  who  had  been  its  most  inveterate  oppo¬
nents,  now  ranking  amongst  its  strongest  supporters;  to  see  those
who  had  ridiculed  and  almost  persecuted  its  advocates,  now  coming
round  and  beseeching  them  to  cure  their  sufferings.  (Applause).
A  recent  case  of  remarkable  cure  occurred  to  him — it  was  that  of  a
very  leading  member  of  the  lower  house  of  parliament  (Sir  Benjamin
Hall),  who  avowed  that  he  had  received  very  great  relief  from  mes¬
merism.  He  was  thrown  from  his  horse,  which  rolled  over  him,  and
pushed  his  eye  very  nearly  out  from  its  socket — so  nearly  indeed
that  the  pupil  was  forced  round  close  under  his  nose.  For  a  year
he  suffered  exceedingly,  and  was  in  the  greatest  pain.  He  tried  all
the  means  which  wealth  would  command,  but  in  vain,  and  he  then
bethought  him  of  mesmerism.  Fie  first  of  all  sent  a  lock  of  his  hair
to  a  person  in  London,  a  well-known  clairvoyante  (Mdlle.  Julie),  and
on  perceiving  it  she  at  once  said  the  person  to  whom  it  belonged  was
affected  in  his  eye.  He  afterwards  went  to  see  her  himself,  and  upon
touching  him  she  said  he  was  the  person  to  whom  the  hair  had  be¬
longed.  At  first  she  would  not  undertake  his  cure,  saying  that  she


214


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


had  twenty-two  patients  daily,  and  they  quite  exhausted  her ;  but  at
length  she  was  prevailed  upon,  and  he  (Mr.  Gordon)  knew  that  for
thirteen  days — after  having  previously  passed  sleepless  days  and
nights,  and  suffered  intense  agony — he  was  entirely  without  pain.
By  mesmeric  treatment  this  gentleman  was  relieved  in  a  most  extra¬
ordinary  way,  and  although  the  pupil  of  his  eye  was  now  not  exactly
straight,  yet  it  was  nearly  so,  and  he  was  able  to  attend  to  his  duties
and  make  speeches  in  the  house  almost  daily.  After  relating  a  case
which  had  been  told  to  him  of  a  remarkable  cure  of  the  late  Duchess
of  Gordon  by  Dr.  Mesmer,  the  Chairman  read  letters  of  apology,
but  expressing  sympathy  with  the  movement,  from  W.  J.  Tubbs,
Esq.,  surgeon,  Upwell  Isle,  T.  W.  Saunders,  Esq.,  Temple,  London,
the  Rev.  G.  Sandby,  &c.  He  concluded  by  expressing  a  hope  that
the  Mesmeric  Institute  would  be  cherished  by  the  Bristol  public  and
flourish  under  their  auspices  and  kind  wishes.

Mr.  S.  D.  Sanders,  honorary  secretary,  in  presenting  the  report
of  the  committee,  said — Having  had  six  or  seven  years’  experience  as
a  mesmerist,  and  mesmerised  a  large  number  of  individuals,  he  was
perfectly  convinced  that  every  disease  not  arising  from  organic  mal¬
formation  could  be  either  thoroughly  cured  or  greatly  relieved  by
mesmerism,  when  judiciously  and  perseveringly  applied.  When  they
found  that  that  horrid  disease,  cancer  of  the  breast,  had  been  cured
by  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  when  he  told  them  that  he  had  more  than  one
case  of  cure,  or  in  progress  of  cure,  by  himself  in  Bristol,  they  would
admit  that  its  supporters  had  a  right  to  say  that  mesmerism  was  a
valuable  agent.

REPORT  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

The  Committee,  in  presenting  their  present  report,  cannot  but
congratulate  the  subscribers  on  the  success  which  has  attended  their
past  efforts.

The  Institute,  though  existing  only  in  the  present  form  from  the
date  of  its  public  recognition  last  year,  is  enabled  to  present  three
important  considerations —

1st.  The  absolute  necessity  of  such  an  Institution.

2nd.  The  good  which  has  already  been  accomplished.

3rd.  The  continued  claims,  and  the  contemplated  extension  of
the  same.

The  necessity  of  the  society  has  been  proved  by  the  large  amount
of  applicants.

The  good  already  accomplished  will  be  shewn  by  the  Medical
Report,  which  will  be  read  by  Dr.  Storer.

The  Treasurer’s  Report  will  prove  how  large  an  amount  of  good
can  be  accomplished  with  moderate  means  and  a  fixed  purpose  ;  but,
in  saying  this,  the  Committee  are  desirous  to  state  how  this  has  been
accomplished.  Independently  of  the  services  of  a  paid  operator,
they  have  had  the  fullest  assistance  from  their  medical  officer,  with
two  or  three  gentlemen  of  the  Committee,  and  from  one  or  two  ladies,
who  have  devoted  much  time  in  furtherance  of  the  cause.  This  the
Committee  feel  cannot  but  be  expected  to  be  continued;  and  they  are
now  the  more  desirous  of  increasing  the  funds  of  the  Institute,  so  as


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


215


to  enable  them  to  engage  further  assistance  to  meet  the  increasing
demands  of  patients.

What  has  been  already  accomplished,  has  been  through  the  im¬
mediate  friends  of  the  cause.  The  subscriptions  during  the  past
year  have  amounted  to  about  £43,  and  the  disbursements,  including
rent,  a  paid  mesmeriser,  advertisements,  stationery,  &c.,  and  two  or
three  unpaid  bills,  have  been  somewhat  about  from  £45  to  £50.

The  Committee  have  hitherto  refrained  from  a  general  appeal  to
the  public,  until  they  were  in  a  condition  to  prove,  by  the  actual
operations  of  the  Institute,  that  such  an  establishment  was  really
required,  and  that  some  good  results  would  follow.  Being  now  in
this  position,  they  the  more  confidently  make  this  appeal,  and  think,
after  the  various  corroborations  of  these  statements,  that  the  public
will  be  equally  ready  and  willing  to  assist  in  the  carrying  out  of  such
intentions.

Dr.  Stoker  presented  the

MEDICAL  REPORT.

This  report  contains  an  account  of  47  cases,  which  have  come
under  treatment  at  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute ;  there  have  been
besides  many  other  applications,  but  the  patients  being  unable  to
leave  their  homes,  it  was  with  regret  that  the  means  of  the  Institute
would  not  allow  of  the  necessary  aid  being  extended  to  them.  In
some  few  instances,  however,  this  has  been  accomplished,  and  the
patients  visited  at  home.

When  it  is  considered  that  almost  all  the  cases  received  have
been  of  the  most  extreme  character — some  of  years’  standing — and
that  many  of  them  have  been  rejected  as  hopeless  under  ordinary
treatment,  the  actual  amount  of  benefit  conferred  ought  to  be  the
only  just  criterion.  Amongst  these  cases  are  comprised  several  of
the  most  severe  forms  of  epilepsy,  of  paralysis,  of  hysteria,  of  ex¬
treme  nervous  debility  with  depression  ;  cases  of  tic  douloureux,  with
rheumatism,  in  all  its  varied  shapes ;  spinal  disease,  with  scrofulous
affections  of  the  hip  and  knee  joint.

There  have  been  also  several  cases  of  nervous  dyspepsia,  sleep¬
lessness,  nervous  headaches,  acute  inflammation  of  local  parts,  such
as  the  eye,  ear,  and  throat,  which  have  been  subdued  by  mesmeric
influence.  Several  minor  painless  operations  have  been  performed,
such  as  the  extraction  of  teeth,  and  the  application  of  caustic  to
various  parts  of  the  body.

As  regards  epilepsy,  the  results  are  as  follow  : — Four  of  the  cases,
though  of  a  most  intractable  nature,  are  considered  quite  cured;  four
have  been  considerably  relieved,  but  did  not  continue  their  attend¬
ance  long  enough  to  have  had  a  larger  amount  of  good :  and  there
are  six  cases  now  under  treatment,  all  more  or  less  progressing.  The
cures  and  relief  of  tic  douloureux  and  rheumatism  have  been  of  a
most  encouraging  nature ;  also  of  those  more  generally  known  as
nervous  disorders.

There  have  been  a  few  cases  of  deafness  and  imperfect  vision,  in
which  great  good  has  been  effected ;  some  of  these  are  still  under
treatment.


216


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


Dr.  Storer  then  gave  details  of  some  cases  cured  by  him.  One  was
a  case  of  severe  mental  depression,  with  a  greatly  impaired  vision;
second,  of  severe  mental  affliction,  with  great  despondency  and  ina¬
bility  to  sleep;  and  a  third  a  case  of  tic  douloureux.  Many  minor
operations  in  surgery  have  been  performed  under  the  influence  of
mesmerism,  and  were  their  Institution  on  a  more  extended  scale
capital  operations  might  be  performed.  At  present  they  were  only
doing  in  a  nutshell  what  Dr.  Esdaile  was  doing  in  India  on  a  grand
scale,  because  he  had  the  support  of  the  government  and  the  public.
If  they  had  a  mesmeric  hospital  in  Bristol,  and  a  proper  relay  of
mesmerisers,  there  would  not  be  a  case  which  might  not,  in  twelve  or
twenty-four  hours,  be  brought  under  mesmeric  influence  for  surgical
operations.  (Cheers.)

Mr.  Janson,  of  Pennsylvania-park,  Exeter,  in  moving  the  adop¬
tion  of  the  report,  bore  testimony  to  the  great  importance  of  mesmer¬
ism  as  a  therapeutic  agent.  He  regretted  that  the  medical  profes¬
sion  should  oppose  it,  because  he  was  satisfied  that  it  was  the  long-
wanted  desideratum.  Medical  science  had  done  a  great  deal  for
mankind,  but  there  were  certain  complaints  not  within  its  reach
which  mesmerism  did  reach.  Mr.  Capern,  of  Tiverton,  had  per¬
formed  a  great  number  of  cures,  in  many  of  which  medical  treatment
had  failed,  while  others  had  been  discharged  from  the  Exeter  hospital
as  perfectly  incurable  cases.  The  speaker  then  read  the  following
letter  addressed  to  Dr.  Storer,  by  the  celebrated  oriental  traveller
whose  name  it  bears  : —

“  Dear  Sir, — If  I  had  not  imperative  engagements  in  London,
which  I  can  neither  forego  nor  postpone,  it  would  have  given  me  the
greatest  pleasure  to  have  attended  your  meeting  to  bear  my  testi¬
mony  to  the  value  and  importance  of  mesmerism  as  a  means  of  cure
for  many  cases  of  disease  in  which  every  effort  of  medicinal  treatment
has  failed  to  give  relief.  I  am  now  giving  the  best  proof  of  the  sin¬
cerity  of  my  belief  in  its  efficacy  by  placing  Mrs.  Rogers  under  your
care  at  Bristol,  and  my  own  daughter  under  the  care  of  Mr.  W.  Wil¬
kinson,  surgeon,  in  London,  for  the  same  purpose,  and  in  both  cases
I  entertain  the  strongest  hope  of  success.  The  subject  first  attracted
my  attention  in  Philadelphia,  in  the  year  1837,  and  in  my  work  pub¬
lished  on  that  country  in  1841,  I  have  given  a  detailed  statement  of
the  mesmeric  operations  witnessed  by  me  in  that  city,  in  the  pre¬
sence  of  some  of  its  leading  inhabitants  of  great  intelligence  and
respectability.  Ever  since  that  period  I  have  taken  the  liveliest
interest  in  its  advancement,  and  have  seen  so  many  cases  of  success¬
ful  cures  of  various  ailments  and  infirmities  that  my  greatest  aston¬
ishment  is  to  witness  the  ignorant  and  interested  opposition  to  its
progress  by  the  majority  of  the  medical  profession,  who,  had  it  been
as  profitable  to  them  as  it  is  likely  to  be  otherwise,  would  have  been
the  most  zealous  in  propagating  its  virtues  and  adopting  it  in  prac¬
tice;  and  the  apathy  and  indifference  of  the  general  public,  who,  if
they  could  be  made  acquainted  with  its  powers,  and  were  not  de¬
terred  by  a  stupid  dread  of  innovation  from  examining  the  subject


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


217


for  themselves,  would  hail  it  as  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  and
most  valuable  discoveries  which  Providence  has  permitted  to  be  ad¬
vanced  by  man  for  the  last  century;  notwithstanding  both  these
hindrances,  however,  it  will  eventually  overcome  every  obstacle  in  its
path,  and  confirm  the  old  adage,  that  truth  is  mighty  and  will  pre¬
vail.  I  enclose  a  small  donation  of  two  guineas  to  your  fund,  regret¬
ting  that  my  limited  means  will  not  allow  me  to  make  it  two  hundred,
which  would  be  still  an  insufficient  test  of  my  estimate  of  the  value
of  mesmerism  to  mankind. — I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  truly,

“To  Dr.  Storer.  J.  S.  Buckingham.”

(Great  applause.)  Mr.  Janson  went  on  to  remark  on  the  antiquity
of  mesmerism,  instancing  that  in  one  of  the  pyramids  of  Egypt  a
hieroglyphic  depicted  a  priest  or  physician  in  the  act  of  mesmerising
a  patient,  thus  shewing  that  it  was  practised  3000  years  ago.  A
remark  made  by  him  at  the  former  meeting  in  this  city,  avowing  his
belief  in  prevision,  had  brought  down  upon  him  the  remarks  of  a
host  of  periodicals,  one  of  which  had  called  him  a  blasphemer.  Now
the  most  tender  conscience  need  not  be  offended  by  any  fear  that
mesmeric  phenomena  could  interfere  with  anything  sacred.  There
were  in  certain  cases — they  were  very  few  he  admitted — the  power
of  foretelling  events,  but  then  it  was  in  a  very  limited  sense  indeed,
and  had  no  relation  at  all  to  the  prophecies  of  Scripture.  A  great
deal  of  ridicule  was  cast  upon  the  science,  but  it  should  be  remem¬
bered  that  the  mind  could  not  receive  truths  for  which  it  was  not
prepared.  If  any  one  were  to  tell  the  inhabitants  of  the  north  pole
that  they  travelled  in  England  by  steam  at  the  rate  of  a  mile  per
minute,  that  they  did  not  confine  themselves  to  earth,  but  took
voyages  among  the  clouds,  that  they  made  the  sun  take  likenesses,
and  conversed  by  lightning  at  hundreds  of  miles  distance,  and  in  a
second  of  time,  some  witty  Greenlander  would  smile  at  the  relation,
and  ask  if  it  was  expected  that  he  should  believe  in  such  a  rhodo-
montade?  The  difficulty  under  which  mesmerists  laboured  was  this —
they  were  placed  in  advance  of  the  world,  and  must  put  on  good
faces  and  be  prepared  to  battle  for  the  truth.  (Cheers.)

Mr.  G.  Cumberland  seconded  the  resolution,  which  having
been  adopted  nem.  con.,

Mr.  Lane  rose  to  address  himself  immediately  to  the  subscribers,
feeling  assured  that  they  would,  with  one  accord,  join  with  him  in  a
vote  of  thanks  to  the  medical  officers  of  the  Institution  ;  and  although
all  had  most  eminently  deserved,  yet  it  was  but  justice  to  notice  the
rare  talents  and  indefatigable  zeal  which  Drs.  Elliotson,  Storer,  En-
gledue,  and  Ashburner,  had  betrayed  at  all  times  and  in  all  places,
through  evil  and  through  good  report.  Dr.  Elliotson,  indeed,
“  what  can  speak  him  home his  great  and  supreme  powers  in
medicine  he  had  endeavoured,  with  a  genuine  philanthropy,  to  ren¬
der  more  complete,  by  adding  to  it  the  powerful  agent  of  mesmerism  :
amalgamating  the  two,  pain  at  once  flies,  and  life  and  vigour  of  life
restored.  Thus,  then,  how  could  they  withhold  their  praise  and
thanks  to  such  men  as  Drs.  Elliotson,  Storer,  Engledue,  and  Ash-


218


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


burner ;  and,  if  he  might  dare  to  make  use  of  an  expression  em¬
ployed  on  a  much  more  solemn  subject,  would  say,  “  that  neither
were  afore  or  after.”  It  seemed  an  inherent  infirmity  in  the  human
mind,  to  receive  with  extreme  caution  and  even  suspicion,  all  great
innovations,  or  even  vital  improvements.  Galileo  was  persecuted
and  imprisoned  when  he  published  his  vast  discoveries  in  astronomy ;
and  Jenner,  in  our  own  day,  derided  and  scoffed  at,  for,  as  it  was
termed,  innoculating  the  disease  of  an  animal  into  that  of  the  human
system.  It  could  not,  therefore,  be  matter  of  wonder  if  mesmerism,
in  its  turn,  should  be  sneered  at  by  those  who — too  indolent  to  wit¬
ness  a  demonstration,  or  too  elevated  in  their  own  conceit — wilfully
shut  their  eyes  and  steel  their  senses  to  its  salutary  and  astounding
results,  and  would,  therefore,  without  mercy,  give  mesmerism  “to
the  winds.”  He  could  adduce  many  facts  that  had  fallen  under  his
own  notice,  and  that  too  ratified  by  concurring  testimony,  which
would  at  once  dispel  all  doubt,  and  silence  all  opposition,  to  the  un¬
biassed  ;  and  it  was  not  a  little  consolatory  to  find  that  mesmerism
was  wending  its  way  to  the  shores  of  the  Bosphorus,  and  returning
to  the  country  of  the  Ptolemies,  in  which  its  great  discovery  was
first  developed — Egypt,  2500  years  ago.  The  paintings  in  the  tomb
or  pyramid  of  Sesostris  speak  in  higher  or  lower  strains  of  its  adap¬
tation  and  practice  in  the  curative  art,  by  the  ancient  Egyptians.
Mesmer  only  revived  it.  In  the  district  of  Pera  (Constantinople),  an
amateur  applied  it  with  effect  on  a  native,  but  as  might  be  easily
imagined,  the  fatalists  ascribed  it  to  Satanic  powers.  The  Egyp¬
tians  had  an  overwhelming  example,  in  the  case  of  Miss  Martineau,
the  celebrated  and  useful  writer,  whose  sedentary  habits  produced
such  derangement  of  the  system  as  no  medicine  could  reach :  her
physician  left  her,  intimating  that  nothing  remained  but  to  smooth
the  descent  to  death.  Here  then,  was  genius,  and  taste,  and  talent,
consigned  to  the  tomb,  when  mesmerism  came,  and  with  a  bland
and  reassuring  smile  tendered  its  aid.  In  a  month,  her  nightly
doses  of  narcotics  were  rendered  nugatory,  excruciating  pains  sub¬
sided,  the  animal  functions  gradually  returned  to  their  wonted  vigour,
and  in  about  a  twelvemonths  after,  she  was  discovered  writing  a  let¬
ter  on  the  great  pyramid,  having  ascended  to  its  summit  without
anything  more  than  the  ordinary  fatigue  of  climbing  to  so  vast  a
height,  over  steps  at  least  two  feet  and  a  half  high.  What  a  mighty
triumph  for  mesmerism  !  But  still  greater  remained ;  to  get  down
is  infinitely  more  difficult  than  getting  up, — a  task  fraught  with  pain
and  much  danger.  Men  glide  from  step  to  step  by  the  seat,  but
women  prone  on  the  chest ;  and  then  they  have  to  jump  six  or  eight
inches  to  reach  the  step  below,  and  woe  to  the  she  or  he  who  shall
lose  their  equilibrium  ;  if  you  topple  over,  no  earthly  power  can  save
you  from  destruction ;  bang,  bang,  you  go  from  step  to  step,  till
you  reach  the  bottom  a  shapeless  and  crushed  mass  ;  and  all  this
was  accomplished  by  Miss  Martineau  by  mesmerism  ! !

Dr.  Stokes,  in  seconding  the  proposition,  eulogized  the  character
of  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  adverted  to  the  efficiency  of  Dr.  Storer.

The  resolution  having  been  passed,


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


219


Dr.  Storer,  in  acknowledging  the  compliment,  said  the  Bristol
Institute  had,  indeed,  reason  to  be  proud  of  such  names  as  Drs.
Elliotson,  Ashburner,  and  Engledue.  Dr.  Elliotson  was  known  wher¬
ever  science  and  humanity  were  recognized  ;  the  other  gentlemen  by
their  writings,  also,  as  practical  physicians;  personally,  he  felt  the
honour  of  such  association,  and  his  best  endeavours  would  be  to
promote,  as  far  as  in  his  power,  the  object  of  the  Institute.

Mr.  Luxmoore,  a  Devonshire  magistrate,  in  moving  a  resolu¬
tion  inviting  the  co-operation  of  the  public,  avowed  his  firm  belief,
as  the  result  of  eight  or  nine  years’  investigation,  in  the  truths  of
mesmerism,  which  ought  to  go  hand  in  hand  with  mesmerism  in  the
cure  of  disease.  He  firmly  believed  in  clairvoyance  and  in  the  power
of  clairvoyants  to  discover  the  seat  of  disease,  and  see  in  effect  into
the  interior  structure  of  man.  He  believed  it  because  he  had  seen  it
in  many  extraordinary  cases.  (Hear.)  He  had  seen  Mdlle.  Julie
give,  upon  touching  a  lock  of  hair,  and  without  any  previous  know¬
ledge  of  the  party,  such  a  true  account  of  his  or  her  condition  as
compelled  him  to  place  implicit  confidence  in  what  she  stated,  and  he
was  convinced  that  no  mesmeric  hospital  would  do  the  greatest
amount  of  benefit  without  a  clairvoyant.

Mr.  Hazard  having  seconded  the  resolution,

Mr.  W.  Lowe,  of  College-green,  avowed  his  conversion  to  a
belief  in  mesmerism,  from  having  mesmerised  his  servant  girl,  who,
while  under  the  influence,  told  him  what  disease  she  was  afflicted  by,
and  foretold  some  fits  by  which  she  was  attacked.

Mr.  Barnes,  surgeon,  of  Bath,  said  he  had  been  in  the  medical
profession  twenty-six  years,  and  for  a  long  time  had  had  strong
doubts  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism.  His  first  impression  was  received
from  a  visit  to  a  woman  in  a  state  of  madness,  whom  two  powerful
men  were  unable  to  hold.  He  advanced  to  her,  fixed  his  eye  upon
her,  took  her  hand,  and  she  at  once  fell  down  under  the  influence.
Afterwards  he  was  sent  for  to  a  man  whom  he  found  with  one  side
completely  paralyzed,  his  arm  and  leg  being  perfectly  lifeless.  He
made  some  passes  over  his  person,  the  capillary  vessels  at  once  began
to  fill,  the  warmth  returned,  and  he  was  soon  restored,  and  a  few
days  ago  carried  two  hundred  weight  for  a  mile  and  upwards.  Four
days  ago  he  (Mr.  Barnes)  was  called  to  see  a  child  who  had  been  in
fits  for  a  fortnight,  and  under  the  care  of  the  hospital  surgeons.
She  was  insensible,  kept  incessantly  rolling  about  her  head  in  a
shocking  way,  and  had  not  spoken  for  many  days.  The  moment
that  he  touched  the  top  of  her  head  the  rolling  motion  was  stayed,
she  soon  became  perfectly  still,  and  smiled  at  him,  and  directly
afterwards  she  spoke.  He  left  her  greatly  recovered,  and  the  next
morning  her  mother  told  him  that  in  an  hour  after  his  leaving  her
she  asked  to  be  dressed,  and  was  as  perfectly  well  as  ever  she  was
in  her  life.  This  might  seem  to  be  a  miracle,  but  it  was  the  result
of  a  principle  which  could  be  explained  upon  scientific  grounds.  He
had  produced  similar  effects  in  fever,  and  in  lumbago  and  sciatica.
His  own  gardener  suffered  severely,  and  after  being  in  the  hospital


220


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


for  a  time  without  benefit,  came  to  him  ill,  and  unable  to  stand
erect ;  he  mesmerised  him,  and  in  five  minutes  he  rose  up  as  straight
as  a  dart,  and  went  home  perfectly  well.  As  to  clairvoyance,  he
had  had  opportunities  of  seeing  it  in  patients  again  and  again,  and
could  attest  its  truth.

The  resolution  having  been  passed,

Mr.  W.  Hazard  next  addressed  the  meeting,  observing  that  at
the  opening  of  this  Institute  last  year  he  stated  he  had  been  a  be¬
liever,  and  practised  mesmerism  for  sixteen  years,  to  which  he  could
now  add  another,  and  with  increased  faith,  from  seeing  and  proving
daily  and  hourly  the  vast  blessing  it  was  as  a  curative  agent.  His
greatest  desire  was  that  it  should  be  still  more  known  and  practised.
They  daily  hear  of  the  march  of  intellect,  of  the  progress  or  perfec¬
tion  of  many  branches  of  science,  and  as  one  it  is  gratifying  to  per¬
ceive  that  mesmerism  had  not  fallen  short,  but  was  steadily  and
firmly  progressing.  The  public  could  no  longer  be  misled  by  the
medical  press;  the  conductors  of  which,  for  the  most  part,  are  the
mere  hirelings  of  party,  their  principal  business  being  to  crush  and
cry  down  such  truths  or  discoveries  as  might  chance  to  militate
against  the  interests  of  the  schools  and  coteries  they  were  employed
to  serve.  The  would-be  wits  had  amused  themselves  at  the  expense
of  the  mesmerists,  and  directed  against  them  all  the  shafts  of  their
satire  :  yet  like  the  religion  of  the  Reformation  in  its  earlier  struggles,
mesmerism  had  been  embraced  and  practised  by  thousands,  who
have  neither  the  courage  nor  the  honesty  to  dare  the  avowal.  To
Dr.  Elliotson,  then,  who  openly  came  forward  to  bear  testimony  to  its
■worth,  words  were  wanting  to  express  their  gratitude.  How  but  for
him  could  they  so  long  have  stood  against  such  organized  opposition?
Pleasing  indeed  must  it  now  be  to  him,  and  to  all  those  who  have
the  welfare  of  mesmerism  at  heart,  to  see  and  know  that  institutions
are  opened  for  the  cure  of  disease  by  mesmerism.  Of  the  relief
experienced  and  cures  effected,  the  report  just  read  of  that  Institute
had  fully  proved,  and  long  might  it  continue  to  flourish  for  the
benefit  of  mankind.  He  had  now  to  propose  a  vote  of  thanks  to  the
honorary  officers  and  committee,  with  a  request  that  they  would  con¬
tinue  their  valuable  services.

Mr.  Barnes  seconded  the  proposition,  and  described  a  case  in
which  he  had  had  a  tumor  on  his  own  face  cured  almost  instanta¬
neously  by  the  mesmeric  power  of  a  lady  then  in  the  room.

The  resolution  was  adopted  nem.  con. ;  and  thanks  having  been
voted  to  the  Chairman,  who  stated  an  instance  in  which  Alexis  fore¬
told  a  tumor  on  a  lady’s  side  four  years  before  it  outwardly  appeared,
the  meeting  separated.

In  the  course  of  the  proceedings  several  subscriptions  were  an¬
nounced,  among  which  wrere  two  of  £  10  each,  from  Earl  Ducie  and
J.  A.  Gordon,  Esq.,  and  other  sums  from  General  White,  H.  Janson,
Esq.,  Major  Buckley,  Mr.  Luxmoore,  Rev.  Dr.  Martyn,  Rev.  Mr.
Rankin,  Rev.  Mr.  Lewis,  Rev.  Mr.  Simpson,  See.


(  321  )


XII.  Which  waiy  does  the  wind  blow  ?

Mesmerism  is  true.  Dr.  William  Davies  of  the  Bath  United
Hospital  says  so — and  we  say  that  the  Bath  doctor  is  right.
Hurrah  !  Who  will  dare  to  dispute  the  fact  now  ?  Dr.  Storer
will  have  another  ally  in  the  west  country,  and  who  can  pre¬
dict  the  changes  which  must  follow  ?  It  appears  that  mes¬
merism  has  produced  hysterical  fits  in  a  young  girl,  and,  mar¬
vellous  to  relate,  the  first  fit  occurred  nine  months  after  she
had  ceased  to  be  mesmerised  !  Verily,  our  science  possesses
greater  powers  than  we  had  given  it  credit  for,  albeit,  we  have
witnessed  marvels  enough  to  make  us  exceedingly  cautious  in
bestowing  a  negative  upon  statements  which  are  advanced.
But  to  be  serious.

We  are  not  amongst  those  individuals  who  blame  their
neighbours  for  changing  their  opinions.  A  man  may  form
his  opinion  on  insufficient  evidence,  and  he  may  be  very  posi¬
tive  and  dictatorial  in  advancing  and  sustaining  it ;  but  after
a  time  some  important  facts  are  presented  to  him,  or  some
new  light  is  thrown  upon  a  branch  of  the  subject  which  he
has  for  years  considered  to  be  settled,  this  directs  his  thoughts
into  a  new  channel,  and  thus  he  is  made  to  embrace  a  truth
which  probably  he  has  spent  a  great  portion  of  his  life  in  op¬
posing.  Under  such  circumstances,  and  more  especially  when
the  subject  under  discussion  is  one  affecting  the  reception  and
advancement  of  a  great  scientific  truth  or  principle,  we  like
the  man  who,  in  a  manly  way,  stakes  his  change  of  opinion,
and  gives  the  reasons  which  have  prompted  him  to  adopt  his
new  views.  Two  or  three  years  ago  we  pointed  out  the  great
alteration  in  the  views  of  the  late  editor  of  the  British  and
Foreign  Medical  and  Surgical  Review,  Dr.  Forbes,  and  we  were
compelled  to  criticise  in  terms  of  severity  the  manifest  want
of  philosophic  truthfulness  as  regards  the  course  which  he
pursued  in  promulgating  his  change  of  opinion.

From  time  to  time  we  have  also  been  compelled  to  criticize
the  proceedings  of  other  would-be  leaders  of  the  medical  and
scientific  world,  on  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  and  in  our
former  volumes  we  have  abundantly  demonstrated  the  truth
of  the  humiliating  fact,  that  however  elevated  an  individual
may  be  in  the  esteem  of  the  scientific  world,  he  is  neverthe¬
less  in  his  researches  too  frequently  influenced  by  the  fickle
fashion  of  the  day,  and  too  easily  prevented  from  investigating
what  is  important,  by  the  sneers  of  the  vulgar  and  the  jests
of  the  ignorant  and  unrefined.  If  these  individuals  do  not
join  in  the  vulgarities  of  the  many,  their  conduct,  as  we  have
just  remarked,  is  influenced  thereby,  and  they  stand  back

VOL.  VIII.  R


222


Which  way  does  the  wind  blow  ?


and  permit  those  they  despise  to  lead  public  opinion,  and
thus  seriously  retard  the  progress  of  true  philosophy,  whose
language  is  on  all  occasions,  without  any  exception  whatever,
“  Read,  examine  for  yourselves,  draw  your  own  inferences,
diligently  and  impartially  investigate ;  we  present  you  with
our  conclusions  and  the  reasons  on  which  they  are  founded  :
we  believe  them  to  be  valid  and  irrefutable,  but  scrutinize
them  closely,  put  them  to  the  test ;  discharge  your  own  duty,
and  assist  us  by  pointing  out  any  fallacies  you  may  descry ;
let  us  be  coadjutors  in  the  grand  cause  of  truth”

We  must  not  however  permit  ourselves  to  enter  into  the
general  question  of  the  duty  of  scientific  men ;  their  duties
may  be  summed  up  in  one  sentence, —  Obey  the  moral  law  of
truth.  The  fearful  departure  of  some  therefrom  may  be  ga¬
thered  from  the  example  which  the  Rev.  G.  Sandby,  in  his
usual  manly  and  philosophic  style,  has  published  in  our  pre¬
sent  number.  On  the  present  occasion  we  have  merely  to
chronicle  the  fact  that  at  Bath  on  the  21st  of  March,  1850,
Dr.  W.  Davies  read  a  paper  before  the  Bath  and  Bristol  Branch
of  the  Provincial  Medical  and  Surgical  Association,  entitled,
“  A  cure  of  cataleptiform  hysteria  apparently  induced  by  mes¬
merism,  with  remarks.”

Case: — Mary  Jane  Targett,  aged  17  years  last  Christmas.
Her  aspect  nervo-lymphatic.  Enjoyed  good  health  till  about
the  period  she  went  into  service,  two  years  ago.  Three  months
from  the  time  of  her  entering  into  service  she  was  first  mes¬
merised.  During  the  next  three  or  four  months  she  was  very
frequently  placed  in  the  mesmeric  sleep.  She  left  her  service
in  perfect  health  about  twelve  months  ago.  For  the  next  nine
months  she  enjoyed  good  health.  (So  says  Dr.  Davies  him¬
self.)  At  last,  after  these  nine  months  of  perfect  health,
during  which  period  she  was  never  mesmerised  (so  says  Dr.
Davies  himself),  she  was  seized  with  a  fit  of  an  hysterical
character,  which  lasted  four  or  five  hours,  and  during  which
she  remained  motionless  and  apparently  unconscious,  and
then  gradually  “  returned  to  her  usual  health.”  Dr.  Davies
says,  “  To  my  mind  it  certainly  does  appear  in  a  very  high
degree  probable,  that  the  mesmeric  trances  into  which  this
girl  was  formerly  put,  bear  a  causative  relation  to  the  fits
under  which  she  now  suffers.”  Now,  we  would  ask  any  me¬
dical  man,  of  even  moderate  experience  in  the  treatment  of
female  diseases,  whether  he  has  not  seen  scores  of  such  cases,
and  since  they  are  so  common,  whether  Dr.  N.  Davies  is  jus¬
tified  in  stating,  even  if  the  fit  had  followed  within  a  few  days
the  mesmeric  sleep,  that  the  attack  was  produced  by  mesmer¬
ism  ?  Post  hoc ,  ergo  propter  hoc.  What  a  fallacy  for  an


Which  way  does  the  wind  blow  ?


223


educated  man !  Roast  beef,  plum  pudding,  and  a  bottle  of
port  wine  would  be  considered  a  very  improper  dinner  for  an
individual  threatened  with  apoplexy,  but  suppose  the  attack
of  apoplexy  did  not  occur  for  nine  months  after  John  Bull’s
dinner,  who  would  think  of  referring  it  to  the  former  reple¬
tion  ?  What  a  happy,  self-satisfied  practitioner  Dr.  Davies
must  be.  If  we  may  judge  from  this  specimen  of  his  cerebral
training,  we  have  no  doubt  that  he  applies  this  same  style  of
reasoning  to  all  the  cases  of  disease  he  may  be  treating,  and
felicitates  himself  that  whatever  he  does  is  right, — that  all
the  favorable  symptoms  occurring  in  his  cases  after  a  few
doses  of  medicine,  result  from  these  very  doses ;  but  when
the  symptoms  are  unfavourable,  why  then,  the  post  hoc  alone
is  true,  and  the  propter  hoc  gives  way  to  the  more  consoling
reflection,  that  the  deplorable  termination  is  in  the  ordinary
course  of  nature,  and  in  spite  of  the  means  used.

The  poor  girl  has  had  several  of  these  hysterical  attacks,
and  strange  and  paradoxical  as  it  must  appear  to  most  indi¬
viduals,  the  fact  that  nine  months  intervened  between  the
last  mesmeric  sleep  and  the  first  fit,  is  seized  upon  by  Dr.
Davies  as  a  convincing  proof  that  his  view  is  correct.  Most
unbiassed  individuals  would  express  very  grave  doubts,  and
the  majority  we  are  sure  would  draw  the  opposite  conclusion.
But  everything  is  fair — bad  logic,  and  no  logic  at  all,  it  is
all  the  same,  there  must  be  a  sneer  at  mesmerism ;  it  creates
a  laugh ;  the  antis  shake  their  heads,  talk  learned  nonsense
on  physiological  points,  and  then  go  their  way,  passing  on  to
the  grave  not  one  bit  wiser  than  their  predecessors.

We  cannot  quote  the  physiological  explanation  given  by
Dr.  Davies,  or  the  statement  of  his  own  belief  in  the  alleged
facts  of  mesmerism ;  it  is  quite  sufficient  for  ns  to  inform  our
readers  that  he  sums  up  by  stating, — “  The  evidence  in  favour
of  a  belief  in  the  ordinary  facts  of  mesmerism  is  sufficiently
strong  to  overcome  in  my  mind  any  scepticism  founded  on
their  inherent  improbability.”  Dr.  D.  then  quotes  from
Blackwood’s  Magazine  for  February,  1845,  the  personal  expe¬
rience  of  Professor  Agassiz  while  under  the  influence  of  mes¬
merism.  As  usual,  we  have  no  experiments  of  his  own.  He
is  brimfull  of  cautions  as  to  when  mesmerism  is  to  be  used —
can  easily  account  for  the  ordinary  phenomena — of  course
does  not  believe  in  the  extraordinary  phenomena,  and  leaves
us  to  conclude  that  he  considers  every  person  insane  who
does.  He  says,  “  As  far  as  I  know,  all  the  established  (read,
all  the  phenomena  which  Dr.  D.  believes)  phenomena  of  mes¬
merism  are  explicable  by  means  of  the  monotony  and  conse¬
quent  exhaustive  agency  of  the  passes.”  “  This  is  a  very  im-


224


Which  way  does  the  wind  blow  ?


portant  point,  as  it  removes  all  mystery  (!)  from  the  subject,
and  brings  it  within  the  sphere  of  our  ordinary  and  every-day
experience.”  “  Clairvoyance  stands  in  the  predicament  of
being  inherently  absurd,  opposed  to  the  fundamental  principles
of  human  belief,  and  at  the  same  time  utterly  unsupported  by
any  evidence.  As  regards  phreno-mesmerism,  it  is  enough
to  say  that  it  presents  an  example  of  an  ingenious  but  very
unphilosophical  mode  of  reasoning,  namely,  supporting  one
very  improbable  hypothesis  by  the  aid  of  another  almost
equally  so.”

We  have  not  the  pleasure  of  being  acquainted  with  Dr.
Davies,  neither  do  we  happen  to  know  whether  he  has  passed
the  grand  climacterick,  but  it  is  manifest  that  he  is  not  yet
fairly  out  of  the  trance  in  which  he  has  been  for  so  many
years  buried.  He  has  just  discovered  that  the  ordinary  phe¬
nomena  of  mesmerism  are  true.  Cerebral  physiology  he  has
not  yet  been  able  to  grapple  with.  A  little  more  rubbing  of
the  eyes,  and  a  few  more  convulsive  throes  of  his  stiffened
muscles,  and  we  do  not  despair  that  even  Dr.  Davies  will
discover  that  the  laws  of  cerebral  physiology  “  are  within  the
sphere  of  our  ordinary  and  every  day  experience;”  and  that
phreno-mesmerism,  or,  the  power  to  excite  the  cerebral  organs
of  a  patient  while  under  the  influence  of  mesmeric  sleep,  is
supported  by  evidence  “  sufficiently  strong  to  overcome  in  his
mind  any  scepticism  founded  on  their  inherent  improbability.”

At  the  conclusion  of  the  paper,  Mr.  John  Barrett,  Dr.
B.  Hall,  and  Mr.  Estlin,  favoured  the  meeting  with  their
remarks.

Mr.  J.  Barrett  said : —

“There  had  been  such  a  disposition  on  the  part  of  those  who
supported  mesmerism  either  to  deceive  or  to  be  themselves  deceived,
that  the  profession  at  large,  marked  as  it  was  in  this  country  by
good  sense  and  a  love  of  truth ,  seemed  to  fear  all  connection  with
such  investigations  ;  still  an  error  might  be  committed  this  way,  for
there  could  be  no  doubt  that  some  rare  phenomena  had  been  ren¬
dered  more  frequent  by  mesmerism,  such  as  catalepsy ;  and  the
legitimate  study  of  these  cases  when  they  occur,  might  lead  to  our
better  understanding  others  connected  with  them,  such  as  that  class
of  diseases  called  hysterical.”

Dr.  B.  Hall  entered  into  a  physiological  description,  for
which  we  have  not  room — it  was  purely  speculative.

Mr.  Estlin,  said  : —

“From  experience  of  mes-  “No  medical  man  could  em-
merism  he  could  easily  explain  ploy  himself  in  the  investigation
the  disinclination  of  medical  men  of  mesmerism,  without  lowering
to  enter  upon  the  subject,  from  himself  (and  I  think  deservedly)


4  case  related  by  Evelyn.


225


some  of  the  parties  professing
mesmerism,  only  acting  their
self-seeking  part,  while  others
who  were  unaccustomed  to  in¬
vestigations  of  the  kind,  were
easily  led  astray  and  duped  by
the  designing.  At  the  same
time  he  would  direct  the  atten¬
tion  of  the  members  to  the  highly
interesting  accounts  given  by  Dr.
Esdaile,  whose  Hindoo  patients
seemed  more  readily  influenced
by  mesmeric  manipulations ,  than
is  common  in  this  country .” —
March  2\st,  1850.


in  public  estimation.” — June
29th,  1843.

“It  seems  to  me  impossible
for  a  medical  man  to  engage  in
the  practice  of  animal  magnetism
without  resorting  to  expedients,
and  allying  himself  with  persons
not  altogether  congenial  to  a  re¬
fined  taste  and  cultivated  mind.”
— June  2 9th,  1843.


In  the  interval  between  1843  and  1850,  mesmerism  has
made  rapid  strides  in  public  estimation.  In  spite  of  the  op¬
position  of  Mr.  Estlin  and  a  host  of  others  of  the  same  calibre,
it  is  practised  in  every  town  in  the  united  kingdom.  Even
Mr.  Estlin  has  not  only  cunningly  gauged  the  force  of  public,
opinion,  but  he  has  at  the  eleventh  hour  commenced  to  inves¬
tigate  the  subject,  and  absolutely  calls  on  his  medical  bre¬
thren  to  study  the  beautiful  Indian  facts  which  we  have  so
repeatedly  published.  “  Better  late  than  never, ”  says  the
proverb.  We  may  well  ask,  “Which  way  does  the  wind
blow  ?”


L.  E.  Gr.  E.


XIII.  A  case  related  by  Evelyn ,  which  offers  some  analogy  to

that  of  the  Estatica.

Most  persons  have  heard  of  the  G  erman  sleep-waking  females
called  the  Estatica  and  Addolorata,  and  described  from  per¬
sonal  observation  by  the  present  Earl  of  Shrewsbury  in  a  pam¬
phlet  in  1841,  and  treated  of  at  some  length  in  Dr.  Binns’s
Anatomy  of  Sleep,  fyc.,  in  1845.  Upon  the  palms  of  the  hands
and  soles  of  the  feet,  and  over  the  heart,  of  Maria  Mori,  the
Estatica,  red  spots  appeared  which  bled,  corresponding  with
the  wounds  of  Christ.  Whether  there  was  a  certain  mixture
of  deception  in  the  cases  we  know  not ;  but  we  have  no  doubt
that  the  cases  were  in  the  main  genuine  instances  of  sleep¬
waking,  with  ecstasy,  arising  from  constitutional  predisposi¬
tion  and  external  circumstances.  The  red  marks  and  bleed¬
ing  have  been  ridiculed;  but  we  dare  not  pronounce  the
impossibility  of  their  production  in  the  sleep-waking  state


226


A  case  related  by  Evelyn.


from  mental  impression.  As  to  anything  supernatural  in  the
matter,  the  idea  must  be  scouted.

In  Evelyn’s  Memoirs  there  is  the  following  account : —

“There  was  sent  me  by  a  neighbour  a  servant  maid,  who
in  the  last  month,  as  she  was  sitting  before  her  mistresse  at
work,  felt  a  stroke  on  her  arme  a  little  above  the  wrist  for
some  height,  the  smart  of  which,  as  if  struck  by  another  hand,
caused  her  to  hold  her  arme  awdiile  till  somewhat  mitigated,
but  it  put  her  into  a  kind  of  convulsion  or  rather  hysteric  fit.
A  gentleman  coming  casually  in,  looking  on  her  arme,  found
that  part  pondered  with  red  crosses,  set  in  most  exact  and  won-
derfull  order,  neither  swelled  nor  depressed,  .  .  .  not  seeming
to  be  any  way  made  by  artifice,  of  a  reddish  colour,  not  so
red  as  blood,  the  skin  over  them  smooth,  the  rest  of  the  arme
livid  and  of  a  mortified  hue,  with  certaine  prints  as  it  were  of
the  stroke  of  fingers.  This  had  happened  three  severall  times
in  July,  at  about  ten  days  intervall,  the  crosses  beginning  to
wear  out,  but  the  successive  ones  set  in  other  different  yet
uniform  order.  The  maide  seemed  very  modest,  and  came
from  London  to  Deptford  with  her  mistresse  to  avoid  the  dis¬
course  and  importunity  of  curious  people.  She  made  no
game  by  it,  pretended  no  religious  fancies,  but  seemed  to  be
a  plaine,  ordinary,  silent,  working  wench,  somewhat  fat,  short,
and  high  coloured.  She  told  me  divers  divines  and  physitians
had  seene  her,  but  were  unsatisfied ;  that  she  had  taken  some
remedies  against  her  fits,  but  they  did  her  no  good ;  she  had
never  before  had  any  fits ;  once  since  she  seem’d  in  her  sleepe
to  hear  one  say  to  her  that  she  should  tamper  no  more  with
them,  nor  trouble  herself  with  anything  that  happen’d,  but
put  her  trust  in  ye  merits  of  Christ  onely.

“  This  is  the  substance  of  what  she  told  me,  and  what  I
saw  and  curiously  examin’d.  I  was  formerly  acquainted  with
the  impostorious  nunns  of  Loudune  in  France,  which  made
such  noise  amongst  the  papists;  I  therefore  thought  this
worth  the  notice.  I  remember  Mons.  Monconys  (that  curious
traveller  and  a  Roman  catholic)  was  by  no  means  satisfied
with  ye  stigmata  of  those  nunns,  because  they  were  so  shy  of
letting  him  scrape  the  letters,  which  were  Jesus,  Maria,
Joseph,  (as  I  think,)  observing  they  began  to  scale  off  with
it,  whereas  this  poore  wench  was  willing  to  submit  to  any
trial;  so  that  I  profess  I  know  not  what  to  think  of  it,  nor
dare  I  pronounce  it  anything  supernatural.” — 5  August,
Diary,  1670.  Memoirs  of  John  Evelyn ,  Esqr.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  328.


227


Anecdote  of  Major  Buckley.

XIV.  Infantile  Simplicity  and  Scientific  Truth.

“Alleged  Theft  from  Filial  and  Sisterly  Affection. —
About  noon,  on  Saturday  last,  a  girl  named  Elizabeth  Lee,  went  into
the  shop  of  Mr.  MTntosh,  draper,  Oldham-street,  and  took  a  dress-
piece  from  a  pile  of  goods  some  distance  inside  the  door,  which  she
placed  under  her  shawl  and  then  ran  away.  The  theft  was  noticed
by  one  of  the  shopmen,  who  followed  and  caught  the  girl  with  the
piece  of  print  in  her  possession.  She  was  immediately  given  into
custody.  On  Monday  morning  she  was  brought  at  the  Borough
court,  and  when  placed  in  the  dock  she  was  crying  bitterly.  On
being  asked  what  she  had  to  say  to  the  charge,  she  stated  that  she
had  been  working  in  a  factory,  but,  in  consequence  of  some  slight
accident  or  fault,  was  ‘bagged’  on  Wednesday  last.  ‘I  feared  to  tell
my  father,’  continued  the  poor  girl,  apparently  with  the  greatest
sincerity,  ‘  because  I  have  six  little  brothers  and  sisters,  and  I  knew
that  he  had  no  money  to  buy  them  food,  and  I  wanted  to  make  up
my  wages.  Oh,  I  don't  know  how  it  was,  but  something  tempted  me
to  do  it*  The  father,  a  decent-looking  man,  said  that  the  prisoner
had  got  up  at  half-past  5  o’clock  every  morning  during  the  week  to
go  to  her  work  as  usual.  She  had  always  behaved  herself  well,  and
was  a  great  help  to  him  in  bringing  up  his  motherless  children.  ‘  It
wasn’t  that  I  was  afraid  of  father,’  said  the  prisoner;  ‘  he  wouldn't
have  beat  me — only  he  frets  so.'  Mr.  Hodgson  discharged  the  pri¬
soner,  and  she  left  the  dock  with  a  fresh  burst  of  tears,  and  with  a
fervent  ‘God  bless  you,  sir,’  from  her  father.” — Manchester  Guardian.

We  insert  the  above  anecdote  without  one  word  of  com¬
ment.  To  the  cerebral  physiologist  it  is  invaluable.  Verily,
we  may  learn  wisdom  from  a  child.


XV.  Anecdote  of  Major  Buckley.

This  indefatigable  and  uncompromising  upholder  of  mesmer¬
ism  was  lately  requested  by  the  Duke  of  Cambridge  to  become
a  steward  to  the  festival  of  St.  Mary’s  Hospital,  about  to  be
opened  in  Paddington.  The  following  was  his  answer : —

“  Major  Buckley  has  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt
(last  night)  of  his  Hoyal  Highness  the  Duke  of  Cambridge’s
letter  of  the  25th  instant,  and  begs  most  respectfully  to  inti¬
mate  that  he  could  not,  consistently,  officiate  as  one  of  the
stewards  on  the  occasion  referred  to  in  his  Hoyal  Highness’s
letter,  in  consequence  of  his  being  a  zealous  advocate  for  the
use  of  mesmerism,  which  he  considers  the  greatest  boon,  after
health  itself,  bestowed  on  mankind  by  the  Almighty,  while  he
has  no  assurance  that  the  governors  of  St.  Mary’s  Hospital


228  Books  received ,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  §c.

will  sanction  its  employment  for  the  prevention  of  pain  under
surgical  operations,  or  for  the  cure  of  diseases  which,  without
its  aid,  are  deemed  incurable.

“27a.  Old  Bond  Street,

“  29th  March,  1850.”


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Religious  Mystery  Considered.  Chapman,  Strand.  This  is  the  work  of  a
profound  thinker  and  a  learned  and  honest  man.

The  Chrono-Thermalist,  or,  People’s  Medical  Enquirer.  April,  1850.

The  Principle  of  Health  Transferable.  Second  edition.  Two  copies.

Dublin  Evening  Post,  April  16.

New  York  Medical  Repository,  Feb.  16,  1816,  containing  a  remarkable  case
of  double  consciousness.  By  Dr.  Mitchell.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

The  duty  of  printing  a  report  of  the  Mesmeric  Institutions  of  London  and
Bristol  has  demanded  an  additional  sheet ;  but  still  we  are  compelled  to  post¬
pone  communications  from  Dr.  Davey,  Mr.  Davey,  Dr.  Elliotson,  Mr.
Hayman,  Mr.  Hobson,  Mr.  Lee,  Mr.  Lloyd,  Mr.  Majendie,  Mr.  Mayhew,  Mr.
Noel,  Non-Wist,  Mr.  Reynoldson,  Mr.  Rolfe,  Mr.  Sloman,  Dr.  Storer,  Mr.
H.  S.  Thompson,  and  J.  W.

Translation  of  Gall’s  Octavo  Work. — The  cerebral  physiologists  of  England
consider  that  Mr.  Combe  and  his  Scotch  friends  did  very  wrong  in  not  publishing
an  English  translation  of  Gall’s  work  above  twenty  years  ago  when  they  had  the
power,  instead  of  publishing  their  own  very  inferior  books  ;  and  are  most  anxious
to  see  in  print  the  translation  which  has  been  made  so  carefully  by  Mr.  Symes.
They  propose  to  subscribe  for  its  publication.  Mr.  Amor  of  Bond-street  is  will¬
ing  to  subscribe  for  10  copies,  and  other  gentlemen  for  one,  two,  and  three.
A  subscription  of  £2  2  will  entitle  the  subscriber  to  a  copy.  Subscriptions

will  be  received  by  Mr.  Bailliere,  219,  Regent  Street.

Dr.  Todd,  with  certain  others,  will  receive  in  our  October  number  what  they
richly  deserve.


THE  ZOIST.

No.  XXXI.


OCTOBER ,  1850.


I.  Mesmeric  News  from  India  in  the  present  Quarter.
Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  In  the  public  journals  of  the  last  month  I  have  seen  an  advertisement  relating
to  the  establishment  of  a  mesmeric  hospital,  in  which  patients  are  to  be  mesmer¬
ised,  in  order  that  they  may  be  subjected  to  surgical  operations  without  suffering
pain,  and  the  names  of  several  noblemen  and  gentlemen — one  of  them  a  cabinet
minister — are  to  be  found  in  the  list  of  patrons  of  this  new  institution.  It  would
be  well  to  inquire,  have  these  individuals  been  themselves  present  at  such  a
number  of  operations  performed  under  what  is  called  the  mesmeric  influence,  as
would  furnish  the  data  requisite  for  the  adoption  of  a  new  principle  in  pathology  ?
Have  they  had  the  assistance  of  competent  persons  in  the  investigation  of  matters
with  which  they  are  not  themselves  familiar  ?  Are  they  aware  that  a  large  pro¬
portion  of  those  who  undergo  surgical  operations  without  being  mesmerised
scarcely  complain  of  pain ,  whatever  they  may  feel :  it  is  not  very  uncommon  for
them  to  converse  at  the  time  as  if  they  were  indifferent  spectators,  and  that  it
seems  to  be  in  the  power  of  almost  any  one  under  the  influence  of  excitement  or
a  strong  moral  determination  to  sustain  bodily  suffering  without  any  outward
expression  of  what  he  suffers.  Have  they  read  the  history  of  the  sleeping  man
recorded  in  the  24th  volume  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society,  who,
though  tormented  in  various  ways,  by  pins  thrust  into  his  flesh,  by  scarifications
and  cupping,  and  spirits  of  ammonia  thrown  into  his  nostrils,  never  could  be
raised  from  a  state  of  profound  sleep  for  four  entire  months ;  but  nevertheless
was  not  so  insensible  to  other  external  impressions  as  to  be  prevented  from  regal¬
ing  himself  daily  on  bread  and  cheese  and  beer,  and  performing  certain  other
functions,  the  necessary  consequence  of  eating  and  drinking,  in  an  orderly  and
decent  manner  ?  And  lastly,  are  they  aware  that  other  cases  of  the  detection  of
similar  impostures  are  recorded  on  the  best  authority  ?*

‘f  There  is  no  greater  desideratum,  either  in  medicine  or  surgery,  than  to
have  the  means  of  allaying  or  preventing  bodily  pain,  not  only  in  cases  of  surgical
operation,  but  in  other  cases  also ;  but  there  is  too  good  reason  to  apprehend  that
it  has  not  been  reserved  for  the  revival  of  animal  magnetism  under  a  new  name  to

*  The  ignorance  of  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  of  the  reality  of  these  cases,  and  of  the
possibility  of  anaesthesia  or  want  of  susceptibility  of  pain  from  mechanical  causes
while  the  feeling  of  resistance,  contact,  pressure,  and  the  power  of  voluntary
motion,  &c.,  &c.,  remain,  is  ludicrous  to  those  who  see  those  things  daily  in
mesmerised  patients,  who  see  them  occasionally  in  disease,  and  see  them  not
unfrequently  in  persons  under  the  influence  of  ether  or  chloroform,  as  may  be
found  in  No.  XVI.,  p.  580  ;  XVII.,  p.  44,  &c.  ;  XXI.,  pp.  5,  6.

VOL.  VIII.  S


230


Mesmeric  News  from  India.


accomplish  that  for  which  all  physicians  and  surgeons  have  been  looking  in  vain
from  the  days  of  Hippocrates  down  to  the  present  times.” — Sir  Benjamin
Brodie.  A  Lecture  reported  in  the  Lancet  for  Oct.  10,  1846,  and  delivered  at
St.  George’s  Hospital  to  the  rising  generation  of  medical  practitioners,  and  not
unlikely  to  keep  them  back  to  his  own  point  of  information  and  tenderness,  and
prejudice  the  poor  youths  blindly  against  the  most  important  truths  and  the
most  humane  measures.*

“  A  sincere  Christian, — Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  finds  time,  notwithstanding
his  many  occupations,  for  religious  duties,  and  he  may  be  seen,  when  in  town,  a
regular  attendant  at  St.  James’s  Church  on  Sunday  afternoon.”'!' — Mr.  Wakley,
Lancet,  May  4,  1850.  p.  544.

Painless  removal  of  a  Tumor  weighing  about  80  lbs.
“Though  f tumors  of  the  usual  character 9  are  now  drugs  in
the  market  of  mesmerism,  we  cannot  avoid  noticing  the  ex¬
cision  of  one  at  the  hospital  yesterday  by  Dr.  Esdaile.  It
weighed  about  80  lbs. — if  anything,  more ;  but  rarely  has  an
operation  of  this  kind  been  attended  by  such  profuse  blood¬
shed.  It  was  performed  in  two  minutes  and  a  half  to  a  second,
but  as  soon  as  the  mass  was  removed  we  mentally  ejaculated
with  Harry  Blount, —

‘  By  St.  George  he’s  sped.’

The  copious  use  of  carbonate  of  ammonia,  however,  soon
made  his  pulse  perceptible ;  and  when  we  left  he  was  perfectly
vif  and  sensible,  totally  unconscious  of  pain  suffered,  and  un¬
knowing  that  any  operation  had  been  performed  upon  him.
Extraordinarily  weak  no  doubt  he  was,  but  did  not  know
why,  and  declared  he  had  awakened  from  a  refreshing  sleep.

*  In  L.E. G.E.’s  powerful  article  against  Sir  B.  Brodie,  Mr.  Wakley,  Drs.
Forbes,  Conolly,  &c.,  in  No.  XVI.  of  The  Zoist  are  the  following  remarks,  at
pp.  596-7, — “For  a  complete  answer  to  these  extraordinary  observations,  we
must  refer  our  readers  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s  pamphlet,  Surgical  Operations  without
Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State.  The  only  other  comment  we  shall  make,  is  to  refer
Sir  B.  Brodie  to  the  convert,  Dr.  Forbes,  who  says,  ‘  If  the  statements  be  corro¬
borated,  and  if  insensibility  can  be  produced  artificially,  surely  the  immense
acquisition  both  to  operator  and  patient  is  obvious  at  once.  We
hesitate  not  to  assert,  that  the  testimony  is  now  of  so  varied  and  extensive  a  kind,
so  strong,  and  in  a  certain  proportion  of  cases  so  seemingly  unexceptionable,  as
to  authorize  us,  nay,  in  honesty,  to  compel  us  to  recommend  that  an  imme¬
diate  AND  COMPLETE  TRIAL  OF  THE  PRACTICE  BE  MADE  IN  SURGICAL  CASES,”

Those  who  know  from  The  Zoist  the  hundreds  of  surgical  operations,  many
of  those  by  Dr.  Esdaile  gigantic  and  such  as  Sir  B.  Brodie  never  has  performed
and  never  will  be  able  to  perform,  must  laugh  at  Sir  B.  Brodie’s  ignorance  or
effrontery.  His  arguments  against  the  evidence  of  the  effects  of  mesmerism  in
preventing  pain  apply  equally  to  the  effects  of  ether  and  chloroform.  He  long
set  his  face  against  these  two  agents  :  and  was  with  great  difficulty  induced  at
last  to  witness  an  operation  under  chloroform.  And  now  operations  are  per¬
formed  daily  under  it  even  in  St.  George’s  Hospital,  and  he  is  completely
beaten.  See  No.  XXI.,  pp.  30,  31.

f  Sir  B.  Brodie  has  a  son,  a  curate  in  Surrey,  who  did  his  best  to  prevent  a
party  from  going  to  witness  mesmerism  by  Mr.  Bockett,  the  vicar  of  Epsom.
Had  Mr.  Wakley  known  this,  great  would  have  been  his  glorification  of  the  son
for  treading  in  the  father’s  steps  and  proving  himself  “  a  sincere  Christian .”


Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


231


The  tumor  was  a  peculiarly  disgusting  mass.  Among  the
spectators  were  Dr.  Allan  Webb,  Mr.  Wilby,  Mr.  Heatly,
Mr.  Allin  of  New  York,  who  is  about  to  deliver  mesmeric
lectures  (as  we  are  told)  in  the  Town  Hall ;  and  Mr.  Calder.

“We  subsequently  witnessed  one  or  two  interesting  mes¬
meric  experiments.  A  young  Baboo,  who  had  been  operated
upon  some  time  ago,  and  who  then  evinced  extraordinary
delicacy  of  mesmeric  constitution,  was  locally  mesmerised,
and  found  incapable  of  dropping  anything  he  had  grasped
with  one  hand  which  had  been  mesmerised,  while  all  the  rest
of  the  body  was  perfectly  free.  A  ruler,  that  Dr.  Esdaile  had
privately  breathed  upon,  was  to  all  appearance  casually  given
to  him  to  hold,  and,  as  soon  as  he  did  so,  the  hand  clutched
the  wood  spasmodically,  and  the  muscles  up  to  the  deltoid
became  rigid.  Not  till  the  arm  was  demesmerised  could  the
ruler  be  disengaged  from  the  baboo's  grasp.

“We  are  happy  to  learn  that  the  Sukea's  Lane  Dispensary
has  been  made  over  to  Dr.  Esdaile,  for  the  express  purpose  of
introducing  mesmerism  into  regular  hospital  practice." — Cal¬
cutta  Morning  Chronicle,  April  9,  1850.


“  A  friend  called  in  at  the  Mesmeric  Hospital  yesterday  to
look  at  the  subject  of  the  operation  we  described  in  our
morning's  issue.  The  man  was  slightly  feverish,  but  looked
and  spoke  well,  and  though  weak,  as  might  be  expected  from
the  immense  loss  of  blood,  presents  that  cheerful  aspect  which
is  rarely  seen  in  the  wards  of  any  other  than  a  mesmeric
hospital.  He  declared  that  he  had  felt  no  pain  whatever  after
the  operation  when  awakened,  and  indeed  did  not  know  that  it
had  been  performed  till  apprised  of  the  fact.

Cure  of  Dumbness  from  Palsy  of  the  Tongue,  of  a  year’s

standing.

“We  have  had  the  opportunity  of  watching  an  interesting
case,  in  which  the  medical  effects  of  mesmerism  have  been
peculiarly  exhibited.  A  Hindu  boy,  about  thirteen  years  of
age,  of  a  family  predisposed  to  nervous  maladies,  was  more
than  twelve  months  ago  severely  attacked  by  some  nervous
derangement  or  other,  which  as  usual  the  natives  termed
insanity.  After  a  while  the  ‘insanity'  went  off,  but  was
succeeded  by  permanent  paralysis  of  the  tongue.  The  tongue
in  fact  resembled  a  piece  of  meat,  perfectly  motionless  and
recurved,  so  that,  had  the  frsenum  been  severed,  the  impres¬
sion  of  a  looker-on  would  be  that  the  tongue  would  be  swal¬
lowed.  The  dumbness  of  the  lad,  we  need  hardly  add,  was

s  2


232


Mesmeric  News  from  India.


complete.  After  remaining  a  year  in  this  unhappy  state,  the
boy’s  relatives  were  induced,  by  the  marvellous  tales  of  cure
they  heard  of  patients  in  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  to  carry  him
to  Dr.  Esdaile.  He  was  received  and  appropriately  treated,
and  the  consequence  was  that  on  the  fourth  day  the  flexibility
of  the  tongue  was  restored,  though  the  power  of  articulation
was  still  withheld ;  on  the  eighth  day  articulation  was  percep¬
tible,  but  the  voice  was  more  or  less  a  squeak ;  on  the  ninth
day  (yesterday)  we  enjoyed  the  pleasure  of  hearing  the  boy
read  a  paragraph  out  of  a  Bengallee  newspaper,  quite  intelli-
bly  though  sotio  voce  and  as  it  were  with  effort.  We  con¬
sider  this  cure  to  be  one  of  the  most  remarkable  we  have
been  so  fortunate  as  to  witness.  There  can  be  little  doubt
that  in  a  very  few  days,  if  the  rate  of  recovery  be  undimin¬
ished,  the  lad  will  exercise  complete  control  over  his  vocal
organ.  It  should  be  added  that  the  mesmerising  was  entirely
local,  and  the  patient  never  entered  the  comatose  state.” —
Calcutta  Morning  Chronicle ,  April  10,  1850.*

A  Visit  to  Dr.  Esdaile3 s  Hospital.

“We  had  the  gratification  of  witnessing  a  series  of  mes¬
meric  applications  at  the  Hospital  yesterday ;  so  strange,
however,  were  the  sights  we  beheld,  so  many  novel  ideas
came  crowding  on  the  mind  from  a  conviction  of  the  mes-
meriser’s  influence  and  of  the  thorough  mastery  he  has  over
his  subject,  that  wre  have  no  desire  to  commit  our  opinions  to
paper  while  yet  the  impression  is  almost  confounding  and
the  mind  has  hardly  time  to  arrange  its  own  perceptions.
Upon  the  evidence  of  his  own  senses,  Dr.  Esdaile  would  make
any  man,  not  predetermined  to  be  blind,  an  enthusiast  in  the
science,  from  the  clear,  forcible,  and  honest  manner  in  which  he
developes  and  illustrates  the  mesmeric  power.  Always  satisfied,
from  beholding  such  crude  attempts  as  it  chanced  to  be  our
fortune  to  witness,  we  have  never  w;anted  firm  faith  in  this
powder  from  the  first  hour  of  casually  looking  at  a  patient
under  its  peculiar  influence  :  it  was,  however,  left  to  the
moment  under  review  to  unfold  an  entirely  new  train  of  con¬
ceptions,  and  to  cause  an  assurance  that,  like  geology,  mes¬
merism  is  adding,  perhaps  the  most  important  page,  to  the
volume  of  human  understanding,  and  in  a  shape  so  exclusively
foreign  to  all  preconceived  ideas,  and  yet  so  perfectly  irre¬
sistible  in  itself,  that  the  wonder  is  less  at  its  existence  than
where  its  power  shall  terminate.  We  must  notwithstanding
refrain  from  trusting  ourselves  to  a  deposition  the  inherent

*  On  the  twelfth  day  the  cure  was  complete,  and  he  spoke  as  well  as  ever  he
did  in  his  life. — J.  Esdaile.


Communicated  bij  Dr.  Elliot  son.


233


sanguineness  of  which  we  readily  acknowledge ;  but  will  en¬
deavour,  without  favour  or  affection,  to  detail,  in  to-morrow’s
issue,  not  only  what  we  saw  but  what  we  were  able  to  glean
from  the  rapid  sketch  of  principles  delivered  by  the  mesmeriser.
We  think  Dr.  Esdaile  seemed  to  be  uncertain  as  to  the
removal  of  the  Hospital  to  another  locality,  and  certainly  he
did  not  express  any  anxiety  for  it.  Where  he  wishes,  there
the  Hospital  should  be ;  and  we  sincerely  trust  it  may  not
yet  be  too  late  to  make  those  wishes  known,  because,  as  the
prolongation  of  the  experiment  has  been  mainly  owing  to  a
public  solicitation,  it  is  fitting  the  public  should  understand
that  the  practitioner  is  perfectly  contented  to  be  where  he  is,
and  his  voice,  even  for  interest’s  sake — the  interest  of  the
science — ought  to  determine  the  point  without  further  ques¬
tion.  The  reasons  entertained  are  too  obvious  to  escape  notice,
and  we  hope  that  intention  of  a  removal  to  another  site  may
be  abandoned,  if  it  has  been  seriously  contemplated.  The
present  Hospital  enjoys  advantages  that  would  not  be  visible
in  the  more  distant  location.” — Indian  Times,  April  25,  1850.

That  mesmerism,  as  a  science ,  has  taken  root  so  fixedly  as
to  he  beyond  the  power  of  opposition,  needs  hardly  to  be  told  at
this  day,  and  indeed  a  description  of  experiments  which  esta¬
blish  its  reality,  is  now  as  a  “  thrice-told  tale,”  and  must  be
wanting  in  the  attraction  which  novelty  invariably  affords.
Still  as  it  has  not,  before  Wednesday  last,  been  our  chance  to
witness  any  exhibition  of  the  mesmeric  power  that  could  do
more  than  satisfy  us  of  an  inexplicable  fact,  and  though  we
yielded  rather  to  the  testimony  of  men  unlikely  to  be  deceived
and  incapable  of  distorting  truth,  than  to  conviction  from
personal  experience,  we  took  rank  amongst  the  willing  be¬
lievers,  and  founded  our  reliance  on  the  details  furnished  by
Dr.  Esdaile  and  sustained  by  a  mass  of  evidence  which  we
considered  to  be  equally  undeniable  and  irresistible.  At  the
hazard  of  mere  repetition,  we  will  now7  venture  to  shewr  the
effect  produced  upon  ourselves  as  spectators  of  this  wonderful
power ;  endeavouring,  at  the  same  time,  to  communicate  wrhat
we  understand  to  constitute  the  agency  through  which  it  is
obtained  and  the  manner  in  which  it  may  be  exerted  to  alle¬
viate  many  of  the  pangs  “  to  which  flesh  is  heir.”  On  arriv¬
ing  at  the  Hospital,  we  were  informed  there  were  no  cases  in
hand  for  the  use  of  the  knife ;  but  we  saw  patients  who  had
undergone  operations,  and  were  satisfied  they  wrere  all  doing
well  after  having  had  their  tumors  removed.  We  then  pro¬
ceeded  to  the  hall,  where  the  Doctor  at  once  commenced  upon
his  task  by  assuring  us  he  had  acquired  a  sufficient  influence


234


Mesmeric  News  from  India.


over  his  subject  to  render  his  audience  familiar  with  results
sufficiently  palpable  to  prove  that  surgical  operations  could  be
performed  without  pain,  and  with  concomitant  security  to
life.  We  wrere  prepared  for  this,  having  understood  that
there  is  no  instance  upon  record  wherein  loss  of  life  has  followed
from  the  application  of  medical  mesmerism.  The  patient,  if  we
may  so  term  a  man  in  apparent  health,  was  now  produced,
and  coma  stole  over  him  in  the  course  of  three  minutes.
Dr.  Esdaile  then  took  a  breast-pin  of  some  length,  and  darted
it  with  force  into  the  breast  of  the  mesmerised  man :  it  en¬
tered  slantingly,  but  was  firmly  fixed,  and  yet  caused  no  sen¬
sation  whatever.  Whilst  lying  in  this  condition,  we  remarked
a  constant  twitching  of  the  patients  eyelid,  a  circumstance
we  are  induced  to  notice  more  strongly  as  we  shall  find  occa¬
sion  to  refer  to  it  by  and  bye.  It  may  be  proper  to  mention
that  Dr.  Esdaile  did  not  seize  the  hands  of  the  youth  under
his  influence,  but  simply  held  out  two  fingers  in  a  direct  line
with  the  head,  himself  fixing  upon  the  eye  of  his  subject  with
a  steady,  penetrating  gaze,  such  as  we  may  suppose  to  be
that  of  the  “  mad  doctors,”  as  they  are  termed,  who  fasten
their  glance  upon  the  maniac  and  fascinate  him.  The  next
step  taken  went  to  cause  that  utter  rigidity  of  limb  which,
under  ordinary  events,  can  only  be  assumed  by — death :  this
wras  done  and  undone,  by  passes  and  counter-passes,  at  the
mesmeriser's  will,  the  helpless  being  before  him  becoming,  as
it  were,  but  an  automaton,  moving  mechanically  in  obedience
to  the  pleasure  of  him  “  who  pulls  the  strings ”  Demesme-
risation  restored  consciousness  without  dissipating  influence,
and  the  young  man  became  a  self- declaratory  evidence  of
whatever  was  done  to  him,  assisting  with  his  own  will  to
demonstrate  how  the  parts  under  subjection  were  utterly  in¬
sensible  to  puncture,  burning,  and  what  in  a  natural  condition
of  body  must  have  been  actual  torture.  We  will  attempt  to
describe  separately  the  experiments  performed :  and  first  of
the  eye.  The  lids  fell  when  the  coma  was  so  complete — that
to  raise  them  required  some  slight  effort ;  but  sight  was
denied,  for  the  pupils  had  been  turned  upwards  to  such  a
degree  that  the  whites  were  alone  perceptible,  and  no  exer¬
tion  served  to  draw  the  former  down.  The  tremulous  motion
of  the  lids  was  very  remarkable,  and  subsequently,  when  the
mesmeriser  counter-passed  and  the  pupils  did  descend  a  little,
we  thought  we  detected  a  peculiar  visual  cast,  which  a  mere
pretender  to  the  science  is,  we  believe,  unable  to  command.
Questions  were  put  and  answered ;  the  young  man  being,  in
every  other  respect,  at  this  moment  a  free  agent.  When
vision  was  restored  he  was  directed  to  rub  the  eyes,  and  this


Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.


235


act,  after  a  very  little  time,  rendered  back  the  natural  powers
of  sight,  he  himself  expressing  his  sense  of  change  as  demes-
merisation  proceeded.  Then  came  fresh  trials  upon  the  whole
body.  The  youth  stood  up ;  but  the  physical  power  of  his
frame  sunk  into  insensibility  and  unconsciousness  under
general  passes  from  the  crown  of  the  head  to  the  feet,  the
body  notwithstanding  remaining  lithesome,  until  reduced  to
rigidity  by  further  passes.  Released  from  this  state,  the  hand
was  stiffened  over  a  walking  stick  which  it  clenched  with  a
grasp  that  no  force  could  relax,  the  arm  meanwhile  shewing
itself  perfectly  flexible,  though  powerless.  Opened  again,  as
the  mesmeriser  observed,  by  a  gentleness  that  was  superior  to
strength,  a  watch  was  placed  in  the  palm — the  hand  being
downward  turned  and  so  mesmerised — and  there  kept  till  it
suited  the  manipulator’s  purpose  to  recover  it ;  the  spectators
being  invited  to  persuade  him  or  bribe  him  to  dash  it  to  the
ground,  or  throw  it  into  the  tank ;  but  he  could  as  soon  have
thrown  his  head  off !  Then  a  leg  was  stretched  out — made
rigid  and  continued  in  its  extended  position  for  the  space  of
about  twenty  minutes,  without  the  slightest  movement  or
token  of  suffering.  While  in  this  instance  the  passes  were
going  on,  we  remarked  a  muscular  action,  as  if  from  the
shock  of  a  galvanic  battery.  To  this  succeeded  trials  upon
the  nose,  to  which  (a  bandage  being  placed  over  the  eyes)
carbonate  of  ammonia,  of  strength  to  have  knocked  down — a
horse  we  were  about  to  say — was  applied,  without  causing  the
slightest  sensation ;  on  the  bandage  being  removed,  the  eyes
were  strongly  affected,  while  the  nostrils  remained  insensible;
and  when  the  nose  was  demesmerised  it  could  not  stand  the
pungency  of  the  ammonia  for  a  second  !  The  ears  came  next
under  subjection,  and  a  chillumchee  (unseen  by  the  patient)
was  brought  close  behind  and  struck  violently  with  a  stick,
but  the  noise  failed  to  arouse  the  remotest  degree  of  atten¬
tion.  The  influence  again  removed,  we  were  requested  to  call
him  by  name,  and  upon  this  being  done  once  or  twice,  he
slowly  turned  round  to  reply ;  an  evidence  that  he  was  again
master  of  the  sense  of  hearing.  Then  came  experiments  on
the  mouth  and  tongue ;  the  former  being  opened,  by  the
mesmerist’s  desire,  was  immediately  fixed  and  a  small  quan¬
tity  of  the  ammonia  (we  believe)  being  placed  on  the  latter,
the  question  was  made  whether  he  felt  anything  unpleasant :
he  answered  he  did  not,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  test
was  borne  vindicated  the  truth  of  his  assertion.  Taste  being-
restored  to  him  by  the  counter-passes,  in  an  instant  he  spat
out  the  unpalatable  substance  with  an  expression  of  great
disgust.  Again  the  arm  was  placed  in  durance,  and  a  live


236


Mesmeric  Neivs  from  India.


coal,  or  a  piece  of  burning  wood,  applied — once  or  twice  by
himself  and  at  length  by  Dr.  Esdaile,  vrith  no  indication  of
pain  however,  till  the  charm  was  unwove,  when  the  conscious¬
ness  of  it  was  unmistakably  betrayed  ;  the  mark  of  the  burn
was  there ,  and  the  man  confessed  to  his  endurance,  which
was  instantly  relieved  by  local  mesmerisation  !  Dr.  Esdaile
explained,  as  he  proceeded,  with  that  eloquent  simplicity
which  captivates  and  instructs  us  by  the  readiest  method :  he
might  then  have  led  us  blindfold ;  but  it  was  only  because
we  saw  his  thorough  disdain  of  trickery,  and  felt  assured  our
confidence  could  not  be  misplaced,  where  he  had  afforded
data  which  it  required  but  the  exertion  of  our  own  senses  to
establish  as  irreversible.  It  would  appear  from  what  he  said,
that  he  considers  the  mesmeriser  to  pass  off  a  portion  of  his
own  nervous  fluid  into  the  body  of  the  party  mesmerised.
The  faculties  of  the  individual  being  previously  rendered  inope¬
rative,  he  becomes  as  it  were  a  mirror  reflecting  what  is  done
from  without :  he  acts  no  longer  by  his  own,  but  by  the
volition  of  the  man  who  has  entranced  him,  and  thus  is  made
to  subserve  the  demonstrative  process  of  the  operator.  In
like  manner,  clairvoyance  would  be  but  the  entire  suspension
of  personal  will,  and  an  imitative  representation  of  the  will
of  another.  This  is  intelligible,  as  it  teaches  us  at  once  how
the  inpouring  is  of  the  operator's  mind,  and  that  the  responses
given  are  in  fact  but  its  echo.  But  not  on  these,  or  like  cir¬
cumstances,  does  Dr.  Esdaile  insist  for  confirming  the  value
of  mesmerism ;  he  is  even  averse  to  experiments,  from  motives
of  humanity,  except  indeed  as  they  may  serve  to  throw  new
light  upon  the  favourite  and  wonderful  power.  At  present
he  proclaims  medical  mesmerism  only — bears  evidence  to  the
truthfulness  of  attendant  phenomena,  but  looks  to  the  utility
of  the  science  for  his  mark.  And  who,  that  would  not  write
himself  down  a  fool,  will  presume  to  say  he  is  in  error,  with
the  facts  of  so  many  successful  operations,  without  one  single
calamity,  staring  him  in  the  face  !  The  great  object  of  mes¬
merism,  so  far  as  it  has  as  yet  advanced  is,  to  insure  painless
surgical  operations  on  the  one  hand,  and  perpetuate  cures  of
local  affections,  by  withdrawing  a  superabundance  of  the
nervous  fluid,  on  the  other.  In  reference  to  the  first  we  are
told, —

“  The  flesh  will  quiver  where  the  pincers  tear,

And  sighs  and  tears  by  nature  grow  on  pain.”

Now  in  the  mesmeric  trance  the  pincers  may  tear,  but  neither
does  the  flesh  quiver,  nor  are  sighs  and  tears  elicited — a  proof
that  pain  is  unfelt ;  and  to  doubt  the  declarations  of  those


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Reply  to  Dr.  Todd.


237


who  have  submitted  to  operations  which  human  nature  could
not  otherwise  sustain,  seems  to  us  to  be  the  act  of  prejudice,
or  of  folly  verging  into  madness.  Rheumatism,  headaches,
spinal  affections, — have  each  yielded  to  the  curative  power  of
this  extraordinary  science  :  tumors ,  that  distress  the  sight  by
their  very  magnitude ,  have  been  removed  by  the  knife  without
the  patients  being  aware  of  either  the  relief,  or  the  means  of  it,
till  bidden  to  self-examination ;  and  these,  too,  not  examples
of  here  and  there — one  in  a  hundred  whereof  the  success
achieved  might  be  but  of  chance — but  of  every  day’s  occur¬
rence,  and  in  all  cases  accomplished  without  disaster,  the  men
becoming  their  own  historians,  and  bearing  in  their  recovered
health  the  living  proofs  of  the  substantiality  of  mesmerism.
It  is  to  this  point,  at  least  for  the  present,  that  mesmerism
aspires,  as  it  is  found  to  combine  b armlessness  with  safety,
and  is  known,  beyond  dispute,  never  yet  to  have  failed  where
the  patient  has  come  under  its  influence  :  he  then  who  denies
its  ability  to  perform  what  it  now  purposes,  “  rails  at  the  sun
for  want  of  light,  at  mid-day/”  For  Dr.  Esdaile  himself,  we
have  only  to  express  our  unqualified  admiration — whether  we
advert  to  his  patience,  his  consummate  resolution,  his  clear,
able,  and  impartial  views,  his  indifference  to  other  than  prac¬
tical  utility,  his  scorn  of  all  disguise,  and  his  detestation  of
extravagance  as  exhibited  in  his  straight-forward  manner  of
expatiating  on  the  doctrine  he  professes.  We  perceive  in  all
the  same  singleness  of  object,  the  same  undeviating  con¬
stancy,  which  has  been  created  by  the  steady  virtue  of  the
man  and  the  honest  conviction  of  the  practitioner.  Here  for
the  day  we  must  close :  we  purpose,  to-morrow,  to  give  an
analysis  of  the  mesmeric  theory,  and  to  attempt  an  elucidation
of  the  principles  upon  which  it  acts.  It  is  as  a  science  that
mesmerism  must  be  deemed  invaluable,  while  its  perfect
adaptation  to  the  ends  of  surgery  forms  the  lasting  condemna¬
tion  of  those  who  are  bent  upon  opposing  it  and  denying  its
efficacy. — Indian  Times ,  April  26,  1850.


II.  Reply,  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  to  incorrect  statements  made  in  a
Lecture  delivered  a  few  months  ago,  before  the  College  of
Physicians,  by  Dr.  Todd,  Professor  in  King’s  College,
respecting  a  deeply  interesting  Cure  recorded  by  Dr.
Elliotson  in  The  Zoist  for  October,  1843  (No.  III.)

“  Mesmerism  certainly  is  not  plausible.  That  it  should  be  in  the  power  of
the  mesmeriser,  without  actual  contact,  merely  by  gesticulation  and  by  an  exer¬
tion  of  will,  to  produce  in  his  patient  the  trance  which,  in  the  language  of  the
science,  is  called  somnambulism  ;  that  the  somnambulist  should  lose  his  general


238


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Reply


perception  of  the  exterior  world,  should  not  hear  the  conversation  around  him,
should  not  feel  pressure  from  external  bodies,  should  endure,  without  pain,  a
surgical  operation,  but  should  receive  new  powers  of  perception  with  respect  to
those  with  whom  he  is  put  into  what  they  call  relation,  should  read  their  thoughts,
see  the  state  of  their  internal  organs,  detect  in  them  any  disorder,  and  know  in¬
stinctively  what  are  its  appropriate  remedies, — all  these  are  phenomena  for  which
we  are  unprepared  by  any  previous  experience.  They  are  not,  to  use  a  common
word  in  its  derivative  sense,  likely.  They  do  not  resemble  anything  that  we  have
previously  known.  We  ought  not  to  admit  them,  except  on  proof,  more  than
sufficient  to  support  propositions  supported  by  analogy.  But  it  is  impossible  to
deny  that  to  many  men  of  high  moral  and  scientific  character  the  proofs  already
adduced  have  appeared  sufficient.  Nor  is  it,  we  think,  to  be  denied  that  this
number  is  increasing,  and  that  mesmerism  is  assuming  an  importance  which  must,
at  no  distant  time,  occasion  a  formal  inquiry,  in  which  its  errors,  which  probably
are  many,  will  be  separated  from,  what  we  may  be  sure  are  also  many ,  its  truths.”

“  Dr.  Elliotson  has  all  the  qualities  which  Mr.  Lewis  requires  in  an  unex¬
ceptionable  witness  to  a  matter  of  perception.  The  facts,  so  far  as  they  were
matters  of  perception,  fell  within  the  range  of  his  senses ;  he  attended  to  them  ;
he  possesses  a  fair  amount  of  intelligence  and  memory  ;  and  he  is  free  from  any
sinister  or  misleading  interest.  His  interest,  indeed,  would  have  led  him  to  con¬
ceal  almost  all  that  he  has  told ;  for  his  connexion  with  mesmerism  gave  to  his
reputation  a  taint  of  quackery,  which,  for  a  time,  materially  injured  his  practice.
He  has  also  all  the  rarer  qualities  which  Mr.  Lewis  requires  in  a  competent
authority  in  matters  of  inference, — talents,  learning,  experience,  and  integrity.
If  his  evidence  and  his  opinions  are  to  be  scornfully  rejected  because  he  relates
phenomena  which  are  not  supported  by  analogical  facts,  how  is  the  existence  of
such  phenomena  to  be  proved  ?  Are  we  to  adopt  the  pyrrhonism  which  main¬
tains  that  it  is  more  probable  that  any  amount  of  testimony  should  be  false  than
that  anything  differing  from  what  we  believe  to  be  the  ordinary  course  of  nature
should  have  occurred  ?  On  such  principles  the  King  of  Siam  was  justified  in
disbelieving  that  water  can  become  solid  ;  and  the  Emperor  of  China  might  refuse
to  be  convinced  that  it  is  possible  to  send  a  message  from  Pekin  to  Canton  in  a
second.”

“  No  one  can  doubt  that  phenomena  like  these  deserve  to  be  observed,  re¬
corded,  and  arranged ;  and  whether  we  call  by  the  name  of  Mesmerism,  or  by
any  other  name,  the  science  which  proposes  to  do  this,  is  a  mere  question  of
nomenclature.  Among  those  who  profess  this  science  there  may  be  careless
observers,  prejudiced  recorders,  and  rash  systematises  ;  their  errors  and  defects
may  impede  the  progress  of  knowledge,  but  they  will  not  stop  it.  And  we  have
no  doubt  that  before  the  end  of  this  century,  the  wonders  which  now  perplex
almost  equally  those  who  accept  and  those  who  reject  modern  mesmerism,  will  be
distributed  into  defined  classes,  and  found  subject  to  ascertained  laws  ;  in  other
words,  will  become  the  subjects  of  a  science.” — Edinburgh  Review ,  April,  1850.

Exactly  seven  years  ago, — in  the  number  of  The  Zoist  for
October,  1843, — I  recorded  an  exquisite  mesmeric  cure  per¬
formed  by  myself,  upon  a  lad  fifteen  years  of  age,  who  had
been  completely  deaf  and  dumb  for  two  months  after  a  severe
epileptic  fit.

“I  ascertained  that  four  years  previously  he  had  been  seized
with  a  delirious  epileptic  jit  at  church,  running  out,  beating  his
head  against  the  tomb-stones,  and  then  becoming  violently  convulsed
and  insensible,  and  returning  to  himself  in  five  or  six  hours,  but
feeling  very  ill  till  the  next  morning :  that  he  had  a  second  of  the
same  length  at  the  Queen  Dowager’s  Stables  at  Bushey  Park,  rather
more  than  three  years  ago :  and  a  third  two  years  ago,  from  being
made  drunk  by  two  young  gentlemen  of  Twickenham,  who  engaged


to  the  incorrect  Statements  of  Dr.  Todd.


239


him  to  attend  them  while  fishing,  and  took  nearly  six  quarts  of  ale
with  them,  of  which  they  partook  so  freely  that,  when  the  boy
wished  to  drink  no  more,  they  threatened  to  throw  him  overboard
if  he  did  not  finish  what  was  left,  amounting  to  a  large  quantity.
After  leaving  them,  he  fell  into  a  ditch  and  does  not  know  how  he
got  out:  went  to  his  grandmother’s  and  fell  on  the  floor  convulsed
and  ‘raving  mad,’  and  so  remained  till  the  next  morning,  when,
after  a  short  intermission,  his  convulsions  and  former  delirium  re¬
turned,  intermitting  for  only  short  intervals,  and  he  was  sent  to  the
union  workhouse  and  was  bled,  but  did  not  recover  his  senses  for
five  days,  and  then,  being  allowed  to  go  into  the  yard,  he  got  over
the  wall,  ran  home,  and  was  quite  well  in  a  few  days.”*

Thus  the  fit  whicli  had  left  him  deaf  and  dumb  was  the
fourth, — one  having  occurred  every  year  or  two.

“The  account  given  to  me  by  the  father  was,  that  the  boy  lived
with  him  at  Twickenham,  and  supported  himself  by  fetching  small
periodicals,  about  twice  a  week,  from  London,  and  distributing  them
in  the  neighbourhood.  Rather  more  than  three  weeks  previously,
on  the  1st  of  April,  he  had  gone  as  usual  to  No.  4,  Brydges  Street,
Covent  Garden,  for  books  and  newspapers,  and  had  to  procure  four
dozen  of  ‘  Lloyd' s  Weekly  London  Newspaper.’  He  put  two  dozen
upon  the  counter :  two  dozen  in  his  handkerchief,  with  the  books
on  the  top  of  the  latter,  intending  to  put  the  two  dozen  which  were
upon  the  counter  on  the  top  of  the  books,  and  tie  all  up  together ;
but  he  forgot  those  on  the  counter,  and  tied  up  only  the  books  and
the  Lloyds  which  were  in  the  handkerchief.  On  arriving  at  home,
he  found  only  the  two  dozen  of  the  Lloyds,  and  was  terrified  at  the
idea  of  his  father’s  anger.  His  father  returned  home  at  eight,  ac¬
cused  him  of  being  drunk,  being  himself  by  no  means  a  teetotaller,
and  of  having  spent  the  money  in  liquor.  The  boy  protested  he
had  tasted  only  water  and  tea  the  whole  day.  They  walked  to  Rich¬
mond,  and  the  boy  got  on  an  omnibus  to  go  to  London,  hoping  to
find  his  Lloyds  where  he  had  left  them.  He  remembers  nothing
more  after  this  than  that  he  one  day  ‘  awoke  as  from  a  deep  sleep,
in  a  strange  place ;  began  looking  around  him,  tried  in  vain  to  speak,
and  could  not  hear  any  noise  at  all.  Seeing  a  board  over  the  fire¬
place  with  the  words  King’s  College  Hospital  upon  it,  he  learnt
where  he  was.’  The  father  ascertained  that  when  he  returned  to
the  newspaper  office  his  papers  had  been  carried  off  by  some  one,
and  no  more  were  to  be  had  till  the  next  day  ;  that  he  had  gone  to
a  neighbouring  coffee  house,  been  seized  with  a  most  violent  epileptic
Jit,\  and  carried  by  the  police  to  King’s  College  Hospital,  where  he
lay  perfectly  insensible  for  four  days  and  five  nights.”

I  presently  obtained  the  clearest  proofs  that  he  was  com¬
pletely  deaf  and  dumb.

“  It  required  very  little  sagacity  of  observation  to  know  in  five

*  No.  III.,  p.  341-2.

f  Frightfully  convulsed  and  foaming  at  the  mouth.


240


Dr.  Elliot  sonh  Reply


minutes  that  the  boy  was  completely  deaf  and  dumb.  He  could  not
hear  the  loudest  or  shrillest  sound,  or  make  an}'  noise  above  the
faintest  puffy  or  mere  breath-sound,  however  forcibly  he  expired.”

After  my  restoration  of  his  hearing  and  voice  the  poor
lad  wrote  me  out  an  account,  from  which  the  following  is  an
extract : —

“Then  I  knew  where  I  was,  and  I  found  that  all  was  very  quiet,*
and  I  tried  to  speak  and  could  not ;  and  when  the  doctors  came  they
asked  me  a  great  many  questions  ;j*  but  the  writing  has  got  so  dull,
that  I  cannot  make  out  many  of  the  questions ;  and  Doctor  Guy
asked  me  if  I  had  ever  had  the  hands  passed  before  my  eyes,  and
I  told  him  no ;  and  when  the  students  came,  they  began  asking  me
such  foolish  questions,  one  was  this,  ‘  Does  your  mother  know  you
are  out?’  and  this  is  my  answer,  ‘That  is  joking;  but  still  she
knows  that  I  am  not  at  home  now.’ — *  Have  you  ever  been  in  the
same  way  before  V  ‘  I  have  had  fits,  but  not  been  so  bad  before.’ —
*  What  is  the  ring  for?’  ‘For  fits.’ — ‘But  that  does  not  do  you
any  good?’  ‘No,  not  now,  sir.’  And  then  Dr.  Todd  hallooed  in
my  ear,  and  asked  me  if  I  felt  it,  and  I  told  him  that  I  heard  a
noise  like  a  pot  boiling ;  and  a  great  many  other  foolish  questions
they  asked  me.  And  a  young  man  in  the  hospital  told  me  that  Dr.
Todd  said  cuckoo  in  my  ear,  and  then  they  wrote  down  that  I  should
not  have  any  food  till  I  spoke  and  asked  them  for  some,  but  they
gave  me  some  when  I  told  them  I  could  not  ask  them  for  any ;  and
one  day  Dr.  Budd  saw  me,  and  he  said,  ‘  Oh,  the  damn  young
scoundrel,  he  is  only  shamming :  if  I  was  Dr.  Todd,  I  would  whip
him  till  he  did  speak ;’  the  sister  told  me  ;  she  wrote  it  down  ;  and
when  Dr.  Todd  came,  I  told  him,  and  he  told  me  to  take  off  my
jacket  and  shirt,  and  he  would  give  me  the  whip ;  and  I  did  take
them  off,  but  he  did  not  whip  me,  and  then  he  ordered  me  a  cold
shower  bath  every  morning,  and  I  had  it  five  times ;  and  one  day
when  father  came  to  see  me,  Dr.  Russell,  the  house-surgeon,  told
him  that  it  was  of  no  use  him  keeping  me  there  any  longer,  so
father  brought  me  out  with  him,  after  I  had  been  in  twenty-one
days.

“  I  do  not  know  what  they  did  to  me  when  there,  during  the
time  I  was  insensible,  which  was  four  days  and  five  nights,  only  a
young  man,  a  patient  in  the  hospital,  told  me  that  they  thrust  pins
in  me,  and  burnt  me  with  hot  spoons,  and  done  several  other  things
to  me  as  well,  to  make  me  speak.”

Three  years  afterwards  I  met  Dr.  Todd  at  a  party  in
Eaton  Square,  at  the  house  of  my  most  excellent  friend,
Mr.  Moffatt,  the  Member  for  Dartmouth,  who,  knowing  by
observation  that  mesmerism  is  true,  has  the  benevolence  and
moral  courage  to  subscribe  to  the  Mesmeric  Infirmary.  Dr.
Todd  began  to  speak  of  my  account  of  the  case ;  and  added

*  All  was  a  dead  silence,  and  he  soon  discovered  he  was  deaf.

f  The  communications  were  made  in  writing,  and  with  a  pencil  only.


to  the  incorrect  Statements  of  Dr.  Todd.  241

that  if  he  were  a  censor  of  the  College  of  Physicians  he  would
summon  me  before  the  college.  I  told  him  that  I  should  be
delighted  to  receive  and  obey  such  a  summons,  for  I  had
written  nothing  but  truth.  His  complaint  against  me  was
that  I  represented  him  as  having  considered  the  boy  an  im¬
postor  when  under  his  care  in  King’s  College  Hospital;
whereas —

“  He  had  never  thought  the  case  to  be  one  of  imposition,  and
had  taken  great  interest  in  it,  and  pointed  it  out  to  his  pupils.  I
replied  that  whenever  I  found  myself  to  have  made  an  erroneous
statement  respecting  any  person,  or  to  have  held  a  wrong  opinion
on  any  point,  I  would  make  a  point  of  retracting ;  and  that  I  would
declare  in  The  Zoist  that,  notwithstanding  the  boy  had  assured  me
that  he  was  throughout  treated  as  an  impostor  in  King’s  College
Hospital,  and  been  made  game  of  by  physicians  and  pupils.  Dr.
Todd  had  never  for  an  instant  thought  him  an  impostor.  But  I
added  that  the  boy  was  watched  narrowly  by  myself  and  others  in
my  house,  and  satisfied  us  that  he  spoke  the  truth  whenever  we
could  judge  of  what  he  said ;  and  that  I  had  found  the  humbler
classes  just  as  truthful,  just  as  honest,  just  as  charitable,  just  as
virtuous  in  all  respects  as  those  above  them  :  that  I  had  the  addi¬
tional  reason  for  believing  his  assertion  that  Dr.  Todd,  like  Dr.  Budd
and  Dr.  Guy,  and  the  rest,  considered  him  to  be  an  impostor,  be¬
cause  Dr.  Todd  treated  him  as  an  impostor.  ‘  Oh  yes,’  replied  Dr.
Todd,  ‘  we  put  him  to  all  kinds  of  tests — some  of  them  pretty  severe
ones,  I  assure  you :  he  was  pumped  upon,  blistered,  and  had  a
number  of  severe  things  done  which  I  forget.’  *  What,’  rejoined  I,
‘you  never  doubted  the  reality  of  his  case,  and  yet  you  treated  him
with  severity  as  an  impostor!’

“  I  have  now  fulfilled  my  promise ;  but  fancy  it  would  have  been
better  for  us  to  have  believed  that  Dr.  Todd  mistakingly  thought
him  an  impostor,  than  that  Dr.  Todd  treated  him  as  an  impostor
without  ever  thinking  he  was  one. — After  all,  I  did  not  once,  either
in  No.  III.  or  No.  XIV.,  say  that  Dr.  Todd  had  thought  him  an
impostor.  My  words  were  that  he  was  ‘  treated  as  an  impostor  by
Dr.  Todd  and  others,’  and  this  it  appears  on  Dr.  Todd’s  acknowledg¬
ment  was  the  truth.”*

Dr.  Todd  had  no  idea  of  the  true  nature  of  the  case :  was
perfectly  ignorant  that  the  boy  had  been  suddenly  convulsed  and
seized  with  all  the  characteristics  of  an  epileptic ,  till  I  informed
him  upon  this  occasion.  He  fancied  the  boy  had  been  seized
with  sudden  hysterical  insensibility,  on  recovery  from  which
he  remained  paralyzed  in  speech  and  hearing.  He  had  not
inquired  enough  into  the  case  to  know  this  :  nor  that  the  boy
had  three  decided  epileptic  fits  before.  But  all  this  I  stated  to
him  :  and  he  had  nothing  to  reply.


*  No.  XVI.,  p.  454.


242


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Reply


“  Dr.  Todd  remarked  to  me  that  it  was  a  very  striking  case,  and
that  he  had  pointed  it  out  as  such  to  the  students ;  that  it  was  an
instance  of  sudden  suspension  of  power  in  certain  nervous  parts
without  any  other  symptom.  I  replied  that  it  did  not  appear  to  me
wonderful,  that  is,  of  an  uncommon  nature ;  that  it  was  simply  an
instance  of  a  very  common  fact,  the  loss  of  power  of  some  nervous
part  after  an  epileptic  fit.  Master  Salmon  lost  the  use  of  his  legs
after  a  fit,  and  not  many  months  pass  without  my  seeing  palsy  of
sensation  or  motion  in  some  part  or  other,  or  loss  of  memory,  or
even  fatuity,  after  a  fit :  and  the  loss  remains  sometimes  a  few
minutes,  sometimes  days,  weeks,  months,  and  sometimes  perma¬
nently.  Dr.  Todd  assured  me  he  had  never  heard  of  the  occurrence
of  any  fit  in  the  case.  But  the  diligent  investigation  which  I  had
made  of  it  disclosed  that  the  palsy  of  speech  and  hearing  followed
a  violent  epileptic  fit,  that  he  was  taken  into  the  hospital  in  the
coma  of  this  fit,  and  that  several  other  epileptic  fits  had  occurred
previously.  Indeed  afterwards  he  had  an  epileptic  fit  on  being
frightened  at  hearing  while  waiting  at  table  a  conversation  about
deafness,  dumbness,  and  blindness.  So  imperfectly  was  Dr.  Todd
acquainted  with  the  case  and  its  cure.”

I  told  Dr.  Todd  of  this  other  fit  which  the  boy  had  from
emotion  in  Yorkshire  while  waiting  at  dinner ,  after  his  restora¬
tion  by  mesmerism;  that  it  was  perfectly  epileptic,  character¬
ized  by  complete  insensibility ,  violent  convulsions,  and

EOAMINO  AT  THE  MOUTH.

Dr.  Todd  next  rejected  the  fact  that  mesmerism  had  been
of  any  use.

“Dr.  Todd  then  added  that  mesmerism  had  not  cured  him:  that
he  would  have  got  well  by  nature  at  last.  This  is  what  we  are
always  told  by  our  opponents  when  we  effect  a  cure.  But  why  did
not  the  patients  get  well  under  our  opponents,  who  had  all  the
opportunity  they  could  desire  of  putting  all  their  useless  plans  into
execution.  It  is  strange  that  nature  should  be  so  fond  of  us  mes¬
merists,  that,  after  baffling  the  doctors  tied  ancieni  aviso  ant  bono  aut
mauvaiso,  as  the  presiding  doctor  says  in  Moliere,  she  so  often  cures
the  patients  either  as  soon  as  we  take  them  in  hand,  or  allows  the
cure  to  begin  to  shew  itself  soon  after  we  begin.  If  ever  patient  was
cured  by  art,  this  boy  was  by  mesmerism.  For  not  only  were  full
and  numerous  mesmeric  effects  produced,  but,  finding  that  I  could
produce  great  pain  during  his  mesmeric  state  in  the  palsied  parts  by
pointing  my  fingers  on  them,  I  at  length  one  day ,  having  an  hour  or
two  to  spare ,  resolved  that  before  he  left  the  house  he  should,  if
possible,  be  cured.  I  began  pointing  my  fingers  in  his  ears:  pro¬
duced  dreadful  agony :  and  he  at  length  heard.  I  then  did  the  same
with  the  root  of  his  tongue,  and  at  length  he  spoke.  To  say  that
mesmerism  did  not  cure  him,  is  tantamount  to  saying  that  when  the
blacksmith  hammers  his  red-hot  iron,  he  does  not  fashion  it  into  the
shapes  it  takes.  I  entreat  every  medical  man  who  reads  this  page  to
read  also  the  passages  to  which  I  have  referred.  Possibly  the  lad


to  the  incorrect  Statements  of  Dr.  Todd.


243


would  have  recovered  his  hearing  and  speech  at  last.  But  when  ?
he  might  have  remained  deaf  and  dumb  for  monthg—for  years — for
ever.  I  have  seen  palsy  of  sensation  or  of  motion  in  various  situa¬
tions  after  fits  remain  for  life.  Miss  Issell  was  dumb  and  fatuitous
too — her  intellectual  organs  palsied — seven  years  and  a  half :  and
lo!  at  the  end  of  a  fortnight ,  mesmerism  effected  the  commencement
of  her  cure.  Would  it  be  rational  to  doubt  that  mesmerism  effected
her  cure?  If  it  would  be,  then  let  sleep  after  opium,  and  vomiting
after  ipecacuanha,  be  doubted  and  pronounced  coincidences  and
effects  of  nature;  both  which  of  course  they  often  are  when  no  sopo¬
rific,  no  emetic,  has  been  taken,  no  art  employed  to  induce  them.”

Miss  Issell,  to  whose  case  reference  has  just  been  made —

“  On  the  20th  of  November  or  December,  1839,  while  returning
from  a  place  of  worship,  was  struck  to  the  ground  by  lightning.
The  shock  rendered  her  dumb,  with  the  exception  of  the  ability  to
say  *  yes’  or  £  no’  by  a  very  great  effort,  and  by  taking  a  deep  in¬
spiration.  She  was  confined  to  her  bed  and  sofa  for  about  ten  weeks.

(e  Medical  aid  was  employed,  but  to  little  or  no  purpose.

“  As  soon  as  she  could  be  removed,  she  was  taken  to  Plymouth
to  consult  one  of  the  first  medical  men  there,  who,  before  the  mother
had  time  to  finish  her  account  of  the  case ,  pronounced  the  poor  girl
to  be  an  impostor.  He  was  so  angry  as  to  swear ,  and  told  her  to
go  home,  saying  she  could  speak  if  she  would,  and  that  it  was  her
wickedness  and  craft  that  made  her  seem  dumb.  There  is  a  man
there  who  has  treated  other  patients  in  the  same  way.  Notwith¬
standing  this  ignorant  and  cruel  .medical  opinion  of  this  'one  of  the
first  medical  men  in  Plymouth,’  she  grew  worse  and  worse.  Her
intellect  deteriorated  so  much,  that  she  could  no  longer  write  her
own  name  or  calculate  any  numbers,  and  she  could  not  be  trusted
out  by  herself.  Her  sleep  became  so  unsound,  that  after  the  acci¬
dent  no  one  ever  saw  her  asleep ;  whenever  her  mother  stole  into
her  bed-room,  she  was  always  awake,  the  slightest  sound  rousing
her,  I  presume,  as  it  does  a  bird.  She  lost  her  appetite,  and  her
strength  declined ;  her  extremities  became  cold  and  her  pulse  feeble.

“She  was  placed  under  Mr.  Davey’s  mesmerisation  on  the  11th
of  March,  1846,  at  Dartmouth,  where  he  had  been  lecturing ;  and
after  her  cure  she  was  removed  from  thence  to  Plymouth,  and  brought
forward  at  his  lectures  as  a  proof  of  the  efficacy  of  mesmerism  in
such  cases.  She  remained  in  his  family  about  ten  weeks.

“It  took  Mr.  Davey  fifteen  days  to  produce  sleep.  From  this
time — after  the  first  mesmeric  sleep — her  health  improved,  she
began  to  grow  strong  and  look  well,  to  sleep  soundly,  to  eat  well;
she  recovered  her  intellect,  and  she  began  to  speak  intelligibly:  and
in  three  months  after  mesmerism  was  begun,  she  was  married,  at
St.  Andrew’s  Church,  Plymouth,  by  the  vicar,  the  Rev.  John
Hatchard,  to  Mr.  Stabb,  to  whom  she  had  been  engaged  before  she
was  struck  with  lightning;  but  her  distressing  state  had  for  seven
years  and  a  half  prevented  the  marriage.”*

*  “  ‘  One  of  the  first  medical  men’  in  Plymouth,  who  swore  at  this  afflicted


244


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Reply


The  cure  of  dumbness  from  palsy  of  the  tongue  effected
by  Dr.  Esdaile  was  exactly  parallel.  After  remaining  a  year
in  this  unhappy  state,  the  boy  was  mesmerised,  and  on  the
eighth  day  articulation  began,  and  on  the  ninth  he  could  read
intelligibly.  See  above,  p.  232.

In  another  case  to  which  wre  shall  in  a  moment  find  that
Dr.  Todd  joyously  refers,  the  recovery  was  slow  indeed,  and
the  roaring  of  the  sea  was  not  heard  till  above  two  years  had
elapsed  :  for  mesmerism  was  despised.

The  following  is  a  minute  account  of  the  cure  of  my
patient :  —

“  I  determined  on  doing  what  I  could  for  him  with  mesmerism  :
and,  standing  before  him,  made  slow  passes  downwards  before  his
face,  and  after  a  time  merely  pointed  the  fingers  of  one  hand  to  his
eyes.  The  former  had  no  sensible  effect  ;  but,  when  I  merely
pointed,  his  eyelids  presently  began  to  wink,  and  continued  winking

girl  and  off-hand  pronounced  her  an  impostor,  did  only  as  too  many  of  his
brethren,  often  through  their  lamentable  ignorance  of  the  phenomena  and  exist¬
ence  of  a  curious  class  of  nervous  diseases,  are  in  the  habit  of  doing  when
speaking  of  such  cases,  and  especially  when  consulted  on  them  and  not  likely  to
obtain  much  profit  by  them,  as  in  this  instance,  or,  after  having  made  a  good
profit,  and  tried  all  things,  even  the  most  painful  and  distressing,  except  the
proper  remedy,  they  find  they  have  done  no  good.  Thus  the  two  Okeys,  who
were  cured  of  severe  epilepsy  many  years  ago,  and  are  alive  and  well,  were
pitilessly  called  by  Mr.  Wakley  impostors.  Thus  the  young  lady  who  had
laboured  under  chorea  and  distressing  spasm  for  years,  as  detailed  in  my
pamphlet,  Numerous  Cases  of  Surgical  Operations  without  pain  in  the  Mesmeric
State,  p.  86,  sq.,  was  so  pronounced  by  Dr.  Marshall  Hall.  After  having
cupped  her  every  five  days,  and  given  her  mercury  till  not  a  tooth  is  left  sound  in
her  head,  he,  as  soon  as  he  heard  that  mesmerism  was  being  tried  in  her  case,
declared  himself  perfectly  certain  that  the  disease  was  feigned.  Unfortunately
three  years  more  have  elapsed,  and  her  condition  is,  as  I  always  predicted  to  her
mesmeriser,  as  bad  as  before.  Had  she  recovered,  she  might  have  been  married.
One  was  ready  to  espouse  her,  and  she  him  :  but  all  was  hopeless,  and  he  is  mar¬
ried  to  another.  Mighty  reasons  had  she,  and  has  she,  to  feign  !  Miss  Issell  had
as  good  reason  to  feign.  She  was  engaged ;  but,  through  her  illness,  the  marriage
was  delayed  for  nearly  eight  years  :  and,  as  soon  as  ever  mesmerism  put  an  end
to  it,  she  and  her  lover  were  united.  If  the  exciting  cause  of  her  loss  of  speech
was  not  evident  and  sufficient,  if  the  bad  state  of  her  intellect  and  general  health
was  not  evident  and  sufficient,  to  prove  her  no  impostor  ;  the  delay  of  the  mar¬
riage,  to  which  no  other  obstacle  existed,  for  nearly  eight  years,  ought  to  be  proof
enough  of  reality.  I  never  heard  of  a  woman  who,  when  devoted  to  a  man,  all
anxious  for  the  marriage,  chose  for  no  reason  upon  earth  to  live  ununited  till  she
was  seven  or  eight  years  further  advanced  in  womanhood.  The  young  man  of
Tinsbury,  whose  beautiful  case  of  sleep-waking  was  recorded  by  an  able  physician
in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society,  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,  and
whose  case  was  only  like  endless  others  recorded  in  books  and  seen  by  all  persons
of  extensive  practice,  respecting  the  genuineness  of  which  no  well-informed  phy¬
sician  can  entertain  a  shadow  of  doubt,  as  I  have  pointed  out  at  full  length  in  my
Pamphlet,  into  which  the  whole  is  extracted,  was  as  boldly  as  ignorantly  pro¬
nounced  by  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  in  the  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  an
impostor ;  and,  without  any  notice  of  the  ample  proofs  I  gave  of  the  genuineness
of  the  case,  has  been  lately  with  the  same  ignorance  and  boldness  so  pronounced
by  him  a  second  time.” — No.  XVI.,  p.  451.


to  the  incorrect  Statements  of  Dr.  Todd.


245


more  and  more  strongly  to  the  end  of  the  half  hour  which  I  resolved
to  devote  to  him.  The  next  day,  and  ever  afterwards,  the  eyes  began
winking  as  soon  as  I  pointed  to  them.  The  winking  became  stronger
and  stronger,  and  the  itching  and  smarting  of  the  eyes  obliged  him
to  rub  them  violently:  the  upper  eyelid  descended  more  and  more,
remaining  still  for  a  short  time  when  it  quite  descended,  and  remain¬
ing  still  in  this  position  longer  and  longer,  till  after  a  few  days  the
eyes  continued  closed  for  some  moments,  there  being  evidently
snatches  of  sleep.  The  effect  was  invariably  less  the  instant  I
changed  the  pointing  to  passes  and  soon  ceased  altogether.  The
periods  of  sleep  lasted  longer  and  longer,  his  body  bending  forwards,
and  he  snoring,  but  soon  starting  up  again  awake.  The  sleep  in¬
creased  in  duration,  and  now  he  occasionally  did  not  snore.  In  a
fortnight,  I  had  only  to  point  to  his  eves  two  or  three  seconds,  and
he  always  dropped  into  the  profoundest  sleep,  not  waking  for  a
quarter  or  half-an-hour,  or'  till  I  awoke  him.  If  he  awoke  spon¬
taneously,  I  always  sent  him  at  once  to  sleep  again,  that  he  might
have  his  complete  half  hour  of  mesmerism.

“On  Sunday  afternoon,  May  14th,  I  was  sitting  between  him
asleep  with  his  head  against  the  wall,  and  another  patient  who,  in
her  somnambulism,  never  allows  me  to  leave  her,  though  she  invari¬
ably  mistakes  me  for  one  of  her  sisters,  her  father,  or  some  one  else
whom  she  loves;  and  not  having  found  any  improvement  in  him,  I
resolved  to  mesmerise  locally:  and  therefore,  as  I  sat,  pointed  my
right  forefinger  into  his  left  ear ,  and  rested  my  other  fingers  and
thumb  behind  and  under  his  ear.  In  five  minutes,  he  all  at  once
became  agitated,  emptied  his  pockets,  putting  some  things  in  his
bosom,  some  under  him,  clenched  his  fists,  and  struck  about,  not,
however,  very  violently,  and  still  sitting.  On  waking,  he  stared  at
finding  his  waistcoat  pockets  turned  inside  out,  and  at  my  pointing
out  to  him  that  some  of  his  little  articles  were  in  his  chair  and  a
little  song  book  crumpled  up  and  stuck  near  his  shoulder  half  under
his  cravat,  he  shook  his  head  and  wrote  that  he  had  been  dream¬
ing  of  fighting.  I  was  too  busy  for  two  or  three  days  to  do  more
than  send  him  to  sleep  and  trust  to  the  general  influence  of  mesmer¬
ism  for  the  local  benefit.  But  on  the  Thursday  I  began  to  point  my
fingers  into  both  his  ears  for  some  time  during  his  sleep:  and  he
then  began  to  express  pain  in  them  and  around,  as  he  slept.  In  two
days  more,  the  pain  was  felt  at  various  hours  when  he  was  awake,
and  rapidly  increased,  till  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  week  it  was
dreadful,  and  when  I  had  sent  him  to  sleep,  he  not  only  put  his
hands  to  his  ears,  but  struck  them  violently,  drew  up  his  legs  and
kicked,  struck  his  head  against  the  wall  next  to  which  he  sat  with  a
large  cushion  for  his  head,  as  my  easy  chairs  and  sofa  were  occupied
with  other  patients  fast  asleep,  the  tears  rolled  copiously  down  his
cheeks,  his  face  was  flushed,  and  he  sometimes  was  almost  frantic :
but  made  not  the  faintest  noise  all  this  time,  nor  did  he  awake.  I
was  obliged  at  last  to  lay  him  on  the  floor  in  his  sleep.  The  pains
agonized  him  in  the  waking  state  and  it  was  distressing  to  see  him
come  to  me  every  morning,  with  his  cheeks  flushed,  his  eyes  red
VOL.  VIII.  T


246


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Reply


with  crying  and  his  cheeks  wet  with  tears,  his  handkerchief  in  his
hand,  and  his  countenance  expressive  of  the  most  intense  suffering.
He  walked  from  beyond  Twickenham  and  back  every  day,  a  distance
altogether  of  two  and  twenty  miles.  He  had  become  so  susceptible,
that  pointing  at  him  even  with  any  thing,  or  gazing  intently  at  him
immediately  made  his  eyelids  quiver,  and  in  two  moments  always  sent
him  into  his  deep  sleep;  which,  however,  did  not  last  above  a  quarter
of  an  hour  or  twenty  minutes,  and  required  to  be  renewed,  unless  ex¬
periments  were  made  upon  him,  and  then  he  would  sleep  very  long.
Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  of  Fairfield  House,  near  York,  was  with  me
one  day,  and  made  longitudinal  passes  down  his  arm ;  when  we
found  it  extend  and  grow  rigid,  but  it  soon  came  down.  The  phe¬
nomenon  was  induced  more  easily  and  efficiently  from  this  time,  and
continued  longer  and  longer  the  oftener  the  attempt  was  made.  All
his  extremities  could  now  be  stiffened  at  pleasure.  The  extended
limbs  would  suddenly  relax,  as  we  observed  in  the  Okeys:  but  could
be  kept  up  almost  indefinitely  by  making  a  pass  or  two  down  them
when  they  began  to  descend  slowly.  Breathing  upon  an  extremity
instantly  caused  it  to  relax.  Sometimes  if  one  extremity  was  acted
upon,  the  corresponding,  and  at  last  all  four,  would  rise.  If  any
part  was  pressed  against  with  the  point  of  the  finger  or  any  thing
else,  it  immediately  pushed  against  the  object:  a  finger  on  his  nose
caused  his  head  to  rise  and  move  forwards:  if  put  on  the  back  of
his  head,  his  head  pushed  backwards:  if  on  his  arm,  his  arm  rose.

"  One  day  (May  1 7th,)  a  day  or  two  before  the  pains  were
evident,  and  three  days  after  I  first  put  my  fingers  into  his  ears,
while  asleep  he  appeared  in  a  dream :  held  up  one  finger  and  inclined
his  head  forward  and  a  little  sideways  in  the  most  natural,  and  there¬
fore  beautiful,  attitude  of  listening,  for  a  short  time.  A  day  or  two
afterwards,  while  asleep,  he  suddenly  rose  from  his  chair,  walked  to
the  door,  pushing  against  things  in  his  w'ay,  opened  the  door,  took
the  proper  direction  in  the  hall  towards  the  street  door,  but  knocked
against  a  bust  at  a  corner  where  he  had  to  turn,  walked  towards  the
street  door,  and  seated  himself  in  a  chair,  upon  which  he  habitually
sat  while  waiting  for  me,  though  he  would  have  sat  too  near  the
edge  but  that  I  pushed  it  fully  under  him.  I  was  obliged  to  leave
him  in  the  care  of  a  servant;  but  he  awoke  in  five  minutes,  and  was
brought  back  to  me,  shaking  his  head  and  smiling,  puzzled  and
amused  at  finding  what  must  have  happened.  On  the  Thursday  of
the  week  in  which  his  pain  had  become  so  severe,  the  second  week
of  pain,  May  25th,  I  was  less  busy,  and  resolved  to  bestow  half-an-
hour  or  an  hour  upon  him,  and  if  possible  restore  his  hearing  and
speech  that  morning.  As  he  lay  on  the  floor,  several  gentlemen
being  in  the  room,  I  sat  behind  his  head,  held  it  raised  as  w'ell  as  I
could,  and  inserted  the  extremities  of  my  fore-fingers  in  his  ears.
This  was  rather  troublesome  to  continue,  as  he  tossed  his  head  in
all  directions,  and  struck  his  arms  and  legs  about  from  time  to  time
with  agony.  At  last  he  awoke,  and  on  my  making  some  observation
he  smiled: — He  had  recovered  his  hearing ,  but  he  could  not  utter  a
sound.  I  sent  him  to  sleep  again:  and  kept  the  points  of  all  my


to  the  incorrect  Statements  of  Dr.  Todd.  247

fingers  under  the  front  of  his  lower  jaw,  against  the  root  of  his
tongue  and  his  larynx  at  the  top  of  the  windpipe.  After  a  time,  he
began  to  make  efforts  to  speak,  the  root  of  the  tongue  and  the  larynx
moving  and  the  former  swelling.  At  length  an  expiratory  sound
was  audible,  louder  than  the  faint  breathing  sound  hitherto  heard
when  he  strained  to  make  a  noise.  I  persevered  with  my  fingers,
and  his  efforts  increased.  The  sound  augmented:  actually  became
strong  :  and  then  he  half  articulated,  and  at  last  spoke  perfectly  well,
waking  in  the  midst  of  the  efforts.

“  The  joy  of  all  present  can  be  imagined.  Mr.  Thompson
walked  across  the  room,  shook  my  hand  in  the  warmth  of  his  heart,
and  the  next  day  provided  for  the  boy  by  taking  him  into  his  estab¬
lishment  in  Yorkshire,  having  heard  from  my  steward-butler,  who
has  lived  with  me  very  many  years,  that  the  poor  boy’s  conduct  had
always  appeared  to  him  strikingly  good  and  that  he  thought  very
highly  of  his  character.”

If  any  one  who  reads  these  particulars  with  a  sincere  love
of  truth,  overcoming  his  miserable  feelings  should  his  organi¬
zation  and  education  have  given  rise  to  any,  let  him  seriously
consider  the  result  of  mesmerism  in  this  attack  of  deafness
and  dumbness.  He  lay  insensible  in  King’s  College  Hospital
four  days  and  five  nights :  he  remained  deaf  and  dumb  above
seven  iveetcs,  the  routine  of  practice  being  followed,  and  mes¬
merism  despised.  In  his  second  attack,  August  24,  1843,
precisely  the  same  in  character  and  intensity,  he  was  recovered
from  the  insensibility  by  Mr.  Thompson,  with  mesmerism,  in
half  an  hour.

“  I  immediately  went  and  mesmerised  him,  in  half  an  hour  he
came  to  his  senses,  and  made  signs  that  he  would  write,  and  that  he
could  not  speak,  or  hear,  or  see.  I  mesmerised  his  eyes,  when  he
opened  them,  but  the  pupil  was  dilated  and  they  appeared  to  be
quite  insensible  to  light.  I  mesmerised  him  again,  and  he  then  got
the  use  of  his  eyes,  but  he  still  continued  deaf  and  dumb.”

He  was  recovered  from  deafness  and  dumbness  with
mesmerism  by  Mr.  Thompson  in  five  days.

“August  29th. — I  cannot  help  writing  you  a  line  to-night,  as  I
am  certain  you  will  be  glad  to  hear  the  lad  has  recovered  his  hearing
and  speech  ;  to-day  I  mesmerised  him  still  more,  and  dropped  mes¬
merised  water  into  his  ears.  He  wrote,  that  he  heard  a  roaring  like
a  waterfall,  and  a  sensation  as  if  I  thrust  a  hot  iron  into  his  ear.
However,  though  I  continued  to  mesmerise  him  for  an  hour  and  a
half,  there  was  no  symptom  of  his  recovering.  After  he  left  me,
the  sensation  of  heat  increased,  and  he  began  to  feel  acute  pain  in
his  ears  and  back  of  his  head,  and  he  came  back  to  me  in  hopes  I
should  be  able  to  relieve  him.  I  mesmerised  him,  and  he  was  so
violent,  that  another  man  and  myself  could  scarcely  hold  him
down.  *  *  *  *  He  at  last  fell  into  a  quiet  state,  and  after  he  had


218


Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Reply


remained  so  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  I  blew  in  his  face,  when  he  awoke.
At  first  he  was  not  aware  that  he  could  either  hear  or  speak,  and
was  much  astonished  to  find  he  was  restored.”

The  cure  was  effected  with  mesmerism  so  much  sooner  on
this  occasion,  because  he  had  been  rendered  very  susceptible
by  me,  whereas  on  the  first  occasion  I  had  to  w ork  up  suscep¬
tibility  in  him.

While  he  was  under  my  treatment,  he  went  to  King's
College  Hospital  to  carry  a  nosegay  to  the  nurse,  who  had
been  very  kind  to  him,  and  he  saw  the  doctors :  after  his  cure
he  went  to  show  himself  to  the  doctors.  They  did  their
utmost  to  prevent  him  from  trying  mesmerism  after  their  own
failure  :  and  when  he  was  cured  shewed  no  Christian,  no
King's  College,  joy  at  his  recovery.

“  The  following  is  a  part  of  a  letter  from  him  to  me  after  he  was
settled  in  Yorkshire:  —

“  ‘  And  when  I  went  to  see  them,  they  told  me  that  mesmerism
would  never  do  me  any  good,  and  they  told  me  it  was  no  use  to  come
to  you  to  be  mesmerised;  they  wrote  it  down,  and  they  told  me  to
come  again  and  see  them  again.  And  when  I  went  again  I  could
speak  and  hear,  and  they  said  to  me.  Well,  have  you  got  your  tongue
yet?  and  I  said,  Yes;  and  Dr.  Todd  said.  How’s  that?  is  that  with
mesmerising?  and  I  said.  Yes,  and  he  said.  Do  you  really  think  that
you  have  been  cured  by  mesmerism?  and  I  said,  Yes;  and  they
said.  Oh  foolish  boy,  you  should  not  think  that,  because  you  would
have  got  your  speech  and  hearing  just  as  soon  if  you  had  stopped
here  ;  and  I  said  to  them.  What  made  you  send  me  home  then  if
you  could  have  cured  me?  and  then  they  began  laughing  at  me,  and
I  told  them  I  did  not  come  there  for  to  be  made  game  of ;  and  then
they  said,  That  will  be  a  fine  thing  for  Dr.  Elliotson  to  make  some¬
thing  of :  and  then  they  asked  me  a  great  many  questions,  but  they
laughed  at  me  so  that  I  would  not  answer  them  ;  and  the  questions
were  about  Dr.  Elliotson ;  and  they  would  laugh  at  me  so  that  I
would  not  stop  any  longer.’

“Another  note  from  him  ended  thus:  —

“  *  And  they  made  all  manner  of  game  of  me,  and  laughed  at  me,
and  said  that  I  was  a  foolish  boy  to  believe  that  Dr.  Elliotson  had
cured  me  by  mesmerism.  But  I  told  them  that  he  had  certainly
cured  me.  And  I  said  this,  that  I  had  no  hearing  or  speech  when
1  went  to  him,  and  that  now  I  could  both  hear  and  speak.’  ”


I  at  length  come  to  Dr.  Todd's  lecture,  to  which  all  I
have  said  has  been  preliminary.

“On  the  second  of  April,  1843,  a  boy,  Alfred  Russon,  set.  16,
was  brought  into  King’s  College  Hospital  in  a  state  of  what  I  must
call  hysterical  coma,  or,  to  connect  it  with  phenomena  otherwise  pro-


to  the  incorrect  Statements,  of  Dr.  Todd.


249


duced,  mesmeric  coma.  The  only  history  we  could  obtain  of  him
was  that  he  had,  about  two  o’clock  in  the  morning,  walked  into  a
coffee  shop  in  Drury  Lane,  where  he  was  found  sitting  in  one  of  the
boxes,  speechless  and  insensible.  He  was  handed  over  to  the  police,
by  whom  he  was  brought  to  the  hospital.  The  house-physician
found  him  sitting  erect  on  a  chair,  his  eves  widely  open  and  motion¬
less,  pupils  dilated,  and  presenting  an  undulating  motion  when  the
candle  was  placed  near  them ;  conjunctive  rather  injected;  counte¬
nance  expressive  of  astonishment ;  respiration  easy,  although  a  little
quicker  than  it  ought  to  be;  power  of  deglutition  perfect;  no  spasm
or  twitchiug  of  any  single  muscle.  The  most  remarkable  feature  was
his  utter  insensibility  to  every  external  impression ;  even  the  rough¬
est  treatment  produced  no  effect  upon  him ;  the  splashing  of  cold
water,  shaking,  pinching,  shouting  in  his  ears,  seemed  to  make  no
impression.  He  had  walked  into  the  hospital  between  two  police¬
men:  whilst  in  the  surgery  of  the  hospital  he  never  altered  his  posi¬
tion  in  the  slightest  degree ;  and  after  having  been  examined  in  the
surgery,  he  walked  up  stairs  to  his  ward  without  dragging  his  feet,
but  aided  by  the  policemen.

“  After  he  was  placed  in  bed  he  continued  in  the  same  state  of
insensibility  to  external  impressions,  but  appeared  to  resist  any
attempt  to  alter  the  position  of  his  limbs,  and  exhibited  a  disposition
to  retain  the  limb  in  any  position  in  which  it  was  placed.  He  kept
for  some  time  continually  opening  and  shutting  his  mouth  at  regular
intervals,  and  winked  his  eyes  naturally,  and  moved  his  eye-balls
from  side  to  side.

“At  10  a.m.,  eight  hours  after  his  admission,  he  was  still  insen¬
sible;  his  bladder  became  much  distended,  and  three  pints  of  urine
were  drawn  off,  which  exhibited  no  morbid  character,  but  was  of
low  specific  gravity,  1010.

“  He  remained  in  this  state  the  whole  of  the  2nd,  and  on  the
3rd  he  was  still  found  insensible,  having  not  uttered  a  sound  since
his  admission.  He  was  taken  out  of  bed,  and  an  attempt  made  to
place  him  in  the  erect  posture,  but  his  whole  body  became  rigid,  all
the  muscles  being  thrown  into  powerful  tonic  contractions:  he  was
returned  to  his  bed,  where  he  lay  in  the  same  insensible  state :  the
urine  accumulated  in  his  bladder,  and  had  again  to  be  drawn  oft".

“  To-day  various  expedients  were  resorted  to,  to  test  the  reality
of  his  insensibility,  which  ended  in  confirming  our  belief,  from  the
appearance  of  the  patient  that  he  really  was  insensible.  Among
other  means  employed,  the  soles  of  his  feet  were  Shipped  with  a  wet
towel,  without  exciting  the  least  indication  of  sensibility.  A  bottle
of  strong  ammonia  was  held  under  his  nostrils,  but  the  fumes  pro¬
duced  no  effect  beyond  watering  of  the  eyes  ;  and  after  some  time
he  turned  away  his  head.  He  continued  to  lie  in  bed  apparently  un¬
conscious,  but  occasionally  snapping  with  his  teeth.

“  On  the  second  day  after  his  admission  (the  4th)  he  made  signs
for  paper,  and  wrote  an  account  of  himself,  stating  that  he  had  been
subject  to  fits,  and  giving  the  address  of  his  father,  and  also  giving
a  history  of  himself  during  the  day  previous  to  his  admission  to  the


250


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Reply


hospital.  But  it  was  very  remarkable  that  in  writing  he  seemed  to
trust  entirely  to  the  guidance  of  his  sense  of  touch,  for  during  the
whole  time  he  was  writing  he  kept  his  eyes  averted  from  the  paper,
with  a  fixed  gaze  directed  towards  the  ceiling,  and  when  a  handker¬
chief  was  applied  round  his  eyes,  it  did  not  interfere  with  his  ability
to  write.  But  we  could  not  obtain  any  satisfactory  evidence  that  he
could  see,  or  hear,  or  smell.

“  After  this  he  began  to  ask  for  food,  and  ate  with  the  most  ex¬
traordinary  eagerness,  snapping  at  every  thing  that  came  in  contact
with  his  lips:  even  pieces  of  paper,  which  he  chewed  and  swallowed.

“  In  the  afternoon  of  this  day  he  began  to  see,  and  amused  him¬
self  reading  and  writing,  in  both  of  which  he  showed  himself  a
proficient.

“  He  was  still  defective  in  hearing  and  in  the  power  of  speech;
he  seemed  quite  insensible  to  the  loudest  noises;  shouting  into  the
ear,  which  generally  produces  so  disagreeable  a  sensation  in  the
meatus,  seemed  to  produce  no  effect  upon  him,  either  upon  the
common  sensibility  or  upon  the  hearing.  We  could  only  converse
with  him  on  paper,  and  he  showed  great  readiness  in  keeping  up  the
conversation.

“  He  continued  in  this  state  in  the  hospital  nearly  three  weeks
from  his  admission  :  various  means  and  devices  were  tried  to  ascer¬
tain  whether  he  could  hear;  but  all  who  saw  him,  both  nurses,
patients,  students,  and  visitors  to  the  hospital,  agreed  in  opinion
that  he  could  not  or  did  not  hear,  or  that  if  he  did  hear  he  carried
on  his  deception  in  the  most  remarkable  manner.

“  Nor  could  he  be  induced  to  speak :  on  one  occasion  I  ordered
him  to  be  kept  without  food  until  he  spoke,  but  the  effect  of  this
was  merely  to  cause  a  paroxysm  of  hysterical  crying.

“Unfortunately  this  patient  was  inveigled  from  the  hospital  by
some  devotee  of  mesmerism;  and  he  was  placed  under  the  care  of
a  physician  who  unhappily  misapplies  his  great  talents  to  what  I
can  regard  no  otherwise  than  as  the  conjurings  of  mesmerism.  By
this  gentleman  he  was  mesmerised  daily  for  one  hour  for  the  space
of  four  weeks.  After  one  of  these  mesmeric  sittings  he  recovered
his  hearing,  and  in  three-quarters  of  an  hour  after  that  his  speech.
I  cannot  help,  however,  expressing  my  belief,  that,  as  his  health  had
greatly  improved  under  the  discipline  and  treatment  to  which  he  was
subject  in  the  hospital,  he  would  have  recovered  both  his  hearing
and  his  speech  in  less  time  than  under  the  mesmeric  processes,
which,  indeed,  I  cannot  doubt,  had  the  effect  of  retarding  recovery ;
for  I  can  no  more  believe  that  the  hysterical  disposition  is  to  be
removed  by  the  frequent  repetition  of  the  hysterical  paroxysms,
than  I  can  suppose  that  the  tendency  to  epilepsy  is  to  be  cured  by
the  daily  repetition  of  an  epileptic  fit.

“  I  am  confirmed  in  my  belief  that  this  patient  would  have  per¬
fectly  recovered  without  the  aid  of  the  mesmeric  mysteries,  by  the
favourable  result  of  another  case,  which  we  succeeded  in  keeping  out
of  the  hands  of  the  mesmerists.

“The  patient,  in  this  case,  was  a  girl  of  19  years  of  age,  of  a


to  the  incorrect  Statements  of  Dr.  Todd.  251

nervous  temperament.  She  accidentally  fell  into  a  river,  and  was
immersed  in  deep  water  for  many  minutes :  she  was  taken  up  in  a
state  of  suspended  animation.  Six  hours  elapsed  before  she  re¬
covered  her  senses;  and  she  continued  unwell  and  depressed  with
headache  for  several  days  after  the  accident.  Ten  days  after  it,  she
had  an  hysterical  paroxysm,  and  lay  for  nearly  four  hours  in  a  state
of  stupor,  out  of  which  she  came,  deprived  of  the  power  of  speech
and  of  hearing,  as  well  as  of  taste  and  smell,  and  her  mental  faculties
quite  benumbed  or  paralysed,  as  she  gave  no  indication  that  she
recognized  any  of  her  friends  about  her.

“An  admirable  account  of  this  case  has  been  given  in  the  Lancet
for  1845,  by  my  friend,  Mr.  Robert  Dunn,  to  whose  kindness  I  am
indebted  for  the  opportunity  of  seeing  it.  The  patient  recovered
perfectly  under  a  treatment  directed  to  the  improvement  of  her  phy¬
sical  health  and  strength,  and  is  now  in  a  perfectly  healthy  state.”*

Now  the  case  was  not  one  of  hysterical  coma,  but  of
violent  convulsion,  followed,  as  is  usual  in  epilepsy,  by  pro¬
found  sleep  or  coma,  to  which  common  epileptic  fits  he  had
been  subject,  and  one  of  which  he  had  afterwards  in  the
presence  of  Mr.  Thompson.  Dr.  Todd  knew  all  this  from
The  Zoist.

The  poor  boy  was  not  inveigled  from  the  hospital  by  some
devotee  of  mesmerism.  He  left  because  he  was  the  subject  of
cruel  ridicule  and  treated  barbarously  as  an  impostor,  and
told  that  Dr.  Todd  could  do  nothing  for  him.  After  his
return,  a  charitable  lady  learning  his  situation  advised  him  to
come  to  me,  in  the  hope  that  mesmerism  might  restore  him.
Dr.  Todd  knew  all  this  from  The  Zoist.

Dr.  Todd  may  tell  the  College  of  Physicians  publicly  that
mesmerism  is  conjuring,  but  the  non-medical  public  will
laugh  at  him  ;  he  may  say  that  I  “  unhappily  misapply  my
great  talents”  to  what  he  can  regard  no  otherwise  than  as  the
"  conjurings  of  mesmerism  he  may  flippantly  represent  that
after  one  of  these  mesmeric  sittings  the  boy  recovered  his
hearing,  and  in  three  quarters  of  an  hour  his  speech,  but  the
public  knows  from  my  account  that  all  the  effects  of  mesmer¬
ism  were  gradual  and  evident,  and  the  restoration  was  as
decidedly  beautiful  and  successful  a  process  of  art  as  the
absorption  of  an  enlargement  by  a  course  of  iodine,  or  the
restoration  of  strength  and  colour  in  a  pale  girl  by  a  course
of  iron.  Dr.  Todd  knew  all  this  from  The  Zoist.

The  poor  boy's  health  had  not  greatly  improved  under  the
discipline  and  treatment  to  which  he  was  subject  in  the  hos¬
pital.  He  was  subjected  indeed  to  discipline  and  treatment ,
as  he  well  knew  ;  but  his  health  wras  not  improved,  for  it  was


*  London  Medical  Gazette,  May  17,  1850;  p.  833.


252  A  curious  Case  independent  of  Mesmerism ,

perfectly  good,  with  the  exception  of  his  deafness  and  dumb¬
ness;  the  fit  had  made  no  other  difference  in  him.  No  good
of  any  sort  was  done  to  him  in  the  hospital,  nor  anything  that
could  do  him  good.  He  would  have  recovered  both  his  hearing
and  speech  in  less  time  than  under  the  mesmeric  process  :  and
Dr.  Todd  has  no  doubt  that  mesmerism  retarded  the  reco¬
very  !  !  Unfortunately  all  the  facts  I  have  detailed  are  facts —
his  are  fancies  :  and  such  discourse  mav  answer  before  medical
men,  but  must  make  the  better  informed  public  smile  at
Dr.  Todd  as  very  simple,  or  as  amusingly  cunning.  The  boy
had  no  hysteric  paroxysms  induced  by  mesmerism,  but  most
tranquil  sleep-waking :  and  if  such  had  been  induced,  why
should  they  be  declared  beforehand  calculated  to  prevent  the
cure  of  hysteria.  Dr.  Todd  ought  to  know  that  the  best
remedy  for  vomiting  is  frequently  an  emetic;  the  best  remedy
for  diarrhoea  is  frequently  a  cathartic;  the  best  remedy  for
haemorrhage  is  frequently  the  abstraction  of  blood.

As  to  the  case  related  by  his  “friend,”  Mr.  Dunn,  its
cure  was  exceedingly  slow,  not  ascribable  at  all  to  Dr.  Todd’s
treatment,  and  it  might  have  been  cured  in  a  twentieth  part  of
the  time  with  mesmerism,  which  I  regard  it  unpardonable  in
Mr.  Dunn  not  to  have  adopted  instead  of  calling  in  an  anti-
mesmerist  :  for  Mr.  Dunn  has  often  seen  mesmerism,  acknow¬
ledges  it  to  be  true  and  useful,  and  has  actually  practised  it
on  his  own  patients.  Mrs.  Dunn  ought  to  scold  him.*

Dr.  Todd  should  reflect  that  over  the  gate  of  King’s
College  is  written, —

“  Sancte  et  sapienter.”


III.  A  Case  in  which  many  such  phenomena  as  are  produced
by  Mesmerism  occurred  without  mesmerism,  and  the  cure
was  effected  by  Nature,  after  a  great  length  of  time,  on
account  of  the  neglect  of  Mesmerism :  read  to  the  Royal
Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  by  Mr.  Robert  Dunn,
General  Practitioner,  and  reported  in  the  Journals  of  the
day.

“  Mesmerism  produces  no  phenomenon  that  does  not  occur  in  nervous  affec¬
tions  without  mesmerism,  as  I  often  stated  in  the  theatre  of  University  College
Hospital,  but  that  it  does  produce  all  the  most  wonderful  phenomena  of  all  affec¬
tions  of  every  portion  of  the  nervous  system  ;  and  that  the  torpor  or  somnambu¬
lism  or  sleep-waking,  which  it  produces,  is  that  which  occurs  in  trances,  as  the
deepest  form  of  singular  sleep,  with  very  moderate  cerebral  activity,  at  one  ex¬
treme,  and  that  of  persons  in  extatic  delirium  at  the  other,  in  which  most  of  the


*  We  will  present  our  readers  with  the  whole  case  as  our  next  article,  and
they  will  judge  how  far  Dr.  Elliotson’s  remarks  are  correct. — Zoist.


detailed  by  Mr.  Robert  Dunn.


253


faculties  are  very  active,  many  perhaps  far  more  active  than  when  in  the  natural
state,  and  only  some  faculties  torpid,  and  these  perhaps  but  partially  torpid,  so
that,  while  the  patient  may  be  very  talkative,  clever,  and  facetious,  he  may  be
divested  of  his  usual  proper  reserve,  and  even  of  all  sense  of  propriety,  and  really
he  in  a  new  waking  state.  I  shall  in  the  next  chapter  detail  cases  of  surgical
operations  in  which  the  patients,  in  this  peculiar  sleep,  felt  nothing ,  and  con¬
versed  all  the  time  with  the  operator — Dr.  Elliotson,  Numerous  Cases  of
Surgical  Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State,  p.  35.

“  Many  and  curious  are  the  instances  which  have  been  recorded  of
the  arrest,  suspension,  and,  at  the  time,  apparent  obliteration  of
some  of  the  most  ordinary  functions  of  the  nervous  system,  in  con¬
sequence  of  a  sudden  shock,  agitation,  or  fright.

“  Such  cases  are  not  more  startling  to  the  minds  of  common  ob¬
servers,  than  they  are  interesting  to  the  physiologist  and  medical
inquirer.  The  following  plain  narrative  of  an  interesting  case,  which
has  come  under  my  observation,  may  not  be  unworthy  of  the  notice
of  my  professional  brethren.  The  subject  of  the  narrative  is  a  young
woman,  now  in  the  nineteenth  year  of  her  age,  of  a  mixed  tempera¬
ment,  the  nervous  with  the  lymphatic,  and,  as  the  medical  attendant
of  the  family,  I  have  had  frequent  opportunities  of  seeing  her  since
she  was  two  years  old.  She  was  the  first  child  of  her  parents,  and
came  prematurely  into  the  world  about  six  weeks  before  the  usual
term  of  gestation.  No  reasonable  hope  was  at  first  entertained  that
she  could  live.  She  had  not  strength  to  suck,  but  the  milk,  of  which
fortunately  there  was  an  ample  supply,  was  drawn  from  the  breasts,
and  she  was  fed  with  it  by  a  spoon,  and  from  a  nursing  bottle.  At
the  end  of  six  weeks,  the  completion  of  the  reputed  time  of  gestation,
she  was  in  convulsions  for  nearly  an  entire  day,  and  all  hope  of  her
living  was  extinguished  ;  but  nevertheless  she  did  survive,  and  from
this  time  she  began  to  thrive,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  every  one
who  had  seen  her.  She  improved  rapidly,  and  when,  at  four  years
old,  she  was  inoculated  for  the  small-pox  she  was  a  fine,  strong,  and
healthy  child,  stouter  and  larger  than  most  children  at  her  age.  A
custom  prevailed  in  the  village  to  which  she  was  removed,  and
where  indeed  she  had  been  born,  that  whenever  the  small-pox  broke
out  naturally,  as  it  was  termed,  among  the  inhabitants,  the  other
children  of  the  village  should  be  inoculated ,  if  their  parents  or  friends
thought  proper  to  have  it  done.  At  other  times,  inoculation  was  not
permitted.  She  was  accordingly  inoculated,  and  had  the  small-pox
so  severely  that  it  nearly  cost  her  her  life.  She  passed  favourably
through  the  other  ordinary  diseases  of  childhood,  with  the  exception
of  scarlatina,  which  she  had  in  a  severe  form  when  she  was  ten  years
old.  After  the  attack  of  scarlatina,  she  enjoyed  uniformly  good
health,  up  to  the  date  of  the  present  narrative,  and  grew  up  a  strong,
robust,  and  hearty  young  woman.  Her  perceptive  powers  were
naturally  quick,  and,  being  largely  endowed  with  the  imitative  fa¬
culty,  she  was  put  to  the  business  of  a  milliner  and  dress-maker.
Two  years  ago,  her  health  beginning  to  suffer  from  long  and  close
application  to  business,  she  went,  on  my  recommendation,  to  her
grandfather’s,  in  the  county  of  Kent,  and,  while  there,  the  following
accident  occurred:  —


254


A  curious  Case  independent  of  Mesmerism ,


“  Oil  the  14th  of  July,  1843,  as  she  was  walking  with  her  aunt,
by  the  side  of  the  river  which  runs  through  the  park  of  Sir  Percival
Dyke,  of  Lullington,  she  accidentally  let  a  parcel  which  she  was
carrying  slip  from  her  hands,  and  in  the  effort  to  save  it  fell  into  the
water.  She  laid  hold  of  the  grass  upon  the  side  of  the  bank,  but
this  giving  way,  she  again  fell  backwards  into  the  water.  He  aunt
immediately  ran  for  assistance,  but  on  getting  back  nothing  was  to
be  seen,  but,  about  twenty  yards  below  the  place  where  the  accident
had  happened,  a  part  of  the  girl’s  shawl  was  observed  to  be  floating
upon  the  surface  of  the  water;  and  from  this  place  she  was  eventually
dragged,  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  from  the  time  of  her  falling
in,  in  a  state  of  suspended  animation.  She  was  carried  to  the  house
of  Sir  Percival  Dyke,  where  she  received  every  attention.  A  medical
man  was  sent  for,  and  after  the  lapse  of  about  six  hours,  she  became
sensible,  and  so  far  recovered  as  to  be  well  enough  to  be  removed,  on
the  afternoon  of  the  following  day,  to  her  grandfather’s  house  at
Shoreham.  Though  she  was  now  sufficiently  recovered  to  give  some
account  of  the  accident,  and  of  the  state  of  her  feelings  after  falling
in,  on  her  first  attempt  to  get  out,  she  was  far  from  well,  complain¬
ing  of  great  uneasiness  about  the  bowels,  and  of  pain  in  the  head.
The  bowels  were  obstinately  constipated ;  there  was  no  evacuation
from  the  day  of  the  accident  until  the  20th  of  the  month,  a  period
of  seven  days;  and  when  the  constipation  gave  way,  the  alvine  de¬
jections  proved  that  both  mud  and  gravel  had  passed  into  the  stomach.
On  the  ‘24th,  she  was  seized  with  a  fit  (up  to  this  time  she  had  been
quite  sensible),  and  is  described  as  lying  in  the  fit  in  a  state  of  com¬
plete  stupor  for  nearly  four  hours,  when  she  opened  her  eyes,  but
was  deprived  of  the  powers  of  speech  and  hearing,  and  of  the  senses
of  taste  and  smell;  her  mental  faculties  quite  benumbed  or  paralyzed,
giving  no  indication  that  she  recognized  any  of  her  friends  about  her.
The  head  was  shaved,  and  covered  with  ice ;  a  blister  applied  to  the
nape  of  the  neck,  and  other  remedial  measures  adopted.  I  regret
that  I  cannot  furnish  more  precise  information  as  to  the  nature  of
the  fit,  and  of  the  treatment  pursued.  I  have  written  twice  to  Mr.
Richards  on  the  subject,  but  have  not  been  favoured  with  any  reply
to  my  notes.

‘‘After  the  lapse,  however,  of  about  three  weeks,  she  was  so  far
recovered  as  to  be  able  to  be  removed  to  London;  and  I  saw  her,  for  the
first  time  after  the  accident,  at  her  own  home,  on  the  8th  of  August.
She  did  not,  or  rather  could  not,  recognize  me,  for  her  psychical
faculties  were  quite  suspended;  indeed,  her  only  medium  of  commu¬
nication,  at  this  time,  with  the  external  world,  was  through  the
senses  of  sight  and  touch,  for  she  could  neither  hear  nor  speak,
smell  nor  taste.  Her  vision,  at  short  distances,  was  quick,  and  so
great  was  the  state  of  exaltation  of  the  general  sensibility  upon  the
surface  of  the  body,  that  the  slightest  touch  would  startle  her;  still,
unless  she  was  touched,  or  an  object  and  person  was  so  placed  that
she  could  not  avoid  seeing  the  one  or  the  other,  she  appeared  to  be
quite  lost  to  everything  that  was  passing  around  her.  She  had  no
notion  that  she  was  at  home,  nor  the  least  knowledge  of  anything


detailed  by  Mr.  Robert  Dunn.


255


about  her;  she  did  not  even  know  her  own  mother,  who  attended
upon  her  with  the  most  unwearied  assiduity  and  kindness.  Her
memory,  and  the  power  of  associating  ideas,  were  quite  gone.  Wher¬
ever  she  was  placed,  there  she  remained  throughout  the  day.  She
was  very  weak,  but  her  bodily  health  was  not  much  deranged ;  the
tongue  was  clean;  the  skin  moist;  and  the  pulse  quiet  and  regular;
but  the  bowels  sluggish.  At  the  time  of  the  last  menstrual  period
there  had  been  considerable  general  debility,  attended  with  some
febrile  disturbance,  and  with  an  increase  of  heat  about  the  head  ;  and
these  symptoms  I  noticed  on  subsequent  occasions.  The  catamenia
had  followed  immediately  upon  the  accident,  and  reappeared  at  the
proper  time,  and  continued  regular  and  copious  throughout  her
illness.  Her  appetite  was  good,  but  having  neither  taste  or  smell,
she  ate  alike  indifferently  whatever  she  was  fed  with,  and  took  nau¬
seous  medicines  as  readily  as  delicious  viands.  She  required  to  be
fed;  when  I  first  saw  her,  she  had  no  notion  of  taking  the  food  that
was  placed  before  her,  but,  a  few  days  afterwards,  if  a  spoon  was  put
into  her  hands,  and  fillled  by  her  mother,  and  conveyed  for  a  few
times  to  her  mouth,  she  would  afterwards  go  on  by  herself  until  the
whole  was  eaten.

“  Her  wants  were  sedulously  attended  to,  but  she  manifested  no
uneasiness  as  to  food,  however  long  she  might  be  kept  without  it.
The  same  thing  was  observed  in  reference  to  drink.  The  calls  of
nature  were  alike  unheeded  by  her  ;  the  urine  and  faeces  were  voided
unconsciously,  but  with  the  striking  peculiarity,  that,  during  the
expulsion  of  the  faeces,  such  was  the  reflex  action  induced  that  the
extremities  became  spasmodically  convulsed  and  rigid;  the  head  was
thrown  backwards;  the  muscles  of  the  neck  were  stiff ;  and  the  eye¬
lids  closed;  so  that  her  mother  considered  that  her  bowels  never
acted  without  her  having  what  she  called  ‘a  convulsion  fit;’  the
same  thing  occasionally  happened  when  the  bladder  expelled  its
contents,  and  what  is  still  more  remarkable,  the  same  tonic  rigidity
of  the  muscles  invariably  took  place  whenever  she  went  to  sleep.
Every  night,  when  she  was  placed  upon  the  bed,  she  remained  for
some  time  in  a  semi-recumbent  posture,  after  which  the  eyelids  closed
and  the  head  fell  backwards  upon  the  pillow ;  the  hands  were
clenched;  the  muscles  of  the  neck  stiff;  the  arms  and  legs  in  a  state
of  tonic  rigidity,  the  latter  always  crossed  the  one  upon  the  other;
after  a  time  the  muscles  became  relaxed;  she  turned  upon  her  side,
and  slept  soundly  until  the  morning.

“  Such  was  the  state  in  which  I  found  the  young  woman  on  her
arrival  in  London,  nearly  one  month  after  the  occurrence  of  the
accident,  aud  I  may  here  anticipate  the  narrative  by  stating  that  from
the  time  her  mental  faculties  became  suspended,  in  the  fit  on  the
24th  of  July,  1843,  until  the  July  of  the  following  year,  when  they
were  again  restored — her  life,  to  herself,  is  one  continued  blank.  She
has  not  the  slightest  knowledge  or  remembrance  of  anything  which
took  place  during  the  interval.  I  put  her  at  once  upon  a  course  of
tonic  medicine,  giving  her  of  the  compound  mixture  of  iron,  12


256  A  curious  Case  independent  of  Mesmerism,

drachms,  three  times  a  day,  and  a  frequent  aperient  of  the  aloes  and
myrrh  pill,  adding,  occasionally,  a  few  grains  of  blue  pill.

“  One  of  her  first  acts  on  recovering  from  the  fit  had  been  to
busy  herself  in  picking  the  bed-clothes,  and,  as  soon  as  she  was
able  to  sit  up  and  to  be  dressed,  she  continued  the  habit  by  inces¬
santly  picking  some  portion  of  her  dress ;  she  seemed  to  want  an
occupation  for  her  fingers,  and,  accordingly,  part  of  an  old  straw
bonnet  was  given  to  her,  which  she  pulled  to  pieces  of  great  minute¬
ness  ;  she  was  afterwards  bountifully  supplied  with  roses ;  she  picked
off  the  leaves,  and  then  tore  them  into  the  smallest  particles  ima¬
ginable.  A  few  days  subsequent  she  began  forming  upon  the  table,
out  of  these  minute  particles,  rude  figures  of  roses  and  other  common
garden  flowers ;  she  had  never  received  any  instructions  in  drawing.

“  Roses  not  being  so  plentiful  in  London,  waste  paper  and  a
pair  of  scissors  were  put  into  her  hands,  and  for  some  days  she
found  an  occupation  in  cutting  the  paper  into  shreds  ;  after  a  time
these  cuttings  assumed  rude  figures  and  shapes,  and  more  particu¬
larly  the  shapes  made  use  of  in  patch- work.  At  length  she  was
supplied  with  the  proper  materials  for  patch-work,  and,  after  some
initiatory  instruction,  she  took  to  her  needle,  and  in  good  earnest
to  this  employment.  She  now  laboured  incessantly  at  patch-work
from  morning  till  night,  and  on  Sundays  and  week-days,  for  she
knew  no  difference  of  days ;  nor  could  she  be  made  to  comprehend
the  difference.  She  had  no  remembrance  from  day  to  day  of  what
she  had  been  doing  on  the  previous  day,  and  so  every  morning  com¬
menced  de  novo.  Whatever  she  began,  that  she  continued  to  work
at  while  daylight  lasted,  manifesting  no  uneasiness  for  anything  to
eat  or  to  drink,  taking  not  the  slightest  heed  of  anything  which
was  going  on  around  her,  but  intent  only  on  her  patch-work.  Oc¬
casionally,  indeed,  and  not  unfrequently  two  or  three  times  in  the
course  of  the  day,  she  would  have  what  her  mother  called  her  ‘fits.’
Whilst  intent  upon  her  work,  and  without  any  external  exciting
cause,  her  head  would  fall  backwards,  her  eyelids  close,  her  arms
and  legs  become  rigid,  and  her  hands  clenched.  After  a  short  time,
varying  in  extent  from  a  few  minutes  to  half  an  hour  or  more,  the
muscles  would  become  relaxed,  the  eyes  open,  and  she  would  resume
her  work,  apparently  unconscious  that  anything  had  happened.
About  this  time  she  began  to  show  indications  of  feeling  interested
in  the  figures  of  the  flowers  and  buds,  &c.,  upon  the  silk  and  other
materials  which  are  made  use  of  in  patch-work.  The  perception  of
colours,  and  the  exercise  of  the  imitative  faculty,  were  the  first  evi¬
dences  she  exhibited  of  psychical  advancement  in  her  present  state.
Although  she  had  received  a  good  plain  education,  and  had  been
very  fond  of  books,  now  she  could  neither  read  nor  write,  nor  even
be  made  to  comprehend  the  letters  of  the  alphabet.  All  her  former
knowledge  and  past  experience  appeared  to  be  obliterated,  or  at  least,
for  the  time,  to  be  buried  in  oblivion,  with  one  exception — a  feeling
of  dread  or  fright  in  connection  with  water ;  and  she  now  began,  de
novo ,  like  a  child,  to  acquire  ideas  and  to  register  experience.  Ad-


detailed  by  Mr.  Robert  Dunn.


257


mitting  that  the  senses  are  the  only  inlets  of  all  the  materials  of
knowledge,  and  that — ( Nihil  est  in  intellectu  quod  non  prius  fuerit
in  sensu,’  it  wras  not  to  be  expected  when  in  this  abnormal  condition,
with  only  the  senses  of  sight  and  touch  in  communion  with  the  ex¬
ternal  world,  that  her  progress  could  be  otherwise  than  slow  in  the
extreme.  However,  she  evinced  an  interest  in  looking  at  pictures
and  prints — more  especially  of  flowers,  trees,  and  animals — but
when  shown  a  landscape  in  which  there  was  a  river,  or  the  view  of
a  troubled  sea,  she  became  instantly  excited  and  violently  agitated,
and  one  of  her  fits  of  spasmodic  rigidity  and  insensibility  imme¬
diately  followed.  If  the  picture  were  removed  before  the  paroxysm
had  subsided,  she  manifested  no  recollection  of  what  had  taken
place,  but  so  great  was  the  feeling  of  dread  or  of  fright  associated
with  water,  that  the  sight  of  it  in  motion,  its  mere  running  from
one  vessel  to  another,  made  her  shudder  and  tremble,  and  in  the
act  of  washing  her  hands  they  were  merely  placed  in  the  water.
After  she  had  been  at  home  a  fortnight,  I  had  the  benefit  of  fre¬
quent  consultations  with  my  friend,  Dr.  Todd,  of  King’s  College
on  her  case.  She  had  partially  recovered  her  taste,  and  refused
any  longer  to  take  nauseous  medicines.  Dr.  Todd  expressed  his
conviction  that  eventually  she  would  perfectly  recover,  however
gradual  and  protracted  the  recovery  might  be — an  opinion  which
has  been  fully  verified.  The  accident  happened  in  1843,  and  it  is
only  within  the  last  few  weeks  that  she  has  completely  regained  her
hearing  and  the  full  exercise  and  enjoyment  of  her  mental  and
bodily  powers.  We  agreed  that  the  tonic  course  of  medicines  should
he  continued,  combining  quinine  with  the  iron.  We  further  advised
the  frequent  sponging  of  the  head  and  spine  with  cold  water,  and
the  use  of  the  shower  bath  as  soon  as  it  could  be  borne.  The  first
attempt,  in  accordance  with  our  wishes,  of  running  water  through
a  common  cullender  upon  the  head,  induced  such  alarming  excite¬
ment  and  fright,  and  was  followed  by  a  fit  of  insensibility  of  such
long  continuance,  that  the  experiment  was  not  repeated.

“  From  this  time  her  interest  in  flowers  daily  increased,  more
especially  for  rose-buds  and  wild  flowers.  Nothing  pleased  her  so
much  as  a  fresh  little  rose-bud.  She  would  look  at  it  again  and
again,  and  place  it  beside  her  with  evident  delight,  while  a  smile
would  play  upon  her  countenance  if  her  mother  or  I  appeared  to
admire  it.  But  she  was  still  without  smell,  nor  did  she  regain  this
sense  until  the  January  of  the  following  year.  Her  mind,  however,
was  gradually  awakening  from  its  lethargy,  or  rather  her  perceptive
faculties  were  becoming  re-developed,  under  the  stimulus  of  external
agencies,  for  she  took  more  heed  of  the  objects  by  which  she  was
surrounded,  and  greater  notice  of  her  little  brothers,  wrho  were  con¬
stantly  beside  her,  and  watched  more  closely  the  movements  and
actions  of  her  mother.  The  presence  of  strangers,  when  brought
under  her  notice,  made  her  irritable  and  figetty,  but  she  could  not
bear  to  have  her  mother  out  of  her  sight.  Things  were  progressing
in  this  way,  when  an  incident  occurred,  in  October,  in  the  family.


258


A  curious  Case  independent  of  Mesmerism,


which  roused  her  sensibility,  and  suddenly  brought  into  play  another
lost  or  suspended  power — the  faculty  of  speech.  Seeing  her  mother
in  a  state  of  excessive  agitation  and  grief,  she  became  excited  herself,
and  in  the  emotional  excitement  of  the  moment,  suddenly  ejaculated,
with  some  hesitation,  ‘Wh — a — t’s  the  mat — ter?’  From  this  time
she  began  to  articulate  a  few  words ;  but  she  neither  called  persons
nor  things  by  their  right  names.  The  pronoun  ‘this’  washer
favourite  word,  and  it  was  applied  alike  to  every  individual  object,
animate  and  inanimate.  She  continued  her  labours  at  patch-work,
and  so  assiduously,  that  she  had  worked  up  all  the  materials  which
had  been,  or  could  be,  collected,  and  her  mother  was  now  at  a  loss
what  to  do,  or  where  to  look  for  a  further  supply.  In  this  dilemma,
worsted-work  was  fortunately  suggested  by  one  of  her  friends,  and,
though  new  to  her,  soon  engrossed  her  exclusive  attention,  and  be¬
came  her  constant  employment.  She  was  delighted  with  the  colours
and  with  the  flowers  upon  the  patterns  that  were  brought  to  her.
The  harmony  of  colours  seemed  to  be  a  source  of  special  enjoyment;
nor  did  she  conceal  her  want  of  respect  towards  any  specimen  of
work  that  was  placed  before  her  where  she  thought  this  had  not
been  observed — it  was  immediately  thrown  aside.  She  applied  her¬
self  closely  to  her  new  occupation,  and  abandoned  altogether  the  old
one.  Still  she  had  no  recollection  from  day  to  day  what  she  had
done,  and  every  morning  began  something  new,  unless  her  unfinished
work  was  placed  before  her ;  and  after  imitating  the  patterns  of
others,  she  began  devising  some  of  her  own.

“  In  January  her  sense  of  smell  returned,  and  from  this  time
she  made  her  further  advances  in  progressive  improvement.  Her
susceptibility  to  impressions  was  increased,  and  emotional  feelings
were  readily  excited.  She  was  subject,  as  formerly,  to  her  fits  of
insensibility,  with  spasmodic  rigidity.  They  were  even  more  frequent
than  formerly,  but  it  was  now  manifestly  obvious  that  they  were
generally  the  result  of  emotional  movements.  On  one  occasion,
being  alarmed  by  a  stranger,  she  had  quite  an  hysterical  paroxysm,
followed  by  insensibility  ;  and,  in  consequence,  she  lost  her  speech,
taste,  and  smell,  for  some  days  afterwards.  The  mere  sight  of  the
same  person  again  was  followed  by  a  scream  and  excessive  agitation.
Her  predominant  feeling  was  that  of  fear  or  dread,  and  whenever
she  was  alarmed,  the  result  was  a  fit.

“At  the  recommendation  of  Dr.  Todd  and  myself  she  was  re¬
moved  into  the  country  in  April.  She  was  taken  again  to  her  grand¬
father’s,  at  Shoreham,  in  Kent,  and  to  the  same  house  where  she
had  been  stopping  previous  to  her  accident.  She  was  delighted  with
the  face  of  nature  and  the  appearances  of  spring,  but  her  mind  was
still  in  an  abnormal  state.  She  did  not  recognize  her  grandfather
and  grandmother,  the  house,  nor  Shoreham,  ‘  as  old  familiar  friends
and  places she  had  lost  the  recollection  of  all  things  and  events
which  had  there  taken  place.  But  the  sight  of  her  old  favourites
and  earliest  associates, — for  as  a  child  she  had  quite  a  passion
for  them, — the  wild  flowers,  made  her  literally  bound  with  joy;


detailed  by  Mr.  Robert  Dunn.


259


she  ran  about  the  fields  in  search  of  them,  and  her  delight  and  sur¬
prize  found  expression  in  articulate  language.  Wild  flowers  were
the  first  objects  which  she  called  by  their  right  names.

“  A  young  man  for  whom  she  had  formed  an  attachment  prior
to  the  accident,  and  who  had  been  very  kind  and  attentive  through¬
out  her  illness  in  London,  accompanied  her  and  her  mother  to
Shoreham.  In  a  day  or  two  afterwards  he  returned  to  town,  before
she  had  got  accustomed  and  reconciled  to  the  place  and  her  friends,
for  as  yet  everything  new  and  every  strange  face  was  to  her  a  cause
of  fearful  alarm.  She  missed  him;  he  had  been  the  great  object  of
her  attention*  and  she  became  unhappy  and  fretful.  I  may  here
take  the  opportunity  of  remarking,  that  from  an  early  stage  of  her
illness  he  had  been  an  object  of  interest  when  nothing  else  would
rouse  her.  She  was  always  soothed,  and  her  fears  allayed,  when  he
was  beside  her.  Nothing  seemed  to  give  her  so  much  pleasure  as
his  presence.  He  came  regularly  every  evening  to  see  her,  and  she
as  regularly  looked  for  his  coming.  At  a  time  when  she  did  not
remember  from  one  hour  to  another  what  she  had  been  doing,  she
would  look  anxiously  for  the  opening  of  the  door,  about  the  time  he
was  accustomed  to  pay  her  a  visit,  and  if  he  came  not  she  was
fidgetty  and  fretful  throughout  the  evening.  Now  that  she  saw  him
no  longer  she  became  unhappy  and  irritable;  her  fits  were  severe  and
more  frequent ;  she  ate  little,  and  had  no  delight  in  anything ;  at  last
she  took  to  her  bed,  and  her  mother  became  seriously  alarmed.  The
young  man  was  sent  for,  and  it  was  finally  arranged  that  he  should
remain  for  some  time  at  Shoreham.  His  presence  had  the  desired
effect;  it  roused  her,  and  when  he  was  beside  her  she  was  happy.
Her  bodily  health  and  strength  improved,  and  after  a  time  she  took
to  the  employment  to  which  she  had  been  accustomed,  dress-making.
Still  her  state  could  not  be  considered  a  natural  one.  Her  memory
was  so  weak,  that  she  forgot  from  day  to  day  what  she  had  been
doing.  She  was  very  irritable,  and  easily  excited;  the  slightest
alarm  brought  on  a  fit  of  insensibility  and  spasmodic  rigidity.  She
was  fonder  of  running  about  the  fields  and  woods  after  wild  flowers
than  of  using  her  needle  in-doors.

“  Such  was  the  state  of  things  at  the  beginning  of  July.  Many
new  words  had  been  added  to  her  scanty  vocabulary;  she  had  made
some  mental  advances,  and  her  health  and  strength  were  quite  re¬
established,  when  the  scene  was  disturbed,  and  new  feelings  aroused
by  the  hydra,  Jealousy.

“  She  was  now  sufficiently  alive  to  what  was  passing  around  her
to  notice  and  to  be  disturbed  at  the  attention  the  young  man  was
paying  another,  to  the  neglect  of  herself,  and  at  the  manner  in  which
his  attentions  were  received  and  requited;  in  a  word,  she  became
jealous,  and  not  without  reason.  One  day  she  witnessed  a  scene
which  gave  her  system  such  a  sudden  and  violent  shock  that  she  fell
down  in  a  fit,  and  remained  many  hours  in  a  state  of  insensibility,
to  the  great  alarm  of  every  one  around  her.  It  is  described  as  re¬
sembling  the  first  fit  with  which  she  was  attacked  when  she  lost  her
senses.  It  proved  critical  and  sanatory.  When  the  insensibility


260


A  curious  Case  independent  of  Mesmerism.


passed  off,  she  was  no  longer  spell-bound.  The  veil  of  oblivion  was
withdrawn,  and,  as  if  awakening  from  a  sleep  of  twelve  months  dura¬
tion,  she  found  herself  surrounded  by  her  grandfather,  grandmother,
and  other  familiar  friends  and  acquaintances,  in  the  old  house  at
Shoreham.  She  awoke  in  the  possession  of  her  natural  faculties  and
former  knowledge,  but  without  the  slightest  remembrance  of  any¬
thing  which  had  taken  place  in  the  interval,  from  the  invasion  of
the  first  fit  up  to  the  present  time.  She  spoke,  but  she  heard  not ;
she  was  still  deaf,  but  as  she  could  read  and  write  as  formerly,  she
was  no  longer  cut  off  from  communication  with  others.

“  Though  she  had  no  recollection  of  the  scene  she  had  witnessed,
and  the  sudden  effect  it  had  produced,  nor  any  idea  that  her  lover
had  formed  an  attachment  for  another,  her  mother  prudently  judged
it  expedient  to  remove  her  home  as  soon  as  possible,  and  thus  avoid
again  exposing  her  to  the  risk  of  having  her  feelings  hurt  and  her
mind  disturbed.

“  I  saw  her  on  the  day  of  her  return.  She  was  weak,  but  sen¬
sible,  and  very  glad  to  see  me ;  perfectly  aware  that  she  was  at  her
own  home,  surrounded  by  her  mother  and  family,  and  presenting
a  striking  but  gratifying  contrast  to  the  state  in  which  I  had  found
her  when  she  was  first  brought  home  on  the  former  occasion.  From
this  time  she  gradually  improved,  but  it  was  not  until  the  last  month
that  she  recovered  her  hearing.  She  soon  perfectly  understood,  by
the  motion  of  the  lips,  what  her  mother  said  ;  they  conversed  with
facility  and  quickness  together,  but  she  did  not  understand  the  lan¬
guage  of  the  lips  of  a  stranger.  On  one  occasion,  when  the  Tower
guns  were  firing,  she  heard  the  noise,  or  rather,  to  use  her  owrn
words,  ‘felt  it  all  over  her  body.’  But  a  boy  whistling  in  the  street
was  the  first  sound  she  distinctly  heard.  He  was  whistling  a  well-
known  popular  tune  in  a  sharp  and  shrill  key,  and  she  had  the  tune
sounding  in  her  ears  all  the  day  afterwards.  About  five  or  six  w  eeks
ago  she  went  to  Brighton ;  after  a  few  days  she  heard  the  roaring  of
the  sea,  and  now  she  hears  nearly  as  well  as  ever  she  did.  She  has
come  home  in  good  health  and  in  the  exercise  and  enjoyment  of  all
her  mental  and  bodily  powers.” — Lancet,  Nov.  15  and  22,  1845.


After  detailing  the  case  of  the  poor  man  of  Tinsbury,  so
cruelly  stigmatized  as  an  impostor  by  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,
Dr.  Elliotson  remarks  in  his  pamphlet,  at  p.  41  : —

“  The  changes  which  occurred  at  different  times  were  highly  cha¬
racteristic  of  these  more  rare  affections.  After  his  first  paroxysm  of
sleep  he  was  dumb  for  a  whole  month.  During  the  first  fortnight  of
his  second  paroxysm  of  sleep  he  would  open  his  eyes,  but  aftemards
he  did  not; — a  likely  thing  that  a  man  feigning  sleep  would  ever  lie
with  his  eyes  open,  or  open  them  from  time  to  time !  At  one  period
he  ceased  to  eat  and  evacuate :  his  jaws  closed,  and  neither  food  put
at  his  bed-side  disappeared,  nor  did  an  alvine  evacuation  appear  in  his
utensil  for  six  weeks  and  four  days,  though  once  he  made  water.  At


Another  case  independent  of  Mesmerism.


261


another  period,  when  he  was  called  on  by  his  name,  “  he  seemed  to
hear  them  and  be  somewhat  sensible,  though  he  could  not  make  them
any  answer;” — was  this  likely  in  a  man  feigning  absolute  sleep?  His
eyes  were  not  now  shut  so  close,  and  he  had  frequent  great  tremblings
of  his  eyelids: — a  probable  thing  this,  that  he  would  have  kept  his  eyes
constantly  in  this  irksome  state  of  movement  when  sleep  would  have
been  better  shammed  by  keeping  them  closed  !  The  countryman
could  never  have  devised  all  these  little  circumstances  which  practi¬
tioners,  who  have  seen  as  many  cases  of  this  description  as  I  now
have,  recognise  at  once  as  striking  peculiarities  of  such  affections.  It
is  worthy  of  notice  that  the  man  was  so  inveterate  a  smoker  as  to
have  “  a  hole  made  in  his  Teeth,  by  holding  his  Pipe  in  his  Mouth,”
yet,  by  sleeping  thus,  first  in  1694  for  a  month,  then  in  1696  for
seventeen  weeks,  and  then  in  1697  for  six  months  with  the  exception  of
a  few  minutes  once,  he  deprived  himself  of  what  must  have  been  an
indispensable  pleasure.

“  On  waking  from  his  sleep  of  seventeen  weeks,  so  far  from  wish¬
ing  it  to  be  believed,  he  could  not  easily  be  brought  to  believe  it
himself  till  he  saw  the  oats  and  barley  ripe  which  were  sowing  when
he  saw  the  fields  last.”


IV.  A  recent  instance  in  France  of  Sleep-waking,  similar  to
that  which  occurred  at  Tinsbury  near  Bath  a  hundred
and  fifty  years  ago  and  is  obstinately  and  absurdly  pro¬
nounced  by  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  an  imposture ;  recorded
in  the  Gazette  Medicale  for  1850,  and  translated  into
the  London  Medical  Gazette  of  May  10 th,  1850.

“ - non  deficit  alter

Aureus.”  Virgil,  JEneid,  vi.  143.

“  R - H - ,  aged  1 9  years,  of  a  good  constitution,  lympha¬

tic  temperament,  with  black  hair  and  brown  eyes,  having  good
general  health,  menstruation  regular,  moderate  in  religious  observ¬
ances,  of  a  gay  and  thoughtless  character,  fell  asleep  one  evening  about
seven  o’clock:  her  mother,  who  was  at  the  time  absent  from  home,
was  surprised  on  her  return  to  find  her  daughter  asleep,  and  endea¬
voured  to  wake  her,  but  without  avail.  Being  alarmed,  she  summoned
M.  Maugin,  who  found  her  lying  on  her  back  in  a  quiet  and  calm
sleep,  interrupted  every  now  and  then  by  deep  sighs  ;  the  pulse  was
regular,  soft,  and  slow;  the  limbs  supple  and  moveable.  The  eyelids
being  opened,  remained  so ;  the  pupils  were  insensible  to  light,  and
no  means  of  excitation  addressed  to  either  of  the  senses  succeeded  in
rousing  her.  She  was  insensible  even  to  cutting  and  pricking  and
pinching  the  surface  of  the  body.

“This  state  lasted  from  the  Sunday  evening  until  Tuesday  morn¬
ing  at  ten  o’clock,  when  suddenly  she  rose  from  her  bed,  fell  on  her
knees  by  its  side,  and  opening  her  eves,  which  she  raised  towards
heaven,  joined  her  hands,  and  began  a  scene  impossible  to  be  de¬
scribed,  and  worthy  the  pen  of  a  romance  writer.  All  the  catechisms,
VOL.  VIII.  u


262


Cure  of  Rheumatism,


prayers,  sermons,  pious  books  that  she  had  ever  known  or  read,
were  repeated  with  the  fervency  almost  of  inspiration.  The  state  of
physical  insensibility  remained.  She  continued  thirteen  hours  in  the
same  condition,  and  thus  occupied.  On  waking  she  expressed  sur¬
prise  at  the  concourse  of  people  that  surrounded  her,  and  complained
only  of  debility.

“When  questioned  she  stated  that  she  had  dreamt  that  an  angel
had  conducted  her  to  heaven.  She  gave  a  most  rapturous  account
of  the  happiness  she  had  experienced  in  her  dream.

“  This  state  of  ecstacy  returned  four  times,  twice  at  intervals  of
fourteen  days,  and  once  of  eight  days,  and  lasted  on  one  occasion
twenty-six  hours.  Her  general  health  has  not  suffered.  M.  Maugin
regards  the  case  as  one  of  a  peculiar  form  of  insanity.”


V.  Four  remarkable  Cures  of  intense  Chronic  Rheumatism,
Erysipelas,  Neuralgia,  and  Consumption.  By  Mr.  May-
iiew,  Farnham,  Surrey.

“  In  the  whole  domain  of  human  arguments,  no  art  or  science  rests  upon
experiments  more  numerous,  more  positive,  or  more  easily  ascertained.”

“  To  me  (and  before  many  years  the  opinion  must  be  universal)  the  most
extraordinary  event  in  the  whole  history  of  human  science  is,  that  Mesmerism
ever  could  be  doubted.” — Mr.  Chenevix,  Medical  and  Physical  Journal ,
London ,  1828,  1829.

Cure  of  Rheumatism.

Mrs.  Elizabeth  Dalrymple,  aged  32,  wife  of  George  D.  L.
Dalrymple,  Merchant,  residing  at  the  corner  of  Spring  and
Mercer  Streets,  in  the  City  of  New  York,  had  been  afflicted
with  rheumatism  for  four  years  without  any  intermission.
From  head  to  foot  she  was  a  rheumatic  cripple — not  able  to
walk  across  the  room  without  the  most  intense  pain — her
hands  utterly  useless,  she  not  having  the  power  to  open  them
to  one-third  of  their  natural  extent — her  neck  rigid,  so  that
she  could  not  turn  her  head  to  the  right  or  left  without
turning  her  body  also — her  jaws  fixed,  so  that  for  a  long
period  she  had  been  obliged  to  take  only  such  food  as  she
could  suck  in  between  her  teeth — and  for  two  years  she  had
had  a  constant  fixed  pain  in  the  region  of  the  Organ  of
Firmness.

I  mesmerised  her  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  the  sleep,
and  in  twenty  minutes  she  slept.  She  rapidly  passed  into
the  deep  sleep.  I  then  proceeded  to  operate  locally  on  the  parts
affected,  first,  by  breathing;  secondly,  by  friction;  thirdly,
by  very  light  passes,  gliding  off  towards  the  extremities.
After  she  had  slept  about  half-an-hour,  I  awoke  her.  It  was
found  that  she  had  received  the  most  astonishing  benefit;
inasmuch  as  the  legs  and  thighs  were  freed  from  rheumatism,


by  Mr.  Mayheiv,  Farnham,  Surrey.


263


the  hands  were  without  pain  and  liberated  almost  to  their
full  extent,  the  neck  perfectly  cured,  the  jaws  entirely  libe¬
rated,  and  the  fixed  pain  at  the  top  of  the  head  had  vanished.

I  remained  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  this  lady  till  I  left
America,  about  two  years  afterwards ;  and  up  to  that  time
she  had  no  return  of  her  affliction.

Cure  of  Erysipelas.

Eliza  Herron,  of  Newark  in  the  State  of  New  Jersey,
aged  23,  was  afflicted  with  erysipelas  in  the  left  side  of  the
face,  which  was  very  much  swelled  and  covered  with  a  dry
scurf.

I  mesmerised  her  for  about  forty  minutes  before  any  effect
was  perceived.  The  passes  were  then  felt  as  a  cool  breeze
blowing  over  the  part — the  throbbing  began  to  decrease —
and  the  inflammation  to  descend  under  the  passes  towards  the
neck,  thence  to  the  shoulder  and  elbow,  there  it  lodged  for
some  minutes,  and  then  suddenly  flew  to  the  epigastrium,
and  descended  the  right  side  and  leg  towards  the  foot  by
which  it  disappeared.

She  passed  a  comfortable  night,  quite  free  from  suffering.

On  the  following  day,  about  noon,  the  throbbing  and  burn¬
ing  returned,  with  less  intensity  however  than  on  the  preced¬
ing  day,  and  disappeared  again  in  the  same  way,  under  the
passes,  in  about  thirty  minutes.

On  the  third  day  the  same  symptoms  again  appeared,  but
were  again  dispelled  in  a  few  minutes,  and  did  not  again
return  at  any  subsequent  time.

During  the  treatment  of  this  case  there  was  no  sleep.

Cure  of  Neuralgia.

George  P.  Frederick,  aged  30,  Merchant,  residing  in
West  Broadway,  in  the  City  of  New  York,  was  suffering
from  neuralgic  pains  in  the  stomach  and  side.  So  intense
were  they,  that  he  could  neither  sit,  stand,  nor  lie,  by  day
or  night.

For  some  considerable  time  he  had  been  under  the  care
of  Dr.  Campbell,  without  experiencing  the  slightest  allevia¬
tion  of  his  sufferings.

As  I  commenced  mesmerising  him  he  endeavoured  to
compose  himself  upon  his  bed,  and  in  about  half-an-hour  he
was  in  a  beautiful  deep  sleep,  and  to  all  appearance  entirely
free  from  pain.

I  then  proceeded  to  operate  locally  according  to  my  usual
custom  in  such  cases,  and  concluded  by  the  open-handed
long  pass,  for  soothing  and  deepening  the  sleep.

I  then  left  him  to  take  the  full  benefit  of  the  sleep ;  and

u  2


264


Cure  of  Consumption.


after  several  hours  he  awoke  spontaneously,  much  refreshed,
and  quite  free  from  pain ;  of  which  I  have  never  heard  that
he  had  any  return.


Cure  of  Consumption.

The  following  is  the  first  of  my  English  cases  worthy  of
notice.  It  had  been  pronounced  by  two  medical  gentle¬
men  of  extensive  practice  to  be  a  decided  case  of  consump¬
tion, — and  one  of  the  lungs  was  pronounced  to  be  nearly
gone.  I  am  inclined  to  differ  from  them  in  this  opinion.
I  believe  it  to  have  been  undoubtedly  consumption,  but  not
so  far  advanced ;  it  should  rather  be  termed  incipient  con¬
sumption.  The  symptoms  attendant  on  the  commencement
of  the  treatment  fully  warrant  me  in  forming  this  opinion.

A  false  delicacy  on  the  part  of  this  young  lady  ties  my
hands,  so  that  I  cannot  give  names.  But  I  hold  myself
ready  to  give  private  reference  to  the  lady  herself,  should
it  be  desired  by  any  of  the  readers  of  The  Zoist.

E.  A.  M.,  aged  26  years,  to  all  appearance  in  a  rapid
consumption.  Her  two  medical  attendants  had  pronounced
“  her  case  to  be  hopeless,  and  one  of  her  lungs  to  be  nearly
gone.”

This  young  lady  being  a  dear  friend  of  my  sister,  I  com¬
menced  her  treatment  with  feelings  of  peculiar  interest  and
anxiety  to  benefit  her ;  and  I  am  happy  to  say  that  my  efforts
were  successful.

She  slept  lightly  at  the  first  sitting,  and  regularly  after¬
wards  at  each,  and  was  mesmerized  twice  a  day.

She  improved  so  rapidly  that  in  less  than  one  week  her
friends  were  filled  with  astonishment  at  the  change  in  her
appearance.  Duty  calling  me  to  leave  that  neighbourhood,
I  instructed  her  sister  in  the  necessary  processes,  and  left  her
under  her  sister's  care.

From  time  to  time  I  heard  of  the  progress  of  her  recovery,
till  it  was  entirely  re-established,  and  I  extract  the  following
passage  from  a  note  received  from  her,  dated  Feb.  1st,  1849

“  My  health  is  now  so  good  that  I  do  not  think  it  abso¬
lutely  necessary  to  continue  mesmerism.  My  friends  all
agree  in  saying  they  never  saw  me  looking  better.  Such  is
also  the  testimony  of  our  medical  attendant  (Mr.  B.),  who
says,  ‘  Of  course  it  is  all  owing  to  mesmerism.'  Allow  me
again  to  thank  you  for  your  kindness  and  attention,  and  I
hope  when  I  see  you  again  you  will  be  able  to  witness  my
improved  state  of  health.”

To  the  present  day  this  young  lady  continues  in  good
health,  without  a  single  consumptive  symptom  remaining.


Earl  Stanhope’s  testimony  to  the  truth  of  Clairvoyance.  265

In  this  case  mesmeric  sympathy  was  remarkably  developed.
The  slightest  movement  on  my  part  was  so  instantaneously
answered  by  a  corresponding  movement  on  her  part,  that
the  motion  of  my  limbs  and  hers  were  as  if  they  had  been
members  of  one  and  the  same  body,  and  under  the  control
of  the  same  will,  and  this  though  we  were  separated  by  a  dis¬
tance  of  18  or  20  feet.  Attraction  was  also  beautifully  ex¬
hibited.  If  I  sat  near  her,  her  hands  would  gradually  turn
over  on  her  knees,  so  that  the  palmar  surface  would  be  up¬
ward  ;  the  fingers  would  then  reach  upward  as  if  feeling  for
something ;  the  hands  would  begin  to  rise,  and  would  con¬
tinue  to  move  towards  my  hand  or  finger,  till  the  points  of
her  fingers,  of  each  hand  respectively,  were  in  contact  with
the  point  of  one  of  my  fingers,  or  some  other  part  of  my
hand,  but  her  favourite  resting  place  was  the  point  of  a
finger.

These  phenomena  appeared  spontaneously.  I  did  not
seek  to  develope  more.


VI.  The  Earl  Stanhope’s  Testimony  to  the  Truth  of  Clairvoy¬
ance.  Communicated  by  Major  Buckley.

“  I  never  said  it  was  possible.  I  only  said  it  was  true.” — M.  G.  Lewis.

“  Le  vrai  n’est  pas  toujours  vraisemblable.” — Fontenelle.

Lord  Stanhope  having,  in  the  first  instance,  sealed  up  two
papers  at  my  lodgings,  during  my  absence  from  the  room,
delivered  them  to  me  on  my  return  to  it,  informing  me  that
one  contained  something  written  by  a  friend  of  his,  the  other
something  written  by  himself.  I  gave  them  that  evening,
while  in  my  box  at  the  opera,  to  two  ladies  of  my  party,  who
had  often  been  placed  by  me  in  a  state  of  waking  clairvoyance,
and  had  read  in  nut-shells  and  boxes,  but  never  in  sealed
packets.  One  of  them,  after  I  had  made  passes  over  the
paper,  said  that  the  words,  (which  she  wrote  in  pencil,)  “  Be¬
lieve  not  every  spirit,  but  try*  whether  it  be  good,”  were  writ¬
ten  on  it ;  and  that  after  the  last  word  of  the  sentence,  there
was  one  which  she  could  not  make  out — that  it  did  not  appear
to  belong  to  the  sentence — that  it  began  with  a  capital  letter
like  a  D.  The  other  lady  informed  me  that  she  could  make
out  the  following  words  only,  but  that  there  were  others

*  The  words  “  the  spirit”  were  inserted  here  in  the  original  paper,  of  which
the  last  words  were  a  Christian  and  surname  ;  the  first  letter  of  the  name  was  P,
but  so  written  as  to  resemble  D. — Stanhope.


266  Earl  Stanhope’s  testimony  to  the  truth  of  Clairvoyance.

which  she  could  not.  “  If  you  *  this  f  much  good.”  She
thought  that  the  word  between  “ you”  and  “  this”  was  “read,”
but  not  feeling  sure  she  would  not  write  it.

On  the  4th,  the  Earl  brought  with  him  into  my  carriage
two  packets  of  motto  nuts  sealed  up,  informing  me  that  he
had  purchased  them  in  different  shops,  one  in  Bruton  Street,
the  other  in  the  Strand,  and  that  they  had  not  been  touched
by  any  person  but  himself  since  they  were  purchased.  He
took  from  one  of  the  packets  a  nut,  which,  at  my  request,  he
marked  with  a  file,  and  gave  it  to  a  lady,  who  stated  the
words  of  the  motto.  His  Lordship  opened  it  and  found  the
words  were  as  stated.  The  same  was  done  with  three  more
nuts  and  with  the  like  success.  No  passes  were  made  over
my  face  or  over  the  nuts.

We  called  on  two  more  ladies,  and  found  them  in  com¬
pany  with  their  mother  and  two  military  officers.  The  lady
who  had  read  in  the  carriage  read  three  more  while  in  the
house,  without  passes  being  made.  One  of  the  other  ladies,
three;  the  other,  two.  They  required  passes  to  be  made
over  my  face,  as  well  as  over  the  nuts,  and  all  the  nuts  were
previously  marked,  and  afterwards  opened,  by  Lord  Stanhope.
One  of  them  was  read  while  in  his  hand.  One  lady  told  us,
before  the  nut  was  opened,  that  it  contained  one  perfect
motto,  excepting  that  part  of  the  word  “  think  ”  was  wanting,
and  on  the  same  paper  one  line  and  three  words  of  a  second
line  belonging  to  a  second  motto.  All  this  proved  correct.
The  following  were  read  in  the  carriage  : —

“  The  sight  of  my  fair,  makes  joyful  my  heart,

’Tis  only  when  absent  that  IJ  feel  any  smart.”

“  Aim  to  acquire  talents,  for  they  will  last
When  thy  present  charms  shall  all  be  past.”

“  Bless  the  hour,  name  the  day,

Haste  to  church  without  delay.”

“  Your  faults  are  odious  in  my  sight,

And  ne’er  can  give  my  heart  delight.”

The  following  in  the  house,  taken  from  the  second  sealed
packet  by  Earl  Stanhope  : —

“  Is  there  on  earth  a  joy  so  great,

Blest  with  a  fond  and  faithful  mate  ?”

“  A  person  with  a  wooden  leg,

Will  come  your  favour  soon  to  beg.”

*  The  word  “  read”  was  here  inserted  in  the  original  paper. — Stanhope.

f  The  words  “you  will  do”  were  here  inserted  in  the  original  paper. —
Stanhope.

J  Before  this  was  opened,  she  said  the  figure  1  was  in  place  of  the  word. — W.B.


Power  of  Mesmerism  over  Deafness.


267


“  In  search  of  joy  some  cross  the  sea,

I’m  only  happy  when  near  thee.”

u  Of  all  the  pains  the  greatest  pain
Is  to  love  and  love  in  vain.”

“  Think  not  too  much  of  form  or  grace,

The  mind’s  more  noble  than  the  face.”

<(  Let  the  hours  be  swiftly  fleeting,

Till  they  bring - .”

u  Love,  they  say,  on  sweets  reposes,

And  took  your  lips  for  his  bed  of  roses.”

u  Life  is  a  bark  o’er  which  dark  fates  oft  hover,

As  a  pilot  sure  let  us  take  our  lover.”

“  Where  there  is  no  sincerity,

There  cannot  be  fidelity.”

Old  Bond  Street,  Aug.  6th,  1850.  W.  Buckley.

The  above  statement  is  perfectly  correct.

Stanhope.

I  must  observe,  that  neither  my  friend  nor  myself  was
at  the  Opera  when  the  above-mentioned  papers  were  read.

Stanhope.


VII.  Power  of  Mesmerism,  over  Deafness,  and  Affections  of  the
Spine  and  Heart ;  with  some  curious  facts.  By  Lieut.-Col.
Davidson.

“  To  devote  an  article  to  the  consideration  of  animal  magnetism ,  now  that  the
English  practitioners  are,  one  and  all,  ashamed  of  its  name,  would  be  a  work  of
supererogation,  if  the  delusion,  unabashed,  were  not  yet  parading  itself  over  some
parts  of  the  Continent.” — Drs.  Forbes  and  Conolly,  British  and  Foreign
Medical  Review,  April,  1839.

“  We  have  already  stated  that  we  cannot  insert  any  communication  in  support
of  the  extravagant  humbug  of  animal  magnetism .” — Mr.  Wakley,  Lancet,
December  8th,  1844.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — If  the  following  cases  are  of  any  service  to  mesmeric
progress,  do  me  the  favour  to  publish  them.

I  am,  Sir,  yours  obediently,

C.  J.  C.  Davidson.

Grindlay’s  Rooms,  St.  Martin’s  Lane,

London,  August,  1850.

Miss  L.,  daughter  of  a  most  eminent  artist,  had  laboured
under  almostr  perfect  deafness  for  12  years.  She  could  hear
if  the  speaker’s  mouth  were  placed  close  to,  or  on  her  ears,
but  otherwise  not  a  single  sound  had  reached  her  for  that  long


268


Cure  of  old  Spinal  Affection,


period.  I  mesmerised  her  200  times.  At  the  sixth  sitting
she  fell  into  a  species  of  mesmeric  sleep,  but  was  not  insensible
to  pain  nor  rigid.  The  sleep  never  became  deeper.  At  the
55th  sitting,  I  was  much  gratified  by  learning  that  she  had,
during  my  absence,  overheard  a  conversation  between  her
nephew  and  the  cook, — the  latter  refusing  to  give  up  certain
apples  to  the  boy.  She  herself  w7as  much  surprised,  turned
round,  and  inquired  of  the  woman  whether  she  had  said  such
words;  to  which  the  cook  replied,  a  Yes,  ma’am  :  master
Edwin  wants  to  take  the  apples  that  are  meant  for  baking.”
A  night  or  two  afterwards  there  was  a  violent  storm,  and  the
patient  could  not  sleep  for  the  howling  of  the  wind.  Again,
one  night  when  soundly  asleep  mesmerically,  she  awoke
rather  peevishly,  and  said,  “  I  can*t  sleep  for  that  child*  s
screaming ;**  an  infant  in  the  room  having  had  its  repose  dis¬
turbed.  She  awoke  several  times  from  my  having  accidentally
sneezed  under  the  influence  of  a  cold.  The  nephew  warned
his  mother  in  a  laughing  manner,  stating  that  his  aunt  could
hear  now  !  In  fact,  her  progress,  though  slow,  was  decidedly
gratifying,  and  I  determined  to  spare  no  labour  to  effect  her
restoration  to  hearing.  Her  general  health  was  perfectly
established,  and  she  gained  flesh  rapidly.  Then  came  the
curious  and  puzzling  change.  She  invariably  slept  within  about
three  minutes  after  I  had  begun,  but  there  w7as  a  sudden
cessation  of  her  power  of  hearing ;  and  up  to  the  200th  sit¬
ting,  I  worked  hard  to  accomplish  her  recovery,  but  perfectly
failed.  I  do  not  attempt  to  account  for  this  unexpected
termination  of  my  anxious  labours.

The  second  case  presents  some  singular  features.  Mrs.

- ,  a  very  stout  portly  woman,  about  40  years  old,  was

brought  to  me  by  another  patient  with  the  view  of  trying  the
effect  of  mesmeric  action  on  her  case  of  spinal  affection  of  more
than  twelve  years*  duration.  She  was  thrown  into  the  mes¬
meric  coma  within  six  minutes,  on  the  first  sitting ;  and  in
the  second,  in  six  slow  passes;  and  subsequently  she  became
perfectly  rigid  at  almost  every  sitting,  and  after  the  17th
declared  herself  perfectly  recovered.  She  was  accompanied
by  an  unmarried  female,  of  great  muscular  power,  who,  on
one  occasion,  although  perfectly  ignorant  of  the  peculiarities
of  mesmerism  (which  of  themselves  require  much  study  and
attention),  undertook  to  mesmerise  my  patient  at  her  own
lodgings,  and  threw  her  into  the  rigid  state;  for  the  patient
w7as,  as  I  have  observed,  exceedingly  susceptible.  The  matter
was  never  perfectly  explained  to  me,  but  I  suspect  that  the
mesmeriser,  while  her  friend  was  in  that  state,  manipulated  the


269


by  Lieut. -Colonel  Davidson.

cerebral  organs.  Certainly  the  results  were  very  lamentable,  for
the  patient  suffered  excruciating  pains  in  her  brain,  and  could
obtain  no  relief.  I  was  told  by  the  lady  who  had  introduced
her  to  my  care,  that  she  was  in  great  pain ;  and  I  answered
that  her  conduct  in  submitting  to  the  power  of  a  second  party
was  very  indiscreet,  but  that,  if  she  attended  again,  I  would  re¬
lieve  her  at  the  first  sitting.  The  patient  accordingly  returned,
and  explained  the  cause  of  her  painful  attack.  She  seated
herself,  and  I  then  calmly  proceeded  with  extremely  slow
simultaneous  passes  from  the  midline  of  the  brain  down  over
each  shoulder,  and  occasionally  down  in  front ;  and  in  less  than
ten  minutes  the  pains  had  completely  left  her ;  and  they  never
returned.

I  shall  now  mention  a  singular  fact,  on  the  perfect  truth
of  which  you  may  rely.  During  this  patient’s  absence  from
her  regular  sittings,  1  was  attending  another  afflicted  lady,
and  every  now  and  then  was  compelled  to  desist  from  making
passes,  from  feeling  sharp  shooting  pains  in  my  brain  !  Being
a  stout,  elderly  man,  I  became  much  alarmed  at  these  symp¬
toms  and  began  to  demesmerise  myself,  in  the  same  manner
that  I  subsequently  practised  on  my  patient,  and  succeeded
in  removing  them.  I  had  to  repeat  this  process  several  times
a  day  for  three  days,  wondering  how  such  symptoms  could
have  arisen,  as  I  enjoyed  the  most  robust  health  in  other
respects,  until  I  was  informed  of  the  cross-mesmerising  of
my  spinal  patient.  I  could  not  then,  and  do  not  now,  doubt
as  to  the  origin  and  cause  of  my  painful  attack,  and  I  hope
that  mesmerisers  will  warn  their  susceptible  patients  not  to
subject  themselves  to  such  a  chance  of  injury.  I  say  chance ,
for  I  have  had  proof  that,  if  the  patients  are  not  highly  sus¬
ceptible,  the  simultaneous  action  of  two  persons  on  the  same
sufferer  is  not  invariably  injurious.  But  certainly,  in  using
such  double  power,  one,  at  least,  of  the  mesmerisers  should
be  possessed  of  great  calmness  and  self-possession,  so  as  to
be  able  to  observe  and  check  the  first  unfavourable  symptom
of  cross-mesmerism.

As  usual,  this  patient  had  been  subjected  to  every  species
of  the  routine  practice,  viz.,  blistering,  issues,  &c.,  &c.,  under
very  eminent  medical  men  for  many  years  past.  I  forgot  to
mention  that  at  the  conclusion  of  her  case  she  mentioned
that  she  was  perfectly  well,  with  the  single  exception  of  one
small  spot  close  to  her  left  scapula.  I  placed  a  handkerchief
over  the  place,  and  breathed  strongly  over  it  for  a  quarter  of
an  hour  or  more,  and  the  next  day  the  pain  had  entirely  dis¬
appeared,  but  a  large  red  spot  was  there,  as  if  the  part  had
been  recently  blistered.  For  the  benefit  of  such  as  may  be


270


Cure  of  Affection  of  the  Heart.


inexperienced,  I  may  state  that  I  stood  or  sat  chiefly  at  the
patient's  back,  and  made  my  passes  down  from  the  top  of  the
head,  following  the  course  of  the  spine.

The  third  case  proves  the  inestimable  value  of  mesmeric
action  on  diseases  of  the  heart,  such  as  are  otherwise  incur¬
able  by  medical  skill.

Kate - ,  a  young  woman,  20  years  of  age,  had  for

three  years  been  subject  to  such  violent  palpitations  of  the
heart,  as  to  render  her  almost  useless  as  an  attendant  on  one
of  my  spinal  patients,  who  had  been  for  four  years  confined
to  her  bed.  This  disease  had  been  produced  by  tight-lacing,
and  the  girl  was  so  satisfied  of  this,  that  she  discarded  stays
in  toto.  On  leaving  the  lower  apartments  of  the  house,  at
the  sound  of  her  mistress's  bell,  she  was  compelled  by  sudden
attacks,  during  her  ascent,  to  stand  gasping  for  breath,  and
in  this  manner  she  slowly  reached  the  sick  chamber  of  her
kind  mistress.  This  lady  mentioned  her  case  and  asked  me
if  I  thought  she  might  gain  any  advantage  by  the  use  of  mes¬
merism.  I  said  that  at  all  events  I  could  try,  and  would
whenever  my  services  were  required.  Being  desirous  of  pro¬
curing  the  benefit  of  a  clairvoyant,  Kate's  sister  was  brought
to  me,  as  she  had  been  cured  of  epilepsy  in  three  sittings
and  had  shewn  strong  symptoms  of  lucidity.  I  mesmerised
her,  and  threw  her  into  a  low  clairvoyant  state  in  a  very  few
minutes.  I  then  asked  her,  “  What  is  the  matter  with
Kate  ?"  “  She  has  a  disease  of  the  heart."  “  What  would

cure  her?"  “ Mesmerism  would."  “How  long  would  it
take  !"  “  Five  sittings."  “  Are  you  quite  sure  ?"  “  Yes."

“  Perfectly  sure  ?"  “  Yes."  “  How  do  you  know  ?"  “  I

don't  choose  to  tell  you."  “What!  won't  you  obey  your
mesmeriser  ?"  “  No,  not  unless  I  choose  !"  Kate  sat  the

next  day,  and  in  twenty-five  minutes  was  soundly  asleep  ;  but,
on  being  questioned,  spoke  with  great  difficulty  and  much
against  her  inclination,  saying  that  she  would  be  quite  well
in  four  more  sittings  !  She  repeated  the  date  of  her  cure  at
the  third,  and  at  every  subsequent  seance ,  until,  at  the  fifth,
she  declared  that  she  was  quite  well,  but  would  be  seized
with  a  fit  that  evening  at  5  o'clock.  I  asked  her  if  she  were
perfectly  certain  that  she  would  not  be  subject  to  any  more
attacks?  She  hesitated  a  moment,  and  then  stated,  “Yes,

I  shall  have  another  this  day  fortnight ;  and  that  will,  I  am
sure,  be  the  very  last."  “But  how  is  this?  you  are  quite
well,  and  are  going  to  have  another  this  day  fortnight !  How
will  that  be  caused?"  “By  a  fright !"  The  evening  of  her
last  sitting  arrived,  and,  on  going  out  for  some  beer  for  her


Dr.  J.  A.  Wilson’s  terrific  Harveian  Oration.  271

fellow-servants,  she  was  seized,  at  the  outer  door,  with  a
violent  fit,  and  obliged  to  sit  down  till  she  could  breathe.
I  waited  with  anxiety  to  discover  whether  the  second  part  of
her  prediction  would  be  accomplished.  The  13th  day  arrived,
and  Kate,  like  all  the  maid  servants  of  the  town,  being  de¬
votedly  fond  of  dancing,  after  great  difficulty  obtained  the
permission  of  her  mistress  to  attend  a  servants*  ball.  She
danced  gaily  until  four  in  the  morning,  in  the  most  perfect
health  and  enjoyment,  but  met  then  with  a  fright  which  pro¬
duced  the  predicted  fit.  I  know  that  for  four  months  she
has  not  had  another  attack.  Her  mistress  declared  her  to  be
a  perfectly  new  creature,  active  and  lively.  Kate  returned
me  her  hearty  thanks  for  her  complete  restoration  to  health.
I  exhibited  her,  while  in  the  mesmeric  coma,  to  a  young
barrister  of  the  family,  and  to  the  medical  man,  while  Kate
shewed  mesmeric  sympathy  both  with  myself  and  with  such
as  were  put  in  mesmeric  connection  with  her,  in  tasting  salt,
smelling  flowers,  hartshorn,  &c.,  &c.  The  barrister  said  it
was  very  curious,  but  there  might  be  collusion  between  us  !
“  Not  that  I  accuse  you,  but  there  might  be !”  The
medical  man  saw  me,  by  placing  my  hand  on  Kate*s  brain,
instantly  stop  a  strong  fit  of  hysteria  produced  by  the  rude
handling  of  her  brain  by  one  of  the  young  ladies  present ;
and  I  said  to  him,  “  Look,  is  that  a  delusion  ?”  “  It’s  very

curious  certainly  !  *’  *  Certainly  it  is  curious  :  but  the  be¬
nighted  and  self-blinded  class  will  not  prosecute  the  re-dis¬
covery.  Unwise  men  that  they  are  !  they  permit  half-edu¬
cated  and  unprofessional  men  to  pluck  the  laurels  within
their  reach,  and  wantonly  despise  a  power  greater  and  surer
than  that  of  any  medicine  at  their  disposal.  What  a  curious
creature  is  man  !  Very.

C.  J.  C.  D.


VIII.  An  account  of  the  deadly  blows  dealt ,  in  the  very  pre¬
sence  of  the  President  and  whole  College  of  Physicians,
upon  all  the  mesmerists  of  the  earth  in  their  absence,  by
the  valiant  Dr.  John  Arthur  Wilson,  a  physician  of
St.  George’s  Hospital,  in  his  late  right  comical  Harveian
Oration.  By  John  Elliotson,  M.D.,  Cantab.  E.R.S.,
&c.,  &c.,  one  of  the  sufferers,  and  not  likely  to  recover.

“  I  was  often  called  upon  to  defend  our  nation  from  the  charges  of  polygamy
and  atheism.  They  were  dreadfully  scandalized  at  our  refusing  to  acknowledge
the  authority  of  the  Pope,  and  one  gentleman  asked  me  seriously,  and  with  an

*  A  surgeon  named  Paget,  practising  at  Leicester,  witnessed  some  mesmeric
phenomena,  and  all  he  could  do  was  to  say  “  It’s  very  funny,”  and  think  no
more  of  the  matter.  But  he  picks  up  ^4000  per  annum,  by  medical  and  surgical
practice.  See  Zoist,  No.  III.,  p.  326,


2  72


Dr.  John  Arthur  Wilson’s


air  of  great  concern,  whether  I  ever  said  ray  prayers  !  On  one  occasion  a  large
party  had  assembled,  among  whom  was  a  merchant  recently  arrived  from  Aleppo.
In  the  course  of  conversation  he  began  to  attack  the  English.

“  ‘  The  Ingleez,’  he  said,  ‘  are  a  very  fierce  and  intractable  nation.  They
marry  many  wives,  and  care  very  little  about  Allah,  whose  name  be  exalted.’

“  I  here  interrupted  the  speaker,  and  asked  if,  in  the  course  of  his  travels,  he
had  ever  heard  of  the  English  church.

“  ‘  Belli,  yes,’  he  answered,  ‘  I  know  the  whole  history  of  your  church.  You
must  understand,’  continued  he,  turning  to  the  rest,  ‘  that  once  there  lived  in
England  a  great  sultan,  whose  name  was  Napoleon  Buonaparte.  This  sultan  was
like  unto  Antar  and  Iskander,  the  Macedonian,  and  he  made  many  of  the  kings
of  Frangistan  his  footstool.  But  his  heart  was  lifted  up,  and  he  defied  Allah  in
his  pride.  And  Napoleon’s  wife  was  old,  and  she  was  no  longer  pleasing  in  his
eyes.  Then  it  came  to  pass  that  he  looked  upon  a  certain  fair  damsel  with  the
glances  of  love,  and  he  said,  “  Inshallah,  I  will  divorce  my  wife  and  get  me  this
fair  one  in  marriage.”  Now  the  Ingleez  were  all  catholics  then,  and  therefore
Napoleon  sent  a  message  to  our  father  the  Pope  desiring  that  he  would  grant  him
a  divorce.  But  the  Pope  reproved  Napoleon  for  his  pride  and  unkind  dealing
with  his  wife,  at  which  the  sultan  waxed  wrath,  and  said,  “  Surely  this  Pope  is
no  better  than  Abou  Jahash,  even  the  Father  of  Stupidity  ;  but  Inshallah,  I  will
make  him  eat  abomination.”  So  he  went  with  many  soldiers  and  besieged  Rome,
and  took  the  Pope  prisoner,  and  shut  him  up  in  a  great  tower  in  London,  which
is  the  chief  city  of  the  Ingleez.  But  the  kings  of  the  Franks  all  joined  together,
and  made  war  upon  Napoleon  Buonaparte,  and  overcame  him.  Then  their
soldiers  came  to  London  and  set  the  Pope  at  liberty.  And  when  the  Pope  re¬
turned  to  Rome  he  cursed  Napoleon,  and  excommunicated  him  and  all  the
Ingleez.  But  Napoleon  laughed  at  his  beard,  and  he  said,  “  Inshallah,  but  I  will
have  a  church  of  my  own.”  So  he  made  bishops,  and  they  divorced  his  wife,
and  they  married  him  to  the  beautiful  damsel,  after  which  he  founded  the  English
church.’

“  All  the  assembly  were  deeply  penetrated  and  impressed  with  this  narrative,
which  was  delivered  with  great  volubility  and  lively  pantomimic  action.  I  had
but  little  chance  of  being  attended  to  in  my  vindication  of  my  country  and  its
religion,  for,  say  what  I  would,  the  audience  shook  their  heads  doubtfully,  and
departed  full  of  admiration  at  the  wisdom  of  the  Aleppo  merchant,  and  regarding
the  English  church  as  the  profane  invention  of  that  second  Nimrod,  Napoleon
Buonaparte.” — Notes  from  Nineveh ,  and  Travels  in  Mesopotamia,  Assyria,  and
Syria.  By  the  Rev.  J.  P.  Fletcher.

The  fury  of  Mr.  Wakley,  the  leader  of  the  British  anti¬
mesmerists — the  Holy  Alliance  of  medical  and  chirurgical
presidents  and  fellows  of  colleges,  baronets,  knights,  archiaters,
examiners,  teachers,  of  fashionable  and  unfashionable,  dashing
and  miserable,  pure  and  not  pure,  physicians,  surgeons,  apo¬
thecaries  and  men-midwives,  to  hospitals,  dispensaries  and
unions  and  without  office  at  all,  of  dentists,  cuppers,  and  chi¬
ropodists,  from  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  down  to  Elijah  Drench
of  Rosemary  Polygon  and  Miss  Moucher  of  Tothill  Fields,

Grandes  et  savantissimi  doctores,

Medicinse  professores,

Chirurgiani  et  apothecari, —

Grandes  doctores  doctrinse
De  la  rhubarbe  et  du  sene,* —

the  fury,  I  say,  of  the  terrible  coroner  of  all  Middlesex,  as
soon  as  he  found  that  T  was  appointed  to  deliver  the  Harveian
oration  in  1846,  was  something  so  awful,  that  apoplexy,  palsy,

*  Moliere,  Le  Malade  Imaginaire.  Troisieme  Internude.


Terrific  Harveian  Oration.


273


and  insanity  were  severally  feared  by  his  affectionate  friends
and  admirers  for  several  weeks  during  that  glowing  summer.
His  wild  cries,  are  they  not  all  preserved  in  the  sacred  pages
of  the  virtuous  Lancet  of  that  memorable  period,  and  faith¬
fully  copied  into  the  accursed  pages  of  the  unholy  Zoist  for
Jan.  1849  ?*  They  are  :  and  great  will  be  the  help  of  these
immortal  works  to  the  medical  historians  who  shall  live  when
we  and  mesmerism  are  no  more  to  be  found  in  any  corner  of
the  earth.  But  the  more  violent  a  paroxysm,  the  greater  the
exhaustion  and  repose  which  follow.  When  the  oration  had
not  only  been  delivered,  but  printed  and  eagerly  read  in  every
Christian  country,  a  mesmeric  establishment  was  founded  :
and  the  leader  of  the  alliance  raved  not  again,  but  gave  just
one  hoarse  growl,  on  Saturday  morning,  July  18th,  1846  : —

“  First-fruits  of  the  mesmeric  oration  at  the  College  of  Physi¬
cians. — The  following  disgusting  advertisement  appeared  in  the
Times  of  Tuesday  last,  July  the  14th  :  ‘Mesmeric  Infirmary. — At  a
meeting  at  the  Earl  of  Ducie’s/  &c.” — Lancet.

A  fellow  of  the  College,  whose  intellect,  morals,  and  taste
had  been  cultivated  with  all  the  advantages  and  care  which
Oxford  and  Cambridge  only  can  bestow,  and  with  whom  I
was  and  had  been  for  twenty  years  on  terms  of  incessant  and
most  friendly  intercourse,  and  with  whom  at  my  side  during
the  banquet  which  followed  my  oration  I  enjoyed  myself  ex¬
ceedingly,  as  friends  do  on  such  occasions,  sent  the  following
delicious  lines  to  the  Lancet ,  selecting  this  magazine  no  doubt
in  the  sincerest  friendship,  as  it  had  so  unmercifully  and  deli¬
cately  abused  and  so  seriously  injured  my  purse  and  my
character  for  eight  long  years  and  been  more  violent  than
ever  against  me  during  the  preceding  month.

“  THE  MESMERIC  HOSPITAL.

“  To  the  Editor  of  the  Lancet.

“  Sir, —

<c  It  appears  from  your  last,  as  I  erst  had  suspected.

That  a  Mesmeric  Hospital’s  to  be  erected  ;

And  if  the  subscriptions  pour  in  pretty  fast,

The  scheme  will  perhaps  be  accomplished  at  last.

Dr.  E.  will  of  course  be  the  leading  physician  !

A  man  of  acknowledged  and  vast  erudition,

Well  versed  in  the  art ;  and  the  cream  of  the  joke  is,

He  has  booked  for  the  nurses  the  two  little  Okeys.

Then  away  with  examiners,  drugs,  and  degrees  ;

Away  with  old  fashions,  excepting  the  fees ;

Away  with  the  Hall,  and  away  with  the  College ;

Away  with  chirurgico -medical  knowledge  ;

*  No.  XXIV.,  pp.  422-3.  “  The  parties  concerned  in  this  infamous  publi¬

cation  are  in  a  state  of  perpetual  mortification  at  their  fallen  and  degraded
position.5’ — Mr.  Wakley,  Lancet,  July  31,  1847.  See  Zoist ,  No.  XIX.,  p.  293.


274


Dr.  John  Arthur  Wilson  s


The  * passes  ’  will  act  like  the  wand  of  a  fairy.

For  Mesmer’s  the  *  grand  plenipotentiary.'

All  the  hospitals’  heads  will  be  hid  and  diminished
The  moment  this  foetal  Mesmeric  is  finished.

And  paupers,  in  future,  will  learn  to  despise,

King’s  College,  The  London,  St.  George’s  and  Guy’s.

No  more  shall  we  hear  the  afflicted  complain,

Operations  will  give  more  of  pleasure  than  pain  ;

And  ladies  will  smile  in  their  mesmerised  trance
As  the  pains  of  their  uterine  efforts  advance.

Then  shut  up  the  schools,  burn  the  Pharmacopoeia,

Let  us  carry  out  old  Dr.  Mesmer’s  idea :

And  whilst  sceptics  their  agonized  vigils  are  keeping.

His  disciples  will  through  their  afflictions  be  sleeping.

“  B - .

“  Chelmsford,  July,  1846.”

The  poet  was  modest,  yet  felt  it  a  duty  to  himself  to
secure  the  glory  of  such  a  composition,  and  therefore  indi¬
cated  the  authorship  by  appending  the  word  Chelmsford  and
the  letter  B ;  and  after  many  coy  blushings,  hangings  down
of  the  head,  evasions,  and  positive  denials  of  the  authorship,
at  last  confessed  to  me  that  the  pretty  production  was  his
own — the  offspring  of  the  head  and  heart  of  Dr.  John  Carr
Badeley,  M.D.,  Cantab.,  at  present  writing  as  many  pre¬
scriptions  as  he  is  requested  in  the  market  town  of  Chelms¬
ford.

The  oration  of  1847  was  delivered  by  a  quiet  gentleman¬
like  physician,  Dr.  Southey,  a  graduate  of  Edinburgh,  was
very  short,  and  contained  no  allusion  to  mesmerism.

The  orator  of  1848,  Dr.  Francis  Hawkins,  registrar  of
the  College,  with  whom  I  had  always  been,  as  far  as  I  knew,
on  “  the  best  terms,”  came  out  dashingly,  and  at  once  called
all  mesmerists  quacks,  impostors,  and  lewd  persons.  Not
only  was  he  unreproved,  but,  when,  in  a  letter,  I  pointed
out  this  insulting  conduct  to  the  president  officially,  1  could
obtain  no  redress,  not  even  a  notice  of  such  an  unjust  and
offensive  attack  ;*  whereas  either  he  should  have  been  severely
censured,  or  I  and  every  mesmerist  in  the  College  deprived  of
the  fellowship,  which  ought  not  to  be  held  by  a  quack,  an  im¬
postor,  or  a  lewd  person.

In  1849  the  oration  was  furnished  by  Dr.  Badeley,  and
he  made  no  allusion  to  mesmerism,  having  said  all  he  knew
about  it  in  poetry,  and  having  heard  from  me,  in  reply  to  a
note  in  which  he  assured  me  he  should  not  mention  mesmer¬
ism,  that  I  trusted  he  would,  and  that,  if  he  said  anything
improper,  I  would  make  minced  meat  of  him.  I  was  too
kind-hearted  to  say  minced  veal,  though,  as  he  is  an  Essex
man,  I  might  with  perfect  zoological  propriety.

*  See  No.  XXIV.,  p.  399.


Terrific  Harveian  Oration.


275


In  this  year  of  1850,  John  Arthur  Wilson,  Esq.,  M.D.,
Oxon.,  performed  the  part  of  orator,  and  belaboured  us  with
all  his  might,  calling  us  all  sorts  of  names,  like  the  Oxonian
Dr.  E.  Hawkins,  unreproved,  and  making  strangers  imagine
that  Harvey^s  day  is  the  feast  of  unreason,  or  saturnalia,
when  the  most  unoffending  and  well-meaning  must  submit,
without  power  of  redress,  to  be  spit  upon,  kicked,  and  re¬
viled,  and  hear  all  manner  of  evil  spoken  of  them.*

Having  seen  in  the  newspapers  that  we  had  been  terribly
castigated,  I  trembled  on  reading  a  solemn  declaration  from
the  orator,  that  he  had  spared  no  pains  to  utter  nothing  but
the  truth ;  so  that  all  accusation  must  appear  well  grounded,
and  his  thumps  justified  in  the  sight  of  all  men.

“  My  first  object  is  to  speak  the  truth ;  to  hold  no  opinion  that
is  not  correct.

However,  I  resolved  to  go  through  the  penal  details  like
a  man,  and  find  how  many  blows  were  bestowed  upon  me
and  my  race,  and  what  reasons  were  given  for  them.

“Of  those  forward  female  creatures  who  busy  themselves  in¬
cessantly  with  every  strange  practice  in  medicine,  surgery,  and  mid¬
wifery,  and  clamour  in  public  without  any  modesty  for  this  or
that  man-midwife  who  happens  to  be  their  delight,  contrary  to
the  teaching,  the  morals,  and  the  innocence  of  Harvey, — of  this
or  that  duke,  earl,  senator,  knight,  who  trust  their  wives  or  daugh¬
ters  to  these  indecent  mesmeric  or  obstetric  women , — of  mesmeric
bishops,  of  arch-mesmeric  arch-bishops , — allow  me  for  this  one  day,
while  I  am  among  my  brother  doctors,  to  hold  my  tongue  out  of
sheer  disgust,  out  of  modesty,  out  of  my  reverence  for  re¬
ligion  !”J

*  In  a  lecture  delivered  before  the  College  a  few  months  previously  to  Dr.  Haw¬
kins’s  oration,  “  He  said  that  mesmerists  absurdly  talk  of  preventing  the  pain  of
surgical  operations  by  mesmerism,  and  tell  us  of  a  man  in  Nottinghamshire  whose
leg  was  cut  off  without  his  feeling  pain,  but  who  was  like  Sir  Thomas  Hardy,
a  brave  fellow,  and  one  who  could  bear  pain,  or  did  not  know  what  the  word
pain  meant.  And  then  he  descanted  upon  the  blessings  of  chloroform,  and  thought
the  bishops  ought  to  be  requested  to  draw  up  a  form  of  thanksgiving  to  God  for
having  vouchsafed  to  us  the  knowledge  of  chloroform  to  prevent  pain.  He  next
ridiculed  mesmerism  as  an  imposture  sometimes  shewn  in  drawing-rooms  to
fashionable  dowagers  with  not  half  the  sense  of  laundry-maids,  and  talked  about
Rosicrusian  parsons,  and  semi-delirious  butlers.” — Zoist ,  No.  XXIII,  p.  344.

f  “  Id  primum  respicio,  ut  verum  sit  id  quod  dicam,  ut  quod  sentiam  sit
sincerum.”

£  “  De  mulierculis  istis  protervis,  omni  insolitae  methodo  vel  medicinse,  vel
chirurgiae,  vel  artis  obstetricae  se  confestim  immiscentibus, — pro  hoc  vel  illo  ob-
stetrico  in  deliciis  habito,  contra  Harveii  doctrinam,  mores  et  innocentiam,  per
publicas  vias  impudice  clamitantibus, — de  duce  hoc  vel  illo, — de  comitibus,  sena-
toribus,  equestribus,  in  mesmericarum  vel  obstetricarum  istarum  impudicarum
muliercularum  clientelam  se  et  conjuges  et  Alias  suas  tradentibus, — de  episcopis
mesmericis,  de  archiepiscopis  archi-mesmericis, — prae  fastidio,  prae  pudore,  prae
religionis  studio  liceat  mihi  medico  saltern  inter  medicos  hoc  die  tacere  1”


276


Dr.  John  Arthur  Wilson’s


This  was  a  very  pretty  way  of  holding  his  tongue.  How¬
ever,  I  found  myself  in  the  best  society,  as  it  is  called ;  and  the
blows  neither  made  me  reel  nor  gave  me  pain,  and  for  a  very
good  reason,  because  they  were  no  blows,  since  the  orator  did
not  attempt  any  proof,  justification  or  illustration  of  what  he
said,  but  merely  called  names,  which  every  body  knows  are
not  blows  and  can  be  furnished  by  any  coward  or  child  in
any  quantity.

After  collecting  his  strength  as  well  as  he  could,  the  orator
aimed  another  blow  : —

“Let  us  return  to  Harvey  and  Lumley,  into  day-light  again.
Get  out  of  the  way  you  modern  'patrons ,  you  homceopathists,  you
hydropathists,  you  visionariesy  you  MESMERISTS.  Your  ways,
your  nature,  disqualify  you  for  patronizing  in  conjunction  with  that
pure  old  English  breed  of  the  nobleman  and  the  physician.”

“  Do,  pray,  let  the  absurdities,  the  presumption,  the  indecencies,
with  which  you  have  so  long  oppressed  and  almost  extinguished  our
divine  art,  be  banished  for  ever  into  utter  darkness  and  silence  by
this  adjuration  at  least  (I  am  going  to  speak  about  the  blood).”*

We  learnt  most  satisfactorily  that  we  are  successful  swind¬
lers  : —

“To  all  who  cultivate  genuine  medicine  daily,  diligently,  and
most  laboriously,  who  try  to  preserve  their  good  feelings  and  the
excellence  of  their  nature,  purity,  and  morals — to  all  who  prefer
living  in  honest  poverty  to  growing  rich  by  the  systematic  quackeries
of  homoeopathy,  hydropathy,  and  mesmerism — to  all  these  respect¬
able  fellows  of  the  College,  though  humble  in  ambition  and  pocket,
let  us  return  due  thanks  solemnly  in  obedience  to  Harvey,  as  to  our
benefactors. ”f

So  enthusiastically  struck  with  benevolence  and  piety  was
Dr.  Wilson,  like  all  other  virulent  revilers  of  mesmerism  and
mesmerists,  when  ether  and  chloroform  were  announced,  that
he  proposed  public  and  private  thanksgivings  should  be  of¬
fered  up  throughout  the  country  to  Almighty  God,J  the

*  “  Ad  Harveium  et  Lumleium,  quasi  in  lucem,  redeamus.  Date  locum,
hujusce  sevi  patroni,  homoeopathici,  hydropathici,  mercuriales,  mesmerici.  Inter
hos  duos,  inter  hunc  nobilem  et  medicum  ilium,  stirpis  veteris  illius  Anglicse
et  sincerse  propaginis,  clientela  non  morum  est  vestrum,  non  vestri  est  ingenii.

“  Ineptise,  arrogantise,  impudicitise,  quibus  artem  nostram  divinatn  jaradiu
opprimitis  et  pene  obruitis,  hac  saltern  adjuratione,  (de  sanguine  nunc  agitur,)
in  tenebras  actse  conquiescant !”

f  “  Omnibus — qui,  verse  medicinse  scientiam  excolentes,  in  hac  nostra  vitse
ratione,  quotidiana,  assidua,  laboriosissima,  humanitatem  animi,  et  mores  suos
integros  servare  student — omnibus,  qui  honeste  pauperes  vivere  optant,  potius
quam  homoeopathicis,  hydropathicis,  mesmericis,  etiam  ad  normam  empirice
exquisitis  artibus  divitias  parere — omnibus  his  bene  moratis  sociis  nostris,  quam-
vis  spe  humili  et  opibus  prsecisis,  gratias  hodie  ut  benefactoribus,  Harveio  ipso
indicente,  pro  debito  et  solemniter  agamus.”

X  Lancet,  1847.  See  Zoist,  No.  XXVIII.,  p.  375.


Terrific  Harveian  Oration.


27  7


bishops  composing  the  form, — but  the  common  burial  service
being,  I  suppose,  sufficient  to  be  read  over  the  mortal  remains
of  those  who  perish  by  either;  and  he  gave  utterance  to
these  feelings  in  his  oration,  and,  like  all  the  candid  tribe  of
anti-mesmerists,  but,  in  all  honesty  and  simplicity  of  heart
and  no  doubt  “  out  of  sheer  disgust ,  out  of  modesty ,  out  of  his
reverence  for  religion without  a  single  allusion  to  the  endless
cases  recorded  in  The  Zoist  of  the  anaesthetic  powers  of  mes¬
merism,  or  to  the  gigantic  labours  of  Dr.  Esdaile  which  “  will
endure  longer  than  the  royal  pyramids  of  Egypt.”

“  —  allow  me,  Fellows,  to  say  a  very  few  words,  but  those  of
prayer  and  thanksgiving,  to  extol  that  heavenly  gift  vouchsafed
divinely  by  the  author  of  all  good  for  the  relief  of  man,  the  ethereal
power  of  which,  diffused  among  the  nerves  by  the  blood,  prevents
even  the  most  violent  pain.

“  This  is  surely  as  deserving  of  patronage  by  our  aristocracy  and
idle  female  creatures  as  mesmeric  passes  ;  and  as  much  to  be  thought
a  miracle  and  received  with  gratitude  by  religious  philosophers.

“A  truly  wonderful  thing,  a  thing  in  which  we  see  the  hand  of
God,  and  to  which  no  language  is  adequate.

“  Alas !  how  has  it  been  received  into  the  hands  and  not  the
hearts  of  many  of  us,  who  are  stupid  dolts  without  a  spark  of  reli¬
gion.  Unworthy,  ungrateful  wretches !  cannot  the  grovelling  Eng¬
lish  mind,  always  hankering  after  money  and  titles, — cannot  the
little  soul  of  the  morbid  anatomist,  always  busied  with  particles, —
cannot  the  superficial  medico-chirurgico-obstetrico-practical  mind,  no
longer  simple  and  earnest  as  in  the  olden  time,  endure  the  presence
of  God  in  his  works  ?

“  Our  pious  Harvey  would  not  have  given  such  a  reception  to
the  sight  of  the  blood  now  made  to  triumph  in  the  nerves  over  pain
by  the  vapour  of  ether ;  nor  would  he  who  was  at  once  physician,
philosopher,  and  poet,  have  passed  by  this  subject  for  adoration  like
a  summer  cloud  without  profound  admiration.  Where,  where  is
that  Religio  Medici — that  &a-07j<m  of  his  art  and  its  object  expressed
in  the  sentence,  ‘  Men  never  come  nearer  to  the  gods  than  when
contemplating  the  divine  nature  and  giving  health  to  their  fellow
creatures/’*

*  “  —  mihi  fas  sit  perpaucis  verbis,  sed  iis  preces  et  gratias  agentibus,  iterum
coram  vobis,  Socii,  donum  illud  coeleste  extollere,  ab  Auctoris  cujusve  boni  ad
solatium  hominum  divinitus  missum,  cujus  vis  actherea  in  nervos  per  sanguinem
diffusa,  dolori,  utcunque  atroci,  in  principiis  obstare  valet.

“  En,  quod  a  viris  nostris  principibus  et  mulierculis  otiosis,  aeque  ac  manipu¬
late  mesmerica  dignum  est  ut  in  patrocinium  et  clientelam  recipiatur, — a  reli-
giosis  philosophise  faventibus  aeque  pro  miraculo  habendum,  et  grata  mente
excolendum  !”

“  Res  plane  mirabilis,  res  Dei !  et  cui  potest  par  oratio  nulla  inveniri.

u  Heu  !  inter  plerosque  nostrum,  quam  crasso  ingenio  quam  sine  religione,  in
manus,  sed  non  in  animam  receptum.  Indigni!  Ingrati!  Anegestas  hujusce  animi
nostri  Anglici  in  nummationem  et  titulos  semper  proelivis,  an  angustiae  pectoris
pathologiei  particulis  partium  semper  occupati,  an  levitas  ingenii  medico-chirurgico-
VOL.  VIII.  X


278


Dr.  John  Arthur  Wilson’s


Dr.  Wilson  of  course  hit  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  for  he
alone  of  all  anti-mesmeric  surgeons,  as  far  as  I  know,
made  himself  notorious  for  opposition  to  ether  and  chloro¬
form,  and,  I  suppose,  in  order  to  be  consistent,  as  he  had
ridiculed  the  idea  of  so  many  people  suffering  much  pain
in  operations.  Dr.  Wilson’s  words  are  very  classical  and
pretty — “  stupid,”  “  without  religion,”  “  unworthy,”  “  un¬
grateful.”  But  he  is  certainly  wrong  in  representing  that
there  was  other  opposition  to  the  ether  and  chloroform.  For
the  medical  world,  being  violently  anti-mesmeric,  embraced
the  anaesthetic  drugs  frantically ;  and  as  to  the  aristocracy
and  idle  female  creatures,  the  nobility  were  invited  by  the
hospital  surgeons  to  witness  the  painless  surgical  operations,
and  did  go  to  witness  them  in  crowds,  with  anti-mesmeric
divines  and  literary  men, — and  the  “idle female  creatures,” if
they  did  not  rush  with  the  gentlemen  to  witness  surgical
operations,  were  shewn  the  anaesthetic  effects  upon  poor  birds
and  guinea-pigs,  some  of  which  unfortunately  died  instead  of
recovering,  by  Mr.  Brande  at  the  Royal  Institution,  and  by
Dr.  Buckland,  the  Dean  of  Westminster,  and  others,  at  pri¬
vate  parties,  on  both  poor  dumb  animals  and  on  human  beings,
some  of  whom  vomited  all  over  the  drawing-room  carpets. —

Allow  me,  my  fellow  men,  to  say  a  very  few  words,
but  those  of  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  to  extol  that  heavenly
gift,  vouchsafed  divinely  by  the  author  of  all  good  for  the
relief  of  man,  the  mesmeric  power,  which  influencing  the
system  prevents  even  the  most  violent  pain.

This  is  surely  as  deserving  of  patronage  by  our  aristo¬
cracy  and  idle  female  creatures  as  ether  and  chloroform;  and  as
much  to  be  thought  a  miracle  and  received  with  gratitude  by
religious  philosophers.  A  truly  wonderful  thing,  a  thing  in
which  we  see  the  hand  of  God,  and  to  which  no  language  is
adequate.

Alas  !  How  has  it  been  received  by  the  hands  and  not
the  hearts  of  many  of  us,  who  are  stupid  dolts  without  a
spark  of  religion.  Unworthy,  ungrateful  wretches  !  Cannot
the  grovelling  English  mind,  always  hankering  after  money
and  titles, — cannot  the  little  soul  of  the  morbid  anatomist,


obstetrico-practici,  haud,  ut  in  tempore  praeterito,  simplicis  et  concentrati,  Deum
in  ipso  opere  praesentem  non  possunt  perferre  ?”

“  Non  sic  pius  noster  Harveius  sanguinem,  per  aetheris  vaporem,  de  dolore
in  nervis  triumphantem  in  mentem  suam  oculis  recepisset.  Non  ille,  medicus,
philosophus,  poeta,  hoc  pro  adoratione  indicium,  quasi  nebulam  astivam,  sine
admiratione  singulari  praetermisisset.  Ubi !  ubi !  est  ea  Religio  Medici  ?  &ur
drjcns  ilia  artis  suae  et  ejus  propositi,  quae  his  verbis  exprimitur,  f  Homines  nun-
quam  ad  Deos  propius  accedunt,  quam  Dei  naturam  contemplando,  et  salutem
hominibus  dando.’  ”


Terrific  Harveian  Oration .


279


always  busied  with  particles, — cannot  the  superficial  medico-
chirurgico-obstetrico-practical  mind,  no  longer  simple  and
earnest  as  in  the  olden  time,  endure  the  presence  of  God  iu
his  works  ?

Our  pious  Harvey  would  not  have  given  such  a  reception
to  the  sight  of  mesmerism,  now  made  to  triumph  over  pain
and  disease.* —

It  is  droll  to  hear  Dr.  Wilson  utter  so  much  religion,  and
pour  forth  such  shocking  abuse,  in  the  same  breath  ;  and  to
observe  him  not  struck  with  the  fact  that  he  is  registering  him¬
self  on  the  list  of  a  tribe  of  miserable  forgotten  fellows,  who
would  not  witness  Harvey’s  facts  and  abused  him  with  all  their
might,  and  who,  whenever  a  great  discovery  or  invention  has
been  made,  especially  in  our  science  and  art,  have  taken  pains
to  make  themselves  the  laughing-stock  of  posterity  and  have
fully  succeeded. t  Dr.  Wilson  describes  the  anti-circulation
gentlemen  thus : —

“  Constantly  abused  by  those  whom  his  discovery  chiefly  inte¬
rested;  injured  severely  from  the  same  cause  in  his  practice  and
income;  pronounced  insane,  though  his  reason  never  failed  him  in
his  life;  he  preserved  his  purity  of  life,  and  his  goodness  of  heart
equalled  and  kept  pace  with  his  firmness  to  the  last. ”7

But  what  Harvey  thought  of  his  revilers,  you  may  learn
from  his  own  words,  quoted  in  my  Oration,  p.  67  : —

“  Some  rail  with  a  torrent  of  expressions  which  are  discreditable
to  them,  often  spiteful,  insolent,  and  abusive,  by  which  they  only
display  their  own  emptiness,  absurdity,  bad  habits,  and  want  of
argument  (which  results  from  sense)  and  show  themselves  mad  with
sophistries  opposed  to  reason.”  “  How  difficult  it  is  to  teach  those
who  have  no  experience  or  knowledge  derived  from  the  senses,  and
how  unfit  to  learn  true  science  are  the  unprepared  and  inexperienced,
is  shown  in  the  opinions  of  the  blind  concerning  colours  and  of  the
deaf  concerning  sounds.”

And  at  p.  51  : —

“Dogs  must  bark  and  vomit  forth  what  is  in  them,  and  cynics
will  be  found  among  philosophers  :  but  we  must  prevent  them  from
biting  or  infecting  with  their  maddening  venom,  or  gnawing  the
bones  and  foundations  of  truth.  I  resolved  never  to  read,  much
more  never  to  condescend  to  answer,  detractors ,  idle  carpers,  and
writers  tainted  with  scurrility ,  from  whom,  nothing  solid,  nothing  but
abuse,  could  be  expected .  Let  them  indulge  their  depraved  desires:

*  See  my  paper  in  No.  XVII.,  p.  44.

f  See -my  Harveian  Oration,  pp.  15 — 17.

X  “  Contumeliis  ab  iis,  quibus  maxime  sententia  ejus  immortalis  serviebat,
assidue  insectatus ;  in  clientela  et  in  re  pecuniaria  multum  ex  eadem  causa  immi-
nutus  ;  amentise  etiam,  qui  tota  non  errabat  via,  accusatus,  nunquam  vitae  inno-
centiam  amisit,  sed  benevolentiam  constantiae  suae  adaequari  et  pari  passu  ince-
dere  usque  ad  finem  curavit.”

x  2


280


Dr.  John  Arthur  Wilson’s


I  cannot  think  they  will  find  many  respectable  readers ;  nor  does  the
Almighty  bestow  upon  the  bad  the  most  excellent  and  highly  to  be
desired  gift  of  wisdom.  Let  them  continue  to  revile  till ,  if  they  are
not  ashamed ,  they  at  least  are  sick  and  tired.”

As  Dr.  Wilson  mingles  so  much  religion  with  his  invec¬
tives,  he  does  not  scruple  to  mingle  up  with  them  all  manner
of  loving  words  ;  for,  though  he  is  about  to  carry  fire  and
sword  and  squibs  and  crackers  into  our  camp,  sparing  neither
man,  nor  woman,  nor  innocent  child,  he  begins  by  saying, —

“  Harvey  calls  you  lovingly  together  again,  as  a  father  does  his
children,  to  love  and  friendship  for  the  sake  of  science.”* * * §

Following  my  example,  never  before  set  I  believe,  as  my
other  bitter  reviler,  Dr.  F.  Hawkins,  did  two  years  ago,f  of
prefixing  or  introducing  into  the  oration  Harvey^s  foundation
of  the  oration,  and  his  command  to  the  orator  in  it  to  exhort
the  fellows  for  the  honour  of  the  profession  to  continue  mu¬
tually  in  love,  he  concludes  with  these  affectionate  words :

“  Experience!  Love!  Friendship!  The  words  of  Harvey  him¬
self — the  words  of  all  ages,  times,  places  !  Laws,  manners,  even
royal  diplomas,  all  things  human  change.  Love  and  friendship  are
from  God ,  and  never  change.”  \

He  complains  of  the  utter  neglect  of  the  College  by  the
Government.  That  in  the  time  of  the  Asiatic  cholera  it  was
not  once  consulted  by  the  Senate,  the  Privy  Council,  or  the
Home  Secretary  :  its  voice  was  not  heard  in  either  house :  not
one  fellow  was  consulted.

“  By  Harvey’s  blood  and  heart,”  he  exclaims,  “  if  this  is  not
insulting,  I  should  like  to  know  what  is.”§

And  this  was  not  enough,  he  continues,  but  a  Board  of
Health  independent  of  us  was  established  at  Whitehall :  and
the  public  treat  us  as  badly,  despise  and  insult  us  in  every
way,  and  is  now  in  the  habit  of  giving  us  a  sovereign  only
for  a  fee  and  keeping  the  shilling  in  its  pocket  to  spend  in
some  other  way.||  This  really  is  abominable,  and  I  pity  Dr.
Wilson  if  it  is  much  loss  to  him.

The  Government  and  the  public  know  that  the  Fellows  of
the  College  are  in  the  present  day  allowed,  in  Harveian  Ora-

*  “  Iterum  in  amorem  et  amicitiam,  scientise  causa,  ut  pater  liberos,  amanter
vos  hortatur.”

f  “  O  imitatores,  servum  pecus,  ut  mihi  ssepe
Bilem,  ssepe  jocum  vestri  movere  tumultus.”

Horat.  Epist,  xix.  19.

J  u  ‘  Experiential  Amor  !  Amicitia  !’  verba  ipsius  Harveii — verba  omnium  seta-
turn,  temporum,  locorum  !  Leges,  mores,  etiam  diplomata  regia,  humana  omnia
mutantur  ;  amor  et  amicitia  a  Deo  sunt  et  manent.  Veniam  date.”

§  “  Per  cor  et  sanguinem  Harveii !  Quid  est,  si  hoc  non  est  contumelia.”

||  “  Tanta  est  complurium  invidia,  ut  particulam  pene  vicesimam  honorarii
per  longa  seva  prsescripti  in  sua  comrnoda  a  nobis  soleant  divertere.”


Terrific  Harveian  Oration.


281


tions  and  lectures,  without  reproof  or  the  possibility  of  redress,
to  use  towards  each  other,  without  any  provocation,  the  lan¬
guage  used  by  Dr.  Francis  Hawkins  and  Dr.  John  Arthur
"Wilson.  Is  this  calculated  to  inspire  respect  or  confidence?*
Before  Dr.  Wilson  finishes,  he  proposes  that  we  should
give  a  diploma  to  Prince  Albert,  and  implores  his  Boyal
Highness  to  attend  our  meetings  afterwards,  and  take  his
seat  at  the  right  hand  of  the  President.!  I  wish  this  with

*  Every  public  institution  will  be  respected  or  not  according  to  its  usefulness
and  dignity  of  conduct.  In  a  club  of  poor  honest  cobblers,  if  a  member  were  to
rise  and  declare  his  expei’ience  of  the  truth  and  utility  of  certain  facts,  and  most
respectfully  intreat  the  members  to  examine  them  dispassionately :  and  then
another  were  to  rise  and  say  that  all  persons  of  the  last  speaker’s  opinions  were
quacks  and  impostors  and  lewd  persons ;  and  then  another  were  to  rise  and  con¬
trast  such  persons  with  those  whose  morals  are  pure,  who  prefer  poverty,  honesty
and  industry  to  quackery,  that  he  cannot  mention  such  persons  for  sheer  disgust,  for
the  sake  of  decency  and  his  religious  principles,  and  that,  though  they  have  regular
degrees,  they  are  bragging,  violent,  mischief-making  empirics  :*  what  would  be
done  ?  Either  the  accuser  would  be  made  to  apologize  and  retract,  or  the  accused
would  be  expelled  as  unfit  for  the  society.  In  any  other  medical  body  would  a
member  have  dared  in  a  lecture  to  speak  of  another  member  as  having  inveigled,
or  shewn  that  he  approved  of  the  inveiglement  of,  a  patient  from  an  hospital  in
order  to  treat  him  in  a  particular  manner  ?  or  would  he  have  spoken  of  a  patient
as  kept  by  himself  and  the  surgeon  from  the  hands  of  another  member’s  party  ?

Will  the  Public  or  the  Government  respect  such  an  institution  ?  The  College
would  not  have  been  disregarded  as  it  is,  had  its  course  been  different.  It  was
offered  the  splendid  Hunterian  Museum,  and  it  refused  the  gift :  it  has  no  grand
museum  of  morbid  anatomy  as  it  should  have,  and  might  have,  since  all  the
physicians  of  hospitals  and  those  in  large  practice  are  fellows  :  it  publishes  no
transactions,  whereas  it  should  be  the  fountain  or  channel  of  all  medical  dis¬
coveries  and  improvements  and  publish  glorious  volumes :  it  has  no  reunions
of  the  profession  and  the  learned :  it  has  no  control  over  the  physicians  seven
miles  beyond  London :  it  can  prevent  no  one  from  calling  himself  doctor  of
medicine,  nor  in  effect  even  from  practising  as  a  physician  in  London  without
its  sanction.  If  its  friends  urge  that  it  has  not  the  power,  or  the  necessary
supplies,  then  its  plain  duty  is  to  go  to  Parliament  and  declare  that  for  want
of  these  it  cannot  do  its  great  duties,  and  that  without  full  ability  to  do  its  duty
and  render  full  service  to  the  nation  it  must  throw  up  its  charter  and  will  exist
no  longer.  It  ought  to  examine  every  general  medical  practitioner  in  England,
and  not  to  have  allowed  the  Company  of  Apothecaries  to  assume  this  office,  as
the  Company  did  unwillingly  and  with  respectful  deference  to  the  College  of
Physicians  ;  and  I  add  that  the  Company  has  performed  with  great  credit  and
great  national  benefit  the  duties  entrusted  to  it.  Oratorical  lamentations  and
invectives  are  idle  :  a  noble,  candid,  and  self-denying  course  is  required.

f  “  Collegii  nostri,  diplomate  regio  (fauste  sit  dictum  !)  jam  tandem  post
longa  eeva  renovandi,  et  fructus  suos  in  salutem  publicam  de  novo  reddituri,  ad
quern  primitias  deferre  praestat,  quam  ad  ilium,  qui  amoris  et  consilii  particeps,
amore  et  consilio  imperii  consors,  quotidianis  precibus,  parens  et  maritus,  in
thalamo  regio  instauratur ;  ad  ilium  Albertum,  quern  inter  nostros,  prse  c ceteris,
Principem  omnes  libenter  agnoscimus.

“  Accede,  Princeps,  ad  dexteram  Praesidis  nostri,  in  sellam  honoris  et  gratise
causa,  tibi  soli  prsepositam.  Comitiis  nostris,  socius  inter  socios,  civis  inter  cives
saluti  publicae  consulentes,  prout  libeat,  subinde  intersis  ;  institutis  nostris  si  qua
bona  fuerint,  in  auxilium  venias,  concionibus  ob  beneficia  recepta  solemniter,  ut
nunc,  habitis,  auctoritatem  regiam  impertiri  ne  fastidias.”

*  .  .  .  “  jactatores,  violentos,  conturbatores,  quamvis  ad  normam  et  quoad  no¬
men  exactos,  revera  empericos.”


282  Dr.  J.  A.  Wilson's  terrific  Harveian  Oration.

all  my  heart.  Orators  and  lecturers  would  observe  decorum
in  their  addresses ;  and  be  afraid  of  vulgarly  vilifying  the  be¬
lievers  in  mesmerism,  for  Prince  Albert  acknowledges  the
truth  of  mesmerism,  and  condemns  the  profession  for  not
carefully  investigating  the  subject.

I  terminated  my  oration  with  the  word  “Dixi” — I  have
finished.  Dr.  Wilson  concludes  with  “  Veniam  date ” — make
every  allowance  for  me.  To  which  I  answer, — I  really  can¬
not  think  of  such  a  thing,  j*

Let  not  Dr.  Wilson  imagine  that  I  may  be  driven  from
my  course  of  duty  ;  for  I  agree  with  him  that

“  He  who  desires  true  medical  fame  must  be  brave,  firm,  active.  If
Harvey  had  been  inactive,  or  less  than  bold,  what  would  his  talents,
his  knowledge,  of  his  goodness  have  availed  ?  Therefore,  let  every
imitator  of  Harvey  be  wise  in  the  selection  of  his  profession  and
studies,  and  brave  in  the  pursuit  of  them  ;  brave  not  only  to  repel
the  animosities  and  injuries  of  the  malevolent;  but,  &e.*

John  Elliotson.


*  “  Ignavia,  sit  sine  invidia  verbum  Socii, — ignavia  cui  nomen  modestiae
supponitur,  jamdiu  tabescimus  et  perdimur.  Sit  fortis,  constans,  animosus  ille,
cui  in  rebus  medicis  laus  vera  ambitioni  est !  Quid,  si  Harveius  ignavus,  si  minus
quam  audax  fuisset  ?  Quid  scientia,  quid  ingenium,  quid  benevolentia  ejus  sine
fortitudine  animi  valuissent  ?  Sit  igitur  omnis  verse  laudis  ad  Harveii  gressum
in  medicina  sectator,  cum  in  vitse  et  studii  ratione  suscipienda  sapiens,  turn  in
ea  suscepta  fortis:  fortis,  non  solum  ad  inimicitias  et  simultates  malevolorum  re-
pellendas,  sed  fortissimus,  adversus  se  et  suos  assentatione  et  vanitate  prsevalent-
ibus  ;  fortis,  ne  illecebris  otii,  ne  falsa  studii  et  agendi  specie,  a  disciplina  ad
veram  doctrinam  pertinente  alliciatur ;  ne  a  nobilitate  urbis  ad  nimiam  cognitionem
devocetur.

f  My  business  in  The  Zoist  is  with  the  anti-mesmeric  fun  only  of  the  oration,
or  I  would  tell  forth  all  Dr.  Wilson’s  waggery  :  how  he  regrets  that  he  was  not
allowed  by  Harvey  to  say  what  he  does  in  plain  English,  as  though  he  is  not
plain  enough,  and  his  Latin  plain  enough, — how  he  calls  Dr.  Snow,  whose  voca¬
tion  is  to  administer  ether  and  chloroform.  Doctor  Nix,  per  cethera  notus, —
how  Dr.  Golden  Bird  he  calls  aureus  avis, — how  he  says  that  Government
thought  no  more  of  consulting  our  president,  Dr.  Paris,  than  if  Dr.  Paris  were
president  at  Paris, — how  Dr.  Burton  having,  the  first  or  the  second,  observed
a  blue  line  upon  the  margin  of  the  gums  when  lead  has  been  prescribed,  and
Dr.  Prout  having  paid  much  attention  to  the  renal  secretion,  he  says  that
Dr.  Burton  raised  a  leaden  monument  more  durable  than  brass,  ( monumentum
sibi  exegit,  qudmvis  a  plumbo,  cere  perennius,)  and  that  prceclarus  hie  plumbo,
prout  ille  urinh, — how,  notwithstanding  we  have  lost  Dr.  Prout,  yet,  as  Dr.  Rees
has  selected  the  same  fluid  for  study,  apud  nos.,  consensu  omnium  jamdudum
salva  res  est , — how  a  certain  somebody  impudently  turned  the  iron  of  the
public  railroads  into  gold  ( durum  e  ferro  viis  publicis  instrato  impudenter
conversum), — how,  thinking  no  doubt  of  the  wood-cut  portraits  just  published  in
the  Lancet  of  the  dogged  anti-mesmerists,  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  Dr.  Chambers,
and  Dr.  Marshall  Hall,  he  sneers  at  “  breathing  ”  wood-cuts  representing  wooden
features  daguerreotyped,  ( spirantia  ligna,  ad  ligneas  suas  effigies  a  solis
radiis  expressa ),  —  how,  most  justly  lashing  numerous  living  physicians  and
surgeons  for  contriving  to  obtain  public  compliments  to  commemorate  what  is
but  really  their  own  good  luck  in  life,  he  adds,  “  If  any  one  present  applies  this
to  himself,  be  easy,  I  speak  of  none  but  the  dead,”  ( bono  animo  sis,  quisquis  es,
ohdioni  huic  qui  ailsis  !  de  mortuis  hodie  est  qiursiio), — how  the  Times  newspaper
is  the  index  of  the  low  morality  of  the  present  generation,  how  this  is  shewn  by


(  283  )


IX.  —  On  the  Psychological  Theories  of  modern  German

Physiologists.  By  Mr.  R.  R.  Noel,  Rosavitz,  Bohemia.

The  last  ten  years  have  been  particularly  fruitful  in  physio¬
logical  works  in  Germany,  and  in  these  the  researches  into
the  structure,  substance,  and  functions  of  the  nerves  and
brain  take  up  no  unimportant  part.  To  any  one  who  has
attended  to  the  progress  which  has  been  made  in  the  anatomy
and  physiology  of  the  nerves,  particularly  of  the  cerebro-spinal
and  sympathetic  systems,  and  to  the  speculations  to  which
these  have  given  birth,  it  must  be  apparent  that  a  kind  of
revolution  is  taking  place  as  regards  the  so-called  science  of
psychology.  There  seems  now  to  be  a  general  understanding
that  mental  science  can  no  longer  be  left  in  the  hands  of
speculative  philosophers.  The  great  authority  which  the  latter
have  hitherto  exercised  in  this  department,  if  not  entirely  set
aside,  is  nevertheless  considerably  undermined.  Indeed  there
are  writers  to  be  found — not  physiologists,  or  professors  of
any  other  physical  science,  but  followers  of  philosophic  schools
— who  now  candidly  confess  that  psychology  must  be  treated
as  a  science  of  nature.

Although  this  much  is  openly  expressed,  still  there  are
very  few  of  the  physiological  or  psychological  writers  who  go
to  the  full  extent  in  acknowledging  and  carrying  out  the
principles  of  materialism,  as  has  been  done  by  writers  in  The
Zoist .  The  old  pure  metaphysical  doctrines  are,  to  be  sure,
so  far  departed  from,  that  mental  manifestations,  or  the
greater  part  of  them,  are  never  treated  of  without  reference
to  bodily  conditions.  But  still  the  existence  and  independ¬
ence  of  the  mind  per  se,  as  a  peculiar  principle  or  power,  is
contended  for,  even  by  those  who  admit  a  certain  connection
or  parallelism  between  its  manifestations  and  organic  actions,
in  individual  human  life.  Of  course  nearly  every  physio¬
logical  or  psychological  author  has  his  peculiar  views  regard¬
ing  the  nature  and  conditions  of  many  of  the  mental  pheno¬
mena  ;  but  there  are  certain  doctrines  common  to  all,  whether

the  Times  (typis publicis  quotidinnis  exprimitur — “tempora”  proclnmant  mores) .

The  oration  is  a  singular  compound  of  information  and  ignorance  ;  of  ability
and  weakness  ;  of  honest  independent  feeling  and  servility ;  of  good  sense  and
absurdity ;  of  severe  justice  and  of  injustice  ;  of  philosophy  and  conceit.  After
reading  it,  a  phrenologist  would  say  this  man  has  an  ill-balanced  head,  much
good  being  opposed  by  much  which  through  its  excess  is  not  good  and  makes  a
medley  of  the  brain’s  doings.  But  the  good  predominates,  and  the  oration
is  vexy  striking  :  far  different  from  the  twaddle  which  has  generally  characterized
these  compositions,  well  deserving  of  being  i*ead  by  the  profession  and  the  public,
and  of  being  translated,  since  a  very  small  number  of  even  the  profession  in
England  can  read  Latin.


284


The  Psychological  Theories  of


partially  and  reservedly  or  thoroughgoing  materialists ;  and
it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  attempts  are  generally  being
made  to  mediate  between  the  adherents  of  the  spiritualist  and
materialist  schools.

In  the  following  pages,  I  shall  speak  of  several  of  the
principal  works  of  modern  German  physiologists,  and  try  to
convey  to  your  readers  some  idea  of  the  psychological  doc¬
trines  which  they  contain.  I  think  there  will  be  little  diffi¬
culty  in  showing  that  the  opinion  I  have  above  ventured  to
express  is  not  without  foundation ;  and  in  pointing  out  to
what  results  this  revolutionary  process  ultimately  must  lead.
J ust  as  in  the  social  world,  in  those  periods  of  history,  which
in  especial  may  be  designated  revolutionary,  we  see  confusion
and  anarchy  prevail,  so  in  the  department  of  physiological-
psychology  there  is  no  want  of  excitement,  vague  undigested
theory,  and  angry  controversy.  Amidst  this  diversity  of
opinions,  however,  physiologists  may  be  divided  into  two
leading  parties.  The  one  considers  all  mental  actions  to  be
the  particular  forms  of  expression  of  bodily  states  and  pro¬
cesses;  in  short,  that  all  phenomena  called  mental  are  bound
to  material  conditions.  The  other  asserts,  that  the  mind  is  a
peculiar  power  or  principle ;  but  that  its  manifestations  never¬
theless  depend,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  on  bodily  condi¬
tions,  on  the  impressions  made  by  the  outward  world  on  the
senses  and  central  organs,  and  on  the  activity  of  the  latter.
There  is  a  third  party,  or  subdivision  of  the  second,  whose
doctrine  is  that  the  mind  is  a  spirit,  an  immaterial  essence,
that  this  uses  the  bodily  organs  merely  as  an  instrument,  and
that  it  even  fashions  the  latter.  Yet  these  spiritualists,  not
very  consistently  allow  that  the  organs  of  the  mind  can  be
deranged  or  out  of  tune,  and  thus  the  manifestations  of  the
latter  imperfect.  But  this  school  is  daily  losing  ground.

It  is  curious  to  see  that  all  the  modern  physiologists,
whether  carrying  out  materialism  to  its  logical  consequences
or  not,  either  openly  or  tacitly  repudiate  phrenology.  In
this  respect,  they  resemble  the  followers  of  the  pure  metaphy¬
sical  schools ;  but  without  seeming  to  be  aware  of  it  them¬
selves,  physiologists  are  nevertheless  continually  approaching
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  views  of  the  immortal  Gall.

In  Wagner’s  Encyclopedia  of  Physiology ,  a  work  of  which
the  third  volume  is  now  completed,  and  a  fourth  in  progress,
several  articles  have  already  appeared,  treating  more  or  less
directly  of  psychology,  in  connection  with  the  functions  of  the
nerves  and  brain.  This  work  is  not  an  organ  of  matgrialism,
but  quite  the  contrary  ;  I  shall  therefore  begin  with  it,  and
speak  in  conclusion  of  the  psychological  views  of  the  material-


Modern  German  Physiologists.


285


ists.  Amongst  the  articles  alluded  to,  those  to  which  I  have
devoted  an  earnest  study,  are  “  Seele  und  Seelenleben"  (the
mind  and  the  mind's  life),  by  Professor  Lotze;  “Psychologie
und  Psychiatrie,"  by  Dr.  Hagen ;  and  “  Temperament,"  by
Dr.  Harless.  We  will  begin  with  Professor  Lotze.

It  is  necessary  to  premise  that  the  German  word,  “  Seele,"
is  used  in  a  twofold  sense ;  sometimes  like  the  word,  soul,  in
English,  in  a  mere  spiritual  one,  as  in  the  expressions,  “  the
immortality  of  the  soul"  (seele),  “the  living  soul"  (seele),  as
opposed  to  “  the  dead  body."  Physiologists,  however,  apply
the  word  to  designate  the  higher  manifestations  of  organic
life,  “  Seelenthatig  Keiten  ;"  and  they  call  the  mental  life  of
men  and  animals,  “  Das  Seelenleben  der  Meuschen  und
Thiere."  Yet  the  German  word,  “  seele,"  cannot  be  consi¬
dered  entirely  as  the  equivalent  of  the  English  word,  mind ;
for  seele  is  used  to  signify  the  sensual  sphere  in  particular,  as
opposed  to  the  higher  mental  or  intellectual  states  in  man  ;
these  being  called  “  geistig."

It  is  much  to  be  lamented,  that  writers  on  mental  pheno¬
mena  do  not  take  especial  pains  to  give  a  clear  definition  of
the  words  they  use  for  abstract  ideas.  If  they  would  do  this,
much  would  be  gained  for  the  progress  of  mental  science,  and
much  of  a  mere  polemical  character  would  of  itself  fall  to  the
ground.  But  writers  on  mental  philosophy  must  learn  to
attend  more  to  concrete  facts  than  they  have  hitherto  done,
before  we  can  expect  more  distinctness  and  clearness  in  their
abstract  ideas.  Lotze' s  article,  which  is  of  considerable  ex¬
tent,  and  divided  into  seven  chapters,  I  have  read  with  great
attention,  and  I  think  it  as  well  to  state  here  distinctly,  that
it  was  not  taken  up  in  the  mere  spirit  of  criticism,  but  rather
in  the  hope  that  if  I  should  find,  as  I  expected,  Gall's  disco¬
veries  of  the  functions  of  the  brain  spoken  of  contemptuously,
nevertheless  I  might  be  able  to  increase  my  stock  of  know¬
ledge  by  learning  some  new  physiological  facts  or  sound
inductions.  But  I  have  been  woefully  disappointed.  This
article,  from  beginning  to  end,  bears  such  a  vague,  speculative
and  metaphysical  character,  that  one  can  only  wonder  how  it
came  to  be  admitted  into  an  Encyclopaedia  of  Physiology.

To  follow  Lotze  through  all  his  psychological  lucubrations
•would  take  up  more  space  than  could  be  afforded  in  a  period¬
ical  work,  destined  to  record  the  observations  and  investi¬
gations  of  phenomena.  I  shall  therefore  confine  myself  to
such  extracts  and  remarks  as  will  suffice  to  convey  some  idea
of  the  ground  the  author  occupies  as  a  physiologist  and  philo¬
sopher.  As  it  is  generally  unfair  towards  an  author  to  give
isolated  sentences  torn  out  from  the  context,  I  will  translate,


286


The  Psychological  Theories  of


at  the  risk  of  wearying  your  readers,  a  few  of  those  passages
in  extenso,  in  which  Lotze  has  taken  particular  pains  to  ex¬
pound  the  leading  features  of  his  physiologico-psychological
theory.

In  the  first  chapter,  entitled,  “  How  has  psychology  ori¬
ginated,  and  what  does  it  require  ?”  Lotze,  after  some  pre¬
liminary  and  obscure  remarks,  says  : —

“The  conception  mind  ( seele )  has  not  originated  in  the  vital
development  of  language,  in  such  a  manner  that,  out  of  a  variety  of
appearances  (phenomena),  all  that  was  like  and  corresponding  has
been  collected  together  into  one  general  picture ;  but  rather  with  a
kind  of  presentiment,  as  we  so  often  find,  language  has  theorized,
and  has  expressed  in  this  idea  the  conviction  that  a  group  of  various
appearances,  owing  to  their  inward  relations,  refer  or  point  backward
to  a  peculiar  fundamental  explanation,  by  means  of  which  these
appearances,  pertaining  only  to  themselves,  must  be  considered  apart
from  other  classes  of  phenomena.  This  referring  or  pointing  back¬
wards  seems  to  be  clearly  shewn  in  the  three  following  circumstances.
First,  in  the  observed  facts  of  conceptions,  feelings,  and  desires;
three  forms  of  actions,  in  all  which,  beyond  mere  being  and  oc¬
currence,  the  addition  of  the  perception  of  this  being  and  occur¬
rence,  the  phenomena  of  consciousness  in  the  most  extended  sense,
becomes  apparent :  secondly,  in  the  oneness  of  consciousness,  a  fact
which  does  not  allow  that  mental  actions  should  be  bound  to  an
aggregate  of  endless,  divisible  and  isolated  bodily  masses;  and  lastly,
in  the  circumstance  which,  though  not  itself  a  fact  of  direct  obser¬
vation,  still,  as  the  result  of  observations,  must  be  antecedently
admitted, — that  whereas  everything  else  that  is,  acts  in  all  its  rela¬
tions  merely  as  an  effecting  cause,  which  according  to  universal  laws
of  necessity  produces  pre-ordained  consequences  :  that  which  we  call
gifted  with  mind,  as  an  acting  subject,  produces  out  of  itself,  with  a
new  and  free  beginning,  motions,  changes,  actions  in  general.  If  we
examine  all  these  three  circumstances,  to  see  if  they  justify  the
admission  of  a  peculiar  principle,  the  mind,  for  their  explanation,  we
shall  find  that  psychology  cannot  be  based  with  equal  right  on  all.

“  Let  us  first  consider  the  phenomena  of  consciousness,  and  our
experience  will  shew  them  to  be  merely  transient  states,  connected
with  a  no  less  transient  complication  of  bodily  masses,  with  the
living  frame.  The  thought,  therefore,  naturally  suggests  itself  to
examine  whether  this  bodily  basis  does  not  itself  contain  the  explan¬
atory  principles  of  mental  life;  a  circumstance  which  would  cause
psychology,  as  a  particular  science,  to  be  not  only  unnecessary,  but
even  impossible.  The  views  of  philosophers,  who  have  occupied
themselves  extensively  with  the  problems  of  psychology,  have  how¬
ever  taken  the  same  direction  as  the  common  opinion,  and  although
the  connection  between  bodily  and  mental  processes  is  continually
presented  to  our  view,  still  it  has  nevertheless  been  found  necessary
to  admit  a  peculiar  substratum  for  the  mind.  All  that  takes  place
in  physical  masses  as  such,  or  in  the  living  body  as  a  combination  of


Modern  German  Physiologists.


287


them,  the  totality  of  the  laws  of  extension,  motion,  and  mixture,
will  bear  no  comparison  whatever  with  the  nature  of  that  conscious¬
ness,  which  shews  itself  in  the  most  various  mental  processes.  On
the  clear  acknowledgment  of  the  absolute  difference  between  thought
and  extension, — to  use  a  word  which  has  now  become  of  historical
importance, — psychology  rests  her  right  to  deduce  mental  states  from
a  no  less  peculiar  ground.  Before  we  enter  upon  the  objections
which  have  been  made  to  this  simple  fundamental  principle,  we  must
he  careful  to  guard  against  a  very  common  misconception.  He  who,
owing  to  the  impossibility  of  comparing  consciousness  with  physical
processes,  grounds  the  first  upon  a  peculiar  principle,  asserts  nothing
more  than  that  analytically  mental  phenomena  cannot  be  derived
from  bodily  ones.  He  by  no  means  denies  that  their  actual  occur¬
rence  is  often,  perhaps  always,  bound  to  the  conditions  of  bodily
processes.  In  like  manner  as  every  effect  depends  upon  the  union
of  several  conditions,  not  one  of  which,  isolated,  of  itself  alone,  would
with  un motived,  creative  power  have  produced  a  consequence,  we
may  in  this  place  confess,  that  the  peculiar  principle,  the  mind,
would  never,  out  of  itself  alone,  have  developed  those  phenomena,
into  the  progress  of  which  it  is  drawn,  owing  to  the  stimulus  of
bodily  motions.  But  whilst  we  are  of  opinion  that  the  latter  contain
the  occasioning  cause,  or  those  complemental  conditions,  according
to  whose  permission  alone  mental  phenomena  take  place,  we  be¬
come  satisfied  that  they  imply  a  foreign  principle,  to  which  they  are
only  complementally  added.  We  can  make  still  further  concessions,
and  must  do  so  here,  where  so  much  depends  on  the  guarding
against  unmotived  misconceptions.  Owing  to  the  total  disparity  of
physical  and  psychical  phenomena,  we  have  as  yet  no  right  to  assign
both  to  different  classes  of  substances,  but  rather  we  leave  for  the
present  the  question  open  of  a  Thought  and  Being  combining,  and
consequently  of  a  physical  and  psychical  attributes-in-one-uniting
subject.  But  even  in  this  case,  supposing  that  nothing  whatsoever
exist,  which  does  not  possess  a  certain  degree  of  spiritual  life,  how¬
ever  easily  it  may  escape  our  observation,  even  then  the  theoretical
consideration  of  this  actual  union  of  the  bodily  and  spiritual,  would
be  of  no  immediate  advantage.  Such  an  admission  would  not  in  the
least  narrow  the  chasm  which  separates  the  two.  On  the  contrary,
we  should  have  gained  nothing  beyond  Spinoza’s  idea  of  a  single
substance  comprising  within  itself,  in  a  perfectly  incomprehensible
manner,  two  absolutely  different  attributes,  the  knowledge  of  the
one  affording  no  possible  passage  to  the  other.  The  hope  alone
would  remain,  that  some  outward  power,  pertaining  to  both  attri¬
butes,  had  bound  them  so  together,  that  with  the  variations  of  the
one  certain  corresponding  modifications  of  the  other  were  connected;
yet  so,  that  it  would  absolutely  be  only  possible  to  form  a  conception
of  the  quality  and  inward  manifoidness  of  the  latter,  by  means  of  the
general  character  of  its  attribute,  and  not  by  means  of  that  of  the
other.  If,  therefore,  in  reality  such  a  unity  existed,  the  theoretical
consideration  would  not,  at  least  not  in  the  commencement  of  the
examination,  gain  by  it ;  for  however  two  disparate  circles  of  pheno-


288


The  Psychological  Theories  of


mena  might  condition  eacli  other,  still  the  one  could  never  in  such
wise  be  the  principle  by  which  to  understand  the  other,  that  the
manifestations  of  this  latter,  in  their  entireness,  could  be  derived
from  it,  but  only  in  so  far  as  the  form  and  the  rhythm  of  their  con¬
nection  might  be  shewn  in  its  proportionality  with  the  connecting
forms  of  the  existing  disparate  circle.  On  these  accounts,  we  are
of  opinion  that  psychology,  as  an  independent  science,  decidedly
rests  on  the  principle  mentioned ;  and  that  the  admission  of  the
mind  as  a  particular  principle,  is  necessary  to  explain  those  pheno¬
mena  of  consciousness.  We  express  this  opinion  here,  at  the  com¬
mencement  of  our  examination,  because  here  alone  it  is  justified.
We  are  well  aware  that  a  strict  separation  of  mental  (< geistig )  and
bodily  phenomena  is  opposed  to  some  wants  of  our  mind  ( 'seele ),  and
we  participate  in  that  longing  to  see  these  antitheses  interwoven  in
a  higher  unity.  But  it  is  folly  to  suppose  that  that  which  is  iden¬
tical  in  its  root,  must  be  so  too  in  its  branches.  Beginning  with
actual  experience,  we  have  the  last  sprouts  and  blossoms  before  us,
and  here  observation  shews  us  positively  nothing  but  an  harmonious
connection  of  bodily  and  mental  phenomena,  neither  of  which,
rightly  conceived,  can  be  traced  back  to  the  other.  Nothing,  there¬
fore,  remains  for  us  but,  in  the  first  instance,  to  hold  fast  to  this
separation  of  principles,  and  after  we  have  developed  each  in  its  way,
and  reviewed  the  manner  in  which  they  harmonize,  to  look  around,
and  reflect  how  the  higher  unity  of  these  two  now  known  circles  of
phenomena  may  be  possible.’’

This  extract  would  alone  suffice  to  convey  some  idea  of

«/

the  author’s  psychological  doctrines.  He  continues  through
several  pages,  and  comes  back  again  and  again  in  different
parts  of  his  work  to  ring  the  changes  on  his  favourite  idea  :
to  wit,  that  there  is  some  sort  of  connection  or  proportionality
between  bodily  states  and  mental  phenomena,  although  these
do  not  stand  in  direct  relation  to  each  other  as  cause  and
effect, — that  the  mind  [seele)  is  a  “  peculiar  substratum,”
concerning  the  nature  of  which,  however,  we  are  left  in  the
dark.  A  few  pages  beyond  the  above  extract,  Lotze  indeed
says  : —

“  The  word  c  seele  ’  does  not  in  our  view  signify  any  distinct  kind
of  substance,  but  it  is  rather  a  phenomenological  expression,  and
implies  every  to  us  as  yet  unknown  substratum,  in  so  far  as  it  may
be  capable  of  producing  the  above-mentioned  (mental)  phenomena.”

Whether  such  vague  inconsistent  ideas  as  those  contained
in  the  above  extracts  can  be  considered  as  an  improvement
upon  the  long-cherished  purely  metaphysical  doctrines  of  the
schools,  I  will  leave  your  readers  to  decide.  To  me  it  seems
that  a  well-organized  brain,  reasoning  upon  the  data  afforded
by  physical  sciences  in  general,  and  the  physiology  of  man  in
particular,  can  find  no  logical  process  by  which  to  gain  any


Modern  German  Physiologists.


289


clear,  definite  conception  of  the  human  mind,  whether  it  he
considered  “  a  peculiar  principle,”  “  an  unknown  substance,”
or  an  immaterial  essence.  However  mystical  the  Professor’s
abstract  doctrine,  his  “  peculiar  principle  necessary  to  explain
mental  phenomena,”  still  he  not  very  consistently  admits
that  the  latter  are  in  reality  bound  to  the  conditions  of  bodily
processes,  and  that  they  depend  on  u  the  stimulus ,”  “  the  per¬
mission  of  bodily  motions ,”  for  their  manifestation.  The  prac¬
tical  consequences  of  his  theory  are,  therefore,  in  the  main
correct,  and  agree  with  the  principles  of  materialism.  But
our  philosopher,  afraid  that  such  an  inference  may  be  drawn,
devotes  several  pages  to  an  uncompromising  attack  on  those
physiologists  who  regard  all  concrete  mental  phenomena  as
the  necessary  consequences,  the  outward  forms  of  expression,
of  various  inward  bodily  states,  changes,  &c.,  according  to
so-called  mechanical,  chemical,  and  other  physical  laws,
whereby  the  laws  of  hereditary  organization  and  the  influ¬
ences  of  the  outward  world  on  the  same  are  especially  appa¬
rent.  To  adopt  consistently  a  material  basis,  to  appeal  to
nature,  in  fact,  in  psychological  investigations  and  reasonings,
is  stigmatized  as  shallow  and  rude ;  and  yet  the  “  unknown
substratum  the  “  substance  not  necessarily  opposed  to  other
known  substances ,”  which  our  Professor  presupposes  as  “  capa¬
ble  of  producing  the  phenomena  of  mind”  can  hardly  be  said  to
agree  with  the  doctrines  of  spiritualism.  Perhaps  “  the  phy¬
sical  and  psychical  aitribules-in-one-combining  subject ,”  for
the  possible  discovery  of  which  he  leaves  the  door  open,  is  to
form  the  happy  medium  of  reconciliation  between  contending
principles.  The  passages  quoted,  and  indeed  the  whole  tenor
of  Lotze’s  article,  must  lead  the  attentive  reader  naturally  to
infer,  that,  whilst  the  author  on  the  one  hand  is  biased  by
predilections  for  the  doctrines  of  divines  and  professors  of
transcendentalism,  he  cannot,  on  the  other  hand,  resist
coquetting  to  a  certain  extent  with  the  principles  of  material¬
ism.  If  this  is  the  case,  we  may  apply  to  him  the  words  of
the  song, —

“  It  is  well  to  be  off  with  the  old  love,

Before  you  are  on  with  the  new.”

Now  and  then  it  would  seem  as  if  he  had  some  glimpses  of
the  truth,  but  that  the  “  letting  I  dare  not  wait  upon  I
would”  prevented  him  from  going  further  in  the  right
direction.

But  instead  of  speculating  on  the  subjective  character  of
the  professor’s  psychology,  it  will  be  well  to  let  him  develope
it  more  fully  in  his  own  words.


290


The  Psychological  Theories  of

In  that  part  of  his  article  devoted  more  especially  to  the
refutation  of  materialism,  Professor  Lotze,  after  combating
the  views  of  those  physiologists  who  consider  that  in  many
cases  relations  of  quantity  may  form  the  conditionary  ground
of  qualitative  phenomena, — a  question  it  is  not  necessary
here  to  enter  into, — comes  again  to  the  grand  question,  the
asses*  bridge  of  psychologists — the  oneness  of  consciousness,
and  asserts  the  impossibility  of  explaining  this  according  to
the  principles  of  materialism.  On  this  head,  he  says  : —

“  Either  each  simple  element  of  nervous  matter  must  be  con¬
sidered  as  a  bodily  mind  ( seele),  possessing  knowledge  of  its  own
state,  without  this  view  assisting  in  the  least  in  explaining  that  one¬
ness  of  consciousness  which  we  perceive  within  us ;  or  it  must  be
granted,  that  of  the  elements  of  nervous  substance  only  one  has  the
privilege  of  knowing  its  own  states,  whilst  the  rest  are  merely
destined  to  aw'aken  these  states  in  it  in  regular  order.  In  the  first
case,  instead  of  one  mind  we  should  have  a  system  of  minds,  thus
multiplying  the  problems  for  explanation  without  our  deriving  any
advantages  for  the  solution;  for  it  would  be  just  as  little  allowable
to  speak  of  the  sensation  of  a  brain  fibre  as  to  attribute  a  collective
consciousness  to  a  heap  of  sand.  In  the  second  case,  we  might  per¬
haps  succeed  in  explaining  the  undoubted  fact  of  the  individuality  of
consciousness,  but  the  admission  of  a  single  monad  ruling  over  the
rest,  carries  us  away  from  the  entire  materialist  view,  and  leads  us
back  to  the  necessity  of  a  peculiar  principle  for  the  explanation  of
mental  phenomena;  with  the  addition,  however,  that  this  one  prin¬
ciple  is  to  be  considered  in  the  first  instance  as  a  bodily  mass,  which
at  the  same  time  enjoys  the  privilege  of  a  spiritual  nature.  To  pur¬
sue  further  the  necessity  of  that  substratum,  which  forms  the  basis
of  all  mental  phenomena,  being  a  complete  individual  unity,  would,
owing  to  the  incompatibility  of  this  demand  with  the  endless  divisible
nature  of  all  matter,  cause  even  this  last  remnant  to  vanish,  and
convince  us  that  one  of  the  most  important  problems  of  psychology,
the  oneness  of  self-consciousness,  has  no  hope  of  ever  being  solved
without  the  previous  admission  of  a  peculiar  ground  of  explanation.

“  We  may  therefore  assert  that  psychology,  as  a  distinct  science,
can  be  firmly  based  on  this  previous  admission  of  a  peculiar  mind
(seele),  which  the  impossibility  of  comparing  mental  phenomena
with  bodily  processes  and  the  oneness  of  consciousness  show  us  to  be
indispensable.  However,  this  assertion  is  not  to  be  taken  in  a  w  ider
sense  than  that  which  is  implied  in  the  treatment  of  different  sciences
as  particular  departments.  Starting  from  experience,  the  admission  of
the  identity  of  body  and  soul  involves  us  at  once  in  misconceptions,
which  obscure  the  perception  of  the  simplest  relations  between  the
two.  It  appears,  therefore,  to  be  a  methodological  demand,  to  take
in  the  beginning  the  contrast  of  both,  distinctly  marked,  as  a  basis,
so  as  to  be  able  to  observe  the  intimate  connection  which  beyond  all
doubt  exists  between  them,  more  clearly  than  if  this  wrere  to  be  pre-


Modern  German  Physiologists .


291


supposed,  without  further  analysis,  as  a  thing  of  course.  It  seems
to  me  necessary  to  urge  this  point  continually,  since  it  is  too  often
neglected;  this  view  in  the  end  naturally  cannot  satisfy  us,  but  to
speak  again  here  of  that  which  is  necessary  to  its  completion,  and
point  out  the  unity  of  body  and  soul,  is  the  less  necessary,  as  I  shall
return  to  this  subject  in  conclusion.”

All  that  is  said  in  the  passages  cited,  and  in  other  parts
of  the  article,  on  the  advantages  of  treating  of  the  phenomena
called  mental  in  abstracto,  and  of  the  bodily  conditions  as
separate  branches  of  knowledge,  may  be  assented  to  in  a
certain  understanding ;  and  even  the  allusions  to  a  unity  of
soul  and  body,  of  mind  and  matter,  taken  in  a  purely  abstract
philosophical  sense,  have  a  meaning.  The  most  matter-of-
fact  mind  can  understand  that,  by  a  synthetical  process  of
reasoning,  all  that  is,  the  entire  universe,  may  be  considered
as  a  harmonious  whole.  Direct  and  special  observations  of
the  processes  of  nature  lead  us  to  the  knowledge  of  anteced¬
ence  and  consequence,  of  cause  and  effect — of  the  various
combinations,  actions,  and  reactions  of  matter  on  matter.  It
is  this  knowledge  of  the  connections  and  mutual  relations  of
things,  the  discovery  of  general  laws,  which  brings  a  reflec¬
tive  mind  to  form  the  general  conception  of  unity ;  and  this
not  only  in  a  purely  abstract  sense,  for  there  are  many  thinkers
who  can  understand  Lichtenberg's  bold  flight  of  imagination,
when  he  asserted  that,  “  if  a  pea  were  to  be  shot  into  the
Mediterranean,  a  vision  more  acute  than  that  of  man  must  be
able  to  trace  the  effect  to  the  coast  of  China.”  That  general
conceptions  have  a  charm  and  a  value,  few  will  deny.  It  is
the  abuse  only  which  is  reprehensible,  particularly  in  a  phy¬
siologist.  It  is  not  rare  to  find  in  German  natural  philoso¬
phers  *  an  overweening  pride  in  their  powers  of  thought,  a
taste  for  abstract  speculations  and  definitions  of  nature,  to
that  extent  that  the  study  of  concrete  phenomena  and  induc¬
tive  philosophy  are  neglected.  And  as  regards  the  mind —
taking  this  term  as  usually  applied,  to  signify  the  aggregate
of  the  so-called  affective  and ,  intellectual  faculties  of  man.
These,  in  conjunction  with  their  bodily  conditions,  may  be
conceived  as  a  unity,  and  mental  phenomena  may  be  con¬
sidered  abstractedly  as  a  separate  branch  of  knowledge.  In¬
deed  this  is  necessary,  if  we  will  rise  above  mere  empiricism.
But  it  is  plain  that  the  more  exact  and  comprehensive  our
knowledge  of  concrete  phenomena — the  principles  of  material-

*  The  terra  u  natural  philosopher’  ’  has  not  the  same  meaning  in  the  German
language  as  in  the  English.  The  German  “  Natur  Philosoph”  is  more  of  a
speculator  than  investigator.


292


The  Psychological  Theories  of


ism  being  understood — the  more  true  and  perfect  the  abstract
conception  of  the  mind  will  be ;  the  less  we  become  inclined
to  personify  or  to  dream  of  the  latter  as  some  supernatural
power  or  “  peculiar  principle.”  On  the  other  hand,  it  can  be
asserted,  that  the  more  perfect  the  abstract  general  concep¬
tion  mind,  the  greater  the  capacity  to  interpret  special  pheno¬
mena.  Here,  as  in  all  scientific  investigations,  observation
and  combining  reflection,  cause  and  effect,  act  and  react  on
each  other.  He,  however,  who  overlooks  the  historical  pro¬
cess,  the  manner  in  which,  in  the  course  of  ages,  the  concep¬
tion  mind  has  been  formed, — shewing,  as  it  does,  various
modifications  in  every  age,  with  every  people,  and  in  each
individual  being, — and  believes  that  his  abstraction  mind  is
the  originating  motiving  principle  in  human  nature,  that  it
is  an  immaterial  power  manifesting  itself  merely  through
bodily  organs,  evidently  mistakes  effects  for  causes,  and
proves  himself  to  be  more  of  a  wonder-loving  idealist  than  a
philosopher  of  nature.  He  who,  moreover,  goes  so  far  as  to
acknowledge  that  mental  phenomena  depend  in  each  concrete
case  on  hereditary  organisation,  and  on  all  the  manifold  influ¬
ences  of  the  outward  world  on  the  same,  of  climate,  food,
fortuitous  and  systematic  education,  &c.,  involves  himself  in
endless  inconsistencies,  if  he  at  the  same  time  assert  that
each  human  being  possesses  a  mind,  per  se ,  independent  of
the  body;  not  the  abstract  conception  alluded  to,  but  an  im¬
material  principle,  specially  and  spiritually  responsible  for
qualities  and  actions  known  only  de  facto  as  human.

In  the  present  state  of  physiological  science,  although
enough  has  been  brought  to  light  to  show  the  nature  of  the
human  mind,  and  to  establish  the  fact  that  the  science  of
psychology,  even  in  its  most  extended  sense,  has,  like  every
other  science,  a  material  basis,  still  certain  deficiencies  and
errors  may  be  found  in  the  theories  of  mind  considered  as  a
system  or  whole.  These  can  only  be  supplied  and  corrected
in  the  course  of  time,  by  pursuing  the  material  direction  in
our  investigations,  and  the  logical  process  of  reasoning.

There  is  nothing  new  in  the  above  remarks.  Materialists
will,  I  think,  approve  of  them ;  spiritualists  call  them  highly
superficial.  I  should  not  have  ventured  on  them,  had  it  not
been  necessary  to  point  out  clearly  the  position  which  Lotze
and  many  other  German  physiologists  at  present  occupy,  as
regards  their  theories  of  the  mind.  It  is  evident  that  the
“ peculiar  principle  ”  which  Lotze  presupposes,  is  not  the
understandable  abstraction  I  have  alluded  to  above ;  more
importance  is  attached  to  the  u  presentiments  of  mankind, — to
the  theorizing  expressed  in  language  ”  at  a  time  when  scientific


Modern  German  Physiologists.


293


investigations  were  in  their  infancy,  than  to  such  abstractions
as  are  derived  from  a  broad  basis  of  concrete  realities.  Mental
states  are,  to  be  sure,  according  to  Lotze's  theory,  in  part,
particularly  in  their  sensual  sphere,  dependent  on  bodily  con¬
ditions  ;  and  the  brain,  temperament,  and  the  stimulus  of  the
external  world  in  the  first  formation  of  conceptions,  are  more
or  less  taken  into  account.  Nevertheless,  the  mind,  per  se ,
Lotze  teaches,  is  something  distinct  from  all  known  material
substances  ;  and,  as  we  shall  see,  it  is  said  to  possess  qualities
or  attributes  of  a  peculiar  kind,  as  consciousness,  ethical  and
sesthetical  judgment  and  thought,  which  are  utterly  independ¬
ent  in  their  nature  of  all  organic  conditions.

Now  what  do  we  see  here  but  revolution,  a  process  of  de¬
composition  going  on  as  respects  the  good  old  faith  which  dis¬
regards  physiological  facts  and  teaches  that  the  mind  is  a
spiritual  power  or  essence  merely  using  the  body  as  an
instrument,  whilst  the  principles  of  materialism  are  not
acknowledged  and  carried  out  to  their  logical  results?  We
may  not  uncharitably  presume  that  some  leaven  of  the  old
schools,  mixed  up  with  some  half-digested  doctrines  of  certain
modern  philosophers  of  the  identity  of  body  and  soul,  mind
and  matter,  prevent  a  physiologist  like  Dr.  Lotze  from  inter¬
preting  aright  the  phenomena  which  he  undertakes  to
investigate.

Our  professor  treats  with  great  contempt  the  arguments
of  those  physiologists  who  assert  that  consciousness,  like
every  other  mental  state,  is  cc  materially  conditioned that  it
by  no  means  shows  an  absolute  oneness  in  all  its  phases,  but
rather  is  a  matter  of  gradual  historical  development ;  and  that,
even  as  regards  the  I  of  self-consciousness,  we  see  in  it  a  vary¬
ing,  relative,  individual  character,  according  to  particular
organization  and  the  special  influences  of  the  outward  world.
But  all  such  objections  to  his  theory  Professor  Lotze  holds
very  cheaply.  He  quotes  an  argument  of  materialists,  viz. : —
“  that  facts  are  often  forgotten  and  again  remembered,  that
conceptions  appear  to  float  in  consciousness  in  different
degrees  of  intensity,  and  that  consequent^  this  strict  one¬
ness  is  by  no  means  shewn  in  the  whole  contents  of  conscious¬
ness,  but  rather  in  that  part  only  which,  at  any  particular
moment,  reaches  the  culmination  point  of  its  development.”
To  this  he  replies  : —

“  It  is  easy  to  perceive  that  we  have  here  only  to  do  with  differ¬
ent  states  of  one  and  the  same  principle,  and  that  a  conception  which
has  vanished  from  consciousness  has  not  gone  over  as  a  conception
to  another  subject;  but,  rather  continuing  with  the  same  subject,  it
has  transformed  itself  from  a  conception  into  another  state  of  this
VOL.  VIII.  Y


294


Modern  German  Physiologists.


subject.  Besides,  according  to  the  above  objection,  no  one  of  the
bodily  parts  could  be  substituted  for  the  mind  (seele)  ;  for  no  one  of
them  would  represent  an  indivisible  unity  until  it  were  removed
beyond  the  confines  of  sensible  perception  and  thus  transformed
into  an  indivisible  and  spaceless  being  (sein),  which,  without  possess¬
ing  form,  could  nevertheless  very  well  have  its  particular  place  in
space.  But,  thus  transformed,  it  is  no  longer  the  conception  of  any
thing  material,  but  of  being  in  general,  and  of  such  in  fact  as  agrees
with  the  psychological  conception  of  the  soul.”

Howr  “ formless ,  spaceless  being  ,”  can  yet  have  “  its  parti¬
cular  place  in  space”  we  must  leave  to  the  brains  of  philo¬
sophers  like  Dr.  Lotze,  and  other  disciples  of  Herbart,  to
comprehend.  For  my  part,  after  pondering  over  the  above,
and  scores  of  passages  containing  no  less  curious  matter,  I
have  been  obliged  to  confess  with  Goethe’s  Faust  when  sum¬
ming  up  his  studies  and  their  fruits  :  —

“  Nun  steh  ich  hier,  ich  arrner  Thor,

Und  bin  so  klug  als  wie  zuvor.”

Considering  that  our  author  dwells  so  much  on  conscious¬
ness,  as  proving  the  u  peculiar  foreign  principle”  so  necessary
to  explain  mental  phenomena,  it  is  rather  remarkable  to  find,
a  few  pages  further  on,  the  following  passage : —

“  Psychological  experience  is  so  limited,  that  we  can  seldom  suc¬
ceed  in  distinguishing  which  manifestations  are  primary,  and  which
are  derived  from  others ;  for  we  know  next  to  nothing  of  conscious¬
ness  in  its  growth,  and  not  too  much  of  it  when  it  is  developed.”

Here  Dr.  Lotze  allows  that  consciousness,  which  he  else¬
where  asserts  to  be  so  thoroughly  independent  of  all  known
material  conditions,  is  subject  to  the  laws  of  development,
like  every  other  mental  faculty.  The  passage  just  quoted  is
taken  from  a  paragraph  in  which  the  professor  expresses  his
contempt  for  “  empirical  psychology, — that  apparently  easiest
method  of  arranging  mental  phenomena,  and  then  subjecting
them  to  an  explanatory  theory.”  Observation,  analysis,  com¬
parison,  and  classification  are,  it  would  seem,  held  to  be  of
little  or  no  value  by  this  profound  physiologist.

(To  be  concluded  in  our  next).

***  It  may  be  well  to  refer  the  reader  to  our  remarks
upon  materialism  as  perfectly  innocent  and  consistent  with  a
full  belief  in  Christianity,  in  No.  XXI.,  p.  112.  See  mate¬
rialism  fully  discussed  and  shewn  to  be  a  simple  fact  without
hypothesis,  whereas  spiritualism  is  an  hypothesis,  No.  III.,
p.  288;  XII.,  pp.  418,  511.

See  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Human  Physiology,  pp.  32 — 48 ;  pp.
360-69 ;  and  Dr.  Engledue’s  pamphlet  on  Cerebral  Physiology
and  Materialism. — Zoist.


(  295  )


X.  Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  Brutes ;  as  effected  by  the  Duke
of  Marlborough  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bartlett.  By  Dr.
Elliotson.

“  You  say  you  will  not  believe  what  you  do  not  understand.  Look  at  an
egg  !  If  a  man  break  it,  there  comes  only  a  watery  and  yellow  substance  out  of
it ;  but,  if  it  be  placed  under  the  wings  of  a  fowl,  there  comes  a  living  thing  from
it.  Who  can  understand  this  ?  Who  ever  knew  how  the  heat  of  the  hen  pro¬
duced  the  chicken  in  the  egg  ?  This  is  incomprehensible  to  us,  yet  we  do  not
deny  the  fact.  Let  us  do  like  the  hen.  Let  us  place  these  truths  in  our  hearts,
as  the  hen  does  the  eggs  under  her  wings ;  let  us  sit  upon  them,*  and  take  the
same  pains,  and  something  new  will  come  of  them.” — Speech  of  an  African
Savage,  named  Mosheshe,  to  his  brethren. — Missionary  Labours  and  Scenes  in
Southern  Africa,  by  Robert  Moffatt,  p.  Gll.f

Mankind  is  still  in  its  age  of  infancy,  and  has  all  the  pre¬
judices  and  ignorance  of  infancy.  Because  our  race  has
existed  some  thousands  of  years,  be  they  few  or  many,  it  is
generally  considered  as  at  present  ancient.  But  time,  like
size  and  power  of  all  kinds,  is  estimated  according  to  the
degrees  to  which  we  have  been  accustomed.  The  Lilliputians
considered  Gulliver  an  enormous  giant ;  the  Brobdignagians
a  very  little  pigmy.  With  human  intelligence  the  animal¬
cule  cercaria  ephemera,  which  lives  but  six  hours,  would  think

*  Why  did  not  a  medical  committee  “sit”  long  ago  upon  the  truths  of  mes¬
meric  science  ? — J.  E.

t  To  those  Christians  who  advocate  the  punishment  of  death  as  the  most  likely
to  deter  others  from  crime,  and  have  no  scruple  for  the  sake  of  others  still  innocent
to  cut  short  the  time  of  criminals  for  repentance  that  they  ought  to  think  can
never  be  too  long,  I  offer  the  following  passage  from  the  work  of  this  most  noble
man,  devoted  to  the  welfare  of  his  fellow-creatures.  The  subject  is  indeed  uncon¬
nected  with  the  present  article :  but  one  on  which  The  Zoist  earnestly  labours.

“  A  feast  had  been  proclaimed,  cattle  had  been  slaughtered,  and  many  hearts
beat  high  in  anticipation  of  wallowing  in  all  the  excesses  of  savage  delight :  eating,
drinking,  dancing,  and  singing  the  victors’  song  over  the  slain,  whose  bones  lay
bleached  on  the  neighbouring  plains.  Every  heart  appeared  elate  but  one.  He
was  a  man  of  rank,  and  what  was  called  an  Entuna  (an  officer),  who  wore  on  his
head  the  usual  badge  of  dignity.  He  was  brought  to  head-quarters.  His  arm
bore  no  shield,  nor  his  hand  a  spear ;  he  had  been  divested  of  these,  which  had
been  his  glory.  He  was  brought  into  the  presence  of  the  king  and  his  chief
council,  charged  with  a  crime  for  which  it  was  in  vain  to  expect  pardon,  even  at
the  hands  of  a  more  humane  government.  He  bowed  his  fine  elastic  figure,  and
kneeled  before  the  judge.  The  case  was  investigated  silently,  which  gave  so¬
lemnity  to  the  scene.  Not  a  whisper  was  heard  among  the  listening  audience,
and  the  voices  of  the  council  were  only  audible  to  each  other  and  the  nearest
spectators.  The  prisoner,  though  on  his  knees,  had  something  dignified  and
noble  in  his  mien.  Not  a  muscle  of  his  countenance  moved,  but  his  bright  black
eyes  indicated  a  feeling  of  intense  interest,  which  the  moving  balance  between  life
and  death  only  could  produce.  The  case  required  little  investigation  ;  the  charges
were  clearly  substantiated,  and  the  culprit  pleaded  guilty.  But,  alas  !  he  knew
it  was  at  a  bar  where  none  ever  heard  the  heart-reviving  sound  of  pardon,  even
for  offences  small  compared  with  his.  A  pause  ensued,  during  which  the  silence
of  death  pervaded  the  assembly.  At  length  the  monarch  spoke,  and,  addressing
the  prisoner,  said,  ‘  You  are  a  dead  man,  but  I  shall  do  to-day  what  I  never  did
before  ;  I  spare  your  life  for  the  sake  of  my  friend  and  father  ’ — pointing  to  the
spot  where  I  stood.  ‘  I  know  his  heart  weeps  at  the  shedding  of  blood ;  for  his

Y  2


296


Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  Brutes.


the  life  of  man  almost  an  eternity :  an  African  baobab  tree,
or  Virginian  cypress,  which  live  five  and  six  thousand  years,
would  think  it  but  a  span.  The  amount  of  ignorance  and
absurdity  throughout  the  earth  would  to  me  be  insupportable,
were  I  not  to  hope  that  an  adult  period  will  arrive  to  our
race,  when  all  that  prevails  at  present  will  be  looked  back
upon  with  the  smile  which  we  give  to  the  prattle  and  ways  of
little  children.

Among  the  errors  still  prevalent  is  the  idea  that  we  are
essentially  different  from  other  animals ;  whereas  we  are  as
truly  animals  as  the  horse  or  the  butterfly.  Every  animal,
however  small,  however  poor  its  capacity,  has  the  sense  of
personality,  has  sensation,  has  inclination,  has  will,  as  truly

sake  I  spare  your  life ;  he  has  travelled  from  a  far  country  to  see  me,  and  he  has
made  my  heart  white ;  but  he  tells  me  that  to  take  away  life  is  an  awful  thing ,
and  never  can  he  undone  again.  He  has  pleaded  with  me  not  to  go  to  war ,  nor
destroy  life.  I  wish  him,  when  he  returns  to  his  own  home  again,  to  return
with  a  heart  as  white  as  he  has  made  mine.  I  spare  you  for  his  sake,  for  I  love
him,  and  he  has  saved  the  lives  of  my  people.  But/  continued  the  king,  ‘  you
must  be  degraded  for  life  ;  you  must  no  more  associate  with  the  nobles  of  the
land,  nor  enter  the  towns  of  the  princes  of  the  people;  nor  ever  again  mingle  in
the  dance  of  the  mighty.  Go  to  the  poor  of  the  field,  and  let  your  companions
be  the  inhabitants  of  the  desert/  The  sentence  passed,  the  pardoned  man  was
expected  to  bow  in  grateful  adoration  to  him  whom  he  was  wont  to  look  upon  and
exalt  in  songs  applicable  only  to  One  to  whom  belongs  universal  sway  and  the
destinies  of  man.  But,  no  !  holding  his  hands  clasped  on  his  bosom,  he  replied,
‘  O  king,  afflict  not  my  heart !  I  have  merited  thy  displeasure  ;  let  me  he  slain
like  the  warrior ;  I  cannot  live  with  the  poor/  And,  raising  his  hand  to  the
ring  he  wore  on  his  brow,  he  continued,  ‘  How  can  I  live  among  the  dogs  of  the
king,  and  disgrace  these  badges  of  honour  which  I  won  among  the  spears  and
shields  of  the  mighty  ?  No,  I  cannot  live  !  Let  me  die ,  0  Pezoolu  !’  His
request  was  granted,  and  his  hands  tied  erect  over  his  head.  Now  my  exertions
to  save  his  life  were  vain.  He  disdained  the  boon  on  the  conditions  offered,  pre¬
ferring  to  die  with  the  honours  he  had  won  at  the  point  of  the  spear — honours
which  even  the  act  that  condemned  him  did  not  tarnish — to  exile  and  poverty
among  the  children  of  the  desert.  He  was  led  forth,  a  man  walking  on  each
side.  My  eye  followed  him  till  he  reached  the  top  of  a  precipice,  over  which  he
was  precipitated  into  the  deep  pool  of  the  river  beneath,  where  the  crocodiles,
accustomed  to  such  meals,  were  yawning  to  devour  him  ere  he  could  reach  the
bottom  !  This  was  a  sabbath  morning  scene  such  as  heathenism  exhibits  to  the
view  of  the  Christian  philanthropist,  and  such  as  is  calculated  to  excite  in  his
bosom  feelings  of  the  deepest  sympathy.  This  magnanimous  heathen  knew  of  no
hereafter.  He  was  without  God  and  without  hope.  But,  however  deplorable
the  state  of  such  a  person  may  be,  he  will  not  be  condemned  as  equally  guilty
with  those  who,  in  the  midst  of  light  and  knowledge,  self-separated  from  the
body,  recklessly  rush  into  the  presence  of  their  Maker  and  their  Judge.  We
have  often  read  of  the  patriotism  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  heard  that
magnanimity  of  soul  extolled  which  could  sacrifice  honour,  property,  and  life
itself,  for  the  public  good,  rather  than  become  the  vassals  of  a  foe,  and  live  di¬
vested  of  the  poor  trappings  of  human  glory ;  if  this  be  virtue,  there  are,  even
among  Afric’s  sons,  men  not  inferior  to  the  most  illustrious  of  the  Romans.  The
very  monarch  who  was  thus  influenced  by  the  presence  of  the  Christian  mis¬
sionary,  needed  only  to  ask  his  warriors,  ‘  Who  among  you  will  become  a  sacri¬
fice  for  the  safety  of  the  state,  and  the  country’s  good  ?’  and  his  choicest  men
would  have  run  upon  the  thick  bosses  of  the  enemy’s  buckler.” — pp.  539 — 542.


Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  Brutes.


297


as  Shakspeare  had.  And  Shakspeare  was  a  chemical  com¬
position  and  an  organization  as  truly  as  a  mouse.  The  com¬
position  varies,  and  the  organization  varies,  and  with  these
variations  result  differences  in  the  degree  of  power  and  dif¬
ferences  in  the  character  of  powder.  But  all  animal  nature  is
essentially  the  same.  All  exist,  and  all  perform  all  their  func¬
tions,  nervous  and  cerebral  no  less  than  the  muscular,  or  the
nutrient  or  vegetable,  by  chemical,  electrical,  and  analogous
operations.  The  property  of  life  must  be  of  the  same  family
as  these  other  powers,  and  exists  as  truly  in  a  blade  of  grass
as  in  man;  so  true  are  the  words  that  “all  flesh  is  grass.”
According  to  the  composition  and  organization  of  each  organ
are  its  properties  and  functions, — no  less  of  brain  than  of
muscle  or  liver :  and  brute  and  human  organs  differ  in  modi¬
fication  and  degree  only.*  It  would  therefore  be  impossible
for  mesmerism  not  to  affect  brutes;  and  we  have  evidence
enough  that  they  are  subject  to  its  influence.  The  fascination
of  one  brute  by  another  is,  in  all  probability,  mesmeric.  My
friend,  Dr.  John  Wilson,  late  of  the  Middlesex  Hospital, — not
the  physician  who  signs  his  prescriptions  “  J.  A.  W.,” — has
published  a  work,  now  out  of  print, f  containing  a  large  num¬
ber  of  mesmeric  experiments,  without  regard  to  sex  or  age,
upon  dogs,  cats,  horses,  pigs,  calves,  goats,  turkeys,  fowls,
geese,  ducks,  fish,  elephants,  lions,  and  leopards.  The  effects
were  decided ;  and  any  body  can  repeat  the  experiments  who
has  perseverance.  Many  persons  experiment  with  cats,  and
make  them  deeply  comatose  and  quite  rigid.

The  Duke  of  Marlborough  is  a  man  of  great  ability  and
acquirement,  and  the  last  in  the  world  to  hold  ridiculous  opi¬
nions.  However,  he  is  one  of  the  “aristocratic  fools,”  and
believes  in  the  truth  of  mesmerism;  and,  what  is  worse,
openly  avows  his  conviction.  I  some  years  ago  received  the
following  letter  from  him,  which  I  am  at  liberty  to  publish  : —

“Mote  Park,  Athlone,  January  1,  1843.

“  My  dear  Elliotson, — At  Lord  Ely’s  farm  is  a  yard  dog,

*  Many  a  brute  is  more  kind  than  human  individuals  ;  and  many  brutes
surpass  all  mankind  in  some  mental  faculty,  some  perception  or  instinct.

f  Trials  of  Animal  Magnetism  on  the  Brute  Creation.  By  John  Wilson,
Physician  to  the  Middlesex  Hospital.  London  :  Sherwood,  Gilbert,  and  Piper,
Paternoster  Row.  1839.

Dr.  Wilson  made  many  trials  of  mesmerism  on  his  patients  in  the  hospital,
and  with  striking  phenomena  and  great  benefit ;  but  was  so  persecuted  that  he
desisted  in  disgust.  One  of  his  cases  is  published  in  No.  II.,  p.  186.  In  this
same  hospital  Mr.  Tomes  extracted  eleven  teeth  painlessly  in  the  mesmeric  state
(No.  V.,  p.  107  ;  XIV.,  p.  215)  :  and  a  breast  was  painfully  cut  away  which
might  have  been  cured,  for  the  woman’s  other  breast  was  condemned  to  re¬
moval,  but  cured  out  of  the  hospital  with  mesmerism  by  Mr.  Fradelle  and
Mr.  Flintoff  (No.  XIV.,  p.  218)  :  a  surgeon  refused  to  take  off  a  leg  in  the
mesmeric  state  (p.  216),  and  the  committee  behaved  lamentably,  especially  the
Rev.  Mr.  Scobell,  in  reference  to  mesmerism  (p.  224).


298


Mesmerisation  of  two  savage  Bogs.


so  savage  and  ferocious  no  one  dare  approach  him.  I  was
determined  to  beat  him,  and  in  thirty  minutes  had  him  fast
asleep,  his  last  sigh  being  a  deep  growl.  In  presence  of
several  persons  I  then  kissed  the  dog  on  his  forehead,  and
there  left  him  to  awake  at  his  leisure.

“  Yours  most  truly,

“  Marlborough.”

I  requested  the  duke  to  learn  the  subsequent  state  of  the
dog,  and  the  following  was  the  reply  : —

“  Blenheim,  February,  1843.

“  My  dear  Elliotson, — I  have  a  letter  from  Ely  Lodge
this  morning,  written  by  Lord  Adam  Loftus.  I  extract  as
follows  : — ‘  The  dog  has  been  quite  stupid  ever  since/ —

“  I  must  now  tell  you  what  I  have  been  doing  here.  I
have  also  a  very  savage  yard  dog.  I  tried  him  to-day ;  in
about  fifteen  minutes  he  ran  into  his  kennel  and  hid  his  eyes
from  the  manipulating  process, — growling,  snarling,  and
barking  most  furiously,  notwithstanding.  I  then  made  the
man  who  feeds  him,  and  who  is  the  only  person  who  dares  go
near  him,  drag  him  out  of  his  kennel  and  nail  up  a  hurdle
before  the  entrance,  so  as  to  keep  him  effectually  outside.  I
then  went  to  work  again,  the  dog,  as  you  may  suppose,  being
ten  times  more  furious.  In  about  45  minutes  I  had  him  so
quiet,  oppressed,  and  stupid,  that  he  dropped  his  nose  several
times  in  the  mud  around  his  kennel,  and  kept  shutting  and
opening  his  eyes.  Carts  and  horses,  and  men  and  boys  were
passing  and  repassing  which  served  continually  to  arouse
him,  so  that  I  could  not  satisfactorily  complete  the  task,  and
leave  him  dead  asleep  ;  besides  which  a  heavy  snow  storm
was  falling  all  the  while,  and  I  could  not  feel  my  fingers’
ends.  But  I  completely  subdued  the  beast,  and  patted  him
on  the  head  before  I  left.

“  Yours  most  sincerely,

“  Marlborough.”

My  friend,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bartlett,  produced  mesmeric
effects  upon  a  bull,*  as  he  thus  wrote  me  word  : —

“  My  dear  Sir, — It  may  perhaps  not  be  uninteresting  to
you  to  hear  of  a  little  incident,  which  occurred  to  me  in  the
autumn  of  1847,  when  I  was  in  Westmoreland  and  Cumber-

*  In  Chambers’ s  Journal  for  October  27th,  1849,  is  the  following  account : —
“  A  gentleman  residing  at  Oxford  had  in  his  possession  a  young  Syrian  bear  from
Mount  Lebanus,  about  a  year  old.  This  bear  was  generally  good-humoured,
playful,  and  tractable.  One  morning  the  bear,  from  the  attentions  of  some  visi¬
tors,  became  savage  and  irritable ;  and  the  owner,  in  despair,  tied  him  up  in  his
usual  abode,  and  went  away  to  attend  to  his  guests.  In  a  few  minutes  he  was
hastily  recalled  to  see  his  bear.  He  found  him  rolling  about  on  his  haunches,


Mesmerisation  of  a  savage  Bull .


299


land.  Upon  descending  a  mountain,  over  which  I  had  been
wandering  alone,  and  enjoying  the  magnificent  prospect  which
opened  before  me,  I  found  myself  in  a  narrow  road  between
two  stone  fences,  which  perhaps  separated  the  lands  of  differ¬
ent  proprietors.  On  one  side  of  the  fences  were  cattle  and  a
bull.  The  bull  approached  the  fence  in  an  angry  mood,  and
walked  along  the  other  side  of  it,  parallel  with  me,  for  more
than  a  quarter  of  a  mile ;  he  then  grew  more  excited,  tore
the  ground  with  his  horns,  and  bellowed  fiercely.  As  I  could
not  but  apprehend  that,  should  there  be  a  breach  in  the  wall,
he  might  leap  over  and  attack  me,  I  was  considering  what
course  it  was  best  to  take,  when  we  came  to  a  very  high  and
strong  gate.  Upon  reaching  the  gate,  the  bull  rushed  close
up  to  it  and  bellowed  loudly  through  it.  As  I  knew  that  he
could  neither  leap  over,  nor  force  this  gate,  I  also  approached
it,  and  looked  him  steadily  in  the  face.  In  about  a  minute,
I  caught  his  eye,  which  then  fixed  upon  me.  In  about
another  minute  a  twinkling  of  the  eyelids  arose,  very  similar
to  that  of  a  human  subject  at  an  early  stage  of  mesmeric
influence.  After  probably  three  or  four  minutes,  the  eyes
gradually  closed,  and  the  bull  remained  quiet,  and  appeared
to  be  as  immoveable  as  if  he  had  been  chiselled  by  the  hand
of  the  sculptor  !  The  transition  from  his  previously  excited
state  to  his  perfectly  motionless  state,  was  indeed  most
striking !

“  I  could  not  but  feel  thankful  that  all  danger  from  the
bull  was  now  past,  and,  after  looking  at  his  fixed  form  for  a
few  minutes  more,  I  descended  the  remainder  of  the  moun¬
tain,  and  did  not  stop  to  wake  him.

“  Believe  me,  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

“  Very  faithfully  yours,

“T.  Bartlett.

“Kingstone,  near  Canterbury,  Aug.  23rd,  1850.

John  Elliotson.


faintly  moving  his  paws,  and  gradually  sinking  into  a  state  of  quiescence  and  re¬
pose.  Above  him  stood  a  gentleman,  well  known  in  the  mesmeric  world,  making
the  usual  passes  with  his  hands.  The  poor  bear,  though  evidently  unwilling  to
yield  to  this  new  influence,  gradually  sunk  to  the  ground,  closed  his  eyes,  became
motionless  and  insensible  to  all  means  used  to  rouse  him.  He  remained  in  this
state  for  some  minutes,  when  he  awoke,  as  it  were,  from  a  deep  sleep,  shook
himself,  and  tottered  about  the  court,  as  though  labouring  under  the  effects  of  a
strong  narcotic.  He  exhibited  evident  signs  of  drowsiness  for  some  hours  after¬
wards.  This  interesting  scene  took  place  in  the  presence  of  many  distinguished
members  of  the  British  Association  when  last  held  in  the  university  of  Oxford. —
F.  T.  Buckland.”  (Son  of  the  Dean  of  Westminster.)

Meeting  the  Dean’s  son  one  evening  at  the  apartments  of  a  clergyman,  who
was  staying  with  his  family  at  Almond’s  Hotel  in  Clifford  Street,  I  asked  him  if
the  account  was  true  :  and  his  reply  was  that  he  himself  had  sent  it  to  Chambers.


(  300  )


XI.  Mesmeric  Cure  of  a  Cow ,  by  Miss  Harriet  Martineau.

By  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  All  sane  men  possessed  of  a  knowledge  of  physiology,  pathology,  and  thera¬
peutics,  must  regard  homoeopathy,  mesmerism,  and  hydropathy,  as  the  socialism
of  medicine.  We  class  these  three  extravagances — these  specimens  of  European
Mormonism — together,  because  we  see  that  the  followers  of  one  of  them  are
always  the  supporters  of  one  or  both  of  the  other  two.

“  If  we  read  the  signs  of  the  times  aright,  we  believe  that  one  effect  of  the
protrusion  of  these  audacious  quackeries  into  the  face  of  day,  will  be  to  unite  the
profession  strongly  against  those  who  trade  in  them,  or  those  medical  persons  and
others  who  keep  the  traders  in  countenance.” — Lancet ,  April  20,  1850,  p.  486.

As  brutes  resemble  us  in  composition  and  organization,  and
exhibit  mesmeric  phenomena  according  to  their  properties
and  functions,  so  must  they  be  subject  to  most  of  the  same
and  to  analogous  diseases  with  ourselves,  and  be  more  or  less
amenable  to  the  same  remedial  measures.

The  Zoist,  No.  XII.,  p.  522,  contains  two  striking
mesmeric  cures  of  inflammation  in  horses,  by  Mr.  H.  S.
Thompson.

“  Last  winter  I  tried  the  power  of  mesmerism  in  inflammation  on
two  horses.

“The  first  had  got  cast  in  the  stall,  and  had  severely  injured  his
eye.  There  was  great  inflammation,  the  eyelids  were  closed  and
very  much  swollen,  and  the  eye  seemed  seriously  injured;  the  cornea
quite  opaque.  I  mesmerised  the  eye  by  passes  over  it  for  half  an
hour,  when  the  animal  opened  the  eye  and  the  inflammation  was
considerably  abated.  The  first  ten  minutes  the  horse  did  not  seem
to  experience  any  sensation ;  afterwards,  however,  it  was  evident
that  it  did  so,  as  it  slightly  twitched  its  head  away  every  time  I
passed  my  hand  over  the  eye,  although  I  did  not  touch  it,  but  made
the  passes  at  a  few  inches  distance.  The  operation  was  repeated  by
my  groom  that  day,  and  twice  the  following  day,  when  all  swelling
had  subsided,  and  there  were  no  signs  of  inflammation,  merely  a
white  streak  across  the  cornea,  evidently  from  the  severity  of  the
blow,  and  which  was  some  months  before  it  was  quite  obliterated.
No  other  means  were  used  at  all  for  its  recovery.

“  The  second  was  a  horse  who  had  a  severe  cut  on  the  back  sinew
of  the  fore-leg.  There  was  great  inflammation  in  the  leg,  and  the
horse,  from  pain,  had  not  placed  his  foot  firmly  on  the  ground  from
a  few7  hours  after  the  accident.  On  the  third  day,  I  made  passes
down  the  leg  at  the  distance  of  about  an  inch  from  the  leg,  con¬
tinued  the  process  for  little  more  than  half  an  hour,  when  the  leg
was  considerably  cooler,  and  the  horse  placed  the  foot  flat  and  firmly
on  the  ground.

“  I  have  tried  no  other  experiments  of  this  kind  on  brutes.”

Having  heard  that  Miss  Martineau  had  lately  cured  a
cow,  I  wrote  to  Ambleside,  requesting  her  to  inform  me


Mesmeric  Cure  of  a  Cow.


301


whether  the  report  was  correct.  The  following  is  her  obliging,
and,  I  will  add,  noble  answer  : —

“  Bolton,  near  Skipton,  August  19th,  1850.

“  Dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — Your  note  has  just  reached  me,
having  been  forwarded  from  home.  The  story  of  the  cow  is
this  : — One  very  hot-  evening  in  July,  I  took  some  young
cousins  to  see  my  stock ;  and  I  saw  a  small  pail  half  full  of
blood  at  the  door  of  the  cow  house.  During  my  absence  that
day,  my  cow,  Ailsie,  had  been  taken  violently  ill,  so  that  the
servants  had  sent  to  Rydal  for  the  cow-doctor,  who  had  bled
her,  and  given  her  strong  medicines.  This  had  been  done
some  hours  before  I  saw  her ;  and  the  doctor  had  said  that  if
she  was  not  much  relieved  before  his  evening  visit,  he  was
sure  she  would  die.  There  were  no  signs  of  relief  in  any  way
when  I  saw  her  at  seven  o’clock,  nor  when  the  doctor  came,
soon  after  eight.  He  said  she  could  not  recover,  and  it  was
a  chance  if  she  lived  till  morning.  At  ten,  she  was  worse  ;
and,  to  be  sure,  no  creature  could  appear  in  a  more  desperate
state.  She  was  struggling  for  breath,  quivering,  choking,
and  all  in  a  flame  of  fever.  Her  eyes  were  starting ;  her
mouth  and  nostrils  dry;  and  the  functions  suspended,  as
they  had  been  all  day.

“  It  occurred  to  me  then  to  have  her  mesmerised ;  but,  I
am  afraid,  I  was  rather  ashamed.  The  man  knew  nothing
whatever  about  mesmerism,  except  the  fact  that  I  had  once
done  it,  with  success,  to  his  sister.  I  believe  he  had  hot  the
remotest  idea  what  was  done,  or  what  it  meant.

“  I  desired  him  to  come  up  to  the  house  at  twelve  o’clock,
and  let  me  know  Ailsie’s  state.  As  I  sat  during  those  two
hours,  I  remembered  how  I  had  known  cats  affected  by  mes¬
merism,  and  how  Sullivan,  the  whisperer,  tamed  vicious
horses,  and  Catlin  learned  from  the  Indians  how  to  secure
buffalo  calves  by  what  seemed  clearly  to  be  mesmerism ;  and
I  determined  to  try  it  upon  the  cow,  if  by  midnight  she
proved  to  be  past  the  power  of  medicine.

“  At  midnight  I  went  down,  and  found  that  there  was  no

improvement  or  promise  of  any.  I  then  directed  the  man  to

mesmerise  her,  and  showed  him  how.  He  was  to  persevere,

till  he  saw  some  decided  change,  in  making  passes  along  the

spine,  from  the  head  to  the  tail,  and  also  across  the  chest,  as

she  laboured  more  dreadfully  than  ever  in  her  breathing.

Within  a  few  minutes  her  breathing  became  easier,  her  eye

less  wild,  her  mouth  moist,  and  before  morning  she  was

relieved  in  all  wavs.

«/

“  The  first  news  I  heard  was  of  the  astonishment  of  the
llydal  doctor,  who  came  early,  without  an  idea  that  she  could


302


Mesmeric  Cure  of  a  Cow.


be  alive.  He  exclaimed  that  he  had  '  never  thought  to  see
her  alive  again/  that  'it  was  a  good  <£10  in  Miss  M/s
pocket  /  and  so  forth.  One  thing  struck  me  much.  My
man  called  to  me  as  I  was  in  the  garden,  and  asked  me  to
come  and  see  how  '  Ailsie  fare  to  go  to  sleep  like/  when  he
mesmerised  her;  and  it  really  was  curious  to  see  how  her
eyes  grew  languid  and  gradually  closed  under  the  treatment.

''  This  is  not  all.  Towards  noon,  I  was  told  that  Ailsie
had  relapsed,  and  was  almost  as  bad  as  ever.  I  went  down,
and  saw  that  it  was  so,  and  ordered  an  hour’s  mesmerising
again.  The  relief  was  as  striking  as  before,  and  in  two  hours
more  she  was  out  of  danger,  and  has  been  very  well  since.

''  I  foresee  how  such  a  story  may  be  ridiculed ;  but  I  per¬
ceive  how  important  it  is  that  we  should  gather  some  facts
about  the  power  of  mesmerism  over  brutes,  not  only  for
truth’s  and  humanity’s  sake,  but  because  the  establishment
of  a  few  such  facts  would  dispose  of  the  objection  that  the
results  of  mesmerism  are  'all  imagination.’  I  am  fond  of
my  cow,  and  stand  up  for  her  good  qualities,  but  I  cannot
boast  of  any  imaginative  faculty  in  her.  A  cow  morbidly
imaginative  is  a  new  idea,  I  believe.  If  it  is  true  that  the
greatest  chemist  in  the  world  says  that  he  must  believe  if  he
saw  a  baby  mesmerised,  I  would  ask  him  whether  a  cow,  or
a  cat,  or  a  vicious  horse,  would  not  do  as  well.

"  If  my  cows  are  ever  ill  again,  I  will  try  the  experiment
with  great  care,  and  let  you  know  the  result.  I  may  men¬
tion  that  some  of  my  neighbours  were  aware  of  the  desperate
illness  of  the  cow,  and  of  her  doctor’s  astonishment  at  her
recovery.  We  did  not  tell  the  doctor  how  we  interfered  with
his  patient,  and  I  dare  say  he  has  not  heard  of  it  at  this  hour  :
but  others  of  my  neighbours  were  deeply  interested  in  the
story,  and  wished  it  could  be  made  known.  To  this  I  can
have  no  objection,  as  I  do  not  mind  a  laugh,  and  should  be
glad  to  save  the  life  of  even  a  single  cow.

"  I  am,  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

"Your’s  truly,

"  Harriet  Martineau.”

If  Miss  Martineau,  after  all  her  most  useful  and  enlight¬
ened  publications,  has  at  length  lately  come  out  as  a  good
agricultural  improver,  she  has  still  more  distinguished  herself
by  proving  to  the  agricultural  world  that  they  possess  a  great
and  unsuspected  power  over  some  of  the  diseases  of  their  live
stock.

But  higher  is  the  credit,  in  my  opinion,  due  to  her  for
her  courageous  honesty  in  telling  the  useful  truths  which  she


The  Case  of  Robert  Pate.


303


knows,  utterly  regardless  of  the  sneers  and  insults  which  she
is  sure  to  experience  from  the  noisy  and  ignorant,  who  flutter
in  their  little  day  and  disappear  for  ever.  Oh  !  I  know  lite¬
rary  persons  who  fully  believe  in  the  wonders  and  the  mighty
good  of  mesmerism,  who  have  witnessed  it  again  and  again
and  again,  nay,  have  practised  it  with  benefit  to  their  fellow-
creatures,  and  yet  who  are  too  feeble-hearted,  too  lavishly
endowed  with  the  fear  of  the  world  in  proportion  to  their
desire  for  the  good  of  their  kind,  to  publish  what  they  know,
to  defend  mesmerism  in  their  daily,  weekly,  or  monthly  writ¬
ings,  or  even  to  subscribe  to  the  Mesmeric  Infirmary,  since
this  ■ publishes  a  list  of  its  subscribers.  Such  people,  I  verily
believe,  would  change  their  religion  /,  if  they  thought  the
change  would  increase  their  respectability .

John  Elliotson.


XII.  The  case  of  Robert  Pate — Disease  mistaken  for  Crime .

The  proceedings  at  the  Central  Criminal  Court ,  for  July  11th,
1850,  must  ever  be  remembered  with  regret  and  humiliation
by  the  man  of  science  and  the  philanthropist.  Our  readers
must  be  aware,  that  since  the  issue  of  our  last  number  our
beloved  queen  has  been  unhappily  assaulted  by  one  Robert
Pate — an  insane  gentlemau.  Her  Majesty,  when  driving
through  Piccadilly,  received  a  severe  blow  with  a  cane  from
the  above  named  person,  who,  it  appears,  was  incidentally
walking  in  that  direction,  and  so  came  in  contact  with  the
royal  cortege.  We  regret  very  much,  in  common  with  all
persons  of  properly  constituted  mind,  the  annoyance  to  which
our  good  queen  was  subjected ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  is
impossible  we  can  do  otherwise  than  express  our  strongest
disapproval — even  condemnation — of  the  views  taken  gene¬
rally  of  the  affair,  both  by  the  newspaper  press  and  the  public.
To  the  former  we  very  naturally  look  for  the  expression  of
views  and  opinions  calculated  to  lead  the  latter  to  a  more
just  and  more  rational  conviction  :  the  press  should  lead  the
public  mind,  should  raise  it  out  of  the  obscurity  of  new  and
former  times,  and  place  it  side  by  side  with  an  advanced  and
progressive  humanity.  When  the  writers,  engaged  by  the
leading  journal  in  particular,  shall  have  studied  modern
science,  and  so  made  themselves  acquainted  with  cerebral
physiology  and  pathology — when  these  gentlemen  shall  have
learned  the  psychological  principles  requisite,  in  the  criminal
and  lunatic,  to  prevent,  in  either,  the  infringement  of  the
moral  law — then  may  we  hope  no  longer  to  be  shocked  by  the


304


The  Case  of  Robert  Pate.


perusal  of  such  leading  articles  as  that  which  disfigures  the
Times  for  Monday,  July  1st;  and  in  which  we  are  assured,
that,  if  we  would  control  the  insane  impulses  of  the  madman,
we  must  do  so  by  the  infliction  of  punishment  !  i.e.,  if  we
would  arrest  the  external  and  visible  indications  of  internal
disease,  involving  the  human  organism,  we  must  do  so  by  the
infliction  of  yet  additional  pain  on  the  person  of  the  sufferer.
We  hope  the  writer  of  the  editorial  article  alluded  to  may
never  be  found  in  so  pitiable  a  condition  :  however,  should  it
happen  otherwise,  he  may  be  assured  of  our  best  and  sincer-
est  sympathies.

With  reference  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Central  Criminal
Court  above  alluded  to,  it  is  not  our  intention  to  dwell  on  the
various  speeches  made  by  the  legal  functionaries  engaged  at
the  trial ;  we  purpose  only  to  seize  the  most  important  facts
of  the  case,  and  to  prove  therefrom  that  the  question  of  the
insanity  of  Robert  Pate  was  not  only  most  unfairly  dealt  with,
but  most  mischievously  and  inhumanly  so.  As  our  readers
are  doubtless  aware,  the  prisoner  was  defended  by  Mr.  Cock-
burn,  the  counsel,  if  we  mistake  not,  who  so  ably  advocated
the  cause  of  Mc’Naughten,  tried  some  eight  years  since  for
the  murder  of  Mr.  Drummond.  We  cannot  help  thinking
that,  if  Mr.  Cockburn  had  considered  it  of  sufficient  importance
to  have  put  forth  his  mental  strength  on  this  late  occasion  as
he  did  on  that  just  alluded  to,  the  issue  would  have  been  less
discordant  with  the  facts  of  medical  science,  and  less  opposed
to  the  dictates  of  the  commonest  humanity.  If  the  address
for  the  prisoner  be  correctly  reported,  it  constitutes  but  a  fee¬
ble  exposition  of  the  Law  of  Lunacy  as  it  should  be  contained
in  the  statute  book  of  the  empire.

The  arguments  of  the  Attorney  General  were,  we  regret
to  say,  of  the  same  unphilosophical  and  vindictive  nature  as
those  we  have  been  ever  accustomed  to  from  the  bench  and
the  bar.  They  were  to  the  effect,  that,  if  Robert  Pate  knew,
at  the  time  he  struck  the  blow,  what  he  was  doing,  and,  more¬
over,  that  he  was  doing  wrong,  then  was  he  “  responsible  for
his  acts,  and  the  law  required  that  he  should  be  punished  for
such.”  How  long  our  legislators  and  lawyers  will  persist  in
allowing  and  advocating  such  a  system  of  ethics — one  so  much
at  variance  with  practical  medicine,  and  so  strongly  opposed
to  the  knowledge  and  experience  of  so  many  excellent  physio¬
logists,  whose  time  and  talents  have  been  most  successfully
directed  to  psychological  studies — it  is  perhaps  impossible  to
say :  but,  if  the  few  facts  to  be  stated  presently  were  better
known  and  studied,  then  we  should  venture  to  hope  for  more
rational  proceedings.


Disease  mistaken  for  Crime.


305


Mr.  Baron  Alderson  summed  up  after  much  the  same
fashion  as  the  Attorney  General,  and  informed  the  jury  that
“  they  must  clearly  understand  that  it  was  not  because  a  man
was  insane  that  he  was  unpunishable,”  and  that  “  upon  this
point  there  was  generally  a  very  grievous  delusion  in  the  minds
of  medical  men  and  so  far  he  adds  the  authority  of  his  name
to  the  injustice  and  oppression  advocated  by  the  Times ’  Editor.
But,  whatever  may  be  the  opinions  of  Mr.  Baron  Alderson  and
his  confrere ,  there  is  little  chance  in  the  present  day  of  a  re-
introduction  of  the  whip  and  stocks  into  the  modern  asylum,
— there  love  not  fear  is  regarded  as  the  controling  power  to
the  “  uncontrollable  impulses ”  of  the  unhappy  and  once  for¬
saken  lunatic.

We  beg  to  assure  both  the  Attorney  General  and  Mr.
Baron  Alderson,  that  neither  consciousness  nor  the  ability
to  distinguish  right  from  wrong  constitutes  anything  like  a
test  of  either  the  sanity  or  responsibility  of  an  individual,  and
that  even  those  maniacs  whom  they  both  think  are  irrespon¬
sible  and  should  be  protected  from  the  strong  arm  of  the  law
— even  those,  in  almost  eve^  instance,  not  only  know  what
they  do  and  say,  but  can  and  do  most  easily  discriminate  right
from  wrong ;  and  this  truth  they  may  learn  any  day  they  will
be  at  the  trouble  of  visiting  the  County  Lunatic  Asylum.
We  tell  these  gentlemen  and  the  profession  to  which  they
belong,  notwithstanding  what  Lord  Hale  may  have  said  to
the  contrary,  that  the  intellect  is  in  no  way  the  measure  of
the  responsibility  of  man,  either  sane  or  insane.  The  first
holiday  Baron  Alderson  and  Sir  John  Jervis  may  make,  we
would  entreat  them  to  make  a  trip  to  the  Hanwell  Asylum,
and,  when  there,  to  walk  deliberately  through  the  various  work¬
shops  and  storerooms,  the  laundry,  &c.  :  there  they  will  ob¬
serve  large  numbers  of  maniacs,  both  male  and  female,  em¬
ployed — and  usefully  and  honorably  too — as  printers,  tailors,
shoemakers,  upholsterers,  bakers,  brewers,  gardeners,  and  in
domestic  avocations.  This  could  not  be  the  case  if  the  insane
were  so  ignorant  as  they  are  believed  and  represented  to  be.
Generally  speaking,  mental  derangement  consists  in  an  altered
and  depraved  condition  of  the  affections  and  propensities :  it  is
these  which  in  almost  every  instance  of  lunacy  give  evidence
of  disorder ;  the  intellectual  powers  are  affected,  it  is  most
true,  but  sympathetically  as  a  consequence  only.  We  may
here  add,  that,  inasmuch  as  by  far  the  larger  part  of  the  brain
ministers  to  the  moral  feelings  and  propensities,  it  is  neces¬
sarily  more  liable  to  diseased  action  than  the  smaller  and  an¬
terior  portion  of  the  same  organ — the  seat  of  the  perceptive
and  reflective  faculties.  The  intellectual  powers  of  every  man,


306


The  Case  of  Robert  Pate.


it  is  plainly  to  be  seen,  are  much  modified  by  his  moral  nature.*
How  certainly  are  our  likes  and  dislikes  a  part  rather  of  our
sympathies  than  the  result  of  our  mere  knowledge  of  things  !
Love,  joy,  ambition,  anger,  pride,  religion — each  and  all  of
our  affective  feelings  and  our  passions,  tincture  and  color  the
intellect  with  their  peculiar  hue  ;  and  the  same  psychological
principle  which  obtains  in  sane  man  obtains  also  among  the
insane  of  our  species.  This  most  important  fact  is  not  only
proved  by  every  day  observation,  but  is  demonstrated  by  all
we  know  of  the  anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  brain.

Mr.  Baron  Alderson  has  given  it  as  his  opinion,  that  the
commission  of  a  criminal  act  by  a  lunatic  during  a  lucid  in¬
terval  cannot  absolve  him  from  responsibility  and  consequent
punishment.  When  Mr.  Baron  Alderson  has  given  the  world
some  good  reason  to  believe  that  he  has  studied  cerebral  pa¬
thology,  as  a  branch  of  medical  learning,  then  and  not  till
then  shall  we  receive  his  dictum.  He  has  yet  to  learn,  that
“  the  crimes  which  are  alleged  to  have  been  committed  in  a
lucid  interval  are  generally  the  result  of  the  momentary  ex¬
citement  produced  by  sudden  provocations ;  that  these  pro¬
vocations  put  an  end  to  the  temporary  cure  by  immediately
reproducing  that  pathological  condition  of  the  brain  called
irritation ;  and  that  this  irritation  is  the  essential  cause  of
mental  derangement,  which  absolves  from  all  the  legal  con¬
sequences  of  crime”  (Bay). — There  remains  but  one  more
psychological  error  in  this  trial  for  us  to  point  out  to  our
readers'  attention,  and  this  one,  like  those  we  have  already
touched  upon,  is  very  commonly  paraded  in  our  courts
of  justice.  Mr.  Baron  Alderson  is  reported  in  the  Times
to  have  said,  “  The  only  insanity  which  excused  a  man  for
his  acts  was  that  species  of  delusion  which  conduced  to  and
drove  a  man  to  commit  the  act  alleged  against  him.  If,  for
instance,  a  man,  being  under  the  delusion  that  another  man
would  kill  him,  killed  that  man,  as  he  supposed,  for  his  pro¬
tection,  he  would  be  unpunishable  for  such  an  act,  because
it  would  appear  that  the  act  was  done  under  the  delusion  that
he  could  not  protect  himself  in  any  other  manner,  and  there
the  particular  description  of  insanity  conduced  to  the  offence  ;
but  on  the  other  hand,  if  a  man  had  the  delusion  that  his
head  was  made  of  glass,  that  would  be  no  excuse  for  his  killing
a  man :  he  would  know  very  well,  that  although  his  head  was
made  of  glass,  that  was  no  reason  why  he  should  kill  another
man,  and  that  it  was  a  wrong  act,  and  he  would  be  very  pro¬
perly  subjected  to  punishment  for  that  act.”

*  See  Dr.  Elliotson  on  the  Influence  of  the  Feelings  on  the  Intellect,  No.  III.,
p.  296.


Disease  mistaken  for  Crime.


307


It  happens  unfortunately  for  this  very  pretty  little  theory
of  Mr.  Baron  Alderson,  that  the  delusions  of  the  insane  are
of  little  or  no  importance  to  the  question  of  criminal  respon¬
sibility.  A  delusion,  so  called,  is  no  criterion  of  the  extent  of
the  mental  disorder ;  it  may  be  superadded  to  a  very  slight
and  but  a  temporary  insanity,  and  it  may  not  be  present  in
disease  involving  the  whole  brain  and  of  long  duration.  It
is  never  the  delusion  which  prompts  to  violence,  but  that
morbid  condition  of  the  brain  upon  which  the  said  delusion
is  consequent.*  The  delusions  of  the  insane  express  only  the
nature  of  the  predominant  feelings,  and  are  always  in  har¬
mony  with  the  morbid  affection  originating  them.  For  in¬
stance,  the  organs  of  Self-esteem,  Veneration,  or  Destruc¬
tiveness  may  severally  take  on  diseased  action,  and  their
natural  functions,  in  consequence,  may  at  length  become
co-exaggerated,  so  that  the  sufferer  is  necessarily  the  mere
instrument  of  such  an  unhappy  physical  condition.  Now  the
first  symptom  of  acute  disease  of  any  of  the  organs  above
named  is  expressed  by  an  extraordinary  display  of  either  pride ,
religious  enthusiasm ,  or  anger ;  if  the  patient  be  not  relieved,
or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  if  the  abnormal  action  continue
unabated,  the  chances  are  that  a  delusion  will  become  super-
added  to  the  other  indications  of  mental  derangement,  con¬
stituting,  as  it  were,  an  apology  for  his  ostentatious  deport¬
ment,  or  fanaticism,  or  cruelty  of  disposition.  A  delusion
then,  it  is  seen,  is  only  an  effect,  and  not  a  cause,  of  perverted
feeling  or  uncontrollable  impulse  to  violence.  “  The  assumed
personifications,”  i.  e.,  delusions,  “  of  the  insane  must  be
regarded  only  as  a  morbid  colouring  to  their  several  deranged
moral  feelings,  as  a  voluntary  and  tangible  ideal  of  their  in¬
nate,  involuntary,  and  morbid  impressions.”  “The  speech
and  actions  of  the  lunatic  must  be  regarded  only  in  the  light
of  symptoms  of  the  abnormal  condition  of  the  affections  and  .
propensities,  which,  under  circumstances  of  health  as  well  as
disease,  impart  the  character  to  man.”f  The  uncertainty  of
delusions,  regarded  as  an  indication  or  symptom  of  insanity,
their  independence  of  the  extent  or  variety  of  the  cerebral
disorder,  their  temporary  and  fleeting  nature,  and,  what  is
more  than  all,  their  association  with  the  predominant  morbid
feelings  by  which  the  intellectual  powers  are  so  manifestly
overruled,  and  to  which  they  are  made  subservient,  must
assure  our  readers  not  only  of  Mr.  Baron  Alderson’s  inaccu-

*  This  is  proved  by  mesmeric  experiments.  See  Dr.  Elliotson’s  papers,
No.  X.,  pp.  471-2;  pp.  460-1-2.  Great  light  is  thrown  upon  insanity  by  the
experiments  detailed  in  No.  TIL,  p.  346;  IX.,  pp.  362 — 378.

f  See  Dr.  Davey’s  Mental  Pathology ,  Sec.


308


The  Case  of  Robert  Pate.


racy,  but  also  of  the  great  necessity  which  exists  for  an  im¬
mediate  and  total  extinction  of  the  Law  or  Lunacy  as  ex¬
plained  by  our  Peers  and  Judges.

Our  readers  are  now  in  a  position  to  judge  of  the  premises
upon  which  Robert  Pate  has  been  consigned  to  the  hulks
and  denied  the  aids  and  sympathies  of  one  suffering  from  a
dreadful  malady.  Robert  Pate,  it  should  be  well  remembered,
is  one  of  many  unfortunate  people  who  are  allowed,  though
labouring  under  a  form  of  disease  more  awful  than  any  other,
to  roam  about  the  world  unheeded  and  uncared  for.  Like
McNaughten  and  many  more,  he  had  been  to  all  intents  and
purposes  insane  for  years ;  but,  because  he  possessed  a  tolerable
share  of  intellectual  power,  and  showed  himself  competent  to
the  discharge  of  the  every  day  duties  of  life,  he  was  allowed
to  go  his  own  way.  In  all  such  cases,  the  necessary  treatment
is  delayed,  and  disease  once  curable  is  allowed  to  take  so  firm
a  hold  of  the  brain  that  recovery  is  hopeless.  Day  by  day
the  patient  is  engrossed  by  his  morbid  fancies  and  desires ;
his  moral  nature  is  slowly  undermined  by  the  pressure  of  ce¬
rebral  changes.  His  life  is  passed  in  yielding  to  the  impulses
of  a  diseased  brain ;  each  recurring  sensation  and  thought  is
tortured  into  either  a  cause  or  an  effect  of  his  altered  habits
and  pursuits,  which  he  wants  the  powrer,  but  not  always  the
inclination,  to  control.  His  intellectual  existence  becomes  a
prey  to  the  phantasies  which  harass  him.  His  life  is  consumed
by  his  own  perverted  feelings  and  a  glimmering  consciousness
of  his  own  miseries ;  their  nature  and  not  improbable  conse¬
quences  fasten  upon  him,  and  all  these  facts  not  unfrequently
realize  the  fate  of  the  suicide ,  or  it  may  be  what  is  yet  more
dreadful,  that  of  the  homicide.  May  the  case  of  Robert
Pate  act  as  a  warning  to  all  men — friends  or  relatives
of  the  insane.

-  Q.

When  the  news  of  poor  Pate's  condemnation  reached  us,
we  hazarded  the  opinion  that  Sir  James  Clarke  would  com¬
municate  to  Her  Majesty  the  opinion  of  the  leading  members
of  the  profession  on  the  nature  of  the  case,  and  that,  not¬
withstanding  the  sentence  which  had  been  passed,  Her  Ma¬
jesty  would  have  been  induced,  by  the  representations  made
to  her,  to  pardon  the  unfortunate  patient  and  consign  him
to  the  safe  keeping  of  an  asylum.  We  do  not  know  whether
Sir  J.  Clarke  did  this  or  not.  We  fear  not,  because,  if  he
had  done  so,  and  supported  his  views  of  the  case  with  all  the
collateral  evidence  which  could  be  brought  to  bear  so  power¬
fully  upon  it,  we  feel  convinced  that  Her  Majesty  would  not


Paralysis  of  the  Arm  and  Ley.


309


have  sanctioned  the  transportation  of  an  unfortunate  lunatic.
That  a  man  with  a  diseased  brain  should  be  banished,  treated
as  a  criminal,  and  made  to  become  the  associate  of  the  idle,
the  dissolute,  and  the  depraved,  is  not  in  accordance  with
those  benevolent  views  which  should  be  our  guide,  either  in
the  treatment  of  disease  or  in  the  administration  of  the  laws.

If  we  had  occupied  the  position  of  Sir  J.  Clarke,  we  should
most  certainly  have  requested  an  audience  of  the  queen,  and
we  should  have  considered  it  our  duty — a  duty  devolving  upon
us  as  members  of  a  profession  which  should  alone  give  an
opinion  as  to  the  sanity  or  insanity  of  an  individual — so  to
have  placed  the  facts  and  arguments  as  to  have  convinced
Her  Majesty  that  the  poor  creature  who  aimed  the  blow  at
her  head  was  clearly  insane,  and  that  his  last  act  was  merely
the  termination  of  a  series  of  absurd  movements,  the  prompt¬
ings  of  a  diseased  brain.  In  such  a  case  what  signified  the
ignorance,  the  short-sighted  views,  or  the  expediency-notions,
of  ministers,  lawyers,  or  the  writers  of  articles  for  the  public
press?  We  should  not  have  cared  for  opposition  from  what¬
ever  quarter  it  might  have  presented  itself — we  should  have
kept  the  one  end  in  view,  our  duty — the  saving  from  trans¬
portation  and  association  with  criminals  a  man  who  was  af¬
flicted  with  disease,  and  a  disease  to  which  the  proudest
intellect  must  oftentimes  succumb.

Dr.  Conolly  very  properly  gave  an  opinion  that  Pate  was
a  person  who  should  be  confined,  as  far  back  as  last  November.
Suppose  this  advice  had  been  attended  to,  and  from  an  error
of  judgment  he  had  been  afterwards  released  from  the  re¬
straint  of  the  asylum,  and  had  then  committed  the  act  for
which  he  was  lately  condemned,  we  ask  would  the  same  sen¬
tence  have  been  passed,  or  would  the  authorities  have  ventured
to  carry  it  out?  We  say,  No.  We  are  driven  therefore  to
the  conclusion  that  the  unfortunate  man  is  suffering  the  pe¬
nalty  of  transportation  because  his  friends  did  not  attend  to
the  advice  given  to  them  by  a  member  of  that  profession
which  is  alone  capable  of  giving  an  opinion.  Such  is  the  law
of  England  !  Such  is  the  justice  of  our  rulers  ! — Zoist.


XIII.  “  Paralysis  of  the  Arm  and  Ley  cured  with  Mesmerism.
Remarkable  phenomena  developed  during  the  Mesmeric
Sleep.  By  Dr.  Davey ,  of  the  Colney  Hatch  Lunatic
Asylum .”  Sad  Conduct  of  the  “  Medical  Times.”

Dr.  Davey  while  residing  in  Ceylon  attended  a  case  of  ute¬
rine  disease  (hydatids),  during  the  progress  of  which  the
muscles  of  the  extremities  became  paralytic.  The  constitu-

VOL.  VIII.  Z


310  Paralysis  of  the  Arm  and  Leg

tional  treatment  pursued  improved  the  state  of  the  patient
very  much, —

“  But  nevertheless  much  remained  to  be  done  towards  the  com¬
plete  recovery  of  the  spinal  functions  of  the  extremities  :  for  although
the  flexion  and  extension  of  both  the  upper  and  fore-arm,  and  pro¬
nation  and  supination  were  now  little  short  of  perfect,  yet  the  deeply-
seated  muscles  of  the  fore-arm,  those  attached  to  the  phalanges,  the
flexors  and  extensors  of  the  fingers,  and  those  belonging  to  the
thumbs,  were  capable  only  of  very  slight  movements ;  and  similarly
of  those  of  the  lower  extremities,  and  particularly  so  of  those  mus¬
cles  attached  to  the  inferior  phalanges.

“  Such  was  the  condition  of  my  patient  in  the  ninth  week  after
the  escape  of  the  hydatid  mass  from  the  uterus — and  at  this  time  I
advised  her  to  proceed  to  Nuwera  Ellia  in  the  hope  that  a  change  of
air  and  scene  might  be  beneficial:  nor  was  I  disappointed.  On  her
return  to  Colombo  (after  an  absence  of  two  months)  in  May,  both
the  hands  and  feet  were  somewhat  less  affected  than  they  had  been
previously.

“  In  the  hope  of  facilitating  the  recovery  of  the  deeply-seated
muscles  of  the  arm  and  leg,  viz.,  those  attached  to  the  phalanges,
superior  and  inferior,  and  all  of  which  were  at  this  time  in  so  para¬
lyzed  a  condition  as  to  render  the  hands  and  feet  not  much  more  than
useless,  I  proposed  to  Mrs.  T.  that  she  should  allow  me  to  mesmerise
her.  I  did  so,  and  with  but  little  trouble,  on  several  occasions — in
fact  until  she  left  Colombo  for  Galle.  At  each  sitting  and  directly
she  became  insensible — comatose — the  arms  were  raised  involuntarily,
and  without  the  patient’s  knowledge,  high  above  the  head,  and  those
parts  hitherto  all  but  powerless  were  seen  endowed  with  motion —
e.g.y  the  fingers  now  and  then  jerked  out  like  an  inanimate  body
when  surcharged  with  electric  fluid.  The  hands,  which  for  a  period
of  about  five  months  had  seemed  more  like  mere  appendages  to  the
wrists  than  anything  else,  falling  here  and  there  as  the  motions  of
the  fore-arm  directed,  were  brought  or  rather  thrown  into  a  straight
line  with  the  other,  the  inferior,  parts  of  the  member.  This  state
of  things  always  lasted  about  20  or  25  minutes,  when  it  was  termi¬
nated  by  a  kind  of  hysterical  paroxysm  ;  on  the  subsidence  of  which
consciousness  would  reappear,  and  with  it  the  parts  affected  reac¬
quired  their  former  and  abnormal  condition.  However,  directly  on
the  employment  of  animal  magnetism,  the  recovery  of  the  hands  and
feet  progressed  rapidly,  and  at  this  time  (December)  Mrs.  T.  is,  to
use  her  own  words,  *  quite  well,’  *  as  well  as  ever.’  When  pressed
closely  she  admits  that  one  ancle  is  *a  little  weak,’  and  that  she
finds,  when  executing  a  difficult  piece  of  music,  the  fingers  occasion¬
ally  feel  *  stiflish.’  The  general  health  is  now,  as  it  has  long  been,
perfect.

"  The  following  letter  contains  Mrs.  T.’s  own  opinion  of  the
benefits  she  has  received  from  mesmerism : —

“  ‘August  4th,  1848.

“  ‘  Dear  Dr.  Davev, — Your  letter  of  the  29th  of  July,  I  received


cured  with  Mesmerism.


311


a  few  days  ago ;  and  it  is  with  much  pleasure  I  write  to  express  to
you  my  opinion  as  to  the  effect  mesmerism  had  on  my  limbs.  1
have  derived  great  benefit  from  it ;  for  I  had  not  the  least  power  in
my  wrists  before  mesmerism  was  resorted  to.  I  think  you  mesmer¬
ised  me  altogether  four  times,  and  the  last  time  was  on  a  Sunday.
I  left  Colombo  for  Galle  the  following  day,  and  it  was  in  the  coach,
on  my  way  there,  I  first  observed  I  could  nearly  raise  my  wrists.
In  about  a  week  I  entirely  got  the  use  of  them ;  and  since  then  my
hands  have  continued  to  strengthen  daily.  Within  three  weeks  of
the  time  you  first  mesmerised  me  I  was  able  to  write  my  bazaar
account ;  and  soon  afterwards  little  notes  to  my  friends,  and  to  your¬
self  among  the  rest.  I  can  now  also  walk  about  the  house  quite
alone,  but  still  have  a  little  difficulty  in  getting  up  from  my  chair.
I  am  in  the  best  health  ;  and  this  note  will  be  alone  sufficient  to  shew
you  the  improvement  which  has  taken  place  in  my  hands  since  I  last
wrote  to  you.

(Signed)  “  ‘  E - T - .’  ”

Dr.  Davey’s  work  upon  insanity,  noticed  in  No.  XXIX.,
pp.  106-7,  fell  into  the  hands  of  Dr.  Bushnan,  the  temporary
paid  editor  of  the  Medical  Times ,  who  reviewed  it :  but  after¬
wards,  discovering  that  Dr.  Davey  was  an  abettor  of  mesmer¬
ism  and  the  true  physiology  of  the  brain,  wrote  the  following
learned,  elegant,  and  moral  notice  a  fortnight  subsequently
in  the  number  for  August  the  10th  : —

“Dr.  Davey  has  been  appointed  Resident  Medical  Superintendent
at  the  New  Colney  Hatch  Lunatic  Asylum,  having  recently  returned
from  having  charge  of  the  Government  hospital  for  the  insane  at
Ceylon.  In  reviewing  his  work  on  the  pathology  of  the  brain,  we
suggested  that  he  was  in  every  respect  well  qualified  for  such  an  ap¬
pointment  ;  and  we  may  now,  therefore,  be  fairly  expected  to  con¬
gratulate  him  on  his  success,  which  we  do  with  pleasure,  but  not
without  some  misgiving,  for  we  have  since  heard  that  he  is  one  of
those  digital  philosophers  who  believe  in  phrenology  and  profess  to
have  faith  in  the  more  pernicious  heresy  of  mesmerism.  In  other
words.  Dr.  Davey  is  a  phreno-mesmerist ;  but  we  hope  we  have  been
misinformed,  for  a  man  who  holds  so  responsible  an  office  ought  to
enjoy  an  amount  of  public  confidence  which  will  never  be  awarded  to
any  one,  however  scientific  he  may  be,  who  becomes  notorious  for
his  credulity.  Phrenology  is  a  ver}7  innocent  pastime,  and  we  should
no  more  dream  of  disputing  seriously  the  pretensions  of  any  person
professing  to  interpret  character  by  phrenological  signs,  than  we
should  think  of  lecturing  a  child  for  playing  with  a  Chinese  puzzle.
It  is  amusing  enough  to  play  at  hit  or  miss  in  divining  a  lady’s
character,  by  running  one’s  fingers  through  her  glossy  ringlets  and
braided  hair,  more  especially  if  rewarded  for  our  pains,  as  Juvenal
says  the  Roman  ladies  did  the  metoposcopists  who  practised  this  art
even  in  the  days  of  Vespasian, —

‘  Prsebet  frontem  manumque  Vates  propysma  roganti/

z  2


312


Paralysis  of  the  Arm  and  Ley

But  mesmerism  is  a  very  different  affair.  Here  the  mystic  manipu¬
lations  of  the  operator,  by  fatiguing  and  exhausting  nervous  sensi¬
bility,  superinduce — particularly  in  females  disposed  to  hysteria —
that  well-known  state  of  coma  in  which  the  mesmeriser,  from  the
insensibility  of  the  patient,  may  truly  boast  that  he  can  do  what  he
pleases.  Truly,  it  is  a  profound  mesmeric  slumber ;  but  *  in  that
sleep  what  dreams  may  come  V  Phrenology  is  little  more  than  an
agreeable  drawing-room  plaything ;  but  mesmerism,  from  the  demo¬
ralizing  results  which  have  attended  the  practice  of  it,  ought  to  be
excommunicated  for  ever  from  the  circle  of  our  social  life.  We,  of
course,  do  not  make  these  remarks  with  the  most  distant  idea  of  any
personality  towards  Dr.  Davey ;  he  now  holds  a  situation  of  high
public  trust  and  responsibility,  and  we  feel  assured,  that  he  will  not
tamper  with  the  confidence  that  has  been  reposed  in  him.  With
these  feelings,  we  wish  him  every  success  in  his  new  office ;  he  has
already  had  much  experience  in  the  organization  and  management  of
lunatic  asvlums,  and  when  he  considers  how  much  remains  vet  to
be  done,  in  order  that  these  establishments  shall  be  placed  upon  a
better  footing  than  they  are  at  present  in  this  country ;  and  when  he
reflects  how  little  is  yet  known  of  the  pathology  and  proper  treat¬
ment  of  insanity,  he  will  find  a  field  open  before  him  which  will
demand  his  incessant  and  anxious  exertions,  and  in  the  midst  of  such
important  occupations,  he  will — we  would  fain  believe — forget  the
fictions  of  phrenology  and  the  dreams  of  mesmerism.”

We  fully  intended  to  publish,  as  appeared  in  our  last
notice  to  correspondents,  a  short  statement  of  Dr.  Davey's
case  in  our  last  number,  but  were  prevented  from  fulfilling
our  intention  by  a  press  of  matter.  We  do  not  regret  the
delay,  because  it  enables  us  to  place  in  juxtaposition  with  the
case  the  above  attack.  As  our  readers  will  perceive,  accord¬
ing  to  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Bushnan,  Dr.  Davey  was  in  every
way  qualified  for  the  appointment  which  he  has  lately  received,
until  this  learned  editor  discovered  that  he  belonged  to  that
band  of  truth-seekers,  who,  regardless  of  the  scorn  and  con¬
tempt  of  the  world,  dare  to  perform  what  they  believe  to  be
right,  and  to  publish  w  hat  they  have  proved  to  be  true.  No
sooner  did  Dr.  Bushnan  discover  this  rare  virtue — a  virtue
very  uncommon  amongst  medical  writers  during  the  past
twelve  years — than  he  is  suddenly  seized  with  “  misgivings,”
because,  to  use  his  own  words,  Dr.  Davey,  “  is  one  of  those
digital  philosophers  who  believe  in  phrenology,  and  profess  to
have  faith  in  the  more  pernicious  heresy  of  mesmerism.”  It
is  very  fortunate  for  Dr.  Davey  that  he  is  not  one  of  those
men  who  wait  for  the  popular  breath  to  teach  what  scientific
subjects  may  or  may  not  be  investigated.  Dr.  D.  thinks  for
himself,  as  we  know  from  abundant  experience,  and  he  is
neither  to  be  guided  in  his  scientific  pursuits  by  Dr.  Bushnan,


cured  with  Mesmerism.


313


nor  frightened  from  his  consistency  by  the  onslaughts  of  a
man,  who  was  convicted  in  our  last  number,  by  the  Rev.
Mr.  Sandby,  of  suppressing  one  half  of  a  sentence ,  which  he
professed  to  extract  from  a  paper  written  by  that  gentleman.*
Dr.  B.  very  innocently  insinuates  that  he  feels  assured  that
Dr.  Davey  will  not  tamper  with  the  confidence  reposed  in  him.
We  wish  that  we  could  say  the  same  for  Dr.  Bushnan.  After
the  exposure  in  our  last  number,  what  literary  man  would
countenance  him  or  take  his  word  for  the  accuracy  of  any
quotation  which  he  might  make  ?  Alas  !  for  the  readers  of
the  Medical  Times,  to  what  an  impure  fountain  do  they
resort !  A  systematic  suppression  of  the  most  astounding
operations  ever  performed — the  abuse  of  all  those  who  are
investigating  what  he  has  not  the  honesty  to  refer  to  except
with  a  sneer  or  with  a  pen  flowing  with  the  outpourings  of  a
prurient  imagination — the  barefaced  assertion  that  mesmer-
isers  are  an  immoral  class— -the  contempt  of  the  truths  of
cerebral  physiology,  a  science  which  all  thoughtful  men  have
long  since  recognized  to  be  true, — this  is  the  trash  with  which
the  medical  men  who  read  this  journal  are  amused.

Dr.  Bushnan  is  evidently  trying  to  outvie  Mr.  Wakley.
Mr.  Wakley  never  wrote  anything  worse  than  the  specimen
we  have  just  given.  Disgraceful  and  contemptible  as  his  out¬
pourings  have  been,  Dr.  Bushnan*  s  last  has  the  singular  merit
of  being  not  only  more  contemptible,  but  more  beastly  than
anything  which  ever  came  from  the  pen  of  Wakley.  Dr.  B.
cannot  find  fault  with  us  for  giving  him  his  meed  of  praise.
We  have  often  thought,  what  would  we  give  for  a  correct
report  of  all  the  doings  and  misdoings  of  all  the  cliques  and
coteries  which  hunted  down  poor  Harvey.  How  amusing  the
history  of  those  times  would  be.  Every  scrap  of  the  nonsense
uttered  by  the  great  men  of  the  day  would  be  useful  now,  if
only  for  the  purpose  of  contrast  with  the  inanities  written  by
a  similar  class  upon  another  truth,  and  one  certain  to  produce

i

*  He  was  guilty  of  the  same  misconduct  in  reference  to  Dr.  Elliotson.  He
wrote — “  Poor  Dr.  Elliotson,  repudiating  his  Alma  Mater — eschewing  his  dip¬
loma — ashamed  that  he  belongs  to  the  medical  profession,  because  he  has  entered
the  cloudy  sanctuary  of  mesmerism  and  quotes  the  following  words  from  Dr.
Elliotson,  with  every  appearance  that  they  complete  a  sentence, — “  I  feel  shame
that  I  belong  to  the  medical  profession.”  See  No.  XXIX.,  p.  31.

Now  Dr.  Elliotson’s  words  were  :  “  I  feel  shame  that  I  belong  to  the  medical
profession,  I  feel  shame  that  I  am  a  human  being,  when ,  forgetting  for  a  moment
those  noble  and  beautiful  unworldly  characters  who  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,  and
before  whom  I  count  myself  as  nothing,  I  behold  human  nature  capable  of  such
inhumanity,  such  absence  of  moral  principle,  and  such  weak  short-sightedness.”
No.  XXVIII.,  p.  368.

Dr.  Elliotson  repudiates,  &c.,  eschews,  &c.,  and  yet  always  styles  himself
John  Elliotson,  M.D.  Cantab. !


314  The  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review ,  fyc.,

still  greater  results.  We  shall  save  the  future  medical  his¬
torian  from  hunting  through  the  periodicals  for  the  opinions
of  the  day  on  the  science  of  mesmerism,  for  we  invariably
reprint  all  the  rich  morsels  we  can  find,  and  of  course  we
take  care  to  attach  to  them  the  names  of  their  authors.  It
shall  not  be  our  fault  if  they  do  not  obtain  immortality.


XIY.  The  British  and  Foreign  Medico-Chirurgical  Review,

Dr.  Laycock,  and  Orthodox  Medicine,  versus  Empirical

Systems.

The  Bi'itish  and  Foreign  Medico-Chirurgical  Review  while
under  the  fostering  care  of  Dr.  Forbes,  almost  commenced
its  career  with  the  publication  of  an  article  which  was  in¬
tended  to  stop  for  ever  the  investigation  of  mesmerism.  The
writer  of  the  article  in  question  manifestly  knew  nothing
about  the  subject.  He  merely  received  orders  from  head
quarters  to  demolish  Elliotson  and  his  band,  and  the  hireling
undertook  to  do  so,  with  what  success  will  be  apparent,  when
we  relate  that  his  employer  was  shortly  after  converted  to
the  truth  of  the  subject  he  had  struggled  with  might  and
main  to  crush.  In  this  article,  which  appeared  in  April,
1839,  the  following  passage  occurred:  “If  we  can  quicken
its  (mesmerism)  decline  where  it  now  reigns  in  the  hearts  of
nervous  proselytes  and  dreaming  physicians,  or  can  assist  in
forming  a  barrier  against  a  probable  revisitation  of  it,  we
shall  not  think  the  otherwise  more  than  due  attention  we
have  given  to  the  wild  productions  which  treat  of  it  entirely
thrown  away."

Dr.  Forbes  terminated  his  connection  with  the  British  and
Foreign  Review  three  years  ago,  by  writing  an  article  therein,
not  only  favourable  to  the  science  of  mesmerism,  but  he
called  on  the  medical  profession  not  to  treat  it  with  the  dis¬
dain  with  which  he  had  taught  them,  but  to  investigate  a
subject,  which  it  was  evident  every  day's  experience  was
rendering  more  and  more  important.  He  said,  “  Indeed  we
hesitate  not  to  assert,  that  the  testimony  is  now  of  so  varied
and  extensive  a  kind,  so  strong,  and  in  a  certain  proportion
of  cases  so  seemingly  unexceptionable,  as  to  authorize  us,
nay,  in  honesty,  to  compel  us  to  recommend  that  an  imme¬
diate  and  complete  trial  of  the  practice  be  made  in  surgical
cases."

The  Review,  as  an  article  of  barter,  passed  into  the  hands
of  Dr.  Carpenter,  and  he  seems  to  be  contented  with  the  old
jog-trot  routine  followed  by  his  predecessor  in  1839,  and


versus  Empirical  Systems.


315


thus  to  place  his  readers,  if  they  attend  to  his  teachings,  in
a  worse  position  than  they  were  in  previous  to  his  assumption
of  the  editorial  duties.  Before,  however,  we  enter  more
particularly  on  the  consideration  of  the  article  in  the  British
and  Foreign  Review ,  which  has  given  rise  to  these  observa¬
tions,  let  us  consider  in  a  moral  point  of  view  what  are  to
be  recognized  as  essential  editorial  qualifications.  It  appears
to  us  that  there  is  a  vast  difference  in  the  estimate  which
we  should  form  of  intellectual  and  moral  qualifications  in
this  department  of  literature.  A  moment’s  reflection  will
convince  us  that  there  are  two  vital  and  fundamental  con¬
siderations  which  should  enter  into  our  estimate  of  the  quali¬
fications  of  an  individual  for  the  responsible  position  of  a
critical  editor.  The  world  too  frequently  seems  to  be  satisfied
with  the  intellectual  qualifications,  and  appears  not  to  recog¬
nize  the  fact  that  the  moral  power  of  the  writer  can  alone
give  value  to  the  produce  of  the  former.  What  possible
benefit,  for  instance,  can  accrue  to  the  reader  of  a  scientific
article,  however  brilliant  the  writing  may  be,  if  there  is
wanting  that  truthfulness,  that  high  moral  purpose,  without
which  the  outpourings  of  the  most  powerful  intellect  should
be  viewed  as  little  better  than  the  notes  emanating  from
sounding  brass  or  tinkling  cymbals  !  What  does  it  avail  an
honest  investigator  of  natural  phenomena  to  find  the  facts
he  is  in  search  of  mixed  up  with  distorted  statements,  absurd
and  mischievous  insinuations,  and  in  some  instances  with
abominable  charges  against  individuals,  only  to  be  equalled,
and  certainly  not  surpassed,  in  publications  of  the  lowest
character  ?  ‘If  we  are  asked  for  proofs  of  these  statements,
we  have  simply  to  refer  to  the  quotations  from  the  leading
medical  periodicals,  which  we  have  inserted  in  almost  every
number  of  our  journal ;  and  we  are  quite  willing  to  abide
the  verdict  of  the  intelligent  and  educated,  either  within  or
without  the  profession.  It  has  always  appeared  to  us  to
augur  unfavourably  for  the  standard  of  professional  attain¬
ments,  and  for  the  wish  on  the  part  of  the  profession  to  be
catered  for  in  a  superior  manner,  that  they  should  permit
the  journals  in  question  to  indulge  in  such  a  style  of  writing.
It  may  be  asked  how  is  it  to  be  prevented?  We  answer,  by
each  person  who  is  disgusted  with  the  course  which  is  pur¬
sued,  discontinuing  to  read  the  journal  in  question,  and  com¬
municating  to  the  editor  his  reasons  for  so  doing.  This  would
soon  produce  an  improvement,  for  with  all  these  conductors
of  medical  periodical  literature,  the  money  question  governs
their  principles.  If  a  disputed  point  is  under  discussion,  the
question,  apparently,  is  not  what  is  the  truth,  but  which


316  The  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review,  fyc.,

side  shall  wc  take  to  secure  the  largest  number  of  subscrib¬
ers.  The  fact  was  indirectly  confessed  by  Mr.  Wakley,  in
1838,  when  he  stated  that  for  one  letter  which  he  received
in  favour  of  mesmerism  he  received  tiventy  against  it.  This
was  important  information.  He  soon  shaped  his  course,
suppressed  what  we  knew  to  be  truth,  and  secured  his  ex¬
chequer.  If  this  is  not  the  true  explanation  we  shall  be
happy  to  receive  another.  We  leave  our  own  labours  out  of
consideration  for  a  moment,  and  we  ask  what  other  explana¬
tion  can  be  given  for  the  total  neglect  by  all  the  journalists
of  Dr.  Esdaile*  s  operations  at  Calcutta?  What  are  the  facts?
There  is  an  hospital  erected  by  the  Governor-Ceneral  of
India — there  are  assistants  paid  by  his  orders  to  act  as  mes-
merisers — there  have  been  a  large  number  of  gigantic  opera¬
tions  undertaken  in  a  state  of  mesmerism,  and  brought  in
consequence  to  a  successful  termination — patients  travel  from
all  parts  of  India  to  be  operated  upon  by  Dr.  Esdaile,  because
they  avoid  pain — the  operations  are  performed  in  public,  and
therefore  witnessed  by  the  surgeons  of  Calcutta;  and  all  this
has  been  going  on  for  upwards  of  three  years  without  one
single  notice  having  been  bestowed  on  the  subject  by  any
medical  or  surgical  journal !  Can  this  be  considered  honest  ?
Does  it  raise  in  our  estimation  the  individuals  who  act  thus  ?
Can  there  be  any  reason  for  this  conduct  but  the  one  above
suggested  ?

Professional  men  as  yet  have  made  no  movement  in  the
matter,  but  let  a  few  once  express  a  decided  opinion,  and
these  editorial  perverters  of  the  truth  will  soon  become  con¬
vinced  that  Dr.  Esdaile  has  been  performing  wonderful  oper¬
ations,  and  we  shall  have  the  pages  of  their  periodicals  teeming
with  his  cases,  and  their  pens  lauding  the  very  individuals
they  have  been  for  years  abusing  and  vilifying.  This  is  a
deplorable  picture  of  the  state  of  medical  journalism,  but  it
is  one  with  which,  unfortunately,  we  have  been  long  ac¬
quainted,  and  we  have  referred  to  the  subject  again  and
again,  because  we  thought  it  necessary,  and  because  we  con¬
ceived  that  a  short  time  would  produce  an  alteration,  but  we
are  daily  becoming  more  and  more  convinced  that  the  change
must  be  brought  about  by  the  pressure  from  without.  When
professional  men  are  convinced,  and  they  soon  must  be,  that
they  have  been  grossly  deceived,  then,  and  not  till  then,  will
the  conductors  of  the  press,  not  from  a  desire  to  do  what  is
right,  but  from  compulsion,  insert  all  the  facts  which  they
can  accumulate,  and  leave  their  readers  to  draw  their  own
conclusions.  This  is  all  wc  ask.  We  want  not  their  opinions
— we  want  a  record  of  facts — facts  supported,  be  it  remem-


versus  Empirical  Systems.  317

bered,  bv  some  of  the  most  learned  and  acute  men  of  the
age.

How  do  they  act  on  other  matters?  If  a  patent  for  a
new  method  of  consuming  gas  is  taken  out  by  one  of  their
contributors,  the  fact  is  heralded  with  a  flourish  of  trumpets,
and  our  attention  is  directed  to  it  in  large  type,  and  we  are
told  that  the  inventor’s  name  has  been  on  more  than  one
occasion  seen  in  their  pages.  If  a  new  drug  is  discovered
in  the  centre  of  India,  or  the  wilds  of  Abyssinia,  there  is  a
scramble  amongst  them  for  the  first  and  fullest  description
of  it.  We  ask  if  an  operation  is  performed  in  India,  of  a
character  far  more  imposing  than  anything  accomplished  at
a  London  hospital,  and  under  circumstances  involving  several
physiological  phenomena  of  a  novel  and  interesting  character,
why  is  this  not  to  be  chronicled  also  ?  Why  is  the  informa¬
tion  to  be  withheld  from  the  medical  practitioners  of  England  ?
We  demand  an  answer  to  this  question.  We  know  we  shall
demand  in  vain,  and  for  this  reason.  They  have  committed
themselves  to  a  certain  course  of  conduct,  they  have  told  their
readers  for  years  that  mesmerism  is  untrue,  and  unfortunately
the  great  bulk  of  their  readers  have  believed  them, — they  know
the  power  they  possess  to  suppress  information,  and  they
have  used  it,  and  continue  to  do  so.  The  success  which  has
attended  their  efforts  leads  them  to  suppose  that  they  may
always  manage  to  suppress  news  from  whatever  source  it  may
arrive,  and  they  think  if  they  accomplish  this,  that  the  change
which  they  are  well  aware  must  come,  may  nevertheless  on
their  part  be  managed  so  warily,  as  to  make  it  appear  that
they  come  round  to  the  truth,  on  account  of  the  accumula¬
tion  of  evidence,  and  not  because  they  are  compelled  by  the
force  of  public  opinion.  Of  the  honesty  of  this  course  all
can  judge  without  any  attempt  on  our  part  to  point  out  the
enormity  of  such  a  proceeding.

So  much  then  for  the  tone  of  medical  journalism  in
general.  Let  us  now  consider  the  article  in  the  British  and
Foreign  Review,  to  which  we  referred  just  now,  “The  relation
of  True  Medicine  to  Empirical  Systems.”  We  are  really  at
a  loss  to  understand  why  this  article  was  written.  We  think
that  we  can  detect  the  labour  of  two  individuals  in  it.  There
is  such  a  mixture  of  philosophy  and  folly — such  a  combina¬
tion  of  truth  and  falsehood — such  a  contradiction  visible
throughout,  that  we  feel  convinced  it  is  a  compound  produc¬
tion  the  result  in  fact  of  an  intellectual  partnership,  formed
for  the  nonce  between  Drs.  Laycock  and  Carpenter.  Which
of  these  individuals  can  lay  claim  to  the  philosophy  and  which


318  The  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review,  fyc.,

to  the  folly,  we  know  not,  neither  do  we  much  care ;  it  is
sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  announce  that  in  the  medical
world  Dr.  Laycock  of  York  has  the  credit  of  writing  the
article — a  matter  of  small  importance,  except  as  a  point  of
interest  at  some  future  period.  There  are  four  empirical
systems  which  furnish  the  materials  for  this  article.  With
the  remarks  made  on  homoeopathy  and  hydropathy  we  have
nothing  to  do.  The  supporters  of  each  system  must  defend
themselves.  We  have  no  experience  on  either  subject,  and
we  never  give  an  opinion  on  a  disputed  point  without  careful
study  and  investigation.  We  are  not  prepared  to  defend,  or
even  to  offer  support  to  the  promulgators  of  new  doctrines.
We  are  investigating  one  subject,  and  we  think  we  have
made  some  progress  towards  its  elucidation.  We  have  es¬
tablished  a  journal  for  the  publication  of  all  matters  referring
to  it,  because  all  the  medical  periodicals  were  closed  against
our  researches,  and  because  the  editors  were  continuallv  in-
forming  their  readers  that  our  doctrines  were  so  preposterous
and  visionary,  so  abominable  and  immoral,  that  we  ought
to  be  scouted  from  respectable  society.

“The  relation  of  true  medicine  to  empirical  systems.”
What  is  true  medicine  ?  Who  are  the  authors  of  this  paper
that  they  should  attempt  to  dogmatize  and  to  assert  what  is
true  and  what  is  false  ?  Is  the  science  of  medicine  so  perfect
that  physicians  never  have  recourse  to  empirical  methods  of
treatment?  Are  not  many  of  the  empirical  methods  of
treating  disease,  which  are  rife  during  a  portion  of  one
century,  very  often  the  recognized  and  orthodox  methods  of
treating  disease  during  a  portion  of  the  next,  and  therefore
taken  in  relation  to  the  age  in  which  they  are  adopted,  to  be
considered  as  true  medicine  ?  But  is  that  system  which  the
physicians  of  the  age  recognize  and  practise,  true  medicine  ?
Are  not  many  methods  of  treating  disease,  which  orthodox
practitioners  have  recognized  as  true  medicine,  superseded
by  more  modern  innovations,  the  innovation  when  investi¬
gated,  consisting  of  some  previous  empirical  system  which
the  practitioners  of  true  medicine  in  their  day  would  not  con¬
descend  to  notice  ?  Surely  such  facts  as  these,  facts  which
the  history  of  the  medical  profession  furnishes  in  abundance,
should  teach  men  to  reflect  and  consider  well  before  they
condemn.  But  medical  men  are  like  many  others  without
the  profession,  they  do  not  appear  to  gain  wisdom  by  re¬
flecting  on  the  past;  they  are  like  many  of  the  leading
politicians  of  the  day,  who  read  history  as  a  pastime,  and
quote  it  only  when  it  suits  their  purpose ;  they  do  not  read


versus  Empirical  Systems.


319


it  with  a  philosophic  spirit,  or  frame  their  maxims  in  accord¬
ance  with  the  principles  which  the  experience  of  ages  has
stamped  with  the  impress  of  truth.

True  medicine  being  in  reality  a  very  imperfect  science,
is  of  course  ready  to  embrace  any  empirical  system  which  is
proved  to  be  founded  in  fact  and  experience.  It  becomes
the  province  of  true  medicine  to  place  the  empirical  system,
or  such  portion  of  it  as  may  be  found  valuable,  in  its  proper
position,  and  to  apportion  to  it  its  true  value.  What  is  true
and  valuable  in  the  empirical  system  becomes  then  true
medicine.  False  medicine,  or  rather,  medical  practitioners,
not  under  the  influence  of  the  desired  philosophic  spirit,
scorn  whatever  does  not  happen  to  emanate  from  their  own
ranks,  and  too  often  even  what  does, — they  reject  what  is
not  in  accordance  with  their  preconceived  notions,  quite  for¬
getting  that  their  notions  do  not  constitute  true  medicine,
and  that  there  necessarily  must  be  many  more  great  truths,
important  facts,  and  even  empirical  systems  yet  to  be  dis¬
covered,  and  to  be  embraced  even  during  their  lives,  in  their
philosophy.  If  we  could  imbue  the  whole  race  of  medical
practitioners  with  these  views — if  we  could  elevate  them  from
the  position  of  mere  traders,  a  position  which,  much  as
they  have  been  annoyed  at  the  charge,  two-thirds  of  them
still  occupy,  and  make  them  think,  feel,  and  act  as  philoso¬
phers,  having  but  one  object,  truth  and  the  advancement  of
science,  and  but  one  enemy  to  contend  against,  prejudice,
and  the  plebeian  notions,  the  necessary  result  of  such  in¬
ferior  cerebral  training, — how  different  would  be  the  result  ?

But  this  desired  state  of  things  is  not  to  be  brought  about
by  such  an  article  as  that  inserted  in  the  British  and  Foreign
Medical  Review.  Before  a  writer  can  expect  to  produce  a
reform  in  medical  ethics,  there  is  a  preliminary  qualification
which  it  is  essential  for  him  to  possess,  viz.,  the  power  of
adjudicating  justly.  Surely  before  an  author  takes  upon
himself  to  denounce  and  condemn  a  compeer,  he  should  be
quite  sure  that  he  is  in  possession  of  all  the  facts  requisite
to  form  a  judgment.  Would  it  not  be  a  laughable  farce,  if
a  judge  in  a  court  of  law  were  to  proceed  to  pass  sentence,
irrespective  of  the  opinion  of  the  jury,  and  before  the  re¬
quisite  evidence  had  been  submitted?  Dr.  Laycock  has  com¬
mitted  a  greater  crime  than  this,  he  has  not  only  pronounced
sentence,  without  submitting  evidence,  but  he  has  endea¬
voured  to  bring  into  contempt  by  sneering  (a  very  pretty
accomplishment  for  a  would-be  ethical  writer)  at  an  individual
who  is  as  far  superior  to  him,  as  regards  the  position  which
he  holds  in  the  scientific  world,  as  is  his  opinion  on  questions


320  The  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review ,  fyc.,


more  particularly  belonging  to  professional  subjects.  What  do
our  readers  think  of  this?  Who  shall  have  the  credit  of
this  precious  morsel,  Dr.  Laycock  or  Dr.  Carpenter?  In
the  first  place  we  are  favoured  with  the  following  quotation
from  the  American  code  of  medical  ethics.

“It  is  derogatory  to  the  dignity  of  the  profession  to  resort  to
public  advertisements,  or  private  cards,  or  hand  bills,  inviting  the
attention  of  individuals  affected  with  particular  diseases,  publicly
offering  advice  and  medicine  to  the  poor  gratis,  or  promising  radical
cures ;  or  to  publish  cases  and  operations  in  the  daily  prints,  or
suffer  such  publications  to  be  made ;  to  invite  laymen  to  be  present
at  operations ;  to  boast  of  cures  and  remedies ;  to  adduce  certificates
of  skill  and  success  ;  or  to  perform  any  other  similar  acts.  These
are  the  ordinary  practices  of  empirics,  and  are  highly  reprehensible
in  a  regular  physician.”

To  this  Dr.  Laycock  adds  his  own  remarks.  He  says :
“  Let  us  bring  the  conduct  of  Dr.  Elliotson  to  this  standard ;
and  it  is  soon  made  manifest  how  recklessly  and  how  con¬
stantly  he  has  sinned  against  sound  professional  ethics,  from
the  time  that  he  invited  laymen  to  meet  him  at  the  North
London  Hospital.  If  that  fallen  man  had  undertaken  the
investigation  of  mesmeric  phenomena  with  a  due  regard  to
the  dignity  of  his  profession,  and  in  a  spirit  of  a  sound  phi¬
losophy,  medicine  might  by  this  time  have  been  enriched  with
not  only  a  new  and  most  valuable  curative  agent ,  but  with
large  additions  to  one  of  its  most  defective  departments — the
physiology  of  the  cerebrum;  and  Dr.  Elliotson  would  have
been  honoured  and  esteemed.  But  Dr.  Elliotson  preferred
the  empirical  course ;  he  invited  laymen  to  be  present  at  his
manipulations ;  he  has  published,  or  suffered  cases  to  be  pub¬
lished,  in  the  newspapers ,  and  in  journals  intended  for  popular
circulation;  he  has  boasted  of  his  cures;  but  we  need  not
prolong  this  painful  matter ;  he  is  indeed  a  beacon  set  on
high  to  warn  his  brethren  against  the  treacherous  quicksands
that  have  engulphed  him ,  and  against  a  course  which  has  been
even  more  disastrous  to  science  than  to  himself.  To  his
conduct  may  be  traced,  in  a  great  degree,  the  seizure  of
mesmerism  in  England  by  quacks  and  jugglers,  &c.,  and  its
proscription  by  true  science

Perhaps  it  would  be  scarcely  possible  even  for  Dr.  Lay¬
cock  if  he  were  to  try  again,  to  bring  together  in  such  a  fewr
lines  so  many  gross  mis-statements.  We  shall  not  take  the
trouble  to  refute  them,  we  shall  only  make  a  few  remarks.

Dr.  Laycock  either  possesses  evidence  to  authorize  him  to
make  such  assertions,  or  he  does  not.  If  he  does,  he  is
bound  to  produce  it — if  he  does  not,  then  he  is  writing  ma-


versus  Empirical  Systems.


321


liciouslv,  and  making  assertions  which  he  cannot  substan¬
tiate.  Dr.  Elliotson  “  sinned  against  sound  professional  ethics
from  the  time  that  he  invited  laymen  to  meet  him  at  the
North  London  Hospital."  Now,  we  ask  Dr.  Laycock,  if
the  surgeons  of  the  several  London  hospitals  did  not  adopt
the  same  course  when  ether  and  chloroform  were  first  intro¬
duced?  We  know  that  they  did  so,  and  that  the  operating
theatres  wrere  crammed  with  unprofessional  persons  every
day,  but  we  never  heard  till  now  that  any  person  considered
that  the  surgeons  “  sinned  againt  sound  professional  ethics
and  we  feel  quite  sure  that  they  did  not.  We  ask  then  in
what  manner  did  Dr.  Elliotson’ s  proceedings  differ  from  these  ?
Again,  did  not  Professor  Faraday  lecture  on  the  anaesthetic
properties  of  ether  and  of  chloroform  at  the  Royal  Institution,
and  were  not  these  lectures  delivered  chiefly  to  laymen,  and
even  to  ladies  ?  Does  not  Professor  Faraday  lecture  to  the
laitv  on  his  own  discoveries  and  on  those  of  others,  and  did
Dr.  Elliotson  do  anything  more  than  this  ?  Did  he  not  at
the  North  London  Hospital  invite  the  profession  to  witness
the  experiments,  and  if  they  would  not  and  did  not  come,
was  it  his  fault  ?  If  they  chose  to  listen  to  the  ignorant  and
impudent  assertions  of  Mr.  Wakley,  and  if  by  having  done
this  they  find  themselves  ten  years  behind  the  rest  of  the
world,  surely  Dr.  Elliotson  is  not  to  blame.

If  Dr.  Elliotson  had  not  shewn  his  experiments  to  the
world — if  he  had  carefully  excluded  from  his  Hospital  all
laymen,  and  if  he  had  confined  all  his  efforts  to  coaxing  and
persuading  the  profession  to  come  and  witness  his  experi¬
ments,  why  then,  Dr.  Laycock  with  the  most  perfect  simplicity
says,  “  medicine  might  by  this  time  have  been  enriched  with
a  new  and  most  valuable  curative  agent,  and  Dr.  Elliotson
would  have  been  honoured  and  esteemed.”  One  would  think
that  medicine  had  not  been  enriched  with  a  new  curative
agent.  One  would  think  because  the  profession  as  a  body
have  remained  ignorant  of  a  great  truth,  that,  therefore ,  no
facts  have  been  accumulated,  as  if  the  rest  of  the  world
stood  still,  while  a  few  butterflies  sleep.  One  would  think
that  Dr.  Laycock  must  have  just  awaked  from  a  state  of
coma,  when  he  sat  down  to  write  this  article,  all  that  he
says  might  have  been  accomplished,  has  been  accomplished,
and  the  world  is  ringing  with  the  fact ;  and  as  to  honour  and
esteem,  Dr.  Elliotson  has  received  plenty,  without  waiting
for  the  homoeopathic  dose  of  both,  which  he  may  yet  re¬
ceive  from  a  few  intellectual  sloths  and  professional  laggers.
We  learn,  therefore,  and  we  are  obliged  to  Dr.  Laycock  for
the  information,  that  “a  new  and  most  valuable  curative


322  The  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review ,  fyc.,

agent”  has  not  been  received  into  “  true  medicine”  because
Dr.  Elliotson  took  the  best  possible  means  to  make  this  valu¬
able  curative  agent  as  much  known  as  possible,  because  he
did  with  mesmerism  what  was  done  by  the  whole  profession,
in  the  metropolis  and  in  the  provinces,  with  ether  and  chlo¬
roform,  and  which  in  consequence  were  received,  and  imme¬
diately  adopted,  notwithstanding  the  applauding  smiles  of
the  laity,  both  male  and  female.  The  man  who  lost  his  leg
under  the  influence  of  mesmerism,  and  declared  he  did  not
feel  was  an  impostor  and  a  liar.  The  man  who  lost  his  leg
under  the  influence  of  chloroform,  and  declared  he  did  not
feel  was  a  pattern  of  truth.  A  fact  was  not  a  fact  if  reported
by  a  mesmerist — facts  were  only  received  as  such  when  re¬
ported  by  the  orthodox  practitioners  of  “  true  medicine.”

We  are  consequently  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  the
system  of  medical  ethics  as  laid  down  by  this  writer,  being
a  pseudo-system  without  regular  and  defined  rules,  is,  there¬
fore,  in  reality  no  system  at  all ;  for  what  is  heterodox  in
one  decade,  is  orthodox  in  the  next,  and  the  means  which  were
used  and  are  now  said  to  have  prevented  “  true  medicine”
from  embracing  truth ,  at  one  period  of  a  scientific  investiga¬
tion,  are  the  very  means  which  were  taken  at  another  period,
and  with  another  subject,  without  a  single  objection  being
advanced,  to  accomplish  the  same  desired  end.  O !  Dr.
Laycock,  Dr.  Laycock,  verily  you  have  placed  your  brethren
in  a  pretty  dilemma.  After  this  confession,  the  concluding
sentence  of  the  quotation  we  have  given  is  really  amusing.
“  To  his  conduct  may  be  traced,  in  a  great  degree,  the  seizure
of  mesmerism  in  England  by  quacks,  jugglers,  &c.,  and  its
proscription  by  true  science.”  If  it  be  a  matter  for  com¬
plaint  that  mesmerism  got  into  the  hands  of  unprofessional
persons,  we  ask,  why  did  it  do  so?  Could  not  any  person
have  predicted,  if  a  great  truth,  capable  of  universal  appli¬
cation  and  by  right  belonging  to  the  medical  profession,  was
neglected  by  that  profession,  that  it  would  necessarily  pass
into  the  possession  of  the  laity?  But  for  Dr.  Laycock  to
turn  round  at  the  eleventh  hour,  and  with  pharisaical  sim¬
plicity  say  that  the  state  of  things  which  he  deplores  has
been  produced  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  when  it  is  notorious  that  it
has  been  produced  by  the  wilfulness  of  Dr.  Laycock,  and  all
who  think  and  act  with  him,  is  to  say  the  least,  a  dishonest
statement,  and  one  not  likely  to  impose  upon  any  but  the
purblind,  or  those  who  thoughtlessly  pin  their  faith  to  such
authorities  as  the  writers  in  the  British  and  Foreign  Medical
Review.

Truth  it  appears,  from  whatever  mine  it  may  be  raised,


versus  Empirical  Systems.


323


or  from  whatever  quarter  it  may  be  imported,  is  not  to  be
worshipped  as  truth,  but  it  must  be  dressed  in  a  particular
garb  before  it  can  be  recognized,  or  before  it  can  be  rendered
acceptable  to  orthodox  practitioners,  and  obtain  a  position  in
the  sacred  records  of  true  medicine.  We  have  always  been
taught  that  true  science  embraced  everything  which  was  true,
and  accepted  it  for  its  intrinsic  value,  disregarding  the
quarter  from  which  it  might  arrive;  but  according  to  Dr.
Laycock,  the  fact  of  a  great  truth  having  been  discovered,
expeditiously  published,  recognized  by  the  world,  and  appro¬
priated  to  its  proper  use,  is  the  reason  it  is  “ proscribed  by
true  science  ”  Surely  this  writer  must  be  considered  a  coun¬
terfeit  professor — a  pseudo-apostle  of  what  we  have  been  in
the  habit  of  considering  true  science.  We  ask,  who  are  the
quacks  now  ?  Where  are  the  empirics  on  this  occasion  ?
Some  men  get  out  of  their  depth  so  recklessly,  and  flounder
about  in  such  a  state  of  intellectual  debility,  that  like  the
swinish  herd  when  cast  into  the  sea,  every  effort  they  make
to  release  themselves  from  their  awkward  predicament,  but
hastens  their  dissolution.  As  a  medical  ethical  writer  it  is
evident  Dr.  Laycock  has  failed,  and  on  such  a  subject  a  single
failure  must  be  considered  as  equivalent  to  a  compulsory  re¬
tirement  from  this  division  of  literary  labour.

“  None  to  the  peak

Return,  who  falleth  to  the  mountain’s  base.”

Our  space  will  not  permit  us  to  continue  the  subject,
tempting  as  it  is,  for  there  is  scarcely  a  page  in  the  article
with  the  doctrine  in  which  we  can  entirely  agree.  We  stated
just  now  that  the  article  was  brimful  of  contradictions,  and
that  we  were  quite  certain  we  could  trace  the  work  of  two
persons  therein.  We  cannot  better  illustrate  this  charge  than
by  giving  the  following  quotation.  Dr.  Laycock  or  Dr.  Car¬
penter,  then,  says,  that  the  editor  of  the  Bridgewater  Times
thus  writes  of  the  members  of  the  medical  profession  : —

“  They  appear  to  resent  any  departure  from  precedent  in  a
manner  which  leads  the  public  to  suspect  that  they  are  enemies  to
the  advancement  of  medical  science.  Instead  of  carefully  and  calmly
examining  any  new  principle  or  practice,  they  at  once  place  them¬
selves  in  opposition,  ridicule  it,  and  its  professors  ;  and  if  they  can¬
not  succeed  in  upsetting  it  in  this  way,  they  strive  by  some  such
means  as  that  exhibited  in  Messrs.  Edwards  and  Blake’s  case,  to
damage  the  character  of  its  professor  in  public  estimation.”

We  say,  bravo,  Mr.  Editor  of  the  Bridgewater  Times,  you
have  written  the  truth.  But  Dr.  Laycock  or  Dr.  Carpenter
savs :  —

V


324  Cure  of  long -standing  Inflammation  of  the  Eyes,

“  We  do  not  know  [ innocents ]  whether  this  accusation  be  true  or
false;  but  we  are  certain  that  all  experiments  on  health  and  life,  by
whomsoever  made ,  all  facts  or  'phenomena  likely  to  elucidate  the
science,  or  add  to  the  art  of  medicine,  nay ,  all  things  whatsoever
having  relation  thereto ,  deserve  a  calm  investigation  from  the  pro¬
fession.  Human  life  and  ease  are  too  sacred  to  be  sacrificed  to  pre¬
judice,  however  praiseworthy;  medical  art  must  be  advanced  without
regard  to  feelings  or  individuals.  The  true  practitioner  like  the
emmet,

“  Quicquid  ore  trahit,  et  addit  acervo.”

Surely  we  shall  not  be  considered  to  exceed  the  bounds  of
politeness  if  we  ask  for  a  little  consistency  in  the  next  article
on  medical  ethics  in  the  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review.

One  word  more  before  we  part  with  Dr.  Laycock.  He
says  (p.  293) : —

“  Hence,  mesmerism,  ignores  more  or  less  the  use  of  the  ste¬
thoscope,  the  microscope,  the  urinometer,  the  speculum,  the  sound;
hence  the  professors  cultivate  no  accessory  sciences,  unless  it  be  for
parade  and  show ,  for  their  principles  are  sufficient  of  themselves,
and  have  no  connexion  with  other  branches  of  human  knowledge.”

We  can  assure  Dr.  Laycock  that  we  use  all  these  aids  to
correct  diagnosis  every  day.  We  flatter  ourselves  that  wre  are
what  may  be  considered  hard  workers  in  our  profession ;  and
that,  in  addition  to  all  other  means  which  we  possess  for  the
treatment  of  disease,  we  prescribe  mesmerism  where  we  think
it  necessary.  When  we  are  in  the  possession  of  a  truth,  we
never  wait  till  our  compeers  consider  it  is  respectable  to  an¬
nounce  our  belief.  We  take  our  stand  upon  it,  and  we  know
full  well  that  the  opposing  world  will  come  over  to  our
opinion.

L.  E.  G.  E.


XY.  Cure  of  long-standing  Inflammation  of  the  Eyes,  painless
destruction  of  a  Ganglion  with  some  mesmeric  phenomena,
instances  of  Mesmeric  Insensibility,  success  of  Ether  and
Mesmerism  conjointly,  and  painless  extraction  of  a  Tooth.
By  W.  J.  Tubbs,  Surgeon.

“  Only  let  some  adventurous  and  sanguine  practitioner,  possessed  of  the  in¬
fallible  talisman,  M.D.,  M.B.,  or  F.R.C.S.,  propose  a  new  remedy,  or  an  out-
of-the-way  operation,  be  it  chloroform,  or  catheterising  the  Fallopian  tubes,  &c.,
&c.  ;  let  him  forthwith  advertize  himself  and  his  marvellous  abortion,  or  yartu-
riunt  montcs  offspring,  in  a  popular  medical  journal,  and  straightway  the  experi¬
ment  is  tried  on  hundreds  of  faith-inspired  patients,  to  the  great  emolument  cf
the  operative  chemist  or  the  crack  instrument-maker  of  the  day.  And  yet  every
body  rails  at  the  Homoeopaths,  Mesmerists ,  et  hoc  genus  omne,  whilst  the  nu-


by  Mr.  W.  J.  Tubbs.


325


merous  quacks  within  the  profession  grow  rich,  and  laugh  at  their  honester-
principled  brethren.”* — William  Smith,  Member,  &c.  Medical  Gazette ,  March
15,  1850  ;  p.  451.

Chronic  Inflammation  of  the  Eyes.

Frances  Smith,  aged  30  years,  of  Outwell,  was  first  attacked
with  inflammation  of  the  eyes  when  cook  in  the  service  of  a
clergyman  at  Oakley  in  Hampshire,  and  attributes  the  in¬
flammation  to  the  great  heat  to  which  she  was  constantly
exposed.  She  returned  home,  being  unable  to  continue  in
service.  On  the  29th  of  June  she  applied  to  me.  She  was
obliged  to  wear  a  green  shade.  The  sclerotic  coat  of  both
eyes  was  inflamed,  and  there  was  a  lencomatousf  state  of  the
left  eye,  external  to  the  centre  of  the  cornea.  She  stated
that,  after  the  application  of  blisters  behind  the  ears,  her
eyes  always  got  nearly  well,  and  remained  so  for  a  week  or
fortnight,  when  she  was  again  compelled  to  have  recourse  to
blisters.

I  mesmerised  her  on  the  27th  of  June,  and  three  days
afterwards  she  left  off  her  shade.

She  was  mesmerised  twice  daily  until  the  5tli  of  July,  on
which  day  she  left  my  infirmary {  perfectly  cured.  I  called
upon  her  on  the  11th  August :  her  ej^es  wrere  then  free  from
inflammation,  and  could  bear  the  strongest  ordinary  light.

Ganglion  of  the  Wrist  dispersed  without  pain  in  the  mesmeric

state.

Miss  A.  W.,  living  at  Newmarket,  came  to  me  on  the
2nd  of  August,  and  expressed  a  wish  to  be  mesmerised  for
the  purpose  of  having  a  tumor  removed  from  her  wrist,  which
had  considerably  weakened  her  hand.  Passes  at  the  back  of
her  head  very  speedily  produced  insensibility :  but,  being
just  then  called  to  a  case  of  urgency  some  miles  off,  I  had  to
defer  the  operation.  Miss  W.  was  thrown  into  the  mesmeric
sleep  every  day  until  the  7th,  on  which  day  during  the  trance
I  dispersed  the  tumor  by  several  blows  with  the  back  of  a
book,  she  remaining  all  the  time  immovable  and  calm.  A
few  minutes  after  the  operation  she  was  seen  by  Mr.  Palmer,
solicitor,  Mr.  Chapman,  grocer,  and  Mr.  Harris,  in  whose
presence  I  asked  her  whether  she  would  have  the  tumor
removed  the  next  day.  She  answered,  “  If  you  please,  Sir,”

*  These  are  the  opinions  of  one  who,  poor  man,  evidently  considers  us  quacks.
— Zoist.

f  Lencoma  is  a  white  opacity  of  the  cornea  or  window  of  the  eye. — Zoist.

J  Mr.  Tubbs  has  made  an  infirmary  over  his  coach-house ;  it  answers  exceed¬
ingly  well.  It  is  made,  with  rods,  ringles,  and  curtains,  into  boxes,  so  that  each
patient  is  unseen  by  all  the  rest.  Every  morning  from  nine  till  half-past  ten,
and  from  half-past  six  till  nine  evening,  are  the  hours  on  which  he  attends  to
mesmeric  patients. — Zoist.

VOL.  VIII.


A  A


326


Mesmeric  Anaesthesia,


and  said  she  felt  very  comfortable  and  happy.  After  she  had
slept  about  two  hours  I  demesmerised  her ;  she  was  quite  un¬
conscious  of  the  severe  blows  which  had  been  inflicted.

Miss  W.  met  me  at  the  Lamb  Inn,  Ely,  on  my  return
from  Downham  in  the  isle,  on  the  14th.  I  minutely  exa¬
mined  the  hand,  and  found  the  tumor  had  disappeared.

All  the  higher  phenomena  of  mesmerism  were  beautifully
shewn  in  this  case.

The  following  is  a  note  from  her : —

“Newmarket,  August,  1850.

“  Sir, — I  am  happy  to  say  that  the  tumor  from  my  wrist  is  quite
dispersed,  and  perfectly  free  from  pain  ;  and  should  I  at  any  time
have  to  undergo  an  operation,  it  should  be  under  the  influence  of
mesmerism,  as  I  am  positive  I  never  felt  the  slightest  pain  whilst
you  performed  the  operation.  Having  therefore  derived  benefit,  I
can  speak  with  confidence  upon  the  science.

“  I  remain,  your’s  respectfully,

“A  Friend  to  Mesmerism.

“W.  J.  Tubbs,  Esq.,  Upwell.”

Mesmeric  Anaesthesia.

William  Benstead,  of  Wisbech,  34  years  of  age,  and  single,
had  been  subject  for  16  years  to  fits,  which  originated  in  his
being  worried  by  a  horse,  at  Peterborough.  They  occurred
almost  daily,  sometimes  twice  in  the  day,  and  lasted  an  hour
or  more.  One  leg  was  permanently  contracted,  and  in  this
state  he  could  walk  with  crutches,  pointing  his  toe  downwards.
He  was  twice  bled,  at  his  own  request,  aud  subjected  to
various  plans  of  treatment  in  vain.  On  the  29th  April,  1849,
I  was  requested  to  mesmerise  him.  Mr.  Burman  turned
down  the  bed-clothes,  and  shewed  me  the  man’s  right  leg,
spasmodically  drawn  up,  and  any  attempt  to  extend  it  caused
extreme  agony.  A  pillow  was  placed  at  his  back  as  he  sat,  and
the  mesmeric  process  threw  him  readily  into  a  deep  mesmeric
trance.  I  breathed  upon  the  contracted  limb,  and  he  was
presently  able  to  extend  it.  The  most  violent  pull  gave  no
indication  of  pain.  He  was  soon  found  to  be  readily  attracted
and  repelled.  I  drew  up  the  right  hand,  then  the  left,  and,
while  the  right  was  half  bent,  I  rendered  it  rigid,  and,  on
being  breathed  upon,  it  relaxed.  His  stiffening  by  passes,
and  relaxation  by  breathing,  were  repeated  many  times.  The
head  was  then  drawn  forwards,  and  again  driven  back  by
darting  the  fingers  towards  it.  He  was  then  drawn  sideways
off  the  bed  upon  his  feet  to  the  centre  of  the  room,  walking
all  the  time  with  the  toe  and  heel  flat  on  the  ground,  al¬
though  the  heel  had  not  been  down  before  for  a  considerable
time ;  at  first  he  tottered,  but  soon  walked  well,  and  actually


by  Mr.  W.  J.  Tubbs.


327


danced  at  the  wish  of  the  mesmeriser.  He  returned  to  bed,
and  was  demesmerised.  Mr.  Burman  was  satisfied  he  might
have  undergone  any  surgical  operation  without  suffering.
Mr.  Hides,  surgeon,  of  Wisbech,  and  Mr.  Medcalf,  surgeon,
of  Tydd  St.  Mary’s,  were  also  present.

The  man  had  been  originally  mesmerised  by  John  Hopper,
who  thus  averted  a  fit,  and  did  the  same  frequently  after¬
wards.  This  John  Hopper  was  himself  very  susceptible,  and
had  been  often  thrown  by  me  into  the  mesmeric  sleep,  in
which  he  could  not  be  made  to  feel  pain.

Joint  success  of  Ether  and  Mesmerism.

On  the  day  of  my  visit,  it  was  proposed  to  amputate  a
diseased  finger  which  required  this  operation ;  as  he  had  not
been  mesmerised  for  a  week  he  was  not  very  susceptible,  and
the  passing  and  repassing  of  any  person  in  the  room,  and  the
noise  of  the  children  playing,  prevented  complete  success.
I,  following  the  suggestions  of  Professor  Gregory,  of  Edin¬
burgh,  proposed  that  a  little  chloroform  should  be  adminis¬
tered.  A  little  was  dropped  upon  a  handkerchief,  and  instantly
stupified  him.  The  finger  was  removed  without  any  sign  of
sensation.  While  the  artery  was  being  searched  for,  I  requested
Mr.  Hides  to  assist  me  in  making  longitudinal  passes,  and
sleep-waking  was  produced.  On  being  asked  if  he  would
have  his  finger  amputated  to-day  or  to-morrow,  he  replied,
“  Why  now  to  be  sure.”  He  was  then  made  to  walk  into
another  room,  and  afterwards  was  awakened  by  demesmerising
passes,  so  that  his  state  had  been  truly  mesmeric.

N.B.  Mr.  Burman  (a  few  days  after  I  left)  extracted  a
tooth  from  Benstead  while  mesmerised,  and,  on  returning  to
the  ward  a  few  moments  after  the  operation,  found  him  in
the  same  insensible  state.  On  being  demesmerised  the  man
was  not  aware  of  its  extraction.

Extraction  of  a  Tooth  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

Yesterday  (August  29,  1850)  my  assistant  extracted  a
firm  molar  tooth  from  the  left  lower  jaw  for  Eliza  Pall,  of
Up  well.  During  the  lancing  of  the  gum,  and  much  force
used  in  its  extraction,  not  a  muscle  was  seen  to  stir.  On
demesmerising  the  patient,  she  was  unconscious  of  its  having
been  removed.  This  was  only  the  second  time  of  her  being
mesmerised.


(  328  )


XVI.  Instance  of  Clairvoyance  during  Sleep.  Communicated

by  Dr.  Davey,  of  the  Colney  Hatch  Lunatic  Asylum.

“My  dear - ,

“  In  accordance  with  your  request  I  herewith  transmit  you
particulars,  as  they  occurred,  of  the  peculiar  dream,  if  such
it  may  be  called,  which  proved  of  so  essential  service  to  me.

“  As  I  mentioned  to  you,  I  had  been  bothered  since  Sep¬
tember  with  an  error  in  my  cash  account  for  that  month ;  and,
despite  many  hours  examination,  it  defied  all  my  efforts,  and
I  almost  gave  it  up  as  a  hopeless  case.  It  had  been  the  sub¬
ject  of  my  waking  thoughts  for  many  nights,  and  had  occu¬
pied  a  large  portion  of  my  leisure  hours.  Matters  remained
thus  unsettled  until  the  11th  December.  On  this  night  I
had  not,  to  my  knowledge,  once  thought  of  the  subject ;  but
I  had  not  long  been  in  bed,  and  asleep ,  when  my  brain  was
as  busy  with  the  books,  as  though  I  had  been  at  my  desk.
The  cash  book,  bankers*  pass  books,  &c.,  &c.,  appeared  before
me,  and,  without  any  apparent  trouble,  I  almost  immediately
discovered  the  cause  of  the  mistake,  which  had  arisen  out  of
a  complicated  cross-entry.  I  perfectly  recollect  having  taken
a  slip  of  paper  in  my  dream  and  made  such  a  memorandum
as  would  enable  me  to  correct  the  error  at  some  leisure  time ;
and,  having  done  this,  that  the  whole  of  the  circumstances
had  passed  from  my  mind.  When  I  awoke  in  the  morning  I
had  not  the  slightest  recollection  of  my  dream,  nor  did  it
once  occur  to  me  throughout  the  day,  although  I  had  the
very  books  before  me  on  which  I  had  apparently  been  engaged
in  my  sleep.  When  I  returned  home  in  the  afternoon,  as  I
did  early  for  the  purpose  of  dressing,  and  proceeded  to  shave,
I  took  up  a  piece  of  paper  from  my  dressing  table  to  wipe  my
razor,  and  you  may  imagine  my  surprize  at  finding  thereon
the  very  memorandum  I  fancied  had  been  made  during  the
previous  night.  The  effect  on  me  was  such  that  I  returned  to
our  office  and  turned  to  the  cash  book,  when  I  found  that  I
had  really  when  asleep  detected  the  error  which  I  could  not
detect  in  my  waking  hours,  and  had  actually  jotted  it  down
at  the  time.  I  should  not  have  thought  much  of  all  this  but
for  our  conversation.  It  certainly  is  a  convincing  proof  to
me,  that  the  mind  can  and  does  act  quite  independently  of
the  body,*  and  that  in  a  more  rational  and  connected  manner
than  many  folks  would  suppose.

*  This  is  absurdity.  The  brain  was  acting  in  all  this  :  and  the  writer,  while
he  uses  the  babyish  language  of  the  world,  really  knows  better  ;  for  he  says  his
“  brain  was  as  busy  with  his  books,  as  if  he  had  been  at  his  desk.”  Sleep  is
quite  consistent  with  partial  action  of  the  brain :  and  this  partial  action  may  be
more  intense  than  in  the  waking  state.  Imagination  or  conception  is  infinitely
stronger  in  dreams  than  in  the  waking  state.


Postscripts  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s  articles.


329


“  You  are  perfectly  at  liberty  to  make  any  use  you  please
of  this  communication  if  it  will  support  any  theory  you  are
anxious  to  establish.

“  I  remain,  dear  Sir,

“  Your’s  truly,

a  January  14th,  1850.  “C.  J.  E.

“P.S.  I  may  add  that,  on  a  former  occasion,  nearly  a
similar  occurrence  took  place ;  with,  however,  this  difference,
that  I  awoke  at  the  conclusion  of  the  dream,  and  was  per¬
fectly  aware,  when  certainly  awake,  of  having  made  the  me¬
morandum  at  that  time.  This  however  was  not  the  case  in
the  occurrence  I  have  above  detailed.  Should  you  be  likely
to  print  the  above,  please  let  it  appear  with  initials  only ,  as,
although  I  would  corroborate  it  to  any  one  wishing  for  a  per¬
sonal  satisfaction  by  inquiry,  I  have  no  desire  to  see  my  name
in  type;  it  might  also  be  prejudicial  to  me.”*

***  In  reply  to  our  enquiry  for  further  information,  our
informant  writes  as  follows. — Zoist.

“  I  have  no  recollection  whatever  as  to  where  I  obtained
the  writing  materials,  or  rather  paper  and  pencil,  with  which
I  made  the  memorandum  referred  to.  It  certainly  must  have
been  written  in  the  dark,  and  in  my  bed-room,  as  I  found
both  paper  and  pencil  there  the  following  afternoon,  and  could
not  for  a  long  time  understand  anything  about  it.  The  pencil
was  not  one  which  I  am  in  the  habit  of  carrying,  and  my  im¬
pression  is  that  I  must  have  either  found  it  accidentally  in  the
room,  or  gone  down  stairs  for  it.

“  C.  J.  E.”


XVII.  Postscripts  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s  articles  upon  Dr.  Todd’s
mis-statements  and  Dr.  J.  A.  Wilson’s  Harveian  Oration.

At  p.  251,  I  said  that  Dr.  Todd  flippantly  represented  that
“  after  one  of  these  mesmeric  sittings  he  (the  patient)  received
his  hearing,  and  in  three  quarters  of  an  hour  after  that  his
speech.”

On  this  I  ought  to  have  remarked  that  it  was  not  after
but  during  the  mesmeric  sleep-waking  of  the  patient  that
these  two  restorations  were  accomplished,  and  accomplished
with  and  during  great  perseverance  on  my  part  in  local  mes¬
merising  and  a  determination  to  effect  the  cure  if  possible  on
that  morning  (see  pp.  246-7).  Dr.  Todd  knew  all  this  from
The  Zoist.

*  We  have  the  gentleman’s  name  and  address. — Zoist.


330


Postcripts  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s  articles.


At  p.  282,  I  said  that  Dr.  J.  A.  Wilson  calls  Dr.  Golden
Bird,  Aureus  avis :  but  I  find  the  name  is  Golding  Bird,  so
that  the  joke  is  a  very  bad  one.

At  p.  273,  for  trust  their  wives  or  daughters ,  I  should  have
written,  trust  themselves ,  their  wives  and  daughters.

Second  Postscript.

Frankfort,  Sept.  16th.

Bad  as  this  joke  is,  I  find  there  is  a  worse  ;  so  bad,
indeed,  that  I  never  perceived  it  till  this  morning,  when  I
happened  to  wake  long  before  it  was  time  to  get  up  and
began  thinking  of  a  thousand  things.  I  should  never  have
discovered  it  but  for  being  in  Frankfort  and  thinking  of  the
Jew’s  Lane  where  Rothschild  was  born,  of  the  abundance  of
Jews  here,  of  two  persons  on  board  the  steamer  yesterday,
one  a  Jew  and  the  other  a  Christian  born  of  a  Jewish  father,
and  there  being  a  ham  at  dinner  :  and  then  of  the  Germans
calling  pork  swine-flesh  (schwein-fleisch) ,  and  then  of  Dr.
Wilson  calling  a  Dr.  Sweeny  “  medicus  porcinus” — a  pig¬
gish  doctor.  It  now  suddenly  flashed  upon  me  that  he  so
called  the  blockhead,  not,  as  I  had  thought,  because  of  the
poor  man’s  stupidity,  but  because  the  booby’s  name  was
Sweeny ,  which  was  all  but  Swing.

When  I  recorded  his  lamentation  over  the  lost  shilling  in
his  fees,  I  might  as  well  have  mentioned  his  grief  that  the
college  could  give  his  audience  and  himself  nothing  to  eat
(impransis)  after  their  labour  of  listening  to  his  heavy  blows
upon  countless  persons  and  his  toil  in  carrying  on  such  an
onslaught  for  between  one  and  two  hours,  and  pouring  forth
such  torrents  of  sesquipedalians — muliercularum — obstetrica -
rum — mesmericarum — episcopis  mesmericis  et  arcliiepiscopis
archimesmericis — medico-chirurgico-obstetrico-practici.  Mine
was  the  first  oration  followed  by  a  dinner  for  twenty-five
years.  After  Dr.  Wilson’s  oration,  they  all  went  empty  away.

J.  Elliotson.

***  I  have  just  heard  from  Miss  Martineau  that  her  cow
remains  quite  well,  and  gives  ten  quarts  of  milk  a  day.  So
much  for  the  fibs  now  prevalent, — as  the  power  of  mesmerism
can  be  no  longer  denied, — that  after  mesmeric  cures  relapses
always  occur  and  ill  effects  ensue  sooner  or  later.

The  word  fare,  used  at  p.  302  by  Miss  Martineau’s  Nor¬
folk  farming  man,  is  a  Norfolk  word  and  signifies  to  incline
to,  or  to  be  actually  in  a  condition.  In  the  tale  of  David
Copperfield,  Mr.  Dickens  makes  Ham  say  to  Copperfield,  at
p.  523,  “  I  fare  to  feel  sure  on’t.”


Mesmeric  Infirmary.


331


XVIII.  Mesmeric  Infirmary.

We  are  happy  to  report  that  this  unpretending  institution  is  working
satisfactorily.  About  twent}^  patients  are  mesmerised  every  day  be¬
tween  10  and  4  o’clock  by  two  able  healthy  mesmerisers  and  the
secretary :  and  great  has  been  the  good  already  done.  The  com¬
mittee,  the  majority  being  medical  gentlemen,  meet  every  Monday,
at  two  o’clock,  to  examine  the  cases  of  fresh  applicants,  and  care¬
fully  listen  to  a  report  of  the  proceedings  of  every  day  in  the
previous  week, — the  attendance  of  each  patient,  with  the  length  of
each  mesmeric  process;  the  duration  of  the  sleep,  if  any;  and  all  the
effects,  being  duly  detailed,  as  well  as  a  report  being  given  of  the  state
of  each  patient  on  the  last  Saturday  compared  with  that  on  the  pre¬
ceding  Saturday.  Everything  is  conducted  in  the  most  orderly,
attentive,  and  unexceptionable  manner.  The  mesmerisers  and  the
secretary  deserve  every  praise.  Mr.  Buckland  will  be  succeeded  as
secretary  and  resident  superintendent  on  the  14th  of  October  by
Mr.  Capern  of  Tiverton,  whose  mesmeric  power  and  disinterested
benevolence  are  so  great.  Mr.  Buckland  has  scrupulously  fulfilled
all  his  mesmeric  duties,  and  has  conducted  himself  towards  the
patients  and  every  one  else  with  the  utmost  kindness  and  attention,
and  superintended  the  administration  of  mesmerism  as  it  should  always
be  conducted.

Since  the  last  report  was  published  in  July  there  have  been  the


following  additional  Donors  : —

£  s.  d.

The  Archbishop  of  Dublin  .  10  0  0

The  Rev.  Dr.  Knatchbull,  Smeethe  Rectory,  Kent .  2  0  0

Mr.  Langston,  M.P .  100  0  0

Mr.  Snewing,  Kenilworth  .  1  0  0

Miss  Spedding . 5  0  0

And  the  following  additional  Subscribers  : —

Mr.  J.  Baldock,  H.M.  Dockyard,  Sheerness  .  1  1  0

Mr.  George  H.  Barth,  4,  Mornington  Crescent  .  2  2  0

Mr.  Bishop,  Hastings .  1  1  0

Mr.  Buckland,  Mesmeric  Infirmary  ....• .  1  1  0

Rev.  Joshua  Cautley,  Thorney,  Peterborough  .  1  1  0

Mr.  Deverel,  Purbrook  Park,  Portsmouth .  2  0  0

Mrs.  Gosset,  3,  Westbourne  Place,  Hyde  Park .  1  1  0

Mr.  Heath,  123,  Edgeware  Road  .  1  1  0

Mr.  William  Salmon,  Red  Lion  Street .  1  1  0

Mr.  E.  Shackleton  .  1  1  0

Mr.  Taylor,  Dockeray  Hall,  Cumberland  . .  . . .  1  1  0

Mr.  Yieusseux,  6,  Gloster  Place,  Regent’s  Park  .  1  1  0

Mrs.  Van  der  Heyde,  Sydenham . 1  1  0


And  among  those  who  had  promised  assistance  the  following
remain : —


Don.  Subs.

£  s.  d.  £  s.  d.

Adare,  Viscount,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  Eaton  Square  .  10  0  0.. ..  2  2  0

Bell,  Mrs .  1  0  0

Bully,  M.  de,  15,  Harley  Street  .  1  0  0


332  Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  §c.


Flintoff,  Mr.  S.,  Surgeon,  73,  Great  Titehfield  Street  . .  5  0  0

Flintoff,  Mr.  H.,  12,  Orchard  Street,  Portman  Square  ..

Frances,  Mrs.,  9,  Norfolk  Crescent,  Hyde  Park .

Hands,  Mr.  D.,  Surgeon,  Dorset  Square .  5  0  0

Kingdom,  Mr.  W,,  Westbourne  Terrace,  Hyde  Park. ...  21  0  0

Majendie,  Mr.,  F.R.S.,  Hedingham  Castle,  Essex .  5  5  0

Moore,  Mr.  R.  R.,  Temple  .

Murray,  Mr.  T.  Lamie,  26,  Cornhill  .  50  0  0

Swann,  Mr.  Edward  Gibbon .


1  1  0
1  1  0

5  5  0

1  1  0

2  2  0


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Physico-Physiological  Researches  on  the  Dynamics  of  Magnetism,  Electricity,
Heat,  Light,  Crystallization,  and  Chemism,  in  their  relations  to  Yital  Force.  By
Baron  Charles  Yon  Reichenbach.  The  complete  work,  from  the  German  Second
Edition.  With  the  addition  of  a  Preface  and  Critical  Notes,  by  John  Ashburner,
M.D.  London  :  Bailliere,  Regent  Street.

See  our  abstract  of  the  former  edition  in  Nos.  XIII.,  XIV.,  XY.

Dr.  Ashburner  has  been  prevented  by  ill  health  from  preparing  the  second
part.  As  soon  as  it  is  published  we  shall  review  the  work.

***  Dr.  Gregory,  of  Edinburgh,  has  also  published  a  translation  of  this
edition,  but  has  not  sent  us  a  copy.

The  Art  of  Questioning  and  Answei'ing  in  French.  By  A.  C.  G.  Jobart.

Pure  Sounds  against  Immatei’ialism,  or  that  Sounds  are  not  pure  Sounds.
Written  for  a  Pi’ize.  By  A.  C.  G.  Jobart.

Vegetarian  Reports  and  Messenger.

The  Insanity  of  Mankind.  By  Arthur  Trevelyan.

Theory  of  Heat  and  the  Vital  Principle.  By  Arthur  Trevelyan.

The  Method  of  using  the  Appai’atus  for  exhibiting  Vibrations  caused  by  Heat.
1829.  A  description  of  a  Chemical  Vapour  Lamp  Furnace,  1834.  And  an
account  of  an  Experiment  with  Chlorine  Gas,  1833.  By  Arthur  Trevelyan.

Religious  Mystery  considered.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

In  our  next  will  be  published  the  articles  with  which  we  have  been  favoured
by  Mr.  Davey,  Mr.  Elliot,  Mr.  Fradelle,  Mr.  Hayman,  Mr.  Hobson,  Mr.  Lee,
Mr.  Lloyd,  Mr.  Majendie,  Non-Wist,  Mr.  Reynoldson,  Mr.  Rolfe,  Mr.  Sloman,
Dr.  Storer,  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  J.  W.,  Mr.  Capern,  &c.

The  prophecies  of  Nostradamus  have  been  received,  and  are  under  consideration.


ZOIST.


THE

No.  XXXII.


JANUARY,  1851.


I.  Distressing  effects  produced  in  a  Doctor  upon  the  removal  of
a  Disease  from  a  Cow  with  Mesmerism.  By  Miss  Harriet
Martineau.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

u  —  tantsene  animis  ceelestibus  irse  ?”*

Virgil,  JEneid.  i.  11.

The  following  letter  could  not  but  suggest  to  me  this  excla¬
mation  of  Virgil  when  about  to  relate  the  conduct  of  one  in
a  very  high  situation.

“  Ambleside,  Oct.  23rd.

“  Dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — Something  has  just  happened  which
has  amused  my  household  so  extremely  that  I  am  tempted,
as  you  are  a  party  concerned,  to  tell  you  of  it,  and  let  you
share  the  laugh.  It  appears  that  not  only  are  sick  brutes
like  sick  people  under  the  power  of  mesmerism,  but  that  the
analogy  extends  to  the  respective  doctors.  The  cow-doctor
has  just  been  here  in  a  prodigious  rage.  Somebody  has  read
him  the  account  of  Ailsie’s  cure  from  a  newspaper,  and  he
has  come  all  the  way  from  Rydal  to  abuse  us, — in  the  very
same  words  that  some  other  doctors  have  abused  us  before,
about  my  own  recovery,  and  my  maid  Jane’s,  and  some  others’.
He  says  we  want  people  to  believe  that  his  medicines  and
doings  did  no  good, — that  we  cured  the  cow  and  not  he,  and
so  forth.  He  adds,  however,  something  more  liberal  than  I
have  vet  heard  from  anti-mesmeric  doctors, — that  the  next
time  my  cows  are  ill,  we  may  cure  them  by  mesmerism,  for
he  will  give  them  no  more  medicine :  we  may  try  by  ourselves
what  mesmerism  will  do.  This  advice  is  liberal,  and  it  comes
in  corroboration  of  my  own  opinion.

*  u  Can  heavenly  creatures  get  so  furious  ?”


VOL.  VIII.


B  B


334  Distressing  effects  produced  in  a  Doctor.

<(  Though  this  incident  is  ludicrous  enough,  there  is  a
serious  aspect  of  it.  It  is  a  striking  instance  of  the  likeness
of  human  nature  everywhere,  in  similar  circumstances  of
stimulus  or  temptation.  I  should  be  glad  if  any  medical
man  should  be  struck  with  this,  and  (if  he  deserves  the  mor¬
tification)  should  see  himself  reflected  in  the  case  of  this  cow-
doctor.  The  cow-doctor’s  case  is  the  boldest,  because  he  is
cut  off  from  the  commonest  resort  of  the  opponents  of  mes¬
merism, — imputation  upon  the  patient.  He  cannot  say  that
the  cow  is  an  impostor  ;  so  he  gives  us  the  plain  truth,  declares
his  rage  to  be  because  we  think  there  is  something  better  than
his  craft.  As  he  cannot  blame  his  patient,  he  quarrels  with
nature  and  those  who  study  nature  and  use  her  benefits.
I  am  sorry  for  the  poor  man’s  passion :  but  we  are  obliged  to
him  for  thus  making  himself  a  mirror  of  professional  nature.

“  I  am  very  truly  yours,

“  Harriet  Martineau.”

I  can  imagine  some  physicians  falling  into  an  extasy  of
delight  on  learning  the  truly  professional,  disinterested,  scien¬
tific,  and  manly  and  uncompromising  indignation  of  the  cow-
doctor,  wishing  it  were  possible  to  propose  him  for  a  Fel¬
lowship,  and  exclaiming  with  the  medical  chorus  in  Moliere’s
Malade  Imaginaire : —

u  Dignus,  dignus  est  intrare
In  nostro  docto  corpore.”

Some  exclusive  Fellows,  however,  would  object  to  his  admis¬
sion,  and  not  allow  the  cry  of —

“  Phoebe  fave  ;  novus  ingreditur  tua  templa  sacerdos,”

even  though  his  supporters  should  promise  to  make  him  sweet
and  clean,  and  comb  his  hair,  and  provide  him  with  an  Oxford
or  Cambridge  gown,  worn  by  so  many  Fellows  who  never  saw
either  university,  and  to  urge  him  to  a  respectable  appear¬
ance  in  the  further  words  of  the  same  Roman  poet  to  the
god  : —

“  Sed  nitidus  pulcherque  veni :  nunc  indue  vestem
Sepositam  :  longas  nunc  bene  pecte  comas.”

Tibullus,  Elegia ,  ii.  v.

It  is,  therefore,  probable  that  a  subscription  for  a  testi¬
monial  will  be  set  on  foot :  and  a  statue  may  be  agreed
upon.  The  cow-doctor  may  be  represented  taking  mesmer¬
ism,  in  the  shape  of  a  formidable  bull,  by  the  horns;  and
the  various  proprietors,  editors,  and  sub-editors  of  the  me¬
dical  journals,  and  their  allies  of  all  professional  grades,  may


Striking  utility  of  Local  Mesmerism.


335


be  also  represented  as  spectators  in  high  excitement  at  his
prowess.  A  statue  represents  but  one  moment  of  an  action :
and  the  subsequent  events  of  his  being  tossed  into  the  air  and
coming  down  a  senseless  carcase,  while  the  bull  looked  round
in  triumph  and  contempt  upon  the  spectators,  who  then  took
to  their  heels  and  were  heard  of  no  more,  will  be  handed
down  to  posterity  in  the  pages  of  The  Zoist.

John  Elliotson.


II.  Striking  utility  of  Local  Mesmerism  upon  a  Steei'’s  inflamed
leg  and  foot,  and  upon  a  human  finger  agonized  through  a
wound  with  a  rusty  nail.  By  Mrs.  Yon  der  Heyde,
Lewisham.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Our  readers  will  very  well  remember  that  years  ago  Miss  Martineau  made
some  noise  by  the  publication  of  her  personal  mesmeric  experiences — and  by  the
blindness  that  could  not,  or  the  self-will  that  would  not,  see,  even  after  they  were
pointed  out,  the  large  holes  in  the  argument  by  which  her  positions  were  sus¬
tained.  Once  more  the  same  lady  appears  publicly  in  the  character  of  a  mes¬
merist, — once  more  leaning  on  the  logic  which  proceeds  by  the  conversion  of  the
coincidence  into  the  sequitur , — but  this  time  having  a  patient  that  announces  a
great  enlargement  of  the  field  of  mesmerism.  Miss  Martineau  has  been  mes¬
merising  a  cow.  The  case  of  the  cow  bears  a  strong  resemblance  to  Miss  Mar-
tineau’s  own.  The  cow  was  taken  violently  ill,  and  the  cow-doctor  was  sent  for :
which  in  our  opinion  was  a  very  rational  proceeding  under  the  circumstances.
The  doctor  said,  that  if  the  cow  did  not  get  better,  she  would  die ;  and,  that  she
might  get  better,  he  proceeded  to  bleed  her  and  apply  other  active  remedies.
After  the  remedies  had  had  sufficient  time  to  act,  the  cow  did  get  better ;  but  as
she  had  not  got  well  at  once.  Miss  Martineau  had  in  the  meantime  had  1  passes
made  along  the  spine,’ — and,  as  in  her  own  case,  the  passes  have  the  credit  of  the
cure  which  was  in  progress  under  the  administrations  of  the  doctor  at  the  time
when  they  were  made.  We  have  a  group  of  three  leading  facts — based  on  the
illness  of  the  cow.  The  cow  was  bled  and  took  *  strong  medicines,’— the  cow  was
mesmerised— the  cow  got  well.  The  first  of  these  facts,  for  the  sake  of  simplifi¬
cation,  is  discharged  altogether, — and  the  two  remaining  propositions  are  strung
together,  and  married  by  Miss  Martineau  into  the  relationship  of  cause  and  effect.
Suppose,  now,  the  cow  had  not  been  bled  and  physicked  : — has  Miss  Martineau
no  misgiving  as  to  what  might  have  been  the  result? — Not  that  we  mean  to  affirm
that  a  cow  is  not  as  good  a  subject  to  conjure  with  as  an  artful  servant  girl,  —  and
a  great  deal  more  to  be  depended  on  as  far  as  the  evidence  goes.  In  all  physio¬
logical  facts  relating  to  the  mere  animal  organism  of  the  human  body,  we  may
expect  to  find  the  same  phenomena  exhibited  by  the  lower  animals.  Thus,  if  the
decillionth  of  a  grain  of  charcoal  makes  a  man  drunk,  as  alleged  by  Hahnemann,
— it  ought  to  produce  the  same  effects  on  a  dog  or  a  cat.  If  human  beings  may
be  sent  to  sleep  by  staring  at  them,  or  flourishing  in  their  faces, — so  may  animals.
Even  the  circumstance  that  the  cow  fell  asleep  while  the  man  was  mesmerising
her,  fails  to  convince  us.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  in  natural  history  that  cows
sleep  without  mesmerism  : — that  sleep  precedes  a  favourable  termination  of  disease
is  also  well  known.  Whatever  may  be  the  real  condition  of  the  nervous  system  dur¬
ing  the  cataleptic  sleep  occasionally  observed  in  susceptible  persons,  we  know  too
little  of  its  curative  effects  to  say  that  in  any  case  it  produces  a  beneficial  effect  on
the  animal  system. — In  fine,  we  ask  Miss  Martineau  to  reconsider  the  evidence,
and  be  just  to  the  cow-doctor.” — Athenaeum ,  Oct.  26,  1850.

This  article  of  the  Athenaeum  is  one  tissue  of  falsehoods.
Mr.  Dilke,  in  his  supreme  ignorance  of  cerebral  physiology,

B  B  2


336


Striking  utility  of  Local  Mesmerism ,


and  indeed  of  all  science,  issued  an  order  that  all  writers  in
the  Atlienceum  should  scout  phrenology  as  nonsense;  when
mesmerism  attracted  public  attention,  he  issued  an  order  that
mesmerism  should  be  scouted  as  another  quackery  :  and  those
with  whom  it  is  an  object  to  earn  his  money  wrote  and  write
accordingly  in  all  abjectness,  and  will  till  fresh  orders  are
issued  by  a  wiser  man.*

Miss  Martineau  had  a  complaint  which  disabled  her  from
exertion  and  rendered  her  life  miserable,  and  was  treated  for
five  years  by  medical  men  absolutely  in  vain  ;  and  the  most
experienced  declared  she  would  never  recover.  In  truth  the
means  employed  never  cured  such  a  case  and  never  will.  She
was  well  mesmerised  by  a  powerful  mesmeriser,  Mrs.  Montague
Wynyard,  and  perfectly  recovered.  Those  who  wish  to  be
satisfied  of  all  this,  and  to  learn  the  disgraceful,  aye,  and
disgusting  and  heartless,  conduct  of  some  persons  who  ought
to  hide  their  heads  for  ever,  must  read  The  Zoist,  No.  IX.,
pp.  86 — 96.  An  article  in  No.  XII.,  and  one  in  No.  XIV.,
are  worth  looking  at.

The  cow-doctor  did  not  say  the  cow  would  die  if  she  did
not  get  better ;  but  that  he  was  sure  she  would  die  if  she  were
not  much  relieved  before  his  evening  visit :  and  there  were  no
signs  of  relief  at  his  evening  visit,  soon  after  eight  o’clock,
and  he  then  absolutely  said  she  could  not  recover,  and  it  was
a  chance  if  she  lived  till  morning.  At  ten  she  was  worse;  in
a  desperate  state :  struggling  for  breath,  quivering,  choking,
and  in  a  flame  of  fever  :  her  eyes  were  starting  :  her  mouth
and  novstrils  dry :  and  the  functions  suspended  as  they  had
been  all  day.  At  midnight  there  was  still  no  improvement
nor  promise  of  any  :  and  she  was  then  mesmerised,  and  in  a
few  minutes  her  breathing  became  easier,  her  eyes  were  less
wild,  her  mouth  moist,  and  before  morning  she  was  relieved
in  all  ways.  On  calling  in  the  morning  he  exclaimed  that  he
had  “  never  thought  to  see  her  alive  again. The  cow  did
not  get  better  after  the  doctor’s  remedies  had  time  to  act.
Moreover  the  cow  had  a  relapse  at  noon  and  was  almost  as
bad  as  ever.  No  bleeding  or  medicine  was  employed  :  but  she
was  mesmerised  for  an  hour,  and  in  two  hours  was  out  of
danger,  and  has  never  been  ill  since.  The  writer’s  conscience
allowed  him  artfully  to  suppress  this.

The  writer  who  could  pen  such  a  wicked  perversion  of
truth  walks  among  civilized  men,  among  Christians,  and  is

*  For  an  example  of  the  iron  rule  of  the  editor  of  the  Athenceum ,  see  an
account  of  the  humiliating  position  of  Mr.  Robert  Hunt,  one  of  his  reporters,
in  Zoist,  No.  XXIX.,  pp.  104-6.  Also  in  the  present  number,  p.  342.

f  See  No.  XXXI.,  p.  301.


by  Mrs.  Von  der  Heyde.


337


tolerated  !  His  vocation  is  to  earn  his  livelihood  by  attempt¬
ing  to  obstruct  a  mighty  truth  and  the  alleviation  and  cure  of
the  sufferings  of  his  fellow-creatures — human  and  brute.  Un¬
happy  is  the  man  who  is  in  such  a  case.

How  different  was  the  impression  made  upon  a  lady  will
appear  by  the  following  letter.  Of  all  bad  beings  a  bad
woman  is  in  my  eyes  the  worst :  of  all  insufferable  creatures
a  vain  or  superstitious  woman  is  to  me  the  most  insufferable :
but  of  all  beings  in  my  eyes  a  thoroughly  sensible,  conscien¬
tious,  benevolent,  and  fearless  woman  is  the  most  noble  and
delightful.  John  Elliotson.

"Yale  Cottage,  Sydenham,
“Nov.  2nd,  1850.

44  My  dear  Sir, — If  the  following  simple  narrative  will  aid
the  cause  of  mesmerism,  I  shall  be  highly  gratified.

“  Having  read  your  account  of  Miss  Martineau’s  cow  in
The  Zoist,  I  determined  to  try  it  on  a  steer,  which  my  hus¬
band  had  purchased  of  a  drover.  The  poor  beast  from  being
overdriven  had  a  very  inflamed  leg  and  foot,  so  that  he  could
scarcely  move.  The  parts  were  poulticed  for  two  days  and  a
half,  and,  as  our  man  says,  the  foot  looked  as  if  rotten.  I
now  went  into  the  farm-yard,  and  saw  it,  and  had  the  poultice
removed,  and  directed  the  man  how  to  make  passes.  He  did
so  for  nearly  a  week,  when  the  foot  was  quite  well.  The
passes  were  made  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  three  times  a  day,
and  nothing  was  applied  from  the  day  the  poultice  was  re¬
moved.  Our  simple-minded  man  was  quite  astonished.

“  But  now  for  my  anecdote.  Impressed  with  the  won¬
derful  cure  of  the  steer,  John  Howell,  the  man  who  mes¬
merised  it,  having  run  a  rusty  nail  into  his  finger  and  suffer¬
ing  excessive  pain,  thought  he  would  mesmerise  the  part.
He  did  so  with  his  other  hand.  He  declares  he  felt  the  agony
darting  out  of  his  finger-end, — it  was  vjell.  If  this  statement
requires  his  signature,  here  it  is  : —

“  ‘  I,  John  Howell,  do  here  certify  that  the  steer  was  cured,  and
likewise  my  finger,  by  my  mistress’s  directions.’

“  I  remain,  dear  Sir,  yours  very  respectfully,

“  Charlotte  A.  Yon  der  Heyde.


44  Dr.  Elliotson.”


(  338  )


III.  Two  Cares  of  violent  Fits.  By  Mr.  Rawe,  Lemaile,

Wadebridge,  Cornwall.

Homoeopathy  and  mesmerism  are  the  nearest  approaches  to  the  laissez-faire
in  medicine  that  can  be  conceived  ;  and  if  the  prophets  of  these  mysticisms  would
only  go  a  step  further  in  that  direction,  they  would  find  that  Nature  could  per¬
form  her  own  cures  without  the  globules  and  without  the  mesmeric  passes.  The
trick  in  each  case  is  a  mere  redundancy.  It  does  no  harm — except  so  far  as  the
morals  of  medical  practice  are  concerned,  and  except  so  far  as  reliance  on  it  may
stand  in  the  way  of  active  remedies  when  active  remedies  are  imperatively  de¬
manded,— and  no  good.  Whatever  of  real  and  useful  appears  to  exist  by  the
side  of  these  modern  quackeries  is  traceable  —  as  was  elaborately  shewn  by  Mr.
Noble  in  his  Mesmerism  :  True  or  False  ? — to  the  action  of  natural  forces,  un¬
connected  with  the  mysteiies  of  mesmerism,  odylism,  homoeopathy,  and  so  forth.”
— Athenaeum,  Nov.  16,  1850.  The  wise  writer  and  Mr.  Noble  are  Tar  Nobile.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — I  beg  to  offer  you  a  brief  account  of  two  cases  of  fits
treated  mesmericallv,  thinking  you  may  judge  the  communi¬
cation,  either  in  its  present  or  an  abridged  form,  of  sufficient
interest  for  insertion  in  your  journal.

Residing  in  this  remote  part  of  the  country,  and  debarred
as  I  am  from  any  opportunity  of  personal  communication
with  other  mesmerists,  the  arrival  once  a  quarter  of  my  copy
of  T'he  Zoist  is  an  event  of  much  interest  with  me,  and,  in
return  for  the  pleasure  and  instruction  derived  from  it,  I
would  willingly  contribute  anything  which  might  be  consi¬
dered  of  any  value  in  my  mesmeric  experience.

I  am,  Sir,  yours  obediently,

Lemaile,  near  Wadebridge,  John  Rawe.

Cornwall,  Nov.  3,  1850.

N.  Tom,  a  lad  about  15  years  of  age,  engaged  in  farm-
work,  was  in  November,  1848,  attacked  with  fits  attended
with  a  degree  of  insanity.  He  received  medical  treatment
from  Mr.  Wilkins,  a  talented  surgeon  of  this  neighbourhood,
but  without  benefit.  I  heard  occasional^  of  these  attacks,
and  concluded  that  the  probable  result  would  be  his  becoming
an  inmate  of  the  lunatic  asylum.  Being  a  rather  large  payer
to  the  poor-rate  of  this  parish  (Eglashayle),  to  which  the  boy
belongs,  I  took  the  first  opportunity  of  consulting  with  some
of  the  parish  officers  on  the  case.  I  met  Mr.  Pollard,  the
much-respected  guardian  of  the  poor,  and  Mr.  Lakeman,
agent  to  Sir  William  Molesworth,  and  they  agreed  that  some
steps  ought  to  be  taken  at  once,  and  proposed  sending  him  to
the  Truro  Infirmary.  I  stated  my  opinion  to  be  that  nothing
but  a  course  of  mesmerism  would  cure  the  boy.  I  heard
nothing  more  of  the  matter  for  a  week  or  two,  when  one
evening  the  boy’s  father  called  on  me,  accompanied  by  his


Two  Cares  of  violent  Fits.


339


son,  and  made  the  following  statement : — An  application  had
been  made  to  the  infirmary,  but  was  refused  on  the  ground
that  cases  of  fits  were  not  received  there.  It  was  then  pro¬
posed  for  him  to  be  removed  to  the  union-house  to  be  under
the  care  of  the  surgeon  of  the  establishment.  This  the  au¬
thorities  refused  on  the  ground  of  the  appearance  of  insanity
in  his  attacks.  The  poor  man  expressed  himself  perplexed
what  to  do,  and,  having  heard  that  I  advocated  mesmerism
for  such  complaints,  said  he  should  feel  greatly  indebted  if  I
would  try  it  on  his  son.  I  told  him  to  send  the  lad  up  next
day,  and,  if  he  could  do  any  work  on  the  farm,  he  should  have
his  wages  for  it.  The  man  described  the  attacks  as  generally
coming  on  about  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  first  symp¬
toms  being  pain  across  the  forehead  and  coldness  of  the  ex¬
tremities  ;  the  lad  would  at  times  fall  down  quite  insensible,
but  generally  would  attempt  to  run  straightforward,  some¬
times  falling  to  the  ground  and  rising  again,  the  countenance
appearing  wild  and  distorted  :  if  restrained,  he  would  threaten
violence.  After  the  fit  he  would  remember  nothing  of  what
had  passed,  was  greatly  relaxed,  “  as  limp  as  a  piece  of  cloth,"
to  use  the  parent's  words.

I  commenced  mesmerising  N.  Tom  on  the  31st  of  January,
1849,  and  continued  the  process  half  an  hour  daily  for  a  fort¬
night,  and  every  other  day  for  the  succeeding  two  weeks.
He  did  not  appear  a  susceptible  subject  during  the  first  five
sittings :  the  eyes  never  closed,  but,  to  my  surprise,  the
liead-ache  and  coldness  of  the  extremities ,  which  I  found  had
before  been  felt  every  day ,  whether  a  fit  came  or  not,  had
entirely  disappeared  from  the  first  day  of  mesmerising.

On  the  sixth  day  the  eyes  closed  for  a  short  time ;  and
this  effect  gradually  increased,  so  that  in  the  half  hour  there
would  generally  be  three  or  four  dozes  of  a  few  minutes  each.

The  fits  entirely  left ,  and  the  boy  soon  acquired  a  healthful
appearance ;  and  from  that  time  to  the  present , — a  year  and,
ten  months, — he  has  enjoyed  uninterrupted  health.  This  I
am  enabled  to  state,  as  I  have  had  the  boy  in  my  domestic
service.

This  was  the  first  serious  case  I  ever  undertook,  and  it
occasioned  me  anxiety  as  well  as  labour :  but  I  felt  the  grati¬
fying  success  attending  my  efforts  to  be  an  ample  reward.

Case  II. — M.  A.  Osborn,  aged  31,  a  married  woman,  and
mother  of  six  or  seven  children,  had  epileptic  fits  for  four
years  and  a  half ;  sometimes  several  in  a  week,  and  was  never
free  more  than  a  week  or  two  at  a  time.

She  has  had  several  narrow  escapes  when  seized  with  the


Two  Cures  of  violent  Fits.


fits.  On  one  occasion,  having  fallen  on  the  hearth  with  her
baby,  her  clothes  were  beginning  to  burn  when  her  mother
accidentally  came  into  the  house :  she  has  fallen  down  stairs  :
and  one  dark  evening,  when  going  to  her  father's  house,  she
fell  with  her  face  in  a  drain  of  water ;  some  one  happening  to
pass  heard  a  struggling,  and,  getting  a  light,  came  in  time
to  prevent  suffocation.

M.  A.  O.  applied  to  a  medical  man,  and  says  his  answer
was,  “that  he  could  do  her  no  good ;  that  all  the  drugs  in  his
surgery  would  he  of  no  avail.”  He  recommended  her  to  get
a  bottle  of  spirit,  and,  when  she  felt  any  symptoms  of  a  fit,
to  take  a  dram.  This  was  tried,  but  not  long  persisted  in,  as
the  effect  was  to  increase  the  severity  of  the  fits.  The  strug¬
gling  had  not  previously  been  very  violent,  but,  in  the  attacks
which  followed  the  use  of  the  spirit,  it  required  three  strong
men  to  hold  her.

This  woman  applied  to  me  to  be  mesmerised  on  the  19th
of  March,  1849.  There  had  been  no  improvement  up  to  that
time,  but  rather  an  increase  of  the  disorder.  I  found  her
very  susceptible  to  mesmerism,  being  rendered  comatose  in
five  minutes  at  the  first  sitting,  and  subsequently  less  than
one  minute  was  sufficient.  I  commenced  to  mesmerise  her
regularly  half  an  hour  every  day.  From  notes  made  at  the
time  I  extract  the  following.

Her  usual  head-ache  disappeared  at  once.  In  a  few  days
she  reported  to  me  that  a  great  change  had  taken  place  in  her
nights’  rest.  In  time  past  she  had  been  very  wakeful  and
restless  at  night,  and,  when  asleep,  frequently  moaned  and
started :  now  she  had  a  profound  slumber  from  bed  time  to
rising  time.  She  observed,  that  it  seemed  to  her  as  if  she
was  going  to  make  up  for  all  the  lost  sleep.

April  1st.  M.  A.  O.  has  occasionally  suffered  pain  in  the
stomach  and  in  the  back :  to-day  these  are  quite  gone,  but
there  is  a  rather  severe  pain  in  the  right  leg.  She  never,
that  she  can  remember,  felt  pain  there  before.  In  mesmer¬
ising  her  I  have  sometimes  made  long  passes  from  head  to
foot.

5th.  The  pain  in  the  leg  gone ;  much  pain  in  th efoot.

7th.  Pain  in  foot  gone.

10th.  Last  night  she  was  taken  with  trembling  and  a
slight  twitching  of  the  limbs.

14th.  She  has  felt  rather  poorly  to-day :  complained  of  a
trembling  sensation  about  the  heart,  similar  to  what  she  used
to  feel  when  a  fit  was  coming  on.

16th.  From  the  unfavourable  symptoms  apparent  for  some
days  past,  I  feared  that  the  sanguine  hope  I  had  indulged  in


Cure  of  Epilepsy.


341


would  receive  a  check,  and  that  a  fit  would  occur.  After  a
month's  exemption  from  them,  it  was  with  some  anxiety  that
I  looked  for  the  arrival  of  the  woman,  and  was  relieved  to
find  there  had  been  no  fit.

The  cure  had  moreover  been  put  to  a  severe  test.  The
temper  of  this  woman  I  knew  to  be  very  excitable,  and  she
confessed  to  having  been  thrown  into  a  great  passion  last
evening  by  some  domestic  occurrence  :  formerly  such  a  mis¬
fortune  would  have  certainly  been  followed  by  one  or  more
fits  ;  now  there  was  a  trembling  for  about  an  hour.

Mesmerism  was  used  every  second  day  for  about  a  week
longer,  and  two  or  three  times  at  irregular  intervals  after¬
wards.  Her  cure  then  appeared  complete.

It  is  now  a  year  and  a  half  since  I  last  mesmerised  this
woman,  and  she  has  had  no  return  of  the  complaint :  she  has
not  had  a  fit  since  the  first  day  of  mesmerising.

J.  R.

***  Having  seen  this  communication,  and  being  intimate
with  the  family  of  the  Molesworths,  I  mentioned  it  to  the
Dowager  Lady  Molesworth,  who  immediately  said  she  would
write  to  Mr.  Lakeman  to  know  who  Mr.  Rawe  is.  The  fol¬
lowing  is  his  answer.  What  an  example  is  Mr.  Rawe  to  the
Cornish  gentry  and  medical  men  !  John  Elliotson.

“Coslelost,  Nov.  29,  1850.

“  My  Lady, — Mr.  John  Rawe  is  a  highly  respectable  yeo¬
man  :  he  farms  principally  his  own  land ;  and  his  veracity
is  undoubted.  Dr.  Elliotson  need  not  doubt  his  report  of  the
cures  he  has  made  by  mesmerism.

“  I  remain,  my  Lady,

“  Your  faithful  and  obliged  servant,

“  John  Lakeman.”


IV.  A  Cure  of  Epilepsy,  by  Dr.  Kenny ,  Stoke  Newington.
By  Mrs.  Cooper,  Stoke  Newington.  Communicated  by
Dr.  Elliotson.

“  We  have  all  along  maintained,  with  regard  to  mesmerism,  that  it  embraces
psychological  and  physiological  phenomena  which  deserve  investigation.  We
accept  Baron  Reichenbach’s  book  as  an  attempt  to  explain  the  latter ; — and  very
glad  we  should  be  if  some  one  could  as  satisfactorily,  under  the  former  head,  ex¬
plain  the  condition  of  mind  into  which  Dr.  Ashburner  and  his  brother  mesmerists
have  got  in  this  country.” — Athenceum ,  Oct.  19,  1850.

The  Athenaeum  has  “  all  along  maintained,  with  regard
TO  mesmerism,  that  it  embraces  psychological  and  phy¬
siological  PHENOMENA  WHICH  DESERVE  INVESTIGATION

The  Pope  and  the  cardinals  have  always  maintained  that  the


t


342


Cure  of  Epilepsy,


sun  does  not  go  round  the  earth,  but  the  earth  round  the
sun,  even  as  Galileo  maintained  these  truths !  Satan  has
always  maintained  that  he  wished  all  men  to  be  good,  and  he
has  always  preferred  holy  water  to  any  other  !*

The  editor  of  the  Athenceum ,  like  many  others,  begins  to
suspect  he  must  turn  about  or  be  in  the  minority.

On  March  15th,  1849,  a  young  lady,  eighteen  years  of
age,  was  brought  to  me  labouring  under  epilepsy.  It  is  my
habit  to  abstain  from  proposing  or  even  mentioning  mesmer¬
ism  to  medical  men  in  consultation,  or  to  patients  who  seek
my  advice  unaccompanied  by  a  medical  man,  before  it  is
mentioned  to  me.  I  therefore  after  taking  down  her  case
prescribed  medicine.  But  the  question  of  the  propriety  of
mesmerism  was  put  to  me,  and  instantly,  as  is  also  my  habit,
I  gave  my  opinion  in  regard  to  it  without  reserve.  In  order
to  encourage  all  the  parties,  I  advised  that  the  medicine  and
mesmerism  should  both  be  employed.  The  patient  was  cured,
and  the  grateful  mother  eagerly  offered  to  write  out  the  case
for  publication,  the  patient  and  whole  family  joyfully  assent¬
ing  : — an  example  worthy  of  all  imitation,  and  a  sad  contrast
to  the  fear  too  frequently  entertained  of  the  ignorant  and
malicious.

“  To  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  9,  Church  Street,  Stoke  Newington,
“  London,  Dec.  20,  1850.

“  Dear  Sir, — As  all  who,  either  by  themselves  or  their  re¬
latives  have  experienced  the  restorative  powers  of  mesmerism,

*  “  The  details  of  many  of  these  cases  of  possession  are  so  like  the  wonders
of  mesmerism,  that  they  may  be  penned  as  proof  that  there  is  no  folly  so  exposed,
but  that  it  has  a  chance  of  being  revived ;  that  there  have  been  fools  and
knaves  in  all  ages,  and  pretenders  to  imaginary  sciences,  whom  the  great  vulgar
and  the  small  are  alwrays  ready  to  credit. ” — Athenaeum,  Jan.  11,  1842.

“  Hydropathy  is,  in  fact,  but  one  head  of  the  great  hydra  quackery, — and  is
sprouting  up  at  the  expense  of  its  scotched  sisters,  mesmerism,  phrenology,  and
homoeopathy.  They  are  all  the  offspring  of  the  same  stock — phantasies  of  over¬
wrought  German  abstraction ;  which,  long  after  they  had  ceased  to  trouble  the
parent  mind,  are  imported  at  second  hand  for  the  amusement  of  us  English.” —
Athenceum,  May  13,  1848.

“We  would  have  been  better  satisfied  to  have  seen  mesmerism  introduced
among  other  mental  delusions,  than  to  find  it  used  as  the  fly-wheel  to  carry  the
other  parts  of  the  machinery  round  the  1  dead  points’  of  the  work,  if  such  a  me¬
chanical  phrase  be  permitted.” — Athenceum,  Review  of  Mr.  Robert  Hunt’s
Panthea.  Mr.  Hunt  instantly  fell  on  his  knees  before  Mr.  Dilke,  and  said  he
meant  all  the  time  to  include  it  in  delusions,  “  and  that  self-delusions  and  often,
he  feared,  inexcusable  fraud  mark  the  small  amount  of  truth  upon  which  it
lingers.”  I  have  heard  that  Mr.  Dilke  kept  him  on  bread  and  water  in  a  corner
with  a  certain  cap  upon  his  head  for  a  whole  day,  notwithstanding  the  naughty
boy’s  blubbering  and  repentance.

See  also  the  mottos  in  the  present  Number  to  Articles  2  and  3.


by  Dr.  Kenny.


343


are  indebted  to  yonr  sagacity  which  perceived,  and  your
truthfulness  which  asserted,  its  efficacy,  in  the  face  of  preju¬
dice  too  presuming  to  investigate  and  too  angry  to  be  fair,  I
beg  you  to  accept  a  mother’s  gratitude,  and  a  statement  of  a
few  particulars  respecting  the  very  severe  disease  of  my
daughter,  and  her  recovery  by  the  agency  of  mesmerism
only.

“My  daughter,  Elizabeth Naish  Cooper,  although  she  had
been  vaccinated  in  infancy,  sickened  of  the  small-pox  in  theyear
1846;  this  was  succeeded  by  violent  head-aches,  and  she  had
been  subject  from  childhood  to  sick  head-ache  with  which  she
awoke  in  the  morning  :  the  head-aches  at  length  ceased,  and
epileptic  fits  began  in  December,  1848.  The  fits  gradually
increased  in  severity,  duration  and  frequency,  until  we  almost
began  to  despair.  She  not  only  fell  suddenly  down  senseless
and  went  into  strong  convulsions  by  day,  but  after  a  time
was  attacked  in  the  night,  though  never  during  the  first  three
hours  of  sleep,  and  she  sometimes  was  not  awakened  at  all
by  the  fit.  They  were  often  very  numerous  in  her  sleep.  At
last,  the  fits  took  place  most  frequently  when  she  was  getting
up,  or  turning  in  bed  before  waking.  In  the  convulsions  she
would  bite  her  tongue  and  roll  her  eyes  upwards.  Besides  the
strong  fits  she  had  very  many  slight  ones,  almost  merely
threatenings.  After  an  attack  she  usually  vomited,  and  al¬
ways  had  pain  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  stupor  and  head¬
ache.  Before  the  fit  she  always  had  pain  in  her  jaws ;  and
before,  during,  or  after  it,  nettle-rash,  which  would  not  spare
her  eyelids,  tongue,  &c.  She  was  always  very  thirsty,  and
had  a  voracious  appetite :  and  her  feet  were  always  cold.

“  Two  eminent  medical  gentlemen  in  vain  attempted  her
cure.

“  The  sea  air,  and  likewise  the  air  of  the  interior  of
Hampshire,  were  ineffectually  resorted  to.  The  disease  gained
upon  her  till,  on  March  15,  1849,  I  brought  her  under  your
notice,  she  being  18  years  old.  After  you  had  taken  down
her  case  and  prescribed  sulphate  of  zinc  for  her,  she  herself,
being  a  believer  in  mesmerism,  though  at  that  time  I  was  not,
because  its  phenomena  had  not  come  within  the  scope  of  my
observation,  nor  the  testimony  as  to  its  reality  and  curative
power  to  my  knowledge,  earnestly  asked  you  if  she  might  not
hope  for  a  cure  from  mesmerism.  You  encouraged  the  idea,
and  shewed  her  how  her  sister  was  to  make  the  mesmeric
passes,  and  at  the  same  time  recommended  me  to  read  Sandby..
Afterwards  when  you  saw  her  sister  and  observed  how  nervous
and  delicate  she  was,  you  remarked  that  she  was  more  fit  to
be  mesmerised  than  to  mesmerise.  Her  sister,  however,  mes-


344


Cure  of  Epilepsy,


merised  her  regularly  :  but  never  was  able  to  produce  the
mesmeric  sleep.  She  took  the  zinc  three  times  a  day  for
two  months,  in  doses  of  four  and  five  grains  after  the  first
fortnight ;  and  at  the  close  of  the  year  a  sharp  attack  of  illness
obliged  her  sister  to  desist  from  mesmerising  her.  The  fits
had  long  become  less  severe  and  of  less  duration.  Elizabeth
then  grew  worse,  and,  on  the  15th  February  of  the  present
year,  fell  down  in  a  violent  fit  in  Abney  Park  Cemetery.
The  assistance  of  Dr.  Kenny,  of  High  Street,  Stoke  Newing¬
ton,  was  called  for,  and  this  gentleman  kindly  offered  to  try
upon  her  the  effect  of  daily  mesmerism.  On  the  16th  he  gave
her  a  cleansing  medicine.  On  the  18th  he  began  to  mes¬
merise  her ;  at  the  same  time  directing  her  to  take  no  more
medicine,  to  let  her  diet  be  like  that  of  the  rest  of  the  family,
but  to  abstain  from  fermented  liquors ;  which  indeed,  with
the  exception  of  a  short  interval  of  six  weeks,  she  had  ab¬
stained  from  for  the  last  two  years.

“  On  the  first  day  the  effect  was  very  slight ;  but,  on  the
second,  irrepressible  streams  of  tears  for  hours  coursed  down
her  cheeks.  I  opened  my  eyes  in  wide  astonishment,  because
she  was  a  girl  who  never  would  indulge  in  tears,  however  keen
her  distress.  On  the  third  day  she  fell  into  a  deep  mesmeric
sleep,  from  which  it  was  twenty-four  hours  before  she  was
completely  awakened.  Afterwards  she  was,  from  one  to  three
hours  daily,  under  the  mesmeric  influence,  and  often  a  great
deal  longer.  Her  natural  rest  soon  began  to  improve ;  she  was
no  longer,  by  night,  slumberous  and  semi-conscious,  but  soundly
asleep.  The  next  advance  towards  health  was  marked  by  the
cessation  of  that  obstinate  constipation  of  the  bowels  by  which
her  malady  had  all  along  been  attended,  though  they  were  in¬
variably  kept  regular  by  strong  medicine;  then  came  relief
from  the  aching  and  sense  of  tightness  in  the  chest,  which  had
generally  preceded,  and  always  succeeded,  her  fits.  Subse¬
quently  the  sickness  ceased,  and  the  stupor,  that  used  to  last
for  hours,  passed  away  in  about  twenty  minutes.  At  this  stage
of  her  recovery,  Dr.  Kenny  pressed  her,  while  she  was  in  the
mesmeric  sleep,  to  tell  him  of  some  means  of  completing  her
cure.  She  replied,  ‘  Mesmerise  me  every  day  ;  do  not  let  me
drink  much  of  warm  liquids ;  make  me  rise  at  five  o’clock,
and  do  not  permit  me  to  eat  after  seven  o’clock  in  the  even¬
ing.’  These,  her  instructions,  were  strictly  attended  to,  and
though,  through  the  ensuing  three  weeks,  nature  seemed  in
hard  conflict  with  disease,  and  Elizabeth  had  many  fits,  yet
they  were  unaccompanied  by  their  former  formidable  symp¬
toms,  and  the  14/ A  of  May  witnessed  her  last.  Nearly  eight
lunar  months  have  now  elapsed  without  the  slightest  return


by  Dr.  Kenny.


of  her  disorder.  For  five  months  the  mesmeric  treatment
has  been  discontinued.  Her  digestion  is  good,  so  also  are
her  spirits,  and  she  has  every  indication  of  vigorous  health.

“  Phenomena. — The  phenomena  which  Elizabeth  presented
while  under  the  mesmeric  treatment  were  very  curious ;  and
some  of  her  illusions  excited  somewhat  of  apprehension  in
me,  though  they  did  not  so  in  Dr.  Kenny,  to  whose  patient
skill  and  generous  and  persevering  benevolence,  in  the  appli¬
cation  of  mesmeric  power,  she  owes  the  cure  of  her  awful
malady.  Shortly  after  she  had  been  submitted  to  its  agency
she  became  highly  somnambulic,  and  always  then  mistook
the  doctor  for  some  other  person ;  and,  when  the  mesmeric
influence  had  completely  sealed  up  her  eyelids,  she  used  to
charge  him  with  taking  away  her  sight,  and  allege  that  as  a
proof  that  he  could  not  be  Dr.  Kenny ; — f  For  Dr.  Kenny  is
benevolent  :  the  person  therefore  who  has  taken  away  my
sight  cannot  be  Dr.  Kenny/  And  if,  either  through  design
or  inadvertently,  he  offended  against  a  grammatical  rule,  she
seized  the  circumstance  as  another  evidence  that  he  could  not
be  Dr.  Kenny  ; — ‘  For  Dr.  Kenny  is  an  educated  gentleman,
and  would  not  fall  into  such  an  error/  She  was  always  re¬
spectful  to  him  when  she  was  capable  of  perceiving  that  he
was  Dr.  Kenny,  and  most  discourteous  when  she  took  him
for  another  person.  But,  though  she  quarrelled  with  and
scolded  him,  she  never  failed  of  an  excuse  for  keeping  fast
hold  of  him  ;  generally  observing  that  she  must  detain  him,
otherwise  he  would  go  and  injure  Dr.  Kenny.

“  She  used  to  lock  her  left  hand  into  the  right  hand  of
her  mesmeriser  so  tightly  that  he  could  not  always  disengage
himself.  When  asked  why  she  grasped  his  hand  so  firmly,
she  would  reply,  f  Because  it  does  me  good/  I  watched  her
anxiously ;  and,  from  the  pertinacity  with  which  she  seized  on
every  opportunity  of  glueing  her  hand,  as  it  were,  to  that  of
the  mesmeriser,  and  the  sense  of  injury  she  expressed  when
not  permitted  so  to  do,  I  am  persuaded  that  a  healing  efflu¬
ence  passed  from  it  into  hers.

“  Whatever  the  mesmeriser  ate  she  always  tasted,  and
almost  immediately.  On  one  occasion,  when  she  was  in  the
mesmeric  sleep,  not  being  aware  that  raisins  set  her  teeth
aching,  he  ate  of  them.  She  then  began  to  feel  pain  in  her
teeth,  accused  the  doctor  of  putting  raisins  into  her  mouth,
and,  having  in  vain  tried  to  find  them  wfitli  her  own  fingers,
compelled  the  doctor  to  try  to  find  and  take  them  out  with
his,  and  this  of  course,  as  they  had  not  been  in  her  mouth,  he


346


Cure  of  Epilepsy,


failed  to  do :  and  the  irritation  of  her  teeth  did  not  cease  till
some  little  time  after  he  had  desisted  from  eating  raisins.

“  She  often,  during  the  sleep-waking  state,  required  the
mesmeriser  to  recite  for  her  amusement  the  passages  from
Shakespeare,  Pope,  and  other  poets,  with  which  he  had  stored
his  memory  in  youth.  Her  own  was  then  so  accurate  that
she  at  once  detected  any  deviation  from  the  received  reading,
and  visited  it  with  a  no  very  gentle  rebuke.

“  Her  sense  of  touch  was  greatly  disturbed,*  and  often  far
from  being  nicely  perceptive.  On  one  occasion  she  accused
her  mesmeriser  of  taking  her  to  sea  in  a  crazy  boat,  and,  as
she  stumbled  against  and  felt  the  different  articles  of  furni¬
ture,  she  called  them  rocks ;  and,  when,  to  allay  her  fear  and
dispel  the  illusion,  she  was  made  to  feel  the  carpet,  she  ob¬
served,  1  This  is  sand,  such  as  is  always  to  be  found  near
rocks  and  about  the  sea/  When  with  extended  arm  I  leant
against  the  mantel  to  keep  her  from  the  fire,  she  struck
against  me,  and  exclaimed,  ‘  O  we  are  at  Spithead  now,  and
here  is  a  part  of  the  Royal  George and  then,  seizing  my
hand,  she  said,  ‘  I’ll  have  a  relic  of  this  and,  taking  a  pair
of  scissors  from  her  pocket,  she  was  proceeding  to  cut  a  piece
from  my  thumb,  when  the  doctor  came  to  my  rescue.  A
circumstance  or  twro,  besides  this,  occurred  to  teach  that  som¬
nambulic  patients  should  be  deprived  of  knives,  scissors,
and  instruments  of  mischief  previously  to  being  mesmerised.
On  another  occasion  she  saw  tigers  and  heard  thunder,  and
asserted  that  she  had  been  taken  to  the  deserts  of  Africa ;
and,  when  the  doctor  said  that  the  noise  was  from  the  wag¬
gons  in  the  street,  she  exclaimed,  ‘  What  ignorance  !  and  you
call  yourself  Dr.  Kenny.  But  who  ever  heard  of  streets  in
the  deserts  of  Africa?’  With  a  strength  that  overpowered
mine  and  the  doctor’s,  she  forced  open  the  door,  and  rushed
away  from  the  room  which  she  called  the  deserts  of  Africa.

“  One  afternoon,  when  she  had  been  more  than  four
hours  in  a  mesmeric  sleep,  from  which  the  doctor  had  in  vain
endeavoured  to  awaken  her,  the  motion  of  her  lips  and  her
looks  evinced  that  she  was  holding  a  conversation,  though  her
eyes  were  perfectly  closed  and  her  voice  inaudible  :  and,  when
the  doctor  came  the  second  time,  and  partially  awoke  her,  she
instantly  gave  him  his  dismission,  saying  that  a  gentleman
had  visited  and  promised  to  cure  her,  and  had  brought  a
green  vase  as  a  token  that  he  wras  sent  to.  do  so.  This  per¬
sonage  v7as  a  mere  creature  of  her  imagination ;  yet,  of  all  her


*  This  was  in  reality  cerebral  hallucination. — J.  E.


by  Dr.  Kenny.


347


strange  doings  under  the  influence  of  mesmerism,  and  all  her
strange  visions  and  imaginings,  this  apparition  has  alone  left
a  trace  behind.  She  faintly  remembers  talking  to  a  gentle¬
man  with  a  green  vase  who  came  to  cure  her.

“  While  under  delusions  respecting  the  identity  of  the
doctor,  she  always  knew  his  ring,  and,  unable  otherwise  to
account  for  its  being  on  the  finger  of  the  mesmeriser,  she
would  accuse  him  of  obtaining  it  unfairly,  and  insist  on  hav¬
ing  it  transferred  to  her  own  finger,  that  she  might  restore  it
to  Dr.  Kenny.  She  constantly  required  him  to  deliver  to  her
whatever  money  he  had  about  him,  always  knowing  my
money  from  that  of  the  mesmeriser.  On  every  occasion  that
I  stealthily  handed  it  to  him  that  he  might  give  it  to  her
instead  of  his  own,  she  indignantly  threw  it  away.  She
shewed  a  great  abhorrence  of  me  during  the  mesmeric  state;
sometimes  angrily  asking,  ‘Who  are  you?*  at  others  asserting
I  was  a  creature  whom  the  mesmeriser  had  brought  to  tor¬
ment  her.  She  shrank  from  contact  with  me;  unless,  during
her  somnambulism,  I  became  an  obstacle  in  her  way,  when
she  would  seize  and  hurl  me  from  her  with  a  strength  almost
incredible.  While  in  the  sleep-waking  state  she  generally
exhibited  a  wonderful  degree  of  power.

“  Once,  after  the  mesmeric  treatment  had  caused  the
complete  sealing  up  of  her  eyelids,  finding  a  piece  of  paper  on
the  mantel,  she  wrote  a  note,  of  which  the  wording  is  good,
the  spelling  correct,  and  the  writing  rather  graceful.  It  bears
in  itself  evidence  that  she  could  not  see,  for  it  is  a  complaint
to  Dr.  Kenny,  that  some  person  (assuming  his  name)  had
taken  away  her  sight.  It  is  properly  folded  and  directed ;
and  she  charged  the  mesmeriser,  whose  identity  she  failed  to
recognize,  to  deliver  it  to  Dr.  Kenny  :  the  mesmeriser  being
then,  as  always.  Dr.  Kenny.  Her  behaviour  to  this  gentle¬
man  during  the  sleep-waking  and  somnambulic  states  was
very  unceremonious,  imperious,  and  sometimes  vindictive.
Occasionally  he  was  obliged  to  manage  her  by  making  the
mesmeric  passes  down  her  arms,  when  they  would  remain,  in
whatever  position  he  had  placed  them,  rigid  as  marble.

“  This  irregular  action  of  the  imagination  and  perceptive
faculties  I  have  mentioned  more  in  detail,  in  order  that,  as
the  issue  has  been  so  highly  beneficial,  some,  who  may  be
called  to  witness  similar  phenomena,  may  thereby  be  exempt
from  the  apprehensions  with  which  I  was  sometimes  disturbed.

“  I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  highest  respect,

“Your  obliged  servant,

“Ann  Cooper.

“P.S.  Lest  I  should  have  been  in  anything  incorrect,  I


348


Cure  of  Epilepsy,


have  submitted  this  letter  to  the  perusal  of  Dr.  Kenny.  He
affirms  the  accuracy  of  the  facts  stated.”

Every  particle  and  every  phenomenon  of  nature  deserve
our  admiration  and  study.  But  the  phenomena  observed  by
mesmerists  transcend  the  facts  of  anatomy,  common  physio¬
logy  and  pathology,  the  ordinary  observations  of  even  mi-
croscopists,  and  experiments  on  the  agency  of  various  sub¬
stances  on  the  functions  of  the  lungs,  liver,  kidneys,  muscles,
&c.,  as  far  as  the  study  of  the  Parthenon  or  St.  Peter’s,  of  the
steam-engine  or  electric  telegraph,  transcends  the  study  of  gas-
pipes  or  the  process  of  soap- making.  For  the  properties  and
functions  of  the  human  brain  tower  high  above  all  other  ob¬
jects  which  we  can  witness  in  nature.  The  phenomena  of  the
present  case  are  calculated  to  rivet  the  attention  of  the  phi¬
losopher  : -but  are  as  lost  upon  the  mass  of  medical  men  as
the  works  of  Phidias  and  Michael  Angelo  upon  the  birds
which  fly  around  them.

The  phenomena  of  this  case  are  those  continually  observed
in  all  countries  and  in  persons,  some  in  one  aud  others  in
another,  who  never  heard  of  each  other  or  of  such  phenomena.

The  sleep-waking  state  differs  from  the  ordinary  waking
state  of  the  patient,  as  far  as  my  own  observation  and  my
knowledge  obtained  from  others  extend,  in  some  particulars
of  the  intellectual  or  affective  faculties.  At  the  least  there
is  more  openness  and  ease,  and  sometimes  a  total  disregard  of
any  superiority,  however  great,  of  those  around.  Sleep¬
walkers  are  usually  at  their  ease  with  persons  of  the  highest
rank :  may  disclose  what  they  would  not  mention  in  their
ordinary  state,  and,  if  displeased,  speak  in  a  manner  not  ob¬
served  when  they  are  awake.  In  some  the  altered  character  of
the  patient  amounts  to  a  degree  of  delirium,  and  this  may  vary
in  different  patients  and  in  the  same  patient  at  different
times.*  In  a  beautiful  case  recorded  by  me  in  No.  VI.,
p.  219,  the  patient  always  mistook  every  body.t  Some  mis-


*  See  my  observations  on  Mr.  W.  Salmon’s  striking  case  in  No.  III.,
p.  323.  “  We  should  always  remember  that,  in  the  sleep-waking  state,  there  is

often  a  touch  of  morbid  mental  condition,  of  endless  variety,  and  of  all  degrees,
up  to  decided  insanity,  though  perhaps  some  faculties  are  at  the  time  extraordi¬
narily  acute,  and  faculties  not  seen  in  the  healthy  state  present  themselves  to  our
astonishment.  The  ignorance  or  forgetfulness  of  this  puzzles  many  persons  who
witness  sleep-wakers  and  makes  them  fancy  imposition.”  See  also  Mr.  Griffiths’s
case,  No.  IV.,  p.  409.

f  “  She  never  knows  who  or  where  she  is,  what  time  it  is,  or  to  whom  she  is
speaking.  Though  attracted  to  me  she  never  recognizes  me,  but  mistakes  me  for
some  one  whom  she  likes, — her  father,  mother,  & c.,  but  far  more  frequently  for
her  favourite  sister.  Her  conversation  is  perfectly  rational,  and  as  full  of  intelli-


by  Dr.  Kenny.


349


take  the  mesmeriser  only  or  certain  other  individuals  only.
X  have  had  cases  in  which  individuals  could  be  recognized
only  by  the  patient  feeling  a  ring  or  something  else  belonging
to  the  mesmeriser :  and  sometimes  there  is  such  determined
want  of  recognition  that  the  thing  intended  to  lead  to  recog-

gence  as  in  her  waking  state,  with  every  power  and  feeling  of  its  degree  habitual
to  her  waking  state;  and  she  says  exactly  what  she  would  say  under  the  circum¬
stance  in  which  she  mistakes  herself  to  be.  Whoever  she  fancies  me  to  be,  her
conversation  with  me  is  precisely  what  it  would  be  with  that  person.  When,  for
instance,  she  considers  me  her  sister,  she  tells  me  things  and  makes  remarks
which  she  would  utter  to  none  but  her  sister.  Fancying  no  one  present  but  the
person  she  addresses,  she  will  tell  things  in  the  presence  of  those  whom  she  begs
may  never  be  informed  of  what  she  tells.  Wherever  she  fancies  herself,  any  im¬
pression  you  attempt  to  make  upon  her,  if  the  circumstance  would  be  impossible
there,  she  misapprehends.  If  my  parrot  or  cockatoo  makes  a  noise  while  she
fancies  herself  at  home  where  there  is  no  bird,  and  I  tell  her  the  bird  makes  a
noise,  she  will  declare  it  not  to  be  the  noise  of  a  bird  but  something  else.  When
she  fancies  me  her  sister,  she  persists  that  mine  is  a  female  voice :  and,  if  I  speak
very  gruffly  and  pretend  to  be  a  stranger,  she  will  laugh  at  me  (her  sister)  for
imitating  so  charming  a  person  with  my  voice.  She  has  fancied  herself  ai  home
with  her  sister  and  taking  tea  and  reading,  while  squeezing  one  of  my  hands  in
each  of  her’s  :  and  declared  she  held  a  cup  in  her  right  hand  and  a  book  in  her
left.  I  told  her  to  give  me  the  cup,  still  keeping  my  hand  in  her’s  :  she  replied
that  I  would  not  take  it.  I  withdrew  both  my  hands,  and  she  then  said  she  had
given  me  the  cup.  I  replaced  my  hand  in  her  left,  and  she  said  I  had  given  her
the  book  back  after  having  taken  it  away.  I  withdrew  my  hand,  and  she  said
there  was  nothing  in  her  hand  and  that  she  had  put  the  book  in  her  pocket.
When  she  was  again  squeezing  my  hands  with  this  same  fancy,' I  caused  her  to
relax  them  by  breathing,  and  she  then  said  she  had  put  both  cup  and  book  down.
When  imagining  me  her  mother,  and  both  of  us  at  tea,  if  her  sister  touched  her,
she  instantly  withdrew  her  hand  complaining  that  I — her  mother — had  put  the
cold  bread  and  butter  upon  it.  She  has  fancied  herself  at  work,  putting  a  cord
through  a  cape;  and  then  declared  she  had  the  scissors  in  her  hand.  Her  sleep¬
waking  was  always  a  beautiful  display  of  rational  dreaming :  the  internal  activity
of  her  faculties  representing  everything  to  her  with  the  vividness  of  external  im¬
pression  so  as  to  be  mistaken  for  reality,  and  all  external  impressions  being
mistaken  for  circumstances  in  perfect  harmony  with  her  current  of  fancy.

‘‘Her  fancy  could  be  directed:  her  judgment  led  entirely  by  her  feeling.
She  could  be  made  to  fancy  herself  wbth  a  sister  or  some  other  person  she  liked
by  my  speaking  to  her  :  and  with  some  one  she  disliked  by  another  speaking  to
her :  and  the  rest  of  the  circumstances  which  she  fancied  would  all  harmonize
wdth  the  circumstances  of  the  relation  of  herself  and  the  favoured  party.  While
she  fancied  me  her  sister  and  squeezed  my  hand  affectionately,  she  repelled  this
very  sister’s  touch,  fancying  her  some  one  she  disliked  :  because  the  touch  of
every  other  person  than  myself  was  usually  disagreeable  to  her,  and  gave  her  a
fancy  that  it  was  some  one  she  disliked.  If  she  fancied  herself  at  home  with  none
but  those  she  loved,  and  any  one  but  myself  (for  instance,  her  sister)  touched
her,  she  did  not  fancy  any  disagreeable  acquaintance  had  touched  her,  this  being
impossible  in  her  view,  but  that  a  cold  wet  towel  had  been  put  upon  her.

“  Her  fancy  often  changed.  One  moment  she  fancied  me  her  sister,  and  then
her  father,  and  then  some  friend,  or  her  sister  again.  She  would  talk  to  me
immediately  in  each  fresh  view  of  persons,  place,  and  time,  exactly  as  she  would
have  done  to  the  fresh  fancied  person  ;  forgetting  what  she  had  just  said  to  me  as
the  other  imaginary  person,  if  the  time  of  that  fancied  interview  had  been  poste¬
rior  to  the  time  of  the  present  fancy.  Otherwise  she  could  not  be  brought  to  re¬
member.  She  sometimes  mistook  another  person’s  voice,  not  touch,  for  mine,
and,  having  fancied  me  her  sister,  continued  speaking,  but  to  the  fresh  person,
still  as  her  sister.”

VOL.  VIII.  .


C  C


350


Cure  of  Epilepsy,


nition  is  not  admitted  as  an  argument :  its  characters  are
absolutely  denied  though  it  is  examined  by  the  patient.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  mesmeric  attachment  to  the
mesmeriser  exists  with  equal  strength  though  he  appears  to  be
not  recognized.  But  a  patient  may  really  recognize  the  mes¬
merise^  and  yet  not  be  conscious  of  his  recognition.*  Yet,
just  as  a  hypochondriac  may  be  the  prey  of  a  fancy  which  he
cannot  shake  off  though  all  the  time  he  knows  it  to  be  un¬
real — cases  of  which  kind  I  continually  see — two  convictions
coexisting,  or  rather  being  felt  in  alternation  so  rapid  that
they  seem  to  coexist — so  mesmeric  attachment  with  open  re¬
cognition  may  coexist  with  anger.  A  patient  may  be  power¬
fully  under  the  influence  of  mesmeric  attraction,  while  very
angry,  absolutely  savage,  with  his  mesmeriser  for  some  little
annoyance,  as  in  common  existence  lovers  will  love  and  hate
at  the  same  moment.  I  have  now  such  a  patient  in  whom  the
mesmeric  attachment  is  very  strong :  but  it  is  quite  intellec¬
tual  :  for,  if  through  my  cheating  him  he  mistakes  me  for
another,  he  repels  me :  and,  if  he  mistakes  another  for  me,
he  retains  the  hand  of  that  other  person :  he  has  no  halluci¬
nation  and  cannot  open  his  eyes  for  the  least  vision.  In
some  cases  there  is  an  occult  power  of  distinguishing  the
mesmeriser  from  every  other  person  by  the  touch  :  his  hand  is
grasped,  and  the  hands  of  all  others  repelled,  however  care¬
fully  means  may  be  adopted  to  cheat  the  patient,  and  even
though  the  latter  always  deliriously  calls  the  mesmeriser  by
the  name  of  another  and  denies  his  identitv.t

v  1

*  See  No.  XXIV.,  p.  375,  and  No.  V.,  p.  70,  on  this  curious  subject.

f  See  two  exquisite  cases  related  by  me  in  No.  VI.,  p.  213-15.  “  She  had

occult  senses, — senses  which  in  her  waking  state  she  had  not.  However  blind¬
folded,  even  if  a  large  doubled  cloth  was  thrown  over  her  head  and  chest,  she
could  readily  distinguish  the  point  of  my  finger  upon  her  hand  from  that  of  any
other  person ;  or  my  breath  from  that  of  any  person  upon  her  hand :  and  even
the  proximity  of  any  other  person’s  hand  :  nay,  anything  first  held  in  the  hand
of  another  was  disagreeable  to  her.  My  breath,  touch,  and  anything  I  had
touched,  wrere  agreeable  and  warm  to  her  :  but  the  breath,  contact,  proximity,  or
anything  from  the  hand  of  any  other  person  gave  her  the  sensation  of  coldness.

“  If  others  stood  close  to  her,  she  began  to  shudder  ;  and  the  proximity  of
several  was  distressingly  cold  to  her.”

“  I  have  a  patient  who,  in  his  silent  sleep,  with  his  eyes  perfectly  closed,  and
any  thickness  of  cloth  thrown  over  his  head  and  chest  and  drawn  close  round  him,
is  instantly  distressed  beyond  a  measure  by  a  piece  of  gold  placed  upon  the  back
of  his  hand  after  lying  in  the  hand  of  another  person,  but  not  at  all  if  it  has  been
taken  from  my  hand.  Any  one  with  gloves  on  makes  the  experiment,  placing
the  sovereign'  first  on  my  hand  or  the  hand  of  another  at  pleasure,  in  every  suc¬
cession  and  with  as  many  repetitions  as  are  thought  proper.  Nay,  if  the  gold  is
taken  off  my  right  hand  and  placed  upon  his  left,  or  off  my  left  and  placed  upon
his  right,  he  is  distressed,  and  shakes  it  off,  and,  if  it  is  placed  in  his  palm,  vio¬
lent  spasm  of  the  hand  occurs ;  though  he  expresses  no  uneasiness  when  it  is
taken  from  my  right  and  placed  on  his  right,  or  from  my  left  and  placed  upon
his  left.  Neither  temperature  nor  anything  but  occult  pi*operty  can  explain  these
wonderful  facts.  The  silliness  of  those  people  who  pronounced  that  the  Okeys


351


Community  or  sympathy  of  sensation  is  a  perfectly  esta¬
blished  fact,  and  is  no  doubt  cerebral*  as  much  as  the  sym¬
pathy  of  thought  and  wish  or  willing: — all  phenomena,  how¬
ever,  perfectly  unknown  to  the  medical  profession,  and  in
vain  to  be  searched  for  in  the  chapters  on  sympathy  in  me¬
dical  works.

As  the  disagreeable  feeling  from  raisins  in  the  mouth  arose
from  the  presence  of  raisins  in  the  mesmeriser’ s  mouth,  the
attempt  to  remove  it  by  performing  the  action  of  removal  in
the  patient’s  mouth  was  necessarily  fruitless,  and  the  proper
plan  was  to  remove  the  raisins  from  the  operator’s  mouth.
When  Mrs.  W.  Snewing  felt  her  mouth  burning  from  the
various  spices  which  had  been  in  my  mouth  causing  me  to
have  a  burning  sensation,  she  was  instantly  relieved  by  my

were  impostors  and  knew  by  their  warmth,  moisture,  See.,  what  metals  had  been
mesmerised,  does  indeed  appear  preposterous  to  me,  now  that  every  class  of  facts
in  those  two  sisters  have  been  carefully  verified  by  me  in  so  many  other  patients.

“  This  youth,  like  the  present  patient,  can  distinguish  the  touch  of  the  point
of  my  finger  from  that  of  any  other  person,  though  his  eyes  are  always  firmly
closed  and  turned  up,  and  however  much  his  head  is  covered  ;  and  the  touch  of
every  one  else  makes  him  withdraw  his  hand,  unless  indeed  they  are  under  the
influence  of  mesmerism,  and  he  then  is  never  annoyed  by  them.  The  present
patient  disliked  the  touch  of  others  in  even  their  mesmeric  state,  always  frowning,
but  did  not  find  their  touch  cold  she  said,  in  answer  to  our  encpiiries  when  we
placed  the  hand  of  others  asleep  upon  her ;  yet  she  could  not  by  any  possibility
see  whose  hands  touched  her.  Her  attachment  to  me  was  only  to  me  as  her  mesmer-
iser ;  since,  last  Sunday  (June  23),  the  first  time  for  nearly  three  years,  another  per¬
son  than  myself  tried  to  mesmerise  her  :  Mr.  Atkinson  sent  her,  by  pointing  and
looking,  to  sleep  in  ten  minutes :  she  then  smiled  when  he  touched  her  hand,  and
frowned  when  I  did,  sight  being  impossible  :  she  awoke  in  a  few  minutes  suddenly,
without  precursory  symptoms  :  I  then  sent  her  to  sleep  in  one  minute,  and  she
smiled  on  my  taking  her  hand ;  but  the  relation  to  him  that  had  existed  just
before  continued  in  some  degree,  for  she  allowed  him  to  touch  her,  and  was
pleased,  though  her  smile  was  faint  and  she  did  not  grasp  his  hand.  As  soon  as
I  put  my  hand  upon  his,  while  it  lay  upon  her’s,  she  smiled ;  my  impression
actually  being  conveyed  through  his  hand.  We  repeated  these  trials  again  and
again,  with  the  same  results  invariably,  vision  being  impossible.”

The  latter  circumstances  mentioned  in  this  quotation  give  me  an  opportunity
of  remarking  that  the  mesmeric  attachment  has  nothing  sexual  or  sensual  in  its
nature  :  it  is  simple  attachment,  and  much  like  that  of  a  child  to  its  parent  or
nurse,  fearing  separation  and  dreading  all  others.  If  the  mesmeriser  is  changed,
the  attachment  is  equally  strong  ;  and  this  whatever  the  sex,  age,  or  appearance
and  character  of  the  person  who  has  induced  the  mesmeric  state.  Of  course,
dissolute  persons  may  be  mesmerised  and  retain  their  habitual  character  in  the
mesmeric  state  :  but  this  is  not  mesmeric  attachment :  merely  the  manifestation  of
vicious  feeling  at  that  time  just  as  it  might  occur  on  another  opportunity.  If
any  disposition  to  impropriety  is  observed,  a  mesmeriser  should  firmly  refuse  to
mesmerise  the  party  again :  and,  if  mesmerism  would  be  a  mercy  to  the  patient,
a  mesmeriser  of  the  same  sex  should  be  selected.

*  See  a  fine  example  by  Dr.  Engledue  in  No.  VI.,  p.  269  ;  by  Mr.  Topham,
No.  XVIII.,  p.  126,  in  which  only  one  half  of  the  patient  sympathized,  but  with
either  side  of  the  mesmeriser  ;  by  Mr.  Holland  in  a  blind  gentleman,  No.  XVIII.,
p.  140  ;  by  Mr.  Hockley,  No.  XIX.,  p.  307  ;  by  myself,  No.  XIX.,  p.  241 — 6.

These  cases  are  a  full  exemplification  of  the  subject;  and  merit  the  deep  re¬
flection  of  every  philosophical  person.


C  €  2


352


Cure  of  Epilepsy.


putting  cold  water  into  my  mouth.  I  was  thoughtlessly
about  to  give  her  water  when  she  complained ;  but  on  it  being
handed  to  me  I  took  some  myself  before  I  advanced  with  it
to  her,  and  she  to  my  surprise  exclaimed,  “  That  is  nice
and  cool both  of  us  being  relieved  at  once  from  the  burning
sensation.  (No.  XIX.,  p.  243.)

It  is  remarkable  that,  although  raisins  in  the  operator’s
mouth  produced  habitually  no  unpleasant  sensation  in  him,
the  sympathetic  sensation  of  raisins  in  the  patient’s  mouth
was  as  disagreeable  to  her  as  when  raisins  were  in  her  mouth.
Of  course,  I  presume,  if  she  had  not  suffered  uneasiness
habitually  from  raisins  in  her  mouth  and  the  operator  had,
she  would  sympathetically  have  suffered  the  uneasy  sensation
which  he  would  have  felt.

The  phenomena  illustrating  the  great  force  of  imagination
in  the  mesmeric  state  perfectly  coincided  with  those  which  I
have  observed  in  so  many  patients.  In  common  sleep  imagi¬
nation  produces  effects  which  no  force  of  imagination  pro¬
duces  in  the  waking  state.  We  cannot  “hold  a  fire  in  our
hand  by  thinking  of  the  frosty  Caucasus but  Miss  Collins,
when  I  told  her  I  had  given  her  sweet  cake  and  kept  the  points
of  my  fingers  upon  the  organ  of  Alimentiveness,  munched
bitter  aloes  with  exquisite  relish  and  in  a  quantity  which  pro¬
duced  great  subsequent  effects.*  When  Thomas  Russet  fan¬
cied  I  was  a  respectable  young  woman  of  his  acquaintance
with  whom  he  was  taking  a  walk,  I  could  make  him  fancy
that  I  had  given  him  sweet  cake,  whereas  I  had  given  him
dried  worrmvood,  which  he  chewed  and  swallowed  with  delight,
though,  on  my  suddenly  waking  him  after  he  had  been  eating
for  some  time,  he  was  so  disgusted  that  he  ran  out  of  the  room
and  spat  it  all  out  and  vomited. f  The  Okeys  in  their  mes¬
meric  state  wrould  have  fits  of  partial  delirium,  in  which  they
held  conversation  with  an  imaginary  being.  In  a  very  strik¬
ing  state  of  the  elder  Okey,  she  fancied  she  saw  a  beautiful
negro  and  continued  whispering  questions  to  him  and  then
resting  in  silence  for  his  answers.  My  observations  on  this
point  in  No.  XXIV.,  p.  372-3,  may  be  worth  perusing  by
those  who  are  learning  the  mesmeric  phenomena. J

*  No.  XII.,  p.  4G1-2.  This  case,  and  others  in  the  article,  are  a  fine  study  to

the  mesmerist.

f  The  patient  from  King’s  College  Hospital  (see  No.  III.,  p.  340,  &c.),
whose  phenomena  were  so  interesting  as  well  as  his  cure,  though  Dr.  Todd  calls
them  hysterical  only,  and  felt  not  the  least  interested  in  them.  A  pretty  word  is
hysteria  to  enable  us  to  disregard  wonders  of  human  nature.  See  No.  XXXI.,
p.  237.

X  See  also  Mr.  Parsons’s  most  interesting  case,  to  which  my  observations  are
appended  as  a  note.  That  gentleman’s  patient,  a  youth,  uttered  predictions  fan¬
cied  to  be  communicated  to  him  in  a  book  to  which  a  ghastly  figure  pointed.


Theories  of  modern  German  Physiologists.


353


The  augmentation  of  muscular  strength,  and  of  the  force
of  memory  during  the  mesmeric  state,  are  occurrences  seen
by  all  of  us :  and  in  truth  any  faculty  or  power  of  any
part  of  the  brain  or  of  other  organs  may  be  augmented  or
diminished  in  this  state,  as  in  similar  states  not  produced
artificially.

The  benefit  from  holding  the  mesmeriser’s  hand  deserves
attention.  The  good  might  arise  from  the  happiness  expe¬
rienced  from  holding  it :  but  nervous  energy  might  be  posi¬
tively  imparted,  for  we  know  that  healthy,  robust,  active,
happy  persons  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  with  a  warm  fleshy
hand,  produce  far  more  health  in  mesmerising  than  others  :
and  that  some  mesmerisers  who  are  in  apparently  perfect
health  frequently  disagree  with  many  persons,  from  something
discernible  but  not  previously  known  to  us,  or  from  some¬
thing  occult.

John  Elliotson.


Y.  On  the  Psychological  Theories  of  modern  German  Phy¬
siologists.  By  Mr.  B.  B.  Noel,  Bosavitz,  Bohemia.

(Concluded  from  p.  294.)

Amongst  the  other  curiosities,  so  abundant  in  Lotze’s  article,
I  may  as  well  communicate  one,  taken  from  the  fifth  chapter,
“On  the  formation  of  conceptions.”  The  Professor,  treating
of  the  development  of  the  conception  I — of  our  individuality —
says  : — “  The  observation  that,  as  regards  the  existence  of  the
7,  many  of  the  bodily  parts  can  be  dispensed  with,  the  con¬
templation  of  dead  bodies,  and  other  observations,  cause  the
image  ( bild)  of  the  living  body  to  become  insufficient  for  the
expression  of  the  7;  and  in  its  place  the  conception  of  a
constant,  change-outliving,  imperceptible,  thinking  substance
is  formed.  In  this  we  see  the  analogy  of  that  process,  through
which  the  common  perceptions  of  the  senses  give  place  to  the
conception  of  a  thing,  or  of  soulless  substance  per  se.  And,
just  as  this  conception  of  substance  per  se  is  held  to  be  the
seat  of  those  powers  which  operate  in  nature,  so  also  the  ulti¬
mate  cause  of  inward  experience  is  sought  for  in  the  mind
{ seelej .  In  this  manner,  however, — through  the  process  of
thought, — has  only  the  general  conception  of  the  mind  arisen;
and  it  is  not  thus  that  his  I  has  become  clear  to  each  indi¬
vidual.  The  principal  feature  in  individuality  is  not,  there¬
fore,  to  be  found  in  the  mind  itself,  as  a  thinking,  unchange¬
able  substance,  but  in  the  empirical  I  alone.”  A  little  further
on,  he  adds,  “  The  peculiar  tone  of  the  mind,  the  tempera¬
ment,  we  consider  to  be  a  nearer  seat  of  this  sought  for  7.”


354


The  Psychological  Theories  of


It  is  unnecessary  to  waste  words  in  criticizing  the  above
passages.  To  do  so  fully,  I  must  report  more  of  Dr.  Lotze’s
lucubrations  on  the  mind  per  se,  and  on  the  empirical  I.  We
shall  speak  on  the  latter  subject  in  another  article.

Professor  L.,  who  understands  enough  of  the  principles  of
physiology,  of  the  results  of  combinations  of  parts  and  systems,
of  their  mutual  relations,  actions,  and  reactions  on  one  ano¬
ther, — in  short,  of  the  conditions  of  organic  life, — to  reject
the  old  notions  of  a  peculiar  power  of  life  (lebenskraft) ,  yet
w7ill  not  allow  that  there  is  any  analogy  whatever  between  the
facts  and  arguments  which  have  at  length  dispelled  this  phan¬
tasm  of  physiologists,  and  those  which  materialists  bring  for¬
ward  against  the  acceptance  of  a  “peculiar  principle”  or  power
as  the  ground  of  the  phenomena  called  mental.  I  shall,  how¬
ever,  not  take  up  time  with  the  Professor’s  arguments  on  this
head,  for  they  have  no  physiological  wreight,  and  scarcely  any
speculative  interest.

Having  now  shewn  enough  of  the  manner  in  which  our
author  treats  two  of  those  circumstances,  which,  according  to
his  view,  prove  the  necessity  of  the  admission  of  a  “ peculiar
principle”  to  explain  mental  phenomena;  viz.,  the  conscious¬
ness  displayed  in  perceptions,  feelings  and  desires,  and  the
oneness  of  consciousness,  we  come  to  the  third  circum¬
stance, — the  peculiar  freedom  of  action  that  the  mind  displays.
The  Professor  is  obliged  to  confess  that  this  circumstance  is
not  a  fact  of  observation,  but  merely  an  admission.  In  the
course  of  his  argument  he  says  : —

“The  difficulties  which  are  connected  with  the  idea  of  free-will
are  too  great  to  allow  us  to  build  upon  it  our  further  psychological
views.  But,  although  it  is  not  necessary  to  express  here  a  decisive
opinion  on  this  point,  I  should  be  sorry  if  the  declining  to  do  so  were
to  be  thought  to  imply  that,  merely  out  of  reverence  for  generally
received  opinions,  I  disregarded  the  importance  of  the  subject.  It
has  often  been  said,  and  to  me  particularly  in  a  tone  of  reproach,
that  regard  for  freedom  of  will — a  point  we  consider  so  necessary  to
be  acknowledged — should  not  deter  us  from  admitting  the  thorough
dependence  of  the  mind  on  the  body,  and  that  it  must  be  left  to
faith  to  satisfy  our  moral  wants.  Those  who  express  themselves
thus  should  consider  that  this  dependence  is  by  no  means  proved,
and,  apart  from  this  much  contemned  regard  for  our  moral  wants,
that  there  are  difficulties  opposed  to  the  materialist  views  that  have
never  yet  been  overcome.”  Again  he  says:  “All  scientific  investi¬
gations  must  in  the  end  conform  to  views  embracing  the  whole  uni¬
verse,  and  we  must  never  allow  any  science  to  develop  its  doctrines  in
such  a  manner  that,  however  well  they  may  harmonize  in  themselves,
they  should  nevertheless  take  a  direction  in  which  other  no  less  im¬
portant  requirements  cannot  be  satisfied.  I  require  the  investigating


Modern  German  Physiologists.


355


mind  to  employ  its  whole  powers  on  every  subject,  however  unim-
portaut,  and  all  the  requirements  of  the  mind,  not  the  theore¬
tical  only,  to  be  fully  attended  to,  so  that  whenever  scientific  results
do  not  satisfy  all  mankind,  they  should  at  least  not  be  permitted  to
close  the  door  to  further  satisfaction.  In  scientific  investigations  of
nature,  we  are  not  to  be  led  by  our  mere  theoretical  wants,  like
lower  animals  by  a  one-sided  instinctive  idea ;  on  the  contrary,  we
must  consider  that  in  those  analytical  examinations  of  things  where
we  proceed  from  that  which  is  before  us  to  its  grounds,  we  arrive  at
a  plurality  of  possible  explanations,  and  that  it  is  not  the  first  best
suggested  by  impressions  on  the  senses  that  is  to  be  taken,  but  rather
that  we  have  to  choose  that  one  which  agrees  with  our  eesthetical
and  ethical  requirements.  Such  requirements  may  appear  untenable
to  thinking  brain-fibres ,  but  minds  (geister)  will  approve  of  them.”

Such  sentiments  as  the  above  would  sound  very  prettily
in  the  mouth  of  a  mere  speculative  moralist  or  a  divine,  but
are  rather  curious,  to  say  the  least,  as  the  creed  of  a  physio¬
logist.  Professor  L.  backs  out  very  readily  from  the  exami¬
nation  of  the  question  of  free  will  from  the  physiological  point
of  view.  He  does  not  apply  to  it  the  light  of  that  philosophy
which  has  for  its  basis  scientific  research ;  the  experience  that,
in  the  so-called  inorganic  or  organic  worlds,  we  know  of  no
states  or  conditions  of  things  but  what  result  of  necessity  from
foregoing  states  and  conditions.  But,  apart  from  this  ques¬
tion,  it  may  be  asked,  What  is  Dr.  I/s  interpretation  of  man's
sesthetical  and  ethical  wants  ?  There  are  doubtless  some  views
on  this  head  that,  in  so  far  as  the  elements  of  human  nature
and  a  certain  amount  of  the  external  and  social  circumstances
in  which  men  are  placed  are  everywhere  the  same,  may  be
called  universal  and  absolute.  But  we  cannot  deny  that  the
conceptions  of  the  beautiful  and  the  moral  have,  in  the  his¬
tory  of  all  nations,  displayed,  and  do  at  this  present  moment,
amongst  the  most  highly  educated  communities,  shew,  a  vary¬
ing,  relative,  and  individual  character.  What  standards  does
Dr.  L.  set  up  for  his  eesthetical  and  ethical  judgments  in
general  ?  May  they  not  have  been  formed  under  the  influ¬
ence  of  those  objects  and  conceptions  of  beauty,  physical  and
moral,  concrete  and  abstract,  which  in  especial  prevail  in  his
country,  amongst  his  race,  and  which  the  schools  of  art  and
the  schools  of  philosophy  in  Germany  have  embodied  and
taught  ?  And  as  regards  his  condemnation  of  materialism
because  it  will  not  satisfy  our  sesthetical  and  ethical  require¬
ments,  cannot  a  conscientious  materialist  be  of  a  totally  dif¬
ferent  opinion  ?  When  we  consider  the  doctrines  of  spiritual¬
ism  in  their  origin  and  their  results,  we  can,  on  the  one  hand,
acknowledge  their  foundation  in  the  nature  of  man,  and  their
influence  in  the  history  of  his  moral  development.  But,  on


356


The  Psychological  Theories  of


the  other  hand,  we  must  not  overlook  the  dark  side  of  the
picture, — the  awful  crimes,  the  deeds  of  blood,  the  cruelty
and  injustice, — which  have  been  sanctioned  by  blind  faith,
3’es,  even  by  ethical  and  sesfhetical  dogmas.  How  many
naturally  not  cruel  and  depraved  beings,  calling  themselves
Christians,  have  not  regarded  with  indifference,  if  not  with
pleasure,  the  torturings,  the  immolations  of  fellow  creatures,
pronounced  to  be  heretics  or  witches,  and  have  not  believed
that  such  barbarities  were  gratifying  to  their  God  ?  And
even  in  our  days,  despite  the  humaner  views  which  science
has  promoted,  do  we  not  find  narrow-minded  antipathies  and
animosities  grounded  only  on  a  difference  in  belief?*  A  Spanish
lady  of  the  present  day  will  witness  with  feelings  of  agreeable
excitement,  even  if  they  be  tinctured  with  soriie  emotions  of
pity,  the  combats,  the  tortures,  the  agonizing  deaths  of  brutes
and  men,  and  without  doubt  call  the  spectacle  beautiful.
Her  conscience  is  at  ease,  for  no  father  confessor  has  told  her
that  it  is  sinful  to  visit  the  arena  of  the  bull-fight.f  But  I
need  not  dwell  on  this  topic;  for  all  who  have  studied  history
and  traced  the  progress  of  civilization  must  be  aware  that
something  more  than  mere  faith  or  than  hitherto  prevailing
scholastic  dogmas  of  the  ethical  and  msthetical  must  be  taken
into  account,  if  we  would  understand  the  main  agents  in  pro¬
moting  real  virtue  and  happiness.  In  our  times,  especially,
something  more  is  wanting,  for  no  one  who  attends  to  the
state  of  things  in  Europe  can  doubt  that  a  spirit  of  criticism
is  abroad,  and  that,  as  regards  many  ancient  and  once  vene¬
rable  doctrines  and  institutions,  a  process  of  dissolution  is
apparent,  which,  unless  the  sound  education  of  the  people
becomes  the  principal  aim  of  statesmen  and  those  possessed  of
power  and  wealth,  threatens  society  with  fearful  convulsions.
What  is  wanted  is  practical  moral  science,  based  on  the  know¬
ledge  of  man’s  nature,  on  the  principles  of  materialism,  on
the  understanding  of  the  connections  of  things,  of  their  mu¬
tual  relations  in  the  great  causal  chain  of  phenomena.  The

*  Look  at  the  intolerant  feelings  fiercely  raging  in  Great  Britain  at  this  moment,
of  Roman  Catholics  and  Protestants,  of  the  Church  of  England  and  other  Protes¬
tant  sects,  nay,  of  the  various  divisions  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  of  the
varieties  of  Protestant  dissenters,  against  each  other  ;  and  at  the  private  persecution
constantly  at  work  in  conversation  by  every  religious  sect,  both  of  all  the  rest,
and  of  truly  good,  elevated  and  high-minded  men,  who  are  rational  enough  to  uso
with  thankfulness  and  a  strong  feeling  of  duty  the  common  sense  with  which  they
are  endowed.  Read  our  article  on  the  Rev.  H.  Wilberforce,  in  the  number  for
July,  184G,  headed  Arrogance  Unmasked.  He  is  now  a  Popish  priest,  and  was
with  difficulty  brought  to  see  it  his  duty  to  leave  the  Church  of  England. — Zoist.

t  See  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  p.  277,  for  an  account  of  a  visit  of  the  queen  of  Spain
to  a  bull-fight,  and  of  her  attendance  at  church,  and  being  blessed  by  a  bishop
shortly  after.


Modern  German  Physiologists.


357


philosophy  of  necessity  offers  more  practical  lessons  than  any
speculative  theories  founded  on  the  immateriality  of  the  mind.
The  advantages,  the  necessity,  of  moral  conduct  to  the  pro¬
motion  of  happiness — mankind  being  considered  as  a  whole —
are  plainly  demonstrable,  and  arguments  to  this  effect  can  be
supported  at  every  step  by  physiological  and  pathological  facts.
Indeed,  until  the  principles  of  physiology  and  the  science  of
anthropology  be  thoroughly  understood  and  generally  taught,
moral  progress  can  be  but  slow ;  and  there  is  little  chance  of
those  mere  abstract  and  mystical  doctrines,  which  even  now-
a-davs  enchain  the  mind  and  cause  men  to  be  uncharitable  to

v

one  another,  falling  to  the  ground.

But  to  return  from  this  digression,  into  which  the  pom¬
pous  sentences  of  our  professor  of  physiology  about  the  sesthe-
tical  and  ethical  wants  of  man  have  led  me.  In  further  ex¬
plication  or  modification  of  his  doctrines,  he  informs  his
readers  that  he  “  believes  wTe  have  no  right  to  assume  a  pecu¬
liar  principle  for  the  explanation  of  conceptions,  feelings,  and
propensities,  since  the  whole  nature  of  such  a  principle  could
only  consist  in  producing  these  phenomena  in  consequence  of
excitements  from  without.”

“We  must  rather  acknowledge,”  he  adds,  “that  these  faculties
pertain  to  a  subject  already  characteristic  of  itself,  and  which  by  no
means  requires  to  be  always  the  same.”

Further  on,  Dr.  L.,  speaking  of  those  objects  in  nature
that  may  be  presumed  to  be  endowed  with  soul,  says : —

“  It  is  a  difficult  question  to  decide  which  of  their  manifestations
are  to  be  deduced  from  the  attributes  of  spiritualism  ;  which  from
other  sources.”

The  foregoing  extracts,  so  remarkable  for  their  profundity,
lucidity,  and  consistency,  have  been  taken  from  the  first
chapter  of  Lotze^s  article.  In  conclusion,  we  will  glance  at  a
fewr  passages  in  the  sixth  chapter,  “  On  the  mind  and  the
central  organs.”

Lotze  commences  here  by  saying  that  observation  and
experience  form  the  only  means  by  which  to  increase  our
knowledge  of  the  mutual  influences,  the  actions  and  reactions,
of  the  mind  and  central  organs  on  each  other,  of  the  wTay  in
which  these  take  place,  and  of  their  limits.  Here  he  again
speaks  of  the  mind  as  something  entirely  distinct  from  the
body ;  something  which  can  be  stimulated  by  the  latter,  and
can  react  upon  it.  In  several  parts  of  the  work  much  stress
is  laid  on  these  mutual  influences,  and  actions  and  reactions
of  mind  and  body.  There  is  no  difficulty,  according  to  the
principles  of  materialism,  in  understanding  what  is  in  reality


358


The  Psychological  Theories  of


implied  in  such  expressions.  In  the  relations  of  human
beings  to  the  outward  world,  and  in  those  of  the  manifold
parts,  systems,  and  organs  in  the  human  frame  to  each  other,
actions  and  reactions  are  continually  taking  place.  But  men¬
tal  philosophers  and  certain  phrenologists*  are  constantly
dreaming  about  the  actions  and  reactions  of  spirit  and  matter,
of  mind  and  body,  whereby  they  argue  as  if  some  particular
supernatural  power  or  essence — some  mere  phantasm — having
no  analogy  with  sensible  objects,  or  with  the  so-called  impon¬
derables,  were  yet  amenable  to  natural  laws,  and  can  be
affected  by  matter  and  react  upon  it.  It  is  high  time  that
such  absurdities  were  desisted  from  by  men  professing  to  be
students  of  nature.

Lotze,  however;  directly  after  the  mystical  passages  just
glanced  at,  candidly  confesses  that  materialism,  one  point  ex¬
cepted,  is  a  “  clear  and  plain  view.”  The  point  excepted  is  of
course  the  oneness  of  consciousness.  “  Not  the  same  can  be
said,”  he  adds,  “  of  those  views,  according  to  which  the  brain
is  the  organ  or  instrument  of  a  supposed  independent  mind.”
Strange  to  say,  the  Professor  actually  strikes  here  into  the
right  path,  and  he  shews  up  the  absurdity  of  the  orthodox
phrenological  doctrine.  But  he  cannot  march  straightforward,
for  he  delights  in  byeways,  dark  and  tortuous  paths ;  and  he
therefore  immediately  qualifies  his  condemnation  of  the  above
view,  by  adding  that  it  “  at  least  deserves  praise,  for  entering
a  protest  against  the  complete  amalgamation  of  mind  and
body.”  (Has  he  forgotten  his  own  “  unity  of  mind  and  body ,”
his  “  unknown  substance,”  his  u  subject,  combining  psychical
and  physical  attributes  in  one  ?”)  “  When  I  hear  of  an  organ

of  thought,”  Lotze  continues,  “  the  question  immediately
arises,  in  how  far  can  this  action  require  an  organ,  or  in  what
way  can  any  given  mass  of  the  brain,  together  with  its  sup¬
posed  powers,  actually  serve  the  purposes  of  thought  ?  In  the
common  opinions  on  this  question  I  find  no  answer;  for  the
perfectly  brainless  idea,f  according  to  which  particular  mo¬
tions  and  changes  in  the  brain  are  called  thinking,  I  naturally
cannot  allow  to  pass  as  such.”  It  is  rather  amusing  to  find
our  psychologist,  in  his  eagerness  to  vindicate  the  imma¬
teriality  of  thought,  call  the  converse  view  to  his  own  a
te perfectly  brainless  idea.”  However,  those  physiologists  who
actually  regard  the  brain  as  the  mere  organ  of  the  mind,  i.e .,

*  Herr  Struve,  for  instance,  though  an  ultra-destructive  in  politics,  is  very-
conservative  as  regards  the  old  doctrines  of  the  mind.  In  his  German  work  on
Phrenology,  he  attaches  much  weight  to  the  actions  and  reactions  of  spirit  and
matter,  mind  and  brain.

t  German,  “  kopfios ,”  headless  ;  but  brainless  is  the  English  equivalent.


Modern  German  Physiologists.


359


of  a  spiritual  power,  or  what  not,  are’  guiltless  of  the  crime
Lotze  condemns.  Not  so  those  who  use  the  term  mental
organ  in  a  sense  analogous  to  that  in  which  physiologists
speak  of  bodily  organs  in  general;  for  instance,  of  the  lungs,
as  the  organ  of  respiration.  Functions,  thus  abstractedly
conceived,  are  not  elevated  by  physiologists  into  immaterial
powers ;  effects  are  not  mistaken  for  causes.  Lotze  seems  to
confound  two  very  different  employments  of  the  term  organ.
I  long  ago,  in  my  German  work  on  Phrenology,  expressed  my
opinion,  that  there  will  be  much  more  chance  of  physiologists
paying  due  attention  to  Gaiks  discoveries  of  the  functions  of
the  brain,  when  phrenologists  shall  cease  to  speak  of  the  brain
as  the  mere  organ  or  instrument  of  an  immaterial  human
mind.

In  the  course  of  his  arguments  against  organologists,
Dr.  L.  asserts  that  the  formation  of  conceptions,  that  think¬
ing  and  reasoning,  and  all  higher  mental  processes,  will  not
admit  of  the  co-operation  of  the  organs  for  their  explanation ;
nevertheless,  he  adds,  all  conceptions  and  thoughts,  in  so  far
as  their  contents  are  derived  from  outward  perceptions,  cer¬
tainly  do  require  this  co-operation  :  this  much,  and  no  more,
being  shewn  and  confirmed  by  experience.

“  But  the  nerves  do  not  appear  in  the  process  by  which  percep¬
tions  of  the  outward  world  obtain,  and  give  rise  to  subjective  sensa¬
tions,  to  act  as  organs,  properly  speaking,”  continues  our  Professor;
“  their  states  are  merely  the  conditions  which  give  to  the  in  itself
unbodily  sensation  *  in  each  case,  a  particular  character.  This  one
point  is  certain  (?)  with  it  a  second,  but  uncertain  one,  is  connected.
Neither  common  observations,  nor  any  theory  well-founded  in  itself,
force  us  to  admit  that  the  actions  of  bodily  organs  have  anything  to
do  with  conceptions,  in  so  far  as  these  are  acts  of  memory,  and  not
direct  perceptions.  Experience  shews  us  nothing  in  this  respect,  and
neither  anatomical  nor  physiological  observations  support  the  view
that  memory  depends  on  bodily  organs.  This  view,  too,  is  not
necessary  in  itself,  for  it  is  not  the  question  here,  whether  the  mind
shall  learn  the  form  of  a  succession  or  combination  of  external  ob¬
jects — which  to  be  sure  it  could  only  have  done,  in  the  first  instance,

*  Professor  L.,  in  the  chapter  “  On  the  qualities  of  sensations,  ”  develops  at
full  the  theory  to  which  the  words  in  italics  refer.  Sensation  itself,  he  asserts,  is
a  phenomenon  pertaining  only  to  the  mind  ( seele )  per  se.  He  allows,  however,
a  certain  “  proportionality”  between  the  nervous  states  which  act  as  stimulants
for  the  mind ;  modifications  resulting  from  the  varying  tone  of  the  nervous  system
being  taken  into  account,  and  the  contents  of  sensation.  That  “  another  change¬
ful  element,  the  states  of  the  central  organs,  should  stand  between  nervous  pro¬
cesses  and  sensation,  and  have  an  influence  over  the  latter,”  Lotze  holds  to  be
“  thoroughly  improbable.”  The  wondrous  arguments,  the  ambiguities,  the
twistings  about,  in  this  and  all  the  other  chapters,  must  be  read  in  extenso  to  fill
the  cup  with  enjoyment  or  disgust,  according  as  the  reader  may  have  a  turn  for
mysticism,  or  for  scientific  investigations  and  sound  inferences.


360


The  Psychological  Theories  of


through  the  intermediation  of  bodily  impressions ;  the  mind  has  to
reproduce  only  what  it  actually  possesses  in  itself,  and,  without
doubt,  there  is  just  as  well  room  in  it  for  the  variety  of  conceptions,
as  for  these,  like  endless  complications  of  sound-figures,  as  it  were,
to  imprint  themselves  on  the  separate  elements  of  the  brain.

“  In  support  of  the  latter  view,  a  few  extraordinary  cases  only
can  be  brought  forward,  in  which  the  destruction  of  a  part  of  the
brain  has  been  attended  with  loss  of  memory  in  general,  or  of  a
certain  class  of  ideas  only.  We  shall  speak  of  these  cases  presently.
We  repeat  here,  what  we  have  already  admitted,  that  this  view,
however  deficient  in  foundation,  does  not  imply  anything  totally
impossible.  We  can,  if  we  will,  consider  the  mind  to  be  to  that
extent  sluggish,  that  it  never  works  itself  out  of  its  unconscious
existence,  into  a  state  of  consciousness,  unless  motions  of  the  body
stir  its  substance  too  ;  thus  the  course  of  the  associations  and  repro¬
ductions^  conceptions  may,  at  all  times,  develop  themselves,  as  the
chain  of  bodily  changes  becomes  unrolled.  But  if  we  are  willing  to
concede  this  much,  still  the  central  organ  in  this  case  would  only,
through  its  inward  processes,  afford  a  succession  of  influences,  owing
to  which  mental  consciousness — a  thing  existing  of  itself,  and  by  no
means  to  be  thus  explained — receives  its  direction  to  particular
subjects.  And  in  this  case  the  brain  would  not  so  well  appear  as  an
organ,  by  means  of  which  the  mind  thinks,  but  rather  it  might  be
compared  to  a  rudder ,  which  directs  a  vessel  in  its  course,  without
assisting  in  its  onward  progress.  On  the  other  hand,  this  view  (that
conceptions  in  memory  depend  on  bodily  organs)  contains,  if  it  were
to  be  carried  out  consistently,  and  supposing  this  possible,  the  same
concession  which  the  most  complete  materialism  demands,  indeed,
it  may  be  said,  even  a  worse.  He  who  amalgamates  mind  (geist)
and  matter,  has  at  least  ground  for  the  assertion,  that  the  former
cannot  be  without  the  latter;  but  he  who  separates  the  two,  and  yet
allows  the  first  to  dangle  in  this  way  after  the  latter,  constructs
merely  a  machine,  and  cheats  himself  with  the  hope  that  faith  will
work  wonders  and  reanimate  this  abortion  of  science.”

Lotze  continues  in  this  strain  to  express  his  opinions
regarding  mental  organs,  and  sums  up  at  length  as  follows  : —

“We  must  admit  that,  owing  to  changes  which  previously  take
place  in  central  organs,  every  first  perception  of  an  object,  every
first  conception  of  things,  is  forced  upon  the  mind;  neither  necessary,
nor  probable,  though  not  impossible,  is  the  second  view,  that  all
consciousness  likewise  is  a  forced  state  of  the  mind,  forced  in  so  far
as  without  the  continual  stimulus  of  the  ever-changing  nervous  pro¬
cesses  the  mind  would  fall  back  into  an  unconscious  state;  impos¬
sible,  however,  is  the  third  view,  that  the  brain  is  an  organ  which
the  mind  makes  use  of  to  become  capable  of  forming  conceptions  in
general.  It  is  only  by  the  procuring  of  the  materials  on  which
thought  may  occupy  itself,  that  the  central  organ  can,  in  fact,  pro¬
mote  the  purposes  of  thought,  but  no  bodily  co-operations  whatever
■ — the  knowledge  of  outward  objects,  once  for  all,  being  presupposed


Modern  German  Physiologists.


361


—can  ever  promote  the  necessary  connection  in  logical  reasoning,  or
in  cesthetical  and  moral  judgments.  We  see,  therefore,  that  there
cannot  be  any  organ  whatever  which  the  mind  makes  use  of,  but
that  there  are  merely  conditions  on  which  the  direction  of  its  activity
depends.  On  this  account,  I  have  already  stated  the  opinion  that
there  can  be  no  bodily  organs  for  the  higher  mental  states,  since  the
mind  is  bound  to  the  co-operation  of  the  body  only  in  so  far  as  it
may  require  to  receive  impressions  from  without,  and  to  manifest
inward  states  externally.”

But,  even  after  this  resume,  Professor  L.  cannot  resist  the
pleasure  of  dwelling  further  on  this  theory,  and  he  leads  the
patient  reader  into  a  labyrinth  of  arguments  intended  to  prove
that  logical  reasoning,  sesthetical  and  ethical  judgments,  and
other  “  higher  mental  states,”  do  not  depend  on  bodily  con¬
ditions.  I  must  humbly  confess  that  I  have  been  totally
unable  to  find  the  logical  thread  to  lead  me,  through  this  in¬
tricate  psychological  labyrinth,  to  new  scientific  facts  or  sound
inductions.  I  can  find  only  vague  speculations,  inconsistent
hypotheses,  and  tortuous  arguments,  to  escape,  as  it  would
seem,  from  the  consequences  of  strict  physiological  principles.
According  to  Lotze^s  theory,  Caribs,  and  other  savage  and
next  to  idiotic  tribes,  must  possess  logical  reasoning,  sesthe-
tical  and  moral  judgments ;  it  is  some  bodily  hitch  only,  we
presume,  (our  Professor  vouchsafes,  however,  no  special  infor¬
mation  on  this  head,)  which  prevents  these  high  qualities
being  manifested  by  individuals  of  such  tribes,  although  their
minds,  per  se,  always  possess  them.  In  respect  to  insanity,
the  Professor  allows  that  the  above-mentioned  higher  mental
states  are  often  absent ;  but  in  this  case,  lie  adds,  “  the}T  never
can  become  lost  to  the  mind ;  it  is  their  applicability  only,
depending,  as  this  does,  on  the  manifoldness  of  the  world  of
conceptions,  which  may  be  spoilt.”

Some  insight  has  been  already  given  into  Lotze’s  doctrine
that  moral  judgments  are  independent  of  bodily  co-operations.
But  in  another  part  of  his  article,  this,  like  each  of  his  other
psychological  views,  is  considerably  modified,  and  we  find  the
“  perhapses,”  and  “not  seldoms,”  the  “  buts,”  &c.,  again  act¬
ing  a  prominent  part.  “We  judge  morally,”  he  says,  “of
every  action  in  a  twofold  manner;  firstly,  theoretically,  by
subjecting  it  to  our  general  principles,  which  have  an  absolute
value  in  all  men  (?)  secondly,  by  looking  to  the  feelings
called  forth  in  us  by  the  conception  of  the  action  which  has
taken  place,  which  feelings  not  seldom  betray  their  origin  in
bodily  sources.”  He  speaks,  too,  of  “  sesthetical  feelings  ”
being  seldom,  perhaps  never,  entirely  separated  from  “sensual
feelings,”  which  latter  form  “  a  gentle  running  accompaniment


362  Theories  of  Modern  German  Physiologists.

to  the  former.”  And,  even  as  regards  thought,  he  cannot,  en¬
tirely  shut  his  eyes  to  the  fact,  that  this  pure  mental  action
has  something  to  do  with  bodily  states.  On  this  head,  he
thus  enlightens  his  readers  : —

“  A  chain  of  scieritifie  thoughts  does  not,”  he  says,  “pass  ab¬
stractedly  through  the  head ,  without  exciting  a  recollection  of  our¬
selves,  or  without  becoming  perfectly  amalgamated  with  the  picture
of  our  I.  Self-observation  teaches  us,  that  even  in  this  process  the
separate  links  of  the  chain  obtain  for  us  a  certain  objective  clearness,
and  that  we  move  about  amidst  them,  not  without  feelings  of  ease  or
awkwardness,  of  freedom  or  constraint.  Thus  on  the  whole,  even
our  abstractest  ideas  and  trains  of  thought  are  accompanied  by  a  con¬
tinual  symbolizing,  whereby  we  appropriate  to  ourselves  their  import,
by  the  aid  of  sensual  feelings,  and  in  such  a  manner  that  we  seem  no
longer  to  be  performing  an  act  of  pure  thinking,  but  rather  one  of
the  entire,  individual  concrete  I.  In  this  transformation  of  pure
mental  actions  into  such  as  excite  not  merely  the  abstract  mind
(geist),  but  the  concrete  whole  of  the  individual,  we  find  a  ground  of
probability,  that  in  the  acts  of  memory  our  conceptions  are  likewise
accompanied  by  a  weaker  nervous  process,  resembling  that  which
they  would  have  originally  produced  when  the  outward  perceptions
actually  took  place.  But,  we  must  distinctly  add,  this  probability  is
far  from  being  a  certainty,  and  that,  even  if  it  were,  still  conceptions
could  never,  in  the  first  instance,  receive  their  excitation  through  the
nervous  processes,  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  latter  through  the  former(!)
We  are  further  of  opinion  that  the  conception  of  a  red  color,  for
instance,  does  not  reproduce  that  state  of  the  optic  nerve,  or  of  the
optic  central  organ,*  owing  to  which  the  conception  of  a  red  color
would  originally  take  place — although  this  is  not  an  impossibility —
but  rather  the  conception  awakens  the  nervous  affections,  which
moreover  are  always  the  consequences  of  conceptions.  And  it  is
exactly  in  this  sense  that  the  sensorium  would  prove  itself  to  be  an
organ  of  the  higher  mental  actions,  namely,  as  an  instrument  which
these  make  use  of,  to  give  to  their  conceptions  a  higher  degree  of
clearness  and  interest.”

I  fear  I  have  taxed  the  patience  of  my  readers  rather  too
much  in  giving  so  many  extracts  from  Lotze’s  work.  And
yet  they  will  but  suffice  to  convey  a  general  idea  of  his  theory
of  the  “  mind  and  the  mind’s  life.”  It  would  require  volumes
to  enter  into  all  the  details.  The  passages  selected  have  been
translated  conscientiously,  as  regards  the  author’s  words,  and
may  be  said  to  belong  to  the  least  obscure.  We  plead  guilty
only  to  faults  of  style,  in  attempting  correctness  as  to  sense.
To  have  given  a  mere  digest  of  the  Professor’s  theory  would
have  been  a  more  agreeable  task,  had  it  been  possible  to  do


*  Lotze  speaks  in  several  parts  of  his  work  of  central  organs  in  general,  and
in  particular  of  an  optic  central  organ,  and  of  a  central  organ  of  hearing.


Cure  of  chronic  Scrofulous  Ophthalmia.


363


this  in  a  few  words.  The  specimens  communicated  will  suffice
to  shew  that  such  an  attempt  would  be  nearly  as  difficult  as
to  square  the  circle.  In  justice  to  Dr.  Lotze,  we  must
add,  however,  for  the  edification  of  English  readers,  that  he
enjoys  a  vast  reputation  in  Germany,  amongst  this  nation  of
thinkers.

That  such  a  profound  psychologist  should  reject  phreno¬
logy  must  be  taken  as  a  matter  of  course.  One  of  L.’s  objec¬
tions  to  the  science  is  founded  on  the  absence  of  logic  and
consistency  in  the  phrenological  doctrine  that  the  brain  is  a
mere  organ  or  instrument  of  the  mind ;  yet  we  have  just  seen
that  our  Professor  himself  speaks  of  organs  and  instruments
which  mental  actions  make  use  of  to  give  to  their  conceptions  a
higher  degree  of  interest,  &c.  !  This  is  like  seeing  the  mote
in  a  neighbour’s  eye  and  disregarding  the  beam  in  one’s
own.  Lotze  is  entirely  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  there  are
many  phrenologists  who  base  their  doctrines  on  nature  only ,
and  eschew  mere  metaphysical  and  mystical  assumptions.
Lotze  reproaches  the  followers  of  Gall,  too,  with  departing
from  the  doctrines  of  their  master.  “  Gall,”  he  says,  “  never
taught  that  there  are  organs  for  higher  mental  states,  but
tried  merely  to  connect  those  actions  with  particular  central
organs,  by  means  of  which  the  mind  inwardizes  (to  coin  a
word  for  the  nonce)  outward  objects,  and  expresses  outwardly
inward  states.”

We  see  by  this,  how  attentively  Professor  Lotze  must
have  studied  Gall’s  works ;  and  now  we  will  take  our  leave  of

him.

R.  R.  Noel,  Rosavitz,  Bohemia.


VI.  Cure  of  chronic  Scrofulous  Ophthalmia,  by  Mr.  Amor.

Communicated  by  Mr.  Kidd.

“With  a  due  sense  of  the  exalted  power  of  emotion,  imagination,  and  fancy,
we  would,  at  all  times,  discountenance  conduct  tending  to  reverse  the  natural
order  of  things.  In  the  economy  of  God’s  providence,  it  is  clearly  the  rule  that
Mind  or  Intellect  should  govern  the  emotions  and  passions ;  whereas  the  works
and  practices  of  mesmerism  reverse  the  order  of  education,  and  render  the  lower
impulses  of  human  nature  predominant.” — On  Healthy  and  Diseased  Structure ,
and  the  true  principles  of  treatment  for  the  cure  of  Disease,  especially  Consump¬
tion  and  Scrofula  ;  founded  on  Microscopical  Analysis.  By  William  Addison,
M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Wimpole  Street ;  1849;  p.  177.*

“  To  the  Editor  of  The  Zoist.

“  Sir, — 1  beg  to  enclose  you  a  letter  from  Mr.  Kidd,  together  with
the  statement  of  Lydia  Saunders,  the  mother  of  the  little  girl  men-

*  What  is  the  good  man  dreaming  about  ?  The  best  way  to  promote  his  own
interest  1--- Zoist.


3G4  Cure  of  chronic  Scrofulous  Ophthalmia.

tionecl  by  him,  and  to  testify  to  the  truth  of  his  statement;  and  if
you  think  it  worthy  of  a  place  in  your  valuable  journal,  I  should,  as
the  mesmeriser,  feel  delighted  to  answer  any  questions  relating
thereto.

“  Should  any  lady  or  gentleman  doubt  the  cure  of  scrofulous
ophthalmia  by  mesmerism,  I  will  produce  the  little  girl  if  called-
upon  to  do  so,  when  she  can  tell  her  own  tale.

“I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant,

“  13 5,  New  Bond  Street,  “John  Amor.

“  7th  Dec.,  1850.”

“  To  the  Editor  of  The  Zoist.

“  Sir, — I  have,  for  very  many  months,  been  narrowly  watching
the  progress  of  the  newly -revived  science,  called  mesmerism;  and,
being  naturally  of  an  enquiring  mind,  I  have  given  no  inconsiderable
attention  to  the  subject  in  all  its  wonderful  ramifications.  The
‘  cases  ’  which  have  from  time  to  time  been  introduced  to  the  public
through  your  journal,  have  startled  me  not  a  little.

“The  respectability  of  the  sources  from  whence  }7our  information
has  been  derived;  the  signatures  attached  to  many  remarkable  au¬
thenticated  cases  of  cure  by  mesmerism,  when  all  medical  aid  from
the  ‘  old  school’  had  failed;  these  and  many  other  weighty  consider¬
ations,  the  result  of  much  observation  on  my  part,  have  induced  to
the  belief  that  there  is  more  in  the  science  than  meets  the  general
eye, — ‘more  things  in  heaven  and  earth  than  are  dreamt  of  in  our
philosophy.’  Once  a  perfect  infidel,  I  am  now  an  avowed  believer
in  the  truth  of  what  I  have  witnessed  ‘  with  my  own  eyes.’

“  I  will  not,  being  one  of  the  laity,  exercise  myself  in  discussing
the  various  phenomena  attendant  upon  persons  in  a  state  of  mesmeric
somnolency.  They  are  sufficiently  curious,  and  afford  materiel  for
intense  thought, — seeing  that,  after  all  that  has  been  said  about  the
‘  vital  principle,’  and  after  all  that  can  be  said  about  it,  the  question
remains  still  an  open  one, — ‘What  is  it?’

“The  simple  ‘case’  annexed,  is  one  of  a  girl  aged  12,  the
daughter  of  poor  but  respectable  parents,  residing  in  the  New  Road,
Hammersmith.  She  was  seen  one  day,  in  October  last,  seated  in  an
omnibus,  with  her  face  tied  up,  and  her  eyes  partially  bandaged;
the  latter  presented  a  most  appalling  spectacle.  There  were  two
abscesses,  one  on  each  eyelid,  and  the  eyes  were  considerably  in¬
flamed.  The  child’s  face  was  deadly  pale  from  debility ,  and  her
general  appearance  indicated  that  she  was  in  a  deplorable  state  of
suffering.

“  It  so  chanced  that  Mr.  John  Amor,  of  New  Bond  Street,  was
present  on  this  particular  occasion.  Seeing  what  a  miserable  plight
the  poor  child  was  in,  he  kindly  asked  what  ailed  her?  The  girl’s
answers  were  so  simple  and  straightforward  that  Mr.  Amor  felt  par¬
ticularly  interested  in  her  welfare,  and  he  humanely  went  to  see  her
parents  at  once.”

“It  was  then  arranged  that,  if  Mr.  Amor  would  kindly  try  the
effects  of  mesmerism,  the  child  should  come  to  his  house  regularly


by  Mr.  Amor.


365


every  morning  (Mri  Amor  lived  in  the  New  Road)  to  be  mesmerised.
I  heard  of  this,  and,  being  an  intimate  friend  and  neighbour,  felt
pleasure  in  watching  the  daily  and  weekly  progress  of  the  operations.
I  should  here  remark  that  Mr.  Amor,  like  myself,  is  non-profes¬
sional;  that  he  is  perfectly  independent  in  all  his  actions  and  opi¬
nions;  and  actuated  in  all  his  amateur  experiments  by  one  single
motive, — the  desire  of  benefiting  his  fellow-men.

“  When  I  first  saw  the  child,  the  abscesses  on  her  eyelids  it  was
painful  even  to  witness.  Within  a  short  week,  however,  one  of  them
had  nearly  disappeared  altogether,  and  the  other  was  gradually  being-
reduced.  In  ten  days  the  child’s  whole  appearance  had  undergone  a
complete  metamorphosis.  Not  only  were  her  eyes  becoming  c  clean'
and  healthy,  but  her  habit  of  body  was  altogether  changed.  Instead
of  the  attenuated,  sickly  being  I  first  saw,  behold,  there  stood  before
before  me  a  little  plump  damsel,  merry,  playful,  and  animated.  Her
eyes,  too,  had  gained  in  this  short  space  of  time  strength  sufficient
to  enable  her  to  do  needlework  without  any  sensation  of  pain.  A
month  previous,  to  do  needlework  was  with  her  a  matter  of  impos¬
sibility.

“Thus  has  she  progressed  until  the  present  time.  The  ravages
of  the  disease  will  never,  of  course,  permit  her  eyes  to  be  free  from
all  disfigurement;  but  since  they  were  strengthened,  they  have  in  no
degree  ‘  gone  back,’ — which  is  marvellous  exceedingly.  To  renovate
her  stomach,  she  has  had  given  her  one  glass  of  port  wine  daily.  I
need  hardly  say,  the  medical  profession  had  given  her  up  as  ‘  in¬
curable.’

“  Several  of  my  neighbours  accompanied  me  in  my  visits  to
Mr.  Amor’s  house,  and  can  equally  well  attest  the  truth  of  what  I
here  relate.  The  ‘  case’  itself,  as  jotted  down  by  the  child’s  mother,
will  tell  its  own  tale;  but  as  all  these  ‘great  facts’  ought,  for  the
sake  of  truth  and  for  the  benefit  of  society,  to  be  corroborated,  I  un¬
hesitatingly  append  my  name,  and  remain,  Mr.  Editor,

“  Your  obedient  servant,

“William  Kidd.

“New  Road,  Hammersmith,  Dec.  7,  1850.”*

Maria  Saunders,  12  years  of  age,  has  been  suffering  for
years  with  diseased  eyelids,  which  commenced  with  repeated
styes  after  her  vaccination  at  ten  months  old.  I  have  tried
many  things  that  were  recommended  to  prevent  them  ;  but
to  no  effect.  At  three  and  a  half  years  old  she  had  the
measles,  which  seemed  to  cause  severe  affliction.  From  that
the  eyelids  have  been  very  bad,  sometimes  bunches  arising,
eyelids  very  much  swollen,  and,  although  she  has  been  at¬
tended  by  many  medical  men,  such  as  Mr.  Alexander,  Cork
Street,  Dr.  Simpkins,  Curzon  Street,  Dr.  Routli,  Dorset
Square,  and  Mr.  Obre,  Lisson  Grove,  who  drew  the  eyelashes  all

*  For  a  similar  cure  of  ophthalmia  and  references  to  others,  we  beg  our
readers  to  look  at  No.  XXX.,  pp.  194-5. — Zoist.

VOL.  VIII,


D  I)


366  Cure  of  chronic  Scrofulous  Ophthalmia.

out,  and  burnt  the  lids  with  something  which  turned  them
quite  black  and  caused  a  deal  of  pain  every  morning,  with  a
view  of  curing  them,  until  I  could  not  bear  to  take  her  any
more.  I  then  tried  Dr.  Savage,  of  Upper  Gloucester  Place,
for  some  weeks,  but  to  no  avail.  I  was  then  recommended  to
try  Dr.  Stewart,  of  West  Cottage,  South  Bank,  who  strongly
recommended  port  wine  and  new-laid  eggs.  I  had  not  got
it  in  my  power  to  get  that  for  her,  and  finding  his  application
of  no  use  I  left  him.  I  have  tried  many  things  for  their  cure,
such  as  ointment  that  Mr.  Watts,  chemist,  Edgware  Boad,
recommended,  repeated  pots  of  the  golden  ointment,  and
different  eye-waters.  She  has  been  to  the  Eye  Institution  in
the  New  Boad,  as  out-patient  to  the  University  College
Hospital,  Gower  Street,  and  to  Dr.  Epps,  and  all  to  little
or  no  good.  I  went  to  Dr.  Malan,  the  homoeopathist,  who
told  me  there  was  no  cure  in  the  old  school  for  that  disease,
and  that  he  could  not  cure  it.  I  at  length  resolved  on  going
to  no  more  medical  men,  but  merely  keep  them  clean  and
trust  to  Providence.  (Signed)  Lydia  Saunders,

Mother  of  the  child.

Starch  Green,  Hammersmith.

NOTE  BY  THE  ZOIST.

This  cure  was  a  mere  coincidence — a  mere  post  hoc ,  without  any
propter  hoc  ;  just  like  Miss  Martineau’s  own  cure  and  all  the  other
mesmeric  cures  recorded  in  our  eight  goodly  volumes.  No  rational
being  would  think  otherwise.  u  Certainly  not says  the  Athenceum  :
u  Certainly  not”  says  the  Lancet:  “  Certainly  not,”  says  the  Me¬
dical  Gazette :  11  Certainly  not  ”  says  the  Medical  Times :  u  Certainly
not,”  says  the  Institute  :  u  Certainly  not  ”  says  every  teacher  to  his
pupils :  u  Certainly  not,”  says  the  family  doctor  to  the  mother  of  the
family, — “  cer-tain-ly  not,  ma’am  :  and  those  who  think  mesmerism
had  any  share  in  the  cure  are  weak-minded  persons,  not  fit  to  be
consulted.  Besides,  ma’am,  mesmerism  always  debilitates,  and  causes
irritation  of  the  brain :  and  is  very  dangerous  :  and  what  is  more,
ma’am,  it  is  complete  humbug.  I  should  be  ashamed  to  look  into
the  subject,  for  Sir  Vinegar  Won’tsee,  Sir  Fiddle-faddle  Coldheart,
Dr.  Curechest,  Dr.  Curenerves,  Dr.  Cureliver,  Dr.  Curekidney,  Dr,
Hurryon,  Dr.  Plausible,  Dr.  Holyman,  and  every  leading  consulting
physician  and  surgeon  in  town  and  country,  all  who  will  live  long
after  they  are  dead,  ma’m,  though  I  cannot  hope  for  so  much,  albeit
I  have  sent  some  interesting  trifles  to  the  journals  and  seen  my
medical  speeches  in  print,  all  laugh  at  it,  I  assure  you,  ma’am.”

We  can  imagine  Mr.  Amor,  when  standing  at  his  door  in  Bond
Street,  and  seeing  the  endless  sons  of  Esculapius  hurrying  along,
some  in  aristocratic  vehicles,  some  in  humble  ones,  and  some  on  foot,
smile  at  the  consciousness  of  his  knowing  important  facts  in  phy¬
siology  and  pathology,  and  powerful  methods  of  alleviation  and  cure,
all  which  are,  to  the  cruel  misfortune  of  their  patients,  totally  un-


The  Historical  Relations,  §c.  367

known  to  them.  We  could  excuse  him  for  saying  loud  enough  to  be
heard,

“  Omnia  vincit  Amor  —

The  time  will  come  when  all  medical  persons  who  may  happen  to
hear  him  must  finish  the  verse  and  say,

“  —  et  nos  cedamus  Amori.”

Virgil.  Eclog.  x.


VII.  Account  of  “  The  Historical  Relations  of  ancient  Hindu
with  Greek  Medicine  in  connection  with  the  study  of  modern
Medical  Science  in  India  :  being  a  general  Introductory
Lecture  delivered  June,  1850,  at  the  Calcutta  Medical
College.  By  Allan  Webb,  M.D.,  author  of  the  Pathologia
Indica;  Surgeon  Bengal  Army,  Professor  of  Descriptive
and  Surgical  Anatomy,  lately  offg.  Professor  of  Medicine
and  Clinical  Medicine.  Calcutta,  1850.”  Communicated
by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Quackery.

“  It  will  form  no  part  of  our  policy  to  ignore  the  existence  of  any  species  of
quackery,  until  it  is,  indeed,  wholly  suppressed.  It  is  our  intention  rather  to
grapple  with  its  hydra  heads  in  detail.  Mesmerism,  doubtless,  finds  many  be¬
lievers  still.  Faith  is  a  normal  principle  of  the  human  mind ;  we  instinctively
believe  everything  which  is  confidently  related ;  it  is  only  by  painful  experience
that  we  come  to  doubt  of  alleged  facts,  when  we  have  discovered  the  infinite
variety  of  motives  which  actuates  men  to  practise  deception.  The  followers  of
Mesmer  continue  t-o  make  bold  assertions,  and  to  find  unwary  persons  to  receive
them  as  truths.  Amid  the  multitude  of  subjects  claiming  the  study  of  young
medical  men,  it  is  no  wonder  that  they  can  give  no  time  to  the  history  of  frauds.
So  long  as  there  are  living  exponents  and  upholders  of  them,  with  address  and
talent,  so  long  will  there  be  inadvertent  disciples.

“  Thus  it  is  with  the  question  before  us.  Our  respected  correspondent,  Dr.
D’Alquen,  whose  letter  we  print  in  another  column,  claims  our  notice,  as  he  is
certainly  an  example  of  a  class  in  the  profession,  not  large  indeed,  but  still
respectable,  who,  for  various  reasons,  entertain  the  opinion  that  there  is  actually
something  in  mesmerism.  We  pledge  ourselves,  before  we  lay  aside  the  subject,
to  shew  that  there  is  nothing  but  the  old  staple  of  all  quackery — bold  assertions,
half-observed  facts,  and  multifarious  inventions.

“  At  the  foundation  of  the  whole,  lies  the  allegation  that  certain  phenomena
may  be  elicited  by  and  upon  certain  favoured  individuals  of  the  human  race,
which  phenomena,  although  purely  physical,  wholly  fail  to  appear  when  others —
and  these  a  majority  of  mankind — are  operated  on.  Here  is  a  contradiction  at
once  to  all  physical  science,  and  a  case  calling  for  an  entirely  new  set  of  rules  for
our  scientific  logic.  If  chemical  affinities  only  manifested  themselves  in  the
hands  of  individual  philosophers  ;  if  the  electric  shock,  or  the  magnetic  motion  of
the  needle,  only  shewed  themselves  at  the  bidding  of  one,  or,  at  most,  a  few
persons  scattered  widely  through  time  or  space ;  then  we  might  listen  to  an
account  of  other  physical  phenomena  equally  marvellous.  But  surely  it  must  be
at  once  perceived  that  any  man  pretending  to  be  able  to  elicit  actions  or  pro¬
perties  from  natural  agents,  which  refuse  to  appear  at  the  bidding  of  others,
throws  the  question  of  his  credibility  at  once  back  upon  his  personal  character.*
We  must  ask,  is  he  honest  and  trustworthy  ? — is  he  credulous  and  deceivable  ? —
can  we  be  sure  he  is  neither  deceived  nor  capable  of  attempting  to  deceive  us  ?
Nothing  of  this  kind  is  applicable  to  true  science.  The  greatest  rogue  in  Chris-

*  Opium  always  causes  sleep,  purgatives  always  act,  people  are  all  sick  at
sea.— J.  E.


D  1)  2


368


The  Historical  Relations  of


tendom  might  discover  a  new  metal,  or  a  new  test  for  arsenic.  The  experiment
would  only  have  to  be  repeated,  to  fix  the  fact  in  the  records  of  science  for  ever.
Nothing  alleged  of  mesmerism  is  similar.  We  are  referred  to  what  Mesmer  did
(and,  by  the  way,  we  may  observe  it  is  our  intention  to  shew  the  character  of  that
miscreant  to  our  readers  in  a  future  article ;  we  are  told  what  has  been  done  in
Calcutta ;  what  was  once  done  somewhere  or  other ,  not  what  may  be  demonstrated
anywhere  with  due  precaution  and  ordinary  skill  !  We  are  not  speaking  of
miracles,  as  we  apprehend  mesmerisers  do  not  pretend  to  miracles  in  the  ordinary
acceptation  of  the  word.

“  To  return  to  our  correspondent,  does  he  think  that  Dr.  Elliotson  quitted
his  position  at  University  College  on  a  question  of  mere  professional  etiquette  ?
If  so,  we  refer  him  to  the  Lancet  of  the  period,  and  he  will  see  reason  to  change
his  opinion.  Mesmerism  actually  began  an  alliance  with  demonology  !  Whilst,
at  the  same  time,  the  attempt  was  made  to  shew  that  the  alleged  phenomena
followed  the  usual  course  of  science  by  subjection  to  the  influence  of  various
metals.  All  its  pretended  facts  were  scattered  to  the  winds  by  the  application  of
a  little  common  sense,  and  a  few  experiments  made  by  Mr.  Wakley.  For  which
service  he  has  our  thanks.

“  Dr.  D’Alquen  quotes  a  passage  from  Dr.  Forbes ;  but  does  he  forget,  or  did
he  never  hear  of  the  exposure  of  the  fraud  attempted  by  a  certain  Alexis,  by
that  physician.  We  suspect,  that  the  passage  quoted  from  Dr.  Forbes  was
written  before  the  adventure  in  question.  It  would  be  more  to  the  point  to  have
his  present  opinion.  Is  it  possible  to  receive  the  testimony  of  persons  once  so
exposed,  so  convicted  of  either  incompetency  to  deal  with  physical  science,  or
unfaithfulness  to  the  holy  cause  of  truth  and  honesty  ?  We  think  not,  and  there¬
fore  reject  as  fabulous  the  alleged  power  of  ‘  manipulations  ’  and  ‘  passes,’  to
render  any  one  insensible  to  the  pain  of  surgical  operations.  We  have  now
several  definite  physical  agents,  ether,  chloroform,  &c.,  to  effect  this  purpose
completely ;  but  the  influence  of  these  anaesthetics  gives  no  support  to  the  power
of  mesmerism.” — The  Institute:  a  weekly  medical  journal,  Nov.  30,  1850.*

This  lecture  was  published  at  the  request  of  the  Council  of
Education  of  India.  It  opened  the  16th  Session  of  the  Cal¬
cutta  Medical  College,  which  was  instituted  in  1835.

“  The  finest  medical  education  is  freely  offered  gratis,  to  all  com¬
ers  ;  of  whatever  creed,  of  whatever  caste,  of  whatever  clime.  No
wonder  where  all  is  thus  freely  given,  that  we  find  this  goodly  gath¬
ering  of  students,  of  all  kindreds,  and  countries  around  us.  From
the  Punjab  to  the  Burman  Empire,  from  Ceylon  to  the  snowy  moun¬
tains  of  the  north,  our  young  men  assemble  here  ;  without  any  other
jealousy  than  that  of  professional  honour,  any  other  distinction  than
that  of  science.  All  are  equally  welcome,  equally  rewarded,  equally
respected,  if  they  do  well.”

The  Bishop,  in  his  address  upon  the  Queen's  birthday,
said, —

“  Her  Majesty  will,  we  are  persuaded,  be  also  pleased  to  learn,
that  the  Indian  Government  has  succeeded  in  a  truly  wonderful  man¬
ner  in  diffusing  through  the  land  the  soundest  principles  of  medical
science ;  that  graduates  are  being  educated  at  the  Medical  College  in
a  manner  not  inferior  to  some  of  the  most  celebrated  schools  of  medi¬
cine  in  Europe  ;  and  that  their  skill  and  talents  are  successfully  ex¬
erted  for  the  mitigation  of  human  suffering,  in  the  various  dispen¬
saries  of  thp  provinces. ”f

*  See  p  377 .  —  Zoist.  f  Christian  Intelligencer,  June,  1850.


Ancient  Hindu  with  Greek  Medicine.


369


Dr.  Webb  states  that  the  ancient  Hindoos  were  far  behind

\

the  Greeks  in  anatomical  knowledge  :  but  that  both  nations
were  upon  a  level  in  physiology,  though  there  is  little  doubt
of  the  Greeks  having  derived  their  systems  of  philosophy
and  medicine  from  the  Hindoos.  Galen,  the  Greek  physician,
who  flourished  in  the  reign  of  the  Roman  emperor,  Hadrian,
taught  from  his  own  experiments

“  That  the  nerves  were  not  ligaments  as  they  seemed  to  be  to
others,  but  conductors  of  sensation  and  motion,  by  means  of  a  subtle
animal  spirit,  passing  through  their  tubes  :  that  the  arteries  and  left
ventricle  of  the  heart  contained  blood,  not  air,  as  was  then  believed
and  for  a  thousand  years  afterwards,  until  our  great  countryman,
Harvey,  reproduced  proofs  to  the  contrary,  derived  from  Galen.
Again,  that  the  lungs  got  rid  of  the  fuliginous  part  of  the  blood ;
that  blood  in  the  veins  was  darker  than  that  in  the  arteries  ;  that
anastomosis  took  place  between  the  extreme  vessels ;  lastly,  that  the
valves  of  the  heart  prevented  regurgitation  of  blood,  was  distinctly
asserted  by  him.  When  we  see  him  proving,  in  spite  of  all  cavil,
that  the  voice  did  not  proceed  from  the  head  as  Zeno  declared,  but
from  the  larynx ;  that  arteries  do  not  degenerate  into  nerves  as  Prax-
agoras  affirmed  ;  that  the  heart  is  not  the  seat  of  intelligence,  as
said  to  be  by  Chrysippus,  but  the  brain ;  that  the  carotid  arteries  do
not  carry  spirit  to  the  brain  as  Erasistratus  maintained,  but  blood  ;
when  we  see  bones  and  ligaments,  joints  and  muscles,  and  viscera
and  senses  described,  reverentially  admired,  and  understood,  we  are
constrained  to  admit  that  he  was  really  worthy  of  that  glorious  esti¬
mation  in  which  he  was  held  :  a  fame  to  which  no  one  in  our  profes¬
sion  has  since  attained.  For  to  the  right  methods  of  investigation
which  Galen  introduced,  i.  e.,  experiment  as  opposed  to  conjecture,
medicine  owes  its  establishment  as  a  science,  and  its  emancipation
from  false  theories  and  absurd  conceits.  Grand  steps  are  these  which
I  have  enumerated  towards  our  present  physiology  ;  few  of  which
appear  to  have  been  known  to  the  Hindoos. — They  knew,  however,
of  the  existence  of  the  lacteals  which  he  did  not ;  nor  we  either,  until
1615.  They  asserted  that  the  chyle  (globule)  got  its  red  colour  in
the  spleen,  which  is,  I  think,  probable.

“  But  so  prodigious  are  the  attainments  of  some  men  now-a-day,
so  intuitive  their  ‘  subjanta  genius ,’  that  they  exclaim  against  the
folly  of  searching  out  medical  opinions  before  the  time  of  John  Hunter!
John  Hunter  was  a  great  man,  Astley  Cooper,  and  John  Abernethy
too  were  eminent,  but  they  might  have  learned  from  a  greater  still.
Both  these  surgeons  taught  that  a  broken  spine  was  incurable.  So
I  believed ;  but  tried  to  reduce  one  once,  here,  in  Calcutta,  and
cured  my  patient.  But  when,  elated  with  my  success,  I  was  about
to  publish  this  novel  and  wonderful  case,  I  found  Galen  had  been
before  me,  had  got  it  all  in  ehis  book  ’  I  remember  too  a  case  (not
mine,)  of  removing  a  piece  of  the  sternum,  and  so  exposing  the
heart,  to  relieve  matter  pressing  upon  it  behind  the  bone.  This
was  quoted  as  a  daring  feat  of  modern  surgery.  I  found  it  done  six¬
teen  centuries  ago ;  and  old  Galen  rather  glorifies  himself  thereupon.


370


The  Historical  Relations  of


“  For  one  thousand  years  at  least,  wherever  medicine  was  taught
as  a  science,  the  works  of  Galen  were  appealed  to  as  infallible.  With
a  regard  not  less  reverential  than  that  of  the  Hindoos  for  their  Vedas
and  Shastras,  did  the  Christian  world  of  Europe,  and  the  Moslem
world  of  Asia,  look  to  him,  as  respects  matters  medical.  He,  and
Avicenna  his  successful  imitator,  were  the  chief  authorities  upon  me¬
dicine  during  that  long,  dark  night,  when  monkish  superstition  over¬
shadowed,  and  well-nigh  extinguished  in  Europe,  the  light  of  science.
The  invention  of  printing  in  1440,  and  the  glorious  Reformation,
dispelled  this  Egyptian  darkness.  The  mind  of  Europe  awoke.  But
no  such  light  broke  upon  India.  Until  the  institution  of  this  Col¬
lege,  as  regards  the  science  of  medicine,  India  had  not  advanced  one
step  since  invaded  by  Alexander.  In  Europe  even,  those  powerful
levers  of  modern  medical  science,  chemistry  and  the  microscope,  have
but  lately  burst  open  the  hidden  secrets  of  physical  existence,  and
finally  dispelled  the  elemental  theory.  ‘  How  little  progress  had
been  made  till  a  very  recent  period  in  the  examination  of  the  nature
of  bodies  as  opposed  to  their  movement,  may  be  well  understood
from  this  fact,  that  in  the  popular  works  on  science  which  were  in
circulation  in  our  own  childhood,  fire,  air,  earth,  and  water,  were
still  represented  as  the  four  elements  of  the  universe.  To  what  point
the  inquiry  into  these  subjects  may  be  carried  hereafter,  it  seems
impossible  to  anticipate;  the  doctrine  of  atoms  appears  indeed  to  be
bringing  us  to  the  very  elements  of  physical  existence;  while  the
study  of  the  phenomena  of  electricity,  of  magnetism,  and,  above  all,
of  what  is  called  animal  magnetism,  seems  to  promise  that  in
the  course  of  years,  or  it  may  be  of  centuries,  we  may  arrive  at  some
glimpses  of  a  yet  higher  mystery,  the  relations  of  physical  and  moral
existence  towards  each  other,  and  the  principle  of  animal  life.’*

“  During  these  middle  ages  little  was  added  of  importance  to
medical  science.  India  was  perhaps  in  advance  of  Europe  as  respects
practical  medicine.  Anatomy  was  not  taught  by  dissections  till,  in
1315,  Mondini  di  Luzzi  publicly  demonstrated  at  Bologna  in  Italy.
The  Arabs,  more  strictly  fettered  by  their  religious  creed  than  the
Hindoos,  were  prohibited  absolutely  from  the  practical  study  of
anatomy;  whatever  they  did  know  upon  the  subject  they  derived
from  the  Greeks,  and  Galen  was  their  chief  authority.  For  many
years  after  I  became  attached  to  this  College,  the  students  who
formed  the  great  majority  of  the  Hindoostani  class,  being  Mahome-
dans,  it  was  supposed  impossible  to  engage  them  in  practical  dissec¬
tions.  Many  an  earnest  consultation  have  I  had  with  Pundit
Moodoosoden  Guptoo  upon  this  subject.  He  was  sanguine  of  success
as  respects  them,  if  in  dissection  they  should  be  allowed  the  same
opportunities  with  the  English  class.  When  the  dissecting-rooms
were  placed  by  Government  under  my  charge,  the  wish  of  my  good
friend  was  accomplished;  and  he  did  succeed,  with  one  or  two  excep¬
tions,  in  engaging  the  military  students  of  the  class  in  actual  prac¬
tical  dissections.  I  had  at  that  time,  and  have  often  had  it  since,
the  great  satisfaction  of  recording  publicly  the  efficient  attainments

*  Divisions  and  Mutual  Relations  of  Knowledge.  A  Lecture,  by  T.  Arnold,
D.D.,  Rugby,  1839.  p.  11.


Ancient  Hindu  with  Greek  Medicine.


371


of  this  class  of  students.  Taught  in  the  Oordoo  language,  their  only
manual  of  anatomy,  the  notes  they  had  taken  at  the  Pundit’s  lec¬
tures,  the  admirable  perseverance  of  these  young  men  overcame  all
difficulties  under  the  kindly  guidance  of  their  preceptor.  This  Col¬
lege  achieved  another  triumph,  and  Pundit  Moodoosoden  Guptoo
gained  another  laurel,  when  for  the  first  time,  in  India  at  all  events,
Mahomedans  were  seen  in  classes,  engaged  in  dissections  ;  studying
anatomy  in  their  own  language.”

Dr.  Webb  next  says  that  practical  medicine  has  been
thought  to  have  attained  to  greater  eminence  among  the  an¬
cient  Hindoos  than  the  ruins  of  their  knowledge  of  disease
would  lead  us  to  suppose.  Greeks  and  Arabs  borrowed  from
their  materia  medica ;  and  cures  of  epilepsy  and  leprosy  are
said  to  be  effected  at  present  by  combinations  of  drugs  of
great  antiquity.

u  But  among  the  ruins  of  ancient  Hindoo  medicine ,  the  practice
of  mesmerism  may ,  I  think ,  be  mentioned  as  most  curious.  B  v  passes
and  breathings  those  itinerant  priests  of  Esculapius,  the  c  Jhar  phon-
knawallas,'  profess  to  cure,  and  do  cure,  rheumatism,  palsy,  epilepsy,
just  such  as  mesmerism  is  known  to  cure.  Assiduously  muttering
their  munters,  they  yet  continue  to  make  passes  from  head  to  foot ;
the  body  of  the  operator  being  kept  steadily  in  contact  or  relation
with  his  patient.  To  these,  and  these  only,  may  be  fairly  attributed
the  cure.  And  so  general  is  the  practice,  that  there  is  hardly  a
village  in  India  in  which  it  does  not  exist.

“In  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  so  successfully  esta¬
blished  by  Government  in  this  city  under  the  super¬
intendence  of  Dr.  Esdaile, — you  have  all  witnessed,  or

YOU  MIGHT  HAVE  DONE  SO  AT  ANY  TIME  THESE  LAST  TWO

YEARS, - THE  POWER  OF  ANIMAL  MAGNETISM  TO  RENDER  THE

HUMAN  FRAME  ABSOLUTELY  INSENSIBLE  TO  PAIN  DURING  THE
MOST  FORMIDABLE  OPERATIONS  OF  SURGERY.  But  wliat  is  of

still  more  importance,  you  might  have  seen  also  the  power  of  this
subtle  agent  to  cure  different  forms  of  paralysis.  A  Hindoo  student
was  brought  to  me  as  acting  professor  of  medicine  by  one  of  your
fellow  students,  probably  now  present,  from  a  place  some  twenty-five
miles  off.  The  patient  could  express  himself  by  writing  in  Persian  or  in
Bengali,  but  had  been  dumb  for  a  year  and  a  half ;  after  coma  and
fever.  The  tongue  was  immoveably  retracted.  He  was  said  to  have
consulted  in  vain  the  most  eminent  physicians  in  this  city.  I  advised
mesmerism,  the  liberality  of  Dr.  Esdaile  provided  means,  he  was
cured  in  his  hospital  by  his  native  mesmerisers  in  about  a  fortnight  ;
and  can  now  speak  as  well  as  ever  he  did.  This  is  not  a  solitary
instance.

“  The  practicability,  which  has  been  daily  demonstrated  in  the
Mesmeric  Hospital  in  this  city,  of  performing  the  most  dreadful
operations  of  surgery  without  pain  to  the  patient,  must  be  regarded
as  the  greatest  medical  triumph  in  our  own  days.  I  cannot  now  recall
without  astonishment  at  what  I  witnessed  the  extirpation  of  a  can-


372


The  Historical  Relations  of


cerous  eye,  while  the  man  looked  at  me  unwinkingly,  unflinchingly,
with  the  other  eye.  Another  man  looked  dreamingly  on  with  half-
closed  eyes,  the  whole  time  of  an  operation,  even  whilst  I  examined
the  nature  of  the  malignant  tumor  I  had  removed,  and  then  having
satisfied  myself,  concluded  the  operation.  The  use  of  chloroform
and  other  anaesthetic  agents ,  which  are  universally  adopted  now ,  fol¬
lowed  as  necessarily  upon  the  discovery  of  the  anaesthetic  power  of
animal  magnetism ,*  as  did  the  use  of  the  ligature  to  suppress  bleed¬
ing ,  upon  the  discovery  of  the  circulation.  Now  the  surgeon  being
able  to  command  the  effusion  of  blood  either  by  pressing  upon  the
blood-vessels  or  by  tying  them,  and  by  mesmerism  or  chloroform
to  render  his  operation  painless,  there  seems  but  little  left  to  desire
in  surgery  but  real  anatomical  skill.”

What  must  be  the  astonishment  of  the  English  public  on
reflecting  that,  while  such  an  honest  and  enlightened  lecture
has  been  delivered  in  Asia,  and  hundreds  of  painless  operations
performed  under  mesmerism,  together  with  surprising  cures,
our  English  College  of  Physicians  and  all  our  medical  journals
have  remained  in  wilful  darkness,  and  been  pouring  forth  the
most  ignorant  and  vulgar  abuse,  and  mesmerism  been  scouted

*  “This  term  is  used  by  me,  as  more  intelligible  to  the  students  than  that

£  Animal  odyle,  or  odylic  influence ,’  which  has  been  substituted  by  Baron
Von  Reichenbach,  (see  Researches  on  Magnetism,  part  I.  p.  164,)  in  a  work
which  has  done  more  to  clear  up  the  study  of  what  I  must  once  again  call
animal  magnetism  than  any  thing  ever  yet  attempted.  This  ‘  odylic  influence ’
is  quite  as  powerfully  developed  in  a  crystal  as  in  a  magnet.  The  human  hand
may  be  charged  with  it  from  a  crystal  or  a  magnet ;  but  the  hand  charged  will
not  attract  iron  filings,  neither  will  the  crystal :  therefore,  although  like  mag¬
netism  it  is  yet  different.  It  is  luminous  in  the  dark,  in  the  magnet,  the  crystal,
and  the  human  hand:  and  howsoever  obtained,  from  digestion,  chemical  decom¬
position,  the  sun’s  rays,  from  heat,  or  from  electricity,  its  lambent  light  is  seen
by  sensitive  eyes ,  and  the  power  has  upon  them  its  peculiar  effects.  Many  people
in  Calcutta,  not  sensitives,  saw  light  as  of  fire,  pass  between  the  hand  of  Mr.
Alin  and  the  head  of  his  subject,  whom  he  was  attracting.  This  I  did  not  see,
but  heard  from  their  own  lips.  I  have  seen  in  Dr.  Esdaile’s  Hospital  bodies
charged  ‘  odylically,’  (I  may  not  say  magnetized)  produce  the  same  effect  upon
his  ‘  sensitives’  (Hindoo  patients,)  or  even  more  striking  effects  than  those  re¬
corded  by  the  Baron,  as  seen  at  Vienna.  A  piece  of  paper  no  bigger  than  a
wafer,  charged  odylically,  and  dropped  upon  the  patient’s  hand,  has  rendered  it
insensible,  and  fixed  it  to  the  bed  ;  a  brick  floor  charged  odylically  has  tied  a  man
by  the  leg ;  a  good  stare  at  a  plaster  wall  has  charged  it  odylically,  so  that  a  man
passing  by  and  his  head  placed  against  it  has  been  so  forcibly  attracted  he  could
by  no  means  get  away ;  a  gold  watch-guard  charged  odylically  has  rendered  rigid
and  insensible  any  limb  upon  which  it  was  wound ;  even  a  glass  of  water  charged
in  like  manner  has  had  like  effects.  Dr.  Esdaile  rarely  walks  abroad  without
a  spare  charge  or  two  at  the  service  of  his  friends.  And  some  hundreds  of  the
students  were  present,  when  at  my  request,  and  for  demonstration  at  my  ana¬
tomical  lecture,  he  put  on  his  spectacles  and  charged  by  a  good  stare  a  poor
Cooly  in  the  next  room,  till  he  was  brought  in  insensible  ;  and  every  important
group  of  muscles  demonstrated  on  the  living  body,  in  their  proper  action,  one
after  another : — the  theatre  offering  from  top  to  bottom  a  sea  of  living  wondering
heads,  for  it  had  been  noised  abroad  in  the  College  that  ‘  the  dead  man  was
1 iving’  and  standing  upright !”


Ancient  Hindu  with  Greek  Medicine.


373


from  all  our  medical  and  chirurgical  societies  and  hospitals,
both  as  a  preventive  of  pain  and  a  remedy  of  disease  !

An  epidemic  insanity  has  visited  the  medical  division  of
society,  and  the  rest  now  look  on  with  wonder  at  its  wildness.
“  Why  do  the  nations  so  furiously  rage  together,  and  why  do
the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing  ?”  Truly  the  medical  world
is  sinning  against  nature  herself  and  laughing  her  to  scorn.
The  amount  of  suffering  which  would  have  been  prevented  by
opposite  conduct  in  the  medical  world  can  never  be  atoned
for,  and  will  lie  a  heavy  sin  for  ever  at  the  door  of  the  pro¬
fession.

John  Elliotson.


***  In  our  prefix  from  the  Institute ,  the  writer  says  ;  “To  return
to  our  correspondent,  does  he  think  that  Dr.  Elliotson  quitted  his
position  at  University  College  on  a  question  of  mere  professional
etiquette  ?  If  so,  we  refer  him  to  the  Lancet  of  the  period,  and  he
will  see  reason  to  change  his  opinion.”  Our  readers  will  find  a
portion  of  Dr.  Eiliotson’s  farewell  letter  to  his  class,  in  No.  XVI.,
pp.  420— G: —

“  Entreated  on  all  sides  to  exhibit  the  phenomena,  I  requested
of  the  Council  permission  to  demonstrate  them  in  one  of  the  theatres
of  the  College,  when  this  was  not  in  use.  But  I  was  refused.  One
of  the  Council,  whose  goodness  and  liberality  render  him  an  ornament
to  the  Jewish  nation  and  to  England,  moved  the  reconsideration  of
the  refusal  or  made  a  motion  for  permission;  but  in  vain.  I  hear
that  he  entreated  the  Council  to  witness  the  phenomena  and  judge
for  themselves  as  he  had  done;  but  in  vain.  Yes,  the  majority  of
the  Council,  perfectly  ignorant  of  the  subject,  refused  to  go  to  learn
anything  of  it  before  they  passed  judgment  upon  it;  and  among
these  were  legislators,  barristers,  and  one  physician.  Yet  this  same
Council  gave  permission  for  the  exhibition  of  a  calculating  boy  to  the
public,  at  so  much  a  head,  and  tickets  were  purchased  by  any  one,
as  for  a  concert.

“  On  December  27th,  I  received  a  resolution  of  Council,  from
the  Hospital  Committee, —

“  ‘  That  they  be  instructed  to  take  steps,  forthwith,  for  the  discharge  of
Elizabeth  Okey  from  the  Hospital.’

“  I  immediately  shewed  the  paper  to  the  apothecary,  who  said
that  he  had  known  of  the  resolution  several  days  before,  as  well  as
of  another,  which  I  had  not  yet  received  from  the  house  committee,
viz.,  that  the  practice  of  mesmerism  should  be  immediately  discon¬
tinued.  I  proceeded  to  the  house  of  the  treasurer  of  the  College
and  Hospital,  and  he  informed  me  that  the  second  resolution  had
also  been  passed.  I,  therefore,  at  once  wrote  the  following  letter  to

the  secretarv  of  the  Council.

*


374


Dr.  Elliotson’s  Resignation,  fyc.


“  ‘  Sir, — I  have  just  received  information,  that  the  Council,  without  any
interview  or  communication  with  me ,  has  ordered  my  patient,  Elizabeth  Okey,
to  be  instantly  discharged,  and  forbidden  me  to  cure  my  patients  with  mesmerism.
I  only  am  the  proper  person  to  judge  when  my  patients  are  in  a  fit  state  to  be
discharged,  and  what  treatment  is  proper  for  their  cases.

“  ‘  As  a  gentleman  in  the  first  place,  and  as  a  physician  in  the  next,  I  feel
myself  compelled  at  once  to  resign  my  office  of  Professor  of  the  principles  and
practice  of  medicine,  and  of  clinical  medicine  in  the  College,  and  of  Physician  to
the  Hospital ;  and  hereby  resign  them  all,  and  will  never  enter  either  building
again.

“  ‘  When  I  was  made  Professor,  I  received  a  class  of  90, — the  class  is  now
197, — even  13  more  than  at  Christmas  last  year  :  and,  as  there  were  24  entries
after  Christmas  then,  the  whole  number  of  the  present  session  would,  no  doubt,
have  been  above  220.

“  ‘  I  have  not  received  my  fees  this  session.  It  is  my  wish  that  they  be  all
refunded  to  the  young  gentlemen,  who  are  perfectly  welcome  to  the  lectures
which  I  have  already  delivered.

“  *  I  have  the  honour,  &c.,

“  ‘John  Elliotson.

“  ‘  Conduit  Street,  27th  December,  1838.’  ”

“  You  will  agree  with  me,  gentlemen,  that,  to  hold.,  office  one
moment  on  such  terms,  and  under  men  capable  of  acting  in  a  manner
at  once  insulting  and  irrational,  would  have  been  impossible.  If  I
was  unfit  to  determine  when  my  patients  were  in  a  state  to  be  dis¬
charged,  and  how  they  were  to  be  treated,  I  ought  to  have  been
dismissed.  But,  while  I  held  office,  I  was  to  be  considered  fit  to
judge  of  these  points.  Had  my  colleagues  in  the  hospital  possessed
a  becoming  spirit,  and  felt  what  was  due  to  themselves  and  the
profession,  they  would  have  resisted  this  infringement  of  their  gene¬
ral  rights,  whatever  their  opinion  of  mesmerism,  even  if  they  had
attended  to  it  sufficiently  to  justify  an  opinion.  Indeed  they  were
bound  to  act  thus,  since  they  had  resolved  months  before  in  com¬
mittee,  that  they  acknowledged  ‘  my  undoubted  right 9  to  practise
mesmerism  in  the  hospital.  But  this  I  could  hardly  expect,  since
they  were  so  forgetful  of  academic  propriety,  that,  in  their  lectures
Dr.  Thompson  designated  my  patient  Okey  ‘an  impostor,’  and  Mr.
Liston,  the  bosom  friend  of  the  editor  of  the  Lancet,  called  mes¬
merism  ‘  the  most  impudent  of  modern  humbugs,’  and  indeed  pro¬
nounced  me  to  the  students,  in  a  public  room  of  the  hospital,  to
be  ‘  a  tom-fool.’  The  insult  was  the  greater,  as  I  was  senior  phy¬
sician,  was  thought  to  have  greatly  raised  the  reputation  and  num¬
bers  of  the  school,  and  had  been  the  main  cause  of  the  establishment
of  the  hospital,  although  I  gave  great  offence  at  the  time  to  some
of  the  Professors  for  honestly  pointing  out  that  the  medical  school
was  inefficient  without  an  hospital.  The  conduct  of  the  Council
was  irrational,  since  the  majority  refused  to  witness  the  experiments
upon  a  subject  of  which  they  were  utterly  ignorant,  and  to  have  an
interview  with  me  for  the  purpose  of  enquiring  into  the  business.
They  suspended  a  practice  which  was  perfectly  innocent,  simple,
and  devoid  of  expense,  and  had  worked  and  was  working  many
most  remarkable  cures,  even  in  cases  which  had  resisted  all  other
treatment  and  had  been  sent  out  of  other  hospitals  as  incurable,—
all  which  they  well  knew.  The  College  was  thriving  this  winter  as


Disappearance  of  a  Uterine  Polypus  under  Mesmerism.  375


much  as  last ;  my  class  was  larger  than  ever  it  had  been  at  this
period  of  the  season;  and  the  hospital  was  crowded  with  patients
and  pupils.  The  Council,  completely  unknown  in  science  or  litera¬
ture,  as  they  all  are,  with  two  or  three  exceptions,  proved  themselves
totally  unfit  to  conduct  a  place  of  education,  and  more  especially  one
which  boasted  to  be  founded  on  the  most  liberal  principles  and  to  be
free  from  the  prejudices  of  old  Universities.  They  put  a  blot  upon
the  Institution  which  will  never  be  erased.”


VIII.  Disappearance  of  a  Uterine  Polypus  under  Mesmerism.
By  W.  B.  Mott,  Surgeon,  Devonshire  Place,  Brighton.

“  Quackery.

“  In  the  advertisement  announcing  our  views  and  purposes,  we  have  pledged
ourselves  to  the  opinion,  that  it  is  the  duty  and  the  policy  of  the  profession  to
demand  the  suppression,  or,  at  least,  the  control  of  quackery,  at  the  hands  of  the
legislature.  In  our  second  number,  we  offered  some  reasons  for  the  adoption  of
this  course  ;  which,  if  we  mistake  not,  are  irrefragable.  There  may  be,  we  fear,
many  members  of  the  profession,  and  some  among  our  readers,  who  are  not
convinced  of  the  expediency  of,  or  necessity  for,  new  legal  enactments  of  the
character  proposed.  From  various  causes,  but  chiefly,  we  are  inclined  to  think,
from  amiable  feelings,  they  entertain  a  hope  that  the  force  of  truth,  the  array  of
arguments,  the  production,  and  reiteration  of  facts,  will  alone  be  sufficient  in  the
long  run  to  effect  the  purpose  of  bringing  men  back  to  the  dominion  of  truth  and
reason  ;  that,  at  any  rate,  people  will  not  risk  their  lives  by  relying  on  pretensions
which  have  been  demonstrated  to  be  false  and  fraudulent.

“  If  there  be  one  amongst  us  who  entertains  such  an  opinion,  we  would  point
to  the  present  state  of  that  mean  and  contemptible  delusion — Mesmerism.
Refuted,  exposed,  and  only  saved  from  utter  annihilation  by  the  tenacity  with
which  one  individual,  and  he,  unfortunately,  a  medical  man,  clings  to  it ;  ever
and  anon  it  raises  its  head,  as  if  it  had  received  new  life  and  vigour.  The  com¬
mon  artifice  of  all  charlatans,  from  time  immemorial,  has  been  first  to  delude,
and  then  to  thrust  forward,  some  noble  lord,  some  reverend  simpleton,  or  some
person  with  a  popular  reputation,  as  a  shield  against  attack,  and  as  a  decoy  to
attract  the  vulgar.  Amongst  our  titled  classes,  in  the  offices  of  the  church,  and
popular  writers  of  fiction,  are  found  individuals,  and  such  indeed,  abound  at  all
times,  whose  talents,  and  education  totally  disqualify  them  from  dealing  with
anything  within  the  region  of  fact.  Still  they  are  held  in  great  respect  and
esteem,  and  properly  so,  for  many  virtues,  whilst  they  are  not  proof  against  the
flattery  which  raises  them  into  the  class  of  philosophers,  and  they  become  them¬
selves  both  dupes,  and  ringleaders  of  delusions.

‘‘The  public  press,  unfortunately  without  reflection  on  the  mischief  which
ensues,  greedily  seizes,  to  fill  up  a  vacant  space,  on  any  marvel,  vouched  for  by
names  so  respectable.  The  multitude  read  the  stories  as  established  facts ;  and
where  the  evil  works  and  brings  forth  the  natural  offspring  of  falsehood,  and
error,  and  wffiere  the  limits  of  that  evil  lie,  no  human  tongue  can  tell.

“  So  long  as  these  fooleries  are  practised  upon  the  lower  animals,  we  cannot
invoke  the  aid  of  the  law  to  suppress  them.  But  these  stories  have  a  further
purpose ;  in  the  very  number  of  The  Zoist,  from  which  they  are  derived,
mesmerism  is  represented  as  an  effectual  remedy  against  almost  all  mortal  dis¬
eases.  The  obvious  purpose  of  these  fabulous  stories  of  animals,  is  to  draw  human
victims  to  the  shrine  of  mesmerism — to  lead  unwary  sufferers  to  trust  to  this
nonentity,  instead  of  having  recourse  to  the  art  of  healing  in  the  hands  of  those
who  understand  it.”  .  .  .

“  Let  us,  in  a  few  wrords,  show  the  value  of  these  tales.  Who  is  there  that
does  not  know’  how  utterly  wanting  the  education  of  the  nobility,  and  the  clergy
generally,  is  in  natural  history,  or  philosophy  ?  A  smattering  of  classical  learn¬
ing,  the  myths  of  the  Greek,  and  the  Roman  poets,  a  little  lying  history,  and


376  Disappearance  of  a  Uterine  Polypus  under  Mesmerism*


the  mere  rudiments  of  mathematics,  constitute  generally  the  entire  amount  of
their  secular  information.  No  class  of  men  are  less  capable  of  furnishing  any
trustworthy  testimony  to  natural  phenomena.  The  reputation  of  the  Duke  of
Marlborough  is  neither  for  shrewdness  of  observation,  nor  accuracy  of  judgment.
A  coronet  may  seem  to  place  him  in  a  position  to  impose  opinions  on  mankind ;
but  such  sheer  folly  as  the  above  must  surely  destroy  any  illusion  of  the  kind.
What  is  there  in  the  story  of  these  dogs  belonging  to  mesmerism  ?  What  more
than  any  dogs  of  spirit  would  do,  when  confronted  by  a  gentleman  using  such
foolish  gesticulations,  and  who  kept  fairly  out  of  their  reach  for  1  forty-five
minutes  ?’

“  Next  comes  the  Rev.  T.  Bartlett.  In  charity  we  will  only  say,  that  thirteen*
years  too  often  convert  our  dreams  into  apparent  realities  ;  and  the  reverend  gen¬
tleman  no  doubt  met  with  this  adventure  in  his  easy  chair.  Should  this  meet  his
eye,  and  find  him  unwilling  to  admit  this  inference,  we  invite  him  to  exhibit  his
prowess  on  an  infuriated  bull  in  Smithfield,  before  competent  witnesses.  That
would  convert  us  to  mesmerism.

“  But  what  of  Harriet  Martineau  and  her  cow?  Miss  Martineau  is  a  lady
who  has  earned  a  no  mean  reputation  by  composing  works  of  fiction.  Many  of  her
tales  are  amusing  enough  ;  but  she  has,  to  a  judicious  observer,  perhaps  in  every
one  of  them,  shewn  an  entire  incompetency  to  deal  with  facts  and  figures.  In  one
publication,  written  to  bring  down  to  ordinary  capacities  the  wretched  philosophy
of  the  Benthamites,  this  lady  deals  with  the  ticklish  question  of  population.
Most  innocently  does  she  display  her  fancy  by  assuming  that  children  are  brought
forth  by  litters  in  any  number  short  of  a  dozen  ;  and,  in  order  philanthropically
to  lend  her  aid  to  save  society  from  being  destroyed  by  over-population,  and
mankind  from  the  horrible  necessity  of  feeding  on  each  other,  she  strongly  recom¬
mends  the  employment  of  what  she  designates  preventive  checks,  to  limit  the
number  of  children.  A  reviewer  of  the  day  very  properly  attributes  this  to  the
innocent  ignorance  of  a  young  unmarried  lady  ;  and  advises  her,  instead  of  study¬
ing  Malthus  and  Godwin,  ratios,  progression,  and  such  profound  philosophy,  to
ask  a  few  questions  of  her  mamma.

“  Miss  Martineau  seems  to  have  grown  no  wiser  with  age.  What  is  the
meaning  of  her  joke  about  a  cow  morbidly  imaginative  ?  No  lady  of  that  species,
we  believe,  has  ever  been  accused  of  writing  poetry,  or  fictions  for  children.  But
what  child  does  not  know  that  cattle  will  often  become  frantic  with  terror  at  the
sight  of  an  unknown  object,  with  a  flaring  colour,  especially  red  ?  We  need  not,
however,  have  recourse  to  a  theory  to  account  for  nothing.  That  her  cow  reco¬
vered  by  the  unaided  and  unimpeded  efforts  of  nature,  we  do  Miss  M.  the  credit
to  believe,  or  the  morning  blood-letting  may  have  done  something.  The  whole
story  may  not  be  a  fiction  ;  nay,  it  may  be  forgiven  that  a  lady  should  imagine
that  the  passes  of  her  cow-herd  are  as  efficient  as  those  of  her  correspondent,  the
Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians;  but  that  she  should  permit  the  publi¬
cation  of  such  trash,  and  by  this  use  of  her  name  assist  in  deluding,  and  inflicting
perhaps  irreparable  injury,  on  some  suffering  and  prostrate  fellow-creature,  is  not
alone  to  be  guilty  of  a  folly — it  is  to  commit  a  crime.” — Institute ,  Nov.  9, 1850.

I  was  called,  early  in  tlie  morning  of  June  25,  1850,  to  visit
Miss  T.,  a  lady  about  48  years  of  age,  but  not  appearing  morei
than  35  or  40,  rather  embonpoint  and  healthy-looking.

She  was  suffering  from  ischuria,  attended  with  severe
spasm  and  pains,  resembling  those  of  labour,  occurring  every
eight  or  ten  minutes ;  the  hypogastrium  was  much  distended
and  the  abdominal  muscles  particularly  rigid.  Without  any
further  inquiry  at  the  moment,  I  passed  the  catheter  and
drew  off  about  two  pints  and  a  half  of  natural-coloured  urine,
and  gave  her  immediate  relief,  spasm  and  pains  ceasing  in-
*  The  fact  occurred  in  1817  !  See  p.  298. — Zoist.


By  Mr.  Mott.


stantly.  The  patient  then  informed  me  she  had  polypus
uteri,  which,  upon  examination,  I  found  to  be  the  case.  The
polypus  protruded  through  the  os  uteri  about  three  quarters
of  an  inch,  and  was  evidently  of  a  fibrous  texture.  Upon
asking  what  treatment  she  had  been  under,  I  found  she  had
consulted  several  practitioners,  both  physicians  and  surgeons ;
and  that  in  April  last  she  had  been  to  London  and  consulted
Mr.  F.,  an  eminent  surgeon,  who  told  her  the  polypus  was
not  sufficiently  pedunculated  for  him  to  afford  her  any  relief
(I  suppose  he  meant  by  operation),  and  that  she  must  wait
six  or  twelve  months  before  anything  could  be  done.  She
then  begged  her  sister  to  consult  Dr.  Elliotson  as  to  the  pro¬
priety  of  her  being  mesmerised.  Dr.  E.  recommended  her
to  try  it,  and  kindly  referred  her  to  me  as  she  was  about  to
reside  in  this  locality.

I  commenced  on  the  1st  of  July,  at  half-past  ten  o’clock,
a.m.,  by  longitudinal  passes  from  the  forehead  to  the  feet,
very  slow,  and  continued  for  twenty-five  minutes.  On  July
9th,  after  repeating  this  process  daily,  I  succeeded  in  putting
her  to  sleep  for  twenty-five  minutes ;  and  ever  since  she  has
continued  to  sleep  exactly  that  time  when  subjected  to  the
magnetic,  or  odylic  power  according  to  Reichenbach.  This
treatment  was  persisted  in  every  day,  except  Sundays,  until
Nov.  16th  instant :  an  odylized  saline  solution  being  given
every  morning  in  a  state  of  effervescence  as  a  gentle  aperient,
and  it  invariably  acting  as  such.  By  the  1st  October,  the
polypus  had  receded  completely  within  the  uterus,  and  on  the
15th  instant,  after  a  careful  exploration  with  the  uterine
probe,  it  was  found  to  have  totally  disappeared.

Observations. — During  the  curative  process,  this  patient
had  ischuria  twice,  at  the  catamenial  periods,  from  pressure
of  the  uterus  on  the  neck  of  the  bladder ;  and  so  great  was
this  pressure  that  considerable  difficulty  was  met  in  passing
the  catheter.  At  these  times  her  sufferings  were  very  acute.
When  she  first  came  under  my  care  she  could  scarcely  walk
twenty  yards,  and  generally  rode  in  a  hand  chair;  but,  after
six  weeks  treatment,  she  could  walk  half  a  mile  without
inconvenience.


***  The  proprietor  of  the  medical  journal  from  which  the  deli¬
cious  motto  to  the  present  article  is  taken — its  Mr.  Dilke — is  Mr.
Martin,  surgeon,  at  lleigate,  Surrey,  who  is  responsible  for  all  that
it  contains.  He  says  that  he  wishes  to  raise  the  respectability  of
general  practitioners  like  himself  still  higher  in  the  eyes  of  society  by
his  journal  than  they  are.  The  nobility  and  clergy,  of  Surrey  espe¬
cially,  and  Dr.  Elliotson,  will  all  feel  his  compliments,  and  acknow¬
ledge  his  talents,  information,  modesty,  and  good-breeding. — Zoist.


(  378  )


IX.  Cure  of  Chlorosis  and  Dropsy  with  alleged  diseased  Lung.

By  Mr.  H.  J.  Fradelle,  13,  Seymour  Place,  New  Hoad.

“  The  October  number  of  The  Zoist  indicates  the  good  effects  which  have
attended  our  recent  castigations  of  that  mendacious  journal.  It  now  appears  to
be  writhing,  coiled  upon  itself,  like  a  wounded  snake  in  its  last  agonies.  There
are  evidences  of  its  impending  dissolution  in  every  article  it  contains  ;  and,  while
its  limbs  are  quivering  in  this  enfeebled  state,  it  would  be  the  height  of  inhumanity
to  reapply  the  knout .*  This  organ  of  fiction  set  out  in  a  tone  of  triumph,  trum¬
peting  forth  its  spurious  facts  under  the  pretended  banner  of  philosophy ;  while
now  and  then  it  waxed  eloquent  under  the  inspiration  of  preaching  up  its  own
false  doctrines,  just  as  all  unprincipled  gamblers  become  the  more  desperate  as
the  game  appears  the  more  losing.  But  now,  feeble  and  outworn  in  its  dying
moments,  it  has  scarcely  strength  to  1  make  a  sign/  and  only  sputters  out  a  little
delirious  abuse  on  Dr.  Todd  and  others  who  are  beyond  its  reach.

“  The  Rev.  George  Sandby,  we  presume,  will  pronounce  its  funeral  oration,
Dr.  Elliotson  provide  the  cash  to  erect  its  monument,  and  we  ourselves  will  write
its  epitaph.” — Medical  Times,  Oct.  12,  1850.

Having  been  requested  by  Mr.  Barton,  of  No.  7,  College
Terrace,  Kentish  Town,  to  shew  him  some  experiments  in
mesmerism,  of  the  utility  of  which  as  a  curative  agent  he  was
scarcely  aware,  I  offered  to  try  its  effect  at  his  house  on  any
friend  of  his  out  of  health,  on  whose  veracity  he  could  de¬
pend,  as  more  likely  to  convince  him  of  its  truth  than  any
thing  he  witnessed  at  mine.  He  was  anxious  to  witness  phe¬
nomena  of  a  different  class  to  those  of  cure.  I  promised
none ;  but  relief  from  pain,  should  I  even  not  be  able  to  pro¬
duce  mesmeric  coma.

I  was  introduced,  May  7th,  to  Miss  Sarah  Ann  Orton,
20  years  of  age,  whose  case  Mr.  B.  had  briefly  mentioned  to
me  as  one  pronounced  dropsy  and  diseased  lung,  and  I  pre¬
sently  commenced  mesmerising.  Coma  and  sleep-waking
were  induced  in  thirteen  minutes.  Her  breathing  became
affected  when  the  passes  were  directed  down  the  chest :  I  dis¬
continued  these  and  made  a  few  transverse  ones.  To  the
question,  “Are  you  asleep — comfortable?”  the  reply  was,
“  Yes.”  She  was  easily  awakened,  after  having  slept  more
than  an  hour :  was  unconscious  of  having  spoken.

Mr.  B.  was  now  convinced  :  but,  as  he  was  desirous  of
seeing  more,  I  went  to  his  house  again  a  few  days  after,  and,
finding  on  this  occasion  Miss  O.  still  more  susceptible  to  the
influence,  for  the  coma  was  produced  in  about  three  minutes,
I,  from  taking  an  interest  in  Mr.  B,  took  an  interest  in  the
case  itself,  and  offered  my  services  on  her  behalf.  These  were
accepted.  I  mesmerised  her  till  August  9th,  three  times  a
week  on  an  average.

I  next  inquired  of  Miss  O.,  on  whose  authority  this  state¬
ment  was  made  that  she  had  water  on  the  chest  and  a
diseased  lung  ?  if  she  had  had  medical  advice,  and  if  so,

*  Pray  never  spare  us,  honest  man  !  See  pp.  31,  313.  —  Zoist.


Cure  of  Chlorosis  and  Dropsy.


379


whose  ?  Her  reply  was  the  following,  made  in  the  presence
of  Mr.  Barton,  who  was  present  at  every  sitting.  That  she
had  been  three  months,  last  year,  under  the  medical  treat¬
ment  of  Dr.  Allen,  of  Islington  :  that  he  had  not  told  her  of
the  nature  of  her  complaints,  but  mentioned  it  as  being  water
on  the  chest  and  diseased  lung  to  a  female  friend  who  accom¬
panied  her,  and  from  whom  she  heard  it.  Dr.  A.  in  applying
the  stethoscope  to  the  left  lung  had  not  said  anything,  but
merely  shaken  his  head.  She  was  then  in  a  state  of  great
debility,  as  she  had  continued  ever  since.  The  powerful
tonics  he  prescribed  proved  of  not  the  slightest  benefit.  In
truth,  it  must  be  allowed  that  Miss  O.  scarcely  did  justice  to
his  treatment,  as  she  has  since  told  me  she  did  not  take  the
whole  of  the  medicine  he  prescribed.  He  bestowed  the  best
attention  upon  her  most  kindly  and  disinterestedly.  Not
finding  any  relief  at  the  end  of  three  months,  she  proposed
going  into  the  couutry :  and  he  assented,  requesting  her  to
let  him  see  her  again  on  her  return.  She  went  in  winter,
and  returned  in  May,  in  no  way  better ;  and,  thinking  her
case  hopeless,  did  not  see  him  again.  She  felt  a  dull,  heav}'
weight  in  the  chest,  a  dragging  forward.  Her  legs  used  to
swell  to  a  considerable  size,  especially  after  a  walk,  which,  if
extended  to  a  mile,  or  even  less,  would  sometimes  prevent
her  from  taking  her  stockings  off :  she  has  been  compelled  to
cut  them  off.  Her  legs  became  purplish.  She  had  little  ap¬
petite,  and  was  of  a  tallowy  white.  Her  nights  were  bad.  In
the  day  she  had  constant  pain  in  the  left  side,  at  the  lower  part
of  the  lung.  Any  exertion,  such  as  going  up  stairs,  brought
on  palpitation  of  the  heart.  Besides  this,  Mr.  B.  informed
me  that  her  catamenial  periods  were  exceedingly  irregular ;
three  months  had  elapsed  since  the  last  appearance.  I  enquired
of  her,  while  in  sleep-waking,  if  the  liver  were  in  a  proper
condition.  She  replied  it  was  not,  and  pointed  to  the  spots.

In  this  deplorable  state  of  things,  as  I  did  not  consider
the  sleep  of  itself  sufficient  to  cure,  I  determined  to  operate
separately  on  the  diseased  organs.  It  occurred  to  me  that
the  water  in  the  chest  might  be  carried  off  by  micturition.
As  I  had  observed  signs  of  clairvoyance,  I  ventured  to  direct
her  attention  to  what  was  passing  in  my  mind,  and  if  I  were
right  in  my  conjecture.  After  a  few  moments’  consideration
she  replied,  “  Yes.”  She  smiled  during  the  process  as  though
conscious  that  benefit  had  commenced.  Then  I  attended  to
the  lung,  which  she  described  as  being  ulcerated  at  the  lower
part.  At  first  she  was  alarmed  at  the  state  she  saw  herself
in,  but  I  requested  her  to  be — and  by  degrees  she  became —
composed,  relief  being  at  hand.  First,  I  drew  from  it ;  then


380


Cure  of  Chlorosis  and  Dropsy,


made  slow,  contact  passes,  and  breathed  on  the  affected  part.
When  awakened,  she  said  she  felt  better,  as  if,  pointing  to
her  chest,  something  (meaning  the  complaint)  had  been
touched :  and  touched  it  certainly  had  been,  for  I  was  in¬
formed  by  Mr.  B.,  the  next  time  I  went,  that  the  intended
object  had  been  fully  realized.  Plentiful  micturition  had  im¬
mediately  after  ensued.*  I  learnt  besides  that  the  renal  secre¬
tion  had  been  at  all  times  sparing.  The  protracted  term  had
also  been  brought  on  by  the  first  mesmerisation.  The  case
progressed  steadily  and  favourably.  By  the  26th  I  could
produce  the  sleep  in  one  minute.  She  foretold  when  the
dropsy  would  be  cured,  and  that  it  would  never  return.  A
fortnight  later  it  was  completely  gone.  From  the  third  time
she  was  mesmerised  her  legs  did  not  swell  again.  Water
appeared  to  form,  as  it  continued  to  pass  in  quantity  and
freely  up  to  this  time ;  but  it  did  not  collect  in  the  chest,  for
her  dresses  required  to  be  taken  in  three  or  four  inches  across.
In  sleep-waking  she  declared  that  mesmerism  had  saved  her
life  :  was  insensible  to  pinching  :  and  had  community  of  sen¬
sation.

Miss  O.  had  laboured  under  dropsy  more  than  a  twelve-
month  ;  to  pain  in  the  side  for  three  years.  I  proceeded  with
the  lung  without  varying  the  mode,  till,  meeting  with  Mr.
Mayhew’s  cure  of  a  similar  case,  I  added  mesmerised  flannel
with  marked  success.  New  flannel  I  considered  the  best :
mesmerised  it  for  five  minutes  with  the  intention  of  communi¬
cating  vital  heat  to  the  affected  part,  and  of  keeping  up  the
action  during  my  absence.  The  same  piece  of  flannel  was
not  employed  a  second  time.  The  patient  told  me  it  would
retain  its  power  four  days.  She  could  not  in  general  bear
flannel  in  contact  with  her ;  when  mesmerised  it  did  not  irri¬
tate  the  skin,  but  diffused  warmth  through  the  affected  side,
which,  while  I  was  mesmerising  the  flannel,  was  drawn  to¬
wards  it.

One  sultry  summers  night  she  had  thought  proper  to  dis¬
pense  with  it;  yet  in  natural  somnambulism,  to  which  she  had
always  been  subject,  she  got  up,  fixed  the  flannel  exactly
right,  and  concealed  under  some  heavy  trunks  the  bag  which
had  contained  it  and  which  she  could  not  find  next  morning  till
after  a  two  hours’  search.  The  first  discovery  was  that  of  the
flannel.  This  treatment  was  regularly  continued  till  July  17th,
when  on  the  proposal  of  mesmerising  another  piece,  she  de¬
clared  she  did  not  require  any  more ;  that  the  ulcers,  which

*  We  beg  our  readers  to  peruse  Mr.  Tubbs’s  cure  of  dropsy,  No.  XXX.,
pp.  196-7,  in  which  mesmerism  had  the  same  effect.  See  the  same  in  Mr.
D.  Hands’s  case.  No.  XV.,  p.  365. — Zoixt.


by  Mr.  Fradelle.


381


on  the  13th  appeared  mere  dots,  were  completely  healed ;  that
the  side,  comprising  the  heart,  would  require  strengthening.
This  has  been  done.

The  pain  in  the  side  has  since  entirely  left  her.  She  can
go  up  stairs  rapidly  without  palpitation  of  the  heart :  and  can
walk  seven  and  even  eight  miles  without  distress.  Her  coun¬
tenance  improved.  Her  friends  tell  me  her  appetite  is  three¬
fold  what  it  was,  and  find  fault  that  she  sleeps  too  long.  One
point  difficult  to  overcome  had  been  occasional  extreme  de¬
pression  of  spirits.  Frequent  dreams  of  ghosts,  &c.,  would
inspire  her  with  dread.  Hope  could  not  be  sufficiently  ex¬
cited.  There  was  a  morbid  action  of  the  brain  somewhere,  yet
where  I  could  not  tell.  But  the  patient  did  in  sleep-waking ;
and,  pointing  to  the  left  side,  described  the  space  affected,
including  Wonder  and  a  portion  of  Melody,  Mirth,  and  Caus¬
ality  ;  this  latter  making,  as  then  observed  by  her,  “things
unreasonable  appear  reasonable.  Time  caused  her  to  dream
of  church  music,  and  Wonder  created  phantoms;  ghosts  came
there. ”  I  mesmerised  earnestly  to  withdraw  excitement,  and
then  to  restore  healthy  function.  I  was  fortunate  enough  to
overcome  this ;  but  not  at  once.  When  she  told  me  that  side
was  well,  I  desired  her  to  retain  this  impression  in  the  waking-
state  :  for  Miss  O.  was  strongly  impressed  with  the  notion
there  was  something  wrong,  without  being  able  to  say  what
or  where.  The  impression  was  retained.

I  have  repeatedly  mesmerised  to  impart  strength  to  the
whole  system,  by  holding  the  hands  and  willing  the  influence
to  pass  up  the  arms,  and  down  the  trunk,  avoiding  the  head,
to  the  feet :  that  which  ascends  the  left  arm  passes  to  the  left
leg  and  foot,  and  vice  versa.  I  have  also  ascertained  in  this
case  that  the  influence  can  be  directed  to  any  part  and  ac¬
cumulated  at  will.  Having  gradually  gained  strength,  Miss
O.  considered  herself  well.

What  I  here  subjoin  is  in  no  way  related  to  her  former
complaints.  Having  on  the  21st  of  July  been  on  an  excursion
on  the  water  with  a  party  of  friends,  and  walked  besides  a
considerable  distance,  she  increased  a  cold  taken  the  day
before  by  exposure  with  too  slight  covering  to  night  air  on
the  water.  The  next  day  she  was  completely  laid  up.  Not
informed  of  it,  I  did  not  call  till  the  25th.  Her  head  wrapped
in  flannel,  her  face  extensively  swelled,  she  suffering  from  a
gathering  under  the  left  eye,  from  tooth-ache  and  ear-ache,
the  inflammatory  action  had  reached  the  throat  and  was
spreading  over  the  upper  part  of  the  chest.  To  complete  her
misery,  two  pills,  given  to  her  without  advice,  had  been  so
violent  in  their  effects  that  all  she  took  passed  immediately.

VOL.  VIII.  E  E


382


Cures  of  various  Diseases,


No  time  was  to  be  lost.  On  this  occasion  a  few  seconds  were
sufficient  to  produce  the  sleep.  I  then  set  about  removing
the  effects  of  the  cold  she  had  taken,  relieved  the  pains  in  the
head  and  face,  and  reduced  the  inflammatory  action  which
was  spreading.  I  mesmerised  water  for  a  fever  draught.  The
patient  could  taste  it  while  I  was  preparing  it,  and  imitated  the
action  of  swallowing  while  I  took  some,  as  she  had  said  this  would
do  equally  well,  if  not  better.  Placing  the  hands  with  intention
to  strengthen  the  viscera  restrained  their  action  and  over¬
came  their  irritability.  Then  I  mesmerised  an  hour  later
in  bed  to  produce  gentle  perspiration.  This  came  on  as  I
intended,  and  assisted  to  remove  a  portion  of  the  obstruc¬
tions.  On  the  following  and  next  evening  to  that  I  repeated
the  above  with  the  exception  that  I  mesmerised  water  for  an
aperient,  and  also  to  assist  in  carrying  off  phlegm  which  was
collecting.  The  patient  in  sleep-waking  chose  senna.  Mes¬
merised  for  strength.

By  August  2nd  Miss  O.  had  recovered ;  went  on  a  visit
for  a  few  days,  and  returned  on  the  9th,  when  I  mesmerised
her  for  the  last  time.  Has  continued  well  since.*


X.  Cure  of  intense  Palpitation,  obstinate  Vomiting,  chronic
Headache,  and  Rheumatism,  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.
Hazard,  4,  Dowry  Parade,  Hotwells,  Clifton.

“  We  shall  not,  therefore,  allow  this  heresy  [mesmerism]  still  to  be  pro¬
pagated  under  the  pretext  of  its  having  any  pretension  even  to  the  name  of  a
science.  Judex  damnatur  cum  nocens  absolvitur we  shall  bruise  the  head  of
the  serpent,  and  leave  it  to  trail  its  wounded  length,  hissing  but  harmless,  along  its
tortuous  paths  for  the  remainder  of  its  days.” — Medical  Times ,  Aug.  31,  1850. f

I.  Cure  of  Rheumatism  in  both  Arms.

April  5,  1850.  —  Simmonds,  a  sailor,  belonging  to  one
of  the  Bristol  Steam  Packets,  had  been  suffering  a  length  of
time  from  rheumatism.  So  much  had  it  increased  previously
to  his  visiting  me,  that  he  was  obliged  to  give  up  his  situation,
not  having  the  power  to  raise  his  arms.  I  mesmerised  him  lo¬
cally  for  20  minutes,  three  times  a  week  for  one  month,  when
he  resumed  his  situation  perfectly  cured.  He  has  not  had  a
return  of  the  complaint  from  that  period  to  the  middle  of
November,  when  I  last  saw  him.

*  See  similar  cures  by  Mr.  Parker,  p.  186;  and  Mr.  Tubbs,  No.  VI.,
p.  258. — Zoist.

f  Heighday  !  When  we  appeared  again  in  October,  in  full  vigour,  he  was
too  humane  to — not  allow  us, — to  bruise  our  head, — to  make  us  hiss  wounded
and  harmless  for  the  rest  of  our  days;  (see  p.  378)  and  so  here  we  are  again,
wishing  him  a  happy  new  year  .—  Zoist.


by  Mr.  Hazard.


383


II.  Cure  of  continued  Vomiting.

May,  1850.  Miss  T.  C.,  a  young  lady,  was  taken  with
continued  vomiting  from  a  severe  cold,  and  could  not  retain
anything  on  her  stomach.  A  medical  man  was  sent  for,  who
employed  various  means  to  allay  it,  without  effect,  for  several
days.  She  had  no  sleep,  and  was  much  exhausted.

I  was"  sent  for  one  evening,  and  found  her  very  weak.  I
mesmerised  her  by  making  passes  from  the  head  to  the
stomach  for  an  hour,  and  left  her  in  a  very  composed  state.
Her  mother  told  me  the  following  morning  that  she  had  slept
well  the  whole  of  the  night  and  the  sickness  was  entirely
gone.  She  soon  gained  strength,  and  in  a  short  time  her
usual  good  health.

III.  Cure  of  Rheumatic  Headaches.

May  14th.  Charlotte  James,  aged  39,  had  been  afflicted
many  years  with  rheumatic  headaches  and  stiffness  of  the
neck.  Her  eyes  were  but  half  open  from  the  continued  pain
she  suffered,  which  also  occasioned  a  fixed  melancholy  in  her
features.  She  was  under  my  care  for  two  months :  I  mes-

V

merised  her  three  times  a  week.  From  the  first  week  she  felt
relief,  and  from  July  to  the  present  time  has  had  the  head¬
ache  but  twice.  It  is  now  more  than  two  months  since  she
had  it  last.  The  stiffness  of  the  neck  is  entirely  gone,  and
her  face  is  resuming  a  happy  expression.  She  had  been
medically  attended  without  any  permanent  benefit,  although
she  had  had  her  head  shaved,  been  blistered,  bled,  and  cupped.

Dec.  10th.  She  is  now  perfectly  well.

IV.  Cure  of  intense  Palpitation.

“  To  Mr.  W.  Hazard.

“  Dear  Sir, — Is  it  still  necessary  to  give  publicity  to  cures  effected
by  mesmeric  treatment  in  order  to  testify  its  truth  ?  Assuredly
not;  for  the  benefits  daily  afforded  to  thousands  of  the  suffering  sons
and  daughters  of  humanity  by  its  soothing  and  benign  influence
fully  demonstrate  its  truth,  and  afford  proof,  too  real  and  positive
to  be  questioned,  of  its  importance  and  efficacy  as  a  curative  agent.
Yet  it  is  much  to  be  lamented  that  there  are  hundreds,  many  of
whom  are  medical  men,  who,  although  thoroughly  convinced  of  the
power  of  mesmerism,  and  who  are  not,  cannot  be,  blind  to  the  fact,
that  its  success  is  surely  and  steadily  placing  it  on  the  high  pedestal
of  public  confide  nee  and  esteem,  are  too  timid,  too  cowardly  to
venture  just  yet  on  an  honest  open  avowal  of  their  opinion.  It
becomes  therefo.e,  in  my  opinion,  the  duty  and  privilege  of  those
who,— having  tested,  dare  to  assert  its  truth, — to  diffuse  as  widely
as  possible  the  knowledge  they  possess  for  the  benefit  of  others,

E  e  2


384


Cures  of  various  Diseases.


This  being  my  conviction,  I  herewith  enclose  you  a  plain,  simple
statement  of  facts  in  reference  to  my  case,  which,  should  you  think
worth  a  place  in  The  Zoist,  or  even  to  be  sent  to  the  editor  of  this
valuable  work,  you  have  my  full  permission  so  to  do.

“  I  am,  Sir,  very  truly  yours,

“Hotwells,  Nov.  1850.”  “Ellen  E.”

“Not  many  weeks  ago  I  was  suffering  from  an  attack  of
influenza.  After  trying  the  remedies  usual  in  such  cases
without  effect,  I  sent  for  the  medical  man  who  had  attended
me  several  times  previously.  He  continued  to  visit  me  for
four  or  five  days,  during  which  time  I  continued  feverish  and
weak.  I  could  not  sleep,  in  fact,  scarcely  lie  down  in  bed,  in
consequence  of  violent  palpitations  of  the  heart,  and  a  sort  of
convulsive  or  spasmodic  action  which  almost  lifted  me  from  off
the  bed.  The  slightest  unusual  noise,  even  the  loud  opening
or  shutting  of  a  door,  increased  the  palpitations  to  such  an
alarming  extent  that  I  almost  gasped  for  breath.  On  the
Sunday  evening,  being  almost  worn  out  from  want  of  rest,
and  having  read  and  heard  a  great  deal  about  mesmerism,
the  thought  struck  me  that  I  would  try  if  it  would  have  any
good  effect  in  my  case ;  and,  a  friend  coming  in  at  the  time,
I  requested  her  to  send  some  one  for  Mr.  Hazard,  he  being
the  only  mesmerist  I  knew  who  resided  near.  Mr.  H.  was
accordingly  sent  for,  and  promptly  obeyed  the  summons.  He
began  mesmerising  me  by  making  passes  from  the  head  to
the  feet  with  both  hands  for  some  time;  then  laid  his  hands
over  the  heart,  let  them  remain  there  some  few  seconds,  and
gradually  drew  them  from  me  to  each  side ;  altering  these
passes,  he  rested  his  open  hands,  one  on  the  top  of  my  head,
the  other  over  my  heart,  for  some  minutes,  looking  me  steadily
in  the  face  all  the  time.  This  he  continued  I  should  think
for  half  an  hour.  He  left  me  more  calm  and  feeling  disposed
to  sleep;  and  I  slept  very  tranquilly  for  some  hours,  and  the
next  morning  the  palpitations  were  comparatively  slight,  and
ray  breathing  more  free  than  it  had  been  for  some  days.  I
was  not  mesmerised  on  Monday  evening,  in  consequence  of
Mr.  H.  being  too  much  engaged  with  patients  to  visit  me.  I
passed  a  restless  night,  sleeping  only  a  few  minutes  at  a  time.
On  the  Tuesday  evening  Mr.  H.  called,  and  succeeded  in
putting  me  into  a  sound  sleep,  from  which  I  awoke  at  seven
o'clock  the  following  morning,  free  from  any  unpleasant
symptoms.


“Ellen  E.”


(  385  )


XI.  Obstinate  Uterine  Haemorrhage  instantly  arrested — Clair¬
voyance  :  Inflammation  of  a  Leg,  at  once  greatly  relieved:
and  a  case  of  Inflamed  Knee-joint  treated  with  Mesmerism.
By  Mr.  W.  J.  Tubbs,  Surgeon,  Upwell  Isle,  Cambridge¬
shire.  Together  with  some  account  of  a  recent  Lecture,
by  Mr.  Tubbs.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson,

“The  mesmeric  cases  reported  by  Mr.  Capern,  Mr.  Mott,  Mr.  Parker,  and
Mr,  Tubbs,  (gentlemen  whose  euphonious  names  are  at  present,  professionally,
“  to  fortune  and  to  fame  unknown,”)  may  be  summarily  dismissed.  They  re¬
mind  us  only  of  the  significant  couplet  in  the  poem  of  Dr.  Syntax,  where  the
bookseller,  shaking  his  head  at  the  manuscript  of  the  poor  traveller,  reminds
him —

“  i  We  can  get  tours — don’t  make  wry  faces —

From  those  who  never  saw  the  places.’

Which  may  be  thus  travestied  : —

“  ‘  We  can  get  facts — don’t  make  wry  faces —

From  those  who  never  saw  the  cases!’  ”

Medical  Times,  Aug.  31,  1850.

I.  Obstinate  Hcemorrhage.

Mary  Dawson,  Upwell,  aged  36,  had  been  attended  by
me  for  five  days.  Haemorrhage  had  so  weakened  her  that
her  life  was  hanging  on  a  thread  ;  and,  as  the  discharge  still
continued  in  spite  of  all  the  astringents  given,  as  well  as  the
local  application,  of  cold  friction,  &c.  I  resolved  to  try  what
effect  mesmerism  would  have  as  a  last  resource.  The  very
day  that  I  began,  November  22nd,  the  clergyman  had  been
praying  to  her.  Shortly  after  he  left,  I  called,  and  her  coun¬
tenance  wras  exsanguious;  her  pupils  frightfully  dilated ;  there
was  a  sensation  in  the  head  as  if  a  machine  was  at  work  in  it,
and  a  hammer  beating  the  skull  bones ;  the  fingers  and  toes
were  tied  up  with  red  tape,  &c.  All  she  could  uttter  was,
“  I  must  die.”  I  said,  do  let  me  try  and  mesmerise  you,  it
may  do  good,  but  I  cannot  promise  you  it  will.  All  I  could
hear  her  say  was  cc  yes.”  I  took  my  seat  on  the  side  of  the
bed,  holding  each  hand  and  looking  at  her  eyes.  In  less
than  two  moments  the  pupils  contracted,  the  eyes  turned  up,
and  nothing  was  observed  but  the  lower  parts  of  the  sclerotics,
and  the  eyes  remained  half  closed.  I  dropt  her  hands  and
closed  them ;  and,  on  raising  her  arm,  it  fell ;  in  truth  she
was  gone  into  the  state  of  coma.  I  mesmerised  her  for  half
an  hour,  and  left  strict  orders  that  she  should  not  be  dis¬
turbed.  However,  in  the  course  of  an  hour,  the  Welney
curate  called,  on  his  way  home,  (at  the  request  of  the  clergyman
who  had  prayed  to  her  in  the  morning)  and,  on  his  entering  the
chamber,  she  seemed  half  roused,  and  instantly  said,  “I  know
you,  I  saw  you  go  past  this  very  morning  in  a  pony  gig  :  it
was  at  such  an  hour :  you  are  the  Welney  parson.”  The


386  Inflamed  Leg  relieved  by  Local  Mesmerism,

women  present  said  to  Mrs.  Dawson,  “  you  are  wrong  it  is
Mr.  Dealtry,”  meaning  the  Outwell  parson.  “No,”  said  the
Welney  gentleman,  “  she  is  right :  I  did  go  by  this  morning
at  the  time.”  Now  this  patient  had  been  confined  to  her
bed,  and  it  was  utterly  impossible  that  she  could  have  seen
any  one  pass  her  window.  On  calling  the  next  day,  I  found
her  better  in  every  respect.  Under  chicken  broth,  beef  tea,
milk,  and  mesmerism,  I  am  happy  to  say  she  is  daily  improv¬
ing  :  her  sister  from  Little  Port  sends  her  to  sleep  twice  a
day.  I  was  at  her  house  yesterday,  Dec.  6th,  1850,  and  have
every  reason  to  hope  that  she  will  get  perfectly  well  in  the
course  of  a  short  time.

Mrs.  Emmerson  and  Mrs.  Barns  were  present  when  I
mesmerised  her  the  first  time.

N.B.  “’Tis  strange,  Tis  passing  strange,  Tis  pitiful,  Twas
wondrous  pitiful,”  that  his  Beverence  did  not  offer  his
prayers  for  a  poor  dying  woman  after  he  had  heard  she  had
been  mesmerised :  but,  when  told  so,  he  said,  “  pooh,  pooh,
silly  nonsense.”

II.  An  Inflamed  Leg  greatly  relieved  by  Local  Mesmerism.

One  evening  in  November,  while  conversing  with  Mr.
Everett,  a  gentleman  who  called  to  consult  me  mesmerically,
when  on  his  way  from  Malvern  to  Norwich  (where  he  resides.)
I  was  hastily  summoned  into  the  village  to  see  Mrs.  Andrews,
who  was  in  great  pain  from  an  inflammation  in  her  left  leg.
It  was  tense,  red,  and  painful;  she  was  sitting  in  a  chair  with
her  foot  on  a  stool,  and  immediately  that  she  saw  me,  she
said,  “  Oh  doctor,  what  am  I  to  do  ?  my  leg  must  burst,  and
I  am  fit  to  go  crazy.”  Of  all  things  in  the  world  she  had
been  putting  tar  ointment  on  the  inflamed  sores.  I  said,  let
me  see  if  I  can  ease  your  leg  of  the  pain  by  mesmerising  it,
Her  reply  was,  “  O  yes,  try  it  and  welcome.”  I  held  my  hands
for  a  short  time  over  the  knee,  and  then  made  downward  passes
slowly,  and  as  near  the  skin  as  I  could  without  touching  it.
The  heat  I  instantly  felt  running  up  my  right  arm,  and  but
slightly  that  of  the  left;  in  less  than  ten  minutes  I  had  per¬
fectly  removed  all  heat  from  the  leg ;  the  redness  at  once
disappeared,  and  the  patient  said,  “I  am  quite  easy.”  I  told
her  to  let  the  servant  mesmerise  the  leg  half  an  hour,  and  to
take  a  draught  I  should  send  at  bedtime  if  required.  The
next  morning,  I  called  with  Mr.  Everett,  and  Mrs.  Andrews
met  us  at  the  door,  saying,  “  she  had  been  quite  free  from
pain,  and  I  might  have  the  draught  again.”  She  told  Mr.
Everett  how  she  felt  the  heat  go  from  her  leg.


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


387


III.  A  violently  Inflamed,  Knee,  treated  with  Mesmerism.

Thomas  Maywood,  aged  10  years,  living  in  Up  well,  was
brought  to  my  Infirmary  by  his  father,  at  the  recommenda¬
tion  of  Dr.  Burt,  to  be  mesmerised.  He  was  a  pretty  curly-
headed  lad  of  the  strumous  and  sanguineous  temperament,
had  had  a  hollow  cough  for  some  months ;  one  knee  was
puffy,  and,  upon  examination,  I  found  an  enlarged  bursa
which  was  chronically  inflamed.  He  was  first  mesmerised  on
the  2nd  June,  1850,  and  after  a  few  days  went  into  the  sleep¬
waking  state.  His  amendment  was  gradual,  and  he  was  dis¬
charged  on  the  10th  July  well.

I  was  requested  to  see  him  a  few  days  afterwards,  as  he
had  received  a  severe  kick  on  the  knee  from  one  of  his  play¬
mates.  I  found  him  in  bed,  with  all  the  symptoms  of  inflam¬
mation  of  the  interior  of  the  whole  joint;  and  his  sufferings
were  intense,  as  suppuration  was  actively  going  on,  I  mes¬
merised  him  generally  and  at  the  knee,  and  could  then
roughly  handle  his  knee  while  he  was  in  the  sleep.  One  of
my  assistants  then  mesmerised  him  daily.  I  found  it  neces¬
sary  in  a  few  days  to  open  an  abscess  which  occupied  the
outer  side  of  the  knee,  and  I  did  so  in  his  father's  presence,
leaving  the  instrument  in  the  abscess  while  I  asked  him  how
he  felt.  His  reply  was,  “very  well."  He  kept  his  bed  about
a  month,  was  mesmerised  twice  daily,  and  his  knee  dressed
with  warm  water  and  oiled  silk.  He  was  then  enabled  to
walk  up  to  my  Infirmary  to  be  mesmerised,  and  was  dis¬
charged  in  September ;  his  cough  having  left  him,  his  knee
being  quite  well,  and  his  health  altogether  improved.  On
the  27th  November,  he  was  present  with  my  other  mesmeric
patients,  at  a  lecture  I  delivered  before  the  members  of  the
Wisbech  Scientific  Institution.


***  We  are  not  in  the  habit  of  publishing  mesmeric  lectures,
but,  when  a  medical  man  has  the  courage  and  honesty  to
deliver  one,  and  that  medical  man  boldly  advocated  and
practised  mesmerism  in  the  earliest  days  of  The  Zoist  and
became  a  real  martyr,  and,  being  a  widower  and  a  father,  was
compelled  to  relinquish  the  subject  on  account  of  the  great
diminution  of  his  general  practice  and  was  persecuted  by
many  of  his  medical  brothers  in  his  neighbourhood,  we  feel
it  a  duty  and  pleasure  to  make  an  extract  from  the  Wisbech
Advertiser  of  Dec.  6.

“On  Wednesday  evening  the  27th  ult.,  Mr.  W.  J.  Tubbs,  of
Upwell,  delivered  a  lecture  on  the  above  subject,  in  the  Lecture  Hall,
Crescent  Passage,  to  the  members  of  the  Scientific  Institution.  The


Lecture  on  Mesmerism,


o

O


88


lecturer  stated  that,  being  a  lover  of  science  in  the  aggregate,  he  had
for  several  years  past  made  choice  of  the  study  of  mesmerism,  which
was  his  favourite  science,  and  having  adopted  it  he  was  anxious,  to
the  extent  of  his  ability,  to  communicate  to  his  audience  and  to
others  who  felt  interested  in  scientific  matters  his  views  upon  the
subject.  The  science  derived  its  name  from  a  German  philosopher,
Anthony  Mesmer,  who  was  born  in  1734,  at  Mesburg,  on  the  shores
of  the  lake  of  Constance,  and  died  in  his  native  place  in  1815,  at
the  advanced  age  of  81.  He  published  a  thesis  on  taking  his  degree
at  Vienna,  upon  the  influence  of  the  planets  on  the  human  body.
The  professor  of  astronomy  at  Vienna  believed  in  the  efficacy  of  the
loadstone  as  a  remedy  in  human  diseases,  and  invented  a  peculiar
form  of  magnetized  steel  plates.  Mesmer,  being  an  intimate  friend
of  the  professor,  employed  them  in  his  own  way  ;  and  effected  many
cures,  which  he  communicated  to  the  professor,  who  published  them
and  attributed  the  cures  to  the  form  of  the  plates.  This  offended
Mesmer,  who  had  discovered  the  peculiar  mode  of  using  them  to
insure  success,  which  was  by  manipulations,  now  called  *  passes.’
lie  left  Vienna  and  arrived  in  Paris  in  17/8,  and  from  his  success
there  was  called  the  great  magnetizer.  The  Freuch  government
then  took  up  the  matter  and  offered  him  a  large  annual  income
if  he  would  make  known  his  secret:  but  this  he  refused  to  do.  He
then  returned  to  his  native  place,  and  in  his  last  illness  sought  relief
from  his  own  discoveries.  After  passing  through  the  French  ordeal,
a  Frenchman  named  Dupotet  came  over  to  England  and  was  intro¬
duced  at  the  Middlesex  Hospital.  Dupotet  practised  the  science
with  great  success  in  the  metropolis  ;  at  length  came  its  great  English
champion,  Dr.  Elliotson,  who,  despising  the  threats  of  those  whom
the  world  calls  great,  the  ridicule  of  the  weak,  and  the  frowns  of
his  social  friends,  openly  and  boldly  took  his  stand  as  the  un¬
flinching  advocate  of  mesmerism.  When  he  (the  lecturer)  viewed
Dr.  Elliotson  suffering  the  persecution  of  old  associates,  deprived
of  his  medical  honours,  cast  from  the  society  of  almost  all  his
medical  attachments,  and  all  for  the  best  intentions  towards  his
fellow  men,  language  failed  him  to  speak  his  praise ;  and,  if  he  had
the  power  to  do  so  it  would  be—

“  1  To  gild  refined  gold,  to  paint  the  lily,

And  add  a  perfume  to  the  violet.’  ”

His  (Mr.  Tubb’s)  convictions  arose  from  witnessing  Field’s  experi¬
ments  in  this  town  in  1843.  He  went  to  laugh,  and  came  away  a
convert.  He  soon  investigated  the  subject,  and  his  labours  were
not  in  vain.  The  first  four  persons  he  tried  were  susceptible  of  the
mesmeric  influence  ;  upon  two  of  them  extraordinary  effects  were
produced.  These  cases  were  so  full  of  interest  that  he  would  read
them  from  a  publication  called  The  Zoist.  After  reading  the  cases,
Mr.  Tubbs  proceeded  to  enumerate  a  multitude  of  others  in  which
successful  operations  had  been  performed  by  him  under  the  influence
of  mesmerism,  and  then  introduced  several  of  his  patients  who  had
been  cured  of  various  disorders  under  its  influence.  The  first,  Henry


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


389


Ayliff,  of  Nordelph,  apparently  about  50,  stated  that  lie  had  been
cured  of  rheumatism  by  means  of  mesmerism.  After  making  this
statement,  he  was  invited  by  Mr.  Tubbs  to  take  a  chair  on  the  plat¬
form,  and  after  a  few  “  passes,”  mesmeric  sleep  was  induced  and
the  individual  was  evidently  insensible  to  pain  and  external  impres¬
sions.  The  next,  Susan  James,  a  young  woman,  who  had  been  a  suf¬
ferer  from  wry  neck  and  been  cured  by  the  same  means,  was  also
‘passed’  to  sleep;  and  two  little  boys  of  the  age  of  12  were  similarly
treated.  Harriet  Bell  was  put  into  the  mesmeric  sleep,  and  in
that  state  was  made  to  exhibit  powers  of  imitation,  which  excited
the  admiration  of  the  audience.  A  verse  of  ‘The  Wishing  Gate’
was  sung  by  Master  Groom,  in  which  the  female  mesmerised  followed
every  word  and  tone  with  great  precision.  This  was  more  fully  ex¬
emplified  subsequently  in  her  exact  imitation  of  ‘  Molly  Bawn,’  Master
Groom  taking  the  lead.  A  gentleman  present  (Mr.  Stavely)  put
this  faculty  more  strongly  to  the  test  by  reciting  a  passage  in  French
which  was  ‘  echoed’  to  his  entire  satisfaction.  Another  very  in¬
teresting  case  was  that  of  Frances  Payne,  aged  20,  who  stated  that
ten  years  ago  she  was  an  inmate  of  Bury  Hospital  on  account  of  a
diseased  arm.  She  had  there  been  strapped  down  to  a  table  for  the
purpose  of  having  her  right  arm  amputated,  but  in  consequence  of
a  difference  of  opinion  among  the  surgeons  the  operation  was  de¬
ferred,  and  she  returned  to  her  home  and  came  under  Mr.  Tubb’s
mesmeric  treatment,  which  was,  happily,  successful,  as  she  is  now
in  the  service  of  Mr.  Gregory,  of  Nordelph,  and  has  the  use  of  her
arm  perfectly  restored  to  her.  In  several  of  the  patients  rigidity
of  the  muscles  was  produced  and  the  most  complete  mastery  was
exhibited  by  Mr.  Tubbs  in  his  treatment  of  his  subjects.  The  last
person  operated  upon  was  a  young  man,  whose  phrenological  organs,
being  excited,  developed  manifestations  strictly  in  accordance  with
the  phrenological  system.  In  all  the  cases  the  patients  retained  the
powers  of  hearing  and  speech,  and  while  in  the  mesmeric  sleep  re¬
plied  to  questions  put  to  them  by  Mr.  Tubbs,  which  was  accounted
for  on  the  principle  that  only  a  portion  of  the  brain  was  in  a  dormant
state.  In  conclusion,  the  lecturer  said  he  had  endeavoured  to  show
some  of  the  happy  effects  of  mesmerism.  He  had  been  able  by  its
influence  to  relieve  much  pain  and  had  effected  some  cures  in  cases
where  medicine  had  failed.  Those  individuals  present  who  had  re¬
ceived  mesmerism  as  a  fact  would  need  no  further  proofs :  those  to
whom  it  was  new,  would,  he  trusted,  examine  well  for  themselves
before  they  ventured  to  condemn  it:  and,  if  there  were  any  present,
although  he  felt  convinced  there  were  none,  who  were  disposed  to
call  it  by  the  title  ‘  humbug,’  he  trusted  they  would  be  manly
enough  to  state  their  objections  in  a  philosophic  manner.  He  thought
there  was  not  one  amongst  the  persons  present  who  would  assume
to  himself  the  knowledge  of  all  the  phenomena  of  the  human  in¬
tellect,  or  who  would  say  that  it  was  capable  of  no  further  advance¬
ment,  and  that  every  dormant  faculty  had  been  brought  into  action.
He  hoped  that  his  efforts  that  eveniug  would  be  received  with  that
goodwill  which  he  entertained  towards  them,  and  he  assured  them  that
he  would  be  ready  at  any  time  to  afford  them  any  further  informa-


390


Lecture  on  Mesmerism.


tion  which  they  might  require.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  lecture,
Mr.  Bays,  who  was  chairman  on  the  occasion,  proposed  a  vote  of
thanks  to  Mr.  Tubbs  for  the  very  interesting  lecture  which  had  been
presented  to  them.  The  attendance  was  good,  particularly  as  there
was  a  less  scientific  exhibition  at  the  Exchange  Hall,  under  high
patronage,  and  the  audience  displayed  great  interest  in  the  pro¬
ceedings.  There  were  several  scientific  gentlemen  present,  who  all
appeared  thoroughly  satisfied  that  everything  was  perfectly  fair  and
straightforward  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Tubbs  and  his  patients,  without
any  attempt  at  concealment,  or  any  display  of  effects  merely  to  excite
the  wonder  of  the  audience.”

With  Mr.  Tubbses  cases  Dr.  Elliotson  has  forwarded  the
following  extract  from  a  letter  of  Mr.  Tubbs  to  him ;  and  a
letter  from  Mr.  Everett  to  Mr.  Tubbs.

“To  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  —  Either  the  public  must  have  progressed  in  their  views  of  mes¬
merism  since  my  lecture  at  Chatteris,  or  I  must  have  become  more
convincing  and  persuasive  myself;  for  I  am  surprised,  when  I  think
of  the  universal  approval  I  meet  with  at  Wisbech,  no  opponent
having  dared  to  make  the  least  stricture  upon  my  efforts.  I  hope
that  for  your  own  sake  and  that  of  mesmerism  you  will  be  long
spared  amongst  us,  and  in  the  full  possession  of  health  and  spirits.

“  Believe  me,  sincerely  yours,

W.  J.  Tubbs.

“N.B.  Thomas  Wainwright  whose  cure  of  enlarged  liver  and
dropsy  is  reported  in  No.  XXX.,  p.  196,  is  quite  well,  and  is  a
very  curious  little  clairvoyant  subject.  Dr.  Whitsed  called  for  me
to  visit  a  patient  with  him,  during  Mr.  Everett’s  stay  here,  and  saw
the  boy’s  power  of  clairvoyance,  and  expressed  himself  satisfied.*

“  Up  well  Isle,  Dec.  7,  1850.”

“To  W.  J.  Tubbs,  Esq.

“  Dear  Sir, — I  was  glad  Dr.  Whitsed  called  as  he  did,  and  had
the  opportunity  of  witnessing  the  powers  of  your  little  clairvoyant
boy  Wainwright,  the  strikingly  correct  way  the  boy  described  the
various  engravings  as  well  as  cards,  &c.,  &c.,  that  were  indiscrimi¬
nately  placed  before  him,  must  I  think  have  been  sufficient  to  have
set  him  thinking  upon  a  subject  which  the  medical  profession  above
all  others  are  bound  dispassionately  to  investigate.  Had  I  entertained
any  doubts  as  to  the  beneficial  effects  of  mesmerism  in  alleviating
pain,  they  must  have  been  dispelled  after  hearing  the  account  Mrs.
Andrews  gave  me  of  her  sufferings  from  an  inflamed  leg,  which  she
described  as  having  been  perfectly  free  from  pain  from  the  time  you
mesmerised  her  the  evening  before.

“  Wishing  you  every  success,  I  am,  yours  truly,
“Norwich,  Nov.  20,  1850.”  R.  Everett.

*  Dr.  Whitsed  has  since  eaten  his  words.  We  expected  nothing  less  of  the
old  gentleman.  See  No.  VI.,  p.  254  ;  XXX.,  p.  195.  He  is  not  worth  a  mo¬
ment’s  attention  from  so  intelligent  and  straightforward  a  man  as  Mr.  Tubbs. —
Zoist.


Case  of  Clairvoyance.


391


The  excitement  of  the  faculty  of  imitation  in  Harriet  Bell
(p.  389)  was  still  more  strikingly  shewn  afterwards.  For —

“On  December  10th,  at  the  termination  of  Mr.  Hay’s  Concert,
Harriet  Bell  was  introduced,  for  the  first  time,  to  Louisa  Foote  Hay,
by  Mr.  Tubbs,  and  having  been  by  him  thrown  into  the  mesmeric
state,  at  once,  and  without  the  slightest  preparation,  sang  songs  of
exceeding  difficulty,  presenting  most  extraordinary  and  incredible
effects.  Harriet  Bell’s  imitations  being  of  the  most  perfect  cha¬
racter,  some  gentlemen,  who  witnessed  this,  being  anxious  for  a
public  display,  arrangements  were  made  to  give  a  Concert  on  the
11th.  Mr.  Tubbs  kindly  consented  to  attend  and  exhibit  the  won¬
derful  effects  of  mesmerism  on  the  organ  of  imitation.  Louisa
Foote  Hay  was  to  introduce  impromptu  snatches  of  ballads  in  various
styles,  so  as  fully  to  test  Harriet  Bell’s  extraordinary  power.  No
communication  was  to  be  allowed  with  Harriet  Bell  previously  to  her
appearing  before  the  audience.”

On  the  11th  the  Concert  took  place,  and  Harriet  Bell  in
her  sleep-waking  state  sang  some  difficult  songs  with  Miss
Flay  delightfully,  to  an  audience  of  about  seven  hundred.


XII.  A  Case  of  Clairvoyance.  By  Mr.  LIayman,  Market
Place,  Sidmouth.  Communicated  by  Mr.  Janson.

“  A  great  deal  of  talent  is  lost  to  the  world  for  the  want  of  a  little  courage.
Every  day  sends  to  their  graves  a  number  of  obscure  men  who  have  only  remained
obscure  because  their  timidity  has  prevented  them  from  making  a  first  effort ;  and
who,  if  they  could  only  have  been  induced  to  begin,  would  in  all  probability  have
gone  great  lengths  in  the  career  of  fame.  The  fact  is,  that  in  order  to  do  any
thing  in  this  world  worth  doing,  we  must  not  stand  shivering  on  the  bank,  and
thinking  of  the  cold  and  the  danger,  but  jump  in  and  scramble  through  as  well  as
we  can.  It  will  not  do  to  be  perpetually  calculating  risks,  and  adjusting  nice
chances :  it  did  all  very  well  before  the  Flood,  when  a  man  could  consult  his
friends  upon  an  intended  publication  for  a  hundred  and  fifty  years,  and  then  live
to  see  its  success  for  six  or  seven  centuries  afterwards ;  but  at  present  a  man
waits,  and  doubts,  and  hesitates,  and  consults  his  brother,  and  his  uncle,  and  his
first  cousins,  and  his  particular  friends,  till  one  fine  day  he  finds  that  he  is  sixty-
five  years  of  age, — that  he  has  lost  so  much  time  in  consulting  first  cousins  and
particular  friends,  that  he  has  no  more  time  left  to  follow  their  advice.” — The
Rev.  Sydney  Smith,  Elementary  Sketches  of  Moral  Philosophy,  &c.

About  the  beginning  of  September,  1848,  Elizabeth  Baker,
of  Otterton,  Devon,  a  married  woman,  aged  about  27  years,
was  in  sleep-waking,  and  I  asked  her  if  she  could  see.  She
replied,  “  Yes,  but  not  very  clearly  yet  :  but  in  five  minutes
I  shall  be  able  to  see  across  the  seas  to  Australia,  India,  or  in
any  part  of  the  world.”  When  the  time  was  up,  I  asked  her
if  she  could  see  now.  “  Yes,”  she  replied,  “  very  clear.”  I
then  said  that  I  wanted  her  to  find  out  a  young  man  in  India,
a  nephew  of  mine.  She  said,  ff  I  will  try.”  After  two  mi¬
nutes  she  replied,  “  I  don’t  like  to  look  there,  as  there  has
been  a  dreadful  battle.”  She  felt  very  hot  and  was  much


392


Case  of  Clairvoyance .


affected  at  what  she  saw.  She  did  not  like  to  stay  there,  as
she  had  such  a  dislike  to  see  battles.  I  told  her  that  I  did
not  wish  her  to  look  at  the  battle  if  it  made  her  ill :  but  I
only  wished  her  to  see  if  the  young  man  was  living  or  not.
She  replied,  “  I  will  see  :”  and,  after  a  pause  of  about  two
minutes,  she  said,  “  Oh  !  he  is  living.”  But,  to  make  sure,
I  requested  her  to  describe  his  person  and  features,  and  she
did  most  accurately.  I  was  then  convinced  she  saw  him  :  and
said,  “  are  you  sure  you  see  him  ?”  “Quite  sure,”  was  her
reply.  She  said,  he  was  a  soldier,  but  had  not  been  in  the
battle,  as  he  was  ill :  she  saw  him  standing  behind  with  a
large  military  cloak  over  him :  he  was  very  thin  and  pale  :  he
had  been  very  ill,  but  was  getting  better.  She  said  that  his
friends  all  thought  he  was  killed.  I  asked  her  where  his
father  lived.  “  In  Bath,”  she  said ;  “  that  he  was  in  great
trouble  about  him,  as  he  never  expected  to  hear  from  him
any  more.”  I  asked  her  if  he  had  written  or  was  about  to
write  to  his  friends.  She  said,  that  “  his  father  would  not
hear  from  him  for  some  time  to  come,  but  he  would  write
when  he  was  better,  and  when  they  were  removed  from  that
part  of  India.”  She  then  felt  fatigued  with  her  long  journey,
and  fell  into  a  deep  sleep.  After  ten  minutes,  I  awoke  her,
and  questioned  her  about  India,  & c.,  &c.  She  knew  nothing
about  India,  nor  had  she  heard  of  any  battle  having  been
fought  there.  About  three  weeks  after,  I  put  her  into  the
sleep- waking  state  again.  My  wife  was  present.  After  she  had
been  in  the  state  for  ten  minutes,  I  asked  her  if  she  could
see;  “Yes,”  was  her  reply  :  “I  see  the  young  man  again  in
India,  and  Mrs.  Hayman  is  thinking  about  him  now.”  My
wife  asked  her  how  he  was  looking.  “Oh,  better;  he  is  get¬
ting  better  :  he  has  more  colour  in  his  face :  he  is  gaining
flesh.”  “  Has  he  not  written  yet?”  “No,”  she  said;  “he
will  get  over  this  illness,  and  his  father  will  hear  from  him.”

About  a  fortnight  after  when  I  put  her  into  the  state
again,  she  saw  him  again.  He  was  then  standing  by  the
side  of  a  horse  with  his  cloak  over  him :  he  was  better.  She
said  he  would  write  to  his  father  soon.  I  put  her  after  a  time
into  the  state  again.  She  saw  him  ;  he  was  looking  much
better,  and  he  had  written  to  his  father.  She  said  that  his
father  had  given  him  up :  and  many  other  things  were  told  of
him  by  her.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  P.,  of  Bath,  giving  him  a  statement  of
what  I  had  heard  E.  Baker  give  of  his  son  George  in  India,
and  that  I  had  every  reason  to  believe  he  was  living,  and
would  not  give  him  up.  Mr.  P.  did  not  know  what  to  think
about  it :  but  I  am  happy  to  state  that  his  father  has  received


Cure  of  obstinate  Hysteria.


393


two  letters  from  his  son  George,  confirming  every  particular
of  what  my  patient  had  stated  concerning  him,  which  letters
I  have  seen.  He  said  he  had  been  very  ill,  laid  up  in  the
hospital ;  was  now  much  better  :  had  not  been  in  the  late
engagement.  I  could  give  you  the  names  of  the  parties  and
of  the  regiment  he  is  in,  if  you  wish  it ;  but,  he  being  a
family  connexion,  I  think  proper  to  suppress  it.

I  can  vouch  for  the  correctness  of  the  above  statement  :  I
had  several  witnesses  at  the  time,  who  heard  what  passed.

Stephen  Hayman.

To  H.  U.  Janson,  Esq.

***  We  have  seen  a  letter  from  Mr.  Janson  in  which,
speaking  of  this  account,  he  says,  “You  may  depend  on  its
truthfulness,  for  Mr.  Hayman  is  a  downright  honest  fellow,
quite  as  much  so  as  Capern  ;  and  in  fact  something  like  him.”
— Zoist.


XIII.  Cure  of  obstinate  Hysteria ;  painless  Tooth  Extraction ;
ready  cure  of  Loss  of  Voice.  By  Mr.  Thomas  Chandler,
Surgeon,  Botherhithe.

“  How  many  were  deluded  by  the  Hohenlohe  quackery — by  Morrison’s
pills — by  Mesmerism — by  magnetic  rings — by  brandy  and  salt.” — Mr.  Wakley,
Lancet,  Oct.  12,  1850.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — The  following  extracts  from  my  note-book  are  at  your
service  if  you  think  them  worthy  of  record.

Obstinate  Hysteria.

Miss  M.  B.,  mt.  16,  fair  complexion,  lymphatic  tempera¬
ment,  applied  to  me  in  April,  1849.  She  had  suffered  from  vio¬
lent  hysterical  fits  for  about  twoyears:  she  has  them  two  or  three
times  a  week,  sometimes  two  in  a  day :  struggles  very  much,
and  bites  her  hands  during  the  fit.  Has  frequent  attacks  of
globus  hystericus,  and  suffers  from  severe  pains  in  the  head
and  back.  Catamenia  regular,  and  health  otherwise  tolerably
good.

April  9th.  I  commenced  mesmerising  her.  She  went  off
in  two  minutes.  After  .remaining  asleep  ten  minutes,  she
awoke  and  went  into  one  of  her  fits,  which  promised  to  be  a
very  severe  one.  But  I  placed  my  fingers  on  her  eyes  and
made  contact  passes  over  them;  when  in  two  or  three  minutes
she  became  quite  tranquil  again,  and  went  to  sleep.  I  awoke
her  by  transverse  passes  after  fifteen  minutes  more,  and  she
remained  comfortable.


394


Painless  Tooth  Extraction ,  fyc.


The  next  day  she  went  to  sleep  in  a  minute  and  a  half;
and  awoke  in  ten  minutes  looking  wild.  But  contact  passes
quieted  her.  I  let  her  sleep  half  an  hour.  She  said  she  was
conscious  but  could  not  speak  or  move.  After  awaking  her,  I
put  the  alum  crystal  into  her  hand,  and  she  went  off  in
twenty  seconds.  She  had  never  heard  of  it  before.

May  25th.  She  has  been  mesmerised  daily,  and  has  only
had  two  slight  fits,  caused  by  excitement.  She  is  now  very
susceptible — going  off  with  one  pass — unconscious  during  the
sleep,  and  cataleptic.  She  is  very  sensitive  to  mesmerised
water,  and  goes  to  sleep  every  night  on  taking  a  sip,  waking
when  the  clock  strikes  seven,  because  I  have  told  her,  when  in
the  sleep,  to  do  so.

Shortly  after  the  above  date,  she  told  me  she  considered
herself  quite  well,  and,  as  it  was  inconvenient  for  her  to  attend
me,  she  would  get  a  friend  to  mesmerise  her  who  lived  near,
and  would  come  to  me  occasionally.  She  has  never  had  ano¬
ther  fit.


Painless  Tooth  Extraction.

About  two  mouths  ago,  she  presented  herself  accompanied
by  her  mesmeriser,  wishing  me  to  extract  a  tooth  for  her  in
the  mesmeric  sleep.  She  was  sent  to  sleep  without  a  pass;
her  mesmeriser  merely  saying,  “  Go  to  sleep  Maria.”  I  then
extracted  the  tooth — a  bicuspid — not  loose  ;  and  I  think  it
must  have  been  a  very  determined  sceptic  who  could  have
doubted.  The  perfect  relaxation  of  every  muscle  was  beau¬
tiful  :  no  practice  could  have  enabled  her  to  perform  in  such
perfection.  She  still  remains  quite  well.

Loss  of  Voice.

Mrs.  Moss,  whose  mesmeric  accouchment  and  tooth  ex¬
traction  have  been  reported  in  former  numbers  of  The  Zoist}
applied  to  me  about  a  month  since,  suffering  from  aphonia
(loss  of  voice)  and  inflammatory  symptoms  arising  from  cold.
I  immediately  mesmerised  her,  but  without  any  relief;  and,  as
on  other  occasions,  I  had  usually  given  her  immediate  relief
from  whatever  she  might  be  suffering,  I  did  not  persist,  but
gave  her  medicine,  ordered  leeches,  mustard  poultice,  &c.
This  was  on  a  Tuesday.  I  went  on  secundum  artem  until
the  following  Friday,  when,  finding  her  worse  rather  than
better,  I  said,  “  mesmerism  must  cure  you  after  all.”  I
accordingly  put  her  to  sleep  for  half  an  hour,  and  left  her.
I  then  returned,  and  made  local  passes  over  the  throat  and
chest,  and  made  her  take  mesmerised  water  during  her  sleep
(she  cannot  even  look  at  it  when  awake,  she  is  so  very  sus-


395


Cures  of  Rheumatism,  Insanity,  fyc.

ceptible),  and,  when  I  awoke  her,  she  spoke  out  to  the
astonishment  of  her  husband  and  neighbours,  as  she  had  not
spoken  out  for  five  days  previous.  She  did  not  again  lose
her  voice,  and  two  or  three  more  mesmerisings  on  that  day
and  the  following  removed  all  the  pain  in  the  chest  and  other
symptoms.

I  have  for  some  months  past  been  mesmerising  a  gentle¬
man,  aged  83,  for  what  he  terms  chronic  lumbago  :  and  the
relief  he  has  experienced  is  truly  wonderful.

In  conclusion,  permit  me  to  add  my  testimony  to  the
wonderful  clairvoyant  power  of  a  patient  of  Major  Buckley's.
I  was  never  before  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  existence  of
the  phenomenon  of  clairvoyance.  I  can  now  no  longer  doubt
it.  After  seeing  several  packets  that  had  been  read  unopened,
I  sealed  up  a  sentence  in  an  envelope  myself  in  such  a  way
that  it  would  have  been  utterly  impossible  for  any  one  to  have
opened  it  undetected :  and  it  was  read  accurately.  When
will  the  whole  science  obtain  a  thorough  and  impartial  inves¬
tigation  ?

I  remain,  yours  faithfully,

Thomas  Chandler.

58,  Paradise  Street,  Botherhithe,

Dec.  6th,  1850.


XIV.  Cures  of  Insanity ;  Rheumatism ;  and  extreme  Nervous¬
ness,  with  inflamed  Eyes.  By  Mr.  Elliot.

Mrs.  Sutton,  age  30,  No.  5,  Queen's  Boad,  Chelsea,  was
brought  to  me  to  be  mesmerised  under  a  severe  attack  of
rheumatism.  She  carried  her  left  arm  in  a  sling,  and  it  was
very  much  swelling  from  the  hand  to  above  the  elbow.  Her
legs  and  feet  were  also  very  bad ;  she  was  hardly  able  to
stand.  She  had  been  under  medical  treatment  for  about  a
month,  but  did  not  get  any  relief  from  her  pains,  which  were
constant  day  and  night  and  deprived  her  of  all  sleep.  She
was  mesmerised  every  other  day  for  three  weeks,  and  was
quite  restored  to  her  former  health.

Rheumatism  and  Debility.

Mrs.  Kendall,  age  36,  No.  35,  Lower  George  Street,
Queen's  Boad,  Chelsea,  had  been  very  ill  for  about  nine
months  with  general  debility  and  loss  of  appetite.  She  then
had  an  attack  of  rheumatism,  and  was  obliged  to  keep  her
bed  and  lie  on  her  back.  The  pain  extended  over  her  whole
body,  but  at  length  became  more  violent  in  the  legs  and


396


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,


feet,  which  were  swollen.  By  being  mesmerised  a  few  times
she  lost  all  her  pains,  and  fast  recovered  her  former  strength.

Insanity.

Charlotte  Kendall,  age  46,  sister  to  the  above  Mrs.  Ken¬
dall,  some  time  back  lived  as  cook  and  housekeeper  in  a
gentleman's  family  at  Brompton,  and  from  some  cause  un¬
known  she  unfortunately  became  quite  insane.  Her  friends
were  about  trying  to  get  her  into  the  Lunatic  Asylum,  but
wished  to  try  mesmerism  first.  I  treated  her  with  mesmerism,
and  she  is  quite  restored  to  her  reason,  and  now  gone  to
service  again  in  her  right  mind  and  in  good  general  health.

Miss  Ann  Elliott,  aged  23,  Stanhope  Boad,  Bromley
Common,  Kent,  has  been  a  great  sufferer  for  the  last  four
years  from  a  general  debility,  loss  of  appetite,  and  lowness
of  spirits,  palpitation  of  the  heart,  frequent  faintings  under
the  least  fatigue,  and  great  nervousness,  and  for  a  long  time
had  been  subject  to  weak  and  inflamed  eyes.  The  young
woman  has  been  mesmerised  daily  for  about  three  weeks,  and
is  now  returned  to  the  country  quite  well.

Edward  Elliot.

29,  College  Street,  Dowgate  Hill,  City,

December,  1850.


XV.  Researches  in  Cerebral  Development ;  Averages  and  Pro  ¬
gress  of  the  Human  Head  from  Infancy  to  Fifty  Years :
with  some practical  Applications .  By  Mr.  James  Straton.

In  two  previous  papers  I  discussed  at  some  length  the  imper¬
fections  of  the  ordinary  method  of  estimating  and  recording
cerebral  development  (Zoist,  No.  XXIII.,  pp.  291 — 301,  and
No.  XXV.,  pp.  53 — 64).  These  papers  are  avowedly  brief
and  imperfect.  To  have  discussed  every  point  of  the  subject
fully  would  have  required  more  space  than  I  felt  justified  in
asking,  and  more  time  than  I  thought  the  subject  worth.  I
take  leave  to  presume  that  enough  was  said  to  demonstrate
that  an  extensive  reform  is  necessary  before  the  followers  of
Gall  can  do  either  their  science  or  themselves  justice.  If  that
point  has  been  attained,  we  are  prepared  to  consider  the
nature  and  extent  of  the  change  required;  and  that  considera¬
tion  will  in  its  progress  point  out  many  of  the  imperfections
of  the  ordinary  system,  more  clearly  and  effectively  perhaps
than  lengthened  arguments  for  the  special  purpose.

Since  the  papers  referred  to  appeared,  I  have  been  fa¬
voured  with  remarks  bv  various  esteemed  cultivators  of  our

•/


by  Mr.  Straton.


397


science  on  some  of  the  points  discussed.  A  few  of  these
remarks  I  think  it  valuable  to  quote,  as  anticipating  objec¬
tions  which  are  likely  to  occur  to  others.  Several  of  the  par¬
ties  think  it  would  have  been  better  to  go  on  with  improve¬
ments,  leaving  imperfections  to  die  a  natural  death.  It  would
have  been  much  the  more  pleasant  way,  but  others  think  I
delayed  too  long  in  drawing  attention  to  imperfections  with  a
view  to  their  removal.  I  have  successively  participated  in  the
sentiments  of  both  parties.  I  hoped  when  it  was  shewn  that
the  cranium  could  be  measured  scientifically,  it  would  then
be  seen  that  this  was  only  a  first  step  in  improvement,  that
others  would  follow  in  due  course,  and  that  we  would  hear
no  more  of  the  impossibility  of  improvement.  I  found  my
mistake.  At  every  turn  I  met  with  evidence  to  convince  me
that  the  nature  and  extent  of  these  imperfections  were  un¬
seen,  and  unsuspected.  It  then  appeared  improper  to  avoid
discussing  the  subject  so  far  as  was  necessary  to  lead  candid
thinkers  to  look  at  the  matter,  and  leave  it  there.

The  next  step  in  cerebral  observation,  after  the  absolute
size  of  the  head  is  obtained,  is  to  discover  the  relative  or  com¬
parative  size.  This  is  a  very  laborious  process  in  the  first
instance,  as  the  sequel  will  shew,  but  the  easiest  possible  af¬
terwards.  I  have  now  completed  that  labour  to  such  an  extent
as  enables  me  to  submit  the  results  with  considerable  confi¬
dence,  and  this  is  the  primary  object  of  the  present  paper.
It  will  be  found  important  to  preserve  a  consecutive  view  of
our  subject,  I  therefore  briefly  repeat  the  conclusions  reached
in  the  preceding  articles,  noticing  by  the  way  one  or  two
objections  just  referred  to.  I  put  these  conclusions  into  the
form  of  comments  on  the  following  “  note  of  development.”

P.  G.  finale)  aged  10  years.

DEVELOPMENT.


No.

1.  Amativeness . 11

2.  Philoprogenitiveness. .  14

3.  Concentrativeness. ...  11

4.  Adhesiveness . 11

5.  Combativeness . 11

6.  Destructiveness . 11

f  Alimentiveness . 10

7.  Secretiveness . 12

8.  Acquisitiveness . 11

9.  Constructiveness  . .  . .  10

10.  Self-esteem . 12

1 1 .  Love  of  Approbation. .  10


No.

12.  Cautiousness . 10

13.  Benevolence . 12

14.  Veneration  . 13

15.  Firmness . 13

16.  Conscientiousness..  11

17.  Hope . 11

18.  Wonder . 12

19.  Ideality . 12

20.  Wit  . 10

21.  Imitation . 13

22.  Individuality . 14

23.  Form . 14


No.

24.  Size . 14

25.  Weight . 13

26.  Colour . 12

27.  Locality  ....  12

28.  Number  ....  14

29.  Order . 13

30.  Eventuality  . .  14

31.  Time . 12

32.  Tune . 13

33.  Language  ....  13


34.  Comparison  . .  14

35.  Causality  ....  13


SCALE.


1.

6.  Small

11.

16.  Rather  large

2.

7.

12.  Rather  full

17.

3.

8.  Rather  small

13.

18.  Large

4.  Very  small

9.

14.  Full

19.

5.

10.  Moderate

15.

20.  Very  large

F  F


\


VOL.  VIII.


398


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,


The  subject  selected  is  a  boy  at  the  earliest  age  recognized
as  suitable  for  phrenological  investigation.  What  does  the
note  of  development  enable  us  to  predicate  of  the  boy,  and
to  predict  of  the  man  ?

Absolute  size  of  the  head. — The  series  of  measurements
given  does  not  enable  us  to  discover  by  any  specified  rules
what  the  size  of  the  head  is.  It  may  be  either  the  average,
or  above  or  below  the  average,  of  the  male  head  at  10  years
old.  We  neither  know  the  truth  nor  the  possible  extent  of
error.

Comparative  size  of  head. — Knowing  neither  the  absolute
size  of  the  head,  nor  the  average  of  the  sex  at  the  given  age,
it  is  impossible  to  institute  any  comparison,  and  equally  im¬
possible  to  say  what  alteration  (or  if  any)  the  head  will  un¬
dergo  in  subsequent  years.

Development  of  parts.- — To  appreciate  accurately  the  deve¬
lopment  of  regions  and  organs,  it  is,  first,  essential  to  know
the  equal  balance,  and  the  average  proportions  in  all  sizes.
Neither  of  these  have  yet  been  determined — they  are  still
matter  of  opinion,  and  claimed  as  such  by  all  observers ;
whilst  the  variety  of  model-heads  in  existence  prove  the  great
difference  of  opinion,  the  great  importance  of  the  question,
and  the  difficulty,  not  to  say  impossibility,  of  solving  it  by
ordinary  practice.  Secondly,  it  is  necessary  to  ascertain  the
absolute  development  of  each  part,  but  this  is  never  attempted.
An  estimate  of  the  “  relative  development”  is  thought  quite
sufficient  in  all  cases.  Here  the  most  ample  scope  exists  for
variety  of  opinion,  and  ample  latitude  is  taken.  Even  among
observers  who  agree  about  the  equal  balance  proportion,  some
find  three  or  four,  whilst  others  find  six,  eight,  or  ten  degrees
of  development  in  the  same  case.  Thus  is  matter  of  fact
involved  in  all  the  uncertainty  of  matter  of  opinion,  and  that
which  should  be  determined  and  uniform,  is  doubtful  and  va¬
riable  as  the  tastes  and  the  tempers,  the  talents  and  the
training,  the  intelligence  and  the  ignorance  of  human  beings.

Objection. — We  may  know  that  one  part  is  large  and  ano¬
ther  small,  without  knowing  either  how  large  the  one,  or  how
small  the  other  is.

Reply. — This  is  the  popular  mode  of  evading  instead  of
meeting  the  general  question.  We  may  grant  the  affirmative,
but  must  add  what  a  little  reflection  will  confirm, — that  just
in  proportion  to  our  knowledge  of  how  large,  and  how  small
the  parts  are,  so  is  the  value  of  that  knowledge,  our  confidence
in  its  certainty,  and  our  willingness  to  be  guided  by  it.  We
may  put  our  case  thus : — An  important  point  (say  the  fate  of
a  fellow-creature)  is  depending  on  the  question  of  the  deve-


by  Mr.  Straton.


399


lopment  of  certain  parts  of  his  brain.  Three  witnesses  having
taken  the  development  “  by  the  estimate  of  the  eye  and  the
hand,”  on  being  separately  examined  declare  that  Acquisi¬
tiveness  is  “  rather  large,  or  large and  that  Cautiousness  and
Conscientiousness  are  “  rather  small,  or  small a  rare  unani¬
mity,  but  we  take  the  most  favourable  view  of  the  case.
Other  three  witnesses  having  found  the  development  of  the
parts  by  measurement  (assuming  that  possible  for  a  moment),
state,  not  th  e  precise  “  how  large”  and  “how  small,”  we  will
suppose,  but  that  Acquisitiveness  exceeds  in  development  that
organ  in  the  average  man  of  thirty  years,  and  that  Cautious¬
ness  and  Conscientiousness  are  below  those  in  the  average
boy  of  seven  years.  The  different  degrees  of  weight  which
the  respective  items  of  evidence  would  carry  to  every  rational
mind  need  not  be  commented  on.

Scales. — To  preserve  a  useful  record  of  our  observations
for  future  comparison,  confirmation  or  correction,  and  to
convey  our  ideas  of  development  accurately  to  other  minds,
it  is  necessary  to  use  a  scale,  each  term  of  which  has  one
clearly-defined  and  unchanging  meaning,  which  could  be  un¬
derstood  in  one  sense  only  by  all  parties  at  all  times.  Instead
of  this  we  have  a  variety  of  scales,  each  term  of  which  is  un¬
derstood  in  a  somewhat  different  sense  by  different  persons  at
the  same  time,  and  by  the  same  person  at  different  times.

It  follows,  then,  that  a  “  note  of  development”  of  any
case  simply  shews  the  writer’s  opinion  of  the  “  relative  pro¬
portions”  of  the  organs  in  words  or  figures,  which  perhaps
no  two  individuals  understand  exactly  in  the  same  sense,  and
which  the  writer  himself  may  not  understand  in  the  same
sense  at  any  future  time.  Taking  it  for  granted  that  the  ob¬
server’s  opinions  are  correct  regarding  the  equal  balance  pro¬
portion,  and  the  degrees  of  deviation  from  that  balance,  the
sum  of  the  information  conveyed  by  the  “  note,”  is,  that  cer¬
tain  parts  are  developed  in  a  greater  degree  than  certain  other
parts ;  but  how  much  or  how  little  the  greatest  exceeds  the
least  or  any  intermediate  part,  or  what  is  the  absolute  deve¬
lopment  of  any  part,  we  are  not  informed.

Thus  much,  or  rather  thus  little,  can  we  say  of  the  boy.
Of  the  man  we  can  say  nothing;  knowing  neither  the  size  of
the  head  given  in  the  note,  nor  the  average  alteration  in
either  size  or  form  between  10  years  old  and  maturity.

The  note  of  development  reviewed  is  as  explicit  in  every
essential  particular  as  such  notes  usually  are.  Every  specified
condition  is  fulfilled,  and  the  only  orthodox  means  whereby
to  convey  additional  details,  is  to  furnish  each  reader  with  a
cast  of  the  head  If  this  were  conveniently  practicable,  then

f  f  2


400


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,


each  party  would  find  the  phrenology  of  the  case  for  himself,
would  reach  the  conclusions  which  he  thinks  most  proper,
and  believe  these  to  be  the  conclusions  which  every  other
phrenologist  either  had  reached,  or  might,  could,  would,  and
should  reach.  If  it  were  farther  practicable  to  collect  a  hun¬
dred  or  a  thousand  notes  from  as  many  observers  practising
in  widely  separated  localities,  and  to  submit  these  to  one  who
knew  not  what  was  meant,  it  appears  to  me  extremely  im¬
probable  he  would  ever  suspect  that  any  considerable  number
of  the  notes  referred  to  the  same  case.  Some  would  give  one
series  of  measurements,  some  another ;  some  would  call  the
head  one  size,  some  another ;  some  would  use  one  scale,  some
another ;  some  would  use  one  part  of  a  scale,  some  another ;
and  the  estimated  development  of  the  regions  and  organs, —
modified  partly  by  conflicting  ideas  of  equal  balance  propor¬
tions,  and  partly  by  the  talents  and  training,  the  proficiency
and  the  pretensions  of  individual  observers, — would  in  all
probability  be  variable  to  an  extent  only  limited  by  the  num¬
ber  of  notes  compared.

Objection. — The  proportions  stated  by  each  good  observer
will  coincide,  particularly  if  the  case  is  a  marked  one,  such
as  those  in  our  museums,  though  their  terms  differ.

Reply. — First :  I  have  always  found  the  best  observers  the
first  to  acknowledge  the  imperfections  I  have  sketched,  and
the  readiest  to  regret  the  impossibility  of  coinciding  either
with  themselves  at  different  times,  or  with  others  at  any
time.

Second  :  we  must  judge  of  the  proportions  stated,  by  the
terms  used.  If  the  latter  differ,  we  may  suppose  in  some  in¬
stances  that  the  former  agree,  but  that  is  only  our  supposition.

Third  :  agreement  in  marked  cases, — the  very  rare  and  by
far  the  easiest  cases  would  be  the  least  possible  proof  of  the
suitableness  of  the  system  for  indiscriminate  use.  Still  less
are  the  cases  in  our  museums  suitable  tests.  They  were  our
“  school-books,”  so  to  speak.  We  studied  them  in  connexion
with  notes  of  development  in  the  published  treatises,  and  the
known  character  of  the  individuals.  We  are  therefore  neither
independent  nor  always  impartial  observers  of  such  cases.

It  sometimes  happens,  however,  that  just  when  a  marked
character  emerges  into  public  view,  a  few  independent  esti¬
mates  may  be  collected  before  u professing  phrenologists”
have  time  to  take  one  from  the  “  higher  powers.”  These  form
curious  commentaries  on  the  points  we  have  discussed.  I
close  this  department  with  one  or  two  illustrations.  T.  Leith,
who  was  hanged  at  Dundee  some  years  ago  for  poisoning  his
wife,  was  long  well  known  in  the  place  as  a  leading  man


by  Mr.  Straton.


401


among  the  sect  called  Ranters.  He  had  at  various  times  got
five  separate  notea  of  his  cerebral  development ;  all  highly
favourable.  A  sixth  observer,  however,  who  manipulated  the
condemned  in  his  cell,  found  “  that  Conscientiousness  shelved
completely  away  behind,  as  did  also  the  intervening  organ ;”
“  and  his  Secretiveness  very  fully  developed,  in  a  peculiar
way  indicating  that  it  had  increased  from  its  original  develop¬
ment  ;”  and  many  other  strange  things  (see  North  British
Mail,  8th  October,  1847).  Leith  held  to  the  previous  five,
and  requested  a  cast  of  his  head  to  be  taken  after  death,  ob¬
viously  believing  that  it  would  support  his  plea  of  not  guilty
which  he  maintained  to  the  last.  Copies  of  the  head  are  now
in  many  collections.  I  heard  the  accuracy  certified  by  several
gentlemen,  one  of  them  an  excellent  artist,  who  were  present
when  the  mould  was  taken.  It  is  a  valuable  specimen  of  a
low  type  and  a  large  head.  I  need  hardly  add  that  it  refutes
all  the  six  estimates  very  completely.

The  next  is  the  much  more  famous  case  of  Rush.  I  give
six  estimates  of  a  few  of  the  organs.  The  first  three  (Edin¬
burgh,  Paris,  and  New  York)  shew  the  differences  conse¬
quent  on  different  ideas  of  equal  balance  proportion.  The
fourth  (London)  is  from  “  Clark's  Life  of  Rush,  27th  edition
and  the  two  last  are  from  respectable  local  papers.


James  B.  Rush,  the  Stanfield  Hall  Murderer.


Edinbur.

Paris.

N.  York.

London.

Manches.

W  OLVERHAMPTON.

Amativ.  ...

CONCEN.  ...

Combat.  ...

Destruct.

Seoretiv...

Acquisit....

Cautious.

Benev .

Vener .

Hope .

Ideality...

Very  large
Rat.  small
Full

Moderate

Moderate

Large

Small

Full

Full

Full

Moderate

Very  large

Moderate

Full

Full

Moderate

Moderate

Moderate

Full

Full

Full

Full

Very  large

Moderate

Full

Full

Moderate

Full

Moderate

Full

Full

Full

Full

Very  large
Very  full
Full

Full

Very  full
‘  Wanting’
W  anting

Very  defic.

Very  large
Very  small
Very  large
Very  large
V  ery  large
Very  large

Small

Small

Very  small

Very  large

Almost  wanting
‘  Enormous  ’

Enormous

Enormous

Enormous
‘  Not  large  ’

‘  Almost  entire,  wanting  ’
Almost  entirely  wanting
Almost  entirely  wanting
Almost  entirely  wanting

This  is  pretty  well,  but  we  want  one  or  two  “  notes ”  of
date  when  Rush  was  quite  a  respectable  man,  to  make  the
melee  more  complete.

The  question  of  which  is  right  we  may  pass  by :  it  is  the
“enormous”  difference  of  the  “proportions  stated”  that  is
worth  looking  at.  Gaiks  method  is  barely  borne  out.  There
is  great  variety  of  estimate  of  all  the  marked  organs  except
one,  Amativeness.  As  to  the  modern  improvements  whereby
we  pretend  to  discriminate  to  a  hair's-breadth  in  all  cases —
where  are  they  ?  what  are  they  ?  It  were  easy  to  charge  with
incompetency,  and  as  useless  as  it  is  easy ;  to  prove  where,
and  to  what  extent,  would  be  another  and  a  very  different


402  Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,

matter.  One  of  what  I  think  the  most  preposterous  of  the
estimates,  is  by  one  of  the  oldest  phrenologists  in  the  kingdom  ;
a  person  who  had  all  the  advantage  of  Dr.  Spurzheinks  in¬
structions,  and  has  ever  since  been  in  public  practice.  But
though  proof  of  incompetency  was  complete,  Cui  bono  ?  what
is  accomplished  ?  The  mischief  would  be  neither  killed  nor
cured; — not  even  arrested  for  a  moment.  Uniformity  among
observers  in  estimating  cerebral  development  without  measure¬
ment,  is  obviously  as  hopeless  as  between  the  Esquimaux  and
the  Caffre  in  estimating  the  heat  of  the  air  without  the  aid  of
the  thermometer.  Whilst  uniformity  is  impracticable,  accu¬
racy  is  impossible.  Almost  any  change  which  would  secure
uniformity  would  be  an  improvement.  Though  it  were  im¬
possible  at  first  to  avoid  error  to  some  extent,  if  uniformity
even  in  error  were  secured,  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  error
would  sooner  or  later  be  discovered  and  removed.  A  change
is  not  less  required  to  enable  the  honest,  the  talented,  and  the
industrious  to  compare  their  observations,  to  verify  their  facts,
to  establish  their  principles,  to  vindicate  their  superiority,
and  advance  their  science,  than  to  harness  the  senseless  zealot
and  expose  the  ignorant  quack.  As  the  case  stands,  we  have
only  the  certainty  of  error,  without  the  certainty  of  where,
how,  or  to  what  extent,  Gaiks  discoveries  are  caricatured
and  prostituted,  minds  disciplined  in  the  stern  school  of
modern  science  are  turned  away,  and  the  progress  of  truth  is
indefinitely  retarded.

To  illustrate  the  practical  bearings  of  my  investigations,  I
will  continue  the  case  of  P.  G.  through  all  its  stages ;  keep¬
ing  steadily  in  view  the  conviction  that  our  scientific  duty  will
not  be  performed  until  we  not  only  shew  what  he  now  is  (in
cerebral  development)  both  in  capability  and  tendency — both
positively  and  relatively,  but  what  he  has  been  since  birth,
and  what  he  will  be  at  all  ages  to  the  latest  period  of  life.

The  human  head  (always  excluding  the  face,  of  course),
or  cranium,  is  a  singular  exception  to  all  other  parts  of  the
body  in  the  facilities  afforded  for  accurate  measurement.  The
soft  muscular  tissues  of  the  arm,  the  hand,  the  leg,  the  thigh,
and  the  trunk,  yield  to  the  touch  of  the  most  delicate  instru¬
ment,  yet  they  are  measured  every  day  with  great  accuracy;
but  the  brain  in  its  perfectly  fitted  case  of  bone  is  as  suscep¬
tible  of  instrumental  measure  as  if  it  was  a  solid  mass  of
ivory,  iron,  or  stone.

Absolute  size  of  head. — The  only  difficulty  in  obtaining
the  absolute  size,  or  volume, — the  cubic  measure  of  the  cubic
mass, — is  in  the  irregularity  of  its  shape.  This  difficulty  is
removed.  In  my  Contributions  to  the  Mathematics  of  Phre-


by  Mr.  Straton.


403


nology*  I  have  shewn  how  the  size  of  the  head  can  easily  be
determined.  By  the  method  there  described,  I  find  that  the
head  of  P.  G.  is  7  inches  average  length,  5T  average  breadth,
and  3*4  average  height;  the  size  is  therefore  121  cubic  inches

Comparative  or  relative  size — Averages.

Our  next  question  is  the  comparative  size.  Is  121  cubic
inches  a  large,  a  small,  or  a  medium  male  head,  at  10  years
of  age  ?  And  farther,  supposing  the  progress  of  the  head  to
be  average  during  the  subsequent  periods  of  life,  what  will  be
the  size  (and  shape  also,  we  must  ask)  at  20,  30,  40  years,
and  upwards.

This  at  once  brings  us  to  the  questions  of  progressive
development,  of  average  size,  and  range  of  sizes  of  both  sexes
at  all  ages.  The  importance  of  these  questions,  both  to  science
and  to  art,  has  long  been  extensively  recognized,  and  their
solution  attempted  by  many  parties ;  or  rather,  I  should  say,
attempts  have  been  in  this  direction.  Skulls  have  been
gauged,  brains  have  been  weighed,  and  heads  have  been  mea¬
sured  in  a  variety  of  ways,  but  the  systematic  investigation  of
cerebral  development  is  still  to  begin.  Of  the  little  that  has
been  done,  the  greater  part  is  labour  lost.  Notions,  alike
varied  and  vague,  seem  to  be  entertained  both  as  to  what  is
to  be  done  and  how  to  do  it.  We  must  consider  both  points  for
a  moment.  We  have  to  trace  the  cerebral  development  of  both
sexes  separately,  through  all  its  changes  both  of  size  and
shape,  from  birth  to  the  latest  period  of  life.  There  is  a
great  variety  both  of  sizes  and  shapes  of  the  same  sex  at  the
same  age,  and  of  each  sex  at  all  ages.  We  have  therefore  to
discover  (1)  the  average  shape,  and  (2)  the  range  of  shape
from  the  highest  type  to  the  lowest.  We  have  also  to  dis¬
cover  (1)  the  average  size,  (2)  the  range  of  sizes  from  the
smallest  to  the  largest,  and  (3)  the  laws  of  grouping,  if  I  may
so  speak ;  that  is,  the  proportion  of  cases  at  each  point  or  step
in  the  scale  of  size  from  the  smallest  to  the  largest.  All  this
has  to  be  investigated  in  each  sex  at  all  ages,  and  in  each
community,  tribe,  nation,  and  race.  Herculean  task  this  un¬
doubtedly  is,  which  will  require  much  time  and  labour  to
execute.  I  can  only  “  break  ground  ”  in  a  corner  of  the  great
field ;  but  every  item  is  an  acquisition  to  real  knowledge,  and
every  subsequent  addition  made  will  not  only  have  its  own
value,  but  increase  that  of  all  the  previous  store.

The  terms  average,  mean,  and  medium,  are  frequently

*  Simpkin  and  Marshall,  Stationers’  Hall  Court,  and  Bailliere,  219,  Regent
Street,  London.


404


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development.


spoken  of  and  written  about  as  if  they  were  synonymous.
They  may,  or  they  may  not,  be  so  in  our  department,  and
must  therefore  be  clearly  understood.  Let  the  numbers  100,
108,  and  110  be  three  heads,  composing  a  group  of  which  we
wish  to  find  the  average.  The  mean  of  the  group  is  105,
being  equidistant  from  both  extremes,  viz.,  from  100  and  110.
The  medium  is  108,  there  being  an  equal  number  of  cases
(viz.,  one)  in  the  group  above  and  below  that  point.  The
average  is  106,  being  the  size  which  the  three  heads  would
be  if  they  were  exactly  equalized.  The  average  is,  next  to
the  laws  of  grouping,  the  most  important  particular  to  be
known.  It  is  that  size  of  head  which  we  would  obtain  in  any
group  of  few  or  of  many  cases,  if  we  could  take  from  the
larger  and  add  to  the  smaller  until  all  were  of  one  and  the  same
size.  The  average  is  therefore  the  most  appropriate  single
term  which  can  be  used  as  a  general  representative  of  the
cerebral  development  and  power  of  any  group,  tribe,  race,  or
nation.  A  knowledge  of  the  average  is  of  great  importance
for  philosophical  purposes, — for  general  comparisons  and  de¬
ductions  ;  but  it  takes  for  granted  for  the  moment  that  all  the
heads  composing  the  group  are  of  the  same  size.  This  is  very
far  from  being  consistent  with  the  facts  however,  and  for
more  minute  comparisons  we  therefore  require  much  more
definite  knowledge.

Laws  of  grouping. — If  we  take  at  random,  or  without
selection,  any  group  of  several  hundred  individuals,  of  the
same  age  and  sex,  say  boys  in  their  eleventh  year  as  an  ex¬
ample  :  on  measuring  each  in  the  group,  we  find  some  of  the
smallest  heads  only  90,  whilst  some  of  the  largest  are  above
150  cubic  inches.  These  are  the  ordinary  limits  of  size,  or
the  length  of  scale  over  which  the  entire  group  ranges.  The
next  question  is,  Are  the  sizes  spread  equally  over  the  scale,
or  do  they  cluster  more  numerously  at  some  point  than  at
others?  Plate  I.  illustrates  this  question.  Fig.  1  is  the
scale  of  size,  viz.,  cubic  inches,  of  our  imperial  standard.
Figs.  2,  3,  and  4,  are  groups  of  twenty ;  and  Figs.  5,  6,  and  7,
groups  of  a  hundred  cases  each  (males  in  the  eleventh  year),
taken  at  random  as  they  were  measured  and  entered  in  my
book ;  a  dot  being  placed  for  each  case  opposite  its  size  in  the
scale.  In  Figs.  2,  3,  and  4,  the  cases  are  too  few  (twenty
each)  to  give  a  single  ray  of  light  on  the  subject.  In  glanc¬
ing  the  eye  over  group,  Fig.  5,  the  law  seems  to  be  a  pretty
equal  distribution  of  sizes  over  the  wrhole  range ;  but  in  Fig.  6
the  tendency  to  cluster  near  the  centre  of  the  range  is  seen ;
this  tendency  is  still  more  obvious  in  Fig.  7 ;  and  Fig.  8,
which  is  the  three  preceding  groups  combined,  makes  the


Plate  I.  Cerebral  Development. — Laws  of  Grouping.


4-

3

2

1

5

1  6

7

1  8

M  C.

W.C.

P.  C.

Cubic

100

100

100

800

20

20

20

inches.

Paup.  Class.

Work.  Class.

Mid.  Class.

Three  combined.

92

93

•

•

94

95

96

•

•

97

98

•

99

•

•

100

101

•  •

102

•

•

103

•  9

•

104

e

•

•

105

•

106

•  •

•

•  •

•

107

•  •

•  •  •  •

•

•

108

•  •  •

•  •  •

109

•  •

•  9

•  •  •  •

9

110

•  •  •

e  •

•

111

•  •

•  t

112

•  •  •

•  •  •

113

o  •  •

114

115

116

•  •

•

117

•  •  •  •

•  •  •

•  •

•

•  •

118

119

•  •  •

•

•

120

•

•

121

•  •  •  •

•  •

•

•

122

•  •

•  •

•

•  •

123

•  •  •

•  o  •

•

•

124

•  •  •

•

•

125

•  •  •

•  ••••<>•

•  •

126

127

•  •

128

•

•

•  •  •

•

•

•

129

•  •  •

•  •  •  •

•  •

•

130

•

•

•  •

•  •  •  •

131

•

•

•  •

•  •  •  •

•

132

•

•  •  •  •

•

133

•  •  •

134

135

•

•  •  •

-

136

•

•

•  •

•  •  •  •

•

137

•

•

•

•  •  •

138

•

139

•

•  •

•  •  •

140

•  •  •

9  9  9

•

141

•

9

142

143

•  •

9  9

144

145

•  •

9  9

146

147

148

149

150

•

9

151

1

152

_

•

•

406


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,


matter  very  clear.  With  this  before  the  eye,  arid  the  measure¬
ment  of  any  male  head  at  the  given  age,  we  see  at  a  glance
the  relative  position  of  the  individual  in  the  scale  of  cerebral
development.  If  the  example  is  120  inches,  his  place  is  the
centre  of  the  group ;  if  it  is  110,  his  place  is  far  down  in  the
scale;  and  if  135,  though  far  from  the  highest  point,  he  has
but  a  small  per  centage  of  superiors  in  cerebral  development
at  his  age.

This  may  appear  to  many  as  attempting  fastidious  ac¬
curacy,  and  I  must  grant  for  the  time  that  it  is  so,  and  shall
here  say  little  more  on  the  point,  but  take  leave  to  doubt  that
it  will  long  be  considered  in  that  light.  In  every  department
of  science  the  fastidious  accuracy  of  one  age  became  the  com¬
mon  standard  of  the  next,  and  the  greater  the  precision  in  prac¬
tice,  the  richer,  in  a  greatly  increased  ratio,  has  the  harvest  of
results  been.  The  alchymist  of  old  might  estimate  his  bundles
of  herbs,  his  lumps  of  earth,  and  masses  of  metal,  by  the  eye
and  the  hand,  and  smile  in  derision  at  the  fastidious  scruples  of
his  modern  representative,  conducting  his  investigations  with
the  most  minute  attention  to  weights,  measures,  atomic  theo¬
ries,  and  tables  of  chemical  equivalents.  During  the  estimate
of  the  eye  and  the  hand,  astrology  held  the  place  of  astronomy.
The  earth,  a  boundless  plain,  was  the  material  universe,  round
which  the  hosts  of  heaven  revolved  in  their  spheres.  The  sun
and  moon  rose  in  the  east  and  set  in  the  west,  the  wandering
stars  were  gods  ruling  the  destinies  of  men,  and  the  fixed  stars
were  food  for  the  picturesque  among  the  shepherds  on  the
plains  by  night.  With  instrumental  aid,  a  more  precise  esti¬
mate  of  facts  is  obtained ;  the  earth,  turned  into  a  ball,  rolls
away  in  the  regions  of  space  to  its  place  among  the  gods ;
having  by  turns  been  the  scene  of  their  creation,  their  cradle,
their  temples,  and  their  tomb.  The  wandering  stars  become
worlds,  and  the  world  becomes  a  wandering  star;  the  sun
comes  to  rest  in  the  centre,  and  the  stars  adorn  the  circum¬
ference  of  the  system ;  the  geometrician  stretches  his  lines
and  applies  his  scales ;  the  planets  are  measured  and  their
paths  traced  out  in  the  skies ;  the  sun  is  weighed  as  in  scales,
and  the  moon  as  in  a  balance.  Greater  precision  still  is
attained,  and  we  discover  “  in  every  star  a  system,  in  every
atom  a  world.”  But  between  the  first  step  in  improvement
effected,  and  the  last  yet  attempted,  what  lapses  of  time,
what  efforts  of  genius,  what  accumulations  of  labour,  what
improvements  in  art,  what  advances  in  science  were  neces¬
sary  !  That  our  science  will  run  some  similar  course  of  im¬
provement  is  my  firm  conviction.  Each  generation  improving
on  the  preceding  in  the  precision  with  which  it  appreciates


by  Mr.  Straton .


407


facts,  purifying  and  enlarging  the  fountain  of  its  inductions,
extending  and  establishing  the  domain  of  science.  In  essay¬
ing  improvement,  I  am  more  anxious  in  the  meantime  to
attain  the  easiest  practicable  than  the  greatest  possible  stage
in  advance.  The  illustrations  given  will  suffice  to  indicate
the  nature  and  importance  of  what  I  have  called  the  laws  of
grouping,  and  make  the  averages  and  ranges  of  size, — the
centres  and  lengths  of  the  groups  we  may  say, — more  fully
intelligible.  These  will  shew,  in  a  general  way,  the  modifi¬
cations  incident  to  age  and  sex  in  the  population  included  in
the  survey.  What  further  modifications  in  any  or  in  every
particular  may  obtain  in  other  parts  of  the  empire,  and  among
other  tribes,  nations,  and  races,  are  important  questions,  but
impossible  to  be  answered  till  the  requisite  data  are  collected
and  collated.

Data. — We  have  a  choice  of  three  classes  of  objects  as
data  for  solving  the  problems  before  us,  viz.,  the  brain,  the
skull,  and  the  living  head.  We  may  notice,  in  passing,  the
peculiar  merits  of  each.

Brains. — The  weights  of  brains  are  considered  by  many
as  the  only  suitable  data  from  which  to  deduce  the  develop¬
ment.  They  are  highly  useful  in  some,  but  useless  for  our
purpose  in  other,  particulars.  (1.)  Is  the  weight  of  the  dead
a  true  index  of  that  of  the  living  healthy  brain  ?  This  is  very
doubtful,  to  say  the  least  of  it.  It  is  quite  certain  that  we
could  never  discover  the  average  size  and  weight  of  the
healthy  by  weighing  and  measuring  emaciated  dead  bodies.
But  (2.)  granting  that  the  weight  of  the  brain  is  in  every
instance  unchanged  in  its  passage  through  disease  and  death,
as  we  cannot  weigh  the  living,  the  results  furnished  by  dead
brains  do  not  meet  our  most  important  wants.  Still  they  are
useful,  I  repeat ;  though  least  accessible,  they  have  been
more  attended  to,  and  their  facts  tabulated  with  greater  care
and  skill  than  has  obtained  in  either  of  the  other  classes  of
cases.  They  furnish,  from  independent  data,  a  chain  of
results  running  parallel  in  several  particulars  with  our  pre¬
sent  investigations ;  we  will  therefore  take  their  evidence  in
the  proper  place.

Skulls. — Crania  are  admitted  by  all  to  be  suitable  data.
Vast  collections  have  been  made  all  over  the  world,  and  at  a
cursory  glance  we  seem  to  have  ample  material  for  every
useful  purpose;  but  it  dwindles  rapidly  on  closer  inspection.
Of  many  specimens  the  sex,  and  of  many  others  the  age,
cannot  be  determined.  Of  a  third  class,  both  age  and  sex
are  unknown.  Contributors  to  this  department  seem  to  have
thought  the  name  of  the  tribe,  caste,  nation,  or  race,  all  the


408  Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,

information  necessary  to  be  given,  or  it  was  probably  all  that
could  be  obtained  with  the  specimens ;  nor  has  the  examina¬
tion  of  the  crania  been  as  yet  conducted  with  greater  care
than  the  collection  of  them.  Professor  Tiedemann  measured
the  internal  capacity  of  crania  by  filling  them  with  millet
seeds.  Now  these,  in  common  with  most  other  seeds,  are
very  susceptible  of  alteration,  both  in  weight  and  bulk,  by
atmospheric  changes.  But  still  worse  for  the  end  to  be  at¬
tained  is  the  fact  of  its  being  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to
shake  or  pack  uniformly  the  same  weight  into  the  same  bulk
or  measure.  Sir  William  Hamilton  avoided  the  errors  con¬
sequent  on  atmospheric  changes,  by  using  “  pure  siliceous
sand  •”  but  as  regards  uniform  packing  sand  is  little  superior
to  seeds.  Dr.  S.  Morton  used  leaden  shot  for  the  same  pur¬
pose  ;  this  is  by  far  the  best  solid  substance  for  the  purpose
which  has  yet  been  proposed.  Leaden  shot  of  small  size,  if
well  made,  is  so  smooth,  spherical,  and  heavy,  that  it  packs
into  uniform  space  with  very  little  care.  I  have  seen  the
suitability  of  all  these  substances  tested  by  experiment  so
often,  and  always  with  the  same  results,  that  there  seems  no
room  for  doubt  about  the  matter.  But  M.  de  WolkofFs  re¬
searches  stand  first  in  merit  in  the  mode  of  determining  size
or  capacity.  He  measured  the  crania  by  the  quantity  of
water  which  each  contained.

Heads. — Living  heads  are  at  once  the  most  numerous,  the
most  accessible,  and  the  most  important  data  for  the  purpose
of  cerebral  physiology,  and  it  is  small  compliment  to  our
industry  and  love  of  scientific  precision  to  be  under  the  ne¬
cessity  of  admitting  that  hitherto  they  have  been  the  least  used
for  the  purpose  in  hand.  Lists  of  line  and  calliper  measure¬
ment  of  twenty,  thirty,  or  forty  cases  may  be  found  in  phreno¬
logical  books ;  but  no  systematic  investigation  has  hitherto
been  executed  in  any  race,  nation,  or  tribe.  Sir  William
Hamilton  has,  and  will  long  have,  the  sole  merit  of  having
“  established,  apart  from  the  proof  by  averages,  that  the  human
encephalos  [entire  brain]  does  not  increase  after  the  age  of
seven  at  highest.  This  has  been  done  by  measuring  the  heads
of  the  same  young  persons  from  infancy  to  adolescence  and
maturity.”*

We  will  look  again  at  this  singular  discovery.

Individual  cases. — It  may  occur  to  others,  as  it  did  to  Sir
William  Hamilton,  that  to  discover  the  progressive  develop¬
ment,  and  period  of  maturity,  it  is  necessary  to  measure  the
same  young  persons  from  infancy  upwards.  I  have  repeatedly


*  Edinburgh  New  Philosophical  Journal,  April,  1850.


by  Mr .  Straton.


409


found  the  delusion  (for  such  it  is)  existing  in  quarters  where
I  little  expected  to  find  it ;  and  when  it  does  exist  it  may  be
entertained  by  honest  and  industrious  inquirers  even  after
they  have  many  hundred  cases  tabulated.  The  change  both
in  the  size  and  shape  of  the  head  goes  on  for  so  long  a  period
of  time,  the  difference  between  the  sexes  at  all  ages,  and
between  individuals  of  the  same  sex  at  the  same  age,  and  at
all  ages,  is  so  great,  that  measurements  tabulated  indiscrimi¬
nately  seem  to  be  an  inextricable  mass  of  confusion  only,  in
which  it  is  impossible  ever  to  discover  order  or  harmonious
progression.  But,  when  large  numbers  have  been  properly
classified,  and  the  averages  taken,  all  doubts  about  obtaining
harmonious  results  will  vanish.  Every  link  of  the  chain  may
not  be  complete  at  first ;  some  may  be  obviously  a  little  too
large,  others  too  small.  No  matter,  additional  cases  will  per¬
fect  the  symmetry ;  and  when  perfected,  no  subsequent  num¬
ber  of  cases  taken  at  random  in  the  same  locality  will  sensibly
alter  the  results.  All  this  will  be  admitted  after  due  reflec¬
tion.  Except  the  average  size  of  the  head  at  any  or  at  all
ages  be  different  in  different  years,  or  in  different  seasons  of
the  same  year,  in  the  same  locality,  it  is  not  necessary,  it  may
not  even  be  proper,  as  we  will  soon  see,  to  measure  the  same
head  twice  for  the  purpose  contemplated.  It  may  be  possible,
but  is  not  very  probable,  that  any  one  head  makes  exactly
average  progress  in  development  from  infancy  to  adolescence
and  maturity.  I  have  in  many  instances  measured  the  same
head  twice,  thrice,  or  more  times,  with  one,  two,  or  more
years  of  interval,  and  am  prepared  to  prove  that,  if  average
progress  be  the  rule  in  individual  cases,  there  are  many  ex¬
ceptions  to  that  rule.  In  some  cases  I  have  found  scarcely
any  progress  for  years;  in  others  I  have  found  much  more
than  the  average  progress.

The  influence  of  circumstances  on  development  has  yet  to
be  investigated.  Not  only  health  and  sickness,  but  change
of  employment,  change  of  residence  from  town  to  country,
and  from  country  to  town,  are  capable  of  producing  important
deviations  from  the  average  progress.  Shortly  after  my
amiable  friend,  Sheriff  Watson,  opened  his  ragged  schools  in
Aberdeen,  I  measured  the  heads  of  all  the  inmates,  amounting
to  several  hundred  boys  and  girls.  Three  years  afterwards
I  repeated  the  survey,  and  found  some  eighty  or  ninety  of
those  I  had  previously  measured.  Nearly  all  of  them  had
made  more  than  average  progress,  some  of  them  more  than
double  that  rate.  This  change  (still  more  marked  in  other
parts  of  the  body  than  the  head)  was  unquestionably  the
effect  of  the  altered  circumstances  in  which  they  had  been


410  Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,

placed  daring  the  preceding  years.  From  wandering  about,
begging  and  stealing,  suffering  all  the  miseries  of  cold,  hunger,
filth,  and  neglect,  they  were  taken  under  comfortable  shelter.
Food,  clothing,  air  and  exercise,  both  mental  and  physical,
had  been  judiciously  regulated,  and  such  were  the  happy
consequences.

If,  however,  the  cases  repeatedly  measured  were  suffi¬
ciently  numerous  to  secure  the  precise  average  of  health,
sickness,  and  all  the  other  contingencies,  known  and  un¬
known,  which  influence  cerebral  development,  then  they
would  be  equally,  but  not  a  whit  more,  appropriate  than  if  the
same  head  had  never  been  twice  measured.

Quantity  of  data  required. — It  will  be  admitted  by  all  that
the  greater  the  quantity  of  data  collected  and  collated,  even
the  entire  race,  nation,  tribe,  or  community  if  that  were  pos¬
sible,  the  greater  the  certainty  of  discovering  the  truth.  But
I  expect  no  such  unanimity  as  to  the  smallest  number  of  cases
that  may  with  safety  be  relied  on.  Soemmerring,  from  one
case,  found  maturity  attained  at  three  years  of  age.  Tiede-
mann,  with  six  male  cases  under  seven  years  of  age,  is  con¬
fident  that  the  brain  reaches  its  full  weight  in  the  seventh  or
eighth  year.  Sir  William  Hamilton,  on  similar  data  by  Sims,
finds  maturity  at  the  sixth,  or  at  the  utmost  in  the  seventh,
year,  “  superfluously  confirmed.”  We  will  soon  cease  to  be
surprised  at  any  conclusions,  however  absurd,  being  drawn
from  so  very  limited  premises.  At  the  recent  meeting  of  the
British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  the
secretary  of  one  of  the  sections  descanted  very  learnedly  on
an  ancient  Scottish  race,  who  once  peopled  the  part  over
which  my  survey  of  the  present  population  extends ;  the  said
race  being  represented  on  the  table  of  the  section  by  five
skulls,  the  sex  of  some,  the  age  of  others,  and  even  the  iden¬
tity  of  race  of  one  or  two  of  which  appeared  to  me  doubtful.
Professor  Tiedemann  represents  the  entire  human  race  by
225  male  and  25  female  examples.  Dr.  Morton  performs  a
similar  feat  with  620  crania.  He  represents  the  Germans  by
18  crania,  the  English  by  5,  the  Anglo-Americans  by  7,  the
Irish  by  6,  the  Arabs,  the  Chinese,  and  others,  by  3  cases
each.  As  a  specimen  of  his  accuracy,  I  may  state  that  his
largest  English  is  just  equal  to  the  average  Scotch  male  skull
at  50  years  of  age.  His  thus  trifling  with  truth  cannot  easily
be  excused  in  some  particulars.  In  the  Germans,  English,
Irish,  and  some  others,  he  might  have  tabulated  any  quantity
of  data

At  an  early  stage  of  the  investigation  I  saw  that  at  least
100  cases  of  each  sex,  at  each  year  of  the  age,  from  birth  till


by  Mr.  Straton*


411


14  years  or  older,  were  required.  I  have  since  found  that
many  more  than  100  cases  of  the  same  age  and  sex  do  not
suffice  for  every  purpose.  The  groups  in  Plate  I.  show  the
adaptation  of  large  compared  with  small  quantities  of  cases
to  discover  the  more  recondite  laws  of  development.  The
three  smallest  groups  (fig.  2,  3,  4,)  of  20  cases  each,  lead  to
conclusions  the  very  reverse  of  those  established  by  the  larger
groups  (fig.  5,  6,  7,)  of  100  cases  each ;  yet  they  are  all  the
same  cases  grouped  at  random  from  the  same  pages  of  mea¬
surements.  The  smallest  groups  give  neither  the  range  nor
the  average,  singly  nor  combined,  and  they  do  not  give  a
glimpse  of  the  laws  of  grouping.  Even  the  larger  groups
(fig.  5,  6,  7,)  are  not  quite  conclusive  on  the  latter  point ;  we
require  the  symmetry  exhibited  in  the  largest  (fig.  8,)  to
demonstrate  the  degree  of  certainty  obtainable  from  large,
compared  with  small,  quantities  of  data.  A  glance  at  the
large  group  inspires  a  feeling  of  confidence  that  the  general
features  at  least,  the  great  outlines  of  this  department  of  na¬
ture,  are  seen,  though  some  of  the  more  minute  details  may
not  be  distinctly  in  view.  The  value  of  large  quantities  in
solving  important  problems  will  become  still  more  obvious  a
little  further  on.  We  may  just  remark  here  that,  in  conse¬
quence  of  the  great  range  of  sizes  (about  two-thirds  of  the
average  head)  of  both  sexes  at  the  same  age  and  at  all  ages,
rendering  small  quantities  liable  to  be  unduly  influenced  by
an  excess  of  either  large  or  small  cases ;  and  in  consequence
also  of  our  ignorance  of  the  constant  conditions  of  the  problems
to  be  solved,  we  can  avoid  the  risks  of  error  by  one  means
only,  that  is  by  tabulating  numerous  examples.  When  we
are  better  informed,  it  is  not  only  possible  but  highly  probable
that  a  few  cases  may  suffice  to  reveal  the  truth.  The  meteor¬
ologist  of  our  day  may  discover  the  average  temperature  of
many  places  with  very  limited  data;  but  it  required  the
hourly  observations  of  years  to  learn  how  to  abridge  labour
and  at  the  same  time  attain  the  truth.  A  few  broken  bones
may  enable  the  modern  anatomist  to  sketch  the  skeleton
which  he  never  saw  nor  heard  of,  but  the  laws  under  which
nature  operates  in  this  department, — the  constant  conditions
of  the  probiem, — had  first  to  be  discovered.

Races. — The  distinction  of  races  is  so  broad  and  marked
in  the  general  outline,  that  it  is  universally  recognised ;  but
in  the  details  there  is  every  variety  of  opinion,  and,  of  course,
of  classification  also.  This  is  quite  as  it  should  be  in  the
present  state  of  knowledge,  or  ignorance  rather,  of  the  sub¬
ject,  and  ought  to  continue  until  a  more  accurate  apprecia¬
tion  of  form  and  size,  and  more  definite  reasoning  on  their


412  Researches  in  Cerebral  Development ,

consequences  prevail  in  the  scientific  world.  The  doings  of
ethnologists,  the  ostensible  inquirers  in  this  department,  are
sad  specimens  of  scientific  bungling.  The  tendencies  are  in  the
right  direction,  however;  a  little  farther  on  they  will  discover
that  ethnology,  apart  from  Gaiks  discoveries,  is  the  shadow
apart  from  the  substance.

Sex. — The  difference  between  the  sexes,  both  in  size  and
shape,  particularly  the  size  of  the  head,  seems  so  obvious,  that
separate  classification  would  never  be  omitted.  Not  so,  how¬
ever  ;  Dr.  Morton  in  common  with  some  others,  has  entirely
overlooked  the  distinction.  The  consequence  is  that,  except
we  are  warranted  in  assuming  that  there  are  equal  numbers
of  each  sex  included  by  him  (a  very  doubtful  proposition),  his
splendid  “  Crania  4mericana/*  and  productions  in  that  de¬
partment,  are  little  better  than  lost  labour  on  waste  paper.

Age. — The  greatest  variety  of  opinion  prevails  as  to  the
period  of  life  at  which  the  head  attains  its  full  size :  3,  5,  6,
7,  8,  10,  14,  16,  21,  25,  30,  and  above  40  years,  have  by  turns
been  named  as  the  period  of  maturity.  Such  a  state  of  un¬
certainty  called  for  special  attention  to  the  classification  of
ages,  but  seems  to  have  had  just  the  contrary  effect;  as  if
variety  of  opinion  justified  neglect  of  the  subject,  or  the  most
trifling  exertions  to  discover  the  truth.  Of  this  Sir  William
Hamilton  is  amongst  the  most  recent  and  characteristic  in¬
stances.  From  one  to  a  dozen  of  cases  have  respectively  been
held  as  ample  evidence  to  settle  the  question  and  justify  theo¬
rising  to  any  extent.  Every  friend  of  science  is  entitled  to
protest  against  this  summary  mode  of  settling  so  important  a
point,  and  to  maintain  that  no  inquirer  has  any  right  to
theorise  on  the  matter.  It  is  his  duty  to  classify  data  in
single  years,  or  less  periods  while  development  is  rapid,  and
in  small  groups  of  years  after  the  progress  becomes  slow,
leaving  the  facts  to  tell  their  own  story.  To  assume  on
trifling  evidence  that  the  head  attains  maturity  at  3,  6,  12,
or  any  other  age,  and  class  all  above  that  as  mature,  is  vir¬
tually  to  shut  up  the  path  which  leads  to  truth.

Thus  far  the  propriety  of  classification  will,  I  venture  to
presume,  be  admitted  after  due  consideration.  But  I  have
only  entered  on  the  subject,  not  ended  it ;  though  with  only
one  suggestion  more,  I  must  close  for  a  time.

Sections. — I  had  seen  it  stated  by  some,  denied  by  others,
and  proved  by  none,  that  a  difference  of  size  in  the  average
head  characterised  different  sections  or  classes  of  the  same
community.  On  the  authority  of  hat  merchants*  observations,
it  became  generally  supposed  possible,  if  not  indeed  probable,
that  the  lower  classes  of  societv  had  smaller  heads  in  the

V


by  Mr.  Straton.


413


average  than  the  middle  and  higher  classes.  Against  this
statement  might  be  placed  a  semi-scientific  article  in  the
Phrenological  Journal  (vol.  xix.,  p.  216.  Edinburgh,  1846),
which  represents  the  inmates  of  the  ragged  schools  (beggars
and  thieves)  as  larger  headed  than  the  average  population  of
their  locality, — London.

The  article  is  plausibly  written,  but  seemed  to  me  far
from  remarkable  for  either  close  observation  or  clear  reason¬
ing,  and  tended  to  mystify  a  subject  which  was  anything  but
clear  before.  We  are  told,  “  It  needs  but  a  glance  at  the
physique  of  these  boys  to  perceive  that  mental  daring  pre¬
dominates  over  bodily  strength ;  for  as  they  are  subject  to
alternate  fits  of  repletion  and  starvation,  and  as  in  addition
the  air  which  they  continually  respire  is  surcharged  with  the
foulest  vapours  and  pregnant  with  death,  dealing  fevers
instead  of  conferring  the  healthy  bloom  of  youth,  they  appear
emaciated,  careworn,  and  consumptive.  The  heads  of  the
majority  of  the  boys  are  large,  much  larger  indeed  than  the
heads  of  most  well-educated  youths ;  many  in  fact  of  the  age
of  fifteen,  possessing  heads  as  large  as  those  of  active  men  of
thirty.  In  “  civilized”  and  in  savage  life,  in  society  and  in
solitude,  in  the  cave,  the  cot,  the  hut,  and  the  hovel,  in  the
forest,  the  desert,  the  bogs,  and  the  back  slums,  alternate  fits
of  repletion  and  starvation,  air  surcharged  with  the  foulest
vapours,  pregnant  with  fever  and  death,  have  long  played  in
full  force  on  the  human  frame ;  if  they  are  fitted  to  promote
cerebral  development,  and  make  “the  great  absolute  and
relative  size  of  the  frontal  lobe  striking,”  then,  long  ere  this
time  in  the  world's  history,  genius  should  have  been  the  rule,
mediocrity  the  exception.  Be  the  facts  what  they  might,  the
nature  of  my  investigations  left  me  no  alternative  but  to
penetrate  the  mystery.  If  different  sections  of  the  same
community  present  different  averages  of  either  size  or  shape,
such  differences  could  not  be  overlooked  without  certainty  of
error  to  some  unknown  extent  in  the  general  averages.  I
therefore  visited  the  ragged  schools,  and  embraced  every
other  opportunity  of  measuring  and  tabulating  the  pauper,
the  working,  and  the  higher  classes  separately ;  the  resulting
averages  surprised  me  not  a  little.  The  groups  in  Plate  I.
make  the  whole  obvious.  Fig.  5,  shows  the  grouping  on  the
scale  of  size  (fig.  1,)  of  100  paupers  found  in  the  ragged
schools,  in  the  jails,  and  prowling  about  picking  up  a  living
by  begging,  stealing,  or  selling  matches,  &c.  Fig.  6,  is  a
similar  group  of  100  of  the  labouring  classes,  and  fig.  7,  is
100  of  the  middle  or  higher  classes  of  society,  in  which  I
include  the  professional  classes,  doctors,  lawyers,  ministers,
VOL.  VIII.  G  G


414


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,


schoolmasters,  merchants,  manufacturers,  landowners,  leading
agriculturists,  &c.,  and  their  families.  The  whole  of  the
cases  forming  the  groups  are  males  in  the  eleventh  year  of
their  age.

Little  explanation  is  necessary.  The  position  of  the
respective  groups  on  the  scale  of  size  is  seen  at  a  glance.  The
pauper  obviously  range  full  five  inches  less  than  the  working
classes,  and  these  again  quite  as  much  below  the  higher
classes.  The  same  relative  position  and  proportions  obtain
in  both  sexes  at  all  ages  from  five  till  between  twenty  and
thirty  years  at  least.  Above  the  latter  and  below  the  former
my  data  are  not  sufficiently  ample  to  decide.  The  silent  clus¬
ters  tell  one  story  and  one  only.  No  obliquity  can  mistake,
no  casuistry  misrepresent  or  distort,  it.  The  smaller  groups
(figs.  5,  6,  and  7,)  do  not  present  the  perfect  symmetry  and
completeness  of  the  large  group,  fig.  8;  it  were  singular  if
they  did  so.  All  the  cases  were  taken  at  random,  as  I  have
already  said,  and  tabulated  as  they  were  measured.  The
grouping  was  consequently  subjected  to  all  the  vicissitudes  of
chance,  accident,  or  whatever  else  it  may  be  called.  Never¬
theless,  the  symmetry  is  sufficiently  complete  to  shew  that  no
additional  number  of  cases,  however  great,  taken  at  random
from  the  same  classes,  the  same  age  and  sex,  in  the  same
locality,  would  move  the  average  of  any  of  the  groups  to  an
important  extent.  The  group  fig.  7  is  the  least  symmetrical
of  the  three ;  a  feature  which  is  to  my  mind  the  most  remark¬
able  fact  of  the  whole,  and  will  be  understood  in  a  moment.
The  middle  and  working  classes  blend  so  imperceptibly  into
each  other,  the  line  of  demarcation  is  often  so  indefinite,  that
it  is  no  easy  matter  to  say  of  many  individual  cases,  to  which
of  the  classes  they  most  properly  belong.  But  further,  scep¬
tical  as  I  was  for  a  long  time,  about  sectional  differences
existing,  or  if  existing  of  their  being  sufficient^  marked  to  be
detected  and  clearly  brought  out  in  figures,  and  being  rather
wishful  than  otherwise  that  a  laborious  task  should  not  be
rendered  more  so  by  the  necessity  of  attending  to  such  dis¬
tinctions,  I  was  for  some  years  not  so  fastidious  in  the  classi¬
fication  as  I  ought  to  have  been;  hence  results  the  more
scattered  appearance  of  group  fig.' 7.  Though  the  effect  of
more  minute  attention  to  classification  might  have  been  to
render  the  sectional  distinctions  slightly  more  marked,  I  do
not  now  regret  the  circumstances  stated.  To  demonstrate  the
nature  and  extent  of  varieties  in  the  same  community,  which
were  doubted  by  some,  denied  by  others,  and  unsuspected  by
many,  is  important  in  some  particulars ;  but  it  is  far  more  so
to  see  demonstrated  the  great  facility  which  our  science


by  Mr.  Straton.


415


affords  for  deducing  laws  from  statistical  investigations ;  and
that  just  in  proportion  to  the  care  and  accuracy  with  which
the  investigation  is  conducted,  so  are  the  distinctness  and
precision  of  the  resulting  averages.

Such  averages,  when  legitimately  evolved,  form  a  species
of  evidence  which  fools  alone  can  cavil  with.  Candid  minds
bow  to  the  dicta  as  revelations  of  nature,  on  whose  truth  the
utmost  confidence  can  repose.

In  the  average,  or  mathematical  being,  we  have  a  well-
known  and  clearly-defined  entity  on  which  to  reason ;  but
though  real,  he  differs  in  many  important  particulars  from
organized  existences.  He  is  freed  from  all  the  individual
peculiarities  of  constitution  and  training,  which  are  often
difficult  to  discover,  and  which  give  bent  to  individual  charac¬
ter  which  it  is  equally  difficult  to  account  for.  The  average
being,  when  distinctly  brought  in  view,  exhibits  all  the  great¬
ness  and  all  the  littleness,  all  the  strength  and  all  the  weak¬
ness,  all  the  virtues  and  all  the  vices,  all  the  capabilities  and
all  the  tendencies  of  the  race,  nation,  age,  sex,  or  section,
which  the  individual  represents.

The  importance  therefore  of  average  individuals  as  solu¬
tions  of  problems  in  cerebral  physiology  can  hardly  be  over
estimated.  Indeed,  it  may  safely  be  said,  that  it  is  only  after
many  such  problems  are  solved  that  the  full  value  of  Gaiks
discoveries  will  be  understood.  If  then  in  the  same  commu¬
nity,  varieties,  which  have  escaped  the  notice  of  the  most
careful  observers,  can  be  clearly  demonstrated,  and  that  too
when  the  one  element  of  size  only  is  the  criterion,  how  much
more  so  when  the  element  of  shape  also  is  considered  ?  And
how  much  more  clearly  still  may  the  varieties  of  communities,
tribes,  nations,  and  races  which  compose  the  human  family —
varieties  so  markedly  obvious  as  to  have  attracted  the  atten¬
tion  of  the  most  cursory  observers — be  demonstrated  with
ease,  clearness,  and  precision?  What  light  may  yet  be  thrown
on  the  question  of  Celt  v.  Saxon,  about  which  so  much  has  of
late  years  been  spoken  and  written,  and  of  which  so  little  of
the  clear  and  definite  organic  distinctions,  if  any  such  exist,
is  yet  known.

But  just  in  proportion  to  the  importance  of  such  results,
when  obtained  with  precision,  are  the  pernicious  conse¬
quences,  when,  by  want  of  due  attention  to  essential  condi¬
tions  of  the  problems,  errors  are  propagated  under  the  guise
of  truth.  If  the  average  of  ten,  twenty,  or  thirty  crania  is
permitted  to  pass  as  the  true  representation  of  a  race,  a
nation,  or  a  tribe,  there  are  no  limits  to  the  errors  which  may
be  committed,  the  absurdities  which  may  be  promulgated,

g  g  2


416


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development ,


either  as  favourable  or  hostile  to  Gall's  discoveries.  No  doubt
the  labour  to  be  done  is  immense.  Much  time  must  elapse,
and  much  talent  be  spent,  before  even  half  the  human  family
be  surveyed  with  the  requisite  care.  Without  hyperbole  we
may  say,  the  harvest  is  great  and  the  labourers  are  few ;  there
is  consequently  much  temptation  to  abridge  the  labour;  but
truth  must  be  attained  at  whatever  cost — error  must  be  ex¬
posed  at  whatever  sacrifice.

Vastly  more  extensive  data  must  be  collected  than  has
hitherto  been  deemed  necessary,  and  vastly  more  care  must
be  exercised  in  collating  these  data.  In  all  lands  the  heads  of
the  living,  as  well  as  the  crania  of  the  dead,  must  be  mea¬
sured.  The  latter  alone  have  as  yet  been  noticed ;  in  defiance
of  the  fact,  that  the  latter  can  never  be  fully  understood  with¬
out  minute  comparison  with  the  former.  We  are  little  pre¬
pared  to  judge  of  an  extinct  race,  or  even  to  know  that  it  is
extinct,  except  we  are  able  to  compare  minutely  the  supposed
extinct  with  the  living  races.  The  living  as  well  as  the  dead,
therefore,  the  civilized  and  the  savage  race,  nation,  tribe,  and
community :  age,  sex,  and  section ;  the  high  and  the  low,  the
rich  and  the  poor,  the  virtuous  and  the  vicious,  the  wise  and
the  foolish,  must  be  collated  and  classified,  in  order  to  see  the
true  nature  and  importance  of  the  subject  before  us.

To  do  this  work  other  minds  are  needed  than  either  the
philosophers  who  reached  maturity  at  seven  years  of  age,  or
the  phrenologists  who  like  to  boast  of  filling  their  coffers  by
their  devotion  to  science.  They  who  would  solve  such  pro¬
blems  must  make  light  of  losses ;  must  risk  even  health  and
life  itself.  The  dwellers  in  the  city  and  the  desert,  the  equa¬
torial  jungles  and  the  polar  snows,  the  dens  of  vice  and  hovels
of  wretchedness,  filth  and  disease,  may  not  be  surveyed  with¬
out  certainty  of  loss  and  sacrifices  of  many  kinds,  but  science
will  not  therefore  want  servants  when  the  work  is  seen.

I  have  discussed  what  may  be  called  the  previous  ques¬
tions  at  greater  length  than  would  have  otherwise  been  war¬
ranted,  from  the  consideration  that  the  importance  of  the
subject  is  seen  and  acted  on  both  by  scientific  societies  and
individuals.  But,  though  recognized,  the  investigations  as
hitherto  conducted  are  good  for  nothing,  saving  perhaps  so
much  done  in  the  way  of  exhausting  errors.  Instead  of  see¬
ing  science  advancing,  we  witness  the  painful  spectacle  of
talents  of  a  high  order  wasted  and  time  spent  in  teaching
error  in  the  semblance  of  truth.

Dr.  Frederick  Tiedemann,  Professor  of  Anatomy  and
Physiology  in  the  University  of  Heidelberg,  undertook  an
elaborate  series  of  investigations  with  a  view  to  discover  the


by  Mr.  Straton.


41 7


relative  size  of  the  negro  brain.  He  visited  the  principal
museums  of  Europe,  measuring  all  the  crania  of  whose  au¬
thenticity  he  was  satisfied.  His  researches  were  presented
and  read  to  the  Royal  Society  (London),  on  the  16th  June,
1836,  and  they  occupy  full  thirty  pages  and  five  plates  in  the
Philosophical  Transactions  for  that  year.  He  drew  the  infer¬
ence  that  the  negro  brain  is  not  inferior  to  that  of  the  Euro¬
pean.  His  production  was  highly  prized  and  praised  at  the
time  as  satisfactory  and  conclusive.  On  a  more  deliberate
inspection,  however,  we  discover,  1st.  That  he  represents  all
the  races  of  men  by  250  crania ;  a  quantity  barely  sufficient
for  one  age  of  one  sex  of  one  nation.  2nd.  That  his  mode  of
measuring  the  crania  (by  filling  them  with  millet-seeds)  was
defective.  3rd.  That  he  classed  all  above  seven  years  old  as
mature.  And  4th.  That,  granting  the  accuracy  of  his  data,
the  European  brain,  by  his  tables,  averages  111  cubic  inches,
the  negro  102,  consequently  his  own  premises  refute  his  con¬
clusions.

Dr.  S.  Gr.  Morton,  of  Philadelphia,  U.S.,  conducted  an
extensive  series  of  investigations  of  national  crania,  chiefly
American,  Egyptian,  and  negro  tribes.  His  Crania  Americana
is  a  splended  folio  volume,  with  many  finely-executed  plates
on  a  large  scale.  He  presented  a  condensed  view  of  his
labours  to  the  Academy  of  Natural  Science  in  the  city  where
he  resides,  and  the  paper  is  published  in  the  Edinburgh  New
Philosophical  Journal ,  April,  1850.  His  mode  of  measure¬
ment  (by  lead-shot)  was  good,  but  he  committed  several  fatal
errors.  1st.  He  represents  all  the  human  race  by  623  crania;
a  number  little  more  than  sufficient,  in  the  present  state  of
knowledge,  for  one  age  of  both  sexes  of  a  single  nation.
2nd.  He  classes  all  above  sixteen  years  as  mature.  And  3rd.
He  does  not  distinguish  the  sexes.

Sir  William  Hamilton,  Professor  of  Logic  and  Meta¬
physics  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  has,  we  are  told,
“  been  long  engaged  in  researches  into  the  natural  history  of
the  brain  of  man.”  He  has  gauged  crania,  weighed  brains,
and  measured  living  heads  from  infancy  to  “  maturity.”  He
gives  the  results  of  his  researches  as  remarks  on  Dr.  Morton's
tables  in  the  same  number  of  the  same  journal.  In  that
paper  he  appears  equally  remarkable  for  what  he  does,  and
what  he  does  not,  state,  for  trifling  with  truth  in  collecting
facts,  for  boundless  confidence  in  drawing  conclusions,  and
unmitigated  dogmatism  in  detailing  discoveries:  but  as  it  lies
right  in  our  way,  we  cannot  avoid  a  passing  notice.

We  read  p.  331. — “  Dr.  Morton's  conclusions,  as  to  the
comparative  size  of  the  negro  brain,  are  contrary  to  Tiedemanu's


418


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,


larger,  and  to  my  smaller,  induction,  which  concur  in  proving
that  the  negro  encephalos  is  not  less  then  the  European.”

Note. — Tiedemann  refutes  himself  as  we  have  just  seen,
and  of  course  refutes  Sir  William  Hamilton  also,  and  con¬
firms  Morton  in  this  particular.

Page  332. — “  Dr.  Morton*s  method  of  measuring  crania
is  certainly  no  'invention*  of  his  friend,  Mr.  Philips,  being  in
either  form  only  a  clumsy  and  unsatisfactory  modification  of
mine.  ...  I  found  that  pure  silicious  sand  was  the  best
mean  of  accomplishing  the  purpose,  from  its  suitable  ponde¬
rosity,  incompressibility,  and  equality  of  weight  in  all  wea¬
thers.**

Note. — The  suitability  of  any  substance  for  such  a  pur¬
pose  is  chiefly  determined  by  the  facility  with  which  it  packs
with  the  least  possible  care  into  the  least  possible  space.

Experiment. — Take  a  smooth  vessel  of  known  capacity,
say  a  tube  of  glass,  ten  inches  long  by  one  or  more  wide,
filled  deliberately  with  a  liquid,  such  as  water  or  mercury ;
no  shaking  or  tapping  will  compress  the  liquid  in  less  space.
Pilled  in  like  manner  with  seeds,  they  pack  into  an  inch  and
a  half  less  space  of  such  a  tube ;  sand  packs  about  one  inch ;
and  leaden  shot,  not  more  than  three- eighths  of  an  inch.
Hence  the  first  and  the  last  are  by  far  the  most  suitable  sub¬
stances.  It  is  not  easy  to  believe  that  Sir  William  could
write  as  he  did,  without  having  tested  the  facts ;  and  still
less  easy  to  suppose  that  he  bungled  so  simple  an  experiment.
Yet  we  must  either  believe  the  one  or  the  other  of  these,  or
accept  a  much  more  disreputable  alternative.

Page  332-3. — “  By  weighing  the  brain  of  a  young  and
healthy  convict  who  was  hanged ;  and  afterwards  weighing
the  saud  which  the  prepared  cranium  contained,  I  deter¬
mined  the  proportion  of  the  specific  gravity  of  the  cerebral
matter  (which  in  all  ages  and  animals,  is  nearly  [nearly ;
how  beautifully  vague]  equal)  to  the  specific  gravity  of  the
sand  which  was  employed.  I  thus  obtained  a  formula  by
which  to  recover  the  original  weight  of  the  encephalos  in  all
the  crania  which  were  fitted ;  and  hereby  brought  brains
weighed,  and  skulls  gauged,  into  universal  relation.  On  the
contrary,  the  comparisons  of  Tiedemann  and  Morton,  as  they
stand,  are  limited  to  their  own  tables.  I  have  once  and
again  [that  is  twice  of  course]  tested  the  accuracy  of  this
process  by  experiment  on  the  lower  animals,  and  have  thus
perfect  confidence  in  the  accuracy  of  the  results,  [the  italics  are
put  by  me  to  mark  the  passage],  be  the  problem  to  recover
the  weight  of  the  encephalos  from  the  cranium  of  a  sparrow,
or  from  the  cranium  of  an  elephant.**


by  Mr.  Straton.


419


Note. — So  far  is  it  from  true  that  the  specific  gravity  of
the  cerebral  substance  is  the  same  in  all  ages  and  animals,
that  I  possess  twice  the  number  of  facts  given  by  Sir  William,
tending  to  shew  that  in  the  same  age  of  the  same  animal  (viz.
man,)  brains  of  the  same  size  differ  in  weight  to  the  extent  of
several  ounces.  But  passing  over  this,  the  important  fact  to
be  noticed  is,  that  three  experiments  were  lield  sufficient  to
establish  “  his  perfect  confidence  in  the  accuracy  of  the
results,”  and  justify  so  sweeping  conclusions.  Without  this
information,  the  next  paragraph,  which  is  the  most  important
to  us,  would  have  been  much  more  mysterious  than  it  now  is.

Page  333. — “  I  have  now  established  apart  from  the  proof
by  averages,  that  the  human  encephalos  does  not  increase  after
the  age  of  seven  at  highest.  This  has  been  done  by  measuring
the  heads  of  the  same  young  persons  from  infancy  to  adole¬
scence  and  maturity,  for  the  slight  increase  of  the  size  of  the
head  after  seven  (or  six)  is  exhausted  by  the  development  to
be  allowed  for  bones,  muscles,  integuments  and  hair.”

Note. — As  Sir  William  does  not  say  how  many  young
persons  he  measured  from  birth  to  maturity,  we  are  bound
by  the  context  to  believe  that  he  repeated  the  experiment
“  once  and  again,”  and  has  “  perfect  confidence  in  his  accu¬
racy.  It  is  highly  probable  that  some  reach  maturity  at  an
earlier  age  then  others.  I  have  long  suspected  that,  in  many
of  the  labouring  population  who  exercise  their  mental  powers
to  the  least  possible  extent,  the  growth  of  the  brain  stops
perhaps  ten  or  fifteen  years  earlier  than  in  the  active  minded
of  the  upper  classes.  But  if  there  is  a  single  family  in  this
country  who  reached  cerebral  maturity  at  six,  seven,  or  eight
years  of  age,  it  is  a  phenomenon  which  I  wrould  go  a  good
few  miles  to  witness.  It  is  quite  unparallelled  in  my  experi¬
ence,  and,  consequently,  I  have  reached  very  different  conclu¬
sions.  The  fact  of  including  the  hair  in  the  measurement  of
the  head  is  a  marked  feature  in  scientific  precision.  Measured
in  that  way  the  head  certainly  attains  its  maximum,  if  not  its
maturity,  at  an  early  age.  The  luxuriant  locks  of  the  boy  of
six,  or  the  lad  of  sixteen,  tell  well  on  the  tape  line,  compared
with  the  “bald  pate”  of  the  man  of  sixty.  With  this  speci¬
men  of  accurate  observation  before  us,  the  bungled  experi¬
ments  with  sand,  seeds,  and  shot,  become  “  nearly”  credible.
As  he  tells  us  neither  the  age,  sex,  nor  number  of  his  exam¬
ples  measured,  nor  the  measures  of  the  head,  bone,  muscles,
integuments,  nor  hair  of  any  one  of  them,  he  leaves  us  no
room  to  reason  with  him.  Fortunately  the  “  slight  increase”
after  seven  is  so  great  as  to  leave  little  room  for  dispute
about  the  matter.


420  Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,

But  with  all  the  light  on  the  art  of  philosophizing  which
the  professor  of  logic  has  favoured  us  with,  I  am  unable  to
see  my  way  through  the  “  ridiculous  blunder  made  by  Dr.
Sims  in  his  valuable  paper  and  correlative  table  of  the  weight
of  253  brains/”  in  which  he  “  attacks  the  results  of  my  obser¬
vations.”  Dr.  Sims  in  his  table  (Medico  Chirur.  Trans.
vol.  xix.)  did  not  separate  the  sexes,  and  found  “the  average
weight  of  the  brain  goes  on  increasing  from  one  year  old  to
twenty.”  Sir  William  separated  the  sexes,  and  tells  us  that
“  his  (Dr.  Sims’s)  table,  when  properly  arranged,  confutes
himself,  and  superfluously  confirms  me.  This  is  comparing  the
girls  with  the  woman  [comparing  sixteen  cases ,  between  two
and  seven  years,  average  forty  ozz.  with  fifty-three  cases
between  ten  and  fifty,  average  forty-four  and  a  half  ozz.]
and  the  boys  with  the  men  [four  cases  from  two  to  seven ,
average  forty-two  ozz.,  and  thirty-nine  cases,  between  ten  and
fifty,  average  forty-eight  ozz.,  “nearly”]  it  appears  from  his
own  induction,  that  the  cranial  contents  do  reach  the  average
amount  even  before  the  age  of  seven.”

I  “  give  up  the  case.”  It  may  be  possible  by  some
dexterous  manceuvering  with  very  large  brains,  which  occur
“  once  and  again  in  the  table,  ( a  boy  of  six,  is  forty-nine  ozz.,
being  more  than  the  man  at  fifty,  and  three  girls  under  six
years,  are  above  the  average  woman)  to  obtain  superfluous
confirmation;  but  in  what  way,  I  cannot  tell;  neither  can  I
tell  why  he  overlooks  the  more  recent,  more  extensive,  and
much  more  appropriate  investigations  (for  Scottish  averages)
carried  on  in  his  own  city,  and  published  some  three  and  a
half  years  before  his  paper  appeared.

Dr.  Reid,  and  his  successor  in  office,  Dr.  Peacock,  col¬
lected  the  weights  of  356  brains  in  the  Royal  Infirmary  of
Edinburgh,  in  1843  and  preceding  years.  The  results  of
their  combined  labours  were  published  in  the  Journal  of
Medical  Science,  Sept.  1846.  The  following  are  their  general
results  up  to  fifty  years  of  age  : —

AVERAGE  WEIGHTS  OF  BRAINS.


Years.

Male.

No.  of  Cases.

Ounces.

Years.

Female.

No.  of  Cases.

Ounces.

2  to  5

. .  5  . .

43

2  to  5

8  .  .

37

5  to  7

4  . .

43  ....

5  to  7

4

38

7  to  10

6  . .

46  ....

7  to  10

4  . .

41

10  to  13

4

50  ....

—

. .  —

—

13  to  16

5  . .

47  ....

—

. .  —

—

1 6  to  20

8  . .

51  ....

16  to  20

..  13  ..

45

20  to  25

..  16  ..

52  ....

20  to  25

..  13  ..

47

25  to  30

. .  24  . .

49  ....

25  to  30

..  13  ..

43

30  to  40

..  41  ..

51  ....

30  to  40

. .  33  . .

45

40  to  50

. .  44  . .

49  ....

40  to  50

. .  23  . .

45

by  Mr.  Straton.


421


We  here  see  increase  in  weight  till  past  twenty  years  of
age.  The  apparent  diminution  between  that  and  fifty  I  need
hardly  say  is  fallacious.  It  would  be  easy  to  shew,  from  what
we  know  of  the  laws  of  grouping,  that  there  is  an  excess  of
small  brains  after  twenty-five  years  •,  but  I  think  it  unneces¬
sary.  The  cases  collected  are  far  too  few  as  yet  for  trust¬
worthy  results,  even  were  they  otherwise  unexceptionable.

Having  sketched  the  work  to  be  done,  and  what  has  been
done,  I  have  next  to  submit  a  different  class  of  evidence.

District  and  people  surveyed. — On  the  ethnographic  map
of  Europe,  by  Dr.  Gustaf  Kombst,  turning  the  eye  to  Scot¬
land,  a  band  of  deep  yellow  tinge  is  seen  stretching  along  the
east  coast,  from  the  Eirth  of  Forth  northwards  over  the
Orkney  and  Shetland  Islands.  The  band  touches  the  German
Ocean,  and  spreads  inland  some  thirty  or  forty  miles  from  the
Forth  to  the  Spey.  From  that  northward  the  band  is  irre¬
gular,  narrow  and  broken,  seldom  exceeding  eight  or  ten  miles
in  breadth.  It  is  over  this  district  that  my  survey  extends.
The  yellow  band  marks  a  tolerably  homogeneous  mixture  of
Norman,  Dane,  and  Celtic  blood.  The  district  includes  the
towns  of  Dundee,  Montrose,  Banff,  Elgin,  Forres,  and  others
of  less  note.  From  the  banks  of  the  Tay  north  to  the  Spey,
the  race  is  more  highly  Norman  than  in  the  vales  of  the
Lossie,  the  Findhorn,  the  Nairn,  and  farther  north  and  west.
In  Elgin  and  Forres  the  preponderance  of  clan  surnames  and
Celtic  accent  are  so  marked,  that  I  have  used  the  cases  col¬
lected  there  but  sparingly  in  my  averages,  and  have  excluded
the  population  beyond  the  Nairn.  My  purpose  in  this  is  to
preserve  the  classification  of  race  as  pure  as  possible  for  future
comparison,  when  the  other  districts  of  Scotland  are  surveyed.
The  district  south  of  the  Forth  and  Clyde  is  tinged  a  paler
yellow  on  the  map.  It  includes  Edinburgh,  Glasgow,  Dum¬
fries,  Hawick,  Kelso,  &c.,  and  is  said  to  contain  a  greater
mixture  of  Saxon  blood.  Judging  from  what  I  have  seen  of
that  district,  I  do  not  anticipate  that  the  averages  will  differ
in  any  important  particular  from  those  I  have  obtained.  But
in  this  I  may  be  mistaken,  and  purposely  avoid  foreclosing
the  question.  The  third  and  last  ethnological  district  of
Scotland  extends  from  the  Clyde  northwards,  including  the
Highlands  and  western  islands.  It  is  tinged  slightly  blue  on
the  map,  indicating  a  population  of  Celtic  origin.  In  this
district  the  average  head  is  probably  a  few  inches  less  than  iii
the  other  districts ;  but,  though  the  space  be  large,  the  popu¬
lation  is  widely  scattered,  so  that  when  they  are  included  they
will  not  reduce  the  general  average  beyond  one  or  two  inches
at  most.  We  have  no  such  variety  in  average  size  in  Scotland


422


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development ,


as  is  said  to  exist  in  England.  The  hat-merchants,  our  only
authorities  as  yet,  indicate  80  inches  to  110  cubic  inches  as
common  sizes  in  Spitalfields,  Coventry,  Essex,  Hertford,
Suffolk,  and  Norfolk.  I  now  reject  the  statement  as  quite
incredible;  Devonshire  and  Hertfordshire  are  said  to  average
above  London ;  and  Lancashire,  Yorkshire,  Cumberland,  and
Northumberland  to  range  still  higher.  Let  us  hope  our
friends  south  of  the  Tweed  will  soon  see  the  importance  of
such  problems,  and  furnish  the  solutions.

The  deep  yellow  band  covers  about  one  million,  in  round
numbers,  of  the  two  and  a  half  millions  composing  the  popu¬
lation  of  Scotland.  My  investigations  include  both  the  town
and  rural  population  of  the  district.  The  million  of  people
are  represented  in  my  averages  by  above  5,000  cases.  I
visited  schools,  hospitals,  jails,  & c.,  and  took  every  opportu¬
nity  of  including  all  classes  in  my  survey.

Measurement  and  record. — I  measure  two  series  of  homo¬
logous  lines  in  every  case.  The  first  series  of  eight  lines  is
specified  in  my  “  Contributions,”  page  3,  and  from  these  I
obtain  the  cubic  size.

The  second  series  of  forty  lines  gives  the  shape  as  well  as
the  size  of  the  head ;  so  that  the  one  forms  a  check  upon
the  other  in  practice.  I  defer  specifying  the  second  series
until  an  after  period,  when  I  discuss  shape  of  head  more
fully.

After  I  had  discovered  the  average  type  of  head  of  both
sexes  at  all  ages,  I  found  it  unnecessary  to  measure  all  the
lines  in  every  case.  In  ordinary  cases  I  often  found  that  from
two  or  three  lines  I  could  say  with  certainty  to  a  tenth  of  an  inch
what  all  the  others  were.  But  even  then  in  no  case  tabulated
did  I  measure  less  than  twenty,  and  seldom  less  than  thirty-
five  lines.  I  always  lay  aside  the  hair,  and  press  the  instru¬
ment  firmly  to  the  skin  at  the  anatomical  points  of  the  cra¬
nium  selected  as  suitable,  and  by  which  I  am  always  guided.
In  general  I  have  an  assistant  writing  what  I  read  from  the
scale,  the  instant  the  measurement  is  taken ;  in  this  way  time
and  labour  are  economized,  and  greater  accuracy  secured.
I  also  classify  the  ages  and  sexes  at  once ;  each  measurement
in  its  appropriate  column,  so  that  a  glance  of  the  eye  detects
any  remarkable  deviation  from  the  usual  proportions ;  and,  if
error  is  suspected,  the  measure  is  repeated,  and  the  error,  if
any,  detected  and  corrected.

As  the  disputed  period  of  maturity  has  chiefly  been  be¬
tween  the  sixth  and  sixteenth  year,  I  have  been,  if  possible,
more  particular  with  that  than  any  other  time.  None  of  the
following  averages  for  that,  and  very  few  for  other  periods,


by  Mr.  Straton.


423


are  based  on  less  than  one  hundred  cases  of  each  sex  at  each
age  given,  and  frequently  on  many  more.

A  detail  of  the  vast  mass  of  data  collected  is  of  course
quite  impossible  here,  I  must  therefore  limit  myself  to  a
table  of  general  results.


Age

Average.

Male.

Min.  Max.

Range.

Average.

Female.

Min.

Max.

Range.

7  days  38  .

.  28  to  48

—

20

34  . .

25

to

43

—

18

7  mons.  75  .

.  55  to  95

zzz

40

68  ..

50

to

86

—

36

1

vear  84  .

.  62  to  106

—

44

75  ..

55

to

94

ZZZ

39

,  2

„  90  .

.  66  to  114

zz

48

81  ..

60

to

105

HZ

45

3

„  96  .

.  71  to  122

zzn

51

87  ..

64

to

111

—

47

4

,,  102  .

.  75  to  129

zzz

54

92  . .

67

to

116

ZZZ

49

5

„  107  .

.  78  to  135

—

57

96  ..

70

to

122

—

51

6

„  HI  •

.  81  to  140

—

59

100  . .

73

to

126

—

52

•  7

„  U4  .

.  83  to  143

—

60

102  . .

76

to

129

ZH

53

8

„  116  .

.  85  to  146

—

61

104  ..

78

to

131

HZ

53

9

„  118  .

.  87  to  148

—

62

106  ..

80

to

134

ZZZ

54

10

„  120  .

.  88  to  151

—

63

108  ..

81

to

136

ZZZ

55

12

„  125  .

.  92  to  158

HZ

66

113  ..

83

to

142

ZZZ

59

15

„  130  .

.  95  to  165

—

70

117  ..

86

to

147

—

61

18

„  135  .

.  99  to  171

ZH

72

122  ..

90

to

153

—

63

21

„  HO  .

.  102  to  177

—

75

126

94

to

158

ZZZ

64

30

„  145  .

.  106  to  184

ZZZ

78

131

97

to

165

ZHZ

67

50

„  150  .

.  110  to  190

—

80

135  . .

100

to

170

—

70

Increas.  112

82  142

60

101

75

127

52

Except  the  ages,  all  the  above  numbers  represent  cubic
inches.

Of  the  many  particulars  brought  into  view  by  the  table,  I
can  at  present  notice  only  a  few  of  the  most  obvious.

Eirst. — The  size  of  the  female  ranges  less  than  that  of  the
male  head  at  all  ages.

Second. — Progressive  size  is  obvious  from  birth  upwards.

Though  I  have  not  gone  beyond  fifty  years  in  the  table,
it  must  not  be  from  that  inferred  that  there  is  no  advance  in
any  individual  or  class  of  cases  after  the  fiftieth  year  ;  on  the
contrary,  my  tables  shew  progress  to  a  later  period,  but  after
the  thirtieth  year  the  advance  on  the  average  is  so  slow  as  to
justify  the  supposition  that  in  many  individual  cases  there  is
no  progress.  And  farther,  a  very  slight  preponderance  of
either  the  higher  or  lower  sections  influence  the  averages  to
some  extent ;  they  therefore  require  to  be  balanced  with  great
care,  and  verified  again  and  again  before  certainty  is  obtained.

Third. — The  progress  is  rapid  at  first,  and  gradually  be¬
comes  more  and  more  slow  as  age  advances.

The  size  during  the  first  week  is  doubled  in  the  seventh


424


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development ,


month,  and  the  progress  is  rapid  during  the  whole  of  the  first
year.  In  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  years,  it  is  about  six
inches  per  annum.  The  rate  then  sinks  to  five,  four,  and
three  inches,  and  after  the  seventh  year  there  is  a  very  uni¬
form  increase  of  two  inches  till  the  twentieth  or  twenty-first
year,  after  which  the  advance  is  very  slow.

It  curiously  enough  appears  to  be  the  fact  that  rate  of
increase  may  be  expressed  by  a  simple  formula,  which  is  very
easily  remembered ;  viz.,  that  the  size  of  the  head  within
seven  days  after  birth  is  doubled  in  the  seventh  month,  tripled
in  the  seventh  year,  and  quadrupled  in  seven  times  seven
years.

Fourth. — The  rate  of  progress  is  in  proportion  to  the  size
of  the  head.  The  smallest  female,  advancing  from  25  at
birth  to  100  inches  at  fifty  years,  is  similar  in  proportion  to
the  largest  male  advancing  from  48  to  190  inches.

This  uniform  rate  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  head
renders  it  easy  to  say  of  any  head  of  either  sex,  at  any  age,
what  it  has  been,  and  what  it  in  average  circumstances  will
be,  at  all  ages  embraced  by  the  table.

Knowing  the  average  rate  of  increase  of  all  sizes  at  all
ages,  we  are  now  in  condition  to  grapple  with  the  important
questions  of  influence  of  circumstances  in  modifying  either
by  increasing  or  diminishing  the  rate  in  individual  cases.
And  we  have  seen  by  the  instance  of  the  ragged-schools  no¬
ticed  in  classification  of  sections,  that  circumstances  do  exer¬
cise  a  very  important  influence,  not  on  individuals  only,  but
on  whole  classes  or  groups  of  cases.

Fifth. — In  consequence  of  the  rate  of  increase  being  in
proportion  to  the  size,  the  laws  of  grouping  are  different  at
different  ages  :  the  cluster  is  constantly  lengthening  on  the
scale  so  to  speak.  The  columns  of  the  table,  headed  “  range,”
shew  the  length  of  the  group.  This  at  the  earliest  female
age  is  only  18  inches,  at  the  latest  age  of  the  male  the  group
is  80  inches  of  the  scale.

Here  again  let  it  not  be  inferred  that  the  table  shews  the
very  largest  and  smallest  heads  to  be  found ;  though  either
larger  or  smaller  cases  are  very  rare,  they  do  sometimes  occur.

There  are  male  heads  in  existence  considerably  above  200
inches;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  both  male  and
female  cases  (idiots)  so  low  as  20  to  30  inches  at  twenty  or
thirty  years  of  age;  but  the  table  shews  a  normal  range  which
is  very  rarefy  exceeded.

Neither  must  it  be  inferred  that  the  rate  of  increase  of  all
parts  of  the  same  head  is  to  the  same  extent,  and  during  the
same  period  of  time.  This  leads  us  to  the  element  of  shape


Pf.ATE  11.


CEREBRAL  DEVELOPMENT  LAWS  OF  PROGRESSION.


to  face  Page  425.


by  Mr.  Straton.


425


at  all  ages,  a  subject  which  I  can  only  touch  in  the  mean¬
time,  and  leave  for  future  consideration.

Shape  or  form. — The  most  efficient  way  of  conveying  a
few  general  ideas  of  changes  in  form,  or  development  of
parts  which  take  in  the  progress  from  infancy  to  maturity,  is
by  an  illustration,  and  Plate  II.  is  given  for  that  purpose.
The  plate  shews  four  geometrical  outlines  of  the  lateral  per¬
pendicular  section  of  the  average  male  head,  on  a  scale  of
half  the  natural  linear  dimensions.  The  figures  represent
the  head  at  the  respective  periods  of  seven  days,  seven  months,
seven  years,  and  fifty  years  of  age.  With  very  slight  con¬
sideration  it  will  be  seen  that  the  shape  is  gradually  changing
from  the  earliest  to  the  latest  period.  In  the  infant  outline
the  larger  mass  of  brain  is  seen  to  be  upward  and  backward
from  the  external  opening  of  the  ear.  In  the  mature  the
shape  is  very  much  the  reverse  of  the  infant,  the  larger  por¬
tion  of  brain  is  upward  and  forward  from  the  ear.  These
characteristics  are  so  constant  and  so  marked,  that  I  think  it
hardly  possible  to  compare  any  infant  with  a  mature  head
and  not  recognize  the  general  distinctions.  The  growth  or
expansion  of  the  different  parts  may  be  judged  of  by  the
spaces  or  distances  between  each  of  the  outlines,  particularly
between  the  inner  and  the  outer  figures.  Upward  and  for¬
ward  it  will  be  seen  that  the  intervening  space  is  greater  than
backward.  I  may  farther  add,  that  the  parts  upward  and
backward  from  the  ear  attain  maturity  at  or  before  the
thirtieth  year,  but  the  upper  and  fore  parts  increase,  in  a  por¬
tion  of  the  community,  at  least  till  past  the  fiftieth  year.

One  of  the  greatest,  if  not  the  greatest,  practical  benefit
of  the  table  we  have  obtained,  is,  that  in  it  we  are  furnished
with  a  scale  suitable  to  every  purpose  for  which  we  require
one, — a  scale  graduated  by  nature,  each  term  the  language  of
science,  of  definite,  positive,  invariable,  meaning  and  known
value, — a  scale  equally  suitable  to  express  the  development
and  power  of  the  whole  cerebral  mass,  however  large,  and  of
each  part,  however  small.

The  application  of  the  scale  to  represent  the  size,  in
other  words,  the  development  and  power  of  the  brain  as  a
whole,  is  already  obvious ;  the  farther  application  to  represent
those  of  the  parts,  regions,  or  organs,  will  soon  be  equally
obvious.

In  any  head  of  any  size,  from  20  inches  or  less  to  200  or
more,  if  all  the  parts  are  in  equal  balance  proportion,  then
the  same  term  which  represents  the  size — the  development  of
the  whole — may  with  perfect  propriety  be  used  to  express  the
development  of  each  part.  If  50  inches  be  the  size  of  the


426


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,


head,  then  the  term  “  50”  attached  to  each  and  all  of  the
organs  shews  that  they  are  developed  to  precisely  that  extent,
or  equal  balance  proportion.  If  150  is  the  development  of
the  whole,  then  “  150”  represents  that  of  each  part,  and  so
with  all  other  numbers.

Let  it  be  remembered,  that  it  is  the  extent  of  development
of  the  parts  (not  the  size,  the  inches  and  fractions)  which  it
is  essential  to  record.  The  development  must  be  obtained  by
measurement,  because  the  scale  precludes  the  estimate  of  the
eye  and  the  hand,  but  the  size  is  not  useful  except  as  the  data
of  development.  The  sizes  of  the  organs  of  an  equally-
balanced  head  are  very  different,  but  the  degrees  of  develop¬
ment  are  one  and  the  same.  It  is  the  development,  not  the
size,  which  is  the  measure  of  power,  and  this  is  what  we  must
record  in  all  cases.

If  the  head  is  unequally  balanced,  as  most  heads  are,  the
application  of  the  scale  is  equally  simple ;  the  development  of
each  organ  is  indicated  by  the  size  of  the  equally-balanced
head  to  which  the  part  corresponds.  Let  a  given  case  mea¬
sure  120  inches  ;  the  parts  which  are  in  equal  balance  propor¬
tion  are  marked  “  120,”  the  less  developed  parts  are  equal  to
the  corresponding  organs  of  head  of  110,  100,  90  inches,  or
less,  while  those  more  developed  correspond  to  130,  140,  145,
or  more,  and  are  to  be  recorded  as  such.

A  few  examples  will  best  illustrate  the  suitability  of  the
table  as  a  scale  of  development  and  concomitant  power.  With
these  (page  427)  and  one  or  two  remarks  I  must  close  for  a
time.

The  development  of  each  part  is,  I  repeat,  obtained  by  mea¬
surement.  Of  course  the  average  of  the  parts  corresponds  to
the  size  of  the  head  obtained  by  an  independent  series  of
measurements;  we  have  therefore  a  check  and  test  of  accuracy.
The  average  is  obtained  by  grouping  the  parts  into  clusters  of
equal  size  (the  organs  are  of  very  unequal  size  in  all  cases),
and  then  taking  the  average  of  the  clusters ;  to  this  the
regions  (Contributions,  p.  28)  form  a  convenient  guide.  The
anterior  may  form  one  cluster,  the  coronal  three,  the  poste¬
rior  three,  and  the  lateral  two.  The  average  of  these  nine
parts  will  give  the  size  of  the  head  in  all,  except  some  rare
cases  of  very  unequal  balance,  and  to  which  more  minute
grouping  must  be  applied.

The  examples  given  differ  from  all  other  modes  of  stating
development  in  the  essential  particular  that  the  positive  or
absolute  development  (not  the  relative  merely)  of  each  organ
is  indicated,  and,  as  the  absolute  development  is  the  measure
of  the  power  or  capability  of  each  part,  it  is  the  first  thing  to


Reflective  Perceptive  Inferior

Faculties.  of  Motion.  Perceptive  of  Matter.  Superior  Sentiments.  Sentiments.  Propensities.


by  Mr.  Straton.

Examples.


427


1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

ORGANS.

Male — Ten  Years  of  Age.  |

Fifty  Years  of  Age.

Fein.

P.  G.

Average.

Superior.

Criminal.

J.  M.

P.  G.

Average.

Superior.

Criminal.

J.B.

1.  Amativeness .

110

120

120

140

105

140

150

150

190

150

2.  Philoprogenitiveness

140

130

130

125

95

160

150

160

150

120

3.  Concentrativeness  .  .

no

125

130

125

80

130

150

160

140

120

4.  Adhesiveness .

no

120

125

120

80

140

150

150

150

130

5.  Combativeness  ....

no

125

125

145

85

140

150

150

180

140

6.  Destructiveness  ....

no

125

125

150

85

140

150

150

190

140

7.  Secretiveness .

no

125

125

145

95

140

150

150

180

140

8.  Acquisitiveness  .  .  .

no

125

125

145

105

140

155

155

180

140

9.  Constructiveness  . .

115

120

120

120

105

145

150

150

150

130

10.  Self-esteem .

120

130

130

i  30

85

160

160

160

155

100

1 1 .  Love  of  Approbation

100

120

120

115

95

140

140

140

135

100

12.  Cautiousness .

100

130

130

120

95

140

155

160

150

100

13.  Benevolence  .

120

115

130

100

75

160

155

180

130

no

14.  Veneration .

130

120

130

105

75

155

155

180

140

120

15.  Firmness  .

130

130

130

125

85

165

155

180

145

130

16.  Conscientiousness  . .

125

125

130

no

80

150

150

170

140

no

17.  Hope .

120

120

130

no

75

155

145

160

130

120

1 8.  Wonder .

125

115

130

no

75

165

145

160

125

120

19.  Ideality .

125

115

130

100

80

155

145

160

120

100

20.  Wit  .  .* .

no

115

130

100

95

145

145

160

120

100

2 1 .  Imitation  . . .

120

115

130

100

85

155

145

160

120

100

22.  Individuality .

125

no

130

105

135

175

155

180

150

140

23.  Form .

125

no

130

105

150

170

150

180

150

135

24.  Size .

125

no

130

105

150

170

150

180

150

130

25.  Weight  .

120

no

130

105

120

160

150

180

145

130

26.  Colour  .

115

no

130

105

120

155

140

170

145

120

27.  Locality .

125

no

130

105

120

160

150

180

150

120

28.  Number .

125

no

130

100

no

160

150

170

140

120

L  29.  Order .

no

no

130

100

no

150

140

170

140

120

30.  Eventualitv .

125

115

130

no

135

170

145

170

150

120

31.  Time . .

120

115

130

100

115

165

150

180

140

no

32.  Tune .

120

115

130

100

105

165

140

170

140

no

33.  Language  .

no

no

130

105

no

150

150

170

140

120

34.  Comparison  .

no

no

130

100

105

155

155

190

130

no

35.  Causality .

no

no

130

100

105

155

155

190

120

.

no

428


Researches  in  Cerebral  Development,


be  noticed  in  all  cases.  In  one  of  the  examples  of  ten  years
of  age  (column  5,  J.  M.)  some  organs  are  seen  to  be  as  little
developed  (75)  as  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  average
infant  of  seven  months ;  others  again  only  equal  the  average
of  twelve  months,  while  one  or  two  of  the  perceptive  organs
equal  the  average  of  fifty  years.

The  positive  development  being  given,  the  relative,  which
is  the  difference  between  the  positive  degrees,  and  which  is
the  measure  of  tendency ,  is  seen  at  a  glance.  The  moral
tendency  is  indicated  and  measured  by  the  difference  of  posi¬
tive  ;  in  other  words,  by  the  relative  development  of  the  pro¬
pensities  and  sentiments.  In  cols.  3  and  8,  the  sentiments
are  much  above  the  propensities  in  development,  whilst  in
cols.  4  and  9,  the  propensities  far  exceed  the  sentiments ;  in
cols.  2  and  7,  there  is  a  near  approach  to  the  equal  balance.
The  intellectual  tendency  is  indicated  and  measured  by  the
balance  of  the  perceptive  and  reflecting  organs.

Cols.  3  and  8,  represent  the  balance  of  the  higher  classes
in  the  best  sense  of  the  term ;  they  are  the  leading  minds  in
science,  literature,  art,  commerce,  manufacture,  &c.  The
anterior  and  coronal  regions  preponderate,  and  the  same
balance  is  found  in  all  sizes  of  heads.

Cols.  4  and  9,  show  a  balance  verv  much  the  reverse  of

'  _  V

the  preceding  columns.  The  propensities  are  up  to  the
highest  male  development,  \vhile  the  sentiments  and  intellect,
particularly  the  refining  sentiments  and  reflecting  organs,  are
down  to  the  average  of  ten  years.  The  type  is  found  in  every
variety  of  size,  and  varied  in  balance  also,  from  the  average
male  to  the  lowest  criminal  cast  or  cranium  in  our  museums.
The  class  is  numerous  and  well  marked  in  the  unscrupulous
energy  which  they  manifest  to  obtain  the  means  of  physical
enjoyment.

They  are  found  in  all  classes  of  society  and  all  conditions
of  life.  The  leading  speculator  “  doctoring  ”  his  balance-
sheets,  and  “  gingering”  his  lines ;  the  M.P.  purchasing  a
seat  in  St.  Stephen's ;  the  parson  buying  a  benefice  “  for  the
glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  souls,”  “  with  light  duties,  in  a
fine  county,  and  select  society ;”  the  sturdy  beggar  demand¬
ing,  with  threatening  scowl,  alms  from  the  timid  maid  ;  and
the  still  more  sturdy  thief,  “  taking  a  benefit”  without  leave
either  asked  or  given,  are  specimen  links  from  opposite  ends
of  the  chain.

Cols.  5  and  10,  are  individual  cases  to  contrast  and  illus¬
trate  the  capabilities  of  the  scale.

Col.  5,  J.  M.,  is  a  rare  case  of  idiocy  from  defective  deve¬
lopment  of  both  propensities  and  sentiments ;  the  more  com-


by  Mr.  Sir  at  on.


429


mon  form  being  either  defect  of  the  whole,  or  of  the  anterior
and  upper  parts,  of  the  brain.  In  this  case  (a  boy  of  10  years)
the  propensities  range  from  80  (the  average  of  9  months  old)
to  105,  which  is  only  equal  to  the  corresponding  organs  in
the  average  boy  of  less  than  5  years.  The  sentiments  range
from  75  (average  of  7  months)  to  95, — the  average  at  3  years.
The  reflecting  organs  are  about  the  average  at  5  years,  and
the  perceptive  range  from  110  (average  at  10)  to  150,-«4he
average  of  maturity.  When  I  saw  the  boy,  he  had  made  fair
progress  for  his  age  and  time  at  school  in  acquiring  know¬
ledge  ;  but,  except  the  defective  parts  increase  at  much  more
than  the  average  rate,  he  will  when  he  reaches  manhood  be
very  much  in  the  predicament  of  a  machine  without  motive
power  ;  an  engine  without  steam.

Col.  10,  J.  B.,  a  female  about  30  years  of  age,  exhibits  all
the  characteristics  of  the  criminal  type.  The  propensities  are
above  the  female  average  at  maturity,  while  the  sentiments
only  equal  the  female  average  at  6,  8,  and  10  years.  Even
the  inferior  sentiments,  rarely  defective  in  the  male  criminal,
and  still  more  rarely  in  the  female,  are  in  this  case  down  to
the  average  of  6  years.  J.  B  had  been  76  times  in  jail  before
I  saw  her ;  a  few  days  out  and  a  few  months  in,  is  her  usual
routine.

Cols.  1  and  6.  Of  P.  G.,  my  specimen  case  throughout,  I
could  say  much  with  pleasure,  did  space  permit ;  fortunately
little  is  needed  for  my  present  purpose.  At  both  ages  the
close  resemblance  to  the  superior  class  cannot  be  mistaken,
and  a  fine  temperament  raised  the  power  higher  than  I  have
shewn  it.  The  talents  and  tendencies  were  completely  in
harmony  with  the  development.  The  circumstances  of  his
parents  gave  him  the  choice  of  a  profession.  He  would  be  a
mechanic ;  in  this,  he  is  another  of  the  many  instances  in
which  the  whim  of  the  boy  belied  the  tastes  of  the  future  man.

When  about  30  years  of  age,  a  bequest  from  a  friend
placed  P.  G.  in  comfortable  circumstances  for  life ;  from  that
period  every  waking  moment  of  his  existence  was  devoted  to
science  and  literature;  his  favourite  studies  were  chemistry,
geology,  mineralogy  and  natural  history,  particularly  the
microscopic  departments  of  the  latter;  he  read  Latin,  French,
German  and  Italian.  The  relaxations  of  his  leisure  hours
were  such  “light  literature”  as  the  leading  Quarterlies;  these
he  generally  read  throughout.  Unfortunately  he  was  too
ardent  a  learner  to  assume  the  office  of  teacher,  and  he  car¬
ried  his  vast  and  varied  store  of  knowledge  to  the  grave  with
him.  He  died  a  few  months  ago,  at  the  age  of  50  years,
deeply  regretted  by  a  wide  circle  of  friends,  in  whose  memory

VOL.  VIII.  H  H


430


Account  of  the  two  translations  of


the  name  of  Peter  Grant  will  ever  be  associated  with  a  most
ardent  love  of  truth  for  its  own  sake,  with  elevated  sentiment,
refined  feeling,  and  a  moral  character  of  spotless  purity.
Aberdeen,  November,  1850.


XYI.  Researches  on  Magnetism ,  Electricity ,  Heat ,  Light,
^Crystallization,  and  Chemical  Attraction,  in  their  relations
to  the  Vital  Force.  By  Karl,  Baron  Yon  Beichenbach,
P.H.,  D.R.  Translated  and  edited,  at  the  express  desire
of  the  Author,  with  a  Preface,  Notes,  and  Appendix,  by
William  Gregory,  M.D.,  P.R.S.E.,  Professor  of  Che¬
mistry  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  With  three
Plates  and  twenty-three  Woodcuts.  Parts  I.  and  II.,
including  the  Second  Edition  of  the  First  Part,  corrected
and  improved.  [London  :  Taylor,  Walton  and  Maberley,
Upper  Gower  Street,  and  Ivy  Lane,  Paternoster  Bow.
Edinburgh  :  Me  Lachlan  and  Stewart.  1850.]
Physico-Physiological  Researches  on  the  Dynamics  of  Mag¬
netism,  Electricity ,  Heat ,  Light,  Crystallization,  and  Che -
mism,  in  their  relations  to  Vital  Force.  By  Baron
Charles  Yon  Beichenbach.  The  complete  work  from
the  German  Second  Edition.  With  the  addition  of  a
Preface  and  Critical  Notes,  by  John  Ashburner,  M.D.
[London  :  Hippolyte  Bailliere,  219,  Begent  Street,  and
169,  Fulton  Street,  New  York,  U.S.  Paris  :  J.  B.  Bail¬
liere,  Bue  Hautefeuille.  Madrid  :  Bailly  Bailliere,  Calle
del  Principe.  1851.]

It  is  a  good  sign  for  the  cause  of  mesmerism  when  the  public
finds  itself  supplied  with  two  translations  of  a  remarkable
work  by  the  distinguished  Baron  Yon  Beichenbach.  We
sincerely  wish  very  ample  success  to  both  of  them,  and  should
be  rejoiced  to  learn  that  each  had  arrived  at  a  market  which
eagerly  demanded  a  new  edition.  We  have  given  the  full
titles  of  these  translations,  for,  if  there  were  any  truth  in  the
report  that  the  scientific  author  was  dissatisfied  with  his  first
appearance  before  the  British  public  in  the  form  of  an
“  abstract,”  he  will  now  have  ample  cause  to  be  content  with
the  effort  made  by  one  translator  to  shew  him  as  near  as  pos¬
sible  in  the  strict  likeness  of  himself,  and  with  that  of  the
other  to  clothe  him  in  a  free  and  easy  flowing  English  dress.
We  believe  each  translation  to  be  good.  One  mistake,  it
appears  to  us,  has  been  made  by  Dr.  Gregory,  in  coining  the
word  odyle,  which  occurs  nowhere  in  the  original.  If  such  a
word  had  been  intended  to  convey  a  chemical  meaning,  it  was


Baron  Von  Reichenbach’s  remarkable  work.  431

singularly  inappropriate,  for  the  termination  yle  would  refer,
by  analogy,  to  amyle,  ethyle ,  formyle ,  &c.,  a  special  kind  of
bodies,  belonging  to  organic  chemistry,  and  to  which  the
special  nomenclature  should  be  confined.  It  is  in  Paragraph
215  of  the  Pirst  Part,  the  last  of  the  sixth  treatise,  that  the
Baron  Von  Reichenbach  gives  his  reasons  for  a  new  name  to
that  force  which,  in  fact,  in  the  hands  of  Mesmer,  had  ob¬
tained  the  designation  of  the  universal  fluid ;  and  there  is
something  amounting  to  almost  an  expressed  injunction  to
use  the  word  od,  a  monosyllabic  term,  by  no  means  involving
the  hypothesis  which  belongs  to  substances  either  ascertained
or  supposed  to  exist,  and  forming  the  radicals  from  which  a
series  of  compounds  is  produced  by  combination  with  other  sub¬
stances.  The  termination  yle  applied  to  od,  is  clearly  a  hasty
error  on  the  part  of  Professor  Gregory,  who  must  on  consi¬
deration  have  been  aware  that  the  word  odyle  would  convey
to  the  chemist  the  idea  of  an  organic  radical,  formed  of  two  or
more  of  the  elements  hydrogen,  carbon,  nitrogen,  and  oxygen,
and  would  thus  superadd  a  notion  not  advanced  by  Reiclien-
bach.  We  venture  to  regard  this  word  as  not  an  unimportant
liberty  taken  with  the  author's  text,  although  we  do  not  in¬
tend  to  found  upon  it  any  controversy  as  to  the  claims  of
those  who  have  thought  it  but  justice  to  the  memory  of  an
original  thinker  to  term  a  science  Mesmerism,  after  the  name
of  an  author  who,  whatever  were  the  disproportions  of  certain
organs  of  his  brain,  threw  forth  to  the  world  ideas  which  were
the  foundation  of  perhaps  the  most  important  truths  that  can
occupy  the  thoughts  of  man.

In  other  respects  the  edition  of  Dr.  Gregory  is  a  highly
creditable  publication,  and  the  preface  is  written  in  a  style  and
a  spirit  which  are  most  refreshing.  There  is  a  charm  about
the  manner  and  the  sentiment  of  the  learned  Professor  that
must  captivate  the  attention  of  every  reader.  In  these  ob¬
servations  it  is  not  our  intention  in  any  way  to  disparage  the
rival  edition  produced  by  the  enterprise  of  our  publisher,  Mr.
Bailliere,  who  has  put  forth  a  very  handsome  volume,  most
conveniently  illustrated,  and  admirably  printed  in  a  clear
type.  We  have  one  observation  to  make  on  this  edition  in
reference  to  the  title-page.  A  mistake  having  occurred  in
the  motto  at  the  back  of  this  page,  the  leaf  was  very  properly
cancelled ;  but  in  giving  a  new  title-page  with  the  Second
Part,  a  slip  of  paper  should  have  indicated  to  the  purchaser
the  cause  of  the  error,  and  given  a  direction  as  to  the  binding
of  the  correct  copy.  We  were  at  a  loss  to  understand,  in  com¬
paring  the  two  editions,  why  one  should  cost  half-a-crown  more
than  the  other.  The  greater  handsomeness  of  Mr.  Bailliere's


432


Account  of  the  two  translations  of


volume  would  not  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  the  difference  of
price,  which  however  is  soon  accounted  for  when  we  reflect
upon  the  copious  notes  by  Dr.  Ashburner.  The  Professor’s
notes  and  appendix  taken  together  would  occupy  no  more
than  about  eight  pages  of  letter- press,  whereas  Dr.  Ashburner’ s
would,  in  small  type,  take  up  the  space  of  seventy-eight  pages.
The  present  number  of  The  Zoist  allows  us  but  a  small  space
for  a  notice  of  the  contents  of  the  important  work  of  the
Baron  Von  Reichenbach;  but  this  is  less  to  be  regretted,
since  an  ample  account  of  the  matter  contained  in  the  First
Part  was  written  by  Dr.  Elliotson  in  our  fourth  volume,  upon
the  appearance  of  the  very  able  and  interesting  abstract  of
the  first  German  edition  of  the  First  Part,  which  was  given
to  the  English  public  in  the  year  1846;  a  work  which  was  so
well  received,  that  in  a  very  short  space  of  time  not  a  copy
was  to  be  procured  in  London  at  double  its  published  price.
When  the  Second  Part  of  Von  Reichenbach’ s  work  appeared
in  Germany  in  1849,  the  First  Part  having,  as  a  first  edition,
been  originally  a  supplement  to  a  periodical  (Liebig’s  Annalen
der  Chemic),  the  author  prefixed  to  it  a  second  edition  of  his
First  Part,  and  it  is  of  these  two  parts  that  the  present
English  editions  consist.

It  is  almost  needless  to  state  here  that  the  Researches
published  in  the  First  Part  tend  to  the  establishment  of  a
force,  considered  by  the  Baron  to  be  new,  but  which  is,  by
implication,  if  we  mistake  not,  claimed  by  Dr.  Ashburner,
notwithstanding  an  almost  extravagant  admiration  of  the
Baron’s  powers  of  long-patient  and  logical  habit  of  investiga¬
tion,  as  the  force  said  to  have  been  discovered  by  Mesmer,
but  which  is  in  fact  of  a  date  much  anterior  to  his  period ;  as
is  proved  by  one  of  Mesmer’s  severest  commentators  and  oppo¬
nents,  Thouret,  (Recherches  et Routes  sur  leMagnetisme  Animal ,
1784),  who  quotes  the  works  of  Maxwell  and  Santanelli  to
shew  that,  even  in  the  seventeenth  century,  the  idea  of  an
universal  fluid  had  been  promulgated,  and  that  strong  ana¬
logies  existed  between  this  idea  and  the  views  of  ancient  mag¬
netism  shared  by  Paracelsus,  Kircher,  and  others.  Becker’s
expressions,  “  Anima  mundi  magneticse  illius  facultatis  vector,
&c.  .  .  .  Spiritus  mundi  universalis  omnia  perlustrans,”  are
examples  of  the  same  thoughts.  The  speculations  in  which
Maxwell  indulged  are  not  altogether  unlike  some  things  in
Reichenbach  and  the  notions  Dr.  Ashburner  would  appear  to
have  of  subjects  just  as  much  beyond  our  present  reach,  ex¬
cept  that  the  latter  makes  an  effort  to  determine  the  mate¬
riality  of  all  the  forces  which  come  under  the  cognizance  of  the
philosophical  physicist.  Maxwell’s  words  are,  “  Tam  tenuis.


Baron  Von  Reichenbach’s  remarkable  work.  433

tam  agilis,  spirituals,  lucida,  setherea  res.  .  .  .  Spiritus  vitalis
.  .  .  totus  ubique  lucis  instar  sibi  simillimus.”  Santanelli
speaks  even  of  “  the  particles  of  this  spirit,  so  elastic  and  so
mixed  with  other  bodies,  exilitate  et  minimitate,  as  to  be
nearest  to  the  intellectual  soul,  which  is  a  real  immaterial
spirit.”  Immaterial  particles  !  We  do  not  pretend  that  Rei¬
chenbach’s  force  is  not  more  logically,  consecutively,  illus¬
trated  by  inductive  experiments.  It  is  our  desire  to  shew
only  that,  however  isolated  may  be  the  facts  of  the  thinkers
of  former  times,  the  sources  whence  they  drew  their  conclu¬
sions  of  an  universal  fluid  were  in  many  instances  identical
with  those  in  the  work  under  consideration ;  and,  whatever  be
the  name  given  to  this  agent,  it  is  acknowledged  to  be  the
same  which  is  productive  of  mesmeric  phenomena.

This  force,  fluid,  influence  or  power,  is  certainly  shewn  by
the  Baron  to  exist  as  an  imponderable  agent,  having  proper¬
ties  which  distinguish  it  from  heat,  light,  electricity,  and
magnetism,  although  associated  with  each  other.  It  is  a
dynamic  which  pervades  every  object  in  nature,  and  hence
perhaps  not  so  inaptly  termed  the  universal  fluid.

Light,  as  ordinarily  known,  is  not  so  subtle  an  imponder¬
able  as  this  force,  although  the  comparative  velocity  of  their
motions  under  analogous  conditions  may  admit  of  question.
It  is  not  a  power  that  attracts  iron,  though  it  is  associated
with  magnetism.  It  is  found  by  the  Baron  that  this  force
resides  in  the  principal  axis  of  crystals,  and  here  it  is  demon¬
strated  to  exist  clearly  in  a  separate  state,  and  unaccompanied
by  any  agency  which  is  capable  of  attracting  iron.  Notwith¬
standing  all  that  the  world  appears  for  ages  to  have  previously
known  of  such  a  fluid,  it  comes  upon  us  like  a  wonder,  that
the  Baron  has  found  this  agent  in  all  bodies, — in  the  living
forms  of  organic  fabrics  and  in  substances  without  life ;  varying
in  degrees  of  manifestation ;  abundant  in  the  human  body,
and  developed  in  the  various  chemical  actions  of  all  organic
nature — in  animals  and  in  plants.  It  is  associated  with  the
rays  from  the  sun,  moon,  planets,  and  fixed  stars.  The
Baron  has  a  treatise  to  demonstrate  its  diffusion  over  the
whole  created  universe.  It  is  shed  from  the  human  hand,
from  the  face,  eyes,  nostrils,  lips,  and  lungs.  Like  electri¬
city  and  magnetism,  it  has  a  positive  and  negative  polarity.
It  is  manifested  by  luminous  phenomena,  visible  to  such  as
are  sensitive  to  these  impressions,  and  they  comprise,  in  the
temperate  latitudes,  perhaps  about  one-third  of  mankind.
These  luminous  phenomena  are  deeply  interesting,  and  the
relations  of  the  experiments  instituted  by  the  Baron  on  this
point  are  captivating  to  a  high  degree.  Although  their  power


434


Account  of  the  two  translations  of


is  of  such  feeble  energy  as  to  be  rendered  perceptible  to  per¬
sons  of  keen  sensibility  only  in  the  ordinary  state,  when  in
perfect  darkness ;  yet  their  characters  are  very  beautiful,  for
they  are  attended  by  all  the  colours  of  the  rainbow,  under
circumstances  indicating  remarkable  laws.

It  would  appear  that  the  highest  degree  of  sensitiveness
is  not  shared  by  the  majority  of  keener  sensibility  than  usual
and  who  constitute  one-third  of  mankind.  Those  keenly  sus¬
ceptible,  in  the  highest  degree,  to  the  luminous  emanations
are  more  rare.  Persons  affected  with  nervous  and  spasmodic
diseases ;  persons  who  are  apt  to  walk  or  to  talk  in  their
sleep ;  persons  who  are  cataleptic,  or  who  are  insane ;  are
more  commonly  endowed  with  the  requisite  keenness.  But
this  high  condition  of  sensitiveness  may  be  found  in  some
individuals  who,  in  the  vague  acceptation  of  those  who  do
not  severely  define  the  meaning  of  words,  are  said  to  be  in
perfect  health :  in  men  as  well  as  in  women ;  in  the  old  and
in  the  young ;  in  the  married  and  in  the  single.

As  far  as  the  experience  of  the  Baron  has  gone,  this  keen
sensibility  to  the  perception  of  the  delicate  phenomena  is
never  absent  in  somnambulists.  His  researches  on  this  point
have  been  confined  to  such  cases  of  spontaneous  somnambu¬
lism  as  presented  themselves  among  his  subjects.  Those  in¬
dividuals  who  were  highly  sensitive  in  their  natural  state  in¬
variably  became  still  more  intensely  so  when  they  fell  into
somnambulism.

After  the  Seventh  Treatise,  and  at  the  end  of  the  First
Part,  the  Baron  sums  up  his  Researches  by  a  conclusion  ad¬
mirably  condensing  the  various  portions  of  his  investigation.
Then,  in  his  Second  Part,  he  treats  of  the  luminous  emana¬
tions  from  magnets  alone,  in  the  fullest  detail.  The  analo¬
gous  phenomena  of  the  lights  of  crystals,  of  the  human  body,
and  of  all  other  substances,  must  be  reserved  for  later  portions
of  his  work.

In  the  Introduction  to  Part  Second,  Baron  Yon  Reichen-
bach  first  gives  a  Catalogue  Raisonne  of  more  than  sixty
subjects,  sensitive  in  various  degrees ;  of  whom  thirty-five
are  persons  in  full  health,  of  all  classes,  and  the  remainder
are  partly  persons  suffering  from  actual  diseases,  partly  those
who  are  only  sickly,  feeble,  or  delicate.  The  observations  of
each  of  these  persons  on  the  light  from  magnets  are  there
given,  forming  a  body  of  evidence  quite  unique  in  such  a
subject,  as  the  produce  of  one  man’s  labours.

He  next  gives  a  detailed  comparison  of  the  od  force  with
the  known  imponderables,  electricity,  magnetism,  &c.,  to  shew
that,  while  analogous  to  all  of  them,  it  is  yet  quite  as  distinct


Baron  Von  Reichenbacti s  remarkable  work.


435


from  all  as  they  from  each  other,  and  that  it  must  have  a

«/  /

special  name.  But  he  points  out  that  all  these  forces  may
one  day  he  referred  to  a  common  origin :  in  which  case  the
names  now  given  to  them  will  still  be  useful  to  designate  the
several  groups  of  phenomena.

The  Baron  then  proceeds  to  describe  the  light  from  mag¬
nets  in  detail ;  its  various  forms,  such  as  glow,  flame,  lumin¬
ous  smoke  or  vapour,  fibrous  or  downy  light,  &c.  &c.  He
then  goes  on  to  its  colours,  and  to  the  influence  on  these  of
the  position  of  the  magnets,  and  of  the  shape  of  the  magnets,
and  this  leads  him  through  a  most  exquisitely  beautiful  series
of  phenomena,  to  the  study  of  the  light  as  seen  in  large  and
active  magnets  of  a  spherical  form.

Here  he  produces  the  colours  of  the  rainbow,  which  are
always  present  in  odic  light  in  the  perfect  form  and  similitude
of  the  Aurora  Borealis  and  the  Aurora  Australis ;  and  he
concludes  with  an  attempt  to  explain  the  Aurora  of  our  earth
on  odic  principles.  This  attempt  must  be  regarded  as  so  far
satisfactory,  that  it  infinitely  surpasses  all  explanations  of
that  appearance  hitherto  offered.

We  have  been  compelled,  by  want  of  space  to  refrain
from  giving  extracts  from  this  remarkable  work.  Indeed,
were  we  to  begin,  we  should  hardly  know  where  to  stop.
We  have  therefore  confined  ourselves  to  a  general  sketch  of
the  work,  and  we  would  conclude  by  saying  that  the  reader
will  find  the  details  of  Baron  Y on  ReichenbaclPs  Researches
deeply  interesting,  while  he  will  discover  that  they  give  addi¬
tional  security  and  a  new  foundation  to  mesmeric  truth.  May
we  soon  see  more  of  these  admirable  Researches.

We  hear  that  the  Third  Part  is  in  preparation,  and  Pro¬
fessor  Gregory,  w7ho  is  our  informant,  states  that  in  it  the
Baron  will  treat  of  the  effects  of  this  imponderable  on  the
human  body  more  fully  and  specially,  and,  in  doing  so,  he
must  enter  into  the  subject  of  somnambulism,  artificial  as
well  as  natural.  The  voluminous  observations  of  nearly  five
years  of  constant  labour  on  all  parts  of  the  immense  subject
of  this  new  enquiry  were  all  noted  in  his  journals,  as  they  oc¬
curred.  It  is  no  light  task  to  bring  them  into  a  shape  fit  for
publication,  but  we  rejoice  to  know  that  the  Baron  is  busily
occupied  with  it.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Researches  on  Magnetism,  Electricity,  Heat,  Light,  Crystallization,  and
Chemical  Attraction,  in  their  relations  to  the  Vital  Force.  By  Karl,  Baron
Von  Reichenbach,  P.H.,  D.R.  Translated  and  edited,  at  the  express  desire  of
the  Author,  with  a  Preface,  Notes,  and  Appendix,  by  William  Gregory,  M.D.,
F.R.S.E.,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  With  three
plates  and  twenty-three  wood-cuts.  Parts  I.  and  II. ,  including  the  Second  Edi-


436  Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  fyc.


tion  of  the  First  Part,  corrected  and  improved.  London  :  Taylor,  Walton,  and
Maberly,  Upper  Gower  Street,  and  Ivy  Lane,  Paternoster  Row.  Edinburgh:
Me  Lachlan  and  Stewart.  1850.

Physico-Physiological  Researches  on  the  Dynamics  of  Magnetism,  Electricity,
Heat,  Light,  Crystallization,  and  Chemism,  in  their  relations  to  Vital  Force.  By
Baron  Charles  Von  Reichenbach.  The  complete  work  from  the  German  Second
Edition.  With  the  addition  of  a  Preface,  and  Critical  Notes,  by  John  Ashburner,
M.D.,  London.  Hippolyte  Bailliere,  219,  Regent  Street,  and  169,  Fulton  Street,
New  York,  U.S.  Paris  :  J.  B.  Bailliere,  Rue  Hautefeuille.  Madrid :  Bailly
Bailliere,  Calle  del  Principe.  1851.

The  Passions  of  the  Human  Soul.  By  Charles  Fourier.  Translated  from  the
French,  by  the  Rev.  John  Reynell  Morell.  With  Critical  Annotations,  a  Bio¬
graphy  of  Fourier,  and  a  general  Introduction,  by  Hugh  Doherty.  Vols.  I.  and
II.  London  :  Hippolyte  Bailliere,  219,  Regent  Street.  1850.

Influence  of  Physical  Agents  on  the  Development  of  the  Tadpole  of  the  Triton
and  the  Frog.  By  John  Higginbottom,  Hon.  Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of
Surgeons,  England.  From  the  Philosophical  Transactions.

The  Hand-book  of  Mesmerism,  for  the  guidance  and  instruction  of  all  per¬
sons  who  desire  to  practise  Mesmerism  for  the  Cure  of  Diseases,  and  to  alleviate
the  sufferings  of  their  fellow-creatures.  To  which  is  annexed,  the  Rules  and  Re¬
gulations  of  the  Mesmeric  Infirmary,  No.  9,  Bedford  Street,  Bedford  Square,
London  ;  with  a  List  of  the  Subscribers  to  it.  By  Thomas  Buckland,  late  Secre¬
tary  to  the  Mesmeric  Infirmary.  London :  Hippolyte  Bailliere,  219,  Regent  Street.

***  We  received  a  slip  of  the  New  Monthly  Belle  Assemblee  containing  a  notice
of  this  little  book,  and  in  the  notice  were  the  following  paragraphs  : — “  From  all
we  have  seen  and  read  on  the  subject,  we  should  be  inclined  to  define  the  *  mes¬
meric  state’  as  that  in  which  the  senses  are  temporarily  and  spiritually  separated
from  their  organs,  so  that  the  former  can  exercise  their  office  without  the  inter¬
vention  of  the  latter.  Those  readers  who  wish  to  gain  many  useful  hints  and  a
great  deal  of  practical  information  on  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  cannot  do  better
than  refer  to  Mr.  Buckland’s  ‘  Hand-book.’  ”  The  latter  is  true  :  the  former
unintelligible  to  our  plain  understandings  and  but  common  sense.

Dipple’s  Handbooks.  Mesmerism  :  its  Processes,  Uses,  and  Advantages  ex¬
plained,  with  Directions  for  its  Application  in  the  sick  chamber  or  the  lecture
room.  By  S.  D.  Saunders,  Esq.,  late  Hon.  Secretary  to  the  Bristol  Mesmeric
Institute,  &c.  London :  Edwin  Dipple,  Strand.

***  For  a  penny,  information  is  here  afforded  worth  a  pound,  aye,  and  the
shilling  too  which  Dr.  J.  A.  Wilson  says  his  patients  cheat  him  of  so  cruelly  :
see  our  last  number,  p.  280.

Woolmer’s  Exeter  and  Plymouth  Gazette,  Dec.  14,  1850. ,

***  This  paper  contains  Mr.  Janson’s  last  letter,  termed  the  Exeter  Mesmeric
Record,  now  annual,  but  from  its  former  frequency  the  twenty-third.  We  la¬
ment  that  we  have  not  room  for  it,  and  indeed  for  all  the  previous  twenty-two.
They  are  all  excellent,  and  were  formerly  thundering,  as  it  was  fit  they  should
be ;  but,  since  our  adversaries  are  now  yielding  rapidly,  the  present  is  only  philo¬
sophical  and  historical.  It  is  extremely  good,  and  we  wish  it  were  printed  as  a
penny  tract.  Mr.  Janson  has  fought  the  good  fight  valiantly  and  unceasingly  for
many  years,  and  frequently  advertized  the  best  mesmeric  books  and  The  Zoist
itself  at  his  own  expense.

Thoughts  on  the  Nature  of  Man,  the  Propagation  of  Creeds,  and  the  Forma¬
tion  of  Human  Character.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

The  length  of  Mr.  Straton’s  most  important  article,  and  the  necessity  of
noticing  Reichenbach’s  work,  are  our  apology  for  deferring  the  interesting  com¬
munications  of  several  valued  correspondents.

A  Subscriber  is  informed  that  the  word  biology  signifies  a  discourse  on  life,
and  is  used  synonymously  sometimes  with  physiology,  sometimes  with  biography.


END  OF  VOL.  VIII.
