THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. XIII (April 1855 to January 1856).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Assembled from the five microfilm issue scans on the Internet Archive (sim_microfilm collection); no bound-volume scan of this volume is available.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XLIX.


APRIL, 1855.


I. Reichenbach and his Researches. Translation of the Preface
to Baron Von Reichenbach’s “ Sensitive” (Der Sensi-
tive Menscu), by Atexanper J. Exis, B.A., Trin.
Coll., Cam.


(Continued from Vol. XII., No. XLVIII., p. 334).


‘* There is no slander in an allowed fool, though he do nothing but rail; nor
no railing in a known discreet man, though he do nothing but reprove.’’—
SHAKSPEARE, Twelfth Night, acti., sc. 5.


“ Another public critic of my labours, Herr Heidenreich,
has imagined that he could facilitate the performance of his
task by putting my odic writings under the rubric of mysticism.
Mysticism is what we do not understand, and keep concealed
to prevent its being thoroughly understood (Krug’s General
Lexicon of the Philosophic Sciences, vol. ii., p. 826). As
soon as a thing is comprehended and understood, mysticism
vanishes. In my writings nothing is kept concealed. On
the contrary, they only contain clear facts in nature and
human consciousness. Everything is established as a scientific
fact by copious and strict and numerous proofs. It would be
more correct to say that I tore the veil from mysticism, if any
still remain. Nothing mystical is to be found in my book.
The use of such a term is a mere misconception. If any
thing of the kind enters the head of the reviewer, it can only
be because he does not understand the contents, that is, be-
cause he has not read my writings, and examined my plainly-
stated facts and their proofs. I recommend him to lay to
heart a striking sentence in Herr Hugo von Mohl’s last
work : ‘ No one should criticize a book who does not thoroughly
understand its subject, because immature judgment radiates

VOL, XIII. B


2 Heidenreich’s extreme absurdity.


mischief.’ (Botanic Intelligencer, Botanische Zeitung, of 17th
June, 1853.)

The same author has also remarked that about six years
since I hazarded the conjecture that diamagnetism might
belong to the field of od, and that consequently Mr. Faraday
and myself might be working towards the same subject from
different points. This he finds very ‘naive’ on my part.
But a few pages afterwards he terms Herr Dubois Reymond
‘the greatest of all electricians,’ after having just detected
an immense blunder on his part respecting the best known
laws of electricity ; and he assumes od without further cere-
mony as equivalent to diamagnetism, even interchanging
their names quite ad libitum and without the slightest foun-
dation. In one place he says that numerous hale and healthy
people are sensitive; and eight lines afterwards (Therapeutic
Physics, p. 126) he asserts that od cannot be regarded an
exact science, because it is not perceived by healthy men. I
find this ‘very naive’ also, nay, I find it a thoroughly un-
scientific muddle.

Herr Heidenreich begins by saying that od ‘is an hypo-
thesis, and should consequently be excluded from his expe-
rimental writings.’ Does he not forget that every power is an
hypothesis? That warmth, light, electricity, which he treats
in his Therapeutic Physics, in so far as he considers them as
powers and not phenomena, are not a hair’s breadth less
hypothetical than od?

These academic pen fights are very unrefreshing both for
writer and reader. But as long as unjust attacks are made
on a man to put him down and annihilate him, he has no-
thing for it but to ward them off as he best can. The tone
of such objections was better in former days. A few lustres
ago, we had arrived at restraining scientific contradiction
within the bounds of politeness. To Messrs. Liebig and
Dubois we are chiefly indebted for restoring the ancient rude-
ness in all its repulsiveness. And, alas! silk gloves won’t
parry clubs.

I will only give one example, which just occurs to me, of
the manner in which my labours are usually tested and then
condemned. Not long ago a professor of physics in Vienna
collected a number of young men who attended his class, in
order to investigate my statements regarding the phenomena
of odic light in the dark chamber. Some fifteen or sixteen
young men were present, and, according to my statements,
there must almost necessarily have been one or two sensitives
among them, Nevertheless, let them wait as long as they
would, no one could see a glow from any crystal or magnet


A Viennese philosopher acts unscientifically. 3


or anything else. From this experiment a report was circu-
lated through all Vienna that a professor of physics had
tested my assertions and found them worthless. And yet
among these people was Herr Eduard Von Vivenot, whom we
shall soon come to know as a capital sensitive of middling power,
and who, during four hours that he passed with me in my
dark room, saw the odic light excellently well, perceived the
glow over himself and me and all other objects most plainly,
as clearly and beautifully as I could wish. Now why did he
see so well in my dark room, and yet see nothing at all in
the professor’s? Simply because the latter was faulty, not
absolutely dark ; because little cracks and chinks let in light
in all directions, and moreover the company did not remain
together more than half an hour, which is entirely insuffi-
cient to prepare the eye of a middling sensitive. The pro-
fessor drew up a very exact report of the whole operation,
and the announcement that there was just about nothing in
all my labours went out into the world from this assembly.
Such is the procedure and such the sentence of an otherwise
very estimable professor of physics, like those of non-profes-
sors before him.

There are not a few natural philosophers who dare not
admit any fact in science that cannot be immediately ex-
plained by the natural laws already established. This is a
thoroughly baseless and totally inadmissable requisition.
Give it place, and it would check science in the full swing of
its progress. The more inexplicable any phenomenon ap-
pears, the deeper lies its foundation ; the more important are
the laws it conceals, the greater the interest attaching to it,
the more urgent is the demand on science to test and solve
it. Of course we must be careful (like Beneke, Archives for
Praymatic Psychology, 1853; p. 283) not to admit any con-
ception into science that cannot give such an account of
itself as to justify its admission. But it earns a right to ad-
mission when a connected series of undoubted facts has raised
it to an idea, and correct induction has given it its certificate.
In this case it must he admitted into science, and forms a
problem thoroughly entitled to its consideration.

All this it will be owned justifies or rather compels me to
build upon the broadest possible foundation in citing proofs for
the facts and observations I adduce, and to arm myself with
all the apparatus of inductive demonstration that I possess
and can command. For this purpose I have affixed to every
single experiment, as I entered it at the time, the number by
which it is distinguished in my journals, one of which I have

B2


4 Reichenbach’s laborious accuracy.


kept for each sensitive.* I am thus able to give a pledge not
only to every sensitive observer, but also to every reader, to
establish the genuineness of every individual experiment and
to trace it to its origin. This will give a security, controlled
by the sensitive who is cited by name, that each experiment
took place as I have stated and not otherwise; that it is not
an imaginary but a real experiment, and that the result was
exactly as I have described it down to the minutest detail.
I place myself and my labours by this means under the con-
trol not merely of 160 sensitives, but of the whole public.
People must perceive that when I speak of 50, 60, or 80 or
more experiments in which particular phenomena have been
repeatedly tested, these are not mere figures of speech, but
a conscientiously-stated fact—a reality proved by witnesses.
My sensitive re-agents are not dumb, like the chemical ones.
They can speak and answer questions. This is not their fault,
but their privilege. Finally, these numbers will be a safe-


guard against forgetfulness on the part of the sensitives,
should such occur.+


* “T have a large round table made to turn easily upon a central pivot. It
has some seventy odd vertical pigeon holes, and, being placed on the left of my
desk, contains the experimental journals of all my sensitive friends in alpha-
betical order. A single turn of the table suffices to bring any one of them under
hand.”’—§ 740.

+ [An example will make this paragraph clearer. The following is selected
rather with that view than for its individual interest, although it is a fundamental
experiment.—A. J. E. '

§ 1068. ‘If Fraeulein Dorfer (13), Herr Seb. Zinkel (11), von Offenheim
(49. 67), and Prof. Roesner (39), held their flat hands over a horse-shoe magnet of
one plate ; Herr Huetter (16) and Johann Klaiber (62) over one of three plates ;
Herr Gustav Anschuetz, Prof. Unger (42), and Frl. Glaser (30), over one of
five plates ; Fri. Ernestine Anschuetz (10), Frau Mueller (1), and Frau Kienes-
berger (4) over one of seven plates; Baroness Tessedik (17), von Vivenot (11),
Fri. Claudius (11), Blahusch (18), Geraldini (236), B. Hek (55), Girtler (3),
Prof. Schroetter (8), Prelate von Schindler (15. 16), von Siemianovski (96),
Alois Zinkel (104), Elger (16), Dr. Natterer (19), Euter (9), Leopolder (35),
Ranftl (30), Ritter Von Sidorowicz (21), Herr Steiger (44), over one of nine
plates; they all of them felt warmth and coolness at the different poles. I
directed all of them to use their left hand for this purpose, and they consequently
all found the northward pole emit a cool, and the southward pole a warm aura
(Hauch, breath). I caused several others to test magnets of many different
sizes, e.g., Hrn. Kotschy (42), Klein (64), Tirka (26), Joh. Klaiber, Prof.
Paulus (7), Frl. Sophie Pauer (35), Frl. Hermine Fenzl (14), &c. ; they all felt
the same sensations. Prof. Husz (23), of Stockholm, perceived that a horse-
shoe magnet of nine plates emitted a lukewarmness from its northward pole
against his right hand that it did not from the southward pole. Herr Sturm
(44) felt coolness stream out from the northward pole of a horse-shoe magnet of
seven plates, but felt scarcely anything from the southward pole. Dr. Pfretschner
(42), Dr. Nied (72), Klein (64), Dr. Loew (111), Herr Steiger, Major Phi-
lippi (45), Fri. Ernestine Von Martins (2) of Munich, Frl. Anna Beyer (56),
the two Fri. von Unckhrechtsberg (68), Josephine Poppe (16), Katharine


Byles ay AME


|
|


Odic effects real though not universal. 5


Many of my opponents have hoped to find a strong argu-
ment against the reliability of my statements in the pheno-
mena being perceptible to sensitives only, and not to every
body. An esteemed natural philosopher wrote to me that as
long as I was not in a condition to adduce experiments which
were visible to every body, od and my researches formed no
part of natural philosophy. As if there could be no music
because many men have no ear for it! As if there could be
no gout, because by far the greatest part of mankind have
never felt its pains! As if there were no hydrophobia be-
cause millions of men have never been in a condition to
observe it! Every process in nature is an object of natural
philosophy. No process in nature, however peculiar or iso-
lated in itself, can be excluded. On the contrary, the rarer
and consequently the more enigmatical its appearance, the
greater the interest it offers, the greater its claim, I must
repeat, to the attention of investigators, and to profound re-
searches. It is perfectly indifferent whether all men see odic
light and perceive odic effects, or only one out of every three
or four. The proof of the existence of these things is per-
fectly established if a hundred, or a thousand, or a hundred
thousand persons perceive the effects of od. It is totally unne-
cessary for the establishment of the fact of their existence that
all the world should see them. This objection, on which many
think that they may lay stress, is not of the slightest import-
ance, and in fact has not the least connexion with any critical
considerations on the subject, as any one may perceive who


Rupp (53), Frau von Hauer (68), all felt coolness on their left hand from the
northward pole of horse-shoe magnets of all sizes, and lukewarmness from the
southward pole; and conversely on their right hands, lukewarmness from the
northward, and coolness from the southward pole.”’

{[N.B.—The northward and southward poles are those which point to the
north and south respectively when the magnet is freely suspended.

In order to repeat this fundamental experiment correctly, it is necessary to
attend to the following points :—(a), the hand must be at rest; (0), if the
magnet is large, the hand must not be placed very near, as otherwise the tem-
perature of the metal affects it; (c), the palm of the hand must be at right
angles to the limb of the magnet; (d), the hand must not be held over the
magnet for long at a time, the first sensation is the one to be remembered ; (g),
the sensitive should stand with his back to the magnetic north, and the poles of
the magnet should be in the meridian, the northward towards the north; (4), the
magnet should not be held in any person’s hand, but supported by wood ; (/),
the distance of the hand from the magnet should be the same for each pole ;
(m), the sensation felt on removing the hand must be disregarded; (n), no
people, animals, crystals, strong plants, sunshine, moonshine, walls, metallic
masses, &c., should be very near. These and other (e, f, i, 4) sources of error
are pointed out at length in § 1072, but those omitted could not be rendered in-
telligible without previous explanation. This example may serve to shew the
laboriousness and the scientific precision of Baron Von Reichenbach’s experi-
ments.—A. J. E.]


6 Reichenbach not visionary like same mesmerists.


has ever heard of the elements of logic and the theories of
induction and deduction.

But it is not merely natural philosophers and chemists
who look askant at me, even the so-called magneticians, the
mesmeric physicians, are not the best disposed towards me.
Herren Justinus Kerner, Eschenmayer, Ennemoser, Schwarz-
schild, &c., have already looked black at me, here and there,
openly or covertly. One of them seems to think that as I
have come into the field thirty years after them, there is
little propriety in my putting in a word of instruction ; an-
other asserts that my talk is but the echo of what they have
been preaching for ages; a third and fourth declare that they
can learn nothing from my writings. Indeed I myself per-
ceive that these gentlemen have learned nothing from me.
But they are one and all displeased that instead of building
on the basis of their extensive magnetic and somnambulistic
literature, I insist upon laying my own foundations. What
can I say to a man who, like Herr Schwarzschild in his latest
work (Magnetismus, &c., vol. ii., p. 10) literally says: ‘The
route of observation that is the most instructive in all
sciences, is precisely the unsafest in the enigmatical doctrine
of (animal) magnetism?’ In what other safer way will Dr.
Schwarzschild then solve the riddles of (animal) magnetism,
if he considers observation the unsafest? Iam, on the con-
trary, perfectly convinced that we can only advance by means
of observation ; that it is only by the most diligent, attentive,
and extensive observation that we can escape from the laby-
rinth into which excessive speculation has so lamentably
misled so-called animal magnetism. And what will instructed
and experienced (animal) magnetic investigators think of the
thoroughness of Dr. Schwarzschild’s views when they read
(Ibid., p. 125) that he considers so-called magnetized water
to be ‘imposture and illusion,” (Betrug und Toeuschung,) and
that consequently this most recent author, who so unsparingly
demolishes almost all his predecessors, has not even yet got so
far as to be acquainted with magnetized, or odized, water ? (!)
I am sorry not to have it in my power to work with these
gentlemen on a common basis. I have seen no spirits. No
such visitor, welcome as he would be, has obliged me with
a call. I know nothing of a general nervous spirit and nerv-
ous ether, and have not only never been able to recognize
the substratum of such an obscure, vague, and consequently
unjustifiable notion, in the emanations from living beings,
but have also never been able to discover it in my crystals,
my bell, my chemical preparations,-sunshine and moonshine,
friction, or chemical processes. I do not aim at therapeutics,


ee:


ro


—


—


:
:


ete et


Mesmerism is a part of Od. 7


and have never been able to perceive that any imponderable
embraced the quintessence of all curative means. I have
never been able to understand that in natural phenomena
belief can supply the place of knowledge. These gentlemen
must therefore excuse me when I say openly and decidedly
that I can never place myself at their standpoint. I can
make little or no use of all their rich literature because it is
altogether medical, or sympathetic, or ‘ spiritual,’ or because
it is entirely deficient in the requisite conditions of correct
induction. I have nothing to do with mysticism ; medicine
offers a subordinate interest only to me, and of ‘ rapping
spirits’ I know nothing at all. With me, everything goes
on quite naturally, in accordance with laws evolved from
experimental researches. A few only of the phenomena I
deal with have been occasionally observed in the sick room ;
the greater part have had nothing to do with it, but have
been rather studied in open nature, in society, and, in their
immeasurable sphere of operation, principally among healthy
sensitives, and on this I lay stress. In this way I have
arrived at results which reach far beyond the dark narrow
circle in which the so-called magnetizers have hitherto re-
volved, and out of which they have found no exit. Od, like
heat and light, embraces the universe, and has not space
enough in the half-decayed and tottering edifice of our pre-
sent science of medicine. I have already said elsewhere
(Letters on Od), and must repeat it here, that mesmerism,
or the magnetic curative process, is only a particular applica-
tion of the odic imponderable to therapeutic purposes, and
has unfortunately hitherto consisted of a mere aggregate of
isolated observations without any scientific connexion. The
expressions od and mesmerism are consequently in no respect
opposed to each other. Each has its own meaning. Od is
a general physical force which embraces the whole of creation.
Mesmerism is a particular application of od to Dr. Mesmer’s
therapeutics. They are related, then, as an extensive whole
to a limited part, to a detached application of the same in
certain determinate cases, or as a genus to a species, and
have consequently each its own arena, of which the in-
comparably smaller is included in the wide circuit of the
larger. The men, too, who direct their studies to mesmerism
or to general odic phenomena, have room enough side by
side, and it seems to me very uncalled for to provoke bitter
replies by injurious attacks, when we can be agreeable and
useful both to ourselves and the world by a quiet interchange
of ideas and reasons.

And thus I stand perfectly isolated in the midst of na-


8 Liebig and Dubois’s violence will not prevail.


tural philosophers, physiologists, physicians, (animal) mag-
netizers, and to whom I may soon have to add of psychologists.
Not because the investigation of nature in its widest sense
cannot admit my individual propositions, for it cannot deny
the facts which I advance. Physics cannot argue away the
light which emanates from crystals. Chemistry cannot refuse
her astonishment at the emergence of the odo-chemical
series. Physiology cannot close its eyes against the threefold
polarity of the human body. Medicine must fain allow the
mitigation and excitation of spasms by odic passes. (Animal)
magnetizers are struck dumb at a piece of wood being charged
with positive or negative od by the orange and blue rays of
the solar light. Psychology, finally, must also quake at my
depriving an apparently healthy man of his consciousness in
a few seconds by merely touching his toes, and restoring it
to him at pleasure. These substantial facts cannot be got
rid of, even by the rude words of a Liebig or Dubois. They
must be admitted, willingly or unwillingly. It is not this
which isolates me. No, it is the scientific discipline by which
I have succeeded in connecting all these remarkable pheno-
mena, and reducing them to the common well-founded idea
of an hypothetical imponderable, Od. The scientific bond
by which I have united these thousands of phenomena, the
consistently built theoretic edifice in which I have shel-
tered and distributed them,—this is what vexes so many
learned humdrum folk,—this is what they find so trouble-
some to subdue their nature to,—/his is what fills them with
repugnance against wide-spreading novelties. It is much
easier, then, to shake the thing off as worthless, and keep
to the old road in peace. But it isof no use. If no one
will help me, I engage unaided to heave the burden on their
shoulders again. It is truth which gives me strength.

That in so doing I depend entirely upon my own experi-
ments alone, and, at least in the first instance, make scarcely
any use of the experiments and observations of others, is the
result of many well-weighed reasons. In the first place I
know the degree of exactness and conscientiousness of my
own labours, and am sure that I can depend upon them,
which is not always possible, at least to the same extent, with
the labours of others. In the next place the experiments
require so much caution, freedom from prejudice, attention
to the sensitive, and so many checks upon his statements by
counter experiments and repetitions of the same experiments
on sensitives unknown to each other, as well as on sensitives
of different degrees of power, and by the complementary
roads of the phenomena of sensation and those of light


z


Yat


Reichenbach trusts to the experiments of himself only. 9


throughout, that I can find no satisfactory example of such
proceedings in any older writings which have come to my
knowledge. In by far the greater number of cases they are
still wanting in the requisite profundity of insight into the
matter itself, to excogitate a sufficient and demonstratively
convincing system of checks for the experiments. Hence I
am unable to trust the mass of prior unconnected and uncon-
trolled isolated experiments sufficiently to employ them in
my labours, in which every proposition must possess that
degree of certainty which ‘the present method of physical
research’ has rendered requisite in physics and physiology.
I have indeed in the course of these very investigations
unfortunately had personal experience of the little trust which
can in such matters be reposed upon what a man has not him-
self immediately examined. In my Researches on Magnetism,
Electricity, &c., in their relation to the vital force (as translated
by Dr. Gregory), § 17, I communicated an experiment which
I did not perform myself, but which a daguerreotypist whom
I thought I could trust, carried out according to my indica-
tions. This attempt to form photographic pictures by means
of odic light was not confirmed when I repeated it a few
years afterwards, and I am consequently obliged to withdraw
it and to my annoyance retract its result. The first and only
experiment, then, which in these matters I ever received at
the hands of another whom I thought I could trust, broke
down. How can I, then, acknowledge the authority of
unknown (animal) magnetizers with whom I am unacquainted
and whose writings swarm with miracles, which only too
often bear the stamp of self-deception on their front, and
that so plainly, that one can hardly read their statements for
impatience? I must request indulgence therefore. I have
to build up a new division of physics and physiology, and in
order to put it upon sure foundations I find myself compelled
to begin from the very beginning and re-perform all the
experiments according to my own plan. I cannot consider
myself sure of their exactness until I have obtained the
results myself before my own eyes and ears. The only means
of advancing in this study is to establish knowledge upon
well proved experience, and then develop a continual deduc-
tion. Not only do we otherwise fail to advance in intelligence,
as I conceive to be the case hitherto with mesmerism, which
has not yet attained to a scientific basis, but we fail to reach
even a tenable beginning.* I believe that my method avoids


* English mesmerists will demur to this dictum. They must remember how-
ever, that Reichenbach is speaking of the science not the art. The art of mes-
merism is very far advanced in this country. We know how to manipulate


10 Mesmerism is in its infancy.


these inconveniences, and creates a safe foundation for my
subject on the basis of my own experience. Hereafter, when
I have completed the task I have set myself, should a few
years of life still remain, I may perhaps review the better
portion of former works and collect an anthology from their
mingled tales and reports, that will sift the good they con-


tolerably well in given cases, and we have some notion of the sort of results to
expect. But we are very far from being able to predict or explain results, that
is, to deduce conclusions from general laws, or refer phenomena to them. We
have no laws of mesmeric action which can aspire to any higher rank than such
as are termed in philosophic language, empirical rules, which are only applicable
within very narrow limits, and which are continually liable to be crossed by
unknown conditions. This is the initiatory state not only of mesmeric but of all
therapeutics. Indeed the whole science of life is only just struggling beyond it.
It has been Reichenbach’s aim to obtain certain general laws which will in many
cases enable us to predict results—the only test of real knowledge. His laws of
the dualism of od, the charging and conducting of od, unipolarities of certain
bodies, of the direct and reverse pass, of odic light and vision, &c., &c., are
laws of this kind. From the last named, for example, he has been able to give
something like a satisfactory explanation of that part of clairvoyance which con-
sists in seeing objects when the eyes are closed. He has also succeeded in
explaining the action of mesmerised water, and other therapeutic agents. The
practical mesmerist will be immediately able from a knowledge of these laws to
correct many of his empirical processes. But Reichenbach has not attempted to
proceed far into therapeutic od or mesmerism, and even with all the general
laws he has established, it remains true that the science of mesmerism considered
as a means of predicting and explaining the results with which the art of mes-
merism has rendered us familiar, is, like so many other sciences, still in its infancy.
If the science of mechanics itself, the most perfect, after pure mathematics and
geometry, which we possess, is totally inadequate to explain the greater number
of mechanical agencies with which we are surrounded, but requires completion by
a vast collection of empirical rales formed at the cost of an immense amount of
laborious experiments, and even in those cases to which it is adequate (as the
explanation of the motions of planets, comets, liquids, and gases), leads to cal-
culations so involved that they hitherto defy our powers of analysis to perform,
we must not be surprised that in one of the most complicated of actions hitherto
submitted to inquiry—the mutual reaction of living organisms in the odic direc-
tion, rendered still more enigmatical by the diseased condition of at least one of
them in the mesmeric case, we have a small amount of science to a huge mass of
empirical details. Our only duty is to keep those details pure ; not to complicate
them with hypothetical agencies, such as ethers, or spirits of which we know
and can know nothing, or with false estimates of known instrumentalities, as
electricity, magnetism, &c., but to give them as they are, and connect them so
far as possible only with some verifiable hypothesis. This is what Reichenbach is
attempting, for his od, though termed by him a dynamid, or something resem-
bling a force, translated by Dr. Gregory, imponderadle, is never considered as a
material something, any more than electricity or light. It is a name by which
laws are hypothetically connected, and these laws admit of a direct verification,
which he has himself with wonderful perseverance endeavoured to give, and, on
the whole, with remarkable success. We have many mesmerists, practical and
benevolent men, who are doing a great amount of good, but we should have
advanced further if more of them had been truly scientific experimenters, and
known something about what is and what is not an inductive proof. The pages of
The Zoist contain a mass of evidence which is irresistible considered as a mere
proof of the reality of certain phenomena, but little of it is in a proper state for
that scientific process which Reichenbach contemplates, and which few of those
who furnished it had in view.—A. J. E.


Teg EE


ne a


-


OT acl


Has not been cultivated philosophically. 11


tain from their mass of unsafe, misinterpreted, false or ima-
ginary statements. The present treatise is based on my
former odic works, especially on the Researches, &c., and may
be considered as a continuation of them. Taken together,
they form an unbroken series of investigations. The present
is nevertheless an independent treatise, a monograph on the
sensitive human being, as the others were separate, though
very condensed, monographs on the odic relations of crystals,
the magnet, sun, and moon, heat, &c.: much that is touched
upon here serves to correct and complete what was communi-
cated in the Researches, &c. In some points my views have
been corrected by a more profound examination of the nature
of the subject, the experiments have been differently and
more perfectly understood, and some of them have had to be
changed. This is the course of all investigations when we
proceed from darkness to light. Those who look below the
surface will find the principal difference between my labours
and those of all my predecessors to consist in the method by
which I have arranged the order of my investigations. As
in the whole of nature, so also in the sensitive and odic phe-
nomena, we only meet with particular individual cases in all
their complexity and entanglement. The first problem, the
problem of physical research, is to remove or break through
this entanglement and arrive at the elementary factors and
elementary processes. It is not until we have thus displayed
and determined the general fundamental laws of the elements,
that we can advance safely to compositions and applications.
My predecessors on this field, began, as I did originally, with
the various wonders of somnambulism. They kept on height-
ening these more and more, till they lost themselves in the
highest intellectual and ‘spiritual’ regions. The incompre-
hensible thus only became more incomprehensible under
their hands, and finally often toppled over into the ridiculous.
I also started from the astonishing facts of somnambulism
and catalepsy, but I have not allowed myself to be led away
by them, or to be stupified by the surprise they raised. On
the contrary, I recognized in them excessively complicated
manifestations of nature, and judged it necessary to follow
an exactly contrary path. By a retrogressive analysis, I have
returned from the complex to the simplex, @ posteriori ad prius.
I have thus, by a constantly analytical process, succeeded in
reaching the original facts of the phenomena, and their compo-
nent elementary powers. Then, but not till then, taking
these as starting points, a priori ad posterius, I was able to
advance synthetically, and, from the discovered laws of the
elementary forces, construct explanations of the wondrously


12 The despisers of Od are lame practitioners


complicated phenomena which actually occurred. This is what
is termed the method of physical research at the present day.
Instead of being considered as an objection, as certain super-
ficial opponents would like to view it, it should be regarded
as the essential advantage of my labours, as that which sepa-
rates them from all others in this field, and has led to those
rich results which are set forth in my treatise.

He who has not grudged the labour of making himself
acquainted with these results, will share my conviction that
every physiologist and every physician must not only notice,
but become thoroughly master of them, if he is not contented
to remain in ignorance of a whole series of important truths.
The physiologist will discover in sensitiveness a group of
vital functions which have been hitherto overlooked, and the
physician will find in od a power without which he will not
only not be able to give any assistance in numerous Cases,
but even to understand the symptoms he beholds, much less
to have any mastery over them. The doctrine of od will
thus soon increase the distance between an educated and
uneducated physician, and distinguish the man of knowledge
from the mere craftsman. Ido not mean that every physician
should be an (animal) magnetizer; far from it: but a phy-
sician who understands nothing about the terrestrial od of
position, solar and lunar od, the odic poles of man, the odic
influence of baths, the partial pass or odic obstructions, or
the mighty influence of od on spasms, nay, who does not
even know in what direction to stand when he feels a patient’s
pulse, must certainly play a miserable part by the bedside of
a sensitive. The present and future revelation of the laws of
od, must cause almost a revolution in whole sections of
therapeutics.

I say nothing of the natural philosophers and chemists of
the present day. Those who have speculated for centuries
over the deeply occult power of magnets, who study the optic
and diamagnetic axes of crystals, who pass sleepless nights
over the invisible rays of chemical and polarized heat, who
worry their brains with phosphorence, decomposition, the
influence of light on vegetable and animal life, on the in-
ternal qualities of substance that lie beyond the apparent,
and yet will not listen to, nay, will not allow a word to be
uttered by, the man who makes palpable to the outer senses
most important facts regarding sensation and light that form
the conditions of those hidden phenomena; these we can
only pity for their unworthy blindness. I must accuse the
present at the judgment-seat of the future, from which alone
I can hope for satisfaction.


and limited philosophers. 13


I am sorry to add another term to the difficult and in-
volved series of imponderables, especially one of such a
character as to bring physiology, which had hitherto kept
tolerably apart, into direct and most intimate connexion with
physics. Natural philosophy will, it is true, be considerably
enriched on her hitherto most barren spot, but its study, and
a thorough penetration into its higher circles, where life
presses on crystallization, and material vegetation begins to
embrace spiritual life, will be rendered considerably more
difficult. And in this very circumstance must lie a principal
reason for my meeting with scarcely any but opponents.
There is no difficulty in taking up a few isolated experiments
from journals, and inserting them in their proper place into
our store of knowledge. But it is very laborious, it involves
the loss of much time, it is exceedingly difficult, to enter upon
an entirely new field of knowledge, to pursue it into its
widely-ramified developments, to store it in the memory, and
duly weigh its comprehensive significancy. The older and
weightier scientific authorities will seldom submit to this.
But I cannot help it. ‘Truth is power.’ Facts which exist,
truths which are discovered, insist on their rights. A man
who is highly esteemed in the world of natural philosophers,
wrote to me: ‘If things really were as you assert, it would
be too beautiful, and we do not find this in nature.’ Hence,
then, because the discoveries which od has revealed are ‘too
beautiful,’ they are baseless, and cannot, and may not, stand !
Their reality is inadmissible on account of their great impor-
tance! ...1f certain jog trot natural philosophers imagine that
the series of imponderables is closed, and can contain none
but the long-since naturalized company of heat, light, elec-
tricity, magnetism, &c., they may prove to be as wrong as he
who thought that God had placed seven planets in heaven for
the seven days of creation. Men of another stamp will rise,
and draw other too beautiful powers from the deep well of
natural forces up to the daylight of human knowledge, be-
sides the few which we have as yet with comparatiely little
trouble gathered from the surface !

REICHENBACH.
Schloss Reisenberg, near Vienna,
Middle of May, 1854.”


[The second and concluding volume of Der Sensitive
Mensch (pp. xxx., 785) has just appeared. The following is
an extract from the preface prefixed to it. ]

“Prof. Vogt, of Geneva, in the 13th vol. of his Physiolo-
gical Letters, (2nd edition) communicates his opinion upon


14 The folly of Professor Vogt of Geneva.


od and sensitiveness, that I am bound not to withhold from
my readers. The following is the elegant style he employs,
p. 322 :—

‘The whole series of nonsense which has been puffed into
the world under the name of odic phenomena rests wholly
and solely upon an exalted nervous excitability, by which
sensations and impressions which pass without a trace in or-
dinary life are communicated to the consciousness. I have
observed a woman who had been brought to the brink of the
grave by violent vomiting continued for days, and who was
suspected of a stomachic disease, whereas the only cause of
her abnormal meagreness lay in incipient pregnancy. During
this total exhaustion of the body, the nervous system was
roused into such a condition of exalted excitability, that the
patient not only heard the steps of the villagers when I could
scarcely see them, but could distinguish individuals who
were crossing the road, by their steps alone. It is easily seen
that this susceptibility had only to be slightly increased to
occasion phenomena, which, especially if we had had to do
with deceitful characters, would have been denominated
magnetic clairvoyance.’ . . .

Herr Vogt must allow me to anatomize his experiments a
little. First he declares that ‘the whole series of odic phe-
nomena rest wholly and solely on an exalted nervous excita-
bility.’ Very well. He acknowledges in so many words,
then, that odic phenomena ezist, nay, that the whole series
which I have advanced exist, for no one has advanced any in
the same way. He honours them indeed with the polite
predicate of a puff of nonsense, which I must of course
endure from a professor who has himself given out so much
nonsense ; but, as he asserts that all these phenomena rest on
nervous excitability, and what rests upon something must
itself be something, they must at least exist. Well, for the
present I am content with this acknowledgement of odic
phenomena. It is a basis which we will not allow to be con-
jured away from us.

When he next proceeds to declare that these phenomena
‘rest on an exalted nervous excitability, by which, passing
without a trace in ordinary life, they are communicated to
our consciousness,’ I must ask him what I have in general
announced their subjective part to be? whether I have not
myself ascribed it universally to a higher or more exalted
nervous excitability? In my very first treatise in Liebig’s
Annals (1845), I gave it as my decided opinion that sensitive-
ness rested on an exalted nervous excitability, that not only
the general feeling but also the sensorial nerves were in a


Sensitives have a peculiar sensibility. 15


state of increased excitement, that there was ‘an extraordi-
nary acuteness of the senses’ in smell, taste, and hearing, and
that feeling and sight received perceptions of which ordinary
people are incapable. I have repeated the same in the first
pages of the Researches, &c. (Gregory’s Translation, part ii.)
in the Letters on Od, and in a hundred other places in my
writings, as thousands of Germans, English, and French can
witness. What is the meaning of such an objection, which
is no objection at all? An objection which is nothing but a
repetition and corroboration of what I have already stated
myself !

I have connated this kind of exalted nervous excitability
and its peculiarities by the term sensitiveness, and I cannot
have been very wrong in so doing, as Herr Vogt himself in-
voluntarily used the term ‘ sensitive nervous fibres’ in p. 300
of his Physiological Letters.

Of course this does not settle the question. Herr Vogt
means to say something more than this, and as he has not
attained to a clear conception of his own meaning, I will help
him to it. His words are intended to convey the idea that
sensitiveness consists solely in a more exalted, and not in a
specific, nervous excitability. We gather this intention of
his obscure phraseology from the example of the pregnant
woman, which he adduces as an illustration. Now I have
always asserted that sensitiveness is not only a more exalted,
but over and above this, a specific, nervous excitability. I
will not fail to give a refutation of his opinion and a proof of
my own assertion. Let us take the excitability of the visual
nerves. Some men have extraordinary powers of vision both
near and far. Others are pitiably short-sighted. According
to Herr Vogt’s argument the acute séers with their high
visual excitability should all be impressible with odic pheno-
mena, while the short-sighted, from the obtuseness of their
nerves of sight, should be inexcitable by them. Experience
gives a directly contradictory result. Men of excellent vision,
who are not specifically sensitive, may remain for days in my
dark chamber without beholding a trace of odic light. Others
who are myopic, as Professor Endlicher, Superintendent
Paur, Frau von Vivenot, Fraeulein Sophie Paur, and others
who constantly use eye-glasses, can all see the odic light per-
fectly well in profound darkness. Similarly with feeling. If
there are many persons who cannot endure another to sit,
stand, or lie on their right hand side, but are quite contented
for him to go to their left, this is a phenomenon which is
inexplicable on the theory of a simply more exalted nervous
excitability, and is consequently based on a specific excita-


16 Sometimes also ordinary sensibility is exalted.


bility of sensation in addition. Why are some people abso-
lutely unable to endure their left eye to be gazed at by a left
eye, but are pleased when a right eye looks into their left
eye? Why may one place the fingers on one hand and not
the other, one end of a crystal and not the other near a sen-
sitive’s eye? Why do many people fall into irresistible sleep,
catalepsy, or tetanus, if I make upward or downward passes
over them at a distance of several rooms’ length? Dr.
Reclam may if he chooses call this quackery (Prosch, Medico-
Chirurgical Encyclopedia, art. Electric Cures, p. 563), al-
though he is not justified in employing the expression before
investigation, but it remains a proved fact, for all that, and
one that has continually occurred before my eyes. Why do
some persons find one end of a crystal affect their hand with
warmth and the other with coolness? Our previous know-
ledge had shewn us nothing at these ends to produce such a
sensation, not to mention two dissimilar sensations ; and yet
it is a fact as hundreds of experiments testify. All these
nervous excitements and a thousand others which I have
investigated and inductively demonstrated ‘ according to the
present method of physical research, cannot possibly be ex-
plained by Herr Vogt on the mere ground of a more exalted
general excitability, which can only change the intensity and
not the nature (quantum, non quale) of a sensation. It isa
specific, peculiar excitability which in concrete cases, as for
example with diseased sensitives, may be, but is not neces-
sarily accompanied by a more general one. Nay, in many
cases it is clearly not so accompanied, as with the generality
of healthy sensitives, taking healthy in its ordinary signification.

This is the very turning point of Herr Vogt’s bottomless
objections. He wants to deduce the odic phenomena of the
human body (that he does not deny because he cannot)
from the single fact of a generally more exalted nervous
excitability, and thus cut the ground from under sensitive-
ness, whereas this also rests upon a specific excitability. I
do not deny, on the contrary I establish, by my experiments
the existence of a generally heightened nervous excitability,
but subordinate to this, the whole nervous system is pene-
trated by a specific excitability, which is here the point of
importance. Now with his pretended explanation, he cannot
account for the simplest odic phenomenon, and has not even
ventured to try to explain them and thus refute my demon-
strations of, one single fact which I have advanced. He has
nothing for it then but to accept my solutions. Whatever
device he may hereafter contrive to escape from them withal,
I will engage to prove it untenable.


Vogt might have cured a vomiting with his hand. 17


How very slightly he has penetrated into the internal
relations of these things, and what little light is at his com-
mand, is evident from the example he adduces from his own
experience,—that of a sick pregnant woman whose vomiting
could not be stayed. In this woman he had clearly at com-
mand nothing less than a declared excellent sensitive of high
power. But he does not discover it. Her high state of sen-
sitiveness was moreover exalted by her pregnancy, as I have
proved (§ 808). The spasms of the stomach were evidently
just such as he might have cured immediately, without any
medicine at all, by merely placing his right hand over the
region of the stomach, as I have done in similar cases
instantly and thoroughly (§ 1054—1058, 2763, &c.) The
secondary phenomena that he observed, namely, the power
possessed by the patient of recognizing people in the street
by their steps, at a considerable distance, have been observed
thousands of times, but never in cases of simply exalted
nervous excitability, only, on all occasions, without any excep-
tion, in sensitives of high power. He is at liberty to term
this ‘magnetic clairvoyance’ if he chooses, and he has no
need of ‘deceitful characters’ for that purpose, unless he is
determined by denying palpable facts which take place before
his very eyes, or their necessary consequences, to deceive his
own self. Had he only been unprejudiced enough to examine
the nature of the extraordinary powers of this remarkable
woman more closely; had, indeed, delicate observation and
profound deduction lain within his compass, he would have
soon found that her hearing was by no means so exalted as to
allow her to distinguish persons by the sound of their foot-
steps at distances where he could scarcely see them (a little
decoratio calami, no doubt), but that she must have obtained
these perceptions in a totally different manner. He would
indeed find this described in the present volume, but will not
find it, as such a gentleman of course cannot work his way
into my puff of nonsense. In the same manner, he shews
clearly enough, without being at all aware of it, that he had
not the slightest comprehension of, or penetration into, the
case before him; not even a hint to help him towards the
solution of the interesting riddle he was observing. This is
a proof of poverty that shews how far his pride lies below the
height on which it weans to stand.

The poor pretext of ‘imposture’ that is everywhere
charged on sensitives by those who do not understand the
phenomena, and that Herr Vogt partly shelters himself
behind, has already sunk into a commonplace. A natural
philosopher who can be tricked in matters of such depth

VOL, XIIT. c


18 Reichenbach’s injustice to us.


cannot have inherited much talent for the solution of scien-
tific problems. A man who can put questions and weigh
answers will not let a trickster lead him by the nose in phy-
sical or physiological matters. He who has not this in him
should leave physical research and the criticism of physical
investigators to wiser heads. .

Schloss Reisenberg, December, 1854.”


[The parts omitted contain some metaphysical observa-
tions on Herr Vogt’s theory that mind (die siele) is secreted
by the brain, “as bile by the liver and urine by the kidneys.”
We have omitted it, both because it had no reference to odic
phenomena, and because the English metaphysical phrase-
ology corresponds so unsatisfactorily with the German as to
render a faithful rendering of the passage almost impossible. ]


(This article will be concluded in our next.)


NOTE BY THE ZOIST.
Reichenbach says at p. 6 :—


“But it is not merely natural philosophers and chemists who
look askant at me: even the so-called magneticians, the mesmeric
physicians, are not the best disposed towards me. Herren Justinus
Kerner, Eschenmayer, Ennemoser, Schwarzchild, &c., have already
looked black at me, here and there, openly or covertly. One seems
to think, &c., &e. Indeed I myself perceive that these gentlemen
have learnt nothing from me. But they are one and all displeased
that instead of building on the basis of their animal magnetic and
somnambulistic literature, I insist on laying my own foundations.”


No one would suppose that any mesmerists had been
willing to give him fair play. But British mesmerists have
acted the most friendly part to him. Dr. Gregory, the pre-
sent Professor of Chemistry in the University of Edinburgh,
published in 1846 an abstract of his researches, and The
Zoist gave a full account of this abstract in three numbers
in Vol. IV., the articles extending through forty-seven pages.

When Reichenbach published a separate work upon this
subject, we noticed the English editions by Dr. Gregory and
by Dr. Ashburner in our Eighth Volume, in 1851, and began
our account in these words: “It is a good sign for the cause
of mesmerism when the public finds itself supplied with two
translations of a remarkable work by the distinguished Baron
Von Reichenbach.”

His new work we began to describe in our last number,


ea ea 2 © bates


oe © eniindasr


aay <2.


y
cs
}


The writers in’ The Zoist are not visionary. 19


continue our notice in this, and purpose continuing it in our
next. We took pains that he should be informed of our
notices in 1846 and in 1851. He was bound therefore, we
think, to except English mesmerists from his complaints.

He ought to know and to acknowledge that the writers
in The Zoist have prosecuted mesmerism as philosophically,
as carefully, in as perfect freedom from superstition and other
folly as he himself has prosecuted his researches. We “ have
seen no spirits. No such visitor, welcome as he would be, has
obliged us with a call.” Wr “know nothing of a general nerv-
ous spirit and nervous ether.” Like him, we have “ never been
able to understand that in natural phenomena, belief can supply
the place of knowledge :” we “ have nothing to do with mys-
licism :”” we ‘have never been able to understand that in na-
tural phenomena belief can supply the place of knowledge :’” “ of
rapping spirits we know nothing at all.”

We are not aware how he can “ stand perfectly isolated in
the midst of natural philosophers, physiologists, physicians,
ANIMAL MAGNpTIsTs,” &c.

The Zoist, which displays the British mesmeric mind,
DOES NoT “swarm with miracles, which only too often bear
the stamp of self-deception on their face, and that so plainly
that one can hardly read them for impatience.”


“* My predecessors,” says Reichenbach at p. 11, “on this field
began, as I did originally, with the various wonders of somnam-
bulism. They kept on heightening them more and more till they
lost themselves in the highest and ‘spiritual’ regions. The incon-
prehensible thus only became more incomprehensible under their
hands, and finally often toppled over into the ridiculous. I also
started from the astonishing facts of somnambulism and catalepsy,
but I have not allowed myself to be led away by them, or to be stu-
pified by the surprise they raised.”


We defy Reichenbach to shew in the pages of our twelve
volumes anything of this kind, and therefore he ought not
to have thus accused the mass of mesmerists, however justly
many of our predecessors and cotemporaries deserve his rebuke.
We were investigators of those matters before he began, and
have never fallen into the follies which he supposes to be
common to all mesmerists. He should have made a distinc-
tion: and an honourable distinction. We have displeased
the visionary and superstitious class of mesmerists, who shake
their heads at us, as people sadly inferior to themselves in
intelligence and goodness.

To shew that English mesmerists had done something in
Reichenbach’s own line before he had published upon the
matter, we will mention the effects of mesmerised water upon
c2


20 Mesmerisation of inanimate substances.


the Okeys by Dr. Elliotson in 1838, and published about
that time. (See Zoist, Vol. IV.)


*«* Water has no effect: but, if it is breathed into or has a finger
placed in it, acquires the power of producing sudden sleep if drunk
by either sister: and, in the elder, contraction of a finger or limb
which is moistened with it, as well as deep sleep. We send her to
sleep by passes, and measures are taken to prevent the possibility of
sight, and, when she is asleep, we moisten any finger, the side of
the nose, or any other part of the face with it or with plain water.
If with plain water, there is no effect: if with the mesmerised, the
part after a time contracts. If the back of the finger is moistened,
the finger extends: if the inside, it bends: if the forehead, this
wrinkles and moves up and down: if the eyelids, they open: if the
angle of the mouth, it twitches sidewise. These experiments have
been made thousands of times, and always, except for some evident
reason, with the same results. But the mesmerised water has a
powerful narcotic and depressing property. The longer it is applied,
and the more of it is used, the deeper the sleep and snoring become:
and, if too much is used, paleness, exhaustion, rapidity and extreme
smallness of pulse take place, so that no one should presume to
make these experiments unless well acquainted with the subject.
Indeed, with respect to any of these experiments, for an ignorant
man to take the matter in hand himself, as though he had made
himself master of the subject, is as absurd and disgusting as if a
countryman should push aside a chemical lecturer, and mix acids,
alkalies, and salts from various bottles, and declare, because things
did not happen as he expected, that chemistry was fudge: or if such
a clown, who had never seen a microscope before, should put objects
under it, and knowing nothing about the instrument, be able to see
fog and confusion oniy, and therefore declare the instrument an im-
position. If the susceptibility is not strong, water swallowed may
have no effect till a second draught is taken, or even a draught of
unmesmerised water, so as to occasion friction of the part wet with
the mesmerised water. Since, if a part has been breathed upon or
touched by another, or touched with something mesmerised, friction
with any unmesmerised or unmesmerisable substance will bring out
the effects of the previous and hitherto dormant cause or re-excite
effects that had ceased: should a finger be held by another person,
and then rubbed with a brush moistened with unmesmerised water,
effects will ensue just as if water first mesmerised were used. Should
mesmerised gold or nickle have been applied to a part, and from the
susceptibility being low no effect have occurred, or should there have
been an effect and it have ceased, friction with anything will bring
out the effect of the thing previously applied: or should a thing not
direetly mesmerisable, but mesmerisable by contact with a directly
mesmerisable metal, be ignorantly allowed to be in contact with a
mesmerisable metal, and then be applied to the person, the effects
of the directly mesmerisable metal will be produced.’

“The effect of all mesmerised substances I found different in dif-


 -_— i. 8 dl Ue OU U6 lee


Some directly, others indirectly. 21


ferent people, and in the same at different times. Metals, even
nickel, had no effect upon Elizabeth Okey at last. All the manifesta-
tions and all the phenomena of these cases, whether spontaneous or
mesmeric, are liable to fluctuation. In the same way, not only do
different medicines act differently upon different persons, but the
same medicine at different times.”

“The Okeys felt nothing from common water ; but mesmerised
water drunk threw them into insensibility: and at one time, in
one, it did not till a second draught or a draught of plain water
was afterwards taken. Applied to the finger of one, but of Elizabeth
only, it caused contraction inwards, if applied to the inside; out-
wards, if applied to the outside: when sight was impossible, and
water from a mesmerised and an unmesmerised glass variously, kept
behind her back, even behind a screen, was employed! These
beautiful experiments were shewn by me to Mr. Wakley, and he had
nothing to object to them : he was quite at a loss even for impudence,
and passed them over in silence in his unfair and ignorant account of
what he says he saw. At length, if much was employed, insensi-
bility and extreme debility for a time ensued.”


Reichenbach tells us that the power of crystals can be
transferred to solid bodies and water by striking them with
one of its poles, and that every patient can distinguish them
from those not struck, if no time were lost in the experiment.
In England we had observed the same fact in mesmerism.


** This is the case with mesmerism, in water and inanimate bodies
mesmerised by contact, breath, passes, &c. I also find that by
rubbing mesmerised gold, &c., upon a body not capable of direct
mesmerisation, although it might appear so if the animal moisture
upon it was not wiped off, this substance might be indirectly charged.
Thus by rubbing mesmerised gold on copper, this becomes mes-
merised.

“‘ The power in my experiments instantly began to decline and was
soon lost, just as with Reichenbach’s crystal and magnet power.

‘I have known parties mesmerised at a distance by sending them
by the post a piece of leather, &c., first mesmerised. The effect,
however, was gradually lost, and a fresh piece required. Once un-
mesmerised leather was sent with no intimation, and there was no
effect ; a mesmerised piece, as usual, was then sent, with no inti-
mation, and the effect came.”


As to the retention of power, Reichenbach found “ that
some bodies lost their power almost instantly, as paper;
others after a few minutes; and in no case did the power lost
remain in the body charged longer than ten minutes.”


“This was our general experience with the mesmeric influence.
But the longer the mesmerisation is continued, the greater and


22 Mesmeric force connected with health.


more lasting is the power: the more spongy or capable of retaining
mesmerised moisture the substance, and the less the exposure, the
longer does the power last.”


On the fact of our being able to charge metals with mes-
merism, and the connexion of mesmeric power with health, the
same English mesmerist wrote as follows in 1838 :—


** By means of chargeable metals, I devised a mode of shewing
very accurately the influence of health upon the mesmerising power.
I took one of the sisters into a female ward in which she had never
been, and respecting the inmates of which she and I were perfectly
ignorant. Every ticket with the name of the disease on the head
of the bed was removed: every patient had the clothes drawn com-
pletely over her. A sovereign, which had lain long untouched, and
had therefore no mesmeric charge, was taken up by her, and we
proceeded to the ward. She put the sovereign under the bed-clothes
into the hand of each patient in succession, and at the same number
of moments by my stop-watch took it out again and kept it in her
hand. I noted the period in which the effect began, the length of
time it lasted, and the amount of it,—whether it caused spasm of
the hand only; of the hand and arm; or spasm and stupefaction
So we went round the ward, and in one bed, at the request of a
certain student, I repeated the experiment. As soon as each expe-
riment was finished, the bed-clothes were turned down and the
ticket examined. The effects were in every instance precisely pro-
portionate to the strength of the patient in whose hand the sovereign
had been placed. Those in consumption or worn down with para-
lysis produced little or no effect: those who had complaints not im-
pairing the health and strength produced full effect: and all the
intermediate degrees were exquisitely proportionate to the condition
of the patient. One patient had produced a great effect, who, the
student said, was continually bled and kept constantly on low diet.
But I found she had not been bled for some weeks, had been for
some time on full diet, was taking bark, looked in capital condition,
and had only some cautaneous disease not interfering with her
strength. Of the two experiments made at one bed, the first had
produced a full effect proportionate to the strength of the patient.
The second experiment produced only a moderate effect: the clothes
were then turned down, and it proved that a nurse said to be in
good health, and to do all the work of the ward, had been lain in
it. The woman, however, looked very sickly, and I found that she
had just lain in, and had come back to her place very weak, and long
before she was competent. The experiment was triumphant, and
an apology was the next day made to me by the student (Dr. Parkes,
now a professor in the place) who had so misrepresented to me the
state of those -two patients, and at whose request I had willingly
made the experiments in this his wise uncle’s (Dr. A. T. Thomson)
ward, because the results in the case of both sisters, perfectly ac-
cordant in every instance up to that time with the strength of each


The imparted Mesmerism wastes. 23


patient, though modified like all results in their form in each sister,
had been made in my own ward, where they and I knew every
patient.

‘Another beautiful set of experiments was made with brutes.
If their hand was brought into contact with a brute, the rapidity
and intensity of the effect was always proportionate to the size of
the animal. If their fingers were placed under the wing of a per-
roquet, the effect was much inferior to what it was if they were
placed under the wings of a cockatoo. If placed on the nose of a
small deer, the effect was inferior to what it was if placed upon a
lama or a large deer:—a mere rigidity and concussion of the head
in the first instance, stupefaction and at last perfect insensibility
and relaxation in the latter. Contact of the ends of the fingers
with the dry rough trunk of the elephant had no effect upon the
elder : but, the instant she touched the soft moist mucous membrane
of the trunk of this immense beast, she dropt senseless and snored
loudly, and did not become sensible for ten minutes.”


Again, the following experiments bear upon the point :—


“‘A beautiful experiment shewed the gradual diminution of the
power imparted to the gold: and could, for the most part, be made
upon the younger Okey only, as her susceptibility was, in general,
not so great as to shew powerful effects from moderate causes. A
sovereign is held in a person’s hand, and then given her. Instantly
her hand closes violently upon it, she becomes stupified with her
eyes open, and at last falls senseless and relaxed: on waking, in a
minute or two, she is desired to pick up the sovereign, and again it
causes her hand to close, and stupifies her ; yet not so soon but that
she has time to rise a little from the floor, before the stupefaction
and rigidity come; and the perfect sleep and relaxation are longer in
supervening. On waking she is desired to pick up the sovereign
again; the effects are longer in supervening, so that she rises higher
from the floor before they come, and there is time, by pointing one’s
finger at her close hand, to cause it to relax, and drop the sovereign;
and in consequence of the absence of this, the rigidity and stupe-
faction are not kept up, and terminate in waking instead of perfect
sleep and relaxation. She is desired again to pick up the sovereign;
she does so, and rises higher than ever before the effects come, and
they are shorter. All is repeated, she rises completely before they
come, and they are still shorter. Again all is repeated, and she
not only rises but goes about, and talks before the effects come, and
they are slight. On repetition a still longer time intervenes, and
still slighter are the effects ; and so experiment after experiment goes
on till the sovereign has lost its power altogether. The sovereign
often rolls far away; and in such cases it has been changed for one
charged by contact with another person, it being impossible for her
to observe the change and impossible for her to detect any difference
in regard to warmth or moisture, as the original sovereign has been
as much in her own hand as the new sovereign in the hand of another


24 Inanimate bodies mesmerisable by the eye.


person. The new sovereign has always produced a far more quick
and strong effect than the exhausted one.”


He charged inanimate bodies with the eye.


**I have looked,” says Dr. Elliotson, “intensely at one sove-
reign among several lying together: and then called the Okeys into
the room, and desired them to take them up one by one. No effect
occurred till the sovereign which had been stared at was taken up:
and then the hand was violently contracted. No word was spoken
—no look given. It was totally impossible for the children to have
known —ns about the matter. Sir George Cayley well recollects
one occasion of these satisfactory experiments at University College
Hospital, though beneath the notice of the council and professors.”


He never found a magnet, mesmerised or unmesmerised,
have any effect upon the Okeys, but—


“They were affected by no metal, unless it was first mesmerised,
that is, held in the hand or against some other point of the surface,
breathed upon, or gazed intensely at. Certain metals, gold, silver,
platinum, nickel, could be so mesmerised: while others, as copper
and lead, could not, unless the breath or perspiration was left on
them; and then an effect came, but none if they were well wiped;
and if any substance, but iron, not wiped after a good application
of the breath or cutaneous moisture to it, were applied, the effects
came. Iron could never be made to affect them. When they were
rigid and unconscious and the eyes closed, from a mesmerised sove-
reign lying on their hand, their muscles all relaxed, their eyes
opened, and they were restored instantly, by placing iron upon the
gold: the effects returned on withdrawing the iron, and ceased on
placing it again upon the gold. ‘Some metals, as lead and copper,
could never be charged so as to affect the elder; and nickel had al-
ways a tremendous influence over her, such as I defy any human
being to imitate. But lead and copper affected the younger, if, after
having been held in the hand of another, the perspiration was not
wiped off them. If it was wiped away, no effect ever occurred.
Iron could never be made to affect either, under any circumstance;
on the contrary, it invariably destroyed the power in charged gold or
silver. Nothing could be more interesting than to see a charged
sovereign or shilling lying in their hand, a screen being held between
it and their head ; and, as soon as the hand began to close and the
eyes to fix, to observe these effects instantly arrested and subside
when a short iron rod was brought into contact with the metal, and
augment again when it was withdrawn. I have often substituted a
rod of silver or of some other metal, for I had rods made of various
metals precisely similar in form and size, when it was impossible the
girl could know which was being used; and in the case of a leaden
rod I myself should not have known by the eye at the moment, but
to prevent confusion had put each into a separate pocket. The
silver, copper, and lead had no neutralizing power, and therefore
never diminished or arrested the effect. I recollect one day having


SS ee ae


Fale to at


+) ABR a A ae


The two sides differently susceptible in some patients. 25


put a charged sovereign into the hand of the younger. Her hand
began to contract, and she could not by any effort open it. She was
very cross, and seeing two rods exactly alike, took up one, thinkin
it was iron; and told me now she was a match for me and woul
open her hand. But her hand would not open. I then went to look
at the other rod, and found that it was the iron rod, and that she
had taken the leaden. I pulled the leaden one out, and introduced
the iron one between the fingers and palm, and her hand imme-
diately opened.”

“IT have mesmerised a sovereign without the knowledge of the
Okeys, and placed other unmesmerised sovereigns upon it, and a finger
of one sister upon the last of them, and the effect has always at
length come. When an unmesmerised roll of sovereigns has long
lain in Mary Ann’s hand without increase of effect, I have put my
finger on the highest, and the effect, presently became great.”


Before Reichenbach had published, the same English
writer had noticed a difference of the two sides in one of his
patients.


“‘T have a patient who in his deep sleep-waking would never allow
one of his hands to be put in contact with the other, or with any
part of the opposite half of his body, but moved it away very
angrily. Neither would he allow my right hand to touch his left, or
any part of the right half of my frame to touch his left half, or the
converse. In Vol. II., p. 215, I said, ‘ As a further illustration of
occult property in the mesmeric state, I have a patient who, in his
silent sleep, with his eyes perfectly closed, and any thickness of
cloth thrown over his head and chest and drawn close round him, is
instantly distressed beyond measure by a piece of gold placed upon
the back of his hand after lying in the hand of another person, but
not at all if it has been taken from my hand. Any one with gloves
on makes the experiment, placing the sovereign first on my hand or
the hand of another at pleasure, in every succession and with as
many repetitions as are thought proper. Nay, if the gold is taken
off my right hand and placed upon his left, or off my left and placed
upon his right, he is distressed, and shakes it off, and, if it is
placed in his palm, violent spasm of the hand occurs ; though he ex-
pressed no uneasiness when it is taken from my right and placed in
his right or from my left and placed upon his left. Neither tem-
perature nor anything but occult property can explain these won-
derful facts.’ If while his right hand was holding my right hand
tightly, I touched any part of his left half or my left half with even
one finger, he instantly let my hand go angrily, just as he did if I
touched another person with it; and when ordinary occular knowledge
was an impossibility. He is a high-minded, modest youth, disdain-
ing all affectation and artifice.”


In No. XXXIX., p. 356, will be found the following
passages. Six pages are most interesting.


26 Petetin’s experiments early in this century.


“Dr. Petetin noticed facts recently communicated to the world
by Reichenbach. In speaking of one of his patients he says: —

“«] had a magnetized steel bar in my pocket, capable of being
entirely hidden by my hand. I approached the patient (in one of
her cataleptic attacks) and, after having bent one of her hands in
order that she might hear me (this patient seemed to hear only when
words were whispered at the ends of her fingers), I turned the hand
and presented the south pole at the distance of three or four inches
from the pit of her stomach: her countenance changed immediately.
I asked at the ends of her fingers how she felt? ‘ Better in regard
to my stomach; but I warn you that unless you devise some means
to moderate the next paroxysm, which will begin half an hour
sooner than usual, I shall die.’ ‘ In what respect do you feel better
in the stomach?’ ‘In a pleasant sensation produced by luminous
fluid which escapes from the iron you are holding, and which pene-
trates into my stomach.’ I turned my hand and presented the north
pole. The patient instantly shrieked, and fell into convulsions,
which obliged me to change the pole without delay: and, when they
had ceased, I asked her the cause of them. ‘I entreat you not to
point the end of this iron to my stomach: the flame which proceeds
from it is much too active: but the other is as beneficial as this is
injurious to me.’ I satisfied the impatience of my colleagues and
the bystanders by letting them see the magnet : and they were struck
as much as myself with this new prodigy. I say new, because I
had never before thought of trying the magnet with this patient.

***T begged her to attend to the fingers which I held at a little
distance from her stomach, and say whether she saw light proceed
from them also. She said, ‘ Yes, but with this difference, that the
light was weaker and did not produce the same effect upon her
stomach.’

*«« Practitioners, upon whom we can rely, declare that the magnet
is useful in nervous diseases: but what nervous diseases, the degree
of strength which it should possess, and the method of employing
it, are not yet well enough known for us to employ it in difficult and
urgent cases.’—pp. 245-7.” (Electricité Animale. 1808.)


Our experiments made with magnets subsequently in con-
sequence of our becoming acquainted with Reichenbach’s
writings will be found in Vol. IV., from p. 277 to p. 284.


‘Both my present patients followed the magnet with their hand,
as a piece of iron would, and adhered to it as closely as possible.
On being asked why they did so, their reply was that they did not
know—they could not help it. The action was not regular like that
of a needle following a magnet, but irregular, like that of a person
striving to keep close to and up with another. Baron R. is correct
in considering this to be no magnetism. It is evidently a willed
action ; an involuntary, forced willing. The patient has a pleasant
sensation, and finds the inclination to touch the magnet irresistible.
The movements produced by traction, even when they vex the pa-


The invention of the Minié rifle. 27


tient, are equally willed, although by compulsion (see Vol II., p.
58, 204.) Although the magnet produced these effects upon Baron
R.’s patients even when apparently insensible, the sleep of sleep-
waking, which was their state, is seldom so deep but that certain
influences, different in different cases, are felt, and, if there be
strength enough, some active voluntary sign of the influence mani-
fested. The brains of his patients in the deep sleep no doubt felt
the influence of the magnet, and unconsciously and involuntarily
willed movements towards it. When patients’ eyes are open in their
mesmeric state and they see, some roll them involuntarily rapidly
from side to side, upwards or downwards, just as a prism, or piece
of wood, &c., is moved.” When the hand was contracted by the
magnet applied to the palm, I opened it by applying the magnet to
its back ; and it was rigidly opened.”


To shew how averse we have been from speculating and
dreaming, we will quote the English physician’s words from
our Fourth Volume :—


“That there was a distinct power for which I adopted the term
mesmerism, after finding it used by Mr. Chenevix, but whether
invented or not by him I knew not, I was satisfied ; and stated this
in my demonstrations at University College Hospital in 1838, and
subsequently in my own house. I also declared I could discover no
grounds for supposing it identical with electricity or magnetism, and
therefore preferred an arbitrary name to one which implied a specula-
tion. I never ventured to call it an imponderable, because I did not
know whether there are any imponderable bodies. I invariably called
it a power, force or influence, expressing a mere fact—the existence
of a certan power in animal bodies, both human and brute; and of
its existence in the latter, I gave sufficient proofs. But whether this
was a property of the forms and states of matter with which we are
acquainted, or of a peculiar matter, I never ventured to determine;
its existence in animal bodies being the fact, it having a peculiar
matter imponderable and subtle being a mere speculation and fancy.
I always gave ample proofs of its communicability to inanimate
matter, by the mesmerisation of metals, water, &c.: its gradual
wasting again: its transmission through substances transparent and
opaque,”


II. Instances of great benefit from Mesmerism in Typhus
Fever, Dysenteric Diarrhea, violent Pains of the Bowels,
severe suffering in Pregnancy, After-pains, Congenital De-
Sormity of the Foot, severe cut in the Face, and Chronic
Abscess. By Joun Bartisuitt Parker, Esq., Surgeon,
Exeter,

‘The idea of attempting improvements in fire-arms had struck him many


years ago. He had begun by learning particulars of everything that had been
already done. He also learned all the details of the gunmaker’s trade: he be-


28 Archbishop of Dublin’s late sermon.


came a working man, able to carry out his own ideas. He could fashion every
part of a rifle. He thus obtained a thorough knowledge of his business. He
had not always studied under favourable circumstances. In explanation of this
remark, I may add, from authentic information which I have obtained, that
M. Minié’s study of fire-arms almost cost him his position in the army during
the reign of Louis Philippe. His dismissal from the service was actually signed
when the Duke of Montpensier, who lived at Vincennes, interceded (to his
honour be it said), and obtained the revocation of this most disgraceful act of
tyranny. Innovations in France, as in other countries, seldom bring profit to
the innovators. Officials hate to be disturbed from their old routine. The man
with an idea is avoided, rather than courted. The army did very well, he would
be told, for instance, with the old musket. Austerlitz was fought with flint and
steel. It is very probable that in certain military circles the percussion-cap is
hardly regarded with a friendly eye even now. Some men fall into routine, as
horses fall in with the monotony of a water-wheel; the former do their work
blindfold like the latter. Unhappy, therefore, is the humble member of a corps
who suggests an improvement. Routine will surely prick up its length of ears,
and aim the proverbial force of its asinine hoofs at him. M. Minié began his
useful work in times of peace, while France was governed by a crowned carofeur :
while ¢raiteurs were ruining themselves by serving the royal table at so much
per head; while France was regarded at the Tuilleries as an Orleanist domain
hardly large enough to satisfy the reasonable wants of a very numerous family—
when improvements in the machinery of war were disregarded as a matter of
course. We were all going to turn swords into sickles—cannon into metal mo-
numents to Quakers! Almost hopelessly must Minié have worked on at Vin-
cennes, while in Paris Victor Hugo and his English friends were pelting one
another with olives. Yet while war must be, unwise are the governments that
disregard the labours of a Minié. In that little work-room of his—within the
shadow of the grim tower whence the spirit of Mirabeau looks down upon his
labours—the modest Chef du Tir has done brave work in his generation. He
has given double strength to the armies of his country. The extent of his sacri-
fices and of his perseverance was described, not in a studied narrative, but in
little detached bits of gossip, generally referring more to the progress of the
science of warfare generally than to himself.””"—Dairy News, Feb. 2. An
account of a visit to M. Minié, the inventor of the Minié rifle, by W. B. J.


Tue progress of our cause is most cheering. Converts are
daily added to our lists, and bodily sufferings in many cases
overcome the strongest opposition to the use of mesmerism :
however, there are many persons who take every opportunity
of denouncing it, no matter how ignorant they may be of
the subject. I have often wished that the excellent sermon
preached by the Archbishop of Dublin at Liverpool during
the late assembling of the British Association could be ex-
tensively circulated and read. Dr. Whately animadverts on
the persecutions which are being carried on for differences of
opinion on religious beliefs and practices. Consequently
I have often thought it might be read with advantage by
those who revile the curative powers of mesmerism, and
endeavour to impute the most degrading motives to those
who are engaged in practising and disseminating it. I ques-
tion whether a greater pleasure can be experienced than that
felt by a successful mesmeriser, and that pleasure is not a
little enhanced when a grateful patient boldly expresses his


he TEP OTE 6s


a cee ae


$A Se ATC AE.


a


Nine-tenths of the deaths in England not from old age. 29


wish that the relief of his sufferings should be made public,
in order that some other fellow-sufferer may have a chance
of learning how he may be relieved from similar pain. The
daily experience of every medical man must convince him of
the difficulty, if not of the total inefficacy, of all the usual
remedial means in relieving many of the most common ills
to which flesh is heir. It is in the treatment of many such
cases that the contrast of success between ordinary and mes-
meric measures becomes so conspicuous. If we consult the
Registrar-General’s Report we shall find that one only in ten
of the deaths is the result of old age or violence: the remain-
ing nine are proofs of the inefficacy of ordinary medical and
surgical knowledge. I would ask if this ought not to be
sufficient to rouse the attention of the medical profession and
that of the thinking part of the community? Do medical
men oppose, laugh, and sneer at mesmerism, because it pre-
tends to alleviate sufferings which baffle all other means of
cure? For my own part, I cannot too strongly declare that,
in wishing to introduce this powerful agent into the materia
medica, I do not presume to affirm that it shall supersede
other remedies: but, from practical experience, I have found
it of inestimable value, sometimes in conjunction with these,
and sometimes alone.

Every medical man is so familiar with typhus fever as to
be thoroughly acquainted with its intractable character: that
for six, eight, or even twelve weeks, patients often struggle
through this terrible scourge, and that active remedies are
frequently inadmissible, if not pernicious, and palliatives only
can be adopted. Having conversed with many intelligent
persons who have recoverd from long and severe attacks of
typhus fever, I find that they nearly all agree that the suffer-
ings in the stomach and bowels are trifling when compared
with the disordered state of the brain and spinal cord,
aching pains of the limbs, constant head-ache, confused intel-
lect, if not delirium, aggravated by sleepless nights and rest-
less days. The want of repose and absence of oblivion
torment the sufferer; and, if his strength be not wasted by
such long continued disorder, ending in coma and death,
years often elapse ere the patient recovers his usual vigour ;
and this is because a congenial remedy has not been hitherto
applied. This I shall endeavour most fully to establish by
showing the curative powers of mesmerism in the following
cases of typhus fever.*


* See a case successfully treated with mesmerism, recorded by the father, a
medical man, in No. XLVII., p. 316.


Typhus Fever cured.


I. Typhus Fever in a Child.

The child of Mr. Warner, of Newtown, Exeter, at three
and a half years of age, was attacked with a swelling in the
neck that terminated in abcess. His health became impaired,
feverish symptoms came on with such marked features as to
be declared typhus by the medical man who had been con-
sulted, and who pronounced the case hopeless. Three weeks
had elapsed from the commencement of the attack before I
saw him. The little fellow was lying on his back, with his
mouth open, his tongue almost black and quite dry, his lips
and teeth covered with black sordes, his eyes partially closed,
his breathing quick, and his pulse 140. He took no notice,
but remained in a comatose state. On pouring a tea-spoonful
of water into his mouth, a few drops only passed into the
throat with difficult deglutition, and the remainder ran over
the lips. I told the parents I thought the child would live
but a few hours, as a last resource I advised him to be mes-
merised, and they, being very intelligent people and anxious
to save their child, at once consented. In a few hours, I
could perceive that the eyelids were more closed. The boy
was continuously mesmerised: injections of gruel were ad-
ministered twice in the twenty-four hours, and the improve-
ment was perceptible daily, although slow. At the end of
a fortnight he could speak again: at the end of the third
week he was quite restored, and is now as fine a specimen of
the race as can be found. Here was a case of apparent hope-
lessness, with such difficulty of swallowing that there was
scarcely a fair chance for any kind of medicine to be adminis-
tered by the mouth. The triumph of mesmeric means was to
my mind complete. There was a second case in the same
family ; for just as this little boy was convalescent, his sister,
aged nine years, had some similar feverish symptoms, with
head-ache, delirium, &c. Indeed the symptoms of typhus
were of a most marked character: but, from the early applica-
tion of mesmerism I believe the little patient was spared a
long and distressing illness, as at the end of a fortnight she
was quite well again.


Il. Typhus Fever in a Man.

M. Sharland, a robust man of very active habits, had

an attack of typhus fever at Bermondsey, that confined him
to his bed for six weeks. When convalescent he came to
Devonshire to recruit his strength. After spending a short
time with his friends, he found many of his former sufferings
returning. He then came to Exeter to consult me. At our
first interview I clearly saw that he was threatened with a re-


ee
il EO Ri ROR


2 aie tial Ni


arma
vas ls A le aad


Typhus Fever, Diarrhea and Dysentery cured. 31


lapse of his former complaint. He had no appetite, was very
thirsty, with an anxious countenance, and short and hurried
respiration : his hands were tremulous, as well as his tongue,
which was dry and brown; he had head-ache, and constant
pain in his back and limbs, with a pulse at 120. He naturally
dreaded another long and dreary illness, and was very anxious
to try the most efficient means of restoring his health. In addi-
tion to other means, I had him mesmerised twice daily from
the 24th of June to the 5th of July last, when he declared him-
self perfectly well and competent to resume the active duties
of his business. The recovery from his former attack, was
neither so rapid nor complete as on this occasion, for between
the illnesses he had never been free from head-ache and pain
and weakness in the back and limbs.


III. Dysentery and Diarrhea.

E. Merson, aged 27 years, a servant of Mrs. Hurst, Paul
Street, Exeter, had been suffering from diarrhceea with some
symptoms of dysentery two months under the care of a medi-
cal man before I was requested to see her. I found her ina
state of hectic fever, with flushed cheeks, a pulse of 110 and
small, night perspirations; tongue very red and irregular
over the whole surface, with slight fissures and corresponding
elevations; abdomen very tender and tumid, evacuations
liquid, frequent and at times tinged with blood, and invo-
luntary, and tenesmus. Astringents with or without opiates
ceased to give relief, the latter always producing very
uncomfortable effects on the head and taking away all desire
for food. The perspirations which at first only came on
during the night, now partook of a clammy character, and
seldom left her. I clearly saw she was in the most precarious
state, as her malady was no doubt much aggravated by the
atmospheric influence, which caused so many cases of diarrhoea
in this city during the past summer. Perceiving she was
fast sinking, I told her friends that mesmerism offered the
only chance of saving her life. She was consequently mes-
merised daily. For several days, the only change we could
perceive was that she did not get worse. On several occasions
I began to think that all our efforts were vain. But the
greater the emergency the more heroically did my mesmeriser
Mr. Johns meet the difficulty. Never was energy displayed
in a more conspicuous manner, and at last, by determined
and punctual perseverance, he was the immediate human cause
of rescuing this poor woman from the jaws of death. The
perspirations were lessened daily, and then entirely ceased :
the abdomen lost its tenderness, the tongue its redness and


32 Severe pains of the bowels cured.


roughness, the countenance indicated the improved internal
condition, the evacuations were not more frequent than natural,
the appetite resumed its wonted zest, which was followed by
more healthy digestion, so essentially necessary to restore the
strength lost by such a protracted illness. After being mes-
merised for ten weeks she was enabled to go to her friends in
the country, who soon wrote to inform me of her complete
convalescence.


IV. Violent pain in the Bowels.

Mrs. was attacked with violent pain in the bowels.
She sent for a medical man: his remedies entirely failing,
she sent for a second, the various means he suggested were
tried for two days, castor oil and other aperients were all
vomited, enemata and other local applications produced no
relief, and the lady described her sufferings as greater than
they were at either of her accouchments. In this state of
affairs she was advised to try the effects of mesmerism. I
reached her residence about ten at night on the 8th February
1854, and found her in the greatest agony. I immediately
began to mesmerise her, and in less than three quarters of an
hour she was sleeping soundly. I then left her for the night.
The next morning I was pleased to find she had had some
hours of refreshing sleep. She still experienced much pain
at intervals, caused, as 1 judged at first, by an accumulation
in the bowels. I mesmerised her twice daily, and the bowels
acted regularly without any aperient. In the middle of the
second night, after my first visit, she awoke, and found
herself so perfectly free from pain that she thought she must
be suffering from mortification. I was summoned in great
haste and found her dreadfully frightened at this unexpected
turn of events. I soon convinced her that her painless state
was the effect of mesmerism alone. I continued to mesmerise
her twice daily till the 5th of March. During the whole of
this period the bowels were daily relieved, without any aid of
medicine, of their long pent up accumulations. She often
told me that she had had several similarly severe attacks, but
perhaps not accompanied by such long and continued pain.
The most gratifying thing to add is, that never, on any pre-
vious occasion, did she recover her strength so quickly.


V. Severe suffering during Pregnancy, &c.

I have now the pleasure of recording the gratitude of
Mrs. Truscott, late of St. Thomas Street, Exeter. She came
to my house three weeks after her confinement, to beg me to
publish her case, that other sufferers might read it, and


Great good in After-pains. 33


derive benefit from mesmerism, as she had done. She was
far advanced in pregnancy with her third child, when her
constant attendance on two sick children brought on such
sufferings as all the usual various means entirely failed to
relieve. I then suggested a trial of mesmerism, and she soon
felt its soothing effects. Her confinement, however, took
place before she had regained the strength lost in tending her
sick children, and consequently her nervous system was
sadly disturbed. However, a few passes prevented any after
pains: for which she was very thankful, as she had suffered
greatly from them on the previous occasion. Her trials were
not to end here. The act of nursing her infant produced the
most cruel sufferings. Mesmerism was again triumphant, and
in a few days she was free from pain, and perfectly well;
and she told me she had not been able to nurse either of her


former children with the same comfort she now could this
last child.


VI. After-pains.

Mrs. R was confined with the sixth child after a few
hours’ illness only. During her pregnancy she suffered much
from pain in the womb, that she attributed to her want of
proper care of herself after a previous confinement. Soon
after the birth of her last child, she complained of more than
the ordinary sufferings on such occasions. I immediately
began to make slow and vigorous passes over the bowels, and
was soon gratified by perceiving the change of countenance,
on which a joyous smile soon replaced cruel distortion. At
my subsequent visits, she always recurred to the wonderfully
soothing powers of mesmerism, which had spared her the
repetition of pains often more distressing than those of labour.
As these tortures often continue with slight interruptions for
many days, I can but wish that every one who reads this
would recommend so simple a remedy on such occasions, and
trust me it will not be wanting of its virtue.


VII. After-pains.

Mrs. A was delivered of her fifth child after a natural
labour of two hours only. After former accouchements, she
had suffered for days from after-pains. This time I began to
mesmerise her directly, and at my second visit she expressed
surprise that they had not visited her this time. This aston-
ishment I always hear expressed from my patients so treated.
In this case, Mrs. A was enabled to resume the arduous
duties of her little family sooner, and more vigorously, than
VOL, XIII. D


34 Great good in a distorted foot.


on any previous occasion. This is a small additional argument
in favour of mesmerism.*


VIII. Great advantage of mesmerism in a case of congenital
deformity of the foot (varus.)

Congenital deformities of the extremities in infants are
the effect of the loss of antagonism of the muscular system.
Whether it be the result of some defect of the nervous system,
is a question which anatomists have not yet decided. The
following case will clearly shew the advantage of no delay in
preventing any increase of the deformity, leaving which to
itself only adds to the difficulty of relieving, or even dimin-
ishes the chance of ultimate cure. For, if the loss of anta-
gonism be allowed to continue, the ends of the bones become
rounded, and the vessels of nutrition have less chance of
renewing any loss of substance that may have been sustained
during the latter period of the intra-uterine life. Within a
few minutes after the birth of Mrs. A ’s little boy, the
sole of the foot was discovered to be turned quite upwards:
it was easily returned to its proper position, but there was a
difficulty in keeping it so. Four hours only elapsed before
some means were applied to keep the foot in its proper posi-
tion: yet it required considerable effort to keep it so. As
restraint was necessary to accomplish our object, from our
having to contend with that wriggling motion of the foot that
infants are constantly exercising during the few waking mo-
ments of their earliest life, mesmerism, to counteract the
bad effects of uneven pressure, and to reconcile the little
patient to the necessary restraint, was of infinite service by
the method of breathing and making slow passes. After a
trial of different plans, a small stocking laced on each side,
from above the knee to the sole of the foot, was fastened to
a slipper formed of tin, which were removed twice daily for
the purpose of ablution, and to prevent any abrasion of the
skin, and at the same time to enable the child’s foot to be
mesmerised. This no doubt allowed it to bear its fetters with
diminished discomfort. A permanent deformity by these
means has been prevented, and a more severe treatment by
division of the tendons obviated. The little boy is now three
months old, and the deformity is scarcely perceptible.


IX. Severe cut of the Nose.


Mr. J , who is between 60 and 70 years of age, left a


* See Mr. Parker’s other instances of the benefit ef mesmerism in after-pains,
Nos. XV. (with some by Dr. Esdaile and Mr. Chandler), XVIII., XX., XLIII.


Mi


2 reap.


ue


Benefit in a wound and in an abscess. 35


friend’s house in the evening of the 18th of April, 1854, and
finding it rather cold put his hands in his pockets and made
an effort to run. Before he had gone many paces, he fell on
his face, and was so stunned that he knew not how he got
up or found his way home. His face was covered with blood,
which being washed off, he recovered his consciousness, but
was in such agony that he lost not a moment in coming to
my house accompanied by a friend. On examining him, I
found he had received a cut (probably from a flint-stone) at
the root of the nose, through the skin to the bone, and
extending towards each eye. There were several small abra-
sions on the forehead, and a considerable extravasation of
blood around the eyes. As the wound had been cleaned, I
applied a piece of gold-beater’s skin to it, and began to mes-
merise the part. In less than ¢wo minutes Mr. J ex-
claimed that the effect was perfectly wonderful ; that, having
been in an agony of pain, he was now perfectly free from it.
+ He was mesmerised daily for a week, when there was not a
vestige left of the injury he had received.


X. Chronic Abscess.

Edward Coleman, aged 11 years, of the parish of St.
Olave, Exeter, had always been a healthy boy, till September
1852, when he cut his foot whilst bathing, and soon afterwards
abscesses began to form in the upper part of the thigh and
groin. These became so troublesome and intractable that
his friends procured his admittance into the Devon and Exeter
Hospital on the 10th of February, 1853. There he remained
for seventeen weeks, when he was made an out-patient, and
he continued his occasional attendance at the hospital till
August 17th, when he was discharged as cured. Within a
few days after this, another deep-seated abscess burst in the
groin. At the end of August, at the request of the Rev.
Douglas Boutflower, assistant curate of the parish, I called to
see him, and found the lad with seven sores in the upper part
of the thigh and groin, from most of which there was a con-
stant and copious discharge. Not many days elapsed before
another abscess burst. I had him mesmerised daily, and at
f the end of six weeks there was no discharge from any of the
: sores, his general health was much improved, he was able to

take long walks in the country. He remains quite well to

this date.
Joun BatrisHiLy PARKER.
Exeter, December 2nd, 1854.


( 36 )


III. An account of Native Mesmerism in India, by a resident.*
Communicated by William Neilan, Esq., Corresponding
Secretary of the Edinburgh Mesmeric Curative Asso-
ciation.


‘* Even among uncivilized nations foreknowledge and divination exist ; for an
Indian, named Calanus, when about to die and ascending the burning pile, ex-
claimed, ‘O what a glorious removal from this world; for, as in the case of
Hercules, my mind will pass into life when my mortal body is burnt. On
Alexander desiring him to say what he wished, ‘ Excellent Sir,’ he replied, ‘I
shall see you shortly again.’ And so it turned out, for Alexander died at Babylon
a few days afterwards.’’—Cicero on Divination, part i.f


Tue city of Madura, situated in southern India, is cele-
brated for being the most ancient seat of Brahminical learn-
ing in Hindostan. It is still revered by the natives as a
place of no ordinary sanctity ; and the Brahmins connected
with the four principal pagodas still existing there are looked
npon as the literati of their class, being well versed in San-
scrit literature, which, as is well known in Europe, is chiefly
of a moral and legislative nature, and they are on this ac-
count appealed to on all occasions of dispute among the lower
classes. They are also venerated as being adepts in all the
mystical arts and ancient sciences of the East. Among the
most practically useful of these, on account of the large
revenue derived from it, is astrology, which is in universal
application among Hindoos of all orders.

The Brahmins of Madura practise divination in ail its
most occult forms, and there is nothing more certain than
that mesmerism with all its modern improvements and dis-
coveries has been known and practised by this very race of
Brahmins from the most remote ages. They are, however, so
extremely jealous of Europeans, and so averse to the disse-
mination of their sacred knowledge, which they say was
given to their race by Brahma himself, that it is only those
who have for years been favourably situated for observing
their habits and acquirements and who have sought for in-
formation on this particular subject, that can gain any insight
into their mysteries ; and thus it is that so little is really


* The gentleman is known to one of the Editors. But, as the memoir is
published without his knowledge, it is not felt right to mention his name.— Zoist.

t ‘Est profecto quiddam etiam in barbaris gentibus presentiens atque divi-
nans, si quidem ad mortem proficiscens Calanus Jndus, quum adscenderet in
rogum ardentem, ‘O preclarum discessum,’ inquit, ‘e vita! quum ut Herculi
contigit, mortali corpore cremato, in lucem animus excesserit.’ Quumque Alex-
ander eum rogaret, si quid vellet, ut diceret, ‘ Optime,’ inquit, ‘ propediem te
videbo.’ Quod ita contigit; nam Babylone paucis post diebus Alexander est
mortuus.””—De Divinatione, \. i., 23.


Indian belief of the power of the will. 37


known of the present state of learning amoung the high castes
of India. One of their most fixed and popular opinions is,
that, at the creation of this world, Brahma endowed mankind
with a portion of his power: he breathed into their nostrils
the breath of life, and acquainted them with the power they
possessed of imparting a portion of that life to others by
means of the will simply, but more particularly by the power
of the eyes, and the motion of the hand. They were also
taught to do wondrous things by the “ force of the mind,”
as they call it. A number of them were told to meet toge-
ther and to concentrate their prayers for the accomplishment
of any particular object, willing at the same time powerfully
that it should be done. Many important historical events
are attributed to these meetings, and at the present day it is
asserted by the Brahmins themselves that this is one of their
most important and wonderful privileges. I have been told
that the ceremony is performed in the following manner
when it is simply confined to one pagoda, which is generally
the case except in popular movements.

Three Brahmins, being seated round a stone in front of
their idol, cross hands in such a manner as to form a triangle.
Still retaining their hold of each other, they elevate their
hands until these are level with their heads, and lowering
them suddenly, and as often raising them again, they com-


mence their invocations with the sacred word “Ome,” and
concentrate the whole energy of their minds upon what they
are intent upon accomplishing. They sometimes all three go
off into a state of trance, at least such is the only meaning
of the explanation given to me; and the way they account
for this peculiar state is by the belief they entertain and ex-
press that a man has two distinct sets of perceptive faculties,
viz., an internal and external one, and that, when they con-
centrate their minds intently upon any particular abstract
idea, the latter becomes closed, and the interior sense opens
and is then capable of viewing things immaterial and spi-
ritual. This seems to be analogous to the lucidity of modern
mesmerism. In that state the Brahmins assert that they
can t-avel mentally to any distance, see through stone walls,
and, in fact, from the simplicity of their food and their
highly sensitive physical and mental structure, they seem to
be clairvoyants of a high order. It is an indisputable fact
that the news of the disasters in Affghanistan in 1840 and
1841, and more particularly the defeat of some of our troops
at Ali Musjeed in the Kyber Pass, was known and spoken of
in the bazars of Southern India before the news had reached
Calcutta.


Influence of the eyes.


They have numerous ceremonies of the same kind, all
proving the fixed and inborn belief that there is a peculiar
mental power inherent in man, acting upon other bodies in
an unseen manner, and causing effects corresponding with
the force and energy of will employed. Thus in every garden
in India where there is anything growing under native culti-
vation, singular-looking clay pots, painted white, and often
spotted, are to be observed. On enquiring of a Madura
Brahmin what was the use of those pots, he explained that
that from every man’s eyes there issued a peculiar emanation,
—avee ;” literally white vapour, which flows in streams ac-
cording to the direction of the visual rays, as they may
justly be called in this case; and, as this influence in some
people is very malignant and injurious to the growth of plants,
the pots are elevated on poles a little above what is growing,
in order that the attention of the person looking may be
taken off from the plants below to the singular-looking object
immediately above them. Their idea thus seems to be that the
former are protected from injury, much in the same manner
as a house is protected from lightning by means of the inter-
position of some better conducting substance, which absorbs
and carries away the destructive fluid.

The emanation, or “ avee,’’ from the eye of man, and also
from the eye of a peculiar kind of rock snake, which, by
means of intense gazing, fascinates its prey, is nowhere
doubted in the East. Reverting again to the clairvoyant
state so commonly spoken of in India: it is very interesting
to know that what Mr. Braid, of Manchester, calls hypno-
tism, has for ages been known and practised throughout the
length and breadth of this land. It is done in this manner:
when any particular information is desired regarding stolen
property, &c.: a person sits down and gazes steadily for half
an hour or more upon a shining mixture of cocoa-nut oil and
charcoal, which is of an intense and beautiful black. In
probably half the time alluded to, the person’s external sense
is dormant, and the windows of the inner mind are opened
to see sights beyond the power of mortal vision. There is
still wanting something however to direct the internal per-
ception to what is needed at the time, and accordingly ano-
ther person waives his hands behind the entranced one’s
back, and suggests the visions which he is to see on the sur-
face of the charcoal. The same party then slowly puts his
questions, making passes at the same time.

The following is a type of-this peculiar method, which
happened within my own knowledge.

A native in Palamcottah being anxious for the safety of


They induce Clairvoyance. 39


his brother, who had left some days previously for Madras,
through a country in which cholera was raging with fearful
virulence, demanded a sitting of a friend of his over the oil
and charcoal, and caused the following questions to be. put
to him while in the oblivious state.

. “ Where is my brother ?”

. “* Sitting under a tamarind-tree, near a tank.”

* Do you know the place ?”

“Yes; there is a large village and a pagoda.”

* What is its name?”

“ Why do you ask me such a question: what does a
name mean ?”

“ Do you see my brother clearly ?”

“a

“ What is he doing ?”

. “ Going to eat his rice.”

“ What kind of turban has he on?”

“ A red one.’

At this juncture the man broke off questioning, as he
declared that his brother never had on a red turban in his
life. A letter however came shortly afterwards from his
brother, dated from Madura, in which he stated, that at a
certain place on the road, which we all well knew, he had
bought a red turban for six rupees, and hoped that his brother
would overlook the extravagance, as he needed something to
cheer him on such a gloomy and dangerous path. There is
a large tamarind-tree close by a tank at the place alluded to,
which I have myself slept under in my palanquin, and I have
therefore no doubt of the vision being genuine as far as it
goes. Stolen goods are continually being recovered in this
manner.

It is a very well known fact now in England, that many
of the Hindoo fakeers have the power of throwing themselves
into a state of spontaneous catalepsy, as our doctors are fain
to call it, in the absence of a better name, but which is in
reality a mesmeric state, induced in many susceptible indivi-
duals by intense gazing, and also by a peculiar power of
abstraction, which seems to be inherent in some constitutions
among the inhabitants of Eastern climes, and which is referred
to repeatedly by many of the old Hindoo and Persian authors,
and is also to be found spoken of in the records of Ancient
Egypt, as well as in the traditions of Armenia, all of which
countries, in the primitive ages, abounded with mystical
knowledge, much of which is lost at the present day from
the influx of more sordid and worldly ideas, consequent upon


hORORO


hORORO


40 They know the ill effect of lying east and west.


the accumulation of wealth and the growth of avarice among
all nations.

A curious instance of this cataleptic power is mentioned
in a work under the title of The Court and Camp of Runget
Singh. I have myself heard of numerous instances of it
during my residence in India.

There is more truth in ancient superstitions than we are
sometimes inclined to admit. They are foolish and super-
stitious to us, simply because in these matter-of-fact days we
do not understand them. No impartial investigator of truth,
with a mind unfettered by modern orthodox ideas, will, on care-
fully analyzing their nature and origin, seek to deny that there
is often to be found, in even the most puerile and ludicrous
of them, traces of wisdom such as far transcends what at the
present day is looked upon as the greatest elevations of
genius.

An idea is very prevalent, indeed universal, among the
Hindoos, that it is injurious to sleep with the head towards
the rising sun. This has been laughed at, and scornfully
pointed out in many works on India, as a piece of ignorant
superstition among the Hindoos, and has been classed as such
in their own land ever since their civilized conquerors dwelt
among them. The late discovery of Reichenbach, however,
that sensitives are positively unable to sleep in any position
not horizontally coincident with the plane of the magnetic
meridian, has a tendency to throw the laugh back upen our-
selves for our ignorance ; and thus it is with very many of the
ancient customs and superstitions which are all to be found
in their primitive purity in Hindostan.

The simple action of the hand in making a salaam has a
meaning in it to those who can read nature. Until very
lately, it was a rare thing to get a native to shake hands, and,
even at present, this custom is only conformed to by the lower
castes. Occasionally a Europeanized Brahmin does so, but
there is no surer test that he has, from the influence of foreign
contamination, become estranged from the sacred order.
Their objection to the ceremony is, that it occasions a con-
junction of emanations which should only flow between those
congenial to each other, thus plainly admitting the existence
of a subtle fluid flowing from the body by the impulse of the
mind, that has a tendency to amalgamate with a similar
influence existing in others: and the highest of them shun
this as the greatest of moral contaminations. This is the true
explanation of contamination by touch.

I may state, as a further argument to prove that contami-


|


x
+
‘


‘ood not eaten that has been gazed at by the stranger. 41


nation is not considered to be caused by simple contact alone,
that a Brahmin, though he will not willingly take a letter di-
rectly from the hands of a person of inferior caste, does not ob-
ject to pick it from the ground after the person has laid it down
for the purpose. All that they are anxious to avoid is the
magnetic emanation which actual contact with the hand
would inevitably expose them to: and this has been repeatedly
explained to me. At Madras, the primitive habits of the
natives have become so corrupted and changed by the influ-
ence of Europeans that few of their more refined prejudices
are even discernible.

In stating the facts adduced above, I speak exclusively of
the natives of the inland district, for I have known Brahmins
in Madras even profess ignorance of them, although doubt-
less at the Presidency we rarely come in contact with the
higher orders of their class. There is, however, hardly a
Brahmin in the country who does not retire and perform
ceremonies after having been in the presence of Europeans :
and, as they are, as I have already mentioned, the most stolid
and incommunicative people in existence, there has been
nothing more misunderstood by our English writers on India
than this so called prejudice of caste. It is simply founded
upon a profound knowledge of the mysteries of our nature,
handed down to them from remote ages, which to the wise of
the present day is foolishness and superstition.

Another very curious feeling exists among them, which
has also been mixed up with caste prejudice. No native
except of the lowest and most degraded class will eat food
which has come under the eye-sight of any one not of his own
family or class. The “ avee,” they say, from the eyes is dele-
terious, and I have known instances, when travelling, of
some of my own writers who were employed by me in the
cotton districts actually throwing away the food which had
thus suffered contamination: and, to prove that this is not
strictly a caste prejudice, upon one occasion I may mention
that I was myself the innocent cause of communicating some
unwelcome “avee” to a quantity of rice, from having chanced
to disturb the process of cooking that was going on among
some of the people above alluded to in the jungle. The in-
jured owner immediately forgave me, and partook of the rice,
“avee” and all. I may mention however that this man,
although of a high caste, was peculiarly friendly towards me.

No native of India, even among the lowest of them, will
willingly see in the morning what he calls “a bad eye.” They
are most particular in this respect, and will even go out of
their path to avoid such an influence, which they say is of


42 Cure by passes upon the paris.


such a nature in some people as to cause them distress and
uneasiness during the rest of the day. A curious antidote to
this malign influence is sometimes employed. When a native
finds it impossible to avoid the “ glances of the wicked,” he,
at an early hour in the morning, before his own vis vite has
recovered from the torpor of sleep, gazes steadily upon the
surface of a looking-glass, which has a supposed power to
fortify the system against any uncongenial influx. They are
unable to explain this, but it is universally believed in. Who
is bold enough to scout it as mere superstition ?

What has been stated above fully tends to shew that many
of the principles of mesmeric phenomena are acted upon and
recognized by the learned, as well as the unlearned, portion
of the inhabitants of Hindostan.

I have now to enter into its more practical application as
a remedial agent in cases of simple loss of vital power from
the anemia so prevalent among the under-fed population
of a tropical climate, as also in cases of disease.

Many of the more acute forms of suffering in India arise
from affections of the nervous system. Pains in the limbs
are relieved by the process of shampooing, or stroking by the
hands of another person: and so universal is this remedy that
it is known amongst Europeans as a curative process peculi-
arly native to the country. That the effects are not due to
friction alone is evident from the fact, that the operation, if
performed by the person himself, although ever so well done,
has not the same influence in removing the pain. This seems
to be the most simple and primitive application of the power.

We now come to the more elaborate and scientific employ-
ment of mesmerism asa curative agent, although the more
enlarged knowledge of its mysteries is confessedly confined
to a few, viz. :—the learned pundits and the higher Brahmins,
who alone profess knowledge in the occult sciences, and who
scrupulously refrain from imparting any of their secrets to
those whom they consider beneath them in caste—a discri-
mination which includes the whole of mankind—all being
alike out of the pale of their order.

In cases of acute illness a native doctor is generally called in,
who exhibits his drugs in the manner usual amongst his more
civilized brethren of the healing art. Should the case become
desperate, however, a Brahmin is sent for, who immediately
supersedes the doctor, and orders him out of the house, some-
times in a manner not very complimentary or courteous. If
the patient is of a very low caste, the pure offspring of
Brahma declines to enter, but orders him to be brought out
into the pial or verandah, to be seen in front of every native


sal Fate ls le


ps eon aI


Ome. They induce trance. 43


house. A curtain is hung up to intercept the uncongenial
gaze of the vulgar, and the process of cure begins. A fire is
lighted in a clay dish into which is thrown a small portion of
gum-benjamin and camphor. The object of this has never
been explained to me. The real business on hand now com-
mences. The Brahmin, after having commanded perfect
silence, seats himself near the patient, and gazes steadily at
him, in such a manner as to give beholders the idea that he
is perfectly oblivious to every thing around him but the one
object upon which his magnetic glances rest. This initiatory
process having lasted for about ten minutes, he moves up
close to the patient, steadily gazing at him all the while, and
proceeds to make passes with both hands, with the fingers
spread out (to which are sometimes attached pieces of leaves),
from the face downwards, at intervals repeating the holy and


ineffable name Ome,* (pronounced as in the English word
Dome), and, I believe, almost invariably succeeds in throwing
him into a state of crisis. Occasionally the patient falls sound
asleep, and awakes many hours, or even days, afterwards, and
finds himself recovered from his disease. As the Brahmin,
however, is never called in until the last moment, the patient
seems to die as often as he recovers, being, in many instances,
poisoned by the powerful remedies which had been previously
employed; but it is beyond a doubt that many extraordin-
ary cures are continually performed by this means, and I
have had abundant opportunities of satisfying myself that
not only the practice of mesmerism, as we call it, is well
known among the Hindoos, generally, but that the higher
orders of them are possessed of a degree of knowledge of this
mysterious power, of a rude kind, it is true, but still far
beyond what the most enlightened mesmerists in England
can at present pretend to. Many years before Reichenbach’s
work on Od came out, I was told by a native that, in the
dark, he had seen luminous streams of avee (white vapour)
flowing from the points of his fingers: and, a few days ago,
while conversing with a most excellent old native gentleman,
who was with me in Southern India, and whom I have known


* The word Ome is revered among the Hindoos in the same manner as the
word Jehovah was among the ancient Jews. It has an Egyptian origin it is said,
and comprehends in its meaning the very extreme of purity and wisdom. The
word is never uttered out of the pagoda, and even there it is only said with
reverence and awe. In some rare instances it has been found engraved on seals,
in the interior of a triangle, and so great is its power that the natives assert this
to be the identical word which imprisoned the unfortunate genii when fished up
by the fisherman, as detailed in the Arabian nights. The secret was known to
king Solomon, who possessed a seal regarding which there are many extraordinary
things told all over the east.


44 Mesmerism cures the scorpion’s bite.


for many years, I learnt by accident that in his present state
of ill-health he sometimes, when lying looking intently at
any particular object, sees a luminous cloud encircling what
he is looking upon, and that he is then able to see through
material substances, and, in fact, in that state every thing
appears to him to be in a state of transparency. He says
it is the “life principle” he sees, and that this exists in
every thing—in fact a sort of anima mundi. Such ideas,
crude as they are, are worth analyzing when the opportunity
occurs for hearing their recital.

The natives of India are so accustomed to be laughed at by
Europeans for their customs and prejudices that, as has been
before hinted, nine out of ten of them will equivocate and
deny the existence of these when they are questioned. This is
not to be wondered at, when it is recollected that the majority
of Europeans speak to them on such subjects in a tone of
ridicule and contempt, which habit, so prevalent in India,
has alone given them the impression that we are of, in their
own phraseology, a “lower caste” than themselves. They
are nature’s children, possessed of her secrets without fashion
or prejudice, and, although they cannot reason from such
physical facts as we are possessed of, yet they can observe and
understand effects which with us are as often clouded by a
false philosophy as by prejudice and ignorance. A native of
India knows that making passes with the hand over his
brother’s arm, which has just been stung by a scorpion,
relieves the pain, and prevents the poison from ascending ;
and he believes it, simply because it is so. The power he
feels to be in his hand as the instrument of his will, and, in
his simple mind, there is no denying it.

The effect alluded to is very wonderful. The poison of
the scorpion, although its introduction into the system does
not often prove fatal, is still a very painful contamination,
and its effect in producing severe swelling in any part of the
body that may be stung is well marked in every case. Now
it is impossible to explain how magnetic manipulations applied
with intent to draw the poison towards the extremity of an
arm or a leg, for instance, can have this effect. The fact,
however, is undoubted, and I have known cases where the
pain has ceased, with a tingling sensation, under a very few
passes, made, however, in this case with one hand only, and
with the fingers encircling the limb. To touch it would be
impossible. The natives say that the power of the hand con-
trols the “anger of the poison.” _ The effect may probably be
due to superinduced rigidity preventing the blood on the
surface from circulating in its normal direction, and thus the


ee


References to examples of ancient and remote Mesmerism. 45


poison, which is of a very volatile nature, may be checked in
its course until neutralized by the action of what is immedi-
ately in contact with it.

The orthodox remedy among Europeans is the immediate
application of caustic ammonia to the part stung. This cer-
tainly decomposes what poison may be in the wound, but the
suffering caused by it to the wound and the surrounding parts
is very great, and the pain produced by the poison is not al-
layed by any thing we can apply in the shape of opiates, &c.
There is a power in man himself far exceeding these, if he
only knows how to employ it. The natives of India have
this knowledge, without any prejudice in favor of any one
system or another. It is not a system with them, it is an
instinctive belief, a belief founded by nature’s laws, which,
strange to say, a state of civilization seems to annihilate.
Can it be that the knowledge of this power is a step nearer
our spiritual being than is compatible with the gross and
worldly ideas of the present day?


NOTE BY THE ZOIST.


Consult—Mr. W. W. Lloyd on allusions to mesmerism
in the classics, Nos. X., XI.

Forbes’s Oriental Memoirs : account of clairvoyance among
the Brahmins, Nos. XVIII., XXIII.

Dr. Esdaile on mesmerism among the natives of India,
No. XXIII., p. 255.

The Bible’s mention of mesmerism, No. XXIII., p. 257.

Lieut.-Col. (now Major-General) Bagnold on mesmerism
among the natives of India, No. XXIII.

Capt. Bagnold on mesmerism among the natives of Africa,
No. XXVIII.

Mr. W. W. Lloyd on mesmerism among the ancients,
No. XXIX.

Dr. Webb on mesmerism among the native Indians, No.
XXXIL., p. 371.

Lieut.-Colonel Davidson on mesmerism among the natives
of India, No. XXXIII.

The Rev. C. H. Townshend on mesmeric records in
Egypt, No. XXXV., p. 228.

Lieut. R. F. Burton’s account of a form of sub-mesmerism
in Scinde and other Eastern countries, No. XX XVIII.
Mesmerism among the Hindoos, ditto, p. 203.


( 46 )


IV. Rapid Cures of Pains. By Joun James Birp, Esq., of
No. 22, Maddox Street, Hanover Square.


Celsus takes but a superficial view both of the Christian notions and the
heathen opinions which he contrasts with them, disparaging the former as absurd
and ridiculing the faith which, addressed almost exclusively to the low and ig-
norant, resembled a pedlar prowling about the house, who despairs of imposing
on the master, but gladly converses with the women and servants. Yet in the
midst of his ridicule, he cannot avoid admitting the fact of the wide prevalence of
Christianity, and is at a loss to account for so strange a phenomenon : he can
only conclude its silent progress to be the result of a fraudulent conspiracy, treat-
ing the absolute supermundane God of Christian and Jew as an unjustifiable
revolt against that general feeling of heathenism, which, in all its phases, had ever
claimed the presence of its Deity as immanent in nature.—OriGEN, Contra
Celsum,


TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.


GentLEMEN,—I beg to forward a few cases and remarks
for insertion in The Zoist, subject to your approval.

During the past year I have had satisfactory proof in many
parts of England, and Wales, of the triumphant progress of
mesmerism, and have laboured successfully in propagating its
truths. It is with real pleasure that I observe so many of the
clergy of the establishment, and dissenting ministers, labour-
ing practically in behalf of this science. Among the many
thousands who have died in the year 1854, in this metropolis,
large numbers might have been saved had mesmerism been
employed. This fact comes home forcibly to the mind of the
mesmerist in his own experience, whilst the astounding cures
which have been effected at the Mesmeric Infirmary are
patent to all. The reign of ignorance and bigotry is on the
wane. The incubus of prejudice is surely undermined. The
most benevolent, the learned, and the intellectual of this
progressive generation are attracted by the force of the peculiar
truths which this beautiful science is daily unfolding, display-
ing a field of thought for the good and wise of both sexes, a
study calculated to develop innate moral courage, and to
educate the best feelings of humanity. To the physician a
right apprehension of its powers is of priceless value. The
time is not distant when a full measure of justice will be
rendered to the high-souled man who has endured so much
for the cause of man and of woman. Justice was awarded to
Harvey during life, let us hope as much for Elliotson.

In December last, being on a visit to a relative in Car-
marthen, a Major in the army, who was sceptical about mes-
merism, whereas his wife was favourably inclined, and knowing
that his circle of acquaintance in the country was extensive,
I was anxious to convince him. My first attempt was upon


'
Madge). td. Loch Sean


Steady spread of Mesmerism in England. 47


one of his children, three years old. I laid her upon a
table in the dining room, and in five minutes succeeded in
deeply entrancing her. She was totally unconscious, and
lay as one dead. In an hour, to allay their apprehensions,
I awoke her. (Will the Quarterly Reviewer pronounce this
to have been suggestion)? The following evening I mes-
merised the eldest daughter, twelve years old. In seven
minutes she was asleep, and unconscious of the proximity of
any but myself. With a few passes I produced rigidity of all
the limbs : the arm followed my hand as a needle the magnet.
Releasing the rigidity, I drew her with strong tractive passes,
without any contact, from the sofa, across the room, through
the hall into the dining room, and back. Not a word was
spoken, the eyes and ears of the child were scaled. The
amazement of the father and witnesses was extreme, and they
were convinced of a power which they had before regarded
as of every doubtful fame.

The same evening, a lady, the wife of a naval officer, who
had suffered much from inflamed eyes, for more than a month,
and could get but little sleep in consequence of the irritation,
came to me to be mesmerised. In the morning she called to
shew me her eyes, which were nearly well, and to tell me that
she had slept soundly all night. I mesmerised her again ; and
I saw her next day perfectly well. I left with this family the
October number of The Zoist. By this time, it has passed
through the hands of many readers.

At Swansea, the opposition which had been given to the
introduction of mesmerism by a physician of that town has
resulted in the conversion of hundreds, who, but for the con-
troversy which was engendered, would probably have remained
ignorant of the meaning of the word. I left there several
copies of Mr. Purland’s tract on the operation of removing
Mrs. Flowerday’s breast in the mesmeric sleep, that were
everywhere received with much interest, especially by Dr.
Nicholls, a physician of long standing there. At Reading the
subject of mesmerism created considerable interest. At Hast- .
ings, Gloucester, Cardiff, and Bristol, it gave me pleasure to
observe that mesmerism is receiving a fair share of patient
investigation ; facts which are spoken of are no longer re-
ceived with a smile of incredulity.

I have the honour to be, Gentlemen,
Your most obedient servant,
Joun James Birp.
22, Maddox Street, Hanover Square,
January 25th, 1855.


Cures of various pains.


Rapid cures of Nervous Head-ache.

November 3rd, 1853. Met at the house of a gentleman
in New Bond Street, Mr. Wm. Kidd, of Hammersmith. Mr.
Kidd was suffering from intense nervous head-ache. At his
request I endeavoured to relieve him, and in twenty minutes
succeeded. In aletter received from Mr. Kidd next day, he
says: “Your manipulations did me much good. My head
when you saw me was at boiling point!” He writes in the
December number of his journal :—“We know very much of
the curative power of mesmerism. Not long since we were
suffering from an undue excitement of the brain. We chanced
to call on a friend that day and found Mr. Bird present.
Sitting down and submitting to his kind offices, we were not
long in being put quite right. Mesmerism is no longer a
bugbear, and we name this as an act of pleasing duty.”


Cure of Pains in the Loins.

November 10th, 1854. Robert Owen, Esq., having suf-
fered much from pains in the back and kidneys, and finding
he could get no relief, requested me to mesmerise him. I did
so, locally. At the expiration of about half an hour he was
free from pain. He pressed me to call upon him in a few


days that he might tell me if the benefit were lasting. I
visited him on the 14th, and he still remained free from pain
of any kind. He had been previously mesmerised in America
aud England. I mesmerised him twenty minutes. On the
22nd, I received a letter from him, in which he writes: “I
am well in health, and relieved from the pains in my back :
but since you mesmerised me I have had, to me, a singular
itching over my body, arms, and legs, but it is gradually
subsiding.”


Cure of Internal Pains and Sleeplessness.

In the middle of November last, I was requested to visit
the wife of Mr. G. M., New Road, who, since her confinement
three months previously, had suffered much from internal pain
and want of sleep. Medicine had afforded her no relief. At
eight in the evening I mesmerised her powerfully from the
forehead to the feet, three quarters of an hour. Sleep was
not induced, but drowsiness, followed by a copious perspira-
tion which continued some time. I called the following
evening: she told me that she had slept soundly all night for
the first time since her confinement, and on awakening found
that her pains had entirely left her. She has continued well
up to this date, and in better health than for many months.
She has since notified this to me by letter.


A case of voluntary Sleep-waking with Anesthesia. 49


Curious temporary effects of Mesmerism.

Very lately I mesmerised in the evening her eldest
daughter, ten years of age. In three minutes she was asleep.
The child asked me to make passes over the stomach, and
several times desired me to “ go on,” saying that it was doing
her good. I asked her what was the matter? (this was
Thursday.) She answered, that she had had a head-ache
and sickness since Sunday. After mesmerising her about
twenty minutes, a singular change came over her. Her face
and neck appeared to swell and assumed a spotted appearance,
of a deep purple, crimson, and yellow. This so alarmed her
mother that she prudently left the room. I continued to
mesmerise with the long passes from the stomach off the feet
until this subsided. Profuse perspiration set in: she awoke
spontaneously, entirely relieved of head-ache and sickness, and
very hungry. She has continued in better health since. Her
father, and a gentleman who before this was a disbeliever in
mesmerism, were witnesses: the latter was converted.


V. An instance of voluntary Trance and Anesthesia recorded
by St. Augustin. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


“Nam et hominum quorumdam naturas novimus multum
ceteris dispares, et ipsd raritate mirabiles, nonnulla ut volunt
de corpore facientium, que alii nullo modo possunt, et audita
vix credunt. Sunt enim qui et aures moveant, vel singulas,
vel ambas simul, ec.

** *£ & & &

“Jam illud multo est incredibilius, quod plerique fratres
memori4 recentissimA experti sunt. Presbyter fuit quidam
nomine Restitutus, in parcecia Calamensis ecclesiz, qui quando
ei placebat, (rogabatur autem ut hoc faceret ab eis qui rem
mirabilem coram scire cupiebant,) ad imitatas quasi lamen-
tantis cujuslibet hominis voces, ita se avferebat a sensibus,
et jacebat simillimus mortuo, ut non solum vellicantes atque
pungentes minime sentiret, sed aliquando etiam igne ure-
retur admoto, sine ullo doloris sensu nisi postmodum, ex
vulnere: non autem obnitendo, sed non sentiendo non mo-
vere corpus eo probabatur, quod tanquam in defuncto nullus
inveniebatur anhelitus: hominum tamen voces, si clarius lo-
querentur, tanquam de longinquo se audire postea referebat.”
—S. Augustini Episcopi De Civitate Dei, liber xiv. 2, vol. vii.,
p. 375. Ed. Benedict.

VOL, XIII. E


Great merit of Mr. Nixon, of Cumberland.


“ For some men are so differently constituted from others
as to be wonders from their singularity, doing at pleasure
certain things with their bodies that others cannot do, and
would not believe, if told so. Some can move their ears,
together or separately.....

“A circumstance related to me by several monks who
distinctly remembered having witnessed it, is much more
incredible. There was a presbyter, named Restitutus, in
the parish of the ecclesia Calamensis, who, whenever he
chose, (but he always required to be asked to do it by those
who desired to witness the wonder,) on sounds being made
like those of a person in distress, could so abstract himself
from sensation that he lay like a corpse, not feeling in the
least if pinched and pricked, and sometimes was burnt with-
out any sign of pain, except after he came to himself. That
he gave no sign of pain, not from self-restraint, but from
insensibility, was proved by this,—that no catching of breath-
ing could be detected in him. Yet he would afterwards say
that he had heard a voice as if it were at a distance if any
person had spoken very audibly to him.”


How beautifully this agrees with the facts of the Notting-


hamshire case of painless amputation recorded in my pamphlet
on surgical operations in the mesmeric state without pain!
The amputation gave the peasant no pain: but on waking he
said he thought he had heard a kind of.crunching—no doubt
while the bone was being sawed through.*

Joun E .iotson.


VI. Two cases—l. of rigidly-contracted Fingers and Arms,
2. of contracted Neck, wherein Mesmerism was successfully
employed as a remedy. By R. Nixon, Esq., Surgeon,
Wigton, Cumberland.t+

‘* How many grave persons were deceived by the impostures of Miss Mc Avoy,
of Liverpool, of the Miss Okeys of St. Pancras, and of the fasting woman of


Tetbury, although there was no one among them whose exploits could be com-
pared to those of a conjuror at a country fair !’’—Quar. Rev., No. cxli., p. 101.


* Numerous Cases, §c., p. 10. Various writers and speakers actually know
not the difference of the signs of insensibily from those of self-restraint, as St.
Augustin did.

t+ In 1846, No. XV., Mr. Nixon published an article, entitled ‘‘ Extraor-
dinary benefit of Mesmerism in dangerous Fractures of the Leg and in Fits.”

In 1848, No. XXIII., Miss Aglionby published an account of her mesmeric
treatment, with all its phenomena, by Mr. Nixon. She said, ‘‘ I feel truly thank-
ful to have known so kind, unprejudiced, and intelligent a medical man as Mr.
Nixon, whose interest in' this NEW AND BEAUTIFUL ADDITION to his art, is
quite intense.’’—p. 243. How blessed would the public be if every medical
man were as rational and right-minded as Mr. Nixon !—Zoist¢.


Misery from spasm and bad thoughis. 51


I know well the professional distrust which awaits the state-
ment of any man having the temerity to record his experi-
ence as having effected in popular language “ wonderful
cures,” especially should the remedy successfully employed
be mesmerism. Disclaiming having anything to do with the
miraculous, I shall give two simple cases, the employment of
mesmerism in the first of which effected a cure in less than
five minutes, and in the second of which afforded instanta-
neous relief from a very painful symptom, where no form of
galvanism or electricity could have been properly, that is to
say, scientifically, ventured upon, and where, I may venture
to say, no substitute so speedy in its effect could have been
supplied by the materia medica.

But, before doing so, let me repudiate the advocacy of the
empirical employment of any one remedy in all classes of
disease, and state that, in my opinion, mesmerism has a far
wider sphere of application and a greater claim upon the me-
dical profession than any other single remedial agent within
the domain of what is called legitimate therapeutics. Perhaps
not the least remarkable feature in my recommendation of
the employment of mesmerism is its harmlessness and perfect
freedom from injurious consequences when it fails (and all re-
medies are liable to fail) in removing or alleviating the com-
plaint.


Relaxation of intensely-contracted Fingers and Arms.

David Mc Conkey, et. 47, was for many weeks in the
receipt of parochial relief, and was entered in the medical
return as “ nervous and debilitated.” When he was seen for
the first time in August, 1854, both his arms were dangling
by his sides, the fore-arm rigidly flexed at right angles with
the arm, the fingers and thumbs firmly clenched ; the fingers
so strongly that the nails penetrated through the skin in the
palms. Any single finger could be forcibly extended, but
the attempt gave him pain, and, on being left loose, the
finger immediately resumed the flexed condition with a force
resembling the recoil of a spring and with a snap which was
audible. The long-continued spasm, subjected to no inter-
mission, was a source of exquisite suffering, and was much
complained of, and prevented sleep, every night having been
passed in a restless and most wretched manner. He had not
only to strive against the effects of spasm, but a train of
“bad thoughts” would obtrude and harass his mind, which
until the commencement of his illness had been well regu-
lated. As might be expected, in the morning he was unre-
freshed, and altogether unfitted for mental or bodily exertion.

E2


52 The spasms speedily removed.


The earlier symptoms of his commencing malady had
evidently not been so remarkable nor so painful as those I
have mentioned, since they had long ago passed away and
were forgotten.

The case was diagnozed one of neglected chronic inflam-
mation of the brain: the persistent phenomena, as exhibited
by the flexor muscles of the arms, hands, and fingers, and
the pain also occasioned by any forcible attempt at extension,
pointed to the probability of inflammation of the brain as still
existing. Without speculating upon pathological changes
likely to ensue from long continued congestive or inflamma-
tory action, doubtless disease of the brain had already super-
vened, and the “bad thoughis”’ were ominous psychological
manifestations of the poor man becoming, at no distant day,
a religious monomaniac, doomed to nocturnal paroxysms.

Disregarding the medical treatment of the case to deal
only with adjective symptoms, the most pressing indications
were to relieve pain and procure sleep; and nothing seemed
more likely to conduce to the latter than to remove, if
possible, the abnormal condition of the muscles of the arms,
that doubtless gave rise to insomnolency. With these
objects in view, long mesmeric passes were made in the usual
way from above the head in front of the face to the lower
part of the chest, and then changed locally to the limbs
affected by directing strong longitudinal positive passes
without contact from the commencement of the origin, along
their course, to the insertion of the extensor muscles: these
were succeeded in like manner by negative passes, with con-
tact, along the flexor muscles of the arms, hands, and fingers.
After manipulating for a few minutes, relaxation of the spasm
was gradually and perfectly effected. Relapses have occa-
sionally occurred at irregular intervals, and have been speedily
overcome by the same process.

Mc Conkey is still an ailing man, but there has been no
further occasion for the use of mesmerism as an adjunct in
the treatment of his case.


Case 2.—During my attendance upon a lady, last Sep-
tember, whose complaint was of a serious nature, causing my
visits to be looked for daily, I observed that her maid had
“stiff neck.” But my attention was not especially called to
it: the distress and anxiety which prevailed in the family circle
occasioned the young woman’s neck to be entirely overlooked,
until, the malady getting worse and incapacitating her for her
accustomed duties, I was requested to examine and prescribe
for the case.


4


RNS:


The muscles relaxed immediately. 53


M. J., 20 years of age, had enjoyed uninterrupted good
health until a fortnight previously, when she caught a cold
and stiff neck from sleeping in a chair placed betwixt the
window and fire place. Being of a lively and feeling dispo-
sition, having no time to think of or care for herself, she
continued to attend upon her mistress until really ill and
requiring nursing herself. The inclination of the head mean-
while became more confirmed, and pain on moving about
or attempting to regain the erect from a recumbent position
was particularly irksome, and appeared to have gradually
increased ever since she caught cold. Over exertion, want of
sleep, and pain in the neck, had by this time induced symp-
tomatic disturbance, with depression of spirits, and an uncon-
querable desire to leave her situation.

I addressed the young woman in soothing language, and
sympathized with her in her distressed condition, endeavouring
in this way to gain her confidence, and then began to examine
her neck. The inclination of the head had brought it down
with the ear directed to a little beyond the right shoulder,
and it had become immoveably fixed for several days in that
position. Recourse had been had to friction by means of
liniments and embrocations, but without success; and, at the
time of my visit, a large linseed poultice was upon the part
affected, and it had been repeated in hopes that suppuration
would ultimately terminate the complaint.

Having removed the poultice and gently wiped the part
dry, I pronounced the case to be one of “ torticollis, or wry
neck,” probably occasioned by the sterno-cleido-mastoideus
and the clavicular portion of the trapezius muscle on the right
side being affected with spasm. I had seen two similar cases
of volitional immobility (but neither of them were so bad as
this one) give way to mesmerism, and immediately conceived
that this was a proper case for its employment. Accordingly
the séance did not materially differ from what has been
already described in case the first. The positive passes were
strongly directed along the antagonizing muscles, and negative
passes to the muscles in a state of spasm. Those who are
unaccustomed to witness the effect of a few minutes’ mes-
meric treatment would scarcely believe the gratifying result.
The head, as it were, became loosened from its bindings, and
the patient herself, incredulous of her own capabilities, moved
her head first to one side, and then to the other, and again
up and down, in a very ludicrous manner, not unlike the
figure one sees of a Chinese Mandarin. The cure, as far as
regarded the spasmodic affection was most signal and com-
plete, and did not occupy five minutes.


( 54 )


VII. Extraordinary discovery of a drowned body at Hudders-
field by a clairvoyant, through Captain Hudson of Li-
verpool. By Josuua Farrar, of Marsden.


“At the evening meeting at the Royal Institution on Friday, February 9,
1855, Professor Owen delivered a lecture ‘on the orangs and chimpanzees, and
their structural relations to man.’ ... Professor Owen said that authors of two
centuries ago appeared to address a higher class of readers than the popular writers
of the present time, and he intimated his opinion that, with all our boasted enlight-
enment, we have not advanced intellectually beyond the age of Moore. It was
said, indeed, in disparagement of their judgment, that they believed in witches ;
but have not we our believers in CLAIRVOYANCE ; and if it be thought folly to
suppose that a long cylindrical piece of wood, when stridden across by certain
old women, could rise in the air, was it less opposed to reason to conceive that a
flat circular piece of wood, when touched with the fingers, could be moved about
without any effort, and rise in the air? Having thus ridiculed the superficial
scientific knowledge which induces persons to suppose themselves wiser than their
forefathers, and to take up any notion, however erroneous, without sufficient
investigation, if it be only supported by specious arguments, Professor Owen
proceeded to point out the distinguishing differences in the skeletons of the
orang outang and the chimpanzee, of which there were full-sized drawings ex-
hibited.”,—Daity News, Feb. 12, 1855.


I wrote to Mr. Hudson, at his residence at Liverpool, on
the 29th December, asking him if he had a good clairvoyant
in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield. Mr. Hudson wrote
me on the 2nd January, stating that he had asked a subject
when in the mesmeric state if she knew anything respecting
the young woman that had been drowned, and she had stated
that the body was within 14 mile of Mirfield. Mr. Hudson
said that he could not “ say much respecting it, as he had never
tried her before ; but you have it as she has given it.” I then
took the letter to Mr. Samuel Whitehead, when he and myself
went to see Mr. Hudson on Wednesday the 3rd instant.
Mr. Hudson then told us to go for Miss Challand to Mold-
green, and we took a cab and went for her. We did not say
anything to her, except that Mr. Hudson wanted to see her.
She came with us. After she was put into the mesmeric state,
Mr. Hudson asked her if she knew what we were come about.
She replied, “ Yes; about the poor girl that is drowned.”
Then Mr. Whitehead opened a handkerchief which contained
a shawl and part of her dress. Mr. Hudson asked her if she
knew what those things were that Mr. Whitehead had on
his knee ; and she said it was the shawl the young woman had
on when drowned. He then asked her if she knew what that
other: was. She said, “Yes; it is the skirt of a frock the
young woman had on when drowned.” Mr. Hudson said that
it cannot be a dress, for it is literally rags. She then seemed
rather cross with Mr. Hudson for disputing what she had
said, and directly made up to Mr. Whitehead, and took hold


Every particular was verified. 55


of it, and threw it into the shape of a skirt immediately, and
said, “ You see this is the skirt.” Mr. Hudson then replied,
“What is the reason of its being so torn in pieces?” and she
said, “ That it was because the watercourse was so full of
stones, and it had caught the stones, and the water had torn
the body away ; and if he saw the stones, he would not be
surprised at it being so torn.”” Mr. Hudson then said to the
young woman, “Go and find her?” She then stood quite
motionless about twelve minutes, when she again made a
start, and Mr. Hudson told her to come back to the place
where we were. After about half a minute, she moved, and -
Mr. Hudson said, “ Have you found her?” and she said,
“Yes, I’ve found her, she has nothing but her feet bare, her
body being covered with mud and sand.” Mr. Hudson then
said, ‘ Whereabouts is she?” and she said, “ About half
a mile from Mirfield.” Then Mr. Hudson tried to know
if there was anything about her; but she said there was
nothing about her but mud and sand. He then asked her if
the water was deep, and she said, “ Not very deep, middling.”
Mr. Hudson again asked her several times what is near her,
and she said, “ Nothing but sand, and mud, and water.”
He then asked her what there was on the bank. She said,
“It is green.” Then he says, ‘‘ You mean grass:” she said,
“Yes.” He then asked her at the request of Mr. Whitehead,
if there was anything near the place, any bridge, or anything.
She said, “ Yes, there is the second bridge within a hundred
yards of her.” Mr. Whitehead went the following morning,
and took two other persons with him, named Francis Goodall
and Joseph Bulmer, and also engaged two more persons at
Mirfield; and Mr. Whitehead, counting the bridges from
Mirfield, began to search at the wrong bridge, and sought till
noon, when he said to the Mirfield men, “Is this called the
second bridge?” and they said, “No.” They then went to
the second bridge, and found the girl in a quarter of an hour,
about twenty yards from the bridge, covered all over with
mud and sand, except her feet, as the young woman had
described.

I then went to Mr. Hudson myself the day following, and
asked him which side of the water she was on, and he said,
the clairvoyant had stated on the right side going down, and
they have passed her twice and have moved her. The men
stated that they did pass her twice before they pulled her out.

Josnvua Farrar, Manufacturer.
Marsden, near Huddersfield.


The following is the account of the accident as given in


56 Opinion of the Rev. Dr. James.
the Huddersfield and Holmfirth Examiner of January 13,


1855 :-—


‘A young girl, on the stormy night of the 14th of De-
cember, was accompanying a friend a part of her way, and after
leaving her and proceeding on her way in the direction of her own
home was lost, as was supposed in the river which was then more
than usually swollen, owing to the heavy rains that had fallen. It
appears, that the girl, whose name is Sarah Ann Lumb, daughter of
Mr. James Lumb, farmer, of Marsden, had been, on the night in
question, at the Sunday school to repeat some ‘pieces,’ and on
coming out had gone with a companion part of her way home, in
conformity with a well known custom in this district of going ‘ a-
gaterds’ with each other. They had parted at Snailhorn-Bridge, and
the deceased crossed the bridge on her journey home. She had
afterwards to cross another bridge at a short distance, called John-
son’s-Bridge, and some young persons who had met her, hearing
a splash in the water, went to see if any thing was the matter, but
could not find anything. The girl was however lost, and no doubt
existed as to her fate. The various reservoirs on the river Colne, from
Marsden to Colnebridge, had been examined without resulting in any
discovery of the body. A shawl, dress skirt, and flannel petticoat,
which the poor unfortunate girl had worn on that fatal evening, had
been found during the following week at various points on the river
Colne, leading to the certainty that she had fallen into the stream
at Johnson’s-Bridge, while crossing immediately after meeting with
the young men before referred to. Every attempt to find the body,
though £5 had been offered as a reward for its discovery, had been
fruitless until the 4th inst., when it was discovered in a very remark-
able manner, by means of information obtained from Miss Challand,
of Moldgreen, one of Captain Hudson’s ‘ subjects.’ Of course we
are not about to theorize on mesmerism ; and what is here stated,—
whatever may be the explanation given of it, and whether mes-
merism be true or not,—is a simple fact, that cannot be disputed,
however it may or may not be accounted for. It is not one of those
after-event prophecies which sometimes gain a kind of suspicious
currency in the world, for many persons whose testimony cannot for
a moment be doubted knew of the circumstances before the discovery
of the body. It is, perhaps, necessary to premise, before detailing
the evidence given at the inquest, that Miss Challand had not been
informed of the purpose for which she was wanted at Captain Hud-
son’s until she was put into the mesmeric sleep by the operator.”


Since the preceding matter was in type, we have received
the following.


“To the Editors of The Zoist.
“Leeds, February 28, 1855.
“Gentlemen,—I hasten to forward you a true copy of a


letter I have this morning received from the Rev. Dr. James,
of Marsden, near Huddersfield: if it be of any service to


A strange fact in Professor Owen’s life. 57


you in confirming the account I sent some time ago, you can
make use of it. We are going on now very well, and of the
patients I have under my care many are doing well.
“IT remain, yours most faithfully,

“H. Hupson.”


* Marsden, Huddersfield,
“ Feb. 27, 1855.
“ My dear Sir,—In reply to your note of the 3rd instant,
I beg to state that Sarah Ann Lumb, who was drowned at
Marsden on Thursday-night, the 14th of December last, and
whose body after a fruitless search of three weeks was even-
tually recovered in consequence of information given by one
of your patients at Huddersfield under mesmeric influence,
was known to me as a neighbour, and as a regular attendant
at the church Sunday school. The information given by the
clairvoyant can only be accounted for on one of two princi-
ples—either that in a clairvoyant state under mesmeric influ-
ence she saw where the body lay, so that she was enabled to
testify the fact on three successive days, as she did; or be-
cause by a mere shrewd guess she happened to hit the very
locality in which the body was found. Having carefully exa-
mined the parties who heard the clairvoyant give the infor-
formation required of her, as well as those who, acting upon
that information, went in search of the body and found it,
I fully believe the former.
“ T am, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
“D. JAMEs.


“H. Hudson, Esq., Lecturer on Mesmerism.”


NOTE BY THE ZOIST.


“ Have we not our believers in clairvoyance?” Yes we
have: and among men of as great knowledge, as great talent,
as great modesty, as great candour, and as great independence
and integrity, as Professor Owen. We ask him to answer
the cases of clairvoyance detailed in The Zoist. If he open
M4 No. XXXV. (October, 1851), he will find references to all
: our cases up to that time. The rest of our cases will be
found by referring to the Indices to Vols. XI. and XII. In
No. XLV. will be found a case of remarkable clairvoyance
that occurred fifty years ago and was admitted by a disbe-
liever in mesmerism. We defy him to explain them away.
They are as established as any facts in nature. His sneers may
gain a laugh at the Royal Institution,* but they will not among


* See No. XL., p. 346.


58 Captain Hudson’s cures.


those who are qualified to judge. How does Professor Owen
get over the fact which Professor Whetstone, Dr. Arnott, Dr.
Roget, Dr. Elliotson, &c., &c., witnessed in the theatre of Uni-
versity College Hospital? Dr. Elliotson has recorded it twice
in The Zoist. It perhaps was not clairvoyance: but it was so
allied to it that, if it were true, as Mr. Owen knows it was, for
he witnessed it and could say nothing against it, clairvoyance
is no longer difficult to believe.


“One of the Okeys would accurately imitate, when in deep
sleep-waking, any grimace made behind her back, and movements
made on the other side of a closed door.

**On one occasion, indeed, I observe, in a note made by a gen-
tleman of a visit he paid Dr. Wilson’s patient,* that the man ap-
peared to exhibit this new faculty. It is as follows :—‘ Dr. Wilson
then went behind him, and sat with his mouth open. The patient
then opened his mouth and yawned several times. He could not see
the operator, or have any idea of what he was doing.’ How many
exquisite experiments of this kind did we not make with Elizabeth
Okey! Professor Owen, of the College of Surgeons, once made
certain grimaces behind her with one side of his nose which he only
of the party could make, and no one knew what he was going to do;
but she, though asleep in her chair, imitated it perfectly. He
acknowledged the reality of the wonder. But when he found that
Mr. Lawrence and others ignorant of the subject, but fully compe-
tent to judge, laughed at her as a ‘humbug’ and me as a soft fool,
he forthwith sneered with the rest at mesmerism and me.’’+


She was fast asleep in a high-backed chair: and Mr. Owen
crouched down behind the chair, so that if her eyes had been
open she could not have known what he did: nor could any
body standing before the chair and looking towards it see
what he did. But he afterwards told them, and those who
stood behind the chair saw what he did.


VIII. Cures of Rheumatism, Contracted Joints and Spine.
By Captain Hupson, Liverpool.


Its power was chiefly exerted among that class of whom Celsus speaks so
contemptuously—the weavers, shoemakers, and curriers ; those above the pre-
judices of gross ignorance, but uninfluenced by the political or speculative predi-
lections of the noble and philosophical: men whom history disdains, but the
secret working of whose minds was-sure to turn the scale of opinion, and give
character to the age. Persecution only nourished the flame originally kindled by


* Dr. Wilson’s patient was in the Middlesex Hospital, and his remarkable
and instructive case is detailed in the article from which this quotation is made.
+ Zoist, No. II., p. 190.


ad
tl

1
54


Rapid cure of Rheumatism. 59


the mind’s reaction against the hardship of the world, and was regarded as
abridging to a favoured few the passage to a divine kingdom soon to be within
the reach of all.—(Epioupyods, nal oxvrotduovs, kar kvadets kal Tovs dmaidevTo-
tdrovs Te Kal dypoxordrovs.) OrnicEen, Contra Celsum, iii., 52,55. ‘ All the
refinements of your cruelty,’ exclaims Tertullian, ‘ only give zest to our calling
and multiply our numbers; our blood is the fruitful seed of a more abundant
harvest.’ ‘Although of yesterday only, we already fill all your quarters, your
cities, strongholds, even your camps. We are in the palace, the senate, the
forum ; we leave you only your temples; we can match the numbers of all your
armies; why, there are more Christians in a single province.’—TeRTULLIAN,
Liber Apologeticus, Adversus Gentes pro Christianis. ‘ Nec quicquam tamen pro-
ficit exquisitior queeque crudelitas vestra, illecebra est magis sectee. Plures effi-
cimur, quoties metimur a vobis : semen est sanguis Christianorum.’ cap. 1. ‘ Hes-
terni sumus et vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella, municipia,
conciliabula, castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, palatium, senatum, forum; sola vobis
reliquimus templa. Possumus dinumerare exercitus vestros: unius provincise
plures erunt.’ cap. xxxvii.


Rheumatism.

Joun Miller, aged 39, of No. 19, Cross Lisbourn Street,
Leeds, had been afflicted with severe rheumatic pains and
swollen joints, and unable to work for twenty months. He
had been unable to feed himself for six months. His first
doctor advised him to go into the Leeds Infirmary, and he
was there under Mr. Hey, the surgeon, for twelve weeks:
afterwards he was for six months an out-patient ; confined to
his bed for eleven weeks; he was again in the hospital for
eight weeks, and under Mr. Wilson. Still receiving no be-
nefit he went out again. Some friends collected a sum of
money, and sent him to Harrowgate. There he continued
four weeks, a little improved from the warm baths. He
returned home, and went to Buxton for one month: re-
turned home improved, but shortly he became worse, suffer-
ing much from pain and swelling of the joints. He went
again into the Infirmary, and was under Dr. Heaton, remain-
ing there five weeks, and receiving every attention and kind-
ness both from the doctors and all persons in the Infirmary.
Still he was no better. He went over to Huddersfield, where
I was lecturing and operating on patients. A friend of his,
Mr. Carr, currier, of Huddersfield, advised him to come to
me and try mesmerism. He came. I found him very sus-
ceptible of my influence. It so much improved him in six
times that he could walk well: the pains left him: he re-
turned home: has been working for his wife and family. It
is now near three months since he came to me; he is quite
well, can walk well, and work hard, with great pleasure and
comfort to himself.

After he had attended my lectures at Leeds, and men-
tioned his case and the medical gentlemen he had been under,
they sent for him the next day. They were astonished to


60 Contractions, and Spinal Affection.


find him so well. He has often expressed his gratitude to the
Giver of all good for the blessings of health he now enjoys.


Contraction of the Knee.

Mrs. Anne Wilson, aged 39, of Princes Street, Hudders-
field, had been afflicted for eight years with a contracted
knee. After trying every means in her power to get relief
both in London and elsewhere, she applied to me. I mes-
merised her for several weeks, and she obtained relief; and
now can walk with great ease; and is able to walk with her
husband—what she could not do before she was mesmerised.
She does this with ease, is still improving, and thankful for
the change.


Rheumatic Pains and Contraction of the Arms and one Knee.

Enoch Crowther, aged 36, Princes Street, Huddersfield,
had been severely afflicted five years. For two years he could
not lift his arms to his head nor bend his knees. After being
mesmerised by me several weeks, he can now use his arms
and bend his knee with ease. He is a person of good cha-
racter. Although he has been so very much afflicted, he has
been in one employ for ten years. He is now well and can
go through his work with pleasure. He has frequently spoken
of his cure before the public audiences at Huddersfield and
Holmfirth, where he is well known.


Contraction of the Hip.

Eliza Ann Staley, of Holmfirth, near Huddersfield, aged
20 years, had been afflicted for nine years with a contraction
of the hip, and could not bear her weight on the side affected
for nine years. After having been operated on by me for one
week, she can now walk well and stand on her foot, to the
astonishment of her friends. She is still going on with mes-
merism, and I expect she will soon be cured completely.


Severe Spinal Affection.

Ann Cotton, of Crossland Moor, near Huddersfield, aged
17, has been very much afflicted for four years, and not able
to walk for two years. After being put into the mesmeric
sleep a few times, she began to walk alone, to the astonish-
ment of her mother and friends. As she is now improving
fast, she expects to run about shortly.

H. Hupson.

6, Nile Street, Liverpool.


|


EE


3


(


IX. On the claims of Dr. Robert H. Collyer in reference,
1. to the original excitement and stupefying of distinct
Cerebral Organs by Local Mesmerism ; 2. to the original
suggestion of preventing pain by the inhalation of narcotic
vapours ; and 3. to the original production of the pheno-
mena absurdly called Electro-Biology.


61 )


‘* Another error is, that men have used to infect their meditations, opinions,
and doctrine with some conceits which they have most admired, or some sciences
to which they have most applied; and given all things else a tincture according
to them, utterly untrue and improper. So have the alchemists made a philosophy
out of a few experiments of the furnace; and Gilbertus, our countryman, hath
made a philosophy out of the observations of a loadstone.’—Lorp Bacon, Ad-
vancement of Learning, book i.


‘The electrical operation, concerning which Gilbert and others since him
have made up such a wonderful story, is nothing else than the oppolition of a
body, which, excited by friction, does not well tolerate the air, and prefers another
tangible body if it be found near.’-—Lorp Bacon, Novum Organum, book ii.*


1. In our Third Number, at p. 237, the origin of the dis-
covery in 1839 of the possibility of exciting and stupefying
distinct cerebral organs by local mesmerism was fully de-
tailed. The discovery was made quite accidentally in 1839
by Dr. Collyer, at Pittsfield in North America, but remained
unheeded by him and unknown both there and in England.
In fact, Dr. Collyer in 1842 declared that he had been mis-
taken, and that the phenomena had arisen from unintended
suggestion alone.

In May, 1843, he published a pamphlet entitled, Psy-
chography, or the Embodiment of Thought, with an Analysis
of Phreno-magnetism, Neurology, and Mental Hallucination,
in which he most positively denied that the organs were ever
excited by any force transmitted from the fingers.


“At a party, when mesmerism was the topic of conversation,
he threw into the mesmeric sleep a young lady who had always
refused to allow him to examine her cerebral development. He took
this oportunity of examining it with his hands, and, to his asto-
nishment, as he touched over the organs of Self-esteem, Combative-
ness, Wit, &c., the respective faculties went into action. He was,
however, already so excited with the occurrence of clairvoyance at
this period that he confesses he paid very little attention to the cir-
cumstance. In Louisiana, during the following spring, he produced
the same results; and, having become a lecturer on mesmerism at
Boston, in the spring of 1841, he publicly demonstrated such facts


* What would Bacon think of this his own folly were he to come again upon
the earth and witness all the facts now ascertained in the science of magnetism
and electricity ?

Since he could write thus foolishly, we cannot wonder at the writings of the
medical profession against our mesmeric facts, obvious, great and most blessedly
useful, though they are.—Zoist.


62 Mesmeric affection of distinct cerebral organs proved.


there as early as May—above two months before any other person in
America pretends to have made similar observations. However, in
October, 1842, he was convinced that he had been mistaken, and
declared that he had claimed priority of what he no longer held to
be a reality. He does most positively deny, in the pamphlet pub-
lished two months ago, ‘that the organs were ever excited by the
transmission of any force from the fingers.’ ”’*

After he had witnessed experiments made without the pos-
sibility of suggestion, he still adhered to his scepticism but
ascribed the effect to the power of the operator’s will.

This fancy, however, was completely dissipated by Dr.
Elliotson’s experiments, in some of which small pieces of
paper were put upon the organs of a sleep-waking patient
highly susceptible of the effect, and certain organs excited
through mere pointing at them without the possibility of
the patient’s knowledge of what was doing, and by a person
ignorant of both mesmerism and phrenology and of the pur-
pose for which he was requested to point: no body looking
at what he did, till the excitement of the respective organ
manifested itself by external signs, when the mesmerist
turned round and found the manifestations were those of
an individual organ that had been and was still being pointed
at. These results were the more remarkable, as the organ
of the side only which was pointed at was excited in this
patient : so that if pride, rage, or attachment was pointed
at on one side, the corresponding arm performed the action
of pride, rage, or affection: and a different organ on the
opposite side might be thrown into action. For instance,
at the same time, the right hand and arm would squeeze and
embrace and the left arm repel and strike. Let the scoffers
at phrenology and mesmerism study and get over, if they
can, the exquisite facts which prove the truth of the two
sciences at once, and which are detailed in both No. IIL,
pp. 239—246, and No. VI., pp. 222—233. In all phy-
siology and psychology nothing can surpass, and few things
approach them, in interest and wonder. But cells, and
fibres, and all minute anatomy, requiring the microscope;
and the humble functions of nutrition or vegetable life (albeit
all worthy of our careful study) forcibly attract the attention
of the generality of medical minds, which seem at present
unable to appreciate the higher matters of our nature.

The fact unintentionally- noticed by Dr. Collyer was too
astounding for his belief: and he ascribed it to suggestion.
Yet the fact was but an instance of local mesmerisation ; like
the stiffening of a finger by a pass along it or pointing at it,


* Zoist, No. III., p. 237.


Dr. Collyer has no merit on this subject. 63


and the relaxation of it again by breathing upon it. This
was very excusable in him, but he must now regret that he
did not ascertain by an easy experiment whether this expla-
nation was just.

Mesmerisation of distinct cerebral organs is on a footing
with the production of every other mesmeric effect. Every
one may result from imagination, and this may be produced
by suggestion ; and, to prove a mesmeric phenomenon to be
genuinely mesmeric, perfect care must be taken to prevent
the patient from knowing what is being attempted. When
the patient does know, and expects the effect, we have no
right to assert that the effect, whatever it be, is from simple
mesmeric agency. In truth, by suggestion you may in some
persons excite the manifestation of particular faculties by
touching any part of the head or any part of the system—
body or extremities.

A long while afterwards, when Dr. Collyer witnessed the
mesmeric excitement of distinct cerebral organs in circum-
stances where he saw that suggestion was impossible, he
ascribed the effect to the operator’s will. But in Dr. El-
liotson’s experiments, mentioned above, this explanation was
out of the question, since the operator had no idea of what
he was doing, and one was equally ignorant of mesmerism
and phrenology and mesmeric phrenology and no other person
witnessed to what organs he was pointing. Nay more, by
the strongest will which Dr. Elliotson can exert, and with
staring at the seat of the respective organs, he has never been
able to excite one of them in this patient.

In the matter of the mesmeric excitement of cerebral
organs Dr. Collyer, therefore, has no pretension to merit.
Mr. Mansfield discovered these facts in 1841 in Clare Hall
in the University of Cambridge.* We had always under-
stood that Mr. Mansfield’s facts were equally the result of
accident in 1841 with those of Dr. Collyer. But recently
Mr. Mansfield has anxiously assured our readers that there
was no accident in the matter ;+ but that his facts resulted
from what he calls induction. By this we suppose he means
that he was induced to make the experiments by reflexion.
He now asserts that a lady in sleep-waking, on hearing a
discord which distressed her, assured him in answer to his
enquiry that she felt pain in the organ of Music. This, how-
ever, was not mesmeric excitement of a cerebral organ. He
calmed the pain by putting his finger over the organ, as pain
is calmed by mesmerists habitually. He says that he fol-


* See No. III., p. 238. + No. XXXVIII., p. 226.


64 Mr. Mansfield has ail the merit.


lowed up the facts which he witnessed, and made the dis-
covery by reasoning, by investigation. His friend, Mr. (now
Sir John) Gardiner, soon joined him in the investigation.

This account by Mr. Mansfield is not the same as that
which was given by Dr. Elliotson in the Phrenological Asso-
ciation on the authority of two gentlemen who were present
when Mr. Mansfield announced his discovery, and who were
present when this account was read. Neither has expressed
that it was inaccurate, and it stood in the pages uncontra-
dicted till Mr. Mansfield wrote to The Zoist in 1853, as we
have stated. His letter was a little eccentric, and so full
of blots and alterations that these struck us. If we take his
last account we see no mesmeric excitement of any organ.
His merit, however, is that of following out the subject.
Whether the fact which he followed out presented itself to
him accidentally or not, his merit is indisputable, great, and
sufficient.


2. We some time ago received the following letter from
Dr. Collyer, and press of matter has caused it to remain
unprinted till now, as we were desirous of making it the
groundwork of an article.


** San Francisco, California,
“ May 24, 1852.
“For The Zoist.
“To the Editor.

“You will confer on me a favour by republishing the
enclosed communication.

“The whole merit of the discovery of inhalation to pro-
duce unconsciousness or nervous congestion of the brain, and
abstracting sensibility from the rest of the body, so that
surgical operations can be performed without pain, is due to
mesmerism ; and had it not been for my mesmeric investiga-
tions, the important fact ‘that all stimulating and narcotic
vapours produce insensibility’ would, in all probability, have
remained as an undeveloped law of nature until this day.
I think it is in the Fifth Number of The Zoist that you refer
to my claim; and by referring to the pamphlet in the pos-
session of Dr. Elliotson, entitled Psychography, &c., pub-
lished in 1843, it will be there seen that I declare, in several
places, the identity of the condition induced by mesmerism
and inhalation. Dr. Morton was a resident dentist of Boston,
and attended my lectures, and saw my experiments in 1842:
it was not until 1846, when I was in Europe, that he pre-
tended to have made the discovery.

“ Yours truly,
“ Ros. H. Cotiyer.


Dr. Collyer’s claim to suggestion of anesthetic inhalation. 65


“N.B. It was in 1846 that a Dr. Collier died in England:
perhaps Dr. Morton, like many others in the United States,
supposed it to be myself.

“ Electro-Biology, as it is called, is also fully explained
by me in the same pamphlet : I called the condition ‘induced
mental hallucination.” I made all these experiments in the
waking state in 1842 and 1843.”


We could not excite the slightest attention of the medical
profession to the importance of performing surgical opera-
tions without pain, notwithstanding before their eyes were
the case of painless amputation at Wellow, Nottinghamshire,
read at the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, and all
Dr. Esdaile’s gigantic painless operations in India, as well as
many operations of all kinds in Great Britain, America, and
the West Indies. How on the promulgation of the anzs-
thetic power of ether they all became not only convinced of
the possibility but of the duty of preventing pain in surgical
operations, is shewn in our Seventeenth Number: the whole
profession became frantic:* and the enthusiasm was the
greatest in every one who had been the most bitter against
mesmerism and most indifferent to the duty of preventing
pain—Dr. (now Sir John) Forbes, Mr. Liston, Professor
Miller, Mr. Lawrence of Bartholomew’s Hospital, and nume-
rous leading and minor practitioners in town and country, and
every antimesmeric dentist.

In the Daily Alta California, of May 4, 1852, Dr. Collyer
published the following letter :—


“Tue Erner Cram in Concress.—Arrest oF Dr.
Jackson.—The House Committee have decided upon awarding one
hundred thousand dollars to Dr. Morton for his discovery of ether.
Dr. Morton has caused the arrest here of his competitor, Dr. Jack-
son, for libel.

“Is it possible that Congress has awarded one hundred thousand
dollars to Dr. Morton, of Boston, for the use of ether in —
operations ? I cannot divine the merit of merely making the applica-
tion, when the principle was laid down years previous, that ‘ the exha-
lation of all stimulating and narcotic vapors would produce nervous
congestion of the brain analogous to that produced in the mes-
merised person.’ Nor could Dr. Morton have been ignorant of the
fact, that in the city of Boston in the year 1842, experiments were
made publicly and in private by me, in order to prove ‘ the bow! of
molasses experiment’ as it was facetiously called by the press at the
time. I made persons inhale the fumes from alcohol, olibanum,


* See Dr. Elliotson’s article, entitled ‘‘ On the Art of suddenly restoring the
Moral Feelings and Intellect to activity in large masses of Mankind,” No.
XVII.: April, 1847.

VOL. XIII. v


66 Mr. W. W. Lloyd's remarks in 1845.


opium, stramonium, &c., and induced a perfectly unconscious state.
These results were the topic of conversation throughout the Union.
I was not, however, satisfied with allowing these experiments to pass
unrecorded, and accordingly published a pamphlet in 1843 at the
Philadelphia Ledger office, called Psychography, or the Embodiment
of Thought; wherein, at pp. 26, 27 and 28, I distinctly and
unequivocally declare that the ‘inhaling of narcotic and stimulating
vapors will induce the peculiar congestion of brain.’ I also secured
the copyright, by entering the pamphlet in the District Court of
Pennsylvania. I am also certain that some 500 copies now remain
at the Ledger office.

“The subsequent use of chloroform in preference to ether cor-
roborates my position, ‘ that ail narcotic and stimulating vapors will
produce the congestive condition, the degree of unconsciousness
depending on the particular quality of the ingredient used.’

**T conclude by stating, that all the dentists of Boston in 1841,
’42 and ’43, used to mesmerise their patients and extract the teeth,
during that state, without pain.

**The pamphlet referred to was extensively sold in New York and
Boston. Dr. Morton dates his discoveries in 1846!

“« By giving this letter publicity, you will confer on me an act of
justice. Yours, Xe.

Rosert H. Coiryer.”


In the pamphlet to which Dr. Collyer refers, we can dis-
cover mention of only the power of vapours to prevent sen-
sation; not any account of surgical operations performed
painlessly.

At p. 26 we read :—


** The magnetic or congestive state of the brain is often accom-
panied by that exalted condition of mind, called cLAiRVOYANCE.
Then, the faculties seem to have hardly a limit of action; time and
space are annihilated; the secrets of the past, present and future
are brought within the immediate range of THouGHT.

“The power to induce this state of the nervous system is not con-
fined to the nervo-vital fluid from a second person. The same
state of things may be brought about by mental excitement, accom-
panied with muscular action ; the inhaling of narcotic and stimulat-
ing vapors; the abnormal condition, as manifested in somnambu-
lism, trance, catalepsy ; or by the will of the individual himself, as
was the case with Apollonius of Tyana, Emanuel Swedenborg,
Mahomet, &c.”’


The peculiar instances of Mount Parnassus, &c., are
then related.


In the third of Mr. W. Watkiss Lloyd’s very learned
papers (No. XI., printed in October, 1845), before the days of
ether and chloroform inhalations, this gentleman says :—


“These instances suggest the question whether experiments


LAY el ate


Dr. Collyer’s claim to Electro-Biology, absurdly so called. 67


may not be advantageously directed to test the efficacy of the
gases in inducing mesmeric coma or somnambulism, or influencing it
when produced. (The effects of nitrous oxide, or laughing gas, are
very analogous to mesmerism.) The presumption in favour of their
influence in this way is strongly supported by some statements of
Strabo, xiv.

“ * Between Tralles and Nysa is a village of the Nyseeans, in which
is a Ploutonion, with grove and fane of Ploutén and Koré, and a
Charonian cave of a very wonderful nature. For they say that the
sick who resort to these gods for cure go thither and live in the vil-
lage, near the cave, with those of the priests who are skilled, and who
sleep on their account (the vicarious incudatio familiar to usin Egypt
and Greece), and prescribe modes of treatment from their dreams.
Frequently also they take them into the cave and = them there
to remain in quietness and without food for several days as if in a
state of hybernation.’ ”

«The nature of the cave is apparent from what follows,—

** Every year at a festival a bull was taken to the cave, and, being
sent in, after a few steps fell dead.’ jcpov mposehOwv mimter kar
€x7Tvovus yevera,””


This is a clear suggestion : but Mr. Lloyd does not belong
to the medical profession, and could not easily prosecute the
subject experimentally.


3. As to what is absurdly called electro-biology, the fol-
lowing passages occur in Dr. Collyer’s pamphlet :—


“Persons there are, and by no means a few, who can be acted
on at any time, imaginatively, so as to produce extraordinary results.
The imaginative action is the operation of the mind from informa-
tion previously acquired. That is, if a person, who has been accus-
tomed to the use of ipecacuanha or tartar emetic, should take an
inert substance, supposing it be ipecacuanha or tartar emetic, the
operation would take place as effectually as if the real article had
been administered.

“‘ When a person has been charged with the nervous force, and is
a good recipient, he or she can be acted on when awake. Any part
can be acted on independent of the rest of the body, even before any
attempt has been made to produce the unconscious or congestive
state. This experiment was first performed by me in Boston, in the
spring of 1841, on Mr. Nichols, a dentist; I then magnetized his arm,
and it remained rigid for several hours after; since which time I
have fixed any part of the body, in a moment, in a perfectly immov-
able condition.

* Mental hallucination can at any time be produced on persons in
the waking state, who are recipients to the agency, with much more
power and marked results than during the mesmeric state.

“I have made persons, when perfectly awake, believe themselves
to be partaking of a good dinner; they would in their own minds
be filling their plates from empty dishes. I could successively
F2


68 Galileo’s praise of our Dr. Gilbert.


change the nature of their food, make potatoes turn into apple-
dumplings, a turkey to a leg of mutton, water ‘into brandy, sugar
into aloes, or a piece of wood into a stick of candy. In one instance
I took four persons and pressed their thumbs ; they all immediately
commenced reeling as if intoxicated; I then restored them in an
instant ; would obliterate from their memory the occurrence which
had just transpired, and alternately bring them vividly to their recol-
lection, and cause them to scream with agony on placing a piece
of money in their hands, they feeling all the torture of burning
metal when placed on their skin. I made two persons at the same
time believe themselves bottles of ginger beer; they distinctly heard
the fermentation within, and desired me with all earnestness not to
pull out the cork, for that would kill them. I made a man fancy
himself a general officer, a locomotive, &c. In fact I know not a
single condition but what may be brought about by the action of the
mind of the operator.”—p. 17.


X. Cure of a Painful and Contracted Hand with Mesmerism.*
Communicated by Dr. Elliotson, from Mr. Harrison.
Galileo wisely says of Gilbert, ‘‘I extremely admire and envy this author.
I think him worthy of the greatest praise for the many new and true observations
which he has made, to the disgrace of so many vain and fabulous authors, who
write, not from their own knowledge only, but repeat everything they hear from
the foolish and vulgar, without attempting to satisfy themselves of the same by
experience: perhaps that they may not diminish the size of their books.’”’”—
Drinkwater’s Life of Galileo, p. 18.
To Dr. Elliotson.
7, Alfred Terrace, Queen’s Road, Bayswater,
Feb. 26th, 1855.

My dear Sir,—At last I send you the case of injured
hand so rapidly restored to usefulness by mesmerism. You
should have had it long ere this for publication, had the cure
been perfect when I discontinued the employment of mes-
merism. My patient, Mrs. Kellow, of Stonehouse, near
Plymouth, and widow of Capt. Kellow, an officer in the
Royal Marines, was obliged to wait till last September for an
opportunity of renewing the treatment which rendered the
cure complete. She narrates her case herself, and readily
consented to its publication for the benefit of others.

I am, dear Sir, your’s truly,


JoHn Harrison.
J. Elliotson, Esq., M.D.


About two years and a half ago, I met with a severe
accident. At first I thought. that I had pricked my hand


* See a similar cure by Dr. Elliotson in No. XI., p. 318.


Cl


f


| |


Immediate benefit from Mesmerism. 69


with a broken needle, but it subsequently proved that the
needle was broken in my hand, which lost its usual strength
and became very stiff and painful. About a fortnight after
the accident I attempted to write, but the attempt produced
severe cramp. This was about four o’clock in the afternoon.
It seemed as if the arm was being torn from the socket, my
side even appeared affected, aud the torture was indescribable,
and continued until the next morning, when it ceased.. I
then suffered from a feeling of sickness, and all the symp-
toms of fainting without really losing consciousness. This
continued until the afternoon, when I experienced a strange
sensation in the head, yawning frequently ; and sometimes
I was without the power to do so, but annoyed with the
desire which increased with the inability to satisfy it. I began
to lose power over the jaw, which felt stiff. I then became
alarmed, felt nervous, and could not keep still. This state
of things continued until five o’clock, when I called in my
medical attendant, who extracted a piece of the broken
needle about the length of the mark within the brackets
( ). I frequently suffered from a sensation of
sickness and much nervous derangement after the extraction
of the broken piece of needle: but not from the other sensa-
tions. The second finger was rendered quite crooked, and
the hand contracted. I was obliged to keep it in a sling,
and could not use it. At times I suffered great pain, any
movement causing the veins and hand to swell considerably.
My nerves were much shattered, and I suffered from sleep-
lessness. About two months after the extraction of the piece
of needle, and when in great pain, Mr. Harrison, who was
spending the evening with us, offered to mesmerise my hand.
He did, and relieved me almost immediately of the pain, and
my finger became. more pliant. After one or two sittings I
was so relieved that I could use my hand, which before had
been useless, in knitting and working: but the exertion
caused pain and a rush of blood to the hand.

Eight days after Mr. Harrison commenced, so wonderful
had the improvement been that I was able to play rapid tunes
on the piano; but such exertion caused some stiffness. Mr.
Harrison did not continue the mesmerisation, but directed
that it should be continued. This unfortunately was not
done. I always experienced the sensation of something cold
passing over my hand when being mesmerised, and a feeling
of comfort and tranquillity both during and after mesmerisa-
tion; no sleep at the time, but great improvement in my
sleep at nights. About the middle of last August, after
having suffered much from mental anxiety, causing sleepless-


70 The cure perfect.


ness, and a most distressing tension of nerves, I went to
London, and during a fortnight my health became improved,
and my sleep was sound. Mr. Harrison seeing that my hand
was still contracted, and that the veins swelled after exertion,
which I was unable to continue for any length of time, advised
me to be mesmerised by Mons. Ricard, a powerful and expe-
rienced mesmerist. Mons. Ricard induced sleep for the first
time, and, while conscious, I experienced a warm sensation,
and as if sparks were thrown at my head. This I continued
to feel, but did not sleep during mesmerisation after the first
time. The second time he mesmerised me, I recovered the
perfect use of my finger, unaccompanied by any painful
feeling, or the swelling of the veins, redness, or fatigue.
The finger became as straight as the others, and the hand
recovered its straightness, and this after only two sittings.
While mesmerised by Mons. Ricard I always felt drowsy, and,
although I did not sleep after the first sitting, my eyes would
at times close involuntarily, and it was necessary for me to
strain them in order to get them open ; and I once felt as if
some gummy substance had caused the lids to adhere. One
afternoon I slept after being mesmerised, although strangers
were in the room. My face and hands always perspired very
freely. My attendance on Mons. Ricard continued with
much irregularity for two months, when he left town. Some
of my old sleeplessness and restlessness returned on the dis-
continuance of mesmerisation. I was too little acquainted
with the subject to attribute this to the right cause at the
time.

My hand has continued ever since the second mesmerisa-
tion by Mons. Ricard, perfectly straight and free from pain,
swelling, and inconvenience after exerting it.

7, Phoenix Place, Stonehouse, Plymouth.


XI. Fatalism and Free-will considered in themselves, and in
relation with Phrenology. By M. A. Castie, M.D.,
Montmorency, near Paris.

“ But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call heresy, so


worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the
law and in the prophets.’’—Acts of the Apostles, xxiv. 14.


Parr I.


A PHRENOLOGIST, as any other thinker on the subject of
man’s nature, may hold fatalist and materialist doctrines,
but it does not follow, because some phrenologists are fatalists


Phrenology leaves Fatalism & Materialism as it finds them. 71


and materialists, that all are necessarily such. It will ever
be found that the phrenologist who upholds these doctrines
has not deduced his convictions primarily from phrenology
itself, but, accepting the principles of this science, connects
them with his previously-formed opinions.

Whoever impartially investigates these questions, must
be convinced that they remain just where they were before
the existence of Gall’s system.* Indeed if fatalism attaches
necessarily to phrenology, it must do so equally to all sys-
tems of philosophy which admit natural diversities of cha-
racter among men. For the question of the existence of
cerebral organs as media for the manifestation of these dif-
ferent propensities does not change the fact which the simplest
observation sustains, of the diversity of primitive mental en-
dowment.

Few men, whatever may be their theories on the subject
of necessity, are really fatalists, that is practically such.
There are few who are not at times conscious of choosing be-
tween alternatives, and the act of choosing implies that man
believes himself not to be passive in the general movement
of things.

On the other hand, the idea of absolute freedom is no less
fallacious than that of absolute necessity. Both extremes are
dogmatic. Absolute freedom cannot be conceived by the
finite mind, whereas relative freedom can.

Free-will, in an absolute sense, implies what science
rejects as impossible, viz., something free from laws. What
can free agency mean, indeed, but the power to act unim-
pelled? And an unimpelled will is a contradiction of terms,
since will cannot be conceived without motive. Will, then,
being in relation with motive, is governed by Jaws, conse-
quently is not free.t


* This is asserted by all sound cerebral physiologists.

‘“ If these are facts,” (the correspondence between the heads of endless well-
known individuals and their mental character,) says Dr. Elliotson, ‘‘ all objec-
tions on the score of fatalism and materialism are unworthy of attention. Because
no rational or religious person believes that one truth can contradict another: or
that a truth can lead to anything but good. But, in reality, phrenology gives no
additional support to such views. It leaves all questions of fatalism and mate-
rialism where it found them.’”’ Human Physiology, p. 398.—Zoist.

+ ‘‘ Our liberty,’’ says Voltaire, in his charming article on Liberty, ‘ consists
in the power of doing what our will requires of absolute necessity.’’—Diction-
naire Philosophique.

‘‘ Every thought, feeling, and will, is merely cerebral action : when we will,
this cerebral action results of necessity from something which is sufficient to
excite it. Everything in nature has a cause; and everything or effect results of
necessity from the cause, in the circumstances. We cannot will without a cause,
and this cause produces the result, and makes us to will, of necessity. When


Man is necessitated and free.


It is this tendency of philosophers and theologians to deal
with the absolute,—to seek to express what is beyond our
intelligence and the power of language, which has rendered
so abstruse certain philosophical questions, and none more
than that we are considering.

Metaphysicians and divines will continue to hold arbitrary
and irreconcilable doctrines with regard to man’s nature, so
long as they prefer their own speculations to the study of that
nature by the method adopted in all scientific researches, viz.,
that of strict observation and induction. By this method it
will be proved that man is both necessitated and free,—that
neither his freedom nor his dependency can be absolute.
The task of the philosopher is to point out the conditions
which determine the ascendancy of the one over the other.

In order, then, to study will in connexion with motive,
he must first view it under its simplest form, namely, as in-
stinctive will, (a term we use in contradistinction to the higher
manifestations, as free or rational will,) and to this end must
trace it to its origin, as evidenced in animals, in whom we
first see beings influenced by motives.*

If to recognize in animals a germ of the most elevated
human faculty be revolting to some minds, it can be so only
from ignorance and mistaken pride; for if certain satirists
have levelled man almost with the brute creation by defining
him as a “ speaking animal” and an “ animal clothed,” it is
not the less true that by observing his points of contact with
inferior beings we discover most clearly in what and how
much his nature differs from their’s.

Animals have desires, but none which can be called
moral, or which tend to perfect their nature. Their instincts
tend no farther than to the preservation of their existence
and of their kind.¢ Instruction has but limited influence
on them, and adds nothing to their happiness.


we control an inclination of our brain, some stronger motive in our brain, some
stronger motive excited in the brain of necessity, by some causes, makes us of
necessity to will to control it—to resist it, and the stronger wish succeeds. Our
inclinations depend in health both upon the excitability and strength of the
respective portions of the drain, native and from mental training, and upon the
influence which they experience at the time from external causes of excitement :
and in disease upon all the causes of disease that can act upon the brain.”—Dr.
Elliotson, in No. XII., p. 418.—Zois¢.

* It is usual for writers in France to say man and animals. But man is as
really an animal as a horse or a fly ; and therefore in our Journal we always write
man and other animals, or man and brutes. Man is an animal, and all animals
but man are brutes.—Zoist.

+ Brutes have attachment to individuals of even other species than their own.
They likewise sometimes exhibit benevolence : a strong dog will sometimes pre-
vent another from injuring a small one, or another brute from injuring a child.
An account appeared a year or two ago of a horse that plunged into the water to
save a man.— Zoist.


os RY


i TSS,


Points of identity between man and brutes. 73


Man, on the contrary, modifies man by instruction, as
generation does generation. He has, moreover, as one of
his peculiar prerogatives, a spontaneously progressive intellect,
and an indefinite expansibility of feeling. Thus, present hap-
piness can be such to him only on the condition that he
believes in its continuation. The more elevated his nature,
the more the future is mingled with the present in all his
aspirations. It is this very capacity in man of indefinite
expansion and culture, which constitutes the law of human
progress.

Nothing analogous can be observed in animals. They
have no notion, as they have no desire or power, of changing
their primitive condition. When such change takes place, it
is through the agency of man; and, his influence ceasing,
they fall back to their former state. Neither the past nor
the future exist for animals; they know only the present.
The foresight and memory which they undoubtedly manifest
at times, are rarely aught but a result of the instinct of self-
preservation, or at most, of rudimentary intellectual faculties.

If such wide distinctions exist between the animal and
the human species, why not recognize also the points of
analogy between them? Is it not folly to deny what on exa-
mination is undeniable, that they are not formed on totally
different principles, either as regards physical structure or
mental endowment ?

In fact, the study of man shews his system to compre-
hend all the elements of inferior creations. He feels, hears,
sees, by the same organic arrangement as animals. What
are termed his inferior instincts, his affections even, are found
in animals, Courage, cunning, maternal love, fear, exist in
them, and manifest themselves by a cerebral organization
analogous to ours. A like analogy may be traced between
their intelligence, however rudimentary and narrow its sphere
of action, and our own. It is difficult to conceive how Buffon
and other intelligent writers could limit the minds of animals
to sensation, denying them any kind of ideas; for nothing
would appear more evident than the fact of their having not
only ideas, but even, as Condillac maintains, a certain degree
of reasoning power.* However limited these may be, they


* “ Brutes, the object of all the contempt of the ignorance and pride of man,
have so many things in common with him that naturalists are sometimes at a loss
to say where the brute ends and man begins. Brutes are engendered, born, and
nourished according to the same laws as man: their muscles, vessels, bowels,
and nerves are nearly the same and perform the same functions: they have the
same senses and use them in the same manner : they are subject to the same emo-
tions,—joy, sorrow, fear and terror, hope, envy, jealousy, rage: they have most
part of our inclinations : they are excited to preservation like ourselves : they love


74 Superiority of the human being.


would be recognized as intellectual phenomena, if manifested
in children or in men to the same degree.

The difference between man and animals lies however not
only in the higher development of man’s faculties, but in the
addition of new and superior mental elements. These new
faculties do not supersede those possessed in common with
inferior beings; they exalt these, and their mission is to fit
man for higher destinies.

Thus the instincts acquire a wider range of action in pro-
portion as they unite themselves with moral feelings, and,
when these two classes of faculties are enlightened by intel-
ligence, they become unlimited in desire, and ingenious in
the means of procuring satisfaction.*


and take care of their young: they are attached to one another and to man: are
courageous and boldly defend themselves and their’s against their enemies: like
us they support themselves with vegetables and other animals: they have the
feeling of property: and, while some are cruel and sanguinary, others have
pleasure in merely stealing ; they are sensible to blame and disapprobation: they
are mild, docile, and compassionate, and assist each other: some are vicious,
indocile, intractable, obstinate: they remember kindness and injuries, and are
grateful or spiteful: they are cunning and circumspect: they judge of the future
by the past, and take necessary precautions against threatening danger: they
correct their judgment and their failures by experience: they have an idea of
time and foresee its periodical return: they possess memory: they reflect and
compare: they hesitate and determine according to the most powerful motive :
they are capable of a degree of individual perfectibility : they have the power of
abstraction : they communicate by means of articulate language or gestures their
ideas, wants, and projects: they acquire sagacity and knowledge through circum-
stances which compel them to be more shrewd and cautious: they balance the
evil consequences of certain actions which they recollect, with their present
desires: they carry out plans considered and agreed upon among many indivi-
duals: they are well acquainted with each other: they sing or are sensible to
music: they have wonderful local memory and they travel: many construct:
some even count: their actions often display moral sentiment or sense of justice
and injustice, &c, We should be almost tempted to say with Lactantius, that,
except the religious feeling and the knowledge of the existence of God, there is
no moral or intellectual faculty the first germs of which are not found among
some or other of them. If this comparison is thought to degrade man, I answer
with Pascal that, if it is dangerous to make man see too clearly how near he is to
brutes without pointing out to him his grandeur, or to make him see his grandeur
without his lowness, it is still more dangerous to let him remain ignorant of both.
We shall not the less recognize in this work the distinguished place which the
Author of nature has assigned to him: his real advantages are brilliant enough
to establish his superiority of themselves without our having recourse to what is
repugnant to experience and natural history. The true detractors of the human
race are those who fancy that the dignity of man must be maintained by denying
the intelligence of brutes. St. Gregory of Nyssa (de hominis opificio, Bazilie,
1567: ch. xviii.) and St. Augustin (Lid. de vera religione) long since pointed
out the necessity of comparing man with brutes.’’ Gall, Fonctions du Cerveau,
t.i., p. 56.—Zoist.

* “ The being who has the most faculties, the greatest equipoise of his facul-
ties, and the most knowledge, has the greatest range of liberty. If a person acts
wickedly or absurdly from hearing necessity advocated, it is because certain mo-
tives become extinguished in him and his range is contracted. It results that we
should educate and give as many and as good motives as possible; and, when we


Free-will is the power to decide between motives. 75


Will in man is instinctive when, as in children or animals,
it is employed to satisfy desire, uninfluenced by reason. So
exercised, it is but blind or impulsive.

But when two desires, tending in opposite directions, ma-
nifest themselves simultaneously, and when intelligence inter-
venes to weigh the one against the other and to judge, there
exist the conditions for the exercise of rational or free-will.

It follows from these observations that will, of that kind
which we have distinguished as instinctive, differs in man and
animals only in so far as the impulses differ from which it
springs. But in man only does will acquire, by the reaction
of intelligence upon instinctive and moral feeling, the character
which justifies its being termed free or rational.

To consider free-will, however, otherwise than as the
power to decide between motives, would be to admit, as has
been already said, a power different from all others recognized
by science—a power subject to no law, or, as Gall expressed
it, “a phenomenon without a cause.”

None of the examples chosen by writers on this subject,
to prove that free-will is a power independent of the other
mental elements, bear the slightest analogies. It is advanced,
for instance, that a man may act with the pure intention of
proving the freedom of his will; or, what is considered a still
more conclusive argument, that he can and often does act in
opposition to the solicitation of his passions, even at the cost
of pain. Examples are not wanting of men who have suffered
torture and death rather than betray a friend or a party or
act against the dictates of conscience.

But, in the first case, is it not evident that the “ pure in-
tention ” itself constitutes the motive? In the other cases, it
is equally evident that alternatives are present to the mind—
that these alternatives involve motives, the strongest of which
determines the will. If death be preferred to infamy, it is


punish, we should punish not from presuming that we have a right to condemn,
but for the purpose of giving additional motives to good conduct, where there
has clearly not been enough of them.’’—Dr. Elliotson, Human Physiology,
p. 409.

‘* B. My dog possesses as much free-will as myself: he necessarily has the
will to run if he sees a hare; and the power to run if his legs are in good order.
I am therefore not above my dog: you reduce me to the state of a brute.

‘‘ 4. These are the poor sophisms of the poor sophists who educated you.
You are sadly off in having liberty like your dog. Do you not eat like him, &c. ?
Would you smell otherwise than with your nose? Would you have liberty dif-
ferently from your dog ?

‘“‘ B, But I have a very reasoning soul, and my dog hardly reasons. He has
simple ideas almost only ; while I possess a thousand metaphysical ideas.

‘* 4. Well, you have a thousand times more liberty than it has: that is, you
have a thousand times more power of thought than he.’’—Voltaire, ibid.—Zoist.


76 Intelligence an indispensable condition of freedom.


because the fear of death is less strong than the love of good
and the horror of ill. And, if a man resist the impulse of
strong passions, he decides impelled by passions still more
powerful, though not so tumultuous. The passions are less
tumultuous in their nature, in proportion as the faculties
from which they spring ascend in the mental hierarchy, in
which the place held by each is proportionate to the range or
extent of its application. Thus each faculty claims a higher
title of superiority* according as it tends to place man in
harmonious relation with a greater number of his fellow crea-
tures ; and, the larger its sphere of action, the more numerous
are its points of contact ‘with, and the greater its power of
eliciting the concurrence of, the intellect. In other words, in
proportion as the faculties rise in the scale, they lose in the
instinctive, and gain in the inéellectual element.

For instance, Approbativeness or the desire to please,
arouses the intelligence more effectually than does Amative-
ness. It awakens examination into the consequences of acts
and represses in well-constituted and educated minds the
tendency to indulge in brutal propensities, to which those
having less Approbativeness and less intelligence would yield
without restraint.

Again, suppose inordinate Pride opposed by conscience, or
the instinct of equity ;+ the first manifestation of this con-
science is a vague impression of pain, of which the intelli-
gence seeks the cause. Memory, imagination, analysis and
comparison, develope a distinct intellectual appreciation of
duty, or of the equitable relations of one man to another.
The whole intelligence, being thus awakened by conscience
(with which it has a closer natural affinity than with Self-
esteem), finds arguments which neutralize or dissipate pride.

I have endeavoured to establish that free-will is impossible
in all cases without an intellectual appreciation of motive.
But the reaction of intelligence upon the impulsions does
not yet confer the power ¢o act freely; it constitutes merely
an indispensable condition of freedom. The intelligence may


* The faculties are subject to the Jaw of the series, a fundamental law of the
human mind, no less than of the external world.

+ ‘‘I must differ from Dr. Spurzheim in regarding conscientiousness and jus-
tice as the same. For conscientiousness may relate to matters in which justice is
not concerned. The social organs of Love of Offspring, Friendship, Benevolence,
Veneration, when they have been disregarded in those who have them large, feel
reproaches of conscience no less than these are felt when Justice has been disre-
garded by those who have its organs large. Conscientiousness relates no more to
Justice, than to Friendship, Veneration, &c. The proper term, I conceive, is
justice, honesty, fairness, and surely this must depend upon a particular sense or
faculty.”’ Dr. Elliotson, No. XII., p. 466.—Zoist.


Intelligence and executive power in rational Free-will. 77


conceive and indicate most clearly, after a due balance of
motives, the manner in which will should act, and yet the will
may remain passive.

To take an example:—The intelligence points out the
advantages of following a certain line of conduct, but, if
courage be requisite for doing so, the decision of the intel-
ligence will be put into execution only if the individual be
possessed of an amount of courage adequate to the task.

Of the elements of which courage is composed, one espe-
cially is indispensable to the realization of the elections of
judgment. This faculty is Firmness, and strict analysis shews
it to be the principal executive power of the will.

Rational or free-will would appear then to present itself
under three inseparable aspects :— ;

Ist. Instinctive impulsion or motive ;

2nd. Intellectual option ; and,

3rd. Executive power.

It is requisite then in the first place that there should
exist in the mind conflicting motives of action, for, when
human acts spring from instinctive feeling alone, uninfluenced
by reflexion, there is, it is evident, no scope for the exercise
of free-will, as there is no option between alternatives. When
this first condition exists, rational will manifests itself in pro-
portion to the development and culture of the intellectual
faculties, and the support they derive in the execution of their
decisions from Firmness.

The necessity for this special power of execution is most
strikingly displayed in those frequent mental situations where
the superior moral sentiments and the intelligence are not
alone sufficient to repress the violence of some energetic pas-
sion impatient of satisfaction.

A gambler for instance, who reflects on leaving the gam-
ing-table upon the certain ruin which awaits him, and re-
cognizes the illusiveness of the hope which his own peculiar
character leads him continually to indulge, makes for the
hundredth time the resolution to reform his habits. His
duty to those who depend upon him, dignity and other supe-
rior feelings, may all dictate the line of conduct he should
pursue; but to-morrow he abandons himself anew to the
passion he repudiated yesterday.

In this case and all others where the mind is vacillating
and wanting in consistency of purpose, there is inadequacy
of the principle of resolution (firmness) to resist the force of


we passions by which the decision of the intelligence is com-
ated.


Whereas if the degree of firmness were sufficient, it would


78 Wili not free unless there is a choice of motives.


find the very condition necessary for its manifestation in
the intellectual conviction of the advisableness of one line of
conduct rather than another.

In selecting examples of instinctive and of rational will,
we must distinguish those cases where an absorbing and con-
stant passion takes possession of the mind, whose faculties
are all directed towards finding its satisfaction, from those in
which the mind, drawn in opposite directions by conflicting
passions, chooses a line of conduct by means of the intelli-
gence, and employs Firmness to maintain its decision.

It is not easy, however, even to the acutest observer, to
distinguish between acts of rational and of instinctive will.

For instance, a man may act in the most energetic and
consistent manner, follow under difficulties the most inflexible
line of conduct, and yet, if he merely obey an impulse which
meets with no opposition within himself—if intelligence have
not been called upon to decide between two modes of action,
there is will, but no election or choice, consequently no free-
will.

It results from these considerations that human will is
never free in the sense that it can be independent of motive
—that it is free insomuch as there is power to choose between
motives.

Both the votaries of absolute necessity and of absolute
liberty have therefore argued partly in truth and partly in
error; since fatality and free-will are relative terms.


Part II.


If the view taken in the preceding pages be correct, free-
will must be ranged among the compound powers of the mind,
and, like all the other parts of our mental constitution, it will
differ in degree in individuals. There are men who, from
the primitive constitution of their mind, act almost invariably
from impulse, and have not even the notion of self-control.
Others, though enlightened by intelligence, are themselves
incapable of acting according to its dictates.

We thus anticipate one of the strongest objections brought
against phrenology, namely, that it admits the possibility of
a want of equilibrium among the instinctive, moral, and
intellectual faculties of an individual—of a too great prepon-
derance of some faculties over others. Thus, it is urged,
the sentiment and consequently the idea of right and wrong
is made to depend on an organ which may be so poorly deve-


~ eee
eee


A fact being established, its consequences must be accepted. 79


loped as to be easily reduced to inaction by the superior force
of other more egoistic organs, if these chance to be more fully
developed ; so that the robber or assassin is not responsible
for his actions, or at least is responsible only as he possesses
a little more or less cerebral matter.

This objection appears at first sight to have some weight :
but it must be remembered that phrenology, like every other
science, is based upon observation of facts, and that, when these
facts are established, the consequences which result from them
must be accepted without hesitation.

If those who would reject phrenology on the score of
fatalism, and who deem the objection just stated to be para-
mount, will follow my argument, they will find that the
language of facts is so conclusive that no arbitrary theory
can hold against it.

Examined from this point of view, it will be found that
phrenology, so far as it recognizes the various aptitudes of
different persons, and even the radical moral and intellectual
inferiority of some to others, advances nothing new—does
but admit.a state of things which the commonest observation
ean verify, and for which this doctrine is in no way respon-
sible. Like every other philosophical observer, the phreno-
logist analyzes the facts which come under his notice; and is
it not an undeniable fact that men exist who denote by their
conduct an almost entire absence of all moral and social con-
science ?

Instead of ignoring such truths, the phrenologist analyzes
and compares the phenomena presented to him by human
nature, and is led by the strictest process of observation and
reasoning to a theory which enables him to propose practical
measures of amelioration.

This positive method of studying human nature is the
only one by which the philanthropist can hope to discover a
remedy for the perverse manifestation of man’s instincts and
the tardy development of what is good in him.

If this be true, and it is truth of the clearest demonstra-
tion, how little do those self-styled defenders of morality and
religion understand the best interests of mankind, who would
check the investigation of facts, and deny their existence with-
out examination, merely because they are not in accordance
with received doctrines !

But the truths proclaimed by phrenology, no less than
innumerable other scientific discoveries now recognized, but
long denied and declared impious, will sooner or later meet
with universal acceptance.

The highest interests of morality and religion cannot be


80 Phrenology requires rational will and responsibility.


better served than by the increase and diffusion of the know-
ledge of natural laws, and, above all, of those which more imme-
diately govern man in his twofold nature, material and spiritual.

The mind has doubtless laws peculiar to itself, but, in the
terrestrial condition of man, they are never observed to act
independently of physical and organic laws.* The mind mani-
fests itself very differently through a diseased or ill organized
brain and through one which is healthy and well endowed

This truth is indeed universally admitted in extreme cases,
for no one thinks of denying the connexion between madness
and idiocy and a diseased or defective condition of the brain.

The phrenologist, in tracing a like connexion between
vicious or deficient characters and certain conformations of
the brain, does but apply the same observation of the mutual
dependence of organic and mental laws.

But his task does not end here ;—he maintains, and brings
facts to the support of his assertion, that man has the power
to create the conditions necessary for the harmonious, i. e., the
providential, manifestation of these laws, and hence proclaims
the possibility of human progress as a direct effect of human
intelligence and will.

Thus when a brain presents a deficiency of those organs
on which the higher manifestations+ of the human mind de-
pend, if it can be shewn (as we maintain) that such deviation
1s traceable, not to hazard or a caprice of nature, but to an
infringement of natural laws both moral and physical, are we
not inevitably led to the conclusion that the means and the
condition inflexibly necessary for the progress of humanity lie
in implicit obedience to laws ; and, in insisting on this con-
clusion, does not phrenology recognize at once the rational
will of man and his responsibility ?}


* Except perhaps in some cases of somnambulism, in which known organic
laws appear to be suspended.*

+ I will consider more at length in a future article why men are more or less
favourably endowed from their birth. This inequality may appear to some a cry-
ing injustice. But I think all truly philosophical minds will agree that the idea
of injustice in the Supreme Being must be rejected as absurd and impossible.

Notwithstanding its close connexion with the subject of the text, this question
must be left aside for the moment, as purely speculative, for we are dealing now
with only odserrable facts and the consequences to be drawn from them.

} Responsibility appears to us to be nothing more than being consciously
liable to the established consequences of our own deeds.—Zoist.


* In the case of clairvoyance we should say that some natural laws are sus-
pended, were it in our power to declare that these are natural laws: but the facts
of clairvoyance prove that certain facts which have been regarded as natural laws
are not so in all circumstances. He who has not witnessed or learned clairvoy-
ance is imperfectly acquainted with the facts of animal nature, and judges from
limited knowledge.— Zoist.


Bad circumstances deteriorate a good development. 81


Responsibility in many cases doubtless rests chiefly with the
individual, but the investigation of social facts shews that most
frequently it attaches to society in general,—to the ignorance
or negligence of the conditions necessary to the normal deve-
lopment of every character. The justice of this remark will
need no demonstration to those who have reflected on the
mutual dependence, the solidarité, of all the members of the
human family, and particularly of those who, from necessity
or by common consent, are in more immediate contact with
each other, as citizens of the same nation, or members of the
same family. But to illustrate my meaning I will give an
example.

Behold a child gifted with that beauty of feature and that
cerebral organization which impress us justly with belief in
his moral excellence and his intellectual superiority. The
child is stolen from his parents by gipsies, or wandering
mountebanks, who immediately commence ‘his education in
vice by initiating him in the art of begging and stealing. He
is rewarded or punished according to the ability he displays,
and the success which attends his efforts.. Thus his early life
passes in misery, and in the continual and exclusive exercise
of those egoistical feelings which constant suffering awakens.
The very faculties which, well directed, would have contributed
to develope the sentiment of honour, and a noble ambition,
are enlisted in the service of the vilest passions and the most
criminal acts. The intelligence, always limited when unaided
by instruction, undergoes a like perversion.

Can we regard this being as responsible in the same de-
gree,—has society a right to demand as much from him as if
he had been educated in a rich and intelligent family, and a
career opened to him in which he might have been useful to
his fellow-citizens ?

Arrived at manhood, he unites himself with a woman of
the class into which he has fallen. A new generation arises,
in which the native type of the father is lost. The want of
exercise of the highest faculties of his mind has reduced the
corresponding portions of the brain toa state of atrophy almost
beyond the reach of excitement, while those portions appro-
priated to the mere animal instincts, being alone kept in play,
have augmented in energy and in volume.

His child inherits this perverted character, represented by
a corresponding formation of the brain. ‘The coronal and
frontal regions are depressed, and the occipital region in-
creased.

This modification becomes still more striking in a third

VOL, XIII. G


82 Present state of society unfavourable to high development.


generation, and thus ignorance and misery gradually change
the cerebral conformation, and with it the character of man.

We live in a state of society which, whatever may be its
superiority compared with past times, is still characterised by
incapacity to give a fair degree of satisfaction to the first
physical and moral necessities of a large proportion of its
members. Such being the case, the very conditions unhappily
prevail in which the most egoistical and the least social of
the faculties are kept mest constantly in play. The farther
we descend into what are called, with sad truth, the lower
orders of society, the more plainly do we see how rare are the
occasions in which the highest faculties of the mind can find
exercise ; and while these lie dormant, the lower instincts even,
wanting in their due counterpoise and complement, cannot
attain to the exercise of their highest functions, and not only
so, but, being themselves continually and painfully repressed,
they assume gradually the form of the lowest egoism.

The result of this state of things, continuing from gene-
ration to generation, cannot fail to strike every observer in
visiting the various quarters of a great city. The difference
in the physiognomy and general appearance of those who live
in dark and stagnant streets and unventilated houses, and of
those who enjoy a certain ease, and dwell in the more salubri-
ous parts of the town, is as striking as the difference in their
mode of life and their social position. They almost appear
to be of different races !

In the presence of these facts,* no observer truly desirous
to find a remedy for such evils will refuse to recognize that
their immediate cause lies in the want of adaptation of the
material and social medium, to which the miserable and igno-
rant are perforce confined, to the necessities (physical and
moral) of human nature.

If the example I have given above be generalized and
carried out into its farthest consequences, it will easily be
understood how centuries of slavery or servitude, of misery,
ignorance, and the absence of all moral and intellectual cul-
ture, have affected to a deplorable degree the cerebral organ-
ization of entire classes of society.

At the same time it is true we may seek almost in vain,
even in the most favored class of society, for a cerebral


* Should any of my readers be unacquainted with the valuable and popular
work of Mr. George Combe, The Constitution of Man, I cannot too strenuously
recommend its attentive study, as a means of acquiring much important infor-
mation on physical and moral laws in relation to human welfare.


re


i
¥


ote Mat


Few of any class have scope for high morality. 83


organization which is not yet far removed from the type of
excellence to which we believe humanity may attain; nay,
farther, that very defective organizations are frequent in
the classes which have never suffered privation, and have
had all the advantages of education. But these facts are
referable to the same law of procreation on which I have in-
sisted. In the more favored portions of society, as well as in
the disinherited, the highest moral sentiments are too fre-
quently ill-direeted or repressed. How few, indeed, are the
careers open to men in the actual state of society, which ac-
cord strictly with elevated principles of morality. Conscience,
for example, finds but little scope in most of the pursuits of life,
Sor, were it listened to, its dictates would too often be in oppo-
sition with worldly interests. If then, a merchant, a specula-
tor, a lawyer, repress habitually the activity of his conscience
or his benevolence, the organs of these faculties will become
inert, and in the next generation will present themselves less
developed.*

The native depravity which cannot be denied in some
characters, and the want of equilibrium so commonly found
among the different parts of the brain, is ever referable to
this law: and those, who would infer from such facts a want
of justice and goodness in the Creator, have but an obscure
perception of the freedom, and consequent responsibility, with
which man is invested.

Let those, who accept scientific truth with less unwilling-
ness when supported by authority, remember that the text
our argument may be found in the words enounced by
Moses :—

“The Lord thy God . . . visits the sins of the fathers
upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of
them that hate him, and shews mercy unto thousands in them
that love him and keep his commandments.”

To Physiologists my remarks on natural laws contain
nothing new; but I would call the attention of those, who
occupy themselves with the mental nature of man, to the ne-
cessity of a scientific investigation of the influence of matter
upon mind,

So far as the admission of the phrenological facts I have
presented leads to the conclusion that man, like all other
created things, is subject to the laws of universal nature—so


* It may sometimes be observed that qualities are inherited, not immediately,
but after the lapse of a generation ; but this fact in no way invalidates the law of
the gradual modification of cerebral organization (for good or for evil) by pro-
creation,


G2


84 Study may be prayer, knowledge grace, obedience is worship.


far I grant that phrenology is fatalist. But facts are fatalist
in the same sense. Who will maintain indeed that man is
free not to be born with certain native tendencies, not to ex-
perience hunger, thirst, the inclemency of the seasons, or the
debilitating effects of privation and suffering—that he is free
not to die?

But if, by his very constitution, he lies under these neces-
sities, he has also a special sphere of liberty. He is free to
seek the causes of the evils from which he suffers, and to
apply his intelligence to their removal. He is free to use, for
his happiness and the amelioration of his condition, the riches
which nature offers him with a bountiful hand. He is free,
by the study of his own nature, and of his relations with the
material world, and with his fellow-creatures, to discover and
place himself in the normal conditions of his being, thus
making himself a co-operator with God in the work of his
own elevation.

In recognizing that man possesses a spontaneously pro-
gressive intellect, we have declared our faith in his power and
his will. The law of progress (synthesis of all others) is the
law of humanity, as of each man individually, and, in order to
place ourselves in harmony with this law, we must seek, by
the light of science, the conditions necessary for the normal
and integral development of all the faculties of each indivi-
dual, and consequently for the well-being of humanity.

Our doctrine then, while shewing how and by what man’s
liberty is circumscribed, is far from being fatalist, as is the
teaching of those who, while proclaiming his absolute liberty,
maintain that sorrow is the lot of man, sin the very essence
of his nature, and that he must await the grace of God to
bring his soul to good.

Who thinks otherwise thinks with me, that man is an
active being, endowed by the Creator with intelligence and
power to place himself in harmony with the general plan of
nature, and be happy.

Such doctrine as I maintain is not irreligious—it elevates
man by the consciousness of his responsibility and by the
aspirations to which it gives rise, it teaches faith in the pro-
vidence of God, and shews that study may be prayer, that
knowledge may be grace, and that obedience is worship.


( 8 )


XII. Swedenborg and The Zoist again.


‘* What thought so wild, what airy dream so light,
That will not prompt a theorist to write !
What act so prevalent, what proof so strong,
That will convince him his attempt is wrong !”
The Rev. Gzorce Crasse, Library.


TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.


GENTLEMEN,— It would seem that our good friends of the
New Church still feel themselves somewhat aggrieved by the
treatment which their founder has received in your pages.
My last article on this subject in the January Number has
evoked a reply from the New Churchman, a monthly journal
of the Swedenborgian body, published in London. The
respondent, “ Gabriel,” asserts in the first place, that the
‘rapping movement of the American spiritualists cannot be
pervaded by Swedenborgian doctrines, because the rappists
believe in the spirits who are their seeming interlocutors,
against which Swedenborg, in his Diary, has strongly cau-
tioned his followers in these words :-—


“Spirits narrate things wholly false, and lie. When spirits
begin to speak with man, care should be taken not to believe them,
for almost everything they say is made up by them, and they lie;
so that if it were permitted them to relate what heaven is, and how
things are in heaven, they would tell so many falsehoods, and with
strong assertion, that man would be astonished ; wherefore it was not
permitted to me, when spirits were speaking, to have any belief in
what they stated. They love to feign. Whatever may be the topic
spoken of, they think they know it, and form different opinions about
it, altogether as if they knew; and if a man listens and believes,
they insist, and in various ways deceive and seduce.”


Now it really is a pity that clever men should commit
themselves by writing on a subject without having previously
studied it. Even from my articles in the January and April
Numbers for 1854, “Gabriel” might have discovered that
the rappists admit their spiritual friends to be the most
shameless liars and counterfeits that ever imposed on the
credulity of erring mortals by the pretence of a God-
commissioned errand. Not only have the American spi-
ritualists discovered this, but they also quote the very words
of Swedenborg, given above, as a justification of their scep-
ticism in reference to much which they hear from their
ghostly comforters. To be sure, as the Baron himself be-
lieved that some angels were at least occasionally veracious,
aud that one spirit, whom he conceived to be the Lord, might


86 Gabriel assumes the very point in question :


be implicitly relied on, so do the rappists also believe that
they can discriminate between the false and the true, the real
and the apparent, in their heavenly guides. But why has not
“Gabriel” discovered all this for himself? How is it that
he has presumed to write on a subject wherewith his remarks
demonstrate that his acquaintance is not merely superficial
and secondhand, but absolutely nil.

In his second paragraph, “Gabriel” attacks what he is
pleased to call the “ strong point” of my letter to the Editor
of the Intellectual Repository, where I had observed,—


“The evidence of Professor Bush proves a manifest similarity
between the fundamentals of Swedenborgianism and Behmenism, and
the order of sequence will, I suppose, determine their respective claims
to be primal or derivative.”


To this very plain statement, what is the reply of the
New Churchman’s correspondent? After simply denying
what my statement and the paper of Alfred Roffe clearly
prove, an agreement in many essential points between the
two illustrious mystics, he thus proceeds :—


** But granting, for the sake of argument, that the fundamental
doctrines of Swedenborg and Behmen were the same, what then?
Mr. Jackson says Behmen having lived and written before Swedenborg,
therefore Swedenborg owed his ideas to Behmen.. The absurdity
of this conclusion may be made evident from this. Suppose a tra-
veller one hundred years ago had gone to Egypt, had seen Pompey’s
Pillar, had taken its altitude and described its proportions, and left
the record of them in his journal, and supposing I had been in Egypt
in 1844, had seen Pompey’s Pillar, and had described in like manner
its height and appearance, and had published them in my journal,
would Mr. Jackson say of my description that it was a derivation
from the description of the traveller who had been my predecessor
by a century, and whose journal I had never read? Yet absurd as
would be this assertion in relation to natural things, it is quite as
absurd in relation to spiritual things, which are as firm and definite
realities as aught on earth. If my measurements and description of
the Egyptian pillar agree with my predecessor, there would hence
be a good reason for Mr. Jackson’s believing in the truthfulness
of both ; but such coincidences in relation to spiritual facts seem to
have the reverse effect upon his mind.”


Now does not “Gabriel” perceive that he has here af-
forded us a most flagrant example of that petititio principii
to which one-sided theologians are beyond all others so noto-
riously prone? That two people may see and describe the
same pillar independently of each other, is quite certain—
the actual existence of the said pillar being granted, and con-
stituting, in short, a datum of no mean moment for the


en ee


Co ne Seg


¥
+
-
%


Aes
Arse


dnd regards Swedenborg’s fancies as revelations. 87


solution of the problem, a premise without which affirmation
were impossible. But this actual existence of his spiritual
pillar is, in the case of the seer, the very thing to be proved,
is that whereof all diversely-conditioned minds very rationally
doubt, and on which therefore the whole force of whatever
evidence may be at command should be concentrated. To
base the argument, therefore, on such an assumption, is to
defy every rule and example of dialectics, from the Stagyrite
to Thomas Aquinas, or even to His Grace the Archbishop of
Dublin. Alas! it is precisely this same question of the ex-
istence or non-existence of the Baron’s spiritual world,
whether it, and manifold similar revelations, be God-authenti-
cated verities, or mere shadows and figments of overwrought
and diseased imaginations; it is, we say, precisely this, that
we so urgently want to have definitively settled—not, how-
ever, by the assertion of “ Gabriel,” but something far more
cogent and convincing.

My poor postscript is then quoted, and the following tre-
mendous flagellation administered to its unfortunate author.


‘After this, what can we think of Mr. Jackson? He will assert
anything rather than admit that, in ignorance, he had made a mis-
take. He over-estimates immensely the influence and diffusion of
Behmen’s ideas, to serve his purpose; and, that the infinitesimal
portion of his influence that might be received by Swedenborg, pro-
duced or modified his doctrines, is preposterous. Nothing but the
defence of a foregone conclusion could lead to such an absurd asser-
tion. If the canons of criticism are such as Mr. Jackson affirms,
all we can say is, they want mending. Be it remarked, however,
that Swedenborg’s revelations are not speculations, so in their case
the canon is not applicable.”


Truly, if “brevity be the soul of wit,” the foregoing
paragraph must be admitted to superabound in that most
desirable quality, for a greater quantity of assertions and
opinions was certainly never before compressed within so
small a compass, ‘ Swedenborg’s revelations are not specu-
lations.” Alas! most credent but illogical “ Gabriel,” dost
thou not perceive that this is the very point in dispute?
Were the doctrines propounded and the visions described by
this most learned but fanciful philosopher, revelations or no
revelations, “light from heaven” or the ignis fatuus of a
once great and gifted mind, tending chaoswards in its decline
and fall? But granting them to be quasi revelations, are
they on this account superior to all the canons of criticism?
Are we then forbidden to try the spirits? If so, the Koran
and the book of Mormon are invulnerable, and the rhymes
of Johanna Southcote may successfully. defy investigation !


ee ee ed


88 Does not know that ecstasy is not preternatural.


But enough of this. If our friend “ Gabriel” should ever
want an additional instance of “a foregone conclusion” de-
fended by unfounded assumptions and baseless assertions,
we commend him to a reperusal of his own lucid article, in
which deduction is defied, and logical sequences are ignored,
to an extent somewhat astounding to all but readers of the
New Churchman.

When we find “ Gabriel” informing us, that Swedenborg
had no predecessors, that his case is unique in history, the
only conclusion to which we can come is, that he is alto-
gether ignorant of the phenomena of lucidity, and has con-
sequently mistaken that rara avis—an extatic of genius—for
a preternatural manifestation. Overwhelmed, and we may
say overshadowed, by the awe-inspiring vastitude of one
master-mind, he is incapable of perceiving anything beyond
the periphery of his favourite teacher, who is therefore to
him the alpha and omega of all thought and knowledge.
Such a state of mind, however, is not “ unique in history :”
it has “ had predecessors,” and is indeed characteristic of the
followers of every true Vates. And such, we admit, was
Swedenborg; one of an order of gifted spirits, whose ap-
pearance on the stage of events is rare, but whose production
is nevertheless in strict accordance with the laws of nature.
To the careful and earnest study of these, we commend
“ Gabriel” and his co-believers, feeling assured that nothing
is more calculated to liberate men from the prejudices of a
school, and restore their minds to the equipoise of an en-
lightened rationality, than an enlarged acquaintance with
facts—that form under which the Eternal reveals himself in
time.


J. W. Jackson.


XIII. An instance of Clairvoyance in which the information
given was similar to that recorded in Art. VII., but which
occurred without Mesmerism and as a dream. By the
Rev. Cuauncy Hare Townsnenp. Communicated by
Dr. Elliotson.


** And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed:
and, behold, he stood by the river. And, behold, there came up out of the river
seven well favoured kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow. And,
behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, illfavoured and
leanfleshed ; and stood by the other kine upon the brink of the river. And the
illfavoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven wellfavoured and fat kine.
So Pharaoh awoke. And he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold,
seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good. And, bebold, seven


gree nares seritrecqengpine ems >>


lg A Se


pce


Mtniens


Pin
ae Pr dogs


~


Ae SIN teas 0s


Pagan a ae ae


et Kove oa


et Seer


A drowned body discovered by a clairvoyant dream. 89


thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them. And the seven
thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and,
behold, it was adream. And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was
troubled ; and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise
men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream ; but there was none that could
interpret them unto Pharaoh. Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying,
1 do remember my faults this day: Pharaph was wroth with his servants, and put
me in ward in the captain of the guard’s house, both me and the chief baker :
and we dreamed a dream one night, I and he; we dreamed each man according
to the interpretation of his dream. And there was there with us a young man,
an Hebrew servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he inter-
preted to us our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did interpret.
And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto
mine office, and him he hanged. ‘Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they
brought him hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself, and changed
his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh. And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have
dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret it: and I have heard say
of thee, that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it. And Joseph an-
swered Pharaoh. ... . And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is
one: God hath shewed Pharaoh what he is about todo. The seven good kine
are seven years; and the seven good ears are seven years: the dream is one.
And the seven thin and illfavoured kine that came up after them are seven years ;
and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine.
This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God is about to do
he sheweth unto Pharaoh. Behold, there come seven years of great plenty
throughout all the land of Egypt: and there shall arise after them seven years of
famine ; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt ; and the famine
shall consume the land ; and the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason
of that famine following ; for it shall be very grievous. And for that the dream
was doubled unto Pharaoh twice ; it is because the thing is established by God,
and God will shortly bring it to pass..... And Joseph was thirty years old
when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the
presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt. And in the
seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls. And he gathered up
all the food of the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the
food in the cities : the food of the field, which was round about every city, laid
he up in the same. And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very
much, until he left numbering; for it was without number. . . . And the seven
years of dearth began to come, according as Joseph had said: and the dearth
was in all lands; but in all the land of Egypt there was bread. And when all
the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and
Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph ; what he saith to you, do.
And the famine was over all the face of the earth: and Joseph opened all the
storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the
land of Egypt. And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn ;
because that the famine was so sore in all lands.’’—Genesis, chap. xli.


A cincuMSTANCE extremely similar to that of Miss Challand
was narrated to me by my friend, the Rev. J. Bowen, Rector
of West Lynn, Norfolk, in whose parish the affair happened.

In a cottage not far from where he resides dwelt an honest
hardworking couple. One day, the man, who had to cross
the river Nene every day for his work, did not return. An-
other and another day passed, and still he was absent ; nor
could any search or enquiry discover what had become of
him. At length the poor woman fell, one night, into what
seems to have been a natural mesmeric trance, in which she


90 Clairvoyant dreams may require a clairvoyant interpreter.


saw the body of her husband lying in the water, at a par-
ticular spot near the bank, and so covered with mud as on/y
to leave the right arm protruding to ordinary view. The
woman, on awaking from her trance, remembered all the
particulars of the vision, and was so struck with the parti-
cularity and vividness of what she had seen that, in the
morning, she told her neighbours that she felt sure, if the
spot intimated to her were searched, her husband’s body
would be found. From her accurate description, the spot,
which was a long way off, was recognized ; and there, sure
enough, the body of her husband was found, nearly im-
mersed in and hidden by the mud, but with the right arm
partially protruding. It was not doubted that the man had
fallen into the river by accident in going to his work, and
that his body had been carried down to that spot, which
was so solitary that only clairvoyance could have discovered
it there. Mr. Bowen is ready to vouch for the truth of every
particular of this history.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


Instances of clairvoyance without mesmerisation will be
found in Nos. XV., XVII., XVIII., XIX., XX., XXI.,
XXIII., XXVII., XXIX., XXXII., XXXVIII., XL.

Instances not only without mesmerisation, but as dreains,
will be found in Nos. XX., XXI., XXXI., XLI.: and re-
marks upon clairvoyant dreams by myself in No. XLL,
pp. 80—84. In this I mention that clairvoyance in dreams—


“is frequently not a copy, but allegorical, figurative. In my note
on clairvoyance in No. XXIV., p. 375, I said :—

*** If clairvoyance takes place in dreaming, it may give rise to
imagery ; and so commonly was this known in ancient times that
professed interpreters of dreams were consulted. When I reflect
upon the unquestionable unconscious working of the brain, upon its
unconscious reception of knowledge from without—upon its uncon-
scious acting upon this knowledge, upon its unconscious and irre-
sistible willing, I can conceive that a clairvoyant may not understand
his clairvoyance: and another sagacious person, perhaps another
clairvoyant, may be required to interpret for him.’

“These facts all presented themselves to my own observation:
and, as in ordinary clairvoyance. in the waking or sleep-waking state
the clairvoyant information is occasionally given with a degree of hal-
lucination,—as the fancy of an imaginary being or book (No. XXIV.,
p- 337) communicating it, so such appearances sometimes take
place and communicate the information in clairvoyant dreaming.”


The dream of the girl in Suffolk was descriptive : those of


'}
3

fe
¥


ri aden A la


é
b
F


Mesmerism rouses the wrath of the Medical Times. 91


the butler and baker as well as of Pharaoh were no doubt
figurative. These clairvoyant dreamers did not understand
their clairvoyance, but required another to interpret it for
them; and, as no ordinary person could interpret any of the
three dreams, though all the magicians and wise men were
consulted respecting the dream of Pharaoh, we must presume
that one beyond a merely “sagacious person,”—that “ ano-
ther clairvoyant,” was required to interpret for them.


XIV. The Medical Times and the Edinburgh Mesmerists.
By J. W. Jackson, Esq.
** Ye dull deluders, truth’s destructive foes,
Ye sons of fiction clad in stupid prose,
Ye treacherous leaders, who, yourselves in doubt,
Light up false fires, and send us far about !
Still may yon spider round your pages spin
Subtle and slow her emblematic gin,
Buried in dust and lost in silence dwell,
Most potent, grave, and reverend friends, farewell.”
The Rev. Georce Crasse, Library.


A man without enemies may be very amiable, and a cause
without opposition pre-eminently respectable ; but we may be
perfectly sure, that the former is not very energetic, nor the
latter very influential. So strangely is society constituted,
that abuse is the best test of success, and contumely the
surest admeasurement of efficiency. Of all forms of anta-
gonism, that of silent contempt is the most withering: but,
as it is the most destructive to its object, so is it the most
difficult to its agent. That mesmerism is now really making
progress in Scotland, we can no longer doubt, for it has at
length aroused the wrath of a London cotemporary. The
Edinburgh correspondent of the Medical Times has, it seems,
at last condescended to become cognizant of the existence of
a “so-called Mesmeric Association ” in the intellectual capital
of the North, and although, as might be expected, consider-
ably irate thereat, still obviously feels it to be a duty incum-
bent upon him to no longer ignore this heterodox movement.

That even the simplest penny-a-liners are expected to
insert more facts than fallacies, or, at the worst, to be so
near the truth that people who have witnessed an accident,
or attended a meeting, may after a little difficulty recognize
its caricature in the morning paper, is, we believe, admitted
as an established principle in all well-conducted sanctums of
the public press. What then must we think of the capa-


92 The Med. Times declares the young lady to be a boy.


bilities of the gentleman who does our Scotch reporting for
the journal in question, when we find him on December 23rd,
1854, informing his confiding readers that “ among the alleged
cases of cure by mesmerism was one of a boy iu thie last
stage of consumption. However, the professional attendant
of this youth was present, and gave the story the flattest
possible contradiction.” This. strange metamorphosis of a
young lady into a boy, is a mistake which, as she stood pro-
minently forward on the platform, may justly excite a sus-
picion of,—
“« Eyes that scarcely served at most
To guard their master ’gainst a post ;”


And, as her case was also narrated at full length by her ope-
rator, and again commented on by her medical attendant,
we may also add by way of variation,—


Ears that scarcely served at best
To guard their master ’gainst a jest!


Seriously, does it not indicate that the whole report was got
up on the merest hearsay evidence, and sent as “a good hit”
at the mesmerists ?

This “ flattest possible contradiction ” by Dr. Dycer, to-
gether with his subsequent letter to the Medical Times of
January 6th, 1855, impugning the statement of Mr. Vernon,
the operator, has induced the Committee of the Sccttish
Curative Mesmeric Association to publish a counter-statement
with certificates, which most clearly demonstrate that Mr. V.
said nothing more than what he had the full authority of
both his patient and her parents for asserting. This docu-
ment, of which many hundred copies will be distributed, I
here enclose.


[It is entitled, Statements and Certificates as to the case
of Miss Margaret Robertson, now Mrs. Rogers, and we will
give extracts from it.—Zoist¢ |


Mr. Vernon’s statement.


“About the beginning of February, 1854, George Robertson,
tailor, 3, Calton Hill, came to my house to have a tooth extracted,
which I did gratis, and, observing a cataract on his left eye, I pro-
posed to mesmerise it, to which he agreed. I accordingly called at
his house, and applied the mesmeric processes to him three or four
times a week for some time with so much advantage that he volun-
tarily appeared, first at one of the weekly meetings of our society,
and afterwards on the platform at a public meeting in the Calton
Convening Rooms in April, where he stated that he had received
much benefit from mesmerism, and saw much better than he had


wa Rea ass Lelie


|
g
ey
i


Patient better for Mesm., and worse for its omission. 93


done when I commenced the treatment of his case. I afterwards
ceased to mesmerise him, because he would not give up the use of
ardent spirits, which I thought would prevent a complete cure.

“During one of my visits, he and his wife requested me to see
their daughter, Margaret, who had come home from service in bad
health. On being introduced to her, I was told by her father, and
subsequently by herself, that she had a short dry cough, and was in
the habit of spitting up much gross matter,—that she had a severe
pain in her left side, which greatly affected her breathing,—that she
had violent pains in the back of her head, which occasionally caused
partial blindness, and that she had not enjoyed sound natural sleep
for some time. She also shewed me a recipe for a preparation of
opium,—a common sleeping draught, which she had been taking.
Feeling interested in the case, and being convinced mesmerism would
be of essential service to the young woman, with the entire concur-
rence both of the parents | of herself I immediately commenced
to make passes, especially over her left side, the seat of the pain she
complained most of, after which she expressed herself much relieved.
Before leaving, I mesmerised some water for her to drink, and recom-
mended her to substitute it for the medical draught to procure sleep.
On calling next day, Margaret told me that she had followed my
instructions,—had not taken the opiate, but had drunk the mes-
merised water, and had enjoyed a sounder sleep than she had done
for three weeks previous. I continued to visit and make passes over
her, and I also mesmerised water for her to drink, for a fortnight or
three weeks, until she went to the country in April, by which time
she was greatly improved from the state she was in when my atten-
tion was first called to her.

“ After she had been in the country some time, she wrote home
to her parents that she was getting worse, and they told me she had
written to say that she missed me very much, for mesmerism had
done her more good than any other thing she had tried.

“She returned home after being in the country for six or seven
weeks, very much worse than she had ever been, so much so indeed,
that her parents afterwards told me they considered her dying, and
that the doctor had said she would not live six weeks. She was in bed
when I first saw her after her return, and I proceeded to mesmerise
her, on which she said she felt a pleasant warmth all over her. I
afterwards visited her almost daily. One evening she complained of
cold feet, to which she said she was subject. On examination I found
both legs much swollen from the knees downwards, especially about
the feet and ankles, evidently from the presence of water. After
mesmerising her three or four times, the swelling disappeared ; her
feet recovered their natural warmth ; and shortly after this she was
able to perform any household work without being much fatigued.
Her parents led me to believe that she took no medicine except laxa-
tive pills after her return from the country.

*“‘In the month of September, she appeared on the platform of
the Lancasterian School-room, Davie Street, and was introduced to a
crowded meeting of some hundreds of people, in her ordinary waking


94 The father eats his words to please somebody.


condition, as a person cured of consumption by means of mesmerism.
A report of this appeared in the Edinburgh News of 7th October.

** Margaret Robertson’s marriage, which had been postponed in
consequence of her illness, took place in the month of November,
and thus within six months from the time her parents considered her
dying of consumption, she became Mrs. Rogers, and, accompanied
by her husband, and with the full concurrence of her other relations,
she appeared on the platform at the meeting in Queen Street Hall,
on the 11th of December last, as a proof of the curative power of
mesmerism.


**While attending Margaret, her mother, Mrs. Robertson, re-
quested me to try its effects on her also, as she suffered from a bad
cough and pain in the chest, which affected her breathing. I fre-
quently mesmerised her, and she said it always did her good.


** On another occasion, my friend, Mr. Hay, who had accompanied
me, called my attention to a younger daughter, about twelve years
old, as having a remarkably formed head, much too large for her age.
We were told, among other things, that she was very restless, and
started frequently in her sleep,—was dull at school, and very reserved
at home. Mr. Hay recommended mesmerism for her also, and pro-
posed that her head should be examined by Mr. Jackson, to which
her parents cheerfully consented, and we arranged that Margaret and
she should meet us at Mr. Jackson’s, which they did. After Mr.
Jackson had carefully examined her head, he instructed me how to
treat her, and thus 1 commenced to treat a fourth member of this
family mesmerically. Shortly after I was informed that the girl slept
soundly without any starting, and her sister, Margaret, told me that
she was getting on extremely well, that she had been dux of her
class, and had become more cheerful than formerly. I continued my
visits to this family, until Robertson made his supplementary and
contradictory statement of 18th December, after the interference of
his medical adviser, when I altogether withdrew from attending any
member of his family, and since then I have not held any intercourse
with them.

“At different times I had taken my friends to see Margaret
Robertson, and on these occasions the parents said more than once,
as they had often said to myself, that the doctors had given her up :
and both she and her parents always expressed the great confidence
they felt in mesmerism, and cordially acknowledged the good it had
done in their family. They even repeated these expressions of grati-
tude to me on 13th December, two days after the meeting, when
their first statement was taken down.

‘I was therefore exceedingly surprised when I found that after
the doctor had visited them, the father was prepared to make state-
ments so contradictory to all he had previously said both to me and
others. In justice not only to myself, but to the Association and
the cause of mesmerism generally, I have felt it my duty to procure
the enclosed certificates, and to lay before you this statement of the
whole facts. I need not say that you have my authority to make


Dr. Dycer now declares he had treated her for hysteria! 95


what use of it you please, and I am, Gentlemen, your most obedient
servant,


(Signed) W. F. Vernon.


“The doctor’s account of the case is contained in the following
letter, addressed by him to the Editor of the Medical Times, and
published on 6th January, 1855 :—


‘«*Sir,—I read in this week’s publication, a notice of a mesmeric
curative meeting held here ; and as your correspondent has only par-
tially supplied you with particulars, a further account may be accept-
able to some of your readers. The patient referred to as an example
of a cure by mesmerism was a most respectable young woman, and
was introduced on the platform by a Mr. Vernon, who, after putting
her into a ‘mesmeric sleep,’ stated to the audience (of whom I was
accidentally one) that the person before them had been attended by a
medical man for consumption, who considered it a hopeless case, and
said that she could not live five weeks. She then came under mes-
meric treatment, and the result is her present improved condition.

“«*T was astonished when I saw the lady mount the platform, but
I was more astonished at the statement I had heard, as I had been
attending her for a period of several months, during which time she
took cod-liver oil, sweet milk, &c.; and instead of having given her
up as a hopeless case, told her that, with care, she would get better,
as the disease was in the first stage, and I held out every hope of re-
covery. An eminent physician of this city also saw her afterwards,
and told her the same. This I stated on the platform, where I was
urged to go by a medical friend (sitting next me), having said that
the lady’s medical attendant was in the room; and the only reply of
Mr. Vernon was, that ‘he had been told so by the patient’s parents.”

“A few days after this meeting, I called (accompanied by a
supporter of Mr. Vernon) on the patient and her parents, and they
then stated before us both, which statement was taken down in writ-
ing—‘“ That had they known that Mr. Vernon was going to make
such a statement, they never would have allowed her to have goue
on the platform, for the doctor never gave her up, but continued to
attend her, and told her that she would get better as the summer
was before her, and the disease in the commencement, and they did
not think it worth their while to tell the doctor that their daughter
was under mesmeric treatment at the time he was attending, as they
did not put much faith in it.”

***In conclusion, I would remark, that the patient was under treat-
ment for hysteria; and when she went-on the platform (at the earnest
desire of Mr. Vernon), she only thought that she was to be exhibited
as an example, shewing that a person could be put .into a mesmeric
sleep.—I am, &c.

** « (Signed) Cuartes Dycer, M.D,
“18, Pitt Street, Edinburgh,
*** December 28, 1854.’


96 The mother’s statement conclusive for the mesmeriser.


** How far these conflicting accounts are borne out by the evidence
of the parents and others acquainted with the circumstances will best
appear from the following statements and certificates: —


1. Statement of Mrs. Robertson, taken down on the 13th December,
concurred in by her husband, and afterwards read over to them
in presence of Dr. Dycer, on 18th December, and declared to be
correct,


13th December, 1854.

Our daughter left her place about nine weeks before the May term
this year. Dr. Combe had attended her—he said to give her short
walks, and take care of damp beds or colds. She went with her
father to the Dispensary, and was then so weak, her father could
hardly‘get her home. Dr. Dycer called here most attentively; |
think very much of him for that. He brought Dr. Begbie, I think,
the week after he first came. Dr. Begbie said she ought to go to
the country, and it was lucky the summer was before her. He asked
if auy of her relatives had been consumptive. Mr. Vernon had been
here from Ist April, at intervals, till she went to the country. We
had asked him to look at her. She had continued to take cod-liver
oil and the bitters till going to the country. She went herself, by
short stages, to the Star, by Markinch, then Kingskettle, then Strath-
miglo, &c. She took only pills and sweet milk when in the country
instead of cod-liver oil. Dr. Dycer said that sweet milk and cream
would do her good. She came home on a Tuesday—on the Friday
night she took to bed—on the Saturday her father went for Dr.
Dycer. We both thought her dying. Dr. Dycer came on the
Sunday; I went to the door with him. When he came in and saw
her, he seemed much taken up about her. He said it wasa pity she
had staid so long in her place, and that he was afraid if she did not
get a turn, it would go hard with her in five or six weeks. I took it
up that he meant she would die. He said her lungs were sore
affected upon the left side. 1 never told her for long after. Mr.
Vernon came on the Saturday, and came regularly for a number of
nights. He had previously only come at intervals. Dr. Dycer came
regularly—he never missed two days. I never let on that Mr.
Vernon was coming. Before Dr. Dycer went to the country, he said
if she got worse to call Dr. Mackay, of Nelson Street, in his room as
his substitute. But we never needed, for she got remarkably better
every day after. She dropped the cod-liver oil and the bitters when
Dr. Dycer went to the country. She took nothing but laxative pills.
She had begun to get better before Dr. Dycer went to the country.
Since his return he came to the house to see how she went on, and
he was quite overjoyed to see her so much better. I do not want to
get him into any fash or anybody else. I could not say the exact
words he used, but I did say to Mr. Vernon that he told me her life
was a miracle.


2. Additional Statement made on 18th December, at request of Dr.


Proofs of the truthfulness of the Mesmerisis. 97


Dycer, and in presence of one of the Committee of the Mesmeric
Association.
18th December, 1854.
If we had known that when she went to the meeting she was to
go on the platform, and that Mr. Vernon was to state that her
medical man had said she had not five weeks to live after she came
back from the country, we would not have allowed her to go, for her
medical man had never said so, and had never given her up. Our
daughter says if she had not thought mesmerism had done her good
she would not have gone to the meeting, but she would not have gone
on to say that mesmerism had cured her.


3. Statement of Mr. Charles M‘Arthur, who had gone with Mr.
Vernon to see the patient previous to the Meeting.
19th December, 1854.
Mr. Robertson told me that his daughter was bed-fast when Mr.
Vernon took her in hand ; that the doctor had stated to them that it
was consumption, and that he considered she would not get over it ;
in fact, that she was incurable, but that she got on with rapidity,
especially when she left off taking the doctor’s medicines for the mes-
merised water. The daughter also stated that she had not words to
express her gratitude ; she could not tell how thankful she was to
Mr. Vernon for the good that he had done her. Mr. Vernon mes-
merised her in my presence, and after he brought her out of the sleep,
asked her how she felt. ‘‘ She said fine ; there is a nice warmth all
over me, which I had not before. I only feel so after Mr. Vernon
mesmerises me; so much so, that, so to speak, I feel as if I were
another individual, as it were, quite a different person, a new creature,
so refreshed. I believe that mesmerism has done me good more so
than the doctor—there is no mistake about it.”
(Signed) Cuartes M‘Arruur.


[Then come other statements, but we have no room for
them.—Zoist. ]


** Although a strong wish is now displayed by the parents, or at
least by the father, to favour the doctor as far as possible, no attempt
has been made to deny the truth of the statement taken down on

3th December, and it shews so distinctly that Mr. Vernon had the
parents’ authority for all he had said at the meeting on the 11th,
that the Association would have been content to publish it without a
single remark if the subsequent proceedings did not demand a some-
what more lengthened notice.

“Whatever the doctor may now say, he certainly did impress
the minds of the parents with the belief that he had for some time
thought their daughter dying. His words and manner on the last
Sunday in June, when she had returned from the country so much
worse, the fact that the mother was afraid to communicate his opi-
nion to her daughter ‘till long after,’ and his demeanour when he
returned to town and found that her recovery was certain, all prove

VOL. XIII. G


98 Proof upon proof.


beyond dispute, that so long as he thought himself entitled to the
credit of the cure, he led the parents to believe that she had been
in such a state of danger that nothing but his miraculous skill could
have saved her. So far, therefore, as the doctor is concerned, the
Association must say that his verbal statements at the meeting of
the 11th December are completely disproved; while, as to his written
statement, they could only observe that the pretended quotation
from the written testimony of the parents is no quotation at all, and
that the portion marked in italics must be a pure invention of his
own.

**Mr. Vernon is naturally unwilling to renounce his claim to the
credit of the cure, and although the statements of the parents and
others were not obtained with the view of upholding this claim, they
do contain many of the circumstances which induced him and the
Association to believe, as they still do, that mesmerism was the
agent of the cure. The patient herself, ‘a most respectable young
woman,’ as the doctor truly calls her, twice appeared on a public
platform to testify that this was her belief. The doctor’s attempt
to explain away these appearances by saying that she was to be ex-
hibited as a proof ‘that a person could be put into a mesmeric
sleep,’ is not only absurd in itself (that fact in mesmerism being
admitted by all, even by the medical faculty), but is contradicted
by the fact, that she was in her ordinary waking condition at the
Lancasterian School-rooms when the statement of her cure by mes-
merism was first publicly made, and so must have been quite aware
of Mr. Vernon’s object in introducing her to the meeting at Queen-
street Hall. Moreover, there was not the slightest remonstrance or
objection made to Mr. Vernon’s statements, either by herself, her
husband who accompanied her, or her parents, till after the doctor’s
visit between the 13th and 18th of December, and even since then
the only contradictory evidence comes from the parents and not from
the girl herself or her husband. Besides the patient’s own belief
thus expressed, there are the frequent expressions of gratitude
during the progress of the cure, and the undeniable fact that she
grew worse during the time when she was not mesmerised, and better
when she was, and that when she ‘ got remarkably better every day’
the doctor was in the country, and she had ceased to take his pre-
scriptions.

** Although, however, the Association still adhere to their own
conviction as to this cure having been effected by mesmerism, they
wish it to be distinctly understood that the present publication is
made solely for the purpose of vindicating Mr. Vernon from the
imputation of having wilfully made a false statement. The power of
mesmerism to effect cures where orthodox medical treatment would
wholly fail, is attested by so many other examples, that the Asso-
ciation would never dream of giving such prominence to any one case
as to publish a separate account of it, especially where the facts
admit of dispute. Their annual report, mncatioalinn upwards of a
hundred cures, will shew that such a course is quite unnecessary,
and the Association feel that nothing could so seriously injure the


The Medical Times in a great straight. 99


cause of mesmerism, as their wilfully resorting to mis-statement or
exaggeration.”

We cannot close this communication without a remark on
the tone adopted by the correspondent of a respectable me-
dical organ in speaking of those who chance to differ from
him on a controverted question in physiology. “ A meeting
so disreputable in every point of view :” “ we left the meeting
with sentiments of profound disgust,” &c. Such are the
terms in which a movement which numbers the President of
the Royal Society of Edinburgh and several other members
of the Scottish aristocracy amongst its vice-presidents, and
whose office-bearers and associates embrace commercial, pro-
fessional and independent gentlemen of standing and emi-
nence, whose sole object it is to alleviate the sufferings of
humanity by a gratuitous devotion of their time and services
to the application of mesmerism as a healing power,—such,
we say, are the terms in which this philanthropic movement
that is an honour to the age and country in which it exists,
is spoken of by the nameless correspondent of a London
journal. Is the orthodox medical system, then, indeed re-
duced to such straights that it is obliged to have recourse to
garbled reports and personal abuse,—to the sly inuendo and
the suppressio veri,—in short, to all the arts of hireling ad-
vocacy and all the meanness of interested partizanship for its
support ?

Well indeed does this series of communications end
“with a deep conviction” worthy of the darkest days of me-
dizval tyranny, “that the kind of reform which the Uni-
versity of Edinburgh should aim at is not that proposed in
the Edinburgh University Medical Reform Bill, but one
which would prevent a mesmerist from occupying the chair of
chemistry—a homeeopath from teaching general pathology.”
Truly it is a pity that we have no longer the means of com-
pelling Galileo to foreswear his strongest convictions under
penalties! What a delightful prospect of reform for the
nineteenth century, to render the holding a chair conditional
on the receiving the Shibboleth of a school—a reform, that,
if carried thoroughly out, would deprive the scnatus of nearly
every name of European reputation, and leave it without tlic
scientific knowledge of a Gregory, or the logical acumen of
a Sir William Hamilton, and that would, we suppose, even
compel Dr. Simpson, as a person suspect, to take an ex-
purgatory oath, of being now no longer affected by this
pestilent heresy! That beings, so far cultured as to be ca-
pable of expressing themselves grammatically, should be
found willing for a consideration to indite such contemptible

G2


100 Its vulgar personalities.


twaddle as the foregoing, is not so surprising as the astound-
ing fact, that a body of liberally-educated gentlemen should
be willing to patronize effusions so simply puerile and ridi-
culous! ‘This indeed is the darker phase of the matter, and
must suggest serious questions in every reflective mind as to
the condition of the medical world at the present moment.
Is there, we would ask, any other learned profession so com-
pletely lost to all sense of gentlemanly propriety, so lament-
ably deficient in scholarly politeness, so utterly devoid of
the suwaviter in modo, as to maintain a controversy on scien-
tific subjects by an habitual recourse to personalities that
would disgrace the lowest and most vulgar of political broad-
sheets in the coarsest of its diatribes? Cannot a question of
fact be settled by an appeal to nature without an appeal to
Billingsgate? Should such a state of things continue, the
world without will begin to ask and with reason, where is
that high sense of dignity and honour, that native urbanity
and refinement of manners, that fine old esprit de corps, in
virtue of which the physician, as such, was once everywhere
received as a gentleman, not merely in externals, but as one
pervaded by the spirit and endowed with the attainments of
a truly gentle and scholarly mind ?

As to the remarks on Mr. Davey and myself, I should
pass them by in silent contempt but for the circumstance of
a direct mis-statement, that the meetings in the Philosophical
Institution, Queen-street Hall, over which Dr. Gregory pre-
sided, were held for the purpose of enabling us to publish
our cures, whereas they were held for the sole purpose of en-
abling our pupils, the members of the Association, to publish
theirs. As to our having slandered the profession, many of
its honoured members were on the platform, whose respect
and friendship we still enjoy. This is our reply to such an
insinuation. Our well-considered opinions of the profession
are published. Mine appeared in 1851, and were copied into
The Zoist, in a notice of Lectures on Mesmerism, published
in Dublin in that year. Should the correspondent of the
Medical Times feel inspired to say anything more really re-
spectful and laudatory, I shall be most happy to expunge the
passages in question, and substitute his superior lucubrations
in their place in the next and forthcoming edition.


J. W. Jackson.
Edinburgh, March 5, 1855.


( 101 )


XV. Latest account of Elizabeth Squirrell.*


‘* Mesmerism proved True. By the Rev. Chauncy Hare Townshend, A.M.
(Bosworth).—An article in a recent number of the Quarterly Review seems to
have done considerable damage in public estimation to the so-called sciences of
mesmerism, phreno-mesmerism, electro-biology, and odylism. The reviewer
having pointed out in a very lucid manner the numerous errors into which the
cultivators of these delusions had fallen, it was not to be expected that they
would sit down quietly under the rebuke administered; and in this work the
Rev. Chauncy Hare Townshend has undertaken to do battle on behalf of mes-
merism. We cannot congratulate the reverend author on the tone and style of
his volume, both alike inconsistent with the dignity of science and the love of
truth. It is very evident that the reviewer has indicated the method by which
all the marvels of mesmerism may be reduced to the laws which are known to
regulate human thought and action. It is to this the mesmerists object. On the
one hand, they have misinterpreted the facts presented to them; and on the
other, been led away by the impositions of those they have operated on. They
are ashamed to confess their weakness; and Mr. Townshend is only striving to
be consistent in this protest against the reviewer’s arguments. It is very clear,
however, that he has neither the knowledge of the subject. nor the logical
power, of the accomplished physiologist who is reputed to be the author of the
offending review in the Quarterly.”—ATHENa&uUM, March 17, 1855.


19, Temple Street, Wolverhampton,
17th March, 1855.

Sir,—I have the pleasure to inform you that since writ-
ing you last, Elizabeth Squirrell, according to her clairvoyant
predictions, has experienced a return of sight and hearing,
after much suffering in the organs of those senses. She
compared the change to nothing less than a revival from
death to life, and indeed her emotions and expressions of
delight and astonishment upon first using her regained bless-
ings most clearly evinced the fact of her previous loss. As
soon as it was thought she could bear it, she was removed on
her bed to the window, at which time I had the satisfaction
of being present, and the beautiful prospect, which had been
so long shut out from her view, and was then so suddenly
unveiled to her, was more than she could bear, and she
fainted away. The change thus occasioned in her condition
came on gradually until she was in full possession of these
faculties. She retained them for some month or two, and
then began by degrees again to lose her sight, as she had
long previously foretold, at which time I left Ipswich for this
town. I did not hear from her for some time, but a short
while ago she wrote me to say that after I left she grew totally
blind again, but had not lost her hearing (which was also in
accordance with her prophetic statements), and so continued
for two or three months, when her sight gradually returned
once more, and ever since she has been able to see and hear


* See Nos. XLVI., XLVII.


102 The imaginationists ignore our mass of facts.


as well as ever, if not better. She still keeps her bed in
consequence of the affection of the spine, and does not anti-
cipate ever being able to leave it, but she expresses herself
extremely thankful to the bountiful Bestower of all good,
and perfectly happy amongst her books and friends, both of
whose society she can now most fully enjoy.

I have just penned these few remarks, thinking that per-
haps you and your readers may be interested to know the
altered and improved circumstances under which Elizabeth is
now mercifully placed. (In haste.)

I am, Sir, yours very respectfully,
Cuartes Moopy.
The Editor of The Zoist.


NOTE ON THE MOTTO BY THE ZOIST.


What damage “the accomplished physiologist,” with his
“knowledge of the subject” and his “logical power,” has
done to “ Mesmerism, Phreno-mesmerism, Electro-Biology,
and Odylism,” all at once, in public estimation, with his out-
stretched carpenter’s arm, we know not. Reichenbach must
answer for odylism, though he never uses such a word in any
of his writings ; and as to electro-biology—a designation the
absurdity of which we have from the first shewn*—the pheno-
mena are plain indisputable facts resulting from simple ima-
gination induced by suggestion, as we have proved at large.t
The “ considerable damage” done to mesmerism and phreno-
mesmerism is unfelt both by mesmerism and phrenology ;
and, if they suffer in “ public estimation,” this can be with
the utterly ignorant only.

We have again and again pointed out the discreditable
course pursued by this booksellers’ writer and those who
rejoice in availing themselves of him and following the same
course.

The plan which they childishly think will answer for ever
—at least during their life-time—is boldly and impudently to
ignore our innumerable facts, our mighty facts, which they
know are too strong for their attacks. We have reminded
them again and again of our. facts: and we again call upon
them to controvert, and to explain these by imagination,
suggestion, delusion, or collusion, if they can. We publicly
call upon them to come forward like men and answer: no
longer meanly and miserably to ignore for the purpose of


* See our objections to the term in No. XXXIII., p. 110.
t+ See Nos. XXXIII., p. 110; XXXIV., p. 191; XXXV., pp. 295, 330.


We dare them to attempt to explain our facts. 103


pleasing those whose favourable opinion and patronage they
are shortsighted enough to consider more valuable than
truth.

What are “the numerous errors” into which we have
fallen? What is the proof of our facts being “ delusions?”
Will the master carpenter shew us “in a very lucid manner,”
or in any manner consistent with candour and integrity?
Will he shew us how we have misrepresented our facts (facts
they are now allowed to be!), by what “impositions” we
have been led away? Will he “indicate the method” by
which he can reduce our facts “ to the laws which are known
to regulate human thought and action?” Will he point out
what weakness we have to confess ?

We call upon him to explain the three instances of clair-
voyance in this very Number, and those to which reference is
made in this very Number at p. 57, and the fact produced
by Professor Owen and recorded at p. 58.

We call upon him to explain the power of mesmerism
over brutes, children, persons asleep, blind persons, persons
unconscious of its agency, or, if conscious, unaware of the
object of the process or despising and defying its influence.

We call upon him to explain our various phenomena oc-
curring at first without the patient expecting such a result,
sometimes without his knowledge that such phenomena ever
occur in human beings, and without the operator intending
that they should come.

Let him explain the painlessness of the hundreds of sur-
gical operations which we have recorded, some terrific, per-
formed chiefly upon ignorant Indians, under its influence,
and terminating neither immediately nor some days after-
wards in death.

We call upon him to explain our innumerable splendid
cures, many such as medicine never effected: cures not of
affections of the nervous system only, but of various organs,
and of not merely functional, but of structural disease, de-
posits, inflammations, ulcerations, &c.: some of them cures
in persons who had no faith in mesmerism and submitted
merely to please their friends: some in persons who did not
know what was meant by the process, or did not know its
ultimate object : some in persons who scoffed at mesmerism :
some in children and in the brute creation.

We call upon him to answer the facts to which he will
find reference in our last Number, pp. 402-3.

We call upon him. But people say how ill balanced is
his head! how unphilosophical the development of his fore-
head, how enormous the development of his self-esteem, the


104 @ ‘ avdpes’ ’A@nvaio.


natural expression of which manifests itself as he stands,
walks, or talks! &c., &c. If true, this is his misfortune, and
we shall call in vain. b

As to Mr. Townshend’s book, the Atheneist has evidently
presumed to write about it without having made himself ac-
quainted with its contents or with its subject. Let him
condescend to read at least an account of its contents in
Nos. XLV. and XLVII. He will discover how ridiculous he
has made himself by believing the Quarterly Review. He
will find facts detailed or referred to which Mr. Townshend
was witness of, and which we defy him to disparage, or to
explain by imagination and the other follies of Sir H.
Holland, Sir B. Brodie, and all the twaddlers. Some of Mr.
Townshend’s experiments with Egide Aertz were made in the
presence of Dr. Whewell, whose sad conduct he details, and
we have detailed it in No. XLV.: and of two eminent writers,
honourably conspicuous at the late meeting of the Literary
Fund Society, who were satisfied, and have lately declared, we
are told, that they were satisfied of the truth of clairvoyance
from that period. Let Mr. Dilke, the autocrat of the Athe-
neum, consult these two gentlemen before he again issues an
order to his abject hirelings to write against every book and
every person who advocates mesmerism.


XVI. Mr. Townshend and the Atheneum.
By RaapaManrtuvus.


<—s a“ -
w * dvépes’ *"AOnvaio.
DEMOSTHENES.


Or all self-satisfied centuries, the nineteenth is the most
distinguished for its perfect complacency and even glorifica-
tion. Never since the creation was there an age so distin-
guished by liberality of sentiment, by openness to the truth,
and consequently by unbiassed judgment, more especially on
all matters counected with science. Not a subject of specu-
lation but can now be canvassed with perfect freedom, not a
topic but will be treated with fairness, not a principle but
will meet with the most ample justice in any discussion as to
its merits! Such is the stereotyped style, applauded to the
echo, which we find prevalent in all popular works, and
among all classes of literary and scientific periodicals. Yet
who that has had the misfortune to differ from established
usages and to outthink his time, can conscientiously confirm


The writer in the Athenzum obeys his orders. 105


this. We have been led into these remarks by seeing a short
review in the Atheneum of March 19th of the Rev. Chauncy
Hare Townshend’s recent work in reply to the article which
recently appeared in the Quarterly on Mesmerism, Phreno-
Mesmerism, Biology, &c.

Perhaps to no one subject has greater injustice been done
by the pseudo-liberalism of modern times than to mesmerism,
and among its opponents the weekly serial in question has
attained to an unenviable notoriety. It stands committed
against this rising truth. To expect justice in its columns in
reference to any work stating the facts with which mesmerism
has made us familiar, would therefore be absurd. It is an
anti-mesmeric journal, and the tone and tendency of its
notices on this subject may thus be predicted with safety, for
they are always condemnatory. Its scribes have received
their “orders,” and with such small ability as they may
possess “cut up” whatever appears on the opposite side.
The notice in question is an instance in point. In the first
place we are told that the article in the Quarterly “ seems to
have done considerable damage in public estimation to the
so-called sciences of Mesmerism, Phreno-mesmerism, Electro-
biology, and Odylism.” Now so far is this from being the
case, that this same article affords ample evidence of the
progress of public opinion on the subject of mesmerism. It
demonstrates that the Quarterly, that most respectable rear-
guard with all its cumbrous impedimenta of “ received,” “ es-
tablished,” &c., found it necessary to advance as far as
Braidism, to admit at least the doctrine of impressions, while
still obstinately fighting against the co-ordinate truth of
transmissions. It was in short just what might be expected,
a cowardly compromise, a faint admission of what had be-
come too palpable to be denied, with a miserable adherence
to errors supposed to be for a short period longer still re-
spectably tenable.

To this wretched abortion of pseudo-scientific reasoning,
Mr. Townshend administered a coup de grace of the most
effectual order, of which, however, according to our reviewer,
the tone and style are alike inconsistent with the dignity of
science and the love of truth. So then it would seem that
mesmerists must be attacked with every species of vulgar
abuse and vituperation, with a coarseness and ruffianry, of
which, happily, no other literary or scientific controversy
affords a parallel,—but they must make no return. Exposed
to the grossest misrepresentation and to the foulest calumny
for their love of truth, their words must exhibit the “ milk
of human kindness,” and their replies at all times be tem-


106 The anti-mesmeric press disgraceful.


pered by the invincible suavity of the most polished refine-
ment. Attacked with a rancour and virulence that would
disgrace the darkest ages of theological bigotry, with their
statements denied, their veracity impugned, and their motives
misrepresented, they must in self-defence be strictly confined
to such weapons as only love, patience, and long-suffering
would strictly authorize !

That Mr. Townshend administered a well-deserved casti-
gation to “the accomplished physiologist ” of the Quarterly,
that he exposed his ignorance and demolished his fallacies
with an unsparing hand, we admit; but that he was wanting
in true dignity or deficient in a love of truth, we deny. But
had he been guilty of the most flagrant of literary sins, the
opponents of mesmerism are the last who should upbraid
him with such errors. If indeed the reviewer who penned
this piece of cool effrontery wants an example of “ tone and
style” in conducting a controversy, we commend him to the
virulent blackguardisms of the Lancet, and the stultified im-
pertinencies of the Medical Times, whenever they speak of
mesmerism or its advocates. For an absence of everything
manly, open, generous, and straightforward, for a combina-
tion of petty malice with narrow-minded prejudice, for a dis-
play in short of every quality derogatory to the head and
heart of a gentleman and a scholar, we refer him to the anti-
mesmeric medical literature of our age—a product too dis-
gusting to be noxious, too contemptible to be potent.

RHADAMANTHUS.


BOOKS RECEIVED.


Bulletin de V Athénée Magnétique de Lyon; Journal des Sciences Psycho-
Physiques. Janvier, Fevrier, Mars. 1855.

The British Journal of Homeopathy. Published quarterly. January, 1855.

The New Churchman: a monthly magazine dedicated to the exposition and
defence of the doctrines of the New Church as revealed in the writings of Swe-
denborg. February, 1855.

Mesmerism and Media, with full instructions how to develop the alleged spi-
ritual rappings in every family. Bailliere. 1855.

The Phonetic Journal.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


We have exceeded our established quantity of matter: but regret not to have
been able to find room for a few communications with which we have been fa-
youred : and for which we return our thanks.


The late Earl Stanhope. 107


We have just obtained the first cast taken from the head of the murderer
Barthelemy, who was executed at Newgate in January last, and displayed such
extraordinary firmness in regard to his religious opinions. We hope to give a
lithograph of it, and shew its striking conformity with phrenological truth in our
next Number: and call the attention of Sir B. Brodie, Sir H. Holland, and Dr.
Carpenter to it and that of Rush, &c., &c.

Sir B. Brodie—We entirely agree with A. B. that the remarks of Sir. B.
Brodie against mesmerism in hls Psychological Researches are ‘such a tissue of
ignorance, conceit, and twaddle as has seldom been seen.”” We propose examin-
ing it at length in an early number.

Mr. J. H. of Bayswater is thanked for his communication, but its subject
does not come within our scope.

We thank Mr. Janson for kindly advertizing The Zoist in the Phonographic
Examiner.


OBITUARY.


The Right Hon. the Earl Srannore died at his seat, Chevening, near
Sevenoaks, on the 3rd of last March, aged 74. For very many years,—for a
period probably much longer than that during which our attention has been
directed to the subject, he was convinced of the truth of mesmerism and he pro-
fessed his belief. He visited University College Hospital several times to witness
the splendid phenomena which were then demonstrated in 1838 in the Okeys
and others, and might be seen waiting patiently and modestly at the top of the
steps outside the building before the hour arrived. One of the professors—Mr.
Quain, at one of their meetings assembled to put down mesmerism, said con-
temptuously, ‘‘ There is a Count Stanhope who has come here to see it,—a Count
Stanhope!” Their excuse was that the public support of the institution would
be injured. Mesmerism was accordingly put down (see this history in No. L.,
p- 91). The school fell the very year that Dr. Elliotson quitted it—continued
falling—has never recovered: and the debt of the hospital, which is supported
mainly by the students’ fees, has gradually increased till it now amounts to
£5,000, and he who was persecuted has been urgently entreated to open his purse.
When ether was first employed the nobility was allowed to crowd this and the other
hospitals when surgical operations were performed, and there was no grumbling
(see No. XVII., p. 46). Lord Stanhope afterwards neglected no opportunity of
being present at such demonstrations in London. He was continually at Dr.
Elliotson’s, and visited the cases of Miss Melhuish in Bedford Street (see Zoist,
No. IV.), and Master Salmon in Red Lion Street (see Zoist, Nos. III., XXXIV.),
Holborn. He himself mesmerised the poor and with successful results: and he
yielded to the request that he would publish his experience (see some of his cases ,
in Zoist, No. V., p. 80). When begged to subscribe to the Mesmeric In-
firmary, he, like the Archbishop of Dublin, immediately returned an answer of
consent and thanked the Committee for having applied to him. He annually
subscribed £5:5:0: and, when solicited to take the chair at the Annual Meeting
of the Infirmary in 1852, immediately consented, and he acquitted himself of
the duties admirably. His address was full of sense and spirit (see Zoist, No.
XXXVIII., p. 194). In the following year, when the gentleman (Sir Isaac
Lyon Goldsmid) who had promised to take the chair was unable through severe
indisposition, he was again applied to and again came up to town for the purpose,
and at a very short notice.

The letter to Dr. Elliotson which accompanied his cases, and is printed with
them, was very characteristic.


‘*My dear Sir,—I have no objection whatever to the use of my name in the
new edition of Mr. Sandby’s work: on the contrary, I consider it an honour
upon this as upon every other occasion to appear the advocate of truth: and I


108 The late George Swinton, Esq.


am not deterred by popular prejudice, or by the ridicule which some newspapers
have endeavoured to cast upon me asa humble, but zealous, disciple of mes-
merism,” &c.


He possessed excellent abilities and was well read. His integrity, benevo-
lence, candour, modesty, moral courage, and sound sense, were great, and formed
a remarkable combination. We have heard him say that he regarded all men as
equal, and in truth he did treat every one as fundamentally his equal, whatever
was the distinction, proper to be regarded, of education and position. His bear-
ing was that of a finished gentleman of the old school. No one every detected
pride of birth or rank or any other pride in him: no one ever knew him commit
a discreditable act, or contend for what he did not believe to be truth. He told
his tenants that they should not continue to be his tenants unless they allowed
their labourers at least twelve shillings a week. For very many years he had
been a teetotaller, but one of these bodies would not allow him to continue to be
their president because he firmly refused to insist upon the members of his
household following his example and to allow no fermented or distilled fluids at
his table or in his servants’ hall. We have often seen his table supplied with all
kinds of wines, &c., and his family, as well as his guests, partaking of them
while he contented himself with water; for it was his invariable rule to allow
every one around and under him to decide for himself in this and every other
matter of opinion.

His candour was remarkably shewn in the case of Casper Hauser. He took
up the cause and paid for the maintenance of this German: and, when at length
he conceived that he had been imposed upon, actually wrote a pamphlet to declare
himself to have been in error, and excited the anger of Professor Feurbach who
still stood up for the truthfulness of Hauser. Few men have voluntarily written
a book to own themselves wrong.

The Medical Times of the 10th of March last, under the head of Mepicau
News! p. 250, says,—


‘* Stanhope, Earl of, &c., &c.

‘*His father caused his children to be taught trades or professions, so that
whatever social changes might take place, his offspring might be able to maintain
themselves. The late Earl, it is said, was apprenticed to a surgeon-apothecary
in Canterbury, and it is probable that to this circumstance may be attributed the
great interest he, for many years of his life, manifested in the progress of medi-
cine as a science and an art.

“‘ During the later portion of his life, Earl Stanhope lent his energies to the
support and propagation of the MESMERIC DELUSION, and was, we believe, one
of the Vice-presidents of the M ic Infirmary.”


The fact was that he was apprenticed by his father to a brickmaker: and,
when at the Census every one was called upon to give his age and occupation,
&ec., he wrote down after Earl Stanhope, ‘‘ Brickmaker.”

He had grown thin during the last year of his life, and was carried off by an
attack of bronchitis in two or three days.

Mr. Robert Goff, of Kensington Gore, has kindly presented to the Mes-
meric Infirmary an excellent lithograph of him, taken from a portrait made about
fifteen years ago. The likeness is great, and the physiognomy agrees with the
noble character of the man.


GEORGE SWINTON, Esq.


Since the death of Mr. Colquhoun, the cause of mesmerism in Scotland has
sustained another loss by the death of George Swinton, Esq., of Atholl Crescent,
Edinburgh. He was son of the late Lord Swinton, an eminent member of the
Scottish bench. Entering at an early period of life into the civil service of the
East India Company, he attained to a very distinguished position, and, after a
lengthened residence in the East, returned to his native city of Edinburgh. There,


The late Miss Wallace. 109


during many years, he consistently and courageously professed his belief in
mesmerism. On the establishment of the Scottish Curative Mesmeric Association
he became one of the directors, and, while contributing liberally to its funds,
also afforded the aid of that powerful influence which his high social position
and superior character so well qualified him to exert. He was a contributor to
The Zoist. In No. XXXVI., he published a paper entitled, “ A Suggestion to
explain certain properties of Levity.”” In No. XXXVIII., one entitled, ‘‘ On
the transference of the sense of hearing from the ear to the abdomen.” In No.
XXXIX., one entitled, ‘‘ Phenomena of Levity in the human subject.’””—All under
the title of Non-Wist. He had great general experience and varied and exten-
sive attainments, and he manifested through life that true liberality of sentiment
and manly independence in action, which are so rare even in these days of boasted
superiority to the trammels of prejudice and the tyranny of custom. His coun-
tenance and manners were those of a high-minded and high-bred Scottish gen-
tleman. He died after some severe bereavements in his family.


MISS WALLACE.


This elderly lady died before Mr. Swinton and of acute bronchitis. She was
an Irishwoman, and had long lived in Cheltenham. After witnessing the indis-
putable facts of mesmerism she set about practising it for the good of those about
her: and published very many striking cures in The Zoist. In No. XII. are
several excellent cures. In No. XVI. several: and not a few were of ophthalmia.
In No. XXI. is a cure of an affection of the heart, which had been under Dr.
Ackworth at the dispensary at Cheltenham, who declared the organ to be dis-
eased, and treated the man in vain for eighteen months. On Dr. Ackworth tell-
ing him he never would be cured, he replied, ‘‘ Bless the Lord! It might be
worse: I can die happy.’’? Dr. Ackworth put out his hand and said, ‘‘ Then
you are a happy man!’’ One day Miss Wallace found the poor man sitting on
the step of her door, exhausted with wheeling a barrowful of coals to the house,
and suffering such violent agony and palpitation of the heart that, to use his own
words, he ‘‘thought there was not a minute between him and eternity.”” She
took him in hand and cured him: so that ‘‘ I became able to walk above twenty
miles a day with ease, load and unload my goods, and find myself perfectly well.’’
In No. XXVI. she relates a cure of blindness in a boy, who had been under
various oculists, and among the rest under Mr. Alexander. Some of them had
tortured him cruelly, and strapped him down on a table whilst torturing him.
After the cure she says that she took the child to Mr. Alexander, who enquired
by what means he had been cured. ‘“ When I replied by mesmerism, he imme-
diately denounced The Zoist as an atheistical publication which he never read,
and said mesmerism was a d d humbug, and if it was anything it came from
the devil; pronounced all the reports of Dr. Esdaile’s cases as imposition, &c.,
&c. When I enquired by what agency he supposed Alick’s sight had been re-
stored after only an hour and half’s mesmeric sleep, he replied, ‘ by an effort of
nature.’ ’’

She often said that she was obliged to leave Cheltenham on account of the
conduct of some of her family towards her: they persisting that mesmerism was
satanic and an abomination. She, however, was equally superstitious, and had
been educated no better. She believed we are all surrounded by spirits, referred
endless simple natural phenomena to their agency : and when she was on a com-
mittee, and met with some one as absurd in those matters as herself, would talk
for an hour or two about spirit-rapping, spirit-table-turning, and all the doings
of spirits. Her fancies were all those of an ill-informed and impulsive person :
and she would go from one extreme opinion to another and back again. But
her conduct was beyond all praise. She engaged in ornamental working on
glass, confided greatly in others, and died in squalid penury.

There never was a more excellent woman than Miss Wallace. She was
most benevolent, perfectly sincere, unworldly, and untiring in her support of
mesmerism.


The true discoverer of Phreno-mesmerism.


CHARLES BLANDFORD MANSFIELD, Esq.


This gentleman never wrote upon mesmerism or was known to be active in
it. But he struck upon phreno-mesmerism : and led others to prove that it could
be accomplished without contact or any chance of suggestion or the will of the
mesmeriser (see above, p. 63). His high opinion of The Zoist was expressed in
No. IV., p. 470. He was educated for medicine and entered at Clare Hall,
Cambridge. We have heard that the persecution of mesmerism by the profession
caused him to be silent on the subject, and afterwards to relinquish the practice.
He devoted himself to chemistry, and gave a course of lectures on the metals at
the Royal Institution a year or two ago: and once a Friday evening lecture on
Benzole. He was making some experiments with this substance in the northern
outskirts of London last month, when the contents of a retort by some mis-
management caught fire, and enveloped him in flames as well as the poor boy
who was assisting him. He rushed with the retort in his hand to some neigh-
bouring water, broke the covering of ice, and plunged in. He was taken to
the Middlesex Hospital, and the poor boy to another: and, after lingering in
agony for some days, both expired on the same day.

He was full of ingenuity—of the promise of genius: but very eccentric and
impulsive: quick, active, and ingenious, rather than solid and profound. His opi-
nions on many subjects were extreme and fluctuating. His head was small.
The organs of his perceptive faculties were largely developed : but not those of
the higher intellectual powers. He was a good observer from boyhood. At that
period of his life his attainments in what we call scholarship were those of an
intelligent upper class school-boy: he read and composed in the ancient lan-
guages with considerable accuracy and taste. But besides these and other usual
acquirements he possessed a fund of general information not quite so common :
this was owing to his love of natural science. His love was never given to lite-
rature or abstract sciences; that which was more positive and tangible always
attracted him. Natural history was at that time a passion with him. Gentle
and modest, with remarkably engaging manners, he became a favourite with all
about him. He had moreover the sterling qualities of a warm, affectionate heart,
which shewed itself in ready sympathy and willingness to lend hand and mivd to
what was going on. There was ever a sort of playful humour, or shall we call it,
eccentricity, in him which pervaded more or less all he said and did and wrote.
This was perfectly harmless, but indicated originality and self-reliance which
might in after times have developed themselves in a singular independence of ac-
cepted modes and conventions. We deeply lament his loss.


Erratum.


p- 61, motto, 1. 15, for ‘‘ oppolition,”’ read opposition.


Communications cannot be addressed to the publisher, Mr. Bailliere, 219,


Regent Street, too early. They should always be sent a month before the day of
publication,

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. L.


JULY, 1855.


I. Reichenbach and his Researches: the principal “ Laws of
Sensitiveness,” abstracted from Reichenbach’s work, Der
Sensitive Menscu, by ALExanveEx J. Extis, B.A., Trin.
Coll., Camb.

(Continued from No. XLIX., p. 18.)

‘««Tt may be conjectured that we have carried the power of the instrument
(the voltaic battery) to the utmost extent which it admits ; and it does not appear
that we are at present in the way of making any important additions to our
knowledge of its effects, or of obtaining any new light in the theory of its action.’
(History of Electricity. By Dr. Bostock. 1818.) In the newt year a new light,
almost as brilliant as any of the preceding flashes that had illumined its progress,
was thrown on electric science by the discovery of electro-magnetism.’’—Electric


Science ; its history, phenomena, and applications. By F. C. Bakewell, &c., &c.
London: 1853. p. 35.*


1. Introduction—Baron Von Reichenbach’s Popular Letters
on the Odic Force, already translated by Dr. Gregory (Zoist,
Nos. XLII., XLIII., XLIV.), convey a sufficient notion of
the nature of od and sensitiveness. The conclusions there
popularly stated are in this work rigidly proved by an abun-
dance, almost a superabundance, of examples, and by a full
detail of all the operations. No one can properly appreciate
Reichenbach’s industry and sagacity without studying this
book. But, as publishers seem unwilling to enlist in the
English reproduction of so extensive a work (consisting of
more than 1,500 large octavo pages), an attempt will be
made to give very briefly the principal results at which he has


* Dr. Bostock was a man of industry, but of feeble intellect ; a gossiper in
science, and, as we have just seen, a finality man. Nothing more proves feeble-
ness of mind than finality views. We are only just beginning to peep out upon
nature, yet these persons fancy they see her entire expanse, and that nothing
more will be brought forth from her boundless stores. He could discern no
reality in phrenology or mesmerism, and told the world that Gall and Spurzheim
had made Gall’s discoveries (he says conjectures) by dissecting the brain ; whereas
Gall was the discoverer and made his discoveries before he gave any attention
to the anatomy of the brain. See all this in No. XIX., p. 216.—Zoist.

VOL, XIII. I


112 Elementary experiments.


arrived. Such results contain the only scientific Jaws—that
is, invariable and unconditional relations of similarity, simul-
taneity, and’ succession—-that we as yet possess for the mes-
meric condition of the human body, and are therefore of the
utmost importance to mesmerists. In The Zoist, mesmerism,
or curative od, claims more attention than the general con-
sideration of od as a branch of physics. Those laws, there-
fore, which bear upon mesmeric practice will be chiefly treated.
But it is, unfortunately, impossible for this dry statement to
produce the same effect on the reader’s mind as the complete
detail of the experiments from which it is deduced. Few of
our most important laws convey to the uninitiated any con-
ception of their true value. No one on hearing the three
laws of motion, for example, for the first time, could conceive
the wonderful results to which they lead, as shewn in scien-
tific mechanics. Nor will the statements which follow be
held at their real value by those who do not practically act
upon and pursue them to their legitimate deductive conclu-
sions. The main merit of Reichenbach does not consist in
the mere discovery of the phenomena—for many of them had
been perceived by prior observers—but, first, in so instituting,
multiplying, and diversifying his experiments as to analyze
these phenomena with certainty into their component simple
parts ; and, secondly, in seizing the general laws which regu-
late them amid the apparently endless diversity in which
they practically occur. Thus, to recur to the former illustra-
tion, the phenomena of motion had been all observed by the
ancients, but no one had discovered the key to solve them
till the successive genius of Kepler, Galileo, Newton, and
D’Alembert laid bare the three simple general facts by which
they may all be explained. This is the position which Rei-
chenbach holds towards mesmerism.

2. The elementary experiment, by which we are generally
enabled to determine the presence of sensitiveness in any
person, may be thus performed with the greatest hope of
success. Ask any person to extend his unringed /eft-hand
palm upwards, while sitting in an easy posture, with un-
crossed legs, and back to the magnetic north. Standing
with your right side towards his left, extend the forefinger of
your right hand, contracting the others but not so much
as to touch your palm, and extending the thumb at right
angles. Place this forefinger vertically over the wrist of the
other party, with the back of the finger towards his little
finger, your thumb therefore pointing towards his middle
finger, and, without contact, draw a line in the air over his
hand, at the distance of about a quarter of an inch above


Odic Statics. 113
the palm, proceeding from the centre of the wrist to the
extremity of the middle finger, in as nearly as possible a
straight line, occupying about two or three seconds in making
the pass. Carry the line rather more slowly to about an inch
beyond the tip of his middle finger, then contract the fore-
finger, bring back your hand at some distance from his, and
commence again. Repeat the pass from six to ten times.
Out of those on whom this experiment is carefully tried, from
one in three to one in two on being asked if they experience
any sensation, will reply that they do; and, on being pressed
to find some simile to it, will reply that they feel something
like a soft air breathed through a straw, traversing the hand
in the direction of the pass. Various other sensations may
be felt (p. 125), but this is the kind of sensation looked for.
The sensation also is on the whole agreeable, and rather cool
than warm; but errors may occur on these points at first
from an ignorance of the exact laws of the phenomenon.

The experiments detailed by Reichenbach refer especially
to 162 persons, whom he cites by name: of these 67 are
female, and 95 male. They are of the most various age,
aptitude, condition, education, and social position. Among
them are 15 physicians, 8 professors, 8 noblemen, 6 officers,
83 diplomatists, 9 officials, 2 of the imperial family, 12 officers’
wives, widows, or daughters, 12 noble ladies, 3 physicians’
daughters or sisters, and various others too numerous to
classify. Some were decidedly diseased, others to all appear-
ance perfectly healthy, and even extraordinarily powerful and
healthy.

3. The phenomena of sensitiveness are various, and may
be grouped under the heads of, 1. general sensation; 2.
vision and light; 3. smelling, tasting, and hearing, to which
must be added, 4. the general properties of od, and, 5. the
general and psychical properties of sensitiveness, forming the
five sections of Reichenbach’s book, of which the first is by
far the most important, extending to half the work.


Section I.—Opic PHenomena or GENERAL SENSATION.
Part I.—Persistent Odic Conditions in the Human Body.


I.—Odic Statics.


4. Man as a unit.—Sensitives are affected pleasantly or
unpleasantly by the neighbourhood of any other human body,
as if a something streamed out from it in all directions. This
effect is ascribed to od, which must be regarded as belonging
to the same category as heat, light, electricity, or magnetism.

5. Nature of the Sensations—On the one hand cool,
12


114 The Three Odic Azes.


pleasant, refreshing, soporific, soothing; on the other, luke-
warm, disagreeable, numbing, wakening, exciting.

6. Polarity of the human body.—The same cause,—as the
contact or approach of the right hand, northward pole of a
magnet, or pointed extremity of a crystal,—produces one
class of the sensations just described, or the other, according
as it is presented to one part or other of the body. It is
attractive to one side and repulsive to the other, in the
popular and sometimes in the strictly scientific sense of the
terms. This is a phenomenon usually termed polarity. Like
poles of a magnet repel, and unlike, attract. It is usual to
designate poles as positive and negative. If we call the north
pole of the earth positive, then the northward pole of the
magnet, or that which points to the north when the magnet
is freely suspended above its centre of gravity, will be nega-
tive. As then the northward pole of the magnet is always
accompanied by a certain manifestation of od, we call that
particular od negative, and as this is agreeable to the Jeft
hand of a sensitive, and disagreeable to his right hand, we
say that the left hand is positive and the right negative. The
terms positive and negative have been chosen so as to accord
with established electrical nomenclature, as it would other-
wise be indifferent which pole of the body were considered
positive or negative.

A line, of which the extremities exhibit polar effects, is
termed an axis. Generally poles always occur in pairs. But
as we have in chemistry the phenomenon of unipolar bodies
considered electrically, so we have also in od many unipolar
as well as bipolar bodies.

7. The three odic axes.—The latitudinal azis is the hori-
zontal line between the points of the two middle fingers
when the arms are extended in the same plane with the body.
The left hand is positive, the right negative.

The transverse axis is a horizontal line through the middle
of the body, from breast to back. The front is positive, the
back negative.

The longitudinal axis extends from crown to toe. The
feet and abdomen are positive, the head negative.

Left, front, feet—positive.

Right, back, head—negative.

8. Application of these laws.—As all mesmerised patients
are more or less sensitive, the mesmeriser must always bear
these laws in mind, or he will be continually liable to defeat
the intended effect. He must also remember that in some
cases of disease the poles are reversed, and that generally
illness modifies the result. A sick mesmeriser may reckon


Application of the Laws. 115


on doing harm. The effects of positive and negative od do
not destroy each other, as in electricity and magnetism, but
are both perceived at the same time as if interpenetrating
each other.

a. Latitudinal axis.—The right side produces a very
pleasant cool effect on the sensitive left, and a disagreeable
lukewarmish sensation on the right. The left side is pleas-
antly coolish to the sensitive right, and disagreeably tepid to
the left. The universal custom of leading or conducting any
one with honour by taking his left hand or arm in the other’s
right, probably owes its origin to this agreeableness con-
jointly with the desire of leaving the right hand free for
defence. Some sensitive ladies cannot endure any other
mode of conduct.

Sitting or standing for some time even with the right to
the left causes unpleasant sensations to the sensitive, and it
is necessary to alternate sides. This arises from overcharging
(18). But on no account should like sides be brought to-
gether; hence, no one should sit near and by the side of the
feet of a recumbent patient facing him, or sit on his bed and
face him. ‘To sit beyond the feet facing him is pleasant.

In all cases of lying near one another the same principles
apply, but on account of overcharging few sensitives can
bear any bedfellow, or even any one sleeping in the same
room at some distance, and the effect is even felt through
walls sufficiently to cause sleeplessness. Married sensitives
find back to back the pleasantest position, as then unlike
sides are turned towards each other, and from the usual cus-
tom of bending forward the heads are further apart.

The sensitive always prefers sitting with the left hand to
the wall, as at a window, not so much because of the light,
as because a wall is negative.

6. Transverse axis.—Sensitives find the position face to
face the coolest and pleasantest, back to back coolish and
pleasant, back to their front unpleasantly tepid, front to their
back the warmest and unpleasantest ; but in all positions
they experience mixed sensations from the combined actions
of all the poles. Many sensitives cannot bear any one to
walk close before or behind them. Others cannot endure a
person to stand behind them ; as when at the piano some one
stands behind the player to turn the leaves, or a spectator
stands behind an artist at his easel: they cannot carry chil-
dren “ pick-a-back.” Most sensitives feel great discomfort
on horseback.

c. Longitudinal axis.—Sensitives find any person lying
with head towards feet, or feet towards head, as in hammocks,
or even with a wall between in different rooms, most unpleasant.


116 Pairing hands.


d, Mixed cases.—Sensitives cannot endure being between
others, either on the side or front to front. Soldiers and
school-children often suffer from this. This is also the chief
cause of faintingsin crowds. Large crowded parties, churches,
theatres, are consequently unpleasant or intolerable to sen-
sitives. Hence sensitives should sit or stand, if possible, on
the outer right hand side.

As many persons not otherwise perceptibly sensitive be-
come so in sickness, while the sensitiveness of lower sensitives
is at such times very much increased, it is necessary to bear
the laws of polarity in mind when approaching or sitting
near a patient, taking care always to turn unlike sides. By
a neglect of this precaution much pain is often unintention-
ally caused, recoveries retarded, or rendered hopeless, and
even strength wasted.. Physicians have to remember this
carefully, when they stand by a recumbent patient and feel
his pulse. They must never turn a like side towards him,
therefore they must not stand at his side or near his feet and
look towards him; they must approach the upper part of his
body and turn their face in the same direction as his. They
thus turn him an unlike side, which is odically pleasant and
beneficial, and in this position they can remain for some little
time without doing harm. They must be particularly careful
not to feel the pulse with a like hand: if they did so, they
might in higher sensitives immediately occasion spasms, ri-
gidity, trembling, or even catalepsy ; and in those of a lower
degree, all the effects of an “up pass” (p. 124), formication,
stomach-ache, megrim, &c. They must therefore take care only
to use the fingers of the unlike hand, and to have them on the
pulse as short a time as possible to avoid the ill effects of the
“partial pass.” We also see why sensitives should always
lie in the meridian with the negative head to the positive
north, or with the positive front towards the negative wall,
and why others cannot sit with their negative back turned to
the negative wall, and others, even ladies, cannot turn their
positive front to the positive looking-glass.

9. Pairing hands.—If the hand of the operator be laid,
A, across that of the patient, and, a, with the finger-tips
only touching the little finger edge of his hand, or, 4, with
the finger-tips lying beyond the forefinger edge of his hand,
or, B, parallel to that of the patient, and, a, with the tips
of the fingers just overlapping, or, 4, with the finger-tips ex-
tending to his wrist, and all four positions be tried with, 1. the
back of the operator’s hand on the patient’s palm; 2. palm
under back ; 3. palm on palm; 4. back under back,—sixteen
ways of pairing hands are produced. These are on the whole,
I. pleasant when the operator’s right hand is used for the pa-


Table of Polarities. 117


tient’s left; II. less pleasant for left with right; III. un-
pleasant for right in right ; and, IV. most unpleasant for left
in left. And in each division the first pairing is the most,
and the sixteenth the least, pleasant. The root of the nail
is the point of greatest sensation for the pleasant coolness
and disagreeable tepidity.

10. Folded hands or fingers are always unpleasant, least
so when crossed, most so when put parallel and raised as in
prayer. Disagreeable effects result from doubling the hand
into a fist, and are even worse when the last phalanx is left
straight. In these cases the first sensation is agreeable; the
second unpleasant sensation supervenes in about twenty
seconds. Sensitives recommend the union of all the ope-
rator’s fingers into a kind of lictor’s rod to increase the odic
effect. The best way to try the odic effect of any object is
to let the fingers hang loosely over it at a little distance above,
but without contact. Crossed legs and feet are at first
pleasant, but in a few minutes produce a disagreeable effect
over the whole body.

ll. The crown of the head is the most sensitive spot in
the whole body. The brachial plexus is very sensitive to the
fingers. The left hand is more sensitive than the right.

12. Polarities——There are a number of secondary polari-
ties in the human body. Man and woman are unipolar, con-
sidered as wholes, but of opposite polarities. A general view
of the polar constitution of the body is given in the following
table :—


POSITIVE. NEGATIVE.


North pole of the earth. | South pole of the earth.

Southward pole of a magnet. Northward pole of a magnet.

Man (unipolar). Woman (unipolar).

Left hand. | Right hand.

Front of the body. | Back of the body.

Feet and lower body. | Head and upper body.

Palm of the hand. | Back of the hand.

Little finger edge. | Forefinger edge.

Thumb in respect to the other | Fingers in respect to the thumb.
fingers.

Inside of arm from axilla to | Outside of arm from the shoulder
palm relatively to the outside. | __ relatively to the inside.

Sole of the foot. | Upper part of foot.

Left leg and foot. | Right leg and foot.

Left lobe of solar plexus. | Right lobe of solar plexus.

Left side of head. | Right side of head.

Stomach and intestines.

Beating of the heart.


Odic Dynamics.


II.—Odic Dynamics.


13. The dual odic conditions just considered are constant
in place but vary in intensity, occasioning fluctuations which
have now to be considered.


A. Charging with Od.


14. From lifeless objects.—Water is charged principally
with negative od from the sun, and positive from the moon;
with positive or negative, according to the poles, from crystals
and magnets, and from electric induction according to the
direction of the stream—positive when it passes in a right-
handed spiral from the zinc pole, and negative in the reverse
direction ; with positive od from the contact of any body
which is rubbed; with negative od from chemical action ;
with positive od from positive metals; with negative od from
sounding bodies, as a bell.

All kinds of lifeless objects may be similarly charged from
various sources of od. Reichenbach has met with no excep-
tion.

Sensitives prefer mangled to ironed body-linen, because
of the charge of positive od from the metal. They can even
distinguish whether linen has been dried in the sunshine or
shade.

15. From living beings.—Each part of the human body im-
parts a charge of its own od, that is of the same quality of od
as it naturally possesses according to the statical laws just
detailed, to any object placed in contact with it, or near it.

One of the most important applications of this is to odized
water. As the lower part of the body is positive, water should
be odized negatively. Hence the glass in which it is placed
should not be touched with the positive left hand of the ope-
rator even when he principally odizes it with the negative
right hand. The whole of the positive effect is so much loss.
The taste of positively odized water is tepid and unpleasant,
even occasioning nausea or vomiting. The negative water is
brisk and agreeable, and eagerly drunk by sensitives. The
charge may be conveyed in a very short time. The sim-
plest. way is to hold a tumbler of water for a few minutes with
the right hand. It is always better to use water which has
not passed through metal pipes or been exposed to any source
of positive od.

The breath is principally odo-positive. Hence a closed
chamber containing many persons soon has its air charged
with positive od and becomes intolerable to sensitives. Simi-
larly with a closed carriage.


Ye eae ee


Charging with Od. 119


The seat becomes charged and if taken by any one before
the charge given by the person who has just quitted it, has
been dissipated, charges the two sides with similar od. Hence
if the sensitive cannot avoid taking the seat, he should only
sit half upon it, bringing the right side over the odic charge
from the former occupier’s left. But the sensitive charges
his own seat in this way, and hence is always restless on his
chair. The bed becomes so charged, and hence sensitives are
continually, but involuntarily changing sides to bring unlike
od in contact. They are consequently bad sleepers. As a
rule they lie with the upper arm uncovered.

16. Charging from a charged object—An object when
charged can communicate the same charge to another object.
Thus the pricking sensation produced on the hand by the odic
action of sulphur, can be communicated from the hand to the
cheek, even when the first action took place by conduction
instead of contact.

Glasses of water placed on the centre of a table at which
table-moving experiments were being made, became charged,
chiefly with positive od, from the charge communicated to the
table by the fingers.

17. Charging by approximation.—It is not absolutely ne-
cessary that two objects should touch to convey a charge. In
the ordinary mode of odizing water no contact takes place.
The water conveys this charge to the drinker, as in the last
case.

18. Saturation and overcharge ; obstruction ; recoil_—The
first effect of the action of unlike poles on each other is plea-
sant and cool, but it is more or less rapidly followed by a
secondary effect of a contrary nature—warmth, generally dis-
agreeably tepid, but in certain cases pleasantly warm, finally
repulsive, and generative of spasms. This secondary effect
results either when the mutual action of the poles is con-
tinued too long, producing saturation and apparent over-
charging, or when the mutual action is suddenly interrupted,
producing a species of recoil.

It appears as if the od streamed from any source into any
object until odic equilibrium ensues in both. Further charg-
ing in this direction becomes impossible, and the streaming is
checked. The charged object now reacts, with the od it has
received, upon the charging object, but with this difference,
that the od is now similar, and the result is therefore always
disagreeably tepid.

When the charging source is a part of the sensitive’s body,
and the receiving object envelops it, as a part of the dress,
the communicated od not being carried off by the surrounding


120 Conduction of Od.


air, accumulates, and the effect ensues which Reichenbach
attributes to the obstruction of the odic stream by the sur-
rounding object.

Both sources of disagreeable sensations are of great im-
portance to the mesmeriser. In pointing, he must not con-
tinue to point long, but should soon remove his finger, allow
the od to stream away and then return. Much of the theory
of the pass depends upon this law. .

Again, suppose that a northward magnetic pole acts on
the left hand. The hand receives negative and loses positive
od. Let the magnet be suddenly removed, the negative od
received by the hand will leave it and the positive od it lost
will be restored. Hence from both reasons the condition of
the naturally positive hand will become more positive, and
this produces of course a warm effect, which, however, is,
singularly enough, not always disagreeable. Reichenbach
terms this the odic recoil.

Connected with these phenomena is the fact that open
vessels taken into the hand do not become odically warm
because the od can escape with the stream of air generated
by the physical heat of the hand in the interior of the vessel,
but if the vessel is closed, there is no stream to carry off the
od, the vessel soon becomes overcharged and therefore warm
to the hand.


B. Conduction of Od.


19. Od may be conducted through different bodies. In
trying experiments on conduction, some of the following con-
ditions are necessary and others convenient.

The hand of the sensitive must reach beyond the end of
the conductor, which must therefore terminate in the palm.
The grasping fingers must not reach over the object so as to
be brought in contact with the palm. The sensitive should
sit with the head to the magnetic north, and face to the
south. Experiments should be made on the left hand as the
most sensitive. The sensitive must hold the conductor in his
hand about a minute before the experiment begins in order
that his hand may become accustomed to it, and all odic and
thermic disturbances may be brought into equilibrium. The
conductor should be held in a magnetic parallel, or perpen-
dicular to the meridian, and also to the line of magnetic dip,
which will be effected in these latitudes if he hold the rod in
his left hand across his body to the right, slightly raising the
farther end. The last precaution can on no account be ne-
glected when experimenting with iron or nickel.

Metal wires are good conductors of od from all sources,


Attraction. The Pass. 121
as from magnets, crystals, the sun, moon, heat and chemical
action. Experiments were tried with copper wire 100 feet
long, iron wire 33 feet long, &c.

Glass rods are even better conductors than metal wires.

Wood, silk, linen, wool, &c., are good conductors. Silk
seems as good as glass. Both these are remarkable as non-
conductors of electricity.

The finest fibres, a single fibre of silk, a single long wo-
man’s hair—especially when still on the head—conducts od
rapidly.

The whole human body is a conductor.

Chains of various elements conduct, but not so well as an
unbroken body.

The source of od need not be in contact with the further
end of the conductor; approximation is sufficient.

The od conducted is similar to that which issues from the
source.


C. Odie Attraction and Repulsion of Human Limbs.


20. The poles of crystals and magnets attract and repel
the sensitive hand in a peculiar manner. When applied ver-
tically they cause a sensation of lightening or weighting the
hand, applied horizontally they visibly attract and repel, and
when the effect is increased it results in a spasmodic clinging
of the hand to the magnet or crystal.

Odo-positive bodies of all kinds attract the right and repel
the left hand, similar to the southward pole of magnet. Such
bodies are quicksilver, zinc, copper, brass, German silver, iron,
silver, &c.

A stick held in the left hand and passed through a pris-
matic solar spectrum felt lighter in the blue, violet and invi-
sible actinic rays, and heavier in the yellow and red.

The human hands and odic poles act similarly in attract-
ing and repelling.

In all cases however the attractions and repulsions are not
constant, they soon cease, and change to the reverse, analog-
ous to action of electricity on pith balls, and totally unlike
magnetic attraction.


D. The Pass.


21. In the foregoing cases of charging, conduction, attrac-
tion and repulsion, the source of od was supposed to be sta-
tionary. In the pass, it moves. The pass consists of three
parts; 1. coming in contact or near approach; 2. onward
movement of the odic source; 3. separation. Now, 1. on
approach or contact, a charge of od is given which is imme-


122 Metaphoric use of the terms employed.


diately conducted away through the body, but as charging
proceeds more rapidly than conduction, an accumulation of
od at the point of contact takes place as long as the odic
source is at rest. 2. When the odic source moves, the first
spot receives no more od and its accumulated od disperses,
but a slighter addition of od is received from the new point
of contact. Od is now accumulated on the second spot, and
is conducted as before to all parts of the body including the
spot just quitted. 3. When the odic source leaves the body,
the part over which the pass was made, no longer receives od,
charging and conduction cease, and odic equilibrium of the
whole body is gradually re-established. But as the line passed
over loses its od much less rapidly than it received it, od
continues to stream from its whole length towards all parts
of the body for some time. Some minutes, or quarters of an
hour, or even entire hours may elapse before all trace of it is
lost.

“The expressions here employed,” remarks Reichenbach,
“are borrowed from the rude conception of an odic material
fluid, as we have hitherto conceived of an electric fluid. I
have often declared that I cannot in any way guarantee the
correctness of such a conception. I do not know whether od
is matter, or undulation or what not. This is neither the
time nor the place to decide the question. I use a figurative
expression to have some means of wording and imparting my
observations. Every one may then mould them after his own
fashion.”

We are justified then in assuming that when a pass is
made by the odizer, he communicates positive od to the
patient’s right side with the left hand and negative od to the
left side with the right hand, and that this od after a longer
or a shorter time is dispersed over the patient’s whole body,
and then through the chair and floor and atmosphere gene-
rally.


22. Passes over the whole body, or complete passes.
a. Front complete passes.


The odizer makes passes with both hands from crown to
toe over the front of the patient’s body, keeping his right
hand on the patient’s left side, and left hand on the right
side.

Results of 28 tabulated experiments.


1. The general impression left on the patient after
completion of the pass was cool, refreshing, and pleas-
ant, in 16 cases out of 17, or as..............6-4- 16:1


Front complete passes.


2. From the crown to the forehead, fepid........ 27:1
3. From the forehead to the eyes, tepid ........ 26:1
4. From the eyes down towards the mouth, cool.. 22:0
5. Over the cheeks towards the mouth, cool...... 14:0
6. Over the chin downwards, cool.............. 21:5
7. Over the occiput downwards, warm.......... 10:0
i, SN rs I aan 66s ke 6 Hei vrocee ces 27:0
©. The mingle, the csolent 2... cc cccccccccccess 25:0
10. Below the nipple, tepid .............0ce008. 23:0
11. The pit of the stomach, warm .............. 26:0
ee ere 25:0
Bs SP IE, GEE ob oe ewer snenisniwonnsive 10:1
14. Upper part of the thigh, towards the inside, cool 16:0
15. Middle of thigh, within, very warm ........ 27:0
16. Lower part of thigh, above the knee, tepid .... 8:2
xs ) i Tae eres es rere 22:3
18. Below, but near the knee, cool.............. 15:0
19. Lower part of the tibia, warm .............. 13:1
Sk es cited ieikeekecheeed seebe 26:1
in TU SI GD nc ov viccawecede vcends 26:1


There was a little variation in parts, which became after-
wards explicable. All persons were not questioned on all
parts, from want of time, or consideration of sex.

The explanation of these changes from warmth to cool-
ness, and vice versd, Reichenbach discovered to be, that

The effect is cool and pleasant when a source of dissimilar
od is drawn from a nervous centre towards the periphery, (or
in what is usually called the direction of the nerves ;) and
warm, when in the contrary direction. The cutaneous and
subcutaneous nerves are here chiefly concerned.

Thus the supra-orbitalis nerve passes upwards from the
eye to the crown, and the infra-orbitalis downwards to the
lips, agreeing with (2, 3, 4, 5). Both the occipitalis major
and minor proceed from the neck to the crown, giving (7).
In the chin, when the nervus mentalis was passed over ob-
liquely, coolness was always occasioned; when the odic
source deviated to the side so as to pass towards the mus-
culus platisma myoides, tepidity resulted, for the pass pre-
ceded obliquely against the direction of the nerves. This
solved the contradictions which had here occurred. At the
nipple there is a nerve-shed (so to speak), the branches from
the supra-claviculares and subcutaneous colli medius and
profundus ending there downwards, and branches of the
intercostals terminating upwards. Hence the immediate
transition from coolness to warmth.


124 Back complete passes.


A pass made in the direction of the nerves in this sense,
will be called a down pass (as the railway line from the cen-
tral station is the down line) ; and in the contrary direction,
an up pass, without reference to those made in a vertical
direction, which may be distinguished as upward and down-
ward passes.

A down pass acts in the same way as simple contact of
dissimilar poles, and an up pass as that of similar poles.


b. Back complete passes.


Here the hands of the odizer have to be crossed in order
that the right hand may be applied to left side, and vice
versd,

The effects as the fingers passed over,

1. The occiput, were warm ;

2. The nape, coolish, mixed with warmth ;

3. The shoulder-blades, cool ;

4. The whole back in the neighbourhood of the spinal
column, cool; colder at both upper and lower extremities
than in the middle. In the spinal cord itself the cold was so
sensible, that the effect was that of an ice-cold thread drawn
down through the flesh, and occasioned oppression in the
breast.

5. Both hip-bones, cool ;

6. The buttocks, at the lower part, warm ;

7. Thighs down towards the hollow of the knee, warm ;

8. Hollow of the knee, warm, with a strong sensation of
“pins and needles” (kriebeln) ;

9. The calves, cold ;

10. Below the calves, warm, and much “ pins and needles,”
extending up to the sacrum ;

11. Below the heel to the ball of the foot, warm ;

12. Under the toes from root to tip, icy cold, with shud-
dering over the whole body.

All these actions agree with the law already stated, so far
as the courses of the cutaneous and subcutaneous nerves are
known.

23. Incomplete passes over the head only gave the results
already known. Many sensitive women cannot endure comb-
ing their back hair down because of the up pass over the
occiput.

Pass from the shoulder or axilla to the hand :—Odizer’s
right hand over the patient’s left arm, on the inside down-
wards, cold, mixed with warm, but pleasant; on the outside
downwards, cool, mixed with tepid, pleasant. On the pa-
tient’s right arm, inside downwards, cool, with traces of tepid,


Incomplete passes. 125


pleasant; on the outside down, coolish, tepid above, dis-
agreeable.

The odizer’s left hand over the patient’s /eft arm, inside
downwards, cool, a little tepid, pleasant. Outside down-
wards, coolish, partially tepid, disagreeable. Over the pa-
tient’s right arm, inside downwards, cool, scarcely any traces
of tepid, pleasant. Outside, downwards, ccolish, spots of
tepid, pleasant.

The passes on the inside of the arm are more powerful
and effective than those on the out, which feel as if they had
to act through a thick covering.

Down passes with like odic poles are disagreeable and
injurious.

All sensitive nerves, if they do not lie too deep, are af-
fected by the pass, as well as the cutaneous nerves. The
effect of the pass is not confined to the exact line traced out,
but spreads in all directions, and is especially conducted by
the nerves.

Down passes, with unlike poles, produce odo-negative
effects where the odizer pauses a while, or on the path over
which he has passed, not on the whole limb. On the con-
trary, they produce odo-positive effects on the path which has
still to be covered. Hence the pass does not consist simply
of a charging and conduction of od, as we were first led to
believe, but it produces antagonistic odic effects at consider-
able distances, as the entire length of the arm. This anta-
gonism is produced and begins as soon as the finger touches
the arm. The pass, then, may be said to drive tepidity
before it and draw coolness after it.

This is one cause of the variety of sensations experienced
in trying the fundamental experiment of making passes over
a hand with the forefinger. Some patients attend rather to
the tepidity than the coolness. Another cause is that the
palm and back are odically unlike, and hence the pass pro-
duces different sensations on different sides of the hand. The
fingers and thumb are differently polarized, and if all are used
in making the pass differences arise. Again the coolness only
extends to the sides of the fingers where the principal nerves
run in the direction of the pass and not to the middle of
them, where many small nerves running in the opposite direc-
tion occasion tepidity. The palm appears also to feel tempe-
rature differently from the fingers, for which Reichenbach is
not yet able to account.

Persons affected with “dead fingers,” often perceive the
odie pass over them when in that state, and not in the ordi-
nary condition.


?


126 Passes at a distance.

24. Passes made over one’s self.—These may be separated
into crossed and uncrossed, the first corresponding to passes
made by another person with unlike and the second with like
poles. The effects of the two cases are precisely similar, with
the exception of the difference arising from sex.

25. Down passes with like poles—These present great
complications. Generally any down pass, whether with like
or unlike poles, is essentially cool, the unlike down pass being
the cooler and agreeable, the like down pass cool but un-
pleasant, in which respect it differs from the like up pass, which
is warm and unpleasant.

26. Up passes with unlike poles.—These as a general rule
produce effects precisely opposed to the down passes. The
general effect of the complete up pass from toe to crown is
tepid, disagreeable, and even painful. From accurate experi-
ments on passes over the arm, Reichenbach concludes that
unlike up passes produce and leave behind them a feeling of
unpleasant coolness but drive warmth before them.

27. Up passes with like poles.—These should be made
from behind. The result is agreeable, though in a less degree
than the unlike down pass.

28. Passes over the nerves.—In addition to the general
law of pleasant unlike down passes, it is observable that the
odic influence is instantaneously propagated through the
nerves from one extremity of the body to the other, following
the path of the nerves originally affected so strictly as to cross
with them in the medulla oblongata and thus to pass over to
the opposite side of the brain. The nerves must therefore be
considered as especial conductors of od.

29. Passes at a distance.—The effect of the pass dimi-
nishes with the increase of the odizer’s distance according to
some unknown law. It is perceived at greater distances by
higher sensitives. It has been felt at a distance of several
rooms’ length. The effect is greatest when the distance is
least, as for example when there is actual contact on the skin.
Near passes act more locally, distant passes more generally.
Very distant down passes produce oppression in the region of
the stomach. Distant up passes act painfully on the head.
Persons of high sensitiveness should not be troubled by many
motions of the hand from those in their neighbourhood.
When a person walks round a recumbent sensitive he pro-
duces upon him the effect of short distant passes on like or
unlike sides upwards or downwards. The effect of these
passes should therefore be understood by nurses.

30. Direction of the hand in making the pass.—The com-
monest direction in which the hand is held is with the fingers


Rapidity of the pass. 127


parallel and directed upwards. But for both down and up
passes this position is the least pleasant.

Another position inverts the hand turning the fingers
downwards. This is found more pleasant than the former.

In a third position the hand is laid across, the fingers
being turned outwards. This is much more agreeable than
either of the others.

In a fourth position the hand is also laid across but the
fingers are directed inwards. This is still better.

The fifth and only proper position is to keep the four fin-
gers perpendicular to the surface, bending the thumb up so
as to be parallel to it. “ Fraeulein Zinkel found this position
far the most agreeable, producing the purest, the most deli-
cate, and so to speak, the nicest cooling pass, the best in every
respect, and freest from secondary influences.”

The two first positions must be carefully avoided in all
experiments with passes, as they produce very disturbing
effects.

31. Rapidity and number of the passes; effect on the odi-
zer.— Very slow passes are distressing, very rapid passes are
also disagreeable. Reichenbach found that it was best to
consume about twelve seconds in making a pass over the arm.
This gives a velocity of from two to three inches in a second.

The charge increases with the number of the strokes until
the charged body and the odizer are brought into equilibrium,
upon which the effect of like poles (that is a disagreeably tepid
and repulsive effect) ensues upon the patient. Hence care
should be taken not to give too many passes.

A non-sensitive odizer does not experience any effect from
making the passes. On a sensitive odizer, the pass he makes
produces no effect as such upon himself, but there is a con-
tinual pairing of the odizer’s hands with odically like or unlike
parts of the patient. The first is immediately unpleasant, and
the latter becomes so from the effect of charging. Hence
Reichenbach recommends sensitives not to mesmerise cura-
tively.

32. Mediate passes.—By this is meant, passes not made
by the simple hand of the odizer, but by and through some
intermediate body. The patient holds a rod, of glass, wood,
or metal ; the odizer strokes it, making passes towards or from
the patient. When the glass rod was held in the sensitive
left and stroked with the odizer’s right hand from him the
effect was cool and pleasant ; towards him, disagreeably tepid
and formicating (gruslich); stroked with the left fingers from
him, disagreeably cool, weaker and without formication ; to-
wards him, disagreeably tepid, formicating up to the shoulder.
VOL. XIII. kK


128 Partial pass.


In fact, the rod held in the sensitive’s hand becomes a con-
tinuation of his arm and the effects are similar. Since the
floor acts as a rod, persons approaching a sensitive produce a
disagreeable effect, and persons receding a pleasant one.

33. The partial pass.—Reichenbach found that when he
placed his hand upon a patient, dissimilarly, with palm on
palm and finger on finger, so that his fingers projected slightly,
the effect was pleasant, but if the patient’s fingers projected
the effect was unpleasant. Similarly a sensitive required the
head of the odizer to be higher than his. “ When Frau
Anschuetz sat on her husband’s knees with her cheek against
his, she had pains and oppression in her head if it were the
higher. If his head were higher, he, being also sensitive, was
similarly affected, so that they could only endure the position
when they kept their heads on a level.” ‘Short husbands do
not match tall wives.”

When Reichenbach made a pass down the arm and paused
some minutes at the shoulder, it was cool at that spot, but a
thick, swollen, puffy sensation of tepidity commenced in the
hand, and gradually spread to the wrist, elbow and shoulder.
He then commenced the down pass, and, at each spot he
passed over, this puffiness immediately ceased and was re-
placed by pleasant coolness and briskness.

Generally, when any limb is only partially acted on, the
neighbouring parts are contrarily polarized. The negative
down pass on a portion of the arm caused a positive reaction
in the hand; similarly with a portion of the foot; with the
trunk and arms; the fingers and thumb; the hand and the
several fingers; a finger and its extreme phalanx. Hence
the name partial pass for this effect, which is of great import-
ance in therapeutics.

34. Passes with crystals and magnets.—A pass made with
the negative pole of a natural crystal or rock-crystal, selenite,
heavy spar, calespar, tourmaline, or an artificial one of alum
or chrome-alum, affects the patient’s arm and hand precisely
like the fore and middle finger of the right hand. The pass
with the positive pole resembles that with the middle finger,
or more exactly with the thumb of the left hand, in which
last all positive relations are concentrated.

Passes with magnets follow the same law as passes with
crystals, except that they require especial attention to be paid
to the position of the patient with respect to the magnetic
meridian.

35. Passes with breath and wind.—Reichenbach found
that if he breathed on a patient’s hand upwards from the
finger-tips to the wrist, the effect was that of an up pass;


Passes with breath and wind. 129
downwards from the wrist to the finger-tips, of a down pass.
Breathing perpendicularly on the palm produced a mixed
effect from the radiation of the breath, pleasant towards
the fingers, unpleasant towards the arm.

This led Reichenbach to try the effect of the bellows,
knowing that the friction of the air through the tube of the
bellows charged it with positive od. Placing the orifice at
the patient’s right elbow, therefore, he blew gently down the
median nerve. The effect was very pleasant, like an agree-
able down pass. On the Jeft arm the effect was much less
pleasant, partially disagreeable, but endurable. When he
blew up the right arm from the ends of the fingers, the effect
was that of an unpleasant up pass. On blowing up the /eft
arm, a sudden and violently disagreeable tepidity ensued, as
from the strongest up passes. The patient indeed nearly
threw him down, and he had to try every means in his power
to free her in some degree from the raging pain, traces of
which remained all day.

“Wind from the bellows,” Reichenbach remarks, “is
therefore a powerful agent for making passes. Down and up
passes may be thus made with the greatest convenience. By
means of elastic tubes furnished with roses or small orifices,
a stream of air may be conducted with the greatest ease to
any part of the body, and we have therefore a means of odiz-
ing without troubling the physician to be present, and without
any of the numerous inconveniences and discomforts of the
customary hand-mesmerism.”

This suggestion merits careful consideration and further
experiment.

36. Influence of the pass in inducing heat, sleep and
wakefulness.—The pass will not produce the slightest effect
on the most delicate thermoscope. But when at a temperate
of 14° R. (=63°4 F.), Reichenbach made several complete
down passes over the arm of Fraeulein Zinkel, who was very
sensitive, he produced a genuine “ goose-skin,” as from actual
cold. When the same patient lay for a short time with her
head to the south or west she burst into a perspiration. A
series of experiments on this point were interrupted, but he
believes the change of temperature to be due in all cases to a
vital act produced by odizing.

Complete or incomplete unlike down passes produce a
repose in the sensitive’s body and mind, leading to sleep,
which is at first healthy and natural, but if the number of
passes necessary for this effect be exceeded, the sleep assumes
an unusual character and becomes an unhealthy restless
(ungesund, unruhig) somnambulism. .

K


130 Influence of the pass on the brain and stomach.


The up pass dissipates sleep, brisks and enlivens, and
wakes up the patient at once.

Up and down passes, here as elsewhere, mean passes ¢o-
wards and from nervous centres respectively.

37. Influence of the pass on the brain and stomach.—Fre-
quent megrim and stomach-ache are so ordinarily found with
sensitiveness, that their occurrence may be regarded as a
tolerably sure sign of its presence.

Head-ache on one side, opposite to that on which the pass
is made, can be occasioned at pleasure by an up pass, and fre-
quently by an up pass only extending over the toes or hands.

Stomach-ache often ensues upon making up passes over
the arms and legs, and can be removed by down passes. It is
usually on the opposite side to that on which the pass is made.

Even down passes may occasion stomach-ache when not
made over the region of the stomach. It may be caused by
a pass over the decussations of the nerves (nerven-koepfe,
nerve-heads) from the spine. It even results from making
passes two slowly.

Passes at a distance and consequently walking about a
sensitive patient’s bed, as well as chance movements of the
arms and hands, suffice to cause head-ache and stomach-ache.

The pain arises in the spots where tepidity is generated
or driven, and yields on the production of odic coolness.

38. Conclusions.—The odic pass appears to make a change
in the constituent arrangement of the patient. The depth to
which it penetrates in the time of a single pass is small, and
seems to reach no further than the skin and its neighbour-
hood. Its effect is specifically on the nerves.

“ The pass has been used as a curative agent for thousands
of years,” remarks Reichenbach, “and we owe our whole
knowledge of its existence to the effects thus produced.
Hundreds of books treat of this subject and tell us what we
know and don’t know about it. I have not entered upon this
view of the pass, because I am of opinion that what we now
require is not so much practical use as clear conceptions of
this difficult and important subject, and a study of its physical
laws. As long as we are ignorant of the nature, constitution,
powers and action of any object, especially one of such deep
significance, how is it possible to make a rational application
of it, in which the means and the end have to be apportioned
to each other ?”’


E. Separation.


39. When members with dissimilar odic poles are united
a cool effect is produced, but on their being quickly separated,


Separation. Duration. 131


tepid sensations ensue. Conversely, when members with like
poles are united a tepid effect follows, which on quick separa-
tion is converted into a cool sensation.

Upon this principle Reichenbach would explain the un-
pleasant effect of dancing, especially waltzing, swinging,
motion of a ship, pirouetting or any rapid motion of objects
before a sensitive. There is a continual establishment and
breaking of odic relations between a patient and the sur-
rounding objects or terrestrial magnetic poles.

Odizers should be careful when concluding a down pass
and carrying it off beyond the tips of the fingers, not to make
the separation sudden, as they otherwise produce the effect
of an up pass.


F. Duration of Odic Action.


40. To odize water a very brief time is sometimes suffi-
cient, but Reichenbach mentions “ half a quarter of an hour”
(seven minutes and a half), as the average time for producing
saturation, sometimes more, sometimes less. The patient is
able to decide, on tasting the water, whether it has been suf-
ficiently odized.

Conduction of od does not proceed with great rapidity.
It is quicker than that of heat, but very much slower than
that of magnetism or electricity. Metals, glass, silk, conduct
better than wood, linen, or cotton; coherent better than
incoherent bodies. We may say roughly, that od requires
from a half to a whole second to pass through an arm’s
length (30 inches), according as the substance is a better
or a worse conductor.

The time required for the dispersion of od is very variable,
sometimes taking place in a few seconds, sometimes requiring
hours. Water retains the charge a very long time, during
many hours or the whole night. A patient will also retain it
for some time, and often nearly as long as water.

Hence in practice a pause should be made between all
odic experiments on the human body.


[This concludes the first and by far the most important
part in a mesmeric point of view, on the persistent odic con-
ditions in the human body, forming the first half of the first
volume. An account of the second part, on transient odic
conditions, that is quite necessary to explain apparent ano-
malies in the application of the above laws, will be given in
the next number, and briefer abstracts of the remaining parts
will afterwards be added.—A. J. E.]


132 )


II. Cure of intense Depression of Spirits and other nervous
sufferings, after the failure of ordinary means in London
and Cambridge. By the Rev. Jerrery Exins, Rector
of New Sampford, near Braintree, Essex.


‘« Many people become giddy and even epileptic from working for a length of
time on a running stream ; with others this very stream-gazing induces a pleasur-
able reverie or a disposition to sleep. Apply these facts to animal magnetism.
Compare them with the effects of the manipulations so called, and you will have
little difficulty at a just estimate of their nature and mode of action. What is
animal magnetism? It consists in passing the hands up and down before the
eyes of another slowly, and with a certain air of pomp and mystery; now mov-
ing them this way, now that. You must of course assume a very imperturbable
gravity, and keep your eye firmly fixed upon the patient in order to maintain
your mental ascendancy. On no account must you allow your features to relax
into a smile. If you perform your tricks slowly and silently in a dimly-lit
chamber, you will be sure to make an impression. What impression? Oh!
as in the case of the stream-gazer, one person will become dreary and entranced ;
another sleepy ; a third fidgetty or convulsed. Who are the persons that for the
most part submit themselves to this mummery? Dyspeptic men and hysteric
women, weak, curious, credulous persons whom you may move at any time by
a straw or a feather. Hold up one finger to them and they will laugh; depress
it and they will cry! So far from being astonished at anything I hear of these
people, I only wonder it has not killed some of them outright—poor fragile
things! A few years ago I took it into my head to try this kind of pawing in a
case of epilepsy. It certainly had the effect of keeping off the fit; but what
hocus pocus has not done that? I have often done the same with a stamp of my
foot. In a case of cancer upon which I tried the ‘ passes,’ as these manipula-
tions are called, the lady got so fidgetty, I verily believe if I had continued them
longer, she would have become hysterical or convulsed! That effects remedial
and the reverse may be obtained from them, I am perfectly satisfied. Nor do I
mean to deny that in a few—a very few instances, these or any other monotonous
motions may produce some extraordinary effects ; effects which however are ihe
rare exception instead of the general rule. Whatever any other cause of this
case may produce on the human body, these manipulations may by possibility
occasion somnambulism, catalepsy, or what you please. There is no more diffi-
culty in believing this than there is difficulty in believing that the odour of a rose
or the sight of a cat will make certain people swoon away. This much then I
am disposed to admit. But when the animal magnetizers assert that the senses
may be transposed—that the stomach may take the office of the eye, and render
that beautiful organ with all the complete but complex machinery by which it
conveys light and shadow to the brain, a work of supererogation on the part of
the Creator; I turn from the subject with feelings of invincible disgust. If it
be objected that magnetizers have produced persons of both sexes who with their
eyes closed and bandaged read a book placed upon their stomach, by means of
that organ, through a waistcoat-bodice and heaven knows what all! I reply that
the charlatans of all countries every day perform their tricks with a swiftness
that altogether eludes the unpractised eye.’’—Fallacies of the Faculty. By Dr.
Dickson. p. 135.*


To Dr. Elliotson.
Sampford, April 27, 1855.
My dear Sir,—The enclosed case, which I have the
pleasure to send you to forward for The Zoist if you think


* The gross ignorance and misrepresentation which pervade this quotation
need not be pointed out to our readers, Dr. Dickson is referred for information
to No. XLIX., p. 102.—Zoiet.


Mesmerism takes with the poor. 133


proper, was intended for the last Number. As, however, I
did not return home till near the end of the last quarter, I
wished to see my patient again in order to ascertain if she
were permanently cured. Her cure is now a matter of fact,
and this delay in sending her case tends to corroborate the
truth more strongly.

I am happy to say that mesmerism takes wonderfully
with the poor people; for scarcely a day passes without an
application from some suffering person in the neighbourhood.
Their faith moreover in the healing power is confirmed when
they see the names of themselves and of their neighbours
recorded in such a scientific and ably-conducted periodical as
The Zoist ; whilst their confidence in their clerical friend is
increased when they know that he is associated in this labour
of love with many eminent, learned, and benevolent persons,
lay, clerical, and medical, all over the world.

If the clergy at large would only take mesmerism as their
vade mecum in their parochial visits, they would be amply
rewarded by hearing the voice of joy and health more fre-
quently in the dwellings of the poor, who would thus escape
the infliction of many a drastic drug from the itinerant quack,
or that loathsome compound from the village shop, the pa-
nacea of rustic ailments, “ atro inamabilis” haustu. We
might then throw such physic to the dogs, and cure human
diseases in a more humane and handy manner.

I remain, dear Sir,
Yours most truly,
Jerrery EKIns.


Lydia Wright, widow, without children, 40 years of age,
who keeps a shop in the village of Old Sampford, has been
suffering from nervousness and low spirits upwards of two
years. She has been attended by doctors both in London and
in Cambridge, but has received no benefit. Having seen David
Andrews and Ruth Goldstone, both of whose cures by mes-
merism have been recorded in The Zoist (Nos. XLVII. and
XLVIII.), she earnestly entreated me to attend her. Her
malady began with a pain in the spine, that she described as
like the movement of the pendulum of a clock. During the
catamenial period she is subject to overabundant loss, and to
a large loss from hemorrhoids, which have hitherto attacked
her at the same time. I mesmerised her for a quarter of an
hour, and put her to sleep, giving her mesmerised water to
drink before and after the passes, and leaving her a bottle of
mesmerised water to drink at her meals. When I com-
menced the passes, she told me she felt a sensation of great


134 Immediate benefit from Mesmerism.


sleepiness, and then a painful fluttering at the heart, that
she thought would have made her faint if she had not been
relieved by shedding a flood of tears.

Nov. 8rd. Since my first visit her sleep at night has been
better than usual. She looks brighter and more able to bear up
against nervous sensations and depression of spirits. She is
very grateful, has perfect faith in mesmeric influence, and
fully expects to be restored to health on the strength of my
success in former cases. I mesmerised her for twenty mi-
nutes, finishing with contact passes down the spine. During
the time of manipulation, she felt for a short time an inability
to open her eyes, though she was not asleep. I gave and left
the mesmerised water as before.

9th. An engagement prevented my attending her before
this day; but her nerves are evidently stronger. Her circu-
lation is improved; there is less trembling in her limbs, and
her mind not nearly in such an agitated state as at first.
Her hands have now regained their natural use and colour,
whereas she previously had no feeling in them; they were
numb as if “asleep,” and there was a quaking sensation all
over her body. Instead of the craving insatiable appetite
she had before, she now feels satisfied after meals, and is
nourished by her food. Since my last visit, her motions,
which were pale, are now of a healthier colour.

9th. I mesmerised her as before for twenty minutes. In
a few minutes after I began, she gasped hard for breath, and
placed her hand on her chest; but she was soon relieved and
fell asleep.

11th. The two last nights she fell asleep, she said, imme-
diately on going to bed and slept soundly till morning,—a
circumstance unusual with her. She was much refreshed,
and, not feeling bewildered as she had hitherto felt on waking,
she wept for joy. Her appetite continues healthy, and not
voracious as at first. Her spirits are more composed, and
she does not feel flurried at seeing people. Soon after I
began the usual passes, she fell asleep, but was awakened by
a cold sensation moving slowly from the shoulders to the feet,
though I did not continue the passes further than the knees.
At the same time a pain came on in her forehead, but this
was removed by my placing my hand across her eyes. The
coldness remained for twenty minutes after I had mesmerised
her. I then made strong contact passes quickly from the
shoulders to the fingers, breathing on the back of the hands.
The vibratory motion in the spine has ceased. She is na-
turally strong in body and of a cheerful active disposition ;
and, though she attributes her nervous condition to some


Benefit continues and increases. 135


religious misgivings (being a rigid dissenter of the Baptist
persuasion), perhaps the moving cause may be found in the
physical change incident to her time of life.

15th. She is steadily improving, and is not so much dis-
turbed when she is spoken to. I mesmerised her for twenty
minutes. She slept a few minutes, and was awakened by a
fulness and heaviness in the head. She put up her hand to
hold it up, and thought she would have fallen from her chair
if a woman who was present had not supported her. She
then had a strong hysterical fit, and looked like a person
choking. She perspired profusely ; then there came on a
pain at the hottom of the abdomen, together with that sensa-
tion in the spine which she described as vibratory, like the
motion of the pendulum. After these sensations ceased, she
felt relieved, and was glowing with warmth.

18th. She is more composed in spirits and enjoys sound
and tranquil sleep at night. She has gained strength enough
to do more laborious work, is more collected when she at-
tends to her customers and transacts the business of the
shop. Since my last visit she has lost the pain in her fore-
head. Before I saw her she could lie only on one side; now
the palpitation in both sides is gone. After drinking mes-
merised’ water she feels a heat descending down the spine to
the knees. I mesmerised her for twenty-five minutes. In
five minutes her eyes dropped, and she seemed to be asleep,
as she breathed hard; but she declared that she only felt
dizzy and “noteless.” A gradual chill came over her, and
then a feeling as of a weight pressing on her shoulders and
then down her arms. She said that if a sack of wheat were
placed on her back, she could not have been more heavily
burdened. Her hands became livid and very cold to the
touch, and her arm when [I raised it was rigid and heavy.
The chilly sensation ran down the spine. She said her arms
felt as if they were bruised in the fleshy part ; and observed
that, if I had been beating her with a stick instead of making
passes without contact, she could not be in greater pain.
Before I left her, these sensations ceased entirely, and circu-
lation returned. During the time these uneasy and painful
sensations lasted, she declared of her own accord that she
would rather endure them for ten days than suffer what she
had done before I applied mesmeric treatment to her disorder !
She feels perfect confidence in mesmerism in spite of this ex-
traordinary crisis and the one that occurred at the preceding
séance.

22nd. She thinks that the extreme coldness she felt at
my last visit was the precursor of erysipelas which appeared


136 Erysipelas and Dropsy cease.


on her face on the following day. At the same time men-
struation came on too abundantly. I put her to sleep by
passes, and she continued to sleep for twenty-five minutes.

25th. The catamenia still continued, but of a more miti-
gated amount than usual. Erysipelas has disappeared. She
slept well on the night of my last visit. Though she has still
occasionally chilly sensations, she is confident that her health
is improving. On the night of the 23rd, she felt languor
and want of appetite, but was refreshed greatly after drink-
ing mesmerised water. She never can drink water “raw”
as it comes from the well, for it causes difficulty in making
water, and pain in the stomach. I mesmerised her for a
quarter of an hour without inducing sleep. During mes-
merisation she had some slightly chilly sensations, but they
did not last long; and on their removal she felt relieved by
the passes. She has such faith in mesmerism, that, although
I advised her to consult a doctor for the erysipelas, she
declined, saying that she preferred leaving the cure entirely
to me.

28th. She isimproving. Soon after I began to mesmerise
she felt a heaviness over the eyes that prevented her open-
ing them, but she was not asleep. She then felt exceedingly
cold with an unpleasant sensation but not of pain all over her.
She describes this as similar to her first seizure nearly three
years ago:—in fact she had a strong fit of hysterics which
caused her chest to heave violently, and she shed tears and
moaned. After it was over she felt very comfortable, saying
that the passes had done her good.

Dec. 2nd. The passes again brought on heaviness in the
eyes, yet she did not feel as on the last occasion a pressure on
the shoulders and chest, but only a slight aching in the knees.
She felt her nerves decidedly strengthened by the passes.

5th. She forgot to tell me before that she had been drop-
sical and had been under medical treatment for it. She
declares that, since I attended her, the renal secretion passes
more freely, and she can exert herself without that feeling of
incumbrance usual in dropsy. She has no longer that thirst
which troubled her, and she actually forces herself to take the
small draught of mesmerised water which I recommend. In
five minutes after making the passes, she felt as if a weight
was upon her shoulders that went down to the fingers’ ends
and knees, producing an unpleasant sensation in the loins.
This sensation was so oppressive as to cause her to sigh and
moan violently nearly the whole time of mesmerisation. She
was unable to move her hands, and she felt as if something
was creeping between the flesh and skin, of the hands more


Fancies an evil spirit tells her something. 137


especially, and something similar in the loins that she called
“twittering.” She said she could not shed tears. All her
customers have remarked that she is not so bloated in body
aud her complexion is more healthy.

9th. The “ twittering” in the loins is gone, but she feels it
slightly in the fingers. Her sleep and appetite are good. She
can apply her mind to her business and is not so confused as
she used to be in adding up the prices of articles sold to her
customers. Five minutes after I made the passes, she felt a
heavy pain on her forehead and eyes, then she fell asleep for
a few minutes. She awoke in a convulsed state and retched
with a desire to vomit. Then the sensation which on former
occasions went off down the spine, descended to the knees
and went out at the toes.

llth. She finds that mesmerised water strengthens and
supports her more than “beer.” She missed it very much
on the occasion of her having given her portion to a sick girl
who longed for it.

She is now able to work vigorously and industriously from
half-past six in the morning till ten at night, when she goes
to bed. The passes to day had scarcely any perceptible effect
except a slight heaviness of the eyes.

18th. During my absence from home, the mesmerised
water was consumed, and she felt the want of it. To day she
complained of weakness in the back, and the passes affected
it with a slight uneasiness. Her knees which are usually
cold grew warm under the passes, and she felt sleepy. She
is much stronger in the chest and more equal to work: her
mind also is more composed and persevering. She thinks
that if she had not seen me she would never have recovered,
and does not know what return to make to my wife and
myself for our attendance. The poor woman with tears of
gratitude begged our acceptance of two chickens, an offering
worthy of Aisculapius himself.

27th. I found her busy in her shop, and so much better
that I did not think it necessary to mesmerise her, nor did
she require it.

30th. In the interval she had been suffering from piles
accompanied with copious menstruation. She is well in other
respects. The passes immediately removed the pain in the
back, and she soon fell asleep. When she awoke she felt
comfortably drowsy and free from pain.

Jan. 3rd, 1855. Though decidedly improved she has nerv-
ous attacks at times, and fancies she hears an evil spirit tell-
ing her that “ Christ is of no value to her, and she must not


138 Perfectly cured.


trust in him.” I put her to sleep and she felt very comfort-
able in mind as well as in body.

9th The hemorrhords are quite gone. She is very much
improved in every respect—in fact, convalescent and not in
need of mesmerism, but she asked for mesmerised water,
which I gave her. On the 7th she walked in the evening to
a friend living a mile and a half from her house, and returned
home in the dark,—a thing which astonished her neighbours,
who remarked that a few months back she would have been
too nervous to have undertaken and accomplished such an
expedition alone and in the dark.

13th. I did not mesmerise her as she appeared to be re-
stored to health ; but I left some mesmerised water with her.

March 5th. In consequence of my absence from home
she felt the want of mesmerised water, and possibly she was
nervous at the idea that I could not attend to her as regularly
as heretofore. She complained of a return of the dizziness
she used to feel at times on going into the open air; but the
piles and pain in the back are quite gone. I mesmerised her
at her request, and soon after I began she felt for about a
minute a severe pricking in the left foot, the same side of her
body in which she used to feel pain at first. I gave her mes-
merised water as usual before and after the passes and left
some in a bottle.

9th. She has not been so giddy when walking out. Dur-
ing the time I mesmerised her—twenty minutes—she felt an
overpowering weight all over and she felt as if fixed in a vice:
she lost consciousness part of the time, trembled very much
and had a violent fit of hysterics.

Since that day she has regained her health, and I have
not thought it necessary to mesmerise her again. I often
call to ask her how she is, and she invariably tells me and
others that she is quite well and that she owes her cure to
mesmerism. In attestation of the truth she is willing to
attach her name to this statement of

JEFFERY EKINs,
Rector of New Sampford, near Braintree.
Lyp1a Wricuat,
April 25th, 1855.


( 139 )


Ill. The Incurable.


Wuart is more lovely than a Mother’s love,
Smiling its sunshine on the child, whose smile
Towards her seems to flutter with fond joy ?

A Mother’s love, in silent agony,

Watching the agony of her she loves—

Whose life shall never have escape from pain.


‘Twas midnight. In the dreary chamber stood

A Mother gazing on the wasted form,

That bound in movelessness its writhing pangs,

For sake of her who gazed,—who knew her presence
Was adding thus more torture to the woes

Which she could not assuage :—’twas terrible.


Science, with all its venerable pomp,

Had in that room been foiled, and forced, at last,
Humbly to own J can do nothing here.

Potions, and blisters, and the adventurous knife,
Had done their utmost to make suffering less,
By adding but new pangs: the sole result

Of solace, to the mother and her child—

SHE Is INCURABLE! And thus these two

Were set apart, in solitude, to learn

How resignation teaches to endure.

What could that Mother more?


Turning her gaze,
That ever could have lingered on that face
Which grew each day more beautiful for her,
She drew the window curtains wide apart,
That the unsleeping sufferer might behold
The starry loveliness, or drifting clouds,
Or breaking of the dawn,—sporting in heaven
What fancies might be in such hours of pain.
Then, with a silent smiling, she bent down
And kissed her smiling daughter—wordless love
Wearing the look of hope, to sooth each other,
Altho’ they felt we soon shall meet no more.
Against her will, the Mother hurried out,
To counsel with agony in prayer :
Leaving the sufferer to unloose her pangs,
And be exhausted into faint repose—
Procured as by the shadow of the tomb,
Whose portal, opening wide, let out on her


140 The Incurable.


A feeling of the infinite beyond ;
The waning life, in awful victory,
Pillowing its anguish on the joys to come.


Again, within that room the Mother stood,
Transfixed by what she gazed on; her wan cheeks
Decking their old despair with tears of joy.
Why does she gaze, as with the ravishment
That nature puts on in Arabian tale,

Whose magic is too wondrous for belief?

A stranger friend, mighty with Nature’s cure,
Had soothed, with wafting hand, the dying girl
Into a world of dreams,—dreamlike herself,

So beautifully sinking, from her pains,

Into elysian sleep: calm as a star

Floated by Night to lead on glorious Day—
As tide at turn on its own silent depths—

As flowery bloom unfolding to‘drink dew ;

So calm, she seemed the myth of her own being,
In modelled languor of ideal life,

Overcome, at sportive venture, unawares,
Within oblivion’s bath ;—’twas such a change.
Still gazed she on the marble lineament—
Pale as e’er Death carved out to be admired ;
Stifling her joy, lest any movement should
Rustle the sleeper’s ear: and yet she knew
That sleeper was abstracted from the earth,

In occult remedy, alike secure

From sight, or sound, or any sense of woe.


How beautiful the mode of Nature’s cure—
Tranquillity! the dying of disease

Lending the mortal an immortal look,

As pledge of what shall be, in full, put on

When Death mourns at the limit of his work ;—*
As if the patient, seeking the aid of Nature,

Had obtained power to draw upon Health’s fount,
By ebb of half his being to far shore,

Where bliss, partaken, smiles still in what remains
Yet unexpired on earth ;—as if Life’s tree

Were throwing its tendrils out upon the stars—
That all might hold community at last,

Whilst, *neath its shadow now, plucking strange fruit,
The man, trance-wafted, with foretaste of fruition,


* This paragraph alludes to the extatic trance.


The Incurable.


Wanders, imbibing strength in that high state,
To come back and complete probation here—
That should fit him to be made wholly free
Where sympathetic citizenship unveils,

And finds that knowledge is no more in part.


Still gazed she on the marble lineament—

Pale as e’er Death carved out to be admired :

It seemed as if the Mother’s steady gaze

Of yearning, never to be satisfied,

Had turned her lovely daughter into stone,

Their mingled love absorbed into one life :—

Yet, surely there must be a spirit there!

That gentle flush—Was that faint sound a sigh ?
Yes—lo! a life is stirring in that form :

And, as the adamantine beauty dawns

From its great blank, with smiling wonderment,
She gazes on the wonder of her Mother ;

She gazes—doubts—feels that it is no dream ;—
And—from the bed of all her former groans
Springing (straight in each other’s arms they cling,
Knowing there was no gaping grave between,
Weeping with thankfulness and fearless joy),

“ Safe—safe”—shrieked out in sobs—“ my darling safe
Strange sounds to hear in that disconsolate room.
What is so lovely as a Mother’s love?


Clad with the sunny secret that had smiled

Such bliss through all the gloom—shades of her world,
Forth fared that happy Mother, and cried out—

“ BeHoLp My DAUGHTER! Hear me, ah ye mothers,
Who have dear fragile ones, drooping with pain
Beside pain’s remedy, its use denied,—

Fair lilies withering on the very bank

Of the pure stream that should re-lave their bloom :
There is a remedy,—BrEnHoLp MY DAUGHTER !”

“Stop !” cried a sable figure, to whom the crowd
Paid awful deference : “ Good people ! this

Good woman’s daughter was incurable ;

And has been cured by mere imagination.

None but a fool would use the remedy.”

So Science, in its vested rights, passed on

Amongst the crowd, who thought their eyes and ears
Were worthless witnesses against the voice

That had the awful sanction of a college.


There was an agony in the rejoinder ;—


142 Dr. Sieveking’s knowledge.


“ BenoLp My paucuTeR! Wherefore should your own

Lie hopeless on their beds, without a trial

Of what has made mine well? And must they groan,

To please the prejudice of men too learned

To learn from Nature’s self—this living mirror

Shining the truth on you in vain, oh! Mothers?

Alas! thou mighty, poor Humanity,

Defrauded of thy grandeur by thyself—

How long shall Science, like a traitor, stand

Opposed to Death, yet serving on his side !”

Wituiam NEILson.

Edinburgh.


IV. Cures of Epilepsy, Ophthalmia, Strumous Ophthalmia,
Cramp of the Stomach, Hemiplegia or palsy of half the
body, Lumbago (cured in fifteen minutes), Neuralgia of
the Face, Sprained Ancle, Nervous Head-ache (cured at
once). By W. J. Tusss, Esq., Surgeon, Upwell, Cam-
bridgeshire.

‘It is not my purpose to enter into the analysis, nor to weary the reader
with an historic account of all that has been taught on the subject of epilepsy,
from the demoniac influences of Posidon, Enodius, and Hecate, so energetically
combatted by Hippocrates, to the recent vagaries of clairvoyance or animal mag-
netism, or the more philosophical and legitimate inductions of Bell, Flourens.
Romberg, or Marshall Hall.’’—Dr. Sieveking, Fellow of the Royal College of
Physicians, Assistant-Physician to St. Mary’s Hospital,* &c. Medica’ Times,
March 3, 1855; p. 208.


Epilepsy.
In the month of April, 1853, I received a letter from my
sister, saying that Mr. Whiting, surgeon of Lynn, was at-
tending my eldest daughter with an irritable brain. She was
homeeopathically treated. Then followed fainting fits, which
ended in epilepsy. On one occasion the fits were of so serious
a character, that, Mr: Whiting being from home, Mr. Allen,
surgeon, was called in. Leeches were applied, with strong
purgative doses. The fits were always worse towards evening.
On the 28th of May, as I was going to a midwifery case in
Outwell, I met a man with a message for me to return in-
stantly with him, as my parents thought my daughter would
not live the night through. I reached Lynn about 12 o’clock


* Dr. Sieveking, Fellow of the College of Physicians, does not know that the
terms clairvoyance and animal magnetism are not synonymous. ‘‘ Clairvoyance
or animal magnetism !’’ His classical acquirements are displayed in his speaking
of “a-spicula of bone ;”’ and this is no typographical error, for five lines farther
down he reverts to this ‘‘ spicula of bone !”—Zois¢.


Cures of Epilepsy and Ophthalmia. 143


at night, and met my brother at the end of the street, who
said, “I am glad, William, you are come; poor Julia has
now been in strong fits two hours.” All were alarmed in
doors. I said nothing, but proceeded upstairs, and found
my dear girl insensible: the pupils were widely dilated. I
kissed her, but she knew me not. There was a hot skin:
pulse 100 and strong. I gave an injection with asafcetida
and oil of turpentine, and applied cold to the head. I or-
dered all down stairs, and watched her through the night.
I well mesmerised her twice before I went to my bed, which
was in the same room. As soon as I woke in the morning, I
mesmerised her again, with no visible effect. I ordered a fly
and brought her home, my sister accompanying us. She had
fits frequently at home. She was mesmerised regularly
twice a day, and oftener when she was attacked. This treat-
ment I continued for five weeks, when we considered her cured.
From that time to the present she has not had one symptom of
a fit, and is quite well. She is now on a visit near Belvoir
Castle.

During her trance, she would play at cards, and inva-
riably knew the turned-up card. Blindfolding made no dif-
ference to her. She has played at cards with a Mr. Nichols,
of London, who is a friend of Mr. Thomas Wakley, jun.

It was eleven days before she went into the sleep.

On one occasion she said, “ Papa is now coming home,
I can hear him.” I must have been several hundred yards
off. But she was correct. I soon drove into the yard. No
one else could hear the gig. She said she should have only
three more fits before she should be quite well; and that, if
we watched her when the last came on and well mesmerised
her, we should stop it: and so we did.


Ophthalmia.

Ann Barns, aged 27, applied to me on the 2nd of August,
1854, with ophthalmia. She could hardly see the way to my
surgery : or bear me to examine the eyes. I told her to sit
down and made downward passes. She went into sleep and in-
sensibility fit for the knife. She knew nothing of mesmerism.
Mr. Webber was in the surgery with others. On waking her
she could bear the stimulus of light, and walked home with
much less pain.

I mesmerised her ¢en days and cured her. Every day
Mr. Webber came to my surgery to watch the case. She
also walked the first five days to Outwell, the next village,
that Mr. Disnay, the druggist, and Mr. Russell, the school-
master, might witness the progress of her case. I did not
VOL, XIII. L


144 Cures of Ophthalmia, Cramp of Stomach, and Palsy.


give her any medicine. She was easily attracted and repelled
by mesmeric passes.

In the year 1851, she had a similar attack ; and was cupped,
salivated, purged, and blistered, and recovered in six WEEKS.


Scrophulous Ophthalmia.

Ann North, aged 6 years, of Outwell, was mesmerised for
strumous ophthalmia. The eyes were very much inflamed,
and there was much purulent matter. She was drawn up to
my surgery every morning at 9 o’clock ; some days came
twice a day. She was perfectly cured by downward passes in
eight days. She did not go to sleep.


Cramp of Stomach.

John , blacksmith, of Elm, applied on the 14th June,
1854, having been the subject of spasms of the stomach for
three years. Ether and laudanum with a glass of gin were
the only remedies employed that eased him. My mesmeriser
(Mr. Baker) cured him in a week without sleep. He came a
week after to thank me for curing him, as he felt quite well,
and did not require any ether, laudanum, or gin.


Hemiplegia, or Palsy of half the Body.

E. Wine, 75 years, bad been paralyzed two years in one
arm and leg, &c. For nearly a year he had been in the
habit of coming up to my surgery of a Tuesday morning in
order to receive parish relief. The left arm was spasmodically
fixed to the chest, the fingers drawn towards the palm of the
hand and wasted, quite incapable of holding anything: the
lower lip was drawn a little down, and could not hold the
saliva, which dropped out at the side of his mouth: when
walking, would draw the left leg after him. His gait was
tottering, and for two years he was never known to walk
without a stick. Was locally mesmerised on the 21st May.
In forty minutes felt me draw a pain from his shoulder to his
fingers’ ends: after the pain was gone, he felt as if he could
flex and extend the arm, and he accordingly did. He was
shortly after this improvement seen by the Rev. — Taunton
and his lady in my parlour. By the next operation he ma-
naged to hold a spatula in his hand, and exclaimed that he
should now be able to eat all the victuals from his old lady.
He was able to walk up a staircase into my photographic
department, where I took his likeness while he was mes-
merised by Mr. Disnay.

He was mesmerised twice a day, and always felt more
power in the arm and leg. The last Sunday I stuck a


Rapid cure of Lumbago. 145


nosegay in his coat and posted him off to church: and he
tells me he walked like a gentleman down the isle, carrying
his stick in his lame arm. There being a disposition in his
fingers to contract, I have made him wear a splint.

I ought not to omit an important feature in his case ; his
incontinence of urine is nearly cured.

As the rector of our parish knows this poor man, and has
often met him, he will not tell me, as he did in the poor
girl Stevens’s case, that it was the croton oil, &c., which she
had taken that relieved her, not mesmerism: for the old man
took no medicine.

“ June 2nd, 1854.

“Edward Wine we have known for the last two years,
and considered he was such a cripple that there was no possi-
bility of his again using his arm or walking without his stick,
which he now can do since he has been mesmerised by Mr.
Tubbs.

Elizabeth Ransome, Upwell,
Edmund Brown, Upwell,
W. Hopkin, Upwell.
Stephen Bukhee, Upwell,
John C. Wiles, Upwell,
Charles Chapman, Upwell,
John Lock, Upwell.”


Lumbago cured in fifteen minutes.

Charles Laughterton, aged 51, living about two miles
from my house, applied to me on Sunday afternoon, May
l4th, 1854, suffering from rheumatism of the muscles of the
back. He could not stoop without pain; his nights were
restless, and he had kept his house the last four days. As
all paupers ought to attend at my surgery from 9 o’clock in
the morning until half-past, I scolded him for coming so late
in the day. He said he was very sorry to trouble me then,
but he had got much worse since yesterday, and hoped I
would relieve him if I could. I was about prescribing, when
he said, “Sir, I don’t want any medicine: if you recollect,
I came to you this month four years ago, and you did some-
thing to my back with your hands, and I was well in a few
minutes: my back was just the same as it is now.” I replied
that I had forgotten having mesmerised him. He pulled off
his coat and I pulled off mine, for it was a very hot day, and
I went to work by longitudinal passes until I drew the pain
out at his toes. “There that will do,” said I; “ now see if
you can move your loins better.” “ Yes, Sir.” “Now are
you all right?” “Oh! yes.” I told him to walk round my
L2


146 Neuralgia of the Face


garden as fast as he could, and if, in half an hour, the pain
should return, that I would operate again. When in the
garden he said, “I believe I could now run a wheelbarrow.”
I operated again before he left. The next morning I called
at his house and found he had gone to work. He has re-
mained quite well ever since.


Neuralgia of the Face.

Matilda Berry, aged 26, has for several months suffered
at times from neuralgia of the head. Last year she lived as
servant to Mr. Ollard, solicitor, of Upwell. She came to
live with us at Michaelmas, 1854. About a fortnight since
she complained of head-ache, for which she took aperient
medicine with slight relief. Neuralgia of the left side of the
head set in, gradually extending to the symphysis of the left
upper jaw: it now was confined to all the upper teeth and
became severe.

On Sunday, the 25th November, I gave her hydriodate of
potash internally, and she used externally a chloroform ano-
dyne liniment. After tea my wife came and asked me what
I could do for the girl, for she was crying with pain. I
replied, “ Ask her to come in the parlour and be mesmerised.”
She willingly consented. On entering the room she had on
a flannel covered with a large white handkerchief: her cheeks
were flushed and wet with tears, for her agony was intense.
Mr. Disnay, from Outwell, Mrs. Tubbs and my two daughiers,
surrounded the fire, while I commenced passes along the
pained face. I tried for fifteen minutes without producing
any mitigation of the pain. I then placed her head near the
wall, and after giving her a long earnest look found her suf-
fused eyes giving way to my mesmeric efforts. They soon
drooped. I then made downward passes for twenty minutes,
and joined in the fireside circle. Her features seemed placid,
and she slept half an hour. While waking her by the cross
passes I judged from the distorted state of the muscles that
she was uneasy. On coming out of the sleep she looked
about, and then, rubbing her face, smiled. She was quite
free from pain, had not heard us talking, and could hardly
be made to believe she had been in so comfortable a nap.
She hastily left, and at our wish went to bed. I walked
home with Mr. Disnay. On my return, in about an hour,
I found my daughter Victoria trying to ease the pain by
downward passes. I took her place, sitting on the side of
the bed, and mesmerised her a long time before I relieved
her. I found this time that the passes over the head and
face did not succeed. Therefore I began to mesmerise her


removed by mesmeric passes. 147


from the jaw towards the feet. Almost instantly I observed
the hand drop from the side of the face (for she was pressing
her hand against her teeth), and her pained countenance
change to serenity. After mesmerising her twenty minutes,
I breathed on a piece of flannel, applied it to the face, and
left her. Half an hour has now elapsed, and she is asleep.

November 26th. Woke between 12 and 1 o’clock, and
pain continued severe at intervals till breakfast-time. About
10 a.m. she came into the surgery for me to draw two of her
teeth. I tried to mesmerise her, but did not succeed in pro-
ducing an insensible state owing to the pain. I extracted
one of the incisors, which bled freely, and she was easy until
dinner-time, when fresh pain compelled her to wrap a warm
flannel round her head and face. In the evening I mes-
merised her in the parlour. She went off in a few minutes
and slept soundly an hour and a half, and came out of the
sleep still uneasy.

Nov. 27th. My eldest daughter, while going to bed, hear-
ing her moan went and sent her to sleep. The pain had come
on soon after she got to bed. Has had a good night’s rest ;
slept till half-past 6 o’clock ; felt much better; towards noon
had severe pain, which continued all day. After tea, the
pain was felt all over the head, with numbness. She came
into the parlour to be mesmerised ; went into a profound
sleep; was mesmerised half an hour; slept an hour and ten
minutes; moaned at times. After she had been asleep an
hour, I had some trouble in demesmerising her. Her teeth
chattered, and a regular rigor supervened. On awaking
she put her hand to her mouth and asked if I had been doing
anything to her teeth. She had dreamed I had been pulling
them all out. I directed that she should be mesmerised by
my daughter Julia after she was in bed.

Nov. 28th. My daughter sent her to sleep. She slept
well. This morning is quite easy; the pain left the head :
she has felt better ever since.

Nov. 29th. On going through the kitchen I found her
writing. She has been very comfortable most part of the
day, and could not have written a day or two back. She was
mesmerised in the parlour at 8 o’clock, and slept soundly till
I woke her at fifteen minutes past 9. No uneasiness was
observed previously to demesmerising her. But the same
chattering of the teeth took place, and the face became pale.
When conscious could not open her eyes, and it was a long
time before mesmeric effects ceased. When she rose from
the chair complained of stiffness of the neck. I made trans-
verse passes, and the stiffness went off. She wants to know


148 Wonderful power of Mesmerism.


if she may leave off mesmerism, as it makes her feel so chilly
for some time afterwards. My daughter was to send her off
at bed-time.

Nov. 30th. Still pain in the face and under the jaw, which
feels stiff; feels melancholy ; asked me what makes her so:
the features look distressed: had no sleep last night; says
Miss Tubbs did not send her to sleep: missed the mesmerism.
In the evening, I proposed to locally mesmerise the jaw and
see if I could bring the pain out at some point. I began at
9 o’clock, making passes from under the jaws to the fingers.
Finding I could not shift the pain, I altered the passes, bring-
ing my hands obliquely from the jaw to the shoulder. I had
not done so long before she said the pain was in the shoulder.
I then made passes from this point to the fingers: it soon
found its way to the elbow : here it remained some time, with
violent twitching of the muscles. At last I observed the
little finger twitching, the others remaining quiet. I called
my wife and daughters’ attention to it. They laughed; but
could not imitate her, for some of their other fingers kept in
action as well. After breathing on the little finger, it stopped,
and all pain was gone. She now pinched her face, and tried
to find her old pain: but in vain. She went to bed cheerful.
My daughter mesmerised her to sleep. I forgot to state that
she had leeches applied when she lived at Mr. Ollard’s, the
solicitor.

Dec. Ist. Had a very excellent night; was heard singing
by one of my daughters before breakfast ; is quite well ; had
no pain since her little finger shook so ridiculously as it did
last evening; spirits cheerful; says she does not think the
pain will return. This being a cold day, I thought I would
test her, and therefore placed her in the open yard and took
her likeness. She sat eighty-six seconds. This not being
sufficient, she took four more sittings, and some part of the
time it snowed. I asked her on going in doors to dinner if
the sitting for her likeness this cold day had brought back
the pain. Her reply was, “ No, Sir, I feel quite well.”

I beg to enclose the likeness I took, which may be worth
placing in the book of cases at the Infirmary. I never had
a better or a more successful mesmeric case. I shall mes-
merise her a few evenings longer, and if she has a relapse I
will not forget to send you word. I hope to get a line from
Mr. Disnay in confirmation of this beautiful case, yielding
to, as our unbelievers style it, Satanic agency.

She continued well, with the exception of slight attacks
from the mesmerism not being continued regularly.


Cures of Sprained Ancle and Nervous Head-ache. 149


“ Outwell, 1854.

“ Being at Mr. Tubbs’s on Sunday evening, Nov. 26th, I
witnessed one of the most extraordinary cures of -tic doulou-
reux by mesmerism. Mr. T.’s servant came into the room
crying, suffering dreadfully from the above disease. After a
few passes she went into the mesmeric sleep. In about
twenty minutes Mr. T. awoke her, when, to our astonish-
ment, she began laughing, and left the room free from pain.

“W. D. Disnay.”


Sprained Ancle.

William Croxford, a labourer of Mr. John Elmes, of
Upwell, sprained his knee in jumping over a ditch. He was
confined in-doors three days, and then came up to my surgery
limping.

On the 3rd September, 1854, I easily sent him to sleep.
The knee was well mesmerised for half an hour daily. He
went home quite well on the fourth day. He says that the
first time I operated he felt me draw the pain down to the
toes. He has remained well ever since.


Attack of Nervous Head-ache cured at once.

In April of this year (1855) I called one evening upon
Mr. Russell, who keeps the National School at Outwell. He
had Mr. and Mrs. Jude spending the evening. Mr. Russell
had returned from Wisbech with a dreadful nervous head-
ache. As I had mesmerised him five years ago, I said I
should be happy in trying to relieve him by mesmerism. He
replied, “I wish you would.” By passes slowly made from
the chin to the feet, and then from the vertex to the sacrum,
I entranced him. He slept forty minutes. On coming out
of the sleep he was quite relieved, and then enjoyed his pipe
with his friends. During his sleep I could draw his legs,
hands, or head by my tractive passes. This astonished Mr.
and Mrs. Jude, and at once made them converts to mes-
merism.


V. EXTATICS OF GENIUS.


By J. W. Jackson, Esq., Edinburgh.


“The battle of Talavera was fought on the 28th of July, 1809; and the
opening debates of the Session of 1810 of course referred to the progress of the
war. Lord Grey was one of the most eminent public men of that time, and his
memory is held in the highest respect by large numbers of his countrymen. We
find him thus expressing himself: ‘He (Lord Grey) saw much to blame in Lord


150 The greatest men not understood by biographers.


Wellington in a military point of view. . .. When he considered that, for what
was called success, similar honours had been conferred on Lord Wellington to
those bestowed on the Duke of Marlborough, he could not help feeling at such
unfounded assertions that indignation with which he was convinced every English
heart would participate.’ The language of the leader of the Opposition in the
House of Commons was more virulent. He said: ‘ The battle of Corunna was
one where the rashness and presumption of the General induced him to risk an
engagement, which there was no call for him to hazard, and where there was not
one good consequence to be effected by the result.’ The gentleman who spoke
these words was Mr. George Ponsonby, leader of the Opposition in the Lower
House.""—Atheneum, July 29, 1854; p. 933.


Preliminary Remarks.


In no department of literature is the incompetency of authors
for the task which they have undertaken more manifest than
in history and biography. What a lamentable incapacity for
appreciating the presence and working of great first prin-
ciples do we not find in the ordinary narrators of events !
What a dwelling on the merely surface phenomena of effects !
and what an obvious inability to penetrate into the profounder
realm of causes is revealed in the pages of those cumbrous
tomes of inanity that with the majority serve for an authentic
revelation of the past! And when a really great man is
introduced to our notice, and we expect a lifelike portraiture,
have often, in place of the veritable great-souled mover of
the world, the true authentic creator of an age or an epoch,
on whose majestic framework of ideas the after generations
have been but too content to fashion their every thougit ;
how often, I say, in place of this living reality, with his lofty
aspirations, his ennobling emotions, his exalted faith, and
his vast and plastic conceptions, have we some secondhand
description of a dead piece of state-machinery that went by
clockwork, or some miserably defective sketch of an im-
possible combination of wild enthusiasm with cold-hearted
hypocrisy! The sham is ever present, the man is ever ab-
sent ; and, in place of the generous, warm-hearted, and in
every way vitalized enthusiast, whose electrical sympathies
rendered him irresistible with all generous spirits, we are
presented with a monster from whom all higher natures
would have shrunk with abhorrence. Slowly however, yet
surely, is justice being done in this matter. We are begin-
ning, though with much reluctance and recalcitration, to
apprehend at something like their true value the heroic mas-
terspirits of other times. Men are arising among us, gifted
with a sufficiency of insight to prevent the feeble reiteration
of groundless and libellous insinuations in reference to souls
of whom the earth was not worthy, and the prophet spirits
of the past are being, one after another, reinthroned in the


Many were really extatics. 151


heartfelt reverence of their race. Of all the indications of
our age, we hold none to be more hopeful than that which is
afforded by this true catholicity of appreciation. We are
leaving the beclouding mists of sectarianism behind, and
rising into the clear empyrean of universal thought. Of all
the evidences of true manhood, none are more hopeful than
that which is afforded by this power of heartily appreciating
its presence in others. He who can fully and unreservedly
recognize the heroic in another is not himself at an alto-
gether infinite remove from that of which he has so acute a
perception, and to which he can accord such entire sympathy.
A true intuition of the noble is never accorded to the mean,
nor can the base ever give right recognition to the really
exalted. The worshipful of any age is the best index of its
essential character, for the dead saint is ever but the deau
ideal of the living man.

Such a paper as that which we are now about to write
would have been unreceivable a generation since, and but for
the glorious labours of our predecessors in the domain of
hero-worship would doubtless be unreceivable still. We pre-
tend not to leadership in this path; it will be sufficient for us
to follow, longo intervallo, in the footsteps of such men as
Carlyle and Emerson, but too happy, if we can, by present-
ing their favourite subjects from a new point of view, prevail
to throw some little additional light on the inner and outer
life of those great and commanding men to whom was given
the dread capacity for stamping their impress on the succeed-
ing millenniums.

Of the seriousness, earnestness, and truthfulness of earth’s
great master-spirits, most right-minded enquirers have now
little doubt. Of this the evidence is indeed too clear for any
but the blindly prejudiced to fail in obtaining an intuitive
perception of it. But there is nevertheless one very important
circumstance connected with their condition, to which scarcely
an intelligible allusion is to be found in any work treating
either on the details of their biography, or on the success
and character of their mission; we allude to the fact, that
many of them were obviously extatics, that is, they were
clairvoyants or seers. Now so important an element in their
mental constitution ought not to be overlooked, if we would
arrive at a correct estimate of their mental resources, or of
the nature of the influence which they were capable of ex-
ercising over others. It is the key to much that would other-
wise seem utterly unaccountable in their career, and inscru-
table in their character. This interior light, this visional
illumination is a force, our ignorance of which can scarcely


152 Mahomet


fail to lead us occasionally into a false estimate of the motives
under which the whole life of such men proceeded in its
higher phases of development. Through it they would have
a different outlook upon the universe, and in a sense conceive
of themselves as holding a higher relationship to the entire
scheme of existence. Of the effects of such an endowment,
however, we shall be better enabled to speak when we come
to treat of its existence and varied modes of manifestation
in the successive subjects whom we may select as appropriate
examples of its presence and influence. Confined to no age,
country or faith, limited to neither the learned nor ignorant,
the young nor the old, and appearing alike in either sex, the
instances of lucid vision that history presents are both nume-
rous and varied; so much so, that we are more likely to be
encumbered by their multiplicity than limited by their
scarcity. The difficulty indeed consists less in the discovery
than in the selection of cases: and our guiding principle in
the choice of individuals as illustrations must be, in general,
their historical celebrity, in virtue of which their lives will
be better known and their action on society more readily
appreciable.


No. 1.—Maunomet,


Or, Mohammed Ibn Abdallah, the Arabian prophet, the noble
son of the Koreish, and the founder of the faith of Islam,
promulgating a creed and code which have been for twelve
hundred years the temporal guide and eternal pole star of
one hundred and twenty millions of our race ; this gifted and
extraordinary man has been, till lately, regarded as little else
than a cunning quack and successful impostor. Simple in
his habits, warm in his affections, generous in his impulses,
and enthusiastic in his feelings, he united with these great
and ennobling moral qualities those rare gifts of a creative
intellect that ever stamp their possessor with the highest
attributes of genius. Dwelling apart from the undistinguished
multitude in an interior sphere of lofty aspiration and beatific
vision, he could with facility descend from this towering alti-
tude to the commonest duties and most kindly relationships
of life, affording that best of homilies on the dignity of
labour, its cheerful and voluntary performance by himself,
and giving that highest of all sanctions to the obligations of
friendship, and the heartfelt affections of the household, by
his assiduous discharge of the duties of the former, and his
indubitable manifestation of all the sympathies of the latter.
As he was constitutionally devout, religion was a primal
necessity of his higher nature. Idealistic in the caste of his


was an extatic, a clairvoyant, a prophet. 153


genius, his entire life was an acted epic. Earnest and truthful,
he abhorred lies as death. At once kindly in his disposition
and honourable in his sentiments, he could be both just and
charitable. Generous and forgiving to his merely personal
foes, he was, like most high-wrought natures, stern to a
fault in the prosecution of that great enterprise to which he
had committed himself with all the zeal of an enthusiast and
the commanding energy of a prophet.

Such was Mahomet; a man under every point of view
one of nature’s proudest nobles, who might have been a
fanatic, but could never have been a trickster,—a being as
incomprehensible to the sceptical historian of the eighteenth
as to the superstitious monk of the eighth century. Of such
men happily the world is never altogether devoid, but it is
not in every age that they become commissioned.

And this man, we repeat it, was an extatic, a visionary,
a seer, a lucid, a clairvoyant—in short, a prophet. The cave
at Mecca was his shrine, solitary meditation the energizing
process by which the crisis was induced, and the visits of the
archangel Gabriel the subjective form* under which he com-
muned with his higher self. Epileptic in his earlier years,
he appears to have been ever morbidly susceptible to nervous
exaltations and depressions. Profoundly imaginative, his
thoughts were ever embodied in scenic presentations, and the
conclusion of a syllogism became to him the symbolic vision
of wrapt extasy. Profoundly devotional in his feelings, and
spiritually exalted in his reflexions, neither the grosser ido-
latry nor sublime Sabeism of his less enlightened countrymen
could satisfy the irrepressible yearnings of his soul after a
purer faith and higher life than then existed among the
Arabian Shieks and their followers, who had preserved,
amidst the profligate licentiousness and decadent glories of
many successive empires, all the simplicity and much of the
fervour of the Hebrew patriarchy. Disgusted with the for-
malities of the Jew, and the ill-veiled idolatry of the Greek
Christian, this great soul, pitiably dark in all that related to
merely human learning, but illumined within by that bright-
ness which is never vouchsafed but to prophet-born messen-
gers of the truth, felt himself at last vocationed to the mighty
task of originating and promulgating a new faith. The in-
ternal processes of his mind in the evolution of this great
idea, his subjective experiences, however mysterious or ab-
normal they may at first seem, are easily explicable by the
practised mesmerist, who cannot fail to recognize in every


* See No. XXIV., pp. 372-5.—Zoist.


154 Stamped his own character on his converts.


peculiarity of this extraordinary man the distinctive features
of a natural seer of the very highest order. Mahomet, in
brief, was an extatic of genius, and as such the interpretation
of his character and career becomes comparatively easy. He
was a phenomenon, rare we grant, but neither unique nor
exceptional. He was one of a class, and his appearance, so
far from violating any law of nature, did but afford a mag-
nificent illustration of that great truth which the world will
yet have to receive,—that the vast ideas whose promulgation
constitutes an epoch have ever been committed to men,
not merely of great ability, of sound judgment, of far-seeing
prudence, of consummate tact, and of profound thought,
but, above all, of a vivid and creative imagination, rendered
in their case subservient to the aspirations of an ardently
devotional moral nature, and so acting with an energy to
which merely poetic inspiration can never attain. The phi-
losopher may speculate and the bard may idealize, and the
system of the former and the epic of the latter may be ad-
mired and studied when the tide of thirty centuries shall
have swept over the tomb of their author; but it is the
prophet alone who can create, who can evolve those forms of
thought which, penetrating into the innermost depths of
being, become enthroned in the conscience and constitute a
medium through which the subsequent generations have to
contemplate their relationship both to time and to eternity.
Such a man, we repeat it, was Mahomet, the fiery, earuest,
energetic, and enthusiastic visionary of the desert, whose
spiritualized veneration made him the first of Iconoclasts,
but whose ardent passions left him the victim of polygamy.
And who, in his strength and his weakness, in his exalted
adoration, his stern justice, his kindly charity, his burning
zeal, and his licentious profligacy, stamped his personal im-
press so indelibly on his multitudinous converts that to this
day every true Mussulman is a son of the Koreish in petto,
a Mahomet in miniature, who, with the Koran in one hand
and the sword in the other, would be but too happy to go
forth conquering and to conquer, either returning for solace
to the houris of this world, or ascending as a martyred
warrior to the blooming bowers and fadeless beauties of his
sensually symbolical paradise above.

Lest the reader should think we have been too general in
the foregoing remarks, we will subjoin, in a condensed form,
the principal facts connected with the life of Mahomet that
may serve to illustrate and confirm them. He was an Arab
of noble lineage and pure blood; a high caste member of
that Semetic family to whom the theological mission has been


Was epileptic, and his countenance shone occasionally. 155


so especially given. Racially allied to the Hebrew prophets,
he manifested all their fervour, and much of their spirituality.
More than ordinarily gifted with the exalted moral and intel-
lectual qualities of his great brotherhood, he rose superior to
the traditional faith of his age and country, and aspired, as
by the native instinct of a grander nature, to the develop-
ment of some higher form of adoration than that which pre-
vailed around him. Handsome in person, of high nervo-
fibrous and slightly sanguineous temperament, his lofty and
expanded forehead, projecting at the temples,* affords to the
phrenologist the sure indication of a poetic structure, of a
dreamy and idealistic mental constitution. In his earlier
years, ere the Koran was revealed to him, “he was occa-
sionally seized,” says Dr. Gustav Weil, “with a violent
trembling, followed by a kind of swoon, or rather convulsion,
during which perspiration would stream from his forehead in
the coldest weather ; he would lie with his eyes closed, foam-
ing at the mouth, and bellowing like a young camel.” Now
it is a well-known fact that many epileptic persons have spon-
taneously exhibited symptoms of clairvoyance, and many
others have developed lucidity when under mesmeric treat-
ment. The account of his visit to heaven reveals in the
clearest possible manner the fact that it was an extatic vision,
an interior revelation, and not an external experience—a
mental and not a corporeal journey. It began when a water
pitcher was upset, and it ended ere the contents were alto-
gether spilled. This lightning rapidity of thought is occa-
sionally manifested even under artificially induced lucidity.
There is also an anecdote which seems to indicate that his
face was occasionally radiant with even more than the intel-
ligence of genius, and that it shone with the odic luminosity
of extatic seerdom. It seems that the poet Abu Kaber had
written a piece on this glorious phenomenon, which, however,
in some moment of depression, had disappeared from the
countenance of the prophet as he sat in moody silence with
his young wife Agesha, who thereupon rallied and recalled
the agonized and temporarily desponding visionary to himself.

Have we not here then some additional light, from the
lamp of science, thus thrown on the mental and physical
constitution of this extraordinary man? Are we not thus
enabled to more clearly apprehend the basis of original cha-
racter and proclivity, on which in after years was erected the
magnificent superstructure of a prophetic mission. A being


* “ Extremum frontis latus supra tempora pominens exporrectum,” says
Abulfeda, the Arabian historian, who flourished from 1273—1331 a.p., and
whose works were published at Oxford, in Arabic and Latin, in 1723.


156 The grander passages of the Koran the result of extasy.


less earnest and concentrated would have sunk into idiotcy
under his epileptic attacks, or would have raved into insanity
under his subsequent visions. But to this man, as to some
other chosen ones, it was given “to mount the whirlwind
and ride the storm” of constitutional excitement, and come
forth more than conqueror from so fearful an initiation.
Long-continued solitary self-communings have been the re-
source of overwrought natures in all periods of the world’s
history, and the hermit of the Hadges, in his frequent re-
tirements at Mecca, did but fulfil a desire and obey a ten-
dency experienced in equal or greater strength by thousands
similarly affected but not equally endowed. In so far as
genuine, the grander passages in the Koran must be con-
sidered as the product of extatic illumination, being in this
respect, like all other authoritative religious works which lie
at the foundation of subsequent creeds, a revelation of genius,
wrought up to so high a degree of nervous tension and ex-
citement that imagination becomes exalted into lucid vision,
and thought assumes the form of heaven-sent inspiration.
Its imagery was derived from the ideas prevalent in the time
and country, and taught in the early faith of the author,
mingled with the impressions derived from his subsequent
studies and the ideas evolved in his hours of meditation and
wrapt contemplation. European prejudice may yet long
refuse to recognize in the Arabian seer aught but an ignorant
fanatic or impostor. But the true mundane charity of a
dawning universalist philosophy will know how to embrace
not only the Arabian and the Hebrew, but also the Indian
and the Persian, in the same great and all-embracing cate-
gory of worthies: and, while according all due reverence to
the magnificently endowed and profoundly devotional heroes
of Judaism, will not fail at the same time to give befitting
honour and acceptance to the Menus and Zoroasters of those
other faiths whose geographical expansion and long-continued
endurance among the things of time may suffice to shew to
all but the hopelessly blind that they came not altogether
uncommissioned from Him, in whose hands are the issues,
not only of life and death to individuals, of growth and
decline to empires, but also of emergence and decay to faiths.*
J. W. Jackson.
Edinburgh, May 23, 1855.


(To be continued.)


* Gibbon’s Roman Empire is accessible to every body: and the fourth
chapter, from p. 253 to p. 328, 8vo. edit., contains a life of Mahomet.—Zoist.


VI. Cures of Affection of the Lungs and Rheumatism, Debility,
and coldness of the extremities, Deafness, Epilepsy, Nerv-
ousness, Insanity, Lock-jaw, two cases of Inflammation of
the Eyes, Sprained Ancle. By Witusam Davey, Esq.,
Edinburgh.


“* Butherapeia ; or, an Examination of the Principles of Medical Science, with
Researches in the Nervous System. By Robert Garner. (Churchill.)—Mr. Garner
is a country surgeon; a man of considerable scientific attainments, sound judg-
ment, and extensive practical experience in his profession. Hence his opinions on
any subject connected with his profession would obtain respectful attention from
his brethren. This work is an attempt to review the present state of medicine
from a scientific point of view. In some of the chapters he has taken up the
bearing of the last scientific discoveries on practical medicine ; whilst in others
he has displayed considerable knowledge of the history of medicine as an art.
A chapter devoted to the nervous system contains some new views, and indicates
acquaintance with the most recent researches on this subject. One part of the
work is devoted to short practical notes and observations on diseases and reme-
dies, and will be found interesting to the practical man. A chapter on pseudo-
medical science very properly closes the volume. In this chapter, the writer
handles the subjects of phrenology, mesmerism, and homceopathy—those scandals
of the medical profession—with considerable skill. This book will afford pleasant
and profitable reading for the medical man.’’—Atheneum, April 28, 1855;
p- 489.


Affection of the Lungs and Rheumatism.
In the spring of 1853, I was requested by a gentleman to
mesmerise a patient, a sawyer by trade, and who had also
been many years a soldier. I found his breathing greatly
affected, he was continually spitting blood, and, in addition,
was incapable of lifting his arms higher than his shoulders,
in consequence of a severe attack of rheumatism. As a
result of this combination of ailments, he had been utterly
incapable of attending to his usual occupation during more
than twelve months. In a few sittings he ceased to spit
blood, and, after a few more, his breathing became perfectly
easy; and in about two months from the time when his case
was undertaken, he was enabled to resume his former labori-
ous avocations, and has continued to enjoy sound health ever
since.

Debility, and coldness of the extremities.

In February, 1854, I was requested to visit a young lady
in Square, the sister of a Scotch baronet, who during
many years had suffered from great general debility, accom-
panied by such coldness of the extremities, &c., that she was
obliged to have bottles of warm water placed at her feet and
on her stomach during the night, together with folds of
flannel, &c.; notwithstanding which, she frequently obtained
no rest till three or four in the morning. She had the advice
of some of the ablest physicians in Scotland and England,


Se ee


158 Cures of Deafness, Epilepsy, Nervousness.


and had travelled for the benefit of her health through
France, Italy, and Germany, visiting some of the more
celebrated baths during her tour, but without any last-
ing benefit. After the third mesmeric sitting she was so far
relieved as to dispense with her bottles of warm water. From
this period the restoration of her general health was rapid
and satisfactory. To confirm the cure, however, she was
mesmerised daily for about three months, when her general
health appeared to be completely restored, and I understand
there has been no relapse since.


Deafness.

In March, 1854, Miss , a lady rather in the decline
of life, applied to me for the relief of partial deafness, under
which she had laboured during many years, the disease
making slow but steady advance with the lapse of time. In
the space of two months she was thoroughly cured, her hear-
ing being as acute as that of ordinary persons. She has had
no relapse since.

In November, 1854, a legal gentleman, residing in ——
Square, having had an attack of scarlet fever some months
previously, found himself on his recovery partially deprived
of hearing, so that his friends had not only to speak very
loud to him, but in many cases he had to see the motion of
their lips before attaining to a perfect comprehension of any
intended communication. His cure was effected in one
month, and there has been no relapse since.


Epilepsy.

In May, 1854, a beneficed clergyman of the established
church of Scotland called on me respecting his daughter, a
young lady about 13 years of age, who had been suffering
from epileptic fits and severe spasms with increasing fre-
quency during the previous three years. I mesmerised her
daily during the next three months. She never had a fit or
spasm from the first sitting, and has continued free from
these ailments to the present time.


Nervousness.

In the summer of 1854 I was requested to mesmerise a
lady who had suffered under a nervous affection during many
years. When at church, she was afraid the clergyman would
fall out of the pulpit, or that the roof of the building would
give way, and she should be crushed beneath its ruins. She
could not venture to walk down a steep street, as it appeared
to her that she was about to tumble over a precipice: and


Cures of Insanity and Lock-jaw. 159


yet she was afraid to call a cab, for an approaching carriage
always impressed her with the idea that she should be run
over. To detail the varying forms which this most distress-
ing malady assumed in her case would be needless. Suffice
it, that she was continually a wretched victim to the most
groundless fears. To aggravate her suffering, her medical
adviser informed her, when she consulted him about being
mesmerised, that i¢ had driven many persons mad, and would
infallibly affect her in a similar manner. Being, however,
assured by a private friend that this was a prejudice arising
from the ignorance of the medical gentleman,* she at length
consented to try the dreaded remedy, being still however so
apprehensive that she would not allow me to look at her,
fearing lest some malarious influence should be thus commu-
nicated. I accordingly proceeded to make passes over her
without aid of vision. In five weeks she was perfectly cured,
and has since this period visited the home of her childhood,
and informed me that she could walk up and down hill, &c.,
as well as at any period of her life. She still continues in
sound and even vigorous health. :


Insanity.

In November, 1854, a young person from a neighbouring
town, having shewn decided symptoms of insanity, was
brought to Edinburgh by her friends for the purpose of trying
whether anything could be done for her previously to her
being sent to the Lunatic Asylum at Morningside. In six
sittings, extending over a fortnight, she was perfectly restored
to rationality, and went home to take another situation.


The following testimonial will speak for itself :—


Lock-jaw.


«24, Arthur Street, Edinburgh,
** June 22, 1854.

“In the month of January I was seized with a spasm in
the jaws, that deprived me of the power of opening my
mouth, attended with excruciating pain. I remained in this
state for six days, and during that time I fed upon fluids
passed through my teeth, they admitting the point of a tea-
spoon. In this alarming state I was taken to Mr. Davey, to
see what could be done. After a few passes over the face, I
felt considerable relief; and, on coming the next night, Mr.
Davey put his right hand only on my cheek for some minutes,


* Something worse than ignorance, we fear.—Zoist.
VOL. XIII. M


ee


160 Cures of Inflammations of the Eyes, &c.


the pain vanished, my mouth gradually opened, and I became
quite well, and have remained so ever since, now six months
—no symptom returning.

“Thomas Kinnear.”


Witnessed and attested by W. H. Anderson, 48, Rose
Street.


Inflammation of the Eyes with Cataract.

In the autumn of 1854, a young man, a draper, was
brought to me by his father, labouring under so severe an
inflammation of the eyes, accompanied with a slight cataract,
that he required to be led to the house and into the receiving
room, like a person actually blind. This patient had been
under medical treatment for several weeks, without deriving
any benefit from it. In one month he was enabled to re-
sume his duties behind the counter, where of course he had
to distinguish between even minute shades of colour in the
articles to be disposed of. I saw him about a month since,
when he assured me that he had remained perfectly well up
to that time, notwithstanding his having to serve by gas-light
during the long winter evenings.


Inflammation of the Eyes.

In April, 1854, a poor girl from the Old Town was sent to
me by a benevolent lady with the request that I would do
something for her eyes. I found them to be greatly inflamed,
so that she could not bear the light and had to wear a ban-
dage for the purpose of entirely excluding it. In three sit-
tings the cure was completed, and about a fortnight since
the lady called to inform me of its permanency.


Sprained Ancle.

In April, 1855, a gentleman sprained his ancle, which
became very much swollen, and gave him great pain, so
much so that he could not sleep the following night, and
found himself the next morning incapable of moving about
the house. Being himself one of our pupils, and knowing
the advantage of mesmerism in such a case, he sent for me.
After a few passes, the pain and swelling both subsided. He
slept perfectly well the following night, and on the fourth
day he was enabled to walk with his ordinary ease and vigor.


NOTE BY THE ZOIST.


Our readers will be struck with the absence of name and
address from all these cases but one. Our excellent Scottish


Shakspeare and Milton knew a little Phrenology. 161


friends display as great physical courage as any other nation,
but their great prudence too often obliterates their moral
courage. Because they see a chance of being ridiculed or
back-bitten, or of their interests being damaged, some of the
affluent classes let not their light shine before men, and
forget the duty of omitting nothing which will aid the general
reception of mesmerism. This is little, very little.*


VII. Phrenological Sketch, made at Milan in 1842, of the
Character of Colonel Haynau, since well known as Marshal
Haynau.t By Dr. Castiz, of Montmorency, near Paris.

“* His fair large front and eye sublime declare


Absolute rule.”’
Mitton, Paradise Lost, b. iv.


‘*T will have none on’t : we shall lose our time,
And all be turned to barnacles, or to apes
With foreheads villainous low.”
SHAKSPEARE, Tempest, act. iv., sc. 1.


TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.


GeENTLEMEN,—The following phrenological sketch of
Marshal Haynau may interest your readers, as giving what
is admitted by those who knew him intimately to be a true
idea of his character, and particularly as affording a striking
example of the practical application of phrenology.

This examination was made in 1842, when Haynau was
unknown to the public. His character struck me at the time
as little sympathetic, though I had often occasion afterwards
to verify the contrast I then indicated of the amiability of
his manners in private life with his severity as a military
man.

Whoever attentively reads the present sketch, which was
made very unpretendingly, having been rapidly dictated at a
soirée at Count Neipperg’s house in Milan, will perceive that
there is no act of Haynau’s latter notorious years that does
not correspond with, and is not explained by, the character
which I then recognized in him. I have alluded in the text
to the peculiar manner in which Haynau would conduct


* Sir James Clark’s ludicrous prudence is recorded in No. XLIV., pp. 404-9.
The motto to the article upon the timid Sir James was, ‘‘ Among the chief rulers
also many believed on him ; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him,
lest they should be put out of the synagogue: for they loved the praise of men
more than the praise of God.”—St. John’s Gospel, chap. xii. 42, 43.

+ Printed for private circulation, with Haynau’s consent, in 1849, in a collec-
tion of monographs by Dr. Castle.


M2


162 Predicted character of Haynau. Social aspect.


himself in a duel, and to his personal obnoxiousness to
discipline.

An anecdote of his after life is a remarkable illustration
of the first of these inductions. He is known to have coolly
shot a young officer through the head, after having as coolly
recommended him not to lose his last ‘chance of life by miss-
ing his aim. His words were too characteristic to be for-
gotten: “ Kill me if you can, for be assured that if you do
not, I shall kill you.”

With regard to the second induction, it is well known
that in the latter part of Haynau’s military career he was
invited to retire on his pension for having acted contrary to
instructions during the Hungarian campaign.

I remain, Gentlemen,
Yours very truly,
M. A. Castie.


The principal tendencies indicated by the organography
before us present themselves in three divisions: the first,
social and domestic; the second, energetic, resolute, and
headstrong ; the third, intellectual.

On advancing in our analysis, we are prepared to find in
this character many contrasting traits, some advantageous,
others very much the reverse.


§ 1.


M. Haynau will have manifested from his childhood up-
wards a necessity for friendship, strong general affections, and
at times, though not habitually, a certain gentleness of man-
ners, At the epoch of manhood this need of affection will
somewhat have tempered the ardour of passionate love, by the
more restrained though more profound inspirations of senti-
ment. Possessing a strong instinctive feeling as well as high
estimate of his own worth, he will never easily have doubted
the sincerity of one he loved; but, if once jealous, he will
have been violent in his behavi iour, and above all, in no way
accommodating with his rival.

He has ever been fond of children. Paternal love is one
of the greatest joys he is capable of fecling; but, notwith-
standing the strength of this passion, his character is in no
way adapted to the tranquil habits of domestic life, which
would soon become monotonous and wearisome to him.

Religious feeling and benevolent justice are far less influ-
ential in the character of M. Haynau than other constituent
elements. It is probable, however, that he often mistakes


Energetic, resolute, headstrong. 163


for a feeling of justice that which, strictly analyzed, is but a
notion of discipline.

He is doubtless honourable in his relations with others,
but his honour springs, not directly from conscientiousness,
but from the sincerity inherent in an antipathy to all oblique
measures, and from his need of looking things in the face.
Never himself professing what he does not feel or more than
he feels, he is not disposed easily to doubt the truthfulness of
others ; but his indignation against disloyalty is proportionate
to his previous confidence.

From the preceding traits it will easily be inferred that
reflexion or deliberation exercises but little influence over his
actions or his judgment. He will feel sympathy or antipathy,
admiration or indiguation,—he will be generous or severe in
judgment, almost invariably from pure impulse.


§ 2.


M. Haynau’s courage is of the sturdiest kind—danger,
so to speak, does not exist for him. He seeks to realize his
plans and wishes with unrestrained impetuosity. Obstacles
serve only to irritate him and to stimulate his will. They
awaken in him a stubborn perseverance, which will probably
have brought him more than once into serious difficulties ;
nor will experience have had the effect of inciting him to
self-control.

Although ambitious, he is, in moments of action, but little
occupied with the idea of recompense, and still less with the
apprehension of any possible blame or punishment. He sees
absolutely nothing but the obstacle or enemy before him.

This trait is attributable in a great measure to his defi-
ciency of Secretiveness and Circumspection, but still more to
his great confidence in himself, which generates contempt
for his adversaries.

The preceding characteristics are so deeply rooted in his
nature, that, although in calm moments M. Haynau’s judg-
ment is undoubtedly equal to the comprehension of all va-
rieties of tactics, yet there is danger of his feeling and
conceiving, in active service, only the en avant! and this
without occupying himself with measures of retreat.

It is true that as a subordinate officer he would be obliged
to adapt his character to discipline; but if holding a high
position of command, his will would bend but little to the
exigencies of service, and in all cases where it would be
possible for him to outweigh the voices of a council, he
would do so reckless of consequences, and above all of the
responsibility which he thereby incurred,


ein a antl EIS ne onl


164 Interested in intellectual, literary, and artistic matters.


Though so impatient of control himself, M. Haynau is
nevertheless rigorous in the enforcement of discipline on others.
Disposed, from a natural sympathy with bravery, to recom-
pense it largely, he is proportionately vehement in his con-
demnation of anything approaching to cowardice, and in all
cases inflexible and unpitying in the exercise of military
justice.


§ 3.


Those who know M. Haynau only in the relations of
social intercourse would never deem him so haughty and
stern in his military capacity as we describe him. In social
life he will habitually manifest a friendly and even gentle
disposition ; spiritual and intellectual in conversation, easily
awakened to enthusiasm by novelty, interesting himself in
literary and scientific questions, taking pleasure in the arts
generally, and passionately fond of music,—he betrays no-
thing, dans ses belles heures, of that unquiet and indomit-
able nature which bursts forth on other occasions.


It will easily be conceived, then, that the character of
M. Haynau will give rise to the most diverse interpretations,
and will be sympathetic or the reverse to those around him,
according to the nature of their relations with him. We
can understand his awakening even the strongest antipathy
and hatred. It may not unjustly be presumed that tu his
intercourse with his brother officers, for instance, he will
frequently render himself disagreeable by his domineering
spirit, his irascibility, his spirit of faguinerie, his habit of
criticizing ; and that these tendencies will have often led him
into serious disputes and quarrels, in which he certainly will
never be the first to yield.

Engaged in a duel, he would manifest, according to the
arms chosen, that impetuous courage which is most charac-
teristic of him, or the courage of sangfroid, calm and indif-
ferent, of which he is capable also, though he exercises it
less frequently. With the sword, he would be violent and
headlong in attack ; with the pistol, he would imperturbably
receive the fire of his adversary, and, as the chance of his
humor might dictate, spare his life with a capricious mag-
nanimity, or tranquilly take aim and kill him.

Psychologically considered, this latter mode of acting
would shew in his case more contempt for life in general than
that .atrocious cruelty with which such a proceeding might
justly be stigmatized if, while making light of the life of
others, he were less reckless of his own.


At first sight a contradictory character. 165


The great contrast which I have pointed out between
M. Haynau’s bearing in military affairs and his manners in
private life is not, as might appear to superficial reasoners,
psychologically contradictory. This induction is based on a
calculation of the reaction of circumstances on the various
forces of his character. In social life, these circumstances
are propitious to the satisfaction of his intellectual and artis-
tical tastes, and of the desire to please, which awakens the
action of his affections generally. Whereas in his military
relations, self-esteem is more easily brought into predominat-
ing action, and continually elicits the co-operation of other
aggressive tendencies.


NOTE BY THE ZOIST.


We extract the following lines from the Voyage en Italie,
partie septentrionale, lately published in Paris by M. Paul de
Musset, who has devoted some fifty pages of his work to the
phrenological appreciations of many celebrated persons by
Dr. Castle in Italy :—

“The death of General Haynau was terrible as had been
his life. He had a predisposition to catalepsy, and perished
in circumstances which remind us of the death, as recorded
by his biographers,* of Abbé Prévost.”

Among the monographs of Dr. Castle cited by M. de
Musset are the above of Haynau, and those of Radetzky
and Rifaat Pasha. The examination of Marshal Radetzky,
which is a longer and more scientific study than that of
Haynau, will appear later in this publication.

M. de Musset mentions that he made Dr. Castle’s ac-
quaintance at Milan, and that he read the above mono-
graphs in 1844, many years consequently before Haynau’s
name became notorious ;—a circumstance which we record as
furnishing to those who, in the zeal of their opposition to
phrenology, are not too delicate in throwing doubt on the
authenticity of alleged phrenological facts, a corroboration
of Dr. Castle’s statement as to the period when the examina-
tion was made.

By way of contrast to the sketch given above, we translate
from M. de Musset’s work the monograph of Rifaat Pasha by
Dr. Castle.


‘* After a perusal of the moral portraiture of Liszt the pianist,
Dr. Castle obliged me by reading to me that of a person, who at


* It was whispered at Vienna that, at the post-mortem (as it was thought to
be) of Haynau, his heart was seen to beat, the blood flowed, and he groaned.


166 Character of Rifaat Pacha, ambassador at Vienna.


this very time fulfils important functions at Constantinople, and
appears destined to play a more or less active part in the grave
affairs of the East. His Excellency Rifaat Pacha, then ambassador
of the Sublime Porte at Vienna, hearing much of the phrenological
examinations which were then exciting the greatest interest and
curiosity throughout the city, determined to do like others, and
possess his monography. The following are the principal traits of
this singular character ; it will be observed that the forms of polite-
ness are duly regarded, but without any flattery.

“The affections, friendship, benevolence, tenderness predomi-
nate in the organization of his Excellency Rifaat Pacha: the out-
ward manifestation of these sentiments must however be impeded
by a remarkable deficiency in power to take the initiative, his Ex-
cellency having much difficulty in expressing what he feels either by
words or deeds. He is full of kindly wishes for his friends, much
more than he can shew, or consequently than they can imagine.
The passion of love itself assumes in him an indolent and tranquil
form—an air of vacillation, which would seem to indicate but feeble
emotion. The slightest obstacle will suffice to discourage his Ex-
cellency, and cause him to retire; whence it may be inferred that,
notwithstanding a natural propensity on his part to indulge in tender
emotions and gallantry, he has none of the requisites for finding
either pleasure or success in their pursuit. Neither his affectionate
sentiments nor his preferences are easy to discover, even to those
who are the object of them; and they will be perceptible only by
the increased affability of his manners. And yet his Excellency
experiences a constant need of affection, of friendly support, and of
confidential interchange of sentiment; and to such a degree that he
prefers being guided in life by the counsels of a friend than by his
own will.

“The temperament of his Excellency being nervous, all kinds
of physical danger cause in him vivid emotion and un grand serre-
ment de coeur. His imagination even shews him danger where it
does not exist. On the eve of a journey, or when about to com-
mence any enterprise, his mind is assailed by sinister presentiments;
in the midst even of repose and the most tranquil existence, the
same predisposition will trouble his sleep, and, where reality fails to
supply him with cause for apprehension, he finds it in dreams.

“The preceding observations shew that his Excellency is better
fitted for peaceful domestic life than for any mode of existence that
would require energy and resolution. His thoughts do not na-
turally turn to contemplate the future ; the past occupies him more
agreeably, though his memory is not very active. He lives especially
in the present: yet the present itself passes in continual disquiet of
mind. Notwithstanding the goodness and gentleness of his cha-
racter, he feels no contentment; his Excellency is generally over-
whelmed with melancholy ; except only in rare and brief moments
of excitement, has he any respite from such a state. His habitual
melancholy is also an obstacle to the resource he might find in the
exercise of his intellectual faculties. As regards literature, his Ex-


Surgeon Hilton’s tirades against Phrenology. 167


cellency prefers the creations of fancy; he is credulous, and, sup-
posing his mind not to be fortified by education, he might easily
allow himself to be seduced into a belief in the arts of magic, astro-
logy, divination, or of any other occult science. In conclusion, his
Excellency speaks little; he thinks more than he speaks, and he
feels more than he thinks.”’


M. Musset adds :—


“We have here an image presented to us of a good and weak
man, amiable perhaps in the relations of private life, yet singularly
deficient in all that should characterize the diplomatic representative
of a great power.

“But now comes the comic side of the affair. Rifaat Pacha
retired delighted with his consultation, and, having caused it to be
written out on the reverse side of his portrait, distributed many
copies among his friends; and, as, according to Dr. Castle’s own
avowal, Rifaat Pacha thinks more than he speaks, the sangfroid
and dignity of the Ottoman minister rendered it impossible to dis-
cover whether he looked upon his moral monograph in a serious
light, or whether in presenting it to his friends this arriére-pensée
was disguised—‘ You who know me, do you believe this a resem-
blance?’ It is indeed possible that Rifaat Pasha, if he possessed
more shrewdness than phrenology gave him credit for, was not
sorry to pass for harmless and irresolute, thus better to carry out the
schemes of diplomacy and beguile his trusting opponents. He
alone knows the secret of this enigma!’


VIII. Several rapid Cures by James Swinton, Esq., of Edinu-
burgh, one of the Committee of the Scottish Curative
Mesmeric Association: and Cure of Sore Leg, Chronic
Indigestion, and Rheumatism in the Head in one case,
and of Rheumatism of seven years’ standing in another,
by James Adam, Esq., Edinburgh, Member of the Scottish
Curative Mesmeric Association.

“The author shews how diametrically opposed is the FALSELY so-called
science of phrenology to anatomy. (Notes of the Cranium: selected from the


Lectures of John Hilton, &c. By F. W. Pavy, M.D. Low: London, 1855).’’—
Association Medical Journal. Edited by John Rose Cormack, M.D. March 9,


1855.*

Severe pain after a fracture of a collar bone.
Joun Crombie, Walker’s Place, New Street, Edinburgh, had
his collar-bone broken by a fall in July last. After he re-
covered from this injury he always had a severe pain on the
top of his shoulder. When in bed he could not lie on that
side, and when he got heated at his work, or got wet, it


* We intend to lay before our readers all Mr. Hilton’s attack upon phre-
nology.’’—Zoist.


168 Cure of severe pains from various causes.


became very painful. He was sceptical in reference to mes-
merism, but was persuaded by his wife to have it tried.
After having been for several months in this condition, he
was mesmerised in the month of November last for about
ten minutes, when the pain was quile relieved, and he could
move his arm freely in any direction. He was seen three
months after, and, although he had often been heated at
his employment (in the gas-works), and had also repeatedly
got wet, the pain never returned.


Severe pain in a wounded knee.

Robert Oliver, boot-maker, Linlithgow, had his knife
accidentally run into his knee, and when I saw him he was
sitting in severe pain. I breathed heavily over the part, and
made some vigorous passes, which in fifteen minutes sufficed
to completely remove the pain. I called three days after, and
the pain had not returned ; and in a fortnight the wound was
quite healed up.

Rheumatism.

Archibald Bryson, coal-dealer, High Street, Portobello,
had, in the month of April last, a severe attack of rheuma-
tism in the right arm; the pain extending from the shoulder
to the elbow. It was so severe that he had been for a fort-
night quite unable to do any work, and had not slept an hour
during eight days. 1 mesmerised him for a quarter of an
hour, after which he was able to raise his arm and move it
round his head with the greatest ease. The cure was so com-
plete that in half an hour after he proceeded, to the surprise
of his neighbours, fo carry in a load of coals weighing twenty-
five hundred weight. He has remained free from pain ever
since.

Bruised Foot.

John Ford, porter, Railway-station, Linlithgow, had his
foot injured by the fall of a piece of wood. It was in conse-
quence much swollen, so that he could not get on his shoe.
He was also unable to put his heel tothe ground. After one
mesmerisation he was able to perform the latter operation,
and next morning he got on his shoe and resumed his work.
I saw him a week or two afterwards, and it had remained
quite well.

Severe pains and feverishness.

Margaret Ford, a child three years of age, and daughter
of the above, was very weak and feverish, with pains in the
head and abdomen. Twenty minutes’ mesmerisation sufficed
to reduce the fever, after which she slept from eleven o’clock
at night till four the next morning. She then awoke for a


Splendid cure of a mass of old complaints. 169


little and afterwards slept till nine o’clock; after which she
remained perfectly well.

James SwINTON.
Edinburgh, March, 1855.


Cure of Sore Leg, Chronic Indigestion, and Rheumatism of
the Head.

Mrs. Rattray, aged 46, residing at No. 7, Middleton’s
Entry, Bristo Street, Edinburgh, had, from her sixteenth to
her twenty-fourth year, suffered almost constantly from in-
digestion. Her food, which generally became sour in the
stomach, was retained but a short time, and she was in con-
sequence in a very weak condition. She also suffered from
a severe pain, extending from the region of the stomach to
the back. Mrs. R. was comparatively free from these symp-
toms for about ten years after her marriage, which took
place at the age of twenty-four. At the end of this period,
however, they returned with even greater severity than before,
and continued down to the month of August last. She had
thus suffered from this complaint for a period of twenty years
in all. For the last sixteen years she had been subject also
to severe pains in the head, from the coronal region of which
the hair fell off; this being the part most affected by the
pain. These pains were always worse during the cold of
winter and heat of summer. She had, moreover, for about
six months previous to last August suffered much from a very
sore leg. The sore had broken out at the ancle and extended
to the knee, along the inner part of the limb. The part
was somewhat swollen, and very much discoloured. She
was in consequence unable to walk, and was often deprived
of sleep by pain. When I first saw her leg, the part near
the ancle was covered with very dark-coloured unnatural-
looking skin. I may also state that there was a great amount
of heat over the whole system, accompaned by a disagreeable
feeling of itchiness. She was also affected with an impedi-
ment in her speech, which is now almost entirely removed.

Having, at the time when I met with the above rather
formidable case, just concluded a course of instruction in
curative mesmerism under Messrs. Davey and Jackson, I
determined on putting my newly-acquired knowledge to the
test of experiment. I accordingly commenced to mesmerise
Mrs. Rattray in the month of August last, and now beg to
submit the result of my treatment of her case. At the end
of the first week there was a perceptible improvement in her
digestion. She continued gradually progressing, and is now


170 Cure of Rheumatism.


quite well, being able to enjoy all kinds of food without the
least tendency to indigestion. Her head-aches were perma-
nently cured in a fortnight after the treatment was commenced.
The leg began from the first to improve slowly, but the cure
seemed to be retarded by the black skin near the ancle,
already referred to, this part being also very painful. I
attempted to remove this obstacle while the patient was in
the mesmeric sleep, and, in doing so, found that it was at-
tached to the flesh beneath by three peg-like growths extend-
ing inwards. However, by the aid of a pen-knife, I soon
succeeded in entirely removing both it and the growths with-
out the slightest pain to the patient. The leg now rapidly
healed for about two months after I commenced. At this
point I was obliged, in consequence of being myself unwell,
to suspend my treatment for three weeks. During this time
the leg became much worse, the pain, which had previously
left it, having returned; and this notwithstanding that she
had reverted to some of her former remedies. On resuming
the mesmeric treatment, however, it soon began to improve,
and steadily progressed until, about two months later, ano-
ther intermission of a fortnight took place, when it again
became worse as before. Since then, however, the treatment
has been continuous, the sore has gradually healed up, and
the leg is now quite sound; the three cavities caused by the
removal of the growths having been the last parts to heal.

Thus from being a dyspeptic and rheumatic patient, for
a considerable time almost bedridden, Mrs. Rattray, in the
short period of six months, through the agency of mesmerism,
became a healthy and active woman. She will have much
pleasure in answering any enquiries which parties calling
upon her may choose to make.


Rheumatism.

Elizabeth Paterson, Water of Leith, near Edinburgh, had
suffered from rheumatism in the right ancle for seven years.
The part was considerably swollen, and she complained of a
gnawing pain, which prevented her from enjoying her natural
rest. She was also unable to stand for any length of time on
the limb, and was frequently obliged to leave her situation in
consequence. She was under mesmeric treatment for three
months, and is now perfectly cured.


James ADAM.
Edinburgh, March, 1855.


*,* These humble Scottish persons shew moral courage


in abundance, and set an example to Mr. Davey’s patients.
—Loist.


NT


IX. Report of the Sixth Annual Meeting of the Mesmeric
Infirmary of London,


Tuis Meeting was held on the 8th of June, at Willis’s
Rooms, King Street, St. James’s. The large room upstairs
was completely filled with ladies and gentlemen, several of
high rank ; and not a few clergymen were present.

The Rev. George Sanpsy moved that the Earl of
Dunraven take the chair.

The noble Cuairnman, in commencing the proceedings of
the Meeting, congratulated them and all the friends of mes-
merism as to its relative position now and ten or twelve
years since when he first turned his attention to the subject. .
Whatever society they then went into they heard mesmerism
spoken of as an imposition or a chimera, which was to be
put down by the writers in reviews and magazines: but now
it was impossible to go amongst educated people and hear
the subject mentioned without perceiving that a great ma-
jority of the people more or less believed in it; and, if they
did not believe in the highest phenomenon of mesmerism,
they saw it was a matter that could be no longer treated as a
humbug or pooh poohed, but deserving scientific investiga-
tion. When, through the kindness of Dr. Elliotson, he first
witnessed some of these phenomena, he experienced great
delight at the time, but he soon saw it was not to be used as
a plaything, and he accordingly set to work to ascertain its
truth. After devoting many months to the examination of
the subject, he was perfectly satisfied of the reality of all the
phenomena of mesmerism from the lowest to the highest—
that of clairvoyance. And he uever felt any shame or hesi-
tation in acknowledging his conviction. It occurred to him
that, although mesmerism was a beautiful and marvellous phe-
nomenon, it had higher purposes to fill than exciting their
imagination or interesting their intellect, and he saw plainly
it was, as it had been stated by Mr. Sandby, “a gift given
by God with which to alleviate the sufferings of mankind ;”
and that the great point for them to strive to attain was to
place it on such a footing that some institution might be esta-
blished wherein mesmerism might be practised simply as a
remedial agent. What success there had been in accomplish-
ing that object they all knew, and it was not his intention to
enter into the details of that success in their institution, or
the trials there carried on, because that would be done
by more able hands who would address them. He felt he
should not be doing justice to his own feelings if he failed to


172 Report of the Mesmeric Infirmary.


say one word in admiration of, and in gratitude to, one in-
dividual who had contributed to the advance of mesmerism :
for wherever mesmerism was mentioned the name of Elliotson
was revered. Dr. Elliotson, by the open and indefatigable
zeal he had displayed from the commencement to investigate
the truth of the science, had lost the sympathy and support
of many of the members of that profession of which he was
a distinguished ornament: and, if he had not outlived their
obloquy, he had merited and obtained the approbation of all
those who loved to see truth flourish and fully carried out,
and had earned the gratitude of hundreds and the good opi-
nion of thousands of his poor suffering fellow-creatures. If
they agreed with him that mesmerism, as a curative agent,
should be adopted and fully carried out, he called on them
to support the institution, and take a deep interest in it by
visiting it with their friends, and inducing them to become
subscribers to it with them, Those who were already sub-
scribers to the institution could not shew their devotion and
belief in the science better than by doubling the amount of
their present subscriptions, thereby to enable the institution
to increase its benefits.


The Treasurer read the following Annual Report :—

“We have to announce, as at every former Annual
Meeting, that the progress of the conviction of the truth of
the mesmeric phenomena and of a peculiar agency or influ-
ence, as well as of the conviction of the great power of mes-
merism in mitigating and curing disease, aud in removing
and preventing pain, has continued steady.

“When we reflect upon the violence with which mes-
merism was assailed throughout the kingdom from 1838 for
many years, and regard its present firmness and prosperity,
we are enabled to point out a fresh and glorious proof that,
when a thing is founded upon truth and capable of applica-
tion beneficial to mankind, no ignorance, no selfishness or
other discreditable feeling, no rancorous violence, no cun-
ning, no misrepresentation, no false accusation, no combi-
nation of men, can ultimately prevail against it.

“During the last twelve months we have treated 247
patients. At the beginning of this period there were 43 on
our books already: since then we have had 204 more.

“ We have cured 69.

Nearly completed the cure of 9.

Improved to a greater or less extent 49.

We have 41 still under treatment.

Our cures have exceeded those of last year by 27.


Cure of St. Vitus’s dance. 173


« Seventy-one did not continue their attendance beyond
one, two, or a very few days. Some were disappointed at
having nothing more done to them than the mesmeric ma-
nipulations, asking if that was all they were to have done to
them : others were disappointed at not being cured of even
inveterate diseases, offhand, at one sitting; others at not
going to sleep forthwith, declaring that they were therefore
sure they should not be cured.

“The Committee will relate a few cases for the purpose
of shewing certain important points in mesmerism.


“ The following two cures were of chorea or St. Vitus’s dance.

“Frederic Roebuck, aged six years, living at No. 2,
Bath Place, New Road, was received on the 20th of December,
1854, affected with chorea or St. Vitus’s dance. He had
been ill for five weeks. He had fancied that the cat which
slept upon his bed was a monkey, and been greatly frightened.
Chorea frequently arises from terror. His mother could
not remove this illusion, and it increased till he became
altogether a changed boy. He could not sit still, and was
scolded, as children are every day, or even beaten, when
really ill and supposed, poor things, to be naughty. He
crawled about, and was very odd: and at length became
so weak that he reeled and staggered. He was in constant
motion, and constantly grimacing. His speech was indis-
tinct. The mother was advised by a person who had
been cured of intense despondency by Mr. Gardiner to take
him to our Infirmary. At the end of a fortnight he was
no better ; and, as the mother had to carry him or draw him
in a chaise and he was very troublesome, and the cares
of her numerous smal] family were great, she ceased to
bring him after eight days, and placed him in the Homeo-
pathic Hospital in Golden Square. Here he fretted so much
after her, though very kindly treated, that she took him
home again in a week. He then began to be voracious,
and she carried him to a lady at Islington, who gave him
homeopathic medicines for worms, which he was alleged,
though without proof, to have in him.

“ However, he did not improve, but grew worse, and his
mother brought him again to the Infirmary, and Mr. Gardiner
mesmerised him every day. In a few days he lost his im-
pression of a monkey having sitten upon his bed, his move-
ments declined in intensity, and he began to regain his strength.

“ By the 4th of February, he could hold up his hands
steadily, and walk: and on the 18th was perfectly cured ;
but Mr. Gardiner continued to mesmerise him till the 27th,


174 Another cure of St. Vitus’s dance.


when he and his mother returned thanks to the Committee
for the henefit which he had received.

“This patient never slept in the least.

“ Another case of the same disease occurred in a boy
named Thomas Young, living at 36, Wimpole Mews. He
was brought to the Infirmary on February 14th of this vear.
A month previously his father one day at dinner observed him
moving himself about in an odd manner, and scolded him and
sharply commanded him to sit still. His head soon drooped
to the right side, and then rested entirely upon the shoulder.
In a day or two his speech became imperfect, and he dribbled
copiously from the same side. His flesh became flabby : his
limbs powerless. The father took him to a medical practi-
tioner, who gave him purgatives, mixtures, pills, and some
ointment to strengthen his joints: but to no purpose.

“He was mesmerised with downward passes and gazing
at him by Mr. Gardiner.

“The treatment was began upon the 14th of February.
On the 27th he was somewhat improved. On March the 6th
he was greatly improved: was very much quieter, and his
limbs were stronger. On the 13th he was recovering rapidly
and could speak words of one syllable. On the 27th he
could articulate words of two syllables, and hold his head up.
On April the 10th he could pronounce his own name, drib-
bled no longer, and on the 17th walked to the Infirmary
alone—having originally been carried to it in his mother’s
arms. On the 25th he was perfectly well, and appeared
before the Committee to return thanks.

“One day this little patient slept an hour and a half under
mesmerism ; but not at all upon any other occasion.

“St. Vitus’s dance is a nervous affection: and a disease
of debility in the far greater number of cases. It is in
general treated successfully by iron or zinc; arsenic and
copper also cure. Some practitioners give a course of purga-
tives: some employ the cold bath: and some ply the poor
weak and irritable child with blisters or similar irritants.
Now children are often frightened or distressed by cold baths,
whether shower or plunging; and in winter this remedy is
severe. Blisters and similar things cause suffering. Arsenic,
copper, and zinc, unless carefully managed, and frequently
even then, cause more or less sickness and pain from time to
time: and their administration is the continual taking of
physic. Iron is very manageable : but still the poor child has
to take physic two or three times a day: unless indeed the
oxyd ‘is employed and given in treacle, in which case the
child does not feel that it is taking physic. A course of pur-


Cure of Neuralgia, and of inveterate Asthma. 175


gatives is distressing and debilitating: generally not in the
least useful, and often detrimental. Mesmerism cures every
case of ordinary St. Vitus’s dance: usually in a few weeks:
with no annoyance to the child. Many such cures are de-
tailed in The Zoist: no fewer than eight in the Second


Number: and in scarcely any was sleep produced or any
other sensible effect.


“Charlotte Brown, of 16, Lilington Street, Vauxhall
Road, for a fortnight had suffered excruciating pain in the
left side of her face, and was about to have two teeth ex-
tracted when Mr. Gardiner dissuaded her and prevailed upon
her to come to the Infirmary and be mesmerised.

“Mr. Bird, one of those mesmerisers who obligingly
mesmerise some of our patients gratuitously, was requested
to take her: and he made downward passes before her and
gazed at her. She immediately went into the sleep-waking
condition, and became clairvoyant as to her disease, for she
predicted that the next mesmerisation would cure her: and
so it did. The case was neuralgia, and the cure rapid.


“The following case was one of asthma: a functional
affection, without organic disease.

“ Mrs. Case, a middle-aged woman, of 64, Warren Street,
Fitzroy Square, was received November 13 of last year. For
seven years her breath had been shorter and shorter, espe-
cially in cold weather. When walking upstairs or making
any little muscular effort, she experienced great difficulty of
breathing, pain which she could scarcely bear, and a sense
in the sides of her body as if she should burst, especially in
her left side, and frequently palpitation of great severity.
or some years she had been unable to expectorate, however
much she desired it and coughed. She was under a prac-
titioner for two years without any relief in these symptoms.

“She was mesmerised with long passes and gazing by
Mrs. Acott,—formerly Miss Brunning.

“ By the 20th of November she was much relieved, and
continued improving so steadily that on the 19th of December
she could walk with ease, and on January the 16th was able
to run to the Infirmary, and considered herself nearly cured.

“The report on the 28th of February says that she walked
daily to the Infirmary without any inconvenience through
the frost and snow. At the end of March it was not thought
necessary for her to attend more than three times a week :
and on the 16th of May she presented herself in perfect
health before the Committee to return thanks,

VOL, XIII. N


76 Cure of Chlorosis.


“Thus for seven years this poor woman had suffered most
severely during cold weather, scarcely able to walk or make
the least exertion: yet during this severe winter and this
inclement and most ungenial spring she regained freedom
of breathing and perfect health, though she exposed herself
daily to the weather. ,

“‘ Mesmerism never occasioned sleep.

“Cures of asthma will be found in The Zoist. We all
know how intractable it is.


“The following was not a nervous affection, though not
a structural disease. It was one seen every day in young
women, and may almost always be cured with iron, admi-
nistered in suitable doses, at first very small, and gradually
increased to the largest that perfectly agree. It is termed
chlorosis, or amenorrhea anemia.

“Margaret Cook, aged 19, of 21, Little James Street,
Lisson Grove, had caught cold eight months before, in Feb.,
1854, and from that time grew weak, had palpitation, diffi-
culty of breathing, and severe cough, pain under her left
bladebone and in the left breast. She also became exceed-
ingly pale and greenish, lost her spirits, and some functions
were suspended. She took mixtures and pills: but, not
being better, desisted from taking them in a fortnight, so
that they had no chance. Mesmerism was commenced by
Mrs. Acott on the 10th of October. In seven days she felt
better. In seven more she had improved in strength, spirits,
and colour; and on the 31st was perfectly well, and, to use
her own words, ‘ quite another creature.’

“This patiént slept slightly from the first : but the sleepi-
ness never increased.

“Mesmerism cures almost all these cases, though few
are recorded in The Zoist, as iron is so successful a remedy
and generally used.


“The following case had nothing nervous in it: but was
structural and surgical.

“ Mrs. Coleman, of 63, York Street, Lambeth, was re-
ceived on the 28th of February last. A week before Christmas
she felt an odd sensation and pain in the palm of the left
hand, and a knot of the size of a pin’s head appeared upon
the inside of one of the finger-joints. The pain increased
for three weeks, so that for ten nights she could scarcely
close her eyes. Fomentations and hot poultices were applied
every- two hours for three weeks: the hand swelled very
greatly and it was lanced. For five weeks more it was poul-


Cure of Contracted Fingers. 177


ticed and fomented, and a stimulating ointment called basi-
licon was applied. An abscess formed inside the arm above
the bend of the elbow. An abscess formed in the palm of the
hand also, and was opened, and a small aperture remained
for three weeks. The fingers contracted down upon the palm,
perfectly rigid. At Charing Cross Hospital, three surgeons
pressed her head down to her feet ; for what purpose she could
not tell. The treatment was so rough that she disliked it,
and, finding her fingers and hand remain as rigid as ever, she
would continue a patient there no longer. When she came here
we found all the fingers bent fixedly upon the palm, and an un-
healthy sore as large as a florin on the inside of the upper arm.

“We determined upon local mesmerism; with passes
made at the distance of an inch or two downwards from above
the sore on the upper arm along the inside of the fore arm
and palm to the tips of the fingers, her hand lying in one of
the hands of the mesmeriser. Mrs. Acott was her operator.

“Tn one week, the sore and the hand were both improved,
and one finger was liberated: in a fortnight more the sore
was healed, and all the fingers nearly free from contraction.
By the 18th of April, the cure was complete : no contraction
remained, and the fingers and hand were as flexible and obe-
dient to the will as those on the left side. Her joy was
great: for she was the mother of a little family dependent
upon her exertions, and had been told by the medical per-
sons at the hospital that the hand would remain for life as it
was and therefore be almost useless to her.

“ Surgical operations are often performed for these con-
tractions ; and repeated more than once: and without success.

“Cures are in The Zoist: Nos. Il., XL., XLVI., XLIX.

“ Mesmeric cures of contraction of the neck or an ex-
tremity are more common, because these are often of a nerv-
ous character and therefore mesmerism has been employed
in them. Want of knowledge has prevented its application
from being common in cases arising from local injury. But
when its utility in surgical cases shall be generally known,
we shall have plenty of cures recorded.

“A cure of this kind with local mesmerism is very in-
structive. It shews that the power of mesmerism is not
merely over the brain, but over other parts of the living
body: and that sleep is but incidental, and takes place only
when the mesmerisation affects that part of the body called
the brain: and it puts the preposterous fancy of Satanic
agency in a ridiculous point of view.


“ A little girl, 11 years of age, residing in Kentish Town,
N 2


178 Cure of Chronic Ophthalmia.


(we are requested not to give name or address,) was received
as a patient on the 7th of September, 1854. Twelve months
previously she had an attack of measles which left her eyes
inflamed, and they had remained so ever since. When she
came to the Infirmary, they were severely inflamed and an
ulcer existed upon the cornea. She was seen always with a
very large bonnet and her head down, and held a linen cloth
to her eyes, night and day, so great was the pain of light
and the profusion of discharge. She could see to neither
read nor write, and what instruction she received at school
was communicated by another reading to her. Medicines
had been taken for four months with no advantage. Her
family in despair had ceased to apply to medical men, and
looked upon the case with indifference as incurable and scro-
fulous. Mr. Gardiner implored them to try mesmerism :
and he mesmerised her by downward passes before her face
and gazing at her.

“At the end of a week there was no improvement. At
the end of another week, the eye was less sensitive: at the
end of the third week, there was great improvement, and
she could look at objects: at the end of the fourth, she could
use the eye without shading it, and could see to read: at the
end of a fortnight more, she left the Infirmary perfectly
cured. She never slept.

“Such a disease as this we meet with every day in the
streets. It very much resists ordinary treatment, which con-
sists in leeches, blisters, mercury, purgatives, bark, wine, and
the most agonizing applications to the poor children’s eyes.
In the Thirty-second Number of The Zoist an exquisite cure
of this disease by Mr. Amor, one of our Committee, is re-
corded, and all the tormenting means fruitlessly employed
beforehand are mentioned. Mr. Amor met with the poor
child in an omnibus, and prevailed upon the mother to allow
him to mesmerise it. Many other cures of the same nature
will be found in that work, all richly deserving the attention
of oculists and other medical men.


“The following case exhibits the power of mesmerism
over general ill health, functional derangement, especially
of the digestive organs, and over affections of the skin—a
class of disease that mesmerism might not have been ex-
pected by those who do not know its general curative powers
to control.

“Charles Chumley, aged 12, living at No. 10, James
Street, Oxford Street, had for three months been very nerv-
ous and weak and suffered from head-ache; had lost his


Cures of Skin Diseases. 179


appetite, grown thin, flabby, and pale or sallow. He had
been at school at Chelmsford, but taken home. He was
brought to the Infirmary on the 2nd of April, and his lower
extremities were found to be covered with the disease termed
common leprosy. He was mesmerised by Mr. Mayhew with
long passes before his face and gazing: and he drank mes-
merised water, as nearly all our patients do.

“In a week his head-ache was much relieved : still more
in another week: and at the end of the third week the erup-
tion on the legs was greatly diminished, his appetite and
strength improved: and on the 14th of May he and his
mother returned thanks to the Committee for his perfect
cure.

“A very similar cure was effected in a woman named
Elizabeth Morris, living at No. 10, Little College Street,
Westminster.

“She applied on the 14th of last September. She had
suffered from violent pains of the head for a month: but for
five and twenty years her skin had been beset with the leprosy,
produced by drinking cold water when hot. For this she
had been treated by numerous medical men and used medi-
cines and baths abundantly. She had been told that her
disease was white leprosy. She was mesmerised by Mr.
Fisher in the usual manner, and by the 12th of October she
was cured.

“We may mention that a boy, named Guise Stewart,
with that dreadful disease of the face called lupus, of a
scrofulous character, was wonderfully improved with mes-
merism by Mr. Mayhew, but left for America before his cure
was completed. Yet this is a most obstinate disease. The
lad had been under Dr. Curie, a homeeopathist, without any
benefit for three years, having taken medicine from that
gentleman during four years previously for scrofulous enlarge-
ment of the glands of the neck. Dr. Curie dissuaded him
from coming to us, though the doctor had done him no good
after treating the lupus for three years and urged the folly
of supposing that mesmerism could be of any service. As
soon as Dr. Curie died, his mother brought him to us, and
excellent was the result. Dr. Curie was an exception to
homeeopathists, for they almost to a man duly appreciate
mesmerism and strongly recommend it.

“A little girl, named Sarah Fossel, aged 14, laboured
under the cutaneous disease named psoriasis ‘for many
months, getting worse, She was mesmerised by Mrs. Acott,
and rapidly i improved: but was taken by her friends to Aime-
rica before the cure was perfect.


180 Cures of Palsy and a Tumor in the Eyelid.


“There is no class of diseases over which mesmerism has
more power than those of the skin.


“ Palsy is an affection of the nervous system, but too
often produced by an organic affection and very rebellious
to treatment. Yet perseverance in mesmerism often cures it,
probably by exciting absorption of something which com-
presses, or by invigorating.

“Abraham King, aged 43, living at 42, North Street,
Marylebone, came to the Infirmary on February the 4th.
He had been seized with a numbness of the left half of his
surface, loss of the use of his left leg, and a retraction of
his eye and his mouth, together with a dimness of sight, two
years before. He was bled, blistered, took medicines; and
was advised to have a seton, but refused. Mr. Tucker mes-
merised him by long passes and gazing. He was abso-
lutely improved in a week, and cured by the end of a month:
and was still well and at work when last enquired after by
Mr. Tucker. He was never sent to sleep.


“The power of mesmerism to excite absorption of dis-
eased deposit is well established; and the following cure is
very interesting as a surgical operation was prevented.

“Henry Noel, aged 26, living at 31, Marshall Street,
Golden Square, was long troubled with nervousness and in-
digestion; for which he took homeopathic medicines with
little benefit. A tumor appeared in his right upper eyelid.
A surgeon advised that it should be cut away. This he de-
clined. A second homeopathic practitioner recommended
mesmerism as likely to disperse it. He accordingly applied
to us on the 6th of last June, and was mesmerised with long
passes by Mr. Tucker. His health was speedily restored, and
the tumor dispersed. He was reported cured on the 3rd of
August, and, though only a working young man, he made a
donation of a sovereign to the Infirmary. He was never
sent to sleep.


“ The following is a remarkable cure of debility of the brain.

“Joseph Bissoni, aged 14, residing at 4, Wilton Street,
Regent Street, Westminster, came to us January 3rd of this
present year. He had inflammation of the brain six years
before. Ever since, his intellect had been very dull, his me-
mory impaired, both ears deaf and harassed with noises. Mr.
Mayhew mesmerised him with long passes and gazing. In
less than three weeks he was slightly improved: by March 4,
perfectly cured, his intellect and memory and hearing per-


Cure of Debility of Brain. 181


fect; and he returned thanks with his mother. He never
was sent to sleep.


“ The last case with which we will occupy the time of the
Meeting is very striking: but is by no means solitary in its
kind.

“Mrs. Granger, aged 46, the wife of a brickmaker, re-
siding in Teetotal Row, Yewsley, near Uxbridge, had given
birth to four boys, the last in 1846, and for six years laboured
under violent pains and enlargement of the abdomen, being
told by her surgeon, Mr. Stillwell, of Uxbridge, that her
disease was dropsy. She took medicine from him for six
months unsuccessfully, was advised to go to London, and
became a patient in University College Hospital in October,
1849. In that institution she took large quantities of medi-
cine under Dr. Parkes without benefit, and was tapped. On
examination of the abdomen after the dropsical fluid had
been let out, she was found to have an ovarian tumor, and
was directed to prepare for a surgical operation in order
that it might be cut out. To this she objected: and, after
remaining in the hospital six months, and having been
tapped three times by Mr, Richard Quain, she was dis-
charged uncured. She then placed herself under Dr. Coffin
at 32, Hatton Garden, and took his medicines in vain for
six months, and was tapped at his direction three times by
Mr. Hardwicke, at her sister’s, the Metropolitan Lodging
House in the St. Pancras Road, but was uncured. Being
pronounced an incurable both by him and at the hospital,
she returned home, after great suffering and having swal-
lowed immense quantities of drugs. Her neighbours gave
her many receipts, which she followed in the hope of
some relief to her extreme and constantly increasing suffer-
ings. Her sister visited her occasionally from London, and
heard her cries before reaching her house: and at the last
visit was informed by the medical attendant that she would
find her sister in a coffin at her next visit:—which, indeed,
she hoped would be the case, so great and continued were
the pains. Medicine was still taken, with the view of pro-
curing a little ease. The sister had heard of the cures effected
by mesmerism, and a trial of it was determined upon. We
have not funds sufficient to receive in-patients ; and therefore
Mr. Fisher, who has been one of our two male mesmerisers
ever since we opened the Institution in 1850, very nobly
offered, without consulting with any of us, to go to Uxbridge
and mesmerise her gratuitously, after his six hours’ work at
the Infirmary was over, provided the friends would pay the


182 Cure of Dropsy of the Abdomen.


expenses of his railroad journies. He performed this labori-
ous act of disinterested kindness and mesmeric zeal from the
19th of February, 1854, till the beginning of November.
The people of the village sneered and hissed while the treat-
ment was continued, often saying, ‘There goes the devil’s
imp,’ when they saw Mr. Fisher proceeding to the house, and
told the husband when accompanying Mr. Fisher to the
station that he ought not to allow his wife to be mesmerised
nor himself to be seen with such a fellow, who would be sure
to run away with her. Mr. Capern informs us that Mr. Davey
was to have been attacked in the wood between Tiverton and
Bampton as he was going to give a lecture on mesmerism
eight years ago, but the presence of good Mr. Capern at his
side prevented the outrage.

“She was tapped fifty-five times: six times in London,
as already mentioned, and forty-nine times in the country
by Messrs. Stillwell and Kane. At the fifty-third operation
she measured five feet in circumference, and six pailfuls, or
ninety-six pints : for each pail held two gallons. The average
quantity removed at every operation was nine gallons—so
that the whole amounted to four hundred and ninety-five
gallons, or three thousand nine hundred and sixty pints.

** As soon as mesmerism was adopted, she began to suffer
less, to improve in her general health, and to decrease in
size. But there was so much fluid in her when mesmerism
was begun on the 19th of February last year, that Mr.
Stillwell tapped her on the 6th of March: and this was the
last operation required. The fluid on former tappings had
always been of a light yellow greenish colour and nearly
inodorous: on this occasion it was of a dark brown and very
offensive.

“The passes when reaching the abdomen gave her ex-
cruciating pain. When Mr. Fisher had mesmerised her only
six times, he saw that she required tapping, and advised her
to send for her surgeon, Mr. Stillwell, saying that after this
tapping he felt certain he could cure her and prevent the
necessity for another operation. She replied that then she
never should be cured : for Mr. Stillwell had declared after the
previous operation that he would not dare to tap her again as
she would die under the next operation: and she added that
indeed she would not be mesmerised again, since it had given
her more pain than she had ever felt before, and wished her
sister had not interfered, and that Mr. Fisher had never come
to her house. However, Mr. Stillwell did tap her once more
and expressed his surprise at the improved state of her health
when he went to her house to tap her, and he wished to


Death had been predicted by many. 183


know how it had been brought about. But she dared not
tell him that she had been mesmerised and had nothing else
done. He of course now knows the whole history : and we
trust he will give up his weak prejudices.

“The Secretary, hearing of the case, mentioned it to the
Council in the beginning of the summer. Two members,
Mr. Shaw and Mr. Kiste, went into the country, accompanied
by Mr. Driver, surgeon, of Lower Grosvenor Place, Pimlico.
On examining the patient and hearing her statement, he
pronounced the case to be ‘ marvellous, most marvellous!’
but afterwards said that the fluid would gather again (an
amount of it being still in her), and moreover that she would
soon die. The Secretary was requested to go to Uxbridge
and ascertain the facts. At his return, General Bagnold,
Dr. Elliotson, Messrs. Colvin, Purland, T. A. Shaw, W.
Underwood, and Gardiner, feeling that she ought to be mes-
merised daily, and that Mr. Fisher could not do this and was
already doing what few would have done, resolved to subscribe
together and defray the expense of her journies and remu-
nerating Mr. Fisher: while Mr. Frere paid for her board and
lodging with her sister. She accordingly came up in the be-
ginning of November, and first called on Mr. Stillwell to thank
him for his attention and kindness: and he seemed much
pleased with her improvement, but thought that the fluid
would accumulate again: was daily mesmerised by Mr. Fisher
till the 16th of March, though she appeared before the
Council and was found to be entirely free from dropsy and in
excellent health on the 3rd of January. The hard ovarian
tumor could still be felt: but it gave rise to no inconvenience
whatever, and she believes it has lessened.

“She remains well ; and all the people in the country who
know her are astonished at her healthy appearance.

“During her stay in London she called at University
College Hospital, and saw a nurse who had been very kind
to her and who was quite surprised at her improved condition.

“She expresses, we need not say, the greatest gratitude
to Mr. Fisher and all who have contributed to her cure.

“ She never was sent to sleep.*


“Such have been the happy results in our humble insti-
tution during the last year. They would have been greater
but for the inability of some patients to continue their at-
tendance regularly or at all, and the ignorance, absurd fickle-
ness, and impatience of others or their friends.


P * She attended the Annual Meeting in the enjoyment of perfect health.—
oist,


184 Difficulties of regular mesmeric treatment.


“ Distance of residence from an establishment like ours
often renders regular attendance difficult on account of the
weather and the fatigue: though the resolute, if not very
weak, care little for either, and improvement in health and
strength is so common as frequently to lessen fatigue more
and more till it is not felt. But all are not resolute. Some
were too weak to continue to go backwards and forwards for
any sufficient time. Some were almost shoeless, scantily
clad, and half starved, having nearly exhausted their mi-
serable means before they thought or heard of mesmerism.
Yet some of this class have striven courageously and attended
well, even during inclement weather. But the power of
mesmerism has a hard struggle when food and clothing are
deficient. Some patients, when improved, have been obliged
to return to their daily work before the completion of their
cure: others have removed into the country, others to parts
of the town too distant for their attendance.

“A great impediment to the successful issue of mesmeric
treatment in private practice as well as in our hospitals, is
the expectation of a rapid, or even immediate, cure, or of
the production of sleep or some other phenomenon. We not
unfrequently cure with astonishing rapidity: but we have
shewn that in the larger number of cases the cure is pro-
gressive. We not unfrequently produce sleep, and at an
early stage too of the treatment: but persons must remember
that we every day witness cures when, however long the
treatment was continued, there had been no sleep nex any
other effect than the cure of the disease or the improvement
of the health.

“Some patients, however, though apprised of all this
before the treatment is commenced, forget it soon after the
treatment is commenced, and therefore refuse to continue
the only measure which can do them good,—being fickle and
childish by nature, impatient and irritable from disease, or
influenced by ignorant, headstrong, or superstitious friends,
who talk them out of their own convictions and good sense,
making them forget that all inanimate matter is replete with
wonderful properties, many of which were unknown for-
merly and far more are no doubt yet undiscovered, and that
living bodies are endowed with other powers still more won-
derful and hitherto imperfectly investigated, and making
them forget that mesmerism is as purely natural knowledge
and art as astronomy and chemistry and the applications of
these sciences. The ignorance which prevails, even among
persons who fancy themselves well educated and informed,
can be believed by those only who mix much with mankind.


Our cures not ascribable to nature. 185


“It must be remembered that the majority of our cures
have been effected in cases which had withstood ordinary
treatment either under private practitioners or in public
charities ; often under many private practitioners or in more
than one public charity. Every such cure should be regarded
as equivalent to several cures under ordinary treatment, for
a large number of ordinary cures are due to nature more
than to art, or at least art does little else in a large number
of cases than by diet and other regimen remove obstacles in
nature’s way. Paley, in the 23rd chapter of his Natural
Theology, ‘The Goodness of the Deity; section, ‘The Origin
of Evil, makes the following just remarks :-—


*« «Few diseases are fatal. I have before me the account of a
dispensary in the neighbourhood, which states six years’ experience
as follows :—


Admitted ...... eager 6,420
ae
eae


And this I suppose to agree with what other similar institutions ex-
hibit. Now in all these cases some disorder must have been felt,
or the patients would not have applied for a remedy: yet we see how
large a proportion of the maladies which were brought forward have
either yielded to proper treatment, or, what is more probable, ceased
of their own accord. We owe these frequent occurrences, and,
where recovery does not take place, this patience of the human con-
stitution under many of the distempers by which it is visited, to two
benefactions of our nature. One is that she works within certain
limits: allows of a certain latitude within which health may be pre-
served, and within the confines of which it only suffers a graduated
diminution.” ‘The other property of our nature, to which we are
still more beholden, is its constant endeavour to restore itself, when
disordered, to its regular course.’


“We would suggest that the numbers of patients ad-
mitted and dead are no doubt correct, but that the number
of those alleged to be cured may be doubted: for there is no
division of patients relieved only; and these form a large
proportion in all public charities.

“The great majority of our cures are really the effect of
art: and many are wonderful effects of art, some absolutely
wonderful in themselves, others in their rapidity. All are
effected without pain or even annoyance: without the disgust
of nauseous, or the misery of uncomfortably working, drugs.
Many of our patients have been cured or greatly benefitted
who were known by the Secretary to be existing from day to
day on bread and tea only.

“It must be remembered that some diseases, as far as we


186 Permanency of our cures.


can judge at present, are in their very nature incurable.
But, although this is a fair excuse for some portion of our
want of success, we are bound to act upon the hope that a
remedy will be discovered for every disease, and therefore
fully to try mesmerism or any other means which are innocent
and either recommended by trustworthy persons or ever so
little likely on speculation to be of service. We do conse-
quently often advise mesmerism for the chance of benefit.
With the utmost perseverance mesmerism must, therefore,
like every other known remedy, be expected occasionally to
fail, and yet it will be employed by rational persons in a
large number of cases as a last resource. This will greatly
increase the list of failures, but is unavoidable.

“ Again, in numerous instances of mesmerism not curing
it alleviates suffering and removes a certain amount of the
symptoms. Many patients who have tried mesmerism and
are uncured are still very thankful for the good which it has
done them.

“Tn truth, mesmerism should be employed, more or less,
in almost every case, whether medical or surgical. It ap-
proaches somewhat to the character of a universal, though
by no means an infallible, remedy. It is really a general
remedy. As one of us has said in The Zoist,* it soothes
and strengthens, and has a power of assisting the inherent
tendency, mentioned by Paley, of the system to throw off
disease,—the vis medicatrix nature, whatever be the disease.
This appears to be the true expression of the remedial power
of mesmerism.

“ Some of our medical friends who do not say that we do
not cure, or that we do any harm, or that we work by means
of Satan, tell their patients that our cures are not permanent.
Now our cures are permanent if we have fair play: if we are
allowed to continue mesmerism for a sufficient time after a
cure is effected. No good mesmeriser would willingly desist
as soon as a cure is effected, any more than a good physician
would leave off quinine as soon as an ague has ceased. For
an instance of permanency of cure we can triumphantly
point to the youthful page who opens our door. He hada
disease in his left shoulder that in the knee would be called a
white swelling. One of our members so considered it, but
sent the lad to Mr. Fergusson, the surgeon of King’s College,
who kindly saw it and said he considered it a dangerous case,
and prescribed repetitions of blisters, cod liver oil, &c. We
trusted the case to mesmerism only, and Mr. Gardiner per-


a - — _ —EE


* Dr. Elliotson, No. XXXVII., p. 100; XLV., p. 106.


Mesmerism does not interfere with other measures. 187


fectly cured the joint: and it is cured to this hour, and the
boy is a hearty lad. The case is detailed in our last years’
report, and is one of the triumphs of mesmerism.*

“In no case, therefore, should it be forgotten. It may
cure as well as any other remedy, and, what is very important,
without pain or discomfort: it may cure when every other
remedy fails: it may, without pain or discomfort, lessen dis-
ease which it does not cure: and it may prevent and lessen
suffering when it does not lessen disease. When we possess
established means of curing or alleviating disease or lessen-
ing distress, and above all in cases over which they exert
their beneficial operation without suffering or mischief, and
in cases which they cure better than mesmerism, they ought
to be employed as the profession at large employs them, and
as we who are medical do, in common with our brethren,
employ them in our private practice ; though we give not a
particle of any drug in the Infirmary, for patients enter on
the understanding that they are to be treated with mesmerism
only, and we take no cases in which medicines are likely
to be required : our object is to supply to the poor that which
is denied them in every hospital and dispensary, and, if we
employed anything but mesmerism, our cures would be as-
cribed by the profession to the medicines and not in any
degree to the mesmerism.

“Tn ordinary practice, if at the same time mesmerism
also is employed, all established means will tell the more :
they will require to be used with less force, the cure will be
speedier and pleasanter, and the recovery both from the
disease and from the debility left by it and very many ordinary
measures be much accelerated.

“The advantage of mesmerism during convalescence from
any disease and after any treatment is also very great. It
often serves all the purpose of change of air and scene: and
is a blessed substitute to those whose means are too poor for
that advantage. Wonderful as the fact may appear, persons
very susceptible of mesmeric influence, if from confinement
or other debilitating causes they become languid, pale, and
uncomfortable, lose their appetite and are altogether in a
state for which a change of air and relaxation from labour is
an almost certain remedy, find mesmerisation a far more
potent means : for the mesmeric sleep or sleep-waking during
an hour or two, though it should be induced by a single pass
or by pointing or gazing at the eye for only a few minutes,
restores them in general completely and establishes such an


* Sce it detailed in No. XLVI., p. 188.—Zoist.


188 Our cures and blessings ignored by the medical world.


expression of health as causes their acquaintance who acci-
dentally meet them to enquire what they have been doing to
look so well.

“This general and wonderful remedy is always at hand.
The power of administering it is possessed by every healthy
individual: and all the requisite knowledge may be acquired
in a very short time by anybody. The day will arrive when
the extensive remedial powers of mesmerism will be a matter
of common knowledge and be employed in every case of
illness, be this acute or chronic, general or local, and in every
accident : for cure, for alleviation, for repose, or for freedom
from pain, whatever ordinary medical or surgical measures
may also be demanded. The sick child, whatever be its ill-
ness, will be carefully mesmerised by its mother or father, or
nurse if it have one: the sick youth or adult by relatives or
friends or professional mesmerisers. Every nurse will be
expected to include mesmerism in her duties, if required.

“The twelve volumes of The Zoist teem with perfectly
authenticated cases of its benefit in every kind of disease—
whether situated in the head, chest, abdomen, or extremities
—in the interior and on the surface—in surgical cases as well
as medical—in the infant, the youth, and the aged.

“A surgeon who has been very prosperous and signalizes
himself by incessantly reviling mesmerism and phrenology,
tells everybody that mesmerism seems to cure in obstinate
diseases because the last thing always gets the credit of
curing. But something else was the last thing before mes-
merism was tried, and yet the disease was uncured: and that
something would have remained for ever the last thing had
mesmerism not been tried. Well would it be if mesmerism
were often the first thing, or one of the first things tried.

“Tt is true that these cases are ignored by the medical
journalists and the teachers in the medical and surgical
schools. The exquisitely beautiful instance of removal of a
female breast without the slightest sensation or subsequent
inconvenience in our Infirmary last year has been perfectly
ignored by these gentlemen and the rest of the profession.
In private practice throughout the country our splendid facts
are never acted upon or mentioned. The profession has
resolved to be impenetrable. But the public are too wise to
allow the continuance of this state of things: and nothing
can arrest our perseverance, because our foundation is truth
and our purpose humanity.

“The patients of the Institution are in general very
grateful. Many return the most heartfelt thanks when they
leave, and by letters from a distance after they have left:


Praise of the Secretary and Mesmerisers. 189


some make little presents to their mesmerisers ; one patient,
Mr. Case, carried to the Secretary a small ebony toy for his
little son: Master Roebuck, after being cured, presented his
son with a handsome painted horse : others have presented their
mesmerisers with brooches or similar things: one patient put
five shillings, another ten, another a sovereign, into the dona-
tion box: and poorer patients frequently put in their mites
in the fulness of their hearts.*

“The Council have great satisfaction in stating that the
conduct of the four mesmerisers—Mr. Fisher and Mr.
Mayhew, Mrs. Acott, and Mrs. Lickfold, is everything that
can be desired. They most carefully perform the duty of
mesmerising, and are kind, sedate, and in all respects well
conducted. To the resident Secretary and Superintendent,
Mr. Gardiner, the Institution is deeply indebted. He is
absolutely devoted from benevolent feelings to the cause of
remedial mesmerism, and therefore to our Institution. He
is always at his post: looks to everything in the establish-
ment and to all its concerns out of the house, with the most
conscientious assiduity: is kind to every one, uniting his
kindness with suitable firmness ; and very charitable to those
patients whose circumstances are distressing; placid and
quict in his steady doings, and obliging and respectful to
every subscriber and visiter.

“The Infirmary was never before conducted with the


* Dr. Elliotson received the following letter from a young man of humble
circumstances, whose case is recorded in No. XLIII., p. 240, of The Zoist, and
who had already given ten shillings to the Infirmary as soon as his cure was
effected.

‘‘ High Street, Uxbridge, May 24, 1855.
‘J. Elliotson, Esq., M.D., F.R.S., Conduit Street.

‘‘Dear Sir,—It is with feelings of the deepest respect and gratitude that I
now have the honour of addressing you; in fact, I cannot be too thankful for
the kind and generous treatment I received two or three years ago at your hands.

‘*T have little doubt that in consequence of the time that has elapsed since I
was under your care that you have forgotten me, but the facts of my case will
probably recur to your mind. I was living at that time at 17, Elizabeth Terrace,
Islington, and suffering severely from epilepsy, but from your judicious use of
mesmerism, and the blessing of Almighty God, I entirely recovered, and am
happy to say that from that day to this I have remained perfectly free from any
attack whatever.

‘* Under these circumstances, I have long felt it to be my duty to do what I
can for the extension and support of the cause from which I have received such
incalculable benefit. It has not been in my power to do anything before, but I
have great pleasure now in forwarding you a Post Office order for 10s. 6d , which
I intend to continue annually, towards the funds of the Mesmeric Infirmary, and
I trust that that institution will continue to extend its usefulness and become a
greater blessing to the human race.

‘* | have the honour to remain, Sir,
“Your obedient servant,
** Witt1amM Epwarp Dovey.”


190 Praise of amateur Mesmerisers and others.


order and effect which prevail in it at present. Indeed its
arrangements and working excite admiration: and, as far as
we can conceive, are perfect. Our removal to our present
situation has proved in every respect advantageous.

“The Committee gratefully acknowledge the kindness of
the additional donations and subscriptions since the last
Annual Meeting. Captain Stapleton, of Sidmouth, who had
already given us £70, has during the last week given us five
and twenty more. Mr. Frere benevolently defrays all the
expenses of this Annual Meeting, as he did that of last year,
and is continually doing various acts of kindness for us.
To Mr. Amor and Mr. Purland we are indebted for many
special acts of assistance, both in money and taking trouble.
Mrs. Hambleton, who had originally been a donor of ten
guineas, has lately presented us with half the annual interest,
amounting this year to £30, of a certain quantity of East
India Dock Stock, and mentioned her intention of bequeath-
ing to us the corresponding amount of stock. She has re-
paired and embellished our house inside and outside, and
supplied it with numerous articles of furniture and comfort,
altogether at the expense of the greater part of £100. Our
Secretary informs us that one lady has sent a number of
woollen slippers for the patients to put on when arriving at
the Infirmary in wet weather while their own are drying at
the fire: another lady has given him coal and bread tickets,
and several others have given him money, for distribution at
his own judgment.

“We return our thanks to Mr. Tucker, Mr. Bird, Mr.
Gressett, Miss Job, Miss Barlow, Miss Gardiner, Mrs. Hutton,
Miss Mayo, and Miss Lawson, for their kindness in mesmer-
ising gratuitously at the Infirmary: and all the return we
can make is to recommend them, if they desire it, to private
persons who enquire of us for professional mesmerisers.

“We are happy to say that, through the assiduity of
Mr. Gardiner, not more than about half a dozen subscrip-
tions are in arrear.

“We lament to be obliged to mention the decease of one
of our Vice-Presidents, the late Earl Stanhope. He had
been a strenuous advocate of mesmerism for very many years:
never flinched from declaring his opinion : sometimes himself
mesmerised the poor: and was a handsome subscriber to the
Infirmary. He did not hesitate to take the chair at one of
our Annual Meetings when requested: and the next year
came up to London at a very short notice on purpose to take
it when we had been disappointed of another chairman. He
was highly informed, scrupulously honourable, very benevo-


.


=


er


het ete amet lay


The Rev. George Sandby’s speech. 191


lent, very independent, a perfect gentleman, and free from
the follies of pride.

“Every addition to our funds will greatly augment our
means of doing good: as in the same house and with the
same excellent Secretary we could employ several more mes-
merisers: it is large enough for more and he could superin-
tend more. We have not the smallest doubt that we shall
every year be more and more supported in our efforts to im-
part the blessings of mesmerism to the poor and to extend the
conviction of its truth and importance to society at large.

“The accounts have been kindly and carefully audited by
Mr. Wallis, of Long Acre, and Mr. Adlard, of Hatton
Garden, whose statement will be found at p. 197.”


The Rev. Gzorce Sanpsy moved the reception of the
Report, which, he said, was both interesting and instructive.
It was interesting to them who were met together in behalf
of this good cause by shewing that the Institution was pro-
gressing so favourably and so steadily, and remedying such
an amount of evil; and it was instructive from the details it
gave of the manner in which mesmerism operated. He
hoped that, when the Report was printed, it would be read
attentively, and considered both by the friends of the cause
and its enemies. He always felt a peculiar delight in paying
a visit to the Mesmeric Infirmary, as he invariably found
everything there going on in a satisfactory manner and in
admirable order. There was not, indeed, an institution in
the country in which greater system, regularity, order, and
adherence to rule was observed, than in their own Infirmary.
He would especially call the attention of the meeting to the
manner in which the patients were received. On presenting
themselves, an officer examined them, and took down the
nature of their complaints, the number of hospitals in which
they had been treated, or of the private practitioners under
whose care they had been, and a most careful and accurate
account was, if they attended regularly and steadily, kept of
the course of their mesmeric treatment. Each was informed
that he would have to attend regularly for some time, ac-
cording to the nature of his malady, and that he must by no
means imagine he would derive miraculous effects from the
treatment. By means of that register they had collected,
and would collect, the most valuable statistics of mesmerism.
He congratulated them on holding this their sixth annual
meeting on a science which, a few years since, they were told
was ridiculous, when mesmerisers were opposed and those
who attended their meetings were laughed at. They were

VOL. XIII. o


192 Mr. Janson’s speech.


now forcing their way in spite of the opposition they had met
with, and this Institution had taken root and would be a
permanent thing amongst them. He was much struck with
a remark in the Report, that one of their cures was often
equivalent to several by other means. He should like to have
an investigation by a committee similar to the Sebastopol
Committee, of the comparison of cures made by their Insti-
tution (which took in the refuse of other hospitals, allowance
being made for their limited means) with that of other hos-
pitals, and he had no doubt they would stand in a very ad-
vantageous position. The result of such a comparison would
also shew similar results to those of the Sebastopol Committee,
—that it was the love of medical routine and medical red-
tapism that prevented the people from having called to their
aid that great power which nature had so providentially and
bountifully afforded them, and, rather than the feelings of
their friends who were medical men should be hurt, allowed
them to remain uncured. Mesmerism was a great truth
in nature, and he considered that people were madmen not
to employ it when they knew its advantages. He was glad
to see so many ladies present, because they possessed more
moral courage than men. They spoke their minds when men
were afraid of offending their medical practitioner, and he
called on them to stand forth and insist on mesmerism being
tried when all other remedies had failed. Having witnessed
the attention paid at the Infirmary to the patients, and tlic
thankfulness these expressed for the benefit derived from the
treatment, he considered they were arrived at a point from
which they could not be driven back. The Institution had
taken root, for which they had reason to thank God and take
courage to go on and defy all opposition.

Mr. Janson, of Exeter, seconded the motion. He had
been unexpectedly called on to do so, and was not prepared
with a speech for the occasion. The best thing he could
therefore do, was to give them some information of the pro-
gress. of the science in that part of the country in which he
resided. He was located at Exeter, and he knew of no pro-
vincial town where it had made a greater progress than in
that city. He had often asked the question why it had not
progressed as much in other large towns, such as Birmingham
and Manchester. He wished all persons in the provinces
would exert themselves, and try if they could not establish
something like a mesmeric movement, and give the result of
their exertions at mectings similar to this. They had effected

many excellent things at Exeter, to some of which he re-
ferred, but said it was needless for him to enumerate them in


Captain Hudson’s speech. 193


detail, as they must be well known to the readers of The
Zoist.

Captain Hupson, of Leeds, moved the second resolution,
and, in doing so, observed that in his part of the country the
advocates of mesmerism left no means untried by which to
advance the science and to benefit the afflicted. He had de-
livered fifty lectures on the subject at Liverpool, fifty-eight in
Huddersfield, and ninety in its neighbourhood, and he had
just finished his eightieth lecture in Leeds. He regretted
there was not more opposition, for if there was they would
progress more rapidly. At one of his meetings he had four-
teen doctors and six clergymen. The latter and four of the
former were friends of the science, and before the meeting
terminated he succeeded in passing two resolutions in its
favour. The brother of one of the medical profession present
most opposed to the science declared his conversion to the
principle of mesmerism, and that he would do all he could in
its furtherance. He appealed to the ladies to exert them-
selves in the movement, because he had always found them
the best men of business. Wherever he went, instead of
ten opposing him, he found a hundred supporting him,
because he shewed them there was a power connected with
mesmerism calculated to do an infinite amount of good.
After giving instances of the cures he had effected (including
that of a medical man) by mesmerism, and advising the
company to read The Zoist regularly for information, he moved
that Major-General Bagnold be elected a Vice-President.

Mr. Monckton Mitnes seconded the resolution. The \
greatest amount of opposition the science received was from
scientific men, which appeared to many persons to be a great
misfortune and inclined them to think ill of such men in
consequence. He thought it was their good fortune to live in
a scientific age and amongst scientific people, and that this
was a special reason why they might hope mesmerism would
become successful, and, by the exertion of honest men, take
its proper place as a science. Mesmerism had been known
for ages, and there was a glimmering of it to be seen in the
history of medical science; and it appeared surprising that
so beneficial and useful an agent should have appeared in the
scientific world and then have disappeared again. It had been
the same with the great discoveries and improvements that had
been made in our day in the physical sciences. Anzsthetic
agents, like ether and chloroform, were no doubt known as
early as the twelfth century, but, from the want of scientific
investigation, and a sufficient interest to take them up and
perfect them, their employment was allowed to die away as
02


194 Mr. Monckton Milnes’s speech.


if they never existed. Vaccination was known in Spain
years before it was discovered and applied in England by
Jenner. All scientific persons agreed that the discovery of
any particular powers in nature was not of so much import-
ance as the existence of a sufficiently intelligent community
to understand, perceive, and practise them. Therefore it
was that he was glad to see so large an attendance at that
meeting, and he hoped that all would depart with the con-
viction that they would see it become a practical science.
When they were charged with being superstitious for holding
such views, he replied they were not so—that the supersti-
tion was on the other side, with those who wished to get out
of the domain of ordinary nature, and attribute all those
things to fanciful and accidental causes. The advocates of
the science wished the facts to be taken as simple phenomena,
which would in due time accumulate till they could be ar-
ranged under special laws, and be established as a full and
perfect science. It was on that account that he believed
reasonable men interested themselves in this subject, and
that he always felt some doubts as to the reasoning faculties,
and power of receiving evidence, of those scientific men, and
unfortunately there were many, who said they could see
nothing in the science. He had arrived at his conviction
from a knowledge of facts, and not from being led away by
anything merely surprising or curious. He wished them to
confine their attention to this matter as regarded medicai
science. The interesting and wonderful phenomena of mes-
merism connected with the mind were of a totally different
character, imperfectly understood now, and likely to lead
persons away from a clear investigation of the simpler facts.
Mesmerism was a great medical agent which Providence had
given to mankind, not to be played with as a matter of
amusement, but to be applied seriously, and which might
lead to good or bad effects accordingly as it was well or ill
applied. He anticipated an enormous amount of benefit to
mankind when its principles became implanted in the minds
of an intelligent community, and persons met the advocates
of this science in a proper manner by bringing their friends
to be operated on by the mesmeriser, but not as a last
resource. So long as persons did not, but tried their consti-
tutions and damaged themselves in every way by other treat-
ment before they became converts to this science, they must
not be disappointed if they were not always cured. Mes-
merism would not have a fair chance until people applied to
it as to the ordinary healing art—at the beginning of the
disease. He hoped this Infirmary would greatly promote


Major-General Bagnold’s speech. 195


that end, for all the opposition of scientific and medical men
would not in any degree be an impediment to the reception
of truth, but rather useful in the end.

Major-General BaGnoxp said,—In offering you the motion
now in my hand I shall merely say that my presence here, I
trust, is a guarantee that I firmly and implicitly believe in
the curative powers of mesmerism, and yet I confess that for
many years of my life no person could have doubted or ridi-
culed the whole question more than I did. Guess, then, my
astonishment at finding that what I had rejected when pre-
sented to me in the repulsive shape of religious jugglery in
India was founded on a simple fact in nature, and one as
demonstrable by a little patient inquiry as any schoolboy’s
first lessons in electricity or chemistry. But if I felt a degree
of shame and regret for opportunities lost of acquiring a
useful knowledge, what will eventually be the shame and
disgrace of those scientifically educated men whose particular
province is to look into nature’s truths and make them
known, but who, instead of doing so, abuse and revile those
who would do this work for them? However, I do not totally
despair of the medical profession. I have myself made some
converts from that body, so far, at least, as belief goes—but,
alas! I cannot, I fear, find their moral courage to avow and
practise it. A talented young medical friend of mine, not
long since acting house-surgeon at one of our principal
London hospitals, at my suggestion put it to the proof by
trying it on a most frightful case of hysteria that had baffled
every other treatment. He succeeded to his perfect satisfac-
tion, and his poor patient left the hospital with prayers and
blessings on his head. In the warmth of his feelings he pro-
mised me the case for publication—but when the time came
he declined, saying, “ With ample proof as to the fact |
dare not publish it, but I trust a time will come when being
more independent of the heads of my profession I can put
them at defiance. At present it would ruin me.” But,
ladies, it is to you I would particularly address myself—you
who by your nature and your Christian education are minis-
tering angels in sickness and suffering. Are you aware of
the powers you possess in healing the sick, or at least assuag-
ing pain, by a few patient waves of your hands? That in
this power you possess a mine of wealth that you can dispense
to others, and, like the widow’s cruise of oil, is inexhaustible ?
That in your own family circle of relatives and friends it is
invaluable, and to the poor often more acceptable than pe-
cuniary relief? Pardon my enthusiasm, but I feel the time
is not far distant when it will be as common for the strong


196 Mr. Lewis’s speech.


and powerful to give out a little of their superabundant
health to the sick and weakly as it is now for the rich and
affluent to give their surplus wealth to the poor and needy.
And now, ladies and gentlemen, let me close my appeal to
you with the remark, that infirmaries cannot be kept up on
good luck and wishes alone. We then offer you the assur-
ance that what pecuniary assistance you can give us shall be
faithfully and economically applied.* I move that Mr. Klein
and Mr. A. Thomson be placed upon the Council.

Mr. Avotrue Kiste seconded the motion.

Mr. Purtanp moved the appointment of Mrs. Hambleton,
of St. John’s Wood Road, to the Ladies’ Committee, with
an especial vote of thanks for her great liberality towards the
funds of the Infirmary and the embellishment and furnishing
of the house. That lady, he said, had expended nearly £100
on the Infirmary, in addition to £10 presented to the funds,
and an annual subscription of £30.

Dr. Extiotson seconded the motion, and bore testimony
to the benevolence of Mrs. Hambleton, to whom the Institu-
tion was so much indebted for her liberality that it was im-
possible for the Council to adequately express their thanks.

Mr. Lewis, a gentleman of colour, in moving that the In-
firmary deserved support, said he advocated the science for
the sake of suffering humanity, having witnessed its won-
derfu) effects in Africa, America, and the East and West
Indies ; and he felt certain that when it was more generally
known and understood by the public they would avail them-
selves of it. He alluded to its introduction into Edinburgh.
A few years since mesmerism was considered there to be a
humbug, without truth, but he knew of no other city where
it was now making such rapid strides as in Edinburgh.


* Dr. Elliotson afterwards received the following note from Mr. W. Stirling,
who was already a donor of £10 :—

‘* 32, St. Vincent Place, Glasgow,
*€12th June, 1855.

** My dear Sir,—In the Sun newspaper of Saturday I saw an account of the
proceedings of the Annual Meeting of your Mesmeric Infirmary. I rejoice to
find, notwithstanding the continued opposition of those (the medical and scientific
men) who in my opinion should take a lead in its promotion, it continues to go
a-head and to prosper.

**T notice one of the speakers— Major-General Bagnold, remarks, ‘ Infirma-
ries cannot be kept up on good luck and wishes alone.’ Again, your noble
Chairman said, ‘ Those who were already subscribers to the Institution could not
shew their devotion and belief in the science better than by doubling the amount
of their present subscriptions.’ I beg to take to myself the hints of those gen-
tlemen, and have now much pleasure in enclosing a donation for £20, which may
I trouble you to hand to the proper quarter.

, ‘*T remain, yours most sincerely,
“Wo. SvTIRLinG.


Financial Report. 197

The Rev. J. Exins seconded the resolution, believing the
Institution much deserving of support.

Captain Hupson moved a vote of thanks to the officers of
the Institution, which was seconded by Dr. Symes.

A vote of thanks was accorded to the noble Chairman,
who, in acknowledging the compliment, said it afforded him
great pleasure to contribute in any way he could towards the
object in which they were all so deeply interested. He hoped
before long that every town of England would establish a
similar institution to that which they had in the metropolis.*


STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS.


The Treasurer in account with the London Mesmeric Infirmary.


Henry ADLARD,
Tuomas Henry WALLIS,


Dr. Cr,
1854. £ 8. d.| 1855. £ea@
To Balance in hand ...... 48 8 8] By Salaries.............. 282 14 0
Subscriptions ........ 258 14 6 House Expenses ...... 43 16 1
Donations . . 206 6 1 ROE sccccessscessce BW S
Penny Collecting Boxes. 16 9 8 Stationery, Stamps, and
Collection at Willis’s .. 918 9 Printing .. ee 3 4
Rents per Mr. Baume’s Charge forWillis’sRooms 1015 0
Gift. . « wes Rent of 36, Weymouth
Rent of la, ‘Fitzroy ‘Sq. 109 1 3 Street. tiaveken See ae @
Rent of Coach House & Rent of la, Fitzroy ied 109 9 il
Stables in Weymouth Balance . 87 1 7
ME issaseswsese Ee ©
Interest :
On Five ExehequerBills 15 11 2
Per Bankers ........ 7 3
£708 17 4 £708 17 4


: Auditors.


*,* The donations this year have exceeded those of the


last by £86 15s. 7d. :
by £60 Lis. 6d.


and the subscriptions those of the last


* After the Meeting his Lordship doubled his annual subscription to £4,
and Lady Dunraven became an annual subscriber of £2.


198 Leeds Mesmeric Association.


At the close of the Meeting, Captain Hudson handed in
the following paper :—


LEEDS MESMERIC ASSOCIATION,
OFFICERS.
President—Captain Hupson.
Vice-President—Davip NicHo.s.
Secretary—Wi.Li1aM JONES.


Treasurer—WILLIAM BROWNBRIDGE.
COMMITTEE.
SAMUEL SCHOLEFIELD, GEORGE STEEL,
Tuomas Murpuy, WILLiAM Gipson,
Joun MABANE, Davip Drury, ;


W. H. Dormonp.


A number of friends, after having attended Captain Hudson’s |
mesmeric lectures and demonstrations in this town, and witnessed
some of the cures effected by him, being desirous that steps should
be taken to secure the permanent establishment of the mesmeric
practice in the town of Leeds, consulted with Captain Hudson, who
recommended the formation of a class, the objects of which should
be to read and study the principles of mesmerism with a view to ;
their practical application to the cure of disease ; he also volunteered
to give what instruction he could in order to make the class as effi-
cient as possible.

Upon this recommendation a meeting was convened in March,
to which Captain Hudson was invited: he attended the meeting and
explained his views respecting the best course to be adopted in the
formation and working of the class; after which twenty-one names
were entered to form a class. Subsequently we have held weekly
meetings in the Captain’s rooms, that have been devoted partly to
the drawing up of rules, partly to receiving instruction from the
Captain and from that old and tried friend to the cause, Mr. W.

Lloyd, from Fulford, near York (to whom the class will be ever
grateful), and partly to experiments.


We now number fifty-three members, many of whom seem to '
take great interest in the cause, and some of whom, there can be no
doubt, will make very efficient mesmerists. t

We herewith send you a copy of our rules, and shall be very {


happy to receive communications from any of the gentlemen con-
nected with the London Mesmeric Infirmary, or others who have
made mesmerism their study and consequently will be able to impart
to our class much valuable information. In conclusion, we may state
that we feel a strong desire to be recognized by the London Infirmary.
On behalf of the Committee,

Wo. Jones, Secretary.

Address Wm. Jones, 3, Burmantopts, Leeds.


, ( 199 )


X. First Annual Report of the Scottish Curative Mesmeric
Association (Edinburgh).


Tue Annual Meeting of the Association was held in Queen
Street Hall, on Thursday evening, March 22, 1855. On the
motion of ArrHur TREVELYAN, Esq., Dr. Grecory, the
President, took the chair. The proceedings were opened by
an able address from the Professor, in which he philoso-
phically explained the principles of mesmerism, and shewed
that it was capable of curing diseases which ordinary medical
treatment could not reach, and that it could, moreover, ac-
complish this in the hands of non-professional persons, under
whose management it was not only an efficient but a safe
remedy. While admitting that the medical profession had
shewn an injudicous disregard of, and even a needless hos-
tility to, the science, he nevertheless deprecated the exhibi-
tion of hostile feeling towards them, and pointed out that
some of the ablest writers on mesmerism and some of the
most influential leaders of the movement were physicians of
eminence in various countries of civilized Europe. The
Chairman also said the present Association owed its existence
to the persevering labours of Messrs. Davey and Jackson,
who had, for the last two years, been advocating in this city,
and in various parts of Scotland, the claims of mesmerism
in its practical aspect as a curative agent. At the conclusion
of his address, the Chairman read an extract from a letter he
had received from one of the Vice-Presidents, Dr. Esdaile, of
Perth, in which this able champion of the cause announced
his readiness to demonstrate the leading facts of mesmerism
to any competent tribunal, suggesting the Senatus Acade-
micus with the Associated Societies of the University.

Mr. J. Cameron, jun., the Secretary, then read the fol-
lowing Report :—

“The Acting Committee of the Scottish Curative Mes-
meric Association, in presenting their First Annual Report,
are much gratified at being able to state that a very consider-
able amount of success has attended their endeavours during
the past year to carry out the purposes for which the Asso-
ciation was instituted. These purposes are, first, to apply
mesmerism to the cure and alleviation of disease; and, se-
condly, to encourage its use by all classes of the community.

“ With regard to the first of these objects, the Committee
have to report that since the meeting of the Association on
16th February last year, weekly mectings have been held for


the purpose of receiving and disposing of applications for
treatment.


200 Edinburgh Curative Mesmeric Association.


“Of the applications presented at these meetings, and of
such other cases as have been undertaken by the operators
and reported to the Committee, upwards of one hundred and
forty cures have been effected. The Committee may here
state that every case reported by them has been undertaken
and treated gratuitously.

“Cures have been effected in cases of rheumatism, neu-
ralgia, tic douloureux, St. Vitus’s dance, erysipelas, asthma,
deafness, inflammation and other affections of the eye, ulcers,
ringworm, &c.

“The Committee have not received permission to give the
names of parties in all cases, but the following are given as
samples of successful treatment.

* * Ke & *

“In the great majority of cases the cures have been
effected without inducing the mesmeric sleep, and, although
there is reason to believe that in many instances the sleep
would greatly facilitate and hasten the cure, it has been found
in practice that most cases have been treated successfully
while the patients are in the ordinary waking condition.

“Every operator has at present as many cases on hand as
he can possibly attend to, and it is a source of regret that
applications for treatment have frequently to be delayed for
want of operators.

“The experience of the Committee during the past year
has justified their most sanguine expectations of the efficacy
of mesmerism as a curative agent, and this not only in affec-
tions and disorders of the nervous system, but often in serious
derangements of the physcial organism which have defied the
skill of the ordinary medical practitioner. Its general heal-
ing power appears to be that of assisting nature to throw off
disease, whatever that disease may be, while it imparts vital
nervous energy to the system impaired by sickness.*

“The results above set forth must be considered highly
satisfactory, when the disadvantageous circumstances under
which they have been obtained are taken into account. It is
to be borne in mind that a large proportion of the cases are
such as had previously resisted all other systems of treat-
ment—that the Association is indebted for all its success to
the gratuitous exertions of a very few members, who without
exception have had their ordinary avocations to attend to,
and that it has only been portions of their leisure hours that
they could devote to attendance on the cases undertaken by
them. In all cases the patients have been treated either at


* These were our expressions in No. XLV., p. 106.—Zoist.


Its labours gratuitous and at private houses. 201


their own homes or at the residences of the operators, and this
is often far from a convenient or satisfactory arrangement, as
there may be neither the quietude nor the accommodation re-
quisite for efficiently conducting the mesmeric treatment.

“ Before leaving this department of their labours, the
Committee beg to suggest that it would be very desirable to
have a set of apartments in some central situation where the
operators and patients could meet at any hour that suited
their mutual convenience, and where the less experienced
might have the superintendence of a properly qualified mes-
merist to encourage and instruct them in cases of difficulty.

“The Committee will now refer shortly to the means
they have employed for promoting the use of mesmerism by
all classes of the community. During the year, Messrs.
Davey and Jackson, under the auspices of the Association,
have delivered twenty-six lectures especially devoted to teach-
ing and illustrating the science in its practical aspect as a
curative agent.

“The Committee likewise made arrangements for the
gratuitous instruction in practical mesmerism of three large
classes (two for males and one for females), which were at-
tended by upwards of 300 persons. Much interest seemed
to be taken in the subject, and besides a number of operators
furnished to the Association, the Committee have reason to
believe that many of those who attended these lectures are,
in a greater or less degree, practising mesmerism in their own
sphere, independently of the Association. The female class
resulted in the formation of a lady’s auxiliary to the Associa-
tion. Although this auxiliary was only organized in the month
of October, the ladies have already reported a number of cases,
from which the Committee beg to submit the following.

* * kK * F

“In the course of the year Messrs. Davey and Jackson
visited Ayr, and succeeded in forming a class, many of whom
have become successful mesmerists. Several interesting cases
of cure have been reported by them, some of which are
included in the preceding list.

“The Committee cannot conclude this Report without ex-
pressing their warmest gratitude to Messrs. Davey and
Jackson for their invaluable assistance. Their time, their
talents, their experience, have all been freely placed at the
disposal of the Association, and to their unwearied efforts
must be very much ascribed the present promising condition
of the science in this city. The Committee may observe that
they have not included in their list any of the numerous and
unportant cures effected by Mr. Davey.


202 Aristotle and Homer were Phrenologists.


“Tn conclusion, the Committee may congratulate the
Association on the improved state of public feeling as to
curative mesmerism. It is not to be expected, or even de-
sired, that facts so startling at first sight should be believed
without the most searching inquiry; but the unprejudiced
portion of the public now exhibit every desire fairly and
vandidly to investigate the truth. The Committee believe
that this is greatly to be attributed to the manner in which
the claims of mesmerism have hitherto been urged by the
Association. By carefully avoiding to propound any theories,
and devoting their energies to the collection and recording of
facts, they have reduced the whole controversy to the plain
question, Have cures been effected through the agency of
mesmerism ? On a question of fact so simple, every one of
ordinary intelligence is as well qualified to decide as the most
illustrious leader of the scientific world ;—and now that the
spirit of inquiry has been raised, the Association may fear-
lessly abide the issue, and the Committee feel very sanguine,
indeed, that the claims of mesmerism to rank as a grand and
useful science will, ere long, be duly and universally recog-
nized.”

For the rest of the account of the Meeting want of space
compels us to refer to the pamphlet itself.


XI. The Correspondence between the Characters and Heads of
the two Murderers lately executed at Newgate. By James
Srraton, Esq., of Rosebank, Dundee. With an intro
duction and conclusion by Dr. Exiiorson.


‘Those who have a large head, are sagacious—are like dogs ; those who hav«
a small head, are stupid—are like asses ; those who have a conical head, have no
shame—are like birds with curved claws.”

MeydAnyv of thy Kepardy Exovres, aicOntixol’ dvapéperas em Tovs xivas* oi dé
puxpay, dvaic@nro’ dvapéperar em rods bvous’ of Tas Kepadrds hotel, dvaiders
dvapépeta emi robs yauévuxas.—ARISTOTLE, De Physiognomid. cap. vi.

“« Thersites, the basest scoundrel who went against Troy, had a conical head.

Gepairns...
- . . aloxuoros 5€ dvhp bmd “IAcoy FAGe.
potds Envy kepadhy.
Homer, Jlias, B.


Ir is sometimes alleged that we know nothing of the true
moral character of persons, and that intellectual faculties may
exist in strength which has never shewn itself. Frequently,
however, there can be no doubt of either moral character or
intellectual powers. The positive conduct may render the


|


ee - ati


ww upuy dtusy ucewyy


v2U Qrouws 7


“SS8lanZTANWE ABLNDAXS ‘AWS 13Hivve 3


ing


4 Stareasty ath


The Character and Development indisputable. 203


moral character indisputable ; and the positive exhibition of
an intellectual power proves its existence. Can any one
doubt the moral character or intellect of Mr. Haydon the
artist; the moral character of Rush, of the two Mannings,
or the others whose heads have been displayed in The Zoist ?*
We take the positive history of these individuals as it is fur-
nished to all the world ; and we take the developments of their
heads as presented by genuine casts taken immediately after
death and in almost every instance without any interference
on our part. In every case our readers perceive the corre-
spondence between the two, the proofs of the truth of Gall’s
science, and the nothingness of the arguments brought
against it by ignorance, false views, and misrepresentation.
The accounts of the Frenchman named Emmanuel Bar-
thelemy, and of the Italian named Luigi Buranelli, are derived
from the public newspapers. The casts were taken by order
of the Sheriffs by B. Casci, of No. 3, Harford Place, Drury
Lane, in the presence of many persons: and any number of
these casts may be purchased of Mr. Casci, whom I am happy
to recommend for taking casts from the living and the dead.


BARTHELEMY.


Emmanuel Barthelemy, a Frenchman, aged 32, a turner
in metal, and calling himself an engineer, knocked and rang
at the door of Mr. Moore, soda-water maker, No. 73, Warren
Street, Fitzroy Square, in company with a woman with a veil
over her face, on the evening of December 8, 1854. He had
been there several times before to repair an engine. They
were shewn into the back parlour where Mr. Moore was.
In ten minutes, the noise of violent scuffling was heard in
the room, and all three was scen coming out of it—the
woman first, Barthelemy next, with a pistol in his hand near
Mr. Moore’s head, at which he fired it with the effect of
instantly killing Mr. Moore, who seemed to be either pushing
him or holding him back. Two or three persons, and among
them Mr. Collard, a greengrocer, attracted by the quarrel-
ling, collected round the door, which the maid-servant had
opened, dropping her candle; and Barthelemy, observing
them, shut and fastened the door, and ran through the house
to an opposite door which led into the New Road. Mr.
Collard ran round to this door, and was shot in the abdomen
by Barthelemy while endeavouring to prevent his escape.
In Barthelemy’s pocket were found a dagger in a sheath


: © Seo Nes. I., Ti., HL, IV., V., Vi. Vil... Viki, &., ZL, EVE.
XXXVI., XLV., XLVIIL, L.


204 Barthelemy’s Crimes.


sewn into his body coat, twenty-four ball cartridges which
fitted the pistols he had used, and two door keys. A cane
was taken from him with a piece of string at one end, and
a heavy piece of lead, to which it seemed to have been a handle,
but broken off, was found in the room. A strong mahogany
chair was lying broken in the room, and there were several
marks of blood upon the wall at about the height of the
head of a person sitting in a chair, as well as on different
parts of the floor and in the passage. Mr. Moore’s head was
found lying in a pool of blood, with three lacerated wounds
at the top, and a smaller wound on the back, such as the
piece of lead might have made: there was also above the
right eye a pistol-ball wound from which blood and brains
were flowing. Mr. Collard died in University College Hos-
pital of his wound the same night. Barthelemy was tried
on January 4th for the murder of Mr. Collard alone. The
jury, chosen by him to be half foreigners, found him guilty,
but strongly recommended him to mercy. The judge, Lord
Campbell, could not divine the reason of the recommenda-
tion, but it was evidently their disapprobation of capital
punishment. “ The trial lasted nearly eight hours, and dur-
ing the whole of that period the prisoner, who was a most
ferocious, repulsive-looking man, stood firm and erect in the
front of the bar and did not betray the least emotion. He
exhibited the same callous indifference while sentence was
being passed ; and when the learned judge had concluded, he
whispered something to the turnkeys, and then walked deli-
berately down the stairs leading from the dock.”* In prison
he declared that he had no intention to murder Mr. Moore
when he went to that person’s house, had found the cane
loaded with lead in the room, and that it was a thing used in
Moore’s business: that he accompanied the woman for the
purpose of inducing Moore to pay her an allowance which she
received from Moore, who was a friend of her father—a Ro-
man Catholic priest, and, Moore not paying her the money, a
quarrel ensued. He also declared that the pistol which shot
Collard went off accidentally.


**On the day after the sentence was passed, the Rev. J. E. Davis,
the ordinary of Newgate, visited Barthelemy in his cell for the pur-
pose of offering his services, and he then asked permission to write
to several friends. He appeared to be at that time in a state of
despondency, and informed the reverend gentleman that if the law
was not executed upon him, he would take care to execute it upon
himself, for that he was tired of life, and did not care how soon his


* Times Newspaper, January 5, 1855.


His Firmness. 05
existence ceased. The expression of this determination caused the
authorities to be doubly upon their guard, and two officers were
placed in his cell, and remained with him day and night. Ignorant
of the practice in England with regard to persons left for execution,
he thanked the Sheriffs for delaying the carrying out of his execu-
tion so long, as he expected, he said, to have been executed on the
day after his condemnation to death. In the course of this visit,
Mr. Davis prepared the prisoner for his fate by informing him that,
although the jury had recommended him to mercy, he should not
allow his hopes to be excited. The prisoner seemed to think well of
this advice, and on some allusion being made to spiritual matters,
he said, ‘1 am visited by a catholic priest, but he has the good taste
not to speak to me on matters of religion.’ Adverting to his trial
and sentence, the prisover expressed his opinion that Lord Campbell
was guilty of a greater crime in sentencing him to death than he had
been in committing the crime for which that sentence was passed.
He did not appear to think that he had committed any crime, and
on being informed that Ledru Rollin was in court at the time of
his trial, he exclaimed, ‘Ah, no doubt he was glad to hear the sen-
tence of death passed upon me.’

‘Mr. Sheriff Crosley, who took much interest in the prisoner’s
case, and has devoted much of his time to him, attempted on many
occasions to draw his mind to a consideration of religion, but his
efforts were unsuccessful, for the prisoner gave utterance to infidel
sentiments of the boldest character. He denied again and again
the existence of a First Cause. Being pressed upon this point by
Mr. Sheriff Crosley, he exclaimed, ‘ Well, well, if there is a God, |
hope he speaks French.’ He added that he should soon know the
great secret if there were any, but he did not believe in anything of
the sort. Being urged to penitence and prayer, he said, ‘If I pray,
it will not open the prison-door, or break the rope. (You speak of
a deluge, and mankind is as bad as ever.’)

“On Sunday morning Mr. Sheriff Crosley again saw him, and
again deemed it his duty to speak to him on religious matters. The
Sheriff said, “‘ Now take my advice; you have but a short time to
live, and while you have that time to live, try and make your peace
with God.’ Barthelemy replied, ‘I am no believer; I understand
geometry and the sciences, but I don’t understand faith.’ Mr.
Crosley said, ‘ You are a scientific man, and know the meaning of
experiments; now try this—pray to God and see whether he will
not give you that faith which you cannot say you will not have if
you try for it.’ But all was unavailing. He asserted that there
was a vast number of men as bad as he, and their crimes went un-
punished. He particularly mentioned the Emperor Napoleon, who,
he said, had committed more daring and more violent acts than he,
and that while the Emperor was now receiving the acclamations of
Europe, he was sentenced to death on the gallows. The only time
Barthelemy was seen to exhibit any strong emotion was during this
interview with Mr. Sheriff Crosley. The Sheriff said, ‘ You have a
father—a good man, I understand; is he a disbeliever?” He said,


206 His Filial Feeling.


‘No;’ and Mr. Sheriff Crosley then asked, ‘ Why do you not follow
his good example?’ Barthelemy went towards the fire, gazed upon
it intently for a moment, and burst into a flood of tears. He was
spoken to by the Sheriff on the sin he had committed. Barthelemy
passionately exclaimed, ‘I have committed no sin. I have done a
wrong, perhaps, but no sin.” Undaunted by the failure of his good
intentions, Mr. Sheriff Crosley again entreated him to ask forgive-
ness of God, but the answer he received was, ‘1 don’t want the
forgiveness of God; I want the forgiveness of man, that I might be
able to walk out of these doors.’ Mr. Sheriff Crosley then asked
him if there was anything he could do for him, and Barthelemy
expressed a wish to have Paradise Lost in French. After an im-
mense deal of trouble the Sheriff succeeded in obtaining a copy of
this work, and it was read with great attention by the prisoner
every day.

**It is usual for prisoners under sentence of death to attend the
services in the prison chapel on the Sunday previous to their execu-
tion, but of this privilege Barthelemy declined to avail himself.
M. Borelli and M. Peyre, two Frenchmen, with whom he had been
acquainted for several years, paid him a last visit, but there was no
display of feeling during the meeting. The Hon. Mr. Clifford, ac-
companied by the Rev. Dr. Crowe, one of the catholic priests who
had been in attendance, also paid the prisoner a visit, but nothing
occurred between them worthy of notice.

** Nearly the whole of Sunday Barthelemy was engaged in
writing letters, and at 10 o’clock retired to rest, and slept soundly
until four o’clock yesterday morning. He dressed himself, partook
of some refreshment, and then commenced writing more letters.

**Shortly before eight o’clock, Mr. Alderman and Sheriff Mag-
geridge, Mr. Sheriff Crosley, Mr. Under-Sheriff Farrar, Mr. Under-
Sheriff Crosley, the Rev. J. E. Davis, and the Rev. Abbé Roux,—
a catholic priest, visited the prisoner in his cell. He was standing
by the fire, and bowed to them upon their entrance, (smiling and his
countenance becoming animated.)

*‘ Alderman and Sheriff Muggeridge asked the prisoner whether
there was anything he wished to communicate.

*‘ Barthelemy.—‘ No. I have written to my father and friends,
and I have given the letters to the governor.’

“Alderman Muggeridge.—‘ They shall be forwarded. Have
you made a confession or statement to any one relative to this
affair ?’

“‘ Barthelemy.—‘ The last one who knows the secret can tell it if
he pleases.’

“Mr. Under-Sheriff Farrar.—‘Is Mr. Herring, the solicitor,
that person ?”

* Barthelemy.—‘ Oh, no.’

«Mr. Under-Sheriff Farrar.—‘ Have you made any confession
or statement to Mr. Herring ?’

** Barthelemy.—‘ No! no! Very likely he will say he has one.
“The Rev. Mr. Davis. —‘ Barthelemy has never been re-


Firm to the last. 207
served in any way with regard to the crime with which he stands
charged.’

‘“* Mr. Under-Sheriff Farrar.—‘Then you have not made a state-
men to Mr. Herring?”

** Barthelemy.—‘ Mr. Herring, when I was at the court in Marl-
borough Street, came to me and said that he had been sent to me
by Mr. Cooper, another solicitor, who had not time to undertake
my defence. Some time afterwards he said he had been sent by a
friend, and I asked him what friend had sent him. I said to him,
I warn you that I have nothing to give to you except £21, which
somebody owes me. Mr. Herring struck his breast, and said,
‘Money is no object.’ When he came up to the court again, he
asked me to sign a paper for my clothes. ‘I pray you,’ addressing
the Sheriffs, ‘if you have the will and the power, to prevent this.
I cannot see what my clothes are wanted for; but, if they are to go
to Madame Tussaud’s, I think it will be abominable.’

‘Mr. Under-Sheriff Farrar.—‘ Your clothes will belong to the
sheriffs, who will not allow them to be given for any such purpose.’

** Barthelemy.—‘ I thank you, sir.’

*Calcraft, the executioner, was then introduced, but his appear-
ance in no respect shook the remarkable coolness and self-possession
of the prisoner, who said, while his arms were being pinioned, ‘I
hope I shall prove a good example, and be the last.’

“*Mr. Sheriff Crosley, who was deeply affected, said, ‘I hope,
Barthelemy, you have made your peace with God.’

** Barthelemy (with determination).—‘ I have no faith in God.’

** Mr. Sheriff Crosley.—‘I am sorry for that.’

*‘ Barthelemy.—‘ And I too am sorry, because in my present
position I might find some strength from the faith. Faith is an
outward thing, something out of and beyond the will of man, over
which he has no control. I have no faith.’

« Alderman Muggeridge.—‘ Have you anything more to say ?”

** Barthelemy.—‘ I wish to be permitted to hold this paper in my
hand. After my death you may do what you please with it.’

“Alderman Muggeridge.—‘ Certainly.’

“St. Sepulchre’s bell tolled, and the funeral procession was
formed. The sheriff led the way, followed by the under-sheriffs,
the chaplain, and the Abbé Roux. Barthelemy strode up to the
scaffold with an unflinching tread, and met his doom with the cool-
ness which was so eminently characteristic of his life. Ten thousand
persons had assembled to witness the execution; but the sight of
this vast multitude failed, as everything else had failed, to move him.
While on the scaffold he asked Caleraft t¢ do his work as quickly as
possible.

“At the given signal the bolt was withdrawn, Barthelemy fell,
and died without a struggle.

“ At nine o’clock the body was cut down, placed in a coffin, and
removed to the cell. (His countenance was calm and placid.) The
paper which he had requested permission to hold in his hand was
found there after his death. It was the letter from the French
VOL. XIII. P


208 Further particulars of him.


woman at Poictiers, (and signed, ‘Sophie,’ and merely coniained an
exhortation to repentance. It was supposed to have been written by
the woman who accompanied him on the night the murders were
committed).””—Daily News, January 23rd, 1855, except the passages
in parenthesis, which are from the Times.


It is said that in the former revolution he shot a man in
cool blood, and was sent to the galleys, but afterwards was
liberated on the ground that the affair had been entirely
political. I learnt from one who employed him as a workman
that he was what is called a turner in metal: that his coun-
tenance was very forbidding, his temper very violent, and his
nature very revengeful : that he cruelly cheated a poor fellow-
workman here, and declared that he would kill the present
Emperor of the French: yet that his speech was ordinarily
subdued and gentle. An eminent musical composer who was
present at his examination before Mr. Hardwicke, the magis-
trate, tells me that it was absolutely melodious. I hear on
good authority that, feeling himself insulted by a French
refugee, who was an excellent swordsman, he went to France
and practised sword exercise for a year, and on his return
spat in the other’s face the first time he met the man, and
caused the man to send him a challenge: the other, think-
ing him no swordsman, offered to fight him with pistols, the
offer was accepted, and Barthelemy, as is well known, shot
his man dead. It is reported that he was a red republican,
and on the day of the murder in Warren Street had set
off for Paris with the intention of shooting the French Em-
peror, but was too late for the train: the dagger sewn in his
coat, and the pistols and four and twenty balls found upon
him in the evening, he had no doubt started with in the day
and thus did not provide himself with them on joining the
woman in her visit to Mr. Moore. It is not improbable that
he had no murderous intention when he went to Mr. Moore’s:
but that, taking up the woman’s quarrel, he became violent,
struck Mr. Moore with the leaded cane which he found in
the room and fired, and afterwards fired at Collard in order
to escape.

The woman has not been heard of since his execution :
and his story respecting her is not improbable.


BuRANELLI.


Luigi Buranelli, an Italian, aged 31, who had formerly
been an upper servant in a gentleman’s family and latterly
resided at Penshurst as a tailor, came to London and formed
an acquaintance with a Mr. Latham, who went by the name


ee


SS@I4Of TINdY ‘GQainoaxa “IW aNVUNeE ‘4


Buranelli’s History and his Crimes. 209


of Lambert, separated by agreement from his wife, the
daughter of Dr. Badeley, sen., at Chelmsford, and lived at
No. 5, Foley Place with another woman, both assuming the
name of Lambert. He had first known Mr. Latham by lodg-
ing in the same house in Newman Street. He was an idle,
easy, poor man, quite unselfish, and very grateful for kind-
nesses constantly done to him by Mr. Latham. They all
removed to Foley Place, together with a woman named Wil-
liamson, who and Mrs. Lambert set up together as milliners.
Mrs. Williamson became in the family way by him, and re-
quested Mr. Latham to insist on his leaving; and he was
compelled by Mr. Latham, with the threats of blows, to leave
the house on the 28th of December. They feared his resi-
dence there would injure the millinery business. He after-
wards wrote twice to the woman, but received no answer,
became desperate, and deliberately resolved to murder her
and Mr. Lambert—so called. On the 7th of last January,
about 9 o’clock in the morning, he rang the bell at No. 5,
Foley Place, and, betraying nothing particular by his voice
or manner, gave his great coat and a parcel to the woman
who opened the door, and asked where Mr. and Mrs. Lambert
and Mrs. Williamson were. He entered Mr. Latham’s room
on the ground floor back with a pistol in his hand, and, seeing
the latter asleep with his back to the edge of the bed, fired
the pistol at the back of his head and instantly killed him
by dividing the spinal chord. Mrs. Lambert jumped out of
bed, and Ruranelli exchanged a second pistol from his left to
his right, and, firing at her, wounded her in the arm and
neck. He then proceeded upstairs to Mrs. Williamson’s
room, entered in agitation, told her that he had murdered
Mr. Lambert, went into another room, fastened the door,
fired a pistol in his own face, and exclaimed that he should
die and that he was an assassin and murderer to the police-
man who forced open the door. He had a little daughter in
the country, but ceased to enquire about her after his con-
nexion with Mrs. Williamson. He once lived in Italy with a
member of a Scotch family, who afterwards allowed him
£20 a year. He afterwards lived for five months as butler with
a gentleman in Grafton Street, Bond Street, having been
highly recommended : his conduct was good, and he was a
universal favourite: losing his wife—an Italian, he became
inconsolable, constantly wept, declared he could not bear his
trouble, and should destroy himself, and said that his suffer-
ings were greatest on Fridays. When a tailor at Penshurst,
he was considered a quiet inoffensive man, married a native
of the place, lost her suddenly in childbirth, was distracted


210


Al times had been insane.


and continually talked about dying. He had a trifling fistula,
which was cut, and he seemed to suffer mentally from it,
fearing he should die, refusing the operation, and, after it was
performed, being very violent, almost unmanageable, and
tearing off the bandages, wept much, and said, “ Poor
Louis, poor Louis, many troubles, many troubles ;” would
not be left alone, talked of throwing himself into the
river, and asked an acquaintance to shoot him ; thought his
medical attendant tried to poison him, had awful dreams,
believed he should come to an unhappy end; begged for
laudanum to poison himself: was affected by wet weather ; had
pain of his side, congestion of the liver, and was believed by
his medical attendant to labour under, not melancholy, which
is merely lowness of spirits, but melancholia, which is a dis-
ase—a form of insanity, for he had many delusions. He
‘ame up to London, and entered the Middlesex Hospital,
where he was desponding, cried for hours together, and often
insisted that his bed was flooded with water. Just before the
crime, he would talk to himself and gesticulate when alone,
and complained of pain in his head and heart. He exhibited
no signs of insanity when in Newgate. I have not the least
doubt that he had previously been insane at different times,
and was insane at the time of the murder, although as soon
as he had committed it he was himself again. To declare
him not mad previously, because no sign of insanity was
detected afterwards, was ridiculous.* He was contented to
be tried by an English jury: and was suffering from his
wounds at the time, a ball being still up his nose, and he
held a handkerchief to his face during the trial. When sen-
tence was passed upon him he nearly fainted, and was as-
sisted from the dock.

The following account of his execution is taken from the
Times newspaper :—

“« Ever since his condemnation the prisoner appears not to have
entertained any hope of a commutation of the sentence. Being a
Roman Catholic, Mr. Davis, the ordinary of the gaol, of course did
not press his spiritual attentions upon him. Mr. Sheriff Muggeridge
and his colleague Mr. Sheriff Crosley, however, immediately after
the trial made the prisoner aware that he would be permitted to see


* The following appeared in the Standard :—
‘The murderer Buranelli.—A post-mortem examination of the body was
made by the medical superintendent of St. Luke’s hospital, when the brain and


its membranes were found to be perfectly healthy, thus confirming the opinion of


the jury as to the sanity of the man, and his consequent responsibility for the
crimes into which his vicious nature had impelled him.’’ Why insanity may be
purely functional or dynamic, and the brain look perfectly healthy: and of
course his was healthy when he perished.


ee


His behaviour excellent in prison. 211


any clergyman of his own religious persuasion, and Dr. Farr, a
Roman Catholic priest, was requested to visit the culprit, and he did
so, and had several interviews with him. After a short time, how-
ever, he discontinued his visits, and it appears that the reason of his
doing so was that he and Buranelli had a disagreement with regard
to his daughter, Rosa, whose name was mentioned in the course of
the trial, and that the culprit refused to have her brought up in the
Roman Catholic faith. It appears that upon his marriage with his first
wife, who was an Englishwoman, Buranelli pledged himself to bring
this child up in the Protestant religion, and he faithfully redeemed
the pledge he had so given. Dr. Farr, however, insisted upon the
child being handed over to some Roman Catholic institution, and,
upon Buranelli refusing to consent to this arrangement, Dr. Farr
refused him absolution, and ceased his visits. The wretched man
was consequently left without any spiritual adviser; but the sheriffs,
unwilling that the unfortunate man should leave the world without
in some way receiving the consolations of religion, applied to him to
know whether he wished to see any other clergyman, and Buranelli
then expressed a desire to be attended by Father Gavazzi. Mr.
Sheriff Muggeridge observed to him that this gentleman was not a
Roman Catholic, and he said he was aware of that, but he still
desired to see him. Father Gavazzi was at once informed of the
wish of the prisoner, and he immediately responded to it, and during
the last few days of the existence of the wretched criminal Father
Gavazzi has been in constant attendance upon him. It may be as
well to state that, during the whole of the period that has elapsed
since the prisoner has been in Newgate he has never evinced the
slightest indication of insanity ; but, on the contrary, he appeared to
be a very shrewd clever man, and the letters he has written to his
mother and to some other persons exhibit proofs that he was pos-
sessed of considerable education and good feeling. The following
letter was addressed to the lady under whose charge his daughter
Rosa has been placed, on Sunday morning.
“« * Newgate Prison, April 29.

“«*My dear Madam, —Before dying let me renew my thanks for
what you have already done for my daughter, and for the care your
Christian charity has promised to bestow on her. May Heaven bless
you, and impart to my little darling a truly Christian heart, so that
we may meet again in a better world, where I hope I shall be to-
morrow through the mercy of Jesus Christ my Lord and Mediator.
With a kiss to my daughter, I am, yours, eternally obliged,

“«Lurer1 BuRANELLI.’


“The prisoner’s child, referred to in this letter, an intelligent
little girl, apparently about five years old, has visited her wretched
parent once since his condemnation. The interview was a most pain-
ful one. The poor child was hardly of an age fully to appreciate
her melancholy position, but the remembrance of what occurred will
doubtless require a long time to be effaced.

“« Mr. Sheriff Muggeridge and Mr. Sheriff Crosley, accompanied


His behaviour excellent to the last.


by Mr. Under-Sheriff Farrer and Mr. Under-Sheriff A. Crosley,
arrived at the gaol yesterday morning soon after seven o’clock, and
upon proceeding to the cell occupied by the culprit, they found him
engaged in devotional exercises with Father Gavazzi, who had been
with him since half-past five o’clock. An intimation having been
given to him that he must prepare for the fatal moment, he at once
with the utmost calmness resigned himself to be piuioned by Calcraft,
the executioner, at the same time observing, ‘I hope I may be the
last man who will ever sleep in this cell.” Mr. Sheriff Muggeridge
asked the prisoner whether he had any other request to make? and
he said he desired the letter he had written to his mother should be
forwarded to her, and also that a daguerreotype portrait of himself,
and a ring, which were taken from him when he was apprehended,
should be sent to his daughter, and Mr. Sheriff Muggeridge assured
him that his requests should be complied with. The prisoner still
appeared to suffer a good deal from the injury he had inflicted upon
himself at the time of the dreadful occurrence, when it will be
remembered that he discharged a pistol, and the ball passed through
his neck and into his face, where it still remained embedded behind
his nose. Since he has been in Newgate an attempt has been made
to extract it, but as the prisoner complained of the pain that was
occasioned to him, the attempt was abandoned. During the whole
of the proceedings the culprit exhibited considerable composure, but
it was evident that it was only by a great effort that he succeeded in
controlling his feelings, and that nature would not have sustained
him much longer.

** Before leaving the cell to proceed to the place of execution,
Buranelli again earnestly thanked the sheriffs and Mr. Cope, the
governor of the gaol, for the kindness he had received, and also
expressed his deep gratitude to Father Gavazzi and a desire that he
should accompany him to the scaffold. A few words in Italian
passed between the wretched culprit and the rev. gentleman, and
then the melancholy procession was formed and proceeded to the
scaffold. Buranelli walked with a firm step, and appeared to pay
deep attention to the exhortations of his spiritual adviser. At the
foot of the steps leading to the scaffold he appeared somewhat to
falter, and Father Gavazzi assisted him to ascend. He was then
placed under the beam, and surveyed the crowd with a calm and
composed aspect, and very shortly afterward the drop fell. He
appeared to struggle convulsively for two or three minutes, and
then all was over. It would seem that death was not so instantaneous
as usual on account of the culprit being a man of very light weight,
but from the placid appearance of the face after he was cut down,
aud which more resembled that of a man in a calm and sound sleep
than of one who had just suffered a sudden and violent death, it
appeared pretty clear that he could not have suffered much physical
pain. The crowd, however, appeared to think that the executioner
had not performed his duty adroitly ; for, upon Calcraft making his
appearance to cut the body down at nine o'clock, he was greeted
with a tremendous yell, to which, when he had concluded the opera-


Size of the Heads of Barthelemy and Buranelli. 213


tion, he responded by making a bow, which was the signal for an
additional shout of execration.


Account of the Heads by Mr. Straton.


Both casts seem to represent their respective heads with a
fair degree of accuracy.

Absolute size of the casts, heads, and brains.—The part of
each cast above the eyes and external openings of the ears,
representing, of course, the brain with its coverings,—skull,
skin, and muscles, measures 170 cubic inches. The shape of
the heads is so different that most observers who estimate by
the eye will consider the one decidedly larger than the other :
but this is not correct. The difference between them is so
trifling as not to be perceptible in measurement.

As the stucco generally expands a little in working, the
casts are larger than the heads they represent. I therefore
deduct a tenth of an inch from each of the three dimensions,—
length, breadth, and height, as the least probable correction
necessary for this source of error. This correction made, we
obtain 160 cubic inches as the size of each head when alive.

The cast of BarrHEetemy seems to indicate a rough texture
of bone and skin, both being beyond the average thickness ;
at least half a tenth of an inch will require on this account
to be deducted, which will leave 155 cubic inches as the nearest
approximation to the size, with cranium and skin of average
thickness, which it is possible to make from the cast.

The cast of BuRANELLI seems to indicate a finer texture
of bone, skin, and muscle than usual, and they were pro-
bably thinner than the average: but, as this is uncertain from
the cast, I leave the size as stated above, viz., 160 inches.

The age of Barruetemy is said to have been 32 years at
death; and, from the appearance of the cast of Burane tt,
he seems to have been a little younger. But, as a year or two
make little difference in the size of the head at that age, we
may for our present purpose call the age of both 30 years
at the time they were executed.

The average size of the male head at 30 years of age, in
this country, is 145: the largest, excepting a few individuals,
205: and the smallest, excluding idiots, 106 inches.

The absolute and relative or comparative size of the two
will now be obvious, viz.,—


BartHetemy, 155; Burane xi, 160.
Average male at 30 years, 145 : largest, 205 ; smallest, 106.
The former is therefore ten, and the latter fifteen, inches


above the average: and both are far below the largest of their
age and sex. Full 10 per cent. of male heads at 30 years are


214 Size of each Cerebral Organ in both.


equal to, and nearly 30 per cent. are larger in size than,
Bartuetemy : whilst there are about 7 per cent. equal to, and
about 12 per cent. larger than, BuraNeELLI.

The following table shews the absolute and relative deve-
lopment of each of the cerebral organs in the two heads: and,
to shew how far each resembles and differs from the mass of
the community, the general average of all classes is given in
column 3: the average of the superior classes in column 4:
and of the inferior classes in column 5. All these averages
are deduced from a great number of individual cases.


| 2@ 3 Mates Ar 30 years. |
; 3 - |
NAMES OF THE ORGANS. a . —_——
& <
| & = Average. | Superior. | Inferior |
me SF noes crs iy
|
1. Amativeness .......... | 155 | 180 | 155 | 145 | 170
2. Philoprogenitiveness.... | 130 | 140 | 150 | 155 | 140 |
3. Concentrativeness...... 140 | 140 | 150 } 155 | 135 |
4. Adhesiveness ........ | 140 | 130 | 145 | 150 | 140 |
5. Combativeness ........ | 165 | 170 | 150 | 150 | 160 |
6. Destructiveness ...... | 175 | 165 | 150 | 150 | 170
7. Secretiveness.......... | 175 | 160 | 150 | 150 | 160
8. Acquisitiveness ........ | 170 | 155 | 150 | 155 | 160
9. Constructiveness ...... | 140 | 155 | 150 | 150 | 140
10. Self-esteem soswes | 360 1 350 | 155 1 1401 146
11. Love of Approbation.... | 150 | 140 | 145 | 145 | i35 |
12. Cautiousness.......... 150 | 140 | 150 | 155 | 150 |
13. Benevolence .......... | 145 | 140 | 140 | 170 | 130 |
| 14. Veneration............ | 160 | 140 | 145 | 170 | 135 |
ree 185 | 140 | 155 | 170 | 145 |
16. Conscientiousness...... | 150 | 145 | 150 | 170 | 135 |
17. Hope................ | 140 | 145 | 150 | 160 | 130 |
ee EY ek hn wegen 135 | 145 | 150 | 160 | 130 |
EE 5 660005 0 see 130 | 145 | 145 | 160 | 130 |
NR tag ye 125 | 140 | 145 | 160 | 125
21. Imitation ............ | 130 | 145 | 150 | 160 | 130 |
22. Individuality.......... | 175 | 165 | 150 | 165 | 140
et RC oy wr ed wawko ee eae 175 | 155 | 150 | 165 | 140
24. Size ........0....... | 175 | 155 | 150 | 165 | 140
25. Weight .............. | 175 | 165 | 150 | 165 | 140 |
ts MN isd wie A xcelea 175 | 150 | 150 | 165 | 140 |
27. Locality ............ | 175 | 150 | 150 | 160 | 140 |
ee re 175 | 150 | 150 | 155 | 140
Ee 175 | 150 | 150 | 155 | 140 |
30. Eventuality .......... | 160 | 145 | 150 | 155 | 135 |
3, ere 160 150 150 155 | 130 |
8 eee 160 | 150 | 150 | 155 | 130 |
| 33. Language ............ | 160 | 150 | 150 | 160 | 140 |
| 34. Comparison .......... | 140 | 150 | 145 |.170 | 130 |
| 35. Causality ............ | 140] 155 | 145 ' 170 | 130


Explanation of the Numbers. 215


A short explanation of the numbers used to indicate the
development of the organs will make the whole plain. When
the numbers, 120, 130, 140, &c., are used in reference to
heads, crania, and brain, they shew size, or EXTENT OF DEVE-
LOPMENT, of the objects referred to: when the numbers are
used in reference to the separate parts or organs, they indicate
EXTENT OF DEVELOPMENT also, but not inches. Thus “ Wit”
125, means that “ Wit” is just equal in development to the
organ of Wit in the average male heads of 12 years of age.
Again, “ Hope 135,” shews that the organ is just equal to
“Hope” in the average male head of 18 years. The develop-
ment is ascertained by measurement exclusively, and each
number has its definite, invariable meaning,—indicates one
degree of absolute development, whether applied to large
organs, such as “ Cautiousness” and “ Amativeness,” or to
small organs, such as “ Form,” “ Weight,” or “ Colour.”

Having obtained the absolute or positive degree of deve-
lopment of each of the organs, we thus obtain the natural
power also, shewing the capability: whilst the relative deve-
lopments, that is, the difference between the positive degrees
of development, shews not only the direction of the tendency,
but the force or power of that tendency. If in a head of
140 cubic inches all the organs were in equal development,
that number (140) would be used after the name of each
organ to indicate its development and power or capability,
which would be that of the average man of 21 years; and,
the organs being equally developed, there would be no na-
tural tendency in any direction. However, such a head is
seldom, perhaps never, to be met with. As a general rule,
the difference between the development of the least and the
greatest organs in the same brain ranges from 5 to 15, and
this difference gives but a very feeble tendency in any di-
rection.

It will be observed that in BartuetEemy’s development
the difference between the least and greatest organs is 40, 45,
and 50,—a degree of difference which is fortunately not often
to be met with. In some particulars (Self-esteem, Firmness,
Destructiveness, and Secretiveness) he is a very giant, in others
(Wonder, Ideality, Wit, Reflexion, &c.) he is a tiny dwarf.
If we suppose for a moment that he was equal to the average
mature man in the largest organs, then he would only equal
the average boy of four, five, and six years in the least deve-
loped parts. The influence of this variety of development of
the organs in the same brain must have been obvious to intel-
ligent observers at all times, stubborn, overbearing, conceit,
and dogmatism, cunning, cruelty, and unreflecting coarseness,

VOL. XIII. Q


216 Contrast of the Heads of the two Murderers.


would be constant traits of character. As a consistent cha-
racter in his own way, BartHetemy would form quite a
contrast to BuraNnetur. The training and circumstances in
which he is placed exert an influence over every human
being, but the power of such influence is very far from being
equal on different organizations. On such as Barruetemy
the circumstances external to the man has the least, and on
such as BuRANELLI nearly the greatest, influence. The former
would, as I have just stated, be proud and stubborn, cruel,
cunning, coarse, and unreflective, under every condition cal-
culated in any degree to bring out the features. BuraNne wu
would, on the other hand, be proud or humble, constant or
vacillating, kind or cruel, haughty or courteous, reverent or
profane, according to the circumstances of time and place with
which he was surrounded.

As may be observed by inspecting the plate, the shape of
BarTHELEMY’s head is that of a well-known type of idiot,
ranging from a third to about half (50 to 80 cubic inches)
the size of that of Barrnetemy. There are two casts
copied from Dr. Gall’s collection in most of our museums,
and living cases are to be seen in almost every hospital for
the reception of idiots.

BURANELLI approaches very much more nearly the com-
mon type of the European head, and many individuals of
even inferior shape, when surrounded with favourable circum-
stances, pass through life in a creditable manner.

JAMES SPRATON.


Mr. Straton has made this list of organs and put the size
of each corresponding part of the head, although he is not
satisfied, any more than myself, as I have repeatedly stated,
that all these so-called organs are established. He thinks
that twenty at least are established, and so do I.* But it is
well as a general rule to put down the size of each, in order
to furnish facts for an ultimate judgment respecting all.

BARTHELEMY was unmarried. His organ of Amativeness
was average: his Love of Offspring 20 below the average.
Buranewui had been twice married and had lived with a
third woman: his organ of Amativeness was 25 above the
average.

BaRTHELEMY shewed enormous resolution. His organ of
Firmness was 30 above the average: BuRANELLI shewed very
little; and his organ of Firmness was 15 below the average.


* No. XLV., pp. 68, 69, 70.


Contrast of their individual Organs. 217


BarTHELEMY’s organ of Self-esteem was 25 above the
average, and that of Vanity or Love of Approbation rather
above it: BuraNneELui’s organ of Self-esteem was 5 below it,
and so was his organ of Vanity.

BaRTHELEMY’s organs of Combativeness and of Destruc-
tiveness were both much above the average,—15 and 25 above
it: and so were those of BurRANELLI,—20 and 15 above the
average.

In BartHeLtemMy Cunning or Secretiveness was very large,
—25 above the average: in Burane ui large,—10 above it.

In Bartnetemy the organ of <Acquisitiveness was 20
above the average: in BuraNneE.ti only 5 adove it.

In each the organ of Benevolence was only about the aver-
age: in Bartuecemy only 5 above it: in Burane xu of the
average.

In Bartuetemy the organ of Ideality, that which gives
taste and refinement, was 15 Jelow the average: in Bura-
NELLI it was of average size.

In Bartruetemy the organ of the Love of Justice was of
but average size—not at all a match for his enormous De-
structiveness, Acquisitiveness, Cunning, Pride, Firmness, &c. ;
and in BuRANELLI was rather below the average.

The lower intellectual organs, for observation, were large
in Bartueremy : that of Individuality, 25, and of Eventuality,
10, above the average: and in Burane ut, that of Indivi-
duality 15 above the average: though that of Eventuality was
a little below the everage.

But in Bartrnetemy the higher organs of Comparison
and Causality were each 5 below the average: in BurRANELLI
the organ of Causality was good,—10 above the average, and
Comparison was a little—5, above the average.

The organ called “ Wit,” whatever be its function, pro-
bably intellectual, was in BartHEeLemy 20 delow the average :
in BuraNELLI rather—5, below it.

In regard to what is called the organ of Veneration, it was
15 above the average in Bartnetemy, and 5 Jelow it in Bu-
RANELLI. If it gives the sentiment of respect and venera-
tion it does not direct this to any particular object—not more
to God than toa man. Many professed atheists have it, as
well as the higher intellectual faculties, large ; and many of
the most devout and most superstitious persons have all small.
Gall was accused of atheism; and therefore dwelt much upon
the direction of the action of this organ to the Deity.

Let every really good man learn humility from these casts :
be thankful that his brain is not such as their brains were,*


* See reflexions upon Rush’s head in No. XXVI., p. 119.


218 Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c.


or be thankful for his better training. Let every religious
person see the wickedness of putting an end to the life ofa
fellow-creature when in the state of mind in which Barthelemy
was when executed: and reflect that no time given can be ;
too long for repentance.*

Joun E..iorson. '


*,* The lithographs have been taken from calotypes
kindly made for me from the casts by Mr. Barker, of North
Crescent, Bedford Square.


BOOKS RECEIVED.


Bulletin Magnétique de Lyon. Journal des Sciences Psycho—Physiques.
Avril, Mai, Juin, 1855.

First Annual Report of the Scottish Curative Mesmeric Association. Edin-
burgh : 1855.

British Journal of Homeopathy. April, 1855.

Phrenology, Theoretical and Practical. Lectures delivered in Edinburgh.
By J. W. Jackson, Author of Lectures on Mesmerism, The Peoples of Europe
and the War in the East, The Origin and Destiny of the Caucasian Race, &c.
Edinburgh: 1855. With two plates.


This is a cheap and excellent little book, and we advise every person to read
it. The first lecture is upon the Principles of Phrenology : the second, on Phre-
nology in its application to Education: the third, on Phrenology as indicative
of man’s adaptation to his physical and moral environment.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


We are happy that our remarks upon the treatment of children in Nos.
XXXIV., XXXV., XLIII., have caused a lady of family and education—Miss
L. O. Adamson, to take a superior mansion (Beaumaris House) in Upper Bruns-
wick Place, the most delightful and healthy part of Brighton, for the purpose of
receiving a small number of invalid and orphan children of the higher classes,
from the age of one month to twelve years. We know that this lady has the
highest references: and any weak little Dombey would indeed be happy under
such a roof.

The length of the Report of the Mesmeric Infirmary compels us to postpone
the favour of two or three correspondents. ‘7

We earnestly request that all articles be sent as early as possible.


ERRATUM.
p- 107, 1. 8, for ‘‘ mesmerism,” read phrenology.


Omission.


In the obituary of Mr. Swinton, whose nom de plume was Non-Wist, we omitted t
to mention an article from him in No. XXXIII., illustrating cerebral sympathy
and clairvoyance in brutes.


* See arguments against capital punishment in Nos. I., p. 50; II., p. 100;
XI, p. 275; XXVIIL., p. 331.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. LI.


OCTOBER, 1855.


I. Reichenbach and his Researches: the principal “ Laws of
Sensitiveness,” abstracted from Reichenbach’s work, Der
Sensitive Menscn, by AxexanpeR J. Exuis, B.A.,
Trin. Coll., Camb.


(Continued from No. L., p. 131.)


‘More than 2,000 years have elapsed since Thales discovered that pieces of
amber, when rubbed, attracted light bodies, and explained the phenomenon he
observed by supposing that the AMBER POSSESSED A SOUL,* was endowed with
animation, and was nourished by the attracted bodies. Nothing further was


* “The ignorant of all ages have ascribed natural phenomena, especially
when new to them, to a soul in the material, or to miraculous agency, or indeed
to diabolic or satanic agencies :—all pure fancies. ‘Thales ascribed the cha-
racteristic phenomenon, the attraction of a piece of iron, to the agency of a
mind or soul residing in the magnet,’* just as, even in the present day, the world
at large ascribe the phenomena of the brain,’’—phenomena no more theological
than astronomy or geology is, but a department of physiology, and like these to
be cultivated by observation and reason only,—‘‘ to a soul residing in it. ‘The
magnetical properties of the loadstone, like the electrical ones of amber,’ says
Sir David Brewster, ‘ were supposed to he miraculous.’ ’’¢

“The acknowledgment of the positive fact of the brain, or whatever other
name may be given to certain nervous matter possessing in certain circumstances
the properties of feeling, willing, and thinking—of personality, does not interfere
in the least with the belief of a future state, the only evidence of which must be
a revelation. This is a supernatural matter, and to be determined by super-
natural evidence only; while natural knowledge should always be prosecuted
without any reference to revelation or any fear of inconsistency with it.”’

“When I went to the University,’ says the acute right reverend Lord Bishop
of Llandaff, Dr. Watson, the author of the celebrated Apology for the Bible, ‘1
was of opinion, as most schoolboys are, that the soul was a substance distinct
from the body, and that when a man died, he, in classical phrase, breathed out


* .4 System of Mechanical Philosophy. By John Robinson, LLD., late pro-
fessor of Natural Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh, with notes by Sir
David Brewster. Edinburgh, 1822; vol. iv., p. 203.

fT |. c., p. 3.


VOL. XIII.


220 Labour-panys of new knowledge.


added to the observations of the Milesian philosopher until the thirteenth cen-
tury, the knowledge of electricity remaining for 1,500 years in the same state as
among the Indian children on the banks of the Orinoco at the present day, who,
according to Humboldt, amuse themselves with exciting by friction the dry and
polished seeds of rushes, and attracting filaments of cotton with them. About
the time alluded to,* a celebrated physician, Gilbert, of Colchester, a cotempo-
rary, according to Dr. Friend, of our first Edward, in his essay, de Magnete,
recorded several phenomena connected with electrical excitation, and gave to them
the title of electricity—a term derived from the Greek word #Aextpov. Notwith-
standing the very considerable developments which the science of electricity
received, it was not until the beginning of the present century that anything of
real value was done towards elucidating its connexion with physiology. Few
things are more interesting and instructive than to trace the birth and progress of
an infant science,—to watch the labour-pangs by which it struggles into existence
against the obstacles opposed to it by 1GNORANT PREJUDICE,} and those influ-
ences which the illustrious father of the inductive philosophy—the great Lord
Bacon, so happily denominated idols, inasmuch as men are too apt in this blind
fealty to idola specus, theatri et fori, to shut their eyes to the first burst of truth :
nor is it until the light of a discovery blazes out with sufficient brilliancy to dispel
the mists and fogs of error and preconceived opinions that much is done towards
giving it its proper position in the circle of the sciences. With all such difficulties
had the infant science of galvanism or physiologic electricity to contend.’’—
Lectures on Electricity and Galvanism in their physiological and therapeutical
relations. Delivered at the Royal College of Physicians. By Golding Bird,
A.M., M.D., F.R.S., F.L.S., &c. London: 1849. p. 7.


Part I1.—Transient Odic Conditions in the Human Body
temporarily produced by the influence of foreign external
or internal agencies.


I.—Transient Odic Conditions produced by internal changes
in the body.


A. Internal Transient Odic Conditions during perfect health.


41. Stomach.—The diet of sensitives is so marked and pe-
culiar that, when we perceive any persons inclined to it, we have
good reason to suppose them sensitive. They eat very spar-
ingly, especially those of the higher degree. Reichenbach has


his soul, animam expiravit ; that it then went I knew not whither, as it had come
into the body, from I knew not where nor when, and had dwelt in the body
during life, but in what part of the body it had dwelt I knew not... . This
notion of the soul was, without doubt, the offspring of prejudice and ignorance.’
— Anecdotes of the Life of Bishop Watson, p. 14, &c.’’*


* Dr. Elliotson, Harveian Oration, p. 59.


* Gilbert was not born till 1540: and died in 1603.—Zoist.

+ Dr. Golding Bird illustrated in his own conduct with regard to mesmerism
what he condemned in others with reference to other points of science. He was
most bitter against it. When Mr. James Salmon, whose very interesting case
and mesmeric cure are recorded in No. XXXIV., remained uncured by him, and
had no hope held out to him of cure, proposed to consult Dr. Elliotson, who
had cured a brother with mesmerism after Dr. Roots and others had failed, he
‘* said that mesmerism was no more than what was called Perkinism when he was
a boy, and ‘no more than the effect of a dull sensation, such as the sound of a
waterfall or any monotonous sound, which of course would produce sleep,’ and


Internal transient odic states of healthy stomachs. 221


not met with an exception to this. They do not like eating
soon after sleep, and usually delay breakfast to about noon.
They eat more in winter than summer, and at the full moon
than at the new moon. They prefer their food cool or cold,
as meat and coffee. Their favourite dish is salad, not very
sour, but well salted, “ Insalata, ben salata, poc’ acida, ben
oliata.” Rose-leave salad is preferred (the /eaves or petals (?) ;
both German and English are ambiguous.) They like sourish
sweet fruits, as figs, oranges, pines, apples, pears (the last, not
so much), plums, apricots, peaches, cherries, grapes, melons,
&e., strawberries, raspberries, but nof currants, barbaries,
blackberries, bilberries, cranberries, which are too sour, nor
unripe or very sour fruit. After these, farinaceous puddings
aud porridges, milk and eggs are preferred. But the milk
must be warm from the cow, or cold, never warmed up.
The higher sensitives prefer raw undressed meat, “ seasoned”
by a charge of negative od from the right hand. Reichen-
bach found even lower sensitives preferred the unboiled
Westphalian hams to all cooked meats. Simple roast meats
can be eaten by lower sensitives, stewed and boiled meats
are unendurable. Fat and grease are detestable, when cooked.
Boiled soups, boiled vegetables, boiled meat, many boiled
puddings, all things prepared with lard, or baked or fried
with lard or butter, and butter pastries ; “ made dishes ;” any
thing long dead, “high,” or “ going,” also anything re-
warmed, or prepared with yeast, barm, or butter; confec-
tionery and “ goodies” of all kinds, ices excepted ; spices,
(but not pepper, mustard, or horseradish,) and tobacco, are
all repulsive. Water is the drink preferred, and next to it
unboiled milk. Coffee is drunk by some and refused by
others ; tea is generally disliked ; wine is drunk by few, none
like spirits, and most prefer weak lemonade, or raspberry,
strawberry, or cherry juice, &c., and effervescing draughts :
one enjoyed chloroform in water. They drink more in winter
than in summer. Frl. Beyer declared that her tongue was


that there was ‘ really no such thing as mesmerism :’ grew excited, and scolded,
and rose from his chair and walked about the room, and so frightened Master
James Salmon that the youth dropped the subject and took his leave as expe-
ditiously as he could. The lad grew worse and worse: could scarcely walk on
account of the weakness and pain of his back: and in three minutes after at-
tempting to walk in the street was obliged to be carried into a shop: and his fits
all continued.”’ Long after this cure, after he could not deny it and had sent a
civil message to Dr. Elliotson (see No. XXXIV., p. 195), he told a lady living in
Hyde Park Gardens, who was being mesmerised, that he knew what mesmerism
was and had no objection to it, but had a great objection to its being called by
an improper name,—*‘ Why could it not be called galvanism or electricity as it
really was ?’’ So that what he had always been railling against was, according to
himself, galvanism or electricity.— Zoist.

R 2


222 Transient odic conditions—Sleep


ordinarily loaded, and her stomach oppressed, when she ate
ordinary food, but all these symptoms disappeared when she
could eat raw flesh and drink fresh warm blood.

42. Lungs.—The breath is strongly odo-negative. Hence
in all odic experiments the breath should be held or directed
away from the patient, as it will otherwise produce much
disturbance. This is so important that it must become a
confirmed habit in every experimenter.

43. Reproduction.—Sensitive women are mostly fertile.
Their sensitiveness is much increased during menstruation
and pregnancy. Childbearing and marriage do not diminish
the sensitiveness.


B. Transient Odic Conditions during Fatigue and Sleep.


44, Bodily fatigue appears to diminish odic power both in
sensitives and non-sensitives.

45. Sleep.—All sensitives are restless, and apt to throw
off their bedding.

Sensitives must sleep with their negative head towards
the positive north, their positive feet towards the negative
south, and with the negative right side turned (in the northern
magnetic hemisphere) towards the positive surface of the
earth, or else with the negative back towards the positive
earth. Hence the proper direction is on the right side (or
back), with the head to the magnetic north. The presence
of a wall, however, which is strongly negative, requires that
the face should be turned towards it.

Coolness is desirable. Feather beds and down coverings
retain the od and produce the effects of overcharge.

The removal of the sun’s rays at sunset predisposes sen-
sitives to sleep more strongly than ordinary persons.

To secure sleep it is necessary that no odic oppression
should exist. Opiates will not avail to remove such oppression,
but a single down pass will frequently set all to rights.

Sleep (in sensitives) is promoted by coolness, down passes
(22. Zoist, No. L., p. 124) with the hand, magnets, or crys-
tals, a wall, or any strong odo-negative body in front or on
the left hand side, dull rainy weather, a north wind (at least
in Vienna), eating moderately, the presence of trees, espe-
cially apple and pear trees and rose bushes; in short, by
everything which acts odo-negatively upon them.

Some sensitives fall into a sleep while walking, and wake
on reaching their journey’s end. This is different from ordi-
nary somnambulism or ordinary sleep.

The odic state of the brain during sleep is detailed in
Researches, &c., § 256 (Gregory’s translation, p. 193).


-


—In Disease. 223


Sleep is disturbed or prevented by drinking wine, up passes,
moonlight on the Jeft side (on the right side it will promote
sleep) ; in short, everything which acts odo-positively.


C. Transient Odic Conditions in Disease.


46. The so-called calor mordaz of invalids is an odic phe-
nomenon, a change of odic development in the diseased body,
a progression in the odo-positive direction, which is rendered
perceptible to sensitive observers by a violent disagreeably
tepid reaction, formication, and “ pins and needles,” which
rise to an apparent pricking and beating sensation.

The odic radiations, odic glow, and the odic envelop of a
diseased body, are collectively named by Reichenbach the
odic atmosphere, without any intention of asserting its ob-
jective reality as an external substance.* This atmosphere is
coolest and pleasantest around healthy bodies. Reichenbach
considers that it is oxidation which makes the organism more
odo-negative and its odic atmosphere consequently cooler,
and that in the greater number of diseases there is an over-
plus of odic positivity from a want of sufficient oxidation,
and that the disagreeable tepidity of the odic atmosphere is
due to that cause. He believes also that hereafter all rich
people will keep sensitives to examine them daily, and warn
them of the approach of disease. He considers that he has
established the fact that od plays an important part in all
contagious diseases.

47. Sensitives are subject to rheumatism and catarrh.
Catarrhal affections exert such a positive effect that even the
patient’s right side becomes positive. Perspiration is also a
consequence of odo-positive conditions.

48. So-called nervous illnesses.—A restless night produces
the same effect as a slight increase of positivity.

Burnings in the eyes are only found to occur when either
the whole body or the eyes only have been exposed to odo-
positive action.

Startings and twitchings in the limbs were found to occur
in sensitives when any metal, as brass, iron, lead, copper,
gold, silver, or zinc, or a piece of sulphur, was firmly held in
either the right or left hand, or in both hands at once; when
both hands seized the like or unlike poles of a steel magnet,
or crystal, or human hands; even when the patient folded
his two hands together or only brought the finger of one
hand against the palm. In short, they appear as an artifi-
tically-produced condition of the limbs, but merely local and


* Thus Reichenbach is not one of the visionaries mentioned at p. 219.—Zoist.


99 4.


Om


Transient odic conditions—in Disease


momentary, due to the introduction of any more or less
intense odic current. The disturbances thus produced im the
natural odic equilibrium are felt by sensitives as darting,
twitching, heaviness, anxiety, dull beating of the heart, &c.

When the air is thundery, some sensitives feel a peculiar
pain in the roots of the hair.

Pains in the face are sometimes occasioned by the proxi-
mity of metals, volatile alkalis, alkaloids, or any odo-positive
bodies.

“ Dead fingers,” on which Reichenbach has made a series
of very interesting experiments, he has found to be due
solely to odo-positive or odo-similar reactions. Stomach-
ache, head-ache, and megrim are occasioned by the same
causes, and frequently terminate in syncope.

Spasms (kraempfe) are an affection to which almost all
sensitives are especially inclined. Many, especially those of
a higher degree, suffer from them severely. They form the
last term of the series—stomach-ache, head-ache, fainting,
spasm. They may be occasioned by magnets, by terrestrial
magnetism, by poles of crystals, by amorphous, unipolar,
bodies, either odo-positive or odo-negative, by human odic
poles, by the prismatic rays of either the solar or lunar spec-
trum, particularly the green rays, by down passes, but
oftener by up passes, by charging and conduction, whether
immediate or approximative, by the mere odic atmosphere,
by the psychical action of insult, grief, anxiety, fear, an-
noyance, jealousy, quarrels, mental exertion, joy, or even
dreams. They are most conspicuous in the extremities, solar
plexus, and head. They can be artificially excited and
calmed, or depart naturally. They often follow a tolerably
similar course from the toes through the abdomen to the
brain, and thence down the spinal cord, like a pass. In
most cases they can be more or less easily calmed by down
passes. Hence as they are essentially related to sensitiveness,
and immediately dependent on odic motions, they undoubt-
edly belong to the domain of od.

Catalepsy, as distinguished from rigidity and spasm, is
very easily induced in many sensitives by odo-positive reac-
tion, frights, and moral influences. In the case of Fri.
Atzmannsdorfer the following phases of an attack were readily
distinguishable :—a, natural condition ; 4, stomach and head-
ache ; ¢, fainting; d, sleep-waking ; e, catalepsy, with clonic,
followed by tonic local spasms ; f, rigidity; and then e, d, ¢,
5, a, in regular reverse order.

All fevers or feverish states ate odo-positive conditions.
49. Aphorisms on various diseases.—Sensitiveness for


3)


External—from Magnetism. 225


change of weather is an odic position, not dependent on the
height of the barometric column. An unpleasant feeling
beginning in the feet and ascending in a few minutes to the
head predicts bad weather; the pain ceases as soon as the
rain falls. This is especially the case in thunder-storms.

Almost all the higher sensitives suffer from cold feet, and
usually have cold dry hands, while the head is mostly hot.
They are very subject to chills in the feet.

Diminution of the quantity of blood in any part (as in the
hands from holding them up) diminishes the odic intensity.

Sensitives are troubled with incontinence of urine, are
often chlorotic, and very predisposed to typhus, especially
typhus nervosus. The sensitiveness of females is much ex-
cited during the catamenial period.

Sensitives are subject to the most singular transpositions
of pains, generally proceeding from the feet upwards.


D. Transient Odic Conditions in Therapeutics.


50. This is a brief chapter, scarcely containing more than
a recapitulation of the complaints to which sensitives are
liable, with experiments to shew that the restitution of a
negative condition generally effects a cure. But this is a
subject which Reichenbach leaves to the physician, content
with the establishment of the fact of curative od.


II. Transient Odic Conditions of the Body produced by
External Influences.


A. Magnetism.


52. The principal result and principal precautions in con-
ducting experiments with magnets may be read in Zoist, No.
XLIX., p. 4, note f.

When the dissimilar poles of bar magnets were united,
the free odic emanation of each remained considerable, and
could be distinctly perceived by the sensitive hand. Hence
they did not neutralize each other.

The insertion of bodies between the magnet and sensitive
does not prevent, although it weakens, the action.

The sudden application of the armature to the magnet,
by cutting off the odic action, produced a shudder resembling
the shock on breaking the voltaic circle.

Electric magnets act as other magnets. An iron rod laid
in the meridian suffices to produce the effects. This is of
practical importance to sensitives who play the piano; when
the strings are horizontal, they should never run north and
south, or, if they do, the performer should sit at their north-


226 Externally-produced transient odic


ward extremity, as the od from the southward end is suffi-
ciently disagreeable to deprive him of all pleasure in the
music.

Low sensitives must keep their hands on the magnet for a
very long while to feel the sensations.

The first action of the magnet, properly applied, is cool ;
the second, warm.

Sensitives picture to themselves and describe the odic
emanations from magnets as consisting of fine threads or
fibres.* One compared the cooling effects to pins stuck to-
gether as closely as the heads would allow; the interstices
represented the warm effects.

The effects of magnets have been felt at very great dis-
tances, from 36 to 150 feet, varying with the power of the
magnet and the degree of sensitiveness.

53. Terrestrial magnetism.—Terrestrial magnetism affects
men odically in precisely the same manner as the magnetism
of magnets,—exciting, refreshing, weakening, &c. The dif-
ference between the two influences lies in extent and inten-
sity, and in the fact that terrestrial magnetism with its corre-
sponding od can be observed separately and therefore more
distinctly, whereas the effect of the magnetism and od of
magnets is always and unavoidably complicated by the con-
joint action of terrestrial magnetism and od, and is therefore
more difficult to treat.

The magnetic north pole of the earth is odo-positive, and
the south pole odo-negative. When a man lies, his longi-
tudinal axis is the principal direction in which od acts ; nega-
tive at the head, positive in the lower part of the body.
Hence if the head is to the south, there is the unpleasant
action of similar od; if the head is to the north, there is the
agreeable action of dissimilar od. The head to the east is
partially northward, and the head to the west is partially
southward, in its odic relations. The following is an account
of some very careful experiments made with Frl. Zinkel on
the odic effect of different positions :—She was laid on a sofa
in a large room, equally distant from all the walls, and in
the magnetic meridian.


First—Head to the north.


a. Lying on the right side, with face to the west: cool
from head to knees ; warm from knees to toes. The coolness
mild and pleasant like slightly cool bandages about the head ;
the warmth in the feet with some tingling (gruseln), but only


* See Miss Barber’s case, No. XXIII., p. 225.—Zois?.


Conditions—from Magnetism. 227


in the left foot as high as the metatarsus. Head without
pain ; eyes good ; solar plexus free—the best position for sleep.

b. Lying on the /eft side, with face to the east ; coolness
and warmth as before, but the right foot warmer and some-
what pricking, up to the metacarpus only. Head free, eyes
aud stomach good. And yet the position was on the whole
less soothing than the preceding; she felt more lively and
wakeful, and would not have easily fallen asleep.


Second—Head to the south.


c. Lying on the right side, with face to the east; warm
from head to knees; cold from knees to toes. Head-ache
from crown to forehead ; stomach heavy, nausea; burning of
the eyes. Head-ache stronger on the right side of the head.
Both feet equally cool; no tingling.

d. Lying on the /eft side, with face to the west; all the
circumstances as in c, but much more unpleasant. Head-
ache very strong, especially on the left side down to the infra-
orbital nerve. Stomach very nauseated, as from powerful up
passes; eyes burning violently. Both feet without tingling.
This was by far the worst position ; head-ache and eye-burning
remained long after she had reversed her position. It must
be remembered that the northern hemisphere is odo-positive.


Third—Head to the east.


e. Lying on the /eft side; oppression in the right lobe of
the solar plexus, the pain having proceeded from the spinal
cord.

f. Lying on the right side; oppression in the /eft lobe of
the solar plexus, proceeding as before from the spine.


Fourth— Head to the west.


g. Lying on the /eft side; oppression on the right side as
before.

h. Lying on the right side; oppression on the /eft side as
before, but much worse.

Hence in all the four latter positions the oppression was
on the upper side.

Experiments on persons sitting lead to similar results.
Placed in succession on four chairs with their backs to the
magnetic quarters, the sensitive generally feels on the
North chair—agreeable coolness.

East chair—less agreeableness; some, coolness still, but
mixed with heaviness, and a slightly numbing oppression
in the occciput.

South chair—Disagreeable tepidity ; oppression at the stomach.


228 From Magnetism and Crystals.


West chair—obscure warmth ; stomach-ache; oppression in
the head ; burning in the eyes.

Upwards of 91 sensitives on being tried preferred the
north seat. On the east seat the presentation of dissimilar
poles in the latitudinal axis to the north and south diminished,
while on the west seat the presentation of similar poles
increased the disagreeableness of the situation. On these
circumstances depend the restlessness of persons whose beds
are turned in a wrong direction, and the pain they sometimes
feel from riding in a carriage, where they are often forced to
sit for a time in some wrong position. Hence also the incon-
venience of sitting so as to face the altar at the east end of a
church, and therefore with the back to the west.

54. Vertical and horizontal directions—All rods, &c.,
held vertically become odo-polar, the upper end being positive,
the lower negative. But organic beings, as trees and animals,
have the odo-negative pole uppermost. Similar results ensued
with horizontal rods. In trying these experiments, the great-
est caution is necessary in the position of the sensitive and
the nature of the rods. In all cases the specific od of the rod
must be allowed for before the result can be depended upon.

When od is communicated by charging it is never polar ;
hence where polarity is observed, other causes must be looked
for. The cause of the polarity of horizontal and vertical
rods, or rods in the magnetic inclination, must therefore be
sought for in terrestrial magnetism which is always accom-
panied by od.

55. Winds.—An examination of 187 observations shews
that, at Vienna, (the case may be different in different situa-
tions,) westerly winds generally produced burning in the
eyes; southerly, stomach-ache ; easterly, head-ache ; and the
northerly alone were free from all inconvenience, and refreshed
and strengthened the sensitive. Generally, so far as Germany
is concerned, northerly and easterly winds are accompanied
by a change of negative, and southerly and westerly winds
by a change of positive, od.

56. Aurora Borealis—In the few cases in which the
Aurora could be observed so far south as Vienna, it did not
seem to have any peculiar effect on sensitives.


B. Crystals.


57. The base of the crystal, where the “grow” from the
rock, is odo-positive; the point, to which new molecules
attach themselves, is odo-negative. The negative pole is
therefore at the point of greatest crystallinity, and the posi-
tive at the point of least crystallinity.


> as


From Electricity and Heat. 229


Crystals act odically in precisely the same way as steel
magnets. The only difference consists in the od due to the
substance of which they are formed.


C. Electricity.

58. Frictional electricity—In moderate doses frictional
electricity is not dangerous or prejudicial, even to the higher
class of sensitives, and may therefore be applied without fear.

Positive electricity sets positive od in action in hands and
arms; negative electricity, negative od. The cool effect of
the positive electricity on the right side is so much more
powerful than its tepid effect on the left, that the first and
predominant sensation of a sensitive derived from positive
electricity is coolness.

The electro-positive frictional stream passing from the
right hand through the body to the left acts on the sensitive
as an odo-positive down pass; but, when it passes in the con-
trary direction, as an odo-positive up pass.

59. Chemical electricity.—By passing coils of wires round
sensitives, Reichenbach found that od was produced by the
electro-magnetic induction coil in the same way and the same
direction as magnetism, and with the same polarity, so that
the appearance of the od might be ascribed to the induced
magnetism. And generally electricity is a powerful re-agent
on od, and especially vital od, exciting odic motions when
immediately conducted through the body, or when led past
it in wire coils, or through the mere electric atmosphere at
comparatively great distances. These effects are produced
by the weak frictional stream of the electric machine, as well
as by the most powerful voltaic currents. The odic conditions
in the whole body, as well as in particular organs, can be
polarized by electricity, as in a simple glass of water or any
other body.


D. Heat.


60. Immediate contact of warm bodies produces a very
disagreeable, intensifying, odo-positive, effect, like that of an
up pass ; while cool bodies act exactly in the opposite manner.

When a rod of porcelain, glass, copper, iron, or steel has
one end heated in the fire, it gives off powerful negative od
at the other extremity. If arod of wood or a shaving be set
light to at one extremity it gives off negative od at the other.

Radiated heat, whether emanating from the flame of
tapers or from an argand lamp, with or without its surround-
ing glass, produces cold in the sensitive, which is slight and
approaching tepidity on the right side; but intense and suffi-


230 From Friction and Pressure.


cient to cause shudderings through marrow and bone on the
left side; that is, it produces powerfully negative od.

The odic radiation of heated bodies extends to a surprising
distance, and acts negatively.

Hence heat acts positively when communicated, (as in
heated air, liquids, or heated bodies in immediate contact
with the sensitive,) and negatively when acting indirectly as
by conduction, (at distances where no proper heat can be felt,)
or radiation (either from flame or heated bodies), at consider-
able distances.


E. Friction.


61. If a rod be held by the patient and the other end be
rubbed, or if the sensitive rub two bodies together, positive
od is produced. Hence the great dislike which most sensitives
entertain against tearing paper or linen.

The friction produced by the passage of water through
pipes produces positive od. Reichenbach attributes the
power possessed by many higher sensitives of discovering the
position of underground springs to this circumstance, and he
verified his hypothesis by experiment.

A stream of air driven through a pair of bellows also acts
positively. Hence if the air be directed on the outside of a
glass of water, it makes it tepid. (If it be directed on the
surface of the water, it produces evaporation and therefore
negative od. 68.)

— of the hands against one another produces posi-
tive od.

This frictional positive od can be conducted like other od.

It is unpleasant to sensitives to touch rough surfaces with
the left hand, but not so with the right, and this effect is
consequently traceable to the action of frictional od.


F. Pressure.


62. All pressure on parts of the body produces odic
tepidity or positive action, which on removal of the pressure
becomes coolness or negative action. A blow, which must
be considered as an instantaneous pressure, produces the same
odo-positive effects.


G. Sensational effect of Light.


63. Solar light-—Open sunshine acts on the left side
pleasantly cool, on the right tepid, oppressive, unpleasant ;
in front cooler, more agreeable; behind, more tepid and
disagreeable. Some sensitives, especially when sleep-waking,


From Light. 231


can look straight at the sun without having their eyes injured.
Fri. Lehrbass could look at the sun and read small print
immediately afterwards. It was however only the /eft eye
which remained unaffected.

When one end of a rod or long wire is held in the sun-
shine, the other end appears cooler.

Water placed in the sun tastes cooler than water placed
in the shade.

Solar rays are therefore principally odo-negative. But,
when they are polarized by reflexion, the transmitted light is
principally odo-positive, and the reflected light is principally
odo-negative. Hence the solar rays contain odo-positive as
well as odo-negative rays.

The effect of the colours in the spectrum is very extra-
ordinary. The following were the results of careful experi-
ments with Frl. Anna Beyer, who held a deal rod in her /eft
hand, and passed it from some distance beyond the red to
some distance beyond the violet end of the spectrum.

Nine inches before the red—commencement of the sensation
of warmth.

Close to the red—greatest heat.

Red—warm, unpleasant.

Orange—tepid.

Yellow—only a trace of warmth.

Green—coolish, a trace of tepidity, most disagreeable mixed
sensations, trembling of the hand, intolerably painful.

Blue—cool and pleasant.

Violet—not so cool as the blue.

Indigo—cold

One foot beyond violet—coldest, very cold.

As far as 32 inches beyond the spectrum—cool.

Water is charged with negative od by the blue rays, and
with positive od by the yellow and red rays.

The effect of the green rays is most extraordinary. “The
first observation on this subject was made with Frl. Krueger
(Oct., 1845), by moonlight, with a pale spectrum. As she
was passing her rod slowly through the colours, and describing
their effects for me to note,” writes Reichenbach, “ she came
to the green rays, and fell to the ground so suddenly that I
could not catch her. I was not aware of the cause, and after
half an hour, having removed her spasms, I wished to continue
my observations on the spectrum. She now drew her fore-
finger slowly through the red and yellow, corroborating her
former statements, and approached the green. I saw that at
the moment when the edge of her finger reached this colour
she began to tremble, and lose her consciousness, and she fell


232 From Light.


as if struck by lightning. I could scarcely catch her. Prussic
acid could scarcely annihilate a man more rapidly than this
green colour of pale moonlight.” He attributed this effect
at first to an idiosyncrasy of the individual, but soon found
it confirmed by other sensitives.

The odic rays of sunlight were not, like the caloric rays,
absorbed by passing through ten glass plates. A large
portion of them passes through and exhibits all the phenomena
of the ordinary spectrum.

The solar odic rays pass through transparent bodies, suffer
refraction, and appear in the prismatic spectrum (like the
luminous, caloric, and actinic rays). Their refrangibility is
unequal, and the spectrum exhibits a separation of | ssitive
and negative odic rays, which are negative in the blue half
and positive in the yellow half, reaching on both sides far
beyond the visible spectrum.

More than this: colours, generally, are an odic subject,
and affect the feelings of sensitives, not merely in the direct
light of the spectrum, but in sunlight, or even dispersed day-
light, reflected from various coloured objects. The effect is
of the same quality as in the prismatic spectrum, but different
and inferior in quantity. Wherever odic sensations are made
the subject of the experiment, the effect of the colour of
objects must therefore be attended to and allowed for.

The numerous peculiarly diseased conditions of sensitives
are mainly dependent on the periodic appearance and depar-
ture of the odic rays of the sun, and the time of their
commencement and cessation is connected with the harmo-
nious succession of day and night, summer and winter,
presence and absence of sunshine.

64. Lunar light —The thermometric heat of the full moon
is according to Bouguer (Pogg. Ann., vol. Ixviii., p. 228) only
one three hundred thousandth part of that of the sun. Yet
sensitives feel its rays warm. The moon never renders them
sleepy, but often makes them wakeful. On experiment,
Fr]. Zinkel (Oct. 1846,) found moonlight very unpleasant in
her face; unpleasant, but not to so great a degree at the
back ; thoroughly disagreeable on the left side, but coolish
and comfortable on the right side. Hence the lunar rays are
principally positive. Water that has stood in moonlight is
very nauseous and tepid, and often excites vomiting.

Frl. Beyer found transmitted polarised moonlight tepid to
the left and coolish to the right hand; the reflected ray,
coolish to the left and tepid to the right. Hence the trans-
mitted light is positive ; the reflective negative, the same as
sunlight ; but the positive rays are most numerous in the


—


From Sound and the Material Universe. 233
lunar light. As lunar light is only reflected solar light,
it would seem that the surface of the moon (and therefore
probably also that of the earth), absorbs negative od.

The lunar spectrum acts like the solar, the blue half
being negative, the red half positive, but the positive action
is much the stronger.

65. Firelight.—This light is principally negative: when
polarised, however, the reflected light is more negative than
the transmitted. The spectrum acts similarly to the solar
spectrum but more weakly, the positive action being small.


H. Sound.


66. Sound is a source of negative od, from which other
bodies, as water, may be charged, and which is powerful
enough to overcome the odic source of a simple metallic body,
as the bell itself.


I. Chemical Action.


67. Chemical action not only produces od—negative od
in all cases which Reichenbach has observed—during decom-
position, but it does not recombine it in the products formed.
On the contrary, it communicates it freely to its environ-
ment.

K. 68. Evaporation from solids or liquids is accompanied
by the development of negative od.


L. The Material Universe.


69. Each object in nature has its own peculiar od, dif-
ferent in quality and quantity. Od not only appears bipolar
as in magnets, crystals, and organic beings, but unipolar,
inherent, like electricity, in each particular substance. The
complete series of material substances forms, it is true, a
bipolar whole, but its individual elements are unipolar, and
form a vast odopolar series in which each has its own peculiar
position. This series runs so exactly parallel to the electro-


- chemical, that we may unhesitatingly place it in the same


category with the latter, and call it the odochemical series.

The following is this series of simple bodies as determined
by careful experiments, commencing with the greatest odic
warmth or most positive, and proceeding to the greatest odic
coolness or most negative :—

Potassium, sodium, osmium, rhodium, gold, silver, plati-
num, iridium, palladium, mercury, copper, tin, bismuth, lead,
cadmium, cobalt, manganese, iron, nickel, silicon, paracya-
nogen (C N®, ?), titanium, graphite, diamond, carbon,
antimony, chromium, tungsten, molybdenum, arsenic, tellu-


234


From the Material Universe.


rium, phosphorus (red, yellow), iodine, bromium, selenium,
sulphur, perchloric acid (O? Cl' Reichenbach gives O’ U?,
apparently an error for O7 Cl? ?)

70. Compound substances.

Positive. Combinations with alkaline bases as _potass,
soda, lithia, hydrate of baryta, caustic lime, fresh calcined
magnesia, &c. Medicines like opium which contain alkaline
bases invariably produce bad effects on sensitives.

Negative. Oxygen stands at the head; it was not well
adapted for direct experiment, but its negative character is
well shewn in combinations, as perchloric acid which contains
70 per cent. of oxygen. Combinations like the non-alkaline
oxides, as siliceous earth, quartz, zircon, and hyacinth, ruby
and sapphire, and metallic oxides, as iron ore, oxide of chro-
mium, oxide of copper, arsenic, &. Compounds containing
much carbon or sulphur, chlorine and other negative sub-
stances. The more complicated saline combinations in which
the electro-negative elements predominate. One of the most
unpleasant substances is verdigris, and brass appears to be so
unpleasant on account of its being always more or less ac-
companied by verdigris. Sulphate of lime (selenite gypsum)
is very negative, and also chromic acid and its compounds.
Carbonates and sulphates are all negative. Spring water is
often slightly negative from the small quantities of carbonate
and sulphate of lime which it contains. Common bottle
glass is almost indifferent, but if anything slightly negative.

71. Organic substances.

Positive. Pyroligneous acid (spirits of wood), acetic
acid, naphtha, alcohol, sulphuric ether, turpentine, caffeine,
theine, &c.

Negative. Camphor, creosote, acetic ether, dry white of
egg, salicine, sugar, manna, sugar of milk, phloridzine, all
organic acids.

Nearly indifferent. Paraffine, olive oil, dammara resin,
potatoe starch, inuline, rheine, glycyrrhizine (licorice sugar).

Hence basic bodies incline to the positive, acids or those
nearly resembling acids, to the negative, series, and odic is
nearly coincident with chemical indifference.

72. Mixed substances.—Sensitives dislike the smell of
flowers, baths containing sulphurous waters, fatty substances,
fresh whitewashed rooms (on account of the odo-positive
caustic lime) and hence new-built houses or freshly plastered
walls. Old walls, in which the caustic lime has become con-
verted into a carbonate and silicate, are so strongly odo-nega-
tive that no sensitive can sleep with his back towards such a
wall; he feels an incontrollable desire to face it. Hence also


From Crystallization and Vital Action. 235


one cause of the injurious action of stone floors. All vessels
of burned earth, as pottery, stoneware, porcelain, &c., with
glazings of oxide of lead, tin ash, gypsum, felspar, quartz or
borax, are strongly odo-negative. Dry bones are nearly in-
different. Iron stoves being positive are painful, and earthen-
ware stoves being negative are agreeable, to sensitives. Low
rooms and narrow passages produce painful effects from the
negative action of the walls on the negative poles, and their
overcharging of the positive poles of the body.

The earth as a whole is odo-positive. Hence the necessity
for a sensitive’s sleeping on the right side.


M. Crystallization as an Act.


73. Experiments are difficult, because when crystallization
is slow it is imperceptible to sight and feeling, and when
rapid it is accompanied by a development of thermometric
heat. By means of the rapid crystallization of Glauber’s
salt, Reichenbach was enabled to separate the odic and ther-
mometric effects, and determined that crystallization gives out
negative od during the formation of the crystals.


N. Vital action as a source of od in so far as it affects living
human organs, that is, Bi-od.


a. Polarity of Plants.


74. The resultant of the odic emanations of plants is
negative.

If a leaf be held vertically, point upwards, and back or
under-side towards the holder’s breast, its poles correspond to
those of a man; negative at top or point on the right, and at
the back ; positive at the base or stalk end on the left, and in
front or on the upper side. Hence the negative under side
is turned to the positive earth, and the positive upper side to
the negative sunlight.

The outer and downwards turned petals of the corolla are
odo-negative with respect to the inner and upper parts.

Plants turti towards the blue, or chemical and odo-negative
rays, and from the yellow and red, or odo-positive rays.

Dead leaves have no odic polarity. Hay is unpleasant
from its positive od.


b. Polarities of Man and the Lower Animals.
a. Polarities of entire beings and their several meméers.


75. The egg is positive at the big and negative at the
little end. The negative head of the chick lies in this nega-
tive little end. We may observe that the child generally lies
VOL, XIII. s


236


From Vital Action.


in the womb with its negative head to the mother’s positive
left side. Mothers generally carry their sucklings on the left
arm with the head to the left. The egg derives its polarity
from the chick.

Animals are all polarized as man.

76. The blood carries mixed od through the body, positive
from friction, negative from the chemical action of the lungs,
&e.

77. When one person looks at another, the first exercises
an odic influence on the second, different for each eye, so that
although a sensitive can bear his right eye to be regarded by
a left eye, &c., he cannot endure it to be fixed by right eye.

78. If a spiral wire be wrapped round a body and odo-
positive and odo-negative hands be applied to the extremities,
no inductive odic effect is produced.

79. Odic power in a man is weakened by any exertion of
his strength.

80. Every development of muscular strength develops od,
which increases with its increase,—positive on the left, negative
on the right, side. Hence muscular exertion does not, like
friction, develop a constant unipolar od, but only the od
belonging to that portion of the body in which the exertion
takes place.

The physical development of strength in any person com-
plicates the action of his od, partly by conduction and partly
by communication in distans, and can be passed over with the
od to other persons in a certain degree.

81. On the approach of like poles the od on entering the
body produces a series of rapid quivering sensations, which
follow in reverse order when the source of od is removed.


B. Sensitive Excitability.


82. Odic excitability is very different in different persons,
reaching from an imperceptible condition to violent madness.
Odic excitement depends, like all others, upon the degree of
excitability in the recipient, and the strength of the exciter.

83. The degree of excitability is lowered by a full meal, by
drinking wine, by a catarrh or cold in the head, by bodily
exercise, by laying the hands together, by looking at a power-
ful source of od (as a flame, or an eye), by rheumatic affec-
tions and megrim, by recovery from those diseases which
increase the degree of excitability (as those which are accom-
panied by somnambulism), by a long uniform application of the
exciting cause, by down passes, especially complete downward
passes, and generally by any loss of power in the human body.


Sensitive Excitability. 237


The deyree of excitability is heightened by a good sleep
which increases strength without diminishing the diseased
condition of the sensitive, by fasting or moderation in diet,
menstruation (not during the whole time, but the first day
and the day before, the degree sinks on the second day and
on the third the ordinary condition returns), pregnancy, so-
called hysteria, by many diseases (measles), by up passes,
especially complete upward passes, and by similar odic action,
(as by the operator standing behind the sensitive.)

84. The permanent points of principal odic excitability are
the points of the fingers (the hanging hand with loosely dis-
joined fingers is best adapted for testing the odic qualities of
any object), the roots of the nails, the pit of the stomach
(solar plexus), under the eyes (nervus infra-orbitalis), the
nipple, the crown of the head, the lips, and a point on the
forehead immediately above the nose at about two thirds the
height of the forehead.

Accidental points of great excitability are often occasioned
by wounds or diseases. Some patients are more sensitive for
positive and others for negative od.

The uncovered skin is more sensitive than the clothed.
Down quilts and bed-covers will scarcely allow any od to pass.

Sensitives are at the beginning of a series of experiments
seldom so clear and certain of the nature of their sensations
as they become after their attention has been directed to
them. “Fri. Zinkel,” says Reichenbach, ‘ who is so good
and clear a sensitive, gave me numerous incorrect answers in
her first séances. I let her have her own way as I saw she
was shy and frightened. When she had begun to feel at
home and quiet, and her sensations became familiar, her replies
were all perfectly exact. The same was the case with many
other sensitives.” This assimilates sensitiveness to other nerv-
ous and muscular actions.

85. Different persons possess the power of odic excitement
in very different degrees. Neither susceptibility nor power to
excite depend, as regards degree, on youth or age. But the
quality of the od emanating, even when of the same polarity,
is very different for different people, and some sensitives
can distinguish persons by their odic charges alone. There
is also a difference of sex. Women do not like the similar
odic emanations of other women, so much as the dissimilar
odic emanations of men; and conversely. The exact nature
of the differences still requires investigation.


y. Mode of Action of Odic Excitement.


86. The action of od on the sensitive sense, to use this
s 2


238 Soretic and Nemetic Modes of Action.


expression for the time, falls naturally into odo-positive and
odo-negative. But this is only the case, in the proper sense
of the words, when the od is applied on the same spot of the
sensitive body without any change in internal or external
conditions. If anything essential or accessory is changed,
the nature of the sensation and of its perception is also
changed. In this case, regarding the action from another
point it may be separated into—

First, an accumulative, checking action, where we imagine
the od to be forced back and condensed, as a current of water
which is stemmed; this Reichenbach names soretic, from
owpeia, a heaping up, and

Secondly, a resolving, dissipating action, where we ima-
gine the od or its accumulation to be dispersed, or rarified ;
and this Reichenbach names nemetic, from véua, I take away.

Soretic action is produced by an up pass, nemetic by a
down pass. In the first the od is, as it were, forced towards
the centre, and in the second drawn from it—this being of
course a merely illustrative conception.

These are the simplest cases, and are of comparatively
rare occurrence. “ When a pass is made from head to foot
its first effect on all the parts it has not reached is accumula-
tive, or soretic; and on those which it has passed, dispersive
or nemetic. . Suppose then a pass to be made, as the French
often make it, from the head to the stomach, and there be
terminated ; the upper part of the body will be treated nemeti-
cally, the lower and the extremities soretically and so left to
themselves. What has taken place meanwhile in the arms?
The pass went over the breast and shoulders at the root of
the arms and left the arms untouched. Now (§33. Zoist,
No. L., p. 128) a dissimilar contact with the shoulder places
the whole lower part of the arm in an accumulative condition.
Hence a downward pass ending at the stomach places both
upper and lower extremities in an odic condition opposed to
that which it produces in the body. Hence we see how
illogical such passes are, when intended only to produce a
nemetic effect. Fri. Beyer and others often asked for down
passes over the arms after they had been made over the body.
The reason is now apparent. But we also know that man has
a latitudinal and transverse as well as a longitudinal axis, and
that his whole body is thickly strewn with groups and fibres of
returning nerves,. which will be affected soretically when the
principal nervous stems are affected nemetically. Hence in
every pass, no matter what its direction, there must be an
endless complication of accumulative and dispersive action.
Positive and negative should consequently only be used for


iis. RO —


Soretic and Nemetic Groups of Sensations. 239


for the polar value of od, soretic and nemetic for the nervous

conditions they generate.”

87. Soretic groups of sensations, arranged in increasing
order.

a. Discomfort ; rousing, awaking, exciting; disagreeableness,

painfulness, disturbance.

b. Tepidity ; warmth, heat, perspiration, vexation, anger.

c. Fulness ; thickening, swelling, stuffiness, heaviness.

d. Cobwebs; hairiness, (as if covered with fur, pamstigkeit in
the Bavarian and Austrian dialect,) creepiness (as if there
was a soft groping motion under the skin, an augmenta-
tive of hairiness, in the Vienna dialect wurin,) tingling
(an augmentative of creepiness, the internal sensation of
motion being greater and more distinct, &c., Vienna
gruseln), formication; pricking, throbbing, elasticity,
vermiculation.

e. Oppression, confinement of the chest, anxiety, beating of
the heart.

f. Oppression at the stomach, stomach-ache, nausea, fainting,
spasm in the stomach, vomiting; pressure on the head,
head-ache, megrim.

. Burning of the eyes; watering of the eyes, weeping.

. Yawning, tonic and clonic spasms, catalepsy.

i. Numbness without sleep; dead fingers, feet, hands, arms
and legs; numbness of the limbs, temporary blindness ;
trance, rigidity, apparent death.

k. Madness, temporary or permanent.

88. Nemetic groups of sensations.

a. Comfort, quieting, agreeableness, cheerfulness.

b. Freshness, coolness, cold, windy cold, frosty cold, goose-

skin, teeth-chattering.

c. Sleepiness, sleep, strengthening.

d. Emptiness, lightness, feathery lightness.

. Drawing, pinching, (lacing together, zusammenschnueren,)
fibry feel, pricking.

f. Somnambulism (sooner or later, after the whole or part of
the preceding steps or without any forerunners, accord-
ing to the inclination of the various degrees of sensitive-
ness.)

89. Mixed effects.—Since positive and negative od do not
destroy each others effects, (as positive and negative electri-
city and magnetism appear to do,) both can be perceived at
once as acting on the sensitive. Sensations are then expe-
rienced which the sensitive terms disagreeably cold, hard cold,
stiff cold, tepid cold, joined to heaviness, confinement of the


‘>So


&


240 Mixed Sensations.


chest, oppression on the head, trembling and convulsive
attacks.

An excellent example is afforded in table-turning, where
the number of conjoined hands and feet tend to charge the
table powerfully with mixed od, which no sensitive can endure,
and hence many persons are unable to continue experiments
in table-turning and suffer more or less from the attempt.

Most diseases cause a mixture of odic feeling, so that
warmth is felt with the cold even on a contact of dissimilar
poles. The healthiest persons give the most generally cool
sensations, and the general warmth increases with disease.

The sunlight gives mixed sensations, and so does water
odized by the sun’s rays.

When water is odized (or mesmerized) in the usual way
by being held in one hand and pointed at by the other, or
held with both hands, it receives a mixed charge and is there-
fore very improperly odized. For certain diseases it should
be odized positively (with the left hand only), and for others,
and more generally, negatively (with the right hand only).
This is best done by holding the glass in the right hand (for
negative od) or left hand (for positive od) for a few minutes,
and taking care not to use the other hand either to pour out
the water or to offer the glass. The patient should take the
water with the same hand.

Is it best to mesmerise with a magnet or with the hand?
With the hand ; because it is almost purely positive or neya-
tive, whereas, the steel of the magnet being positive in itself,
there is.a mixture of odic emanations when its magnetic
pole is applied. For the same reason crystals are preferable to
magnets. Crystals produce a pure, uniform, mild, quiet,
pleasant, cool odic stream, while magnets, although generally
cool, have at the same time something hard, unstable, and
disturbing to the feelings, nay even warm and almost sharp,
which is unpleasant and sometimes produces perspiration in
the midst of a feeling of coolness. These remarks particularly
apply to the use of horseshoe magnets with both poles applied
to the patient at once.

In distant passes each hand will act sensibly as a dissimilar
pole on one side and a similar pole on the other, and hence
produce mixed disagreeable feelings. There is no position of
one human body with respect to another in which mixed
sensations are not produced, distinguishable by the higher
sensitives.

Accident afforded a striking proof of mixed od. Reichen-
bach placed a series of crystals, a bar magnet, and his right


—. aE


Life and Death. 241


hand, in such a manner as to concentrate their negative odic
effect through a lens of 13 inches diameter. Frl. Zinkel
on placing her left hand in the focus felt a general cool effect,
but in the middle one unpleasant, warm, burning spot, and
on the right hand a general tepid effect with a cold point.
On taking the bundle of crystals, &c., to pieces, Reichenbach
found, that, in spite of his care, he had placed the south-
ward or positive pole of the magnet towards the glass. On
correcting the error and repeating the experiment, no such
hot or cold spot was now perceived. Hence mixed od makes
itself perceptible when radiated and refracted.


5. Life.


90. Healthy organic life is principally unipolar and ne-
gative. Life, as such, must be considered as odically nega-
tive, and the negativity is more decided in animal than in
vegetable life.


e. Death.


The odic polarity which is perceived by a sensitive in
every living being, whether clearly alive or in a death trance,
ceases gradually to be perceptible after death, and in some
thirty-six hours entirely disappears. Hence sensitives become
practically the only means we possess of determining the
reality of death in many cases, and preventing the horrible,
and yet not unfrequent, accident of burying a person not
only alive but perfectly conscious of all that is being done,
and yet unable to indicate his life by any means of his own.
Several such cases have come to the personal knowledge of
Reichenbach, who, after having satisfied himself of the power
of sensitives to determine the reality of death, applied at the
great hospitals in Vienna for permission to admit Frl. Zinkel
to feel a series of patients and dead persons. “TI applied,”
said he, “ to the chief physician in the nervous patients’ de-
partment, and he asked the director of the great general
hospital for permission to have some of the dead bodies taken
by the hand :—flatly refused. I then applied to the director
of the great hospital in the suburb of Wieden, through the
chief physician :—flatly refused! The dead might rot and
be eaten of worms, but not touched by a hand, not even to
save the worshipful directors from burying them alive. And
this happened in the imperial capital and royal residence of
Vienna in the year of grace one thousand eight hundred
and fifty-three !”

“ Sensitives will be our preservers in life and our sureties
in death 1?


242 Cure of the agony of a Crushed Finger.


[This concludes the first section and first volume. The
principal conclusions of every division are here given, but
the numberless experiments by which they were demon-
strated and illustrated, which render the book as amusing as
it is instructive, and the many instructive observations and
careful notes of the precautions necessary to ensure success,
are of course omitted. The extreme brevity of this abstract
is shewn by the fact that the few pages of this and the former
paper present an account of the matter contained in 838
closely-printed large octavo German pages. The abstract of
the second volume will be continued in future numbers.—


A. J. E.]


II. Cures of Crushed Finger, Condemned Palsy of both Arms
and one Leg, Tic Douloureux, and Ulcerated Leg in which
the doctor had considered treatment useless. By Mr.
Wittiam Gissins, Croydon. Communicated by Dr.
Elliotson.


‘I have devoted more years than Mr. Carpenter is old to the improvement
of the medical profession :—I. Upon the Medical Reform; II. Medical Poor
Law Relief; III. Vaccination; and, lastly, my opposition to the fashionable
auacKerieEs of the day, viz., homoeopathy, hydropathy, mesmerism,” &c.—
George Bottomley, Surgeon, Croydon, Dec. 10, 1854. Association Journal,
Dec. 15, 1854; p. 1132.*


Dr. Elliotson.

Srr,—In compliance with your wishes I have sent you
four cases cured by me with mesmerism. I wish to say that
I am indebted to the late lamented R. Barrett, Esq. for my
introduction to the Mesmeric Infirmary four years since,
where “TI saw and believed.”


Crushed Finger.

My first case was that of my own son—a boy then 14
years of age, who had his finger crushed by the slamming of
a heavy door. The finger became very much inflamed, as
did the arm to the shoulder. For two days and nights my
wife poulticed it, but this did not relieve the pain, which was
very great. On the third day I proposed to mesmerise it,
and got laughed at of course: but I persevered and at last
prevailed. I made passes for about four minutes over the
part, when he exclaimed, “Oh, father! my arm is in such


* We shall be delighted if this old gentleman will let us know where his op-
position can be read. We will not fail to answer him. We have already spoken
of him in No. XLIX., p. 421.—Zoist.


i


nie


Cures of Palsy, Neuralgia, and Ulcerated Leg. 243


pain.” I kept on about five minutes more, when he told me
the pain was gone ; but it felt so benumbed that I continued
making passes for about fifteen minutes, when he told me
that he thought i¢ was well ; and he never felt any more of it.
It healed so soon that I was quite astonished, and I made
converts of both mother and son. This was nearly four
years ago.
Palsy of both Arms and one Leg.

My next case was that of William Outtram, a gardener,
aged 66. He had nearly lost the use of both arms and one
leg: and could not dress or undress himself without assist-
ance. He was an out-patient at one of the London hospitals
for three months. He was also under Dr. Sylvester at Clap-
ham, and afterwards under a medical gentleman* of Croydon
for twelve months. The last-mentioned gentleman told his
wife that it was useless to put them to any farther expense, as
he was paralyzed from head to foot.

I began to mesmerise in November, 1851, and mesmer-
ised once a day for nineteen successive days, when I left him
able to goto work. He shortly afterwards procured work with
C. Penfold, Esq., then of Croydon, now of Sydenham, for
whom he has worked ever since, with the exception of a short
time last winter when he was laid up a month with a violent
cold. He still continues to work for Mr. Penfold at Syden-
ham, going on Monday morning and returning on Saturday
evening. He lives at No. 11, Thanet Place, Croydon.


Tic Douloureuzx.

My next case was the wife of the above, Harriet Outtram,
who was afflicted with tic douloureux. She had had the pain
so violent for twenty-four hours that she told me she thought
she must lose her senses. She had poultices of mustard and
pepper, but the pain so deadened the feeling that she expe-
rienced no unpleasant sensation from either. I mesmerised
her about seven minutes, when she exclaimed, “I feel so very
faint ;”’ and soon after that the pain was entirely gone. She
told me a few days back she had not had it since.


Ulcerated Leg.

I now come to an ulcerated leg, in which the doctors had
considered all treatment useless, in a female who does not
wish her name made public, but who will answer privately
to any sceptical person for all that I have written. Her
name is A G , wife of aw of Croydon. She


* Dr. Burney.


244 Insults to the Scottish Association


has been the mother of nine children, and previously to her
accouchement for the last five times she had been afflicted with
a bad leg that she ascribes to certain events when young.
Each successive time the leg became worse, and the seventh
and eighth times the child was still-born : the doctor stated
this to be entirely owing to the state of her leg.

In March, 1854, she was about six months gone, and her
leg was so bad that she had no rest day or night, and could
not walk across the room without the assistance of a crutch,
The doctor told her he could do nothing for her, as it could
not get better till after her confinement, which he said would
take place at seven months.

Without having much faith in it, she asked me to try
mesmerism. I did so, and after my making passes before her
for fifteen minutes she was agreeably surprised to find the pain
gone. I did not think of the leg healing till after her con-
finement : but thought I could in a great measure relieve the
pain. I mesmerised her every evening for three weeks and
kept it free from pain, and at the end of that time the leg
healed to her surprise and mine. She went her time, the
child was born, and is now living—a fine healthy girl. In
the severe weather last winter her leg began to swell again.
I mesmerised it a few times, brought it round, and it has
been quite well ever since !

Thanking you for the valuable information I received
when I saw you,

I remain, your humble servant,
WitiraM Grins.
13, Thanet Place, Croydon.


III. Cure of Neuralgia of the Face at one sitting, Rheumatism
of long standing at one sitting, Pain of the Face, Palsy
of the Face successfully treated as far as Mesmerism was
allowed, great relief in Cancer while Mesmerism was
allowed, cure of Chronic Inflammation of the Ovary. By
Joun James Birp, Esq., of Maddox Street.


** PROVINCIAL CORRESPONDENCE.
‘Edinburgh, March 26, 1855.
“* Professor Gregory and Mesmerism.
‘On the 22nd instant another of these disgraceful exhibitions which have
become so frequent of late took place. The Annual Meeting of the so-called


Mesmeric Curative Association was held, Professor Gregory presiding. There
was nothing in the whole entertainment sufficiently novel to call for any report,*


* Not the statements of a very large number of fine cures >—2Zoist.


¥


|


oer


in the Medical Times. 245


nor need I again indulge in the reprobation which I have already expressed as to
the conduct of any professor who should give his countenance or sanction on
such an occasion. Can Professor Syme, whose honest indignation against his
colleague Bennet, for sanctioning the admission of Braid’s vagaries on this subject
into the Monthly Journal was the means of breaking up the professorial control
over that Journal, do nothing with his other more deeply criminal colleague? It
is, indeed, a melancholy spectacle! One Professor supporting the absurdities of
mesmerism, not among scientific men, where its claims might be calmly and
scientifically discussed ;* but among a radile rout, and in company with those
who, neither from their antecedents or (sic) from their presents, are likely to com-
mand a respectful reception for any scientific truth—another Professor the Magnus
Apollo of Mesmerism; while three of their enterprising colleagues, who, in an
age of Free Trade and Abolition of Tests, have done their best, in their own
Institutions, to oppose the former and maintain the latter, struck with the decline
which that Institution manifests, refuse to recognize the obvious causes which are
leading to it, and beguile their learned leisure by framing Bills for the Regulation
of the Profession, in the concoction of which the Profession are never consulted,
and whose grand purpose it is to maintain and extend, at all hazards, the interests
of their own University.””"—Mrpicat Times, March 31, 1855; p. 317.


TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.


GentLEMEeN,—I have much pleasure in forwarding the
following cases for insertion in The Zoist, and beg respect-
fully to solicit from the readers of this journal their notice of
the noble display of fortitude and perseverance exemplified in
Case No. 6. During nearly two years of anxious mesmerising
in the midst of sceptics her perseverance never flagged. To
the polite ovarian physician in Park Street, Grosvenor Square,
who in 1852 told me that no virtuous woman would allow
herself to be mesmerised, I respectfully submit this case for
his learned and charitable consideration. And to all who,
after having called in a mesmeriser, dismiss him, as I was
lately dismissed in Great Stanhope Street, with the very
soothing reflexion that “ the doctors in attendance may not
like it,” I would gently whisper that, had this lady regarded
the expression of the doctor’s dislike, she would not have
been alive to request me, as she has done, to publish her case
for the benefit of others who, living under the misery of
leeches, blisters, and drugs without number, at length die in
despair. The supineness of educated people and their pros-
tration to medical bigotry are to me incomprehensible. The
facts accumulating in the volumes of The Zoist are forming
a pyramid which will cast its broad shadow over the Royal
College of Physicians.

The Rev. Jeffery Ekins, of Sampford, in your July
Number, remarks that “ Mesmerism takes wonderfully with


* Were its ‘‘ claims calmly and dispassionately discussed”’ by the medical
profession when the painless and successful amputation in the mesmeric state in
Nottinghamshire was detailed without comment in the Royal Medical and Chirur-
gical Society of London? Read Dr. Elliotson’s pamphlet, pp. 12—64.—Zoist.


246 Cures of Neuralgia and Rheumatism.


the poor, scarcely a day passing without an application from
some suffering person ;” and “that if the clergy at large
would only take it as their vade mecum in their parochial
visits they would be amply rewarded by hearing the voice of
joy and health more frequently in the dwellings of the poor.”
Mr. Ekins speaks with the authority of disinterested expe-
rience: I know him as an ornament to mesmerism, and trust
that his brethren of the Church will help to diffuse it more
generally in the homes of the rich.
I have the honour to be, Gentlemen,
Your very obedient servant,

Joun James Biro.

22, Maddox Street, Hanover Square,
July, 1855.


I. Neuralgia of the Face cured in one sitting.

Mary Hawkes had been suffering for many months from
neuralgia of the face, and scarcely ever free from pain. She
had taken much medicine, but could get no permanent relief ;
and applied to me to mesmerise her in November, 1854.
While making the passes she felt the pain following my
hand; her eyes were firmly closed, but she was quite con-
scious. In a half an hour she was entirely free from pain.

I did not see her again until the 13th of July, when,
walking down Hill Street, Berkeley Square, I heard a voice
behind me, “ Mr. Bird, I hav’nt had it since”, The gil
was so much improved in appearance that I did not at once
recognize her. She told me that, from the day I had mes-
merised her, she not only had no return of her pain, but was
better in health than she ever remembered to have been, and
was living in the family of Sir George Forbes.


Il. Rheumatic Pains in the Limbs of long standing and want
of sleep cured in one sitting.

On the 27th of August, 1853, I had occasion to call upon
a lady in Kingsland. She mentioned to me that her servant
had long suffered from rheumatic pains, which had been so
severe the last few days as to deprive her of sleep. 1 pro-
posed to mesmerise her: and, this being agreed to, I laid her
on a couch and proceeded with slow passes from the forehead
to the knees. Jn ten minutes she was soundly asleep. 1 mes-
merised locally for an hour, and left her sleeping. Before
leaving I desired her mistress to write and tell me if I had
benefitted her, and I received the following letter :—


“ 3, Trafalgar Terrace, Mortimer Road, Kingsland.
“ Dear Sir,—According to promise, I drop a line to say


1. ewe!


Cure of Pain of the Face: benefit in Palsy. 247


that my servant Jane awoke soon after you left: the pains
had left her, but a great stiffness remained which continues.
The pain has slightly returned. She rested that night well.
“ Your obliged,

“S$. GrREEnNwoop.”


III. Pain of the Face cured at one sitting.

Nov. 17th, 1853. The lady who is the subject of this short
notice had been suffering for some days from lancinating
pains in the face, and could not sleep at night and had no
appetite. I mesmerised her at 11 o’clock in the morning,
and succeeded in twenty minutes in producing a tranquil
sleep. I remained some time, promising to return at four
o'clock, and requested the attendants to keep the house very
quiet. When I called I found that she had not been long
awake, her pains had entirely ceased, and her appetite had
returned. Six months after I received the following letter :—


“125, Sloane Street.
“ My dear Sir,—I received last night the interesting ac-
count of the operation performed in the Mesmeric Institu-
tion, and thank you much for having sent it. Why is not
this great blessing to mankind more generally practised? Is
it because it takes up too much time? The fact of an ope-
ration being performed without causing pain cannot be de-
nied, and as no ill effects follow from mesmerism, why is it
not always adopted in such cases? I am thankful to say I
have not suffered from my face lately.
“ Believe me, my dear Sir, yours truly,
“M. A. VANSITTART.
“John James Bird, Esq.”


IV. Paralysis of the Limbs from birth: great benefit derived
from Mesmerism.

Malle. Leontine de Macedo, aged 10 years, daughter of
His Excellency the Chevalier de Macedo, Ambassador from
the Emperor of the Brazils, was unable to walk. March 23rd,
1854, I engaged to mesmerise her daily. In six weeks she
had much improved in health, and by the end of May could
walk supported. In consequence of a cold His Excellency
decided to discontinue the mesmerism on the 8th of June,
and I regret to say that it has not been resumed, and I have
not heard from him since. An extract from a letter I re-
ceived from His Excellency will explain. ‘I hope we will
soon recommence with Miss Leontine, as undoubtedly she
was going better before her cold: but I desire again to con-


248 Great benefit in Cancer.


sult the person of whom I spoke to you, and who is expected
before fifteen days.”


V. Great benefit from Mesmerism in Cancer: cure prevented
by a want of perseverance.

January 4th, 1854. I received a letter from which the
following is extracted :—‘ I have consulted my husband, and
he thinks mesmerism in my case might be of great assist-
ance: and, as mine is a life and death case, I feel I must
manage it somehow. I should like to hear what you think
of it, or what way you think would be best. I am so very
anxious to do what I can, as I see death staring me in the
face at present; and though I know it is very wrong to be
too anxious, and that God knows what is best for us, still
sometimes I cannot help wishing to get well.” This patient,
aged 32, the wife of Mr. Roberts, grocer, Crescent Place,
Park Road, Clapham, was suffering from cancer in the breast.
She had been in the hands of medical men three years, and
had submitted to one operation of removal with the knife
under chloroform by Mr. Startin. Other tumors forming in
the same region, she placed herself under Dr. Curie, under
whose treatment she remained some months until his death.
She then consulted Dr. Epps, and it was at this juncture that
she wrote to ask me to mesmerise her, having decided not to
endure another operation. I may be allowed to observe, iu
defence of mesmerism, that I undertook her case giatui-
tously. I commenced mesmerising her once a day for an
hour on the 9th of January, and by the 30th she had much
improved in general health, her appetite was better, her
sleep tranquil, and the tumors had decreased in size. So
palpable was this, that I requested her not to inform Dr.
Epps that she was being mesmerised, feeling anxious to hear
his opinion of her state. I accompanied her to Dr. Epps on
the 3lst January. He had not seen her for a month: he
noticed the favourable change in her state, as indeed had all
her friends. He told her that she was much better, and that
the lump under the arm was disappearing, and that the others
were less. She continued to improve slowly under daily mes-
merising till the 29th March, when, removing with her family
to Kingston, she was placed beyond my reach. My experi-
ence in this case proves the truth of Dr. Elliotson’s maxim,
that no mesmerist should undertake a case unless he is pro-
mised to be allowed to give mesmerism a full trial. Her
husband consented to mesmerise her; and it was then the
want of perseverance was shewn. Some new treatment was
commenced. On the 9th of this month (July, 1855) I heard


Cure of Diseased Ovary. 249


that she was lying in a hopeless state, having been under
some quack treatment.


VI. Cure of Chronic Inflammation of the Ovary.

Mrs. Collins, aged 29, of No. 2, Lowndes Terrace, Knights-
bridge, had been under medical treatment more than nine
months for what was termed chronic inflammation of the
right ovarium. During that period, leeches had continually
been applied, externally and internally, as well as blisters ;
she had taken 180 large bottles of medicine, besides pills.
The physicians consulted were Drs. Locock, Robert Lee and
Prothero Smith; and she had a surgeon in Wilton Street,
Grosvenor Place. When, on the 29th July, 1853, I was first
introduced to her, she was extremely weak and walked across
the room with the utmost difficulty. She did not believe in
the curative power of mesmerism, nor did her husband or
friends: and in passing I must acknowledge the impartiality
of Mr. Collins who immediately that mesmerism was adopted,
although at the time he had no faith in it, refrained from
interference. Throughout this most trying case he did not
by word or sign thwart me. On the evening of my first
introduction she was in much pain. I mesmerised her one
hour, her eyes became sealed, but she was conscious. When
I began her head was very hot and her feet icy cold: she
frequently expressed satisfaction, saying that I was doing her
good, “sending it down.” I left her with a cool head and
warm feet.

Monday, August Ist. The effect of the first mesmerisation
was very satisfactory: she slept very soundly all night and
awoke with improved appetite, but in very great pain. The
following day leeches were again applied internally with effect ;
after they were withdrawn there was a flow of more than a
quart of dark clotted blood. I mesmerised her more than
an hour: a genial heat was established, and I left her in less
pain and comfortable.

2nd and 3rd. In much pain; her appetite which had in-
creased after the first sitting, had again declined. I observed
a tendency to mesmeric sleep: I mesmerised her for an hour,
she was much relieved and her confidence in mesmerism in-
creased.

4th. Better, slept soundly all night, free from pain all day,
appetite improved. In pain towards evening: derived more
benefit from the mesmeric passes and breathing on the seat
of pain than at any former period: asleep part of the time,
pain abated: satisfied as to the benefit she is receiving from
mesmerism. During this sitting of nearly two hours, she was


250 Excellent effects of Mesmerism.


indisposed to speak, but occasionally remarked that she felt
very comfortable—that the feet were very warm and that I
was making her very hungry.

5th. Had slept well, appetite good, digestion much im-
proved, increased pain towards the evening, hysterical. Eyes
sealed, but conscious: left her very hungry.

6th. Better than at any previous visit. She told me that,
after my leaving her last night, the pains ceased, that she
had slept soundly all night and had been comfortable all day
but depressed in spirits. Pain had commenced about five
o’clock this afternoon. This has been its habit these last few
days. Mesmerised as usual, slept all the time ; mach relieved.
Has always during the mesmerising felt a tingling and numb-
ness in the limbs, but now she said I seemed to bring the
pain into the knees. Told a lady present that she should
never forget how much good I was doing her. Tells me that
the surgeon attending her is an opponent of mesmerism and
that, from the manner in which he had spoken of it when she
told him, she has foreborne to mention it again to him. Still
continues to receive his medicine, but has at my request dis-
pensed with the blistering and bleeding.

8th. During the last two days much better; says that I
have done her “so much good” at this sitting: slept all the
time and awoke free from pain. Inclined to dismiss the sur-
geon who is thoroughly opposed to mesmerism but much
esteemed by the family. I left this matter in her own hands.
She observed, “ What can I do? I must take his medicine:
you know what a decided opponent he is to mesmerism, and
that I am keeping this a secret from him. I am really
better: the blood does not now mount upward: I have no
more head-ache, flushing of the face,’* &c., &c. I urged her
to discontinue the medicine.

9th. Told the surgeon her determination to discontinue
his medicine for one week. Remarked that opiates had
always failed with her and that she never had obtained any
relief from constant pain till I mesmerised her.

10th. Much better, slept well all night. Always hungry
after being mesmerised.

llth, 12th, 13th. Continues better but always in pain
towards evening; I seldom fail to abate it. Before she was
mesmerised these pains frequently continued all night, so that
her condition was aggravated by want of sleep. The surgeon
tells her that she will again require leeches, which I refuse to
allow. On making passes over the liver, I produced a very
marked effect. Mrs. C. described it as a leaping sensation.


Spiteful conduct of her surgeon. 251


14th, 15th. In great pain: the leeches have not been
applied.

16th. Mesmerised two hours: the surgeon pronounces her
better: less inflammation: he thinks the leeches may be dis-
pensed with. She has now full faith that I shall in time effect
acure, and wishes that she had known me months earlier:
expects to suffer much before she gets well and knows that it
will be a severe trial for mesmerism: was in the mesmeric
sleep all this sitting, and exhibited many traits of mesmeric
attraction: awoke free from pain. Derives much benefit
from passes over the liver.

17th, 18th. Able to walk a little in the morning, but
obliged to return: in much pain since. I found her suffer-
ing severely from this effort, and succeeded in deepening the
sleep. Awoke much refreshed and entirely free from pain,
but very drowsy. During the sleep mesmeric attraction easily
developed: sense of smell and taste exalted: a complete
sympathy of these senses with myself.

19th. In great suffering, pains agonizing: mesmerised
from 8 till 10: she retired for the night. I then mesmerised
her in bed for sleep: succeeded in ten minutes, continuing
to mesmerise till one o’clock, I obtained a mesmeric promise
that she would sleep throughout the next day until my visit
in the evening.

20th. I had sent her to sleep the previous evening at a
little past ten. At about eight in the morning rose from her
bed as was her habit, but asleep: returned and continued to
sleep until half-past eleven, when she was aroused by the very
unkind interruption of the surgeon, who by his continued con-
versation and spiteful remarks about mesmerism irritated and
thoroughly awakened her. She continued drowsy all day, and
but for this, to say the least, unfeeling, conduct, would I
doubt not have slept till the time promised. She was how-
ever much easier and better: mesmerised her locally, as in-
deed I usually did.

21st. A crisis seems imminent. Informed me to-day of
a change which she says the mesmerism has promoted—a
discharge of clots. Mesmerised locally two hours.

22nd. Spoke to Dr. Elliotson of the case: he considers
it a chronic inflammation in the ovary, and that mesmerism
would probably cure her, if persevered in. On my acquaint-
ing her with this and asking if she had still confidence in
me, she answered, “ Yes; I know that you have brought this
crisis on, and will cure me; but I must yet suffer more: I
am weaker.” Mesmerised locally.

23rd. Her surgeon (whom I have never seen) has inti-
VOL, XIII. T


252 Good conduct of Mr. Rutley, surgeon.


mated that if she prefers the mesmeric treatment he shall
withdraw. She has determined to continue it, and he has
retired.

24th. Dr. Elliotson sent for. He has decided that there
is no abscess, and pronounces the case to be chronic inflam-
mation, and urges that she be mesmerised regularly till she
is well.

25th. I have requested her to confine herself to mes-
merised water instead of wine or other beverage, except tea
or cocoa,

26th, 27th, 28th. To-day pretty comfortable: pains in-
creased as usual towards evening. At her request a lady
present,—Mrs. Greenwood, mesmerised her. Her power was
very soothing at the time, but, on her discontinuing, the
pain returned. She discerned a great difference in the passes,
describing mine as very searching, penetrative, yet soothing,
sometimes giving more pain, but leaving her free and com-
fortable afterwards.

29th. Observed her to be in a very excited state: she
complained much of the head, passed a very restless night,
and generally in great pain: I attributed this partly to cross-
mesmerism. Beginners may learn from this circumstance
how much care ought to be taken to prevent similar states.
Relieved her head: sent her to sleep: mesmerised locally.
She awoke refreshed and free from pain.

30th. Derived more benefit last night than at any other
time: slept all night: comfortable all day.

3lst, Sept. lst, 2nd, 3rd. Mrs. C. asserts that she feels
much better and stronger. Dr. Elliotson considers her better,
and has given her permission to go into the country.

4th, 5th, 6th, 7th. Mesmerised as usual. Left London
for Tunbridge. I have requested her to employ a young
woman to make the passes locally under her own direction.
Mrs. C. remained some time at Tunbridge Wells, and then
proceeded to Dover, and experienced a severe attack of ill-
ness foreign to her complaint, but by the able and very kind
treatment of Mr. Rutley, surgeon of that town, came safely
through. I have not seen Mr. Rutley, nor have I had any
communication with him, but I conceive it to be my duty to
record in The Zoist the thanks of my patient and myself for
his kind and enlightened conduct, honourable alike to the
man and the profession of which he is a member.

Nov. 15th. Returned to London much better than I
expected. So far from ridiculing mesmerism, Mr. Rutley
begged her to resume it on her return to London.

Nov. 16th to 30th. Mesmerised daily as usual with the


ST reas.


Two instances of mesmeric jealousy. 253


addition of passes down the spine, and from them she is
deriving benefit.

Dec. 1st. I must be allowed to digress and mention some
facts in mesmeric jealousy. There was a girl in the house,
the sister of the housemaid. This girl had lived as servant
with a lady near the Regent’s Park whose little girl had been
injured in the spine, having fallen down and been run over
by a horse. The girl was cured by a mesmerist under Dr.
Elliotson’s supervision. The lady thought she could send
her servant to sleep: she tried, and deeply entranced her.
She could not easily arouse her, and became frightened, and
used very rough means to effect her object. The girl at
length awoke spontaneously, but very ill, and continued to
suffer so much in the head as to be obliged to leave her place.
As she had no friends in London, Mrs. Collins allowed her
to remain in her house till she was better. I undertook to
relieve her, and found her extremely susceptible. I sent her
to sleep: she slept calmly more than two hours: awoke very
hungry and quite well, and continued so, and shortly after-
wards resumed her duties. This evening (Dec. 1) there were
some ladies present who had called to see Mrs. C. They
were very sceptical about mesmerism. Mrs. C. proposed
that I should mesmerise Emily. I did so, and she slept
deeply. I allowed her to remain asleep while I mesmerised
Mrs. C., who also passed into the mesmeric sleep. Thus I
had one on my right and another on my left hand thoroughly
mesmerised; and I found that I had plenty of work to do.
On attempting to move from Mrs. C. she prepared to follow ;
and, had I been disposed for further experiment, would have
risen for the purpose or have rolled from the couch. If I
attempted to go over to the other, who was likewise much
disturbed, she would arrest me: and, on my placing my
hand on the head of Emily, Mrs. C. was immediately dis-
tressed, exclaiming in her sleep that she was deathly cold,
her teeth meanwhile chattering and her whole frame violently
agitated. She requested me to awaken her, and not touch
Emily till I had done so. Emily was little less agitated.
This instance of mesmeric jealousy required the utmost calm-
ness. It existed only as long as the mesmeric state con-
tinued. Having awakened my patient, I proceeded to de-
mesmerise the other without contact. It is unnecessary to
remark that the lady visitors were entirely convinced of mes-
merism. I mesmerised her to sleep.

Dec. 2nd. Much disturbed all night, and generally lan-
guid to-day—the effects of the mesmeric jealousy. Mes-
merised as usual: better and more cheerful.

T2


254 Cure completed with Mesmerism only.


3rd, 4th, 5th. Improving and able to dispense with an
operation which had formerly been considered necessary :
her pains are not nearly so violent as when I first saw her in
her state of utter prostration. Thus far accomplished with-
out leeches, blistering, opiates, or any other medicines, &c.

6th, 7th, 8th, 9th. Her late medical attendant called : ad-
mits that she is much better and going on well.

The mesmerism was steadily continued: she often had
violent pain and was very ill: but mesmerism continued to
relieve her greatly and strengthen her, and on April 3rd I
mesmerised her twice a day, and she began to take an airing
twice a week.

From April the 4th to the end of May she took an airing
daily. Grew stronger and could walk short distances. During
the months of May, June, July, and August, I mesmerised
her but once a day. She took short walks when the weather
permitted. Near the end of the month she was so much
improved in health and strength that I was anxious to send
her into the country. She left London for Chiddingly in
Sussex, where she remained till November, improving daily
in health and with a heart full of gratitude. During this
period the mesmerism was discontinued, but was resumed on
her return to London in November. She was mesmerised
daily. In June could walk three miles a day, and in July
was perfectly well.

There are many cases similar to this which go on badly
for want of mesmerism, and are leeched and blistered and
deluged with drugs, as Mrs. Collins was till she adopted
mesmerism : tormented, debilitated, imperfectly relieved, and
ill for an immense time, and perhaps destroyed at length by
the disease and its consequences.


IV. Cure of a nerve agonized for thirteen years. By the
Rev. R. A. F. Barrett, B.D., Senior Fellow of King’s
College, Cambridge.


“ Scottish Curative Mesmeric AssociaTion.—As we have hitherto done
no small disservice* to this INCARNATION OF QUACKERY and vulgar imposture,
by duly chronicling its proceedings, we this week present your readers with a
specimen of the TOMFOOLERYT which this would-be scientific association, headed
by the University Professor of Chemistry, indulge. We take the extract from


* What disservice ? We are all unconscious of it.—Zoist.
+ Mesmerism must be very successful for the doctors to be so very, very


angry. Where does the Medical Times chronicle any of the numerous cures
detailed ?


The Med. Times at its old game of folly and falsehood. 255


one of the Edinburgh newspapers, in which it has evidently been inserted by
authority :—

‘“«* The friends of curative mesmerism had a social meeting last evening in the
Calton Convening Hall. In the absence of Professor Gregory from indisposition,
Andrew Stein, Esq., W.S., occupied the chair. After tea, the Chairman con-
gratulated the Association on the encouraging hopes which the present position of
curative mesmerism was calculated to inspire. Mr. Jackson followed, and re-
marked that this was the first time that mesmerism appeared to be in so fair way
of leaving the recesses of learned castes and becoming the possession of people
at large. Messrs. Davey and Jackson then instituted a number of experiments
on various persons in the mesmeric state. Mr. Alex. John Ellis, B.A., made
some observations on the practical character of the Association, and contended
that it would be as absurd to resist the electric telegraph because we were igno-
rant of the fundamental laws of its operations as to reject curative mesmerism
because we had not yet discovered the laws which regulate it. A variety of
musical pieces were sung during the evening by a party under the direction of
Mr. George Dowie, and the meeting separated shortly after ten o’clock.’ ’’—
Medical Times, July 7, 1855; p. 19.


In December, 1852, A. (the lady whose case I reported in
The Zoist, October, 1854) was requested to give a clairvoyant
diagnosis of a lady who had suffered from a sprain since
1839.

According to the patient’s own account, in 1839 she
sprained her ancle severely in running down stairs. With
proper treatment at the end of three weeks it was nearly
well; but she used it too soon and brought back all the pain.
After that it never seemed to get well at all, though some-
times she was able to walk a little, and then some trifling
accident or extra exertion would make it as bad as ever.
Recourse was had to various remedies, such as leeches, blis-
ters both to the ancle and side, Scott’s bandages (which
caused intense pain for a fortnight, and did not the slightest
good), galvanism, electricity, douches of water, great and
small, constant friction of all degrees, and the application of
every lotion that had ever been heard of for either stimulat-
ing or cooling. But they each in their turn lost their power,
and did nothing towards effecting a radical cure.

For thirteen years the patient could only walk for five or
ten minutes at a time on level ground: going up hill or up
stairs, carrying any weight, even a book, across the room,
or lying on the right side, produced pain in the foot. Some-
times an intense gnawing kind of pain would come on at
night and last for hours, causing sensations of faintness and
sickness, and quite preventing sleep. The pain was genc-
rally in paroxysms, but not always beginning suddenly. All
this affected her health, and weakened her very much, so
that, without being i//, she lived a life of suffering and in-
ability to do what other people do.

Some medical men said that they could see no reason for


256 Rationale of the benefit of Mesmerism.


her sufferings: all agreed that it depended on her general
health, and latterly did not recommend any local treatment :
everything of that sort had been done so often that there
was no more to be done. No measures, however adapted to
improve the general health, had the least effect upon the
foot. She continued to suffer great pains at times, whether
she used it or not, while the least additional walking would
always bring on pain.

In 1852 she came to Malvern to try the water-cure, but
without success as far as the foot was concerned, and it was
as bad as ever when A. saw it in 1852: nothing wrong how-
ever was visible.

Upon examining the case, A. said that the injury was
entirely local; that part of a nerve in the leg was quite hard,
like a piece of twisted lasso, and no nervous fluid passed
down it; that proper mesmerism would open the nerve and
cure the leg, but that the persons who had rubbed the leg
were not suitable mesmerisers, and would never effect a cure ;
one of them (the patient’s sister) would do positive harm ;
another might relieve the pain, but nothing more.

Upon referring to anatomical plates, we ascertained the
diseased part of the nerve to be two or three inches of the
external saphenus nerve, just below the junction of the com-
municans tibie with the communicans fibule.

A. mesmerised the patient from January, 1853, until
about the end of May, by contact passes down the leg and
ancle, sometimes mesmerising in her own waking, sometimes
in her clairvoyant, state. After several weeks, A. said that
the nerve had begun to soften; and, soon after, that about
one-thirtieth of the diseased part was sufficiently open for the
nervous fluid to pass down it; in a few days more, that the
newly-opened part of the nerve became round and like the
healthy part. This improvement was shewn to be real by
the patient becoming able to ride on horseback for the first
time for years, that position having always caused peculiar
pain.

From that time the nerve gradually opened, generally
about the tenth of an inch in eight or nine days. After some
time, A. prescribed general mesmerism in addition to the
local mesmerism, as she said it would give a greater column
of mesmerism to bear down upon the closed part of the nerve.

When the patient went away in May, 1853, she was so
much better that she was induced to return, Nov. 17, 1853:
and she remained until March 9, 1854. During that time
she was mesmerised as before with the same results. March
9th, only five-thirtieths of the diseased part of the nerve


Suet


The Medical Times disgraces itself again. 257


remained closed, which we calculated would take about six
weeks to open: the patient had less pain, and much more use
of her leg.

She returned Dec. 22, 1854, and was mesmerised as
before. On Feb. 21 A. said that the whole of the nerve was
open, and the cause of the weakness removed. General
mesmerism was continued for a short time afterwards.

The injury in the leg now appears perfectly cured, as the
patient feels no more fatigue in one foot than the other.

R. A. F. Barrett, B.D.,
Senior Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge.*
August 4, 1855.


V. EXTATICS OF GENIUS.
By J. W. Jackson, Esq., Edinburgh.


«Stanhope, Earl of.—On Saturday, the 3rd of March, at his residence, &c.,
&e. During the later portion of his life, Earl Stanhope lent his energies to the
support and propagation of the MESMERIC DELUSION, and was, we believe, one
of the Vice-Presidents of the Mesmeric Infirmary.’’—Medical Times, March 10,
1855.


No. 2.—Joan or Arc, THE Marp or ORLEANS.


In few things more than the sacred does distance lend en-
chantment to the view. Whether from modesty or ignobility
of nature, from exalting reverence or debasing superstition, the
masses of any present time fail to see in it the true elements
of the holy and divine. Is it that the littleness of our nature
dwarfs the objects which we more immediately contemplate
and that for a time we seem to reduce everything to the
admeasurement of our own puny statures; oris it in the
nature of the celestial to cast its shadows close at hand but
its lights afar off? Perhaps to the true poet alone is it
given to clearly discern the ideal amidst the real, the prophet
soul only according hearty and immediate recognition to the
Divinity inherently pervading all presences. Truly great is
the power required to see into the open secret; weird the
enchantment which reveals a fathomless mystery in the com-
monplace. Of all magic, that which resists the deadening
influence of habit must be pronounced the niost potent. In
truth, the divine is never primarily revealed but to the in-
spired, of whom others are well content to receive the report


* The cure was worked under Mr. Barrett, who always put the clairvoyant
into sleep-waking and acted as her amanuensis.—Zoist.


258


Exalted natures in all times and all ranks.


at secondhand. This, if we could see it aright, is the true
history of those cremations and crucifixions by which so
many of whom the earth was not worthy have departed
from it, not sorrowfully, but rejoicing as at a mighty deli-
verance. To stone prophets and then build their sepulchres,
to maltreat heroes and then erect their statues, is not in any
respect a modern invention; on the contrary, it dates as a
venerable custom from the very remotest antiquity. The
God-sent travel not on their mystic mission by flowery paths ;
not chaplets of roses, but crowns of thorns, await the brows
of those troubled with the burthen of a celestial message.
Saintship and seerdom have been claimed by some as the
appanage solely of religion: but this is a mistake, for any
great and holy cause may have its martyrs and prophets, nay,
if it be in very truth sacred, will have them. Let us not
uncharitably restrict the circle of merit within too narrow
confines. Whereso is the spirit of self-sacrifice, there is
martyrdom ; and whoso hath unshaken loyalty, the same has
devotion. Mere creedology is simply sectarian and not
grandly catholic in its sympathies, and, while loudly vaunting
the peculiar merit of its own especial heroes, denies that of
the believers in another faith, the supporters of another
cause. It is time, however, that the world were raised above
its olden prejudices in this matter, and made to approximate
somewhat nearer to universality of appreciation. Let us
remember that every faith has had its prophets, and every
condition of life its “excellent of the earth.” Birth has no
prescriptive right to virtue, nor are the humble necessarily
the pure; although, where there are the fewest temptations,
we may perhaps rationally expect the greatest innocence.
Village maidens are admirable subjects for the painter’s easel
and the poet’s verse: nevertheless’ it is scarcely from such
that we should expect the deliverance of a nation in that
dread hour when the councils of the wise and the swords of
the brave have alike proved abortive. So however it has
sometimes proved, as if to shew that the weak things of the
earth are indeed sometimes chosen to confound the mighty.
And of such no nobler or more remarkable example is found
in all time than that furnished by Joan of Arc, the Maid of
Orleans. This simple-minded yet truly exalted peasant,
reared to womanhood amidst the misfortunes which befel
her beloved France in consequence of the English invasion,
was a natural extatic, who, if she had not been evoked into
manifestation as a political prophetess and military leader by
the peculiar circumstances and especial necessities of her age
and country, would in all probability have become a dreamy


First outshining of Joan of Arc. 259


visionary in some cloistered convent, and of whom we might
then have heard, as of a St. Therése or Hildegardis, not
from the pages of authentic history, but the rather apo-
chryphal chronicles of monkish devotion and legendary
sanctity. Joan was from her earliest childhood a seeress.
“Since my thirteenth year,” said she, in some autobio-
graphical notices furnished to us by Delaverdy, from MSS.
in the Royal Library at Paris, “I heard a voice in my
father’s garden at Domremy. I heard it from the right side
near the church, and it was accompanied with great bright-
ness (odic light). At first I was afraid of it; but I soon
became aware that it was the voice of an angel, who has ever
since watched well over me, and taught me to conduct my-
self with propriety and to attend church. Five years after-
wards while I was tending my father’s flocks, this voice said
to me, ‘God has great compassion for the French nation,
and that I ought to get ready and go to its rescue.” When
I began to weep at this, the voice said to me, ‘ Go to Vau-
couleurs, and you will find a captain there, who will conduct
you without hindrance to the king.’ Since that time I have
acted according to the revelations I have received, and the
apparitions I have seen; and even on my trial I speak only
according to that which is revealed to me.” These appari-
tions, it appears, were those of St. Catherine, St. Margaret,
and the Archangel Michael—the forms which had been most
forcibly impressed upon her imagination in childhood.

The following appear to be the principal facts in the life
of Joan that are of importance in connexion with the subject
of the present paper. She was the child of Jacques d’ Arc
and of Isabean Romée his wife, poor villagers of Domremy,
on the borders of Lorraine. She was born in 1410 or 1411.
At thirteen years of age her visions commenced ; at nineteen
they culminated in the imposition of her mission. Finding
that her claims to inspiration were but a source of grief to
her parents, she repaired to the house of her uncle Durand
Laxarl, who lived between Domremy and Vaucouleurs, and
who was so far influenced by her representations, as to pro-
ceed, on her behalf, to Robert de Baudricourt, governor of
the latter town. The reception of the honest villager, by
the stern old warrior, was anything but flattering ; and even-
tually Joan herself proceeded to Vaucouleurs, where, although
she failed in producing much effect on the veteran governor,
she succeeded in convincing two gentlemen, Jean de Metz
and Bertrand de Poulengy, of the reality of her mission.
These with an attendant each, and two sub-officials, making
in all an escort of six, set forth on their perilous journey tu


260 She performs astounding things.


Chinon. Arriving in safety, she was, after much delay,
ushered into the stately hall of its royal castle, where she
recognized the king, though plainly dressed, and purposely
mingled with a crowd of courtiers. Led apart by him, she
spoke of secrets known only to himself and God. While
being equipped with a suit of knight’s armour, she described
an old sword marked with five crosses, lying amidst other
arms, in the church-vault of St. Catherine at Fierbois. It
was found, an old neglected weapon, in the very place she
had described. Promising to lead a convoy into Orleans, she
succeeded, despite, apparently, insurmountable obstacles,
Having declared she would raise the seige of this important
town, she accomplished it in seven days, although three of
them had, by her direction, been devoted to public prayer.
Prophesying that she should be wounded near the breast on
the morrow, she received an arrow in the part indicated,
during an assault on the English works. Returning to the
court at Tours, she again read the royal thoughts, together
with those of some of the principal commanders by whom
the king was then surrounded. Promising to conduct her
sovereign to Rheims for his coronation, she achieved this
seeming impossibility without even a battle. It would seem,
however, that after this her prophetic faculty was greatly
diminished, both in the frequency of its manifestations and
the clearness of its previsions. She had indeed accomplished
her mission, and it was only at the urgent request of the
French generals that she consented to forego her avowed
intention of retiring to a monastery. Her sad fate, therefore,
may be considered as the result of her not obeying the dictates
of that internal monitor under whose support and guidance
she had achieved such almost incredible marvels. But, even
were it otherwise, her cruel death at the hands of her enemies,
although no doubt affording an opportunity for the utterance
of a few smart jests on the part of shallow sceptics, is no
argument against the truthfulness of her claims or the
genuineness of her inspiration; for such has been the kind
of departure usually vouchsafed to the archextatics of all
times.

Now of this vast array of well-established, yet seemingly
almost incredible, facts, what is the explanation? Simply,
we reply, an admission that Joan was an habitual crisiac, a
natural clairvoyant, a spontaneous extatic. With that as a
master-key, the solution of the otherwise difficult problem
becomes perfectly easy; while, without it, the most skilful
ingenuity does but involve its unfortunate possessor in fresh
complications of absurdity at every attempt which he makes


Miserable inanity of sceptics. 261


to solve this deepest yet simplest of riddles. ‘ She had seen
a portrait of the king or heard a description of his person,
and by a strange coincidence happened in her subsequent
conversation with him to light on the very topic which had
been the subject of his secret prayer,” &c., &c. Such are the
foolish and inadequate explanations which learned historians
endeavour to foist on their unhappy readers. Alas! for the
miserable inefficiency of such wretched endeavours to fathom
the ocean depths of a profound mystery with the childish toys
of a shallow, because ignorantly sceptical, philosophy! So
Joan, poor, pure, devout, and simple-minded girl, was but a
successful trickster, a lucky guesser, or, at best, a morbid
enthusiast after all! Such is modern history’s summation of
the whole matter; its greatest ability eventuating in the
presumption of an impossible combination of elements in one
character, for the purpose of affording a very insufficient and
unsatisfactory hypothesis in reference to phenomena whose
manifestations and laws are utterly beyond its ken! To the
gentlemen whose learned toil has disentombed the facts of
this most instructing and interesting case from the archives
of ancient courts and the forgotten tomes of bygone chroni-
clers, we owe a debt of imperishable gratitude. Like vigorous
quarrymen they have furnished us with the rough-hewn blocks
which they found in situ. But we may now say to them,
“ Have the goodness if you please, friends, to yield your rude
masses into more skilful hands, under whose manipulations
they may gradually assume that regularity and beauty of
form which will fit them for becoming pillars and corner-
stones in the great temple of science. Your labour is now
finished, unless, perchance, you have something of more
sterling value in the way of suggestion than that already
embodied in your thrice erudite lucubrations !”

Joan, as we have said, was a natural clairvoyant, her sus-
ceptibility to visional presentiments was doubtless inherent :
but the specialities of her time and the peculiarities of her
faith and position, by their form and pressure, gave the dis-
tinctive character to her endowment under which it is pre-
sented to us in history. A quiet and thoughtful, a devout
and moral, yet ardently patriotic and enthusiastic, girl, she
had from childhood dwelt with morbid yet pardonable earnest-
ness on the political misfortunes of her country, that delle
France, the love and loyalty of whose gay and sprightly
citizens have ever partaken of the character of devotion; and
which, in the instance before us, were concentrated into all
the intensity and fervour of the purest religion. The English
invasion wounded her pride as a citizen, by the humiliation


262 Posterity discovers her exalted nature.


which it inflicted on her country ; while it pained her feelings
as a woman, by the military atrocities and social evils to
which it was continually giving birth. In the quietude of
her rustic life, she dwelt with painful interest on each new
tale of private suffering and public calamity ; till at length
her mind, possessed with an intense desire for the deliverance
of her native land from the oppressive yoke of the hated
foreigner, fashioned to itself that mystic message which im-
posed the mission of championship on her own soul. From
the innermost depths of her pure and maidenly being, far
below the level of all consciousness, welled up that mighty
call of duty, in which “the dweller of the temple” spoke to
the perishing child of clay, filling it as with the breath of
divinity, and bearing it upwards and onwards, above all fear
and through every obstacle, to the previsioned achievement
of what, to every other, had been the impossible. Yes! the
virgin inspiration, which, under the voice and form of an angel,
had, from her fourteenth to her nineteenth year, watched so
well and effectually over her conduct and feelings, now
attained to a higher stage of development, and projected her
from the retirement of rural life, keeping sheep on the moun-
tain side, into all the excitement of a camp and the publicity
of a court.

Brave heart, how nobly didst thou bear thyself amidst
those trying and unaccustomed circumstances. The rustic
maiden remained self-possessed even in the awe-inspiring
presence of royalty, and the timid woman quailed not amidst
the shock and the rush of battle. What Deborah or Judith
of holy records shall, at time’s judgment-seat, be held thy
superior either in heroism or sanctity? Already has the his-
torian learnedly narrated, and the poet ably sung, thine
heroic deeds. Truly, like the most of thine exalted order,
it was the fiery chariot and not the bed of down that bore
thee within the veil. But fear not ; though burnt with indig-
nity by thine enemies as an agent of Satan, grateful France
shall remember thine achievements and embalm thy memory
when centuries shall have rolled away and dynasties been
changed like the phantasmagoria of a troubled dream. The
daughters of royalty shall model thy statue, and the good
citizens of Orleans, with a pomp and ceremonial utterly
unexampled in their quiet locality, shall inaugurate thy monu-
ment; and floating down upon the tide of time, outriding
the storms of revolution and the mutations of a progressive
civilization, the honoured descendants of that humble house-
hold, of which thou wert so distinguished a daughter, shall
be present, “the observed of all observers.” The age when


Naturally noble, she was clairvoyant, & shed influence. 263


thy memory could be blasphemed by perverted genius and
the stage could basely re-echo the unfounded calumny to an
applauding audience has passed. So that even we, whose
stern and relentless English forefathers provided for thee the
terrible honours of a martyr’s death, have received thee into
our list of time’s most noble heroines.

Contemplated scientifically, Joan of Arc is an instructing
example of spontaneous extacy, developed in an individual
of more than ordinary mental energy, Interesting to the
general reader from her historical celebrity, she is of value to
the physician as an indubitable instance of exalted nervous
activity, apparently resulting from, and most certainly con-
nected with, certain irregularities, in virtue of which this
distinguished woman was subject to none of the peculiarities
of her sex: while to the duly enlightened student of mes-
merism she presents not only the phenomena of ordinary
clairvoyance, which are comparatively common, but also that
still higher range of manifestations arising from the mystic
and commanding moral magnetism, with which it would seem
that only the true master-spirits of seerdom are ever effec-
tually enduwed. Constitutionally prone to a development of
the interior life, her lucidity eventuated not simply in vision,
but also in action. It was extacy induced upon, or rather
evolved from, a naturally noble and elevated character ; from
a brain capable of great thoughts, and susceptible to the
influence of exalted emotions; and so conducing to that
resistless potentiality in virture of which the prophet calls
and his disciples come. Resist the truth as we may, there
are born kings and queens of men, and of these the dreamily
devout child in the garden of Domremy was undoubtedly
one. Her age did not need a new creed: its demand was not
for articles of faith, and therefore she came not forth as the
inspired founder of a religion. That which her time and
place required, she provided; namely, the oracular response
of hope to a monarch and people overwhelmed by defeat and
sinking under the burthen of accumulated national misfor-
tunes. She was the moral antithesis of Cassandra, and, as
the prophetic saviour of her nation, cast the golden radiance
of extatic illumination on the clouds of the future, till their
dusk and sombre masses became effulgent as with the reflected
light of some celestial glory. Princes and nobles, learned
priests and rude soldiers, once in her presence, were involved
in that circle of fascination, with which beings of her order
seem ever engirdled. To the effective exercise of this mystic
sway, neither the rusticity of her manners, nor her utterly
unlettered ignorance (“I understand neither A nor B,” said


264 Her mighty ability was intuition.


she to the king’s plenipotentiaries) seem to have presented
any barrier. The resistless force of a great, noble, and enthu-
siastic nature, fully aroused by an all-absorbing and unselfish
zeal for the public good, and thoroughly pervaded in all its
thoughts and actions by an interior light far transcending
that of genius, seems to have overborne all the limitations
usually imposed, even on great minds, by diversity of rank
and the manifold artificialities of society. Regal in soul, a
queen in thought, she triumphantly vindicated her claim to
the exercise of a royal prerogative of command.

It has been attempted to be shewn by some of her bio-
graphers that she really exhibited no ability for military
leadership, and that she failed to impress those with whom
she came personally in contact with an idea of her superiority,
or even with the truthfulness of her claims to veritable inspi-
ration. But the entire tenor of her story demonstrates the
very reverse of this. That her enterprizes were often con-
ducted on principles the very reverse of those maintained by
the pedantic strategy of her time, is no proof whatever of her
being in error. She succeeded where the greatest captains
had failed; she retrieved their defeats, repaired their losses,
and achieved a series of brilliant victories, by apparently very
inadequate means, over the bravest and best disciplined troops
in Europe. -No plan, even approximately executed according
to her design, ever proved abortive. And, although, from the
deception and perversity of her subordinates, some of her
finest and most daring combinations were but imperfectly
accomplished, her presence in the hour of difficulty, induced
by their incompetency, at once sufficed to restore the tide of
fortune to the cause of Charles. The opinions of men grown
grey in the routine of ordinary warfare can never prove an
accurate admeasurement of the abilities of genius, whose ori-
ginality is looked upon by these respectable formalists as an
error. Napoleon in Italy was at first deemed a daring igno-
ramus by the very Austrians whom he defeated with such
masterly skill in every engagement. Joan’s ability was de-
rived not from knowledge, but intuition. These remarks
must be understood as applying to her before the king’s coro-
nation at Rheims. After that, she was still the daring heroine,
but was no longer the inspired leader. As to her inability to
impress those immediately around her, How, we would ask,
but for such a faculty, manifested in most extraordinary force,
could the peasant-girl of Domremy, friendless and money-
less, have made her way to court; or, when there, have
produced such an effect on the mind of Charles and his
counsellors as to induce them to entrust her with the relief


Such exalted females have appeared in all ages. 265


of Orleans? The rapidity of her promotion without antece-
dents, is, in truth, not the least marvellous part of her
wonderful career. Without birth in an age of caste, a woman
in a period of social disorganization and military violence,
she yet bounded at a single leap into a position of honour,
trust, and authority, that excited the envy of some of the
first men in France. To argue that such a person was devoid
of the commanding moral magnetism of a truly great spirit
is, with such facts in our hands, simply to reject truth upon
system. In the history of neither seer nor hero do we find
anything transcending the matchless facility of conversion
exhibited by the whole population, from the monarch to the
man-at-arms, under the personal impressions produced by
this simple shepherdess. In a moral as well as a military
sense, she might without arrogance have used the haughty
Roman’s sublimely laconic triloquy, veni, vidi, vici.

That such beings are common it would be too much to
say; but that they are far less rare than is usually supposed
we are fully justified in asserting. Unsuited, however, to
ages of routine, these marvellously-endowed beings generally
remain in a state of latent passivity ; their peculiar powers,
in most cases, continuing, from want of duly evocative in-
fluences, in a merely germal state. Of old, such were
usually devoted to the service of the altar, and, as Pythia at
Delphi, Druidic priestesses and Scandinavian alrunes, held a
recognized position of trust and honour, in which their
peculiar gifts were duly cultivated and then provided with
fitting opportunity for manifestation. Ata period still more
remote, the prophetic faculty of these extatic females gave
them both authority and renown as sybils. While, in more
recent times, they have in the Roman communion frequently
attained to the distinction of canonization, and often shone
forth among the most eminent of the saints. In all periods
except the present, by which we mean the era of inductive
science, these wondrously-gifted individuals were permitted,
and even encouraged, to follow the proclivities of their nature ;
and, in virtue of this, their free development not only at-
tained to a more vigorous expansion, but often became motor
forces of considerable importance in the general working of
society. We, however, in the full enlightenment of a utili-
tarian age, consider them as of value principally for the
purpose of supplying recruits to our lunatic asylums. Occa-
sionally escaping this, they become important adjuncts to a
revivalist camp-meeting: or still more rarely attain to the
doubtful pre-eminence of quasi-religious founders, followed
only by a few rampant fanatics, while thoroughly despised


266 The day of shallow philosophy must pass away.


by the many, and at best pitied as devout but misled maniacs
by the benevolent and enlightened few. From this degra.
dation, however, true science is now beginning to rescue
them with as yet but an imperfect appreciation, we fear, of
their true position in the scale of moral being. A mesmeric
clairvoyant is but an indifferent succedaneum for an ancient
sibyl, to whom indeed even a veritable Seeress of Prevorst,
though portrayed in the affectionate pages of a Kerner, seems
rather like a scientific curiosity than a legitimate successor,
Fear not, however, O ye mysteriously-gifted daughters of
this sacred sisterhood! Ages of hard unbelief, of unfeeling
scepticism, of ignorant doubt, and of shallow philosophy, are
but the necessary reaction after periods in which dogmatic
credulity has run riot and reverent devotion has sunk into
grovelling superstition. The sunshine and the cloud, the
calm and the tempest, are alike of nature’s production.
“The eclipse of faith” has passed its maximum, and, though
still involved in its penumbra, the rapidly retreating and
diminishing shadows proclaim that the returning light of
cloudless day is at hand. Extacy will yet be recognized as a
condition of being to which genius is an approximation, and
the seer and the seeress will then, like the poet and the
artist, have their rightful place assigned them in the great
hierarchy of human intelligences. Among such the fair
dreamer of Domremy, the heroic Joan of Arc, will hold a0
undistinguished position. Her high-toned patriotism, her
lofty devotion, her unwavering faith, her fearless courage, and
her indomitable energy, placed as they are in the foreground
of a picture so historically important, cannot fail to secure
her the favourable notice of an enlightened posterity to the
remotest ages of civilization. She is a heroine, without the
notice of whose glorious deeds the annals of France can
never be written. As the champion of her country, she is
an instance of extatic lucidity, too important to be over-
looked, too authentic to be doubted. As a divining nun, or
a village prophetess, she might and would have been treated
with contempt by the pretentious conceit of a philosophy
which, while lauding the Novum Organum, yet decides every
important question by an a priori doctrine of probability.
But as a seeress, verifying her own predictions by leading
armies to victory; as a sybil, whose magic words converted
defeat into triumph; as a pythoness, bounding from the
tripos to give confidence to kings and courage to generals ;
as a prophetess, in short, whose words of mighty import
were converted as by a celestial thaumaturgy into unhoped-
for facts which have influenced events through all succeeding


eae


The subject of many writers. 267


centuries, the Maid of Orleans must descend to coming time
as a magnificent and indubitable example of spontaneous
clairvoyance, grandly demonstrating its presence in the great
theatre of the world, and affording a verification of its reality
by the lasting modifications which it has induced on the
destiny of Europe and, through it, of mankind.

As might be supposed, a life so remarkable and romantic
has not failed to furnish a text for many literary productions.
The antiquary, the historian, the poet, and the novelist,
have each and all found appropriate materials wherewith to
prosecute their several avocations in connexion with an indi-
vidual so exceptional and distinguished. Among the more
illustrious continental scholars who have devoted their leisure
and erudition to an investigation of the documents which
throw light on the biography of this extraordinary woman,
we may mention Buchon, Petitot, de Laverdy, and Lebrun
de Charmettes, together with de Bramante and Sismondi;
while in this country an excellent memoir on her has been
published by Lord Mahon, now Earl Stanhope. Introduced
by our immortal Shakspere into one of his historical plays,
her real character, like those of Sir John Falstaff and
Richard III., has been treated with that dramatic liberty, or
rather license, which, in the absence of all detailed historical
knowledge on the part of the people, was then perhaps ad-
missible, but which would not now be tolerated for a moment,
even from a writer of the most commanding genius. Treated
with equal injustice by Voltaire, her memory has in our more
recent literature been restored to respect, if not reverence.
By Southey she was selected as the heroine of a poem, and
by Schiller she was chosen as the subject of a drama; while
the vivid imagination and fertile pen of Alexandre Dumas
have not failed to illustrate the tale of his country’s greatest
heroine.

It would seem that there is no authentic bust or portrait
of Joan in existence, the oldest dating nearly two hundred
years after her death. All descriptions agree, however, in
representing her as a tall, graceful, and beautiful woman,
with flowing golden locks. Obviously one of those fair-headed
daughters of the north who are to be found scattered through-
out the north of France, and whose ancestors must have
crossed the Rhine in one of the many invasions of Celtic
Gaul by its more vigorously-constituted Teutonic neighbours.
Phrenologically speaking, we have reason to believe that she
presented a sanguineo-nervous temperament, with a moral
and intellectual development much above the average. Her
statue by the daughter of Louis Philippe, afterwards Mary

VOL, XIII. U


268 The present age does not comprehend her nature.


of Wurtemberg, is well known for its chaste and exquisite
beauty—it is the dream of one fair woman by another. At
the inauguration of her equestrian statue at Orleans, on May
6th and following days, it would seem that the direct or
collateral descendants of all the principal heroes associated
with her were present, so that Dunois, d’Aulon, la Hire, &c.,
reappeared in their living representatives. It is well to find
her memory thus honoured by her countrymen, who with the
true instinct of universal humanity fail not to perceive in
her something of the divine. But while such very inadequate
and erroneous ideas are entertained respecting her by men
of science and historians, we can scarcely expect that the
public, who naturally follow these as their leaders, will attain
to a due estimation of her truthful and exalted character.
We pity the barbarous credulity of medizval ignorance, but
an age is at hand that will look with equal derision on the
barbarous scepticism of modern knowledge. To write the
history of Joan of Are while ignoring extatic illumination,
with its prevision, thought-reading, intuition, &c., is like
treating of maritime discovery without an allusion to the
science of navigation by which it has been accomplished.
Contemplated as a lucide, her every thought and achieve-
ment is perfectly and easily explicable, and her whole life
constitutes but a beautiful episode in the history of interior
illumination, while without it she seems but like an unac-
countable and meteoric manifestation, sent to dazzle and
blind, not to enlighten. When will learned men have the
courage to throw off their unworthy prejudices, and cease to
write that for the applause of the present which cannot fail
to procure them the contempt of posterity.
J. W. Jackson.

Edinburgh, August 4, 1855.


VI. The Atheneum and Phrenology. By RuapaMantuus.


‘*A new truth has to encounter three normal stages of opposition. In the
first it is denounced as an imposture. In the second, that is, when it is begin-
ning to force itself into notice, it is cursorily examined and plausibly explained
away. In the third, or ‘ cui bono’ stage, it is decried as useless, and hostile to
religion. And when it is finally admitted, it passes only under a protest that it
has been perfectly known for ages—a proceeding intended to make the new truth
ashamed of itself, and wish it had never been born.’’—Letters on the Truths
contained in Popular Superstitions. By Herbert Mayo, M.D. Frankfort on
the Maine and Edinburgh. 1849. p. 21.*


, * The same remarks have often been made before. The most extraordinary
thing is that those who should have been the last to act thus have always been the


Ignorance and effrontery of the Athenzeum. 269


PurenoLoey is true; for the Alheneum hath said it. We
have arrived at the fourth stage in the great conflict of truth,
on this much-agitated subject. There is after all really
nothing new in phrenology ; it has been known since the days
of Aoicenna and the Arabian physicians, and was a favourite
theory of Baptista Porta. So says the great authority of
Wellington Street, Waterloo Bridge, London. Shakespere
among poets and Raphael among artists, it seems, by the
intuition of genius attained to a cognizance of those princi-
ples, for their advocacy of which Gall was stigmatized as a
quack, and his followers as fools.


‘We all allow that the brain is one of the great centres of the
nervous system,—that a blow on the brain-case will often discompose
some subtle machinery, and change the philosopher in a moment
into an idiot. We see by portraits that wide or high foreheads are
generally the characteristics of great men, and that the Hanover
forehead, receding at forty-five degrees, is by no means the mark of
intellectual greatness. Fools and knaves have generally foreheads
‘villanously low;’ and too much thinking, like too much wine, brings
a pain in the forehead. All these are undisputed facts, and were
known long before Gall astonished England or Spurzheim Gaul.”


Indeed—


“The danger and charlatanry of phrenology is, that it starts
from certain opinions that we all hold, but attempts to widen them


out into rules that we can none of us believe.”


Truly we, the phrenologists, may indeed congratulate
ourselves that things have come to such a pass as this, when
our most prejudiced enemies are driven to confess that it is
the amount of truth in our system which renders it so for-
midable. In our time, articles have appeared in the Edin-
burgh Review and in other publications, in which it is doubted
that the brain has more to do with the mental functions than
the lungs or any other organ of the body. As to Gall astonish-
ing England and Spurzheim Gaul, Gall published his great
work in Paris and lectured there for years after to crowded
audiences, and Spurzheim published first, and lectured fre-
quently, in London. If this ignorance is disgusting, and the
effrontery disgraceful, so are the following :—

“The absurdity of phrenology is the dogmatic severity of its
allotment system, and its division of the brain into small plots of
ground, to which the name of certain undetermined and unclassified


first. None have rendered themselves more absurd in this respect than the me-
dical profession, who, as they rattle along the streets, smile and prescribe for
their patients, write plausible books and talk among each other in consultations
and medical societies, ought to feel sorrow and humility at the imperfection of
what they do for their fees.— Zoist.


270 More ignorance and effrontery.


feelings are attached. Several of these plots are still to be let, and
the phrenologists are hesitating about one square inch of the cere-
bellum, as to whether it is the abode of,—we believe, a love of home
or a love of travelling. It is not unlikely a civil war will break out
in consequence of this uncertainty, and the head of Priscian be
much contused.”


No mental function but the sexual instinct ha’ ever been
attributed to the cerebellum by phrenologists. The organ of
Locality, to which when large Gall ascribes the love of travel-
ling, is situated in the anterior lobes of the cerebrum; the
love of settled residence (Inhabitiveness), in the posterior
lobes of the cerebrum.

We have been led into these remarks by noticing a review
of Mr. Combe’s recently published work, on Phrenology
applied to Painting and Sculpture, in the Atheneum for July
7th, 1855, the writer of which seems to belong to the same
school of “ know-nothings,” as the conceited creature who
penned that miserable attempt at smartness, on the Rev.
Chauncy Hare Townshend’s work, which we found it necessary
to mildly castigate in the April number of the present year.
The former and the following sentences are among the choice
indications, thus afforded by this Athenian reviewer, of com-
petency for his task as a literary judge, speaking with au-
thority on the fallacy of a science of whose mere alphabet he
is obviously ignorant.

**Mr. Combe and his followers study anatomy and yet ave dis-
claimed by anatomists.” ‘They start from no surer basis of truth
than physiognomists, and yet insolently disclaim physiognomy.”’
“The phrenologists are hesitating about one square inch of the cere-
bellum, as to whether it is the abode of—we believe, a love of home
or a love of travelling.”


As to the first of these assertions, we are no otherwise
disclaimed by anatomists than they are disclaimed by each
other; for, as we suppose all well-informed persons, except
the writers for the Atheneum, know right well, the functions
of the brain are still a moot point among anatomists, who
range in various gradations of belief, from an entire reception
to an equally entire rejection of the phrenological theory on
this most important subject. The second of these veritable
annunciations is equally without foundation. So far from
phrenologists rejecting physiognomy, they have corrected its
errors and confirmed its truths, and regularly use it as an aid
to cranial manipulation and admeasurement in the develop-
ment of character. Did this most sapient of authorities on
the subject of phrenology ever hear of temperament, and, if so,
has he any idea of its connexion with physiognomy?’ The


-


Still more ignorance and effrontery. 271


third of these vulgar inaccuracies, almost too contemptible
for serious refutation, was probably only inserted as one of
those miserable attempts at wit by which this rather heavy
journal occasionally endeavours to enliven its hopelessly dull
and ponderous articles, with, alas! about the same amount of
of success as an elephant might exhibit in the achievement of
a minuet.
We give one more extract—


“The folly of the thing lies in supposing that the discovery has
placed the human mind in Mr. George Combe’s hands as a substance
to be manipulated on,—that Hodges can be cultivated into Solons,
or that a man can be taught to restrain his passions by bandaging
his cerebellum and holding up his ‘ Veneration.’ ”


It is sheer falsehood to assert that Gall, Spurzheim, or
any known writer on phrenology, ever pretended that the
faculties and character could be altered by manipulation or
any mechanical means. Mr. Dilke should blush, if he ever
did blush, to employ such a trumpery person to write in his
Atheneum as the man whom he paid for this article. The poor
creature was ordered to write against phrenology, and so at it
he went, hoping to have another job soon if he went to work
like the policemen in Hyde Park on Sunday the 24th of
June. But Mr. Dilke is a man neither of science nor of lite-
rature, and no more qualified to hold an opinion upon either
phrenology or mesmerism than a Temple-porter who stands
with his white apron and badge in Fleet Street is to give
an opinion upon the matters of the High Court of Chancery.

Were all this simply one of those desperate endeavours to
“cut up” the able work of some literary rival, or the powerful
production of some political antagonist, for which the Athe-
neum has so doughty a reputation, we might perhaps leave the
respectable parties so engaged to settle their differences of
opinion by the usual exhibition of scholarly insolence and
cultivated impertinence, for which authors and reviewers have
long been celebrated. But in this case a great and rising
truth is attacked as a preliminary to the intended onslaught
on one of its veteran leaders; principle is sacrificed to pur-
pose, and veracity is rendered subservient to an ulterior
object. That all this may be considered as perfectly fair in
the office of this Hellenic periodical, we can readily suppose ;
for the admission of morality as an element in literary criti-
cism would probably prove eminently inconvenient in the
management of a smart journal, the piquancy of whose articles
is, doubtless, in both editorial and proprietorial estimation, of
far more importance than their justice or their truthfulness.


——


272 The truth of Aérolites rejected for 3000 years.


We do not pretend to know the precise intellectual status
of the subscribers to the Atheneum. Of this its managers
must of course be the best judges; and, as we give them full
credit for the greatest possible amount of commercial astute-
ness in the conduct of their journal, we have no doubt that,
as a rule, the communications which appear in its pages are
well adapted to the class of readers for whose especial advan-
tage its profound and eloquent lucubrations are more particu-
larly penned. But really the dense ignorance, the opaque
prejudice (these literateurs must excuse our using scientific
terms to express their mental condition, for ordinary lan-
guage fails to define it,) exhibited by these Grecians on the
subjects of mesmerism and phrenology, are such, that we
cannot help thinking they must be, in this department, vastly
below the level of those who, for the sake of literary or artistic
information, endure, while they laugh at, such a ridiculous
combination of conceit and superficiality as that which we
have thought it our duty to expose in the preceding remarks.

RHADAMANTHUS.


VII. Review of “ The History of Magic by Joseph Ennemosier.
Translated from the German by William Howitt. With
an Appendix by Mary Howitt. Two Vols. London:
Henry G. Bohn.”


‘“** On a supposed Aérolite or Meteorite found in the Trunk of an old Willow
Tree in the Battersea Fields.’ By Sir Roderick Impey Murchison, F.R.S., Di-
rector-General of the Geological Survey of Great Britain. Received June 21,
1855.’—In bringing this notice before the Royal Society, it is unnecessary to
recite, however briefly, the history of the fall of aérolites or meteorites, as re-
corded for upwards of three thousand years, though I may be pardoned for
reminding my Associates, that the phenomenon was repudiated by the most
learned academies of Europe up to the close of the last century. The merit of
having first endeavoured to demonstrate the true character of these extraneous
bodies is mainly due to the German Chladni (1794), but his efforts were at first
viewed with incredulity. According to Vauquelin and other men of eminence
who have reasoned on the phenomena, i¢ was in 1802 only that meteorites ob-
tained a due degree of consideration and something like a definite place in science
through the studies of Howard, as shewn in his memoir published in the Philo-
sophical Transactions.’’—Proceedings of the Royal Society, p. 421.


To those who have carefully studied the progress of public
opinion, it has been long obvious that a change is impending
in reference to what may be called the occult sciences. In
the middle or dark ages there was an entire and unquestion-
ing belief in the supernatural and the marvellous. So all-
pervasive was the popular terdency to credulity, that even
sciences the most prosaic and exact were by this predominant


Formerly the supernatural greedily received. 273


proclivity of the public mind converted into the supposed
arcana of forbidden knowledge. Thus the simplest diagrams
of the geometrician were beheld with horror by the “ unco
guid” of that day as preliminary arrangements conducive to
that dire act of iniquity,—the casting a nativity, whereof the
harmless triangles of the innocent mathematician were fool-
ishly deemed the terrible horoscope. So the star-gazing
habits of any worthy astronomer were in a similar manner
the source of no little scandal, as an indication of his being
addicted, like his brother student of Euclid, to the fascinating
abomination of astrology. While the chemist, poor man!
with his bottles and alembics, was esteemed as one altogether
given up to the delusions, if not the actual worship, of Satan,
to whose potency the wonderful transformations undergone
by various substances in the simple experiments of that early
day were of course attributed by the rigidly orthodox and
zealously devout. In perfect keeping with this condition of
the European mind on matters of science was its unquestion-
ing belief in church marvels. Miraculous cures were con-
tinually wrought at the tombs or by the relics of saints,
visions of angels or demons were frequently beheld by both
priest and peasant, and the entire economy of nature was
thus conceived to be rendered subservient to the effective
propagation of the true faith. With such opinions prevalent
amoung those who were then the leaders of mind, it is no
wonder that tales of witchcraft and ghost-seeing, with legends
of fairy and other cognate lore, should have abounded in the
traditions of the populace. Of the Jaws of the universe, in
our modern acceptation of the terms, men had then no idea.
To them, the power which could disturb, and not that which
sufficed to sustain, the phenomena of the material sphere in
their sublime and awe-inspiring regularity, seemed alone
divine. To minds so constituted, the rising of the morning
sun and the return of the seasons at their appointed period,
were no recurrent and ever-existing evidences of the Godlike
and celestial in creation—the common was to such never the
grandly miraculous: an eclipse, an avalanche, or an earth-
quake, was needed for the demonstration of a presens divus
to intellects so gross and benighted, who would have treated
with unutterable scorn “the meditations of Francis of Ve-
rulam,” and beheld the experiments of Newton as profanities
which imperilled his salvation.

To this age of unquestioning and irrational belief suc-
ceeded another of equally unquestioning and irrational doubt.
This commenced with the dawn of the experimental philo-
sophy, and continued till the close of the eighteenth century.


274 Then facts of natural forces bluntly rejected.


Men’s knowledge of physics now enabled them to perceive
the absurdity of attributing every rare occurrence to spiritual
agency and divine interposition. The much-vaunted miracles
of medizval faith, and its once-respected belief in an all-
pervasive supernaturalism, were exchanged for scientific expe-
riments and a rigid adherence to the laws of nature in their
institution. The Baconian method of induction dominated
alike over the a@ priori philosophy of the schoolmen and the
legendary credulity of the multitudes, and facts, not fictions,
became the order of the day. That this exchange was most
desirable, and must be considered as one of the grandest
steps ever taken in the great march of human progress, can-
not be denied. To it we owe the erection of that magnificent
temple of modern knowledge—the experimental philosophy,
on the edification of which every succeeding generation may
assiduously labour in the certainty that it builds on the im-
mediate foundation of ascertained truth. In this department
at least, man, despite his finite faculties, has reached, and
now stands securely on the adamantine foundation of, reality.
But, as in the case of all good movements, the tendency here
was to excess, for in the indignant rejection of superstition
men proceeded to the extreme of denying the facts on which
it rested. Thus, in refusing to admit that the tomb or the
relics of a saint possessed a remedial power, they quite forgot
to enquire into the truth or falsity of the cure reputed to
have been effected by a visit to the one or a touch from the
other, and so remained ignorant of the great force exerted
over the nervous system of a susceptible patient by the
powerful impression of a long pilgrimage or a religious cere-
monial. In a similar manner, while resolutely denying the
existence of apparitions and fairies as objective phenomena,
they neglected to enquire into the evidence of their being
subjective experiences of certain morbidly susceptible indi-
viduals, and so deprived themselves of much valuable know-
ledge respecting the emanations of various substances and
the relationship of the nervous system thereto. By persis-
tently following out this system of rejecting whatever did not
upon the face of it bear direct evidence of being a very pal-
pable and tangible fact, the ultimatum of a gross, coarse,
and brutal materialism, was eventually attained. From this
nadir of the merely mechanical and ponderable, our investi-
gations into light, heat, electricity, magnetism, &c., marked
the period of ascension, at first slow and difficult, but even-
tually rapid and triumphant. As the close of the last century
approached, mesmerism, or the human imponderable, made
its appearance as the climax of these more refined provinces


The gross absurdity of spiritual agency has returned. 275


of scientific enquiry. To this, as was unavoidable from the
condition of mind then prevalent throughout Christendom,
the most virulent antagonism was manifested. It was a war
of principles, a controversy on fundamentals, in which the
respective belligerents contended, not merely for the reality
or fallacy of individual and isolated facts, but also for the
establishment or abnegation of whole departments of truth,
together with the habits and conditions of mind dependent
on their culture. Mesmerism, after a dreadful conflict, so
far triumphed as to maintain its existence, sorely imperilled
by the indifference or the cowardice of those who were, in
scientific kinship, bound in honour to have afforded it ample
and able assistance : we allude to the chemists and electricians
now at length slowly turning with all their legions to the
rescue.

As a befitting, and we may add necessary, accompani-
ment of this tendency to more refined departments of inves-
tigation in the experimental sphere, there has been a return
to, and a revival of, those supernaturalisms which so abounded
in the medizval period. With the wise, this has been limited
to an enquiry into the facts, and, where there is a sufficiency
of evidence to warrant it, an admission of these, with an
endeavour to explain them on admitted principles. Starting
with the conviction that all phenomena are and must be per-
fectly natural, the true philosopher regards the legends ‘of
superstition as a storehouse of misapprehended and misinter-
preted facts, its foolish stories being, like the chambers of a
labyrinth, one mass of hopeless confusion and contradiction
to all save him who has the clue. With the unwise, however,
we are sorry to observe that this reaction has already pro-
ceeded to such an excess, that, not contented with the facts,
they have also betaken themselves to the fictions of medizval
ignorance and superstition. Of this we have a notable ex-
ample in the American rappists and their disciples in this
country, who, not satisfied with admitting the subjective or
objective truthfulness of certain experiences, have at once
proceeded to the unwarrantable length of accounting for all
seemingly mysterious phenomena by the direct intervention
of spiritual agency. Disregarding the vast array of won-
derful facts with which mesmerism has rendered us familiar,
and practically ignoring the discoveries of physiology in re-
ference to the powers and susceptibilities of the nervous
system, these misled persons have at once plunged into all
the follies of middle-age credulity. If there be anything
calculated to bring those higher departments of scientific
investigation, to which we have been alluding, into contempt ;


WR ence.


276 Some recent works portend the flight of scepticism.


if indeed there be anything which seriously threatens their
stability as incipient and as yet imperfectly recognized pro-
vinces of human knowledge, it is this extravagant conduct
on the part of those from whom a more dignified behaviour
and a more rational tone of thought might have been reason-
ably expected. To return, however, to the more immediate
subject matter of this notice.

Among other indications of this progressive recovery in
the public mind, from its former excess of scepticism, is the
appearance ever and anon of works like the one whose title
we have prefixed to the present communication. Some of
these, like the late Mr. Colquhoun’s Magic, Witchcraft and
Animal Magnetism, are philosophic attempts to explain the
essential character of those admitted facts on which ancient
superstition rested as a foundation. Others, like Mrs. Crowe’s
Night Side of Nature, are mere narrations of the supernatural
in its crude form, as a popular tradition, without any professed
endeavour to elucidate by scientific or other annotation the
experiences described. Some again hold a medium place be-
tween these two classes of the purely philosophic or the simply
traditional, and, while narrating the facts, endeavour to ac-
count for them on the principles of an exalted mysticism,
which, while disdaining the vulgar, evolves for itself a form
of belief more complicated and intellectual but still largely
tinctured with superstition. Such is obviously the under-
current of thought and feeling pervading Kerner’s account of
the Seeress of Prevorst. To this, indeed, the German mind,
when of the literary order, seems to be rather morbidly prone,
listening, like a child that has not yet quite emerged from the
influence of the nursery, with palpitating heart and excited
brain to some tale of the marvellous, and hardly knowing
whether to fear it as a reality or admire it as a romance.

Let us not, however, be too severe on our German friends.
Their country has done good service in the cause of both lite-
rature and science, and can boast of names among her great
men of which any people might be justly proud: and of these
not a few have nobly and fearlessly devoted their time and
talents to the investigation and exposition of mesmeric truth.
Such was Wienhold and such was Hufeland, and among this
band of moral heroes Ennemosier has long been numbered.
Deservedly celebrated among his own countrymen, as a philo-
sopher and a scholar, he has long been partially known to an
especial section of the British public by the occasional notices
of his labours that have appeared in various English works
on mesmerism, more especially those of that eminent writer to
whom we have already alluded, the late Mr. J. C. Colquhoun.


res bt


amo bb a aa


enacted


Ennemosier’s studies have run through forty years. 277


By the present work, however, heralded as it is by the lite-
rary reputation of William Howitt as translator, the name of
Ennemosier cannot fail to become more extensively known on
this side of the water ; and, with this increased acquaintance,
a higher appreciation than that hitherto entertained of his
assiduity and erudition, of his truthfulness and courage, will
undoubtedly prevail. To believers in mesmerism more espe-
cially, a work coming from the pen of one who has been more
than forty years a persevering student of their favourite
science, cannot but command respectful attention and careful
perusal. In his preface dated 21st of October, 1843, the
veteran speaks of himself in the following terms :—


“Thus has the author for the last thirty years moved on the still
uncultivated field of the wonderful phenomena of magnetism; and,
after having once ascertained its reality, and been convinced of the
striking effects voluntarily (spontaneously?) produced by it, he be-
lieves it his duty, in accordance with the saying ‘that a grain of ex-
perience is of more value in medicine than a book full of reasoning,’
to persevere with a certain self-sacrificing and constancy, of which
not all are capable. He considered his first necessary task to be the
making experiments for the discovery of a fixed law for these phe-
nomena. As it soon appeared that such regularity really existed,
the next thing required was to search in history for those similar
mysterious phenomena which shew a greater or less relation to those
of magnetism.”


Such then is the origin of the work before us, from which
its essential character may be readily divined. It is an en-
deavour to illustrate the science of mesmerism, or magnetism
as Ennemosier prefers terming it, by the collection of a great
number of facts, culled from the most varied and heteroge-
nious sources, but which serve to throw light on the operation
of nature’s laws in this important department of her empire.
To this end classical authors both Greek and Roman, Hebrew
rabbis and cabbalists, Arabian, Persian, and Sanscrit writers,
together with multiform data from medizval and other tradi-
tions, have been laid under contribution. It is in very truth
a work which bears upon its every page ample evidence of
being the labour of a life, the product of long years of un-
wearied toil and assiduous investigation devoted to the eluci-
dation of facts and illustration of principles, the former of
which have been generally overlooked by the ordinary scholar,
while the latter have been as systematically despised by the
commonplace philosopher.

To expect that such a work should be in every point satis-
factory would be unjust; and to conclude that, with all its
depth of learning, it has exhausted the subject under enquiry,


278 Is bewildered in his views, but most rich in facts.


would be unwise. It is the production of a scholar rather
than of a philosopher, and abounds with vastly more evidence
of the student than of the experimentalist. It is withal some-
what too mystical in its tone and spirit for the practical mind
of England, or for men of science in any part of the world.
The author has obviously been somewhat infested by the
dusty tomes of old theosophy and metaphysics, over which he
must have so often pored by the midnight lamp ere he could
have collected the manifold data which he has here brought
together. What for instance are we to make of such sen-
tences as the following-in a work professedly devoted to the
illustration of scientific facts—

“If the first man lost his perfect harmony with God and nature,
and, at the same time also forfeited his active government, then must
these have been restored after the restoration through Christ. He
would then communicate with God, and the influences of nature
would produce in him a disinclination to receive any impressions
which could militate against the divine power of his mind. It was
thus that through Christ the true penetrating vision, and the original
power over nature, were restored,” &c., &c.

This and much more of the same kind occurs in the first
division of the work, devoted to the history of magic. The
judicious reader will of course pardon such indications of the
worthy author not having escaped altogether whole and un-
scathed from his thirty years’ plunge into that mystic lore
whence so large a portion of his illustrations are derived. In
the section devoted to the magic of the Germans the writer
enters into some yet more profound and recondite disserta-
tions on Christianity and Germanity, with their synchronous
appearance on the page of history, their mutual adaptation,
and sundry other co-related topics, eminently adapted for the
delectation of Teutonic theologians and the utter confusion
of their Italian, Gaulic and Grecian rivals.

Despite these little defects, however, this work of Ennemo-
sier must be esteemed a great addition to mesmeric literature.
As a grand repertory of facts, connected with the supersti-
tions of various ages and nations, and as a learned exposition
of oriental theosophy and the occult sciences, both of the
East and West, it has no rival in European literature. Its
contents embrace “A History of Magic and its branches in
general,” in which the subject is treated under its grander
heads, and where the reader will find, among other things, a
good account of cabbalism and second ‘sight, the latter, though
very concise, being much superior to Sir Walter Scott’s
superficial notions of the same subject in his work on Witch-
craft and Demonology. From this it would seem that seer-


ES ae CUCU rlCU Sl rlUrlCUr


Great and numerous defects in the work. 279


dom is still comparatively common in Denmark and the
north of Europe generally. This is followed by “ Theoretical
views on Magic among the Ancients,” where the author’s
classical knowledge appears to some advantage. Then we
have “Magnetism among the Ancient Nations; especially
the Orientals, Egyptians and Israelites,” in which, with that
real want of system which pervades the entire work despite
a great show of it in the headings of the sections, &c., the
author once more wanders back to his classical favourites.
In that portion devoted to “Magic among the Israelites,”
extending to nearly seventy pages, there is an immense quan-
tity of matter, quite needless, and indeed altogether misplaced
in a work whose scope and purpose is scientific. Once more
the strong “ Germanity” of our worthy friend finds full and
unrestricted utterance, to the sore annoyance of his wearied
and discomfited reader.

The second volume opens with ‘“ Magic in Mythology,”
classically profound : but, had the author read Pocock’s Greece
in India, we think his ideas of Grecian myths might have
been somewhat different. The deficiency of the work, indeed,
if so generally erudite a production can with any fairness be
accused of superficiality, is in its orientalism, which, with the
exception of that portion devoted to cabbalism, is most ob-
viously borrowed at second hand from modern writers, not
always perhaps the most correct or profound. ‘This is more
especially manifested in his imperfect notices of Budhism,
that ancient and widespread phasis of faith, of whose preva-
lence, past or present, unmistakable traces exist “from Britain
to Japan,” and whose priesthood to this day retain a wonder-
working knowledge that astonishes even the miracle-loving
monks of Rome. (See the Travels of Huc and Gabet.) In
“The Magic of the Germans,” however, Ennemosier is once
more at home, and, after a goodly supply of that Teutonic
mysticism to which we have already alluded, provides us with
a very fair history of medizval witchcraft and sorcery. The
original work concludes with a section on “ Mystic Doctrines,”
where the author endeavours to provide a philosophical
elucidation of the “Magic of the Middle Ages,’ and we
have an account of Paracelsus, Van Helmont, Cornelius
Agrippa, Greatrakes and Cagliostro! together with some
needlessly lengthy extracts from Jacob Béhme and Emanuel
Swedenborg. The whole is concluded by a chapter, not the
very best we have ever read, on “ Animal Magnetism,” ex-
tending to twelve pages, while the extracts from Bohme alone
occupy more than thirty. So much for the taste, judgment,
and discrimination of a German scholar !


280 Much information in Zoist since Ennemosier in 1843.


The appendix by Mary Howitt is a commonplace collec-
tion of threadbare ghost stories and similar matters, not to be
compared to Mrs. Crowe’s Night Side of Nature for making
one “sup full of horrors.” As a “‘ make up” it is too exten-
sive, and, if Mr. Bohn could have managed his two respect-
able volumes without such a needless addition, we think its
absence would have been an advantage.

To the general public this work will prove interesting as
a learned and laborious collection of the wonderful, quite as
exciting as, and vastly more instructive than, an old-fashioned
romance of the Mrs. Radcliffe school. To the enlightened
student of mesmerism it will prove of considerable value as a
work of reference, a storehouse of apt illustrations. Since
its publication (in 1843), however, much valuable information
in connexion with the subjects of which it treats has been
brought to light and embodied in mesmeric and popular lite-
rature, of which, should the learned author favour us with a
new edition, it would be well that he should avail himself.
Need we mention the many admirable papers communicated
to The Zoist? In addition to which, there are the valuable
notices of Waren, or, divine and diabolical possession among
the Hindoos, that have appeared from time to time in the
Dublin University Magazine ; together with many other arti-
cles on correlated topics that have obtained insertion in the
same journal; some on Mesmerism in Sanscrit Literature :
and others on the Fairy Lore and similar superstitions, espe-
cially connected with Ireland. Many very important facts,
eminently illustrative of mesmeric susceptibility, have also
appeared in various books of voyages and travels within the
last few years, that might be extracted and arranged with
great advantage in the pages of a work like the present.
Such productions as those of Dr. Herbert Mayo,* in which he
treats of vampyrism, would afford many additional facts;
as would also Dr. Madden’s Shrines and Sepulchres. In short,
the materials now at our command, if we look to English
literature only, are so much more varied and extensive than
they were even twelve years since, that Ennemosier’s work, la-
boriously compiled as it has been, must undergo considerable
improvement as regards the arrangement of its topics, and
yet more considerable expansion as respects the number and
diversity of magnetic phenomena whereof it treats, if it is to
continue as a leading authority on the subject. The character
of the venerable author’s mind, however, as revealed in this,
his opus magnum, will, we apprehend, disqualify him for the


* See supra, p. 268.—Zoist.


> 12S 2 ©


._ = mm er a & G8 Gaal


A better author on the subject must arise. 281


effectuation of what is really wanted in this department of
enquiry,—namely, the collection and systematic arrangement
of facts and traditions connected with popular superstitions
and the occult sciences; the communication of this rather
abstruse and recondite knowledge in clear language, utterly
devoid of the senseless jargon of mysticism; and, lastly, the
provision of a running commentary of philosophic explanation
to accompany the statement of each case of the seemingly
supernatural, so as to’ensure its being placed before unin-
formed minds in its true light,—as a fact in nature, and not a
miracle above and beyond her. For this, however, and much
else, most devoutly to be desiderated in mesmeric literature,
we must yet wait patiently in the hope that a mind duly
qualified for so onerous but important a task will yet arise.
What we want is nevertheless not a very common occurrence,
for the profoundly read scholar and the deeply meditative
philosopher, the accomplished man of letters with his polished
and eloquent style and the careful experimentalist duly
equipped with scientific knowledge, are rarely combined in
the same person. Ennemosier may be the former, but is
most assuredly not the latter. We say this, not in any spirit
of hypercriticism, but as the simple statement of a fact,
whereof the work under consideration affords ample evidence.
Let us not however be understood as decrying this really
valuable publication, because we thus compare it with an
ideal standard of perfection not yet attained. It is the best
work of its kind yet published, and we would advise all who
feel interested in the subjects of which it treats to make
themselves acquainted with its pages.

The task of translator has been well accomplished by Mr.
Howitt. He has transfused the rather obscure subject matter
of his author into good idiomatic English, avoiding for the
most part those Germanisms of style in which Teutonic
scholars are occasionally wont to indulge. Had he prefixed
a biographical notice of Ennemosier, and appended some ot
those additional data to which we have alluded, the work
would have been more valuable to mesmerists and perhaps
more acceptable to the public. His situation, however, as a
voyager on the stormy deep during the performance of his
laborious task might well plead an excuse for these and many
other more weighty sins, whether of omission or commission.

J. W. Jackson.
Edinburgh, 1]th August, 1855.


( 282 )


VIII. Phrenology inculcated in the Pulpit, by the Rev. Henry
Ward Beecher.


‘‘The same opinions have at one time been regarded as dangerous because
they were new, and at another as useful because they were ancient. We must,
therefore, pity mankind, and conclude that the opinions of cotemporaries as to
the truth or error, and dangerous or innocent tendencies, of a doctrine, are very
suspicious, and that the author of a discovery should be anxious only to ascer-
tain whether he has really discovered a truth or not. A truth once discovered
will make its way, and not fail to produce good effects. ‘ Reason, says Ancillon
after Bonnet, ‘ knows no useless nor dangerous truths.’’’—Gall, Fonctions du
Cerveau, t. i., p. 221.


“ Iv is very hard for a minister of the gospel, standing before
a promiscuous audience, to deal with the facts of their minds
aud their inward lives. It is a melancholy fact, that men
know less about that which is the very element of their being
than about anything else in the world. I suppose that if I were
to go among the intelligent men in my congregation, I could
get every variety of information on subjects connected with
the daily business affairs of life—upon questions of political
economy, upon various questions of commerce, facts con-
cerning the structure of ships, steam-engines: I could collect
any amount of information on all these and a thousand
other kindred subjects. But when I ask them what is inside
of themselves, they can tell me of a great manufactory, and
explain to me the operation and use of all the machinery in
it; but upon the question of the machinery of their own
minds they cannot say a word. In regard to commercial
matters, they know all about them; they have examined
them, they have compared their ideas on these subjects, and
have classified them. They believe themselves to be immortal
creatures, that they have throbbing within them a soul that
shall live as long as God himself shall live: yet, when I ask
them any questions in regard to their inward nature, their
only reply is, ‘I don’t know, I don’t know.’ They do not
know what their reason is; they do not know what is the
nature of their moral powers ; they do not definitely under-
stand the nature or operation of any one faculty of their
minds!

“They understand the nature of the soil of the earth ;
they know what it is capable of producing; they know the
use of the plough and all the implements of agriculture ;
they know what to do with a plant that is not thriving, they
are skilful to impart to it a fresh life, and make it flourish.
But if any plant that ought to grow in the mind is stunted
and does not thrive, they cannot tell how to make that grow.
They don’t know what to do to bring it forth.


Gall’s philosophy most useful to the preacher. 283


“Tt is difficult for a minister of the gospel to set forth the
truth intelligibly in respect to its relation to the human
mind. I think it is partly because men have not been curious
in respect to themselves, and partly on account of the many
bewildering systems of mental philosophy that are in vogue
in our day. For if there were none of these systems except
the old schools of metaphysical philosophy, I would defy any
man to obtain by means of them any clear idea about the
soul, for at best they are of but little more value than so
many cobwebs. Men may study them, however, if they
have a taste for them; if a man loves logic and discussion,
let him take one of the old metaphysical mental philosophies,
and he will have means of busying his mind until he grows
tired of such business. But if a man wishes to know prac-
tically what he is made up of; if a man wishes a knowledge
of human nature for definite practical purposes, there is no
system which will aid him in acquiring that knowledge like
the system of phrenology; not interpreted too narrowly or
technically, but in its relations to physiology and the struc-
ture of the whole body. And I may say here what I have
never said before in the pulpit, that the views of the human
mind, as they are revealed by phrenology, are those views
which have underlaid my whole ministry ; and if I have had
any success in bringing the truths of the gospel to bear prac-
tically upon the minds of men,—any success in the vigorous
application of truths to the wants of the human soul, where
they are most needed, I owe it to the clearness which I have
gained from this science. And I could not ask for the mem-
bers of my family, nor of a church, any better preparation
for religious indoctrination, than to put them in possession
of such a practical knowledge of the human soul as is given
by phrenology.

“T have avoided the use of the nomenclature of phre-
nology in the pulpit as far as possible, because I did not wish
to seem to be a mere teacher of a philosophical system, while
I was a minister of the truth as it is in Christ; but I have
now been so long with you, that I am justified in making this
statement.

“T may say, in regard to the objections sometimes urged
against phrenology, its tendency to materialism and fatalism,
that the same objections may be made to any other system of
mental philosophy. I do not think that such objections
belong to phrenology any more than to any system of intel-
lectual science which you can possibly construct. Men’s
mere logical and speculative reason will always strand them
upon the sands of fatalism or materialism; and it is the

VOL, XIII. x


284  Suggestionists explain one wonder by a greater.


practical sense, the consciousness of actual liberty, that re-
deems us from a belief of the one or the other. Such doc-
trines dwell in the head, but never in the Hanps.”’*


IX. One more fact for Sir Henry Holland and the Quarterly
Reviewers as to their Theory of Suggestion. By the
Rev. Georce Sanpsy.

‘“*A man cannot be fairly required to believe anything very strange and un-


likely, except when there is something still more strange and unlikely on the op-
posite side.”—Archbishop Whately on Evidences.


** Conscious and confessed ignorance is a better state of mind, than the fancy,
without the reality, of knowledge.’”’—Grote’s History of Greece. Preface,
p- 12.


TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.


Flixton, August 15, 1855.

GentTLEMEN,—The Archbishop of Dublin’s remark, which

is quoted above, applies with peculiar propriety to that doc-
trine of suggestion which is put forth by sundry adversaries
of mesmerism in explanation of its facts. Those’facts, it is
now unnecessary to repeat, they have ceased to deny; but
they escape from the difficulty, in which this admission has
placed them, by resolving the phenomena into effects which
the state of the mind had induced upon the body. In other
words, they assert that the concentration of the attention,
or the subjection of the imagination to some dominant idea,
is the clue to the whole matter. Now it must be remembered
that sound mesmerisers have never questioned the influence
which the brain frequently exercises upon the other bodily
organs, especially when the latter are in a weak or morbid
condition; but to explain all the results of mesmerising by
such a theory does appear to land us in a greater perplexity
than that in which we found ourselves before. The notion
of some occult unseen power does not seem to my judgment
half so monstrous or unnatural as this doctrine of expecta-
tion universally applied to every case of mesmerism. In
order that we might not believe something that is certainly
very remarkable, the suggestionists call upon us to believe
something that would be ten times more wonderful. By
their theory we only escape a smaller difficulty to run into a
larger. The existence of an invisible imponderable agent,
which is capable of being transmitted from one human body
to another, on some quasi electric principle, or after the


* From the 4merican Phrenological Journal. A repository of Science, Lite-
rature, and General Intelligence. New York: June, 1855.


i a a i i (ae ee


A blind woman unconsciously mesmerised. 285


manner in which caloric is radiated, may be an astonishing
fact or even incredible; but certainly is far less astonishing
or incredible than the notion that expectant attention is the
invariable cause. At least, I am speaking for myself, and
for my own view of the matter. Different minds are of
course differently constituted, and observe the very same
facts after a different fashion. What looks plausible to one
man, appears preposterous to another; and such is the case
with this theory of suggestion. We are aware that it is the
fashionable, and indeed the convenient doctrine, in anti-
mesmeric circles: to my unfashionable ear it sounds not
merely ridiculous but impossible. In the language of Arch-
bishop Whately we reply, that no man can be fairly required
to believe anything very strange, except when there is some-
thing still more strange on the opposite side. Now upon this
principle let us examine the case of those curative and re-
medial effects which are being produced constantly and in
succession, and with fresh patients, at our Infirmary in
Weymouth Street. Which is the more unlikely thing, that all
those delightful results should be brought about by the ima-
gination alone, or that some unseen and undiscovered power
should be exerted in the work? Is mesmerism, according
to Sir Henry Holland, nothing but the fancy of the brain?
or is there, as we contend, a real power in the operation ?
We will no longer argue, but examine the following alleged
fact.

The Scottish Curative Mesmeric Association furnishes the
case which I purpose to investigate. This Society has been
recently established at Edinburgh, and is composed of a
body of energetic and benevolent persons, who devote them-
selves to the gratuitous cure of disease. Much success has
already attended their labours. Upwards of one hundred
and forty cures have been effected. And in their first most
interesting report the following case is recorded :—


“Ann Donaldson, Burn’s Land, Greenside, a 4lind woman, about
fifty-five years of age, had stumbled over a stool, and fallen with
great force against the projecting arm of a chair, by which her left
breast was severely bruised. This caused her great pain and diffi-
culty in breathing, and when she had occasion to cough her suffer-
ings were very great. It was also with difficulty she could lie in
bed. ‘Having called to pay her a visit,’ says the operator, ‘1
found her seated in her chair narrating the accident and its effects
to a young lady who had called to read to her. It was to hera
matter of much concern, more especially as her neighbours had
persuaded her that all such blows ended in cancer. During the
time she was talking to the lady, I began (without her knowledge)

x 2


286 The effects were most striking.


to make passes over the seat of the pain. In a few moments she
exclaimed, “Eh, bairn, what can be the matter with me? Iam
all prickling to the points of my toes.” A little after she said, “I
am getting all very warm—eh, but I can draw my breath better:
O, but the pain is away,—O, but I am getting sick; what can this
be?” The lady now asked her if she knew she was being mes-
merised. ‘‘ Eh, no,” she said, ‘“ I knew nothing about it: what is
that?” She never again felt any more of the pain.’

“This case proves that mesmerism is not a thing of mere ima-
gination, but, on the contrary, that there is a positive radiation
which passes from the operator to the subject.”—p. 5.


The reader will doubtless agree with me in thinking that
this is a very striking and noticeable case. Here is a poor
woman, perfectly blind, suffering intense pain and difficulty
of breathing, most rapidly relieved and cured without being
made aware that anything remedial was being attempted.
Her mind is so absorbed by present agony, and by the appre-
hension of something yet worse, that she can do nothing but
talk of the accident and of its effects. In the midst of her
tale, she suddenly feels a prickling all over her down to her
toes ; then she feels getting very warm ; then she draws her
breath better; then the pain leaves her; then she has a sen-
sation of sickness, and she expresses wonder as to what it
can all mean. Her blindness prevents her from having any
knowledge of what was taking place. Her mind was net
engaged in the business ; it was, in fact, strongly preoccupied
by something else. Instead of expecting relief, she was
looking forward to something still more formidable; and in
a few moments a marked change comes over her system.
Assuming that the facts are correctly stated, we cannot wish
for a more conclusive case.

It will be observed, however, that no name, excepting
that of the patient, is given in the report ; and this was a
shortcoming which it was essential to supply. Through the
obliging assistance of Mr: Neilson, the active and intelligent
corresponding Secretary of the Association, I have obtained
the requisite information, and several additional particulars
which considerably strengthen the case. I have learnt, too,
from him that the parties, whose names he mentions, are
most trustworthy and conscientious; that their statements
ean be depended upon; and that having had much commu-
nication with Mr. Plowman, the operator, he believes him to
be particularly careful in stating the details of his cases.
This was a point upon which I was anxious to press for
inquiry: a mesmeriser may be a conscientious narrator, and
yet not a close or reliable observer.


—_— oS


_
—_—


~~» wie a et oe ea


The facts placed beyond all doubt. 287


It appears, then, that Mr. Plowman knew nothing before-
hand of the accident or of the sufferings of the poor woman.
His visit was of a religious character. He went to her house
in the capacity of a city missionary. He there finds a lady,
whose name happens to be the same as the patient’s (Do-
naldson), and who also went to the house for a Christian
purpose, listening to the blind sufferer’s distressing narrative.
Without saying a word on the subject, Mr. Plowman pro-
ceeded to mesmerise her, and the result was that which is
given in the report. But Miss Donaldson was so struck by
what she witnessed, that she immediately requested Mr.
Plowman to attend and mesmerise her father, who was suf-
fering from some ailment at the time. And she has moreover
acted with a high-minded courage which reflects the greatest
credit upon her, in openly avowing her convictions of the
truth and in permitting her name to be given.

The following notes have arisen out of my enquiries, and
corroborate the above remarks :—


“© 25, West Nicolson Street,
“July 31, 1855.
“Dear Sir,—The accompanying note I received from Miss
Donaldson last night. There is nothing beyond the report that I
require to mention. You are fully aware of all the facts connected
with the case. The poor woman did not know that there was such
a thing in existence as mesmerism at the time the cure was effected.
‘Yours, &c.,
“Wm. Neilson, Esq.” “ G. PLowman.


‘Miss Donaldson begs to state to Mr. Neilson that the passes
on Ann Donaldson were not by contact, but could not state the exact
distance. She has read the case in the annual report, and, as far
as her memory serves her, believes it is quite correct.

“2, East Broughton Place, Edinburgh,
** July 30, 1855.”


Mr. Neilson has also obligingly favoured me with the fol-
lowing additional particulars which arose out of a visit of
his own :—


“TI called last week on the blind woman, who resides in Burn’s
Land, Greenside Row. She appears to be a highly respectable old
woman. On asking her if she enjoyed good health, she told me
that she had very bad rheumatism in her knees, and an unpleasant
heat in her head. During this introductory conversation, I made
the rapid tractive passes over her feet, that gave a sensation of cool
fanning in the head ; and she said, in speaking of her head, ‘ But
it is fine and cool just now.’ As we continued our conversation, I
made the common down passes, at the distance of three feet, for
upwards of ten minutes; when of her own accord she said, ‘I feel


288 The cause shews the folly of Messrs. Braid and Holland


a fine glow all over me, especially in the knees, most in this one,’
pointing to the chief offender. At this time I had not alluded to
the cure effected by Mr. Plowman. On my mentioning it, she said
it was true. I asked how he cured her. She said, ‘ It was with—
I forget the word.’ ‘ Was it mesmerism?’ ‘ Yes,’ she said, ‘ that’s
what he called it.” ‘Had you heard of it before that time?’ ‘No.’
‘Did you know that he was going to cure you?” ‘ No.’

“I again made the tractive passes, and asked how she felt.
She said she felt ‘a grand flaming about her head.’

“These sensations, as you know, are not experienced by every
subject, and that they were in her case, confirmed me in opinion that
Mr. Plowman’s statements are correct. It was gratifying to find
that I could influence her without her knowledge, for I left her
in ignorance of my having mesmerised her. As she is completely
blind, she could have no idea of what I was about: she and I were
the only persons in the room, and we were talking on various sub-
jects all the time.”


This, then, is the testimony which is brought forward in
favour of this case ;—testimony which at least is adequate
enough to form a primd facie ground for further investigation
into the subject.

lst. There is the poor blind patient herself, who asserts
positively that the pain left her at the time she was being
mesmerised, and that she knew nothing at the time of any-
thing being done.

2ndly. There is Mr. Plowman, the mesmeriser, who en-
tered the house on missionary motives, and commenced mak-
ing the passes without saying one word on the subject.

3rdly. There is Miss Donaldson, an impartial disinterested
witness, who has read the report, and believes it to be quite
correct.

And 4thly. We have the supplementary evidence of Mr.
Neilson, who on a subsequent occasion produced an effect
without communicating his intention. By mesmerising the
feet, at the distance of three feet, he caused a sensation of
coolness in the head.

Now in what manner will our opponents explain away the
above facts? What is their rationale? How does their hy-
pothesis apply? What is the grand physiological principle
which is to solve and settle this case?

For instance, will Mr. Braid, who contends that the so-
called mesmeric effects are produced by the patient being
made to concentrate his vision fixedly on some object for a
certain time, assert that the staring process was the secret of
Mr. Plowman’s success? Did the gaze of the dlind woman
excite her nervous temperament,. and influence her system 80
potentially as to bring about the relief in question ?


and of Dr. Carpenter the Quarterly Reviewer. © 289


Or will Sir Henry Holland teach us, that the principle of
expectant attention was the “natural source” of this result,
when the blind woman was expecting nothing, or rather was
taken by surprise, and attending only to her own story and
her own fears ?

Or perhaps the Quarterly Reviewers will tell us, that
“the study of human nature has been so neglected by us
poor mesmerisers in our educational arrangements,” that we
do not perceive that “‘ dominant ideas” predisposed the mind
of Ann Donaldson to draw her breath better, to lose the pain
in her breast, and to feel a sensation of sickness and of prick-
ling come suddenly over her?

No; these gentlemen will tell us nothing of this: they
will simply say that we are mistaken in our facts; that the
evidence of a blind woman is valueless, because she is a
human being: that had poor Ann Donaldson been an oxyd
of platinum or any inflammable gas, they would have listened
to her statement with the greatest pleasure; but to suppose
that two or three “ignorant men and silly women,” “ with
credulous and excitable minds,” (for thus it is that the
potentates of science compassionately speak of us) were com-
petent to verify a statement, which, if proved, would upset
a learned hypothesis, and compel physicians of eminence to
go back to college,—this would be too preposterous a proposi-
tion; and that, therefore, as one swallow does not make a
summer, so the evidence of one blind patient does not super-
sede the great doctrine of mental consciousness in reference
to health and disease.

This, or something like it, would be what these philo-
sophical gentlemen would give in reply to our narrative,
provided that they were driven into a corner and not allowed
to make their escape without an answer; otherwise they
would use every precaution to bestow no attention upon us.
To suppose that this poor paper of mine should penetrate into
their presence, or that these great students of nature would,
of their own accord, examine a transaction which makes
against their scientific decision, would be a vain presumption.
Self-imposed ignorance is the main prop of their hypothesis ;
and they would owe no thanks to any man who would force
them to open their eyes. To judge from their past demeanour,
there is but one way by which we could ever succeed in con-
straining any of these profound writers on physiology to listen
to our story; and that would be by imitating an incident
in an old comedy,—seizing the professor bodily, tying him
into his chair, and not permitting him to leave the room
till he had heard our facts and given his answer. And what


290° Another such blind case published by Dr. Esdaile.


would that answer “on compulsion” be? Simply that which
I have supposed above ; viz., that a single statement like this
must not be proferred for their belief, until more satisfactory
evidence and more repeated instances shall be adduced in its
support.

Exactly so; to that proposition we offer no objection: in
truth, we do not call upon these writers to believe our facts,
but to examine them. We invite these writers to analyze
and sift them carefully, and then to declare what is the
inevitable conclusion if they be true. At the same time we
are well aware of the disadvantage under which we mes-
merisers labour from the nature of our studies. Mesmerism
is not like chemistry, and does not deal with the same class
of subjects. What I stated in my review of Dr. Holland’s
work about two years back, I must repeat in this little sup-
plementary letter :—


“Our author will please to remember that in cases of mesmerism
the large majority of patients are necessarily prepared for the treat-
ment that is to be pursued; and our difficulty is, to present an
instance in which the party mesmerised was quite unconscious of the
act, and quite uninstructed as to the results that might follow:
because, if it could be shewn that the slightest hint had been given
to the patient of what was about to take place, the adversary would
assert that imagination or expectant attention had wrought its work,
and it would be impossible for us to prove a negative.”’*


In short, a mesmeric patient in a state of blindness or
unconsciousness is not like a piece of sulphate of iron, which
we can find any moment in our laboratory, and heat up in
the retort at will: it is a material of a far more delicate and
sensitive nature: we must seize our moment, when we have
it; if the moment be lost, perhaps an occasion may not
present itself for some time. Blind patients, in an impres-
sible condition, and ready for a rapid reception of mesmeric
action, do not grow, like blackberries, on every hedge. Still,
though they be not so plentiful as we could desire for the
prosecution of our studies, there is more than one instance
on record well worthy of examination. Ann Donaldson’s is
not the single isolated case upon which we build our position.
There are two or three others of much importance : they have
been often referred to before; but on this occasion they will
bear a reproduction.

Dr. Esdaile, the well-known medical officer at Calcutta,—
a man of science, and of careful correct observation, gives


* Zoist, Vol. X., p. 397. From review of Sir Henry Holland’s Chapters on
Mental Physiology.


~_i-n ene oe


Another such blind case published by Dr. Gregory. 291


us the following striking facts in one of his most interesting
works :—

“TI had been looking out for a blind man upon whom to test the
imagination theory, and one at last presented himself.

“I placed him on a stool without saying a word to him, and
entranced him in ten minutes without touching him. ... My first
attempt to influence the blind man, was made by gazing at him
silently over a wall, while he was engaged in the act of eating his
solitary dinner, at the distance of twenty yards. He gradually
ceased to eat, and in a quarter of an hour was profoundly entranced
and cataleptic. This was repeated at the most untimely hours, when
he could not possibly know of my being in his neighbourhood ; and
always with like results.”’*


It will be observed here, that Dr. Esdaile mentions that
he repeated his experiment with this blind man,—how often
he does not say,—but his language leads us to infer on several
occasions. He says that the man became so susceptible, that,
by making him the object of his attention, he could entrance
him in whatever occupation he was engaged, and at any
distance within the hospital enclosure. And he particularly
mentions the fact of distance, lest the suggestionists should
contend that this blind man became aware of his presence
and intentions by smell or hearing, or by his fixed position,
or by his altered breathing, &c. The distance was the first
time twenty yards. Our sceptics will here perceive that Dr.
Esdaile pursued his experiments with philosophical care and
precision.

Professor Gregory, another man of science, and one, from
his high position, well acquainted with the importance of
careful observation and study, gives us another instance :—


“We have ourselves seen a blind patient strongly affected, nay,
put to sleep by our silent gaze, while he was engaged in conversation
with another person. The same patient, while conversing, has also
been put to sleep by another operator, who was trying at some
distance, unknown to the blind man, to put another to sleep.” +


In the Fifth Volume of The Zoist (p. 5), there is a descrip-
tion of the extraordinary effects of mesmerism on a gentleman
who had been perfectly blind for eleven years. In this case,
Dr. Elliotson, who is a most cautious experimenter and most
careful in his observations, says—


“On my second visit, I was anxious that the mesmerism might
be begun when there was no possibility of the patient being aware of


* See Dr. Esdaile’s Natural and Mesmeric Clairvoyance, pp. 227, 228.


‘ t See letter from Professor Gregory on the Theory of Imagination, Zoist,
fol. X., p. 11.


a ee + re a


292 Another such blind case recorded by Dr. Elliotson.


it. Accordingly, while we were all in conversation, Mr. Holland
began to fix his eyes upon the patient, our conversation continuing
equally as before. Presently the captain’s eyelids twinkled; he
exclaimed, are you not mesmerising me? A drop of fluid appeared
at the corner of one eye, and he was soon in sleep-waking.”


Here, then, are the instances of four blind persons being
placed under the influence of mesmerism without their cog-
nizance; and I should like to ask what is the defect in the
testimony? Sir Henry Holland, who has written a chapter
on Medical Evidence, in which his obvious purpose is to teach
that believers in mesmeric agency are scarcely competent to
arrive at a correct conclusion, speaks therein of certain
physiological experiments being “ entirely wanting in all that
gives exactness or truth to scientific research.” Will he
assert that the four cases narrated above fall under this
category? and will he inform us what are the tests which
were neglected in the experiments? Let him, for example,
take the case narrated by Dr. Esdaile. . This gentleman is
one who is quite as capable of conducting a scientific exami-
nation as Sir Henry Holland himself. He does not confine
himself to one experiment, but repeats the trial several times,
and with every precaution, and with due regard to the re-
quired conditions. His object, he tells us, was especially to
test the imagination theory. I ask, therefore, what is there
in this case which is wanting in exactness or scientific enquiry ?
Or again in the two cases related by Professor Gregory and
Dr. Elliotson? Are these two gentlemen unfit to observe
facts which are passing before their eyes, or to form a right
estimate of the various circumstances, primary or secondary,
direct or indirect, attendant on their experiments? Or even
in the case of Ann Donaldson? What is the defect here?
The witnesses are not scientific celebrities, but they may be
just as honest, just as unprejudiced, just as capable of noticing
a simple fact.

Either the witnesses in these four cases are wilfully
deceiving us, or their minds are so impulsive and contracted,
that they are not capable of correct observation, and of at-
tending to the necessary tests ; or Sir Henry Holland’s theory
of mental attention is upset. It is unfortunate for him, for
he has taken great pains to write a dogmatic book, which
should crush the “mesmeric theory” for ever; but like a
great number of ingenious persons, similarly eager to destroy
an enemy, he has endeavoured to prove too much. Had he
contented himself with teaching that the influence of the
mind on the bodily organs is very considerable,—that it often
extends to cases where it had hitherto been little suspected,


Mesmerism in sleep, babies, &c., proves as much. 293


and that the effects of various external excitements on the
sensorium or nervous system of persons of a peculiar tempe-
rament ought always to be taken into calculation, there is
not a mesmeriser of any experience who would not have gone
the full length with him. But, when he and the Quarterly
Reviewers assert that all the “supposed curative powers of
mesmerism,” and all the phenomena which arise out of it
are referrible to the “concentration of the entire mind on
whatever may be for a time the object of its attention, and
to its passive resignation to any notion that may be suggested
to it,” they overstate their case and exhibit more zeal than
judgment. I do not see why a medical impatience to put
down mesmerism should not form as disqualifying an ingre-
dient for the office of judge, as too passionate an ardour for
its support. Prejudice against, no less than prepossession for,
destroys our just perception of what really constitutes scien-
tific inquiry. The one is as unphilosophical as the other.
On these grounds Sir Henry Holland must be put out of
court. He may, indeed, be used as a text-book by Quar-
terly Reviewers who have an object in view, and he may be
quoted as an authority at Royal Societies and Royal Institu-
tions, and be lauded by the toadies and understrappers of
science; but men of calm reflective minds, who have not
committed themselves to a conclusion, and can look at both
sides of a controversy, will admit that, with all his learning
and all his able and interesting researches, the writer has
overlaid his argument, and must write his Chapters over
again, correcting many of his assertions, and qualifying his
too sweeping generalizations. Ann Donaldson with all her
blindness is not more blind than the soi-disant physiologist
who refuses to see the whole of a case.

When we say that these four blind patients, by them-
selves alone, upset the theory of mental attention, it must
be borne in mind that our case is far from resting upon blind
patients only. Infants, sleeping persons, and brutes have
been powerfully influenced by passes without contact, and by
the simple gazing of the eyes. As my accomplished friend,
the Rev. Chauncy Townshend, observes in that philosophical
work of his, in which he has reviewed the Quarterly Re-
viewers so irrefragably :—

“* All that we desire is, that every body should conduct for him-
self a series of experiments in mesmerism. Let a doubter try his
passes where suggestion cannot be an ingredient in the case. Let
him mesmerise babies, if he will. I have seen an idiot boy, who
otherwise never slept, thrown in five minutes into a sound mesmeric
sleep. Let any one make experiments on brutes, above all, on birds.


294 Messrs. B. H. and C. put to perpetual shame.


I have had in two instances birds which were so easily affected by
mesmerism that the head followed the finger, even when held out of
sight. Fish are easily affected by mesmerism, &c., &c.”*


And, as Professor Gregory remarks, the distinguishing of
water or any other object, which has been mesmerised, from
such as has not, is a strong argument against the doctrine of
suggestion. However, we will not on this occasion press
these different and collateral facts into our argument. We
now confine our reply to the case of these four blind patients;
and we call upon the adherents of the suggestion theory, first
to examine our evidence respecting the facts as rigidly as
they wish, and then to give in their verdict, and their reasons
thereof.

I repeat it, then, in conclusion, that Ann Donaldson, the
poor blind Scotchwoman of Greenside, has overthrown the
anti-mesmeric theory of the Quarterly Reviewers. I do not
say that she proves, on the other hand, that there is any
external transmitted agent, for on that point at present we
must admit that we are imperfectly informed ; though what
other inference can be drawn from her case, and from the
one recorded by Dr. Esdaile, it would be difficult to con-
jecture. But let us be satisfied with owning our own ignor-
ance, and disproving the pretentious wisdom of others. “ Con-
scious and confessed ignorance,” as I have already quoted
from Mr. Grote, “is a better state of mind, than the fancy
without the reality of knowledge ;” at any rate it 1s far
better than the over-weening presumption of these writers
who, upon a subject of some difficulty, aim at laying down
positive laws for universal application, and yet omit in their
calculation an essential part of the argument and all the
most important facts which militate against their conclusion.

I remain, Gentlemen,
Your humble servant,
Grorce Sanpsy.


* Mesmerism Proved True. By the Rev. C. H. Townshend. p. 102. This
is a book which every mesmeriser ought to possess, and to study. See also a
paper by Anti-Glorioso in the Twelfth Volume of The Zoist, p. 278, which reviews
Mr. Townshend’s book, with every word of which I concur.


( 295 )


X. Visit to Sarah Ann Bartle, the cataleptic patient near Ely.
By an old Mesmerist.


“‘ Science takes cognizance of a phenomenon, and endeavours to discover its
law.” —J. Stuart Mill on Political Economy.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


August 10, 1855.

Sir,—Having heard a good deal lately respecting the
peculiar condition into which a young girl had lately fallen
spontaneously, and several of the phenomena of which public
rumour had of course magnified into supernatural manifes-
tations, I was desirous of visiting the case for the purpose
of separating the true from the false, and of understanding
the real state of the patient. I had the good fortune to be
accompanied by two friends of much experience and informa-
tion, who rendered considerable assistance in the observation
and examination of the symptoms. It may be as well to
add that our visit was not expected.

Sarah Ann Bartle is the daughter of a small farmer who
cultivates his own land at Prickwillow, near Ely: and she
completed her fourteenth year on the 7th of August, the day
upon which we paid our visit to the house. We found Mr.
Bartle and his wife, the mother-in-law of the girl, very oblig-
ing and ready to answer any questions put to them: and
their whole manner was simple and straightforward, and free
from every appearance of trick or collusive conduct.

We found the young girl lying in bed in a deeply coma-
tose condition ; whether it may be called a trance or a fit, I
will not exactly say, but I should myself consider that she
was asleep. Her hands were clasped firmly together, and
pressed tightly over the pit of the stomach: her eyelids and
tongue kept at a continued flickering motion; her counte-
nance had a pleasing expression, and the face looked full and
fresh. Excepting this darting movement of the tongue and
the constant fluttering of the eyelids, she remained perfectly
still all the time of our visit, which lasted about an hour and
a half.

When I opened the eyelids, I found that the eyeballs
were turned upward, as is the usual state in cases of this
character. Her form was perfectly stiff and rigid: when I
lifted her up, her limbs and whole frame were as firm and
unpliant as a piece of wood. It was a case of rigidity, not
of catalepsy. When the finger was lifted up,—to do which
some little effort was required,—the finger fell back with a
sharp spring. Had the patient been cataleptic, the finger


296 Various phenomena such as those of Mesmerism.


would have remained stationary in the position in which it
was left. Rigidity and catalepsy are constantly confounded.
Real catalepsy I imagine to be a condition much more rare
and curious.

I mesmerised her from ten to twenty minutes, but no
apparent effect was induced. But when our hands remained
for some time closely pressed upon hers, the thumb and fingers
became soft and flaccid, and, when lifted up, did not fly back
with much force.

I understood from the mother-in-law, that Sarah had
been very ill for about ten weeks; that she had been very
depressed in her spirits, and had taken but a small amount
of food, and that her bowels had been very costive. The
menses made their first appearance when she was 11 years
old, and continued very regularly till she fell into her first
trance, and from that time to the present (a period of sixteen
weeks) they have been quite suppressed.

She was for a long time attended by a medical man, but
no benefit resulted from his treatment: I fancy that at pre-
sent all medicines and remedies are discontinued.

She first fell into “these fits,” as the mother calls them,
about sixteen weeks back: she remained perfectly composed
and still, both before and after. The fits generally lasted
several hours: frequently two or three days: once they con-
tinued for the space of five days. We found her in one of
these fits. The one before had lasted for fifteen hours: she
had awakened up at 9 o’clock, and gone off again at 10; so
that as we arrived about half-past 11 we had no hope that
she would awake up during our visit. She never speaks in
this state, and hears nothing that is said to her.

When she wakes up, she talks a little, and mentions her
dreams (or visions, as they are called) to those only who are
disposed to listen to them, and generally tells the time when
she will next go off.

She always continues in bed: and takes very little food,
drinking nothing but water, and eating scarcely anything but
fruit. When she awoke up after the five days’ sleep, she
drank off about five tumblers of water. It should be men-
tioned that neither her bladder nor her bowels act when she
is asleep, let her continue in that state even for three days.

In general she wakes up quite quietly ; but occasionally
of late she has come to herself after much sighing and
agitation.

To judge from the statements of her parents, Sarah is
occasionally a natural clairvoyant. For she has foretold
more than once the coming of some people who were quite


Another lamentable exhibition in the Coll. of Physicians. 297


strangers, and what they would do, and the sort of dress
which they would wear. She has also, according to their
account, predicted the exact time and hour in which some of
the neighbours would die.

The parents also mentioned that there used to be loud
noises in her room when she was asleep,—noises which lasted
all the night: but that for some time these have ceased.
They seemed very reluctant to enter upon this part of their
story, evidently from some superstitious feelings on the
subject. I could therefore understand little or nothing upon
this point.

Your readers will have the goodness to separate that
which IT actually saw from that which I was merely told.
The case appeared to me to be genuine, and I saw no reason
to call in question the veracity or conscientiousness of the
parents.

If this poor girl could be placed under regular mesmeric
treatment, I have little doubt but that she would soon be
cured: but her residence is in such an unapproachable
country that any arrangement seems impracticable, and her
father will not allow her to be removed to a more convenient
neighbourhood.

I am, yours truly,
G. 8.


*,* We shall be glad to hear further particulars of this
case from any friends near Ely.—Zoist.


XI. A few remarks in favour of the application of Mesmerism
in cases of Dysentery and Insanity: a case of the latter
malady successfully treated by it, Contraction of Fingers
from Fracture of Ulna, &c., successfully treated by the
same means, with five cases of After-pains. By Joun
BatrisHILt Parker, Esq., Surgeon, Exeter.


““Harve1an Oration.—On Saturday, the 30th ultimo, the annual oration
in memory of the discoverer of the circulation of the blood, was delivered at the
College of Physicians, by Dr. Steward. In the absence of Dr. Paris, who was
prevented by a domestic affliction from presiding, the chair was occupied by Dr.
Hawkins. The orator began, as is usual on these occasions, by a brief intro-
ductory notice of the birth, education, labours, and services of Harvey, whose
fortune it was, not only to have discovered the great fact of the circulation of the
blood, but to have outlived the envy with which all true discoverers are assailed.
Having referred to the other distinguished benefactors of the College, Mead,
Sydenham, Halford, &c., he compared the scientific and inductive process, by
which Harvey proceeded in his discovery, with the hasty generalizations of the
mesmerists, the hydropathists, and the homoeopathists of the day, for, if


298 A Fellow of the College not over particular.


Nature effected a cure, they ascribed it to their own nostrums ; if, on the other
hand, Nature did not help the curative process, they contented themselves with a
moriendum est! The learned doctor next adverted to the principle of blood.
letting, which had of late been much discontinued ; but he seemed to maintain
that in certain classes of disease it was indispensable, and, indeed, a necessary
consequence of the circulation of the blood. The oration concluded with a
tempered but just tribute to the memory of Harvey, which met with the applause
of the audience.”’—Lancet, July 7, 1855.*


Mesmerism in Dysentery and Insanity.
Tue importance of a diagnosis is often most appreciated
where there has been the greatest difficulty in forming it,
and a correct opinion constitutes one of the greatest triumphs
of the pathologist. But it frequently happens that the fatal
termination of a malady, however sad, is more instructive
than recovery from it in spite of all our prognostications,
neither success nor failure being always in accordance with our
opinions; and, however erroneous the latter may have been,
the recovery. of a patient does not always solve the cause of
our error. It may sometimes appear that an attempt has
been made to exaggerate the danger of a patient’s sufferings
in order to enhance the value of the remedies and treatment
employed. I am induced to make the above remarks by
reflecting on the case of E. Merson, who was suffering from
diarrhoea and dysentery, and reported in the April number
of The Zoist. At the time I forwarded my report for publi-
cation, the patient was quite well, and continued so until the
latter end of December, when she was again seized with
symptoms similar to those described. She was then residing
twenty miles from Exeter, where she was attended by another
medical man, and treated with other remedies than mes-
merism ; and on the twelfth day she died. That an attack
of dysentery might prove fatal, the public even must be too
painfully aware, from the fact of so many of our brave fellow-
countrymen dying from this disease during the present war
in the East. This clearly proves that no specific has yet
been found in the materia medica for that terrible scourge
any more than for cholera. I fully attribute the successful
termination of E. Merson’s former attack to the restorative
powers of mesmerism: and I would most strongly urge its
application in similar cases on all philanthropists, and on
those who are not fettered by stupid bigotry or blind routine.
The author of 4 Month in the Camp before Sebastopol, per-
haps knowingly, perhaps unconsciously, gives a strong argu-


* Who Dr. Steward is we know not. But this we know, that, if he lives a
few years, he will live to be ashamed of his folly, and to see the College ashamed
of having allowed such a display of ignorance and want of feeling for the suf-
ferings of their fellow-creatures within their walls pass unrebuked.—Zois¢.


Cures of Insanity rare ; expense enormous. 299


ment in favour of the treatment I advocate. He says (p. 61) :
“More than one officer has told me with his own lips, that
he ascribed his recovery from cholera to the untiring efforts
of some friend who rubbed and rubbed away for hours at
the bloodless skin till circulation was restored.”

Whilst every experienced medical man must acknowledge
the difficulty of forming a correct diagnosis in some cases,
in others he is as much puzzled to find a suitable remedy,
even when the nature of the malady is most palpable and
conspicuous. Such has been the oft-told and printed expe-
rience of our predecessors, and will be readily admitted by
every one who peruses the following observations. All agree
that the healthy enjoyment of the intellectual faculties con-
stitutes man’s greatest privilege, and that insanity in every
form is the most terrible and melancholy privation to which
the human race can be reduced. And, however much the
present generation has improved in the management of the
insane, the published reports of their different asylums in
Great Britain are in accordance with that of the Worcester
City and County Lunatic Asylum published in the Times of
August 18th, 1855, by which it will be seen that about ten
only per cent. are annually discharged cured. The Census
of 1851 records 21,000 lunatics out of a population of
20,000,000 in Great Britain, whilst the Statistical Journal
agrees with the report of the Devon County Lunatic Asylum,
that from eleven to fifteen shillings a week are paid for each
of the 21,000 lunatics in the different asylums, making a
total of more than seven hundred thousand a year with only
ten per cent. cures. The friends of mesmerism should take
every opportunity of promulgating these facts, and endeavour
to enlist the friends of humanity with the advocates of eco-
nomy in order to test the curative powers of mesmerism on
the insane: the success of it has been fully proved by Drs.
Strong and Kean in India, and also by numerous other cor-
respondents of The Zoist. I have much pleasure in stating
that the subject of the very remarkable case of this kind,
published in one of my reports, has enjoyed perfect health
ever since. I am quite satisfied that by having recourse to
mesmerism at the commencement of mental aberrations we
should cure at least 40 per cent. of our patients. Unfortu-
nately mesmerism is too frequently resorted to when every
other treatment has failed, and even then under such very
unfavourable auspices that I have been quite astonished to
see my patients recover, since I could not hold out the
slightest prospect of success. The following case will clearly
illustrate the correctness of our principles.

VOL. XIII. Y


300 Phrenzy rapidly cured with Mesmerism.


About two months since, just as I was going to bed, the
mother of an insane patient came to my house in great dis-
tress, as her only son was in a state of phrenzy, and had been
most mercifully prevented from committing suicide. Great
anxiety about his business had caused him to pass many rest-
Jess if not sleepless nights; his face was much flushed, and,
though quite sober, he talked incoherently and confusedly.
He did not know me, though I had attended his family for
years. When I endeavoured to take off his coat preparatory
to bleeding him, he would pace about his room; after nearly
sixteen ounces of blood had been taken from him, he became
rather faint. This, however, produced but slight relief to his
disordered intellects, so that I lost no time in sending for
Mr. Johns, my mesmeriser. He soon quieted the patient,
who,- although mesmeric sleep was not produced, soon after-
wards slept naturally, and when he awoke the intellectual
faculties had resumed their natural and healthy condition.
The second evening he was put into mesmeric sleep, from
which he rose perfectly well, and free from head-ache for the
first time since the commencement of the attack. All this
disturbance occurred without leaving the least trace on his
memory,—he had not the slightest recollection of what had
transpired during his illness. At the end of the fourth day
he was quite restored, and able to resume his work, to the
great joy of his family, who had been strongly impressed
with the necessity of sending him to an asylum if the aborra-
tion of the intellects continued and he was not speedily
cured. He is but 25 years of age.


Fracture of Ulna, and undetected Dislocation of Radius, fol-
lowed by Contraction of the Fingers and Thumb.

Jonathan Miller, aged 13, was thrown from a donkey on
June 6th, 1854. He was immediately taken to the Exeter
Hospital, where a fracture of the ulna of the right arm was
recognized, about the point of junction of the upper with the
middle third of that bone. Splints and bandages were ap-
plied, and the boy was made an out-patient. During the
following 48 hours he suffered very severely, and when he
presented himself at the hospital for inspection it was found
necessary to make him an in-patient. The pressure of the
splints had produced such mischief that, at the end of a
fortnight, sloughing had caused five separate sores; one 4
inches long and 2 broad on the inner part of the fore-arm,
two smaller ones just below the elbow, and two of a similar
size on the back of the wrist. The five cicatrices may still
be seen. These sores were of such a character as to render


~_— i> nee oie


Mesmerism prevents a surgical operation. 301


any further restraint inadmissible, and the boy was detained
for five months in the hospital to allow them to heal. The
sore on the inner part of the arm had extended to a great
depth, and had influenced the flexor muscles to so great an
extent as to produce a permanent contraction of the fingers
and thumb on the palm of the hand, and there was a perfect
inability to straighten them. For several months after he
had again been made an out-patient, he continued to pay
occasional visits to the hospital to have his arm inspected.
At length a consultation was held, and it was proposed to
divide the flexor tendons, and the boy was to be received into
the hospital on the following Thursday to undergo the opera-
tion. During the interval, the father brought the boy to me,
when I collected the above history and examined the five
cicatrices. It was quite impossible to straighten either fingers
or thumb, and my first impression was that a division of the
tendons by a knife would be absolutely necessary: the case
was so extreme that I scarcely dared hope that any other
means would avail. However, I determined to try the effects
of mesmerism; and, at the end of twenty-four hours, the
fingers were partially straightened ; but the thumb still re-
mained firmly bent into the palm of the hand. Splints were
now applied to aid in keeping the fingers straight, and after
steadily persevering with mesmerism for a few days some
effect on the thumb was also produced. This treatment was
continued for three months, when the fingers and thumb had
regained their natural use, with such loss only as was occa-
sioned by the unreduced dislocation of the radius. His
hand and fingers are now nearly as useful as ever, and I am
happy to think that all this has been accomplished by the
painless power of mesmerism, and not by the excruciating
knife.
After-pains.

Having recorded in the pages of The Zoist many instances
where much suffering from after-pains had been alleviated,
and even prevented by mesmerism, I think a perusal of the
five following cases may interest its readers; the more so, as
there is seldom a more urgent demand on our sympathy than
that which the parturient state induces. Often indeed the
joy of a child being born into the world is but the precursor
of the most cruel sufferings to its mother.

1. Mrs. Lear, in the early part of her third pregnancy,
strained her side in a violent manner. Constant pain ensued,
and became so severe during the last six weeks previous to
her confinement that she could scarcely walk across the
room. The delivery was short and natural, and everything
¥2


302 Power of Mesmerism in cases of After-pains.
proceeded most favourably until forty-eight hours had passed.
Then the pain in the side became excruciating, and extended
to the womb. As there was no cessation for several hours,
she sent for me. I found her quite unable to move from its
effects; so I began to mesmerise her, and in /ess than ten
minutes she was surprised to find that her pains had almost
gone. Before twenty minutes had elapsed, she was quite free
from suffering, and at my subsequent visit expressed no little
delight and gratitude at what mesmerism had done for her.

2. Mrs. Vicary was delivered of her fourth child February
3rd, 1855, after a very short and natural labour. Everything
went on well with her until forty-six hours after, when she
was seized with violent painsof the womb. These were much
aggravated by the least movement of the lower extremities.
Being of a very sensitive temperament, her head soon sym-
pathized with her other sufferings; at first there was violent
throbbing, then her sight was much affected, and everything
in the room appeared of a reddish hue. As the pain in the
womb increased, everything appeared to be on fire. The
above sufferings had continued nearly five hours before I was
summoned to her bedside ; then her sight had almost left her,
and everything appeared black. I think I never saw a patient
in greater agonies, and this was a case which entirely inter-
dicted the use of opiates or sedatives of any description. In
a few minutes I began to mesmerise her, and very shortly
afterwards she asked if she might move her legs a little, as
they were quite stiff from having been in the same position
for four hours. I consented; and she found that she could
do so without exciting any of the sufferings which had now
nearly left her. Long and slow passes soon made her quite
composed and comfortable.

3. Mrs. F was delivered of her sixth child after a few
hours’ illness only. I was preparing to leave the house when
she complained of most violent pains in the bowels; then
vomited and immediately fainted. At the first examination
I thought there must be another child, but was soon con-
vinced there was internal hemorrhage; and whilst I pressed
the uterus firmly with my right hand, I breathed vigorously
over the heart. Soon the patient felt the restorative power
of mesmerism ; the uterus contracted firmly, and expelled
some very large clots, and there was no return of the hemor-
rhage. The favourable termination of this case is the more
remarkable when compared with the results of another exactly
similar, in which one of her neighbours died in three or four
hours from a precisely similar cause. The wonderful effects
of mesmerism are indeed most varied on the female constitu-


Lord Jeffrey made himself ridiculous for ever. 303


tion, as by its powers an undue hemorrhage can be so speedily
restrained and confined within salutary limits; and on the
other hand these so often aid in producing that periodical
function which is so essential to women’s health and well-
being. ;

4. Mrs. Reeves, the wife of a builder of Newtown, ceased
to be a patient of mine for several years because I had
espoused the cause of mesmerism. I had previously attended
her in three confinements, and three children had been born
in the interval. After the birth of each she suffered severely
from after-pains for a week at least. Having heard that such
sufferings could be prevented by mesmerism, she again re-
quested me to attend her. She was confined with a very fine
boy, and, as soon as the delivery was completed, had an inti-
mation of the return of her former pains. She therefore
reminded me of the reputed powers of mesmerism, and begged
that she might test their efficiency. Before half a dozen
passes had been made, she exclaimed with delight that I had
stopped the pain. I continued to make long and slow passes
for ten minutes. She experienced no more suffering, and
her convalescence was more rapid than on any former occasion.

5. Mrs. Curry, whose cure of after-pains in more than
one instance, and prevention of them in another, are recorded
in The Zoist, was delivered of her tenth child this summer.
As soon as the delivery was complete, I began to make long
and slow passes ; and at my subsequent visits I found she had
been spared the cruel sufferings which she had endured on
former occasions; and her convalescence proceeded most
favourably.


XII. Phrenological Examination of Marshal Radetzky :
making part (by his permission) of the Phrenological
Gallery of Eminent Persons. By M. A. Castix, M.D.*


‘Every one, of course, has heard of Dr. Gall’s cRAN1oLoGy, and seen his
plaster heads, mapped out into the territories of some thirty or forty independent
faculties. Long before this time, we confess, we expected to have seen them
turned into toys for children: and this folly consigned to that great limbo of
vanity, to which the dreams of alchemy, sympathetic medicine, and ANIMAL
MAGNETISM had gone before it.” —Edinburgh Review, September, 1826.7


* The length of the original examination (published in French) obliges us to
omit some details, but only such as are of secondary interest.— Zoist.

+ When Lord Jeffrey penned this ridiculous article in 1826, he little thought
that Sir Benjamin Brodie would have to renew the attack upon phrenology at the
end of almost thirty years in the form of a book called Psychological Researches


304 What Curiosity is.


§1.


Tue accompanying organography indicates the existence of
strongly-developed faculties, among which those which tend
to egoism or personalism predominate over the domestic and
social affections. Among the intellectual faculties the re-
flective are the least developed—a circumstance which leaves
comparatively unrestrained the activity of the instincts, that
is, of the perceptivo-memorative faculties and the affections
in general. This fact leads us to anticipate less marked dis-
tinctness between the phases of adolescence, maturity, and
decline of life, than is observed where the reflective faculties
predominate. Modifications may have taken place, it is true,
but not so great as ever to efface the characteristic signs of
earlier life, among which the most striking were remarkable
physical energy, great vivacity, a quick spirit of observation,
and a memory for details, no less reiterative than prompt
and applying alike to physical objects and to every kind of
event.

The accumulative action of all these traits produces a
restless curiosity* and a constant desire for change, both in
the exercise of the intellect and in the emotions arising
from the feelings.

Thus all that could be learned by observation, by oral
communication, or by incitation, was acquired without effcit ;
whereas the exuberance of his physical energy, and iis im-
patience of all constraint, will have rendered his mind little
apt for studies requiring serious reflexion.


on account of it flourishing far more vigorously than ever: and that animal
magnetism in 1855 would hold a high and proud position and be acknowledged
to be a source of benefit to mankind such as physicians and surgeons could not
hope to see established from their art.—Zoist.

* Three faculties more than others give rise to what is generally understood
as Curiosity ; viz., Individuality, Eventuality, and Causality ; but Curiosity is in
fact a property common alike to the feelings and to the intellectual faculties, and
is modified according to their various combinations. Thus the simple Curiosity
of Eventuality takes special directions according as it is associated with different
instincts ; for instance, when combined with Combativeness and Destructiveness, it
produces interest in warlike events ; with Secretiveness, the kind of Curiosity more
specially understood as inquisitiveness ; with Jndividuality, Constructiveness, and
Destructiveness, it produces a Curiosity, very characteristic of some persons, con-
cerning arms and instruments of torture; with Causality and the reflective facul-
ties generally, it gives rise (according to farther combinations with the perceptions
and feelings) to taste for special sciences, and generally to what may be called
scientific curiosity. Taken in its widest sense, Curiosity is but the first and
strong expression of our primitive faculties, and is therefore as varied as the in-
numerable combinations of these faculties.


2 een


Marshal Radetzky’s cranial developments. 305


CRANIAL DEVELOPMENTS OF MARSHAL RADETZKY.
First Grovp.
Individual affections, limited to the domestic circle (minor).


Amativeness ...... Generative instinct, bissexual attach-

ment, erotic appetite.......... large
Philoprogenitiveness. . Parental instinct, attraction to chil-

dren .... . . small
Adhesiveness. . .. . Instinct of attachment, of individual

friendship, of affection ........ rather large


Seconp Grovp.
General affections, expansive or social (major).


Approbativeness .... Desire of another’s approval, ho-

nour, or glory .............. rather large
Veneration ........Sentiment of deference, respect,

piety, devotion .........- cee. ditto
Benevolence ........ Sentiment of general philanthropy,

charity, goodness ..........:. ditto


Turrp Grovp.
Instincts or impulses, giving physical and moral energy, military spirit.


Combativeness ...... Instinct of resistance, of animal
courage (defensive) .........- large
Destructiveness .... Instinet of physical —— , of attack
(offensive) ..... bos weueee rather large
Firmness .... + . Instinet of will, ‘of perseverance, of
Perera Tr etre large


Fourtsa Grovp.
Propensities eminently selfish.


; Self-esteem ......... Sentiment of one’s own worth, hed
nity, self-respect ............ rather large
Acquisitiveness .... Instinct of en, of accu-

mulation ........ or . small


Firtra Grovp.
Inclinations giving instinctive reserve, or a retentive effect.


Concentrativeness.... Faculty of attention, of continued
concentration, instinct of con-


stancy...... — . rather large
Secretiveness ...... Instinct of revelation, of reserve .. moderate
Circumspection.... .. Instinct of prudence, of ses:

of apprehension ............ rather large


Sixto Grovp.
Sentiments eminently moral.


Conscientiousness .... Sentiment of equity and of justice,
instinct of duty.............- rather large
Hope (?).......... Sentiment of joyous anticipation . . large


306 Marshal Radetzky’s cranial developments.


SeEvENTH Grovp.


Imaginative faculties, producing the sentiment of the beautiful, grand,
and sublime.


Ideality .......... Appreciation of the perfect ...... rather large
Marvellousness...... Instinct of belief, of admiration .. ditto


Eicutu Grovp.


Perceptive faculties, giving general manual dexterity, eminently auziliary.


Constructiveness .... Mechanical instinct, tendency and

aptitude to construct.......... rather large
Imitation.......... Instinct to imitate, faculty ieee

interpretation.......... . ditto
Order ............ Disposition to symmetrical co-ordi-

nation, to methodical, systema-

tical distribution ............ large


Nintu Grovp.


Perceptive faculties of observation, producing general memory.


Individuality ...... Perception of entities, memory of
individualities, sense of things . . large

Locality .......... Perception of the relations of situa-
tion in space, memory of places . . ditto

Eventuality ........ Direct memory of events, of facts. . ditto


Tentu Grovp.


Perceptive faculties, giving special aptitudes and memories.


Configuration .,.... Perception and memory of outlines,

SPINA a 6 chav ccnesesecnns rather large
Extent............ Appreciation of distances, of the di-

mensions of space............ ditto
PR -svevswenss Instinct of gravitation, equilibrium,

appreciation of the pressure and

resistance of a mass .......... large
Colours .......... Perception of the shades of colour.. rather large
Numbers .......... Appreciation of numerical relations,


arithmetical instinct, memory of

cyphers, disposition tocalculation..moderate
Language ........ Perception of the relation of articu-

late sounds, memory of —

facility of elocution .......... rather large


ELEveNtTH GrRovp.


Perceptive faculties which are the foundation of musical talent.
Tones ..... eTer Appreciation of the musical ine. be oderate or


s
tions of sounds, instinctive me- rather large


mory of melodies ..


His Friendship and Love.


Time ............ Appreciation of the relations of suc-
cession in time, instinctive per-
ception of measure, of durations,
of rhythmical intervals, of ca-
dences


TweELtrru Grovp.
Superior intellectual faculties, or reflective powers.


Wit.............++ Perception of contrast, faculty of dis-

crimination, of definition ...... rather large
Comparison ,....... Faculty of approximating analogies

and resemblances ............ large
Causality.......... Faculty of connecting causes and

effects, of reasoning analytically

and synthetically ............ rather large


Temperament, sanguine, now a little lymphatic.
Age, 84 years.


MEASUREMENTS OF THE HEAD.


Circumference, passing over Individuality, Destructive-
ness, and Philoprogenitiveness ...............
passing over Comparison and Concen-
Er eee ee ere er ne ae
From centre of Individuality to centre of Philoprogeni-
tiveness, passing over Comparison and Self-esteem 13 yo
From centre of Firmness to centre of Destructiveness,
passing over Cautiousness ................ 8. 9


204 inches


blo
.
.


§ 2.


The sentiments of Friendship and Love, although ever
ready to be superficially awakened in Radetzky, and even to
assume the appearance of strong feeling, have never been
felt by him as needs. In him friendship shews itself chiefly
as a frank and joyous camaraderie. He is generous in money
affairs and ever ready to loosen the strings of his own purse ;
but he will have been no less disposed, according to circum-
stances, to count on the purse of his comrades.

In his experience of love sentiment has played but a small
part ; although a certain gentleness, arising from the degree
of Approbativeness, Veneration, and Benevolence he possesses,
may occasionally have worn the appearance of sentiment. It
follows, then, that his warmth of feeling and protestations
of affection, however sincere at the time, will have been sub-
ject, the first to vanish quickly, the last to be soon forgotten.
The general programme of an affaire du ceur in his case


308 Not made for domestic life.


will have been an impatient but not easily discouraged energy
of conquest, and a no less facile abandonment of a satisfied
affection for a new caprice.

His affective character is the exact counterpart of his
intellect :—strong curiosity, great need of variety. In a
word, he has never felt or imagined love as a serious senti-
ment. There is another feeling which frequently allies itself
with the need of love (now eliciting it, now called forth by
it), viz., the love of children. In very many minds the
image of a loved companion and a little smiling face springs
up almost as an innate picture. Others, who have never
known such anticipations, are yet, when once they have
formed domestic ties, strongly alive to a sense of duty and
responsibility.

To another class of minds all this is an unknown world,
—the language that would describe domestic happiness, in-
comprehensible. To this latter class, far more at least than
to the two preceding, does Radetzky belong. The fact of his
having married in no way invalidates this statement, and
might be accounted for in various ways. This is at least but
one example more to add to the innumerable instances of
those who inconsiderately marry, though inapt either to find
happiness at the fireside or to confer it.

These reflexions will in no way shock Radetzky, as the
deficiency of the qualities in question will undoubtedly appear
to him of no moment. He cannot be charged with the more
vulgar effects which frequently accompany indifference to
domestic ties, and will never have been liable to reproach on
the score of those meaner details which so often darken mar-
ried life. For him marriage, as any other liaison, will soon
have become a question not serious enough to vanquish his
insouciance.

In absence, complaints and prayers would affect him but
little, and be quickly forgotten; whereas the same represen-
tations made de vive voix would certainly elicit from him kind
and affectionate promises and protestations, sincere at the
time, but soon, them also, to fade from his memory.

This versatile disposition will certainly not have shewn
itself in his affections alone. Many an act or promise of
kindness, prompted in the first instance by a passing moment
of good nature, will have been left unfinished or forgotten,
and, when recalled to his memory, very unceremoniously dis-
missed for ever.

The analysis of such traits would shew how trifling are
the causes of change in an unstable mind. Often Radetzky
will be induced to listen to the applications of every descrip-


Impatient of interference, morally indifferent. 809


tion with which in his position he is assailed, partly it is true
from a certain impulse of goodness, but chiefly from curiosity,
—that tone of novelty which is peculiar to him. This cu-
riosity satisfied or disappointed as the case may be, his
graciousness will give place to the most unequivocal signs of
inattention and even of impatience.

Among his friends and those united to him by still closer
ties he will not always care to distinguish between the sin-
cerity and honesty of some and the obsequiousness, from
interested motives, of others. I say, emphatically, that he
does not care to distinguish, for it will scarcely ever happen
that he does not understand perfectly, the motives of those
around him; but so great is his aversion to anything ap-
proaching to restraint, or interference with his momentary
and changing impulses, that compliance with his will by all
around him is the first necessity for his comfort and tran-
quillity. He does not attach himself to his flatterers, nor is
he, I repeat, imposed upon by adulation, but he tolerates it
as a less evil than opposition.

This indolent moral state, for such it strictly is, will per-
plex many of Radetzky’s admirers by the contrast it offers
with that courage, energy, and will, and that strong sense
of duty (such as he conceives it) manifested by him on im-
portant occasions.

This inconsistency leads to the consideration of the de-
pendence of what is generally understood as the sense of duty
or conscience not only upon the special faculty of Conscien-
tiousness, but upon the general character and circumstances
of the individual. The latter form indeed a combination of
influences which would appear at first sight to render con-
science,—the noblest of our powers,—like an ever-shifting
horizon of which each individual spectator forms the centre.
I would not be understood to mean that conscience has neces-
sarily so undetermined a scope. On the contrary, I believe
that the equitable laws which should enlighten and direct its
application constitute a branch of positive science, and one
too much neglected alike by moralists and by legislators.

As conscience cannot act independently of knowledge, it
must vary in individuals not only in unimportant details, but
even with regard to the most sacred principles, according to
the prejudices of education ; and so long as arbitrary justice
takes the place of equity, or, in other words, so long as
equity is not reduced to positive rules, demonstrable by
science and taught as an art.

Science is truth: when men think truly or scientifically,
they will think alike, for truth is one.


810 Conscience and religious feeling not active in him.


In Radetzky, conscience is not sufficiently active under
ordinary circumstances to restrain that inconstancy, that
indifference to social ties, above alluded to; it needs the exi-
gencies of military life to call forth the utmost activity of
which it is capable. But this military conscience may be
more specious than real, its chief source being a long habit
of disciplinary routine. It has an idol, which may be mis-
taken for duty, but which is frequently only uncontested
authority.*

Such is not the providential scope of conscience, which, as
I have said elsewhere, is the moral counterpart of judgment,
and is intended to inspire the feeling of universal equity.

Whoever will apply the preceding observations to the list
of cerebral developments from which this analysis is derived,
will at once be able to explain many singular traits in Ra-
detzky’s character; for instance, his entire indifference to
order in his expenditure, notwithstanding the disagreeable


embarrassments which must undoubtedly have often followed
such negligence.


§ 3.

Although several of the elements tending to religious
feeling are well developed in this organization, it is never-
theless highly probable that they will have been entirely
subordinate, in fact, to other feelings more instinctive and
more easily excited by the known circumstances of Radetzky’s
life. At most the religious thoughts which will occasionally
have been awakened in his mind will scarcely have prevailed
more than those rare moments of gentleness and good nature
already spoken of.

Each faculty, it is true, tends to manifest itself in direct
proportion to its organic development: but it must be borne
in mind that it is also subject to modification according to
its association with other faculties, and that it may even be
greatly influenced by any one other faculty equal or superior
in activity to itself.

Veneration, for instance, which is the tendency to respect
in general (not directed, as is often thought, to a First
Cause exclusively), gives rise, according to its combination
with other faculties, to the various manifestations of esteem,
admiration, adoration, and piety.


* To this blind veneration for authority, to this substitution of an idol of the
mind for the idea of right and equity, must be attributed many of the acts of
injustice and oppression, of which those in authority, and Radetzky among the
number, often render themselves guilty.


A practical, not a deep thinking, man. Sil


In the same manner the special function of Marvellousness
is to confer a love of the unknown in general.* In certain
combinations only does it produce blind religious faith and
superstition of every kind. And, on the other hand, many
persons superstitious and dogmatic in religion are the last
even to conceive a new discovery in science.t

Again, Hope, which is frequently an eminently religious
feeling, may sometimes confine its joyous anticipations to
this world alone, in cases where the imagination is deficient
in power to conceive a future life, or where the present so
enthralls every desire that the idea of future existence, if
ever it be forced on the mind, is more intrusive than welcome.

To return to Radetzky: it will then be easily conceived
that, though he is deficient in none of the faculties just
alluded to, they will have produced in him (living, as he does,
essentially in the present) but little feeling of religion.


§ 4.


So far, there is little in the present examination that
would appear to apply specially to a man reputed great in
military art and science. It must be borne in mind that
with regard to these, as to arts and sciences generally, the
aptitude for one or the other springs from two different
sources. Science and art stand in the same relation to each
other as theory and practice, and an individual may be dif-
ferently gifted as regards each in any given pursuit.

Radetzky’s intelligence belongs more particularly to the
practical or artistic class : for, not only do his perceptive pre-
dominate over his reflective faculties, but the versatility and
impatience of his character render arduous study in general
distasteful to him, the only exception being in favour of the
study requisite for the military career, which is highly attrac-
tive to him, not only as exercising certain artistic faculties
he possesses, but as affording scope for many pleasurable
emotions. For instance, his instinctive foresight and his
tendency to anticipate the future may agreeably excite his
reflective faculties to speculations on all possible contingencies
in warlike affairs, thus leading him to prepare beforehand
plans of action sufficiently elastic to embrace them all.


* In a forthcoming work the analysis, association, and providential intention
of these and most of the phrenological faculties will be given.

t A person whose phrenological examination I made recently had the organ
of Marvellousness large, with Self-esteem and Causality also well developed.
This person was a firm believer in the miracle of Rimini, but found it incon-
ceivahle that I believed in mesmerism.


312 His intellect synthetic rather than analytic.


While, however, Radetzky will recognize the exactness
of this fact, he will admit also that in moments of action,
though he profits to some degree by preconceived theories,
yet that his practical ability never shews itself more pre-
eminently than when he follows the intuitions, so to speak,
which are suggested to him by circumstances. Strictly ana-
lyzed, these intuitions will be found, it is true, to spring in
some degree from his habit of forethought on military con-
tingencies ; but still they depend more immediately on the
rapid coup d’eil which the peculiar nature of his mind allows
him to take in imminent and unforeseen difficulties.

In his intelligence the perception of analogy predominates
over the power of analysis; he has, in consequence, more
perception and conception of the synthetical than of the
analytical relations of things. Such elements of character,
though not embracing aii the powers requisite for the stra-
tegic art, are yet sufficient, as the present example shews, to
bring about great practical results and consequent military
reputation.

Military talent, of the peculiar kind traced above, is evi-
dently more artistic than scientific, and the conceptions to
which it gives rise will therefore be more immediately appli-
cable by their author than easily transmissible to others.

It is possible that the theories thus formed, notwithstand-
ing their occasional heterogeneousness, will frequently fur-
nish original and useful ideas, which would only need more
careful elaboration in order to assume a scientific form and
become generally applicable.


§ 5.

In every character, but more observably in some than in
others, certain peculiarities exist which are more or less in-
discriminately taxed as oddities, follies, even vices. When
these peculiarities are found associated with other traits
which are recognized as useful or great, they ave classed
under the more gentle name of eccentricities.

Not the vulgar alone but even philosophical thinkers are
rarely disposed to imagine that such traits of character may
frequently be inseparable from qualities allowed to be ad-
mirable, that is, that they are but modified effects of the
same faculties from which the latter spring; a fact which
must be borne in mind by the reader, as some such eccen-
tricities will have to be signalized in the present character.

I have remarked above, that his intellect is more apt
to see things in their synthetic form than to analyze. A


His Order, Time, and Constructiveness large. 313


consequence of this peculiarity may have exposed Radetzky
more than once to censure for indifference to certain details
indispensable to military art, and, unless it should have been
corrected by method, it will easily, as he advanced in age,
have degenerated into a positive ‘habit of intellectual con-
fusion* in one so impatient and impulsive as he is. This
confusion only applies, however, to the co-ordination of
ideas, not to things relating to material order, and still less
to those in which the perception of time is concerned. In
this particular he will manifest even exaggerated precision.

Among Radetzky’s perceptive faculties, Order and Time
are the most largely developed. If in addition to their ac-
tivity we consider his impatience of prolonged repose, it will
be conceived how, during one occupation, his mind is already
fixed upon the employment of the hour which will succeed,
so that no leisure or loss of time may ever occur.

Inoccupation causes him a very fever of impatience, and
as, in advancing age, the tastes of earlier life gradually be-
come less vigorous and the choice of occupation consequently
less varied, such causes of impatience must unavoidably occur
more frequently than formerly. There are, however, certain
tendencies which obtain more as others diminish, and among
these is instinctive foresight, which indirectly tends in the
present instance to the love of arrangement, both in sym-
metry and in time. This taste will gradually have become
more and more deeply rooted, so that order and precision in
constant occupation will have become an absolute necessity.

The routine, inseparable from the business of Radetzky’s
actual position, will in no way be disagreeable to him, and he
will observe in it the most clock-like precision, never overpass-
ing the period allotted to each occupation; and, when forced
by circumstances to such irregularity, giving the most une-
quivocal signs of the displeasure occasioned him by such an
infraction of his previously arranged plans. The truth of the
observation will certainly be admitted by all who have known
Radetzky intimately; and there are other tastes and apti-
tudes traceable to the same faculties in combination with
others not yet spoken of, which must equally be borne out
by facts observable in his past and present habits.

The love of material arrangement already mentioned is
but a simple and direct manifestation of the perceptive fa-
culty (largely developed in Radetzky) of Order. This same
faculty, combined with Constructiveness (also large), gives
rise to something more than mere material order; to the


* A confusion which might have fatal results were the staff not there.


314 His Time, Locality, and Extent large.


conception of mechanical symmetry ; and, further associated
with the organ of Time (large), it developes the still higher
talent for combined mechanical movements.

Carefully developed and directed by a special education,
these tendencies might have had important practical results
in several branches of science (dynamics). Left to their own
spontaneous activity, they will still have greatly influenced
his general intelligence, and above all have given rise to
tastes so unexpected in one of Radetzky’s position as to be
classed as eccentricities. One of these is a strong predilec-
tion for chronometers, watches, and clocks* of all kinds and
shapes, which he will find great delight in collecting—observ-
ing and comparing them with curious interest. He has also
a strong taste for machinery (depending partly on the facility
it procures for rapid locomotion), and a corresponding passion
and talent for directing its use. These same faculties are
again manifested in the pleasure he finds in observing stra-
tegic manceuvres executed by large bodies of troops. And in
their farther association with Locality (large) and Distance
(large), they produce a topographical coup d’qil invaluable
on the field of battle and in all military surveys.


§ 6.

Each faculty has very varied manifestations according tu
the peculiar combinations under which its action is elicited by
circumstances. Thus in the present case, Locality, favoured
by the need of movement and the general tendency to vary
occupation, will produce, not only the love of scenery, but of
constant change from one place to another. The indulgence
of this tendency, while affording great pleasure to Radetzky
himself, may become a source of annoyance to those whose
duty it is to attend him: and it may be conceived even as
giving rise to expensive habits with regard to the removal of
troops; for Radetzky, like most men, will be inclined to con-
sider as useful in general practice, what is but a personal
taste.

There is yet another peculiarity to signalize in this cha-
racter, arising from a propensity eagerly to anticipate the
ordinary course of events, a tendency which, besides its use-
ful applications, may give rise, it is evident, to many accessory
phenomena. Among these is a love of reform, brought about
by sheer love of change. An exaggerated action of Circum-


_ * Even in his campaigns Radetzky is known to have had with him a collec-
tion of watches and clocks.


Careless of expense, fond of horse exercise, dancing, &c. 315


spection is elicited, and Radetzky sees danger everywhere, or
rather sees motives for prudence—necessity for preparation
against scarcely probable contingencies, and, his mind being
possessed by these ideas, he will, codte qui codte, attempt the
immediate execution of plans in consequence.

If it be further considered that Radetzky is, as we have
before observed, but little inclined to occupy himself with
pecuniary details, and feels little the specific value of money,
it may be conceived that, when beset on the realization of his
professional projects, in the way of reforms and changes of
all kinds, he will not much calculate the difference between
thousands and millions; or, when he needs it, easily admit the
impossibility of obtaining any sum he desires. It is there-
fore beyond doubt that, inasmuch as economy is a virtue
essential to a military chief, Radetzky will be greatly deficient
in this respect. So complete a disregard of economy may
give a singular air of eccentricity to many of the prudential
acts of his foresight, but by no means detracts from the value
of the latter quality, which must certainly have been pro-
ductive of many and signal advantages.

Another trait may be mentioned depending on a peculiar
combination of faculties with the love of physical activity,
viz., a taste, and formerly a special talent, for athletic, acro-
batic, and equestrian exercises, as well as the more refined
arts of choregraphy and the dance.

To declare a great and renowned captain to possess some
of these tastes and aptitudes may at first sight appear futile,
but on reflection it will be perceived that the tendencies pre-
viously named as constituting the greater part of Radetzky’s
taste and capacity for the military art, viz., his perception of
ensemble and of symmetry, his reconnoitering talent, his taste
for mechanical and measured movements, are based on the
very faculties which also find gratification in the brilliant
spectacle of the grand ballet. 1 do not hesitate to declare
that, after the spectacle of a review, nothing will attract and
fix his attention so much as the spectacle of a ballet.


§ 7.

The military tendencies and talent of Radetzky are then

a natural result of the synergy of the principal elements of
his character. But it would be an error to suppose that na-
ture implants in any man aptitudes which lead fatally and
exclusively to the career of war. This would be tantamount
to belief in the absolute necessity of warfare in human society,
whereas, truly considered, it is but a temporary and subver-

VOL. XIII. Z


316 War not inevitable in man’s nature.


sive direction of certain forces in man’s character. It is
impossible indeed to admit that, in the plan of creation, men
are destined to use their forces against each other. 'l'o assume
that war—an accumulation of every kind of atrocity—is in-
separable from human affairs, that it is what is termed “a
necessary evil,” is to fall into the gloomiest kind of fatalism ;
for it is simply to renounce all hope of the establishment of
fraternity among men.

The future is to be judged, not wholly by the past and the
present, but also by knowledge of the real tendencies of
man’s innate powers. Because a child is thoughtless and un-
governable, it does not follow that time and change of cir-
cumstances will bring about no modification of his early
character. Neither does it follow that because, in the infancy
of humanity, ignorance, contending interests and suffering of
every kind, have caused discord and war to prevail, we must
for ever revolve in this limited circle.

Every epoch has had its foolish and barbarous customs,
and at every epoch, as now, the mass of mankind has re-
garded them as inevitable, and considered as utopian all prog-
nostication of change.

When religious hatred and persecution were at their
height, but few would have dared to conceive the advent of
that universal religious tolerance to which the world is now
rapidly tending. In like manner few can at the present day
conceive the future consolidation of the interests and creeds
of all into one polity and one theocracy.

We look back with horror upon the cruelties of the in-
quisition and of judicial torture, but explain them te a cer-
tain degree by the madness of superstition and fanaticism.
These passions, so energetic at one time, find but little echo
among us now; they are nearly extinct, and we believe for
ever.

But posterity will find still greater cause for wonder in
the battle fields of our own age, as well as in the remains of
the principle of revenge in our legislation.* It will be noted
with astonishment that, at our advanced epoch, we have not
yet found more effectual means to prevent crime, whether in
those forms which appear before legal tribunals, or in those,
more ambitious, which darken the page of history.

Nothing would so much tend to hasten social progress
as a true knowledge of human nature, and the conviction
which would result therefrom that there are none of man’s


* A subject treated most ably by Mr. George Combe in his essay on Criminal
Jurisprudence, one of the most practical and philanthropic works of our time.


Combativeness and Destructiveness not for War. 317


primitive faculties which are not essentially good, that is, con-
ducive to the realization of the only happiness which he can
desire or attain, namely, social happiness.

Looking on man and his destiny in this light, it will be
understood that his nature includes in fact certain impulsions
which, under subversive circumstances, may produce murder,
carnage, hatred and discord; but that these same impulsions
have quite another providential end.

Combativeness and Destructiveness, for instance, do not
inevitably tend to war, any more than Imitation necessarily
produces buffoonery, or Marvellousness, superstition.

Gall, in defining Combativeness and Destructiveness as
“physical courage” and the “homicidal tendency,” fatally
associated with them the notion of war and social disorder.
But modern phrenologists are well aware that they have, even
now, other manifestations besides those, of which, by induc-
tion, we may declare them to be susceptible in the future.

In fact, far from acquiescing in the belief that these per-
verse effects are the final expression of these faculties, should
we not rather seek what may be their most useful employ-
ment? It appears, indeed, evident that, at a more advanced
period of social harmony, the mind of energy and courage
springing from Combativeness and Destructiveness will very
little resemble the physical courage of the present day; the
providential intention of these faculties being to endow man
with that energy and power of resistance which will ever be
needed to subdue the material difficulties attendant on the
pursuit of the industrial arts, taking that term in its widest
sense, as signifying man’s domination over all nature.

Combined with the higher social feelings (those called
moral and religious), the same forces will give rise to peaceful
militant (not military) enthusiasm in the accomplishment of
difficult and useful tasks from which all humanity will profit.

This result is too splendid to be easily conceived by many
who decry human passion; not knowing how to distinguish
between its derived or subversive manifestations, and those
which characterize its true and permanent nature. I cannot
further enlarge on this subject, but will only call attention to
the fact that humanity, always aspiring towards a better
employment of the forces in question, (which too often injure
instead of serving) has already made an immense step towards
their utilization. We see already, in the wonderful industrial
activity which has developed itself in this age, a proof that
the tendencies to combat and destroy may have quite other
employment than in war, duels, or an idle spirit of adventure.
An enormous sum of energy which would have been in former


9


318 Facts first despised, and then trite.


times squandered in the pursuit of false glory is now absorbed
in industrial efforts, which in their result cannot fail to aug-
ment the general well-being. This circumstance affords a
striking example of the influence of the general advancement
of knowledge upon the direction of our faculties, and shews
that, in proportion as intelligence is developed, the tendency
of our instincts is to quit their brutal form, and, so to speak,
to intellectualize themselves.


XIII. A decided instance of the cure of Delirium Tremens
without Opium. By Dr. Ex.iotson.


“The Times observes that the disparaging comment upon the disclosures (of
the mismanagement of the present war) now is, ‘ This is not new.’ But it is to
be remembered that the previous strictures on the newspaper accounts had been,
‘ This is not true.’ So to-day the facts are treated as trite and hacknied which
yesterday were denied as false, or charged with enormous exaggeration. Thus it
is that any stick is good enough to beat a dog, and what was branded as a lie at
one time is a stale truth when established. The evidence loses noue of its interest
and force as it advances, and it brings before us the acts of men, to call whom
mad would be to dignify their aberrations, but more correctly to be described by
the Scotch word fatuous.’’—Eyraminer, March 7, 1855.


In the Number of The Zoist for October, 1853 (No. XLIIL),
I detailed a severe case of delirium tremens which occurred
in a young man, and was rapidly cured with mesmerism.
Very large quantities of opium had been given in vain. His
delirium was most violent. The disease had existed five
whole days. I was called in upon the morning of the fifth
day of the disease, and immediately prescribed three grains
of opium to be taken every four hours till the evening: and
from this time to the next morning I prescribed three grains
to be taken every three hours. On the morning of the sixth
day, I prescribed four grains to be taken every three hours:
and in the evening four grains every two hours. The medi-
cine was taken regularly. On that evening mesmerism was
performed for an hour, and with the effect of quiet, drowsi-
ness, and momentary snatches of sleep, but only while the
process was going on. The opium was to be given in doses
of five grains every two hours. Mesmerism was not per-
formed the next day (the seventh) till the evening ; but from
this time it was put properly into practice. All this seventh
day I gave five grains of opium every two hours in vain;
and five grains all the night, and till the evening of the
eighth day—from which time he took no more. After the
second mesmerisation, which took place on the evening ol


= @ear &


The mesmeric cure indisputable. 319


the seventh day, I discerned an improvement on the morning
of the eighth, and on the ninth he was perfectly well, having
without another dose of opium continued to sleep twelve
hours after I had sent him into sound sleep on the evening
of the eighth.

In the beginning of last December, through a want of
virtuous resolution, he fell into delirium tremens again, after
experiencing severe pains in the back and hips, nausea, want
of appetite, &c., for a week. His temper became irritable
on the 5th of December; he had fears of approaching mis-
fortunes, scratched and pricked himself, was restless, spoke
shortly and quickly, and lost all inclination to sleep.

He grew steadily worse, and on the fourth day of the
disease began talking to himself incoherently.

On the fifth he was still more unmanageable, and had
extraordinary delusions: and had not yet slept. He was
mesmerised at 10 o’clock at night by Charles Fisher, who
has now succeeded his brother William at the Mesmeric
Infirmary: but without effect.

On the sixth, at half-past one in the morning, C. Fisher
succeeded in sending him to sleep: and by almost continual
passes prevented him from waking before half-past eight.
Toast and chocolate were taken for breakfast, and a good
dinner eaten in the evening: and at eight o’clock C. Fisher
mesmerised him into a sound sleep, which lasted all night.
He awoke much more calm and rational at eight on the
morning of the seventh of the disease, and was again mes-
merised to sleep, and again at night.

On the eighth, the improvement was great, and he had
extreme drowsiness. The mesmerism was continued.

On the ninth, he shaved himself and conversed with his
friends just as when in health.

On the tenth, he attended a midwifery case and visited
his patients.

Not a particle of opium or any other medicine was taken
all the time: nor did I allow him a drop of alcoholic fluid.

He is now in good health; and, keeping to his good
resolution of perfect abstinence, is one of the happiest men
alive.

Joun EL.iorson.


( 320 )


BOOKS RECEIVED.


On Human Longevity and the Amount of Life upon the Globe. By P. Flourens,
Perpetual Secretary to the Academy of Sciences, Paris. Translated by Charles
Martel. Bailliere: London, 1855.

British Journal of Homeopathy. July, 1855.

Bulletin Magnétique de Lyon, Journal des Sciences Psycho-Physiques. No.
15. Avril, 1855.


Handbook of Curative Mesmerism. Edinburgh: 1854. 12mo. pp. 96.

We regret that this little book was not sent to us before. Till now we were
ignorant of its existence. The author mentions the harm which mesmerism
formerly sustained from its being regarded as supernatural, and not, as at present,
as a portion of natural knowledge. We have laboured from our first number to
shew that it is altogether a set of natural phenomena and processes, and pointed
out the gross ignorance, childishness, arid absurdity of those who ascribe the
former to the interference of what they call spirits, to which word we inves-
tigators of nature, and not dreamers, can attach no other meanfng than power,
influence, property, or cause. Unfortunately many meddle with mesmerism in
the present day who know no better, and would be hissed in any society esta-
blished for the cultivation of any other science if they presumed to introduce
such nonsense. In the stream of mankind which is moving onwards to the
temple of truth, some are near, some are distant—some at an immense distance
behind others, and of the latter some will remain stationary, and, without ever
approaching those who are before them, will die in the odour of absurdity.

There are many good and unquestionable pieces of information in the book,
but at the same time statements and directions of the soundness of which we
have great doubts: and many absolute errors. What can be thought of this
sentence ?

‘*That strange unfathomable thing called mind which belongs exclusively to
man, enables him to exercise and receive a greater amount of that essential
which forms so valuable an agent in the human organization.”

We recommend the portion from p. 58 to p. 64, inclusive, to the perusal of
those who ignorantly suppose that materialists cannot believe in the Bible and a
future state.

We should hardly suppose the author to have very great practice in mes-
merising.


POSTSCRIPT TO MR. JACKSON’S ARTICLE ON JOAN OF ARC.


In the Atheneum of Sept. 15th is the notice of two historical works ; one,
Joan of Arc, her Mission and Martyrdom, by M. A. Kenzi, and the other,
Historical Doubt, by C. Delepierre, in which an endeavour is made to demon-
strate that the real Joan was not burnt, but long survived the period of her
supposed martyrdom, living at Metz with her husband, and even visiting Orleans,
the scene of her former triumphs, and being entertained there at the expense of
the city, her brothers joining with many others in giving recognition to her as
their long-lost sister. These works are spoken of by the reviewer as if the doubts
which they suggest were altogether new, but this is a mistake, for the data to
which they refer (some documents in the archives of Metz and Orleans) are
spoken of by Lord Mahon in his admirable paper on the Maid of Orleans, pub-
lished in his Historical Essays, and are familiar to most students of that period of
French history. His Lordship, and we agree with him, considers this second
maid to have been an impostor, who availed herself of considerable personal
resemblance to pass for the heroine, whose brothers aided the fraud, in hopes of
sharing the profit. Granting however that the English burnt the wrong woman,
this should cast no discredit on the previous acts of Joan’s life, which indeed are
written, not on parchment archives, but in the more enduring facts of history,
with which she is indissolubly connected, and of which she forms an enduring
feature.—J. W. J.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. LII.


JANUARY, 1856.


I. Reichenbach and his Researches: the principal “ Laws of
Sensitiveness,” abstracted from Reichenbach’s work, Der
Sensitive Mensca, by Arexanper J. Exuis, B.A.,


Trin. Coll., Camb.*
(Concluded from No. LI., p. 242.)


‘In 1801 he made his grand discovery of the law of interference of undula-
tions of light. In that year, and in the two following, he read memoirs to the
Royal Academy which established the theory on grounds that have since been
almost universally recognized as irrefragable. It was because they were so con-
clusive, very probably, that the Edinburgh Review, which, in those days, would
allow no one to be in the right but itself, determined to ‘ put down’ Young.
The tomahawk was entrusted to Mr. Henry Brougham—now Lord Brougham—
who ran a muck at Dr. Young in the reckless manner which was then charac-
teristic of the reviewers. The following is a specimen of the amenities of the
reviewer ;—

““*We demand, if the world of science which Newton once illuminated, is
to be as changeable in its modes as the world of fashion, which is directed by the


* In the motto on p. 255 of Zoist, No. LI., I am reported in a quotation
from an Edinburgh paper to have ‘‘contended that it would be as absurd to °
resist the electric telegraph because we were ignorant of the fundamental laws of
its operations as to reject curative mesmerism because we had not discovered the
laws which regulate i¢.’’ It could have only been in the hurry of attempting to
condense somewhat lengthy remarks that such nonsense could have been imputed
tome. The substance of what I did say was that it would be as absurd to refuse
to employ the electric telegraph, because we are in ignorance of the fundamental
laws and nature of electricity, as to neglect to use curative mesmerism because
we did not yet know the fundamental laws and nature of general mesmerism.
We do know how to use the telegraph, although much yet remains to be dis-
covered respecting it, and we do know how to mesmerise curatively, although
very much still remains to be learned. We are not ignorant of all the laws of
electricity, although we cannot systematize those we know under one general law.
We are also not ignorant of all the laws of od, although those hitherto discovered
may all prove secondary. The nature of electricity and od are, and will probably
ever remain, equally obscure. But if we refused to apply our knowledge while
yet imperfect, we should be a very unhappy, miserable set of mortals.—A. J. E.
VOL. XIII. AA


22 Sensitive Vision.


nod of a silly woman or a pampered fop? Has the Royal Society degraded its
publications into bulletins of new and fashionable theories for the ladies of the
Royal Institution? Proh pudor! Let the professor continue to amuse his
audience with an endless variety of such harmless trifles, but in the name of
science, let them not find admittance into that venerable repository which con-
tains the works of Newton, and Boyle, and Cavendish, and Maskelyne, and
Herschel.’

“Further on, Dr. Young’s hypotheses are ‘ children of a puny sickly nature,
which have scarcely stamina enough to subsist until the fruitful parent has fur-
nished us with a new litter, to make way for which he knocks on the head, or
more barbarously exposes’ the old. They are afterwards called ‘ awkward gam-
bols,’ ‘ clumsy hypotheses,’ ‘ dull inventions,’ and so on. At last, however, the
reviewer stumbles upon something in the third memoir which common sense told
him could not be got rid of by abuse. It is the account of an experiment made
by Young, the deductions from which were of themselves almost sufficient to
establish the correctness of the undulatory theory. It is what Bacon would have
called a crucial experiment. What is to be done with this? It upsets all that the
reviewer has said. What can the reviewer do? Burn what he has written, says
an honest man. Not at all. There is another resource—to deny it. ‘ Con-
scious,’ says Young, in his most triumphant reply, ‘of inability to explain the
experiment, too ungenerous to confess that inability, and too idle to repeat the
experiment, he is compelled to advance the supposition that it was incorrect.’
It is humiliating to be obliged to add, that Lord Brougham’s ribaldry had the
effect of checking the advance of the undulatory theory. The Edinburgh Review
then tyrannized over public opinion, and there was no appeal from its decrees.
Young wrote a calm, philosophic reply, utterly unanswerable in its logic, of which
one copy sold. This discovery, which Lord Brougham derided with his utmost
powers of sarcasm, is one ‘ which has proved,’ says Sir John Herschel, ‘ the key
to all the more abstruse and puzzling properties of light, and which would aloné
have sufficed to place its author in the highest rank of scientific immortality, even
were his other almost innumerable claims to such a distinction disregarded.’

‘* Some time after this, Fresnel, without knowing, there is reason to believe,
anything of the discovery of Young, brought forward the theory in France, and
supported it, and carried it out with wonderful mathematical precision. Young
always did justice to the merits of Fresnel, and the two philosophers, after a
little skirmishing, came to a right understanding on the value of their respective
shares in the great discovery. It was not Young, however, but Fresnel, who
received a medal from the Royal Society some years afterwards for his scientific
labours on the subject of light.’”,—Dairy News, Oct. 29, 1855. Notice of the
‘* Life of Dr. Thomas Young, F.R.S., &c., one of the eight Foreign Associates of
the National Institute of France. By the Very Reverend George Peacock, D.D.,
Dean of Ely.”


Section I].—Opic PuHenomena or VisIon.
Part I.—Sensitive Vision.
I. Power of Vision and Intensity of Odic Light.


91. All sensitives cannot see odic light in equal degrees,
nor does the same sensitive see odic light from all objects in
equal intensities. Sensitive vision is not confined to any age,
being found in young children and aged men, but is neither
so commonly nor so greatly developed as odic sensation.

92. The first essential for developing the power of odic
vision is the absolute exclusion of all ordinary light, however
faint. The slightest traces of- daylight, or even of candle-
light, shining through a narrow chink and reflected four to


Variations of Odic Vision.


six times before reaching the sensitive, is enough to impair
or totally destroy his odic vision. Even the sunlight on a
shutter, however ‘carefully the light is excluded, rapidly pene-
trates it, like the candlelight through our hands. Reichen-
bach has had three dark rooms built, and uses only the
middle one of the three, which is guarded by double doors
and curtains between them, with cushions to fill up the open-
ings of both doors.

93. In this darkness sensitives begin to see after various
lengths of time according to their degree of sensitiveness ;
the very sensitive in five or ten minutes, the weakest in from
two to four hours. After vision commences, it gradually
improves and reaches a maximum. They first see shapeless
woolly masses of light from their own hands, and convince
themselves of its objectivity by seeing it move when they
move the hand. Sometimes they see the hand as a dark
silhouette in the midst of a lightish cloud.

94. Novices who come into the dark chamber for the first
time are often awkward, and do not recognize objects which
they afterwards readily distinguish. This resembles the facts
of ordinary vision in uncertain lights. The same person does
not see equally well at all times. Short and long-sightedness
have no effect on odic vision so far as power is concerned, but
affect the distance of vision. When the odic light covers a
large space but is of weak intensity, it is best seen at a dis-
tance, and scarcely perceived near. Observations with odic
vision are accompanied with labour, and soon tire the sen-
sitives. The impression remains much longer on the eye than
that of ordinary light, and hence pauses must be made be-
tween observations. Odic vision is also subject to sudden
remittances and intermittences, which must be always looked
for. Sensitives are frequently deceived as to the distance of
objects seen odically.


II. Strengthening and Weakening of Odic Visions.


94, Odie vision is weakened by eating, especially by a full
meal (hence the afternoon or evening is a bad time for ob-
servations), sitting, walking in the open air for some time,
weariness from any exertion (as from observing), a sound
sleep, coldness, catarrh, closing the eyes, using spectacles,
exposure to strong sunshine for some time previously (this is
enough to blind the best sensitives), the sight of blue light
generally, long continuation of observation, ” the approach of
unlike poles to “parts of the sensitive bodies (this often destroys
vision till the unlike pole is removed), conduction of od from
a left hand through a copper wire wound round the body of
AA2


324 Visual Odic Statics.
the sensitive, the inductive effect of a galvanic current on the
brain and eyes placed on the right of the stream, folding
hands or crossing legs, down passes, and generally all nemetic
effects (par. 88, No. L., p. 239). These actions explain the
frequent intermittences of odic visual power.

95. Odic vision is strengthened by fasting (hence the early
morning is the best time for experiments, especially if sleep
has not been sound), standing, catamenia (one of the strongest
intensifiers), pregnancy and, apparently, lactation, recovery
from syncope, spasms, warmth (a comfortable temperature is
indispensable to the success of experiments), sight of blue for
seeing yellow, and of yellow for seeing blue objects, the first
glance (continued inspection with a view to greater accuracy
often confuses), approach of like poles to parts of the sen-
sitive’s body (by which means vision when intermitted may
be frequently restored), inclosure in a metal wire or dress
(armour), conduction of od through a copper wire from the
right hand of the operator, inductive effect of the galvanic
current when the brain and eyes are on the /eft of the stream,
up passes, excitement of passion, and generally any soretic
effects (par. 87, No. L., p. 239).

96. The application of unlike poles to the eyes strengthens
vision. “Hence we have a means of testing the power of
vision without resorting to many hours sitting in the dark
chamber,” says Reichenbach. “We have ouly to take 2
person into a tolerably dark place, as a cellar, or very dark
room, and to make him place his right hand for a few seconds
on his left eye, and his left hand on his right eye. If he
possess odic visual power, he will see a flash of light on re-
moving his hand.”


Part I1.—Permanent Odic Conditions.
I.— Visual Odic Statics.


A. Man as an object of odic investigation with reference to
visual phenomena.


97. The whole human body is seen to glow in an odic
atmosphere, which magnifies it and makes it appear a white
ghostlike monster. The head is seen surrounded by a “ glory.”
There is a bright spot just over each eye and on the upper part
of the cheekbone. The chin also shines. The eyes emit no
light in general, but when exertion (such as a sudden rise
from a stooping posture, pressure or a blow) produces a sub-
jective sensation of light, the sensitive perceives a flash of
equal duration. Mental excitement which produces a so-called
“ brightness of the eyes” also allows them to be seen odically.


Odic Human Luminosity. 325


Generally the head looks like a death’s head with holes for the
eyes. The nose, ears, cheeks, lips and teeth have but a
moderate glow. (The breath glows strongly, and if not held,
makes the mouth and teeth apparently shine, and deceived
Reichenbach at first). The hair and back of the head behind
the ears have much glow.

98. The shoulders were generally soon seen. The sternum
is bright. 'The female breast (in milk) is dark above, bright
over the areola, very bright on the nipple. The pit of the
stomach is very bright. On the abdomen are various bright
and dark and spots. The depression of the navel is dark, but
it is surrounded with a bright ring. The spine is marked by
a stripe of light. All sensitives could see the light of the
hands. The following is the order of brightness about the arm
from least to most :—The whole arm, the left arm, its inside
generally, armpit, elbow joint, the wrist, the hand in general,
the palm, the fingers in general, the finger joints, the finger
tips, the nails, the points of the nails, the roots of the nails
(brightest). All sensitives could sce their thighs and legs
through their clothes, which seemed as a transparent gauze.
The knee was one of the brightest spots. The feet bore about
the same relation to the legs as the arms to the hands.


99. ‘Genitalia virilia Dom. G. Anschuetz me desiderante exacte
examinavit. De lumbis usque ad testiculos utrimque lineam lucen-
tem vidit decurrere. Testiculi apparuere clarissimi. Etiam penis
lucebat, multo minus tamen splendens. Erecto autem eodem lux
multum intensitate auxit. Glans tum preecipue clara eminebat et,
ut digiti, in directione penis lumen flammee simile emittebat, par
illi ipsi longitudine. Fasciculum id lucens colore subcceruleo vestes
ipsas penetravit, pene rubro colore splendente, et in album prope
fumum transiit, similem emanationibus lucis extra digitos manum
pedumque apparentibus. Vapor autem iste lucens fumo similis
trans regionem genitalium preesertim propagatus visus est. Diffi-
cillime est, queror, investigationes hujus generis de organis vivis in
particularibus ample persequi. Hoc tamen cum certitudine ex illis a
me peractis eruit, genitalia sedem esse generalem magnee vis lucendi
odicee, preesertim vero in statu erectionis.”—§§ 1763-4.


100. The glow is stronger on naked than on clothed parts,
but the sensitives see their limbs ¢hrough their clothes, and the
glow as a shining mist over the clothes. This mist rises from
all parts of the body and ascends towards the ceiling, but the
darkest, or least light parts are the cheeks, just under the
zygomatic arch, the m. pectoralis just above the nipple, the
under part of the m. deltoideus on the arm, a spot on the back
where the scapule terminate, a spot about the middle of the
calf, one on the footsole where the ball terminates towards the


326 Effect of Polarity on Human Luminosity.


hollow, where the heel touches the ground, under the left lobe
of the liver, the line of the m. rectus femoris, and the whole
gluteus maximus, that is, the more fleshy parts where nervous
plexus and cutaneous nerves are least frequent.

101. The internal organs are only seen by middle or higher
sensitives. The blood shines visibly to moderately sensitive
persons through the bloodvessels, muscles, fasciz and skin, so
that the blood within the body is seen by a sensitive without.
The bones are similarly distinguished by a peculiar grey light.
The nerves are the especial centres of odic light. All the
nerves, sensor, motor, vegetative and animal, shine, and are
visible not only through the skin, but even from the deep-seated
parts. The most brilliant parts of the body are those in
which the nerves are principally accumulated. On these
phenomena must depend the introvisual power of certain sleep-
wakers.

B. Man as Polar.

102. As man is on the whole polar according to three axes,
his odo-luminous emanations are different for the different
poles, reddish yellow light coming from the left, front and
under or positive parts, bluish darker light from right, back
and upper or negative parts.

103. When like poles approach each other they darken
each other’s light, unlike poles strengthen the light. Hence
persons approaching face to face appear darker. But if unlike
poles touch, then the two axes become one, the touching potut
is one of indifference and absence of light, while the distant
poles are brighter.

104. As touching the sensitive hand or arm in different
positions produces various feelings, so it also occasions different
luminous phenomena. The light is lessened or increased
according as the right or left fingers were placed upon the
larger nerves or muscular fasciz. In the case of unlike
pairing, contact with the nervous plexus of the arms produced
shorter flames from the fingers; like pairing, longer; the
reverse holding good for contact with muscles. Touching
the brachial plexus produced as great an effect as touching the
hand itself. We see from this that the odic streams from the
hands are less a local than a general, apparently cerebral
emission. It is impossible to pursue these beautiful experi-
ments into further detail here.


I1.— Visual Odie Dynamics.


A. Visual effects of the odic charge out of and into the human
body.


105. Tn every case where a charge of od is given light is


Odic Light from Table-turning. 327


produced, whether the charge take place by contact or ap-
proach. In experiments on ¢adle-turning made in the dark
chamber these effects were beautifully produced. The table
was odically charged by the hands; the charge acted soreti-
cally on the sensitive feeling ; both fingers and hands produced
a luminosity on the table, causing its surface to be covered
with a white glow; the feet also co-operated in charging the
table. This charge concentrated itself in the column on which
the round table rested. In the middle of the table, in con-
tinuation of this column, arose a column of hazy light, of the
thickness of a man, which finally reached the ceiling, and
there produced a large bright spot. In all these processes
the positive and negative od did not destroy each other, but
merely mixed. In a second and more successful experiment,
the odic light increased considerably when the table began to
turn (in the first experiment the table did not turn), both on
the table and the table-turners. It became coloured with the
hues of the iris, and was darker from men than from women ;
being greyish-blue from right hands, and yellowish-red from
left hands, similar colours arising from the feet. The foot of
the table traced out lines of light on the floor (see below,
par. 124, e). The act of taking part in table-turning not only
made the performers brighter, but increased their odo-visual
powers. [Professor Faraday is requested to explain these
results by his mechanical theory of table-turning].


B. Attraction and Repulsion.


106. Unlike hands, which mutually attract or produce
the sensation of attraction, excite one another, producing light
and giving a charge. Like hands which produce the sensa-
tion of repulsion, mutually darken each other.


C. The Pass.


107. Without making passes in the dark, half their nature
cannot be understood, as the vague sensations are here ex-
plained by vision. The operator’s fingers become brighter as
he passes over the principal seats of the nerves.

108. Effects of placing fingers on a sensitive’s shoulders.—
In general. Odic charge from the fingers to the shoulder, pro-
gression down the arm, emission through the fingers into the
air. No neutralization of od, but where blue and red od met
a bluish red was formed.—In particular. Unlike pairing, a,
right fingers on left shoulder—dark spots, at first dullishly
glowing hands, afterwards brighter, breaking out into blood-


328 Luminous effect of Passes over the Arms.


red odic vapour, 5, left fingers on the right shoulder, dark
spots, redder hands and finger flames. Like pairings, c, left
fingers on left shoulder,—all redder, brighter hands, d, right
fingers on right shoulder,—all bluer, brighter hands. Simi-
Jarly with the feet. When the fingers were retained some-
time on the shoulder, the brighter light ascended the whole
arm. As the fingers were applied a shudder ran down the
arm.


108. Passes over the Arms.


a. Increased luminosity on the limb in advance of the
hand, accompanied by decreased luminosity behind the hand.
This is a general law for all descriptions of pass, up or down.

b. The advanced light extends at once from the beginning
of the pass over the whole limb, but the darkness only extends
over the portion actually passed over and quitted.

c. The brightness is greater and the darkness deeper for
like than for unlike poles; and also,

d, When the pass is made over the inside; but the contrary,
when over the outside.

e. Up passes with like poles give brighter light and less
darkness than down passes.

f. The light produced by the right fingers is duller; that
by the left, brighter.

g. The dark places disappear more slowly on the inside than
on the outside of the arm.

h. For unlike poles the light is bluish-red, for like nega-
tive poles blue, and like positive red.

i. In down passes, the colouring and intensity of the light
increases until the hand has advanced, with blue flames to the
elbow joint, with bluish red over the forearm, and with red to
the wrist; as the hand proceeds the flames diminish, and
vanish when it has passed the finger tips.

k. The flames at the finger tips are longer, or rather
thicker, round, and lumpy for the down pass.

l. The fumes are stronger for red than for blue light.

m. The darkness from down passes with like individual
fingers is stronger and more lasting than from unlike.

n. Down passes carry the odic stream through the points
of the fingers into the air, up passes drive it into the brain.

o. The legs bear the same relation to the pass as the arms
do, the knee answering to the elbow, the toes to the fingers.

p. Passes made by the sensitive over himself follow the
same laws.

g. A rod held in the hand answers to a lifeless prolonga-


Complete Passes and Separation. 829


tion of the hand ; it may be compared to claws, feathers and
fins, and behaves in the same manner towards the pass.

109. Passes over the whole body.—When Reichenbach
stood or lay in the meridian, with head to north, the unlike
down pass darkened the whole of his natural glow, so as to
make him for a short while invisible to the middle class sensi-
tives. Up passes, on the contrary, immediately restored his
light. Continued and repeated up passes increased this light
till it became an iris, clothing him in prismatic colours like a
living spectrum, violet and blue at the head, green at the pit
of the stomach, yellow in the thigh, orange below the knee,
red at the feet. The head had a blue glory, red flames and
fumes emanated from the points of the toes. When he lay
with head to south, up passes covered him with an iris, in which
the order of colour with respect to his body was inverted, the
feet being now blue and the head red. All kinds of passes,
made in the direction of the latitudinal axis over his arm
stretched out in the meridian, made it shine with the prismatic
colours. Compare the case of magnets, &c. (Researches, &c.
Dr. Gregory’s translation, p. 309, ff.). The up pass over the
whole body therefore differs from the pass over individual
limbs, darkening these, but brightening the whole body.


D. Separation.


110. The pain occasioned by separation (par. 39, No. L.,
p. 130) is a phenomenon resulting from the charge produced
by contact. On a sudden separation the unlike extraneous
od received from the charge is driven out. This is proved by
the colour of the emitted odic flame, which for some time is
the same as that of the part from which the hand was sepa-
rated, but gradually disappears, and is represented by the
usual colour belonging to the part.

111. In the case giddiness, arising from whirling round
(which Reichenbach has found to occur as rapidly in the dark
chamber as in daylight, and hence is not occasioned by the
effects of rapidly altering the adjustment of the eye for ordi-
nary vision), Reichenbach found that the light on the body
became of a uniform grey, and seemed as if composed of
worms knotted together and writhing about, a phenomenon
which lasted nearly a quarter of an hour, and seems attri-
butable to the mixing of the continued discharges of light.


K. Velocity of Odie Light.


112. This has not yet been accurately measured, but it is
never too great to be comfortably followed by the eye.


330 Transient Conditions of Odic Light.


Part I1I.— Transient Odic Conditions.


I.—Transient Odie Conditions produced by internal changes
in the body.


A. During perfect Health.


113. Muscular exertion, which is known to be a source of
heat and electricity, is one of the most powerful sources of
odic light. Reichenbach considers that it is a question for
future consideration which of the three is primary and which
secondary in this case. Excitement of the skin to perspiration
is also accompanied by an increase of odic light.


114. ‘ Testimonia, quee de lucis phzenominis ante coitam vel
sub coitu de diversis hominibus collegi, fere omnia in eo conveniunt,
ut illee lucis apparitiones tanta functionum vitalium exaltatione miro
modo participent. Si in viro libido exardet, id mediis in tenebris a
sensitivis subito percipitur. Primum oculus nitidior fit, tum fulgens,
quandoque imo adspectu terribilis. Huic proxime accedunt phno-
mena manuum, que multo magis odice refulgent flammeeque odi ex
eorum digitis prodeuntes duplo plus consuetam longitudinem supe-
rant; deinceps totum brachium, pectus, imo totus vir in omnibus
suis partibus auctum exhibet splendorem, idque tanto magis quanto
fervidioris, ut dicunt, fuerit temperamenti, aut quo vehementius cupi-
ditas ejus obstaculis obviis fuerit incitata. Sub tali rerum facie penis
erectus totus quantus refulget, longe maxime circa glandem; simul
digitorum facultatem adspiscitur ad apicem oblongum lucis effluvium.
flammam odicam exhalandi, quee longitudinem pedis, imo braciuii,
adtingit, quod in tenebris imo per vestimenta conspicitur. Juxta
memorata viri pariter ac mulieres, nullatenus sibi contradicentes,
accurate mihi enarrabant.

** Maritus quidam et uxor, ambo fere pari ratione mediocriter
sensitivi, mihi referebant, se ambos sub coitu toto corpore nitescere,
ita ut id densa sub caligine fere esset horribile obtutum. Insimul
pudenda mulieris cum partibus contiguis lucido quasi vapore cireum-
funditur. Penis vero si retrahitur, glans rubicundo splendore odico,
reliqua vero pars penis ccerulea luce apparet. [lle ipse rubor tantus
est, ut similis carboni candenti ex nubecula albicante cernatur. Sub
ejaculatione spermatis mirabilis emanat splendor. Nitor per totum
corpus amborum diffusus diu adhuc remanet, nee post horam inte-
gram penitus evanuit.”—§ 2027.


B. Jn Disease.


115. Violent cold on the skin destroys the odic light, but
on the re-action the light becomes more powerful than ordi-
nary. Gentle cold washing, from which the re-action is
almost immediate, increases the odic light. Chills appear
to increase it positively, as an exposure of the right (blue)
side to a chill changes its colour to an intense red. Friction


Reichenbach sees Odie Light. 331


on the other hand increases the odic light. Inflammation and
drunkenness (while it lasts) do the like; when the drunken-
ness is over the light is much weaker than usual. In the case
of coryza, a large long clump of (positive) light seems to ema-
nate from the nose. In general catarrh various parts of the
body shine more, apparently indicating inflammation. Even
old wounds shine more brightly than other parts.

116. Spasms afford some of the finest examples of odic
light, and gave Reichenbach himself for the first time an
opportunity of seeing this light with his own eyes. The fol-
lowing experiments deserve therefore to be given at length.
(Vol II., p. 181).


“ § 2048. The finest and most remarkable luminous phenomena
were very lately presented to be by spasms. I had Fri. Zinkel ('*)
and Schwarz (®) in the dark chamber. I placed a flat transparent
crystal of sulphate of lime (selenite), about five inches long, on the
point of Frl. Zinkel’s left middle finger, so as to balance. She soon
felt its accumulative, soretic re-action. I requested her to keep still,
and those peculiar twitchings, which always accompany these experi-
meuts, soon began, first in the fingers, then in the hand and arm, and
afterwards in the form of jerks over the whole body. At the same
time the crystal became much brighter from the large odie charge it
received, and finger and hand increased in luminosity. This increase
proceeded to such an unusual extent that Fri. Zinkel at last called me
to her, asserting that I could not help seeing something too. To my de-
light and astonishment I actually beheld light rise out of thedarkness.*
At every convulsion of the sensitive I saw a light spot arise from the
poiut where the crystal rested on her finger. I saw this through the
body of the crystal itself. It was as large as the surfaces in contact,
that is, roundish and about half an inch in diameter. It was repeated
at every fresh spasmodic convulsion, and immediately disappeared.
The brightness lasted about a second. ‘The intensity was sufficient
for me to see it distinctly, after having been about two hours in the
dark. It was not uniform for every appearance, but was at times
brighter or fainter, according to the strength of the corresponding
spasm. The light had the appearance of a whitish spot, like that of
putrefying wood (Scheinholz), tolerably well defined, and uniformly
bright over the whole surface. It disappeared gently, and seemed to
shade off into darkness as it came and went. It gave out no light
around it that I could observe, and had no resemblance to the hard
lightning-like velocity of the electric spark. Frl. Zinkel, however,
saw more; not only her hands, but the whole crystal appeared to her
much brighter at every spasm, the two poles much more luminous,
and the polar flames longer. This was also seen by J. Schwarz.
This light appeared and vanished in very unequal intervals, now
several times in rapid succession, and now with pauses of several


* The advocates of the suggestive theory will no doubt seize upon this point
s favouring their views. But let them read ou.—A. J. E.


332 Intense Odic Light from Spasms.


seconds duration. It was not to be mistaken that with every spasmodic
jerking twitch something was evolved from the body of the sensitive
which passed through the arm into the finger, was communicated
to the crystal at the dry point of junction, accompanied by a develop-
ment of light, and passed out at its poles into the air.

**§. 2049. After I had observed this phenomenon and its rapid
repetitions for some time, the finger became cramped. I was obliged
to remove the crystal, and prepared to relieve the cramp by unlike
pairing of our hands. But as I felt for her left hand with my right
in the dark, I was suddenly astonished by a fiery appearance, shining
as bright as phosphorus, and brighter than anything that I had
hitherto witnessed. I was almost startled at. this sudden fire which
arose from the contact of my finger with the sensitive’s hand.*
Meanwhile the cramp had spread very painfully over the whole hand,
and was seizing on the arm of the sensitive. To assist her, I felt
out for her left fingers with my right, and now I had a new spectacle
to observe, for wherever my fingers came in contact with hers spots of
fire appeared. This lasted some twenty seconds, during which time
I saw from forty to fifty luminous spots, of various degrees of bright-
ness, appear and disappear at the points of contact between my
fingers and hers. Wherever I came, fire started up. All these light
spots which arose from the cramped hand were much brighter than
those I had previously seen when the hand was in contact with the
crystal. I had to /ook at the latter in order to see them properly.
I should have seen the sparks from a distance while my attention was
directed elsewhere. The sensitive saw not only the points of contact,
but the whole hand unusually bright ; this, however, was invisible to
me. If during this time she touched her left hand with her own
right fingers, spots of light also arose at their points of contact.
All this was accompanied by violent shooting and drawing pains on
the whole left side, the hands and arms, up to the body, the body
itself, back, head and face, causing the features to contract. When
the cramp was quieted by my fingers the luminous appearances ceased.
Vomiting ensued, and the next day she was perfectly well.

“* I have consequently with my own eyes on two different occasions,
and in considerable frequency, seen light, generated by internal causes,
proceed from a living person. If ever an impression of this book
should lose its way and get to Munich, and the present page should
fall under the eye of an obliging reader, I beg him to refer Herr von
Liebig to the same. It may perhaps be of service to him, if only asa
warning against inconsiderate rashness and false statements in public.”


* Here then we have a case which was so unexpected as to be startling,
and to which therefore the imaginative and suggestive theories are inapplicable.
These remarks apply only to Reichenbach’s personal vision. The impossibility of
suggestion or imagination prompting 161 sensitives to agree for ten years in fur-
nishing Reichenbach with a body of facts reducible to laws such as are here given,
all apparent contradictions which did not fail to occur at first (like those in the
motions of the moon for example, one considerable error in whose theory was
not corrected even at the time of Newton’s death), having ranged themselves
under intelligible laws of compound action, ought not to require pointing
out.—A. J. E.


Odic Shadows. 333


[Reichenbach proceeds to consider the question of human electricity as
the cause of the secondary twitchings in tetanus, and considers that
od may rather be the principal agent, or at any rate that it is a factor,
or even the immediate cause, being itself generated by the electricity,
and thai all Dr. Diibois’s experiments require consideration and re-
institution with this view].


Il. Transient conditions produced by external influences.


A. Shining of the whole anorganic creation.


117. All metallic and electro-positive, that is, all odo-
positive bodies, are seen to glow, and higher sensitives per-
ceive the odic flames and fumes. Odo-negative bodies shine
with a bluish flame. All bodies, amorphous or otherwise,
excite odic sensations and give out odic light.

118. The odic shadow is a name given to an appearance
which produces the effect of a shadow. If a sensitive ap-
proached the wall of the dark chamber, he perceived two
shadowlike images of himself, one darker and the other
brighter than the wall, which had only a delicate glow. The
right side darkens, the left brightens, and generally the front
lightens and the back darkens a wall—which is odo-negative.
If a metallic surface be substituted, the contrary effects
ensue, but are sharper. They result from the darkening
effects of concurrent like od, and brightening effects of con-
current unlike od (par. 103). This apparent shadow is larger
than the real body, on account of the radiation of od, and has
been a fruitful source of imputed ghostly apparitions. It is
seen as a double shadow on the ground, dark on the right
and light on the left. For the same reason the walls of the
room act, when near enough, to darken one another, and
hence the four corners are always dark and the ceiling seems
supported on four dark columns.


B. Crystals.


119. a. All crystals shine with a constant glow:
6. This glow appears to interpenetrate the crystal ;
ec. It is of different intensity in different crystals, varying
with their constituents and their size ;
d. It is of different colour, yellow for tourmaline, blue for
sulphur, &c.
e. Transparent crystals are also odically transparent in
the dark.
f. Bright configurations are seen in the interior of the
crystals.
2 The odic glow forms an iris extending from pole to
pole.


334 Luminous appearances of Crystals


h. The crystals glow more faintly in the middle and
more strongly at the poles.

i. The approach and contact of other odic poles act to
increase or diminish the glow.

k. A shining fume (smoke-cloud) surrounds the crystal.

l. The surface is less luminous than the edges, the edges
than the corners, and these than the polar points.

m. The poles and corners emit flame-like light and fumes.

n. The intensity of this light is greatest at the positive
and least at the negative pole ;

o. It is reddish yellow at the positive, and blue at the
negative pole.

p. The flames extend from the smallest visible size to the
height of a man or more ;

g. They are accompanied by sparks, and end in fumes ;

r. They are prismatically coloured ;

s. They have a finely fibrous appearance ;

t. They are moveable ;

u. They illuminate other objects sufficiently to cast a
shadow.

v. By composition of crystals an odic pile (similar to the
voltaic pile) can be built up, exhibiting an augmented deve-
lopment of od.

w. The effect of such a column with some crystals is so
great as to illuminate the ceiling of a room.

x. Crystals also exhibit transversal polarity.

y. By charging with the hands, the polar flames of crys-
tals may be increased.

z. The polar flames may be propagated by conduction.

aa. By like and unlike pairings with human limbs, the
crystals and the limbs may be made to exhibit obscurations
and intensifications of the light.

6b. Similar effects may be produced by mere approach
from the left or right.

ec. The direction of the crystal with regard to the mag-
netic meridian affects its light ; like direction weakening, un-
like strengthening.

dd. Polar flames when brought together exhibit deflection
and interpenetration.

ee. Odic flames, fumes, and sparks may be driven in dif-
ferent directions, or made to flicker by fanning or blowing
on them.

ff. Recognition of colours is partly dependent on the
distance of the observer’s eye.

gg- Odic shadows (par. 118) may be produced on the wall
by crystal poles.


and of Magnets. 335


hh. Mixed flames are produced by crossing crystals.

ii. The light of crystals is inferior to that of the hands.

kk. The strength and clearness of all these observations
on luminous phenomena is exactly in proportion to the degree
of the observer’s sensitiveness.

ll. The light from crystals is different in media of different
densities, as water and the vacuum of an air-pump.

120. CC. Crystallization as an act causes a development
of negative od sufficient to produce light.


D. Magnetism.


121. On this subject see the Second Part of the Re-
searches, &c. The laws are :—

a. Magnetic light is seen in glow, flame, fumes, fibres,
and sparks, and is prismatically coloured.

b. The flame is not of a uniform size, but gushes, and
seems to stream out in masses.

c. Odie radiation, which coexists to some extent with
these luminous phenomena, proceeds continuously in a straight
line in the direction of the axis of the magnet from its trans-
verse section.

d. Odic shadows of magnetic poles (par. 118) may be seen
on the ceiling at many ells distance (a Viennese ell is about
30°7 inches).

e. Charging of light on other bodies, conduction of light
through long wires, concentration of light through convex
lenses, movement and flickering of light from blowing, occurs
as for crystals.

f. Obscurations and illuminations may be caused by like
and unlike pairings with human limbs by contact or approach.

g. Each polar light allows of being separated into the
single prismatic colours by placing caps with numerous points
on the poles.

h. Terrestrial magnetism can be “ paired” as well as arti-
ficial, so that right hands flame brighter when held towards
the north than when directed southwards; left hands the
reverse : the human body when laid in the meridian is blue
towards the north, and red towards the south, independently
of the direction of head or feet (par. 109).

i. Magnetic light may be conducted from limbs into other
bodies.

k. Vertical bodies are blue above, red below.

1. On cylindrical steel rods (round rods), the odic flames
take the form of a prismatically-coloured hollow cylinder, in
the interior of which other odic colouring is seen, so that


336 Effect of Electricity on Odic Light.


there is an outer shell and an inner stuffing; the first being
chiefly conditioned by the effect of terrestrial od, and the
second by that of the magnetic od of the rod itself.

m. Non-magnetic and non-odopolar bodies are influenced
in their luminous emanations by terrestrial od, whilst odo-
polar bodies, as magnets and human beings, endeavour to
assert an independent odic effect, so that the result is com-
pounded of that and terrestrial odic action.

n. Magnetic light is inferior to the light of crystals, and
therefore also to that of the human hand.


E. Electricity.


122. a. Every electrical motion or disturbance of elec-
trical equilibrium causes motion in od, exciting odic sensa-
tions and producing odic luminous phenomena. The elements
of the electrophorus, friction machine, and Voltaic battery or
pile, are consequently all luminous as soon as they are set in
action. This luminosity increases until the formation of an
odic spectrum is complete.

5. The fur, the zinc, and the conductor shone with a
whitish light ; the resin, copper and rubber were yellow, red-
dish and darker.

c. Human beings, and all objects placed on the insulating
stool and electrically charged, shine with greater brightness ;
electric charging generates odic light.

d. Electric conduction produces odic light. Conducting
rods have an odic glow; metallic plates shine, glow and fume
over their whole surface where they develop an odic spectrum.

e. Bodies brought into the sphere of electric action, glow
odically from induction ;

f. This inductive effect is sufficient to reverse the odic
poles, and

g. It increases the flames of crystal and magnetic poles
enormously.

h. This holds true, not only for the odic flames and glow,
but also for fumes, vapour, fibres, down, sparks, ceiling illu-
mination, &c.

i. The electro-positive pole excites odo-negative pheno-
mena and conversely, both from the conductor and pile.

k. Electrified metals, whether supporters (treger) or con-
ductors, become transparent to the higher sensitives.

1. Electrified hands and other parts of the body become
transparent.

m. Insulated and electrified metallic bodies are clothed
with a distinctly separate luminous appearance—a kind of


Odie Light from Electricity, Heat, and Friction. 337


photosphere, which is surrounded in the middle by a hori-
zontal roll or pad of light.

n. The Leyden jar shines from its charge, fumes and be-
comes transparent.

o. The frictional and contact electrical streams generate
around their conductors a screw-shaped roll of light, directed
from the electro-positive body (i.e,, from the conductor or
zine pole of the pile) in a left-handed spiral towards the fric-
tional apparatus or the copper pole. The wire spirals of the
electro-magnet.themselves exhibit this roll of light.

p. The spark of a jar conducted over a discharging rod
makes it shine like lightning, and then glow odically, give
out sparks and fume.

q. Even the mere influence produced on conductors placed
in the sphere of electric action creates a series of important
luminous appearances with large odic spectra.

r. The angle which the spiral of the luminous roll in (0.)
makes with the axis of the conductor increases with the
strength of the electrical current.

s. The approach of like or unlike odic poles diminishes or
increases the electrical odo-luminous phenomena, and there-
fore also the luminous roll.

t. Breathing and blowing increase the electric odo-lumi-
nosity, and cause it to flicker.

u. No smell of ozone has been observed to arise from the
electric odo-luminosity.

v. There is a remarkable resemblance between the electric
light and odic light.

w. The generation of the odic glow, luminous roll, and
all phenomena of electric odo-luminosity proceed with the
same slowness which always accompanies the formation of
odie light.


123. F. Heat also produces odic light.
G. Friction.


124. a. Hands, finger-joints and tips, and backs of
hands, become more luminous when rubbed against one
another.

b. Metals rubbed on a grindstone, or filed or rubbed
against each other, become much more luminous, produce
flames, fumes and sparks at their extremities, and are clothed
in a luminous odic cloud.

c. Lead-pencils give a bright mark when used for writing
on paper.

d. Glass and porcelain when rubbed on themselves pro-
duce great odic flames and a powerful odic glow.

VOL, XIII, BB


338 Odic Light from Friction and Separation, &c.


e. Wood rubbed on wood (as when the feet of a table are
dragged along the ground) or rubbed ona grindstone, be-
comes luminous. When rasped or sawed, wood produces
luminous dust and splits. Paper shines when rubbed. In
sweeping, both brush, hairs, and floor become bright.

f. Sulphur, fluor spar, calcareous spar, sulphates, lepido-
lite (lithia or peach-blossomed mica), gurhofian (calcareo-
carbonate of magnesia), iodine, sugar, camphor, and a thou-
sand other minerals, salts and other solids, become more
luminous when shaken by themselves or with other substances
in glass bottles.

g- Fluids, as alcohol, ether, petroleum, creasote, acids, and
countless others, become luminous when shaken in closed
bottles.

h. Water shines with a red light when shaken in glass
bottles. It becomes luminous with mere splashing and dash-
ing. When running in pipes it has a red light, and is con-
sequently odo-positive, and this is therefore also the case in
its subterraneous channels.

i. Friction under water also produces light.

k. Air is luminous as it streams in and out of bellows.

125. H. Separation. When substances are broken, the
broken edges appear luminous. I. Pressure, whether active
or passive, is one of the most powerful sources of odic light,
glow, flame, fumes and sparks. K. Blows of one substance
on another, of a cane through the air, &c., produce Jigit.
The same is the case for L. Stretching; M. Change in the
aggregate condition of matter, as from solid to fluid, and fluid
to aériform ; and N. Chemical action of all kinds; as for ex-
ample, fermentation, mouldering, decay, or putrefaction of
organic substances, animal or vegetable, which produces
flames, fumes and sparks. Even the dead, although buried,
produce this light on the surface of the ground, and thus
occasion the superstition of their hovering over their graves.
The breath, which, with its watery vapour, carbonic acid and
heat, is the result of a chemical action in the lungs, is highly
luminous. O. Sound is also a source of light, which, when
arising from struck glass, is blue, the intensity increasing
with the elevation of the pitch, and shines brighter than
finger-tips, yielding glow, flames, fumes and sparks.


P. Light.


126. a. Common light engenders odic light.


b. This photodic light is produced by sun, moon, or lamp
light.


Odie Light from common Light and Life. 339


ec. It increases the glow of bodies which have been shone
on, and makes them transparent.

d. Iron, previously subjected to common light, becomes
white and transparent ; copper, red and transparent.

e. The power which these luminous rays possess of pass-
ing through metallic plates, is so great that they pass undis-
persed as through glass, and can be collected on the other
side. These substances are therefore odo-diaphanous (per-
meable to odic light).

f. Photodic light can be conducted for many ells through
wires, and appears as odic glow, flame, down and sparks at
the other end of the rods.

g. Sensitive eyes can follow its velocity of conduction
without difficulty ; it is much greater than for heat, and much
less than for electricity.

h. Polarized sun and moonlight obey these laws.

i. Prismatic sun and moonlight obey the same laws, the
particular colour being retained.

k. But violet is analyzed into red and blue.

1. Light appears here for the first time as progressing
slowly through opaque bodies, and not merely radiating.


Q. Vital Od.


127. a. Roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and fruit, are in
constant glow during life, so that moderate sensitives can
recognize their forms and colours; the leaves in especial emit
abundant odic fumes, and the light increases and diminishes
with the vital powers.

b. All animals give out odic light.

c. Some organs shine brighter than others.

d. Zoodic light especially proceeds from the principal
nervous centres,

e. And streams out at the vegetative extremities, claws,
cocks’ combs, hairs, tails, and snouts.

f. The eyes are no especial seat of zoodic light.


IV. Odic Luminous Phenomena in particular cases.


128. A. The mutual reactions of odic flames for magnets,
have been considered in the Researches, &c., § 401 and fil.
(p. 317) ; and for the human body the effects are nearly the
same. The flames are lengthened when unlike poles approach ;
when they come nearer they are pressed back and thickened
out; when contact is nearly formed, they are inverted about
their own poles; on actual contact, one flame dips into the
flame of the opposite pole.

129. B. The prismatic colours of the odic flame from
BB2


340 Particular cases of Odo-luminosity.


magnets and crystals are repeated in the polar flames of
human beings, and are dependent on the position of the latter
with respect to the meridian.

130. C. The forms under which odic light appcars, are
glow, flame, fibres or down (pflaum), sparks, fumes or smoke
(rauch) and rays.

131. D. Refraction, transmission, reflexion, and polariza-
tion, hold for odic as well as ordinary light.

132. E. Transparency to od, or odo-diaphaneity, is oc-
casioned in many substances by various modes of odizing
(see par. 126, e).

133. F. The intensity of the odic flame is said by sensi-
tives to resemble the faint outermost flame of a candle, but the
light from different individuals is different without any appa-
rent relation to age. Reichenbach, who is 64 years old, found
himself brighter to sensitive eyes than young powerful men.

134. G. The beauty of the odic light is a subject of the
greatest admiration to sensitives.


H. Phosphorescence.


135. Many odo-luminous phenomena when their intensity
is increased up to a certain point become visible to every
one, and are then called phosphorescence. This is not the
case for all odic light ; that from magnets, crystals, hands, or
substances in general, has never reached the sphere of phos-
phorescence. But the odic charge from sunbeams, chemical
action, heat and friction, which invariably produces odic light,
also produces phosphorescence.

135. Odo-positivity and negativity have also some in-
fluence. The bodies which become least phosphorescent from
sunlight, and only obtain a short transitory phosphorescence
from heat, are odo-positive, as metals and alkalis; whereas
all the bodies which readily become phosphorescent are nega-
tive, as diamond, compounds of earths and sulphuric acid,
fluor spar, heavy spar, numerous salts, high oxides, as sugar,
crystallized vegetable acids, &. The glow-worms are also
negative. It has been shewn by Seebeck (Schweiger’s Journal,
vol. xl., p. 129) and Heinrich (First Treatise on Phosphorence,
§ 27) that diamonds can be made phosphorescent by exposure
to the blue (odo-negative) rays, and even the (faintly visible)
chemical rays alone. But Reichenbach made a diamond
shine (to a sensitive) by exposing it, while enclosed in a tin
box, to the sun, so that the odic and not the ordinary lumin-
ous rays could alone reach it, tin plate being odo-diaphanous.
Hence, and from other grounds which it is impossible to


_—


Phosphorescence. 341


detail here, Reichenbach concludes phosphorence to be merely
a high degree of odic light.*


* Instances of light appearing under mesmerism will be found in No. XXIX.
Mr. Harley relates of one of his patients, Miss Trant, whom he benefitted most
wonderfully with mesmerism, that ‘‘ one evening, when asleep, she said, ‘ Oh, I
never! I see a light blue flame passing through me ; it is stretching the nerves.
You must mesmerise the insteps of my feet strongly. I shall get over the injury
sustained by the fall. I shall be able to walk across the room and open the door
to you in a fortnight’s time.’ And this was fully verified at the expiration of the
time she named, and on the 11th of July, 1848, she walked out of doors for the
first time with assistance. On another evening, she said, ‘ My stomach looks
very weak and soft as a jelly. I see the blue flame passing down over it, like
a soft, gentle breeze. It is this which does me good. I see the disease passing
off the feet like a cloud or dark, thick mist—the light is driving it; I mean the
sparks and streams of light which pass from your fingers.’’’ ‘* When I mes-
merise the water she sees sparks of fire in appearance pass from my fingers into
it; and, if she looks at it when I mesmerise it, she becomes very drowsy at
once.”

Others have made similar observations.

In No. XXI., p. 225, Dr. Elliotson, in his detail of the case of Miss Barber,
whose cancer of the breast he cured with mesmerism, says, ‘‘ I have now to record
a striking fact. While I am drawing up her rigid arm in the waking state with
her eyes free, she sees as soon as the limb begins to ascend, but not before, a
colourless stream pass from it to my hand, of the same breadth as the number of
the points of the fingers which I employ at the moment. Though I cover the
part with a shawl, single or folded, the appearance is equal. This statement
may be relied upon as securely as the phenomena in the chemist’s laboratory. If
I stiffen her body and then make tractive passes from it, as soon as it advances, .
the stream from it is seen. If I draw with both hands, there are two streams
side by side from the part. The farther I stand from her, the fainter the stream
appears ; and, if at a great distance, there is no visible stream, nor traction. She
compares it to moonlight, and it is stronger in the dark. She sees the same from
my hand if I dart it at a stiffened part, but not till this begins to relax. On
darting my hand at a part not rigid, there is no such appearance. In tractive
passes, the stream seems to wave back towards her when my hand moves towards
her again before the next tractive pass. If I breathe upon a stiffened part she
sees no stream of light.”’

In No. XXXIIL., p. 372, we find that in the Calcutta Hospital, ‘‘ Many people,
not sensitives, saw light as of fire pass between the hand of Mr. Alin and the head
of his subject, whom he was attracting.’’

The Rev. Jeffery Ekins, whose mesmeric benefits to his fellow-creatures do
him so much honour and are recorded in The Zoist, says in No. XLI., p. 85,
“On being told at the Infirmary that the matron could perceive a change in the
water when mesmerised, I said I should like to try if I could see anything myself.
Accordingly we both watched the water together, I having previously told her not
to tell me what she saw: when we both exclaimed at once that a change had
taken place. After Mr. Capern had pointed his fingers over the water for a few
seconds, there appeared a dancing light on the surface (like what is seen over a
corn-field on a hot day): then the water was put into an undulating motion,
which began to increase, and afterwards a nebulous form like an inverted cone
slowly descended from the surface of the water towards the bottom of the glass.
I have made these observations at the Infirmary three or four times. The other
day when I was watching the matron mesmerising some water for a patient, I dis-
tinctly saw the undulating motion.”

The statement in No. XL. alluded to by Mr. Ekins is by an anonymous
writer, S. E. de M., who is however well known, and it is very interesting, but too
long for insertion here. In No. XLIV., Mr. Ekins gives fresh examples observed
by himself and two ladies. —Zoist.


342 Smelling, Tasting, Hearing.


Section II1I.—Odic Phenomena of the senses of Smelling,
Tasting, and Hearing.


Part 1.—Smelling.


136. Sensitives have generally a finer smell than non-
sensitives, and are overpowered by odours which affect others
but slightly or not at all. Heliotrope, flowers in a bed-room,
leather, copper, brass, tin, lead, verdigris, palladium, chro-
mium, alkaline smells, blue cabbage, sulphuretted hydrogen
(which last—the gas that flavours rotten eggs—Reichenbach
singularly enough finds rather pleasant than otherwise }),
chromic acid (the last even in an hermetically sealed tube),
&c., were all found overpoweringly disagreeable. The smell
of men, especially of sick persons, also affects them. The
sunlight produces a peculiar smell of burning, which can be
transferred from one object to another, and is even soluble in
water. The poles of a magnet have a strong smell; the
positive or northward pole having an acid, and the negative
or southward pole an alkaline odour.


Part II.—Tasting.


137. The taste of sensitives is very acute. All copper, or
condiments, drinks or any food prepared in copper or brass
vessels, have a disagreeable sweetish-bitter flavour. The
tongue is latitudinally polarized, and must therefore be con-
sidered odically as a double tongue, and hence in tasting the
side of the tongue used should be noted. An hermetically-
sealed tube of chromic acid laid across the tongue produced
a strong pungent reaction on the right side and none on the
left. Similar odo-polar pairing between the tongue and sub-
stances or poles of crystals and magnets produced a bitter,
dissimilar a pleasant taste without bitterness. If a slip of
copper be placed below and zine above the tongue, and they
be brought together, it is well known that a sour taste is per-
ceived on the upper surface of the tongue, not because the
zine is positive, but because the positive character of the zinc
causes the upper surface of the tongue to be negative, and


therefore the taste sour. Hence the electric agrees with odic
taste.


Part III.—Hearing.


138. The hearing of sensitives is very acute and easily
affected. Very high sensitives hear a sound as of the rubbing
of paper or the rustling of dry leaves from the ends of a
crystal. Others hear the sounds of magnet poles, which they


Odic Radiations, Zones, Localities, &c. 343


compare to the last dying sounds of a tuning fork. The
subject has not yet been fully investigated.


Section IV.—The general properties of Od.

139. <A. Radiation. Compact (geschlossene) invisible
pencils of odic rays flow from odic poles, but radiate in all
directions from other sources. These odic rays traverse
metals, stones, wood, &c., and when proceeding from a spec-
trum preserve all the prismatic peculiarities. They are re-
fracted on their passage and partly absorbed. They are
reflected from polished and unpolished bodies.

140. B. Atmosphere. All bodies are surrounded by an
odic atmosphere distinct from the odic radiation, and varying
in its quality with the specific constitution of the bodies.

141. C. Zones. The odic emanations proceeding from
poles and the odic atmospheres differ at different distances,
both quantitatively and qualitatively. The first zone extends
to about a span from the body, the second barely a hand’s
breadth. Then follow two or three zones of unknown breadth.
The whole of these may extend to a width of two paces.
Then comes a zone of about a short pace in width, followed
by one of indefinite extent.

142. D. Odic Localities. Od is conducted more easily
through solids and fluids than through the air, but radiates
more rapidly through air. The intensity of odic emanations
from magnets is proportionate to the intensity of their mag-
netic emanations, and takes place especially at the edges and
corners. Odic emanations prefer sharp edges and points,
similarly to the electric. Od spreads over surfaces. A charge
of od produces no polarity, and is thus distinguished from
both magnetism and electricity. Odic emanations are ejected
with a certain velocity in the direction of the longitudinal
axis of their polarization.

143. E. Copper and iron wire are good conductors of od,
but do not conduct magnetism at all. In this point then od
differs essentially from magnetism.

144. F. Odic Intensity. The distant effect of metals of
the same mass increases faster with their thickness than with
their breadth. On comparing the effects of different weights
of substances Reichenbach found that in round numbers 1
part by weight of sulphuric acid (sp. gr. 1°82) are odically
equivalent to 2 parts by weight of chloride of sodium (com-
mon salt); and 10 parts by weight of the same sulphuric
acid are odically equivalent to 9 parts by weight of amorphous
sulphur. These results, deduced from numerous experiments,
are the first and only measurements yet made, and commence


344 Hereditary Sensitiveness.


a table of odic equivalents, which will be of the greatest import-
ance in the physical investigation of od. An electric spark
which Reichenbach could only see at arm’s length was seen
by a sensitive at the distance of a fathom. Hence, knowing
their relative distance of distinct vision, the comparative
strength of odic and electric emanation might be estimated.

144, G. The sources of od are generally a, molecular
motions (pressure, percussion, extension, separation, melting,
volatilizing, evaporating, stiffening, chemical action, friction,
sound, light, heat), 5, electrical (and magnetic) motions, c,
poliformative motions (vegetable and animal life). Every
unipolar body has its corresponding unipolar body of the
opposite pole, as man and woman, though each is triaxial, form
a bipolar combination. As positive and negative od do not
neutralize each other in any experiments yet instituted, we
are obliged in certain respects to alter our rude conception of
polar particles. Od is the product of all material motion in
nature. Its position is in the midst of all known dynamids
or imponderables. It is remarkable for its permanency as
opposed to the fleeting character of heat, light, electricity
and magnetism. It approaches nearest to the vital force, and
may be one of its factors.


Section V.—Sensitiveness.
Part I.—Hereditary Sensitiveness.


145. In 143 cases out of the 161 sensitives whom Reichen-
bach has examined he has found hereditary sensitiveness, as
there were P

23 cases of sensitive children of sensitive fathers,

50. C*4, - a mothers,

11 ,, where both parents were sensitive, and

54 ,, where brothers or sisters were sensitives.
Reichenbach also discovered 13 cases where sensitiveness
descended from grandparents to parents and children, or
through three generations. In some cases where one parent
only was sensitive, some of the children were sensitive and
others not so. Hence he concludes that sensitiveness is not
a temporary abnormal condition but an hereditary constitu-
tion of body, and consequently essentially inherent in human
nature.


Part II.—Localities of Od and Sensitiveness in the human
body.


146. These may be chiefly collected from the preceding
abstract. Reichenbach’s general conclusion is, that any sore-


Somnambulism. 345


tic action of od excites the cerebro-spinal and depresses the
sympathetic systems, while the nemetic action of od depresses
the former and excites the latter.


Part I1I.—Js Sensitiveness a talent or a disorderly action
(verstimmung) of the nerves ?


147. Reichenbach concludes from a discussion of the
results of his experiments that sensitiveness is on the one
hand a condition of suffering health (leidender Gesundheit),
and notwithstanding this, on the other hand a high physical
and intellectual talent or faculty which elevates its possessor.


Part IV.—Somnambulism and Spasms.


148. Space prevents anything like an abstract of this long
chapter (Vol II., pp. 546—702), in which somnambulism is
considered with respect to its physiological and psychological
origins. There is only space for the conclusion, and one or
two scattered points.

149. General Conclusion—Somnambulism may be ana-
lyzed into two formally different but simultaneously combined
conditions. It is not a simple disease to which a direct treat-
ment is applicable, but a compound and very complex pheno-
menon. Its foundation is sensitiveness, without which there
can be no somnambulism. It is consequently an inborn
capacity, which is aroused and augmented by extraneous and
accidental physical and moral disturbances of the health. It
is essentially odo-negative in its nature, more or less com-
bined with odo-positive and soretic influences from without
or within. It is a mixed odo-negative and odo-positive con-
dition of the nervous system, of the brain.

150. Sense of Light.—The higher sensitives have their eyes
generally closed when in the somnambulistic condition, but
nevertheless perceive external objects in their proper form and
colour, and can do so better and more clearly in the dark than
in the light. The objects appear as it were transparent and
are perceived through other objects, and thus the interior of
the body itself may be seen. This perception is not so dis-
tinct as that of ordinary healthy vision in daylight. The
commencement of an explanation of these phenomena is fur-
nished by the odo-diaphaneity of all bodies, metals, glasses, the
human body and nervous system, that is, their permeability
to odic rays, considering the whole nervous system as a single
odic eye.

BL. Somnambulistic Mental Excitement.—After showing
that soretic action increases cerebral affection and sensorial


346 Phreno-mesmerism.


odo-apperception but weakens and destroys clairvoyance, and
nemetic action the reverse, Reichenbach proceeds to consider
Phreno-mesmerism with which it would appear that he is per-
sonally unacquainted, as his observations turn upon a news-
paper article on the subject, and he adduces no experiment
of his own. He concludes, that all the effects ascribed to
phreno-mesmeric action are due to soretic actions on the
nerves, and especially the cutaneous nerves.*


* As it may be interesting to the readers of The Zoist, a complete translation
of the paragraph alluded to in the text is subjoined. At the same time the
translator cannot but regret that in his anxiety to overthrow materialistic views,
Reichenbach should, so contrary to his wont, have ventured to apply his theory to
particular cases where he apparently had not himself experimented.

** § 2891. Some savant of the ‘ gross realistic school’—among whom are some
physiologists like Herr Vogt and especially numerous chemists like Herr von Liebig,
who have found that salt is decomposed and urea compounded in the human body in
the same way as they can perform the operations in a retort, and have thence
most inconsequentially concluded that man with body and soul, skin and hair,
is nought but a product of affinitive development and consciousness in all its forms
a result of corporeal organisation, a function of matter,—people, that is, who have
never penetrated deeply into an investigation of the intimate nature of conscious-
ness, conception and thought, but nevertheless account themselves fitted and jus-
tified to draw the most hazardous conclusions,—have infer alia laid great stress
on the results of the English investigations on somnambulism, and hence an essay
by Herr Cotta has appeared in the dugsburger Allgemeine Zeitung, entitled ‘ An
EvenInG witH E tiorson,’ which has occasioned much sensation and has ap-
peared to be capable of lending a peculiar support to materialistic views of the
constitution of human nature. I consider it therefore proper to give my opinion
upon it, and consequently all similar cranioscopical investigations in the somnam-
bulistic state. Dr. Elliotson of London is incontestably profoundly acquainted
with somnambulistic phenomena, and the world should be grateful to him for his
instructive labours. As reviewer and translator of a part of my writings into
English [a mistake, apparently arisen from the appearance of translations and
reviews in The Zoist], and as one acquainted with the anatomy of the head, there
were some important considerations which ought not to have escaped him when
he raised the question whence the various grimaces and gestures (Grimassen und
Gebehrden) arose, which appeared on his placing his forefinger on different spots
of the head of a highly somnambulistic person. For as soon as we apply the odic
measuring staff, all these circumstances put on another appearance, and the
realistic hypotheses which Dr. Elliotson and the German physicists suggest, vanish
as morning mists. Our skull certainly incloses the brain and consequently the
instruments of our mental powers, but is that all which we have to consider in
the head? Has not one factor been overlooked, viz., the subcutaneous and cuta-
neous nerves? Is not the whole skull covered with them as with a net? There
are the two frontals, the two trochlears, the two temporals, the two great aurals,
the two posterior aurals, the two small and two large occipitals, all subcuta-
neous nerves, branching in all directions into the skin and concurring like rays
towards the crown. They are all divided into two halves, a left and a right, that
is an odo-positive and odo-negative, and arising from the brain communicate
immediately with it, and stand in rapport to it. Now we know from the doc-
trine of odic ‘ pairings’ and the pass, and from the examples there adduced of
the great effects which external contact of the head or passes in different direc-
tions over the head produce in sensitives, that the least ‘similar’ or ‘ dissimi-
lar’ treatment immediately excites violent re-actions in the sleep-waker. We
know further that there is an immense difference between the influence of a
determinate limb, or finger, applied to the right or to the left side, drawn in the


Sensitiveness a want of odic equilibrium. 347


152. Sensitiveness bears the mark of predominant odo-
positivity, and is consequently based on a want of natural
equilibrium of the odic poles. A person in whom this equi-
librium normally exists is a non-sensilive, and any one in
direction or against the direction of the nerves, kept for a longer or a shorter time
in action, &c. If Dr. Elliotson, e. g., brings the tip of his right finger upon the
right side of the head of a sleepwaker, so as to be diametrically opposed to the
great aural nerve, he will produce a continually more painful effect upon his
sensitives the longer he keeps it there. The effect will be ‘similar’ and soretic,
and moreover, through length of time, will become equivalent to an overcharging.
This must be in the highest degree intolerable to the sleep-waker. Moreover it
will rapidly re-act accumulatively on the brain, and affect the parts lying at the
entrance of the nerve into the brain and about its course. But this will not be
in that part of the brain beneath his finger, but in some other distant places.
Hence if he ascribes the patient’s demonstration of pain to an effect on the portion
of the brain beneath his finger, he is clearly deceived. That part of the brain
is perhaps not affected at all. The emanations from his fingers work, as we have
seen in the course of these investigations, much more quickly in the immediate
path of the affected subcutaneous nerve than through the mass itself. The skull,
a uniform amorphous mass of calcareous matter, is certainly by no means opposed
to the passage of od, but it is incomparably less favourable to it, and more slowly
pervious than the nerve in the direction of its path, and whatever observations I my-
self could make on the odic action on the head, I always found that the effect on
the subcutaneous nerves was predominant both in time and strength. But if Dr.
Elliotson altered the position of his finger, brought it on to the other side of the
head, or employed a finger of his other hand, or instead of placing against, put it
in the direction of the nerve, or laid it where it could act simultaneously on two
or more nerves, or held it nearer or further, or dwelt a shorter or longer time
upon ene spot, or attacked this or that nerve, he would by all these changes con-
tinually produce different sensations in the patient, at one time pleasant, at another
disagreeable, now acting rapidly now slowly, now exciting and rousing anger, now
soothing and soporific, now a mixture of pain and pleasure, tepidity and cool-
ness ; and if he then chooses to interpret this play of the actions as marking sen-
sations of joy and sorrow, religion and wickedness, and so forth, his fancy is
perfectly free to choose (und wenn er dann dem Gebehrdenspiel Empfindungen von
Freude und von Leid, von Religion und von Bosheit und was immer unterlegen
will, so hat er in seiner Phantasie den freiesten Spielraum dazu). If it then really
happens that the odic influence of his fingers penetrates into and through the skull,
the charge certainly spreads over the whole cranium according to the laws of odic
charges in continuous bodies, acts on the whole brain at once, and finally at the
place of the finger on the underlying spot of brain, and thence on all the neigh-
bouring parts simultaneously. This effect must then be so complicated, that no
reliable conclusion can be hazarded respecting the portion of the brain underlying
each separate point, and hence we have nothing more certain for judging of the
action of an alteration in the position of the finger on the head, than its effect at
any place on the corresponding subcutaneous nerves. That this admits of no
opinion concerning the portion of brain under the finger, and still less upon its
mental signification, which indeed cannot be brought into the question at all in
such a process, is self-evident. Hence all the extraordinary things which Dr.
Elliotson has advanced in this way as problems of psychology, clearly repose on
an incorrect connexion of cause and effect. Their explanation must be sought in
a totally different manner, and their consistent solution belongs wholly to the laws
ofod. There is not the least fraction of gain then to be gathered in on this field
for the hylo-zoists.”


It is quite certain that the considerations advanced by Reichenbach will require
to be weighed in all phreno-mesmeric experiments and duly allowed for, but the
actions of the phreno-mesmerised patients are so consistent, so different from


348 Concluding Remarks.


whom it is more or less disturbed, and the odo-positive predo-
minant, is a sensitive. The cause of this destruction of equi-
librium is as yet only a matter of conjecture.


Part V.—General mental condition of Sensitives.


123. Without entering into particulars, the general con-
clusion which Reichenbach draws is, that the mental powers
of sensitives are more excitable and more vivid, but are less
powerful, than those of non-sensitives.


[This concludes a tantalizingly brief abstract of a most
remarkable book, which all mesmerists who can read German
will probably purchase and study. The utmost that sucha
short analysis as has been given in these numbers of The
Zoist can hope to effect, is to make the practical mesmerist
aware generally of the odic polarities of the human body and
their effect on the pass, and to shew him that however diffi-
cult it must ever remain to assign laws to the mutual action
and reaction of two such complicated objects as human beings,
we are not without a beginning of knowledge on the subject,
which for the present we must be content to eke out with
careful empirical observation and consequent rules. ‘To the
collection of such empirical laws—true only between narrow,
and not always known, limits—the attention of the practical
mesmerist should now be carefully directed. The condition
of the art of medicine, in which one agent (the drug) is
inorganic, shews on the one hand the great difficulty, and on
the other the partial success, which we may hope for from
such a course. Those who have the leisure and the acquire-
ments to institute experiments like Reichenbach’s cannot do
better than imitate his example, and let us hope that he will


mere ‘‘ grimaces and gestures,’’ and so consonant with the cerebro-physiological
disposition of the brain by Gall, and so distinct from mere expressions of pain
and pleasure, because characterizing whole conversations and series of connected
actions, that Reichenbach’s explanation is clearly insufficient, whatever the cor-
rect explanation may hereafter prove to be. It must be remembered that Reichen-
bach’s experiments upon mesmerised patients are as yet very few and incomplete.
It is possible, nay very probable to judge from what we know of mesmerised
patients, that the condition of artificially induced somnambulism may cause great
modifications in many of the laws of od. Is it necessary to say that if both fact
(which is undoubted) and theory were established in this case neither the one nor
the other could affect the verata questio of materialism ? Jf any such experiments
could bear on the question those of Reichenbach would be just as conclusive in
favour of materialism as those of the phreno-mesmerists. But the point of
materialism consists in making organic beings obey inorganic laws alone, and
these experiments, if anything, tend to prove that they obey vital laws in addi-
tion to inorganic laws, and hence, if anything, to upset the old rude notion


of materialism, without however in the least degree establishing so-called
spiritualism.—A. J. E.


Notes by The Zoist. 349


long be preserved to us to pursue his ingenious, scientific,
and most valuable researches on a subject with which his
name is imperishably connected.—A. J. E.]

Nov. 14th, 1855.


NOTES BY THE ZOIST.


We have considered it a duty to lay before our readers this
account of the latest publication of Reichenbach’s views and experi-
ments, and beg to express our great obligations to Mr. Ellis for
furnishing us with it. Of the accuracy of Reichenbach’s doctrines
as a whole we give no opinion. Some of his views are doubtless
correct, but of others we have great doubt, and some we know to
be incorrect. We fear his fault is in supposing that what he has
observed are general truths, and not facts peculiar to individuals,
nor indeed frequently temporary peculiarities. Of mesmerism he
appears to know very little, and if he had studied the volumes of
The Zoist he would not have written many things at which a well-
informed mesmerist must smile. In his remarks upon phreno-
mesmerism he is sadly in error. The excitement of different mental
faculties by touching over or pointing to different portions of the head
gives no more support to materialistic views than all the admitted phy-
siological and pathological facts of the brain and its functions. Every
physiologist now allows that the brain is the organ of the mind:
and every physiologist now allows that different portions of the brain
have different mental faculties. As mesmerism can be directed with
effect to individual portions of the limbs, trunk, and face, so can it
be directed with effect to individual portions of the brain in some
persons in the mesmeric state; and even when some persons are in
their usual state. There is no hypothesis here, but plain facts.
According to the emotion excited is the expression of the features;
and the word grimace is highly improper in the case. We see no
grimaces. The mesmeric, or, if he chooses, the odic force, pene-
trates within to the cerebral organs and excites them in certain per-
sons—in some contact of the finger with the patient’s head is
required, in others mere pointing is sufficient. We do not trouble
ourselves about sub-cutaneous nerves. What we have just stated is
all we know of the facts: and as to pain or any kind of sensation,
we have never noticed any. No matter which finger or thumb of the
ten is applied, or in what order, or whether the point of the nose or
chin be applied. We have made very many hundreds of experiments
of this kind, and in various individuals. The application of the
fingers has been varied infinitely, and Reichenbach’s fancy that, if
Dr. Elliotson were to bring the tip of his right finger upon the right
side of the head of a sleep-waker, so as to be diametrically opposed
to the great aural nerve, he would produce a continually more
painful effect upon the sensitive the longer he kept it there, is a


350 Notes by The Zoist.


downright dream, and throws doubt upon some of Reichenbach’s
other views.

For Dr. Elliotson’s experiments upon the excitement of distinct
cerebral orgaus by local mesmerisation, we beg our readers to peruse
Nos. III., p. 239; V., pp. 72, 78; VL, p. 229; IX., p. 68; XIL,
p- 453. The details are exquisitely interesting.

Before Baron Reichenbach writes again, we earnestly request him
to study The Zoist.


The Hufeland Medico-Chirurgical Society of Berlin allowed an
account of Reichenbach’s labours to be read to them by Dr. Neumann
the 31st of last August.

** Among a few biographical notes respecting the Baron Von
Reichenbach, it was mentioned that he was known as a geologist and
chemist before he occupied himself with the inquiries into the nature
of od.

**Reichenbach’s dynamide, his odo-magnetic letters, and Der
Sensitive Mensch, Buckner’s sketch, The Od, Buchmann’s Hydro-
meteore, and a paper published the 4th August, 1855, in the
Leipzig Illustrated News, signed Dr. F., were mentioned as treating
of the doctrine of od.

‘An explanation was given of the name Od, of its various
species, of the (talent) faculty of sensitiveness ; the studies of Rei-
chenbach during ten years, and his 13,000 experiments made in rela-
tion to the od, were mentioned ; the polarity of od as penetrating
the universe, and governing crystals, plants, and animals ; the mode
and way of conducting inquiries into, and experiments on, od, and
the precautions to be observed, were shewn.

** With regard to the experiments on odic sensations, the odo-
chemical series of elementary substances was mentioned, and such
substances as carbon, sodium, sulphur, copper, zincum, and kalium,
&e., enclosed in small glasses, were shewn as being used in such
experiments.

“Dr. Neumann then mentioned the experiments with regard to
the odie light, and the difficulties of establishing a dark room in
his own house; he described the three large dark saloons in M. Rei-
chenbach’s residence, Reisenberg, near Vienna, and said that the
whole castle was a large institute, serving for chemical, geological,
botanical, and physiological experiments.

** At the end of his lecture, the Doctor entered fully into the
phenomena of odic light observed by himself in the dark room.

** After a short discussion on the subject of the paper, the pre-
sident, Dr. Burch (one of the privy council of medical affairs) and
the secretary, Dr. Steinthal (one of the council of the public health),
thanked Dr. Neumann, in the name of the Society, for having
called the attention of the Society to the doctrine of od.”— From
Atheneum fiir rationelle Gymnastik, vol. iii., fascic. ii. Edited
by Hg. Rothslein. Berlin, 1855.


1a 2 eee PETE ae.


351


Il. EXTATICS OF GENIUS.
By J. W. Jackson, Esq., Edinburgh.


“ A special Court of the Guardians of the Poor was held at the Guildhall on
Saturday,’’ &c. ‘ The Clerk read the following report :—

‘The Committee appointed by the Court on the 8th September to consider
a communication made by Mr. Parker in reference to the small number of lunatics
cured by the means adopted in the County Lunatic Asylum and in St. Thomas’s
Hospital, compared with the many cured by mesmerism in India, beg to make
the following report :—

“In investigating this important subject the Committee have endeavoured
to avoid any influence or partiality towards Mr. Parker’s system or prejudice
against it. They feel that it is a subject which not only involves an important
item of expenditure, but is of far higher consideration if, happily, it tend to
ameliorate the condition of those unfortunate persons who are afflicted with the
most terrible disease to which humanity is subject.

“**The cases which have been brought under the notice of your Committee
mesmerically treated by Mr. Parker, having been verified by relations and other
credible witnesses, appeared to warrant a still further inquiry into the effects of
the system which Mr. Parker advocates.

“* Before, however, proceeding in that direction, your Committee thought it
desirable to confer with the medical officers of the Corporation upon the subject
generally ; and particularly upon the cases above referred to, the result of that
conference is here subjoined.

“*Mr. Warren stated that he was decidedly averse to the practice of mes-
merism. It may not be injurious except in cases where mesmerism having been
resorted to precious time may be lost in using other and more efficient means.
The statement contained in Mr. Parker’s letter in reference to the per centage of
cures of lunacy in the Asylum, contrasted with those effected by mesmerism in
India, is erroneous, There is also no analogy to be drawn between a Hindoo and
an Englishman.

“The Chairman having particularly referred to the case of Eliza Maddock,
Mr. Warren said that temporary insanity might be produced by hard drinking or
on persons whose system is out of order. Jf madness could be cured by mes-
merism, the medical profession would have adopted it. He has never known any
ease of cure by mesmerism, and would not concur or assist Mr. Parker in any
case.

«Mr. Perkins had seen a statement of the case at Lion’s Holt. Te had
seen mesmerism practised in a case of hysterical mania; in such a case it may
have a better effect than on others, but the person alluded to instead of getting
better, got worse. While this treatment was going on he declined attending,
but upon its being given up the party came under his care and soon recovered.
Had tried the effect of mesmerism in his own family. Jf the complaint be an
affection in the head, mesmerism will produce congestion of the brain. He does
not believe that mesmeric passes put people to sleep—it produces coma. It may
cause depression of spirits and melancholy, and the profession is opposed to the
practice of it. As he is bound by oath not to practise anything but what is ac-
knowledged and sanctioned by the College of Surgeons, he ought not to be required
to attend any case with Mr. Parker, but should not consider it as interfering with
his duty were any persons in his district put under Mr. Parker’s care entirely.
Mr. Perkins thinks if mesmerism has any power it affects the brain, and would be
injurious in cases of insanity.

““«Mr. Cumming had never seen mesmerism practised except in public, and so
far as he examined it it appeared to have failed. Sleep might or might not have
been produced by mesmerism. If sleep can be produced by mesmerism after
nights of restlessness it may be beneficial. In some instances mesmerism may
do harm. Congestion of the brain-may be produced by mesmerism if it is done
against the will of the person mesmerised, and thereby under the influence of fear.


352 Extatics of Genius.


Is bound by oath not to practise quackery, and he thinks mesmerism may come
under that denomination. He declines meeting Mr. Parker in cases where mes-
merism is to be employed.

‘** Mr. James could not give a positive opinion on mesmeric treatment. It
has influence on certain persons. Upon healthy people it would have a bad effect.
Could not give any opinion of its effect in cases of insanity, but thought it may
be injurious. It would be beneficial to a patient to be put into a sound sleep, but
could not say how far mesmerism would effect this, and he doubts if mesmerism
would produce sound sleep—the patient becoming exhausted may fall into a sound
sleep. Should the Guardians feel disposed to put a patient under Mr. Parker's
care he could not meet him, but he suggested that the patient should be attended
by a responsible person, and that Mr. Parker should not be allowed to give any
medicine. He had attended mesmeric institutions in London, where a great deal
of deception was practised.’

‘The Committee conceive that a trial might be made on persons labouring
under temporary insanity, by which they may become chargeable on the Poor
Rates, or on persons receiving relief.

‘‘There are persons in the workhouse afflicted with continual aberration of
mind and attacks of epilepsy ; if any means could be resorted to to restore to
health or even to shorten the duration of those attacks, the Committee feel that
it would be a source of the highest gratification to the Corporation of the Poor.’’

‘* A long and warm discusssion followed, in which several Guardians expressed
a wish to have the experiment tried on a small scale, as they considered the evi-
dence was clear as to mesmerism deserving consideration ; whilst others said they
had ‘ no right to play tricks upon paupers.’

‘*Mr. Wilcocks made some observations on the great increase of ‘lunatic
paupers, and the heavy expenses entailed thereby upon the ratepayer. He then
moved, ‘ That in case of application for relief being made by persons, not ex-
ceeding three in number, suffering from temporary insanity or epilepsy, relief be
granted for the purpose of their being placed by their friends under the care of
Mr. Parker, for such time as the present Committee may think proper for those
persons to be under the control of the Committee.’

‘The resolution was carried by a large majority.”—Woolmer’s Exeter ard
Plymouth Gazette, Nov. 17, 1855.*


No. 3.—SocratTes.


Ir has been generally supposed that the persevering study of
philosophy is antagonistic to the effective development of
imagination. Whether this be a popular fallacy or not, quite
certain it is that there are many notable exceptions to the
rule. He who would undertake to assert that the poet
Shakespeare was not also one of the profoundest thinkers in
the sphere of moral philosophy that humanity has yet pro-
duced, would exhibit but slender powers for appreciating the
real depth and earnestness of those passages in which this
wondrous master-spirit reveals his intuitive acquaintance with
the subjective sphere of being. True, he does not syllogis-
tically demonstrate or scientifically deduce a conclusion ; he
is neither dry, nor precise, nor formal in his enunciations of
abstract truth. It must be confessed he abounds not with
laboured excogitations, nor does he provide us with the slowly


* Exeter’s medical staff must truly be a glorious and intelligent corps !—
Zoist.


x pg enim as


Socrates. 353
elaborated results of severely and cautiously applied prin-
ciples. His glance is that of an eagle, who from the sublime
altitude of the empyrean contemplates those wide-spread
provinces which the most accomplished of engineers can only
survey in succession with much ado and vast toil, and to
whose successful achievement of the task a great diversity of
instruments and a vast multiplicity of aids and assistances
are an essential prerequisite. He whose more lucid intuitions
indeed transcend not both the heights and depths of mere
scholastic philosophy has but imperfect claims to the gift of
insight. That vision to which the interior life remains un-
revealed is scarcely worthy of the name. The bard who has
failed to know that most momentous of all open secrets to
him, his own soul, yet needs to have his spiritual eye opened.
The poesy, in truth, which is not the result of seerdom, more
or less, must be considered but as a sounding brass and a
tinkling cymbal. And conversely may we not say of the
sage, that he who is devoid of the ideal is but the fraction of
aman. As well might a wing-clipped barn-door parade itself
for the perfection of birdhood, as a merely incarnate deduc-
tion, or digesting demonstration, presume to consider itself
as a befitting presentiment of humanity’s completed whole-
ness. The sage, like the bard, is ever something of the scer
—is in verity a prose prophet.

Who so blind as not to perceive all the elements of a true
poet and writer in our own illustrious Francis of Verulam !
What page of prophecy was ever more truthful in the matter,
or more sublimely eloquent in the manner of its enunciation,
than many which we may find in the Novum Organum! Was
there in very truth no celestial inspiration to prompt such
far-stretching thoughts, which in effect embraced so much of
the glorious futurity of man? Was there no creative power
in that mighty intellect, whose “ meditations” furnished the
plan of that magnificent temple of knowledge, on whose
enduring foundations and never-failing pillars the great and
gifted of all subsequent generations have laboured in willing
obedience to the design of their architectural chief? Was
there no insight here, no spiritual eye to discern the forecast
shadows of coming events? No gift of tongues wherewith
to clothe thoughts so weighty and aspirations so sublime in a
befitting vestment of Janguage, whose eloquence still stirs us
as with the sound of a trumpet? What is this great work
indeed rightly considered but a terrestrial echo of that inter-
spheral harmony, by whose guiding notes suns and their
systems keep step and time in their magic dances through the
infinite, where now all is order and beauty, while without
VOL, XIII. cc


354 Extatics of Genius.

some such directing influence all would be confusion and
chaos? And must he not have had a poet’s eye and prophet’s
soul who could so rightly discern and truthfully declare the
relationships and sequences of things in that terra incognita
of science, on whose outermost boundary man had then
scarcely set foot? What is prophecy if it be not a precogni-
tion of coming events, and who then shall deny to Francis
Bacon the gift of seerdom? Poet and philosopher, sage and
seer, has not all human culture ever commenced with such
grand humanitarian spirits, who could embrace doth these
characters, whose vast circuit of being comprehended at least
thus much of perfected manhood? Did not the first law-
givers propound their authoritative edicts in rhythmical ca-
dences, and what were the primal creeds of men but deduc-
tions of after generations from those revelations of the celes-
tial in which the anthems and other productions of early
bards abounded? The weak and unauthorized separation of
sage and seer is a poor after thought, to which the colossal
minds of the first ages, of whose cyclopean remains in the
moral world our existing beliefs are but fragmentary rem-
nants, would never have condescended. They valued the
man in his integrity, and esteemed oneness in the work and
entirety in the author as a needful accompaniment of all true
greatness, without which to predicate perpetuity of any
human production were the vainest of fancies.

We have been more especially led into this train of reflec-
tion while contemplating the extatic life of those primeval
master-spirits whose sublime contemplations constitute the
true foundation of theosophy in the east and philosophy in
the west. Humanity’s first teachers, we repeat it, were
extatics. To their grander revelations, as to the fountain
heads of thought, all later systems of faith and practice owe
their origin. He alone who is gifted with the intuition of a
seer can speak with the authority of a prophet. The deduc-
tions of logic are never enthroned in the conscience, nor will
men in the mass, or through the sequence of generations,
ever yield loyal obedience, except to the true godsent, whose
edicts are issued not from the superficial sphere of conscious
excogitation, but the far profounder depths of lucid intuition.
Reflection is one thing, inspiration is another; the former
affords, as its name implies, but a secondary and derivative
species of illumination, it is essentially planetary, while the
latter is primeval, solar, and therefore vital. The first may
characterize the philosopher, but it is the second alone which
constitutes the prophet. We have said that originally sage
and seer were one, and that their separation was itself a


Socrates. 355
declension from the massive greatness of that epoch whose
mightier minds have cast their shadow on tradition as
gods and Titans. But when the sacred vates became a mere
poet, utterly unconscious of his spiritual gifts and holy voca-
tion, and when those mystic elements of the ideal in his higher
being, which should have constituted the subject matter of
anthems and the figures of prophecy, became but the play-
things of fancy or the fuel of passion, how fearful was the
degradation, how terrible rather shall we say this desecration,
of so chosen a vessel of the sanctuary to the paltry uses of
man’s vile body feasts. And yet, perhaps, if we think of it
aright, even this misapplication of power in the wayward
and erring bard is not so wide a departure from the higher
path of inspiration as that which we see manifested in the
self-sufficient sage, when he descends to the rank of a
sophist, and bandies propositions from side to side, not with
the exalted aim of arriving at an assured and guiding
truth for the right direction of less gifted souls, but for the
petty purpose of exhibiting his intellectual agility in the
childish game of battledore with ideas for shuttlecocks. <A
passion-blinded bard, swooping down into the fiery depths of
a moral Tophet, on those glorious pinions which should have
borne him heavenwards into the region of prophecy, is in
some sense an object of admiration as well as of pity. This
very power is a redeeming quality, and we feel that the
impulse which has carried him on daring wing to such depths
of sensuous perversity might yet, in regenerated and rightly
directed strength, bear him again upwards to the celestial
altitude of prophetic vision and heaven-vouchsafed inspira-
tion. We still look, if even with abhorence, yet at least
with solemn awe and heartfelt dread, on the wreck and ruin
of such noble powers. We may listen with horror to his
blasphemous adoration of the terrene in place of the divine.
We may lament over, but we cannot thoroughly despise, this
outcast godson, wandering afar from his brethren and his sire,
for, amidst the gusts of his passion and the wailings of his
despair, we still at intervals distinguish the echoes of those
tones which proclaim that a seraph-harper is present, though
clad alas in the sad and degrading habiliments of a minis-
trant at the altar of sense, instead of the pure and radiant
robes of a heavenly hierophant. But of the calm, clear
wisdom of the true sage, of his profound revealings from the
stilly depths of wrapt meditation, what remnant do we find
in the silly and superficial sophist, whose intellectual
armoury is the mere shewshop of mind, where the deceptive
glitter of cleverness passes for the golden ore of true wisdom,
cc2


356 Extatics of Genius.


and the sterling worth of reality is sacrificed to the passing
semblance of appearances.

Of such seers and sages, however, as those to whom we
have been alluding, but little truth biographical, above all
auto-biographical remains. We read their careers in their
effects, their actions are in their bequests, their lives are in
their testaments. Tis true we have a code of Menu, a creed
of Gautama Budha, and a very insignificant echo of the first
Zerdusht in the second; but of the book with its lawgiver
upon Sinai, and its zeal-consumed prophet, mounting heaven-
wards in his fiery chariot, we nowhere, as yet, find a clear
and authentic revelation of the revealer. We hear the
thunders of command grandly reverberating adown the
centuries, and in the wrecks of antecedent faiths we may
trace the path of the bolt which occasioned their destruction,
but the hand which launched it is generally hidden from
view behind those mists of tradition where we know there
must be light, as we are sure there is a sun beyond those
clouds of the evening west, whose varied hues are but the
glory-woven veil of a passing brightness, the jewelled throne
of a retiring majesty, withdrawn not for ever, but only till
the cycle of another morning shall re-bless the earth with
the ruddy radiance of a second day. It is, therefore, of no
small value to the effective illustration of these greater
spirits, that we are permitted to know something of a minsr
visitant of the same order, and, if we cannot stand fave to
face with a primeval Titan or veritable Olympian, we may at
least observe and converse with a restorer of truth of no
mean order.

The master of Plato and the founder of a school of Greek
philosophy, or rather philosophers, whose meditations have
been the glory of the western world for more than two
milleniums, is not to be despised, even in a comparison with
the intellectual giants of remoter ages. Socrares was AN
EXTATIC, and as such in the truest sense of the term, @
master, Wis wisdom, self-derived, looked to no other teacher
for its origin. To him it was a primal revelation, a god-
sent illumination from the interior sphere of trance-life and
demon converse. Behold him standing wrapt in absorbing
thought from morning through the burning day, and out-
watching the evening star till the matin light of another
dawn, “ when as the sun rose he saluted it with a prayer and
departed.” Whoso beholds not here an indication of seer
life has simply not brought with him the power, that is, the
requisite knowledge to see. In this one fact, connected as
it is with so much beside of corroborative evidence, whole


Socrates. 357


volumes are revealed to all competent to the study of such
manifestations. And then that Demon, who always fore-
warned him of impending evil either to himself or friends, what
student of the phenomena of extatic exaltation does not here
recognize the guiding influence of the interior ego—the
unconscious self-intuition of the uncompleted mystic, the
inter-communion between the temporal and fleshly-taber-
nacled mind and the eternal “dweller in the temple?”
Is there not also even in his careless endurance of heat and
cold, of hunger, thirst, and fatigue, an indication of some
approach to that insensibility of the physical system, which
has produced in those still more advanced in the extatic
condition their forty days’ fasts and their long journeys over
desolate regions on angels’ meats? Truly, it is no wonder,
that the sculptor’s son could emerge from his father’s shop
to be the tutor of Plato and the guide of Xenophon, that he
who had no master should become the devoutly worshipped
leader of those great and gifted men who have proved
themselves the world’s masters. How could sophism do
aught but wither in the presence of his spirit, even when
this base system prevailed to destroy the life of his body ?
He was the truth, and lies perished before those veracious
utterances in which his every thought was clothed. The
prison at Athens was a Golgotha, where the martyrdom of
futurity’s prophet sealed the doom of antiquity’s effete
bequest of outworn forms. Well do those who write a
history of the Grecian schools consider his life and teachings
as the beginning of an epoch. Such a man at such a time
marked the commencement of an era, which was only intel-
lectual and not religious, because the sent one came not to a
people having the theological, but the philosophic mission
upon them. He was the prophet of thought, because the
race of which he came and the time at which he flourished
did not permit him to be anything else. But we doubt not
that he who was so faithful to the lesser message would have
been equally so to the greater, had Athens been Jerusalem,
and Greece Palestine.

Socrates derived from nature a powerful and peculiarly
constituted cerebral organization. His head was large and
finely developed, both in the moral and intellectual regions.
The latter is pre-eminently indicative of abstract thought,
the reflective faculties being far above the average and
altogether preponderating over the perceptives. His face,
anything but what might be called Grecian or classical,
departs from the line of facial beauty and proportion, not
like the Roman, by convevity, but rather like that of a Mon-


358 Extatics of Genius.


gol, by concavity of outline. Contemplated ethnologically,
the impression which he gives is that of a half-caste, who
has derived his highly Caucasianized upper head from one
parent, and his common place vulgar physiognomy and
basilar region from another. With this was united a very
mixed temperament, in which, however, the nervo-lymphatic
decidedly preponderated. Such a being, although he might
be profoundly receptive and deeply thoughtful from early
youth, would scarcely attain to radiating energy till the
middle of life. While from the imperfection of his develop-
ment, in fact from the incompleteness of his organization, he
would ever remain disinclined to the sustained mental effort
required for that formal and systematic embodiment of his
conclusions which is implied in the production of a professed
philosophic treatise or dissertation on a special subject.
Discursive and desultory, yet intuitive and original, ironical,
eloquent, sarcastic, and profound, as the case required, his
almost inspired conversation was, in his higher moments,
the spontaneous outpourings of a richly-gifted, self-cultured,
and many-sided mind, whose fine native endowments had
been exalted by extacy to an almost preternatural beauty,
grandeur, and power of manifestation. On such occasions,
and they seem to have become frequent, and almost habitual,
he spoke with that peculiar force which attaches to and
characterizes the crisiac, when his communications come
directly from the interior and subjective sphere. Thex it
was that he shone with that self-derived light which ever
exerts so magical an influence over duly susceptible minds,
and thus converts the otherwise careless hearer or thought-
less pupil into the life-long and devoted disciple. Neverthe-
less, creative rather than constructive, he needed more
prominently developed and more scholastically trained,
though perhaps less profoundly meditative, minds among his
followers, to act as his interpreters to the many, whether of
his cotemporaries or of posterity. An earnest aud gigantic,
yet after all, imperfectly constituted intellect, he suggestively
furnished the germs of thought to others, to whom of
necessity he left their farther development and subsequent
diffusion. Without befitting and competent pupils as needful
and appropriate media, his sublime tuitions, embodying as
they do so much of philosophic truth and moral wisdom,
would have been utterly lost. But for the scholarly authors
of the Phzedon and Anabasis, those sublime and eloquent
utterances, which affected Alcibiades even to tears and
“made his heart leap up like these of persons who celebrate
Corybantic mysteries,” even these glorious revelations would


—


Socrates. 359
have died away like the matin song of the laverock or the
evening anthem of the nightingale, leaving but a sweet remem-
brance, ever growing fainter and yet fainter among his
listeners, and at last dying out in a vague tradition amidst
the widening void of space and the ever-deepening gulf
of time.

The nearest approach which we have had in modern times
to a mind so constituted was in the case of Coleridge, where
we find an anterior and coronal development almost equally
expanded and exalted, together with a somewhat similar tem-
perament, and a style of physiognomy which, although cer-
tainly less inharmonious, was nevertheless very imperfectly
developed. And where despite a much more systematic cul-
ture in early life, and a much greater organizing faculty, we
may yet detect the same tendency to avoid the labour and
minutiz of composition, and to substitute for it an easy and
unstudied yet eloquent and almost inspired oral intercom-
munication with a few favoured friends, who in this case
also seem to have listened rather as disciples, waiting for the
oracular and authoritative responses of a master, than as inde-
pendent critics prepared to question the statements or analyze
the opinions of their interlocutor. In so far there was a
marked and easily observable, nay we might say a generic
resemblance between the two “ old men eloquent,” although
by a profound analysis of their respective individualities it
would of course be comparatively easy to find many points
even of radical diversity. The manner in which Kublan
Khan was written (from the imperfectly remembered fragment
of a dream), together with the character of many of his other
productions, such as The Rhyme of the Ancient Mariner,
are however amply sufficient to shew the essentially extatic
nature of Coleridge’s higher intellectual manifestations. The
exhaustless flow of his conversational power in early manhood,
and the seer-like depth of his wisdom in age, his “ talk” ever
radiant and glorious with at least the reflected light of intui-
tions, welling up from the mystic recesses of his marvellously-
gifted being, a mighty compound of the sage and poet, these
and many other indications of a grand interior life, ever
bursting through the coarse envelopment of external thought
and attainment, are amply sufficient to shew that in the spokes-
man of Highgate we had the elements of a master-mind that
probably wanted but the evocative influences of a noble and
more spiritualized, of a more deeply-enthusiastic and pro-
foundly emotional age, to have become fully developed into
seerdom, with all its grand prerogatives of prophetic annun-
ciation and authoritative theosophic tuition.


860 Extatics of Genius.


To return however to the subject of our present prelection.
We see in Socrates the tendencies and endowments that
under other circumstances might have readily ripened into
the Indian Gymnosophist or Sanyasi, the Persian Saoffee, or
the medizval mystic. But born in the practical and energiz-
ing sphere of a Greek republic, trained from youth to a daily
calling for his livelihood, and having as a man to discharge
the varied duties of soldier in war and citizen in peace, he
became more practical perhaps even as a teacher, more
availably useful, than under other and less positively evoca-
tive influences would have been probable or even possible.
Still despite all these modifying circumstances the extatic
tendency is unmistakably evident, and the sage of Athens
may be studied with advantage as a fine example of that
exalting influence which a development of the interior and
subjective sphere of being exercises over the exterior and
objective life, when, as in the case before us, good sense, sound
judgment, high principle, and habitual self-command, com-
bine to restrain the inspiration of lucidity from degenerating
into visional fanaticism or insane enthusiasm.

The Daimon of Socrates, on which so much learned dis-
cussion has been expended, was, as we have already hinted,
simply the form which his interior illumination assumed, being
doubtless so conditioned, partly by the stage of extatic develop-
ment to which he had attained, and partly by the profounder
faith of his age and country as to the usual character and
manner of preternatural communications. In another time
and under another creed, that is, under other circumstances
and with different impressions, this internal monitor mighit
have assumed the traditional form of a Gabriel, a Creeshna or a
Budha, and in that case might perhaps have imposed a mission
somewhat less philosophic and sedate than that which actually
fell to the lot of “the wisest man in Hellas.” This wisdom.
welled up from the stilly depths of his earnestly meditative
soul, where by prolonged and frequent contemplation he com-
muned with his higher self, till at length the interior Ego
assumed this daimon phase of manifestations, wherewith he
seems ever afterwards to have held high and holy inter-
course.

Verily, as we have said, but a little lower than the plane
of a true and God-commissioned prophet, stood he of whom
we have been writing. And we wonder not that after two-
and-twenty centuries he should still be regarded as the greatest
and wisest of those mighty ancients to whom we are indebted
for all the models of our purer literature, and all the examples
of our higher art, and without whose philosophy we had still


George Fox. 361


been in very truth barbarians in intellect, even though
Christians in morals.


No. 4.—Guorce Fox, the Founder of Quakerism.


In nothing is the gigantic power of a true master-mind
more clearly exhibited, or shall we say more forcibly demon-
strated, than in the extent to which the followers of a religious
leader, generation after generation, unswervingly obey his
precepts and devoutly conform themselves to his example.
Truly may it be said that such men are the moulds of time.
They are divine instrumentalities by which the work of moral
creation is being effected. The force which they exert can
never be known to their contemporaries, for the ideas which
they develope are not simply a gift to the present, but also a
bequest to the future. The systems which they found are not
simply a passing power, they are also an enduring inheritance
for the ages. And this is true ina minordegree even of those
lesser spirits, whose mission is not to found, but to modify,
creeds, who do not speak with authority but in utter submis-
sion to a predecessor: who profess not to originate but inter-
pret, whose sphere is not the primary but the secondary, and
whose intuitions reach not to divine annunciations in the stilly
depths of their own souls, but to a more correct appreciation
of the wondrous revelations vouchsafed to others. Such a
man was Fox, the founder of Quakerism, the leather-jerkined
enthusiast of Drayton, whose deep, quiet, and faithful medi-
tations on the Scriptures eventuated in the development of a
new internal light, under which the pages of inspiration
became the vehicle of “ knowledge from above.”

The mystic is in very truth a practically important as well
as morally interesting character. His visions and aspirations
are no doubt psychological phenomena, which the metaphy-
sician may study with advantage as abnormal manifestations
of human intelligence ; but they are also motor forces which,
it may be, the ages must recognize and the historian will have
to chronicle as among the veritable facts of the Past. The
mystic is himself however, we must remember, but an embodi-
ment of the higher influences of his era. He is ever, when
we come to profoundly examine him, in a certain sense deri-
vative, the result of antecedent influences, a high-wrought
effect of preceding causes. As a feature of his time he is
deeply significant, and may be considered as an index of the
force and direction of the deeper spiritual currents of his
epoch. Neither is he in his simple individuality the sum-


362 Extatics of Genius.
total of all the elements of mutation, for not only the extent
and success, but the very character of his mission, will to
some extent depend on the time and the people to whom he
may be sent. Had the fiery, energetic, and poetical son of
the Koreish been birthed in the sober England of the seven-
teenth century, who can say how his naturally combustible
constitution might have been modified in its manifestations by
the specialities of our then prevalent puritanism. As it is,
his followers, bedizened in the many-coloured and loose-
flowing robes of their oriental costume, bearded to the girdle,
and turbaned to the brow, gravely pay their devoirs to a mul-
titudinous host of odalisques, the earthly representatives of
their anticipated houris. While perhaps under other condi-
tions they might with equal pertinacity and fully proportionate
gravity have yielded a preference to drab-coloured habili-
ments, broad-brimmed head-gear, closely-shaven chins, and
that monogamatic system of domesticity on which the strin-
gent occident plumes itself in comparison with the lower
orient. Man it is said is the creature of circumstances, and
we may affirm, even of the greatest, that their highest com-
mission is but to sound the trumpet-blast of destiny, their
most exalted office that of herald to a resurrection morn.
tngland during the time of the Commonwealth was the
hotbed of theological excitement. From the tyrannical Laude
to the uttermost Puritan, all men were more than usually in
earnest about either the forms or the spirit of religion. De-
spite the tremendous political changes then taking place, the
theological idea really predominated. It was an age of faith,
and men, if we are to trust to their professions, then lived
rather for heaven than earth. The more earnest minds of
that time were no doubt greatly absorbed by serious con-
siderations respecting spiritual and eternal things. It was an
age of gloomy but high-principled fanaticism, of stern but
heroic enthusiasm. The saints when triumphant might occa-
sionally have proved tyrants, but, when defeated, they knew
how to suffer like martyrs. It was a time too stirring and
momentous for the development of philosophic indifferentism.
Creeds were then among the living and moving powers of the
world. The earthquake changes of the Reformation yet
lived in the memory of the aged, and the noises of the new
time seemed to them but a reverberation of its thunders.
Science and literature were then for the few, but religion was
the grand object of interest tothe many. Papacy, Prelacy,
Presbyterianism and Independency, how could men farther
go? Sono doubt thought the-pulpit orators of that day.
To fin’ a still farther remove from hierarchial despotism


George Fox. 363


was left for the Leicestershire shoemaker, whose internal light
sufficed for that which college learning and merely ministerial
zeal could never have accomplished. George Fox in short was
an extatic, a natural clairvoyant, a seer, a prophet, a lowly
brother of the great and good of old, one of that truly spiritual
hierarchy of God-filled minds whose mission it ever is to
make war unto death against the hierarchy of forms. Devout
from childhood, serious, earnest, thoughtful and enquiring,
he seems from the first to have had the elements of seerdom
deeply seated in his nature. These were of course especially
developed by the tendencies of his age and country. During
his internal conflicts, he, like most of his order, sought refuge
in solitude, and dwelt much in hollow trees and other rustic
conveniences, occasionally seeking alleviation from his sore
travail of spirit on commons, moors and barren hills, where
his deeply-tried soul held long and well nigh despairing com-
munions with itself on the origin of evil and the purposes of
the creator. Poor, young, and uninstructed, but honest,
pious, and determined to find the truth or perish in the search,
the Drayton artizan tried priest after priest, vexing them with
strange enquiries, and putting their best school logic to the
test by such strong arguments and startling instances as could
scarcely fail to excite the bile even of such reverend and
much-enduring men: and then going in quest of a sister
extatic, some Lancashire woman, who had been in a trance
for twenty-two days, but who seems at his visit to have been
“under a temptation.” Truly it is no wonder that what with
constitutional tendencies, exciting influences, long fastings,
and the sympathetic re-action of other trance-sleepers, it is
no wonder we say that at last the devout and thoughtful reli-
gionist should have fallen into a vision himself, wherein he tells
us “a great work of the Lord fell upon me, and I saw into
that which is without end, and things that cannot be uttered,
of the greatness and infiniteness of the love of God,” so that
“men thought I was dead, and afterwards many came to see
me for about fourteen days’ time, for I was very much altered
in my countenance and person, as if my body had been new
moulded and changed.” The over-thoughtful child, the mor-
bidly excitable youth, and the visionary man, what student of
extacy but must here perceive all the symptoms of its succes-
sive stages of development? In these last fourteen days of cor-
poreal somnolence and spiritual vigilance, the mystic culminated.
It was his cave at Mecca, nay, with his body “ new moulded
and changed,” was it not a species of lowly transfiguration, in
which the high-wrought and radiant spirit, beaming through
and in a measure overflowing its earthly tabernacle, shone


36 1 Extatics of Genius.

forth a spectacle of lucidity even to carnal beholders? How
the feature of his earnest life was fashioned by the revelations
afforded in this prolonged trance, to what extent even modern
Quakerism is indebted to it for its present form and substance,
it were difficult, if not impossible, to say. Suffice it that we
have here indubitable evidence of the seer-vision, by which
we are enabled to place this skin-covered preacher of the moral
and physical wilderness within the grand category of pro-
phetic souls, albeit, perhaps he was not the very highest of
that exalted order. Even physically we find similar and cor-
roborative evidence afforded, for when they advised him in the
fever of early zeal to be bled, the lancet being then as now
the never-failing remedy of the legalized manslayer in a diffi-
culty, behold they could draw no blood, his juices being dried
up by reason of the world’s sore iniquities, and the inward
troubles of his deeply agitated spirit. Verily, whether upon
the top of Pendle Hill, “ the Lord let him see in what places
he had a great people to be gathered,” or whether sitting still
in the house, “ the elements and stars came over him, so that
he was in a manner quite clouded with it;” in either case
have we not unmistakable indications of a true vates, evoked
and commissioned from within, and so having withal a notable
contempt for outward ordinances, which to him and his were
needless accessories, productive of hinderance rather than
furtherance. But what shall we say to the Elijah-like act
of slaying the doughty Protector of England with a look, for,
mecting the veteran Oliver riding into Hampton-court at the
head of his life-guards, “J saw and felt a waft of death yo
forth against him, and when I came to him he looked like a dead
man.” Of averity, even the profligate Stewart, could he have
been but fully certified hereof, would doubtless have held the
plain spoken apostle of interior illumination in such respect
as a spiritual David after his triumph over the political Goliah
deserved.

A plain, simple, earnest, honest man was good George Fox,
his leather jerkin and extatic visions notwithstanding. His
whole life was one long inspiration. His every thought a
highest intuition, his every act the result of an internal moni-
tion: his earthly pilgrimage was that of a wayfarer guided
through the valley of the shadow by spiritual presences and
divine vouchsafements. To him miracles were no vague tra-
dition, but experimental realities, nor could the theory of coin-
cidences ever prevail to cheat him out of a supporting faith in
providential deliverances. An absorbed and devoted enthu-
siast, to him dreams were realities, and the interior life with
its direct relationship to God the all-important concern of


George Fox. 365


existence. The wonder is not that he should have founded a
sect, but that his followers subsided at so early a period from
world-despising enthusiasts into worldly prosperous men of
business; that the most impracticable of founders should
have given birth to so practical a discipleship. This was duc
in a great measure doubtless to the nature of the ground in
which his seed was sown. Had the taught been mystic
Hindoos or fiery Arabs, the result of his tuitions would have
been widely different. But the logic of Barclay and the prac-
tical knowledge of Penn, acting on the constitutional sobriety
of British converts, soon gave a form and colouring to the
movement such as few who beheld the shaking devotees or
listened to the singing preachers among the early Friends
could have anticipated. In no sect has the change from
ranting fanaticism to quiet respectability been more marked
or complete, and yet perhaps in none has so much of the real
spirit of the founder been preserved, while his minor formulas
have been modified or dispensed with. The Quakers are still
disciples of George Fox, albeit, were the rudely clad wanderer
of Lancashire to be now introduced into the comfortable par-
Jours, and even splendid drawing-rooms, of his modern fol-
lowers, he might perhaps find subject-matter for remark if
not reproof; but take him to the anti-slavery platforms, and
other spheres of beneficent action, and he would still say,
these are my children.

To the philosophic student of extatic exaltation, the qua-
kings, shakings, jumpings, and even flagellations of the various
religious bodies who have at different periods emerged into
manifestation, are not without profound significance. They
all exhibit a generic identity, and are mere varieties of nervous
excitation, generally propagated by sympathy, and are usually
accompanied by prophesyings and preachings in the more
enthusiastic and susceptible of the votaries of this strange
terpsichorean inspiration. In addition to this, some of the
early Friends appear to have been gifted with the power of
affecting others by the breath, so that in America they were
even accused of witchcraft in consequence of the sudden and
extraordinary command which they thus acquired over those
whom they wished to convert. The mesmerist will of course
be at no loss to interpret this—it is simply an instance of
sympathy purposely transmitted, and has its analogue in the
processes which his science has adopted. Altogether, good
George Fox and his Friends furnish many interesting and
valuable illustrations of those laws which regulate the evolu-
tion of the higher faculties of extatic intuition and lucid
vision, and his journal, together with those of his more dis-


366 Extatics of Genius.

tinguished disciples, will be found to abound with narratives
too honestly told, and too truthful in every way to nature,
to permit of doubting for a moment the integrity of the
narrators ; but which are yet, to those ignorant of the mys-
terious domain of man’s inner being, a stumbling block and
rock of offence.


No. 5.—SweEpensBore.


Science justly prides itself upon the exactitude of its
processes, while the mathematics repose with dignified
assurance on the certitude of their results. As schools of
thought each is supposed to produce habits of precision,
which if not positively hostile to imagination are at all events
eminently calculated to regulate and methodize, if not subdue
the native wildness of an undisciplined fancy. The restora-
tion of Paradise Lost to its enthusiastic lender, an ardent
admirer of the author’s genius, with the cold and almost
cynical remark “that it proved nothing,” was a feat that no
one but a student of the exact sciences could have performed !
As a mere tale its probability would vanish if told of any
other order of the intellectual hierarchy. We strongly sus-
pect, however, that, after all, this notion of a profound anta-
gonism between the magnificient real of true science and the
glorious ideal of pure poesy is nothing more than a popular
fallacy, founded on the grossest misconception of what really
constitutes the savant. We have in another of these papers
spoken of the epic grandeur of conception which characterized
the author of the Novum Organum. And descending from
the chief of the inductive philosophy to his humbler, though
still worthily exalted, disciples, what vigour of conception do
we find in the speculations of the elder Herschel on the stellar
arrangements of distant space, and the gradual formation of
solar systems from the advancing concentration of misty
nebulosities! And what is the Cosmos of the venerable
Humboldt but a beautifully descriptive poem, in which the
otherwise dry if not sterile facts of pure science become
instinct with life and redolent of the most gorgeous beauty
and magnificence, when contemplated through the richly-
endowed mind of the deeply studious and far travelled sage,
whose naturally vigorous imagination, so far from being
oppressed, is but sustained and invigorated by the truly
Atlantian load of his acquired knowledge. Are his descrip-
tions of mountain scenery less sublime, are his chasms less
dark and awful, his declivities less precipitous, or his snow-


Swedenborg. 367


clad peaks less radiant, as they shine forth amidst the cloud-
less glories of the tropics, because the accomplished author
knows the geological structure of their interior, and is com-
petent to explain the meteorological laws on which so many
of their surface phenomena depend for the varying pecu-
liarities which they present? Do his descriptions of the
luxuriant vegetation of equatorial savannahs lack one element
of the beautiful, because he is competent to enter botanically
into the minutest description of the multiform flora of these
magnificent regions? Are his skies less blue, his sunsets less
grand, or his prospects more tame and uninteresting, because
in his vast mind he enfolds that all but universal knowledge,
which, when needed, enables him to enter into the minutest
detail of scientific investigation, in every province of nature
to which man has yet directed his attention? Who that has
read Professor Nichol on astronomy but must have perceived
that the attainments of the philosopher have in no respect
detracted from, but rather added to, the native endowments
of the accomplished orator and truly idealistic poet! And
although that greatest of mathematicians, Sir Isaac Newton,
is said to have defined poetry to be ingenious nonsense, it
would perhaps not be difficult to prove that this profound
thinker possessed all the grander elements of the true ideal
in his mental constitution. Indeed we have sometimes spe-
culated seriously on the propriety of including him in the
present series of extatics of genius; for the manner in which
he speaks of many of his discoveries, we mean, of the frame
of mind under which the new truth was first perceived, seems
to indicate that it was rather a lucid intuition than a laboured
excogitation. What were his fits of deep abstraction but a
partial development of the trance-life ? and that faculty which
he is said to have possessed of seeing to the Q.E.D. of every
problem in Euclid, without going through those intermediate
steps of reasoning so necessary to ordinary minds, what was
this but a clairvoyant apprehension of the truth obtained
independently of the conditions imposed on all thinkers in
an ordinary condition? Even that nervous ailment which
attacked him about his fiftieth year seems to have been a
constitutional effort to develop the lucid crisis in this deep,
patient, profound, and persevering thinker, who perhaps with
some slight modification in himself, or in surrounding influ-
ences, might thus have anteceded the mystic visionary, who
is the especial subject of our present observations, in that
path of theologico-scientific revelation which constitutes the
especial claim of the learned Swede to our notice.

The cold and cloudy North, land of the mountain and


368 Extatics of Genius.

the mist, is the natural home of rude but forcible energy of
character. Its short and fleeting summer is followed too
soon by the blusterous gales and long dreary stormful nights
of winter for the mind to become habituated to easy repose
on the bosom of nature. It is no region for languid and
voluptuous souls, whom its howling tempests soon rouse from
their castle of indolence. The uncongenial elements without
afford an environment which is ever compressing the mind
upon itself, compelling it to look, if even mournfully, within
for the resources of intellectual existence. Hence high and
stern resolve in action and intense concentration in thought
have generally distinguished the master-spirits of the Scan.
dinavian race. The vikinger are their earthly heroes, and the
gloomy grandeur of the Sagas the most befitting embodiment
of their genius, while the bloody onslaughts and barbaric
feasts in the halls of Odin are their ideal of heaven. Such
at least are the roots of their racial ideas ; the black tubero-
sities of their mythical Igdrasil, ever, as the ages roll away,
shooting skyward, till the radiant suns and shining stars
become but the adornment of its branches. Of this noble
race, which, taking it morally and physically, as well as intel-
lectually, is perhaps the grandest type which humanity has
yet developed, was born Immanuel Swedenborg, the son of
a Lutheran bishop. Thus reared under paternal influences,
which could scarcely fail to prove favourable both to his inte!-
lectual and moral growth, he had also the advantage of a
first-class education, and the subsequent benefit of a rather
enlarged experience in the management of public affairs.
Studious from choice, and qualified by nature to become both
a scholar and natural philosopher, he was still farther stimu-
lated in the acquisition of varied knowledge by the diversity
of posts to which his eminent talents, rather than his family
interests, provided for him a comparatively easy promotion.
At the early age of twenty-four, conveying ships overland by
his engineering skill, for the military purposes of his warlike
sovereign, Charles XII., by whom his extraordinary merits
seem to have been fully recognized, he was in after years
made inspector of mines and governmental assayer, and
throughout the vigour of his manhood seems to have dis-
charged a variety of important offices with credit to himself
and with satisfaction to his government. Raised for his
eminent services to baronial rank, and possessing a gen-
tlemanly competency, he seems to have travelled rather ex-
tensively, and made himself personally familiar with the
manners, customs, modes of thought, and general. condition
of the more important nations of western “Europe. Gifted


Swedenborg. 369
with literary as well as scientific abilities, his works on various
departments of physics and statistics would alone entitle
him to a distinguished place among the more influential
minds of the earlier part of the eighteenth century. For
fifty-seven years was this massive intellect assiduously devoted
to all the higher purposes of exact science, and to all the
more practical applications of scholastic attainment. No
high-dried political economist ever speculated more effec-
tually, or we might suppose at times more absorbingly, on
the best means for developing the national resources. No
dull chronicler of small facts ever surpassed him in the as-
siduity with which he collected the requisite data for his
conclusions, and no mere mathematical formalist ever tran-
scended the cool precision with which he worked out his
conclusions. Of all men of his time, the rigidly scientific
and laboriously studious Swedish Baron seemed in the ma-
turity of his systematically-cultivated intellect, and in the
meridian splendour of his hardly-earned reputation, the very
last of whom a proclivity to the magically occult and the
wildly visionary could have been safely predicated. His
entire training and experience, his whole life environment,
educational and official, seems to have been diametrically
opposed to the development of that interior life on which
the manifestation of seerdom so essentially depends. To an
ordinary observer, he would seem for the first half century
of his learned existence to have dwelt of necessity in the
objective, and might consequently be supposed very legiti-
mately to have eschewed everything more especially connected
with the subjective sphere.

From the first, however, he appears to have been an
earnest, and with the advance of years an increasingly serious
and religious, man. He scems ever to have loved truth with
paramount fidelity, and, while involved in physical -investiga-
tion, to have regarded the universe not as a piece of dead
mechanism, but as God’s temple ; not as a vast sepulchre for
the reception in endless succession of death’s helpless vic-
timry, but rather as the lowly yet glorious portal to the
eternal sublimities beyond. Studious, thoughtful, and sedate,
ever accumulating fresh stores of scientific and other know-
ledge, sinking from persistence into deeper and yet deeper
fits of abstraction, ever becoming more profound in his
thoughts, and more solitary in his habits, it is no wonder
that eventually an utterly abnormal condition of the nervous
system was induced, and extacy in some of its highest forms
evolved. In a mind of an inferior mould, this might have
eventuated in a fit of hypochondriasis, or perhaps of vulgar
VOL. XIII. DD


370 Extatics of Genius.


and chaotic insanity; but in this calm, self-possessed, and
faithful man, the crisis eventuated not in a subsidence but an
exaltation of all the higher mental powers. He emerged
from the fiery furnace not a victim, but a victor. He trod
chaos under foot, and, mounting the whirlwind which must
otherwise have proved his destruction, converted the ravings
of insanity into the lucidity of inspiration. A mind so pro-
foundly analogical has not elsewhere appeared in these our
latter times. A spirit so grandly symbolical in its utterances
has not spoken since the seer of Patmos despatched his reve-
lation to the seven churches of Asia. Drawing his imagery
not from the burning plains and vine-clad hills of Palestine,
but from the gloomy grandeur of the cloudy north, he looms
on the intellectual horizon, not as a fiery son of Shem, who
might ultimately mount heavenward in the blazing chariot of
his own consuming zeal, but rather as the stern and frowning
child of Odin, on whose Lutheranized soul the heathen
horrors of the Walhalla feasts still lugubriously linger. His
gleams of brightness are like the lurid light of a volcanic
eruption, or the occasional flashes of a midnight storm strug-
gling convulsively for manifestation amidst the surrounding
and overwhelming immensity of blackness by which they are
everywhere engirdled. He dwells on the “night side” of
creation, and contemplates its glories by the fitful radiance
of his own northern aurora rather than the cheerful luminc-
sity of the morning dawn. In so far as it is possible fora
man to be a prophet without being a poet, he was the seer
thus clipped of his soaring pinions, exhibiting his strength of
wing indeed not so much by sublime ascents into the shadow-
less translucencies of the empyrean, as by headlong, yet still
daring, descents into those regions of rayless darkness whence
hope has for ever departed and where despair is tyrant for
eternity. He is no artist, and knows no distinction between
the terrible and disgusting, the beautiful and the ridiculous.
Anthropomorphous in all his ideas of the Deity and things
spiritual, his heavens are terrestrial translations, exhibiting
a poverty of conception absolutely pitiable, while his hells
are simply the reeking cesspools of earthly abominations.
Analogically grand, he is idealistically feeble, and his por-
traitures of the spiritual are interesting only as psychological
curiosities, exhibiting to us at full Jength the subjective
sphere of a grand and gifted, but way ward and diseased, in-
tellect. He fulfilled more nearly than perhaps any other
European the sublime oriental conception that madness is a
divine visitation. An afflatus at all events, if even from
bencath—a desperation if not an inspiration—a being spoken


Swedenbory. 371


through, if even by Satan—an eolian strain, albeit, evoked
not by


‘* Airs from heaven, but blasts from hell.’’


Scientifically, Swedenborg was a spontaneous extatic, and
in his lucid crises, which seem at last to have become habitual,
if not permanent, his subjective conceptions were projected
into apparent objectivity, and the spirits of the dead, devils,
angels, and God himself, assumed to his interior eye the form
and semblance of seemingly sensuous objects, for which how-
ever he seems never to have mistaken them. He was indeed
a conscious clairvoyant, and as such could transfer the know-
ledge and experiences of his trance-life into the sphere of
ordinary consciousness. Modern mesmerists indeed have no
difficulty in affording him honourable recognition as among
the most decisive instances of spontaneously-developed lu-
cidity which have occurred in recent times. From the volume
of his brain and the extent to which it had been previously
disciplined, he was probably the most powerful lucid of the
Christian era, and, had he been of an active and energetic
instead of a dreamy and sedentary character when his
visionary tendencies commenced, there is no calculating the
extent to which he might have modified the faith and practice
of Christendom. To say that he would have been a western
Mahomet is by no means to exaggerate the possibilities which
might have ensued from the appearance of such a being.
Gravely informing the governor and inhabitants of Hanover
that a fire was then actually raging at Stockholm, and having
his description of the conflagration subsequently verified even
to the minutest details of time and extent, who shall estimate
the influence of such a seersman, had he but felt himself
called to found a new instead of mystifying an old faith !
Considering the calibre of the bombshell, the explosion has
so far proved wonderfully innocuous. But let us not too
soon rejoice ; a seed has been planted which may yet fructify
into a mighty harvest. The well-behaved churches of the
New Jerusalem do not embody the whole of his disciples.
The Rappists of America, and many other schools of subli-
mated mystagogues, are obviously among his followers, and
a century or so must yet elapse ere we shall be justified in
asserting that the world is quite free from the possibility of a
grand theological revolution, owing its origin to the extatic
lucubrations of the great, good, wise, and learned, but never-
theless decidedly somnambulistic, Swede.

From the fact that Swedenborg seems to have at all times
clearly perceived the difference between visional presenti-

pp2


372


Extatics of Genius.


ments and natural phenomena, we have reason to believe that
his perceptive faculties were unaffected, while the logical
sequence and methodic clearness of his thoughts would seem
also to imply that the reflective powers must have been un-
touched. The abnormal exaltation under which he laboured
seems to have had its principal seat in the anterior portion of
the moral region, stimulating veneration, sublimity and
wonder to inordinate activity. His disease, in short, was a
form of religious mania, which re-acted on and morbidly
excited an otherwise sound, powerful, highly cultivated, well-
balanced and finely-disciplined intellect, whose noble powers
were only misapplied because exercised upon groundless and
imaginary or, if the terms be preferred, non-existent and
suppositionary data. He reasoned rightly from false premises,
and was thereby led to erroneous conclusions. By some, this
form of mental alienation is termed partial insanity, and it
most undoubtedly arises from some portions of the cerebral
structure being in a diseased, while others are in a compa-
ratively healthy, state. This peculiar condition of the system
is often compatible with the display of unusual intellectual
power, the faculties deriving intense stimulation from the
sentiments, and thus giving birth to thoughts and concep-
tions which partake rather of the character of inspiration
than lunacy. Of this history furnishes us with many notable
examples in the persons of such men as St. Francis of Assis,
Ignatius Loyola, and others, who, in virtue of visional extasis,
manifested resplendent talents which would otherwise appa-
rently have remained latent, and, as a consequence, have
attained to a lasting and extensive influence over their fellow-
men. To suppose that the condition of such persons can be
understood without a reference to mesmerism and phrenology,
is simply absurd. Their drains were affected, and the mani-
festations to which they gave birth must consequently be
considered as symptoms of diseased structure and disordered
function, producing as their unavoidable result more or less
of deranged mental action, whose essentially abnormal cha-
racter is not the less certain because accompanied by exalta-
tion in place of depression. That such individuals have, under
the guidance of Providence, not unfrequently performed an
important part on the great stage of human affairs, furnishes
no argument against the conclusion that, in despite of this,
they were patients for a physician, seeing that in all ages of
the world weak things have been chosen to confound the
strong. Indeed it is in perfect accordance with all our con-
ceptions of the procedure of a universal Deity, to suppose
that he may avail himself alike of all instruments, of the


ueruddixnaiee


Swedenborg. 373
small as well as the great, of the feeble as well as the mighty,
of the visions of the mystic as well as the meditations of the sage.

The authority of Swedenborg, with those who believe in
the reality of his visions, is of course primal; it is that of a
seer who comes commissioned directly from the throne of
Omnipotence. Granting his premises of a divine intercom-
munion, and from his revelation of the truth there is no
appeal but to the counter-statements of a similarly favoured
extatic. He transcends reason and stands on the lofty ground
of direct intuition. His first apprehension of the truth is
through the spiritual eye, and his subsequent demonstration
of its possibility, probability, or necessity, is but a kindly
accommodation to the inferior powers of those who dwell in
the lower sphere of excogitation. To the members of his
church he is not only a prophet but the chief of the prophets,
and stands second only, in the grand hierarchy of spirituali-
ties who have come clothed in flesh, to him over whose birth
the angels sang their celestial anthems and at whose death
the sun was clothed in the darkness of a mourning robe. He
is the grand complement of the Christian scheme, the mighty
angel whose millenial trump announces to earth the descent
of that New Jerusalem whose analogical archtype was beheld
by the rapt seerman of Patmos during his lonely visions in
the Levant. Since the paradisaical patriarchs of the primeval
church, no son of man has held equally free and unrestrained
intercourse with the Lord and his angels. To no mortal
mind since the fall from man’s first estate as an unclouded
spirit, joining earth to heaven, has the privilege of direct
intercommunion with every order of being been equally
vouchsafed. Such is of necessity his aspect to a devout and
unexamining believer, who knows Swedenborg and Sweden-
borg only, and to whom the phenomena of extatic illumina-
tion, with the mystic sphere of our interior life and its mani-
fold forms of radiant existence, have been revealed only
through the multitudinous dissertations of the indefatigable
Baron. Once without this charmed circle, however, with
larger data for comparison, and we at once perceive that such
an overweening estimate of his special position and authority
is quite unwarranted by the facts of the case. We then dis-
cover that, though great, he was not unique, although vast, he
was one of an order, and has had many predecessors of equal
pretensions, and who, without the aid of the press and other
advantages which fall to the lot of master-spirits in these latter
days, nevertheless achieved greater results than have yet
ensued from the labours of the ex-assayer. The Menus and
Hermes’, the Gautama Budhas, Zoroasters, and Mahomets,


374 Extatics of Genius.


of all ages and countries, were his psychical kin, the variously
gifted seermen of their successive generations, to whom it was
given to “teach with authority and not as the scribes.” Who
were in a sense primal and not derivative minds, and spoke
from their interior consciousness and not from the exterior
and merely deductive intellect, and who thus standing on
the plane of intuition commanded thence, as by the right of
the strongest, all inter-sphered intelligences occupying the
lower plane of reflective thought.

To estimate justly the relative greatness of Swedenborg,
then, we must compare him with minds of his order. As an
extatic there is no other standard by which to estimate his
mental stature. Thus admeasured his apparent vastitude
diminishes, from the Titanic and divine to the gigantic and
human. He is still seen to be great, but not pre-eminently
overawing, and occupies not the imperial throne of a founder,
but the footstool of an expositor of faith. He is not in this
highest sense a primary, but a satellite, and revolves with all
his dependencies around the grander centre of Calvary, and,
in the strictest meaning of the terms, is not a master but a
disciple in things spiritual.

Having thus fixed his rank and defined his position in the
hierarchy of prophetic souls, let us now look at some of the
details of his system and endeavour thence to trace its origin
and ascertain its character. Its basis then is immediately
Christian and more remotely Judaic and Patriarchal. It
accepts without questioning the existent faith of Europe in
fundamentals. Hence we learn that Swedenborg was geogra-
phically limited as to the impressions whence his extatic
visions were to be fashioned. The son of a Lutheran bishop,
his most rapt visions are ever conditioned by the essentials of
his paternal faith. He never ascended to the sphere of the
absolute, but in his loftiest moments was still the dependent
creature of time and place and circumstance. The accident
of his birth in Protestant Sweden in the eighteenth century
provided that mould for his conceptions of things both celes-
tial and infernal which would doubtless have been far other-
wise fashioned had he been a good Catholic of southern
Europe, an orthodox Mussulman of Constantinople, a devout
worshipper of Brahma, or a true believer in the manifold
. incarnations of Budha. In the fundamentals of his creed he
was the child of tradition, and hence, as we have said, can be
considered only as a profoundly expository prophet, following
in the train of a greater, and never feeling the dread evocation
to publish anew the thunder-vowed commands of Omnipo-
tence speaking afresh its Messianic messages to the ages.


Swedenborg. 375


On this Christian foundation, however, a superstructure
was reared, composed apparently of somewhat heterogeneous
materials, derived very obviously from the extatic teachers of
the East. Such is his conception of the God who is utterly
beyond the cognition of the highest creatures, and consequent
manifestation under a human form—that of “the Lord,” not
only on earth but in heaven, not only through time but in
eternity. To such an extent indeed is this dogma pushed
that it would eventuate ultimately in the war cry by his fol-
lowers, “There is no God but Christ, and Swedenborg is
his prophet.” This is Budhism—it is the idea of incarnation
carried to the extent of a virtual dethronement of the primal
intelligence. From Brahminism also comes his other anthro-
pomorphous notion, that not only heaven itself, but all its
several societies and individualities, are in the human form,
and collectively constitute the grand or celestial man, whose
head is occupied by the highest order of angels, his breast
and arms by the second order, and his loins and legs, in
gradual descent, by those of inferior condition. No Sanscrit
scholar will here fail to recognize the teachings of the Vedas.
It is simply the transferrence of a Brahminical legend, by
which the institution of Caste is supported, to the Christian
heaven. This similarity is indeed admitted by Swedenbor-
gians themselves, who account for it by the assumption (on
their teacher’s authority) of a primeval church, whose mem-
bers were extatics, and from the fragments of whose purer
doctrines the great Eastern creeds of an historically remote
antiquity were either directly or mediately derived, and that,
consequently, the agreement between Swedenborg and the
Vedantic seers is due to both having had an independent
intuition of the truth. Even granting this to be the case, the
profound student of seerdom would come to the conclusion
that, in each instance, this phenomenon of consciousness
assumed its peculiar form, from the human speciality of the
extatic being projected upon the subject-matter of his visions
and consequently framing and colouring them with its own
peculiarities. Like a spectator on the Brocken, each saw the
gigantic reflection of himself, limned on the vapours of a
morning sky, and mistook this shadow of mortality for the
revelation of a divine personality gloriously manifested amidst
the grandeur of the dawn. From the prevalence of anthro-
pomorphous ideas in all religions, it is obvious that seers have
seldom if ever been unconditioned by their special relation-
ships to the human form of organic life. In the system of
the sage of Stockholm this subjection of ideas to the influence
of an animal type is so all-pervading that it occasionally


376 Extatics of Genius.


becomes a source of the ridiculous, not to say blasphemous,
in his portraitures of celestial scenes and supersensuous occur-
rences. To receive such grotesque conceptions as the ever-
lasting vestment of eternal veracity indicates an abject sub-
jection to the teachings of seer-vision, from whenee we may
calculate the power of an extatic in ages and among a people
less enlightened than our own.

As the truthful revelation of an individual subjectivity,
the visions of Swedenborg are no doubt eminently interesting,
and as a contribution to the facts of psychology their value
cannot be well over-estimated. But to suppose that because
a great, good, wise, learned and pious man, chanced in his
declining years to be so far affected by a nervous distemper
as to confound the objective with the subjective, and, asa
necessary result, to see his conceptions as perceptions, that
therefore his ideas in reference to an ulterior condition of
being are to be received as authoritative revelations, is
simply to misapprehend the essential character of lucidity
and dignify it with a position and authority which a true
philosophy can never sanction. As the analogical vestments
of spiritual truths, as the peculiar form under which from his
mental idiosyncracy the learned Swede had to conceive of
and embody his conclusions respecting a higher stage of exis-
tence, his Heaven and Hell, his Arcana Celestia and other theo-
logical productions, contain many pregnant hints and ideas, and
indeed superabound with materials for thought that would
not have been so long neglected but for the rather grotesque
and occasionally even repulsive form under which they were
presented. In short, it is a pity that the Baron was not an
idealistic poet as well as an analogical sage, for then we should
have had a vastly more beautiful and attractive portraiture of
man’s spiritual condition and future destiny. Still with all
their faults of grossness in imagery and bad taste in the selec-
tion of subjects for illustration, his religious writings consti-
tute a very important and valuable addition to our means for
the analogical interpretation both of the Old and New Testa-
ment, and indeed, we may say, of all sacred books whatsoever.

After all, however, the true greatness of this extraordinary
man is to be found, not in his visions but in his meditations.
He is father of analogy, the master of correspondences, and
the revealer of final causes. Here he stands alone, the col-
lossal founder of a sphere of thought in which he had no
predecessors save those primal sages of the orient of whose
sublime tuitions but the faintest echoes have survived. He
is the Bacon of an a priori philosophy, and marks the dawn of
a return from the microscopic minuteness of analytical expe-


Swedenborg. 3


riment dwelling in ultimates to the vastitude and grandeur
of synthetic meditation, ascending as by a “right divine” to
the sublime altitude of first principles. Of a genius, however,
too diffusive for the composition of an organum of analogical
science, the laws of thought and rules for investigation which
he promulgated must be sought rather in the manifold ex-
amples which he has afforded than in the formal directions
which he has provided. His voluminous works are a vast mine
of illustrative exposition, in which God and nature, history
~ and philosophy, are presented under aspects which, if startling,
are profound ; and, if now and then extravagant, are at the
same time generally original; a mine which others may work
to advantage, and whence blocks will yet be hewn that a
more plastic mind shall hereafter fashion into the more pleas-
ing forms of perfectly symmetrical beauty. He was essen-
tially a precursor, and came not to conclude but to introduce
a system. Thus contemplated, his merits cannot well be
exaggerated. A born giant, a native Titan, he stood like
lesser men with his feet on fact, but, from the god-like great-
ness of his mental stature, his majestic head at the same time
swept the empyrean of principles, where his glance rested on
the starry dwellers in their eternal courses, and he listened,
as of compulsion, while the spheral harmonies rang out into
the supersensuous music of their everlasting anthems. What
wonder then that he at length grew giddy, and in a sense
confused, mingling profound discourse of nature’s highest
and holiest mysteries with vain babble respecting fantastic
visions and waking fancies, at which fools may mock and
whereby the unwary may be led astray, but over which the
wise and good will sigh, as a sad though perhaps instructive
instance of limitation even to the noblest faculties, and of
fallibility as attaching even to the greatest minds.


Our CoTreMPORARIES.


The Present is ever the commonplace and prosaic, except
to those few gifted minds who prevail to lift the mystic folds
which hide the open secret. Genius alone is consciously
engirdled with the wonderful: not to the superficial can the
profounder depths be directly revealed. Matter of fact is
ever blind to the awful, and the man of routine never per-
ceives the gulph in which his diurnal repetitions are to be
swallowed till it has already opened beneath his feet. Me-
diocrity worships the Past, because contemplating it through
the medium of those great souls whose revelation of its


378 Extatics of Genius.


grandeur has become a traditional inheritance; but is in-
competent to perceive the growing greatness of an heroic
Present, because this demands independent insight. The
existing aspect of the world offers unmistakeable evidence
that faiths have grown, and history tells us in its dim and
inefficient way how, in some instances, men of giant mould
have prevailed to found them. But that this should ever
occur again, nay is occurring now, seems to the great mass of
believers in all existing creeds the most remote of probabi-
lities, nay, the very direst of impossibilities. That cycles
should ever revolve their entire circuit, and recommence with
all the increment of the epicycle, may be admitted as an
abstract proposition, but its rigid application to any existing
scheme is of course most carefully eschewed as a fatal heresy.
We may believe that Mahomet flourished in Arabia, and that
Menu lived and legislated in India, but the recurrence of
such a phenomenon, as it would not prove desirable, is of
course to be discredited. But we err; seed-time and harvest
will no more fail in the moral than in the physical sphere,
and the forces which evolved the forms of the past will not
be wholly inoperative during the future. The demands of
the ages ever suffice to evoke competent instrumentalities for
their effectuation, and men of mental stature proportionate
to the necessities of successive eras will doubtless be in due
time provided. Whether any of our more immediate cotem-
poraries belong to this Titanic class is of course a prebiem,
which coming time alone can solve. They and their schemes
will be weighed in the balance, and if found wanting will of
necessity undergo the fate of all inadequacies. In the interim
it may not prove altogether uninteresting or uninstructive to
contemplate the character and pretensions of some of the
more prominent and influential seermen who have lately
been, or who now are, on the scene of action.


No. 6.—Suamyt, leader of the Caucasian Tribes.


Of all the individuals now attracting public attention, few
perhaps are more really worthy of careful and attentive study
than the warrior-prophet, Shamyl, the heroic chieftain of the
Caucasus. Of his military achievements all have heard, but
comparatively few perhaps are aware that to this distinction
he adds that of the prophetic founder of a new faith. Of a
frame originally small and weak, he is nevertheless endowed
with invincible courage and an indomitable will. The frail
tenement encloses a mind whose robust hardihood more


Shamyl. 379


than compensates for the feebleness of its corporeal instru-
ment. Endowed with all the energy of commanding genius,
he has, like many others of his class, compelled an inferior
physical organization to the performance of its appropriate
duties, till at length it has in some measure partaken of the
force of its prime mover. The great soul has at length
energized the incapable body, and the sickly boy has even-
tuated in the enduring and adventurous soldier. Thoughtful
and profoundly meditative even in early youth, of a retired
and quiet disposition, he was from many causes prone to
solitude. This he found in the rugged grandeur of the rocky
altitude which surmounts his native village of Himry, where,
in a spot wild, desolate, and romantic as his own young
thoughts, he cultivated those habits of abstract contem-
plation which prepared him for his subsequent mission. Alone,
yet not afraid, he often lingered long into the night in this
rudely sequestered retirement, perhaps not the less attractive
to such a mind because reported by his countrymen to be
the abode of troubled spirits whose presence was announced
by the volcanic flames which would suddenly burst from the
mountain precipices around.

Asia seems the cradle of religions. All enduring theo-
logical forms have hitherto had their birth in the weird ele-
ments which there engirdle every thoughtful mind as with
an atmosphere of devotional mysticism. If the West be essen-
tially intellectual in its mental constitution, the East is as
essentially moral. If the one be thoughtful, the other is
emotional; and, if philosophy be the mission of the former,
theosophy is equally that of the latter. The heroes of Europe
have been political leaders; the master-spirits of Asia have
been legislators and prophets. The second sight of the Occi-
dent may be a curiosity, but the seerdom of the Orient is a
power, before which thrones have crumbled and dynastic dis-
tinctions have been obliterated. The claim to preternatural
authority based on supernatural illumination sounds strange
and quackish to European ears, but the Asiatic regards it as
a time-honoured respectability, in which it would be dis-
reputable not to believe, and on the examination of whose
merits he enters with a foregone and decidedly favourable
conclusion. Prophets are regarded as beings in the course,
if not of nature, at least of Providence, and the occasional
manifestation of such a phenomenon is among the ordinary
expectances of human affairs. Hence the emergence of men
of obscure lineage and moderate learning into the distin-
guished position of spiritual guides, teaching “not, as the
scribes,” by traditional authority, but by a light directly


380 Extatics of Genius.

vouchsafed to them from above, is not so uncommon as to
excite unbounded astonishment, or so opposed to the general
current of public opinion as to arouse distrust. The dreamer,
the enthusiast, or the visionary, has here no fear of being
considered and treated as a lunatic on the one hand or an
impostor on the other. He has simply to make good his
claims by the performance of works sufficiently wonderful to
give him an influence over the vulgar, or by the announce-
ment of doctrines so far imbued with mysticism and pro-
fundity as to stimulate the curiosity and test the logical
acumen of the learned and select.

Shamyl has promulgated a new phase of Soofeeism, the
hereditary and highly spiritualized theosophy which underlies
the dogmas of nearly all Asia’s manifold and apparently
dissimilar sects. Implying the gift of lucid vision and mental
sympathy in varying degrees in its different ranks of disciples
and teachers, it places the higher orders of its hierarchy in
immediate communication with the essences of things, but
in the special form developed by Shamy] it presupposes its
prophet-founder and hierophant to be in direct communion
with God and occasionally to be absorbed into his being.
Stripped of its conventionalities, this is extacy systematized,
the varied gradations of susceptibility, as being supposed to
afford evidence of successive ascensions into light, knowledge,
purity, and spirituality, constituting the claim of the subject
to a certain position in this hierarchial constitution. More
complicated than the system of Mahomet, it implies greater
educational attainments in its founder, and perhaps a more
advanced stage of mental development in its believers. But
it.is doubtful whether with all this it has the same boldness
of outline or the same grandeur and originality of conception
in its dogmas. It has obviously lost in breadth what it has
gained in height and depth, and has, we should think, little
of that simplicity and practicality in its doctrines and ordi-
nances which would qualify it for that rapid and extensive
diffusion which awaited the faith of Islam. Shamyl is an
extraordinary man, but he is not equal to the son of Koreish.
He did not begin this spiritual despotism, the basis of which
was laid by Kasi Mullah, his preceptor and leader, whose
mantle he inherited after the fatal fight at Himry, where
Kasi Mullah was slain with most of his devoted followers, and
Shamyl fell, pierced by two balls, at the side of his master.
The present hero indeed rather occupies the position of Ali,
or one of the earlier caliphs than of the primal founder of a
new faith. The dangers and difficulties of his position may
suffice to keep up his own extatic exaltation, and stimulate


Joseph Smith. 381


the veneration of his followers: but we greatly doubt whether
this mere adaptation of the old tenets of Soofeeism to the
temporary necessities of a mountain clan will long outlast the
passing circumstances which have called it forth, or prevail
to spread beyond the geographical limitations of the people
and country of its birth.


No. 7.—Josern Smita, the founder of Mormonism.


Nature is the same yesterday, to-day, and to-morrow.
The wise know this, but the foolish are ever exclaiming in
reference to the rarer phenomena of the present, “ never
before,” and of the past “ never again.” Nevertheless, what
has been shall be, and whatever was still is. Could we see
the courses of the grander currents of destiny, shall we say
rather the entire outline of the vaster plans of Providence,
we should find that even the most seemingly stupendous
marvels are recurrent, only their cycle is longer in its re-
volution and their appearance therefore less frequent than
that of ordinary occurrences. The sun sets every evening,
but it is only on rare occasions that it is eclipsed. The
earthquake is as natural though not so common as the storm,
and the comet whose revolution exhausts the centuries is as
integral a portion of the universe as the fixed star which
shines permanently in its own constellation. Nature was
not in convulsions when she birthed a Homer, nor was her
equanimity disturbed when she produced a Shakspear. She
is equal to all emergencies, sufficient for all demands, and
can never be found wanting or taken at unawares. There
is no conjuncture to which she is unequal, and no difficulty
for which she cannot find a solution. The ages are her
schools, and men are her children to be therein educated.
‘The real necessities of a time are the truly evocative spell
under which the master-spirits of eras are called forth. The
man is ever in proportion to the crisis, albeit the true has
but too often his precursors in the false. Did France in the
agonizing throes of her first revolution cry aloud for a
deliverer? Verily at the first shall none seemingly be vouch-
safed, for what were your Dantons, Marats, and Robes-
pieres but insufficient attempts, apprentice-like failures, in
the effort to produce that imperative requirement of the time,
a competent leader. But fear not, when the shadows shall
have disappeared, then will the substance be revealed and a
Bonaparte shall appear.

Prophetic visions and inspired calls are not every day


382 Extatics of Genius.


phenomena. But they have been, and therefore they will
be, “facts in nature.” Seers even to the highest were men,
and to their cotemporaries loomed forth perhaps not so
grandly as to posterity. Elijah “clothed in a garment of
camel’s hair, and having a leathern girdle about his loins,”
running before the chariot of Ahab, did not doubtless to
an ordinary spectator seem exactly the glorious personage
who should eventually mount heavenwards in a fiery vehicle
of his own. The near and the present are ever the prosaic.
Distance lends enchantment to the view in things moral as
well as physical. The poetry of a worshipful fact is never
fully revealed till it be seen in due perspective :—then its
grandeur, beauty, power, and sublimity, come boldly out
from the mass of surrounding common place, and stand
forth in ever-increasing and awe-inspiring vastitude, to the
admiration of an endless posterity. Time is the great
canonizer. He makes the vulgar venerable. There is an
halo from the ages to which the existent can never attain.
Thus the prophet survives and sanctifies the man, till at
length, as with the “son of the Koreish,” the very mending
of shoes and the patching of cloaks becomes an indication of
nobility.

Joe Smith was beyond all doubt a vulgar fellow, a man to
all outward appearance of an order the most irretrievably com-
mon-place, a rustic yankee, whom nature not only makes by
the gross, but the million, and of whom the like might be
found in any village throughout the union. Coarse, ignorant
and cunning, a more unlikely person than our friend Joseph
for the prophetic mission could scarcely be conceived ; yet this
was the man chosen out of twenty millions to found a new
creed and seal its truth as with a martyr’s blood. Truly,
“ vessels of grace” are not always comely in the eyes of their
own blinded generation. Thus, in the present case, beneath
this very unpromising exterior, mental and corporeal, was
there most obviously a spirit, of which the equal is not, from
some cause, of daily manifestation among us sons of morta-
lity. Seriously then it may be asked, what was Joe Smith,
and what is Mormonism? The former we reply was a
natural extatic, and the latter is one of those nascent creeds
to which, in the days of their nonage, vision and miracle are
usually vouchsafed. As to the first assertion, let Joseph
himself be spokesman. He tells us that in the spring of
1823, when he was fifteen or sixteen years old, he began to
think about the salvation of his soul. He went one day
to a sacred place in a grove,knelt down, and began to call
upon the Lord, and, praying fervently, at length beheld a


_s*


ar


Joseph Smith. 383


very bright and glorious light in the heavens above. This
was accompanied with a peculiar sensation throughout his
system, his mind was caught away from surrounding objects,
and he beheld two glorious personages, who foretold some-
what of his future career. On the 21st of September in the
same year, he seems to have had another vision, in which he
saw a personage of a pleasing, glorious, and innocent appear-
ance, who intimated to him the locality where he might find
the golden plates of the Book of Mormon. Here are the
distinctive features of extacy, such as the saintly biographies
of every creed in its infancy are sure to provide in abun-
dance. Nor is this all: Joseph it seems was also “a peeper,”
that is, he was odically susceptible to the influence of crystals,
for, having when engaged in well sinking found a bright
stone of a peculiar appearance, he placed “it in his hat, and
said that he could see in it. This it appears originated the
Urim and Thummim,* by which he was greatly aided in
translating the ancient language of the golden leaves. In
addition to this, it would appear that during many years
the ostensible employment of the Smith family was digging
for money, an occupation not unfrequently pursued by those
who are gifted with susceptibility to the influence of the
divining rod. The evidence then that Smith was an extatic
or natural clairvoyant is not only satisfactory and sufficient,
but must prove irresistible with all duly qualified judges.


* On this subject we beg to repeat a note to a paper by Mr. Hockley on the
ancient magic crystal, in No. XXVII, p. 252.

“Tt would seem from the observations of Sir Gardner Wilkinson that this
form of divination (by crystals) was employed by the Egyptians before the time
of Moses. Not only the form, but the symbols, and even titles, connected with
it, are all related to those of Egypt. The Urim and Thummin, connected with,
if not part of the breast-plate of judgment of the High Priest (Exodus xxviii.,
30), and interpreted as Light and Truth, or Revelation and Truth, correspond
most remarkably with the figure of Re (the Sun) and Thmei (Truth) in the
breast-plate of the Egyptian priest: and Alian and Diodorus Siculus are quoted
as authorities for the custom of the Egyptian priest when acting as arch-judge,
hanging around his neck a sapphire stone which was called Truth. (Manners
and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, ii., 22, v. 28.

‘“* Good accounts of the Urim and Thummim, or rather of what is understood
concerning them, may be found in Winer’s Biblisches Realverterbuch. In the
Rev. Dr. Kitto’s Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature, are extracted the observations
and wood-cuts of Sir Gardner Wilkinson, before whose researches ultra-theologians
endeavoured to make the world believe that the immense and ancient Egyptian
nation had only copied the Jews, whose Urim and Thummin they had learnt
after Solomon had married a daughter of Pharaoh! Dr. Kitto, though we dare
say quite orthodox, is not among these, but cheerfully admits the force of Sir
G. Wilkinson’s observations : just as other orthodox divines cheerfully allow us
to admit the fact of- the existence of the countless worlds for millions of years,
and of the sun not going round the earth but the earth round the sun, and to
agree with the C heva alier Bunsen and others that the current views of history de-
rived from the Old Testament are untenable.’’—Zoist.


384 Extatics of Genius.


The symptoms are unmistakeable, and the patient stands
confessed a rustic seer, who in another age or country might
have proved a harmless dreamer of dreams, or, at the worst,
have been suddenly and effectually snuffed out, like “mad
Tom of Canterbury,” a man by the way in many respects
immeasurably superior to the rude Vermontee.

Such was the author. Now what is his book? A con-
victed plagiarism. A religious novel by the Rev. Solomon
Spaulding, converted into the pretended production of a
Hebrew prophet. The story of the golden plates is doubtless
a pious fraud, but, in all probability, sanctioned to the mind
of the inventor by the directions of some ghostly visitant.
The real origin of the book of Mormon is, however, of little
importance to the world. The question is, what are its
fruits? And destiny replies, 300,000 converts in twenty years,
with society organized on a new basis, and a propoganda whose
missionary enterprizes insure aggressive action on all the
leading nations of the civilized world. How this has been
accomplished by an instrumentality so apparently inefficieut
is a problem which literary criticism, as such, cannot solve.
We laugh at the Koran, and treat the Mormon Bible with
contempt : but facts are against us, for these confused, bom-
bastic, and thoroughly ridiculous works, are nevertheless
received as inspired productions, on whose sentences men are
not only contented to live but prepared to die. In ovr
learned refinement we forget that it is not solely by his
intellectual gifts and graces that a prophet generally im-
presses himself, either on his cotemporaries or posterity.
Mahomet was, and Schamyl probably is, a barbarian in this
respect. Not by the legerdemain of elegance or fluency in
composition, but by the grandly contagious enthusiasm of a
deeply-moved and profoundly visionary spirit, is it that
the electric fire of sympathetic excitement is roused in duly
sensitive minds, who, once intersphered with an appropriate
master or a duly prepared school, become from that moment
hopelessly enthralled.

Such are the prophet and his book, and now let us ask
what is the system to which they have given birth? Facts
compel us to answer, that, in a moral point of view, it is a
profligate fanaticism under which men, on pretence of being
guided immediately by inspiration, have found occasion to
indulge in the most unbridled licentiousness. While in
their endeavour to legalize such proceedings, and obtain for
them the sanction of a religion, they have, so far as their
own community extends, rolled back society on the bar-
barous institutions of remote ages and restored the rudeness


Joseph Smith. 385


without the innocence of primeval times. The possession of
power is a sore temptation to our weak and erring humanity.
Success and not failure is the touchstone of the sage. The
Mormon leaders are obviously men, and of them we can
scarcely say,—


‘* Their failings bear to virtue’s side.’’


To the philosophic observer of men and manners, this re-
appearance of oriental institutions in the far west, where it
begins to face the extreme east, is not without its signi-
ficance. But on this we cannot here dilate. As we have
already said, the Mormons profess to be guided by direct
inspiration, and to possess the power of healing the sick by
the laying on of hands. There is probably a basis of truth
in both these towering pretensions. Founded by an extatic,
they have doubtless inherited from their leader a proclivity
to interior excitement, and will, like all similar bodies, trans-
mit it as an heirloom to their more immediate successors.
The following passages from the history of the Mormons by
Lieut. Gunnison, of the Topographical Engineers, U. S.,
will afford an idea of the scenes sometimes enacted among
these high-wrought enthusiasts. He is describing what took
place at Kirkland, Ohio, in the early days of the Church.
“There were extacies—men and women falling to the floor
in the public assemblies, wallowing, rolling, and tossing of
hands—pointing into the heavens at the cloud of witnesses,
uttering Indian dialects—there was swooning, rushing out of
doors and running into the fields. Some would pick up
stones, and read from characters of writing which were
miraculously made and then suddenly disappeared. Others
found pieces of parchment falling upon them which they
declared were sealed with the seal of Christ, and which they
no sooner copied than they vanished. Visions, tongues,
trances, shoutings, weeping and laughing, the outpouring of
prophecies, and terrible cursing of the Missourians, and
preaching to unscen nations, were among the signs following
at Kirkland.” No student of extacy will here be at a loss
to perceive all the signs of its presence. The people were
obviously wrought up to a pitch of fanatical enthusiasm,
under which every form of morbid manifestation was to be
expected. Such is the inspiration of the saints: while
their miraculous healings, are simply mesmeric and biological
cures, wrought by the combination of faith in the patient
with confidence in the operator, which unwise and prejudiced
opponents may foolishly deny, but which a truly enlightened
and liberal science will acknowledge and explain.
VOL, XIII. EE


386 Extatics of Genius.

It has been long observed that extremes meet, and hence
we suppose it is, that plain, practical, utilitarian, dollar-loving
America proves to be precisely the place for fanatical outbursts
and theological commotions. Revivalist camp-meetings, spirit-
rapping circles, and Mormon migrations, are the contri-
buting streams of that great current of religious enthusiasm
which has been long setting in on the States, probably as a
needful counterpoise to that very direct practicality of
thought which has itself arisen from the stern necessity
imposed on the inhabitants of the new world for rapidly
developing the material resources of their imperfectly settled
country. This aspect of the subject, however, has more
extensive bearings than the geographical boundaries of the
union. Mormonism finds comparatively ready acceptance
here as well as there, and attracts its disciples from the
crowded cities of the old as well as the thinly peopled
prairies of the new world. Straws, in themselves insignificant,
indicate the direction of the tempest. The success of hetero-
doxy is, as we have elsewhere remarked, the admeasurement
of orthodoxy’s incompetency. So contemplated, Mormonism
is a sign of the times not altogether devoid of importance.
People do not go by the 100,000 into the wilderness with-
out an adequate motive. The desert is not converted into
a garden, nor do cities arise as by magic amidst the primeval
rudeness of the mountain and the forest, without the pre-
sence of a powerfully evocative and effectually creative spirit.
That the apparently primal agent of such immediately
extensive and grandly prospective changes was, as ad-
measured by all ordinary standards of moral worth or intel-
lectual greatness, inherently and unutterably insignificant,
nay absolutely contemptible, only adds to the real import-
ance of the movement, for it shews all the more clearly how
thoroughly prepared must have been the soil whence a
harvest so substantial and abundant could be gathered from
seed so very indifferent and by tillage so very unskilful.
Such phenomena indubitably and forcibly demonstrate the


existence of a deeply seated and widely pervasive feeling of


dissatisfaction on the part of no inconsiderable portion of the
Christian public of Britain and America with the prevalent
systems of theology. Were there real contentment, such
facts could never exist, for they arise from a morbid craving
for change, a diseased ankering after pseudo-religious excite-
ment, which having sought relief in vain, by making the
circuit of ordinary sectarianism, eventually embraces the
blasphemous doctrines and brutal obscenities of Mormon
impicty.


sore


Joseph Smith. ; 387


As we have said, Utah in the wilderness is a sign which
those whom it may concern would do well to note. Its real
importance, however, we hold to be rather prospective than
present. Smith was but a precursor. He had none of the
qualities of a true master builder. ‘To him the pure elevation
of thought and real earnestness of feeling were unknown.
He had none of that overwhelming sublimity of conception,
that innate grandeur of purpose, that over-awing nobility of
nature, which we find ever attaching to the veritable architec-
tons of theosophy. He was so essentially vulgar that even
visional extacy could not raise him above the common-place.
His tale of the golden plates is a clumsy fabrication, and his
narrative of their exhumation prosy in the extreme. Com-
pared with it, the Gabriel of Mahomet and the Egeria of
Numa are poetry embodied. Smith, in short, was a Yankee
edition of the seer, a New England phase of the prophet.
The success of a pretender so unutterably contemptible is,
however, a grave reality, to whose indications we should not
remain wilfully blind or foolishly insensible. Let us remem-
ber that shadows ever precede substances, and where the
former have loomed so largely the latter cannot be far
behind. The want of a teacher must indeed have been
urgent when a straw so pretensious as Smith could be
accepted as a heaven-sent witness of the truth. Of Mormon-
ism itself, then, we have no fear. It is a vulgar fanaticism,
whose force will be expended in less than a century. But,
as a premonitory symptom, its importance cannot well be
over-estimated. It is No. 1 of a series, whereof the rappine
excitement may be considered as No. 2. The theological
atmosphere is electric, and it requires no great exertion of
vaticinatory power to determine that a thunderstorm is
impending.

The rise and progress of Mormonism affords an instructive
lesson to those who bigotedly oppose the diffusion of Mormon-
ism. Had there been anything like a general knowledge of
the phenomena usually attendant on abnormal states of the
nervous system, or had the mass of the people been habi-
tuated to the wonderful cures which mesmeric manipulations
occasionally effect, Joe Smith’s visions and the Mormon
saints’ miraculous healings would have proved perfectly
innocuous. As it is, they have led many thousands of other-
wise respectable men and women into courses from which on
the ground of morality alone, without any reference to religion,
they would, but for such lamentable mystification, have shrunk
with disgust and horror unspeakable.


388 _  Extatics of Genius.


No. 8.—Hune-Lew-tseven, the Theological Leader of the
Chinese Revolution.


China has been for ages the beau ideal of conservatism. Its
stagnant despotism has been proclaimed the model of patriar-
chal governments, and the venerable wisdom of the most anti-
quated of corrupt constitutions has been lauded as the acme
of political perfection. British invasion, however, revealed a
weakness in relation to external aggression that the most
sturdy of anti-progressionists could scarcely contemplate with
complacency : while more recent events in the interior have
sufficed to shew that the most systematic immobility on the
surface of affairs is compatible with the growth of the most
revolutionary principles beneath it. It is said that a pebble
thrown into the largest pond propagates its ever expanding
waves to the farthest extremity of the continuous waters, and
it would seem that, if Europe trembled beneath the surgings
of the French Revolution in the last, Asia is to be convulsed
with the changes of China in this century. Our remoteness
from the scene of action disqualifies us for estimating the
movements now proceeding in the farther East at its true
value, but we may be assured that three or four hundred mil-
lions of people cannot attempt to expel their ancient rulers,
and assume new political relationships, without powerfully
affecting the entire remainder of the world. But it wouid
seem that, in addition to dynastic mutation, the multitudimous
population of this immense empire have, simultaneously with
their political, determined also on a change in their religious
affairs, and while fighting for a better government are also
striving after a purer faith. The growing influence of Europe
in the East has penetrated to the theological sphere, and,
while promising to improve the literature and arts, threatens
also to destroy the hereditary faith of the once stagnant mil-
lions, who seemed born but for the most servile imitation and
most unenquiring reception of whatever could boast of prece-
dent fur its existence. It is not only the dynasty of the
Mantchaus, but the priests of Foh (Budha) who are threatened
with summary expulsion from the fertile plains of the Celestial
empire. It is not only the Tartars but the idols over whom
the vengeance of an irritated and down-trodden but now
resurgent people impends. The change is entire, thorough
and fundamental, and promises both for its depth and extent
to transcend all that China has yet experienced. The resist-
ance of centuries has been overcome, and the accumulated
energies of an almost measureless past are now bursting


— a


Hung-Lew-tseuen. 389


through the barriers which prejudice and authority have com-
bined to rear for the defence of error and corruption.

It would seem that the Mongolian race, although not
altogether devoid of a certain religiosity of disposition, has
nevertheless been hitherto without any great theological
mission. Budhism, its predominant faith, has been introduced
from without, and may be considered in its origin as an Indo-
Caucasian creed. The system of Confucius is rather that of
a moralist than a prophet. While the more mystic and
spiritual principles of his great cotemporary, Laou-tsze, may
be considered as an embodiment of philosophical abstractions,
and is at the best but the religion of the intellect, conducing
rather to the quietude of meditative contemplation than to
the zeal and enthusiasm of practical devotion. The popular
religion of the Mongolian tribes since they emerged from
Fetishism seems to have been of foreign growth. Even the
great reform of the Lamaitic system, which took place in the
course of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and which
now so widely separates the orthodox Lama from the old
Bonzee, originated, we have reason to believe, with a “ high-
nosed,” and therefore probably Caucasian stranger, who is
ever spoken of as the mystic tutor of the Tartar founder of
the eastern reformation. And true to this racial characteristic
of theological receptivity, the modern revolutionists of China
seem, in their desire for the suppression of the old idolatry,
to be capable only of importing and transfusing the elements
of a western faith. Hung-Lew-tseuen, their seer and hiero-
phant, is it seems a pupil of the Protestant missionaries.
This man, after the perusal of a tract containing some points
of the Christian faith, is said to have been affected by visions,
in which he seemed to be carried up to heaven, where he saw
“the heavenly mother, kind, exceedingly gracious, extremely
clegant and noble, not to be surpassed.” He saw also “ the
heavenly sister-in-law, worthy, very thoughtful and of great
capacity, always advising the elder brother with a far-reaching
consideration.” It seems that the worthy Chinaman, while
on this mental voyage of discovery, had also a diabolic encoun-
ter of no ordinary character, in which, however, he and some
other illustrious personages managed to rout the infernal
ermy. Was this a clairvoyant prevision of the defeat of the
Tartars and their imperial master? We would certainly
advise the good missionaries to look sharply after their pupil,
who is, if we mistake not, rapidly escaping from their leading
strings. The “heavenly mother” is strongly indicative of
Catholic influence, while the fact that the rebel emperor is
occasionally spoken of as an incarnation of the Holy Ghost,


390 Extatics of Genius.

or as a younger brother of Christ, seems to shew that a lin-
gering remnant of Budhism, with its manifold embodiments
of the divine, still retains its influence over the minds of these
Christianizing Orientals. A people so peculiar as the Chinese
in their habits and traditions, if they commence with extatic
tuition, cannot fail to develope many new trains of thought,
and will from the laws of seer-vision mingle the old and new
ideas together. Protestant Christianity passing through the
medium of such men as Hung-Lew-tseuen cannot fail to
undergo a great modification. Extatic revelations ever bear
traces of the encroachment of the prophet, and an inhabi-
tant of the Celestial empire is so differently circumstanced
from a European, or even western Asiatic, that he could
scarcely fail to give birth to some inconvenient innovations
while transfusing the doctrines prevalent among people so
morally and geographically remote into such a system as his
mind would be capable of evolving under the high-wrought
activity implied in extatic lucidity. Added to this, a mighty
political revolution is now proceeding which cannot fail to
influence the undercurrents of thought and feeling in a seer,
not only cotemporary with, but personally concerned in, its
movements. I suspect the new faith will be a compound
of Christianity with Budhism and that contemplative mys-
ticism which has long prevailed among certain classes of the
Chinese literati.

Altogether ours is an unsettled age. The prairies of
America, the mountains of western and the plains of eastern
Asia, are simultaneously enkindling with the lurid light of
visional illumination. There must be a demand for such
weird phenomena or they would not be evolved. We think
the present forms are transitory. We sce no indications of
the commanding genius of a Menu or a Mahomet in such a
vulgar dreamer as Joe Smith, or even in the dauntless hero-
prophet Shamyl, or the literary seer Lew-tseuen. These men
are, we think, obviously of the temporary and provisional
order only, but are they not premonitory indications of a
future theologically tempestuous beyond any past? Once
more we say, let those whom it may concern look well to the
signs of the times, for verily they are momentous to a degree
seldom equalled.


CONCLUSION.


Let not the reader suppose that I have exhausted the
subject-matter of these prelections, that history and biography


Reproof of the incredulous learned. 391


furnish no further materials for such dissertations as the fore-
going. This were a grave mistake, and would indicate an
utter incompetency to estimate aright the immense, we might
say with truth, the quite incalculable, influence which extatic
illumination has exercised over human affairs. Do we behold
those plastic forces, the mighty creeds and the enduring codes
which have fashioned the minds of men from age to age?
Therein may we contemplate the effects of that mental exalta-
tion under which the master-spirits of our race have spoken
with a power which ensured obedience, and with an authority
from whence there was no appeal. I speak of Genius; in
the extatic we behold this glorious, and shall we say it, divine,
endowment in its highest form of manifestation. Would we
in any respect approach to a comprehension of the vast capa-
bility which could found the politics and edify the institutions
of humanity’s future, would we even in part understand the
mental coustitution of those Titanic souls whose Promethean
fire has been the light and the life of the ages, we must first
study the phenomena of interior illumination, and thus be
enabled to understand that grandeur of conception and vasti-
tude of thought which made their possessors the moulds of
time. Have we anywhere indubitable evidence of originality,
do we at any period discern the traces of a veritably creative
intellect, there also may we be assured are those giant vestiges
which extacy ever leaves upon its path, the enduring monu-
ment, perennius ere, which giants alone could prevail to
erect.

But I have said enough on this subject for the present.
At another time, and under more favourable circumstances,
it may be resumed. I now bid my readers farewell, and,
in doing so, commend the phenomena and effects of extacy
to their most serious consideration, as a branch of study at
once interesting and instructive, and such as cannot fail to
repay the labour which they may bestow it.

J. W. Jackson.
Edinburgh, 12th Nov., 1855.


III. Cure by Mesmerism, without medicine, of a condemned
Diseased Knee, Communicated by Mr. Hockley.


‘‘The incredulity of the learned is hardly less hurtful to truth than the cre-
dulity of the vulgar. When a discovery like animal magnetism is announced, in
the disbelief of which he has been trained from his youth, the learned sceptic
dogmatically declares it impossible, and contradicted by the established laws of
nature ;—forgetting that these laws are mercly certain modes of acting which we


392 Cure of a diseased knee.


have discovered nature to follow. Such an objection, in fact, assumes that we
have a complete knowledge of physical science; whereas, the philosopher most
deeply versed in it will be the first to confess, like Newton, that he is but a boy
gathering pebbles on the seashore, and knowing almost nothing of the vast ocean
of truth that rolls at his feet.’"—Editor of the Dublin University Magazine, vol.
xxxviii., p. 384.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—I beg to submit to your notice a mesmeric cure, effected
without medicine, of a ‘declared hopeless case,” through the un-
tiring zeal and attention of Mr. Laurence Moreton, of Burnham,
Bucks, an amateur mesmerist; and as the case shews the inestimable
blessings which may be conferred upon suffering humanity, even by
the most unpractised hand when under medical supervision, however
slight. I must observe that the mesmeriser was absolutely ignorant
of mesmerism and its manipulations until almost immediately before
the commencement of the present case.

Having the pleasure to be an old friend of Mr. Moreton’s father,
and my advocacy of mesmerism being known, I was requested one
day to shew the members of his family the process by putting, in a
few minutes, one of his sons into the mesmeric sleep, producing
rigidity, &c., at will. This induced Mr. L. Moreton to turn his
attention to the subject, and procuring a Deleuze, and Mr. Barth’s
excellent manual for a guide, he made his first essay upon a young
woman, aged 20, who had long suffered from repeated attacks of
severe head-ache, which he immediately relieved to her great comfort
and his own surprise, producing sleep in about a quarter of an hour,
and by two further mesmerisings she has been permanently relieved.

His next essay was upon John Holden, a labouring man, aged
60, during an attack of gout, to which he had been continually sub-
ject during many years. The first mesmerising produced great relief,
and mesmerising him each evening for a week effected a cure; for,
although about six months afterwards he had another attack, it
yielded to a couple of manipulations, and he has been perfectly free
ever since, now two years,

My young friend now had confidence in himself, and doing as
all good mesmerists should do—subscribe to The Zoist, he deter-
mined not to hide his portion of light under a bushel, and, as erring
man is ever “infringing organic laws,” he speedily found a case—
one which many older mesmerists, myself included, would have
shaken their heads at, and then “ passed over on the other side.”

Not so with Mr. Laurence Moreton: with the ardour of youth,
and a determination to prove to the parish wiseacres that mesmerism
is a great truth, its advocacy having with him produced its usual
fruits—sneers and ridicule from its opponents instead of argument,


he on the 31st August, 1853, commenced operations upon the sub-
ject of this paper.


George East, a last-maker, aged 33, a much more powerful
and older man than his benevolent mesmeriser, suffering from
a diseased knee, the effects of a fall when about eight years


Remarkable effects. 393


old and a subsequent injury, had previously placed himself
under the advice of Dr. Robarts, of Burnham, for a lengthened
period, but without success, and amputation was advised.
He then went to Guy’s Hospital, and was advised by Mr. Cock
and other gentlemen at that institution to rest the leg and
make a stiff knee of it, for which purpose a gutta percha
bandage in a warm state was applied. But this caused such
severe pain that at the end of three or four days it was
removed.

He then placed himself under Dr. Boddy, of Windsor,
who tried the homeopathic system upon him without any
benefit. He then exhausted all the medical science within
his reach, in addition to the equally efficacious remedies of
all the old women in the parish, &c. After several months’
rest his leg became daily more painful, when in August, 1853,
Mr. Laurence Moreton, seeing him at his door supported by
crutches, unable to put his foot to the ground, and, as he
expressed himself, “in despair of ever walking again,” ad-
vised mesmerism and offered his services gratuitously.

On the 3lst August, 1853, Mr. L. Moreton commenced
mesmerising his patient by long passes without contact from
head to foot for half an hour, and then local passes were con-
tinued every evening for about a month; the long passes
were then discontinued, the patient shewing no tendency to
sleep. Little benefit was experienced until the end of the
second month, when the pain was much relieved. About the
end of the fourth month, during the process of mesmerising,
several violent pains, “like shocks of electricity,” passed
through the knee, returning at intervals during the night, and
were reproduced upon mesmerising the following evening.* <A
small red spot was then observed below the knee, which gra-
dually became larger and very painful, and about the middle
of January ulcerated, discharging very freely. Mr. Moreton
was here assisted by the kind advice of a medical friend, who
advised the continuance of mesmerism. In about three


* The occurrence of pain from successful mesmerism has been often noticed.

In No. XXXIIIL., p. 45, is the cure of ulcers in the leg with varicose veins,
by a lady, the sister of a recently deceased distinguished Cabinet Minister. The
passes caused sharp, and at length intolerable, pain, even if a piece of paper inter-
vened. Even if the ointment was mesmerised it produced pain, but otherwise
not: and the comparative trials were made without her knowledge.

In No. XXV., the Rev. Mr. Sandby relates a cure by himself of intense
tooth-ache ; and states that, after mesmerising the patient, an athletic man, for
ten minutes, and making him drowsy, ‘‘ suddenly a shock or sensation passed
over the top of his head, and he roused up in a most vigilant and active state.’’

In the splendid cure of ovarian dropsy related in the last report of the Mes-
meric Infirmary, the pains were extreme which the passes produced in the ab-
domen. See No. L., p. 182; or the Report, p. 16.—Zoist.


a


SS


394 The cure effected

months the ulcer closed ; it reopened shortly afterwards, and,
the case having progressed thus far, and the good result
though existent not very apparent, he on the 3lst May,
1854, took his patient to the Mesmeric Infirmary, and had
the good fortune of bringing him under the notice of Dr.
E lliotson and Dr. Symes. Those gentlemen pronounced it a
favourable case, enjoined the continuance of mesmerism, and
deemed a cure might be expected in about ¢wo years.

Now it must be allowed that a two years’ case would prove
a damper to most mesmerists, but as my young friend wrote
me word, “ Dr. Elliotson, the apostle of mesmerism, had
pronounced a cure possible, and he was determined to achieve
it,” and D.V. he has done so.

At the end of June the ulcer discharged very copiously
and then healed up, but was followed by two others about an
inch higher up, which, by his medical adviser’s direction, was
poulticed, and mesmerised water was given, for which the
patient had considerable relish. Mr. Moreton also constructed
a tube, by which he could breathe strongly upon the affected
part. His patient’s leg now began to improve in shape and
strength fast, and by the middle of January, 1855, was so
much restored that mesmerism was only applied every other
evening for half an hour, and in July the patient could walk
with ease aided by a walking stick.

I was in Burnham in August last, and met the patient
walking in the town, walking with that very leg which ought
to have been amputated; and he with great glee told me
that in the previous week he had passed a day at Slough with
his friends, walking there and back—a distance of eight
miles; eight miles which, according to orthodox rules, he
ought to have stumped on a wooden pin. But let me add,
to the honour of a profession which numbers in its ranks so
many generous men—a profession preéminent for the sacrifice
of time and talents and services to the poor and needy, that
Mr. Moreton was aided and encouraged during his long and
tedious case by the kind advice of — ‘Barrett, Esq. ., Surgeon,
of East Farnham.

Mr. East is now able to stand all day at his work without
fatigue, and I have this day received from him—three months
after mesmerism had been discontinued—the following letter
which I enclose :—


‘* Burnham, Nov. 12, 1855.

“ Sir,—A great many years ago I had the misfortune to hurt my
knee. In November, 1852, 2, I was obliged to give up my work, and
go to Dr. Roberts, but he could do me no good; he said I must have
the leg taken off, or I should shortly lose my life; but I felt anxious


Horrible anti-mesmeric language before students. 395


for further advice. Then I went to Guy’s Hospital, and there I saw
Dr. (Mr.) Coek, and his advice was the same as Dr. Roberts’s. Then
I came home, and tried all the remedies that could be thought of :
but nothing did me any good, when Mr. Moreton offered to mes-
merise me, and in two months I found great benefit, and he conti-
nued for two years.

“* Before Mr. Moreton mesmerised me I could not put my foot
to the ground, now I can stand all day at my work, or walk seven or
eight miles, without feeling tired. Iam sure I am very thankful to
aes for what he has done for me, and I believe he has saved
my leg.

“Sir, 1 feel it my duty to let the public know what benefit I
have received from Mr. Moreton’s mesmerising, although { was much
ridiculed at first; but, I thank God, Mr. Moreton continued, and
now the people can see that his labour was not in vain.

‘Your humble servant,


‘¢G. East.”


Mr. Laurence Moreton has thus the happiness of seeing his gra-
tuitous and untiring devotion to his patient during the long period of
two years crowned with signal success—not having, Mr. East told me,
missed one evening’s manipulation for a year and a half—and with-
out any of the clap-trap marvels of mesmerism to excite him on, his
patient having only once gone to sleep during the process. As he
has sown, so may he reap.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
Frep. Hockey.
Croydon, 12th November, 1855.


NOTE BY THE ZOIST.


A fine mesmeric cure of a diseased knee by Mr. Henry
Stafford Thompson, of Fairfield, near York, to whom mes-
merism and The Zoist are so much indebted, will be found in
No. V., p. 84.

Another, as fine, by Mr. Clements, Surgeon, of Poclington,
Yorkshire, will be found, greatly to that gentleman’s honour,
in No. XXXVII.


IV. Cure of a case of Rheumatism of thirty-five years’
standing. By Mr. James Cameron, Sen., member of
the Scottish Curative Mesmeric Association, and father
of Mr. James Cameron, Jun., Secretary of the Association.

“The reaction from materialism drowns itself in mysticism, and has deve-
loped a spirit, which, manifesting itself in the unhealthy forms of MESMERISM,

CLAIRVOYANCE, spirit-rapping, table-turning, electro-biology, and other inane

falsities and partialities, makes familiar play of the noblest instincts of humanity,


396 Cure of crippling Rheumatism of


and barters our firm beliefs and our righteous reverence for the sickly aberrations
of perverse and prurient imaginations. This reaction has revived the blas-
phemous idolatries of human power, and evolved a spirit which, arrogating to
itself the power of a God, yet gropes for the very holy of holies in the filthiest
kennels—in kennels running deep with the most senseless and God-abandoned
abominations.""—‘‘ Nature is God manifested in the world through power and
love.” —Address at the opening of the Session at the London Hospital, Oct. 1,
1855, by Dr. ANDREW CLarKk. Morning Chronicle, Oct. 3.


Heiten Murray, aged 56, residing at No. 1, Allan Street,
Stockbridge, Edinburgh, was laundry-maid in the service of
Mrs. Fraser Tytler, of Woodhouselee,* in 1820, she being
then 21 years of age. In January of that year, in conse-
quence, as she supposed, of working in a damp washing-
house, she was seized with rheumatism in the left foot, the
pain extending up the left side, and then down the right,
and ultimately inducing severe rheumatic fever. She was,
in consequence, obliged to leave her situation, and go home,
where she was attended by Dr. Allison,t under whose treat-
ment she so far recovered as to be able to return to her place
at the end of six weeks. At this time the doctor strictly
enjoined her to beware of taking cold, more especially of
getting damp feet, as, if the pains returned, the second
attack would be worse than the first. Notwithstanding this
vaution, she was, in August following, seized precisely in the
manner the doctor had feared, in consequence of the feet
getting damp. On this occasion the pains were most acute,
the feet and legs being also greatly swollen. The hands and
arms were afterwards affected in a similar manner, and lat-
terly the whole body. In her own words, “ No tongue can
describe the pain which I suffered at this time; night or day
I could get no rest, and I even wished I should die rather
than suffer such pain.” She was again obliged to leave her
situation, and return home, much worse than before. She
was once more placed under the care of Dr. Allison, who
with the most unwearied exertions exhausted the ordinary
appliances in such cases, as blisters, sudorifics, &c., without
effect. She remained in this condition until the 15th of May
of the following year (1821), a period of nine months, at
which time the elbow and knee-joints had become much con-
tracted, and quite stiff. The doctor now recommended her
to go into the Royal Infirmary, in order to get the benefit of
the vapour-bath for the relief of the contracted joints. The
relaxation thus effected, however, was only temporary. Three


* Widow of Lord Woodhouselee, one of the lords of session and father of
Patrick Fraser Tytler, Esq., the well-known historian. :

+ Late Professor of the Practice of Physic, and now Emeritus Professor of
the Practice of Physic, in the University of Edinburgh.


thirty-five years’ duration. 397


or four nurses were employed in stretching the joints, while
the body was heated by the bath to a high degree; but, when
the body cooled, the joints were found to be as firmly con-
tracted and stiff as before. This treatment was continued
for a month, when she left the Infirmary reduced almost to
a skeleton, and pronounced by Dr. Graham of the Royal In-
firmary, and Dr. Allison, to be incurable. She was now
ordered to the country for the re-establishment of her general
health. She had, at this time, to be carried and fed like a
child for eighteen months, not being able to raise her hand
to her mouth, or put her feet to the ground. She suffered
great pain in being shifted, the slightest touch making her
shriek. After remaining in the country for some time, she
returned home considerably improved in general vigour, but
with the pains, stiffness, and swelling of the joints, as bad as
ever. The doctor’s skill was again tried, but with little or
no benefit.

It is now thirty-five years since this patient was first
seized, and during all that time she has been a complete
martyr to rheumatism, never having at any time been so well
as to be able to walk alone, or even to stand without assist-
ance; in short, a perfect cripple. The only way in which
she could move about a little in the house was by leaning
over the back of a chair and slowly pushing it before her an
inch or two at atime. To remove any little thing from one
side of the room to another, when no one was present to do
it, she had to place it on the chair and push it along in this
manner. From the pressure occasioned by thus leaning over
the back of the chair, her arms had become very sore, and
the parts subjected to the pressure much indurated and
swollen. She was also much bent forward, and was quite
unable, by any means she could employ, to raise herself to
an erect attitude. From the time she left the infirmary, she
had no feeling in the right leg. This limb was also quite
straight, there being no motion in the knee-joint; so that
when she sat it projected in a straight line to the floor, rest-
ing on the back part of the heel. It was always with great
difficulty she could raise herself from the sitting position, it
being necessary to have another chair at her side upon which
she could roll herself over before she could get to her feet.
She had a very little motion in her left knee-joint, but it
was so much contracted that she had to walk on the toes,
having been unable to put the heel to the ground for upwards
of thirty years. This leg continued to be much swollen,
more especially in very hot or wet weather; and was most
free from swelling during hard frost. The right elbow-joint


398 Dr. Allison condemned her for life.


was a complete fixture, and also much swollen, as were also
the whole of the joints of the fingers. Indeed she was every
summer subject to great swelling of the legs and feet, accom-
panied with a feeling of heavy weight and constant pain.
She was also much affected with pains between the shoulders
extending through to the chest, and apparently affecting the
region of the heart. In consequence of this, she was ‘often
obliged to sit propped up in bed for a fortnight at a time, not
being able to get her head down.

Besides all these ailments, she also suffered much from
indigestion, having very little appetite, and finding scarcely
any kind of food to agree with her stomach. Violent head-
aches in the mornings were also a source of great suffering.
Her eyes were also affected to such a degree that she was at
one time quite blind for three weeks, and the sight was sub-
sequently much impaired.

It is little wonder that, having laboured under such an
aggravated form of disease for so long a period as thirty-five
years, embracing the best part of almost any lifetime, from
the twenty-first to the fifty-sixth year, this patient’s spirits
were well nigh sunk within her, and her hopes of recovery
entirely fled. She was visited by Professor Allison, her old
medical attendant, about four years ago. He minutely
examined her on this occasion, carefully feeling all the joints.
He shook his head and put his hand on her shoulder, and toid
her he was sorry to say he could give her not the slightest hope
of any amelioration, and that she must make up her mind to
continue in the condition which has just been described.

I saw this patient on the 3lst of May, 1855, and made
a few contact passes over the left arm and hand, simply to
try if she was in any degree susceptible to the mesmeric influ-
ence, and by no means with the intention to undertake
the cure or even the alleviation of so formidable and invete-
rate a case.

June Ist. Happening to call one day, I was agreeably
surprised to find that the little finger of the left hand, which
had been bent double into the palm for upwards of twenty
years, had become so much relaxed that she could raise it up
by the aid of the other hand. Encouraged by such an unmis-
takeable sign of susceptibility, I mesmerised her twice to-
day, by making contact passes over the right arm, and
distant passes over the whole body, when she “felt a peculiar
sensation in the left knee, and was able to raise the little finger
without extraneous aid with perfect ease. I also mesmerised
water for her to drink, and also to apply to the joints.

June 2nd. Mesmerised twice to- day. Still more effect


Wonderful and instant improvement. 399


produced on the knee-joint. The fingers also begin to be a
little soft and pliable.

June 3rd. Mesmerised once to-day, when she perspired
freely, more especially in the hands; and felt a very drowsy
pleasant sensation. The left knee-joint had suddenly relaxed,
and she was able to put the heel to the ground with ease.

June 4th. Had a most comfortable night’s sleep, more so
than she had enjoyed for a number of years. Mesmerised
to-day as usual, with the addition of making contact passes
over the spine. This caused considerable uneasiness in the
right side, more especially in the right elbow-joint, which was
a fixture. When passes are made over the spine, the influence
is immediately felt over the whole body, and especially in
the affected joints, and sometimes remains for two days after
her being mesmerised.

June 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th. Mesmerised on these days
as on the 4th, particularly over the spine. The influence
produces a more powerful effect each time. The sensation
begins with a great heat at the back of the neck, gradually
extending down the whole of the back. There is also a
fluttering sensation at the heart. She has continued to enjoy
comfortable sleep during the night since June 4th.

June 10th. Mesmerised to-day as before. She can now
pul the right hand to the crown of the head, which she could
not do for upwards of thirty years.

June 14th. Progressing steadily. She begins to feel
stronger in the back. The wrist joints begin to move pretty
freely, and the skin now assumes a much more healthy hue
than formerly. She can now bring the palm of her left hand
to her face, and round to the back of the neck, neither of which
she could do for upwards of thirty years. For this she
feels very grateful, as she had been for the above period
unable to wash her face, except in a very awkward and par-
tial manner, by means of a piece of cloth.

During the next two months she was mesmerised from
three to four times a week, and since then to the present,
twice, and sometimes only once a week. She also continued
to use mesmerised water regularly, from which she thought
she derived great benefit. I also used to breathe upon the
joints, and also to hold them somewhat firmly between my
hands. Under this treatment she gradually improved. Her
back is now so strong that she can stand erect with ease. The
right knee-joint is so far relaxed that she can, when in the
sitting posture, put the sole of the foot to the ground,
whereas formerly the leg used to project in a straight line,
and rest on the back part of the heel. As already men-


100 = Can walk up and down stairs ; and several miles.


tioned, the left knee-joint, relaxed suddenly on the fifth day
of the treatment, and she now enjoys great freedom with it
in walking. Her wrist and finger-joints are also much
relaxed, and the swelling greatly diminished; so that she
can now perform many household duties, formerly quite
beyond her reach. The right elbow-joint, which was formerly
a perfect fixture and much swollen, is now considerably
relaxed and the swelling quite gone. The left elbow- -joint is
also much relaxed, and is, as are all the other contracted
joints, gradually improving. Jn about three weeks after being
first mesmerised she was able to walk down three flights of
stairs with a litile help. On July 2nd, about five weeks after

the treatment was commenced, she walked, with the aid of her

sister, to the Soirée of the Scottish Curative Mesmeric Asso-
ciation, a distance of at least a mile and a half; while she
walked home again by herself. By the middle of August she
could go up and down the stairs herself, and she still continues
to do so, sometimes four or five times a day. During the
summer months she walked a good deal out of doors, until
she was obliged to give over from the tenderness of the soles
of her feet. However, she has, on several occasions, walked
a distance of three or four miles.

Her general health has also much improved during the
mesmeric treatment. She has now an excellent appetite,
and can eat and digest any kind of food. Her head-aches
are entirely gone, and her eye-sight is so much improved
that she can read ordinarily large print without glasses,
which she could not do before. Her legs and feet, which
used to swell every summer, and feel heavy and painful, have
this summer remained free from all such symptoms. Her
appearance, as might naturally be expected, is very much
improved, the skin being now much clearer and softer than
it was previously to her being mesmerised. She is now never
affected by changeable weather, as she invariably used to be.
The pains between the shoulders that prevented her lying
in bed have entirely left her, and she now regularly enjoys
comfortable and refreshing sleep.

Notwithstanding the comparative rapidity of the allevia-
tion in this case, so far as it has gone, there is reason to
believe that it would have been even more rapid if the treat-
ment had been more frequently applied. But various cir-
cumstances combined to prevent this being done. Thus, the
patient resided at a distance of nearly two miles from the
operator, who, being constantly engaged at his business,
found it difficult to attend as ‘often as was desirable. Then
the fact that the patient, from long confinement to the house,


Testimonies to the truth of this cure. 401


had become so sensitive to the bustle and excitement of the
streets as to be easily frightened when she attempted to
walk through the city. In consequence of this, she has
hitherto invariably been mesmerised at her own residence.
Her confidence is now, however, greatly strengthened, and she
expects to be able to wait upon me, and, by thus being
mesmerised more frequently, to improve even more rapidly
than hitherto.

I may just remark in conclusion, that she has shewn
great readiness to receive the visits of such persons as
wished to make personal enquiry into her case. She has
been visited by many ladies and gentlemen, who have in-
variably expressed their astonishment at the case as described
by the patient herself; and she will be happy to answer any


enquiries that may be made by parties who may wish to
do so.


(Copy.)


**No. 1, Allan Street, Stockbridge,
** Edinburgh, Nov. 27th, 1855.
““Mr. James Cameron, Sen.

“ Sir,—I have much pleasure in expressing the great gratitude I
feel for the unwearied exertions you used in restoring me, through
the power of mesmerism, from such a condition as I was in, to such
a measure of health and strength, and freedom from pain as I now
enjoy. Although it is impossible for me to recompense you, I hope
and trust you will not be without your reward. Should this meet the
eye of any one suffering from rheumatism, I would say as a friend—
try, if you have not already tried, the powerful influence of mes-
merism. I have heard the report of my case read over, and I
hereby testify to the correctness of it in every particular.

*T remain, your most humble servant,
(Signed) ‘““HeLten Murray.”


“On Sunday last I visited Helen Murray, in company with Mr.
James Cameron, Jun., when the foregoing statement was read in her
presence, and corroborated by her. I consider her cure the most
extraordinary which has yet been effected, under the auspices of the
association, and the warmth and intensity of her gratitude appear
to be equal to the astonishing benefits which she has received.
Her return to the duties of life, after such a lengthened period of
inaction, is rather like a resurrection than a restoration. From the
immense deposits which took place around many of her finger joints,
by which her hands are still greatly disfigured, the range of flexibi-
lity in several of her fingers is still limited; I therefore advised
the continuance of mesmerism as a means of promoting the_re-
absorption of these obstacles to motion. It may be mentioned, that
the patient is a woman of superior mental powers, and still retains a
VOL, XIII. FF


402 Cures of Pains in Chest and Head.


vivid recollection of the various members of that distinguished
family with whom she resided as a respectable domestic in her
youth.
«J. W. Jackson.
** 37, North Castle Street, Edinburgh,
**28th November, 1855.”


V. Two rapid cures of pains in the Chest and Head; cure of
aggravated case of pains in the Chest, Head, and Back ;
and cure of severe Chest Disease, in which the symptoms
were cough, vomiting of blood, and expectoration of gross
matter, with great weakness. By Mr. James Apans,
219, High Street, Edinburgh.


ArcuiBaLp Wilson, aged five years, residing at No. 1, Thorny
Bank, Fountainbridge, Edinburgh, was, on the 8th of March,
1855, suffering from severe pain in the chest and head,
accompanied with great difficulty in breathing. He fre-
quently on that day went into a kind of fit, in which his eyes
were turned up. He had been in this state from the morn-
ing till ten o’clock at night, at which time I mesmerised him,
making dispersive passes over the chest, and also downward
passes over the body. I continued this treatment for about
an hour, which produced a very soothing effect, as he fcil into
a kind of sleep. At the end of this time he was able to sit
up on his mother’s knee, when he asked for a drink of water.
I mesmerised some water for him of which he drank a good
deal. I continued to mesmerise him for half an hour longer,
when he asked for something to eat. He was shortly after-
wards put to bed, when he enjoyed a comfortable night’s
sleep, and awoke quite well in the morning. I mesmerised
him again the next day, and he has since remained in good
health.

Mrs. Wilson, about middle age, the mother of the above
patient, was on June 3rd, 1855, seized with a violent pain in
the back of the head, and was all over very feverish, and was
during all the following night in a state of delirium. On
the evening of the next day, June 4th, I mesmerised her for
an hour, by making long passes from head to foot. At the
end of this time she felt greatly relieved. I mesmerised her
twice on the following day, when she went into the mesmeric
sleep. She also felt much better on this occasion. I mes-
merised her on the two following days, on the latter of which
she stated while in the mesmeric sleep that she was perfectly


Cure of Pains in Head, Chest, and Back. 403


restored. She has since ther (now upwards of five months)
remained in good health. ‘This patient also drank mesme-
rised water. It may also be stated that Mrs. W. was simi-
larly affected a few years ago, on which occasion, under
ordinary medical treatment, a period of three weeks was
required for her recovery.


Harriet Wilson, aged about fourteen years, daughter of
the last patient, had been, for four weeks previous to the 10th
of November, 1855, complaining of head-aches and a kind
of languor approaching to drowsiness. On the above day
she was very severely affected with pain in the head, having
scarcely power to open her eyes. There was also great pain
in the chest and back. I mesmerised her for an hour, by
making long passes from the head to the feet, with dispersive
passes over the chest. During the time I was mesmerising
her she went into a kind of dose, and trembled violently from
head to foot, moaning heavily all the while. I then allowed
her to remain for an hour without making any passes, during
which time she occasionally trembled and moaned. I then
made dispersive passes over the chest, and laid my hand
upon her head for about half an hour, which seemed to
relieve her considerably. I then woke her up, when she said
she felt a little better.

Nov. llth. She had a very bad night, the symptoms
being the same as at first. She still felt very ill. I mes-
merised her for an hour and half in the same manner as
before, and also gave her some mesmerised water, after which
she felt very much better, though still unable to stand with-
out assistance.

Nov. 12th. She is very much better to-day. Mesmerised
as before.

Nov. 13th. She is so far better to-day as to be able to
walk about the house. Mesmerised as before.

Nov. 17th. She was very ill yesterday. I mesmerised her
to-day as before, and she feels very much better.

Nov. 24th. She now feels quite well. Mesmerised as
before.

Nov. 26th. I mesmerised her to-day, and she is to return
to school to-morrow.

Nov. 27th. Called to-day, when I found that she had
gone to school, being quite recovered.


Magdalene Wilson, aged twenty, residing at No. 1, Thorny
Bank, daughter of Mrs.’ Wilson, was, in May, 1854, house-
FF2


404 Cure of severe Affection of the Chest


maid to a lady in Ayrshire. She had got cold about the
14th of May, and suffered from cough and pain in the chest
till about the middle or end of June. She perspired very
much, especially during the night, and her breathing was so
affected that she could harldy go up and down stairs. She
took gruel, bathed her feet in hot water, and otherwise
treated her illness as she would an ordinary cold. She
became so ill at last that her mistress got alarmed and sent
for a medical man. He applied mustard plasters every night
for about eight days to the right side of her chest, and over
her shoulder and back. He also gave her pills to be taken
every three or four hours. At the end of the eight days as
she was getting worse, he ordered a fly blister, and from that
time till the 9th of August she had on seven large fly blis-
ters altogether. She had also a small blister placed alter-
nately on the right and left side. By the doctor’s advice she
was sent inland to Inchinnan, where she remained eight
days, and where she became rather better. She had taken a
great deal of medicine from bottles and in pills and powders
during this time. She had also tried cod liver oil, but it
would not remain on her stomach. After her return from
Inchinnan, she became gradually worse, till the doctor at last
said there was nothing to be done but to send her home.
He told her this was her only chance of recovery. And she
understood he told her mistress and her grandmother that
she would not live through the winter. She returned home
on the 9th of August. Dr. McDonald came about the end
of the month. ‘Till he came she had felt rather better, and
had taken no medicine. He immediately ordered a large
fly blister, and a dozen of leeches. He also ordered a bottle
of medicine that always made her sick, besides pills and
powders. Under his treatment she put on four blisters, and
swallowed an immense quantity of medicine. All this time
she became gradually worse. She frequently vomited large
quantities of blood, sometimes as much as a pint at a time.
She also coughed up gross matter, and could get no sleep at
night, the cough was so incessant, and she perspired very
profusely. She was also so weak that she could not stand.
She was so ill for some time before mesmerism was applied
that, after hearing the statements of the doctor, the episcopal
clergyman whom she attended brought the bishop to the
house to confirm her and then administered the sacrament.
This patient had heard of mesmerism from her cousin,
Mr. Brown, of Ayr, whose daughter had been cured by its
agency; but she would not let him mesmerise her, she was


and copious discharges of blood. 405


so afraid of it. Mr. Maitland, however, one of the directors
of the Scottish Mesmeric Association, recommended it so
strongly that she agreed to try it. The first time I mes-
merised her she felt relief, and slept better that night than
she had done for months before. I was not able to attend to
her very regularly at first, but she always felt relieved after
being mesmerised. I began to mesmerise her regulary in
February, 1855. She was then very ill, and had almost
entirely lost her voice, not being able to speak above a whis-
per. From this time she began to improve daily. She did
not go into the mesmeric sleep till April, and from that time
she recovered very rapidly. In the beginning of May her
cough had ceased, she had recovered her strength sufficiently
to do the household work, and could walk about during the
day without fear of illness. She has since gained strength
every day, and now feels as well as ever. She has been mes-
merised very regularly since February, but it is now to be
discontinued. She has taken no medicine since I com-
menced to mesmerise her, and, when she feels her stomach
in the least out of order, she takes mesmerised water, which
puts her all right.

Magdalene Wilson’s father and grandfather, and several
other relations, died of consumption.

She did not take any medicine or cod liver oil from the
time when the mesmeric treatment was commenced.


(Copy)


“No. 1, Thorny Bank, Fountainbridge,
* Edinburgh, Nov. 28, 1855.
“Mr. James Adam,

Sir,—I have read the report of my cure, and also that of the
cures of my two daughters, Magdalene and Harriet, and of my son
Archibald, and hereby testify to their correctness.

“TI beg to take the present opportunity of thanking you most
sincerely for the great trouble you have taken in reference to my
family. We are much indebted to mesmerism indeed.

“Tam, sir, your obedient servant,
(Signed) “Jane WILSON.”


(Copy)


“No. 1, Thorny Bank, Fountainbridge,
*« Edinburgh, Nov. 28, 1855.
“Mr. James Adam,
‘“* Sir,—I have read over the report of my cure as effected by
you, through the agency of mesmerism, and I hereby testify to its
perfect accuracy.


406 Fancied enlightenment of the present day.


**T also take this opportunity to return you my most sincere
thanks for the kind and disinterested manner in which you so perse-
veringly attended me.

**T am, sir, your obedient servant,
(Signed) ‘© MAGDALENE WILSON.”


VI. “ Phrenology applied to Painting and Sculpture. By
George Combe. London: Simpkin, Marshall and Co,
Edinburgh: Maclachlan and Stewart. 1855.”


Tue history of a great truth is ever the narration of a fearful
struggle. A new idea is of necessity predestined to conflict,
for it can never win for itself an honourable recognition, and
so attain to the rank and dignity of a received and established
truth, without the displacement of some reverenced and
venerable error. War, even of the internecine order, is in
no respect confined to the physical sphere. Through the
bi-polar and antagonistic relationship of opposing forces is
the harmony of the universal maintained. Whoso would cry
peace when there is no peace, and be thus contented to
dwell amidst the deceptive appearances of a hollow and fal-
lacious truce, is no true man, no veritable Godson, but rather
an ally of him who from the beginning has been the father
of lies. The age of martyr spirits is not passed and we fear
never will, albeit the manner of their suffering may be
changed to suit the fashion of the times in which they
appear. The world, as of old, still hates the truth-teller, and
with good reason, for does he not disturb its voluptuous repose
upon the downy couch of accepted fallacies? Why should
Nineveh give gracious audience to a Jonah come to forewarn
it of destruction? If he will utter forth his unpleasant ve-
racities, let him do so at his own risk and to his own cost.
This nineteenth prides itself in being beyond all other
centuries, par excellence, the fast. Never before was there
such rapidity attained to in the management and transaction
of all human affairs. Former ages crept, latter ages walked,
recent ages ran, but we actually fly! Unfounded prejudice,
that most respectable of conservatives, expired and was de-
cently interred, while we were still in our nonage. “ Facts,
give us facts,” say the men of this day, “and we will not only
readily receive but instantly enthrone them. It was the ig-
norance of former generations that caused them to resist
truth and maltreat its advocates and expounders ; but we who
live in this noon-day light of knowledge are of course pre-


Possibility of progress in all but one’s own line. 407


pared to accept the one and reverence the other!” Perhaps
of all the flattering fallacies wherewith the foolish self-
complacency of a most superficial age ever contented itself,
this is about the most baseless and unfounded. Openness to
the truth! Alas! this, which implies charity, long-suffering,
forbearance, humility, and a thousand other moral qualities
as well as infellectual endowments, and which is, if we could
see it aright, not only the acme and perfection, the very
crowning glory of our imperfect nature, but the high and
laboriously-attained reward of much preceding discipline and
endurance; this, we say, is precisely the last excellence
which might be rationally expected from an age of such un-
qualified self-sufficiency as ours.

It would seem to be in the nature of things, whether
creeds, codes, politics, or philosophies, to get themselves, with
all expedition and with every attainable facility, articled and
established. Without this, their organization seems to be
imperfect, and their working efficiency below the maximum.
Nevertheless such fixity is ever purchased at the expense of
farther growth, which, proceeding with difficulty and at great
disadvantage under such obstacles, eventually, as these in-
crease till they become insuperable, ceases altogether. Num-
berless are the instances in point which might be here cited
to illustrate this principle, history in its every page bearing
decisive record that such is the fact. Perhaps the tendency
to such hardening and ossification is a necessary accompani-
ment of that mortality which too surely attaches to the time-
born, however vitalized and forcible, however pure and pro-
mising, however sacred and holy, at its origin. For is not
death the providentially appointed completion of life, the end
whereto its manifold functions have tended even from the
beginning. Quite true, says the experimental philosopher,
rejoicing in that priceless testament of earth’s greatest master
spirit in the sphere of scientific discovery—the Novum Or-
ganum of Francis of Verulam; quite true, only our depart-
ment is an exception! If there are devils, these subterrestrial
personages must no doubt occasionally enjoy some most hearty
cacchinations at the reiterated spectacle of human folly
clothed in the robes of authoritative wisdom, which their
lengthened opportunities for observation cannot fail to have
presented to their notice. Profession and practice have, we
suppose, always been somewhat distinct departments of human
action, or at all events they only harmonize during that in-
fantile condition of systems in which the immediate presence
and direct spirit of the founder predominate over the surely
growing weakness, pride, and selfishness of his followers.


408 Fundamentally new ideas spurned.

Thus modern men of science profess, in accordance with the
teachings of that great rabbi to whom we have just been
alluding, to revere NATURE alone as their teacher, to appeal
to her tribunal in all cases of dispute, and to submit to her
decision as a final and unquestionable authority. Beautiful
profession, the war-cry of an army going forth conquering
and to conquer till the end of time,—the magical open sesame,
before which the thrice bolted gates of otherwise impene-
trable mystery fold back and expose their priceless treasures
to the ardent gaze of the daring intruder who is but master
of this potent and resistless formulary. But what is the
practice of these recreant and cowardly knights of the sorely
hested truth? After what fashion do they really fulfil those
vaunting professions of fearless loyalty, wherewith they ob-
tained initiation into the brotherhood of that faith which
reveres nature as the sole fountain of veracity in matters
physical? Has an old and established department of inves-
tigation been ever so slightly enlarged, has a new star been
discovered, or a cometary orbit been calculated, the fortunate
pioneer is received with an intensity of applause that might
have put Hipparchus to the blush, and made Copernicus feel
abashed at the superfluity of approval. But let a funda-
mentally new idea be propounded, let an additional province
of science be spoken of, that has no great names, no esta-
blished reputations to make it respectable, that has yet to
fight its way to acceptance, and indifference, contempt, and
opposition will be the assured destiny of its unfortunate dis-
coverer. Men priding themselves in being the disciples of
Bacon, and most cordially assenting in words to all that this
great man has said on the subject of idola, and on the folly
of investigating nature while our minds are filled with pre-
conceived ideas, nevertheless come to the consideration of
every fundamentally new subject with an amount of prejudice,
and with a degree of self-sufficiency, to which mere ignorance
could never approach, absurdly conceiving that a knowledge
of one department of science must qualify them for deciding
ex cathedrd on the merits of another.

For now nearly a century every original thinker has had
to appeal from the sanhedrim of science to the non-professional
and uninitiated public without. - So determined indeed do the
“authorities” seem not to admit a new idea, that but for
this more liberal court of appeal it may be seriously doubted
whether many valuable germs of thought would not be for a
time at least practically ignored, and compelled to reappear
at a later period. Look, for example, at the conduct of the
British Association in its treatment of Mr. Braid, and in its


Cringing and unmanliness prevail. 409


determined rejection of phrenology as an aid to the study of
ethnology. How contemptibly ridiculous the pretension of
such a society to take the leadership of mind, or the initiative
in discovery, while in its corporate capacity it exhibits a fear
of the new and a dread of the untried that would not have
disgraced the sacerdotal gownsmen of Rome in the middle
ages, and that must, we should suppose, excite the unqualified
admiration of every Indian Brahmin or Chinese Mandarin
who chances to hear of so noble a stand against detestable
innovations upon the part of his European heathen, the great
Fee Fums of the West. Men professing in the face of the
world to investigate nature, and yet determinately refusing to
see her facts; making a parade of their love of science, and
yet declining to witness an experiment; trumpeting forth
their desire for know ledge, and yet formally and by authority
silencing its expounders in their assembly! Let us not be
afraid to stigmatize such conduct as it deserves. Here is
either a degree of blinded prejudice which amounts to bar-
barism, or there is a miserable paltering with the truth from
“ fear of the folk,” which, as an exhibition of moral cowardice,
is deserving of profoundest contempt from the present, and
such indeed as cannot fail to draw upon its authors the pity,
if not the reprobation, of wiser and braver centuries. There
may be, no doubt there are, pharisaic formalists enough in
the church, but let them not be ashamed as if they stood
alone in the world, for there are plenty of men who make
broad their phylacteries and also pay tithe of mint and cum-
min in the temple of science,—men whose praises of Newton
are a perpetual anthem, and who yet dare not look a new
science in the face till it has become respectadle. Talk of
hero-worship and the adoration of saints! The most sepul-
chral of creeds never more devoutly revered the rags and
bones of its ancient martyrs and founders than do the rank
and file of modern scientialists in their idolatrous regard for
the mere prestage and authority of great names. Let us not
deceive ourselves; there are many lamentable indications
that the once freely expanding province of science is getting
enthralled by traditional limitations. Our European savans
are becoming enslaved by authority, and in many provinces
dare no longer appeal from the opinion of their masters to
the still higher tribunal of nature herself.

Were the time convenient or space at our command, we
might here say much more on the state, not so much of
science itself, but of that almost equally important matter,
the scientific mind of this nineteenth century. Suffice it that
we have no hesitation in giving it as our opinion, that the


410 Sketch of Mr. Combe’s new work.


true Baconian spirit is sadly on the decline, its place being
supplied by a growing reverence for the memory of those
mighty spirits to whom no doubt humanity will be everlast-
ingly ‘indebted for their priceless labours in so effectually
enlarging the boundaries of knowledge, but who would them-
selves have been among the first to denounce that super-
stitious regard for preceding discoverers which would prefer
their opinions to the incontrovertible evidence of a fact.

The extent of our preceding remarks will, we fear, pre-
vent our noticing at due length the really admirable work of
which the title is prefixed to the present article. The last
production of its veteran author, it is we think in many points
his best. There is beyond question a manifest improvement
in style, manner, and spirit. With all that clearness and
force, that precision of statement, and logical power of de-
duction, which have ever distinguished the phrenological dis-
sertations of Mr. Combe, it has at the same time none of that
hardness which so frequently characterized his earlier produc-
tions. The air of Italy, or, more correctly perhaps, the moral
atmosphere of her magnificent galleries and gentle studios,
seems to have evoked a flow of hitherto latent, but neverthe-
less most genial feeling, in the profoundly observant traveller.
Removed from that arena which in his mind must be asso-
ciated with so many past conflicts, and surrounded by all
which could arouse the finer emotions and nobler idealism of
his nature, the northern champion of a controverted truth
seems for the time to have willingly yielded himself to the
purifying and exalting influences of art and poesy. And the
result is that we have a volume, not only of great value to
the student of phrenology, as an able contribution to that
especial province of his favourite science which has been
hitherto perhaps the most neglected, but a work which the
artist may study with profit and the literary public peruse
both with pleasure and advantage. We would more especially
recommend the first to peruse Chap. V., On the Relation
between particular regions of the Brain and particular cha-
racteristics of the Body; and Chap. IX., On the Cerebral
Development and Genius of Raphael, with Note 2 in the
Appendix, respecting a skull long believed to be his. In the
two latter Mr. Combe triumphantly disposes of what had
long been esteemed an opprobrium of the science, and shews
that the real skull of Raphael is vastly more indicative of his
genius than the suppositious one. As to the artist, we can
only say that he should not only study, but in all earnestness
seek to master and apply, the principles which are here so
clearly and forcibly yet beautifully developed. If he would


Works of art must be judged by the laws of nature. 411


attain to present excellence in the estimation of his more
informed cotemporaries, and, above all, if he would avoid
committing those fatal errors of which a more enlightened
posterity will be the competent, and therefore in a sense
severe, judges, and into which some of the ablest and most
gifted of his predecessors have at times unwittingly fallen from
their ignorance of the principles of cerebral physiology, he
must devote his attention to the laws of nature in connexion
with the development of form and the manifestation of
expression. The day of those merely dilettanti patrons who
take the works of rising or celebrated artists upon trust, and,
while arranging them in accordance with the most approved
laws of upholstery, at the same time discourse of their merits
in the set phrases of artistic scholasticism, respecting colour,
perspective, and grouping; the day, we say, of such wealthy
purchases of soiled canvass in superbly gilt frames is rapidly
passing. While even the cognoscenti, who do know some-
thing of composition, and who are really aware that a work
of art should be the vehicle of an idea or the embodiment
of a sentiment, but who, if they saw the head of a Minerva
combined with the form of a Venus, or the brow of a Jove
on the shoulders of a Hercules, would feel rather than per-
ecive the incongruity, and in whose magniloquent criticisms,
so crammed with the slang of the studio, the vaguest plati-
tudes so often veil the densest ignorance, even these kindly
and accommodating judges will ere long, we suspect, become
comparatively rare. Phrenology, and with it a knowledge of
the laws which regulate and determine organic development,
are in despite of medical opposition and scientific prejudice
becoming recognized and established, and, as a necessary
consequence, works of art will hereafter be judged, not so
much by the varying standard of individual sentiment as by
the immutable laws of nature. Costumes which were never
worn, architecture which never existed, and foliage which
never grew, may be pardoned in an old, but would not be
endured in a modern master. And with the progress and
diffusion of knowledge respecting the types of organic life, it
will become equally necessary to avoid the absurdity, now so
often perpetrated, of painting impossible men, and drawing
delightful, though self-contradictory, women. The future,
both of science and art, will own themselves deeply indebted
to Mr. Combe for his courageous and able initiation in a
path where, we doubt not, he will have many followers.

In taking our leave of this valuable work, we would ob-
serve that no untravelled English reader can possibly do full
justice to the dauntless moral courage manifested through a


412 Mr. Combe’s moral courage duly estimated.

lifelong career by its talented author. To do this one must
have actually resided in Edinburgh, and mingled freely with
its vigourously constituted, learned, accomplished, and yet
strongly, because conscientiously, prepossessed population.
The great school of theology, medicine, and law, and at the
same time the principal seat of literature in North Britain,
public opinion in modern Athens is led by an aristocracy of
intellect more than ordinarily distinguished by energy and
force of character. Justly proud of an illustrious past, and
still glorying in an array of eminent names, whose reputa-
tion is European, the scholarly citizens of this renowned
University are pardonably tenacious of the established and
accepted, while proportionately suspicious of the new and
untried. Discussing every subject with the practised skill
and faultless acumen of professional logicians, they try every
question at a bar in which mercy but slightly tempers justice.
Fully equipped with all that antiquity can teach, they are
however but imperfectly competent to estimate the present,
and never by any chance look prophetically forth into the
untrodden realms of the future. It is the Jerusalem of the
North, where a stern Sanhedrim sits enthroned upon its
unalterable law, saying to the restless waves of mutation
and progress, thus far and no farther. And yet on such an
arena, and before such a public, stood George Combe, fear-
lessly doing battle for the truth, against all comers, during
an entire generation, defying alike the fiery anathemas of a
bigotted clergy, the specious fallacies of a prejudiced bar, and
the unrelenting hostility of an enraged faculty. What
wonder that we occasionally detect an undercurrent of an-
tagonism in his works, which to the English reader seems
needless. The athlete, fresh from a mortal struggle, can
scarcely be expected to possess the unruffled composure of a
calm spectator whose serene repose has been undisturbed by
an effort. Ere the position and bearing of Mr. Combe can
be duly appreciated, we must understand the society in which
he moved, and the influences to which he was subjected.
Thus adjudged, he stands forth the venerable but now vic-
torious champion of a great but unwelcome truth, that with-
out his lifelong effort had still perhaps waited another gene-
ration for recognition.

J. W. Jackson.

Edinburgh, Nov. 26th, 1855.


( 413 )


VII. Two remarkable cures of chronic extreme Agony and De-
bility in a father and daughter. Communicated by the
father, Henry Kenway, of Birmingham, to the late Wil-
liam Barrett, both of the Society of Friends.


1. In the year 1832, I was thrown froma gig on a flinty
road, and was taken up as one nearly dead. The wounds
were dreadful, and I had a concussion of the brain. Up to
the year 1850, I was occasionally suffering from a debility,
although at times much relieved by my kind and able medical
attendants. In the early part of 1850 I was very ill, in pain
all over, and I could not move in bed without assistance, but
bore only the most gentle help, and dreaded every move.
Some thought I was sacrificing my life, because, if relief or
cure could be found, it could only be from homeopathy.
Under a physician of high standing, my intention was to
give three months’ trial, but within a week of that time my
friends thought me too near the grave to persevere. My
physician again so far restored me, as to enable me to seck
strength from the sea breezes on the Devonshire coast.
There no ease or improvement could be found. From that
time I visited other spots strongly recommended, but gra-
dually became more and more feeble, and suffered acutely
over most parts of the body.

Thus things went on till 1852, when all that medicine
could do seemed to have been tried in vain, and it was
thought I was gradually sinking. About the end of that
year, after saying much to discourage the adoption of any
new system, all appearing hopeless, again I yielded to the
desire of my friends, and without hope consented to try mes-
merism. Isaac Phelps of Bristol was engaged. He ques-
tioned me: examining my legs, in wounds from the foot to
the knee, and said that mine was a case of so long standing,
the consequence of the concussion of the brain, that he would
not deceive me by holding out the hope that he could cure
me. The legs were so bad that he never expected to cure
them. All he could say was, he doubted not the suffering
might be considerably lessened. He had been surprised at
some of the cures he had effected. He was ready to do his best
if I thought well to risk the expense, and said it would
rejoice him if it proved more was effected than he dared
lead me to hope. He continued to mesmerise me an hour
morning and evening, except on first days (Sundays) for -
about four months, then every evening only one month. To
my great surprise and comfort, and ‘to the astonishment of
many, at the expiration of that time my pains had left me.


414 ‘ather and daughter cured.


I was able to ramble with delight on the Malvern Hills, and
fatigue some of my hale robust friends, greatly to their won-
derment. My legs gradually healed, and not a wound is left.
My hands and feet, instead of deathly coldness, are generally
warm and comfortable. I could not live without aperient
medicine, now it is rarely ever required. Last winter was
severe and cold, but I was able to enjoy it.

My able physician (and I have good reason to term him
such) said my sufferings were the consequence of the acci-
dent, a shattered nervous system.

2. Part of the time he also attended my daughter, and
examined her minutely three times. The complaint was said
to be neuralgia, and we were given to fear that, without the
greatest care, she would be a comfirmed invalid. This was
at the time mesmerism was producing decided effects upon
me. Finding that in some degree we were similarly affected,
that she was in much pain, and night after night could get
no rest, it was decided to try mesmerism. It produced a
remarkable effect. After it was over she became sleepy, and
slept the whole night. The disease gradually left her. Soon


she was restored “to health, and has required no doctoring
since.


Such facts as these should be sufficient to induce a trial
of mesmerism, particularly when, as in my case, all othe:
systems have failed. Twelve months have now passed,
and a cold winter,—that winter, a winter of comfort to
him, who before in warm summer weather, in a high-back
easy chair, and well wrapt up in front of a good fire, was
often cold and chilly to a painful degree. Had I addressed
thee earlier I could not have forwarded this telling fact.

Henry Kenway.
Birmingham, 11th mo. 19th, 1855.


VIII. Remarkable cures of Neuralgia and Tooth-ache. By


Joun Rawe, Esq., of Haverstock Hill, Hampstead
Road.*


Havine lately, during a visit to Cornwall, met with several
parties who were formerly mesmerised by me for different
ailments, it occurred to me that some of their cases which
have not yet been reported in The Zoist might possibly be
considered of sufficient interest to find a place 1 in that journal.


* Excelle ent cures by this gentleman have bem published i in ‘Ses. XXXIL.,
XXXIII., XXXV., XXXIX., XLVI.


Ape


Cure rapid. 415


With this view I will proceed to describe a few of them,
selecting those in which acute pain was the ailment com-
plained of.


1. Neuralgia of the Sciatic Nerve.

John Collins, a respectable builder, residing at Wade-
bridge, about 50 years of age, applied to me in consequence
of an attack of sciatica. He had been suffering from it
between three and four months, during which time he was
under medical treatment, but had not obtained the slightest
alleviation. At the first sitting, I commenced with passes
down in front over the head and chest to produce sleep: the
eyes closed in about ten minutes, in a little while he was dis-
turbed with an increase of pain in the hip. The passes were
then made from the hip down over the thigh and leg to the
foot. After a few minutes, observing his brow again knit, as
if he were in pain, I enquired what he felt. He said “the
pain is gone from where it was, and is very smart in the calf
of the leg.” A short continuance of the passes removed the
pain, and he found himself free from it. After two days I
saw him again, and was told there had been a slight return
of the symptoms; I mesmerised him as before, and the
results were similar. There was no return of the complaint
after this. The next day he rode several miles on horseback,
and also walked a considerable distance, which was putting
the cure to a severe trial. But, when I saw him the day
following, he felt quite well. I gave him twenty minutes
mesmerising, the last that he received.

On meeting J. C. a week after, he expressed himself as
follows,—‘ I am all right, I have been quite well since I saw
you last, it must be mesmerism that has done it, as for many
months previous I was never free from pain, more or less, and
a feeling of weakness in the leg.”


Neuralgia of the Side.

Mrs. Greenwood, aged 30, the wife of a miller and small
farmer, of fair complexion and delicate constitution : has had
three children, of whom two died shortly after birth.
During her last confinement, (about six months before I saw
her) she took cold and had a violent attack of pleurisy ; her
life was despaired of for several weeks, and one surgeon pro-
nounced her far gone in consumption, and the left lung
nearly obliterated. However, she recovered to nearly her
former standard. Mrs. G. had for many years felt a pain in
the left side, extending back nearly to the shoulder blade,
and more acute after her illness. She was also frequently


416 Pain drawn from its situation.


seized with fainting. Her husband often proposed a trial of
mesmerism, but Mrs. G. considered it an absurd thing, and
objected to his appyling to me on the subject. He ulti-
mately obtained her consent, and, on his acquainting me with
his wishes, I offered to make a trial.

At the first and second sittings I only attempted to pro-
duce sleep, which was effected on the first occasion in half an
hour. The next time in twenty minutes. On the third visit
I decided on trying to remove the pain, but said nothing to
the patient. A light sleep was produced in a quarter of an
hour, and then I made powerful passes for a considerable
time down the left side and over the leg and foot. At the
conclusion of the sitting Mrs. G. said she had felt a strange
sensation as if quicksilver had been trickling down the left side,
then pain was felt in the knee and afterwards in the leg, then in
the foot, and lastly in the toes, when it vanished. The second
day after, there was only a slight pain under the shoulder-
blade, which was removed as before. Over exertion in carry-
ing a heavy child, some days subsequently, produced a return
of the pain, which was again removed at one sitting. The
rest at night was now very much improved, and the faintings
never occurred again. I mesmerised her for the next fort-
night, by which time her appearance was that of good health,
and she considered herself as well as she had been for many
years. Mrs.Greenwood’s feelings towards mesmerism changed
to gratitude and admiration, and, being a kind-hearted wo-
man, she wished to extend its benefits to others. With this
view she proposed to invite a female cousin of hers who was
ill to come and stay at her house to be put uuder mes-
merism. ‘This was acted on with a very good result.


Wills, a middle-aged married woman, residing at the
village of Amble, about three miles from my house, called
on me one day and said she had heard of my making some
persons insensible to tooth extraction, and wished to be mes-
merised for that purpose. She said “ about a month since I
went to Dr. to have a tooth drawn. It was a wisdom
tooth much decayed : he crushed it in drawing, and I believe
some of the splinters are not taken out. Since then I have had
almost constant pain in that side of the head, and have never
had a sound night’s rest.” She added, “there is another
tooth decayed and I wish to have that one out, but I suffered
so much last time, and my nerves are now got so weak, that
I cannot bear it unless I can be put to sleep.” _I tried passes
for nearly half an hour with ho success, and then told her
there seemed no chance of her being made insensible enough


417


for a painless operation. She said “I believe it is partly
owing to my being so much afraid; my friend here (a female
who came with her) told me so many frightful things she had
heard about mesmerism, as we came on the road, that I was
afraid to go to sleep: if you will try me again, I shall not
be so much afraid now.” Another trial was made and sleep
produced in three quarters of an hour, and left to continue
half an hour: on awaking, the pain was found to have ceased.

It was arranged for her tocome two or three times to
deepen the coma before the extraction.

saw no more of her, but a month afterwards was
informed by a neighbour, that the reason of her not coming
was, that she had not felt the slightest pain since I saw her,
and did not wish to have the tooth drawn.

Tooth-ache will generally yicld to mesmerism, and the
relief is often remarkably permanent. I will give one
instance. Mary Goodfellow, aged about 14, had been
troubled with tooth-ache for two or three days, when one
morning she went out to milk her father’s cow, and, wearing
thin shoes, got her feet wet with the cold dew, the conse-
quence of which was an attack of excruciating tooth-ache.
Her mother came with her to me, and said her daughter was
naturally of a very excitable temper, and the pain had made
her almost frantic.

Half an hour’s mesmerising was given, and proved suffi-
cient to render her quite composed and easy. A _ week
after, this girl came accompanied by a little brother about
seven years of age. I expected to hear she had a return of
the pain, but this time it was the little boy she had brought
to be cured. I saw these children occasionally for several
months afterwards, and found they had been entirely free
from tooth-ache.


Tooth-ache eradicated in three cases.


IX. Cures of “ Tabes Mesenterica,’ Head-ache, and (alleged)
Hip Disease. By Captain Fatconer Mixes, Dublin.


I. Cure of Tabes Mesenterica.

A uiTrLe girl, aged three years, the daughter of a medical
man, had been suffering for a length of time from “ Tades
Mesenterica,”’ which had reduced her to such a state that
the flesh was hanging in folds on her legs, her stomach
was swelled to an enormous size, and she had continuous
diarrhoea. Every kind of treatment that the first medical
advice could suggest had been tried without the slightest
effect, and all hopes of the child had been given up, when
VOL, XIII. GG


418 Cures after the failure of all other means.


her mother determined upon trying mesmeric treatment.
She consequently placed the child under my care. I mes-
merised her at night for fifteen minutes, which had the effect
of at once checking the diarrhoea, and this did not return ;
the child has been two months under my care, and is now as
strong and well as possible, and is very fat and heavy. The
stomach is quite reduced, and her medical attendant apmits
that her recovery is most remarkable.


II. Cure of Nervous Head-ache.

“ Mr. dear Mr. Miles,—I cannot leave you without giving
you my warmest thanks for your unwearied kind attention to
me while under your care. I have derived very great benefit
from your skilful treatment, my nervous head-aches and indi-
gestion you have entirely removed, and my health is now
excellent. For some time before I consulted you I slept
very badly, but since you have mesmerised me I have got
eight or nine hours uninterrupted and refreshing sleep, and
now with thankfulness to Him who vouchsafed to bless the
means, and with grateful remembrance of your kindness,

“ Believe me, your’s truly,
“Marian W.
“15 Aughrim Street, Dublin, 1854.”


III. Cure of (alleged) Hip Disease.*

Maria O’Brien, aged 11 years, was brought to me by her
mother, and had been suffering for nine months from hip
disease ; she was greatly emaciated, and screamed out if she
was moved in the slightest degree. She had not been moved
off her bed since January, and had been treated by one of
the first surgeons in Dublin. The usual treatment of issues,
&e., had been freely used without the slightest benefit ; but,
on the contrary, the child grew worse and was sinking: she
was put under my care about three weeks since, and the pain
was removed at the first sitting. I mesmerised her daily for
fifteen minutes; she is now able to walk quite strongly, and
does not suffer the slightest pain on her being tested in
every possible way; her appetite is now good, and she has
also recovered her flesh again in a remarkable way. She
was never put into the mesmeric sleep.

Dec. Ist. This girl has been going to school daily ever
since, and has not had the slightest pain or ache.
Merton, Sandford. Fatconer MILs.


* So called by Captain Miles: but we are certain that it was pure neuralgia,
which is every day mistaken for disease of the spine or hip, and absurdly and
severely treated by surgeons all over the country.—Zois¢.


( 419 )


X. A Visit to the Great Prison at Munich. By the Rev.
Cuauncy Hare TownsHenp, A.M.,Cantab. Ina letter
to Dr. Elliotson.


Lausanne, Dec. 1, 1855.

My dear Elliotson,—You once expressed a desire to have
a detailed account of a visit that some time ago I had made to
the great public prison at Munich. I will now fulfil your
wish as far as my recollections serve me.

Having applied (with passport) at the gate of the vast
building, or rather buildings, that compose the prison, for
permission to view the institution (for indeed it is rather a
great reformatory institution than a prison), I was conducted
to the apartment of the Governor, a man of high military
rank—a colonel, or in German phrase odereste, I believe—
who received me with great urbanity, asked me to be seated,
and, having ascertained that I understood German, addressed
to me some preliminary explanations respecting the prison
plan and discipline.

The institution, he informed me, was very nearly self-
supporting, the great source of its revenue being a manufac-
tory of cloth for the use of the army—every branch of the
manufacture, from the first entry of the raw flax to the final
drilling and calendering of the woven article—being con-
ducted entirely by the criminals themselves. Besides the
cloth-making, other trades were also going on in the pri-
son, such as shoe-making, tailoring, carpentering, bread-
baking,&c. (I should observe that the prison was only for
males), partly to create objects for general sale; but chiefly
(with the exception of the cloth) to supply the wants of the
inmates of the prison. “When a criminal enters the pri-
son,” said the colonel, “the first thing we do, is to ascertain
his former trade, if he had any, and to set him to work at
that. -In the case of his non-instruction in any useful occu-
pation, we immediately take measures to have him instructed
in some business that seems best adapted to his nature and
faculties. Our lowest class of manual occupation is the
winding of flax on reels, and to this work the least clever
and intelligent are set. A large proportion of the prisoners
are employed in this business, which is so essential to our
grand object, the manufacture of cloth. Corporal chastise-
ment is here unknown. Indeed, had there been anything of
the sort employed in this prison, you would not have seen me
here. Neither have we any useless labour (a cut at our
treadmills thought I), anything, in short, which might de-
grade a man from his position as a human being. Our
GG 2


420 Self government and occupation are all important.


great moral object is to raise and to reclaim. Our basis of
principle is the belief that even the worst criminal still
remains man and may be beneficially acted on by kindness,
reason, and the skilful touching of certain human motives
which we have found common to all. Convinced that all
restraint is inefficient which is not accepted by the will of
the criminal himself, we try to lead every one of our prison-
ers to a conviction of the excellence of our measures, and of
the benefits which will accrue to himself from cordially
embracing them. In fine, to produce self-government, not
a government ab extra (continued the colonel with some-
thing of the German metaphysician in his manner) : a sub-
jective, not an objective obedience and acquiescence, is our
end and aim.”

“This must be difficult,” I remarked.

“T have not found it so,” replied the Governor. “ Occu-
pation in the present, an object of interest sect before a man
in the future, the idea of something still to be lost, or still
to be gained. These springs of action judiciously set in
motion are adequate, we find, in every case, to restore or
develop the principle of self-government. Of course, the
chief difficulty is at first. Many a new comer is necessarily
idle, brutish, ferocious even. But this I have ever found with
the worst of criminals: once convince him of your interest
in him, and he is pervious to your influence. The great
source of crime (continued the governor, who seemed to be
somewhat of a philosopher) undoubtedly is the belief in the
lower classes that they are cared for by neither God nor
man. How much of this belief is the fault of the higher
and governing classes, God only knows. At any rate we, in
this place, try to remove the unfortunate impression. There,
at least, the criminal sees that much is done, and disinter-
estedly done, for his benefit and reclaiming. But to tell you
our plan more particularly. Occupation is our first great
means of governing our prisoners. In the morning, every
man has his task of the day set him. Faithful to our prin-
ciple of leaving the criminal to manage himself as much as
possible, we do not secure his attention to his work by a
number of overseers, or by constant supervision. On the
contrary, every working room is, as it were, self-organized.
We leave the inmates as free and uninspected as possible.”

“ But how then,” I exclaimed, “can you possibly secure
the necessary attention to the work in hand, or obtain from
the men the proper amount of labour ?”

“ By a very simple method,” replied the Governor, “ we
know exactly what each prisoner is capable of, and we mea-


No corporal punishment. 421


sure all the work every evening. We expect from each,
according to his trade, so much flax wound off, so many pairs,
or so much of a pair, of shoes completed, so many loaves
baked.”

“ But how obtain the result,” I persisted, “ without su-
pervision or punishment? What motive on the part of the
men or fear of failure can ensure their diligence ?”

“We do not want,” replied the Governor, “ either motives
or salutary fears to render our commands effective. I have said
that we have here no corporal chastisement, but certain punish-
ments which do here exist we find are more dreaded by the
men than any amount of brute pain. For instance, we have
pecuniary fines, or rather losses, and penalties in the shape
of diminishing a prisoner’s allowance of beer, cutting him
wholly off from it, or excluding him from the library.”

“ Are such penalties indeed found sufficient,” I said, “ to
enforce diligence and obedience ?”

“Yes, for each penalty is directly based on a primary
instinct of human nature; first, the love of acquisition,
secondly, the desire of some small daily pleasure and stimu-
lus, and, thirdly, the thirst for instruction and knowledge.
And with all these are blended other inferior or superior
excitements, which together produce that mixture of motives
essential to the production of all action in man. (Remember I
have said the Governor was German and philosophical.) For
instance,” went he on to say, “ one grand stimulus the love
of approbation, and one yct finer motive, the fear of blame,
envelop all our three penalties in their ample folds. Most
of the men have natures sufficiently human, really to feel the
infliction of a fine or penalty, as if their ill-conduct had been
an act of ingratitude towards those who are interested about
them, especially towards myself, whom they know to be
grieved when they do amiss. Once convinced that they are
yet men, yet cared for by somebody, they seem to dread any-
thing like a fall back into that utter self-contempt which was
once their habitual state. They feel they have yet something
to live for, and something which may be vitally affected by
their own conduct.

“The money, which they are allowed to gain for them-
selves, under certain regulations, acts like a forcible task-
master over them. To explain this further. We have in
this prison criminals of every grade, and for every varicd
term of imprisonment, from a few months to fifteen or twenty
years, or even life. ‘To all of these we allow a certain pro-
portion of their labour-money, the proportion varying accord-
ing to their conduct, and iu some certain cases the allowaiuce


422 All have a motive for saving their gains.


is, for a definite time, stopped altogether. When a criminal
leaves the prison with a certificate of general good conduct,
he has a right to the amount of money which has been laid
by for him during his imprisonment. To leave the prison
with a good round sum, undiminished by fines or stoppages,
is an object of great ambition with all these men. Some
are actuated by higher motives than mere ambition, the wish
to provide for their families, or, when they quit the institu-
tion, to enter advantageously upon an honest calling.”

“ But,” I demurred, “in the case of imprisonment of life,
how is this motive to be carried out ?”

“Through another of the primitive desires of human
nature,” replied the Governor, “ namely, to have something
to bequeathe after death. To consent to die an absolute
pauper, and to leave nothing behind one but one’s carcass is
not human, but bestial. Besides, men love to think that they
shall survive somehow after quitting this earth, be talked of
by some one, remembered by some one. Thus we have
found that even the imprisoned for life fall under the com-
mon law of wishing to accumulate, of desiring to have
something to leave at death. Nay, the misers’s passion
comes into play, and it is most certain that, though the life-
imprisoned criminal never sees, never will see his store, he
often asks after it, wants to know again and again how much
it is, and doats over it in his fancy.”

“ But suppose,” persisted I, “that the life-imprisoned
criminal stands unconnected in this world, has no family,
no friends, no ties of any kind (and such cases may some-
times happen), how shall his interest to accumulate and to
bequeathe be awakened, and to what end ?”

The Governor replied, “We have as yet met with no
such case of utter isolation. God has woven too many ties
for man that he can ever stand wholly alone. It is true
that there is now a prisoner for life here who has no rela-
tive living (at least no near one that he cares about): but
then this man, we know, has a deep object of interest in a
woman who was his mistress, and in her children (whether
by him or by some other man I know not), and it is for her
that he hoards, and avoids fines and forfeits, and asks after
his cherished sum, and wishes to live that the treasure may
be larger.”

This branch of the subject being exhausted, I enquired
what possible amelioration in his condition a prisoner for life
could expect; “and yet you tell me,” said 1, “that you keep
hope alive, that you control the worst criminal by a possible
better and a possible worse. How is this? I ask.


An insane criminal executed to please the populace. 423


* By a real better and a real worse,” replied the Governor,
“without exception, in every case; yes, even in that of the
lifelong captive. I will explain this. Among the six hun-
dred are criminals of every grade. We do not always—indeed
we very rarely—execute a man in Bavaria, for any crime—
for murpER even. Our laws are merciful, and we always
spare life, except in cases where the public voice imperatively
demands the sacrifice of a‘ criminal. Not that I think the
public voice is always right in these matters. But passions
are sometimes roused in the populace that it would be
dangerous to tamper with, and the Government throws to the
enraged multitude a victim now and then to prevent worse
loss of life—a popular outbreak it may be—a germ of revo-
lution—a discontent which might end ill. For instance,
lately, a poor lad of only nineteen had his head cut off (our
way of executing criminals) because he had a strange passion
for setting houses on fire, and had been so successful in his
incendiarism as to have caused the death of many people,
besides much loss of property. After he was in prison he
confessed that he had only waited for a favourable wind to
set fire to Munich itself in so many points as to have caused
the destruction of the city. ‘Let me out again,’ he said,
‘and I feel that I should soon be at my old work! I cannot
help it!’ The poor boy was, in fact, a maniacal incendiary
—half idiotic, and, as such, would, under ordinary circum-
stances, have been made prisoner for life: but the bare rumor
of that mercy enraged the crowd to such an extent—those
who had suffered from the incendiary acting on the rest—
that, after long delay, the execution took place. I was sorry
for it. But what will you? All that relates to crimes
and criminals is yet but little understood even in high
places—by the populace not at all. But I am wandering
from my subject. The execution I am speaking of did not
take place out of this prison. Here we have no criminals
who are left for death. Yet we have in it more than one
murderer, and one man who had committed a double murder,
who has been here twenty years already, and who will never
go out alive. This brings me to answer your question,
how, in such cases, the criminal is ruled by hope and fear.
The murderer, or even he who has attempted murder, in
short, the dangerous and the violent, are, on first entering
the prison, heavily fettered, ironed round the legs, and hanc«
cuffed, so that very little power to do harm is left them. As
their conduct improves the fetters are lightened ; and, as con-
fidence in them increases, one after another of the irons is
removed. The handcuffs are the last to be taken away. This


424 The Governor could be murdered at any moment.


is done gradually and carefully. On any outbreak on the
part of the criminal, the fetters are proportionally replaced,
and he is told, ‘Thou seest we cannot trust thee!’ This sort
of discipline takes up long periods, but, at last, a consistent
course of good conduct may remove the fetters altogether
even from a lifelong prisoner. The man who committed the
double murder—one on the master of a house, the other on
the servant, and who came here long before I was Governor,
is at this time entirely free from fetters, and, besides that, is
one of the most trusted of the criminals in the institution.
He is, in fact, overseer of several rooms,—for the internal
management and economy of the prison is mostly managed
by the prisoners themselves. Of course, if the man shewed
any disposition to relapse towards violence, he would forfeit
our trust and his own position. And it is precisely the
knowledge of this which is a beneficial motive to him. No
one who is not, like myself, daily cognizant of such things
can conceive the enormous force of a restraint that is almost
wholly moral. Now,” continued the Governor, leading me
to look out from his apartment down what seemed almost an
interminable passage, on each side of which were long lines
of open doors, “ observe, all these doors are open, yet they
are the doors of rooms, each containing some eight or twelve
criminals—some of them murderers, yet few of them ironed.
They are not forbidden to speak to each other, and, if the
whole six hundred, or only a fraction of them, were to agree
together to come out and murder me, and to take possession
of the prison, there is nothing to hinder them except the
moral force I speak of. We have here no physical strength
to resist them; we have few servants to the prison—no secret
espionage. Yet here I never feel afraid. The men could com-
bine, but they wi// not. There has been too much reforma-
tory spirit introduced amongst themselves to permit of a
coalition for evil.”

So spoke the stout-hearted Governor, but, for myself, 1
must confess, as I looked down the dreary vaulted passage
and saw the open doors, and was aware of the strange myste-
rious stillness which pervaded the place, yet realized all the
while the idea that behind each open door were criminals of
all grades who had only to come out and murder us, I un-
derwent something of a thrill of—no, not fear exactly,—it
was not that—but the sort of imagination which seizes one on
a precipice, where we feel the earth may give way under our
feet, though there is no likelihood of such a catastrophe.

We returned into the Govérner’s room, where he con-
tinued his exposition of the prison system.


a


i


The luxury of beer a potent aid : 425


“In aid,” he observed, “of the wish to accumulate
money, and of the desire to discharge offices of trust, as well
as to be free of limb, we employ certain minor aud subsidiary
rewards and punishments, which yet are very potent to con-
trol the men. And no wonder, since they affect the comfort
and the happiness of every day. You will smile,” continued
the Governor, “ when I tell you that one of our most power-
ful engines of government—perhaps the most powerful, cer-
tainly the most universal—is, beer! Perhaps you know that
the Bavarian loves his beer ?”

I nodded assent, aud said, “ Yes, as a Frenchman loves
his wine.”

“ Well then, we take advantage of that love. We give
our prisoners (when they behave well) beer. Not indeed the
heady Boek-Bier—no, that might undo the good which we
strive to effect. Nothing overstrong is allowed the prisoners,
for we find that ‘he cootine, regular pret of the prison has,
from the first, an immense effect upon their mona being.
Crime, in my eyes, is a disease—a madness, and one half of
the crimes on earth might be spared by a proper attention to
the physical man, and to the present generation which is to
generate the next. The old Adam begets sinful children ;
but, had the old Adam never swerved from the diet that Pro-
vidence appointed him, we might at this actual time have, all
of us, sound stomachs, sound brains, and sound consciences.”

(Well, thought I, Mr. Governor, you are a philosopher !)
He continued, “ But, while we abstain from heating our pri-
soners by over-stimulating diet, we, on the other hand, take
care not to keep them on a lowering regimen. For, strange
to say, the two extremes in their results do really meet ; and
we have found by experience, and by examination of other
prisons, that too low a diet actually stimulates the passions—
yes, the worst passions—of men. Perhaps, in that case, the
weakened brain produces monstrous growths of crime, and
engenders a low feverish madness, which has no strength to
correct its own morbid impressions.

“ But to return to our beer. Not being exactly a ne-
cessity of life we can make use of it as a stimulus, physical
and moral, useful in its place, which can be given or with-
held, according to circumstances. We find that to cut a
man off from his modicum of beer, however small, is the
most dreaded punishment we can inflict. Thus in beer we
possess a mighty engine. Small things become great by
application. Is a man steadily improving in his conduct?
From time to time we give him a small extra of the little
beer (kleine bier) which we use in the prison. Is a man de-


426 and of alibrary. All Bavarians sent to school.


teriorating? We lessen, or wholly withdraw, his allowance
of beer.”

(Thought I, you remind me of a mother, who told me
once that she managed her two little daughters during several
years by means of one box of sugar-plums, which they even
thought it was a great thing to be allowed to look at now
and then. But are not criminals children, and to be treated
as such 7)

The Governor continued, “To be struck off from the
beer list for a long period is felt bitterly by the men—doubt-
less, not only as a physical deprivation, but as a moral
penalty. Our beer tally is something like the good and bad
marks in schools, by which I am told you English achieve
wonders. It is a moral sign, and means more than the thing
itself. To have the fullest allowance of beer proves a pri-
soner to be held in high esteem: to have none at all proves
him to have forfeited approbation.

“ So it is partly with our prison library, which is the last
of our subsidiary means of government that I need mention.
We have a room filled with instructive and interesting books,
access to which is allowed at certain periods to the well-
conducted.”

“ Can your prisoners all read?” I asked.

“Certainly! In our country public instruction is the care
of Government. I have been told that in England the learn.
ing to read and write is not obligatory.” (The more’s the
pity, thought I.) “In Bavaria it is so. Every parent is
bound under penalties to send his children for a certain time
to one of the schools appointed and maintained by Govern-
ment.”


“Ah!” I said, “in our free country we should not bear
that !””

“ But we consider ourselves free,” replied the Governor ;
“only not free to injure ourselves, or our fellow-beings. Cer-
tainly, we find it a great thing in this our prison that those
whom we receive have a certain groundwork of instruction,
on which we may build, and to which we may refer. Thus,
from the first, we have to do with something above the mere
brute man.”

“ Have you schools,” I interrupted, “in the prison?”

“No; for not only have those whom we receive an equal
degree of instruction, but likewise we do not admit here
lads or boys under eighteen years of age. There is for them
a separate reformatory institution in the town. Faithful to
our principle of self-development, we give our men the means
to instruct themselves by reading.”


—


No punishment which can injure health. 427


* And they really like to do this?” I asked.

“Yes; for we take the greatest care to make reading a
matter of desire to them. The moment we were to inflict it
us a task we should be baffled in our aim. Reading is held
out to the men as a privilege, a reward, a something rather
difficult to be obtained. We fence the thing round with
restrictions. The first admission to the library is granted only
as a high reward for good conduct ; and each prisoner knows
that any misbehaviour on his part may exclude him from the
coveted apartment. By such an appeal to the first principles
of human nature—indeed, to very obvious and simple rules—
we obtain the desired end, namely, to make the men hope
and fear about the library. They greatly dread to be ex-
cluded from it, and consider such exclusion, perhaps, as a
greater penalty than any we can inflict, always excepting the
loss of their beer.”

“Are these all your punishments?” I, as the Governor
became silent, enquired.

“ Nearly all. We lay it down as a law that no punish-
ment shall be inflicted which can possibly injure health. Indeed
we have no right to add such injury to the sentence of the law.
This is no place of torture. Viewing the matter thus, we do
not punish ill conduct by more meagre or more stinted food,
or by taking away the daily exercise which we find necessary
to the well-being of our prisoners. Indeed, we should con-
sider such punishments as a moral wrong: for to restore the
health of the mind through that of the body is one of our
greatest aims. Yet as to food and exercise, we vary the qguo-
modo though not the quantum. There is a table for the
offender—a culprit’s court—certain signs of disapproval—a
certain segregation from the rest, when a prisoner has shewn
himself unworthy to communicate freely with his fellows.
Throughout all, we try to make the men feel that whatever
punishment we inflict is just and passionless. For the most
part, I must say, the culprits acquiesce in our judgments, and
do not imagine that we punish in order to please ourselves.

But it is time you should yourself see how our system
works. I have given you a much longer erordium about it
than I generally do to visitors, for the reason that you scem
interested on the subject of prison discipline. I will now call
my head man to conduct you about the prison. I should be
happy to accompany you myself, but this I do not do, because
it might appear that my presence got up the men to an arti-
ficial state of restraint or good behaviour. Go, and judge for
yourself. Ask the prisoners any questions you please, and
visit as many cells as you like.”


428


Some are monitors over others.


Being delivered over to a pleasant-looking official, I was
now conducted to one of the open-door apartments which I
had glanced at from the Governor’s room. Some eight or
ten men were here busy reeling off flax on wheels that were
worked by the foot acting on a pedal. As I and my con-
ductor entered, we excited little or no attention, neither was
there any of the scuffle or sudden silence which, even in
schools, attends the entrance of a functionary. On the con-
trary, the prisoners continued talking in a gentle but not
suppressed tone of voice, each one apparently chatting with
his neighbour, or with the two or three next to him, while,
all the time, the foot was at work, the wheel going merrily
round, and the hands busy. I said to the prison-servant
(I can hardly call him jailer) who accompanied me, “ So,
talking is allowed.”

“Yes,” he replied, “but the prisoner whom you see
yonder in the middle of the room is taking care that no im-
proper conversation goes on here. We have to each room
two or three monitors, who have cach their turn, of so many
hours, to watch over the conduct of their fellow-prisoners.
They keep a strict account of the behaviour of the set en-
trusted to them, and this trust they have themselves deserved
by a long unbroken series of good conduct.”

* But,” I asked (somewhat aside), “are the rest never
angry with their comrade, if their wrong words or doings are
reported by him? Is there not something of the feeling
which prevails against a tell-tale in our English schools ?”

“No,” replied the official, who was thoroughly intelligent,
“here we have nothing of the sort. The rules of the place
are so well understood, and the object of them so plainly
known to be good, that we have never known ill will genc-
rated by a monitor doing his duty.”

I spoke a little with the monitor, asking him how long he
had been in the prison ?

“ Five years,” he replied.

“ And how much longer have you got to stay?”

“Three years,” said he.

“ Your offence ?”

“Theft with violence.”

“ Do you much wish your time here to be out ?”

“No, Sir, I am very well contented here. Still, of course,
I shall be glad to be out.”

He spoke with great openness and unrestraint.

We now proceeded to visit various other apartments, in
one of which the prisoners were making shoes, in another
plaiting list slippers, in another turning boxes, candlesticks,


oe


Sages SRP


Their occupations and rooms made pleasant. 429


napkin rings, &c. I was told that, in choosing the occupa-
tion for the man, regard was had to his comparative health
and strength, as well as to his particular turn for the handi-
craft, and also to his conduct; thus, to be drafted on to the
lighter and more amusing work was considered to be a
reward. Every one was anxious to be a baker, and no
wonder, for I never saw a more animated scene than the
bakehouse presented. In this portion of the reformatory
Erebus there was bustling and laughter and joking going on.
My attendant told me that none but the better sort of cri-
minals, who had either been condemned for only small
offences, or who had worked their way up to confidence by
long good conduct, were allowed to form part of the baking
establishment. So it was with the cooking department, over
which, besides, presided servants belonging to the institution
itself. Of course, I must taste a loaf, and some soup. That
is de rigueur in such cases. Both were excellent. I wish
that all the Oliver Twists in the world might have as good in
their workhouses! ‘ Was meat allowed every day?”

“No; three times a week.”

One of the most interesting sights was the prisoners’
library—by no means an uncheerful room either. Being in
the centre nearly, and looking into a court, it had not the
obligatory bars, and wooden vents, or boxes (like hen-coops
turned topsy-turvy), that made you feel you were in a prison,
when you were in the apartments looking upon the street.
So knowledge was made attractive every way. A few mild-
looking prisoners—chiefly invalids, I was told—were reading
in this book-room, as intently and silently as the studious in
the British Museum. I looked at some of the books. They
consisted chiefly of popularly instructive works—Sketches of
Astronomy, or Geography, History, Travels, and the like.
Not one mystically religious book did I see amidst the well-
chosen collection—a few straightforward moral treatises, or
tales, inculcating love to God and man, that was all; and this
in a Catholic country too! But Bavaria has many Protestant
subjects, and, at the time I speak of, had a Protestant Queen.

The cloth-manufactory—in itself a vast establishment—
had very little of the prison in its appearance. The better
class of criminals only were admitted here. Tidy-looking
men they were—in full activity—running, bustling about,
carding, weaving, dyeing, till the cloth came forth—all of
that whinstone blue, which is familiar to so many eyes that
have gazed upon the Bavarian soldiery. No hive of bees
could be in fuller hum and ferment than was this part of the
prison. This was one of the last sights of the establishment ;


430 Reformation visible in the faces of many.


but I must not forget to say that I had previously been shewn
the man of the double murder—the twenty years’ prisoner,
who still had to end his life in captivity. He was in a large
room, where (I think) they were cleaning flax, or following
some such quiet occupation, and he was one of the monitors
(I was told) of the apartment. Of course I looked at him
with interest. He had by no means an ill-formed head or
countenance. He looked mild, and pale, yet one could see
in looking at his face, that the passions had walked over that
exhausted land. They had passed—there was no fear of their
return. One saw also that.

Generally, I must observe, I was struck by the evidently-
bettered physiognomies of the criminals who had been longest
in the prison. Two or three in fetters (for I saw some of
such) had, methought, hang-dog faces (perhaps the fetters
partly made me think so), and some of the men in the work-
ing rooms had that shuffling uneasy look which indicates the
criminal: but in the majority of cases, I could see in its
various stages the retrieval of the degraded physiognomy.
The prisoners—many of them—decidedly had begun to look
honest men in the face, and to abjure, themselves, the cha-
racter of wild beasts in a cage.

I had been struck by the same thing, in a different degree,
when I had visited an establishment for the reclaiming of
poor depraved women, with which one of the most admirable
and really benevolent ladies that exist has blessed the earth.
On the faces of the poor Magdalens could be plainly seen the
two stamps, namely, of crime, and of reformation—of shame,
and of recoverable or recovered human dignity. In some
cases the brand of crime had been entirely wiped away, and
replaced either by nature, original goodness (alas! I forgot
that divines say, nature has no goodness !), or by the light of
new virtue. So it was with the criminals in the prison at
Munich. In more than one case I (speaking apart to the
official) guessed accurately between the new men and those
who had been longer under reformatory discipline.

About what I sawin the Munich prison I have little more
to tell. The dormitories, not too large nor containing too
many occupants, presided over by servants of the prison as
well as by monitors from amongst the prisoners themselves ;
the neat light iron bedsteads, that could be turned up against
the wall; the clean beds made every morning by their occu-
pants; the well-ventilated infirmary (which had as little
smell of burnt blankets and prisoner as possible)—all was
excellent and in good order.


Having told all that I remember respecting the prison at


Capital punishment is a sort of judicial murder. 431


Munich, I cannot refrain from adding such remarks as the
subject has suggested to me. Some may think, on reading
the account of the prison, that I have been describing an
Utopian institution, which only exists in my own fancy. Not
at all. Any one who is willing and able to visit Munich and
its reformatory prison may convince himself that I have
related the plainest matter of fact only. Some others, who
may believe in the actuality of the prison, may think it a
very German, sentimental sort of affair. But I am convinced
that to many others the prison plan which I have detailed
will appear pleasing, practicable, and (in newspaper language)
“a step in the right direction,” as regards the treatment of
criminals.

We have nothing precisely like it in England: I wish we
had—at least for trial’s sake. The Munich plan involves
three important points, which are not yet embraced by any
of our prison systems. I mean, first, the treating of the worst
criminal as a recoverable human being ; second, the substitu-
tion of self restraint for alien restraint ; third, the absence of
all useless labour, or nugatory punishment, of any kind.

Any one who has thought deeply on the subject—any
habitual reader of The Zoist—will be inclined to acknowledge
that these three points are true and fundamental principles
of right and justice. Any one who has not thought deeply
on the subject, and who merely goes through the hole in the
hedge, like any other human sheep, after the bell-wethers of
the flock—such an one I have neither time nor space even
to attempt to convince that we—under the Christian dispen-
sation—have no right to go by the laws of Judaism—aAave
no right whatever over the lives of our fellow-beings, and that
the execution of the worst criminal is a kind of judicial murder.
“He that is without sin, let him cast the first stone,” is a
sufficient repeal of all the Draconic laws in the world. The
words, “ Our Father,” set the seal to the great charter, which
for the word punishment should substitute correction.

“There goes,” said John Wesley, seeing a murderer con-
ducted to execution ; “there goes—but for the grace of God
—John Wesley !”

It was a sublime saying—sublime because of its truth.
In thought we have, perhaps, all of us, committed crimes that
might have conducted us to the scaffold. We have, at least,
all of us, enough of evil in our breasts to constitute us the
brother of the worst criminal; while, at the same time (as
the poet has finely said),


‘+ Hig follies and his crimes shall stamp him man.”


The best of mankind—for the best are the most acquainted


432 The peoples will abolish capital punishment.


with the heights and depths, the brightness and the darkness,
the grandeur and the meanness, of humanity—the best of
mankind will be the first to acknowledge the relationship.

But the general voice has spoken. Rulers may be wrong.
Priests and Judges may be blind. But the people are right—
the people see: and, though the voice of the mod is not the
voice of God, yet the voice of the people is. For small
sections of time communities may err, but not through
centuries. And what says the popular voice now? In
stronger and stronger tones it says, “ Abolish capital punish-
ment |” Judges indeed still sentence, but Juries recommend
to mercy, and more persistently, more loudly every day.
Take a recent instance. Daniel Lorden murdered his wife
in Spitalfields. It was a bad, a brutal case. What was the
end of the criminal’s trial? “The Jury returned a verdict
of guilty, but recommended him to mercy. The sentence of
death was then passed, the Judge not holding out a hope that
the prisoner’s life would be spared.” (From the Sun news-
paper.)

Whence this discrepancy between Judge and Jury? Be-
cause the Judge is as one to twelve. Again: crowds petition
frequently that a criminal’s life may be spared—but newspa-
pers (generally) cry out upon such a petition as weakness,
sentimentality, false benevolence and all the rest of it.

Why is this, and whence the difference? Because the
crowd is a crowd—but the newspaper (notwithstanding the
editorial We) is but a man, or the expression of the opinion
of a few men, who take upon themselves to think for the
public. However, the public will not always be thought for :
and less and less as intelligence and instruction spread over
the land.

Hence and from a growing feeling that we are all on
a wrong tact altogether, laws are softened—laws are evaded
—and “circonstances attenuantes”’ in the very face of the
most unattenuated crime save the criminal from the law’s last
penalty, and attest the general feeling of mankind with regard
to capital punishment. Of one thing Iam sure. Put it to
the universal vote whether capital punishment should be abo-
lished or not, and the result of the ballot of to-day would be
the abolishment of capital punishment to-morrow. The mil-
lions who elected Louis Napoleon, Emperor, would be a feeble
cypher in comparison with the millions who would place
mercy at the head of law. Mind, I blame no one. The
Judge thinks he is right, the newspapers think they are right.
They consider, when they sentence and shut up their hearts
to mercy, that they are but in the exercise of their proper


Juries say not guilty to prevent executions. 433


function. They do honestly imagine (I hope so, at least) that
the world would come to an end if men ceased to be hung.
Besides, there is, in the very best natures, an abhorrence of
crime that really does make men virtuously vengeful against
a vile criminal. In some wretched cases even oneself is apt
to feel sorry that the culprit should escape: and I can under-
stand the feeling which actuated Southey, when, with flashing
eyes, he used to say, “ If that villain wanted an executioner, I
myself would hang him.”

But do not the worst criminals often get off the best?
Often: and that is the very imperfection of our present laws.
There is so little medium and gradation in them that merciful
juries say, “ Not guilty,” merely to escape condemning a man
to death. There is no half-way-house—no Munich prison to
satisfy the benevolent sympathies of mankind. Hence, laws
that are written in blood often end in milk and water. The
want of proper reformatory institutions produces distorted
efforts to supply the want; whence false indulgences, pardons
in the wrong place, and ticket-of-leave systems, ending in
rapine and murder.

From thwarted benevolence, too, comes false reasoning,
and a glossing over of our bad severity by weak pretences.
Ifundreds of persons (not millions, observe) vindicate capital
punishment only on the plea of example. Observe where this
fallacy leads. I have heard a benevolent gentleman (Selon
Jeremy Bentham, I think he said,) gravely affirm that he
should be quite satisfied if the mere shew of justice could be
carried out, as a sort of spectacle to the mob—if a waxen
figure (for instance) of a murderer could be hung in the mur-
derer’s clothes, while he himself was kept in secref, and very
comfortable ;—or, if a prison were decorated outside with every
implement of horror—racks and wheels even—and the popu-
lace led to believe that the walls were a cover to the most
terrible punishments ; while all the time, inside, the prisoners
were extremely well off—“ dancing and feasting, if you will”
—said the benevolent gentleman. “I have no objection to
their being as comfortable as possible, or as idle as you like,
if only you can hold them up in terrorem and make them act
as an example.” This was said seriously ; but what reality is
there here—what true feeling for the reformation and conse-
quent well-being of the prisoner?

A late trial, and sentence, admirably commented on in
the Examiner, demonstrates with equal force to what absur-
dities the plea of punishing for example’s sake conducts a
man.

Mr. Justice Coleridge, in sentencing Lieut. Austen, the

VOL, XIII. H H


434 Judge Coleridge’ s fallacies.


dismissed Governor of Birmingham Gaol, who had been con-
victed of various acts of cruelty to Edward Andrews, a pri-
soner, which terminated in the suicide of the offender, thus
excuses himself for leniency in condemning Austen to only
three months’ imprisonment. First, the learned Judge con-
tends that, excess of zeal alone having caused Austen to be
guilty of torture and homicide, his punishment ought neces-
sarily to be slight, and next argues that, as the welfare of
society demands some punishment for every recognizable
offence, he is compelled to sentence Austen to imprisonnent
for a short time. In fact the learned Judge’s argument
comes to this—Austen, the over-zealous man, deserves 70
punishment—but, for example’s sake, I am forced to punish
him. Here are the Judge’s own words: “The great object
of all punishment was—that a warning might be given to all
other persons; and, with thal view, the sentence which he,
(Mr. Justice Coleridge) was directed to pronounce, was—that
the defendant be imprisoned in the Queen’s Prison for three
calendar months; and, during that time, be kept among the
first class misdemenants.”

How long is law to be administered by fallacies like these ?
The plea for punishing the bad Governor at all is—* that a
warning might be given to all other persons.” Is the argu-
ment sound? The shade of Bacon would prove you by fact,
and the inductive process, that warnings never do warn.
Experience proves, however, that they often atfract. How
frequently may one observe that the occurrence and punish-
ment of some horrid crime—made as public as possible for
example’s sake—are followed by many other crimes just of
the same sort? There seems to be a mysterious attraction—
a fearful contagious epidemic-like power of spreading in
crime, that would incline wise legislators rather to deal with
it as with the plague, and subject it to quarantine and cor-
dons, than to bring it into full contact with man—for warn-
ing’s sake. “ Flagitia abscondi oportet””—is a maxim which
might be learned from the wisdom of antiquity. Can any
one believe that the gallows, or any such warning, ever
checked a man in the moment of passion? The very pu-
nishment—to man’s strange nature—becomes an attraction.
Witness the Jack Shepherds of a past day, with whom to
march to the gallows with a nosegay and to die game was an
object of high ambition. The experimental proof that pu-
nishments did not act as warnings, but the contrary, is, that
crimes have diminished in proportion as penalties have been
remitted. Forgeries, highway robberies are dying out into
the past, and, altogether, our criminal calendar does not keep
pace with the increase of our population. It is true that the


Capita’ punishment should be abolished at vace. 435


newspapers sometimes relate the (to me apocryphal) words—
in the last dying speech of some brutal wife-murderer—that
he would not have gone so far had he thought he should
really be hung for it. But I imagine there is little reality in
such words, even supposing them to have been uttered.
Either they are prompted, or the man would get up a clap-
trap at his exit—or possibly he believes, in the cool prison,
what certainly would not have been the case in the heat of
wife-murder. Notwithstanding this little bit of humbug,
there begins, almost everywhere, to be a dim misgiving that
example is but a scarecrow and executions serve no good end.
Hence some, who do not go so far as abolition, wish that exe-
cution should take place in private. No wonder! considering
the horrid scenes—as unlike the good effects of a wholesome
warning as possible—which have taken place at some execu-
tions in our day: of that of the Mannings for instance.

Others again—benevolent but cautious—are for a gradual
abolition of capital punishments, and would defer the final
consummation of their far-sighted humane projects until
men are educated and bettered up to the proper point and
fitted for such a millenium. But whether the remission of
capital punishment itself would not hasten the millenium, just
as (possibly) the abolition of South State American Slavery
might—is another question which few ask themselves. Yet
this might seem plain—that whatever punishment ought to
be huddled up in private ought not to take place at all, and
that whatever ought to be abolished at some distant day is
unsound and can serve no good purpose any day. Away
with such rotten deceptions, and sawdust of old saws !

Let me say a few words on the second principle of the
Munich Prison, namely, the inducing offenders to govern them-
selves rather than restraining and governing them ad eztra.

Surely in the long run this is the best policy, for, even if
the severe system answers while the ciminal is in durance,
what good will it have done when the offender is turned out
again upon society? As the Governor of the Munich Insti-
tution said, “ No punishment or system can effect perma-
nent good that is not felt and accepted by the criminal
himself.” The proof is, with us, the quick return of old
offenders to their old prison: while, from the Munich Go-
vernor I learnt that it was the rarest case to have a criminal,
once emancipated, return to the institution. Self-conviction,
self-government, self-restraint, are for all times and places.
The fact is, we are so taken up with the old phantoms, fear-
ful warning, and terrible example, that we think very little
about the criminal himself. And there he is, a man,
endowed with a human heart, with human passions, with a


436 We care not for the unhappy criminals.


sense of justice—oh, how injured! writhing under the ne-
glect of his fellow-men, and having a whole world in him of
which they know nothing. No! He is not to be a man,
but a warning, an example. And was it for this that God
created him? No wonder he blasphemes. How can he
believe God cares for him when he sees man does not?
With him it is a virtue to be an atheist, for the God that he
deduces from the treatment he receives would be to him a
demon. Is not his case hard? Yet God, perhaps, created
criminals, that we might have our best feelings excited in
trying to reclaim them. The sick are a cry for a physician.

To produce an inward change in an offender, to make the
criminal fee] that he is a criminal, and acknowledge the jus-
tice of his sentence, as regards himself and others—these are
high ends which it were well to aim at. Criminals do not
understand our justice. They have been born into the
realm of nature, as her human wolves or tigers (there are also
toads and bats, but these generally get on very well), badly
organized, low in intelligence; and then they have not been
elevated by discipline and education, their animal propensi-
ties have not been balanced by mental culture. Was this
their choice? Do men choose misery and torture? Scarcely
do they understand their own acts, not at all their punish-
ment. Like Schiller’s “ criminal from lost honour,” or the
“‘ Michel Kohlhaas” of Von Kleist, they imagine that they
wage a fair war with society who has done so little for them.
On our side, as Schiller truly says in the masterly preamble
to his Verbrecher, &c. (speaking of a crimiual), “ We regard
the unhappy person, who was still as much a man as our-
selves, both when he committed the act, and when he atoned
for it, as a creature of another species, whose blood flows
differently from our own, and whose will does not obey the
same regulations as our own.”

How beautifully does the great master go on!

“But the friend of truth secks a mother for these lost
children. He seeks her in the unalterable structure of the
human soul, and in the variable conditions by which it is
influenced from without; and by searching both these he is
sure to find her. He is no more astonished to sce the poison-
ous hemlock thriving in that bed, in every other part of which
wholesome herbs are growing, than to find wisdom and folly,
virtue and vice, together in the same cradle. Not to men-
tion (continues Schiller), any of the benefits which psychology
derives from such a method of considering the criminal, this
method has alone the preference, because it uproots the cruel
scorn and proud security with which erect and untempted
virtue commonly looks down upon the fallen.”


Our treatment of criminals radically wrong. 437


From this great gulf between the two classes, designated,
in common parlance, the good and bad (as if gradations
between the two were not infinite), comes it that our efforts
to convince many a criminal of his guilt and of the justice
of his sentence are abortive. The right chord is not struck
in them. Thus, Barthelemy (whose organization has been so
finely explained in The Zoist) when he is assured of the chap-
lain’s good will towards him, only replies, “If you mean me
well, why am I not free to walk out of this place?” Diffi-
cult question to answer, when a man is only free to walk out
from a prison to a scaffold. In the face of such a fact, it
would be absurd to attempt to convince a criminal that
society meant well by him. But, if we could say, “ Let you
out we dare not, for you would still do more than you have
done, injure yourself and others; but we keep you here to
teach you self-restraint,” then indeed might we consistently
talk to a prisoner of our Christian love towards him and our
interest in his welfare. And even Barthelemy had a soft
point in his heart. He wept when his father was mentioned,
and held in his hand on the scaffold, as a last consolation,
the letter of the only person who he thought really cared for
him through guilt and sorrow.

Truly has Harriet Martineau said that the worst have in
them a vulnerable point, a tender chord which may be
touched,—a fact which she exemplifies by relating how she
tried in America to soften and better a prisoner under soli-
tary confinement for some grave offence; how, at first, she
failed so entirely as almost to doubt her own theory ; till, at
last, she happened to say to the man, “ You have a mother !”
when he burst into a passion of tears, and the ground was
broken up for the good seed of gentle remonstrance.

That there is something radically wrong in our system of
treating criminals, no one who observes facts can doubt. So
far from teaching those, for whose instruction we are respon-
sible, the worth and reward of good conduct, we seem to try
to render it valueless in their eyes. With this tendency of
our laws, I was struck during a visit to the Tothill Fields Pri-
son, which, nevertheless, is as good a prison as can be under
our existing systems, and is admirably and benevolently ad-
ministered by Mr. Tracy, the Governor, a man whose zeal
is in every respect, the opposite of that of Lieutenant Austen.
Mr. 'Tracy had explained to me that certain placarded num-
bers affixed to the boys’ arms meant the number of times
they had been returned to the prison. Observing a boy of
about eight years of age, with a non-criminal physiognomy,
who yet had upon his arm No. Six, I asked the little fellow
for what fault he had been so often committed to prison ?


438 What happens in our prisons could not ai Munich.


The answer was, “ For not moving on, Sir.” I looked sur-
prised, but Mr. Tracy assured me the boy had answered me
with perfect truth. He was no thief, no ill-doer, only apt to
be in the way of the police, because, like the poor boy in
Bleak House, he did not know where to go. Yet on either
side of this harmless and neglected one were little thieves
of as arrant a dye as any organization could proclaim.
Now, what must be the tendency of imprisonment on such
a boy as the poor little fellow who would not (or could not)
keep moving? Certainly not self-acquiescence in the justice
of his punishment, but, unless he be a miracle of goodness, a
rebellious dissatisfaction which must tend to make him a
useless, if not a hurtful, member of society.

Again, see what happens from our prisoners not acqui-
escing in our tender mercies towards them, in our treadmills,
silent systems, solitary confinement systems, and all the
ingenious tortures devised on the terrible-example principle.
Under the head of “ Poisoning Extraordinary,” I find in the
Daily News an account of the death of a convict in the
Junior Prison at Parkhurst. He was transported about five
years since for robbing a till, that is, transported to the
prison at Parkhurst. The evidence on the inquest disclosed
the extraordinary efforts devised by the prisoners for escaping
their daily employ (what daily employ ?), and gaining admis-
sion into the hospital. Some of them, with this view, werc
in the habit of making their eyes and legs sore, running
stocking-needles right through their knees, eating ground
glass, or bleeding themselves with knives or lancets (surrepti-
tiously obtained) down to death’s door. The man in question
had, by the prescription of a fellow-prisoner, scraped verdi-
gris off an old pump, made it up into pills with soap, thinking
only to make himself sick; but, taking too strong a dose,
had killed himself.

Now could such a case have occurred in the Munich
Prison, or in any prison where the mind was ameliorated
instead of the body being tyrannized over? Gross ignorance
on the part of the criminals, ignorance that lies at our door,
is at the bottom of all this. Our prisoners come out of an
uninstructed class, and no pains is taken to make them feel
the justice, or even understand the meaning of their punish-
ment. Of the three men, who now lie in gaol for the
Waterford murder, it is stated (in the Sun) that “they are
all extremely ignorant, and seem unaware of the conse-
quences of a conviction of the offence with which they stand
charged.” Ought these things to be ?

Then, as to the useless labour system, so well repudiated
in the Munich Prison, what good results can come from thus


No useless labour ; nor unnatural system. 439


additionally degrading the degraded? If the wild beast be
treated as a wild beast, will you ever make a man of him?
I know that some persons, whose opinions I respect, think
the treadmill and the grinding-wheel efficient instruments of
prison discipline and government. And why? On the
ground that there is nothing which the men fear and hate so
much as this degrading useless labour. But is there no
better appeal than dread to a human heart? aye, even the
worst human heart? And, as I once before observed, how
temporary are such expedients. Remove the lash, and the
criminal is the same as before, only harder. Even if you,
after a fashion, govern men in prison by fear, out of it can
you continue the system? We pretend that human govern-
ment is a shadow of the divine—that our justice, law, and
polity, not only come from God, but imitate God’s manner
of administration. Would it were so. But ours is an in-
verted process. Providence teaches us by an intelligent
system of consequences, with our self-reformation as the end
in view. But we, in the face of nature, adhere to brute
punishment. Think we then to lead back to nature by
unnatural systems? Nowhere, but in our prisons and in the
poet’s exploded Tartarus, do we find Ixion’s wheel and draw-
ing water in sieves. It is no sentimental tender-heartedness
which makes me speak thus, but downright practical philoso-
phy, the philosophy of Mr. and Mrs. Meagles in Little Dorrit
(how I congratulate the world on Dickens’s conferring a new
serial on us); a philosophy, which, more justly than that of
the Gradgrind school, should confer on its possessors the de-
nomination of “ practical people.” The good fruits of self-
restraining systems and intelligent labour are before us in a
thousand ways. At Genoa I saw even a madhouse con-
ducted on such principles with the best effect; and an
intelligent physician at Bonn, who presides over an establish-
ment of the kind, assured me that many a radical cure of
the insane was effected by developing in them the power
and pride of self-government. He told me that experience
led him to have a kind of governmental system conducted by
the insane themselves: monitors and persons of trust, as in
the Munich Prison, chosen from among the very inmates of
the institution. Thus, one of the patients able to control
himself, would be sent out to walk with others less advanced
in self-restraint, and, being made responsible for conducting
them all safely back, was never known to violate his trust ;
while the confidence reposed in him generated a pride of
well-doing that had the happiest effect in promoting his
restoration.

As to criminals, Australia shews us what healthy stimulus,


440 Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c.


and giving up a man to himself at the right time, cando. The
penal settlement has become a fine British Colony. On this
track, therefore, we may safely and practically proceed. Let our
criminals feel that we think of them as well as of society.
Let our prisons be reformatory, as well as penal. Such a
plan will doubtless cost money, but it may possibly be found
in this, as in other cases, that Christian philanthropy is, after
all, the best economist.


BOOKS RECEIVED.
Electro-Dynamisme Vital ou Les Relations Physiologiques de l Esprit et de la
Matiére, &c. Par A. J. P. Philips.
We have not space to do justice to the ability and scientific attainments of the
author, while we differ from him essentially in some of his views.


Mesmerism in its relation to Health and Disease and the present state of
Medicine. By William Neilson, Esq. Edinburgh: Shepperd and Elliot.

The author unsparingly, but not unjustly, exposes the hostility of the medical
profession to mesmerism. The work is worth reading.


The British Journal of Homeopathy. October, 1855.

Bulletin Magnétique de Lyons. No. 16. September, 1855.

The Seer of Sinai. By J.W. Jackson. London: Tweedie, 337, Strand. 1856.

The case of Luigi Buranelli medico-legally considered. By Forbes Winslow,
M.D., D.C.L.

Dr. Winslow argues, as every one ought, that Buranelli was insane.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


We have received a letter from the Rev. George Sandby.

From Dr. Castle, of Montmorency, the case of a young gentleman disposed to
take exaggerated views of matters which interested him, and live frequently in a
waking dream and remain for days subsequently under its influence. Once he thus
felt or saw the death of a relative, the news of which could not reach him till some
time afterwards. He correctly predicted to Dr. Castle that he himself should
die young and by a violent death: in fact, he was one day observed by his
brother officers to be greatly depressed, said he felt that something horrible was
impending over him, and in an hour was found in his room brutally murdered,
together with his servant, by two young serjeants of his regiment. They had
fine cerebral organizations, and murdered him from deep revenge, as he had acted
with severe discipline towards them: they murdered the servant to avoid de-
tection. They confessed the justice of their sentence, implored pardon from
heaven, and then prayed for him whom they had murdered. The elder alleged
that he had instigated the other to the crime, and requested to be executed the
last, that the other might be spared the sight of his execution. In both De-
structiveness and Benevolence were large and the intelligence good : Conscien-
tiousness and Self-esteem well developed in both: and very large in the elder.
In the murdered officer the only organs greatly developed were Ideality and
Marvellousness.

An article on the divining rod by C. W. J., through General Bagnold.

From Mrs. Schutze, 63, Marylebone Street, her own mesmeric cure.

From Mr. Fradelle, of Camden Town, remarkable instances of clairvoyance,
in the waking state and in sleep, independent of mesmerism.

From M. Lombard, of Geneva, on table-turning.


ERRATA.
p- 288, 1. 9, for “flaming,” read blawing p- 320, 1. 29, for “ essential,” read essence.


ney ee


CONCLUSION OF THE ZOIST.


** Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.’’—
Matt. vii. 21.


Tue object for which The Zoist was undertaken is attained.

That object was neither pecuniary gain nor worldly repu-
tation: for loss was nearly certain; contempt, ridicule, viru-
lent abuse, and serious injury, were all inevitable. It was
the establishment of truths, splendid, exquisite, extensive in
their bearings, and of the highest importance to the moral
and corporeal well-being of mankind.

During thirteen years, we have amassed fresh facts in
Cerebral Physiology and Mesmerism, and presented them in
such numbers and with such proofs, that to question them
would be absurd: and they are no longer questioned, except
by the most ignorant, who will gradually form a smaller
minority. We have spared no labour in collecting facts or
examining their solidity: we have never quailed under the
attacks made upon us in the College of Physicians, in other
lectures and addresses, in publications, or in conversation
behind our backs, but have stood our ground and fought
as became conscientious and fearless men. While thus sup-
porting truth, we have as earnestly applied ourselves to
liberate it from the carelessly made observations of some, the
weak and fanciful speculations and dreamings of others, and
from that curse of all true natural knowledge and moral
progress—superstition—supernatural imaginings—which are
excluded from astronomy, chemistry, geology, and other
sciences, and ought to be excluded from the physiology of
the brain, or, in other words, the intellectual and moral
functions of man and other animals, and from mesmerism,
both which are but branches of natural knowledge.

Very few phrenologists have ever seen Gall’s works, and
yet the generality of them believe far more than he wrote.
We have studied them sentence by sentence, and yet are not
satisfied with all that he has advanced, nor with by any
means so much of what has been written by Dr. Spurzheim,


442 CONCLUSION OF THE ZOIST.


Mr. Combe, and others of inferior note: and trust that we
shall induce phrenologists to look more closely into the
grounds of their convictions. We have been anxious that
the world should discern the fact that all the mental—the
moral and intellectual phenomena of man and other animals—
are but so many phenomena of the living organ called brain,
or other nervous substances, and are subject to all the laws
of the functions of all other organs; are inevitable and cal-
culable effects of so many causes acting upon certain com-
binations of matter in certain circumstances ; and that to view
them as anything more than phenomena of nervous matter is
a childish fancy, which in still more uncivilized times pre-
vailed in the consideration of many of the phenomena of in-
animate nature. The terms force, power, principle, have led
to so many fancies of peculiar substances or of spirits, that it
would be better to speak only of phenomena and matter.

We have furnished ample examples of facts in the phy-
siology of the brain of which metaphysicians and pbhysiolo-
gists are not aware—facts proving that the term cerebral
physiology comprehends more than phrenology, and is not
synonymous with it, signifying, as this does, the relation
between individual faculties and development of individual
portions of the brain. We have shewn that one brain
can act silently upon another, one silently sympathize with
another in emotion and in impressions communicated by the
organs of sensation ; that the brain can experience impressions
from concealed or distant objects of sight ; receive impressions
to which we are habitually strangers; and can be impressed
with what has passed or is to come. Imagination in the mes-
meric or sub-mesmeric state can effect prodigies. Mesmerism
has thus thrown a flood of light upon mental philosophy, and
we have furnished an abundance of such illustrations.

The Zoist will for ever banish doubts of the reality of
many facts in physiology and in disease. Only twelve years
ago the whole medical profession scoffed at the possibility of
surgical operations being possible without any sensation.
The evenings of the 22nd of -November and the 13th of
December, 1842, will ever be memorable in the annals of
medicine : and afterwards, when surgeons were overwhelmed


CONCLUSION OF THE ZOIST. 4.43


with mesmeric proofs, they eagerly adopted a new, but fre-
quently injurious, method of accomplishing what they had
held in derision and had spurned. We have recorded all the
glorious doings of Dr. Esdaile in India, and all the painless
operations performed elsewhere up to this hour, so far as we
know of them. We have detailed almost endless instances
of the great curative powers of mesmerism over diseases
apparently very different from each other, and shewn that it
is a mighty adjunct to the restorative power of the living
frame,—to the vis medicatrix nature which always battles
against disease,—that it soothes and strengthens, and, though
not a remedy for every ailment, is likely to be more or less
useful, and often strikingly useful, in every case, medical and
surgical, general and local, in the young and the old, in
the human subject and in the brute creation. We have
shewn what cause mankind would have to congratulate them-
selves if the medical profession would receive it into the mass
of means which they hourly, and too often unsatisfactorily
and injuriously, employ. We have urged it upon the score of
intellect and science, and upon what the profession disregard
in the matter of mesmerism,—upon the score of humanity and
conscientiousness. ‘To say nothing of the cures, we may
fairly express surprise that the common fact of pain being
drawn lower and lower by the passes; of local insensibility
and rigidity being produced by them, and removed by other
processes; of diseases not infectious being communicated,
and as it were transferred, from the patient to the mes-
meriser (who, however, can easily be liberated from it) ; of
susceptibility of peculiar effects in the mesmeric state from
metals and other substances,—do not attract the condescen-
sion of a second thought or look from the profession. We
have forced attention to singular nervous diseases disregarded
by medical men, though occasionally recorded. Examples
of clairvoyance abound in all the volumes. But, though this
phenomenon appears unquestionable, we well know that gross
imposition is hourly practised in regard to it by both pro- |
fessional clairvoyants and private individuals considered to be
trustworthy but influenced by vanity and wickedness. The |
assertions of a clairvoyant may be heard, but should be


14-4 CONCLUSION OF THE ZOIST,

believed in scarcely one instance out of a hundred—nor
indeed ever believed unless they are free from the possibility
of lucky guess or trickery and are verified by ascertainment
of the facts. A host of clairvoyants are impostors, and no
money should be paid to a clairvoyant unless on the under-
standing that he or she cannot guarantee you a true clair-
voyance; for even in the genuine the power is uncertain. We
have also to regret that some mesmerisers are impostors,
pretending to superior power and knowledge which they do
not possess, talking, flourishing, and perhaps pouring forth
religious sentences, and cruelly making pecuniary victims of
their patients. But let society remember that quackery per-
vades all professions and all occupations: that there are
many professional mesmerisers who forego a portion, or even
the whole, of their just remuneration from those who are
poorly off: and that many persons mesmerise silently, mo-
destly, and assiduously without any recompense. The practice
of mesmerism tends greatly to heighten sympathy with our
suffering fellow-creatures and is a source of true happiness to
conscientious mesmerisers. We have presented satisfactory
proofs that mesmeric phenomena, though they may be pro-
duced artificially, may all occur without artificial means, and
are due to a peculiar condition, of which we are as ignorant
as of the true nature of gravitation, electricity, heat, light,
&c. We can only observe phenomena, and ascertain to what
they are or are not owing. We have proved that mesmeric
phenomena are independent of imagination, suggestion, fixed
ideas, &c., though every mesmerist should be aware that
imagination often plays a powerful part in mesmeric pheno-
mena, and has thus proved a stumbling-block to investigators
from the time of the first commission of enquiry in Paris in
the last century to the present hour.

Were the Zoist continued longer it would be replete with
useless repetitions of facts ; it would be too large to be pur-
chased and too extensive to be useful. It must be. regarded
as a complete work which has come out in fifty-two numbers,
one for every week in the year, though the issue has been
slower. It is a rich store, and will be a solid work of refer-
ence for years to come.


London, December 31, 1855


INDEX TO THE CHIEF MATTERS


THIRTEEN VOLUMES.


*.* The figures indicate the Volumes in which the matters will be found. The
Index in each respective Volume will generally indicate the page.


PHRENOLOGY.


Alimentiveness, discoverer of organ of

Amativeness, organ of ee

Association, London Phrenological oe ee oe oe so wel
Association and Suggestion

Association, British

Benevolence and Imitation (twice)

Brain grows for forty years *

Buchanan, Dr. 7” oe oe “ on sad os 3
Carpenter, Dr. .. “<a - oe a a ee ee 4, ‘8, .
Cast-making


he ROO


Children, ignorant and ‘cruel treatment of oe os oe oe "9, m1
Constructiveness - o ee ee ee ‘e <a 2
Conscientiousness na ee ars a os -" “ “6 3
Criminal Code... ne oa oe os a os es 1
Criminals, treatment of .. - oe oe oe * 13
Death, against punishment of (twice) . oe - ee 1, 2, 3, ies 7,8
Development, reporting ee . . P
_ estimating ‘ a ne oa “ “a =
Duality of Mind, by Dr. Wi igan a a ee .*
Education (twice) ‘ wa + as es ai on


Feelings, power of, on intellect

Gall, anecdotes of

original letter of oe oe ee ee + cee
Head of Rev. R. Moffat .. - oe os oe oe “06
John Varley .. ‘ a oe os oe +. .
Lord Chancellor Eldon

John Constable, R.A.

Cooper, murderer


——— Nall, ditto


Taylor, ditto
Rev. Dr. Strauss
——— Lawrence, murderer wa xe «s we ee ne
——— Crouch, ditto
—_— Alderman Sir James Shaw
——— Duke of Sussex
——— a young Thief


DS OO DD DO NO Oe ee et et TO Oe


446 GENERAL INDEX.


Head of Connor, murderer
— Ellison, ditto
——— Hocker, ditto
——— Rush, ditto ‘
——— Mannings the murderers
—— Haydon the painter
——— Socrates
Hippocrates had accurate knowledge of brain’s 8 function
Hobbes .. ee ee
Hope, organ of
Idiots, a family of oe
Insanity, Homicidal (twice) .
——— Criminal

Plea of

Law of
Insane, religious instruction to (twice)
Insanity mistaken for crime
Insanity and crime as ee
Instinct ‘
Introduction to our views
Immortality not dependent on spirit
Language, organ of
Macnaughten, case of .
Madness, to be made artificially
Marvellousness, organ of (twice)
Mathematics of Phrenology
Materialism
Medical and Chirurgical Society
Mége’s, Dr., enlightened views
Mesmeric ametnel (four aaaind
Necessity . es
Nerves, Matteucci « OR. o
Organs of Brain spoken of before Gall .
Phrenology applied to the fine arts
Phrenological Journal °
Physical well-being necessary to moral progress
Physics of the Nervous System
Pleasure and Pain
Prideaux’s, Mr., new views
Prison at Munich
Psychologists, German
Religion not to interfere with i inquiries into nature
Size, organ of -_ ee
Society, London Phrenological
Sympathy, organ of —
Temperament
Veneration, small organ of, excited (twice)
Wit, organ of ‘ ee


*


MESMERISM.


Abscess . . oe os ee
Abscess, Lumbar ~ oa
Acid, Nitric, painless application of .
Africa, Mesmerism in


3, 4, 6 (p. 291), 7 7,8
oe |


—


woe WW


~
a


seaeaedaeie”
“ 4


~— : 3, 8, 9,


.» 1(p. 14), 3


w
Ome OOO OT et


3
12


—_


_


—


~I8SI OW


GENERAL INDEX. 447


After-pains ,
Ancles, weakness ‘of i ‘a va ea sn 10
sprained ee ee ee oe << «= eee
Antiquity of Mesmerism .. es oe ee oe oe oo 56,6,9
Arm, Stiff an ae - a wa “a v ‘a ic 6
Asthma ‘ 1, 2, 3, 4, wd 9, 13
Attraction to right hand only ee $e 8
Attachment, Mesmeric . «
Bear, Mesmerised os ae a ‘a -_ are ie rm 8
Bladder rm ee ‘ ° ,8


5, 11, 13


Blindness .. _ mn sie ro 3,7, 'g, 9, 10, hh. 2
Blind, Mesmerism i in n the "
Bone cured . - os oe “é eS 3
Brain, overw orked . - “a pcs i oe a see
inflammatory excitement of .. = - oe - -- 67
Brass 10
Breasts, inflamed 11, 12
Bronchitis 3


Brutes, Mesmerisation of, by Dr. Wilson


— and Cerebral whegetend in aa ale 9
Bull, Mesmerised . -


ica 8
Burns * 10, 12
Cancer + 4,6
Catalepsy oe ee os im oe se oe sa a
Cat — én en “ ee oe ae
Caustic, painless. application of as.
Cerebral Sy waned oe - 37,9
Chest a a ion ne oe ee _ 5, 12
Chilblains .. on ee ae ar - ae = > wc ae
Chlorosis a - ae * = ee ar “a 8
Cholera . ove we e = ei aa on — oa 9
Clairvoyance ia os «> 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 9, 10, 11, 12, 18
Cold opposes Mesmerism oe oe - ‘< ae =? ©
Coma, cured ; ie sa ai ot a x > me
singular .. oe ee oe es oe ee « « =
Community of feeling os - we 0 of aw - 287
———_-— — taste ee oo are — ae én — «< a
Constipation ee ee 1
Consumption .. 2, 3, 8, 12
Contractions . «= ae
Convulsions ee os & ae
Consciousness, double .. ° és 5
Costiveness “< 8
Cough .. : oo & 10
Cow, cured .. . ar me ca ae “ne “s 8, ll
Cross-mesmerism .. jis os a as on i 3
Crystals ..


a i oa a pe oa ut ee &,¢ 7
Cutaneous disease re on - “— om ‘ oe Mia


Deafness .. - i‘ oe ad ‘en ‘ 2, 4, 5, 8, 11, 12, 13


Debility So Ss Fe 10, ii, 12, 33
Delirium - aie oe ‘a ae - oe
——— Tremens =i oa a ‘a ‘sis os ». £2
Diarrhoea ‘ 11, 13
Distant Mesmerism 7
Dogs Mesmerised 8
Dreams i as oe iz os oe nis pe
Dropsy wi - —_ - _ os aa ia 8, 10, 2
Drowning ee oe . ne


Dyspepsia


"5, 12,13
Ear, Abscess of so” he


8


Ear-ache

Elbow

Electro- Biology

Elephantiasis

Epilepsy

Erysipelas

Esdaile, Dr.

Ether

Eyes, agony of .

Eyelids, Spasm of

Extatics of Genius

Emaciation

Face, swelled

Fatuity .

Female ailments

Fever

Fingers ee

Foot

Fractures

Ganglion

Gold

Gout . -

Gout, Rheumatic we

Goethe on the silent influence of the Brain
’s Clairvoyance

Glands, enlarged

Greek, Ancient, Mesmerism

Grief, effects of, cured

Gums ee

Hand

Head-ache

Heart, affection of

Hiccup

Hindoos, their knowledge of Mesmerism
Hip ee oe oe ee oe
Heemorrhage

Horses, Mesmerism in

Hot iron, painless

Horse, Lock-jaw in

Hydrophobia

Hypochondriasis

Hysteria

Idiosyncrasy, Mesmeric
Imagination, force of .

Imitation °

India

Inflammation .

Introvision ee oe oe
Insanity .. ee ee _
Joints, enlarged

Jumping Fits

Kidney

Knee

Leprosy ee es on ee
Levity °

Light, Mesmeric

Lightning, effects of, cured

List of facts in first ten volumes
Liver ..


oe os ee << oo


148 GENERAL INDEX.


1, 2 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,8, 9, 10, 11 13
-- 4,8, 10,12
"3, 4,5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
ee oe ee 7
7
10


8
6
4
oe 4
eo. 7,13
9, 12, 13
12


"5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12


_
=a


Lied
wr OWED Vise weeK DOs


2, 3, 4,5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12,
‘ ‘ 1, 3, 5, 6, 8,


~


- 69

2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11, 13
1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11

° ee 8

ee 3, 5, te ae

"8, (p. 22,) 9, 10, 12

- , 6, 13

3, 4, 10, ie 12

ee : 9
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
oe ee oo «
6

a in. oe 9

2, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12
8,12

. 12

9, 10

8

10

1]

8


GENERAL


Liver Disease

Lock-jaw

Lung, diseased

Lung, bleeding from

Magnet ‘

Martineau, Miss, her ¢ cure
Measles '

Mesmerism not to be trifled with
Metals in Cholera

Metals, effect of

Muscular pains cured

Neck, twisted

rigid

Nervousness cured. .

Neuralgia :

Noises, unexplained

Occult Faculty ° °
Operations, Surgical, Painless
Ophthalmia cured ° és
Opium, ill effects of, removed ..
Ovarian Disease

Pain .

Palpitation cured

Palsy cured

Parturition

Pericarditis

Phlegmesia dolens

Physicians, College of

Polypus ‘
Pregnancy ,

Prolapsus reduced.

Prostate Gland

Quinsy .

Rapping ‘ as
Reichenbach on”
Rheumatism cured ..
Ringworm

Salivation me

St. Vitus’s Dance cured -
Scarlet Fever, Mesmerism in ..
Scrofula

Self-mesmerism

Shoulder

Shortsightedness

Sleep, extraordinary
Sleeplessness _
Sleep-waking in Siam ..
Sleep-waking, spontaneous
Speech recovered

Spirit-rapping

Spinal Affection cured
Squinting

Squirrel, Elizabeth, her « case
Stomach cured .

Stomach, pain of ..

Steel

Strangulation, fits ‘of

Steer’s foot cured


1 (466), "2, 3, 3, Ay 5, 6 6,


INDEX. 449


“ 12
6, 7, 10, 12, 13
4,7, 11,13
< ae


-


se o. * 4
3

wa es 12
4, 5,7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
= -- it

3, 10, 11

1

-- 5,8

5, 12, 13

7, 8, 10, 12, 13
. 9, 10, 11, 12
; aa 12
es , ‘i win 3
1, 2,* 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,9, 10, 11, 12
2, 3, 4, dod 9, 10, 11, 13

ee ° 6

12, 13
i 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13

j : 2, 7, 8, 10
1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13
; , 2, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10


2, 3,
7;


9

5

6, 7,9
8,9
10, 13
4

‘ 7
2,7


4,11, 12,13


' 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,8, 9, 10, 11, 12,13


12
11

1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10
9

3

6

12

5

1

6

10

; .
2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
7 a a
_ 2,4, 5, 7,8, 9, 12

10


* See also pp. 107 and 120.


150


Swedenborg’s Clairvoyance
Sydenham on Animal Heat
Sympathy of Disease
Tabes Mesenterica
Table-turning ve
Temper, bad, cured
Tetanus

Throat

Thumb ..

Tingling

Toe

Tooth-ache ..

Trance ae De
Transference of Disease
Ulcers me ba
Unconscious action of Brain
Uterine Disease

Vomiting .. as

Water, Mesmerised
Weight increased

Whitlow ve

Will, silent power of
Wound cured


GENERAL INDEX.


6, 12
10

I

‘ —
7, 10, 11, 12
5, 9, 13


3, 6, 7, 8, 9,

==============================================================================

INDEX.


Abscess, cure of 1
Adams, Mr. J., rapid cures of pains
After-pains, cures of

Ancle, Sprained, cured

Asthma, cured


Atheneum, its Antimesmerism


opposition to Phrenology .... 2... ..cecseeceseerseeres


Augustin, St., case of voluntary trance... ........ cece cece cece ee ceeees


Bacon, Lord, his injustice to Gilbert


Bagnold, General, his speech


Barrett, the Rev. R. A. F., cure of Neuralgia .......... 020+ eeeees
Barthelemy, Phrenology of... ........sccccccccecccvcccecessecsceses
Bartlett, Sarah, case of Catalepsy ...... 2... cccccscceccccsccesecvces


Beecher, Rev. H., inculcates Phrenology in the pulpit


Bird, Dr. Golding, his inconsistency..........++++e++++-
Ph POE o/s. tin vene ce ee saice be ke eeehnees ene eetrasion


CME... Wo de pululh bebe ee be eb Oe sa gu aa heen caaie eae


Bostock, Dr., his weakness

Brain, Debility of, cured

RE 6 ona ou edad en ak ce Seek ewe eea
Buranelli, Phrenology of am

Cameron, Mr., his cure of very old Rheumatism


Cancer, benefit in


ie: Se, Ce Ee MET UUINNUEE 5s 0s cn le dows cece awne ee ceeneeus
.. 38, 54, 89, 440


CTO 65 65 ccc csccceveces


Clark, Dr. Andrew, his ignorance and folly ........ 6.05. eeeeeeeeeeee


ee Cr IOS os oc 8. een Sees eeee ne en dae sneneaeeeses


Collyer, Dr., his Mesmeric merits


page
35

402

33, 301

149, 160

Side 175
101, 104, 157
268
49
61
195
254
203
295
282
220
46, 245
176
111
180
168
208
395
248
70


395
36
61


== om the head of Haymam .. ..0...00 cc ccccse cc cece cccccccs


Marshal Radetzky..........++


— remarkable case of Clairvoyance ........00.seeeeceeeeees


4283884


iv INDEX.
page
Ce, Gi, i IE oi 5 dn ckkce ss ents cant ects teedeeeensss SP
Davey, Mr., his cures
IIIT ac cathe wine Wha Misa aeek een ou eer eabentak cee)
ee I CUED oi isos secccesavdeubasiaseeneaeewsenssees Wee
INO ba tafendie ddan w0bsce-anbuxtuGds s660 500 b20eer ceeneey ae
Wihcinems, Wir. Ws ROMCONENINE on oc ccicecvcccccccdcccesccsccoses TB
Deena, Ovarian, GOON oo occc ce cecsccessscccenccceseecesesecccees §3G6
Dublin Review, its strong sense .... 2... cece cece ncececcecceecesees S39
Dunraven, Earl of, his speech ..... re ee
Dysentery and Diarrhoea, cures Of ........cccccccccccccccccseceses Sl
ee ee eT ee a
Electricity, slow progress Of .......cccccccccccsccccccccccceseseses 219
Elliotson, is, Saeiinain st ae aaa da edn eh dee akon bh ened: ae
atiinatined . ees anv ns coed bewenreees 71
SAMAR... <o xnanaiianasnsanauns 318
Ellis, Mr. A. J. (see Reichenbach) .....
Ennemosier, his work on Magic .......0seececccccccecsecseccceess 292
GE. oc cc eins cvcscn cede cssetccscssnccsvcoeecseses SER UO
IIE Oh SN Co 66 0a 00 0:06.60 6s 06:00:066660504060600000000008 EN
Fatalism and Freewill. . C0 006040 wh 56 0080 oe Heed en seceee coos ee 70
Fingers and Arms, cntninnl, ome Sb 66 060000 0000006600 000050 8086 50
Fingers, contracted, cured .........500s00: svveetsoesce BOA
Wee, GOS, OR TIES nn cc cece ce ctessccccccccccccecsscecsceves SI
Galileo's justion to Gilbert 2.20 ccc cccccccccccccccccccccccccssccces 68
Garner, Mir., bis Amtimonmmeriom oc cc cccsccccsccccccccccccccccccess 61ST
Grey, Earl, his disparagement of the Duke of Wellington .............. 154
Girlpping, CUTOd oc occ cc cece cc cece ce sece once cc cees cece cc cecceces 32
St CRE, MEE iccccn cone encbneks bedd cx eebeeeeeeeeneeee 68
Eeaseenem, Dar., eure OF cumionated bamd oc cece cc tece cevcscccccsoness 69
Biopmam, Blaraihal, Be Reed ccc cece sc cccccccces cose cece scceseoens 161
SN, GUN bdwe on 4000 eect ce cece aderceessssocsssectuce BES Oe
Sey CUNNEL QUIEN 666.0606 00 cn c0ce s0eeee de seas eb asieccied Gh0000 59
Ee Eee ee


Se, GU GUN ONIED ha nn ne o5'n6 000s 40 00 ceds sees et esunevns 58


MN oc ce ce caciceccccsvcsscsececcscssense EEE
SEINE, SUE GREIED 66s ces svcctvecscccsvecsesesccesnce SE


II, GIDE a0 cc cede cv cesvecstcnesecsccsecsssasacsescs BED
aint... iwi be nt t6ndnd sa eteken ee ana 36
Infirmary, London Mesmeric, el ccieinas covcccccccscsccce LZ]
CD atitnid dnbikbehes coun cdaeieestneesbed as samaneen. an
Imagination impossible in some cases ........0.sseeeseecscsesessees 284
Insanity, cured . cee ee ee ccescsecccesesccesccsccecseceses 159, 300
Jackson, Mr., wtatihen | ibid an Gee eee Ob aed wkeres ek eeeen 85


INDEX. .


page


Jackson, Mr., on Extatics of Genius. pr ichhiaiaew ance Gaeelede, Ee
. eer es
Mr. George Combe’s late alk itm See

ieee se enecinae Te
eT
CI RE 6 os ov eens s0deehacenap eens esediagetoater 59


That, Mostnarie amd Olle oo once cccecseecssesccssccctesccccssoescs CMD


Lock-jaw, cured ...... oo ve cece cccesovecssesecsevsccoscsocceen IED
Laman, Gente of, Camel. « o.0.00.08 00sec cs cnensececenseeccecsecessecace SOP
OE, Gn GRMN oe. 00.60 00 00 50:00 00 60 66. 06400086 tenses enews oo 1852
Mansfield, Mr., his Mesmeric merits .....ccccccccccecccscccseccccs 110
Marsden, Mr., case of Clairvoyance .. 2... .esecscsccccccccccccces 54
Medical Times, its Antimesmerism .........2e0e00+se000+ 96, 244, "254, 257
Meilan, Mr., Mesmerism in India.....
Miles, Captain F., his cures .........


review of einer


Janson, Mr., his speech...
Jealousy, Mesmeric


Kenway, Mr., his cure ........


, diseased, cured....
Leg, ulcers of, cured .....0 cece cece


Milnes, Mr. Monckton, his speech ......s-seeeesescececccccesecess 193
BMini6 rife oc cccece , ° 0-00 00 00-00 00:00 0600 6c 008 28
Moreton, Mr. J., se iaatiganiinaniinae ioebedesdoseesebexwree “Se
Nock, comtracted, cared oc cic cece cc cc cece cb ccccce cevesecececceses 52
PR, Fg SE CD co 600s co sncecserecsemsctsicmmesmcens Te

inl ° sessesssrweccccses SR
Neuralgia, cured .. .... 00 cccccccceces 144, 146, 175, 246, 247, 254, 415, 418
PR: Tet: WE CIR + 6a. 00:08: 40'b0 00 be esbsenesceennsses bbe 50
Ophthalmia, cured . coatevcesoosqeccessovescvcce BER, BGK, BER See
Origen, account of opposition to Christianity covccccecccccccccccccs 46, 58
Comins DU, GHEE: oc 05:06 ca case cvssusstasthisivecesionncion BF
Owen, Professor, ridicule of Clairvoyance...........eeeseeesesecscecs 54
DE, GUN os kn-08 50 000 60 b06e be eoewne sd bobeseen cece encesess. DOE
Pain and Debility, cured ccceccccccccscccccccccccccccce 6419
sevevessoeccecosecscovecs GG Uae, See Gee
EE Kids ois on oe Kote in eek wenden weeaekeeneeman Tae
PE, Bin WE GRIN isn in 06 0:6. 60-65 69 0060 00 6800 4000008 60 5snnes Be
eg ee ere eS
Phelps, Isaac, his cures .....ccscecccccccssccccccccccccccsescccccs A413


Nervousness, cured... ...ssceeseees


Pains, rapid cures of...


Pee Oe TID | ko. da do nn dts 6ageteessensciseccsesesccciesaccs SN
Quarterly Review, its Antimesmerism . et eehedaea ween be eeeee 50
Radetzky, Marshal, his Phrenology .......+s+eeeececceeeceseseceess 303
PT Le TL eer ee
ee, ee eras |


rage
Rheumatism, cured .............. 59, 60, 145, 157, 168, 169, 170, 246, 395
Sandby, Rev. G., his speech ..... ap lal acted Sr ie deeane aPaeatia ae ae

— refutes Sir Henry Holland ...............scccceees 264
CURD sinteneccsnse vendheecesc cs oven sceeseseweteenee, ee


Scottish Curative Association, Report of ..............eeeeceeeeeesee 199
Sieveking, Dr., his Antimesmeriam .. ........ cesscccccecsccssccceee 142
SN I MIND ob nw tikes code nkexeuNesesecvavar eveseueeebene ae
NEED | ck. in adina-aunnenatabadianex nn se wenumenenee ae
I os aa 5 dn cits ons aun ie eran ka ne ama ga =
Se Ce OUI is nd cain ses enon Weenie nus hele ae awiewae Rowe eS 60
Dantevel, Meeneeth, Tabet acseumt al 2... ccccccsccseccsccsescecness SER
ie Cs oa tcne ke de'eebncens oa 0 hoe ws ee baeeen
Stanhope, Earl, Mesmeric merits of ...... 2... 0scecccccccccccccccres


Steward, Dr., his Antimesmerism


Straton, Mr., on the heads of Barthelemy and Buranelli................


PUNOON, GR QIEIIE o5 6 caine vc euee eee cece sees enesededenesenes
Swinton, Mr., Mesmeric merits of

ig Bn MO Oe 60:65 ck 00 be one bebe se hese eaten neon
I Ns ade ae hee enh Oe en eee wend
Tertullian on opposition to Christianity

I a coe ae hi aia aude ia rier a rw lh allie eee Oba Mae


Townshend, Rev. C. H., on Clairvoyance..........00ccceccccccce secs


a on the great prison at Munich ................
BGR, VORRMIEG ono .0'6 60 00 0000 6606000500860 0560 cbse seeenevess
Tubbs, Mr., his cures ...........

NG EE nn dtd ne 0b os ORE Ob O00 943040 80sS

Typhus, Mesmerism in .......... 2.6

Wallace, Miss, her Mesmeric merits........

Tn, DE DAME, ... cuds Ga niee aniemee/ dd ate eee dares


Young, Dr. Thomas, his treatment by Lord Brougham ................
