THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. IX (March 1851 to January 1852).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/zoistvolixmarch00goog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST:


A JOURNAL


OF


CEREBRAL PHYSIOLOGY & MESMERISM,


AND


THEIR APPLICATIONS TO HUMAN WELFARE,


** Tliis is Tbuth, though opposed to the Philosophy of Ages."— OaU.


VOL. IX.

MARCH, 1851, TO JANUARY, 1852.


7 ^^■


LONDON :

HIPPOLYTE BAILLIERE, PUBLISHER,
219, REGENT STREET;

PA.RIS : J. B. BAILLIERE^ RUE DE L'ECOLE DU MEDECINE ;

LEIPSIZ: T. O. WEIGEL.


MDCCCLII.


LONDON:

PRINTED BY WALTON AND MITCHELL,
W ARDOUR STREET.


INDEX.


page
Abscess, Lumbar, cared 25

Accident, seyere^ relief in 19

Alexander, Mr., his experiments under Chloroform 46

Alexis Didier 402

Axaor, Mr., Care of Lock-jaw in a Hone 50

Ancient Mesmerism 225

Ashbamer, Dr., his Care of Polypas of the Uteras 265

Asthma, fit of, cured 16

Atkinson, Mr., his Book 65, 224, 421

Australia, Mesmerism in 69

Bacon, Lord 65

Baldock, Mr., on Electro-biology 1 10

Bart^b, Mr., Cures of Neuralgia and in one case inability to swallow 80, 384, 388

Cure of Insanity 243

— Spinal Irritation 248

■ Palsy 383

— ■ Mismesmerisation 389

Beale, Lionel, his nonsense , 424

Bennett, Dr., his ignorance of Mesmerism 294, 316

^ Slackwofid^s Magazine, exposed 274, 284

Blindness, Dumbness, and Palsy, cured 145

Brutes, Clairvoyance and Cerebral Sympathy in 392

Buckley, Major, Case of Clairvoyance 72

Busb, Mr., his ignorance and coarseness 307

Busbnan^ Dr., his sad conduct 145

Butler, Mr., his Cure 371

Calcutta Mommg Chronicle 197

Capem, Mr., his rapid Cures of Gout, &c 214, 238

Cerebral Sympathy 392,440


IV INDEX.

page
Chandler, Mr., on Ancient Mesmerism . . . « » 225

Children, ignorant and cmel treatment of 175, 261^ 415

Childs^ Mr., Cases of Submesmerism and Imagination 427

Chloroform, similar to Mesmerism 416

Chlorosis, cored 60, 206

Cholera, debility after, cured 78

Chorea, cured 206

Clairvoyance 14, 16, 24, 72, 234, 290, 392, 402, 422

Collins, Mr., his Cures 259

Copland, Dr., his tirades 336, 357, 371

Crampton, Sir Philip 370

Davidson, Lieutenant-Colonel, on Mesmerism in Indifii 1

Cure of Asthmatic Fits, and Case of Clairvoyance 16

Davy, Mr., his useful labours 304

De Retz, Carduial 274

Deafness, cured 206

Deazeley, Mr., his coarseness and ignorance 307

Debility, &c., cured 375

Devil, his share in Phonography 42

VubUn Evening Post 155, 308, 416

Egyptian Coffins, Mesmerism figured upon 228

Electro-Biology, absurdly so called 106, 191, 295, 330, 424

Elliotson, Dr., Cure of Lumbar Abscess 25

Case of Cure of Ulcers by a Lady, with peculiar effects . . 45

— — — — ^— Cure of Fits, with phenomena 157

On the Treatment of Children 175, 261, 415

On Ancient Mesmerism 226

On the Mannings 331

— -^— ^^■^— On Submesmerism and Imagination, foolishly called Electro-
Biology 106, 191, 424

• On the similarity of Mesmerism and Chloroform 418


Engledue, Dr., his Review of Dr. Gregory's book 215

-^— Answer to Drs. Bennett, Wood, etc 316

Cases of Cerebral Sympathy 440

Epilepsy, cured, &c 21, 237, 240, 398

Esdaile, Dr., his Operations, and censure of the London Medical Gazette. . 1 14

Return to England 313

Fathers, Holy, Mesmerism by the 229

Fergusson, Mr 148

Fingers cured 11

Fits cured 167

Fowke, Mr., his cure 357

Fractured Leg, benefit in 148


INDEX. V

Fradelle, Mr., his core of Uloen 42

Gall : translation ready 223, 442

Galloway, Mr., his ooaneness and ignoranoe 259

Gazette, London Medical, its bad oondact 115, 304, 375

Goethe 392,399, 402

Gout quickly cored 214

Gregory, Dr., his book 201, 215

Case of Clairvoyance 422

Hall, Dr. M., his fake accusation ',, 88

Haydon's, Joseph, Dictionary of Dates 398

Hip, injured, cored 28

Hollings, Mr., his speech 132

Hunt, Mr., his abjectness 61

Hydrophobia : Mesmerism of bitten parts advised 13

Hysteria cored 206

Illusions, visual and acoustic 54

Imagination, considered by the Rev. G. Sandby 294

India, Mesmerism in 1

* Ingoldsby Legends 399

.Insanity cured 206, 243

Institute, attack on Mesmerism and subsequent death 1, 224

Isham, Sir P. T., on Illusions 54

Jackson, Mr., his useful labours 304

his excellent Book 331

Kidney, core of 63

Kingdom, Mr., his case 148

Levity 389

Liverpool, Mesmerism in 310

Lloyd, Mr., Lock-jaw in a Youth 52

core of Affection of Kidneys 63

Lock-jaw in Horses 49

in a Youth 52

Loewe, Mr 378

Mrs* S. E. D M.'s cures 11, 414

MaiUand, the Rev. Dr 299

Manning, Mr. and Mrs., the murderers 334

Martineau, Miss 65, 69, 273

Masset's, Mr., effects in Epilepsy 237

Materialism, absurd notions upon 125

Mayhew, Mr., his case of Introvision 289

Mechanic's Magazine 113

Medical Times 21

Medical and Chirurgical Society, its cruel Injustice 88, 224, 334


VI INDEX.

page

Mesmeric Infirmary, London, Report of. - • ■ • 124

Middleton, Rev. Conyers 231, 284, 289, 382, 416

Mflton 77, 313

Milk bread : its history 378

Mismesmerisation 389

Morning Post 195

Motherwell, Mr., or Mesmerism in Australia 69

Mott, Mr., cure of Palsy 197

Monro, Dr. H., his book reviewed 32

NeuralgU cured 14, 61, 74, 80, 82, 83, 146, 260, 382, 388

Obr^, Mr 85

Odic Force- 329

Odyle and St. Odille 309

Ophthalmia cured 206

Opposition, Medical, to Reichenbach in Vienna 45

Pain cured in a Child 155

Pain of Ulcers from Mesmerism 47

Painless Tooth Extraction 76

other Operations 206, 309

Palsy cured 195, 197, 382, 414

Papin's Proposals to prevent Pain 19

Parker, Mr., his Speech 130

Operations and Cures 206

Parturition, painless 302

Passes, upward 13

Pericarditis cured 206

Phrenology 35, 335

Phrenology, Mesmeric 23, 416

Pilgrim*8 Progress 25, 52, 63

Pioneer 206

Polypus, Uterine, cured 265

Practical Observations, by a Lady 378

Rawe, Mr., his cures 61

Good effects in Epilepsy 240

Rheumatism, acute, much relieved 19

Rheumatism cured 74, 206, 262, 31 1

Salmon, cases of the two brothers 157

Sandby, Rev. G., his speech 124

Answer to the Westminster Review 294

Saunders, Mr. S. D., removal of Pain 13

Cases of Clairvoyance, Sympathy, ete 13, 131

case of painless Parturition 302

— cases of Submesmerism and Imagination 424


INDEX. VII

page

Saunders, Mrs., her Clairvoyance 14

Shelley's Testimony to Mesmerism 79

Sides, right and left, in mesnerism 13

Simpson, Dr., his cowardice, etc 329, 334

Simpson's, Miss, care of intense Debility 78

Sleep prolonged 213

Sloman, Mr., his case 289

Smith, Mr., his Ignorance 225

Smithy Mr. Hubert, his cure 375

South, Mr. case of Lock-jaw in a Horse 50

Southey *. 294

Spinal Irritation cured 249, 261, 357, 371

Spinal Affection cured 357, 371

Spurgin, Dr 84

Steel, Mr., his Ignorance and Coarseness 307

Sterne 16

Stone, Mr., cure of Pain of Eyes 436

Storer, Dr., pamless Tooth Extraction 76

Submesmerism and Imagination 106, 429

Surgical operations, painless, performed in 1681 19

Symes, Dr., his translation of Gall 223

Sympaliiy of Disease 13

Taylor, Dr. Alfred 375

Thomas, Mr., his cures 310

Thompson, Mr. H. S., cases of Lock-jaw in Horses 49

Townshend, Rev. C. H;, on ancient Egyptian Mesmerism 228

on Clairvoyance 402

Trance, Voluntary • 396

Tubbs, Mr., Cure of Neuralgia and Rheumatism 74

Ulcers cured by Mr. Fradelle 42, 45

Voice, Loss of, cured 206, 259

Voltaire 42

Wagstaff, Mr., relief in Rheumatism 19, 195

Cure of Epilepsy 21

Mesmeric Phrenology 21

Mrs., her Clairvoyance 24

Wakley, Mr., his Fury .. 11, 13, 146, 148, 207, 242, 243, 248, 265, 302, 414

Wilson, Dr. J. A., his Ignorance 225

Wry Neck cured 206


•


THE ZOIST


No. XXXIII.


APRIL, 1851.


I. lUuatrations of Mesmerism in the native Human and Brute
inhabUa$Us of India. By Lieut.-Colonel Davidson.*
Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.

'' QtTACKSKT, — MsSMERISlf .
<' It IS OUB INTENTION TO ORAPPLB WITH ITS HTDRA-HSAD8 IN DBTAIL,

&c., &o/' — IfuHtute, Nov. 30, 1850. See Zoist, No. XXXII., p. 367.

The Institute's note is now changed^ as thus appears in the
next and only number in which the Institute has since spoken
of mesmerism : —

*' MsSMBAISM.t

*' The frequency with which Mesmerism has been discnssed in our pages, the
numerous letters we have received relating to it, and the great diyersity of opinion
contained therein, induce us once more to make a few comments upon this
subject.

" As journalists, we fed bound to insert the communications of all sincere men,
bow egregious soever their views may seem. All have a right to an opinion, and
we have pleasure at all times in affording opportunity to our subscribers and
others for exprMsing their sentiments ; and one of the purposes for which this
Journal was instituteid, is served, so long as they simply put forth their opinions
without dogmatizing or losing temper. The case is, however, somewhat modified
when men write positively, either in contradiction or support of theories re-
garding which no certainty has hitherto been attained, or on subjects which ^
cannot be shown to belong to physical sdence, — such as Mesmerism. There are
certain things on which there must always be difference of opinion, because they
do not come within the range of true science. Some persons, for instance,
betieve in ghosts, haunted houses, and all such phenomena ; but it by no means
follows that they are therefore to be qnarelled with, for we hold that one man's
opinion is as good as another's, until proved to be erroneous. Were mesmerism
confined to non-professional persons, it would not engage our attention, or be
more worthy our notice as promoters of science, than the belief in ghost stories ;
and it is only because a few deluded medical men and others have striven to make

^ See this gentleman's former interesting communications in Nos. XVIII.,
XXXI.-n/. SlHotson.

t The word Quaekery is now dropped, though it headed both the former
articles. — J. ElliotMon.


VOL. IX.


2 Mesmerism in Human and Brute inhabitants of India.

it appear a valuable department of medical knowledge, that we ever take np the
matter at all. Neither is it with any fear of mesmerism proving so popular as to
call for a professorship in any of our universities : our sole object is to remove
the disgrace which has necessarily been brought upon our high and noble profes-
sion by the manner in which some ardent imaginations have thrust it forward as
an important branch of the healing art.

** Admitting that all the marvellous stories of its promoters were true, admit-
ting that it were even possible to raise the dead by its means, how could its most
zeidous advocates prove the adequacy of the means to the result ? What room
for science in the matter at all ? There would certainly be the miracle staring
them in the face, but there would be no scientific elucidation of the matter.
Let not our readers suppose we believe such things. We are taking the mesmer-
ists on their highest ground : during the many years the public ear has been
abused with it, they have not given any pathological or physiological proofs.
Were any one of our brethren to say of chloroform, or aether, that the effects
which followed were owing to spiritual agency, we should at once teU him he had
not made himself acquainted with the science he professed ; for it is easy to prove
that the consequences produced by chloroform are dependent upon the physical
action of chloroform itself. Mesmerism admits of no such proofs. But if men
honestly come forward and say that there is something in it which they cannot
explain, they are welcome to their belief in it, as freely as to their belief in any
other nursery tale. But we reiterate our protest against mixing up the subject
with the medical art, and we will never rest until it has been exterminated from a
profession which ought to be devoting itself to higher and nobler aims.

" As we have before stated, we are not 'finding fault with any man for his
peculiar notions ; but among other things on which we have set our hearts, is the
crushing of quackery in each and all of its detestable forms ; and quackery is not
confined to advertising specifics for incurable maladies. Legerdemain, under the
disguise of the words Animal Magnetism, is the vilest quackery of all. If, as
some of our correspondents affirm, tiie power exercised be spiritual, then, for
heaven's sake I let us leave it for those whose peculiar province it is to deal with
such. If, on the other hand, it can be proved to depend upon a magnetic fluid,
we shall be happy to give the subject our best consideration. Our only surprise
is, that this wonderful fluid is not to be had, long before this, at the patent
medicine venders', in little bottles Is. l^d. each, for we are persuaded this is all
that is needed to crown the delusion. Again, if its advocates only pretend to
state that certain results follow certain manipulations, they state nothing more
than has been affirmed from time immemorial ; but what, in the name of common
sense, has this to do with animal magnetism, or how does it prove that there is
such an extraordinary fluid in any animal ? We wish our readers distinctly to
understand that we are not attacking individuals in their private capacities ; we
are opposing a comparatively small number of medical men, in their character as
members of a body politic, upon which they have brought dishonour. We as
private individuals may have many opinions peculiarly our own, not only on tho
subject of mesmerism, but on insanity^ catalepsy, &c. — all of which might be
very strongly expressed were our Journal a miscellaneous one ; but to devote its
columns to such purposes would be to render ourselvies guilty of the very thing
we condemn. As journalists, we treat of facts and reasonings in science and
literature ; all without the range of these we consider quackery, and mesmerism
pre-eminently so. We hope our readers will now be satisfied as to what it is we
are combating ; and we quit the subject, as the space we have of late devoted
to it leaves us in arrear of other and more interesting matter,** — Institute f
Dec. 7, 1850.*

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sir, — I have often had much cause to regret that, during
my long residence of more than twenty-eight years in India,

* I deeply regret that it is my duty to make known to the unprofessional
public that our medical journals contain such writing. — /. Elliotson,


j»*


By LietU.'Col. Davidson, 8

I was ignorant of the very name or existence of mesmerism,
as I can recall to memory many instances of what I then
deemed to be native superstitions^ which I now fally under*
stand and believe to have been the direct effects of mesmeric
action. Although unnoticed, or attributed to other causes,
they are hourly to be observed in our Indian dwellings. Few
children, especially amongst the European residents in India,
ever sleep without being subjected to its influence, either by
the ayahs (or ladies' maids), or by the attendant '^ bearers "
(or valets).

" Bearer,^' a child will say, " set me to sleep ;" on sajring
which it forthwith throws itself on the floor-mat or cotton
carpet, and the bearer immediately commences the mesmeric
operation by patting it on the chest ; and in a few seconds,
such is the force of mesmeric habit, the child is soundly
asleep* I have myself, much to their astonishment, in a few
seconds repeatedly tranquillized a most fractious teething boy
by throwing it into a profound sleep by the mere exercise of
the wiU.

I shall now relate a circumstance proving that the natives
of India apply mesmeric power to the removal of diseases
with the utmost success.

I had, in my establishment at Lucnow, a chupprassee, who
was a martyr to the most deplorable chronic rheumatism.
His hands, wrists, knees, and all his joints, were so greatly
enlarged, and in a state so painful, that his duties had gradu-
ally become merely nominsd.

One day he hobbled up, and begged my permission to
remain at home for a few days, for the purpose of being cured
of his most agonizing disease. I said, " Certainly ; get cured
of your complaint, and let me see you when you return.''

In a very few days, perhaps in four or five, to my great
astonishment he returned, smiling and joyous, with his limbs
as pliant and supple as my own. " What,'' said I, " are you
come back already ?" " Yes, sir, by your favour I am per-
fectly cured." "What, entirely cured?" "Yes, sir, per-
fectly cured." "Well, then, tell me what medicine you took."
"I took no medicine; I called in two women, z&doo wftlees
(dealers in magic), from the bazar, and gave them four pice
a piece (about twopence each), and they cured me." " But
how, what did they do ?" " They put me on a ch&rp&ee (a
low bed), and one sat at each side of me, and both passed
their hands over my body, so (describing long mesmeric
passes), and thus they set me to sleep, and I slept soundly :
when I awoke I was free from rheumatism, and am now per-
fectly well."

^ B 2


4 Mesmerism in Humun and Brute inhabitants of India.

Instead of investigating the sabject^ I was foolish enough
to laugh most heartily^ and told the man to return to his
duties^ which he ever afterwards 'discharged with zeal and
alacrity. I have therefore no reason to doubt but that the
natives of India frequently have recourse to " jhar phoonk/'
or mesmerism^ for the cure of rheumatism ; otherwise the pa-
tient or my other servants would have spoken of it as a strange
practice. But many interesting things are most carefully
concealed from the English^ because we invariably scoff at or
ridicule native practices^ speaking of them in the lump with a
most unphilosophical contempt.

In every part of Hindostan^ most abundant proofs exist of
the dread of zadoo or witchcraft^ in some of its hydra-headed
forms^ amongst all classes of the people^ Moosulmans or
Hindoos : e.ff. When a koombee or cultivator has transplanted
his tobacco or other valuable plants^ he immediately collects
old cracked earthen cooking pots^ and places a spot of lime-
stone whiting on the well-blackened bottom of each : they are
then fixed on stakes driven into the ground^ so that the white
spots may be seen by all passers by. This ingenious pro-
cess is meant to neutralize the influence of the '' evil eye ''
of the envious.

The children both of Hindoos and Moosulmans are inva-
riably protected by amulets for the same purpose ; and should
any Feringee (for no native would) pra^e their personal
beauty^ the parent would immediately spit on the ground and
declare them to be perfect frights. The name "teen cowrie*'
or " paunch cowrie/' (viz., three or five small shells of exceed-
ingly small value,) is given to children, to shew that they are
very slightly esteemed by their parents, and by way of avert-
ing the envy of beholders possessing the evil eye.

The dwellers amongst the mountainous regions to the east
of Bengal (the Bhooteeas and others) accuse all the inhabit-
ants of Bengal of being most horrid sorcerers; and when
suffering feyer in the low malarious tracts, which they are
compelled to pass on descending from the mountains and en-
tering that province, for the laudable purpose of bathing in
the holy Ganges, or of visiting any one of the thousand differ-
ent shrines in the plains, the disease is invariably imputed to
the incantations of the Bengalees.

** Nor tree nor plant
Grows here, but what is fed with magic juice
All full of humane souls." — OSdipus,

• We can all appreciate the wonderful power of imagination
over the human brain, but as I happen to believe that the


By Lieut, 'Col. Davidson. 5

effects prodaced in the following cAse were really and trulj
mesmeric^ or, as the sufferer described them, '' magical/' I
shall allow persons to forai their own opinions ; but the fiicts
related are positively as they occurred.

On visiting Bombay in 1822, I was greatly diverted by a
circumstance communicated by my old Addiscombe friend.
Captain Falconer, of the Bombay Artillery. He stated that
he had had a knl&shee, or tent pitcher, in his service for many
years, and that he was a most faithful and active man, but
that he had, all of a sudden and without any visible cause,
become very greatly emaciated, feeble and ghastly. Falconer
had sent him to the hospital, that he might be benefitted by
the skill of the regimental surgeon ; but, after the lapse of
some time, he was sent back, with the intimation that the
surgeon could not discover any specific disease, and that he
therefore could make nothing of his case.

On bringing back this information. Falconer began to
cross-question his servant, who would not at first acknowledge
the cause of his disease ; but at last, after much persuasion,
he candidly avowed to his master, in confidence, that he was
labouring under the effect of witchcraft. *'And do you
know,'' said Falconer, "that the fellow actually believed it
himself!*' We both laughed most heartily.

His master continued his examination until the kulftshee
confessed that a certain brahmin, officiating at a large tank
close to the fortress of Bombay, had threatened him with his
revenge, and was now actually eating up his liver, by which
process he would shortly be destroyed. " I tell you what I
did ; I no sooner got the brahmin^s name, than I ordered my
buggy and quickly drove down to the tank. On reaching it
I enquired for the magician, and on his arrival I leaped down,
seized him by the arm, and horse-whipped him to within an
inch of his life, occasionally roaring out, ' Til teach you to
bewitch my kul&shee, you villain ! How dare you injure mv
servant, you rascal V and so forth. In a very few minutes the
liver-eating brahmin declared that he would instantly release
the kul&shee from the spell ; and ultimately that he was per-
fectly released, and that on reaching home I would find him
perfectly recovered. And believe me," said Falconer laughing
most heartily, ^' that the fellow mended from that hour, and
is now a most capital servant.^'

''Shampooing'^ is another Indo-mesmeric process, with
which the English public is sufficiently familiar.

I venture to give the following extract from a yet unpub-
lished work : —


6 Mesmerism in Human and Brute inhabitants of India,

Loquitur Gupeenauth*

* * A curse again !
Briug softer pillows, slaye, my Jimbs are racked !
Quick, usher here some well-skilled twice-born dame
To lull their pains, by tender pressure plied,
Of mellow hands."

^' The practice of rubbings or pressings or squeezing the
limbs of a person suffering under pain or weariness^ is carried
on to a great extent in India; even amongst the lowest orders^
the wife may be often seen employed in this soothing avoca-
tion^ to the great relief of her fatigued husband. Females
practise it professionally in most of the principal bazars^ and
there are but few men or women of rank and opulence who
are not subjected to the operation before they can procure
sleep. Such is the fact. The mind of the operatrix is mes-
merically fixed on the body of the patient^ with the hope and
view of removing pain ; and by a series of the most powerful
and continued graspings of the hands (used as indices to the
will) this object is ultimately accomplished.^^

The cure which I shall now relate could not in any con-
ceivable manner^ nor with any candour^ be attributed to the
effects of imagination. It can only be explained by the
action of mesmerism.

The wife of one of my grooms^ a robust woman^ the mo-
ther of a large family of young infants, all living within my
grounds, was bitten by a poisonous serpent, most probably
by a cobra, or coluber naja, and quickly felt the deadly effects
of its venom. When the woman^s powers were rapidly sink-
ing, the servants came to my wife, to request that the civil
surgeon of the station (Bareilly in Uohilcund), Dr. Grimes,
might be called in to save her life. He immediately attended,
and most readily exerted his utmost skill ; but in vain. In
the usual time the woman appeared to be lifeless, and he
therefore left her, acknowledging that he could not be of any
further service.

On his reaching my bungalow, some of my servants stated
that in the neigbourhood a fuqueer or wandering mendicant
resided, who could charm away the bites of snakes; and
begged, if the doctor had no objection, that they might be
permitted to send for him. He answered, '^ Yes, of course ;
if the poor people would feel any consolation by his coming,
they could bring him ; but the woman is dead.^^ After a
considerable lapse of time the magician arrived, and com-
menced his magical incantations.

I was not present at the scene, but it occurred in my
park, and within a couple of hundred yards of my bungalow ;


By Lieui.'CoL DaviiUan* 7

and I am quite confident that any attempts to exhibit medi-
cines would have been quite useless, as the woman^s powers
were utterly exhausted^ although her body was still warm.
The fuqueer sat down at her side, and began to wave his arm
over her body, at the same time muttering a charm ; and he
continued this process until she awoke from her insensibility,
which was within a quarter of an hour.

I shall now relate another circumstance of which I was
an eye-witxkess, that very strongly attracted my attention
at the time, and proves the mesmeric or fascinating power
of snakes.

I was, in the year 1831, Executive Engineer of the pro-
vince of Bundlecund, and dwelt within the fortress of Calpee,
in a stone building standing on the margin of the precipice,
about sixty feet above the water of that ancient river, the
Jumna, and within a few yards of that classic spot at which
one of the incarnations of Chrishnoo made his appearance on
earth.

While within the building, my attention was early one
morning drawn to piercing cries of great distress, which I
knew proceeded from one of that beautiful species of squirrel
called " gillairy,'^ or the striped Barbary squirrel. I quickly
ran to the spot from whence the sounds proceeded, which was
at the very edge of the precipice, then covered by many
stunted bushes and trailing plants, and then observed the
giilairy about four or five feet from the bank leaping inces-
santly backwards and forwards, with his tail erect, upon a
^lender branch overhanging the river. The animal paid no
attention whatever to my near presence, and I could not for
some moments discover the cause of his alarm. At last, on
looking more carefully, I observed the head and about a
couple of feet of the body of a large snake, while the rest of
it was hiddetf by the shrubs.

The body of the reptile continued to undulate in a very
gentle manner, but the head seemed to be almost on fire, so
very brilliant were the almost fire shooting and triumphant
eyes, that seemed to anticipate his victory over the helpless
squirrel, which seemed absolutely spell-bound; for it made no
effort to escape, which under any other circumstances it could
have done with facility by dropping down on a protruding
part of the precipice, a few feet below the bough on which he
traversed. His cries became more and more urgent and
piercing, and, moved by compassion for his sufferings, and
abhorring the serpent tribe, I rushed back into my dwelling,
and speedily returned with my loaded fowling-piece, which I
quickly discharged at the reptile, who fell dead. The squirrel's


8 Mesmerism in Human and Brute inhabitants of India.

cries instantly ceased^ and it dropped down and disappeared.
I sent one of my low-caste servants, who returned with the
carcass of the serpent which had fallen close to the edge of
the river.

The body was about six feet long, and of a proportionate
eircumferen^; the skin of a bright dnnamon colour, having
many of its scales perfectly blacky and of a diamond shape,
but not formed into any pattern that I could discover. It
had no poisonous fangs. I considered at the time that I had
witnessed a genuine instance of the much talked of fascina-
tion of serpents, and I see no reason to change my opinion ;
but I now also believe that it was a perfect case of the exer-
cise of mesmeric power, by the repeated use of which the
serpent was in the habit of procuring its food. In plain
words, the brain of the snake was fixed on the body of the
squirrel, whose brain felt the mesmeric action, and became
grievously harassed by the marked attention, or " evil eye,"
of its antagonist ; and I have no doubt whatever that, if I
had not interfered, at the instigation of my brain, the serpent
would have absorbed the gillairy.

From what I have heard from eye witnesses in the two
following cases, I am of opinion that the tiger exercises the
same power for the same purpose.

No man who has only seen the poor, underfed, miserable,
degraded, spiritless creat^ure of a Lnagerie, can form any
conception whatever, not even the slightest, of the terrific
power, subduing, energetic eye of a wild tiger, when wounded
and advancing to obtain his revenge on an enemy. I have
only once seen it in perfection, and I may acknowledge that
I would infinitely rather head the forlorn hope at an assault
on a well prepared enemy. The following anecdote was told
me by the late Brigadier Skinner, C.B., a man whose bravery
was often cruelly tried, and who long will fie proverbial
for personal courage. We were talking of going out on
foot to meet a tiger face to face. ^' I have seen quite enough
of that. William Fraser once took it into his head, when
out tiger hunting with me, to dismount from his elephant to
attack a tiger sword in hand. It was a fearful sight : he
advanced to within twenty feet of him, just as if he meant to
leap at the brute, when all of a sudden he stood perfectly
fixed and immoveable, as if utterly overcome, and inca-
pable of resistance, and there he continued to stand for
half a minute ; the tiger's eyes glaring with fire, and his tail
lashiug backwards and forwards in the most deadly rage,
till I became almost mad from the spectacle ; I shouted and
compelled my mahout to hasten on to get between the man


By Lieui.-Ccl. Davidmm. 9

and the tiger^ which he instantly effected, Fraser continoing
aknost fastened to the spot. I shot the tiger, and made
Fraser get on his elephant; but neither of us ever talked
over the circumstance/'

Now, if there ever existed a man on earth who was braver,
more cool, or more entirely dauntless than William Eraser,
the Bengal civilian, I have neither ever seen or heard of him;
and I have seen many brave men.

An almost similar circumstance occurred to a young
English sapper recruit, while traversing a plain in Central
India. I was at the time marching down in command of a
detachment of two companies of sappers and miners, to take
possession of my new office of garrison Engineer of the
recently conquered Fortress of Asseer-Ourh, in Central India,
which strong hold stands on an enormous rock, at the height
of 750 feet above the adjacent hills, commanding a beautiful
prospect of the Vindhya range, the Taptee river, and a con-
siderable portion of the Kingdom of Candeish, once one of
the most valuable, productive, and well peopled plains in the
world.

My detachment, after passing through several low forests,
was one morning encamped at Gorapichar, on a somewhat
cleared spot^ but still completely surrounded by jungle,
reputed to be swarming with tigers and aU other wild animals.
I issued orders that none of the Europeans should lose sight
of their tents : but they were aU wild lads, desperate after
sport ; and one of them, named Skelton, walked away firom
camp with his fusil in hand, and the Honourable Company's
ammunition in his pocket, eager to distinguish himself by the
death of a tiger.

The consequence was, that, had it not been that he was
soon missed by his comrades, he would undoubtedly have
been eaten up by a tiger for his disobedience of orders.

He was reported absent, and I ordered a strict search to
be made for him. A party of the Europeans immediately
issued forth, and soon found the sportsman, standing musket
in hand, wholly immoveable and stupid, eagerly staring at a
bush, about thirty yards in advance. They spoke to him,
but he could not answer: they rushed up and tried to
roQse him, but his eyes continued fixed ; and then they both
observed the head of a tiger with his brilliant eyes firmly
rivetted on the intended victim, while his long curly tail was
gracefully waving over his back, in fond anticipation of a
bloody feast. They shouted and the tiger speedily vanished.
Skelton was conveyed back to his tent, and so great was the
shock given to his brain, that many days elapsed before he


10 Mesmerism in Hutntm and Brute inhabitants of India.

recovered his usual vivacity; and there was no more tiger
shooting during the remainder of the march to Asseer-Gurh.

I am, sir, yours truly,
No. 5, Park Road, Stockwell. C. J. E. Davidson.

*^* Colonel Bagnold communicated some similar inte*
resting Indian facts in No. XXIII. of TTie Zoist fMeamerism
in India Forty Years a^oj, and concluded his paper in these
words : —

^^I can only now regret that I should have lost so
many excellent opportunities of searching into these and
similar subjects.'^

In a note to Colonel Bagnold's paper, I said —

" The manly confession of Colonel Bagnold that he now
discovers he was totally in error and lost great opportunities,
forty years ago, reminds me of similar expressions of regret
uttered by Mr. Chenevix, and recorded by me in my article
on mesmerism in the first number of T7ie Zoist, at his having
ridiculed mesmerism thirty years before : —

"^Whenever animal magnetism was mentioned, I joined,*
he says, ^the general tribe of scoffers, and so much was I
convinced (!) of its absurdity, that, being at Botterdam in
1797, I laughed to scorn a proposal made to me by an
English resident there to witness some experiments in which
he was then engaged. The respectability and general under-
standing of this person left no mode of accounting for so ewtra-
ordinary an illusion, but to suppose him labouring under a
monom^ania/ In 1803 and 1804, while travelling in Ger-
many, he continues, 'I heard many very enlightened men of
the universities talk of animal magnetism, nearly with the
same certainty as mineral magnetism ; but their credulity I
set down to the account of German mysticity. / remained an
unbeliever/ At length after nineteen years, Mr. Chenevix
condescended to witness mesmerism in the person of a young
lady in Paris. ' I went to laugh/ says he, ' I came away con-
vinced. To suspect anything like a trick in the parties con-
cerned was impossible.' "

" ^ Presumptuous ignorance had shut in my own face the
door of a science more directly interesting to man than all
that chemistry and astronomy can teach.' ' Nine-tenths,' he
continues, ^who may read will laugh at this, as I did, in 1797,
at my friend in Rotterdam. Let them do so j but, while they
laugh, let them learn, and not, thirty years afterwards, have
to lament that so short a remnant of life is left to them to
enjoy this new and valuable secret of nature.' "

J. Elliotson.


( " )

11. Cure of' two bad Fingers with local Mesmerism, by a Lady,

Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.

" That hydropathy, homoeopathy, and mesmerism, those offsprings of deceit
and humbug, should have found, not only belierers, but enthusiastic supporters
in the nineteenth century, will ever be a cause of wonder and regret to the sensible
and unbiassed portion of the community. The blind and arrogant vanitj of the
fosterers of these systems, where maduMs is balanced by dishonesty, is the main-
spring of the zesd tiiey display with so much pride ; and though the fallacies which
they profess were clearly proved to them to be untenable, and fraught with in-
calculable mischief. Pride, vigorously backed by Ignorance, would still hold out
and fasten upon the wild notions which were imbibed by the love of singularity.

'* That the mischief resulting from the lies and deceptions of mesmerism is
frightful, has heen proved repeatedly. "—Xonce/, August 10, 1850.

Deau Dr. Elliotson, — ^When the case of which I now send
you an account occurred, I did not believe it sufficiently im-
portant to mention. I have since thought otherwise.

While at the sea-side hist autumn, I saw a ragged boy,
about 11 years old, begging on the sands. The fore finger of
his right hand and the middle finger of his left were bound
up, having been poisoned, as he told me, by bean-stalks.
What the nature of the injury was I cannot say : but the ap-
pearance of the finger of the hand which was the worst led me
to think that it might be long before its use was restored.
The finger was very much swelled, and the disease appeared
all over it in red hard patches, with a kind of circular scale
in the middle of each patch. The joint, of course, would
not bend from the swelling, and there was nothing like active
inflammation or suppuration in the finger. The middle finger
of the other hand was affected in the same way, but was not
nearly so badly.

I took the boy into the house, and held the fingers of my
left hand over the diseased part. In about ten minutes a
servant^ who was watching the proceeding, noticed tiie change
in the appearance of the place, and observed a bright red
line bounding the whole of the affected patches. As I went
on, the poisoned skin swelled out and gathered into a bag.
The boy bit his lips as if in pain, and once or twice said it
felt as though I were pricking him, but he had rather feel
that pain than lose his finger. In one hour^s time the bag, or
blister, was sufficiently formed to be opened ; and, on piercing
it with a needle, there was a large discharge. I repeated the
mesmerising, the boy still feeling a sharp tingling and prick-
ing, till the blister had filled again ; and then opened it and
discharged the contents. In one hour and a half from the
beginning of the process the finger was reduced to its natural
size, and the boy bent it without difficulty and with no pain
except that which arose from the blistered skin. When the


12 Cure of two bad Fingers with local Mesmerism.

process was finished^ I regretted that I had not time to heal
the other finger that day^ and I was told that " the other
finger had been pricking just like the one that had been
done/' A few days afterwards I saw the boy, who told me
that when he got up the day after I had seen him both hands
were quite well, and he had gone almost directly to work
again. My daughter saw him two days after the mesmerising,
and found that the fingers were well, but covered with a dry
loose skin like a blister, which was healing.

The only point which seems to me of any importance is
the fact of the sensation of pricking being felt by the boy in
both the diseased fingers at once^ and the confirmation of this
statement by their being simultaneously healed.

I have thought since that an agent which must have com-
pletely penetrated the system, though it was only perceptible
where there was disease, might very probably have power to
counteract the poison of hydrophobia, and^ should an unfor-
tunate instance occur of a bite by a mad dog, I only hope
that some kind and powerful mesmerisers may try whether
the wound cannot be healed, and the bad efiects averted, by
the simple means always at hand. From some practice in
healing wounds and sores by mesmerism, it seems to me that
the remedy is not merely superficial : that nature's medicine
alters the state of the system, of which state the external
sore is a manifestation, before the latter can assume a per-
fectly healthy state. I believe, in proof of this, that an
abscess caused by disease is much longer in being cured than
one from merely External causes.

Believe me, dear Dr. EUiotson^ yours very truly,

S. E. D. M.*

P.S. The following circumstance, as far as the galvanic
effects of mesmerism on a diseased part are concerned, in
some points resembles the former. It is copied from a note-
book and occurred in 1848.

In mesmerising a finger from which a needle had been
extracted, I met with a circumstance which as yet I have not
seen mentioned in any writing on mesmerism. The patient
was a highly susceptible subject, who has frequently suffered
from hysteric fits. The finger had been poulticed and was
quite raw, and still suppurating. I mesmerised it only to
heal the wound, which caused a good deal of illness and
prevented rest.

* I am at liberty to communicate the lady's name to any person who desires
to know it. The lady is the same who wrote Art. 8, No. XXVII. — /. Elliotsonl


Instances of Mesmeric phenomena. 18

On holding the fingers of my left hand to the diaeaaed
finger^ violent throbbing was felt in the wound ; bat on rather
suddenly bringing the points of my right hand fingers to the
other side of the patient^s finger and opposite the throbbing
spot^ I observed the poor woman start and bite her lips. I with-
drew the right hand, and without saying anything replaced
it. This was done several times, and each time the sign of
pain was apparent : when at last I asked the cause of the
start, the poor woman said she felt a shock or blow in her
bad finger each time I placed my right hand fingers opposite
the left. The wound gathered in the night, broke, and ra-
pidly healed.

In the first case, that of the boy, only one of my hands,
the left, was at work, and he felt the stinging in both his.
In the last instance it seemed as if the mesmeric agency
formed a circuit, which was completed by the wounded finger.
In both instances the mesmerism was only perceptible in the
diseased parts.

*:);* I strongly advise medical men to act upon S. E.
D. M.'s suggestion : for cutting and applying caustic to the
bitten parts is not proved to avail. Persons so treated after
being bitten by a mad dog have escaped : but the majority of
those bitten escape though nothing be done : and again, the
late Mr. Callaway, of Guy's Hospital, told me that he had a
iatal case of hydrophobia in a person in whom he had cut
away the part instantly after the bite and kept up a copious
discharge from the wound for a long time. A red-hot iron
must be a far better preventive than the knife and caustic,
and should never be neglected, as so high a heat destroys all
contagion : mesmerism should next be employed, as the sys-
tem may be already poisoned. — J. Elliotson.


III. An instance qf remtwal of severe Pain ; one of Clair-.
voyance ; and two of Sympathy of Disease; with the effect
of upward passes over and from the Stomach. By Mr.
S. D. Saunders, of Bristol.

" If the inhabitants of Upwell, near Cambridge, are such noodles as to give
encouragement to a mesmeriser, they may m tiie end obtain something fitr more
annoying than a scornful laugh for their folly. We cannot undertake the teaching
of such pupils. Wisdom is to be acquired by them only through the instru-
mentality of a costly experience. It appears that they have quite enough of iubt
for their whales. Tha quackery of mesmerism is as revolting, on account of its
indecency «, se often practised on females, as it is detestable, in many instances,
owing to the knavery of its advocate?." — Lancet, Jan. 4, 1851.


1 4 Imtances of Mesmeric phenomena.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

SiB^ — Happening to call in upon Mr. Hazard, jun., who
resides in Small Street in this city, I found his wife labouring
under a most severe attack of tic douloureux on the left side
of the head and face. The cheek was very much swollen and
exceedingly inflamed. Her husband, being too nervous to
mesmerise her, asked me to try and give her some relief.
I consented, and pointed the fingers of my right hand close
to her ear. She had never been mesmerised, and had no
faith in it. The pain appeared to increase very considerably,
as it required the utmost strength of her husband to prevent
her from throwing herself out of her chair on to the ground.
But in a few minutes she became more calm and went into a
slight doze. After she had remained in this state a short time
longer, I demesmerised her and she said her face was very
greatly relieved. She went to bed, and I advised her husband
to mesmerise her face strongly before she went to sleep. I
called again the next evening, and found her quite as bad as
she was on the previous night. I pointed my right fingers to
her face and placed my left hand upon her head; and,
although there was a piano playing, and a gentleman and lady
singing at the time, she passed off into a state of uncon-
sciousness. In about ten minutes I awoke her up and the
pain had left her: and she has had no return up to this time,
which is two months since I mesmerised her.

I must just mention that, during a fortnight after attend-
ing Mrs. Hazard, I daily felt slight ^pains in the left side of
my face : they however gradually decreased until they entirely
left me.

My friend Mr. P. H. came over from Bath to dine with
us ; but, just before dinner he felt rather unwell from bile,
and drank about a tablespoonful of brandy which relieved
him. After dinner we were talking of mesmerism, he looked
across the table full in Mrs. Saunder^s eye, and she went like
a shot into the mesmeric sleep. Mr. F. H., knowing Mrs.
Saunder^s powers of clairvoyance and mental travellins", took
the opportunity of making inqoiries of her respecting an
absent friend. He took her hand, and she went with him
mentally along the railway, through various towns, and at last
got to a Welsh one, where she saw his friend, an old gen-
tleman, ill. As far as the journey to the last town was con-
cerned, Mr. P. H. said that she was perfectly correct, but
beyond that he could say nothing, as he was unacquainted
with the last town that he had taken her to. After about
half an hour he awoke her and left us. In a few minutes,


By Mr. S. D, Saunders, of Bristol. 1 5

Mrs. S. was seized with a severe pain in the stomach, and I
relieved it by making strong downward passes. At night
after retiring to rest^ she as usual went into the mesmeric
sleep and told me that in the morning she should wake with
a severe fit of bile ; that her head would ache and she would
be ill, very ill indeed, the whole day, and that the bile had
passed off from Mr. F. H. to her, whilst he had hold of her
hand after dinner. In the morning I found her words come
true ; for she was literally groaning with a pain in her head,
her stomach was very sore, and she felt exceedingly sick :
she kept retching but could not bring anything off her
stomach. She with great difficulty got up and dressed her-
self, and took a little tea; but still the headache and retch-
ing continued. In about a couple of hours, I found her
sitting in her chair in a sound mesmeric sleep, having gone
off spontaneously. I asked her if I should mesmerise her
head : but she said, " No, all you have to do is to make a
few strong passes upwards, from the lower part of my stomach
to my mouth, but be sure you do not go higher." I imme-
diately did as she had directed me, and after about ten or
twelve upward passes she brought up a quantity of thick dark
bile. She said, '^ there that will do : it is all up. It is not
my bile, it is Mr. F. H.^s: mine is never so dark as that; you
must let me lie a little and I shall soon get well. If you
had not made those upward passes, I should have had a very
serious illness." In the course of the day she got better, and
in a couple of days, with occasional mesmerising and without
taking any medicines, she became quite well.

The chief interest in this case is its corroborative testi-
mony of the power of the upward passes. I believe there is
a case in a recent number of 7%e Zoist (which I cannot at
this moment put my hand upon) in which the upward passes
are alluded to as producing sickness : and I remember Mr.
Spencer Hall telling me that on one occasion a gentleman,
being very much opposed to mesmerism, had the impudence
to tell him that it was all humbug; when Mr. Hall asked him
to allow him to try the effects of a few passes, which request
he laughingly allowed ; but, instead of the passes being made
as usual downwards, Mr. Hall made them upwards over his
stomach and chest, and in about five minutes the laughing
gentleman was transformed into a very sick one, and was
compelled to go to his bed and remain there for several hours.
If it is not occupying too much of your valuable space, I
will just mention, for the sake of those who say that our
cures are not permanent; that the two ladies Miss S. and


16 Mesmeric Clairvoyance and removal of Asthma.

Mrs. C, whose cases appeared in the number of 7%^ Zoist
for April 1850^ remain to this day perfectly well.

I am^ Sir^ yours truly^
Back Hall, Bristol, Feb. 2l8t, 1851. S. D. Saunders.

*^* Two striking instances of sympathy of disease will
be found, with a reference to another and remarks, in Dr.
Elliotson^s account of Mr. and Mrs. William Snewing's phe-
nomena, in No. XIX., pp. 446-8. — Zoist,


TV. An instance of Mesmeric Clairvoyance ; and another of
removal of a Fit of Asthma. By Lieut.-Col. Davidson.
Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.

'< Whilst the unlearned were all busied in getting down to the bottom of the
welly where Truth keeps her Utile oourti were the learned in their way as busy
in pumping her up through the conduits of dialectic induction ; — they eoneemed
themeehee not with facts, — thbt reasoned."

'' 'Tis above reason, cried the doctors on one side ;

'Tis below reason, cried the others.

'lis fidth, cried one ;

'Tis a fiddlestick, said the others.

'Tis possible, cried one ;

Tis impossible, said the others." Sterne.

To Dr. Elliotson, Conduit St., London.

Jersey, Jan. 4, 1849.

My dear Sir, — The following circumstances may possibly
be of use to asthmatic sufferers, and therefore are placed at
your disposal.

Having heard from my friend. Captain Lucas, an officer
of the Bombay army, at present residing in Jersey, that the

Count , an Austrian officer of rank, was a powerful

mesmeriser, who had cured him and other persons in his
neighbourhood of rheumatism, I determined on paying him a
visit, and for this purpose went to the village of St. Aubin,
where I found the Count residing in Bulwark House. By
means of my card and a ^^ braw Scotch tongue in my head,''
I speedily accomplished an introduction, and was by the
Count introduced to Mr. Bermingham, of Evesham in Wor-
cestershire, one of the benevolent Society of Friends, tem-
porarily residing, for the benefit of his health, in the same
house.

After a little conversation on mesmerism, and its still in-
explicable wonders and inexhaustible powers, the Count, at
my request, sent a message through his landlady to require


By lAeut.'CoL Davidson. 17

the presence of one of his late patients^ a yoaog English girl^
who quickly arrived.

It had been the Count's intention to throw her into the
mesmeric sleep while she was standing in one of the corners
of a parlour below and he was seated in the drawing-room
above in my company; hot Mr. Bermingham unfortunately
placed her in a. different comer to that which had been agreed
on^ and in coosequence^ after the Count had mentally ope-
rated and believed that a su£Scient time bad elapsed to allow
a full and complete action of the mesmeric power^ we found,
on descending^ that she was still in her normal state. She
was immediately placed in a corner, and the Count, in less
than two minutes, at a distance of ten feet, threw her into a
sound mesmeric sleep, during which she was in our presence
tested in the following manner.

She was desired to proceed to Mr. Bermingham's house at
Evesham in Worcestershire, by the steamer plying between
St. Helier and Southampton. She immediately assented,
but remarked that she had no funds for the journey. An
imaginary supply, with which she was perfectly satisfied, was
placed in her hands, and in a few seconds she announced her
arrival at the pier, her landing, and entering the railway at
Southampton and London. Here all of a sudden her coun-
tenance expressed a fit of anger and indignation ; her manner
became ruffled and energetic ; and, on being requested to ex-
plain the caase^ she stated the difference to have been caused
by the drunkenness, insolence, and attempted extortion of
the cabman who conveyed her to the North- Western railway!
She soon reached Evesham, and, having been directed to the
residence of our friend, she accurately described both the
room and the ladies then occupying it ; the two brackets at
the sides of the fireplace, on which the ladies used to place
their tea cups while sitting by the fireside ; and wound up
her description by suddenly noticing a very beautiful long-
haired white cat, which she immediately caught up in her
arms, dandling and caressing it in the most rapturous and
affectionate manner, to our great amusement.

After endearments innumerable, she said, " Vl\ steal this
beautiful darling, for, although I am walking about amongst
them, its very odd that they dont see me.'' The Count smiled,
did not object ; but directed her to return to St. Helier. She
folded her apron over the imaginary animal, fondling it with
great tenderness, and soon after announced her arrival at the
pier and ultimately at Bulwark House. The Count then
asked her what she had concealed in her apron. She replied
with an astonished tone, "What have I got here? Why the

VOL. IX. c


18 Mesmeric Clairvoyance and removal of Asthma.

white cat, of course; what else?'' The Count said very
gravely^ '^ You have not surely stolen the cat ? You must go
back immediately and return it/' " What !" said the indig*
nant girl, '' go back all that way with a cat 1 Did you not
know that I was going to take it ?" " It was not honest to
steal the cat ; you must take it back immediately." " What,
all across the sea V " Yes, certainly." " Well then if I
must, I must :" and she departed in a most incensed and in-
dignant state of mind. When she reached the house at
Evesham, she opened her apron, threw down the poor cat,
and with the most expressive and emphatic accents, said,
" There, you brute ! I've had trouble enough with you at all
events." Soon after I took my leave, and expressed a hope
of seeing the Count and his friend at their earliest leisure.

About a fortnight afterwards (immediately before the last
French revolution) the Count and his friend one morning did
me the favour to return my visit, and found me in a very
unusually bad state of health, having been for several days
labouring under the horrors of spasmodic asthma, which
hardly allowed me to speak. The servant shewed them into
the drawing-room above, and I followed them exceedingly
slowly, and with great uneasiness. On reaching them I ex-
plained that, as they must have seen, / could hardly speak
from spasm. The Count, after condoling with me, said, "Will
you allow me to try , a little mesmerism ?" I cheerfully
assented ; but at the end of ten minutes he enquired if I felt
any relief ? I replied, " None whj^tever." The Count then
rose to take leave, saying, " We must not trouble you now,
but come some other time to converse a little." When they
left me, I descended cautiously to my parlour below, and in-
formed my wife that the Count had mesmerised me, but
ineflfectually.

I had not said this two minutes, when, all of a sudden, I
was in the most unexpected, disgusting, immoral, obscene,
impure, qnackish, and unprofessional manner, restored to the
full and perfect use of my lungs ! Nay, what is worse, and
must be absolutely shocking to all well-regulated and Wak-
levan minds, I have not been one moment ill since that
period.

Before I could see my mesmeric friend, the Count sent
me his P. P. C, having been called over to Paris by the bub-
bling caldron of the revolution, still beginning, never ending;
but as he is a constant reader of The Zoist, and as I am igno-
rant of his present address, I must through these pages beg
permission to convey my warmest thanks to that elegant,
accomplished, and perfect gentleman, for his benevolent and


Great benefit of Mesmerism in acute Rheumatism, ifC. 19

sacoessful administration of meflmerism, which in spite of the
vituperative toils of the upright, impartial, philosophical^
humane, scientific^ and candid Member of Parliament and his
dim>eyed and short-sighted colleagues, I honestly believe to
be the " sovereigaest thing in the world for an inward bruise/'
I am, my dear Sir, your faithful and obliged servant,

C. J. C. Davidson.


V. Instance of the great benefit of Mesmerism in acute Rheu-
matism and a severe Accident. By Mr. Wagstafp and
Mr. 'Wa.i.j^is, Surgeons. Communicated by Dr. EUiotson.

'' A Manuscript^ by Pdpin, so well known for his sncoessftil experiments con«
nected with the motiye power of steam, has just been disoorered (says the SiicleJ
near Marburg, a small town of Electoral Hesse. This work bears the name of
Traiti des Operations sans Douleur, and in it are examined the different means
that might be employed to deaden, or rather altogether nullify, sensibility when
surgical operations are being performed on the human body. Pfeipin composed
this work in 1681, when filling the situation of professor in the university of
Marburg ; and in it he has anticipated the effects produced in modem times by
chloroform and snlphoric ether. He communicated his ideas to his colleagues in
the umversHy, bnt from them receiyed anything but encouragement. In conse-
quence he took such a disgust to medical pursuits that he gave up his profession
as a physician and directed his attention to natural philosophy, in which he sub-
sequently became so celebrated. In quitting (rermany to return to Firanoe, he
gave the manuscript to a friend of his, Dr. Boemer. It at last came into the
hands of a teacher named Lahn, who died near Marburg last month. It has
now been purchased by the Grand Duke of Hesse for his private library." — Daily
NewSf March 4, 1851.

Leighton Buzzard^ Bedfordshire,
Feb. 1, 1851.
Dear Sir, — The following instance of the value of mesmer-
ism is at your disposal, if worth your acceptance to forward
to The Zoist.

Henry Hounslow, by trade a horse-dealer, caught, in con*
sequence of exposure to weather, what is usually called rheu*
matic fever. After many weeks suffering he came under my
care, being quite helpless and suffering great pain in all his
joints. After, treating him some time with no success, it
occurred to me to try mesmerism. The rheumatic pains
were instantly relieved, or rather completely removed, by a
few mesmeric passes.

On Tuesday, January 21, 1851, whilst crossing the road
to my surgery, he was knocked down and very much injured
by a chaise, driven by a gentleman in a state of intoxication.
He was picked up and brought to my house in Leighton,
complaiuiug of severe pain in the back and the breast-bone.
He appeared to be suffering very much, moaning and tossing

c 2


20 Great benefit of Mesmerisn in acute Rheumatism, SfC,

himself about. Knowing he was easily put into the mesmeric
sleep^ I at once endeavoured to put him to sleep^ and^ in one
minute, he was perfectly easy and fast asleep. I suffered him
to remain so for ten minutes, and, on my awaking him, he
sufiPered as much as ever. But, being obliged to leave home,
I requested my assistant, Mr. J. Wallis, to put him to sleep.
Mr. Wallis will now continue the account.

Yours sincerely.
To Dr. EUiotson. Philip W. Wagstaff.

Mr. Wagstaff has requested me to finish the account. I
put Henry Hounslow to sleep in a few seconds, and in that
state thrust a pin into his hand without producing the slight-
est sign of suffering. I then had him put into the convey-
ance to take him to his home, at Wing, three miles from
Leighton. The cart was met and severely struck by the
same gig that had caused the first injury, but without in the
least disturbing him. We at length reached his residence,
took him from the vehicle, carried him to bed and undressed
him without his knowing it. I then awaked him ; and, on
awaking, he appeared to suffer as much as ever. I put him
to sleep again, and, with the consent of his wife, I left him in
the mesmeric sleep all night. I came home to Leighton and
did not return until the next morning, twelve o'clock. On
my arrival at Wing, I found him in the same sleep as when I
left him over night : but, on awaking him this time, he was
comparatively easy, and complained only of being very hungry.
During the time he was awake on Tuesday evening, the night
of the sad accident, he suffered so much pain that it was with
diflSculty we kept him on the bed : but, as soon as he was put
to sleep, he was as easy as if he had never been injured.

He appears to have received considerable injury to the
upper part of the spine and to the pelvis. Indeed, I think
the sacro-iliac synchondrosis on the left side is separated. He
appears to be going on well, although not able to leave his
bed : and, when in pain, he is put to sleep and immediately
becomes quite easy.

The above facts were witnessed by a number of persons,
whose names can be had if required. I have mesmerised the
man every day since the accident, and he told me this day,
February 1st, that if it was not for the necessity of eating and
drinking he should like always to be in the sleep, as then he
is quite free from pain. He is going on well, and I only wish
mesmerism was more highly prized by the medical precession.
But there will come a day when all will not only believe but
practise it. The first time I ever witnessed mesmerism was


, Cure of EjMepsy in an AdulL 21

at ray friend^ Mr. Tubbs's^ of Upwell. I myself did not
believe it at first : but now, I am happy to say^ I practise
mesmerism whenever an opportunity offers.

I am^ dear Sir, yours sincerely^

JoflN Wallis, Surgeon.

*4e* Mr. Wagstaff is another example in the medical pro-
fession of conscientiousness in regard to mesmerism from an
early period^ that ought to make a large number of greater
name^ deserved or undeserved^ blush for their neglect of hu-
manity and duty^ and want of self-respect and moral dignity.

John Elliotson.


VI. Cure of Epilepsy in an Adult, By Mr. P. W. Wagstaff,
Surgeon, Leighton Buzzard. Communicated by Dr.
Elliotson.

" What use can mesmerism be applied to which- chloroform cannot more
effectually accomplish ?" . . .

** Mesmeric phenomena, if real, are nothing more than the symptoms of a
morbid state wholly analogous to some of the most terrible diseases which afflict
humanity."— 3ftf</ica/ Timer, Feb. 1, 1851 ; p. 130.*

Leighton Buzzard, Feb. 28, 1851.
Deak Dr. Elliotson, — I enclose another case, which occurred
some few years back, shewing Mrs. WagstafTs (formerly
Miss Hall) powers of seeing and prescribing at a distance.
I have sent my own version of it, and also the statement
drawn up by the friends of the patient.

I remain, yours truly,

P. W. Wagstaff.

Thomas Fossey, a labourer, of rather a serious turn of
mind, and much in the habit of preaching in the different
villages round his residence, was called to visit and pray by
his sister-in-law, on the 15th of May, 1848, who was sup-
posed to be dying. Whilst praying he was suddenly seized
with a convulsive paroxysm, and began raving and knocking
himself about, so that when I arrived at the house (having
been sent for to attend him), I found him in such a state that
six men had some difficulty in holding him. This state con-
tinued some time spite of all means used for his relief. At
length it subsided, so that he had intervals of rest and return

* Both these passages shew the grossest ignorance : but they also disclose a
oonscioDsness that the statements and opinions in passages taken as mottoes in
former numbers of The Zoisi from the Med. Tifnea^ will answer no longer ; that
the cause of antimesmerism is hopeless; and a quiet retreat very desirable. — Zoiat,


22. Cure of Epilepsy in an Adult.

to rea9on^ alternating with violent paroxysms of screaming
and throwing himself abont. He was bled, cupped, leeched,
blistered, and purged, without benefit^ and he then went to
consult an old medical man of the name of Parker^ who
treated him on the same plan with as little success : and he
was finally given up by us both as incurable^ being quite
unable to follow his usual labour or his preaching ; in fact it
was not safe to leave him by himself.

I lost sight of him from this time until I heard he or his
friends had written to Miss Hall^ who then resided in London,
and that he was being mesmerised by her directions, she
having described him to be sufiPering from chronic inflamma-
tion and thickening and redness of the membranes of the
brain, more especifdly over the organs of Veneration and
Firmness. In the statement of the case by his friends you
will see the dates. His description only comes up to the 7th
March, 1860. He is now (Feb. 28, 1851) quite well, and
works and preaches as he used to do : and Mrs. Wagstaff,
looking at his brain now, says it is almost well, the mem-
branes being only a little thickened.

I did not know of his applying to Miss Hall (now Mrs.
Wagstaflf) at that time, nor indeed until he was nearly well :
and Mrs. W. never saw him for nearly two years after she
prescribed for him, and did not know anything of him pre-
viously. Indeed she did not know him when she met him
in her natural state, until I pointed him out to her.

May you live to see the medical profession become mes-
merists. I shall tell them a long tale about it some day.

P. W. Wagstapf.

A few statements relative to the affliction of Thomas Fossey,
of Heathland Reach, drawn up by his friends.

" On May 15th, 1848, I was taken unwell : I had severe
pain in the stomach and pressure on the brain : had to be
held in bed for some hours ; after that was tied down in bed«
In my illness I was attended by Mr. Wagstaff and Mr. Bell,
who did all in their power for me. But not improving much,
I applied to Dr. Parker. I was bled twice in the arm, cupped
on the back of the neck with three cups and on my temples
with one ; three blisters on my head, and one on my neck :
also had two setons in my neck about seven weeks : leeches
very often : and after all was given up incurable. Mr. Parker
said I should never be well again. The pressure on the brain
was attended with such excruciating pain as to render me
(though perfectly conscious) utterly incapable of governing
myself. Under medical treatment I after some weeks imr


By Mr. Wagataff, 28

proved sufficiently to go to chapel on the 6th August. On
the 17th September I was able to go to work^ and continued
until some time in November, when I was partially laid aside,
and only went to work occasionally on the road as an invalid.
In the commencement of 1849 I was decidedly worse, and
could not attend chapel from January 7th till April 22nd.
Meanwhile^ through a friend, I applied to Miss Hall for
advice, who kindly and gratuitously sent me medicine, and
recommended mesmerism as the most likely and effective
remedy for my disease.

" March 23rd, was mesmerised for the first time by Mr.
Bradbury according to Miss HalFs directions ; Mr. B. con-
tinued to mesmerise me two or three times a week for some
weeks. Almost immediately after commencing mesmerism my
attacks began to abate, and soon diminished both in strength
and number. Afterwards I was mesmerised by Thomas
Marsden for several other weeks, and gradually my health
began to be restored ; so much so that on 26th May I was
able to go to regular work, and through mercy 1 have con-
tinued to work to the present time, March 7th, 1850.^'

*:ic* That the cerebral organs may be excited by pure
mesmerism independently of imagination or suggestion on
the part of the patient and of will on the part of the operator,
I fully proved in the sixth number of The Zoist, pp. 230-3.
Being desirous of knowing whether Mr. Wagstaff's case was
satisfactory, I wrote to him upon this point, as well as re-
specting the medicine taken by the second patient, and the
steps necessary for the exertion of Mrs. Wagstaff's clairvoyant
powers. The following is Mr. Wagstaff^s most satisfactory
answer. — John Elliotson.

" Leighton Buzzard, March 4, 1851.

" My dear Dr. Elliotson, — Mrs. Wagstaff says that Fossey
only took her medicine one fortnight, and the cure was due to
the mesmerising. The medicine was homoeopathic 1 believe,
but what I do not know. I believe it was nux. vomica and
belladonna.

"With regard to the excitement of the phrenological
organs in the man Hounslow, of Wing. Not only did he
not know what was expected, but he does not even know the
name of phrenology, or the name of one single organ. More
still, his mesmeriser, Mr. Wallis, does not know them, for,
although Mr. Wallis knows what phrenology is, he knows
nothing of the practice of it, nor does he know the seat of a
single organ; so that, on touching Hounslow at random,
the man began to pray, and, when Mr. Wallis intended to
touch Combativeness, not knowing where it was, he touched


24 Cure of Epilepsy in an Adult.

Melody^ and the man began to sing ; proving^ I tbink^ as I
have often seen before^ that the imagination in this case has
nothing to do with it.

"Mrs. Wagstaff does not require any rapport, or any
lock of hair^ to enable her to see any person^ no matter
where they may be : she only requires a definite name and
address^ as she says^ to * identify the individual,^ She can
with that aid see and describe their appearance^ age^ and ail-
ment ; but as she is now sa constantly employed to describe
disease^ she does not wish to interfere with^ or detract from,
her power of seeing disease, by concentrating her powers on
inanimate substances or external appearances — ^she has the
greatest possible aversion to anything in the shape of testing.
If you want proof of her powers, send ns some case of ill-
ness, well known to yourself, and prominent in its features,
and yet unknown to either of us, and we will send you a de-
scription of it.

" I have had a very beautiful case of paralysis cured by
mesmerism, that I will make out and send you as soon as
it is a little more advanced. It is a.case of paralysis of the
right arm and leg, and rigidity of the neck. I made a few
passes down her back last Thursday with some relief. The
paralysis took place fifteen or sixteen weeks before, and had
not improved at all for many weeks. She could only move
the right arm by lifting it with the left one, and she could
not walk at all. On Saturday last, March 1, I put her into
the sound mesmeric sleep after about ten or fifteen minutes,
in which state she was so insensible that I could have taken
any limb off without disturbing her. I had some difficulty
in waking her, but when she awoke she could move her arm
a little, but complained sadly of the feeling otpina and needles
in the arm.

" On Monday, March 3, I put her to sleep again, and
after waking she could put her right hand to her mouth, and
could walk a little. After mesmerising her to-day and re-
awaking her, she could cut her food with her right hand and
use it almost as well as the other ; and I fully believe she will
quite recover the use of her leg.

" I cured a case of rheumatic fever the other day by once
putting the patient into a sound mesmeric sleep ; in which I
could move the rheumatic limbs without disturbing the pa-
tient, although five minutes before you would have heard her
screams a quarter of a mile if I had moved a finger.

" I have not time, dear Doctor, to write more now, but
will revert to the subject at the earliest opportunity.

" Yours truly,

"P. W. Wagstaff."


( 25 )

VII. Cure of Lamhar Abscess, by the patienfs mother. By

Dr. Elliotson.

" ChrUtian.—Met yoa with nothing die in that valley ?

** FaitA/ul.^YeB,^ I met with one Shame; hut of all the men that I met
with in my pilgrimage, he, I think, bean the wrong name. Hie others wonld
be said nay, after a little argamentation> and somewhkt else, but this bold-fiuxd
Shame would never have done.

" Chrisiian. — Why, what did he say to you ?

" Faithjul. — What ! why he objected against religion (mesmerism) itself: he
ndd it was a piti/itl, low, tneakinf business for a man to mind religion (mes-
merism). He said that a tender cantcience was an unmanly thing ; and that for
a man to watch over his words and ways, so as to tie up himself from that hec-
toring liberty which the brave spirits of the times accustom themselves to, wonld
make Aim the ridicule qf the times. He objected also that few of the miffkty,
rich, or unee, were ever of my opinion ; nor any of them neither, before they
were persuaded to befools, and to be of a voluntary fondness to venture the loss
of all for nobody else knows what. He moreover objected the base and low
estate and condition of those that were chiefly the pilgrims (mesmerists) of the
times in which they lived : also their ignorance and want qf understanding m aU
natural science. Yea, he did hold me to it at that rate also, about a great many
more things than I here relate. . . . Indeed, this Shame was a bold villain t I
could scarce shake him out of my company ; yea, he would be haunting of me,
and continually whispering me in the ear with some one or other of the infirmities
that attend religion ; but at last I told him it was in vain to attempt further in
this business ; for those things that he disdained, in those did I see most glory :
and 80 at last I got past this importunate one." — Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress,

On the 23rd of October^ 1848, Master Mc Alpin, aged 14^
resident at No. 10, Warwick Street, Gk>ldeu Square, was
brought to me by his mother. He was pale, thin, and had
dark eyes, and a decidedly scrofulous aspect. His pulse was
140, and his breathing 30, in a minute. I was told that he
had night sweats : and difficulty of breathing on first lying
down, on walking, and on any exertion, but that he had no
cough nor expectoration : and, on careful examination of his
chest by the ear, I found his lungs sound. His bowels acted
once in four days. He weighed 70 pounds. His back-bone
projected and also was curved laterally, so that his stature
was greatly shortened, and there was a hole in the flesh at its
right side leading into an abscess and discharging a large
quantity of matter. The projection and lateral curvature of
the spine were higher than the hole. The case was clearly
one of lumbar abscess, and this is generally, and according to
most surgeons is always, accompanied by disease of the back-
bone.

The history given to me was the following.

His spine had been rather curved for some years. But
about the 21st of March, 1848, he felt a very disagreeable
pain on the right side of his back and in his hip and groin,
and grew ill. His parents took him to Mr. Cutler, of Old
Burlington Street, one of the surgeons of St. George^s Hos-


26 Cure of Lumbar Abscess*

pital. Mr. Cutler told them that an abscess was forming,
which would take its own course, and that he could do their
boy no good. They then took him to Mr. Cantis, a surgeon
in Maddox Street, who advised him to be taken to the sea-
side and let to remain three years, as physic would be.
useless, and expressed a belief that he would not recover.
The father now consulted Dr. Epps, a homoeopathist, who
said that a sea-voyage would be the best thing, but gave him
medicines thrice a day for a month, and then sent him on
the 17th of June to Brighton, where he continued to take
infinitesimal doses regularly under the direction of Dr. Mad-
den, another homoeopathic practitioner, till his return home
on the 24th of September.

While he was under Dr. Epps the abscess continued to
enlarge till it was of the size of a young child^s head, so that
he could not cover it with his hands behind him. He was all
the time both taking medicines three times a day, and ab-
staining by order from wine, pepper, and other spices, vege-
tables, fruit, malt and spirituous liquors, tea and coffee, but
was allowed meat and cocoa, which, as well as the medicines,
he purchased of Dr. Epps^s brother. The abscess burst on
the 2nd of June, and discharged copiously for three days,
and had~ discharged more or less ever since. He grew weaker
and weaker all the time that he was under Dr. Epps and Dr.
Madden, so that he not only was bent to one side, but from
the 24th of September had to be carried up stairs, and on
this day he returned to London and relinquished homoeopathy.

On the first of October, Mr. Mitchell, of the firm of
Walton and Mitchell, Printers, in Wardour Street, who are
among the most conscientious and attentive persons with
whom I ever had dealings, saw the youth, and, recollecting
the striking case of lumbar abscess and diseased spine, which
he had repeatedly seen during its treatment with mesmerism
till the cure was perfected and the whole recorded in The
Zoist (No. XXII., p. 201), and being in the habit of advocat-
ing in season and out of season the use of mesmerism, bestow-
ing as much of his spare time as possible in blessing sufferers
with its benefits, urged the parents to mesmerise the lad, and
begged them to take him to me as he had great difficulty of
breathing. I saw the patient with great willingness, and en-
treated them to follow Mr. MitchelFs advice, assuring them
that I would see their son as often as they wished to bring
him.

The mother had mesmerised him half an hour daily before
she brought him to me upon the 23rd. I allowed him porter,
in addition to his meat. In November he had diarrhoea for a


By Dr. Elliotson. 27

short time. At the beginning of December^ he was very much
better: but had not been sent to sleep. At the beginning of
January, he had become so much stronger that be could walk
up and down stairs without feeling faint. In February, he
had pains through all his hmbs and a severe cough : and I
recomniended him to be mesmerised twice a day. This in-
crease of mesmerism was productive of great benefit, and he
usually went to sleep for an hour. Up to this period of sleep
he had sweated profusely ; but the sweating gradually lessened
from the tinae he began to sleep. In March, he was still
better and stronger : could walk anywhere by himself; and
was getting much straighter. The wound still discharged a
little. In June, he began to sleep two hours every time his
mother mesmerised him. The sleep was not very deep, and
he was always awakened without difficulty. He was still
stronger ; and much more upright. He continued to improve
rapidly, and in April the wound had healed, and he was able
to assist in his father's business.

He is now perfectly well. Walks to his father's house of
business now. No. 46, Albemarle Street, from 17, Osborne
Terrace, Brompton, every morning, and back in the evening;
besides walking about the town during the day. During the
whole treatment his mother brought him to me from time to
time : and he took no medicine except an aperient for the
first three months, and some astringents during the short
time the diarrhoea existed. He has grown a handsome fresh-
coloured healthy-looking youth : weighs 84 pounds, and his
pulse is 62. He had gradually required the aperient less
frequently. For the first three months he had taken the com-
pound rhubarb pill.

Before he was mesmerised he was always very subject to
head-aches : but they very soon left him for good.

The superiority of mesmerism to country air was strikingly
proved. For he got worse and worse at Brighton ; and begau
to recover as soon as he was mesmerised, though living at
the time in the close neighbourhood of Warwick Street,
Golden Square. The whole of the next year he lived in
Warwick Street : and it was not till October, 1849, that the
family began to reside at Brompton.

The mother mesmerised him by slow passes before his face
and chest. The father generally operated on Sundays : but
never sent him to sleep so soon as the mother, though a large
and healthy man.

The sleep was always light, and the least touch awoke
him. No phenomena, not even rigidity, insensibiUty of pain,
or traction^ could ever be produced.


28 Cure of a severely injured Hip.

I trust he will be mesmerised twice or three times a week
for long to come in order to re-establish his health perma-
nently.

The perfectly similar cure of Master Home in Wiltshire,
recorded in No. XXII., p. 201, deserves to be perused in
conjunction with this. Mr. Norman, of Bath, had honestly
said that the disease would destroy him in two years.

Such cures, and these are the only ones I have ever at-
tempted in this usually fatal disease, give me a feeling of pity
and something more for my professional brethren who are so
Tain and hard-hearted as to conduct themselves as the public
are now aware is their habit in private and in their colleges
and societies. But I deeply commiserate the hundreds of
thousands in this country, who, through the cruel perverseness
of medical men, are deprived of the blessing of mesmerism in
addition to or in the room of common medical means.

« Qoidquid delirant reges, plectontnr Achivi.'' — Hokat. Bp. 1. 2, 14.

John Elliotson.
87, Conduit Street, March 1, 1851.


VIII. Cure of a severely injured Hip, by the patient^s eldest

sister. By Miss Isabella Litoff.

** He began to cone and to awear." — Mark zIt. 71.

Having on March 11, 1850, from a fall down stairs received
a severe injury in my left side, Mr. O'Connor, of George
Street, Fortman Square, was consulted. He soon considered
my case of a more serious nature than he had anticipated ;
and, after applying ten leeches, advised my being placed
under Mr. Cutler, of Burlington Street and St. George's
Hospital, who pronounced my case to be ulceration of the
cartilages and great injury of the pelvis. After taking a great
quantity of different medicines, all to no effect, and my leg
being found to be rapidly contracting, I was salivated. This'
afforded me temporary relief : but when it was discontinued,
all my sufferings returned. I was a second time salivated,
but found no permanent benefit from it. The next treatment
was blistering, but without effect. Four dozen leeches were
then applied, but to no purpose. The next treatment was
fomentations with hot water. This failing, the whole hip was
enveloped in hot linseed poultices. The bowels getting very
irregular, I was compelled to take house-medicine and castor
oil. Then, under the influence of chloroform, I had issues
made with potass caustic in the hip, and they were kept open


By Miss Litoff. 29

for ten weeks with bread and linseed poultices* Mr. Cutler,
wishing me to be kept in one position, ordered me a leather
splint to be worn from the knee to the hip. I was kept on
low diet while in the hospital. My suffering becoming at
last almost unbearable and depriving me of sleep, I was
ordered morphia night draughts: but to no effect. I also
suffered much pain from the irregularity of the periods. My
leg got more contracted every day, so that when I left the
hospital my toes met the ground, and the whole leg was per*
fectly rigid. The erysipelas being in the same ward, Mr.
Cutler advised my being taken home for fear in my danger-
ous state of my taking it: but begged me to return in a
fortnight if I found myself no better.

I now found myself a perfect cripple, after eight mouth's
torture. Though I had a pair of crutches given to me by the
hospital, I was too weak to support myself; and knew that if I
returned to the hospital I must subject myself to the treat-
ment I had already gone through to no effect, and that
Mr. Cutler had assured me that a cure would be the work of
five years, as the injury was so great. But Providence willed
it otherwise. A married sister, who had benefitted under
mesmeric treatment, found me in despair of ever recovering,
and almost broken-hearted. She was induced to try the
effect of mesmerism on me ; and, to the great joy of herself
and the astonishment of the family, she produced sleep by her
gaze in five minutes, and awoke me by her will after th/ee
hours' sleep. She again the same day, through her mesmer-
ising a younger sister in the same room, caused coma in me :
and she awoke us both by her will in one hour after. The
next morning at 10 o'clock she again produced coma by the
gaze and left me until 10 o'clock at night, when she awoke
me by her will. I found myself much refreshed and much
relieved from pain. I slept well the same night, the first
night for seven months. The third time my sister made local
passes from the wound in the hip down to the toes : and while
she was throwing the influence and concentrating her mind
on the part affected, I perceived and felt a movement in all
my toes. The whole of my family was called to witness this
happy result. Over whatever part my sister placed her hand
the muscles became active. After producing coma the fourth
time, my sister finding me clairvoyant begged me to state
plainly to her the internal appearance of the injured hip, and
prescribe the treatment for my case. In this I instantly
obeyed her: and told her that the injured part was of a
brownish colour and much inflamed, and with a great deal of
humour about it. My sister then asked me what would


30 Cure of a severely injured Hip.

benefit my hip and my general health. I then predicted
mesmerism would cure me in two months. To cause the
bowels to act regularly^ I prescribed half a pint of mesmerised
water to be taken for a week fasting : to bring the periods at
their regular time, I prescribed boiled milk for my breakfast
for two months, my diet to be very plain, and meat to be
taken three times a week : and I ordered for myself a sponge
ing bath with cold water and bay-salt all over the body every
morning, but said that no medicine should be taken. For
4six weeks my sister visited me every night, and, after produc-
ing coma, left me under the influence all night. She again
questioned me regarding the appearance of the hip, which I
told her was still looking brown, but not quite so red, al-
though it had a great deal of humour. I begged her to throw
the influence well on the side and make the passes downward.
At the next visit her treatment was the same, and I found
myself rapidly recovering. My next account of the hip was,
very little brown and still red, but not so much humour. It
rapidly improved in appearance every day until it became
quite natural : and then each day I moved from my bed room
to the sitting room on my crutches, and at the expiration of
siv weeks from the first I left oflF my crutches and walked
down three flights of stairs. For the next fortnight I was
mesmerised three times a week : and, at the expiration of the
two months I found myself as I had predicted, perfectly cured
by mesmerism.

My sister and myself then paid a visit to Mr. Cutler. She
went into the room first, and he spoke kindly and said that
he remembered the case, and it was a very bad one. She
told him that I was cured : and then I entered. He stared
with astonishment : and, on being informed it had been by
mesmerism, fell into a passion, and swore that mesmerism
was damned infernal humbug,* and the cure had been the

* We must lament one seriously bad effect of mesmerism, though it has
never been objected to by our opponents; and this is, its causing so mudi profane
Bwearing in medical men, — ^not in the mesmerised patient or the mesmeriser. Only
think of Mr. Cutler, so prettily behaved a man before ladies and gentlemen, pour-
ing such words out of his mouth as d d i 1 h g. Mr. Alexander, not the

Great of Macedon, nor the good coppersmith of Ephesus, when Miss Wallace took
to him the little boy whose sight she had restored after he had declared it could
never be restored, exclaimed to that lady, that '' mesmerism was a damned humbug,
and came from the devil if it were anything ; and that The Zoiet was an atheistical
publication, which he (pious oculist !) never read.'' (ZoUtt No. XXVI., p. 199.)
Other instances are recorded in this work, as well as examples of other very
. shocking language. We cannot, however, give up mesmerism on account of this
awful effect. We can only exhort these graitlemen, who all, on occasions, profess
sincere belief in Christianity and real veneration) to remember a certain passage to
this effect, <' Swear not at all." — ZoUt,


By Miss Utoff. 31

work of time. My sister reminded him of his own words
which he had spoken in the hospital, viz., that his own brother
was afflicted in a similar manner, and his case took five years
to effect a cure, and that it would be the same in my case.

I now declare before God and all the world, that my sister
cured me in two months without a pennyworth of medicine
and with mesmerism only, and that I have continued up to
this period quite well.

Should this meet the eye of the incredulous or the suffer-
ing, I ana willing to apply to them the same blessing which
has been bestowed upon me and to alleviate their suffering by
mesmerism : and should consider myself wanting in my duty
to God and my fellow-creatures if I did not give my case
publicity.

Isabella Litoff.
63, Great Marylebone Street, London,
March 4, 1851.

P.S. I knew on waking nothing that had occurred in my
mesmeric sleep-waking : but am told that I could, and still
can, be made rigid and to stand in any position, was and am
completely insensible to pinching, pricking, &c., and bear a
pen pushed up my nostrils without suffering : that I would
sit up in bed and eat my supper.


*:ic* How lamentable to reflect that through Mr. Cutler's
ignorance and contempt of mesmerism in abject and servile
obedience to his patron. Sir Benjamin Brodie, this good
young woman was not only not cured when she might have
been cured, but underwent suffering which she might have
been completely spared. No chloroform* need have been
required while two issues were being made, and they indeed
would have been unnecessary. She might have been secured
a perfectly good night^s rest seven times every week. But
man, proud man, dressed in a little brief authority plays
fantastic tricks.

We wonder whether it was Mr. Cutler to whom Dr.
Elliotson alluded in his pamphlet on Surgical Operations
without Pain.

" But five days before (December 8th) he saw you standing near
a table, while the leg of a poor young woman was cut off in the

* It is curious to obserye how tlie intellect of so many medical men can
embrace a drug, but is unable to perceive the astounding power and results
of that great force of nature which is set in action by mesmeric processes. It
is carious also to observe the very low state of moral feeling, the want of dignity
and self-respect, in so many of the medical profession. — Zoist'


32 Review of Dr, H, Munro on Insanity.

midst of agonizing shrieks, she being evidently in the last stage of
consumption, and with which, as well as her scrofulous knee, she
had been under the same surgical care for four months. On this
very day she had died (December the 13th) ; and, on being opened, it
was seen that at the time of the operation she had been very far ad-
vanced in consumption. Not only was the upper part of the right
lung extensively disorganized, but the whole left lung was studded
with tubercles, which in the upper part had suppurated and formed
several large abscesses ; one abscess was very large, and had burst
into the cavity of the chest. It is a surgical rule not to operate for
even a fistula, unless the lungs are examined and found healthy.
Here the operation could only agonize the poor creature and shorten
the wretched remnant of her days; and the reflection that she might
probably have been spared the useless agony of the operation by
mesmerism, — a blessing in the eyes of every one but Dr. Copland,
drew a sigh from Mr. Wood as Mr. Hawkins vented forth his hos-
tility. Had indeed the stethoscope been employed the state of things
would have been known, and she spared the operation altogether, —
the stethoscope, without being conversant with which no man can
treat diseases of the chest without daily blunders, but which has
been despised in the building where the unfortunate woman died, is
spoken of now by one there as a folly reminding him of a fisbing
line with a fool at one end and a fish at the other, and was spoken
of formerly with equal contempt by one who now uses it hourly, but
who, when I first defended its importance years ago, persecuted me
with his tongue, and said it was just the thing for Elliotson to rave
abont and he had never met with a single sensible man who advo-
cated it,"— Zvist.


IX. — A review of a new book, called " Remarks on Insanity :
its nature and treatment. By Henry Munro, M.B.
Oxon., Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians.^^

" There is a certain number of men endowed with such strength of mind and
nobleness of soul, so thoroughly sensible of their own worth, and so passionately
fond of independence, that they resist every external influence calculated to sub-
ject them. Hiey endeavour, as much as possible, to establish themselves in
countries where there is the most liberty ; they follow a pursuit which renders
them independent, which exempts them from the favours and the caprices of the
great. Dominion over their inferiors, which would lead on to slavery under an
absolute master, to them would be insupportable. Honours and distinctions in-
tended for merit, when lavished on men of no pretensions, are in their eyes only
degradations- If they prosper, it is through their own exertions. Like the oak,
they sustain themselves ; and, for whatever they are, they consent to be indebted
to no one. This is a pride which has not degenerated into haughtiness ; which is
often the companion of great virtues, is the enemy of all baseness, and the sup-
port of courage in adversity. ... I am the most modest, the most humble of
men, when I behold around me the immensity of things which I am condemned
not to understand, and which, nevertheless, are connected with the objects of a
medical observer and practitioner. But when the discovery of the structure and
functions of the brain is spoken of, I believe myself, with imperturbable confi-


Review of Dr. H. Munro on Insanity, 33

dence, to be above all my predecessora, above all my coCemporaries. Yea ; I am
the first who has established the physiological principles on which the stmctare
and (noctions of tbe brain must be studied ; I am the first who has broken down
the barrier opposed by superstition and ignorance, for thousands of years, to the
progress of the physiology of the nervous system ; the first who conceived the
idea of distinguishing; the general attributes from the true qualities and Ainda-
mental Oeusalties ; the first who determined the instincts, the inclinations, the sen-
timents, and the talents which are connected with certain cerebral parts. I am
the first who had the courage, the patience, and the perseverance to examine and
fix the relations w^hich exist between the energy of the moral qualities and of the
intellectual facnlties, and the various development of the parts of the brain. I
am the first who has extended these researches to the whole brute kingdom, who
has studied thousands of animals, as to their most striking instincts, inclinations,
and fiiculties, and the configuration of their brain, both in individuals and siiecles.
I am the first who discovered and pointed out the means of discovering the seat
of each instinct, sentiment, and intellectual faculty. I am the first who disco-
vered these seats, and demonstrated them by numerous physiological and patholo-
gical facts, and by an infinity of researches into the comparative anatomy and
physiology of all species of animals."

" Yes ; once more, I am the first and the only one to whom the physiology of
the brain owes its existence ; I have discovered it without the assistance of any
man. This the history of each of my discoveries proves. It is the same with the
physiology of the brain as with its structure. To pick out what might by chance
be found dispersed in authors, would have required more cleverness than to detect
the mysteries of nature by observation. I began, continued, and completed all
my discoveries, without any previous learning ; and if, at a later period, I com-
piled quotations, it was rather to mark th^ point of my departure, than to
strengthen my ideas by those of my predecessors and cotemporaries." — Gall,
Sur le» Fonctions du Cerveau, t. iv., p. 254 ; and t. v., pp. 519, 522.

There is, we believe, no one department of medical science
that has attracted of late years a larger share of the attention
of medical men than that o{ Insanity. It would appear, how-
ever, from the character of the numerous books upon disor-
dered brain, that medical authors are yet wretchedly deficient
in that knowledge which is necessary, nay indispensable, to
the elucidation of abnormal cerebration. The brain of man
would seem a sadly neglected portion of our organism, and as
if out of reach of that care and studious research which are
bestowed so successfully on the other important organs of the
body. He who would investigate the healthy manifestations
of the heart, liver, or lungs, would not unfrequently approach
the brain with a too evident disinclination or mistrust : and,
whilst the disease of those organs may be fairly and clearly
illustrated, the pathologist shrinks from an unprejudiced
analysis of the phenomena regarded as indications of un-
sound mind. The fact is doubtless to be ascribed to the pre-
ponderance of the superstitious feelings over the philosophic ;
and these almost necessarily lead men to prefer the imma-
terial or fanciful to the material or truthful.

Some two or three years since, when the publication of
the PsychologicalJoumal of Medicine was announced, and the
name of '' Forbes Winslow," the author of an essay designed

VOL.. IX. D


84 Review of Dr. H, Munro on Insanity.

to elucidate insanity with the aid of OalFs physiology of the
bndn (Phrenology)^ appeared as that of the editor of the said
journal, we were led to anticipate some indications of change
and progress. We hoped to see evidence of something like a
due appreciation of OalPs immortal discoveries^ in so far as
they enlighten us on matters psychological. We need hardly
add that our disappointment has been great indeed. If a
specialist like Dr. Forbes Winsiow takes no kind of notice of
the phrenological doctrine, if he neglects to avail himself of
that which alone can reveal either the nature or extent of
insane affections, surely does he, i.e., as the conductor of the
Psychological Journal, too plainly excuse the various editors
of the ordinary medical papers, and not less the medical
writers above alluded to, for neglecting the same important
branch of medical knowledge ; one not less necessary to the
Munros and Sutherlands et hoc genus omne, than is a correct
acquaintance with the healthy eye, or heart, or lungs, or
ovaries, &c., &c., to gentlemen engaged specifically in the
treatment of the diseases of these several structures or organs.
Dr. Henry Munro, the gentleman who has written the
book, the title of which heads these observations, is included
in the very mild but not undeserved censure conveyed in the
foregoing remarks, because he has ventured to treat of' the
diseases of the cerebrum without any kind of information con-
cerning the healthy uses of this important organ; which,
although declared to constitute about one-fortieth part of the
human fabric, and, what is more, to stand in need ^^ of one-
tenth,'* at the least, "of the entire current poured forth from
the left ventricle of the heart,''* is, for the most part, treated
as of little importance in the animal economy. Dr. H. Munro
tells us he takes but " a partially phrenological view " of the
case at issue. We cannot doubt him. His views are indeed
PARTIAL. Else his phrenological readers could hardly find
him asserting that the surfaces of the brain and sktUl do not
correspond : that " there are physiological considerations
quite sufficient to involve phrenological data in uncertainty :"
that he has yet to learn that the sensorial operations in man
depend equally on the grey and white substances of the brain,
and liot exclusively on the former, as he would have his
readers to believe that Gall and his followers teach. Dr. H.
Munro would much oblige if he were to inform us of the name
of that cerebral physiologist who penies " that the quality of
the texture of the brain, its chemical composition, the cha-
racter of its vital stimuli, &c., have much more to do with its

* * See Good's Siudy of Medicine f yoI. Iv., page 31. Second edition.


Review o/Dr, H, Munro on Insanity, 86

powers than simple size" The following extract places oar
author in a somewhat painful dilemma, inasmuch as phreno-
logy is essentially a science of induction, and not one of mere
theory, as he would persuade us: — ^'Phrenologists are, I
believe, rather afraid of physiology, comparative anatomy,
and the kindred sciences ; and, if this is the case, it is, in my
opinion, alone sufficient to render their system more eccentric
than is desirable in any science/' Poor Oall I After spend-
ing a long and valuable life in the collection of facts, and
those of the highest importance; and after disposing and
arranging them all with that care and anxiety so character-
istic of the laborious searcher after truth ; and after fhe closest
and most accurate investigation into ''physiology" '' com^
parative aruiiofny" ''and the kindred sciences" from which
alone He deduced his imperishable discoveries of the physio-
logy of the brain; after all this,* to have his great and illus-

* " The foandation of this oaefol doctrine being laid/' says Gall (8ur lu
Fonetion9 du CerveaUf t. yi., Preface), ** it must be aa immovable as the mate-
rials, — ^the facts, of which it is constracted. Bat I am far from believing the
edifice complete : neither the life nor the fortune of one man would be sufficient
for this vast project. Up to this present moment I have been left to mp own
resources^ An immense concourse of the most favourable circumstances would
be required to raise this study to the height which it is capable of attaining.
There would be required a complete collection of the crania of brutes, not only of
different species, but also of individuals in which qualities or faculties strongly
pronoimced had been observed. There would be required a complete collection
of the brains of brutes, modelled in wax after nature, to multiply the means of
comparison. There would be required a number of crania, or at least of casts,
of men and women distinguished by some quality oc faculty ; finally there would
be required a more extensive knowledge of natural history than we have at pre-
sent, with respect to instances of industrious aptitudes, qualities, and Acuities ;
in a word, with respect to the internal economy of the brute creation."

*' Dr. Yimont," says Dr. EUiotson (Human Physiology ^ p. 406), ''of Caen,
has carried on the researches into the phrenology of brutes with extraordinary
perseverance, and produced a most magnificent work. Attracted, in 1818, by
the prize offered by the French Institute to the author of the best memoir upon
the anatomy of the brain in the four classes of vertebrated animals, he began
researches into the subject, without any reference to phrenology, for he had not
read Gall, and bad seen him spoken of in books and heard of him only as a
charlatan: however, he thought it incumbent upon him to read Gall's work
among others. ' Hardly,' says he, ' had I begun to read it, when I found that I
had to do with one of those extraordinary men whom dark envy endeavours to
exclude from the rank to which their genius calls them, and against whom it em-
ploys the arms of the coward and the hypocrite. High cerebral capacity, pro-
found penetration, good sense, varied information, were the qualities which struck
me as distinguishing Gall. The indifference which I first felt for his writings,
therefore, soon gave way to the most profound veneration.' (Introduction, p. 14.)
*' In 1827, I>r. Vimont presented to the Institute a memoir containing a frag-
ment of the researches on which he had then spent so many years, together with
2500 heads of brutes of various classes, orders, genera, and species. Among
these, 1500 had belonged to brutes with whose habits he had been individually
weli acquainted before they died or were killed : 400 wax representations of the
brain, modelled after nature, and an atlas of more than 300 figures of the brain
and cranium, executed with the strictest accuracy of dimensions, also accompanied

D 2


36 Review of Dr. H. Munro on Insanity.

trious name bespoiled by the harsh and unjust criticism of
one who, however great the respectability of his name, and al-
though possessed of opportunities of no every-day attainment^
has yet to learn the science which he discards — the philosophy
he would ridicule; and, what is more, has yet to acquire
that knowledge of the brain and its healthy manifestations
without which his own career as a practitioner engaged in the
cause of the insane must be attended with much additional
difficulty and increased disappointment, — is sad indeed. When
next we meet Dr. Henry Munho in the character of a lite*
rary aspirant, we hope he will not again injure so much that
is really good and valuable in his pages by such an intermix-
ture of what is truly mischievous.

Turn we with much satisfaction to the brighter side of the
picture. The design of Dr. Munro^s book is to shew that
insanity is not an inflammatory disease, but that it is caused
by "a loss of nervous tone'' affecting the cerebrum, and that
this fact is made evident to us by either an " irritable excess

_ m

tlie memoir. The work in which he now sets forth his observations has an atlas
of 120 exquisite plates, containing above 600 fignres. The accuracy of dimen-
sions is said to surpass anything before attempted in anatomy : and, if the im-
mense mass of proofs of phrenology from the human head, and the facts pointed
out by Gall in brutes, were not sufficient to convince the most prejudiced, the
additional multitnde amassed by Dr. Yimont will overwhelm them."

" In animals of the lower classes," says Dr. Yimont, '* to begin with fish and
reptiles, the number of cerebral faculties is small ; their acts are generally of short
duration : all have a spinal chord. In the apparatus of the senses they have^
externally, a mnltitnde of Shades of form and structure calculated to facilitate
their actions. The most prominent cerebral faculties are conservation, alimenta-
tion, and reproduction. If there are any perceptive faculties, they are, except in
some species, very limited.

*' What a difference, in this respect, between them and birds ! How must
we be struck with admiration on observing that, with the more energetic and
complicated actions of birds, the cerebral system becomes more ample ! Is it
not still more surprising to see the combination and energy of the faculties per-
fectly coincide with the wants of the species ? How can we, on the other hand,
refuse to be convinced of phrenology, when it proves to us, by the inspection of
many thousands of skulls, that if birds, whatever be their class, order, genus, or
species, or even their peculiar habits, have a faculty in common, for example that
of migration or recognizing places, their skulls will always resemble one another
at one point ; and, as this truth applies to all the faculties discovered by observa-
tion, to deny the existence of these facts is to deny that the eye is the external
apparatus of sight, the ear of hearing, the nose of smelling, &c.

*' In quadrupeds and quadrumana, in which the cerebral operations, generally
considered, are more numerous and present a more continued action than in
birds, we find the cerebral system more developed. Some organs, which were
but rudimentary in the two first classes, are very prominent ; and the acts de-
pendent upon them, being more energetic, confirm the general law of nature, —
the relation between the extent and force of the acts of the nervous system with
its volume or development." ''Full and perfect reliance may be placed on my
observations ; for they are the result of a scrupulous and conscientious examina-
tion of many thousand skulls of brutes, and the dissection of their brains, subse-
quent to the study of their most striking manners and habits."


S^view of Dr. H. Mvnro oa Insaniiy. 87

of action/' or by a '^ paralysis " or deficiency of action ; in
other words^ that insanity is essentially a disease of debility, i.e.
"of nervous and vital depression/* to qnote our author's own
words. In order to prove his position^ the author refers to
dissimilar '^ states of imperfection of mind arising from various
internal and external causes /' viz.^ dreaming, somnambulism,
voluntary abstraction of mind, passion, the mind of in&ncy,
senile imbecility, intoxication, "and fever/' Under these
several heads we find observations of much value; and, al-
though we may complain perhaps of the manner in which
these are put together, and of the almost tedious length which
here and there characterizes them, nevertheless we must not
withhold frord Dr. H. Munro the credit which he deserves
for the care and patience he has bestowed upon his subject,
which is one of some difGiculty and originality. In his " dis-
cussion of the relation which the condition of the vascular
system in insanity appears to hold to the disease,'^ we find
the following remarks : " That no doubt frequently great con-
gestions and sometimes inflammatory action in the brain take
place in persons subject to insanity ; that, when they do so take
place, they aggravate the violence of symptoms in all cases ;
and very probably, in many cases, the insane paroxysm does
not occur until the infirm brain is subjected to this deleterious
influence : 2nd. That this inflammatory action is to be consi-
dered of an asthenic nature : 3rd. That inflammatory action
can under no view of the case be the original catise of insanity:
4th. That it cannot be looked upon as a condition essential
to insanity : 5th. That the presence of inflammation confirms
rather than invalidates the theory that insanity is a disease of
nervous and vital depeession.'^ And further on we find these
words : '^ Prom all that has been said, we may believe that
the brain in insanity may be frequently subject to a low con-
dition of inflammation. But the point of greatest importance
is to give this inflammatory action its right position. Now
to say that insanity and inflammatory action in the brain hold
the relative positions of consequence and ultimate cause,
would be absurd and dangerous. It would be absurd, because
many cases exhibit no symptoms of inflammatory action at
all: so far from there being any febrile symptom present, they
exhibit either a state of unimpaired bodily health, or of such
hodily health as we can attribute to anything but the febrile
state. It would be absurd, again, because inflammation of
the brain and its accompanying delirium is an afiection to
which all are prone, provided the exciting cause be sufficient ;
where^LS insanity is certainly a specific disease, afiecting only
certain constitutions. It would be dangerous to say this if it


88 Review of Dr. H. Munro on Insanity.

led us to antipUogistic treatment^ as has been already shewn;
for be the inflammation acute or chronic^ active or passive, it
will not stand this mode of treatment; while the patient
flourishes generally under the contrary treatment/' "But
suppose, for argument sake, that all insane cases exhibited
inflammatory symptoms; suppose antiphlogistic treatment
answered- as well in insanity as in ordinary inflammation of
the brain ; it would still be absurd and impossible to say that
insanity had no further origin than ordinary inflammation of
the brain, as long as its specific and hereditary character is re-
cognized* And, as we cannot but acknowledge a specific and
constitutional character to insanity, it becomes us to look for
a specific and constitutional cause ; and this is the express
object of these remarks ; but this — a mere tendency to ordi-
nary inflammatory action--can, in my opinion, never be.
Inflammatory action in the brain seems to bear only the posp-
tion of an incident in relation to the cause of insanity, and not
that of an essential part of the disease; a very happy incident,
as we may look upon it as a sign on the part of nature of
reaction and repair, but an incident more connected with the
principle of repair than with the ultimate causation of dis-
ease/' Dr. Munro assures his readers that his pathological
views are eminently borne out by the general physical condi-
tion of the insane, which he has spoken of as one " mumfest-
ing a depressed vitality J^ He writes thus, " A gentleman,
now under my care, is a most violent patient ; at times his
vociferating and fighting propensities are intolerable, and,
though a small man, it requires two much larger men to re-
strain him from acts of violence. This gentleman's face is
pallid, lips white, and his aspect generally enfeebled ; he has
a remarkably intermitting pulse, the intermissions occurring
about every six pulsations. When his appearance improves,
his mania decreases. We do all we can to strengthen his
system, under the firm belief that anything like antiphlogistic
treatment would be his ruin." As may be expected, good
diet and tonic medicines, with afr and exercise, constitute
the remedial resources of Dr. Henby Munro.

It is quite impossible for us to speak too highly of the
pathological and general views contained in the book under
consideration ; nor can we do otherwise than recommend the
principles of treatment advised in it to the especial and favour-
able notice of our readers. However, this much remains for
us, viz., to assure Dr. H. Munro that the opinions he has now
presented to the attention of his medical brethren are not of
that ORIGINAL character which he claims for them ; nor are
they his own exclusively, as various passages in his book seem


Review of Dr. U. Munro on In$amty. 89

to imply — ^ tny theory y^ to quote our author — \% of older date
than therein represented. The colnmus of our own journal
will inform those who will be at the trouble to refer to Vol. I.,
page 111 and seq., that "insanity'' was^ in 1843 (nearly eight
years since) , described "as of two kinds, the one dependent on
nervous irritation of the brain, and the other on ii^Ummation;''
and that the former cause of the disease " consists in an aber^
ration from the normal standard of the ultimate structure of
some portion or portions of the cerebral mass J' In order to
prove insanity "a nervous disease/' the writer remarks,
" What very materially confirms my position, is the fact thai
the most violent forms offwious mania most commonbf occur in
persons of weak and delicate fire and great susceptibility*'
He adds, '^ / frequently witness the most urgent symptoms of
acute insanity in combmation with a small and feeble and quick
puke, cold skin, and a retracted and anxious countenance, 8^c."
The cerebral disorganizations, effusions, &c., the effects of
past inflammatory action of the brain and membranes, are
singularly enough explained and accounted for on precisely
the same t>riuciples as those offered by Dr. Henry Munro in
his book. Thus : "No one can doubt that every single thought
and feeling is associated with. certain physical and molecular
changes in some part or parts of the brain; and, if so, every
case of insanity, however slight and temporary, must consist of
an obnormal action of a portion of the ultimate structure; and
this, continuing to increase in intensity and content, so affects the
vascular condition of the brain and membranes, that to it at
length we become indebted for the more palpable and demon-
strable pathological conditions already spoken' of " Again:
" What I would contend for is, that in the majority of instances
where the disease (insanity) is not prodtu:ed by a physical
injury, the abnormal appearances here considered are the ef-
fects only of a pre-existing cause," viz., " nervous irritation."
" The very common evidences of the existence of past or even
present inflammatory action of the brain or membranes, I con-
sider a proof of not only the occasional association of dis-
eased cerebration mth inflammation as its immediate cause, but
also of the frequent occurrence of such in the progress of in-
sanity ; that is, of that form of the disease consequent on
^nervous irritation.'"

The following observations we consider of much value,
and essentially practical; they well bear out the doctrines
advocated by Dr. H. Munro, and, if we mistake not, that
gentleman will derive some satisfaction from their perusal : —
" T/te patients in Han/well are very liable to attacks qf cerebral
and meningeal inflammation, and which not unjirequenily prove


40 Review of Dr. H. Munro on Insanity.

the immediate catise of death. In such cases the general symp^
toms which indicate the eonstence of inflammatory disease as-
sume the same asthenic character which belongs to enteritis
erysipelas, ^c, when occurring in n£rvoits and irritable subjects.
Upon the same principle that such persons are more liable to
ordinary derangement of the general health, of which chronic
inflammatory diseases form a great part, so are the insane
predisposed to the occurrence of cerebral and meningeal inflam-
mation, and hence of coterse the ordinary appearance observed
c^er deathP

The very similar manner in which our authors have ex-
plained their views does not end here : for, as it remains for
us to shew, not only do they agree as to the essential nature
of disordered mind — its association with an impaired general
health — its frequent combination with asthenic inflammatory
affections of the cerebral mass and of its membranes, effusions,
&c., regarded only as effects of a pre-existing cause, viz.,
*^ irritable excess of action^' (Munro), " nervous irritation ^^
(Davey), but, what is more, they each advocate the same
principles of treatment. Thus, whilst the former-named writer
prescribes ^^ good food'' and "tonic medicines,^' the latter in-
sists on it that " the most appropriate and successful treatment
consists in the administration of sedatives, with a generous diet,
and the employment of those various means calculated to im-
prove the general health.'' Dr. Davey continues: "Many
cases of violent mania are cured in Hanwell by the administra-
tion of wine and steel.'*

These opinions are much amplified, and, what is more,
practically illustrated, in the late publication by Dr. Davey,
entitled "Contributions to Mental Pathology,'^ and from
which the annexed cases are taken. Each case the author
considers to demonstrate the important fact, that " the excite*
ment and fury which belong to acute insanity are (iw the ma-
jority of cases) but evidences of vital exhaustion, and con-
stitute merely an asthenic or atonic delirium, and are of much
the same nature as that which obtains in the advanced stages
of typhoid fevers.'^

"P. A., of European extraction, a native of Ceylon. When ad-
mitted he was wretchedly emaciated and enfeebled, and very restless
and excitable His mind was tormented by the most miserable fore-
bodings of evil; and altogether his condition was the most abject and
deplorable I ever saw. He suffered also from aggravated dyspepsia,
indicated principally by a dirty and loaded tongue, depraved secre-
tions, and an occasional tenderness of the epigastrium. My first
care was to put the digestive apparatus into good order, for which
purpose I directed tte daily use of pills composed of pil. hydr., pil.


Review of Dr. H, Munro on Insanity. 41

rheei co., and p. scammoD. ; afterwards he took quinine and carb.
ferri. Sedatives, ns morphia, were given as required at night, and his
diet was properly attended to throughout his illness. When he had
sufficiently ina proved he was encouraged to employ himself, and to
walk out night and morning. When discharged he appeared a stout
athletic maa; his gratitude is unbounded.

''Some time since I was cousulted concerning a high-caste Indian
— a Chitty — who presented, in many particulars, much the same
condition as the last patient. This poor fellow had been most un-
mercifully bled, each accession of mental excitement had been met
by " more leeches," " more leeches :" but, as may be expected, this
treatment had been attended with no advantage. I put him on a
tonic plan, and sent him from his home: he soon recovered.

''A little girl, aged 14, for some months insane, and who was
treated antiphlggistically by an eminent member of the medical
profession in Ceylon, was brought to my notice. Pills of pil. hydr.
and aloes, and ext. hyoscyam., at night, an occasional shower-bath,
with the internal use of carb. ferri and quinine, restored her to ex-
cellent health. Thecatamenia made their appearance, and so termi-
nated her mental disorder. At Hanwell I found such cases as com-
mon as possible."

We must add oar conviction that, had Dr. Henry Munro
enjoyed the good fortune to be acquainted with the contents
of The Zoist, he would hardly have ventured to present
his book to the medical public without referring, in some
way, to the article in our first volumCj from which we have
above quoted so fully. We doubt not that, should Dr. H.
Munro's book reach a second edition, he will not again be
found writing of " my theory ^' with the same confidence as
on this the first issue of his opinions.

One word more. Dr. H. Munro has given it as his belief
that the " irritable excess of action" so much insisted on as
the cause of insanity, is the consequence of a " loss ofnervotis
tone ;'^ and to this latter cerebral condition he refers also the
^^ paralysis^' or " deficient nervous tone" which characterizes
long-standing cases of lunacy, imbecility, and so forth. On
reconsideration our author may perhaps be disposed to modify
this view of the case, involving, as it does, not a little diffi-
culty and suspicion. Irritation, i.e. "morbid sensibility"
(BiUing), should be viewed rather as the cause of nervous ex^
haustion than in the light of the effect, or we greatly err.
/'Continued excitation of the nerves of a healthy part at last
produces ipflammation, by exhausting that nervous influence
which gives the capillaries power ; they thus become weak-
ened, allow of over distension, and the part is in the state of
inflammation or congestion.^'* The history of almost 99 cases

* Dr. BiUmg's Principles of Medicine, pp. 30, 31,


42 Cure of an ulcerated Leg.

pf insamtj out of every 100 will^ if we mistake not^ prove
this much. That an ^'irritable excess of action" (Munro)y
confined to the brain^ is^ in certain cases^ more certainly
caused by a defective circulation of blood through the organ^
that is^ by an arterial rather than by a nervous exhaustion, is
plainly seen ; and under such circumstances^ we take it, did
cerebral ^'paralysis " (Munro) occur, it must be regarded as
a natural sequence of the pre-existing morbid affections ; viz.,
an altered quantity or quality of the circulating fluid and
irritation of the cerebral fibrous structure. The observations
of Dr. Billing on the proximate cause of " morbid sensibility,"
alias ^' irritation" are of great interest to the pathological
enquirer, and their perusal we would earnestly recommend to
our medical readers.

Q.


X. Cure of a very bad and ulcerated Leg with varicose veins.

By Mr. H. J. Pradelle.

"Thb new Nuisance — Phonoorapht.

<< To the Editor qfihe Exeter and Plymouth Gazette.

** Sir^ — ^The powers qf enil are ever on the alert; and snch, unfortunately, is
the corruption of man's nature, that it is always far easier to effect a change for
harm than for good. Of all the devices concerted in the workshop of folly and
iniquity for some time past, one of the most mischievous, in my opinion, is that
of the so-called Phonetic writing ! A generation educated on Phonetic principles
might be expected to speak a jargon such as was never heard since the world
began. But this, though a very serious, though an intolerable oonsequence, is as
nothing compared to the probable evils of' an infidel and democratic nature, re-
sulting from the general adoption of this odious scheme ; the original conception
of which, as I have before intimated, I can only attribute to it^femal powers. —
A Clergyman in Exeter, — January, 1850.'


tt


Haying, in January 1848, been requested by Mr. Briggs, of
27, Nottingham P)ace, to attend a poor woman, Mrs. Susan
Gurden, then 43 Vears of age, residing at 18, Paradise Street,
High Street, Marylebone, for a diseased leg, which was threat-
ened with amputation, I did so with complete success, and
here subjoin her own statement of the case.

In 1839 her legs began to swell, especially after standing
for any length of time or walking, and still more during preg-
nancy. About a year after this, and two months previous to
a confinement, she received a very severe shock from her hus-
band being brought home much injured by a fall. Her left
leg being exceedingly swelled at thq^ time, one of the veins
started, and she lost about three pints of blood. Mr. Jackson,
of South Street, Manchester Square, was called in. On his
removing the apron which Mrs. G. had applied to stanch the


By Mr. H. J. FradeUe. 43

bloody this flowed afresh. Mr. J. stopped it by the application
of lint and a bandage. He ordered her to be kept all night
lying on three chairs^ and cold water to be frequently poured
upon the bandaged leg. He told her that her legs were so
much swelled that^ independently of this accident^ sooner or
later a vein w^ould have burst. Her legs soon got better^ and
the swelling went down : the only inconvenience she experi-
enced was weakness of the left ankle, which would frequently
give way.

Six year3 after^ and about six weeks before her confine-
ment, the same vein broke out afresh two or three times.
Dr. Davis, of the dispensary in Welbeck Street, then attended
her, and ordered her not to walk at all, to give it as much
rest as possible, and to apply cold bread-and-water poultices
to it. He also ordered her bark, of which she took a great
deal. A sore having broken out, he said he must not heal
it tOl after her confinement. It was accordingly bound up :
plaster strapping was applied, and six yards of bandage tightly
bound round. Thus it remained for about three weeks, and,
when the bandage was taken off, the leg was quite healed ; .
but she by his direction kept the bandage on five weeks more,
when the leg became stronger.

Two years after this (1847) her Jeft leg broke out again
in sores ; about twenty of them round the ankle and half way
up the leg : she then obtained a letter for the dispensary in
Welbeck Street, and has had three since, and was under the
care of Mr. Beaver, of Berners Street, for a twelvemonth.
He ordered her to use the same poultice as before, and to
keep her bed. He attended her on this occasion at her resi^
dance two or three times during the week. Fomentations
of poppy-heads were applied. Many small sores like blind
boils took place, and the leg turned almost black. Lotions
were afterwards applied, and also Unt smeared with red oint-
ment, wetted and covered with oil-silk. He then applied
liquid caustic on some of the sores with lint, and made them
bum and smart terribly. She took during the first six months
a quantity of pills and other medicine, which she left off, as
they had not done her any good. There had been no improve-
ment in the state of her leg since, while under his care. In
the summer he recommended her to wear a laced stocking;
but it pressed so much on her leg that, after wearing it for
one day, she gave it up entirely. There was frequently a
Tunning and bleeding, the bandages being tightly put on
during the whole twelvemonth. He told her he thought hers
a very troublesome and dreadful leg, and that it would never


44 Cure of an ulcerated Leg.

be well again. Dr. Campbell and several other medical men
who saw it there said the same. Mr. Beaver had said in her
presence that she had varicose (mistaken by her for very coarse)
veins^ such as he had never seen before. He said more
than once to her, " I cannot make a cure of your leg;^' some-
times (scratching his head), '* Poor creature ! I don't know
what to do with you.'' He at last proposed that she should
have it off, and wear a wooden one in its stead. The next
time he saw her he asked if she had made her mind up for
the operation. She told him. No ; she would rather have her
own leg ; to which he facetiously replied, " Why if you have
a wooden one and pay for it, will it not then be your own ?"
I mention all this to shew the inefficacy of all the ordinary
means carefully and kindly employed.

Her leg at the time I first attended her presented the
appearance of being scalded, was greatly swollen, and the
veins were distended. Five or six ulcers were about the ankle,
and above it ; they were white in the centre, red and raised
round the edges. She had often told her husband that she
. would prefer losing her leg than suffer as she did from it.

The first time I mesmerised by very slow passes over the
face for half an hour : this not appearing to affect her in the
least, I altered the mode to that of mesmerising locally, which
I thought might be better suited to her case. The first few
passes convinced me that it was so; for they produced an
agreeable coolness, which lasted. I continued them for half
an hour longer with increased benefit. I repeated this process
an hour daily for four weeks ; at the end of which time the
largest and last ulcer was completely healed. Pointing steadily
at the ulcers, though it produced a pricking sensation, assisted
in curing them. I had from the first directed her to remove
the bandages and replace them without troubling the surgeon.
Z preferred mesmerising by passes without contact over the
bare leg.

About a fortnight from the commencement of mesmeric
treatment, she went to the dispensary. Mr. Beaver observed,
*' Your leg is getting well, I suppose, or you would have come
to me before." She then shewed him her leg, without inform-
ing him that it had been mesmerised. He appeared surprized,
and said, " Well ! I think I shall make a cure of your leg at
last." It remains for me to add that the swelling of the veins
of her legs has since subsided : that it is now three years since
the cure was effected : and that she has not since had any
trouble from her leg, or any symptoms of her former com-
plaint, but works as a charwoman for fifteen out of the


Cure of Ulcers of the Leg. 45

twenty-four hours every day except Sunday, supporting her
crippled husband and three children. I subjoin the attesta-
tion to this eflFect of both Mr. and Mrs. Gurden, who will be
happy to ansTirer any questions to anybody.

March 5th, 1851. H. J. Fkadelle.

13, Seymour Place, Euston Square.

We, the undersigned, hereby certify that the above state-
ment is perfectly correct. Susan Gurden.

Henry Gurden.


XI. Cure of Ulcers of the Leg with varicose veins, by a Lady.

By Dr. Elliotson.

" On this, as on all former occasions, we see the accuracy of the statements
made by MUe. Reichel, which continue to be exact, even in cases like the pre-
sent, in which I did not at first rightly apprehend them. And this is the same
MUe. Reichel whom her countrymen, the Vienna physicians, formerly mentioned,
have not been ashamed publicly to brand as a liar and impostor. She is a simple,
but inteUlgent and well-principled girl, belonging to an order of nuns ; and during
three months, which she spent in my house, her conduct was entirely blameless,
and snch that all of ns felt attached and kindly disposed towards her. Nothing
is easier and more convenient, as a cloak for ignorance, than to get rid of, by
declaring it to be imposture, a phenomenon which, for want of knowledge, we
cannot: understaml, or, for want of dexterity in investigation, we cannot lay hold
of. But then, I must say it openly, there is nothing more unmanly and dis-
honoo-rable than, abusing our superiority, recklessly and unconscientiously to
deprive a poor, sick, defenceless girl, of the only treasure she has, her good
name, and to brand her with dugrace. When the accusation, besides, is a false-
hood, a mere groundless calumny, as I shall prove to these gentlemen out of
their own account of their deplorably bad experiments, it cries to heaven for
redress, and every honest heart, with a sense of truth and duty, will share in the
indignation I feel at such unworthy conduct." — JReiehenbach*s Researches, trans.
lated by Dr. W- Gregory, p. 327.

•* It is painful to think that parallel cases have not been wanting in England.
The spontaneous somnambulism, and apparent transference of the senses, in Miss
M'Avoy, met with precisely similar treatment ; as did the very interesting facts
which occurred in the case of Dr. EUiotson's patients, the Okeys. There was
the same predetermination to find the patient an impostor, the same utter absence
of all cogency in the evidence adduced, and the same rash and unjustifiable, as
well as unmanly, accusation of imposture, brought against persons of whom no
evil was known, apparently because the authorities chose to assume the facts to
be impossible. The still more recent case of Miss Martineau's servant girl is
another instance in point. Having seen that girl, and made observations on her,
I can speak with confidence of her honesty and truthfulness. It is the duty of
every lover of truth and of science, to protest energetically against the system of
reckless accusations of imposture preferred against persons of bkmeless charac-
ter, because their statements appear to us incredible, or, as has often happened,
because we are unable, from want of knowledge of the rules of scientific re-
search, to form a clear distinction in our minds between what is real, and what
may be imaginary or delusive, in the results obtained." — Note by Dr. Gregory,
at p. 356.

A LADY, who is among the very dearest of my friends, and
resides in Belgravia, requested me, in July 1847, to see her


4G Cure of Ulcers of the Leg,

maid's leg. I found ulcers upon and below the calf of one
leg, with varicose veins all over the leg and foot. The maid
was a tall, stout, florid, healthy-looking young woman. The
leg was much swollen and very red and hot. The obvious
treatment was to lay the leg up as much as possible, to reduce
the diet considerably, and give cathartics with mercurials :
and this was rigorously adopted: and spermaceti ointment
was applied. The lady and her daughter well knew the truth
and value of mesmerism ; and after a short time mesmerism,
as the improvement was very small, was proposed, and the
lady's daughter, on my recommending it, cheerfully offered
to make passes over the bare leg for half an hour daily.
Decided amendment soon began: and the ulcers slowly
healed : and in six weeks she could move about as well as
ever. The leg has remained perfectly healed to this day,
nearly four years : though she has lived like the rest of the
servants, is still stout and florid, and as a lady's maid is ne-
cessarily a good deal on her legs. She wears a laced stocking:
though, had mesmerism been continued many months, this
perhaps would not have been necessary. Every surgeon
knows, not only the obstinacy of ulcers on the legs with vari-
cose veins, but their disposition to return.

As ordinary treatment was combined with mesmerism, I
cannot adduce the case as one of cure with mesmerism : but
knowing, as we all do, on the one hand, the extreme obsti-
nacy in general of ulcers of legs with varicose veins, espe-
cially in plethoric heavy persons of the sanguineous tempera-
ment ; and, on the other, the great power of mesmerism in
causing ulcers to heal,* I am satisfied that mesmerism was
the chief means of cure.

* See my rapid cure of an ulcer in the leg of old Mr. Edwards of my own
street, after Mr. Haviland, a surgeon in the Edgware Road, had employed the
soundest treatment in vain, and I had afterwards failed as completely. Miss
Edwards mesmerised the leg, and in two days she saw improvement enough to
satisfy her that the leg would heal. It has remained well to this hour, now six
years. See Zoistf No. XL, p. 316. " On account of the inflammation I also
ordered leeches, which first and last were applied a dozen times ; the application
of cold water, which soothed very much more than warm fomentations ; I gave
him an abundance of cathartics ; gently mercurialized him ; allowed no flesh food,
not even broth, — ^he was already an abstainer from wine, malt liquor and spirits ;
and ordered the leg to be kept up. Various applications were made to the ulcers,
and nitrate of silver among the rest.

'^ After he had been under my care six weeks, improving no more than he had
done under Mr. Haviland of Maida Hill, with whose approbation I saw him, I
was absolutely at a loss, and in my annoyance proposed a trial of local mesmer-
ism, hardly venturing to hope it would answer better than my previous measures.
The daughter promised me to make longitudinal passes over the sores and inflam-
mation for half an hour night and morning : and she fulfilled her promise.

'* In two days, the three small ulcers began to close and the large ulcer looked
better — the edges somewhat drawn towards each other ; so that she said, ' this


By a Lady. 47

However, those who are ignorant of mesmerism are at

liberty to reject the cure. I publish the case to illustrate

the positive agency of mesmerism upon the living parts : and

the facts which I shall now relate corroborate the probability

of the great share of mesmerism in the cure — ^the permanent,

be it remembered, cure.

During the first few days of mesmerism nothing occurred.
But at length, in a few minutes after the passes were com-
menced, she always began to complain that her leg was asleep^
and that she felt sharp pricking sensations like those known
by the name of pins and needles. Wherever the fingers
were directed, the pains were chiefly felt ; and occasionally
were so acute that she could scarcely endure the passes. They
grew sharper every time the leg was mesmerised, and in-
creased the longer each process was continued.

On hearing this I made a trial myself, and found the same
pain come on after a few passes, and increase till they were
evidently intolerable. The further off I stood while making
them, the less severe was the pain : and, at the distance of a
few yards, I did not produce it during the short time that I
made a trial.

I next examined the effect of an intervening body, and
made the passes over paper held between her leg and my
hand. This lessened the painful effect, and for a minute pre-
vented it ; but by perseverance I at last produced the pain in
some degree, and gradually more and more as I persevered,
till she begged me to desist.

The pain became at length so severe and began so quickly

will do,' convinced that she had now the proper remedy. The chronic inflam-
mation mpldly disappeared ; the pain, burning and itching, which had tormented
him for half a year^ subsided ; the large ulcer began to heal ; and in a month
from the day when mesmerism was begun^ there was neither ulcer nor infiamma'
tionj and his leg has continued as sound as the other to this day^ Sept, 20th :
all medicines and applications having been omitted, that the mesmerism might be
fairly judged of."

Odier mesmeric cures of ulcers abound in The Zoist, and many of the ulcers
were scrofuloas.

See No. XII., pp. 519, 520. Two remarkable cures of inveterate scrofulous
ulcers, by Miss Wallace.

No. XXII., p. 198. The cure, by the Rev. T. Bartlet, of several very long-
standing ulcers, treated in vain, and no doubt properly, in a hospital, and in a
dispensary, and in private.

No. XXVI., p. 176. The scrofulous ulcers were of five years standing, and
had been treated by medical men all the time. Mr. Hazard, like Mr. Amor, (No.
XXXII., p. 365,) both cured the ulcers and restored the health.

No. XXVII., p. 301. By the wife of a distinguished mathematical philo-
sopher.

No. XXIX., p. 39. By Mr. Capera. p. 90. By Mr. Tubbs, a finger dis-
eased from an accident, p. 166. By Mr. Capem, after medical treatment for
eight years, and eighteen quart bottles of medicine firom one surgeon only.


48 Cure of Ulcers of the Leg,

that by the time the cure was almost complete mesmerism
could not be continued, and I advised the dressing of sper-
maceti ointment and lint, employed merely to save the sores
from friction, to be mesmerised always before it was applied.
But a degree of stinging was felt even from the mesmerised
dressing : not so severe, but still real enough. Sometimes un-
mesmerised dressing was employed without the knowledge of
the patient, but it never produced pain. This does not sur-
prise me any more than the cure and the stinging by the
passes over the leg ; because the various effects of mesmerised
water upon certain mesmeric subjects are well-established facts,
and have been witnessed by me times innumerable during the
last thirteen years.

The ready accusers of mesmeric patients will be at a loss
here to indulge their ignorant ahd vulgar habits. The disease
and the cure were visible and indisputable. The case was one
perfectly private. The phenomenon was local, and by no
means calculated to excite : and nothing could be contem-
plated by pretending pain but the stoppage of the cure and
of a most benevolent attention from a young lady. From
this case we may learn to be more disgusted than ever with
the conduct of Mr. Wakley and of a host of people no better
than himself towards the Okeys and others who have mani-
fested mesmeric phenomena.

The motto prefixed to this article shews the same spirit to
animate some of the medical profession at Vienna as in Great
Britain and Ireland. But it shews likewise that Baron Reich-
enbach deems it his duty to expose them with no more mercy
than we expose them here. Some working and openly-pub-
lishing mesmerists formerly differed from us who expose and
castigate our adversaries. But every such mesmerist has
long confessed that he now goes with us, and that silence
and gentleness would have been taken advantage of by these
persons. The mesmerists who contribute nothing to our
science, or who conceal their names when they do so, still
disapprove of our plain-speaking, and adduce for our imitation
B/Cichenbach, who in his first edition castigated nobody. I
recollect Dr. Thomas Mayo talking thus to me. But Dr. Mayo
has not laboured at all for us : nay, he told a patient that
mesmerism would injure him ; and made such silly remarks and
such an attack upon Miss Aglionby as could have been ex-
pected from none but a hardened autimesmerist. Beichen-
bach, now that his innocent patients have been attacked,
belabours his adversaries without mercy :

" He does not shew a spark of mercy :
No, not he« but vice vers^,**

Conduit Street, March, 1851. John Elliotson.


( 49 )

XII. Successful remit of Two cases of Loch-jaw or Tetanus
in Horses, treated with Mesmerism. The one by Mr.
H. S. Thompson, of Fairfield, near York; the other by
Mr. South, Veterinary Surgeon, New Bond Street.
ComDQunicated by Dr. EUiotson.

" Flasienrs chevanx ont aim^ et d^fenda lenn maitres ; plasieara ont M
rebeUes et ingrats, mais c'est le petit nombre. Un cfaeval bien tndt^, bieDnmirri,
caresse par son maitre, est boiaooap plus reoonnaissant qn'mi conrtisan.'*—
VoLTAi&s, IHaloguea, xzix.

Case by Mr. Thompson.

Understanding that a case of lock-jaw or tetanus in a horse
has been successfully treated by Mr. Amor, of Bond Street,
I have thought that an account of a case of lock-jaw in a
horse, treated by myself, several years ago, and in which
the animal recovered, may not be altogether uninteresting.

A valuable yearling colt was suddenly seized with lock-
jaw. As I was from home, staying at a frieud^s house in
the neighbourhood, my groom immediately dispatched a
messenger to inform me, and in the mean time sent for a
veterinary surgeon. I arrived a few minutes after the vete-
rinary surgeon, and asked him what treatment he proposed.
He said bleeding, and, if possible, giving calomel and opium :
if he could not get anything down the throat, then to give
it injections in the first place of oil and opium. I next asked
him if he had seen many instances of tetanus. He answered
that he had seen many. ^^How many had he cured?''
'^ None ! V 1 then told him, as that was the case, I should
prefer killing the colt my own way ; and I immediately set
two men tp work, one on each side, to rub the animal from
the head to the tail with a piece of flannel steeped in oil,
hartshorn, and camphorated spirits, and. to make the friction as
light and as rapid as possible over the animal. When the men
were tired, I put two others to take their places. I had the
satisfaction in two hours of finding the animal could turn his
head slightly, and that it could separate its teeth about half
an inch. This process was continued for several hours, and
there was a further improvement. I then ordered some sheep
to be brought up, and two to be killed every two Y>r three
hours,*' and their warm skins to be wrapt round the body and
neck, and partially over the head. The colt the next day
could move about, bend his neck, and drink freely. I con-
tinued this treatment for two days, i.e., friction and sheep skins,
and at the end of a week a slight stiffness only in the limbs
was observable : but the eyes were still turned up and drawn

VOL. IX. £


50 Thao cases of Lock-jaw or Tetanus in Horses,

inwards. The friction was still persevered with for an hour or
so .each day, and the animal kept warm. The last thing that
got qnite right was the direction of the eyes. It was nearly
five or six weeks before they looked quite natural. The colt
got perfectly well; I sold it for a good price, and it won
several races afterwards. Its name was Cable, by &heet
Anchor. At the time I pursued this treatment with the colt
I was altogether ignorant of the benefit of mesmeric manipa*
lations^ though I had been long aware of the great use of
friction and animal heat* in cases of strains, rheumatic affec-
tions, and swelling of the joints and limbs.

The first time that I witnessed the good effects of animal
heat in recent strains was when I was quartered with my
regiment in Ireland. A horse I was training sprained the
fetlock so severely that it could scarcely put its foot to the
ground, and the joint was much swollen. I was recommended
by an old man, who had had great experience with horses,
to apply a lamb skin hot from an animal recently killed.
The effect was almost immediate ; the horse very soon appear-
ing free from pdn: and with no other applications than
fresh skins, and light friction, it was soon quite sound again.
The application of a sheep skin, warm from the animd, in
cases of strains, or rhenmatic affections of the loins and back
of a horse, is a very old and common remedy with country
farriers ; and I know of none so efficacious. The skin is
generally left on until it becomes offensive : but I am con-
vinced, from experiments which I have witnessed, that the
application of fresh skins is far more effective. Of the use
of friction every horse owner is aware. After severe work,
or when the legs are at all swollen, hand-rnhhing is the usual
and constant practice of all good grooms ; and I have often
seen hard swellings removed by the use only of constant
friction with the hand.

H. S. Thompson.
Fairfield^ near York,

Feb. 28, 1861.

Case by Mr. South.

Sir,*--I hope you will excuse the liberty I have taken in
writing to you respecting the case of tetanus that you saw
at my Infirmary. Should you, Sir, consider this case worthy
of forwarding to The Zoist I shall be very happy.

Your obedient Servant,
To Dr. Elliotson. G. South, V. S.

* See my note upon this subject in No. XXIII , pp. 254^-263. — J. Elliotsom.


sHCcessfitlfy treated with Mesmerism. 61

On the 25th D^.^ 1850, I was sent for to see a horse
that was very ill, and on my arrival I fonnd him suffSering
with a general spastic rigidity of the mnscles ; the jaws were
completely closed. I had him removed to my Infirmary with
the intention of carrying ont the new views on the subject ;
and, if possible, to pnt hint' into a comatose or sleepy state.
Having had the opportunity of seeing the operation of mes-
merism in tfa^ human subject, and with a satisfactory result,
I concluded that some relief might be given to the horse ;
and, with the kind assistance of Mr. Amor and a friend, we
commenced oar operation at 6 o'clock, p.m., and continued
tQl 12 p.m., and during the latter part of the time he was
sleepy, frequently nodding his head, and nearly falling. We
made passes with contact from the back of his head to his
tail, and down his foce.

26th, 8 a.m. I recommenced my former treatment with
the assistance of Mr. Amor and my assistant ; we kept at
him until 11 p.m. At 6 p.m., I was visited by Ih*. Ashbumer
iond Mr. Amor, who kindly assisted in the operation.

27th. Treatment continued to 81st ; water well mesmer-
ised, and likewise gruel, were frequently offered, but he was
unable to partake of the slightest quantity.

Jan. 1st. Treatment continued; and before leaving him
two quarts of water were strongly mesmerised, and drunk
by him.

2nd. Treatment continued.

8rd. Ditto ditto; symptoms better; not so much rigidity
of the muscles or excitement ; and with great difficulty he par-
took of a little hay. There was thus decided improvement
on the 9th day; and from this time he continued to mend.

4th. Symptoms better; treatment was persevered in, and
he steadily improved, so that on the 25th Feb. I sent him
home perfectly well.

*3ie* Those who thought Miss Martineau mad for declaring
she cured a cow may ponder on these two cases, and begin
to remember that cows, horses, and other brutes, are, like
us, flesh and blood, and brain and nerves ; and, Uke us, eat,
drink, and feel, and walk,* and above all things take physic
like ourselves with advantage. — John Elliotson.

* See my remarks, No. XXXI., pp. 295-303.


E 2


( 52 )

XIIT. Case of Lock'Jaw in a youth successfully treated. From
William Lloyd, of the Society of Friends, Naburn,
near York. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.

** Then stood forth Etwy, and said to this effect : M7 lordf I bare known this
man a long time, and will attest upon my^oath, before this honourable bench,
that he is

*' Judge. Hold,— give him his oath.

** So they sware him : then he said, My lord, this man, notwithstanding his
plausible name, is one of the vilest men in our country. He neither regardeth
prince nor people, law nor custom : but doth all that he can to possess all men
with certain of his disloyal notions, which he calls principles, &c.''

'* Then they called Superstition [M'Neile, Tonna, and the rest?], and bid
him look upon the prisoner : they also asked what be could say for their lord the
king against him. Theu they sware him ; so he began.

" Superstition. My Lord, I have no great acquaintance with this man, nor
do I desire to hix»e further knowledge of him : however, this I do know, that he
is a very pestilent fellow, from some discourse that the other day I had with him
in this town ; for then, talking with him, I heard him say that our religion (ther-
apeutics) was naught, and such by which a man could by no means please God.
Which saying of his, my Lord, your Lordship very well knows what necessarily
thence will follow, to wit, that we still do worship in vain, are yet in our sins,
ioid finally shall be damned ; and this is what I have to say." — Pilgrim's Pro-
gress.

Very esteemed friend, Dr. Elliotson, — The report of a per-
fect cure in a case of decided lock-jaw appearing to me too
valuable a link to be withheld from the long chain of evidence
in favour of mesmeric influence, I tender the following infer-
mation for insertion in the pages of The Zoist, should it be
approved as a suitable communication.

The particulars I obtained in a letter kindly sent me by
the mesmerist who performed the cure, in reply to my appli-
cation posted to him (though a stranger), in consequence ^f
my having heard of the circumstance. I should have been
glad to have forwarded a copy of the said letter for insertion,
containing as it does full particulars, including the locality
and the names of all parties concerned ; but, though I have
repeatedly written for such permission, or that he would for-
ward his own account, I am as yet minus a reply. I will
therefore risk the responsibility of giving my own narration
of the particulars I have thus obtained. Nevertheless I do
not feel at liberty under such circumstances to include the
desirable information of names and locality ; to obviate which
deficiency, I enclose the same for deposit at the publishers,
if they will kindly exhibit it to such as may apply.

In the summer of 1843, a youth of about 14 years of age,
the son of J. B., wharfinger and shipowner in a town in the
north of England, had a fall from a tree, which subsequently
produced lock-jaw. He lay in a hopeless state for some days,
when his father called upon the mesmerist, J. W., a respect-


Case of Lock-jaw in a yotUh successfully trealed. 53

able tradesman in the town^ expressing a strong desire that
he would kindly attend and try the effect. He did so, and
took with him a highly susceptible mesmeric subject. He
was told that the application was made with the approbation of
the medical attendant^ W. D. On his arrival he was informed
that the lad oould get no slesp^ and that he had a violent pa-
roxysm about every fifteen minutes. His mother appeared
to be strongly prejudiced against the employment of mesmer-
ism ; she, however, remained during the process. The sus-
ceptible subject having been put into the mesmeric sleep, a
copper wire fastened round his wrist was affixed to the wrist
of the patient on the side the jaw was most affected ; the usual
mesmeric passes were then commenced, and continued for
about half an hour, down the face and along the jaw of the
patient, who did not appear to be asleep, though his eyes were
for the most part closed. The mesmerist, after continuing
the copper-wire connexion for about an hour, discontinued
his efforts for that time. The parents expressed some sur-
prise that, during the time thus occupied, there had been no
paroxysm, whereas according to usual course four might have
been expected* From the great coldness with which he was
received by the patient's mother, and with a desire not to
give offence to the medical man, J. W. concluded not to go
again unless pressed to do so. Next day, however, the mother
herself sent for him. He went and conducted the process as
before. He was told that the boy had had some very refresh-
ing sleep during the past night; that there had been no
change in the medicine or medical treatment. Whether to
attribute the effect to mesmerism or not they could not tell,
but such was the fact.

With this second application mesmerism became trium-
phant over the disease, the improvement being such that its
repetition was deemed unnecessary. The patient obtaining
sleep and an ability to obtain refreshment, the nervous irri-
tation gradually subsided, and in a short time he was fully
restored to health. It will afford me heartfelt satisfaction
should this narrative be the means of bringing the genial
influence of mesmerism to bear successfully on any case of
this awfully fatal malady.

J. W. in the same letter informed me that he once applied
mesmerism in the case of a poor man afflicted with a dreadful
cancer in the face, who declared he had not known a night's
sleep for four years : which account appears to me of great
importance, inasmuch as it proves the efficacy of local passes,
preparatory to an operation, in cases where coma cannot be-


54 Some euriaui Sensual lUusians.

produced.* After the first application, the following day the
patient said he had enjoyed a most refreshing sleep : the pro^
eeas was then repeated, and another nighfs comfortable rest
obtained. The next day the operation of excisioii was per-
formed, immediately subsequent to local passes over the partj,
for the patient could not be rendered at all unconsdous : yet
he sustained the operation with scarce any apparent suffering,
and his own acknowledgment was, " that he had felt very
little pain indeed :'' — a circumstance, I should suppose, nnpa-
ralleled in the annals of cancer excision, except where the
patients may have been subjected to the mesmeric influence,
or the hazardous inhalation of chloroform.f

With much esteem and regard, I remain thy firiend^
Nabum, near York, William Lloyb.

8rd Month (March) 18th, 1851.

P.S. Should the foregmng appeiu*, I shall be glad if thou
shouldst see the propriety of appending a note expressive of
thy disapprobation of copper as a means of contact, and also
advising, in case of any mesmerist operating on a lock-jaw
patient, to apply the influence to the spinal cord as well aa
the jaw.


XIV. Same curioue Vimdl and Acoustic Illusions, By Sir
Chablss Isham, Bart. Communicated by Pr. Elliotson.

*' In my mind's eye, Horatio.'' — Hamlet, i. 2.

Every sensation from external causes may occur as an in-
ternal feeling from internal causes only, or without the
ordinary cause of the sensation. Thus without an external
cause we may have a feeling of heat or cold, — without the
contact or proximity of hot or cold matters : we may have a
feeling of pulling, pinching, striking, stabbing, &;c. : we may
hear unreid noises, smell unreal odours, taste unreal tastes^

* In connexion with this see my case. No. VI., p. 247 ; VII., p. 388,—
J. Elliotson.

t Painlessness without sleep occnrred to Mr. Case, of Fareham, and is ie«
corded in The ZoUi, No. V., p. 107. He was mesmerising a person before the
extraction of a tootiti, and sent her to sleep the first two da3ns ; but on the third
he failed. However, the operation was performed immediately, and no pain was
felt. Lieut-Col. Davidson did not lose Ms fit of asthma while being mesmerised;
but five minutes afterwards. See above, p. 18. I have « patient who goes to sleep,
never while I mesmerise her, but after I have left her. Mr. Capem mesmerised
a man without causing sleep : but as the man was walking home he began to
feel drowsy, and on arriving slept sixteen hours; though he had not slept an hour
at a time for eight weeks. See his Mighty Curative Powers, p. 3. — J. Elliotsow.


B§ Sir Charki Isham, Bart. 55

and see anreal objects : and sometiiiies illnaions td two or mora
of these kinds are united.^

Visual illnsiona are vory common. Men, brutes, plants,
and inanimate bodies, may appear to the imagination from
various bodily derangements, and are treated of in medical
books and their remedies pointed out, snch as the removal of
blood, aperients, cold applications, narcotics, and tonics, fcc,
&o., according to the condition of tiie brain and rest of the
body. The medical world know no more of the subject. But
mesmerists know that these phenomena sometimes arise from
tympaihy of brains; that one person may have qninpatheti*
oally the sensations, nay, the thoughts and wishes, of another,
even at a distance. If one person thinks intensely upon ano-
ther, this other may fiincy he sees and hears him : and, as
this is the whole of the matter, and there is no proof or pr(A>a«
bility of ghost or spirit, or any such imaginary immaterial
thing, — ^for clothes and other inanimate objects may be equally
seen in fancy and sounds heard, — ^we regard the phenomena
as excitement of some parts of the brain equally with the first
mentioned kind of cases, but produced by the influence of
another's brain. It would seem, if accounts are to be de-
pended upon, that these illusions sometimes arise in a more
inconceiv^fcble manner : like the highest and rarest kind of
clairvoyance,t in which there is an intuitive and unexplained
foreknowledge of external events. A gentleman has lately
communicated to me some strange instances of this form of
illusion — not clairvoyance, but sensual illusion: and not
necessarily the appearance of the individual concerned, but
some other impression to which apparently the working up
of circumstances to result in a certain event has, we know not
how, given rise. I transmit the accounts as they were oblig-
ingly sent to me, and without further comment. It is our^
business, as students of nature, to collect facts carefully but
humbly ; not to reject them as supernatural or idle tales be-
cause they are mysterious and not explicable by our present
amount of knowledge. If they are true, additions will in
time be made to the stock and an explanation will spring up.
John Elliotson.

'' To. Dr. Elliotson. '^ Lamport Hall, Northampton,

"January 21, 1851.
'' Sir, — ^In belief that all psychological facts must be inte-

* See my note to the remarkable Swiss case, in No. XXUC.» p. 24 ; and my
note on the superstitions of mesmerism » p. 68.

•f See remarkable instances even independent of mesmerismi Vol. V., pp. 30»
130, 31 1*344,347.


56 Some curious Sensual lUuswns.

resting to you to know, and may assist in advancing the
study, I venture to write a line to apprize you that there is
at present living, at Gotham, seven miles from Nottingham, a
poor man, by name WiUiam Dring, set. 56, who possesses the
unusual faculty of seeing the apparition of persons, whom he
may have previously known, a short time before their death ;
his mother, set. 85, is also living in the same village, who also
possessed the same power, but appears to have lost it within
the last few years; her mother, she tells me, had the same;
and it is beginning to shew itself in one of the daughters of
the man.

^^ During a visit with the rector last week, I had an oppor-
tunity of seeing the old woman and her son, from whom I
gained many little particulars relating to their case, which,
if you should deem it worthy of enquiry, I should be happy
to communicate to you.

'^ I enclose my card, and remain yours,

'' Charles E. Isham.^'


CC — - - -


Lamport Hall, Jan. 23, 1851,
Sir, — I this day received your note, and take great plea-
sure in forwarding to you all the particulars I could gather
from the case in question.

^' The mother of William Dring, as I before stated, is in
her 86th year, from which circumstance her evidence regard-
ing dates, &;c., cannot be entirely depended upon ; yet she
appears to be in possession of all her faculties. She was first
subject to the phenomenon at about the age of 20 : has seeiv
an apparition as much as three weeks before the death of the
individual, but usually a much shorter time intervenes. They
occasionally appeared in a white dress, looking very gay. One
lady of that description met her on the road, walking rapidly
past, whom she at the time supposed to be a reality : another
walked towards .a stile, and then moved backwards and for-
wards, as it were wishing to pass over but at a loss how to do
so. Upon one occasion, whilst on a visit with a friend at Not-
tingham, she in the night felt a cold hand touch her, and heard
a voice which said, ' You are lying very comfortable ;' knew it
to be an apparition, and avoided looking through fear. This
is the only instance she could give of a speaking voice being
heard ; but, on another occasion, during her confinement, both
she and the woman attending her heard some screams re-
peated close behind them. She also gave an instance of
having heard footsteps coming down stairs whilst sleeping on
the ground floor, but did not look through fear. But the
greatest cause of alarm to her was when the apparition ran


By Sir Charles Isham, Bart, 57

Bt her, as it occasionally did. She was stirring the fire at one
time, and looking ronnd saw a man come from out of the next
room Tanning rapidly towards her : she was also once much
terrified at seeing a coffin borne by several men, and looked
away. At another time she saw two apparitions together,
one of them sat on the bed and looked ' unpleasant ;' could
not exactly describe what she meant by the term, but I be-
lieve said, ^ all of a bunch and black :' the two were killed by
an accident together. Upon enqniry as to whether she had
ever seen a little child, she answered, that at the time of the
death of her infant a white cat appeared to her, ran past her
and vanished : she called this a token of death. She gave an
instance in which she feels sure she saw an apparition some
hours after the death had taken place. Both herself and son
once saw an apparition simultaneously.

" Since the cessation of the power of seeing apparitions,
she has frequently had tokens of death, knockings, &;c. All
T could learn about her mother, who died many years since,
was that she also had the same power of seeing, and that it
also forsook her in old age, but that she afterwards dreamt.

^^I understood that another female relative, long since
dead, also saw in the samef manner.

" William Bring, the only one of that generation, as I
could make out, through whom the faculty has descended, is
an honest looking man, and evidently has not any desire to
deceive or overstate the truth, looks very strong, and has
always had good health ; would not be suspected of having
sensitive nerves ; on the contrary, he has perhaps rather a
heavy expression ; is by occupation a rat-catcher ; age 56 ;
has a wife and family. First saw apparitions at about the age
of 10, when some of his brothers died of fever : his father has
frequently beaten him for disturbing him in the night when
he saw them. Does not know the number he has seen, but
is sure above a hundred : has not the least fear of them : has
passed his arm through one without any sensation. The
death of the individual seen always happens within 24 hours
of the vision : has occasionally seen soldiers without being
able to recognize them. Is sorry his memory is not better;
was not close enough to see number of regiment, nor can he
read. The apparitions are usually in motion, sometimes pass
to and fro several times ; usually turn a corner or pass through
a gate and disappear. Some he must look steadily at, and
not wink his eye, or they vanish. Has never seen a door
opened by one. Saw one without a head, walking j knew the
person by the dress. Can see them distinctly at some dis-
tance, although it may be so dark that he cannot see his


68 Some curioui SetmuU JUusums.

hand before him : they do not appear to be carrying a light.
Sees them daring the day as well as the night. They appear
as distinct as living persons^ so much so tl^t he is frequently
deceived. Never saw the same more than once. At one
time^ when walking by the side of a person, saw that same
person at a distant part of the field, who died, as usual, a few
hours after. They frequently wake him in the night by a
sensation as of widking lightly over him or pressing him* In
a former house he inhabited, many used to come from a cer-
tain door, and disappear behind a projecting chimney-comer.
His wife tells me she has frequently been directed by him in
the night to look at them, but without any result. When I
first saw him, last Sunday week, he had had a disturbed
night, and supposed he should hear of a death, but was not
aware that he had seen anything : heard of the death of a
friend in the neighbouring parish next morning.

''The following example will prove that the individual
seen need not be of necessity on terms of close intimacy with

the seer. The parish is the property of Lord H , but,

the family residence being some thirty miles firom the place,

Dring had seen the late Lady H on but few occasions,

and believes he has not spoken more than to say Good morning.
He one day saw the apparition of a lady whom he thought
resembled Lady H., and told several persons, adding that he
hoped it was a mistake of his. However news afterwards
came that Lady H. died (1836).

'' Upon enquiring whether he had ever seen other than the
human form, he answered. Never, except that many years since,
whilst walking at night on a turnpike road, near a burial
ground, a creature which he described as somewhat resem-
bUng a calf, of a brown colour, with the head set dose upon
the shoulders, walked before him some little distance, and
then ' reared itself up' against a tree (sat on its haunches).
He ran past it much terrified, and, looking back, saw it in the
same position. He has since heard that horses in coaches have
been stopped in that spot apparently frightened. He has
been there since, but without seeing anything. He has passed
through churchyards at all hours of the night, but has never
seen anything, and does not believe in ghosts of dead persons
appearing, although he has heard many stories relating to
them.

" The wife of Dring told me that she believes one o! her
daughters, age 30, is about to manifest the same phenomenon,
since she firequently feels uneasy before a death ; and, when
last week her brother-in-law died, she almost thinks that she
saw him, and is sure she saw his teeth ! — they were very white.


By Sir Charlei bham, Bart 69

*' I believe I have now given a ttatement of the facto I
gathered during a eonversation of two hours with the fiuniljr.
I shall expect to be in London shortly, and will call on ^ou
and confirm what I have written, or make more intelligible
anything that has not been clearly stated.

** I remain, yours sincerely,

'^Chablbs E. Isham/'

''LampcMrt HaU, Feb. Ist, 1861.
'' Dear Sir. — ^When I saw yon yesterday I omitted making
known to you a circumstance wmch took place to a young
lady. Miss T., now stajring with me at Iiamport.

'' About five years ago Miss T., then aged about 20, was

staying in the house of her uncle near the town of C ^r,

in Essex, and occupied the same room with lus daughter,
Miss E. T. One night at about 11 o'dock, and soon after
they retired to their room. Miss T. distinctly heard a bell toll-
ing, which she supposed proceeded from the church, distant
a mile and a half; she remarked it to Miss E. T., who how-
ever could not hear it. After a little while Miss E. T. said
she could also hear one, and thought it strange that the bell
should be tolling at that hour of the night; they accordingly
opened the window to be more satisfied of it, but the bell did
not appear louder than when it was shut. This astonished
them still more, but they went to sleep, and the next morning
mentioned the circumstance to the rest of the family, and
caused much amusement to them, who said it must have
been sheep bells, &c. The next night they both heard the
bell at the same time and in the same manner as before, toll-
ing until they went to sleep. This took place on four nighto
consecutively. Other persons were called into the room
to hear it, bat could not ; others went into the garden, but
were also unsuccessful ; the rector made enquiry, but the bell
had not been tolled, and no other church bell could be heard
from that spot. On the third night, whilst the governess was
listening attentively at the shut window, and saying she could
hear nothing. Miss T., who is a matter-of-fact sort of person,
said ' then it must be our fancy, and is all nonsense ; when
immediately another very much louder bell tolled once, and
the sound seemed to come from the ^rden ; the two ladies
heard this, but not the governess. This frightened Miss E. T,
to such a degree that she was near fainting. It was never heard
i^ain. On the second and following nights a clock was heard
by them to strike two, only once each night, whilst the other
bell was tolling, and appeared as if in the opposite direc-
tion, and to be much nearer. As soon as Miss T. heard it


60 Some curious Sensual Illusions, 6fC,

the first time^ she said to Miss E. T.^ ' I did not know yoa
had a stable clock/ ' Neither have we/ returned Miss E. T«
Miss T. then said^ to avoid putting a leading question^ ' Did
you hear anything then/ The answer was, 'Yes, a clock
struck two/

" On the third night Mrs. N., sister to Miss E. T., and
who lived three miles distant, dined with them ; they told her
about the extraordinary circumstance. Mrs. N., who was not
in very good health at the time, but not supposed to be seri-
ously ill, immediately said as near as possible these coords :
* You will soon hear of something; it will not relate to either
of you, but it will be something which will concern you both ;'
and turning to Miss T. said, * You heard the bell first, and
you will hear of the circumstance first.'

'^ The two ladies saw that the conversation had taken great
effect on Mrs. N., and that she evidently applied the omen
to herself, although she did not actually say so; they were
therefore extremely sorry that they had said anything about
it. They heard the bell again that night. The next morning
being the fifth day. Miss T. left her uncle's place for London ;
she heard the bell again that night in London, but not the
clock. Miss E. T., who remained with her father, also heard
it that night, but neither of them heard it again.

"The bell always began to toll at about 11 o'clock, when
they went to bed, and continued until they slept ; it appeared,
like a distant bell, louder and fainter. Miss T. agreed to raise
her finger when it sounded louder, so did Miss E. T., and
the sounds which the two heard coincided. In the course of
a few weeks Miss E. T. came to London to see a dentist, and
joined Miss T. there. Mrs. N. remained in the country, and
was now known to be in a precarious state. Miss E. T. was
waiting one morning for the post; a letter came, but Mrs. N.
was much the same. Miss E. T. immediately went out for a
drive ; in the course of about an hour, a friend brought intel-
ligence that Mrs. N., had died, and Miss T. heard of the event
about two hours before it was known to Miss E. T. The
funeral took place within a day or two of two months since
the first tolling of the bell.

" You may depend upon the truth of this narration, as I
have just written a copy of it and shewn it to Miss T., which
she has corrected in this manner, and which I send with her
permission. " Believe me, yours sincerely,

"Charles E. Isham/'

*^* Sir Charles Isham has obliged me with the names of
all the parties mentioned in this paper. — John Elliotson.


( 61 )

XY. Cure of Chlorosis mih Neuralgia and other affections.
By Mr. Rawe, Leroaile^ Cornwall. Communicated bjr
Dr* liilliotaon.

"We would have been better iatisiled to have seen memnefism Introdtieed
among other mental delfuUmi, than to find it used as the fly-wheel to carry the
other parts of the naachinery ronnd the 'dead points' of the work, — if such a
mechanical phrase be permitted/' — Athefueumf Nov. 17f 1849, review qf poor
Mr. Robert HwnfB *'Panthea."

Dear Dr. EUiotson^ — I take the liberty of submitting to
your notice the following account of a mesmeric cure, which
you. may possibly think worth sending to the editors of 7%tf
Zoist for publication.

As my mesmerising has been performed in portions of time
snatched from business, and amounting to a rather serious
sacrifice, I have for the most part declined to undertake any
but those cases, among my suffering neighbours, which ap-
peared hopeless under the ordinary modes of treatment.

Having never accepted from those I mesmerised any re-
muneratioa but the expressions of their gratitude, I shall
hardly be suspected of any sinister reason for stating the
motives which have actuated me in the labour. I investigated
mesmerism not for the sake of being amused with it, but to
ascertain if it were really a remedial agent; for I consider
the alleviation of human suffering one of the noblest occupa-
tions man is capable of, and that affording the purest pleasure.

Experience convinced me of the power and value of the
resources of this art, and I have for the last two years devoted
what time I could command to its practical application.

In a scientific point of view the mesmeric phenomena ap-
pear to me bighly interesting, and regarding them as mani-
festations of laws impressed on nature by its divine Author,
I should despise myself if any such consideration as the un-
fashionableness of the subject could deter me from the study
of it.

I remain, with much respect, your obedient servant,

John Bawe.
Lemaile, near Wadebridge, Cornwall.

F. E., a young woman, aged 22, child's-maid in my family,
was obliged in consequence of delicate health to resort to
medical advice in the latter part of 1848. The medicine taken
produced a^ood effect, and*there was very evident improve-
ment. In a month or two from the discontinuance of the
medicine she had relapsed to just the same state as at the first.
The doctor commenced a fresh course of physic, which was
att.ended this time with perceptible benefit, but much less than


62 Cure of Chlorosis with Neuralgia, ^c.

the firsts and more evanescent. A third course was tried
during the autumn of 1849^ but it produced no improvement^
and the patient thought it occasioned an increase of pain ; she
was evidently getting worse.

The friends of the young woman then decided on putting
her under the treatment of Mr. W.^ surgeon, of Wadebridge.
He made a careful examination of the complainti and con-
cluded that there was functional disorder of the uterus, and
a slight spinal irritation, accompanied with dyspepsia: the
catamenia had disappeared for seven months, the action of
the kidneys wad imperfect, and the legs swollen. Mr. W.
felt very confident of being able to remove the disorder, and
told me that in a few weeks he thought the patient would be
restored to health. I felt glad at his confidence ; the young
woman, besides having lived with us several years, being the
daughter of an old servant of my father's.

It was in the last week of '49 that Mr. W. began treating
the case, and he continued till the end of February following:
but, contrary to his expectation, without being able to subdue
the disorder; there was a slight mitigation of the symptoms at
first, but this soon passed, and F. became worse than at any
previous time. She was never free from pain in the head,
stomach, side, back, and lower abdominal region. Food was
frequently rejected by the stomach soon after it was taken :
the rest by night was very disturbed.

I proposed a trial of mesmerism, and, meeting with the
concurrence of the sufferer and her friends, commenced on
the 28th of February with a sitting of half an hour. She
was put into a sound coma, and, in answer to my enquiries^ I
found that the pain was gradually removed.

I will here insert an extract from my note-book : —

''March 1st. F. has been nearly exempt from pain since
the sitting yesterday ; she islept soundly all night.

"March 10th. Have mesmerised F, every evening since
the 1st. The change in her appearance is very striking ; in-
stead of the paleness of countenance extending even to the
lips, she is now moderately rosy; her spirits and appetite
good ; the nighf s rest unbroken ; and there has been a per-
fect exemption from pain since the second day.

''March 11th. The catamenia, suppressed with one slight
exception for nine months, have returned.''

I continued the mesmerising two or three weeks longer,
and then desisted. There has been no return of the com-
plaint. I should state that the medicine was discontinued at
the commencement of mesmerising, and F. has taken none
since. J. R.


( 68 )

XYI. Cure of excessive produeHon and drfective retention of
the Renal Secretion. From William Lloyd, of the So-
ciety of Frieads, Nabum, near York. Commiimcated by
Dr. EUiotaon.

'* Then was Mr. Fickthank [M.P.— a Member of Ftoliament ?] nroni, and
bid say what Ae knew in the behalf of thdr lord the king, agidnat &e priaoner at
the bar.

" Piektkank, — ^My lord^ and yon gentlemen all : thia fellow I hare known of
a long time, and baye heard him apeak things that ought not to be spoke ; for he
hath railed on oar noble prince Beelxebnb [meaning kmue^, M.P. ?], and haUi
qpoken contemptoonaly of hia Aonotrro^ie Irienda."

" When this PicklLank had told hia tale, the judge directed hia apeedi to the
prisoner at the bar, saying : Thou renegade heretic and traitor, hast thou heard
what these hone9t gentlenun haye witnessed against thee V'-^PUgrim'e Progreee.

Ybby esteemed friend. Dr. Elliotaon^ — ^I am inclined to
tender tbe foUowing case to be sent to The Zoist^ thinking it
may contribute to yariety^ and perhaps encourage other mes-
merists to offer their genial assistance should any similar case
occur in any of the various localities in wluch they are
situated.

Edward Lunn, late chemist and druggist^ Fossgate, York,
was for a long time afiiicted with an inveterate incontinence
of the renal secretion ; in addition to which he passed a very
inordinate quantity. He had skilful medical attendance by
a surgeon and physician of good repute^ but all efforts to arrest
the disease proved unavailing. At a comparatively early stage
of the malady I strongly advised him to try mesmerism ; but
thougb he professed a belief in^ and approval of, the principle,
yet he continually held back from giving it a personal trial ;
until one evening, the early part of last winter^ as I was with
him in conversation, and renewing my remonstrance with
him on the subject, and resuming my offer of assistance, he,
just to please me, and for no other reason, submitted himself
to a trial. I made passes before him for about half an hour,
but failed to produce any degree of coma ; yet I had an espe-
cial regard to the object in view, and directed the local passes
accordingly. I did not myself expect much result from this
first effort, but intended to give further attention to the case,
should I find him at all disposed for a continuation. I did
not call on him again till about four days afterwards ; when
he told me that, to his great astonishment, the following
morning he found that, the first time for more than twelve
months, perfect continence had been maintained through the
night ; and he added, '' It has been better by day and by
night ever since.'' He proceeded to remark, '' You know,
Mr. Lloyd, I never thought mesmerism suitable to my case.
I expected no result, and I looked for no result; therefore it


64 Cure of excesiive SecreiioUy SfC.

could not be the effect of imagination/' I then recommenced
my efforts, attending him every evening ; and in about two
weeks the inordinate secretion was reduced to a natural flow,
and that was under perfect control. I never succeeded in
producing in him satisfactory coma — ^nothing beyond a kind
of dreamy bewildered state, so that I think the result was the
effect of the local passes. He was much pleased with the
relief experienced, and repeatedly and spontaneously antici-
pated a report of his case, remarking that he thought all per-
sons receiving essential benefit should for the good of others
be willing their cures should be made public.

I would here remark that I had another case of urinary
malady, where there was a lack of due secretion, and drop-
sical symptoms attended. The fluid was brought to a satis-
factory flow, and the dropsical symptoms greatly diminished.

I enclose a letter from the truly honourable surgeon who
attended Mr. Lunn : —

" Colliergate, York, 1st June, 1850.

" My dear Sir, — I have great pleasure in complying with your
request, and adding my testimony to the benefits which were derived
by Mr. Lunn from the employment of mesmerism, in removing some
distressing symptoms under which he laboured.

** I had attended him for upwards of two years in a professional
capacity for an affection of the bladder and kidneys, accompanied by
considerable diuresis, and during sleep there was involuntary dis-
charge of urine, that rendered his situation most distressing. All
the usual plans of treatment were had recourse to, and the opinion
of one of our eminent physicians taken, without any benefit resulting
therefrom. He mentioned to me that you had wished him to give
mesmerism a trial, and asked my opinion in the matter. I advised
him to do so, and the effect was certainly wonderful ; the involuntary
discharge of urine ceased at once, and the quantity became consider-
ably diminished; and though certainly his general condition was not
materially benefitted, the removal of the previously-mentioned symp-
toms rendered his Ufe comparatively comfortable and greatly dimi-
nished his sufferings.

** I am yours very truly,
"To Mr. Lloyd. W. Procter."


I should have been very glad if candid detail ended here,
but I have further to observe, that Edward Lunn had other
complaints which my mesmeric power failed to relieve. How
it might have been had he yielded to my first proposals, it is
of course impossible for me to determine ; but he ultimately
died of organic disease of the liver and kidneys.

Permit me further to observe, that I have found the sub-
mitting to invalids for perusal accounts of the cure of diseases,


The Fire-away Style of Philosophy . 65

Bimilar to* their own more effectaal in producing a willingness
to submit themselves to the genial influence of mesmerism^
than all the argument which could be advanced. Therefore^
the greater the variety of cases recorded^ the wider the field
of reference ; whilst the more numerous the cases in each
particular class^ the more confirmatory their effect.

Wishing, if consistent with the Divine will, thou mayest
long be continued the friend and patron of mesmerism, and
that thou mayest be favoured with peaceful satisfaction
therein, I renaaiu, with feelings of much esteem and regard,
very respectfully, thy friend,

Naburn, near York, William Lloyd.

6th Month 1st, 1850.

In a letter from Mr. Lloyd to me in January, he adds the
following postscript : —

Ist Month, 1851.

P.S. It naay perhaps be interesting to thee to know, that
as I was in Scarborough some weeks last summer, I called
on Alderman Weddell, who kindly lent me the 14th number
of The Zoist, containing the account of a very remarkable
cure of intense disease reported by him, and on enquiry he
informed me that the individual remained well to the present

TIME.* ^


XVII. The Fire-away Style of Philosophy briefly Examined

and Illtistrated, By Anti-Glorioso.

*' It was prettily derised of Esop, the fly sat upon the axle-tree of the chariot
wheel, and said, 'What a dost do I raise!' So are there some Tain persons,
that, whatsoever goeth alone, or moveth upon greater means, if they have never
80 little hand in it, they think it is they carry it.'* — Bacon, Essay on Vain
Glory.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sib, — I am a lover of Truth — of Truth at all price and from
all sources. Moreover I admire bold and free investigation,

* This was a case of extreme irritability of the bladder : thirty calculi had
passed away in six months : ropy offensive mucous was discharged, dark and
sometimes bloody : and large doses of morphia were constantly given, but almost
in vain : and the patient was sinking, till mesi^erism assuaged his sufferings and
finally cared him.

In No. XIIIm P* 50; Dr. Esdaile gives a case of the cure of extreme irritation
of the bladder. In No. XVII , p. 81, Mr. H. S. Thompson gives a case in
which he quickly and permanently removed a violent strangury : and in No. XIX.,
p. 289, another of inflammation of the bladder, in which he was equally sue-
cessful. ' In No. XXVIII., p. 437* is a striking instance of great relief in a case
VOL. IX. F


66 • The Fire-away Style of Philoaqphy

aod a pliilosophical spirit of enquiry, and all who pursue
knowledge courageously and faithfally enjoy my warmest
sympathies. But it is possible for this search after knowledge
to be clothed with the most ludicrous garb of self-conceit, and
there are those who appear to think that no one loves truth
but themselves^ that no one is impressed with the value of
enlightened study but their own favoured associates; and who
monopolize in their own estimation all the wisdom, and truth-
fulness, and honesty of the world. And yet vanity like this
can ape the sweetest humility, and in a tone of amiable can-
dour impugn the motives and conduct of those who travel by
a different route to themselves. I may say this without scruple
to the readers of The Zoist, who are all more or less investi-
gators of knowledge at its highest sources.

I have been led into these remarks by the perusal of a
work called '' Laws of Man^s Nature and Development^' by
Mr. Atkinson and Miss Martineau. In this volume a love of
scientific Truth appears actually travestied; philosophy is stalk-
ing on the stilts of a masker, and a self-sufBdency which
borders on the burlesque is the most prominent characteristic
throughout.

To ludge by the letters of the gentleman, the secrets and
mystenes of nature are on the eve of a bright disclosure; all
the systems of all the sages that the world has ever seen are
false and mistaken, but a genius is at length amongst us, who
will soon set all things to rights, and pour upon mankind a
glorious illumination.

And yet when we come to analyze this promise of large
discovery, and look closely into the facts that are revealed to
us, the knowledge that we obtain sinks into infinitesimal
smallness. The old saying is strictly verified^

" What is new is not true.
And what is tme is not new."

In other words, the pages of The Zoist have been pilfered
without remorse and without even reference : And opinions
that are familiar to many students of nature, are put forth as
novelties with a cool effrontery which is really quite amusing.
The absence moreover of all logical sequence in the argumen-
tation, and the rapid way in which conclusions are arrived at,
(torn premises that hardly make their appearance, are addi-
tional marks of this writer's peculiar style.

of diseased prostate. In No. XXX., p. 189, Mr. Mott, surgeon at Brighton,
records a remarkable cure of diseased bladder ; and at p. 169, Mr. Capem records
the core of noctamal inability of retention that had resisted the most eminent
physicians and surgeons of London. It will be found also in Mr. Capem's
Mighty Cfurative Potoere qf Mesmerismt p. 84. — John Elliotson.


briefly Examined and lUuitraied. 67

I shall say nothing on the subject of his religious viewSy*
much 88 1 may deplore and feel amazed at them^ for the pages
of The Zotsi being addressed to persons of every creeds are
pages for science exdnsively^ and are not open to theological
discussion. But the point that espeeially gives its colour to
the book^ and to which I particularly direct your attention,
is the infantine simplicity with which the lady receives the
decisions of her correspondent. No votary of Apollo ever
travelled to the shrine of Delphi with feelings of more credu*
lous submission than those with which Miss Martineau bows
to the decrees of her atheistical Pontiff. Questions that bear
upon the profonndest mysteries of man's being are propounded
to the oracle with the most child-like artlessness ; and though
the oracle replies in rambling and evasive terms, still the dis-
ciple is so infatuated that she can see nothing but what is
sublime in his sentiments, and unanswerable in bis arguments.

That so strong-headed and dear-minded a writer as Miss
Martinean has hitherto shewn herself should be captivated by
such shaUow pretensions to wisdom is a curious physiological
problem.

I was pursuing the other morning a train of thought in
accordance with the above observations, when my mesmeriser
arrived : (for you must know, Mr. Editor, that I am a patient
under mesmeric cure.) He soon threw me into a deep sleep,
and left me as usual. Upon waking up I found a M.S. in
my own hand-writing Iving on the table by my side which I
evidently had composed in the sleep- waking condition ; and
as the ingenious character of the composition is very superior
to anything I could write in my normal state, it is a proof of
that exaltation of the faculties which the mesmeric condition
is supposed to induce. I enclose for your perusal a copy.


'< Clown. — ^What is the opinion of Fhythagoras concerning wildfowl ?''

Twe^h Night, Act 4th.

Harriet enquireth.

There is an inexpressible charm in your letters. Upon reading
them I seem to breathe the fresh air of the mountain top, and to
have escaped from the mists and darkness of the benighted vale.
You seem to be possessed of some fundamental principle by which
the secrets of nature can be explored. I must apply to you there-
fore i^in and again : There is a question which has been haunting
me day and night, and which I must beg you to answer, for upon

* A celebrated wit declares the great religious view of the hook to be,
There is no Ood, and Mr, Atkinson is his prophet. —Zoist.

F 2


68 The Fire-away Style of Philosophy.

its solution depends a train of important consequences. You know
the electric telegraph ; bow grand, how magnificent a triumph of
progress ! Will you tell me whether in your opinion the electric
telegraph will ever be developed in such perfections that it will assume
the type and attributes of a sentient animal ?

Henry respondeth.

The laws of material condition are for ever in action. Nature is
grand : knowledge is power. Metaphysicians may smile and blas-
pheme against every truth as it is revealed ; but when will the world
learn wisdom by the past, and hope for the future 1 Humility is the
source of true philosophy. Truly does Bacon with almost a foresight
of your question observe " For a true Philosopher will dissect not
sever nature. And the prime matter is to be laid down joined vAxh
the primitive form, as also with the first principle of motion as it is
found." All is change — change eternal. Faraday has unfolded the
great secrets of electricity: and if there were such a thing as a spirit,
which would more resemble one, the speaking animated electric tele-
graph, or the stupid theologian who strives to keep down the world
to the level of his own ignorance ?

For these reasons therefore there can be no doubt but that in
the course of a century or two, (and what is that in the march of
matter ?) the electric telegraph will ascend into the ranks of animated
nature.

Harriet rejoiceth greatly, and enquireth again.

I cannot express what I feel from your last answer. How clear,
how conclusive ! When I look back at the trammels of ignorance
from which you have emancipated me, my wonder is great. I am
now walking healthily on the broad common of eternal nature. And
now for another question ; can you tell me if in the progress of time
the moon, by receiving light from the sun, will ever be converted
into a luminous body itself? and if so, could a brain like mine by
constant contact with a divine organization like your own, ever ascend
into a similar state of intellectual superiority ?

Henry respondeth.

The knowledge of a cause will present a means to an end. All
we know is phenomena : the forces of nature proceed as necessity
impels ; while the fundamental cause is wholly bevond our concep-
tion. Some men tell us of light proceeding in straight lines ; others
speak grandly of the undulatory theory ; as if the light of the sun
did not proceed on its own force and by its own laws. Bacon and
the Swiss Historian Zschokke constantly speak a language that would
confirm these facts. Gall was the greatest of men : but it was re-
served for me to discover a fresh set of organs in the cerebellum :
and if a great Philosopher would employ the muscular powers of the
lesser bram towards developing the higher manifestations of the cere-
brum, there can be no doubt but that an idiot would receive the in-


Mesmerism in Australia, 69

fltience in the same way that light will act ultimately upon the lunar

body.

Harriet exulteth still more, and enquireth yet further,

O how clear! what lucid unraTellings of thought! I am more
than satisfied ; I am bewildered with enehantment. Philosophy,
as unfolded by you, is indeed a perpetual feast of nectared sweets.
Let me now ask, if the Sea-Serpent— —


Here the manuscript unfortunately stopped: whether I
fell into a deep coma, or was accidentally awakened, I know
not ; but though the organ of Imitation has been since fre-
quently mesmerised, no result' has been produced. However
I send the above as an Illustration of the new Fire- a- way
Style op Philosophy ; and remain your humble servant,

Anti-Glorioso.


XVIII. Mesmerism in Australia. Communicated by

Dr. EUiotson*

** Among the few things of which we can pronoance onradyes certain, ia the
obligation of inqnirers after troth to communicate what they obtain : and there is
nothing in the surprise, relactance, lerity, or disapprobation of any person, or
any nomber of persons, which can affect that certainty. It may be, or it may
not be, that there are some who already hold our views, and many who are pre-
pared for them and needing them. It is no part of onr business to calculate or
conjecture the rece|ition that onr correspondence is likely to meet with/' — Miss
Maktinkau, The Laws qfMan*9 Nature and Development, Prefieuse.

Collins Street^ Melbourne^
To Dr. EUiotson. 20th October, 1850.

Dear Sib, — ^Though personally unacquainted with you,
yet from the celebrity of your name and reputation, known
over the world as one of the strenuous supporters of the
truths .of mesmerism and clairvoyance, I have taken the
liberty of sending you the enclosed statement of a clairvoy-
ante, relative to Sir. J. Franklin's polar expedition. If it is
true, it will establish beyond cavil or doubt the wonderful
powers of a clairvoyante : and if we are to judge of the things
that we do not know by those that we do, it must be true,
because that all she said about Sir J. Franklin from the time
he wrote the letter in 1838 up to the time that he arrived in
England (before sailing on his northern expedition), we know
to be perfectly correct ; and must therefore presume that the
remainder of what she has said must be equally so. I have
had the statement verified and initialed by two or three per-
sons here, whose signatures can be proved in London ; for
mine own, if you apply to Col. Perec vhI, Serjeant-at-Arms to


70 Mesmerism in Australia.

the House of Lords^ he will recognize it. Mr. Cassell's can
be proved by application at the Custom-house, London : Dr.
Howitt is the brother of William and Mary Howitt, of well-
known celebrity: and Mr. Westgarth^s signature can be proved
at his London agents.

She is at present engaged in tracing Dr. Leitchard, who
went from Sydney in 1847 upon an exploring expedition
round New Holland^ and expected to reach Swan River in
two years.

I do not know any place where mesmerism has made so
much progress in iso short a time as in Melbourne. In March
last it was scarcely known, and now in October you could
scarce credit the great number of believers in it. Many cures
of disease have been effected ; and a young lady here (who is
clairvoyant) has prescribed in many cases for the sick with
the most marked success. Mr. Gilbert mesmerised his servant
boy, and gave a lecture on animal magnetism and phreno-
mesmerism at the Mechanics' Institute. Though perfectly
satisfactory to any imprejudiced observer, yet because the
mesmerisee was his servant boy, and because the phenomena
exhibited were so wondrous, there were many persons present
,who left the room confirmed sceptics. Amongst the rest, a
Mr. Patterson, who had two black boys — aborigines of the
Murray tribe — ^in town with him. When he went home from
the lecture, he tried to mesmerise these natives, who could
scarce speak English, and fully succeeded. They responded
in the most beautiful manner to the phrenologicsJ organs ac*
cording as they were excited. What a glorious triumph it
would have been for Andrew Combe had he lived to see these
two untutored savages clearly proving the truth of his favoured
science, Phrenology, and that too under mesmeric influence I

Pray excuse the liberty I have taken, and if you will ac-
knowledge the receipt of this statement it will oblige,

Yours truly,

J. B. MOTHERWBLL.

P.S. If Captain Hill of the 96th, or Mrs. Hill (formerly
Miss Maconochie), are in London, they will attest to you
my character for uprightness and truth. Captain Hill sought
an introduction for me to you when I was in London in last
July twelvemonth, and you gave your card for me to go to
Mr. Chandler, Botherhithe, who was kind enough to shew me
some of his mesmeric cases.

J. B. Motherwell, M.D., L.B.C.S.I.

Friday evening, Ist October, 1850. A letter written by


Mesmeriam in Australia. 71

Sir John Franklin^ in 1888, was placed in the hands of a
clairvoyante by Dr. Motherwell. She said that she saw the
writer in Hobart Town^ the place where that letter was writ-
ten; and upon being requested to trace the writer from
thence^ she described with complete accuracy several events in
Sir John Franklin's life in the Australian colonies, and ulti-
mately followed him to England. She then commenced fol-
lowing him npon his expedition to the North Pole : and the
following is substantially and nearly verbatim the account
which she gave from time to time of the expedition.

" I see the vessel Sir John Franklin is in ; there are other
vessels with him; they are all starting together. I think
there are three or four of them^ and they are saiUng now :
they are passing land just now which is very high. Shall I
follow the vessel Sir J. F. is in^ because they are beginning
to separate ? (Told to follow the vessel.) I see land now ;
it is very low^ and seems inhabited by natives who are quite
astonished and are running down to look. The vessels are
beginning to come near each other now, and I see floating in
the sea those large white cliffs : they are icebergs.*' * * * *

I forward the whole MS. to the editors of 7%« Zoist, but
request that the rest may not be published at present ; for it
by no means follows that^ because those parts of her enuncia-
tion which can be at present verified are perfectly correct^ the
remainder must be equally so. Indeed the case may be, in
regard to what is known to be correct, cerebral sympathy
rather than clairvoyance. The best clairvoyants wander
egregiously, and the present, however gifted^ is no exception,
because in one circumstance she is to a certainty incorrect.
I believe in clairvoyance : but I place implicit reUance in no
clairvoyant : and, as there is generally more error than accu-
racy in the whole clairvoyance of every person^ however mi-
nute and abundant the accuracy^ I shall defer publication of
the remainder till we have tidings of Sir John Franklin and
can verify her statements. — John Elliotson.

*^ This statement has been produced before us at Melbourne^
Fort FhiUp^ this nineteenth day of October, one thousand
eight hundred and fifty : —

J. B. Motherwell, M.D., Collins Street.

James Cassell, Collector of Customs, Melbourne.

GoDPBEY HowiTT, M.D., ColUns Street.

W. Westgarth, Merchant.

James Milne Wilson, Flinders Street.^'


( 72 )

XIX. A recent instance of Clairvoyance. Communicated

by Major Buckley.

" An Indian, named Galanns, when about to die, and asoebding the burning
pile, exclaimed, * O what a glorious removal from this world ; for, as in the case
of Hercules, my mind will pass into life when my mortal body is burnt/ On
Alexander desiring him to say what he wished, " Excellent Sir,' he replied, * I
shall see you shortly again.' And so it turned out, for Alexander died at Babylon
a few days afterwards."* — Cicebo, Ve Divinationef i. 23.

TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.

4; Egremout Place, Brighton,
January 11, 1851.
Gentlemen, — I have the pleasure to send you a good case
of clairvoyance, which you may think worthy of a place in
The Zoist, The mesmerisee is a very respectable woman, who
keeps a shop here. Her Christian name is Elizabeth, not
Ellen. She is a widow ; I knew her husband, a carpenter,
who died after breaking a blood-vessel. She has lost both
her children from consumption. The mesmeriser is my ser-
vant; he has often performed cures by mesmerism.

Believe me, yours obediently,

J. W. Buckley.

I mesmerised Mrs. Anscombe on the evening of Friday,
Jan. 3rd, in the presence of two friends who had never seen a
case of mesmerism before. Among other questions, she was
asked if there would be a letter on the following morning for
a lady who had letters addressed to her house. " No, there
will not be a letter for me, but I can see a letter coming here
with the Hastings post-mark on it. I don't know anybody
in Hastings : it is not for me. Why there is a cover on it,
and I can see printed words on it." " Can you read any of
the printed words on it?" "Wait a minute; make some
slow passes over my eyes. Now I can see. I can read ' Dead
Letter Office ' in the corner." " Who is it directed to ?" " I
can see the name of ' Ellen,' and I can see ' Jn — ' of the
next word ; but it is not for me, I never knew anybody at
Hastings : I can see the Hastings^ post mark on the letter
quite plain."

I awoke her and left directly with my two friends, and
thought no more of the circumstance, till the following

* *< Est profecto qniddam etiam in barbaris gentibus prtesentiens atqvie divi-
nans, si quidem ad mortem proficiscens Calanus Indus, quum adscenderet in
rogam ardentum, ' O preeclarum discessam/ inquit, 'e vital quum ut Herculi
contigit, mortal! corpore cremato, in lucem animus excesserit.' Quumque Alex-
ander eum rogaret, si quid vellet» ut diceret, * Optime^' inquit, ' propediem te
videbo/ Quod ita contigit; nam Babylone paucis post diebns Alexander est
mortuus."


A recent instance of Clairvoyance, 73

mornings (the subject of the letter was not mentioned to
her) when one of my friends, who had been present the
night before, reminded me of the circumstance, and asked
me if I had been to enqaire if there had been a letter corre-
sponding with the one Mrs. A. had described in the mesmeric
sleep. I then went to the house and enquired of Mrs. A. if
there was a letter for the lady. She said in answer there was
not any letter for the lady, but the postman brought one di-
rected *• Ellen Anscombe ;'* there were printed words, " Re-
turned paid Letter^* and "Dead Letter Office" on the cover ;
that she had opened it and found there was a letter enclosed
with the Hastings* post-mark on it. I then told her how she
had described it in her sleep, which, surprized her very much.
To the best of her recollection she had never seen a letter
from the Dead Letter Office in her life before.

The Dead Letter Office cover bears the London post-mark
of January 2nd, and the Brighton post-mark of January 3rd,
and was delivered on the morning of January 4th ; and, from
information I received at the post-office, the letter had not
been sent till the morning when it was delivered.

James Knowles.

" I would affirm upon oath, if required, as to the truth of
this statement." — E. Tucker, 67, Edward Street, Brighton.
Testified also by P. Richardson, 53, Surry Street, Brighton.

Returned paid Letter.


Mrs. Ellen Anscombe^


Brighton.


'a


Dead-Letter Office.


For William Anscombe,

At the Post Office until called for,

Hastings, Sussex;
Not called for.

" Brighton, November the 21st, 1850.
" Dear husband, — I received your letter, and am glad you
are in good health, as this leaves me at present : I thank God
for it. Dear husband, you wish me to come to you, and I have
made up my mind to do so. William Goddard and his wife
will mind our house until we come to Brighton again. Dear
husband, let me know in your next letter where I am to meet
you. Write by return of post. No more at present from
your affectionate wife, Ellen Anscombe."


( 74 )


XX. Cures' of Neuralgia and Rheumatism; ttnth painless
extraction of a Tooth. By Mr. Tubbs, Surgeon, UpweU.

More " tubs for their whales." — Lancet, Jan. 4thy 1851 ; quoted as motto to
our third article, p. 13.

I. Cure qf Neuralgia, supervening upon an injury of the knee.

On the 27th Sept. 1850, Susannah Brown, aged 23, whfle in
the service of Mrs. Carver, of Tower Street, Lynn Regis, hurt
her knee while she was scrubbing the chamber boards. Pain
was immediately felt under the cap of the knee. She finished
her room with difficulty : and the next morning the knee was
painful and swollen. A poultice was applied at the suggestion
of her mistress. On the 80th she was sent to consult Dr.
Ingle of High Street, Lynn, who recommended resting the
limb, leeches, and a lotion. She kept her bed until the 4th
October, when she resumed her work up to a month before
Christmas. During this time she often experienced neuralgia
in the limb. Mrs. Harrison, her sister, who resides in Lynn,
got a recommendation for her admission into the Lynn Hos-
pital, from Lewis Jarvis, Esq., solicitor, where she remained
in bed a fortnight, under the care of Mr. Sayles, who pre-
scribed for her general health, but ordered nothing for the
knee. She left the hospital at the expiration of a fortnight
at her own desire, telling the surgeon she felt quite well.
Ten days after her return home, she again became lame and
was obliged to keep her bed for some days, sufPering much
from pain in the knee and hip. She came with her mother
to my surgery quite lame, on the 27th Jan. 1851, to be mes-
merised. Being engaged, I merely made a few passes over
the knee, and told her to come at 4 o^clock, p.m. She came
at the time appointed, and said I had removed the pain from
the knee to the ankle. I mesmerised her then ; and again in
the evening at her mother^s. On taking her out of the sleep
the second time, she was free from pain and could walk better.
The next day (28th) she was seen by Mr. Eade, surgeon, of
Blofield, near Norwich ; Mr. Roper, surgeon, of Lynn ; and
Mr. Millard, of Norwich : gentlemen who came over on pur-
pose to see some of ray mesmeric cases (I only shewed them
seventeen good ones), to whom she related her previous lame-
ness and pain, as well as the benefit she had received from
mesmerism.

On the 31st she became lame again after a long walk, and
applied to me in the afternoon to mesmerise her. On exam-
ining the knee, there was a feeling of crepitation over the


Cures of Neuralgia and Rheumatism. 75

joint in flexing it^ attended with pain. All this was speedily
removed by a few passeSi and she walked home without limp-
ing. I aow forbad her to walk until the limb had been suffi-
ciently mesmerised for some time. She was daily operated
upon for five weeks, although she was firee from lameness and
pain during that time. I have this evening (March the 8th,
1851) examined the knee, which is quite well, no less than her
general health ; and she has this day been for a long walk to
see one of her mesmerisers. On applying a crystal 1 obtained
last Wednesday from the Mesmeric Infirmary, 9, Bedford
Street, London, while she was under the mesmeric influence,
it caused her limbs to become rigid and cold.

II. Chronic Rheumatism cured by a few operations,

William Ward, aged 24, a tall, fat, and strong labourer,
who had been the subject of painful joints, disabling him from
work for more than a month, and who had been under Mr.
Allen's care, of Lynn, (surgeon to the Odd Fellow's lodge
— Ward belonging to that society,) called me in on the 2nd
Feb., 1851. I prescribed for him. On calling upon him on
the 5th, I found that he had not sent up for his medicine. I
mesmerised him at the request of a neighbour. He was asleep
in a few minutes. When awake he could walk up and down
the room with comfort. It was a damp day, and I was asto-
nished to see him at my surgery at seven o'clock in the even-
ing, waiting to be mesmerised again, having walked a mile
and a half. After daily mesmerisations of an hour's duration,
I sent him away cured. Several individuals saw this interest-
ing case.

III. Chronic Rheumatism relieved by two operations.

Widow Breeze, 62 years of age, a fine strong subject,
weighing thirteen stone, had suffered from rheumatic pains in
the head, shoulders and knees, all the winter, and was latterly
unable to dress herself or get out of her chair without assist-
ance. I mesmerised her to sleep at her own house in half an
hour, and again at my house last Friday. She slept some
time soundly. On being restored she had no pain, and walked
quickly up and down the room, a thing which she assured us
she could not do previously to her coming. Before she left,
she told us she had yards of flannel about her. As she has
not been up again, I suppose she is cured.

William Ward, aged 42, of Upwell, whose great toe I re-
moved some time since, in consequence of a machine acci-


76 Painless Tooth Extraction.

dent^"^ was mesmerically affected to a state of coma^ the
second day after the amputatioD. I tried to mesmerise him
to perform the operation^ but could not succeed ; and he told
me he ^^ should never go to sleep that way: he could stare the
wall out.^^ This man was every day mesmerised for a month,
and never felt the slightest pain the whole time. The follow-
ing persons visited him, and witnessed some of the curious
phenomena of mesmerism in his case.

— Burton, of Wisbech,

W. Cooper, Esq., Lynn,

Peter Eade, Esq., surgeon, Bloiield,

Brobert Roper, Esq., surgeon, Lynn.

V. Painless extraction of a Tooth.
James Bunton, of Upwell, aged 28, came to have a tooth
removed last month. He was susceptible of the mesmeric
influence, and I extracted a firm right incisor of the upper
jaw, in the presence of Mr. Ekens, farmer of Upwell. We
had a hard job to convince the man that he was minus a
tooth.


XXI. Case of painless Tooth Extraction. By Dr. Stober,

of Bristol.

*^ Dr. Copland contended that, if the account of the man experiencing no
agony during the operation were trae> the/act was unworthy qf their considera-
tion ^ because pain is a wise provision of nature , and patients ought to suffer
pain while their surgeon is operating ; they are all the better for itt and recover
better I** — Dr. Elliotson's Surgical Operations without Pain, p. 59.

We, the undersigned, having witnessed the extraction of two
teeth from a young lady, under mesmerism induced by Dr.
Storer, have much pleasure in attesting that there did not
appear to be the slightest indication of pain ; and that the
patient, when awake, expressed her entire unconsciousness of
the fact. J. S. Buckingham,

Admiral Byng,

R. C. Bagley,

William Score,

E. A. Smith,

Elizabeth Hemlett (Mother of the
March 6th, 1850. above-named young lady).

* A married man^ named Wilson, received a very severe injury to the right
foot, in this manner ; an accident which might have heen prevented by the exer-
cise of only common foresight and prudence. I being sent for, found it requisite
to amputate part of the foot. The poor man has been daily put under the influ-
ence of mesmerism since the operation took place, and the wound is progressing
rapidly to a cure, without pain.


Cure of intense Chronic Debility. 77

A similar painless operation was performed on the Mondaj
preceding, which was witnessed by several visitors at the
Institute.

The name of the present dentist is not added^ at his own
request. He has not the sitiallest doubt of the reality of what
he witnessed^ but he candidly acknowledges that he is afraid
to give his written avowal^ lest he should give offence to his
medical patrons. To inspire him in future with more self-
reliance^ I will now mention the names of several dentists in
his immediate vicinity who have extracted teeth for me under
mesmerism, and who have willingly signed, or openly corro-
borated, the facts when called upon: — Messrs. Williams,
Young, Mosely, and Edwards, dentists, residing at the time
in the same street as the present operator.

I am, Sir, yours obediently,
Henry Storek, Physician to the Bristol

Mesmeric Institute.


XXII. Cure of intense chronic debility left by Asiatic Cholera,

Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


** Henceforth I learn


n


♦* by small
Accomplishing great things, by things deemed weak
Snbyerting worldly strong, and wofldly wise
By simply meek, that suffering for truth's sake
Is fortitade to highest yictory,
And to the faithful death the gate of life." — Paradiie Logt, xii.

TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.

Gentlemen, — I have just received the enclosed from a
perfect stranger, and am delighted with the high moral feel-
ing which has impelled the writer to make known her cure to
the whole world with the accompaniment of her name and
the names of those to whom she owes so much. When I
reflect how many fine people have been cured or relieved with
mesmerism and would not have the world know it on any
account^ and how many to whom and any of their friends I
have repeatedly taken the trouble to demonstrate mesmeric
phenomena, and who firmly believe the truth of mesmerism,
and have even mesmerised with success, are too vain and
selfish to publish their cures, or to declare their convictions in
the sight of men by subscribing to a mesmeric charity even
when applied to, I do respect this humble and noble-minded
woman. I remain, &c..

Conduit St., London, March 17, 1851. John Elliotson.


78 Cure of intense Chronic Debility.

Sir, — You will much oblige by forwarding the following
for the excellent Zoist^ as a cure worthy the notice of the
public.

In the summer of 1849, I was afflicted with that dreadful
disease, the cholera, which left me in such a dreadfully debili-
tated state that I was for above seven months unable to sit
up longer than an hour and a half in the day. For the first
four months I bore it patiently, still hoping that I should
ultimately recover. But after that time hope entirely forsook
me. I was in a most miserable condition, a burden to myself
and to those around me. I was in this wretched state, when
my sister brought me Thomas Cooper^ s Journal, and begged
of me to read it. I told her my mind was too ill at ease to
admit of my reading. She persisted in her endeavour. I at
last yielded, but with great reluctance : when the first thing
that my eye rested upon was his testimonies in favour of
mesmerism, the first being its beneficial effects on the health
of Mrs. Cooper. How eagerly I perused its contents 1 will
not attempt to describe. Suffice it to say I once more felt
the cheering influence of hope. I begged of my sister to
write to Mr. Cooper, and ask him if he could tell me of any
one who mesmerised gratuitously. She did so ; and he not
only condescended to answer the note, but actually came
down on purpose from Knightsbridge to shew her how to do
it himself. My brothers and sister tried their powers, but,
being very nervous, they produced but very little eflfect.
Hope again began to fail me, when a friend, Mr. W. Costlow,
of Union Road, Rotherhithe, kindly offered to try his powers.
He mesmerised me daily for several months, and I am happy
to say the result has been a perfect cure. I assure you I am
in better health and spirits than I have been for years. I
assure you. Sir, I feel truly grateful for the discovery of
mesmerism ; but to attempt to describe my gratitude to the
two above-named gentlemen would be foUy. Suffice it to
say, that I not only owe my present enjoyment of health, but
my very existence to them.

I must now conclude, and believe me to remain your well-
wisher in tile cause of mesmerism,

97, Bermondsey St., Bermondsey. Sarah A. Simpson.
To Dr. EUiotson.

As the writer lives at no great distance from Mr. Chandler,
who has courageously, though a medical man, contributed
excellent papers to The Zoist from its commencement, I re-
quested him to do me the favour of enquiring into the case.
The following is his answer : —


Rapid and permanent Cures of Neuralgia. 79

'' 58, Paradise St., Botherbithe,
"March 15, 1851.
" My dear Sir, — I went yesterday to Bermondsey Street,
and saw the sister of Miss Simpson. She corroborated every-
thing stated in the letter. She tells me her sister had cholera,
and that afterwards she went into a state of extreme nervous
debility without any symptom of organic disease, according to
the opinion of several medical men. She remained so, in spite
of constant medical treatment, for abont six or seven months,
and then tried mesmerism and found immediate relUf. She
could scarcely walk across the room before. She was mes-
merised five months daily, and has been now seven months
without it, and is better than she had been for years. She is
single, set. 35.

" Yours ve^ truly,

"Thomas Chandleb.''


XXIII. Rapid and permanent cures of Neuralgia ; and united in
one instance with almost fatal inability to swallow. Sy
Mr. Babth, Mornington Crescent, Hampstead Boad.

'* I had seen animal magnetism practised in India ; had myself benefitted by
H at Creneva ; emd at Shelley's earnest request, consented to try its efficacy on
him daring his next attack. One of tiiem affected him during an evening when
two ladies, one of whom was Mrs. Shelley, were present. The imposition of my
hand on his forehead instantly put a stop to his spasms, and threw him into a
deep slumber, which for want of a better name has been called somnambulism.
He slept with his eyes open. During the continuance of it, I led him from one
part of the room to the sofa in the other end ; and when the trance was overpast,
after tiie manner of all somnambulists, he would not admit that he had slept, or
that he had made any replies, which I elicited from him by questioning ; those
replies being pitched in the same tone of voice as my own. He also during a
second experiment improvised some Italian verses, which were faultless, although
he had at that time never written one. Shelley had never previously heard of
mesmerism, and I shewed him a treatise I composed, embodying most of tiie
fincts recorded by its adepts; and he was particularly struck by a passage in
Tacitos, no credulous historian, who seriously related two cases (witnessed, he
says, by many living) in Egypt, that might stagger the most sceptical.'' — Med-
win's Xf/fe qf Shelley, voL ii., p. 49.

March 14th, 1851.
Dear Dr. EUiotson. — I enclose to your care for The Zoist
three cases of neuralgia cured by mesmerism, if you will
peruse, and then oblige me by forwarding them for inser-
tion. I take the liberty of sending to you personally, because
two of the parties, being my private patients, rather object to
having their names published, although willing to respond to
any respectable private enquiry; and I enclose to you the
names and addresses of the ladies and the medical attendants


80 . Rapid and permanent Cures of Neuralgia.

in the first case, should any parties consalting you wish to
make such reference. The cases are narrated as briefly as
possible, and I have only selected them because evidence of
the remarkably easy and speedy cure of pain, and the mis-
chief consequent on pain, that may be accomplished by mes-
merism. I have reason to think in the first case the lady
could not have survived many days had mesmerism not been
resorted to ; and the patient^s friends are of the same opi-
nion. Certainly the only other chance of relief was afibrded
by the use of chloroform — at best a desperate and dangerous
remedy — although the trial of it would have been imperative
and justifiable had mesmerism failed.

I have been somewhat annoyed at having heard a report
from difibrent channels that you were lately challenged by a
physician to investigate with him one of the alleged cures by
mesmerism published in The Zoist, and were compelled to
acknowledge that the statement published was false, and a
mis-statement or fabrication. If the editor of that periodical
has been imposed upon by some correspondent presumed re-
spectable, I am sure an explanation of the circumstance will
be furnished by you for the forthcoming number. If the
report of such a challenge, investigation and result be a false-
hood, pray state as much, that the friends to mesmerism may
have your positive authority to contradict such report when
repeated in their hearing. The conversation of friends, or
even strangers visiting as friends, is always presumed to be
received confidentially ; — we cannot insist upon our inform-
ants disclosing the names of their informants, and thus trace
a calumny to its source. One lady was told this by her medi-
cal attendant, and she would not like to disclose his name.
All therefore that remains is to give it a denial, and to make
that denial public.

Believe me, dear Dr. Elliotson, yours faithfully,

G. H. Barth.
No. 4, Mornington Crescent, Hampstead Road.

I. Cure of severe Neuralgia of three months? standing.

On Sunday afternoon, February 9th, two gentlemen called
on me, and requested my immediate attendance to an invalid
lady, residing in one of the new villas near Primrose Hill.
They represented the case as particularly urgent, the lady
being totally unable to swallow either solid or liquid food, or
medicine, or even one spoonful of water ; so that they feared
for the ultimate result, unless mesmerism succeeded in ena-
bling her to swallow food. The lady, who was under the care
of her own medical attendant, had also suffered since the 9th


By Mr. Barth. 81

of November last with tic or a nearalgic affection of the nerves
of the left side of the face^ which all this gentleman's care
and skilly and the advice of two physicians, had failed to cure.
I found the lady propped up in bed by pillows. She had a
violent accession of pain on the left side of the face recurring
about once in ten minutes^ lasting three or four tninutes, and
so severe that I perceived a rope was attached to the bedpost
with a portion padded, to put into the poor sufferer's hands
to grasp and pull at during the paroxysm. This frightful
neuralgia had endured (with two intervals of some twenty
hours each excepted) for three months, and all medicine and
means of relief tried, including galvanism, had failed entirely.

On the morning of the day on which I was called in, a
spasmodic action or constriction of the oesophagus had com-
menced; deglutition was totally impossible; the jaws were
nearly locked; the patient could not articulate distinctly;
and the laudanum administered was dropped on a brush,
which was then introduced betwixt the teeth. There was a
reason why the means sometimes used when nourishment
cannot be taken into the stomach to support a patient were
in this case not available, and it was clear the patient could
not survive long unless relief was obtained, but must sink
from inanition. Indeed the anxious and earnest deportment
of the relatives was evidence of their fears. The lady's medi-
cal attendant had joined in urging her to submit to a trial of
mesmerism, and this, although he had little or no faith in its
efficacy. He assured her there was not anything wicked or
wrong in mesmerism, and that it was her duty to try every
means which held out the slightest chance of relief, and his
duty to advise her to assent to it : everything which he could
suggest had been tried and failed.

The seemingly desperate nature of this case gave me much
anxiety when I reflected that on my personal exertions did
the chance of a successful result from mesmerism depend, —
when I looked at the watchful faces around the patient's bed-
side, and saw how much they hoped from it in this otherwise
hopeless or nearly hopeless case : but I also remembered what
my old mesmeric pupil and friend, Mr. Bayley, had accom-
plished in Madam Paschond's case at Vevey ;* and believing
that I could personally do whatsoever any other mesmeriser
could accomplish, and that nil desperandum should be the
guiding principle of every mesmeriser, I went to my work
with all the energy and determination to succeed which I
could command. I mesmerised the patient on the Sunday

* See ZoUtl, No. XXIX., p. 12.
VOL. IX. G


82 Rapid and permanent Cures of Neuralgia.

evening for more than an hour and a half^ producing decided
evidence of the influence being felt. I again mesmerised her
on Monday evening, and she slept naturally part of the night
after I left, and awoke -on Tuesday morning well ! the pain
having left, and the ability to swalloio food having returned.

Mr. L., the medical attendant, called on the Tuesday
morning with chloroform, intending to try and produce un-
consciousness, and feed his patient during its persistence.
He was both surprized and delighted to find that she had
already taken some food, and exclaimed, " Can this be attri-
buted to the mesmerism ? I can only say that it is not from
anything which I have done/'

This case speaks for itself. I need merely add that the
lady was mesmerised daily for three weeks to prevent any
danger of relapse, and a few times more at longer intervals ;
that the mesmerism is now discontinued, and there has been
no return either of neuralgia or spasmodic constriction,

II. Severe Neuralgia, which had persisted four years and a
half, cured by four mesmeric operations.

On the 19th of December of last year M M ,

a lady residing at Brixton, called upon me to be mesmerised.
She suffered severely from neuralgic pains of the left side of
the head and face, that she had been afflicted with for four
years and a half. She also had pains in her legs, either of a
neuralgic or rheumatic kind, every night, when she became
warm in bed. She had tried many remedies without obtain-
ing relief, and her general health was breaking down in con-
sequence of continual suffering by day and want of rest at
night. I mesmerised her for three quarters of an hour. Her
eyes closed ; she lost the power of opening them voluntarily.
I was able to make her arms and legs rigid by a few passes ;
but I did not induce sleep, for she retained her memory and
consciousness. I dismissed her this day free from pain. She
was mesmerised again on Dec. 21, and again on Dec. 23.
She had not experienced any return of the neuralgia on the
left side, but she had felt considerable pain on the right side,
where she had never felt any previously. The third mesmeric
operation removed this pain, and she was free from any pain up
to Dec. 28, when I mesmerised her for the last time. On this
last occasion the lady went to sleep. About a fortnight after
this last visit I received a note from her, requesting to know
if I could accommodate her in my house as a boarder, and if
Mrs. Barth would accept her as a friend added to our family
circle, as she would like, as soon as the pain returned, to come
and stay with us until cured. She stated that she had not


By Mr. Barth. 88

been troubled with any return of her old pain^ but she did
not believe that the present relief was more than temporary,
as she could not possibly expect that a disease of four and a
half years' standing could be cured in four operations. Not
having heard from this patient again, I addressed a note to
know if there had been any return of the neuralgia, and re-
ceived the subjoined reply : —

'" Brixton, March 7, 1861.
^' My dear Sir, — I have indeed pleasure in sajring that I
remain perfectly well : free from the neuralgic pains I have
so long suffered from in my face, and that my general health
is perfectly re-established. Had it been otherwise you would
have seen me ere this. I did intend calling to thank you for
your attention when I was such a sufferer : but my time has
been so much occupied that 1 really have not been able to
find an opportunity. I hope, however, to have that pleasure
soon, and remain, &c., &c., A. C. M.^'

Cure of Neuralgia of the head and face by one mesmerisation.

On the 18th of February last, a young lady, who instructs
my children to sing, called, not to give her lesson, but to
explain why she could not give it. She had been rather
poorly for some time, but during the last six or seven days
was afflicted with a pain in one side of her face and head that
she described as agonizing, hardly endurable. Suffering and
want of sleep in consequence made her feel altogether ill ; she
was also low-spirited, and remarked that the illness of which
her father died was ushered in by a similar pain. Mrs. Barth
made her stay till 1 had time to attend to her. I mesmerised
her for about a quarter of an hour ; she went to sleep for an
hour and a half, and awoke spontaneously quite well ; per-
fectly free from pain and full of animation and strength. She
remains quite well up to the present time. I believe I may
venture to give the name of the lady, who is known to a large
portion of the frequenters of the metropolitan and provincial
concert-rooms for her magnificent contralto voice, Miss
Jane Collins.

In The Zoist of April last year there appeared a case of
insanity, cured after only eight mesmerisations. As it is
sometimes urged by the opponents of mesmerism that the
cures are apparent and not real — the patients soon relapsing,
I wrote to know how Miss Louisa Bott, the patient alluded
to, was, and received the following reply, which shews that
this case has been cured (and without relapse) for more than
twelve months : — .

G 2


84 Answer by Dr. Elliotson to a false report >

" S, Bath Place, Islington,
" Mr. Barth. " March 12, 1851 .

" Sir, — I am happy to inform you that my daughter con-
tinues quite well since she was under your care. I fully
believe in all the virtues of mesmeric influence. Trusting
that others may be benefitted by your judicious treatment,

" I remain. Sir, your ever grateful,

" M. A. BoTT.^'


Answer by Dr. Elliotson to Mr. Earth's enquiry.

The report mentioned by Mr. Barth is an utter falsehood.
I was never challenged to investigate a cure published in The
Zoist : nor do I know of one which is at all untrue.

I may take this opportunity of communicating to the
public what is a very little matter, but demonstrative of the
too prevalent medical feeling against mesmerism. I was told
last summer by a lady and gentleman that Dr. Spurgin, hear-
ing me praised by them, remarked that he once had a good
opinion of me, but of late years had seen reason to change his
opinion in consequence of my having garbled a case published
in The Zoist in 1843, — the exquisite case of Miss Emma
Melhuish, published in No. IV. I immediately wrote to
Dr. Spurgin to ask if this was the fact, and begged him to
point out in what particular I had misrepresented any case.
He replied that as far as he was concerned in the case the
statement was inaccurate. I wrote as follows : —

" Dear Sir. — All the portioD of my account of Miss Emma Mel-
huish* s case relative to its history before my attendance was derived
from the family : and therefore any inaceuracy respecting you is
theirs, not mine.

" I leave you the first volume of The Zoist that you may point out
the mis-statement. The only references to you are at pages 430
and 431.

** In the former the whole that is said of you- is, * Dr. Spurgin
was called in by Mr. White, and leeches were put upon her legs,
and another blister to the back of the neck, and medicines of differ-
ent kinds sent.'

'* In the latter, — * All the medical treatment was continued. Dr.
Spurgin applying blisters all over the head, and wishing to put one
all over the stomach. But the treatment was fruitless ; and so fright-
ful was her state, that Dr. Spurgin (January 6 th) wrote to a medical
mad-house keeper for ' a trustworthy female attendant to take charge
of a young lady labouring under hysterical mania.' Another practi-
tioner who was called in advised her removal to a lunatic asylum.
She had taken eighteen dozen draughts by the 1 0th of January.'


Answer by Dr. ElUotson to alleged inaccuracies, 8&

" I will send for the Tolume of The Zoist and your answer to-
morrow, and remain. Dear Sir, yours truly,
" Conduit Street, May 22, 1850. J. Elliotson."

To this Dr. Spurgin thus replied : —

"38, Guildford Street, 23rd May, 1850.
"Dear Sir. — According to my notes I find I paid Miss Melhuish
eleven visits between the 15th November and the 1 1th of December,
1838, and five between the 3rd January and the 19th, 1839; but
daring this time it does not appear that I ordered more than a pur-
gative draught or pills occasionally, leeches once, and several anti-
spasmodic mixtures. I can find no mention of a blister ; indeed it
is contrary to my practice to apply blisters, either ' all over the heacP
or ' all over the stomach ;* and it must have been in reference to this
misrepresentation and to the statement that my treatment was fruit-
less that I animadverted upon the inaccuracy of the report ; and I
beg to remain,

" Yours truly,
"To Dr. Elliotson. J. Spurgin."

Now the family declare that, whether in Dr. Spurgin's
notes or uot, he did order blisters : whether to the whole head,
as they said, or not is quite unimportant ; for many good prac-
titioners apply them in severe cases all over the head* No
one did or can doubt the propriety of Dr. Spurgin^s treatment
of the case : nor was anything more intended than to shew
that mesmerism had effected what the best ordinary treat-
ment had failed to effect. In truth. Miss Melhuish was as
bad as ever she had been, the whole family said, when I was
called in.

I will mention another, and the only other case in which
an attempt has been made to throw a doubt on the accuracy
of a statement of treatment in The Zoist, Here also the
reference is to the treatment described by the family as having
been employed before mesmerism was adopted. In the last
number, Mr. Amor details his splendid cure of an obstinate
scrofulous ophthalmia, with ulceration of the lids, that had
baffled practitioners for many years. In the account given
by the mother, it was said that one gentleman, " Mr. Obre,
Lisson Grove, drew the eyelashes all out and burnt the lids
with something which turned them quite black and caused a
deal of pain every morning, with a view of curing them, until
I could not bear to take her any longer."

I received the following letter from the gentleman : —

"Grove Place, Lisson Grove, March 6, 1851.
" My dear Sir. — In the last number of TTie Zoiat, in the descrip-
tion of a case of scrofulous disease of the eyes cured by the com-
bined influence of portwine and mesmerism, in naming the different
medical men under whose care the sufferer had previously been, the


86 Answer by Dr. Elliotson to alleged inaccuracies.

following paragraph occurs : — ' And M. Obr6, Lisson Grove, who
drew the eye-lashes all out, and burnt the lids with something which
turned them quite black, and caused a deal of pain every morning,
with a view of curing them, until I could not bear to take her any
more.' Will you allow me to ask, were you aware, previous to the
publication of The Zoist, that such a remark was about being printed ?
I am inclined to hope you were not, as no one is better aware than
yourself how little reliance is to be placed on the remarks of patients
as to the treatment they received from the previous medical adviser ;
and again, how unjust it is to give currency to such remarks without
first ascertaining their correctness.

" I remain, dear Sir, yours very truly,
"To Dr. EUiotson. Henry Obre."

The following was my answer : —

" My dear Sir. — It is a rule with me not to answer the question
of any one who has no right to put it to me.

" Besides your question, you tell me that you hope I was not
aware previously to the publication of The Zoist that such 'a remark'
was about being printed, and yet you do not deny the truth of what
is printed. If it is not true, you ought to deny its truth. If it is
true, you ought not to insinuate its untruth by saying that no one
knows better than myself how little value is to be placed upon the
'remarks* of patients as to the treatment they received from the
former medical adviser ; and again, how unjust it is to give currency
to such ' remarks,' without first ascertaining their correctness. You
say 'remarks,' but I do not find one made by the mother. She
makes a statement that such was the treatment : and that she ceased
to take her child to you because she did not like to see it suffer the
pain which the treatment occasioned. I do not see indeed a remark
by any body upon your treatment.

" Allow me to add, that I know no reason why you should feel
hurt. I observe it is a rule with The Zoist to detail, without remark,
without pronouncing it good or bad, the treatment previous to the
use of mesmerism : and evidently that the world may be the better
able to judge of the great utility of mesmerism. I always candidly
detail my own unsuccessful treatment previous to the mesmeric ; and
so do the other medical gentlemen who publish their mesmeric cures.
The mention of your treatment is no condemnation of it : nor do I
see how any one can condemn it, since it was a common treatment
in such cases. You had no opinion of the- 'combined influence of
port wine and mesmerism' in such cases.

" I have placed your letter in the hands of Mr. Amor, to whom
and not to me you should have addressed yourself. He informs me
that the wine was not given till mesmerism had been employed for
six days and the eyes were rapidly improving. He says also that
the mother has declared over and over again that her statement is
true, and that he will take care she shall be at his house with the
child at any time you may appoint to meet her face to face.

" My dear Sir, your very truly,

"John Elliotson."


Answer by Dr. Ellioison to alleged inaccuracies. 87

I then received a second letter : —

"31, Grove Place, Lissoa Grove, March 14, 1851.

" My dear Sir. — ^As you defend The Zoist in your letter to me,
perhaps you will have no objection in my saying, that my ophthal-
mic note book does not accord with the published statement. I find
Maria Saunders, of 13, *Harrow Street, Lisson Grove, when six years
old became a gratuitous patient of mine on the 24th of September,
1843, with psor-ophthalmia, of which she had suffered three years ;
that she was not treated by drawing the eye-lashes all out, or bum-
ing the lids with any application that turned them black : neither
did I see her every morning.

'' Mr. Amor can place the poor woman's statement and mine in
jiixta-position, and believe which he likes. I never care about my
treatment being made public, or shrink from admitting my .non-
success, if the truth be told, which certainly has been much exag-
gerated in this instance. I should be sorry to say I did not give the
youngster pain, for I fear I do so very frequently.

" Yours very truly,
"Dr. Elliotson. Henry Obre."

Finding nothing in this letter that required any notice
on my part, I did not answer it, but transmitted it to Mr.
Amor, who sent for the mother and child. I saw them
at his house. The mother was full of gratitude for the
wonderful and easy cure, and expressed great gratitude for
Mr. Obre's gratuitous attention to her child, and begged
not to be supposed she meant anything disrespectful to him
in her statement. She protested that, every morning she
attended with her child, as many eyelashes were pulled out
as the child could bear, and something was then applied
which gave extreme pain and turned the skin black, as well
as turning black and rotting the napkin which the poor child
held to its eyes immediately and all her way home. She went
every other morning for a fortnight. Now this treatment no
doubt was most judicious, but mesmerism is shewn to be infi-
nitely superior ; and, if by inflammation the eyetids become
inverted and the lashes turn in upon the eyes, mesmerism, by
subduing the diseased state of the lids, remedies this inver-
sion and renders unnecessary the severe means hitherto found
necessary.

It is absurd to think of publishing mesmeric cures, unless
we communicate all the previous facts of the case : and, if the
patient or his friends are inaccurate, as they will be in spite
of the best intentions, I feel certain that the rectification of
any inaccuracy will be immediately admitted by the editors.

John Elliotson.


( 88 )


XXIV. False accusation in the Royal Medical and Chirurgical
Society against a poor man because he suffered no pain
while his Leg was amputated in Jhe mesmeric coma ; and
cruel refusal of the Society to receive his solemn denial of
the truth of the false accusation. Bj^Dr. Elliotson.

** Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour/'

Ninth Commandmeni.

It is universally known that a leg was amputated* at Wellow
in Nottinghamshire^ in 1842^ in the mesmeric coma, without
any pain, and that the patient rapidly recovered. Mr. Topham
the raesmeriser^ and Mr. Ward the surgeon, drew up the case
and transmitted it through the hands of Mr. Stanleyf to the
Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society of London, before
whom it was read in the same year.

As the Society was satisfied beforehand, without any ac-
quaintance with the subject of mesmerism, but by the force
of irrational prejudice and bad feeling, that mesmerism was
an absurdity and imposition, every kind of folly was uttered
by the Fellows, to express their conviction that the poor pa-
tient was a rogue, and the two gentlemen concerned in the
case a pair of blockheads or rogues, just as each speaker was
inclined to represent them. Some talked of people who bore
pain silently by strong resolution ; forgetting that in such in-
stances the strong resolution is manifested by some external
sign, as holding the breathy clenching the hands, biting the
lips, &c., &c. : whereas this patient shewed no signs whatever
of resolution, but lay perfectly placid, without any muscular
action or expression, and breathing calmly; just as they
now frequently see patients lie when operated upon under the
influence of chloroform, but not one of which patients, even
if he does not lie placidly but struggles and hollas, or talks
freely, is pronounced an impostor when he afterwards de-
clares that he felt no paiu.j:

**The operation was now commenced. * Mr. Ward, after one
earnest look at the man,' in the words of Mr. Topman, 'slowly

* The first operation rendered painless in England by mesmerism was the
introduction of a seton by my order into the neck of Elizabeth Okey in University
College Hospital, in 1838. The second was the division of the ham strings by
Dr. Engledueat Southsea, in 1842.

f Mr. Stanley most justly considered the case so satisfactory that he assured
me it was ** as clean a case '^ as he had ever read : and yet he sat in timid silence
at each meeting, and allowed the authors to be ill treated.

X See my exposure of the self-condemnation of the enemies of mesmerism by
their opposite conduct in reference to the senseless state induced by chloroform^
in ZoUt, No. XVII., p. 44.


False accusation in the Royal Medical Society. 89

plunged his knife into the centre of the outside of the thigh, directly
to the bone, and then made a clear incision ronnd the bone, to the
opposite point on the inside of the thigh. The stillness at this
moment was something awful ; the calm respiration of the sleeping
man alone was heard, for all other seemed suspended. In making
the second incision, the position of the leg was found more inconve-
nient than it appeared to be;' and Mr. Ward, to use his own words,
' having made the anterior flap,' * was under the necessity of com-
pleting the posterior one in three stages. First, by dividing a por^
tion of the flap on the inside ; then a similar portion on the outside.
This proceeding, which was of course far more tedious and painful
than the ordinary one, was necessary to enable me to pass the knife
through under the bone and thus complete the whole, as I could not
sufficiently depress the handle to do so, without the two lateral cuts.'
Yet, notwithstanding all this, the patient's ' sleep continued as
profound as ever. The placid look of his countenance never
changed for an instant; his whole frame rested, uncontrolled, in
perfect stillness and repose; not a .muscle was seen to twitch. To
the end of the operation, including the sawing of the bone, securing
the arteries, and applying the bandages, occupying a period of up-
wards of twenty minutes, he lay like a statue.*

*• Soon after the second iuoision, *a low moaning' was heard at
intervals until the conclusion of the operation, that is, after the leg
was off and while the arteries were tying and the bandages potting
on, giving *to all present the impression of a disturbed dream.'
That it arose from troubled dreaming I have no doubt ; for in the
mesmeric coma it is common for patients, after the lapse of a cer-
tain time, to dream and talk, and especially if anything has just
before strongly impressed them ; and this patient was very likely,
and from my experience I should say was almost certain, to dream
of his having soon to undergo the operation, the thoughts of which
had so acutely distressed him and must have occupied his mind to
the last moment of his waking state. I have at this moment three
patient& who in the coma always dream and talk of something which
has very recently, generally the same day, interested them, or of
something they expect on the same day. Had it arisen from the
operation, it would have occurred during the most painful periods ;
would have occurred, as it did not, exactly and only at moments of
the proceeding most likely to be painful, whereas it occurred as much
at moments when nothing was doing to give pain. The man could
not have moaned from pain in spite of himself at moments when there
was nothing to make him moan in spite of himself. It would have
been increased, and indeed changed to a sudden and louder noise,
whenever the end of the sciatic nerve was roughly treated. For,
still farther to test his insensibility, Mr. Ward 'twice touched*
and, as he informs roe, pretty roughly and with the points of the
forceps, so that he in fact pricked, ' the divided end of the sciatic
nerve, without any increase of the low moaning.' The pain which
such an experiment would occasion to a person in his ordinary state
must be equal to a strong dart of tic douloureux ; and I defy any


90 False accusation in the

human being, in his ordinary condition, to be subjected to snch an
experiment without, not to say an increase of low moaning if he was
already moaning, but without suddenly giving some other more decided
sign of anguish, — without some interruption to the ' perfect stillness
and repose of a statue.' Mr. Ward further informs me that he ' once
put his thumb roughly upon the nerve in taking the posterior flap in
his hand to sponge, and also used the sponge very roughly.' If the
man had not been able to bear the pain of the operation without
moaning, he would not have been able to retain the perfect placidity
of his countenance, the relaxed and motionless state of his lips and
hands, and the undisturbed regularity of his breathing."

'' The mesmeric state of the patient usually lasted half an hour ;
and, after this lapse of time, the operation having been commenced
in rather more than a quarter of an hour subsequently to its pro-
duction, and having occupied, inclusively of applying the bandages,
above twenty minutes, he * gradually and calmly,* as usual, awoke."

'''At first, he uttered no exclamation; and for some moments
seemed lost and bewildered,' — a<characteristic and striking pheno-
menon so familiar to mesmerists when any visible change in external
circumstances has occurred while the patient was asleep. But, after
looking around, he exclaimed, ' I bless the Lord to find it's all over.'

** 'He was then removed to another room; and, following imme-
diately,' Mr. Topham ' asked him in the presence of all assembled
to describe all he felt or knew after he was mesmerised. His reply
was, " 1 never knew anything more; and never felt any pain at all;
T, once, felt as if I heard a kind of crunching.** * Mr. Topham
' asked if that were painful ? He replied, " No pain at all ; 1 never
had any; and knew nothing till I was awakened by that strong stuff**
(the sal volatile).' Of course the moment he became sensible he must
have tasted the sal volatile, and would fancy that it awoke him, and
he must have continued to taste it for some time after he was awake.
When mesmeric patients awake spontaneously, they continually
ascribe their waking to their first sensation, or even to something
imagined.

" ' The crunching no doubt was the sawing his own thigh bone.'
It is not uncommon for patients in the mesmeric coma, although
insensible to mechanical causes of irritation, yet to hear more or less.
As there are in mesmerism various degrees of insensibility to me-
chanical causes of irritation, from perfect to but slightly impaired
sensibility, in different cases; sometimes in the same case at different
mesmerisations ; and sometimes at different periods of the same
mesmerisation ; and sometimes one part is insensible and another
sensible : so there are various degrees of affection of hearing. In
some cases patients hear not the loudest sounds; in others, they hear
and answer questions ; and it is very common for them to hear well
at one moment and appear perfectly deaf at another, as the mesmeric
conditions fluctuate in intensity : and the state of sensibility to me-
chanical causes of irritation and of hearing may bear no relation to
each other. It would be wonderful were all this not to happen,
since the very same observations hold in similar affections of a func-


Royal Medical and Chirurffical Society, 91

tional character independent of mesmerism. I have no doubt that
the man did confusedly hear the sawing of the bone in his coma.

" * He was left easy and comfortable ; and still found so at nine
o'clock that night: about which time' Mr. Topham 'again mesmer-
ised l)im (in a minute and three quarters) and he slept an hour and
a half.'

" Two days afterwards, when he was put into the mesmeric coma,
Mr. Topham proposed to Mr. Ward, who intended to dress the
wound that day for the first time, to take this opportunity; and the
wound was accordingly dressed without the man's knowledge, and
there/ore without the least pain.

** The man has done perfectly well. Within twenty* four hours
after the operation he was singing. In three weeks he sat up to
dinner, * and had not a single bad symptom : none even of the nervous
excitement J so Jrequently observed in patients who have undergone
painjul operations, and who have suffered much previous anxiety in
making up their minds.'

** Such was the artless tale ; beautifully true to nature in every
incident, and at once recognized as pure truth by all who are not
ignorant of mesmeric phenomena, or who do not unphilosophically
tdlow unworthy feelings to supplant their judgment."*

Mr. Coulson and a Dr. Truman considered that the man
had been trained not to express pain. Of course by Mr.
Topham and Mr. Ward : and yet the poor man was agonized
with pain except when mesmerised.

Sir Benjamin Brodie talked of some people not being
capable of pain : passing the fact over in cool sUence^ that^ in
the reading of the case ten minutes previously^ the poor pa-
tient was declared to suffer exqnisite pain from the slightest
movement np to the moment the mesmeric insensibility was
effected. Sir B. B. very boldly told of a person (Dr. Holland)
not crying out under an operation^ and therefore argued that
there was no expression of pain : but he gave no account of
the expression of the countenance^ the breathings the hands^
— some or the whole of which I have always seen express pain
when patients astonished us by their firmness. He and the
rest seemed never to have thought of the difference between
insensibility and firmness. As now they all employ chloroform^
they may learn to make the distinction. Sir B. B. was sadly
off his guards for he added that^ seeing a nerve lie bare^ he
touched it to see how the patient stood this wanton experi-
ments ^^^ ^^® patient cried out. Mr. Ward seeing a nerve
exposed^ and a nerve far larger than that — and knowing the
patient did not feel^ touched it^ but the patient did not cry
out or express pain in any way.

Dr. Marshall Hall said the poor patient was an impostor
because^ when his leg was being cut off the other leg did not

* Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations without Pain. By Dr. EUiotson.


92 False accusation in the

move : — a piece of preposterous folly ; and shewn to be so, for
in the insensibility from chloroform, when an extremity is cut
off, the other does not move ; and in the numerous painless
operations since performed under mesmerism this movement
of the corresponding extremity which is not operated on has
taken place but once ; and was no doubt accidental. But there
is no physiological folly too great for Dr. Marshall Hall to
have the face to utter or write, so blinded is he by vanity.

Some, as Dr« James Johnson, declared they would not
have believed the facts had they seen them.*

The speakers all passed over the striking fact, in addition
to that of insensibility to pain, of the poor patient having
quieter nights and an improvement in his health from mes-
merism.

Yet, notwithstanding all these truths, and the intense
importance of the paper, they resolved at the next meeting
not to have the faintest trace of it upon their minutes — to
erase all mention of the occurrences of the preceding meet-
ing, upon the trumpery pretence that the case had been pub-
lished since the preceding meeting. Now the authors were
fully justified in publishing it : for Mr. Topham, addressing
the president, formally withdrew it from the Society in my
hearing — and in the Royal Society, upon the model of which
this Medical Society was formed, authors often withdraw
their papers as soon as these are read, and send them to the
Royal Society for no other reason than to have it in their
power to say that they had communicated certain facts to it.
Mr. Topham and Mr. Ward were prepared to withdraw it,
and printed it in readiness for immediate publication, because
they had been threatened in private, if they dared to have it
read in the Society, with all the virulence which they actually
experienced.

" When the chair was taken, a secretary read as minutes of the
preceding meeting merely that such a paper had been read ; no ab-
stract being given according to the established custom of the society.
The authorities thus disdained to possess the particulars on their
books. The president then put the usual motion for the confirma-
tion of the minutes, when Dr. Gregory, known in connection with
small pox and cow pox, rose to express his disapprobation of the
authors having published the paper immediately that it was read.

" Dr. Copland rose to oppose the motion on two grounds, — the
character of the paper, and the publication of it by the authors
without the permission of the society. He would allow no trace to
remain that such a paper had been read. He protested that the

* Dr. Chambers and Sir B. Brodie have used the same philosophical language
to many persons in regard to mesmerism.


Royal Medical and Chirurgical Sociely. 98

paper ought not to have been read, because the author was not a
medical man ! — As though knowledge was ever to be despised from
any source. Whj one of the authors was a surgeon, though neither
was a fellow of the society. He then contended that, if the account
of the man experiencing no agony during the operation were true,
the fact was unworthy of their consideration^ because pain is a unse
provisitm of nature, and patients ought to suffer pain while their
surgeon is operating; they are all the better for it, and recover bet-
ter ! Will the world believe that such folly was gravely uttered ?
This vnll be remembered as a doctor's speech in 1842, when the
doctor himself shall be forgotten. In due consistency. Dr. Copland,
when he is about to have a tooth extracted, of course goes to a
clumsy dentist and begs the man to give him all the pain he can.
In due consistency, he of course gives his patients that physic which
he thinks most likely to pinch them well, because they must be all
the better for being twisted with sharp pain while it is operating ;
the agony must do them good, and make them anxious to take h%»
physic again.

** Dr. George Gregory was so shocked that he proposed the affair
should be promulgated by advertisement in three newspapers.

*'Dr. Moore, of Saville Row, protested that the authors had
Tiolated the laws of the society ; and, at the same time that he was
so indignant at its publication having been taken out of the hands of
the society, declared, most consistently, that it was unworthy of a
place in their minutes. ' How would the character,' he exclaimed,
' of that medical society be afiPected, on whose records it should
appear that it had received and discussed a subject like mesmerism,
when no proof existed as to its truth?"

The clamour became frightful. Mr. Topham was censured
in strong language behind his back for publishing the paper,
and a visitor rose to defend him, but was immediately pre-
vented from speaking by Mr. Caesar Hawkins, and on the
ground that the laws forbid any one not a member of the
Society to speak. Yet there is no such law. Thus the
Society enacted a law for that moment.

'' Here was a body of men censuring an absent gentleman in
strong language, and, when his friend rose craving permission to
explain for him, that friend was instantly compelled to hold his
peace. This was conduct unworthy of a society of men of the very
numblest class. No law of the Society forbad Mr. Wood to speak ;
and, had there been such a law, the laws of justice, and of that
charity without which Mr. Hawkins is as ' sounding brass,' would
have been superior to it under these circumstances.

"This virtuous indignation at its publication was truly laughable.
The speakers all knew that the Society would not have published this
paper, and they would have risen in arms at the bare suspicion that
the council contemplated such a thing ; and yet as much clamour was
made as if the Society had been deprived of a treasure. I resolved


94 False accusation in the

to take no share in the discussion, as I knew that neither the authors
nor the public would care whether the minutes were confirmed or not.
I never enjoyed a farce of Foote*s more than the acting of this even-
ing ; for, by a little effort, as I sat silently observing the speakers,
I represented to myself that they were enacting all their parts for
my amusement.

" So the virtuous indignation of a large majority condemned the
minutes to non-confirmation, — a most ridiculous proceeding, since,
from reporters being admitted, the whole proceedings of the previous
meeting were already published in the various journals, and recorded
more publicly than they would have been in the minute-book of the
Society, which nobody sees but the secretary when he writes in it
and the president when he signs his name." — Numerous Cases, ^c.

To mesmerists the perfect freedom of the poor man from
pain daring the operation was a familiar thing : and those visi-
tors at the Society who were not of the medical profession
could scarcely restrain the expression of their surprise at the
Society doubting, and being ignorant of^ one of the most com-
mon facts in mesmeric anaesthesia as regards mechanical
injury. Since that day, many hundred operations^ produc-
tive of intense agony in ordinary circumstances^ have been
performed without the slightest pain : operations of all sorts,
amputations, cutting away of nails, extractions of the firmest-
rooted teeth, removals of breasts and of immense tumors
weighing from eight or ten pounds to above a hundred, — and
with the happiest success. Dr. Esdaile has removed with
success and perfect painlessness tumors so vast and so nume-
rous that he would leave all the surgeons of Great Britain and
Ireland in the shade, even had he not performed them with-
out pain. I know of no other surgeon living or dead who has
done such mighty things, or things approaching to such ex-
ploits. And yet all our surgeons pretend ignorance of his
doings, though recorded in the imperishable, yes^ imperishable
ZoiM : and the accounts of them, to the disgrace of the profes-
sion^ are excluded from the medical libraries^ and all notice of
them from medical schools and nearly from all the medical
journals of the United Kingdom. Posterity will read this
black page of medical history with wonder.

But though the world has made gigantic progress in its
knowledge of mesmerism and the humble and poorer mem-
bers of the profession have been decidedly on the move, the
fashionable, the bustling, and the talking and writing mem-
bers, have remained perfectly still, standing up to their middle
in the same cold swamp of ignorance in which they stood in
1848, when The Zoist was established and I published the
proceedings of the Boyal Medical and Chirurgical Society,


Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. 95

and an account of all the painless surgical operations per-
formed up to that period ; as the following details will exhibit
to the astonished world.

At the meeting of the Boyal Medical and Chirurgical
Society, held on the 10th of last December, Dr. M. Hall, in
a discussion upon chloroform, before he sat down seized the
opportunity of informing the meeting that the man whose
leg Mr. Ward had taken off without pain bad now confessed
himself an impostor and asserted that he suffered like other
people ; and the President and Fellows allowed him to make
these statements without interrupting him. The following
are the reports in the four London weekly medical journals.

Medical Gazette, Dec. 20« 1850, p. 1076. " He thought it was
ill judged to have changed from ether to chloroform, as the former
is less dangerous and as capable of prodacing anaesthesia. If a
patient is in a state of anaesthesia, he can be moved : and the met-
meric experiment, performed some five years since, to produce this
state had been confessed to Dr. Hall by the party operated
ON as all a trick.*'

Medical Times, Dec. 28, 1850. Dr. Hall "then spoke of the
amputation performed some years ago under the alleged influence
of mesmerism. This has since been proved to have been a sheer


FRAUD."


Institute, Dec. 23. '' Dr. Hall then alluded to a case of amputa-
tion under mesmerism, the particulars of which had been read before
the Society some years ago, but had since been acknowledged to
have been a piece of trickery and knavery."

Lancet, Dec. 28, 1850. Dr. Marshall Hall said that "before he
sat down, he begged leave to communicate a fact of some interest to
the Society. The Fellows would doubtless remember the case of
amputation read to it some time ago, said to have been performed
during a state of anaesthesia induced by mesmerism. It was argued
by him at the time, that the reported perfect insensibility of the
patient proved too much. Volition being removed, there ought to
have been some reflex movements. He indicated that this man had
since confessed that he acted the part of an impostor."

Thns Dr. M. Hall led the world to suppose that he had
received the confession of guilt from the patient : for he con-
tradicted none of these printed reports. Mr. Topham wrote
to him^ enquiring whether it was true that he had so spoken
in the Society : and the following was his answer ; —

" Sir, — I duly received your note yesterday and, in reply, beg
to state,

" 1. That the report of my observations in the Lancet is perfectly
correct.


96 False accusation in the

" 2. That the fact, which I stated hefore the Royal Medical
and Chirurgical Society, was commuaicated to me by a gentleman
whom I have known for the third part of a century, and whom I
regard as among the most honorable and truthful of men.

" 3. That I do not feel called upon to give up this my authority
to you without reserve ; but that I will do so to any gentleman or
gentlemen in strict confidence.

'' 4. That I have shewn your note and mentioned the facts of
the case to a friend, to whom my informant has been equally known
for a long series of years ; and that this gentleman's opinion entirely
coincides with my own.

" 5. That I never shall cease to raise my voice against everything
derogatory to my profession — ^whether originating, unhappily, with-
in its ranks, or coming intrusively from without.

^' 6. That I am of opinion that, in these, days of multifarious folly
and quackery, every member of my profession is called upon in honor
to do the same.

" 7. That you will be pleased to regard this as a final communi-
cation.

" I have the honor to be, &c., &c.,

" Marshall Hall.
"38, Grosvenor Street, Jan. 16, 1851.
— Topham, Esq."


4


Thus Dr. M. Hall had accused a fellow creature at a pub-
lic meeting of a society, on the authority of another person^
but without giving his authority, and refuses afterwards to
give up. his authority unless in secret and to individuals who
should be bound not to mention it to any body !

But this is not the whole.

Dr. Hall next sent to the editor of the Lancet, March 1st,
a copy of his letter to Mr. Topham with this addition ; —

" A few days ago, I was told that the credibility of my statement
at the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society wDuld be called into
question at the next meeting of that Society. I therefore addressed
a note to my informant, a gentleman long known to Professor Grant,
to Dr. Robert Lee, to Dr. Webster, of Dulwich, and to many others,
in order that I might have his written authority for the truth of my
statement. I enclose this gentleman's reply for your [Mr. Wakley's]
private perusal. It contains the following declaration ; —

** * The cojifession of the man was distinctly and deliberately
stated to me bv a person in whom I hsive full conjldence,

" • It was m Nottinghamshire that I was told the fact, last Au-
gust, and I FULLY BELIEVE IT.' "

Thus Dr. M. Hall now confesses, that he not only did not
have the statement from the poor man, nor from a person —
nameless and never to be named to the world — who heard such
a confession from the poor man ; but from a person — nameless


Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. 97

and never to be named to the world — who had it from some
other person — nameless also.

Of course any farther remarks npon Dr. M. Hall are out
of the question. I leave him and his deeds to the world for
judgment.

Mr. Ward went to the poor man^ and received an express
denial to the accusation. Mr. Ward despatched by post to
Dr. M. Hall, March 11, this denial, with a request that he
would make it publicly known to the Society : and Dr. M.
Hall says he never received the letter. But, thinking that
a formal denial would be advisable, Mr. Ward requested the
Rev. J. Sampson and a medical gentleman, named Williams,
to visit the poor man and take his statement.

The following is the document given to Mr. Ward by
these gentlemen after their visit on Saturday, March 22.

WHEREAS,

An assertion having been publicly made to the effect
that James Wombell, labourer, late a patient in the District
Hospital at TFellow, in the county of Nottingham, (who un-
derwent the operation of amputation of the thigh under the
influence of mesmerism,) had made a pretended confession, as
to his actual feelings at the time, in variance with the decla-
ration which he made immediately after the operation was per^
formed : the above-named James Wombell, having been this
day seen by us, the undersigned, makes, in our presence, the
following affirmation, to the truth of which he is ready to
swear.

I, James Wombell, of the parish of Carlton-upon-Trent,
labourer, do hereby most solemnly affirm, that I never have
made any pretended coi\fession or statement to any one as to
the sensations which I experienced under the operation that
was performed upon me in the Wellow Hospital while under
mesmeric influence other than those which I mentioned at
the time, when questioned by Mr. Topham and other gentle-
men who were present. My statement then was, that "/
never felt any pain at all;'^ "I once felt as if I heard a crunch-
ing/^ To this statement I still adhere, and again do most
unequivocally assert, that I felt no pain at all under the ope-
ration^ and therefore that I never did make, or could have

VOL. IX. H


98 Jiejusal of justice by the

made^ the confession imputed to me. And to this^ my solemn
affirmation^ I hereby set my mark.

James Wombelli x his mark

Signed by James Wombell,"^ Theophilus Sampson, Rector of

this 22nd day of March, > Eakring, Notts.

1851, in the presence of J Thomas M. Williams, M.R.C.S.

Carlton-upon-Trent, near Newark, Notts.

I, Theophilas Sampson, Clerk-Rector of Eakring, in the
County of Nottingham, do hereby certify, that I have this
day examined (and required the accompanying affirmation
from) James Wombell, being led thereto by the feeling of
having been myself an ear-witness of the ewpressiona used by
the patient at the time referred to, the veracity of which ap-
pears now to be impugned.

Witness my hand this 22nd day of March, 1851,

Theophilus Sampson.

At Carlton-upon -Trent, near Newark,' Notts.

But the cruelty of the case does not end here.

It was presumed that the Society, having allowed Dr. M.
Hall to give a deliberate contradiction to a scientific state-
ment made at a meeting eight years ago, — ^viz., that by means
of mesmerism a certain patient had been rendered insensible
to the pain of an amputation, (as insensible, we may now
say, as if he had inhaled chloroform,)-^and to accuse a fellow-
creature of wicked imposition, would, in common justice,
have allowed the poor man to deny the accusation and declare
his innocence by means of a Fellow of the Society, in the
the place where, and as publicly as, the accusation had been
made.

Dr. Ashbumer went to a meeting of the Society, with a
statement from Mr. Ward that the man totally denied to him
the accusation made by Dr. M. Hall. He arrived after the
secretary had begun to read a paper, and was told by his
friends that he was too late.

He attended the next meeting, which took place at the
end of a fortnight ; and, when the business of the evening was
beginning, rose for the purpose of presenting to the Society
a copy of Mr, Bailliere^s edition of a translation of the Baron
von Beichenbach's. Besearches, availing himself of the oppbr-


Royal Medical and Chimrgical Society. 99

tunity to make some observations on the nature of the work,
and had wished^ in reference to his own note in the book on
Luminous Animals, to pay a passing tribute to the memory of a
former distinguished member of the Society, the late Professor
Macartney of Dublin ; when, having alluded to *' some state-
ments made by a member of the Society on a late occasion,
with reference to an operation of amputation performed while
the patient was under the influence of mesmerism,'^ he was,
I understand^ suddenly interrupted by the president. Dr.
Addison, who would not allow him to finish his sentence,
saying he remembered the subject alluded to by Dr. Ash-
burner, " which had arisen^ he did not know how, in the course
of conversation at a previous meeting. No doubt the gen-
tlemen who had originally presented the paper in relation
to the case might think themselves aggriev.ed by the charge
made by Dr. Marshall' Hall, but this meeting was not the
proper occasioh to discuss the truth or untruth of the asser-
tion made by a member on a former occasion, — that must
be settled elsewhere. Dr. Addison felt bound therefore to
request that Dr. Ashburner would not now introduce the
subject.*' Dr. Ashburner wished, however, in presenting a
book which he said was distinctly a work on m^sm^erism, to
explain certain matters. But the word mesmerism so excited
Dr. Copland, that this gentle man roared out '^ Orders order,'*
at the top of his voice, and was so well seconded by the
loud clamour of many others that Dr. Ashburner bowed to
the chair in order to restore the calm which should at all
times characterize the proceedings of those pretending to the
position of gentlemen.

Dr. Cohen, of St. Thomas's Hospital, then endeavoured
to procure a hearing, and said (though only heard bj a few
in his immediate vicinity. Dr. Copland determining, it seemed,
to seduce the meeting to a bear garden) that " He hoped for
the future that no member of the Society would be allowed
to make any statement at one of their meetings to which a
counter-statement would not be allowed in reply ; that their
present proceedings were manifestly unjust.'' •

Every member should feel aggrieved by the stain inevitably
and for ever attached to the Society by its late unwarrantable
proceeding. A number of persons calling themselves gentle-
men listen to a statement declared to be false, and to be a
lie, — ^asserted, a fortnight before the meeting that has so
distinguished itself, to several members in the library to
be false^ — that assertion forming a topic of conversation
among the members of the council, — and yet these persons
hug and protect the falsehood, widely disseminated iu the

h2


100 Refusal of justice by the

pages of the Lancet as a fact stated before the Society^ and re-
fuse to become the vehicle for carrying the real light of truth
to the world. If Dr. Addison could be literally translated,
his words might run thus^ " Dr. Marshall Hall may have told
an untruth ; he and his friends of the Lancet may have used
this Society as their tool for the propagation of his untruth !
We choose that no counter-statement shall be made here to
anything Dr. Marshall Hall pleases to utter." The Royal
Medical and Chirurgical Society wish it to be handed down
as a fact histoHcal, that in their opinion anything is fair
against mesmerism.

The following are reports of this sad business in the
weekly London medical journals.

The Medical Gazette, March 7th, p. 428 —

" Previously to the paper of the evening being read. Dr. Ash-
burner made an attempt to address the meeting respecting a statement
made at a meeting of the Society, held some weeks previously, by
Dr. Marshall Hall, with respect to the report of the case of a patient
who appeared to have had his leg amputated under the influence of
mesmerism, and which Dr. Hall stated the party operated on had
confessed to him to be a deception.

" The President considered that this was a question which rested
entirely with Dr. Marshall Hall and the party who read the paper,
and could not now be entered into before the Society.

'* Dr. Ashburner again attempting to address the meeting, and
order being called from all parts,

" Dr. Copland rose and said it was evident that the gentleman
now attempting to address the meeting was insulting the Society.

" The President said this course of proceeding was quite irr^u-
lar; and, order being restored, the business of the meeting was pro-
ceeded with."

The Medical Times of March 8, in its report of the pro-
ceedings of that evening makes no allusion to the subject, nor
any in the subsequent numbers of the 15th and 22nd.

The Lancet of March 1, p. 239—

" Several new fellows having been nominated, and the ballot
having commenced. Dr. Ashburner, in presenting Dr. Reichenbach's
work on Animal Magnetism, requested to say a few words respecting
a statement which had been made at a former meeting, in relation to
a case of mesmerism. He was proceeding, amid much interruption,
to say, that a fellow of the Society had remarked, in reference to an
operation which had been performed during mesmeric sleep, that the
man so operated upon had acknowledged himself an impostor. Here
the calls for the Chair became so general that Dr. Addison rose and
explained to the last speaker that the Society could not be made the
place to discuss points of evidence. The paper alluded to had been
read a long time since, and the allusion to the subject of it, made on


Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, 101

a. late occasion by Dr. M. Hall, was to the effect that the medical
men in attendance had been imposed upon. But, howeyer anxious
the gentleman interested might be to shew the contrary, this was
not the place to do it, and he must request that no such attempt
would be made. It was entirely a question between the parties in-
terested in the statement made. Dr. Ashbumer and Dr. Cohen
subsequently attempted to address the »Society, but the interruption
became so great that they sat down. Dr. Copland declaring that it
was an insult to the Society for any gentleman to attempt to address
them respecting a paper which ought never to have been read, and
the record of which had been erased from the minutes."

And in its answers to correspondents, p. 263, we read —

** 3f.D. — Dr. Cohen was, we think, very ill advised in the matter.
The president acted with firmness, but with his usual urbanity and
impartiality. There is no just cause of complaint against the course
pursued by Dr. Addison."

The InstUute,

'* On Tuesday sennight a singular attempt was made by the mes-
merists to arrest the ordinary business of the evening, and to bring
on a discussion on mesmerism, which was, however, frustrated by
the firmness of the presiding President, supported by all the Fellows
present. Some years ago the council permitted a paper to be read
there, describing the amputation of a limb under the supposed in-
fluence of mesmerism. This was made a great card by the mesmer-
isers, and frequently quoted in support of their opinions. At a
subsequent meeting of the Society the minutes of that proceeding
were expunged from their books, and still more recently, during the
present session, in fact. Dr. Marshall Hall announced that he had
had proof that the man operated on was an impostor. This naturally
galled the relaters of the case, and on Tuesday night Dr. Ashburner,
after the minutes were read, got up and addressed the ipeeting on
the subject, but was called to order by the President, who said that
the case was a matter now between those gentlemen and Dr. M.
Hall, but it would be quite irregular to discuss it further at that
Society. After some demur Dr. Ashburner sat down, but a Mr.
Cohen was not so easily put down. In spite of the stringent opposi-
tion of the Fellows present, and the repeated intimations of irregu-
larity from the President, he persisted in speaking for several minutes,
although not a word could be heard, his voice being drowned in the
calls for order, &c. At last Dr. Copland came to the rescue, and
told him he was insulting the Society by his conduct, and a sense
of the indecency thereof then seemed to strike him, and he resumed
his seat. Although we have had many years' experience of Medical
Societies, we do not think we ever before witnessed such a scene.
If Mr. Cohen be a Fellow of the Society, he should be called upon
to apologize."

In Bunyan^s Pilgrim^ s Progress we read as follows, —

** Then went the jury out, whose names were Mr. Blindman,


102 Refusal of justice by the

Mr. No-good, Mr. Malice, Mr. (Narrow-mind,) Mr. (Selfish^ Mr.
Heady, Mr. High-mind, Mr. Enmity, Mr. Liar, Mr. Cruelty, Mr.
Hate-light, and Mr. Implacable ; who every one gave in his private
verdict against him among themselves, and afterwards unanimously
concluded to bring him in guilty before the judge.

'' And first among themselves, Mr. Blindman, the foreman, said,

* I see clearly that this man is an heretic* Then said Mr. No-good,
' Away with such a fellow from the earth.' • Aye/ said Mr. Malice,

* for I hate the very looks of him* Then said Mr. (Narrow-mind),
' I could never endure him.* * Nor I,' said Mr. (Selfish), * for he
would always be condemning my way,* * Hang him, hang him,' said
Mr. Heady. * A sorry scrub,* said Mr. High-mind. ' My heart
riseth against him,' said Mr. Enmity. ' He is a rogue,* said Mr.
Liar, ' Hanging is too good for him,' said Mr. Cruelty. * Let iis
dispatch him out of the way,* said Mr. Hate-light, Then said Mr.
Implacable, * Might I have all the world given me, I could not be
reconciled to hinl ; therefore let us forthwith bring him in guilty of
death,* And so they did ; therefore he was presently condemned to
be had from the place where he was to the place from whence he
came, and there to be put to the most cruel death that could be in-
vented."

The present proceeding is but a poor imitation of what
was done in regard to the lady whose breast was removed
painlessly in the mesmeric state many years ago in Paris by
M. Cloquet. She was styled an impostor by an anonymous
member of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society ; and
the Medical Gazette lent itself to the false account.

" In the London Medical Gazette for the 2nd of last December,
immediately after an imperfect and incorrect account of the discussion
in the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society on the paper which
detailed the case of amputation in the mesmeric state, h an anony-
mous letter of three paragraphs, — signed ' a member of the Medical
and Chirurgical Society,' who is ashamed to give his name, and there-
fore does the deed in darkness, — the first styling the account * very
silly' and unfit for the society, the second heartlessly accusing the
poor patient of deception, and the third as follows : —

'* ' It is rather remarkable that it should have occurred to no one
present to mention the case of a woman whose breast was ampu-
tated, some years ago in Paris, by M. Cloquet, while she was (as
it is supposed) in a state of mesmeric stupor. This woman was
believed to have been insensible to pain during the operation ; and
was a better actor than the man mesmerised by Mr. Topham, as she
did not even moan. Some considerable time afterwards, however,
while dying of an internal complaint in another hospital, she con-
fessed to the nurse that the whole had been a cheat ; that she had
experienced pain like other persons, but had sufficient command over
herself not to shew it.'

'* The Nottingham surgeon, to whose letters I have already twice


Royal Medical and Chirurffical Society. lOS

referred, writea, — ' some years ago in France the breast of a female
was removed while she was professedly ia the mesmeric sleep. She
died &/ew daya afterwards ; an operation which in other cases rarely
indeed proves fatal. Is it not too probable that the attempt to bury
the anguish in her own bosom proved too much for nature to sustain :
Another mesmeric operation case succeeded better, but the patient
subsequently confessed tliat her insensibility was all feigned.'
' Many similar cases have occurred, &c.'

'* Now the statements of both writers are altogether untrue.

** Madame Plautin was never in an hospital, but the wife of a
wealthy merchant of Paris ; resided in a country house which she
could hardly be prevailed upon to leave in the fine season of spring
to take up her abode in Paris for the purpose of being mesmerised,
for she disliked mesmerism because it had been tried upon her at
different times unsuccessfully, and she was unwilling to submit to
the restraint of mesnieric treatment ; and she was terrified at the
thought of a surgical operation under any circumstances, and de-
clared she would rather die, and had indeed suffered severely from
refusing even to be bled in one of her pregnancies.

*' M. Cloquet testified to the Academy that she was pious, modest,
and incapable of any collusion; and Dr. Caldwell of America, hearing
a rumour in London that this surgeon confessed he had operated
upon other patients in an ordinary state who bore the pain as un-
moved, called upon M. Cloquet, in Paris, to ask the question, and
told me that he received for answer, * Jamais ! jamais ! jamais /'
However, Dr. Davison, a friend of mine, called upon M. Cloquet at
my request in January, to make enquiries respecting the case ; and
the following is an extract from his reply, —

^* 'The letter to which you allude in the Medical Gazette is fcdae
in every particular, save the death of the patient. The lady was
never the inmate of an hospital. She was the wife of a rich n^O'
eiant, an excellent person, respected by all who knew her. She
died above a fortnight after the operation, of & pleurisy ; the wound
having done well, and she having taken a drive some days previ-
ously. Cloquet saw her and is quite sure that she never made the
confession alluded to.

As to the other case, spoken of by the Nottingham surgeon.
Dr. Davison has made every enquiry in Paris, and cannot learn
that it ever occurred. 'Many similar cases have occurred!' I call,
upon him to make good all his assertions. He knows that Mr. Wood
flatly contradicted him in The Nottingham Journal, in regard to the
one, and pointed out that he gave no authority whatever for the
others : yet, though two months have elapsed, this candid person
has never replied or ventured* to recur to the subject.

It was most improper in the Medical Gazette to insert a serious
anonymous charge against a person now no more, — ^and that person
a female, a foreigner, and whose family are all now resident in Paris
and of great respectability ; and shameful in the Nottingham surgeon
to make these wholesale accusations, not one of which he has been
able to prove.


104 Refusal of jmiice by the

" The unscrupulousness of so many medical men to blacken the
characters of their fellow creatures, already one would think suf-
ficiently afflicted, by accusing them, without any other reason than
their own ignorance, of imposture, is a foul spot upon the profes-
sion. Wherever a person displays mesmeric, phenomena, or is cured
or even relieved by mesmerism, he is at once impudently called an
impostor, and any sort of thing fabricated to support the cmel
charge.

" * L'homme est de glace aux v^rit^ ;
II est de feu pour le mensonge.'

" La Fontaine.

'* The Okeys not only were impostors, but confessed the impo-
sition !

"In a letter, paid for as an advertisement , in the Newry Tele-
graph for last February 9, signed —

"J. MoRisoN, M.D.
" J. Woods, Surgeon,
" W. Starkey, M.D.
« G. H. KiDDS, L.R.C.S.

are these words, — * If we except Dr. Elliotson, — ^whose mind always
exhibited a tendency to wild and extravagant theories, and who in
consequence of his attachment to the marvellous lost his chair in
the London University, as also his standing as a practitioner, — all
the others, as Mesmer, Dnpotet, La Fontaine, preached the mes-
meric doctrines to some advantage, if not to the public, at least to
themselves.' I never knew even the names of these four gentlemen
before, but they ought to be aware that the character of my mind is
the opposite of what they aver. I have never speculated, bat have
always devoted myself to the observation of facts ; so that, whatever
I have advanced, I have seen ultimately established.

** 'The Okeys,' these gentlemen further say, *were proved to be
impostors, and afterwards acknowledged the tricks which they had
practised on the credulity of Elliotson.' The only reply to be
made is, that this is totally untrue. One of them was said by Mr.
Wakley to have been reported to have figured at Irving's chapel.
The report was not only totally untrue, but I cannot &id that it
existed before it appeared in the Lancet. Mr. Wakley, like Dr.
Johnson, is a father, and he should have some feeling for innocent
young females, who, though in the humbler walks of life, are not
nis inferiors in respectability. He even advertised in the morning
papers, * An editorial article on the tricks and deceptions practised
by performers and patients under the stale name of animal mag-
netism, shewing the total failure of the patients to fulfil the promises
of the magnetisers, when the signals which pass between them are
effectually disallowed.' — Numerous Cases, ^c.

But more has been done to the poor Nottinghamshire
putient. Existence at anytime was denied to him, and I was
obliged to assure some persons that he was not a fabuloua
creature.


Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. 105

The present proceeding itself is perfectly stale : for it was
once before enacted the year after the operation^ and is thus
recorded and reported in The Zoisi for July^ 1843. In a paper
on the anti-mesmeric falsehoods of medical men^ I wrote —

" Medical men in different parts have reported that the patient
whose leg was amputated without pain in Nottinghamshire has con-
fessed that he cheated. I paid no attention to this report till last
week I received a letter from a friend, beginning thus : —

" ' I am constantly greeted with the information that the poor
man whose leg was amputated last year, has lately acknowledged
that the account of his being asleep and insensible to pain is all a
hoax. As those who set this story afloat are said to be medical men
of high repute, I am anxioas to have it in my power to give a flat
contradiction to it. It was only this morning that a lady told me
she had lately heard a learned professor of Cambridge assert that it
is a well-known fact that the man now says he was awake during the
whole of the operation. Could you get me a line from Mr. Topham
or Mr. Ward, contradicting the said report, and enclose it to me,
you would greatly oblige, and enable me with confidence, the next
time such a thing is asserted, to make use of language more plain
than polite, particularly to the faces of certain persons in London
active in spreading this falsehood.'

*• I therefore wrote to Mr. "Ward, who amputated the leg ; and
he forwarded the following certificate from the patient, which I will
preface with part of a note from that gentleman : —

" ' I have this day sent off the certificate witnessed by Mr. Flint,
as Vicar of Wellow, to give it if possible more weight. Wombell
cannot write, and I therefore thought it almost a necessary precau-
tion, as the sceptics are so unscrupulous. I had not previously been
able to meet with the two together.'

" ' I hereby declare that I have never said that I had deceived
Mr. Ward, and had felt the pain of the operation he performed upon
me, and I further declare that I stated the truth at the time, namelj
that I never felt any pain at all ; but that I once felt as if I heard a
kind of crunching.

** * James Wombell, -f his mark.

« « WJtnPQ«P« / Charles R. Flint, Vicar of Wellow,
witnesses I ^ G. Wheelhouse.

"'Wellow, June 20, 1843.'

" These reports occurring at different times, on differing cases,
and all similar, are evidently no mistakes, but wilful fabrications. I
shall make no further remark than that such conduct is as short-
sighted as immoral."

Let me assure all my medical brethren that I have exag-
gerated nothing in my accounts of mesmeric phenomena and
cures : that 1 have spared no labour to ascertain the truth :


106 Sub-mesmerism and Imaginaiion.

and have observed and experimented dispassionately and with
the greatest anxiety not to be wrong or lead others astray. I
do not hesitate to declare that the introduction of mesmerism
into our treatment of medical and surgical patients is as
mighty a thing as the introduction of steam into mechanical
operations. If mesmerism is found useful in such a multitude
of cases^ so different from each other^ let us remember that
blood-letting, opium, mercury, iodine, and other remedies,
are each employed usefully in cases of great diversity. The
best expression of the agency of mesmerism in the cure of
disease that I can give is, that mesmerism has a tendency to
assist the Hving system to right itself when wrong, and in
whatever way wrong, — to augment the power'of the vis medi-
catrix natur€e.*


XXV. Sub-mesmerism and Imagination.

Four gentlemen from America, Dr. Warren, Dr. Darling,
Mr. Lewis, and Mr. Stone, have been exhibiting in different
parts of England and Scotland such effects as the following,
the account of which we extract from Chambers's Journal of
Feb. 8 :—

*' We sat down, about thirty in number, in a large drawing-room,
and eight or nine persons, including two ladies, came forward as
subjects. The lecturer disposed them in a row on chairs, and gave
each a small disk, composed of zinc, with a spot of copper in the
centre, on which he directed them to keep their eyes fixed for a
quarter of an hour or so, in which time it would be ascertained
whether any of them were to prove susceptible or not. Meanwhile
silence was enjoined. My friend, who had seated himself amongst
the rest, with the disk in the palm of his hand, cast me a waggish
look before fixing himself in the proper attitude, as much as to say.
Now you shall see this humbug exposed. I resolved, for my own
part, to watch everything that was done with the greatest care, in
the hope of detecting the trick on which I theoretically presumed

* Mr. Ward has sent the declaration and following note to the President
and Council of the Royal Medical and Chimrgical Society : —
** To the President and Council of the Roy. Med. Ch. Society.

** Gentlemen, — As Dr. Marshall HaU, a few weeks ago, made the Royal
Medico-Chimrgical Society a medium for publicly disaeminating a misstatement,
and as he has declined giving up his authority except in eoi^idence, may I beg
the favour of you to lay the accompanying declaration before the members. I
cannot think that a number of my professional brethren, among whom there are
so many who rank high not only in their profession, but as gentlemen, would wish
their Society to be made the medium for making public a slander without allowing
the same for its refutation.

*^ I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, your very obedient servant,

" W. Squirb Ward."


Sub-mesmerism and Imagination, 107

the whole affiiir rested. It was soon to appear that trick on the part
of the lectarer was entirely out of the question, and that all depended
on the fidelity of his patients.

" At the end of a quarter of an hour Dr. Darling went softly up to
the row of subjects, and said a few words to each in succession, '4>P*"
rently in order to ascertain the condition in which they were. It soon
appeared that both ladies were in a favourable state, but that all of the
gentlemen but one were unaffected. These accordingly retired, and
took their seats amongst the rest of the company. What was ray
surprize to find that the oae gentleman who appeared susceptible was
ray friend ! The experimentaUst was aware of his previous scepticism,
and of course felt the greater pleasure in having succeeded with him.
He gently laid his hands over the eyes of my friend, and said to
him, * Now you cannot open them.' A hearty effort seemed to be
made, but in vain. The lecturer then said, 'Now yon can open
them ;' and he opened them accordingly. I question if he ever had
occasion to open them wider. We communicated looks, testifying
our common sense of surprize. We were, in fact, thrown out — he
on finding himself become all at once the subject of suspicion to me
and others — and I at finding myself called upon to watch one who
had hitherto been my associate in the effort at detection. My friend
vras now requested to hold out his hands, laid palm to palm. Dr.
Darling, after a few passes, and pinching the fingers sharply toge-
ther, said briskly, ' Now you can't separate them.' My firiend tried
in vain to take them asunder, till, on a nod and a word from the
experimentalist, he did at length draw them apart. After a few
passes along the limbs, my friend was told that he was fixed to his
chair. He strained himself to rise, using the most violent muscular
efforts ; but all in vain, till he received permission. He afterwards
acknowledged to me that he had felt as if bound down to his seat by
ropes. A touch on the lips imposed an involuntary dumbness on
my friend. Not till told that he might now speak could he utter a
word. He was then told that he had forgotten his name. He never-
theless pronounced it. The experimentalist performed a few further
manipulations, and said emphatically, ' Now you can't tell me your
name !' Sure enough the word had vanished ! Our patient looked
up with a blank expression, and then a stare of puzzlement, which
I should vainly endeavour to describe. He finally cast a bewildered
and pleading gaze upon his fascinator, who calmly smiled and nodded,
as if to undo the spell, when out came the missing vocable, appa-
rently to the no small relief of the patient. He was after this fixed
to the ground standing. Sway as he might in all directions, not a
foot could he move. Dr. Darling also held up his fore-finger, and
causing my friend to touch it, told him that he could not draw it
away. He accordingly could not. Then, this spell being undone,
the lecturer held up his fore-finger, and told my friend he could not
touch it. He tried, darting his finger first on one side, then on
another — above, below, in all directions but the right one. In short,
my friend had become, from a proud sceptic and derider, a perfect
victim. He withdrew from the field utterly discomfited. It appeared


108 Sub-mesmerism and Im4;tgination,

that he had uever been asleep, but continued throughout to possess
his usual consciousness. He had really done all he could to resist
the commands of the operator ; but power had gone from him. He
had been absolutely compelled in each case to submit.

'' The experimentalist now turned to one of the ladies ; and here
a very interesting series of phenomena was presented. The lady, I
may say by way of preface, is an intimate friend of my own. She
is a tall, elegant person, about two years married, and the mother
of one infant. Her figure is of that rounded kind which indicates
an infusion of the lymphatic temperament. When found to be in
the suitable state, I observed that her face was slightly flushed, and
her eyes had an embarrassed expression; but she bore no other signs
of being in an extraordinary condition. Her, too, the lecturer fixed
to her seat, and to the floor, and to his own finger. He caused her
voice to desert her ; he-made her forget her name ; passed, in short,
through a repetition of the principal experiments which had been
already practised with my friend. Then he proceeded to some of
apparently a higher kind. He told the lady that she was sad i and
sad to all appearance she was. He told her she must laugh ; and
she laughed accordingly — heartily and long, not stopping till she
was bid. She was now seated in the middle of the floor, so that
every gesture and proceeding could be accurately seen. The lecturer
said to her, ' Here is a miniature of your husband,' and seemed to
place something in her hand. She took the ideal article, and looked
at it with an interested expression, then proceeded to suspend it to
a chain containing similar trifles which hung round her neck, con*
dudiug the aflair with the gratified look which a young woman might
be expected to exhibit on having a pretty miniature of one she loved
presented to her. The innocent grace shewn in the whole of this
fictitious proceeding drew forth exactly that kind of admiration from
the company which would be bestowed on a piece of exquisitely-natural
acting in a theatre. I suspect, however, it was ' a grace beyond the
reach of art.' Dr. Darling now ventured on a trying experiment.
He bade the lady look at her husband, who, to our apprehension,
sat smiling at her. He told her that her lord and master had taken
a great dislike to her. She seemed arrested with a sudden sorrow,
gazed painfully at her husband, and then we saw her eyes slowly
fill with tears. This deception was quickly undone, but only to be
followed by one not much less distressing to the patient. She was
told that the company were enjoying themselves at her expense : they
were all laughing at her. She assumed a proud expression, rose up
majestically, and looked round and round the room with an air of con-
temptuous defiance. On this feeling being banished from her mind,
she sat down again. The lecturer, pointing along the floor, said, 'You
are fond of flowers — ^here is a fine flower-garden before you — ^you
see beautiful beds of roses ;' and he added the names of other favour-
ites of the English garden. The lady looked, and gradually began
to assume a pleased expression, such as she might have manifested if
led into the precincts of a Chatsworth or a Kew. She became fully
convinced that she saw a flower-garden, although, as she afterwards


Sub-mesmerism and Imagination. 109

fold us, she nerer ceased to be aware of the fact that she was sitting
in a room. Then Dr. Barling affected to plack flowers and hand
them to her. She took them, smelt them, and arranged them in
her bosom with the same graceful simplicity which had been mani-
fested in stringing the miniature. ' This is a water-lily,' he said;
'smell it.' She said, *The water-lily has no smell;' but ncTerthe-
less went through the gesture of putting it to her nose, when we re-
marked that the expression of countenance was suitable to the fact of
the inodorousness. The lecturer then told her to look at the fine
sunset (we were looking through eastern windows at a heavy grey
sky) ; she beheld a fine sunset accordingly. Then he convinced her
that she saw a fine park and three gentlemen walking in it. ' And
here,' he said, ' is a nice horse, come and have a ride upon it.' She
moved to the middle of the floor, with the look of one approaching a
horse. She stroked the ideal palfrey, and took the bridle reins from
Dr. Darling's hand. He slightly raised her by the waist, and told
her she was now mounted. She then went through the gestures
appropriated to riding — got into a rapid movement — leant forward —
suddenly clasped her cap at the back of her head, which she felt fall-
ing off — and finally stopped, a little exhausted with the exercise, and
allowed herself to be in imagination lifted off upon the ground.
Finally, after she had been reseated. Dr. Darling put a tumbler of water
into her hand, and desired her to taste that fine beer. She tasted, and
admitted that it was beer. Next he convinced her that it was milk ;
then it was water, with animalcules driving pell-mell through it. The
air of implicit belief in all these cases was perfectly accordant with
the presumable feeling. No intentional acting by the highest adept
could have been truer to our conceptions of what was proper on each
occasion.

"The other lady, who was younger, and unmarried, was next
placed on^ a sofa. The lecturer held her hands for a few minutes,
looking into her face ; he then touched her eyebrows, and made a
few other trifling manipulations. It quicklv appeared that she had
become as obedient to the volition of the lecturer as the first lady
had been. On being told that she was sad, she assumed the aspect
of a Niobe, forming the finest possible study for that character.
She was then told that her father, who was in the room, was in
great affliction. She gazed fearfully at him for a minute, and clasping
her hands wildly, threw herself back in a passion of tears. The ex-
perimentalist hastened in pity to relieve her from her distress. She
smiled with wonder at the strange delusion under which she had
been. She was then told that the company were laughing at her.
She looked round fiercely, panted with suppressed rage, uttered some
exclamations, and twisting her handkerchief like a rope between her
hands, plucked at the two ends as if she would have torn it asunder.
In her the passion of wounded self-esteem was more violent than in
the other lady, which afforded the lecturer occasion to remark that
the demonstrations are more or less peculiar in every case, according
to the natural character of the individual. On the whole, there was
a somewhat alarming degree of susceptibility on the part of this


110 Sub^mesmerism and Imagination,

subjeet, and at the request of her father the experiments were dis-
continued. I was assured, nevertheless, that no one had ever been
known to be injured even in the slightest degree by undergoing these
processes.

** While the party was subsequently at lunch, I had a conference
with my friend, as well as with the two female patients, in order —
I need not say to test the reality of all these demonstrations, for
their reality was beyond a question — but to learn what the patients
had felt while subjected to the lecturer's will. It appeared that there
never had, in any case, been any failure of consciousness. They
knew where they were, and by whom they were surrounded. They
were fully apprehensive of the wish of Dr. Darling to subject them
to his wUl, and uixious to defeat him in his design, my friend par-
ticularly so. But their physical powers proved treacherous to their
desire, and they were compelled to obey another will than their own.
As a last experiment I requested the operator to try if he could
arrest the hand of the married lady in lifting a glass of wine to her
lips. He fairly stopped it in mid air. This was twenty minutes
after leaving the room in which the experiments had taken place.
I afterwards learnt that she felt drowsy for a day or two after our
stance; and perhaps during all that time the lecturer might have
re-established his power over her will, without going through any
such preliminary process as the gazing upon the disk."

The individual is brought into a calm state by quietly
gazing at something for a length of time : and then the ope-
rator uses some of the usual mesmeric means, — looking at the
subject, making a few passes, or touching the head more or
less. AH this is a degree of mesmerisation : and it is an
ascertained fact that our imagination, which has an immense
power over us all at all times and upon the child while it still
forms a part of its mother, has far greater effect in every
degree of the mesmeric state. We refer to the numerous won-
derful experiments related by Dr. EUiotson in No. XI., p. 362,
&c.* How much the will may contribute we do not know.
Experiments to prove its share ought to be made without the
subject having any means of knowing what the operator in-
tends : whereas in these experiments he is openly told what
is to happen to him.

We regret that what is merely imagination with a greater
or less dash of mesmerism should be ushered in with a new
name. One calls it electro-biology, and another electro-psy-
chology. Now biology is but another word for physiology, or
the science of the powers and functions of living things ; and
some so designate physiology. As to the adjective electric,
all living phenomena, perhaps all the phenomena of nature,
are electric : and if the reason for prefixing the word electric

• See alsM> No. IV., p. 440.


Sub-mesmerism and Imagination. Ill

is that the patient stares at zinc and copper^ this is absnrd^
for^ if he stares at a piece of wood or sugar^ the efiPect is the
same.

A humble man, named Aylieff, has been exhibiting these
phenomena at Sheerness, and we have one of his handbills
which was printed in November. Mr. Baldock has kiudlj
written to us the following letter : —

" Sheeraess Dock Yard, Feb. 24, 1851.
" Having read in Chamben^ Edinburgh Journal of the 8th instant
the article Electro-Biology, wherein it is spoken of as being the dis-
covery of an American gentleman, I am induced to send you an
account of what appears to me to be identical with the phenomena
described in Chambers*. I was called upon in October last bv a Mr.
Aylieff, who told me * he had a power far exceeding mesmerism ; but
which had nothing to do with mesmerism.' And after a short con-
sultation he decided upon delivering a lecture on the 22nd November,
1850. Mr. Aylieff is connected with the excise, and resides at Mil-
ton, near Sittingboume, in Kent. He is an individual with the eye
of a hawk, in robust health. Muscular and powerful — just such a
man as a powerful mesmeriser would be expected to be. It was very
evident to me that he only knew that certain effects would follow
certain actions of his ; that he knew nothing of mesmerism, but
believed firmly his was a new discovery. He brought with him two
or three individuals upon whom he had previously operated; and
placing himself before them for a minute or so, and gazing strongly
in their face, and making an upward pass from the nose over the
forehead, he told them to shut their eyes; and upon his teUing
them they could not open them, they found they could not. But
when he desired them to open them, they did so. And then with

their eyes open — wide awake — he said, * You are Mr. .* • Yes,'

was the immediate reply, ' I am so.' ' No you are not ; you are

, Mr. .' * Yes, so I am,' was the reply. He offered them water

— calling it beer, milk, gin, &c., and they declared it was so. At
length a stranger to Mr. Aylieff mounted the platform, believing it
to be a got-up affair. He gazed upon him with a strong stare for a
minute or two, placed his thumb on his nose and his fingers open
upwards, and making two or three upward passes told him to shut
his eyes, and then that he could not open them. The man found
they were fixed. He told him to open them, and he did. And he
gave him a glass of water and called it spirits, which the patient said
it was. He warned him not to drink too maeh, as it would intoxi-
cate him. But the patient would drink, and he became helplessly
drunk, feeling and exhibiting every symptom of intoxication and
falling down. With this patient, as with the others, his command
seemed unbounded. He told them they could not move from the
spot, and they stood rivetted to the ground. He told them they
could not leave their chairs, and they were fastened to them. They
could not spell. He took irom them all reasoning powers, and res-
tored them at command. A friend of mine who was present is to


112 Books received, Notices to Correspondents, ifc.

write me his views of the lectare, which I will send you with this if
it arrives in time.

*' My conviction is, that this and the Edinburgh affair are both
pure mesmerism, produced by a powerful magnetizer. The gazing
upon the spot of copper in the zinc disc £xes the eyes, and renders
the patient highly susceptible to the operations of the magnetizer.
I send you the rough proof of Mr. Aylieff 's bill ; and it is just pos-
sible you may make some mention of this case in The Zoist"

BOOKS RECEZVBD.

Kinesipathy; or, the Care of Diseases by specific Active and Passive More-
ments. By Professor A. Georgii. London : Bailliere, 219, Regent Street.

This pamphlet contains a clear and succinct account of the system of Swedish
Medical Gymnastics, for which the world is indebted to the genius of the Swedish
poet. Ling, written by one of his fi&vourite disciples, Professor Georgii, upon
whom, in conjunction with Professor-Branting of Stockholm, the mantle of their
master may be said to have descended. TUs system consists in the methodic
application of certain specific active and passive movements, carefully selected in
each individual case, to the cure of disease ; and we have no hesitation in saying
that the principles on which it is based are consistent with the soundest canons of
physiology, and well worthy of the attention of the medical world. Nothing can
be further removed from quackery than a treatment based on the universally
admitted fact, that motion and exercise increase the flow of blood to a part, and
favour its increased development, acting at the same time as a derivative with
respect to other parts which are left in a quiescent state. The extent of the
effects to be produced in the human frame by these means, and their applicability
to the task of bringing it from a diseased to a healthy state, are evidently ques-
tions of fact to be decided by experiment.

The Mighty Curative Powers of Mesmerism. By Thomas Capem, Secretary
to the Mesmeric Infirmary.

This little work contains a mass of cures, sufficient to convince any sceptic of
the sanative powers of mesmerism. They are described artlessly and carry inevi-
table conviction. The Preface is written by an evidently honest and disinterested
man, and contains a collection of most amusing anti-mesmeric opinions.

Letter* on the Laws of Man's Nature and Development. By Henry George
Atkinson, F.6.S., and Harriet Martineau.

liettor to the Rev. John Gumming, D.D., on the subject of his Lecture,
entitled, God in Science.

ERRATA.

In Miss Cooper's case, recorded in No. XXXII., p. 34, Mrs. Cooper begs
us to state that the epileptic fits began in December, not 1848, but 1847 ; and
that the whole of (he year 1848 was spent in fruitless efforts to relieve them,
before mesmerism was employed.

In the present number. Art. IV., for ** Munro " read Monro,


Dr.EUiotson begs us to add to the second foot note at p. 54, that Miss Aglionby,
writing to him of a patient, remarks, '* She never falls into coma during the
t^aneet merely becoming drowsy and her eyes closing, but the moment I leave
her she falls into a very deep sleep which lasts for several hours. She suffers
violently from pain in the side, and it is quite beautiful to see the instant relief
which the passes local and general give her."

We are requested by Mr. Tubbs to say that his patient, mentioned at p. 74,
has had some pain again in her knee. We fear she has used it too freely and the
mesmerism been slackened too soon.

We regret being obliged to defer several communications till Julj.


THE ZOIST.


No. XXXIV.


JULY, 1851.


I. Dr. Esdaile and the London Medical Gazette. By Dr.

Elliotson.

" When sach men as Sir David Brewster are compelled by sheer force of
direct evidence of their own senses, to admit the trathfolness of these extraordi-
nary phenomena, is it too much to ask the learned and eeientiftc Mr. Wakley,
and the other medical grandees who swear by him and his Lancet — is it, we say,
too much to beg of even these infallible aotocrats of science, to suspend their
sneers and allow ordinary mortals to attach some little weight to the evidence of
their own eyes ? We fear it is too much to ask anything so unreasonable. Al-
though these doctors confess with one breath that they have never investigated the
Bubject for themselves^ and with the next breath admit their almost complete ig-
norance of the laws of organic life or nervous phenomena, — ^they yet strenuously
refuse to credit the assertions of any body else, no matter how trustworthy and
sober-minded, who professes to have witnessed the facts for himself. It certainly
matters very little, so &r as these worthies themselves are concerned, what they
believe or what they disbelieve. But the misfortune is, that so many other people
who pin their faith implicitly on such blind guides, are prevented from examining
for themselves." — Meekame's Magaxine, May 10, 1851. p. 368.

I BECEiYED from Dr. Esdaile, last August, a letter dated
July 1st, in which he wrote,

^'By last mail I sent a paper to the Medical Gazette, con*
taining 161 mesmeric operations for scrotal tumors, with a
list of all my other operations, and a short resumi of the
history of mesmerism in India. WiU they dare to refuse it ?
I have particularly requested that the article may not be
destroyed, if not accepted, as a friend will call for it, and I
hope you wiU do me that friendly office if the paper does not
appear in a reasonable time. You make what use you please
of it.^'

In the London Medical Gazette, for September 6th, ap-
peared the following article, —

VOL. IX. I


114 Dr. Esdaile and the London Medical Gazette.

" ON THE OPERATION FOR THE REMOVAL OF SCROTAL TUMORS^

ETC.,

THB EFFECTS OF MESMERISM AND CHLOROFORM COMPARED,

By James Esdaile, M.D., Marine Surgeon, Calcutta.

*^ I AM induced to address you in consequence of having read,
in the February number of the Medical Gazette, an account
of a fatal operation performed at Alexandria for the removal
of a large scrotal tumor. As I have probably performed more
operations of this description than have taken place all over
the world, you and your readers will not be displeased perhaps
to learn the practical results of so extensive an experience.

" From the rarity of this disease in temperate climates,
this operation is comparatively a novelty to European sur-
geons.

'^ These singular and often prodigious tumors are so com-
mon in Bengal, that they may be considered as an endemic
curse of the climate. The disease in a great measure is con-
fined to Bengal and the sea-board of India. A hot, moist,
malarious, and relaxing climate seems to favour its invasion,
as it is rarely met with in Upper India. In Egypt it is also
principally confined to the Delta of the Nile, and is seldom
seen above Cairo. It is also prevalent in the West Indian
Islands. All these tumors are generally called " elephantiasis
of the scrotum ;^^ but this is incorrect, as simple hydrocele is
probably the origin of nine-tenths of those here, the remainder
being divided between syphilis, leprosy, and elephantiasis.
There is a most remarkable predisposition to hydrocele pre-
valent among this population, the extent of which may be
imagined from the fact that about 2000 cases are operated
upon yearly in the hospitals of Calcutta; and this is the
perennial source of the inexhaustible supply of this kind of
surgery.

" The native treatment, which is worse than useless, is to
make deep eschars in the tumor With red-hot charcoal balls,
which often brings on an intense inflammation, deep slough-
ing, and fatal haemorrhage, and never, as far as I know,
causing a resolution of the tumor. On the contrary, I am
convinced that it accelerates its growth by the local irritation ;
and it causes a most vexatious complication of the case to the
surgeon operating, as the testes are always adherent to these
cicatrices, and often completely involved in them. The dis-
ease sometimes only attacks the colis, which assumes the
appearance of an elephant's trunk, hanging down to the
knees, and ending in a wart bigger than a man's fist. But
however fantastic or monstrous the shape may be, the colis


By Dr. ElHotson. 115

is always found unchanged, and in situ ; and in these pro-
boscis-like productions it may be at once found, by cutting
down upon a cane pashed up to the pubes, or, still better by
sUtting the tube up with a very long strong bistouri cach(
thrast up to the symphysis pubis. The operation for the re-
moval of scrotal tumors, till of late, was considered so for-
midable^ that few surgeons cared to deal with large cases ;
and Dr. GooUene, of the Medical College, Calcutta, who had
considerable experience in this line, thus speaks of it in vol.
viii. of the Transactions of the Medical and Physical Society
of Calcutta ; —

" ^ It is clear that this operation is one of imminent dan-
ger ; in which, hitherto, it has appeared that the chances for
and against the recovery of the patient are evenly balanced/
'* The practical conclusions I have come to from 161 ope-
rations are —

*' I. That so far from this being the case, the results are
marvellously satisfactory, even when the tumors weigh 40,
50, 60, 70, 80, 90, lOOlbs. and more, provided the opera-
tion can be got through quickly enough, — in from three to six
minutes, and in the mesmeric trance. In 161 operations for
the removal of tumors, from the size of a man's head to
1031bs.,the mortality has only been five per cent. ; but in no
instance has death been caused directly by the operation, or
followed soon after it, but at the distance of many days,
weeks, or months, in consequence of lock-jaw, fever, cholera,
diarrhoea, and exhaustion of the system ; — from what may be
called hospital diseases, and accidents in the course of the
cure ; and this has been going on with all the regularity of a
law of nature for the last five years.

''II. That, when the constitution is good, the patient
not above 40 years years of age, and the tumor does not ex-
ceed 401bs., or possibly 501bs., it is quite practicable to save
all the organs without much 'danger.

" III. That when the age of the man and the size of the
tumor exceed this, no attempt should be made to save the
testes ; because the patient will either bleed to death in the
attempt, or, if not, the testes will be found to be useless
after all, and requiring to be removed. But, even supposing
the patient to escape with his life, and the testes to be sound,
his constitution would not be able to perform the process of
xovering them again ; they would slough, and require a second
operation for their removal, or the man would die exhausted
in the effort at reparation, as we have more than once seen.
I therefore never attempt to preserve the testes when the
tumor is above 501bs. (unless the man is strong and robust) ;

I 2


116 Dr. Esdaile and the London Medical Gazette.

but the colis^ with one exception^ has been always saved^
however large the mass*

" I will now present your readers with some illustrative
cases^ taken from the beginnings middle, and end of my
practice, and will conclude with some practical remarks on
the propriety or otherwise of administering chloroform in
such operations.

" The following is among the first mesmeric operations for
this disease ; —

^' Sept. 2nd, 1845. I was stopped on the road to-day,
and requested to go into a temple to see a sick Fu Queen.
On entering, I found a healthy-looking man of 60 ; but he
was nearly blind from cataracts, and had a scrotal tumor of
about 301bs. weight, which he begged me to remove. I ex-
amined it, said I would consider of it, and then drove on to
Chinsurah to see Dr. Boss, the surgeon in charge of the
troops there ; to whom I said, that if he chose to return with
me I would endeavour to show him a mesmeric operation.
He willingly consented; and, in passing the Fu Queen's
house, we carried him to the hospital along with xxa. The
cook of the hospital, one of my best mesmerisers, was set
upon him, and in half an hour made him insensible. Con-
sidering the man's age, and the size of the tumor, we did not
think it worth while to save the testes, and the operation was
therefore very soon effected. The man never moved, and
did not awake till after the last artery was tied. Seeing him
about to awake, he was covered with a sheet, and asked,
when he came to his senses, if he had been in any way dis-
turbed in his sleep : he said ^No.' He was then desired to
sit up and show the tumor, as I wished to examine it. He
did so, and actually put his hands down to raise the mass as
usual ; and his look of amazement on missing it was some-
thing not to be forgotten.

^' Dr. Boss published an account of this and other opera-
tions in which he assisted me.

"Oct. 25th, 1845. Oooroochuru Shah, a shopkeeper,
aged 40. He has got a monster tumor, which prevents him
moving : its great weight, and his having used it as a writing
desk for many years has pressed it into the shape of a gigantic
cocked hat. His pulse is very weak, and his feet (edematous,
which will make it very hazardous to attempt its removal ;
but life is literally a burden with such an appendage, and he
is willing to risk life for the chance of getting rid of it.
Having no precedent to guide me, and knowing that expe-
dition was his only safety, 1 determined to make it a case of
decoUation as much as possible, without attempting to save


By Dr. Ellioison. 117

the colis even. lie became insensible on the fourth day of
mesmerising, and was drawn on the mattress to the end of
the bed. Two men held up the mass in a sheet, extending
its neck, and I took it off by a circular incision. The loss of
blood was immense, and he immediately fainted, but recov-
ered without great difficulty in a short time. After tying the
last vessel^ the mattress was again pulled back upon the bed
with him npon it ; and at this moment he awoke, and said
that nothing had disturbed him. We had no time to spare,
certainly ; but I saw that the colis might have been spared,
and in every subsequent case it has been so.

'' At the end of a year I reported to government that one
hundred operations of all kinds had been performed by me
in the mesmeric trance, without the patients knowing any-
thing about it; and I offered to demonstrate the truth of my
statement to any number of persons in whom the Gk>vemment
had confidence. Upon this a mesmeric committee was or-
ganized by order of Sir Herbert Maddock, the Deputy Gov-
ernor of Bengal, to witness and report upon operations to be
performed by me before them. For this purpose I came down
to Calcutta from Hooghly, and in the course of fourteen days
performed seven mesmeric operations in the presence of the
committee ; and this is the summary of the committee's ob-
servations : —

'^ ' In all these cases, without exception, after the opera-
tion was completed, the patients expressed no knowledge or
recollection of what had occurred, denied having dreamed,
and complained of no pain till their attention was directed to
the place where the operation was performed' — (Mesmeric
Committee's Report).

'' Among the operations performed before the Committee
was a completely successful one of amputation of the thigh :
but as this paper is devoted to scrotal tumors, I will proceed
to the first very remarkable case that occurred after I came to
Calcutta ; —

'^ A few days after the Committee had ceased to sit, a
man came to the Native Hospital, where the Committee held
their meetings, with an enormous tumor, and I put him
under treatment.

." Oct. 9th, 1846. Horoonundo Saha, aged 27, hearing
that I was in Calcutta, came to the Native Hospital to-day
with an immense tumor. It measured seven feet in circum-
ference, and two feet round its neck. The disease began
seven years ago with hydrocele, and its progress has been
very rapid for the last three years. Although the tumor is
actually as heavy as his whole body (he appears to be under


118 Dr. Esdaile and the London Medical Gazette.

8 stone weight)^ hi9 person is in tolerable condition^ and bis
constitution does not seem mucb broken.

^' 10th. He was mesmerised to-day for the first time^ for
two hours by two persons, taking one hour each. He slept
profoundly, and was partially cataleptic. The best mode of
managing the mass, described heresdOter, was rehearsed with*
out awaking him.

'^llth. No mesmeric effects to-day, on account of his
system being deranged by the periodic (?)* that very generally
attends these tumors.

" 12th. The mesmeric phenomena are less marked than
on the first day. He is still feverish.

'^ 13th. This day being excessively stormy I did not go to
the hospital, thinking that the gentlemen interested in the pro-
gress of the case would not venture out in such bad weather.
At 2 o'clock, p.m., I received a note from Mr. Hume, a ma-
gistrate of Calcutta, and a member of the late mesmeric
committee, informing me that the patient had that day ex-
hibited the most perfect catalepsy, and that ' I might have
made minced meat of him.^

'^14th. The same appearances being present to-day, I
proceeded to opiate upon him. The tumor had been daily
tied up in a sheet, to which a rope was attached rove through
a pulley in a rafter. The colis was dissected out. The mat-
tress was then hauled down to the end of the bed ; his legs
were held asunder, and the pulley was put in motion to sup-
port the mass and develope its neck. It was transfixed with
the longest two-edged knife, which was found to be too short,
as I had to dig the haft of the mass to make the point appear
below, and it was removed by two semicircular incisions right
and left. The flow of venous blood was prodigious, but soon
moderated under pressure of the hands, the vessels being
picked up as fast as possible. The mass, after half an hour,
weighed lOSlbs., and was as heavy as the man^s whole body.
During the whole operation I was not sensible of a quiver of
his flesh. Dr. Duncan Stewart, Presidency surgeon, and a
member of the late mesmeric committee, held his pulse all
the time, and had the best opportunities of observation : he
has kindly furnished me with the following notes ; —

" Dr. Stewarfs Notes.

" ' The time occupied in the operation was six minutes,
including the application of ligatures to the spermatic arteries,
and three or four other vessels that spouted. The arterial
haemorrhage was very small indeed, but the welling of blood

* Omission in ManoBCiipt.


By Dr. EUiotson. 110

at the moment of each transverse cut was appalling. The
loss coald not have been less than ten or twelve pounds.
The patient remained throughout most perfectly still and
motionless. I held his pulse the whole time, and counted it
carefully^ Immediately on the removal of the tumor it sank
to zero ; his face became pale, and cold sweat bedewed his
forehead : it was not till his head was lowered that he recov-
ered from the coUapse caused by so sudden and great a with-
drawal of vital stimulus from the heart and brain. The pulse
gradually returned, and was found, when first counted, to
be 120, very small, compressible, and intermitting, but there
was not the slightest evidence of consciousness or pain.

" ' It was now found necessary by Dr. Taylor and myself
to pour some wine and hartshorn down his throat ; but, as
he could not swallow in this state, it was allowed us to dash
cold water in his face, blow in his eyes, and fan him ; by
which means he awoke from his trance, recovered sufficient
aensibiUty to drink some brandy and water, and presently
subsided into perfect repose : the pulse, however, remained
very weak, and settled at 100. The patient was then care-
fully removed to a clean bed : he passed a good night ; the
wound was stitched and strapped the following day ; and on
visiting him this morning, I found him looking composed,
and sleeping soundly, the parts looking well, and with every
prospeet of a most successful cure.

" ' (Signed) D. Stewart, M.D.' "

^^ The operation was performed in a room full of spectators,
including the Secretaries of Government, and many medical
and unprofessional gentlemen. Although this operation was
not performed before the committee, it was ordered to be
printed in their report by the Government.

'' The man is now well and fat.

^* On receipt of the mesmeric committee^s report, which
was printed by order of the Government, the Deputy-Gover-
nor determined to give me an experimental hospital for a year,
whidi intention was thus intimated : — ^ So far has the possi-
bility of rendering the most severe surgical operations painless
to the subject of them been, in his honour's opinion, estab-
lished by the late experiments performed under the eye of a
committee appointed for the purpose, as to render it incum-
bent on the Government to afford to the meritorious and
zealous officer by whom the subject was first brought to its
notice, such assistance as may facilitate his investigations,
and enable him to prosecute his interesting experiments under
the most favourable and promising circumstances.' (Lettea*


120 Dr. Eadaile and the London Medical Gazette.

of the Secretary to the Government of Bengal to the Presi-
dent of the Mesmeric Committee).

" Forty-six capital operations were performed within the
year in the experimental hospital ; and^ as the last operation
has the novelty of having been performed by a native surgeon,
I shall give it only.

" Dec. 23rd^ 1847. Luckynaram Day, aged 87, mesmer-
ised for the first time to-day. He bore pricking and pinching
very well, and only a slight shiver of the skin took plsice when
he was touched with a bit of live charcoal. He resisted all
the usual means of demesmerising, but awoke instantly on
having cold water squirted into his eyes.

''4th. Found deeply entranced to-day: he was pricked
and pinched with the same results as yesterday, and could
not be roused by the loudest noises. Some sulphate of mag-
nesia was put into his mouth with difiEiculty, as his jaws were
firmly clenched, as usually happens. The tongue remained
quite passive, and the month gradually closed again. His
nose was also put into a bottle of carbonate of ammonia, and
he inhaled the fumes like common air. [Repeated attempts
were made to demesmerise him : his eyes were rubbed, opened,
and sharply blown into, without the least effect. He was at
last awakened by his eyes being syringed with cold water; and
the moment he came to his senses he began to retch, and said
that his mouth was disgustingly bitter — ^why, he could not tell.

''5th. In the same state to-day. Tins man was quite
ready the first day, but the operation was put off at the re-
quest of some persons who desired to be present.

" 6th. The operation was performed to-day by my assis-
tant, Baboo Budunchandea, in the presence of Dr. Mouat,
and other gentlemen. The cohs having been first freed, an
incision was made in the course of the right cord, which ex-
posed a large hydrocele sac, on opening which a great quan-
tity of bloody pus escaped. As this convinced us that the
testis was useless, it was no farther sought for, but was re-
moved with the mass, after the left one had been dissected
out. The left testis was also found to be involved in a hy-
drocele ; and as the tunica vaginalis was much thickened and
hardened, it was dissected off the testis and cord ; all which
he bore like a dead body. He was demesmerised a quarter
of an hour after all was over ; and when asked, said he had
slept soundly, without being in any way disturbed, and was
as strong as usual. He could not be convinced that he had
been operated on till the part was shown to him. On seeing
it he was overjoyed, and begged me to pare down his legs in
the same way, as they were both elephantoid.


By Dr. ElUotson. 121


t€


Mr. (yShaughnessy^ Professor of Surgery in the Medical
College^ Calcutta^ tells us that^ since the discovery of ether
and chloroform^ ' Mesmerism no longer deserves the serious
consideration of the operating surgeon '/ and this brings me
to the question of the propriety of administering chloroform
in cases of large scrotal tumors. If my views are correct^
they have a much more extensive application.

'^ If chloroform is resorted to at all (and I very rarely re-
quire to do so)^ I see no reason to suppose that it will not be
as successful in moderate sized tumors as in amputations^ &c.
But in my last half-yearly report of the Mesmeric Hospital I
asked :— -

" ' Who would dare to remove scrotal tumors weighing
from fifty to one hundred pounds and more^ under the influ-
ence of any narcotic drug whatever ? Not I^ certainly ; and
I would earnestly dissuade any one from attempting it^ or
suffering it to be done to him. We all now know that chlo-
roform has a tendency to paralyse the hearty Inngs^ and brain,
and it requires no doctor's learning to be convinced that such
exhausting operations can only be performed with a chance of
success in cases where the vital powers are intact. When
these tumors weigh above forty pounds, the loss of blood is
so profuse that the pulse is usually extinguished on the spotj
and it takes a considerable time to revive it; the brain is so
exhausted by the sudden withdrawal of blood, that the patient
generally faints, and awakes in a half delirious state, and,
the stomach sympathizing, vomiting also takes place, and
hours elapse before the equilibrium of the sanguineous and
nervous systems is re-established.

" ' In the last tumor of four pounds I ordered the solid
clots to be gathered, and they weighed two and a half pounds ;
and, taking into account the serum on the floor, with the
blood in the mass, I presume that about five pounds of blood
were lost in as many minutes ; and we have seen that Dr.
Stewart estimated the loss of blood at ten or twelve pounds
in the monster tumor.

" ' It must be evident to every one that persons fainting
from this immense haemorrhage would probably (rather cer-
tainly) never revive if the vitality of the heart, lungs, and
brain, was lowered by any additional influence whatever.'

^' A girl lately died at the Medical College here a few
minutes after the extraction of an eye ; and Mr. O'Shaugh-
nessy, the operator, made the following remarks upon the
case : — ^ The unfortunate result in this instance I am disposed
to attribute entirely to the insensibility produced by chloro-
form. The loss of blood was trifling, the time occupied by


122 Dr, Esdaile and the London Medical Gazette,

the operation was shorty and there was no important organ
implicated by the removal of the diseased parts. The child
fainted ; and, owing to the general insensibility, the attempt
at reaction was imperfect, asphyxia followed, and she exr
pired/

^'But thongh/oin^m^, (nsphywia, and death followed the
administration of the chloroform, we are plainly told by Mr.
O'Shaugnessy that this valuable drag possesses ' no poisonous
properties V Mr. O'Shaughnessy more truly,^ays afterwards,
however, ^ that all narcotic drugs are open to the objection
that they prevent the reaction necessary for recovery from in-
juries attended with great exhaustion of the system.^ Dr«
Ooodeve, who, as he told me, has known and believed in
mesmerism for the last twenty years, and fully appreciates its
practical and philosophic interest, on seeing me remove a
seventy-pound tumor lately under the mesmeric influence,
said, on witnessing the state the man was reduced to, that,
if there bad been a drop of chloroform in the man's blood, he
would never have breathed again. In the very last operation
on a worn-out man of fifty (weight of tumor eighty pounds),
I emphatically pronounced him dead, although the operation
was performed in two and a half minutes. He at last gave a
gasp, however, and in ten minutes was out of all danger,
and is about to quit the hospital. Does any one believe that
this man would have ever gasped again if his blood had been
saturated with chloroform, or his vitality in any way de-
pressed? Mesmerism is not open to the same objections;
for it not only protects, but exalts the nervous system, as we know
from extensive experience both in medical and surgical cases.

'^ My warning against the use of chloroform in large tu-
mor cases no sooner reached Madras than, as if to establish
my character of a true prophet, we immediately heard of a
fatal case there ; and the occurrence of another at Alexandria
goes to confirm my predictions. I would on no account be
aiding and abetting in giving chloroform in monster cases of
scrotal tumors, being convinced that the patient, if he cannot
be mesmerised, has a better chance of life if operated on in
his natural state. In one case of eighty pounds, the man
could not be affected by mesmerism, and I removed the mass
in his waking state : he recovered very well. In another re-
fractory case of fifty pounds, in which all the organs Were
sound, I would not give chloroform, and the man did per-
fectly well.

'^Calcutta, May 6th, 1850.

" *5^* Want of space has compelled us to omit from this


By Dr. EUioUm. 128

paper some passages which appeared to us to have no imme-
diate relation to the subject^ as well as the long list of opera-
tions and the large accompanying illustration/'

In the Calcutta Morning Chronicle, of December 12th,
were the following remarks, —

" We have to congratulate the medical mesmerists on their
fads being at last permitted to be made known to the profes-
sion and the public through a Medical Journal I

'' In the Medical Gazette, just received, we see a paper
from Dr. Esdaile, — ' On the operation for the removal o£
scrotal tumors, &c/ So far well : it is something to see the
unclean thing admitted into the pages of a pure Medical
Jovsmal, which has hitherto (in common with the whole tribe)
Beyer mentioned Mesmerism without insult and injury.

'^Although the editor of the Medical Gazette has not
dared to suppress this paper, he has ventured, we are in-
formed, to do something as cowardly and unjustifiable, by
mutilating the paper according to his liking, and leaving out
many interesting and important points. The burking com-
mences with the very title of Dr, Esdaile's communication,
which was. One hundred and siwty-one Mesmeric Operations
for the removal of Scrotal Tumors. By the change of the
title, and the corresponding suppressions in the text, the
reader cannot learn that all these operations were performed
in the mesmeric trance, A short resume of the progress of
mesmerism in Calcutta was worked into the paper, we are
told ; and this has been mercilessly struck out, ^ as having no
immediate connexion with the subject f although the veriest
owl could not make such a narrative stupid in relating it to
persons totally ignorant of the subject, like the editor and
his readers. Appended to the paper was a long list of mis-
cellaneous capital mesmeric operations, amounting to upwards
of 250, drawn up on purpose to confute the stupid lie that
mesmerism was only useful in the removal of tumors ! This
list was also of importance from showing the mortality in
mesmeric surgery (five per cent.) for comparison with other
systems ; but it is suppressed, for ^ having no immediate con-
nexion with the subject,' we presume.

'^An illustration of the illustrious monster tumor,
weighing lOSlbs., was also sent, but has met the same &te,
and for the like reason, no doubt. It was not ^ connected
unth the subfed/ we suppose, after being cut off his body 1

^^ But when a favourite dentist's lectures are reported in
the Medical Gazette, every page is profusely illustrated with
wood engravings.


124 Mesmeric Infirmary.

" Let an outline drawing of the most remarkable morbid
mass in the world be sent for publication^ however^ and it is
contemptuously burked — because it is a triumph of mesmerism.
Dr. Justinus Kerner himself^ although he does not in the
least doubt that Dr. Esdaile has performed the most painful
operations without the knowledge of the patients — ^that being
quite within his knowledge of mesmerism^ — yet begs leave to
limit his belief when it comes to details. His imagination^ it
seems^ is crushed under the weight of a tumor above 601bs. ;
and the Medical Gazette wiU not condescend to assist its
equally unimaginative readers by eyesight^ and authenticated
weights and measurements taken on the spot.

'* We have no doubt that the Medical Gazette will soon
be boasting of its magnanimity and impartiality in admitting
this mesmeric communication; but we are sure^ that Dr.
Esdaile and all lovers of truth and fair play will regard its
unwarrantable mutilation as a greater insult than its total
suppression.

^^ We venture to ask again^ in the most respectful manner^
how long the doctors intend to tolerate such conduct in the
editors of medical journals ?"


II. Mesmeric Infirmary.

The annual meeting of the friends and subscribers of this
institution was held on Wednesday^ May 7, at the Infirmary,
No. 9, Bedford Street, Bedford Square — the Rev. George
Sandby, in the chair.

The Chairman opened the proceedings by expressing his
regret at the unavoidable absence of their president, the
Earl of Dacie, and a number of their noble and influential
supporters. At the same time, he could not but congratu-
late them on the progress their institution had made during
the past year. They would see by the report that there
had been a great variety of cases treated most successfully.
He had been in the habit of frequently attending the hos-
pital, and had invariably found the committee sedulously
attentive to their duties, and the mesmerisers performing
their various offices in the most efficient manner. He was
happy to say that their funds were also improving and several
donations had been sent to them. Amongst these donations,
he was proud to tell them, was one from the Archbishop
of Dublin, who invariably followed out the truth faithfully
and fearlessly in all matters, and also one from Earl Stan-


Mesmeric Infirmary. 125

hope. Besides these^ many other zealous and kind friends had
rallied round them, and he thought they were justified in
saying they were steadily and progressively forming an im-
portant nucleus amongst themselves, the effect of which wonld
be felt through the kingdom. But, whilst he expressed his
pleasure at finding so many had joined them, he conld not
refrain from avowing his regret that there were several dis-
tinguished persons who had benefited from their system
whose names were still wanting. (Hear, hear.) He could
not, however, help thinking that their absence was rather a
proof of the strength of their institution than of its weak-
ness, although that might appear paradoxical. For when they
first commenced operations they were confined to a small
body : but they ralUed round each other, confident in their
hopes of success. Time passed on, and this, like all other
great and important truths, could now afford to have subdivi-
sions amongst its disciples. They must all be aware that there
were differences of opinion amongst the adherents of mes-
merism on several points — some leaning to spiritual, some to
material,'^ and some to physiological views; but, however,

* That Mr. Sandby nuiy not be misconoeiyed, we insert oar following passage
from No. XXI. i p. 112: — '* Maierialism.'^So uninformed are most persons,
that we eyery day hear men spoken of with horror as materialists. Now a man
may be not only most consdentious, but most devout; nay, be a sincere and fer-
yent Christian, aye, and a trinitarian Christian too ; and most eyangelical, — ^and yet
be a materialist. That is, a man who believes that the matter of his organized
and living brain is endowed with such properties that it wills, feels, and thinks,
and that these by nature decay and cease for ever with the brain at its decay,
deatii and disintegration^ may aliBO believe that, by the will of God, by an addi>
tional and miraculous grant, they will exist again with a brain reproduced but,
however glorified, still matter ; according to the Fourth Article of the Church of
England, which asserts that Christ, the first fruits of them that slept, sits at the
right hand of the Father, with ' his body, with flesh, bones^ and all things apper-
taining to the perfection of man's nature.' We urge this, because we know that
many ezceUent persons who take such a view of a future state are vilified and
called atheists^ infidels, sceptics, and cruelly injured^ firom the total ignorance of
the majority of people, even of the higher ranks, that, though the term materialist
is sometimes used to signify an atheist, it has another and most innocent signifi-
cation, relating, not to supernatural things, but to an innocent opinion on a
natural thing. Yes ; a man may be a true Christian^ of any protestant denomi-
nation, tiiough not of the Roman CaUiolic persuasion, and yet be a materialist.
We beg those who have not reflected much on this subject, but think, as parrots
talk, by imitation^ to read Bishop Law's Theory qf Beligiony Bishop Sherlock's
J)iscour8e8, Bishop Watson's Anecdotes of his own Life, and Archbishop
TiUotson."

Locke says, ** All the difficulties that are raised against the thinking of
matter, firom our ignorance or narrow conceptions, stand not at all in the way of
the power of God, if he pleases to ordain it so." The faculties of brutes prove,
** either that God can and doth give to some parcels of matter a power of percep-
tion and thinking, or that all animals have immaterial and consequently immortal
souls as weU as men; and to say that fleas and mites, &c., have immortal souls as
well as men, will possibly be looked on as going a great way to serve an hypo-
thesis." — Second Reply to (he Bishop of Worcester, p. 466., 8vo. edition.


126 Mesmeric Infirmary,

divergent their opinions might be on some points^ he trusted
they would all join heart and hand in the promulgation of the
truth of the one great cause they had in view. Their object
was to relieve and alleviate suffering humanity in every shape
and form. (Cheers.) Therefore, in a great cause like that,
it behoved every sect, every creed, to unite and give a helping
hand, both by their persons and their purses. (Hear, hear.)
He believed the time was not far distant when the medical
profession would also be converts to their system, and rally
round them in their works of charity and love, and when the
sons would blush to think that their fathers had been the
foes of mesmerism — (cheers) — and when the hospitals would
be anxious to have their assistance and support. There was
one part of the report to which he felt particularly anxi-
ous to direct their attention. A proposition had been made

Dr. Law, Bishop of Carlisle, in his Theory qf BeUgUm, &c., which went
tfarongh seren editions, asserts that the sentence of death passed upon Adam and
Eve meant nothing less than a total destruction qf existence: and that the idea
of its implying a continuation of consciousness and real existence in some other
place than earth, is not sanctioned by Scripture, but is the philosophy of after^
ages, — p. 345. He adds, that Archbishop llllotson, though a patron of this notion,
confesses it is not found in the Bible: and, after a critical and elaborate ezamina-
tion of the words used in Scripture to denote soul and spiritt and their various.
Implications, he sums up the enquiry thus : — ** But neither do these words f nor
any other, so far as I can find, ever stand for a purely immaterial principle in
man, or a substance, whatever some imagine they mean by that word, wholly
separable from, and independent of, the body."

Bishop Sherlock employs strong expressions : — ** Scholars may reason on
the nature of the soul, and the condition of it when separated from the body :
but the common hopes of nature recdye no support from such enquiries. We
die and moulder to dust ; and in that state, what we are, or where we are, nature
cannot say.'' Discourses ii., p. 85, and vol. iv., p. 79.

** In the ordinary derivation of plants and animals," says Ptdey, '' from one
another, a partiehf, in many cases minuter than all assignable, all conceivable
dimensions ; an aura, an effluvium, an infinitesimal ; determines the organization
of a future body : does no less than fix, whether that which is about to be pro-
duced shall be a vegetable, a merely sentient, or a rational being ; an oak, a
frog, or Si philosopher i makes all these differences ; gives to the Aiture body its
qualities, and nature, and species. And this partick, from which springs, and
by which is determined, a whole future nature, itaelf proceeds from, and owes its
constitution to, a prior body," &c. — Natural Theology t conclusion, p. 591.

Bishop Watson says, '' when I went to the University, I was of opinion, as
most schoolboys are, tiiat the soul was a substance distinct from the body, and
that when a man died, he, in classical phrase, breathed out his soul, animam
ejppiravit; that it then went I knew not whither, as it had come into the body,
from I knew not where nor when, and had dwelt in the body during life, but in
what part of the body it had dwelt I knew not." " This notion of the soul was,
without doubt, the offspring of prejudice and ignorance." — '* Believing as I do in
the truth of the Christian religion, which teaches that men are accountable for
their actions, I trouble not myself with dark disquisitions concerning necessity
and liberty, matter and spirit ; hoping as I do for eternal life through Jesus
Christ, I am not disturbed at my inability clearly to convince myself that the
soul is or is not a substance distinct from the body." — Anecdotes of the Life of
Bishop Watson, p^ 14. sqq.


Mesmeric Infirmary. 127

that the committee should have the power of adding ladies
to their number. This might seem rather a novel pro-,
ceeding^ but he hoped that it would be received favour-
ably^ for there were many reasons of a pecuhar nature^ which
it was unnecessary for him to mention^ why such a sug-
gestion was exceedingly advisable. The presence of ladies
would^ in a great measure^ silence all the suspicions of low
and vulgar minds^ who, conscious of their own iniquity,
judged others by themselves. (Cheers.) To the ladies they
were already greatly indebted, for, through their instrumen-
tality^ mesmerism had been introduced into families with the
greatest success. In supporting this institution, they all had
two grand objects in view, the extension of a great truth, and
the alleviation of much human suffering and the cure of griev-
ous complaints. The rev. gentleman concluded by calling
upon Dr. EUiotson, the treasurer, to read the report.

The following Report was then read : —

^' It was at the house of the Earl of Ducie, on the 9th of
January, 1846, that the London Mesmeric Infirmary was
founded : and, on the 25th of March, 1850, the committee
sent a notice to every donor and subscriber that this house
was open for the mesmerisation of patients. At first the
committee did not feel justified in engaging more than one
mesmeriser, the secretary himself promising to mesmerise at
least two patients daily. But, on the 10th of June, they en-
gaged a second. These two persons were William Fisher and
Charles Mayhew, both recommended by Mr. Tubbs, surgeon,
of Upwell, Cambridgeshire, and previously employed by him
to his satisfaction as mesmerisers. During the last month, a
third, a married woman, recommended by Dr. Ashbumer,
was engaged : and all three perform their duties satisfacto-
rily, — ^with regularity, diligence, care, kindness, and pro-
priety.

^^The committee are most happy to inform the donors
and subscribers that, since the 17th of November, they have
had the services of Mr. Capern as secretary; the former se-
cretary having resigned. Of Mr. Capem^s mesmeric strength
to assuage suffering and cure disease, of his devotion to the
healing powers of mesmerism, of his indefatigableness, his
disinterestedness and benevolence, they need not speak. He
lias fulfilled all the expectations which were formed of him
from bis previous history. He is present in the public rooms
of the Institution from 10 till 4 o^clock, mesmerises many
patients himself, and superintends the processes of the three
mesmerisers, who attend daily, except Sunday, from 10 till 4


128 Mesmeric Infirmary.

o'clock^ and are allowed each, but not all at the same time,
an hour in the middle of the day for dinner.

" The committee meet every Wednesday at two o'clock,
and a complete account of the work of every day is read to
them : — the history of each patient during the preceding week
is detailed : his-or her attendance, the length of time that he
or she was mesmerised, the name of the mesmeriser, the
mode of mesmerising and the effects, together with the reme-
dial results which were observed at the end of the week.
Fresh applicants are seen by the committee and examined by
its medical members, and those persons who cease to be pa-
tients present and report themselves.

'' Ninety-one patients have been mesmerised, — 54 males
and 87 females : 29 are at present on the books, — 19 males
and 10 females. The greater part of the diseases have been
palsy, neuralgia, rheumatism, epilepsy, St. Yitus's dance, and
intense nervousness : and nearly all the cases had been of
long duration before they came under our care, and had re-
sisted various and frequently severe modes of treatment under
numerous well-informed medical gentlemen. Their chronic
character rendered it impossible for mesmerism to produce
many rapid cures. This circumstance, and the engagements
and difficulties of the poor, together with the frequency of
impatience, fickleness, and childishness common among hu-
man beings of all ranks, caused many to give up our services
before a fair trial was made : and, indeed, some after a few
visits. With the majority of those who received no benefit,
or no permanent benefit, this was the fact : and they amount
to 28. Twenty-four left before their cure was complete, but
were more or less benefitted, and many very much benefitted,
so that they were able 'and desirous to return to their em-
ployments.

" Some very striking cases have occurred. We may
mention one of epilepsy in a child who was brought above a
year ago. Not only has there been no fit for above six
months, though previously the attacks were frequent and
severe, but the child's appearance and general health have
undergone a remarkable improvement — a circumstance which
mesmerisers are in the habit of witnessing, whatever may be
the disease.

"There is an equally satisfactory cure of epilepsy in ano-
ther child.

'^ A child, with a leg shortened through disease of the hip,
was received at the end of November : and on the 14th of
April the father, who had previously procured the best treat-


Mesmeric Infirmary, 129

ment for his boy in vain^ declared that the amelioration had
exceeded all his expectations^ and the improvement in the
general health was remarkable. The child is still under
treatment^ and may be seen.

'' On the 9th of last Aprils a man applied with an almost
total inability to open his mouthy and an inability to swallow
anything bat fluids; and those he swallowed with extreme
difficulty^ so that he feared being starved. He had received
public and private medical attendance for several weeks, and
been informed that his complaint was palsy of the mouth and
throat ; and so indeed it was, but from cold, not from internal
disease. One local mesmerisation by Mr. Capem enabled
him in ten minutes to swallow his saliva, and on returning
home he ate a rasher of bacon : and by repetitions of the
treatment he has been enabled to eat all solids at his meals
and to return to his work.

''A man, 75 years of age, who laboured under palsy of
one side of his system and had received no benefit before,
can now walk many miles a day. He is still under treatment
and may be seen. The very first day he felt the mesmeric
influence like a hot steam.

'^ A very remarkable case is that of a dumb boy, 14 years
of age, who had been palsied from his birth and totally unable
to walk. He had been in many hospitals and under many
private medical gentlemen : and been refused admission into
St. Bartholomew's Hospital from the conviction of the medi-
cal officer that his case was hopeless. He was first mesmer-
ised on the 2nd of February, and an improvement was dis-
cernible after the first mesmerisation. After the sixth he
could positively walk across the room without assistance, and,
on the 27th of March, he walked from the Infirmary into
Tottenham Court Road. He is still under treatment and
may be seen. His father was lately absent from town, and
on his return was astonished at the improvement.

'' A dreadful case of despondency, with pains and noises
in the head, giddiness, and dimness . of sight, in a man 56
years of age, is yielding in a remarkable manner. Various
medical gentlemen did their best, but in vain ; and month
after month life became a greater burden to him. He was
admitted here in April, and now makes the following state-
ment : — ' All my accumulated afflictions have been gradually
subsiding ; indeed, some of them, the giddiness and noises
in the head, together with the great nervous oppression and
dismal gloomy forebodings^ have already left me, never, I
hopefully trust, to return. My hearing and my eyesight are
progressing favourably, the latter most especially, as I can

VOL. IX. K


180 Mesmeric Infirmary,

now read better without glasses than I could see to read with
them previously to being mesmerised/ This patient is still
under treatment^ and may be seen.

" We must not pass over the case of Catherine Brown, 7,
King^s Head-yard, Tooley-street, 57 years of age. When
seven years old she fell down in a fit, and was unconscious
for twenty-four hours. She had a similar attack monthly tiU
she became a patient here, last February ; and, for seven or
eight days after the fit, she was invariably so weak as to be
unable to attend to her avocations, and indeed was at no time
able to attend to them properly. She sufiered agonizing
pains. She was treated by numerous medical gentlemen in
London and in Ireland, without the least benefit. Her
agonies frequently made her contemplate self-murder. She
was three times in Ouy's Hospital and twice in St. Thomas's,
the last time for four months. She applied to a dispensary
also, and the surgeon told her she had tic douloureux ; and,
in attempting to extract several of her teeth, broke some of
them. From the first attack, above 44 years ago, she was
never free from pain, and took large quantities of laudanum
when under medical treatment. She saw Mr. Capern early
in February, and he mesmerised her head with contact for a
quarter of an hour. The pain instantly and entirely ceased ;
and from that moment she has not experienced the slightest
pain, nor has she bad a fit. On leaving the infirmary that
day she called upon her niece at Islington, and, feeling a
great desire to sleep, sat down in a chair and fell into a sleep
so profound that her relatives were alarmed, and supposed
that her doctor had given her too large a dose of laudanum.
She woke spontaneously in four hours, greatly refreshed, and
has remained well to this very time.

" We trust that the public will soon be satisfied of mes-
merism being beneficial not only in such diseases as those
hitherto treated here, but in every other : curing by itself in
some instances, and in others powerfully aiding the medical
and surgical measures of established utility that may be pro-
per, nay indispensable.

'' Many cases cannot be treated mesmerically unless the
patients reside in the mesmeric institution ; and, as long as
the general hospitals refuse the benefit of mesmerism to their
inmates, the poor must sufier grievously from our pecuniary
inability to meet the difficulty. But we feel a strong convic-
tion that the day is not far distant when the public sympathy
will enable us by increased funds to receive in-patients.

" Donors have presented to the Infirmary £899 : 8 : 0.
We have 118 annual subscribers, who, with one lately de-


Mesmeric Infirmary. 131

6eased^ have contributed from the commencemeDt £352 : 10 : 0,
and the 118 contribute annually £197 : 19 : 0. We receive
about £12 as the interest of five exchequer bills. We have
£884. : 4 : 3i in hand.

" Our chief expenses are for rent, rates, and taxes, nearly
£100 : : ; and for salaries £218 : : 0. Various other
matters have cost about £20 : : during the last 12 months.

'^ We trust that some leasehold property promised us by
Mr. Beaume will produce us about £50 per annum ; and Mr.
Capern has generously declared that as soon as we grant
leases he will present us with 20 guineas.

'^ The world is becoming every day better informed as to
the reality, the curative and assuaging power, and the inno-
cence of mesmerism : and the English medical profession is
now emancipating itself from the unfortunate feelings which
overpowered it from the time, now above 12 years ago, when
the college and hospital, their council and medical professors,
within a few yards on one side of the spot where we are now
assembled, scouted mesmerism with contumely, not enquir-
ing for a moment whether it was useful or true, and forbade
its presence within their walls: and when Mr. Wakley,
within a few yards on the other side of the spot where we
are now assembled, loudly declared to mankind that mes-
merism was an entire fraud, and that all those who promoted
it were cheats and impostors unworthy to be associated with
by respectable medical men. We, therefore, trust that our
donors and subscribers will steadily encrease, and our means
prove sufficient for the holy cause in which we are engaged.
The support hitherto given to us has been all but unsoUcited.
We have not had a sermon, a public dinner, a ball or a
bazaar : nor do I know of more than one donor and one sub-
scriber brought to us by solicitation. The matter has been
one of extreme delicacy up to this time. But, as the truth
and importance of mesmerism are now so extensively acknow*
ledgedy no one need longer to hesitate in advocating the
cause of mesmeric charity before all men, in season and out
of season. Persons apply . eveiy week for admission into the
Infirmary for whom we have no room : — so much has the
fame of mesmeric remedial power spread, and so quickly is
that gross ignorance vanishing which connected the simple
and natural process of mesmerising with Satan.

'* We have received £141 : : in donations since the
former general meeting : and had an increase of 32 annual
subscribers, whose payments will amount to £65 : 19 :
annually. May the ensuing twelvemonth prove still more
prosperous. The committee are anxious to propose to the

K 2


132 Mesmeric Infirmary,

meeting what they believe will be a great improvement. A
lady^ the wife of a distinguished mathematician and philoso-
pher^ proposed to Dr. Elliotson that ladies should be upon
the committee^ and offered to join if other ladies would do
the same. He at once highly approved of the plan^ and
mentioned it to the committee, who equally approve of it.
Such a measure must be advantageous in many respects, as,
in addition to our having female patients, we now employ a
female mesmeriser.

" Mr. Holme, of Highgate, has kindly placed the whole
of his phrenological collection in the hands of the institution,
to be returned whenever we think fit, or his son, now very
young may, after coming of age, may desire to have it. The
strong alliance between mesmerism and phrenology caused
the committee to regard the offer of a fine phrenological col-
lection as too valuable to be slighted ; and they have Mr.
Holme to give occasional gratuitous discourses upon it after
the mesmeric business of the day is over.''

Mr. HoLLiNGS, in moving the adoption of the report,
could not refrain from adding his own expressions of deep
and unfeigned satisfaction to those already pronounced by the
Chairman, at the present condition of mesmerism in its cha-
racter of a curative agent, as testified not only by the meet-
ing, but by the, growing convictions of the great body of the
public at large. Fifteen years have now elapsed since expe-
riments were first made upon an extensive scale, and under
the direction of distinguished medical authority, in this
country, for the purpose of testing the reality of the pheno-
mena of animal magnetism, and the applicability of what is
called the mesmeric state to the alleviation of various forms of
suffering and disease. Of the spirit in which the results of
such experiments were extensively, and perhaps not unnatu-
rally, received, few among those who were present need be
reminded. Nor would he (Mr. Hollings) attempt to infuse a
single element of bitterness into the deliberations of the
assembly, by adverting, in any but the most casual manner^
to the unjust, the uncandid, and the most unphilosophical
temper by which an opposition almost universal was at that
time characterized. If this opposition, however disreputable,
however unjustifiable in its manner, was the result of sincere
and honest conviction, it is to a certain extent to be respected.
If it arose from unreflecting and unenquiring prejudice, it is
to be lamented. If it was prompted in any single instance
by personal enmity, by professional rivalry, or by jealous
self-interest, it is to be forgiven. Fifteen years however have
elapsed — ^fifteen years of open and unremitting controversy —


Mesmeric Infirmary. 133

during which^ whatever other means of refutation may have
been neglected, the motives, the objects, the judgment, and
even the characters of the friends of mesmerism, will gene-
rally be acknowledged to have been in no single instance
either respected or spared. But, after all the employment of
counter-arguments upon this subject, or of a method of an-
tagonism to which men are but too apt to have recourse
where argument itself is wanting, what is the result ? At
the present moment there is scarcely an intelligent mind in
Great Britain, which does not acknowledge that there is
reality in at least what we may call the normal characteristics
of the mesmeric sleep ; in other words, that its ordinary and
easily induced phenomena of coma, of cataleptic rigidity, of
insensibility more or less complete to impressions from with-
out, are true ejQPects of a specific and independent, however
mysterious, cause ; although such conditions were formerly,
almost without distinction, regarded either as mere halluci-
nations in the mind of the operator, or, so far as the patient
was concerned, as instances of audacious and palpable fraud.
In many quarters institutions are arising with the express
view to the application of these conditions to medical pur-
poses, and everywhere with the promise of extensive support.
The names of men widely eminent in science and in literature,
of the highest professional standing, of well-known authority
in the church, in the senate, in the state, are being daily
added to the already numerous list of the defenders and sus-
tainera of this once contemned and vilified cause. We look
to the neighbouring continent, and we find that the researches
of one of the most original and philosophic minds of the age
— he (Mr. Hollings) alluded to the recent experiments of the
Bait>n Von Beichenbach — ^have succeeded in tracing, through
the means of mesmerism, the existence, and in some measure
the laws, of an entirely new material agency, upon the im-
portance or the ultimate applications of which no man at the
present time can venture to pronounce. Or we turn to that
vast theatre of wealth, of promise, and of teeming humanity,
presented by our Eastern dependencies; and what do we
there behold ? That which no one, who is not wholly insen-
sible to the interests of his fellow beings, can regard without
emotion, without gratitude, without delight. We see a flou-
rishing and already celebrated public hospital, founded under
the direct auspices of the British Government, and directed
by medical skill and experience second to none in Europe,
in wbicb the power of the mesmeric state both as curative
and ansesthetic is a matter of daily, nay, of almost hourly
demonstration. We are told of the most agonizing and pro-


134 Mesmeric Infirmary.

tracted operations^ — ^the removal^ for instance^ of tumors^ in
some cases actually equalling in weight the bodies of the pa-
tients themselves^ — repeatedly performed during a condition
of absolute unconsciousness : and when the use of any other
known method for the purpose of inducing insensibility would
be but the substitution for physical endurance of almost cer-
tain death. We hear from the same quarter of the successful
treatment, by similar means, of paralysis, of epilepsy, and of
mania, as events of constant recurrence. And these truths
are being openly taught by eminent professors, and under the
sanction of the Council of Education of India, in the great
medical school of Calcutta, to crowds of students, gathered
from all climes and quarters of the gorgeous East. Yet a
little while, and every district of that ancient cradle of art
and civilization, to which both are now returning with more
benignant promise, and in the strength of a maturer life-—
from the stony crest of the Himalayahs to the forests of
Ava — shall rejoice in these trophies of curative or of palliative
skill; trophies than which, with the exception of the still
greater blessings of equal legislation and of the pure religion
of charity and love, none more glorious have been reared
within those often disputed confines, from the time at which
the phalanxes of Alexander turned back from the waters of
the Indus, to the day when the banks of that famous river
were crowded by those victorious warriors of the stormy
North, whose banners were emblazoned with the reminiscences
of fields contested in a distant hemisphere against ensigns
more dreaded than those of the Macedonian, and whose arms
were nerved to conquest by the recollections of Arcot, of
Plassy, and of Assaye. Now if such have been the e£Pects of
but fifteen years of experiment, what, it may be reasonably
asked, may not be expected from an equal space of years yet
to come ? For the progress of every great discovery is, as all
are aware, in anything but the constant ratio of its initial
force. Long and arduous and painful are its first advances
towards even partial recognition and acceptance; but this
barrier once surmounted, there is no scale or series known
to the mathematician which can measure the strength of its
expansiveness, or the rapidity of its difinsion. Let us not
however be misunderstood. In the conduct of this Institution
we do not proceed, we have not hitherto proceeded, upon th^
supposition, that in mesmerism is contained an absolute and
infsdlible specific for all shapes and conditions of disease.
There may be temperaments over which it will be found to
have but a limited influence. There may be, there probably
are, some forms of malady, which it will prove incompetent


Mesmeric Infirmary. 135

materially to affect. How far, nnder what circumstaiices,
with what limitations and restrictions it is heat applicable,
must be learned, as everything else in therapeutics has hitherto
been learned, &om the teaching of experiment alone. We do
not even attempt to pronounce apon the nature of the cause
to which this most remarkable state is owing. Nor do we
deem it our province to investigate those higher and myste-
rious phenomena of magnetic somnambulism, which afford
so extensive and so deeply interesting a field for the labours
of the psychologist. We are not claiming for mesmerism any
higher place than that of a most powerfiil and most valuable
subsidiary to the known resources of the medical art j far less
do we wish to see it separated from the judgment and super*
intendence of those whose professional studies may be pre-
sumed best to qualify them to determine upon the expediency
of its employment. What however we do afSrm — not a few
among us upon the testimony of our own senses again and
again repeated ; many upon the strength of evidence which
appears wholly incontrovertible — ^is this, that for the most
acute and depressing suffering the agency which we are advo-
cating has often proved the only available palliative : that
under the most trying conditions of terror and anguish to
which human fortitude can be submitted, it has been found a
refuge as safe as it is welcome and effective : and that directed
against not a few of that most melancholy class of disorders,
upon which the utmost skill of the physician is vainly ex-
hausted, it has issued in an unquestionable and permanent
cure. How multitudinous and how various are the latter
sources of human misery, can be known to that Being alone,
by whom, doubtless for wise although inscrutable purposes,
they are permitted to exist. Such conditions of evil are not
indeed of a character to attract either public or general
notice. They do not meet us in the midst of our crowded
streets and thoroughfares : they do not come forth to court
attention beneath the open blaze of day. But if, amidst the
splendour and the tumult, the flow of busy life, the rush of
joyous and exuberant existence, which the external aspect of
this vast metropolis at the present moment exhibits, the cur-
tain which conceals its darker features &om our observation
were suddenly withdrawn; if, like the common father of
mankind, in the gloomy but immortal description of Milton,
we could behold but a portion of those cases of physical debi-
lity and protracted torture, over which medical science, —
saying nothing against its undoubted triumphs — nothing
against its manifold and improving appliances — nothing
against the noble and disinterested spirit by which multitudes


136 Mesmeric Infirmary,

of its professors are actuated^ — but over which this great
science mourns hopelessly and in vain ; who is there among
us who would not stand aghast at the spectacle thus afforded?

'* Sight 80 deform, what heart of stone could long
Tearless behold V*

Who would not welcome^ who would not readily avail himself
of any means, however vague, however novel, however empi"
rical, which held out even the most distant promise of the
relief of ills so terrible and extensive F He (Mr. HoUings)
could distinctly and deliberately assert that he had seen such
cases ; their undeniable severity — ^their as undeniable relief.
He had seen the most acute neuralgic anguish — not of days,
but of months' continuance, and for which all that practised
skill could suggest had been suggested to little purpose —
allayed in a few minutes and almost as if by magic, by the sim-
plest mesmeric treatment. He had seen disease, pronounced
by competent medical authority to be organic, and by infer-
ence incurable, and for which the dissolution of the patient
seemed to offer the only probable means of release, succeeded^
after the same mode of treatment had been for not very many
days adopted, by a condition of active and vigoroiis health.
But these are not insulated cases. The experience of the
Chairman, and the experience of many who were present, could
appeal to others quite as remarkable. They are paralleled^
they are even far exceeded, by the records of this or of kin-
dred institutions, aud by hundreds of similar instances, esta-
blished on the authority of the most unexceptionable wit*
nesses both at home and abroad. Surely then we have at
least a fair case for a candid and impartial hearing ; a case
which may challenge the most patient enquiry and justify the
fullest and the most extensive experiment. Surely we are
well warranted in addressing the most zealous and the most
obstinate among our opponents in some such terms as these.
Our statements are at least sufficiently numerous, our autho-
rity eminent, our objects of unspeakable importance to the
general interest, if likely to prove attainable ; still more so,
if in any degree already attained. Examine for yourselves.
The field of enquiry is easily accessible. The method of expe-
riment from which we have drawn our conclusions is open to
all. But do not in this day of enlightenment run counter to
all those principles of inductive research upon which every
science, and most especially the science of therapeutics, is
based, by falling back upon assumed theories, while we appeal
to absolute facts. Investigate strictly, sternly, severely, with
every bias towards suspicion and distrust, and, if it must be
so, with an utter disregard to the forms of that conventional


Mesmeric If^rtnary. 137

conrtesy which should at all times distinguish the contro-
versies of liberal and enlightened men ; but at least do not
prejudge. Denounce — but first enquire. Strike if you will —
but hear. — ^At the moment in which we are commemorating
at least the partial triumph — ^at least the greatly improved
prospects of a remedial means which we firmly and most sin-
cerely believe to be second in value and efficacy to none
adopted from the earliest periods of history by the professors
of the healing art — it would ill become us to forget to whose
instrumentality the progress of this most beneficial agency
in the public estimation is principally owing. It cannot be
denied, that for the present aspect of mesmerism both in this
country and in the East, we are mainly indebted to the sin-
gular talents, to the persevering, the uninterrupted, and the
benevolent efforts of one individual, who was foremost among
us in asserting its claims to support, and who for many years
continued almost single-handed to demonstrate its benefits,
with a constancy, displayed amidst multiplied difficulties and
discouragements, which may well be compared with most of
the best known and the noblest instances of devotion to truth
and principle under the most trying forms of personal sacrifice.
On the many claims possessed by Dr. Elliotson to the general
gratitude, it was not necessary in that gentleman^s presence
to enlarge. Much moreover of what might be said in relation
to his disinterested labours in the cause of humanity would
probably be embodied in a resolution, which it was intended
to submit to the meeting at a future stage of its proceedings.
Thus much however he (Mr. HoUings) might say, that in any
mark of esteem and respect which either upon that or upon
future occasions may be offered as an acknowledgment of his
invaluable services, all who are acquainted with his personal
character, or who have in any degree learned justly to appre-
ciate the uniform tenor of his professional career, must con-
sider it equally a pleasure and a privilege to concur. And
this, not only from feelings of individual respect, but upon
general considerations of the highest moment. Heroism
and devotion of one description tdone have hitherto almost
exclusively engrossed the praises and the honours of man-
kind. On all sides we saw monuments reared to commemo-
rate the triumphs of physical powers, lasting oblations to that
martial daring, that contempt of personal peril or of immi-
nent death, for which nations have as yet principally reserved
their titles, their statues, and their distinctions, their accla-
mations, and their wreaths. At the same time, it has too
frequently been forgotten that there is a courage yet more
honourable, far rarer, and with much more difficulty sustain-


138 Mesmeric Infirmary,

able than this. It is that moral heroism^ which neither
scorn, nor obloquy, nor diminishing estimation, nor waning
repute, nor the chilled affection of former friends and asso-
ciates, nor, yet more formidable than all of these, ''the
world's dread laugh,'' can turn back from that which pro-
mises to issue in the lessened suffering or the enlarged hap-
piness of mankind ; even though the attainment of such an.
object may appear but as a dim possibility in the far distant
future; even though the perfect development of its conse-
quences and the full appreciation of its importance seem only
likely to occur when the hands which hare laboured the
most zealously for its furtherance shall long have been min-
gled with the dust. But this heroism, too, shall one day have
its trophies: and, side by side with the great masters and
swayers of the sword, the armed protectors or oppressors of
their respective ages, shall be seen the names of those whose
labours in more peaceful fields have had for their ends the
mental or the moral elevation of their fellows, the alleviation
of human misery, the diffusion among unborn generations of
better, less emperilled, or more tolerable conditions of life.
In that day, and among the long list of names thus honoured,
which the history of our own land will supply, far from the
least distinguished, will be that of the eminent physiologist,
the accomplished physician, and the generous philanthropist,
who was the first to make known, and the most strenuous to
establish among his countrymen, the healing tendencies of a
state, imitative of nature's best restorative, and no less potent
than this for the renewal of impaired vigour, or the alleviation
of the racking sense of pain ; a state by which, as proved by the
grateful experience of multitudes, functional disorders of the
worst and most obstinate character have been repeatedly ar-
rested; the progress of those maladies, through which the
mind of man sinks slowly but surely amidst the ruins of his
shattered intellect, suspended ; and those seasons of agonizing
endurance, which the judgment of the surgeon is compelled
to appoint as the only means of preventing yet severer evils,
passed either as an utter pause in consciousness, or, at worst,
as but a troubled and a feverish dream.

The Hon. Capt. Scarlett, in seconding the resolution,
said, that after the speech they had just heard it was quite
needless for him to detain them by any further remarks. He
would, however, call their attention to one point, and that
was the great economy practised in that institution, and the
great zeal and ability, as well as gratuitous attention, of the
medical offieers. He had great pleasure in seconding the
adoption of the report.


Mesmeric Infirmary. 139

The motion was curried unanimoasly.

Mr. Janson (of Exeter) moved that the Archbishop of
Dublin and Earl Stanhope be requested to become vice«
presidents of the Institution. The hon. speaker briefly alluded
to the immense progress that the science of mesmerism had
made in Exeter^ and said he appeared on the present occasion
as representative of that city.*

Mr. Pabker (of Exeter)^ said he had much satisfiK^on
and pleasure in seconding the resolution which Mr. Janson
had proposed. Being entirely a stranger to the audience,
with two exceptions only, he had to claim their indulgence,
as he should feel quite inadequate to the task of addressing
them had he not to advocate the cause of truth. He came
there to-day not to boast of what he had done in the cause of
mesmerism ; but he came to render an account of his labours
as an act of homage to Dr. Elliotson, their leader and general,
'^ whose deeds of heroism have not been celebrated at the
cannon-mouth nor bathed in the tears of the widow.'' Al-
though he held no public appointment, he had enjoyed the rare
privilege of being assisted by Mr. Janson, — that noble spe-
cimen of the human race on his left hand. When he told
them that he had performed upwards of twenty of the most
painful operations on the eye whilst the patients were under
his (Mr. Janson's) mesmeric influence, they need only look at

* Dr. EUiotson made the request in virtue of this resolution, and the follow-
mg are the answers of the two noblemen : —

" Merton Lodge, Sloughy
" My dear Sir, " 30th May, 1851.

** I shall be happy to accept the office of Vioe-President of the Mesmenc
Infirmary.

** The practice is so dangerous in bad or careless hands that it is most im-
portant it should be patronized and efficiently superintended by the trustworthy.

** To hold back from it because there are dangers attending it^ is to leave it
in the worst hands.

** I trust the Institution will, eventually, accomplisli much more than the
immediate relief of the patients who apply to it.

" There are two other most important results which I think it may be the
means of bringing about : (1) the training of some well-qualified persons as pro~
fessional mesmerisers ; of which there is a great want : (2) the discovering of
some valuable medical clairvoyants,

** Believe me, dear Sir, yours very truly,

*' R. Dublin."

** Chevening,
** Dear Dr. EUiotson, " May 28th, 1851.

** I beg to assure you that I gladly and gratefully accept the distinguished
honour wUch is proposed to me of becoming a Vice-President of the Mesmeric
Infirmary, and that no person can feel more interested than myself in the pros-
perity of that most admirable Institution, or can be more deeply impressed with
the conviction of its inestimable importance.

" Very faithfully yours,

*• Stanhopb."


140- Mesmeric Infirmary,

him to recognize his very large organ of Benevolence. There
is another friend to mesmerism whose presence here to-day he
(Mr. Parker) could have wished, and as Mr. Janson fancies
there is a kind of free-masonry between mesmerisers, he
(Mr. Parker) had the privilege of calling Mr. Luxmoore
a brother mason as well as a brother mesmeriser^ whose
noble deeds he need only mention. He (Mr. Luxmoore) has
mesmerised a patient under his (Mr. Parker's) care for five
years and a half^ from three, sUs, nine, and even thirteen hours
a day, with few intermissions. The sufferings of this patient
had been so severe that he had been obliged to bleed her
eight hundred times in the course of nineteen years as the
only palliative remedy, and she is now quite restored to health
by mesmerism. Whatever objections the fastidious may find
in public exhibitions of mesmerism, he begged to offer them
some compensation in the following resiQts. Having had
mesmeric stances at his own house for several years past,
(twice, three times, and often four times a week,) at which
from 30 to 70 persons had been gratuitously admitted, he and
his mesmerisers had produced some of the phenomena of mes-
merism on nearly 1,200 persons out of a population of 35,000
inhabitants. In conducting these investigations he had had
two objects in view ; /the first, to examine the variety of phe-
nomena; the second, to provide patients for operations.
During the last eight months he had extracted upwards of
thirty teeth whilst the patients were in the mesmeric sleep and
unconscious of pain. From ten to seventy persons had been
present at almost every operation. Multitudes had had their
toothache cured, without extraction, and various other pains
removed at his stances. Irregularities of the female system
had been relieved in hundreds of cases. He would tres-
pass on the audience to mention one case in particular, illus-
trating the glorious triumph of mesmerism, that of a young
gentleman, 16 years of age, whose father is at present and
has been for four years in an asylum; his grandmother
died deranged. This young gentleman was at school, in May,
1850, at a country town, 10 miles from Exeter, and being,
very zealous to win a prize, studied so hard as to become
deranged. The medical attendant of the father considered
the son's case, after fourteen days' treatment, hopeless.
Whilst in this state the patient had torn every nail off his
hands from their roots; and being in this miserable and
hopeless state, the mother flew as the last resource to mes-
merism. Her only child had passed the whole of the four-
teenth night in violent delirium. As soon as he (Mr. Parker)
and his mesmeriser reached the country town, his mesmeriser


Mesmeric Infirmary. 141

soon induced mesmeric sleep, and they had the opportunity of
bringing him (the patient) the whole way to Exeter in a quiet
state, in an omnibas ; and after eleven days' perseverance, they
had the gratification of restoring his intellect, and in the
course of a few weeks he was quite restored to health and has
remained well ever since. In answer to an observation from
Mr. Hollings he begged to offer the result of his experience.
He had found a relay of mesmerisers succeed in relieving the
most desperate and forlorn cases, and the last moments of
many of his patients had been soothed by mesmerism : in
fact, the last words that some of his patients had uttered, had
been to thank Mr. Parker for having administered the com-
fort of mesmerism in their dying moments. He could not
expect the audience to sympathize with him for the base
calumny he had received. He dared not trust himself to
describe it. The conduct of persons who would wish to be
thought to be guided by the genial spirit of Christianity had
even surpassed the iniquitous bigotry of the Inquisition, and
more resembled the remorseless cannibal. WhsA, had been
said there to-day he wished to be recorded by his children's
children, as the truth of mesmerism must prevail. It might
meet with obstacles ; it could never be defeated. It put all
other doctrineiB into the shade. It was, in fact, that great
electric light that would conduct the human race to the intel-
lectual oasis before them. Mr. Wakley, in his Lancet, once
compared him to a Phoenix : but he (Mr. Parker) knew that
he had not been burnt and revived from his ashes, but had
lived twenty years in his house without its having yet been
on fire.

The motion was then carried.

It was then moved by Mr. Robertson, and seconded by
Mr. Briggs, that ladies be added to the committee during the
ensuing year.

This was also unanimously agreed to.

Dr. EUiotson was then re-elected Treasurer.

Dr. Symes next proposed that the following address be
presented to Dr. EUiotson : —

'^ That the sincere congratulations of this meeting are due
and are hereby tendered to John EUiotson, M.D., F.R.SI,
upon the satisfactory advancement of this institution and of a
form of medical treatment, the establishment of which, in
Oreat Britain, is due principaUy to his disinterested, persever-
ing, and most efficient advocacy. Many years have now
elapsed since the reality of the phenomena of mesmerism and
its applicabiUty to the treatment of some of the most for-
midable and obstinate diseases, acute and chronic, were de-


142 Mesmerid Infirmary,

monstrated by experiments conducted by him^ and published
under the high sanction of his authority as a public professor
of medicine and a distinguished teacher of physiology and of
therapeutics. How these great truths were received by the
medical profession at large^ is only too generally known. The
pertinacious opposition of an unenquiring scepticism to facts
as satisfactorily established and as easily demonstrable as any
within the range of experiment and research ; and the extent to
which base detraction^ open invective^ and secret obloquy have
been systematically substituted for argument and enquiry,
are no less matters of general notoriety. The period of pre-
judice, of incredulity, and intemperate reproach in regard to
mesmerism as a curative agent, is at length, however, hasten-
ing to its close. Hundreds of cases successfully treated have
established incontestably the efficacy of this simple but power-
ful means for the alleviation and cure of disease. The expe-
riments of enquiring minds here and abroad have succeeded
in evolving from mesmeric phenomena truths both physical
and physiological, hitherto unsuspected, but which further
investigations promise speedily to connect by the bond of
common relations with a new and universal law. In this
Institution, and in the Mesmeric Infirmary at Bristol and
Exeter, and in the Mesmeric Hospital at Calcutta, to the last
of which the direct countenance and support of Government
have been extended, the employment of mesmerism has been
attended with advantages which the most sanguine of its ad-
vocates could hardly have dared to anticipate. In all these
Institutions the severest and most inveterate maladies have
been arrested and cured, the dumb have been made to speak,
the deaf to hear, the blind to see, and the lame to walk ; the
sick, the insane, the wretched and despairing have been
restored to comfort and health; and while not a few opera-
tions have been conducted to a successful termination under
its soothing influence in this country, in the Calcutta hos-
pital more particularly hundreds have been subjected in a
state of perfect unconsciousness and tranquillity to capital
operatations of the gravest kind, in not one of which has the
employment of this anaesthetic been attended with other than
beneficial results ; results only less marvellous than the per-
tinacity with which they have been excluded from all the
medical journals which ought to have been the first to wel-
come and promulgate them. With our congratulations to
Dr. EUiotson we will not mingle one word of regret for the
labours he has expended, the sacrifices he has made, the per-
secution he has endured in the warfare against prejudice,
indifference and injustice; these are the gains and form the


Mesmeric Infirmary. 143

common lot of those who are in advance of the age in which
they live ; and we feel assured that the magnificent results
to which we have referred, effected through the' agency of the
cause for which he has suffered^ and its progress and triumph,
must to his large and cultivated mind be more than a com-
pensation for all he has undergone/^

Dr. AsHBURNEB, in seconding the proposition, said, that
it gave him great pleasure to second the motion. The address
which had just been read he considered a graceful and well-
merited compliment to the extraordinary man they all agreed
to regard as the indomitable champion of the holy truth of
mesmerism. They had heard from Mr. Parker that Dr.
EUiotson was their leader and their general. He has well
fought the battle in which he has been engaged ; and, be-
sieged by base enemies, he has thrown missiles into their
camps more striking than injurious shells. He has projected
the astonishing cure of a case of cancer, which will do more
damage to their hostile forces of pride, slander and malice,
than a thousand shrapnells. Dr. Elliotson was their general.
Let them rather give him a higher function, that of teacher ;
the highest in which a human being can be engaged ; and
they could not pay him a better homage than to bear witness
to his zeal and energy in the investigation of a science on
which his genius and acumen have been the means of shed-
ding so much light. He (Dr. Ashbumer) was quite unpre-
pared to address the meeting, but could not allow the occasion
to pass without adding his little tribute of cordial respect for
the man whom he was sure they would unanimously address
in the terms so well conceived in the paper Dr. Symes had
presented to them.

Mr. Alex. J. Ellis (of Sristol) in supporting the motion,
remarked upon the silence of preceding speakers with respect
to one eminent quality in Dr. Elliotson, which was compara-
tively rare, but was of the utmost importance to investigators,
and especially to mesmeric investigators. To these Dr.
Elliotson was in this respect not merely a teacher, but a
model ; he did not merely shew theni the path, but he pursued
it himself. It happened curiously enough that it was this
very quality for which he received the least credit from the
world in general ; or rather, he was given credit for a pre-
cisely opposite quality, and it was therefore due to him that
the truth should be publicly spoken. Dr. Elliotson is a re-
markably slow believer. So far from being the mere theorist
which his detractors assume him to be, he is a patient investi-
gator, who will not allow himself to be led away by appear-
ances, and who never asserts a fact on his own authority till


144 Mesmeric Infirmary,

he has thoroughly and carefully established it for himself.
He (Mr. Ellis) could speak from long personal acquaintance,
and from a knowledge of his writings. It was of the utmost
importance that this course should be pursued by mesmerisers
generally. A theory may be combatted by arguments: a
fact established on the evidence of a careful experimenter ia
incontrovertible. The science of mesmerism is still in the
stage of collecting facts : the theory will follow in time. But
we must know the what, before we can pretend to tell the
how. It is a blessing which mesmerisers enjoy above all
other investigators, that while they are, scientifically speak-
ing, merely discovering facts and processes in nature, — merely
instituting experiments for their own private satisfaction, they
are practically doing an immense amount of good to their
feUow men, and gratifying the most disinterested benevolence
at every stage of their enquiry. Mesmerism is the worthy
pursuit of the acutest philosopher and the warmest philan-
thropist.

The address was unanimously agreed to, and presented to
Dr. Elliotson amidst marks of the greatest approbation.

Dr. Elliotson returned thanks ; and, a vote of thanks
having been given to the chairman, the meeting separated.


The Jury Magnetique d' Encouragement et de Recompense,
of Paris, has just voted and transmitted silver medals to
Baron von Beichenbach and Dr. Elliotson. The following is
the letter which was written to the latter gentleman : —

"Paris, 80 Mai, 1851.

" Monsieur, — J'ai Fhonneur de vous annoncer que dans

sa seance du 22 courant, le Jury Magnetique vous a decerne

une Medaille d^ Argent A titre de recompense, pour le con-

cours puissant que vous avez prSte a la cause mesmerienne.

" Le Jury, juste appreciateur de vos beaux travaux et de
votre perseverance, est persuade que le temoignage qu^il vous
offre de sa vive sympathie, sera une petite compensation aux
peines qui vous sont venues en defendant la noble cause de la
science, de la justice et de la verite.

" Veuillez croire. Monsieur, que je suis heureux d^Stre,
dans cette circonstance, Pinterprete du Jury, et agreer Tex-
pression des sentimens de haute estime et de parfait devou-
ment

" De votre serviteur et coUegue,

"LeCh«. M'Sheehy,
" S«. G»*. du Jury.


Cure qf Blindness, Dumbness, ^c. 145

^' P.S. M. Shaw^ votre compatriote^ et notre ami, a bien
Toulu 86 charger de vous remettre cette lettre avec la m^daiUe
qui Yous est destin^e ; et aossi, un exemplaire des statnts da
Jury.

'^ Voas recevrez, par la poste, le compte rendu imprim^ de
la seance precit^e oii se trouvent exposes les inotifa de la deci-
sion qui vous concerne/'

The medal is by Lassagne. It presents an exquisitely
finished head of Mesmer ; and on the reverse is inscribed —

Le Jury Magn^tique

D'Encouragement
*Et De Recompense.
(Institu6 k Paris, le 25 Mai 1847)
A Mr. John EUiotson.

Around are these words —

La Nature OflPre Un Moyen Universel De Guferir Et De

Preserver Les Hommes.


III. Cure of Blindness, Dumbness, and Palsy of the Lower
Limbs. By a Clergyman of the Church of England.
Communicated by Dr. EUiotson.

'*Bat for divinesi Mesmerism, Homoeopathy, and such like lying spirits,
would have been long since laid in the bottomless pit of oblivion.'' — Dr. Bushnan,
Medical Times, May 31, 1851, p. 606.

Dear Dr. EUiotson^ — Should you think the enclosed case of
the cure of a child^ of 11 years of age^ by mesmerism^ adapted
for forwarding to The Zoist, it is very much at your service.

The child in question had scarlatina last year^ followed
by severe influenza ; and after a few months her sight failed^
her speech became inarticulate^ and her lower extremities pow-
erless. As she had been under the care of a skilful medical
man for some little time without any apparent benefit, I un-
dertook, with his concurrence, to apply mesmerism; and
commenced for that purpose on the 28th of November. The
sight was then so much impaired that she could not see the
largest capital letters, and placed her eyes close to the book
like a very near-sighted person. Her speech, also, was so
affected that she could not articulate a single word of any
kind.

I made passes over her eyes and throat for a quarter of an
hour, and then left her to sleep. She slept from half an hour
to an hour every day, and after a few days began to see and
speak better. By the Ist of January she had quite recovered

VOL. IX. L


146 Cure of Uterine Neuralgia.

both her sight and speech. Toward the end of December
her lower extremities became useless^ and she could not stand
for a moment^ but^ if placed upon her feet^ she fell down
without the power of rising. Being absent from home^ I
could not resume the mesmeric treatment until the 21st of
January^ when, at your kind suggestion, I put her to sleep
and made strong passes down the spine. This was continued
until the end of February, almost daily ; and during the pro-
cess she gradually recovered her strength and entire use of
her Umbs. On the first of March she was quite restored,
and walked on that day, without fatigue, about three miles.

Our medical friend, whose practice and experience are of
th^ most respectable and extensive nature, has kindly allowed
me to enclose his account of the case to you.

I will only add, that the child continues perfectly well ;
and I saw her yesterday weeding my daughter's flower beds,
and delighted in the occupation.

From, dear Dr. E.,

Very faithfully yours,
Kingstone, Canterbury, T. B.

May 24th.

^' Charlotte Brooks applied for relief with an affection of
the optic nerves causing blindness, and also the nerves sup-
plying the muscles of deglutition and the tongue were so much
affected as to interfere with swallowing, and the speech so
much so as to render it impossible to understand her utter-
ance. Counter-irritation and attention to the general health
were attempted to procure rehef, but without any effect ; and
she then was subjected to mesmerism. I have seen the above
case since the mesmeric treatment was adopted, and the sight
and articulation are perfectly restored. But she had also lost
the use of the lower extremities, in addition to the impaired
functions before mentioned ; and she appears this day per-
fectly well in every respect.

"Edward Long, Surgeon.
"March 21st, 1851.^'


IV. Cure of Uterine Inflammation or Neuralgia. Communi-
cated by Dr. Elliotson.

*' Hie sober and legitimate conclusion of a few thousand years of experience
are not suflScieutly piquant for their taste (the mushroom portion of the aristo-
cracy). pRiESSNiTZ, the Silesian boor, Hahnemann, the German knaye, or
Mesmeb, the French mountebank, with their disciples, are more to thefr mere-
tridons tastes than the patient followers of physiology and pathology.'


f>


Communicated by Dr. Ellioison. 147

*' We must continue to urge professional men who have a just appreciation
of the noble art to which their lives are devoted, to keep a strict watch on the
public career of all consultants who dabble with mesmerists, homosopaths, and
h7dropaths." — Mr. Wakley, Lancet, May 3, 1851. pp. 499, 500.

Mks. C. S , aged 40, married 10 years. Three months

after marriage I miscarried by over walking. I was ordered
by an eminent physician to be kept in the recumbent position
to arrest the haemorrhage : but in vain. My family consider-
ing the case dangerous, a second equally experienced physician
was consulted, who immediately ordered half grain doses of
oxide of silver, which, after the second dose, had the desired
effect, the haemorrhage becoming less every day, the severe
and racking pains leaving me ; and all that appeared requisite
to perfect my cure and strengthen me was change of air.
Brighton was chosen ; but bathing strictly forbidden. After
remaining there three months, and finding myself so wonder-
fully improved, I returned home : but, to my dismay, found
my constitution had from this severe illness received much
injury, for walking or standing immediately caused me great
pain ; and, after a few months, I found myself suffering much
at the neck of the uterus from inflammation. I was compelled
again to call in medical attendance. I changed my doctor as
I had not derived permanent benefit, my sufferings being
alleviated for a short time only, although I had followed up all
directions to the very letter : but in vain. I was induced to
try homoeopathic treatment : but all to no effect. Having
read from a work called The Zoist of so many wonderful
cures being performed by mesmerism, I was induced after so
many years of suffering and unsuccessful treatment to try it,
although, I admit, very despairing and incredulous. But, to
my great surprize, I found myself in one month after being
mesmerised three times a week, quite free^ from any pain ;
and in six weeks perfectly cured, without coma having been
produced. The passes were made over the part affected:
mesmerised water was drunk, and no medicine taken. It is
now eight months since my wonderful cure was effected. I
have had no return of pain ; my health, spirits, and appetite
remain good. I consider it my duty to those who may be
suffering from the same cause as mine — inflammation at the
neck of the uterus — to give my case publicity.

C. S. March 26th, 1851.

*:jc* I am at liberty to give the name and address to any
person who wishes to know them.

Prom trying circumstances some pain lately returned : but
was soon completely removed by mesmerism.

J. Elliotson.
l2


( 1^ )


V. Benefit of Mesmerism in a severe Fracture of the Leg. By
Mr. Kingdom. Communicated by Dr. EUiotson.

" His immortal TVeatUe on the Circulation qf the Blood cost him twenty-six
years to bring to maturity. His discovery was ill-received.

''The epithet circulator, in its Latin invidious signification {quack), was
applied to him by many in derision, and his researches and discoveries were
treated by his adversaries with contempt and reproach. To an intimate friend
he himself complained, that after his book came out, he fell considerably
in his practice ; and it was believed by the vulgar that he was crack-brained ;
all the contemporary physicians were against his opinion, and envied him the
feme he was likely to acquire. That reputation he did at last enjoy : about
twenty-five years after the publication of his system^ it was received in all the
universities of the world.**

** The courtier behind is one of that class of gentlemen who, in reference to
the advancement of social and philosophical conditions, ' cares for none of these
things ;' he is permitting himself to be entertained by some of Harvey's oppo-
nents. These are incarnations of pedantic bigotry and stolid imbecility — the
two great opponents of scientific progress — ^who, by insult and obloquy, show
their hatred of him who dares, by asserting truth, unsettle their long cherished
absurdities." — Mr. Wakley, Lancet , April 5, 1851, p. 383. Account of an
Engraving of Harvey shewing the Circulation to Charles I.

Reform Club, Pall Mall, 25tli April, 1851.
My dear Sir, — Absence from England the greater portion of
the last three years having prevented my seeing more than
an occasional number of The Zoist, some similar case to the
following may have already appeared in that excellent peri-
odical. I place it, however, at your disposal.

I should premise that in 1841, whilst on a visit in Buck-
inghamshire, I fractured the bones of my right leg, just above
the ankle; the fracture, however, was reduced without much
pain, although the surgeon did not arrive for several hours.
With the exception, indeed, of the first two or three nights,
when it was necessary to apply cold lotions, I suffered but
little at any time. Notwithstanding these favourable symp-
toms, I was not permitted to leave my bed for the sofa until
the middle of the sixth week, nor to be removed in an easy
carriage to my own residence until the end of the ninth week.
Even these periods, I believe, are considered rather early
for one of my age, which — as the truth must be told — ^was at
that time, fifty.

On the 10th January of the present year, 1851, whilst
crossing the upper part of Regent Street, I was knocked
down by a cab, the wheel passing over and crushing the bones
of my right leg, just at the former fracture. After being
assisted into another cab, I drove to the chambers of a friend
near Fall Mall, who kindly placed his rooms and servants at
my disposal. Mr. Patterson of Piccadilly was soon in atten-
dance j but this gentleman, finding the leg very much swollen.


Benefit of Mesmerism in a severe Fracture of the Leg. 149

the flesh and muscles seriously injured^ and the bones broken,
into numerous pieces all but protruding through the skin,
considered it necessary to have the additional aid and advice
of Mr. Fergusson of King's College, on whose arrival the
fracture was skilfully reduced, though not, as may be supposed,
without considerable pain. I was then left for the night,
under care of a nurse, with sundry bottles of lotion, fever
draughts, &c., in the expectation, no doubt, from the severity
of the accident, that pain and fever would ensue ; but I ex-
perienced neither one nor the other during the whole of my
illness, or rather confinement, — not even any disturbance of
my sleep by those twitchings of the muscles, or dreams of
falling over precipices, so common after such accidents. The
lotions and fever draughts were untouched to the last, and
the only cork drawn was from a bottle of old sherry.

With the natural anxiety of an unfortunate bachelor to
ascertain whether his future polkas were to be danced with a
straight or crooked leg, I had the splints removed on the
tenth day in the presence of both surgeons ; the inspection
proving so satisfactory that Mr. Patterson a few days after-
wards consented to order a pair of crutches, although more
perhaps to humour me than from any idea of my being able
to use them so early as I anticipated. On the 21st day, how-
ever, I quitted my bed for the sofa in the adjoining room ; on
Sunday, the 16th February — the accident having occurred
on the 10th January only — I removed into the country ; and
on the 19th March exchanged my crutches for a simple
walking stick.

For this rapid* recovery and perfect freedom from all pain
and fever I am indebted to mesmerism; certainly not to
" rhubarb, senna, or purgative drugs,'' for none were admin-
istered. I was told, it is true, that I possessed a good con-
stitution and a good temper — powerful auxiliaries, no doubt
— without reckoning my conscience ; but, as they existed in
1841, my recovery should have been as rapid then as in 1851,
with a much severer fracture and the not very trifling addi-
tion of ten years to my age.

My mesmeriser was the female servant at my friend's
chambers — an active, intelligent woman of thirty-five. She
had never heard of mesmerism : but, under my directions,
made slow passes from the knee to the foot of the injured leg,
for half an hour, on the night of the accident, and afterwards
four times a day from ten to fifteen minutes each, until my
departure on the 16th February.

* When Mr. , of St. George's Hospital, heard of my leaving my bed

on the 21st day, he declared that I ought to have been put into a straight jacket.


150 Benefit of Mesmerism in a severe Fracture of the Leg.

As the mesmevic passes were entirely local — ^no attempt
being made to induce coma^ — so simple a remedy might surely
be applied with great facility in almost every case of accident :
and its exclusion from our public hospitals reflects but little
credit on those who have the management of them^ unless^
indeed^ they think with Dr. Copland* that pain is necessary
to effect a cure^ which it certainly was not in my case^ the
very absence of it being held as the principal cause of my
rapid recovery. In addition^ however, to relief from pain —
no slight boon to the sufferer, can there be any longer a doubt
as to the existence of a positive curative power in mesmerism ?
It may be urged that nature, in accomplishing the union of
a fractured bone, works by a slow and particular process : so
she does in the growth of trees and plants, and, as the process
may, in one case, be accelerated by the application of manures
or other stimulants, why deny the possibility in the other
of a similar effect from mesmerism ?

In justice to Mr. Patterson, I should state that in discuss-
ing the subject he admitted that he could not shut his eyes
to facts. Mr. Fergusson, on the contrary, treated it with
ridicule, which he will doubtless ere long regret.

I am glad to find the Mesmeric Infirmary is opened, and,
although unable to render it the assistance I had reason to
hope at the meeting at Lord Ducie's in 1846, I have great
pleasure in forwarding a check for £\0 : 10s. ; and with every
wish for its success.

Believe me, my dear Sir, yours ever sincerely.
To Dr. Elliotson, P.R.S., &c. &c. William Kingdom.

I enclose the statement of Mr. Patterson, the surgeon
whe had the chief charge of the case : —

" Piccadilly, Jan. 30, 1851.

'^ On the 10th January I was called to a gentleman, 60
years of age, lying at 28, Regent Street, who had been
knocked down by a cab, the wheel having passed over his leg
or the horse having trod upon it. On removing the trdwsers,
drawers, and socks, I found both bones of the leg, the tibia
and fibula, broken, just above the ankle-joint, and very badly
broken in pieces \ it was what is commonly called a commi-
nuted fracture, and all but a compound fracture, a great deal
of injury and violence having been done to the soft parts : the
whole of the leg was very much discoloured by the effusion of
blood, &c., and much swollen. Finding the limb so badly
fractured, &c., and so much displacement, I suggested the

* See Dr. ElUotson's pamphlet, entitled, Numerow Caaeg qf Surgical Ope'
rations without pain, p. 59.


By Mr, Kingdom, 151

propriety and necessity of some efficient help in setting it. I
do not recollect so bad a case doing so well^ although many
similar cases came under my notice when I was with Sir
Astley Cooper and since that time.

" J. D. Pattbeson, M.K.C.S.''

*** We hope there is some mistake in Mr. Kingdom's
view of Mr. Fergusson's conduct. We hear, indeed, that
Mr. Fergusson has Mr. Wakley to dine with him, and has
carefully shewn himself shy of better and wiser men who are
honest and courageous enough to declare the truth of mes-
merism on all occasions. But allowance must be made for
Mr. Fergusson. He may not feel a giant's strength in either
intellect or moral dignity. He has come from the north to
the south to make his fortune, and a predisposition to the
prudent habits of Scotland have no doubt been transmitted
into his brain from his father, grandfather, and his great
grandfather, and his training from childhood was " wisdom
in his generation,'' before he left Edinburgh.

Mr. Liston was attacked by Mr. Wakley as a cruel wretch
for ignorantly doubting the reality of spontaneous anaesthesia
in a case of catalepsy which occurred in the Royal Infirmary
of Edinburgh.

** The Lancet for May 22, 1830, gives a report of a clinical lec-
ture, delivered in the University of Edinburgh, by Dr. Duncan, upon
the case of a young woman who had for a short time been subject
to seizures of perfect insensibility and catalepsy ; * her limbs, on the
application of force, yielded' no more readily, however, than lead
would, * in whatever direction they were bent ; and, when the force
was withdrawn, remaining motionless and without tremor, hke bars
of lead, in whatever position they were placed, no matter how painful
under ordinary circumstances, or bow contrary to the ordinary laws
of gravitation.' The poor creature's case was perfectly real ; but,
because some were so ignorant of medical science as to be unac-
quainted with the features of such an affection, she was sui^)ected of
imposition.

" The following is Mr. Wakle/s report of Dr. Duncan's account
of the experiment : ' We cannot avoid noticing, and we do so with
feelings of the most unmixed disgust, an unmanly, wanton, and
barbarous experiment, practised on this unfortunate patient by an
individual, unconnected, we are happy to add, with the department
of clinical me£?2cm6 ' (as distinguished from clinical «t<r^^). <It
will scarcely be credited, but nevertheless it is strictly true, that
during a paroxysm of insensibility, the person to whom we allude,
tore with his nails two separate pieces of skin from the Jumd of the
patient. She was not aware of the cruel and unwarrantable experi-
ment at the time, but sbe felt the effects in the intervals very
acutely. It is satisfactory, however, to know that but one feeling


152 Benefit of Mesmerism in a severe Fracture of the Leg,

of the most unequivocal reprobation pervaded teachers and pupils at
this inhuman and unprofessional act/ Dr. Duncaa hints only that
it was a surgeon. Mr. Wakley declares the surgeon was Mr. Liston;
for, in the index is this reference to the two pages in which the expe-
riment is related : —

** 'Liston, Mr., inhuman experiment by, pp. 278, 281.'
** Yet it is impossible not to think the statement erroneous, be-
cause Mr. Wakley and Mr. Liston are now inseparable friends, and
Mr. Wakley has placed his son under Mr. Liston. There, however,
stands the accusation in the index to Lancet ^ May 22, 1830, p. 278,
vol. 18."*

Afterwards, when Mr. Listen was invited by University
College, London, to join it, Mr. Wakley wrote against the
appointment of a man of blood, that is, a man fond of ope-
rating and distinguished for nothing but operating — the ear-
pentery of the medical profession — to that institution.

Mr. Liston, who, though a great blusterer and accustomed
to all sorts of asperity and coarseness behind a man's back,
was an arrant cowsgrd and ready to truckle to those he hated
when he felt cringing prudent, obtained after all this an in-
troduction to Mr. Wakley, by means of Mr. M'Christie, now
the city revising barrister, but at that time Mr. Wakley's chief
reporter, whom he met accidentally in the steam-boat which
brought him to London. Mr. Listonf then became the bosom
friend of Mr. Wakley, and, burning with envy of Dr. Elliot-
son's popularity at University College, stirred his new friend
up to the onslaught upon that gentleman and mesmerism.
And now what is the end of all this ? He is dead and for-
gotten, like other professors of University CoUlege who were
violent against mesmerism : and left his excellent wife to be
supported by others : and mesmerism is triumphant all over
the earth. University College fell immediately that Dr.
EUiotson resigned, and has sunk lower every year; Mr.
Wakley turning round upon it and hastening its downfall to
the best of his means. Such is the wonderful working of
eternal laws.

If Mr. Fergusson has succeeded to Mr. Wakley's intimacy
and friendship, still we cannot imagine that he meanly courts

* Numerous Cases qf Surgical Operations without pain in the Mesmeric
State: &c., &c. By John EUiotson, M.D., F.R.S. p. 32.

See Mr. Liston's gross conduct in No. VI., p. 283 ; No. XXII., p. 211.

t Mr. Wakley must be aware that his former friend, Mr. Liston, greatly
favonred homoeopathy : and associated with Dr. Qnin. His opinion was indeed
not worth a straw : and the probability is that be talked and acted in its favour
from a desire to secure Dr. Quin's introduction of him to the aristocracy and
rivet himself with the family of Lord Anglesea. His good opinion of homoeopathy
is mentioned as an argument in its favour by some English homoeopathic authors.
Mr. Wakley does not tell the medical world that Mr. Fergusson also meets the
homoeopatbs, be this right or wrong.


By Mr. Kingdom. 153

Mr. Wakley and the herd of medical antimesmerists by turn-
ing his back in the sight of men upon mesmerists and sneering
at mesmerism. When he was not intimate with Wakley,*
and -his present place in this man's favour was occupied by
his rival Liston, he was candid. In the fourteenth number
of The Zoist, published in 1847, we read that Mr. Thomas
Bell, one of the professors of King's College, lecturer at Guy's
Hospital, and secretary to the Royal Society, extracted quite
painlessly a tooth, and afterwards quite painlessly six stumps.
Mr. Bell stated that there was not the least indication of
pain, or of consciousness of the operation, nor any change in
the pulse j and that without the mesmeric state the pain must
have been severe.

Mr. Fergusson gave his testimony honestly to the truth :

" The undersignedy who were present at the operation above
mentioned^ attest the accuracy of the statement.

" W. Fergusson, Professor of Surgery in King's College, and
Surgeon to King's College Hospital.
£. Forbes, Professor of Botany in King's College.
James Luke, Surgeon to the London Hospital.
John Adams, Assistant-Surgeon to the London Hospital ."f

In a case of affection of the prostate gland, in a man 70
years of age, treated in the ordinary way by Mr. Fergusson,
mesmerism was employed at the same time by the patient's
nephew with great benefit. The case is detailed in No.
XXVIII. of The Zoist. Although the patient had been almost
sleepless for five nights through agony, in spite of the strong-
est opiates, and was in great pain when the passes were begun,
he fell into a sound sleep in five minutes and snored; and
slept for an hour and a half, and then awoke in good^ spirits
much refreshed, relieved the bladder without instruments, and
took food. In about an hour he was sent to sleep again in
four minutes, slept fifty-three minutes, again took refresh-
ment, and again relieved the bladder without instruments.
His nephew sent him to sleep a third time in three minutes
and a half, and he slept soundly for two hours and twenty
minutes — having slept altogether nearly five hours that night,
— and again he was refreshed, and much to his delight con-
tinued to relieve his bladder freely and without the least pain.

What was Mr. Fergusson's conduct ? Why —

" Mr. Fergusson called to see him in the morning, and said,
' Well, Mr. Jacobs, you have done more for him than I could;' and
was very much pleased, and desired me to say to Dr. EUiotson that
he was very satisfied with the effects of the sleep, and requested me

* He has joined the Wakleys in their Assurance Company,
t Zoist, No. XIV., p. 211.


154 Benefit of Mesmerism in a severe Ft'adure of the Leg,

to repeat the mesmerism again on the foUowmg night. An opiate
was given to Mr. Jones on Friday night (the night hefore I first
mesmerised him), hut without effect. He had not had so much rest
in any one day or night before for five weeks *^

The patient completely recovered ; and Mr. Fergusson

" Complimented me," says Mr. Jacobs, ** upon my success, assur-
ing me that the sleep had been most beneficial and conducive to the
recovery of Mr. Jones."

Mr. Fergusson^s conduct in these two cases reflects great
credit upon him. Nay^ more ; we have heard Dr. EUiotson
say that he lately met Mr. Fergusson in consultationi this
gentleman being called in by the family as the surgeon in-
stead of Sir Benjamin Brodie^ purely on account of his honest
and rational behaviour in regard to mesmerism : and that^ in
the consultation^ Mr. Fergusson spontaneously suggested the
use of mesmerism for the purpose of calming the patient. It
is true that it was to Dr. EUiotson that he made the sugges-
tion, and that he knew the family were most favourable to
mesmerism. This, however, Mr. Fergusson, most wisely,
did.

Mr. Wakley frightens some medical men into courting
him and sneering at mesmerism, and has been attempting to
frighten an M.P. who fears him not.

** We learn that there is a young French damsel practising in

Wigmore-street, Cavendish-square, hight Mdlle. Julia de B ,

who treats ophthalmic disease mesmerically, in the manner described
by the Quarterly. Whether the young Frenchwoman preceded the
Quarterly^ or whether the Quarterly be a humble follower of hers,
we cannot certainly inform our readers, but we incline to the latter
opinion as the most probable. Mdlle. Julia is in great request for
her extraordinary soothing powers amongst the elderly hypochon-
driacal gentlemen of the West-end who are bitten by mesmerism.
We believe she has practised extensively, and we are told success-
fully, upon Sir Benjamin Hall, Bart., the M.P. for Marylebone,
whose confidence in the profession we recommend the medical electors
of Marylebone to remember when he next solicits their sweet voices at
an election. Sir Benjamin has, or fancies he has, recovered the use
of his head and eyes under the fascinating passes of Mdlle. Julia, a
circumstance which we dare say will be related in the next numbers
of those kindred publications, the Zoist and the British and Foreign
Medico-Chirurgical Review.*' — Mr. Wakley, Lancet, Feb. 8, 18.51,
p. 160.

Zoist.


( 155 )

VI. Cure of severe Abdominal Pain, by the father of the little
patient. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.

** The two translations of Baron Von Reichenbach's work were published
about a year ago, and we waited with great curiosity for a critique in some of the
Reviews. They will not presume, we said, to ignore such a famous philosopher as
the German Baron, or to sneer at either of his translators. Ah ! but they did
ignore the Baron's book, though it is the most extraordinary volume that has
appeared in the present century. And yet bis researches actually and inevitably
point out that Von Reichenbach commenced his experiments with a prejudice
against animal magnetism. But it appears to us the difficulties of the science
have terminated. The doctors may scoff to the less informed, but when such
men as Sir William Hamilton, of Edinburgh^ one of the first mental philosophers
in the kingdom ; as Sir David Brewster, Dr. Gregory, a^ others, have pro-
claimed their adhesion, it will do no longer to indulge in a fool-bom jest, or a
horse-laugh, or even to affect ignorance or indifference on the subject. '^ — Dublin
Bcemng Post, May 27, 1851.

Mb. Janson had more than once \rritten to me respecting a
gentleman at Sturminster, one of the Peace Society or
League of Universal Brotherhood, who was one of his corre-
spondents, and remarkable for great attainments acquired in
the midst of a laborious life and for enlightened views and
energy and excellence of character.

In April, Mr. Janson favoured me with a letter which he
had received from Mr. Colbourne, the party in question, and
the following is an extract from it.

'^ William Colbourne to Henry Umfreville Janson.

" Sturminster, 11th April, 1851.
" My dear Sir, — I find I have allowed a couple of posts to
pass without thanking you for your last kind present of The
Zoist. I did not intend this, but I have the old excuse to
offer. I take time by the forelock with a little firmer grasp
to-day, and send my sincere acknowledgments both for the
book and your amusing letter. The number is certainly a
highly interesting one, as indeed they are all ; and surely not
the least interesting is the case (page 391) communicated by
yourself. When I have read it carefully, which I shall not
accomplish for a week, so little time have I at my own dis-
posal, I shall spend sixpence upon it, and forward it into Scot-
land. I find by news from the North, received yesterday,
that your two last letters in the Exeter paper, which I sent
up, have made no small stir amongst the good folk in
" modem Athens ;*' they are at present taking a regular turn
amongst some topping people. I hope they will find their
way back to me again some day. By my Louise's account of
things, mesmerism has taken a higher stand and excited
more interest in Edinburgh this winter than ever before. I
know she will lend her little help to raise the row.


156 Cure of severe Abdominal Pain.

'' I had a very pretty bit of practice myself on Wednesday
evening. I have never had much practical experience^ being
somewhat of a puny fellow^ shut up within these four brick
walls for so great a portion of my existeuce^ that I fear I
should have but little power over my robust neighbours^ the
farmers ; but on the evening mentioned^ ray little Sidney, the
same who is celebrated in the document you enclosed in your
last, was sufi*ering from severe pain in the stomach, a little
above the umbilical region, or between the chest and the ab-
domen. I had not seen him myself all the afternoon, but
according to the servant's account he had been moping and
groaning with it for at least four hours, and it had resisted all
her applications of hot tea, &c., to remove it. I had been
glancing cursorily at TJie Zoist just before, and it occurred to
me that a few passes would do him no harm at all events : so
I made some slow passes over the part affected for about five
minutes, and then enquired how he felt. He replied that it
was still there, but he thought it was better. This gave me
a little encouragement, and I took him into another. room to
be undisturbed by the other children, and there I mesmer-
ised him with all the volition and energy that I could bring
to bear for more than ten minutes without ceasing; he then
declared himself much better. I followed it up again for from
five to ten minutes longer, when he found himself quite free,
entirely free, from pain, and so he continued the whole of the
remaining evening; and, to use his own words, he ^ quite
forgot it.' Now this could be no effort of imagination ; a
child of five years could know nothing of what was going to
be done to him ; could have no more imagination to prompt
him than Miss Martineau's cow. I must add the sequel
though, which is, that for more than an hour after the opera-
tion above detailed, I had a very disagreeable pain in the very
spot or part of the body where I had mentally imagined
Sidney's to be when making the passes over him."

At Mr. Janson's suggestion, I took the liberty of writing
to Mr. Colbourne for further particulars, and received the
following answer:—

*' Sturminster, April 21, 1851.
"Sir, — Presuming my letter to Mr. Janson states the
duration of the affection, namely, from before 2 o'clock until
after 6, and the transfer of the pain to the parent, there will
be little else to add unless you think what I have written on
the annexed page as copy for the compositor be worth doing
so. The person there alluded to is a Mr. Spinney, secretary
to our institution, who came in to announce that our lecture-


Cure of convulsive and rigid Fits. 157

room was put in due order^ as I had engaged to ' hold forth *
that night. I was cuddling and nursing the little chap on
my knee, and we spoke together about him^ noticing his pale
face, which plainly told that it was no fancied ill. Mr. Spinney
was greatly surprised, when at the room doors I told him of
the doings and the result of them.

" I remain. Sir, yours very respectfully,
" Dr. EUiotson. W. Colbouene."

'^ That the affection was not of that very trivial character
which you may be inclined to suppose, can be evidenced by a
gentleman who happened to call on me that evening, and who
noticed and condoled with the little sufferer. This party was
equally surprised and interested on my teUing him of the
application and the result an hour or two afterwards. I have
frequently, before and since this case, mesmerised slight cuts,
burns, and scratches in this and my other children, with
beneficial effects."


VII. Cure of convulsive and rigid Fits, and extreme sensitive-
ness, and muscular debility : together with some peculiar
mesmeric phenomena. By Dr. Elliotson.

** We aU know or haye witnesaed the operation of the nitrous ozyde on the
nervous system : the aitoniahing influence of meemerism : the anaesthetic effect
of the inhalation of ether/' &c., &c. — Lumleyan Lecture delivered hefore the
Royal CoUege of Physicians, London, April, 1851. By Dr. Badeley,* Fellow
of the CoUege, as published in the Medical Gazette,

Those who are fortunate enough to possess the first volume
of The Zoist, now so scarce, may be acquainted with the in-
teresting mesmeric cure of Master William Salmon, who,
when eight years old, in 1834, after labouring for two years
under attacks of intense neuralgic pains of the abdomen,
had fits of shaking and rigidity for a year, and then fits
of genuine epilepsy, each of which left some part or other
palsied for a time.

^'On January 26th, 1839, I was summoned to him, late in the
afternoon, and found him lying on a couch, so paralyzed that not

* Dr. Badeley deserves great praise for his honesty and courage in thus
speaking of mesmerism as a truth in that College where two Fellows have lately
ventured upon such vulgar, unseemly, and ignorant (No. XXIII., p. 234) con-
duct at a public lecture, as Dr. F. Hawkins and Dr. J. A. Wilson did unblush-
ingly, secure of impunity from the President and other officers. Indeed, while
Dr. J. A. Wilson Was on one occasion so discoursing, the President, Dr. Paris,
is said to have nudged his next neighbour and wagged his head to one side know-
ingly. — Zoiet.


158 Cure of canvtdsive and rigid Fits.

only could he not walk, but he could not raise his head in the least
from the pillow, or move it to one side. If others raised him even a
few inches, he became insensible; or, as the family said, fainted. Of
all this I satisfied myself. A fit which had taken place twelve days
before had left him thus paralyzed in the legs and trunk and neck.

" Though I had just resigned at University College because I
was not allowed to cure my patients with mesmerism, the father had
no view to mesmerism, and gave me pen, ink, and paper to write a
prescription. But knowing, as all medical men in their hearts do»
that medicine in the majority of cases of epilepsy and numerous
other nervous affections is of no, of little, or of secondary use, what-
ever number of pills and bottles are consumed and other appliances
made, I said nothing, but went to my carriage, and requested Mr.
Wood who was in it to come and help me mesmerise a patient. We
returned to the house. I raised the child to the sitting posture,
and altnost immediately he became comatose, as many epileptic and
hysterital patients are in the habit of becoming between the perfect
fits or when perfect fits have not yet shewn themselves. He was
not pale, nor was his pulse alt^ered : — the state was coma,- not faint-
ing. I restored him to the horizontal position and made transverse
passes before his chest and face ; and he awoke suddenly and per-
fectly, with the usual sudden inspiration which I had always seen
characterize the return of the Okeys and many other mesmerised
patients to the waking state. The parents said that the return to
consciousness was much move rapid than they had ever seen it before,
— shewing that his state was really mesmeric. I then, without say-
ing a word, took Mr. Wood's hand, and he the father's, and with
the other hand I made passes before the child from his. face down-
wards as he lay. His eyelids presently began to droop, and in about
five minutes nearly closed, and were in a state of rapid tremor. His
jaw had become locked; and he could not be roused by rough shak-
ing, nor did he appear to hear, except that clapping the hands in
his face increased the tremulous contraction of his eyelids. I made
passes along his arm and hand and the extremity extended and rose,
and presently fell : then passes transversely, and it somewhat moved
transversely : and the longitudinal passes on being repeated caused
his extremity to extend and rise again. The child was ignorant of
mesmerism and sleep-waking or somnambulism; but beautifully dis^
played, though unprepared for my mesmeric proceedings, the phe-
nomena of mesmerism and sleep-waking. He was fast asleep, as his
breathing and indifference shewed. He fell asleep in the true mes-
meric manner, his eyelids closed and trembled, and his jaw was
locked. Nothing could be more genuine. To talk of imposition
would be preposterous, and only display ignorance of the subject.
But he could, like many other sleep-wakers, partially hear and see.
His eyes were not completely closed, and I found that he heard me.
For, while making the longitudinal passes I said aloud that I would
make the transverse, but continued the longitudinal. However, his
hand moved transversely. The explanation was this. There was
excited in him a strong propensity to imitation and obedience. He


By Dr. Ettiotson. 159

had no occult power, as some sleep-wakers have, of knowing what I
was doing ; he judged hy his sight and hearine ; and, if I could
deceive him, he did what I led him to believe I ordered or was doing.
During the whole of my attendance he scarcely went beyond this.
His eyes were always a Uttle open, as every body clearly saw, and
he directed them to his mesmeriser ; and when he was able, as he
was in a few days, he directed his head likewise in order to watch
his mesmeriser. There was no disguise : he had a strong propensity
to imitate and obey, and used his external senses naturally for in-
formation. I have had patients who learnt what was doing without
any known means, and imitated grimaces made behind them, when
their eyes were closed. Persons ignorant of the subject pronounce
patients, circumstanced like this boy, to be impostors. I did so
myself in two or three instances, when I first attended to mesmerism :
and deeply do I now lament the injustice I did the individuals. I
was not aware that the propensity to obey and imitate might be
excited in sleep-waking, while no means beyond the external senses
existed to supply the patient with imformation : and when I deceived
a patient and led him to imitate whaj^ he fancied me to do, and not
what I really did, I accused him of imposition. My conscience is
never easy when I think of my injustice. A young woman in whom
this was remarkably the case, and against whom I became so greatly
prepossessed that I scolded her and did not take any interest in her
and ceased to mesmerise her, died of her diseases in the hospital
after I left town one autumn. My moments are to this day em-
bittered when my injustice towards her recurs to my memory. My
only excuse is my ignorance. I must be thankful that I did not,
like my brethren, remain ignorant; but that, seeing there was truth
in mesmerism, applied myself to it, till I became familiarized with
its facts.

" I next moved Master Salmon's legs by vertical tractive move-
ments; and then tried his head. It soon began to«move as if an effort
were made to raise ^t. Mr. Wood and myself made the movements
together, and the effort became greater and greater, till at last the
boy raised it from the pillow, — a thing he had not done for ten days.
It soon fell back again. But we persevered again and again, till
he rose into the sitting posture. The more we slowly retreated in
making these tractive movements, the stronger appeared to be the
influence. Every time we had retreated as far as the room would
allow, he fell back powerless. At last, after having drawn him into
the sitting posture, we made tractive passes from the top of his head
upwards; and this soon made him elevate his head, and then elevate
his whole frame till he positively stood erect on the floor. We had
moved him to the foot of the couch with his legs hanging down,
before I tried to make him stand. I walked backwards making trac-
tive passes from him to me, and he slowly followed me. The father
and mother were petrified, and called in their people from the shop
to witness the strange sight of their child with his head nodding in
sleep and slowly moving after me, though unable to raise his head


160 Cure of convulsive and rigid Fits.

an inch or move his legs at all a quarter of an hour before. The
room was behind the shop and small; and I opened the door, re-
ceded into the shop, and he slowly followed me. I turned into the
room again, making the tractive passes, and he went round it after
me. I stood on one leg, he stood on one leg; I turned round, he
turned round, I opened mj mouth, he opened his mouth. I drew
him onwards to the couch and laid him down upon it. I awoke
him two or three times by blowing in his face; and sent him to sleep
again presently by longitudinal passes before him.

*^ After a sovereign had been held in my hand for a minute, I
put it into one of his, which instantly closed upon it, but relaxed as
soon as a piece of iron was rubbed upon his hand. This experiment
was frequently repeated and invariably with the same result, except
once, and then the rigidity was rather increased. The iron, I be-
lieve, abolished the effect of the gold; but the friction increased it.
If therefore the friction happened to be rapid, it might more than
counterbalance the specific effect of the iron. I met with precisely
the same results in the Okeys ; — simple friction, no matter with
what, increased the effects of gold and silver, &c., while iron, held
still, abolished it. Ailer the sovereign was removed, the palm was
rubbed with I forget what, and it closed rigidly again, but relaxed
when a piece of iron was applied to the back of it.

''I moistened my finger with saliva and rubbed it on his palm,
his hand instantly closed : I did the same to the back of his hand,
it instantly extended, and the extension was increased by farther
rubbing. At one time time when gold had been applied, he became
cataleptic: but his extended arms or legs could not be made to de-
scend by darting the hands at them as those of the Okeys could.
Friction along the hand increased the rigidity. I at length made
tranverse passes on his eyebrows and awoke him, and did not send
him to sleep again, but asked him whether he had been sitting up
and walking. He replied, ' No, I have been asleep.* He had no
knowledge of anything that had transpired, nor was he at all fatigued.
I gave him my hand and desired him to sit up. He did so. I then
desired him to stand and walk. He did so; but was qbite at a loss
to understand it, saying, * How is it ?' I then replaced him in the
recumbent posture; because his newly acquired strength would soon
have been exhausted.

" Jan. 27th. On visiting him in the middle of the next day, he
immediately raised himself on the sofa and held out his hand to me.
He had experienced no headache since the preceding evening, though
before he had long suffered much from it. I put my gold watch
into his hand, but it produced no effect. After I was gone, however,
he had a peculiar sensation in his hand. As I expected company at
three to witness some mesmeric phenomena, I begged his father to
drive him to my house. When he had arrived, I put him into the
sitting posture in an easy chair, and it was not till the end of five
minutes that his insensibility took place, and his hands became cold.
His mother stated to the company that previously he instantly be-


By Dr. EUiotson. 161

came insensible if even his head was raised enough for his nightcap
to be put on. I hiid him down^ and he soon recovered with the
usual sudden inspiration. I made longitudinal passes before his face,
and his eyelids began to tremble, and in a few minutes he was
asleep. I drew his arms and legs in different directions bj tractive
passes; and then by means of them drew him forwards in the chair,
and then upwards, and he stood upright on the floor, followed me
all about the room, and imitated every movement which I made. At
last I made outward passes with my thumbs on my own eyebrows.
He did the same on his own, and immediately awoke to his natural
state. He was in perfect ignorance of all that had happened, and
declared himself not in the least tired. . . .

" In his sleep, before I drew him up from the chair, I applied
gold, first touched a short time by myself (mesmerised) to the palm
of his hand, which instantly tontracted, and any metal touched by
the gold then had the same eftect.

" 28th. Was now able to sit up a long while without insensi*
bility coming on. I sent him to sleep, and, standing at his right
hand, drew up his legs by tractive passes. After they had dropped,
I in the same way attempted to draw up his right arm: but, instead
of it, the legs came up again. I then tried the left arm. It did
not rise on account of being wedged in between his body and the
side of the couch: but his right arm and both legs came up. I dis-
engaged his left arm, and, standing on his left side, endeavoured to
draw up his left arm, but both arms and both legs rose, and con-
tinued to rise though I ceased to make any tractive movement.

'^ This is very curious, and similar to what I continually observe.
When a muscular effect has been produced, — elevation, depression,
extension — it has a strong tendency to recur, when any attempt to
produce a muscular eflect is made. The idea seems fixed in the
patient, and confounds itself with the new impression or even gets
the upper hand of it, at least for a time. Not only will a previous
movement of the same sitting then return, but a movement of a for-
mer sitting. I had a patient, who, like many others, though fast
asleep mesmerically, and with his eyes bandaged, would close or
extend his hand, exactly as I closed or extended mine near his :
though how he knew what I did is a perfect mystery. The effect
came slowly, and, if I placed my fingers and thumbs in strange
ppsitions, very slowly, and not till after many efforts and mistakes,
though at last most accurately. I had one day put my thumb be-
tween the fore and middle fingers, and he had done the same. The
following day I put my hand in some other position, and before he
imitated this, which he at length did, he put his thumb precisely in
the condition of the previous day, and for some time he continued to
shew a tendency to this, when I presented to his hand my closed or
extended hand for him to imitate. Another patient would close her
hands in imitation of mine. But after some months, I held mine
extended near her*s. She extended her's, but always closed it first,
and often two or three times before she extended it. This patient
had her eyes partially open, though I could never satisfy myself that

VOL. IX. M


162 Care of convulswe and rigid Fits.

she saw. But though they were open, and she might see, she
invariablj for months executed the closure of the hand before she
would extend it in imitation of mine. It frequently happens also,
that other parts besides those from which the mesmenser makes
tractive passes will move. Sometimes both hands, both legs, or all
four, if traction is made to one only. Old movements continually
recur, when, if the patient had a desire to impose they would not,
because no steps are taken to prevent him from seeing what you are
about. There is the disposition to imitate or obey, acting not only
upon information it receives in any way, but influenced by a previous
association, which may be more powerful than the present new
impulse.

'* So strong is the disposition when once given, that the move-
ment will continue after the mesmeriser ceases to give an impulse ;
and, if he hurries to another experiment, the old effect may con-
tinue and be repeated again and again before his new attempt suc->
ceeds; — and this equally whether no precaution or every precaution
is taken to prevent the patient from knowing what you are attempt-
ing."

On the 29th he was much stronger and better^ and I
made some more experiments with metals upon him.

" Mesmerised lead and iron, placed repeatedly in his hands for
some time, had no effect. On a mesmerised half-crown being put
into them, they closed; and he found considerable difficulty in open-
ing them, saying, that they stuck. I desired him to close them
again, which he did with some difficulty, and the rigidity was so
much increased that he was unable to open them. I applied the
poker to the back of his left hand, and this instantly opened : I
rubbed the palm with the poker, and it closed again firmly, the fric-
tion probably overpowering the specific influence of the iron. Lead
was applied to the back of his closed hand, and this alowly relaxed,
probably from the eff^^t of the silver dying away and not from any
influence of the lead.

*' I took the half-crown out, held it in my own hand, and then
placed it on the back of his. The hand opened more. Another
mesmerised half-crown was put upon the first, and the hand extended
widely and so firmly that he could not close it. A piece of iron was
placed upon the half-crowns, and he then could close it partially.
The half-crowns were removed, and the iron left alone in his hand,
and he opened and shut it with perfect ease. Iron, rubbed on the
back or palm of the hand, caused rigid extension or closure : it was
applied without friction to the back of his hand, and relaxation at
once followed. Two sovereigns first held in my hand and then
wiped, that mesmerised perspiration might have no influence, were
placed in his hands and caused immediate closure. I rubbed lead
on the back of his left hand, and it opened instantly. I rubbed the
back of the right hand against the arm of the chair, and it opened
slowly. Some patients are not affected by metals : of those who are
affected, some are affected in one manner, some in another : many


By Dr. Elliotson. 168

preci^ly as the Okejs were affected, while the susceptibility to their
effect lasted, hnt its duration was not three years. The effect of
gold, silyer and iron, upon this little boy, was so similar to that
upon the Okeys, that I thought of poor Mr. Wakley when I saw the
same phenomena come forth. . . .

"I now drew him by tractive passes off his chair. He stood and
ibUowed me all about the room, and more quickly than the first
night; but reeling and tottering, though he never fell; turning
round, sitting down, stooping, standing on one leg, folding his arms,
trying to whistle, exactly as I did. After great amusement in this
way, I passed my thumbs upon his eyebrows and awoke him« His
mother wished him to lie down supposing he must be tired, but he
sat up, declaring he was not tired at all.

** This is one of the most striking things in mesmerism : — ^that
persons very weak, perhaps exhausted by previous exertion, shall be
thrown into the mesmeric sleep-waking, and be kept in constant
muscular action, perhaps extendmg their arms and legs, or in a state
of rigid flexion, forced into and retained in the most awkward, and
one would think painful, attitudes, such as they could not support a
hundredth part of the time in the natural state, and on beine
awakened, know nothing more than that they feel much stronger and
better than before you sent them to sleep.

" 30th. So strong that he sits up without any support of cushion
or back, and walks across the room without assistance.

" I drew up one hand ; some one else the other ; and I then drew
him upright from the floor. When he was sent to sleep, the attrac-
tion to me was so powerful, that he not only followed me about the
room, but stood as close as possible to me, and, when I sat down,
sat in the same chair, pushing violently at me as if he wished to be
in the very same point of space. I shdl in the next number publish
a case in which a young man invariably did this, sitting or standing
or kneeling, never satisfied with mere contact, but driving on against
his mesmeriser. I have two female patients, one of whom approaches
as near as possible, but never touches her mesmeriser, and the other
puts her head forward, and, as soon as it touches, she withdraws it
and stands fixed. The child now attempted to drive against me,
while standing, but soon gave up and yielded to his propensity to
imitate all I did. I took a spoon off the sideboard and laict it on the
floor. He did not go through the whole of this, but only the latter
part, — he stooped down and put his hand on the floor. When I
spoke, he spoke in a whisper, repeating my very words. He tried
to whistle when I whistled. In following me about he reeled so far
over to one side that we all thought continually that it was impossible
for him not to fall, yet he always righted himself and never fell: and
though his hands were often within an inch of the ground, he
invariably recovered himself without touching it with them.

" He was again placed in a chair, and a board held before his
eyes. I endeavoured to draw up his right leg: his hands moved,
and his feet came up a little, after trying a long while. I partially
awakened him, or rendered his stupor less deep, by rubbing my

M 2


164) Cure of convulsive and rigid Fits.

thumbs once upon his ey^brows^ and again attempted to draw up
his legs. They now followed till they were on a level with the chair,
when they suddenly fell and the sleep became more profound. Here
was a beautiful illustration of a fact invariably observed in the Okeys.
After a strong or continued muscular exertion, as the ascent of an
arm, &c.« &c., sudden relaxation would always occur, and the sleep
become so profound that they dropped powerless and no impression
could for a time be made upon them. The boy had never seen
them, — all was nature in them and him, and I may add in thou-
sands of others."

On the Slst

" Sleep took place with passes made at the distance of ten feet,
though not so quickly as usual. I laid him flat on his back upon
the floor, and by tractive passes upwards made him rise and stand
up without assistance from touching the floor with his hands. This
he was desired to do after he awoke, but was unable."

He always had anaesthesia in the mesmeric state.

" Such was the insensibility to pain from mechanical cause in
his mesmeric sleep, that, though from having for a very long while
had an eruption with open sores upon his head'*' he could not bear it
touched in his waking state, Mr. Wood put his hand upon it, after
sending him to sleep, without occasioning any sign of sensation.
His mother, noticing this, proposed sending him to sleep every day
when she was going to dress it, as the agony he suffered from hav-
ing it dressed was extreme, his irritability of system rendering him
a bad hand at bearing pain, and the hour of the process was dreaded
by both him and her. This was done ever afterwards, till the head
was healed. When about to dress it, she made a few passes before
his face, sent him to sleep, dressed it without his noticing what she
did, and blew in his face and awoke him again, and he happily
found all the business was done. The first day, not having been led
to expect this, he asked her sometime after she awoke him, when
she meant to dress his head.

*' Feb. 6. Not only does his health improve, but the sores on his
head have healed so much that he can bear his head touched in his
waking state.'*

The kindness of the father was such that he allowed me to
take any one to see the phenomena at his house ; and I re-
fused no one, either in or out of the medical profession.

*^ A great number of gentlemen and ladies went at my visits to
witness his walking after me about the room, staggering and reeling,
but never falling, with his eyes just open and looking full of sleep,
and then sitting still in perfect repose and breathing heavily when I
sat still. A few medical men witnessed the case; but they merely
thought it very odd and went about their business again like men

* These were the result of severe stimulAtlng applications ordered by his
medical attendants.


By Dr. Elliatson. 165

wise in tbeir generation, not pondering on such wonders in the work*'
ing of the brain, nor thinking of any improvement in the confused
and ansatisfactory, and often absurd and injurious, treatment which
has been followed from generation to generation in such diseases.

'' The boy never spoke the first; and he always replied in a faint
whisper and in very few words."

He became clairvoyant as to his own disease; for on
March 7^ he declared^ in answer to my enquiries^ that he
should have no more fits^ and but five threatenings or little
attacks of shaking without unconsciousness — *^ indications ''
as he called them — and those in the course of three months.
All this was exactly fulfilled ; and he has never had the least
return of his disease^ though twelve years have now elapsed.

In him I made^ on the 10th of June, 1839, the curious
discovery that one half of the body might be sent into the
mesmeric state.


cc


I pointed to one eye only — ^the right. Both equally nearly
closed. When I spoke, he answered faintly that he was neither
asleep nor awake: that he could not hear or see with his right side,
— that is, his right half was asleep. If I raised the right arm, it
dropped, for that side wais asleep, and he never was cataleptic. If
I raised the left, it remained, for he had power in his left half, and
he voluntarily sustained it. This was the first time I witnessed
mesmerism of one side of the brain only: and I had forgotten the
fact when I saw cerebral organs of one side only mesmerised for the
£rst time a year ago. He said that I could not draw him in this
state : nor could J.

" When I raised his evelids, I saw more of the cornea of the
left. The right being asleep, was rather turned up. This was a
beautiful fact, and in harmony with the reality of the rest. The
exquisite delicacy of mesmeric phenomena would be full proof to all,
were some not destitute of delicacy of observation and true feeling
and common sense. I then pointed my fingers towards both eyes;
and he suddenly sank and breathed hard as in sleep. I now drew
him as usuaL

''On another occasion, when I mesmerised one eye only, he
said^ he was 'cut in half;' that is, one half only was powerless as
in sleep."

When Master William Salmon was cured with mesmerism
in ISSO^"^ he had a little brother^ named James^ ten years

* The elder brother was some years ago set up by his father as an npholsterer
in Bedford Row, and supplied the editor of the Medieal Timei with furniture
to no smaU amount, and, at one of the numerous interviews which he has
subsequently had upon the matter, he mentioned his own case, but was met
with the reply that patients use mesmerism when they are getting better and
then ascribe the cure to mesmerism. The man who would recklessly say this
would, of course, not hesitate to say that mesmerism without the support given
to it by dimes would have gone long ago to the bottomless pit of oblivion (See


166 Cure ofconmMve and rigid Fits.

old. Nine years after hig oure^ this brother, then mneteen
years of age, while talking with his father at 9 o'clock in the
evening of Tuesday, the 21st of November, 184&— having
just made up the shop books and found them correct — was
seissed with a disposition to commit suicide, and immediately
ran screaming from the shop in which they were into a room
behind, thence into a yard, and thence along a passage-^the
distance being about a dozen yards, — ^and then fell down in-
sensible at the foot of the stairs. On recovering in about ten
minutes, he felt insane, and could not refrain from flinging
his head, limbs and body about, and acting so violently that
several persons were required to hold him, and he screamed
and attempted to bite, and at the same time had a very
severe pain and weight at the top of his head. After this
violence had lasted above an hour, he became more comi-
posed ; but still felt his head very heavy and could not stand.
In half an hour more, he walked up to bed and went to
sleep. At two in the morning he awoke very giddy ; vomited
copiously and had a severe affection of his bowels for half
an hour. He was then much better, went to sleep again^
and rose at 9 o'clock, dressed himself, and went down stairs
and breakfasted j he felt tolerably well for about an hour,
when, on taking up a book, he became giddy as soon as his
eyes met the letters, and he soon experienced a violent pain
and heat in his head, and his back began to feel very weak
and to ache. Spirits and water were applied to his head in
vain, and his mother then sent for the family medical atten-
dant, who arrived about 4 o'clock, ascribed the symptoms to
the spine, and sent a blister for the nape of the neck and all
down the spine, and some medicine. The eyes could scarcely
bear the Ught as the day advanced. At 7 o'clock, while
walking about the room for a change, his knees suddenly
gave way and he fell down, and was too weak for some time
to move, and was carried to bed and fainted. He could not
walk again for three weeks, getting worse and worse in every
respect. The next day, after the blister was taken off at the
end of twelve hours, he began to have attacks every five
minutes of a sense of painful tightness at the top and back
of the head, rigidity, closure of the eyes, and a clicking noise

Motto, p. 141), or to quote a part of Mr. Sandby's expressions on one occasion, and
a part of Dr. Elliotson's on another, so as to give the very reverse of their mean-
ings, (See No. XXX., p. 171, and No. XXIX., p. 31,) and to falsely accuse
the most truth-loving men of &bricating mesmeric cases, (See No. XXXII., p.
385>) or to say that Dr. EUiotson was oilled upon to resign his chair in Univer-
sity College, when all the world knows that he indignantly quitted it, to the dismay
of the Council and the Professors, who had no idea that he would contemplate
such a step, (No. XXIX., p. 32.) Such, be it known to the public, are the
men employed by booksellers to conduct the medical periodical press. — ZoUt.


By Dr. EUiotion. 167

such as is made to horses or poultry. Tet he slej^t oalmlr at
night. The medical gentleman said that the fits arose nrom
fulness of blood in the head^ and bled him in the arm with
great relief to his pain on the third day of his illness ; and
from that time his eyes remained wide open in the attacks^
and these lasted longer. Leeches were next applied to his tem-
ples the following day^ with relief to bis pain of head^ but with
the effect of greatly weakening him, and causing the attacks
for the first time to come on even when he was lying down :
and he could no longer raise his arms^ nor allow any person
to raise his head for him from the pillow ; but the fits ceased.
In five days more he had blisters behind his ears with great
benefit^ and then gradually improved^ so that at last he sat
up all day.' But st3l^ ten days after the blisters had been put
behind his ears^ the sense of weight at the back of the head
induced the medical attendant to apply a blister to the nape
of the neck. This caused him to be worse than ever : he
grew weaker and weaker^ was tormented with flatulencci
trembled exceedingly, and was next seized with violent con-
vulsive fits. His hair was cut close^ cold lotions were ap«
plied to his head : the room was darkened : every body spoke
in a whisper, the door was muffled, and no one entered with-
out first gently tapping, — ^without all which precautions he
had palpitation or a fit, so intense was his sensitiveness as
well as his debility. He was kept on very low diet, and took
abundance of cathartics. Thus the second and third week
passed. In his fits he was quite sensible, but very violent ;
bit his tongue and hands, and sometimes broke his teeth in
biting things within his reach. After each fit he was ex-
hausted, but did not sleep. The father often entreated the
medical attendant to have a consultation, but was always met
with the reply that he fully understood the case. One day,
there being a very severe fit, and be confessing that he could
not arrest the flatulence, the father insisted upon a second
opinion^ and named a physician. This gentleman, after
witnessing a fit, said he thought the poor boy was in love }
and, having made all leave the room, begged the lad not to
mind making a confession to him. The boy assured the phy-
sician that he had never yet been in love, and had no sort of
idea what the naughty flame was. Cold water was ordered to
be thrown over him, which would certainly extinguish flame
if there were any, and would cool if there were not; and
tonics and good living were prescribed. This plan produced
great benefit. The convulsive fits ceased, and left the rigid
fits only. His debility lessened, so that, from being obliged
to remain in his bed room, he got into the drawing room^


168 Cure ofconvuUive and rigid Fits.

though sitting in an easy chair with* his head on a pillow^
and unable to walk except between two persons ; and then into
the dining room down stairs^ and to sit without a pillow under
his head. Yet the debility of his back rendered a pillow
necessary at his loins i and he could not walk more than a
dozen yards without resting, and at the end of the day fainted
several times in going up stairs to bed.

His convulsive fits now began again^ and^ in his own opi-
nion^ from sitting all day in the drawing room, where the
number of persons excited him. If he were fatigued, his
spirits flagged, he shed tears, he became excited, rigid, or
convulsed, for about twenty minutes, and then began crying
again for ten minutes, and recovered or had a second attack.
If he heard music or read^ he grew rigid for a few minutes
and then experienced extreme debility and flatulence.

Getting no better, he visited his physician in January,
and visited him once a week from the middle of January to
the end of April. He was ordered the cold shower bath,
bitter ale, light suppers, and some pills. Sut the fits were
as violent as ever. His physician told him it was greatly in
his own power to get well if he chose to resist the approadi of
the fits. He tried, and succeeded better than he expected :
and afterwards had the rigid fits only, without the convulsive,
and those very often every day. He went to Deal, though
told by his physician that change of air would produce no
lasting benefit. He was greatly improved, but still could not
bear any sort of vibration or an attempt at reading. His
physician declined prescribing for him, and said that patience
only would cure him, ofiering most kindly to see him at any
time without expense. In two days after his return he had a
relapse of both the rigid and the violent convulsive fits ; and
extreme debility followed. The lower part of his back seemed
to give way, nor could he bear the least noise nor hum a tune
without a sense of tightness in the head and general rigidity.

At the end of three weeks from his last visit to his physi-
cian, finding himself so ill and thinking the physician was not
likely to do him any good, he wished to consult me. The
physician, on hearing this, said that mesmerism was no more
than what was called Ferkinism when he was a boy, and
'^ no more than the eflect of a dull sensation, such as the sound
of a waterfall or any monotonous sound, which of course
would produce sleep,^^ and that there was '^ really no such thing
as mesmerism \'^ grew excited, and scolded, and rose from his
chair and walked about the room, and so frightened Master
James Salmon that the youth dropped the subject and took
his leave as expeditiously as he could. The lad grew worse


By Dr. Elliot son. 169

and worse : could scarcely walk on account of the Weakness
and pain of his back : and in three minutes after attempting
to walk in the street was obliged to be carried into a shop :
and his fits all continued.

In addition to this account^ for the whole of which I am
indebted to the patient^ I must mention that he ascribed his
disease to having been greatly excited by riding on a veloci-
pede. For eight months before his attack^ he and one of the
young men in his father's employment took a fancy to rise at
five o'clock several times a week and make long excursions on
these machines before breakfast and business. The machines
would frequently break j and between the worry of these mis-
fortunes^ the expense^ the anxiety to wake in time^ and the
exertion of the expedition^ he was in high excitement^ to
say nothing of the fatigue being on an empty stomach before
the business of the day commenced : and he began to feel
unwell in August before the attack in November^ 1848.

He was brought to me in August^ 1849 : and I gave it as
my decided opinion that mesmerism would cure him. His
mother-in-law offered to perform it daily for half an hour^
by slow passes from opposite his forehead to opposite his
stomach. But she was not young or very strong, nor in per-
fect health : and consequently a shopman promised to take
her place. The youth was not affected immediately^ and when
I called from time to time I found that they had all grown
careless^ and that he was mesmerised only now and then^ and
never efficiently ; that his mesmeriser often left off and went
away in the midst of the process^ and that interruptions and
sudden noises were endless. The result of this mismanage-
ment was^ as I had warned them^ that he grew no better :
but actually worse. The sudden noises while he was under
the process^ and^ above all^ the frequency of his mesmer-
iser leaving him while it was going on^ produced extreme
irritability : for his was eventually an instance of great mes-
meric attachment and attraction^ and this attraction is not
unusually felt^ and was in his case^ before sleep is ever in-
duced^ and while the patient is not aware of it^ as I myself
have ascertained.*^ Mesmerism itself acted well upon him^ for

* See this fact in No. VI. » p. 210 : '* I hare a patient in whose mesmeric
sleep there is a powerful attraction to me, and he grasps my hands firmly. Before
he is asleep, while still wide awake, looking at me as I look at him and hold one
of his hands in mine while the other is on his forehead, this attraction will come
on, so that bis &and grasps mine. On my telling him of this the first time, he
looked down and saw that it was so ; but he did not know it before, and assured
me had not consciously grasped my hand. On subsequent occasions the same
has often happened, — the mesmeric effect in the feeling of friendship taking place
before there was any very great advance towards sleep ; but he, now suspecting


170 Cure of convulsive and rigid Fits.

it always warmed him : but these disturbances made it indi-
rectly injurious to him, and he had better not have been
mesmerised at all.* His fits grew worse^ and he would be-
come rigid and remain so for five minutes if any person spoke
to him unexpectedly^ and then suffer such exhaustion as for an
hour to be unable to stand. Trifling fits for a minate or two
occurred all day^ without obvious cause^ or from such slight
circumstances as his holding a skein of silk or wool while
another wound it^ or attempting to do anything with his
hands.

Pitying him, and feeling an interest in the family from
having formerly cured his brother and produced exquisite
phenomena and found the parents as excellent persons as
exist, — gratefid, kind, conscientious, and courageous to tell
aU the history of the elder brother^s cure to everybody, and at
the time of the treatment to allow me to shew the case to any
number of persons, medical or not medical, noble or humble,
I offered in the middle of December to mesmerise him myself,
if he would come regularly to my house every evening. They
all gladly accepted my offer, and he came seven times every
week with the greatest regularity.

Two things must strike everybody as very singular. The
one that, knowing how readily and permanently the elder
brother had been cured of a similar disease after the complete
failure of drugs and the common routine, th^ never thought
of mesmerism, but went on month after month, bleeding and
blistering, and then drugging and changing the air: and, when
the family doctor did no good, called in a physician who
never prescribed mesmerism and indeed scorned it; and had

the matter and therefore attending to the pointy would say, ' Sir, I feel my fingers
curling round your hand, but I can't help it ; I don't curl them round.' How-
ever, before he Ib quite asleep, his hand is firmly grasping mine, nor is he able to
relax it. And as a £uther Ulustration that this was the emotion of attachment
and an unconscious exertion of Tolition, I must remark that when squeezing my
hands with painful tightness in the moments of deep sleep, he would frown and
let them go if I conversed with others, and would not take them again while I
continued conversing. I am certain that persons, that is, the brain, can uncon-
sciously receive external impressions, and unoonsdously act upon these impres-
sions ; so unconsciously as to deny, with no falsehood on their part, that they
received the impression or did the act ; and this while awake — while apparently
awake, but, I should say, in a waking state with a dash of sleep on certain feel-
ings and exertions of what we call will. The materialnt only, who is the only
true cerebral physiologist, sees the simple explanation of all this ; sees that all is
ascribable to partial cerebral activity, — that one portion, or some portions, of the
brain are active independentiy of the rest, without the knowledge^of the rest, just
as one portion of the surfieu» of the body may be active in secreting, and the rest
not, and partial perspiration is the result." See also No. V., pp. 54, 58, 59.

* See a case of my own in which fits came on from my being obliged to leave
the patient without waking her and firom the approximation of others.-— No. VL*
p. 201.


By Dr. EUiotson. 171

recourse to me at the eleventh hour. The only explanation
they can give is that, when he was suddenly seized at first,
they s^it for their family medical attendant ; and, when they
resolved on a consultation, forgot me whose services had been
gratuitous. I most add that the medical gentleman who had
attended the elder brother was dead, or he would have imme-
diately recommended mesmerism, so thoroughly satisfied of
its truth and efficacy had he become while I treated his pa-
tient, and so good a man was he,-^Mr. Winston, of Charter-
house-square, a quaker. The only explanation which oc-
curs to me is the one which is applicable to a large part of
the continaed foolish opinions and actions of mankind — ^that
they did not think at all, but went on at a sluggish jog-trot,
like nine tenths of mankind, without raising their heads and
looking about, without any refiection, any feeling of enquiry
and intellectual activity. The other remarkable circumstance
is that the family did not put mesmerism in force efficiently.
Never before I witnessed and conducted mesmeric treatment
had I an idea of the want of earnestness in a large portion of
mankind when one would suppose there would be right ear-
nestness. I was consulted in a case of blindness from opacity
of the cornea of one eye, and of the lens of the other, in a
very rich and good old lady whom no oculist pretended he
could benefit ; and I strongly advised mesmerism. Two dif-
ferent surgeons, excellent men and excellent mesmerisers,
were dismissed after a short trial, of the one in town and the
other in the country, and merely because the old lady did
not like the trouble of sitting still at a certain hoiu* daily for
half an hour : and yet there had been an evident beginning
of improvement. I was consulted in a case of epilepsy in a
young lady whom nothing had benefitted; and was consulted,
I was told, because my opinion might be depended upon.
The father agreed to mesmerise her daily ; but after a time
gave up : and, when I asked him why, his reply was, " Oh,
we are trusting to diet.^' (Trusting to diet to cure epilepsy I)
and added, moreover, that sometimes he was busy, and could
not find leisure. Yet this is a very sharp and active person :
his time is pretty much (certainly all the evening) his own,
and I often see him doing nothing : and he has some grown up
strong sons living in his house, and not over occupied, and not
at all in the evening: and I dare say they all love the afflicted
young lady. His family medical attendant, however, I believe,
remains intentionally ignorant of mesmerism and is unfavour/-
ahle to it.-— I was consulted in a case of amaurotic blindness
in a gentleman in the prime of life, and one of the first
mesmerisers in England offered and began to mesmerise him :


172 Cure of convulsive and rigid Fits.

and a glimmering of improvement was effected. Bnt he sud-
denly gave up and goes instead yearly to some German ocu-
list on the Bhine who does him no good and never will.
I meet with patients every week who have received no benefit
notwithstanding the expense and trouble^ and disgust and
frequently the pain^ of treatment under numerous medical
men^ consulted for weeks^ months^ or years^ and begin
mesmerism ; but^ because they are not improved or sent to
sleep^ in one sittings in a week^ a mouthy or a few months^
give up mesmerism^ though it requires them only to sit still *
for a short time daily^ and many of them can have it at a
cheap rate or at no expense at all. Some^ and their friends
too^ relinquish mesmerism when they know that suffering and
death are uncontrollable by other means. The fact is that
a very large portion of mankind are as weak in some point of
character as a very large portion are wicked in some point;
however rational the one portion may seem^ and however
good the other portion would have us believe them to be. An
immense proportion of mankind prove to be very silly, or with-
out steadiness of purpose or clear views, "when you are able to
observe them closely, and sadly annoy sensible and earnest
persons; just as the hypocritical who seem so respectable
and religious annoy the noble and virtuous, who value truth,
integrity and benevolence beyond the favour of the weak,
the proud, the selfish, and the pharisaical, the last of whom
patronise the very man whom they silently despise, and
openly persecute . the high-minded and conscientious whom
they fear and hate.

No unpaid mesmeriser should undertake the treatment of
a case unless a promise is given him that the process shall be
persevered with for a fixed time. In acute cases it may be
sufficient to stipulate for a certain number of days : but in
chronic cases many months, or even one or two years, may
be required. The cancerous mass in Miss Barber^s breast
was not dissipated by me under five years.* The opacity of
the cornea in the case of blindness of twenty-four years stand-
ing was not dissipated by the wife of the Archbishop of Dublin
in less than two years and a half.f In Miss BemaPs case of ex-
treme debility and agonizing sensitiveness of much of the ner-
vous system with severe neuralgic pains, a year elapsed before
she was well; months before there was the least improvement,
and I never at all witnessed sleep or any phenomena in her
from my daily mesmerisation.j:

It is the same in the treatment of chronic diseases with


* No. XXVIII., p. 232 ; f No. XXV., p. 84 ; t No. XVIII., p. 119.


By Dr. Elliotson. . 173.

drugs. I have often been obliged to prevail upon my pa-
tients suffering from malaria^ which will keep up derangement
of the system for years^ to continue for two or three years
the use of quinine in appropriate doses — those which perfectly
agree and produce no inconvenience^ and yet are the largest
that suit the individual. In cutaneous diseases an equally
well-regulated course of arsenic is often requisite as long^ in
order to eradicate the affection. It is the same with iodide
of potassium in some diseases: the same with mercury in
others : the same with hydrocyanic acid in the liability to
stomach complaints^ and especially to attacks of severe neu-
ralgic pain^ which^ without any ground, is continually ascribed
to gall-stones, but at length cured without any reason to sup-
pose they ever existed, and is the result of only morbid exci-
tability of the stomach producing acute agony, each attack
being followed necessarily by temporary tenderness, and the
spasm giving rise necessarily to temporary jaundice, if impli-
cating the gall ducts or their terminations in the intestines.
A curative regimen is generally given up long before it has
consolidated a cure. An immense number of chronic diseases
which might be cured are not cured, because the proper plan
which has been commenced is childishly discontinued. With
mesmerism this is eminently the unfortunate fact : and I hear
hourly of failures which are no failures at all, — no more
failures than instruction is a failure if a person gives up the
study of a language, of mathematics, or any natural science,
as soon as he has acquired a smattering or possibly not even
that. Yet people pursue homoeopathy patiently for years;
go abroad for months or years ; keep open issues and setons
for years ; and take blue pills and draughts for years. The
opponents of mesmerism take full advantage of this folly
of patients in regard to it for the purpose of disseminating
stories of its failure, and thus cause a large neglect of this
invaluable boon in nature to suffering man. It may be right
to change the mesmeriser for various reasons ; and even when
the mesmeriser seems healthy and strong, and mesmerises
earnestly, kindly, and wisely, to try another after long con-
tinuance : it may be right in an acute, or in a chronic case
after great perseverance,* to try the effect of more than one,
to have relays, or to try the joint effect of more than one at the
same moment. But in chronic cases, where the mesmeriser
is apparently quite unobjectionable, and is known to possess
power, perseverance with the same one is often the most judi-

* See my paper on mesmeric disturbances, No. XXVII., pp. 238, 244 ;
No. IX., pp. 49, 50.


174 Cure of eonvuhive and rigid Fits.

cioas plan.* Stilly when we see no reason for the want of
success in a particular mesmeriser^ another may b^ tried for a
few times : because occasionally a patient is not ajffected by
one and is affected by another^ without any clear reason^
though sometimes the opinion of the patient seems the cause,
and^ when susceptibility has once been induced^ the first mes-
meriser may succeed perfectly ever afterwards. We ought
carefully to impress upon the world that cures are effected
without sleep or any other sensible effect.

I affected Master James Salmon the first time ; but not
to the extent I had affected his brother the first time so many
years before. His eyes closed and he went to sleep at the
end of half an hour : but no phenomena occurred ; his eyes
did not half open, his arms did not obey my traction nor did
he follow me. His muscles were powerless^ and he gave no
sign of consciousness on subsequent nights. I produced sleep
in fifteen or twenty minutes; but he always awoke spon-
taneously in five, ten, or fifteen minutes^ and in a rigid fit :
and he was instantly aroused by the least noise^ as by any one
coughing or my cockatoo suddenly fluttering his wings or
callings and became rigid but perfectly sensible.f I always
sent him to sleep again immediately. I thus mesmerised him
three or four times every evening, in order to give him sleep
enough. Had I been able to sit always with my hand in his
and spoken to no other person, the sleep would probably have
lasted a good time and not been so readily disturbed by
noises. For he turned out to have a high degree of mesmeric
attraction and mesmeric jealousy, and I was not aware of
this at that time, as he could not speak nor make any move-
ment of hand or foot for many weeks ; and therefore I did
not think of his attraction or jealousy, which he might have
felt at any rate when his sleep was declining, and thus might
have been roused by them ; and, if I had discovered them, I
should have endeavoured gradually to wean him from such
feelings, because they are annoying to the mesmeriser,:^ and
prevent him from doing so much good to his patient as he
would if he were able to leave the party asleep and were at

• See No. VI., p. 197.
t In the sleep which occurs from mesmeric means before they shew insensi-
bility to pinching and are readily roused by common means, and in very deep
mesmeric sleep, Uiere may be unconsciousness, but we are never sure of it; for oitea
occurrences which took place in these instances without any sign of consciousness
were occasionally proved at a distant time to have been taken cognizance of with-
out any memory of the patient on waking : and proved in the ordinary waking
state, in ordinary dreaming, or in mesmeric, or spontaneous sleep-waking : the
impression silently and without the patient's knowledge, manifesting itself at a
distant period.

J See No. V., p. 52. ; No. XL, pp. 356—8.


By Dr. ElUoistm. 175

liberty to occupy himself otherwise. For^ unless such sleep
is foundj or is discovered by the patient in the sleep-wnking,
to be detrimental^ a patient should not be awakened from his
sleep, however long it may last.*


* To be aroused from sleep in any circmnstances, unless there is a morbid
beaviness, is more or less a violence to nature : and particularly in the case of
young people, and tu above all in the case of diildren, who require more sleep,
and in proportion to ihehr tenderness of age, than the world imagines. Children
should never be. aroused from sleep, unless for some very great reason. We
interfere cruelly with nature in our treatment of children — tiioee holy and hea-
yenly beings who always inspire me with humility, reverence and love, and to
whom our duties are so solemn. They ought to deep out their sleeps, and be
awakened by nature only : and be allowed to sleep in the middle of every day till
they are five or even six years of age. Parents and nurses little think how much
debility and how much peevishness and naughty behaviour are ascribable solely to
want of a due amount of sleep, and how much predisposition to disease this occa-
sions. They should be taken into the fresh air onoe, and if possible twice, a
day : care should be taken that they be not over-ezcited or over-worked, for they
are prone to excitement, and they have little power of fixed attention, and to
pore long over anything is painful and exhausting to them: care should be taken
to let tl^m learn all things easily, and they should never be forced into pro«
digies of acquirement in reading or anything else : never be allowed stimulating
drinks, unless for medical reasons given by a sagacious medical man, nor tea,
nor coffee, never any but simple food, simply prepared : some of them should
eat no flesh at all, soUd or liquified, and none of them while they are very young :
none be enticed to eat more than nature dictates to them, or to taste any trash,
whether solid or liquid, as a treat on any festive occasion : nor should they be
phjrsid^ed when they are well : they should be washed or bathed all over onoe
or even twice a day with water tepid or cold, aecording to the season of the year
and their strength : they should never be beaten or even slapped, nor scolded
sharply, but be spoken with calmly and seriously when they do wrong : and, like
grown up persons and the insane, be treated with such firmness as must make re-
sistance hopeless, but a firmness free from asperity and all appearance of anger.
Very bad diildren, bad by nature, but more frequently by very bad management,
sometimes require strong measures ; but these should be administered without
cruelty or even a sign of irritation ; and with sorrow, though not with the less
firmness. No word or deed should they hear or witness that is wrong : not a
statemrait that is not known positively to be true ; not an absurd unintelligible
opinion, or a vicious or a silly or superstitious deed. For they naturally and
innocently believe all that is told them, and imitate what they see done : and
error beg^un in infimcy may endure till extreme old age, producing mischief to the
party himself and to others during the whole of this long course.

Between absurd indulgence, severity — and this often when there is no fault
and a child's reasons are misunderstood — the absence of firmness, or the substi-
tution of unMndness for it, the neglect of proper food, fresh air, and bathing, and
the bad example set them by the adults around them — parents or servants — toge-
ther with the merciless and irrational medical treatment to which numerous prac-
titioners too often subject them, I do regard children as the beings most to be
pitied in the world. Among the very poor, children have no chance: their health,
their intellect, their morals, are all tiie twenty-four hours subjected to the most
deleterious influences i and among the highest duties of better-off' classes to both
the children and the adults of the poor, is that of dissipating poverty by a con-
scientious alteration of so many absurd and injurious laws which cramp industry
and supplies — of producing a disgust of and a discontent with abject poverty and
want of comfort — and of exposing the folly of superstition, and the blessedness of
rational, manly, and holy views of ourselves, of life, and of our duties to others ;
and above all, of the duty of not engendering human beings, when the want of


176 Cure ofconmlrive and rigid Fits,

In about two months he began to shew signs of perception
and consciousness during his sleep; to acquire voluntary
muscular power ; and I led him to speak. At first there was
only a motion of his lips ; but^ by coaxing €tnd encouraging
him I brought him to open and shut his mouthy and then,
by repeated trials, to speak more and more intelligibly and
loudly j and in a few days he spoke perfectly well.

As soon as he could move his extremities, he manifested
the mesmeric attachment to the mesmeriser and repulsion of
others, by trying to seize my hand, and feeling extreme dis-
tress if others touched it ; and such was his uneasiness if I
took my hand from his that I was obliged to remain at his
side, or he began whining and grunting, looked very cross
and distressed, and extended his arms towards me, or rose
from his seat and pursued me ; and if another person touched
him, or went close to him, he was greatly excited, agonized,
and savage, and for many months a fit of rigidity and insen-
sibility resulted. The same occurred if I left the room ; and
he would, if not prevented, leave it, but not go further than
the ' hall, and when he found his pursuit useless fell into a
short coma : and if he did not leave the room my absence,
after five or ten minutes, caused him to wake. His mesmeric
attachment was accompanied by intense jealousy : so that if
I began mesmerising another person, or paid any attention
to a patient in the mesmeric sleep— such as attempting to
deepen a sleep to remove a pain, his countenance changed,
he became very restless, sighed, bit the ends of his fingers,
shook one of his legs or feet, and nipped and scratched him-
self till he could bear it no longer, and came to me, slowly
or suddenly, seized my hand, and perhaps put his head on
my shoulder, and then frequently fell into a short coma, his
head and Us hands drooping; an^ he gave no sign of sensa-


means renders them sure to be born to want and misery. The world is without
intermission guilty of heinous sins of commission and omission^ and of representing
innocent matters as mighty sins ; as though the real sins to which we are prone
were not numerous enough without the establishment of artificial sins which are
no sins at all.

Preachers might render the pulpit a source of immense instruction, were they
to give nothing but solid, unquestionable, and useful truths ; to mention nothing
imintelligible, nothing but what those who run could understand and see the
reason of and apply to practice ; were they to give a natural and philosophical
reason for every virtue and against every vice, since morality is as much a natural
science as astronomy. (See Zoistt No. X., pp. 131 — 138 ; No. XXIX., p. 68.)
But the day is not yet in view when this will be ; and when good men will be
prized above the mystic, the bigot, the pharisee, and the dirty hypocrite; the poor
not be huddled together in misery and want sd that vice is unavoidable and
a large number of human beings necessarily grow up devils ; and nations will
not sing Te Deums after the slaughter of their enemies.


By Dr, Elliotsan. 177

Hon, consciousness^ and volition, beyond what was shewn by
the fact of his still standing. On coming out of this coma^
he always seized my hand again : and this he invariably did
on coming out of the coma^ however produced. He would tell
me it was unkind of me to attend to others^ that he did
not like it^ that it was very unkind^ it was a shame^ and I
should see if he would bear it any longer. His great happi-
ness was to sit by my side^ and perhaps hold my hand ; or^ if
my feet were resting on a chair,^ to sit in that chair and
touch my shoes or slippers.f If I talked much to even
visitors, and neglected him, he would exhibit at last some of
the distress he felt when I attended to mesmerised patients.
Yet, knowing how all this made him laughed at, he resisted
the feelings to the utmost of his power. No one strug-
gled more against any inclination than he did. He would
often not tell me for many minutes how uneasy he was ; he
would keep himself in his chair, or sit down in it again and
again after rising to come to me : he would stop half way
after he had left his chair : perhaps stop two or three times
before he reached me: and, when quizzed about it, laugh
and blush, and say it was very odd but he could not help it.
If I were sitting alone, doing nothing, reading, writing, or
talking to a visitor, or in general conversation with him and
other patients or visitors, he would come to me every five
or ten minutes, seize one of my hands, squeeze it very hard,
let it go, and return to his seat smiling and saying, " Thank'ee,
that will do.^' This satisfied his feelings of attachment for the
moment. The harder and longer the squeeze which he gave
my hand, the greater and longer was his contentment ; and
it was harder and longer in proportion to the time since the
previous squeeze. This was all the natural working and lan-
guage of intense friendship, and amused visitors exceedingly
who could not at first comprehend why he was rising from
his chair, coming across the room, and seizing my hand ; and
his smiling at his own absurdity rendered the thing far more
droll. At first he could not bear to sit away from me ; then
he bore this, but came to me from time to time ; and the
intervals between the periods of his feeling impelled to come
grew longer and longer, so that now he wfll come only two
or three times in the course of an evening, and not at all if I

* When we are tired, mere sitting refreshes far less than if the legs are sup-
ported in the horizontal position at the same time.

f Captain Valiant's nnrse» who had an operation performed pamlessly upon
her jaw, at Chatham, hy Dr. Charlton the regimental surgeon, was always con-
tented if the point of her shoe touched her mistress's shoe, or that of any one
else who had mesmerised her at the time. See my publication on operations
without pain, p. 76 ; and Zoistf No. IX., p. 52.

VOL. IX. N


1 78 Cwre of, commbive and rigid Fits.

•

talk mach to him or there is a general conTersation in which
he partakes ; and this will prevent him from filling into coma
from time to time, and so again prevent his desire to come
and squeeze my hand, for on coming out of each little coma
— spontaneous or not, he still always comes to me to squeeze
my hand. As the intensity of this feeling gradually lessened
to a certain point, and he acquired more and more self goyem-
ment, did he gradually bear others better. At first he could
not bear others to touch his clothing, even to be near him ;
but at length he was distressed only when others touched his
bare hand or face, and could bear them to touch him through
his clothes, and to stand close to him ; but still he becomes
violently excited, and even frightfully rigid and perfectly in-
sensible, and his face ready to burst with fulness of blood,
and his breathing arrested, if they persevere in trying to
touch his bare hand or face. -

If another person instead of myself mesmerised him, he,
of course, shewed the same attraction to this person that he
had shewn to me, and repelled me as strongly as he repelled
strangers when I mesmerised him.

. Nay, if I mesmerised one half of him, and another person
mesmerised the other half, the half which I mesmerised was
attached to me and it repelled others, and the half which the
other person had mesmerised was attracted to that person
and it repelled me. It was in his brother that I first ascer-
tained the fact of its being possible to mesmerise one half of
a person.* I had mesmerised the present patient many
months before I tried this experiment upon him, and I thought
of it accidentally one evening when I was shewing his case to
some friends and had just awakened him. By making passes
with a forefinger before one of his eyes, the eye was presently
afiected and soon closed : the corresponding arm dropped if
raised by me, and he had no power over it while the mes-
meric state of the half of him was deep : and it and the cor-
responding half of the face and body bore hard pinching
without pain, whereas a slight pinch of the corresponding leg
gave unusual pain, — ^a peculiarity, as I shall soon mention, of
his mesmeric state when he was universally mesmerised : the
mesmerised half, whether leg, arm, or side of the trunk,
could be made perfectly stiff, whereas the unmesmerised half
was insusceptible of such an effect, rigiditiy of any part by
long passes with contact being one of the effects of general
mesmerism upon him; so, too, by drawing the point of a
finger along any part of the mesmerised half of his face, the

* I had another instance of this and mentioned it in No. XII., p. 468.


By Dr. EUiotson. 179

muscles of the spot could be thrown into strong spasmodic
action — ^as was possible all over his face when he was nniver-
sally mesmerised^ but no snch effect was possible on the op*
posite^ unmesmerised half: the hand of the mesmerised half
squeezed mine and repelled the tonch of every other person ;
whereas the hand of the unmesmerised half showed indiffer-
ence if I put mine into it^ and no repulsion if another person
touched it. Thus one.half of him remains mesmerised and the
other half unmesmerised. But more could be effected ; for^
if another person now mesmerised the unmesmerised half bj
making passes before the eye of this half^ this half became
insensible except the leg which acquired great sensibility :
this half could now be made rigid^ and the muscles of this
half of the face be thrown into spasmodic contraction : and this
half was no longer merely indifferent to me or him^ but repelled
me and shewed strong attraction to him by seising his hand.
Any two persons could thus mesmerise his two halves^ and
produce those phenomena at pleasure : and by waking him^
and each mesmerising the side previously mesmerised by the
other^ change the relations of the two halves to the two par-
ties ; the one side attracting him whom it previously repelled^
and repelling him for whom it previously had an attraction.
One side could be awakened^ and the other left in the mes-
meric state. When one side only was mesmerised^ its mes-
meric state did not at length spread to the other^ as^ when
a cerebral organ of one side is mesmerically excited in sleep-
wakings the corresponding organ of the other half also be-
comes after a time excited.

He had a fondness^ as so many have in the mesmeric
sleep-waking, to be near or even to hold the hand of, others
in the same state, although the contact of every person not
in the sleep-waking, except his mesmeriser, occasioned him
distress. This attraction may occur equally when there is no
repulsion of persons who are not in the mesmeric sleep-waking
and no inordinate attraction to the mesmeriser j tod some-
times is so strong that the hands can with difficulty be torn
from the hands of the other sleep-waker.*

His repulsion and attraction were entirely matters of sen-
timent^ not of sensation. He had no occult or new faculty by
which he could distinguish by the touch the hand of his mes-
meriser or the hand of those who were in the sleepwaking
state. I have recorded instances, and still possess an exqui-
site instance, of the faculty of distinguishing persons in the
sleep-waking state from others; so that if various persons

* See No. VI., pp. 216, 217.

n2


180 Cure of convulsive and rigid Fits.

were placed in the same room^ some in their ordinary state,
some in various degrees of intensity of mesmeric affection,
they distinguish the mesmerised from the others. M. A. tells
the degree of the intensity of the mesmeric state with perfect
accuracy. She never can open her eyes in the least ; and,
moreover, her accuracy is equally great, if the other parties
are completely covered except their hands, and the arrange-
ments are all made before she is taken into the room where
they are, and she is led in silence from one person to another.
In proportion as the mesmeric state comes on in any patient
by the mesmeric process, as ascertained by observation of the
countenance and other proofs, she declares its increase as
accurately as a thermometer tells an increase of temperature.
She is a most delicate mesmerometer. Her hands adhere to
every one who is in the mesmeric state. The sensation from
them is very agreeable to her j and I have no doubt that this
is the reason of the adherence : — that she finds it difficult, and
when the mesmeric state is intense, impossible, to will strongly
enough to withdraw her hand from the source of so delightful
a sensation. She fancies her hand adheres by means of some
adhesive substance ; and calls this sticky stuff."^

That Mr. J. Salmon has no such occult sense is shewn by
it being possible to cheat him. As he cannot open his eyes,
it is easy to substitute my hand for that of another person, or
the contrary : and to substitute the hand of one in sleep-
waking for that of another who is not mesmerised, or the
contrary. No matter whose the hand, if he fancies it mine
or the hand of one in sleep-waking, he takes and squeezes it ;
and if he fancies mine or the hand of another in sleep-waking
to be the hand of another not in sleep-waking, he angrily
repels it. He laughs heartily when his mistake is proved to
him : and never pretends to possess an occult sense, or pre-
tends at all, for he is perfectly sincere, and perfectly unaf-
fected, loving true investigation of mesmerism too purely to
wish to deceive or run any chance of being deceived. From
long and careful observation I know that I can place full
reliance upon every mesmeric observation made on him or
Mary Anne ; and upon every one of their assertions. His
brother had a strong propensity to imitate, which he has not,
except occasionally : but his brother could imitate only what
he noticed by his ordinary senses, whether heard or seen ;
for his brother, unless in moments of deep sleep, had his

* These phenomena m various cases are detailed in No. V., p. 51 ; No. VI,
VI., pp. 213. 216, 217, 51, 54, 77 ; No. XI., p. 358 ; No. IX., p. 53. These
four cases deserve the most attentive study, as well as No. III., art. IV., and
No. IV., art. VII.


By Dr, Elliotson, 181

eyes partially open in his mesmeric state^ and looked about
anxiously after his mesmeriser in order to indulge this propen-
sity. But I have had instances of an occult faculty of know-
ing what was doing around them though the eyes were firmly
closed ; and what was done was done behind their chair^ so
that their eyes^ if open^ could not have seen ; and what was
done on the other side of a door or even fiirther off. The
elder Okey^ at some periods, possessed this faculty in great
strength, in addition to the propensity to imitate : so that I
have known her in sleep-waking open and shut her mouth
and grimace exactly as some one, not necessarily her mes-
meriser, did behind her. This strikingly occurred before
Professor Bell, the Secretary of the Boyal Society, Professor
Wheatstone, Dr. Amott, and others, when Professor Owen,
while her eyes were closed, placed himself behind her chair
where she could not see him, made, by his peculiar ability to
twist up one side of his nose, such a face as no one else can
make, and, on retiring from his position behind her and
asking what she had done, for those who watched her could
not watch him and vice versa, and being told that she had
made such a grimace, declared himself satisfied, since he had
made precisely that grimace and he had never met with any
one before who could make it."^ This attraction and repul-
sion, or the propensity to imitate, may exist separately from,
or in conjunction with, occult faculties of discernment.

* No. II. I p. 190. In a wonderful instance of occult powers, in which the
right hand attracted my right hand, and the left attracted my left, and the re-
pulsion was converse, the occult faculty distinguished each of my two hands from
the other, for I rendered all ordinary means of knowledge impossible, and it
learnt when I touched another person, and exhibited jealousy by dropping my
hand as soon as I touched another person. The astounding facts are detailed
in No. v., p. 53 ; No. IX., p. 53. ** I have one who, though always in a silent
sleep without speaking, becomes uncomfortable and wakes if I cease to hold his
hand ; and will not bear the touch of a stranger, nor the contact of metals pre-
viously touched by another ; and, though he often grasps my hand, he lets it go
if I converse with or touch others : nay, each half of his brain experiences affec-
tion distinctly ; for he often grasps one of my hands with one of his while the
other continues perfectly indifferent. When both halves of his brain are ex-
periencing affection^ his right half has an affection for only my right half and
his left for my left, as shewn by his grasping my right with his right and taking
no notice of it with his left, and my left with his left, but taking no notice of it
with his right ; nay, by his withdrawing his right angrily from my left if I touch
it with my left, and his left from my right if I touch it with my right ; and, what
is more wonderful, his right hand will not endure the contact of gold first held in
my left hand or his left hand, nor his left endure the contact of gold first held in
my right hand or his right hand. If, while his hands are grasping each of my
corresponding hands, another person touches me anywhere, or if I bring my two
hands in contact at the smallest point, the end of a finger for example, he lets go
my hands with angry indifference. All this I may remark happens equally when
such care is taken as to render his seeing or discerning by any of the five ordinary
senses what is done absolutely impossble."


182 Cure of cawmMve and rigid Fits.

He did not possess aay degree of extraordinary powers,
not that common degree of clairvoyance which his brother
possessed relatively to his own disease, and could give me no
information as to its course or cure. Yet he exhibited many
peculiarities in regard to ordinary phenomena.

Though he felt resistance and contact perfectly well, it
was difficult to give him any pain by mechanical means,
pinching, pricking, &c., at any part above his hips. This
partial ansasthesia, if anaesthesia^ it can be called when con-
tact and pressure can be felt, I have noticed in other cases
and fully detailed.* But there was more than a limitation of
ansesthesia in his case : his lower extremities were exquisitely
sensible to pain from mechanical causes, so that a pinch at
any part of them that he bore patiently in his ordinary state
or in his unmesmerised half if only half of him was mesmer-
ised, gave him intolerable pain if perpetrated on them when
in sleep- waking. His sensitive legs could be rendered tempo-
rarily insensible to pain from mechanical causes by long con-
tact-passes, just like the face of Mary Ann.f Again, though
such was his anaesthesia, his sensibility of temperature was
unchanged. The parts which would not bear pinching, would
not bear a cold or a very hot substance : he was as sensible
to temperature as ever; and his legs and arms shewed no
difference in this respect4

He had some peculiarities in regard to other ordinary
phenomena. Any part could be stiffened by ordinary long
contact-passes. But the stiffness was intense, and if the
passes were made briskly was excruciatingly painful. He
would always cry out and implore me or others to make them
more slowly if our hands moved quickly. By passes along
his arms or legs, these became like bars ; down his back, he
was bent backwards, and altogether according to the portion
on which the passes were made : and there he stood or sat
like a statue. He could not endure this to be done at the

* See the striking fiicts detailed by me, No. VI., p. 210 ; No. IX., p. 59 ;
No. XII., 452; and my Pkynoiogy, in which I describe madi of the cases of
the Okeys, and all my observations on mesmerism op to a certain time,

t See No. VII., p. 388. Though she could have suffered any operation
painlessly below her collar bone, I had always to make long contact passes on her
face to prevent the pain of tooth extractions : and in proportion to the duration
of the passes was the depth of her local anaesthesia, which extended first to the
outer part of the cheeks only, then to the inner, then to the outer part of her
gums of the side passed upon, and finally to the inner part of the gums : and
lasted in proportion to the duration of the passes ; and sensibility returned in the
opposite order of parts to that of the invasion of insensibility.

X These phenomena I noticed some years ago and described in former Zoisitt
and no antimesmerist would believe me ; yet now they are acknowledged, as chlo-
roform may produce them. See No. XVI., p. 576; No. XVII., p. 44} No.
XXT., p. 5.


By Dr. Elttoism. 188

back of his neck and head. Of course a hand or a single
finger could be stiffened in the same way ; and every part
could be stiffened into eitension or flexion^^ accordingly as
tbe passes were made down, outside or inside of, the part, or
up it on its inside. When great stiffening of the back or
extremities was produced, it did not last long, and soon
ended in complete relaxation and deep coma, so that he more
or less drooped and snored loudly, and then came into his
active sleep-waking state again with sighs and the clicking
noise already mentioned, and almost invariably put out his
arm to me, and if he could not find me went about after me,
miserable till he got hold of my hand : and if I eluded him
he would be grieved and vexed, and drop into deep coma
again ; return from it and repeat all the same phenomena :
and so on repeatedly till perhaps he awoke. The occurrence
of coma after great muscular rigidity, or careful muscular
movements, or when the accomplishment of any effort or wish
proved impossible, I noticed originally in the Okeys ; and of
course it was imposition in them, though it has now been
observed in endless cases.f

There was more than the amazing and painful intensity
of rigidity in him, and its short duration when so intense : for
if a knee or elbow was grasped, the extremity all became rigid.

If I drew the point of one or more of my fingers along
the inside of his palm, at the roots of his fingers, his hand
immediately closed violently; if along the corresponding part
of the back of the hand, it instantly flew open as rigidly ;
and so with any individual finger.

The effect of a similar proceeding on any part of the
face was to induce almost any grimace at pleasure. By pass-
ing the fingers along either side of it outwards, the features
were drawn strongly towards the ear of that side ; if upwards,
the feattures on that side were drawn upwards ; if downwards,
they descended; if the hand was drawn along both sides, all
the features were drawn. I could draw the mouth into any
shape ; set it open, or close it firmly ; wrinkle the forehead,
turn up the nose, draw up all the features, and set his head
upwards; or make his face long, and set his head downwards.
If his tongue were put out, a few passes over it without con-
tact fixed it ; I could fix it to one side, fix it with its tip
curled up or drawn down ; fix either Up drawn up or down ; or
by squeezing his nose between my finger and thumb dose his

* For the absurdity of an antunesmeristt a son of the late Archbishop of
York, becausei when I made long passes to stiffen Rosina's arms and not her
fingers, her fingers did not become stiff, see No. YI., p. 206.

t No. III., p. 325.


184 Cure of convulsive and rigid Fits.

nostrils^ so that an indentation appeared on each bide of his
nose and he could speak through his nose only^ to use
common^ but very incorrect^ language^ as though he had a
violent cold^ to our great amusement. The grimaces thus
induced were not only most various^ but might be induced
with marvellous rapidity ; the muscles already contracted re-
laxing instantly when their relaxation was necessary to the
contraction attempted upon their antagonists. Yet I could
never thus make either eye open ; and for this reason. In
sleep the eye^ when closed, is actively, spasmodically, closed,
and not shut from relaxation of muscles, as the arms and
hands drop. This fact, — that the orbicular muscle which
closes the eye is in a state of high activity in sleep, — I men-
tioned at length a few years ago.*

These effects upon his face reminded us of figures made
of gutta percha, whose faces we can pull into grimace.

As I could stiffen one or more limbs or fingers in any
position at the same time that I stiffened his features into a
grimace, his whole appearance might be rendered irresistibly
laughable.

These contractions of his face soon ceased, and, when con-
siderable, were followed by immediate relaxation of his frame
and sound sleep, like the stiffening of his limbs and body ;
and he soon came again out of his sleep, sighing, and click-
ing, and grunting, and feeling for me ; and having squeezed
my hand, and perhaps said ''thank^ee,^ resumed his seat,
and chatted as before.

Relaxation could not be induced by touching his bare
hand or face : nor by transverse passes, except over the elbow-
joints in rigidity of the arms, and over the knees in rigidity
of the legs. He enjoyed the slow stiffening of his limbs or
back by passes made from the summit to the end of their
length, saying, " Oh, that^s very nice :" but rapid passes
produced such violent and rapid contraction as made him
cry out and beg me to desist, even at the time when his
surface bore pinching and other mechanical causes of pain
without feeling ; and I dare say the muscles, though drawn
to spasmodic contraction, would have presented insensibility
to cutting. This probability is consistent with the fact of a
part insensible to mechanical causes of pain being fully
sensible to heat and cold, to contact and pressure, and to
tickling. The very parts which I could pinch without giving
pain could not, even at that moment, bear tickling. The
same was the fact in the lady whose breast was painlessly

* No. IX., p. 45 ; No. VI., p. 208.


By Ih\ Blliotson. 185

cut away two and twenty years ago in Paris^ by M. Cloquet ;
she had no pain from the knife, but fell into loud laughter
from the sponge and its warm water, used to re.moye the
blood, tickling her. See my pamphlet on Surgical Operations
without Pain, p. 81.

These spasmodic contractions of his muscles seemed all
voluntary, though irresistible. He evidently willed them, but
was forced to will them, — the inclination to will them could
not be overcome by him. In the same way a ticklish person
cannot help writhing, calling out, laughing, all with his vo-
luntary muscles, when tickled : or a child withdraw its hand
if this is touched with something burning hot. There is
every degree of will, from apparent perfectly free will, that is,
where the will is not intensely excited and motives for more
than one action are operating, — motives nearly balanced,
though that which acts the most forcibly forces the wiU, and
thus the will in every case acts successfully, like every other
power in nature, however weak in a particular instance and
however almost balanced by other powers, when it does act
successfully, from absolute necessity (philosophical necessity
being an evident truth),^ — up to the most evidently involun-
tary, irresistible will, when but one inclination exists or
one incalculably more forcible than any other inclination.
In chorea all allow the incessant movements are a little volun-
tary ; and yet no patient can cure his disease by his will, — nor
will strongly enough to be quiet. It is the same with all
convulsive diseases, with crying, and with every voluntary
action. The will may be so compelled that its exertion in a
certain direction is manifestly involuntary, and indeed that
all signs of volition are lost ; and the action runs insensibly
into the class of spontaneous, automatic, involuntary actions,
as in severe coughing, in sneezing, and in the outward expres-
sion of any emotion :t though we may will without being
aware of it, just as various mental operations may go on un-
consciously, j:

The exertion of the will was often evidenced by his
seeming puzzled what to do, and correcting himself. If I at-
tempted rapidly to excite him to opposite movements of a
part, he would sometimes make a mistake and correct him-
self, — a thing noticed in various phenomena of evidently

* See my remarks on Necessity and Free-will, No. XII. , p. 418.

t No. v., p. 70 ; No. II., p. 189. In catalepsy there does not appear any
degree of volition, even obscured by compulsion : and I formerly could dis-
cover none in rigidity ; but certainly discovered it in the present case when pro-
duced by passes, though not when produced by gold.

X Noi v., p. 70 ; No. VI., p. 211 ; No. XL, p. 362.


186 Cure of convulsive and rigid Fits.

irresistible will, siicli as a disposition to imitate* or to

obey.f

Timctive passes without contact had no e£Pect upon him,
as he had no occult sense, and his eyes were firmly dosed.
Once or twice very lately, from some disturbing cause, his eyes
opened for a few minutes, but they were motionless, and he de-
clared he could see nothing : and I am sure that he could not.

Traction seems the result of a^ disposition to obey, j: Yet,
unlike his brother, he in no other way shewed an irresistible
disposition to obey, or at least to verify what I said, by doing,
like some of my patients, what I said he would do;§ nor did
he ordinarily shew a disposition to imitate. When his legs
were rigid, their sensibility was still acute : whereas in some
persons the production of rigidity occasions the simultaneous
loss o£ sensibility to mechanical causes of pain. For some
months the contact of gold caused intense and instant ri-
gidity, [j as it did in the Okeys and in his brother. But sud-
denly this ceased, and he became subject to paroxysms of
involuntary and incessant imitation of all he heard, as I shall
presently mention: and the susceptibility of rigidity from
gold has never returned. No other metal or substance, liquid
or solid, mesmerised or unmesmerised, causes any effect upon
him, — another point in which his case differed from that of
his brother. But he has a remarkable pleasure from rough
bodies, whatever they be. Smooth substances he dislikes.
So that if I place an ivory paper-cutter with a rough carved
handle in his hand, he rejects the smooth portion, and revels
in pressing and twirling about the rough handle and does not
readily aUow it to be taken fi^m him.

In his sleep-waking he is subject to paroxysms of four
kinds of cerebral excitement, — ^ungovernable affection, pride
and anger, imitation, and mirth. Yet he is insusceptible of
excitement of any cerebral organ by pointing to it, or touch-
ing over it. This is the more worthy of notice, because every
time he has been mesmerised a patient has been in the room,
various of whose cerebral organs are most readily excited by
touching over them. When a paroxysm of pride and rage or
imitation occurs, it is usually preceded by restlessness, a dis-
tressed state, and perhaps violent and general itching and
tingling : and generally terminates in deep sleep. The pa-
roxysm of pride and anger is invariably followed by one of in-

* No. II., p. 188 ; No. III., p. 317. f No. V., p. 68.

t No. v., p. 59 J No. VI., pp. 208, 214. § No. IV., pp. 434—6, 316—17,

II See an account of the effects of gold, and of mesmeric rigidity in general,

and some interesting portions of the cases of the Okeys, and Mr. Wakley's ob-

toseness or something worse, in No. V., pp. 63 — 71.


^SlOLOGY OP y^^


¥. J. GALL, M.D.

TYanilaledJrom the French,
EDMOND SHEPPARD SYMES, M.D.,


Cnntrats :

THE ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN.


Influepce of the Br^n upon the form of the Skall. — Diffimltiea and means of
determining tiie Fandomental QoBlities and Faculties, Bnd of diicovering
the seat of their Oi^am. — Eipoiilion of the Fundamenta] Qualidea and
F&culdes, and their Locmlitj- ; or Oi^auologx.

Organology; or Expoaitioii of the Instincts, Propensities, Sentimenta, and
Tidents ; or the Fondamental Moral Qnalitiea and Intellectnal Facnlties
in Man and the Bmte, and the seat of their Organs.

Organology; or Expoiition of the Inatincti, Propenritiea, Sentiments, and
Taienta ; or the Fundamental Moral Qualitiea and Intellectual Faculties
in Man and the Brute, and tlie seat of thdi Organi.


APPENDIX,
'^ntaining a notice of the sererel Organs and Views sngf—'sd by other writers.


By Dr. EUiotson. 187

tense affection to his mesmeiiaer^ in which he expresses great
regret at his previous conduct : he wakes up into' this from
the coma which follows the paroxysm of pride and anger.
The paroxysm of affection goes off without sleep, and after a
sigh or two he smiles and is quite ashamed at having been so
childishly affectionate, squeezes his mesmeriser's hand, and
returns to his seat retaining his ordinary degree only of mes-
meric attachment. Sometimes the paroxysm of affection is
not preceded by one of pride and rage.

As the paroxysm of pride and rage is invariably followed
by one of intense affection, so it may be produced at any
time by plaguing him and disparaging him : and the readiest
way to this is to call him a fidli, and urge that he is a fish by
saying that his name proves it. He wUl sometimes make a
great effort not to be angry, but always at length finds resist-
ance impossible, and then flies into a violent fary, abusing
every body who speaks to him, smiling with supreme contempt
when not at the height of violence, and holding every body
in the world very cheap. This was discovered by accident,
when^ in the merry conversations of my sleep-waker and my
friends, we happened to quiz him about his name, little
thinking he would take it seriously amiss. There is no other
mode of putting him out of humour, except by strongly rous-
ing his jealousy; and this never fails. When the paroxysm is
over, he laughs as heartily at it as he does at the paroxysm of
affection. The paroxysm of imitation occurs if he is generally
excited by merry conversation, or has been excited by a
paroxysm of pride and rage. He then readily falls into an
irresistible and continued state of imitating. He answers no
questions, but repeats the question; whatever his mesmeriser
or any other person says, he says ; whatever noise is made,
he makes it. He is always very happy in the paroxysm : .al-
ways has a smile on his countenance : and usually comes close
to me, so that his happiness is complete. He has no increase
of his power of hearing or of attending, and consequently
his imitation of a foreign language is not very accurate : he
I has the simple propensity to imitate : and such pleasure does
its gratification give him, that, when we preserve silence, he
assumes the attitude of carefully listening and does listen
most attentively for some sound to imitate, and begins imi-
tating the ticking of an exceedingly small Vienna clock which
stands upon my table. If the words we utter or the noise
we make lead him to suppose we perform certain actions at
the time, he imitates this supposed action ; for instance, bow-
ing, or shaking the head. It is impossible to stop him unless
by closing his mouth with passes, by drawing his hps together,


188 Cure of convulsive and rigid Fits.

and then he makes sounds as nearly like the words as pos-
sible — ^still does his best to imitate.

We can produce rigidity of any part as readily in any of
these paroxysms as in his ordinary mesmeric state : and the
anaesthesia above his hips^ and the morbid sensibility of his
lower extremities^ continue in them all. When he returns
to his ordinary mesmeric state^ he tells me that I ought to
have stopped his mouth by passes and not allowed him to go
on talking as he did^ since I knew that he could not help
it. His pride and anger in their paroxysm continue equally
unabated as imitation in its paroxysm^ when he is stiffened all
over and his mouth shut up : and his abortive efforts to in-
dulge the respective propensities are remarkable. The pa-
roxysms appear to end the sooner if he is thus prevented from
indulging his propensities.

I have never been able to induce in him the very common
phenomenon of fulfilling on returning to the natural condition
a promise made in the sleep-waking. Those who wish to
study this phenomenon may peruse the account of my nume-
rous experiments on different patients in the history of Miss
Collinses case.* My attempts with him have been numerous.
I obtained the promises from him of the most simple and easy
actions immediately before waking him^ and the fulfilment was
to take place immediately after his waking. But not the least
duration of impression have I ever made upon his brain : and
yet another patient always in the same room, she in whom the
cerebral organs can always be so readily excited mesmerically,
can be invariably influenced in this way, and to very com-
plicated and very numerous results.

In every case of sleep-waking that I have witnessed there
has been a slight deviation from the usual condition of the
cerebral functions, very slight or very considerable ;t aiid it
has in the majority lessened gradually if sleep-waking was
very frequently induced through a long period. The Okeys,
from being absolutely wild in their sleep-waking and remark-
able in many particulars, became at length so reasonable and
well-conducted that strangers had some difficulty to discover
any peculiarity in them. So Mr. James Salmon now ap-
proaches in his sleep-waking far nearer to his ordinary state
than formerly. He is much less jealous, and bears my ab-
sence from the room much better, is seldomer excited into one
of his four kinds of paroxysms, or in any way : and addresses
persons as Sir and Ma'am. His intellect is as perfect as

* No. XT., pp. 362—379.

t See my Numerous Cases qf Surgical Operations^ Sfc.f pp. 35 — 38, 42 — 44,
and Zoisi, No. III., p. 323; No. IV., 409.


By Dr. ElUotson. 189

when he is awake, and was, I believe, from the first : bat
his feelings have made great advances to their natural con-
dition.

An idiosyncrasy, discovered accidentally like the rest in
this case, was that of the pressure of the points of his fingers,
especially of the middle finger, of either hand, against either
of my palms, rendering his upper extremities and his trunk
and neck instantly rigid, the latter and his head inclining
backwards : and the rigidity was greater in proportion as he
pressed his fingers the more forcibly. The effect, however,
thus produced was never strong enough to give him pain, as
it might be when produced by brisk passes down his back,
but always afforded him pleasure. The pressure of his fingers
against the back of my hand, or against any other part of
me, had no such effect.

I may here mention that contact-passes up his extremities,
or up his back or front, or his face, occasioned him great dis-
comfort, and a sensation of coldness at the parts and of " going
the wrong way." As there are endless modifications of all
the established phenomena in different cases, so there are
endless idiosyncrasies in the susceptibility of impressions
from different agents. Neither powerful magnets nor large
crystals had any effect upon him. A rough crystal he loved,
because of its roughness,* but to touch the smooth surface
of a large crystal was unpleasant to him. He never saw light
from them in his natural state when placed in a dark room :
nor in his sleep-waking, as his eyes were closed.

A beautiful experiment, which may be made upon most
other sleep-wakers, exhibited the soporific power of the mes-
meric agency, and the phenomena of the invasion and decline
of sleep, so exquisitely, that every good poet, actor and physi-
ologist should witness it.f I thirteen years ago found that
the eyes, independently of their vision, were among the most
mesmerically-susceptible parts and best conveyers of the in-
fluence to the rest of the system. The more widely Elizabeth
Okey opened her eyes, not to gaze upon me, but upon the
ceiling, in which upward-action more of the eyes is exposed
than in any other gaze, and especially if I pulled the lower
lid down, the effect of passes with the hand or finger before
the face was considerably increased. This led me to try the
effect of placing the finger on the closed eyelids at the centre :
and also to try the effect of goldupon the exposed eye. The
effects were, as I anticipated, very great. I have since habi-
tually deepened mesmeric sleep in sleep-wakers by placing the
point of a finger upon each eye : and the result has been ^uat

* See p. 186. f See No. II., p. 176.


190 Cure of commlswe end rigid Fits.

as great at the first trial as afterwards^ and when tbe patients
had no idea of what I intended. If the points of two fingers
were placed in his sleep-waking upon the upper Ud over the
central and most prominent part of the eye, and pressed a
little firmly, his head presently dropped, and his arms hung
powerless at his sides : he next breathed heavily : his chin
fell quite upon his chest, his knees began to bend, and his
tmnk to incline forwards : his knees bent more and more
till the bac^ part of his thighs touched his calves, and ap-
proached his heels, and he snored ; sustaining himself in
what to a person awake would be a painful posture, — just as
by long contact-passes I could stiffen his middle, ring, and
little fingers into various relative states of flexion and exten^
sion that were impossible to him when awake.

If I removed my fingers from his eyes he rose gradually
from this posture, his trunk grew straight, his head rose, and
he ceased to snore : and, if I replaced my fingers, the first
order of changes were repeated : and thus I could have him
up or down at pleasure. When he was very low, if I conti-
nued my fingers on the eyes, he at length fell upon the floor
and generally rolled over on his side ; and, what was curious,
his knees remained bent, and his feet therefore above the
ground : and, if I removed my fingers^ he slowly awoke to the
ordinary active sleep-waking state, and arose wondering how
he had got upon tbe floor : but, if I replaced my fingers on
his eyes, his legs fell, his knees were no longer bent, his feet
went to the ground, and he was a powerless relaxed mass
upon the fioor in a dead sleep, and might be pushed and
rolled in any direction without noticing it. The respiration
and heart's action continued ; whereas in exhibiting chloro<-
form, if the application of it is persevered with, the respiration
at length ceases, and presently the heart's action, and the pa-
tient dies. But no such result has ever happened from the
coma of mesmerism : nor is it likely, however long the fingers
be kept on the eyes, or deep the coma be otherwise rendered ;
because, in deeply mesmerising a patient, the system seems at
length to resist any inrther effect, and the sleep often breaks
up in the midst of mesmerism.*

* I made the following obseirations in No. VI. i p. 235 : — " There is usually
BO sorer mode of deepening sleep than to establish contact with the patient.
Laying the hand upon the forehead or any other part, placing the points of tha
fingers on the eyes, or the tip of the nose, or the points of tiie fingers upon the
points of his fingers, all are powerftd in deepening and prodacing sleep. The
more eztensiye the contact the greater in general (he effect. An occult soporific
power oyer others exists clearly in the animal frame. In the excitement of active
sleep-waking, contact gradually reduces the excitement and deep sleep comes on.
The Okeys in their delirious sleep-waking were often so susceptible &at, if they


By Dr. Ettioison. 191

The prodaction and removal of sleep in my patient was
peculiar. The phenomena of its increase and cessation are
varioos in different persons.* If dow downward passes were

laid a hand upon my shoulder, or if sitting on the ground they rested their head
against my leg while I was writing, they were presently lost in sleep. Generally
the pointed parts of the body, as the bent knuckles and stOl more &e tips of the
fingersy the ehin and still more the point of the nose, are more efficacioiis than an
equal portion of flat sur&ce. There may be for a time a peculiar susceptibility
of a certain part. I have often known touching the point of the patient's nose
with the tip of my finger produce instant sleep for a period ; and then hare no
particular effect for a period. The phenomena of this kind in the Okeys were
endless, and all have presented themselves to me again and again in other cases*
The absurdity of trying to explain mesmeric sleep by monotonous impression on
the senses, or by fetigue or oyer straining, and of not seeing clearly that there are
occult powers not recognized by the medical world, is glaring ; no less so than the
attempt to explain certain phenomena by currents of air and other common im-
pressions on ordinary sense. Water, mesmerised by passes oyer it, and even by
pointing at it, is often powerfully soporific, and produces, as it did in the Okeys,
instant depth of sleep in the mesmeric state.

** So strong is the occult soporific power in the animal frame, thai I find it
sometimes impossible to wake some patients who have a propensity to grasp my
hand, unless I prevent this, and even keep them at as a great a distance from me
as possible. The present patient could not be awakened by any means I ever
adopted , my only method was to remoye as far from her as she would allow me,
and retire more and more accordingly as she bore my absence better : and not
only this, but to keep all others as fiur from her as possible. At one period she
was no sooner asleep than she awoke, even though vctf finger-points were on her
eyes ; and required to be sent off repeatedly before the sleep acquired any depth :
occasionally she would sleep for many hours."

I am happy to be able to refer to these remarks printed seven years ago from
my experience thirteen years ago ; for it is absolutely ludicrous to find medical
gentlemen in Edinburgh and other places, who have scorned to giye any attention
to the mesmeric facts with which so many of us haye been fSmiliar for above a
dozen years, and who have stigmatized all who asserted these facts, now conde-
scending to attend to the subject and admit more or less of it, and giving to
the world their crudities, their doubts and admissions, just as green medScal
students after having hesrd a few lectures on chemistry declare to their fellow
students that they doubt this and that, and see this and that in quite a different
view from the laborious teachers who haye spent their lives in the study. It is still
more amusing to see Dr. Gregory expressing his trust that now, as gueh men are
attending to the subject, light v^ at length be thrown upon it,— ^men who have
now slightly attended to it in consequence of some public exhibitions, under the
absurd name of electro-biology or electro-psychology, of fiuits familiar to all mes-
merists, and now presented to the worlcf by mesmerists in a manner not the
most admired by gentlemen. The phenomena are the result of imagination (see
my remarks. No. IV., p. 440) excited by suggestion, and sometimes probably
also by will, and in persons sometimes a little mesmerised by staring, passes, and
contact. The word mesmerism has generally been ayoided, and its share some-
times altogether denied in public, though not in private. Eyen the influence of
suggestion and will has not been mentioned, and great mystery has been affected.
Nay, more ; the secret has been sold to some for a few pounds. Contact and
pressure of certain parts of the head were the secret sold by some : pressure of
the back of the head with tiie thumb, and of the palm with the fingers, was th^
secret sold by others : and each purchaser believed he had secured the real thing.
These are all means of impressing the patient's mind. The pretence of influ-
ence from two metals stared at is another disgusting part of the affair.

• No. IV., p. 342 ; V., p. 48—50 ; VI., p. 234.


192 Cure of commlsvoe and rigid Fits,

made before his face^ he soon began to advance his head^ and
then at every pass to incline it a Uttle ; to stare fixedly straight
forwards^ and to follow the motions of the hand when they
were a little to one side ; if the hand moved upwards^ his
head rose and his eyes turned up^ and he made a sign with
his hands to direct me to raise my hand at one side of him
and not before him^ because this upward movement of my
hand distressed him. As a general rule in mesmerising^ the
hand after a -downward pass should be raised again at one
side and not in front of the patient. His eyes would at last
converge and then close ; his head drop^ and his body bend
over to one side with one or both legs raised from the ground
by this attitude : but, though strangers thought he would fall,
he never fell; so strong was he and so nicely sensible was he
of the point at which he would lose his balance.f

If, instead of passes, I pointed only to his eyes, their
convergence was extreme : they became each fixed as close as
possible to the nose, and so remained, every bystander de-
claring that it would be impossible for any person in his ordi-
nary state to do anything like it : and, after a time his eyes
closed, and sleep declared itself as when he was mesmerised
with passes. He might be readily sent ofi' by merely placing
the points of a finger upon each eye : and, knowing what I
wished, he would fix my fingers himself exactly on the cornea
and press them firmly, finding that he thus went to sleep the
sooner.

I could send him to sleep by merely staring at him : but
this method was very tedious. From the depth of his sleep —
and except when produced by the points of my fingers on his
eyes it was never so deep as to cause him to fall, whether sitting
or standing — he emerged by raising his head and body, click-
ing and sighing, and, as soon as he was in active sleep-waking,
able to know and talk, he felt for me and made after me to
seize my hand.

The waking him was always a most troublesome and to
strangers a very unpleasant process. In some persons the
difficulty arises from their great sleepiness, so that the pre-
sence of two or three near them prevents it, and we are
obliged to put all others out of the room, or remove the
patient to a distant part or to another room, when perhaps
he will awake spontaneously.! Sometimes they are so sleepy
that contact-transverse-outward passes with the thumbs or

t See the remarkable case in No. V., pp. 49—58 ; also No. IIT., p. 324.
X No. VI., p. 235.


By Dr. EUiotsan. 193

fingers on the eyebrows deepens the sleep more than the
movement dissipates it, and the transverse passes are fruitless
except made without contact. But the diifficulty with this
patient arose from his unwillingness to awake. If it were late,
he would ask me to awake him ; and yet, when I began, he
was desirous not to be awakened, and resisted violently. The
first transverse pass before him made him close his lips and
pout them forth, contract his shoulders against his trunk
raise his body in violent anger, and utter a sort of scream-
ing grunt : every fresh pass, and every puff of my breath in
his face, aggravated all this, and at last he so resisted, crum-
pled up and frowning, and his mouth tightly shut, that no
pass or puff had any effect. Then he would relax and speak,
and abuse me for attempting to wake him* Then he might
recover his command over himself, and beg me to press my
hand upon his stomach, which always relieved a distressing
feeling which the attempt to awaken him occasioned. He often
pressed upon it himself. At length he opened his mouth
widely : and, after opening it two or three times, he opened
it at last very widely, as if he was going to swallow a horse,*
and in an instant opened his eyes and was wide awake, calm
and smiling and happy, — shewing such an instantaneous
change from fury and distress to perfect happiness as aston«
ished everybody .f

I need not say that he was now as strong as he was happy :
all the stronger the longer he had been kept asleep :% the
more intensely and the longer he had been stiffened and put
into all sorts of apparently painful, and to a stranger per-*
haps up to that moment improbable, attitudes.

He has long been perfectly well. * The last convulsive fit
occorred a year and a quarter ago : and it is nearly a year
since he had even a little rigid attack. If he sees any person
suddenly, or is noticed by any person, hears music, even a
brass band, or receives any unexpected intelligence, it has no
more effect upon him than upon other people ; he can bear a
strqng light, can read, and write at any length : whereas for«
merly any of these things gave him a stiff fit or severe head-
ache. The attempt to look at paper while he wrote his own
name always induced such a fit. So did fatigue ; and very

* On coming out of his deep coma into the active sleep -waking state daring
his mesmeric state, this opening of the month was always ohserved, and in pro-
portion to the depth of his coma.

t No. v., pp. 61, 62.

t On the utility of allowing patients to wake spontaneously, see No. III.,
p. 310 > No. IX., p. 41 ; No. XI., p. 357; No. XVI., p. 471; and on the
utility of stiffening and exciting them in the sleep-waking, see No. IX., p. 60.
VOL. IX. O


194 Cure of cpnmUive and rigid Fits.

little fatigued him. He often dropped down from fatigue,
and could walk no further. He has ceased to suffer from the
weather. Before he was cured, every change of weather
affected him : and he was never so well in hot as in cold
weather, and was much better in a cold strong wind and
for being out of doors. He is no longer troubled with attacks
of flatulence, low spirits, palpitation, fiilness of the head,
or giddiness. The painful wes^ness of his back has left him :
and this had been a great torment. When I was absent for
five weeks in Switzerland at the end of autumn, he was not
mesmerized regularly at home, and again grew weaker and
generally worse : but I soon set him up again on my return.

After some months he was mesmerised but three times a
week : then seldomer. But I beg him to come now and then
even at present : so important is it not to leave off mesmerism
as soon as a patient is cured. Unlike his brother, he is as
susceptible as ever. But he likes mesmerism: and I may
add that he advocates it on all occasions and before all peoples
subscribed from his own pocket to the Mesmeric Infirmary be-
fore the end of last year, and paid a second subscription, not at
the end of twelve months, but soon after the new year began.

The importance of warmth in mesmerising was mani-
fested in him. For if the room was cold, he was never so
easily affected. This point should always be attended to,
and not only the room and the mesmeriser's hands be warm,
but no mesmeriser be employed who has not naturally a warm,
and perhaps a pretty fieshy, hand. Probably the heat has
much to do with the apparently greater facUity of producing
mesmeric effects on persons in warm climates. There has
not been any proof that this arises from a greater natural
susceptibility of inhabitants of hot countries. When there
were currents of cool air in the rooms. Dr. Esdaile's patients
could not readily be affected.* This observation we had al-
ways made here : and for want of a knowledge of the fact
disappointment may occur.

The mesmeric phenomena in the two brothers, though on
the whole similar, were differently modified : just like those
of the two sisters Okey.f Permanent and striking differences
existed in the two sisters and the two brothers : and yet so
superficial an observer as Mr. Wakley, a man at the same
time perfectly ignorant of the whole subject and not yet
known to be capable of the least scientific investigation,
did not hesitate to take upon himself to proclaim opinions
upon it to the world and lead the medical profession, and call
the one sister an imperfect imitation of the other. The sooner

* No. XXL, pp. 2—8. t See my Physiology, pp. 1164—1170.


1

Cure of Paralysis, 196

he makes a turn right round the better for his credit and the
sale of his Lancet A comparison of the phenomena of the
two brothers is worth the trouble.

I must not close this narrative without mentioning the
praiseworthy conduct of my patient's former physician. When
called upon by Mr. James Salmon since the cure^ he expressed
great satisfaction^ behaved most kindly, and sent a polite
message to me, though I am not aware of having ever seen
him j and he sent a letter of introduction to ine, a few months
agOj with a medical gentleman, whose sister he informed me
he had been treating in vain for epilepsy and had no hope of
curing, but whom all parties now wished to be mesmerised.
It is a great pleasure to me to record good conduct, and pain«
ful when, in justice to the sacred cause of mesmerism and to
my own character, I have to expose bad conduct and bestow
censure. John Elliotson.

87, Conduit St., Hanover Sq., June, 1851.


Vin. Cure of Paralysis. By Mr. Wagstapp, Surgeon,

Leighton Buzzard.

'* And while the age has brought to light myriada of tbinga unknown before,
to teach and benefit mankind, others harebeenj as it were, re-discovered: know,
ledge that has slept for ages has been again awakened into life, whether for use or
mis-use, can as yet be hardly known ; but before the half-century just com-
menced has waned^ the secret will be told ; and the discovery be as well appre-
ciated then as many things are now, of which human knowledge first took note in
or since the year of our Lord one tiiousand eight hundred.

" Among the rMliscoveries^ is the mystery unfolded in the persons of some
who, by a steadfut look — a wave of the hand — control the will of another, and
make a man a mere machine ; for, however much quackery and folsehood may
have essayed of imposition and collusion, that certain persons do possess this
power, and certain others are amenable to it, seems to have been in many cases
demonstrated.

''For lack of happier nomenclature, we have called this process *m9imerUmi*
,and its reproduction has afforded some of the most striking incidents of the
century. We say reproduction, for its own disciples are the readiest to concede
that its powers were known in earlier ages, and used for the purposes of false
religion, and the maintenance of priestly power." — Morning Post^ New Year's
Day, 1851.

I WAS called to see Mrs. Odell on the 17th of Nov. 1850.
I found her suffering from paralysis of the whole voluntary
muscular system to some extent, but more especially of the
right upper and lower extremities. She was quite conscious,
but unable to move or to open her eyes, or even to speak
except in a whisper. She complained of a great deal of pain
in her back : and from the symptoms I considered she was suf.
fering from some affection. of the spinal chord. On consulting
Mrs. Wagstaff on the case,* she told me that there was

* Mrs. Wagstaff is a clairvoyante as to disease. — Zoist.

o 2


196 Cure of Paralysis.

paralysis of the muscular system of nerves, from want of
tone or sudden cessation of tone in the parts of the chord
that supplied the motor power to the muscles of the trunk
and extremities : that the brain was not affected : and that it
was not from inflammatory action.

Z attended her for about six weeks^ up to Jan. 1^ 1851^ with-
out apparent benefit, beyond restoring the power of speech.

She went from my care to the Union medical man, Mr.
Williams, I believe^ who I am informed saw her once and
sent his assistant once. Mr. Williams saw her, I heard,
about Jan. 28, 1851, and his assistant about Feb. 18, 1851.
I did not see her again until Feb. 26. On that day the hus-
band requested me to see her once more to satisfy her. I
had not at this time thought of mesmerising her, as I con-
sidered the case quite hopeless^ When I saw her this time
she had crawled to her sister's, a distance of some fifteen or
twenty yards. She then had complete paralysis of the right
arm and hand: the limb being contracted and held across her
chest : she could only use the right leg by drawing it after
her along the ground, being quite unable to raise it or sup-
port herself on it. She managed to move by means of a
stick and an assistant, but was otherwise quite helpless. She
had, moreover, constant shaking of the right leg and foot.
I tried to mesmerise her on this day by maUng passes down
the spine : but without producing any perceptible change. I
saw her again on the 29th (Saturday) and endeavoured to put
her to sleep ; and, after some twenty-five or thirty minutes, I
found her in a deep sleep and quite unconscious. I let her
sleep some little time and then awoke her; and found con-
siderable difficulty in ^o doing. When she awoke she com-
plained that we had been doing something to her arm ; that
it felt, as she called it, " all pins and needles.*' However,
she could feel with the arm and hand and could move it a
little.* I mesmerised her to sleep every second day until the
following Saturday or Sunday: at the end of the fourth sleep
(I sometimes left her asleep for four or five hours) she could
use the right arm as well as the left, and the jerking of the
leg had quite subsided.

She cut some bread and butter with the right arm and
hand after the second sleep. The lameness was nearly gone
after the seventh or eighth sleep, after which time I did not
see her for three weeks. She had not improved at all during
these three weeks: but httd rather retrograded. I recom-
menced the sleep, and she improved again : so that she be-
came, and now is, quite well. About ten days since, in

* The superiority of general to local meBmerinn was striking. — Zoi»t.


Cure of Paralysis. jgy

consequence of getting cold she had severe himbago^ so that
she neither slept nor even lay down for several days. When
sent for to see her, I could scarcely get her to bed, I put
her into the sleep and left her: and, when she awoke'she was
free from pain, and is this day quite well.

During all this time she took no medicine, except a little
oxymel for her cough, and only a few doses of that. I think
taking all the circumstances of the case into consideration'
that Mrs. WagstaflPs opinion is quite borne out in the case '

P. W. Wagstaff
June 7, 1851. ^"•

IX. Oure of Paralysis. By Mr. W. R. Mott, Surgeon^

Devonshire Place, Brighton.

** We lately animadverted on the indecent and scurrilous tone of the editor of
the Lancet f when men and things did not square themselTes according to his
ideas of their eternal fitness.

'* The editor of the Medical Timee also belongs to the equare school of philo-
sophy ; and not only holds up the men who dare think and act for themselves to
professional reprobation, but endeavours, like a Dominican friar, to draw down
upon their heads public execration and persecution by nick-naming them injldele
and aiheiete. We see numerous Jeremiade in the medical periodicala about ' the
d^;nulation of the medical profession, and the low estimation it is held in by the
public' But a profession is what its professors make it; and we should like to
know how our respect is to be secured by the coarse and slanderous manner and
language of the Lancet and Medical Timea. Their policy is, of course, to please
the majority of their readers ; and to judge from the mental food provided for
them, they must be filled with ' envy, hatred, and all uncharitableness' towards
each other, and be enemies of all freedom of thought, word, and action. Form-
ing our opinion of the tone of the medical profession from their pretended leaders,
the Lancet and Medical Timee, we would consider it a greater honour to belong
to the ancient fraternity of barbers than to be a member of the College of Sur-
geons or Physicians. But this would be as gross a slander upon the profession
as any uttered by these scurrilous papers against the honest, talented, and coura-
geous men who fortunately, every now and then, arise to declare and advocate
new truths to the consternation of successful routinists and schools thriving on
' the wisdom of their ancestors,' — ^the scrapers and polishers of dead men's bones,
which they cherish like pieces of the true cross, because they live by them. It
is in vain to demonstrate to these idolatrous worshippers of the past that each of
them cannot be in possession of a piece of the true cross, as they have enough
wood among them to crucify all the disturbers of their faith upon. The greater
is the minu^, is their reply :— * credo, quia ivupoaHhileJ Whenever the preachers
of new truths have boldly declared them, the same horrid howl of ' cru(dfy them !
crucify them !' has been raised, whether it were in Jerusalem, Paris, Iiondon, or
Calcutta. Wherever a new and truer faith has been taught, whether in religion
or medicine, there have ever been doctors in theology and physic to cry, * Not
this man, but Barabbas !"

** These remarks have b^en elicited firom us by reading a so-called review o{
the eighth volume of The Zoiet in the Medical TVme*, of which the toYiowVag ia
the exordium : —

** * We have given the title of The Zoist exactly as it appears on the wrapper
of the July number, — a title remarkable for its unparalleled presumption and
unblushing effrontery. Under the mask of '* cerebral physiology" we have l^ere
the old atheistic doctrine, that the mind is not a self-ejListent, independent prin-
ciple, but a mere result of some mystic action or fanctioa of the brain, surrep^


198 Cure of Paralysis.

titioaBly imposed upon us. We hare next the aasmnptioDt that not only is mes-
merism true, but capable of ** applications to human welfitre," ingeniously insi-
nuated ; then follows the trumpet-tongued quotation, " This is the truth, though
opposed to the philosophy of ages ;" and subjoined to this persiflage appears t£tt
▼ery famous woodcut before described by us, representing Dr. Elliotson seated
between the two Okeys, in the character of a bearded sage, poring over the book
of feite, the inspired damsels on either side resting their fair heads upon his
shoulders/*

** We had tliou^ that * atheiit * was the last argument, — * the mrgummUum
ad hominem ' of the polemic ; but the editor of the Medical TVmcf, a supposed
professional and scientific journal, resorts to the same cowardly weapon in the
hope of consigning mesmerism and Dr. Elliotson to the tar-barrel. It is thus
that this medical philosopher speaks of a subject of the highest interest and im-
portance, and of a man who hias more of the spirit of Christianity in his little
finger than there is in the souls of a thousand Wakleys and Bushiuuis ; for such
it ought to be known are the names of the men who glory in their shame : —

<< * Still we must not permit the sense of the ludicrous to dazzle our judgment,
and carry us away from a more serious consideration of the subject ; for the princi-
ples propounded by The Zoiett as we have premised, are calculated to undermine
the foundation of idl philosophy and religion, and cut asunder the ties that bind
together the very framework of society. The ultimate tendency of the doctrines of
' cerebral physiology/ as propounded by The Zoiiit EQiotson himself has openly
enough avowed ; in Human Physiology (vide note, p. 365) he formally enunciates
this opinion, — ^we quote his own words, — ''that we possess no such imaginary
thing as an immaterial soul." '

** We have turned to the reference given, and find these words : —

'" It is asserted by Lord Brougham, who positively says tiiat we have a "per-
petual sense that we are thinking," " quite independent of all material objects,"
(p. 56,) that the circumstance of the existence of matter is only an hypothesis,
and that materialists grossly and dogmatically assume that matter exists. Now,
we do not assume — we know, that matter exists. From certain sensations, we
believe inevitably, intuitively, by the laws of Grod, that what we term matter
exists. He allows, indeed, " that we believe in the existence of matter, because
we cannot help it." (p. 241.) This is enough. As to our minds, we observe
that no mind exists in nature but as a property or power of matter. We never

* Dr. Bushnan, the editor of the Medical TVmev, little thinks how amusing
he is. He fancies that nobody knows that he stole this piece of wit from one <^
his own firatemity, the late Dr. James Johnson, who wrote the following passage
in his Medico- Chirurgieal Review f in 1843 : —

" The Zoist is ornamented with a neat vignette representing a venerable man,
intended no doubt for Dr. Elliotson, poring over a volume opened on his knee,
while two females of prepossessing mien, but remarkably loose habits, support
the Doctor upon either nde, and compose a striking and interesting group. The
ladies, of course, are the Okeys, and although we are aware that such gifted indi-
viduals are far above what are vulgarly considered the decencies of fife, yet we
would venture, with great diffidence, to hint that their petticoats are rather
scant." (See our No. VI., p. 279.)

This noble pair of scribblers litde thought that the design on our cover
was by one of our first artists — by Flaxman : and little did they think, or we
think, tiiat these three very figures of our cover would ornament the handsome
card sent round by University College in Bfay, 1851, to invite gentlemen to a
private view of the Flaxman Gallery in the College. Yet such is the ftct, and
the College card of invitation lies before us surmounted with the three figures of
our cover, — ^with Flaxman's design : — a neat vignette representing Dr. Elliotson
with an Okey, a female of loose habits and rather scant petticoats, on each
ride, according to Dr. Johnson, in 1843 ; — Dr. Elliotson and the Okeys, the
derign reminduig one of the choicest hieroglyphics of Moore's almanac, according
to Dr. Bushnan, in 1850. (See our No. XXIX., p. 31.) These two ** Ladies"
are really a youth of each sex.— ^om/.


By Mr. W. R. Mott, Surgeon, Brighton. 199

see mind. We certainly learn the eziatenoe of matter by the property of our
brain called mind ; but that is no reason for saying that tlie power called mind
exists alone. If it were felt by oarselves to exist, though we had no knowledge
of niatter aroimd us, it would only shew that we felt personality without knowine
the cause of it, — ^without knowing that we had brains.

" * When Lord Brougham reminds us that we learn the existence of matter
only by our minds^ he should remember that we are not conscious of our exist-
ence till matter me^es an impression upon us. The existence of mind as a pro-
perty of peculiarly arranged and circumstanced matter was fully proved before"
and therefore these considerations, like every other fact, harmonize with the
account: and the doctrine of the existence of mind, independently of matter
indicates a want of modem knowledge, and involves us in endless absurdity* Its
studied display usually proceeds in our profession from rank hypocrisy and
malice, as though a materialist may not be a devout Christian, and these phari.
sees say aloud, *' I thank thee, Lord, that I am not as other men are — even as
this materialist. '' I ageee with the early Christians and Mr. Carmichael C-^n
Essay on such Physical Considerations as are connected with Man's Ultimate
Destination, Sfc, by Andrew Carmichael, M.R.I.A., Dublin, 18S0), that, as all
nature is one whole, all other created beings are also organized. They and we
are in but one spot at a time, and can move from one spot to another ; what does
so, cannot be else than matter and a property of matter. I consider this alone a
proof that we possess no such imaginary thing as an immaterial soul.'

"For doctors to insult each other, and cry * infidel I* and 'atheist/' when they
differ in opinion as to whether they have material or immaterial souls, seems to
us to be about as profitable as the ' Gorham controversy,* and as likely to be
satisfactorily decided. It is sufficient for us to know and believe, that if God
has given us material minds here, he can give us immaterial ones hereafter, if it
so please him.*

*' Dr. EUiotson merely says, that we cannot separate mind from matter in
this life, and leaves the rest to Grod, as we willingly do also." — The Calcutta
Morning Chronicle, Nov. 9th, 1850.

William P , aged about 55, formerly a trooper in a

dragoon regiment, was afflicted with hemiplegia of his left side,
so badly as to preclude his daily labour entirely. His limbs
dragged ; his circulation and temperature were much affected.
He had received severe contusions about the head in an affray
with peasantry in Ireland, while on duty there some years
ago. On careful exploration, no abnormal depression of bone
was apparent. The disease may be traceable to concussion,
as he was thrown from his horse severely, on several occa-
sions, while on service in the Peninsula. He is a fine-looking
man, about 6 feet 8 inches in height, and of unusually tem-
perate habits for one of his class.

* Dr. Elliotson's words are, — It is the doctrine of Scriptore ** that the resur-
rection will he positively of body, — ^that in our flesh we shall see God, — and
therefore our minds, according to tiie Scripture doctrine, must appear as much a
property of body hereafter as at present.'' " The Christian doctrine teaches the
resurrection of what we obviously are — bodies, and this through a miracle of the
Almighty," — ^that by nature our being is utterly extinguished, but by the additional
^£t of God, by a miracle, we shall all be made alive again. He quotes a sermon
of Paley for the following passage, — '' It is a question by which we need not be at
all disturbed, whether the bodies vrith which we shall arise be new bodies, or the
same bodies under a new form ; for no alteration will hinder us from remaining
the same, provided' we are sensible and conscious that we are so.*' CHuman P^v-
siology, pp. 43, 47, 48.) — Zoist,


200 Cure of Paralysis.

He had had a fit occasionally, supposed, from his description,
to be epileptic. The paralysis was rapidly increasing: the
facial muscles on the left side were becoming implicated.
There being general bloodlessness and want of power, &c.,
I administered small doses of hyd. chlor., with a gentle ape-
rient or two, followed by nutritious diet and cod liver oil.

I mesmerised him for the first time on March 3, for three
minutes. He slept for fifteen minutes, and felt much re-
freshed, and his left hand and arm became sensibly warmer.

4th. Galvanized for 30 minutes. And mesmerised : slept
15 minutes.

6th. Galvanized 80 minutes. Mesmerised : slept 15 min.

8th. Galvanized 15 minutes. Mesmerised : slept 30 min.

10th. Galvanized 15 minutes. Mesmerised: slept 35 miu.

11th. Mesmerised afone ; slept one hour.

12th. Gtdvanized 20 minutes. Mesmerised: slept 30 min.

13th. Mesmerised only: slept 40 minutes.

14th. Ditto ditto 30 minutes.

15th. Ditto ditto 20 minutes. Much better

in every respect.

17th. Mesmerised : sleep not recorded.

18th. Mesmerised: slept 30 minutes.

20th. Mesmerised : slept 25 minutes.

Has gone to work, having recovered the use of his limbs :
the temperature quite equal to that of the right side. Has
not complained since. He is hearty and well.

*:ie* Mesmerism here clearly effected the cure. For every-
body knows that a grain or two of calomel and a gentle ape-
rient or two do not cure severe hemiplegia. Those unrea-
sonable antimesmerists who could boldly assert the contrary
will not say that these drugs given once or twice can cure a
case of any standing : nor cure it in seventeen days. Every
body knows that cod Uver oil is no remedy for palsy : and at
any rate no unconscionable antimesmerist will boldly assert
that it cures severe hemiplegia in three weeks. If they do
talk thus, we must laugh at them.

The cure cannot be attributed to the galvanism, for this
was employed but five times, and sometimes with the mes-
merism, and not after the 12th day of treatment. Mesmerism
was begun first, and the very first day produced most decided
effects, — sleep, refreshment, and warmth of the palsied arm
and hand : and it was continued to the last. — ZoisL


( 201 )

X. Comments, cursory and critical, upon Professor Gregory^s
*' Letters on Animal Magnetism,'^ By Anti-Olobioso.

'' Demi-verite est mensonge."

Half-truth is untruth. French Proverb.

TO THE EDITOR 07 THE ZOIST.

Jane^ 1851.
Sib. — It must be admitted^ we may sappose^ by all who are
competent to form a judgment^ that a complete work on
mesmerism is still a " desiekratum" in EAglish literature.
Various as are the volumes which we possess, there is some-
thing defective in each^ of them. A work is required, that
shall be at once philosophical, scientific and practical ; one
that shall dive into the depths of the subject ; and, discussing
with impartiality the controverted points which belong to the
psychological and materialistic schools, shall range through
the wide field of abnormal facts that present themselves in
the study of animal nature, and prove by induction and evi-
dence how they all take their rise £rom one common principle
of action. The " Isis Sevelata '* of Mr. Colqahoun, rich as it
is in historical research, leaves a large portion of the subject
untouched. The work of Mr. Townshend, though eminently
philosophical, and in some parts not unscientific, has in the
present day essential shortcomings, which the accomplished
author can readily supply in a future edition. Mr. Sandby's
volume, though abounding in practical and useful information
and disposing of certain religious scruples, does not aim at a
scientific or philosophical character. Dr. Scoresby^s work
displays a large amount of scientific knowledge, and proves
the accuracy of his experimental researches, but there its
value ends. Mr. Pyne's little book is most excellent as far as
it goes, but is obviously too Umited in its compass. Mr.
Newnham's thick volume, though elaborately written and full
of pretension, is deplorably superficial, and scarcely worth
the paper upon which it is printed. Miss Martineau^s origi.
nal letters had great weight at the time of their first publica-
tion, as the results of valuable experience, but are probably
not much referred to in the present day. Wheh, therefore,
it was whispered about, that Dr. Gregory, Professor of Che-
mistry in the University of Edinburgh, a man of high standing
in the scientific and medical world, and who had been the
first to introduce the discoveries of Von Beichenbach to the
English public, was preparing for publication a work on mes-
merism, the greatest interest was naturally felt by the advo-
cates and students of that science.


202 Comments upon Professor Gregory* s

As you did me the favour to admit iii your last number a
few of my remarks pn Mr. Atkinson's and Miss Martineau's
views on the Laws of Mavis Nature and Development^ and as
I believe that the public has in a great measure concurred in
the opinions I ventured to express^ perhaps you will allow
me to offer a few observations on Dr. Gregor}r's letters. For
having read with some attention the works referred to above,
and many others which have been published on the continent
on the same subject, I do not feel myself altogether incom-
petent for the task.

First, then, as to the title of the book. Why have we
again that double term '' Animal-Magnetism V^ Dr. Gregory
has himself allowed, that it involves the inconvenience of
assuming a theory. But he is surely mistaken in his next
assertion, that the word '^ mesmerism'^ has a limited meaning.
That name is understood to express, as distinctly as it is ne-
cessary, the power, which we possess, of inducing a peculiar
influence on the system of another, and there is no reason
why that word should not be applied to every one of the various
methods by which that influence is brought on. Moreover,
the word is short and simple ; and not an unworthy tribute
to the memory of one, who took a prominent part in the re-
introduction of the practice. Dr. Gregory also has in another
way evinced his disapprobation of his own title ; for in the
latter part of the b<K)k he discards it, and introduces that of
^* odyle,'' in its stead. Surely, then, it would be far better to
adhere to a phraseology which is now usually adopted. The
objection to ''odyle'' is, that it is new; the objection to
'' animal-magnetism,^^ that it is troublesome and lengthy.

I was surprized to observe, that in his preface. Dr. Gregory
states that he first became acquainted with the subject of his
book in 1827 ; it was not, however, till 1842 or 1848, that
he found he could produce the magnetic sleep in others, and
that he became thoroughly convinced of the truthfulness
of the whole system. The question that here presents itself
is, why was he so long silent*? If, at an early day, a trumpet
had sounded from the north, re-echoing a belief in the facts
which ten years ago were the subject of so much debate in this
metropolis, who can tell what might have been the beneficial
result of such an outspoken declaration ? At that period.
Dr. EUiotson was bearing '^ the heat and burden of the day,"
and stood almost alone, without support or sympathy. Now
that his truthfulness is established, we see adherents pouring
in, with scarcely an allusion to their great predecessor.
Doubtless our learned professor had excellent reasons for his
silence ; and at any rate the reader may hope to obtain the


" Letters on Animal Magnetism.** 208

results of a larger experience from his prudential reserve.
Upon this pointy then, let us now enter.

The book itself is written pleasantly ; the style is clear and
flowing; and Dr. Gregory thoroughly understands his own
meaning, and enables the reader to understand it also; a
point, which is no small recommendation to a scientific work.
The arrangement of the " subject matter '^ is also admirable.
First, he disposes of the objections to the science, next we
have a description of the minor phenomena, and thirdly of
the higher. His statements abound with copious scientific
illustrations, which greatly assist the reader in his comprehen-
sion of the subject. Nothing can be better, as far as they
go, than the first eight chapters. He especially enters largely
upon the subject of clairvoyance and lucid prevision, and
seems to have studied it carefuUy.

In the ninth chapter, our author refers to Dr. Darling,
Mr.' Lewis, and Mr. Braid, and it is satisfactory to observe,
that he takes a correct view of their different methods. He
sees that each of these is but mesmerism under a different
phase.

His chapter upon trance is not very satisfactory; the
author himself admitting that he is deficient in experience
upon this point; but his observations on phrenology and
phreno>magnetism are accurate.

Chapter the twelfth is but a second edition in a shorter
compass of his own translation of Von Beichenbach. Much
therefore of it is both superfluous and tedious. In the two
last chapters, however, of this First Part of his book, there is
a good deal of valuable observation well deserving of the
serious consideration of his medical brethren. At page 41
he had said, that '^ it is to medical men that the public will
look for the fiirther prosecution of the enquiry.'' It is to be
feared, however, that the public will be compelled to employ
a little gentle violence with the said medical gentlemen, before
they will feel disposed to take up the enquiry in the manner
that Dr. Gregory would require from them.

The Second Part is full of interesting facts and cases, and
closes the volume with much useful information.

The question, however, that now comes to be asked, is.
What, after all, is the real value of the book 7 The price is
heavy, and a purchaser, who would wish to have his library of
mesmeric works complete, might be disposed to enquire,
what amount of information he would be likely to obtain by
its possession ? It would be the grossest flattery to say, that
Dr. Gregory has added anything new to our previous stores
of knowledge. In its main points the book is the merest


204 Commefds upon ProfMor Gregory's

repetition of what has been said by English and foreign
writers*^ on the subject over and over again : it is not a collec-
tion of truths^ but of palpable truisms. What he says of
simple mesmerism may be found in every mesmeric work;
what he says of electro-biology and of the waking or consciouB
state, may be found in Mr. Stone's pamphlet and is well
known to mesmerisers; what he says of the researches of
Beichenbach may be found in Dr. Ashbumer's notes in Mr.
Bailliere's excellent edition of that work ; and the statements
respecting witchcraft, divination, and magic, and of the assist-
ance whidi ^'natural causes'' offer in elucidation of many mys-
terious and marvellous traditions, are iterations copied almost
verbatim from various publications under this head. And
having therefore carefully read these '' Letters" through, I
really know of nothing original in them, unless it be a theory
of clairvoyance under the action of odyle, which theory in
itself is not unworthy of consideration, as far as the author
himself is able to unfold it, though he naturally leaves the
modus operandi very obscurely defined. Saving this hypo-
thesis, the whole volume is but a richauffi of former works.

But there is cause for more serious complaint against Dr.
Gregory. Want of originality in an author is no crime; and
it may be fairly expected from the lucid arrangement of his
matter, and the information which he has communicated re-
specting Mr. Lewis and Dr. Darling, that many persons will
rise from the book with satisfaction and profit. But what
reader previously unacquainted with the history of mesmerism,
would surmise from these pages that almost everything that
is said in them has been repeatedly said before? This want
of reference in our learned Professor evinces a want of can-
dour ; what he has kept back is in importance nearly as much
as what he has revealed ; his omissions almost amount to a
suppression ci truth. In this respect two striking instances
force themselves upon my attention ; and I would say that
Dr. Gregory might have chosen for the motto of his book,
the words that were applied to an angry old author, '' Pereant,
qui ante nos nostra dianssent"

I have already referred to Dr. Elliotson. The mesmeric
world well knows what it owes to him, what he has endured,
and what he has accomplished : but who could guess from
the faint and hesitating praise so briefly accorded in these
Edinburgh epistles, that it is owing to his unwearied exer-
tions, that mesmerism has taken its rank among the sciences
in this country. It was of course impossible for any one to
publish a work on this subject, and entirely omit that honored
name; but in these '^ Letters on Animal Magnetism/' allusions


'^ Letters on Animal Magnetism.*' 205

are so few and &r between that an omission of the name alto«
gether would hardly have been more offensive. For a moment
I have been inclined to attribute this silence to personal or
professional jealousy ; but that notion of course is out of the
question. Can it be that the narrow minded views of others
have unconsciously warped the feelings of the professor, and
restrained or guided his pen? Can it be that he prefers be-
longing to a clique^ and gives up '^to party what was meant
for mankind V*

But the scanty references to I%e SSoist itself deserve still
stronger reprehension. And even when a reference is made^
it is given in a cold indifference of tone which seems to imply
a tendency to ignore the work, if that were practicable. Upon
this point I feel at liberty to speak out my opinion, being
neither proprietor nor editor of your journal, and having no
other interest in its success than what appertains to a love of
truth and science. Let me then observe that I can regard
The Zoiet as no common or ephemeral work. When I look
to the depths of its philosophy, the largeness of its views^ the
variety and copiousness of its facts, and the accuracy of its
details, dissenting as I do from many of its opinions, I feel
confident, nevertheless, that this journal will take a perma*
nent position in periodical literature. The medical reviews
may strive to keep it down, or affect an unacquaintance with
its existence, but no physiological library will ere long be
complete unless its goodly volumes appear in their proper
places. The day is not far distant when the early numbers
will become scarce, and be eagerly bought up as opportunity
offers. And having purchased every number since its com-
mencement, and carefully perused them, I scruple not to say
that there is not a single fact of importance recorded by Dr.
Gregory, which had not previously made its appearance in
some one of its pages. This, our Professor of Chemistry
must have known, or ought to have known, for he has been
a contributor to it : and it would have been but becoming
and graceful on his part to have informed his readers more
readily and more frequently of that vast storehouse of scientific
knowledge.

All this is s^d more ^' in sorrow than in anger ;" but had
I not given utterance to these opinions, I should myself have
been guilty of the crime, which I have stigmatized in my
motto. I have not the honour of Dr. Gregory's acquaintance ;
and I believe him to be anxious to promote the spread of
science ; but while I have ventured to direct the attention of
the reader to what are painful defects in his work, I cheerfully
acknowledge at the same time that it is calculated to aid the


206 Report of Cases treated with Mesmerism

caase^ in which we &el a common interest. Many persons^
however^ say^ What is the use of giving utterance to these
feelings of disapprobation : it were far better, they think, to
be silent, and appear pleased and satisfied ; and not give the
common enemies of mesmerism a cause of triumph at this
expression of diffeilenoes. I am altogether of an opposite >

opinion ; and if I have not misunderstood the feelings with
which the editor of The Zoist would wish his journal con-
ducted, those feelings coincide with my own. Let praise be
rigidly and amply accorded, where it be due; but let the
truth and the whole truth be spoken without foolish delicacy i

on one side, or morbid apprehension on the other. Neither
mesmerism nor cerebral physiology will suffer damage in the
long run by this proceeding.

I remain, Mr. Editor, Yours, &c., ]

Anti-Globioso.


XI. Report of cases treated by mesmerism and in connexion
tvith the Exeter Mesmeric Institution, The painless
removal of a very pair^ Wart : 5 cases of the Loss of
Voice: 6 of Acute and Chronic Rheumatism: 1 ofChlorotic
Anamia unth Anasarca: 1 of Rheumatism with Anasarca:
1 of Hysteria with violent Convulsions and Delirium : 1 of
violent Mania with strong hereditary Predisposition : 1 of
Deafness of seven years duration : 1 of Wry Neck : 1 of
Pericarditis : 2 of Strumous Ophthalmia with Ulcers on
the Cornea: 1 of St. Vitus's Dance: 1 of great benefit in a
case of severe if\jury : 2 cases of prolonged mesmeric sleep.
By Mr. J. B. Parker, Surgeon, Exeter.

'* When Mr. Wakley, in the pages of the Lancet , denonnoed the mesmerists
as a clique of impostors, unfit for the society of respectable men, he did that
which he had often done before, and heaped abuse on men, who, from the purity
of their motives and the ezpansiveness of their minds, were fit only for hi»
scorn. The dissensions between the committee of the ' North Ix>ndon ' and Dr.
Elliotson at that time simply marks a phase which occurs in the progress of all
new ideas, and was just what might have been expected. But what a contrast
that, with the position of mesmerism now, when patients are treated at an hos-
pital ostensibly established for the purpose, and conducted by men of such worthy
that the very slanderers are silenced.'' — Pioneer y June 7, 1851.

I AND my mesmerisers have now succeeded in producing some
of the phenomena of mesmerism on upwards of twelve Imndred
persons, out of a population of 85,000. I haye performed
upwards of two hundred surgical operations without the
patients feeling the pain whilst under the influence of mes-


in the Exeter Mesmeric Institution. 207

merism^ including twenty most painful operi^ions on the eye^
tying the radial artery^ more than one hundred bleedings,
cutting off a very painful wart^ and the extraction of upwards
oi forty teeth, more than thirty during the last seven months^
when seldom less than ten, but more frequently y9hGn fifty
or seventy, persons.have been present. These facts have nearly
silenced the venomous tongues of our opponents ; and^ as I
am resolutely determined to spread the truth of the blessings
of mesmerism^ I have gratuitous stances at the Exeter Mes-
meric Institution twice weekly : and one of the great advan-
tages of my stances is the number of persons who present
themselves for the relief of headache^ earache, rheumatisni^
toothache, &c. In the majority of cases, the extraction of
the teeth has been avoided by the permanent relief mesmerism
has afforded after every other means had failed. In many of
these cases, the oil of tar, creosote, oil of cloves, laudanum,
and various other applications had fedled ; and in some cases
it has been necessaiy to try as many as six mesmerisers in
immediate succession before any relief has been produced.
Another no small advantage from this multitude is, that we
have always found some clairvoyant to give directions how to
deepen the sleep ; and when tins has been practicable (and I
have invariably found their instructions perfectly correct)^
it was a very great advantage in our mesmeric proceedings,
since it gave increased confidence to the operator, as will be
illustrated in the following case.

Painless removal of a very painfal Wart, — E. Collins^ set
17 years, came one morning to consult me about a very pain-
ful wart on the fore finger, the extreme sensibility of which I
attempted to destroy with nitrate of silver, having immersed
the finger in hot- water for half an hour previously. 'As this
afforded no relief she came the same evening to my seance :
and after some time mesmeric sleep was produced, but not
sufficiently deep to allow the slightest touch of the wart.
Having at this time another young woman under my influ-
ence, I consulted with her what was best to be done as I was
anxious to cut off the wart in the presence of at least fifty
persons. The young woman who was under my inflnence
immediately went to the other end of the room and began
to breathe over the head, eyes and finger, and in the course
of ten minutes she pronounced E. Collins to be ready for the
operation. I immediately pared off the wart, including a
portion of skin at the base. The removal of the wart from
the base was so complete that at least a table-spoonful of
blood was lost. The finger was dressed with cotton-wool and


208 Report of Cases treated with Mesmerism

bound with sticking plaister; and after half an hour the
patient was awakened. She knew nothing that had been done^
and could only believe that the wart had been cut off when
it was shewn to her in a basin. As a further test of the veiy
great sensibility of the surface from whence the wart had
been removed^ three days afterwards she came to have the
dressings removed^ when I attempted to apply very slightly
the nitrate of silver^ which gave her very considerable pain
as she was then in her natural state and not in mesmeric
sleep.

Loss of Voice, — Jane Rogers^ aged 14 years^ had lost her
voice for several months in consequence of repeated colds ;
and^ when other medical treatment had failed, I succeeded
in restoring her voice, by mesmerising her for several days.
She then caught a fresh cold and I put her under the care of
another mesmeriser who soon succeeded in restoring her
voice, which has remained well through the whole df the past
winter.

Loss of Voice. — Palmer, aged 21 years, a porter, had lost
his voice for ten days, during which time he had been under
the care of a medical man. One evening he presented him-
self at one of my stances. He could then only speak in a
whisper. He was successfully mesmerised at the first attempt,
the voice in great measure restored, but was lost as soon
as he was awakened. The following day he was again mes-
merised; the voice was again restored; and it has remained
quite well ever since.

Loss of Voice, — E. Steer, had lost her voice for three
months. During this time she had been under the care of
the family medical attendant without any benefit. She was
now mesmerised for several weeks ; her voice was completely
restored ; and it has remained quite well ever since.

Loss of Voice, — A groom, at a public house, had lost his
voice for several months when he presented himself at one of
my stances. He was successfully mesmerisecl the first time,
and his voice restored in the presence of eighty persons.

Acute Rheumatism.^^Mr. C. whose former attacks of acute
rheumatism I have published in The Zoist^ Jan. 29, 1851,
again sent for me, and I found him unable to move in
bed, from an attack similar to the former. All the parts
affected were much swollen and very painftil, and there was


in the Exeter Mesmeric Institution. 209

complete inability to move. I then gave him suitable reme-
dies^ and he was mesmerised twice daily with immediate and
constant reUef : and at the end of ten days he was enabled to
resunxe his occupation; on former occasions^ without mes-
merism^ he has been disabled for three months from a similar
attack.

Severe Chronic Rheumatism. — Bodley, aged 70 years, ap-
plied to the Exeter Mesmeric Institution at one of my stances.
He had not been free from pain for seven years, and was com-
pletely crippled from rheumatism, and was obliged to walk
with two sticks. He was put into mesmeric sleep, at the
first attempt, in three minutes. At the end of ten days he
was quite restored and free from pain.

Severe Chronic Rheumatism. — Hooper, aged 63 years,
crippled from rheumatism for several years, was mesmerised
for a fortnight and completely restored.

Severe Chronic Rheumatism. — Hooper, aged 56 years,
brother of the preceding, also crippled from rheumatism.
He was mesmerised for a fortnight and completely cured.

Severe Chronic Rheumatism. — Crabb, aged 42 years, had
suffered from rheumatism for two years : had been a patient
in the Exeter Hospital and applied in a crippled state at one
of my stances. He was so much relieved the first time as to
be able to run all the way home, a distance of nearly half a
mile ; and after a few more applications of mesmerism was
quite restored.

Severe Chronic Rheumatism. — A farm servant was so
crippled from rheumatism as to be unfit for his occupation ;
he was mesmerised for ten days and quite restored.

Chlorotic Ancemia unth Anasarca. — D. aged 21 years, had
been the subject of chlorotic anaemia for two years. The
countenance had the appearance of spermaceti. There was
cedema of the under eyelids and cheeks with considerable
oedema of both feet, and a disinclination to take the least
exertion as it produced an uncomfortable palpitation of the
heart. She had been under medical treatment for a long
while before I saw her, and, as there was no propect of im-
provement, she was advised to try mesmerism. This was
continued for three months combined with suitable medical
treatment. At the end of this time she was restored to such

VOL. IX. p


210 Report of Cases treated with Mesmerism

a state of vigorous health as she had been a stranger to> from
the commencement of her health being impaired.

Rheumatism and Anasarca. — ^An elderly lady had been
complaining for some time of inability to take her usual
exercise^ as it was attended with pain over the whole system ;
and she was seldom free from pain^ even when she was per-
fectly quiet. The face and abdomen^ legs and feet, were
dropsicml. She was submitted to mesmerism and suitable
medical treatment for a few weeks, by which her health was
so much restored as to enable her to walk ten miles a day
without any inconvenience.

Hysteria with violent Convulsions and Delirium* — C. B.,
whose case I mentioned in The Zoist, July, 1850, should
attract the notice of every well-wisher of the human race.
During the last seven months I have been called to see this
young woman in hysteria with violent convulsions or delirium
at least fifty times. Almost every attack has been the result
of fright of some kind or other, of which she has been very
susceptible since a narrow escape from drowning fifteen
months ago. On my arrival I have found her either uncon-
scious or delirious, and she has generally been in one of those
states at least an hour before I have been fetched, as the
friends have always wished to avoid giving me the trouble to
attend her ; and, whether I have found her unconscious or
delirious, I have seldom been more than tu?o minutes in
bringing b&[ under my mesmeric influence, when aU her pre-
vious sufferings have immediately vanished : and after half
an hour or so she has invariably given me directions as to the
time of awaking her.

Sunday evening, May 25, 1851. I am just returned from
witnessing one of the above scenes^ and I must here record
the great difference of my feelings in reference to another
case of the same violent character that I have witnessed
witiiin the last week. In this latter case I had never seen
the patient in hysteric convulsions before, and on my arrival
I found her struggling and unconscious ; and, as I had never
before attempted to mesmerise her, I luid no alternative bat
to wait for a moment of consciousness and give her a dose
of medicine, and she had no sooner taken it than the hysteric
convulsion returned, and continued with slight interruptions
for several hours.

Violent Mania with strong hereditary predisposition, com-
pletely cured by mesmerism. — ^E. F., a young gentleman, in


in the Exeter Meimeric Institution. 21 1

his sixteenth year: his father is now and has been in an
asylum for these four years past : his grandmother^ on his
father's side^ died deranged. This young gentleman was at
school ten miles from Exeter^ and determined to win the
prize of his class. He studied so hard as to become de-
ranged. The medical attendant on the father attended the
son for fourteen days, and now considered the case as hope-
less. Whilst in this wretched state, the patient had torn
every nail of his hands from its root, and, he being in this
hopeless state, the mother flew to mesmerism as the last
resource, as her only child had passed the whole of the four-
teenth night in violent delirium. As I and my mesmeriser
went to the country town, my mesmeriser soon induced mes*
meric sleep^ and we had the gratification of bringing him the
whole way to Exeter in a quiet state in an omnibus; and
after eleven days perseverance, we had the further gratifica-
tion of restoring his intellect, and in the course of a few weeks
he was quite restored to health. He has remained quite well
ever since, now twelve months.

Loss of Voice. — ^Elizabeth Chapman came to one of my
m^meric stances, and could only speak in a whisper. She
was successfully mesmerised on the first attempt, and after
four times her voice was quite restored.

«

Deafness of seven years' duration. — Elizabeth had

been so deaf for seven years as to be unfit for service. She
was mesmerised for four months, and the hearing so much
restored that she heard conversation in an ordinary tone.

Wry Neck. — Cooley, aged 14 years, had the chin perma-
nently fixed over the right shoulder for three months before
she applied for my advice. Any attempt to turn the head
was attended with considerable pain. She was now mesmer-
ised, but not so regularly as I could have wished, as more
time was required to effect her cure, which her irregular
attendance protracted to five weeks. The head at the end of
this time haid resumed its natural position, with its ordinary
moveableness without pain. This is a case pointing out the
necessity of regularity in the application of mesmerism.

Pericarditis completely relieved by mesmerism. — E. Mead,
aged 22 years, had suffered for many months from pain over
the region of the heart to such an extent as to render her
unfit for service. Pulse quick and wiry; every pulsatioi^
produced pain, which was increased by exertion ; countenance

p 2


212 Report of Cases treated fvith Mesmerism

florid and anxious. Suitable treatment combined with mes-
merism has removed all her sufferings^ and she has returned
to her situation quite well after three weeks absence.

Strumous Ophthalmia. — Harris^ aged 5 years^ had been
subject to strumous ophthalmia for nearly two years ; a great
part of this time she had been a patient in the Exeter Eye
Infirmary without any benefit. The day she was brought to
me the chin was resting on the upper part of the breast-bone
to avoid the lights in addition to her wearing a green veil.
There was an ulcer on each cornea. Mesmerism combined
with medical treatment for three weeks completely restored
the eyes to their natural lustre^ and she had no further need
to wear a veil.

Strumous Ophthalmia. — Reed^ aged 5^ years^ had been
subject to strumous ophthalmia for 18 months. She likewise
had been a patient of the Exeter Eye Infirmary for many
months. When she was brought to me there was an ulcer on
each cornea, the chin resting on the breast-bone to avoid the
lights in addition to a green veil. This little patient was
treated with mesmerism and other suitable remedies, and at
the end of five weeks her eyes had resumed their natural
lustre: and the eye-lashes, which had fallen off. had now
grown again. She had now no further need to ;ear a veil,
and she could run about in bright sunshine.

St. Vitus's Dance. — I., a little girl, 11 years of age, whose
case I reported in a former number of The Zoist, was on a
visit to some friends in the country, when she was allowed to
ride a very spirited pony. The animal ran away with her
and threw her off. The symptoms of St. Vitus^s dance soon
made their reappearance, and were not relieved by ordinary
medical treatment. When I saw her she was partially para-
lyzed ; the whole body was incessantly agitated by involuntary
movements ; she could not hold a cup in her hand or walk a
few steps without falling. Mesmerism combined with suit-
able medical treatment was now continued for six weeks, and
perfect success has been the result.

Benefit from mesmerism in a case of severe injury from a
fall.—T. Beedle, a carpenter, March 20, 1851. Whilst he
was repairing the roof of a house, the ladder slid away and he
fell to the ground. When I arrived I found him in a state of
collapse, and it was necessary to give him cordials with am-
monia : and, as soon as reaction had taken place, the breath-


in the Exeter Mesmeric Institution. 213

ing was short, harried, and very difficult: there were no
bones broken. I then bled him and gave him an aperient,
which produced no alleviation. The countenance was now
very anxious, and difficulty of breathing very distressing. I
was fearful some vessel might have given way internally, and
I told the friends I apprehended a fatal result, and that mes-
merism offered the only chance for him, which must be con*
tmued by a relay of mesmerisers throughout the night. At
my morning visit I was delighted to find my instructions had
been strictly followed with the most satisfactory result. It
was necessary to keep him in bed for several days, and mes-
merism was persevered with until he was enabled to resume
his occupation, as he did at the end of a fortnight from the
accident.

Tivo cases of prolonged mesmeric sleep, — Jane Berry, a
servant living at Mr. Crabb^s, chandler, High street, allowed
a neighbour to try to mesmerise her; and he succeeded.
But, elated with his success, he lost all control over his sub-
ject, and one evening I was fetched to give instructions how
to awake her. Perceiving the mesmeriser had lost his firm-
ness, it was necessary to transfer her to Mr. Bead, my mes'-
meriser, who in the course of an hour and a half succeeded
in awaking her. About a fortnight after this transaction, a
young man in the family thought he should be more success-
ful, and soon produced mesmeric sleep on Tuesday evening,
March 11, 1851, and then found he had no power to awake
her. As he found all his efforts unsuccessful, my mesmeriser
was again in request, and remained with her on the Wednes-
day aU day and night. On Thursday he thought she was
awake as she opened her eyes. He then took her for a walk
of three miles. He had to remain with her for seven days
and seven nights before he could awake her. During this
time she took her usual food and medicine when necessary.
Having passed eight days in mesmeric sleep, she was awoke
with perfect unconsciousness of everything that had transpired.
Her exhibitions of independent clairvoyance were very re-
markable and too numerous for the pages of the valuable
Zoisty which should be the receptacle of facts of usefulness.

Within a few weeks of this occurrence, Emily Lang, a
servant girl of Mr. Whippell, mercer. High street, in this
city, came to my Friday evening siance to have her toothache
relieved, and this was effected. She was then thrown into
mesmeric sleep, and after half an hour was awakened, and
returned to her family. She went to bed and slept all night
and got up early next morning, and attended to her domestic


214 Rapid Cure of a Fit of the Gout, by Mr, Capern.

occupations. At 10 o'clock ahe was found sitting on a chair
asleep^ and about an hour after this I was fetched to awake
her. As she remained in this state during the day and nighty
on Sunday morning she was removed nearly half a mile to
lodgings, and late the same evening she was awoke without
the least consciousness of what had transpired.

In addition to the above recorded cases, my mesmeric
siances have been and are so numerously attended, that a
multitude of cases have been relieved without any comment :
and as mesmerism has been proved to be a specific in the ir-
regularities of the female system, hundreds of females have
experienced the blessing of mesmerism.

I shall be happy to give any respectable person the name
and residence of any case I have reported in The Zoiat,

J. B. Parkeb.

:ie*:ie When modical treatment was adopted simultaneously
with mesmerism, we cannot expect our readers to be satisfiea
that mesmerism effected the cure. If medical treatment had
previously failed, and there was success when this was con-
tinued with mesmerism, the fact is no proof that mesmerism
effected the cure or contributed to it, because we do not
know that the medical treatment, when introduced with mes-
merism, was not superior to that which had been employed
without mesmerism. — Zoiet.


XII. Rapid Cure of a Fit of the Chut, at the Mesmeric In-
firmary. By Mr. Capern.

Benjamin Dickenson, late of Tiverton, now of No. 1, Store
Street, Bedford Square, on Saturday the 14th June, 1851,
was attacked with gout in the right foot. On the following
Monday, being advised to go to the Mesmeric Infirmary,
I did so with the impression they would do no good. In
less than ten minutes after Mr. Capern had begun to operate
I was quite relieved from pain, and can now walk quite easy,
and wear my boots, as though nothing had happened.

Benjamin Dickenson.
June 17th.

I have great pleasure in adding my testimony to the
wonderful effects of mesmerism in the above case, a complete
cure being effected in six or seven minutes by Mr. Capern,


Review qf Dr. Gregart^s *^ Letters,^^ ^c. 215

notwithstanding the patient had just stated that he could
not have walked^ or even put his foot to the ground^ had the
room full of gold been offered to him : and for forty*eight
hours previous he had endured the most intense pain^ com-
pelling him to go to the Infirmary in a cab. But he walked
home without requiring a stick.

ROBEBT WhEELEH JoB^

Artist in Photography,
June 23th, 1851. 7, Newman Street.


XIII. Review of ^* Letters to a Candid Inquirer, on Animal
Magnetism. By William Gregory, M.D., F.R.S.E.,
Professor of Chemistry in the University of Edinburgh.


if


If we were anxious to present our readers with some sign
indicative of the progress of mesmerism, perhaps we coiUd
not select one more clearly conveying the required informa-
tion than these letters by Dr. Gregory. They are written in
a style well calculated to bring down a somewhat difficult
subject, as regards its connection with physiological science,
to the comprehension of the popular reader and inquirer.
To our taste the style of composition is perfect. When we
made a remark of this kind to a friend a few days ago, he
replied, " The work is written by a Gregory,*' implying that
a knowledge of this fact was a guarantee for the character
and style of the production.

Having said this much regarding our opinion of the lite-
rary merits of the work, let us without further preface pro-
ceed. Did ever critic undertake his task and find no fault
with his author? The most laudatory review, even if the
laudations reach the last page without alloy, winds up with a
sentence or two of recommendation for a second edition, and
it is said to be almost impossible for a member of this captious
and fault-finding race to bestow any praise without neutral-
izing the effect with a small quantity of that article which is
too often their staple commodity. Well then, if necessary, we
confess our weakness, but, like all our fellow labourers, we
protest in the name of all that is just and honourable, that
we will not find fault without good and sufficient reason.

When we opened the book, and turned over the titled-page,
unfortunately^ the first impression was disagreeable. Our
eye caught at the dedication, and we stood aghast, — '^ To His
Grace George Douglass Campbell, Duke of Argyle, K.J.,
F.R.S.E., &c., &c., &c.'* What ! we cried aloud, are the
days of literary flunkeyism not yet numbered? We w^re


216 Review of Dr. Gregory^s

painfully reminded of the course pursued by the men of a
past age, who always placed their productions under the
fostering care of some great man, and in terms of fulsome
adulation besought him to protect with the shadow of his
mighty wings their puny bantling. It is still the custom, and
we see no good reason why the custom should be changed,
for ship-builders to solicit some fair lady to pronounce the
name, and to break a bottle of wine against the bows of the
vessel which they have constructed, ere she passes into the
waters. Coach-builders always tell their customers that
certain patented improvements are approved and patronized
by my Lord This or That. In every town in the kingdom,
the fashionable grocer and tea-dealer, the tailor, the corset-
maker, and the peruke-manufacturer, think it essential to
their welfare that they should be patronized ; each advertizes
his wares with the important announcement in gilded letters
over his shop-window, that by special license he is so-and-so
to the Duke of Belgravia ; or, perhaps the still more fortu-
nate puffer, to Her Majesty, Prince Albert, and the Royal
Family, — and so let it be. The many are attracted by such
trifles, and they frequently reap their reward. In this world
of competition men think that they elevate themselves above
their fellows, more by the display of trash tinsel, by the
glare of some ridiculous sham, than by the striving after a
positive improvement in their several callings.

We had thought, however, that literary men were influ-
enced by higher motives. We had thought, at any rate, that
the teachers of philosophy were so profoundly impressed with
the value of their researches — so conscious that the informa-
tion which they publish from time to time was worthy of
being well received without the assistance and patronage of
the world's great men, that we confess we felt something
more than astonishment when we discovered that Professor
Gregory had dedicated his book to His Grace the Duke of
Argyle. If it were necessary to solicit the assistance of some
protecting arm, were there no veterans in science to whom
this compliment could have been offered ? Were there no
labourers in the field with Dr. Gregory ? Are there no men
who have stood boldly fortli, and in spite of obloquy and
the frown of the great and powerful, advanced the science
which is now attracting so much attention ? What has the
Duke of Argyle done for the advancement of Mesmerism ?
He is young in years, but destined we sincerely trust to take
rank amongst the real labourers in the scientific vineyard,
and when he has done so, it will be time enough for the
workers to step out of their way to perform an act of homage.


" Letters on Animal Magnetism,^* 21 7

We can see no good reason why a veteran in philosophy — :
and moreover^ oae^ who from his position should have set
an example of good taste and literary independence to those
who naturally look to their teacher at college for example —
should follow a worn-out tracks and one which the great
majority of thinking men have long considered undignified.

We confess that we are jealous for the independence of
literary men. We look with the most profound respect on
the literary exertions of thinking and scientific men, — their
labour is more glorious than dl the handicraft which the
workers of this busy hive perform, — they are the pioneers in
all that relates to true progress ; and we feel certain that, as
a body, they are impressed with such exalted notions of their
calling, that they would wish their productions to take posi-
tion on their intrinsic merits, without any attempted bolstering
from whatever quarter the same may be tendered. Above
all, they should be true to themselves ; and to do this, they
must recognize their brethren, — their fellow labourers, and
endeavour to give to each his due. We cannot conceive that
our author is acting in accordance with the ethical rules which
should be our guide, if he commence the illustration by a
subject like mesmerism, — concerning which there have been
so many difficulties to overcome, and in the practice of which
many men have sacrificed their professional position, — by
ignoring the exertions and the contributions which they have
added to the general stock of natural facts. By the courage
of these men, mesmerism has progressed, and at the twelfth
hour, when the victory is won — when the difficulty is to find
an individual whose judgment is worth appealing to, who
does not recognize the truth of what has been written during
the past thirteen years — we say, at this hour of the fight, for
a person in Professor Gregory's position to voluntarily come
forward and to give the greater number of his compeers the
cold shoulder, is, in our opinion, one of those extraordinary
proceedings which we should not have expected to meet with
in the occupant of a professorial chair in modern Athens.
Nowhere do we find that he refers in the manner he ought
to have done to the* labours of men who have worked in the
path he is now pursuing. He quotes plentifuUy from the
cases he saw with Dr. Darling, a gentleman who has lately
arrived from America on a purely mercantile speculation.
We mean no disrespect to Dr. Darling ; we merely] wish to
remark that Dr. Gregory appeals to his experience with this
gentleman, but nowhere quotes the cases or refers to the
experience of those who have worked for years without any
other fee or reward than the approval of their own conscience,


318 Review of Dr. Gregory's

and who by their exertions have rendered it safe for a pro-
fessor of chemistry to speak out boldly. He three times
sHghtly refers to TTie Zoist, but nowhere informs his readers
that it is the only repertory of facts published in this country
— ^that it is a quarterly journal^ and has appeared regularly
for the last eight years. He nowhere quotes or appeals to
the experience of EUiotson^ Ashburner^ Sandby, Thompson^
Chandler^ and a host of others, who have all recorded cases,
and written papers replete with philosophical observations
tending to elucidate this most difficult subject. He says that
the Bev. Messrs. Townshend and Sandby " have published
small works on mesmerism/' when the fact is, they have both
published most interesting and instructive works as large as
his oum, and each containing a larger amount of practical
information — ^the result of several years of study and research.
For thirteen years — we are speaking now in the name of
mesmerisers in general — we have had to fight against the
ignorance and prejudice of the community, the opposition
not confined to the vulgar and uneducated, but most fre-
quently met with amongst persons in that station of life which
is considered to be refined ; and none but those who have
suffered from the annoyances can have the least idea of the
extent to which the persecution was carried, or of the means
used to damage the reputation of those who were guilty of
the crime of speaking the truth, and of not bowing down
in obedience to the dicta of men who spoke without inves-
tigation, and denounced those they should have esteemed.
The members of the medical profession who have been inves-
tigating mesmerism, have had to submit to the most un-
principled opposition. The periodical literature of their
profession, with scarcely an exception, denounced them in
the most severe terms, and their brethren were told over and
over again, not to meet in consultation any one who practised
the hated science. Here is a specimen only a week old —

** Qaackery and imposture must cease in the profession. Men
doing the bidding of idle lords and ladies, dabblers in physic, varying
their gossip of the chorus of Grisi and Taglioni with the astonishing
lies of mesmerism and homoeopathy, must be made to feel that they
are more accountable to their profession than to their fashionable
companions." — Lancet^ June 21, 1851.*

The public voice was frequently raised in obedience to

* We have ererj reason to believe that dus wa« written bj a person whose
conduct was so disgusting at the house of a gentleman, a short time back, where
there was a case of mesmerism under investigation, that he was threatened with
personal chastisement, and was compelled to apologize for the gross language he
used.


t(


Letters on Animal Magnetism." 219


the same opinion^ and all those who have been engaged on
this subject have experienced the damage which a determina*
tion to do what thej knew to be rights effected in their social
position. The vulgar at all times are ready enough to seize
on a subject which their prurient imaginations can pervert^
and it needed but the signal from those organs^ which are
falsely considered to speak the sentiments of the profession,
to hound on a class, by far too numerous, who always wait
till some opinion is pronounced concerning a new truth, be-
cause they think they can then quote a high authority. Thus,
frequently, the advice of the most unworthy persons was
followed, and as a necessary consequence, great mischief was
the result. However, the world now recognizes the truth,
the many are convinced, but the few remain where they
have been for years, the occupants of the opposition benches,
having all natural facts and the greater number of thinking
men arrayed against them.*

We regret that Dr. Gregory has used the term animal
magnetism. The use of this term was discontinued because
it involved an hypothesis, and the term mesmerism was substi-
tuted because it did not involve an hypothesis. When we say
that we mesmerise a person, although the word is derived
from the name of the modem discoverer of the power, we do
not mean to suggest an hypothesis, we simply state a fact —
we recognize a power to do a certain something by means of
passes, or by some other means ; but concerning which power
we know but little. We have a precedent for this course in
the use of the term galvanism. Mesmerism is a word now
generally used throughout the country, and it is beginning
to be used on the Continent, and when there is nothing to
be gained in exactitude of expression, we would not advocate
the alteration of our nomenclature. We object therefore to
the term animal magnetism, because it implies an hypothesis,
and we adopt the term mesmerism because it represents the
existence of a fact. The use of what we consider the objec-
tionable term introduces a looseness of expression. For in-

* MesmerUm is again attracting attention, we may be qnite snre of that, for
the waverers, and those who only speak out when it is safe to do 80, begin to
breathe more freely, and to whisper a few words in fayour of the truth. Amongst
this class we rank the Messrs. Chambers of Edinburgh. Some years ago they
published several papers in their journal, but after a Uttle time they ceased to do
so« not because they had changed thidr opinion, but because it was possible, from
the position which the medical profession had assunrad, that the sale of their
journal might become injured. Thus the men who had done so much towards
enlightening the masses by bringing down to the money-capabilities of all men
Qseftd and scientific infbrmation, treated a great sdentific truth as a mere article
of merchandize. On a recent occasion they refiised to insert an account of the
astounding results obtained by Dr. Esdidle in India, and gave as a reason, that
tAe sale ^theirjoumai would suffer. They have now become courageous again,
and advocate the truth, when their advocacy is of little importance.


220 Review o/Dr, Gregory* s

stance,* Dr. Gregory says : " I would urge on the reader the
important consideration, which to me appears the turning
point of the controversy, that all, even the most marvellous
facts of magnetism, have occurred spontaneously without any
magnetic process/' Now, to make this sentence intelligible
— for Dr. Oregory does not mean to say that the phenomena
of magnetism are witnessed independently of the power or
force of magnetism — it requires the word "animaV' intro-
duced in two places, and after having done this, the sentence
is incorrect, because we possess no proof that there is such
a power as animal magnetism, and if not, we have no right
to speak of an animal-magnetic process. Again, Dr. Oregory
thinks its highly probable, and so do we, that the power, the
existence of which Beichenbach has demonstrated, is identical
with the power which we use when we produce a mesmeric
effect, or, rather, when we induce certain phenomena, by
whatever means accomplished, and which for the want of a
better method of explaining ourselves we rank for the present
under this title. Now, if the "od^' force or power be iden-
tical with what we have been in the habit of recognizing as
mesmeric force or power, and if Beichenbach be correct in
his statement, that this ^'od'' force is not identical with mag-
netic force or power, what right have we to speak of the phe-
nomena of animal magnetism, or of the animal magnetic
process ? In fact we are quite at a loss to account for the
anomaly, that Dr. Gregory should agree with Beichenbach
in destroying the identity of the two powers, and ^et continue
to use a phraseology which will lead the superficial reader to
believe the reverse. He has written a work descriptive of
certain phenomena which he designates by a particular title,
and the whole force of his arguments indicates that the title
which he has chosen tends to give an erroneous explanation
of the phenomena I

We shall not enter into an examination of the proofs
which Beichenbach advances for the existence of this ^' od^'
force, because we wish our readers to study for themselves his
philosophical researches, which they can easily do by reading
the translation of his work. There are two editions, one by
Dr. Gregory and another by Dr. Ashburner. The latter we
consider the best, not only on account of the faithful charac-
ter of the translation, but because it is enriched throughout
with copious and learned notes, embodying a vast amount of
curious information. While we are on the subject of nomen-
clature, we must enter our protest against a still more unjus-

* Dr. G. is guilty of this constantly : and we all should be obliged to commit
this error, or talk of animal-magnetizers animal-magnetizing patients at the animal-
magnetic infirmary, if we gave the name of magnetism to mesmerism. — ZoUt.


t€


Letters on Animal Magnetism.^* 221


tifiable innovation by Dr. Oregory. We allude to the word
which he uses for the purpose of designating this new force
we have now under consideration. Beichenbach in his work,
after referring to the isolated manifestations of this force
which have been noticed during the past seventy years, and
the great variety of names which have been applied to it, all
mori or less delved from certfdn lesemblancls or complica.
tions with magnetism, with which he contends, " that it has
no more identity than magnetism has with crystallization,
than crystallization with electricity, electricity with affinity,
than heat with light, &c.,^' says : —

" But as long as an empty iron rod, which will not support an
iron filing, displays as mucn power in regard to the force, of which
we are treating, as a powerful steel magnet of equal size ; so long as
magnets and crystals are met with acting with equal strength upon
the nerves, the former of which will support masses of iron, while
the latter will not lift up a filing, and no scientific account can be
offered of this vast distinction, so long will the two forces remain
essentially different, so that we cannot examine them under a common
point of view ; and therefore, for the present, a peculiar fitting name
appears to be necessarily required. Leaving the etymological deri-
Tation to be justified at some other opportunity, I will take the
liberty to propose the short word Od for the force which we are en-
gaged in examining. Every one will admit it to be desirable that an
uni-syllabic word beginning with a vowel should be selected for an
object which occurs universally in an infinity of complex conditions
of the material world, for the sake of convenient conjunction in the
manifold compound words. The words magnetism, electricity, &c.,
are by far too long for convenient use in the language of science.
When tiiey are lengthened by additions, as in vital magnetism,
animal magnetism, &c., it becomes as burdensome as it is falser for
these things do not belong exclusively or even principally to life,
still less are they identical with magnetism. To that which supports
iron, and constitutes the compass, let us leave the old name, with
the original conception of a supporter of iron, which belongs to it.
If then the term Od shall be found acceptable, in general use, for
the force which does not support iron, and for which we require and
seek a name, the nomenclature for all its various kinds of derivation
may be easily formed by composition, &c." — Ashbumer^s Transla^
tion, pp. 223-4. «

Now, in spite of the reasons given by Reichenbach for
the course he has pursued, in spite of the great caution mani-
fested on his part. Dr. Gregory substitutes the word " odyle'*
for the word " od.*' He says : ^' In the magnet, this influence
which Beichenbach has named odyle,'* p. 249. We think
this is taking a great liberty, and we have reason to know
that Reichenbach is by no means pleased with this substitu-


222 Review of Dr. Gregory's " Letters."

tion of terms. Dr. Gregory has a fancy for the word odyle.
He does not like the word od, because we presume it looks
and sounds so very odd. He does not suggest his term as a
quasi-improvement in a foot note to the translation of his
author^ but he absolutely alters the text and perverts Beich-
enbacVs meaning for the sake of introducing his pet word.
We contend that a translator has no right to pursue this
course. When he professes to place before the public the
researches and scientific thoughts of a foreign philosopher,
he is bound to do so. Any suggestions he may have to offer
find their proper place in a foot note. It is not as if Beich-
enbach had expressed a doubt about the word. He does no
such thing, and is most positive in his reasons why the word
should be uni-syllabic, and even suggests the addition of the
other syllable when necessary, as od, — odic. When an author
does this, and gives his reasons for so doing, surely a trans-
lator should act honestly by those who are not able to go to
the original work for their information. We object on prin-
ciple to the course Dr. Gregory has pursued, and moreover
we object to the word he has introduced because it will not
bear critical examination. What do we want to represent ?
It is a force or power. We surely, then, ought to choose a
word which will do this. Beichenbach did so. But when
Dr. Gregory converts od into odyle, he derives his second
syllable from the Greek vXtj, signifying matter, which is just
what we do not want to represent. Again, the word will
produce confusion, because we have words terminating in the
same way in constant use in chemistry, such as formyle, ethyle,
&c., all signifying certain forms and combinations of matter.

In many parts of the work we meet with expressions which,
in our opinion, indicate that Dr. Gregory^s practical experi-
ence is limited. He seems to have obtained a vast portion of
the matter descriptive of the phenomena developed during the
mesmeric sleep, from the literary productions of others, and
we regret that he does not make a practice of recording the
authority he quotes from. The beautiful experiments which
Dr. Elliotson has described in so many papers in TTie Zoist,
are not noticed, as they should have been, by reference and
quotation, although we detect over and over again that Dr.
Gregory must have perused them, and that Dr. Elliotson is
most probably the authority from whom he receives his infor*-
mation. We had marked many passages for comment, but
our space warns us to conclude.

At p. 89, there is the following passage : — " If the mag-
netic sleep has either been followed by any discomfort, or if
it has been found difficult to awake a person from the sleep,


Books received. 223

this has arisen solely from the inexperience of the operator^
who has rashly produced a state which he knows not how to
control/' Now, this is certainly not strictly the fact. The
inability to awake a patient may occur to any one, even to
the most experienced mesmeriser. It has occurred to us oyer
and over again, and all that is necessary to teach the experi-
menter is this. In such a predicament, let the patient sleep
•—no harm can ensue.

At p. 91, we are told ''that at Calcutta Dr. Esdaile never
fails to magnetize the natives.^' We believe he has frequently
failed.

Dr. Gregory is in error when he supposes that it has not
been ascertained whether in ordinary spontaneous somnam«-
bulism the sleep-walker remembers his previous acts of som-
nambulism. In Dr. Elliotson's Physiology^ p. 868, and in the
American edition of Dr. Spurzheim's Phrenology, will be
found recorded cases, proving that in spontaneous somnam-
bulism, the various attacks of sleep-waking had the memory
of each other, as in mesmerism.

But we must conclude. We are convinced that the work
will be of great service to the progress of mesmerism. It fur-
nishes a very good, although not a strictly fair, resume of
what has been accomplished; and by bringing Reichenbach's
researches to bear upon the higher phenomena of the mes-
meric sleep, it will undoubtedly excite the attention of expe-
rimenters and prompt them to carefully record their observa-
tions.

W. C. Engledue.


%* We are veiy anxious that the public should know that Dr. Symes'*
translation of Gall's octavo work on the Physiology of the Brain, published in
1824, is now completed, and will appear as soon as the number of Subscribers is
sufficient. The work contains a great deal that is not in the Quarto and Folio
editions, which were published in 1810-20 ; and those who purchase the transla-
tion will have this advantage over those who possess the original, that they will
have the anatomy of the brain and the beautiful and numerous plates of those
large editions, originally published at 30 and 40 guineas ; whereas no anatomy
and no plates accompany the original of this translation. We ourselves know the
translation to be faithful, and the additional views of phrenologists since the time
of Gall are appended.

BOOKS RBCBXVED.

Letters to a Candid Enquirer on Animal Magnetism. By William Chregory,
M.D., F.R.S.E., Professor of Chemistry in the University of Edinburgh. Lon-
don : Taylor, Walton and Maberiey, Upper Gower Street. 1851.

The Meanerist's Manual of Phenomena and Fk«ctioe ; with Directions for ap-
plying Mesmerism to the Cure of Diseases, and the Methods of producing Mes-
meric Fhoioiiieoa. Intended for domestic use and the instruction of be^nners.
By George Barth. Second edition. London : Baillike, Regent Street. 1851.

Thottghts on the Nature of Man, the Propagation of Creeds, and tiie Forma-
tion of Human Character, London : Clayton, Strand. 1850. (Second copy.)


224 Notices to Correspondents, SfC.

The Moral and Religious Guide to the Great Exhibition. London : Longman
and Co. 1851.

The Great Exhibition Prize Essay. By the Rev. J. C. Whish, M.A. Incum-
bent of Trinity Church, East Peckham, Kent. Longman and Co. 1851.

Somnolism and Psycheism ; or, the Science of Qte Soul and the Phenomena
of Nervation : as revealed by Vital Magnetism or Mesmeiisniy considered Physi*
ologically and Philosophically. With Notes of Mesmeric and Psychical Expe-
rience. By Joseph W. Haddock, M.D. Second edition, enlarged and illustrated
with Engravings. London: Hodson, Portugal Street. 1851.

The Human Body and its connexion with Man. IHosferated by the principal
Organs. By James John Garth Wilkinson. London : Chapman and Hall. 1851.

Marriage with a Deceased Wife's Sister. A Letter to tiM Lord Bishop of
Exeter. By W. Campbell Sleigh, Esq., of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-law.
London : Ward and Co. 1851.

The Unit. New York. Three numbers.

Elements of Catholic Philosophy ; or, Theory of tiie Mstitfal System of the
Human Mind. London : Longman and Co. l&O.

MOTXCB8 TO CORRB8PONDBMT8.

We have again exceeded our Umits : and must defer several valuable commu-
nications. We wish to do justice to the most meritorions, conscientious, and
useful lecturers on mesmerism, Messrs. Jackson and Davy ; but could not find
time to go through all the recent Irish newspapers, or room in the present
number. Nothing shall prevent a due notice of them in our next.

Miss Martineau and Mb. Atkinson. — ^We quite agree with Indignation,
in his letter to us, in which he says, — '* I am very glad of the castigation of
Atkinson and Martineau. I quite agree with it. l^eir book is a very impudent
production. They treat all otiier writers and thinkers on the subject in the same
way that the Pope does the Anglican bishops. The amount of ignorance displayed
by Miss Martineau as to what has been done and thought, is really sometUng
marvellous. Her friend has behaved very ill, and in a manner which betokens a
decided want of conscientiousness.''

The Institute is dead and forgotten. Cachinnua should direct his letter of
condolence to Mr. Martin, Surgeon^ Reigate.

The Rotal Medical and Chibuboical Society's conduct is lament-
able. It allows a scientific fact to be pronounced a falsehood, and a fellow-
creature to be falsely accused of confessing imposture ; but when proofs of the
truth of the fact and the falsehood of the accusation of confession are offered,
it sturdily refuses to admit the proof or hear a word. Mr. Ward's letter pub-
lished in our last (p. 106) has been unnoticed by the President : and the Society
lies degraded and the wayfarer shakes his head in surprise and pity as he beholds it.


Brrata In the Uust Number.

In Mr. Lloyd's paper, page 53, line 34, for ** obtain refreshment," read take
refreshment. Mr. Lloyd's present address is Fulford, near York.

In Master McAlpine's case, page 27, line 20, for " Osborne," read Onslow.

It is our duty to mention that the other case of lumbar abscess reported in
July, 1848, No. XXII, as cured, has lately proved fatal : not that the cure was
not perfect, but that want of care produced a recurrence of the disease, just as
any inflammation may be brought back by carelessness in diet or not guarding
against cold, or a broken leg or dislocated shoulder well set and recovered from
may be rebroken or redislocated. The poor boy being well acted as though he
had never been ill and had as strong a back as any other boy. He rode on horse-
back to excess, hard and long, and used to terrify persons in the town by entering
it so dashingly : and this impetuosity occasioned him to have several fialls. His
back was not strong enough to stand this ; and the parts fell again into inflam-
mation, and suppuration, and all the consequences. This ought to be a grave
lesson to patients and those who should guide them.


THE ZOIST


No. XXXV.


OCTOBER, 1851.


I. A Mesmeric Scene a thousand years ago. Communicated
by Mr. Thomas Chandler * With a note by Dr. EUiotson.

'* The new-fangled doctrines of hydropathy, homoeopathy, and mesme&ism,
were also touched upon and criticized." — Notice of Dr. J. A. Wilson's Harreian
Oration,t London Medical Gazette^ July 5, 1850, p. 41 : Editor, Dr. Alfred
Taylor ; Proprietors and Publishers, Messrs. Longman & Co.

'' Mesmerism is evidently a new birth : whether a legitimate ofispring or of
surreptitious and spurious race, I leave to the worthy doctor to determine.'' —
Mr. W. Smith, of Belper, Derbyshire, in the London Medical Gazette, Aug. 16,
1850; p. 239.

TO THE EDITOB OF THE ZOIST.

Sir, — In Mrs. Jameson's third volume of Sacred and Le-
gendary Art, entitled. Legends of the Monastic Orders — a
work full of instruction and amusement — I was much pleased
to find the accompanying sketch, which by the kind permission

* Mr. Chandler has employed an artist to lithograph the scene, and presented
us with impressions for all the copies of our present number. We return our
best thanks to him for this additional proof of his disinterested zeal in the great
cause of mesmerism. He has been one of our earliest, most frequent^ valuable,
and valiant contributors,* and of course, like every other contributor, without any
remuneration. For The Zoiet is a labour of love. No writer or supporter of it
has gained, or desired to gain, a fieurthing by it. On only one occasion has a con-
tributor received from us as a compliment the number which contained his article :
and that was sent because we fancied that the purchase might be inconvenient.
Mr. Janson continually advertizes the work in the west-country newspapers at his
own expense, though he is entirely unconnected with it. — Zoist,

t Reviewed in Zoistt No. XXX.

* See his papers in No. II., p. 165 ; VII., p. 373 ; X., p. 189; XII., p.
486 ; XIII., p. 102 ; XIV., p. 206 ; XV., p. 328 ; XVI., p. 571 ; XVIL, p.
1 ; XVIII., pp. 135, 142 ; XX., pp. 404, 407, 409 } XXI., pp. 56, 59 •, XXU.,
pp. 188, 208 ; XXV., p. 70; XXXII., p. 393.

VOL. IX. Q


226 A Meifmeric Scene a thousand years ago.

of the authoress I send for publication in the next Zoist, if
you think it worthy of a place.

Mrs. Jameson informs me that Bernard von Orlay was
born about 1490, and died about 1560. By this it would
appear that the curative power of mesmerism, which, as
has been clearly demonstrated, was known to the ancient
Egyptians, has never been entirely lost sight of, but has been
revived at intervals. It remained, however, for the present
age to establiish it on a firm foundation.

I think no one can dispute the fact that St. Ewald is heal-
ing the maniac by means of mesmerism, though of course he
did not call it by that name. He lived about 700.

The learned authoress has this remark upon it, p. 82 :
" I have etched the scene of the miracle. The attitude of
St. Ewald is precisely that which I once saw assumed by a
famous mesmerist, when throwing a patient into the mes-
meric sleep.^^

I remain, yours faithfully,
58, Paradise Street, llotherhithe, Thomas Chandler.

July 14th, 1851.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.

The Saint is represented ea^tending his thumb and fore and
middle fingers towards the patient's front, while his ring and
little fingers are bent against his palm. This is a very
ancient representation of an exertion of influence.

To the edition of the anatomical works of Galen by
Joannes Guinter, in 1531, is prefixed the figure of a man,
with his hands crossed upon his breast, imploring another
person, who is stretching forth his own hand towards the
su£Ferer, and whose thumb and two adjoining fingers are eoe-
tended, while the ring and middle fingers are bent.* Galen
flourished in the second century.

In another edition of Galen's works, published in 1625,
to the book de sectis ad eos is prefixed the figure of a man
with his right hand stretched forth ; the thumb and two ad^
joining fingers are extended, while the otJ^er two are bent,\

The works of the ancient Egyptians were destroyed at
the period of the invasion by the Romans, and we know no
more of their medical and mesmeric practice than can be
learnt from the history and writings of other nations who
were acquainted with Egypt in its prosperity and decline.

* Claudii Galea! Pergameni de anatomicis administrationibuSf lib. ix. : Joanne
Gainterioy 1531.

t Galeni Isagogici libri. — ^Venetiis apud Juntas, 1625.


With a Note by Dr. Elliotson. 227

Their medical practice was divided into the ordinary and the
occult. Its practice was forbidden to the common people^
and permitted to kings^ grandees^ and priests only.* In the
monument which is named the Table of Isis, are three per-
sons : one lies upon a bed^ a second places his left hand upon
the other's breast and holds up his right wide open^ while a
third, in front of the second, who is looking towards him,
holds his right hand above the head of the recumbent person,
with his thumb and two adjoining fingers extended and the
two others bent. The gesture and attitude of the third person
are very striking : he evidently is giving directions.f

The Indians, according to M. Gauthier, like other nations,
observed that the mesmeric force was great, active, and pene-
trating in the thumb and two adjoining fingers, united and
extended, while the two others were bent ; and that the force
was diminished when all were extended.

The god Vishnu has four arms and eight hands : two arms
and their hands are raised, the others at a level with the
chest. The thumb and two adjoining fingers of the raised
hands are extended, the two other fingers bent. Each of these
four hands is surrounded by flame.

The four hands of the two other arms are wide open. The
god presents them all with an evident intention, which was
not discerned by antiquarians because they were ignorant of
mesmerism. :(

Other divinities, Chiven, Parachiven, Ravanen, Farachati,
are represented sometimes with four arms, sometimes with
many, and all the hands are represented open and extended,
or with three fijigers raised and two bent.§

For all these remarks I am indebted to M. Aubin Oauthier's
work, entitled. Introduction au Magnitisme, Examen de son
existence depuis les Indiensjusqu^c^ PSpoque actueUe, sa thiorie,
sa pratique, ses avantages, ses dangers, et la n6cessit6 d£ son
concours avec la M^decine, Faris, 1840 : and I take this oppor-
tunity of thanking M. Gauthier for his kindness in presenting
me with a copy. The representation in Galen's dis sectis ad

* The art of curing by occult medicine^ by frictions called my$ierum8j among
the Egyptians, is attested by Prosper Alpinus, who wrote a work upon Egyptian
medicine.* The occult remedies were principally frictions, which are declared by
him to be different from ordinary frictions, the imposition of the hand, the action
of turning the finger round and round, and breathing. They used friction in
pestileoticd fevers, small pox, the most inveterate dysenteries, &c.

t Pluche, Hisioire du Cielt tom. i., pi. 2.

t Sonnerat, Voyages aux Indea orientoles, t. i., 1. ii., pi. 32, p. 155.

§ Same work, pp. 158 — 175.

* JOe Medicina Egyptiorum ; De secretie auaptliis quif'tis JEgypii «<» ioletit,

Q 2


/


228


A Mesmeric Scene a thousand years ago.


eos seems to me to be of God creating or energizing the uni-
verse : and that in Pluche* to be of the process of embalming.
The highly accomplished^ refined, and benevolent author
of the Facts in Mesmerism — a charming work, so well known
in the mesmeric world and so courageously and nobly pub-
lished in 1889, when very few bestowed a thought upon
mesmerism, and the majority of those who condescended to
witness it or converse about it sneered contemptuously in all
the vulgar pride of ignorance, and of which a second edition
appeared in 1844,t has favoured me with the following inte-
resting note, after a conversation upon the mesmerism of the
ancients : —

" My dear Elliotson, — I perfectly remember when I was
in Berlin some years ago, that the director of the Egyptian
Museum, Professor Passalaequa, shewed me both painted and
sculptured figures, on coflfins, and on stone cases, — figures
which seemed so evidently to be in the act of mesmerising,
that the Professor himself, without any remark of mine,
pointed them out to me, with the observation that it was evi-
dent the Egyptians practised mesmerism. The figures were
standing with hands protruded over other figures that lay on
couches below them. Prom every finger streamed a ray, or
jet, as of light, or water, down to the figures that seemed to
be the recipients of the energy.


* That in Pluche resembles an en^ving of the process of embalming in
Conyers Middleton's Germana quadanit &c.

t Fads in Mesmerism^ with reasons fir a dispassionate enquiry into it. By
the Rev. Chaunoey Hare Townshend, A.M., late of Trinity Hall, Cambridge.

See also Mr. Townshend's Weaioer's Boy and other poems. London, 1821.

Descriptive Tour in Scotland. Brussels, 1840.

Sermons in Sonnets, with a text on the New Year, and other poems. London,

1851.


With a Note by Dr. EUiotson. 229

" If this can be of any use to you, you are at full liberty
to make use of my name.

" Believe me, my dear EUiotson, yours sincerely,

" C. Harb Townshend.
" 21, Norfolk Street, Grosvenor Square,
"Sept. 5, 1851.^'

This may be merely an imaginary representation of
efflux. But we all know that patients sometimes declare they
see light emanating from the head or hand of the mesmeriser :
and the following faot, recorded by me in my account of the
cure of Miss Barber, from whose breast mesmerism dissipated
an unquestionable cancerous scirrhus, is very striking : —

^' While I am drawing up her rigid arm in the waking state with
her eyes free^ she sees as soon as the limb begins to ascend, but not
before, a colourless stream pass from it to my hand, of the same
breadth as the number of the points of the fingers which I employ
at the moment. Though I cover the part with a shawl, single or
folded, the appearance is equal. This statement may be relied upon
as securely as the phenomena in the chemist's laboratory. If I
stiffen her body and then make tractive passes from it, as soon as it
advances the stream from it is seen. If I draw with both hands,
there are two streams side by side from the part. The farther I
stand from her, the fainter the stream appears ; and, if at a great
dbtance, there is no visible stream, nor traction. She compares it
to moonlight, and it is stronger in the dark. She sees the same from
my hand if I dart it at a stiffened part, but not till this begins to
relax. On darting my hand at a part not rigid, there is no such ap-
pearance. In tractive passes, the stream seems to wave back towards
her when my hand moves towards her again before the next tractive
pass. If I breathe upon a stiffened part she sees no stream of light."
—ZoUt, No. XXII., p. 225.

It is certain that among all heathen nations from the
remotest antiquity, and among Christian nations from the
apostolic age to the present moment, clairvoyance and ap-
parent miracle have been taking place. A miracle etymolo-
gically means merely something astonishing, perhaps unac-
countable on the principles known to the witnesses and others
who hear of it : and, in this sense, there always have been,
and to the greater portion of mankind still are, miracles. But
a miracle properly means an occurrence which the laws of
nature positively could not have produced, and which has
occurred through the exertion of a supernatural power. In
this sense we may presume that there has never been a miracle
among heathen nations, nor among Christians since the apos-
tolic age. What in an ignorant age and nation appears a
miracle, and what in an enlightened age and nation (thongVv


230 A Mesmeric Scene a thousand years ago,

the ignorance^ cruelty, immorality, and childish views, de-
sires, and occupations prevalent more or less among the
greater proportion of mankind in even every European country
at this very moment compel me to regard our civilization
as worth the name merely by comparison with what is greater
barbarism) passes among the badly educated, however high
their rank, pretensions, and authority, for a miracle, is no mi-
racle at all in a better-informed age and nation and among
the few who are so enlightened and have so cast off the
prejudices of false education (perhaps in too humble a po-
sition to be considered superior men and women, and per-
haps manually labouring persons) as to take a clearer view of
the world around them, made up of inanimate, vegetable, and
animal, portions into one and, to out apprehension, infinite
and eternal whole. The miracle of one age, or of one class
of persons, is no miracle to another age, or another class of
persons. Phenomena produced by men who are a little ac-
quainted — and no one is more than a little acquainted — with
the optics, mechanics, electricity, magnetism, chemistry, &c.,
of nature, have in all ages caused the uninformed to regard
them as dealing with imaginary, poetical, beings called spirits,
and term them sorcerers and dealers in black arts with an arch
spirit, whom these uninformed style the devil and believe to
be a real personage, though so clearly figurative and poetical.

The phenomena of mesmerism are no longer denied by
any but the ignorant, or by the unprincipled and designing
who laugh in their sleeve at those, hundreds of whom are me-
dical men, whom they persuade to disbelieve. But to such
extent does ignorance prevail even in Great Britain that these
natural facts are ascribed by thousands to supernatural agency :
in fact, to the devil. Mr. Sandby is said to have bestowed
too much of his excellent book, called Mesmerism and its
Opponents, and which every person should read, to shew that
mesmerism is not satanical. But I am satisfied that he has
not written a line too much. I am acquainted with two
peeresses living in Belgrave Square, fine-looking women, who
go to Court and the House of Lords in all the splendour of
the English aristocracy, and yet are so stupidly ignorant as
to believe mesmerism the work of the devil, and keep quite
clear of me, though I am on the best terms with their hus-
bands. Many among the higher orders are equally ignorant
and silly. Many clergymen of the Church of England still
talk the same nonsense : and religious ladies without number,
even Protestants, who consider the Roman Catholics alto-
gether superstitious, and themselves, with all their ignorance
and superstition, not superstitious at all : as well as peasants


mth a Note by Dr. EUioison. 231

and a swarm of the frequenters of all kinds of places of wor*
ship in towns.

Some of those who are too enlightened to admit of super-
natural agency in the production of natural phenomena have
been too little informed to recognize certain phenomena as
natural^ and have therefore denied them altogether or as-
cribed them to other natural causes than the right. Among
these is the powerful, learned, truth-loving, valiant, and inde-
pendent Conyers Middleton,* whose works I purchased in
1816, and studied with delight month after month. t In his
celebrated Letter from Romey he contends that the multitude
of the ceremonies and forms and views of the Roman Ca-
tholic church are merely adoptions from Paganism, one set
of names being substituted for another.}: Equally celebrated
is his Free Enquiry into the MiracuUms Powers which are sup-
posed to have subsisted in the Christian Church from the ear-
liest ages thrtmgh several successive centuries : By which it is
shewn that we have no sufficient reason to believe, upon the au-
thority of the primitive Fathers, that any such powers were
continued in the Church after the days of the Apostles.^ In
this work (which as well as the Letter from Rome every body
should read) he attempts to dispose of all the miracles per-
formed after the death of the apostles, by ascribing in general
the statements to folly or fraud and denying their truth.

That there was no miraculoujs, no supernatural, agency,
will be doubted by no person not steeped in superstition from
his infancy by his family or strongly disposed to superstition
by his organization.

Now there can be no question that the ancient fathers
were, whatever their merits, partial talents, partial learning,
and partial worth, grossly superstitious, credulous, ignorant,
and, like all such persons, not so scrupulous as cool, dignified,

* The celebrated Dr. Parr says : — ** Dr. Middleton was a man of no common
attainments ; his learning was elegant and profound ; his judgment was acute and
polished ; his taste was fine and correct ; and his style was so pure and harmo-
nious, so vigorously flowing without being inflated, that, Addison alone excepted,
he seems to me without a rival.''

t The Miscellaneous Works of the late reverend and learned Conyers Mid'
dleton, D,D.f Principal Librarian to the University of Cambridge f 8fc. 4 vols.
4to. London, 1752.

t A Letter from RomCf shewing an exact cof^ormity between Popery and
Paganism f or the religion of the present Romany derived from that of their
heathen ancestors. To which are added j 1. a Prefatory Discourse ^ containing an
answer to aU the olijections of the writer qf a Popish book, intituled^ ** The Ca-
tholic Christian instructed, 8fc." with many new facts and testimonies in further
confirmation qf the general argument of the Letter; and 2. a Postscript f in which
Mr. Wdrburton*s opinion concerning the Paganism of Rome is particularly con-
sidered. 1729.

§ 1748.


232 A Mesmeric Scene a thotisand years ago.

and philosophical enquirers into nature^ — into what is^ to
speak figuratively^ a great and indisputable revelation. A
learned writer, " Mr. Dodwell, one of their most zealous ad-
mirers,'' "frankly owns that their way of reasoning is loose,
sophistical, and declamatory, far short of the solidity of the
modems, who excel them not only in philosophy and learning,
but in the knowledge of antiquity and even of their own lan-
guage : and all that he places in favour of their interpretations,
especially of the New Testament, is, that they should not be
wholly slighted, though they have but little sense in them, be-
cause they were agreeable to the taste of those ages.'^* " Le
Clerc, an eminent writer of ecclesiastic history, declares there
is not one of them, who made any scruple in those ages of using
the hyperbolical style to advance the honour of God and the sal-
vation of men."t There can be no question that the accounts
of miracles in the writings of the fathers are generally very
ridiculous and must be rejected by all enlightened persons of
the present day. St. Austin declares that the bones of St.
Stephen, which had lain buried and unknown for nearly four
centuries, were revealed in a vision to one Lucianus, a priest,
by Gamaliel, the celebrated doctor of laws, at whose feet St.
Paul had been bred, instantly cured the gout, the stone, and
fistula, restored the blind to sight, and raised five dead per-
sons to life ; two of whom were carried dead to the reliques
and brought back alive, two restored to life by the virtue of
the garments only which had touched the reliques, and a
fifth by the oil of the martyr's lamps : and St. Austin then
apologizes for not recording an infinite number more, well and
publicly certified (Middleton, iv.). St. Chrysostom declares
that St. FauVs pocket-handkerchief could once do greater mi-
racles than all the Christians of his day could do with ten
thousand prayers and tears fib. J. What must be a genuine mi-
racle when it occurs — the raising of the dead (not of the en-
tranced or those in a state of what is loosely termed suspended
animation) — was, according to Mr. Dodwell, a common occur-
rence in the days of Irenseus 1% Other statements need not
be rejected as evidently false, but as proceeding from erro-
neous views. Such are numerous cures of diseases, many of
which cures were evidently spontaneous intermissions of pa-
roxysmal diseases, or spontaneous permanent cessations, or
the result of mental impressions. Casting out devils, or

* Prafai. ad IHsaeriat, inlrerueumt § 12. See Middleton's/n^utry, SfC, iii.

t Hi8t, Eccles,, p. 681. See Middleton, ib,

X ** Exdtabant mortuos in ecclesiis apostolicis, quos tamen raros legimus.
Ezcitabant similiter mortuos fraternitates Irenaei, nee illos tamen adeo raros sed
sjEPissiME.'' — Dissert, in Iren.f § 10, t. ii., p. 165. See Middleton, iv.


With a Note by Dr. Elliotson. 238

demons, comes under tbe same head : as it was the ancient
superstition of most countries^ and is in barbarous nations
and among the worst educated of all European nations at
this moment^ that certain diseases of the nervous system are
possessions.

Cures equal to any among Christians of the ages after the
apostles occurred among the Pagans, whose temples, accord-
ing to Strabo (1. viii.), ''were constantly filled with the sick,
imploring the help of the god : and had tables hanging around
them in which all the miraculous cures were described/^ Ac-
cording to Fausanias, " in the temple at Epidaurus there were
many columns or tables of brass or marble, and six of them
remaining to his time, inscribed with the names of men and
women who had been cured by the god ; with an account of
their several cases, and the method of their cure ; and there
was an old pillar besides, which stood apart, dedicated to the
memory of Hippolytus, who had been raised from the dead/'*
" There is a remarkable fragment of one of these tables still
extant, and exhibited by Oruter in his collection, as it was
found in the ruins of ^sculapius's temple in the island of
the Tiber in Rome : which gives an account of two blind
men restored to sight by iEsculapius, in the open view, and
with the acclamations of the people, acknowledging the ma-
nifest power of the god. Upon which the learned Montfaucon
makes this reflection, that in this are seen, either the wiles
of the devil, or the tricks of Pagan priests, suborning men
to counterfeit diseases and miraculous cures.t^'

As to the performance of the Christian post-apostolic
miracles, St. Chrysostom, TertuUian, and Augustin confess
that the administration of miracles was committed " to boys,
to women, and above all to private and obscure laymen, not
only of an inferior, but sometimes also of a bad, character :"
that heretics confirmed their own doctrines by raising the
dead, strengthening the weak, foretelling the future: and
that wicked men performed some greater miracles than holy
men could accomplish (Middleton, ii.).

Middleton assures us laymen " that we are informed at the
same time by the Christians themselves, that the same cures
as their own were performed also by knaves and impostors of
all sorts and nations ; by heathens, Jews, and heretics ; which,
according to the principles of those days, were ascribed either
to the power of demons, or to the magical force of amulets
and charms.^' ''TertuUian and all the fathers in general

* "Corinth., 1. ii., c. xxvii.

t Antiqu.f torn. 2, p. i., 1. 4, c. 6. Also Grater, Inscr., p. Lrxi. ; sec Mid-
dleton, VI,


284 A Mesmeric Scene a thousand years ago,

declare that magicians and wandering jagglers performed
many wonderful things^ above the force of human power^
which they wholly ascribe to the assistance of daemons'' (iv.).
^' There is not a single historian of antiquity^ Greek or Latin^
who has not recorded oracles, prodigies, prophecies^ and mi-
racles/' " Many of them are attested in the gravest manner
and by the gravest writers^ and were firmly believed at the
time by the populace '' (v.).

While there can be no reason to difiPer from Middleton as
to the utterance of much downright falsehood and error^ and
the occurrence of much that was ordinary natural result un-
connected with the means employed^ the knowledge which
we now possess of natural facts unknown to the majority of
educated persons of modern times renders it indisputable,
not that Middleton was mistaken in concluding that there
were no miracles on these occasions, but that things occurred
which he took for granted to be impossible, and effects were
produced by causes which he took for granted to be inade-
quate to their production. He was ignorant of the facts of
mesmerism. He did not know, as we do, that clairvoyance
in 8leep.waking, and withont sleep-waking, is, and Jways
has been, a fact :* he did not know the occurrence of cere-
bral sympathyt of sensation, idea, and inclination ; nor the
power of the silent human will, j: He did not know the effects

* ClaiiToyance in the mesmeric state, No. IV., p. 467, Mr. Brindley; Y.,
p. 139, Mr. Brindley ; YI., p. 271, Dr. Engledue, p. 291, Dr. Symes, p. 293,
Mr. Atkinson, Earl of Donraven; YII., p. 365, Mr. Brindley; YIII., p. 293,
Col. Garwood, p. 483, Mr. Adam Gordon, pp. 495, 510, ^arl of Danraven, p.
501, Dr. Costello, p. 504, Mr. Healey, editor of the Medical Times, p. 507, Rev.
G. Sandby, p. 511, a Lady, p. 512, Count d'Orsay, p. 514, Dr. Edward John-
son, p. 516, Rev. H. Sims, p. 518, Rev. T. Robertson, p. 521, Mr. John
Auldjo ; IX., p. 29, Mr. Kiste ; X., p. 220, Mr. Jago (now of Plymouth), p.
226, Mr. J. Hands; XI., M. de Gosse; XII., Dr. Storer ; XIII., Dr. Buxton
and Mr. Fry, and at pp. 51, 152, Mr. Luxmoore; XYI., Mr. Luxmoore ; XYIII.,
Mr. Topham; XIX., Mr. Hockly, Lieut. Hare; XX., Mr. J. Hands; XXII.,
Dr. Ashbumer; XXIII., Mr. Parsons; XXI Y., Lord F. Fitzclarence, Major
Buckley, Mr. Parsons, and Mr. Tubbs ; XXY., Mr. Parsons, Mr. Barth ; XXYI.,
Earl of Dude, Mr. Hazard; XXYII., Dr. Esdaile, Mr. Barth, Miss Aglionby,
Mr. Haddock; XXIX., Dr. Elliotson, Lieut. Hare; XXX., Major Buckley;
XXXI., Earl Stanhope; XXXIII., Mr. Saunders, Lieut..Col. Davidson.

Clairvoyance independent of Mesmerism, No. XYI., Mr. Prideaux ; XYII.,
Mr. Clark; XYIII., Mr. Jonas Forbes; XIX., Dr. EUiotson; XX., Mr. Pri-
deaux and Mr. Roffe; XXI., Capt. BeU; XXIII., Goethe; XXYIL, John
Wesley; XXIX., Mr. Hockley ; XXXII., Dr. Davey, Mr. Hayman.

t Sympathy of Brain, No. YI., p. 269, Dr. Engledue ; IX., p. 29, Mr.
Kiste; X., p. 236, the Hon. Carolina Courtenay Boyle; XYIII., Mr. Topham,
Mr. Chandler, Mr. Holland; XIX., Mr. Hockley, p. 241, Dr. Elliotson;
XXYI., Rev. E. Topham; XXYIII., Mr. Roflfe; XXIX., Dr. EUiotson, Mr.
Harley ; XXX., Mr. H. S. Thompson ; XXXII., Mrs. Cooper.

X Power of the silent will. No. YII., p. 365, Mr. Brindley ; XI., Mr. H. S.
Thompson ; XIX., Dr. Ashbumer and Lieut. Hare ; XX., the Rev. L. Lewis ;
XXX., Mr. Cattell and Mr. H. S. Thompson.


With a Note by Dr. Elliotson. 235

of mesmeric processes nor their power over disease^ not to say
of all kindsi but of any kind. He did not know the stupen-
dousness of the power of suggestion and imagination. With
the knowledge which we possess, he would have allowed that
oracles and prophecies were often genuine : that heathen and
post-apostolic wonders, though not miracles in the sense of
supernaturalism, were not the less possible, and in innumer-
able instances were no doubt true. Many Jews and Chris-
tians, though not inspired nor miraculously endowed, acted
like persons of all the nations who had preceded them and
who surrounded them, and spoke and accomplished things
which ignorance only ascribed to supernatural agency, holy
or impure as their revilers might choose, or denied from the
fancy of impossibility.*

In speaking of the miraculous cures narrated by partial
and interested or by weak and credulous men, he says that
they will always furnish reasons to suspect men either deluded
themselves or willing to delude others : and, unless we know
more precisely the real bounds between nature and miracle^ we
cannot pay any great regard to such stories (iv.) . Yet he did
assume that he knew these real bounds : and therefore as-
sumed that things, not allowed by him, and very properly not
allowed, to be miraculous, could not be at all. This is the
error of the multitude in the present day. They at once
deny the truth of all mesmeric facts on the score of impossi-
bility : though there is nothing in those facts contrary to reason
or experience, each occurring from time to time indepen-
dently of mesmerism, and their experience respecting the mes-
meric production being simply defective, not contradictory.

Many things we may fearlessly declare to be impossible
and at once deny. For instance, in my Human Physiology,
p. 672, I have related the following impossibility : —

Voltaire advises the devil never to address himself to
the faculty of physic, but to that of theology, when he wishes
to impose upon mankind. However, in 1 726, a poor woman,
at Godalming in Surrey, pretended that, after a violent long-
ing for rabbits while pregnant, she brought forth these ani-
mals : and persuaded her apothecary, Mr. Howard, a man ot
probity who had practised for thirty years, or, in common

* Facts respecting the antiquity of mesmerism in various nations ^ be fomid
in Mr. Lloyd's ^'AUusions to Mesmerism in the Classics," ^°^',-^ *?„ ^
See No. XIX. for his " Magnetism and Mesmerism in Antiquity ; XXlll. tor
Col. Bagnold, Dr. Esdaile, and Mr. Forbes's examples in India; XXVlll. tor
Capt. Bagnold's in Africa and the American Indians ; XXIX-, for " Mesmerism
among the Ancients," by Mr. Lloyd; XXXIL, for Dr. Webb on the Umdoo
Mesmerism ; XXXIII., for Lieut.-Col. Davidson on Mesmerism in India.


236 A Mesmeric Scene a thousand years ago,

language^ a highly respectable practitioner of great experience^
that in the course of about a month he had delivered her of
nearly twenty rabbits. George the First, not thinking it im--
possible^ sent his house-surgeon^ Mr. Akers^ to inquire into
the fact : and the royal house-surgeon returned to London^
convinced that he had obtained ocular and tangible proof of
the truths and promised to procure the woman a pension.
The wise king then sent his seijeant-surgeon, Mr. St. Andr^ :
and the seijeant-surgeon returned to town a firm beUever.
They both returned with rabbits as proofs, and the rabbits
had the high honour of being dissected before the king. An
elaborate report of their production and dissection was pub-
lished by the serjeant-surgeon : and the honest, severe, vain,
and visionary Arian clergyman, Whiston (of the faculty of
theology indeed), in a pamphlet (for a furious controversy
arose between the believers and the unbelievers), shewed that
the miracle was an exact fulfilment of a prophecy in Esdras.
An eminent physician. Sir Richard Manningham, backed by
Caroline, the Princess of Wales, detected the cheat, and, on a
threat of a dangerous operation and imprisonment, Mary
Tofts confessed the whole.

But I will now give an instance in which I conceive that
Middletoa waa mistaken, and rejected as rubbish what was a
truth and an example of a power not a trace of the know-
ledge of which have I discovered in any of his numerous
writings, though I have carefully studied them all, most de-
lightful and invigorating as they are to read. '^ St. Jerome,^'
(he says, iv.,) has related a most ridiculous story, in his life of
St. Hilarion, the monk, where, after a narration of many
cases of devUs expelled by that saint from the bodies of men,
he adds, ^ But it is to little purpose to talk of men ; brute ani-
mals were daily brought to him, mad or possessed : among
the rest a Bactrian camel, of an enormous size, which had
already destroyed many people : above thirty men were em-
ployed to drag him along with the strongest ropes. His eyes
were bloody : his mouth foaming : his tongue rolling and
swollen : and his strange roaring above all terrors. The old
man ordered it to be let loose : upon which all who were
about him ran away immediately : the saint came forward
alone, and in the Syriac tongue, said, ' thou dost not affright
me, devil, with all that bulk of body : thou art one and the
same in a little fox or in a camel :' and so he stood firm with his
arm stretched out : and as the beast advanced towards him,
furious and ready to devour him, it presently fell down with
its head to the ground : so that all present were amazed at
the sudden change, from so great a fierceness to such a tame-


Good effect of Mestnerism in an Epileptic Fit, 237

ness. Upon which the old man took occasion to teach them
that the devil used to seize cattle^ out of his hatred to men^
to whom he bore so great a grudge^ as to wish^ not only that
they, but all which they had, might perish/ " Now Middleton
would not regard this as a most ridiculous story, were he
alive at present, and acquainted with the power exhibited
by the Duke of Marlborough on two ferocious dogs by making
passes with his hands before them,* and by the reverend Mr.
Bartlett over a savage bull on staring fixedly at the auimal.
A more striking case of the power of mesmerism over a brute
never occurred. The good people were all wrong in suppos-
ing that the devil or demon had got into and was in pos-
session of the poor and only infuriated animal, as the Jews,
even after they became Christians, invariably did, like all
Asiatics, in cases of insanity, epilepsy, and other nervous dis-
orders, or that the Syriac tongue was comprehended : but the
account of the energy of the fanatic devotee, the stretching out
of his arm, with no doubt a determined stare as he boldly
advanced, and the falling down of the huge beast powerlessly
before him, and its sudden change from fierceness to tame-
ness, are a most graphically mesmeric description.


II. Good effect of Mesmerism in an Epileptic Fit. By Mr.
Masset, jun. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.

"Mesmerism was the first blow struck at the prosperity of the College and
Hospital (North London, and now called University) , which have been gradually
sinkmg since.''t — Mr. Wakley, Lancetf June 21, 1851.

Red Lion,t Highgate, 28rd May, 1851.

Dear Sir, — I have the pleasure of sending you a correct
statement of a fact that occurred on 13th ult., at a place
called the Bald-faced Stag, Finchley Boad.

I was walking out on Tuesday evening the 13th, when I
saw a crowd ; and, upon asking what was the matter, was
informed that there was a woman dying, who had been taken

* Middleton, iii. See ZoUi, No XXXI., pp. 297, 298.

Dr. Gregory says (Letters to a Candid Enquirer, p. 341) : ** The Duke of
Marlborough magnetized a very fierce dog by gazing alone." The Duke mes-
merised two fierce dogs; but employed manipulation with both. There is no
mention of '* gazing idone :** and of one dog his Grace says, *' he ran into his
kennel, and hid his eyes from the manipulating process.''

t Mighty must be the power of mesmerism to cause the downfall of two such
great institutions : and durable must be its effects, for thirteen years have passed
since University College and Hospital had a particle of mesmerism in their poor
insides. — John Elliotson.

% Mr. Masset was staying there at the time, but holds an office in the Custom
House.


238 Good effect of Mesmerism in an Epileptic Fit,

into the stable adjoining the inn called the Bald-faced Stag.
I went in and fonnd a woman in fits^ foaming at the mouth.
A policeman of Highgate had hold of her by one arm, and
two labourers (or navvies) held the other. She was struggling
against them with all her might. I immediately, without
asking questions, commenced making passes downwards from
her head to her feet, and in less than two minutes she was
quite calm. I made the men leave hold of her, and then she
complained of pains in her side. These I relieved instantly by
local passes on the place she pointed out to me. I then in-
stantly threw her into a beautiful calm sleep and she remained
quite still, her breathing being hardly visible. I left her, and,
caUing on the following morning, found her in the same at^
titude in which I had left her. The men, who had slept on
some straw by her side all night (one of them was her hus-
band), told me that she had walked thirty miles, and that
she often had fits, but that she had slept well all night. I
ordered some breakfast for her and left her, and have not
heard of them since. If you think this worthy of The Zoist,
or of being made known, the information is at your disposal.

I remain, dear Sir, yours respectfully,

A. Masset, jun.
F.S. I am known to Dr. Symes, of Grosvenor Street, and
can vouch for the accuracy of all stated here.
To Dr. Elliotson.


NOTE BY DB. ELLIOTSON.

If Mr. Masset had done this in former days, he might
have been glorified with such a portrait as that of St. Ewald,
and perhaps been also canonized in due time. Some of the
feats of Mr. Capern would, in those days, have established
his right to saintship also.

" William Isaacs, carpenter, West-Exe, Tiverton, in the employ
of John Heathcoat, Esq., M.P., was suddenlv seized in the autumn
of 1847, while employed at the bench, with severe pains in the
groin, and which immediately afterwards extended to the foot. The
pain near the knee was excruciating. He thought at first it was
caused by a splinter ; but on examination it was proved that this was
not the case. He was carried home by two men and put to bed, and
two surgeons were immediately called in, who advised his removal to
the hospital. The agonies he endured were fearful. On one occa-
sion, an attempt being made to remove him in his bed, he fainted
with the pain. The leg and foot were enormously swelled — so much
so, that when he extended his leg straight before him he was unable
to see his toes. This continued several weeks. The surgeon believ-
ing that there was a formation of matter, made an incision in the


By Mr. Masset. 239

limb near the knee. A small quantity of matter then issued from
the wound, but the operation afforded him no relief whatever. He
was confined to his bed for nearly two months, during which time
the pain was most excruciating. He had no rest whatever : he was
nearly worn out for want of sleep : his appetite was gone, and he
was reduced to a state of great weakness, despairing of obtaining
any relief from the surgeons. Being strongly advised by his friends,
he applied to Mr. Capem. He procured a pair of new crutches and
left his home for the purpose of going to Mr. C.'s residence. He
was unable to put his foot to the ground, and it was only with great
difficulty that he could manage to get along. Happening to meet
Mr. Capem on Exe Bridge he stated his object. Mr. G. invited him
to turn back and accompany him to the Swan Inn (not far from his
own house). At the very first pass he experienced some reUef ; and
in less than five minutes he was entirely free from pain. He was so
dehghted and astonished at his sudden and unexpected cure, that he
hardly knew what he was about ; and without even waiting to thank
Mr. C., shouldered his crutches, and ran off to the workshop, where
he made his appearance, to the great amazement of his /ellow work-
men, who knew the state to which he had been reduced. From the
workshop he proceeded to the club-house, where he gave notice of
his intention to relinquish his sick-pay. This was on a Friday, and
on the following Monday he was in full work. He has never had a
return of the pain, or lost a day's work since. At the time of his
application to Mr. Capern he had no faith whatever in mesmerism."
" Statement of John Lethbridge, labourer, West-Exe. — * Whilst
at work in a hay-field, occupied by Mr. Ford, in the summer of 1847*
I felt a sudden attack of inflammation of the knee. The swelling
was so rapid that my friends were compelled to cut my clothes from
me. I was confined to my bed and under the surgeon's care for six
weeks. From thence I was removed to the Exeter Hospital, where
I was a patient nine weeks. There was also a contraction of the
muscles of the knee. An issue was inserted near the knee ; and
thirty peas were placed daily in it for the purpose of opening a
wound. This caused me great pain. At the time of my leaving, a
consultation of surgeons was held and the case pronounced hopeless
and incurable, and they stated that I should be crippled for life. I
was compelled to walk with two sticks. I met with Mr. Capem in
West-Exe, and he, observing the pain and difficulty I had in walking,
offered to make a few passes over me, which he did, and in Jive mi-
nutes I was enabled to walk without the assistance of any stick.
Within a few weeks the pains left me ; but the stiffness was not
removed for ten or twelve weeks ; after which time I was enabled to
resume my daily labour, and am now as well as ever I was in my
life."*

* The Mighty Curative Powers ^f MesmeHsm^ proved in upwards (if One
Hundred and Fifty Cases qf various Diseases. By Thomas Capern, Secretary
and Resident Superintendent of the Mesmeric Infirmary ; pp. 72, 46. Also see
Zoist, No. XXVI.


( 240 )

III. Striking proofs of the remedial power of Mesmerism over
Epilepsy, By Mr. Rawe, of Lemaile^ Cornwall. Com-
municated by Dr. Elliotson.

'* While the colleges suffer the presence of the Elliotsons, Ashbumers, Hen-
dersons, Gregorys, &c., we can wonder less that other men should mistake their
duties. The quacks must leave us. Confined to the ordinary- paths of the rest
of mankind, and left to their own insignificance, they are simply ridiculous. Mes-
merists and homoeopathists, while pursuing their frauds amongst lunatics and fools,
give us neither umbrage nor disquiet, but within the walls of our colleges they
are scandalous nuisances and an insufferable disgrace." — Mr. Wakley, Lancet,
July 19, 1851 ; p. 66.

Lemaile^ Cornwall, July 8, 1851.

Dear Dr. Elliotson, — In offering to your notice an ac-
count of a cure of severe fits, with a few observations arising
out of the subject, I shall be happy if I can add to the evi-
dence of the value of mesmerism as a therapeutic agent;
more especially in a class of maladies in the removal of which
I have taken a particular interest, namely, nervous disorders
characterized by fits and mental derangement.

In March last I was called on by a woman of the name of
Lobb, accompanied by her son, 10 years of age, afficted with
fits. She had - been advised by Mr. West, a neighbouring
yeoman, in whose employment her husband was, to apply to
me concerning the fits. Her story was, that, about six
months previously, her son one evening received a fright, and
in the following night a fit came on immediately on his going
to sleep : on some succeeding nights in the following week
there was a repetition of the attack, with increasing frequency,
so that in about a fortnight from the first the fits became of
nightly occurrence.

Mr. Fearce, surgeon, of St. Tudy, was consulted and gave
some medicine : but said that, as the seizures were brought
on by a fright, he did not expect to cure them. A short time
after going to bed, the fit invariably came on : the boy con-
tinued from ten to twenty minutes either convulsed or trem-
bling, and then went into a comatose state, without any
interval of consciousness, and would continue so all night,
appearing as though in a frightful dream : he would start,
scream out, and sometimes jump up and get out of bed. He
never remembered any of these things, and was never con-
scious of having had a fit at all.

I found the boy of about the average size of boys at his
age, with light hair, fair complexion, and a head well deve-
loped. I enquired of him if he suffered pain in the head.
He said, '^Yes, Sir.'* "Put your fingers exactly on the
spot.'* With the right hand he touched the organ of Caution.


Remedial power of Mesmerism over Epilepsy. 241

" Is that the only place ?'' « No, Sir/' He then with accu.
racy indicated to me the opposite organ of Caution. His
mother said that, when holding him in the fits, she had often
perceived the sides of his head to be very hot. I told her 1
thought there was great danger of her son's mind becoming
disordered. She said he was already much altered, was be-
coming very stupid, and not like the same boy.

I found the eyes very susceptible to the mesmeric passes :
but the coma induced either at first or subsequently not
deep. The first sitting was on the 23rd of March last, and
he was mesmerised daily for the first six days ; on alternate
days the next week ; and once or twice afterwards.

Very remarkable changes in the disease began to appear
from the first. These I will mention in the order they were
observed. The fits were arrested ; and the night succeeding
the first mesmerising was passed without one, — this being the
only occurrence of stick an exemption for five months. The
headache was not felt after the third day. On the sixth day,
when I enquired of the boy about his sleep, he said, " Mother
says I sleep much better ; but I dreamed a dream last night,
— I thought a snake was going to bite my leg.'' I said,
" How do you know you dreamed : I thought you never re-
membered anything that occurred in your sleep ?" He replied,
" Since I have been mesmerised I remember some dreams."
From this I inferred that the comatose state had merged into
natural sleep, and the delirium into dreams. In a few days
afterwards I found he ceased to dream, and his mother re-
ported that his nights were passed in a quiet slumber. Every
symptom of disorder had now disappeared, and there has been
no return of either of them. Previously to closing this report,
I have sent for the boy, and find that he has been perfectly
well since I last saw him. His appearance is greatly improved.

The above and several other cases have convinced me that
epilepsy is generally curable, but at what stage it may be con-
sidered as past remedy, I am unable to judge from my own
observation. I have recently tried the mesmeric process on
three subjects of severe epilepsy of five years' standing ; males,
aged respectively 28, 11, and 22. In all a beneficial change
is evident, but the least so in the last. In him after the
eleven sittings which he has had there is an improvement in
the expression of the countenance and in the rest at night :
but two fits have occurred. At the time his friends brought
him to me he was passing through a series of frequent seizures,
attended with great aberration of mind.

The second, aged 11, was, when six years old, at the time
of his first attack, an intelligent child and could read fluently.

VOL. IX. R


242 Remedial power of Mesmerism over Epilepsy.

Some years afterwards he did not know a letter of the al-
phabet. His parents thought the disease not so bad for the
last year or two : but for several months it has been getting
worse, and, in the fortnight before he was brought to me,
there had been a fit every night. He has been mesmerised
twelve days, and, during that time, there has been no fit, and
he looks better.

The trial of mesmerism on the other individual has been
longer, and the evidence afforded by the results more con-
clusive. This is an interesting case, as, from the j^oung
man^s competent position, he has been able to obtain the
best medical advice, and fully carry out the modes of treat-
ment recommended. All has resulted in failure : the longest
time he has ever passed without a seizure for just five years
was three weeks, and that but once. His daily visits to me
commenced 22nd of May last. He had one very slight attack
on the fifth day afterwards, and has been quite free since — a
period of six weeks. He was mesmerised daily for five weeks.

I hope to communicate a further account of these cases
when suflBcient time has elapsed to render the results of
greater interest. At present I think they prove that on epi-
lepsy, of several years standing, at least a benefical impression
is made by mesmerism j and the conclusion is rendered pro-
bable that perseverance in the same treatment will effect a
cure.

As diseases affecting the mind must be ranked among the
most terrible afflictions to which mankind is liable, the ques-
tion of the value of mesmerism as an auxiliary in their cure
is of corresponding importance. In the recently published
Annual Report, by Dr. Tyreman, of the Cornwall Lunatic
Asylum, is the following paragraph : — " As has been usual,
the cases of the majority admitted were of an incurable cha-
ra^jter ; 8 having been epileptic, 7 paralyzed, 5 idiotic from
birth, 19 previously insane for a year and upwards, and a few
others, although not so long insane, betrayed symptoms of Iei
generally hopeless character.^' I presume that this may be
taken as a sample of what is met with in all similar institu-
tions, and it is evidently a matter of the highest importance
to ascertain whether the resources of mesmerism are sufficient
to remove a numerous class from this gloomy list. Whatever
conclusion mesmerists may arrive at as to the cure of such
cases, the experiments I have made clearly prove that by the
timely adoption of mesmerism, prevention is practicable, and
generally easy.

I remain, with much respect.

Your obedient servant,

John Rawe.


Cure of a C€t8e of Insaniiy. 243

*^* See Mr. Bawe's delightful cures of two cases of epi-
lepsy in No. XXXIII.

** All imagination^ nothing but imagination/^ will say the
men replete with wisdom : " of imagination all compact.^'

John Elliotson.


IV. Cure of a Case of Insanity, by Mr. Barth. Communicated

by Dr. Ashburner.

" The sev^ty of oar strictures on homoeopathy and mesmerism have met
with very general concurrence on the part of the profession. We have only, it
is proved, expressed plainly and firmly, opinions which had already found place
in the minds of all men who can see and understand what is going on in the
profession.

'' It is because homoeopathy and mesmerism have no place whatever in science,
that wo call upon our colleges to make use of the powers entrusted to them. It
is because these quackeries are synonymous with folly, fraud, and crime, that
we call upon our colleges to act. It is because they are dishonouring, because
they are used by knaves to entrap the credulous and the ignorant, that we insist they
shall not be practised within the limits and under the garb of the profession. Let
the Hendersons, the Gregorys, the Elliotsons, and the Ashburners leave us, and
we are content. With the Quins, the Culverwells, the Courtenays, the Mor-
risons, the Dicksons, and the Holloways, they would be in their proper places,
and if lords and ladies love to consort with such we shall bestow upon patrons
and quacks nothing more formidable than contempt, fiat it is a wilful perversion
of the question to represent sudi advocacy as this as tending in the smallest degree
to limit the freedom of enquiry or to erect that impossible thing — a standard of
medical orthodoxy. We would not allow to quackery even the humblest place in
medical science. We would not wish freedom of opinion to be ventilated in such
odious haunts. We denounce it as fraud and pursue it as such. But we may be
asked to define what is quackery ; we answer practically homoeopathy and mes-
merism are such.

" Of mesmerism we would not speak with any more charity than of homoeo-
pathy. There are circumstances indeed, when practised by the sexes, which
render it even more censurable. Both have their foundation in folly and false-
hood, and end in pranks the most ludicrous and contemptible. Mesmerism is
also the longer lived of the two, for it alleges in its favour certain known but
obscure nervous phenomena of which phjrsicians have not been able to give any
reasonable account. Though its arrogant pretensions and gross folsehoods have
often been denuded and exposed, and though it has been made infamous for a
time, yet its Cagliostros, allured by the love of gain, at each succeeding age
return upon our hands. This most probably is the case to some extent, as long
as wealUi and power are in the possession of very feeble individuals." — Mr.
Wakley, Lancet f June 28, 1851 ; p. lb, &c.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sir, — In transmitting to you Mr. Barth^s case of success-
ful treament of hallucinations, induced by exposure to the
hardships of a military life in hot climates, I may be per-
mitted to express my complete satisfaction that a most worthy
man, an excellent member of the society in which he moves,
has been restored to health by the blessed agency of a force,
the properties of which it becomes daily more imperative that
every honest and honourable medical man should study. It
is easy for knaves to call those men quacks who know more

R 2


244 Cure of a Case of Insanity.

than they do. Vituperation is not argument^ and^ as far as
I am personally concerned^ I feel that the atrocious calum-
nies which have been spread against me, — ^the abominable
attempts at subornation to prove me guilty of crime, are best
answered by continued labours in the righteous cause of mes-
merism, by the publication of truth to the world, by the real
services to humanity that are evident in the cure of diseases
quite intractable by the ordinary appliances of the medical
art. Such triumphs over cerebral disease as are recorded by
Mr. Barth, are sources to us of more real happiness than all
the gratification which any bands of ignorant and envious
men can experience from all the wealth they have gathered
by their sly and cunning slanders issued to coteries of hos-
pital governors, and to the weak and silly women whom they
have duped by their falsehoods.

However deeply interesting is the detail of Mr. Earth's
case, it is by no means a solitary instance of mesmeric cure
of insanity. During the last two years that I was physician
to the Queen Charlotte's Lying-in Hospital, I had two most
interesting cases of puerperal mania eflfectually cured by mes-
meric agency. The stupidities who opposed the practice of
mesmerism in that hospital, and who threatened to call down
upon me the thunders of the Royal College of Physicians,
may now coolly reflect upon the manner in which their back-
bitings of each other, and their most interesting intrigues,
recoil on themselves, and could not injure the cause of mes-
merism. They may gloat on the idea of the immortality that
their self-glorification would lead them to, based on their
proud ignorance of mesmerism; on the clever tricks they
played upon Lord Howe, and on the handsome insinuations
levelled at Dr. Locock, in connexion with the EarFs anxiety
to have the affairs of the institution well conducted ; but
their noble conduct, however calculated to blind subscribers,
could not, and did not, avail the weight of a feather against
mesmerism. Mesmerism practised in the hospital did cure
puerperal mania and puerperal fever, and it has been attended
by like satisfactory results out of such establishments. I am
not at liberty to detail some deeply interesting cures of mania
conducted by myself under mesmerism, but they would much
gratify the readers of The Zoist. On a future occasion I hope
to be able to communicate some observations on epilepsy
cured by mesmerism, and thus have an opportunity of illus-
trating the subject by cases of the cure of insanity.

I am. Sir, your obedient servant,
65, Grosvenor Street, 2nd Sept., 1851. John Ashburner.


By Mr. Barth. 245

4, Momingtou Crescent, August 30, 1851.

Dear Dr. Ashburner, — You kindly recommended me last
year to a gentleman who wished a trial of mesmerism to be
made in the hope of restoring a dearly loved brother afflicted
with insanity : and you are aware that such trial was made
aad has proved successful. 1 thank you for the handsome
manner in which you spoke of me when advising that the
patient should be placed under my care ; and rejoice that the
result is such as to prove that your confidence in me and in
the curative power of mesmerism has not been misplaced.

As a physician, you do know how inefficient all drug re-
medies and routine treatment prove in insanity ; as a mes-
merist physician, you do know that the mesmeric agency is a
potent, I might almost say specific, remedy for a large pro-
portion of cases of mental disease. I am sure you will agree
with me that every case of insanity cured by mesmerism
ought to be recorded as evidence, which will ultimately accu-
mulate until the general conviction of the public will render
mesmerism the routine remedy for afflictions of this class, and
not only in private practice but in our public institutions. I
therefore send you a brief account of this case, which I re-
quest you will forward to the editors of The Zoist for insertion.
I send this to you for perusal in the first instance, because
the circumstances of the case, and delicacy and respect for
the feelings of patients and friends who entrust themselves
confidentially to us, prevent our publicly mentioning names.
Oblige me, therefore, since you know the parties, by adding
your testimony to mine as to the truth of the narration : and
you may refer respectable persons to the patient^s friends, if
such reference be at any time required.

I am, dear Dr. Ashburner,

Yours very faithfully,

George H. Babth.

Case. — Insanity cured by Mesmerism.
A. B. was placed under my care at the end of April,
1850. He was brought from a highly respectable private
asylum in Sussex; where I believe he had been confined
nearly three • and a half years. The brief statement of his
case is, as I understand it, that, being engaged in his duty
as an army surgeon with our troops in China during the war
there, fatigue and excitement brought on an attack of fever
whicli ended in insanity, and manifested itself in constant
delusive ideas and impressions. These were of a character
very common amongst insane patients : such as fancying that
strangers and other persons were constantly insulting him —


246 Cure of a Case of In$aniiy*

that persons were plotting against hiixiy and the like — ^and that
he must chastise the offending parties. He was sent home on
sick leave : but, his delusions increasing, and taking a form
which might have become dangerous to himself or others, his
friends, acting under competent medical authority, and hop-
ing for his cure, placed him in the asylum from which he was
brought to me.

Whilst in this asylum he was always kept under the eye
of an attendant, who accompanied him in his walks ; and, as
a matter of course, he was deprived of his pen-knife and
everything which could have been converted into a weapon of
mischief. But, excepting the precautions necessary for his
safety, I believe that no annoying restraint was imposed, and
that, as far as regarded kindness and moral management
went, everything was done by the proprietor and me£cal of-
ficers for his restoration to mental health.

I found my patient a perfect gentleman in the strictest
acceptation of the word ; well educated, possessed of remark-
ably acute reasoning powers, but reasoning from delusive and
insane conceptions instead of sane ideas; his perceptions
through the external organs of sense bein^ constantly dis-
torted or perverted as soon as impressed, and thus confirming
instead of correcting his delusions. Amongst many delusive
ideas there was one which was constantly present, and sug-
gested the idea of mesmerism being tried for his recovery.
He fancied himself the victim of some potent but unknown
mesmeriser, who had been employed to influence him and
control his actions, and that he therefore could neither act
nor think otherwise than as desired by this unseen enemy.
He believed himself surrounded by witchcraft and spells. If
his table shook, witchcraft did it ; if a board or stair creaked
when he trod upon it, the noise was caused by witchcraft ;
when he felt conscious of anger or excitement, this was owing
to the absent magnetizer influencing his cerebral organs by
pointing a magnet at his head ; if he felt calm, it was owing
to the same imaginary individual soothing him. He believed
that his miniature had been taken by the Daguerrotype, mul-
tiplied by engravings, and so distributed that every boy in
the street knew him and was employed to insult him. His
social faculties were also perverted. He had been most
warmly and truly attached to his brother and sister, who sin-
cerely reciprocated his affection, — ^indeed their devoted self-
denying kindness to him whilst thus afflicted is beyond all
praise : but the influence of the deranged feeling caused their
presence and visits to irritate and annoy him. My poor
friend was in constant mental suffering, and frequently de-


By Mr. Barth. ^7

clared that his life was a perfect misery and burthen to him ;
that the torments inflicted on their prisoners by the North
American Indians were as nothing compared with the refined
and subtle cruelties practised upon him. He often prayed
that the Giver of his life would resume it : and I believe that
he was only prevented from laying violent hands on himself
by a large organ of Conscientiousness that happily was not
influenced by functional derangement.

I took this patient into my house; gave him two apart-
ments^ and engaged an attendant who had been accustomed
to such cases to wait upon him and be responsible for his
safety. The treatment adopted for his cure was steady per-
severance with mesmerism twice in the day^ — morning and
evening ; constant and unvarying kindness with which I met
all his irritability^ anger, and reproaches, and the avoiding
all argument by running away and leaving him alone when he
wished to engage my attention on the subject of his delusions.
I determined to make him a sane man, and to treat him as
such as soon as I could so at all ; not waiting till prudence
declared it quite safe to do so. I soon allowed him the use
of a knife, and, withdrawing the keeper, permitted him to
take his walks alone and unwatched, exacting only his word
of honour as a gentleman that he would guard himself froQi
the commission of any wrong or extravagant act which would
cause me to be blamed for trusting him. This he promised
conditionally. He declared that, as far as he could he would
take care I should incur no blame for reposing confldence in
him j that he had no fear as far as it depended on himself;
but he would not promise to succeed if the man with the
great magnet pointed it at his head and excited his organs.
I never had occasion to repent putting confidence in his
promise. He was induced to submit to my mesmerising him
in the hope that I might dispel the influence of the unknown
mesmeriser.

No remarkable mesmeric phenomena presented themselves
during the treatment of this case; the true mesmeric sleep
was never induced, although he often became sleepy and
dozed. At first the passes, though very carefully and gently
administered, rather irritated and exeited than soothed him ;
particularly when they were made over the posterior part of
the head and down the spine. He would often, when thus
mesmerised, jump up suddenly and refuse to allow me to
proceed, declaring that I brought all his old torments back
upon him. For a time I desisted from this process, because
it annoyed him so much.

The first symptoms of improvement were a lessened irri-


248 Cure of most intense Spinal Irritation,

lability of temper^ and a less frequent reference to the sub-
jects of his delusions. Then in a day or two the old delusions
and morbid feelings would return^ then remits and again
return, until the remission lasted three or four weeks.

This gentleman has only left my house a few days; a
period of five months having elapsed since I last saw any in-
dication of his old delusion, and that indication was very
trifling, and would hardly have been observed by a stranger
in conversation with him. He has returned to social inter-
course with his relatives, who pronounce him as well as ever
he was, and he is now residing in apartments of his own
choosing, perfectly restored to that freedom of action which
every man of sound mind is accustomed to exercise. Mes-
merism HAS CUBED HIM.

As this patient was residing with me about sixteen months,
and five months have elapsed since I perceived any indication
of delusion, we may say that the case occupied from ten to
twelve months in the cure.

I will not close this brief account without acknowledging
the service rendered several times, and on one occasion par-
ticularly, by Mrs. P. W. Wagstaff, the wife of Mr. WagstafiF,
surgeon, of Leighton Buzzard. This lady is by far the best
medical clairvoyant whom I have met with, and I have seen
as many as most men. It would be unjust in me to take
credit for mesmerism and exclude any acknowledgment of
service rendered by mesmeric clairvoyance. The only other
remark I need make is, that, after mesmerising my patient,
I often felt so unusually irritable that I had difficulty to con-
trol myself, and used to request my wife and family to keep
out of my way until the feeling had passed away, as it did in
half an hour or so. It really seemed as if the irritated state
of the patient^s brain had sympathetically irritated mine. —
G. H. B.

*^* The patient's friends will reply to any respectable
enquiry made from proper motives. Of course it would not
be admissible to recall old associations of ideas by referring
to the patient himself.

V. Cure of a most intense Nervous Affection, commonly called
Spinal Irritation, by Mr. Barth. By Miss Southey,
one of the Society of Friends. With a Note by Dr.
Elliotson.

" Have we no homoeopathic and mesmeric delinquents in this part of the
Island, who deserve expulsion from the profession they slander and disgrace ?"
** If we turn to the College of Physicians, we are obliged to admit that this


By Mr. Barth. 249

body has not been satisfied even with snpinenees. We are obliged to consider it
as having contributed to the flood of qnacltery which now overwhelms the pro-
fession. Much of what is now passing around us, to the scandal of all r^;ular men,
is the appointment of Elliotson as its public orator. There was in that act such
a scandalous encouragenaent of error and folly in science and of impropriety and
irregularity in practice, that it wounded the entire profession. As we said then,
and say now, it was most painful that the place whose glory was enhanced by the
labours of Harvey and Sydenham should sink into such a slough of contempt
uncjer careless successors. Can we wonder, when the College of Physicians
opened its highest honour to a mesmerist, that lords and ladies> and kings and
queens, confound quackery and regular physic." — Mr. Waklby, Lancet f July 5,
1851; p. 13.

To Dr. EUiotson.

Respected Friend, — Possibly thou wilt not recollect my
calling on thee at the end of the eighth month last year, ac-
companied by George Barth, who introduced me to thee, as
I was desirous of telling thee personally how much reason I
had to be grateful to mesmerism for the very great blessing
of restored health through its agency : and I must confess I
was anxious to see thee, because gratitude for my mesmeric
cure led me also to associate thee with it as one who had ever
with unflinching constancy and, at the price of enduring
cruel and undeserved odium at the hands of thy professional
brotherhood, maintained that which thou hadst ascertained
to be the truth, and which it is the peculiar duty of the phy-
sician to advance. I then promised thee to publish my case
and cure. I now redeem this promise, and regret both that
it has been unavoidably delayed and that it is not penned by
one of more ability. I do not desire to obtrude my name
before the readers of 7%c Zoist in print, and would certainly
not have done so had I not deemed it a sacred duty to state
the truth and aflSx my name to the statement, that any sor-
rowing sister who may suffer as I have done, and wishes
encouragement to try mesmerism from one who has a personal
knowledge of its utility, may know who to apply to.

I am respectfully, thy friend,
Selgars, near Collumpton, Devonshire, A. Southey.

6th month, 1851.

In the beginning of the year 1844, I was thrown from a
chaise; and, falling with my whole weight on my head, I
received from the shock a concussion of the brain. The first
effects soon appeared to pass off; but ultimately occasioned
a great deal of suffering. The stomach and spine particu-
larly were much affected, and a violent bilious attack followed
in a few weeks.

I partly recovered from the effects of this accident ; but
remained delicate and frequently ailing until the summer of


260 Cure of most intense Spinal Irritation.

1849^ when I experienced a great shock from a horse taking
fright and running away with a gig in which I was riding.

Having formerly tried the hydropathic treatment with
success^ I again had recourse to it ; but without deriving any
decided benefit : and was obliged^ after persevering at inter-
vals, to give it up entirely, as every successive application of
the system only tended to reduce the already too low state of
my vitality.

Not being then aware of the curative power of mesmerism,
I applied, for the satisfaction of my friends, to a medical
practitioner, who attended me almost constantly for five
months. Notwithstanding all his care, attention, and reme-
dies, my whole system became weaker and weaker, and more
and more functionally disordered. The digestive organs had
lost all potver, as the most simple food occasioned great suf-
fering in the process of digestion : the brain also shared in
the generally debilitated state of the body, as my memory
was greatly impaired, and I was unable to read without a dis-
tressing effort of application, — reading was almost impossible :
the least noise, or the necessity to attend to the most trifling
subjects, completely upset me, — so much so that my relatives
and domestics seldom asked me any questions requiring
thought. A death-like coldness had for months pervaded the
whole frame : and I appeared altogether in an irrecoverable
state.

From the great weakness and sufPering in the back, I
feared that my spine was decidedly diseased. This my mer
dical attendant candidly acknowledged to be the case, and he
proposed my following the general routine treatment for the
disease, although he feared I was too debilitated to bear up
under the treatment. To this I would not consent, being
well aware, from my peculiar feelings, that I was too far re-
duced to endure the remedies suggested, viz., blistering and
moxas.

About this time the Mesmerisfs Manual had been pro-
cured for my perusal, and, with much eflfort, I succeeded in
reading that part which more particularly applied to myself —
the chapter on disease — and then I applied to the author,
George Barth, for his opinion of mesmerism in my case : and
in consequence placed myself under his care about the middle
of the 6th month, 1850.

Very soon I had the satisfaction to find there was a far
greater power in mesmerism than maiiy persons, even in the
present advanced stage of the science, are willing to admit.
My friends thought it the very height of folly for me to at-
tempt the journey to town ; few of them expecting to see me


By Mr. Barth. 251

ever return again. But I had made up my mind^ and nothing
short of an impossibility of reaching the railway station would
have prevented my attempting it. I did reach town accom-
panied by a brother. G. Barth had procured me lodgings
near to his house^ and mesmerism was commenced the day
after my arrival. At this time I was as white and bhodUss
as it was possible for any one to be : I had a constant pain in
my spine, which was so much inflamed or irritated that the
slightest touch on one portion instantly threw me into a pa-
roaysm qf suffering, convulsion, and trembling ; I could only
sleep about three hours at nighty even if I did get to sleep.
My usual diet was a little bread sopped in hot water for
breakfast, a little semola or water-arrow-root for dinner, and
a repetition of the sopped bread for supper. / could not bear
any animal food, or tea, cocoa, milk, butter, sugar, or vege-
tables, and was nervous to a painful and even ridiculous ex-
tent ; being quite conscious of my infirmity, although I could
not by any mental effort subdue it. I give an instance : I
feared that I should be obliged to remove from my comfort-
able apartments in consequence of the pattern of the paper,
in my distempered perception, causing me to fancy animals
were staring at me from the walls. I was so reduced in
strength that I could only walk with the (assistance of another ;
I could not lie on the back part of my head, the pressure of the
pillow caused me such severe pain. I suffered from many
other distressing symptoms, which need not be detailed.

The first effect of mesmerism was a violent fit of hysteria ;
afterwards a calm and happy feeling of peaceful contentment.
My eyes closed and my jaws locked, without my being able
to open them, and my limbs and body became perfectly pow-
erless and rigid until demesmerised. But I did not sleep,
and have never once lost consciousness whilst being mes-
merised, although I sometimes dozed after I was left in this
rigid and powerless condition. Mesmeric passes down the
spine at first increased the pain : but G. Barth always finished
by totally removing it. I was mesmerised three times daily
for a fortnight, and then twice daily.

I need not enter into the details of my mesmeric treat-
ment. It may suffice to say that, although I had hoped
much from it, the results far exceeded my expectations. Day
by day did my strength increase ; my appetite and power of
digesting food returned ; I slept better at night ; the red tinge
again visited my cheeks and lips and I gained flesh ; I could
eat animal and other customary food again ; began to take
walking exercise : and, at the end of eleven weeks, having


252 Cure of most intense Spinal Irritation.

no pain in the back^ my nervousness being entirely subdued,
and my strength very much renovated, I returned home.

After my return home I instructed a domestic to mes-
merise me, and continued to increase in strength until I
could walk four or five miles in one morning. My old me-
dical attendant on my return home candidly allowed that
mesmerism had cured me : as no other remedy was tried but
this, and I got well under it, he acknowledged that it was
perfectly right to consider it as the means of my cure.

I have since caught a violent cold, which has caused me
severe illness, but of a very different character from that of
last year ; and, as I have remained quite free from the disease
in my back and nervousness, I accept it as an additional proof
that of this disease I was then perfectly cured.

Notwithstanding this last attack, my confidence in mes-
merism was unshaken, and I again placed myself under the
care of George Barth, in whose house I have been a patient
for three months during the summer, and to whose constant
attention and unwearied efforts for the alleviation of suffer-
ing I can speak unreservedly. The same favourable results
have followed, and I now consider myself in a better state of
health than I have been for several years — a blessing for which
I cannot feel sufiSciently grateful : nor can I cease to consider
those who practise mesmerism for the good of others as
amongst the greatest benefactors of mankind.
Selgars, near Collumpton, Devonshire,
9th month, 1851.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.

These spinal affections are every day treated in the most
barbarous manner. Mistaken for chronic inflammation or
structural disease of the spinal bones, ligaments, cartilages, or
chord, the poor female is tormented with issues, setons, moxas,
blisters, and lowered with nibbling leeches and cupping and
injurious medicines. Some medical men boast of the success
of their cruel treatment of forcing her out of bed, making
her stand and walk, and letting her fall if she cannot
hold up. When rational and kind treament is adopted, it is
very unsatisfactory. But mesmerism is a most satisfactory
remedy in the majority of cases, and many fine mesmeric
cures are recorded in 7%e Zoist,

In No. V. is Miss Raymond^s case, written by herself.
She was a highly respectable lady, living alone, I believe, and


By Captain Anderson. 253

not so affluent as to be able to enjoy physic and doctors as a
luxury ; but with every reason to wish to saye her money and
be in good health. For nine years she could not be removed
from her sofa night or day: and was attended by various medical
men in Chelmsford. For months she had two setons : two
caustic issues up each side of the spine^ and five horse-beans
in each issue : repeated blisters along the spine for ten weeks :
five or six caustic plaisters : leeches, blisters, and ointments
out of number : medicines of all descriptions : and aperients
were taken every night for the nine years. If placed upon
her feet by any medical man, she fainted for hours. She
was never &ee &om pain : sometimes in indescribable agony :
never once slept soundly for nine years. For the three last
years she had been quite speechless. Nothing did her sub-
stantial good : and she was completely tired of doctors. How-
ever painful the remedies prescribed, she never objected, felt
it her duty to submit and prayed that God would bless them
with success. She had resigned herself to her fate, praying
that her suficrings might soon be ended. In this state of
matters, mesmerism was proposed to her and she laughed at
it; but at last allowed it to be tried in March, 1843. She
soon ceased for good to take any sort of medicine. In less
than a month she slept soundly every night and could sit in
a chair : in another month she could stand without fainting,
and could ride in a Bath chair : and before the end of the year
walked out every day unassisted and without any pain, and
was regaining her speech.

On April 9th, 1844, the following letter appeared in the
Chelmsford paper, from one of the medical persons who had
seen her in her illness, and was too mean and cowardly to
affix his name to his weak production : —


i(


To the Editor of the Essex Herald,


" SiE, — My attention has been drawn to an alleged * ciure of spinal
disease by mesmerism,' first communicated to The Zoist, and trans-
ferred from the pages of that journal to the columns of the Chelm^ord
Chronicle, I have thought that the pubhcation of the following remarks
might perhaps interest your readers, and tend, in some degree, to pro-
tect their credulity,

"I shall premise with the observation that no one can he more
rejoiced than myself to hear and to witness the gradual restoration of
Miss Baymond to health and enjoyment ; at the same time, the interests
of science, the honour of medicine, and the love of truth, compel me
to withhold my assent from the statements which have in all honesty
been made, both with reference to her disease and to the eflBcacy of
mesmerism as its cure.

" I am not now about to enter into a discussion upon the truth or


254 Cure of most inieme Spinal Irritation.

fallacy of the pretensions of the new science of animal magnetism. They
are yet wh jiidiee, and it would be prematuie and unwise to prejudge*
the result of so important an investigation.

" But I do take upon myself very positively to assert even in this
stage of the inquiry, that the results it is stated to have elicited in the
case of Miss Eaymond prove most conclusively the non-existence of
' spinal complaint' as it is generally understood, viz., carious disease
of the spinal vertebrsB, attended with absorption.

" It should, therefore, I think, be communicated to your readers
that the opening statement of the lady, that for nine years and a half
she * had suffered from spinal complaint,' is to be received with con-
siderable hesitancy and caution. It certainly is not proved satisfactorily
to my own mind — neither does the long enumeration of the remedied
measures employed, tend, in any degree, to settle the point.

'' For it has happened to myself, and I doubt not to ail my pro-
fessional brethren in this place, to witness a great number of singular
affections, supposed, although erroneously, to be diseases of the spine^
and sometimes treated medically as such. Now, these affections, unlike
actual spinal complaints, are most common amongst unmarried females,
and are more frequent than is imagined. I borrow the description of
the malady from Dr. Holland's Essay on some ' supposed disease of the
spine.' • There is fixed or fluctuating pain along the course of the
spinal column, very often relieved temporarily by local bleeding, blis-
tering, moxa, and other similar applications. There is, moreover,
weakness or numbness of the lower extremities, sometimes amounting
to total loss of power, and hence construed into paralytic affection ;
pain from exertion, rdief from recumbency; tendency to muscular
spasms ; and often difficulty in performing the accustomed evacuations.
You touch a spinal process, and the patient flies up with the expressicMi
of the most exquisite pain. Yet all these symptoms may exist without
any affection of the spine whatever ; and, in most cases, are best treated
by the adoption of measures which have no relation to the back what-
ever. Nay, further it is said of these affections, with great propriety
and truth, that " the symptoms are often greatly aggravated by the
means designed for their relief, and spinal disorders even produced
when not existing before, by the muscular debility due to long confine-
ment, recumbent posture, and local depletions.'

" Sir C. Bell, in his Institutes, makes the important observation, —
* Here a serious consideration offers itself to the surgeon — ^how does it
happen that so maay young ladies are laid upon the inclined plane, and
remain so confined for many tedious months, having no disease of the
spine T ' Many,' he continues, * have I known so put down for twelve
or eighteen months — ^then oome hysterical weakness, strange anomalous
symptoms, paralysis, &c., and the health at this critical period is quite
destroyed.' •

" It cannot be denied that these hysterical affections, in which the
symptoms are referred to the spine, and which are invariably attended
by most distressing sleeplessness, are often mistaken for ulceration of

* Premature to ^^r^udge ! Unqnestionably.— /. E.


By Captain Anderson. 255

the intervertebral cartilages and bodies of the vertebrae. Sir B. C.
Brodie has seen numerous instances of young ladies being condemned
to the horizontal posture, and to the torture of caustic issues and setons
for successive years, whom air, exercise, and cheerful occupation would
probably have cured in a few months. (On Zocal Nervous Affections^
p. 46.)

" In his Lectures on the Principles and Practice of Physic, Dr.
Watson writes, * Another prank belonging to hysteria, and one which
it is very necessary that you should be on yotir guard against, is that of
mimicking disease of the bones of the spine. The patient complains
of pain and tenderness in her back, and of weakness probably in her
lower extremities ; and it is now become notorious that scores of young
women have been unnecessarily confined for months or years to a hori-
zontal position, and have had their backs seamed with issues, for sup-
posed disease of the bodies of the vertebrae, who had really nothing
the matter with them but hysteria, and who would probably have soon
ceased to complain, if, instead of being restricted to that unnatural
imprisonment and posture, they had taken a daily gallop on horseback.'

"It is curious enough to notice how the mind is apt to become
affected in some of these cases. After the patient has been lying supine
for some weeks she is unable to stand or walk, simply because she
thinks she is unable. The instant she makes a fair effoii: to use her
limbs again, she can and does use them. Her condition is at once
reversed. Potest qui posse videtur, Mr. Corfe, the present apothecary
to* the Middlesex hospital, has no little trouble with patients of this
kind ; but he generally succeeds in making them walk, and in con-
vincing them, as well as himself, that they may do so with impunity.
Sometimes, though the authority of the doctor may not be efficacious
in this respect, some stronger influence prevails. A lady told me, not
very long ago, that an acquaintance of her's, a member of a family of
distinction, had been lying, I know not how long, upon her back ; that
position having been prescribed to her by some medical man for a pre-
sumed disease of the spine. She lost all power of using her legs ; but
she got quite fat, as, indeed, weU she might, for her appetite was
remarkably sharp, and she lived chiefly upon chickens ; and the num-
ber of chickens she devoured was incredible. She lived at some little
distance from town, and at last Sir Benjamin Brodie was sent for to
her. Now, Sir Benjamin, to use a vulgar phrase, is up to these cases,
and he wished to see her ^ to walk ; but she declared that the attempt
to do so would kill her. He was resolute, however, and had her got
out of bed ; and in a few days time she was walking about quite well,
and very grateful to him for his judicious conduct. A medical man of
less name, or of less determination, would probably have failed. These,
sir, are the cases which suit the purposes of miracle-mongers. A few
years ago all the journals belonging to a certain party in the religious
world were full of an instance of miraculous cure. The patient was
a young woman ; her legs had been paralytic or contracted, I forget
which ; some enthusiastic preacher had influence enough with her to
make her believe that if, on a certain day, she prayed for recovery with
a strong faith, her prayer would be successful — she would recover at


256 Oare of most intense Spinal Irritation.

once ; and slie did so. No one can doubt tliat it was just sucli a case
as I have been just describing. Many of these pseudo-diseases termi-
nate suddenly under some strong moral emotion — a fall — a fire in the
house — any overwhelming terror will frequently put an end to them.

" I We, Sir, said enough to describe this singular and by no means
uncommon disease. I shall beg, however, to introduce one more quo-
tation from the Essay of Dr. Holland, in relation to its treatment : —
* The patient often recovers from symptoms which have had their dura-
tion for months or years, in a very few weeks — and this recovery
derived, not from remedies applied to the spine, but from steel, bark,
ammonia, and valerian, cold salt-water bathing or washing and, above
all, exercise of the liTnbs sedulously persevered in and extended. In
those instances, by no means unfrequent, where some mental infirmity
(guery ffuUibilitt/ 7) is added to the physical condition producing this
state, the moral remedies which the judicious practitioner may employ
will greatly aid the success of the treatment.' And these, I may add,
are the cases whose anomalous phenomena have in all ages perplexed
even thinking men, and furnished large material for wonder to the
credulous or uninstructed.

"Having been betrayed into such length, I shall not now. Sir,
detain you by making any application of the foregoing observations to
the case in question. Tour readers will be sufficiently clear-sighted to
do that for themselves. I certainly believe that the recovery of the
lady may admit of explanation, without having recourse to the principle
the magnetizers so anxiously desire to establish, and conclude with the
expression of my opinion, founded upon a minute and searching, exami-
nation which I some years since had the opportunity of making into
this identical case, that whatever mesmerism and Capt. Anderson may
have done to enhance the ^present happmesi of Miss Eaymond, it is not
yet proven that among the many maladies dragged in triumph at their
chariot-wheels, 'spinal disease,' as generally understood, can truth-
fully be numbered.

" I am. Sir, in haste,

" Your obedient servant,
" Chehnsford, April 8th, 1844." " A Suegeon.

Her complaint was not a " spinal complaint !" The surgeon*
thinks the truth is to be received with considerable hesitation
and caution. She surely had some complaint or other : did
not her doctors attend her because she laboured under a
complaint ? so that one of the two words is right. All the
agony and the chief debility were in her spine. Her complaint
was therefore spinal. What else was it ? In medicine this
complaint is always termed spinal irritation. Irritation and
morbid sensibility and pain are surely a complaint or a disease.
In her account of the case in The Zoist the word employed
is invariably complaint^ and the word disease is not once

* Not a surgeon, it now turns out, but a rhyming physician. — Zoiat,


By Captain Anderson. 257

used. The restless scribbler^ therefore^ quotes inaccurately.
Some seem ignorantly to fancy that the words have different
meanings : as though every complaint were not a disease^ and
every disease a complaint. Bheumatic pain of the arm is a
complaint or disease : diarrhoea and irritation of the bowels
IS a bowel complaint or disease : asthma is a chest complaint
or disease : palpitation and pain of the heart are a x^omplaint
or disease^ and^ being seated in the heart, are a heart
complaint or disease. No one considers that in rheumatism
bones must be carious or rotten, that in diarrhoea the bowels
must be ulcerated, in asthma the lungs or chest must be ul*
cerated, or that in pain or palpitation of the heart the struc-
ture of this organ must be altered.

Nor in the account of Miss Baymond^s case is there the
slightest hint that she for a moment supposed her spinal com-
plaint to be " carious disease of the spinal vertebrae, attended
with absorption." Well might the writer, whether a phy-
sician in the place, or a surgeon, be too ashamed to sub-
scribe his name. As this among the various gentlemen who
attended Miss Raymond was up to the case, to use what he
confesses to be vulgar language, why were not the proper
means taken to cure her instead of issues and setons ? Why
was she not forced out of bed and cured ? Why does not
Sir Benjamin Brodie, Mr. Corfe, the elegantly-spoken, re-
fined, tolerant, and kind-hearted apothecary of the Middlesex
Hospital,* cure all these cases if the matter is so easy ? Poor
Miss Baymond, like other such sufferers, would have been
thankful to be cured : and had faith enough, or she would
not have spent her substance for so many years upon doctors.
But her faith was at last, after nine years, exhausted when
she reluctantly consented to try mesmerism. Whenever mes-
merism cures a disease, we are told that .nature, imagination,
faith, or chance effects the cure. It is never mesmerism :
cannot be mesmerism. Yet strangely nature, imagination,
faith, charms, would not kindly stop the disease while the
doctors were carrying on their routine. Nature would stop
it just when mesmerism was adopted.

The writer's remark about whatever Capt. Anderson may
have done to enhance her present happiness, is an insinuation
altogether unworthy, not to say of a gentleman, but of a man.

In No. XIII., Mr. HoUings relates a similar perfect cure
in a working man, 37 years old, after seven years of ineffec-

* See quotations from his antimesmeric pamphlet in Nos. XXIII. and XXIV.
He calls mesmerism delusion of the devil, indecent, disgraceful, injurious, las.
civious, lilHdinous, from the devil, a true devil, and, with phrenology, a fraternal
spirit of uncleaimess allied to blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.

VOL. IX. S


258 Cures of most interne Spinal Irritation.

tual ordinary treatment^ blisters^ embrocations^ irritating oint-
ments^ leeches^ and internal remedies^ and after the disease
had been pronounced^ by two medical men in Leicester of
extensive practice^ '^ an organic affection of the spinal chord/'

In No. XXVI., Miss Love, of Plymouth, describes her
own case. She was said to have a " spinal disease^' for eight
years, and had submitted to rigorous cauterizations on two
occasions, electricity, galvanism, not only without benefit,
but with injury : and taken courses of medicines. In about
six or seven weeks mesmerism began to give her a healthy
appearance, improved her appetite and strength, lessened her
pain, and caused her sleep to be refreshing : and her general
health is now as good as it ever was.

In ]^o. XXVI. are two cures, by Mr. Saunders, of the
extremest spinal debility, and in one case with great pain : one
young lady is now "the astonishment of all her friends,*' and
the other, " quite a different person." There is another cure
of " spinal irritation " and various other symptoms, in India,
by Mr. Watkins.

In No. XXXI. is the cure by Lieut.-Col. Davidson of a
portly woman, forty years of age, who had suffered from a
spinal affection for twelve years, and been unrelieved by blis-
ters, issues, &c., &c.

In the present number (XXXV.) will be found a beautiful
cure, by Mr. Collins, of a case of spinal irritation and con-
vulsions.

I must refer likewise to the striking cure of Miss Bernal,
daughter of the Chairman of the Committee of Ways and
Means in the House of Commons and sister of the Member
for Middlesex. The disease was of the kind termed spinal
irritation : only the chief suffering was higher up, more in
the back of the head. Her debility and agony were intense.
Her brother, Mr. B. Osborne, assured me she had not been
able to see him for two years. Her whole train of symptoms,
and the variety, severity, and futility of the previous treatment
by several fashionable physicians, were detailed by herself, four
years ago, in No. XVIII. She began mesmerism in despair :
thought it an absurdity, and, like many others who nave
been cured with it, had not the least faith in it till after a
time she positively began to mend. Neither time nor imagi-
nation had any share in her cure. Her recovery was complete
and permanent. Yet I never produced sleep or sensible effect
at my visits.


( 269 )

VI. Cures of Loss of Voice, Neuralgia, Spinal Irritation, ex-
eructating Rheumatism. By Mr. Collins^ of Lini;oln.
Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.

** Elliotson Qt supra, article Bronchitis, p. 681. It is true that this writer
has now deserted the path of legitimate medicine. But when he wrote the above,
he was an oracle amongst us. How are the mighty fallen !'' — ^Mr. L. Broke
Galloway, Surgeon, Royal Regiment of Artillery, Devonport,* in an article on
Unhealthy Inflammation in the London Medical Gazette, June 20, 1851.t Editor,
Dr. Alfred Taylor ; proprietors and publishers, Messrs. Longman and Co.

The Park, Lincoln, 30th Aug., 1851.
Dear Sir, — I beg respectfully to forward to you the fol-
lowing mesmeric cases, being a few only of those which
came under my care when I resided at Liverpool ; and, if
you are of opinion that they possess sufficient interest to
appear in TTie Zoist, and that the time which has elapsed
has not rendered them ineligible to appear in that excellent
and important publication, I would beg the favour of your
kindly forwarding them to the editor.

You will be glad to be informed that your patient, my
daughter Ellen, whose case is recorded in the third volume
of The Zoist, continues quite well.

She and all my family feel a deep sense of gratitude for
your kindness and liberality on that, as on other occasions,
and I am.

Dear Sir,
Tour most obliged and grateful servant,

James Collins.
To John Elliotson, Esq., M.D.,
London.]:

* A little farther this army surgeon writes thus, " I, Mr. Galloway, a very
ohscnre individual, and no au&ority at all, take the liberty, notwit h sta n di n g, of
throwing my hat into the ring, and asserting tiiat all three, — ^blood-letting» mer-
cury, and antimony, — are not only worthless, but mischievous agents in this
disease'' (bronchitis). — J. Elliotson.

t I am not aware that I ever saw or had any communication of the remotest
kind with this gentleman ; yet his language woiUd lead persons to suppose that
we had quarrelled. I am not aware tluit I practise otherwise than my brethren, or
than I ever did ; except that I employ mesmerism also when I believe it may be
usefal. I am not aware that I ever was an oracle : and I should be very sorry to
be considered one, or if what I may write or say should not be carefally weighed
and valued at simply its true worth. I really diink that, if I am so fallen, it is
hardly noble in one holding rank in the British army to kick me after I am
down and unable to help myself. — J. Elliotson.

t The account of the beautifal cure of Miss Collins and the numerous ex-
quisite phenomena will be found in No. XI. and XII., and deserves carefal
perusal, for it is a fine mesmeric study. This young lady has shewn her gratitude
by bestowing the benefit of mesmerism upon others, and publicly recorded some
cures ; see in No. XIII. a cure of tic douloureux ; and in No. XX. a cure of St.
Vitus's dance. Mr. Collins has acted similarly, and published a remarkable cure

s 2


260 Cures of loss of Voice and Neuralgia.

I. Recovery of the voice.

A young lady^ now my daughter-in-law^ in the spring of
1848^ completely lost her voice for some time^ probably from
having taken cold. The physician who attended the family,
a believer in mesmerism, but only very partially acquainted
with the practice^ made passes over her throat, but without
producing any beneficial effect.

She therefore came to the residence of her brother, in
Everton, in order that I might attend her.

I mesmerised her in the evening for about half an hour
by passes in front, and rendered her drowsy, but did not
send her to sleep. I then locally mesmerised her throat, and
breathed upon it, but did not succeed in restoring her voice.
The mesmerising was repeated in the evening, but with appa*-
rently no better success. I desired her not to return to
Liverpool until I had seen her in the morning. On calling
upon her I was delighted when she accosted me with her
natural voice, quite as full as usual, and which I am happy
to say she has ever since retained.

II. Neuralgia.

Mrs. Roberts, residing in Islington, Liverpool, informed
me on the 27th October, 1847, that she had been a sufferer
for a considerable time with tic douloureux on both sides of
her face. The previous evening she had passed in great
agony, and she suffered much this morning.

I mesmerised her by downward passes in front for twenty
minutes; but, as this did not render her even drowsy, I
locally mesmerised her from the top of her head, and along
the lower jaw, terminating the passes at the chin. I also
made passes along the whole trunk and limbs. She felt a
pleasant glow in her fingers and in her feet, with a slight
pricking sensation, but was unable to move either the one
or the other till I relieved her by transverse passes.

I saw her again in the evening, and found she had had
two or three smart twinges a short time before I called, but
was then free from pain. I mesmerised her as before, and
with similar results. That night she slept comfortably. She
had had some pain for B.few minutes at day-break, but went
to sleep again and awoke quite well.

On the 29th, she went out, although the weather was
cold and raw, and when I saw her at noon I was glad to find

of a twisted neck in No. XX. Both father and daughter have courageously and
virtuously advocated the truth of mesmerism daily from the time of Miss CoUins's
cure, in season and out of season, and before violent opponents, whether in
the medical profession or not. — J. Elliotson.


By Mr. Collins. 261

she had not had the slightest pain since I last saw her. I^
however^ mesmerised her again to confirm the cure.

My stay in Liverpool wds rather longer than a year after
this period^ during which time Mrs. Roberts remained quite
well.

The only peculiarity in this lady's case was the delightful
sensation^ as she described it^ of seeming to float, although
not asleep, on the top of fleecy clouds.

III. Spinal Irritation.

Miss Francis, a very respectable lady, one of the teachers
in the Mechanics' Female School in Liverpool, had been
suffering from spinal irritation and from convulsive fits,
attended by great pain. The lady who sought my assistance
forewarned me that Miss Francis had become^ exceedingly
irritable owing to her affliction, and begged me not to be
offended by anything she might say.

On the 20th March, 1848, I walked down to her resi-
dence, about two miles distant, and found her lying on the
sofa in great pain, and very weak. She informed me that
her medical attendant had recommended her to have mes-
meric passes made along the spine. Instead of finding her
irritable as I had been led to expect, she was calm, intelli-
gent, and very lady-like.

As she was unable to sit or incline on a chair, I mesmer-
ised her as she lay on a sofa, by passes in front along the
body to her feet, also from the crown of her head along her
neck and arms. This soothed her and relieved her pain.
She became drowsy, but did not go into the mesmeric sleep.

The next day at noon I found my patient in bed, and
very full of pain. After I had left her yesterday she had a
severe convulsive fit, and another in the evening. She com-
plains of being very ill. She had a blister on the back of
the neck which was very irritating.* I mesmerised her as
before, and in about ten minutes she said the pain of the
blister had entirely gone, and that she felt composed, com*
fortable, and free from pain.

On the 22nd, I found her in bed poorly and sick. She
had had no fit since the 20th.

* How many nervous diseases are made worse, how many patients cruelly and
uselessly tormented, with blisters and other external irritants I Children with St.
Vitus's dance and yarious other complaints of irritation are absurdly and wantonly
agonized in this way ; and yet the poor little creatures are far more sensitive than
we are — feel far more pain from an equal cause, and have high feverish excite-
ment induced. When I think of the cruelty inflicted with various treatment by
medical men upon innocent little children, and to no purpose, I wish the com-
plaints of these beings, of whom it was exquisitely said, *' of such is the king-
dom of heaven," were often left to nature. — ^J. Elliotson. ■


1


262 Cure of excruciating Rheumatism.

Mesmerised her, as she lay, from the crown of her head
to the ends of her fingers. As I made the passes she felt
a smart twitching and throbbing in the fingers of her left
hand, — the side sdSected. I left her free from pain and in
better spirits.

From this period she continued to improve. Her appe-
tite increased, and she was generally free from pain.

On the 28th she felt quite well, and was going into the
country to her mother's.

In consequence of several changes in our residence, a
letter, which Miss Francis wrote to my daughter, expressive
of her affliction and of her gratitude for the benefit she de-
rived from the blessed efiects of mesmerism, has, I regret,
been lost or mislaid.

I have not had the pleasure of seeing Miss Francis since
her recovery, but I heard she was married shortly after her
cure.

lY. Excruciating Rheumatism.

Bobert Tedd, aged B2, a shoemaker, residing in North
Terrace, Beau Street, Liverpool, a man of a naturally strong
constitution, and whom I saw for the first time on Sunday,
the 26th March, 1848. I learned that he had been wet
through eighteen months before, and that this brought on
severe Rheumatism. His left knee I found much swollen
and bent, and he was in constant pain, so that he was unable
to stir without a stick, and with it could only walk, or rather
hobble, along for a very short distance.

Fortunately for this poor fellow, for he had a wife and a
family of small children, his arms were not particularly
affected, and, when he was placed upon his stool, he was
enabled to work at the easiest part of his trade, namely, the
making of children's shoes. He suffered so much pain, and
had so great difficulty in getting up and down a few stairs,
that his meals were usually brought to him as he sat at work,
and from his stool he did not move except on the most press-
ing necessity.

In six minutes I succeeded in sending him to sleep, but he
did not lose his consciousness. After mesmerising him for
three quarters of an hour, a severe pain, which he had above
the knee, gradually removed to below the joint, and t?iat I
took away by passes after I had awaked him.

Although I scarcely missed a day for seven months with-
out mesmerising him, it will not be requisite to record every
day's results, as they proved to be such as are well known to
all mesmerisers.


By Mr. CoUins. 263

30th. The pain which I had brought behw the knee rose
to the middle of the knee-joint^ and was very severe. Whilst
I was mesmerising it descended again belofv the knee^ and I
again removed it by passes.

31st. The pain continued at the centre of the knee-cap,
but I brought it below the knee, somewhat lower than on the
preceding day^ with slight pains shooting still lower. As he
sat he could move his leg backwards and forwards without
the assistance of his right leg, which he had always been
obliged to use, since his lameness, as a lever.

On the 2nd April there was a terrific storm of thunder
and lightning. When it commenced he felt a severe pain
over the cap of the knee, as if this had been beaten with a
stick.

During the mesmerising the pain gradually moved down
his leg^ and settled in the inst^y from which I afterwards
took it away as before. He can now move his leg more
freely.

4th. He feels better. The f&ia followed my fingers whilst
I was making passes down the leg, and it settled across his
toes.

5th. Has had a wretched night with pain in the left hip
and along the thigh, but with scarcely any in the knee or
leg. Removed the pain by passes : it seemed to follow my
fingers.

6th. He rested well last night, and had little or no pain.
The knee is less swollen, and he can stand more erect than
usual.

8th. While he was mesmerieally asleep, / straightened
his leg very nearly vnthout causing pain^ nor did the pain re-
turn when he awaked. The swelling above the knee has
nearly gone.

9th. Mesmerised him to-day from the top of his head
down the spine^ along the thigh, and over the knee. This
brought so severe a pain in the hip and thigh as to awake
him. He can move his leg more easily, and can stand
straighter, but his knee is stiU weak.

13th. The pain has nearly gone; he feels stronger, and
can move his leg backwards and forwards with ease. Walked
this morning across the room without his stick.

14th. Mesmerised as before, but, when he fell asleep, I
tried the effect of a horse-shoe magnet that would lift two
or three pounds. This I held in my left hand, placing the
North pole against the thumb of his right hand, and putting
my fingers of the right hand to his eyes. His sleep was
deeper than usual ; and, when I awaked him, he felt a pain


264 Cure of ewcfuctating Bheumattsm', ^c.

for the first time under his knee. He told me he felt as
though his body was consolidated into one immovable mass.

16th. He has more strength in his leg, and is able to
stand nearly upright. When at work his leg was formerly
drawn quite under, but now he can place it erect and keep
it in the proper position for the performance of his work.

18th. I employed the magnet to-day longer than usual.
The pain about his knee, particularly in the inside, was so
severe as to awake him, and he anxiously enquired what I
had been doing to him. Removed the pain by passes. He
afterwards walked several times across the room without his
stick.

21st. He can get up and doum stairs easily. Formerly to
get down stairs was, to use his own expression, " like taking
his life.^^ He complained of a sore throat from cold. I sent
him to sleep again, and locally mesmerised the throat, and
gave him relief. To-day I gave him mesmerised water for
the first time.

22nd. Not so well to-day. His wife is dangerously ill,
and he has had no comfortable rest during the week. Care
and anxiety have had an injurious effect.

17th May. He is progressing, though slowly. He told
me to-day he had been in the habit, in consequence of his
pain and wretched nights, of taking lO^d. worth of laudanum
a week.

He is now gradually leaving it off, having lately taken
not more than two pennyworth in eight days. I earnestly
desired him to leave it off altogether.

4th July. Last night he suffered the most excruciating
pain, which wholly deprived him of sleep. The pain ex-
tended down the back, and along the left thigh and leg, to
his great toe.

5th. He is in high spirits to-day, feels stronger and better
than he has ever done since he was first attacked. He walked
down stairs without his stick.

11th. His back is quite straight^ and he can now see for
Xhe first time, for nearly two years, the distinct form of the
cap of his knee.

From this period I discontinued taking notes, but I daily
mesmerised him during my stay in Everton, from which I
removed in November. He was then so much better as to
be able to walk about the town on his business, and to visit
the friends he had there.

I understand he left his residence shortly after I quitted
the neighbourhood, and, though I have since made frequent
enquiries about him, I have been unable to learn where he


Cure of large Polypus qf the Uterus. 265

is DOW living. He bore the character of being a steady,
sober, and well-conducted man; he was much better in-
formed than many of his class, and knew so much of music
and singing as to have been engaged, on several occasions,
as a choir and chorus singer. I felt a sincere regard for him,
and was most anxious to benefit him.

James Collins.
Lincoln, 29th August, 1851.


VII. Cure of large Polypus of the Uterus. By John Ash-

BUBNEB, M.D.

'* Another and still more flagrant disgrace attaches itself to this, the greatest
Society of the kind which has ever existed in this country (the Royal Medical and
Chirargical). Elliotson has been allowed to send a marble bust of himself to the
Society, and this has been set up on a pedestal in the library ! Yet this man is
avowedly, as the editor of The Zoistt at the bead of a band of mesmerists, ho-
moeopaths, and hydropaths.* These are his friends, and these his followers, yet
he is to be honoured with a niche in the society of Baillie, Brodie, Chambers,
Travers, and the rest of the men who have graced, and not disgraced, their con-
nexion with the Society. If, at the next session, this scandal is still witnessed
we shall feel ourselves compelled to consider the President and Council of the
present year individually and collectively responsible for it. What does a man
like Elliotson hold in common with the fellows of the Medical and Chirurgical
Society, that he should intrude himself in any shape upon their company ? Let
him have his bust in the Mesmeric Hospital, or gratify the homoeopaths with it
in one of their nosocomial parodies.

" We shall not allow the Council to shrink from their duty in this manner.
We believe there is not a single licentiate or fellow of the College of Physicians,
excepting only Ashbumer and one or two other kindred creatures, who does not
feel the position of EUiotson, as Harveian Orator, to have been a disgrace to the
profession. At the time, it was said the order of rotation could not be disturbed.
Since then, we believe the CoUege have acknowledged their fault, by passing over
the name of Elliotson, when it came to be his turn to be chosen an Elect. This
is as it should be. The council of the Medico-Chirurgical Society are more for-
tunate than the College of Physicians, in being able to remedy their fault. They
can do this in no other way than by summarily dismissing homoeopathic fellowd
and moBmeric busts." — Lancet, August 30, 1851.

One Sunday morning, nearly nine weeks before Christmas-
day, 1849, I was called from my bed to attend upon Mrs.

T , a milliner and dress-maker, who was said to be dying

from a profuse haemorrhage from the uterus. She lived then
in Portman-street, and had been attended, as she said, with
great assiduity and kindness by Mr. Humpage, of whom she
spoke with much gratitude. He had professed himself unable
to do more for her, and recommended that she should try to

* Dr. Elliotson is not an homoeopath, nor an hydropath. Mr. Wakley knows
this very well. It is really not pretty to tell fibs. Besides, it looks as if Mr.
Wakley does not find he gets on in his attempts to injure Dr. Elliotson by accusing
that gentleman of being a mesmerist, and so resolves to try the effect of adding
other accusations. — ZoUf,


366 Cure of large Polypus of the Uterus.

get admitted into the Middlesex Hospital. I found her feeble
and blanched with loss of blood ; a small weak pulse of 108
and a faltering voice accompanied this state. The odour from
her person was very offensive^ and gave some warrant to the
idea which had been expressed that the disease was probably
cancer. On examination^ I found a very large polypus^ of
rather a compact structure^ occupying the uterus and pro-
jecting into the vagina. I estimated the circumference of
this tumor at about ten inches, and its length from the fundus
of the uterus downwards at about six inches. The base of
attachment was too broad to allow of the application of a liga^^
ture, and the operation of extirpation by knife would have
been a wild idea. I commenced mesmerising by passes^ and
continued afterwards^ touching the organs of Adhesiveness^ to
gaze into the right eye with a strong efifbrt of will, to induce
sleep. I failed in this object, although I continued operating
upwards of two hours ; but the hsemorrhage was almost com-
pletely arrested. I pursued the same treatment for six days,
during which time the discharge had altered its character,
and was so much diminished in quantity that the salutary
change even on the countenance of the patient was very re-
markable. She was gaining strength and could leave her bed.
The offensive odour had left her person, and she was on the
high road to recovery. I continued to mesmerise her for
about an hour every evening, and did not repeat my exami-
nation of the tumor until three weeks had elapsed from the
date of my first visit. To my astonishment, I found it r^-
duced to half its former dimensions ; and the patient was so
much improved in vigour that she was able to superintend
her business. In the course of another three weeks, during
which I daily mesmerised her for at least an hour at a time,
BxiA sometimes continued pointing in addition for half an hour
with the fingers of my right hand to her eyes, the tumor de-
creased to the size and about the shape of two fingers. In a
fortnight more, the discharge having perfectly ceased, I made
another examination, and found a healthy uterus, rather
large in size with an unusually open os tincse, but no vestige
of polypus. Thus, in eight weeks was this woman cured of a
very serious disease by mesmeric agency; and though, by
pointing at the eyes, she was occasionally, and but occasion-
ally, rendered somnolent, sleep was never produced by all my
efforts. I succeeded in exalting her nervous power. There
was exaltation of vitality. There was mental enjoyment ; a
countenance daily expressive of affectionate gratitude, but
seldom a token of the approach of sleep.

How often are patients, who undergo mesmeric treatment.


By Dr. Ashbumer. 267

anxious on the subject of sleep I How often do they become
impatient^ declaring a conviction that they have given mes-
merism a fair trials since they cannot succeed in obtaining
what they erroneously believe to be an essential condition of
their cure. The result of many cases makes it sufficiently
obvious that sleep is not necessary in order to effect a cure by
mesmeric agency ; and^ in order to institute an enquiry into
the circumstances under which sleep would become an essen-
tial condition^ we have not yet a sufficient number of statis-
tical facts. As far as we hitherto know^ a great deal would
appear to depend upon the relation between the peculiar force
inherent in the mesmeriser^ and the peculiar aptitude of the
patient to receive the impression of that force. In some of
the cures of lumbago and rheumatism effected with astonish-
ing rapidity by Mr. Capern^ there was not only no sleep pro-
duced^ but the pain was chased away by a few strokes of the
hand. In like manner, I have myself repeatedly removed
pain in various parts of the body from persons of a susceptible
nervous fibre. Major Buckley has frequently^ to my know-
ledge^ done the same thing without the induction of sleep.
It is a strong fact, bearing upon the question, that at a time
when I was a great sceptic as to the power of his influence in
this way, in the year 1845, he removed an intense head-ache
for me ; and, when I told him that I was certain it would
Tbcur in ten minutes, for that it was dependent on a condition
of stomach with which I was familiar, and which would be
removed by a dose of calomel, he assured me that, if I would
allow him to make a few passes along the abdomen, I should
not require the medicine. Having no faith, I ridiculed his
proposal : but, from a feeling of civility towards a most good-
natured man, I submitted, and in a few minutes the passes
had really the same ample effect as if I had taken a moderate
dose of castor oil. The experiments of submesmerism, to
which the ridiculous compound word Electro-Biology has been
applied, are illustrative of the same general prq[>08ition — ^that
sleep is not a necessary condition for the cure of disease by
mesmeric agency. The wonderful efficacy of local mesmerism
in the cure of severe acute inflammation without sleep, and
the clumsy, unscientific arrangements of hydropathy, are ad-o
ditional proofs tending to the same point. In whatever mode
and under whatever circumstances an ample and powerful
development of Baron von Beichenbach's odic force positive
is made to affect a patient labouring under pain or disease,
whether sleep accompanies its presence or not, the cure is
commenced, and, if the force can be kept in action for a suf-
ficient space of time, the cure is effected.


268 Cure of large Polypus of the Uterus,

The more I reflect on the subject of sleep^ the more I be-
come assured of the practical advantages of the theory which
I have proposed in the fourth volume of The Zoist. All sleep
results from an increased compactness of brain and nervous
matter^ — consequently^ an attractive force is present and ac-'
tive among the molecules of that matter. Sleep results in
different individuals from different quantities or intensities of
the attractive force. In one the amount of power necessary
to call into play the action of sleep may be very different from
that in another. But the same force attractive which brings
on sleep is the odic force positive of the Baron von Beichen-
bach^ — the sleep-producing power of the pointed end of the
rock crystal^ of sulphate of alumina^ of sulphate of soda^ of
sulphate of magnesia^ of nitrate of potass^ of the north pole of
the magnet^ of the downward mesmeric pass, of the fingers
pointed a sufficient length of time to the eyes of a patient, or
of the gaze of a mesmeriser whose mind is occupied with be-*
nignant feeUngs, or of the will of a mesmeriser directed by
the same class of feelings. This mesmeric force attractive
may operate on the nervous system of individuals in a more
rude and clumsy manner by causing the eyes to look upwards
strainingly, squinting at an object held or fixed a few inches
above the forehead. This coarse and unpleasant mode of
hypnotizing is, like the silly explanation which has been given
of its modus operandi, just, only as characteristic of the low
tastes of the badly organized brain from which many mean
and unenviable feelings have emanated. The mode of induc-
ing enlarged pupils of the eyes and the submesmeric condi-
tion — ^the first stage towards the approach of sleep — by the
zinc and copper discs used by the American electro-biologizers
belongs to the same class of agencies. All the phenomena of
electro-biology can be produced on any individual who is sus-
ceptible of being brought to the requisite impressionable con-
dition by the practice of any of those modes of mesmerising
which have been known to us for a long time. Secrets are
out of the question.

It is not necessary to point out here the analogies that
exist between the effects of electric currents observed by Mat-
teucci and other philosophers who have exercised their inge-
nuity in watching the physical phenomena of animated beings,
and the facts developed by the students of mesmerism. The
grand fact established by Faraday, that currents proceed in
the gymnotus in a direction from the head of the animal to
the caudal extremity, — that the cephalic extremity is the posi-
tive pole, and that the opposite extremity is the negative pole,
was corroborated by Matteucci at Naples ; and, notwithstand-


By Dr. Ashburner, 269

ing some curious facts on the production of sleep in India by
upward passes observed by Dr. Esdaile. it may be assumed as
a general proposition that the influence of the odic or mes-
meric force acts in the great majority of cases more agreeably
on patients and with more certainty in producing sleep, when
practised in the direction from the head towards the feet than
in the contrary sense. Matteucci speaks of the effects of the.
current in a dLct course, and of those of the current in an
inverse course. (See his interesting lectures On the Physical
Phenomena of Living Bodies, published in French in the year
1847, and Mr. Noad^s abstract of his ideas in a letter to me,
inserted in a note in the fourth volume of The Zoist.) He
points out facts very important for practitioners to remem*
ber: and I may remark on a circumstance very characteristic
of the " stupidities '^ who oppose mesmerism and recommend
the use of the electro-magnetic coil to their patients, — that they
have for the most part either never studied the principle of
the instrument they recommend, or know nothing of the
proper direction of the current that would be beneficial to their
patients. What could you expect of the refinements of medical
study in a man, for instance, who would take a goodly quantity
of blood from the arm of a woman who was dying of a rapid
decline, and who actually died two hours afterwards ? It is
easily understood why such men oppose mesmerism. They
have only to blunder through Ufe, giving way to the feelings
engendered in such heads as they possess, by the baneful in-
fluence of competition. They cannot have the patience to sit
pointing with their fingers for one hour or two hours at a time
at the eyes of a suffering fellow being, even if by such means
they could cure cancer : nor could they have the patience to
labour hard in making downward passes along such women as
have the misfortune to fall under their treatment for inflamed
veins of the womb and puerperal fever, of whom they could
thus save numbers, and from whom they should enjoy a spe-
cific reputation for having lost more than their fair share.
The patience, perseverance, and ardour for the good of the
patient required in some anxious cases of mesmerism are enor-
mous. Every mesmeriser should reflect on the importance
of his or her mission. I hear of many persons, who are well
remunerated, becoming listless and indifferent over their
work. No one should undertake the duty whose zeal and
energy are apt to become languid. It may be very tiresome
to go on making slow passes for a length of time : but then it
is known that every pass is doing good, is perhaps saving
life, in a case where there is no other help. In the last stage
of typhus fever, in otherwise hopeless cases of scarlet fever^ I


270 Cure of large Polypus of the Uterus.

have wrottght hard for hours^ making passes ; and have saved
life where the case was out of the reach of the common ap-
pliances of medical art. Certain men and their slanderous
abettors may after this glorify me with the name of quack^
but they cannot take from me the power of studying the re-
searches of Matteucci and Yon Beiehenbach^ and of arriving
at convictions which will lead to the improvement of the
science of medicine.

The physiological phenomena that are noted by Matteucci
as attendant upon the direct and inverse electrical currents
are of great importance to the students of mesmerism, for
they illustrate curiously some of the facts we have observed,
and are corroborative of Von Beichenbach's philosophy in
offering striking differences between mesmeric and electric
agencies on the nervous system. On a future occasion I shall
enlarge on this subject. At present I have room only to
notice very briefly some facts which I have observed during
the time I have mesmerised certain patients by pointing at
their eyes with two fingers — a mode I learned originally from
Dr. EUiotson,'^ and of the value of which I entertain a very
high opinion, although it is inapplicable in numerous cases.
To illustrate the value of this method of mesmerising, I may
state that it gives us a test by which we may ascertain the
amount of beneficial influence we may have been able to es-
tablish towards the cure of disease in any given case in which
it is not easy to obtain the sleep.

Mr. Decimus Hands sent me a case of hypertrophy of the
heart which he wished me to examine: and, as it seemed
very difficult to produce the slightest mesmeric effect upon
her, he was desirous that I should try my power of mesmeric
agency. She will probably be referred to as a cure among
the patients of the Mesmeric Infinnary, for I have trans-
ferred her to that institution. I found she had been examined
by Dr.Elliotson, and declared by him to have an over growth, —
an hypertrophy of the heart, and there can be no doubt as to
the nature of her disease. Her name is Isabella Cathie, and
her state of wretched health prevented her from earning her
livelihood by needlework. I \o^ sight of her soon after she
began to attend : for, though she could not easily be put to
sleep, she was very amenable, in the waking state, to the
influence of the silent will ; and she complained that I made
her perform many ridiculous tricks. After many months
Isabella got worse, and made her appearance again ; for she
had not found the same benefit elsewhere that had attended

* See ^oisi. No. VI., pp. 197, 233, 235.


By Dr. Ashbumer. 271

my efPorts to do her good. For three months she came
pretty regularly at nine o'clock every morning : and, having
seated ber in an easy chair, I pointed my middle and ring
finger to her eyes for an hour daily. At first there was
little perceptible effect upon the eyes. But in the course of a
fortnight the pupils began to dilate ; the right eye looked
at the point of my finger, but the left eye wandered away
further and further from me, sitting as I was at her right
side ; gradually the whole head with an extremely slow action
turned in the same direction. Where this phenomenon obtains,
the sleep is very difficult to induce : the repulsive agencies of
the brain would seem to combat with the influence of the
mesmeriser. I believe that, however powerful may be the
curative influence of the mesmeric or odic positive force,
delivered to the eyes firom the fingers' ends, there is a repul-
sive agency in the direction of the fingers, the polarity of
which is overcome and reversed in time in those cases in
which sleep supervenes. Isabella's right eye closed in the
course of two months : but the left remained open, curiously
contracted by an effort to close, and the aperture assuming
a circular form of the size of a threepenny piece. In another
fortnight, the aperture gradually narrowed and lengthened,
the pupil being much dilated; a yawn succeeded, a slight
somnolence, and then a wide awake state of both eyes. This
patient was never put to sleep, but she fdt so much recovered
that Dr. Elliotson could detect no vestige of her former
disease. I recommended her attendance at the Infirmary
in Bedford Street to confirm her cure, as I was leaving town
for Brighton. When after long and patient repetitions of
this mode of mesmerising no sleep is induced, I consider the
conditions of submesmerism as evidenced by the dilated pupil,
the yawn, and finally, the tendency of the eyelids to approxi-
mate and grasp spasmodically, sufficient for the purposes of
cure. If I had mesmerised Isabella for three months more,
I might have probably made her q^elids fast and put her
into a mesmeric sleep.

In a deplorable case of epilepsy, iii a boy 19 years of
age, I worked for five hours and a quarter one day, pointing to
his eyes. Although the pupils dilated often, they contracted
again, and threatened to wear out one's patience. The
approximation of the lids of the two eyes played at see-saw.
First one was nearly closed, while the other remained open ;
then the open eye closed, and the other slightly opened ; until
at last they both closed together spasmodically, and the boy
slept. He, who had had three or four fits every week, had
none for a year, and then only a slight one from error of


272 Cure of large Polypus of the Uterus.

diet^ &c., and the recurrence of it was entirely prevented
by mesmerism.

In a case of epilepsy of long standing, treated unsncoessfnlly
by numerous medicMsd men, the young lady was mesmerised
by me for upwards of three months for an hour each time,
and occasionally twice or thrice a day. She offered the same
phenomena with the pupils and eyelids as Isabella Cathie for
upwards of two months. At last the changed condition
manifested itself, harmony was established between the eyes,
and they both consented to close spasmodically together.
One day I was upwards of an hour pointing with the fingers
and watching the see-saw of the lids until they both closed
together; the next day I put her to sleep in a little more
than six minutes. Her recovery commenced from that
moment. The sleep is important when it can be obtained,
but it is not essential for a cure. In like manner, I am
pleased to find a deep sleep supervene, because I know that a
deeper tone results, and the restoration to health in all cases
is but a restoration to a condition of tone. So it is better to
find a patient, who is unable to open the eyes and to proceed
into a deep sleep, continue to proceed into a condition of
rigidity, because that state is a proof of encreased healthy
tone. I have at present a case which I snatched by the
agency of mesmeric passes from the last stage of typhus fever,
in which the patient, a boy 11 years of age, was in muttering
delirium with sleepless nights ; passing urine and faeces invo-
luntarily ; his abdomen was tympanitic ; his mouth and tongue
black and encrusted; his pijQse weak, at 120. He was pick-
ing at his bed clothes, and approaching with rapid strides to
the last moments of existence. All the appliances of the
medical art had been had recourse to in vain. This case is
adduced to illustrate the fact that a patient can be put to
sleep with ease by pointing the fingers to the eyes ; that that
patient may be in the state of the second consciousness, for-
getting when awake all that passes in his presence during
sleep and all the conversations he has held in the state of
sleep ; and yet, though the sleep is effecting a cure, it is not
a complete and satisfactory mesmeric sleep, for one eyelid is
more closed than the other, and he becomes wide awake in a
few minutes if the passes or the holding the fingers to the
eyes be discontinued. I hold the fingers to the eyes daily
for two hours, and he is mesmerised a good deal besides; but
I shall not be satisfied with the mesmeric condition of my
little patient until I have his eyes closed in harmony. If he
gets well before that event, mesmerism will have cured him of
typhus fever of a grave character, succeeded by large abscesses,


By Dr. Jshbumer. 278

originating in deep-seated inflammation of the absorbents of
the right thigh^ and occupying successively the thigh and hip-
joint ; then the tibia of the same limb ; then the cellular parts
above the knee. Before the full development of these^ a large
abscess had appeared under the jaw. Then the mesentery^ per-
haps affected with tubercular disease^ was the seat of small
abscesses which found an issue by the stomach and by the
rectum^ leaving the boy a victim to peritoneal inflammation^
the agony of which was completely relieved by tractive passes
made with my right hand ; previously to which operation^ no
pressure could be borne anywhere on the surface of the ab-
domen. Notwithstanding all this^ I do not consider this
patient as satisfactorily influenced for a perfect cure. If he
were left as he is, he would die a cripple from the victory which
tubercular disease would inevitably obtain over him. If the
medical profession were not arrogantly insane on mesmerism^
they might be challenged to produce such another case. Even
now, I would defy them all to cure his morbus coxae without
the aid of mesmerism ; and with it I shall have the gratifica-
tion of seeing him walk as well as any of them. Let them
rave, and call us quacks, or whatsoever they please ; let them
by detraction and slander injure our reputations with the sim-
pletons of the silly portion of the world : their ignorance and
their brutality may last as long as their Lancets, but time is
too strong for them ; and, when they are all forgotten, the
blessed truth of mesmerism will remain.

John Ashbxjrneb.
65, Grosvenor Street.


*^e* Let those who grossly abused and unfeelingly ridi-
culed Miss Martineau because she was cured with mesmerism
of an agonizing uterine disease, which had confined her to
her couch for five years, was pronounced by one of the most
renowned obstetric practitioners to be incurable and not
hkely even to be much relieved, and had not yielded at all to
ordinary medical treatment continued for years, now reflect
upon their folly and cruelty. Let them view her case and
the splendid history just detailed by Dr. Ashbumer side by
side and blush. Her case was enlargement and induration of
the womb, with polypus. The whole of the most interesting
history of her disease and cure, and of the sad conduct of her
medical attendant, will be found in No. IX. : and a notice of
the permanence of her cure and the falsehood of medical
reports that she was not cured will be found in No. XII*
The Athenaum also treated Miss Martineau disgracefully*

VOL. IX. T


274 A reply to BlackwoocPs question,

In No IX. is also a remarkable and rapid mesmeric cure
of agonizing enlargement and chronic inflammation of the
womb^ with two ulcerations^ after the failure of leeches every
four days for many months, various medicines, large quan-
tities of morphia which nearly drove her mad, and an opi-
nion £rom her medical attendant, Mr. Taylor, of Brighton,
that he knew not what more to do, and that she would never
be able to walk again, except about the house. This gen-
tleman did not behave like some medical men. When his
permission to try mesmerism was requested, he gave it with
a laugh, saying mesmerism would do neither good nor harm.
Some would have fallen into a wild fiiry : some would have
declared that, though they confessed they could do no good,
and should make no further attempts, yet, if mesmerism were
tried, they would never attend any more, even to prescribe
an aperient or an opiate, or anything else, to lessen the suf-
ferings of the patient. — Zoist.


VIII. What is a Magazine ? A reply to Blackwood's ques-
tion, " What is Mesmerism ?" By Anti-Glorioso.

^* Cette consideration est one de celles qui m'ont oblig^ de vous dire quelqne-
fois, que Ton est plus souvent dup^ par la difiance que par la oonfianoe." — Mim.
du C De Retz, liv. ii.» p. 115.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sir, — The old Cardinal, whose sagacious remark is quoted
above, was deeply read in human nature. Mixing largely
with all ranks and characters, and placed by his position be-
hind the scenes of political life, he obtained an insight into
the motives that regulate men^s conduct, and was able to
appreciate at their real value the sincerity and truthfulness of
their professions. Tiresome as his Memoirs often are from
their detail and prolixity, they abound with observations
which relieve the weariness of the narrative and catch the
reader's attention by their acuteness. De Betz, in fact, in
commenting upon others, looked as often into his own heart :
not over virtuous himself, he well understood the weaknesses
and vices of his cotemporaries ; and his maxims, if collected
together, would serve as a useful little text book for a young
diplomatist : and never did his experience lead him to form a
juster conclusion than when he teaches, that men by their
extra-cunning and over-suspiciousness are more frequently
duped and misled, than when, in good faith themselves, they
trust to the good faith and honesty of their brethren.

What is Mesmerism ? asks Blackwood in a discreditable


<{


What is Mesmerism ?" By Anti-Glorioso. 275


article^ which has appeared in a recent number^ strongly cor-
roborating by its contents the justice of the Cardinal's apo-
thegm. What is a Magazine? I ask in reply^ that we should
reverence its dicta as an authority^ especially when the writers
exhibit a palpable unacquaintance with their subject. Indeed^
I am sorry that old Ebony should have thus joined the com-
mon herd of slanderers : his pages were worthy of something
better : coarse as he often has been^ Christopher North used
to love the truths and to scorn an attack upon a weaker party.
And in the present day he should have doubly paused^ before
he hastilv committed himself to an adverse judgment. As a
reader^ therefore^ who has long delighted in the racy volumes
of Blackwood, I must repeat my regret at the appearance of
this article. Moreover, it is a retrograde movement. In
1887 and in 1845 there were promises of sounder notions in
this Magazine. While the world has been marching forwards
and mesmeric facts converting thousands to their truth, how
is it that our ancient friend has thus stumbled into a pitfall ?
Some disappointed doctor must have been dabbling in the
matter.

But our question is, What is a Magazine ? A Magazine
is in several respects not unlike Mesmerism, being dependant
upon the manner in which it is conducted and the purposes
to which it is applied. The Editor of a Magazine, like the
conductor of a mesmeric exhibition, may pander to the
vulgar taste of the public, may delight in charlatanry and dis-
honourable trickery, may suppress or disguise or distort a
fact, and rather consult his own interests than the interests
of truth and science. The Editor of a Magazine may know
just enough of his subject to be able to impose upon the ig-
norant and unwary ; and what he wants in study, he may
make up for by impudence and falsehood. The Editor of a
Magazine may care nothing for the great cause which he
professes to advocate, and may be seeking only to fill his
pages or his pockets, rather than the minds of his readers '
with information and facts. Thus it is, that the best of
Magazines may fall into the worst of hands, and its columns
be abused and perverted ; though the principles, upon which
It started, may be most sound, and their truth more indubit-
able than ever : we can assure the superficial writers in Black-
wood, that most of the above remarks will apply to the prac-
tice of mesmerism.

The article under consideration consists of two parts :
first, the paper of an " excellent correspondent,^' who favours
the pubHc with his notions on Mesmerism : and secondly, a
postscript by the Editor, or rather by some coarse-minded

T 2


276 A reply to Blackwood^ s question,

writer whom the Editor in an evil hour permitted to supply
his place.

I. " Our excellent correspondent/^ to judge from internal
evidence, is a practised writer, and competent to furnish an
agreeable article upon a subject with which he is really con-
versant. It may be a mistake, but I should almost say that
his hand has appeared in Blackwood before. Be that, how-
ever, as it may, he is clearly out of his depth on this question.
It would seem probable (from his visit to Adolphe and from
ojther points) that he is a resident in the country ; that there
some old fashioned notions cling to him, for instance, a great
dread of ^^ consequences '' at every discovery ;* that he comes
up to town once in a while to rub oflf his annual incrustation
of rural rust ; that in London he mixes with a set of demi-
savans and demi-philosophers, men who have just a sufficiency
of curiosity to tempt them to look at the outside of a truth,
but neither the courage nor honesty to follow it thoroughly
out, finding much charm in a novelty, but no charm in pa-
tient, persevering investigation. From these men, our writer
picks up a strange medley of belief and scepticism, and
amongst other topics he hears the subject of mesmerism
started, and is of course influenced by their inconsequent
views ; — he returns into the country half laughing and half
astounded, — sees Adolphe by accident, — hears of exaggerated
claims and meets with undoubted failures, — listens to some
apothecary^s verdict, and compares that oracle^s shake of the
head with the sneering smiles of our Jjondion literati, — begins
to think that he now knows a little of physiology, — takes up
his pen and writes an article for Blackwood on the nature of
man, — a study that might well tast the powers of the most
gifted — and having thus quitted subjects respecting which he
does know something, for one on which he absolutely knows
nothing, he becomes an additional example of the wisdom of
De Eetz^s saying, that men are more frequently the dupes of
thdr own distrust than of a confiding credit. Of course, the
above is an imaginary picture, and yet may not be very far
oflP the truth : at any rate the reader may be assured that it
somewhat represents the fashion by which many an anti-
mesmeric critic has been manufactured.

The article itself is as illogical a production as ever fell

* The pecaliarity of some minds is at every discovery only to see evil. Thus
Gas was to bum down every house and city : railways to be a convenient means
of transit for rogues only ; steam vessels to bring a foreign soldiery to our shores.
What were not the ''consequences'' that were to arise from chloroform , ma-
chinery, &c. ; and so with mesmerism : it is not the mighty benefits^ which have
actually occurred at which these alarmists look so much, as at a few improbable
and contingent evils.


" fFhat is Mesmerism .?" By Anti-Glorioso, 277

from pen of schoolboy. No reference is made to the remedial
powers of mesmerism^ to its aid in surgery, or to the marvel-
lous operations of Dr. Esdaile. T\vo points are presented for
consideration, and strictly speaking little more : and yet the
article is headed, " What is Mesmerism V

1. The point that the writer takes upon himself princi-
pally to examine is the nature of clairvoyance : and this,
which is but one department of mesmerism, he treats as if it
were the whole matter ; and here he talks the wildest non-
sense. His conclusion seems to be, that either clairvoyance
must be a nonentity, or that the clairvoyant possesses a kind
of "omniscience'' and '^omnipresence," an "ubiquity of
spirit,'' — and a " spiritual power ;" that a somnambulist must
be " an inspired person," " being in the spirit and not in the
body," — and so forth. Surely, some intermediate position
might rather be imagined, — something between two such
wide extremes. Mesmerists are occasionally described as un-
satisfactory reasoners, but no mesmerist that I am acquainted
with could write more illogically than this. From the non-
existence of nothingness to the omniscience of inspiration or
of Deity, there is a vast interval, and room for infinite de-
grees of power. Does our physiologist, for instance, know
accurately the nature and powers of the nervous system ? Is
he acquainted with the action of the brain on the optic nerve
under every circumstance ? Can he decide whether the retina
be indispensably necessary for the purposes of sight, and
whether there may not be some property in the brain or in
the nerves, analogous to an electric force, which is capable of
being brought forth and set into motion in certain abnormal
conditions ? These questions might be multiplied, and should
be all answered before a writer jump, in one step, not from
the sublime to the ridiculous — but from omniscience to im-
posture. That clairvoyance is a fact in nature, I have not a
shadow of doubt. Even Dr. Maitland, no friend to clairvoy-
ance, admits in his pamphlet on Mesmerism that " when every
" allowance has been made, and every mode of escape has
" been tried in vain, the plain fact remains, that unless these
" stories (respecting clairvoyance) and hundreds like them,
" contain much wonderful truth, many persons who have been
" hitherto considered respectable for character, station, and
" talent, are either cheats or fools :"* but that, therefore and
in consequence thereof, the clairvoyant is proved to be an
"inspired person" is a conclusion that may suit this young

* See " Enquiries relating to Mesmerism," by the Rev. S. R. Maitland,
D.D. p. 43.


278 A reply to BlackwoocPs question,

student in physiology, but will hardly accord with the severer
rules of true science. What indeed may be the nature of
clairvoyance is a point adhuc sub judice, — and long likely to
remain so. Professor Gregory gives one theory ; Dr. Haddock
of Bolton his theory ; and other mesmerists their theories :
the materialist has his notion, and the psychologist his : but
after all we know little more than that clairvoyance stands
forth as a proved fact in physics. The powers of this faculty
may perhaps be overestimated by some ardent believers, both
as to their reach and their intensity : it may be a vision, not
susceptible of being exercised in clear continuous action, —
irregular, uncertain, and easily exhausted ; coming forth by
fits and flashes, — catching a bright gaze for a moment and
falling back into an indistinct glimpse or lustre, — but that to
some extent or other, and with a certain quantum of living
force, the thing itself does exist in rerum naturd, is a point,
that must be regarded as settled, — or there is an end of all
credibility in human evidence for ever. Our writer, of course,
if he be so minded, may deny that there is a sufficiency of
evidence to prove the reality of this alleged faculty : but then
he must be so obliging as to inform us next, what amount of
evidence or what class or accumulation of witnesses would
satisfy his mind on any given subject, — say as to a miracle —
or rather as to any wonders in nature or science, into which
he had no opportunity of making personal investigation. I
repeat it, let him first determine the ratio of testimony which
he would demand as needful towards a credence of any other
marvel,— and then let clairvoyance be tested by the same rules
and procedure however stringent : but do not let a critic, who
professes to instruct the public mind on the subject of mes-
merism, be frighted out of his wits by vague notions of ma-
terialism, or again put his pen to insufferable trash about
omniscience, omnipresence and inspiration. Well, indeed,
may that most accomplished writer. Sir Bulwer Lytton remark,
" Who shall judge of that power of which he knows not the
" element ? or despise the marvel of which he cannot detect
" the imposture ?^^*

This writer, indeed, is so bewildered between spiritualism
and materialism, — ^that, while in clairvoyance he would bring
in a supernatural spiritualism to override the material, in the
influences produced upon the lower animals he sees the doc-
trine of " mind-communion by rapport '^ greatly modified, if
not quite " annihilated.^' " In what manner do the mesmer-
" isers of mad bulls and savage dogs enter into the animus

* Harold; vol. ii., p. 57.


€C


What is Mesmerism ?" By Anti-Glorioso, 279


" of the animal they may make submit to them ?" How
cunning at fence our author is I He overthrows the mate*
rialist by arguments drawn from the doctrine of spirit : he
dashes the unhappy spiritualist to pieces by asking where
the mental action is to be found with regard to the bull and
dog ! Here is a fearful dilemma : it is difficult indeed to tie
down such a Proteus: and yet for a spiritualist himself
escape from the inference is not impossible ; whilst to the
pure materialist the answer is plain and easy. The true
mesmerist, then, regards all the primary effects, — all that
may be classed under the title of lower phenomena, as simply
the result of matter acting upon matter, i. e., of one body
acting upon another, through some physical medium : in re-
spect to the highet phenomena, the question may be called
an open one; here it may be possible that spiritual or mental
influences intervene ; but, whether they do so, or not, (and
some of us think one thing, and some another,) no mes*
merist of any authority considers that our first or lower order
of facts are anything else than the results of a purely physical
action, though here and there they may be often greatly
aided by the power of imagination. And so much for the
*^ wonderful inconsistency in the advocates of our science,'^ —
an inconsistency which has simply taken its rise from the
confosion of ideas with which our writer is himself per-
plexed.

2. The remaining point, to which this writer directs his
attention, is the way in which mesmerism is or may be used.
We must " look to consequences,^' he says : " what will be-
come of us under its workings ?'' ^' it is a fearful power in
evil hands :'' and so on. Now here the point to notice is the
author's once more illogical conclusion. I am myself no
admirer of public exhibitions of mesmerism^ and no Mend
to an unnecessary exercise of the power : but this is beside
the purpose, — or rather proves the propriety of the practice
being more regularly studied by the scientific and the com-
petent. In short all his arguments apply to the abuses of
mesmerism, — ^upon which we are agreed : but what a view to
take of a great physical truth ! The same pen, with which
our writer wrote this inconclusive essay, might have been
either employed in the composition of the noblest treatise of
morals or of the foulest personal libel : and the very same
argument may run through the whole range of nature ; every-
thing may be abused ; everything may be a ^^ power of evil-
in evil hands.^^ One is sick of such nonsense : let us, there-
fore, make the argument personal or rather professional, and
see if the writer can understand us.


280 A reply to Blackwood^s question,

Is '' CorreBpondent'' a Clergyman ? Would he have the
question^ " what is Christianity/' answered by reference to
Johanna Southcote and the ravings of some field preacher^
or rather by his own orthodox and articled theology ?

Is he one of the Faculty ? Would he have the practice
of medicine estimated by the advertisements of an itinerant
quack^ or by the careful diagnosis of the educated physician?

Is Correspondent a Barrister? Would he wish for an
opinion of English Jurisprudence to be formed from the
pettifogging tricks of a needy attorney^ or by the dedsions
that emanate from Westminster Hall?

This is the way in which Mesmerism^ or any other Ism^
is to be tried ; not by the injudicious proceedings of sai-
dUant friends — but by the sober and scientific conduct of its
recognized advocates.

If then this ^^ excellent Correspondent'^ wishes to know
^' what is Mesmerism/' let him go to Mr. Parker^ Surgeon^
Exeter^ who^ in addition to numerous most important cures^
has performed upwards of 200 surgical operations without
the patients' feeling any pain whilst under the influence : — ^let
him go to Mr. Chandler^ Surgeon^ Rotherithe^ and hear his
description of successfiil treatment: — ^let him go to Mr.
Tubbs^ Surgeon^ XJpwell Isle, Cambridgeshire, and learn
what that able practitioner has effected in Neuralgia, Rheu-
matism, Ophthalmia, &c; — let him go to Dr. Storer, Bristol, —
to Mr. Wagstaff, Surgeon, Leighton Buzzard,— to Mr. Mott,
Surgeon, Brighton, — and learn their evidence in the matter :
— let him go to the Mesmeric Infirmary in London, and
witness the sick relieved and cured, by the admirable ex-
ertions of Mr. Thomas Capem, and under the supervision
of Dr. Elliotson, Dr. Symes, (a most able friend to the
cause,) and other medical members of the committee : — let
him go to the Mesmeric Hospital, Calcutta, and be instructed
as to the prodigies performed under Dr. Esdaile's surgical
skill: — but do not let him go to Adolphe and regard the
exhibition of that somnambule as a proof of what mesmerism
really is, — or estimate the phenomena which he witnessed at
Dr.Elliotson's (mere accessories to the treatment, and curious
as developments of mesmeric action), as if they were the
^'Be-all and the End-all" of the science, — and overlook
the cure itself, which was the great point of interest in the
cases exhibited, — and the fact, as I have been informed, to
which Dr. Elliotson himself primarily directed the attention
of his audience.

If then I were askcd^ " what is Mesmerism," instead of


■— 1


'' What is Mesmerism f" By Anii^Glorioso. 281

writing fustian about omniscience^ or alluding merely to any
evil method by which its influences might be abused^ (a
quality which it shares in common with every other " good
and perfect gift which is from above/^) I should say that
mesmerism was a power by which phenomena such as clair-
voyance^ extasis^ exaltation of the senses^ sleep-wakings or
somnambulism as it used to be called^ rigidity of the muscles^
catalepsy^ complete insensibility^ and many other peculiar
manifestations that have all occurred spontaneously in the
human frame, and been recorded by writers before Mesmer
was born, might be brought on as it were by an artificial
process, and made to * prove the harmony of nature in its
operations; and that under its action such a change was
wrought upon our system, that diseases, hitherto intractable,
could be often greatly relieved, and in some cases completely
cured ; while the insensibility to pain was so complete, that
operations, dangerous under chloroform, might be performed
with safety^^and without the patient's cognizance.

This would be my delineation of this mysterious agent, —
short indeed, but far more correct than the lengthened des-
cription furnished by Blackwood's correspondent, a gentle-
man, who " neither believes nor disbelieves,'' — a curious state
of mind for a self-constituted public instructor. In taking
leave, therefore, of our worthy scribe, let me give him one
hint. If he must write, let him write on a subject with which
he has at least some slight acquaintance ; let him, with the
fair friends of the Vicar of Wakefield, discuss "pictures,
taste, Shakespeare, and the musical glasses ;" in short, any
thing but a great Truth, respecting which his habits, his ex-
perience, and his friends have retained him in a melancholy
state of ignorance, of which a well educated man ought to
feel somewhat ashamed. But, after all, it is easier to smile*
with one's acquaintance at the zeal of the mesmerists, and to
secure a reputation for knowledge without its labours, than
to advocate an unfashionable discovery : so magnetizers must
bide their time — and make up their minds for more unfaith-
fulness and time-serving.

II. The Second Part of Blackwood's paper consists of a
Postscript by a Sub-Editor : a disgraceful production, vulgar-
minded, and full jof misrepresentation; — ^for the appearance
of which the respectable proprietors of that Journal will one
day feel sorry. It begins with a gross misstatement ; an un-
intentional one perhaps : but the ignorance, that dictated it,
is not excusable.

The writer says, " No person was ever magnetised, when
" totally unsuspicious of the operation of which he was the


282 A reply to Blackwood's question,


sabject. This is conclusive; because a physical agent^ which
never does^ of itself and unheralded^ produce any effect^ is
no physical agent at all/' Now whatever may be this
writer's Umited acquaintance with facts^ — or whatever he may
have been informed by some aged and angry apothecary^ (for
it is these old gentlemen who try to keep mesmeric practice
down^) I beg to inform him, that his statement is incorrect.
A writer should be more cautious in throwing off dogmatic
and general positions. Experienced mesmerisers, and men
competent to form a judgment, could tell him that many
persons have been ^^ magnetized'' when totally unconscious
of the operation. I have myself mesmerised parties under
such circumstances, with the fullest success. But I name not
myself only : the thing is notorious to all our best and most
practiced operators.: and I have long ago contended that this
is " concltmve, because a physical agevU which unheralded
" does of itself produce an effect y^ is already proved to possess
an ascertained existence. I perceive, however, that Black-
wood's argument is the one most recently adopted by Anti-
mesmerists. But they are as much mistaken on this point, as
they are on every other. Facts are against them ; but none
are so ignorant as those who will not learn.

The writer of the Postscript then speaks of the ^'magnetic
superstition,"— of men's '^ infatuation" for it, — and of the
mesmerised party being in a " disgusting condition :" surely,
most unbecoming language for a respectable journal to
employ, in reference to a medical appliance, which has
received the sanction of men of approved science, and been
advocated from motives of the purest philanthrophy I I am not
aware that any one ever recommended mesmerism as per se
either pleasant or desirable. Mesmerism is a remedy for sore
jiisease : and, like other remedies, may be placed in the
category of things not agreeable in themselves, but chosen as
preferable to greater evils.* And the ^infatuation," with
which it is regarded, is simply analogous to the infatuation
with which men regard any other system, by which they may
escape from a dreaded illness or acute and protracted pain.
And as to a ^^ disgusting condition :" which is the condition,
most shocking to witness, the convulsions of an epileptic,
the paroxysms of mania, and the racking agonies of tic, — or
that tranquil healing sleep into which the manipulations of
the mesmeriser lull the patient ? Certainly, if we must speak
of " disgust," I feel infinitely more disgust at the cold-blooded

* Is a coarse of calomel a thing pleasant in itself ? or saliyation, or blisters,
cuppings, leeches, and moxas ? or have we a *' superstition" for excisions or
amputations, &c. ?


((


What is Mesmerism ?^' By Anti-Glorioso. 283


heartlessness of medical men, who^ being aware of the alleged
virtues of mesmerism, can yet allow their patients to suffer
on, and not even recommend a trial. However, these things
are matter of feeling, respecting which the sick themselves or
the friends of the sick must now make their choice. At any
rate I have made mine ; and, while I neither wish to be mes-
merised myself nor to mesmerise another, when we are both
in health, I am but too happy in times of illness to call in the
'^ medical hand '^ of the mesmeriser, and to thank God for a
provision of nature by which some few of the evils of life may
be at least relieved.*

" How then is this miserable nonsense to be disposed of ?^^
asks the Postscript in conclusion. There has been a time
when Blackwood could speak in a more humanized and Chris-
tian tone.

Blackwood in 1837.

** Animal Magnetism now comes before us as a science, founded
upon natoral laws, gathering round it new proofs the more closely it
is examined, and substantiating its claim to be considered the great-
est blessing ever vouchsafed to mankind." Vol. xlii., p. 384.

Blackwood in 1845.

** The production by external influence either of absolute coma or
of sleepwaking . . . has been too lightly estimated and too little ex-
amined. This alone is apparently so connected with the mainsprings
of sentient existence, as to deserve and demand an impartial and per-
severing scrutiny." Vol. Ivii., p. 241.

I recommend the above passages to the consideration of
the Editor, before he again commit his Journal to the rash
conclusions of his Contributor, or to the ipse dixits of some
distempered Doctor. The litera scripta of the sceptic will
remain an irrevocable blot in his pages that future convic-
tions will in vain endeavour to erase : and as to the ^' force of
public opinion *' which he would evoke as an extinguisher of
our science, he must learn that public opinion is all the other
way. Public opinion may reject the vulgarized tricks of an
exhibition : public opinion may look with a forbidding eye

* These writers seem to imagine that mesmerists take up our science for pure
pastime, and without any good or definite purpose. But there is nothing which
our approved writers more condemn than useless experimenting. I^fessor
Gregory, our latest authority, observes that *' Animal Magnetism is not a toy,
not the amusement for an idle hour, not a means of gratifying a morbid craving
for novelty, or for the marvellous. All such uses I abjure as abuses. Neither
is it a thing to be exhibited to gaping crowds for money.'' p. 335. Mr. Sandby
in his work, *' Mesmerism and its Opponents,'' speaks very strongly in the same
way ; see page 217. Dr. Elliotson, Dr. Esdaile, Dr. Hufeland, and every
writer of character deprecate an improper and unnecessary exercise of the power.


284 Remarks upon an account in Blackwood's Magazine

upon idle and improper experiments : but public opinion is
beginning to cry out^ in words that will soon thunder at the
doors of every medical practitioner^ that for the chamber of
the sickj for the knife of the surgeon^ and for the wards of
aa Hospital, Mesmerism is an auxiliary which mast no longer
be neglected : and^ if Blackwood again attempt to prevent such
a merciful exercise of the power, *' public opinion '' will ask
" What is a Magazine/' however able it may be in various
other respects, that we should attend to it in preference to
the .facts of experience and the demands of common hu-
manity ?

I am, yours, &c.,

Anti-Gloeioso.

F.S. Let me take this oportunity of correcting a mis-
statement that appeared in your last number, in my notice
of the *' Letters on ^Animal Magnetism,'^ wherein I taxed
Professor Gregory with a "prudential reserve '^ in regard to
his belief of Mesmerism. Fxom conversations that I have had
with a few Scotch friends, I learn that Dr. Gregory has
spoken out for some time in the Northern Capital. It might
have been wished that his adhesion to the cause had been
better known, and at an earlier day, amongst us here in Lon-
don ; — but, however, it is certain that he openly declared his
convictions to his brethren at Edinburgh a few years back :
and I therefore retract my observations on this point, with a
regret that they were made. But, on the other hand, I feel
more than ever convinced that there existed no disposition on
the part of the Chemical Professor to do full justice to The
Zoist, There are those who try, however cautiously, and
rather by inuendos than by plain speaking, to keep The Zoisi
back, (their efforts are in vain ;) and from these unfriendly
mesmerists the Professor may possibly have received an im-
pression. This is mentioned not from an unkind feeling to
him, but for the sake of putting him on his guard for the
future. A. G.


IX. Remarks upon an anonymous account in Blackwood's Mag-
azine of a visit to Dr. Elliotson's house, permitted sia^ years
ago to a stranger. By Dr. Elliotson.

" But to speak my mind freely on the subject of consequences, I am not so
scrupulous in my regard to them, as many of my profession are apt to be : my
nature is frank and open, and warmly disposed not only to seek but to speak what
I take to be true, which disposition has been greatly confirmed by the situation
into which Providence has thrown me. For I was never trained to pace in the
trammels of the church, nor tempted by the sweets of its preferments to sacrifice


of a visit to Dr. EUiotson^s house. 285

the philosophic freedom of a studious to the servile restraints of an ambitious
life ; and, from this very circumstance, as often as I reflect upon it^ I feel that
comfort in my own breast, which no external honours can bestow. I persuade
myself that the life and faculties of man, at the best but short and limited, can-
not be employed more estimably or laudably than in the search of knowledge ;
and especially of that sort which relates to our duty and conduces to our happi-
ness. In these enquiries, therefore, wherever I perceive any glimmering of truth
before me, I readily pursue and endeavour to trace it to its source, without any
reserve or caution of pushing the discovery too far, or opening too great a glare
of it to the public. I look upon the discovery of every thing which is true as a
valuable acquisition to society, which cannot possibly hurt or obstruct the good
effect of any other truth whatsoever ; for they all partake of one common essence,
and necessarily coincide with each other ; and, like the drops of rain, which fall
separately into the river, mix themselves at once with the stream, and strengthen
the general current." — The Rev. Conters Middleton, D.D. Free Inquiry into
the Miracuhut Powers, Sfc, Preface, p. viL

** But truth was never known to be on the persecuting side, or to have had
any other effect than to promote the general good and to co-operate with heaven
itself in bringing us still nearer to the perfection of our being, and to the know-
ledge of that eternal rule of good and ill, which God originsdly marked out and
prescribed to the nature of man. Let the consequences then of truth reach as far
as they can : the furth^ they reach the better : Uie more errors they will detect,
and the more they will dissipate of those clouds and mists, in which the crafty and
interested part of mankind are apt to involve and disguise the real nature of
things from the view of their fellow-creatures." — Ibid.

An article has been pointed out to me in Blackwood's Maga-
zine for July^ in which the anonymous writer gives an account
of some mesmeric phenomena which I shewed in 1845 to
some friends and a few persons whom I allowed them to in-
troduce. If I recollect right, the President of the French
Republic^ the Archbishop of Dublin, several clergymen of my
acquaintance, and gentlemen in other professions, were pre-
sent. The rest of the article I have neither time nor patience
to notice : but upon the report of his visit I shall freely com-
ment, because its inaccuracies ought not to be unknown to
the public.

The anonymous writer thus begins : —

*' I had met a professional gentleman — a great mesmerist, and
who had published much upon the subject — who spoke of the new
phenomena which we would see exemplified at Dr. Elliotson's, phe-
nomena connected with phrenology, and which shewed how charac-
ters were convertible by mesmeric process: for instance, that by
exciting (and that without touching it, but by waving the hand over
it) the organ of Acquisitiveness, a person would be induced to steal
anything that came in the way, — * for instance,' said he, * the ring
off one's finger ;' and he shewed that on his' own. Then, by exciting
in the same manner other organs, the thief would become a liar, a
proud justifier of the deed, and a combative one; then that, by
altering the process, the same thief would become a highly moral
character, and abhor theft. We arrived at Dr. Elliotson's. There
was a large assembly of people, so that what I am narrating was evi-
dently not intended as a private or secret exhibition : did I so con-


286 Remarks upon an account in Blackwood's Magazine

sider it, I should be silent. Doubtless^ the object was to shew the
phenomena ; and I suppose I can scarcely be considered as acting
contrary to that objec<^ by simply narrating what I saw."

The words private and secret are far from synonymous.
A dinner party at a gentleman^s house is not a secret party :
the distribution of a book printed for his friends by an author
is not a secret distribution : still the one and the other are
private ; and no newspaper^ without direct permission^ feels
it right to publish an account of the dinner^ nor a reviewer to
criticise the book. My party was not secret, but it was pri-
vate : and no person oefore^ after having been at any such
party in my house, ever published what he witnessed without
enquiring of me whether this would-be agreeable. Very
lately I shewed the phenomena to some German Princes,
several German Professors and other scientific and literary
men — chiefly introduced by the Prussian Minister, the Chev-
alier Bunsen; and an account appeared in the jiUgemeine
Zeitung, for June 27 and 28 : but the gentleman who re-
ported the visit was not so underbred, or rather not so defi-
cient in right feeling, as not to ask me previously whether this
would be agreeable to me. I at once gave him my consent,
as I have done on every such occasion, and should have done
had the writer in Blackwood applied to me.

He thus proceeds, —

*^ Two young women were mesmerised by a single wave of the
hand to each. After this, the gentleman before alluded to, who
stood behind one of these young women, infiuenced, by a movement
of his hand — ^yet not touching — the organ of Acquisitiveness. She
immediately put out, in all directions, her restless fingers, as in
search of some object to lay hold on ; finally she put her hands a
little over her head, and did actually take the hand of the profes-
sional gentleman who had previously spoken of the phenomenon, and
took his ring from his finger. The other young woman was then, by
a similar process, excited to a high moral sense ; and when told that
her companion had stolen the ring, she gravely lectured her upon
her criminal conduct. The thief at first denied the fact, wluch
caused the remark that the thief is necessarily a liar ; but after a
while the organ of Pride was excited, and she justified it, and defied
her lecturing companion in a tone of great contempt. And now the
hand was also over the organ of Combativeness, upon which the
thief gave a sharp slap of her hand to her moralizing companion, and
continued the same proud bearing. After this the whole was reversed :
the young woman who had acted the good part of justice, became,
under mesmeric process, the thief ; and the thief took the part of
justice — nor was there much variation in the manner of the transac-
tion."

Now the writer must have a bad memory and be a bad


of a visU to Dr. Elliotson^s house. 287

observer. The truthful gentlemen whom he met did not tell
him this. I never in either of these patients was able to ex-
cite a cerebral organ without touching over it ; nor even in
any patient did I, or could I, excite a cerebral organ by waiv-
ing the hand over it. I have succeeded in a few patients by
pointing at an organ^ but not by pointing unless for some
minutes. There was no waiving to excite the organs of the
two patients whom he saw : but contact over the organs.
Neither did even the effects on the brain take place imme-
diately in one of these patients. In one of these patients a
considerable time elapses before the finger in contact with the
head produces the effect upon the organs. There is no imme-
diately, no touch-and-go, no presto ; and after the removal
of the finger some time elapses before the excitement of the
organ subsides.* Yet the writer piques himself upon attention
to minute facts I

" I could not, however, but notice to myself that the whole
passed as it was previously told me it would pass ; and that the very
ring was taken which had been shewn me as a ' for instance ' only ;
and I mention this, because, in the investigation of facts, minute
truths are of value ; and we are allowed to entertain suspicion where
there is a possibility of trick or acting. Nor is it necessary, in sus-
pecting, that we should throw any moral blame on those high-minded
and gifted men who take part in these transactions. They may be
persons deceived, and of a nature liable to self-deception, as well as to
be imposed upon by others ; but I am not here now, while treating
upon this subject, casting suspicion — I only state what then passed
through my mind."

Of course the whole passed as it was previously told. If
it had not, what would he have said ? When a chemical lec-
turer makes an experiment, does not the audience expect that
all will take place as he declares it will : not that there will be
no precipitate when he declares there will be one : not that a
fluid will become red when he declares it will become green ?

What right had he to insinuate that I or my friends were
of a nature liable to self-deception, as well as to be imposed
upon by others ? Can he adduce instances to justify him in
this insinuation : or to justify him in the mean and affectedly
candid assurance that he is not casting suspicion ; only stating
what passed in his mind ? Mrs. Candour's pet son he is,
without a doubt.

" There was another fact with regard to one of these young
women. Dr. EUiotson willed that she shoi:Qd come to him, at the

* See Zoiet, No. XII., p. 454 ; «* last long afterwards but do not begin for
some time." See also p. 465 for the scene.


288 Remarks upon an account, ^c.

same time telling her by word of mouth not to come. This exhibi-
tion was very beautiful, for the young woman assumed most graceful
attitudes, as if irresistibly, but slowly, moving towards him, saying,
* Why do you tell me not to come, while you are making me come ?'
I think it cannot be denied that here there was an exhibition of a
fearful power."

I did not produce this effect by willing ; but by beckoning
most perseveringly. I have never produced an effect of any
sort upon this patient by my will. Long continued beckon-
ing has always been the only means by which I could make
her advance towards me. I have willed in vain till my head
ached : and by long-continued beckoning^ without any exer-
tion of will, and even while thinking of other matters, I
succeed. Any person equally succeeds : and persons who
have no idea what is to be the result of their beckoning, as
her eyes are always firmly closed, or who are perfect sceptics
as to mesmerism. Yet the writer makes no allusion to the
striking fact that I stood beckoning for many minutes, per-
haps ten, before the result came. What there was fearful in
this, I do not know. On reaching me, she, as she always
does, stood still and simply asked what I wanted. As I could
produce the effect by beckoning only, what more could have
been done by the fearful power of beckoning for an hour, I
cannot imagine. The fact is very extraordinary that the beck-
oning has this effect, though ordinary vision is rendered im-
possible. Nay, she has no idea that we are beckoning : and
merely replies when asked why she has come to us, that we
called her to us : but how we call her, she has not the faintest
idea. Any one can beckon her with effect in her mesmeric
state, whoever it may be that induced the state.

'* At the same time there .was another woman mesmerised, but
there was no other exhibition with regard to her than that which was
indeed extraordinary enough ; but it was a bodily effect. She was
in a chair with her legs and feet extended, and in such a position
that I should have thought no person could have maintained very
long ; but as I sat close to her, and perhaps for two or three hours,
during which time she did not in the least move, I felt sure that she
was under some cataleptic influence.

This patient was Miss Barber, whose scirrhus of the
breast I dissipated with mesmerism.* A bodily effect I Why
all were bodily effects. When the cerebral organs were ex-
cited, what was this but a bodily effect, — an excitement of cer-
tain portions of the bodily organ termed brain? just a^
brandy or opium, in exciting or depressing certain feelings and

* See No. XXIII.


Introvision, with the verification after death, 289

powers, excites or depresses the activity of certain portions of
the bodily organ termed brain. The cases are the same.

Under a cataleptic influence I There was no catalepsy,
but simple rigidity. I never knew her cataleptic. If the
writer had studied The Zoist, as he was bound to do before
writing, especially No. V., he would have learnt that catalepsy
and rigidity are two different things. However, let that pass.

Under a cataleptic influence ! Why the influence she was
under was the mesmeric influence. I had by passes sent her
into a perfect mesmeric sleep-waking : and then I had made
her legs, arms, and whole body rigid by making long contact
passes upon them. But not a word of this does he mention.
Some cataleptic influence ! The careful, acute observer !
the faithful narrator ! the clear-sighted and intelligent phi-
losopher !

'* But with regard to her, perhaps the still more extraordinary
fact was the manner in which she was awakened. Dr. Elliotson, who
was at a considerable distance from her, made a rapid movement
with his fingers, and at the same instant her eyelids shook tremulously,
as in correspondence with the action of Dr. Elliotson's hand ; and
thus she was awakened — the stiffness of her limbs removed by pass-
ing the hand along them — and she arose and walked away, apparently
unconscious of what had taken place. Dr. EUiotson, however, just
as he began in this way to operate, told the company what would be
the effect, yet he instantly recollected that his so saying might shake
the belief of some, and regretted doing so — at the same time stating
that the effect would have been exactly the same."

He never saw me pass my hands along her limbs to relax
them. This process would have stiffened them still more.
Her limbs were relaxed by passing the hands at a distance
over them transversely.^


X. An instance of Introvision, with the verification after death.
By Mr. Slom an, surgeon, and Mr. May he w ; of Farnham,
Surrey. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.

*' But plain facts cannot delude us ; cannot speak any other language, or give
any other information, but what flows from nature and truth. The testimony
therefore of facts, as it is offered to our senses, in this wonderful fabric and con-
stitution of worldly things, may properly be called the testimony of God himself:
as it carries with it the surest instruction in all cases and to all nations, which in
the ordinary course of his providence he has thought fit to appoint for the guid-
ance of human life." — ^The Rev. Con vers Middleton, D.D., Free Enquiry
into the Miraculous PowerSf Sfc. Preface, p. ix.

" I easily foresaw I was sure to encounter all the opposition that prejudice,
bigotry, and superstition are ever prepared to give to all free enquiries into opi-

* All the phenomena of this patient are recorded in No. XXIII. v
VOL. IX. U


290 Inirovision, with the verificaiion e^ier death.

nions which depend on the prevalence of their powers. I was aware that the very
novelty of it wonld offend, and the matter of it still more ; that many would rise
up against it, and some of them by writing, others by noise and clamour, try to
raise a popular odhim upon it ; but my comfort was that this would eidte the
candid inquirers also, to take it into their consideration, and to wdgh the merit
and consequences of it ; and it was the judgment of these alone by which I pro-
posed to determine my future measures and resolution with regard to it." — Ibid.,
Prefoce, p. x«

I LAST year received from Mr. Mayhew of Famliam^ who has
made some valuable communications to The Zoisij* the fol-
lowing instance of striking introvision : but was not certain
that I might forward it to the journal. As I now learn that^
if I judge it worthy of publication^ I may transmit it^ I
do myself that very great pleasure : for the reality of intro-
vision can be established by the accumulated narrations only
of opinions and anatomical examinations^ given in all sim-
plicity.

The patient laboured under structural disease in the ab-
domen : but it proceeded with a rapidity unusual in such com-
plaints when occurring in adults.

The symptoms, Mr. Mayhew writes to me, were great
vomiting, of either dark greenish, or bloody, matters.

Alvine evacuations either of a dark brown colour, thick,
like dregs — or resembling blood and water — or consisting of
pieces of coagulated blood.

His agony was great, especially towards the lowest part
and the left side of the abdomen.

Towards the end of his life, the palpitation of the heart
was dreadful.

The account given of the symptoms by the clairvoyante
corresponded with them.

The following are the opinions given by her on examina-
tion of each part at various periods : and the appearances of
the respective parts after death. The opinions were taken
down by Mr. Mayhew : the details of the appearances are
certified by Mr. Sloman. I will prefix to them a letter which
I received from the latter gentleman, whose intelligence, ho-
nesty, and moral courage are an example to his brethren.

" Famham, 28th May, 1850.
'^ Dear Sir, — I must apologize for not having before replied
to your kind note of the 24th ult. My principal reason for
proposing to draw up a sketch of the post-mortem appear-
ances in Mr. Mayhew^s case of Hopwood was more to prevent

* No. XXIX., cure of pulmonary consumption, in the chiirvoyante whose
powers are exhibited in the present article. The case is in all respects most inter-
esting. No. XXXI., four remarkable cures of intense chronic rheumatism,
of erysipelas, neturalgia, and consumption.


By Messrs. Slaman and Maphew, 20i

the possibility of its being said that he had concocted it to
suit his case than from any other motiye : since I know how
absurd and unwarrantable is the prejudice against mesmerism,
and therefore how desirable it is to have the strongest testi-
mony and the most unquestionable facts. This case appears
to me to be singularly striking, as proving the power of the
clairvoyante : inasmuch as she accurately described appearances
and mentioned facts which were not indicated by the usual
symptoms, and indeed the existence of which appeared highly
improbable from the apparently short duration of illness, but
which the post-mortem examination proved to be strictly
correct. I will only therefore add that Mr. Mayhew^s account
of the post-mortem examination^ which I read over, is per-
fectly correct, and that I believe the disease of the intestine
which he mentions was of a scirrhous nature and very far
advanced.

" I had another ehurvoyant examination at my house last
evening, and I think in all probability I shall again have an
opportunity of testing it by a post-mortem examination, as I
fear the man is sinking fast. In this case neither Mr. Mayhew
nor the clairvoyante knew whom they were to examine before
they came to my house, and I did not sav one word to either
as to the nature of the case; and neitner of them, to the
best of my knowledge, had even seen the man before, and I
do not think that they either of them even now know who it
was ; in fact I took every possible precaution to prevent their
finding out. Mr. Newnham had seen the case previously
with me, and we both think the examination extraordinarily
correct, so far as we can judge. If I have a post-mortem ex-
amination, I will send you an account of it.

''Allow me to add that I, as an humble individual, feel
deeply indebted to you for your able and disinterested efforts,
through evil report and good report, to establish the truth of
this most important and interesting subject : and I trust that
you may live to see its truth established. But should it not
be so, you will have the satisfaction to feel that you have
shared the fate of all those who have ventured in the path of
scientific research : and others will share the fruit of your
labours.

" I am, dear Sir, faithfully yours,

''S. George Sloman.'*


u 2


^92 Intrwision, with the verification after death.


Clairvojaiit Examinatioii of Mr. Hopwood, bj Mias
Hewitty the Surrey Clairvoyante, under the mesmeric
management of Mr. S. Maybew, of Famham, Snrrey.

1851.

May 1. HsAD veiy much affected with aching
and heaviness. Vessels of the eyes are
affected.
9. Head is affected with a heavy feeling.

1. Bowels yeiy mnch affected. They look
very dark, especially towards the left side.
There appears to be something congealed
in the bowels, — ^it looks like blood. I
think it came from the veins in the liver,
through over exertion.
They are very much inflamed towards the
left side : more to the lower part.
They are very much loaded, and appear
not to have had a direct passage for some
time. It makes them appear very hard :
more to the front part and below.

3. The lodgment is moving, — it is breaking
up.

6. There is a little more passage.

9. Do not look so well — they are affected
by the inflammation. I don't like their
appearance at aU.

1. Lives is very much affected. It is in
an unpleasant slimy-looking state — ^there
are some yellow-looking biots about in
it. It appears rather loaded : it has a
bilious appearance.

On the under side a large vessel that runs
there is full of corruption : it is distended
very much.

The liver extends about three inches
below the ribs.

6. Better : free from that yellow slimy stuff.
There is a small vein burst.

7. Not so well.

8. It looks clearer of slime, and the gall-
vessel is better. The burst vessel still
bleeds, but not so much.

There is another small one connected
with the gall-bladder burst, but does
not bleed much.

9. The gall-bladder is burst a little at the
top. The outside edge of the liver looks
very dark. The blood which he raises is


Notes taken of post-
mortem appearances :
oertifiedbyMr. Sloman


Not examined.


Intestines gan-
grenous throughout.

Malignantdisease
of the rectum to an
enormous extent, —
distehdedlikeablad-
der, and enormously
thickened.


Liver fall of tfimort
and enormously en-
larged.

No leakage conld be
detected in the liver.

The liver was quite
free from blood.

The parts around
the gall were deeply
stained; therewas con-
siderable moisture, but
actual leakage could
not be ascertained.

The liver literally
fcdl of tumors; some
the size of pea ; vari-
ous sizes lurger, and
one weighing 16 ozs. '
apothecaries' weight.

The large tumor in
the liver, on being dis-
sected, was found to
contain in its centre
about 3 oz. of thick
fluid of a reddish brovm
colour, in the midst of


By Messrs. Sloman and Mayhew.


298


from the liver. The vessels that are
burst bleed more.


1. Kidneys. — The kidneys are a little
affected by a dark appearance towards
the bowels, which has caused an aching
across the loins.

5. Better.

1. Stomach requires cleansing, it has a
bilious appearance.

5. The blood which comes up, comes from
a small vein in the Hver having burst.
It has been increased by his retching.
His retching has caused a great deal of
darkness to come up from the spleen to
the stomach.

7. The stomach itself \s a little affected.

1. Lungs look veiy misty, but are not
ulcerated. There is a great deal of im-
pure blood in the veins which branch
over the lungs.

8. I am sure the inflammation from the
throat vnll reach the lungs ; but it may
be prevented if the bHster draw.

(The blister did not draw).

9. They are much more inflamed than last
night.

6. Heaet. — He has much throbbing at the
heart.

7. Same — continued.

8. Same — ^not quite so much.

9. Same — much more.

8. Thboat. — Much inflammation in the
throat, at the lower part of it ; if not
stopped, it wiU reach the lungs and chest.

9. Very much furred and bad.

9. 9 a.m. There is no ground for hope. He
may survive till 12 or 4, but I tmnk not
longer. I do not see the end very
clearly, but he cannot Kve much longer.
10 p.m. He thinks himself better, but
he is not ; he is sinking very fast.


which wasa round mass
of matter, resembling
congealed blood.

From the flnidto the
outside of the sac the
colour gradually as-
sumed a lighter shade,
the outwari part bemg
about the same as the
other small tumors —
of a cream colour.

Nothing observ-
able.


Coats of the Sto-
mach are thickened.
Commencement of
slight ulceration to-
wfffds the fundus,
with slight inflam-
mation.


Sight lung some-
what congested, and
rather crepitant.

Considerable ad-
hesion in the left
lung, and recently
inflamed.


Heart rather fat-
ty. Considerable
dilatation of the
right auricle.

Not examined.


Died at 9 a.m„
10th May.


1^94 Tke Westminster Review and its Doctrine of

In a note which I received from Mr. Sloman to-day, is the
following passage : —

'* I am sorry to say that I have not kept the notes of the
other case which I mentioned to you (or at any rate I cannot
find them) : but I clearly recollect verifying the prognosis of
the clairvoyante by a post-mortem examination most fully, in
the presence of several persons who had been present at the
clairvoyant examination/'

Sept. 20, 1851. John Elliotson.


XI. The Westminster Review and its Doctrine of Imagination
examined. By the Bev. George Sandby.

" Yo<i know aldo that I atn a mortal enOmy to that sort of incredulity which
is founded upon mere ignorance." — Life of Southepf vciL. it,, p. 104.

to THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Flixton, Sept* 9th, 1851.
Sir, — It was in October, last year, that I was appointed by
that facetious Journal, the Medical Times, to '^ pronounce a
funeral oration *' over The Zoist. In the estimation of the
well-informed Editor, not only was mesmerism in an almost
expiring condition, but such evident symptoms of dissolution
weW also exhibited by your Journal that its melancholy ter-
mination was to be expected any hour. Under these circum-
stances, having no very particular case to communicate, I
awaited in silence,

" that wd, that BOldmn day/'

when the obsequies of the departed periodical were to be ob-
served according to order. But it would appear that the wish
of the Medical Times was " father to the thought,^' and that
the editor is likely to prove a false prophet. Mesmerism is
not only spreading itself widely, and advocated by fresh
and very important friends ; but 7%e Zoist appears in a most
vigorous condition, and rich in instructive and philosophic
matter. Nay, the publisher tells me that the sale has re-
cently very considerably increased, a constant demand being
made for " back numbers.'* On the whole, therefore, we may
say that the cause is looking up, and that our science is more
firmly established than ever.

I once more make my appearance in your columns for the
purpose of noticing an article on mesmerism in the West-
minster Review, That article, indeed, professes to treat the
subject of electro-biology : but it takes occasion by the way
to make an assault upon mesmerism, and to give utterance.


Imaginaiian examined. By the Rev. George Sandby. 295

in its line of reasonings to an almost exploded notion. This
is much to be regretted in every way. Blackwood's Magazine
has also come out against us : Blachooody however^ is only
labouring in its vocation^ as the consistent opponent of much
that is good and true. But the Westminster Review takes
better ground. The Westminster Review professes to be the
friend of progress^ to advocate improvement, and to be the
foe of prejudice in every branch of physics. How is it, then,
that a journal with such soaring pretensions should forget its
principles and desert its standard ? How is it that the good
of the people should be forsaken, and the advancement of
knowledge laid aside or resisted ? or rather, how is it that the
editor can permit an ignorant and shallow writer to foist his
crude opinions upon the public, and to reiterate, as a settled
point, the crambe repetita of obsolete and refuted fancies?
The very character of the journal is at stake.

From the conclusions of the writer respecting electro-
biol(^, we shall not dissent. He takes the same ground
that was adopted by The Zoist last April, viz., that suggestion
and imagination present the key to the phenomena. Of this
I have not a doubt. I attended Mr. Stone's lectures in
London, and watched him carefully. There was a slight
mixture of badly-concealed mesmerism in his proceedings, for
the purpose, as I assumed, of strengthening the influence,
but the main process itself was not mesmerism. It seemed
to me, that by the continued act of staring fixedly upon the
metals, the brain of the subject was brought into a condition
of weidtened power, or rather into a state of such impression-
ability that it readily submitted to any suggestions that were
strongly forced upon it. Mr. Stone actually bullied his pa-
tient's brain into obedience to his will ; and the brain seemed
rendered so passive and powerless- that it had not energy
enough remaining to resist his commands. It does not,
therefore, seem to be necessary to enter any further into the
reasonings of the reviewer respecting biology : we are both
agreed in the main, and I am willing to adopt his theory of
'^ imagination,'' as he expresses it, in explanation of the phe-
nomena of the conscious or vigilant condition.

But the reviewer, like many other ingenious gentlemen,
is so enamoured with his very original discovery, that he
must needs push the principle a little further. It is the old
saying revived for the thousandth time, " nothing like leather,"
— ^nothing like a system-monger for straining and applying
his system to every possible contingency. Because the theory
of imagination, or cerebral impressions, confessedly meets the
facts of the electro-biologists, it is now made to fit every other


296 The Westminister Review and its Doctrine of

development of abnormal condition. The effects of mes-
merism^ it is next said^ are nothing bnt the work of imagina-
tion. Imagination is the cine to the whole matter. The
reviewer most complacently assures his readers that this is a
settled point ; and his Magnus Apollo^ to whom he refers for
corroboration, is a Dr. Bennett of Edinburgh, who, forget-
ting that other parties have the means of examining his
position, decides the question upon the data that his own con-
fined experience furnishes.

Amongst other statements the reviewer observes, —

" Of course, we are aware that more is claimed. It was at one
time very commonly asserted that a mesmeriser could produce effects
upon his patients without being either seen or heard by them; in
fact, when they were seated in another room, &c. But these pre-
tensions are now becoming more and more rare, and we have never
seen a tittle of evidence to support them worthy of the slightest
credit."

Dr. Bennett arrives with the reviewer at the conclusion,
that the " motions, passes, and other acts of the so-called
animal magnetizers, are only useful in fixing the attention,
and communicating suggestive ideas :'^ in other words, for act-
ing upon the imagination.

What an impertinence it is in these writers to assume
that this doctrine of '' imagination " had not often presented
itself to the many scientific and philosophic minds who have
studied the phenomena of mesmerism. It is almost unneces-
sary to remark, that this explanation has been considered and
examined over and over again, and by those who are most
competent to arrive at a.correct conclusion. That imagina-
tion performs its part in mesmerism, is admitted by every
physiologist amongst us. The influence of mind over matter
is notorious. It acts under every system of medical treat-
ment ; and what physician is there, who has not largely pro-
fited by its aid ? Perhaps if the truth could be known. Dr.
Paris, Dr. Chambers, and other notabilities owe some of their
most successful cures to its auxiliary effects. And so is it
with mesmerism, wherein the confident faith and expectation
of the patients have often assisted the hand of the operator,
and accelerated a favourable result. And while this is espe-
cially true with regard to the second and subsequent mesmer-
isations, it occurs not unfrequently at the first sitting. Let
this be conceded readily. But we beg to inform Dr. Bennett
and the reviewer, that, after a liberal deduction of cases of
this order, there still remains a collection of successful in-
stances in which the action of imagination has been impos-
sible.


Imagination examined. By the Rev. George Sandby, 297

Let me mention one or two cases ; some that have come
ander my own personal observation^ and some that I have
received from parties whose accuracy may be fully relied upon.

No facts could be more free from the possibility of error,
than two of my own cases, which have already appeared in
7%e Zoist, and which I republished in my work on mesmerism.'^
The parties were very ignorant and uneducated ; had never
heard of mesmerism, and were not conscious of my manipu-
lations ; and yet in about five minutes a most marked effect
was induced with both. So far from having communicated
to them my intentions, I did not know them myself when I
entered their cottages : if ever any fact occurred a I'imprO'
viste, and without warning or premeditation, or hint, it was
my mesmerisation in these two instances. Dr. Bennett says
that our " passes are only useful in fixing the attention and
suggesting ideas.^^ If Dr. Bennett would do me the favour of
reading my narrative, perhaps he might be disposed to mo-
dify his views : I pledge myself for the accuracy of the state-
ment. Imagination or suggestion were out of the question.
The sufferers, in consequence of the intense agony which ab-
sorbed all their thoughts, were not cognizant of anything that
I did. Should Dr. Bennett, as an impartial and philosophic
inquirer, be disposed to study this point, and to furnish
us with an unprejudiced judgment on the facts described, I
should be most happy to present him with a copy of my little
work, if he would condescend to accept it. I only ask for
information. The subject is full of instruction : and all that
mesmerists require, is, not an a priori conclusion, but one
formed from the examination of evidence and of facts.

Mr. W , a gentleman whom I recently had the plea-
sure of meeting at Dr. Elliotson^s, recapitulated to me a
similar case of his own. A poor woman, whom he was visit-
ing, was suffering from severe rheumatic pains in her knees.
He said nothing to her on the subject of mesmerism ; but
while conversing on general topics, he made a few passes over
the parts affected, and the pain ceased. The poor woman
was amazed: she had not perceived that any manipulations
were being made.

Dr. £sdaile, in his admirable work, p. 41, mentions his
first mesmeric experiment in India, — where imagination was
also out of the question. ' The points to notice were the
purely accidental and unpremeditated nature of the experi-
ment, the want of consent between the parties, the operator's
want of belief in his own power, and the absolute ignorance

* See Mesmerism and Us Opponents. Second Edition, p. 135.


298 The Westminister Review and Us Doctrine of

of the patient. Dr. Esdaile has recently arrived from India^
and is now in Scotland : here is a physiologist for Dr. Bennett
to encounter, if he be willing. Has the Westminster reviewer
studied Dr. Esdaile's facts and his Mesmerism in India ? and
if he have not, is he competent to write on the subject?

Dr'. Esdaile's experiments with the ignorant natives of
India reminds me of a case which is probably new to most of
your readers, and well worthy of perusal. I received it firom
my valued friend. Captain John James, of Littleboume, Kent :
and it was communicated to him in a letter from a Mend, of
which the following is an extract : —

'^ I feel sure you will be interested in one part of a letter
I had yesterday from Charles in Van Diemen's Land. A few
only of the Aborigines remain in the colony, and these are
now located at a place called Oyster Cave, and put under the

special care of Dr. M . Shortly before he wrote, Charles

had accompanied Dr. M. in a ride to this station, which is
twenty -three miles from Hobarton, and their conversation, as
they rode, turned on mesmerism, on which the doctor was
very sceptical. They passed the night at the station, and the
next morning Charles, wishing if possible to convince his com-
panion that there was something in it, selected one of the
female natives, and proposed to Dr. M. himself to mesmerise
her, shewing him how to proceed. The doctor agreed, and
the woman passed readily into the state of trance. Pricking
her hand had no effect upon her : but, Charles taking her hand
and making the savages prick himy she immediately withdrew
her hand and rubbed it as if in pain. A dog's paw was put
into her hand, and the animal's ear pinched, when she imme-
diately began rubbing her own ear, and seemed greatly dis-
tress^. Charles, holding her hand, put some honey in his
mouth, when Dr. M. asked her what she tasted, and she said,
* sugar.' He then put a quantity of salt in hiis mouth, when
she made all sorts of faces and seemed almost inclined to
vomit. The natives looked on with awe, and Dr. M.^s scep-
ticism was shaken."

I should, indeed, think that the doctor's scepticism was
shaken : and so will be the scepticism of every other doctor,
who will venture to look at our facts. However, the point to
notice here is this : in what way were the passes '^ useful in
communicating suggestive ideas" to an ignorant untaught
savage ?

Again : Foissac mentions the case of a child, aged 28
months, who was placed in somnambulism. In the Fifth
Volume of The Zoist, is an account of a blind gentleman
being mesmerised, when there was no possibility of his being


Imagination examined. By the Rev. George Sandby, 299

aware of it. Children are easily mesmerised : and some deaf
and dumb persons have also been thrown into the sleep^
though not cognizant of what was going on.

Will these sage reasoners^ also^ reject the evidence pre-
sented by the brute creation ? Miss Martineau's good but
''unimaginative cow/' — Mr. Bartlett's bull, — the Duke of
Marlborough's dogs^— and the animals at the Zoological
Gardens, whom Dr. Wilson (late of the Middlesex Hospital)
mesmerised ? Or are these facts beneath the study of our
sublime and philosophical opponents ?

A curious case happened to a medical friend of mine —
a most determined sceptic, — whom I had long, and in vain,
endeavoured to convince. He proposed to mesmerise the
servant-girl of a lodging-house, where an acquaintance re-
sided. " Let me try and put you to sleep,'' he said. She
stoutly refused. '' Sleep !" she cried, " I don't want to go to
sleep, I want to go to my work, I'm after my work !" How-
ever, they insisted, and commenced operations: she was in
the deepest coma almost immediately, without time being
given for '' fixing the attention ;" while her imagination was
all the other way, being directed to her work, for the neglect
of which she was fearful of being scolded. My friend said
that so deep was her sleep and so insensible her condition,
that he could have performed upon her the most serious ope-
ration without her knowledge. It need not be added, that
my friend ceased to be sceptical and to talk any more of
'' imagination."

However, I do not propose to give an elaborate treatise on
this subject, but simply to offer to the Westminster Reviewer
VLprimd facie case in reply to his reasonings.- It is for him
to follow this statement out : at any rate, it would be but
decent in him to assume that mesmerisers are far too nu-
merous and too well informed a body; not to have well con-
sidered their position before they adopted such language in
the maintenance of their views.

And now for a diffef^nt subject, — Dr. Maitland and his
opinions. It may not, perhaps, be known to many of your
readers, that in the weekly publication called Notes and
Queries, a correspondent enquired on the 22nd of last March
when Dr. Maitland would publish the remaining parts of his
Illustrations and Enquiries relating to Mesmerism. The writer
says, '' It is high time that Christians should be decided as to
whether or no they may meddle with the fearful power whose
existence it is impossible to ridicule any longer." This writer
is evidently not aware that a complete answer to Dr. Mait-


300 The Westminister Review and its Doctrine of

land^s views appeared in the seventh volume of The Zoist,
and a second in the eighth volume ; to both of which I refer
him.* In the number of 29th of March^ Dr. Maitland re-
plied with a statement^ which seems to postpone the publica-
tion of his second part to a most indefinite period. His reason
for delay is. that he is now removed to an ^' inconvenient dis-
taoce fi^m the libraries which were formerly within his reach
and open to his use.'^ This sounds plausible ; but it strikes
me^ that^ if this learned doctor had access to the famous library
at Alexandria^ consisting of the seven hundred thousand
volumes which'the Ptolemies collected, but which the caliph
Omar burnt down, he would be hardly able to maintain his
position concerning clairvoyance. All the libraries in the
world would be insufficient for that purpose.

After all, however, discussions with the Westminster Re-
view or with Dr. Maitland, are of inferior moment compared
with the curative effects of mesmerism ; and here I have very
cheering facts to communicate. I have just now under my
care a patient, one of my parishioners, whom I have all but
cured of tic douloureux and of severe spasms in the stomach.
Her constitution became seriously affected by over-exertion :
lameness in one of her knees supervened : and she suffered
dreadfully from spasmodic pains and from tic in the face.
She had been under the care of two medical men ; but was
very ill indeed, and very full of suffering when I persuaded
her to try mesmerism. ^^ She should not go to sleep, she
knew '" so much for imagination. She was off, however, in a
very few minutes, and has been rapidly improving in every
respect since we commenced. The bloom of health is return-
ing to her cheeks ; the lameness is gone ; she has not had a
spasm for ten days ; and the attacks of tic are becoming '^ few
and far between,^' and less each time in intensity and dura-
tion.

But I have a far more striking fact to narrate. You will
remember, doubtless, the very interesting case of insanity
cured with the assistance of mesmerism which I communi-
cated to The Zoist in the thirtieth number. The benevolent
and active lady, who was the mesmeriser on that occasion,
has just written to me a letter from which I make the follow-
ing extract, —

'^ I have now a most deeply interesting case of consump-

* These answers have smce been republished in a separate form by Mr.
Bailliere, entitled The Edinburgh RevieWf Mr. Comewall Lewis, and the Rev,
Dr. Maitiand, on Mesmerism. A communication Jrom a Gentleman in England
to a Friend in France.


Imagination examined. By the Rev. George Sandby. 301

tion, — ^sleep-waking on the second day, clairvoyance on the
third, with so much gentleness and exalted piety as melt and
elevate me^by turns. She was, when I commenced, bringing
up as much as half a pint of blood at a time from the left
lung, which, as she told me in her sittings, also contained
matter ; and she was suffering with the usual catalogue of
symptoms, extreme weakness, constant pain, night perspira-
tions, &c. She has had only seven sittings ; and she told me
last night, in her sleep, that the lung was entirely clear, that
she had now no inflammation, only a little heat ; and that
the raw place was skinned over ; and she bade me make the
contact passes gently, lest I should break the skin. She said
that there was nothing of the disease left, only weakness :
that she should be some time getting strength, and must be
very careful not to take cold. She made me wash my hands
repeatedly, and said that I had drawn all the matter out of
the lung, and taken away all her pains. It does me good to
listen to her, — to hear her praise God in her sleep, and to
see her tears of gratitude.^'

My correspondent writes in conclusion, ^' it seems necessary
to add that the symptoms have passed away, and that, instead
of sitting up in misery during the night from cough and oppressed
breathing, she sleeps the sweet and healthy sleep of restored
nature" This last sentence is the point to notice : for, even
if the cure be not perfected, as the patient asserts, — and as
the sceptic will assume, — ^yet here remains the fact, that the
symptoms have passed away, and that an untold amount of
relief and of comfort has been imparted by the mesmerism.

What encouragement do these cases offer to the faint-
hearted mesmerist ! My admirable friend (for such I must
call her) knew nothing of mesmerism about two years back,
and wrote to me for instruction. Since that time, she has
been the blessed instrument that has been at work in two
cases : one a case of insanity, and the other of consumption.
Verily, I must return to the title of my original pamphlet ;
and say, in spite of the Westminster Review and Dr. Bennett,
that mesmerism, is not a delusion, but the merciful " gift of
God.^^

I remain, Mr. Editor, your humble servant,

George Sandbt.

*^* As to imagination, a person might imagine himself into
sleep ; but the mesmeric state is not sleep, it is sleep-waking — a pe-
culiar state of which patients are usually very or quite ignorant, and
in which various singular phenomena come forth, some in one pa-
tient, some in another, without the operator knowing what they will
be. — Zoist,


( 802 )

XII. Painless Parturition during the mesmeric state. By Mr.
S. D. Saunders^ Bristol. Communicated by Dr. EUiotson.

" Dr. Copland filled the vacancy caofied by the expulsion of Dr. EUiotson,
pro tempore. The immediate cause of the secession of the latter from University
College and Hospital was the introdaotion of the fooleries of meranerisra into the
latter building. The school has been since gradually on the decline." — Mr.
Waklby, Lancei, July 19th, 1851, p. 74.*

On Saturday morning, Sept. 18th, at about 8 o'clock, Mrs.
Saunders brought into the world a little girl. The labour
commenced at 10 o'clock. I mesmerised her strongly, par-
ticularly during the last hour; and when she woke, which
was at about twenty minutes after the delivery, she was per-
fectly ignorant of anything having taken place, and enquired
of tne surgeon how long it would be before it would be over.
We assured her that the child was bom ; but she would not
believe this till she heard it cry. Both are doing exceedingly
well. She says that she will never think of being confined in
any other way. Her two former children were bom under
the old system and nearly caused her death.

I send you the name of the medical gentleman who at-
tended her with me, but do not wish it to appear in print,
for some of his brother professionals might do him an injury,
particularly as one of our leading physicians considers all
medical men who believe in mesmerism to be out of their
minds.

The after-pains are instantly relieved by the passes ; but
I find that these require to be made with much less vigour
than before the confinement. Even down the arms a strong
pass will act like the <!utting of a parcel of knives, whereas
formerly they only stiffened the arm without giving any pain.
Back Hall, Bristol. S. D. Saundebs.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.

Talk of the Inquisition I talk of Austrian and Neapolitan
tyranny ! Here, in free and enlightened England, the friend
of a medical man, in 1851, from kindness does not mention his
name, when he has acted a rational and humane part in mix-
ing himself up with the bestowal of the incalculable blessings of
mesmerism upon a suffering fellow creature ! A dentist ex-

* Mr. Wakley knows that the first sentence is untrue ; and that Dr. EUiot-
son, on learning that the oounoil had issued an edict that no patient should be
cured or relieved by mesmerismt huiantly sent in bis resignation, and refused to
enter the walls of either the college or the hospital again, though in the midst of
a course of lectures, to the dismay of the council, professors, and students. See
the account in No. XXXII., pp. 373-4. — Zoist,


I


Painless Parturition during the mesmeric state, 803

tracted several teeth from a poor girl painlessly in the mes-
meric state^ on condition that his righteous deed sbonld not
appear in The Zoist ; and refused to extract some from a lady
because a promise to this effect was refused to him^ and he
declared therefore that he would extract them only in her
ordinary state— with full agony : yet^ when chloroform was
afterwards discovered^ he ran about in high excitement^ anx-
ious to take out as many teeth as might be desired under in-
sensibility from the drug. A surgeon refused to amputate
an extremity in the mesmeric state^ though he had confessed
that the Nottinghamshire painless amputation made the mat-
ter well worthy of attention. A dentist in a provincial city^
when requested to extract the tooth of a lady^ already ren-
dered insensible to pain by mesmerism, actually refused, un-
less she was demesmerised ; and she therefore was demes-
merised, and her tooth extracted with all orthodox agony,
for there was no chloroform at that time.

Why fear their own brethren and the medical journalists !
Afraid of these persons ! There is not one medical man,
who has this fear when duty lies before him, that deserves
the name of Briton — the name of man — ^the name of Chris-
tian. Yet these poor cowards, or unprincipled, heartless bus-
tlers, assume all sympathy of voice, of word, and manner,
in their interviews with patients ; and shew themselves regu-
larly at places of worship, professing fear of the God who
threw a deep sleep upon Adam before the rib was removed^
and love of the Christ who wept over the sufferings of the
world, and went about inculcating sympathy, mercy, charity,
and integrity, disinterestedness, and independent manliness.
His followers went to prison rather than renounce their prin-
ciples : and St. Paul fearlessly spoke out before his judges
tiU they trembled. If they were now on earth, they would
not act as the medical profession is acting ; neither would the
present set of medical men have acted as those honest and
noble-minded beings acted above eighteen hundred years ago.

In No. V. Mr. Lynell of Manchester details a case of great
benefit from mesmerism in labour : and, with more experience,
of the practice of mesmerism, Mr. Lynell would probably have
prevented pain altogether.

In No. XV., Mr. Chandler details a case of labour, in
which all proceeded favourably, and all the efforts were mani-
fested, but no pain was felt and the birth took place uncon-
sciously ; and the effect of mesmerism upon the after-pains
was equally satisfactory. Dr. Esdaile details an equally satis-
factory instance of the power of mesmerism over after-pains ;
and Mr. Parker of Exeter a third.


304 Messrs. Jackson and Davey.

In No. XVIII. Mr. Parker gives an instance of the great
power of mesmerism over after-pains^ and in No. XX. relates
another. In Vol. YI. Mr. Chandler relates another case of
painless and unconscious parturition ending successfiiUy;
and mesmerism mastered all after-pains and even the agony
of sore nipples.

In No. XXIII. Mr. Chandler gives another unconscious
mesmeric delivery of one of the patients whose case was re-
lated in No. XV.

When I consider the large number of persons who are
susceptible of mesmeric insensibility, if the process is con-
ducted in a warm room, by a strong warm- handed person,
and with very slow passes in perfect silence, I am satisfied
that an immense number of labours might be rendered painless.

John Elliotson.

Since these notes were written, I have received the fol-
lowing letter from Mr. Saunders, —

'' Back Hall, Baldwin Street, Bristol,
" September 21, 1851.
'' Dear Sir, — I find there is no objection made by Mr.
Wilkins (the surgeon who attended Mrs. Saunders) to his
name appearing in Tke Zoist, should the case be considered
sufficiently interesting. He says that, Mrs. Saunders not
being of a very strong constitution, and the child being above
the average size, the labour was a difficult and dangerous one ;
that she was perfectly unconscious till 20 minutes after the
birth ; that there was not the usual prostration of the womb ;
and that the strength was much less diminished than under
the old system : and that, though he should be indisposed to
attend a case of labour where chloroform was used, he should
always be happy to assist when the patient was placed under
the mesmeric influence.

" I remain. Sir, yours, &c.,

" S. D. Saunders.
" To Dr. Elliotson."

'^P.S. The pamphlet — Edinburgh Review, Mr, Lewis,
and Dr, Maitland — is very useful. I may just mention that
Mr. Wilkins says he would have written to you himself, but
left it to me to do as being more acquainted with the subject.'^

XIII. Messrs. Jackson and Davey. By Dr. Elliotson.

'^ Where, however, Dr. Gregory extends to the objections agamst mesmerism
the same reasoning that he applies to the discoveries of Newton, we cannot but
join issue with him. This rejection of the hypothesis of animal magnetism cannot


By Dr. Elliotson. 305

.be for one moment put in comparison with the opposition to the reception of the
theories of Copernicus, Columbus, Galileo, Newton, and Harvey.

** The great difference between the cases, — ^a difference which destroys all pa-
rallel, is thEit those great discoTorers (Copernicus, Columbus, Galileo, Newton
and Harvey) had incontrovertible facts and data whence they deduced their prin-
ciples : and these have been subsequently and abundantly confirmed. But can it
now, or will it ever be said, that such is the condition of mesmerism ? Is not
this subject confessedly imperfect ? Are its professors agreed on its nature and
character ? Did Newton claim attention to his theory of gravitation until its data
were all perfected and placed beyond the power of cavil or dispute .' Did Harvey
announce his theory of the circulation, before his observations were sufficiently
exact and numerous to confirm his deductions ? Dr. Gregory must abandon this
argumenium ad hominem until the time arrives when the views which he advo-
cates are matured : until then, he may more wisely leave this line of reasoning
to makers of wild, gratuitous hypotheses. The same argument is used by luna-
tics who cover the walls of their chambers with rhapsodies of incoherent wonls,
and dignify their efl^ons with the titles of demonstrated theories/' — London
Medical Gazette. Review of Dr. Gregory's work.

The spread of mesmerism in this country has been much
accelerated by two well-known lecturers — Messrs. Jackson
and Dayey. The greater part of mesmeric lecturers have
done much harm by not being sufficiently acquainted with
their subject or with any subject^ by attempting to display
facts totally unfit for the disturbing influences of a public
exhibition^ by talking of themselves more than of their sub-
ject, by promulgating their own fancied discoveries more than
nature^s truths, by allowing behaviour which is not tolerated
or even attempted at lectures on other subjects, and by being
altogether unqualified to stand forth as expositors of a science.
But these two gentlemen are exceptions to all these ; and
have given perfect satisfaction in England, Wales, and Ire-
land. Some of Mr. Davey^s cures are recorded in The Zoisty
XIV., XVI., and it was he who mesmerised Mrs. Northway
when Mr. Jolly painlessly amputated her arm (X.) Several
other medical gentlemen have operated painlessly upon patients
mesmerised by them, and given public testimony to their merits.

At their lectures in Bridport a molar tooth was extracted
without pain by Mr. Jefibrd, surgeon. At the same period
a tooth was extracted in private painlessly from a young lady
mesmerised by Mr. Davey in the presence of several medical
men.

In the lectures at Sherborne Minster, a tooth was ex-
tracted painlessly from a Master Brown, twelve years old.
A surgeon named Parkinson presided, while the operation
was performed by another surgeon.

At Wincanton, Mr. Bruerton painlessly extracted a firda
and sound tooth from a young milliner, that was obstructing
another growing before it ; and a second which was loose.

In February, 1847, Mr. Davey went to Bridport, Dorset,

VOL. IX. X


306 Messrs, Jackson and Davey.

and delivered six lectures on mesmerism^ giving demonstra-
tions of mesmerisation of distinct cerebral organs^ sympathy
of brains, clairvoyance^ besides the common phenomena.
The Sherborne Journal reported the whole most favourably.
Several medical men as well as some leading gentlemen volun-
tarily gave the most flattering testimonials after the course
was concluded : — ^Mr. W. H. Hay and Mr. J. Jeflford, surgeons ;
G. Symes, M.D. ; and the Mayor, Mr. Stephens ; the Town
Clerk, Mr. Michilett ; Mr. Temple, solicitor ; Mr. Gundry,
banker.

In the autumn he delivered a course of lectures in the
Literary Institution of Sherborne Minster, The committee
of the Institute presented Mr. Davey with a resolution ex-
pressive of their entire satisfaction. A young medical man,
Mr. Mowle, assistant to Mr. Good of Sturminster, hand-
somely and courageously allowed himself to be mesmerised at
one of these lectures, and exhibited numerous exquisite phe-
nomena.

Mr. Jackson had now become associated with Mr. Davey
in lecturing. Mr. Good wrote a letter to both detailing the
phenomena exhibited by his assistant, and expressing his con-
viction of their reality, and his readiness to give every infor-
mation to any person who might desire it of him. Another
surgeon, Mr. Bruerton of Wincanton, who attended the lec-
tures, was noble enough, though he went a sceptic as to the
higher phenomena, to allow one of his own children, a daugh-
ter under twelve years of age, to be mesmerised that he might
be sure of the existence of no collusion, and, being thus con-
vinced, to write a letter to Mr. Davey declaring his conversion
and allowed to be shewn to any one ,* and he himself extracted
a tooth painlessly.

" With such facts," he writes, " coming under my immediate
notice, I can no longer doubt, although I may not fully comprehend
the exact rationale of so mysterious a science. The straightforward,
honest manner in which Mr. Davey explains his facts and theory to
every enquiring mind, deserves attention ; and I would recommend
all those desirous of becoming acquainted with a science to which the
world is so generally adverse, to examine into and judge for them-
selves, when I have little doubt the result will be as pleasing and
satisfactory as it has been in my own case.

" (signed) W. Bruerton, M.R.C,S.E.
"Wincanton, February, 1848."

ft

The Hereford and Welsh Newspapers give an accurate
account of their lectures delivered from November, 1849,
through 1850. Of course some medical men signalized


By Dr. Elliotson. 307

themselves by the coarsest opposition.* The Chronicle news-
paper^ published at Bangor^ was viralently and fanatically
abusive at the end of last year and the beginning of the pre-
sent^ declaring mesmerism to be wholly an imposition. But
soon afterwards Mr. Davey introduced the sub-editor^ Mr.
Williams^ on the platform at one of- these lectures^ and then
before the public produced fixity and attraction and brought
him on his toes. This silenced the Chronicle and its editorial
proprietors^ who^ however^ never acknowledged this triumph
of the truth. The Welsh newspapers teemed with accounts
of the lectures — some in English^ some in Welsh.

Having finished a triumphant course in Wales^ Messrs.
Jackson and Davey proceeded to Ireland^ and have been lec-
turing there with the same success for many months. Medi-
cal opposition was of course ordained for them there as well as
in Wales^ and the opposition was for a time most dire and
malignant. The medical men shrank from public opposition^
but carried on a mean warfare by declaring to the respectable

* A surgeon named Charles Deazeley of Milford, wrote in the Pembrokeihire
Herald, Aug. 20, 1850, '* As ignorance and superstition are fast disappearing
before the rapid strides of modern education, we may easily predict what will be
the amount of posthumous reputation awarded to Mesmer and his disciples.
They, together with the professors of astrology, phrenology, witchcraft, fortune
telling, homoeopathy, &c., will occupy some lofty shelyes in the libraries of pos-
terity. As a medical man, and consequently curator of the public health, I con-
sider it my duty to raise my voice against what, from numerous experiments and
investigations conducted without prejudice or party feeling, I considered injurious
to the welfare of mankind, and even calculated to undermine the very foundation
of all philosophy and religion. Thus then, with these few remarks and repeated
cautions, I must conclude the correspondence, — leaving those who feel 'it is as
pleasant to be cheated as to cheat,' to follow such men as Elliotson, EsdaUe,
Ashburner, Sandby, Townshend, and a host of others, who, through the medium
of their own periodical — The ZoUt — have pronounced themselves infidels and
materialists." " Even the Rev. George Sandby, vicar of Flixton, Suffolk, who is
evidently ignorant of the very literature, and other ecclesiastics, under some
visionary in&tuation, have departed from die spirit of their own sacred ministry
to enlist under the guidance of this presumptive infidel. Dr. Esdaile, a similar
character to Dr. Elliotson, is at present in India, following his nefarious vocations ;
and, from the tone of The Zoistj I fear is but too successful among that benighted
people."

Mr. Robert Steele of Abergavenny made a lamentable display of letter writing
in the newspaper, and uses such expressions as '* these worthies," " great opera-
tors,'* ** a pair of peripatetic illuminati," ** conjurors, quacks, and mounte-
banks •" and talked the usual twaddle about imagination, &c.

A Mr. Bush, a surgeon of Narberth, also wrote letters accusing Mr. Jackson
of being a sceptic in religion. He informed the world that, from the time Mesmer
published his wild theories in 1 776, the chief supporters of mesmerism have been
** physicians without practice, gentlemen without occupation, and charlatans with-
out shame." Like his betters, he could not distinguish between resolution and
fortitude under pain, and relaxed unconsciousness. At last he says it cannot be
denied that some mesmeric phenomena " result from some principle heretofore
unknown, and not yet correctly designated ; or from some modification of recognized
principles which cannot be accurately limited or defined."

X 2


308 Messrs. Jackson and Davey.

families in their morning rounds that the thing was an impos-
sibility and had been exploded. The very existence of a re-
spectable mesmeric literature was ignored by them^ nor did
they seem to know anything of the great achievements of
Dr. Esdaile in Calcutta. Ignorance and prejudice reigned tri-
umphant in almost every circle of society. An eminent Pro-
testant clergyman, Mr. F., of the McNeile school, denounced
mesmerism from the pulpit last March, and declared its phe-
nomena to be the result of diabolic agency.*

At the latter part of May, a medical gentleman assured
the audience that I had given up mesmerism for three years.
Mr. Jackson fortunately had a letter in his pocket just received
from me : he read it aloud, and the gentleman was put to
disgraceful silence. However, the lecturers have at length
triumphed, as appears by the following extract from the Dublin
Evening Post of June 17th.

" Let people say what they will, either in vehement anger,
or with the affectation of derisive incredulity, it is an extra-
ordinary fact — one which at any rate they cannot affect to
ignore — ^that for forty nights, during a period of little more
than two months, forty lectures have been delivered on the
subject in Dublin, elucidated by the most curious and singular
phenomena of the science (if the term be not premature).
Doubtless the great ability, the extensive knowledge, and the
admirable command of language evinced by the lecturer, Mr.
Jackson, and the honest, successful, and decidedly earnest
experiments of Mr. Davey, must have done much towards the
popularity of these lectures; but to be able to command
crowded audiences for such a length of time, is an evidence
that the influence of the faculty in this regard and in Dublin
is gone. We remember that, a few years ago, M. La Fon-
taine (and he was doubtless a clever man) would be hardly
listened to. There were rows almost every evening gotten
up by some surgeon's or apothecary's apprentice, or by some
smart shopman who had no other way of distinguishing him-
self in public. The doctors laughed and joked, and the
Frenchman was ultimately obliged to beat a retreat. How
different has it been at present, it is superfluous to say ; and,
although there have been some occasional interruptions, we
confess we are very agreeably surprized to learn that they
have been so few. Nay, we learn that there has been a bray

* It may be mentioned that another Irish clergyman of the same school, named
Beamish, and a great friend of Mr. McNeile^ preached against it in London
some time ago, at bis chapel in Condnit-street, next door to my honse. Some
of his congregation knew the truth and valiie of mesmerism, and felt exceedingly
indignant.


By Thr, Elliotson, 309

from a fanatic or roguish parson^ sorely in want of a topic^
against mesmerism (clergymen of the establishment in Eng-
land being the most unexceptionable witnesses of mesmeric
facts). These have produced no effect upon the public. We
have not visited the Rotunda more than twice, owing princi-
pally to the distance of our residence in the country from the
Rotunda, and from the indisposition natural to elderly per-
sons to stir from home after dinner : but we saw enough of
the remarkable talent of the lecturer, and the zeal and mas-
tery of his art in the experimenter, to satisfy ourselves of their
knowledge and integrity. As to the matter itself, we require
neither the testimony of our senses nor the light of reasoning.
For many years, neither Dr. EUiotson, Ashburner, Gregory,
nor Haddock, could be more thoroughly mesmerists than
ourselves, without having been present on more than five oc-
casions at any mesmeric experiment."

It is pleasant to record the following attestation of the
utility of mesmerism. Mr. Jackson favoured me with the
letter ; and I do not hesitate to transmit it to The Zoist.

" Merton, CuUenswood, Dublin,
"March 21, 1851.
" Dear Sir, — Since I had the pleasure of attending your
interesting lecture last night, a fact has taken place, which
I think but right to inform you of, and which no doubt may
be valuable to you to know. You may have observed that
my son had an abscess on his left temple, and which this
morning was much enlarged, and exceibdingly painful when
the medical man saw it, and examined it; he said it would be
necessary to open it. The boy was adverse to this ; but I
said. Come I will put you to sleep, and you shall not feel it.
I accordihgly, in the presence of several persons, in less than
four minutes had him in what you call a "comfortable
sleep." The doctor asked was he ready : I said yes ; when he
opened it, making rather a deep cut, from which there was
an immense discharge. The boy never flinched or moved in
the SLIGHTEST DEGREE. I then made some upward passes,
when he immediately awakened, and enquired directly, was
it yet done? I replied in the aflSrmative, but he would
scarcely believe it until he saw the discharge from it, declaring

he DID NOT FEEL IT IN THE SLIGHTEST DEGREE. ThuS giving

one more proof of the practical uses mesmerism may be
applied to : and I assure you, I feel greatly obliged to you for
having opened my eyes to see its value and truth, as when
properly applied, it cannot but be a boon to poor suffering
humanity. The medical gentleman that opened the abscess


310 Mesmerism in Liverpool.

was Mr. William Waters. You have my full permission to
make what private use you please of this statement.

" I am, dear Sirs, yours truly,

"Falconer Miles.
" To Messrs. Davey and Jackson,
" 7, Upper Sackville Street.''


XIV. Mesmerism in Liverpool,

*' Y gwir yn erbyn y byd."

Old Bardic Motto.
" Truth against the world/'

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sir, — The following cures with mesmerism by a non-me-
dical man, may interest some of the readers of your journal.
Although possessing no novelty, they are interesting, inas-
much as they cannot come under the designation of fancy
cures, or cures ;n delicate and nervous females. Each cure is
attested by the signature of the party cured, and many by
witnesses of known character and standing amongst the Welsh
part of the community of the town. Should you think proper,
you may publish them ; and, if you require any further infor-
mation, I shall be most happy to furnish it.

I am, Sir, yours respectfully,

Joseph Thomas.
Post-oflSce Hotel, Canning Place, Liverpool.

For many years I was subject to a pain in the head,
legs, and shoulders : I was also troubled with bad digestion,
fainting fits, and lowness of spirits, so that I was unable to
follow my employment. I tried medical men, but never re-
ceived other than a temporary relief of a few days. I was at
last recommended to try Mr. Thomas, and am now, after ex-
periencing his treatment, quite free from pain and am reco-
vering my strength.

(Signed) Hugh Williams.
Charlotte Place, Queen Street, Sept., 1850.

I certify that, after having been a sufferer for ten years
from rheumatism down one side of my body, I was perfectly
cured by Mr. Thomas in a short time without pain.

(Signed) Hugh J. Hughes.
17, Lowther Street, Liverpool, Nov. 25, 1850.

Mr. Thomas relieved me from the following painful state.


Mesmerism in Liverpool. 311

I had been confined to my bed a long time ; my legs^ hands^
and arms were swollen and full of inflammation : I could
scarcely speak or breathe owing to a pain at my heart and in
my left side, and was quite unable to turn without help. In
a fortnight^s time I was able to run up and down stairs after
being under Mr. T.^s care.

(Signed) Lewis Hughes.
150, Great Howard Street, Liverpool, Dec, 1850.

After suffering for these last nine years, and being unable
to work, owing to severe pains in my thighs and stomachy
caused I believe by exposure to damp, I am now restored to
health by Mr. Thomas, and enabled to follow my employ^
ment^ after being under his hands but a short time.

(Signed) Owen Williams.
Park Lane, Liverpool, February, 1851.

Witness, O. Williams, Canning Place.

Mr. Thomas cured me in ten minutes of a distracting
pain in my head, which I had suffered days and nights to-
gether to such a degree that I could scarcely bear to hear one
walk across the floor. I had previously tried everything that
I was ordered by a medical man.

(Signed) Charlotte Edwards.
1, Back Bridport Street, Liverpool, March 1, 1851.

I had been troubled for seven years with a severe pain in
my breast, back, and between my shoulders, also with vomit-
ing. I tried several doctors without relief. They said I had
disease of the heart. I had begun to think there was no help
for me ; when I was advised to try Mr. Thomas, who made a
perfect cure of me.

(Signed) Owen Davies.
George Street.

Attested by Wm. Syms, 33, Berry Street, Liverpool, May
1, 1851.

About twelve months ago a hard swelling arose on my
stomach, from which I felt violent pains shoot through my
back and breast, especially when in a stooping posture. My
health became much deranged, but medical men could find
no name for my disorder.. I took great quantities of medi-
cine, and endured many painful operations in vain. At
length being in Liverpool I tried Mr. Thomases treatment,
and I rejoice to say that I am now restored to health after
being under him but a short time.

(Signed) Edward Ward.
Skelton, Cumberland.


312 Mesmerism in Liverpool,

Attested by Wm. Ward, 56, Bedford Street, Liverpool,
June 5, 1851.

Mr. Thomas has cured me in three weeks of severe rheu-
matism of two years' standing. I can now walk almost as
well as ever I could in my life.

(Signed) John Davies.
Rhyl, Sept. 28, 1849.

Mr. Thomas has entirely relieved me of severe rheumatic
pains in my hands, arms, and legs, under which I laboured
many years : I was not able to dress or undress myself. I
had previously visited Buxton and other watering places, and
tried many prescriptions, with no avail.

(Signed) Ellen Foote.
48, Mount Pleasant, Liverpool, Oct., 1849.

I and others can testify to the following cure performed
by Mr. Thomas. A young lady staying at my house was
afflicted with tic douloureux and palpitation of the heart. She
had been under medical men and had undergone operations
without being benefitted. Mr. Thomas cured her in about
a fortnight.

(Signed) Wm. Elias.
2, Magnum Terrace, Everton, Oct., 1849.

I was afflicted with tic douloureux for the greater part of
six years. I tried tooth-drawing and every remedy I could
hear of without eflfect. At last I could not sleep nor rest five
minutes in one position. I was then recommended to try
Mr. Thomas, from whom I received considerable benefit on
the first visit, sleeping well all night afterwards. In less
than a fortnight I was perfectly cured.

(Signed) Sarah Barnet.
1, Albion Place, Old Haymarket, Nov., 1849.

I derived considerable benefit from Mr. Thomases mode
of treatment. For ten years I had been troubled with rheu-
matism : I could hardly lift my feet from the ground, was
unable to put my own stockings on, and suffered much pain.
It is with pleasure I testify that, after a week's attendance
from Mr. Thomas, I could use my limbs, and dress and un-
dress with ease.

(Signed) Edward Williams.
Pen y Groes, Llanllyfin, Dec. 5, 1849.


Dr, Esdaile^s return to England. 313

Mr. Thomas cured me in one visit of a severe pain in mj
back^ from which I was a sufferer for several days.

(Signed) John Philips.
17, Duke Street, June 5, 1850.


XV. Dr. Esdail^s return to England. By Dr. Elliotson.

** To whom oar Saviour calmly thus replied.
Thou neither dost persuade me to seek wealth
For empire's sake, nor empire to affect
For glory's sake, by all thy argument.
For what is glory but the blaze of fame,
The people's praise, if always praise unmiz'd ?
And what the people but a herd confus'd,
A miscellaneous rabble who extol

Things vulgar, and, well weighed, scarce worth the praise ?
They praise, and they admire, they know not what,
And know not whom, but as one leads the other ;
And what delight to be by such extoU'd,
To live upon tibeir tongues, and be their talk,
Of whom to be disprais'd were no small praise ?
His lot who dares be singularly good.
The intelligent among them and the wise
Are few, and glory scarce of few is rais'd.
This is true glory and renown, when God
Looking on the earth, with approbation marks
The just man, and divulges him through heaven
To all his angels, who with true applause
Recount his praises/'

Paradise Regained^ iii., p. 154.


A PBiEND sent me the following notice : —

'^ A distinguished officer of the Bengal medical service has
just quitted India, Dr. James Esdaile, who will long be remem-
bered as the father of painless surgery amongst us. Amidst
a storm of ridicule and derision. Dr. Esdaile some five years
since commenced systematically to practise surgery on patients
rendered insensible by mesmerism, and continued in this way
to perform the most painful and difficult operations with per-
fect success. To satisfy the general scepticism which prevailed
on the subject, a Committee of Enquiry was appointed, and
ultimately a mesmeric hospital established, where painless
surgery was practised with much more uniformity and success
than it has ever been under the influences either of ether or
chloroform, and with entire exemption from the dangers at-
tendant on the administration of drugs. Dr. Esdaile leaves
India in the prime of life, to resume, we trust, in his native
country, the career of honour and of usefulness he has hitherto
pursued in Bengal. Not having held a seat in council, or
command in the army, and not being supposed likely to have


314 Dr, EsdaiWs return to England,

patronage at home at his disposal^ so as to awake those feel-
ings of gratitude which make their appearance on the pros-
pect of favours about to be conferred^ and halving only been
the benefactor of humanity in general^ and the reliever of the
sufferings chiefly of the poor, he has left qur shores without
any public dinner, or acknowledgment of his services, but
with the benedictions, not loud but deep, of the hundreds
whose lives he has saved, or whom he has saved from agony
in the hour of trial,— which, though breathed in foreign ac-
cents by heathen lips, may perhaps comfort him for the want
of the flattery of sycophants, whose homage is reserved for
wealth and rank/' — Bombay Medical Times , — Overland Sum-
mary of Intelligence^ from 7th to 24th June, 1851.

Soon afterwards Dr. Esdaile made his appearance in
Conduit Street, and the sight of so truly distinguished
a man filled me with delight. He returned to his native
land, and, on my requesting him to draw up a sketch of
the progress of mesmerism in India, sent me the following
letter : —

'' Garry Cottage, Perth, 15th Sept., 1851.

"My dear Dr. EUiotson, — I would gladly comply with
your request to furnish you with an account of the progress
and present state of mesmerism in India up to the date of
my final departure, three months ago. But I hope this will
prove to be superfluous, as I yesterday sent a work to London
bringing down my proceedings from the date of my first book,
in 1846, till my departure from India. If this is fortunate
enough to meet with a publisher, you will find in it all you
wish to know, and all I have to tell about mesmerism.

" My first intention was to confine myself to its practical
application to surgery and medicine, and a description of the
principal physical phenomena : but I have changed my mind^
and in this work have related all I know regarding the higher
mesmeric phenomena. My reason for so doing will appear
very extraordinary to some persons, I dare say, especially to
those who have attempted to ruin you, and put you down by
nick-naming you an ^ Atheist !' hoping at the same time to
terrify others from supporting the cause of truth by their tes-
timony. But I prefer being called an ^ Atheist^ (I suppose
they will call you an Anthropophagus next) in your company
to being such a Christian as your cowardly and malignant
anonymous traducers.

" My brother, the Rev. David Esdaile, was not a little
horrified and mystified on reading in the Ecclesiastical Review,
that mesmerism not only led to Atheism, but was Atheism ;


By Dr. Elliotson. 315

for my brother not only believes in the physical and psychical
mesmeric phenomena, but is also readily mesmerised by his
wife, as I witnessed the other day. So lie is triply an Atheist
•—a pretty fix for a clergyman to be in ! He was somewhat
comforted when I told him that the venerable and excellent
Bishop of Calcutta and most of his clergy were in the
same awkward predicament, and that the clergy of all deno-
minations in India had been among my first and staunchest
supporters. The last time I had the pleasure to meet the
Bishop of Calcutta, he said, ' I read everything you write
Dr. Esdaile ; I believe all you say. Sir .-^ and I hope be will
not withdraw his confidence on reading my new book.

" The Archbishop of Dublin belongs to the goodly fellow-
ship of Atheists also ; and his wife, with the Rev. Dr. Scoresby,
the Rev. Mr. Sandby, the Rev. Mr. Townshend, the Rev.
Mr. Pyne, &c., are all practical Atheists, for they go about
continually doing good by means of mesmerism. All the
honest men and gentlemen of England will soon treat with
contempt the raisers of this malignant howl. In the mean-
time, let us laugh at and defy them.

"Before leaving Calcutta, I had the satisfaction to see
Dr. Webb, Professor of Demonstrative Anatomy in the Me-
dical College, Calcutta, gazetted as my successor in charge of
the Mesmeric Hospital ; and, as he has manfully borne his
testimony to the truth of mesmerism firom the commence-
ment, and is deeply convinced of its physiological and philo-
sophical interest, as well as of its surgical and medical im-
portance, I have no doubt that he will be a frequent corre-
spondent of The Zoist, and a valuable contributor to the
cause of cerebral philosophy.

" I am, yours very truly,

"James Esdaile.^^

I then wrote a second time begging him to enable me to
state why he left India : and the following is his noble and
characteristic reply, which I will venture to publish without
asking his permission.

" Garry Cottage, Perth, 20th Sept., 1851.
" My dear Dr. Elliotson, — My reasons for leaving India
were simply that I detested the climate, the country, and all
its ways from the moment I set foot in it, and had therefore
long determined to quit it at the first practicable moment ;
which I have accordingly done. Knowing that all the wealth
of India could not bribe me to remain a moment after the
expiration of my period of service, I was perfectly indifferent
to being called an ^ advertizing qtmck/ &c., for addressing the


316 What is Mesmerism ?

public through the newspapers — their only source of informa-
tion : the medical journals having combined to suppress all
evidence on the subject of mesmerism. I could well aflford
to laugh at the attempts to injure me in my practice ; the truth
being, that I did not care a straw about it. If I lived a very
few years, I knew that my actions would give the lie to the
friendly commentators on my conduct, who gave out that I
was agitating for a place in Calcutta in order to drive a great
trade there like themselves. You may imagine their asto-
nishment and delight at seeing me give up, almost as soon as
got, what to them is the summum bonum of good fortune, — a
good place in Calcutta with the prospect of a great practice.

" You seem surprised that my departure from India has
not been signalized by some kind of public demonstration.
But, for years, mesmerism has been a mere matter of course
in Calcutta, and familiarity has blunted the interest of the
public in it. Besides, after having planted mesmerism as a
curative agent in the Government Hospital of Calcutta, I
considered my mission frilfiUed, and did not think it worth
while to obtrude my daily doings upon the public after having
gained my object.

^^ The only reward I looked for was independent of public
demonstration of any kind, and ias been fully realized. I
have increased my knowledge and powers of usefnlness, and
this was all I had in view from the commencement.

" I am, yours very truly,

" James Esdaile.*'


XVI. What is mesmerism ? An attempt to explain its pheno-
mena on t?i€ admitted principles of physiological and psy-
chical science. By Alexander Wood, M.D. Sutherland
and Knox, Edinburgh, 1851. pp. 31.

The Mesmeric Mania q/^ 1851, with a physiological explanation
of the Phenomena produced. A Lecture by John Hughes
Bennett, M.D., P.R.S.E., Professor of the Theory of
Physic and of Clinical Medicine in the University of
Edinburgh. Sutherland and Knox, Edinburgh, 1851.
pp. 21.

Electro-Biological Phenomena considered physiologically and

psychologically. By James Braid, M.R.C.S.E., M.W.S.,

fee, &c. Sutherland & Knox, Edinburgh, 1851. pp. 33.

Speech of Dr. Simpson at a Meeting of the Edinburgh Medico-
Chirurgical Society, March 19th, 1851. Monthly Jour-
nal of Medical Science, May, 1851. pp.485.

Letter from Dr. Simpson in the Lancet of Sept. 20th, 1851.


By Dr. Engledue. 317

"What is mesmerism?^* One would naturally suppose that
the author of the paper to which this query is prefixed would
have used every effort to have become acquainted with the
ordinary phenomena manifested during the mesmeric sleep
before proceeding to answer it. This^ however, is not the
method pursued by the Edinburgh anti-mesmeric school.
We shall find that Dr. Wood is ignorant of the subject on
which he writes. In this anomalous position he is not singu-
lar, for Dr. Bennett is his companion, and Dr. Simpson boldly
states before his assembled brethren and does not meet with
a rebuke^ that " some fifteen or sixteen years ago he had as-
sisted in writing a somewhat bitter article against the so-called
phenomena of animal magnetism, and it was not till after it
was published that he saw any of the phenomena themselves !"
*^ O, tempora ! O, mores !" Behold a teacher of youth who
must influence the career of those who listen to his prelections.
We all know how ductile youth is, how prone to receive im-
pressions either for good or evil, and yet here is their teacher
stating without a blush and without the expression of the least
regret, that he wrote without information, and denounced
what he had never seen I

lu this world of action and scientific progress can there be
any sight more humiliating than that of an educated medical
man remaining in precisely the same state of ignorance for
sixteen years, regarding such a subject as mesmerism — a sub-
ject which has made such rapid strides, caused so much dis-
cussion, and developed so many curious problems for the in-
vestigation of the physiologist ? Not to have bestowed any
attention whatever on the subject, we can quite understand
and to some extent forgive : but, to have adopted a certain
line of thought, — to have started on one's career with a certain
string of prejudices, with a set of stereotyped formulae which
have been hugged and cherished through this long series of
years with a devotion worthy of a better cause and of the
most rigid follower of the Baconian philosophy, — to have re-
mained from 1835 to 1851 in a state of ignorance on one of
the most curious and important professional investigations,
— not to have made one step during this long period towards
a practical inquiry, and yet at the end to presume to intrude
upon the scientific world one's crude notions, — to have spent
one's time in spinning theories for the purpose of attempting
to disprove facts which have been collected by careful ob-
servers, and which may be multiplied ad infinitum by any in-
dividual endowed with a common share of intelligence, — to
have wasted the best period of one's existence in endeavouring
to retard the progress of the car of science, not by a manly


318 What is Mesmerism ?

and philosophic display of recorded observations^ but by a
parade of metaphysical subtlety^ and by a sort of mosaic car^
pentry dividing and subdividing a series of propositions^ some
of which are destitute of a solid foundation and more calculated
to mystify than to enlighten those who are so unfortunate as
to attempt to read them ;-— we say, to have done all this when
the simple course was open for a real, bond fide truth-seeker,
of appealing to nature, and recording the observations made,
does appear to us one of those extraordinary psychological
phenomena which the progress of mesmerism, more than the
progress of any other science, has tended to develope.

We are thus particular in directing attention to the career
of Dr. A. Wood, because it fell to our lot in 1834-5 to break
a lance with him in a discussion on this very subject at the
Eoyal Medical Society of Edinburgh. We recollect on
that occasion quoting to Dr. Wood the aphorism of Dugald
Stewart, ^' Unlimited scepticism is equally the child of imbe-
cility as implicit credulity.^' As we found him theuj so we
find him now. Very little progress has been made. If he
had been buried for this period, and thus debarred from asso-
ciating with his fellow men, he could not have presented a
more pitiable spectacle of profound ignorance of the subject
he is so aniuous to discuss. We do not mean to insinuate
that he is wanting in a certain kind of acumen, or that there
is a deficiency of that smartness which men too often mistake
for profundity ; but we do say that he is wanting in that great
essential which is so truly characteristic of a philosopher —
the power to dive to the bottom and to grasp the main and
fundamental facts upon which the superstructure or science is
built — the power to cast aside all extraneous matter in the
shape of prejudices, preconceived notions and fancies, and>
having convinced himself that the foundation he has sought
for is worthy and secure, to proceed step by step to the veri-
fication, or the reverse, of all those statements which other
observers have recorded. Having accomplished this most im-
portant preliminary, then comes the period for generalisation,
for philosophic disquisition. Any attempt to do this before
taking a careful survey of facts and becoming convinced of
the truth or falsehood of recorded observations, is, we are
bound to say, sheer impertinence.' We have no patience with
the man who contemptuously brushes aside the labours of
others because they interfere with his opinions ; and we pro-
ceed with the perusal of such a paper as Dr. A. Wood^s with
a kind of disgust from the moment we perceive that he is
drawing upon his fancy and not from the broad field of natural
facts.


By Dr. Engledue. 319

Dr. Wood seems to have been suddenly aroused from his
state of torpor on this most interesting subject by the visits
of some American gentlemen to Edinburgh. The curious
phenomena produced by these gentlemen on persons appa-
rently in the natural state^ or, as we would propose to call it
in the sub-mesmeric state^ excited considerable discussion in
literary and scientific circles. Dr. Wood is astonished at what
he saw, and is forthwith prompted to write, and, like a sensi-
ble man, he of course does not attempt to do so till he has
prepared himself with pen, ink, and paper. He knew these
were essentials, he knew that his cerebral distillations could
not assume a material shape without first preparing the matter
by which and on which they were to be chronicled. He ig-
nores, without practical examination, a certain number of
facts, because he says, ^^ it is more easy to suppose that some
of these (sources of fallacy) had escaped detection, than that
the marvellous phenomena recorded actually did occur in the
manner which their annalists have supposed.^' He admits
without examination a certain number of other facts, and
then proceeds to theorize. He wishes to be considered a psy-
chologist, but he neglects the only course by pursuing which
the title can be gained, — he does not work, he does not pre-
pare his materials. To our view it would be quite as rational
for him to sit down and attempt to record his thoughts with-
out pen, ink, and paper, by moving his finger in the air, as
to attempt to theorize on such a subject as mesmerism without
preliminary practical examination — without being thoroughly
convinced what facts or statements are to be admitted as truths,
and what to be rejected.

What will our readers consider to be the value of Dr.
Wood's theoretical views when in the fifth paragraph of his
pamphlet we find him stating that all the theories of mes-
merism '^ rest on, and derive strength from, certain pheno-
mena which are exhibited to wondering and credulous specta-
tors by itinerant performers who feed on popular credulity .''
Is this the fact ? Are our labours of no value ? Is the col-
lection of facts chronicled in this journal to be treated with
this kind of disrespect ? Are there no materials in our pages
for the theoretical philosopher to arrange and classify ? We
are not itinerant performers — ^we have never given public lec-
tures — ^we have never administered to popular credulity — ^we
have simply recorded what we know to be true facts, and ere
long Dr. Wood and others will be compelled to admit them.
If all previous theories have been formed in the manner stated
by Dr. Wood, we humbly ask, on what basis is his theory
built? Where are his facts? where are his observations?


320 fl^hat is Mesmerism ?

How many cases of mesmeric sleep has he seen? In hour
many persons has he produced the sleep ? In shorty what
does he know to authorize him to propound a theory ? We
wait for an answer. All the leading practical mesmerists with
whom we are acquainted have considered it to be their duty
to accumulate facts ; we do not know one who has propounded
a theory. To theorize on the labours of others, and to de-
nounce as vulgar charlatans those on whose labours the
boasted theory is built, seems to be the part played by those
who know nothing practically, but who think it is not safe, as
Dr. Wood says, " in the present age for physicians to stand with
folded arms and regard such proceedings (mesmeric siances)
with the sneer of scornful contempt.^'

Dr. Wood not only betrays great ignorance when he speaks
of the phenomena of mesmerism, but he is equally ignorant
of the phenomena developed during disease. We are not
aware of a single phenomenon developed during the mesmeric
sleep which is not sometimes developed in the natural course
of disease. This is true of clairvoyance as well as of all the
other astounding facts recorded by observers. And yet Dr.
Wood in his second page states that there are two classes of
phenomena for which belief is demanded. '

First. — ^Those which may be denominated analogous, and
which have their analogues in many diseased states.

Second. — Those which may be termed heterologous, such
as the alleged manifestations of clairvoyance, the phenomena
presented by which not only have no analogues in the body,
healthy or diseased, but seem totally opposed to all the re-
cognized laws by which the physical or psychical phenomena
of the living body are regulated I Now, the ignorance dis-
played 16 manifest upon the very surface. ' He has not even
read up the literature of the subject. To talk about a series
of well-observed facts being opposed to " all the recognized
laws by which the physical or psychical phenomena of the
living body are regulated,^^ and therefore to be scouted^ pre-
supposes that ^^all the recognized laws^^ embrace all the
laws by means of which our organisms are governed, — a con-
clusion which none but Dr. Wood could arrive at, for it be-
tokens a degree of self-confidence which only those can enjoy
who believe their scientific knowledge to be perfect, the
science of physiology to have reached its utmost limits, and
who view all attempts at innovations as the labours of ^^ itine-
rant performers who feed on popular credulity.'^

Of course Dr. Wood quotes our old friend Dr. Forbes.
" Birds of a feather flock together.^^ We say to Dr. Wood,
as we have said to Dr. Forbes over and over again, since you


By Dr. Engledue, 321

consider that you display sach great acumen in detecting fal-
lacies in the recorded observations of others, why do you not
work for yourself? Why do you not perform your own experi-
ments ? Why do you theorize when you ought to observe ?
Why will you continue to dream, when life is so short, facts
so numerous, and workeris so few ?

" Wisdom is ofttimes nearer when we stoop
Than when we soar."

It is quite impossible for us to give even an abstract of
Dr. Wood's paper. It is a perfect puzzle. His propositions
are so numerous, and he divides and subdivides them to such
an extent, that one detects at a glance the non-practical man.
After a careful perusal we are bound to say that his explana-
tions explain nothing, and, when he flatters himself that he
is most lucid, to our view he is most obscure. We really cannot
follow Dr. W. paragraph after paragraph, and point out the
small amount of mesmeric knowledge he possesses, but we
will take a few of his divisions and make a remark or two
upon them as we proceed.

Let us take, " Perversion of the external senses" Dr. W.
says —

" When the strong assertions of the operator cause the patient
to believe that the same water is at one time sweet, at another bitter,
it is evident that the only change is in the assertion, and therefore
that it must be the cause of the phenomenon. In attempting to
explain this, we must bear in mind that the qualities of bodies are
changes in the state of the mind, which they effect. All sensation,
therefore, resolves itself into a mental effect produced by a material
cause, and by finding that the effect usually succeeds the operation
of the cause, we come to associate them together. The feeling in
the mind, then, is all of which we are conscious ; and if it does not
follow the application of the external body, there is no sensation.*^

Now, let us see how soon all this is knocked down by one
positive experiment. A person is placed in the mesmeric
sleep, and while in this state manifests what is called com-
munity of taste, that is to say, tastes whatever the mesmeriser
has in his mouth. We must state for the information of
Dr. Wood that these phenomena are not presented by every
person ; for the same reason, we presume, that all persons
do not die of apoplexy or consumption. There are organic
peculiarities which we cannot be expected to explain. We
only recognize the fact.

Eafperiment. The mesmeriser eats an orange. .The pa-
tient immediately manifests delight and apparently enjoys
the taste of the orange, and the -mouth performs all the.
movements as if the orange were really there. Let it be

VOL. IX. Y


322 TVhat is Mesmerism ?

borne iu mind that there is no conversation— no suggestion.
Now^ let the patient be presented with an orange and re-
quested to eat it. The mesmeriser and the patient are now both
eating the same article. While this is going on^ let the mes-
meriser place some cayenne pepper upon his tongue: the
moment he feels the burning sensation the patient will spit
out the orange^ and declare most likely that it is bad^ or that
something has been mixed with it. Here^ then^ is not only
community of taste^ but the eflfect, produced on the nerves of
taste in the mesmeriser^ is conveyed by some means (Dr.
Wood would say by the fancy of the patient) to the senso-
rium of the patient^ and overcomes the taste of the real article
which is at the moment absolutely applied. Will Dr. W. ac-
count for this? Probably he will deny the truth of the ex-
periment. This is just the case where he creeps out of his
difficulty by laying down the law, " that it is more easy to
suppose a fallacy than to admit that the marvellous pheno-
mena actually did occur.^^ Of course this is an ea:planation.
Be it so. We can only say to him, try the experiment. We
assert it to be a true one, and one devoid of sdl fallacy. We
refer him to his countryman, Dr. Forbes, of Aberdeen, who
saw these and analogous experiments, and tested them in
his own way, some years ago. We ask how the argument
of the theorizer applies, — " all sensation, therefore, resolves
itself into a mental effect, produced by a material cause."
" If the feeling in the mind does not follow the application
of the external body, there is no sensation !" Why, here is
the feeling in the mind, without the application of the ex-
ternal body; the said feeling being produced in one organism
by the application of the external body to another organism^
some mysterious relationship existing between the two, and
this relationship being induced by a few passes of the hand,
which produce mesmeric sleep. We are not, be it observed,
speaking of an experiment in which there is suggestion or
command by means of spoken words, or in any other way
conveyed : we are speaking of an experiment of a much higher
character, for the purpose of indicating how very inadequate
the apparent explanations are to account for one of the com-
mon phenomena of the mesmeric sleep.

" Perversion of common sensibility.'^ Dr. W. here refers
to surgical operations without pain. In 1835 we recollect
Dr. Wood denied the truth of Cloquet^s operation. He now
admits the truth of the surgical operations recorded in our
journal. He says, " Well authenticated instances are also
recorded of severe operations having been performed without
pain.''


By Dr. Engledue. 323

Now for the explanation. He says, —

" In order that pain shall he experienced, two pre-requisites are
necessary : —

" 1st. That an impression should be made on the sensorinm
commune, or that part of the brain in which the sensory nerves are
implanted; and

''2nd. That that change should be recognized by the brain-
proper, or, in the words of the report made to the French Academy
of Sciences, on the Mdmoire of M. Flourens, the 'cerebral lobes
are the sole receptacle where the sensations can be consummated
and made perceptible to the animal.'

" If then, we suppose that by some temporary cause the action
of one or other of these is suspended, or the communication between
them interrupted, it may help to account for the insensibility to
pain which is displayed by many persons in the magnetic sleep."

We humbly submit that this is no explanation at all^ be-
cause many of the patients are acutely sensible to pain^ or^
uneasy sensations^ if the same are produced on their mes-
meriser. For instance^ in a room full of people^ the patient
being asleep at one end and the mesmeriser talking to a
friend at the other^ the mesmeriser was suddenly and without
previous intimation pricked with a penknife on the hand by
a sceptic. The result was instantly manifested by the pa-
tient crying^ and rubbing the spot on the hand analogous to
that which had been wounded in the mesmeriser. At the
instant of the performance of this experiment^ the mes-
meriser was requested by another sceptic to retire into the
next room with him^ and when there^ he suggested tickling
the interior of the ear with a feather^ which was instantly
done. After a few seconds both parties returned into the
room where the patient was seated ; the latter was seen rub-
bing the ear^ and placing it down towards the shoulder as
persons do who are teazed with anything irritating them in
that part. Strange to say^ in this instance^ the sensation
was not felt by the patient in the same ear as had been ex-
perimented on in the mesmeriser. Now, we want to know
how the impression is made on the sensorium commune of
the patient — how it reaches " the cerebral lobes, the sole re-
ceptacle where the sensations can be consummated and made
perceptible to the animal'/' (?). We should like to be in-
formed how the function of the cerebral lobes can at one and
the same moment be suspended and increased in intensity ?
How the same process suspends a function and increases its
activity ? How a certain portion of cerebral matter becomes
insensible to an impression applied directly, and seuBible to
an impression made on another organism ?

Y 2


324 What is Mestnerism ?

The anatomical and physiological description of the brain
into which Dr. Wood enters is quite unintelligible to the
general reader^ and even if thoroughly comprehended affords
no explanation of the phenomena we have just recorded. To
recognize a certain physiological phenomenon^ and, by means
of minute anatomical and physiological knowledge, to say
that the phenomenon is the result of functional disturbance
in a certain portion of cerebral matter, and therefore that is
an explanation of the phenomenon, leaves us just where we
were. We know that the optic nerve conveys the impressions
produced by light to a certain portion of brain which takes
cognizance of the same ; and that the auditory nerve conveys
the effect of the vibrations of the air. We know that the
corpora striata and adjacent parts are the centre of volition —
that there exists a centre of sensation, and that there must be
ample communication with the hemispheres, &c. Let us take
Dr. Wood^s eight general conclusions in regard to the ana-
tomical relation of this inquiry, and without quibble or doubt
give our assent thereto, — what then? Are we one bit nearer
any rational explanation of the production of mesmeric sleep ?
Does this answer the question, " What is mesmerism V^ Is
this any explanation of that wonderful relationship between
the nervous systems of the mesmeriser and the mesmerised ?
Does this explain to us how, or in what manner, a patient
who is in the deep mesmeric sleep, so deep that a leg may be
amputated without his knowledge, can in one second of time be
aroused from this sleep, not by being touched, not by being
commanded by an outward or visible sign, but by the mental
wish of the mesmeriser? Can any anatomical description of
cerebral matter be considered an explanation of this ? Let
us not forget the title of Dr. W.^s pamphlet, " What is mes-
merism T* Dr. W. has not shewn us this ; he does not know
anything about the most simple phenomena which are pro-
duced in the mesmeric sleep. Need we wonder, therefore,
that we are still to look for the explanation ? When Dr. W.
eondescends to become a pupil, he will at the same time be-
come convinced that there is some marvellous relationship
established between organisms when the mesmeric sleep is
induced, and that the explanation is not to be afforded by
the anatomist, nor by the physiologist with his present amount
of knowledge.

Dr. Bennett, the author of the second pamphlet which we
have placed at the head of this article is a Professor in the
University of Edinburgh. He is a veiy bold man, and like
Dr. Wood is afflicted with the same kind of monomania, viz.,
a belief that he thoroughly understands and can, therefore.


By Dr. Engledue. 325.

explain^ a subject which he has never studied. Dr. B. also
favours us with five pages of anatomical description^ such as
one can obtain from any rudimentary work on the science of
anatomy. This is followed by eight pages of matter collected
from metaphysical and physiological works^ — matter with
which any first year's student is acquainted^ and which has
just as much to do with the promised explanation of mesmeric
phenomena as a page of Napier's Logarithms^ or a chapter
from a dissertation on Hindoo Mythology. A mere collection
of curious facts furnishes no explanation of the facts. A child
can perceive that a solution of tartaric acid thrown into a so-
lution of carbonate of soda produces a bubbling^ but does the
recognition of the fact furnish the explanation ? Suppose the
chemist steps in and recounts all the analogous phenomena
where bubbling takes place when two solutions are mixed^
would this be considered satisfactory ? Certainly not. The
chemist studies his subject, he experiments practically, he
leads you to the knowledge you require step by step, teaches
you the laws of afl&nity, proves to you incontestibly why such
and such phenomena take place, and gives you the law which
governs the whole ; in fact, he is a philosopher, and never
tells you in cases of doubt, and when new compounds are
presented to him, and astounding facts recorded, that " it is
more easy to suppose that some of these (sources of fallacy)
had escaped detection, than that the marvellous phenomena
recorded actually did occur in the manner which their annal-
ists have supposed," but straightway proceeds to his labora-
tory, and wrings from nature the secret which a more fortu-
nate compeer had discovered before him.

Dr. B. informs us that he has tried " numerous experi-
ments.'' We are not furnished with an account of them, and
therefore cannot be aware of their character; but we cannot
conceive a professor of physiology to be so blinded by prejudice
as not to recognize at a glance the importance of the pheno-
mena developed in a good case of mesmeric sleep. We un-
dertake at any moment to show him experiments which will
not only astonish but puzzle him^ and make him wish that
his boasted explanation had never seen the light. It is very
curious to look back and see the progress which these men
make. Till the present moment all mesmeric phenomena
were " humbug," and the patients and experimenters were
either charlatans or imbecile. Now, some of the phenomena,
and those too of the least importance in a physiological sense,
are considered valuable, and we are told that, *' once admitted
into physiology, must have an important influence ou t\ie
• theory and practice of medicine." The humbug of yesterday


• 326 What is Mesmerism ?

is suddenly become the valuable material of to-day; and^ like
children with a new toy^ each one as he becomes acquainted
with even the most trivial facts — facts^ of the truth of which
we have been thoroughly convinced for years, and for the re-
cognition of which we have begged over and over again —
thinks he is bound to offer his explanation, and, from the ra-
pidity with which it is issued, evidently imagines that his lu-
cubrations are of the most vital importance. In all cases,
however, we are expressly warned, that nothing which they
have seen or heard leads to the conclusion that such a prin-
ciple as animal magnetism exists, that it is unnecessary " to
enter into any lengthened argument to refute the numerous
hypotheses which ascribe these effects to external influences,
&c/^ This is unnecessary labour, because the term animal
magnetism has not been used by English mesmerists for years.
It was discontinued, because the term involved a theory, and
it was considered improper to use a term which implied a be-
lief in a theory unsupported by the facts. To write, therefore,
in the manners Drs. Wood, Bennett, and Simpson are doing
is simply ridiculous, and betokens not only gross ignorance,
but, we regret to say it, we fear dishonesty of purpose. We
mean to say, that, after opposing for years what they now find
to have been true, they are compelled to avow their belief,
but think it necessary to do so by disavowing the theories of
others and substituting one of their own, proclaiming their
recognition of a few facts, and wishing to make it appear that
they would have done so long ago if certain parties had not,
like themselves, prematurely theorized, and used a vocabulary
not warranted by the facts.

But to Dr. Bennett^s explanation. We recommend our
readers to take a strong cup of coffee before attempting to
read the following extract. We have read it, and read it
again and again. We have fried the coffee ; we have rubbed
our forehead most vigorously, and worked ourselves into a
state of intellectual activity till we spoiled our night's rest,
and in the morning we found ourselves just where we were on
the previous evening before reading Dr. B.'s explanation.
We looked at the title page, and the great letters met us,
"Mesmeric Mania of 1851, with a Physiological Explanation
of the phenomena produced.'^ We took up Mr. Braid's
pamphlet, which we must leave the consideration of till our
next number, read it, laughed at its dogmatism, turned to
Dr. Bennett's pamphlet again, sighed over it, took another
cup of coffee: but it was useless. We gave up the explanation
in despair, and, for fear our readers may consider us unusually
obtuse, we now furnish them with it, that they may try their


By Dr. Enyledue. 327

ingenuity. Such condition (mesmeric) may probably be ac-
counted for physiologically in the following manner, —

'^ We have previously seen that the cerebral lobes contain white
fibres, which run in three directions. 1st, Those whidi pass from
below upwards, and connect the hemispherical ganglion with the
spinal cord. 2nd, Those which pass transversely, forming the com-
missures, and which unite the two hemispheres. And 3rd, Those
which run from before backwards, uniting the anterior with the
posterior lobes on each side. It has also been stated, p. 7, that
these fibres are probably subservient to that combination of the men-
tal faculties which characterizes thought. Now all metaphysicians
and physiologists are agreed that the mind is composed of various
faculties, and that different portions of the nervous mass are neces-
sary for their manifestation. True, it is by no means determined
what, or how many faculties mind should be divided into, still less
is it known which parts of the brain are necessary for the manifesta-
tion of each. But let the first proposition be granted, then there is
no difficulty in supposing that one or more of these may be paralyzed
or suspended, whilst others are entire, any more than there is in
knowing that sensation may be lost, whilst motion remains intact,
although the nerve fibres of both run side by side. I presume, then,
that certain mental faculties are temporarily paralyzed or suspended,
whilst others are active ; that in consequence the psychical stimuli of
the former, make no impressions on the cerebral conducting fibres,
whilst those of the latter are increased in intensity ; that as a result
the proper balance of the mind is disturbed, and the individual for
the time being acts and talks as if the predominant idea was a reality.
The condition is analogous so far with ordinary somnambulism, cer-
tain forips of hypochondriasis and monomania, but admits of infinite
changes according to the nature of the idea suggested.

" According to this theory, therefore, we suppose that a psychical
stimulus is generated, which, uncontrolled by the other mental
operations acting under ordinary circumstances, induces impressions
on the peripheral extremities of the cerebral fibres, the influence of
which only is conveyed outwards to the muscles moved. In the
same manner the remembrance of sensations can always be called up
by the mind ; but under ordinary circumstances we know they are
only remembrances, from the exercise of judgment, comparison, and
other mental faculties ; but these being exhausted, in the condition
under consideration, while the suggested idea is predominant, leave
the individual a believer in its reality.

*' In this manner we attribute to the faculties of the mind a cer-
tain power of correcting the fallacies which each is liable to fall into,
in the same way that the illusions of one sense are capable of being
detected by the others. We further believe, that the apparatus ne-
cessary for the former operations, consists of the nerve fibres which
unite different parts of the hemispherical ganglion, whilst that ne-
cessary for the latter, are the nerve fibres connecting together the
prgans of sense and the ganglia at the base of the encephalon. A


328 What is Mesmerism ?

healthy and sound mind is characterized bj the proper baknoe of all
the mental faculties, in the same manner that a healthy body is de-
pendent on the proper action of all the nerves. There are mental
illusions and sensonal illusions, the one caused by predominant ideas
and corrected by proper reasoning ; the other caused by perversion
of one sense, and corrected by the right application of the others.
Both these conditions are intimately united, and operate on each
other, inasmuch as voluntary and emotional movements and sensa-
tion are mental operations.

''This theory, if further elaborated, appears to me consistent
with the facts described at the commencement of this lecture, and
capable of explaining them on physiological principles."

"What farther " elaboration *' may do for the theory we
know not : we will wait patiently for the labour of the elabo-
rator. Nothing bat the paternal embrace will ever squeeze from
it an explanation of the cause of mesmeric sleep^ or of the
extraordinary physiological phenomena manifested during its
continuance. We shall continue on the tip-toe of expectation
and shall turn every month to the pages of the Edinburgh
Monthly Journal^ of which Dr. Bennett is one of the editors^
anxious for the promised enlightenment. We are glad to find
that Dr. B. is convinced of the importance of the few facts he
has seen. We recommend him to falfil his duty^ and to in-
vestigate for himself in his own library^ and we promise him^
that, in proportion as he does this^ he will be less anxious to
publish ; but will become more and more convinced that some
extraordinary problems await solution, and^ to use his own
words, '^ there can be little doubt that in no long time its in-
fluence (mesmerism) when further studied^ will be Acknow-
ledged/'

We were amused with the- last paragraph. Here it is, —

** In conclusion, I would observe that no physiological principle
can be established by interesting the merely uninformed, by exciting
sleep or day dreams in young or sensitive persons, by astonishing
the generally educated, or even scientific classes, or enlisting in its
favour the agreeable pens of the writers of fiction. It is not reason-
able to suppose that a mathematical question can be decided by a
botanist, or that mechanics can be advanced by a naturalist. Nor
is it easy to imagine that the laws of vitality, and the difficult pro-
blems connected with the influence of the mind over the body, are
to be determined by natural philosophers, by chemists^ or the eulti-
vators of light literature. Every science has its own laws ; and
those persons who are unacquainted with physiology, and the func-
tions of the nervous system, are surely not those who can be expected
to come to a correct conclusion on the subject which has engaged our
attention. If, then, important facts can be demonstrated, let them
be judged of by those whose habits of thought and previous studies
qualify them for the task. It is easy indeed to say that medical men


By Dr. Enylednie. 329

are prejudiced, and oppose themselves to novelties ; but I must leave
you to determine how far such a charge is reasonable, and especially
how, from the manner in which I have treated this important ques-
tion, it is applicable to myself."

Cease to investigate and to publish^ Sir D. Brewster^ Dr.
Gregory^ and the Messrs. Chambers. Ye men of Atheufi,
cease to lift your voices in the cause of truth.

Dr. Bennett speaks. Like the Duke of Athol he will
permit no interlopers on his domain. He has been silent
for years. Tou have forced him to speak out at last^ and
you reap your reward. He sneers at you, and tells jou to
keep to your own departments, for a professor of physiology
is the only individual at all capable of judging of important
facts. He says: —

" I am the role
For thought and action, thou should' st follow me
And not precede ; but like pet humble lambs,
Behind thy shepherd walk with earthward glance ;
The track I lead doth surely lead to ."

We have the report of a speech made by Dr. J. Y. Simp-
son^ at a meeting of the Edinburgh Medico-Chirurgical
Society^ and a letter which he has published in the Lancet
of last week. Poor Dr. Simpson ! After playing with mes-
merism for years, and on every occasion neglecting to speak
out in the manner /ac/^ prompted him, and his position de-
manded of him, he is at last thoroughly frightened by Mr.
Wakley. It appears he has been " shivering on the brink"
of an avowal, and that his belief and his practice have been
of that mamby-pamby character which we would rather not
designate by the title which the moment suggests to us.
Mr. Wakley vows vengeance because Dr. Simpson supports
mesmerism. He should laugh him to scorn as we have always
done, and as we do now. Let him rant and rave, and blaze —
it is his vocation — it sells his journal. On mesmerism he
and his paid vmters conduct themselves like lunatics, and
yet, strange to say, they are convinced that mesmerism is
true. We know this. Some years ago, and since Dr. Simp-
son became convinced of the truth of mesmerism, he pub-
lished a pamphlet on anaesthesia. He enumerated all the
methods for producing insensibility, from Adam^s " deep
sleep" to the exhibition of his own chloroform, but he did
not mention mesmerism, although important surgical opera-
tions had been performed, and the pains of child-birth
avoided.* He was afraid then to publicly avow his belief.

* See Mr. Chandler's three cases and Mr. Saunders's case at pp. 303-4.


330 What is Mesmerism ? Sfc.

It was a manifestation of the same want of conscientiousness
which prompted him some years ago to write a little article
against mesmerism^ and afterwards confess that it was not
" till after it was published that he saw any of the phenomena
themselves"

The following extract from his letter furnishes the pith
of his speech^ and will show the extent of his belief, as well
as the careless and superficial manner in which he must have
performed his experiments, and the little care he has taken
to adopt experiments which would prove or disprove either
the doctrine of " suggestion'^ or " self-mental acts'' as ex-
planations of all mesmeric phenomena.

"I do not believe, and never did believe, in animal magnetism.
During the last ten or fifteen years I have repeatedly seen experi-
ments made upon the subject, and have repeatedly made them my-
self. In the course of them I have witnessed very interesting phy-
siological and psychological results, such as the production of deep
sleep, fixture and. rigidity of muscles, lesions and perversions of
sense, &c. : but I have no belief whatever that these effects are the
effects of any power, force, agency, or entity, such as is understood
by the term animal magnetism, passing from the so-called ' mes-
meriser* to the so-called * mesmerised.' On the contrary, these ex-
periments have firmly convinced me, as they have convinced others
who have seen them, that these and other phenomena of the like
kind are merely effects produced by the mind of the ' mesmerised'
upon his or her own economy ; that they are only self mental acts,
if I may so speak, and that they are as independent of any ' mes-
meric' influence as the phenomena of common sleep, or common
dreaming, or common hysteria^ are."

We do not deny the doctrine of suggestion, nor deny
the facts of electro-biolc^y. We have experimented too long
and too anxiously to do this. We know that suggestion is
most powerful in the mesmeric sleep as well as in the sub-
mesmeric state. We regret the introduction of a new name,
because, like the term animal magnetism, it involves the
belief in a theory. The facts of electro-biology are mesmeric
facts. Analogous facts can always be produced in the mes-
meric sleep, but till the recent phenomena were exhibited
to us we were not aware that they could be produced in
the siib-mesmeric state ; that is to say — before the patient
had really passed into the mesmeric sleep. This is new and
most important. As regards Dr. Simpson's assertions we
refer him to our remarks on Dr. Wood's theory. The super-
ficial nature of his knowledge of mesmerism, and the fright
he is suffering from, apparently lest Mr. Wakley may re-
duce the number of his fees — for if this fear were not
lurking why take any notice of the attack? — is plainly


Books received. 331

proved by his assertion that " electro-biological experiments
are, therefore, directly and entirely opposed to the so-called
doctrines of mesmerism/'

We presume, therefore, that Mr. Wakley will permit
Dr. S. to continue his electro-biological experiments without
molestation." Nevertheless, the new phenomena, or, mes-
merism according to Simpson and Wakley, promise to be
productive of important scientific results.

** What's in a name ? that which we call a rose.
By any other name would smell as sweet.''

Romeo and Juliet.

W. C. Engledue.


BOOKS RECEIVED.

Lectures on Mesmerism, delivered at the Rotunda, Dublin. By J. W. Jackson.
Dublin : 12mo., price Is. *

Whoever wishes to comprehend what is the whole range of the subject of
mesmerism, should read this little book. We will transcribe a few passages.

p. 27. '* We have heard much of contagion, and the word is one of terror ;
but it would seem that nature has been more just than we deemed, for the prin-
ciple of health is as transferable as that of sickness, and a vigorous operator is a
fountain of sanative influence, whence the decrepid and ailing may derive a fVesh
supply of vital force. Perhaps, we do not exaggerate when we say that the mes-
meric aura is the true nectar of classic antiquity, which the youthful Hebe pre-
sented to the father of the gods ; the mythic ambrosia, on which divine natures
were fed of old ; the elixir vite, whose traditionary powers led on the dim faith
of mediaeval alchymists to the pursuit of earthly immortality.

'* A universal medicine composed by art seems an absurdity ; but the trans-
fusion of the m medicatrix nature from one system to another, granting it to be
possible, would, of necessity, accomplish the results so foolishly anticipated from
merely chemical compounds. If, in mesmeric experiments, we have to do with
the vital foroe itself, then have we mastered the grand desideratum of ages, and
stand on the vestibule of that temple whose adyta will yet unveil to us the ma-
jestic realities of primeval knowledge. Mesmerism, as a medical appliance, tran-
scends the limits of authentic history, and looms out from amidst the shadows of
remote antiquity, as the mighty heritage of sacerdotal castes, and the priceless at-
tainment of long-sought and successful initiation into the secrets of a wisdom
that was already old, when Greece was in the first dawn of her advancing know-
ledge, and the ' seven hills ' were a hunting-ground for Italy's untutored abo-
rigines."

p. 28. " Mesmerism, as you are doubtless aware, led the way to painless ope-
rations. The insensibility which it produces is preferable to that which results
from ether and chloroform, if only from its being more safe. It has never yet
proved fetal. How sad is the contrast presented by the records of chemical
anaesthetics I It is mortifying that Esdaile, a name already assured of immor-
tality, should have needed to remove to the extremity of our empire for the pur-
pose of effecting that glorious series of experiments which have rendered Calcutta
permanently illustrious in the annals of medical science ; and even at home, . the
provinces have preceded the capital in mesmeric operations, as if the latter were
the seat of too much knowledge or too much prejudice to prove a convenient site
for heterodox experiments in the art of healing."

p. 31. **The sweet slumbers of childhood can be commanded at pleasure,
and the wail of its young nature, under the sufferings to which it is so frequently


332 Books received,

exposed, may be exchanged for the profound placidity of a dreamless sleep, with-
out the administration of one nauseous or noxious ingredient. Whenever it is
thought that a simple recipe might be safely administered without the formality of
medicid advice, there, at least, mesmerism may be tried, even by the simplest in-
dividual, with safety and advantage. Let us not, then, n^lect the due culture
of a dawning power which promises to endow the parent, the friend, the clergy-
man, and tibe philanthropist with an exhaustless treasury, whose priceless g^ of
health is one which the wealth of princes has but too often failed to purchase."

p. 57. ** Obeying the practical genius of their age, modem metaphysicians
have contemptuously dismissed, with a few cursoiy remarks, those strange revela-
tions of humanity's interior nature, that now and then loom out upon us, in
fitful gleams from the records of mystic spiritualism. The results of these strange
experiments, although extending geographically from the Ganges to the Rhine,
and chronologically from the remotest traditionary records, whose oft-reverberated
echoes are caught in the earliest pages of the Vedas, and whisper their mystic
mutterings in such stray fragments of Hellenic lore as have survived to us from
Pythagorean tuition and Eleusi^ian initiation ; these results, we say, although de-
veloped again and again in Fakeer, Dervish, and European saint, although nar-
rated now of a Socrates, and then of a Swedenborg, have been allowed to quies-
cently slumber in the dusty tomes where their records are preserved for a
profounder age, the more superficial mental phenomena of ievery day-life being
apparently considered as alone worthy the attention of the wise, and illustration
from the ingenious * men of the west.' **

p. 59. *' We are greater than we know, sons of the Infinite ; we inherit a
germ, whose roots may yet be nourished in the soil of Time and Space, but whose
blossoms already prepare to extend their fragrance through the shadeless vistas of
an ever-present Here, and an everlasting Now."

Perhaps we have given too many specimens : yet we must add another ad-
dressed to the medical profession.

p. 32. *' As a body they hold a distinguished and enviable position in society,
and one, too, of which their solid attainments and the high spirit of gentlemanly
honour by which they have been long characterized, render them eminently de-
serving. From the palace to the cottage they are the trusted advisers in man's
last extremity ; necessarily confided in on subjects and under circumstances that
admit them to the penetralia of the domestic hearth, they have nobly riaen to the
demands made on their high-souled integrity, and proved themselves worthy of a
confidence never before placed in any but a sacerdotal body. Why, then, should
they risk these advantages, the ripened results of ages of arduous toil and manful
discharge of duty, by committing tiiemselves to an insane warfare with palpable
facts ? For themselves, as a respectable profession, it is unwise, it is inexpedient,
it is suicidal. Neither is the permanent diminution of their influence which must
result from such a course desirable for society. In the present deUration and
dilapidation of so many things venerable, we cannot afford to lose the harmoniz-
ing influence of a body of gentlemen who, in city and village, among rich and
poor, are the welcome visitors and the confidential counsellors of all classes : they
are a priesthood. Mesmerism, as a great doctrine, can, if they reject it, develope
another. Already some of the choicest of this new wine has been poured into ves-
sels never used in the ancient sanctuary. A little longer and the rejection or as-
sumption of this great power will no longer be optional, perhaps it has ceased to
be so already."

Elementary Anatomy and Physiology for Schools and private Instruction :
with Lessons on Diet, Intoxicating Drink, Tobacco and Disease. By William
Lovett. Illustrated with ten coloured Plates. London: Darton and Co. 1851.

The Literary Gazette for March 22, praises and recommends, as we beg leave
to dp, this book, to the youthful reader, who ought to learn something of his own
form, and states that it is " free from every view and fact unsuited to tender
years," with the following ignorant reservation :— ^

** Mr. Lovett may not be aware that the middle lobe of the brain is that
which is common to man with beasts ; that the front lobe is common to him
with many of the lower animals ; and that the back lobe is peculiar to man : so


Books received. 333

peculiar, indeed, that it contains parts, such, e.g,, as the * hinder horn of the
lateral ventricle,' and the * hippocampus minor,* of vrhich there is no vestige,
even in the apes that make the nearest approach in structure to man. Mr. Lovett
can, perhaps^ conceive that these, and a score of like * damning facts * against
phrenology, may have operated in preventing such anatomists and physiologists
as Jones and Richard Quain, Dr. Paris, J. F. South, W. B. Carpenter, and
M. Magendie, from accepting a doctrine which makes the prapenniies common
to man with animals the result of the action of a part of the brain which is pecu-
liar to man, and the moral sentiments to be the functions of a part of the brain
which the wolf and the hysena possess in common with man. And Mr. Lovett
must certainly know that, in endeavouring to instil into the minds of youth
such a dictum as that the reverential and other motives to prayer are a function
of the middle lobe of the brain, or any part of it, he is inculcating a hypothesis
which is held by the minority of the authorities he cites as those on which his
compilation is founded, and by a very small minority of the actual cultivators of
anatomy and physiology. However much such a doctrine may be congenial to his
own habits and modes of thought, he was bound, therefore, not to inculcate it in a
book for youth, as a physiological truth established, like that of the functions of
the two roots of the nerves, and like the circulation of the blood. This blot
affects the utility, and will probably still more damage the success of his work."

Of what importance to a truth is it whether certain individuals believe it or
not ? especially individuals who know nothing about it. What does Dr. Paris
know of phrenology, or what has he advanced against it ? We know that he never
ceased a single day for years to speak in the most uneasy manner against the use
of the stethoscope, but at last holds his tongue because it is now carried in every
medical man's pocket. What are Dr. Paris's distinctions or attainments to make
him an authority ? Magendie sneered in perfect ignorance of phrenology, misre-
presenting it, and yet unconsciously admitted some of its fundamental facts in his
Physiology. Dr. Carpenter decided against it when he was a lad at college : but
has latterly we believe given way. His ignorance of the subject and his unworthy
conduct in regard to it have been often demonstrated. Mr. South was actually a
member of the London Phrenological Society when it existed. Dr. Jones Quain
and Mr. Richard Quain we have heard express their conviction of its truth to a
greater or less extent. As to the posterior lobes, the division into lobe» ^r^appa-
rently for mechanical purposes, and has no relation to functions : and if a certain
portion of the back of the brain has certain functions, it is of no importance
whether this portion be divided into lobes. The bird's wing is as much its ante-
rior extremity for motion as the fore-leg to the quadruped. There is even in man,
in the words of Dr. Jones Quain, ** no precise line of demarcation between the
middle lobe and the posterior." (Elements of Anatomy y p. 639.) The propen-
sities common to men and animals the result of parts of the brain peculiar to
men ! Why Amativeness resides in the cerebellum : Destructiveness, Acquisitive-
ness, Cunning, in the middle lobes. The moral sentiments reside in parts common
to men and animals ! What in hysnas and wolves is the degree of development
of the spots in which these faculties reside ? Why should not the disposition
to pray reside in the brain, like any other mental disposition ? Truly, poor scrib-
bler, it must : where else ? We advise you to cultivate every part of your ante-
rior lobes for the sake of becoming intelligent and well informed, for the sake of
justice and humility, as well as of reverence and prayer. If this part is badly
developed or softened, and good for nothing, there can be no intelligence, no
moral sentiment. If you meet with an instance of the reverse, pray inform us
and we will accompany you to see it.

The Prevention and Cure of many Chronic Diseases by Movements. An
exposition of the principles and practice by those movements for the correction of
the tendencies to disease in infancy, childhood, and youth, and for the cure of
many morbid affections of adults. By M. Roth, M.D. 8vo.

In our last number but one, XXXIII., we noticed Dr. Georgii's book on
Kinesipathy, and recommended the subject as highly worthy of attention. TVve
present work will amply repay those who read it. They will find aH mo^etnetiXa
scientifically considered and very numerous and excellent iU-ustraidons Vn Nvood.


834 Notices to Correspondents , ^c.

The Unit. A monthly paper, devoted to spiritual and natural education by
the dissemination of a knowledge of the law of universal unity. New York.
July, August, September, and the conclusion.

This contains much that is admirable and deserving of close attention, but
much that is most absurd, visionary, and beyond natural research.


NOTXCB8 TO OORRB8PONDBNTS.

The Royal Medical and Ckirurgical Society, — ^Mr. Ward's letter to the Pre-
sident, published in our last but one, p. 106^ and referred to in our last, p. 224,
has been thus acknowledged.

'' Sur, — Your letter with the accompanying declaration has been laid before
the Council of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society.*'

Thus the fellows at large are not informed that Dr. Marshall Hall's accusation
was utterly untrue : and the profession, who learnt the accusation from the reports
printed in all the medical journals of the proceedings of the meeting at which it
was made, must remain uninformed of the poor man's positive denial of the truth
of the accusation, as Mr. Ward's letter is not communicated to a meeting of the
Society. Such is the tone of moral feeling among men who would wish to be
thought just and honourable.

8. R. E,A. is much thanked for her verses : and we regret that having much
exceeded our limits we have no room for them.

Dr, Sin^son years ago experimented upon mesmerism, and demonstrated it
to parties. But when Mr. Wakley denounced it, he shewed it no more, nor
spoke about it; and told a Scotch M.P., who told us again, that he was con-
vinced of its truth, but dared say so no longer, lest he should injure his practice.
A noble example for the youth under his care !

Felix Parley* 8 BrietolJoumal, Sept. 20, 1851.— " Sept. 13, at fhe Back-
hall, Baldwin Street (whilst under the influence of mesmerism), the wife of Mr.
S. D. Saunders, of a daughter."

The articles kindly famished by Mr. Alexander, Mr. Berth, Mr. Clements,
Dr. Elliotson, Dr. Fowke, Dr. Storer, together with some others formerly received,
will appear in our next ; as will the remarkable and important discoveries of Dr.
Burq, of Paris, in regard to the power of the application of plates of copper to
the surface of die body, and in regard to the indications which their effects afford
of the possibility of producing mesmeric effects in any particular individual. Dr.
Burq was led to these discoveries through mesmerism only.


Errata.

p. 304, 1. 27, 28, for *'womb; and," re^d Jramet indeed.
No. XXXIV., p. 176, 1. 26, for ** to deepen sleep to remove pain/* read to
deepen sleep or remove pain,

p. 184, 1. 22, for ** immediate" read univeraal.
p. 191, 1. 53, for '' head," read hand,
p. 193, 1. 1, for '* deepens" read deepen.


*ni* It is particularly requested that all communications be sent for the Editors
to the care of Mr, Baillih'e, 219, Regent Street, at least a month h^ore the day
qf publication.


-.


THE ZOIST


No. XXXVI.


JANUARY, 1852.


I. On the Brains of Manning and his Wife, the Bermondsey
murderers. By John Elliotson, M.D., Cantab., F.R.S.

** That the faculties and propensities have their seats in particular portions of
the brain, which portions are respectively the organs of the faculties and propen-
sities, are two assumptions equally ill founded with the foregoing/' — *' tLe divi-
sion of the feculties, (which) is opposed to just views of philosophy, and is alto-
gether empirical/' '* It may at once be averred that the proofs in support of the
localization of the feculties of the mind are not merely defective but altogether
wanting, and that the loose analogies which have been advanced are either inap-
plicable, or admit of various explanations, none of which come in aid of the
proposition." ** Hamng thus disposed of a doctrine" &c., &c. ! ! — Dr. Copland's
Dictionary of Practical MedicinCf &c., art. Insanity, pp. 502, 505.*

** Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles ?

" Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit : but a corrupt tree
bringeth forth evil fruit." — Matthew viii. 16, 17.

A MAN and his wife named Manning, be 30, and she 28 years
of age, lived at No. 3, Miniver Place, Bermondsey, South-
wark. The house consisted of a passage, a front and back
parlour on the right, a front and back kitchen below, and a
front and back bed room above, them : with a small garden at
the back. He was the favourite son of a publican at Taunton,
who left him a larger share of property than the rest of the
children, as well as some dependent upon the death of his
mother. He became a guard upon the Great Western Rail-
road: but was dismissed because no doubt existed of his
connection with robberies of bullion' that occurred upon the
line : and even afterwards was, as well as his wife, arrested on

* Dr. Copland's head is as striking an instance of the truth of Gall's dis-
coveries, " disposed of**hy Dr. Copland, as can be desired. A lecture on his
head would convince the most sceptical.

VOL. IX. Z


336 On the Brains of Manning and hii Wife.

strong suspicion of participating in another robbery upon it.
She was a Swiss, from Lausanne^ and had been a lady's^-maid
in some high families^ and was related to the murderer Cour-
voisier^ an account of whose brain I gave in a little pamphlet,
illustrated with drawings by Mr. George Lewis and published
by Highley of Fleet Street. Manning married her in 1847.

Between the time of his dismissal and his apprehension
on suspicion of implication in the last robbery, they kept an
inn at Taunton : but their characters suffered so much by the
suspicion that they left the place and opened a beer-shop
near the Hackney Road. This was suddeiJy closed : and she
absconded, taking with her the greater part of the property,
to a house provided for her, at another part of the metropolis,
by a ganger in the London Docks, named O'Connor, who
had been her suitor at the same time with Manning, whom
she preferred to him. Her husband traced her out : prevailed
upon her to live with him again ; and, after a time they took
possession of the house in Miniver Place.

O'Connor appears to have been a totally unprincipled

Eerson : not only an adulterer in regard to Manning^s wife,
ut a thief in regard to money matters and a hypocrite in
regard to religion. By pretending that he was persecuted by
his brother, a respectable Catholic priest, as well as by other
clergymen of the Roman Church, and wronged by his brother
of property bequeathed to the whole family, he found favour
in the eyes of Dr. Copplestone, the late Bishop of Llandaff,
and other amiable persons, and not only obtained from them
large sums of money but the situation of tide-waiter to the
Customs, which office led to his afterwards being promoted
to that of ganger to the London Docks by the influence of
the late Mr. Sheil, who had obtained his seat for Tipperary
chiefly by the influence of O'Connor^s brother — the clergy-
man. Father Laffan, Mr. P. Fogerty, and other friends of
O'Connor, who was thus a fine instance of the too frequent
temporary success of rogues in this world.

O'Connor continued very intimate with the two Mannings.
On Friday, August the 10th, 1849, O'Connor was not at
his post at the London Docks : nor on the Saturday nor on
the Monday. Enquiries were made by his relatives and the
police at the house of the Mannings, but were answered by
Mrs. Manning with such composure that no suspicions of the
truth were entertained, and conjecture was completely at
fault.

On the 17th of August the police visited the house again :
but the Mannings were gone, and the house stripped of all
its furniture, which had been sold in a lot to a n.eighboui'ing


By Dr, Elliotson. 337

broker. They had remained ia the house up to the 15th^ and
possihly up to the 16th.

Nothing was discovered that led to suspicion^ till one of
the policemen^ named Barnes^ was struck in the back-kitchen
on noticing a damp mark between two of the flag-stones.
With the assistance of another policeman he instantly re-
moved them. There was mortar immediately under them^
and earth below the mortar : and they seemed to have been
disturbed recently. On removing the earth to the depth of a
foot, a man^s toe came into view, and, at the depth of six
inches more, the loins and back. Then a perfectly naked
and entire body of a man came into view, lying on its front,
the legs being brought back and tied upon the thighs with a
strong cord like a clothes-line: and it was enveloped in
slacked lime. The lower part was more deeply imbedded than
the rest of the body.

There was a small protuberance, hard and moveable, over
the right eye, containing a pistol-bullet, under which and a
little to the right was an aperture in the skull. At the back
of the head were extensive fractures, so that sixteen pieces of
bone were removed. There were many wounds in the head,
apparently made with a cutting instrument, but accompanied
by bruises. They might have been produced by a round bar
of iron that was found, with its ends made like a chisel. The
fractures were quite sufficient to have caused death, and the
wound by the bullet might eventually have proved &tal.

The body proved to be that of the gauger in the London
Docks, Patrick O'Connor, a single man, resident at No. 21,
Oreenwood Street, Mile End Road, and, though intimate with
both Mannings, was especially so with Mrs. Manning, who it
appears was very frequently with him, sometimes at his lodg-
ings, and sometimes out of doors late in the evening.

O'Connor went to dine with them about five o'clock on
Thursday the 9th of August, 1849, and was not seen alive
afterwards. That very evening Mrs. Manning went about
seven o^clock to his lodgings, a sitting room on the first floor
opening into a bed room, and though he was not at home
she remained alone in his room from a quarter before six
to a quarter past seven ; and, while leaving the house, not by
the private door but through the shop, she was observed to
be very pale and also tremulous, particularly her left hand,
which received some change for half a crown with which she
paid for a penny biscuit, while she appeared holding some-
thing under her right arm with her right elbow.

On the next day she called again at the same hour, staid
as long, was observed while passing through the shop and

z2


338 On the Brains of Manning and his Wife,

baying a biscuit to be still paler than the day before^ and her
left hand shook much as she paid for a penny biscuit^* while
her right arm was against her side as on the previous day.

O'Counor^s cash box and trunk were always on the top of
the drawers in his room : and one of the two sisters who were
his landladies had a week before seen his cash box open and
his papers on the table when the two Mannings were visiting
him, and he carried his keys in his pockets.

A medical student^ who lodged with the Mannings^ but left
about a fortnight before the murder at their desire^ deposed
that the man Manning asked him (he believes in the wife^s
presence) whether laudanum or chloroform " would produce
stupefaction or partial intoxication^ so as to cause a person to
put pen to paper :^' and added that ^^ he should like to get
O'Connor to sign a promissory note for a considerable sum
of money^ ^600.'^ He proposed having O'Connor in the
house^ and said to the student^ "You frighten him well
about the cholera, and persuade him to take brandy as a
specific for it.^' He once asked the medical student what
part of the head was most vital or tender. The student
replied that he believed it was under the ear : he had heard
of very slight injuries to that part being attended with fatal
results. He once asked where the brain was placed. The
student pointed to the part. He once asked if the student
had ever fired off an air-gun^ and the student told him he
had not fired one off himself, but had heard them fired off.
He asked whether they made much report in the discharge^
and the student told him no — they did not. He was once
talking about the wax-figure of Rush at Madame Tussaud's^
and asked the student whether he thought a murderer went to
heaven.

He purchased about the end of July a bushel of quick-
lime, which was by his directions put into a basket in the
back kitchen. He purchased also about the same time a
crow-bar or ripping-chisel, and, while a shop-boy was carrying
it home he met the boy and complained that it was not
wrapped up, and, midway between the ironmonger's shop and
his own house, he went into a stationer's shop for a sheet of
brown paper, which he wrapped a dozen times round the
crow-bar and then carefully tied : though ironmongers never
think of putting crow-bars in paper. Mrs. Manning received
it of the boy, asking if it came from the individual shop
where it was purchased, and complaining that the price was
higher than had been agreed upon at the shop. This was
exactly such an instrument as might have inflicted the wounds,
bruises, and fractures. On the eighth of August Mrs. Man-


By Dr. Elliotson. 339

ning purchased a short dust-shovel of another ironmongery
who m vain recommended a larger one to her. On the 11th
of August she engaged a match-girl from the streets to clean
diflFerent parts of the house^ remarking that she herself had
cleaned the kitchen " the day before yesterday :" and the
girl noticed a basket which appeared to have contained lime.
These facts^ with many others which came to light on the
trial, prevent any doubt from being entertained of the truth
of the following confession made by the husband Manning
to the Rev. Mr. Roe, Chaplain of Horsemonger Jail ; —

'' On or about the 15th of March, I left my residence. No. 41,
Castle-street, Regent-street, for Jersey, and I remained there three
weeks, and returned about the 5th of April; and, during my absence,
I found that my wife had engaged the house. No. 3, Miniver-place.
The landlord, Mr. Coleman, required a reference, and she referred
him to Mr. 0*Connor. On the Sunday night after entering upon the
house, O'Connor slept there, and promised to return on the follow-
ing night, with his boxes, but did not keep his promise. On the
following Thursdav» he '.oime and told her that he had altered his
mind, as he thought that Manning and he would not agree, as he
(Manning) might one night return home drunk, and make a dis-
turbance with him. Maria Manning replied, that he (O'Connor)
was no man, nor worthy of the name, and said, that this was not the
first time he had served her in this manner; that he was the sole
cause of her taking the King John's Head, at Haggerstone, by which
^100 were lost; that he had once before induced her to take a house
in the Mile-end- road; and that he might depend upon this, that he
should abide the consequences; stating at the same time, that she
herself was the same as her own poor father was, who despised a
man whose word he could not depend on, and that she herself would
sooner see the devil enter than one on whose word she could not
rely. Shortly after, three weeks from the 25th of March had elapsed,
my wife made a claim on O'Connor, for the payment of what she
considered due from him for three weeks' lodging, and summoned
him at the county court, Osborne-street, Whitechapel, to recover the
same. The day previous to the time for appearing to the summons
in the court, O'Connor came to Miniver-place, and paid 30s. for the
three weeks to me, in the presence of my wife, and apologized for
not taking the lodgings, saying that he was ashamed at the idea of
giving my wife so much trouble, and trusted we should not be bad
friends in consequence. I replied, that it was a matter of indifference,
as the object of his lodging there would be of little account. I then
said, I had been informed that he had spoken disrespectfully of me,
and that if I could be certified of it, 1 would bring an action against
him for defamation of character. He almost shed tears, solemnlv
declaring he had always spoken of me in the highest terms, and held
out his hand to shake hands with me. He begged me to take a
glass of porter and smoke a pipe. 1 then said, ' O'Connor, I owe
you not the slightest animosity, and never did.' He presently


310 On the Brains of Manning and his Wife.

aslced me by whom I had been told that he had spoken disrespect-
fully of me; I gave him no reply. It was, however, my wife who
had said so to me, but begged me not to name it to O'Connor that
such had been the case. O'Connor lefl the house, and we parted
good friends. When he was gone, my wife said, ' That old villain
has been the cause of my losing much money ^ and I am determined^
as I am a living woman in this room, to have my revenge upon him.*
I asked what she meant ? She replied, * I will shoot him if I am
hanged for it, as he has deceived me so many times.' I then expos-
tulated with her on the impropriety of her conduct. She said there
was no more harm in shooting him than in shooting a dog ; that he
was a perfect brute. I said, ' Do, in the name of Grod, banish such
thoughts from your mind.' Her answer was, * I will now inform
you of the plan I shall adopt. I shall frequently ask him here to
dinner, and go to his house very often, to endeavour to ascertain
the amount of money he has in his possession, as also the number
of railway-shares he has.' She added, * she was quite certain he had
foreign bonds to the amount of ^4,000 which she herself could
dispose of, as there was no name to them.' O'Connor did come
frequently to dine, and she did visit him twice a week, at his house,
up to the time of the murder. She went and found O'Connor tipsy
one evening at his house, and came home and informed me she had
seen him quite drunk — ^he having taken brandy at the docks as a
remedy for cholera. She said he went into his bed-room, and brought
out all his scrip and bonds, and shewed them to her, solemnly de-
claring to her that he had made a will, bequeathing to her ^1,300 ;
and had so made it, that Manning should have nothing to do with it
after her death. She said that she believed what the old villain said
was a great lie, having an assurance that he would never leave her a
shilling, and that she was quite contented, having seen the amount
of property he possessed. ' Now,' said she, ' I shall begin to get
things ready to cook his goose.' This took place about the 25th
of July. At that time I was offered a situation at Messrs. Gk)ver
and Co.'s, Stationers, Holborn-bars, as their town and country
traveller, at a salary of £2 per week, and 5 per cent, commission on
goods sold. I then said to her, ' Banish all these thoughts from your
mind as regards O'Connor ; this is an excellent situation, and I may
be enabled to save a great deal of money.' She replied, ' You fool,
you will never be able to save the amount which I shall, by murder-
ing that O'Connor; and, if you take that situation, you will be

knocking about with in London and the country ;' and that, if

I took it, she would follow me to every part of London I visited, and
that I had better let her carry out her plan, as she was determined
to have her revenge upon that old vagabond. I persisted in going to
see Mr. Gover. She locked up my coat and hat to prevent my going,
and said, ' Now I shall prepare his grave.' She went and purchased
a shovel at an ironmonger's shop in Tooley-street, and began next
day to dig the grave, which was completed between a fortnight and
three weeks previous to the murder. O'Connor had been in the
kitchen three or four times after the grave was finished, and in walk-


By Dr. Elliotson. 341

ing oyer it frequently made observations as to what was being done.
She told him that Mr. Coleman was having the drain altered, and
O'Connor observed it was a long time in action. She said there was
a great deal to do, and the men were not constantly at it. The
reason he went to the kitchen was to wash his hanas previous to
taking his tea or dinner. On the 26th or 27th of July, my wife got
William Massey to write a letter to Patrick O'Connor, which was to
the following effect : —

" * Dear O'Connor, — I shall be happy to see you to dine with me
and my sister, as she is coming from Derbyshire to remain a few
weeks with me (this was entirely untrue) ; she will be most happy
to be introduced to you. Dinner will be ready at half-past five
o'clock. If you are engaged, drop me a line. Trusting you are
quite well,

" * I am, dear O'Connor, yours truly,

'"W, Massey.'

The letter was dated No. 3, Miniver-place, Bermondsey. O'Connor
came on the Thursday the 26th of July, at the time specified in the
note. When he came into the house he asked for Miss Massey and
her brother. My wife said that they had just gone out, but she
expected them to return in time for dinner. I was sitting in the
parlour with O'Connor, relating my intention of bringing an action
against two men at Taunton for defamation of character. During
this time my wife called me, and asked me why I did not leave the
room, for she wanted to get him into the kitchen to 'cook his
goose ;' upon which I said I would not have any such thing done.
During this conversation between her and myself, O'Connor rose,
put on his hat, and left the house. She immediately ran up-stairs
and followed O'Connor, and overtook him about 300 yards from the
house, and she told me she said, ' Patrick, what makes you leave in
such a mean way V He answered, he did not like my observations
as to bringing an action against the two men, and that it was his
firm opinion I meant to entrap him in the same manner, and he
therefore declined returning to the house. She said that she repeat-
edly pressed him to do so, but he did not return. She came back
in a very excited state, and said to me, ' You cur-hearted villain, you
have prevented me carrying out my plan. You will stand for it, for
it never will be found out. I am now quite certain he will never come
here again.' I then asked her what would become of her soul if
she committed an act of murder ? to which she answered, ' We have
no soul ; after we are dead we are like a lump of clay, and there is
no more thought of us, and we shall never suffer hereafter for mur-
dering that man.' The next morning she said to Massey, ' O'Connor
was here last evening, and I informed him that you were out with
your sister. I wish you to write me a note to O'Connor.' He said,
' Certainly; but you must dictate.' Massey then sat down and said,
* Now, Mrs. Manning, what do you wish me to say ?' and then, at
her dictation, he wrote as follows :—

" « Dear O'Connor, — After arriving home late last evening, being


342 On the Brains of Manning and his Wife,

informed that you had been at my house, I was truly sorry that my
sister and myself were not able to be at home to dinner. We went
to our uncle's in the aflemoou, and while we were there he was
taken dangerously ill, and my sister was obliged to remain the whole
of the night ; but we shall be most happy of your society some day
next week. Trusting that you are quite well, I am, dear O'Connor,
yours very truly,

" ' W. Massey.'

On Wednesday, about two days afterwards, my wife wrote to him to
come and dine. He never came until 10 o'clock that evening, as he
did not receive the note before seven. He was accompanied by the
witness Walsh, and appeared to be quite drunk. He laid on the
sofa, and seemed to be in a fainting state. My wife got a bottle of
eau de Cologne and applied it to his nose and washed his face, and
implored Mr. Walsh to go straight home with him. We all shook
hands, and parted as the best of friends. The next day, Thursday,
the day of the murder, at nine o'clock a.m., she wrote a note to
O'Connor, and took it to the post-office herself, telling me that there
was a certainty of his getting it. The note was as follows : —

** * Dear O'Connor, — I shall be happy to see you to dine with us
this day at half-past five. I trust you are quite well. Yours truly,

" * Maria Manning.'

He came at ten minutes past five on the Thursday, August 9, pre-
vious to which she had laid the table for five, with the dish-covers
and everything down. Nothing had been prepared in the way of food.
When he entered the house, he asked where Mr. and Miss Massey
were, and my wife said they were up-stairs dressing for dinner. He
then inquired how long they had been up-stairs. My wife replied,
they had only just gone up— they saw him come to the door. At
this time Massey was not in the house, nor was his sister even in
London; and even to the present hour it is my belief that she has
never seen London at all. My wife asked O'Connor to go down
stairs and wash his hands, which he declined. She said, * Patrick,
Miss Massey is a very particular young lady.' He had then been
in the house twenty minutes. My wife pressed him to go down and
wash his hands, and I heard him go down the stairs, being at the
time in my bed-room washing. In about a minute after he had de-
scended, I heard the report of a pistol. My wife then came up to
me and said, ' Thank God, I have made him all right at last; it never
will be found out, as we are on such exceedingly good terms. No
one will ever have the least suspicion of my murdering him.* I
replied, ' I am quite certain you will be hanged for this act.' She
replied, *It will not be you who will have to sufier; it will be me.'
After shooting him, she said, ' I think no more of what I have done
than if I had shot the cat that is on the wall.' Upon her coming to
me up-stairs, she insisted on my going down immediately, and on
my reaching the kitchen I found O'Connor resting on the grave. He
moaned, and I never liked him very well, and I battered in his skull


By Dr. ElHotson, 343

with a ripping-chisiel. She took from his trousers-pocket the keys of
his trunk and cash-bos, and within ten minutes after the murder,
viz., twenty minutes to six, she put on her bonnet and mantle, and
proceeded to his house. I then said it would be impossible for me
to stay in the house, and I went out into the garden, and smoked a
pipe on the wall, and conversed with the landlord of the next house,
and went out into his out-house to make a purchase of some rice he
had there. My wife returned from O'Connor's, letting herself in with
the street-door key. This was about twenty minutes to eight p.m.
She appeared much excited, and said, ' I have the whole of the
shares and the bonds with me. I knocked at the door when I went
to O'Connor's house, and Miss Armes let me in. I then asked if
O'Connor was at home. Miss Armes said, 'No; he is not home
from the docks yet;' upon which I asked leave to go up-stairs, as I
had come to see him on business. I went up to his room, and re-
mained there for fifteen minutes. I walked to his bed-room, un-
locked his trunk, and took all the shares I could see — his two gold
watches and gold chains. I saw the banker's book, by which it ap-
peared there were ^3,000 in the banker's hands. The book was
useless, so I did not take it. I remained at Miss Armes' about an
hour and ten minutes, and then returned home.' She then sorted
the shares, and, while doing so, said she had not the foreign bonds,
which were worth between ^3,000 and ^4,000, and she was deter-
mined to go again on the following day to get these foreign bonds, as
she was quite sure he had them, as she had seen them before she
knew him (Manning). She repeated her visit on the following day
to Miss Armes', and returned greatly excited at not having found
the object of her search. She said she had purchased a cake of
Miss Armes, remarking to her that it was very strange O'Connor
had not come home ; to which Miss Armes assented; my wife de-
siring her to be kind enough to tell him that she had been two even-
ings to see him, as she desired to do so upon important business.
My wife remained there about the same time as on the previous day.
On Saturday she told me she wanted ,me to go to a sharebroker's
with some Eastern Counties' shares. I asked her what was the use
of doing so, as I should have to commit a forgery ? She replied,
' The man is dead, so there can be no witness against you.' Upon
which I said it would be impossible to sell the shares now, as fifteen
days' notice was required before a sale could be efiected. She then
said I could borrow money on them, and I went to Messrs. Killick
and Co., sharebrokers, and wanted to borrow £120 upon them. They
asked who had referred me to them, and I replied, ' A gentleman
who had been in the habit of doing business with them.' I was
then asked my name and residence, to which I replied, * Patrick
O'Connor, 21, Greenwood-street, Mile-end-road.' I was told that
^120 could not be advanced on the shares, but that I might have
£110, and that the rate of interest was 5 per cent., and for six weeks.
I replied, ' I should not want the money more than two months ;'
and they said the charge would be the same if I had it only for a
week. They then produced a document, which I signed, * Patrick


344 On the Brains of Manmng and his Wife,

O'Connor, 21, Greenwood-street, Mile-end-road.' They gave me a
^100 note and 10 sovereigns. I immediately went to the Bank of
England and had the note changed for 50 sovereigns and five £10
notes, and returned home and gave the money to my wife. There
were other shares with O'Connor's name on them, and my wife said
I had hetter take them to another broker and turn them into money.
The last-named shares I believe to have been some of the Leicester-
shire and Birmingham, an India bond for <^5, and about six scrips
of the Bordeaux Railway. I declined to comply with this last
request. She declared there was not the least danger as the man
was dead, and she became much excited and insisted qu my going.
I put on my hat, and went out as if going to a broker ; and returned
in about two hours, and said I had been to a broker (though I had
not), who would advance- money on the shares on Thursday. She
remarked it was strange he would not do so then, and that she had
her doubts as to my having been to a broker. On Monday, the 13th
of August, I left home at nine in the morning, and returned about
half-past 12, when my wife told me two persons had been there in-
quiring both for O'Connor and myself; that she did not know them,
but believed they were Custom-house officers. I replied it was my
firm opinion they were policemen in plain clothing, and that as sure
as she was a woman we should both be apprehended for this crime.
She replied, * Don't tell me that, or I shall faint.' I then sat down
to dinner, and after dinner she said I had better go to Bainbridge's,
the broker, and get him to come and take the furniture that night,
so that we might take our departure by the train to Liverpool, and
go thence by steam-packet to New York. I left at half-past two for
Bainbridge's, and upon my quitting she said she would join me in
about an hour and a half. After waiting about two hours, I sent the
servant to Miniver-place, but she did not find the house. I then
went home, and found my wife was gone away in a cab with all her
boxes. I went through a neighbour's house, and found my own
back door wide open, and that everything, except the furniture, had
been taken away; and I was, therefore, left penniless. In about
half an hour I returned to Bainbridge's, and told Mrs. Bainbridge
that my wife had started for the sea-side, but I thought I should
remain with them a fortnight. I asked the terms, and was told they
were the same that Massey paid. I remained there till Wednesday
morning, when I declared my intention of going in the country for
a month or so; and I sent Bainbridge's girl for a cab, and quitted
the house at half past seven o'clock, but did not tell the cabman
where to drive to till he had gone a quarter of a mile down the street.
I then told him to go to the South- Western station, where I took a
ticket for Southampton, and left that place at midnight by the
packet, and reached Jersey in twelve hours, and went to the Navy
Arms Hotel."

He then detailed the proceedings against him at Jersey^
and added : —

M That after his wife returned from Mr. O'Connor's on the night


By Dr. Elliotson. 345

of the murder, she went down stairs with a large pair of scissors,
and cut off the whole of his clothes and buried them, as well as the
slippers that were upon the corpse; and then she got a strong piece
of cord, and they both tied the legs back to the haunches; and
having done so thej put the body in the hole and covered it with
lime, and then trod the earth in, which occupied a considerable time,
and they did not retire till nearly midnight, and the next morning
they again set to work at the grave, and concluded it about 1 1 o'clock,
and then the wife said, 'Thank God, we are safe; it is over; no one
will think of looking there for him.' About a fortnight before we
purchased a pint and a half of vitriol, and this was thrown over the
body before the lime. My wife also frequently expressed her pleiAsure
at O'Connor being dead, and said thai he was the greatest villain
that ever lived, and she said she would put no money out to interest.
She afterwards said it would never be found out unless through my
nervousness, and if any one came she would answer them, as she
had the nerve of a horse. She likewise said she was sorry she had
not read prayers over the body**

This remarkable statement concluded in the following words ; —

'' I do hereby solemnly declare that the foregoing account, as
written by the Rev. W. 8. Koe^ the chaplain, at my suggestion, is
just and true.

" Frederick George Manning.
"Condemned Cell, Horsemonger-lane, Nov. 9. 1849.

'* Signed in the presence of W. S. Roe, G. Hallett, S. Deale."

It was proved that the murderess on Monday, August the
13th, hired a cab, went in it a very roundabout way to her
house^ and carried away boxes and baskets to the Brighton Bail-
road station, where she fixed cards upon them with the words
'^ Smith, passenger^ Faris/^ written upon them at the station,
and ordered them to be left till called for. When forced open
at the office of the secretary of police, they were found to
contain female apparel, marked Maria Boux — her maiden
name^ and a quantity of articles belonging to O'Connor, and
several letters written from him to her. On the following
day, she booked herself at the Euston-square station direct
for Edinburgh, her luggage being marked with the name
Smith. An electric dispatch was sent to Edinburgh, and in
one hour an answer was returned that she was arrested. The
following is the account of her arrest, as given by Mr. R. J.
Moxhay, superintendent of police, Edinburgh : —

** On the 2 1st of August, I went with a Mr. Dobson to a lodging-
house in Leith-walk. I left Mr. Dobson at the door, and, going
into a room, saw a lady. I said, ' Mrs. Smith, I presume ?" and
then I added, * May I be allowed to ask if you are a married lady V
She said that she was, and that her husband's name had been Smith,
but that he was dead. She stated that she came to town on the


346 On the Brains of Manning and his Wife.

Tuesday or Wednesday previously, aud that there was no person in
Edinburgh to whom she could refer but Mr. Shaw, a gentleman oyer
the way, who had recommended her to the lodgings in which I found
her. She further stated that she had last come from Newcastle, and
that her object was to improve her health, adding that she had
bathed at Portobello. I asked if she had any scrip ? when she said,

* What do you mean by scrip V I replied, * Any railway shares V
when she said she had not, nor had she been offering any for sale.
I then looked very intently at her, and said, ' My impression is that
you are the wife of Frederick George Manning.' I then directed an
officer who accompanied me to ask Mr. Dobson to come in. That
gentleman accordingly entered, and said, 'That is the lady who
offered me scrip for sale.\ I asked her if she had any objection to
let me see her luggage, and she said, ' Certainly not.' I got her
keys from her, and, on opening a trunk, the first thing found was a
tavern bill-head, with the name, ' F. 6. Manning, Taunton,' upon it.
The moment I saw that, I said, ' My suspicions are confirmed ; put
all these things up ;' and then turning to Mrs. Manning, I informed
her that I was the superintendent of police, and, after cautioning her
in the usual terms, I asked if she had any scrip ? She replied,

* Scrip ? Oh, yes, scrip of my own.' She said she had no objection
to my looking at it. In one of her trunks I found a certain number
of sovereigns, and scrip of the Sambre and Meuse Bailway, numbered
from 6460 to 6469 inclusive, and also of the same railway, numbered
from 26,523 to 26,532, both inclusive. There was also scrip of the
Bolongne and Amiens Railway, numbered from 48,665 to 48,674,
both inclusive; a certificate of Spanish bonds, numbered 3620,
and some other scrip. There was a purse containing 73 sovereigns;
also a Bank of England note for ^50, numbered 11,037, and dated
the 9th of November, 1848; six <^ 10 Bank of England notes, ^^%
of which were numbered from 67,372 to 67,376, and the remaining
one 78,378, and one Bank of England note was numbered 20,051.
There was, besides, a luggage-ticket, and a ticket for excess of lug-
gage between London and Newcastle, having upon it the name of
Smith, and a number of other articles. I asked her about her hus-
band after taking her to the police-office. I asked her if she had
any objection to tell me where he was ? She said, * Upon my honour,
I do not know. I came off from London suddenly, when he was
out, on Monday afternoon. I took a cab and drove with my luggage
to the London-bridge terminus of the Brighton Railway. I there
left part of my luggage, on which I put the address, '* Mrs. Smith,
passenger for France," and then drove to the Euston-station. She
alluded to O'Connor, and said, * Murder O'Connor ! certainly not;
he was the kindest friend I ever had in the world ! he acted the part
of a father to me. I last saw him on Wednesday night. .He came
the worse for liquor, and went away late. We expected him on
Thursday to dinner, but he did not come ; and, as I was rather sur-
prised at it, I went to his house to inquire for him.' She then
stated that when Friday came, he not making his appearance, she
again went to ask after him, but could get no account of him. She


By Dr. Elliotson. 347

made reference to her husbancl, and complained of his bad usage of
her. She said he maltreated her, and once pursued her with a
knife, and threatened to cut ofiP her head. One of their chief causes
of quarrel was that he could not get the money she had.

'' By Mr. Sergeant Wilkins : Mrs. Manning stated that when she
first started from home, she did not know, lip to that moment,
whether to go to Paris or to Scotland.

" By Mr. Ballantine : She said that part of the scrip found in
her possession had been purchased for her by Mr. O'Connor."

Manning was captured at Jersey. He slept at the broker's
on the 14th of August, and was greatly alarmed next morn-
ing at seeing the blinds up, because he said he had a bill of
i6200 falling due that day. On his voyage he confined him-
self to the fore-cabin and drank immoderately of brandy. He
was overbearing, and quarrelsome with every body he spoke
with in Jersey : and drank brandy very freely. He talked and
acted in a very unguarded way. After a few days his manner
changed wonderfully : and in two or three more he ceased to
live at inns and hired a room in a private house, drinking a
bottle of brandy a day to avoid the cholera, he said, and re-
maining in the house, and avoiding observation as much as
possible when others called or saw him in the garden.

These circumstances caused him to be suspected as the
murderer mentioned now in the English papers ; and, on his
becoming aware of this he trembled from head to foot and
could scarcely articulate. Various circumstances rendered it
probable that he had gone to Jersey, and a police-ofiBcer,
named Langley, was dispatched thither after him. A party
consisting of Messrs. Chevalier, Langley, Lockyer, two Heu-
lins, and Purkis, entered his bed-room soon after he had
retired. The door was ajar; Mr. Chevalier pushed it open
hastily, and —

''Placing the caudle he held in his hand on the table, he rushed
towards the bed in which the man lay. At the same instant, Langley,
who had paerely caught a side glimpse of his face, cried out, * That's
the man — seize him !' Lockyer and Mr. Purkis instantly seized
both the murderer's arms, Mr. Chevalier having thrown himself
upon the bed and thus disabled him from making any further resist-
ance. The somewhat rough seizure to which he was subjected ap-
peared to give Manning some annoyance, and he cried out, * Hallo I
what are you about ? Do you mean to murder me V "

On the voyage to England, the passengers took every op-
portunity of catching a sight of him : and he seemed highly
delighted at the notice which he excited : chatted a long while
with a woman, saying he had two wives, and that was one
too many.


348 On the Brains of Manning and his Wife,

When in the train from Southampton to London^ he told
the officer that his wife had committed the murder with a
pistol : and^ when reminded that there were other wounds
also^ made no reply.

When the Jury found them both guilty, and the Clerk of
Arraigns asked them whether either could say why sentence
should not be passed upon them, she addressed the Court in
a state of great excitement : —

'' She spoke with a strong foreign accent, and with remarkable
yehemence, her excitement appearing to supply her with fluency of
speech : — There is no justice (she said) and no right for a foreign
subject in this country. There is no law for me. I haye had no
protection — neither from the judges, nor from the prosecutors, nor
from my husband. I am unjustly condemned by this Court. If I
were in my own country, I could proye that I had money sent from
abroad, which is now in the Bank of England. My solicitors and
counsel could haye called witnesses to identify shares that were bought
with my own money. Mr. O'Connor was more to me than my hus-
band. He was a friend and brother to me eyer since I came to this
country. I knew him for seyen years. He wanted to marry me,
and I ought to haye been married to him. I haye letters which
would prove his respect and regard for me ; and I think, considering
that I am a woman and alone, that I haye to fight against my hus-
band's statements, that I have to fight against the prosecutors, and
that' eyen the Judge himself is against me — I think that I am not
treated like a Christian, but like a wild beast of the forest; and the
Judges and Jury will have it upon their consciences for giving a verdict
against me. I am not guilty of the murder of Mr. O'Connor. If I
had wished to commit murder, I would not have attempted the life
of the only friend I had in the world — a man who would have made
me his wife in a week, if I had been a widow. I have lived in re-
spectable families, and can produce testimonials of character for pro-
bity in every respect, if inquiry is made. I can account for more
money than was equal to the trifling shares that were found upon
me. If my husband, through jealousy, and a revengeful feeling
against O'Connor, chose to murder him, I don't see why I should
be. punished for it. I wish I could have expressed myself better in
the English language. That is all I have to say.

'' Manning said nothing.'*

When the Judge began to pass sentence upon them, and
said^ Frederick George Manning, and Maria Manning, you
have been convicted of the crime of murder, she interrupted
him vehemently : —

" No, no; I won't stand here to hear that said. You ought to
be ashamed of yourselves. There is neither law nor justice here.
[She then turned round as if to leave the dock, but was prevented
by Mr. Cope, the Governor of Newgate, who stood behind her.]


By Dr. Elliotson. 849

" Mr, Jastiee Cresswell : Yoa have been defended by able counsel.
'* Mrs. Manning : Thej did not produce any witnesses for me.**

On the Judge mentioning the word witnesses again in the
course of his speech, she again interrupted him with an ex-
clamation, "The witnesses in my favour were not called."

At the close, she again attempted to address the Court,
when

*'' She was ordered to be removed. She exclaimed that it was
shameful to pass such a sentence upon her, and added> * Base and
shameful England!' According to custom, the bench in front of
the dock was strewn with rue. Taking some of this in her hand,
she threw it into the body of the court, as if by that contemptuous
act she could find some relief from the excitement under which she
laboured. She was immediately removed by Mr. Cope and a female
turnkey."

A point of law was reserved at the trial, and she confi-
dently expected that this would be determined in her favour
and she should, then escape death. When she was disap-
pointed in this, and it was announced to her that she would
be executed on a certain day, November 13, —

" She seemed extremely surprised at the announcement, and ex-
claimed that she had been unjustly tried and convicted, which her
unfeeling husband could prove. He could unravel the whole of the
circumstances relative to the murder, and if he told the truth it
would exculpate her from any participation in the dreadful crime.
She seemed rather excited at first, but afterwards put her hands to
her face and cried bitterly. The chaplain exhorted her to employ
the few remaining hours she had to live in prayer and repentance,
and implored her to make a full confession of the crime for which
she was convicted. She asserted that she was not the party who com-
mitted the murder, and she had nothing to confess.

** Her husband several times expressed his anxiety to see her, which
was communicated to her. He still continued in a very depfessed
state, eating hardly anything, although everything he wished for,
consistent with jthe regulations of the gaol, was afforded him. He
occupied all his time in reading religious works and writing.

" The authorities of Horsemonger-lane gaol, fearing that Maria
Manning might do some violence to herself after hearing her fate on
Wednesday morning, thought it advisable to have an extra woman
in attendance upon her. Accordingly, Mrs. Randall, the female
searcher of the Southwark police-station, was sent for that night to
assist the two other women in watching her. Mrs. Bandall attended
upon her during the several lengthy examinations at the police-court,
and Mrs. Manning seemed very much attached to her. As soon as
she was introduced to her in the cell, she seemed much pleased, and
conversed freely with her on several subjects. The unfortunate wo-
man still asserted that she was innocent, and would not be executed.


350 On the Brains of Manning and his Wife.

and that some influential ladies would intercede for her in high quar-
ters. On Tuesday (the 6th) she wrote two letters, and believed that
the contents would have the effect of saving her life. On being told
that her legal advisers had done all thej could for her, she stamped
her foot on the floor, and exclaimed in a violent manner, * Done all
they could ! "Why, they have done nothing; they and everybody
else in the court decided upon hanging me before I was tried.' In
alluding to her husband, a few minutes afterwards, she said, ' Ah,
he is a vagabond. I never said anything about him. He knows who
murdered poor O'Connor, and can tell all.' She still refused all
religious consolation, and paid little attention to the Rev. Mr. Boe,
the chaplain. She was visited by a charitable lady, who attempted
to instil into her mind the awful position in which she stood, and
implored her to offer up prayers to her Maker; but she listened with
a deaf ear, and as soon as the lady had left the cell she entered into
conversation with her attendants, as unconcernedly as if she was free
from crime. She ate heartily, and slept well, but if any of her at-
tendants would converse with her all night she "would sit up and join
them. XJpoii some allusion to her attorney (Mr. Solomon) and the
counsel who defended her, she became much excited, and, clenching
her fists, exclaimed, ' Oh, if I only had them here I'd serve them
out. They might have got me acquitted if they had done their duty.'
She, however, seemed confident that she would be set at liberty, and
had no idea that the sentence of the law would be carried into effect."

Manning wrote a very proper letter to his wife on Oct.
29. Her reply was as follows : —

*' I address you as my husband. I am far away from my happy
native land, on account of this contract and this land, which you
have made to me a captivity. The peace and well-being of society,
the laws of truth, which you have broken, have alike demanded my
banishment from the country which gave me birth. But I am not
going away from God ; He is everywhere alike present, and at all
times gracious to those that seek his mercy and his favour. What
has brought me into this eternal consequence ? If you live and die
unforgiven by God, though those sins will be punished by the laws
of man, they are still all registered by the only Gk)d. All that I
have to say is this — I never made any statement of any kind to injure
or condemn you in this matter — that you well know — from first to
last. I am here condemned only by your statement. If it had
proved beneficial to you, I should have been satisfied with all your
doings, and the great expense of your learned counsellors, that did
not benefit you, but plunged me unmercifully with you to this horrid
fate. All I have to beg of you now is, to state facts; as you know
that I was not in the house when O'Connor met with his death ; but
I was gone to see for him, and during that time he called, in my
absence, and was shot by that young man from Guernsey, who was
with you in the back parlour smoking; but that I did not know any
thing about it until the Saturday, and that it was all settled in the
kitchen. I was in hopes that you would have brought that young


By Dr. EUioison. 351

man forward oa the trial, but that yoa did not do, but only blame
me, as you did, from the first day. But, my dear, as you now know
that you cannot save yourself, I implore of you to state the facts,
which are truth, and endeavour to save your wife. By so doing, it
would be satisfaction to your own heart and soul, to know that you
are doing right and good towards me before you depart from this
world. The Lord Grod will forgive you and comfort you. Believe
me, I upbraid you not, but trust you will be assured that I forgive
you, and every one, as I pray and hope I may be forgiven by God.
If you comply with this true statement, I shall be happy to see you
until the last day. My hope and life is in your hands. Tou can, if
you will, save me. Remember you cannot answer for our sins and
transgressions, when all our secret sins shall be set in the light of his
countenance, and when the wicked who carelessly lived and miserably
died, without the fear or favour of God, shall doubtless perish ever-
lastingly. In that day, a craven conscience shall proclaim a failing
heart, and an angry judge shall point to the wicked.

*^ I humbly look to thee, O Lord. Thou hast set forth as a pro-
pitiation for the remission of sins that are past through Thy forbear-
ance. I cannot write any longer. God bless you, and have mercy
on us both.

" M. Manning."
"Received by F. G. Manning on the 30th of October, 1849."

She made no confession, but protested her innocence to
the last^ and to the last exhibited no religious feelings however
decorously she might behave during religious offices. When
told that her husband was anxious to have an interview with
her^ she refused and begged to have her eyes bandaged if she
were near him in chapel that she might not see him, for
otherwise she should tear his eyes out. However, at the last
religious service in the chapel, she did, after much entreaty,
see him, and he kissed her. From the Thursday of the
murder, for five days, as she had no servant, she must have
performed the ordinary business of a kitchen where she had
killed O^Connor, and have walked incessantly over his grave ;
cooked her victuals, and probably burnt the victim's clothes,
at a fire so close to the spot where the body lay that the stone
above it might be warmed. She had confidently hoped to
escape upon the reserved point of law, and wrote a memorial
to the Queen, and afterwards a letter to Sir George Grey, in
the hope of being saved : and declared that if certain parties
did not interfere for her she would make great exposures.
At the ^' condemned ^' sermon, she, as well as her husband,
sobbed aloud : she not from penitence, I presume, but from
vexation and disappointment. It is said that she at length
attempted suicide.

On the scaffold the clergyman once more approached her,

VOL. IX, A A


352 On the Brains of Manning and his Wife.

hoping she would confess^ and asked if she had anything
to say. Her reply was^ '^ Nothing, except to thank you
much for all your kindness.'' Her conduct had been respectful
and proper to all the officers of the jail. The man was pro-
bably truly penitent. But ten days before his confession he
vehemently protested his innocence to his brother, hoping
'^ that God Almighty would commit his soul to hell flames if he
were guilty of the murder.'* However, a change afterwards
came over him : and I believe the literal truth of his con-
fession, though he endeavoured to make it, I think, falsely
appear that he had not premeditated the murder, whereas he
had purchased the crow*bar himself, and witnessed the exca-
vation of the grave by his wife, if indeed he did not work at
it himself. I doubt not that she suggested the murder,
and urged him on all the way through, he yielding like
Macbeth. The crow-bar he declared could be found at the
Lewes station on the Brighton Railway : and, on opening a
parcel which had lain there some time, directed to Mrs.
Smith, they found it with human hair and spots of blood
upon it.

She was one of the most libidinous of women : and her
conversation abominable.

She dressed well, and was carefully dressed for her exe-
cution : and would have worn a pair of new kid gloves, had
not the excellent surgeon of the jail persuaded her to take
them off.

While the man ascended the steps leading to the scaffold,
his legs shook and he could scarcely move. He turned his
face to the east, apparently wishing to avoid the gaze of the
crowd, and, a gleam of sunshine fdling on his face, a deadly
paleness was discernible. She, to avoid the sight of the
crowd, had, previously to ascending, carefully bandaged her
eyes. She ascended with a firm step, and then stood under
the beam as fixed as a statue. He recovered his firmness, and,
turning towards her, shook her hand in token of farewell.

Let no one say that the characters of the Mannings are
not fully known. Men every day obtain the reputation of
the highest respectability, of warm benevolence, of unselfish-
ness, of pure morality, and of profound piety, who are but
whitened sepulchres, full of dead men's rotten bones, platters
filthy in the inside. It costs nothing, but may be great gain,
to show a demure exterior, to talk quietly and with gentle
and prolonged expirations, to use scripture phrases, to give
alms in the sight of all men, trifling in contrast with their
means, and calculated, on the principle of 'lending to the


By Dr. Elliotson. 358

Lord/' to produce repayment with interest: it costs nothing,
but may be great gain, to be seen going to and returning from
a place of worship, and most attentive during the worship,
turning to every passage of the Bible to which the preacher
refers^ and to split hairs with intense zeal upon points of
doctrine : to be busy in religious associations, and make a
mighty fuss about non-essentials : to maintain an appearance
of honesty in every public matter. Yet with all this a man
may be very immoral when not seen by the world ; very mean
or very grasping in pecuniary matters; may not believe a
word of the tenets of the religious denomination of which he
appears so grave a member ; be thoroughly proud of his birth
which was quite independent of himself, of his rank which was
prepared for him before he spoke or walked, or was acquired
by himself through cunning or by some perfect chance : or
be proud of riches, descended to him or acquired by discre-
ditable methods; of his person, talents or virtues, which were
all bestowed upon him and not made by himself. Jesuits
abound equally among Protestants as among Catholics. But
when persons act as the Mannings acted, we may be positive
of their character.

A cast of the head of each, made as soon as they were
cut down, has been kindly presented to me by Mr. Harris,
the surgeon of the jail. Circumstances rendered it impossible
to publish an account of the heads before : and copies of the
casts must not be taken. But Mr. Donovan, of King William
Street, Strand, possesses casts, and would be happy, I have
no doubt, to shew them to any enquirer into cerebral science.
I need not say that the casts agree perfectly with the cha-
racters.

The woman's head is by far, very far, the worse. I never
saw a more horrid cerebral formation ; rarely, one so bad,
so shapen in iniquity. Persons unacquainted with phrenology
would be struck with its hideousness. It displays no good
quality. It is worse than Rush's head. Bush displayed large
organs of Attachment and Love of Offspring : she did not.
The whole head is large for a female. Her forehead is ordi-
nary, as good as in thousands of persons, though rather
narrow. But her head expands at the sides immediately
where the forehead ends ; and the expansion is so great that
the organs of the Love of Property (Acquisitiveness) are very
large, and those of the Disposition to Violence (Destructive-
ness), and Cunning (Secretiveness), are enormous. The organs
o{ Alimentiveness are also enormous, as well as those of Courage
(Combativeness). The cerebellum in which resides the sexual
instinct was of awful size. The organs of Cautiousness were

A a2


854 On the Brains of Manning and his Wife,

also eoormous. Self-esteem, Love of Notoriety, or Vanity,
especially the latter, were very large. The upper part of the
head, the coronal surface, in which the organs of the higher
moral sentiments reside, was low. Benevolence was small :
Veneration not more than full. The organ of Perseverance
or Firmness is full, but I must repeat what I said in my paper
on Bush in No. XXYI. : — '' Much that is called firmness is
really either courage, or the strong action of some other organ :
and the organs of perseverance were so supported by the im-
mense power of the very large organs, that I see no reason
to doubt from this head that Gall is correct in what he ad-
vances upon this organ and faculty. The term firmness in
common acceptation signifies sometimes steadiness in a course,
sometimes resolution or courage in some particular circum-
stance. The former is supposed to be the faculty of the
organ,^* p. 118.

The organ of Ideality is small.

The part considered by Dr. Spurzheim to be the organ of
conscientiousness, I think erroneously, and which, if it be
anything of the sort, I would call the organ of the sense of
justice, if that is the property of the part, is low, though
broad, and app^rs sadly encroached upon by the enormous
organ of Cautiousness. The organs of Attachment or Friend-
ship and of the Love of Ofi^pring are but moderate.

Thus the organs of Amativeness, Combativeness, Destruc-
tiveness. Cunning, Caution, Acquisitiveness and Alimentive-
ness. Self-esteem and Vanity, must have made up the posi-
tive character of this wretched being.

The man's head was large generally, and good in the
forehead and many parts. His organ of Amativeness was
certainly very large : but the misfortune of the head was the
enormous size of the organs of Love of Property (Acquisi-
tiveness). The organs of Cunning were very large, as well as
those of Violence (Destructiveness), Combativeness, Self-esteem,
Love of Approbation and Alimentiveness. The organs of FTrm-
ness were larger in him than in her. He shewed great firm-
ness. We should remember that he must have been nervous
from having drunk hard : and that his organs of Veneration
were much larger, and also those of Benevolence and Attach-
ment — a difference of organization that agrees perfectly with
the difference of their conduct. He was vain, tyrannical and
cringing. The so-called organs of conscientiousness or justice
shelve off in him, while they are low in her. If each of the
two heads, taken alone, strongly confirms the doctrine of Oall,
still more do the two when contrasted and compared with the
contrast of the characters of the two individuals.


By Dr. Elliotsm. 355

The circamference of the cast over the eyes is —

In Maria Manning 23 inches.

In F. G. Manning 24f ditto.

In Rush 24f ditto.

A line drawn from ear to ear over the eyes is —

In Maria Manning 1 1|. inches.

In F. G. Manning 12 ditto.

In Rush 12| ditto.

A line drawn from ear to ear backwards is —

In Maria Manning 11|- inches.

In F. G. Manning 12| ditto.

In Rush 12 ditto.

A line drawn from ear to ear over the head is —

In Maria Manning 12 inches.

In F. G. Manning 13^ ditto.

In Rush 12| ditto.

•
The breadth at Disposition to Violence is —

In Maria Manning 6|- inches.

In F. G. Manning 6| ditto.

In Rush 6| ditto.

The breadth at Courage is —

In Maria Manning 5|- inches.

In F. G. Manning 5f ditto.

In Rush 5|- ditto.

The breadth at Love of Property is —

In Maria Manning 6 inches.

In F. G. Manning 6f ditto.

In Rush 6f ditto.

The breadth at Cunning is — *

In Maria Manning 6|- inches.

In F. G. Manning 7 ditto.

In Rush 6| ditto.

The breadth at centre of Sexual Impulse is —

In Maria Manning 3f inches.

In F. G. Manning 3f ditto.

In Rush 3f ditto.

The breadth at Alimentiveness is —

In Maria Manning 6|- inches.

In F. G. Manning 6f ditto.

In Rush 6f ditto.

The distance measured by callipers from the orifice of the ear to
Firmness is-

In Maria Manning 5f inches.

In F. G. Manning 5f ditto.

In Rush 6|- ditto.


856 On the Brains of Manning and his Wife.

The distance measured by callipers from the orifice of the ear to
Veneration is —

In Maria Manning 5|- inches.

In F. G. Manning 6 ditto.

In Bush 6 ditto.

The distance measured by callipers from the orifice of the ear to
Benevolence is —

In Maria Manning 4j- inches.

In F. G. Manning 5^ ditto.

In Bush 6f ditto.

The distance measured by callipers from the orifice of the ear to
Self-esteem is —

In Maria Manning 5\ inches.

In F. G. Manning 5|- ditto.

In Bush 6\ ditto.

The distance measured by callipers from the orifice of the ear to
Parental Love is —

In Maria Manning «S-| inches.

In F. G. Manning 4| ditto.

In Bush 5f ditto.

The breadth at the centre of the two organs of Attachment is —

In Maria Manning 3^ inches.

In F. G. Manning 3| ditto.

In Bush 4 ditto.

Her cerebellum weighed 6 ounces : her whole brain weigh-
ing 2 lbs. 12^ ozs. His cerebellum weighed but 6^ ounces :
his whole brain weighing 3 lbs. 15^ ounces.


•


The conduct of the crowds who went to witness the exe-
cution was^ as usual^ disgusting^ and was described by Mr.
Dickens in The Times of Nov. 14 of that year, as I have
stated in a note to a paper, by L. E. G. E., entitled Killing
according to Law, printed in the same volume as my paper
upon Rush. Examples of the shocking scenes exhibited by
the public at executions will be found in No. I., p. 50 ; II.,
p. 105; VII., p. 299; XI., p. 275; XXVIII., p. 342. Yet
I hope that, while the punishment of death disgraces our
statutes, executions will be perfectly public. See No, XXVIII.,
p. 351.


( 357 )


II. Cure of Spinal Affection of long standing by the continuous
use of Mesmerism, after the failure of several eminent
medical practitioners. Detailed by the patient. Com-
municated to Dr. EUiotson by William Fowke, Esq.>
L.F.T.S.G.^ Medical OfScer to the Cloyne Dispensary
and Infirmary.

'* When a peraon possessed of common sense hears of the numerous spells,
charms, incantationSf superstitious rites, &c., so frequently had recourse to in
former days for the cure of scrofula, he considers them humiliating proofs of the
credulity of the human mind, during ages commonly called dark, or only partially
enlightened ; and he is induced to form a comparison betwe^ those ages and
present times, and to draw inferences which will probably be by no means in
favour of the former. Superstitious and absurd notions and practices were no
more then, than they are now, confined to the lower classes of society, or to the
uninstructed mind: and howerer lowering they may appear to the dignity of
human nature, however irrational and impossible the results imputed to them
may seem to the thinking, however devoid of those connections which entitle
the imputed causes to the credit of the reported effects, when any effect was even
loosely observed, still greater absurdities, still more wonderful charms, more en-
trancing spells, more blind superstitions, and more gross impositions are credited,
in this age of boasted civilization, of scientific advancement, and of mechanical
contrivance and invention, and more numerous instances of blind credulity are
daily manifested, than in ages of the darkest and lowest mental abasement.

" Everywhere— in all ranks and classes, in all professions, and even among
those reputed to be instructed, or learned, or even embued with science — mo9t
absurd doctrines connected with the healing art, human impostibilities, the most
ridietdoua notionst the most extravagant assertions^ are promulgated by knavish
in^ostors, and believed in by credulous multitudes ; the impudence of the former
and the fadth of the latter being the greater, the more devoid of truth these doc-
trines are, and the more they are opposed to good sensSf to true science, and to
honest dealing. When we find, as may be found at the present day, in the
senate, in the hierarchy, in the judicial bench, — amongst those who govern the
country, who interpret and administer the laws, who profess to direct the religious
belief of the community, not merely believers in, but also propagators of, the
most absurd medical doctrines and medical means — officious meddlers in what
they are incapable of understanding — abettors of the knavery qf mischievous
quacks — can the decadence of true medical science be far off? What is neither
honoured nor rewarded must necessarily cease to be safficientiy, ardenUy, and pa-
tiently cultivated. If the impertineneies qf the ignorant, the impudence qf the
vulgar, the professions of the uneducated, are to be esteemed above the acquire*
ments of the scientific and philosophic investigator, there must, at no remote-
period, be an end of the learning and science of those who shall hereafter assume
the office and rank of physician.

" It is very generally believed tiiat the patronage of quacks and quackeries —
qf impostors and qf impositions — ^is to be imputed chiefly to ignorance; but this
is only one of several sources to which it should be referred. Credulity, a ten-
dency, even in the incredulous, to believe in whatever is confidentiy asserted, a
disposition to admire whatever is unknown or unexplainable, the faith which
many place in the impossible — ^the Catholic dogma, ' Credo quia impossibile est'
— ^have collectively and severally an influence on the minds of the majority—on
those who will not take the trouble of looking closely into matters, or of thhiking
snfficientiy for themselves, especially when they are dther imperfectly or not at
all acquainted with the natures and relations of such matters. It is not a little
remarkable that, since the founding of the College of Physicians at the commence-
ment of the 16th century, expressly with the view of preventing the injurious and
irregular medical practices of the day, down to recent times, most of the quacks


358 Cure of Spinal Affectum of long standing,

and quackeries, against whidi the College had to contend, were patronized by
bishops and dignitaries of the chnrch, and by persons of high rank, as sufficiently
set forth in Groodall's History of the College.

** It would appear, at the present day, as if the aberrations of the human mind
apparent in all classes and places, in matters connected with the disorders of the
body, were the humiliating inflictions of Providence on those to whom the pro-
fessions are as a worldly craft, science as a matter of traffic, and learning as an
occupation of the memory involving none of the higher manifestations of the
mind. The history of human delusion, as to matters medical, and of the fashions
which have suecessively engaged the weak and selfish, respecting the ailments of
their debilitated frames, shows that, in an era of luxurious indulgence, of exhaust-
ing vices, and of enervating enjoyments, the impudent anertions qf intpostort
have ft more powerful influence on the minds and bodies thus emasculated, than
the upright and rational advice of scientific and learned physicians. The victims
of the former are either incapable of reasoning upon, or are too indolent to exa-
mine, the opinions and assertions which they practically adopt ; and hence, of the

8EYXRAL MVDICAL IMPOSTURES OF THB PRB8VNT DAT, the mOSt popukUT is that

one which is the most extravagant in its pretensions, the most abounding in ab-
surdity, and the most deficient in the least approach to truth. *■ Probitas Umda^
tur, at alget* — honesty, however, is hardly praised ; but dishonesty and assurance
are more than praised — ^they are worshipped with a fervency equal to the extent
of delusion they achieve — ^to the amount of their success — a success acquired only
at the expense of human suffering, and by the sacrifice of human life, but wor-
shipped nevertheless."

" During the seventeenth and dghteenth centuries, the seventh son of a
seventh son, and still more the ninth son of a ninth son, divided the laurels with
royalty for their success in curing scrofula by the touch ; the odd numbers, as
wdl as the rare occurrence of so prolific offsprings in succession, producing the
cures as effectually as the high rank of the royal competitors. ACthe present
day, the passes of the mesmerist profess to effect more than either the royal
touch or the humbler ministrations of even the ninth son of a ninth son, wherever
he may be found."

** When the age and other circumstances, in which external scrofula presents
itself, are considered, it may be safely inferred, that a very large proportion of
those who were thus touched recovered at indefinite periods after it was resorted
to. The accession of puberty, the influence of the mind on the body, the change
of living, of season, of air and scene, and the journey, when this mode of healing
was confided in, and various related circumstances, combined to produce no mean
constitutional effects, and thereby to remove the local manifestation of the con-
stitutional evil. The transfer of nervine influence from the healthy to the sick, or
any other mode of explanation which the modem mesmerist adopts to account
for the effect, when effect was observed, could have but a small share, if any, in
producing it ; but, at the present day, mesmerism usurps the place of the royal
touch, although with doubtful efficacy, unless it brings to its aid aU the accesso-
ries which I have now mentioned, as well as many others aiding more or less in
producing a constitutional as well as a local change." — Dr. Copland, Sept., 1851,
A Dictionary qf practical Medicine, art. SerqftUa,

Cloyne, Sept. 18, 1851.
Deab Dr. Elliotson, — Permit me to place at your dis-
posal an ^' established cure ^^ resulting from the long-continued
use of mesmerism. This lady nvas more or less an invalid
from her childhood. For sixteen long years she was confined
to her bed — in truth a bed of torture. To understand her
sufferings, it is necessary to combine hysteria in its worst and
most varying shapes, tic douloureux, chronic rheumatism, and
convulsions of the muscles of the entire frame. The details


after thefaUure of severed eminetU practitioners. 359

of the case amply shew that every mode of treatment had a
fair trials and that it was only after the failure of all and
every known means that mesmerism was practised. One of
this lady's medical attendants has said that I deserve no
credit for curing this disease of " the imagination/' He is in
truth a very eminent medical practitioner : but^ alas ! I fear
he will live and die in ignorance of " the truths of mesmerism.;'

Suffer me to draw your attention to the remarkable crisis
by which this disease terminated. As the acute symptoms
subsided^ the transfer or extension of the disease was most
apparent. All the abdominal surface became so sensitive to
the slightest touch that at times the pressure of the bedclothes
could not be borne : and^ most curiously^ each mesmerisation
was felt in the stomach and excited disagreeable sensations.

This lady was married on the 5th of August : I have no
doubt you will unite with me in best wishes for her happiness.

I remain^ dear Dr. Elliotson^ with high esteem^

Very faithfully yours,

William Fowke.
John Elliotson, Esq., M.D., &c., &c.

P.S. It may be necessary to inform you that in this case
there never was the slightest irregularity of the catamenial
function.

" Prom my very childhood I Bad a tendency to pain and
weakness of my back, always suffering in that part on taking
too much exercise. In the autumn of 1832, a circumstance
occurred which agitated me much, and I fainted at the time,
but to this I was liable. However, I never felt as strong
from that day as before. Shortly afterwards I had palpitation
of the heart, accompanied by weakness of my limbs and
increased weakness of my back.

" I continued much in this state till February, 1833, when
I suffered from a most distressing dragging kind of pain in
my back. The sensation was as if the sinews of that part were
too short. For this tincture of iodine was rubbed on, and
removed the pain for the time. But the back felt much
weaker. In April of this year I felt soreness on slight
pressure at both sides of my spine. This increased much in
the following September, and I had then also a recurrence of
the dragging pain, and the back became still weaker. A
blister was applied ; but without any good effect : and the
tenderness and weakness of back gradually increased till
March, 1834. I must not omit to mention that during this
past year I was subject to severe headaches, which for the
most part came and left me suddenly. During the latter


860 Owre of Spinal Affection of long standing ,

part of this period I was able to take but little exercise^ and
was obliged to remain in a recumbent position for several
hours every day.

'' In Aprils 1838^ I consulted a second physician, who dry-
cupped me, and gave me tonics^ and ordered me generous diet,
— beer and wine* For the first week of this treatment, the
cupping appeared to agree, relieving the tenderness to pressure.
But in a week the tenderness returned worse than ever, and
I was less capable of any exertion. Slight gymnastic exercises
were then tried : but, after six weeks, were given up from the
great increase of pain. Moxa was then used to the most
painful spot of my back : but after it I was decidedly worse,
and walking even across the room gave me intolerable pain.

^'A THIRD physician was then called in. He recom-
mended my sitting in a chair, supported by crtUches under the
arms ; and ordered tartar emetic ointment to be rubbed on the
sides of the spine. I was also to take a preparation of iodine
and potass. On the pustules coming out through the tartar
emetic ointment, I used to become apparently insensible,
though I really was not ; but was aware of all that passed.
IVom a feeling of utter exhaustion I was not able to speak,
or even open my eyes, and though plied with wine, ether, &c.,
used to remain in this state for six hours at a time. The
tartar emetic ointment was then discontinued, and croton oil
substituted, which had much the same e£Fect. Needles were
then introduced into parts of my back, but without any good
effect. Then veratrine ointment was resorted to with the
same result. Shower baths and friction of the limbs were then
ordered, but did not agree.

'^ By this time, October, 1834, I could no longer walk or
sit up. At the end of this month I was so severely attacked
with dysentery as to be despaired of. But it pleased Grod to
restore me. On my recovering firom it I was most violently
attacked with spasmodic cough. This was removed by inhal-
ing belladonna, and taking it inwardly. But St. Yitus's
dance succeeded to an extreme degree. This was followed
again by catalepsy. Next I was attacked by periodical spasms
four or five times in the twenty-four hours, and they were so
violent that I used to be suddenly raised up in my bed and
stand and walk on it, and then as suddenly fall back. Several
persons were obliged to hold me lest I should be hurt.

"A very clever physician, the fourth, who was then
called in, said that he had witnessed several cases of spas-
modic St. Yitus's dance in many hospitals, but all their at-
tacks were child's play compared to mine. These lasted
several months, but gradually subsided about May, 1885.


after the failure of several eminent practitioners. 361

During this period I scdOfered much less than usual from pain
in the back. I need hardly say that all so-called antispas*
modics were given me in abundance^ as musk, &c. On the
spasms subsiding^ the back again became worse : and a bella'
donna plaster was applied to it^ but weakened the part con-
siderably. I remained much in the same way till 1836,
always obliged to remain in a recumbent position.

" In the May of that year, owing to a change of resi-
dence, I had to take a short journey of about sixteen miles,
and I was carried in my light couch by bearers. I had much
increase of pain after this exertion : but after about a month
this subsided.

'^ Another physician, the sixth who had seen me, was
then called in, and ordered steel powders. These appeared
to weaken me so much that I had to discontinue them. In
April, 1837, I had a very severe attack on my liver, and my
stomach and head were greatly affected, and during this year
I was often obliged to have my right side blistered: this I
think was owing to my inhabiting a very warm room. From
September, 1887, to September, 1838, I occasionally sat up
in an arm-chair for about half an hour : but while doing so,
I always felt a great increase of weight in the back jo{ my
neck, — this being a symptom I had from the commencement
of my illness, as well as palpitation and pain in the back. It
was thought advisable to blister the back, and, on this being
healed, four issues were made, and kept open till February,
1839 : but without any apparent benefit.

'^ This month I was attacked very alarmingly with inflam-
mation of my liver, attended by severe headache and high
delirium. Blistering and profuse leeching were resorted to,
and the attack with the Divine blessing was got under. On
my beginning to recover from it, for two days I felt as if my
back was quite well, and fancied I had only to regain strength
enough to be able to walk about and sit up. But I had
hardly hoped ere I was disappointed : as my back rapidly
became as usual : and in the August of this year the soreness
increased much, and the back bone itself became very tender.
Leeching the back and blistering were then tried, but only
weakened it more.

'^ I then saw another physician, the sbyenth, who can-
didly said that he could not order anything for me, but
looked forward to my being well in time, &c. He suggested
merely my trying warm steeps when any increased attack of
pain came on, as at this time I used occasionally to be seized
suddenly with a most violent thrilling starting kind of pain
in the back, accompanied by great beating pain in the head,


362 Cure of Spinal Affection of long standing ^

and at times violent spasms in my limbs^ as well as violent
hysterics from the severe pain. The slightest noise in these
circumstances gave me intolerable pain^ and I used to hear
sounds^ as it were in my back^ and at a much greater dis-
tance than I could hear at ordinary times ; though at all
periods my sense of hearing was very acute. I could not
even raise my finger at these periods witfunU torture, and used
also to suffer from pains in my arms and collar-bones and legs.
These attacks lasted from one to six weeks according to their
intensity. Sometimes I have been a year without one : but
from l&4il they returned more frequently, till at length I had
scarcely a longer interval than a month between them, each
one leaving me more and more incapable of exertion ; so that
I had to give up any kind of work with which I was accus-
tomed to amuse myself occasionally, and at length the exer-
tion of feeding myself became too much for me : the weight
of holding the knife and fork tiring me greatly and bringing
on the pain and beating of my back.

''In 1841 I tried the electro-magnetic machine: but it
seemed to make me more nervous. I also took a preparation
of arsenic : but was obliged to give it up. In 1843 I tried
rqfteated leeching to the back and a preparation of potass : but
without any benefit. In the winter and spring of 1844 I
had recourse to the cold water system : but this proved equally
remediless. That summer I was removed to the sea, carried
by bearers in my Uttle couch, hoping that change of air
might be of benefit. The distance was but five miles from
my own home : but I was not better for the change, and suf-
fered so much from pain in the back that I tried again what
blistering might do, and kept six open on the back for two or
three months. But these, I need scarcely say, only made me
worse. I remained at the sea-side for one year and a half by
the advice of the most celebrated surgeon in Ireland, to
whom a statement of my case had been sent, and whose reply
I think it worth while to subjoin in order to shew how per-
fectly out of the reach of medicine such cases as mine are
considered by him, and I believe by all candid, well-judging,
and experienced medical practitioners.

" ' I have attentively considered the case of the yoimg
lady submitted to me. It is by no means an uncommon one,
nor (distressing as are the symptoms) is it at all likely to
shorten life. The disease is an aggravated form of hysteria,
and has been frequently described under the name of spinal
irritation. I have seen many such cases, and the result of
my experience is that they are but little under the control of
medical treatment, and that the symptoms are aggravated.


after the failure of several eminent practitioners. 868

and the disease itself rendered much more tedious by all
active remedies^ such as bleeding, blistering, caustics, mer-
cury, spring exercise, bathing, opium, &;c.; in a word, all
means which excite local or general irritation, or exhaust the
nervous power. The only medicine I know of which is likely
to afford relief, and which never produces any serious mis*
chief, is assafoetida in large doses. But of all the means
which I have either myself employed, or known to have been
employed by others, the most efficacious are a residence at the
sea-side^ and the going on the water for some hours daily
whenever the weather will admit of it. If the young lady
does not suffer from sea-sickness, a voyage might be under-
taken with every prospect of advantage. With respect to
diet, as the general health seems to be excellent, little need be
said on that score ; the only articles to be avoided are tea,
coffee, wine ; all kinds of food that are difficult of digestion,
such as pork, salt meat ; the oily fishes, such as salmon and
herring; and all crude vegetables, such as salad, cucumbers, &c.'

'^ I tried the residence at the sea^side, remaining there for
a year and a half, but without the slightest change for the
better. Indeed, on the contrary, I suffered far more in my
back du7^ng that period than at any previous one: and felt my
whole nervous system more and more disarranged, having a
most shattered unstrung feeling, and to such a degree that
the seal with the motto, ' I am out of hinge,' always reminded
me of myself. I was completely enervated, especially in the
early part of each day, and always chose the latter part for
my reading time. Such was my state when, after much de-
liberation, I consented to try what mesmerism might, with
God's blessing, do for me : and, in January, 1846, I tried it
for the first time. If the results I experienced from it, were
the effects of imagination, any candid reader wUl confess that
they were strange ones. I kept a diary of the effects produced
by each mesmerisation : and from it will now abridge or make
extracts.

" January Ist, 1846. I saw Dr. Fowke for the first time.
He made passes for a quarter of an hour, but I did not feel
any effect. He came again in the evening, and made passes
for twenty minutes. After the first ten, I felt a kind of
current down the left side of my nose, my left eye watered
and had a pain : I felt also a quivering sensation in my right
hip and between my shoulder-blades, and my right hand
became very hot.

'^ Jan. 2nd. Dr. Fowke used the passes and breathed also ;
but I did not feel any effect. As he was not well that day he
desisted.


364 Cure of Spinal AffeeHcn of long standing ,

" I was not mesmerised again till the 6th. On that day
and the two following the effects were the same as on Jannary
Ist^ with the addition of a quivering of my eyelids^ singing
in my ears^ and confused feelings in my head^ as well as
beating and pain in my back that caused spasm and hysterics.
The latter were stopped by Dr. F. pressing on my legs above
my knees, and rubbing them down: this also relieved my
back. I felt heat as if passing from Dr. F.'s fingers when
mesmerising me.

'^Next day, January 8th, before being mesmerised, Z had
the singing in my ears. Mesmerism affected me much as on
the previous day.

'^January 9th, 10th, 11th, I was affected much as on the
8th, except that the back had more pain and beating : and
on the two latter evenings after being mesmerised I had long
fits of yawning, to which I was subject.

^^January 12th, I had much the same sensations ; but Dr.
F. did not remain long enough to relieve the effects excited
by mesmerism, a patient having sent for him. Accordingly
shortly after he left, the beating of my back returned, and
violent hysterics came on, weight in my neck, lump in my
throat, a feeling as if I lay on ropes strained beneath my
back, stiffness in my arms, pain in my left side and shiver-
ings. All these unpleasant sensations I was in the habit of
having in one of the bad attacks of pain and spasm which I
before described. Dr. F. was sent for, and by passes along
my legs and by breathing on them, gradually relieved me.

''After the many means I had for long years resorted to
without experiencing the slightest relief, I could not have
believed that any agent could have such power.

'' January 13th, 14th, I was affected much as in the even-
ing before, except that Dr. F., by occasionally relieving me,
was able to mesmerise me more. The only new sensations I
had were one of burning in the back of my neck and much
greater drowsiness than heretofore.

" January 15th, was not at all tired as I was the two pre-
vious days. I felt the passes at once in my eyes ; palpitation
was soon brought on, and beating in my back. Dr. F. had
therefore ceased making passes for a little time. When the
palpitation had subsided, he recommenced and continued for
more than half an hour. I felt exceedingly drowsy, indeed
half asleep ; and there seemed to be a haze before my eyes.
But I was roused out of this by twitchings in my whole frame.
I had a return of the shiverings, of the feeling as if ropes
were strained along my back, and of weight in my neck ; I
had also a pain in the back. All these states of pain were


after the failure of several eminent practitioners. 366

gradually subdued. Beverse passes relieved me wonderfully.
My back became again every indifferent during the day^ and
I dreaded one of my bad attacks : but it did not come on.

'' January 16th^ the effects of mesmerism were much as
on the 15th.

" From the 16th to the 22nd the only new effects were,
that the eyes used to be closed by the mesmerism, and, though
awake, I could not open them, I occasionally had a peculiar
throbbing in my back of the same kind that I used to have
from the electro-magnetic machine. My back became very
sore to the touch, and Dr. F., on placing his hands beneath
my back, felt very unpleasant sensations. I also had a feel-
ing as if something heavy rolled down the sides of my back
internally. But altogether I bore mesmerism much better ;
the twitchings and other unpleasant sensations not being so
quickly excited. I was much sooner and more powerfully
brought under the influence of mesmerism.

" On the 22nd, Dr. F. was fully an hour making the
passes before my eyes closed. I felt greatly overpowered at
the time, and was often not able to distinguish any object.
The back of my head and neck became very stiff. Contact
passes down the back relieved the sensation.

'^ From this to the 2nd of February, the only new effects
recorded in my diary were numbness of the sides of my back,
a feeling as if cold air passed over my hands, and a similar
feeling deep in my back, generally followed by a burning
sensation, which was ever readily induced by Dr. F. when he
placed his hands under my back, and kept them so placed
for a little time. My back became much less sore to the
touch, and I was able to bear friction which before I used
mesmerism I could not have borne for a second without being
thrown into hysterics.

"February 2nd. Mesmerised in the morning, as my
back warned me that one of my severe attacks of pain was
coming on. Mesmerism relieved me ; but, after a few hours,
I had a recurrence of the unpleasant sensations, such as weight
in the back of the neck and most distressing beating in the
back. In the evening a severe attack of pain in my back
was excited by the mesmerism. Bubbing down my chest and
stomach gradually relieved me. The burning sensation before
spoken of came on as I got relief.

" From this date to the 28rd the entries in my diary are
but a repetition of these returns of severe attacks of pain in
the back and all the unpleasant attendant symptoms. Some-
times these attacks came on during the process of mesmerism :
at other times of their own accord. But, in either case, every


366 Cure of Spinal Affectum of long standing^

unpleasant condition was invariably relieved by mesmerism.
During this period I was frequently obliged to be mesmerised
morning and evening in consequence of tny back feeling so
uncomfortable. The morning mesmerism made me feel better
during the day. I find that during this time there was a
great increase of the burning sensations in the back during
mesmerism. At first these sensations were as if drops of
very hot water were deep in my back. The decline of these
sensations left an internal soreness very like the feeling one
has when a blister is rising.

^' After some time these sensations changed to streams of
heat so intense that I have involuntarily put my hand on the
spot thinking I was burning. This feeling was ever the fore-
runner of relief. During the severe pain my back felt very
cold to Dr. F., though not perceptibly so to me. He also
felt the burning sensations in his hands.

" The power of mesmerism over me increased daily, and
I was often nearly unconscious : but I used to be roused by
pain in the back, spasm, &c. ; and I find this remark :
' Whenever I am decidedly more overpowered by mesmerism,
and approaching sleep, I suffer from it; the next day my
back is not so well.'

" February 23rd, 24th, 25th. When mesmerised I had a
return of the severe attack, to which I was subject years be-
fore, and which I have already described, but different from
these, inasmuch as they did not continue longer than about
twenty minutes; and though I was greatly fatigued after
them, yet it was not at all to the same extent as before when
subject to them. I find also a curious sensation recorded.
*' I had a most extraordinary feeling in my leg, as if it was
gradually slipping away from me ; reminding me of the feel-
ing we have when sitting in a carriage, and watching objects
receding from us. This seems absurd ; but so I felt.''

From the 25th February to the 8th March these attacks
ceased to be produced: but, every time I was mesmerised
severe headache was brought on, just the same kind of head-
aches I had years previously : and it is a curious fact that at
the first stage of my complaint I used to suffer from these
headaches. Mesmerism brought on all the old symptoms^
but in an inverse order. After being excited by mesmerism
up to a certain point, all the distressing symptoms were always
completely removed by Dr. F.

'^ While mesmerism was thus acting on my head, I had
burning sensations such as I had in my back ; also the cold
chills, great beating and pain in my head. In my diary I
call this pain ' mesmeric' for this reason, that it was different


afiet the failure of several eminent praciitianers. 867

from ordinary headache. Also 'mesmeric beating' for the
same reason. I had much headache this fortnight when not
under the influence of mesmerism^ and a great deal of full-
ness in my head.

" March 9th. I find mention in my diary of an extraor-
dinary sensation down the back and in the head^ as if some-
thing were rushing down them. This brought on the old
soreness to touch in the back ; which continued to the 12th.
And on the 13th I find mention of a return of the same sen-
sation under mesmerism ; but it was not followed by the sore-
ness to touch.

'^ On the 12th and ISth, during the process of mesmerism^
I had constant quivering sensations in my neck and back^ so
that I thought the bed was shaken by some person. Dr. F.'s
hand and arm shook when in contact with my shoulder.

" From the 15th March to the 23rd April the diary is but
a record of the most terrible suflering while I was under the
influence of mesmerism; sickening sensations in the back
with pain so violent that my teeth would chatter^ and I would
fall into most violent fits of hysterics. In a word^ I had pain^
palpitation^ and every bad symptom to which I had been
liable. During this time it was necessary to mesmerise me
continually; I often felt as if heavy weights were wedged
into parts of my back. Daring mesmerism I used to feel as
if these rolled down. All the time I safifered great agony.

'^ From April 23rd to May 4th there was some cessation
of this great sufferings and I bore mesmerism much better;
less pain resulting from it. From this period till the follow-
ing January mesmerism appeared much to increase the dis-
tressing pain in my back. I had from this time repeated
severe agonizing attacks of the pain in my back^ with all the
other unpleasan^t accompaniments ; but with this great differ-
ence^ that whereas the old attacks lasted for weeks^ those
brought on by mesmerism were not prolonged beyond some
hours ; and^ instead of my being as formerly left weak and
utterly prostate^ I was^ to my great astonishment^ invariably
better and stronger in a few days after these violent attacks.
I bore mesmerism better^ that is, I felt less pain from the
process.

" Up to September 20th mesmerism had full power over
these attacks, and relieved all excitement. But from this
time till January it seemed in a measure to have lost this
power, not giving me the relief which it did formerly. The
attacks were protracted for days with very short intervals of
relief: yet they were not of the same severe character as
before I tried the powers of mesmerism.

VOL. IX. B B


368 Cure of Spinal Affection of long standing,

" At this time I almost despaired of a cure being effected^
and mentioned my fears to Dr. F. He assured me that all
this excitement would pass away^ and that mesmerism would
not then produce pain or disturbance of any kind. 'All
would be plain sailipg :' that with the blessing of the Lord
resting on the means^ I should eventually be restored to
health : that mesmerism would not produce in me such agony
unless my nerves were full of disease. The sequel will prove
the soundness of his views with respect to my disease and
the action of mesmerism.

*'Not more than a month after this conversation^ one
nighty after I had suffered much agony^ I dosed for a few
minutes. On wakings I fainted several times from yiolent
pain in the lowest bone of my back. About one hour after
this pain left me^ I was attacked with violent pain in the
stomachy great sickness and prostration. I could not bear
pressure on any part of my stomachy my strength sank rapidly^
and I was in such danger that my kind attendant scarcely
left me for a moment. For two days he ceased to mesmerise
me^ fearing that pain in the back might be induced^ and he
dreaded the slightest additional disturbance of any kind. The
third day found me utterly prostrate ; my strength (as it were)
ebbing from me. Dr. F, held both my hands; I did not know
why he did so, as he had never mesmerised me in that way
before. He had not held me thus many minutes when I felt more
tranquil. I was on the border of delirium at the time.

'^ Strength b^an gradually to come back. He continued
thus gently to mesmerise me for that night, breathing occa-
sionally on my forehead. Every hour I became stronger;
feU as if inhaling a most powerful tonic. The inflammation
of my stomach was cured by leeching, blistering, and mer-
cury. My mouth was very sore ; and my stomach continued
in a very deranged state for more than two months.

'^ During this time I know not how my strength could
have been kept up but for the use of mesmerism, acting as a
tonic without increasing the inflammation, and as an opiate
without the unpleasant effects of such a drug.

"During this time I never had 'Nature's sweet restorer'
except when mesmerised. So much did I need it, that we
were obliged to procure an assistant to aid my kind doctor.
From this period its effects were soothing, it ceased to excite
pain anywhere. In the sleep produced I often had spasms,
but without pain ; neither was I aware of them.

" This was evidently a great crisis. The disease evidently
changed its position as the inflammation declined; for the
stomach became externally sensitive to the touch as the back


after the failure of several eminent practitioners. 369

had been. When the inflammation of the stomach subsided
I could not be put to sleep by mesmerism ; the process merely
produced great general torpor.

''From month to month mesmerism acted most benefici*
ally on me. It did not produce pain or disturbance of any
kind. On the contrary^ it soothed and strengthened. I had
no return of those violent attacks of pain and spasm^ and
was able each day to make more exertion.

'' In about one year and a half after this crisis^ I was
able to attempt to standi to sit in an arm chair^ and so on.
It pleased the great and good Physician of both body and
soul to give me back the health and strength so long with-
holden.

"For the last year and a half I have endured much fatigue
of mind and body : acting for weeks as the chief nursetender
by the bedside of those most dear to me^ and to witness
their removal from me. I am still easily fatigued^ but am
sure that I should be much stronger than I am^ but for the
great over-exertions I had to make so soon after recovery.

'' I still resort to mesmerism when the back feels at all
uncomfortable^ or I have any nervous sensation ; such as lump
in the throat or inclination to palpitation.

" From my own experience I can say it is a powerfully
efficient remedy, a strengthener and restorer of the nervous
system. Should any persons who may read this statement
doubt my testimony, I only ask them calmly and dispassion-
ately to study and weigh all the evidence that has been given
by so many and various parties.

" If any fellow-sufferers peruse these pages, I would ear-
nestly entreat them to try what it could do with the blessing
of the Lord resting on its use. I would impress on them not
to give it up without a long continuous use of it ; for, had I
not been naturally of a courageous and persevering spirit, I
should never have continued for the long year of agony which
I had to endure from its first effects upon me.

" I now thank God, who gave me this spirit to enable me
to do so, and who also gave me the kind persevering physician
I had. Mesmerism is indeed a mighty power, not to be dealt
lightly with, not to be despised.

'' In compiling these notes of its effects upon me, I have
done so with the earnest wish that they may prove of use in
causing many of my suffering feUow-creatures to employ a
remedy which is always nigh at hand, and which has been of
such signal service to many.^


B B 2


f>


370 Cure of Spinal Affection of long standing.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.

The preceding narration is a terrible commentary upon
Dr. Copland's effusion with which I have beaded it. The
long list of various, and many of them very disagreeable or
even severe, measures, so long persevered with in vain under
the direction of eight physicians and of the most eminent
surgeon of Ireland, — ^no doubt Sir Philip Crampton, prove
the present high and palmy state of medicine, a change from
which must truly be an awful " decadence :'' for the per-
fect inutility and severity of medical appliances it seems
are the characteristic of the perfection of medicine, and the
successful substitution of mesmerism is disgraceful and ap-
palling quackery and imposture.

Oh ! it is sad when the lower feelings of our nature revel
unrestrained by intellect, benevolence, justice, humility, and
a love of truth : when men of education set such examples
to those who have not possessed their advantages, and utterly
throw off good breeding as well as every mark of intelligence.

One word to Sir Philip Crampton also. This gentleman
should reflect upon the case. He once confessed himself
satisfied of the truth of mesmerism, and declared that, at
his return from London to Dublin, he would avow his con-
viction on all occasions. He began to fulfil his promise ; but,
as soon as the Irish newspapers quizzed him for this, he wrote
to them that he did not believe the truth of mesmerism, and
had often seen strange things in hysterical patients* His life
since that time has been marked by opposition to mesmerism ;
and, like Dr. Forbes, instead of investigating its ordinary
phenomena and its curative powers, he has talked of nothing
but clairvoyance, and tried to test this by enclosing, as he said,
a bank note in an envelope, which bank note turned out, it is
said, to be a blank cheque. His lamentable antimesmeric con-
duct may be learnt from an article entitled. Letter to Sir Philip
. Crampton, Bart., which I wrote in No. XIII.* of The Zoist^

* pp. 140 — 152, See also p. 155. I will make one extract: — "Allow me
to ask you why you are so anxious about the truth of clainroyance, when there
are simple and intelligible points enough in mesmerism that you may ascertain
in five minutes every day of the year, and of the highest Importance to mankind
in reference to their bodily sufferings , which you make your fortune by attempting
to alleviate. Learning as you do, from all quarters^ that mesmerism cures diseases,
soothes the tormented, and absolutely prevents the agony of your surgical instru-
ments, is it not your solemn duty to ascertain with all earnestness and dispatch,
especially as the two arts of medicine and surgery which you profess are most
lamentably imperfect, whether this be true or not ? Believe me mesmerism is
no subject for jokes, sneers, levity or contempt. If you are not philosopher
enough to discover its grandeur, its mighty importance as a portion of universal
nature, at least let the feelings of humanity as it is termed, but which even the


Cure of Spinal Irritation and Palsy, 371

Had he investigated mesmerism^ as was his duty^ he would
have been able to cure the present patient^ and would not have
sent her fruitlessly to the sea side^ but saved her a long period
of severe suffering. This case ought to be a great moral lesson
to him for the rest of his days.

This physician and surgeon will have been the cause of
hundreds of medical men disregarding mesmerism, and thus
of thousands of sufferers not experiencing cure or important
relief.


III. Cure of Spinal Imtation and Palsy. By Mr. Butlbe,

Chelmsford.

** Dr. Copland contended that if the account of the man experiencing no
agony during the operation were true, the fact was unworthy of their considera-
tion, because pain is a wise provision of nature, and patients ought to suffer pain
while their surgeon is operating : they are dl the better for it and recover
better/'*

When Dr. Ashbumer endeavoured to communicate the truth to the Society
after Dr. Marshall Hall's false accusation of the poor patient nine years after
the operation. Dr. Copland declared that " it was evident that the gentleman
now attempting to address the meeting was insulting the Society." — Zoitt, No.
XXXIII., p. 100.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

In your last number^ Dr. Elliotson has referred at some
length to the very interesting cure of spinal irritation in the

brutes so often beautifnUy display, prompt you to ascertain its medical value.
This would not be the less, were clairvoyance proved a delusion. There might
still be humble useful iron, though gold were not to be found. But you exhibit
the same range of intellect and feeling with Dr. Forbes, who, like you, cries out
all day for clairvoyance! clairvoyance! and no more heeds the simpler and already
practical truths which surround him, than the animals which rove the forest heed
the wonders in botany, in geology, in astronomy, which are above and below
their heads and around them, llius Mr. Listen, when he had heard the details
of the Nottinghamshire amputation case, how mesmerism had given the poor
sufferer good nights, and improved his health, and enabled him to lose his leg
without a pain, passed all this by, and with a stolid and unfeeling look, which I
shall never forget, rose in the society to say he should be happy to know if the
interesting patient had since the operation ' learnt to read with his belly.' His
question fell flat — ^no one replied. Thus a Dr. Lietch lately declared in public,
that ' he regards clairvoyance as the key-stone to mesmerism, and that if it fiiils
the whole structure falls.' " ** Why be anxious about clairvoyance, — a mysterious,
a comparatively rare and uncertain phenomenon ? Why not ascertain whether
the elementary facts of sleep-waking, rigidity, insensibiUty, &c., are real pheno-
mena ? Why not ascertain whether mesmerism prevents pain in torturing sur-
gical operations and cures diseases for which you are hourly taking money for
vain attempts to cure or even alleviate ? And why not make all these trials
yourself, as Dr. Esdaile did, instead of writing letters characterized by error,
superficiality and flippancy, and scraps of poetry ?"

* Speech in the Royal Medical Society. See Dr. Elliotson's Numerous Cases
of Surgical Operations unthout Pain, &c., p. 59. Now that most surgeons
endeavour to prevent the pain of operations by administering chloroform, Dr.
Copland's position is as sad as that of a withered tree by the road-side.


S72 Cure of Spinal Irritation and Palsy.

case of Miss Raymond^ detailed in the fifth number of l^he
Zoist. There is a sequel to that narrative, which may prove
acceptable to your readers, since it supplies the opponents of
mesmerism with what some of them have desired, viz., a
second trial of its efficacy upon an individual labouring under
a complaint similar to one previously declared to have been
remedied by its agency.

In April, 1846, Miss Raymond, who, from the time of her
cure in 1843 by Captain Anderson, had continued in good
health, was overturned in a stage-coach. She was the only
inside passenger; and, when rescued, was found doubled up
with her head beneath her. The effects from this accident
were concussion of the brain, nearly total loss of vision^ pa-
ralysis of the right side and of the lower extremities : indeed
a recurrence of the entire symptoms from which she had so
long previously suffered. After continuing three day§ in
great pain, and without sleep, her brother-in-law requested
that I would mesmerise her : and, as Mr. Lovell, the medical
attendant of the family, offered no objection, I consented.
My efforts, however, on two trials, so far from alleviating the
pain and inducing sleep, caused greater agony and excite-
ment, so that Mr. Lovell and her friends advised that mes-
merism should be discontinued: a month elapsed during
which time her medica] attendants had successfdUy combated
all dangerous symptoms, and much relieved the brain by his
treatment. There was, however, no motive power in the
lower extremities, and but little feeling in them; although
along the spine much pain was experienced. By the advice
of Dr. EUiotson mesmerism was resumed : whereupon Mr.
Lovell suggested that no medicine should be given, and no
other treatment resorted to. This was agreed upon ; and he
kindly consented to watch the case. From that time with
but few exceptions, mesmerism was pursued daily. The
patient by slow degrees losing the oppression on her brain,
and recovering the sense of feeling and the power to move
her lower limbs. After five weeks, she could with assistance
leave her bed, and, at the end of four months, she was able to
walk across a room with a little aid. At this period a cir-
cumstance occurred which rendered nugatory all our past
efforts. Her sister with whom she resided, jumped from a
chaise whilst the horse was running away, and, falling with
great violence on her head, was brought home bleeding and
senseless. Miss Baymond managed to get to her sister's
room : but received so great a shock, that she was taken to
bed, and visiting her the next day, I found that all the old
symptoms had recurred, and that my work must begin again.


By Mr. Butler. 878

Only by the same slow degrees as before^ improvement pro-
ceeded^ so that it was nine months from the time of her
accident before she could walk a short space without assist-
ance. At the end of twelvemonths she could get up and down
stairs alone, and venture with help upon a moderate distance
in the street : and from that period her step became firmer,
and her strength increased. In three more months, making
in all fourteen with mesmerism, she was completely restored ;
and my visits were discontinued.

These are the simple facts of the case, and what conclu-
sion may we draw from them ? Here was a person in 1846,
in precisely the same state of illness and suffering in which
she had been twelve years before. On the first occasion she
was treated in the orthodox way, viz., with setons, issues
kept open by large horse beans, blisters, caustic plaisters,
leeches, liniments, and medicines of all descriptions. This
went on for nine years^ the patient never being free from pain
or enjoying a sound sleep ; nor was her health better at the
end of that period than at first. Mesmerism was then tried,
and in nine months she was walking about in her former and
almost forgotten health. On the second occasion, with the
exception of one month's treatment for the concussion of the
brain, no medical or surgical remedies were attempted ; mes-
merism alone was tried, and, in fourteen months, health and
strength were recovered. No refining away the character of
the illness, no talk aboiit imagination, nervousness, credulity,
and the like, can destroy the force of the plain facts narrated:
a state of suffering and physical deprivation baffled all the
efforts of skilled medical men for nine long years; but yielded
after the same number of months to mesmeric treatment ;
and upon an unfortunate recurrence through a severe accident
of the same condition (in possibly a more aggravated degree)
it was subdued at the end of fourteen months, and would pro-
bably have been subdued sooner but for the shock above men-
tioned. The only other observation which I need make is one
of encouragement to all unprofessional mesmerisers who un-
dertake a case requiring long treatment. In the instance of
Miss Raymond none of those phenomena which so directly
give to the mesmeriser a sense of power, or which excite
pleasure and wonder in the beholder were manifested. Her
sleep, if it could be called so, was at no time deep : she never
lost consciousness: neither rigidity of limb nor community of
taste could be produced : contact with metals, crystals, or
magnets, appeared to be without effect, no action could be
directed by the will. Indeed there was nothing to make the
case interesting to mesmerisers, beyond the pleasure of doing


874 Cure of Spinal Irritation and PaUy.

good to one who by her fortitude so well deserved it. That
consideration should ever be sufficient: let the mesmeriser
remember that above all things to be sought is the recovery
of his patient. If the phenomena referred to^ or those of a
higher character, accompany his efforts, he may observe
them ; but they must not be suffered to divert him from his
clear path of duty. If, on the contrary, no evidence of his
power be directly seen, let him not be discouraged, but even
with greater determination persevere till the end is accom-
plished.

Chelmsford, Dec. 5th, 1851. Edwabd Butlek.


NOTE BY DE. ELLIOTSON.

I congratulate Chelmsford upon possessing a medical gen-
tleman so enlightened and liberal as Mr. Lovell : and indeed
upon possessing at least two, for I had the pleasure of meet-
ing Mr. Cremor of that town in consultation last summer
respecting a case in which medicine was of no avail, and he,
too, was happy to consent to a trial of mesmerism.

On Sept. 15th, Miss Raymond wrote to me thus: —
'' Thank God 1 I am now quite well. I had, you well re-
member, an accident which injured my spine the second
time, and, through the kind perseverance of Mr. Butler, I
am again restored by mesmerism. I have the last week,
while in London, wsdked at least six miles a day, with com-
parative ease. I can walk three miles without resting. I
have fifty stairs to my bed-room, and am up and down twenty
times a day. I think it almost impossible any one could
suffer more than I did the second time. Even those who
despise mesmerism look upon me with astonishment. I brave
all seasons and night air without inconvenience. You will
remember I told you I was nearly blind for weeks, nay,
months : and I found mesmerism the only remedy.^'

On the 2drd of September, I received another letter from
Miss Raymond, in which she says : — ^^ I am more than ever
convinced of the power of mesmerism, and have frequently
had the happiness to relieve pain in others. The little chil-
dren ask me to take away the toothache, and one lady friend
declares she was free from it for months after I made the
passes over her face.'^

In a letter dated Dec. 4, Miss Raymond mentions that
before she was mesmerised her right leg was quite useless
from the hip downwards, and so contracted that the heel was
always two inches from the ground : the right arm also weak.


Cure ofinc€B8a$U Pain in the Side, Sfc, S75

and the eyes so sensitive tliat for seven weeks she could not
endure a ray of light ; and that now they endure light just as
well as the eyes of other people. Mesmerised water proved
a good aperient^ and was also applied with advantage to her
eyes and back.


IV. Cure of incessant Pain in the Side, Depression of Spirits,
General Debility, ^c. By Mr. Hubert Smith^ St. Leo-
nards^ Bridgnorth^ Shropshire. Communicated by Dr.
EUiotson.

<< Our readers must not suppose from the title, that this essay is written in
support of the mesmeric auACKB&Y." — ^Review of Reichenbach's Researches
in the London Medical Qazette, and repeated Oct. 4» 1850, p. 585. — Editor,
Dr. Alfred Taylor.

St. Leonards^ Bridgnorth^ 29th Oct.^ 1851.
Sir, — ^I send you a Post Order for £\ Is., being one year's
subscription to the Mesmeric Infirmary, Bedford Street.

At your request I have forwarded to the publisher of The
Zoist, Mr. Bailliere, an outline of the case fdluded to in my
letter. The patient continues perfectly well.

Assuring you that as one convinced of the beneficial in-
fluence of magnetism in many cases, I shall be ever ready to
forward as far as possible your benevolent exertions.

Believe me. Sir, very truly yours,

Hubert Smith.
John Elliotson, Esq., M.D.

In August last my attention was drawn to the case of a
young penon who was suffering severely from pain in the
side, and I was asked if I thought mesmerism would do her
any good. As the case appeared to my questioner to require
more than ordinary aid, I enquired from the patient the
symptoms, and found her suffering, weak, and in very low
spirits, continued pain in the side, no sleep during the night,
frequent attacks of headache, fits of crying, toothache, teeth
decaying fast, general debility and lassitude. She had for
some time previously, until within a week of this time, taken
four mercurial pills a day, with the occasional application of
blisters, and she stated that the surgeon said the pain in the
side would never leave her.

At the first sitting on the 28th August I found her suffi-
ciently susceptible to derive benefit. I produced great drow-
siness almost immediately. In about three quarters of an
hour / removed the pain in the side, whilst a general compo-
sure of the system ensued ; and when, at the end of the hour.


376 Cure of incessant Pain in the Side, ^c.

she was demesmerised and questioned, she answered^ " Oh !
I feel quite a different person ; when I came into the room I
was almost distracted with pain/^

On the following evenings the 29th^ the pain in the side
returned about 4 o^clock the same afternoon. Another sitting
was given at 7 o^clock. The pain in the side was removed in
half an hour. The same composure of the system was pro-
duced. She experienced a feeling of great drowsiness and
peculiar sensations. The sitting continued an hour, and the
patient said she was very much better, had slept well the
previous night, which gave her much ease, as she had not
had a good night^s rest for many weeks.

On the 30th August the pain in the side again returned
about 4 o^clock in the afternoon, but the patient had slept
well the previous night and looked better. Gave another sit-
ting at 7 o'clock. Drowsiness produced almost immediately ;
felt cold; used passes down the legs, and the feet became
warm; removed the pain in the side in three quarters of cm
hour. The manipulation continued for an hour.

On 31st August, sitting from 7 until 8 in the evening.
Patient ?iad experienced no pain in side since the last sitting.
Had slept well the previous night, but suffered from toothache
most of the day. Produced the usual effects, but did not
entirely remove the toothache, although the pain became
much easier.

On the 1st September gave the usual hour's sitting at 7
in the evening. The pain in side had again returned about
the middle of the day ; the toothache had prevented a whole
night's sleep. The usual effects produced feet warm in a
short time. The aura from the fingers cold. All pain entirely
removed. On being questioned, patient liked being magne-
tised ; felt benefit from it ; felt inclination to be mesmerised
when 7 o'clock came; liked slow passes better than quick
ones, thought they did her more good; felt very comfortable
when mesmerised; feels warm when the hour's sitting is
concluded.

2nd September. Sitting as usual at 7 o'clock. Pain in
side had again returned in the evening ; had slept well the
previous night. Told patient to close the eyes fast; put hand
on forehead, telling her to open them, but she was unable to
do so. Many persona about this time expressed surprise,
when meeting her, at her altered and improved appearance.

4th September. The usual sitting at 7 o'clock. The
patient had experienced no pain in the side since last sitting,
but was troubled with severe headache. Removed all pain.
Spirits appear much better. When mesmerised, particularly


By Mr. Hubert SmUh. 377

over one eye^ she could not open it, whilst she was quite able
to open the other.

5th September. Gave no sitting.

6th September. Oave sitting as usual at 7 o'clock. Patient
had no sleep during the night of the day she was not meeme-
rised; pain in side had returned, and she suffered from head-
ache. Produce the usual effects, and remove all pain.

7th September. Usual sitting at 7 o'clock. Slight pain
in side for a short time during the day, but free from pain in
the evening. Produce usual effects, and gave the patient
magnetized water.

From this time, in consequence of an absence from home,
the patient had no sitting until the 3rd of October, when I
found she had scarcely been troubled with pain in side, but
was then suffering from severe headache ; spirits not so good,
but improved in appearance, and had experienced good nights'
rest during the period intervening.

3rd October. Mesmerised the usual period from 7 o'clock.
Drowsiness produced immediately ; feet warm. Removed the
severe headache in a short time. She was only able to open
her eyes very slightly.

4th October. Gave the usual sitting at 7 o'clock. Patient
had experienced a good night's rest ; was troubled slightly
with headache, but had not been troubled with pain in the
side for some time. Removed the headache almost immediately.

5th October. Usual sitting at 7. Patient slept well the
previous night ; had experienced no pain since the last sitting ;
generally well and in good spirits ; a manifest alteration in
her appearance for the better observed; colour returned;
improvement frequently remarked by friends and others;
said she felt quite a different person, and was certain I had
cured her.

6th. Usual sitting at 7. Patient in good health; quite
free from pain.

7th October. Usual sitting at 7 ; no return of pain. Pa-
tient often expressed gratitude for the inconvenience I had
caused myself, and said she was quite recovered. From this
time to the present she has only had two sittings, when I
removed each time a return of the severe headache. The pain
in the side having entirely left her, she is now quite well.

By these extracts from my notes I have endeavoured as
shortly as possible to mark the singular and surprising im-
provement of the patient which took place during a short
series of sittings ; setting forth the curative power of mes-
merism rather than the phenomena which presented them-
selves to observation.


878 T\vo or three practical Mesmeric Observations.

Mesmerie phenomena have ever been considered hy me
secondary in importance as compared with the curative results
of this powerfol soporific force. These phenomena are varied
and singular, but are often more attractive to the casaal ob-
server than to the mesmeriser, who finds a deeper subject for
contemplation in the patient^s returning health. There are
two facts, however, which I shall not omit to mention as
connected with this case. The one is the abstraction of
memory which I was able to exercise whenever I chose to
exert the power, and the other, the power of attraction exem-
plified as follows : If the patient's hand were placed in mine,
and she was directed to raise it or remove it, she could not,
with the exception of one or two instances, and on those
occasions only by slow degrees.

To this case, as a guarantee for its correctness, I have
attached my name, being able to support the statement if
questioned. It would have pleased me better not to have
given publicity to private research : but this is not a time
when information should be withheld. Those interested in
the progress of a science whose study promises so many bene-
fits should not hesitate to contribute such results as they may
deem useful, increasing thereby the collection of indisputable
facts which patient and unremitting attention have annuaUy
arranged, published and authenticated.

It is much to be regretted that these investigations have
hitherto been received with such acrimony of temper, and
that even in the present enlightened age some degree of cou-
rage is necessary in openly adding one additional fact to phy-
siological and mesmeric elucidation. The subject, from its
importance, at least merits calm and dispassionate enquiry
either to expose the error or to test and establish its efficacy ;
and before a decision is delivered, as conclusive, one woidd
venture as a suggestion, Acdpe qute prius peragas.

HuBBBT Smith.
St. Leonards, Bridgnorth.


V. Two or three practical Mesmeric Observations. By a Lady.

Communicated by Dr. EUiotson.

*' A chambermaid of Maria de Medicis invented the milk bread; the Queen
ate of it so frequently, and became so fond of it^ that it was called Pain a la
Reine ; and geveral cooks in France, who understood the making of it, made
their fortunes by it. The bakers, envious at the success of the former, prevailed
upon some clergymen to preach with the greatest zeal against the milk bread, as
being a food which excited lust, immoral ideas, and witchcraft. A superstitious
notion was prevalent at that time, that if an enamoured person wrote his name
on a warm loaf of this milk bread, and the beloved object ate of ii, the latter


By a Lady. 879

would always remain constant. At length the faculty interfered, and amongst
them the milk bread found its advocates as well as its opponents. At the h^d
of the former was the famous 6uy-Patin, who proved from Hippocrates that
fermentation was detrimental to the human frame; Perault, on the contrary,
asserted from Pliny that it was beneficial to it. The matter was at last carried so
far, that the Parliament was obliged to interpose its authority, and ordered a
chemical process to be instituted, the result of which was, that the milk bread
was with all due form and gravity prohibited. But notwithstanding this, ever
since the publication of that edict, which is more than one hundred years ago,
the capital of France alone has consumed annually to the amount of a million of
francs in the milk bread, and every individual without distinction, from the highest
to the lowest, has paid due homage to it, without being restrained by any fear
of incurring either a penalty or ol^er punishment." — IVeatise on the PhenometM
qf Animal Moffnetism, By H. Loewe. Iiondon, 1822. Preface ii., iii.

To Dr. EUiotson.

HaU, Nov. 28, 1851.

My dear Sir, — I have been wishing to write and give you the
fruits of my late experience in mesmerism, but have hesitated
hitherto, thinking that yon were probably familiar with all I
had learnt, and might feel that such communication was pre*
sumptuous, coming firom one of the ''laity.'' But as one of
my friends has recently visited the Mesmeric Infirmary, and
has asked whether he may mention what he has seen, because
it is not practised there, I write to you immediately, because
if there be anything good or new in it, (and of the former I
cannot doubt,) I wish that you should have the opportunity
of introducing it into the infirmary. It is so simple a thing;
and yet it makes all the difference between a lingering or a
rapid cure. It is merely this : — ^to have a basin of water by
your side, in which to wash your hands between every sixth,
fifth, fourth, third, or even second pass, when making contact
passes ; the frequency of the washing to be determined by
the virulence of the disease. I find it impossible to cleanse
the hands entirely by mere flinging ; something of the disease
collects upon them and between the fingers, fling them with
all the energy you may ; and it too often happens that the
disease thus collected upon the hands of the mesmeriser is
put back again, or transferred to another part, when he least
suspects such an operation. If the hands are carefully and
continually washed, the malady, whatever it be, will be as
carefully and continually transferred from the sufferer to the
basin. Care must be taken after the first washing not to
dip the hands to the bottom of the basin, because (to speak
in the clairvoyant language) the pain sinks to the bottom,
and you would pick it up again ; on which account the basin
should be deep. Also, it must be scalded after each sitting,
and not used for other purposes. I find I must wash my
hands every time I change from one part of the body to an-


880 Two or three practical Mesmeric Observations,

other, and always before renewing the air passes. Also it
seems that plain water without soap is best ; and as the con-
stant washing tends to harden and to dry the hand, making
it a less good condnctor (as I suppose), the use of cold cream
between the sittings seems desirable.

Pray forgive me, my dear Sir, if I seem to be teaching
you anything which possibly yon know already ; but I have
found the difference so very material between cases with and
without the washing, that I am desirous to make known to
you that which will greatly lighten your fatigue, and greatly
shorten the suffering of your patients.

It is only quite lately that I have arrived at the above
conclusions.

Believe me, my dear Sir, yours very gratefully,

Mabt .

I need not add that I never wish my name mentioned
among strangers.

To Dr. EUiotson.

Hall, Dec. 3rd, 1851.

My dear Sir, — ^You have received my communication so
kindly that I am encouraged to write more, always however
with the risk of troubling you with what you know already ;
for I have read little on mesmerism, not being able to indulge
myself with many books.

You remember instructing me to breathe on flannel, and
leave it, so mesmerised, with a patient I was obliged to quit ;
and I continued afterwards to send such flannels by the post,
for the effect wore out upon the second or third using. It
occurred to me that a lock of my hair might produce the
same effect, and not lose its power. I did not try it theUy
not wholly wishing it ; but for another and recent case I have
done so with the utmost result I could wish, viz., the same
deep refreshing coma as is induced by passes. I desired the
patient to press it between her hands, not the palms, but the
roots of the thumbs. I thought of other matters meanwhile.
She was asleep in a minute. She is obliged to time herself
before she takes it, or, she would sleep on any indefinite time;
at first ''a day;*^ and now she says "months." She says
this sleep is meat and drink and strength. It is the same
thing as a sitting.

Wherever she has pain, a piece of my hair laid upon the
spot draws it out in a few minutes. But I need scarcely tell
you what I had supposed, viz., that any person touching her
eyes and asking her questions could extract from her answers


By a Lady. 881

relatiBg to myself; for the hair throws her into the sympa-
thetic and clairvoyant stage as effectually as the manipulations.

From what I have seen, I am inclined not to attach much
importance to the phenomenon of rigidity as a cause of
strength ; it seems to me rather a result and effect proceeding
from the amount of strength induced.*

All I ever think about now is to draw out the disease,
/and to induce a happy state of mind; and the effects follow
as they may : never in the same cluster in any two patients.
The same lock of hair retains its effect, and acts perfectly
well when I am at a distance ; causing the same sympathy
with me in health or sickness as does a sitting, so that when
I was ill, she was obliged to omit taking her sleep. My sister
has tried upon one of her poor patients with the same power-
ful effects. The poor woman is paralyzed from her waist
downwards, and was suffering constant pain in her back.
My sister left her quite a small piece of her hair to wear upon
her chest for pain ; the relief was so great that the patient
proceeded to sew it inside her clothes upon the back also.
The pain soon lulled, and in the course of about two days
had entirely left her. She continues to wear the hair, and
to enjoy this rest. It does not induce sleep unless pressed
between the hands, or between the hand and chest, for in-
stance. Another lock of hair ensures to her a sleep daily,
when my sister cannot go to her, and the poor thing is over-
joyed at her restored appetite and good spirits. '' My spirits !
oh my spirits !'' (as surprised at them herself;) '^ but miss,
when am I to walk ?'' She is 53 ; has been paralyzed some
years ; but we hope soon that she tinil walk.

With respect to the washing of hands, I find that if I
make too many passes without it, the pain is seen to ooze
between my fingers, so that I am obliged to wash them care-
fully at the back of the hand as well as the palm.

When disease has been wholly drawn out, my patient
desires me to soothe and strengthen her by flat contact circlesf
wherever there is weakness. " There is nothing to come off
now; your hand is clean. Can you not see?*' My impres-

* If persons are very weak they caimot be stiffened, and when they grow
stronger &ey may perhaps be stiffened. Bnt the strongest frequently cannot be
stiffened. This effect, like all the other phenomma, depends upon a peculiar
predisposition. Some are invariably rigid in their sleep-waking without any
means being employed for the purpose (see No. VI.). The process of stiffening
is so much additional mesmerisationi and, whether it induce rigidity or not, is
Tery strengthening. When patients are stiffened, they afterwards feel all the
better. Some say, during tiie long contact passes of stiffening, that you are
pouring strength into them. — J. Elliotson.

f N.B. In making circles, the hand must pass down not up the spine.


382 Cures of Palsy, Inflammation of the Face, S^c, 8(c.

sion is^ that no disease could resist these means^ if exercised
and received in a spirit of dependance and of prayer.

Should I learn more I will not fail to write to you. 1
hope ere this you have seen one of my friends^ who is, I
believe, deeply interested in this subject.

Believe me, my dear Sir,

Ever gratefully and sincerely yours,

Maky .


VI. Cures of Palsy, Pain and Inflammation of t?ie Face, and
Neuralgia : with the effects of Mesmeric mismanagement.
By Mr. Barth. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.

'* The Gospel indeed soon began to make a considerable progress among the
vnlgar, and to gain some few also of a more distinguished rank, yet continued to
be held in such contempt by the generality of the better sort, through the tJwee
first centuries, that they scarce even thought it worth white to make any enquiry
about it or to examine the merit of its pretensions. The principal writers of
Rome, who make any mention of the Christians, about the time of Trajan,
plainly shew that they knew nothing more qfthemy or of their religion, than whai
they had picked upt as it were, by chance, from the o&oss misrepresentations
of common fame, and speak of them accordingly, as a set of despicable, stubborn,
and even wicked enthusiasts.

** Suetonius calls them, a race of men of a new and mischievous superstition
{genus hominum st^erstitionis nov(B et mateflcaj. And Tacitus, describing the
horrible tortures which they suffered under Nero, for the pretended crime of
burning the city of Rome, says, * that they were detested for their ^^7»ot(« prac-
tices ; possessed with an abominable superstition ; and condemned, not so much
for their supposed crime of setting fire to the city, as for the hatred of all man-
kind ; and, though they deserved the most exemplary punishments, yet it raised
some pity towards them, to see them so miserably destroyed, not on account of
the public utility, but to satiate the cruelty of a single man.'

" PUny also, when he was the governor of a province, in which the Christiaiis
were very numerous, and under an actual persecution in the reign of Trajan, yet,
in his celebrated letter to that emperor concerning them, declares ' that he had
never been present at any of their examinations, and did not so much as know for
what they were punished or how far they deserved punishment : that, by all the
enquiries which he had since made, he could not discover any practices among
them but what were harmless, innocent, and nothing, in short, but a wretched
and extravagant superstition, which had spread itself very wide among persons of
both sexes, of every age and condition ; which might however be subdued by gen-
tle methods ; by moderating the rigor of the persecution and pardoning the peni-
tent ; by which lenity great numb^ of them had already been recalled to their
antient worship.'

" This is the whole account which we have of the primitive Christians, from
the best heathen writers, to the time of Antoninus Pius; in whose rdgn,
and that of his successor Marcus Aurelius, the antient apologies of Justin Martyr,
Melito and Athenagoras, were addressed to the Emperor and Senate of Rome ;
notwithstanding which, their condition, generally speaking, continued much the
same, through the following ages, till they were established at last by the civil
power : during all which time, they were constantly insulted and calumniated by
their Heathen adversaries, as a stupid, credulous, impious sect — ^the scum ofman^
kind, and tha prey of crafty impostors, calumnies of which the antient apologista
complain, and take great pains to confute. TertuUian expostulates very warmly
with the Heathen magistrates, ' that they would not give themselves the trouble to


By Mr, Earth, 383

maki the least enquiry into their manners and doctrines ; but condemn them for
the mere name without examination or trial; treating a Christian^ of course, as
guilty of every crime, as an enemy of the Gods, Emperor, laws, customs, and
even of Nature herself ; and what,* says he,. ' eon be more unjust than to hate,
what you know nothing of, even tho' it deserved to be hated ?' Amobius and
Lactantius make the same complaint more than a hundred years later, in the
beginning of the fourth century, that they were derided everywhere by the Gentiles
as a eemelese, ettqnd race qf blockheads and brutes, (nos hebetes, stoUdi, obtusi,
pronuntiamur et bruti, &c.) to whose impieties all the calamities, which afflicted
the several countries where they lived, were constantly imputed." — The Rev.
CoNTBRS MiDDLBTON, D.D., Free Enquiry into the Miraculous Powers, v., $ 2.

No. 4>, Mornington Crescent^ Sept. 13.

My Deab Sib, — I enclose to your care, as treasurer to
the Mesmeric Infirmary, two guineas, being the amount of
my annual subscription, which will, I suppose, soon be due
or is now due to its funds. I recommended one patient, Mrs.
Hook, a case of amaurosis, to the privilege of receiving gra-
tuitous mesmeric treatment there, and am glad to find that
she is nearly cured ; as, on enquiring this morning, she tells
me that she is now able to read and work as well as ever ; al-
though she still has a few black specks floating before her
eyes, the cloud or dimness which prevented her seeing is quite
gone.

I send you a few cases of mesmeric cures. I could fur-
nish you plenty, if I had only time to pen the details from
my note-book. Be so good as to get them inserted in The
Zoist, if the editors have room in their pages ; and believe me.

My dear Sir, yours faithfully,

George Baeth»
John Elliotson, Esq., M.D.

Cure of Paralysis.
About the beginning of July, 1850, Miss L., the elder of
two sisters who conduct a first-rate boarding school for young
ladies at the west end of town, consulted me respecting the
trial of mesmerism as a cure of paralysis of the right arm
and hand. She had, the previous winter, the misfortune to
receive a fall which not only gave her nervous system a serious
shock, but broke the right arm a little way below the shoul-
der. After the fracture had united and the bandages were
removed, she discovered that she had totally lost the use of
the right hand and arm. She could not flex the fingers or
thumb, nor, if they were bent by some other person, straighten
them again. The function of the nerves of sensation was
also considerably impaired, and the hand was always clammy
and cold, and excreting a moisture which had a very dis-
agreeable foetor. The remedies tried for a cure had not been
of any use. I treated her by general mesmerism to impart

VOL. IX. CO


384 Cures of Palsy , Inflammation of the Face, 8fc. ^c.

strength to the constitution^ and by local mesmerism firom
the cervical vertebrse to the ends of the fingers to act directly
on the nerves of the arm. The first application of the mes-
meric influence produced somnolence^ but not a decided
sleep^ and warmth in the arm and hand. Breathing strongly
through a folded handkerchief from the shoulder do.wnwards
along the arm^ so as to force the animal heat accompanying
the expelled air through the pores of the skin^ was especially
beneficial. After mesmerising several times^ I also employed
the galvanic current from a series of twenty-four double pair
of plates of Smee's battery^ without the application of any
coU^ using a simple break to intermit the current. I believe
the galvanism to the fingers was very useful^ after a good
dose of mesmerism^ by causing a determination of nervous
force to them. Miss L e visited me fourteen times alto-
gether^ pajring her last visit on October 22nd, at which time
she was capable of carving at table for her pupils, of writing
and working, and in fact using her hand as formerly. She
was not able to visit me every day or every second day, as I
wished. Had this been convenient, it is very probable that
she would have been cured in a fortnight. I had the pleasure
of receiving a call from this lady a few weeks ago ; the cure
remains permanent, and mesmerism has not a more enthusi-
astic advocate than she has become. There is not any better
way of making adherents to the truth of mesmerism, and
ultimately silencing its medical opponents, than by curing
their patients after they have failed.

II. Severe Pain and Inflammation of the Face cured by one

mesmeric operation.

The above lady. Miss L e, her sister. Miss Mary Anne

L e, and two young ladies, the Misses W , called on

me one day last autumn. The Misses L., after introducing the
young ladies, stated that they were " two of their children ;"
that they had been educated at their establishment, and were
two dear young friends, who had been visiting a week with
them, and were now about to proceed from the Euston Square
station into Buckinghamshire to visit some country friends.

Miss L e next called my attention to Miss W. who was

enduring very severe aiid continuous pain and swelling on
the left side of her head and face. After my expressing re-
gret that the young lady should have so much pain, and en-
quiring if she was subject to it, and receiving a reply in the
affirmative. Miss L o said, " The young ladies are going
away by the five o'clock train — ^it is now just past three. It
is a great pity that Miss W. should go on her visit while she


By Mr. Barih. 885

is so ill, because she will not be able to enjoy herself or the
society of her friends; so we had an early dinner, and have
brought her to you, Mr. Barth, and would be very much
obliged if you would be so kind as to cure her before the train
starts.^'

However good my inclination, I very much doubted my
ability to make a cure in so short a time. I therefore replied
that I was sure mesmerism would cure the young lady ; that,
as she was frequently subject to attacks of this kind, I very
much doubted if she could be cured at once — ^it might re-
quire many mesmeric operations ; but, as I had several times
cured chronic affections of the same kind by one mesmerising,
I would try; only I protested against the failure of a single
operation being received as a proof that mesmerism had been
tried and failed ;* if I did not cure, I might probably give
some relief. I invited Miss W. to seat herself in an easy
chair, took a seat opposite to her, and requested permission
to take her hands in mine. Miss W. assented, and remarked
that she '^ did not believe in mesmerism ; that she did not
therefore believe I could cure her — ^she only consented to let
me try, to please her former governesses ; that she did not
believe any person could be put to sleep by mesmerism, but
if it was possible, she objected to it being practised on her-
self.^* I received the young lady^s protest against the truth
of mesmerism with a smile, and told her I would try and
cure her without sleep, if she did not sleep ; but she must
certainly allow me to try for sleep ; that she had nothing to
fear from the mesmeric power, as she felt so convinced of its
non-existence ; that my only object was to cure her, since,
having put so many people to sleep, I had no curiosity to
gratify by practising on her, and her friends being present
she could have nothing to fear. Taking her hands, I re-
quested her to look at my right eye whilst I looked at her.
Her eyes became affected in two or three minutes ; I closed
the lids with my fingers, made a few passes downwards over
the eyes arnd face, and my patient's head fell back on the
cushion previously arranged to receive it. I now made a few
long passes, and, raising and letting one hand fall suddenly,
found my patient asleep in just six minutes from the time of
commencing. I next mesmerised her a little, and then in a
whisper enquired if she were comfortable. She replied im-
mediately in a whisper, ''not very." I again asked (speaking
loudly), " Why are you not so ?" The reply was in a loud

* Many people give up mesmerism after one trial, and yet will take physic
daily for years, or stay at a watering-place many months. — Zoist.

C C 2


386 Cures ofPaby, Inflammaium of the Face, i^c. ifC.

tone, " Because my fiice is in great pain, and, having had no
sleep with it for the last five nights, I am tired and exhansted
— ^I suppose this is a sufficient reason for jon" The slightly
petulant manner of my patient, and her replying in the same
tone of Toice as that in which I addressed her, showed that
she had passed into the '' sleep-waking state/' The subjoined
questions and replies followed : —

Q. — " Are you asleep. Miss ?''

A. — ''How absurd! What should make me asleep? Mes-


merism IS nonsense/'


Q. — '' Please to open your eyes and look at me/'

A. — " My eyes are open, and I am looking at you ; I
could not see if my eyes were shut/'

I was perfectly satisfied that the eyes were closed, and
that, if she had a perception of me resembling ordinary vi-
sion, it was not by the ordinary visual organs ; and, calling

her sister and the Misses L e towards her, found that she

saw them quite distinctly. She seemed both annoyed and
amused at our requesting her to say what we were holding up
or doing with our hands, while testing this power of seeing
with closed eyes; as she believed her eyes to be open. I re-
quested her friends to retire a few minutes, and speaking
kindly and seriously, told her she had been mesmerised, that
her eyes were shut, and begged she would reflect a few mi-
nutes, and then tell me if she was asleep.

After a short silence, she addressed me in a gentle tone
of voice, sajring, " I now perceive that I am asleep — in what
you call sleep ; but it is not like being asleep ; I don't under-
stand it myself/' I replied, " Do not try to understand it at
present, but reflect and tell me how to cure your fiice-ache/'
After a brief silence, she raised her own hand and placed her
fingers on a part of the cheek, saying, " I don't see it clearly;
but it seems if you would hold your fingers here a little while,
and then draw them away, and afterwards mesmerise me
with both hands over this side of my face, and down my
back, that you will do me good. You must do it in your own
way, as the feeling in your mind tells you is best/' I did as
directed, by holding my fingers on the cheek, and then mes-
merised by passes for about twenty minutes, standing behind
my patient, and putting plenty of earnest will and physical
energy into my manipulation. The result of this was fwt
only to cure the pain, but also to remove the puffing or swelling
of the cheek. As the tumefaction of the cheek was consider-
able, so great as quite to disfigure her, I was both surprised
and gratified to see it so quickly removed.

The Misses L c and my patient's sister now came, and


By Mr. Barih. 887

congratulated her upon the relief from her suffering and her
restored good looks. After a' little general conversation^ in
which the young lady joined as readily and rationally as if
she had been awake^ as it was four o'clock^ I proceeded to
awaken her^ and I succeeded in about five minutes. I be?
lieve the following is a verbatim account of the conversation
which followed : —

^^ Well, Miss, how do you feel ? I hope you have had a
pleasant little nap/^

" When you have made me go to sleep, Sir, it will do to
ask if I have had a pleasant nap. I don^t believe anybody
can be put to sleep by mesmerism. I don^t believe in it.^'

'^Although you do not believe in mesmerism, I hope you
will believe me, when I assure you that you have been asleep
for the last hour through my mesmeric influence.'^

Looking puzzled : *^ That cannot be. It is only two or
three minutes since you began mesmerising me.'^

I found that she had lost Consciousness suddenly almost
immediately on my beginning to mesmerise, and, the whole
period of the mesmeric sleep being a blank in her memory,
she naturally connected the first moment of her renewed con<-
sciousness with the last immediately previous to her mesmeric
sleep, and thus concluded that she had just sat down to be
mesmerised. I took out my watch, and shewed her that it
was ten minutes past four o^clock ,* reminded her that it was
a little past three when she sat dt>wn; and asked her to
account for the interval of time which had elapsed, if she had
not slept. She looked at her own watch, to verify my asser-
tion j but, instead of being convinced, declared, ^^ there must
be some mistake, for she was quite sure she had not been
mesmerised, and therefore could not have been to sleep.^^
Her friends now interposed, and assured her she had been
mesmerised and had slept, and had conversed with them ; de-
tailing some of the conversation. Miss W. to this replied,
" that, as an hour certainly had passed away, and everybody
said she had been asleep, and had been talking in her sleep,
she must believe it ; but she believed against the evidence of
her own senses, for she had not the least possible knowledge
or recollection of it.^' As she was getting rather excited, I
stopped the conversation, remarking ^' that we would not say
any more on the subject, but I woi]dd be glad to know if she
felt the pain now. Miss W. replied, that she ^^ did not know
what to say — ^it might be gone — or it might not — she did not
know — she thought she did not feel it, but it might be merely
a fancy — ^it seemed she was no longer able to be sure about
any thing." On my pressing my question, the pjatient de-


888 Cures of Palsy, Ii^Usmmation of the Face, b;c. ^c.

dared that the " oertaiiily felt no pain whatever^ but conld
hardly believe that the absence of the pain was reaL^' I re-
marked that she might safely condnde that the pain was
removed if she did not feel it; that it might retnm again ; I
hoped it would not ; and I requested her to rise firom her
chair and look at her face in tibe glass. I shall not easily
forget the look of intense astonishment with which^ on per-
ceiving the improved appearance of her face^ she turned and
gazed upon us, after a few seconds, slowly, and dropping her
words, one by one, ejaculating, " Why ! — ^Why ! — ^how — ^has
— ^this — ^thing — ^been — done/' Miss W/s unbelief was now
conquered ; she left my house cubed, in time for the five
& clock train, a believer in mesmerism, and very grateful for
the benefit she had received through its agency. When I saw

the Misses L e a few weeks ago, I understood fix)m them

that Miss W. had never experienced a return of her former
severe and frequent annoyance.

I will give the name and address of the Misses L e to

any respectable enquirer who may wish to refer to them.
Their high character is such as to compel an admission of the
truth of the above statements, when verified by their corro-
boration ; and they will cheerfully respond to either epistolary
or personal enquiries.

III. Cure of Neuralgia by Nature or Mesmerism.
One night during the past or passing away summer I was
sent for to visit a lady in my own neighbourhood, about
eleven o'clock, but was unable to attend, having a bad case to
visit at that time. I was again sent for early in the morning,
and I called as soon as I had taken my bresj^fast (for I never
like to work, on an empty stomach.) I found a very interest-
ing lady, the mother of a family, suffering from acute neural-
gia of the head. The regular medical attendant had sanc-
tioned a trial of mesmerism. Everything he had tried having
failed, he did not know what to do for her, and was kind
enough and honest ^enough to advise or sanction mesmerism,
saying he should be only too happy to hear that it succeeded
where he failed*. The neuralgic paroxysm generally com-
menced at ten or eleven p.m., was di^adfiilly severe about fpur
or five A.M., and declined towards the afternoon. I have veiy
few particulars of the case, as my duty was rather to cure the
sufferer than trouble her with questions. I saw from the
number of half-taken bottles of medicine on the toilet table,

* I have had several patients this year to mesmerise, by the advice or sanc-
tion of their medical attendants ; gentlemen unacquainted with mesmerism prac-
tically, bnt not willing to resist the facts brought to their notice.


By Mr. Barth. 389

that the medicines had probably been often changed. I mes-
merised the patient for nearly an hour^ leaving her much re-
lieved; indeed^ the pain^ which was severe when I began^
had nearly ceased. I called again in the evening. The pain
had returned soon after I left the house in the mornings but
ceased about four f.m.^ its usual time of remission. I mes-
merised for fifteen or twenty minutes^ promising to call early
in the mornings and do a strong battle with the pain by a
long mesmerisation. I called next mornings and saw my
patient who declined being mesmerised^ as she had slept well
all flight, having had pain for only five or suv minutes ; and^
feeling quite tveU, she thought she would much rather not be
mesmerised unless the pain returned^ when she would send
for me. I purposely and from motives of delicacy avoided
calling on the lady again^ lest I might appear desirous of
forcing my services upon her. She never sent for me^ and I
hear from her sister that she remains well. I ascribed the
cure to mesmerism; I think the patient had a little doubt
whether it was mesmerism or nature which had cured her.
I am therefore quite willing to divide the credit with Dame
Nature^ who seems to have formed a professional partnership
with mesmerisers^ and assists them when she refuses to assist
routinists. This is not to be wondered at^ seeing that tnany
of the routine practitioners have so totally set themselves
against her way of conducting her business^ that it is impos-
sible for the old lady to act in harmony with them and their
practice.

IV . Mischief caused by an in^oper appliceUion of Mesmerism,
and cure of the mischief by Mesmerism
A short time since I received a visit from an intelligent
lady^ about middle age and unmarried^ who understands mes-
merism, and had also been several times mesmerised by a
young amateur operator, who bad large power but little ex-
perience. He mesmerised her one morning after he had been
out all night at a party, and whilst he was still somewhat
under the influence of strong potations ; as the lady^s obser-
vation, her olfactories, and his own admission testified. She
had grave doubts about the propriety of his mesmerising her;
but, as he was kind and gentlemanlike, she had not resolution
enough to request him to desist. He put her as usual into
an imperfect sleep-waking state, during the persistence of
which he made some phreno-mesmeric experiments by ex-
citing her cerebral organs, and amongst others that of ali-
mentiveness. After a time he aroused her; but, instead of
feeling the customary benefit, she said she felt " muddled,^^


890 Cures of Palsy ^ Inflammation of the Face, ^c. S^c.

"not like herself;'' and^ what was most distressing and
serioas, when night came she experienced an uncontrollable
hankering or desire for brandy and water. Nor was this
unnatural desire dissipated by a night's rest^ but was renewed
night after night, week after week ; it had become a mo-
nomania. The poor lady abominated intoxicating drinks ;
she abominated herself for desiring them; still the desire
was so strong that she could not sleep at night without gra-
tifying it ; she declared to me she had struggled against it
for nights together, walking her chamber the whole night,
determined to conquer the morbid propensity by the force
of her will. But all in vain : there was no rest for her until
she had taken a dose of the stimiQant thus craved for. It
occurred to her frequently that this unnatural propensity was
to be attributed to the mesmerism, as she had never pre-
viously experienced it ; and at length, conquering the reluc-
tance which she felt to make so delicate a subject known to
any one, she called upon me and explained the circumstances,
soliciting my advice and assistance. I at once perceived how
the effect must have been caused, and mesmerised the lady
into sleep-waking, in which state she remembered that her
mesmeriser had pressed over Alimentiveness, as suspected. I
therefore breathed over the organ on each side for nearly a
quarter of an hour, and then dispersed the mesmeric influence
both locally over that part and generally, in order to arouse
her after allowing her a long sleep. I had the pleasure of
hearing soon afterwards from her, that there had not been
the slightest return of this unnatural longing for brandy and
water until the evening previous to this, her second, visit to
me, when, in consequence of having encountered circum-
stances involving her in great excitement and personal fatigue,
she felt at night time a recurrence of her longing, though in
a much less degree. She came to me next day, was mes-
merised, slept several hours, had Alimentiveness breathed
upon, and any abnormal excitation of the organ dispersed^ as
before ; and was then thoroughly demesmerised. I saw the
lady recently, and she remains quite free from the serious
consequence of having been mesmerised when the operator's
brain was in a state of unhealthy excitement, and in that state
having a particular organ of her brain mesmerically stimu-
lated. This poor lady was so ashamed of the disease, for a
disease it was, of which she had innocently become a victim,
that she declined giving me her card. Of course, under-
standing her motives, I did not for a moment press for it.
At her last visit she voluntarily tendered it to me. As she
reads The Zoist, I beg to add that her confidence in my dis-


By Mr, Earth. 391

cretion is not misplaced : that I immediately destroyed her
card, and her name in connection with this affair will never
pass my lips. I feel it a duty both to mesmerisers and
patients to put this case on record^ as a caution. I have had
several other cases of mischief done by phreno-mesmeric ex-
perimentS; in the hands of unskilled operators^

George Barth.


4i, Momington Crescent^ Dec. Ist^ 1851.
Dear Dr. Elliotson^ — ^I forgot to mention my first
mesmeric experiment on Miss L— — e; indeed I had for-
gotten it altogether until the lady herself called it back to
my memory a few days since. About three years ago I was
introduced to Miss L.^ and^ after spending an hour very
agreeably in converse with the lady and some friends^ ob-
served tears suddenly appear on her cheeky and that she
applied her handkerchief to her eyes. As I presumed that some
painful reminiscence had caused this display of emotion; de-
licacy prevented any notice of the circumstance until Miss
L. made some remarks respecting it. I then found on en-
quiry that she was suffering from a torturing physical pain^
instead of mental emotion. It was apparently of a neuralgic
character, and every evening about six o'clock attacked the
upper part of the right cheek and the muscles surrounding
the orbit of the right eye. It speedily caused so much in-
flammation and swelling of the affected part that the eye was
closed as in erysipelas ; indeed, medical friends who had seen
without ascertaining the particulars of the case, pronounced
it to be erysipelas. This painful affection had rarely been
absent on any one evening, at about this time, for tfie last
five years. It usually lasted until midnight, and then gra»
dually ceased until about the same hour the next evening.
Every remedy which medical skill had suggested for her relief
had been tried in vain — everything failed. I had a strong
impression that I could cure this case, and enquired of Miss
L. if she thought I looked like a person who had dealings
with the Prince of the dark regions below ? The lady seemed
somewhat surprised at my question, and politely declared she
had no such opinion of me. I therefore offered to mesine-
rise her, explaining that it was possible it might afford her relief.
Miss L. was ignorant about mesmerism, knowing it only by
name, and could not understand how my moving my hands
over her face was likely to remove the pain, but consented to
my making an immediate trial. This I did, and in twenty
minutes removed the pain, which has never troubled her since
from that day to this.


892 Cerebral Sympathy in Brutes.

These cases of neuralgia^ rheamatic inflammation of the
nerves^ or by whatsooTer other name we call them^ yield in a
most wonderful manner to earnest mesmeric influence^ as
the experience of every good mesmeriser amply testifies. The
frequent failure of cupping at the back of the neck^ blistering
behind the ears^ cold lotions^ stimulating embrocations^ and
other local applications ; of internal remedies^ as croton oil^
calomel and blue piU^ opium, morphine^ strichnine^ belladonna^
iron^ quinine^ and many other presumed remedies^ must
clearly teach the non-medical public that the great body of
medi<^ teachers and practitioners have a great deal to learn
yet respecting these affections^ both as to cause and cure.
The rapidity with which mesmerism cures^ ought to lead us
into a path of investigation which might discover the cause ;
and if even investigators fail to enlarge their pathological
learnings they will still gain practical knowledge^ which may
be useM to their patients, by lifting up their eyes to behold
the lessons taught them by the disciples of Mesmer.

My cases reported in last Zoiat, of " Spinal Irritation
cured/* and '^ Insanity cured/' remain, I am happy to say,
quite well.

I am yours very faithfully, ,

George Barth.


YII. Cerebral Sympathy and Clairvoyance in Brutes.

'' As I said, we are all groping among mysteries and wonders. Besides, one
soul may have a decided influence upon another, merely by its silent presence^ of
whidi I could relate many instances. It has often happened to me that, when I
have been walking with an acquaintance, and have had a living image of some-
thing in my mind, he has at once begun to speak of that very thing. I have also
known a man who, without saying a word, could suddenly silence a party engaged
in cheerful conversation, by the mere power of his mind. Nay, he could also
introduce a tone which would make every body feel unqomfortable. We have all
something of electrical and magnetic forces within us, and we put forth, like the
magnet itself, an attractive or repulsive power, accordingly as we come in contact
with something sunilar or dissimilar.'' — ConversatUma qf Goethe with Ecier-
numn and Soret, vol. ii., p. 19.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sir, — Aa an instance of cerebral sympathy in the lower
animals, you may be pleased to insert in the pages of The
Zoist the annexed story of a dog. It seems to show that
speech is not indispensable for the interchange of ideas, and
that in withholding from the brute creation the faculty be^
stowed on man, nature has given them another means of un*
derstanding the thoughts of each other as well as of man
himself, which, except in the abnormal state of mesmerism,


Cerebral Sympathy in Brutes. 898

we do not possess. To a certain extent the natural cries of
the several animals supply the want of speech; but it will not
be disputed that by such means the little dog of the story
could have told his grievance to his big friend and champion ;
the fact, too, is curious of the former finding his way home
from the hotel, a distance of 80 miles, and conducting his
friend there to avenge his cause.

Some years ago I addressed a communication to 7%e
Zoisi, in which I suggested, amongst other things, the pro-
bable existence of some instincts inherent in the human or-
ganization which in the progress of civilization appear to
become dormant, but which at times and under certain influ-
ences, as in the stages of mesmerism, are awakened and
developed in an extraordinary degree. I allude to the facul-
ties of seeing, hearing, and smelling, which in the dog, for
example, and in a less degree in the savage, are much more
acute than in social life where the intellectual powers are in
full play. The sleep-walker is said to see in the dark : but I
think his vision, like his heightened powers of hearing and
smelling, is a mental perception entirely independent of the
external organs of sense. Why then should we hesitate to
believe in the faculty of thought-reading in the human subject
when we have such unquestionable evidence of its existence
in the numerous and well-authenticated anecdotes of the dog.*
To account for many of these anecdotes it has been asserted
that the subject of them understood the language of his
master ; but it seems to me that we should be much nearer
the truth if we assumed that the sagacious animal had read
his thoughts. I could enlarge on this theory ; but will not
further trespass on your time.

I am. Sir, your obedient servant,

Non-Wist.
Edinburgh, 2nd Dec., 1851.

" Stort of a Doo.-r~A gentleman re»dent in Lincolnshire
was travelling about eighty or ninety mUes from home, and
ieft a favourite little dog at an hotel while lie visited another
town in the neighbourhood. On his return, the landlady, in
dismay, told him his dc^.h^d been attacked by a large dog
of her own, and had run. away from the house. He left, but
xetamed again to the samei hotel after the lapse of a few
weekly when the landlady informed him that his little dog
had returned in the interim, accompanied by a lai^e dog,

* See a striking instance in Dr. EUiotson's Human Physiology f p. 516, from
BiaeJnoood*9 Magazine ^ Feb. 1824, and obseryed by Hogg the Ettrick Shepherd.


894 Clairvoyance in Brutes.

itho attacked her own dog so fiercely that he had nearly killed
him. From the description given of the animal^ the gen-
tleman entertained no doubt bnt that it was his own house-
dog from Lincolnshire ; and on his return home he learned
from the servants that^ shortly after his departure^ his little
favourite dog returned one day, bearing marks of much ill-
usage, and after apparently consulting with the larger animal,
the two dogs set off together, and were absent several days,
presenting evidences on their return of having travelled a
considerable distance/' — Lincoln Times.

*:►* The following are the letters alluded to : and were
not published because we hoped to become better acquainted
with all the phenomena to which they relate and turn our
correspondent's suggestion to a better account than we could
at the time we received them. — Zoist.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

81st May, 1848.
Sir, — ^Will you kindly allow me, through the channel of
your interesting journal, to submit a few thoughts which
occurred to me on witnessing some experiments in clairvoy-
ance. The mesmeric patient has lately come to this city
(Edinburgh) from Glasgow, where she has exhibited her ex-
traordinary faculty of supersentience, as it is termed in the
third numoer of the Phreno-Magnet, in which, at p. 80, will
be found an account of some very curious particulars regard-
ing her. It is very probable that one, or more, of the con-
tinental writers on mesmerism has anticipated the notion
which I propose to throw out ; but I am not aware that such
is the case, as none of their works have fallen into my hands,
nor have I met with it in any of the English works on animal
magnetism which I have had an opportunity of perusing.
My idea is this, that the faculty in question is nothing super-
natural ; — ^that it is possessed in a much higher degree by
some of the inferior animals, by whom it is daily exercised,
and only shews itself occasionsdly in man, whose nervous
system, though resembling in many respects that of the brute
creation, differs in this regard, that, except in an abnormal
state, whether arising, as in many instances, from natural
causes, spontaneously, of which many cases are on record in
medical works, or whether induced by the art of the mes-
meriser, it is dormant in the ordinary condition of life and
incapable of conveying to the mind the information which the
inferior animals, by a wise provision of nature, are enabled
to acquire without effort. To man God has given reason —


Clairvoyance in Brutes. 395

to the other animals instinct. Both wonderful faculties are
exercised through the agency of the nervous system and
braln^ and^ while in the brute creation we cannot fail to see
many acts more resembling the dictates of reason than of
instinct^ so in man we at times perceive (assuming the truth
of the phenomena of clairvoyance) the power of exercising a
faculty which haa been described as a pecuUar sense in ani-
mals^ whereby they are enabled to discover distant things
and places beyond the power of vision, and to find their way
in situations in which man with all his boasted superiority of
intellect would be utterly at fault. I allude to the well-
known facts of pigeons, dogs, cats, horses, sheep, returning
to the places where they have been accustomed to live, after
long intervals, and under circumstances which in many cases
rendered it impossible that they could have seen their way
when first removed. Doubtless it is the possession of this
peculiar sense which enables the cetaceous tribe, for example,
to find their young when separated from them in the ocean,
and not that of the sense of smell or vision, which is usually
assigned as the faculty by which this is effected. It is true
that dogs can trace their absent master by the smell of his
footsteps j but, though by this means they may often accom-
plish their purpose, there are many instances of sagacity in
dogs where it is not possible to conceive that the smell could
have been the medium through which they were enabled to
perform the wonderful feats recorded of them.

To conclude, I would humbly submit therefore that clair-
voyance is nothing incredible — ^that the inward sight, as ex-
cited in mesmeric patients, is part and parcel of our nature,
and that all the curious phenomena of second sight, dreams,
presentiments, oracles, and witchcraft of old have their origin
in this sense, which appears so extraordinary only because we
are not able to exercise it at will like the other senses. Ac-
customed to use our eyes &om our earliest infancy, we see
nothing wonderful in the perception of a distant object, and,
because i# ceases to be visible when we close them, we rest
satisfied with the conclusion that through the eye, and the
eye alone, distant objects can be seen. But do we know the
way in which the optic nerve conveys the intelligence to our
mind, or are we warranted in denying that other nerves
might become capable of conveying similar, nay, still more
extraordinary, sensations ? The nerves of hearing are situ-
ated in the ear : but we can close the external organ, and yet
hear through the teeth the ticking of a watch. And, won-
derful as the faculty of the clairvoyant may appear to us, is it
a bit more inconceivable than the power of ordinary vision is


396 Voluntary Trance.

to a person born blind^ where only knowledge of external
bodies is acquired through the touch ? Beyond the reach of
his hand all external nature is as much shut out from him as
the invisible world is £rom us^ and yet we may conceive a
sense which may make known to the mind things invisible as
easily as we perceive by the eye what is inconceivable by the
blind.

Hoping and believing that the pages of The Zoist will yet
record many things as incontestable facts, which are yet little
dreamt of in our philosophy, and will open up a new world
to our view,

I remain. Sir, your obedient servant,

G. Non-Wist.

Dundee, 3rd December, 1844.
Sir, — ^From the favourable notice you were pleased to take
of my crude suggestions in your answers to correspondents,
p. 470 of your first volume, I was induced to hope that yon
would take up the subject of my communication ; but I can
well understand how you have been prevented from doing so
by the accumulation of other and more important contribu->
tions. Under the signature of An Old Subscriber, you will
see an article in the last number of the Edinburgh Phreno^
logical Journal, entitled '^Mesmerism in connection with
Mental Philosophy,'^ in which I have alluded to certain dor-
mant faculties in man which we see in constant action in
some of the lower animals, and which would appear to be
called into play in the human subject when under the influ-
ence of mesmerism. The subject is certainly curious and
worthy of being followed up. I would, in reference to this
supposed community of faculties in man and the inferior
creation, beg to call your attention to article ii. in the Phre--
nological Journal above referred to, by Dr. Lyon Flayfair,
where he speaks of the winter sleep of hybemating animals,
and of the experiments of Saissy, who found that their re-
spiration becomes extremely feeble at the commeueement of
their winter sleep and ceases altogether when that sleep be-
comes profound. In the instance of a pig overwhelmed with
a slip of earth, that lived 160 days without food, it was
found to have diminished in weight more than 120 lbs. ; an
instance, he remarks, quite analogous to the state of hyber-
nation. We have not, I believe, any record of this act of
hybernation in man, at least to such an extent ; but that man
is capable of it, may be inferred from the cases of the priest
Restitutus, who whenever he pleased could throw himseli into
a state of complete insensibility and be like a dead man ; and


Voluntary TVance. 397

of Colonel Townsend^ as reports by Dr. Cheyne^ both of
which are noticed in the first volume of Mr. Colquhoun's
work on Animal Magnetism, p. 147.

What I wish to notice is, that this art of restraining the
breath and, by long practice, of gradually affecting the re«
spiration and even of suspending it altogether, is well known
to the Indian Fakirs, and we have the most authentic ac-
counts of one Fakir in particular at the Court of the late
Bunjeet Sing, chief of Lahore, who allowed himself to be
buried alive for several months, while every precaution was
taken by guards over the place of interment to prevent any
collusion or fraud. English officers who were eye-witnesses
of the experiment have vouched for the truth of the fact, and
it is a remarkable confirmation of the reality of this case of
hybernation that, when released firom his tomb, the Fakir was
in a state of frightful emaciation. I cannot immediately lay
my hands on the printed accounts of this case, but I have
read them, I believe, in the journal of the Asiatic Society of
Bengal, and in a recent work by an English officer at the
Court and Camp of Bunjeet Sing.*

This communication is UQt intended for publication ; but
I shall be glad to find, in your notice to correspondents, that
you consider the subject of it curious and worthy of further
investigation ; more especially in regard to the practices of
the Hindoos, who in common with the Chinese would appear
to have been long familiar with the influences of mesmerism.
And my request is that for the sake of preserving the curious
letters of Miss Martineau in a more durable and more widely
extended journal in the scientific world than the AthetkBum,
you would be pleased to republish in your next number the
several communications she has recently made to the editor
of that periodical.

Apologizing for this intrusion on your time,

I remain. Sir, your very obedient servant,

NoN-WlST.

As to the practice of Hindoo mesmerism, you will find a
short communication made by me to the Medical Times, in
No. 250, for the 6th July last, under the signature of a
retired East India Surgeon, p. 292.

* See an account of all this in Dr. Elliotson's Human Physiology y p. 693, in
his chapter on Sleep, Dreaming, Sleep-waking, Mesmerism, and Hybernation :
and of Colonel Townsend's case at p. 485. — Zoist.


( 398 )

Vm. Cure of Epilepsy. MeemerUaiian of diMntt cerebral
organs. B7 Mr. M. Bedman^ Surgeon, Lmooln.

" AiaicAL MAGMETisif . — ^This deception was introduced by Faflier Kehl, at
Vienna, about 1774 ; and had wonderfol success in France in 1788. It had its
dupes in En^and also in 1789 ; but it exploded a few years afterwards. It was
a pretended mode of curing all manner of diseases by means of tjfmpatketie
n^eetUm between the sick person and the operator. The effect on the patient
was supposed to depend on a certain motion of tiie fingers and features of the ope-
lator, hie placing himself immediatdy before the patient, ^iHKMe ^es were to be
fixed on hb. After playing in this manner on the imagination and enfeebled mind
of the sick, and performing a number of distortions and grimaces, the cure was
said to be completed." — Dictionary of Dates and Unwergal Rtferenee, By
Joseph Haydn. Moxon, Dover Street: 1841. Page 24.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sib, — ^The impartiality of your pages in the advancement of
science has induced me to forward for the perusal of your
readers the subjoined case, which, although of no unusual
occurrence in the metropolis and vice versd among us, will
tend to shew that mesmeric operations have been witnessed
in this city.

Sarah Fletcher, aged 18, residing in Mint Lane, by occu-
pation a dressmaker, had been subject to fits weekly for some
years. Believing her case a favourable one for mesmerism, I
employed that powerAil agent last March on four different
occasions in the presence of a mixed assemblage of persons
at my own residence, several of whom were previously very
sceptical. The result has been not only that her health has
considerably improved since that period, but the fits have
not recurred ; a sufficient proof of that invisible and impon-
derable agent through which many diseases supposed to be
incurable will yet succumb.

The manifestations produced through phreno>mesmerism
were perfectly satisfactory to the company.

It may be necessary to observe, that, when a pupil of Dr.
EUiotson^s at University College and Hospital in 1837 and
1838, I was an ardent admirer of the doctor's mesmeric and
Christian-like proceedings, and have no hesitation in saying,
that those of the medical faculty who take an interest in the
advancement of knowledge would, after carefully examining
and testing a few cases for themselves, become converts to
the science, and adopt it as a safe and legitimate mode of
treatment in a great variety of diseases.

I have the honour to be. Sir, your obliged servant,

M. Redman.
Lincoln, Dec. 3rd, 1851.


( 899 )
IX. A Suffffestion to explain certain Phenomena of Levity.

" We all walk in mysteries. We are surrounded by an atmosphere of which
we do not kndw what is stirring in it, or how it is connected with our own spirit.
So much is certain, that in particular cases we can put out the feelers of our soul
beyond its bodily limits, and that a presentiment, nay, an actual insight into the
immediate future, is accorded to it/' — Conversations of GoeiAe, vol. ii., p. 18.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

SiR^ — ^A perusal of Dr. Gregory's admirable translation of
Baron Beichenbach's work on magnetism has suggested some
ideas to me which I submit^ with all deference^ for your con-
sideration^ should you deem them in any respect deserving
your notice. Whatever the odyle* fluids which the Baron
assumes to be distinct from (though intimately connected
with) the magnetic^ may ultimately prove to be^ it obviously
plays an important part in all mesmeric operations, and to
its presence he ascribes all the virtue of mesmerised water.
Its close resemblance to the magnetic fluid, in its polarity
and other properties, would seem to justify the notion that

* We regret that our good Scotch conespondent has adopted the word odyle.
We have no right, arbitrarily to change the name given to the power by its
discoverer Reichenbach. The termination yle is peculiarly given to a certain set
of material compounds : and the term odyle is therefore likely to lead to error
and is quite inappropriate as well as arbitrary. The word od may be pronounced
ode, and we may say odic force, as we say electric or galvanic, and then there
will be nothing odd. We adhere to the opinions given at pp. 221-2, and will
oppose the term odyle with all our might. There was a saint who spelt her
name nearly in the same way — Saint Odille. Odille disappeared for ever ; and
so, we trust, will Odyle. Possibly we shall be punished for our cruel treatment
of Odyle as those were who behaved ill to Odille. Never mind. Odille's story
is sung in that English classic and book of endless fun for the melancholy. The
Jnffoldsdy Legends^ by the Rev. Mr. Barham : —

'* Many ladies in Strasburg were beautiful ; still
They were beat all to sticks by the lovely Odille,''

:|( » 4e :|c 4e >|e 9|e

** He gained the old Count, who said. Come, mjmheer fill,
' Here's a health to yourself, and the lovely Odille.' "

4e * 4e * * ♦ ♦

'* And of all whom they met, high or low, Jack or Jill,
Asked, * Pray, have you seen anything of Odille ?'"

* « « j|i i|t 4e *

'* 'Twas her voice ! — ^but 'twas ffow et praterea m7.
Nor could any one guess what was gone with Odille."

^fi 3tt ^t mi :te ^it ilji

" Then burst from the mountain a splendour that quite
Eclipsed in its brilliance the finest Bude light.
I am really ashamed of you "both ; my nerves thrill
At your scandalous conduct to poor dear Odille."

" One hint to your vassals. — A month at the mill
ShaU be nuts to what they'll get who worry Odille !"

The Lay qf St, Odille.

Reichenbach has, we presume, given the name od to the power which he treats
of, because Odin was the name of the principal deity of the ancient Germans, and
this deity was really a personification of the elements of nature. — Zoist.

VOL. IX. D D


400 Suggestion to explam certain phenomena ofLevUy,

both are modificationa of one and the same mysterious agents
energy, force or influence which in the animal organization
is^ as it were, the life of the nervous system. Is it not^ in
fact, animal magnetism, operating on the human frame, as
terrestrial magnetism on some of the metals, and (inasmuch
as organized and living matter is superior to inorganic) induc-
ing in the former higher and more to us surprizing and unac-
countable phenomena f Doubtless in the fulness of time all
this will be better understood, and mesmerism will take its
place with the other acknowledged branches of natural phi-
losophy taught in our schools. But to come to the immediate
object of my thus presuming to speculate on the Baron's dis-
covery, allow me to hazard a suggestion that, admitting the
existence of odyle and its affinity, in its prop^ties and effects,
to magnetism, it may help to account for some alleged facts
of which, hitherto, no explanation has been attempted to be
offered. I allude to the cases of levity in the human frame
referred to in the Isis Bevelata of Mr. Colquhoun ; to those
of apparent increase of strength in the Okeys and other mes-
meric patients in 8apportin| heavy weights which in their
normal state they were incapable of lifting from the ground;
and to the apparently well authenticated experiment recorded
by Sir David Brewster in his work on natural magic, in which
a heavy man is raised with the greatest facility the instant
that his own lungs and those of the persons who raise him
are iniSated with air. In regard to the last-mentioned ease,
which in the annexed note^ is given in Sir D. Brewster's

* " This experiment was, I beliere, first shewn in England a few years ago
(1833) by Major H., who saw it performed at Vienna nader the direction of an
officer of the American navy. As Major H. performed it more than once in my
presence, I shall describe as nearly as possible the method which he prescribed.
The heaTiest person*in tiie party Iks down upon two chairs^ his legs being sup-
ported by the one, and his back by the other. Four persons, one at each leg
and one at each shoulder, Ihen try to raise him, and they find his dead weight
to be very great from the difficulty they experience in supporting him. When
he is replaced in the chair, each of the four persoBB takes hold of the body as
before, and the person to be lifted gives two signals by dapping his hands. At
the first signal, he himself and the four lifters b^n to draw a long and full
breath, and, when the inhalation is completed, or the lungs filled, the second
signal is given for raising the person from the chair. To his own surprize and
that of his bearers, he rises with the greatest facility, as if he were no heavier
than a feather. On several occasions I have observed that when one of the bearers
performs his part ill, by making the inhalation out of time, the part of the body
which he tries to raise is left, as it were, behind. As you have repeatedly seen
the experiment, and have performed the part both of the load and of the bearer,
you can testify how remarkable the efifects appear to all parties, and how com-
plete is the conviction either that the load has been lightened, or the bearer
strengthened by the prescribed process. At Venice the experiment was pecfi)rmed
in a much more imposing manner. The heaviest man in the party was raised and
supported upon the points of the fore fingers of six persons. Major H. declared


Suggestion to explain certain phenomena of Levity, 401

own words^ it will be observed that it is said the experiment
will not succeed if the person lifted be placed upon a boards
it being necessary that the bearers should communicate^
directly, with the body to be raised. Now in all these casesj
if^ instead of asserting that the weight (or in other words^
the attraction of gravitation) is overcome by an extraordinary
accession of muscular force, we assume that the body of the
patient, or the mass to be lifted, has its gravity counteracted
or neutralized by magnetism, as in the instance of an iron bar
suspended in the electro-mi^netic helix, or in that of a needle
when in equipoise with a weight in the opposite scale^ where>
as soon as the influence of a magnet held over it commences
to act, the needle ceases to have any weight and the equili-
brium is destroyed. This theory is doubtless fanciful, and
open to obvious objections ; but, in the case of the Okeys
above referred to, it were to be wished that the following
experiment had been tried for the purpose of testing the fact
of increase of strength under the mesmeric influence. Grant-
ing that it had been proved that Miss Okey could not lift; a
weight of 801bs. in her natural state which she did when
mesmerised, let her, in the latter state, attempt to draw an
arrow to the head with an 801b. bow ; i . e., a bow which re-
quires a weight of 801bs. to bend it to that extent. Such a
bow requires the use of a powerful arm, contending not against
the attraction of gravity, but against the resistance of elas-
ticity. If she failed to draw the bow while she succeeded in
lifting the weight, would it not prove that the weight had
become lighter, and not that the muscular power had increased
in strength ?

But, setting aside the hypothesis of magnetic or odylic
influence in the cases above mentioned, which I admit is
more than questionable, if not absurd, I would venture to
ask if, in the solution of this mysterious agency, we gain a
step in advance by ascribing the effect in Sir David Brewster's
experiment to the concentrated and simultaneous operation
of the wUl of all the parties directed to one and the same
object. What is meant by will ? Is it spirit acting on matter,
or is it the Baron's newly discovered fluid that, in combination
with the oxygen inhaled, gives the vital force. Alas for poor
science! fVill, spirit, imagination, odyle, are but names of

that the experiment would not sacceed if the person lifted were placed npon a
board, and the strenffth qf the indttnduaU applied to the board. He conoeiyed
it necessary that the bearers should eomfMrnieate directly Vfith the bodp to be
raised, I have not had an opportunity of making any experiments relative to
these curious fects ; but> whether the general effect is an illusion, or the result qf
known or qfnew principles, the subject merits a careful investigation." — Letters
on Natural Magic, addressed to Sir Walter Scott. 1832.

D D 2


402 Recent Clairvoyance of Alexis Didier.

unknown qualities which^ like the letters a? and y of the alge-
braists^ we employ in physics and metaphysics to work out
our problems^ which too often end in the production of a surd
or impossible root^ leaving us as wise as to the real nature of
the cause as when we began* The passions of rage and des-
pair^ we know^ can endow an individual with abnormal
strength ; but in the instances above referred to no extraor-
dinary excitement appears to be called into play. In maniacs
too we read of feats of extraordinary strength. In the Phre-
noloffical Journal some years ago there was an extract from
some foreign journal, containing the case of an individual
who could not be restrained by the combined power of several
men, but whose superhuman strength failed him whenever
he fell on a pavement of asphalte, — the reverse of the giant
Antseus with whom Hercules had to contend. To conclude
in the words of Sir David Brewster as quoted in the note,
" The subject merits a careful investigation.^'

I remain, Sir, your obedient servant,

Non-Wist,
Edinburgh, 7th June, 1850.

P.S. With reference to some notices of Swedenborg in
The Zoistj allow me to caU your attention to a very able article
on the character and writings of that extraordinary man in
the Prospective Review for last month.


X. Recent Clairvoyance of AkaAs Didier. By the Rev.
Chauncey Habe Townshend, London and Lausanne.
Communicated by Dr. EUiotson.

*' And if any one advances anything new which contradicts, perhaps threatens
to OTertHm, the creed which we had for years repeated ; and have handed down to
others, all passions are raised against him, and every effort is made to crush him.
People resist with all their might ; they act as if they neither heard nor could
comprehend ; they speak of the new view with contempt, as if it were not worth
the trouble oi even so much as an investigation or a regard ; and thus a new truth
may wiut a long time before it can make its way." — Conversations of Goethe, vol.
i., p. 108.

Mon Loisir, Lausanne, 25th Nov., 1851.
My dear Elliotson, — I thought you might like the accom-
panying account for The Zoist, If so, it is heartily at your
service. I thought I ought to have the moral courage to
stand up for Alexis, whom some think a humbug, and to tell
the truth, let persons think of it what they will.*

* The examples of Alexis Didier's clairvoyance published in The Zoist are
overwhdming. See Nos. YI., VIII., XXIV., XXXV. like other true clair-
voyants he has sometimes been at &ult : but like other clairvoyants he has often


By the Rev. Mr. Townshend. 403

I have rather under-stated than over-stated the matter;
because about myself and the lady mentioned^ I could uot
state one half the wonderful things he said.

Erer^ my dear EUiotson^

Very faithfully yours,

C. Ha&e Townshbnd.

In passing through Paris I saw Alexis last month, and the
results of the interview were so extraordinary that I think
myself bound to communicate them to you.

First : As there are such different opinions about the
clairvoyance of Alexis, and as many represent him as a mere
sham, I went rather prepossessed against him than otherwise.

Secondly : I took every precaution not to be known to
him in such a way as might account for any revelations he
might make.

I was only to stay in Paris one whole day, and late in the
evening of that day (about six o^clock) I went to the house of
M. Mardllet, the mesmeriser of Alexis, whose address I pro-
cured (remark) only through a sort of Parisian blue-book,
which I got leave to look at in a shop.

M. Marcillet was not at home when I arrived at his door,
but was expected back soon to dinner.

I waited for him in his agreeable apartments, and soon
he came in, accompanied by an extremely pretty girl — his
daughter — whom I immediately recognized as the original of
a fine portrait that hung upon the wall.

I merely introduced myself as a friend of Dr. Elliotson,
which indeed seemed quite 8u£Scient passport, and gave my
name, saying I lived at Lausanne, wluther I was proceeding.

M. Marcillet, seeming to speak very little English, con-
versed with me in French, and I found, incidentally, he was
quite ignorant I had written a work on mesmerism. In short,
I feel convinced there was no clue to any particular knowledge
about me. And you know I was not in London when M.
Marcillet and Alexis were there, and that I only recently
occupy my present residence in town. I found M. Marcillet
more desirous to talk than to enquire, and full of enthusiasm
about mesmerism. He told me some interesting anecdotes
regarding his mesmeric power — of his having restored to con-
sciousness persons who had, in the streets of Paris, dropped

been treated most unfairly by sceptics, especially by those of the medical pro-
fession.

In No. XXXV., p. 234, will be found a list of all the instances recorded in
7%e Zoist of clairvoyance, cerebral sympathy, and the power of the silent will. —
J. Elliotsok.


404 Recent Clairvoyance of Alewia Didier.

down in apoplectic fits^ and he shewed me, recorded in a
newspaper of a few days back, a case of the kind.

I must say that M. Mardilet made a favourable impression
upon me.

I now spoke of Alexis, and expressed a wish to see him
in the mesmeric state.

M. Marcillet told me that he was going to give a sianee,
with Alexis, at 10 o'clock the following day.

" But,'^ said I, " I shall by that time have quitted Paris.
I leave by the seven o'clock morning train for Dijon. What
is to be done ?''

*'Why,'' (replied M. Marcillet,) "Alexis lives three miles
from me, out by Montmartre, and he will very probably be
at some theatre before I can send to him (as he is very fond
of theatrical amusements) ; but I will do what I can to bring
him to you at your hotel before nine o'clock this evening. K
we are not with you by nine, do not expect us. Where do
you lodge ?*'

I told M. Marcillet that I was stapng at the Hdtel
Wagram^ Rue RwoK, au sisnhne ; for, having arrived late in
Paris the preceding evening, I had great difficulty in finding
any lodging at all. " I hope,'' said I, '* you will not mind
coming up my break-neck staircase. It is too bad to give
you all this trouble."

" Oh/* replied M. Marcillet, " nous somme$ iris habUufs
h cela h Paris, now autres Parisiens /" So, on this agree-
ment, I took leave. Seated in my aerial domicile, which
seemed to command all Paris in the shape of infinite chimney-
pots, I awaited the hoped-for, but hardly expected, visit.
Eight o'clock struck — half-past eight. ^

Slow and wary steps were heard mounting the stairs.

The door opened.

Enter M. MarcUlet, followed by a young man of (in ap-
pearance) some six or seven and twenty years old, of middling
stature and pleasing countenance.

^' Void ce grand gaillardf" said M. Marcillet, "I just
caught him in time, and here he is I And now, to lose no
time, commenqons. You shall mesmerise Alexis yourself, for
I think it will please you so to do."

Accordingly, M. Marcillet, taking Alexis by the shoulders,
squeezed him down into an arm-chair, and I seated myself
opposite to him, took his hands, and began to mesmerise.
After I had made passes for two or three minutes, the face of
Alexis began to be strangely convulsed in a manner I had
never seen in any other patient. The truth is, he made very
ugly faces indeed, but this kind of spasm lasted but for a


By the Rev, Mt. Tawnshend. 406

short tkne. Suddenly bis whole countenance grew calm^ and
he fell back in a passive state^ with a deep sigh^ and murmur-
ing, " Merci !**

^' Maintenant il en a eu assez !^' said M. Marcillet ; " he
always says^ ^ Merci J' when he is mesmerised enough/' '

I now asked Alexis the usual question^ ^^ Dormez vaus
bien ?" to which he replied, " 7V& bien /"

'^ And now/' said M. Marcillet, *' Je ne veux pets vousgener,
I am going to take a turn for half an hour, and shall leave
you to ask Alexis what questions you please* So good bye
for the present/'

I was not sorry for this. " Now," thought I, " there can
be no collusion at least."

As soon as M. Marcillet was gone, I began to test the
clairvoyance of Alexis, in the matter of seeing distant places.

I asked him if he would visit my house (in thought).

He immediately asked, '' Which ? for you have two !
You have a house in London and one in the country. Which
shaU I go to first ?"

I said, ^^ To the house in the country."

Alter a pause, Alexis said, ^' J'y suis /" and then, to my
surprise, he opeued wide both his eyes, and stared about him.
I saw, however, at once, that he had the fixed rigid gaze of a
sleep-waker. As far as I could perceive, he never once al-
tered the fixed position of the lids during the whole time that
he was in distant clairvoyance. The pupil looked dilated, dull,
and without any movement of conscious activity.

" Well," I asked, " what do you see ?"

'' Je vois" said he, " une maison d'un moyen apparence.
CPest une maison, pas un chdteau. II y a unjardin autour.
A c6t6 gattche ily a une maison^ phts petite, sur lapropri^tS"

All this was said in breaths, with some effort, and with a
hurried gasp, as it were, between each sentence.

I own I was surprised at the accuracy of the description
of my house near Lausanne, particularly at the mention of
the small house on the left-hand side, where, according to
Swiss custom, dwells my landlady. It was, in fact, a mark-
ing feature of the place, not to be guessed at by a stranger,
and, as such, brought much conviction to my mind.

Now," said I to Alexis, " what sort of view do you see ?"
De Peau, de Veau /" said he hurriedly, as if he saw the
lake which indeed spreads out before my windows. Then,
'^ Ily a des arbres en face tout pris de la maison'^ (all true).

" Well, now," I said, " we will go into the drawing-room
fsalonj. What do you see ?"

He looked about, and said, (where my memory fails as to


406 Recent Clairvoyance of Alexis Didier.

the exact words^ I give the sense in English^) '^ You have
a good many pictures on the walls. But now^ this is curious
— they are all modern^ except two/'

" And those two/^ said I ; " can you see the subjects?''

" Oh^ yes I One is a sea-piece : the other — is tin sujet
religieux,''

I really felt something of a shudder at this extreme pre-
cision. How then was I astonished when Alexis went on to
describe minutely the 8ujet religieuXy which was a picture I
had lately bought of an Italian refugee^ and which had many
striking peculiarities.

He said at once^ " There are three figures in the picture
— an old man^ a woman^ and a child. Can the woman be the
Virgin? (he asked of himself musingly.) No! she is too
old I (proceeded he^ answering his own question, while I re-
mained perfectly silent.) The woman has a book upon her
lap^ and the child points with its finger to something in the
book ! There is a distaff in the comer"

Effectively^ the picture represented St. Ann teaching the
Virgin to read^ and every particular respecting it was correct.

I asked^ " On what is the picture painted ?"

Alexis answered^ ^' It is neither on canvass, nor copper
(metal). It is on a curious substance.^'

After some consideration, he began to rap on the table
with his knuckles, as if trying to ascertain the nature of the
substance. Then he called out, " C'est sur pierre" (The
picture is in fact on black marble.) " Now,'' said he, " I am
looking at it behind. It is of a curious colour entre noirdtre
et gris (the exact colour it is, behind). It is also rough
behind. Et tiens" added he, " &est bomb6/*

This last peculiarity would have convinced the most incre-
dulous. The picture, from a warp or curve in the stone, had
been very difBcult to frame.

Alexis now described many minute particulars of my house
in Norfolk Street. He gave an exact description of the two
women-servants — one old, one young. (He said that in
neither of my abodes were any but servants — quite true.) He
seemed pleased to describe the young one minutely, whom he
thought pretty. He made no single mistake as to the colour
of eyes, or hair, &c.

He told me my house had a park before it — " Not your
park,*' said he smiling.

He said, when I asked him if there was anything " re-
marquable " in the style of furnishing ?

'^ Remarquable, si vaus voulez. Mais on le voit assez sou-
vent. C est style Louis Quatorze.^'


By the Rev. Mr. Toumahend. 4fyf

He described the book-room next to the draving-room.

He told me the windows of the saloon were bow-windows^
and he described accurately the frame of a looking-glass
carved by Orinling Oibbons over the chimney-piece. " Im
fflace/' said he^ " est petite en camparaison de la bordure. II
y a desfleurs, des fruits, toute sorte de choses, sculptis" Then
suddenly he said^ ^' I see a picture reflected in the mirror ''
(most true). I asked him to describe it.

He did not begin^ this time, by naming the subject^ but
he seemed struck^ at firsts with the female figure of the piece.

"Elle a" said he^ "tt» corsage rouge, draperie noire, ou
plutSt brunefoncSe"

So went he on to describe the two children^ and then sud-
denly he said,

'' (7 est aussi un sujet religieux — une sainte famille I"

I asked the name of the painter. He seemed puzzled at
first. He said, '^// est mort depms long terns !"

At last he murmured out, in a very cavernous voice,
" Raffaelle I" and sunk back in his chair as if exhausted by
some effort. The fact is, the name of Raphael is written
dimly in golden letters on the hem of the Virgin's garment.
Alexis then described the pictures on either side of the Holy
Family. " There is only one on each side,*' said he. " That
on the right is a sea-piece — ^a storm.''

About the left-hand picture he was longer. He, at first,
merely described it as " un interieur" But, on being pressed,
he gave the minutest possible description of a Morland which
I have hanging up there.

The inside of the stable — the man with a wheelbarrow —
and the grey horse lying down, were all accurately noted. He
seemed to pity the horse, and added the last astounding
touch to his description by saying, ^^ Pauvre bite ! II a des
blessures sur lesflancs /"

Alexis seemed now rather fatigued. I made a few passes
to relieve him, and then proceeded to test his power of read-
ing through obstacles.

I brought out of the next room Lamartine's Jocelyn, which
I had that day bought. I opened it, and Alexis read some
lines with closed eyes. (Directly the distant clairvoyance was
over, he shut his eyes.) Then suddenly he said, ^^ How many
leaves off would you wish me to read ?" I said, ^^ Eight."
(I had heard of this faculty, but never witnessed it.) He
then traced with his finger slowly along the page that was
open, and read, —

''A devore dW jet toute ma Bympathie.''


406 Reeeni CUbnxnfanee of Alexin DUUer.

I ooimted down eight lemves froia the leaf first opened,
and found, exactly nn^ where his finger had traced, the line
he had read, correct, with the exception of a single woard. He
had said lifeiktr^ instead at divorL

Hnman incredulity began to stir in me, and I really
AoDght perhiqps Alexis knew Jocdfn by heart. So I again
went to a drawer in the next room, and brought out a large
book I had also bought that day — a sort of magazm pUto-
resque, called Les beaux Art$. This, at least, Alexis oonld
not know by heart. Again, the same wonder was performed.
I have foigotten the exact place, which I omitted to mark as
I did in Jocelyn (in which the pieces of paper I pat to specify
the marvel stfll remain), but I certify that Alexis read in lii
beaux Arts, also, several words many pages below the page
he had open before him. Still, to make all sore, I brought
forth an English book, Tke Inheritance, IGss Eerriei's clever
novel of years ago, and in this he read the name of Gertrude,
and other words at the distance of many leaves. With regard
to all the books, they were never opened but once, and kept
open at the place first opened, and Alexis never touched 1^
leaves, or could, by possibility, have caught a visual glance
of what was below the pi^ he was looking on. (And all with
closed eyes, remember.)

I now brought out, by Alexis's own request, a letter
which I had received from a lady rather lately.

He said, " Avez^voua une lettre ^une personne pour laqueUe
VOU8 ites interessi? Je vous dirai quelqueehose Id desnuJ'

The letter was enclosed in a perfectly opaque envelope,
which Alexis (and I carefully watched him) nevar attempted
to disturb. He held it quietly in his hand.

The first thing he exclaimed was, ''Why, here is a bit of
newspaper fd^un vieux journal) in the letter.''

I had forgotten the drcumstance, but, on consideration,
remembered there was.

'' I see,'' said Alexis, ** the words ' brotherhood of nations '
(he said, brudderhood) printed on the paper."

It was in fact reaUy so, being something about the Peace
Society, that Mrs. T. had cut out and sent me.

Then said Alexis, '' This lady lives in Suffolk, and at so
and so Place/'

He began to write with a pencil I gave him the name of
the place, outside the letter, quite correctly.

I found, on subsequent inspection, the address, so and so
Lodge, — Suffolk, written on the letter.

But now — ^marvel of marvels ! — ^Alexis told me the whole
history of my fair correspondent — how long I had known


By the Rev. Mr. Townshend. 409

her^ and many minute circumstances respecting herself and
our acquaintance — something too about the character of her
sister^ and (to crown all) he wrote (still on the outside the
letter) both the Christian and family name of her father ! I
will shew you^ my dear EUiotson^ the letter and the writing
on it^ when we meet ; but^ of course, I do not wish to make
the lady's name public, nor can I further particularize the
very remarkable things that Alexis said respecting her and
her fJEunily.

M. Marcillet now returned from his walk, and, seeing me
still engaged in asking Alexis questions, would have again
retired, but I made him come in, having established enough,
during his absence, to put away all idea of complicity.

I now Mked Alexis some questions about myself, my avo-
cations, subjects of interest, and finally health — all of which
he answered as if he had known me all my life.

He spoke on very deep and serious subjects, and Alexis
shewed a pleasing and religious turn of mind. Partly misun-
derstanding a question of mine, he assured me he knew
nodiing of the state of the soul after death. '^ Dieu seul le
saU/* said he. '' It is true,'' he continued, '' many somnam-
bulists pretend to make revelations about a fixture state. But
the proof they are all wrong is, that no two of them agree :
all give different accounts.''

As to the state of my health, no medical man could be
more precise, and he described my temperament, &c., almost
in the very words of such medical attendants as have had my
confidence.

In giving this account, I by no means intend to say that
Alexis spoke all the recorded things without hesitation, or in
a manner different from the or£nary one of sleep-waking,
which is invariably full of effort and excitement. Once or
twice he made mistakes. Somethnes he asked me to con-
centrate my attention strongly on what I wished him to see.
I believe, and M. Marcillet said, that a great part of his suc-
cess came from my patient manner, and from his feeling at
ease with me. I have no doubt, had I been impatient, sus-
picious, ready to take up every little error, Alexis would have
lost his clairvoyance, and perhaps attempted to supply it by
guessing.

This is the history of most of the mistakes and apparent
want of truth of somnambulists. We have no patience with
them, and will not observe the conditions requisite for the de-
velopment of their clairvoyance.

But a thousand negations are nothing before one affirm-
ative proof, and, had Alexis even been otherwise wrong


410 Clairvoyance of Ales^ Didier.

throughout^ yet have described my picture at Lansaniie^ and
told me the name of Mrs. T/s father merely by reading it in
my thoughts^ I should have thought nothing of the failures^
everything of the success. So however will not the world,
who insist on having all right, or nothing.

Alexis awoke with the same convulsive movements and
ugly faces with which he went to sleep. In a moment he
arose, no longer the free and easy somnambulist, but a shy
respectful young man.

It was past 10 o'clock, and in a few minutes M. Marcillet
and he were gone, leaving me to muse, as much I might, on
the events of the evening.


NOTE BY DB. ELLIOTSON.

A friend several months ago gave me a short account,
which he had printed for private distribution, of some proofs
of the clairvoyance of Alexis. As I was more anxious for
the public to feel an interest in the medical powers of mes-
merism than in its highest wonders, which are most calculated
for the studious and philosophical, I put it aside, but, on
receiving Mr. Townshend's communication, sent' it to a friend
in Paris, and begged him to ascertain its correctness from M.
Marcillet. The following is the account, and to it I have sub-
joined the answer from my friend. Dr. Davison : —

" Clairvoyance of Aleons.

'^ About eight days before the election. General Cavaignac
went incog, to consult Alexis, as to whether Louis Napoleon
or General Cavaignac would be President : to which Alexis
replied ' It wiU not be you.' ^ I dont speak of myself. I
speak of Louis Napoleon and General Cavaignac' ^ I under-
stand,' rejoined Alexis. ^ It will nofr be you.' On which the
General went away disconcerted.

" Mon. Sabine> Chief of the Station of the Havre Railroad,
went a few days ago to consult Alexis, who, when in somnam-
bulism, said, ' You come about something lost in the service to
which you belong.' ^ It is true,' replied he. ^ You are employed
on the Havre Railroad?' 'It is likewise true. (Mon. Sabine not
having previously stated his business to any one.) 'It is a basket
that is missing, containing some little animals. They are —
they are — ^leeches. You sent to enquire about the basket at
Rouen and at Havre, and you have received no news of it. This
is what has taken place. A traveller going to Havre by your
carriages on the — ^the — the 11th November, was greatly an-
noyed, on arriving at his destination, to find only one basket


-


Clairvoyance of Alensis Didier. 411

instead of two^ which he had on setting off/ 'This is
wonderful !^ said Mon. Sabine. ' There were two baskets of
leeches/ 'The train (continued Alexis), on arriying at
AoueUj left several travellers with their luggage^ and one of
the baskets was put^ by mistake^ on one of the omnibuses going
into the town^ and the conductor was surprised to find that
no one claimed it. From fear of being scolded he did not
deposit it in the baggage warehouse^ but hid it for some
days in his stable ; and while it was there you wrote to Bouen
and Havre about it^ the reply being that it could not be found.
A few days ago the conductor put it in the goods depdt^
near the entrance and beneath the first window on the right.
You will find it if you set off to Bouen ; only^ on account of
the length of time that has elapsed^ you will find about 200
leeches dead.' On the next day Mon. Sabine returned from
Rouen^ having found the basket at the place indicated by
Alexis^ with 200 of the leeches dead. The Directors of the
Bailroad expressed themselves doubly obliged to the somnam-
bulist and his magnetizer^ inasmuch as the proprietor of the
leechesj perceiving that they were not found after twenty-five
days, had stated their value to be double what it actually
was.

''In the autumn of 1845, Alexis gave a series of mes-
meric stances to the medical men of Havre, each of whom
was permitted to bring one friend to witness the experiments.
One of them took with him Mr. Featherstonhaugh, the Con-
sul at Havre, who had come over the day before from Cali-
fornia, and was a decided sceptic as to mesmerism. In order
to test Alexis, Mr. Featherstonhaugh put in his pocket, en-
closed in a box, a portion of a Japanese Idol which he had
picked up out of the wreck of a vessel from Japan which
had been lost on the coast of California during his stay there.
On being asked by Mr. F., ' What have I in my pocket ?'
Alexis -answered, ' It looks like a beetle ; but it is not one,
but part of a Japanese Idol with an inscription on it : you
picked it up during a walk on the seashore in California, and
thought at first it was some curious stone, but you afterwards
perceived it was an Idol which had been washed up from the
wreck of a Japanese vessel that was lost on that coast a few
days before.' The relater of this was Monsieur Paravet, of
Havre, to whom it was told by one of the Medical men pre-
sent at the time.

"Additional Fact Relative to the Clairvoyance ofAleans,

" At a seance which took place before the Slite of the
society at Versailles, Dr. Bataille, one of the principal phy-


413 CUwrvoyanee of Alexis Didkr.

sidans of this town^ placed in the hands of Alexis a letter^
and requested him to describe the residence of his son, who
was living at Grandville. ' Instead of giving yon an account
of the iq[>artment of your son/ said Alexis, * I am now oc-
cupied about his health, whidi is very bad/ ' How I Bad P'
replied his interrogator. ' Ton have in your hand his last
letter, dated six day^ agoi, in which he states himself to be
very well/ ' To morrow/ rejoined Alexis, ' you will receive
a letter from his wife, announcing to you that he is very ill.
I recommend you on the receipt of this to set off tinine«Ka/e/y,
for, knowing as you do the constituticm of your son, there is
only you who can save him. He is very ill/ The next day
the letter arrived, and Dr. Bataille immediately set off for
Grandville, found his son very ill, and, after a fortnight's
sojourn, succeeded in restoring him to health. On his
return to Versailles this event produced a great sensation
throughout the town.''

'' My dear Doctor, — I have called several times on M.
Marcillet, but it was only to-day I met with him at home.
I read to him the paper you sent me, and he declares that all
therein is true. I questioned him particularly as to the &et
of Cavaignae's visit. He asserts the truth of it ; he is, he
says, peifeetly acquainted with the person of the General.

'^ I had before heard of the extraordinary divination of
Alexis at Havre firom the British Consul himself, at whose
house it took place. It is, I think, mentioned in Dr. Gre-
gory's late book ; but Mr. Featherstonhaugh told me that as
there related it is not in every particular correct, though it is
perfectly so as to the material facts.

" Marcillet begs me to send the enclosed, published in the
Indicateur de Seine et Mame.*

'^ I have to apologize to yon for the delay in answering
your enquiries.

* "The journals some time ago reported a serious accident which happened
at the Tk^re de9 Vmi^t^ to a young lady who fell into a kind of lethargy, in
which she remained above an hour without any auccess from the means employed,
when M. Marcillet restored her in less than ten minutes by mesmeric passes.

"Another similar instance of perfect success has attended his exertions.
Lately, a gentleman advanced in fife, and wearing a decoration, fell down in tiie
garden ci Ihe ToiUeries in a state of oerebral congestion. He was immediatd,y
canied to a diemist's shop in the Rue Castiglione by two soldiers of the republican
guard who were passing. M. Marcillet, who by a lucky chance was on the spot,
went up to the gentleman, breathed slowly upon him over his heart, and made
passes over his chest and stomach, till at length, by pressing with the ends of the
fingers upon the various portions of his fece and neck, M. Manallet rdazed the
muscles of the mouth that had all along been contracted and rigid, and thus en-
abled the patient to tell his name and address. The witnesses of this sort of
resurrection retired applauding the suceessful disciple of Mesmer."


Clairvoyance of Alems Didier. 413

• '^ I sincerely trast you are well, and believe me, my dear
doctor,

" Ever trtdy yours,

" Thomas Davison.
" 88, Rue Monthabor, llth Dec, 1851/*

The following is an extract from Le Pays of tbe 20th of
last September, which also I had put aside : —

" To the Editor of Le Pays.

" Sir, — ^An old proverb saysi, ' better late than never :*
yet I regret having so long delayed the publication of a re-
markable mesmeric fact relative to myself.

" In August, 1849, one of my clerks absconded, taking
with him a considerable sum from my house. The most
active search by the police proved fruitless:, when a friend,
M. Linstant, to whom I had mentioned my misfortune, went,
without apprising me, to M. Marcillet in order to consult
Alexis. The following dialogue took place.

" ' Can you tell me, Alexis, why I am come to you V

'^ ' You are come. Sir, to gain some tidings of a sum of
money stolen from a friend by one of his clerks.'

" ' True.'

" ' The sum,' continued Alexis, ' is very considerable — as
much as 20,000 francs.'

" * That also is true.'

" Alexis, considering a moment, went on to say that the
name of the dishonest clerk was Dubois — that he saw Dubois
at Brussels — in the Hdtel des Princes, where Dubois was
staying.

'^ ^ Set off instantly,' added Alexis, ^ and you will find him
at the place I have mentioned.'

'^M. Linstant left for Brussels. Unfortunately he did
not set off till the evening of the following day. On his
arrival, he learnt that Dubois had really been staying at the
H6tel des Princes I but only some hours previously had quitted
Brussels. Not knowing which direction to ts^e with the
prospect of overtaking the clerk, he returned to Paris, and
came to my house and communicated to me the singular
facts which I have just mentioned.

'^ Interested and curious in my turn to consult this clair-
voyant, I begged my friend to take me to M. Mardllet.
Alexis, being put in communication with me, declared that
he saw Dubois in the gambling-house at Spa, — that Dubois
was losing a great deal of money, and, at the time of his
arrest, would have nothing left.


414 Cure of Powerlesgnesa of a Baby^s legs and feet.

" Although this prediction was not very encouraging^ I
started that same eYcmng for Spa. On arriving at Brussels,
I went to M. Montigny^ Secretary to the French Legation,
who wished to give me a letter of introduction to the Secre-
tary-Oeneral of Justice in Belgium, that Dubois might be
arrested. But he was unable, because I had not provided
myself with one from the parquet at Paris. I was conse-
quently obliged to return to France for this purpose, and thus
lost valuable time.

'^ A criminal information was then drawn up and entrusted
to M. Bertrand. As soon as all the formaUties were gone
through, I set off afresh. On reaching Spa, I found that
Dubois had quitted it some days before. Supposing that he
had left the country for good, I staid in Spa but a few hours.
On returning to Paris, I went immediately to Alexis.

^^ ' You have not had much patience,' said he before I
asked ^him a question. ' Some days ago Dubois went to A.ix-
la-Chapelle. He has continued gambling and has lost con-
siderably. I see him now returning to Spa ! where he will
lose the little which he has left.'

'^ After this last information, I at once wrote to the aa-
thorities at Brussels and Spa that I had learnt that Dubois
had returned to Belgium.

Some days afterwards he was arrested at Spa.
Exactly as Alexis had also declared, the fellow had lost
all at play. At the end of four months of preventive confine-
ment in the prison of Verviers, Dubois died there just when*
his extradition into France was authorized by the two powers.

"Accept, &c.

" E. Peevost,
" Commissionaire at the Mont de Piete,

" 9, Rue du Mouton.
"Paris, September 19, 1851.''


XI. Cure of Powerlessness of a Baby's legs and feet by one
Mesmerisation. By a Lady. Communicated by Dr.
Elliotson.

** Certain it is, since the days of the Elliotson exposure, nothing like the pre-
sent explosion has taken place : never htu so signal a cheat been so utterly blown
to the winds/' — Mr. Waklby, Lancet , Nov. 22 ; p. 498.

Deab Dr. Elliotson, — The enclosed statement describes as
well as I can do a cure effected by three or four minutes^
mesmerising, on an infant of three months old ; whose feet,
from total want of power in the insteps, hung down in a Une
with the leg. The mother, Mrs. Childs, who, as she states


By a Lddy. 415

had received splints to support the feet, found it perfectly im-
possible to keep them on so young an infant, and begged me
to assist her in putting on a bandage. I wished first, how-
ever, to shew her how to mesmerise the baby^s legs, and was
mj8elf surprised by seeing the feet (which hung down with
the soles turned inwards) drawn up sti£9y into the right posi-
tion. This effect was produced in about three minutes ; the
rigidity, which seemed painful to the child, soon passed away,
but the feet did not fall, and have continued to this time per-
fectly well.

It will hardly be supposed that my little patient was such
a specimen of juvenile depravity as to hang down his feet in
order to deceive his medical attendant, or to hold them up to
impose on me : it is equally difficult to believe that the muscles
gained strength suddenly by themselves just at the moment
when my hand passed over them.

It is very pleasant to save poor little children from the
discomfort and suffering of the usual remedial measures : and,
if it be true, as stated by the doctor, that affections of the
feet, similar to those of this child^s, often result in lameness
or distortion, it is most desirable that so easy and speedy a
mode of cure should be made known.

The cure was effected early in August. I have this day
enquired after the child, and find that it has had no return
whatever of the ailment.

Yours very truly,
Dec. 16, 1851. S. E. D M.

P.S. When I was at B , a sweet little baby had

glandular swellings : two doctors were consulted ; they pre-
scribed opposite remedies for a time, and the torture they put
that dear child to made my heart ache.*^ I would have mes-
merised it, but the mother dared not give up the blistering
ointment, &c. ; and, when she asked one doctor whether mes-
merism would be useful to procure rest for the baby, he said
that for so young a child it could do no harm, as it would not
affect it in any way, but, if the child had been older, it would
hurt him very much. I could do nothing, but long for more
enlightenment to reach the doctors.

The following account was written out by the mother of
the child whose legs were cured : —

" My baby, who was three months old, had had a weak-
ness in his instep since he was born. His feet hung down in
such a way that the soles turned inwards, and the instep was

* The barbarous and worse than useless practice I — J. Elliotson.
VOL. IX, E E


416 Mesmerisation of distinct Cerebral Organs^

on a line with the leg. The doctor told me he would have
clnb-feet unless they were splintered or bandaged so as to be
constantly in the right position ; and I had from him first a
wooden splint, afterwards a gntta percha one. It was
hardly possible to keep either of these on so yonng a baby,
and I did not know what to do with the feet. When Mrs.

saw them in July she passed her hand over them for

about five minutes ; in less time than that the feet had drawn
up into their right position. I passed my hand over them in
the same way some times afterwards, and four days after they

were done by Mrs. , I took the baby to the doctor, who

said the feet were quite well : and they have remained so
ever since.

Susan Childs.'*

XII. An instance of the Mesmerisaiion of distinct Cerebral
Organs during the effects of Chloroform. By Mr. John
Alexander, London. Communicated by Dr. EUiotson.

** If the practice and example of past ages, of what duration bo ever, had been
thonght of weight enough to over-rule sdl other evidence, no improvement of
science, or reformation of religion, nor even Christianity itself, could ever have
made its way into the world." — Contbrs Middlbton,* RemarJcs on two pant'
phiet8 lately published agaifut Dr, Middleton*8 Introductory Discourse : the one,
intituledf Observations on that Discourse in ansttfer to the AiUhor's prejudice, i(c.
The other. The Jesuit Cahalfarther opened; or, a Defence of Dr. ChapmaiCs late
Charge. With a preface to their remarks, giving a brief account of a certain
book, which professes to exhiMt a jvU, true, and comprehensive view qf Chris-
tianity, Sfc, as it was taught and practised by the Universal Church during the
first four centuries, with some occasional ructions on the said book.

To Dr. EUiotson.

47, Botolph Lane, 27th August, 1851.

Sir, — Believing you to be interested in anything con-
nected with mesmerism and phrenology, I write you the
following facts.

Some time ago I was in a counting-house in Aberdeen,

* In an account of my note to the first article in the last Zoist hy the editor
of an Irish newspaper, it was said that Conyers Middleton wasaninfidd. Nothing
lowers a person more in my estimation than to hear him call another an infidel.
If men search diligently, in the spirit of truth, they ought to be pitied, not re-
viled, should they come to conclusions different from our own : and those who differ
from us in opinion may be truly good, far better than ourselves. The very best
and the wisest men on earth have been caUed infidels, by their inferiors in virtue
and wisdom. The Turks call Christians infidel dogs. Dr. Middleton was one of
the wisest, best informed, and ezceUent among mankind. If he were an infidel ibr
not believing in any asserted miracles since the time of the apostles, so have been
hundreds of thousands of good Christians.

In the Eneyclopadia Britannica* is the following statement : — ** It was long

* 1842. Article CAm^ianf/y. See also Bishop Kaye's £ccfe«ta«<tca/ Atf/ory
of the Second and Third Centuries, p. 98.


during the effects of Chloroform. 417

and with me a young man to whom I administered chloroform
at the time when it was first introduced ; and the eficct of it
was the following. He became not completely overpowered
or motionless^ but restive and in fact bent on striking every
thing near him without regard to the pain that might result.
Now I had remarked previously that this youth^s leading pro-
pensity seemed to be destructiveness^ from the satisfaction he
' evinced in cutting up pencils^ boxes^ &c.^ &c. Thislsuggested
to me the idea of trying his cerebral organs while he was in
this state. The first organ tried was Veneration; and it
answered most satisfactorily. Next Destructiveness, when he
commenced the old game. Then Self-esteem^ and his proud
manner and gesture could not be mistaken. From the mode
in which he gains his livelihood I am perfectly satisfied there
was no tricky and that he knew nothing of phrenology.

the current opinion, even among Protestants, that a miraculous power con-
tinued for several centuries to reside in the Christian church. When Dr. Mid-
dleton controverted this opinion in his Free Inquiry j he encountered the most
vehement and acrimonious opposition ; and many of the clergy, with Archbishop
Seeker at their head, thought themselves warranted in representing this lingering
power AS AN ARTICLE OF FAITH. But the progTCss of reason, though slow, is
commonly certain ; and the present Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Kaye, has ventured
to express himself in the following terms : — * My conclusion then is, that the
power of working miracles was not extended beyond the disciples, upon whom the
apostles conferred it by the imposition of hands.''

I have not been able to discover a line in Middleton's works declaring or
insinuating infidelity : and in some passages he distinctly declares his belief in
Christianity.

When he had written his celebrated Letter Jrom Borne, that every body
ought to study and never forget, he was attacked as an infidel by a Roman Ca-
tholic, whom he answered in a most masterly Prefatory Discourse to the second
edition of his Letter from Rome, ''This," says Middleton, '' is the constant
refuge of baffled zealots, to throw the odium of infidelity and free thinking on
those who dare to expose their impostures." '' I take this occasion to declare that
I look upon miracles, when accompanied with all the circumstances proper to
persuade us of the reality of the facts said to be performed, and of the dignity of
the end for which they were performed, to be the most decisive proofs that can be
given of the truth and divinity of any religion. This was evidently the case of the
Jenoish and of the Christian miracles, wrought in such a manner as could leave
no doubt in the senses of those who were the witnesses of them ; and for the
noblest end^ for which the Deity can be conceived to interpose himself, the uni-
versal good and salvation of man. For the Jewish and Christian dispensations
are but different parts of one and the same scheme : mutually illustrating and con-
firming each other's authority : and from this view of them, in which they should
always be considered as necessarily connected and dependent on each other, we
see the weakness of that objection, commonly made to the Mosaic part, on the
account of its being calculated for the use only of a peculiar people ; whereas, in
truth, it was the beginning, or first opening of an universal system ; which, from
the time of Moses, was gradually manifested to the world by the successive mis-
sions of the PropTiets till that fulness of time or coming of the Messiah, when
life and immortality were brought to light by the Gospel, as the chief good and
happiness of man perfectly revealed to him."

How a man who writes thus can merit the reproach of infidelity, the bigoted
only, who hate all who attempt to use their intellect freely for overthrowing
superstition and imposture, can explain.

E E 2


418 Me9meri$aiian of £Mtmct Cerebral OrganM,

He had been with me for twelve months at the time, and I
oonld phice every confidence in his veracity. Trosting this
may interest you,

I am. Sir, yonrs most respectfnlfy',

JOHK Al^XANBSK.

P.S. I tried him once afterwards ; bnt finom some reason
or other he would not '' go off'' : he would not dose his eyes^
although I gave him a double dose of chloroform. His be-
haviour was in fact that of one half mentally deranged, and
I have therefore been deterred firom ever again experimenting
with chloroform.


KOTE BT BR ELLIOTSON.

I have learnt from Mr. Alexander that, as the young man
had left Aberdeen, there were no means of ascertaining
whether bis cerebral organs could be affected by touching
over them with the fingers in the ordinary state. Not a mes-
meric pass was made or any other mesmeric means used on
the occasion except the application of the fingers over the re-
spective organs.

The condition induced by ether and chloroform is si-
milar to that induced by mesmerism : it is sleep-waking,
varying from partial inactivity of the nervous system to pro-
found coma — with this difference, that there is no danger of
the coma going on till its intensity becomes death when pro-
duced by mesmerism, but the greatest danger of this from
mismanagement, and even in some cases of great suscepti-
bility with the best management, in the case of ether and
chloroform, because they are chemical poisons which enter
into the blood, pervade the system, and more or less change
the composition of the fluids and solids.

In No. XVI., pp. 580-1, I remarked, —

''One patient, it is declared, 'knew what the operator was
doing ; perceived him, for example, take hold of the tooth and
draw it out, felt the grating of the instruments, but still felt no
pain.'

" In another, '^the features assumed an expression of pain, and
the hand was raised.'

"Another 'flinched and frowned, and raised his hand to his
mouth.'

" But all, on coming out of the stupor, declared they had felt
no pain. Dr. Forbes was present at the amputation of the thigh
by Mr. Liston, and says that the man seemed partially conscious
and declared that in his sleep he had heard some words and felt


during the effects of Chloroform, 419

something was being done to his limb, but that he had felt no
pain. Some have known all that was going on« some have talked,
and some have recollected mnch or all afterwards.

** What was the conduct of the Medical and Chirurgical Society
and of writers in medical journals and newspapers, because the poor
man, whose leg was amputated without pain by Mr. Ward in
Nottinghamshire, moaned, as in a disturbed dream, after the lee
was off, and on wakine said he thought he had once heard a kind
of crunching, but had felt no pain and knew nothing that had
passed ? Why, he was violently and coarsely pronounced by accla-
mation a trained impostor, and his case not allowed to remain on
the minutes. I beg the world to read pages 10, 11, 33, 34, 55,
of my Pamphlet.

''The truth, unsuspected by Messrs. Liston, Wakley, Boott,
and the rest of the eager antimesmerists, is, that the state induced
by ether is somnambulism — the very same state as the mesmeric —
which varies from deep coma to more or less partial activity of
brain. In both instances it is induced artificially ; but in mesmerism
it is induced by a living frame, in inhalation it is induced by an in-
animate compound."*

A lady having informed me that under chloroform she
saw with her eyes closed^ I wrote to her for particulars : and
she kindly sent me the following answer : —

" Dear Dr. Elliotson, — The last time I took chloroform
my eyes were certainty closed when able to see : it was the
first time I distinctly noticed it. I was at the time in a sort
of sleep. At all times when under it I have had as it were a
bright light in the head^ — the same as when mesmerised.

" I know a young lady who went with a fnend who was
chloroformed for the extraction of a tooth. While she was in
a state of insensibility^ the young lady who was at the other
end of the room with her back turned to the back of the
chair in which the patient was, let a bottle fall on a soft sub-
stance : it broke, and the lady immediately exclaimed, ' Oh,
Georgie, how could you be so stupid? but I knew you'd do
it from the awkward way in which you took it up.'

" In haste.

" Yours very truly,

" M G .

'' , Dec. 22, 1851.''

* In No. XVIIT., Dr. EsdaUe wiU be found in his trials with ether to have
made the same remark : — *' Here then is a most exact imitation of the physical
phenomena witnessed in the mesmeric trance, and the sleep-waking state caused
by ether beautifully illustrates the distinction between aensation and consciousness
so often seen in the mesmeric state, and which I have insisted upon so frequently,
with little effect I fear. These men were capable of talking and acting, and made


420 Mesmerisaiion of dUtinct Cerebral Organs,

Insensibility to pain from mechanical causes in the case of
both mesmerisation and of narcotisation hj ether or chloro-
form may take place in one of two di£Perent degrees : it may
be simple loss of sensibility to mechanical pain^ while the
patient hears^ talks^ walks^ &c.^ or does more or fewer of
these actions ; or it may arise from deep coma^ insensibility
to pain being bat one of the portions of the general stupe-
faction. When a mesmerised patient falls into sleep-wakings
and still feels pain from mechanical causes^ and we wish that
he should not, we must try to increase the sleep of his sleep-
waking till absolute coma is produced ; and then the surgical
operation may be performed, provided we maintain the state
by a continuation of mesmeric processes, — such as holding
the points of the fingers upon the eyes.

Now in the mesmeric sleep-waking we frequently can
excite distinct cerebral organs by touching over them : and in
the narcotic sleep-waking there may be the same possibiUty
in many patients : but surgeons, considering the use of their
instruments to be sufficiently interesting, and being too proud
to cease to remain ignorant of mesmerism and despise it,
have not made trials to ascertain the fact. Yet I cannot
doubt it, and the present appears to be an example of it.

Still some writers assert that occasionally persons who
have never been mesmerised may in their ordinary state*
have distinct cerebral organs excited mesmerically. But I
imagine this to be a rare occurrence. When persons have
been mesmerised and distinct cerebral organs excited by the
finger, I know that in their ordinary statef organs may be
excited in the same way : just as the arms and legs of persons
in the ordinary state may be stiffened if they have been stiff-
ened in the mesmeric state of those persons, j:

The singular history of the discovery of the possibility of
exciting distinct cerebral organs mesmerically I published in
No. III., pp. 236-8 ;§ and farther on, pp. 240-44, gave ample

the reasonable request to have their eyes opened, although they were uncon-
scious of a deluge of water that was fi&lling on their naked bodies from a height.

** The opponents of mesmerism will probably have little difficulty in believing
all this, because it was done ' gecundum artem,' with an orthodoxly nauseous
drug."

* See No. XII., p. 482. f No. XII., p. 481.

t No. III., p. 245; XII., p. 481.

$ The discovery was made in America by Dr. Collyer, and positively after-
wards denied and rejected by him : afterwards Mr. Mansfield made the same dis-
covery in Clare Hall, Cambridge, without any knowledge of what Dr. Collyer
had done> and quite accidentally. When I announced their discovery in the London
Phrenological Society, Mr. Atkinson rose and said that he likewise had made it.
However, he gave no proof of his assertion : and, grand as the discovery was, he


during the effects of Chloroform. 421

proofs that the effects were mesmbric^ dependent upon the
fingers and not npon the imagination of the patient or the
wiU of the operator :* some of these proofs were obtained
by design^ some accidentally : and I believe were original,
though in mentioning them Dr. Gregory, no doubt through
not having seen them in ITie Zoist, in many respects I am
convinced the most important work of the age, does not refer
to their original source.

I more regret that this unacquaintance with The Zoist has
led Dr. Gregory to speak of some alleged discoveries by Mr.
Atkinson as important, and make no allusion to their denial
by another experimenter.f It is six years ago since I wrote
the following paragraph in No. XII., pp. 467-8 : —

** At page 73 I said that the subject of these cerebellar organs
required much more investigation. Over whatever part of the cere^
bellum I laid the point of my finger, universal sensibility of her
surface returned as lonp as my finger was there, — she became sen-
sible of mechanical injury and of temperature ; and no effect iu
regard to her muscles took place over whatever part of the cerebel-
lum I placed my finger. These experiments were repeated with the
same results till I was tired ; and I have lately tried in vain to
prove the alleged cerebellar organs upon others whose various cere-
bral organs can be affected. The cerebellum has been considered by
some physiologists to be particularly concerned with sensation and
by others with motion : and Gall did not wish to deny that it might
have other functions than those which he discovered. Mr. Gardiner
thought that a mesmeric patient had discovered to him organs in the
fore-part of the side of the head, relating to the five senses, &c. I
made some experiments at his request upon Rosina. At first a
shadow of probability was given to the opinion, but perseverance iu
patient investigation proved the whole to be groundless. I have
never yet known a discovery in science made by a sleep-waker.
Gall remarks that, ' unfortunately scientific discoveries still have to
be made by the long and laborious method of experience, notwith-
standing the magnetized see all their internal structure in the
clearest manner, and magnetism has been practised so long.' "

Mr. Atkinson's discoveries have been confirmed by no
one : and as to the clairvoyant lady who made the revelation
of these discoveries, when I witnessed the case with Dr.
Symes and another we regarded her sayings as mere wan-
dering : and so I still regard them. I remember that at one.
part of the head were organs for being busy I

had communicated it to none of us. Such unsupported claims in any science
excite a smile.

* For other observations which I have made on this curious subject, see No.
VI., pp. 227-8. Indeed see pp. 222-28, and No. IX., pp. 68-71.

f Letters on Animal Maffnetism.


( 4S2 )

XIII. Case of Vision at a distance. By Wm. Gregory, M.D.,
Professor of Chemistry in the University of Edinbargh.
In a letter to the Editor.

SiB^ — ^Abont the end of last April, or early in May, I
went with a friend to visit a lady in a provincial town, at
some distance from Edinburgh. This lady had been once or
twice mesmerised by my friend, and had exhibited consider-
able lucidity. On this occasion, besides my friend and my-
self, another lady and gentleman were present. While we
were all busily conversing, and Miss — waa speaking to
me, my friend, who was sitting on the opposite side of the
room from her, fixed his eyes intently on her, without her
being aware of the fact. In a very few minutes she ceased
to speak, and was found to be in the mesmeric sleep. She
spoke readily, when addressed by the mesmeriser, who de-
sired me to take her hand, and then told her to speak to me,
which she did, and agreed to answer any questions I might
ask. As she told me, on enquiry, that she could see toler-
ably well, I then requested her to visit my house in Edin-
burgh^ which was, as I and my family also were, quite
unknown to her. She soon told me that she was there, and
described accurately the external appearance of the house and
its situation, the lobby, staircase, and public rooms, with their
furniture, as far as I requested her to do so. She then said
that she saw only one lady in the house, whose person and
dress she correctly described, as she did also those of three
servants. I put no leading questions, but simply requested
her to look and tell me what or whom she saw.

I next requested her to visit my brother's house, which is
about two miles from Edinbargh, but without telling her this.
She soon said, " I see a large house, irregular in shape, stand-
ing in a garden, with trees close to it. The roof is irregular,
and at one part there is a bow window, looking into the
garden; at another, a large balcony, also looking to the
garden.^' I asked her to go into the room with the bow
window, in which she saw a bed, and in the middle of the
room a table with books, &c., on it. Thinking her mistaken,
I said, ^^ Do you see anything else, besides books and orna-
ments there?'' "No;" was the decided answer. I then
asked if she saw any plants or flowers in that room, but she
declared positively tber&were none. I still thought her mis-
taken, as a short time before I had seen a large collection of
ferns in that room, but she could see nothing of the kind,
except in a conservatory at the side of the house. I then de-
sired her to look at the garden, which she did, and she soon


Case cf Vision at a distance. 428

discovered two strange half-open places^ as she called them,
one long and lower, and more closed, the other much higher,
round, and more open. The latter, she said, had posts or
pillars, and the spaces between were filled with something
very open, such as wire or cord. She had never seen such
things before, but thought they looked like cages. They
stood, she said, not among the flowers, but just outside of
the garden. In the smaller she saw a good many birds, and
named pigeons, crows, and magpies. In the larger she saw
two large birds, which, after reflection she declared to be
eagles. She was now desired to look for my brother, and
said she saw a man, whom she took to be him, crossing the
garden to the smaller aviary, and throwing corn to the birds
in it. When asked what the eagles were fed with, she said,
after a time, that it was with live creatures, cats, and this she
thought very cruel. When asked to describe the person she
saw; she said he was tall and fair, with very broad and high
shoulders ; that he wore whiskers ; that his unmentionables
were black with narrow white stripes far apart, as if drawn
with chalk; that his sleeves were white, in fact, she said
after consideration, that he had no coat on, but was in
his shirt sleeves ; that his waistcoat was not buttoned, and
that he wore neither collar nor neckcloth, nor hat. This
primitive costume amused her so much that she laughed loud
and long at the idea of it. Now it happens that my brother
works much in his garden, and therefore frequently appears
in it exactly as she saw him, while on that day he wore the
unmentionables described, and at that very hour gave com
to the birds in the smaller aviary. I found also, that, since
I had seen them, the ferns had been removed from the room
to the conservatory. Every detail she gave was strictly correct,
and it was plain that she was not reading my thoughts, other-
wise she would have seen the ferns where I supposed them
to be. Even had she read my thoughts, however, this would
have been equally wonderful with what she did.

I now asked her to go to Greenock, forty or fifty miles
from where we were, (Edinburgh was nearly thirty miles
distant,) and to visit my son, who resides there with a friend.
She soon found him, and described him accurately, being
much interested in the boy, whom she had never seen nor
heard of. She saw him, she said, playing in a field outside of
a small garden in which stood the cottage, at some distance
from the town, on a rising ground. He was playing with a
dog. I knew there was a dog, but had no idea of what kind,
so I asked her. She said it was a large but young Newfound-
land, black with one or two white spots. It was very fond of


424 Sttbmesmeriitn and Imaginaiian.

the boy and played with him. '' Oh/' she cried suddenly^
" it has jumped up and knocked off his cap/' She saw in the
garden, a gentleman reading a book and looking on. He was
not old, bnt had white hair, while his eyebrows and whiskers
were black. She took him for a clergyman, but said he was
not of the Established Chorch, nor Episcopalian, bnt a Pres-
byterian dissenter. (He is, in fact, a clergyman of the highly
respectable Cameronian body, who, as is well known, are
Presbyterians, and adhere to the covenant.) Being asked to
enter the cottage, she did so, and described the sitting room.
In the kitchen she saw a yonng maidservant preparing dinner,
—for which meal a leg of mntton was roasting at the fire, but
not quite ready. She also saw another elderly female. On
looking again for the boy, she saw him playing with the dog
in firont of the door, while the gentleman stood in the porch
and looked on. Then she saw the boy run i^ stairs to the
kitchen, which she observed with surprize was on the upper
floor of the cottage, (which it is,) and receive something to
eat from the servant, — she thought a potato.

I immediately wrote all these detiuls down and sent them
to the gentleman, whose answer assured me that all, down to
the minutest, were exact, save that the boy did not get a po-
tato, but a small biscuit, from the cook. The dog was what
she described ; it did knock off the boy's cap at the time and
in the place mentioned ; he himself was in the garden with a
book, looking on ; there was a leg of mutton roasting, and
not quite ready ; there was an elderly female in the kitchen
at that time, although not of the household. Every one of
which &cts was entirely unknown to me, and could not, there-
fore, have been perceived by thought reading, althoagh^ had
they been so, as I have already stated, this would not have
been a less wonderful, but only a different phenomenon.

I shall send you another case for your next number. The
above case I regard as a very satisfactory one, inasmuch as I
did not know beforehand that I was to try any experiments at
all, and had never seen the lady before.

I remain, &c., &c.,
Dec. 1851. William Qbegoby.

XI Y. Submesmerism and Imagination. By Dr. Elliotson.

** How are the delnsions of homoeopathy, mesmerism, electro-biology, &c., to
be met ? There is only one inflnence that can counteract them, — edacation :
increase the number of thinking minds and you diminish the stock upon which
quackery feeds/' *' When the will feels and dares assert its freedom, neither
empiricism, dogmatism, homoeopathy or mesmerism, can make the mind the
victim of delusion." — Lionel Beale, of King's College. Medical Times, June
21, 1851 ; p. 683.


By Dr. ElUoison. 425

In No. XXXIII., I furnished an article on what is so absurdly
and ignorantly termed electro-biology : and endeavoured to
shew that the phenomena resulted from imagination^ excited
by suggestion in a slight degree of mesmerism^ — we all know
that imagination has a mighty power in the full mesmeric
state. The facts were undeniable : and, though great mystery
and novelty were affected, the whole matter appeared per-
fectly clear, and ought never to have been a mystery. A gen-
tleman named Dods seems to have been the first to shew that
a very little mesmerism was sufficient to give great power
to the imagination. The view which I entertained of the
subject has been adopted, and the very name submesmerism
has given satisfaction. I lately received a letter from Mr.
Stone, in which he honestly agrees with me that the facts
should be called mesmeric and occur in a " submesmeritf' state.'*'
All my friends who attended the lectures of Messrs.
Stone and Darling in Edinburgh and London assure me that
the word mesmerism was not mentioned in their lectures, and
that the audience was not led to suppose that mesmerism had
any share in the effects. This I saw at a lecture by Dr. Darling.
Medical men in general do not appreciate the power of
imagination. They talk of it when their nervous patients
complain, and accuse the sufferers of fancying distress : but
they have no idea of the part it plays in our nature. They
do not, in general, believe that impressions upon the mother
affect the anatomy and physiology of the child : though I
know no fact better established, and have given some remark-
able instances in my Human Physiology. We mesmerists
have all been very careful to exclude the influence of imagin-
ation upon our patients. Our opponents have been of three
classes : one coarse and very ignorant, who derided our facts
and called our patients impostors, and us fools or impostors
also: one, very poor- observers, superficial, and too self-
satisfied to study the subject in earnest : and the third, be-
lievers, but dishonestly pretending to disbelieve. By our. care
to exclude all suggestion for imagination, and thus disarm
the second class, who see imagination only, and to obtain
pure mesmerism, we have established the truth of the pure
mesmeric power, exerted by passes, pointing, fixed look,
breathing, contact, the use of mesmerised substances, the

*- Mr. Stone says, *' Although these effects were not produced by mesmerism,
it would be generally better understood under the name of mesmerism, and per-
haps it would be better if no other was adopted." I am satisfied that many of
Mesmer^s effects resulted from imagination, suggestion, imitation, though the
evident mesmeric agency so fixed his attention that he overlooked the influence of
imagination.


426 Submesmerism and hnagination,

wSli &c. Bat we have neglected the exertion of great power
over patients that we might have excited : and after all^ in
8pite of all onr precautions^ suggestion has freqaently com-
bined with our mesmeric processes to produce the effect : as
I have long shewn in my patients to my friends and in my
earliest papers in Hie Zoist,* I have pointed out the great
power of imagination^t ^^d allowed thus that the French
Commission were justified in ascribing partly the effects which
they beheld to imagination. I have had patients in whom
imagination at last played the greatest part in the pheno-
mena : so that by suggestion I could produce every pheno-
menon which at first I had prodnced mesmerically : and at
last suggestion became so powerful as to exceed the mesmeric
influence. Some patients^ awakened by tran verse passes at a
moderate distance^ could not be awakened by them at last
unless in making the tranverse passes my hands were rubbed
against each other and the patient heard the friction : be-
cause, after a time, in making the transverse passes I had
fallen into the habit of allowing my hands to rub audibly
against each other. In No. XVIII., p. 142, Mr. Chandler has
related a case in which the power of suggestion was remarkably
shewn by him. He governed his patient by it.J In 1850,
Mr. Chandler extracted a tooth painlessly through suggestion.
A patient, whom he had often mesmerised into sleep-waking
and who remained very susceptible, applied to him to have a
tooth extracted. He said only, " Oo to sleep, Maria.^^ She
went instantly to sleep : and he extracted a tight double tooth
without pain or any expression of pain.§

I have detailed a long series of experiments in No. XI.,
p. 362, exhibiting the well-known and wonderful effects of
suggestion without the conscious knowledge of the patient
at the time of the effect : the suggestion being made in the
sleep-waking, and producing its effect in the ordinary waking
state when all the occurrences of the sleep-waking were
buried in oblivion to the patient^s consciousness, though the
brain unconsciously retained the impression and acted in
obedience to it. I cannot too often recommend the study of
those experiments to the physiologist and psychologist.

Since the assistance of imagination is proved to be im-
portant in mesmerism, it is our duty no longer to endeavour
to keep clear of imagination, but to avail ourselves of it for

• No. III., p. 313—1843 ; No., IV., pp. 429, 453 ; No. IX., p. 48—1845.
t One patient I n^e to munch aloes, and another wormwood, with delight,
fiftncying it sweet cake, as I said it was. No. III., p. 346 ; XII., p. 461.

X It and the brother's case related in No. II., p. 162, deserve carefol perusal.
§ No. XXXII., p. 394.


By Dr. Elliotson. 427

the prevention of pain and the aUeviation and cure of disease,
while we employ the usual mesmeric means to the utmost.
Of course we shall furnish arguments to the ignorant for their
assertion that mesmerism works by imagination only : and
this has been a great result of the ^* electro-biological" lec-
tures. But we must bear with this, for the good of our fellow-
creatures, and remain convinced that the power of mesmerism
will establish itself by shining forth in a manner which must
at length convince all mankind that there is a power besides
suggestion, and a state independent of imagination.

To shew the benefit of calling in the aid of imagination,
I will relate some communications which I have received from
different gentlemen.

" Rotherhithe, Oct. 22nd, 1851.
"My dear Sir, — I enclose you another mesmeric tooth from the
same patient as the last, and under just the same circumstances.
Her mesmeriser said, * Go to sleep, Maria,' just as he did before,
and she had the tooth extracted with her eyes wide open, and, to an
ordinary observer, in a state of consciousness ; but eridently not
feeling anythins, and not moring a muscle: it would puzzle the
strongest-nerved person to take it as coolly as she did.

** Yours very truly,

"Thomas Chandler."

Such a fELct as this shews that in those previously affected
with mesmerism/ mesmerisation may not be requisite to a pow-
erful effect by imagination : just as in them we can without
fresh mesmerisation excite rigidity of an arm or excite dis-
tinct cerebral organs. In some who have never been mes-
merised^ submesmerism even may not be required.

"Bungay, 18th Sept., 1851.

" Dear Doctor, — I was absent from home when your letter arrived,
and, although at a distance of only forty miles, wa» not within one
day's post.

"I ha?e yerj few facts, and still fewer views, respectins electro-
biology. My experience is this : an intelligent friend told me he
had submitted to the treatment, and had undoubtedly found that
his will and his senses were subordinated to the will of the operator.
He described the mode of operation so far as he had observed it,
and I determined to see for myself. Accordingly I attended a lec-
ture by Dr. Darling, followed by experiments by Mr. Stone, and
observed throughout as closely and as accurately as I was able. The
apparent object of the lecturer was to shew that the effect produced
was purely electrical, but the whole was so exceedingly vague, that
I was compelled to feel that the lecturer was either culpably deficient
in any definite idea, or was consciously endeavouring to mystify his
audience, and to lead them on a false scent.

" The operations of Mr. Stone consisted in setting the subjects to


428 Sfdnneimerim and Imaginaium.

gaze at a bit of metal (copper and zinc soldered together), prescribing
at the same time the utmost practicable abstraction of the mind from
all other things, and at intervals of a few minutes gazing into the
eves of each, while with one hand he grasped his head, and with
the other one of his hands ; on each occasion he concluded with one
or more rapid passes, masked however under the appearance of
smoothing the hair, or stroking the face. At the end of about twenty
minutes several persons were found to be more or less susceptible,
but it seemed necessary for the operator to employ the loudest tones
and most vehement gesticulations in order to act with effect upon the
subjects.

" On mj return home I tried the same mode, so far as I had
observed it, on above a score of persons of both sexes and of eveiy
age. To the best of my belief, not more than one or two had ever
heard of electro-biology, or had any guess of what I proposed or
expected. Of the whole number I found, I think, seven susceptible
in various degrees, but I further experimented on only four, who were
highly susceptible, Tn these cases I found the effect complete. I
could cause them to see, feel, or believe whatever I directed, and,
on the contrary, I could render them so entirely insensible, that I
have a strong assurance they might have undergone a grave surgical
operation without consciousness of pain.

*' I had observed that whenever Mr. Stone failed in acting on a
susceptible person, he caused him to gaze on his eyes for a few
seconds, or made rapid passes down his person in front or behind ;
and in my own cases I have discovered that I produce but an imper-
fect result, unless, when I give a direction, I catch the eye of the
person.

" In three of the four cases it has not been necessary to repeat
the original means of producing the effect ; but in the fourth case I
found it needful each time of operating to repeat those means.

" The former three cases are those of my own children, and I
may remark that, whereas I had often previously attempted in the
usual modes to affect them by mesmerism, and had invariably failed,
thev became highly susceptible of the mesmeric action immediately
on being thus affected.

*' The facts, so far as I have been able to observe them, are so
few and so little varied, that I have seen no means of generalizing
them, and can discover no point on which they seem to converge.
I have seen not the slightest reason to suppose that electricity, as we
commonly imderstand the term, in its usual developments, and in
subjection to its ascertained laws, has anything to do with the matter.
Seeing that the effects are originally produced by the same means
virhich excite mesmeric action, that where persons are imperfectly
susceptible the effect is immediately heightened by similar means,
and that, where a high degree of susceptibility is found and excited,
an equally high degree of mesmeric susceptibility is at the same time
developed. I am prepared to believe that the mesmeric and the elec-
tro-biological phenomena have an identical origin ; are but varying
developments of the same principle.


By Dr. ElUotstm. . 429

'* Beyond this my experience does not entitle me to specnlate,
and I am by no means willing to add to the mass of crude theories
on these interesting but recondite subjects.

*' I by no means desire to see my name in prints but if there be
anything here which you think worth condensing or abstracting, and
to which the authentication of my name would add yalue, I do not
absolutely refuse to allow it to be used.

" Dear Doctor, very obediently yours,
" Dr. EUiotson." *' Charles Childs.

"Back Hall, Baldwin Street, Bristol,
"April 13, 1851.
*' Sir, — On Friday evening one of my patients, whom I am at-
tending for rheumatism, asked me to mesmerise her cousin, that her
uncle and aunt might see a few experiments. I sent Miss I. H.,
a young lady about 24 years of age, into the mesmeric sleep, by
the passes, m about one minute. I then ordered her to open her
eyes, which she did, but could not keep them open. I said, ' Open
them and keep them open : you can.' She opened them, and they
continued open during the rest of the evening. I said, ' Hold up
your arm.' She did so. 'You can't put it down.' She tried, but
could not. • Are you very well V * Yes very.' * You can't speak.'
She tried, but could not. ' Put your arm down.' It fell imme-
diately. 'What is your name?' *I. H., of course.' *You have
forgotten it.' * I have indeed ; I knew it once, but I can't recall it
now.' * You know it.' * I. H. is my name.' ' You stammer.' She
stammered very much for some time. * Now you can speak plainly.'
' Ah, yes, very well indeed.' * You can't get up.' She tried, but
appeared fastened to the chair. 'You can.' She rose directly.
* You can't sit.' She could not. * You can.' She sat down. Her
aunt then took her hand, and asked her if she knew her. 'Yes,
certainly, you are my aunt ; why do you think that I do not know
you?' 'You are asleep, are you not?' 'Asleep! no, certainly I
am wide awake. I know you all.' ' I pointed to her aunt, and said,
' Prince Albert ;' she instantly drew back, saying, ' well this is an
honour I never expected. Prmce Albert, I never could have thought
of seeing you.' ' But,' said her aunt, ' you call me Prince Albert;
why is that?' Miss I. H. replied, 'I can't tell you; I know you
are my aunt, but that man (pointing to me) has me in a spell, he
makes me believe anythiue he likes. I know you are my aunt, and
yet he makes me believe that you are Prince Albert.' Her aunt asked
her how she was dressed. She said, 'Your usual cap on with the
lace and ribbons.' I said, ' 'Tis a hat.' ' And a very high one too,*
she replied. I said, ' On your left is the Duke of Wellington,'
(there was no one there.) She turned round and said, ' I see him :
I know him well. That is certainly a very great honour to be be-
tween two such great men.' ' Shake him by the hand.' She did so,
and seemed much gratified. ' It rains hard.' ' Oh dear,' she said,
' I am wet through ; what shall I do?' 'Take this umbrella.' I
gave her a paper knife. She held it over her head. 'There I don't


480 Submesmerigm and Imaginaium.

feel the vet now.' *Toa have a shocking cold.' 'Ah, yes; my
oongh (cooghing) is very bad indeed. I am qnite hoarse' (she wheezed).
* You are well.* • Yes I am qnite well.' * It is very hot.' * And the
son shines heantifully indeed.' * What is this?' giving her a wafer
stamp. 'Why a wafer stamp of course.' 'Then you know what it
is r ' Yes, certainly ; why should I not V ' It's a candle.' ' Yes,
with a large flame.' ' Put your finger in the flame.' She held her
finger over the stamp, and cried with the pain I gave her a glass
of water, she said it was very refreshing. I said, ' It is port wine.'
She replied, ' It is rather weuc.' * It is very strong.' ' It is indeed
the best I have ever tasted.' ' It is ginger wine.' ' Yes ; and very
hot of ginger, it bums my month.' ' It is water.' ' Yes ; and nice
and cooting.' Her unde asked her if she knew what she was doing.
She said, ' Yes ; but that man compels me to obey ; whatever he teUs
me to do I must do ; he has a spell over me.' ' Is this a song,' said I,
or a piano piece,' giving her a newspaper. ' Oh, it is a song, because
there are words.' ' It is a newspaper.' ' I see it very well ; it is
full of politics.' ' Read it.' She then read it as fluently as I could
myselL I held my hand towards her, and told her she could not
hit my hand. She tried with all her might, hitting above, below,
sideways ; and she said, ' I should so like to hit it.' I said, ' You
can,' and she immediately struck it. After her obeying many other
commands, I made her sit down ; and (her eyes closed) proceeded
to demesmerise her, which I accomplished in about ten or fifteen
minutes. She had knovm nothing of anything that had taken place ;
during the last hour I felt certain that she was conscious ; but upon
demesmerising her I found that she had been in a thorough mes-
meric state. During these experiments I had only to speak and was
instantly obeyed, almost before the words were out of my mouth.
I did not exert the will, and spoke in a subdued tone of voice. I
tried a few of these experiments on Miss B., whom I am mesmer-
ising for cancer. She was wide awake. I said, pointing to her
mouth, ' You can't speak.' She could not. ' You can,' and she
then could. She said that, when before I had taken away her speech,
by passes over her mouth, it appeared as if her tongue was tied, but
that this time it seemed as though her brain could not convey her
words to her tongue. None of the other experiments succeeded.
I tried the same with Mrs. C, but only caused a difficulty in her
speech.

*'Mr, Pester (my clerk),

" He looked at the disk for about ten minutes. Mr. Harris, my
late partner, placed his fingers upon Fester's eyes, and said, ' You
can't open your eyes.' P. tried, but could not. He then said, ' You
can :' and P. did open them. He told P. that he could not speak :
but P. spoke, though with a slight hesitation. Nothing more was
attempted. But since then he has been made, after having gazed
on the disk, to taste water as water, as milk, and as cream ; and to
see it as such : he has been made to stammer a little : other experi-
ments did not succeed on him. He was perfectly conscious the whole


By Dr. Elliotson. 431

time, and did not require demesmerising. I tried some time back
to bring on the sleep in the usual way (he being ill), but could only
cause a drowsiness.

''Miss Starr.

"A young lady about 18 years of age. I placed my fingers
upon her eyes for about four or fLve seconds (not minutes), and asked
her if she felt sleepy, and she said, ' No/ 1 then drew the back of
my hands quietly across her forehead, and she said she felt sleepy.
I took my fingers from her eyes, and she was unable to open them.
I told her she could open them, and she did. I placed her in a
chair in the middle of the room ; I held her arm out and said, ' You
can't put it down.' Seeing that it was falling, I made tractive up-
ward passes over it, and it followed my hand. As she could not let
it down till I left off the passes, I told her she could not rise from
her chair, but she did easily. I made her sit again, went behind
her, made a pass down the spine without contact, and she was
unable to rise, though she repeatedly tried : and this young lady,
though conscious of everything that was doing, was obliged to be
demesmerised before she felt comfortable. She had never seen any
mesmeric experiments before. A friend of hers having gone down
to the street door (two pairs of stairs), she said, when he returned,

that she took him for Mr. , with whom he had been speaking,

though none of us knew that he had even gone to the door or seen
any one."


''Miss V .

" I had been attending her some time for indigestion, spinal
affection, &c. ; and could never induce sleep. I made her look at
the disk, but it irritated her. I put my fingers upon her eyes, and
told her she could not open them. She did it easily. I made her
shut them again, but could not fix them. I told her that she could
not keep them open, and, after insisting seven or eight times forcibly
that she could not keep them open, they closed, and, though she
tried hard, she was unable to open them. I, after a little time, told
her she could open them, and she did, but with a slight difficulty.
I told her she could not tell me her own name, (looking at her
steadily in the eye.) She said, ' Oh yes I can.' I insisted that she
could not, and she insisted that she could: till at last she said,
' Well really I cannot : it is impossible for me to do it.' I said,
' Now you can.' She pronounced her name. I told her she could
not do it without stammering : she insisted that she could ; but,
upon trying three or four times, and stammering each time, she
admitted that she could not. I made a pass down her arm, and it
became fixed. I had no occasion to demesmerise this lady.

"Miss V , the above lady's sister, suffers from severe

heat in the head. I gave her the disk : she closed her eyes in about
eight minutes : but in about ten minutes more the effect wore off,
and she became as usual. I placed my hand upon her head and
said, ' In half a minute your head shall be cold : it is cooler even

VOL. IX. p P


432 Submesmerism and Imagination,

now ;' and at the end of about half a minute I said, ' Now your
head is quite cold.' I took off my hand, and she said her head felt
as though a piece of ice were on it. Her head remained cooler during
the whole of the next day, and she slept well during the night.

''Miss Haynes being in the room during the time that I was
mesmerising her cousin, I placed the disk in her hand : but, after
looking at it for some time, she said it made her feel uncomfortable,
vnA preferred the passes with the hand. I made some passes, but
did not produce much effect, for she said the disk had unsettled her,
I was unable to induce any of the phenomena previously produced ;
but on Friday evening, she being again present, I used neither disk,
passes, nor anything else, but looked at her mouth and said, * You
can't speak.' She tried, but in vain. I said, 'You can now,'
and she spoke. I held up her arm and said, * You can't put it down.'
She found great difficulty in doing so, but succeeded at last. I gave
her a glass of water : she tasted it ; it was water. I made a few
passes over the water, and told her it was ginger wine. She said,
* It tastes like very good ginger wine, although I know it is onl^
water.' I made a few more passes over it, and ordered her to taste it
as a black draught. She did so, and made terrible faces, and it was
some time before I could prevent her being sick. Her cousin whis-
pered in my ear to make it raspberry vinegar. I gave her the glass
of water, and asked her what it tasted like. She said, ' It tastes
like orangeade or orange wine.' It being late, I was obliged to
leave. In this case she was neither biologized nor mesmerised. This
young lady subsequently had a double tooth extracted in the mes-
meric state induced by me, or rather whilst partly under the mes-
meric and partly under the sub-mesmeric state. She felt not the
slightest sensation of pain.

" Last evening some friends called in, and, the conversation turn-
ing upon electro-biology, a gentleman held a disk for a few minutes
in his hand looking at it. I then told him to close his eyes, and he
did. I said, ' You can't open your eyes.' He tried with all his
might, but could not. No other experiment answered, except on the
arm, which, when he was told he could not put it down, he found
some little difficulty in putting down. Another person was tried in
the same way with exactly the same result, though he found a slight
difficulty in speaking.

"On August 13th I called upon Mr. Dobbin, of this dty. In
the room was a surgeon who was attending Mrs. Dobbin for a nervous
disease, and eight or ten young ladies, and one of the young ladies
a neice of Mr. Dobbin I was told was very susceptible of mesmerism ;
and the surgeon, being to a certain extent a believer in mesmerism,
was desirous of seeing a few experiments tried upon a person in
whom he could be certain there was no deception, and asked the
young lady to allow herself to be put under the influence by me.
To this she assented. I took her hand and willed strongly. She
went into the thorough sleep in about two minutes. All the usual
phenomena of catalepsy, attraction, excitation of the phrenological
organs, &c., were perfect. Touching her on the nape of the neck


By Dr. Elliotson. 433v

prevented her from both singing and speaking. After I woke her up,
I tried the experiment of suggestion. I held her arm out^ and told
her that she could not put it down : and she could not. Her arm
was perfectly riffid, whereas before when she was in the mesmeric sleep
her arm was only cataleptic. I told her she could not avoid getting
up from her chair, and she said, 'Well I am determined I unll not get
up, for certainly I can do as I please.' But in less than a minute
she got up, saving, * I must do it.' I made her walk to any part
of the room, ao anything that I told her, give awav her bracelets,
&c., by merely tellmg her that she must do it ; but, being told by me
that she ooula not sit down, and, upon trying, finding she could not,
some one spoke to me and took off my attention when she sat down
immediately. After shewing an immense number of similar experiments
I gave her up, and mesmerised Mrs. Dobbin by gazing at the eyes.
She closed them in about three or four minutes : one pass was suffi-
cient to make the arms as rigid as iron. It took me some little time
to demesmerise her. She had never lost her consciousness. After
she had awakened and conversed for some time with her medical
attendant, I told her to close her eyes, and she did so. I told her
she could not open them : she tried but could not, and it took me
full ten minutes to open them for her. I then held one arm out,
and told her she could not put it down. She tried, but could not
succeed : her arm was perfectly rigid. It also took a long time to
restore it to its natural state. Her son, a young man about 23 or
24 years, of age, came in at the end of the experiments. I put my
fingers on his closed eyes, and told him that he could not open them.
He did open them, but with much difficulty. I tried it again
directly, and his lids became perfectly fixed, to the astonishment and
laughter of the young ladies. I touched his lips, and he was un-
able to open them ; also, when his mouth was wide open, I prevented
him from shutting it. It must be observed, that these experiments
were performed without the slightest preparation, either with the
usual mesmeric process or the disks.

** A gentleman connected with the Bristol and Exeter Bailway,
whom I had occasionally mesmerised, and who was very susceptible,
called on me one morning to be mesmerised for the purpose of re-
ducing a hard swelling that had come on the top of his head. I
had usually sent him off in about three minutes, and rendered him
perfectly unconscious of pain ; for on one occasion, he having ex-
pressed himself doubtful as to his being pricked with a pin without
his feeling it, and wishing us to prove it to him, I stuck a pin in the
back of his hand ; and he confessed when awake that he had not the
slightest knowledge of our having done it till he saw the pin sticking
in his hand. But on this morning I placed a disk in his hand instead
of sending him off in my usual manner^ and in about one minute he
gave a deep sigh, closed his eyes, and fell back in his chair. I did
what was necessary to the bump on his head, and then tried his sus-
ceptibility of pain ; and found that he could feel. I made a few
passes over his hand, and then tried him : but he still remained
susceptible of pain, and, in about a quarter of an hour from his

F F 2


434 Submesmerism and

fifst going off he woke up apontuieoiialj — ^a tlung that he had meoer
dome before when sent i^ by the umuU wteemene proeen : for it was
Qsoallj difficult to restore him.

** A Mr. Sanders, when present at some of my experiments, was
desirous of trying the effect of the disk. I pnt one in his hand,
and he gazed at it for ten minutes or more. I closed his eyes, and
told him that he could not open them. But he did open them easily.
I tried the same several times, but with no better success. I hdd
his arm out, and told him him he could not put it down : but he
lowered it busily, and felt not the slightest sdffiiess ; this I also tried
sereral times with the same want of success. I then held his arm
out, and, after making strong passes down it scTeral times, it became
so stiff that he could not move it. I tried no other eiqperiments
with him.

''Charles Jennings, whose case I haye mentioned in another
place, was sent off by my clerk with the disk, and neither he nor I
could produce catalepsy or rigidity. But, after I had sent him off
by the usual mesmeric process, I was able to render both arms and
1^ perfectly rigid.

" John Berry (a poor boy) can be made to do, not to do, and
believe, anything yon like, by merely saying a word without the
slightest preparation by either disk or the usual mesmeric passes. If
a hundred guineas were placed before him, and I told him he could
not touch it, he would not be able to do it. He has been frequently
mesmerised before being tried by submesmerism, and is a good sub-
ject.

" Tours truly,

'' S. D. Saunders,

''Back Hall, Bristol.

"P.S. The great advantage in the disks is that yon can try
the susceptibility of a number of persons at a time, and then choose
from them."

I have forwarded these experiments to The Zoist because
they were made by gentlemen who had not been induced to
pay a few pounds sterling for a secret^ as some too easily did
to different lecturers, engaging not to divulge it for three
months. In No. XXXIV., p. 191,* I mentioned that the
pretended secret of some was to touch and press certain spots
of the head or hand : and that not a word of mesmerism was
mentioned, any more than at the lectures. The gentlemen
whose cases I have related saw the nature of the phenomena
at once : that aU was imagination excited by suggestion, and
usually a little mesmerism, and sometimes will into the bargain.
As to electricity in the matter, there was no more than in
all the operations of nature.

* See also No. XXXIII., p. 110.


By Dr. Elliotson, 435

I said in No. XXXIII., p. 110, that ''the individual is
brought into a calm state by quietly gazing at something for
a length of time : and then the operator uses some of the
usual mesmeric means, — looking at the subject, making a few
passes, or touching the head more or less. All this is a degree
of mesmerisation : and it is an ascertained fact that our ima-
gination, which has an immense power over us at all times
and upon the child while it still forms a part of its mother,
has far greater effect in every degree of the mesmeric state.
How much the will may contribute we do not know. Expe-
riments to prove its share ought to be made without the sub-
ject having any means of knowing what the operator intends :
whereas in these experiments he is openly told what is to
happen to him.

" We regret that what is merely imagination with a greater
or less dash of mesmerism should be ushered in with a new
name. One calls it electro-biology, and another electro-psy-
chology. Now biology is but another word for physiology, o
the science of the powers and functions of living things ; and
some so designate physiology. As to the adjective electric,
all living phenomena, perhaps all the phenomena of nature,
are electric : and, if the reason for prefixing the word electric
is that the patient stares at zinc and copper, this is absurd,
for, if he stares at a piece of wood or sugar, the effect is the
same.'^

The terms electro-biology serve to deceive people as to
the real simple nature of the affair. It was right to demon-
strate the power of imagination, especially when aided by a
little mesmerism : but the true nature of it ought to have
been set forth — especially by those who professed to be doc-
tors of medicine. One of them called upon me long ago,
introduced by a friend, who, like another friend of mine, had
paid him five pounds for the secret ! He declined telling me
what he had to shew, and professed that it was not mes-
merism but a step beyond mesmerism, which required time
to explain. He never called again : and the world may now
see that the whole is a simple business : requiring no metals,
no contact with pressure upon certain parts, and no appear-
ance of conjuring or mystery. A man of science ought to
have declared the nature of the whole while he exhibited the

* I prefer the word imagination to snggestion, because the imagination which
is induced, though excited by suggestion, is often induced in the experiments far
more by a violent persuasion, amounting, as Mr. Sandby justly says, at p. 295,
to bullying. ** Sir, you cannot tell your name, I say you cannot, you know you
cannot,'' may be the imperious words of the experimenter, while perhaps he
stamps and shakes his fist and looks fierce.


436 Cure of long-continued Pain of the Eyes,

phenomena. Much good will ensue from the knowledge and
recognition of the great power of imagination and the em-
ployment of it to aid mesmerism. But imagination will not
take the place of mesmerism. For it often fails: and its
effects may cease when their continuance during an operation
is required. The sleep of mesmerism is frequently most be-
neficial and important : and the health of the mesmeriser has
frequently a powerful influence upon a patient^ so that different
mesmerisers produce effects of various degrees of advantage.
I will conclude with a quotation from Dugald Stewsit.
" It appears to me, that the general conclusions established
by Mesmer's practice, with respect to the physical effects of
the principle of imagination (more particularly in cases where
they co-operated together), are incomparably more curious
than if he had actually demonstrated the existence of his
boasted science : nor can I see any good reason why a phy-
sician, who admits the efficacy of the moral agents employed
by Mesmer, should, in the exercise of his profession, scruple
to copy whatever processes are necessary for subjecting them
to his command, any more than that he should hesitate about
employing a new physical agent, such as electricity or galvan-
ism," Elem. of the Phil, of the Human Mind, vol. iii., p. 221.


XV. Cure of long-continued Pain of the Eyes, by Mr, Stone.
By Mr. Dunscombe, J. P., of the County of Cork.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sib, — At the request of Mr. Stone I am induced to send
you a brief account of my case, which was cured by mes-
merism and electro-biology in eighteen months.

I may state that for upwards of seventeen years, from
early youth, I had been afflicted with a heat and pain in the
eyes at intervals, especially after reading by the light of
candles or of lamps. At the commencement of the period, I
had suffered somewhat from a protracted attack of dyspepsia,
which was aggravated, and afterwards made in a measure con-
stitutional, by constant drugging on the old system. How-
ever, by abandoning this method of treatment and adopting
the water-cure, I rapidly became better, and finally recovered
perfectly. I merely mention this matter incidentally, to ac-
count for a curious phenomenon, namely, that, as my health
improved, in a corresponding ratio did the pain in my eyes
become greater, and the intervals between the paroxysms
shorter ; and so well aware was I of this fact, that I often
partook of beverages (such as very strong tea) which I knew


By Mr. Stone. 487

would disagree with me, in order to relieve the eyes at the
expense of the stomach. I consulted several medical prac-
titioners on the subject of this pain, but not one of them had
the least idea of its cause, as the eyes presented no traces
of inflammation after or during the most violent paroxysms,
and the vision remained perfect at all times. However, hav-
ing heard and read much while in France two years ago of
the extraordinary performances of Madame Adele, and other
clairvoyantes of Cahagnet, I shortly afterwards consulted a
lady whose specialty was the cure of disease ; and, after a
careful examination by introvision, she declared that I was
in a perfectly healthy state, with the exception of a small
portion of the brain behind the eyes that was slightly in-
flamed in consequence of the pressure of some substance lodged
at the back of the eyes, and extending somewhat laterally on
either side. She said this pressed on the nerves connected
with the eyes, and caused all the pain I endured. She also
stated that it was curable ; but only by mesmerism aided by
certain stupes, &c. : she aJso said that the better my health
became, and the firmer my constitution, the more condensed
were these collections of matter, and as a consequence the
harder they pressed on the neighbouring nerves. I may here
observe, that, during the eighteen months I was under cure,
this lady was repeatedly consulted either by me in person, or
in my absence by my being called up by friends, I was also
examined by another young lady, who had the power of intro-
vision and was a beautiful thought-reader and mental tra-
veller. I have also had the assistance of another similarly
gifted^ and all three without any concert between them
agreed in the main points of my case.

I have kept a memorandum each week, but, as this would
occupy too much of your space, I send you a brief and con-
densed account of my notes.

On 20th of May, 1850. I commenced being mesmerised,
and was daily operated upon for many months : (except Sun-
days) and for the first six weeks I became gradually worse
and suflFered deep depression of spirits, (I forgot to mention
that all along this at certain periods accompanied the pain in

eyes,) which Madame C said was always produced by a

sympathetic action of the nerves extending from the head
downwards. I was also stuped with warm vinegar and water
behind the ears several evenings.

From this period to the end of July I was on the whole
worse, passing but few days in comparative tranquillity. I
also found it more diflScult to read even by day, not from any
defect of vision but from the pain caused by looking at print.


438 Cure of long-continued Pain of the Eyes.

August 11th. Madame said the matter was liquefying and
passing off, which previously entirely destroyed my appetite.
Same day. Mademoiselle above mentioned also examined me^
and agreed with Madame.

I passed the interval between this date and 24th of Nov.
sometimes better but generally worse, when I was obliged to
cease being mesmerised (through an unavoidable occurrence)
for one fortnight, and was thereby thrown back considerably.

Dec. 15th. The clairvoyante declared the-matter passing
off fast.

Dec. 22nd. Warned to expect a sharp crisis soon. This
occurred shortly after.

By the end of February, 1851, most of the matter had
passed.

March 9th. Never spent so bad a week ; declared to be
in another crisis.

March 16th. Much better. I was able to read a little.

April 6th. I unfortunately took from a servant in the
house sore eyes, declared by the clairvoyante to be a sort of
scurvy, which grievously aggravated my suffering and threw
me back considerably.

From this time to July 20th I made but little progress^
being so much retarded in my recovery by the above disease.
At this time Mr. Stone arrived in Cork to perform experi-
ments in electro-biology. Having attended these perform-
ances, I was amazed to find myself obliged to act as the sub-
jects on the platform did. Thus my arms and legs became
rigid when those of the subjects were similarly affected. After
the second seance, I made the acquaintance of Mr. Stone,
and, having casually mentioned this circumstance to him,
and having also stated to him the suffering from my eyes,
Mr. Stone asked me to call on him, and said that he enter-
tained no doubt he would be enabled to cure me of this com-
plaint. I accordingly waited on that gentleman and was oper-
ated on by him biologically and mesmerically, very seldom
however by passes, but almost always by his powerful will.
In fact, so great is the extent of his power of will, that he
has caused me, by way of experiment, to leave my seat in one
part of my house, and follow him all through it and out of it,
until I found him. Now Mr. Stone was not in the room with
me at this time, neither had I the slightest idea of his attempt-
ing the experiment. I felt an unaccountable desire to go in
a certain direction, and, when I swerved from the line Mr.
Stone had taken, I was always corrected by the same desire,
although at the time I was quite unconscious of the cause of
it. I have digressed thus far, because I know that the power


l\vo cases of Cerebral Sympathy. 439

of the mil is not universally believed in. I have, however,
felt it in my own person, and seen Mr. Stone equally suc-
cessful with others on numerous occasions. To resume, —
after the few first days I experienced a very gratifying change
for the better, and was ordered to read by Mr. Stone. This
however, I at first refused to do, having already suffered so
much from that gratification, and having now been obliged to
discontinue it (with the exception of a few minutes at intervals
far apart) for upwards of thirteen months. Being pressed by
Mr. Stone, I at last mustered sufficient courage to make the
attempt ; and, I will add in justice to Mr. Stone, with suc-
cess. Whenever, after reading for an hour or two my eyes
felt unpleasantly, Mr. Stone cooled them by biology at once.

Aug. 24th. Madame declares me all but well.

Sept. 7th. Eyes somewhat in pain, but in a very mitigated
degree, and declared by Madame to be in the very last crisis.
From this date to the present time I rapidly improved under
Mr. Stone, who operated almost daily on me. I now, thank
God, can read by day or night, and, after repeated tests of
everything which used to cause such sufferings in my eyes,
after braving wind and rain with impunity, I consider myself
perfectly cured, and shall ever feel the deepest gratitude to
Mr. Stoue and also to three other valued friends (whose names
I reluctantly withhold), by whose sympathy and assistance
my sufferings were mitigated and my cure forwarded ; and I
shall ever hold their kindness in the liveliest remembrance.

Nicholas Dunscombe,

J. P. of County of Cork.
Mount Desert, Cork,
Nov. 28, 1851.


XVI. Two Cases of Cerebral Sympathy. By Dr. Engledub.

While discussing with a friend the experiments which I saw
performed at Hungerford Hall, by M. Lasaigne and Made-
moiselle Prudence, the following statement was made. I
enclose it, as an example of a similar nature, and I think it
may interest your readers.

" I visited a clairvoyante in Ireland, Madame Lareugo.
Those who came to enquire were obliged to tell her husband
(who mesmerised her) the questions to be answered.

" However, wishing to test her powers without the pre-
sence of her mesmeriser, when he had thrown her into the
trance, I begged him to withdraw.


440 Two Cases of Cerebral Sympathy,

" I qnickly found I had established a sympathy with her,
and she answered me at once.

'' I held in my hand a hair ring with two sets of initials :
these she declared accurately. She told me it was my own
hair. She then, after some delay, told me there was an incrip-
tion INSIDE the ring, that it was from the Bible — ^the Psalms.
She then mentally spelled out letter by letter thus : ^ W e
took sweet counsel together,' &c. She then
insisted there was something more. I said, ' No.' However,
she said there was 'January 1851 -/ which was quite correct.

'^ She then travelled back a space of six months, told me
where I stood on a particular day, what parcel I had then in
my hand, whom I gave it to, and that a soldier's funeral
passed at the moment I gave it. All this was correct.

" I visited her very often, and always Tiad my own inter-
view aloTie. She seemed to take the greatest anxiety in all
that concerned me. She wept in the trance: and, as she
seemed to look back to the circumstances I was investigating,
she wept bitterly. She recognized a lady's picture which I
had hid in my glove. She had never seen the original, but
recognized it as the picture of my friend. She then told me
the inscription on a mourning ring of my mother's, letter by
letter, age, and date, and where the person had died.

" She then described accurately a book bound in wood,
which I had in my pocket. She told me the wood came from
the bottom of the sea from a ship ; that the ship was the
wreck of the Boyal George : gave the date and place. I need
not say this was correct. None in the room but myself knew
anything of the wreck or the book.

^' One gentleman always came to doubt/ and with him she
failed often. I asked her why (in the trance) : and she re-
plied, ' Oh, he holds up always a black curtain over his brain,
I can't see thro' it.' However, she succeeded once with him,
and spelled out a written word on paper — the name ' Natty
Bumps.' She always knew in the trance if I entered the
room, and said so."

This was a case of thought-reading on the part of the
mesmerized with a third party ; the experiments which I saw
at Hungerford Hall were chiefly experiments in thought-
reading with the mesmeriser. There was one, however, ana-
logous to those just related, which I will presently mention.
I wrote on a card at the moment, " Tell her to bring her
pocket handkerchief and give it to me," and passed this card
down to M. Lasaigne. Instantly she arose, and, passing by
several persons, at last came to me and gave me the pocket


Books received, Notices to Correspondents, i^c. 441

handkerchief. She took from the hand of a gentleman sit-
ting at the corner of a seat a small flower^ and gave it to
another gentleman sitting at the opposite side of the room.
This was proved to be a command on the part of some person
in the room, by the paper conveying it being displayed. She
took an umbrella from a person, opened it, walked across
the stage with it over her head, closed it and gave it to a per-
son on the opposite side. This was found to be in accordance
with a command.

She took a ring from the finger of a person, carried it to
a different part of the room, and placed it on the finger of a
little girl. This was in accordance with a command.

Sometimes these experiments were performed with great
rapidity. Occasionally there was some hesitation, and she
made mistakes, but quickly recomiized that she had done so.
and rectified them. I do not think it is necessary to recapi!
tulate all the experiments which were performed, which were
of an impromptu character; but I wUl conclude by relating
the following.

A gentleman, who afterwards stated that he was an officer
in the army, came down upon the stage, and, he taking her
hand, M. Lasaigne requested her to tell him the remarkable
circumstance in his life which he was then thinking about. She
then slowly but without hesitation told him that he was on
horseback — that he was fighting — ^that he was thrown down —
that he was in great danger — that he was wounded : and told
him where. During the whole of this conversation, her man-
ner was such as to lead one to suppose that she was really
present at the rencontre she was describing.

The gentleman stated to the audience that all she had
said was perfectly true. That many years ago, being an
officer in the army, he was unhorsed in a charge of cavalry,
and that he saved himself by seizing his opponent's sword in
his hands, in doing which he was terribly wounded, and
shewed the scars on his hands.

W. C. Engledue.
Southsea, Dec. 1851.


BOOKS RECEIVED.

A History of Magic, Witchcraft, and Animal Magnetism. By J. C. Col-
qnhoon, Esq., author of Ins Revelata. In two volumes. London : 1851.

If we have space we shall notice this in our next number. It is entertaining
and instructive : but disfigured by the same errors and violent prejudices which
characterize Mr. Colquhoun's other performances.


442 Book9 received, Notices to Correspondents, ^c,

Magnetoid Cnrrents ; their Forms and Directions : with a description of the
Magnetoscope. A series of experiments. By J. A. N. Rntter, F.R.A.S. To
which is subjoined a letter from William King, Esq., M.D. Cantab. London :
1851.

We shoold not feel justified in hazarding an opinion at present on the subject
of this work.

Remarks on the Plea of Insanity, and on the Management of Criminal Lu-
natics. By William Wood, M.D., Licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians,
and Medical Officer of Bethlehem Hospital. London : 1851.

This is a well-written pamphlet on a very important subject. The views
entertained by the writer are the same that we have been in the habit of enforcing
for many years in this journal. The subject is likely to call forth l^^lative in-
terference during the next Parliamentary Session, and we shall take an early op-
portunity of returning to it.

Lectures on true and false Hypnotism or Mesmerism. The result of experi-
mental examination of the subject at home and abroad, delivered in London at
the Western Literary and Westminster Institution, and corrected and 1»ought up
to the present period. To which is added, a Discourse on the condition of the
Soul during common sleep, illustrated by details of dreams. By Horatio Prater,
Esq., author of Experimental Enquiries in Chemical Physiology, Essays on the
injurious effects of Mineral Poisons in the practice of Medicine^ Thoughts Psycho^'
logical, &c. London : 1851.

Our friend '' Walker " states that prater signifies " an idle talker, a <^at-
terer." We have read Mr. Prater's book through, and we are bound to say that
never did a man's name more clearly and truthfully characterize the nature of his
book. From the first page to the last Mr. Horatio Prater does nothing ebe but
prate. He states, '' On my return to England, after a pilgrimage to the ruins of
Thebes, Kamac, and Philse, I find that ' mesmerism ' seems rather to have gained
than lost ground during my absence. I have accordingly decided to make a new,
though probably useless, sacrifice of time and money on the altar of truth, and
publish these lectures — the result of personal experience^ delivered in London
before my departure, corrected and brought up to the present period."

How important that the public should be made acquainted with Mr. Prater's
travels — as if the travels of a man necessarily render him a better judge of the
truth or falsehood of physiological facts. We recommend mesmerists to obtain
this little book, that tiiey may be enabled to judge of the small amount of real
knowledge which some persons think necessary before they write a book, and of
the very mediocre reasoning power which some enjoy even after the advantage of
a pilgrimage to '' Thebes, Karnac, and Phils.'' Except for this purpose the
book is worthless — ^absolutely not worth the paper which has been blotted by the
type.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

** TO THE EDITORS OF THE Z0I8T.

*' Sirs, — ^Will you allow me a comer in the forthcoming number of your valu-
able periodical to reply to numerous enquiries as to when my translation of Gall
will be published. I find that the expense of publication will be about j^600 :
say three hundred subscribers : as yet I have littie more than half that number.
So confident however am I that such a splendid work must make its way when
once fairly out, that I shall send it to the press as soon as I have two hundred
subscribers, and I cannot doubt that this number will soon be secured.

" E. S. Symes."

We strongly urge English phrenologists to exert themselves in procuring sub-
scribers to this translation of Gall's work, which is so littie known in this country,
and would, if rendered intelligible to all by an English translation, give a fall


Books received, Notices to Correspondents, Sfc. 448

idea of the science and make converts in all directions. If every three subscribers
would procure one other, the translation could be printed immediately.

A Studentf Islington. Sandby's Mesmeritm and its Opponents. — ^The
Mesmeric Infirmary, No. 9, Bedford Street, Bedford Square, where Mr. Capem
will be happy to afford information, if a shident gives his name and address, and
takes an introduction from a subscriber.

A constant Subscriber at Dalston, — Mr. Stone is at present in Cork, Imperial
Hotel.

J. W. Slater, Fairfield, Manchester. — Bailliere, of 219, Regent Street,
London, is the best person to apply to for publishing Mr. Slater's translation of
X)r. Kieser's great work on Mesmerism, which is considered by some to be *'the
most philosophic and consistent treatise on the subject extant." Mr. J. W.
Slater expresses his willingness to forward to us or any parties who might take
an interest in the work specimens of his translation. We should be happy
to see his translation completed and published, for (German works are as sealed
books to the migority of the English public. But we can hold out no hopes of
success, when we perceive that Dr. Symes has not yet been able to reach above
half the number of subscribers necessary to enable him to publish his trans-
lation of Gall's beautiful work upon cerebral physiology without loss.

Rusticus.^-Thi^ symptoms are no reason for discontinuing mesmerism. Passes
downwards before the eyes should be persevered with for the best part of an hour :
and probably sound sleep will at length be induced. If not, it will be unim-
portant. Perseverance is everything.

R. C. misconceives the passage to which he refers : we can draw no such in-
ference from it as he does, and are certain that no such view was intended. R.
C. will surely allow that God could, if it seemed good to him, create an infinite
universe, and an imiverse to last to all eternity, whatever changes of condition he
might ordain it to undergo continually or at intervals. Eternity as to the future
does not imply eternity as to the past. Though R. C. believes he will now
endure through all eternity, he does not believe that he has existed from all
eternity.

Thousands of phenomena are miracles to ignorant persons that are not re-
garded as anything but natural phenomena by the well-informed : and when it is
said that a miracle in one age is no miracle in another, the expression appears to
us to be the same as when we say a man rational to-day is mad to-morrow ; that
is, may be. A true miracle is always a true miracle : but a thing may be re-
garded as a miracle through ignorance and may never have been set forth as a
miracle. Conyers Middleton and Bishop Kaye of Lincoln reject all the miracles
since the time of the apostles, but fully admit those of the apostolic age and of the
Old Testament — the post-apostolic miracles are no mirades to Drs. Middleton
and Kaye. The people see miracles performed daily in Italy, yet most English
Protestants see no harm in smiling or in sighing, when they hear or read sudi
accounts.

Non-Wist* s communication of Nov. 12th is under consideration.

We regret being obliged to postpone Professor Gregory's elaborate communi-
cation, as well as several from Mr. Clements, Dr. Elliotson, Dr. Storer, Mr.
H. S. Thompson, and other correspondents, every one of which will eyjpear in our
April number: and we doubly regret the delay that has unavoidably occurred with
those which arrived in good time, that is, before the month preceding the day of
publication.

We gratefully acknowledge the receipt of a sovereign from Mr. Stone for The
Zoist : but have handed it to our publisher, who will forward to Mr. Stone its
value in such numbers of The Zoist as Mr. Stone may name.

Dr. Burq has not fulfilled his promise of furnishing us with an article.

Errata in No. XXXV.

p. 304, 1. 3, for " Vol. VI." read No. XXI.

p. 305 and 6, for ** Sherborne Minster," read Wimbome Minster.

p. 306, for << Michelett," read Nicholetts : and for " Mowle," read Mawle.

END OF voir. IX.


ME8BEERIC UHFJLRBKARY.


ADDITIONAL DONORS AND SUBSCRIBERS

Smee October 1.

DONORS.

Bfr. W. G. Lyle, 17, Bkmmsbnry-street, Bedford-square 10

Ifr. Loverton, 26, Hertford-street, Fitzroy-sqiure

Bfr. Mdhuish, 9, Bedford-street, Red lion-street 2

Mr. J. W. WiDiams, Hackney-road

Hon. Augostna MoreUm, 8, Great GnmberUind-place 2

Ann'miet

A finend of BIib. De Morgan

MiM — — , by Mr. Ciqpem 4

Mrs. Wedgwood

ATisitor

Mr. Chailea Brine, South-row, New-road 2

Mr. W. G. G., Great Portland-street 1

By the Mifses Brine :—

Mr. Taylor, Upper Baker-street 1

Bfr. H. T. Anson, Bishopsgate-street

Mr. Matts, Regent-square

Miss Herring, Brighton

Miss M. D. G., Walthamstow

H. G., Camden-town .'.......

A. L., Gray's-inn-place

M. A. P., HoUoway

Mr. Dixon .'

J. A., Southampton-street «

Mr. J. P., Great Queen-street

SUBSCRIBERS.

Rev. E. W. Friedlander, Clapham

Dr. C. M. Friedlander, ditto

Mr. J. H. Dnnlop, 2, Harley-place, Maida-hill

Mr. Melhuish, Bedford-street, Red Lion-street

Mr. Hubert Smith, St. Leonards, Bridgnorth

Mr. Page, Dover

Dr. Gregory, University of Edinburgh

Mr. W. S. Louch, 12, Buckingham-street, Adelphi 2


8. d.


10

2

10

2

5

10


10

5

2

1


10


10
5
5
5
5
2
2
2
5


1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2


6
6
6


Those Subscribers who have not paid their subscriptions for the last year
are earnestly requested to forward them to the Infirmary without delay. It is
painfol for the Committee to write more than once for this purpose, and the In-
firmary was opened on the faith reposed in the Subscribers.

The Infirmary is working very gi'eat good, and many remarkable cures have
been effected, and reported to The Zoist, which, however, has no room for the
reports this quarter, but will publish them in April,

More patients apply weekly than can be received, though four mesmerisers are
always at work.

line crystals may be purchased at the Institution at a very low price.
