THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. I (March 1843 to January 1844).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/zoist01unkngoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST:


A JOURNAL


CEREBRAL PHYSIOLOGY & MESMERISM,


THEIR APPLICATIONS TO HUMAN WELFARE.


" Thi> I* TRUtH, though opp<M«d to the Philosophy of Agtu**^GaU.


VOL. I.

MARCH, 1843, to JANUARY, 1844.


LONDON :

HIPPOLYTE BAILLriiRE, PUBLISHER,
219, REGENT STREET;

PARIS : J. B. BAILUtlRE, RUE DE L'ECOLE DE MEDECINE ;
LEIP8IZ : T. O. WEIGEL.

M DCCC XLIV.


Digitized by


Google


LONDON :

PRINTBD BY WALTON AND MITCHELL,
24, Wardoor Street, Oxford Street.


Digitized by


Google


INDEX.


page.

Association, Phrenological , 1843 221

-^-^— Declaration of certain Members of the. . . . 148

■: On the Conduct of certain Members of the 143

Association and Suggestion 285

Atkinson, Mr.,-on Mesmeric Phrenology 134

' - his judgment on the Rer. Mr. Moffatt*8 Head 137

— ' Letter on the conduct of certain Members of the Phre-
nological Association 143

Paper on the Head of Mr. J. Varley 137

the late Lord Eldon 277

■ Paper on the Organ of Size 390

Bene?olence and Imitation 369

Brindley, Mr., Cures with Mesmerism 464

Brain, Affection of, cured with Mesmerism 466

■ Cases of Clainroyance 467

Heart, Affection of, cured with Mesmerism 465

Cerebral Physiology 1

CheneTix, Mr. the more modem introducer of Mesmerism into England 65

Clainroyance, apparent Cases of • 467

Constable, Mr., R.A., Head of 385

Cooper, murderer, Head of... « 46

Criminal Code 101

Da?ey, Dr., Case of morbidly-excited small organ of Veneration .... 38

of Homicidal Insanity 247

on Criminal Insanity • 253

Medico-Legal Reflections on the Trial of M'Naughten. . 397

Dance, St. Vitns's, Cases of, cured by Mesmerism 195

Death, against the Punishment of 49

Deyeloproent, Reporting on • 25

Education as it is 351

Eldon's, Lord, Head 277


Digitized by VjOOQIC

418224 ^


I

■ iv INDEX.

page.

EUiotson, Dr., on the Plea of Insaoity 139

CD the Influence of the Feelings on the Intellect .... 296

— on the Head of the marderer Cooper and against the

Punishment of Death 46

— » — Opening Address to the Phrenological Association .. 227

Cures of Insanity with Mesmerism •..«• 161

St. Vitus's Dance 195

Palsy 300

Epilepsy 407, 457, 458

Hysteria—' 427, 429

— Jumping Fits , 453

-— — Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations without Pain

in the Mesmeric State 211

^ on the Anti-mesmeric conduct of some Medical Men . . 208

Engledue, Dr., Case of homicidal Insanity 246

The Law of Insanity 263

Epilepsy, Cure of, with Mesmerism 407, 457, 458

Feelings, Influence of, on the Intellect s 296

Orief, effects of, cured with Mesmerism 461

Heart, affection of the, cured with Mesmerism 465

Hering, Mr. W., on the Head of Mr. Constable 385

Hope, Doubts on the Organ of 296

Hysteria, cured by Mesmerism 427, 429

Imitation and Benevolence 369

Insanity, Plea of 139

Law of 263

Cases of, cured by Mesmerism • 161

Jumping Pits, cured by Mesmerism 453

Lang, Mr., on Mesmerism 349

Letter from a Mechanic 273

Lowe, Mr., Hudson, on the Organ of Wit 266

Suggestion and Association 285

Mania, Lecture 95

Materialism , 288

M*Naughten, Trial of 397

Mesmerism, late introduction of, into England 68

, Phrenological 55, 236, 248

, the Gift of God 217

Moffatt, the Rev. Mr., his Head 137

Montagu, Mr. Basil, his efforts to abolish Hanging 284

Nail, murderer. Head of 44

Palsy, Cases of, cured by Mesmerism 300

Pleasure and Pain, Ultimate Sources of • 129

Prichard, Dr., Strictures on 405


J


Digitized by


Google


INDEX. V

P«ge-
Prideaax, BIr., on Reporting DeTelopment 25

— ^-^^— — Temperament •. 32

— ^— — — — Cases of St Vitus's Dance cured by Mesmerism . . 202

' New Views in Phrenology 392

Rheumatism, cared with Mesmerism • • • • • • . . 462

Sampson and Simpson, Messrs 156

Siae, Organ of • 390

Society, Phrenological, of London ..... • • 41

134

227

Spencer, Mr. Herbert, on Imitation and BencTolence . • • 369 >/

Taylor, Murderer, Head of 42

Temperament, Mr. Prideaux, on 32

TreTclyan, Mr., Letterfrom • 275

Tnbbs, Mr., Cares with Mesmerism . . . . • 460

— — — Grief, Effects of, oared with Mesmerism. 461

Mascolar Pain removed by Mesmerism ih,

Uwins, Mr., Case of Mesmeric Excitement of Cerebral Organs 55

on the Head of Mr. Constable, R.A 386

Varley, Mr. John, his Head 139

Veneration, Morbid Excitement of, when small 38

— — ^^-^— — — — — ^ with Disease of the Membranes over it 40

Verity, Dr., his affair with the Edinburgh Phrenological Society... . 472

Wit, the Organ of 266

Wood, Mr., on the Head of the murderer, Taylor 42

Nail 44

Wakley, Mr 92

161

171

176

422


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


THE ZOIST.

No. I.


APRIL 1843.


VBOSPEOTVB.

Thb object of this work is to collect and diffose information
connected with two sciences — Cerebral Phtsioloot and
Mesmerism.

The science of Cerebral Physiology has made but little
progress during the last fifteen years, notwithstanding its
extensive diffusion as a popular study. How is this to be
accounted for ? By its having attained a state of complete-
ness which leaves few facts to be discovered 7 Such a pro-
position cannot be entertained. We believe the cause wiU be
found in the unwarranted notions of the perfection of their
science generally prevalent amongst Cerebral Physiologists,
in conjunction with that spirit of conservatism, the sworn foe
to all progress and improvement, which is as apt to intrude
itself into science as into poUtics, and with equally injurious
results.

A generation has grown up since the first introduction of^.
the science of Cerebral Physiology into this country. The \
promulgation of this new philosophy has cast upon the world ^
of thought a flood of new ideas, new views, and new prospects.
But, instead of testing their truth, men have been engaged in
questioning their applicability to favourite doctrines and esta-
blished ways. Too often those who should have defended
them have adopted the equivocal and coward-like poUcy of
endeavouring to trim and square them with the standard of
opinion for the hour, thus pandering to ignorance and sacri-
ficing truth at the shrine of a mistaken expediency; for vain
and fruitless will ever be the attempt to amalgamate the facts
and inductions of science with the dreams and chimeras of a

VOL. I. B

Digitized by LjOOQIC


'-?


2 Prospectus.

bygone, ill-informed age. It is not by mutilating truths that
man can render them subservient to his use.

The leading facts and first principles of the science are
easily acquired : and the majority remain satisfied with this
amount of knowledge. But this is only the first step to the
portico of the temple. The mere array of a few facts cannot
give men the least idea of the power of the mighty engine
they possess to push them onward in the race of human im-
provement. They have yet to stvdy the science which will
conipel them to study themselves, — they have yet to become
acquainted with its philosophy, with its regenerating powers,
with its practical application to the affairs of man individually
and collectively, in fact, to all that appertains to humanity.

A periodical devoted to these objects has long been a de-
sideratimi, and the Editors of this Journal will endeavour
to furnish a medium for the fireest expression of thought on
questions of social, moral, and intellectual progress. In
giving an opinion on important questions, they will riot be
influenced by external movements, either popular or the
reverse. They claim perfect independence of thought, but
will be guided in the expression of it by the unerring princi-
ples of their science. They aim to be truth-seekers, and they
consider it to be their duty to promidgate the ^^ truth of
facts,*' impelled by the conviction that all truths are subser-
vient to the happiness of mankind.

The discovery of a new truth gives to the philosopher
intense delight. The science of Mesmerism is a new physio-
logical truth of incalculable value and importance ; and, though
sneered at by the pseudo-philosophers of the day, there is not
the less certainty that it presents the only avenue through
which is discernible a ray of hope that the more intricate
phenomena of the nervous system,— of Life, — ^will ever be
revealed to man. Already has it established its claim to be
considered a most potent remedy in the cure of disease;
already enabled the knife of the operator to traverse and
divide the living fibre unfelt by the patient. If such are the
results of its infancy, what may not its maturity bring forth ?
Let us pause for a moment to survey our position. An acute
susceptibility of pain has been diffused throughout the human
body to warn man of injury, and hitherto it has been deemed
a necessary consequence that suffering should follow the vio-
lation of its integrity. Behold, in a painless operation during
the trance, the arrest of an important function at the will of
man ! and for the purposes of beneficence, — a result which a
few years since it would have been considered madness to
conjecture. Is not this a triumph justly deserving the name


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Prospectus, 3

of glorious^ quickening the pulse in the bosom of philanthropy^
and unfolding bright visions of the future to the gladdened
eye of the well wisher of his race ? Shall an era occur in the
progrem ofman^ and the tidings fall on the cold ear of apathy .-
and indifference ? ^

The extraordinary phenomena elicited during the excitation
of the cerebral oi^ns by means of Mesmerism, and establish-
ing a coiinection between the two sciences, constitute another
department demanding the most serious attention and inves-
tigation, and the ultimate results of which may transcend in
vidue and utility aU that man has yet dared to hope for from
science. Let what many facts render probable be once esta-
blished, viz., that this state of increased activity can be ren-
dered permanent and carried into the natural state, and who
does not catch a glance of a mighty engine for man's regenera^
tion, vast in its power and unlimited in its application, rivalling
in morals the effects of steam in mechanics.

Numerous experiments in this new and startling science^^^
are daily performed by individuals in different parts of thb
country, agreeing in result. A Journal seems required to
dironicle the fruits of their labours; and aU agree that the
period has arrived when judicious combination may be pro-
ductive of the best results.

The science of Cerebral Physiology experienced strong
q[»po8ition before even its first principles were recognized, or
the truth of its most obvious facts conceded. The science of
Mesmerism has been destined to pass through the same ordeal.
There is one curious and melancholy feature which deserves
especial notice, and which proves how little Cerebral Physiolo-
gists have profited by the difficulties they encountered during
the infimcy of their own science. Men of science denounced
Gall as an enthusiast and visionary, and proclaimed his facts
to be fallacious. Men of science and even Cerebral Phy-
nologists denounce him who is convinced bv his senses of
the truth of Mesmerism as an enthusiast and visionaiy, and
proclaim the extraordinary phenomena which are developed
in the trance to be gross impositions. Thus the very course
which Cerebral Physiologists condemn in the opponents of
their own views, many of them are the first to adopt on the
proclamation of a new and startling truth ; and this is the
more extraordinary, because many of the phenomena illustrate
in a most beautiful manner the excited action of the cerebral
Cleans. How great the difference between theory and prac-
tice ! They believe in a philosophy which teaches them ai^
opposite course of conduct and yet &el not its influence I

However, those who are investigating nature and recording

b2


Digitized by


Google


4 Prospectus.

facts know that in a short time opposition must ceaae^ and
they turn from the gloomy to the bright side of the picture
and contemplate in the distance the results of their labours.
They look for their reward in the plentiful harvests of the
future^ rather than in the reapings and gleanings of the
present or the past. " Glorious, heroic, fruitful for his own
Time and for all Time and all Eternity, is the constant speaker
and doer of Truth.'' The assertor of truth may be crushed
and we may breathe a sigh over the martyr as he passes from
the field of his labours, — ignorance and prejudice may for a
time reign triumphant, and the abettors of sloth and selfish-
ness be considered the great, the good, and the wise, — but
Time rolls on, and Reason will assert her dominion.

To hasten the arrival of this period will be the leading
object with the Editors of this Journal. They will bestow
great attention upon the practical department of the two
sciences which they have undertaken to cidtivate, but at the
same time will not be regardless of their vivifying power.
They will not forget that man. Eternal Man, is the theme ;
and, while they survey his past history and point out how his
best interests have been neglected, they will indicate the
manner in which these two sciences may be made subservient
to the great end in view, — ^the progressive improvement and
increasing happiness of the race. \

The work, being equally devoted to Cerebral Physiology
and Mesmerism, will contain original . communications q£
facts and views in both sciences, — analyses of the best works
upon them, — and the proceedings of those engaged in their
cultivation and dissemination.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


( 5 )


I. Cerebral Physiology,

A RETROSPECT of the progress of every science is instructive,
but of the science of man pre-eminently so. K we trace
the progress of Cerebral Physiology from the period when
Gall first promulgated his discoveries in the capital of his
native country, to its introduction into Great Britain, and
from this to our own day, we shall find cause for joy in the
rapid development of the machinery which is to work out
man^s emancipation, but cause for regret that its application
should have been so limited as to produce such meagre results.
How numerous the struggles of the last fifty years, and how
different the feelings with which we survey them !

We look back upon the dawn of the philosophy which is
to regenerate humanity, and we admire the attempts of the
philosopher to instruct his countrymen : but, suddenly, the
despot^s mandate goes forth, and Gall and his truths are
alike banished. It has been remarked, ** When a great man
dies, then has the time come for putting us in mind that he
was alive.*' How true as regards the greatest of modern
philosophers ! His country spumed and banished him. The
generation which witnessed this iniquitous procedure has
passed away, and the next seeks from his disciples in a
foreign land the knowledge their parents refused. In this
there is nothing new. Superior brains give birth to new
ideas, or prompt to the collection of neglected facts and the
subsequent development of general laws. No sooner is this
achieved than a system of persecution is commenced against
the daring innovator. Weak attempts are made to controvert
his facts, but the great object is to crush the man. Man
ever injures his fellow when he presimies to wander from
the beaten track, and attempts to instruct his compeers in the
truths he has discovered. Hundreds suffered before Gall for
daring to break their intellectual thraldom, and till the truths
of Cerebral Physiology are universally embraced, hundreds
will continue to suffer the same persecution. Even now the
system is pursued, and the generation is refrising to inves-
tigate truths, which their children will embrace and turn to
their advantage.

Grermany banished the noblest brain she ever produced !
The tyrant, — for he is a tyrant who checks the freest ex-
pression of thought and opinion, — ^retarded the development


Digitized by


Google


6 Cerebral Physiology,

of truths essential to the happiness of his species^ and Crall^
the German^ the discoverer of a system of philosophy which
will cause his name to descend to the remotest generations^
sought refuge in the capital of a neighbouring nation.

But it may be asked^ Why did he leave his country?
The answer will present us with a beautiful moral lesson.
He preferred freedom^ to the controul of a despotic govern-
ment^ and the unrestrained investigation of important phy-
siological truths^ to intellectual fetters and a compulsory
silence. The man who consents to suppress his thoughts at
the command of another^ voluntarily withdraws one of his
most essential attributes — ^he has ceased to be free — ^he is no
longer a man. Gall felt this^ and for this reason he left his
country. Without fortune and without friends^ he abandoned
the lucrative practice of his profession, — scorned all selfish
considerations, and prompted by the true and noble feelings
which should guide all men in the cause of truth, he entered
upon a moral and intellectual crusade against error. Of all
the contributions which the fertile eighteenth century added
to the mighty stream of increasing knowledge, his was the
most important. It was to give the power to solve the un-
worked problem of human rights and human duties. Bely-
ing on his facts — ^facts accumulated during a long and labo-
rious investigation of nature, he went forth boldly to meet
the advocates of an ideal philosophy, proclaiming as he went,
with the calmness of a philosopher and the dignity of a
man, the result of his studies, ''This is truth, though
opposed to the philosophy of ages.^'

We cannot have the least idea of the debt we owe to
Gall till we become acquainted with the state of metaphysical
science before his time. Bead the ponderous tomes which
crowd the shelves of our libraries. What crude indigestible
masses of metaphysical speculation ! What heaps of idle
theories ! What a display of learned ignorance I What a hete-
rogeneous mixture of useless lumber I Every teacher advanced
his peculiar views and his estimate of man^s powers. But
instead of searching for his peculiarities and the elements of
his character, in his organism and in the world, he selected
himself as the specimen best suited to his purpose, and thus
endowed the r^ce, with the strengths and weaknesses — ^the
dreams and speculations — ^the follies and vanities which were
most prominent in his own character.

But how fared it with Gall in his new abode ? For a
time scientific men embraced his views and Paris resounded
with his praises. But another despot issued his mandate, and
suddenly the inteUectually-great Cuvier and his coadjutors


Digitized by


Google


Cerebral Phynology, 7

bedane hypocrites and cowards. No language can censure
such conduct with sufficient force. Cuvier^ the philosopher^
uttered opinions which he did not entertain, at the com-
mand of a proud and selfish tyrant. The jealousy of a tyrant
is developed in the exact proportion he has cause to fear free
investigation. Napoleon feared this, and having expressed
his opinion — the servile philosophers changed theirs. Bidicule
took the seat of reason, and the imperial nod marked the
limits and guided the course of scientific discussions. By
such means was the progress of truth delayed and the advance
of man proportionately retarded. Withdrawal from power
produced no change in Napoleon's estimate of the new phi*
losophy. Even from the rock of St. Helena, — ^the man who
had devoted his life to the promotion of schemes for self-
aggrandizement^ and his energies to carry out plans of
slaughter and annihilation, — ^the oppressor and destroyer of
his race, and the ruthless invader of kingdoms and nations,
— breathed forth the same spirit, and laughed at the phi-
losophy which would rebuke him for his sins and render
apparent the secret springs of his actions and thoughts.

Great Britain was destined to receive the visit of Qtdl's
coadjutor Spurzheim. And how did her men of science
welcome the new philosophy ? In the land of liberty there
could be no cause for neglecting its investigation — ^there was
no tyrant whose interests it invaded — ^no institutions whose
foundations it could immediately sap, — ^it was the very spot
in this " Bedlam of the Universe" where we should have pre-
dicted the occurrence of a free, candid, and open discussion
of its principles — ^it was the centre from which had emanated
the great in science — it boasted of the most enhghtened
philanthropists, the greatest orators, the most powerfiiil legis-
lators, — an assemblage of men who ought to have been
deeply interested in the progress of all questions appertaining
to the welfare of himianitpr. But how different the result !
What lamentable defalcations of moral courage ! What
breaches of conscientiousness ! What struggles of perverted
intellect! From all quarters what ignorant and cowardly
attacks !

The literary records of these times will furnish a sad
catalogue of despicable tergiversations. There was the same
cry then which assails us now, — " Give us facts. Where are
your facts ?'* Nature teemed with them. Pacts the most
palpable were declared to have no existence. The most
beautifrd specimens of an inductive philosophy were sneered
at, and the philosopher who directed attention to them was
called a juggler, a buffoon, and a German quack ! Mur-


Digitized by


Google


8 Cerebral Physiology.

derers — ^moralists and philanthropists — ^the great — the good
— the depraved and the imbecile, were aU classed in the
same category as possessing brains ; but when the difference
in quality and size, especially regional size, was adverted to,
this was called a scientific quibble. Sage philosophers filled
skulls with peas or millet seeds, and because the skulls of
opposite characters contained an equal measure, it was ai^ed
that the size of the brain was no test of the character. It
would be impossible and very improfitable to enumerate a
tithe of the absurdities. Even anatomical facts — ^the des-
cription of the arrangement of cerebral matter, was declared
by an anatomical teacher to be an illusion, and when he was
surroimded by friends who were unanimous in their expression
of admiration at the beauty and clearness of Oall and Spurz-
heim^s demonstrations, he still declared that he did not see
the peculiar arrangement under consideration I It was not
his interest to receive the evidence of his own senses, — ^it
wounded his pride to be compelled to promulgate the dis-
coveries of other men and retract an expressed opinion, —
he could not rise above the selfish temptation of the moment
— he therefore degraded himself. Misrepresentation and
vituperation, the usual attendants on the advocates of a
weak cause, were now turned to the best advantage. Folly
put on her most alluring smiles, and ridicule became the
barometer to mark the progress and record the struggles of
the new philosophy. Gordon, Jeffrey, and Hamilton, and a
host of smaller fiy, whose obscurity we will not remove by
recording their names in the page of history, fluttered through
their little day, attacked and charged again and again, assisted
by all the weapons they could command for the purpose of
retarding the recognition and appreciation of natural truths.

It has been remarked that ** the darkest hour is nearest
the dawn,'' and truly these proceedings were the prelude to an
important change. Reason slowly assumed her dominion.
Disciples became advocates — societies were founded — a pe-
riodical was commenced, and Cerebral Physiologists have
gradually increased in numbers, till now their science ranks
amongst admitted truths, and the period has arrived when it
becomes their duty to assume a commanding position and give
effect to the philosophy which they have so zealously promul-
gated. But how is this to be accomplished ? In our opinion
the course is broad and clear if we avow the truth, but nar-
row and ambiguous if we continue in our present position.

In the political arena we behold two great classes of men,
the representatives of two antagonistic powers — conservatism
and innovation. The former the advocates of antiquated


Digitized by


Google


Cerebral Physiology. 9

measures^ and surrounded by men who believe their duty to
consist in supporting with their utmost power the usages^
customs, institutions, and laws — ^the inventions and codes of
former men.. The latter the decided opponents of all this,
and united with those who originate new views — ^proclaim the
existence of abuses — ^remove impediments to progression, and^
believe that man is to work out his own reform and emanci-
pation. In science as in politics there is precisely the same
spirit of conservatism, the drag-chain to all improvement;
and in our own science we have the same two divisions. One
party has always adopted an equivocal and cowardlike policy,
mixing the thoughts and dreams of bygone men with the
&cts and inductions of science, using an objectionable phrase-
ology, insisting on the reception of an essence as a moving
power, and thus presenting to the world the anomalous spec-
tacle of inductive philosophers wearing the dress of mysta-
gogues. The other, the assertors of truth regardless of the
consequences — men, who would rather be the victims of a
daring integrity than the abettors and upholders of a system
of expediency; who, contend that the enlistment of an im-
known cause of action is an unphilosophical proceeding —
'' that the belief in spiritualism fetters and ties down phy-
siological investigation — ^that man^s intellect is prostrated by
the domination of metaphysical speculation — ^that we have no
evidence of the existence of an essence — and that organised
matter is all that is requisite to produce the multitudinous
manifestations of human and brute cerebration.^'

An ancient philosopher said '^ it was his duty to make
wonders plain, not phan things wonderful,'' and an acute
writer has remarked, '' there cannot be a sounder maxim of
reasoning, than that which points out to us the error of
admitting into our hypotheses unnecessary principles, or re-
ferring the phenomena that occur to remote ana extraordi-
nary sources, when they may with equal facility be referred
to sources which obviously exist, and the results of which we
daily observe." We may reap advantage by attending to
this rule. Our first and most important effort should be to
teach man the constitution of his nature. Here then on the
very threshold we meet our first difiSculty.

As long as man believes that his thoughts and actions are
the promptings of a power external to himself, or, that the
stimuli <x)nveyed by his senses to his cerebral laboratory are
modified by a certain commixture with an indescribable some-
thing external to himself, — ^so long we conceive will man be
prevented from attaining his proper position, or from even
possessing correct notions of his own capabilities. This fun-


Digitized by


Google


10 Cerebral Phyriology.

damental error must be eradicated. To accomplish this^ we
must use a more accurate phraseology, and we feel confident
that the important results which should flow from the prac-
tical application of our science cannot be attained without
this most essential step. ''Out of one foolish word may
start one thousand daggers.^' What errors have been per-
petuated — ^what time has been lost — and how stationary our
science, because Cerebral Physiologists will continue to use
the word "minrf/' Cerebral Physiology is essentially an
inductive science. To study it profitably we must apply the
principles of inductive philosophy. Tins has been accom-
plished to a certain ' extent. The organology of Cerebral
Physiology has arrived at its present state solely by the ac-
cumulation and comparison of innumerable examples. The
result has been the development and recognition of a law;
viz., that a certain portion of brain is for the purpose of
evolving a certain species of thought — a peculiar feeling or
passion. But this is only an example of a more general law \
viz., that every portion of our organism has a particular
function and a peculiar property.

To state the subject clearly; the grand question for
solution is this. Does the brain act per se in consequence
of its peculiar organism ? or, does a something exterior to
brain constantly compel certain portions of brain to exhibit
peculiar properties? We never witness the evolution of
thought — ^the manifestation of a benevolent feeling— -or a
destructive propensity, independent of brain. The instant
we detect the property we are morally certain of the exist-
ence of the structure ; and if the structure is healthy, the
manifestation of the property is so Ukewise. The conclusion
is thus forced upon us, that a peculiar organized matter is all
that is necessary to produce the diversified manifestations of
human and brute cerebration. To our view this is as clear as
the working of an algebraic equation. " Is it consistent with
any sound principles of philosophy, gratuitously to burden
science with an imaginary being, the existence of which is
not demanded for the explanation of a single phenomenon V^
There is no proof whatever that cerebration results from the
action of an essence, or, even from the combination of an
essence with cerebral matter. The behef in the existence of
an external essence is a proof of the non-recognition of the
laws we have referred to, — ^is a remnant of the behef which
existed when imagination, instead of inductive reasoning,
dictated principles to philosophy. The pecuhar property
manifested, has been mistaken for an imaginary external
power. I%e belief in the existence of " mind'' is an exempUfi-


Digitized by


Google


Cerebral Physiology. 1 1

cation of the tendency in uncultivated man to personify aU the
actions of nature, — ^is a barbarous recognition of the mani-
festation of a property resulting from a peculiar molecular
arrangement of matter^ and which arrangement necessitates
the exhibition of the property.

The savage witnessing the movements of a steam engine^
in the depth of his ignorance concludes that the motive
power is the Great Spirit. He does not see the steam — ^he
is not acquainted with its enormous expansive power — ^neither
can he be made to understand that this is perfectly under the
controul of man^ and that to obtain the movement he has
merely to fulfil ^he requisite conditions. In what respect
does the philosopher differ from the savage? The phi-
losopher witnesses the phenomena of thought^ and acknow-
ledges that the brain is essential to its production^ — but he is
not satisfied with this knowledge^ and because he cannot
understand and see distinctly how these functions are pro-
duced^ he, like the savage, has recourse to an external,
unknown, invisible agent, — to a spirit. Can greater igno-
rance be manifested ? The philosopher feels the difficulty,
but instead of using his best endeavours to unravel the mys-
tery, he cuts the knot, and enlists a power which he has not
seen and cannot appreciate, for the purpose of explaining
phenomena, for which as Cerebral Physiologists we contend
there is already a sufficient cause.

There are many individuals who see the true bearing of
this question, but who contend that there is no impropriety
in continuing the use of the term mind, provided we clearly
understand the meaning to be attached to it. But herein
lies the difficulty. Shall we practise a system of delusion ?
Shall we continue to use the old phraseology when it mani-
festly prolongs the. existence of a pernicious error? "To
temporize with a known evil, announces either weakness,
uncertainty, or collusion.^' It must be discarded, and we
shall date the advent of a new era in Cerebral Physiology
from the moment we cease to speculate concerning spirit,
and confine ourselves to the investigation of organized
matter. Let us speak in the language of truth — ^let us
dare to utter our thoughts with philosophic resolution — ^let us
use terms which will not require explanation — ^let us appeal
to man^s reason and not to his imagination — and most as-
suredly we shall reap the reward.

We have now seen that man^s ignorance prompted him to
personify the functional manifestation of his own brain; and
his arrogance forthwith led him to conclude that he possessed
a different constitution to the beings around him. Most


Digitized by


Google


14 Cerebral Thysiology,

ihem? With their assistance why not test the present state
of society — ^its unnatural institutions — ^its injurious laws — ^its
selfish legislation — ^its low standard of morality ? There is a
faint heartedness^ a cold calculating withering apathy in our
leaders, which to the enthusiastic and sincere philanthropist
is extremely distressing. Instead of stating these truths for
truth's sake, and boldly avowing the deductions to which an
unfettered intellect would lead — ^they have winked at error,
and this for the most selfish of all objects, a contemptible and
fleeting popularity. They have permitted popular fancies
with their injurious residts to reign paramount, instead of
inducing by the purer light they possess more rational modes
of thought, and indicating the position man should endeavour
to occupy. The selfish man collects his riches and revels
with imceasing pleasure over every addition to his golden
store. He does not increase the happiness of his neighbour,
neither does he add one iota to the stock of human enjoy-
ments. We possess that which is far more valuable than
gold, and shall we nevertheless follow this example, and
whilst humanity sleeps, oppressed and confounded by the
visions and speculations of an ideal philosophy — ^shall we
stand by, overwhelmed at the sight, and cowardlike neglect
to bestow one thought on the cause, or refuse to lend our aid
and assistance towards the application of a remedy ? Un-
fortunately, such has been our course, but forthwith let us
wipe away the stigma. Cerebral Physiologists must be pre-
pared to carry out the principles of their science — ^to push
them to their ligitimate conclusions. There is one conclusion
to which their science leads, and the reception of which must
be insisted upon.

The actions of the human race necessarily result from their
organic constitution, and the circumstances which surround them
at any stated period.

- The evolution of thought is a vital phenomenon, the
necessary sequence of a certain combination of atoms assuming
a certain form and arrangement and having received the
requisite stimuli. Thus, then, the production of a thought,
or, the manifestation of a feeling, by a brain : and the effect
to be produced by any external cause on the same brain, are
governed by invariable and immutable laws."" "What is man,
viewed philosophically by the aid of the doctrine of necessity ?
A mere link in the chain of causation, connected with in-
numerable links before his existence, and with the future chain
ad infinitum, the consequences of his existence being endless ;
calling, probably, numberless beings into existence by the
same necessary law by which he himself began to be. A


Digitized by


Google


Cerebral Physiology. 15

mere atom in the mass oi sensitive creation^ called into exist-
ence without any choice on his part^ and moved by influences
over which he has no more controul than an atom of matter
over attraction or repulsion, or whatever other laws it may
be constituted to obey. He, an atom of the great body of
mankind, bearing the same relation to it as a single atom of
the human body does to the whole ; the atom is introduced
into the system by the laws of nature; it passes through the
several stages of assimilation, becomes capable of feeling, and
again passes away; so does man from the great body of
society, the eternal receptacle of 'youth, and beauty, and
delight/^'

Man cannot resist the necessity which governs all his func-
tions. If he is compelled to submit to a surgical operation,
he has not the power to avoid the necessary residt of the
infliction of a wound — ^pain. He cannot prevent his spinal
cord from performing its function, nor its branches from
receiving and conveying external impressions. He cannot
apportion the amount of stimulus to be transmitted, nor the
intensity of the impression when it is communicated. As
regards these laws he is obliged to continue such as nature
firom the first necessitated him. In precision and immuta-
bility — do the laws of thought differ from other laws ? Is
man free to think or not to think ? To believe or disbelieve ?
To love or hate ? To detest virtue and embrace vice ? Has
he the choice not to believe his dearest friend guilty of the
basest crime, when a certain amount of evidence is pit)duced ?
Has he the power to choose to be bom of certain parents and
in a particular coimtry? Has he the power to avoid the
result of impressions conveyed to him in his infancy by an
injudicious and ignorant teacher f Can he prevent his brain
from fulfilling its numerous functions, or with healthy external
senses, has he the power to resist the thoughts which unceas-
ingly result after the several stimuli have been conveyed by
them ? Man has no more immediate power over the function
of cerebration, to be free to think or not to think, than he
has power over the function of common sensation, to be free
to f»Bl or not to feel. By education and judicious training he
can improve his cerebral organism and in this way improve
the function, but he is not free to command healthy thought
from diseased organism — ^mature thought from untrained
brain— or, to resist thoughts which are the necessary conse-
quences of cerebral movements.

We confess that this has always appeared so clear, so self-
evident, and so completely a logical deduction from the fects
and premises in our possession, that we are at a loss to account


Digitized by


Google


16 Cerebral Pkysioloffy.

for the noise^ and bustle, and the hostile array with which the
anks of Cerebral Physiologists lately received the enuncia-
tion of this doctrine. To what cause can this opposition be
attributed 7 Whence the rancour and ill feeling, the divisions
and the vituperation? We are compelled to agree with
Berkeley, who says : — ''Two sorts of learned men there are :
one, who candidly seeks truth by rational means ; these are
never averse to have their principles looked into, and examined
by the test of reason. Another sort there is, who learn by
rote a set of principles, and a way of thinking which happens
to be in vogue; these betray themselves by their anger and
surprize, whenever their principles are freely canvassed."

Cerebral Physiologists not necessitarians ! Why the very
fSsict that we have enrolled ourselves under the designation of
Cerebral Physiologists, as cultivators and expounders of a
science, proves that we consider that the thoughts, actions,
and feelings of men, can be made a subject of scientific investi-
gation, — demonstrates that we avow that there is a constant
and unchanging series of e£Fects, resulting from recognized and
specific causes. What more is required to prove t£iat we are
assisting to promulgate the doctrine of necessity ? Are we
to do this in secret and disavow it in public ? Are we to lay
up materiab for the benefit of future generations, and because
the truth is unpalatable now, voluntarily decline the prof-
fered good for our own 7 Or, are we quietly acting on this
belief in our own intercourse with society, but leaving our
neighbour to grope on in his ignorance 7 Whatever may be
the causes which influence our conduct, whether ignorance or
cowardice, hypocrisy or chicanery, or, whether we are adopt-
ing the course which many follow in religious questions, and
profess an esoteric and exoteric religion — one belief for the
closet and another for public avowfd — all are equally bad,
and can produce no permanent satisfaction to ourselves, but
will assuredly promote the moral degradation of the beings
around us.

To the prevalence of the two errors we have been com-
bating, we refer the languid state of our science. Cerebral
Physiologists are so impressed with the necessity of the belief
in a mysterious and non-describable constituent in man's
nature, and also in the presumed freedom of man's thoughts
and actions, that a species of apathy has been engendered and
cerebral analysis has made but little progress. Notwith-
standing the repeated difficulties encountered, unwarranted
notions of the perfection of the science are generally preva-
lent. Even with our present knowledge, — with the power to
appreciate, to a great extent, the combinations of tempera-


Digitized by


Google


Cerebral Physiology. 17

ment, and thus the quality of cerebral fibre — ^with the ability to
recognize the shape and size of the various portions of brain
and their various active combinations — stilly the predication
of character by the most enlightened and successftil amongst
us, is in many instances far from satisfactory. In glancing
at what is to be accomplished to perfect our science, we may
almost venture the assertion, that cerebral analysis has yet to
be commenced. The geography of Cerebral Physiology, ex-
cept a few additions, was accomplished by Gall, but the
exploration of the several cerebral divisions, that which we
would designate cerebral analysis, must be carried out by
ourselves.

The doctrine of necessity will stimulate us to make the
required exertions. When the cause of every thought and
every action is sought for in man^s cerebral organism, then
wiU be the commencement of a more strict and accurate
investigation — then will man be convinced that he has the
power to promote and carry out changes in the civilization of
his race — ^then will he strive to remodel, combine and recom-
bine the numerous organic elements at present existing in
the great fiEmiily of man. The astronomer calculates the
return of a comet, and from repeated observations and the
severest mathematical induction, he is correct in his predic-
tion. But suppose he is wrong, suppose a few hours or a day
elapses. Does he in despair give up his investigations ? Does
he conclude that the causes of his failure are beyond his
reach ? No I He recognizes unascertained causes in action,
and is certain that more extended investigation, and a more
rigid and careful calculation will unveil the mystery and
render manifest the apparent anomaly. The history of astro-
nomical science proves the truth of this statement. The
chemist is not satisfied till he reduces a substance to its
elementary constituents, and is able to declare with precision
the quality and quantity of each portion. He adopts the
most carefril analyses, and what victories he has achieved I
Let us follow the example. When we meet with difficulties
let us not have recourse to existing dogmas — ^let us not cloak
our ignorance by the assumption of an air of mystery and
the parade of unintelligible theories. Let us not imagine an
unexpected phenomenon to be the result of a species of
eflFervescence between an essence and cerebral matter — in the
language of Mr. Combe: the result "of the compound ex^
istence of mind and body, which act constantly together" — let
us not rush for relief to the doctrine of free-will, to that
administrator to man^s pride — rather, let us recognize the
existence of unascertained causes, of unappreciated organic

VOL. I.


Digitized by


Google


18 Cerebral Physiology ,

elements^ which^ when discovered^ will perfect our machinery,
and increase our power to scrutinize character.

But to take a more extended view, apart from the imme*
diate consideration of our own science — ^what mischief has
resulted from neglecting to emhrace the doctrine of necessity.
Even now it is imagined that man can believe what he pleases —
nay, that by the imposition of pains and penalties, and the
promulgation of anathemas, it is possible to make him believe
that which is absolutely revolting to his reason. How many
millions have been slaughtered because the stronger party
entertaining certain notions, determined that the weaker
should be compelled to embrace the samel How many
victims have the torch and the faggot destroyed, because their
opinions were not considered orthodox — ^because they did not
square with a certain artificial standard ! Peace, charity, and
good-will, have been mere empty soimds, and even now their
value and importance are lost sight of amid the insane strug-
gles of one set of men, to compel others to adopt the same
belief. The wealth of nations has been spent not to increase
the happiness of their population, but too often to destroy
their neighbours because they embraced an opposing faith.
Is there any crime which has not resulted from this grievous
error ? It has poisoned all the institutions of our country —
it disfigures our laws — ^it disgraces our criminal code, and
renders absurd and irrational the opinions of our judges.
When the source, from which the fountain of universal
justice should spring forth, is rendered turbid, how can the
stream, which is to flow through the length and breadth of
the land, carry ought else but impurity ?

Cerebral Physiologists I Teachers of youth ! Instructors
of the people ! To you we direct our views, and entreat a
careful and patient consideration. Remember I it is truth
for which you are to seek, and when you have discovered it,
you are morally obliged to state your conviction. There can be
no excuse — ^it is always expedient to speak the truth. If,
however, you are determined to support certain views — ^if you
are cowards, slaves to the popular opinion, and traitors to your
cause — ^then we say, give up philosophy — ^give up your task —
resign your calling. But on the other hand, if you are
influenced by that great moral force — ^that determination to
assert what you bdieve to be truth, although you may be
persecuted, " yet the sympathy and friendship of the few real
lovers of truth, who are capable of appreciating your motives
and views, and the internal consciousness arising from the
activity of the highest feelings will more than repay you for


Digitized by


Google


Cerebral Physiology, 19

an that the world is capable of withholding. Though the
friends of the man who dares to promulgate and support
unpopular truths are necessarily few, yet they are more
valuable, and are the source of more happiness than a host
bound to him by the ordinary worldly ties, or than the stupid
staring and loud huzzas of the multitude/'

Man's perfect happiness must result firom the supremacy of
the moral faculties. These must be the monitors constantly
dictating not only what is right and just in the actions of the
individual, but also in prompting to the necessity of unceasing
efforts to promote the happiness of the race. We see this
supremacy occasionaUy ma^ested in the career of one — ^but
where do we find it governing the actions of a nation or a com-
munity ? Is there on this earth a race universally searching
after truth — enacting laws to ensure justice to the many and
to suppress the selfish views of the few — ^founding institutions
for training their youth in intellectual and moral science, and
discarding all principles and all practices having an irrational
and therefore an unnatural tendency ? Alas ! such a race is
nowhere to be found. Even amongst ourselves, comparatively
the most civilized and enlightened community, does there
exist a national yearning after truth ? Do not our legislatorial
halls reverberate nightly the cry of a pitiful expediency ? Do
not our rulers ward off by the most barefaced sophistry the
measures calculated to alleviate the miseries of their suffering
countrymen ? Are they not now sacrificing national interests
to party views, and the happiness of millions to their supposed
individual welfare? Is not intellect employed in promoting
schemes for self aggrandizement, and neglecting the great
truth, that real individual happiness can only be obtained by
increasing the happiness of all? Are not schemes for awaken-
ing national thought shorn of their power, grandeur, and
utility by the selfish predilections of ignorant senators ? In
fact nowhere is this great moral truism carried out, that it is
the interest of man to concede justice.

" In every clime this troth's confest, that man's worst foe is roan."

We feel shame for our race while we record these enormi-
ties ; but have we overcharged the recital ? Let us as moral
philosophers look forward to a period when the causes of
human misery shall be removed, and the means of producing
universal happiness made clear and attainable — ^but above all
considerations, let us remember that we are the expounders
of a system of philosophy which will do this. We have met
with considerable opposition and this will continue. The

2


Digitized by


Google


20 Cerebral Physiology.

generation which is to appreciate our science is yet to be bom.
It would be as difficult for the old man to adopt the gymnasia
of the youth, as for the existing generation schooled in the
errors of the present system to directly embrace and practi-
cally apply the new philosophy.

Those who take a low estimate of humanity tell us that
no such change as we desire can ever take place. They cry
" Human nature, is human nature, and since self-preservation
is a law of nature, you must expect men to look after their
own individual interests.^* It is needless for us to say that we
disclaim connection and all sympathy with this party. These
men speak of man^s destiny as if the proceedings of the last
thousand years were to be taken as a test of his moral and
intellectual aptitudes. History cannot furnish us with infor-
mation to work out this all important problem. " Ancient
history traces the outlines of a mass of preponderating animal-
ism. Modem history tracks out the course and records the
struggle of intellect escaping from bondage." From such
data only how is it possible to pourtray the destiny of man,
or to frame a social system which will assist him to fulfil it ?
How is it possible by looking at the past, at the records of
bloody wars and brutal devastations — at the scenes of carnage,
oppression and woe — at the pride, animosity, and the riot of
fierce and fiery passions, proofs of a barbarous age and mere
animal excitement, to judge of the future — of a period when
man^s nature shall be universally understood — ^when his Rea-
son shall have assumed its supremacy — ^when the moral
revolution, the grandest of all revolutions shall have been
achieved, and all shall be united in one bond, the bond of
universal fellowship— of a period, when the rights of the weak
and helpless will form the theme on which the more powerful
will expatiate — ^when the gladiatorial displays in the senate
will not be for the mere purpose of proving the party expe-
diency of certain measures — ^mere additions to the long cata-
logue of selfish actions, but, all will assist in obtaining the
enactment of just and equitable laws — ^will proclaim the utter
abolition of aU privileges and aU distinctions, having for their
object the aggrandizement of the few to the ruin and desti-
tution of the many — ^the struggle vidll be one of concession,
concession founded on the principles of moral right, and —

" Man's age of endless peace.
Which time is fast maturing,
Will swiftly, surely come."

However, let it not be imagined that we are so sanguine
as to suppose that any sudden amelioration of man^s condition


Digitized by


Google


Cerebral Physiology. 21

will result from the adoption of a more rational system of
education and legislation. Physical progression is the cause
of progressive civilization. There must be an improved
organism before we can expect a change in the inevitable
results of organic action. Individuals influenced by the
purest philanthropy may suggest plans — ^may improve ex-
ternal circumstances and endeavour to change the habits
and thoughts of the mass — ^but disappointment will be the
result. From the sowing of the seed, to the growth of the
plant, and from this to seed time and harvest, there is a long
interval. In like manner the habits, thoughts, feelings and
actions of men cannot be changed or remodelled in a day. If
we wish them to become more in accordance with the dictates
of reason and virtue, we must use our best endeavours to
promote, and wait patiently for the necessary organic change.
How numerous the writers who describe the beauties and
chronicle the wonders of our earth— but how few the real
workers who endeavour to hasten the moral and intellectual
perfection of its brightest ornament f The being which at its
birth is the most helpless, is destined by the mere growth and
judicious exercise of its organism, to become the mightiest
amongst created beings. But can the greatest amongst us
trace the gradual progress of his own thoughts upwards to the
maturity of intellect, or describe the course he pursued by
which the resulting accumulation was gained? Yet such
progress has been made, such accumulation has taken place,
and that too from the earliest period of infancy. May we not
use the simile and compare the growth of a man from infancy
to muturity, to the advance of man from a state of barbarism
to perfect civilization.

If an organic change must precede every civilized move-
ment, how pre-eminent are the services of the Cerebral Phy-
siologist ! In the name of science then we appeal to them I
As philosophers, are you performing your duty if you are
conscious of the efficacy of certain measures suggested by
your science, and still make no onward movement ? A heavy
responsibility rests upon you, if you are certain of the result
but cowardlike refuse to make the trial — ^if you are in posses-
sion of the power, but hesitate to use it — ^if you are convinced
that man^s nature may be improved, but fail to strike at the
blighting, woe-producing dogma that man is irreclaimably
depraved — ^if you promulgate facts which to unprejudiced and
thinking men inevitably lead to certain conclusions, but still
cling to old ideas and antique speculations. Speak not of
your philosophy whilst you aim at no higher attainment than
acceding to the opinions and belief of your own generation.


Digitized by


Google


22 Cerebral Physiology.

Boast not of your science^ if its only application is to consist
in the appreciation of individual character — if your only object
is the collection of the skulls and casts of the great and the good^
the infiunous and the depraved — ^if your annual meetings are
to continue such as they have been^ and at which you reiterate
the same thoughts and opinions year after year^ but which
your prejudices will not permit you to test by the philosophy
of the science you are met together to promulgate. The inves-
tigation of individual character^ the estimate of individual apti-
tudes^ the mere organology of the science^ has claimed consi-
derable attention — ^but the philosophy^ the estimate of national
character — ^the application of it as a test to national institutions
and laws^ national virtues and vices — ^the ascertainment of the
cause of the depraved state of the present generation^ and the
recognition of the means by which future generations are
to be elevated — ^these are elementary studies requiring rigid
investigation.

We ask not for a catalogue of the societies of Great Britain,
of the number of disciples in each town, nor for the number
of the world's great men enrolled amongst you; but we ask
what have you done for humanity ? You have in your pos-
session the power to unfold man's destinies, to open up new
views and new prospects, to lay bare primitive truths, truths
pregnant with hope and joy, to call forth the noblest aspirations,
to hasten the advent of human knowledge and human happi-
ness, to enlighten legislators on man's nature and the causes
of his actions — ^you possess the power to do aU this, but how
have you employed the talent entrusted to your care ? When
or where, as an assemblage of natural philosophers have you
ventured to speak your opinions on any important topic?
When or where, as a body have you dared to proclaim that
which your science teaches, that the ctctions of the human race
necessarily result from their organic constitution f When or
where, as the philosophic expounders of man's nature have you
asked for his greatest want — ^a rational and national education?
True, you have advocated in your writings the supremacy of
the moral feelings, and the pleasure arising from a cultivated
and well trained brain ; but there you have left the subject.
You have organised no scheme; you have suggested no plan
by which social improvement may be advanced, universal
justice conceded, and the happiness of all increased. You
have scattered the seed, but you have directed no attention
to the culture. The tree has grown, but where is the fruit ?
It has not even blossomed!

To obtain a great end co-operation is necessary. We must
combine to become the leaders of a great national movement.


Digitized by


Google


Cerebral Physiology. 23

We must unite to assert with power the moral and intellectual
supremacy of man^ and not only to assert^ but to carry out
the reformation so loudly demanded. Our philosophy is
opposed to the principles and practices of all governments and
ahnost all laws and institutions.

Glance at the state of our social system. It is torn into
innumerable segments; wretchedness and misery meet us on
every hand ; injustice and oppression result from our erroneous
system of laws^ and we who know the cause of all this have
made no united movement towards obtaining the removal of
such a mass of evil. It is the fashion to boast of our progress
in civilization^ but let us test the advance. Have we increased
the happiness of our countrymen ? Our population and our
wealth-producing powers have increased^ but our population
was never in such a deplorable and degraded position. In our
daily walks what opposite and distressing scenes are presented
to us ! Luxurious refinement and the most squalid wretched-
ness ; — intellectual advancement and the deepest ignorance ; —
profiuion of nourishment and complete starvation ; — in fact,
''the coincidence of overflowing national wealth with the misery
and destitution of millions V^ And this amongst a people who
have made the greatest advances in science ; who have made
the elements subservient to their wishes, and who have
compdled inanimate matter to perform duties with which the
most ingenious artificer cannot compete.

Sur^ no more lengthened detail is required to prove how
little attention has been devoted to man. We are now speak-
ing of masses of men, not of individuals. The passions are
allowed to blindly seek their gratification ; — ^the feelings are
active and erroneously directed; — ^the intellectual faculties are
weak and untrained; — ^this is the national characteristic.
There are millions of brains producing impure firuit, or firuit_
of a n^ative quality, which under improved culture might
manifest important powers. The exercise of the intellectual
faculties will restrain the activity of the propensities, and if
combined with judicious moral training during the first fifteen
years, and followed out as a national scheme, wotdd in the
course of two generations completely remodel society. As an
enthusiastic young fidend exckdmed the other day, '' Ah ! if
we could but teach the art of thinking, as well as that of
singing to the million, how speedily might we change our
pandmonium into a paradise.'^

Teach the million to think ! Thrilling and stupendous
sound ! Science has given us the steam engine, and its un-
tiring arm can call forth thought from millions, who without
this aid would have dragged through a constant and unvaried


Digitized by


Google


24 Cerebral Physiology,

blank. With such a power in action^ who will place limits to
human thought^ or map the boundary line which is to impede
man^s onward progress ? Some there are who say the belief
in this progression is a fancy and an idle dream. What !
Is there no proof of progression? Alas! How much is
there still lying in man to be developed ? Think ye^ that if
the ignorance of man has forged chains by which he is held
in bondage^ that reason cannot unshackle them ? Call ye,
universal education ; — ^the complete toleration and liberty of
thought, and the inculcation of an amount and species of
knowledge unparalleled in the past history of our race ; mea-
sures of no importance not destined to work mighty results ?
Let the people once obtain all this as a national and natural
right, and we will talk no more of probabilities, of possibilities,
but of realities. There is a slow upheaving power at work
which will shake the whole fshnc of the sodsd system, but if
guided by Cerebral Physiology, will shape a philosophy of
definite proportions and practic^ utility.

But we must conclude. As regards our own exertions, we
know our difficulties and we are prepared to meet them ; we
expect opposition, and we can predict the quarter from which
it will come. But we are influenced by motives which will
enable us to bear all this. We estimate our exertions not by
the approval of men, but by their accordance with the dictates
of Conscientiousness guided by Reason. The opinions of those
interested in the continuance of error shall not influence us,
neither shall we be frightened from our path by the exclama-
tions of the vulgar and unrefined. " There are few things more
disgusting to an enlightened mind than to see a number of
men, a mob, whether learned or illiterate, who have never
scrutinized the foundation of their opinions, assailing with
contumely an individual, who, after the labour of researdi and
reflection, has adopted difierent sentiments from theirs, and
pluming themselves on the notion of superior virtue, because
their understandings have been tenacious of prqudice.'* We
look for no reward. The reward we have for our labours is
the conviction that we are assisting to disseminate correct
principles, and although we may not live to see the consum-
mation of our aspirations, we are morally certain that we shall
promote the happiness and freedom of future generations.

In conclusion. We say to Cerebral Physiologists grapple
with nature, cease speculating on the unseen, the imknown,
the unfelt, the chimerical. lumit yourselves to the consider-
ation of practical questions and apply the knowledge you
accumulate. Separate the conjectural and the plausible from
that which is established truths embrace the latter and defend


Digitized by


Google


On Reporting Devehpment, 25

your position regardless of the consequences. Be Philoso-
phers. Cease drawling forth misereres over the fading rem-
nants of spiritual theories ; the ofiTspring of infant brains ; the
vestiges of an intellectual chaos^ a period of ignorance and
superstition; and rejoice at the approaching indications of
man's emancipation from the incubus of error. Discard
authority, if authority come forth unsupported by the com-
panionship of facts. Attach yourselves to no party except
the party of truth seekers. Do this, and ye will present the
grandest characteristics of humanity : ye will stand forth men.
Do this boldly, with strength, activity, and unity of purpose,
and ye will hasten onwards the progress of your race, and will
place on the topmost seat in the halls of science the Professors
and Teachers of Cerebral Physiology.

L. E. G. E.


II. On Reporting Development. By T. S. Prideaux, Esq.,
Southampton.

Considering how much the progress of the science of Cere-
bral Physiology is dependent upon its cultivators being able to
impart to each other with accuracy and facility, the features
of those cases which fall within the sphere of observation of
each, — to determine the best mode of noting development,
must certainly be admitted to be an object of paramount im-
portance, and one deserving much more attention than has
hitherto been bestowed on it. The great benefit which would
accrue to the science, from one system of notation being uni-
versally employed by those engaged in its study, (in the same
way as the musicians of all civilized nations make use of the
gamut of Guido,) can scarcely be overrated; and the only
way in which so desirable a result is likely to be achieved, is,
by the evolution of a plan for noting development of un-
doubted superiority to any existing system. Let such a plan
once appear, and receive the sanction of any influential body
of Cerebral Physiologists, and its progress to universal adoption
would probably be rapid. I would suggest to the Phrenolo-
gical Association the appointment of a committee to investi-
gate the subject, and draw up a report of its labours to be
read at the ensuing session, and adopted by the body, if
thought deserving.

In lajring (as I am about to do,) the mode of noting de-
velopment employed by myself before the public, I do not,
for a moment, suppose that it possesses any claim to ge-


Digitizedby VjOOQIC -


26 On Reporting Development.

neral adoption; if^ in submitting it^ I should furnish a hint
for the foundation of a better^ or if it should only have the
effect of directing the attention of some more competent indi«
vidual to such a task^ I shall be satisfied with the result of
my labours. The method which will eventuaUy become per-
manent^ will doubtless be the offspring of a period when our
knowledge of the practical department of Cerebral Physiology
is much more advanced than at present^ and will be con-
structed after a minute comparison and experience of different
systems ; but if, in the meantime, we can take a step in ad-
vance of our present position, let us do so.

The opinions of Cerebral Physiologists, whose organisation
varies considerably, will doubtless not correspond as to the
extent of the scale advisable to be adopted. Tliose who unite
a large order, and number, to a good endowment of the {Seuml-
ties which appreciate the development of the organ, will, no
doubt, be in favour of a more minute system of notation, than
those oppositely organised. Mutual concession is necessary,
though it is not too much to say, that the latter class must, in
some measure, be contented to receive the law, from those best
adapted by nature for giving it. That it is desirable that the
method of notation employed should be as minute as is con-
sistent with practical convenience, is a position which every
one will admit ; the only question is, where does this limit
commence, — and wherever the sub-divisions of a scale are ex-
tended so far, that considerable disparity would exist between
the places assigned to the individual organs by competent ob-
servers, then we conceive a practical inconvenience arises.
Now, I believe, if two Cerebral Physiologists of ability and
experience, were each required to write out the development
of a head according to the Edinburgh scale, of 30 degrees,
not only would more than half the organs be characterised by
different numbers, but a difference of as much as two, or even
three degrees, would be found between several of them, and
for this reason it appears to me, that a scale, with a range less
extensive, would be more useful.

Considering the different shades of meaning attached by
different persons to the same word, and the d^culty, or ra-
ther, impossibility, of obtaining an assortment of adjectives
whose vsdue shall increase, or diminish, by regular and equal
gradations, I think, that though the use of adjectives may
be useful to afford some indication of the value of the scale at
certain points, or boundaries, the employment of numerals is
far preferable to denote the intermediate stages. The scale
we are in the habit of employing for our private memoranda,
distinguishes 1 1 degrees or gradations of development, and is in-


Digitized by


Google


On Reporting Development. 27

tended to indude all the different shades which occnr^ between
deprivation or idiocy on the one hand^ and monstrosity on the
other. Cases of tins description occur but seldom^ and when
they doy merit a particular description. I assume an average
pointy and reckon 5 degrees above^ and 6 below average^ which
we express on paper^ by means of the first five digits, and the
positive and negative signs, thus, — 5, —4, — 3, — 2, — 1, a,
+1, +2, +3, +4, +5. Three above average, and three below
average, answer to my ideas of lai^ and small, respectively,
and the division of the scale into above, and behw, average,
together with the method of notation employed, appear to me
to tend much to simplify the subject, and to keep the exact
degree of development in view. The extreme points of the
scale —5, and +5, are but very rarely required to be em-
ployed, and the greater number of heads should be described
witibout exceeding the range from — 3, to +3. Should a case
occur in which it would be desirable to indicate an interme-
diate shade of development, such, for instance, as an organ
being a trifle fuller on one side tlum the other, it may be very
simply effected by the use of a decimal, thus, + 1-6, would in-
dicate a gradation halfway between +\, and +2.

Whatever scale of reporting development be however
adopted, a most valuable aid in ensuring accuracy and imi-
formity, would be a set of standard casts, exhibiting each or-
gan in every gradation of development recognised by the
scale. With a scale of 11 gradations this object might be ef-
fected by a set of 11 casts ; and, independently of the precision
which such a guide would impart to the value of each grada-
tion of the scale, it would afford most important assistance to
Cerebral Physiologists of limited experience, or mediocre capa-
city for appreciating development. From the infinite variety
of the ontUne of heads, the accuracy of reports of cerebnd
development, must always depend, to a certain extent, on the
judgment of the individual observer; but, it is scarcely too
much to say, that the adoption of the scheme proposed, would
narrow the chances of error to the smallest possible limit which
the nature of the subject renders practicable, and much contri-
bute to fsudlitate and extend the practice of the science.

With regard to describing the size of the brain as a whole.
Cerebral Physiologists ought not to be content to acquire their
information on a point so clearly within the reach of the appli-
cation of a definite system of measurement, from the arbitrary
notions of individuals as to what constitutes large, small, or
moderate. A system of measurement may unquestionably be
invented which will indicate the area of the skidl within a very
near approximation to the truth ; and the result of some ex-


Digitized by


Google


28 On Reporting Development.

periments I have made on the subject is^ that I have found
that the sum of six of the most descriptive and comprehensive
measurement of the skull gives its area in cubic inches^ to a
very great nicety. In a skull^ the area of which I ascertained
by filling it to be 81 inches^ — ^the circumference was 20 in,,+
the length from the occipital spine to the root of the nose over
the head in the mesial line, 12*5 in.,-!- the length firom the
occipital spine to the root of the nose over the top of Caution,
Ideality, and outer edge of Causality. 12 in.,+ the length firom
ear to ear over the centre, 12-6in.,+ the length firom ear to
ear over Selfesteem, 13 in.,+ length firom ear to ear over the
top of Comparison, 11*1 in. = 81*2 in. This mode of consi-
dering the size of the skull, viz., as containing so many cubic
inches, appears to me an interesting and attractive one, equally
precise and convenient, and worthy of general adoption tiU
some better be suggested. When the measurements are taken
firom a head instead of a skull, a deduction of about eight inches
should be made, to aUow for thfe thickness of the integuments.

In reporting the development of a head it would also be
very desirable, that the solid bulk of the following different
masses of brain (ascertained by some approved system of mea-
surement) should be stated. First portion of brain before a
line drawn fix)m the anterior margin of benevolence to the
termination of the fi*ontal suture, about an inch behind the
orbit, (this line will bisect Constructiveness at about the dis-
tance of two-thirds of its diameter firom its anterior edge).
Second portion above the points where ossification commences
in the firontal, and parietal bones, not included in the first di-
vision. Third, the portion below the plane of the same points
not included in the first division, — and, lastly, the Cerebellum ;
and the information thus obtained, might be rendered still
more precise, if the relative proportions between the inferior
and superior parts of the first division, and between the ante-
rior and posterior parts of the second and third divisions, were
likewise stated.

I conceive, the arbitrary opinions of individuals should
only be resorted to as evidence, on those points to which the
application of measurement is not practicable ; and, unfor-
tunately, this must always to a great extent remain the case,
with regard to the development of a large portion of the in-
dividual organs. This circumstance should, however, render
Cerebral Physiologists the more anxious to avail themselves
of the accuracy ensured by measurement, whenever its employ-
ment is possible. The practice of estimating development by
measure seems very much fallen into disrepute; and, per-
haps, this is scarcely to be wondered at, when it is reeol-


Digitized by


Google


On Reporting Development, 29

lected, tliat at the time when the Craniometer was invented
and it was proposed to introduce a precise system of measure-
ment, the size of an organ was considered, in a great degree,
to depend upon the distance firom its surface to the ear. The
futility of such a mode of ascertaining development was soon
discovered, and the practice of estimating size by measurement,
undeservedly came in for a portion of the discredit, which the
fallacious system with which it was first associated, merited
and received, and was at once, to a great extent, abandoned,
without that attention being bestowed on the question, as to
whether it might not be possible to introduce a really useful
system of measurement, which the importance of the subject
demoded. Now, however, Cerebral Physiologists are famiUar
with the fact, that height may be imparted to the head, and
length from the ear to the forehead, by the lateral expansion of
the middle lobe of the brain, without the intellectual and moral
organs being necessarily well developed ; now they are in pos-
session of other landmarks besides the ear, to assist them in
forming their conclusions ; why should they not attempt to
avail themselves of the accuracy which the employment of the
rule offers, by inventing a system of measurement adapted to
the clearer and more precise ideas of cerebral development,
which they now possess. I am aware that it is very common
to see it stated, that the hand or eye is the best judge; and,
unquestionably, many Cerebral Physiologists are fully able to
form a very accurate opinion of the development of the head
by these means alone, and they may be quite sufficient to sa-
tisfy the mind of the individu^ manipulator ; but, ought such
a method to be deemed satisfactory by Cerebral Physiologists
as a body, in receiving a report drawn up by an individual, of
whose qualifications thev are ignorant

Let it constantly be borne in mind, that in stating mea-
surements we record facts; whilst, in stating, that certain
parts of the head are large, small, or moderate, we record
merely opinions, and from cases that have fallen under our
own observation ; we are afraid it too frequently happens, that
Cerebral Physiologists suffer their judgment to be biased by
their preconceived ideas, and are apt to see in heads just that
degree of development, which the character of the individual
according to their notions requires ; and thus, many usefrQ
cases of partial, or modified exceptions, which, if investigated,
might serve to increase the precision of our knowledge on
many points, are buried in oblivion.

There are two points, to which, in reporting cases, it would
be useful to direct attention, as nothing definite is at present
known respecting them. First, as to the effect on character


Digitized by


Google


30 On Bepcrting Development,

of an organ being developed in very different degress in the
two hemispheres ; and^ secondly, what modifications take place
in manifestation of function, according as the size of an organ
is principally dependent upon length, or breadth.

When the size of an organ varies greatly on opposite sides of
the head, are we to expect to find the character in accordance
with the greater or less development, intermediate between
the two, or influenced by each, alternately. I have never
yet been able to satisfy myself on these points, though I
am rather inclined to the beUef, that the character will, in
general, be most nearly in accordance with the larger deve-
lopment.

With regard to the influence of length and breadth in mo-
difying manifestation, Dr. Spurzheim has stated it to be his
opinion, that length of fibre conduces to frequency of action,
and thickness to intensity. His opinion, on any point, is en-
titled to great weight, and may be correct in the present in-
stance, but I am not aware that there is any published evi-
dence in its support, and conjectural views (whatever the talent
of their author,) must always be deemed unsatisfactory.

Another subject to which, in reporting cases, it would also
be desirable to pay much greater attention than has hitherto
been done, is — ^Temperament. When the temperament is
mixed, which will be the case in the great majority of the in-
stances, the presumed proportionals of each of the primitive
temperaments which are combined in the individual should be
stated, together with the groimds on which the opinion of the
observer is formed, comprising a general description of the
person and gait of the subject examined. Amongst the points
deserving to be particulansed, are, the colour and texture of
the hair, — ditto of the skin, and whether hairy or otherwise.
Colour and size of the eyes, — outline of the nose, mouth, and
chin,— degree of prominence of the cheek bones, — make of the
ears, hands, and feet, — stature, — development of the osseous
and muscular systems, of the tiiorax, and abdomen, — ^the cha-
racter of the pulse, — state of the cellular tissue, — ^tone of the
voice, — ^and general character of the motions. The practice
of recording these particulars, may be the means, at some fu-
ture period, of affording data to decide the interesting ques-
tion : to what extent it may be possible, notwithstandLig the
apparent infinite diversity of individuals, to specify certain
general features of development, as in some measure charac-
teristic of particular races, and to assign to each its concomi-
tant external peculiarity of person.

Before quitting the subject of reporting development, I
have one more suggestion to offer, the adoption of which would.


Digitized by


Google


Ofi Reporiinff Development, 31

we are convinoed^ be attended with great practical advantage^
and be prodnctiYe of the happiest effects^ in promoting the
progress of our science. It is^ that as often as possible^ each
report of the development of a head should be accompanied
by certain measurem^itSy of such a nature as to enable any
one, though ignorant of drawings mechanically to delineate
the profile of the head, and also the outUne of two or three of
such lateral sections of it, as shall be deemed the most import-
ant; and, in the next number, I hope to give the details of
a system of measurement for effecting this object, illustrated
by a plate, exhibiting its application, and containing the out-
line dT some well-known head delineated by its agency, as a
proof at once of its accuracy and practicability.

I shall conclude these remarks by expressing a hope, that
the present race of Cerebral Physiologists will fulfil their duty
to posterity, by omitting no opportunity of noting the actions,
and collecting the busts, of the most remarkable of their con-
temporaries. Correct busts of extraordinary characters, ac-
companied with authentic details of their actaal conduct and
capacities, will, at all times, possess an intriimc value, and may
afford materials to future Cerebral Physiologists, for deter-
mining the functions of organs, the very existence of which
has not yet been even surmised. Nature is not lavish of ex-
traordinary cases of development, and an individual observer
to whose mind any new views may have suggested themselves^
might pass his IHetime without meeting with so numerous,
and sudi decisive cases, either confirmatory or contradictory
of them, as would be placed at once before his eyes, in an ex-
tensive and well arranged collection of casts; and hence the
importance of such collection cannot be too much insisted on.
Many are the disputed points in the history of by-gone ages,
on which great hght might be thrown, did we possess casts of
the heads of the parties most deeply concerned in them. The
head of every public character ought to be' deemed the pro-
perty of the public, and the time will come when the crama of
the principal actors on the great stage of the world will be con-
sidered an indispensable adjunct to the history of their age.
Indeed, every Cerebral Physiologist will be of opinion, that
the information to be collected from this source, wotdd enable
posterity to appreciate the motives of an individual much more
correctly, than a perusal of the conflicting opinions of historians
of opposite fieu^ons.


Digitized by


Google


( 32 )


III. On Temperament. By Thomas Symes Prideaux^ Esq.
Southampton.

Our present mode of estimating temperament must be
considered as vague and empirical^ rather than founded on
that scientific basis which alone can ensure its efficiency.

Notwithstanding the importance of the subject, it appears
to me that an accurate analysis and philosophic classification
of those conditions^ which independently of absolute size in-
fluence the process of Cerebration, has never yet been made,
and although fully sensible that our present want of positive
knowledge as to the causes of these conditions, must preclude
the possibility of a perfect arrangement being effected, I have
yet concluded that many important, and some permanent
distinctions might be drawn, which would not only impart
greater precision to our existing knowledge, but at the same
time contribute to accelerate its progress, by indicating the
points most requiring elucidation, and thus suggesting definite
paths of inquiry, to many whose ideas on the subject would
otherwise remain too general to allow of their prosecuting such
investigations with advantage.

Little difference of opinion I believe exists, as to the
unsatisfactory state of the subject at present, indeed the recep-
tion which Dr. Thomases theory has met with from Phreno-
logists, — ^welcomed, but not adopted, — ^is a convincing proof
not only of the opinion generally entertained of the faultiness
of the existing system, but also that the new has been found
equally defective.

That the relative proportion of the head, chest and abdo-
men, exerts a most important influence on Cerebral mani-
festation, and constitutes no inconsiderable portion of the
individuality of an animal, is most indisputable ; but that a
classification founded on this basis alone, comprehends all
that was previously included in the designation Temperament,
is an assumption totally at variance with facts, and under
these circumstances the application of the term — ^Tempera-
ment — ^by Dr. Thomas to his system, must be regarded as
both injudicious and unwarrantable. It is in fact a specimen
of the too common error, of attribating a sort of substantial
existence to a mental abstraction ; — temperament is regarded
as a specific entity, and in the same way as we are enlightened
as to the component parts of some well-known mineral, or
vegetable substance, we are told that it consists of something
different from what we have supposed, when in reality, except
as a sound, it has no existence, but as the representation of


Digitized by


Google


On Temperament, 33

those ideas, which common consent has appended to it. Had
Dr. Thomas shown that all the bodily characteristics usually
comprehended under the term temperament, arose from varia-
tions in the relative size of the three great cavities, his adoption
of the designation would have been allowable ; or, had he
broadly asserted the existing classification to be based on
distinctions too worthless to deserve preservation, and stated
that he availed himself of the term temperament, as a word
set at liberty fipom the ideas previously attached to it having
become obsolete, whatever difference of opinion might have
existed as to the correctness of his views, his conduct would
have been pronounced intelligible; but without any such plea
to take possession of a word long employed, and well under-
stood in a definite acceptation, and employ it to indicate ideas
totally different, is quite indefensible.

With regard to the views advanced by that able and
original writer on Phrenology, Mr. Sidney Smith, that the
constitution of the body is dependent upon the predominance
of certain Cerebral organs, viz., the bilious on the develop-
ment of Firmness, the sanguine on Hope, and the nervous on
Cautiousness. I must observe that my own experience hitherto,
impresses me with the belief that they are unfounded. I have
met with many striking agreements in the course of my obser-
vations, but not so invariably as to lead me to believe in any
connection of dependency existing between them. I admit
that I should expect to see an impersonification of Hope,
depicted with blue eyes and golden locks; but an important
distinction must be drawn between phenomena merely asso-
ciated together as coincidences, and those coexistences which
are bound together by the tie of Causation. Supposing an
island peopled by the descendants of two individuals, one of
whom had possessed a large cerebellum and wide cheek bones,
the other a small cerebellum and narrow cheek bones, it is
not only possible, but probable, that a relation between the
development of the cerebellum and the width of the cheek
bones, would exist in the majority of the inhabitants. Sup-
posing then a relation to exist between the development of
hope and the sanguine temperament, in a large proportion of
the Anglo-Saxon race, seeing that the relation is not invariable,
is not the fact more rationdly explained by supposing a large
hope and sanguine temperament to have been fortuitously
conjoined in their Saxon progenitors, than by supposing the
relation of cause and effect to subsist between them.

An attempt has lately been made bv some Phrenologists,
to revive in a somewhat modified form, the deservedly exploded
doctrine, that the character may to a certain and far from

VOL. I. D


Digitized by


Google


34 On Temperament,

inconsiderable extent, be predicated from the temperament ;
thus inconstancy and levity, are said to be the character-
istics of the sanguine temperament, whilst the lymphatic is
pronounced favourable to the activity of Cautiousness and
Secretiveness. If temperament signifies general constitution
of the body, its effect whether stimulating or repressing,
should be equally participated in by all the cerebral oi^ns,
and I do not hesitate to say, that facts show the contrary
opinion to be a crude unsupported hypothesis. The idea that
the lymphatic temperament is favourable to the display of
Secretiveness and Cautiousness, is preposterous, and equivsdent
to indentifying apathy with activity. When it can be sho¥m
that general Hstlessness and inactivity, rather than exertions
to conceal and secure, are manifestations of these faculties ;
then, and not before, this notion will deserve serious consi-
deration.

It is scarcely necessary to state, that every well founded
distinction increases the accuracy of our knowledge, and that
ideas in proportion as they become less general, become more
precise. The great defect in our present mode of appreciating
temperament and one which vitiates the whole system, is the
mixing together in one estimate ; the conditions of texture,
and relative size of organs ; thus basing our classification upon
general ideas made up of the undefined compounds of two es-
sentially distinct qualities. That the present system possesses
great practical utility and suffices to convey in a great majority
of cases, tolerably correct information of the appearance and
conformation of the individual, I readily admit, but still deem
it wanting in that capability of universal application, which a
more analytical, and therefore more philosophic classification
would possess. To give an example — an individual with
moderate, or even rather small sized head, small bones and
muscles, fine soft skin, fine soft light brown hair, ruddy
complexion, and blue eyes expressive of vivacity, would be
denominated ^^ Nervous Sanguine,^' and if I mistake not, the
totally different appearance and conformation, of one with
large bones, blue eyes, the same ruddy skin and light hair,
but rather coarse than fine in texture, with a head greatly
predominating in size over the thorax, abdomen, and the
muscular system, would be designated by the same terms ; the
term nervous being prefixed to the first, in consequence of the
fine quality of the tissues of the body, and notwithstanding
the moderate proportionate size of the head ; and being pre-
fixed to the temperament of the second, in consequence of
the predominating size of the head, and notwithstanding the
comparative coarse quality of the tissues of the body ; and if


Digitized by


Google


On Temperament. 35

this supposition of mine be correct, as I believe it to be, it
is clear that we employ the word nervous to designate two
very different conditions, viz., those of fine quality of bodily
tissue, and large relative size of cerebrum.

Conyinced from observation that great variations occur in
the texture of the tissues of the body, with similar proportions
of the head, chest, and abdomen, and vice vers&, I altogether
repudiate the idea of their mutual dependence, and whilst
admitting the necessity of attending to the rekUive size of
these organs, in estimating cerebral manifestation, maintain,
that this condition must be considered as an adjunct, and as
an adjunct only, to an infinitely more influential one, viz.,
that of texture.

Most unquestionably the materials for a philosophic clas-
sification of the temperaments have yet to be collected, and
I anticipate that the adoption of the improved methods of
physiological research, and more particularly the microscope,
will afford us much valuable information as to the ultimate
cause of the varieties of bodily texture. Among those points,
the investigation of which may be expected to be productive
of valuable results, may be particularized the specific gravity
and diameter of the ultimate fibrils of the nervous and mus-
cular systems, together with their chemical composition. The
composition of the blood and its degree of vitality, or time it
takes in dying after abstraction from the system, (probably an
important characteristic of temperament, and one well worthy
elucidation by the prosecution of a series of experiments on
the blood of individuals in a state of health who vary greatly
in the quality of their organization). The difference in kind
of manifestation, between two brains of the same extent of
surface, but in one of which the sulci are ipuch deeper than
in the other and the mass of medullary matter in consequence
smaller. The relative quantity of grey and white neurine in
the brain and other portions of the nervous system, a question
which leads to the important inquiry, whether its three great
divisions, the spinal, cerebral, and ganglionic, participate in
one common nature, the texture of one division affording a
criterion for estimating that of another, or not. Perhaps
future researches may demonstrate the relative size of these
three systems to each other, and the proportion of white and
grey neurine contained in each, to lie at the very root of the
question of temperament.

I anticipate that the quality we term Nervous will be found
to bear a relation to the smaUness of the diameter of the
tdtimate fibres of which the primitive tissues of the body are
composed, and that termed Bilious, to their specific gravity,

d2


Digitized by


Google


36 On Temperament.

whilst the Sanguine may be discoyered (though I regard this
as more doubtful) to be greatly dependent upon the profusion
of red globules in the bloody and the Lymphatic^ to be pro-
duced by the deficiency of the characteristics of the Bilious
and Sanguine.

Although we must wait till the labours of the chemist and
the physiologist have enlightened us^ as to the ultimate cause
of the varieties of bodily organization^ before we can sit do¥m
to the task of systematising on the subject of temperament^
with the confidence that we are erecting a permanent edifice,
in the mean time, and whilst labouring for the accomplish-
ment of this object, it may be advantageous to endeavour to
introduce such slight mo<Ufications in our present system as a
clear perception of its errors enables us to suggest. The most
important of these I have before stated to be the blending
together in one estimate the two distinct and independent
conditions of texture and relative size, a. proceeding so cal-
culated to introduce vagueness and obscurity into our ideas of
the distinctions on which our classification is based, that I
regard its discontinuance as an indispensable preliminary to
any advance being made in the subject, for let it be remem-
bered, that it is not two conditions producing the same result
we associate, but two conditions producing results essentially
different. Texture determines the capacity for rapidity of
action, and texture and absolute size conjoined determine
power, whereas relative size has no influence on these capaci-
ties, except mediately, through the modifications it tends to
produce in texture. The immediate influence of relative size
IS in the tendency to act frequently, or for a long period of
time, an attribyie which should carefully be distinguished
from capacity for rapid action, though too often confounded
with it, under the single designation activity. Let us once
more review these distiuctions. Power is dependent upon
ABSOLUTE SIZE and TEXTURE, Capacity for rapid action upon
texture, and tendency to frequency of action upon the relative
ENERGY of an organ, compared with the other organs of the
body, which condition is determined by relative size and
texture conjoined.

Beyond insisting upon the necessity of giving a separate
estimate of the * texture' of the bodily fabric, in which no
considerations of ^relative size' shall be allowed to enter, and
making this latter condition the subject of a special descrip-
tion, the modifications in our existing system I wish at present
to submit to the consideration of cerebral physiologists are but
slight. I propose adopting for the ground work of our classi-
fication the three states of the body, known as Bilious,


Digitized by


Google


On Temperament. 87

Sanguine^ and Lymphatic^ as indicating certain unk^own^ but
peculiar^ and ea&oly recognisable conditions^ and in this^ their
eligibili^ for forming the basis of divisions consists.

The attribute designated by the appellation high or nervous,
I regard rather as a quality, always present in a greater or
less degree in the bodily fabric, than as a variety of texture
subsisting by itself, and propose invariably appending to the
three divisions before specified an adjectional term indicating
the degree in which this quaUty may be supposed to be pre-
sent. «

Believing the characteristics designated Sanguine, Bilious,
and Lymphatic, may exist in equal purity in textures of very
various degrees of fineness, I regard the notification of this
point as important, and so dose do I believe to be the relation
that subsists between fineness of texture and the attribute
termed nervous, that though far from asserting their identity,
or that increased knowledge may not demand their separation,
for the present, I purpose to assume fineness of texture to be
the measure of this unknown but important quality, the
plentiful presence of which is indicated by high sensibility
both in man and animals, and obtains for those highly en-
dowed with it amongst the latter the appellation " thorough
bred/' To describe the measure of this quality supposed to
be present, I propose to employ a scale of seven gradations,
denoted by the words, — very fine, fine, rather fine, medium,
rather coarse, coarse, very coarse; but the precise limits of the
scale to be employed, together with the appellation of its
divisions, is of course a mere question of detiol, to be decided
by convenience.

I am far from denying that varieties in the texture of dif-
ferent parts of the body may exist, and that the brain in conse-
quence may be more or less highly organised than the appear-
ance of other parts would lead us to expect ; but till some
criterion for estimating this difference be discovered, we must be
content with that near approximation to the truth, which in the
great majority of cases, the texture of other parts unquestion-
ably affords. The general characteristics of the Sanguine,
Bihous, and Lymphatic conditions of body are so well under-
stood, that I think it unnecessary to enumerate them. I will
however observe that as a general rule, the less we rely upon
colour in our distinctions the better, this criterion being only
applicable to the Caucasian variety of the human race, whereas
there is every reason to suppose that the peculiarities of con-
stitution on which our classification is based are common to
the species.

Did I think the attempt likely to meet with success, I


Digitized by


Google


38 To the Editor of the Zoist.

should be inclined to substitute the designation Fibrous for
Bilioua, and Serous or Flaccid for Lymphatic.

In illustration of the proposed alteration in the method
of noticing development which it has been the object of the
preceding remarks to unfold^ I now subjoin a description of
the temperament of the two individuals before alluded to^ as
being both likely, though very dissimilar, to be designated by
the same terms (Nervous Sanguine), according to the present
system.

The Temperament of the first (see page 34) would be as
follows :

Fabric — Sanguine; quality — ^fine; head, chest, abdomen,
and osseous, and muscular systems — ^proportionate.

That of the second :

Fabric — Sanguine ; quality — ^rather coarse ; head greatly
predominating over chest, abdomen, and muscular system, but
less so over the osseous.

To those who may be inclined to demur to the greater
length of description attendant upon the proposed alteration,
I have only to observe, that no subject can be treated with
greater simplicity than its nature admits of, consistently with
the preservation of accuracy, certainly the more important
consideration of the two.


IV. To the Editw of the Zoist.

Oentlemen, — I think the following case may be con-
sidered sufficiently interesting, to deserve publication in your
periodical. E. M., set. 64, an inmate of this institution,
and for some time past the subject of chronic rheumatic
disease, &c., expired on the 6th of December, 1842. The
examination of the body revealed the brain and membranes
apparently healthy, with the exception of old and inseparable
adhesions between the surface of the convolutions, indicating
the organs of Veneration, and the membranous structures
naturally in contact only. So firmly adherent were the
membranes to each other, and to the surface of the brain, on
either hemisphere, that in my eflforts to disunite them the
dura mater was torn. To render the case more complete I
had better, perhaps, add, that the only other morbid appear-
ance discovered was in one of the mucous membranes.

Since the autopsy I have seen a nephew and neice of the
deceased, who have told me that about nine or ten years since.


Digitized by


Google


To the Editor of the Zoist. 39

when the old lady became insane, her friends were first made
conscious of her disease by an extraordinary penchant she
evinced for theological dispute, and, which eventually became
so excessive, that she has been known, when attending divine
service, to c^l the minister to order for, as she said, attempt-
ing to promulgate opinions on religious matters, at variance
with all propriety and truth. She subsequently regarded
herself as an apostle, and used to declare she was an instru-
ment in the hands of the Almighty, with which it was His
intention to efiect some extraordinary and great good. Such
then is the early history of E. M. ; and which, when con-
•sidered in connexion with the post mortem appearances, is of
much value.

My personal knowledge of the patient has been limited to
the last two years of her life ; during which I have only ob-
served that she has been a little strange and irritable, and
that when displeased, she has applied the epithet : ^^ wicked,^'
to whoever happened to offend her, and has conjectured his or
her probable condition in the next world.

I should add, also, that the effects of sacred music was
somewhat extraordinary. It appeared to send her into a
kind of ecstacy, the excitement was temporary, and only indi-
cated by the gesticulations and voice, the latter becoming
shrill and tremulous. Paroxysms would oftentimes recur
during the service performed at the Asylum Chapel. It was
sometimes considered necessary to forbid her attendance.

The above constituted a case of excessive action of small
organs. An examination of the cranium would have induced
any Cerebral Physiologist to declare : — ^^ Veneration small"
The skull was not thinner in this particular region than
elsewhere.

Your obedient Servant,

Jambs George Davey, M.D.

Hanwell Asylum, Middlesex,
March 16tb, 1843.

As an appendix to this interesting case forwarded to us by
Dr. Davey, we extract, but in a very condensed form, the fol-
lowing case from the Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal
for March 4th, 1843.

A clergyman, after prolonged study, and a total neglect of
all measures calculated to preserve his health, presented some
premonitory symptoms, and after a few weeks exhibited the
most positive evidence of disease of the brain. Mr. Millar,
the gentleman who records the case, gives the following his-
tory of the immediate exciting cause : —


Digitized by


Google


40 To the Editor of the Zoist.

^' He had that morning called on a notorious drunkard of
the village to read him a sermon on his besetting sin, but his
parishioner received his ministerial offices so contemptuously
as to resolutely order the reverend curate out oi his house.
This conduct had such an effect on his already-excited feel-
ings, that he rushed into the square of W , holding his

Bible in the air, and knelt down praying Gt>d to subdue the
obduracy of the sinner's heart, and rising up, began most
vociferously to exhort people to repentance, for sin had dark-
ened the land, and the judgments of Gt>d were coming upon
the earth. After much d^culty he was compelled to go
home, when he ran up into his bedroom, stripping and wash-
ing himself by dashing basins of cold water over his body,
and praying most earnestly " that the waters of life he was
now washing in would cleanse his soul fipom all sin.'' This
process he had repeated thrice, and such was the intensity of
his convictions respecting his own impurities, that each time
he determinedly refused to be dressed in the same clothes,
because they were unclean.

He lived twelve days, and the following is the account of
the inspection of the brain : —

'' The vessels of the dura mater were tinged with blood,
looking blue and prominent, and so adherent was this mem-
brane to the cranium that it was impossible to separate it
entire; the sinuses were loaded with blood; the arachnoid
membrane was firm and opaque, having a fluid yellow fibrinous
secretion between it and the pia mater — ^this was particularly
manifest over the convolutions along the mesial line of each
hemisphere and on the left especially ; pia mater gorged with
blood,'' &c. Sec.

Mr. Millar remarks, " the character of the insanity is, I
believe sufficiently well accounted for by the nature of his
studies — ^religion and the serious responsibilities of his profes-
sional avocation — and I am free to confess that the portions
of brain to which phrenologists ascribe the functions of Venera-
tion were precisely the seat of the greatest vascular easement,
the most decided opacity and firmness of the arachnoid coat,
and the most ejffusion between that membrane and the pia mater
— a most striking evidence of damaged function in connection
with organic disease"

Many may not be aware that the pia mater is the nutrient
membrane of the brain. It is excessively vascular, dips dovm
between every convolution, and distributes multitudes of ves-
sels to the grey substance. Here, then, we have the most
conclusive evidence that a certain abnormal functional mani-
festation was accompanied by a certain organic change in the


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 41

membranes, that one of the membranes supplies the vessels
for the purpose of nourishing the convolutions, and that the
inflammation was more acute in the portions covering the
convolutions which Cerebral Physiologists have proved to be
the organs for the evolution of a particular faculty — ^Venera-
tion.


V. Phrenoloffical Society.

The Phrenological Society was founded in London by Dr.
EUiotson, in 1824 ; and has regularly held its meetings, at eight
o'clock, on the first and third evemngs of each month, during
a session lasting the greater part of the year, ever since : —
what can be said of no other Phrenological Society. The
Edinburgh society, which began so well, ceased at length to
meet, so that, when a great legacy was left it by Dr. Roberton,
of Paris, Dr. Verity, of the same city, disputed the bequest
on the ground of its non-existence. This is a wretched state
of things, when we consider that the good phrenologists of
Edinburgh made it their boast that Dr. Spurzhein had pre-
dicted that Edinburgh would be the place in which phrenology
would first take root in the British Isles, and whence it would
extend. Even the Phrenological Journal left Edinburgh for
the banks of the Thames ; and, though it has now returned
for change of air, having nearly perished by marsh miasmata,
it is very sickly and kept alive by nourishment conveyed to
it from a distance.

The London society has always been too much neglected as
well as the Edinburgh, by those who should have supported it,
— the medical profession, and now the majority of its mem-
bers are not medical men. But from the greater size of London
than of Edinburgh, and the perseverance of some of its mem-
bers in spite of all neglect, it has existed on : and for the last
two or tbree years, its meetings have been very interesting and
instructive, and a large number of less desirable members
have dropped from it, so that it never was really so flourishing
as at present, though its numbers are small. Ladies are now
admitted to its alternate meetings, and since the adoption of
this regulation, its room at Exeter Hall has been crowded on
those nights. We shall always put our readers in possession
of its proceedings.


Digitized by


Google


42 Phrenological Society.

First haffofthe Session, 1842—3.
November 7th. Dr. Elliotson, President, in the Chair.

Mr. Wood begged to direct the attention of the members
to the two casts before him. He had recently been at York,
and, on visiting the Castle there, two heads had been pointed
out to him as those of murderers of their own wives. On
examination he found the forms of their heads so different
from each other, and both so different from the heads of the
general run of murderers, that he thought they would be
interesting to the society, and immediately applied for casts
of them ; and, after considerable diflSculty, owing principally
to the respectability of the family of one of them, he succeed^
in obtaining copies.

It was too often imagined, by those who did not reflect
upon the various incentives to crime, that in every case of
murder there must necessarily be an immense development
of the organs of destructiveness ; and, when this did not
happen, they would hold the instance up in triumph as dis-
proving phrenology: forgetting, or not being aware, that
although some monsters may be impelled solely by an innate
love of cruelty, and although, under the operation of our
criminal laws, all those convicted of murder are classed
together, as if equally guilty, and all alike consigned to the
tender mercies of the hangman ; yet the vast majority are
urged by mixed impulses, some fatally impelled by adverse
circumstances, and that many might, under different example
and opportunities, have become useful members of society.
A good illustration of this would be found in the present
instances.

The first man, Jonathan Taylor, aged 60, formerly rented
a farm of above 200 acres, imder Lord Wenlock, at Escrick, a
few miles from York. It appeared, from the evidence adduced
on his trial, that he had lived peaceably with his wife and
six or seven children, all grown up, until a few years ago.
It has since been discovered that he had been carrying on a
secret intercourse with another female. Three or four years
before his crime he formed an acquaintance also with another
woman, who was of dissolute character, and he left his home
to reside with her at Hull, where they took a pot-house of
the lowest description, frequented by rogues and abandoned
women. Some of his family visited him there, endeavouring
in vain to induce him to return home ; but he consented to
transfer his right in the farm to his wife and sons, and the
landlord transferred the lease to them. A year or two after-


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society, 43

terwards he returned to his wife, but again left after a few
days ; and repeatedly afterwards paid her similar visits, always
returning to Hull after a day or two, until about 18 months
before his crime, when he went to reside permanently with
his family, but was not allowed to take any part in the
management of the farm, still less to receive any money, a
few shillings only being occasionally given him for pocket
money. Things remained in this state till October, 1841,
on 26th of which month all the family, except his wife and
himself, had to go to a field, at a distance from the house, to
dig potatoes. He left the house at half-past six, saying he
was going to Selby, a distance of four miles ; at quarter-past
nine the last of the sons went out, leaving the mother alone.
At 12 the family returned to dinner, and found their mother
lying extended, with her head on the hearth and' quite dead ;
some of the lower part of her dress still burning, but her cap
and neckerchief entire. She appeared to have been dead some
hours ; and the surgeon discovered evident marks of strangu-
lation. The keys of all her drawers, which she usually carried
in her pocket, lay by her side. On examining that in which
she usually kept her money, it was ascertained that a small
sum, which was safe there in the morning, had been abstracted,
evidently by means of the keys, as the lock was not forced.
The deceased had been seen by her husband to deposit £70
in it some days previously ; but she had afterwards, without
his knowledge, entrusted it to her eldest son. Various papers
had been similarly abstracted from drawers in other rooms,
and articles of plate in the same drawers left untouched. It
was afterwards found that a miUer had called at the house at
half-past 9 and seen Taylor, who told him that all the family
were at the potatoe field ; the miller asked. Where is the mis-
tress? and Taylor, who appeared most anxious to get him
away, replied that she was gone there too. At half-past 10
Taylor was seen in a bye path leading to Selby, where he
arrived about half-past 11. A bottle of rum, taken from the
house, was afterwards picked up in this track. He stayed at
Selby, where he had no business, till past two. On his way
back, he was told of his wife's death and that she was supposed
to have fallen into the fire in a fit ; he replied, " Yes she has
had a headache some days past.'' This was not true. Taylor
afterwards denied that he had been home since he left at half-
past 6 ; but subsequently acknowledged it, giving a frivolous
excuse for his return. That was also proved to be false.
Other circumstances brought the murder clearly home to
him; and he was convicted and executed accor(£ngly; but
denied his guilt to the last.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


44 Phrenological Society.

The peculiar features of this case, therefore, consisted in the
cool premeditation and the cunning attempt at concealment in
disposing of the body, so as to make it appear that the woman
had dropped down in a fit, or otherwise been burnt to death,
rather than in any inordinate cruelty in the mode of com-
mitting the crime. There is no evidence of any previous
violence of character. Indeed the family appear to have been
desirous of having him amongst them, though evidently dis-
trusting his honesty. Yet he showed no great love of pro-
perty, since he voluntarily assigned to them his interest in
the farm. The strongest point in his character was that of
debauchery. All this is admirably borne out on his head.

We find a most inordinate development of the organ of
sexual love; large cautiousness, and very large cunning.
The organ of sense of property, — ^acquisitiveness, is moderate ;
and the organ pred^posing to violence, — destructiveness,
though relatively large, is by no means stnkingly developed.
The intellectual region is tolerably good; but the whole
coronal region slopes off at the sides, shewing a very moderate
development of the moral region.

In the other case, there was clearly a degree of insanity.
Robert Nail, about 30 years of age, had been married between
seven and eight years ; during which period he and his wife
had been separated six or seven times. They had been living
apart for eight or nine months previously to the 27th Nov.
Isist ; and the woman is said to have cohabited, at one time,
with a man named Hibbard. Yet he seems to have been
much attached to her ; and, during their separation, he had
often called upon her and threatened her with violence be-
cause she would not live with him. He had even repeatedly
threatened her life. On the 27th November, Nail and his
wife went together to a beer shop, where they slept and re-
mained till the following afternoon. He then treated her
very affectionately, and appeared happy in the thought of
again living with her. They left together at 5 p. m. on 28th,
after drinking several pints of beer; and they then went
about to different gin shops, drinking ale and spirits together
till 8 p. m., when they went to the house of Ndl's sister and
were permitted to sleep there. Both were at the time intoxi-
cated, but Nail the worst, and they still seemed very friendly
together. About 9 the sister went out, leaving them both in
bed. She returned at 12, and saw Nail standing by the fire
place. In reply to her question, "what he was doing there,'^
he moaned and said he wanted to go away, that he had been
ill using his wife, and feared he had killed her. She told him
to stay there while she went for her brother. He said he


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 45

irould, and she went out and retomed in two hours with her
brother and a watchman. Nail had thrown himself on the
dead body of his wife and was then weeping and kissing it.
He immediately confessed his guilt, and took from his pocket
the clasp knife, with which he had committed the murder.
On his way to prison, he said he should be hanged for her,
but she would never again desert him for another. He told
the superintendent of police, that, after his sister had left the
house, a quarrel ensued between them, the wife threatening
to leave him again and return to her paramour. He at first
tried to sooth her; but she was abusive, and he sprung from
the bed in a passion, took the knife from his pocket, and
stabbed her. She exclaimed, ^'Oh Bob! thou hast killed
me ! Kiss me ! '' He was immediately stung with remorse,
stabbed himself with the same knife, and afterwards hanged
himself with a handkerchief, but it broke. It was given in
evidence that Nail had received several wounds in the head ;
that, about a fortnight before the murder, his skull had been
laid bare by a blow fipom a crane ; and that he was " flightjr^'
when provoked, and always extremely irritable and violent.

The following is the Judge's (Baron Parke) address to
him after lus conviction, as reported in the YorksMreman.
(The jury had recommended him to mercy. J

" Robert Nail, you have been convicted of the crime of
wilful murder, and although the learned counsel in his ad-
dress in your favour has endeavoured to impress upon the
jury the belief that you were not at the time altogether a
reasonable being, yet I foimd it to be my duty to tell them,
and I feel it my duty to tell you now, that the state of mind

ou were in was not such as legally to extenuate your crime ;

lut that you were responsible for your acts, and for the in-
terests of wxnet^ you must suffer for them. Whether or not
there may be curcumstances which may in a moral point of
view necessarily extenuate, if not in some measure /u«/(/y, your
conduct, is beyond my province to determine: but I should be
acting in a manner not such as the country has a right to
demand from me, and such as my duty to you requires, were
I not to tell you that, in spite of the recommendation of the
jury, / can see nothing whatever to justify my holding out
any prospect that the sentence of the law will not be carried
into eflfect,'' &c. &c.

The head presents anything but the development cha-
racteristic of a murderer. The moral and intellectual regions
are both very fiedrly developed, while the disposition to vio-
lence, though large, is by no means preponderatingly so.
Perhaps the largest organ in the head is that of attachment;


I


Digitized by


Google


4f6 Phrenological Society,

and there can be little doubt that the crime was committed
in a fit of jealousy^ while the poor wretch was under the
influence of liquor^ acting upon a brain rendered morbidly
irritable by previous mechanical injuries.

Nov, 2lst, 1842. Ladies' night

Dr. ElUotson delivered an address upon the character and
cerebral development of Cooper, the murderer, executed at
Newgate last summer.

A policeman, named Moss, saw a gentleman walking near
Homsey wood, followed by a young man, answering the de-
scription of a foot-pad who had latterly committed several
highway robberies, heavily armed : Moss pursued him, and,
when within a few yards of him, the man turned round and
shot Moss with a pistol in the arm. Millet, another police-
man, and a baker, named Mott, pursued him. When Mott
was within a few yards of him, the man drew another pistol
and shot Millet in the shoulder. The baker pursued him
into some fields, and the man got into a lane with no outlet ;
and, having run two miles, was met by Daly, another police-
man, whom he shot dead, through the heart ; having been
observed to reload his pistols. He had first drawn the pistols
and presented them, and said he would shoot the first man
who molested him, and then fired both pistols at once at Daly
and the baker. The baker seized him, and he exclaimed, '^I^m
done, now I give myself up ;" and, on being desired to deliver
up his pistols, he did. He denied having anything more about
him, but was found to have a dagger a foot long, sharpened
at the point and both sides, in his fob pocket.

He gave his name as Thomas Cooper, resident at No. 1,
Rawstone Street, Clerkenwell ; and said he was twenty-three
years old, and a bricklayer. He treated what he had done
with the greatest indifference: and repeated several times
that he had served the men right for having come near him.
The pistols were heavy caval^ pistols. Only four pence
were found in his pockets. He had no shoes nor stockings.
When brought out to have the charge read against him
for the murder of Daly, he became deadly pale, and ex-
claimed, **what, is he dead V' He then asked for a pillow,
and some coffee and bread and butter.

He afterwards said that, while he was pursued, he took
poison, which he carried about with him.

During his imprisonment he was often very violent, and
for some time expressed only regret that he had been unable
to inflict mischief upon and even to murder the other police-
man and other witnesses who had appeared against him. He


Digitized by


Google


Pkrenohgical Society, 47

declared he would murder the surgeon, if he could, for not
supporting the plea that he was insane.

It was asserted on the trial that he attempted to hang
himself five years ago : and to poison himself with laudanum
and arsenic some months before his capture: that he fre-
quently had expressed himself tired of life : that he took a
silver watch to pieces and sold it for five shillings : that he
would sometimes spend all the money he had in tarts, and
had many strange and childish ways ; that he once threaten-
ed his brother's life without any provocation : that once he
said he was a child of God and converted : that on another
occasion he stuck up two cards and declared that they were
his castles and that he would defend them : that once when
ill, he fancied the devil was coming for him ; and a woman
deposed that she would not have allowed him to be at large,
had she been his mother. On these grounds a plea of insanity
was attempted; but iu>o ladies, whom he had stopped and rob-
bedy declared they did not think ?nm mad, and the surgeon and
others who saw him frequently in prison alleged that they
discovered no signs of insanity in him.

He had been so affected at the death of his father as to have
fainted for several minutes. He had actively exerted himself in
rescuing several persons from the house in which a stack of
chimneys had fallen and killed a young lady during the storm
in April, and his conduct had called forth the commendations of
the coroner and several witnesses at the inquest.

After his committal he was very talkative, and was often
violent ; boasted much of himself in many points of cleverness
and skill and said he could have shot any one; and, before his
committal, had declared he would shoot himself if he could
have a pistol, and was very impatient of the public gaze, leaning
forvrard and covering his face with his hands ; shewed no signs
of penitence or religious feeling to the last ; and, on his mo-
ther speaking seriously to him, said, " Don't bother : I have
had preaching enough already."

During the judge's address he shook his fist at the police-
man. The papers reported that "his poor heart-broken
mother attended him nearly daily in his cell, and he exMbU-
ing a very strong affection for her. She seemed to have consi-
derable influence over him.^^

He at length became subdued in prison, and his conduct
was quiet and decent at his execution; but certainly no con-
trition was manifest.

He had been very fond of reading, but chiefly the Weekly
Dispatch and similar prints. He was pale, thin, and sickly
looking : and walked with difficulty to the place of execution,


Digitized by


Google


48 Phrenological Society.

on account of the effects of the arsenic on his feet. He
mentioned in prison that he had always robbed alone ; never
trusting any one with his plans ; that he could snuff a candle
at a considerable distance with a pistol ; that he never sold
his booty to pawnbrokers, but to jews, to avoid the risk of
detection; and that he never desired to commit violence
upon any one. He certainly murdered the policeman only
in self-defence.

The measurements of his head were as follows : —

Circumference over the eyes, 21|

Line from ear to ear do lOf

backwards 10|

over the head 12

From the meatus to Firmness b\

Veneration 5|

Benevolence 5^

Sense of things 4f

Comparison 4f

Pride 5

Parental love SJ

————— Inhabitiveness 4

Breadth at the outer extremity of the orbits. ... 4 J

disposition to violence 6f

: centre of Causality l|

■ Sense of Property 5f

Cunning 6|^

Courage 4f

Sexual love 2|

Circumspection 6

Ideality A\

Attachment 2|

The head was of ordinary size. The intellectual region
narrow ; but otherwise fairly developed, especially at the lower
part. The moral region sloped off at the sides, especially in
its anterior half. The sides grew broader and broader, above
and below, from the intellectual region to the parts above the
ears, so that the organs of the sense of property (Acquisitive-
ness,) disposition to violence (Destructiveness,) cunning (Se-
cretiveness,) and Cautiousness, all greatly preponderated over
the intellectual portion ; as also did those of Firmness and Self-
esteem. They were all very large. The organs of courage (Com-
bativeness,) love of applause, and sexual love were large, that
of friendly love (Attachment) still larger: Benevolence was very
high, though there was a great and immediate sloping off from
its highest portion. Had all the head been on the sc^e of the
intellectual and moral regions, it would have been very small.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society, 49

Its size depended upon the very great relative breadth of its
sides, and the height of its posterior-superior parts, and of its
posterior. Such a head would naturally be most occupied with
depraved and violent pursuits. The intellectual and moral
portions of the brain being greatly overpowered by the size
of the rest, the being would have had no hesitation to steal
on aocoont of the large size of the organ of Acquisitiveness
and the poverty of the moral region ; and would have been
canning in the extreme ; subject to desperate violence on all
occasions; and, on account of the great size of the organ
of self-esteem, as well as that of the organ of the disposi-
tion to violence, would have been most revengeftd ; but very
kind when not provoked, and would not have done violence
without provocation. Prom the evidence, there probably was
a dash of insanity in his brain, though too little for acquittal
on the plea of insanity. Still his cerebral development pre-
vented him firom being a law to himself. Society, indeed,
would not have been safe while he was at large, and its
security demanded his confinement for life. But, continued
Dr. Elliotson, he ought not to have been hanged, if hanging
is intended as a judgment — ^a retribution ; for his organ-
isation rendered him an object of pity. However, urged the
speaker, punishment should not be regarded as retribution,
— as the infliction of something deserved; but as the adminis-
tration of additional motives in default of the e£Giciency of
commendable motives, — ^to supply the motive of fear to the
culprit and to others. He expressed his decided horror of
capital punishment, and his persuasion of its superfluousness.
He objected that, however bad a man may be, he had still, in
almost every instance, something good in him. The executed
Cooper was warmly attached to his mother, fainted at the
deatii of his father, and had nobly exerted himself but a short
time before to save the lives of several fellow creatures. At
Troyes, a man named Pattevoie, was lately guillotined for
attempting to murder another, and had led a dissolute life ;
but while in prison he tamed a pigeon and a sparrow, and was
tenderly attached to them. " Some persons,^' says Charles
Dickens, (pardon me the vanity of saying my friend Charles
Dickens,) in Oliver Twist, ** have expected to see his crimes
written in the face of the murderer, and have been disap-
pointed because they did not, as if this impeached the dis-
tinction between virtue and vice. Not at all. The circum-
stances only showed that the man was other things, and had
other feelings besides those of a murderer. If he had nothing
else, — ^if he had fed on nothing else, — ^if he had dreamt of
nothing else but schemes of murder, his features would have


Digitized by


Google


50 Phrenological Society.

expressed notUng else : but this perfection in vice is not to
be expected firom the contradictory and mixed nature of our
motives. Humanity is to be met with in a den of robbers ;
nay^ modesty in a brothel. Even among the most abandoned
of the other sex^ there is not unfrequently found to exist
(contrary to all that is generally supposed) one strong and
individual attachment, which remains unshaken to the last.
Virtue may be said to steal, like a guilty thing, into the
secret haunts of vice and infamy ; it clings to their devoted
victim^ and will not be driven quite away. Nothing can
destroy the human heart.^^

The punishment of death hardens the heart and smooths the
way to crime. If the destruction of life is sanctioned and ap-
proved in any single case, the ill-disposed regard it with far less
repugnance, and are led to think it justifiable in others, and so
men more easily become murderers. About two years and a
half ago, a little boy ten years of age who had been taken /or
ike second time by his father to see a public execution, was
detailing all the particulars to his schoolfellows, some of
whom were terrified, and one little girl asked him if he "was
not afraid when he saw the woman hanged.^' " A£raid!'' he
replied ; '^ not the least. Woman ! / could have pulled the rope,**
A large number of those who read of, and still more of those
who witness, an execution, feel more or less of a savage plea-
sure, and are injured in their moral feelings. The scene of an
execution is one of disgust and dismay. Jokes, ribaldry,
obscenity, drunkenness, and thefts go on ; and the female por-
tion are equally bad with the other sex. This is not peculiar
to England. Two men convicted of arson, robbery and
murder, were executed not long ago at a small town in France
called Berus. From twelve thousand to fifteen thousand
persons collected. Booths were erected, tables spread, tuns
of cider broached, and games set up; and the magistrates
with gensd'armes and troops had difficulty in preventing "still
more scandalous proceedings.'^ The young priest "with
much force, but mildness, endeavoured to bring the crowd to
a state more suited to the scene.''

The deadening effect upon the moral feelings of the ex-
ecutioner must be very great. His heart must indeed be-
come hard; and the ruin of his benevolence must tend
towards the ruin of more of his moral feelings. Have we
a right to injure the nature of a fellow creature by mak-
ing him an executioner ? He also becomes disliked in so-
ciety, and is sure to be pointed at as Jack Ketch, though
glad to receive the pay of his odious occupation. In Switzer-
land the privilege of officiating as executioner resides in


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society, 51

certidn families^ who are looked rather coolly upon by the
rest of the community and usually marry among themselves.

It is unnecessary. In former days, though Christianity
was supposed to thrive throughout Europe and was the law of
every land, torture of all descriptions, cutting to pieces,
stretching and tearing, burning, alow burning like that or-
dered by the Christian ! Calvin for Servetus who diflFered in
opinion with him on a theological point, disembowelling, and
screwing, and repetitions of dl the modes of causing excruci-
ating agony that fiends could suggest, were considered, like in-
numerable absurdities among which we now live, as matters
of course, perfectly consistent with morality, and so consistent
with religion, that the most dreadftd were ordained for dif-
ferences of speculative opinions and for disapprobation of the
vices and tyranny of priests, and all were pronounced as
absolutely necessary to maintain the order of society. Those
who travel on the continent of Europe are shewn horrid dun-
geons and instuments of torture without end. But there are
remains enough in our own land. I lately read the follow-
ing passage from the Inverness Courier,

Invernbss.^Ancibnt Highland Dungeon — The road oyer the stone
bridge here is at present undergoing repair, and on Saturday last the work-
men threw open the Tault bnilt in one of the arches, which was formerly used
aa a gaol, and afterwards as a cell for maniacs. It was truly " a double
dungeon," made by " wall and wave." About a foot below the surface of
the road they came upon a small iron door, from which a flight of stone steps
led down to the damp and miserable chamber. An iron grating or air-hole
lighted the place, which was found to be about twelve feet long, nine feet
wide, and six feet high. There were no indications of a fire place ; a hole in
the floor was used for letting down a pitcher for water ; and it is scarely
possible to conceive a more wretched or horrid receptacle for human beings.
The situation of the captives, with the river rolling below them, and the
sound of horses and vehicles passing over the roof of the cell, is strongly cal-
culated to impress the imagination. In winter when the river is in flood, or
during a storm, a sort of wild and fearful tublimity must have been added to
the scene. The last inmate of the cell was ha^ devoured by rata! Thank God,
we have in some things improved upon '* the wisdom of our ancestors."

But they have disappeared in succession ; and, with their
decline, cruelty and violence have declined : and we find they
were unnecessary. So will it be with capital punishment.
Perpetual imprisonment, properly regulated, will be found to
answer as weU. The prospect of it is more terrific than that
of death, for to this we must all come sooner or later ; but
perpetual imprisonment— exclusion from the sight of nature
and the haunts of men — is indeed terrible to contemplate,
and ever will be terrible to contemplate, although its severity
must be gradually less felt by the prisoner. Nature accommo-
dates us to almost all situations. Milton represents the fallen
angels as comforting themselves with the hope that their

e2


Digitized by


Google


52 Phrenological Society.

nature would at length become assimilated to the *^ burning
marl" on which they trod.

'' Our purer essence then will overcome
Their noxious vapour ; or, inured, not feel ;
Or changed at length, and to the place conformed
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain ;
This horror will grow mild, this darkness light."

Yet^ just as we know that a man who has been well off
becomes at length so accustomed to filth and the most dis-
gusting food as to feel its inferiority no more than those who
have been bom to and brought up in it^ and notwithstanding
we know this we could not bring ourselves to look without
horror at living in filth and eating such food^ so the prospect
of perpetual confinement will never lose its terrors because
we are satisfied that we should at last grow accustomed to
it. And here let me suggest that every one condemned to
solitary or silent confinement should^ besides the means of
improvement by books for his intellectual and moral feelings,
and muscular occupation, be allowed an animal, a bird at
least, for his comfort. He could not contaminate it, nor it
him. Besides alleviating his unhappiness, it would improve
him by gratifying a socid, benevolent feeling ; and, as mad-
men are allowed to cultivate those talents which are unim-
paired, so ought criminals to have every practicable encou-
ragement for the welfare of their moral feelmgs. Society has
a right to protection ; and therefore the perpetual, or at least
very, very long protraction, till the fiery days of passion are
all past, of imprisonment is justifiable and necessary.

In the Netherlands there are no executions ; and yet
murders and other great crimes are not more frequent than
here and in France, if so frequent. I have walked in the
prison of Ghent, among prisoners hard at work and looking
well, who had committ^ crimes of all descriptions. I read
the following paragraph in a newspaper last year.

Died, May 3rd, in the prison of Ghent, aged 80, Pierre Joseph Soete, after
a captivity of 63 years ! At the age of 17 he was condemned, for the murder
of a young girl, to be broken on the wheel ; but the Empress Maria Theresa,
at the solicitation of the SocidU de Saint George, at Ghent, commuted his
punishment to that of perpetual imprisonment. In 1814, after 36 years spent
in prison. Count Bichaloff, hetman of the Cossacks, then quartered at Ghent,
released Soete ; but finding himself without kindred, friends, or the means of
living, he begged to return to confinement, and in the dreary asylum of the
Roip'Huis (prison) he passed 27 years more, till death released him.

In speaking of imprisonment, let me for one moment raise
my voice against the inhuman brutalities and horrors which are
every now and then reported of some of our own ; and against


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 58

the frightful arrangements which I have seen in the Bicfitre
of Paris — arrangements as if devised to make the wicked ten
times more wicked than before.

The prisoner need be no tax to the community; what he
earns will more than keep himself, even should he live to be
past labour. No religious person can defend capital punish-
ment ; for when is he able to say that the culprit is pre-
pared for heaven ? The apparent contrition of criminals at
their execution is generally an absurdity, as the whole affair
is for the most part a mockery. If they are sincere, when do
we know that it is more than the sincerity of terror. Conver-
sion from depravity must continue long and gradually pervade
the man, and become as it were a new nature to him, to be
real and worth anything.

Often the wrong person has been executed, often a mad-
man has been executed, often a madman is now executed ;
and who that is executed is not an object of pity, — ^has not
done only what we should have done, but for greater advan-
tages, of which we never think, as if we were of ourselves just
what we are? If all criminals are objects of pity, let us feel
it our duty to ameliorate their character and not strangle them.
Let us most seriously remember that they are criminals,
if through a vicious nature, also through disadvantageous ex-
ternal drcimistances. Let us act upon the truth that it is a
duty to strive earnestly to improve the faulty condition of so-
ciety; to give every one, not a sectarian, but a rational, a manly,
a noble, a virtuous education, fit for all men, in whatever
strange creed and religious speculations they may unfortu-
nately have been brought up. Let us remember that it
appears that the size of cerebnd organs are affected by culture
and neglect of the faculties, and that therefore, within cer-
tain limits, a man^s cerebral development may be changed. I
say within certain limits ; for no external circumstances would
make a Newton of an ordinary man,— or all the wranglers of
Cambridge would be Newtons; — nor a Howard of a Henry the
Eighth, any more than exercise, good air and nourishment,
would make Patagonians of a short family. But the fjBwrt;
cannot be too carefully remembered, that we produce alteration
in the offspring by acting on the parent; that even among brutes
things taught to the parent are far more readily taught to the
offspring than they were to the parent ; nay, that the off-
spring frequently requires no instruction. Of this I have given
very many illustrations in mv Physiology. The influence
of good institutions is thererore greater than is generally
imagined. But besides this, all should remember that it is our
duty to marry only those with good organizations. When the


Digitized by


Google


54 Phrenological Society,

science of the head shall be duly appreciated^ a sensible man
or woman will think it madness to marry a person with a bad
organization.*

December 5th, 1842.

William Kingdom, Esq., Thomas Uwins, Esq., R.A.,
William Topham, Esq., Barrister-at-law, having been duly
proposed and severally ballotted for, were elected ordinary
members of the society.

Dr. Engledue of Southsea, and Dr. Debout of Paris,
having been duly proposed and severally ballotted for, were
elected corresponding members of the society.

The cast of the head of the murderer Cooper, having
been lectured upon at the preceding meeting, was examined
by the members. The president laid before the society the
cast of the female patient whose case is alluded to by him in
his letter, published with Dr. Engledue^s address, as being a
beautiful example of the excitement of distinct cerebral organs
by mesmerism. The development was exceedingly ^ood : es-
pecially in the situation of all the highest moral feelings.

A copy of a small work, entitled Neurology ; or, an Ac-
count of some Experiments in Cerebral Physiology y by Dr.
Buchanan, and published here by Mr. Robert Dale Owen,
was pointed out to the meeting as asserting the claims of Dr.
Buchanan to be the discoverer of the possibility of affecting
individual cerebral organs by mesmerism.

The president then read the following documents from
Captain Daniell of the Coldstream Guards, just returned
from Canada, given him for the purpose of shewing what
were Dr. Collyer's claims to the same discovery.

^' Regarding the priority of discovery of the new science
entitled Phreno-Mesmerism, I saw a letter addressed to Dr.
CoUyer by the Rev. Mr. Dodds of Massachussets, in answer
to one addressed to him by Dr. CoUyer, asking him if he had
any recollection of the date when he first communicated this
discovery to Mr. Dodds. The following is the substance of
Mr. Dodds' reply, dated August, 1842 : ' I well remember it
was early in May, 1841, you explained to a gentleman in my
hearing, your views regarding the extraordinary phenomena
of being able during what you termed mesmeric sleep to excite
various organs of the head.^

* The American censas for the year 1840, proves the population of the
United States to be 17,063,353, and the number of idioU to be 17,434. This
gives about 1 to every 979 of the popalation ! Surely some effort is required
to educate a people in sound physiological knowledge, which will make
clear to them the numerous causes producing such a frightful state.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 56

"In April, 1841, Harrington the proprietor of the Ly-
cenm-room, Boston, engaged to pay Dr. CoUyer so much
nightly for delivering a series of lectures on the new discovery.
His letter asserting he did so, I have seen, and it bears date
August, 1841.

" Mr. P. Shattock, proprietor of the Mercantile Beading-
room, Boston, writes stating he considers it a simple act of
justice to affirm he witnessed Dr. CoUyer^ amongst other
experiments, excite in a subject the organ of Benevolence
whilst under the influence of mesmeric slumber. Dr. Bu-
chanan till very recently scouted the idea of Phreno-Mag-
netism, but supported a ^stem called by him galvanoid, based
on very different principles. The foregoing is to substantiate
Dr. CoUyer's claim to the discovery of Phreno-Magnetism
in April and May, 1841, antecedently to which date it was
never heard of.

" Signed, H. Daniell.^^

December 19th, 1842. fLadie^ Meeting. J
Mr. Symes delivered an addr^ upon the correspondence
between the character and cerebral development of Daniel
Good the murderer.

January 2. fHolidaiy.)

January 16/A, 1843. (Ladies' MeetingJ
A case was read illustrative of the eflTects of mesmerism
upon various phrenological organs, by Thomas U wins, Esq. R. A.
The subject was a married female, about 30, without chUdren.
She had originally been mesmerised for indigestion, water-
brash, &c., with very considerable benefit to her health ; but
Mr. Uwins, having heard of results obtained from patients
in the sleep-waking state, confirmatory of phrenological &cts,
determined to test the truth of them. Mr. Joseph, the emi-
nent sculptor and a profound phrenolc^ist, was present at
the first experiment. To prevent the possibility of decep-
tion, Mr. Joseph wrote on paper the organs he widied to have
acted upon in succession. We began, said the author, with
Ideaiity and Wonder : exclamations of admiration accompanied
by the most expressive and appropriate actions immediately
followed the application of my fingers to those portions of
the brain. '' How beautiful !'' "What a delicious place I" '^t
is like the happy valley in Basselas I'^ " Where are the people
going V I said, " What is it you see V " Oh look, look V
She repeated, "There, there, look! How finely they are
dressed I They are going to dance : I'll have a jig with


Digitized by


Google


56 Phrenological Society.

them/' And she began beating time as if she were about
starting off in a dance, when suddenly she said, " Oh no,
I'll go in that boat. Oh, what a beautiful lake !'' I now
put my finger on Cautiousness : she instantly drew back with
the most marked expression of fear, and seizing me by the
arm, said in an under tone, "Come away, come away/'
" What are you afraid of?" I said. " Do you not see," she
replied still in a lower tone, " they are following us? They
will do us some mischief." " Don't fear," I said, " 111 fight
them off." " No, no, no," she still held my arm and whis-
pered in my ear, '* do not strike them, they will hire some-
body to murder you for five shillings. Come away, come
away." Mr. Joseph's course now led to my removing the
finger firom Cautiousness to Self-esteem, still keeping the
thumb as before on Ideality. I had scarcely touched this
organ when she drew herself up, (she was before crouching
under the influence of fear), raised her head very high, and
said in an under and reserved tone, though with an expression
of cunning satisfaction, " They are actually bowing to me,
they think me a person of consequence, and indeed I think
myself quite as good as any of them I" She then stood up
and made some formal patronizing curtseys to the right and
left, varying her assumed and stately demeanour till I broke
the charm by removing my fingers from the organs, which
left her as usual stretching out her hands in darkness and
vacancy. Mr. Joseph's next instructions were Philoprogeni-
tiveness. The patient immediately put on the most winning
smiles, and seemed by her actions to be courting children to
come to her. *' Oh the dear little creatures," she exclaimed,
''come, come." At length she seemed to have caught one in
her arms, which she hugged with the most extatic delight,
" Look," she said, " what a dear little angel." I ask^ if
it was her own, but repented the question as soon as it had
escaped my Ups. She sank back in her chair and said with
a deep sigh, " No, my home is never to be so blessed." I
shall never forget the scene, Mr. Joseph appeared affected
almost to tears. As I still kept my fingers on the organ, she
soon resumed her pleasurable feelings and seemed again to be
fondling a baby in her arms. Mr. Joseph now wished me to
carry my thumbs on both sides of the head to the organs of
Destructiveness. Instantly she threw the child away, and
began tearing and raving with a fiend-like fury. I said,
'' Surely you are not going to kill the child ?" She replied,
" I could kill it, — a little ugly devil." " I could tear it in
pieces," she continued, using the utmost violence with her
hands as if she would destroy every thing within her reach.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society, 57

I went now to Benevolence. The change was delightful.
She smiled and seemed by her action to be surrounded by
objects agreeable to her. I asked what it was that gave her
so much pleasure. " Don^t you see" she said, " Here are
all my kind friends :^^ '^it is indeed a pleasure to be sur-
rounded by so many kind friends.^^ She continued her smiles
of recognition from one side to the other, and named some
persons Ifrom whom I knew she had received kindness. At
Mr. Joseph's request I now touched on Combativeness. She
instantly began squaring with her fists like a boxer. I said,
" Surely you are not going to fight ?" She replied, " I do
not know what I may do with provocation.'^ '* Oh nonsense,''
I said. '' Not such nonsense neither," she replied, *^ I can
strike a hard blow ; I do not think you would like to take as
many blows as I could give you ;" she still kept her hostile
action of defiance. From Combativeness I went to Con-
scientiousness. She instantly dropped her hands and assumed
an expression of self-accusation ; she did not speak or move
but seemed absorbed in reflection. By Mr. Joseph's desire,
I moved my fingers to Veneration, when her face assumed a
sainted expression of devotion, and bending her body a little
forwards, she clasped her hands in the attitude of prayer.
Music was the last organ touched. She began beating time <
as if listening to some instrument or voice. I said, " What
is it ?" '^ Do you not hear ? Listen : it is my favourite tune,
' Woodman spare that Tree.' My husband plays it. Be still :
listen." All this was accompanied by gestures indicative of
the pleasure the music gave her.

On a subsequent occasion the experiments were less suc-
cessful, which the operator attributed to a moral cause acting
upon himself. The author soon found another opportunity to
carry out the experiments, previously to which, he and Mr. Jo-
seph satisfied themselves that the patient did not know either
the name or situation of a single organ. On the third trial, ex-
periments, similar to the foregoing, were made with invariable
success upon the organs of Wit, Benevolence, Acquisitive-,
ness, Hope, Music, Colour, Number, Size, and Order. When
Eventuality was touched, she fell back in her chair. Lan-
guage could not be excited, and some other unsuccessful
attempts concluded the sitting.' The last trial was made in
the presence of two ladies, who handed to Mr. Uwins on
paper the names of one or more of the organs in turn ac-
cordingly as they wished one or more to be brought into
activity, and the eflFects immediately ensued with the follow-
ing exceptions. Individuality and what has been called Even-
tuality produced nothing : Language nothing : Imitation


Digitized by


Google


58 Mesmerism.

little that was satisfiActory ; and Hope, which I thought before
ascertained, now became Despair, &;c. &c.

A paper was afterwards read by H. G. Atkinson, Esq.,
upon Mesmeric Phrenology, pointing out the importance of
mesmerism in phrenological investigations, and the mutual
bearing of the two sciences upon each other.


VI. Mesmerism.

Mesmerism is established.* Mesmerism has always been
true. Dimly known for thousands of years in barbarous and
semi-barbarous countries, known as to some of its high results
in many of the great nations of antiquity, though the know-
ledge was confined to the chosen, it is only now beginning
to be seen in its various aspects and ramifications, and to
assume the character of a science, — a science of the deepest
interest and importance, inasmuch as the phenomena of life
transcend those of all inanimate matter, and the faculties of
the brain — ^the mind — are the highest objects in the universe
that man cau study ; and inasmuch as its power over the
faculties of the body at large, and especially over the brain
and whole nervous system, is immense, and therefore capable
of application to prevent and remove suffering, and to cure
disease, far beyond the means hitherto possessed by the art
of medicine.

^'Animal Magnetism is true/^ — ^was the opening sentence
of a series of five papers published by Mr. Chenevii on the
subject in 1829, in the London Medical and Physical Journal.^

The second sentence was the following : — ^' In the whole
domain of human acquirements, no art or science rests upon
experiments more numerous, more positive, or more easily
ascertained.''

If this was the case then, how much more is it not the
case now ? Within these very few years, thousands of persons
have made successful experiments upon the subject ; and, al-
though as far as mesmerism has for ages been proved, it has
been in one sense established, — established as a truth, the
multitude of positive facts, and the multitude of persons cog-

* On MetmtrUm, improperly denominated Animal Magneiiim. By Richard
Chenevix, Esq., F.R.S. London and Edinburgh M. R. I. A. London
Medical and Physical Joornal, 1829, March, Jane, Augmt, September,
and October.


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 59

nisaut of these facts^ are at this moment such^ that it is beyond
all shadow of doubt established as a possession by mankind^
which can never be demolished, never be neglected^ or lost.
Accident determines the knowledge, the opinions, and the
pursuits, both of most individuals and of most nations.
Where any cerebral organ, or group of organs, preponderates
over the others, it will impel the individual, with Uttle refer-
ence to the influence of surrounding circumstances, or even
in spite of them ; but the generality of men are without such
preponderance, and take the kind of knowledge which is offered
them, imbibe the opinions of those around them, and fall into
the habits and pursuits of their countrymen. The know-
ledge, the opinions, and pursuits of a nation, must necessarily
depend much upon natural cerebral development, but very
greatly also upon accident ; upon the physical circumstances
which surround them, rendering one mode of life and action
absolutely inevitable, or at least more suitable than another;
upon accidental impediments to one or another kind of know-
ledge, opinion, or pursuit; upon the accidental impartment
to them, by individuals of remarkable cerebral organization
among themselves or by other nations, of one or another kind
of knowledge, or upon a similar accidental influence upon
their opinions and pursuits. When a subject does not require
a peculiar organization for excellence, as music or colouring
does, — ^is but merely a good development of the group of
superior intellectual faculties, chance chiefly directs whether
it shall be known and cultivated by a nation. Consequently
nations, at an equal point of civilization and most different
in their intellectual organization, differ greatly in their know-
ledge and opinions. Mr. Priault, in his learned Qtuesiiones
MosaiciB^ asks, ^'Who can assert a priori the particular
direction which civilization shall take? The Greeks were
long without any true knowledge of the year, and yet Mexico
at its discovery had a year of three hundred and sixtv monthly,
and five intercalary days. The Otaheitans too, built curi-
ously carved canoes, and wove doth and mats, and were,
nevertheless, ignorant that water could be made to boil. And
the Peruvians, similarly, had constructed roads throughout
their dominions, and had established posts of communication
between the several parts of their country and their capital;
they had learned also to card and weave wool, and could
work silver into vessels and tools, and would even, occa-
sionally, mould it into images, which prettily imitated nature ;

* Quasiiones MomictBy or the Book qf Gene.tii, compared with remains qf
ancient reUgion, By Osmood De Beauvoir Prmult. p. 212. Bohn, 17,
Henrietta Street, Coveot Garden, 1842.


Digitized by


Google


60 Mesmerism,

and yet the iron that was at their feet they had never ob-
served, and knew not how to turn to account. When, there-
fore, we compare that which the early nations are said, at
any given time, to have known with what they remained in
ignorance of, we may often be surprised as well at the «ti-
iiUy and ingenuity of their discoveries, as at the stupidity of
thetr ignorance: but we cannot from this ground ai^e
against their inventions. Neither can we, on the other hand,
infer the untruth of alleged science or the ine£Giciency of art,
because in a country of much science and art it is unknown
and disregarded, or even despised.^^

The greatest events in history have been determined very
much by accident. There is, indeed, a general working, or
influence of general causes, which renders an accidental
circumstance availing or unavailing, so that what appears ac-
cidental may not be so altogether, nay, perhaps in but small
part. But, nevertheless, fortuitous circumstances, that is to
say circumstances not in a natural sequence of occurrence,
and arising from other and independent causes, do most
materially influence events, both for their production and
their prevention.

Thus it has been with Mesmerism. One would suppose
that a thing so easily practised by every one would long ago
have been known universally in Europe. But the subtle
Greeks had no true knowledge of the year, the carving and
weaving Otaheitan never boiled water, nor did the sagacious
Peruvian use the iron he possessed. The time and trouble
demanded for its practice; the disinclination of persons to
permit such powerful effects to be produced over the whole
frame of their friends without immediate evident good ; and
the brutally ignorant prejudices of the superstitious, who
unquestionably form the mass of mankind in every coun-
try, in referring the natural phenomena of mesmerism to
imaginary beings and agencies, have probably been sufficient
to deter men from its investigation. But the longer time
rolls on, the greater and more numerous the opportunities for
favourable chances to turn up and exert their influences;
and thus, at last, is caught hold of and fixed what might have
been in our possession ages back, had attention been directed
towards it, and impediments manfrdly opposed ; and its con-
stant cultivation for the future is secure. Mesmerism has at
length had its happy chances, and as certainly as civilization
itself is now secure, through the art of printing and some
other modem inventions, so certainly may mesmerism hence-
forth defy oblivion or neglect.

Till the present moment mesmerism never attracted more


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 61

than a very partial and temporary notice in this country.
Maxwell wrote respecting it in 1679, laying down all the
very propositions afterwards advanced by Mesmer, just as
before him in the beginning of the seventeenth century Van
Helmont, a Belgian physician, had written of it in the lan-
guage which a disciple of Mesmer would have employed. In
the middle of the seventeenth century an Irish Protestant gen-
tleman named Greatrakes, of spotless character, receiving no
recompence, writing in the purest spirit of piety and benevo-
lence, and not pretending to explain how he did it, " stroked^'
thousands of the sick with his own hands, and, though he did
not pretend to cure all, is said to have cured large numbers,
and two celebrated men, Boyle and Cudworth, put themselves
under his care, which we presume they would not have done,
if the great doctors of the day had not failed to cure them.
The Lord Bishop of Derry declared that he himself had seen
" dimness deared and deafness cured,^' pain '* drawn out at
some distant part,^^ '^ grievous sores of many months date, in
a few days healed, obstructions disappear, and stoppages re-
moved, and cancerous knots in the breast dissolved^^' by his
manipulations. The Boyal Society published some of his
cures, and accounted for them ^' by a sanative contagion in
Mr. Grreatrakes's body, which had an antipathy to some par-
ticular diseases, and not to others.^^ A gardener, named
Leveret, did the same, and used to say that so much virtue
went out of him that he was more exhausted by touching
thirty or forty people than by digging eight roods of ground.

Dr. Elliotson mentions in the chapter on mesmerism in his
Human Physiology, p. 563, that a lady named Prescot, who
died at an advanced age a few years back, in Bloomsbury
Square, practised mesmerism there during the greater part
of her life; and that he recoUects that, now about thirty
years ago, a woman mesmerised for a time at Kennington.

The establishment of mesmerism in England sprung from
the visit of an Irish gentleman, named Chenevix, who had
fixed his residence for several years in Paris, to London in
1828. His visit was short, but during it he solicited and
prevailed upon several persons to see him make trials of mes-
merism : and afterwards prevailed upon the editors of the
London Medical and Physical Jowmal to publish the report of
all that took place.

Notwithstanding the sentence of the Royal Commission
appointed in France to pronounce upon the truth of animal
magnetism in 1754, when Mesmer had drawn it from oblivion
and discredit, and proved its truth and power, the facts had
taken firm root in France and some other parts of the con-


Digitized by


Google


62 Mesmerism,

tinent^ and several clever and estimable persons had always
practised and cultivated it. Indeed it could not be otherwise^
for the Commission^ like all the adversaries of mesmerism in
every country and at every period^ whether a body of men
or private individuals^ behaved most unfairly. Whenever a
person resolves to oppose mesmerism he seems to forget him-
self entirely^ to part with common sense, common morality^
and common propriety. This Commission would not examine
it with Mesmer, but with one of his pupils, named d^Eslon ;
Mesmer himself being not only more capable of demonstrat-
ing it, but one of the most powerful mesmerisers that ever
existed. Mesmer protested in vain to Franklin, and to the
Baron de Breteuil, who did not even condescend to reply to Ms
letter. Their examination was immediately shewn to be most
incomplete and superficial, by a host of writers.* The members
were careless in their attendance and did not all regularly
assemble, but went casually, and as each or two or three felt
inclined. They asked po questions of the patients, took no
trouble to observe. They took up the subject prejudiced
against it ; and in theiir experiments omitted the conditions
which they were expressly told were indispensable. — " Point
de questions aux personnes soumises omx iprewoes^'—pas le soin
d' observer, — pas assidus aux stances — aUa^nt de temps en temps.
Nous les voyons dans tme disposition peu bienveUlante ; nous les
voyons malgre toutes les representations qui leur sonifaites, fakre
des essaiSy tenter des experiences dans lesqueUes ils omiitent les
conditions morales exigees et annoncees comme indispensables
aux succes. These are the words of Drs. Adelon, Pariset,
Marc, Burdin, sen. and Husson, appointed by the Boyal
Academy of Medicine of Paris, in 1825, to report upon the
propriety of examining the subject again.

Franklin gave himself very httle trouble about the matter.
One, however, a truly celebrated man, the illustrious botanist
Jussieu, paid the utmost attention ; and what was the result?
Why, that he refused to put his signature to the report of the
rest, notwithstanding the pressing soUcitation of his colleagues
and the menaces of the minister — ^Baron de Breteuil; but
drew up a report of his own, in which he declared that the
facts which he had witnessed depended upon an external
agent independent of the imagination.

Mesmer found a large number of pupils who resolutely
took up the subject among them. The Marquis de Puys^ur,
a truly virtuous man and a soldier, produced somnambulism

* Rapport et DiuuMMunu de V Aead^mie Royak de Mfdedne 8wr le Magni-
tisme Animml. Par M. P. Foiuac, Paris, 1833. p. 225. Every body interested
in the history of mesmerism should read this book.


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 63

by the process^ though unprepared for it by Mesmer, who
however was eonversant with the fact ; and he published at
the end of 1784 and in 1785. He had not been converted
by a course of lectures by Mesmer^ though he attended dili-
gently; but subsequently by mesmerising in the way of joke
the daughter of his steward^ and the next day the wife of his
game-keeper. The shortest mode of ascertaining the truth
of the matter^ is thus to make experiments for one^s self. His
third patient was a peasant^ who fell into a quiet sleep^ and
into somnambulism^ in a quarter of an hour. In this state
she talked aloud of her affairs. He awoke her^ and left her
in an hour. She slept the whole of the night ; and a severe
cold^ for which he hiad mesmerised her^ was sensibly better
the next morning.

He was the first who accurately described this state^ and
pointed out the intuitive knowledge possessed in it by some
patients with reference to their own complaints and those of
others. Puys^ur relinquished the road to certain power and
fortune in order to devote himself both on his estate and in
Paris to cultivate and establish mesmerism. ^' All those who
had the honor of knowing him/^ says Foissac^ ^' knew that
the love of benefitting others was his religion^ and that he
undeviatingly pursued^ to the last day of his existence^ the
course which Providence had pointed out to him. like his
ancestors^ M. de Puys^gur^ placed on the high road to honours
and fortune^ might have attained the highest dignities ; but
he sacrificed all to the more tranquil and true happiness of
comforting^ assisting^ and enlightening his fellow-men. In-
deed he often said that his mission on earth was to place mes-
merism in the hands of physicians. This mission he fidfilled
with incomparable zeal and complete success : for soon after
his deaths in 1824^ the Iloyal Academy of Medicine ap-
pointed a committee^ which admitted all the phenomena of
mesmerism and somnambulism.*

M. Deleuze^ originally destined like Puys%ur for the
army^ but afterwards devoted to literature and science^ and
established in an appointment in the Jardin des Plantes^
heard in 1785, when thirty-two years of age, and, at his na-
tive place Sisteron, of the cures effected by Puys^gur on his
estate, and thought the whole must be nonsense. A physi-
cian, however, at Aix, converted him, and he wrote admirably
and extensively upon mesmerism till 1825, and cultivated it
assiduously in Paris. He avoided all speculation^ all mystery,
and shetoed that the phenomena of mesmerism were in harmony

• Foissac, p. 344.

Digitized by VjOOQIC


64 Mesmerism.

with the laws of nature. He shewed that the adversaries of
mesmerism^ precisely like the adversaries at the present day,
" are iffnarant of mesmerism^ and imagine absurdities to be held
by its partisans which they do not hold, — -pass over in silence
(he most convincing proems, — refute statements that nobody
makes, — ^and when obliged to confess incontestable facts, as-
cribe them to insufficient causes/' In 1828, he was appointed
librarian of the Museum of Natural History. He has always
been spoken of in the most respectful and honorable terms.
''His rare qualities,^' says M. Foissac, "his kind and instruc-
tive intercourse, gained for him many friends among the
most celebrated learned men — ^Levaillant, Duperron, Cuvier,
de Humboldt, &c. ; the unanimous opinion of his cotempora-
ries concedes to him and M. le Marquis de Puys^ur, the
honour of having preserved, defended, and propagated one of
the most beautiful discoveries of modem times.''

Many other men of less prominence in mesmerism, kept
up the subject both in France and Germany, and even Kussia,
and it found its way temporarily into some German universities
and hospitals. In 1818, the Academy of Sciences at Berlin
offered a prize of 3340 francs for the best treatise on mesme-
rism ; it was practised in Russia, in 1815, when a committee,
appointed by the emperor, declared it to be a most important
agent; in Denmark, in 1816; in Prussia, in 1817, where the
practice of mesmerism was by law ordered to be confined to
physicians. But its head was held above the surface of the
waters with difficulty.

At the instance of Dr. Foissac, in 1825, a committee was
appointed by the Royal Academy of Medicine of Paris, to
determine whether a commission should be appointed to in-
vestigate mesmerism. The committee reported in the affirma-
tive. A long discussion took place, in which as much non-
sense was talked by the opponents as could be desired bv its
most malicious supporter; — and to this the Committee drew
up a powerful, and in every respect admirable answer, which
settled the matter; and a commission was appointed in 1826.
One difficulty however after another occurred. The conduct
of Dr. Magendie, one of the commission, was shuffiing tmd
contemptible in the extreme. He wrote to Dr. Foissac, that
the secretary of the committee took careful notes and drew
them up, when it had been resolved that none should be
drawn up. He made an appointment at his own house with
Dr. Foissac for the latter to be present at a meeting for experi-
ment, kept Dr. Foissac waiting fix)m four till six, — ^never saw
him, — and had him let out by a back door. When one of
the committee — ^Dr. Husson — wrote a very polite letter to in-


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism, 65

fona him that permission was obtained for epileptic patients
at his hospital to be mesmerised for experiment^ and begged
him, as a physician of the hospital and one of the committee
of the enquiry, to be present, — ^he, in apish imitation of the
Baron de Bretenil forty years before, did not condescend
to notice the invitation ! " M. Magendie ne repondit pas"
All this may be seen in Dr. Foissac^s book. The business
languished, and no report was heard of for five years, — until
1831, when indeed a most favourable report was given, ac-
knowled^ng the truth of mesmerism, and its most wonder-
ful hcts ; and displaying earnestness, labour, candour, and
a truly philosophical spirit. But in the mean time (and indeed
afterwajrds, for this report was not allowed to be printed or
Uthognq>hed, but was put in a box and thought no more of
by the academy) mesmerism had little prospect, for miserable
obstacles were thrown in the way, and particularly by Dr.
Magendie who, it is said, not only violated truth and acted,
as he knows so well how, with vulgar unpoliteness, but ceased
as well as Dr. Double (who with Magendie had no singleness
of purpose) to attend the experiments, and consequently could
not sign the report.

The learned and important, and those in authority, would
not condescend to notice mesmerism ; the superficial herd of
time-serving practitioners, vulgar medical journalists, and all
kinds of ephemeral medical writers, railed at it and all who
upheld it, so that it was a poor outcast, neither legitimate nor
respectable. Still, being the oflFspring of an eternal and vigor-
ous parent — ^Truth, it was sturdy, and lived on, without
being indebted for food, lodging, clothes, or countenance to
the flourishing and respectable members of learned or fash-
ionable society.

" In France,'^ says Mr. Chenevix, and his article in the
Edinburgh Review, 1819, on France and England, shews
that his long residence in Paris had made him perfectly
acquainted with the French character and habits, ^' where
words and jargon are more valuable than facts, it has been
treated as a matter of opinion, not of experiment -" '' it has
been believed, and reviled, and believed again, and has fol-
lowed all the vicissitudes of fashion.'' " Though all the phe-
nomena have been produced over and over again, yet, as
these phenomena are not phrases, the academy of medicine
thinks it can argue down somi^mbulism, and talk lucidity
out of existence.''

The influence of the opinions of those around him had
their full weight upon Mr. Chenevix, —

VOL. I. F


Digitized by


Google


66 Mesmerism.

'* Whenever animal magnetism was mentioned I Joined," he says, ''the
general tribe of scoffers, and so much was I convinced (!) of its absurdity,
that, being at Rotterdam in 1797, I laughed to scorn a proposal made to me
by an English resident there to witness some experiments in which he
was then engaged." '' The re$pectabiUty and general understanding of this
person l^ no nwde of accounting for so extraordinary an illusion^ but to suppou
him labouring under a monomania,"

In 1803 and 1804, while travelling in Germany, he
continues —

*' I heard many very enlightened men of the universities talk of animal
magnetism, nearly with the same certainty as mineral magnetism ; but their
credulity I set down to the account of German mysticity." '* / remained an
unbeUever."

At length, after nineteen years, Mr. Chenevix condescended
to witness mesmerism in the person of a young lady in Paris.
" / went to laugh" says he, " / came away convinced"

*'To suspect any thing like a trick in the parties concerned was impossible.
They were of the highest respectability and distinction, and some of them
I had known for maivy years. The magnetiser was, indeed, in the frivolous
French metropolis, called a charlatan, which made me suppose he was not
so; and the event proved that I was right. He was, indeed, poor; he ex-
ercised his art for money ; he gave public lectures at three francs a ticket.
Many young physicians have as fair a claim to the title as he had. But from
the hour above alluded to till the period of bis death, I remained acquainted
with the Abb^ Faria, and never knew a man to whom the epithet impostor
was less applicable.

*< No sooner had the Abb^ Faria begun to operate than the countenance
of the lady changed, and in two seconds she was fast asleep, having mani-
fested symptoms which could not be counterfeited. The sitting lasted about
two hours, and produced results which, though I still remained a sceptic
upon some of the most wonderful phenomena, entirely convinced me of the
existence of a mesmeric influence, and of an extraordinary agency which
one person, can by his will, exercise upon another. The Abb^ Faria offered
every means to dispel my remaining doubts, and gave me all necessary in-
structions to obtain total conviction from experiments of my own. I most
zealously attended his labours, public and private, and derived complete
satisfaction upon every point relating to mesmerism ; even upon those which
appeared supernatural. Many of the experiments I repeated, not only upon
persons whom I met at his house, but upon others totally unacquainted with
him or with his studies, and was ultimately compelled to adopt the absolute
and unqualified conclusion announced above ; — Mesmerism is true"

And what then was his conduct ? Did he content himself
with saying, ^' It 's very wonderful, certainly,^^ " I dont un-
derstand it,^' and then think no more about it, turn to
something by which he was making money, or which was
pretty or popular? Did he content himself with saying,
" I should like to know the use of it ? as though the sight of
any of nature's wonders were not in itself use, — a high, an
invigorating, a noble, intellectual, and truly delicious and im-
proving occupation, far beyond the occupation, however
necessary, of procuring food and raiment and property, the
administration of which to the more humble wants of our


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 67

nature oonstitate the only view possessed by many of utility,
— as though every fact of nature were not a part of the
mighty, the universal whole ; — as though a knowledge of any
fact in nature could fail directly or indirectly, sooner or later,
to give power to good. Did he content himself with saying,
" It cannot be doubted ; but it is a dangerous power and may
be turned to mischievous purposes \" — as though whatever is a
power is not a power to evil as well as to good, and greater
power to evil in the very same degree in which it is a greater
to good ; as though heat, without which we die, without high
degrees of which die arts administering most to our advantage
and comfort and prosperity of all kinds cannot be practised,
is not converted to the most destructive purposes by the ill-
disposed and a source also of incalculable unintentional acci-
dental mischief; — as though the steel instruments always
on our eating tables, and in our hands, and in all parts of our
dwellings, might not in one moment be made implements of
injury and death ; — as though half our medicines in hourly
use may not be made instruments of death. Did he content
himself with saying, " Well, I am sure the medical profession
will see its truth and importance, and I shall leave it to
them V* as though any revolution in science or institutions
had ever come from those in whose hands the subject was
placed ; and had not always been forced upon them, and forced
upon them with toil and anguish and persecution to those who
effected it. He had read that Christ, for his efforts to substi-
tute, in the room of long public prayers and sanctimonious
scrupulousness about indifferent things, and the pomp and
ceremony and mechanism of worship, and nicety of doctrines,
and priestly assumption, — to substitute humility, disinterested-
ness, and universid benevolence, " saying, " It was said of old
time ; but / say unto you,'' was vilified by all the Jewish
establishment and the so-called respectable Jews, and then
nailed on high in the open air to two crossed pieces of wood.
He knew that the discoveries of Newton were long excluded
from the University of which he was a member, and were
introduced through stratagem only by Dr. Samuel Clarke ex-
plaining them in notes, without any appearance of argument or
controversy, to the book of Descartes used as a text book by
all the tutors, though, like these notable fellows, now forgotten
and in the dust, unseen and imremembered; and that the
exploded and unfounded system of Descartes kept its ground
for more than thirty years after the publication of Newton's
discoveries. He knew that the medical profession laughed
Harvey to scorn and made the public think him too great
a fool and visionary to be fit to physic them, when he taught

f2


Digitized by


Google


68 Mesmerism,

the circulation of the blood, and were so perversely obstinate
that not one doctor who had arrived at years of discretion, —
had attained his fortieth year, — ^when the discovery was an-
nounced, ever relented, or admitted the truth of the circula-
tion, or allowed himself to the day of his death to be the wiser
for Harvey's discovery, but lived on perversely and piggishly
boasting of error; though probably many noisy professors
of unbelief did, like a host of noisy living doctors who declare
their unbelief at this moment in mesmerism and, like gentle-
men of a dark hue in the basement story, ^'believe and tremble"
Mr. Chenevix knew that beneficial changes in bodies of men,
united as an institution or corporation, or even in a profession
or occupation, and standing up for their vested rights of
ignorance, unimprovability, and undisturbed motionlessness,
required always heavy blows and pressure from without before
these bodies bestir themselves and think of moving onwards.
Did he think a truth less important because neglected and
despised ? No. Mr. Chenevix,

'^ Surprised at the pasillanimity of the French academy, which could
not deny and yet had not the manliness to avow the facts which one half of
its members declared they had witnessed, resoWed, with aU due humility,
yet without shrinking from the task, to devote some time to the collection of
facts, and to offer the result to a much more enlightened public than that to
which the art is compelled to appeal in France."

We really think the last remark, however national, to be
well founded, when we compare the slight hold that mes-
merism has taken of the Parisians, who are more struck with
its marvels than its scientific bearings and practical applica-
tions, who derive a sensation from it rather than an enlighten-
ment, with the deep root it has now taken all over England
and the intense earnestness with which so many of both sexes
study and cultivate it, now that they have recovered from the
stupor into which the ignorant misrepresentations and mis-
conceptions and the bold falsehoods of journalists, medical and
literary, and the clamour of the medical profession, the
lucky leading practitioners all vociferating and the little ones
in due imitation snarUng and making the best little noises
they could, had thrown them.

Mr. Chenevix had no opportunity of renewing his trials of
mesmerism till " May, 1828, when, happening to be on a visit
in Ireland, he enquired for some patient among the peasantry,
no matter what the disorder.^' He soon obtained one, a
woman aged thirty-four, who had laboured six years under
severe epilepsy and had lately in a fit fallen into the fire
" and most dreadfully burnt her leg.'' She also " had a strong
tendency to paralysis of the left leg and thigh ; was subject.


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 69

almost daily^ to spasmodic contraction of her hands and feet^
accompanied by racking pain^ and which sometimes lasted
twelve hours or more ; had occasional absences of mind and
loss of memory, never slept more than a couple. of hours at a
time^ and that but rarely; was constantly thirsty, her appetite
was bad. She was eight months advanced in her sixth preg-
nancy, and it was after her first confinement that she had her
first attack.

1st day. — He mesmerised her for five and forty minutes,
and produced only a little drowsiness ; but that night she slept
better than usaal, and had no spasms.

2nd day. — Mesmerised her for five and forty minutes,
with the efiPect of drowsiness only, but she continued drowsy
till the next day.

3rd day. — ^Mesmerised her five and forty minutes; but no
sleep.

4th day. — ^Not mesmerised.

5th day. — She feU asleep after having been mesmerised
mne minutes, Bind felt stronger and better than before the treat-
ment was begun. The spasms have returned, but lasted a
shorter time than usual.

6th day. — ^Not mesmerised ; and she had had no spasms,
but in one foot only, and for a few minutes only.

7th day. — Sleep in three minutes ; but she awoke on being
spoken to. Now all this in the ignorant peasant was so
beautifully conformable to the daily experience of Mesmerisers,
that the truth is recognised as clearly as in the course of an
attack of small pox which has its regular periods. Had she
shammed, she would not have awakened as soon as spoken to ;
and her health would not have improved.

8th day. — ^Mesmerised.

9th day. — ^Not mesmerised.

10th and 11th days. — FeU into complete mesmeric sleep in
two minutes. Her health was improving rapidly.

12th and 13th days. — ^Not mesmerised.

14th day. — Put to sleep in six minutes by the tvill alone,
without any visible manifestation of it.

15th day. — ^Not mesmerised.

16th day. — ^Mesmerised through the door, at the distance
of fifteen feet ; she not knowing that he was acting on her, but
supposing he was absent ; and in fourteen minutes she was in
complete mesmeric sleep.

17th day. — ^Not mesmerised, and in this interval of two
days without mesmerism, she had a severe attack of spasms
in her left leg and thigh, for six hours, followed by coldness
and numbness.


Digitized by


Google


70 Mesmerism,

18th day. — Sleep in half a rmnute. He mesmerised the
left limbs : in forty minutes he awoke her : when the pain was
absolutely gone, arid the parts had recovered their iLSual strength
and heat.

" This was the last return of these symptoms. By this time she had com-
pletely recovered her sleep, not only at night, but was frequently obliged to
lie down in the day. She now slept ten or twelve hours in the twenty-four,
and one day sixteen hours. She continued rapidly to improve in health,
and her appearance was so much changed that her neighbours, who knew nothing
of the treatment, were struck at the alteration. The operations were continued
until June 20th, when her pregnancy made her unable to come out ; and on
June 28th she was delivered.

''July 6th, Mr. Chenevix called upon her and found her up and well,
except rheumatic pains in her left shoulder, for which he mesmerised her.
She soon felt them descending to her elbow, and thence to her wrist, and in less
than ten minutes was perfectly relieved."

** July 17th, she went to thank Mr. Chenevix for her recovery; and neither
then nor afterwards was he able to affect her again. At the end of nine months,
when he published the account in the London Medical and Physical Journal,
the fits had not returned.

*' From the very first day she was mesmerised, the symptoms were alle-
viated and decreased regularly as the treatment advanced. In less than a
week, thirst, sleeplessness, shiverings, and pains, to which she had been
subject for six years, ceased ; the paralytic tendency diminished, and the
spasmodic contractions were entirely removed after the twelfth day of mes-
merising." ** Although none of the extraordinary symptoms of lucidity
occurred, although this patient awoke the instant she was spoken to, her
cure is interesting, as being completed so rapidly. Twenty-one sittings
sufficed." '* Even at the period when she used to be most aflfected, the
touch of my finger, so slight as to be almost imperceptible to myself, roused
her from her state of mesmerism, and with a sensation which she described
as like the prick of a pin. I have known some educated person who ex-
perienced a similar sensation, compare it to an electrical spark."

Here was an Irish peasant^ fourteen years ago, who had
never heard of mesmerism, and, if disposed to sham, would
have no more known what to do than the pig in her cabin.
Here were the gradual increase and succession of ejQFects just
as mesmerists observe them : yet none of the more dazzling
phenomena, and nothing dazzling at all.

Had the remarkable cure been eJQFected by some new drug,
or some striking variation of an old mode of treating, we
cannot say, curing, the disease, though disgusting medicine
would have had to be taken, annoyance or even pain to be
submitted to by the patient, we will venture to say that the
plan would have been tried in other cases, and we should have
heard of similar trials again and again. But, as it was, without
physic, surgery, issues, setons, cupping, burning, any thing
complicated, expensive, or annoying, not a single trial of the
simple plan of making passes appeared in any of the British
journals as far as we discover. Not a doctor, surgeon, or
apothecary, thought it worth his while to deviate from his
old ways of uncertain and unsatisfactory treatment, all which


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 71

fSEuls in nineteen cases out of twenty^ and are generally^ to
say the leasts troublesome and very long. The impressive
history — ^together with the statement which follows it — that
he had treated thirteen cases of the disease in the same man-
ner, completely succeeded in three, procured immense relief
in eight still under treatment, and had failed but in two,
might as well have been published among the finny tribes in
the depths of the Atlantic ocean.

Between May 23rd, 1828, and January 20th, 1829, Mr. Chenevix *< Mes-
■eriaed apon 164 persons : of whom 98 manifested undeniable effects, some
in one minute, some not till the operation had been repeated several times.
There was hardly one instance where disease existed that relief was not pro-
cured ; and many of the patients offered phenomena as extraordinary as any
recounted in Germany or France." *' While prosecuting his experiments,
he had the good fortune to meet with many benevolent and zealous persons,
nM qf the faculty^ who made trial of the art with entire success, having
hardly ever failed to procure relief for their fellow-creatures, at the same
time that they produced phenomena which highly surprised and gratified
them." He counted fifty who had become both converts and practitioners.
However three physicians of public establishments in the neighbourhood of
the place where his experiments were made, attended to him. Drs. M'Kay,
Peacock, and Cotter, the first of whom '' kindly lent his assistance upon all
occasions,'' and testified the truth of the wonders he saw to every body. We,
however, have not heard of these gentlemen having prosecuted the object or
stood up for it, even when it was experiencing the furious hostility and
roguery of some Irish journalists and medical men. At any rate had they pro-
filed, and felt it their duty to see that their profession profited by what Mr.
Chenevix taught them, mesmerism would now have been perfectly esta-
blished in Ireland. Dr. Cotter yielded to evidence more slowly than the
other two gentlemen, and though he saw two epileptic patients sent to sleep
in about half a minute, — a fit of one instantly arrested, — one struck motion-
less by Mr. Chenevix's will only while walking across the room, and set at
liberty by the same power as instantaneously, — a suspicion of connivance
still lurked in his mind, and he was therefore requested to take five patients
of his own to Mr. Chenevix for experiment, never before seen or heard of by
Mr. Chenevix. He accordingly took a female whom he had been treating
/•wr years for indigestion, costiveness, and headache. Her usual aperient
was ten grains of oUomel and thirty of jalap. She had no idea of what
was to he done to her, and was suffering at the time under violent head-
ache. After being mesmerised for three minutes her headache was better,
and in Jive minutes was gone : in eight minutes she was in the soundest mes-
meric sleep Mr. Chenevix ever witnessed, and continued sleeping for thirty -
five minutes, when he awoke her. During her sleep Mr. Chenevix was
informed by Dr. Cotter, in Loltn, that her bowels were at that moment parti-
cularly bound. He therefore directed his attention to procuring an evacua-
tion, passing bis hands before the abdomen, without however touching it or
approaching nearer to it than three or four inches. In less than an hour
after she bad left the house she had three evacuations, and for some days
her head was considerably relieved. The treatment was unfortunately not
continued, or we have no doubt, from abundant experience in such cases,
that both her head and bowels would have been completely restored to
health. Dr. Cotter now practised himself in a similar case of a young lady
aged fourteen. The pain here was in the left side instead of the head, and
for a length of time Dr. Cotter had given her medicine without permanent
benefit, so that he was desirous she should relinquish *'so injurious a
habit'^

She had no idea what he was trying when he mesmerised

Digitized by VjOOQIC


72 Mesmerism.

her, but in four minutes she was completely asleep. He
mesmerised her only three times, yet she had no return of
the pain, and no longer required aperients, " for which, pre-
viously, there was a continual necessity/' It is a common
ejQFect of mesmerism to render the bowels regular, although
aperients have before been habitually required.

He relates an instance to prove that belief is not requisite
to the effect. A robust lady was a sceptic. He proposed
that she should select any one of three patients who were
waiting for him, and whom he had never seen before. She
selected the most unhealthy.

'* In two minutes the patient's head dropped, bat she started up immedi-
ately ; in less than five minutes, however, she was fast asleep. Here nei-
ther the mesmerised nor the roesmeriser had the slightest conviction npoo
the subject, yet the experiment succeeded as completely as with the most
habituated professor."

We know a still more striking illustration. A gentleman,
well known in Yorkshire, was a sceptic, and laughed heartily
at mesmerism as folly. A lady equsJled him in all this;
and they agreed to play some mesmeriser a trick in the house
in which they were. He was to propose to mesmerise her,
and a thread was attached to her foot and his which he was
to pull when he wished her to sham mesmeric effects. He
began, — but, behold, in a short time she fell back withottt
the signal; and he fancied she was shamming, but had mis-
taken and gone off too soon. The truth, however, presently
appeared : she was mesmerised and in the true coma. He be-
came at once a convert, and is now one of the most strenuous
advocates of the cause, honestly and nobly telling every body
the story of his conversion.

Dr. Cotter had for some time attended a poor man, named
Michael Donolly, and pronounced him "far advanced in a
rapid consumption." Mr. Chenevix found him in bed, exceed-
ingly weak, and his voice scarcely audible. " He was taking
small but repeated doses of tartar emetic and digitalis,^^ as
though he was not sinking fast enough without these debili-
tating drugs. All medicine was left off, and Mr. Chenevix
mesmerised him on February 11. The only sensible effect at
the time was profuse perspiration, but he afterwards slept
about an hour, and on waking found his cough and breathing
easier.

Feb. 12. He was mesmerised again with the same results.

Feb. 13. His voice was stronger, and he seemed more
alive than Mr. Chenevix had yet seen him. Mr. Chenevix
mesmerised him to-day ; but left him to be mesmerised from
this time by his wife for thirty minutes night and morning.


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 73

Feb. 27. Mr. Chenevix called and found him up and dressed.
" He received Mr. Chenevix at the door of his cottage, spoke
with a strong, firm voice, looked healthy, and said he was
nearly recovered.'*

March 16. He went to see Mr. Chenevix, " and looked
qtdie well." Mr. Chenevix "mesmerised him*' for a few
minutes : he slept, and even shewed some interesting pheno-
mena. Mr. Chenevix urged his wife to continue the treatment
for some time longer ; for mesmerism, when persevered in after
the cure is effected, is never dangerous. " This case," Mr.
Chenevix adds, " can be attested by at least twenty witnesses
of the first respectability.** When he informed Dr. Cotter
that he had undertaken this desperate case, that physician*s
reply was, " If the poor man is saved, I will substitute the
pronoun you for we."

Mr. Chenevix cured seven cases of worms by mesmerism,
and furnishes a case described by one of his Irish medical
converts, Mr. Levinge, of a girl eleven years of age, afSicted
with cough, loss of appetite, and general feelings of illness,
and who had passed several worms. She was mesmerised
daily for half an hour.

'* After the first /our days she pansed many irornw, and (e\t much better ;
her cough began also to diminish gradually. At the end of a fortnight the
quantity of worms which she had voided was very great, and the relief
which she experienced was as remarkable. She also drank magnetised
water."

She was mesmerised by Mr. Levinge regularly for three
weeks ; and recovered permanently. " The patient did not
sleep more than ten minutes at a time ; and, as soon as she
opened her eyes, she seemed as completely awake as if she
had not slept at all.**

Mr. Chenevix made some slight and disadvantageous trials
upon some patients at the Wakefield Lunatic Asylum, and
with a certain degree of efiect ; and Sir William Ellis him-
self was afiected and avowed his conviction of the truth.

He next procured the permission of Dr. Whymper,
Surgeon-major, and Mr. Smith, Surgeon, to the Coldstream
regiment of Guards, to make some trials on the men ; and
these gentlemen called into the room for this purpose any
men they thought proper on their sick-list.

The first was not affected in twenty minutes.

The second, Kichard Ireland, went to sleep in six mi-
nutes, his eyes having begun to water, his left nostril to run,
and his eyelids to tremble, at the end of the first ten minutes.
His arm was raised nearly as high as his head and then let
suddenly to fall ; and yet he slept on. After he had slept


Digitized by


Google


74 Mesmerism,

five and twenty minutes^ transverse passes did not awake
him ; but he awoke as soon as he was coiled by his name.

In two days^ another trial was made^ and he was asleep in
five minutes^ and continued asleep for thirty minutes^ at the
end of which time he awoke as before upon being called by
name, and told Dr. Whymper that he had slept soundly.

To prove to the parties that he possessed only a power
diffused as equally as any other power over the whole species,
not confined to a few, " qrws eqtms amavit Jupiter ;" he shew-
ed a Serjeant how to operate, and " Serjeant Bradbury^' sent
the man into a profound sleep in six minutes. The arm was
raised and let fall ; and transverse passes were made in vain.
" His name was then called and he awoke. Questioned by Dr.
Whymper, he said he was not aware that his arm had been
raised or touched ; that he had slept soundly, but had not
been in the chair more than ten minutes.'*

Dr. Marshall Hall would have exclaimed, "what Phy-
siologist could beUeve such an absurdity V The man's arm
to be raised and let drop, and he not be roused, and yet
always to wake and answer to his name when he was called !
Preposterous nonsense ! The man was not a physiologist !
and Sir Benjamin Brodie would have coincided with Dr.
Marshall Hall : and the Royal Medical and Chirurgical So-
ciety, would have resolved by a large, an overwhelming ma-
jority, that the man was an impostor, like the man whose leg
was amputated at the Wellow Hospital, and that both ought
to have been sent to the treadmill for — ^being subject to the
laws of nature and speaking the truth.

On one occasion when a person who had not mesmerised
him raised and let drop his arm, he awoke. The contact
of any other than the mesmeriser sometimes excites consider-
ably, and that might be the reason of this occurrence. At
any rate, had there been deception the man would not have
awaken^ fix>m his arm being raised and dropped on this
occasion any more than he had on others when the mesmeriser
raised and let drop his arm.

A bystander one day begged him to resist to the utmost
his incUnation to sleep. " He did so and succeeded ; but his
eyes and nose watered much, and the inclination to sleep was
very great. He said that, had he shut his eyes one moment
he must have slept."

A trial was made upon one of the band, Oarrand. After
he had been mesmerised for thirty minutes with no sensible
effect, Mr. Chenevix, having apprised the two surgeons of his
intention to communicate to the man's hand a sensation of
heat or cold according to his will, without giving him any


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 75

intimation of that will^ touched his hand with a silver pencil
case with that intention :

" The results of the first six experiments were perfectly correct ; that is
to say, he felt the pencil-case cold, when I (Mr. Chenerix) willed that he
should feel it cold, and hot when I willed that he should feel it hot, without
committing a single mistake ; but, when the experiment was often repeated,
he began to err, and his sensation ceased to be according to my (Mr. Che-
nevix) wUl."

There could be no deception in experiments of this kind.
The man never slept, and if he had shammed anything it must
have been sleep, for as Mr. Chenevix remarks, this is the only
effect he could have heard of. This experiment Mr. Chenevix
made upon at least eighty patients, with more or less success ;
and always found, when he repeated them too frequently at
the same sitting, that the tact of the patient, however accurate
in the first trials, became as it were bewildered and no longer
distinguished the sensation according to his will.

** These anomalies," says Mr. Chenevix, ** have been observed by every
practical mesmeriser, and are still more striking in the class of phenomena
which I have designated psychological. How to account for them, or for
mny of the effects of mesmerism, / know not : but such deviations from regu-
larity are not uncommon in physiology. When we take successively into our
months two known liquors, of different flavours, we immediately recognise
them ; when we repeat the trial too often they are no longer distinguishable."

This remark cannot be too strongly impressed. Not only
experiments which concern sensation, but others, and the more
so the more delicate the effect, generally fail when very jBre-
quently repeated at one sitting. We shall recur, in a future
number, to this when we come to the investigations of Mr.
Wakley. ' Such a deviation^ remarks Mr. Chenevix, ' is in
perfect harmony with all the laws of physiology. ^^The
galvanic excitability of the dead frog is exhausted by repeti-
tion.''

The following experiment was now performed. Garrand's
eyes were most strictly blinded ; he was desired to raise both
his arms, and, being asked whether he felt anything in either
of them, he said ^ no.' A piece of paper, weighing perhaps
from one to two grains, was placed upon his right sleeve, in
such a manner that it was impossible for him to feel it. He
was then desired to raise both his arms, and was asked, " Do
you feel any thing?' 'Yes.' 'What?' 'A stiffness and
weight in my right arm.' This was exactly what Mr. Chenevix
had willed. The same experiment was tried upon his feet,
and with similar success, until too often repeated."

Dr. Whymper tried the experiment himself of willing sen-
sations of temperature with the pencil case, and succeeded
with the man as Mr. Chenevix had once the day before.


Digitized by


Google


76 Mesmerism.

On another day, Mr. North, a surgeon, and the editor of
the journal, was present as well as the two regimental sur-
geons. The experiments of making the limbs stiff and heavy,
by the will, and restoring them again at pleasure, were re-
peated, and

'* The general result was acknowledged to be very extraordinary. Mr.
Cheoevix asked Mr. North, * Do yon think these effecU real?' * Yes.' ' Do
you think they proceed from my action in this man?' ^ I can $eeno other
cause* ! "

Mr. North saw endless wonders in the Okeys, and was
evidently much interested, and owned repeatedly that as to
hysteria he had seen enough of it, but never any thing similar
to what he saw in them. But Mr. North has never followed
up the subject. In the Medical Society he did not offer a
word in favour of mesmerism, when the members revelled in
their absurdities ; and they say that he talks of the effects
of common hysteria, and pretends, (if he does, it can be but
pretence,) not to believe in mesmerism. We know the editor
of a literary weekly journal, who believes in mesmerism, but
ridiculed it one day at dinner. After the ladies were gone,
he was asked how he could talk so when he believed in it.
" Oh,*' said he, " do you think I was going to say I believed
it before the women.^^

On another occasion, when the experiments with the paper
had failed after having been repeated very frequently the day
before, Mr. Chenevix —

*' Said to the gentlemen present* of course without a possibility of being
heard by the patient, * I will try to fix this man in his chair.' I mesmerised
him with that intention for about three minutes, and then said, in my usual
tone of voice, *■ That will do for to day ; you may go.' He rose from his
chair, like a man labouring under severe lumbago, and with considerable
difficulty. Questioned by Dr. Whymper as to what prevented him from ris-
ing from his chair, he said, *< My back and thighs are so stiff.' I then de-
mesmerised him for about one minute, and he said, * the pains are gone;'
he added, * I felt as if a weight had been pulling me down/ "

On another patient he shewed the following experiment :

*' A patient being in complete sleep, the mesmeriser, without his know-
ledge, goes behind him, and then, at a given moment, makes transverse
passes with an intention to awaken him. In such circumstances there can be
no collusion between the operator and the operatee ; neither can the ima-
gination of the latter be anywise suspected of producing the result It is an
experiment which I have repeated upon a great number of subjects, and
very frequently, but which succeeds only upon persons endowed with great
mesmeric susceptibility. In the present case the experiment was thus made.
Having announced my intention to Dr. Whymper and Mr. Smith, without
the possibility of Gould's being apprized of it, I took my station behind his
chair. I then waited a couple of minutes, when I began to operate. At
Ihe very first pass his eyelids fluttered, and in about one minute he sat up
erect in his chair. He soon became entirely awake, and in the same state as
that in which he had been put by the previous operation."


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 77

On another patient taking a grain and a half of opinm daily for chronic
dysentery, Mr. Cheoevix produced no sleep ; but the man *' sat constantly
'With his eyes closed, and when desired to open them, he was full two
minutes before be could do so. When asked, * What prevented you from
opening your eyes?* •! could not^ they were fast closed: there was no
strength in my eyelids. I never felt so before in all my life.'"

This is a fact often observed by mesmerists : — ^that the eyes
dose and for a time cannot be opened though no other result
ensue.

Mr. Chenevix, being in Dublin in March^ 1829, made
trials upon seven patients in the Hospital of Incurables, by
the permission and in the presence of Dr. Croker. On six
no effects observable to a person inexperienced in mesmerism
were produced. The seventh patient laboured under severe
vomiting firom an injury, and was obliged to have the assist-
ance of the nurse and a crutch in going down stairs, but
could just walk from her bed to the fire with the crutch only.
For two months she had suffered excruciating pain in her left
arm, and Dr. Croker feared palsy. After being mesmerised
without any conversation for thirty minutes,

" She then, iff her own accord, said that she thought herself better, and
believed she could walk. She did so, I made her sit down again, and in
fifteen minutes more she had clignotements of her eyelids, complained that
she was too warm, and got up again to walk. This time she used no
crutch, and declared (what indeed was notorious in the hospital) that for
two months she had not been able to do so much. She was mesmerised
again immediately, and, after about sixty minutes, got up again and walked
quite well. The nurse and attendants, when called into the room, expressed
the utmost astonishment at seeing her pace along without the least uneven-
ness in her gait ; and she went up stairs to her ward without any assistance
whatever, leaving even her crutch in the room where she had been mesme-
rised. She slept better that night than she had done a long time ; and
walked perfectly well that day and the next." Mr. Chenevix did not see
her again, aa he went off to London.

Here he obtained two sisters to mesmerise, who were
both epileptic and born of an epileptic father. They were
soon sent into mesmeric coma, and were shewn to different
persons on different occasions. Dr. Milligan and Captain
Bagnold were satisfied of the reality of the sleep, and Dr.
Milligan in regard to one declared his opinion,

'*That the somnolency was the effect of a peculiar influence exercised
by Mr. Chenevix, and that, on account of its suddenness, it could not be
the result of any of the usual modes that produce sleep. Mr. Smith (Surgeon
of the Guards) coincided in this opinion."

Once Sir (then Mr.) Benjamin Brodie was present, and
the following conversation took place between Mr. Chenevix
and him :

" Let me ask you two questions ; but beware of your answers, for it is
fair to tell you that I wish to have them for the exprese purpose of pub-
lication. Do yon think this girl really and truly slept?"

" I do, and tery eoundly too."


Digitized by


Google


78 Mesmerism.

*' Do yoa think the went to sleep herself, out of fatigue or eonui, or, in
short, by means of what you saw me do V
" Certainly, by means of what you did."

Then follows a note fipom Sir B. Brodie to the same eflfect,
with this addition. '' With such information^ however, as I at
this moment possess, I see no reason to believe that this girPs
sleep may not be explained on principles already known, and
I should think that it may be compared to the giddiness
which may be produced by turning round, or still better to
the sleep produced by rocking a child."

Mr. North, the editor of this journal, to this appends a
foot note, stating that in his review of Dupau on Animal
Magnetism, Nov. 1826, he had given the same explanation of
mesmerism, and is, ^^ of course ! confirmed in our opinion by
finding it supported by Mr. Brodie." ^^In speaking of this phe-
nomenon, we observed, there is here no mystery; the effect
might be anticipated." ^^ Upon the same principle a child is
lulled to rest by fatiguing its senses with some nursery lullaby
or some gentle and oft repeated motion."

Sir B. Brodie came to his conclusion in May^ 1829, '^ with
such information as he at that moment possessed." Why has
he not obtained more since, when ample information was
within his reach \ why did he never condescend to ascertain
whether his exphmation of ^facty which he admitted, was cor-
rect, and visit University College Hospital or Dr. Elliotson
who resides in the next street to him. At any rate, this was
his duty, Ms positive dttty, before he ventured, as he is always
said to do, to speak of mesmerism as a worthless imposition.
In those days he was modest or cautious enough to qualify
his doubts with a reference to the " information he at that
moment possessed ;" he now hesitates not to speak positively
on the matter, never having added to the information he at
that moment possessed and obstinately refusing to receive
information. But let him report illiberally and contemp-
tuously on mesmerism, his pride will not be sufiScient to
enable him to hold on much longer, however backed by his
obsequious tenth-rate crumb seekers.

Dr. Prout also saw these patients, and had no doubt that
the same sister really went to sleep. He differed, however,
from Mr. Brodie, who had no doubt that she slept in conse-
quence of the means employed by Mr. Chenevix, for he was
not convinced that the action of Mr. Chenevix had caused the
sleep, ''though he did not immediately see to what other
agency it could be ascribed." Mr. Brodie had no doubt that
Mr. Chenevix caused it. Dr. Prout was by no means convinced
of this ! and yet could discover no other cause ! In a letter to


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 79

Mr. Chenevix lie declares he " must see much more before he
could be satisfied/' Has he seen much more ? No. Has he
not been as proud and obstinate as Sir B. Brodie ; and do they
not encourage each other to continue obstinate. He has firmly
refused even to attend to the subject again. We happen
to know that^ being an old friend of Dr. EUiotson's, he was
requested more thw once to go and see his experiments^ but
never once went, and sent a boy, an absolute boy not in the
medical profession, his son, instead, who made a report to the
father which quite satisfied him that it was all nonsense ; and
Dr. P^nt goes on, as in days past, talking against phrenology
and mesmerism, in perfect ignorance of both, and thinking
that he knows sufficient of both to give an opinion ; and a
prey to the strength of the unworthy passion or weakness, in
fonuliar tongue called obstinacy, he remains, destined in-
vduntarily, though fancjdng himself to act most freely, and
without the tyranny of feeling, to descend the hill of life with-
out beholding beauties of nature, to see which he has only to
turn his head a Uttle in a certain direction. And Dr. Prout
is a writer of a Bridgewater Treatise, setting forth the power
and goodness of God ! Why, no wonders in nature can come
up to the wonders of the powers of the human brain ! It is
the most wonderful of all material objects ; and the pheno-
mena of mesmerism as far surpass those of mechanics and
mere chemistry as life must surpass inanimate phenomena :
and then thus to write not only upon the power, but also upon
the goodness, of Gk>d, and fling back in his face, or at least
reject with scorn, the incalculable benefits which are placed
within our reach by mesmerism ! Out upon such inconsistency
and perverseness !

Mr. Faraday differed from Dr. Prout and Mr. Brodie.
While they haid no doubt of the reality of the sleep, he
thought he saw nothing which a paid actor could not play.
His doubt arose from the girl coughing and putting her
hand to her mAuth at the time. This was from his igno-
rance, pardonable in him as not a medical man, but un-
pardonable now in all medical men, though evinced lately
by nearly all the medical and surgical speakers of the medical
society, that the mesmeric coma is not common sleep. " It
is a great error,^' properly remarks Mr. Chenevix, with re-
ference to Mr. Faraday's doubt, " to confound mesmeric
sleep with common ; for in the former many appearances are
assumed which are incompatible with the latter. The second
person I ever saw in this state of artificial somnambulism
walked about the house and performed many domestic func-
tions while in that state. In natural somnambulism the fact


Digitized by


Google


80 Mesmerism.

has long been acknowledged/^ Dr. Hargood believed both
sisters to be fast askep ; but ascribed all to imagination.
However, he and Mr. Faraday, both of the Royal Institution,
considered these experiments as well worthy of investigation,
and expressed their wish that the subject might meet with
fair and candid enquiry.

Dr. Henry Holland, of Brook-street, saw one of the girls.
She was asleep in five minutes, and on raising her eyelid the
eye appeared fixed and glossy. This disturbance did not
awake her. Mr. Chenevix awoke her at the end of ten
minutes, and asked him whether he thought she had been
asleep, telling him at the same time that his answer would be
published. Dr. Henry Holland replied, " I do. Certainly I
think that without your means she would not have slept '/' but
he did not admit the necessity of any new agency. Lord
Lansdowne was present also, and gave the same replies. Mr.
Chenevix prints a note from Dr. Holland consisting of these
two sentences. ^^ I return the enclosed paper, having nothing
to object to the statement respecting the girl whom I saw at
your house. / believe that she was asleep, and that she could
not have slept but by the means employed by you.''

The late and the present Dr. Babington then saw the
younger of the two sisters. She went to sleep in two minutes.
Mr. Chenevix opened her eye and pressed his finger hard upon
the ball, but she made no motion. " He then put his middle
finger into her mouth as far as he could and stirred it about
for more than a minute, endeavouring to stimulate the fancies;
she showed not the sUghtest symptom of feeling or anything
from this operation. He then tickled her nose and upper lip
with a slip of paper and put the same slip of paper up her
nostril ; but she did not manifest the slightest sensibility to
the impression, which should have resulted in ordinary cases.''
What! no excito-motory motions, no reflex motions! What
would Dr. Marshall Hall have said. Why, he would at once
have condemned the poor little girl as a vile impostor, because
when her irritable parts were tickled, she gave no sign, as the
creatures do whom he has knocked on the head or whose
backbone he has cut through ! What, no reflex movements !
The girl was evidently no physiologist, or she would have
enacted the reflex motions ! But they did not, and do not. Dr.
Hall, in those cases of mesmeric insensibiUty of the surface.
" But they ought,^' replies Dr. Marshall Hall.* However, Dr.


* For Dr. HaU's strange assertions and reasonings on these points in the
Medical Society, when the case of amputation in the mesmeric state was
discussed, we refer our readers to Dr. Elliotson's pamphlet Just published.


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 81

Babington wrote on paper that the two sisters presented the
usual phenomena of " profound sleep/' but ascribed it to no
"new or extraordinary influence/' but to "the imagination^
aided by the will, exercising a power over the faculties 1"
Poor old Dr. Babington, who was in no respect better in-
formed, except in a little chemistry, or more slalful, than any
good old apothecary of the last generation, and like so many
other teachers in Israel must have often wondered and smiled
to see himself looked up to and in lucrative practice, and be
conscious it was owing to mere luck and his unifonnly easy
kind manner when his interest did not make him hostile, and
to his humorous way of repeating Irish stories all day long,
ascribed such a marvellously profound sleep as he witnessed,
occurring too but in two minutes, to imagination aided by the
will ! Did he ever see such a sleep brought on, and so quickly
too, by imagination aided by will? He should, have tried,
and then adduced counter facts. The writer of this well
remembers Dr. Babington declaring, when auscultation first
excited attention in this country, that for his part he had one
day gone into the nursery and put his ears to the chests of
his grandchildren and could discover nothing; and so he went
on practising to the last day of his life in diseases of the chest
without the all important aid of his ear. His pains to inves-
tigate the facts of auscultation, and his conclusion and deter-
mination regarding it, were altogether the same as those of
the mass of the medical world regarding mesmerism.

Mr. Chenevix tried some patients in the Middlesex Infir-
mary before Dr. Milligan and Mr. Evans Biadore, who avowed
their conviction, and also in St. Bartholomew's Hospital be-
fore Mr. Earle, who promised to follow up the subject.

Thus we see that Sir B. Brodie, Dr. Prout, and Dr.
Holland allowed the reality of the sleep. Dr. Holland shewed
his characteristic wariness and ascribed it to Mr. Chenevix's
means, but would not commit himself by saying what means
he meant, though he disbelieved in any new agency. However,
he has ever since considered the subject uttterly unworthy of
his attention, and none of the three has ever condescended to
witness any new facts in it, or will hear of it.

Dr. Prout was not positively convinced that the sleep was
through Mr. Chenevix's means : confessing at the same time
he could conceive nothing else to ascribe it to ! Oh, the
depths of this philosophy I Sir Benjamin Brodie ascribed
the effects to the same principle as when giddiness is produced
by rotatoiy motion, or sleep by rocking. Now, if Sir B.
Brodie had not been so positive, but has imitated " Sir Isaac,
Boyle, and Lock," in being —

VOL. I. G


Digitized by


Google


82 Mesmerism.

.... ** humble, teachable, and mild.
Patient of contradiction as a child,"

and had condescended to witness some of the numerous cases
within his reach for the last five years, he would have known
that the eflfects ensue jfrom merely pointing the fingers, and
even if the eyes are closed all the time, or the passes or point-
ing made behind the back of the head, instead of before the
face, and vnthout the patient's knowledge; nay, out of the
patient's sight, and at a very great distance, when the patient
can have no idea that the operator is thinking of the mat-
ter. And this, by the way, is an answer to those very
i^orant persons who go about lecturing and asserting that
the effects are to be ascribed to monotony only, or weariness.
So much for Sir B. Brodie's explanation.

Dr. Babington did not call in the aid of the principle of
the production of giddiness by rotatory motion, or sleep by
rocking, but ascribed all to effect on the mind: to — any thing
rather than admit the simple truth. Imagination and wiU
when patients are sent to sleep without the possibility of their
knowing that the attempt is making I

Mr. Chenevix's account closes with a document of five pages
by Dr. Elliotson, detailing all he witnessed in the several
interviews which he had with him. He first saw the two
sisters, and says of one, ^^she remained for a considerable
time, as far as I could judge, by carefully watching her fea-
tures and her breathing, in a sound sleep f^ and of the other,
" I was as satisfied of her being in a sound sleep as a bystander
could be/' and, on waking, " her eyes and cheeks were red,
and her eyes heavy, exactly as is observed in persons really
awakening from sleep.'' However, Dr. Elliotson was too
careful to draw any inference from these two cases. Though
he watched them very carefully — "/ might be deceived," he says
in his Human Physiology, " and I drew no inference.^' He
then took Mr. Chenevix to St. Thomas's Hospital, where he
was then physician, and trials were made, too short, however,
as it seems to us, generally for not more than ten minutes, on
nine patients. One, labouring under severe hysteria, had a
fit instantly, induced probably from emotion; and, at a second
trial, though she partly closed her eyes, and no doubt went
to sleep, a fit took place in ten minutes. Mr. Chenevix gave
it as his opinion, with which our experience justifies us in coin-
ciding, that she would certainly have been cured. In six no
effect was produced during an attempt of ten minutes ; though
in one of them the female ftmctions, which had been sus-
pended for three months, returned in ten d^ afterwards.
An epileptic girl of eighteen was then tried. "In ten minutes


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 83

her ejres dosed^ and her head suddenly dropped forwards ; but
I did not consider her/' says Dr. EUiotson, " to be asleep
nntil ten minutes more had elapsed/' She then really seemed
in sound and tranquil sleep. Her hands^ when raised^ drop-
ped immediately; her eyes were completely closed. The
whole frame remained motionless. I placed my face close
to hers, for the purpose of seeing if her eyes were quite shut,
and she did not move a feature, neither did the friction of her
eyelashes cause contraction in any muscle/' This would have
settled the case with Dr. Marshall Hall. No excito-motory
motion, no reflex motion, jfrom touching the eyelashes! Im-
postor — ^you were no physiologist ! Poor girl, she could not
help it. This was years before Dr. Marshall Hall ever thought
of excito-motory, reflex fonction ; and so she did not know
what she ought to have done. ^' On being wakened by Mr.
Chenevix, the redness of her eyes and cheeks, and the heavi-
ness of her look, were completely those of a person wakening
oat of sleep.'' On a second day, ^'in about the same time as
yesterday, she looked asleep ; her hands when raised, dropped
as before ; and Mr. Chenevix signified that he thought her to
be asleep," and addressed her. She at once answered, and
declared she had been asleep on neither day, though at both
times she felt drowsy. It is probable that she was asleep the
second time, but instantly awoke, as many do, when spoken
to, and there is no doubt she was sound asleep the first
time, for it is common for mesmerised persons, and indeed
others, who have been fast asleep, not to believe they have.
Dr. Elliotson gives in his Physiology a notable instance that
occurred to Mr. Gibbon Wakefield, who is as hard headed and
Uttle credulous a man as exists, and whose conversion we will
first stop to relate, upon unquestionable authority. He had
been repeatedly requested by Sir William Molesworth to ac-
company him to University College Hospital, and witness the
wondernil phenomena, of the Okeys especially, which had con-
vinced Sir Wm. of the truth of mesmerism ; and after visiting
the establishment several times to see which. Sir Wm. pre-
sented it with thirty guineas. Mr. Wakefield always excused
himself, because he said he had always heard a high character
of Dr. Elliotson, and did not wish to have his favourable im-
pressions removed by seeing that gentleman make a fool of
himself. However, at last Mr. Wakefield went and was
astonished, but could not make up his mind to believe what
he saw, though the things were astounding, and he could
conceiye no possibility of explaining than by believing them
to be feigned. When the experiments were over, and he
was passing through some part of the hospital to leave it, he

o2


Digitized by


Google


84 Mesmerism.

accidentally noticed one of the sisters with her back to him,
hanging over the balusters carelessly, and looking down, still
in the mesmeric delirium, and therefore highly susceptible.
He thought this a most favourable opportunity to test her,
because he was satisfied that she could not see any thing that
he did. He made a pass behind her back at some distance
with his hand directed to her ; and she instantly was fixed
and rigid, and perfectly senseless. He had sense enough to
believe his senses ; was satisfied now of the reality of all he
had beheld ; satisfied of the truth of mesmerism ; and has
since mesmerised many hundred persons, and spread the
truth widely. Well — ^he one day oflfered to try upon a gen-
tleman who laughed at the thing, and the gentleman was
soon in a profound sleep. As he thought it very likely that
when the gentleman awoke he would deny he had been asleep,
being determined not to believe, he blackened the man's face
with burnt cork and put his wife's cap upon him ; and placed
a looking-glass before him, purposing to convince him by caus-
ing him to find himself thus circumstanced when he awoke.
The wife, however, now feared that he might be so frightened
that he would have a fit, and therefore the cap was taken off
and his face washed, and he was then awakened by transverse
passes. The gentleman knew nothing that had taken place ;
but stoutly denied, and does probably to this moment, that
he had been asleep ! The patient at St. Thomas's Hospital,
therefore, of whom we were speaking, probably had really
been asleep, though she did not know it. However, some
striking effects now resulted. " Mr. Chenevix then mesmer-
ised her arm, with the intention, as he said, of paralysing it.
She said it pained her. After a few transverse passes, she
said the pain was gone. The same effects were produced,
and by the same means, on her head. He then placed a
piece of paper, weighing perhaps from one to two grains, on
one of her arms, and desired her to raise them both. She
felt some difficulty in raising that on which he had put the
paper." But, says Dr. EUiotson, in his Physiology, p. 680,
"I remained unconvinced." So far was he from readily
becoming a convert. What he had seen, however, interested
him : and he felt that the matter deserved enquiry.

The next case he saw exhibited unquestionable facts which
he could not explain on any known principle. The patient
was an ignorant Irish girl, taken by chance from the hospital
list of patients he had in his hand, and unprepared to expect
any thing.

'*She exhibited do apprehension of any kind, but was talking very
cheerfully to me. Mr. C, without saying one word to her, began his maui-


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 86

pulatioDS,- at the distance of half a foot, bat did not touch her. In about
one minute she said, in a plaintive voce, *' Sir, don't do that ;" and seemed
in great distress. She afterwards told as that Mr. C. drew weakness into
her, and made her feel faint. She complained of pain in the abdomen.
Mr. C. moved his hands transversely before it, and she said the pain was
gone. (She had felt a slight pain there before we saw her.) She then com-
plained of great nneasiness in her chest ; and after some transverse move-
ments, made by Mr. C. with the intention of removing it, she declared it
was gone. The pain in the abdomen returned and ceased, as before, by the
manipulations of Mr. C. Mr. C. then darted his open band towards one
arm, without touching it, and told her to raise both arms. She scarcely
could move that which he had thus mesmerised. He then made some trans-
verse passes before it : she at once moved it, and declared the stiffness and
uneasiness to be gone. The same was repeated with the other arm, and
with the same effect. He told her to lift her feet : she did so with perfect
ease. He then darted his hand toward one leg, and she stared with astonish-
ment at finding that she could not stir it without the greatest difficulty. He
then made some transverse passes, when she instantly raised it, and said
there was neither pain nor stiffness in it. He then closed her eyes, and put
a rery small piece of paper, weighing perhaps one grain, on her foot, in
such manner that it was utterly impossible she could perceive it : she could
scarcely move that foot. The paper was removed in the same manner, and
without her knowing it : she could instantly raise her foot. She now com-
plained of pain about the heart : Mr. C. demesmerised her, and she said it
was gone. In all these experiments, Mr. C. had most clearly announced to
me, in French, what his intentions were ; and the effects coincided so accu-
rately with those intentions that I confess I was astonished. Deception was
impossible. Mr. C. looked round at me, and asked, in French, if I was
satisfied. I really felt ashamed to say no, and yet I could scarcly credit my
senses enough to say yes. I remained silent. He then asked me, still in a
language unintelligible to the patient, * Shall I bring back a pain or disable
a limb for you once more f I, of course, requested that he would do so.
He complied instantly, giving her a pain in the chest once, and disabling
her several times from moving her limbs, and removing those effects at plea-
sure, according to the intentions which he announced to me ; the whole
taking place exactly as it had done in every former trial on this woman.
As, however, she began to feel faint and uncomfortable, Mr. C, judged
it prudent to desist ; assuring me that such experiments as these should never
be repeated but with moderation, and only by experienced mesmerisers.

" On questioning this woman a few days after Mr. C. had produced
such decided effects upon her, respecting what had occurred, she declared
that he had disabled first one limb, then another, and restored their use,
exactly as appeared to be the case ; that she never had felt any thing like it
in her life before ; that, though she had not slept during the operation, she
had felt very drowsy ; that she had not been at all afraid ; but, said she,
' I hope never to see that doctor again, as I am sure he has something to do
with the devil.'"

" From this time," says Dr. Elliotson, ** I was satisfied that such a
power as mesmerism exists, and hoped some day to enquire into it* I had
no opportunity, however, before the arrival of the Baron Dupotet in this
country a few months back." This was written in that part of his Physio-
logy which appeared in 1837.

Of all the persons wlio witnessed the experiments of
Mr. Chenevix in London, he was the only one who turned
them to account. On the others whose names are enume-
rated^ Lord Lansdowne, Drs. Babington, senior and junior,
Hargrave, Holland^ Milligan, Prout, Whymper, Wilmot,
Wright, Messrs. Bagnold, Brodie, Earle, North, Biadore,


Digitized by


Google


88 Mesmerism.

But we trust to prove our former assertion^ that to Mr.
Chenevix is owing the establishment of mesmerism in this
country. Of all that he did here we have put our readers in
possession. He immediately returned to Paris. '^All his
ambition/' he says, ''was to excite curiosity; to break the
ice of public incredulity, to turn the attention of a few of
my eminent countrymen to a subject of which so many dis-
tinguished foreigners have long admitted the truth.''

He was employing himself in the preparation of a work,
in which the results of experiments and observations upon
442 persons were to be detailed, — ^results obtained by labori-
ous investigation, ''six, eight, and sometimes ten hours a
day," " during ten months ;" when an acute disease termi-
nated his existence. Whether the work had proceeded far
enough to make the publication of what was prepared advisa-
ble we know not, — ^but we do earnestly suggest that the MS.
should be placed in the hands of some able English mesmerist
for examination. It cannot but be of the highest value and
importance.

Fourteen years have elapsed since he announced the work
in the London Medical and Physical Journal, and nothing has
been heard of it. The journal in which he published the pf^[>er8
which we have now made known to our readers, has long
ceased to be continued, though it ran through thirty-four
years. Of course it will never be reprinted ; and will soon be
found only in the Ubraries of medical bodies; and to the
world will ever be imknown. Indeed it is unknown abroad,
and is now pretty well forgotten here. The labours of Mr.
Chenevix would have been entirely lost, and mesmerism
.would for a long while have dropped in this country, but for
the impression made upon Dr. EUiotson by the case of the
Irish girl operated upon in St. Thomas's hospital.

No fruit of his efforts to convert the English appeared up
to 1836. He had died in 1830 : not one man among those,
to whom he had been at the pains so disinterestedly to ex-
hibit &iCta, had evinced any recollection of his efforts. He
was a man of independent fortune, a thorough gentleman,
highly intelligent, literary, and scientific, and his courage in
announcing the truth of mesmerism here, his disinterested
and untiring efforts to convince persons and establish know-
ledge in the room of entire ignorance and prejudice, cannot
be highly enough praised. The reward he obtained from the
Royal Society was the following insult to his memory in the
annual oration delivered by the President, the weak but
worthy Mr. Davies Gilbert, Nov. 18, 1830.

** Mr. Chenevix was undoubtedly a man of considerable ability, acquire-


Digitized by


Google


Megmerism, 89

Bieot, and indastry. We have from him Beven different communications to
the PkU4aophical TransacHoiu : an Analysis of the Arsenities of Copper, —
Observations on Dr. James's Powders, with a Method of preparing a similar
substance in the Hamid Way, — Obserrations and Experiments upon Oxyge-
nated and hyperoxygenated muriatic acid,— an Analysis of Corundum, —
Observations on the Chemical Nature of the Humours of the Eye, — Inquiries
coDcemiog the Nature of a Metallic Substance under the title of Palladium,
—on the action of Platinum and Mercury on each other.

In the latter years of his life, which could not have reached three score,
he appears to have abandoned chemistry, and to have fallen on speculations
(phrenology and mesmerism) wholly unuHtrthy qf being noticed in this place!"

In 1837 a Frenchman named Dnpotet^ and styled Baron
Dupotet^ who had long practised mesmerism^ came over to
London to propagate it and gain money. He had an intro-
duction to the Middlesex Hospital and was aUowed to make
experiments upon several patients. He produced decided
effects ; but Mr. Mayo^ and all those to whom he was in-
troduced^ disregarded them more and more, and at last left
him to make the experiments by himself; and the poor man
was in despair, when Dr. Wilson advised him to go to Dr.
EUiotson, who, he added, would look ;into the subject and soon
see if there was anything in it. M. Dupotet followed this
advice, was well received by Dr. Elliotson, who said he was
glad of the opportunity of investigating a subject, of the truth
of which Mr. Chenevix had convinced him eight years before,
and which he had ever since hoped one day to enqidre into
for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of its truth. He
daily mesmerised several patients and produced marked re-
sults, that is, mesmeric coma and involuntary movements.
Among the rest was Elizabeth Okey, in the hospital for
epilepsy, and whose sister had been also in the hospital for the
same disease. After several trials she was sent to sleep, but
the sleep was for weeks of only a brief duration, she being
roused again almost as soon as she lost herself; and the ap-
pearance she thought so ridiculous that she was always
unwilling to undergo the process. Gradually the sleep
lengthened, and at last ecstatic delirium occurred, and, after
he had ceased to visit the hospital, all those wonderful pheno-
mena which so many witnessed, of which all the world has
heard, and of which Dr. Elliotson has engaged to furnish this
work with a full account, as well as an ample answer to the
ignorant persecutors and slanderers of her and her sister.
In the autumn Dr. Elliotson left London for his annual
tour, which he found always absolutely necessary for his
health, and left M. Dupotet to mesmerise three or four pa-
tients, whose treatment he had begun. That person, however,
with great weakness and want of propriety, gave out that all
poor people who wished to be mesmerised might apply to him


Digitized by


Google


90 Mesmerism.

at the hospital and would be attended to by him there. The
committee were obliged to put a stop to this^ and Dr. Elliot-
son on his return highly approved of the step and disapproved
of the liberty taken by M. Dupotet. Dr. Elliotson^ having
returned^ now took the care of his mesmeric patients into his
own hands^ and M. Dupotet commenced daily demonstrations
of mesmerism at half-a-crown a head at a house which he
hired in Orchard-street^ Portman-square. His rooms were
always crowded, and he exhibited several genuine and remark-
able cases ; and he made very many converts, who still talk of
the wonders they beheld. At last, notwithstanding his ample
receipts, he got into difficulties, though we believe through no
fault of his own, but the mismanagement of some and the
bad conduct of others; and after vain attempts to borrow
money, left London, and is now at Paris. Having been
aflfbrded every facility at the hospital by Dr. Elliotson, to
whom entirely he owed his success, for before he saw that
gentleman he was about to leave England in despair; having
been shewn every kindness by him, except that of lending
money, which he ought not to have required and which could
have been of use but for a moment, he employed himself as
soon as he returned home again in writing a very shallow
book, containing no information, but silly abuse of Dr. Elliot-
son for having been so grand as to make his annual tour for
&esh air and health, while M. Dupotet was showing mesmeric
facts, although by so doing Dr. E. placed M. Dupotet in a
situation for which he could not have hoped, — ^that of treat-
ing a certain number of patients in one of our public hos-
pitals. On the cause of his anger, — ^the refusal of pecimi-
ary loans, — ^he is silent. In truth, he was an innocent sort
of man, very weak and of little information, and he knew no
more of mesmerism than the most superficial facts. He
however did good to the cause for a time, and then could do
no more, and would have been detrimental had he stayed. All
things serve a purpose for a certain time only, and are then
destined to waste away as useless.

Dr. Elliotson and his clinical clerk, Mr. Wood, regularly
mesmerised certain patients. Some excellent cures were
eficcted, and such striking phenomena produced that the
students regularly attended ; then students from other schools;
then they all requested to bring their friends, so that for
convenience he was obUged to mesmerise no longer in the
wards but in the theatre, just as the surgeons perform their
operations not in the wards but in the theatre. Requests
were poured in upon him from all classes of medical men and
from others to be permitted to witness the cases ; the highest


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 01

nobility and even royalty attended. This of course excited the
jealousy of his colleagues. The school^ which was at a low ebb
when he condescended to join it on account of the wise and
liberal plan of the institution^ (and no other man of his station
would have joined it,) had thriven more and more every
year, and his classes continued to thrive during that time.
But his colleagues determined he should not occupy, what he
never once thought of, a more conspicuous place in the public
view than themselves ; the truth and benefits of mesmerism
they cared not one straw for. They would not witness his facts,
— ^they boasted of this, began every sort of petty, disgraceful
annoyance, and at last, without any previous commimication
or hint, while effecting easy and satisfactory cures, he received
an abrupt order from the council that lus patients were no
longer to be treated mesmerically, — a council of persons neither
medical nor at all conversant with literature or any science,
except two or three of their number. The very moment he
received this insult, worthy of the most ignorant, miserable,
bigotted, and despotic only, he sent his resignation, and has
never since entered either college or hospital.*

* We extract the foUowing dccoant from Dr. Elliotson's fareweU Letter to
his class : —

« My enquiries were soon attended with such results that a large number
of medical men, most distinguished noblemen, nay royalty itself, members
of the House of Commons, some of the first men of science in the country,
Professors of Oxford, Cambridge, King's College, and Edinburgh, the
Presidents of the Royal and Linnaean Societies, and teachers of the various
hospitals, flocked to witness my facts. Some of these gentlemen made hand-
some donations to the hospital in consequence, and others expressed their
intention to do the same, but have declined in consequence of my resigna-
tion. This soon excited envy, and this excited a commotion ; and the late
Dean advised me to desist. He urged that, whether the wonderful facts
were true or not, and virhether great benefit in the treatment of diseases
would result or not, we ought ^o consider the interests of the school; —
not of science and humanity, observe — but of the school : that, if the pub-
lic did not regard the matter as true and the benefits as real, we ought not
to persevere and risk the loss of public favour to the school ; that I was
rich, and could afford to lose my practice for what I believed the truth, but
that others were not:~in short, his argument was ''''rem— rem f and
*' virtuB post nummos** I replied that the institution was established for
the dissemination and discovery of truth ; that all other considerations were
secondary to this ; that, if the public were ignorant, we should enlighten
them ; that we should lead the public, and not the public us ; and that the
sole question was, whether the matter were a truth or not. I laughed at the
idea of injury to the pecuniary interests of the school.

** The commotion increased. My demonstrations were debated upon at
meetings of the faculty, and discussions went on between members of the
council, and professors, an exquisite secretary, and other more bumble
holders of office. Atone meeting of the medical faculty, a professor boasted
that he had seen none of my experiments and should have considered himself
disgraced if he had ; that animal magnetism had been proved above forty
years ago to be a perfect humbug and imposture ; and that it was now in as
bad repute with the public as Christiftttity had been at its first promulgation.


Digitized by


Google


92 Mesmerism,

Mr. Wakley^ thinking to distingoish himself and sail
gallantly with the stream^ fulminated forth what he called

Another professor boasted that be had seen none of the facts, and, though
invited by my clinical clerk to observe them while visiting his own patients
in the ward, that he had declined the invitation. One professor declared
that he never could procure a vacant bed because I detained my patients so
long in order to mesmerise them : and another reported that patients would
not apply for admission, lest they should be mesmerised, and that others left
the hospital to avoid mesmeric treatment. But, when I enquired of the
officer whom I understood to have furnished these absurdities, he assured
me that he was blameless, and made the general scape-goat of the place ;
and he entreated me to accept his denial without an enquiry which would
embroil him with the professors. Not conceiving that any thing but reputa-
tion could accrue to the hospital from the demonstration of physiological and
pathological facts to crowds of the first men in the country, among whom
were characters totally opposed in politics to the place and who otherwise
never would have entered it,—I persevered. The president of the college —
Lord Brougham and five other members of the council did not refuse to
attend the demonstrations ; nor did the professors of the faculty of arts ; nor
Df, Grant, Dr. Lindley, nor Mr. Graham. But, with the exception of these
three last gentlemen, whose conduct throughout has commanded my respect,
I never saw any of the medical faculty : if any ever were present, it could
have been only to reconnoitre unobserved by me. The Irish, the Welsh,
and four of the six Scotch medical professors, held meeting after meeting
of the faculty or of the hospital committee, which my disgust prevented me
from attending. At these meetings I know that the most bitter feelings
against me were manifested, and matters discussed which were perfectly
irrelevant, but the introduction of which showed the hostility of certain
parties. I have always acted in the most honourable and correct manner ;
and dare any examination of my conduct-

'* Dr. Lindley and Mr. Cooper confessed to me that they could not ima-
gine that my demonstrations would hurt the hospital ; and Dr. Lindley, in his
own noble and honest manner, declared that he thought the facts which be
had witnessed were very curious and deserved investigation. The feeling,
however, for what reason they could not tell, was so strong, that they con-
ceived my best course was to give up the demonstrations. Mr. Cooper sug-
gested, as indeed Dr. Davis had done, that I should show the patients in
my own house, or some house in the neighbourhood. One professor recom-
mended a public-house. But I declined to exhibit hospital-patients to a
number of persons anywhere but in the hospital. For the sake of peace,
therefore, I consimted never to show the phenomena again in the theatre of
the hospital, unless my colleagues approved of the list of those to whom I
wished to demonstrate them : and both gentlemen agreed that this ought to
content the party. It, however, did not content them. They still refused to
come and examine into the phenomena; and, when I sent to the medical
committee a list of many of the highest names in and out of the profession,
who had applied for permission to witness my facts, they absolutely refused
to read it.

" Entreated on all sides to exhibit the phenomena, I requested of the
council permission to demonstrate them in one of the theatres of the col-
lege, when this was not in use. But I was refused. One of the council,
whose goodness and liberality render him an ornament to the Jewish nation
and to England, moved the reconsideration of the refusal or made a motion
for permission, but in vain. I hear that he entreated the council to witness
the phenomena and judge for themselves as he had done, but in vain. Yes,
the majority of the council, perfectly ignorant of the subject, refused to go
to learn anything of it before they passed judgment upon it; and among
these were legislators, barristers, and one physician. Yet this same council
gave permission for the exhibition of a calculating boy to the public, at so
much a bead, and tickets were purohased by any one, as for a concert"


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerism. 93

experiments on a subject of which he is as ignorant as of
Latin, French, or mathematics; and from his eflfrontery at once
frightened the medical professioiS, and those, who firmly be-
lieved, now imitated Peter and deniecl their convictions. Noth-
ing daunted, however, from the time of his resignation to the
present. Dr. Elliotson has shewn the phenomena at his own
house very frequently to those who requested the favour, and
has made many hundreds of converts, who in their turn have
converted others.

Another Frenchman named La Fontaine, came over two |
years ago, like Dupotet, on a pecuniary speculation. He also
shewed some genuine and strUdng cases. He lectured in the ^
provinces, and the sister countries ; but at last found the affair
imsuccessful. He appeared a less educated man than Dupotet,
and his knowledge of mesmerism was as limited. He did
great good, however; and more ostensible good than Dupotet,
because he came at a period when the conviction of the truth
had become much more diffused, and persons were more dis-
posed to attend to the subject.

The converts have gone on steadily increasing; the converted
experimenting for themselves and converting others, till, dur-
ing the last twelvemonth, the conviction has spread far and
wide, and people need no more be afraid of being laughed
at for expressing their belief. Numbers of persons originally
converted at University College Hospital and in Dr. EUiot-
son^s house, but afraid to express their mind, have now
taken courage, and talk of the convincing wonders they long
ago saw, and speak of the absurdity of doubting the truth
of the cases of the Okeys. Those who were terrified by Mr.
Wakley^s firing and ran away, have now stopped to take
breath, looked back, and found that he had no shot, pro-
duced merely noise and smoke, and that the giant himself was
an unwieldy, feeble, short-breathed, puffing mortal, only able
to throw his arms about menacingly and make ugly noises,
so that little boys need not be at all afraid of him and may
laugh at him. It will soon be considered ridiculous for a
man to declare he believes mesmerism to be nonsense. The
honest among the most noisy opponents will become Sauls of
Tarsus and be the most strenuous proselytes ; each of this
class will confess his sorrow, as Mr. Chenevix did, that this —

" Presumptuous ignorance had shut in his own face the door of a science
more directly interesting to man than all that chemistry and astronomy can
teach. " Nine-tenths/' he continues, '^ who may read will laugh at this
as I did, in 1797, at my friend in Rotterdam. Let them do so; but
while they laugh, let them learn, and not, thirty years afterwards, hare to
lament that so short a remnant of lUe is left to them to enjoy this new and
valuable secret of nature ;"—


Digitized by


Google


94 Mesmerism.

The uncandid will be silent^ and then at last begin to allow
there is something in it, and pretend that they always allowed
as much, but did not think it right to be precipitate, and
only objected to the nonsense of the matter.

So at last it will be spoken aud written of as a matter of
course, lectured upon as a matter of course, and employed as
a matter of course; and all the folly, ignorance, injustice,
and vulgarity that have been exhibited must be most cha-
ritably forgotten ; only that copies of the Lancet, its heavy
offspring the Provincial Medical Jovmal, the Dublin Medical
Journal, Dr. Johnson^ s Journal, and Dr. Forbes's, will still be
accessible on the shelves of public medical libraries, and we,
*' before we forget them," must from time to time present
our readers with a tit-bit of an extract, sometimes from one
of them and sometimes from another, to show the world
how wild and vulgar doctors can be among themselves, and
how closely their conduct resembles that of the most unedu-
cated, who wonder at what they never saw before, and reftise
to believe their senses because they wonder, forgetting that
what they do believe is all equally wonderftd, but not thought
80 because they are accustomed to it.

'' Wonderfal," says Mr. Cheneyix, '^ indeed, it may appear ; but what
makes anything wonderful to us, if not our ignorance. In my recollection,
they have wondered at hydrogen and oxygen ; at a dead frog jumping be-
tween two slips of metal ; at gas lights and steam boats ; and now they
wonder at all who wonders at these familiar things. They would pity the
wretch who would not instantly believe that a stone falls, and a balloon
rises, by the same impulse : or that the taste which his tongue receives when
placed between a piece of silver and a piece of zinc, has the same origin as
the thunder which strikes his soal with awe. Every thing in creation is
wonderful, or nothing is so, but the last known truth always appears the
most miraculous to unreflecting minds." ^* Since the world began men have
been wondering at every thing till habit tamed their minds upon it."

We ask not the aid of those medical journalists. On the
contrary we entreat them to continue in their present course of
absurdity, for their " fantastic tricks," like those of "angry
apes before high heaven," will amuse us in our leisure mo-
ments, and enable us to amuse our readers as well as our-
selves, by playing with them, and teasing them, and showing
the world what comical creatures they are when well worried.
The facts of mesmerism which we possess are now proftisely
abundant and extensively scattered without the assistance of
professors, examiners, colleges, halls, medical journalists, or
fashionable practitioners. It must go on conquering and to
conquer — ^for mesmerism is established.

S. I. L. E.


Digitized by


Google


( 95 )


VII. The Lecture Mama. — The Medical Profession, —
Mr, Spencer Hall,

We have been engaged in the collection of facts and in
the careful observation of the phenomena developed by the
mesmeric excitation of cerebration. At a future period we
shall enter more fully upon this interesting subject ; but we
do not feel ourselves at present in a position to advance any
opinion^ except this, that we protest in the strongest language
against the unphilosophical manner in which the question has
been handled by injudicious partisans ; — ^men, some of them
evidently sincere in their motives, but rash and careless in
the extreme when promulgating thei/ opinions and their pre-
sumed facts.

In the public press we are continually perusing the reports
of lectures, and we are astonished at the unwarrantable asser-
tions made, at the dictatorial manner in which presumed facts
are advanced, and the efifrontery with which conclusions are
ventured, regarding the phenomena produced in this the first
stage of the inquiry into a new science. We question much
whether the great cause of truth is advanced by performing
experiments in public — experiments, in our opinion, much
more suited for the quiet retirement of the philosopher's
study than the bustle and turmoil of a public lecture room.
How numerous the failures at these lectures ! How vexatious
the opposition at the termination of many of these hazardous
displays ! We know nothing about the power we have at our
command except from the effects we produce, and since no
two cases are precisely alike, and each case assumes a distinc-
tive character modified by the particular organism influenced,
and most probably by the peculiarities of the organism
producing the influence, surely some caution is necessary, ere
we venture to perform experiments as proof of the discovery
of a great truth, calculated to produce important changes in
medicine and in morals.

What can be more suicidal than the following exploit ?
A lecturer after entering into a lengthened deta^ of the
phenomena manifested during the trance, offered (having
neglected to provide himself with a patient) to mesmerise any
individual &om amongst the audience. Several presented
themselves. By this rash procedure this gentleman appeared
to forget that this would be considered an experimerUum cruets
— ^that from the success or failure the truth of his statements
would be judged, and that if he failed, perhaps not two of his
audience woidd attribute it to tile right cause ; an indiscreet.


Digitized by


Google


96 Lecture Mania.

premature and ill-timed attempt to overcome it may be an
impossibility. Such has lately occurred. Two hours were
occupied in firuitless endeavours to produoe the trance, the
audience became irritated, and the experimentalist was obliged
to retreat amidst groans and hisses.*

Besides the numerous disturbing causes which prevent
the accession of the trance, we believe we have yet to discover
what may be called the mesmeric difficulties. This conclu-
sion is forced upon us the more we see and the more we
become acquainted with the experience of others. An indi-
vidual who is generally successful in inducing the trance
endeavours to do so in a particular case, but siter repeated
trials, discovers that no effect is produced. A friend makes
the attempt with the same patient and succeeds in a few
minutes. The occurrence of even one such case, — ^but they
are innumerable, — should cause us to pause before we indis-
criminately take individuals from a crowded assembly to risk
the effect of a failure before the unscientific and the pre-
judiced.

Again, we consider it to be exceedingly indiscreet for
individuals who know nothing of their own anatomical struc-
ture, or of the laws governing their organism, to experiment
in a pubUc lecture room on a subject requiring so much care
and attention. Here is a branch of science referring to the
most extraordinary phenomena ever developed in man, but,
with the exception of a few bright examples, completely and
entirely in the hands of those whose previous education by no
means entitles them to become expounders of its doctrines.
Not that we find fault with any individual for investigating
the matter for himself. He has a perfect right to do so ;
indeed, we hold that he would be culpable if he did not do so.
We are acquainted with many individuals not members of the
medical profession who have devoted themselves to the most
rigid and untiring investigations ; but these are the men who

* ''Mr. Brookes having imprudently offered to operate on persons who might
be utter strangers to him, only stipulating that the operatees should have
large heads and black eyes, the company, consisting principally of females,
looked anxiously around for some possessing the desired qualifications. Two
young women, large-headed and black-eyed, and strangers to Mr. Brookes,
were at length selected, and successively subjected to the manipulations of
the lecturer ; but alas ! all was of no avail. They pertinaciously persisted
in keeping awake ; and after a couple of hours ineffectually spent in the
grimaces and manipulations of the operator, the perfect indifference of the
patients, and the entertainment of some of the audience, the disgust of
others, and the wearying of not a few, the lecturer was compelled to submit
to an unqualified failure, and to leave the stage amidst the hootings and
laughter of the company, who were not sparing in denunciations of the pre-
tended science of mesmerism as arrant humbug." — Weti Kent Guardian.
Feb. 11, 1843.


Digitized by


Google


Lecture Mania. 97

do not intrade themselves before the public, these are the real
promoters of science. What we contend for is the manifes-
tation of a little modesty and caution ; a greater love for
science and the promulgation of truth, than for the accu-
mulation of shillings, the worship of Mammom, and the
admiration of the multitude; a disinclination to promulgate
theories, and considerable hesitation before announcing facts ;
but above all, a cessation of public lectures, and the speedy
investment of the remedial application of the science in the
hands of those whose education, calling, and public responsi-
bility, evidently points them out as the party to wield this
new power.

The science of Cerebral Physiology for a long time suf-
fered, and indeed is stiU suffering, firom the same injudicious
interference. Individuals imagined because they could com-
prehend the leading principles of this science that they were
justified in delivering lectures and offering to develop charac-
ter. And at the present time, because men have witnessed
the method pursued to produce the trance, and know that they
tn common with all the rest of the race have the power to
produce it, immediately commence an expedition for the pur-
pose of gratifying their active acquisitiveness, but with veiy
little regard for the progress of truth or the advancement of
science.

We consider the medical profession responsible for this
state. They have conducted themselves more like the igno-
rant and illiterate than the members of a profession having
for its object the study of human nature and the alleviation
of the miseries of suffering humanity. Who ought to know
better than medical men the lamentable ignorance which
pervades all classes of physiologists regarding the laws go-
veming vital phenomena, and the little power they have, even
with their most powerful appliances, to check the progress of
disease, to remove pain, or to render evident the secret work-
ings of the most simple function 7 We blush for the members
of the medical profession ; we feel ourselves debased and
lowered by the mere recital of their sins of omission and
commission, and we regret that Great Britain should have
been made the theatre for the display of such moral dege-
neration, the development of so many passions and such
misdirected exertions. Really the conduct of some of the
** leading members'' (?) has been disgracefdl. One, Dr. James
Johnson, said at a meeting of the Medico-Chirurgical Society,
that a particular case was a case of gross imposition, and that
if he had witnessed the phenomena ^^ he would not believe the

VOL. !• H


Digitized by


Google


98 Lectwre Mania.

evidence of his own senses I /'^ Such conduct is worse than
the course pursued by the Ptolemists when Gralileo discovered
the four moons of Jupiter. '^ I will never/' said one, *' give
in to the four moons of this Italian firom Padua ; I will rather
die for it/' He would not look through the telescope to see
whether they existed or not ; but Dr. Johnson's conduct is
characterised by fer greater imbecility, for he declares if he
were to see the mesmeric phenomena, he would not believe
the evidence of his own senses I

Medical men in the most obstinate manner have refused
all investigation. They have used their power, and most
extensive this is, with all practitioners, to endeavour to destroy
the reputation of those individuals who have considered it
their duty to avow their belief in the truth of the mesmeric
phenomena. But a change is in progress. How are the
mighty fallen I or rather, how are the ignorant and prejudiced
enlightened ! Lately, at a public lecture in our own neighbour-
hood, we understand these gentlemen assembled in a strong
body, surrounded the patient brought forward for exhibition,
and seemed perfectly satisfied of the reality of the phenomena
produced, and thus before a large audience tacitly gave in
their adherence to the truth of that which they had been for
two or three years rabidly denouncing! Some expressed
their astonishment ; some, if we may judge from the appear-
ance of their features, were like the London physician,
apparently doubting the evidence of their own senses ; while
others far bolder, exclaimed, " O ! we always said there was
something in it, and we have refused to give an opinion till
the subject was completely investigated." Innocent imbeciles !
These of all men we pity. These are the pickers-up of the
crumbs their bolder brethren let fall ; men who are guided by
the opinions of their neighbours and never think for them-
selves, who stand aloof and ultimately locate themselves just
where the popular breath may waft them. They conduct
themselves just as cows in a field towards a recently erected
rubbing post. ^' First, they are suspicious and alarmed and
stare at a distance, by degrees they approach and make their
awkward attacks, and lastly they quietly put it to its use."

From some of our preceding observations it will be seen
that we do not approve of the statements contained in the
Phreno-Magnet. The editor is evidently a gentlemen by no
means qualified to enquire into this intricate question, and
we suspect that he will be the cause of considerable mischief
and will retard the progress of the science. He has published,
and avowed his belief in, the extraordinary doctrines and


Digitized by


Google


Lecture Mania. 99

assertions whicli have lately been advanced in America ; but
he has eclipsed the Yankees and out-Heroded Herod. Here
is a specimen of modest philosophical induction : —

'* Every day some new and glorious revelation is made to
those who are drawn by this principle, this clue through the
windings of nature ; and it was little more than a fortnight
ago that we discovered a most important class of mechanical
faculties, as to the existence of wluch heretofore we had never
received the slightest hint. Thus we are not only able to
prove the existence in the eye-brow of those organs previously
known to phrenologists, as well as those discovered by us last
year, but a great number of others, all equally characteristic
and conclusive in their manifestations. Besides a numerous
cluster of observant and other organs about the root of the
nose, we find in the eye-brows special faculties not only for
walking, riding, swimming, driving, sailing, rowing, climbing,
descending, aerostation, evolution, convolution, extension,
and contraction, for pulling, pushing, lifting, dropping,
various modes of gyration, leverage, &c., and in the region
of the outer angle of the eye-brow which has hitherto
been appropriated to Order, besides one for velocity, and
another for retrogressive motion, we find shooting, spearing,
crouching, springing, striking (or smiting, as with a battle-
axe), slinging, and other beUigerent faculties, all of which
have been atbdbuted by phrenologists to the combined and
modified impulses and actions of the comparatively few organs
marked on the common busts and charts ; and in the manifes-
tation of these functions, the various attitudes assumed by the
patients under operation, might be studied with advantage by
the sculptor and painter, or the scholar who would become
perfect in the exhibition of his physical powers.^'

Verily ! Mr. Hall, we do expect wonders firom you, but
we do not expect '^ in time to gather such a mass of informa-
tion on the various phenomena of human life as will render
our work acceptable to every lover of unsophisticated truth,
and to phrenologists in particular, by leading to a more
ample and accurate cerebnJ classification.''

We say, save us irom such unadulterated truth. Prom
all we have heard of Mr. Hall, and if we may judge from the
style of his lectures, we believe him to be a gentleman in-
fluenced by good motives ; but not having enjoyed the
advantage of a scientific education, he is evidently inclined
to follow the promptings of an imaginative brain, rather than
the calm, persevering, philosophiod course essential to the
cultivation of inductive science and so successfully pursued
by the great founder of Cerebnd Physiology.


Digitized by


Google


100 Lecture Mama.

We entreat Mr. Hall to pause. Let Iiim repeat his ex-
periments again and again, not upon one or two patients,
but upon dozens. Let him mark upon a few busts the locali-
ties of his presumed organs without any name attached, and
forward them to friends in distant parts of the country. Let
him ask them to forward to him the result of their experi-
ments, and we will wait with patience his candid report.

In the name of science we plead for a little respect, and
demand investigation conducted with some appearance of
philosophical spirit.

E. U. G. E.


NOTICES.

We hare reeeired from Dr. Elliotson an accoant of an aatonishiDg
Core of violent and Bingnlar periodical Insanity by Mesmerism, rejected by
the Lancet five years ago : and of the Core of Master Salmon of Epilepsy
by Mesmerism. But they arrired too late for insertion. We shall publish
them, and a group of cases of St Vitas's Dance remarkably cared by Mes-
merism, in our next number.

We had prepared reviews of T€$te and Toumtkend urn MetmerUm^ and of
the AmtTiam Pkremoiogiad Journal, but have no room.

In our next, we shall give Practical Instructions for Mesmerising.

We acknowledge the present of Mr. Edwin Lbb's " Animal MagnetUm/'

vy AH commuHicaiiont must be addrei$d io the Pnbliiker in London,


Digitized by


Google


THE ZOIST.

No. II.


JULY, 1843.


I. Owr Criminal Code,

In our first number we endeavoured to trace the progress of
Cerebral Physiology from its dawn in the land of the despot
to the period of its localization in our own country. We re-
ferred to the labours of the immortal Gall — ^to the opposition
offered to Spurzheim on his arrival here — ^to the rapid advance
made in the promulgation of our principles since that period
— ^to the temporizing spirit manifested by Cerebral Physiolo-
gists, when brought into contact with popular and powerful
prejudices — ^to the benefit which must accrue to the great
course of humanity when our science is practically studied
and practically applied — and we endeavoured by the removal
of all mystery, and by a determination to state boldly, re-
gardless of individual consequences, our facts, and the infer-
ences firom the facts, to clear away difficulties and to infuse
a more healthy tone of thought into our philosophy.

We are now about to offer a few remarks on Criminal
Legislation.

Hitherto, in the investigation of a Criminal Code, Cerebral
Physiologists have only studied the cerebral formation of the
criminal. From the innumerable facts in their possession,
they have been enabled to indicate the cause of the criminal
tendency, and indisputably to demonstrate the necessity of
considering the criminal a moral patient. We now require
a more extended appUcation of our facts. We now want the
application of these facts to the development of the philosophy
of our science, which will necessitate the adoption of legisla-
torial enactments for the purpose of rescuing from the halter
diseased or mal-formed brains, and thus recognizing one of

VOL. I. I


Digitized by


Google


102 Our Criminal Code.

the most important truths we can become familiar with —
that mar^s actions necessarily result from Ms organic constitu-
tion and the circumstances surrounding Mm at any given period.

The carrying out a reform in our criminal jurisprudence,
taking the axiom just enunciated as the basis of the change,
will be in our opinion the first attempt to apply the philosophy
twight us by the science of Cerebral Physiology. We can
quite understand the opposition this proposition will meet
with, and the difficulties which will be raised on all sides for
the purpose of retarding its adoption. We shall hear it said
— ^' If such principles are entertained there will be an end to
all morality, and there will no longer be safety for any indi-
vidual.^^ Parties holding these opinions sadly misunderstand
man^s nature. They look upon the great mass of mankind as
prone to evil, and having a destructive tendency. They con-
sider the punishment of a criminal absolutely necessary as a
preventive measure, and essential to the preservation of the
social compact. We diflfer completely from these views. We
consider Uiat the present disregard of the education and
physical comfort of the masses, on the part of Government ;
and the total neglect, resulting from ignorance, of the most
common facts connected with the laws of hereditary descent,
on the part of the whole of our population, are the main
causes producing a deterioration in the cerebral structure of
a family, and the occasional production amongst them id one
or more individuals having an organism so ill-balanced
that under peculiar circumstances tiiey resort to a criminal
course of conduct. Consider the destitution and ignorance
of the great mass of our countrymen. Large numbers are
incapable of obtaining the nourishment necessary for the deve-
lopment of their organisms, and quite incapable of presenting
to their offspring even the rudiments of moral and intellectutJ
education. Consider the thousands advancing year after year
to maturity who have never enjoyed the opportunity of
instruction in the great principles of truth and honesty.
From this uncultivated mass how many offenders may not be
furnished?

With our present knowledge, when we look back, it does
appear strange that society should have been so long occupied
in punishing men, instead of searching after the causes of
criminal actions. It does appear strange that we should now
be compelled to reason on this subject, when the facts which
furnish us with our arguments have been accumulating for
the last fifty years. It does appear strange that the judge
and the jury should investigate all the circumstances occur-
ing during a long course of criminal conduct, unanimously


Digitized by


Google


Oitr Crimmal Code. 108

express their abhorrence of the particular crime for which the
poMoer is arndgiied; by retuming a verdict which necessarily
consigns him to the gibbet, and yet never ask themselves the
question, why does Ais man differ from ns ? Why did this
man, under the dronmstances, commit a crime, to which,
imder similar circumstances, we should not have been
prompted ? The jury, like so many automata, and the judge
representing the motive-power to put them into action, think
their duty is performed when the evidence has been heard
sad the sentence has been passed. ISie poor wretch is con-
demned. He is visited by philanthropic but ignorant indivi-
dnab who exhort him to repent, but still make no investi-
gation into the causes constituting the difference between the
prisoner and themselves. He is executed; and thousands
look on, yelling and hooting, but never think of the before-
mentioned questions. In this manner we have proceeded till
the present hour, and, if Cerebral Phjrsiologists do not exert
themselves, thus we shall continue. Men are deplorably
ignorant of the most common truths — ^they are bom, nur-
tored^ and continue to exist, enveloped in the deepest igno-
nnee and the most selfish indifference.

Amongst Cerebral Physiologists of all shades of belief,
from the rational and inductive philosopher, or the myste-
rious and spiritual speculator, but one opinion exists regard-
ing the unsatis£Eu;tory state of our Criminal Code. During
the last three years several distressing cases have called forth
an expression of opinion, demonstrating the lamentable
ignorance of our population on the cause of crime, and the
absurd notions entertained by our legislators regarding the
means to suppress it. On the present occasion we shall con-
fine oar observations to the consideration of the crime of
murder, and the usual result of a conviction — ^the punish-
ment of death. For several years the utility of capital
pmnshment has been questioned. It is now almost entirely
confined to crimes against life, and we would advocate the jus-
tice of abolishing it here also. Lately, efforts in this direction
have been desigi^oted ''the work of morbid humanity.'' How
ignorant of human nature must be the author of such an
assertion ! The punishment of death is one of the blots
whidi still characterises our semi-cwilized condUion. The
erecting of a scaffold marks the little progress made in
attempts to improve and reform man — ^proclaims that our
legidators consider it much more efficacious and expeditious
to crush and destroy than to attempt to remodel. We ask
what moral right has a Government to destroy an individual
for committing a crime, when that Government entirety

i2


Digitized by


Google


104 Ow Criminal Code,

neglects the physical growth and the moral and intellectual
education of the people ? Are heings, because they follow the
dictates of a malformed and maltrained brain^ to be hunted
down like tigers in an Indian jungle? These beasts are
prompted by their organisms to shed blood indiscriminately
and continually^ and in self defence man is compelled to
destroy them. But is man himself no better worth? A
tooth for a tooth ! Blood for blood ! Are these the cries
which should emanate from a civilized land? How humanized
and refined must be that civilization when we neglect the
brain-culture of our population, and punish individuals for
actions the necessary result of that neglect ! How well un-
derstood man^s nature, when the only course pursued is
punishment in minor offences, and destruction in those of a
graver character ! A watch or a steam-engine might be de-
stroyed upon the same principle for any irregularity in
their movements. But such a course would be considered
irrational. The watchmaker and the engineer, after great
practical experience, overcome all their difficulties and perfect
their workmanship. They understand the laws governing
the several movements and their several combinations. Man,
capable of being moulded and perfected with equal certainty
if his nature were studied, is neglected — is punished for com-
mitting an action to the performance of which he was
prompted by his nature; and which nature, although his
rulers think it might be expedient to destroy, they have con-
sidered it unworthy to improve.

We dislike half measures. We take not our ground on
the inexpediency of retaining the punishment of death in our
penal code, but we proclaim the immorality and injustice of
such a proceeding. It is immoral, because it is our duty to
endeavour to reform and improve our brother, and not to
destroy him. It is unjust, because we can prevent him fi*om
committing crimes by adopting other measures, and because
we have no right to destroy a being who is acting according
to organic laws, in other words, whose actions are necessary.
On what ground is it continued ? It is not beneficial to the
criminal, for he is destroyed. Neither is it beneficial to those
who have not committed crimes. The latter may be divided
into two classes : one, composed of beings who are '' a law
unto themselves,'^ and who, under the ordinary temptations
attending their career, never commit what may be called a
criminal action ; the other, composed of beings who, from
an ill-balanced brain and the addition too frequently of most
unfavorable external circumstances, are disposed to recognize
no law, but to have recourse to force and cunning upon all oc-


Digitized by


Google


Our Criminal Code. 105

casions and adopt proceedings suggested to them by their
organism, and for which society, ignorant of the natural laws,
condemns to various kinds of punishment, and frequently to
the scaffold. What good is effected by such a course ? An exe-
cution excites no feeling of terror amongst those predisposed
to commit a crime similar to that for which the unfortunate
being is suffering. The security of the social state is not
incr^sed. Man is not to be reclaimed by exciting his fears ;
— ^the hypocrite may become more hypocritical, and the cow-
ard and deceiver more slavish and wily, but surely such a
consummation is not to be desired ; this certainly is not the
aim of judicious legislation. Destroy the sinner, and you
destroy the tendency to sin in his neighbour ! Torture and
kill an individual in the presence of assembled thousands,
and affectionately tell them to behold his agonies, and to
reap moral instruction ! Can greater ignorance be mani-
fested ? Yet this is the course pursued in civilized Britain.
Does the specimen of legalized destructiveness, exhibited by
an execution, excite the moral organs in those witnessing it ?
Quite the reverse; it is a direct stimulant to the animal
oi^ans. How absurd then the notion of elevating and im-
proving man by presenting to his notice the destruction of
the most unfortunate, pitiable, and degraded specimens of
his species. Ferocity and barbarian ruthlessness still charac-
terize our criminal law. Ignorance and indifference are still
personified on the judicial bench, for there physiological
science is not studied, and its moral promptings are uncared
for.

Individuals whose cerebral organism is analogous to that
of the executed criminal are affected in no other way than
this, — ^they feel an inveterate hatred against those whose evi-
dence at the trial secured the condemnation, and against
those who are now engaged in carrying out the mechanical
process of destroying the pitiable object, — ^they give forth
their curses, loud, deep and lasting : and yet these are the
very individuals to whom this last act of the judicial murder
ia to act as an example and a warning ! So far fix)m supposing
that an execution exercises a beneficial influence, we think
the exhibition a most demoralizing and brutalizing agent.
The London police could enumerate a few of the disgusting
scenes which take place in the front of Newgate, — not con-
fined, be it remembered, to the low, vulgar, and unrefined,
but indulged in by those who pride themselves on their birth,
station, and power. Seats at windows and on roofs are hired
for the occasion, — thousands assemble at day-light to secure
" a good sight,''-T-the juvenile and the aged pickpocket arc


Digitized by


Google


106 Ow Criminal Code.

busied at their avocations^ — \3ie ribald jests and the low and
ynlgar slang of the unedncated are heard throughout the
crowd, and even the reporters for the press ask for the last
word, gaze to catch the last look, and lament their ill-luck
if deprived of the opportunity to ascertain whether the poor
wretch struggled much.* Others, who would be unable to
witness the execution, obtain a private interview — ^visit the
condemned cell — ^Usten to the condemned sermon— and to
render the sight more interesting and attractive, the prisoner
upon a late occasion was dressed in his own apparel I Need
we enumerate other instances of this depraved appetite f At
Kirkdalc, in the month of May last, there were two executions.
A local paper thus describes the scene : — ^"He roads to and
from the place of execution were densely crowded, and firom the
number of persons in vehicles of every description, it resembled
a visit to the race course on some attractive occasion. The
number present we have heard variously estimated at from
20 to 80,000.'^ Some years ago our morbid curiosity prompted
us to witness the execution of a young soldi^ for the murder
of his superior officer. There were some extenuating circum-
stances, but into these it is not necessary to enter, we merely
wish to direct attention to the proceedings at the moment.
When the poor creature appeared upon the scaffold, the im-
mense crowd, which had exhibited signs of considerable irri-
tation, was instantly stilled, — the silence lasted during the
whole of the sad preparations, and even when the drop fell
nothing was heard but the suppressed shudder ; and which,
emanating from the assembled thousands, was very distinctly
and impressively audible. The removal of the body was the
signal for the concluding scene. ISie moment the hangman
made his appearance he was assailed with the most terrific
yells ; hundreds of stones were thrown at him, and he was
obliged to retreat as expeditiously as possible, protected by
the officers, but assaulted with every missile which an enraged
and disgusted mob could obtain. What then was gained by
this procedure? In the cant of the day, '' offended justice
was satisfied, and an example was afforded to evil doers and
those who allow! their passions to gain an ascendancy I''
Our belief is that the executioner would have been seriously
injured and perhaps murdered, if he had not been protected
by the judicial officers. Here then were passions running

* ^' Owing to the pressure of a namber of persons on the wooden bridge
leading to the scaffold, we were unable to ascertain whether they struggled
much, but we were subsequently informed that the struggles of the female
were soon over, while those of tha male were much more severe.''^ Ltoerpoo/
CknmicU, What important and instructife information !


Digitized by


Google


Our Criminal Code. 107

riot at the foot of the scaffold^ and on the spot whore but one
hour had elapsed since a fellow-creature had been sacrificed
for the self-same crime, only differing in degree. Here not
one or two, but hundreds, contended for the opportunity to
inflict an injury and to allow their passions to gain an ascen-
dancy. And yet we are told that it is necessary to continue
the punishment of death for the sake of example, — ^that it is
a warning and a terror to all men, and that without it society
could not be efficiently protected !

It may be asked, if this punishment is abolished, what
do you propose to substitute ? On what principles do you
intend to govern men and to punish offenders ? Individuals
who have committed actions which are opposed to the safety
and stability of the social compact, should be confined; not
for the purpose of punishment, but solely with the object of
reformation. A Government firaming laws for the regulation
and control <^ a people should have the power to seclude
those individuals who break these laws ; and, during the se-
clusion, those measures should be adapted most calculated to
enable the offender to recover and retain Ids lost station in
society. Those who have committed crimes against life, or
those whose actions and cerebral conformation prove them to
be incapable of free intercourse with their neighbours with-
out the comndttal of crime, should be confined for life, and
be considered moral patients, more fitted for the wards of a
moral infirmary, than forthe treadmill, the solitary cell, or the
scaffold; they should be considered as beings the victims of
an orgamsm over the formation of which they had no con-
trol, and with the animal promptings of which they had not
sufiScient power to contend. If it is urged that there are
beings incapable of being influenced in any other way than
by ti^e constant dread of punishment, we deny the right to
make such a statement. When, where, or by what party
has the attempt been made ? Where is the instructor of
youth who understands the nature of the being he is training?
Where is the gaoler or governor of a reformitory who recog-
nizes the causes which produce criminal actions, or the means
to be used to remove the tendency ? Where is the legislator
who does not believe that man is a compound being — spirit
and matter — and that the former is the one thing needful,
the cause of all his actions, and yet capable of being con-
trolled by him for the purpose of mod^ying his actions?
Every writer on the subject is governed by tibe dogmas he
may have imbibed in his youth ; he commences the investiga-
tion by believing and asserting that man by nature is despe-
rately wicked, — ^that by his own strength he can do no good


Digitized by


Google


108 Our Criminal Code.

things — and yet supports a system of punishment for crimes
whidi he had just declared of necessity flow out of his cor-
rupt nature. Such is and ever will be the course pursued by
the teachers of mankind till they have correct principles to
guide them^ — ^till they recognize those great ^ndamental^
natural laws^ appertaining to man equsdly with all other
animals.

We do not think we can illustrate our views more forcibly
than by directing attention to the accompanying lithographs^
presenting a side and front view of Greenacre, and, for con-
trast, a side view of Oberlin, the Swiss pastor, who foimd the
people of the five villages of his parish, idle, poor, filthy,
ignorant, and licentious, and led them by imremitting labor
to industry, competency, cleanliness,* knowledge, virtue, and
happiness, with a firont view of the President Jeanmn, who
was a model of intellect, greatness of mind, benevolence,
justice, and every other virtue, so that his master, Henri
Quatre, whose minister he was for seven and twenty years,
always called him " the good man.*'*

A man with a superior cerebral formation cannot under-
stand the brutal craving which would prompt another to
take away the life of his neighbour for a few pounds. Never-
theless Greenacre did this. What is temptation to one man
is not to another. This man's cerebral formation was so bad,
differed so much from even the worst of his countrymen, that
we do not know a head more calculated to convince the sin-
cere seeker after facts, or more sadly proclaiming the ignorance
which still permits our sanguinary laws to be enforced. What
subject can be more interesting, more productive of morality,
than an enqidry into the causes producing such a malforma-
tion ? One glance at the outline of this head is sufficient to
convince us that the superior faculties, the peculiar charac-
teristics of humanity, — ^those which elevate the man above
the mere brute, are lamentably deficient. The brain was
the brain of a brute, with but the mere shadow of huma-
nity added to it. Ought such a being to be considered
amenable to those laws which take away life ? Ought he to
be amenable to any laws, except that most important one
which should reign paramount in every community, giving
the power to seclude such organisms, to remove such beings
from temptation, and thus prevent the possibility of crime
being committed ? But then the liberty of the subject ! — The
adoption of all means to promote the general good and safety
is the only means to ensure true liberty. To allow such a

* See Dr. Spurzheim's Phrenology in connexion with the study qf Physiog-
nomy, 1826.


Digitized by


Google


Our Criminal Code. 109

being to range uncontrolled — to place himself in any situa-
tion most congenial to his low and depraved appetites — ^to
continue a career of the grossest sensuality and to seek his
victims from amongst the ignorant and unsuspecting^ — if to
allow such a being to do this be consistent with the liberty of
the subject^' then we say away with such a dangerous and
treacherous liberty. What reason — ^what benevolence — ^what
justice — what morality can there be in such a course ? Can
any man believe otherwise than that Greenacre was the vic-
tim of his organism ? It would be as easy and profitable to
discourse with a blind man on the decomposition of a ray of
light by the aid of the prism^ as to speak of moral exceUence
and the pleasures arising from the gratification of the higher
faculties to a being with such an organism.

The foUowing case is by no means an uncommon one. A
boy bom of parents immersed in the most squalid misery,
received no education, but was allowed to associate with idle
and dissolute companions during the whole period of child-
hood. His brain was very far firom even an approach to the
normal standard. His organism and the unfavourable exter-
nal circumstances surrounding him led the poor creature to
commit a series of petty thefts. He became bolder and more
reckless as he advanced in age, and ultimately committed a
buiglary for which he was transported for life. During the
period of his imprisonment he associated with the most vicious
and depraved characters. The same occurred when he was
removed to the hulks and during his voyage to New South
Wales. A short time after his arrival in the penal settlement,
he committed some fault for which he expected to receive
punishment. To avoid this he attempted to escape, but after a
short period he was captured and banished to Norfolk Island.
From this place he attempted to escape, was recaptured, and
received several hundred lashes. Goaded by ill-usage and
the cruelties inflicted on him, in a fit of passion he killed his
guard, and for this he was executed. Here then is another
instance of a being the victim of his organism and the bar-
barous neglect of his rulers. The coronal and anterior re-
gions of lus brain were neither developed nor trained suffi-
ciently to regulate his conduct, and he followed the dictates
of the animfd region. In fact, he was comparatively a moral
idiot, and, as Gall remarked, such a being is placed **%n
a worse position for self-government than a well-organized
brute" In his youth his parents could not protect him,
and therefore he should have been protected by the Govern-
ment. After his first oflence, with such an organism, he
should have been secluded for several years, carefully edu-


Digitized by


Google


110 Our Criminal Code.

cated^ and every attempt made to remedy, as far as the
organic laws would permit, the malformation of the coronal
and anterior regions of the brain. If, after every care and
every exertion, it was found utterly impossible to permit him
to resume his intercourse with society, he should have been
secluded for life ; and not through the ignorance of his rulers
allowed to become the sport of circumstances against which
he could not contend, and the victim of an organism over the
(NTginal formation of which he exercised no influence. This
is the only proper course, but how different firom that uni-
versally pursued! However, we feel convinced that more
enlightened and benevolent views will gain an ascendancy;
and we would wish to stimulate cerebral physiologists to pro-
mulgate with increasing energy their doctrines, and thus
force upon the legislature, through the mediimi of public
opinion, the adoption of a more rational and humane system
of judicature. " Let not England forget her precedence of
teaching nations how to live.^' Let the British nation pre-
sent to the world the example in this great cause. Let the
people which rose as one man, and, in (^position to the inte-
rested and selfish, declared that slavery in their dominion
should cease at once and for ever, — ^let them now with the
same power and with the same philanthropic impulse declare
that tiie rights of those who are the shtves of their organimn
shall be protected, — ^that those beings who are now dragging
out a miserable existence scorned, buffeted, and detested,
shall be henceforth treated with kindness and justice, — ^that
they shall be considered as children requiring education in
their own country, and not transported to distant climes and
to distant and uninterested taskmasters, — ^that the look of
scorn and detestation shall be exchanged for the look of pity
and commiseration, and one effort made to treat the criminal
on some other principle than that of punishment and annihi-
lation.

Lito the consideration of this subject we shall firequentiy
enter : we shall continue to rdterate our opinions till the
cause for our labour is removed ; and we call upon cerebral
physiologists, we entreat them, to assist us in our endeavours
to remove this stain from our countiT, and with the aid of
their science to put forth a helping hand to those who are
prevented from hdping themselves.

L. £. G. £.


Digitized by


Google


( 111 )

II. On the Pathology qf Imanity. By Dr. Davey, of the
Hanwell Lunatic Asylum.

From time to time the student of pathology has been
tortured with the most contradictory opinions respecting the
real nature of insanity^ as revealed by structural alterations
of the brain and its membranes. Whilst one authority has
declared that the causes of diseased cerebration must be
sought in certain abnormal conditions of the membranes of
the bndn^* others have asserted that the cerebral mass alone
is the seat of the disease^f and Jaoobi gives it as his con-
viction that madness is invariably associated with and de-
pendent on chronic visceral inflammation. The complications
of insanity with paralysis^ &c.^ have been treated of in the
same contradictory manner. Thus, Calmeil on the one side
asserts that the paraljrsis of the insane is the effect of an
inflammation of the cmeritious substance of the brain ; and
Foville on the other side as positively declares that morbid
changes in the cortical substance are directly connected with
intellectual derangement, and in the white substance with
disorders in the motioe powers.

There can be no doubt that these contradictory state-
ments are dependent on the circumstance that such patho-
logical changes as those above enumerated were considered
rather in the light of causes than effects or accidental
OHnplications : and if the question is viewed in this light,
it is evident that the opimons of an individual pathologist
will be the result of the more permanent oi^anic changes he
may meet with in his researches. That the various diseased
appearances of the brain and membranes met with in the
examinati(m of those who have died insane are, as a general
rule, the mere effects of the disease, and not its first cause,
I trust to make sufficiently obvious as I proceed j at the same
time admitting that the exceptions are fi^uent. "v

In pursuing an investigaticm into the pathology of in-
sanity, it is indispensable lliat we do not limit our attention
to the brain and its membranes. I have met with many
cases in which insanity has been the consequence only of a
disease of the cranial bones. In one case, the petrous por-
tion of the temporal bone on the right side was in a state of
caries ; and, as might be expected, the membranes and even
the brain itself in contiguity with it presented very evident
marks of encreased vascularity. There was some purulent
effusion in the same situation. In another, the cause of the
diseased cerebration was a carious state of the body of the

* M. Baylc. t M. Calmeil and M. Ecorget.

Digitized by VjOOQIC


112 Dr. Dcuvey on the

sphenoid bonc^ which had been completely destroyed. In a
third case, the middle fossa of the base of the cranium was
occupied by an irregular and diffused ossific deposit. I have
seen the Crista Galli of the ethmoid bone so prolonged as to
force its way a considerable distance into the anterior part of
the cerebral hemisphere. In three different instances, por-
tions of the internal table of the calvarium were entirely
removed by ulcerative absorption, and the cavities thus
formed were filled by a semi-fluid substance, evidently se-
creted by the dura mater. In some cases, the skull itself is
diseased, being very much thickened, and as it were hyper-
trophied. This abnormal condition of the bony parietes
may be either partial, or it may involve the whole cranium ;
in such instances, the grooves for the transmission of the
vessels were unusually deep, and the internal portion of the
inner table, in contact with the dura mater, presented an
unusually rough appearance, as if more or less worm eaten.
The convolutions appeared shrunken, and the dura mater
loose and uneven.

In cases of the kind above narrated, where the bones of
the head are found altered from their normal condition, there
can be very little doubt of the real nature of the disease and
of its cause. A correct knowledge of the history of the
patient will generally afford, under all circumstances, very
fair criteria to discriminate the cause from the effect. If
symptoms of insanity occur in the course of acute febrile
diseases, or rheumatism ; or succeed to a blow on the head ;
or constitute the ordinary accompaniment of spontaneous
inflammation of the brain or membranes, we have reason to
infer the diseased cerebration to be exclusively the imme-
diate effect of a primary abnormal and inflammatory condi-
tion of the brain or its membranes. Whereas if the cause
of insanity be what is called moral, if it be produced by
fright, grief, or anger, I am disposed to regard the ordinary
disorganizations, if any, both of the brain and membranes,
either as the effects of a pre-existing cause, or perhaps an
accidental complication. The same reasoning applies to those
cases of insanity which are symptomatic of disease or derange-
ment of distant organs.

Such being the view taken of the question, we are no
longer at a loss to appreciate the many sources of error, so
plainly manifest in the dicta of those whose names have been
already mentioned.

It must not be supposed from the preceding observations
that I infer that deranged cerebration, to speak generally,
can exist without an alteration of the brain, or " unhealthy


Digitized by


Google


Pathology of Insanity, 113

action of a portion of matter/' I believe with Dr. Engledue^
" that the cause of insanity is not to be sought for in the
general appearances presented by the brain and its mem-
branes; but, the healthy ultimate structure of each indi-
vidual portion being ascertained, the cause of the peculiar
form of insanity must be sought in the aberration from the
normal standard of a particular portion or portions of bramy

No one can doubt that every single thought and feeling
is associated with certain physical and molecular changes in
some part or parts of the brain ; and, if so, every case of
insanity, however slight and temporary, must consist of an
abnormal action of a portion of the ultimate structure, and
this, continuing to increase in intensity and extent, so affects
the vascular condition of the brain and its membranes that
to it at length we become indebted for the more palpable
and demonstrable pathological conditions already spoken of.
The varieties and innumerable modifications of alteined struc-
ture, as regards locality, &c. &c., are of course no less dis-
similar than the several indications of insanity or abnormal
cerebration: and therefore we are enabled to account, as
before mentioned, not only for the contradictory opinions
already specified, but also for the association of similar pa-
thological appearances, whether of the brain or membranes,
with very opposite manifestations of the disease.

In the examination of the heads of the insane, by far
the majority of cases, whatever form of disease may have
existed, whether mania, melancholia or dementia, &c., and
complicated or not with epilepsy or paralysis, present very
evident changes of the membranes, and particularly of the
arachnoid, which is spotted more or less with opacities, and
occasionally even presents an appearance like an entire sheet
of tendon. In such instances it is unusually thick : I once
saw it of a thickness equal to that of chamois leather. There
is generally more or less serous effusion beneath the arach-
noid, which is sometimes thick and slightly turbid, like
gum water. The existence of many ounces of serous fluid
between the dura mater and arachnoid, or, more properly
speaking, in the sac of the last-named membrane, is not
unfrequently met with. In such cases, the surface of the
convolutions is shrunken, and the ventricles distended. In
very rare instances, the whole of the membranes will be
firmly and inseparably united into one sheet ; in others, the
adhesion is confined to a part only of the surface of the
brain ; and I know of two instances where this same morbid
appearance was restricted to the organs of veneration, — ^in
these there was diseased cerebration.


Digitized by


Google


114 Dr. Davey on the

Occasionally the pia mater is found adherent to the sur-
face of the couTolutions. This morbid appearance is usually
regarded as one (ji the results of inflammaticm^ and the exist-
ence of the paraljrsis o£ the insane is ascribed by Calmeil to
it^ or to a ramollissement of the grey or cortical substance in
contact with the pia mater. That both these appearances are
the effects (ji inflammatory action there can be little doubt :
but^ inasmuch as the parafysis of the insane is not necessarily
an accompaniment of eitiier of such physical conditions^ and
since, moreover, they are sometimes met with in connexion with
pure mania, melancholia, Sec., I must indeed be excused for
differing in opinion from even so great an authority as Calmeil.

So &r as colour and consistence are concerned, the brain
of course presents every possible variety. It is sometimes
hard, at other times very soft; and its consistence will be
found different in various places : thus the commissures may
be excessively soft, whilst the white substance generdUy may
be firm, and vice versa. The cortical or grey substance is
sometimes softer, at other times harder, than the medullary
or white substance. Whilst on the one hand a hardness
of the medullary part of the brain, consisting in a morbid
adhesion of the cerebral fibres to each other, has been re-
garded by Foville as the cause of paralysis; on the other.
Dr. Prichard believes that a softness of the cortical substance
belongs to cases of the last degree of dementia, with general
paralysis and marasmus, and that then ^^its colour it more
BROWN than usual." Mr. Solly, however, declares that de-
mentia and melancholia are invariably attended by a light
colour of the cortical substance, and that in mania it is of a
dark plum colour. It certainly does appear strange that both
Foville and Mr. Solly should have neglected to qualify their
assertions. That the paralysis of the insane is sometimes
seen in connexion with palpable and demonstrable hardness
of the medullary substance of the brain is most certain (I met
with a well marked case of the kind some ten days since) ;
yet are exceptions neither few nor far between. A morbid
softness of the motor tract would of course give rise to the
same symptoms, and so I have found it. Analogous objec-
tions are applicable to the assertion of Dr. Prichard. I have
notes by Dr. ConoUy of the post mortem examination of
M. A., a patient of the Hanwell Asylum, who died nearly
two years since, during a paroxysm of recurrent mania, in
whom the " cineritioue substance^' was generally very pale."
1 have met with others. So &r as the colour of this sub-
stance is concerned, I most frequently find it darker coloured
in melancholia and dementia than in cases of insanity at-


Digitized by


Google


Pathology of Insanity, . 115

tended with excitement; and this is in strict accordance
with the opinion of Dr. Prichard. Symptoms of acute
mania which Mr. SoUy^ as above explained^ connects with a
dark or plum colour of the grey substance^ Foville^ it seems^
associates with '^ a most intense redness^ approaching to that
of erysipelas/^ of the same tissue. In one well marked
case of melancholia and dementia;, I found the cineritious or
grey substance apparently absorbed in many places^ leaving
only a mere streak of neurine on the surface of the white sub-
stance of the brain. Where this change had not taken place
it presented a very dark colour — ^that of very deep mahogany.

That the spontaneous occurrence of any one of the
several morbid phenomena above mentioned would prove a
sufficient cause of insanity is most true; and that such is
s(Hnetimes the case there can be no doubt. What we would
contend for is^ that^ in the majority of instances where the
cause of the disease is not a physical injury^ the diseased ap-
pearances here considered are the effects only of a pre-exist-
ing cause, which is indicated by deranged cerebration, and
consists in an aberration from the normal standard of the
uUknate structure of some portion or portions of the cerebral
mass. This being the case, we readily understand why it is
so constantly asserted that, in the examination of the brains
of the insane, no morbid appearances were detected; and I
have certainly met with a few cases, where, with our present
means of investigation, it has been impossible to spedfy any
change from the normal condition. About six weeks since I
made a vexy particular examination of the brain of a female pa-
tient^ who nad been insane for a period of eighteen years; and
in whom I could not detect the slightest abnormal appearance.

I am disposed to regard insanity as of two kinds — the one
dependent on nervous irritation of the brain^ and the other on
inflammation. The very common indications of the existence
of past or present inflammatory action of the brain or mem-
branes, I consider a proof of not only the occasional associa-
tion of diseased cerebration with inflammation, as its imme-
diate cause ; but also of the frequent occurrence of such in
the progress of insanity, — ^that is, of that form of the disease
consequent on " nervous irritation.'^

The patients in Hanwell are very liable to attacks of cere-
bral and meningeal inflammation^ and which not unfre-
quently prove the immediate cause of death. In such cases
the general symptoms which indicate the existence of inflam-
matory disease, assume the same asthenic character, which
belongs to peripneumonia, enteritis, erysipelas, &c. &c., when
occurring in nervous and irritable subjects. Upon the same


Digitized by


Google


116 Dr, Davey on the

principle that such persons are more liable to the more ordi-
nary derangements of the general healthy of which chronic
inflammatory diseases form a great part ; so are the insane
predisposed to the occurrence of cerebral and meningeal
inflammation, and hence the ordinary appearances observed
after death. The origin and progress of many cases of in-
sanity are suflScient to prove tins position. Suppose, for the
sake of illustration, that an individual of deUcate fibre is
suddenly frightened by some cause or other, and, instead of
her recovering from the consequences of alarm, they continue
vrith aggravated severity. The faintest sound which reaches
her ear is construed into a renewal of the first cause of her deep
affliction ; the gentlest wind which may happen to blow seems
to threaten her yet more sorely. Every surrounding object
at length appears tinctured with the cause of her misery;
every effort of herself and friends to shake off the horrid in-
cubus is vain. Time rolls on only to shew how much she is
the instrument of her involuntary feelings. At length her judg-
ment is betrayed into acquiescense. She no longer merely
feels her sufferings, but she seeks a cause for them, which
shall not only excuse them to herself, but be in strict har-
mony with her predominant feelings, and thus, in passing
from bad to worse, she at length realizes the presise condition
of one labouring under acute mania.

The deranged cerebration is in such a case necessarily the
effect of an irritation of the ultimate fibrous structure of
the brain, and which must be regarded as the consequence
of the application, through the medium of the external
senses, of a stimulus so intense as to prove incompatible
with the healthy physical capacities of the organ. That a
similar abnormal effect results from the application of a sti-
mulus very much less concentrated, so to speak, if it be per-
manent, is quite certain. If we imagine an individual labour-
ing under intense avarice, grief, or pride, it would follow
that the increasing physical action of the same portion or
portions of cerebral substance would tend to the development
of such a state of susceptibility and irritation of the parts
concerned that at length the volition would become sus-
pended ; or, in other words, the morbid action would acquire
so great a supremacy as to subjugate every other feeling and
propensity, and which of course must be, as above asserted,
incompatible with the healthy physical capacities of the brain.
Under such circumstances, the cerebrum may be compared to
any ordinary muscle which from long use has acquired the
habit of executing a certain movement involuntarily, although
perhaps it may be painful or disagreeable. If such an abnor-


Digitized by


Google


Pathology of Insanity, 117

mal state of the cerebral mass remains unrelieved^ nothing is
more likely than the occurrence of inflammation of the brain
and its membranes more or less insidious^ and which pro-
gressing would necessarily induce those palpable disorgani-
sations of structure, effusions, &c., so generally observed.
Such, I repeat are generally the effects of diseased cerebra-
tion, and not its first cause.

In this light, then, it is seen that I consider insanity to
be essentiaUy a nervous disease, and the consequence of an
irritation of the ultimate structure of the brain, consisting
in a neuralgia of the sensory fibres. Insanity, like other
nervous diseases, when not dependent on local inflammatory
action, which is not unfrequently the case, is invariably ag-
gravated by general bleeding. The exceptions to this rule
are in the cases consequent on meningeal or cerebral inflam-
mation, whether or not dependent on local injury. What
very materially confirms this position, is the fact that the
most violent forms of furious mania most commonly occur in
persons of weak and delicate fibre and great susceptibility.
I frequently witness the most urgent symptoms of acute in-
sanity in combination with a small and feeble and quick pulse,
cold skin, and a retracted and anxious coimtenance. Sec.
Neuralgic and nervous diseases generally are for the most
part associated with similar constitutional symptoms. And,
moreover, the most appropriate and successful treatment, in
both instances, consists in the admini3tration of sedatives,
with a generous diet ; and the employment of those various
means, calculated to improve the general health. Many
cases of violent mania are cured in Hanwell by the adminis-
tration of wine and steel. I mention this of course only in
support of the pathological views.

It may be added that the morbid appearances noticed in
those who have died of insanity, for the most part, hold the
same relation to each other that those common to asthma,
hooping cough, and angina pectoris do to these several dis-
eases respectively. I may almost say of abnormal cerebra-
tion what Laennec and others have said of asthma, viz. :
that no lesions sufficient to account for the phenomena of un-
complicated asthma have been hitherto detected. That such
however exist, cannot be doubted. The microscope is our
only hope, aided of course by a correct acquaintance with
the normal physical condition of the ultimate structures con-
cerned. The analogy between the above-mentioned diseases
does not end here, for not only are very similar remedial
means applicable to them all, both in their complicated and
uncomplicated states, but in each one the pathologist not un-
vol. I. K


Digitized by


Google


118 Dr. Davey on the

frequently verifies the following words of an eminent living
writer, — " changes may take place in the nervous system not
only sufficient to cause the most acute disease, but even to
subvert life, without being so gross as to be demonstrable to
the senses/* If, however, these same ^^ changes*^ are not
sufficiently intense to destroy the life of the individual, the
chances are they become eventually succeeded by others of a
very palpable and demonstrable nature, which are not only
sufficient in themselves to very seriously impair the healthy
function of the part or parts concerned, but, existing as they
may be presumed to do in common with their first cause,
necessarily aggravate all the symtoms of disease. Among
the insane this precise state of things progressively robs the
whole nervous system of its power, and as a consequence
every vital function becomes more and more impeded and en-
feebled and the suflfering party is left only to vegetate and die.
The celebrated Pinel, says Dr. Millingen, clearly declares
that, in the examination of the brains of the insane, he never
met with any other appearances within the cavity of the
skull than are observable in opening the bodies of persons
who have died of apoplexy, epilepsy, nervous fevers, and
convulsions. Haslam, whose experience in this matter was
also very great, asserts that nothing decisive can be obtained
in reference to insanity from any variations of appearance
that have hitherto been detected in the brain. The opinions
of Pinel and Haslam are confirmed by Esquirol in these
words. He says, " The inspection of bodies of lunatics offers
numerous varieties as to situation, number, and kind of mor-
bid appearances. The lesions of the encephalon are neither
in relation to the disorder of the mind, nor to the maladies
complicated with it. Some lunatics, whose mental and bo-
dily disease had given suspicion of extensive organic lesions,
have presented but slight changes of structure in the brain,
while others whose symptoms had been less severe have been
the subjects of great and numerous alterations. But what
disconcerts all our theories is that not unfrequently, even in
the instance of patients who have passed through all the
stages of insanity, and have lived many years under derange-
ment, no organic changes whatever have been traced, either
in the brain or its containing membranes.'* He wisely adds,
^' What shall we then think of the rash pretensions of those
who assume that they can fix upon the diseased portion of
the brain, judging merely from the character of the disease ?"
The attempt to prove the invariable connexion of any parti-
cular alteration of structure, of either the cortical or medul-
lary substance of the brain, with individual forms of diseased


Digitized by


Google


Pathology of Insanity. 119

cerebration and its complications^ is no less absurd than the
idea of associating impaired muscular movements such as ob-
tain in chorea^ or ordinary paralysis^ with a disorganization of
the muscular fibres exclusively. For the integrity of not only
the several muscles is indispensable to a state of healthy but
also that of the nerves distributed to them. The latter are
of course but parts of one whole^ and the normal condition
of both is required for their combined function. And pre-
cisely the same may be said of the various parts and struc-
tures of the brain ; of the cortical and meduUary substance ;
of the motory and sensory fibres ; or, as Foville has desig-
nated them, the ejBTerent and afferent fibres, &c. We must
not either forget the investing membranes : their integrity is
no less essential to sanity, than is that of the pericardium to
the healthy action of the heart. I wonder this mutual de-
pendence never occurred to Calmeil, Bayle, Solly, and others;
and cannot help thinking it almost impossible for any medical
man well acquainted with the nature and pecuUarities of the
various forms of abnormal cerebration to entertain adverse
opinions to those contained in this paper ; but, so it is. They
should weU remember that attacks of insanity, even recent
ones, are occasionally not only as sudden in their occurrence
as those of neuralgia, hysteria, &c. but are also no less tem-
porary, and equally severe, comparatively speaking; and,
like the last-named diseases, may be either idiopathic or
symptomatic ; and, moreover, that it is among the effects of
a severe haemorrhage, or loss of blood, and is then to be
cured only by the removal of its cause. How could all this
happen if it depended purely on an it^mmation of any part
of the brain or its investing membranes ?

It should be here observed that insanity is not indispen-
sably connected even with an abnormal condition of the ulti-
mate structure of the cerebrum. For an unbalanced con-
formation of the cranium necessarily presupposes a similar
physical condition of the brain, and hence the cerebration
must be more or less impaired. All the organs of the body
are sometimes seen to be congenitally affected : for example,
imperfect vision from physical deficiency of the comese is
very frequent. And lameness is as frequently the conse-
quence of a congenital deformity of the skeleton as of disease
subsequent to birth.

In our investigations into the pathology of insanity, we
must recollect that we have to do with matter and matter
only : and in proportion as we unravel its mysteries, and so
develop new beauties and designs, shall we gain additional
evidences of the greatness and goodness of that creative
power to which we all owe existence and enjoyment.

Digitized by VjOOQIC


( 120 )


III. Directions far obtaining from a Cast or Skull a set of Mea-
surements of its more important outlines, of such a nature
as to enable any one, though ignorant of draunng, me-
chanically to delineate such outlines on paper. By T. S.
Prideaux, Esq., Southampton.

The only instruments requisite for the operation, beyond
such indispensable articles as a pencil and ruler, are a pair
of compasses, a pair of callipers, and a right angle, one side
about 4 inches long, and the other about 6, graduated into
inches and tenths. This latter is employed with a pair of
callipers as a substitute for a craniometer, on the principle
that, the base and hypothenuse of a right-angled triangle
being given, it is easy to find the perpencScular, and is used
thus : — suppose it is required to find the distance from the
occipital spine to the centre of the head ; — ^the distance of the
meatus from the centre of the head (half the distance from
meatus to meatus) must be regarded as the base of a right-
angled triangle, of which the distance from the meatus to
the occipital spine forms the hypothenuse, and the distance
from the centre of the head to the occipital spine the perpen-
dicular. Having then found by the callipers the distance
from the meatus to the centre of the head, which we will
suppose to be 2 J inches, and the distance from the meatus to
the occipital spine, which we will suppose 4J inches, take a
pair of compasses with the points 4J inches apart, place one
leg on the base line at 2 J inches from the perpendicular, and
bring the other against this line, and it will be found to indi-
cate S^ inches, the distance from the occipital spine to the
centre of the head, and the measure required.

Although it is quite practicable to take all the necessary
measurements direct from a cast or skull, I believe it will
generally be found a readier mode of obtaining them, first to
delineate the required outlines on paper, and then to obtain
the measurements from these sketches ; this therefore is the
method I shall first describe, premising that I procure the
desired outlines in the following manner.

Mark the outlines intended to be taken on the cast or
skull with a pencil. Next take a stick of a composition of
equal parts resin and bees^ wax of about the thickness of a
quill, soften it in warm water, and lay it over the outline to
be taken, gently pressing it down so as moderately to flatten


Digitized by


Google


Directions for obtaining Measurements, ^c, 121

the inner surface : in a few minutes it will be found hard
enough to be removed, or it may be made so instantly by the
application of a little cold water. When removed, it should
be laid on a sheet of paper, its outer edge fastened at two or
three points, by dropping a little sealing wax on it to prevent
the possibility of its shifting, and the outline of its inner
surface carefully delineated with a pen or pencil, observing
that no error arises from varying the inclination of the in-
strument used for this purpose.

To make the composition of wax and resin, equal parts of
these two substances should be melted together over a slow
fire, stirred tiU nearly cold, and then poured out on a slab
and rolled into sticks of the required dimensions. Mr. Haw-
kins, whose laudable zeal for every thing relating to the
practical part of Cerebral Physiology is so well known, has I
am aware recommended small rods of soft tin for taking out-
lines of the head ; but, after having tried both these and the
composition, I decidedly give the preference to the latter.
Very correct outUnes of the head on any required scale may
be readily taken by a machine on the principle of the common
pentegraph ; but my great object on the present occasion is
to describe a means within the reach of all, and always at
hand.

The desired outlines being obtained on paper, the next
step in the process is to mark out on each a central point
from which the measurements are to be taken. For the pro-
file the meatus will be found the most eligible point for this
purpose ; for vertical sections from side to side at or behind
the ears, the occipital spine, — before the ears, the foot of indi-
viduality; for horizontal sections, any central point in the
mesial line. To find the point for the meatus in a profile,
take the bust or skull and screw a small bit of wire into the
centre of each orifice, leaving it of such a length as just to
be level with the most prominent part of the sides of the
cavity ; the wires will represent the axis of the meatus, and
their object is to give a de^nite point for the application of a
pair of compasses ; half the distance between their extremi-
ties wiU give the distance from these points to the centre of
the head, which being known, the distance from any point in
the mesial line may be found by the graduated right-angle
as before described. To determine then the place of the
meatus on the diagram, ascertain the distance from two
points in the mesial line of the bust or skull (say occipital
spine and foot of Individuality) from the centre, and it is
evident that the point where these two radii meet will be the
seat of the meatus. This being found, take a pair of com-


Digitized by


Google


122 Mr, Prideaux's Directions

passes set at half an inch^ and, commencing at the occipital
spine, divide the whole of the oatUne into half-inches by
slight indentations, number these points, and set down the
distance of each from the meatus, together with the character
of the curve of the head onward to the next point when this
curve varies from the usudl form — slightly convex.

From these measurements and descriptions the outline of
the head may readily be produced with great accuracy, and on
any scale. Two pair of compasses should be employed for
this purpose ; one (the smaller) kept set at the distance it is
proposed the points for measurement shall be apart, for
making these ; and the other for making the various distances
of the points from the centre. To obtain an outline, draw a
horizontal line of the length from the meatus to the occipital
spine ; one end of this Une will represent the former of these
points, and the other the latter. Next take the adjusted pair
of compasses, and, placing one foot at the point representing
the occipital spine, scratch with the other a small segment of
a circle ; then set the larger pair of compasses to the length
of the second measurement, place one leg at the meatus, and
the point where the other intersects the curve made with the
first pair will be the second point of the outline ; proceed in
the same way tiU all the points are obtained, and then con-
nect them by a line slightly convex (except those for which
any other curve is prescribed, when this must of course be
followed), and the outline will be complete.

Occasionally to mark an abrupt transition in the curve of
the head, an extra measurement may be given; generally,
however, measurements at half-inch ^stances will secure ex-
treme accuracy, indeed in a great proportion of heads half
this number of measurements, with a few extra ones judi-
ciously placed, will be found amply sufficient for all practical
purposes.

In outlines of the skull and also of the head, whenever
practicable, it is desirable that the following points should be
indicated. In profiles, point of ossification in the parietal
bone, — ^point where the frontal suture comes in contact with
the sphenoid bone indicating the termination of the anterior
lobe, — ^fontanel, — ^upper edge of the occipital bone. In out-
lines of transverse vertical sections behind the ears, — the points
where the lambdoidal suture first impinges on the cerebellum
or more properly the superior transverse ridge of the occipital
bone, a point of great consequence in estimating the lateral
projection of the middle lobes of the brain, — ^points of ossifi-
cation in the parietal bones or plane of these points, — ^in the
same outUnes brfare the ears, — the position of the temporal


Digitized by


Google


for obtaimng Mecuvrements, ^c. 123

ridges, and the points of ossification in the frontal bone, —
and in horizontal sections at the level of the top of the eye-
brow, the breadth of the temporal ridges, and also of the
occipital bone at the points where the lambdoidal suture first
comes in contact with the cerebellum.

The mode of obtaining the position in the diagram of
these or any other points of the surface of a cast or skull is
easy and simple. To ascertain, for example, in a profile, the
point of junction of the frontal, sphenoidal and parietal bones,
measure with the callipers the breadth of the skull at the
point, let us suppose this to be 4^ inches ; next with the
compasses find its distance from the foot of Individuality
(insertion of ethmoid bone), which we will assume to be 3
inches ; then taking the half of 4t^ inches, 2^ inches for
the base of the triangle, and 3 inches for the hypothenuse,
we find by the graduated angle 1^ inches to be the perpen-
dicular, the distance from the foot of Individuality to the
axis of the point of junction. Find in the same way the dis-
tance of the same point from the occipital spine, and the
spot where these two lines would intersect e^h other will be
the position of the point required in the diagram.

To take the measurements direct from a cast or skull, a
narrow strip of paper or tape, graduated in half-inches, must
be pasted on the outline to be procured, and the distance
from each half-inch to the central point taken by the aid of a
craniometer or the graduated angle and a pair of compasses.

It would be very desirable for all profiles of the head,
delineated for the purpose of shewing development, to be
placed in the same position, since variations in inclination
certainly do not facilitate the institution of comparisons, and
the relative situation of the ear with regard to the roof of the
orbits and occipital spine is a feature of the greatest conse-
quence. Placing the meatus and occipital spine parallel with
the horizon is, perhaps, as a universal rule, as eligible as any
that can be adopted. Another point, equally worthy atten-
tion is, that the scale on which outlines are drawn should
always be stated.

All details of mechanical operations are necessarily trifling
and tedious, and not unfi^uently the process described may
be efifected in much less time than is occupied in detailing it.
To many persons of limited capacity for figures, the preceding
instructions will, I am perfectly aware, appear at first sight
intricate and uninviting ; let not such, however, fall into the
too common error of setting up their own capacities and pre-
dilections as a standard for their brethren, nor hastily con-
clude that what is perplexing to themselves must necessarily


Digitized by


Google


124 Mr, Prideatus's Directions

be so to others. An unpractised hand can produce the three
most important outlines of the head &om a set of measure-
ments in less than three hours^ and any man who wishes to
obtain the form of a head^ — ^is without other means of pro-
curing it, — and yet hesitates to take this trouble to possess it,
— ^had better give up the study of Cerebral Physiology toge-
ther with that of sdl other sciences, for a being so weak of
will, and wanting in purpose, will never achieve any thing of
value.

One benefit which this system of measurement offers, and no
slight one, is that it famishes every cerebral physiologist with
the means of preparing accurate outlines on any scale for the
engraver. For myself I must confess that, when I meet with
drawings, concerning which we are not told the scale on
which they were taken, the method employed, nor even that
any means were used to ensure correctness, I regard them
vrith an annoying sense of uncertainty. That artists require
superintendence, any one may convince himself by turn-
ing to No. 65 of the Phrenoloffical Journal, where he will
find a horizontal outline of the head of Courvoisier, not only
inexact, but singularly unlike the original, presenting in fact
rather the wide anterior lobe of the philosopher, than the
contracted one of the criminal. This, however, is merely
one of the many instances which might be given of the inca-
pacity vrith which the journal was conducted by Mr. Watson,
and must not be taken as a criterion of the character of the
present and previous illustrations of that work, to the general
accuracy of which, as far as I have examined them, I am
happy to bear testimony.

AVhilst speaking of accuracy, let me take the opportunity
of alluding to a subject of vital importance to Cerebral Phy-
siologists, affecting the correctness of casts. Only those who
in the prosecution of their inquiries have made themselves
conversant with the practical details of cast taking, are
probably aware that casts generally measure slightly more
than the head from which they are taken, and that, by a
little inattention on the part of the caster in suffering bits
of plaster to get between the joints of the mould, tMs in-
crease in size above the right standard is easily augmented to
a serious extent. Supposing, then, that from a cast thus
enlarged, a fresh mould be made, it is evident that the casts
it will produce will deviate still more from truth, and if,
instead of recurring to an original on such occasions, as
ought to be done, each fresh mould is suffered to become a
step further removed from it, the progeny will in process of
time become gigantic. This is no imaginary case, but has


Digitized by


Google


/or obtaining Measurements, ^c. 125

already taken place, and the fact cannot be too widely dis-
seminated.

In laying before the pnblic the preceding instructions for
making outlines of the head, nothing is further from my in-
tentions than to propose to supersede casts by drawings ; the
superior advantages of the former are many and obvious, and
no one can ever become a practical cerebral physiologist
deserving this title, who does not spend many a silent hour
absorbed in their contemplation. My wish is that none
should have a cast the less in their coUe^on, but that they
should have draughts in additian. To many a zealous student
in an humble sphere, the cost of a large collection of casts
presents an insuperable obstacle, whilst a still greater number
are prevented firom indulging their taste for them extensively,
on account of their bulk. To all persons so situated, draw-
ings offer a convenient substitute for casts, and, as an adjunct
to the latter in the study of Cerebral Physiology, I have no
hesitation in pronouncing them to be of great value and
utility. The extreme portability of a portfolio or book of
outlines offers many advantages ; it may lie on the table of
your drawing room, — ^form the companion of your travels, —
and be turned over at leisure by your fire-side, and thus, by
being always at hand to fill up an odd moment, give you
that fiamiliarity, — that intimate acquaintance, with general
forms of heads, which only a habit of daily observation can
bestow, and without which your knowledge of practical
Cerebral Physiology will remain for ever but flimsy and
superficial.

The plate illustrating the preceding system of measure-
ments represents three outlines of the skull of OoUop, con-
cerning which the following successful predication of character
may perhaps be acceptable.

Extract from the Salisbury Herald of the 18th of Jan., 1888 :

" A course of four lectures has just been delivered in the
Town Hall, Blandford, on Phrenology, by Mr. Prideaux.
AH who have attended have been highly gratified by the able
and ludd manner in which the principles of the science have
been explained by this gentieman. Mr. Prideaux having
offered to put the truth of the principles of Phrenology to
the test, by giving the outline of the temper and disposition
of any individual, whose bust or skull should be presented
to him; a gentieman availed himself of this offer, and trans-
mitted a skull to Mr. P., with a request to have the character
of the individual delineated. At the conclusion of the last


Digitized by


Google


126 Mr. Pride(ma(^B Directions

lecture, a paper describing the temper and disposition of the
individual, as inferred by Mr. P. from his phrenological deve-
lopment, was laid on the table; and, a medical gentleman
present having produced a sealed letter from the owner of
the skull, containing a brief account of the character of the
individual who once tenanted it, they were both read to the
audience, when the coincidence in all the leading features be-
tween the two was found to be truly astonishing. We regret
that the length of Mr. P.'s observations precludes our insert-
ing the whole of them, but, as we have been favoured with a
sight of the original documents, the correctness of the fol-
lowing extracts may be relied on.

" A glance at the outline of this skull reveals to the phre-
nologist a fearful preponderance of the lower propensities
over the moral sentiments and intellect.

" The organ of Amativeness is large, and will probably
be indulged in the coarsest manner. If this individual were
ever married, he must have been induced to enter into the
married state from pecuniary motives, or motives of conve-
nience ; he would not be greatly attached to his wife, and
she would most likely frequently experience his brutality, for
his utter want of refinement, and of nobleness of character,
vxndd render women peculiarly liable to Ids outrages.

" He possessed a great deed of low cwming. There can be
no doubt but he was a great Uar, dishonest, and very little
accessible to the feelings of pity. He would care for no one
but himself, and be quite indifferent to the sufferings of
others. I have very little doubt but he was a man di^iked
by his fellows, who passed through life without making a
single friend, and whose exit from it was regarded as a for-
tunate riddance by those best acquainted with him.

" K in society I were to meet with an individual whose
head presented a similar configuration, I should most cer-
tainly refuse to trust him either with my life or property, be-
cause I am well convinced that neither considerations of justice
nor benevolence, would restrain him from taking either the
one or the other, if it suited his purpose. The fear of pun-
ishment would be the Only thing which would restrain this
individual from the perpetration of crimes, and therefore, if
placed in circumstances in which he thought himself sure of
evading the arm of retributive justice, he would not hesitate
to commit the most bloody.

^'Phrenologists of course speak only of dispositions;
they cannot speak of definite and positive actions, because
these will ever be more or less under the influence of external
circiunstances. I cannot therefore take upon me to say that


Digitized by


Google


for obtaining Measurements, 6fc, 127

this individual was a murderer^ though I confess I shall not
be surprised to learn that such is the fact.

''On one pointy however, I will speak very decidedly,
viz. : that if he ever committed murder, the influence of his
large cautiousness will be conspicuous in the manner in which it
was effected. Some murderers recklessly attack persons their
equals in physical strength, regardless of the risk to which
they expose themselves by so doing, but this man, if he ever
committed the crime, would probably select his victim firom
amongst the weak, aged, or infirm, or if he murdered a
man, his equal in physical strength, he would take especial
care to attack him under circumstances which precluded his
own person from being seriously endangered by any resist-
ance which his unfortunate victim might make.^'

TTie following is a copy of the sealed letter nf erred to : —

" John Gt)llop, the wretched occupant of this skull, was
executed at Dorchester, for the murder of a woman with
whom he cohabited. He was a seafaring man, verging on
40, of middle stature and apparently cheerful disposition,
and much addicted to female society.

'' He evinced great cunning in the method of destroying
his victim, which was by suffocation, keeping the mouth
closed by the thumb under the chin, and pressing the nos-
trils between the fingers, by which means there were scarcely
any external marks of violence perceptible.

" It was given in evidence on his trial, that he had often-
times said, 'that he considered it no more harm to kill a
person than an animal,' and he frequently boasted of having
killed many, when abroad, in the same manner.

"Although convicted on the clearest evidence, he perti-
naciously denied being the perpetrator of the crime, yet
admitted that he was present, and held the victim.

" This character was given me by an individual who was
personally acquainted with the convict, and may be relied
upon.

" Chas. Warne.

"Dec. 29th, 1S87."


Digitized by


Google


128 Directions for obtainitiff Measurements, ^c.


MEASUBEMENT8 AND DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATE.


No.
1

33 at A.

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27


34 at ^.
28

1

29

30

31

32 . . loth

35 at 1-5


Profile.

Diitance.

3 3-5
4
6

8-5
0-6
2-4
3-7
4-7
6-4
7-4
8

8-4
8-5
8-4
8-4
8
7-9


3
.3
.3

.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.3
3
.3

2
2

.2

1

.1


7-9

7-5

7

6-8

6-5

6

5-3

4

2

0-5

8-3

6-5

6-5

9
6

27
8-4

7


Curve.


. — r.

I — X.

+x.


. X, V.

. . . r.
. . . t?.


. .x,v.

+x.

. . r, a?.


Horizontal section at the plane
of the points of ossification in
the frontal and parietal bones,

1 2 6-2 14 at 4-3. 2 4

2 2 6 v,x.

X, denotes convex, and v, concave ; + and — are used as pre-
fixesy to denote a greater or less than average curve ; x, v denotes
that the first half of the line is to be convex, and the latter concave;
v,x denotes of course the reverse.


No.

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 at 1*5.

1


Distance.


12 ...

13 ....

14 . . . .

15 ....

16 ....

17 ....

18 ....

19 ....

20 ....

21 ....

22 at 2


.2
.2
.2
.2
.3
.3
.3
.3
.3

,2
.2
.3
.3
3
3
.3
.3
.3
.3
.3


6

6-5

7-4

9

1

2-2

2-5

2-3

2-3

8

9-5

1-2

2

2-8

3-5

4-3

4-3

4-5

4-7

47


Curve.

X,+X.

, . .V,X.


+X.


v,x.


. »,ar.


. v,x.


Vertical section at the points
of ossification in the parietal
bones.


I
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10
11
12
13


6

5-5

5

4-5

37

27

1-5

9-8

C-3

3

0-5

7-5

5-8


. . X, +x.
+a?, r, X,


-far.
x,v.
v,x.


Digitized by


Google


t: ^ 5_.? tt


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


On the Ultimate Sources of Pleasure and Pain. 129

Only the curres of those lines which differ from the usual form,
slightly conTeXy are stated; all others are understood to be of this
form.

All the points of measurement are at half-inch distances, except
the extra measurements and the distances of these from the previous
point are appended.

The measurements are given in inches, tenths, and decimals;
and the engravings are executed on the scale of half an inch to an
inch.


rV. On the Ultimate Sources of Pleasure and Pain.
From A. S. M.

It may be worthy of remark, that, although pleasurable emo-
tions are experienced, during excitation of many portions of
the brain, by persons in the magnetic trance, great uneasiness
is nevertheless evinced by them on the excitation of certain
other portions, and the most joyous aspect is suddenly con-
verted into one of the utmost sadness, without any other os-
tensible cause (the sleepwaker being, of course, uninfluenced
by external impressions) than local change in the point of ex-
citement ; which fact must tend to convince all who have had
occasion to observe it, that some organs or nerves are the
especial subjects of unhappy and unpleasant emotions ; for
whatever differences of opinion may exist, with reference to
the recently proposed subdivision of organs, the physical
actions expressive of the opposite emotions of pleasure and
pain are in all cases so definite and distinctive that none who
have witnessed the phenomena can, on this point, mistake, or
to any extent misinterpret the manifestations.

Phrenologists have supposed pleasure and pain to be mere
affections of the faculties. "Each, when indulged in its
natural action (says Dr. Spurzheim), feels pleasure; when
disagreeably affected, feels pain; consequently, the kinds of
pain and pleasure are as numerous as the faculties.^' Thus
misery of all kinds has been supposed to result firom the
wounding of the feelings — causing an undue or unpleasant
excitement of their respective cerebral organs ; but, if the
facts above stated be generally correct, the mere exciting
cause has probably been mistaken for the more immediate^ and,
if pain generally follows from the non-gratification of the
faculties, it would seem to be rather by sympathetically ex-
citing, than by experiencing the emotion themselves; and,
now that it is suggested, it certainly does not seem probable
that any organ should perform more than one definite func-


Digitized by


Google


130 On the Ultimate Sources of Pleasure and Pain.

tion^ which mast be allowed^ in supposing that those which
are the natural recipients of agreeable emotions can really feel
annoyance. How^ for instance, can disappointed hope, de*
spair, or wounded benevolence, feel sorrow ? How can any
organ, however outraged, feel otherwise than it is organized
to feel? Its non-gratification may, and doubtless does,
excite antagonist or avenging organs, which are in reality the
patients of those particular sensations which we have been
accustomed to refer to abnormal excitation.

Revenge, envy, grief, despondency, all are unhappy states
of mind, but they are feelings of too positive a character to
be results of mere negative causes, or of the non-gratification
or wounding of other feelings. Besides, what known organ
or organs, however injured, can feel envy, malice, or despond-
ency, without altogether departing from their legitimate
sphere of action ? Many may indeed give rise to &ese by
sympathetically exciting them, — ^wounded benevolence may
roi^e Destructiveness ; disappointed hope. Despair ; and, in
like manner. Self Esteem, Love of Approbation, or Acquisi-
tiveness, being wounded, excite their avengers, which feel the
pain, anger, remorse (as the case may be), which their own
nature does not admit of. But, though it should appear to be
the essential nature of many organs to suffer, feel for, and
avenge the wrongs sustained by others, it is not at the same
time impossible that, notwithstanding their functions may be
painful by nature, they may afford in their action a species
of gratification; else, whence the phrases — "Indulging in
grief,'' " giving way to despair,'' &c. Let any one reflect on
his own consciousness, and ask if there be not a degree of
pleasure in giving way to violent emotions, even of the most
painful description, wholly unaccountable by the former
theory. Is there not a satisfaction — ^a solace — ^in despdr,
which disappointed hope could never feel ?

It may nevertheless be objected as an inference that as the
alleged facts indicate that we contain within ourselves the
elements of misery, the perfectibilily of human happiness is
necessarily a chimera; and, if indeed all the faculties tend to
action by a necessary law, this cannot be denied. But the
question is not one of consequences, rather of facts, what-
ever may follow frt)m it. If the theory be founded in truth,
nothing can invalidate it ; if man, from his nature, be insus-
ceptible of unmingled felicity, his ignorance of the fact will not
render him the more happy; for what can ignorance of his
true destiny avail, but to deceive him into the abandonment
of substantial attainable happiness for shadowy ideas of unat-
tainable perfection ?


Digitized by


Google


On the Ultimate Sources of Pleasure and Pain. 131

Nature is as fully fraught with the elements of evil as of
good — ^with the germs of destruction as of conservation. The
equilibrium of existence is maintained by opposive forces,
which, by their mutual attractions and repulsions, generate
motion ; and by the same unvarying law that compels the
unconscious atom in its combinations and separations, does
organized matter enjoy and suffer. Grood and evil, happiness
and misery, all are alike the necessitated results of the colli-
sion of concordant or dissonant properties in nature.

Evil, palpable and inherent, exists without and around us;
and shidl we, seeing this, dare to look within and hope to find
it wanting ? Are the causes of human woe and weal wholly
extraneous, incidental, and remediable? Does the human
brain form an exception to the universal analogy of nature ?
Is man the only being formed of concordant atoms? Is he
the only creatmre unswayed by opposive forces and diverse
impulses f K all his faculties tend naturally to good, how
is he impelled to distract them to evil 7 The depressing pas-
sions of our nature are ever forward to action on the presenta-
tion of exciting objects, and such is the constitution of our
brain, that, '' even in the fairest fountain of delight, there is
a secret spring eternally bubbling up and scattering its bitter
waters over the very flowers which surround its margin.^'

But even supposing that no organs are inherently bad, it
is very evident that all are not inherently good. Can anger,
hatred, or revenge, be beneficial in their source or tendency ?
Inasmuch as they exist, they are doubtless necessary, but
they cannot result in any moral advantage. And wherefore
should they? Nature has been unceasingly tortured in
search of final causes, and the predetermination of minds to
this end, rather than the force of internal evidence, has
framed those popular but untenable theories of ultimate good;
which, serving at best but to amuse, do sadly fetter and pre-
judice men's intellects. " To argue from what is defective to
something complete is a liberal mode of argument, but not
warranted by sound reasoning.'' Where conjecture at most
should have sufficed, how has teleology clouded the minds of
truth's votaries I Its rash conclusions have clogged the
efforts of reason, anticipating purposes beyond the reach of
our present knowledge igid facolties; it has enveloped in
deeper mysteiy the secrets it has sought to unravel ; in short
(as IS observett by Bacon, in his *' Organum") " Final causes
may be considered a fallacy, as being very plainly of the
nature of man rather than of the universe."

It has been more especially of late the fashion to ascribe
human ills to external misdirection and abuse of natural im-


Digitized by


Google


132 On the Ultimate Sources of Pleasure and Pain,

pulses; but the facts now brought to light shew that the
main springs of sorrow have their source in ourselves. It
would seem that^ the whole area of the brain being the seat of
nervous impulsion^ all our thoughts, feelings, and actions —
good, bad, and indifferent — originate there; that thus are the
seeds of happiness and misery, of joy, grief, hope, fear, cou-
rage, despair, all equally implanted in our being. Malice,
hatred, and envy, are probably as essential to our nature as
are faith, hope, and charity; and while we have pride to mor-
tify, justice to outrage, or ambition to disappoint, so long
will anger excite, envy torment, and hatred pursue us.

These truly are sad and unwelcome reflections ; but let
the mind, unbiassed, consider whether it is more reasonable
to suppose that human nature, being made up of good and
evil tendencies essentially combined, should harmonize and
sympathize with all around it ; or that, being perfectible, it
should form a single and abortive exception to the uniform
confliction of the world without ?

'^ If plagues nor earthquakes break not heaven's design,
Why should a Borgia or a Cataline V*

Happiness has been believed by phrenologists to consist in
the harmonious gratification of all the faculties, and that, in
order to secure it, " the laws of external creation must accord
with the dictates of the moral sentiments.^'

Now it is to be feared (if the interpretation above offered,
of the facts brought to light by the new science be correct)
that neither of these most desirable objects is entirely possible
of attainment; for the harmonious gratification of opposed
organs* involves a contradiction ; and, moreover, unless the
laws which now regulate external nature change, they cannot
wholly coincide with the dictates of the moral sentiments.
If, therefore, perfect felicity be dependent, as it certainly
appears to be, on the fulfilment of these conditions ; and, if
the present observations be well founded, then does it assur-
edly but mock us with its view.

*^ And as the circle bounding earth and skies
Allures from afar, yet as we follow flies."

But, if, quickly perceiving the truth, and relinquishing
wisely the hope, we do all in our power to seek present good

* If we put any faith in the manifestation of cerebral organs during the
trance, the existence and immediate vicinity of opposed faculties forces
itself upon our conviction. What, then, are we to think of practical phre-
nology—that it is a fallacy ? No ! it rests on far too sure a basis to be really
contradicted by any new truth. We must conclude, then, from this appa-
rent anomaly, that there yet remains much to be investigated and explained
in the complicated process of cerebration.


Digitized by


Google


On the Ultimate Sources of Pleasure and Pain. 133

and avoid future misery, even though perfect bUss be unattain-
able, much partial happiness may yet be ours ; for, great and
manifold as are the evils inflicted by nature, as great if not
greater are those produced by our ignorance.

.Nature at least equalizes her chastisements by her bene-
fits ; the pleasures she bestows counterbalance the pains she
inflicts; if she has rendered us susceptible of grief and
misery, she has given us fortitude to bear, with hope and joy
to counteract, them ; and, although the universal concord re-
quisite to fulfil our ideas of true felicity cannot be drawn firom
the warring atoms which constitute our being, against natural
evil there is a natural remedy, and the philosophy of neces-
sity fortifies the mind.

Supposing similar causes to continue in action, we judge
of the Aiture firom the past. Inasmuch as evil flows from in-
herent causes, we infer that it will continue ; but, inasmuch
as it ensues adventitiously from human error, knowledge may
avert it ; and, as by conforming to nature we advance towards
civilization, the right direction and consequent gratification of
our joyous faculties may prevent the present undue excitation
of the more grievous, and thus a far more equal share of
pleasure may be our portion. For, though the force of nature
and custom so modifies the influence of external causes as to
disable them fi"om rendering us completely happy or misera-
ble, as is shewn by the nearly equal amount experienced
through life in aU ages, and under varied climes and circum-
stances, yet may they, when judiciously created, have great,
though not unhmited, power in making us more or less so.

Knowledge has heretofore been so applied as that power
rather than happiness has been gained ; and not until man-
kind shaU have become sufficiently enlightened to employ it
collectively and co-operatively, instead of individually and
selfishly — ^when the " divide et impera^' of the despot shall be
changed for the cry of the freeman, that " union is strength,^'
will the true advantages of knowledge be made manifest; and
that moral supremacy, so essentia to a preponderance of
social happiness, and so impracticable under a competitive
social system, be generally appreciated by being universally
felt.

But imagination will always furnish something which
can never be realized, and a single hint, even though its
truth be obvious, is found insufficient to overcome prejudice;
and the philanthropist who has been accustomed to take the
brighter view of things will perhaps hardly tolerate the exa-
mination of facts so unwelcome, as tending to disappoint his
hopes and dispel his dreams of human perfectibility. Whilst

VOL. I. L


Digitized by


Google


134 Phrenological Society.

gazing on the wrecks of learning and greatness, on the tri-
umphs of barbarian folly and baseness, we ask why S9 great
a progress has been made in arts and literature, and why
that progress, so rapid and so sustained, has suddenly received
a check and become retrograde ! Time alone can satisfactorily
solve this mighty riddle; and, whether political imbecility and
social injustice be deemed efficient, or instrumental oidy, in
bringing about these sad catastrophies, will, in the present
defective state of science, be a matter of opinion mainly de-
termined by the constitution of the particular brain consider-
ing it. But, in whatever point the question may be viewed, it
is evident that man is now steadily, though not uninterrupt-
edly, progressive ; and that, when the application of know-
ledge shall become rightly understood, its mighty revolu-
tionary agency must work changes in the condition of things
beyond the power of imagination to surmise or reason to
calculate.


V. Phrenological Society.

In our former number we had such an excess of matter
beyond our limits, that we did not complete, as we intended,
our account of all the proceedings of the Phrenological So-
ciety, during the months of November, December and Janu-
ary. We merely mentioned at the close, that, after Mr. Uwins'
paper, one was read by Mr. Atkinson, upon Mesmeric Phre-
nology, pointing out the importance of mesmerism in phre-
nological investigation, and the mutual bearings of the two
sciences upon each other. We shall now furnish an account
of this paper : —

Mr. Atkinson gave a short account of the progress of
Mesmeric Phrenology, and how it has given a fresh impulse
to inquiry, convincing thousands of the truth of Phrenology,
and advancing the science to a position it never could have
held without the aid of Mesmerism. He stated that a year
had passed away since he had the honour, at the request of
Dr. EUiotson, to read a paper before the society, detailing
his discovery of the means of exciting the cerebral organs
during the mesmeric sleep. This discovery was made by two
gentlemen in America, by Mr. Gardiner and Mr. Mansfield,
in coi^unction, in Hampshire, and by himself in London,


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society, 135

about the same time. The London Phrenological Society,
notwithstanding the opposition and desertion of some of
its members, has the credit of being the first society to
welcome these new truths, and to publish them to the world
as important to phrenology, and as exhibiting the most beau-
tiful phenomena in the whole range of science. All truth has
had to meet opposition from the pride of ignorant, bigoted,
or interested men — and so has Mesmero-Phrenology ; — an
endeavour was made to stifle it by a party in the Phrenolo-
gical Association, but fortunately without success. Mr. A.
explained how the different objections urged by Mr. Pri-
deaux and others against Mesmero-Phrenology could be an-
swered ; and he declared that he was most anxious to bring
forward every objection that could possibly be urged against
the conclusions he had drawn from these phenomena; he
wished to give any such objections all the importance that
could be attached to them, so that they might be the more
completely answered. *' Let truth be the sole object of our
inquiry — ^let us advance with sufficient care — ^multiply expe-
riments, and always hold out a salutary caution to those who
are likely to be led away from the path of true philosophv, in
that hasty assent which too often accompanies a love of no-
velty with inexperienced minds, perhaps more anxious for re-
putation than wary in the pursuit of science. But let nothing
discourage us. Phrenology may now be proved to the whole
world to be true, for I defy the most sceptical to resist the
evidence of Mesmero-Phrenology. Phrenology, with the assist-
ance of animal magnetism, will give a new life to the world.
What wondrous changes may we not effect ! How much may
we not prophecy, with the certainty of fulfilment ! Phreno-
logy, in conjunction with mesmerism, is the science of the
Ufe of man and other animals ; and has given an impulse to
intelligence now abroad where aU has been stagnation. For,
since the time of G^aU, we can hardly say that phrenology
has made much advance. It has been applied to the purposes
of life, but the science itself has remained nearly where
it was, notwithstanding all the writings upon it, whiCh
for the most part have rather harrassed the subject than
otherwise, whilst much that is evidently false has been ad-
vanced under the name of phrenology. Indeed we have pos-
sessed no sufficient means for furthering the discoveries of
Gall — ^we have collected over and over again the same evi-
dence, or rather evidence leading only to the same conclu-
sions. The labour required has been too great, and the
difficulties in the path of further discovery has not been sur-
mounted. Indeed, I cannot see how it were possible to go

l2


Digitized by


Google


136 Phrenological Society,

much further than GWl, without the assistance of mesmerism.
There were difficulties in the way which Mesmero-Phrenology
has enabled us to overcome — at least it appears so to me; for
instance^ we had no sufficient, means of discovering the func-
tions of those organs at the base of the brain, nor was there
a single organ, the primitive functions of which could be
said to be certainly and correctly defined. And when we
came to reason about consciousness^ the will, or the senses,
we were quite at a loss. All was speculation — we had nothing
fixed — ^no information on which to depend — so that the most
extraordinary and contradictory assertions were advanced by
different writers, without the means existing to ascertain the
fact. That portion of the brain between Ideality and Cau-
tion has afforded a grand field for speculation. In fact, we
have now good reason to beUeve that there is much required
to complete even the mapping out of the brain, whilst a large
portion is altogether unknown, and the whole will probably
require considerable correction. This is a view of the subject
winch I am aware will be distasteful to many old phrenolo-
gists, who have been in the habit of considering phrenology
as a much more perfect science, at least in its organology,
than it really is, or than any candid inquirer whose sole object
is to arrive at truth could possibly admit. But let me not
be misinterpreted. I hold out no dispiriting views ; for much
has been clearly ascertained and established in phrenology of
the greatest importance. The great principles of mental
science have been laid down, that mind is the function of the
brain, each power having its special organ. We have plenty
that we may work with, and may rest content to wait pa-
tiently for what shall follow. A new impulse has been given
to inquiry : the field of investigation is widening before us.
Let us oixly be diligent and careful, and another year or two
will see mental science holding a very different position, and
acknowledged to be most important in its results ; and, as the
proper study of mankind is Man, phrenology will be shewn
to be the noblest of all pursuits. Throughout the whole
range of man^s wants phrenology is appUcable, so that every
child should get its alphabet by heart, and be trained accord-
ing to phrenological principles; in other words, according to
its nature. For education is not yet understood ; all the rub-
bish taught under the high sounding name of a classical edu-
cation is, for the most part, so much impediment to real
knowledge; and at best much time is wasted which might be
better employed in teaching man to know himself, morally,
intellectually, and physically ; to know what is the constitu-
tion of his nature, the duties of life, and the best intersts of


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society, 137

men. How much is there of time-serving, time-wasting, and
time-killing, which might be profitably and agreeably em-
ployed, had the mind but been properly trained and its
famishing organs supplied ! Then listen not to the ignorant
and the indolent, who would gladly let things go on as they
are. The change will come ; and we are in some measure,
however little may be our individual influence, responsible
that it be guided rightly. Let the world go on discussing
about wars, and political intrigues : let the churchman quarrel
about forms and ceremonies. All this will pass away : but the
truth will not pass away ; and the phrenologist, taught to
know himself, and trained upon that knowledge, shdl sow
the seed for the establishment of good morab and good insti-
tutions in all after ages.^^

February 6th,

Dr. Elliotson exhibited a cast of the head of a gentleman,
requesting that any member of the society would give an opi-
nion of the character of the individual, from its development,
before he said anything about it.

Mr. Atkinson immediately pronounced the head to be that
of a very fine and noble character : of a man possessed of
great strength of many faculties, excellent general intellect,
of a decidedly practical turn, of astonishing firmness of pur-
pose and intrepidity, the highest moral feeling, conscientious-
ness, and benevolence, and particularly of veneration, with
very great attachment, and withal great humility.

It was then stated to have been taken from the head of
the Rev. Mr. Moffatt, the Missionary, who spent twenty-
three years in Africa, and has now returned thither, proba-
bly to remain there for life. Mr. Moffatt at one period left
his family to remove to another part of Africa, and live
among some tribes entirely as one of them, adopting their
mode of living, and learning their language, in order to ac-
quire influence over them for their good ; and has civilized
and improved the condition of a large number of the savage
inhabitants of Southern Africa, as is well known to those
who are acquainted with missionary proceedings.

Dr. Elliotson stated that, from the acquaintance he had
with Mr. Moffatt, he believed the whole of Mr. Atkinson's
remarks upon the head to be in complete unison with the
character, affording a striking proof of the truth of Gall's
great discoveries, and that a more beautiful character he did
not believe to exist than the ^v. Mr. Moffatt.

February 20th. f Ladies' Night. J
H. G. Atkinson, Esq. read a paper upon the character of


Digitized by


Google


138 Phrenological Society,

the late John Varley, the painter and astrologer^ whom he
described as a singular man^ of extraordinary memory^ strange
opinions, and wonderful powers of conversation, combining
at once the wildest theories and the most extravagant analo-
gies and conclusions from dissimilar things, and yet exhibit-
ing the most profound knowledge of wit and of nature, with
much knowledge of the world and a wonderful amount of
common sense ; and yet being the most credulous of beings,
and the most easily imposed upon. He so impressed Dr.
Spiirzheim, as to cause him to exclaim — ^^ surely this man
must have two brains in one.^' Mr. Atkinson would not dis-
cuss the truth of astrology, or of Varley's interpretation of
Homer and of the Ancient Mvthologies, of which he pro-
fessed himself to form no opinion, but his impression was
that in all Varley's wanderings there was much fallacy, mixed
up with some truth. He had a great love of truth and of
justice ; he was a sincere and an honest man, and, above all,
he had a kind and generous heart. He was cheerful even in
adversity — nothing depressed him ; he was full of hope, and,
without being either proud or vain, he possessed a conscious-
ness of power which led him on and served his turn. He was
most open hearted and confiding — he loved the world, and he
loved mankind — and ever deeply sympathized with the suf-
ferings of others. How beautifully would he discourse on
wit — describe the principles on which eflfect depends — ^and
point out the varied beauties of nature. At school he was
conspicuous from his delight in drawing, and from his courage
and physical strength ; never fond of fighting for fighting^s
sake, but ever foremost in defence of the oppressed ; he was
independent, but it was the independence of a noble and ele-
vated mind, not of pride and selfishness. He loved all that was
great and good in nature, and had a proper contempt for the
mean and artificial; but his opinions were tempered with
charity. In all his difficulties, which were chiefly from want
of management, he never lost the respect and good opinion
of those with whom he had to deal. He was a Christian in
the purest sense, but without any belief in the creeds and
dogmas of any of the churches. He entertained singular
notions on spiritualism, believing in dreams and visions, and
the existence of a multitude of spirits ; conceiving that every
diflferent power of the mind might be a separate spirit, and
he loved to dwell on these imaginary notions, like others,
without caring to define them, or inquire into their possibility.
This notion, however, said Mr. A*., was as rational as the idea
of all those different powers existing as one single and sepa-
rate essence, different, and yet the same with the flesh, at one


Digitized by


Google


PhrenohfficeU Society, 139

and the same time the cause and the effect of our different
mental impulses.

Another trait in Varies character was that of great in-
genuity ; — ^he made several inventions for which he took out
patents^ but was a great loser by them, being far more apt
and ingenious than clear sighted in seeing the true value of
his inventions. Although of a most joyous disposition, he
was no wit ; yet he possessed much humour and pleasantry,
was fond of anecdote, and had a surprising memory; he was
singularly happy, too, in illustration, but Ins intellect was not
sufficiently acute and searching for him to be a wit. He did not
devote much time to the elegancies and refinements of life,
either in his costume or manners ; he was too much absorbed
in higher objects for this. A lover of music, but of music as
a means of expressing feeling and not mere execution ; the
simple grandeur and the sublimity of its lofty compositions
impressed him most; the tender passages, the elevating tones,
the religion and the, poetry of Handel, &c. He may be said
to have founded a new school in landscape painting ; his com-
positions were a novelty in art, and he possessed a facility of
execution, and such a power of combining the materials he
had gathered together firom nature, that his compositions were
as original and as varied as those of any master with whom
Mr. A. IB acquainted. Varley was one of those, with Grirtin
and Turner, who founded, or at least was one of the first in,
the Water Colour Society. Many of the first of our artists
have been his pupils, and owe much to his talents and
kindness.

Mr. Atkinson afterwards pointed out the various cerebral
developments on a cast of the head, showing how these cor-
responded with the character of the individual.

March 6th.
A discussion took place upon Mr. John Varle/s cast; in
which Mr. Atkinson's views seemed to be generally approved
by the society.

March 20th. (Ladies^ meeting.)
Dr. EUiotson delivered an address upon the plea of
insanity.

He remarked that there was a general angry disappoint-
ment that Macnaughten's life had not been destroyed by the
law. Campbell the poet had published the following shock-
ing lines in the Morning Chronicle : —

Ye people of England ! exult and be glad,
For ye're now at the will of the merciless mad.


Digitized by


Google


140 Phrenological Society.

Why 8ay ye that but three authorities reign-
Crown, Commons, and Lords ? — You omit the insane!
They're a privileged class, -whom no statute controls,
And their murderous charter exists in their souls.
Do they wish to spill blood— they have only to play
A few pranks— get asylum'd a month and a day —
Then heigh ! to escape from the mad-doctor's keys.
And to pistol or stab whomsoever they please.

Now the dog has a human-like wit — in creation
He resembles most nearly our own generation :
Then if madmen for murder escape with impunity,
Why deny a poor dog the same noble immunity ?
So, if dog or man bite you, beware being nettled,
For crime is no crime— when the mind is unsettled.

Ladies had expressed even more bitter regret than men ;
and this circumstance was an instance of a good feeling run-
ning riot, uncontrolled by the intellect, so as to become the
source of most condemnable error. The horror at the murder
of a worthy fellow-creature made them forget that to destroy
the life of a murderer, who is not in possession of his senses,
is itself foul murder. That Macnaughten was insane no in-
telligent person could doubt; at the same time society
requires protection, and therefore his confinement for life
would be proper.

Some had ignorantly supposed that, if a man possesses a
certain amount of reason, he ought not to be considered mad
when he commits a crime. But madmen are often extremely
sagacious, even more sagacious than many sane persons, and
may have certain faculties more powerful than in their sane
state. A madman need not have all his faculties deranged ;
nor even any faculty deranged on every point to which its
action is directed. He may be partially mad and partially
sane. A madman may even know that what he is doing is
considered very wrong by others, and denounced by the law,
though he cannot consider it wrong; nay, he may himself con-
sider it wrong, and yet be unable to resist the diseased impulse
to its perpetration. Grail properly considered insanity leading
to criminal acts as of two kinds : when there was a delu-
sion, and when persons did wrong in spite of themselves.
There were instances of persons who committed robberies
and murders from the force of some delusion, fancying them-
selves called upon by duty to commit the crime; others
feeling the impulse have, before committing it, hoped to Grod
they would not, and have cried and entreated their friends
to bind them down and restrain them from the deed which
they declared they must do. Delusion and irresistible impulse
sometimes are conjoined. If a man is proved to have acted
under a morbid delusion, or an irresistible impulse, he should


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 141

evidently be treated as a madman. When a sane man mis-
takes a fiiend for a robber, and shoots him, he is not hanged ;
when, from a sudden gust of rage, he kills another, towards
whom he had had no hostility, he is not hanged. How depraved,
then, to wish to hang a man either mistaken through madness,
or uncontrollable through madness ! Yet such ignorance and
barbarity are displayed by those whose public duties demand
more sense and virtue.* Nay, if a man who commits a crime
is known to be mad, he ought not, though his insanity is not
known to bear upon the point of his crime, to be condemned
like a sane person, because the condition of his brain may be
actually such as to have rendered the act one of a madman.
If the brain is at all unsound, we cannot pronounce upon the
limits of its sanity when we find it doing wrong. Mercy
should always take advantage of the possibility or probability
of the crime resulting from insanity; although every rational
and virtuous, every unexceptionable, deed of such a patient
should be as valid as the deed of any other person.

Still madmen may be open to the influence of motives ;
and, as this fact is acknowledged and acted upon within mad-
houses, whenever it is possible, so it ought to be acted upon
outside them. Within madhouses madmen are gratified and
pimished accordingly as they conduct themselves well or ill ; —
punished, not corporeally, not in the least cruelly, but still
punished, — deprived of some gratification or other: and,
when not too insane, they, knowing the consequences of good
or bad conduct, endeavour to shape their conduct accordingly,
and do succeed to a great extent. Outside madhouses the
treatment of madmen should be similar: not cruel, but still
calculated to influence them. They should know what will
to a certainty be the result of certain conduct. Hanging is
out of the question for even the most criminal of their deeds,
but they would dread confinement for life ; and this they
ought to expect if they commit, or attempt to commit, any
criminal act.

And here is another argument against capital punishment —
that mark of imperfect civilization, in the case of the sane. It
is sometimes possible to mistake a madman for a sane person
— sometimes very difficult to draw the line between sanity and
insanity. Yet how dreadful to reflect that a madman has
been put to death — ^been strangled, by the law — ^the perfection
of the law, which lawyers have, in England, fondly called
the perfection of human reason. Yet madmen have been
hanged in our own day. Bellingham was mad. This possi-

* The language held by Mr. Wakley, the coroner, on this point is to us
frightful.— £(/. Z.


Digitized by


Google


142 Phrenological Society.

bility ought never to occur. If capital punishments were
abolished, the sane would be allowed and trained to reform,
which hanging prevents, the poor wretch being impiously
^ sent into the presence of his maker' at once instead of being
prepared by a long course of virtuous training and change of
habits that only can be worth anything; and the insane
would be prevented from doing harm and be treated only as
consideration for himself and for society require.

Indeed man has no right to punish at all with a view to re-
tribution ; for every thought and act results necessarily, as ne-
cessarily as any physical result, from the constitution of the
brain on the one hand and the influence of circumstances
external to it on the other. Punishments should be merely
for the purpose of supplying additional motives to good con-
duct. A mother is not justified in punishing her child with
any other view. All punishment, therefore, should be nicely
adapted to the error, be the certain result of the error, and
carry its own reason on the face of it to those for whom it is
established.

March SI. (Annual Meeting,)
The elections were as follows :—

President.
John EUiotson, M.D., Cantab., F.R.S.

Vice-Presidents.

Archibald Billing, M.D., Oxon. J. G. GraeflF, Esq.

G. Coode, Esq. Professor Wheatstone, F.R.S.

Treasurer — R. C. Kirby, Esq.

Hon. Librarian — J. B. Sedgwick, Esq.

Hon. Curator — H. G. Atkinson, Esq., F.G.S.

Hon. Secretary — E. S. Symes, Esq.

Other Members of the Council.

Bemasconi, B., Esq. Murray, T. L., Esq.

Drew, H. P. L., Esq. Nodin, F. S., Esq.

Feamside, T. R., Esq. Topham, Wm., Esq.

Hering, W., Esq. Uwins, T., Esq., R.A.

Kingdom, Wm., Esq. Wood, Rev. D., M.A., Cantab.

Lewis, Gteorge, Esq. Wood, Wm., Esq.


Digitized by


Google


• ( 143 )

VI. Letter from Mr. Atkinson, on the conduct of certain Mem-
bers of the Phrenological Association, to the Editor of the
Phrenological Journal, but rejected.

Nov. I7th, 1842.
Sir, — ^I perfectly agree with the views expressed in Dr.
Engledue^s most noble Address,* delivered at the opening
meeting of the Phrenological Association; andj having ex-
pressed similar opinions in the paper which I read on another
occasion during the session, I beg to say a few words in reply
to the observations of Sir George Mackenzie, which appeared
in the last number of your Journal. In the first place, it is
not true that there is any "split'' in the Phrenological
Association: a few gentlemen only were displeased at the
introduction of mesmerism, with all its important confirma-
tions and revelations, in connexion with phrenology and the
philosophy of man. The opposition was resisted; and it is
well for the credit of the Association that it was successfully
resisted. A few other gentlemen objected to the material
views of Dr. Engledue, not so much, as it appeared, that
these led to any different practical result from those which
they themselves entertained, but that these at once put the
matter in so clear a light, that there could no longer be any
compromise of truth, any unnatural union between the facts
of science and the poetry and theories of spiritualism and
speculation. Sir G. Mackenzie has said that Dr. E. caUs
upon phrenologists who believe in the existence of mind, to
shew it, saying, '* that as it cannot be seen, it cannot exist.''
Now, Dr. E. has made no such statement in his Address ; all
that he says is to the effect, that it is impossible to prove the
existence, of mind as a separate entity influencing the body.
Nor can we picture it (in the mind's eye of course) as having
such an existence, any more than we can imagine any other
function or prop^y of matter having a distinct and inde-
pendent existence, — ^that is, having life and activity inde-
pendent of matter ; and, since this is unquestionably the case,
on what groimds can we philosophijcally conceive the possi-
bility of such an existence? Besides that, the admission
would be useless, and likely to cause, as it has ever done,
confusion in men's brains and endless disputation, warping the
judgment from the simple truth, and inducing a spirit of an-
tagonism interfering much with the freedom of thought and
enquiry and with the practical application of scientific prin-
ciples.

* Cerebral Physiology and Materialism, &c. By W. C. Enoledoe, M.D.
With a Letter from Dr. Elliotson on Mesmeric Phrenology and Materialism.
BaiUi^re, Regent Street, London.


Digitized by


Google


144 Letter from Mr, Atkinson

If the properties of the entire brain be considered to
have a separate existence^ — to be, in fact, a separate entity,
a thing influencing itself, its own cause, — so also may every
part of the brain have its separate principles existing out of
itself; nay, every atom of each of these several parts may
with an equal show of reason have an independent influenc-
ing spirit, a soul or mind, a life independent of matter : and
to say that the brain is the instrument of the mind, is not only
mere assumption, but false analogy. It is much more rea-
sonable to suppose that the brain uses the mind — a kind of
raw material which it gives shape to and spins out into va-
rious textures, than to say that mind, an imaginary thing,
which cannot be conceived to have power, parts, or properties,
excepting as they are derived from the brain, should never-
theless use the brain as a man uses a knife ; it were mbre
reasonable to conceive the mind to be the instrument of the
brain, as the knife is the instrument of the hand. In truth,
the beUef has no foundation ; while every fact and analogy
leads to the opposite conclusion. It is a mere assumption ;
and, being such, it were just as reasonable to imagine and
to insist upon the existence of some vast shadowy being
moving over the land and upon the face of the waters — a
spirit of the air — a thunder and lightning principle, using
the air and electric fluid to produce what we call wind and
storm, no matter that it shaU be urged how other causes in
nature are observed to produce these effects. The thing can-
not be disproved, any more than the existence of a mind or
soul as a spiritual something separate from the body ; but
who in their senses ever dreams of insisting on such absur-
dity, and to what folly might we not be led by such a belief !
Away with all such nonsense! these are follies that could
hardly now be entertained in any well-regulated nursery.
We have no perception, consciousness, or reason for believ-
ing, that there exists any thing which is not inherent in,
and the property of, matter ; we have no knowledge or con-
ception of any thing existing out of matter. Mentation or
cerebration is observed to hold the same relation to the brain,
that heat, motion, electricity, and gravitation do to inani-
mate things, irritability to plants, or thought and feeling
to the nervous organs of inferior creatures. To assume,
therefore, in the case of man, anjrthing beyond this, is illo-
gical and fanciful. Again, we only perceive the properties of
matter in their effects ; we may study the conditions of mani-
festation, but beyond this all is mystery; we cannot say that
the properties of matter are matter, or something else which
is united with it, though by analogy we might infer that it


Digitized by


Google


on the conduct of certain Members, ^c. 145

were matter, as we cannot conceive life without motion, or
motion without substance. The facts of mesmerism seem to
shew that man and other animals are something, so to speak,
after the nature of electric bodies ; creatures, as all Phreno-
logists, I believe, must acknowledge, of their organization and
of the circumstances which have influenced this — ^the form
and cerebral condition of an idiot producing idiocy, the form
and cerebral condition of a dog or a worm what we know to
be the nature of those creatures. All beyond is mystery — so
far, at least, as philosophy is concerned. Nature reveals to
us no more than this, but which, nevertheless, is the only
real foundation for good morals and for a philosophy of man.
I conceive, therefore, that Dr. Engledue was quite philoso-
phical in declaring that materialism, in this acceptation of the
term, is the basis of Phrenology ; and, as we can conceive
nothing of spirit or of any thing independent of matter, it is
quite right to deny the existence of mind as a single principle
or separate entity. That men have not more respect for
matter and for matter-of-fact than for their own imaginings,
only shews that we are still in an age of delusion and dark-
ness, where pride and bigotry reign triumphant over truth
and morals and true religion. If mind or soul be cerebra-
tion, why, I should be glad to know, may not cerebration be
as holy, as pure, as good, and as everlasting a thing as any
other which is imagined, but unknown.

Sir G. M. triumphantly exclaims — " Let Dr. Engledue
and his associates shew, if they can, to what good purpose
their doctrine can be applied, supposing it true and capable
of demonstration.'^ Is this a time to demand the use of the
truth of any important question which is capable of demon-
station ? I think not. But Dr. E. has shewn good reason
for the course he has pursued : let him answer for himself.
" Uniformity of thought is certainly a desirable object, but
cannot be otherwise obtained than by the establishment of
true principles.'' " To evade the charge of materialism, we
content ourselves with stating that the immaterial makes use
of the material to shew forth its powers. What is the result
of this ? We have the man of theory and believer in spi-
ritualism quarrelling with the man of fact, supporter of ma-
terial doctrines — we have two parties,'' &c. These are Dr.
Engledue's reasons for advocating material doctrines, and to
my mind reasons which are sufBcient ; indeed. Sir Creole's
own conduct upon this occasion is itself a proof that Dr. E.
has judged rightly of the necessitv of establishing the first
principles of any science, that uniformity of thought upon


Digitized by


Google


146 Letter from Mr. Atkinson

all points, likely to cause diflferences, even if not really im-
portant in themselves, may be obtained.

Sir G. Mackenzie appears to allude to the power of the
will, and the sense of personal identity, as though these quali-
ties at least, might exist independently of any appropriate
organs. If he really means this, I beg to say that my late
researches in Mesmero-Phrenology have enabled me to point
out, with some show of probabiUty at least, if not of certainty,
the existence and situation of these organs ; but the existence
of which, at least, we might infer, beUeving, as Phrenologists,
that every mental power must emanate from some material
and cerebral organ.

Sir Gteorge goes on to state — " that a man may enter-
tain whatever system of religion is most congenial to his con-
stitution, and be a Phrenologist at the same time." This is
a strange assertion, and requires a little explanation as to
what Sir Gteorge may mean by Phrenology, and what he un-
derstands by religion. If he intends to say that any religious
dogma may be made to fit in with observable phenomena, I
fear that he will not find many who will agree with him ; but
he seems to have forgotten the fate of Galileo, Harvey, Gtdl,
and a multitude of other martyrs to the ignorance and bigotry
of dogmatism. It is certain, however, that what is true in
any religion cannot be ppposedto any fact in science; and no
one, therefore, need fear the progress of science, unless, in-
deed, he be bent on maintaining the existing errors of super-
stition and ignorance. True religion and real philosophy
must ever go hand in hand ; and whilst we have truth with
us, we have God or nature on our side, and what shall we
fear ? Phrenologists are the best reformers the world has, so
long as they remain firm and honest, and only true to them-
selves and to their science. But why should Sir George
Mackenzie and a few others make all this fuss about nothing,
and leave the association on the very first occasion of any
difference of opinion, and in the very face of the committee's
declaration of their anxiety ^^to maintain the utmost freedom
of thought and inquiry for each member, while securing also
unanimity of feeling and singleness of exertion,^' — and again,
that '^ the association, as a body, is not responsible for the
opinions of its members.^'

If members were always to retire from a society on account
of some difference of opinion, no society in London could be
upheld; members would retire from the Geological Society
after every meeting. But Sir George Mackenzie, in retiring,
has just done what he professes to wish to avoid — " given


Digitized by


Google


on the conduct of certain Members, ^c. 147

strong grounds for those whose lives are devoted to the foster-
ing of that prime obstacle to advancing knowledge, to cause
it to strike its root deeper, so as to hold out more firmly
against that knowledge which facts, plainly seen, have
achieved for us !'' It will still, then, be a question, what
good grounds could Sir G. Mackenzie and his associates have
for leaving the Phrenological Association. Dr. Engledue has
done the cause good service : — he has sown another seed in
mental and moral philosophy, which is already taking hold of
the soil. The light of truth will shine in a new day, notwith-
standing the perversions of ignorance and the ingenious
sophistries of the worldly wise.

A word or two more. I must beg to express to you my
regret, as one of the acting members of the committee of the
last session of the Phrenological Association, that the report
of the papers read, and the discussions, have been so imper-
fectly recorded in your journal. For instance, after the read-
ing of Dr. Engledue^s address. Dr. Moore spoke at some
length, opposing mesmerism and materialism, whilst Mr.
Cull did not speak a word, and Mr. Richard Beamish, on that
day, was a hundred miles from London. Again, after the
reading of my own paper, a discussion took place which
lasted above aoi hour, but of which there is no report at all.
Surely some further notice should have been taken of the
strange opposition which was offered both to the introduction
and to the facts of mesmeric cerebration, as illustrating and ad-
vancing phrenology. Dr. Moore's observations, at least, should
not have been passed over in silence, who thought that mes-
merism was so false a thing and so shocking a practice, that
the facts recorded were no facts at all, and its connexion with
phrenology mere speculation t whilst Mr. Cull did not con-
ceive, though a firm believer in mesmerism, that the evidence
of a great number of cases, careftilly observed and daily expe-
rimented upon, were suflBicient to warrant the introduction of
a subject of such vast importance to the Phrenological As-
sociation, because Mr. A., B., and C, who knew nothing
whatever about the matter, did not yet believe in what they
had only heard reported, and in fact, as Mr. Churchill main-
tained, " mesmerism was not yet sufficiently respectable to
be allied to phrenology f^ so ^at men of science and phi-
losophers are only to support truth when it becomes the
fashion with the ignorant and the vulgar ; — all which objec-
tions were fully answered by Dr. ElUotson, Dr. Engledue,
Mr. Richard Beamish, Mr. James Simpson, Mr. Symes, and
others, and to the satisfaction of a very lai^e majority of
the members present. But the opposition which was offered


Digitized by


Google


148 The Declaration of Esipediency.

to Mesmero-Phrenology and Materialism in those meet-
ings and the committee will remain a bht in the annals of
science.

Heney G. Atkinson.

18, Upper Gloncester Place, London.


VII. The Declaration of Expediency.

The 20th of June, 1842, was a memorable day. British
Cerebral Physiologists assembled for the purpose of receiving
and diffusing information connected with their science. The
views contained in the introductory Address have produced
considerable disquietude ; and whether we recall the proceed-
ings at the meetings — ^read the absurdities contained in the
Declaration of Expediency — reflect on the weakness, tame-
ness, and indecision displayed in the various articles in the
Edinburgh Journal, or review the extreme silliness and vul-
garity of the Phrenological Almanack, we can only arrive at
one conclusion, — ^that the philosophical views contained in
the Address remain unshaken, and that the opposing party
does not comprehend the question under discussion.

Where is George Combe ? He read the Address at the
first meeting of the Association ; he advanced doctrines di-
rectly opposed to those under discussion, and he inculcates
the belief that we are only acquainted with the " compound
existence of mind and body,'' He did not, like Sir G. Mac-
kenzie, and his nephew Mr. R. Cox, the editor of the Phre-
nological Journal, retire &om the Association; he did not
sign the Declaration of Expediency ; and he has not promul-
gated his views in the late numbers of his own Journal.
At a period when such " deadly blows'* are aimed at orthodox
truth, why does he not come to the rescue of his disciples ?
Is he convinced ? Does silence give consent ? Or, does he
agree with those who condemn the promulgation of the views
but at the same time contend that they are not of the least
importance ?

Declaration. Ist November, 1842.

" We, the undersigned, members of the Phrenological Association, ob-
serving that, in consequence of the public aTowal of the theory of Mate-
rialism, made by Dr. Engledue, in his Introductory Address delivered on
the opening of our Fifth Session, a considerable number of the members
have re8igned,^8ome of these founding their resignation upon the opinion,


Digitized by


Google


The Declaration of Expediency, 149

also expressed by Dr. EDgledue, that Materialism is the only sound founda-
tion of Phrenology, — although we do not see, in either of these opinions,
sufficient reason for resignation, deem it advisable to make public, and
endeavour to place on the Records of the Association, the following De-
claration : —

*^ First. — We hold that there does not yet exist, so far as known to us,
any evidence to establish either the theory of the Immateriality or of the
Materiality of the Mind ; and any conclusion yet formed on either side has
been assumption. We never forget that, whatever be the essential nature of
mind (were it even a function of matter, and of matter's functions we do not
know the limits), it is God's work, and therefore wisely fitted for its pur-
pose in creation.

" Sboondly. — When Dr. Engledue asserts that we can discover, in the
brain's structure, the actual origin, or evolution, of thought and feeling, it
appears to us that he has only described the molecular structure of the brain,
as seen by the microscope. Among these molecules he has conjectured
motion, but admits that he has not seen it Mr. Combe's American case,
which Dr. Engledue cites, in which convolutionary motion was felt with the
hand, does not demonstrate molecular. But even had Dr. Engledue seen
molecular motion, that motion itself may still be only the working of an in-
strument, and would not warrant the conclusion that it is itse^ the evolution
of thought, in either animals or man. More generally, Dr, Engledue has
notf in any part qf his Address, predicated anything qf the brain, which canmot
he predicated qf it as the medimn or instrument qf an ulterior power,

'* Thirdly.— Nevertheless, while we hold that Dr. Engledue has not
demonstrated his theory of Materialism, we do not assert the converse of
that theory, namely, that an immaterial essence actually does originate
thought and feelings. On the contrary, we repeat, with submission becoming
our ignorance, that we know nothing in the matter.

*' Fourthly. — ^As we think it probable that the mystery of the mind's
essence has not been placed within the reach of human discovery or cog-
nizance, it is satisfactory to us to be convinced, as we are, that that know-
ledge is not essential to Phrenology ; and that Dr. Engledue has assumed
and predicated that essentiality without shewing it. Phrenology has not
been obstructed by our ignorance of the essence of mind, that science having
to do with the conditions only, not the essence of mind ; so that phrenolo-
gical truths and their applications would have been, and will be, the same,
whether the brain be the mind, or only its material instrument. The dis-
covery of either to be truth would do Phrenology, in so far as it is the con-
nection between development and manifestation, no good; much less the
doctrine without the discovery. But, on the other hand, the doctrine, as
avowed by Dr. Engledue, cannot do Phrenology any possible harm, with
any one who understands both subjects.

** Fifthly. — We hold that the doctrine is equally harmless to religion.
We agree with Milton and Locke, and with Paley, Belsham, Lowth,
Watson, and other divines, that the question is entirely unconnected with
that of man's immortality. On this head, none should be more at ease than
those who hold that it is the special revelation of Christianity alone which
" brings to light" the immortality of man, while his essential nature here is
left a mystery.* That destiny would not be in the least affected by the fact,
were it so, that his nature here is entirely material. The religious ques-
tion, by dismissing a bugbear, actually gains by the conviction that Mate-
rialism itself is not an irreligious doctrine. We, therefore, do not participate
in an inconsiderate alarm on account of it ; and we regret the resignation of
some Phrenologists, who nevertheless take the same view of the question

* BUhop WaUon't wordi are : '* Believing, u I do, in the trath of the Chrifltian religion,
which teaches that men are accountable for their actions, I troable not myself with dark dls-
qaisitions concerning necessity and liberty, matter and tpMt, Hoping, as I do, for eternal
life through Jesus Christ, I am not distorbed at my inability clearly to convince myself that
the sodI is or is not a snbsUnce distinct from the body, "-^Anecdotea of the L{fe qf Bishop
Watmm, 4to. edit. (1817), page \5.

VOL. I. M


Digitized by


Google


160 The Declaration of Expediency.

with oarielvei, as aflbrdlng a Banction to that alarm which they do not intend,
and to which it is by no means entitled.

*^ Sixthly. — Notwithstanding these our views of the doctrine of Mate-
rialism, aware that, with a vast migority of the public (very few, even of
educated men, having thought on the subject), it does excite an alarm highly
prejudicial to the general reception of Phrenology ; and of opinion that,
besides not being cidled for, its public discussion in the Association was the
least likely way to remove prejudices against it, especially when it was
announced in a seemingly authoritative manner, and appeared to commit
the Association by being contained in the Introductory Address, we regret
the course followed by Dr. Engledue ; and such of us as voted thanks to
him for his Address excepted from our vote his avowal of Materialism in
that address. Of course, we do not join in the outcry against Dr. Engledue
for his abstract belief in the Material theory, if to his mind it appears to be
truth ; of which to our minds there is no evidence.

*' Fin ALLY. — Although we consider that the advocation of the doctrine
of Materialism in the Association, especially in the Introductory Address,
and of the opinion, that that doctrine is the only sound basis of Phrenology,
requires a distinct disavowal by us, we do not view the unauthorized, unex-
pected, and withal solitary, occurrence of that advocation, as amounting to
a reason for our abandoning the Association ; we have therefore preferred
the course of remaining, and, as members, endeavouring to vindicate both
the Association and Phrenology.

'* We request that this Declaration, with our signatures, shall be re-
corded in the Books of the Association, and published in the Phrenological
Journal.

James Simpson, Edinburgh.

Richard Bbamish, Cheltenham.

M. B. Sampson, Bank of England.

William Gregory, M.D., Aberdeen.

RiOHD. S. CONLIFF, ^ Qias«>w

Jambs M*Clelland, J^'^RO^'
R. Card well, Blackburn.
Alex. Hood, Kilmarnock.
J. S. BncKiNOHAM, London.
F. A. Mac Kenzib, Baronet.

TK-T^i.X'v'-riH. ! NorthucberUud.

RiCHD. Carmiohael, M.D., Dublin.

S. Harb, London."
Emek member who skaU concur in ike essentials qf the foregoing Declara-
tion (a cop^ of which is sent to all who were members at the date qf the last
meeting), is requested to authorize the annexation qf his signature thereto, by a
letter, prepaid, addressed to Messrs. NeiU and Co,, Printers, Edinburgh ; and
in order to assist in defraying the expense of this circular, which is sent to about
300 members, to enclose six penny postage stamps.

N.B, — To be in time for the Phrenological Journal, the answers must not be
delayed beyond three Posts,

We have republished the Declaration^ although we differ
toto C0do from its authors^ because we consider it to be an
historical record^ marking the period when the great migra-
tion of conservative philosophers took place, recording the
infantile thoughts and absurd opinions of the protesters, and
presenting a new specimen of the concentrated poppy ^^rup
with which certain individuals have so long dosed theur disci-

Eles. Talk of the accouchement of the mountain, and the
irth of a mouse I This is ten times more laughable. The


Digitized by


Google


The Declaration of Expediency, 151

groans of our northern friends and the sympathizing squeaks
of their English and Irish allies afforded us considerable
merriment^ and we can quite picture to ourselves the coun-
tenance^ and fancy the thoughts of Dr. Engledue after he had
perused the copy forwarded to him. It is said the idea of
sending forth this ohve branch originated with Mr. Simpson.
Be that as it may^ he certainly took a very prominent part in
the movement^ and we know that there were two editions cir-
culated before even a few signatures could be obtained. We
shrewdly suspect that the majority of those who have signed
it^ did so under the impression thcd they were discountenanc-
ing the withdrawal of certain members from the Association,
and not by any means intending to convey a censure upon
the opinions contained in the address. How dse are we to
account for the name of Charles Bray appended to it ? He has
written and published a woA to prove the necessity of man's
actions, and yet signs the Declaration I

But we will not enter into any discussion on this topic,
we have to do simply with the Declaration and the course
pursued by certain parties since last June. If this Declara-
tion was intended as an olive branchy to all such olive branches
we shall apply the pruning knife. We will not sanction the
uninterrupted promulgation of doctrines calculated to retard
the advancement of true philosophy. From whatever quarter
such suspicions documents may emanate^ we shall be always
ready to analyze them — ^to separate the mysterious and unin-
telligible from the simple^ plain^ and inductive— the chaff
from the wheat — ^the true philosopher from the mystagogue
and mere wordy disputant. We are rejoiced that there are
Cerebral Physiologists removed from the noise raised by our
own countrymen, who can look at the question in a philoso-
phic light. We give the following extract from a letter fix>m
R. R. Noel, Esq. to T. H. Bastard, Esq., dated March 25th,
1843, Rosawitz, near Tetschen, Bohemia.

" I have read lately a copy of Dr. Engledue's Address,
with EUiotson^s Letter on Mesmerism. I read the letter with
much interest, and immediately translated the greater part,
which I forwarded to Herr Van Struve for the first number
of his Gterman Phrenol(^cal Journal. Unfortunately it ar-
rived too late; but he teUs me it shall be printed in his
second number. When you next see Dr. EUiotson, tell him
this ; and pray likewise beg him to inform Dr. Engledue, if
he has an opportunity, that Coxmt Francis Thun and Pro-
fessor Dr. Cotta and myself have been highly gratified with
his powerful Address : that Thun and myself, as members of
the Association, neither approve of the conduct of the se-

m2


Digitized by


Google


152 The Declaration of Expediency,

ceders, nor would we, had we been in London, have signed
the Declaration of the sixty-six members, mentioned p. 94 of
the January number of the journal. I should be glad if this
could be openly stated. For it would shew that we phrenolo-
gists in this pjort of Germany do not object to philosophical
views and their bold expression. It has really pained me to
read the twaddle contained in most of the letters to the editor
of the journal in the January number. Mr. Prideaux's alone
is a sound production, and I honour the man as possessed of
fine intellect and courage to grapple with prejudice.^^

But to the Declaration. " We hold that there does not
yet exist, so far as known to us, any evidence to establish
either the theory of the immateriality or of the materiality of
the mind : and any conclusion yet formed on either side has
been assumption.^^ This is completely begging the question.
This is assuming that there is such a thing as "mind." A
novel proceeding truly, to discuss the properties of an ob-
ject (?) which has only an ideal existence ! Dr. Engledue
never entered into the discussion whether an oJBTshoot of the
imagination was material or immaterial. The answer is self-
evident. He contended that we had no proof of the exist-
ence of " mind," and that we ought to confine ourselves to
the investigation of matter and its modifications. To talk
about the essential nature of a phantom — the invention of
an uncultivated brain — ^is scarcely surpassed by a simpleton
studying to answer the schoolboy's catch-question, "What
fills a vacuum ?" These gentlemen have taken a false step.
They have assumed that man possesses " a mind," and, when
their error is pointed out, instead of re-investigating their po-
sition, they protest against the reception of the true doctrine
without offering any proof of its incorrectness ; and then,
poor innocents ! " repeat with submission becoming our igno-
rance that we know nothing in the matter." Why protest
then ? If you know nothing about the matter, why not let
those alone who do ? Why all this noise and hubbub ? What
will be said twenty years hence ?

" Mr. Combe's American case, which Dr. Engledue cites,
in which convoltUionary motion was felt with the hand, does
not demonstrate molecular." We are not at aU surprized at
the dealers in essences — spirits and phantasmagoria, remain-
ing ignorant of the laws of physics. We should like to be
informed upon whose authority it has been proved that the
movement of a convolution is not of necessity made up of a
movement in all its particles. How so many names could
be appended to such a manifest absurdity is truly mar-
vellous.


Digitized by


Google


The Declaration of Expediency, 153

" As we think it probable that the mystery of the mimPs
essence has not been placed within the reach of human disco-
very or cognizance^ it is satisfactory to us to be convinced, as
we are, that that knowledge is not essential to phrenology ;
and that Dr. Engledue has assumed and predicated that es-
sentiality without shewing it/* It will be time enough to dis-
cuss the essence of mind when its existence has been proved.
We insist that the onus probandi rests with the protesters.
This quotation furnishes us with an excellent proof how well
these gentlemen understand Dr. Engledue's position. The
whole force of his arguments was to prove the non-ewistence
of mind ; and yet these worthy mystery-mongers assert that
Dr. Engledue "predicates its essentiality without proving it.''
What do they mean ?

*' The wise men of Egypt were secret as dummies,

And e'en when they most condescended to teach,

They packed up their meaning, as they did their mammies,

In so many wrappers, 'twas out of one's reach."

They next confess that Dr. Engledue's doctrine is "harm-
less to religion ;'* nay more, they confess that their religious
dogmas absolutely " gain by the conviction that materialism
itself is not an irreligious doctrine.'' After this, any reason-
able man would presume, that, since Cerebral Physiology is a
science having its foundation in nature, and its superstruc-
ture reared by an accumulation of natural facts, they would
have seen the propriety of leaving the question to fight its
own way. But no ; expediency is the order of the day in the
investigation of political, moral, and intellectual subjects.
They admit that "very few, eveit of educated men, have
thought on the subject," and that therefore it excites an alarm
" highly prejudicial to the general reception" of our science.
Cerebral Physiology is a science clearly inculcating the neces-
sity of free inquiry, and yet here we have Cerebral Physio-
logists nullifying their own doctrine! The discussion of
truth openly may not immediately remove prejudices, but
must most assuredly advance the cause of truth. The philo-
sopher soon learns that prejudices are most ravenous leeches
— they are not easily removed ; and, therefore, in discussing a
scientific question, he thinks less of the impression he is
likely to produce on his compeers, than he does of the re-
ception it will have from, and the benefit it will bestow upon,
the next and future generations. This is the thought which
should animate all men. It is truth in the abstract that we
should search for, and not consider the reception a man is
likely to meet with because he advocates a certain doctrine or


Digitized by


Google


154 The Declaration of Ewpediency.

believes a certain fact, lliese gentlemen took low ^und.
They were not influenced by that determination to risk the
tauDts oi the ignorant and interested — ^to bear the 8C(»m of
public opinion^ after all the worst species of martyrdom, —
but they declared — ^it is now an historical fact — ^they declared
that the discussion of a fundamental natural fact '' woe tm-
called for^' — ^that the public discussion of a question affecting
all men was " the least likely toay to remove pr^fudices against
if' — and that as regards themsdves they neither vote for nor
against the doctrine, but confess " with submission becoming
our ignorance that we know nothing in the matter !"

But it appears that the promulgation of a doctrine displeas-
ing to the self-constituted orthodox Cerebral Physiologists is
not the only crime with which Dr. Engledue is charged, — there
is one still more frightful, the crime of promulgating doc-
trines which were '^unauthorized, unexpected, and withal a
solitary advocation/' This is truly ridiculous. When a gen-
tleman is requested to deliver an address before a scientific
association, of course he conceives that he is to advance what
he believes to be truth, and not what he may fancy will be
palatable to his hearers. But our readers must now under-
stand that such an opinion is erroneous. The new law by
which the writer of an address is to be guided, is this, —
first to ascertain the opinions of the majority, and then write
to please them, — thus lacerating his conscientiousness and
pandering to their vanity : but, if he dare to advance his own
views, although he may distinctly state that he alone is re-
sponsible for them, nevertheless such a fair and manly pro-
cedure is to be considered a high crime and misdemeanour I
"withal a solitary advocation!" What folly! It is with
sorrow we declare it, but where is the scientific truth which
was promulgated by authority ? Where is the college, society,
or association which ever advanced a doctrine opposed to the
wishes of the majority ? Was not Cerebral Physiology first
advanced by the labours of one man, — ^was it not "unautho-
rized, imexpected, and withal a solitary advocation?" And
are not all sciences even now advanced by individuals starting
into action, and stepping over and beyond the sleepers who
after a few years repose under the shadows caused by their
own labours ? So far from considering this a crime for which
Dr. Engledue is to receive blame, we are pleased with him
for advancing into the enemies^ camp, and with torch in
hand producing a blaze which not all the exertions of the
besieged can extinguish.

The receipt of the following letter from a correspondent
tempts us to refer to the Edinburgh Journal,


Digitized by


Google


The Declaration of Expediency. 155

TO THB BDITOK8 OF THB ZOIST.

GKNTLBiiBN,~The letter of Sergeant Adaais, relative to the proceedings
of the Phrenological Association, in the Janaary number of the PktemologiedL
Jotvnal, contains a mis-statement so monstrous and excessive, that it has
excited the surprise of many that the Editor, who must have been better in-
formed, should have inserted it without comment.

Always regretting to see falsehood usurp the place of truth, and the
fictions of envy and malignity recorded as historical facts, and being also
amongst the number of those who consider that the proceedings which actu-
ally took place, coupled with the subsequent conduct of many of the mem-
bers, will suffice to represent them in a sufficiently ridiculous and derogatory
light to posterity, without the aid of the fictions of Sergeant Adams, I
am desirous that these should receive the most direct and unqualified con-
tradiction.

Towards the latter part of his letter the Sergeant expresses himself as
follows — " I left the room immediately after I had concluded my address, as
did a vast number of other persons.'^ And again — " I have understood
that the greater part of the audience had left the room before the vote was
put, and the great m^ority spoken of arose from the circumstance that Dr.
Engledue's friends only remained, and that the numbers were about 20 to 9 ;
but this I cannot vouch for."

Now I cannot lay claim to any great experience in estimating the number
of an audience, but probably as a rough guess I should not be very wide of
the mark in setting them down at 200 ; and out of this number I take upon
myself to assert in the most positive manner, that not 10 had left the room at
Ike time the vote of thanks to Dr. Engledue was put and carried with only
<iot (I ! !) dissentients. I say not ten, to be enabled to speak positively, and
from a desire to ensure being above, rather than below the number; in
reality, I believe only three persons besides Sergeant Adams had left the
room at the time alluded to, and upon referring to the Medical Times, pub-
lished immediately after the transaction occurred, I find it stated — ^' It is
not true that many opponents had left the room before it was put to the vote ;
and so far from there being any difficulty in carrying it, as insinuated in the
iMMcel, only two dissentient hands were held up, vrhilst an amendment,
proposed by the practical phrenologist it refers to, fell to the ground for
want of a seconder."

Further comment is superfluous. Such a mis-statement as 20 to 9, instead
of 200 to 2, fully deserves the epithets of monstrous and excessive which I have
attached to it, and I shall observe, in conclusion, that, when misrepresenta-
tions so gross afiect accuracy and acquaintance with particulars, by pre-
tending to specify numbers, it gives them the suspicious appearance of
fictions, devised and promulgated to serve a purpose.

I am, &c.
A Mbmbbr of THB Association,
Present on the Discussion on the Address.

We quite agree with our correspondent. The letter of
Sergeant Adams ought not to have been published. Mr.
Simpson was in Edinburgh^ and, since he furnished the first
jrepcwrt of the proceedings of the Association to the Editor,
he might have been appealed to for the purpose of deciding
the character of this specimen of legal morality. The state-
ment was so glaringly false, that it scarcely required a second
thought ; and, moreover, wc hold it to be the duty of an
Editor to ascertain, as far as lies in his power, the truth of
aU communications forwarded to him. We have no hesita-


Digitized by


Google


156 Mr, Sampson and Mr. Simpson,

tion in stating that it was a wilful exaggeration. Sergeant
Adams never could have heard such a report. It suit^ his
purpose^ and evidently suited his taste^ to propagate, in the
only journal at that time devoted to our science, this bare-
faced invention. The language of mendacity and deception
is not only a dishonourable^ but it is a dangerous weapon —
when it strikes there is a recoil-blow ten times more fated.

If we could afford the space, we might criticize the other
absurd letters inserted in the journal, more particularly the
letter from the " Eminent English Physician f but really the
whole proceeding is so perfectly unphilosophical^ that we here
leave the subject. DELE


VIII. Mr. Sampson and Mr. Simpson.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE Z0I8T.

Sir,

Nothing ever struck me as more characteristic of brains
not advanced beyond the condition of dark and monkish
times, than the amusing horror of certain members of the
Phrenological Association when Dr. Engledue last summer
delivered that address which in my letter appended to it I
styled ''powerful, truly philosophical, benevolent and noble;
and which has sold, I find by inquiry at the booksellers, to the
number of three thousand. The word materialism stirred up
certain feelings in their brains without any participation of
their understandings, — an occurrence in so many persons re-
specting numerous words employed in both politics and reli-
gion ; as though the fact of materialism was hostile to virtue
or happiness, or even incompatible with the belief in a God
or a revelation. These members in their childish terror re-
signed. Certain others considered this step quite unneces-
sary and put forth a printed Declaration, composed by Mr.
Simpson, to that effect, sending it round to aU the members of
the Association and printing it in the Edinburgh Phrenological
Journal, The grounds of their considering resignation unneces-
sary were, — 1. That "the doctrine of materialism is "a bug-
bear" " harmless to religion" — as Milton and Locke, with Pa-
ley, Lowth, Watson, and other divines have already said ; and
that Christianity indeed " actually gains by the conviction that
materialism itself is not an irreligious doctrine." 2. That the
doctrine '' cannot do phrenology any possible harm with any
one who understands both subjects.'^ 3. That they are too
ignorant of the "matter^'—" knowing nothing in the matter,"


Digitized by


Google


Mr. Sampson and Mr. Simpson, 157

to assert that the mind is an immaterial essence^ all they know
being that " it is God's work," " wisely fitted for its purpose/*
and that " of matter's functions they do not know the limits/'
4. That the advocacy of materialism was " unauthorized/' and
only " solitary /' and 5. That they " of course do not join in
the outcry against Dr.Engledue, for his abstract belief in the
material theory, if to his mind it appears to be truth."

Yet these very men, who declare that the doctrine is per-
fectly innocent, and that Christianity must gain by the
conviction of its innocence, think it necessary to declare,
though its announcement in the Association was " unautho-
rized" and " solitary," (and though the customary declaration
was officially made aloud to the meeting immecQately before
Dr. Engledue delivered his address, — 'that, as a body, they
cannot be held responsible for individual opinions which may
be expressed in any of the papers submitted to the meeting,')
that the address " appeared to commit the Association !" that,
though it '^cannot do phrenology any possible harm with those
who understand both subjects," "it does excite an alarm
highly prejudicial to the general reception of phrenology !"
Pray, by whom ought Phrenology to be received except by
those who understand it, and materialism too ?

They write of the " theory of materialism and materiality,"
as though the expression of a fact could be a theory, which
is a speculative arrangement of facts. The materialist has no
theory : he observes a fact — ^that what are called mental
functions are the doings of the brain, and he contents him-
self with this fact, speculating upon no explanation. The
immaterialist has no theory : he has an hypothesis. He is
not contented with the fact, but indulges his fancy that there
must be an inconceivable something working the brain, which
he calls an immaterial substance, and in this imagined thing
he glories, and declares that, he and he alone has a solid founda-
tion for morality, religion, and future hope. " Theory of the
immateriality or of the materiality of the mind I" They are
displeased with Dr. Engledue for philosophically rejecting hy-
pothesis and adhering in his address to the {'act of mental
thenomena being the working of the peculiar matter called
rain, and they use the words — " taere it even a function of
matter/' and yet allow that they do not know the limit " of
matter's functions," — ^actually professing to be disciples of
GkJl whose work is entitled functions of the brain, — and
in their daily writing and speaking say Junctions of the brain
and function of this or that organ of the brain !

What was the plain, manly duty of men who thought
thus, and who wished to make a public^ declaration ? '\^y


Digitized by


Google


158 Mr. Sampson and Mr. Sknpson.

not to assure the public, among whom " they say very few
even of educated men have thought upon the subject/ that
Dr. Engledue had done very wrong in terrifying them by his
innocent opinions, but that the resigners were very wrong
and yery ignorant to be so terrified. But no ; these nota^
ble persons, who confess that they see no grounds for im-
materialism (see their Thirdly — ^^'we do not assert*' ''an
immaterial essence,*' and ''we know nothing in the matter"),
would not have had the public terrified by the announcement
at the meeting that any " solitary*' member of the Phrenolo-
gical Association was not an immaterialist ; and, as if to
support the ignorant prejudice of old women, anxiously
assure the world that Dr. Engledue has not proved material-
ism, and that phrenology is independent of it, — as though
we ought not to labour incessantly to elevate the world's in-
telligence, and to impress upon it the duty of inquiring in
science simply whether a thing be true, and not whether it
excite alarm. The course of these declarers resembles that
of the professors at University College who would not enter
upon the question of the truth of mesmerism; but, turning
their backs upon its astounding physiological facts and its
mighty power over disease, declared me very wrong to intro-
duce into their seat of science a subject on which the public
were prejudiced, as though their sole duty was not to en-
lighten the pubUc and dissipate its ignorance and prejudice.
Ignoble men !

A sensible man, who had incautiously signed this decla-
ration, would, I should think, have been anxious to have it
forgotten. But no. They end it with these words : " We
request that this declaration, with our signatures, shall be
recorded in the books of the Association, and pijUbUshed in
the Phrenological Journal."

Now, how in reason or decency could they request that
their declaration of disapprobation of Dr. Engledue's address
should be recorded in the books of the Association, when
Dr. Engledue's address, against which it is a protest, is not re-
corded, nor even the subject of the Address ? The only record
of the address is the following, — " Dr. Engledue then read the
opening Address J ^

Yet, — ^before they have sent their request to the Associi^
tion, or any of its officers, as such, — ^before the Association
has yet met since the publication of the declaration, and
therefore before there has been an opportunity of entering it
in the minutes of the Association, — no fewer than seven and
twenty have resigned because it is not so entered.

When the committee met lately for private business, the


Digitized by


Google


Mr. Sampson and Mr. Simpson. 159

declaration was incidentally mentioned in the way of conver-
sation^ and Mr. Sampson^ throwing himself bigly back in
his chair and raising lus arms carelessly above his head^ said
that he would for formes sake propose 'Hhat the circular
signed by Mr. Simpson and thirteen other members of the
Association should be entered in the minutes/^ though^ he
added^ " I am not deputed to take any steps whatever.'' None
of us opposed him. But no one seconded so absurd a motion.
In this there was no premeditation. His motion took us all
by surprise : but the common sense of all made us act spon-
taneously in the same way, — silently to leave the motion to
its fate : just as would have been done had he with no more
absurdity moved that all present should rise and, placing their
hands upon their hearts, oow three times to the inkstand.

To say nothing of the impropriety of putting this disap-
probation of Dr. Engledue's address upon the books, when
neither his address nor even a report of his address was in
them, and when no application had yet been made to the
Association for that purpose, the proposition was too absurd
for notice because the committee transacts only private bu-
siness — does the domestic matters only of the Association
— ^regolating the times and places of meeting, the amount of
subscriptions, &c., &«., and their minutes can record nothing
else. It has no power to interfere in the scientific and real
objects of the Association, nor to write a line in any other
than their oum committee minutes of private business; the
only other records indeed of the Association being the mi-
nutes of its scientific meetings. We one and all supposed
that at the first meeting of the Association the declaration
would be delivered in, and that the signers would see the ab-
surdity of Mr. Sampson's unauthorized course.

Afterwards, Mr. Sampson wrote to Mr. Symes, one
of the Honorary Secretaries, requesting to have his motion
recorded in different words firom those in which it was made ;
to which request Mr. Symes replied that he could not falsify
the minutes.

Satisfied that he could not be wrong, notwithstanding the
palpable condemnation of his doings, he renewed his motion
at the next meeting in these words — " That the circular letter
published in No. 74 of the Phrenological Journal, signed by
various members of the association, together with other sig-
natures in the subsequent number, be entered in the minutes
of the association." This again no one thought of opposing
or seconding; and he made no remark, but hastened away
to do what he had in his breast — to instigate as many mem-
bers as possible to resign. After this meeting he wrote to


Digitized by


Google


160 Mr, Sampson and Mr. Simpson.

Mr. Symes to have the words of his second motion altered to
the form in which he has printed it. He sent to Mr. Simpson
a letter stating all he had done, and that, as he wished " to
support the free expression of opinion/' he had " no choice
but to secede/'

" when," says he, '' I find that that freedom is stifled by the withholding
of the right of protest from a large number of its members.

*' Before sending in my resignation, I communicate with you, in order
that, should you decide upon a similar course, I may at least have the satisfac-
tion of acting with one whose unwavering zeal for Phrenology has been
tested by many years of able advocacy."

This was printed and furnished to each with the following
printed form for resignation, in order to add force to the
instigation ^^ should you decide upon a similar course."

'* To the Honorary Secretary of the Phrenological Association.

^* The undersigned, having perused the foregoing Statement, desires to
withdraw his name from the list of Members of the Phrenological Associa-
tion. He takes leave to state, that the right of protest appears to him to be
the only legitimate security for the free expression of the opinion of a
minority ; and that he adopts his present course from a conviction that Mem-
bership in a Society in which this right is withheld, is totally inconsistent
with a sincere and fearless regard for the promulgation of Truth."

Twenty-five sent in their resignation, through Mr. Samp-
son's hands, by signing this circular ! and two in writing.
Now to say nothing of the numerous preceding arguments
against Mr. Sampson's measure, each of which I consider
fatal, I ask how would the free expression of opinion have
been stifled if even the association should have reftised to
record the protest on application. The protest had been pub-
lished in the Phrenological Journal, and was printed in a cir-
cular sent to every member above seven months ago; and in
the books of the association it would never have been seen
but by the Secretary who writes, and the President who signs
the minutes. Publicity stifled !

They were truly friends of the free expression of opinion
who could censure Dr. Engledue for honestly declaring his.

To prove the wish of the Committee to stifle the free ex-
pression of opinion, we actually resolved, imanimously, at the
same meeting at which Mr. Sampson made his motion, that
one of the signers of the declaration should be requested to
deliver the opening address at the ensuing session, when he
would have had the power of delivering any of his immaterial
opinions, and saying whatever he might think proper.

Yours, &c.

John Elliotson.


Digitized by


Google


( 161 )


IX. Dr, EUiotson's Cases of Cures by Mesmerism.

" Mr. Wakley says he is resolved that Mesmerism shall no Itmger be employed in this or
any other hmpatd,"— Speech nf Mr. H'aUey'e Clerk to Dr, ElUotmm in the ward (tf Unicer-
mtff CMUge /io»pital,where he woe alkwed aeafcoMmr to aee EUzabeth Oheg, November, 1838.

ResolTed— " That the HospiUl Committee be instrncted to Uke sach steps as they shall
deem most adTisable» to prevent the practice of Mesmeriun or Animal Magnetism in ftatore
wHhin the Hospital."— iicaolMMon qf the CouncU qf Uidverntjf CoUege, December 37, 1838.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

June, 1843.
Sir,

For six years I have carefully and constantly investigated
the powers of mesmerism over different diseases, and, to in-
crease the extent of my observation, a gentleman who was my
pupil, and mesmerised extensively for me in University College
Hospital up to the day on which I shook the dust of my feet
upon it, has, at my request, mesmerised patients for me dur-
ing the whole of this period.

I have found it one of the most important remedies, and
accumulated a great amount of decisive evidence of its mar-
vellous powers, even when all other means have failed in
the hands of the most noted practitioners. This evidence I
shall gradually send to your pubHcation. It would probably
not be received by the medicsd journals, and I should indeed
be unwilling to transmit it to any medical journal or society,
since the conduct of the medical profession has been so dis-
graceful, both intellectually and morally. My statements
will, I know, be reUed upon. They are not only true to the
letter, but are the result of the most patient and careAil
labour, gone through with no view to emolument or reputa-
tion, but for the love of acquiring and disseminating know-
ledge. I have never received a fee, and never will, for prac-
tising mesmerism, from the humblest or the highest; and,
unless the case of a person above the humble class of society
occurs among my particular Mends, or is likely to prove inter-
esting, I send it to some medical man who practises mes-
merism professionally, as he would other medical means.
Reputation is out of the question. The medical profes-
sion, being totally ignorant of the subject, have thought
proper to stigmatize me as a fool, a visionary, a madman,
aye, and a quack, for understanding something of it. —
Their ignorance and conceited obstinacy have been my dis-
grace. From being thought "a careful and conscientious
observer,^' ^' a most skilful physician in ascertaining the real


Digitized by


Google


162 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

natare of a disease^ and in employing remedies '/^ " a great
contributor to the improvement of the medical art;'* and
"worthy to have the largest and most leading practice;**
" destined to divide the town with Dr. Chambers who was to
be the Halford and I the Baillie of the day/* "possessing the
highest claim to be physician in ordinary to the monarch ;**
styled " the first physician of the age/* in letters brought by
patients without end^ the only effect of which was to make
me work the harder that I might one day really deserve
such commendation ; I was all at once considered destitute
of all my previous knowledge and skilly incapable of obser-
vation and investigation, and unworthy of any practice, which,
by their good care and co-operation with one whom they pre-
viously abused, has been reduced to one third of what it was;
though during the whole of this time I have prosecuted in-
qtdries into diseases and remedies far more assiduously than
before, and certainly have far more knowledge, far more skill
in treating diseases than I ever possessed. I am some ten
thousand pounds less rich than I should have been. But I
have been amply rewarded in reflecting that I was making a
proper use of my intellect and time, and that I was right ;
and in feeling myself superior to those whose deUgfat is to
disparage me, as they have successively and successfully done
at my advocacy of every new thing, though now established
and employed by them when they could hold out no longer,
and who are at this moment in what they regard as pros-
perity, and are silent upon the opposition they once made
to what they now admit. They have their reward and I have
mine ; and, though I shall probably be another ten thousand
pounds or so the less rich before the day of ignorance and sin
is past, I shall not deviate from the course which I have
ever pursued since I began practice,— of working and trying
to deserve success, and leaving all worldly wisdom, syco-
phancy, religious hypocrisy, authoritativeness, utterance of
truisms and of opinions which are known to be those of the
persons spoken to, and trading industry, to others who can
stoop to these things and feel happy without self-respect.

The first cases I present to you are instances of Insanity.

I. Mr. D., aged IB, had an attack of rheumatism on
the 6th of January, 1837. It was severe, and at first con-
fined to his knees ; but, on the 8th it suddenly seized his
scalp also, causing the most excruciating pain. His pulse
was 120, his skin hot, his tongue white. He was bleid to
twelve ounces by his medical attendant, Mr. Chandler of
Rotherhithe; took colchicum, opium, calomel, and salines.


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmerism. 163

On the 9th he was better in the morning, but the symptoms
returned with increased violence in the afternoon, and he
suddenly became delirious in the evening. He was occasion-
ally violent, but easily restrained. His pulse was now 132,
and very hjurd : his bowels were torpid, and he chewed some
pills of compound extract of colocynth which were given
him : the removal of twelve ounces of blood fix)m his arm re-
duced the pulse and appeared to calm him a little. Calomel
and saline aperients were given. On the 10th he passed a
quiet though sleepless night, and seemed much as he had
been the preceding evening, — still perfectly delirious. His
head was shaved and wetted with an evaporating lotion. He
immediately began to improve, and in half an hour was per-
fectly rational, though he had been delirious for sixteen hours.
The rheumatism left the scalp and, no doubt, the membranes
within the skull which also it had seized ; but it continued in
the knees, which were constantly half bent, especially the right,
so that his right heel was constantly drawn up. On the 11th
the delirium returned at seven in the evening, and lasted two
hours, but without violence. The lotion was applied again
to the scalp, and sinapisms were put upon the feet, with de-
cided benefit: and the calomel and saline aperients were
continued.

An attack of this delirium without violence, in which he
stared a great deal and pointed at imaginary objects, now re-
turned every evening, at the same time within an hour, and
usually lasted an hour or two, followed by a sleepless night,
though he was tolerably well in the day-time. As the disease
had become periodical, two grains of sulphate of quinine were
given every four hours, and six grains an hour before the
attack was expected. Under this treatment the attack came
later every evening, and lasted a shorter time ; and it ceased
at the end of twelve days from its first assumption of a peri-
odical character, though on the fifth night a cause of excite-
ment produced an attack. Curiously enough, in this attack,
his right hed, which previously had applied itself flatly on
the ground, was again drawn up more than an inch, and re-
mained so for about twenty-four hours.

On the 6th of December he had another attack of rheu-
matism, followed, as in the preceding January, by periodical
attacks of delirium, though far more violent. Sidphate of
quinine was tried, in much larger doses than before, but in
vain. Dr. James Blimdell was called in, and prescribed first
musk, and aftierwards arsenic with it, and the disease ceased
about the 23rd. During the severe weather of January,
1838, he experienced upon the 22nd a third attack of rheu-


Digitized by


Google


164 Dr. EUioism's Cases of

matism^ followed as before by periodical delirium, ocenrring
about seven o'clock, sometimes a little earlier, sometimes a
little later, every evening. It began with severe pain of the
head, wildness of look, and slight catchings of the limbs.
In about a quarter of an hour the eyes became fixed, and
the full force of the fit burst forth, of the approach of which
he was perfectly conscious. There was now such violence that
three strong men were required to hold him in his bed, be-
sides sheets confined across his body in several directions.

He raised his head, opened his eyes, and stared violently,
and frightfully ; snapped at every person who went near him,
maliciously and slily watching for opportunities ; he bit the
pillows and sheets, looked ferocious and menacing, and
grinned horridly ; made the most terrific bowlings and voci-
ferations so as to disturb the neighbourhood, and after a
while he invariably began whistling, at first imperfectly, but
at length he got into a perfect tune, and this was a sure sign
that the attack was near its end. He would next sink into a
deep sleep for only a few minutes, and then wake completely
exhausted. He next suffered violent headache for half an
hour, then intense itching of the scalp for two hours, and
then went to sleep. Cold applications to the head made him
more violent. Sixteen grains of musk were given daily, as
well as arsenic, sulphate of quinine, creosote, and carbonate
of iron, all in large quantities, but in vain. Five drops of
Scheele's prussic acid, and the second night eight, quieted
him a little.

He always lay upon his back during the whole of the
paroxysm, and turned upon his right side the instant that it
went off. The length of the attack was from one hour to two
and a half. He had not the least recollection of what had
occurred, but always said he had been very ill.

Before mesmerism was practised, he not only turned on
his back as the attack began, but always pulled off his night-
cap. In an analogous manner, I see patients have pecu-
liar ways as they first go into the mesmeric coma, unless
the sleep comes on instantaneously. One lady always flings
her head and chest violently over the right side of the
bed, and, if precautions were not taken, would injure her-
self severely, as a small table with various articles stands
close to the bedside. A youth flings himself to the right side
of a sofa on which I mesmerise him. Sometimes the head
balances backwards and forwards before it drops.

In this state of things, I was requested by his medical
attendant, my former pupil, Mr. Chandler of Botherhithe^
to visit the patient in the evening during an attack.


Digitized by


Google


Insamty Cured by Mesmerism. 165

On the 8th of February, the seventeenth night of the
present attacks, I found him in bed confined by ropes across
it, and further restrained by three men. He was howling,
shouting, vociferating, barking, menacing, grinning, spitting,
snapping, &c. I mesmerised him with passes for three quar-
ters of an hour, he moving his head in every direction, some-
times to avoid me, sometimes to bite me. No effect was
apparerd. I advised Mr. Chandler to mesmerise him the next
evening before the attack was expected, because during the
violence of any disease the system is less impressionable to all
agencies, whether drugs or other medical means. Mr. Chandler
was totally unacquainted with mesmerism, but trusted to my
carefulness of observation and to my integrity when I assured
him of its powers j and, on my giving him a little instruc-
tion, he cheerfully and amiably promised to comply with my
advice. Although the medicines taking at the time had
hitherto proved useless, I thought it right to give the patient
the chance of benefit from their continuance. The doses of
prussic add and of creosote before the attack were respectively
eight and twelve drops : the daily amount of the sesquioxyd
of iron was two ounces, and of the sulphate of quinine six-
teen grains : and I advised the augmentation of the latter
quantities to four ounces and to twenty grains. The length
of the attack had gradually extended, and this evening reach-
ed three hours.

The patient held mesmerism — "mere pawing before his
eyes,'' as some wiseheads consider it — ^in perfect contempt ;
but he submitted at eight o'clock on the evening of the 9th.
He was mesmerised for two hours and a quarter. The attack
commenced at nine but lasted only an hour and a quarter. It
was also very much modified : for, though each of its stages
was distinctly seen, he made no noise; he was so tranquil that
no restraint was required, his eyes instead of being always
wide open and staring, he evidently seeing, were closed, ex-
cept when he raised his head and half-opened them from time
to time, apparently without discerning objects as before; and
he sometimes seemed asleep for a few moments. The attack
terminated suddenly in a burst of laughter, after several at-
tempts at this in vain. He then said, " That will do," and
was very cheerful.

The mighty power of mesmerism over him was most
decided. His own words were, " There is something in it."
The doses of creosote and prussic acid had been the same as
on the preceding evenings.

Feb. 10. Mesmerism was begun at a quarter past eight
and continued for an hour and a half. The attack com-

VOL. I. N


Digitized by


Google


166 Dr. EUiotson^s Cases of

menced at a quarter before tune and lasted only an hour. He
raised his he»d higher and stared more intently, but the
snatches of sleep were longer than on the preceding evening.
On coming to himself, he allowed that he was conscious now
of having been influenced by mesmerism, and that it saved
him great suffering, though he had denied this the day before
with reference to Mr. Chandler^s first attempt, and had
treated this "marvellous remedy,^' as Mr. Chandler justly
termed it in a letter to me, even with contempt. He sl^i
both this night and the night before three hours, on recover-
ing from the attack,— /ar longer than on any former nights.

The following is Mr. Chandler's letter, giving an abstract
of the effect : —

'' Rotherhithe, April 11, 1838.

'^ I am happy to inform you that our patient is much
better. I tried the mesmerism, and it has succeeded to a
miracle.

" I came home after leaving you on Thursday evening,
and tried the operation upon Mrs. Chandler, who laughed
very much at the idea. After five minutes she laughed still :
but in ten minutes more, making fifteen, she was sound
asleep, and no ordinary means could wake her.

" This converted me completely ; and I went to work the

next evening on Mr. , and continued the operation

two hours and a quarter.

'* The effect was to keep him perfectly quiet.* Though he
had the fit, the influence was very decided, and all the family
were astonished.

" Last evening I practised it again, and with the same
effect. He even acknowledged the influence himself, which
he would not yesterday. It has produced quite a sensation
in the parish.

"T. C."

11th. Mesmerism was begun at ten minutes past eight,
and continued for an hour and a quarter. The attack com-
menced otfive and twenty minutes b^ore nine and lasted but
fifty minutes. He raised his head still higher and stared still
more intently, but his sleeps were longer ; and, when from
his horrible looks and his gestures he made Mr. Chandler al-
most afraid he would spring out of bed, his head would sud-
denly fall back upon the pillow like a lump of lead. The
attack did not go off quite so pleasantly and he did not sleep
so long as on the two previous nights. Still be it remembered
that the attack lasted ten minutes less than the night before,
and he required no restraint. — Here I must make an impor-


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmerism, 167

tant remark. The aggrayation of the symptoms to-night was
nothing more than I continually observe in cases which ad-
vance steadily to a cure under mesmeric treatment. Mes-
merisers should never be discouraged by such occurrences^
but persevere if any good or even any sensible eflfect what-
ever has at any time been produced. The improvement
generally returns. It is for want of perseverance with even
the ordinary modes of treatment of diseases^ that many
chronic diseases are not cured.

12th. Mesmerism begun at eight and continued for an
hour. The attack commenced at a quarter past eight and
lasted but five and forty minutes. Only two drops of prussic
add had been given him.

13th. Neither creosote nor prussic acid was given him,
for it was evident that the amelioration could not be ascribed
to them. 1. A powerful and unquestionable impression was
made upon the disease the first night that he was mesme-
rised b^ore the attack. 2. The prussic acid had been re-
duced on the night of the 13th to two drops. 3. The patient,
in spite of his prejudices, confessed the influence of the mes-
meric process upon him fix>m the diminished indisposition
felt by him when the attack was over, and that it spared him
much suffering j and he was always very anxious that Mr.
Chandler should come in time to control the fit. 4. When-
ever he raised his head upon the pillow, and was advancing
it, a single pass of the hand now caused it instantly to drop
back in sound sleep, though it would rise again in a minute ;
pointing at him with one finger had the same effect, and all
this at the distance of ten feet and in the dark. 5. The
mesmeric process brought on the attack. This had always
begun at nine; but on the second mesmerisation by Mr.
Chandler it began a quarter before nine, on the third at
five and twenty minutes to nine, and on the fourth at a
quarter past eight. It is common for intermittent diseases,
ague for example, or rheumatic pain of nerves, when they
grow more and more severe, or longer and longer, to attack
earlier and earlier; and as they grow more and more mild,
or shorter and shorter, to attack later and later : it is un-
usual for them to attack earlier and grow milder and shorter,
though sometimes they attack later and grow more severe.*
When this patient's attacks in January, 1837, lasted a shorter

* A qaartan ague, one in which the attack comes every fourth, or, more
properly, every third, day, leaving two days clear, generally does not in-
vade in the morning or afternoon, as quicker agues often do, but in the
evening ; being, so far as its attacks are so infrequent, a mild form of the
disease.

n2


Digitized by


Google


168 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

and shorter time, I mentioned that they commenced later and
later. Now, when the attacks became milder, and regularly
shorter and shorter, they commenced earUer and earUer. Any
remedy but mesmerism, while it rendered the attacks milder
and shorter, would have postponed them later and later.
6. The mesmeric effect of attachment to the mesmeriser, so
common when striking effects are produced, was manifested;
for the patient now always turned towards him, whether the
room was in darkness or not, whereas previously to mes-
merism being employed he aimed violence at Mr. Chandler
and at everybody else.

Mr. Chandler, though unacquainted with mesmerism,
saw clearly that the attack was under the control of the
process, and justly conceived that he could bring it on at
pleasure. He therefore mesmerised the patient at half-past
seven. The attack began in five minutes ; and the power of
the process was more clearly demonstrated than ever, for the
youth remained during the whole period as if in a mesmeric
sleep, raising his head from time to time but not opening his
eyes, as he invariably had done on raising his head before.
The attack lasted ^ve and twenty minutes only, Mr. Chandler
awakened him suddenly, as it were magically, by passing his
hand transversely three or four times, without contact, before
the youih's face. On every former occasion he had been al-
lowed to wake spontaneously, and this was always slowly.
He passed a very quiet night, slept three or fo\ir hours, and
was much better in the morning.

14th. Mesmerism was begun at eight o'clock. The attack
took place in eight minutes and lasted five and twenty, in
about the same degree as on the preceding evening. But the
sleep was very profound in the intervals of his raising his
head. Here it is worthy of remark, that little progress was
made to-day. The attack lasted the same time — ^five and
twenty minutes, and the degree of the symptoms was the
same as on the preceding evening ; the only manifestation of
greater power in the process was the increased depth of the
sleep in the intervals, and as a set off to this the production
of the fit three minutes later. The explanation probably is
that Mr. Chandler, firom his engagements, did not begin so
early by half an hour as on the last evening. All remedies,
given to obviate a periodical disease, act more efficiently if
given at periods when the disease is completely absent or
more nearly absent. Quinine, for instance, has compara-
tively little or no effect over ague if given in the fit : it
shotdd be given in the intermission: — when I mesmerised
this patient in his fit, on first seeing him, I made not the


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmerism. 169

least impression. During the intermission the effect of qui-
nine is the greatest as soon as the fit is over, — ^that is, when
the system may be regarded as well cleared of the disease.
Its effect lessens as the period of the fit approaches : and
thus, though efficient when given just before a fit, it controls
the disease less than when given just after a fit ; and the best
practice is to give repeated doses during all the intermission,
but as large a dose as can be borne at once just after the
attack, and as many doses as possible in the early part of the
intermission^ though some of course up to the recommence-
ment of the attack.* As the period of the fit approaches, we
cannot but consider that, although no change is discernible,
the system is gradually working up into the condition of the
fit ; and therefore less and less impressionable by all agencies.
The commencement of the mesmerisation therefore to-night
half an hour nearer the bursting forth of the attack rendered
it less operative. I have no doubt that if it had been begun an
hour earlier, the attack would have been brought on at once,
and been far milder and shorter than ever. The power of the
mesmerism was so manifest, and the ameUoration so clearly
owing to it, that Mr. Chandler now very properly at once
discontinued the sesquioxyd of iron which was taking in the
quantity of four ounces and a half, and the sulphate of qui-
nine wliich was taking in the quantity of thirty-six grains, in
the day. Yet he passed a good night, and was in every re-
spect much better in the morning.

15th. His right heel, which had been constantly drawn up
day and night, just as in the previous rheumatic illnesses,
was to-day flat upon the ground, though the knee remained
weak. Mesmerism was not begun tiU a quarter before nine.
In four minutes he fell asleep, and the attack began ; and it
lasted four and twenty minutes. The sleep was very pro-
found between the movements of his head, and it continued
after these had entirely ceased, till Mr. Chandler suddenly
awakened him by a few transverse passes, without contact,
before his face. He awoke completely in his senses. Mr.
Chandler always knew when the fit was over and that he
might be awakened, from his turning on his right side, as
already mentioned.

16th. He passed a good night. Mesmerism was begun
at ten minutes before nine. The attack began in three
minutes, and lasted twenty-two minutes, ending as usual in

• See my Lectures on the PrincipleB and Practice qf Medicine^ published
in the London Medical Gazette by the Editor, and published in one large
volume, by Dr. Rogers and Mr. A. C. Lee. Second edition. Also my Cli-
nical LectureSf in the Lancet,


Digitized by


Google


170 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

profound sleep. Mesmerisation was continued during the
sleep last night and to-night^ but with no evidence of in-
creased effect.

17th. His condition even during the day regularly im-
proves. Mesmerism was begun at ten minutes after seven.
The fit began in three minutes and lasted but twelve ndmdes.

No prejudiced person will now venture even to suggest
that the fit could not be brought on at pleasure by mesmerism
and rendered mild. The effect of mesmerism now was first to
send him to sleep. Then the fit would begin in a few mi-
nutes^ as shewn by his turning on his back^ raising his head
occasionally^ and sometimes throwing his arms about. He
lay with his face to the side of the bed where Mr. Chandler
sat^ while being mesmerised^ and when asleep till the attack
began ; and then, as before he was ever mesmerised, he in-
stantly turned on his back. Mr. Chandler thought it worth
while to ascertain whether the attack could be cut short by
mesmerism after it had begun. Therefore, before it was over,
while it was decidedly still present, he made transverse passes.
The patient instantly awoke, perfectly himself and seemed better
than he usually was after an attack : he dressed himself again
and remained up for two hours, ate a hearty supper, passed
a good night and felt perfectly well the next morning.

18th. His nose having bled for two nights, some leeches
were put upon his temples ; and, as he strongly objected to
them, and was compeUed by his father to have them on, he
was frightfully irritable the whole day. On account of this,
he was mesmerised at a quarter past four. Though he was
at the time in high excitement, he fell into a sound sleep in
five minutes, and the little features of the attack presented
themselves as usual. Mr. Chandler thought it more prudent
to allow him to sleep rather than to awake him as early as
had been done the night before, and therefore allowed the
state to continue for seventeen minutes, when he was instantly
awakened by a few transverse passes, and appeared perfectly

well, HAVING LOST HIS EXCITEMENT.

19th. Much better. Mesmerised at a quarter before one
in the afternoon. He was sound asleep in two minutes, and
very faint marks of an attack were visible. Mr. Chandler
awoke him by transverse passes at the end of seven minutes,
and he was quite well and so remained all day.

From this day he was not mesmerised and had no attack.
For some time he was more unwell than usual and slept
badly. But this wotdd have been obviated had the mes-
merism been repeated daily for a week or two, and then left
off gradually.


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmeritm, 171

Those who witnessed the exquisite phenomena of the two
Okeys will be struck with the similarity of the present case;
and will appreciate my feelings at receiving Mr. Chandler's
accounts, proving an identity of condition, an identity of
influence, though neither the youth nor the operator had ever
seen the Okeys, nor had any conception whatever of mesmer-
isni, — ^proving the reality of a peculiar state of body and of a
peculiar influence.

The elementary phenomena of the Okeys were the same
as in this youth. By vertical passes they were sent to sleep at
pleasure, and, on the brain becoming active again, they were
delirious. This delirium was attended by activity, so that
they ran about and conversed, and strangers thought them
only strange creatures ; but they could be rendered torpid
again by more vertical passes, and then by transverse passes
they could be instantly awakened, and they awoke into their
natural state, having no knowledge of any thing which had
occurred in the delirium. Thus two states of existence, the
one with no knowledge of the occurrences of the other, though
passed but a minute before, could be alternated many times
in a few minutes.

As the youth knew not what mesmerism meant, he could
not sham these things, had shamming them been possible.
Mr. Chandler could not have led him to them, for Mr.
Chandler knew no more than that he had kindly promised me
to make passes daily before the fit came on.

Here, too, was a cure — a splendid cure — ^rapid and perfect;
when bleeding and powerful medicines, and medicines given
powerfully and perseveringly, had all been unavailing.

Oh ! how I wondered at the obtuseness, the perverseness,
and, as they will now see, the unwise short-sightedness of
the poor teachers of the rising generation at University Col-
lege, the majority of whom, Uke all young beings, impUcitly
adopted the thoughts and the conduct of those to whom in
their want of knowledge and experience they innocently
looked up.

This history will be found in the Lancet, April 14, 1838.
On Nov. 13th, 1838, the patient experienced another attack.
The effect of mesmerism was still more marvellous than
before, and an account of this second affair was drawn up by
Mr. Chandler and sent to the Lancet. But Mr. Wakley had
changed his poUcy. He had slid to another point of his
sliding scale. He had received numberless letters on mes-
merism, and nineteen out of twenty were against it. Nine-
teen people buy nineteen Lancets, one person buys one. Mr.
Wakley had formed the closest, the most inseparable, intimacy


Digitized by


Google


172 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

with Mr. Liston, and Mr. Liston told him that the illustrious
professors at University College were against mesmerism and
me, and, burning with that silly envy which showed itself in the
most delicate and gentlemanlike way when I was doing him
all the good I could and earnestly bent on serving him,
brought the hero to the attack. Mesmerism was now all
humbug; the Okeys were depraved impostors ; I was a fool ;
and WaJiley declared that he would make the Council of
University College order me to treat diseases (however suc-
cesfully) with mesmerism no longer. To the everlasting
disgrace of the Council and the whole place, they, weak,
ignorant, and ignoble minded men as they were, obeyed him,
by issuing the order at the head of this article, without any
previous communication with me, who had joined their medical
school when it was at the lowest ebb, and had raised it to a
height which they never expected it to attain. The very in-
stant I received the resolution of the Council, I wrote them
my resignation, and never more entered either College or
Hospital.

Mr. Chandler, taking it for granted that, as the first part
of the case had been admitted, and was so decided a proof of
both the truth and the remedial powers of mesmerism, fur-
ther and still more striking information would be acceptable
to an honest man, a pure lover of truth, a single hearted
promoter of the benefit of mankind, sent the following state-
ment to Mr. Wakley, who — ^rejected it.

" To the Editor of the Lancet.

Sir, — In spite of your attempt to extinguish mesmerism,
I feel it my duty to come forward in support of it; and think
it still possible that the "last spark ^' may again be kindled
into a vast conflagration.

Having appeared in your pages as a believer (and with
good reason) in the science of mesmerism, I am sure you will
not deny me the opportunity of supporting my opinions by
a few more facts.

My patient, has had another attack of his extraor-
dinary disease, and the effects of mesmerism upon him have
been still more conclusive and wonderful; and I do not hesi-
tate to say that it must rank high as a curative agent, at least
in such cases.

I was sent for to on the 13th of November. I

found him in a state of great excitement ; complaining of
excruciating head-ache. He had no rheumatic affection, as
at the commencement of all his preceding attacks, but his


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmerism. 173

knee was a Utile contracted, as it invariably has been during the
whole time of his former attacks. It became evident to the
fiEunily as well as to myself^ fix>m his demeanour in the after-
noon^ that a fit was inevitable that evening. Nevertheless,
I determined not to mesmerise him until he had had one
paroxysm. He had a very alarming one that evening, re-
quiring two strong men to Iiold him, besides having his legs
strapped down. It commenced at nine o'clock and lasted one
hour and a quarter.

Mark the change. On the following evening I was deter-
mined to begin manipulating early enough, therefore com-
menced at seven o'clock, he having begun to feel ill — ^to
experience the premonitory symptoms, at half-past six ; and
to my great surprise got him into abound mesmeric sleep in
six minutes. This proves that the susceptibility may last ,
though the manipulations are discontinued, for my patient ^/
had not been mesmerised since March. The fit lasted thirty^
five minutes, and he appeared, as oh former occasions, to sleep
through it, occasionaUy raising his head from the pillow and
falling the next moment suddenly into a sound sleep. This
happened about once in a minute at first, the intervals gra-
dually increasing, until at last he remained in a profound
sleep, in which state I left him for ten or twelve minutes,
and then awoke him, as if by magic, by making three or four
transverse passes with my hand before his face.

On the following evening, the 15th, I commenced at half-
past seven ; he was asleep in two minutes, the fit lasted twenty
minutes — ^phenomena the same as usual. His father made the
transverse passes, and instantly awoke him.

16th. Mesmerised at half-past seven ; produced sleep in
one minute and a half; the fit lasted eleven minutes.

17th. Precisely as the night before.

18th. Produced sleep in one minute and a half, fit lasted
ittii^ minutes.

19th. I determined, as the knee had now become straight,
that this should be the last day of operating. I therefore
altered the hour, and mesmerised him at three in the after-
noon. He was sound asleep in one minute, and a slight fit
occurred which lasted seven minutes.

These are incontrovertible facts, to substantiate which I can
bring at least a dozen witnesses; and I still maintain that there
is a decided effect produced by certain manipulations called
mesmerism. And I will go still further. I will assert that
in many cases the most beneficial effects may be produced by
its use. Can any reasonable person read the above case and
deny that my patient received benefit from it. Several medical


Digitized by


Google


174 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

men saw him with me in February, and all declared they never
saw so appalling a case ; yet the very first night the remedy
was employed by me, instead of requiring three strong men
to hold him, he was quiet vnthout bang touched. Should any
fancy collusion, I beg to assure them that my patient is
superior to any thing of the kind ; and further, I defy the
strongest man, when in his senses, to exert such preternatural
strength for so long a time as he did before mesmerism was
employed. Neither can I allow that the effect on the ima-
gination accounts for the phenomena, for my patient ridiculed
the remedy, and was quite indignant at such means being
used. Nevertheless, he was affected at the first trial, as will
be seen by referring to my communication to the Lancet on
the 14th of April.

In conclusion, I think it due to Dr. Elliotson to state that
I have lately seen Elizabeth Okey at the North London Hos-
pital, and the phenomena are so similar to those produced on
my own patient, that I believe there is no deception. I did
not see the experiments with the metals, as Okey was suffer-
ing so much from head-ache that it was deemed improper to
try them.

I remain, sir, your's respectfully,

Thos. Chandleb.*'

Mr. Chandler sent the following further observations to
me: —

" The above communication was sent to the Lancet in
December last (1838), but the Editor thought it easier to
refuse it admission, than to attack the undeniable facts it
contains. I afterwards sent a copy of the same letter to the
Medical Gazette, who also refused to publish it ; although, in
the very same number, he admitted a parcel of twaddle on the
other side of the question.*

" On the 2nd of January, 1839, 1 was again sent for, and
found him labouring under the usual premonitory symptoms.
I determined on mesmerising him that evening ; but the fit
occurred so much earlier than was expected, that I was not in
time to prevent it. He had a very severe paroxysm, which
lasted an hour and a half. 3rd. Commenced mesmerising at

* '* We cannot undertake to give publicity to any communications on
Animal Magnetism."— Lancet, Oct, 27, 1838.

'* We have already stated that we cannot insert any communication in sup-
port of the extravagant humbug of Animal Magnetism." — Ibid. Dec, 8, 1838.

" The letter of Mr. Chandler's is inadmissible."— J6ttt Dtc, 15, 1838.

*< Although we do not always ag^ee with the Editor of the Lancet, yet
with respect to Mr. Chandler's communication, we must also answer that,
it is * inadmissible.' "—London Medical Gazette, December 22, 1838.


Digitized by


Google


Insamiy Cured by Mesmerism. 175

six o'clock; he was sound asleep in three minutes and a half,
the fit lasted forty minutes — ^phenomena the same as on for-
mer occasions. 4th. Mesmerised at seven; produced sleep
in two minutes; fit lasted thirty-five. 5th. Commenced again
at seven ; produced sleep in tu?o minutes ; fit lasted twenty -six.

During the paroxysm this evenings I tried the efiect of
distance^ and found that one pass of the hand (while stand-
ing at the other side of the room) had the same efiect as
when close to the bedside — though the patienfs eyes were
closed in the mesmeric sleep. Each time he arose from the
bed^ one pass of the hand (though at six yards distance) caused
him immediately to fall back.

6th. Commenced mesmerising at half-past six ; produced
sleep in one minute and a half; fit lasted twenty-three. Pheno-
mena the same as before. 7th. Produced sleep in two mi-
nutes; fit lasted twenty-two. 8th. Precisely as the night
before. 9th. Produced sleep in one minute and a half; fit
\ssXj&di fifteen. 10th. Produced sleep in on^e minute; fit twenty-
three. The paroxysm was lengthened by over excitement
during the day. 11th. Mesmerised at four; produced sleep
in one minute'; fit fifteen. 12th. Commenced at four; sleep
in one minute; fit ten. 13th. Mesmerised at half-past three;
sleep in one minute ; fit five. 14th. Mesmerised at one o'clock ;
produced sleep in three-quarters of a minute ; the fit lasted
four minutes. I now considered the cure complete, and
therefore omitted the mesmerism. He has since then en-
joyed good health."

Towards the end of September 1839, another return oc-
curred. He was mesmerised. On the first three nights the
attack went off in the usual way ; but, on the fourth, instead
of falling asleep after each paroxysm, he could be instantly
fixed as Mr. Chandler, and hundreds of others, had seen the
Okeys, in whatever position he happened to be at the time, if
a finger was merely pointed at him, and this even in the dark.
He lay in a French bed ; and if, in such darkness that Mr.
Chandler could barely distinguish his person, his eyes being
closed, Mr. Chandler merely raised one finger above the top,
or moved it beyond the side of the board at the foot, of the
bed, he was instantly fixed, though perhaps tossing his arms
about violently at the moment this was done.

A few transverse passes, even with one finger, made behind
him, at a distance, his eyes being closed, nay, over his head
when his head was hanging down over the edge of the bed and
his eyes were on the fl>oor, never failed to arouse him in-
stantly to his natural state.


Digitized by


Google


176 Dr. ElUotson's Cases of

'' Some of the attitudes were very fine ; quite studies^ —
usually fighting ones/' Who, possessed of common sense,
that saw the Okeys, will not honestly declare that nothing
was more wonderfiil than the fixing of the Okeys ? They, in
their ecstatic delirium, could be instantly fixed by a sinj^le
pass of the hand, or a single finger, at a distance, even behind
them; while dancing, jumping, grimacing, stooping, whatever
they were doing, they were in a moment petrified in their
position, as the inhabitants of a city were said to be instantly
changed to marble in the Arabian tale. The younger often
danced " Jim Crow ;" and to see her or her sister fixed in any
attitude, their faces suddenly fixed also, while in the midst of
a sentence, or of a word, their eyes to close and them to stand
insensible to all around them, and at last either drop down
firom the torpor increasing, or suddenly come to conscious-
ness from the effect having been slighter and going off; to
witness their surprise on coming to, and their anger on having
been arrested in what they were about, and to see them
again suddenly made insensible and rigid while venting their
displeasure, — ^was one of the things which no one can forget
who witnessed them.

These phenomena were shewn by me again and again,
with very many others of the most exquisite kind, — all which
he suppressed, — ^to Mr. Wakley, in that evil moment in which
I — goodnatured and confiding fool — fancied he was, if not a
lover of truth, at least too sagacious not to see that such facts
were unquestionably real, and that to attempt to bully and
write them down, however it might succeed for a moment,
would be the height of madness, and that they must eventually
be admitted by all men, in spite of the selfish and coarse oppo-
sition of the whole profession. It was plain that a medical
case which had occurred once would occur again; that, as mes-
merism produced such wonderful effects upon them, it would
also upon others; and that as doctors and surgeons — ^the con-
sulting and medical men in general, the authoritative great and
the imitating little — ^had never made any mesmeric trials, they
could not expect to have met with such cases, and not only
were not justified in supposing such cases impossible, but had
every reason to suppose, from the cases of the Okeys, that they
had only to take the trouble to examine for themselves, how-
ever beneath their dignity and the importance of their daily
routine.

As to fixing and awakening this patient behind him and in
the dark, Mr. Chandler wrote, " I feel certain I am not de-
ceived with regard to any of the above facts. I have tried
various ways of proving their accuracy, and always with pre-
cisely the same results.'^


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmerism. 177

To the last^ if the attack had once commenced^ mesme-
rism^ as on the night when I first mesmerised him^ had not
the slightest effect ; but, says Mr. Chandler, in the letters he
obligingly sent me, '' let him be ever so much excited^' (and
he was a most excitable person), provided he is still in his
natural state, ''he is affected iafram one to two minutes^ even
sometimes in half a minute. I generally enter into conversa-
tion with him on beginning to manipulate, and he usually
falls asleep in the middle of a sentence, sometimes with a word
on his Ups, half uttered, and this while talking quite rationally/^

In many cases, a relation is established between the mes-
meriser ana the patient, so that no other person can awake
him, or another person interfering produces great disturbance
to the system. This happened here on one occasion. ''I was
called awav after having mesmerised him for some time, and
not thinking it quite right to awake him, I requested his
mother to do so in about ten minutes after I left. In a short
time, I was sent for again in great haste, and found him on
my arrival in a most horrible state; he had tetanus of the
whole body — ^not a Umb could be moved. He remained in
this state about half an hour. I was alarmed and puzzled,
but thought the best plan would be to mesmerise him again,
and then awake him myself. Accordingly I commenced
manipulating, and to my surprise in about two minutes, the
body became relaxed, and he sunk into a quiet and mesmeric
sleep, out of which, after a few minutes, I aroused him in
the ordinary way ; and he woke as usual quite well : but he
remarked that we had been playing tricks with him, and
begged they might not be repeated lest he should be killed.^'
Such disturbance of the system had the interference of an-
other still left.

This relation between the mesmeriser and the patient is
one of the most remarkable occurrences of mesmerism. It
frequently does not exist. It did not occur in the Okeys.
Any one might touch them ; any one woke them, whoever
had sent them to sleep. But in some instances, the contact
of any other person than the mesmeriser, nay, the proximity
of any person, produces the greatest distress, and sometimes
the most violent disturbance.

They generally shudder and complain of cold. Hundreds
of persons have seen my patient Rosina. Her case so beau-
tifiU in many points, so exquisitely beautiful while she sings
in her sleep or converses facetiously, is overpoweringly con-
firmatory of the truth of (Jall^s location of certain organs
of the brain, by the excitement on only one side or the other
of the brain, by merely pointing the finger to them, behind her


Digitized by


Google


178 Dr. Ellioison's Cases of

hack, her eyes being closed or bandaged and the operator and
all others looking away^ so that it is not known to him or others
where he is pointing till the cerebral effects come, or a per-
son pointing where he pleases, without knowing why or to
what he is pointing, and every one looking the other way till
the effects come. She also becomes miserable if her mesmeriser
leaves her, and generally if others stand very near her, and
especially if they touch her ; though her eyes be shut, she
immediately says that something cold, a wet towel, for ex-
ample, is put in her hand, if another than the mesmeriser
touches her. If her shut eyes are blindfolded, and the mes-
meriser and a score of others touch her hand with the point
of their finger, she distinguishes his finger and grasps it,
but repels the finger of another. Not being aware of this rela-
tion, I at first sometimes left her asleep, and the effect was
always violent fits. I mesmerised a young gentleman, about
her age — about seventeen years old, who, though his eyes
were shut and his sleep was sound, instantly distinguished
the point of another person's finger, on the back of his neck,
from my own, though every precaution was taken so as to
render it absolutely impossible for him to learn, — impossible
for him by ordinary means of sense to know, who was touch-
ing him. He allowed others to be near him, but entreated
me not to leave him, and remained close at my side, following
and pulling me back if I attempted to go away. He was not
agitated by the contact of others, but annoyed and distressed;
and said, how cold that is. I have another young patient, who
will not allow any other, not those whom "she most affection-
ately loves, to be within two yards of her in the mesmeric
state. The most noiseless approach of others towards her
makes her shudder from head to foot, and she cries out "cold,
cold, cruel, cruel.'' Even if two persons are at the distance
at which she will bear one without noticing it, she begins
to shiver. Though she will bear one or more at a certain
distance at first, it often happens that their disagreeable
infiuence is gradually felt ; so that after a time, she says "I
feel cold :" and then complains more and more, till it is abso-
lutely necessary for the parties to retire frurther.

I have another case, in which the patient is very rigid,
and the eyes and mouth firmly closed. Wherever I am she
bends very slowly (this is all she can do, for she cannot move
a foot) in that direction ; and she slowly recedes as invariably
from the person, nay, from the hand, of any one else. What
her sensations are I have no means of knowing, from the
locked state of her jaw, her complete deafness and rigidity .
in the mesmeric state, and her total obUvion afterwards of
all that has passed.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Insamty Cured by Mesmerism. 179

I have known it impossible for any one but the mesme-
riser to awake the patient ; and I have known it impossible
for any one but the habitual mesmeriser to mesmerise him.

Mr. Chandler adopted the proper course. He went
himself to his patient^ mesmerised him afresh^ and then
awoke him. It wiU be remembered that the father once
awoke him without difficulty or inconvenience; but then
Mr. Chandler was present^ and that no doubt preserved his
tranquillity. One of my patients^ before the period of spon-
taneous waking has nearly arrived, cannot allow me to leave
her without distress, and goes into fits if I do so for any time,
and on my return to her is not calmed for a long while ; but
is calmed the sooner by my touching her kindly, or making
passes so as to shew she is again the object of my attention.
Mr. Chandler, by mesmerising him, calmed him I have no
doubt much sooner than if he had merely remained with him;
though taking his hand might possibly have had the same
result, because he never, on other occasions when his absence
had not caused disturbance, found mesmerism of any avail
in the fit.

So complete was his recovery that, though after he was
well, while returning to his situation, he sUpped on a cabbage
leaf on London Bridge, and experienced a severe concussion
of the brain, he had not the slightest inclination to a fit, and
came completely round again.

In July 1841, he had a severe attack of acute rheumatism
for three weeks, but with no return of his fits.


In a postcript to a letter written to me by Mr. Chandler
in 1889, he says, ''Could not some periodical be induced to
take the matter up ? It is a great shame that such a bigotted
fool as the Editor of the Lancet should be allowed to write
down what must eventually be established as undoubted
truth." My answer was. No. The English medical journals
are conducted on the principle of presenting to the public not
mere truth and justice, but what is most likely to make them
sell best, and what it is hoped will benefit the editors in
practice and gain, as well as those whom the editors and their
connection like, and to disparage those whom they, for selfish
reasons, dislike. Wheu truth and justice do not interfere
with their ends, they have no objection to do their duty,
though the poor haU'-informed persons, generally hired by
some editors to write, often make sad work of it.

After a time, such cases will be admitted by the editors
as a matter of course. But what they have all written we


Digitized by


Google


180 Dr. ElUotson'a Cases of

can always hold forth in their faces to their disgrace. Too
much credit cannot be given to Mr. Chandler for not being
bUnd to obvious facts^ like the mass of his profession^ and
for not shrinking back from his declarations and convictions
and eating his words, at the thunderings of poor Mr. Wakley,
as a very large number have done, to their lasting disgrace.

I mentioned that, in 1837, Mr. Chandler, on receiving
instructions from me in mesmerising, made an essay upon
Mrs. Chandler before he began with the patient ; and that,
though she had never seen anything of mesmerism and had
laughed at it, she was soon asleep, — ^in fifteen minutes, and
could not be awakened by ordinary means. He informs me
that he has since often tried to mesmerise her, but always in
vain ; and at one period he tried for many successive days,
and sometimes for an hour and a half at a time. This lady
was in good health, and yet there was extreme mesmeric sus-
ceptibility at one time, and none at another. I have met
with extreme susceptibility at first when there was disease,
and none afterwards when the disease was cured.

Again ; during disease, in epilepsy for instance, when no
improvement had taken place, I have seen extreme suscepti-
bility decline, and that rapidly, even suddenly, into complete
insusceptibility for many weeks ; and return again with no
relation to the health, or not return at all, — at least not-
withstanding some perseverance. On the other hand, I have
seen extreme susceptibility continue for five and six years
(my experience reaches no further) after a cure had been fully
established and while the health was good. Weak persons, and
sick and feeble-minded persons, are not in the least more
susceptible than the healthy and strong and resolute. I have
tried for weeks without sensible effect upon some persons who
were very feeble and thin and trembled from head to foot at
any sudden noise, and were a prey to nervous miseries. I have
known epileptic persons unaffected by daily trials for many
months. Those who are subject to sleep- waking and the more
singular forms of hysteria are almost all susceptible. Old
people are often susceptible, and males probably as much as
females.

II. The following case is an instance of the cure of insa-
nity with very little sensible effect.

Charlotte Cook, aged 18, was admitted into University
College Hospital, April 6, 1838.

She was a servant of all work, ruddy and of a full habit.
Till the present period she had enjoyed good health. One of
her sisters had twice had " brain fever,'' and her father had
been deranged.


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmerism. 181

About three weeks previously her mistress observed a
strangeness in her manner. She followed her mistress conti-
nually about the house^ stooping and pulling at her mis-
tresses clothes. In a week she became violently delirious^ and
required two or three persons to hold her down. This state
soon subsided into a low, muttering, moody one, which con-
tinued at her admission into the hospital. No further in-
formation could be collected firom her friends or medical
attendant. We found her complain of pain in the head; her
expression of countenance was heavy; her understanding
dull. She would lie for hours together in bed in the day-
time, occasionally muttering, now and then crying, and not
spontaneously exchanging a word with any one. When
questioned, she always said she had been frightened by cer-
tain persons, and was still afraid of them; that they made
various figures which they placed upon the stairs and on the
table to terrify her. She then grew incoherent, saying she
did not like to see her married sister wasting things ; though
what things, she could never tell. She appeared to dislike
this sister very much. She was quite indiflFerent, almost un-
conscious of what was going on around her. As her habit
was full and her head ached, I ordered her to be bled to a
pint, and to take five grains of calomel immediately, and a
cathartic draught very early in the morning.

April 7th. She was no better and had scarcely slept
during the night. Finding her unrelieved by the bleed-
ing, and knowing the inefficac^^ of medical treatment in
these cases beyond the removal of blood and other lowering
measures if there happens to be fulness, supporting measures
if there happens to be weakness, soothing drugs if they are
borne, attention to the bowels and diet, preservation from
irritating and dangerous circumstances, and the administra-
tion of agreeable ones, and that the cure is generally but a
natural subsidence of the affection, favoured, or not made
worse, by, or in spite of, medical treatment, — I determined
at once to trust the case entirely to mesmerism, and pre-
scribed its administration daily for half an hour by the cUni-
cal clerk, in vertical passes before the face.

She was mesmerised to-day for half an hour.

8th. Mesmerised for half an hour.

9th. It has been very difficult to keep her in bed. Indeed
she has continually got out, and walked slowly about, talking
incoherently. After being mesmerised for a quarter of an hour,
she fell asleep for several minutes; but the continuance of the
process for another quarter of an hour had no further visible
effect.

VOL. I. o


Digitized by


Google


182 Dr. EUiotsm's Cases of

It is not unusual for manifest sleep to be effected and
then cease during a mesmerisation : so that it does not recur
at that time though the process is continued^ and^ even if
sleep has been produced and continue^ the continuation of
the process may not seem to deepen or prolong the sleep,
the patient may wake just as soon as if the process is desisted
from as soon as sleep takes place, — -just as some persons in
whom effects have been produced are not susceptible for a
period of weeks, though mesmerised daily. In other in-
stances^ and these are the most common, the sleep, if it has
ceased, is renewed by continuing the process ; and, if the
sleep has not ceased, it is deepened and lengthened by conti-
nuing the process. It is right, however, to persevere syste-
matically with the process for the time allotted — ^half an hour
at least, or an hour, or still longer — ^to each mesmerisation,
till the susceptibility is such that great effects result from
little mesmerisation ; because it is certain that the process
affects the system even when visible results are not discerni-
ble. Patients recover, and improve in various points of their
health, when very little, perhaps no, visible effect results
during the process ; and in their sleep-waking, when I could
rely upon their revelations respecting their own condition,
they have assured me that, before I had produced sensible
results during the process, I had benefitted them, had calmed
their nervous system, and prepared the way for the sensible
and great effects which had followed.

The expressions — ^insusceptibility and no effect, must be
regarded as relative only. It does not follow because a per-
son is not affected during a process of the length which usu-
ally affects him and often affects others, or by even more repe-
titions of the process than have been necessary to affect either
him or others, that a longer continuance or more numerous
repetitions would not have brought about the result. Possibly
no person would be foimd insusceptible of mesmerism for an
hour or two daily month after month.

10th. Very much improved. Answers questions more readily
and rationally. Several of the delusive notions hitherto enter-
tained by her have departed.

This remarkable improvement was after only three raes-
merisations, and took place immediately after decided sen-
sible effects had resulted the day before. As I have seen
many patients recover from various diseases decidedly through
the agency of mesmerism when no sensible effect was pro-
duced, the absence of this should not discourage us from
long perseverance : and I have produced the most powerftd
and wonderful results at last by a look, or by a few passes with


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmerism. 183

one finger^ in a patient whom I had mesmerised daily for
four months without any certain sensible e£Pect whatever.
Still, when a sensible effect is produced, it is encouraging,
because we have a proof of the impressionability of the
patient, and therrfore a strong ground for hope that the
disease may be chased away by the new impression. I believe
it an exceedingly rare thing for a cure not to be effected with
indefatigable perseverance when sensible effects are produced.

On being mesmerised to-day she was asleep in ten minutes,
and did not awake for four or five minutes. She bore pinch-
ing without any sign of sensation ; but awoke on the eyelids
being forced open.

Some persons awake instantly upon raising one or both
upper eyelids ; and, if not, by blowing upon the exposed eye-
baU, when blowing in the face has failed to awaken them.

11th. Drowsiness only produced. Said she perceived spec-
tral figures.

Tlus fluctuation of intensity of sensible effect is as com-
mon as fluctuation of progress towards cure.

12th. After the process had been continued ten minutes,
she was so drowsy as to fall back in her bed, but did not go
quite asleep. Though mesmerisation was continued, the sen-
sible effect decreased. At my visit in the afternoon I mes-
merised her myself. She did not go to sleep ; but her eyes
became fixedly open, and her head distinctly followed the
motions of my hand upwards and downwards.

13th. No sensible effects were produced. Her intellect has
steadily improved, and many of her answers are coherent and
rational.

14th and 15th. Not mesmerised, on account of the clerk
being iU. The power of mesmerism was shewn in the aygra-
vation of her symptoms, — tfie return of her rambling, after
this omission of mesmerism for two days.

17th and 18th. Mesmerised, but with no sensible effect.

The omission of the process often impairs the suscepti-
bility. Sometimes the susceptibility or the tendency to it or
to an increase of it, is such that the omission for a day or more
makes no difference ; no ground is lost, though time may be
lost. But frequently till this is established every omission
throws the susceptibiUty as well as the cure back: and, where
no sensible effect has been produced, must still retard the
cure, or perhaps defer the susceptibiUty.

As this was the consequence of the omission during two
days, so a return to mesmerism rapidly improved her again,
for in four days —

2l8t. She was much less delirious, and at one time appeared

o2


Digitized by


Google


184 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

perfectly sane : she was able to dress herself, attend to her oum
wants, and assist the nurse in various duties, whereas
she was perfectly helpless at her admission into the hospital.

22nd, 23rd, 24th. Regularly improving. No sensible
effect from the process except that yesterday (23rd) the eye-
lids became completely closed and she could not open them,
though perfectly awake; and they required to be opened
for her.

This solitary local sensible eflFect is not very uncommon.
It very often happens that the eyelids remain closed for some
time after the mesmeric coma is over; and occasionally they
will not open in reasonable time until after being forced open,
(and this may fail,) without much breathing upon them, or
transverse passes with the ends of the fingers or thumbs, or
the steady application of these upon them, or pointing at them
with these, or some pointed body, perhaps metallic. I know
some patients on whom, as far as mesmerism has been tried,
this closure of the eyes is the only sensible effect.

May 5th. She has been mesmerised daily, though with no
sensible effect, and has improved daily, occupying herself
part of her time with needle-work. She is, however, rather
torpid ; not speaking unless spoken to, and then only in a
whisper. To-day she has frequently cried hysterically.

15th. Daily mesmerised and daUy improved. Less hyste-
rical. No sensible effect from the mesmerism, and she says
it does not make her sleepy.

16th. Spoke in a loud voice to day, aft;er some coaxing.
Fear was evidently a strong feature in her insanity.

17th. WiD speak only in a whisper.

18th. Speaks in her natural voice.

29th. She has been mesmerised daily, but still with no
sensible effect. The improvement, however, regularly ad-
vanced, till she was perfectly well, and she returned home
to-day.

Those who are at once vulgar-minded, conceited, and
knowing-looking on the one hand, and superficial, ignorant,
and meanly spiteful on the other, will not dare to mfdce light
of this case. The sensible effects cannot be questioned. The
woman was mad, and too lost and stupid to know what mes-
merism meant, what its effects were, or to feign them. When
she grew more and more intelligent, and became capable of all
this had she been inclined, no sensible effects were obtained.
The sensible effects that did occur were not calculated to excite
wonder and admiration. The sleep was but once profound;
obedience to the movements of the mesmeriser's hand was men-
tioned but once. The fixed closure of the eyelids soUtarily was


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by MeAnerism, 185

a phenomenon she could not have known to be an occasional
occurrence in mesmerism^ and it never recurred. The cure
was no more sham than the disease. But I beg pardon for
troubling the rational reader with these remarks; and what I
write here and elsewhere on mesmerism I beg the vulgar-
minded^ conceited^ knowing-looking^ superficial^ ignorant^ and
meanly spiteful, not to read ; it is not for them ; they had
better remain as they are ; their conversion is totally unim-
portant ; their support would do harm. I would not raise a
finger to convert them. I advise every mesmeriser to do as,
in spite of my nature but compelled by disgusting experience,
I now invariably do, — ^make short work with such persons —
to ask them what difference it can make to the world whether
they are convinced or not— of what importance it possibly
can be ? — ^to tell them he would not take the trouble to walk
once across the room to convince them, and absolutely to
refuse to shew them anything. The more pains you take to
explain every thing to such persons the more unreasonable,
impenetrable, obstinate, rude, and perhaps impudent they
grow. They come roimd best if treated with indifference
and neglect.

No cure was ever effected in an hospital more satisfactorily.
There was no expense beyond the patient's food, except for one
pin and one draught before mesmerism was begun. And yet
my colleagues, aye, that colleague who was prescribing the
whole materia medica of all phannacopoeias, British and Con-
tinental, — ^in almost daily change, — almost daily "quid pro
quo substituendo,'' as Lord Bacon says in his censure of the
practice of physiognomy, would not see it — would not hear of
it : and they intrigued with the Council of the College, till
this body of men, known, with one or two exceptions, neither
in science nor literature, issued an edict that no cures should
be effected by mesmerism, though the wards have contained
cases, as the wards of all other hospitals contain cases innu-
merable, of diseases physicked and tormented to no purpose,
or comparatively little purpose, which might generaUy be
effectually, and often quickly, cured by mesmerism, — ^mes-
merism never, no not in a single instance, employed ; nay, as
little thought of as steam carriages, electro-telegraphs, the
penny post, or Handel or Beethoven's music, among the Caf-
fires or Calmucks. And they glory in it.

The treatment of the chronically insane is littk more than
hygeienic and moral. Of the importance of preserving the
general health of the system, and the absolute necessity of
surrounding such patients with all circumstances calculated
to induce and maintain a natural and happy exercise of the


Digitized by


Google


186 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

cerebral functions, no one can doubt. The benefit that re-
sults is incalculable. Even this, however, has been very badly
— ^very imperfectly — ^put in practice in most lunatic asylums ;
and the greater part of those insanity doctors who thoroughly
enrich themselves by these diseases are little more than board-
ing-house keepers, the inmates being mad instead of sane,
and do little more for their patients than a boarding-house
keeper does, and whenever I have met with them have seemed
to know no more of that wonder of wonders — ^the brain, in
its healthy or diseased functions, than the most ordinarily-
informed of medical men: — being not only ignorant of phreno-
logy^ ^^t of what it really means. Were it not so, what
careful and valuable intelligence should we not have had
long ago from the physicians of great asylums ! What
collections of skulls, what casts, what drawings, what details,
what general views, what results of various modes of treat-
ment, what noble improvements ! But what have we ? No-
thing. But those doctors amass, as the country people say,
cruelly. Even some insanity doctors who have the credit of
being phrenologists and doing much for insanity, know no-
thing of it, and deserve not half the credit which they have.
Seeing that other medical treatment, bleeding, blisters,
drugs, are of so little avail in the majority of cases, and that
we possess so powerful an instrument in mesmerism, shewn
not only by its general influence as in the case just related,
but in acting upon the individual organs of the brain, accord-
ing to discoveries made in America and England, and as I
have seen proved beyond all dispute in four cases of my own,
— ^it is the duty now of all who treat the insane and fatu-
itous to give these unfortunate beings the chance of benefit
from mesmerism. On many I know it can do no good : but
many I am persuaded it would calm and improve ; and many
it would cure.

The following were cases of intense melancholy, all rapidly
cured.

III. The first was under the care of Dr. Wilson, in the
Middlesex Hospital, in June, 1838 ; but I witnessed the case.

WiUiam Rumsay, aged 31, laboured under extreme de-
pression of spirits, which rendered him unable to sleep ; he
walked the room all night in distraction ; could do no work,
nor apply himself in the slightest way to anything. His
despondency led him frequently to contemplate suicide. He
occasionally had headache and giddiness, and at length he
hesitated in his speech. During the three last years he had a
pain in his right side extending to his loins, for which he had


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmerism. 187

as a matter of course been said to have a liver complaint. He
had been no less than twenty months altogether^ at various
times during that period^ on the sick-list of his benefit club.

Dr. Wilson resolved to treat him with mesmerism^ — and
very striking sensible eflfects were produced. The man al-
ways remained wide awake^ not being even sleepy ; but such
phenomena took place as we continually observe in the mes-
meric sleep-waking.

After longitudinal passes had been made before him three
or four minutes^ he began to tremble all over and to have
twitches : his arms and legs, and even his fingers, extended,
and became more or less rigid, as if, to use his own words, this
was "caused by some one successively, but lightly touching
the ends of his fingers, and gently but trembUngly drawing
them apart.'^ All resistance to these changes he found fruit-
less. His arms extended backwards as far as the chair would
permit them. The force of extension he felt to increase and
decrease as the operator's hands approached or receded from
him. By movements of the operator's hand, as if to draw
^^f — by tractive passes, without contact, — he was drawn im-
mediately to one side or the other, forwards or backwards, as
he sat with his arms and legs rigid and extended in the air ;
or his arms and hands could be drawn firmly together or se-
parated, or made to clasp his knees, notwithstanding he
would, for experiment, make every eflFort to resist the influ-
ence. Dr. Wilson could produce these eflfects at the distance
of fourteen feet. He turned in spite of himself towards the
mesmeriser, wherever the latter might place himself, so as to
be turned on his hip in his chair and be brought sometimes
nearly oflf the chair, notwithstanding great struggling to re-
tain his proper position.

If Dr. Wilson went into the next room, so that merely
the points of his fingers could be seen, the eflfects still ensued.

When a 701bs. weight was attached to one arm, he could
raise it if assisted by tractive passes made at a distance above
the arm, though in his natural state he could not raise more
than 561bs. wlule sitting. When in his natural state he could
not raise with his leg a weight of 281bs., through the ring of
which his foot was passed; but under the influence of mes-
merism his leg rose with the weight by the tractive passes of
the mesmeriser. Elizabeth Okey often, in the presence of
hundreds, was made to raise between 70 and SOlbs., in spite
of herself, in the mesmeric state, by similar traction of her
extended arm, from the back of which the weight was sus-
pended. These eflfects were greater the nearer the operator's
hands were to him in performing the traction. So great was


Digitized by


Google


188 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

the force of traction^ that he could be actually drawn oflF his
chair on to the floor while his arms and legs were rigid and
extended^ if no one held him firmly in it. His susceptibility
so increased^ that at last Dr. Wilson affected him at the dis-
tance of 112 feet. The whole of this account is an abstract
fix)m the man's own notes of his case ; but I will give his
own words on this point. " After this I was placed at a dis-
tance of 112 feet from Dr. Wilson, and in less than five mi-
nutes I was so much affected as to cause me to extend my
arms ; and my legs would likewise have extended, had I not
been in a standing position, supported at the back by a wall.
During the time Dr. Wilson was acting upon me at this great
distance, a friend of his that was present, stepped between
us at a distance of about six feet from me. His doing so
appeared to deter the power of magnetism for a few seconds :
but when standing there for a few seconds, it appeared to re-
turn with its full strength, so much so that I was compelled
to request the doctor to cease. N.B. When I was asked to
go to the distance of 112 feet from the operator, I laughed
at the idea, thinking it impossible to be affected at this great
distance."

The man would sometimes endeavour to think of anything
else rather than the operation when Dr. Wilson began ; but
the effects came just as certainly. He said he always felt
during the mesmerisation as if attached to Dr. Wilson by
something flexible. I one day, when he was under the influ-
ence by Dr. Wilson, made tractive passes, but could not
affect him. Dr. Wilson then placed the points of his fingers
near the back of the man's hands, when the latter felt as if
a stream of warm water came upon them from each of Dr.
Wilson's fingers and flowed to the ends of his own fingers :
and Dr. Wilson's power seemed greater than it had ever been
before.

His lips could be moved and his mouth be drawn open by
tractive passes before them with the fingers, — ^an experiment
I often made with EUzabeth Okey, and do now with my
patient, Rosina, even when her eyes were firmly closed in
sleep.

After being mesmerised, he was always weak, tremulous,
and gapish for a short time, though not at all sleepy ; but
this wore off completely in about two hours, and he slept
soundly at night. The very first night, after having been
mesmerised in the day, he slept much better; and the pain in
his right side and back, which no doubt was a neuralgic pain,
like those of the right or left side in so many young females,
and called, as it generally is in them, a proof of liver dis-


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmerism. 189

eases^ was lessened. After the second time he was mesme-
rised^ he slept soundly all night, and his pain was much better.

After having been mesmerised thirteen times, he was per-
fectly well. It was begun on the 15th of June, and he was
discharged cured on the 2nd of August, and went to his oc-
cupation : and up to the time Dr. Wilson saw him again, — a
period of eight months, he remained quite well, never having
lost a day^s work, though during the three years before his
admission he had lost twenty months from his illness. The
late Lord Monson, who witnessed the case, was so interested
with the man that he took him into his service as a joiner at
Gratton Park. I saw him a few days ago, and found that,
from having lost his situation by the death of Lord Monson,
he had fallen into melancholy again ; but Dr. Wilson mesme-
rised him in my presence, and at once produced all the origi-
nal eflfects, though he had not been mesmerised for five years.
He may be cured in a week.

This case was very interesting in regard to the phenomena
as well as to the cure. The effects of rigidity, and involuntary
attraction and traction, which are so common in the comatose
and sleep-waking state, here occurred without any kind or
degree of sleep. I have seen persons who had been mesme-
rised with the effect of sensible results, susceptible, in even
their natural state, of rigidity with extension and flexion, by
passes ; and the same phenomena occur in the sleep-waking
state, even though the patient may freely converse as if awake,
his eyes perhaps being shut. They have all described the
state of the stiffened parts, extended or bent, as altogether
involuntary. One would say, "don^t, — you are drawing
strength into my arm ;" and some of those thus affected in
their natural state have felt severe pain from it. The hands
of the Okeys could be cramped, though painfully, in their
natural state, by mesmerised metals ; and in their mesmeric
state without pain. I know a lady who, in her sleep-waking
state, is as if awake, only that her eyes are closed, and she
cannot speak, and in her natural state she remembers all that
has passed, and she will remain near, and will incline to, the
mesmeriser, and may be drawn in all directions by tractive
passes. Like this man, and like those sleep-wakers who, though
as if awake, forget all afterwards, she says she must move tUs
way or that ; and must bend towards or approach her mes-
meriser. Some must have his contact, be it only with the
point of his foot or finger. Some have a violent desire to
imitate.

This man, however, had no new faculty. Some, with their
eyes perfectly closed and bandaged, know the situation of


Digitized by


Google


190 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

their mesmeriser^ and know all the movements of his hands
or those of others who try to draw them. Others have only
developed an inevitable impulse to obey, to approach, and
to imitate, but must use their external senses to know what
their mesmeriser is doing.

This man obeyed and approached according to the infor-
mation of his external senses only. For he always looked in-
tently and involuntarily at Dr. Wilson the whole time ; and,
when Dr. Wilson once bandaged his eyes, he would slowly
move in any direction in which he was told that Dr. Wilson
was moving him, though Dr. Wilson was perfectly still.
Such a fact I have witnessed in several other cases. Those
who have the propensity to imitate, to be near, or to obey the
commanding movements of the mesmeriser, may or may not
have unususd means of knowing where the mesmeriser is and
what he is doing. If they have not, they without any decep-
tion look at him, though perhaps from being in a sleep-waking
state their eyes may not be fully open. I know one most
truthful little child, who thus looks when imder the propen-
sity to imitate, and, if you try to prevent her, makes every
effort to look ; and says, ^^ really, sir, I must see what you
are doing, for I must do it.'^ One of the Okeys would accu-
rately imitate, when in deep sleep-waking, any grimace made
behind her back; and movements made on the other side of a
closed door.

On one occasion, indeed, I observe, in a note made by a
gentlemen of a visit he paid Dr. Wilson's patient, that the man
appeared to exhibit this new faculty. It is as follows : — "Dr.
Wilson then went behind him, and sat with his mouth open.
The patient then opened his mouth and yawned several times.
He could not see the operator, or have any idea of what he
was doing.'' How many exquisite experiments of this kind
did we not make with Elizabeth Okey ! Professor Owen, of
the College of Surgeons, once made certain grimaces behind
her with one side of his nose which he only of the party
could make, and no one knew what he was going to do ; but
she, though asleep in her chair, imitated it perfectly. He
acknowledged the reality of the wonder. But when he found
that Mr. Lawrence and others ignorant of the subject, but
fully competent to judge, laughed at her as a "humbug" and
me as a soft fool, he forthwith sneered with the rest at mes-
merism and me.

lY. In the spring of 1839, a middle aged man, named
Ward, residing at Hull, was in a state of such melancholia that
he never slept without opium, — was, to use his own words, "in


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmerism. 191

a dreadfully nervous state," utterly unable to do any business,
going about distracted, praying for death, and actually once
attempted suicide. Dr. Alderson of Hull, he said, had
ordered him to take about a grain of opium at bed time ; but,
as this soon failed to have any effect, he increased the dose in
about six months to a lai^ pill of several grains, notwith-
standing which he spent most of the night walking about the
room distracted. He took the same quantity of opium also in
the daytime, whenever he could get it in spite of his wife
who hid it from him as well as she could. He also fell to
drinking in order to drown his misery, and thus aggravated
his disease. He then came to London, and consulted Mr.
W. Hering, of Foley Place, who, knowing the truth of mes-
merism, gave me an opportunity of testing its powers in the
case. Without giving him any medicine, I had the happiness of
seeing the poor man perfectly well in three weeks, after having
been mesmerised dtoly for that time, though without any
sensible effect. He continued well between two and three years ;
till some property was left him, when he fancied that the
way to mf^e a good use of it was to drink more freely than
before, and he was not so well ; but he at length conquered
the habit and is now in good health. In a letter dated, 14th
of this month, to Mr. Hering, the poor man says, '^ I am
persuaded that there is something in mesmerism which is
secret, and which our senses are unable to comprehend, and
that that hidden influence is what has cured my terrible
disorder.''

V. The last case I have witnessed occurred in a very robust
healthly-looking mother, past thirty years of age, — ^Mrs. S.
She had suffered two or t^ee attacks of nervousness, but in
the summer of 1841 fell into a state of absolute distraction.
She fancied all sorts of misfortunes, and, like so many melan-
choly patients, now that mesmerism is a subject of general
conversation ; adopted the delusion of having suffered fr^m
mesmerism. She imagined that a discharged maid servant
had mesmerised her ; and that a child wUch she had lost
was not dead, but had been mesmerised away from her. She
told me I knew all this well. She would cry bitterly, wring
her hands, and grow frantic; accuse all her friends of injuring
her; fiJl into the most furious rage; and talk incessantly
of her imagined afSictions. She wished to destroy herself;
begged others to kill her, and yet was distractedly anguished
with the conviction that she should die and never recover.
All attempts at kind persuasion were lost upon her. She
complained of a scalding pain inside her head, and down her


Digitized by


Google


192 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

arms ; and in the paroxysms of despair and rage^ for she was
worse at times every day and nighty her face was flashed.
She hardly ever slept. Her bowels required medicine every
day ; but her tongue was clean and moist ; and her pulse was
about 90 and not at all fiill. She had lived sparingly^ but I
allowed her to eat flesh; and she frequently ate well, though
sometimes she refused both food and the aperient, being
resolved never to swallow any thing again. The only medi-
cine calculated to tranquillize her distracted feelings was
opium ; and, finding from her medical attendant that he had
given her half a grain of muriate of morphia with no effect, I
ordered her one grain immediately, and another at bed time
if she did not sleep. This was May 18th, 1841. She became
calmer, and even cheerful, but did not sleep. However, she
was soon as bad as ever ; and it was necessary to increase the
dose, and the frequency of the dose, of morphia. As it, Uke
other forms of opium, produced vomiting in her, the meconate
of morphia was substituted, and Mr. Squire's solution was
given, but we had to augment the dose to four and a half
drachms once or even twice a day before sleep was procured,
and presently to increase this to five and a half drachms. It
too produced sickness, like the muriate, and the acetate which
also had been tried. I have never seen any superiority in it ;
indeed it appears a less effective preparation! Finding no supe-
riority in it, and indeed that it seemed to lose its power sooner
than the muriate or acetate, both which lose their power much
sooner than opium, the muriate was persevered with till I
was obliged to give her ten and a half grains every six hours
for a day or two, at the end of which time she slept several
hours, and awoke comfortable and not drowsy; and soon
slept again for several hours, and was much calmer and happy
for several days. She then took but two or three grains three
or four times a day, but was soon as ill as ever. Mr. Wood
then mesmerised her for me, it being arranged that no opiates
should be given. He began September 11th, and the follow-
ing are his notes : —

" Was mesmerised for the first time in fifteen minutes, fell
asleep ; continued mesmerising her for half an hour, and then
left her asleep.

12th. Slept ten hours and is evidently better, but will not
acknowledge it. Is constantly, while awake, moaning and
exclaiming, ^It's of no use, it's of no use. I am sure nothing
will do me any good.' Mesmerised her, and procured sleep
in about the same time as yesterday, and left her asleep.

13th. Slept twehe hours from the time I left her, and then
woke in what they called a choaking fit, and was very sick.


Digitized by


Google


Insanity Cured by Mesmerism. 193

The sickness continued, and the medical attendant was sent
for and he gave her a dose of morphia. She appeared to be
under the influence of it when I saw her, but the sickness
continued. Did not mesmerise her, as morphia had so unfor-
tunately been given by the medical attendant.

14th. Had no sleep last night. Mesmerised her as usual.
After twenty minutes she fell asleep, and I left her asleep.

15th. Only slept for two hours. Sickness continues.
Sent her to sleep as usual.

16th. Sleep did not continue after I left her. Sickness
better.

17tlu Rather better. More quiet, though she had very
little sleep last night.

Here the mischief of giving morphia was evident. It
prevented the full effects of mesmerism for days.

20th. Improving ; but does not sleep much except while
being mesmerised, when the sleep is sometimes very profound,
and she snores, but it does not continue after I leave her.

25th. Will not acknowledge that she is any better, but
certainly is very much better. Appetite greatly improved, and
strength increased* Is able to walk across the room. 771^
improvement is obvious to every body but hersejf.

29th. Getting stronger every day. Always sleeps when
mesmerised, and but very little at any other time. Takes no
aperient medicine.

Oct. 5th. Getting stronger daily. Sleeps better but still
not soundly.

10th. 771^ improvement continues daily.

21st. Is now able to sit up, and is steadily improving.

Nov. 10th. Able to come down stairs. Sleeps better, still
has a good deal of headache at times.

25th. Has been out and seems all the better for it.

Dec. 3rd. There is still occasionally some headache, but in
other respects is pretty u;e// though rather weak.

26th. Spent the day yesterdiay firom home, and is none
the worse.

dOth. Continues very well.

The lady remains weU to this hour — ^nearly two years
having elapsed.

How delightful thus to administer to a mind diseased. In
these cases, and others of the same kind, but far less severe,
medical men are daily consulted, and daily regret the in-
eflSciency of their means. The patients take loads of phy-
sic, are filled with placebos, and perhaps severely injured
with that most useful, but too often misapplied, mineral —
mercury.


Digitized by


Google


194 Dr. EUiotson^s Cases of

In many diseases of excitement, mesmerism promises to be
usefid. When there is inflammation or congestion, the well-
established remedies of these conditions must be employed.
But we have innumerable cases of irritation without inflam-
mation or congestion, or disproportionate to these, or in fact
the source of them ; and in such cases mesmerism is invalu-
able. In the delirium and sleeplessness of low fever, for ex-
ample, and in the convulsions of children, it will often efffect
what nothing else does; and that speedily, and without conse-
quent inconvenience. Even in that awful and at present
incurable disease — hydrophobia, it has relieved indescribably.

Mr. Wood, hearing in 1837 that a case of hydrophobia
existed in Paddington, went and offered his services, which
the friends, and the medical men to their credit, accepted.
The disease was too far advanced for mesmerism to have any
chance of curing it, for the boy was within twelve hours of
his death : but the effects were satisfactory. The following
are Mr. Wood^s notes :

'^A boy about 13 years of age, some time after having
been bitten by a dog, was attacked with symptoms of hydro-
phobia. Two or three medical men saw the patient and pre-
scribed for him, but the disease rapidly increased. This
occurred at the time that Baron Dupotet was in England.
The case appeared to be hopeless, and it was suggested that
mesmerism might possibly be of some use. The attempt
was made; but the disease was already far advanced; for
when it was begun the patient could not bear the gentle
waving of the hctnd before his face, as even this produced a
current of air which increased the dreadful spasms, and
though the noise of pouring water from one vessel to another
did not appear to distress him much, he was unable to swal-
low a drop, and, when asked to try, made the attempt with
the greatest reluctance. He seemed to feel the sUghtest
breath of air and could not bear the door to be opened, though
?ie was far enough from it to be quite out of the way of any
absolute draught. He had already taken large doses of
opium ; but the symptoms rapidly increased. For the first
two hours that mesmerism was tried he remained nearly sta-
tionary. It wa^ still continued and he now began to improve,
and continued improving for two or three hours, so much as to
be able to bear the door being opened, and got out to have his
bed made : the waving of the hand quickly in front of his face
did not annoy him at all, and he could even swallow water a
tea-spoonful at a time.

"The improvement having gone on to this pointy the


Digitized by


Google


St, Vitus^s Dance Cured by Mesmerism. 195

symptoms remained the same^ and unfortunately large doses
of opium were again administered. But in about two hours
more he began to relapse, and continued getting worse till
about 11 A.M., when he died. Mesmerism was commenced at
11 P.M. the previous evening , and continued with an occasional
interval of a few minutes until 8 o'clock, — ^three hours before
his death. It was only then given up, finding that there
was no longer any hope of saving the patient. But it appears
very probable from the temporary, though very decided, im-
provement that did take place, that if there coiUd have been a
succession of mesmerisers to relieve each other as they became
fatigued, the result might have been more favourable : and it
is also a great question whether, as has been frequently ob-
served in other cases, the lai^ quantities of opiimi that were
administered did not stupify the patient to the effects of mes-
merism, and so prevent its having a fair chance of success.'*

Of this I have little doubt, especially when I consider
the ill effect of opium in the case last described. I have
known, in the same way, the good effects of mesmerism lost
for a tune by the administration of strong purgatives. Me-
dicines should be employed either not at all, or with the
greatest cautiousness, when mesmerism is practised: and
mesmerism itself, to have perfectly fair play, should not only
not be disturbed thus, but be administered steadily and per-
severingly. I have known it necessary for two years in a
chronic case ; and in a violent active disease it may be re-
quired to be employed for some time continuously. Mr.
Wood's perseverance in this, and I may add in other cases,
does his benevolence and steadiness infinite credit. For,
though quite disinterestedly, I have known him persevere
daily, for above an hour, even sometimes for two, and for the
best part of a year or even longer, if necessary.


St. Vitus's Dance is a very common disease from six or
seven to sixteen or seventeen years of age, and chiefly in
females. I ascertained many years ago that iron is almost a
specific remedy for it. The least disturbing form of iron is
the sesquioxyd, and I have never once failed to cure the
disease with this remedy, when the disease was general
throughout the body, and had not lasted some years. Pur-
gatives, blisters, and all debilitating and irritating measures
for the most part retard the cure. Arsenic, copper, and zinc,
have great power over it ; but iron cures the most cases, and
the most rapidly, even when there is headache and a full


Digitized by


Google


196 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

habit. I have often seen the good of iron sadly interfered
with by the practitioner being two busy with purgatives, and
fiddle-fadling with other remedies, and not allowing the iron
fair play by exhibiting it steadily and undisturbedly. A
regular state of bowels is all that is required. Still, taking
medicine is always disagreeable ; and I resolved, when I first
saw the power of mesmerism, to ascertain what it could do
in this disease ; and my success has been astonishing. It has
been most beneficial even in a case of many years standing,
such as in which I have found iron useless ; and in which
case itself, iron actually proved useless.

I recollect above twelve years ago smiling incredulously
when a German physician, now no more. Dr. Kind, assured
me in St. Thomases Hospital that " animal magnetism was a
good remedy for St. Vitus's dance.^* He had learnt this in
his own country, but Germany has very little availed itself of
its knowledge ; and it has been reserved to Britain to esta-
blish the universal acknowledgment and application of Gall's
mighty discoveries and of the truths for which Mesmer la-
boured.

I. It is five years since I first treated St. Vitus's dance
with mesmerism. Henrietta Power, aged 17, servant of all
work, was admitted under my care in University College
Hospital, April 28th, 1838, for St Vitus's dance. About a
fortnight previously, while taking in the tea things, she sud-
denly dropped them, and the disease at the same moment
declared itself, but without any other disturbance of a single
function. She was in constant motion, flexion, extension,
rotation, twitching and catching; constantly pulled her
clothes in different directions; dragged one leg along the
ground; rolled the face and chin on the neck and shoulders;
grimaced ; rubbed her eyes ; could not continue to sit in the
same situation. The least excitement rendered all the move-
ments more violent. Her mother had been obliged to make
her a bed upon the floor, and, sit up all night to prevent her
injuring herself; and she had slept but little during the fort-
night. The left arm and right leg were more affected than
the others. She could swallow well, but had extreme di£Sculty
in speaking. When asked to give me her hand, it went into
all sorts of movements. Though she was ruddy and of a fuU
habit, her pulse was quiet and weak. I ordered her no medi-
cine, but mesmerism for half an hour every day, morning or
afternoon. She was mesmerised in the afternoon for half an
hour with no sensible effect. It was necessary to confine her
in bed by straps to prevent her falling out; she slept only


Digitized by


Google


St. Viius^s Dance Cured by Mesmerism. 197

two hours altogether in the nighty but during her sleep was
quiet.

29th. More quiet than yesterday. She was mesmerised
for half and hour. Slept six hours at nighty and did not
reqmre to be confined in her bed.

30th. Movements rather increased^ but she had a good
mght.

May 5th. Hds improved daily since the last report ; walks
easily the length of the ward. During the mesmerism she moves
much less, and is rather heavy.

8th. Has steadily improved; assists the nurse, and can
carry a saucepan of water from an adjoining room to the fire
place in the ward.

13th. StUl better; can extend her arms and hands firmly
and hold a book well enough to read it. Very heavy during
the mesmerisation.

24th. So much better that she does needle-work with ease.

29th. Several persons joined hands^ and one held a hand
of the mesmeriser; and under his manipulations she went to
sleep.

June 3rd. Only drowsiness induced since the 29th.

4th. Not rendered even drowsy.

From this time she was rendered drowsy^ but nothing
more; and

July Sthy was all but perfectly well, and I kept her till
the 24th of July to see her cure established. She took no
medicine all the time, and ate meat several times a week.

Here was another admirable cure without any expense for
drugs. But it was beneath the notice of the doctors^ and
above all of the distinguished Dr. A. T. Thomson who had
patients in the same ward: and such simple^ inexpensive, and
perfect cures were forbidden by the Committee of the College.

n. Marv Ann Vergo, aged 13. HI three months with
St. Yitus^s dance. In the humble walk of life. Sent to me
by Mr. Baker, surgeon, at Staines, August 4th, 1840. She
had experienced the same disease in the spring, four times at
intervals of two years ; and it has always lasted six or seven
months. I mesmerised her for half an hour daily myself, till
the 8th of September, and gave her no medicine. She was
always much quieter during the process, and for the first fort-
night sleepy, but not afterwards. The improvement was very
gradual; but she was well enough actually to make a straw
bonnet before the middle of September, that is in about six
weeks from the commencement of the treatment ; and per-
fectly well before the end of that month.

VOL. I. p


Digitized by


Google


198 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

I have just heard from Mr. Baker that she has remained
well till this summer (1843), the interval of the attack now
having been three years instead of two; and the present
attack is much milder than ever it was before^ and is yielding
to iron and the cold shower bath. There can be no doubt
that mesmerism without either would cure her more rapidly
than before.

III. The following case was treated by Mr. Wood, and I
give it in his words. " Elizabeth Alexander, 26 years old.
When 13 years of age it was first observed that any sort of
excitement produced catchings and twitchings of her hands,
arms, and other parts, and any sudden fright produced the
same symptoms, and caused the bowels to be very much
relaxed. This state continued getting gradually worse until
she was 19, when she was taken to Bath, used the waters,
took cold shower baths, hot baths, &c.

Remained at Bath five months, and returned home quite
well. From that time continued well for five years.

January, 1841. About twelve months ago the same symp-
toms returned and have been gradually getting worse tq> to
January , 1842. She has almost constant involuntary move-
ments and catchings in the head and face, and also in the
hands and feet, particularly the former. She was mesmerised
by Mr. Wood during half an hour without any visible effect.

Mesmerism was continued by Mr. Wood daily for nearly
two months. The involuntary movements gradually subsided,
and at the end of that time she went home quite well.

The only sensible effect produced by mesmerism was
drowsiness, scarcely ever amounting to sleep.^'

IV. A friend of mine who has the largest provincial prac-
tice among physicians in England, and has had the virtue and
manliness always to avow his conviction of the truth of mes-
merism — ^Dr. Simpson of York, related to me, when in town
three years ago, that he had cured a case of this disease at
one sitting; and has just now sent me the following ac-
count of it.

" York, June 9th, 1843.

"My Dear Sir, — I regret not having had an opportunity
of writing to you.

" A little girl, aged thirteen, had an attack of chorea, in
the early part of the year, for three successive years. The
indisposition was perfectly suspended by the carbon, ferri. in
the course of six weeks, on two occasions; on the third attack


Digitized by


Google


St Vitus' 8 Dance Cured by Mesmerism. 199

two sturgeons and myself determined to try the effects of
mesmerism^ without the use of any medicine taken internally ;
she was mesmerised for forty minutes. Very little apparent
effect was produced at the time^ but the disease was entirely
suspended^ and although the process was never repeated, she
has had no relapse.

" My dear sir, yours most faithfully,

"T. Simpson/'

V. Master Linnell, of Mercer Eow, Northampton, nine
years of age, a clever and healthy boy and always in action,
was reading on Friday, November 4th, 1842, near the fire-
place, when he was frightened by flames suddenly descend-
ing from the chimney, the communicating chimney of the
kitchen below having caught fire. He screamed and ran out
of the room ; but took no further notice in particular of the
circumstance. However, at night, after he had been in bed two
hours, he ''flew screaming down stairs, as white as a sheet,'' say-
ing that he smelt fire, and that the fire had broken out again.
His mother warmed him, gave him some wine, and took him
to bed again. In another hour, he ran down screaming again
with fright. His mother then kept him up till she went to
bed herself. On Saturday he was " poorly, fretting, and low."

On Sunday, at church, he disturbed his mother by his
fidgettiness during the whole of the service, on which ac-
count she punished him, and was so displeased that she would
not allow him to go again in the evening.

On Monday and Tuesday he was observed to be in great
motion ; and his mouth frothed, which he said he could not
help, for " his tongue was grown so large." He spoke so badly
that his mother thought he was mimicking, and scolded him ;
when he cried and said he could not speak properly. She
saw that he was ill, and supposed the fright had been the
cause. A druggist told her that " the fright had caused too
much blood to flow to the brain, and that he might have
worms, but that by giving a little medicine and plenty of
nourishment he would soon get better," and sent Um three
powders. " I gave him," writes his mother in a statement
which she drew up, " two, and, after the action on the bowels,
he was immediately worse ; but finding him get worse, sent
him to Dr. Robertson, who said that it was the St. Vitus's
dance, caused by fright, and ordered him a blister on the
back of the neck and strengthening medicine.

" The next day I was obliged to send for Dr. Robertson,
as the motions had increased so much that we could not hold
him, and he had quite lost his speech.

p2


Digitized by


Google


200 Dr. EUioUorea Cases of

" Dr. Robertson and Mr. Terry (surgeon) attended him
daily for some time, and he had scarcely any sleep for ten
nights, and took a great deal of medicine and a shower bath
every morning. Not seeing him get much better, I asked
the doctor if change might not be of use. He said certainly.
I brought him to London. And, having read a book of the
Rev. W. W. Mosely'* (father of the Rev. Professor Mosely of
King^s College), " took my child to him. But after a week's
trial found him getting worse, and was obliged to hire a car-
riage to draw him in and out of the house. I then went to
Surgeon Chohnondley of Nottingham Place, who said he
seldom saw a case of that kind cured in boys.'' She was ad-
vised by Mr. Dyer of Upper Marylebone Street to bring him
to me. On Jan. 4, 1843, he was brought in a coach to me
and obliged to be carried into the house. Supported by his
mother, he walked with great difficulty from my dining-
room into my library.

His debihty was such that he could not stand a moment
unsupported ; his head hung on one side ; his tongue oat of
his mouth, which constantly slobbered ; his look was quite
fatuitous; he could not articulate, making only inarticulate
noises, and these with extreme difficulty. Even yes and no
were said in the strangest manner so as hardly to be under-
stood. He often fell into a passion at not being able to arti-
culate. He ground his teeth and sighed greatly , continually
blew bubbles of saliva from his mouth, and moved his tongue.
The movements of the disease had lessened, so as not to be
in proportion to his extreme muscular debility. He could use
neither hand for any purpose, and scarcely ever raised the
right. He was low-spirited and fretful, and often cried almost
without cause.

His tongue was clear and moist ; his appetite good ; and
his bowels in the most healthy condition. His pulse 74.

He cried sadly at being brought to me, thinking that I
should give him loads of physic to swallow and blister him,
as others had done.

I mesmerised him by vertical passes before his face for
half an hour. He sat well supported in an easy chair, his
head on his breast ; but he sat so quietly in comparison wUh
his ttsual state that his mother noticed it. He was mesmerised
daily for the same time in the same way.

5th and 6th. Spoke less inarticulately after mesmerisation
to^ay than before. Indeed, can walk and stand alone a little,

7th. Walks with less support : his countenance is clearer
and its expression more intelligent. Perfectly still while mes-
merised.


Digitized by


Google


St. VUua^s Dance Cured by Mesmerism. 201

8th. Walks better : after being mesmerised walked twice
round the room alsne, without stoppings though unsteadily^
and he stood well alone.

9th. Walked alone fotar times round the room after being
mesmerised. Is always much stronger after it than before.

10th and 11th. Walked five times round the room alone
and without stopping, faster and more upright.

12th and 13th, Walked much better and speaks better —
said pudding. He blows no bubbles with his saliva while
mesmerised; and has gaped, as if sleepy^ for several days
during the process.

14th & 15th. Walks still better; and speaks decidedly better.

17th. Stands ahout the room well, and has walked out of
doors alone twice : articulates a great many words. He has sat
less and less drooping and supported while being mesmerised;
has sighed, slobbered, and blown bubbles less and less.

In a few days he read aloud freely in a book opened by
me at random, and took a walk every day; and in three
weeks from the first day of mesmerism he fed himself with
his left hand, and walked from his lodgings, Park Street,
Dorset Square, to my house.

On the 30th he walked five miles, and could talk well.
He continued to improve rapidly ; could use his right hand
well on the 2nd of February; and by the 10th was perfectly
cured : and is well at this moment — June 26.

I mesmerised him on the 15th of February for the last
time, having omitted but once (Feb. 6th). He says that for
some time past he has been very sick of sitting still to be
mesmerised, feeling so strong and active : whereas formerly
he was glad to sit still, and sorry when I had finished.

Nothing could be more decisive of the power of mesmer-
ism than this case. The disease was getting worse and worse
at the time I began. An effect was visible in a few days;
the benefit steadily increased ; and, fit)m being a slobbering
idiot-looking child, his head hanging on one side, unable to
speak or stand unsupported, in three weeks he could stand
easily and walk five nules. Not a particle of medicine was
given after the first day.

The true gratitude of the boy and his mother was delight-
ful. But my medical reward was, that the surgeon who at-
tended him, and whose very name I had never before heard
of, gave way to such bad feeling as publicly to attack me, by
reiterating a silly and ignorant string of sentences from a
very dull and feeble medical periodical, called the Provincial
Journal; but took care to omit all mention of the case which
led to Us hostility.


Digitized by


Google


202 Mr. Prideau^s Cases of

The following cases and remarks have been kindly sent
me by Mr. Prideaux of Southampton.

VI. " In November, 1841, Eliza Veale, then about sixteen
years of age, and residing with her parents in the village of
Itchen, became a patient of the Southampton Dispensary
for a severe attack of St. Vitus's dance. After being under
treatment two months without benefit, the surgeon whose
care she was under, Mr. G. B. List, with a freedom from
prejudice which contrasts advantageously with the bigotry of
too many of his professional brethren, offered me an oppor-
tunity of attempting her cure by mesmerism, which I wil-
lingly embraced. At the time I first saw the patient the
convulsive movements were violent and incessant, whilst her
countenance presented a pitiable expression of fatuity which
it was painful to behold, and which indicated that her intellect
had become much impaired. The state of her digestive func-
tions was such that Mr. List proposed that he should admi-
nister a little aperient medicine at the same time that I was
treating her by mesmerism. To this however I decidedly ob-
jected, not from any doubt as to the propriety of the treat-
ment, but because I was aware from experience that the
sittings would render such a course imnecessary, and was
moreover desirous that the result of the case might be as
conclusive as possible, that no loop-hole for doubt as to
the means of cure might be opened, but that the single and
unassisted power of mesmerism might be rendered clearly
apparent.

" At the first sitting I mesmerised her enei^etically for
three quarters of an hour, neither willing to entrance her
nor the reverse, but with the desire that my influence might
be exerted in just that way which would prove most bene-
ficial to her. The only perceptible effects produced beyond a
very slight manifestation of attraction and increase of the
convulsive movements, were, that the patient became in-
tensely cold and experienced a pricking sensation running
along the course of the spine. The first sitting took place on
a Monday morning at 10 o'clock, and her mother was re-
quested to bring her again at the same hour on Wednesday.

" On Wednesday morning she accordingly presented her-
self, the moment she entered the room it was apparent at a
glance that the convulsive movements were very much lessened
both in violence and frequency, but my feelings of pleasurable
surprise at an amendment so rapid were speedily drowned in
the astonishment which seized me, when, as she approached
and I perceived the expression of her countenance, I saw a
change so great that nothing but the evidence of my own


Digitized by


Google


St. Vitus's Dance Cured by Mesmerism. 203

senses could have made me credit it^ and concerning which
it is no exaggeration to say that she was transformed from a
creature apparently verging on idiocy into a rational being.
Could I present my readers with a daguerreotyped portrait of
my patient taken on each occasion^ I might then succeed in
convincing them of the amount of change which took place.
But without such a testimony I feel that any language I may
employ will fail in effecting this object, since, had I myself,
prior to witnessing so incredible a transformation, read any
such account, I should certainly have concluded it to be
exaggerated and made large deductions for the imagination of
the writer.

"The second sitting, like the first, lasted three quarters of
an hour, and the effects produced were the same except that
the aggravation of the convulsive movements by the operation
was more marked. The weather being stormy, to save the
patient from exposure to the wet in crossing the ferry to
Southampton, I promised her mother to visit her at her own
house on Friday morning. I accordingly went, and to my
surprise foimd my patient entirely cured of her chorea. Not
a trace of convulsive movements were to be perceived, and
upon asking her mother when they ceased, she replied, ' I
have not seen her twitch once. Sir, since she left your
houae.'

*' The patient's appetite remaining bad I again mesmerised
her for three quarters of an hour, and on this occasion she ma-
nifested a disposition to sleep without however quite going off.
I left the house with a promise to visit her again if it should
prove necessary, and desired her mother to take an early
opportunity of letting me know how she was. In the ensuing
week the mother ctJled to return her thanks and stated that
her daughter's appetite was quite restored, and that she was
more active, sprightly and better, in every respect, than she
had been for years before, and from a visit I paid her a few
days ago I find that she has remained quite well ever since.

"A case more conclusive than the foregoing of the power of
mesmerism as a remedial agent in the cure of disease it would
be difiicult to conceive. It presents to us a case of severe
chorea under medical treatment for two months without be-
nefit, three-fourths cured by the first sitting; we see the
disease in its subdued form continue up to and during the
second sitting, which has the effect of aggravating its symp-
toms, but, behold, at its termination the patient walks out
of the house cured, and in the language of her mother ' has
never been seen to twitch since;' the occurrence of the
crisis in her malady and the application of mesmerism, bear-


Digitized by


Google


204 Mr, Prideatuv^s Cases of

ing such a relation to each other in point of time as irresisti-
bly to impress all sane individuals with the conviction that
the relation of cause and effect subsisted between them, and
to entitle us to exclaim, that never was the cure of any
disease more clearly attributable to the operation of any
remedy.

'' For my own part so intense has been the gratification
which I have derived from having been the instrument of
conferring such a benefit on a fellow-creature, so great the
delight I have experienced in contemplating this new revela-
tion of nature and musing on the happy consequences to man
which its cultivation promises, that I can truly say that the
pleasurable emotions which the successful result of this single
case has afforded me, have more than compensated for all the
obloquy, abuse and ridicule, which have been heaped upon
me for choosing to believe in the evidence of my senses and
unhesitatingly on all occasions avowing my convictions/'

VII. " The second case of St. Vitus's dance treated by me
is that of a young woman of Hyde, twenty-six years of age,
named Snudden, and was brought under my notice by a lady
whose ever active benevolence is always on the watch to do
good, and who had previously been witness of a most extra-
ordinary cure I had effected by the agency of mesmerism,
and assisted me not a little in its completion.

" The patient, Jane Snudden, about ten years prior to the
commencement of her treatment by me in June, 1843, had
begun to perceive a winking of the eyes and slight move-
ments of the muscles of the face, which continually increased,
till at length, four years after the accession of her disorder,
she was affected with violent twitchings and contortions over
her whole frame to such an extent as seriously to interfere
with her occupation as a seamstress, the jerking of her arms
being often so great as to break the thread she was sewing
with: in other respects her health remained good and her
appetite was not impaired. She continued in this state rather
getting worse than better up to the time when I first saw
her ; at this period her figure was robust, her colour fresh,
and her general appearance quite the reverse of an invalid.

" I mesmerised her on the first occasion for half an hour;
this sitting lessened the severity of the disease frdly one half,
and I entertained the most sanguine hopes of a speedy cure.
Elated with her amendment, at the interval of a week she
walked seven miles under a hot sun to procure a sitting, and
little if any benefit appeared to be derived on this occasion. I
mesmerised her subsequently three or four times at intervals


Digitized by


Google


St. Vitm's Dance Cured by Mesmerism. 205

of a fortnight^ but the cure, though progressing, not proceed-
ing so rapidly as I desired, and attributing the slow progress
to the length of time which intervened between the sittings,
I relinquished the treatment of the case to a gentleman resi-
dent in the town, by whom she was mesmerised three times
a week for three months, at the close of which time she con-
sidered herself cured ; the only trace of her complaint re-
maining being a very slight and almost imperceptible twitch-
ing of the muscles of the face when she became excited.

*' The only perceptible effect produced on this patient by
the sittings I gave her was slight drowsiness, but subse-
quently, liter she had been mesmerised regularly three times
a week for a considerable period, she used to go to sleep on
each occasion, was very difficult to be awakened, and mani-
fested community of taste. A few days since I caUed to see
her, and regret to state that within the last month the disease
has shewn a disposition to return, and she proposes again to
recur to mesmerism in the event of its increasing.'^

Vin. '' Matilda Esther; aged eleven years, residing with
her parents at No. 1, York Square, Southampton, became
in the autumn of 1842 gradually affected with chorea and
paralysis of the right side of the body. After being under
treatment in the dispensary for six weeks with some improve-
ment in her general health, but with little amendment of the
chorea, and none of the paralysis, on the 13th of February
her mother brought her to me by the advice of her medical
attendant.

*' At this period the convulsive movements though not se-
vere were incessant, her arm hung powerless by her side, and
her mother stated that her leg often suddenly gave way, so as
to cause her nearly to fall to the groimd. I commenced mes-
merising her for half an hour every morning. The twitehings
diminished perceptibly from day to day, and at the end of
the fifth sitting not a trace of them remained; about this
period the patient also commenced endeavouring to use her
right hand, and was able to feed herself at the end of the
tenth sitting, which she had not done for upwards of three
months. I now lessened the firequency of the sittings to
every alternate day, and six more sufficed to complete the
cure, and to restore the arm to its normal state of strength.
The only visible effect of the sittings was a great increase of
the convulsive movements ; this was always very marked, and
continued to the end ; and though aftier the fifth sitting no
traces of chorea appeared in the child in her ordinary state,
the twitehings invariably began about two minutes after the


Digitized by


Google


206 Mr. Prideaiuc^s Cases of

commencement of the sittings continued to its termination,
and could always be aggravated in any part by especially di-
recting the operation to it.

"What will the medical scoflFers at mesmerism say to these
and similar cases ? Will they have the assurance to vote
them beneath their consideration, and affirm that their pre-
sent mode of curing such diseases is so satisfactory, so mild
in its nature, and so happy in its results,* as to leave nothing
to be desired ? Or will they resort to their old tactics of
making abortive attempts to explain away facts, and raise
once more the hacknied cry of imagination? Verily if
imagination — pure imagination — work such wonders, she
should be placed at the head of the materia medica, and the
credit of many of the faculty would be more than a little im-
proved by calUng in her assistance.

" With what a choice tableau of the philosophers (? ) of the
nineteenth century, will the scene recenUy enacted in the Royal
Medical and Chirurgical Society furnish posterity. We see
a set of men who are unable to specify one single cause wky the
phenomena of mesmerism should be impossible, beyond the
mere circumstance of these being contrary to their previous
experience, and who must know full well that t/ds can be no
test of truth, and who yet without examination suffer them-
selves so to be carried away by their passions and prejudices,
that, with a violence proportionate to their lack of facts and
arguments, each struggles to bawl the loudest against disco-
veries which the unanimous voice of future generations will
confirm. How lamentable that man should so prostitute the
noble heritage of reason, as to cast it &om him when he
forms his opinions, and only recur to its aid to search for
plausibilities to defend the creed, which, slave as he is, has
been dictated by his passions.

"Were the well-attested facts of mesmerism only one tenth
part so numerous as they are, still their production is so com-
pletely within the reach of all, that no language could be too
strong to characterize the irrationality, the folly, and the blind-
ness of those, who in hot haste rush forward and risk their
reputation by affirming the impossibility of them, without
having made one single attempt to elicit them. All who
make such essays become of necessity converts, and all should

* *< Vide Dr. Elliotson's pamphlet, page 87, for an account of a case of
St. Vitas's dance, treated by Dr. Marshall Hall with—mastard cataplasms
to the spine, copping on the back of the neck every fifth day, and mercury
to such an extent that not one sound tooth was left in the patient's head, —
all without any benefit, and which case is already greatly relieved by mes-
merism.'^


Digitized by


Google


St. VUw^s Dance Cured by Mesmerism. 207

make them except they are prepared to lay it down as an
axiom, that whatever is incomprehensible is false; a doctrine,
the innate Rilliness of which is only paralleled by its arro-
gance and presumption. We are diverted at the incredulity
with which the eastern potentate received the tale, that water
occasionally became solid as crystal in the native country of
his guest, but after having all his life long as inseparably
associated the idea of fluidity with water, as that of heat
with fire, great allowance is to be made for his refusing to
believe in a transformation he had no means of verifying, and
we must not place him so low in the scale of rationali^, as
those who, surrounded mth opportunities for observation, adhere
to some bigoted prepossession against mesmerism without once
availing themselves of their aid.

" As the ignorant become conversant from childhood with
the various phenomena around them, till their firequent repe-
tition has to their unthinking brains divested them of wonder,
and they regard none as requiring explanation, so in phe-
nomena, not one whit more wonderful or inexplicable, when
presented for the first time, they behold an impossibility.
The philosopher however sees that the mere circumstance of
his being conversant with one class of phenomena and not
with another, can exert no influence on their intrinsic quality
of wonderfulness, and smiles to see men whose minds are
too permanently contracted to expand to the reception of a
new truth, and who ludicrously mistake their own narrow-
ness of view for profundity, and the inveteracy of their pre-
judices for superior penetration, complacently characterizing
as visionaries, those whose more enlarged conceptions eman-
cipate them from thinking by habit.

*' The question is,— is truth to be determined by facts or by
the a priori reasonings, — the conjectures, — ^the fancies of in-
dividuals? If the latter, let the maxim of Bacon — ^ Homo
natura minister et interpres, tantum facit et intelligit quantum
de natura ordine re vel mente observaverit ; nee amplius scit,
out potesf — ^be at once exploded, and let us seek at the
hands of these new luminaries of science a fresh edition of
that Aristotelian philosophy which substitutes speculation for
induction, and, wnen opposed by facts, coolly proclaims that
if they do not agree with its theories so much the worse for
them.''

These are all the Cases of insanity and St. Vitus's dance
that have been treated with mesmerism by myself or, to my
knowledge, by my friends. I have therefore no failures to
relate or I would relate them.


Digitized by


Google


208 AntuMesmeric Falsehoods of

I request you to postpone the publication of Master Sal-
mon's Case, as it was partly one of palsy and I purpose to
send you a group of Cases of palsy, cured by mesmerism,
for your next nimiber.

I am. Sir,

Yours, &c., &c.,

John Elliotson.
June, 1843.


X. Anti-mesmeric Falsehoods of Medical Men,

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sir, — If the opposition of medical men to the truth of
mesmerism, while the rest of the world are rapidly admit-
ting it, is a disgrace to their intellect, in as far as they pro-
nounce upon a matter of which they are totally ignorant and
which they refuse to inquire into, the unscrupulous fabrica-
tion of falsehoods by them is a still fouler blot, for this is a
isgrace to their morals.

All these fabrications which are current in general society
have originated among medical men.

One day two teachers from the Middlesex Hospital went
to hear my clinical lecture in University College Hospital,
having been informed by others that I was about to recant
my assertions respecting the truth of mesmerism.

Medical men have assured the world that the elder Okey
was an unknown-tongue performer at Irving^s church. They
have sent forth the report two or three times in the course of
the last four years, that the Okeys had confessed to imposture ;
and that I had confessed having been deceived by them; nay,
that I had given up mesmerism altogether, and discovered
that I had been entirely mistaken. Four medical men, a Dr.
Morrison, a Dr. Starkey, a Surgeon Wood, and a Sui^eon
Kidds, thus traduced the Okeys, with their names in the
Newry Telegraph, on the 9th of Feb. last. The latter report
reminds me of what many of my pupils have told me respect-
ing the Worshipful Company of Apothecaries — ^that the ex-
aminers asked them whether it was not true that I had given


Digitized by


Google


Medical Men. 209

up the exainination of the chest by the ear, and renounced
the use of the stethoscope in diseases within the chest ; as
though any but the grossly ignorant would think of not em-
ploying his ear in them^ since the functions of the chest are all
performed in health with certain sounds, and these sounds
must be altered in disease, just as much as aU the particulars
of the functions of other parts must be altered in disease, and
it is the duty of a practitioner to observe every alteration of
every function. They have also spread a report that both the
Okeys are in lunatic asylums.

A barrister informed me this very week that a titled sur-
geon told him at a dinner party, that the lady whose breast
was removed by M. Cloquet, in the mesmeric trance, had
afterwards died in an hospital, and confessed before her death
that she had felt the pain of the operation and imposed
upon every one. What is this titled surgeon's authority for
this ? The Medical Gazette had, to its disgrace, published an
anonymous letter, without ever pretending that they knew
the writer, — stating that while dying of an internal complaint
in another hospital, she confessed to the nurse ''that the
whole had been a cheat.'' Did the titled sui^eon write
this letter ? or did he forget himself so £eur as to slander
a dead person, and try to injure mesmerism, by spreading a
report upon this anonymous authority? or had he another
authority ? Let him say. I ascertained at Paris that the
report was wholly false; that the patient was the wife of a
wealthy man ; was never in an hospital ; died not from the
operation, but of a pleurisy, and never made any such con-
fession.

A surgeon at Nottingham, named Wilson, wrote to the
same effect in the newspaper called the Nottingham Journal,
a few months ago, stating that the patient died a few days
after the operation, it being " too palpable that the attempt
to bury the anguish in her own bosom proved too much for
nature to sustain, and that another case succeeded better, but
that the patient subsequently confessed that her insensibility
was all feigned. Many similar cases have occurred." Mr.
Wood flatly contradicted these statements of Mr. Wilson;
but Mr. Wilson has never ventured to justify himself, though
five months have elapsed.

Medical men in different parts have reported that the
patient whose leg was amputated without pain in Nottingham-
shire has confessed that he cheated. I paid no attention to
this report till last week I received a letter from a friend,
begining thus : —


Digitized by


Google


210 Anti-Mesmeric Falsehoods, ifc.

'' I am constantly greeted with the information that the poor man whose
leg was amputated last year, has lately acknowledged that the account of
his being asleep and insensible to pain is all a hoax. As those who set this
story afloat are said to be medical men of high repute, I am anxious to haye
it in my power to give a flat contradiction to it. It was only this morning
that a lady told me she had lately heard a learned professor of Cambridge
assert that it is a well-known fact that the man now says he was awake
during the whole of the operation. Could you get me a line from Mr.
Topham or Mr. Ward, contradicting the said report, and enclose it to me,
you would greatly oblige and enable me with confidence, the next time such
a thing is asserted, to make use of language more plain than polite, particu-
larly to the faces of certain persons in London actiye in spreading this
falsehood."

I therefore wrote to Mr. Ward, who amputated the leg;
and he forwarded the following certificate from the patient,
which I will preface with part of a note from that gentle-
man: —

*^ I have this day sent off the certificate witnessed by Mr. Flint, as Vicar
of Wellow, to give it if possible more weight. Wombell cannot write, and
I therefore thought it almost a necessary precaution, as the sceptics are so
unscrupulous. 1 had not previously been able to meet with the two together."

" I hereby declare that I have never said that I had
deceived Mr. Ward, and had felt the pain of the
operation he performed upon me, and I further
declare that I stated the truth at the time, namely
that I never felt any pain at all ; but that I once
felt as if I heard a kind of crunching.

" James Wombell, + his mark.

..Txr-x ("Charles R. Flint, Vicar of Wellow,

^^*^^««^^lC. G. Wheelhouse.

" Wellow, June 20, 1843."

These reports occurring at different times, on different
cases, and all similar, are evidently no mistakes, but wilful
fabrications. I shall make no further remark than that such
conduct is as shortsighted as immoral.

I am. Sir,

Yours, &c., &c.,

John Elliotson.


Digitized by


Google


( 211 )


XI. Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations without pain in the
Mesmeric State ; with remarks upon the Opposition of many
members of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society
and others to the reception of the inestimable blessings of
Mesmerism. By John Elliotson^ M.D., Cantab., F.R.S.
London, 1843. pp. 93.

This is a remarkable book, called forth by a most remark-
able cause, and at a most extraordinary period. It not only
exposes the ignorance and malevolence of certain members of
the medical profession, but it places before us an instructive
lesson — ^the fact, of a strictly moral and intellectual physician
promulgating a great truth — ^fighting with the prejudices of
his compeers, and presenting to them against their desire, as
he Iwts frequently done before, a new engine with which to alle-
yiate the miseries of suffering humanity. If we recal the
proceedings of the last four years, how distressing the retro-
spect ! On every side we behold injustice and persecution.
Erom all quarters the most rabid animalism has been mani-
fested, and too firequently by those whose situation should
compel them to investigate every new physiological subject,
and who, if they were conscientious in the discharge of their
duty, would not prostitute the professional chair to the basest
of ail purposes — the retardation of a great truth, and the
denunciation of scientific investigators.

We remember the disgraceful course pursued by the Pro-
fessors of University College in 1838 and 1839 ; and we find
in 1842 the same disreputable conduct characterizing the pro-
ceedings at the meetings of the Boyal Medical and Chirur-
gical Society. However, notwithstanding all this odious bad
feeling and unphilosophical opposition, we find Dr. Elliotson
atedfastly adhering to the great fundamental principle upon
which he erected his fame — a determination to search after
truth, and moral courage to avow the same when he discovered
it. How exalted and dignified such a course ! How paltry,
mean, and detestable, the contrast — the conduct of those who
filled chairs in the same University ! ^' I think,'' said the
Professor of Physiology, " that there is somethhig in mes-
merism, but if I avow my belief I shall lecture to empty
benches.''

Here, at least, we have the truth. Here is a most sub-
stantial reason for neglecting investigation. Mammon is
their god. Mammon they worship day after day. If their
benches are fuU, they luxuriate in the sight and count their


Digitized by


Google


212 Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations

rent roll.* They confine themselves to the dry detail of their
own particular department — ^they move on in the same jog-
trot manner year after year^ and if aught occurs to interfere
with their preconceived ideas or premature theories, they
either boldly pronounce an anathema on the enundator of the
new facts, or, they fig-leaf truth, flutter through their little
day, and die enveloped in their ignorance. Can it be possible
that such a course was, and is, pursued in the liberal Univer-
sity of the first city of the most liberal nation ? Can it be
possible that men undertaking the duty of public instructors
should so forget the great cause to which they are devoted (?),
as to peril the immediate reception of a truth by a dastardly
subserviency to the popular breath? Oh, how they mistake
their calling ! Oh, how they require that vitality which true
philosophy alone can infiise I When scientific men shall be
advanced so far in the practice of morality as to abhor the
moral turpitude, the result of even an attempt to surpress a
truth — when they shall become sincere in the advocacy of
their opinions and discard the " chirping of the sparrows*'
which flutter around them — ^when they shall boldly unite for
the purpose of disenthralling first themselves, and then the
world — ^how different will be the lessons taught in our colleges,
and how pure and invigorating the philosophy which will
flourish under such favourable culture. Men will then unite
and mutually assist in the investigation of a scientific subject,
and they will be all influenced by that ardour without which
no progress, individually or collectively, can ever be made.
Who can think of the machinery of such a co-operative svs-
tem without being convinced of the important results which
must accrue ? Can low, selfish and individual interests, com-


*We do not think we can better demonstrate the high, liberal, and
philosophic principles, wliich have always guided Dr. EUiotson through
his career, than by contrasting his conduct at the period when he resigned
his chair in University College, with the low, sordid, and grovelling
motives influencing the conduct of the authorities. We quote from Dr.
E.'s admirable farewell address to the students. The Dean urged, *' that
whether the wonderful facts were true or not, and whether great benefit in
the treatment of diseases would result or not, we ought to consider the in-
terests of the school ; — not of science and humanity, observe — but of the
school ; that if the public did not regard the matter as true and the benefits
as real, we ought not to persevere and risk the loss of public favour to the
school ; that I was rich, and could afford to lose my practice for what I
believed the truth, but that others were not; — in short his argument was
' rem, reniy* and ' virtus post nummos.' I replied that the Institutum was esta-
blished/or the dissemination and discovery of truth ; that all other considerations
were secondary to this* ; that if the public were i^orant, we should enlighten
them ; thai we should lead the public, and not the public us ; and that the sole
^stion was whether the matter were a truth or not, I laughed at the idea ^
injury to the pecuniary interests of the school,*'


Digitized by


Google


without Pain in the Mesmeric state, ^c. 213

pete with exalted, liberal, and co-operative efforts ? Can the
pigmy wrestle with the giant, or scientific truths be promnl-
gi^ed fistfter by the efforts of one or a thousand advocates ?
Much as our enthusiasm may lead us to contemplate the con-
summation of our wishes at no distant period — we are com-
pelled to confess that reflection and every day^s experience
convinces us, that now the majority of men are influenced
by selfish motives, and the prospects of individual aggrandize-
ment. We need no better proof than the recent proceedings
at the Medico-Chirurgical Society, when the case of amputa-
tion, without pain, during the mesmeric trance, was brought
forward by Mr. Topham and Mr. Ward. Not one manly
form stood forth to assist the few struggling advocates for the
fireedom of scientific investigation — ^not one of the " world^s
great men'' lifted up his voice to plead the cause of science,
bat all—

** Trammeird and boand in castom's changeless school,
Abturd by system, friTolous by nile/'

assisted to denounce as nonsense a natural fact, and to desig-
nate as visionaries and impostors, the only men who proved by
their conduct that they were really sincere in their advocacy
of a new and startling truth. The discovery of a new truth is
but the recognition of one, or of a series, of previously un-
observed facts. Why then did those who had not observed
the fSacts, question the sincerity and intellectual acumen of
those who had? Here is the answer. Science and ignorance
— the world's wisdom and the world's folly — have both their
boundaries marked by the same sign-posts — ^prejudice and
obstinacy. How clearly was the truth of this opinion proved
on the occasion referred to !

The absurdities and vulgarities which were indulged in,
have been exposed in the most complete manner by Dr.
Elliotson, and we would recommend every one to obtain a
copy of this pamphlet for the purpose of being armed with
the means to enable them to crush similar opposition. We
will, however, assist those gentlemen —

'* Who dare to trample ^here they scarce should tread/'

in acquiring the notoriety they were so desirous for, by en-
rolling their names in our pages. Behold, a motley group !
Mr. 0:>ulson, Dr. Moore, Mr. Blake, Mr. Alcock, Dr. James
Johnson, Dr. M. Hall, Dr. G. Burrows, Sir B. Brodie, Mr.
liston. Dr. Copland, and Mr. B. Cooper. These were the
principal speakers on this memorable occasion, and to the
uninitiated such an array of names, some of which they are
accustomed to consider " great," might make them doubt the

VOL. I. Q


Digitized by


Google


214 Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations

facts these gentlemen opposed. Bat can we not present a
list composed of men far more intellectual, and who are as
far superior, and differ as widely in scientific reputation from
them, as, for the sake of example, Hippocrates or Celsus do
from Dr. Moore of Saville Row, or Mr. Coulson of the city ?*
" It would not," says Mr. Chenevix, " disgrace the greatest
man whom England ever has produced to attempt an experi-
ment or two upon a doctrine which Hufeland, Jussieu,
Cuvier, Ampere, and La Place believed. Nay, would it not
disgrace him more to condemn, without knounng anything about
it, what they knew and credited? Is supercilious ignorance
the weapon with which Bacon would have repelled a new branch
of knowledge, however extraordinary it might have appeared to
him? Surely what great men believe, ordinary men may
try."

Dr. M. Hall receives a complete and well-merited castiga-
tion. His speech contained the most arrant nonsense, and
most satisfactorily has it been dissected and answered.

** Man ever vaants his worth beyond its dae,

On his own wisdom pompously dilates,
And shines in precepts : but his actions yiew,

You'll find him tripping, even whilst he prates."

He took upon himself to explain to an assembly of his bre-
thren, what kind of phenomena the nervous system ought to
manifest when in a state, regarding which he knew nothing at
all ! But Dr. M. Hall shaU speak for himself:

"Dr. Marshall Hall, some years ago, when my Demonstra-
tions went on at University College Hospital, called mesmerism
"'trumpery' that 'polluted die temple of science;' and now, being,
Uke aU the other opponent speakers, totally ignorant of the subject,
and glorying in his ignorance, very consistently considered the pre-
sent case to be one of imposition, because the poor man's sound 1^
did not start or contract while the diseased leg was amputated ! The
case, he said, * proved too much, or rather flatly contradicted itself,*
because the sound 1^ did not contract when the diseased one was
cut. He asserted that, ' in cases of insensibility in brutes, from
intercourse of any portion with the brain being stopped by division
of the spinal chord, or from absolute decapitation, or from stunning
by a blow upon the head, such an injury of an insensible leg as jprick-*
ing it with anything, lacerating, or cutting, — such an injury for in-

* " Dr. Moore has the distinction of being the first person who in a
scientific society of gentlemen required that the detail of philosophical ex-
periments should be supported by affidavits made before the lord mayor.

" Mr, Coulson, while the paper was reading, exclaimed, * What d d

stuff this is {' Mr. C. has also confessed to me since the discussion, tkaJt he
has never seen a mesmeric faet and is quiU ignorant qf mesmerism "^Pamphlet,
page 12.


Digitized by


Google


without Pain in the Mesmeric state, ^c. 215

stance as plaoffing a sharp instrament into the muscles/ (I sat next
to Dr. M. HaO and those were his very words,) ' invariably causes
both legs to contract; and, unless man differs from all other animals,
the same must take place in the human being; and, as this man
did not move his other leg — did not enact the re/lex motions, he was
DO physiologist.' Had he been such a physiologist as Dr. Marshall
HaU and r^ about the reflex motions, ' he would have known bet-
ter, and would have moved the other lee, — and enacted the reflex
motions.' The ignorant man! Dr. Marshall Hall's right leg would
have moved most physiologically, if a surgeon had plunged a knife
into his left. It was very silly of the man not to allow his sound
Ug to start, nor his diseased le^, nor any part of his frame. But
a horse has been just as silly, just 'as bad a physiologist,' and has
just as ' flatly contradicted itself,' by not ' enacting the reflex mo-
tions.' * A horse was struck with the pole-axe over the anterior
lobes of the brain. It fell instantly, as if struck with a thunder-
bolt; it was convulsed, and then remained motionless. It shortly
Wan to breathe, and continued to breathe freely by the diaphragm.
"When lacerated or pricked with a sharp pointed instrument, as a
pin or naily on any part of the face or surface of the body, it was
totally motionless, manifesting no evidence of sensation or volition.'
In another account it is said, Meep lacerations' of these parts
produced no movement of any kind, nor any infliction on the skin
by ' a pin or other pointed instrument.' Now this I quote against
Dr. Marshall Hall on authority considered by Dr. Marshall Hall at
least equal to any in the world, — equal to his own. But whose can
this be: Can there be an authority equal to Dr. Marshall Hall's?
It is Dr. Marshall Hall himself! Dr. Marshall Hall in print,
against Dr. Marshall Hall in debate ! Dr. Marshall Hall in print
proving too much, or rather flatly contradicting Dr. Marshall Hall
in debate I But Dr. Marshall Hall in print is quite right.

** The other extremity may move, but it may not. I cut off
the heads of some frogs, and, in the presence of Professor Wheat-
stone of King's College, Mr. Atkinson, Mr. Symes, and Mr. Wood,
pinched the toes of one leg with the forceps; the leg contracted, but
the other leg was still. I repeated the experiment twenty times,
and, in almost every instance, the same leg only contracted; once or
twice the other leg contracted, but it was when general contractions
of the whole nuiss of the frog took place. I repeatedly pinched the
muscles of the thigh, and they alone contracted, the other extremity
being invariably unaffected. Provoking fro^! Why did you not
contract your other leg? Impostors! lou little thought you
'proved too much' — for Dr. Marshall Hall; and yet you were but
like some other unphysiological froes. For Dr. Marshall Hall says
that, if, when he divides the spinal chord in frogs just below the
occiput, so that the creatures remain motionless, he then pricks or
pinches the toes, ' there is no movement at first, but soon distinct
movements take place, and generally retractions of the lim6!!' not
lmib»."

Is it possible to point out in clearer language the ri^icu-

Digitized by CjOOQIC


216 Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations, ^c. ^c.

lous position in which Dr. M. Hall has placed himself?
Really we feel for him most deeply.

*' The frog a wooing in his op'ra bat-»

The pass in Wellingtons — presumptuous cat f —

Cock-robin's rook in clericals and band—

A hog in armour, or a fish on land —

All move our laughter : but oh !" —

Really his position instead of producing laughter^ excites our
pity. Fancy Dr. M. Hall dictating to dame Nature ! Fancy
the presumption of the man, asserting that the report of a
certain natural phenomenon is untrue, '^ because I, Dr. M.
Hall, have proved by means of certain experiments, such as
the decapitation of frogs and tortoises, and the pithing of
donkeys, that such a phenomenon is impossible.^' Dr. M.
Hall who did not see the man's leg amputated, presumes to
question the honesty of those who did ! Sage physiologist !
to suppose that the phenomena observed during the insensi-
bility of the mesmeric trance, must of necessity be identical
with those sometimes observed in your guillotined frogs and
tortoises ! And yet, this was advanced, aye, and was be-
lieved, in an assembly of men, said to be composed of the
flite of the medical profession. Proh pttdor ! We have
blushed more than once when non-medical readers have
asked us how scientific men could be so easily deceived ? Dr.
M. Hall in 1837 said that mesmerism was "trumpery," and
that Dr. EUiotson's experiments "polluted the temple of
science." Query ? What is the amount of disgrace to be
attached to the man who could talk such nonsense, and to
those who remained quiet and listened to such manifest
absurdities ?

We have been very much pleased with Dr. EUiotson's
pamphlet, and this lengthened notice of it will convince our
readers that we consider the subject most important. All
mesmerisers should possess themselves of a copy. We cannot
refrain from making one other quotation.

** The happiness of a scientific, liberal, and humane coarse they
would find great beyond all expectation. They would feel raised as
men, and be enabled not to view their poor coterie, or college, or
profession, as their world, fashioning their opinions, and habits,
and whole nature by its cramping influence; but, regarding them-
selves as a part of universal nature, would find themselves always
moving freely in it, would keep their regards constantly upon its
truths only, and, walking happily onwards, bestow no more atten-
tion upon the sayings and domgs of the coteries and prosperous
men of the moment, than upon the noisy sparrows which flutter
and chirp outside their window to-day and will not be heard of
to-morrow.


Digitized by


Google


Mesmerismy the Gift of God. 217

'' If I have expressed mjself strongly in this pamphlet, it is what
I intended. The adversaries of mesmerism and of mesmerists have
had their full sway hitherto, and they must he thankful for a change.
Our turn is now come. Their conduct has shown that patience,
sincerity, disinterestedness, and mild persuasion are lost upon them.
Our ohjects are of incalculable importance, — the establishment of
means to cure diseases at present more or less troublesome, diffi-
cult, or impossible to cure, — the prevention of pain in surgical ope-
rations, — and possibly other advances on which I will not venture at
present to say anything. This must require a great effort, for it
will form an era in the history of man; and those who are willing to
assist must be in earnest. I feel no hostility to our opponents.
They merely act the part of puppets; — not knowing why they so act,
and blindly obeying Uie general laws by which a supply of oppo-
nents to every truth and improvement is always provided. The
statistics of opposition to good things would shew that their course
obeys fixed laws; and they are to be pitied for being destined to the
parts which they so eagerly perform."

This is sound philosophy, and we trust Dr. E.^s oppo-
nents will profit by his advice — nous verrons.

L. U. G. E.


XII. Mesmerism the Gift of God; in r^ly to "Satanic
Agency and Mesmerism/^ a Sermon, said to have been
preached by the Rev. Hugh M'Neik : in a Letter to a
Friend. By a Beneficed Clergyman.

The abominable matter published under the name of
M^eile has sold to the amount of 3,000 copies ; and this
reply will sell, we trust, to the amount of three times 3,000.
Rational beings, not mixing much with those who style them-
selves, par excellence, the religious world, might not believe
that a reply could be required; for there are multitudes of
humble mechanics who would blush to have uttered such ig-
norance and absurdities. But it was necessary ; so defective
in all soundness is the education given not only to the poor,
but to the middle, aye, and to the highest classes, in our
highest seminaries.

The reply is written by a minister of the same church as
M'Neile, holding "nearly the same doctrinal views, and
adopting nearly the same scriptural interpretations ;" and,
while it displays throughout the sincerity and fervent piety
expected in a clergyman, it is no less characterized by strong
and enlightened sense, the highest liberality, and the warm-


Digitized by


Google


218 Mesmerism the Gift of God.

est benevolence, and is evidently the production of a true
gentleman.

Every believer in the truth of mesmerism should consider
himself bound to circulate this pamphlet among all his ac-
quaintance. He will thus not merely assist in removing fa-
natical prejudices against an inconceivable blessing, but in
shewing what the best men out of the medical profession
think of the conduct of the so-called heads of that profession, —
in showing that a clergyman sees in their conduct ^'the
bigotry of the priest and the special pleading of the lawyer.''

The total want of common sense, the flat contradictions of
various parts to each other, and the mischievous ignorance
with which the sermon is stamped, are admirably e^bited;
and we humbly ask, in our ignorance of church government,
why it is not the duty of the arch-deacon or the bishop of the
diocese to inquire of M'Neile whether he delivered such a ser-
mon (and indeed he is said to have delivered two such in one
day), and, if he did, why not to take effectual measures to pre-
vent a repetition of such a disgrace to the church. Plmn men
must view it as the solemn duty of the overseers of the clergy,
for that is the simple meaning of the word bishops, to admonish
and silence those who preach nonsense to the intellect and
bad feeling to the heart, and thus excite a doubt whether
" violent hands'' were not " suddenly laid upon" them in the
rawness of their youth, and whether they were really endowed
vrith the holy spirit by the bishop at their ordination. In the
humble days of Christianity, before bishops were clad in
purple and fine linen and fared sumptuously every day and
went to church with powdered footmen behind their carriages,
— when the name of Christian was but a term of reproach,
St. Paul would have considered this the duty of the overseers,
and a mischievous teacher would not have been left uncon-
trolled except by the remonstrance of some indignant fellow-
teacher without authority.

If M'Neile did not preach this sermon, he was solemnly
bound to disown it. He has conversed complacently upon it
with his fanatical admirers times innumerable ; he has seen
printed copies of it ; and he knows the enormous circulation
which they have had ; it was commented upon in the provin-
cial and the London papers. Any mean evasion would be
useless. He has long been bound to disown the two sermons
if they were not his ; and the miserable position in which the
Beneficed Clergyman now exhibits him must compel him, if
his better feelings are not smothered by vanity, now to come
forward and say something in his own defence.

S. I. T. O.


Digitized by


Google


BOOKS RECEITED.

Medico-Legal Reflections on the Trial of Daniel Macnanghten for the
Marder of Mr. Drannnond ; with Remarks on the different forms of Insanity,
and the Irresponsibility of the Insane. By J. 6. Dayey, M.D., one of the
Surgeons to the County Lunatic Asylum.

On the Amendment of the Law of Lunacy. A Letter to Lord Brougham,
By a Phrenologist.

The subject of these two pamphlets we shall write upon in our next
number.

We haye read some very powerful and instructiTe papers on Insanity, in
the John Bull newspaper of last April and May, which we intend to notice.

Mesmerism the Gift of God ; in reply to " Satanic Agency and Mes-
merism." By a Beneficed Clergyman.

NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

** Enquirer." ZoisT is derivable — 1. from zoon (Za)oy) an animal, and,
as cerebral functions are the peculiar characteristics of animal nature, is
applicable to the phrenologist. 2. From zoe (Zaii)) life, and is therefore
applicable to the mesmeriser, who studies a principle which is not confined
to the brain, but extends to all living parts. We could invent no other word
applicable to both phrenology and mesmerism.

*' Arthur," The objection to the convenient word cerebrology is that there
is no good authority for making comi>ounds of Greek and Latin words.
Encephalology would be the proper word ; and Dr. Fossati has proposed and
written an article under the title of Cephalology. When we say organ of
this faculty or of that, surely no risk is incurred of the faculty being consi-
dered an abstract existence or any thing more than a phenomenon of a certain
part. The existence of matter we admit as evidence which is to our nature
irresistible. We cannot help admitting it. We hardly think the word De-
monstratism required to characterize certain knowledge. Nothing but cer-
tain knowledge should have the name of knowledge. All else should be
termed speculation.

*< W. B. qf Arndey," The Opinions on Cerebral Physiology and Ex-
periments in Mesmerism of him and his friends will be admitted in the Zoist
if they appear worthy of attention.

" Scijno" Inquire of anybody at Canterbury or Dover, Their land-
lady at Canterbury spoke without reserve to them and others, and denial
was not attempted.

Press of matter has compelled us to defer Instructions in Mesmerising
and the Review of Teste and Townshend, till our next number, notwith-
standing an addition of above a sheet to our present number. All adver-
tisements must be sent at least a week before the day of publication.

We are requested to say that a pupil of Dr. Wohlfart, who was himself
a pupil of Mesmer, is about to publish a Life of Mesmer ; and that all in-
formation regarding Mesmer will be thankfully received, and any docu-
ments which may be lent will be carefully returned through Mr. Bailli^re.

ERRATUM in No. 1.
At page 61, for 1754, read 1784.


Digitized by


Google


PHRENOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION.


Committee.


H. G. ATKINSON, Esq. F.G.S.

E. BARLOW, Esq. M.D

SIR WILLIAM BAYNES, Bart.

F. B BEAMISH, Esq.
GEORGE BIRD, Esq.

J. CONOLLY, Esq. M D.

G. J. DAVEY, Esq. M.D. „ ^
JOHN ELLIOTSON, Esq. M.D. P.R.S.

(President of the Phrenological Society,

of London.)
W. C. EMGLEDUE, Esq. M.D.
PROFESSOR EVANSON, M.R.I.A.
M. le dr. FOSSATI.

(President of the Phrenological Society,

of Paris.)
HUNTER GORDON, Esq.
WILLIAM HERING, Esq.


S. G. HOWE, Esq. M.D.

(President of the Phrenological Society,

of Boston.)
SAMUEL JOSEPH, Esq.
WILLIAM KINGDOM, Esq.
R. C. KIRBY Esq.
S. T. PARTRIDGE, Esq. M.D.
M. LE DR. RIGONI,

(Pn.fesaor of Physiology In the University,

Pavia.)
RICHARD ROTH WELL, Esq.
J. B. SEDGWICK. Esq.
E S. SYMES, Esq.
C. A. TULK, Esq. F.RS,
T UWINS, Esq. R.A.
WILLIAM WOOD. Esq.
W. S. B. WOOLHOUSE, Esq. F.R.A.S.


iJ^onorars JbecretarCet.

GEORGE J. DAVEY, Esq., M.D., Hanwell,

EDMOND S. SYMES, Esq., 38, Hill Street, Berkeley Square.


The Objects of the Association are the advancement of the science of
Phrenology, and the promotion of intercourse amongst Phrenologists, by
means of Annual Meetings for the reading of papers, the exhibition of casts,
crania, and other illustratiYe specimens ; and by discussions and investiga-
tions calculated to lead to new discoveries ; to point out the importance of
Phrenology as the true Philosophy of the mind, and its several applications
in education, jurisprudence, and medicine ; to correct misrepresentations re-
specting the science, and to awaken a more extended interest in its cultivation.

The SIXTH SESSION will be held in LONDON, at the THEATRE
of the LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC INSTITUTION, EDWARDS
STREET, PORTMAN SQUARE; the first Meeting on MONDAY, the
Third of July, at Half-past One, p.m., for Two precisely; the second, on
the following day at Half-past Seven, p.m., for Eight precisely ; and the
subsequent meetings alternately Morning and Evening at the same hours.

The Opening Address will be delivered by Dr. Elliotson, and the fol-
lowing Gentlemen, amongst others, have engaged to furnish Papers and
Communications : —


H. G. Atkinson, Esq.
Dr. DavBT,
Dr. EixiOTSON,
Dr. Enolboub,


Dr. HowB,
Samuel Josbph Esq.
J. TouLMiN Smith, Esq.


The Committee will be happy to receive papers and other communications
illustrative of the Science from any of the Members ; and it is earnestly re-
quested that Gentlemen willing to contribute, will immediately intimate the
same to one of the Secretaries, in order to afford time for the necessary ar-
rangements for the Session.


The Subicriptitm qf a Member u Ten ShiUitigi ftr each Annual Session he
may attend, for which he will have the privilege qf introducing Two Ladies or
Gentlemen ; and additional Visitor^s Tickets wUl be granted to the Members, ai
Three Shillings and Sixpence each for the Session, or One Shilling each for anif
single Meeting,

Forms of Admission and Tickets may be obtained from the Secretaries.


Digitized by


Google


THE ZOIST.

No. in.


OCTOBER, 1843.


I, Phrenoloffical Association,

In our last number we gave an account of the attempt of
several individuals to prevent the meeting of the Phreno-
logical Association. We criticized the '^Declaration of
Expediency," and we clearly proved the felse and ridiculous
position in which those who resigned had placed themselves.
Messrs. Simpson and Sampson, the former dove-like carrying
forth an olive branch, the latter serpent-like but without the
poison fangs, used their best endeavours to prevent the
meeting. But how triumphantly have they and their adher-
ents been routed !

We attended the first meeting with some fear and trepi-
dation, not because we were afraid that the opinions which on
a former occasion had been inculcated could be overthrown,
but because we suspected that the secession of so many
members would operate in an injurious manner on the
success of the Association. The meetings however were
exceedingly well attended, and to our astonishment the
secretary announced a junction of new members not only
sufBcient to make up the deficiency caused by the seceders,
but numerically exceeding the numbers at the close of the
former session I This was cheering information, and it was
the more so, because it was unexpected and proclaimed this
important fact, — ^that the fearless advocation of what is con-
sidered truth will not injure or retard any science ; it may
merely frighten a few timid advocates, men wcttded to their
own views, who have stereotyped their opinions, and who

VOL. I. E


Digitized by


Google


222 Phrenological Association.

consequeatly consider them^ like the laws of certain barbarous
and ancient empires^ unalterable.

Loud have been the cries for the last twelve months, and
ridiculous the character of the denunciations. ^' Phrenology,
cried some, has been retarded for one hundred years." To
such false prophets we say. Look to the last meeting of the
Association. Numerous have been the declarationists and
seceders, but we triumphantly appeal to the increased list
of new members. The opinions of those attending the
several meetings seemed to be nearly unanimous. All agreed
that Cerebral Physiology had received an impetus calculated
to be of the greatest service.

Last year the exclamation was, — Suppress opinions if
they are not orthodox: Shackle the promulgator of new
views if they are opposed to the prejudices, the ignorance and
blunders of the unthinking : Bow down, bow down, cried
the party; we are the dictators. And why all this ? Because
'^ established opinions are so interwoven with the interests of
individuals, that the subversion of one often threatens the
ruin of the other. Hence the energy which strains every nerve
in their support, and hence much of the rancour with which
the slightest deviation is pursued." Men do not dare to seek
truth without fear and trepidation. "What will the world
say? What will be said if we advocate this opinion ? How
wUl it affect my individual welfare ?" These are the questions
of slaves. Men speaking and thinking thus are counterfeit
men, not the men for the present day, or the present crisis.
The waverers and the lookers back are the drones, and
are unworthy of a seat in the temple of science. Society is
to be pressed on : the masses are to be enlightened. The
moral philosopher should scorn the opinion of the million, if
he is conscious of the truth of his own. He is to be influ-
enced by conscientiousness and benevolence, and when he
discovers a new truth he is to advocate it because it is true —
because it must produce good — ^because it will tend to in-
crease the happiness of his race. lYuih must be favourable to
virtue.

There was another circumstance which attracted the at-
tention of many persons. It was the difference of opinion
regarding the discussion of the science of Mesmerism.
When the address of 1842 was delivered, and the curious ex-
periments on the brain during the mesmeric trance referred
to, there was a loud cry raised that such a subject was foreign
to the object of the Association. Nay, more, at the time, we
remember hearing it stated that a deputation from the Com-
mittee of the Association waited upon the author of the


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 223

address^ the day before it was to be delivered^ to ascertain
whether he really intended to introduce the subject^ and if so,
to remonstrate with him on the impropriety.

Could anything be more absurd than such a proceeding f
With all our boasted discoveries what do we know ? It is
our duty to make use of all the collateral assistance the sister
sciences can furnish us with ; and, wheth^ we recognise by
such means a new truth, or discard an old error, there is
equal cause for rejoicing, because our sole study is truth, and
our only aim the ascertainment of means to increase the hap-
piness of mankind. The address of the present year was de-
Uvered by Dr. EUiotson, and we are happy it is in our power
to give it to our readers entire. Dr. EUiotson occupies a
very proud position. Persecuted and vilified as he has been,
he has only reaped the same reward as all preceding philoso-
phers. And is this not a sufficient reward ? The promulga-
tion of truth is his only object ; the eclat of popular approval
is quite a secondary consideration. However, this will come ;
and, if it were worth looking after, we could promise him in a
short period a bountiful supply. His reception at the Asso-
ciation, and the attention with which every word he uttered
was received, are important and significant signs. The dial
of the world moves on. The subject which last year caused
disorder and confusion was this year productive of unanimity
and enthusiasm. We predicted that such would be the
result, for we certainly were not aware that the Association
had its articles of faith which were sworn to, or that the
science which its members were investigating was unlike other
sciences in this most important particular — ^progressive im-
provement. We were not aware that free thought was to be
suppressed, or that an enquiry into the rationality of a certain
doctrine was to be the signal for the immediate retreat of its
members. On the contrary, we conceived that all were en-
gaged by every* means in their power to advance cerebral
science to its highest state of excellence and usefulness — ^to
assist man to obtain a knowledge of himself, and to promul-
gate £eu^ and opinions for the common advantage of all.
That we were not deceived, the following sketch of the pro-
ceedings at the last meeting will abundantly testify.


r2

Digitized by VjOOQIC


224 Phrenological Association.


The Association commenced its Sittings in the ThecUre of the
Marylebone Literary and Scientific Institution, Edwards
Street J Portman Square, July Srd,

Charles Augustus Tulk, Esq., P. R. S., took the Chair,

and the following Report was read by the Hon. Secretary,

Edmond Sheppard Symes, Esq.

*'The Committee have great pleasure in opening this the 6th Session
of the Phrenological Association; and they congratulate the Mem-
bers upon the great progress which the science has made in public
opinion since the rormation of the Association, and particularly
during the past year.

It will be in the recollection of the members that, at the termi-
nation of the 5th Session, a Committee of twenty-four gentlemen
was appointed for the purpose of carrying out tne objects of the
Association, with power to add to their number, viz. :


H. G. ATKINSON, Esq. F.G.S.

E. BARLOW, M.D.
T. H BASTARD, Esq.

F. B. BEAMISH, Esq.

R. BEAMISH, Esq. F.R.S.
ANDREW COMBE, M.D.
GEORGE COMBE, Esq.
J. CONOLLY. M.D.
ABRAM COX, M.D.
ROBERT COX. Esq.
JOHN ELLIOTSON, M.D., F.R.S.
PROFESSOR EVANSON, M.D.


W. G. ENGLEDUE, M.D.

J. W. B. S. GARDINER, Esq.

J. J. HAWKINS. Esq.

WILLIAM HERING, Em}.

SIR GEO. S. M'KENZIE, Bart.

R. MAUGHAN, Esq.

M. B. SAMPSON, Esq.

JAS. SIMPSON, Esq.

SAMUEL SOLLY, Esq., F.R.S.

E. S. SYMES, Esq.

C. A. TULK. Ebq. P.R.S,

T. UWlNS, Esq. R.A.


And that Edmond S. Symes, Esq. was appointed Hon. Secretary.

It will also be remembered that some dbsatisfaction was ex-
pressed by a few of the members at the views enunciated by Dr,
Engledue m his opening address; notwithstanding the express an-
nouncement had been made, that the Association was not responsible
for the individual opinions of any of its members.

Your Committee regret to add that nineteen members afterwards
sent in their resignations, of whom seven had been elected members
of the Committee. Subsequently, a declaration was drawn up by
Mr. Simpson, circulated amongst all the members of the Association
and published in the Edinburgh Phrenological Journal, to which were
attached the signatures of seventy-one members of the Association,
deprecating the course adopted by those members who had retired
from the Association on the ground of their differing from opinions
expressed in the opening address, and announcing their own determi-
nation not to abandon the Association on such grounds; acknowlede-
ing that the doctrine of Materialism could do Phrenology no possible
harm with those who understood both subjects, and that the reUgi-
ous question, by dismissing a bug-bear, actually gains by the con-
viction that Materiahsm is not an irreligious doctrine, but adding
that the advocacy of Materialism was calculated to excite alarm,
since very few, even amongst educated persons, had thought upon
the subject, and they were of opinion that its public discussion in


Digitized by


Google


Phrenoloffical Association. 225

the Assodation was the least likely way to remove prejudices against
it. And upon these grounds they protested against the expediency
of Dr. Engledue's expressing his << unauthorised, unexpected, and
solitary conyictions" upon the suhject, notwithstanding the ex-
pressed desire of the Committee to preserve the utmost freedom of
thought and enquiry for each member; the Association, as a body,
of course not being responsible for individual opinions.

At the last session of the Association, it was understood that the
following session should be held in Edinburgh. The Secretary there-
fore wrote to Mr. Simpson, some months ago, to that effect, request-
ing him to make the necessary arrangements with the Edinburgh
members for that purpose; and received from Mr. Simpson a repfy,
stating that he had consulted with other phrenologists there, and
they were all decidedly against attempting a meeting in Edinburgh
or Dublin. They considered that the meetings should be held in
London only ; and that a triennial meeting would be enough even in
London. And Mr. Simpson himself was of opinion that ** a meeting
no where should at present be ventured,^*

To this the Secretary replied, that in accordance with the Laws
of the Association it was incumbent upon the Committee to arrange
for an Annual Meeting; and that the original intention was, that
the Association should meet once in three years at least in London,
and in the two intermediate years, either in Edinburgh, Dublin, or
some one of the large towns; again reminding Mr. Simpson of the
express understanding that the next session should be held in Edin-
burgh and requesting to know whom of the members in Scotland
Mr. Simpson had consulted; to which Mr. Simpson replied, that
the meeting in Edinburgh was by no means imperative; but that
he would ascertain the opinions of every phrenologist whether
member or not, known to him in Edinburgh or Glasgow, and com-
municate the result to the Secretary.

In a subsequent letter Mr. Simpson stated, that he " had per-
sonally seen nine individuals in Edinburgh, aU most competent
judses, and Mr. Cunliffe twelve in Glasgow. One decided and un-
quidified opinion was expressed by aU against venturing the meeting
in Edinburgh;" and Mr. George Combe agreed with Mr. Simpson,
that triennial meetings in London would be the expedient course.

After this, and as, from the communications previous to the last
session, it was considered unadvisable to hold the meeting in the
provinces, your Committee entered upon the necessary prelmiinaries
tor holding the present session in London.

At a recent meeting of the Committee for that purpose, the sub-
ject of the declaration before alluded to having been incidentally
mentioned by some of the members, Mr. M. S. Sampson, of the
Bank of England, proposed that this circular should be entered on
the minutes; adding, however, that he had no authority from any
one to make such a motion. And at a subsequent meeting of the
Committee, Mr. Sampson renewed his proposition in a somewhat
altered form. These motions were neither of them seconded, and
consequently fell to the ground.


Digitized by


Google


226 Pkrenohgical Association.

It will scarcely be necessary for your Committee to remind you
that, with every desire to give effect to the wishes of any of the
members of the Association, they were not empowered to enter any-
thing whatever in the books of the Association, excepting the mi-
nutes of their own proceedings, — that their duty is confined to the
transacting of the private business of the Association, the various
arrangements for the meetings, &c.; and that jonr Committee would
have been altogether exceedmg their powers, if thev had presumed
upon their own authority to enter a declaration or any number of
members in the books of the Association.

Mr. Sampson, however, immediately addressed the following
letter to Mr. Simpson, — "

(We do not print this, as we gave an account of it in our last
number, p» 160.)

** The letter was printed and sent round to those members who had
signed the protest, with the annexed form of resignation also printed
and appended to it."

(This will be found in the same page of our last number.)

** Your Committee regret to add that no less than twenty-six sig-
natures have been obtained to this form of resignation, complaining
of the withholding of a right by the Association, which the Asso-
ciation have never yet had an opportunity of granting, (for be it
remembered that the declaration has never yet been sent to the As-
sociation or any of its officers, as such); and upholding the propriety
of "a sincere and fearless regard for the promulgation or truth/*
the parties withdrawing from the Association solely because the Com-
mittee had not consented to exceed their powers, by entering in the
books of the Association a protest on the sole ground of expediency,
against the expression, by an individuaJ, of an opinion which he
believed to be truth, and the truth of which they did not dispute.
Amongst these were three members of the Committee, and four
other gentlemen sent in written resignations; two of whom, also
members of the Committee, grounded their resignations upon the
same plea.

Your Committee have felt bound, in justice to themselves, to
submit this short statement of facts to the Association, 1st. because
your Committee are desirous of having no concealments from the
general body of members, and 2ndly. to show that these hasty se-
cessions have not been caused by any informaUty, or attempt to
suppress opinion, on the part of your Committee.

Should any member be desirous of bringing the subject of the
declaration more particularly before the Association, it is competent
for him to do so at the Business G^eral Meeting, of whicn due
notice will be given; and then would be the proper time to discuss
the propriety of recording it in the books of the Association: but
your Committee cannot presume to offer any opinion upon the expe-
diency of such a course.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association, 227

Tour Committee added the following gentlemen to their nnmbers :


SIR WM. BATNBS, Babt.
GBORGB BIRD, Esq.
G. J. DAVEY. M.D.
M. LB DR. P088ATI,
SAMUEL JOSEPH, Em).
S. G. HOWE, LL.D.
WILLIAM KINGDOM, Esq.


R. C. KIRBT E6Q.

S. T. PARTRIDGE, M.D.

PROFESSOR RIGONI, M.D.

RICHARD ROTHWELL, Esq.

J. B. SEDGWICK, Esq.

WILLIAM WOOD. Esq.

W. S. B. WOOLHOUSE, Esq., F.A.S.


And appointed Dr. Davey joint Secretary with Mr. Symes.

Tonr Committee have the satisfaction to add that a considerable
number of new members have joined the Association^ so that not-
withstanding the defections, the actual number of the members is
iK>w greater than at any former period.

In the published report of the Committee, at the opening of the
4th session it was stated that, at the dose of the session at Glasffow
the number of members amounted to 158; 84 new members had
subsequently joined the Association, making the number then 242.
Last year some increase had probably taken place, but ike numbers
were not stated; altogether there are now 88 new members. The
present number is 283, showing an actual increase of 41 over the
last published statement. Amongst the new members, your Com-
mittee are gratified to find the names of several ladies.

Tour Committee have to acknowledge the liberality of the Phre-
nological Society, in placing their museum at the <usposal of the
Association; and your Committee have selected the casts before us
as illustrations of Tarious forms of heads. The diagrams are kindly
lent us by Mr. Symes.

The cash account will be submitted to the inspection of the mem-
bers at the Business Meeting, towards the close of the session;
when it wUl be necessary to elect a new Committee, as the duties of
your present Committee will terminate with the session.

In conclusion, your Committee, anxious to carry out to the
fullest extent the objects of the Association, one of the most im-
portant of which is the advancement of the science by discussions
and iuTestigations calculated to lead to new discoveries, which can
only be accomplished by preserving the utmost freedom of enquiry,
beg to reiterate the announcement usual with this and other scien-
tific bodies, that thev cannot, any more than the Association at
lai^ be responsible for the individual views or opinions of any of
its members.^'


This report was received unanimously. Dr. EUiotson
then delive^ the following addr«»S8 : —

''Whoever is requested to deliver an opening address and
accedes to the request is left uncontrolled in the selection
and treatment of his subject, and is not required even to
communicate its nature to the committee who have made the


Digitized by


Google


228 Dr. EUiotson's Address to the

request. If the Association is not answerable for the opinions
expressed in any paper which is read^ still less can it be so
for the matter of an opening address. To resign^ therefore,
on account of any thing uttered in such an address, appears
to me the height of absurdity. To refuse the customary
formal votes of thanks, to express viva voce dissent from
the whole or any part of the address, to deliver a written

Erotest against the whole or a part of it to the Association, may
e perfectly reasonable; though it cannot be reasonable to
expect the committee, who do the private and not the
scientific and public business of the Association, to insert
it in the minutes of their own committee and private business
meetings, nor reasonable nor decent to expect the commit-
tee to put it upon the only other minutes and books of
the Association, — ^those which record the proceedings, and
nothing but the proceedings, of the scientific and general
meetings of the society. To resign, therefore, because the
committee does not put on its minutes of private business
a protest on a scientific matter which has formed the business
of one of the scientific meetings, and especially a very long
and scientific, or perhaps unscientific, protest against what
is not recorded in the minutes of the general meetings in
more words than these, — "such a member delivered the
opening address,'' the very subject of such address not being
recorded, appears absolutely preposterous. Whether such
results will follow the present address I know not ; but I
trust that no members are now left in the Association who
can see a plain thing in a perverted aspect or who can
act in a ridiculous manner.

Two subjects produced a commotion at our last session.
The one was a defence of Materialism : the other was the
assertion that distinct cerebral organs might be acted upon
distinctly by Mesmeric processes. The former subject it was
that caused resignations directly and indirectly; — ^resigna-
tions because of its defence, and resignations because a
protest against the expediency of terrifying the world with
what the protest styled a bug-bear, both perfectly inno-
cent, and actually serving Christianity, was not put on
the private business minutes of the committee. In advo-
cating Materialism, the speaker was actuated, as all men
know he can only be actuated, by the highest, the noblest,
the most disinterested motives, — ^to speak what was to his
view pure truth, and to his view truth leading to the most
important results: — ^to urge, (dropping all hypothesis, and
acknowledging the brain to be the organ of all mental


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 229

phenomena, acknowledging these to be its function without
uselessly attempting deeper search or any speculation), —
to impress, upon mankind, on those who feel a joy and a
duty in asosting to improve mankind, the absolute necessity
of improving the qualities of the brain by careful selection
in marriage, as the whole or any part of every animal can
be improved, and by surrounding each individual with such
external circumstances as of necessity tend to produce sound
knowledge, sound views, and sound conduct : — it being clear
that an evil tree cannot produce good firuit, and that a
husbandman cannot expect other than wild grapes imless
he tills the ground and plants his vineyard according to
knowledge, and that, accoiding to eternal laws, a good tree
will then produce good fruit, and evil trees by judicious
grafting, nay by mere rational and judicious tending, will
produce successors which are an improvement upon itself, and
so an evil stock at last become a good one. His object
was to ui^e that to look to these matters is the duty
of us aU : not barbarously to punish those whose bad or-
ganization and bad education and bad circumstances should
render them objects of pity : to do no more with evil doers
than the protection of society demands : and to labour strenu-
ously to change for the better the wretched disadvantages
under which the mass of mankind are trained from their
infancy and still live when they have become adults. To urge
that such truths must tend, not only to this benevolent care
of others, but to universal charity, — ^to making allowance for
the evil deeds of every one, to judging not others, as we
know that the worst man did not make himself, that
the defects of his bad nature are to be lamented since he
was bom in sin and shapen in iniquity, and because we
fully appreciate the disastrous circumstances in which he
may, without any fault of his own, have been placed.
While universal benevolence, activity for the welfare of
all others, and forgiveness of all injury is thus promoted,
no less so is humilitv. For whatever is good in us we must
acknowledge not to oe our own but an undeserved gift ; and
whether a man believes all goodness comes as grace vouch-
safed by the " Holy Spirit,*' or is the result of the happy com-
bination of the natural elements within him, it is all the same,
— ^he can take no credit to himself: and, though we cannot
be accountable for our natural bad or good dispositions, their
existence, being a constituent part of us, ought to render us
humble in our own conceits. In regard to the doctrine of
a continuance or repetition of existence, this, being beyond
all possibility of experience, must rest on totally different


Digitized by


Google


280 Dr. EUiotson^s Address to the

grounds than physiology,— must rest npon a revelation, and
the revelation upon its own evidences. Philosophy leaves
these matters untouched, being concerned with the natural
and not with the supernatural, and the importance of a
revelation should be heightened in the eyes of its true be-
lievers, by such matters being left to rest entirely upon it,
without the aid of philosophy.

The other subject which produced a commotion in our
last session was the introduction of Mesmerism : and I now
introduce it again, and shall make it the subject of the present
address.

The truth of mesmerism is now as extensively admitted
as the truth of phrenology. The science of the physiology of
the brain never made the rapid progress in society that
mesmerism has made within the last two or three years.
The progress of mesmerism has accelerated every month. In
the last twelvemonth, since we assembled last summer, it has
been rapid beyond the most sanguine expectation. Whoever at
present disputes the reality of mesmerism is considered to de-
clare himself at once entirely ignorant of it. Now no circum-
stance, no books of any of Gtdl^s disciples or disciples of his
disciples, no lectures, no societies, have ever given the impulse
to the reception of phrenology which has been given by mes-
merism. Where I formerly converted one, I have since by
means of mesmerism converted a hundred, to the truth of
phrenology. I have never shewn the excitation of Gall's cere-
bral organs by means of mesmerism without converting seve-
ral persons who had up to that moment on all occasions ridi-
culed phrenology. Those phrenologists who scout mesmerism
are therefore the most imgrateful of mankind : and, while
ungrateful, they shew how little they have profited by the
intellectual phUosophy of the science of which they are
votaries, and by the experience of man's waywardness and
incUnation to obey one or two of his feelings uncontrolled,
rather than his intellect and his duty to establish a harmony
of action among his organs and his feelings. True cerebral
physiology teadbes us that we know nothing of the universe
but by ex|)erience; that we cannot before-hand presume
upon what is or what is not, without more or less experience
bearing upon the points. The phrenologist urges this upon
all who object to his science without having examined any of
its facts, nay, without having reflected upon it : and he knows
that the mass of mankind never reflect, that we have music
for the million, but that we want something of infinitely
more importance, in comparison of which music, pleasant as it


Digitized by


Google


Pkrenoloffical Association. 231

is, is trifling and waste of time, — thinking for the million —
and that the mass of mankind hold a nmss of opinions npon
which their knowledge does not qualify them to hold a$iy
opinions at alL Yet will he act towards mesmerism in precisely
the way which he condemns in the case of phrenology and any
other science than mesmerism, — transfer it to the limbo of
vanity without haying condescended to examine it. In acting
thus and shewing also how little he has profited by the intel-
lectual philosophy of his science, he also shews how little he
has profited by its moral philosophy, — how little he has felt,
how little he has been penetrated with, what he professes :
how lost upon him has been the great lesson of cerebral phy-
siology, — ^that self-esteem, that love of man's Mr word, that
pecuniary interest and every other selfish impulse, that firm-
ness of purpose, are all the mere functions of certain portions
of the cerebral mass, and that to be the slave of the action
of any one of them or of more than one of them, while we
have a noble mass in fix»nt and in the upper part of our brain,
to which fix»m its amount and its position all others should
be subject, is mean indeed; that, since our brain is a com-
plication of organs, co-operation and harmony must be indis-
pensable to the due performance of its functions : and, above
all, for inteUectual fSaculties to be subjugated, for judgment
to be perverted, for error to be blindly adopted and retained,
for truth to be unperceived and to be scouted, through over
action of mere impulses, which are as strong in brutes as in
ourselves, is indeed a disgrace to humanity and a proof that
education has been inadequate.

If, in acting thus, the intellectual and moral lessons of
cerebral physiology are set at nought, it is also forgotten that
Gall did not consider mesmerism foreign to his subject, even
above thirty years before the idea of exciting individual ce-
rebral organs by its means had been suggested. In his great
work he treats of mesmerism, because it is alleged to produce
remarkable phenomena in the nervous system. He found
it impossible in describing the functions of the brain and
nerves to pass by the phenomena said to be induced by
mesmerism, even though he himself had seen no evidence
of the higher description of them and therefore rejected these.
He admitted that, on such authority as that of Professor
Walther and Professor Beil and a host of others, they de-
manded his attention in common with all the ordinary
phenomena of the nervous functions. Nothing, it is true,
was witnessed by him which satisfied him that one nerve
could perform the functions of another — ^that any other part
than the eye could be an organ of vision, than the nose an or-


Digitized by


Google


232 Dr, ElUotson's Address to the

gan of smell; nor that vision could be exercised tlirongh per-
fectly opaque bodies or in reference to absent persons luid dis-
tant places ; that foreknowledge could occur^ and knowledge
of languages and things that had never been acquired. He
rejected both the statements and the spiritual explanation
of them. Professor Walther had given as a reason for them^
that " all the nervous system is an identity and a totality — a
pure transparency without cloudy an infinite expansion with-
out bounds or obstacles — such is universal sense :" — " as in
the waking state the soul is more closely and intimately
united with the body'' and ^' natural sleep is a more intimate
communication of our soul with the universal soul of the
worlds so in magnetic sleep our soul is united in the most
intimate manner with the soul of the world and with the
body^ and with the latter not by means of the nervous system
only^ but immediately in all its parts and members^ so that
life is no longer a particularity but an original life.'' To this
Gall replies, "If any one is convinced of these marvellous
fancies, and especially if he comprehends them, he is justified
in asserting that such a doctrine exercises the most important
influence upon the whole of nature." After remarking
that the human mind always turns in the same circle — ^that
Plato and Socrates had taught that our souls knew every
thing originally, were in intimate communication with the
universal soul of the world, and that their connection with
the body did but impede the free use of their knowledge,
he answers, with the playful satire which was so delighti^
in him, that, " if, in mesmeric sleep, our soul becomes inti-
mately united with the soul of the world, none of the
incredible tales of mesmerism can be doubted :" "all wonders
are explicable by the intimate connection with the universal
soul of the world." "We will not ask how the soul can
be intimately united with the body and with the soul of this
world at the same time : how it can be confined in its narrow
prison and at the same moment ^etached from all its ties :
how the soul of the magnetiser and the magnetised can be
mingled and afterwards separated again." But, though Gkdl
rejected the phenomena of clairvoyance, as no patient whom
he examined exhibited them, and I understood that he saw
nothing of the kind that ought to have satisfied any person,
and saw the quackery of mesmerism that still abounds as
it does in all parts of medicine, he admitted the reality of
mesmerism, and details his own personal experience. " How
often," he says, " in intoxication, hystericid and hypochon-
drial attacks, convulsions, fever, insanity, under violent emo-
tions, after long fasting, through the effects of such poisons


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 288

as opium^ hemlock^ beUadonna^ are we not^ in some measure^
transformed into perfeetly different beings^ for instance^ into
poets, actors, &c. Just as in dreaming, the thoughts frequently
have more delicacy, and the sensations are more acute and we
can hear and answer; just as in ordinary somnambulism, we
can rise, walk, see with our eyes open, touch with our hands,
&c. : so we allow that similar phenomena may take place in
artificial somnambulism, and even in a higher degree/^

He recounts his own susceptibility. Having, while in
contemplation, placed his hand upon his forehead, and walking
backwards and forwards several times, with his fingers over
the hairy part of the front of his head, he remarked a gentle
warmth, like a vapour, between his hand and the upper part
of his cranium ; he felt a heat ascend towards his shoulders
and cheeks, heat in his head, and chilliness in his loins. The
same thing having occurred several times arrested his atten-
tion ; and he repeated the experiment, and always with the
same results. If he continued to move for some moments
with his hand suspended, the same phenomena occurred.
'^ The eyes become painful, the tongue no longer articulates,
twitchings of the face occur, respiration grows laborious,
and sighmg and oppression follow; the knees tremble and
totter; and some hours of repose are required to restore him
perfectly. He has often, by the continued movement of the
hand, produced similar phenomena in persons not previously
aware of them. He has produced even deep and prolonged
fainting ; he has, in regard to this peculiarity, a particiUar
aflSnity with persons of both sexes who have fine and rather
curly hair. They act upon him in this manner, and he is
able to distinguish, by this singular impression, if it is an
individual of tibis description or not, who at a distance, in a
numerous assembly, moves his hand over the superior anterior
part of his cranium. On the other hand, he can act upon
persons of this constitution only. The rapidity with which
he loses his senses, and especially the disagreeable impression
produced by an inexplicable depression, have prevented him
from pushing this and obtaining further results.^'

Gall goes still farther : even adopting the hypothesis of a
fluid. ^' We acknowledge a fluid which has an especial affi-
nity with the nervous system, which can emanate from one
individual, pass into another, and accumulate in virtue of
particular affinities, more in certain parts than in others.^'
'^ We admit the existence of a fluid, the subtraction of which
lessens, and the accumulation augments, the power of the
nerves ; which places one part of the system in repose, and


Digitized by


Google


234 Dr. Ettiotsof^s Address to the

heightens the activity of another ; which therefore may pro-
duce an artificial somnambulism/^

^^ We should in general regard the magnetic fluid as a great
exciter of the nerves, able to produce favourable or injurious
effects in diseases, and like other fluids subject to certain
laws, the knowledge of which must be the basis of manipu-
lation. It must, therefore, always be a very important object
to the naturalist, provided he guards against his own illusions
and those of others/' — ^to. toork, vol. i.

If Gall thought mesmerism sufficiently connected with the
phenomena of the brain and nerves to introduce it into his
great work, the members of this Association were hardly jus*
tified in opposing and censuring its mention at our meeting,
where it was introduced as a mode of corroborating the trutti
of Gall's organology and a means of making further disco-
veries in the functions of the brain. Mr. Bichard Beamish
well remarked that it would have been as right to object to
the consideration of Mr. Hawkins's callipers for taking the
dimensions of the cranium on the ground that mechanics
was not a branch of science or art which formed the business
of the Association. Here was another sad example of the
failure of Cerebral Physiology to expand the intellect and
subdue wrong feeling.

I may, perhaps, be allowed to mention, incidentally, that
Gtdl, before his death, shewed a disposition to give more
credit to mesmerism than previously. Dr. Foissac states
that Gall, finding his end near, requested Dr. Foissac to take
a somnambulist to him for the purpose of consultation ; and
that the youth, though not informed of the name or disease
of Gall, correctly pronounced that he had an organic disease
of the heart and a great tendency to paralysis, and pre-
scribed certain treatment, which, however, was refused.

All who have paid sufficient attention to mesmerism to be
qualified to form an opinion respecting it admit its truth,
just as all those who have paid sufficient attention to phren-
ology to be qualified to form an opinion admit its truth. It
is an established fact, that, by means of mesmerism, complete,
or more or less extensive, stupefaction or excitement of the
cerebral functions may be induced : and also simultaneous
stupefaction and excitement of different cerebral functions.
This, however, was not considered to bear at all upon the
doctrine that distinct cerebral faculties are the powers of
distinct portions of the brain. Those who £uicy that the
whole brain performs all the cerebral functions as one homo-
geneous mass, — ^that it all works in all cerebral manifesta-


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological As9ociaiion. 285

tions, see nothing different when in sleepwaking a patient
is highly facetious^ or imitatiye^ or affectionate^ or violent^ or
muflical^ &c. &c.; or remarkable for the elevation of more than
one of these Acuities and the complete inertness of others.
For my part^ I cannot conceive how these varieties can be
explained but by the various condition of different portions of
the brain. The truths discovered by Gall of the great relation
between the bulk of different poortions of the brain and the
native strength of different faciQties make it certain that these
varieties of phenomena result fix»m the various conditions of va-
rious portions of the brain. The reason of these various con-
ditions of various portions of the brain^ in the mesmeric state^
had^ till lately^ appeared to be either individual predisposition
in the various cerebral organs^ or some cause of individual
excitement in the common external circumstances^ sympathy
with the mesmeriser^ or the exertion of his will. Patients
exhibit their characteristic mesmeric phenomena of all de-
scriptions without our being able to give any other reason for
it than that they are actually disposed to this phenomenon or
that. Some go to sleep merely; some talk; some grow
rigid ; some cataleptic^ being moulded into any form ; some
may be drawn by distant movements of the hand of a by-
stander this way or that ; some feel no mechanical injury^
but fed heat and cold^ &;c. &c.^ — ^from the very same treatment
by the same operator^ and perhaps from the identical mani-
pulations, he mesmerising more than one person at the same
moment, and perhaps not knowing what will be the result.

So it is with the respective organs of the inteUectual and
moral fSeumlties. The respective phenomena which occur ac-
cording to the predisposition of each patient may, when the
predisposition exists, be excited in various ways. In some,
particular phenomena are produced by the mere will of the
operator, without any external process. It is said that he
can will them to awake ; will them to sleep ; will an arm or
leg to be paralyzed or rigid. In others, external manipula-
tions are required. For instance, passes must be made near
particular parts, as an arm or a leg, in certain directions,
with or without contact ; particular parts must be pointed at ;
steadily looked at; touched or breathed upon. That such
methods can produce effects without any assistance firom the
will is found by strangers giving rise to phenomena, uncon-
scious of what they are about, or, so far from willing effects,
not knowing while they acted what was to take place, or ab-
solutely, from prejudice, hoping that no effect would ensue.
This is shewn in patients of such high susceptibility that they
may be termed mesmerometers. The Okeys had this exqm-


Digitized by


Google


236 Dr. Elliotsm's Address to the

site susceptibility. Many a stranger^ not knowing who they
were, has caused them in their ecstatic delirium to drop sense-
less, from merely gesticulating near them in earnest conversa-
tion ; a baby has done the same when moving its little hand
in play repeatedly before their face. The same results will
arise from the same means, behind the backs of patients or
before their faces, in sleep as well as in the waking condition.
Nay, intermediately. An inanimate substance touched or
breathed upon for a longer or shorter time by any one, may,
when brought into contact with a person thus susceptible,
produce an effect. Water, in which a stranger's hands had
been plunged in washing, has rendered the Okeys rigid and
senseless in their ecstactic delirium on their washing their
hands in it. A piece of money, touched by another who
gave it them from his own hand, in perfect ignorance of its
being able to be mesmerically charged, and in perfect igno-
rance who they were, would stiffen their hands, then Aeir
whole body, and stupify them.

Before phrenology was known, and among those who are
ignorant of it, or who are both ignorant of it and reject it,
the thought could never have occurred of mesmerising dis-
tinct portions of the brain, as we are accustomed to do dis-
tinct portions of the rest of the body, an arm, a finger, an
organ of sense. Neither did any phrenological mesmeriser
ever think of doing this before the fact presented itself spon-
taneously to us. I now wonder that, in the midst of innu-
merable experiments, during the last five years, I never once
thought of mesmerising distinct cerebral organs. But neither
the possibility nor impossibility ever occurred to me. The
fact presented itself to Dr. Collyer in America, to Mr. Mans-
field in the University of Cambridge, and to Mr. Atkinson
in London, suddenly, unlooked for, and without any one of
these gentlemen knowing that it had already occurred to
another.

Dr. Collyer first discovered, and quite accidentally, in No-
vember, 1839, at Pittsfield, in North America, the possibility
of exciting distinct cerebral organs by contact with the corre-
sponding portions of the surface of the head.* The evidence
of this date appears sufficient. At a party, when mesmerism
was the topic of conversation, he threw into the mesmeric
sleep a young lady who had always refused to allow him to
examine her cerebral development. He took this opportunity

* Psychography, or the Embodiment of Tkovght, with an Analyiit «if
Phreno-magnetism, Neurology , and Mental Hallucination, By Rob. H.
Collyer, M.D., Philadelphia. 1843.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 227

of examining it with his hands^ and^ to his astonishment^ as
he touched over the organs of Self-esteem Combativeness,
Wit, &c., the respective faculties went into action. He was,
however, already so excited with the occurrence of clairvoy-
ance at this period that he confesses he paid very little atten-
tion to the circumstance. In Louisiana, during the following
spring, he produced the same results ; and, having become a
lecturer on mesmerism at Boston, in the spring of 1841, he
publicly demonstrated such facts there as early as May —
above two months before any other person in America pre-
tends to have made similar observations. However, in Octo-
ber, 1842, he was convinced that he had been mistaken, and
declared that he had claimed priority of what he no longer
held to be a reality.* He does most positively denxfy in the
pamphlet published two months ago, ** that the organs were
ever excited hy the transmission of any force from the fingers.f
This I have proved,'^ continues he, "not to be the case in about
fifty new subjects ; when no knowledge whatever was known
of phrenology by the recipient, no accurate result followed.
Those experiments are so very delicate in their nature, that the
whole host of mesmerisers have been led astray ; not one but
admits the truth of Phreno-mesmerism by the direct applica-
tion of the fingers on the sTtull." A postscript to the
pamphlet contains an extract from a letter of my own, in
which I urge that " I affect some of my patients by pointing
only, when their eyes are closed or bandaged, and if any
stranger, unacquainted with phrenology, points, and I do not
know where he is pointing, the effect is produced ;" and an
avowal that he has now seen this done by Captain Daniell, a
friend of mine from England, and several times done it him-
self, but he adds that he has "attributed it to the captain's
will.'' In a letter from Dr. Collyer, dated the 17th of last
month, and received by me last week, he writes, " Since I
received your communication, which says you have repeatedly
effected this by pointing, I suspend my opinion ; I am in-
clined to think I accomplished that last night again, when
there was no possibility of either party being acquainted
with phrenology." In America, also, the Rev. Le Roy Sunder-
land made experiments upon the subject after Dr. Collyer, and
Dr. Buchanan produced effects in the waking state by contact
with portions of the head of persons who had previously been
found susceptible of mesmerism.

On the 17th of January, 1842, I informed the London
Phrenological Society that I had received, in the preceding
month, several newspapers from America, containing accounts
• p. 10. t p. 15.

VOL. I. 8


Digitized by


Google


238 Dr. Ellioisan's Address to the

of cerebral organs of intellect and feeling being excited and
stupefied at pleasure, like other parts of the body, with mes-
merism, and that I had sent them to Mr. Prideaux of South-
ampton with a request that, after haying read them, he would
transmit them to Dr. Engledue at Portsmouth, with a re-
quest that this gentleman would read them and then forward
them to Mr. Gardiner of Roche Court. When Dr. Engledue
received them, he was leaving home for Mr. Case's at Fare-
ham, where he was to meet Mr. Gkurdiner and Mr. Mansfield
and hear the detail of some new experiments made by those
two gentlemen. He put the packet into his pocket, knowing
no more of its contents than that they were mesmeric matter,
heard some most curious and novel details of the excitement
and stupefaction of distinct cerebral organs by mesmeric
processes, and then took out the packet, telling them that he
understood it was something mesmeric and he would read it.
On doing so, the amazement of the whole party surpassed
description. They heard details from America of novelties
similar to those which they had been listening to the moment
before. Mr. Mansfield was a yoimg gentleman of Hampshire,
studying at Clare Hall in the University of Cambridge.
In the University he met with a gentleman, eighteen years
of age, highly susceptible of mesmerism, and who would
lose his sense of time, declaring he had been in a room but
half an hour, when he had been there two hours and upwards,
and referring to events as having occurred but a few minutes
before, when more than half an hour had elapsed. On Mr.
Mansfield breathing upon the organ of Time, he named the
period precisely. " On another occasion he was eating his
dinner, and became exceedingly facetious, his conversation
flowing in a strain of ludicrousness absolutely irresistible.
Mr. Mansfield touched the organ of Wit, with the intention
of arresting his flow of humour, instantly his countenance
assumed a grave appearance; and though his conversation
continued, the humour, vivacity, and drollery entirely disap-
peared. After a few minutes, Mr. M. blew upon the organ,
and immediately the comic strain was again indulged in.
The organ of Alimentiveness was paralyzed in the same
manner, and again excited ; and also the organ of Firmness.'''*^
Mr. Mansfield had related these things to Mr. Gturdiner, who,
with great enthusiasm, entered upon a course of experiments
upon the subject, which he communicated that evening to his
friends, and ultimately published in the Hampshire Telegraph.

As soon as I had made this statement to the Society, Mr.
Atkinson rose, and said that he had made similar observa-

* Dr. Engledae's Cerebral Pkymhgy and MaterialUm, &c. p. 22.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 239

turns. A lady thrown by him into the mesmeric state^ in
Novemb^^ 1841, placed the points of her fingers over the
yarions cerebral organs as they were spontaneously excited,
feeling a sensation in each, and thns disproving the assertion
of Mr. Lockhart, in the Quarterly Review, that we are never
consdons of the seat of any phrenological organ in its excite-
ment. Mr. Gardiner had noticed pain in the oi^n of Music
when he played discords in the hearing of a mesmerised
patient; and, indeed, we must all have noticed local pain
in disagreeable or morbid excitement of individual organs.
Mr. Atkinson, in another case, excited various cerebral fa-
culties in rapid succession by suggesting appropriate ideas,
and the patient as rapidly applied the ends of her fingers over
the respective organs. He informed us that he was thus led
to attempt the excitement of individual cerebral organs in
the mesmeric state with the fingers, and succeeded.

How experiments have since been successfully tried all
over the kingdom, I need not inform the Association.

There can be no doubt that excitement of cerebral
faculties, singly and in various combination, in the mesmeric
state, may be the result of mere suggestion. If the patient
has an idea of the situation of an organ, such is often the
excitability in the state, that the mere contact of any thing
felt in that situation wiU irresistibly impel him, without any
desire to deceive, to fancy it excited and thus cause its excite-
ment. Nay, by misinforming a patient as to the seat of organs,
Combativeness may be excited by touching over Benevolence.
Further still, if an association is establuhed in a patient's
thoughts, a faculty may be excited by touching a distant
part : Benevolence hj touching the nose, and Combativeness
UY touching the chin : and combined actions and states of
difierent organs may be produced in the same way. No
wonder therefore that some fancy they have discovered two
hundred new organs, and organs too for aerostation, gam-
bling, drunkenness, insanity, felony, and I cannot tell what
other absurdities.

I have a patient, an exceUent little girl, who I know
would not practise any deceit. Her mother, at eleven years
of age, was a spontaneous somnambulist. She, at the same
age, has spontaneously fallen into fits of somnambulism, and
in this state I have mesmerised her. She will sometimes
mimic irresistibly : have greater strength than in her natural
state: be cheerful or ill-tempered : and fall into various states,
ignorant generaUy in one of all that has occurred in the others.
Now I can effect any thing in her by imagination. Without a
single pass, but by merely saying, "When I touch the arm of

s2


Digitized by


Google


240 Dr. EUiotson's Address to the

my chair twice, when I lift a book off the table^ (or some-
thing else similar) I wish you to fall asleep/^ she fEdls into the
sleep-waking state, her eyes being just open ; and by similar
means I can wake her, or change her into various moods
and states, there being generally no memory from one to
another. I know there is no deception here : and yet from
her being spontaneously somnambulist, spontaneously mes-
meric, so to speak, imagination has this force over her.

When therefore phrenological experiments are made in
the mesmeric state, there should be no contact, nor any thing
which can communicate to the patient what is expected ; or,
if there is contact, we ought to be absolutely certain that
the patient is ignorant of the nature and situation of the
organs. Then, again, the power of the will of the mesmer-
iser probably m^ do much. I myself have never produced
any mesmeric efifect by my will. But so many persons have
related experiments to me which appear satidactory that I
must admit its influence. I therefore allow that there has
been extreme fallacy in the views of experimenters, and much
injury to both phrenology and mesmerism : that unreal or-
gans have been thought to be discovered, and false views
taken of mesmeric influence. Still there can be no doubt of
the fsict of excitement and stupefaction of individual cerebral
organs by mesmeric influence.

It would be strange, were this not the case. For the
brain is but an organ of the body, and its separate portions
like so many separate portions of other organs. A great
fault has been committed by physiologists and pathologists in
not viewing the brain and its functions exactly like those of
all other organs. Its composition and organization are pecu-
liar ; but still it is an animal compound and organization, has
blood circulating most abundantly through it, and possesses
bloodless vessels and fibres, and pulpy matter ; and is of ne-
cessity subject to all the general laws of structure and func-
tion with all other organs, both in health and disease. If,
therefore, other parts and portions of other parts can be ex-
cited and stupefied or related by true mesmeric means — ^by
an occult influence, it would indeed be singular if this were
not the case abo with the brain. If phrenology ia true, and
if mesmerism is true, then we might presume that individual
cerebral organs would in many mesmeric patients be acted
upon like the individual parts of an extremity or the indivi-
dual organs of sense ; but not in all, because we cannot affect
every other oi^n or every portion of every other part, at plea-
sure, in every patient. To be certain thsA the effects on the
cerebral oi^ns result from mesmeric agency, I conceive.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 241

1. That the subject should have no means of knowing
what is intended : that not a word should be uttered or any
thing done which could by the slightest possibility suggest to
him the expectation of the operator. There should not even
be contact over any organ^ unless it is known with absolute
certainty that he is totally unacquainted with phrenology.
Thus will suggestion^ association, imagination^ be prevented
from acting.

2. The operator should will nothing : he should^ if possi-
ble, not know to what cerebral oi^n he is pointing, that the
will may be prevented from acting.

li the subject is ignorant of the cerebral organs, or ignorant
of the spots over which the influence is being exerted, and
the operator does not will or know what organ he is influenc-
ing, and the established faculty is excited ^ways, or as often
as any other mesmeric effect, or a vital effect of any kind from
any cause is produced, I should consider the proof complete.

Now these conditions I have seen fulfilled times innu-
merable.

1. In some subjects, I or any one else can mesmerise
distinct cerebral organs without any contact, but by merely
pointing to the organ behind the subject's back, the sub-
ject being in perfect somnambulism with the eyes closed and
bandaged. If it is said that the subject can feel the tempe-
rature of the finger, I reply that this is very unlikely through
the hair; that the effect ought to come at once, as when
there is contact, whereas it comes slowly, not perhaps for
one, two, or more minutes ; and that the temperature of the
finger of the operator is the same as that of the subject's
head. I have breathed with my warm breath and blown upon
or held very cold substances close to the head of patients, far
more sensible of temperature than in the natural state, so
that they felt the cold or warmth, though they had no sense of
touch, but without effect; and the moment there has been con-
tact, the organ has gone into action. Again, — some of these
very patients have not believed that any thing was touching
their head, while it was touched, and the effect came. Some-
times the effect lasts some time after you have ceased to point
at or touch over an organ ; and sometimes the effect of the
manipulation comes on very slowly. If time is not taken, but
the operator hurries on to manipulate another organ, the
effect may continue while he is thus engaged, or may not
come on till he is so engaged ; and thus there will be confu-
sion, and he may pronounce that the experiments have
failed. This is common in mesmeric experiments on other
parts, and was one cause of poor Mr. Wakley's blunders.


Digitized by


Google


242 Dr. EUiotson's Address to the

when he presumptuously made experiments and drew conclu-
sions in perfect ignorance of the science.

These effects have as regularly ensued^ when I ascertained
to a certainty that the subjects were not aware what cerebral
organs were manipulated; and in other subjects in whom
contact is requisite I carefully ascertained the same ignorance
to exists before I first made any experiments upon them.

2. My will has hitherto been powerless in all mesmeric
experiments. I have never yet accomplished any thing in
mesmerism by it alone. However long and strongly I have
willed, I have hitherto done nothing without the eye, mani-
pulation, contact or approximation with respect to the
subject, or some substance afterwards brought into contact
with or approximation to him, or by the breath or saliva,
which are substances originally in contact with oneself. Nay,
I have never satisfied myself that I have increased the power
of other proceedings by the most intense will, or impaired
the result from not willing at all. A daily proof that the
will is not the great cause of mesmeric effects is, that their
varieties come out in different subjects quite unexpectedlv ;
and when persons manipulate who know so little of the
matter as not to comprehend what they find themselves
produce.

I have willed the excitement of distinct cerebral organs,
but always in vain. I have looked intently at the situation
of distinct cerebral organs, and willed powerfully, but alwajrs
in vain. In mesmerising distinct cerebral organs, I have
willed nothing-; but talked and thought of other things and
looked carelessly in other directions ; and the effect has come
as soon and as perfectly as when I willed to the utmost at the
same time.

The inefficiency of the will was strikingly shewn in one
of my cases. I had a patient, an epileptic young gentle-
man, in whom I could excite certain faculties by breathing
on the respective organs. I had another, an epileptic young
lady, in whom I could excite them by contact or pointing.
Finding that result in him, I attempted to excite them by
breathing on them in her ; but always in vain, though I have
often breathed till I was nearly spent. On the contrary, when
they are excited, breathing instantly stupefies them as it does
in all my other subjects excepting him.

Again ; in her I touched over or pointed to the organs,
expecting to find the manifestation resemble that in other
subjects; but soon found that I affected the side onl^ of the
brain at which I manipulated. I could scarcely beheve my
eyes ; but I found that if I took her hands in one of mine.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 243

and manipulated one organ of Fride^ the corresponding hand
only was forcibly withdrawn from mine ; and if I manipulated
one oi^an of Friendship^ the corresponding hand only squeezed
mine Tiolently and carried it up to her bosom. To my far-
ther astonishment I discovered that the two halves of her
brain would act oppositely at the same moment : — that if I
took both her hands in mine^ and pointed to the organ of
Pride on one side and of Friendship on the other^ the one
hand would be forcibly withdrawn from mine^ and the other
canj my hand to her bosom^ at the very same moment. So
fSeur from willing all this^ I was taken quite by surprise. Yet
such is always the case in her.

One day I was shewing these fSeicts to a Mend and pointed
to one organ of Pride. We began to converse earnestly and
I to look at him and almost forget my patient. To my
surprise^ the hand of the side opposite to that in which
la^ the organ to which I had begun pointing was violently
withdrawn from mine. But I presently found that^ from not
attending to what I was about^ I had unconsciously moved
my finger over the middle line of the head, and that it was
actually pointing to the organ of the other side.

When Dr. Engledue was with me one day, and she in
mesmeric sleep with her eyes closed in a high chair, I took
her hands and sat looking at them only ; he stood behind her
chair, looked the other way, and pointed at random to what
he guessed might be the situation of one organ of Pride.
Presently, both her hands were violently withdrawn from
mine. We looked at her head, and found that Dr. Engledue
who, it turned out, had pointed with two fingers, had by a
strange chance pointed exactly over the middle line, so that
a point of a finger was over eocA organ of Pride.

After a number of mesmeric experiments, a patient often
becomes altogether insusceptible of more of that kind ; some-
times insusceptible of all mesmeric impression; so that he
remains wide awake, and fatuitous and delirious for a longer
or shorter time. Experiments with mesmerised metals after
frequent repetition during an hour or two will often utterly
M. By waiting a little, sometimes they will act again ; but
if the ex^riments have been numerous, they may not act
again durmg that day. Ignorance of this was another source
of poor Mr. Wakle/s ridiculous conclusions. Now this holds
good respecting the cerebral organs. After many experi-
ments, no more mesmeric impression may be possible. But
a curious occurrence took place in my patient whose organs
can be excited separately in either half of the head. I had
accidentally made my experiments on one half of the head


Digitized by


Google


244 Dr. EUiotson'i Address to the

only^ and^ after complete success^ I could produce no farther
effect^ — the organs I had acted upon ceased to be impressi-
ble. I then began with the organs of the other side, and
all my experiments succeeded as beautifully as they had done
on the exhausted side. This is a perfect argument against
those who would explain the ultimate failure of mesmeric
experiments by the fatigue of the patient's volition.

Again, persons totally ignorant of phrenology, and even of
the reason of their pointing or touching, produce the effects.
After the experiment with Dr. Engledue just related, he and
myself put a minute piece of paper over each organ of Pride,
and I desired a man-servant, who was perfectly ignorant of
phrenology, to come into the room, stand behind her chair,
and point with one finger over either of the pieces of paper
he chose. I took both her hands in mine, and Dr. Engledue
and myself looked aside, carefully avoiding to see to which
organ of Pride the man was pointing. At length one of her
hands withdrew forcibly from mine ; we looked at her head,
and found the man pointing to the organ of the same side.
The experiment was repeated with the same result. The man
does not to this hour know why he was desired to point.
The patient, too, was as ignorant of phrenology as the man,
and, perfectly ignorant of what we were doing.

Just as the point of the nose is often more susceptible
than any other spot covered by skin, I have often found
the point of the operator's nose act more rapidly than the
points of his fingers in producing the ordinary mesmeric
effects ; and so have I found it in her with respect to the
cerebral organs. This shews a peculiarity of influence, and
yet what is done by contact of the operator's fingers over the
cerebral organs can be done by contact with other things,
though less vigorously. In all my cases I can excite the
cerebral organs by the contact of a paper cutter or the comer
of a book. Whether this could be done in subjects whose
cerebral organs have not been previously excited by contact
of the fingers I am ignorant. It cannot be uiged that
any thing is conveyed from the operator's hand through the
substances held by him, because, if he moves the patient's
head so that the situation of the organ shall be brought
against any hard body, the effect occurs as readily as if a
hard substance is brought into contact with the head. But
I have never been able to produce effects by pointing with
any thing else than the living body. Mr. Atkinson ob-
served the effect of such contact of inanimate subjects long
before I did, and ascribes it to the sympathy of the brain
with the pressed siurface.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association, 245

In six of my patients am I able to excite distinct cere^
bral organs. In all I can excite Benevolence and Friendship^
Pride and Destructiveness. In three I can excite these four
only. In one. Veneration also ; in one, Veneration, Music,
and Wit also ,* and in one, Music and Color also. In four I
can excite the organs by merely pointing; and these are the
three in whom I can excite Benevolence, Friendship, Pride,
and Destructiveness, and the one in whom I can excite only
these and Veneration.

Three of these six patients cannot speak or see in the mes-
meric state, and shew the action of the Benevolence, Attach-
ment, Pride, and Destructiveness, by silent language. Under
Pride the countenance scowls, and the head rises and retires
from me ; under Destructiveness the look is furious, and the
head is agitated, and also withdrawn from me ; under Bene-
volence the head approaches me again, and the countenance
relaxes into placidity; under Friendship there is an expression
of delight, and the head comes towards me. In two cases the
body is all rigid ; but in the others, the hands squeeze mine
ardently in friendship, and repel them disdainfully in Pride.
Under Destructiveness the violence is sometimes great. In
all but one the effects are instantly arrested by breathing on
the oi^an; and in them the state of feeling may be changed at
pleasure and with rapidity, if the organ from which the finger
is removed is breathed upon while the finger is removed to
another. The expression of the passions in the countenance,
hands, voice, and gestures, is exquisite ; such as nature only,
or the most finished actor, can present.

Sometimes just as persons who have been mesmerised
with effect can have such local effects induced as rigidity
or palsy of the extremities, without being brought into the
general mesmeric state, so distinct cerebral organs of those
who have been mesmerised with effect can, it appears, be
excited by local mesmerisation in the natural state.

The importance of mesmerism in diseases of the brain is
probably very great.

Phrenology has hitherto done little for the cure of in-
sanity. The modem improvements in its treatment originated
with the benevolent French physician, Pinel; and consist
in treating the insane with, all possible kindness, avoiding
every thing likely to irritate them, doing every thing to make
them happy, and allowing the utmost scope to the healthy
action of every faculty. I am not aware of any improvement
which can be fairly attributed to phrenology; though the
physician who is ignorant of phrenology and treats the
insane, must be like the peasant who tiUs the ground and


Digitized by


Google


246 Dr. ElUotson's Address to the

reaps the com without knowing the meaning of the words
geology or botany. But by means of mesmerism let us hope
that phrenology may do something for the insane, ^e
general benefit resulting from mesmerism in insanity and
other diseases of the brain and nervous system^ I have
begun to publish in the Zoist : the local benefit will ensue
from the general administration^ just as other local dis-
eases^ ulcerations^ pains^ &c. &;c.^ are benefitted by it^ and
just as local diseases of various kinds are benefitted by general
means^ — ^a periodical pain by piUs of quinine^ or an ulcer
by piUs of mercury. But^ since^ in such experiments as have
been related^ we know that distinct parts of the brain may
be subjected to mesmeric influence^ much may be hopra
from its proper administration in monomaniacal and oUier
affections of the brain. As the present treatment of in-
sanity is so insignificant beyond the regimen of the patient
in the full sense of the word^ and mesmerism is so powerful
an agency^ especially upon the nervous system^ it is the
paramount duty of all concerned with the insane to make
themselves well acquainted with phrenology — ^the true cere-
bral physiology^ — and with mesmerism^ and diligently to
avail themselves of the two. Many persons confined for
insanity are really in a mesmeric state^ though this is not
known and would not be readily believed by their medical
attendants.

Discoveries in the functions of the nervous system can-
not but be made by means of mesmerism. Extraordinary
states^ occurring too rarely in disease for much satisfactory
observation^ may be produced artificially^ and thus obser-
vation rendered easy. I have learnt through mesmerism
the character and nature of diseases of which I before knew
scarcely any things and of which the majority of the medical
profession know nothings and much of which from their
ignorance they blusteringly or sneeringly deny. I have dis-
covered nothings but I hope soon to publish some remarkable
facts in corroboration of discoveries made through the reve-
lations of a patient to Mr. Atkinson.


After Dr. EUiotson's address was finished^ Dr. Engledue
related the following Case : —

The father of a large family was suddenly seized with a
desire to kill one of his children^ whilst they were all assem-
bled at the dinner table. The desire was not completely


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 247

ungovernable. He said that he felt '^ as if he should be com-
pelled to destroy his child/' He retired from his hoose and
did not return for several hours, when the desire had ahnost
vanished. Dr. E. stated that he had been attacked in this
dreadful manner several times, always suddenly and without
any apparent cause. The application of the laws as lately
defin^ bv the judges was referred to, and consequently the
lamentable position in which this individual would be placed
if an increase of diseased action on the brain should impel
him to take the life of his child.

Dr. Davey stated, that he had met with several similar
cases. A few weeks previously he had been summoned to
attend a female who had been suddenly seized with the desire
to kill her husband. She was a married woman, the mother
of five children, of bilious lymphatic temperament, and
awoke in the middle of the night about three months since,
feeling dreadfully uncomfortable and irritable. She says she
knew not what to do to relieve herself; but seeing her
husband lying by her side, it burst into her mind that she
must kill him. She tried in vain to conquer the desire, —
it increased in intensity, and she found she could not resist
it. Feeling dreadfully conscious of the awful deed which
threatened her, she screamed out for help, and at the same
moment jumped out of bed to get the poker or some other
weapon with which to execute her fell purpose. The noise
she made awoke her husband, and so the lives of both were
most probably saved.

Two months previously she had had a similar paroxysm.
This occurred very soon after her dinner. It came on as
suddenly as an attack of hysterics, at the time she was wean-
ing her infant child ; and, finding herself impelled to murder
her offspring, she ran screaming to her husband, who was in
a garden on the premises ; and had she not found him, the
poor woman has said with tears in her eyes that she must
have killed it. Two years ago she attempted suicide by
drowning.


Second Silting.

July 4/A. Dr. Elliotson in the Chair.

Mr. Atkinson read a paper, of which he has kindly fur-
nished us with the following abstract.


Digitized by


Google


248 Mr. Atkinson's Paper at the

''His object was to shew the importance of meameio-
phrenology as a means of convincing the world of the troth
of Gall's discoveries, and to advance the science of cere-
bral physiology. He desired to lead others over the ground
which he had traversed with so much success, — to put them
in possession of the facts by which he had been led, and
to explain the course which he had pursued. He fiilly an-
swered the objections which had been urged against the
conclusions which he had drawn from what he had ob-
served: shewing distinctly that there was neither mental
sympathy nor suggestion in any of the cases to which he
referred : that thought-reading, like clairvoyance, was an ex-
ception and not the rule, for that he had found it impos-
sible to influence his patients by his thoughts or to lesA them
by suggestions. He then explained the effects which had
been exhibited by Mr. Spencer Hall to arise from tibe ac-
tion of combined forces, which would be seen to be the case
when the origin of the muscular and the physico-fiinctional
powers were made known ; a knowledge of which would be
seen to be of the first importance, as completing the disco-
veries of Sir Charles Bell whilst correcting and furthering
the views of Gall in some of the most essential points ; and
thus at once setting at rest the question which has caused so
much discussion amongst physiologists in all ages, — ^the ques-
tion of the functions of the lesser brain and the origin of the
muscular and physico-functional powers, including those of
motion and sensation. The answer of Chdl to Magendie and
Fleurens he considered to be most unsatisfiftctory. It was
assumed that the whole cerebellum was the organ of Ama-
tiveness, and the necessity of examining it with reference to
the powers of feeling and motion was almost entirely over-
looked. But a mesmeric somnambulist has now led to the
discovery of the true functions of the cerebellum, where ob-
servation through all other means has failed, and the greatest
physiologists with their probe and knife have only continued
from time to time to perplex the question the more.

'' Mr. Atkinson then gave an exposition of what he con-
ceived to be the true philosophy of action; shewing that
every excitement or action arose from one mass impressing
another when brought into relation : that nothing ever was
or could be free to act of itself or to move by chance : that
mind held the same relation to brain which every other mo-
tion or impression does to the matter of which it is the action
or function, and was excited or impressed either by internal
or by external causes over which it could not possibly have
any control ; and Mr. A. considered the clear understanding


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 249

of this tiniyersal law to be most essential to the further pro-
gress of mental science: and that when this simple and
plainest of facts was fully understood and freely acknow-
ledged^ a vast amount of folly and of misery would at once
be removed firom the world.

'* It is the province of the moralist (he continued)^ as well
as of the physiologist^ to ascertain^ as far as possible, the
precise function, in health and in disease, of each portion of
the oi^nism; the relation and connection of the several
parts, their modes of action and the different causes of ex-
citement ; in fact, the whole conditions under which every
phenomenon throughout the system is made manifest. Now
through mesmerism we are enabled to produce peculiar states
of the nervous system, similar to those which occasionally
occur arising firom disease or other disturbing causes ; and
by this means more readily excite the simple action of any
particular part, or of any particular combination, — arrest
this and excite that, induce this or that condition, and relieve
the patient at will, without any fear of injury, but during
the process of the cure of disease : and thus are enabled to
study all the phenomena of life, and to gain an insight into
the nature of nervous action and into the special function of
each part under every circumstance, and hence may arrive at
the causes of disturbance and at the remedy of evil, which,
as we advance in knowledge, is always found to be of the
simplest nature; — ^for ignorance is ever forced and brutal,
whilst intelligence, using every gentle means, is convincing
the world by persuasion and through the promulgation of
truth.''

Mr. A. then came to the chief object of his paper, and
announced the discovery which he had made by the assist-
ance of mesmerism and through other means of the functions
of the cerebellum ; the importance of which could only be
rightly appreciated by those engaged in the cure of disease
and in the practice of mesmerism. But nothing could be so
easily tested, for these powers may be excited in almost every
instance, when the patient is quite unimpressible in every
other way : and here we at once perceive the cause and the
origin of a hundred phenomena in nervous disease imder
mesmerism, which we have never been able to account for.
That portion of the cerebellum nearest the ear gives the dis-
position to muscular action; next to which, and about half
way between the ear and the occiput on the top of the cere-
beUum^ is musciUar sense, — ^a power conveying the sense of
resistance and the state of the muscles ; beneath which is
muscular power, — giving force and strength; and in the


Digitized by


Google


250 Mr. Atkinson's Paper at the

centre are what may be termed the physico-fimctional powers
— a group of organs^ giving the sense of physical pain and
pleasiure; temperature; and having relation to the general
condition of the body^ and its secretions^ amativeness^ &e.
The part nearest the centre giving the sense of pain ; the
sense of temperature being nearer to the ear^ and amative-
ness beneath. But what is generally termed amativeness will
be shewn hereafter to be a combined power; all which has
been proved beyond a question : and my only astonishment
is that nothing of this should have been discovered before.
But I shall not go further into the question until the facts
have been tested by others : and, to enable them to do so, I
will explain the means which I have used, and the various
ways in which I have been able to prove that which I have
advanced^ — ^by seeking confirmation from cases of inward
consciousness, or those having an innate knowledge of the pe-
culiar action of any particular part and the origin of all which
thesy feel: by exciting those parts in other mesmerised persons,
and observing the effect : again, by asking the patient, in not
very perfect cases, of what they had been dreaming, — ^I have
always foimd the dream correspond with what I have excited.
I have excited these powers in children in their ordinary
sleep, and caused them to rise and perform certain movements,
and then to lie down again, without waking. I can produce
catalepsy by exciting one power, and remove it by touching
another.

In many cases you may produce deeper sleep by exciting
muscular sense, and soothe muscular irritation by holding the
hand over these organs.

Fatigue will cause pain in the muscular powers of the
cerebellum : in fits, pain is often experienced in these parts of
the head : the action of laughing causes pain in the cere-
bellum.

A girl, who had her arm taken off at the elbow, and the
stump moving violently up and down for eighteen months,
had an intense pain in these muscular organs. When I
stopped her arm by mesmerism, the pain ceased, but re-
turned in different points, corresponding with the particular
power under excitement. When any of her functions are
disordered, the effect of an issue, the disease in the joints or
in the bone of the stump, &c., she always has experienced an
intense pain in the centre of the cerebellum, which seems to
go out under Firmness, (the organ of consciousness) and behind
the eyes, but when she has pain in the head from over-
exertion, or the stump moves, or from the action of the
nerves at the end of the stump, feelings as though the fingers


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 251

of the hand which had been removed were contracted^ and
then the pain is in the aide of the cerebellum^ and seems to
affect a part beneath and between Veneration and Benevo-
lence. And it is curious that the points^ where these pains
are felt^ are the most sensitive to mesmeric action ; the top
of the eyes, between Benevolence and Veneration, at Firm-
ness rather in firont, and in the cerebellum ; a fact which
is very curious and important, and which I do not think has
been observed before.

Again, &om the situation of the cerebellum in the head,
with reference to the muscular powers, and its connection by
nerves with the other powers and with the spinal cord.

From observing the natural language of the muscular
powers. I have seen persons pulling with one hand, and
holding the back of the neck with the other.

By causing certain strained actions in the limbs, and
by exciting the spinal marrow, and asking where this is felt in
the head.

By exciting these powers in the brain, and asking where
and in what sensation is felt, and how this alters the con-
dition of the body, and which portion of the spinal cord is
affected. And again, whilst exciting an organ by one metal,
another metal would destroy the effect, whereas no will of
mine, with the same metal, would do anything but increase
the effect. Touching muscular action produces catalepsy; a
drop of water, or breathing on the organ, reduces it instantly,
giving a sensation or pain in the organ. When the patients
cannot fed you touch them or press on any part of the head,
and thqr are quite insensible, touch mucular sense, and, if
susceptiUe, they feel the pressure on this or any other part
instantly. Touch the central organ and they feel pain ; re-
move the finger and they are again insensible ; heat and cold
are felt in tins part.

Lastly, I have observed a multitude of cases of extraor-
dinary muscular and functional power in children and in
grown-up persons, and have found in everv instance, these
orsans corresponding in development with the powers of the
individual. And so on I could multiply the proofs of the
reality of what I have advanced, and rekte cases and facts,
until the evidence swelled into a volume, and proof became
overwhelming. It appears to me that there is nothing more
dear, or that you may confirm so certainly as this, in the
whole range of sdence. These discoveries have beautifully
confirmed those of Sir Charles Bell. Here are organs for
motion, and others for feeling. If I exdte those for motion
or for feeling, and ask which part of the spinal cord is


Digitized by


Google


252 Mr. Atkinson's Papen at the

affected^ in the one case^ it is described as a quantity of long
nerves in double column^ united together in fronts and in the
other as those in the back^ corresponding with what is known
to be the fact^ but of which these somnambulists were quite
ignorant. In conclusion^ I may add, that from the fint I
was impressed with the importance of this enquiry as fer
exceeding every other. What I have done in this matter
has been with the sacrifice of much time. I have laboured
diligently and carefully in the cause of truth, and I trust not
altogether without success/ and if I can only in the end
reflect, that I have been able, in some measure, to arrest the
cant and the prejudice of ignorance, and to advance the
knowledge of man, it will ensure me an enduring gratifi-
cation which no worldly reward or position could have
afforded. But there is neither merit nor demerit in what we
do : we are each but working as our faculties imi>el us : we
deserve neither reward nor punishment: nature does every
thing. We are part of nature, but instruments in the hands
of providence, working out the great ends of creation. But
to learn wisdom, and to do good, is the highest of all delight,
and to this end should every human being aspire. There is
power enough, even in but one new truth to work out the
mightiest revolutions over the world, and against which
armies and senates, and priestly authority, can avail nothing.
Truth is ever glorious and eternal. It is in vain we strive
against it. Phrenology is true; mesmerism is true; mes-
mero-phrenology is true : and what I have now advanced is
true ; but I proclaim it not with the pride of discovery, but
with the sense of its truth and worth, and with the confidence
of knowledge; for truly, may we now exclaim with Lord
Bacon, — "We have held up a light in the obscurity of
philosophy, which will be seen centuries after we are dead.''

After Mr. Atkinson had read his paper. Dr. EUiotson rose
and said^ that he had never excited the cerebellum in any of
his patients, for he had been anxious to abstain from any
course which might at all be considered incorrect in reference
to them, but that Mr. Atkinson was quite right in having
done so, having first received an intimation of the situation
of these powers from the revelations of an extraordinary
somnambulist having the curious power of internal vision
and consciousness, and a lady of undoubted character, and
that it was but just to Mr. Atkinson to state, that about
ten days ago, when he had several patients sleeping, Mr. At-
kinson came in, and without previous intimation or speak-
ing, touched over some part of the cerebellum of one of the
patients, and the arm immediately rose, became rigid, and the


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Associaiion. 253

fingers closed^ and that by simply breathing on the spot which
he had touched^ the arms were instantly relaxed. There
eould be no su^estion or sympathy in this. The patient
had never manifested any other phenomenon whatever than
simple mesmeric sleep^ and was quite unimpressible in every
other respect. Mr. Atkinson then tried another patient^ and
a similar result ensued^ only that the arm rose^ and became
cataleptic^ without rigidity. From that day these patients
have been cataleptic. Mr. A. tried a third patient^ a som-
nambulist^ and who also exhibited some points in mesmero-
phrenology, and obtained a similar result on the muscular
power. In this case, there was a total insensibility to pressure,
whether the pressure were on the head or the hand ; but on
pressing over another part of the cerebellum (muscular sense),
she felt the pressure, on that or any other part, instantly ; he
removed his finger from the oi^an, and she was again insensible
of pressure. Dr. EUiotson thought it right to state thus much
in justice to Mr. Atkinson, and in confirmation of his views.

Dr. Engledue related a case in which he could excite
muscular sense and muscular strength by touching in the
region of the cerebellum.

Some objections having been raised by other members and
answered, Mr. Atkinson said he hoped that no expressions in
his paper had conveyed the idea that he wished to press these
&j(±B and opinions on the meeting. He merely had brought
to the meeting the result of his labours. He had explained
the different means which he had used, and the great number
of ways in which he had tested each point which he had ad-
vanced. Let others go to nature, and enquire for themselves
if he be right or not. Nature is the source of all truth, and
let us enquire of her first, that our opinions or objections may
have weight.

Third Sitting.

July 6th. Dr. Engledue in the Chair.

Dr. Davey read a paper on Criminal Insanity.

"The absolute value of Cerebral Physiology, as a science,

must, it will be admitted, be estimated oldy by its good

effects. All those, then, at all interested in the matter will

endeavour to apply the principles of Gkdl^s great discoveries in

whatever way they can promote human welfere, and thereby

lessen the present large amount of human misery. Since

Cerebral Physiology explains to us the nature and peculiarities

of healthy cerebration, it must necessfirily reveal the indica-

VOL. I. T


Digitized by


Google


254 Dr, Davey^s Paper at the

tions of insanity or abnormal cerebration, and afford a know-'
ledge of its nature and peculiarities. It follows, then, that
any conclusions which may have been at any time arrived at,
concerning the question of the criminal responsibility of the
insane, independently of cerebral science, cannot be entitled
to the slightest respect. What is more ludicrous, I would
ask, than the idea of a body of men, entirely ignorant of the
healthy uses of an organ, meeting together to decide disputed
points in connexion with its diseased conditions ? Can any-
thing be more absurd, more empirical, than the specification
of those symptoms of a disease which shall be held amenable
to the criminal law, and those which shall not : as if they
were severally dependent on the free will of the patient ?

My object in availing myself of the present opportunity
is, to direct the attention of the members of this important
Association to the consideration of the late proceedings in
the House of Lords in reference to the '' Plea of Insanity.''

The members are no doubt aware that five questions have
been submitted to the judges, by the lords, requiring them
to expound the state of the law respecting criminal lunatics,
and the plea of insanity. It appears that this is only a pre-
liminary step, for the subject is about to come under the
consideration of parliament. Such being the case, I am dis-
posed to think thatno opportunity so fitting as the present
can happen, to enquire into the merits and demerits of such
questions, and their respective answers ; the latter, we are
told, have been the result of eight days deliberation.

I cannot help thinking it would be almost criminal in us
to allow the present annual meeting to pass by without
giving some consideration to the subject of the responsibility
of the insane. Late circumstances have so excited the atten-
tion, that almost ever^ one of contemplative habits has be-
come anxious concemmg it.

Without further preface, I will at once proceed with the
immediate object of my address — viz., the consideration of
the questions mentioned, and the answers of the judges to
them. It should, however, be known, that Mr. Justice
Maule alone dissented, in any way, from the conclusions of
his colleagues. The first question proposed runs thus —
''What is the law respecting alleged crimes committed by
persons afflicted with insane delusion, in repect of one or
more particular subjects or persons ; as, for instance, where at
the time of the commission of the alleged crime, the accused
knew he was acting contrary to law, but did the act com-
plained of with a view, under the influence of insane delu-
sion, of redressing or revenging some supposed grievance or


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association, 255

injury; or of producing some supposed public benefit?''
To wnich the annexed reply is given — ^' That notwithstanding
the party committing a wrong act, when labouring under the
idea of redressing a supposed grievance or injury, or under the
impression of obtaining some public or private benefit, lie was
liable to punishment" Now the existence of a delusion, in
this sense, conveys the idea of Monomania ov partial Insanity ;
and thereby infers that the existence of an insane delusion
necessarily leaves the mind of the individual otherwise unaf-
fected. If the authors of this reply were aware that very
many confirmed cases of Monomania, or partial Insanity, ex-
isted without the slightest delusion; and, moreover, that a
delusion is, under all circumstances where it does exist, but a
mere symptom or effect of mental derangement, not only
very uncertain in its existence, but invariably disproportionate
to the extent of the cerebral disease : I apprehend both the
question and the answer would have made their appearance in
a very modified condition. The delusions of the insane
express only the nature of the predominant feelings, and are
in harmony with the morbid affection originating them.
Insane delusions, then, do not in themselves constitute In-
sanity, but are nothing more than additional symptoms, or
indications, of a disease of the brain. For instance — ^the
organs of Self-esteem, Veneration, or Destructiveness, may
severally become diseased, and their natural functions in con-
sequence may at length so increase, that the sufferer is neces-
sanl^ the mere instrument of such an unhappy physical
condition. He becomes, to all intents and purposes, a mere
machine. He would, but he cannot, oppose the force of his
passions. He is the slave of his impulses ; and, compara^
tively considered, is in much the same position as one ex-
hausted by excessive bodily labour, and unable, however
desirous to the contrary, to keep himself awake and stirring.
The volition in both may be said to be suspended. The first
symptom of disease of either of the organs above specified,
is expressed by an extraordinary display of either pride,
religious enthusiasm, or irritability of temper. If the ab-
normal action of such parts of the brain progresses, the
cerebral functions enumerated will of course become more
and more active; and their intensity, and duration, con-
tinuing to increase with the irritation of the individual por-
tions of brain respectively originating them, the sufferer is at
length in the position of a Monomaniac, If the diseased
action were to remain unabated for some time, the chances
are, a^ delusion would become superadded to the other indica-
tions of insanity, and constituting, as it were, an apology for

t2


Digitized by


Google


256 Dr. Davey'a Paper at the

either his ostentatious deportment^ fanaticism^ or cruelty of
disposition. I have at this moment two cases of insanity
under my care, which realize the precise condition here con-
sidered, and a third has just recovered. It is highly in-
teresting and conclusive, and I will therefore mention it.
A young woman, who nearly two years since attempted
suicide, by throwing herself into a canal, and who was sub-
sequently attacked with homicidal monomania, during which
she nearly destroyed the life of her infant child, after two
or three days indisposition, which had received no particular
attention, suddenly awoke in the middle of the night, about
six weeks since, in a most excited and irritable state. After
a vain attempt to recover her self-possession and composure,
she has told me, that, seeing her husband lying by her side,
asleep, she felt irresistibly impelled to murder him. The
horror of her situation immediately flashed across her, and
increased with the strength of the destructive propensity.
She leaped from the bed to reach some instrument whereby
she could effect her awful purpose, and in doing so, created
all the noise and disturbance she could, in the hope that it
might awake her husband, and save them both. Happily he
did awake and prevent the dreadful catastrophe which threat-
ened. This person recovered after a few weeks : she is now
just returned home. Now no one could know better than
this patient that she was acting, or rather about to act, con-
trary to law ; and, moreover, she was quite aware that she was
under the influence of nothing like delusion, nor had she any
idea of " redressing or avenging some supposed grievance or
injury, or producing some supposed public benefit ;*' yet was
she as entii^ly irresponsible, under the circumstances narrated,
as I am for the erroneous opinions of the judges. It is very
much to be regretted that the periodical press, as a rule, refers
to the question of illusion, or delusion, as if impaired cerebral
action, or insanity, was necessarily and invariably associated
with it; and implies, too, that its existence in one insane, con-
stitutes a case of partial Insanity, or Monomania. Nothing
can be more absurd. Nor is this aU. The Times, in reference
to the first question of the lords, and the answer of the judges
to it, writes to the effect that, inasmuch as a partial delusion
implies only a partial inability ^'to distingmsh right firom
wrong,'' the ''Monomaniac is liable to punishment.''

If either of the judges, or even the writer in the Thnes,
whose lucubrations so frequently insult common sense and
humanity, though, I doubt not, unknowingly ; if, I say, one
or more of these gentlemen had taken the pains to visit
Hanwell, or Bethlem, or any other hospital for the insane, it


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 257

would have been readily discovered that delusion, as before
observed, is only a symptom of diseased cerebration ; and is,
therrfore, as uncertain in its existence and duration as mere
symptoms generally are, when regarded in connexion with
disease of any part of our organism. No one can doubt that
every individual portion of the brain may, per se, give indica-
tions of its derangement : thus, as has been above shewn, a
becoming self-respect may degenerate into deplorable and
absorbing egotism and pride ; the mild and fascinating de-
meanour of the sincere Christian may be exchanged for the
rancour and intolerance of fanaticism ; a necessary caution
and prudence may pass into a painful and uncontrollable
timidity and suspicion. To realize such, it is only necessary
to protract, in imi^nation, the temporary extravagance and
excess of feeling or passion we may witness every day of our
existence. In individuals under such circumstances we can
trace no delusions. If, after a time, a delusion did take pos-
session of the patient^s imagination, it would be found in
harmony with the predominant feeling, as before explained :
but it by no means follows that the addition of such delusion
to the other indications of insanity, deprives the individual
in the slightest degree of the power of discriminating be-
tween right and wrong. Neither does it in any way affect
the question of criminal responsibility. The so called delu-
sions of the insane never affect their judgment, because they
are, I am convinced, never believed by them, but only aid the
patient, as it were, in the expression of his abnormal feelings.
I may add, in the words of Lord Erskine, that in such cases
'^ Reason is not driven from her seat, but distraction sits
down upon it along with her, and holds her trembling upon
it, and frightens her fi^m her propriety.'' Since, then, deki-
sion may exist with a partial disease of the brain, that is, may
attend on an abnormsJi action, confined to one cerebral organ
only, constituting a case of Monomania ; and that, moreover,
delusion may be absent in disease involving even the whole
brain, and thereby perverting the moral nature of man, it
must follow that the existence or not of delusion, can in no
way measure either the irresponsibility or insanity of an indi-
vidual. A large majority, too, of those cases which are called
Monomania, are, in fact, instances of general insanity. An
insane man may be possessed of one delusive idea, but the
brain may be, and is very frequently, otherwise disordered
and weakened, though the characteristic iUusion is the most
striking phenomenon.

It often happens that patients are received into Hanwell,
whose cases arc described as " Monomania/' the real nature


Digitized by


Google


258 Dr. Davetf'i Paper at the

of which is^ however^ widely different. The man who some
time since was found in the precincts of Buckingham Palace^
verifies the above position. In him> delusion constitutes only
a prominent symptom of cerebral disease^ a mere feature of
the general moral perversion of his nature. The writer in
the Times daily paper may possibly be surprised to learn,
that the same observations will equally apply to the case of
Daniel M^aughten, in connexion with whom so much igno-
rance and inhumanity have been manifested. It is, more-
over, important to know that the delusions of the insane are
commonly no less various than the different states of feeling
originating them. From all these considerations, then, it
follows that the importance attached to the question of delu-
sion, both by the judges and the writer in the Times Paper,
above aUuded to, is a complete piece of absurdity, as opposed
to truth, as it is a scandal to the present age and advanced
state of Cerebral Physiology.*

I doubt whether an insane act is ever committed with the
sure and certain belief, on the part of the lunatic, that he is
really " redressing or avenging some supposed grievance or
injuiy, or of producing some supposed public benefit.'* In
relation to the case of Daniel M^Naughten, it was asked —
Had his delusions been changed for an actual reality, would
he not have then deserved the consequences of his act 7 As
I have already replied, in my Medico-Legal Reflections on
the Trial of Daniel M'Naughten, " had his delusions been
exchanged for reality, there would have existed no disease of
the brain, or membranes, to rob him of his moral agency.'*

In the judges' answer to the second query, which refers to
" the proper questions to be submitted to the jury" concern-
ing the criminal responsibility of the Monomaniac, are these
words : " That before a plea of insanity should be allowed,
undoubted evidence ought to be adduced that the accused
was of diseased mind, and that at the time he committed
the act he was not conscious of right or wrong j" and that
" every person was supposed to know what the law was, and
therefore nothing could justify a wrong act, except it was
clearly proved the party did not know right from wrong."
By the first quotation we are to understand that if an indi-
vidual, subject to attacks of insanity, commit a crime during

* '< The Tinut has endeavoured to show < that the affirmation of the /act
and nature of the insanity, or delusion, and the affirmation of its effects in
impairing, or not, the moral faculties, are quite distinct and separate. The
first is for the doctors, the second to be determined by the circumstances of
the case. The person who wrote this paragraph ought to be ashamed of
himself.' A delusion is not insanilyy any more than a cough is inflammation
of the lungs. It is, too, an effect only, and not a axuse^ of impaired moral
faculties."


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Msocialion. 259

a lucid interval^ he must be held responsible for the same,
and is, therefore, liable to punishment. In reference to this
matter, I do not hesitate to say, that should the anticipated
parliamentary enquiry into the law of insanity, confirm the
judges in their opinion, it will be a disgrace to the legislature
of the country. If legislators would give their attention to
nature, in preference to the puerile inventions of a bygone
era, we should avoid the awful consequences which threaten
the unfortunate insane, and diminish the increasing tendency
of the human race to so dreadful an affliction. Insanity, like
many other diseases, is occasionally of an intermittent cha-
racter: that is to say, it recurs in paroxysms, leaving the
intermediate periods free. In such cases, it must not be
supposed that because the symptoms are not continuous, the
cause which produces them is only temporary, beginning and
ending with its effects. Such is not the case.

The brains of those liable to intermitted insanity are
diseased, and therefore such persons must be deemed irre-
sponsible for all those acts which are dependent on such
alteration of structure. However quiet and comfortable they
may usually be when protected from the anxieties and irrita-
tions of life, and when subject to the kind and considerate
dictations a£ those under whose care they are placed; they
are no sooner removed from such wholesome influence, than
the brain necessarily rebels with the stimuli offered to it. No
individual under such circumstances can possibly be held ac-
countable for his conduct. The infliction of punishment
could never alter the pathological condition of the brain and
membranes. In reference to the nature of the lucid intervals
of the insane. Dr. Combe says, " In ordinary circumstances,
and under ordinary excitement, his perceptions may be accu-
rate and his judgment perfectly sound ; but a degree of irri-
tability of brain remains behind, which renders him imable
to withstand any unusual emotion, any sudden provocation,
or any unexpected and pressing emergency .'* Dr. Kay, the
celebrated medical jurist, affirms that the reasons why we
ought never to convict for a crime, committed during the
lucid interval, are, that the criminal acts are generally the
result of the momentary excitement produced by sudden pro-
vocations : that these provocations put an end to the tempo-
rary cure, by immediately reproducing that pathological con-
dition of the brain called irritation : and that this irritation
is the essential cause of mental derangement, which absolves
from all the legal consequences of crime. He adds, '' Burdened
as the criminal law is with false principles on the subject of
insanity, the time has gone by when juries will return a ver-


Digitized by


Google


260 Dr. Davey's Paper ai the

diet of 'gtdliy^ against one wlio u admitted to have been in-
sane within a short period of time before the criminal act
with which he is charged/' The judges moreover express
their conviction, that under all circumstances, if the party
accused be " conscious of riffht or wrong" and know the
one firom the other, he must be regarded in the light of a
iome man, and be liable to punishment. The T^mes^ too,
has incurred the responsibility of supporting the same dread-
ful opinions. No honest man, — ^no one daiming the privi-
leges of humanity and professing a correct knowledge of
insanity, — ^no one, certainly, who is in the habit of mixing
with the insane, and consequently practically acquainted with
the manifestations of disease among them, — no one, I say,
who has been, or is, engaged in their management, from the
plnrsioian to the humblest menial in a lunatic hospital, can
reflect on so much ignorance and iigustice and not feel in the
highest degree indignant. All those among the insane who
can commit a crime, who have physical energy 1^ th^oa to
enq^loy the necessary means, know right from wrong , as well
as I do; and are no less eonsciom of every thing about them.
Insanity does not, as it is usually supposed, necessarily imply
an aberration <^ the intellectual powers. On the other band,
sometimes in the most distressing cases of violent madness,
both the perceptive and reflective faculties are unusually
active. This indeed is generally the case in the acute forms
of the disease ; and in those cases most prone to the commis-
sion of acts of violence, to which of course all legislative inter-
ference must apply. How absurd then it must be to speak of
such patients as if they were unconscious and ignorant.

Hysterical females are commonly quite conscious of their
involuntary attacks of nervous irregularity and excitement.
It does not follow though that these are less involuntary. The
pain and annoyance the remembrance oftentimes occasions,
are of course much aggravated with the insane. After reco-
veries from the severest forms of insanity, it is common for
patients to express in the kindest and most affectionate terms
their gratitude for the care taken of them, and to relate with
the greatest precision and accuracy all the circumstances
which may have transpired during their illness, and to de-
scribe also their feelings, their hopes and anxieties, during
its progress. An apt yet highly painful illustration of the
nature of my position, is afforded in the condition of one
suffering from hydrophobia. Though impelled to the most
extraordinary and rabid conduct, the si^erer still retains a
perfect consciousness of all he may do or say. I have observed
this till within a very short period of dissolution. To shew


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological AsiociaiUm. 261

the folly whidi characterizes the acts of the l^slatare in
reference to the insane^ it is abme sufficient to mention to
you that it is declared — " if a man is whoUy disabled^ by
mental disease or incapacity, firom discerning between right
and wrong, he is dearly exempt from punishment ; for his
execution, says Sir E. Coke, would be a miserable spectacle,
both against law, and of extreme inhumanity and cruelty,
and no example to otiiers,'' Now, properly speaking, the
insane are nevar in mich a position. Those who are really,
in the language of the daily TimeB, ^^ wholly disabled by
mental disease or incapadty from diecwering between right
and wrong /^ are not usually in a condition to commit a cri-
minal act, any more tiiui an inanimate body. Their condi-
tion is rather one of mere vegetation. Even idiots do not
invariably come under such a definition ; for very many of
them retain some one or more of the intellectual faculties,
and very commonly give indications of moral feeling; prov-
ing, therefore, that disease of the brain very rarely involves
the whole organ.

Lord Erskine, in commenting on the errors of Lord
Hale, who measured the responsibility of the insane by the
integrity of the intellectual powers, says, — '* If a total depri-
vation of intellect was intended to be taken in the literal
sense of the words, then no such madness ever existed.^' ^' It
is,^' he says, '' idiocy alone which places a man in this help-
1^ condition ; where, firom an original mal-organization, there
is the human frame alone, without the human capacity/' " I
have found the insane,'^ he continues, " not only possess the
most perfect knowledge and recollection of all the relations
they stood in towards others, and of the acts and circum-
stances of their lives, but to have been in general remarkable
for subtlety and acuteness.^'

The observations already made constitute a sufficient ex-
posure of the inconsistencies contained in the fourth question,
and its answer ; and which is in fact nothing more than a
repetition of the first, and therefore equally expressive of the
profound ignorance of insanity displayed in both, and for
which, strange to say. Lord Brougham has told us, the
country was under great obligations.

Nothing can c^ more earnestly on us to use our exer-
tions in the cause of cerebral science, than the knowledge of
the existence of so much ignorance and inattention to its
principles ; as displayed bom in the questions of the lords
and the replies of the judges. Is it not, I would ask, a la-
mentable thing to witness, as we all do, the rapid progress of
Gall's great discoveries, and to observe at the same time the


Digitized by


Google


262 Dr. Davey's Paper at the

legislators and judges of the land neglecting to inform them-
selves of the only means which can help them in the great
cause they have ventured to undertake ? Their responsibility
is indeed immense ; and it must not be supposed that future
ages will hold them unaccoimtable for their neglect and inat-
tention. No one can doubt the desirableness of cerebral
physiologists taking a part in the anticipated parliamentary
enquiry into the law of insanity. As a society it has become
our duty to use all our endeavours to prevent the future re-
cognition in law of those several errors and inconsistencies,
which it has been my hmnble endeavour to lay before you.

At HanweU we frequently receive patients from the vari-
ous metropolitan prisons, to which they have not unfrequently
been sent, on the presumption that they are criminal. Such a
circumstance is, of course, inseparable from the general igno-
rance which prevails on the subject of insanity. The perio-
dical press often supplies us with similar instances of error.
A very remarkable one was narrated some months since of a
youth, in whom a long succession of insane extravagancies
were succeeded by his conviction and imprisonment. The
case occurred I think at the Oxford Assizes. It is full of
interest, and well deserves a patient attention.

If the preceding observations be insufficient to prove the ne-
cessity wluch exists for the inculcation of more correct views on
the subject of insanity, surely, the unceasing recitals of homici-
dal and suicidal deaths cannot be without their weight. With-
out the aid of Cerebral Physiology, such imhappy facts admit
of no explanation; and are therefore very improperly regarded
in the light of crime, instead of being viewed in connexion
with an abnormal action of a portion of cerebral matter. For
the sake of illustration, I would refer to the attempted suicide
at Hampton, narrated a week or two since in the papers,
to the late awful catastrophe at Greenwich, which was the
slaughter of two or three children by their father and also
his own immediate suicide. A particular feature in this case,
was the circumstance of the unhappy man calling from the
window into the street for help and protection. No doubt
he felt that he required it. A similar case happened in the
city, near the Mansion House, about a year since, and another
at Hoxton. There can be no doubt that many such instances
are old cases of insanity; which, as a consequence of either
ignorance or inattention, perhaps both, have escaped detec-
tion, or, if detected, have oeen neglected and kept at home,
instead of being secluded in a proper asylum. Probably the
intellectual powers have remained unaffected, and thus prevented
the recognition of the peculiar nature of the disease.''


Digitized by


Google


Pkrenologxcal Association. 263

Fourth Sitting.
July 6th. H. G. Atejnson^ Esq.^ in the Chair.

Dr. Engledue^s paper was on the same subject^ " The Law
of Insanity/' and the same views were advanced regarding
the opinion of the judges as on the preceding day. The
attention of the members was directed to the great power
they possessed to enlighten men on the cause of their actions,
whether in a state of health or disease. The present system
of appointing judges and the impropriety of selecting men to
try cases of insanity, merely because they were great lawyers,
was proved to be productive of considerable mischief. The
character of evidence required, and the method pursued for
the purpose of obtaining it, could never lead to any beneficial
result. The decisions of a judge delivered two hundred years
ago could be of no practical importance, if scientific men
accustomed to the treatment of insanity were of a diffe-
rent opinion.

^' Human nature is not to be controlled by legal opinions,
or by Acts of Parliament, notwithstanding that twelve judges
may assemble and state and insist upon certain principles
being received. Human nature is conbx>lled by natural laws,
is governed by natural laws, and is to be improved only by a
strict and rigid observance of these laws. What are these laws f
We know but little yet. The last fifty years have produced
men who have done much towards an elucidation, but how
much remains to be accomplished I We, as Cerebral Phy-
siologists, who devote a great portion of our time to the study
of man and his actions, feel compelled to state that we are
not prepared to announce all the laws governing him : but
legal men enveloped in legal phraseolo^ and enshrined in
musty precedents, presume to advance doctrines which are
totally incompatible with physiological science.'^

The decision of the twelve judges, continued Dr. E.,
is opposed to all science and the dictates of humanity. If
the law, as defined by them is to be carried out.

'^ Clearly M'Naughten should have been hanged. He
laboured under a ddusion, ergo, say the judges, he ought
to have been punished according to law. He laboured under
a delusion say Cerebral Physiologists, and his actions like the
actions of all animated beings were necessarily the result of
his oi^anic constitution and the circumstances surrounding
him at the given period, ergo, he ought not to be hanged, but
he ought to be consigned to the wards of a moral infirmary.
Now here is the germ of the question. Until we settle this


Digitized by


Google


264 Dr. Engledue?8 Paper at the

the fundamental principle^ it will be quite useless to attempt
any legislative change. No law for insanity^ no law for the
treatment of criminals will ever be framed on scientific or
natural principles^ till this fundamental and comprehensiye
axiom is acknowledged. It lies at the threshold of all legis-
lation, and yet it has not been thought of by those whose
peculiar province it is to legislate, nay, those who have ven-
tured to announce this truth have been considered vicionaries
and enthusiasts, infidels and atheists. How siaunge that we
are now only commencing to think of man's constitution —
that we are only now labouring to place our facts in such
a position, that the fruits of our labours may become useful.
A great work is to be accomplished, but let us commence
it on a new system. If man make himself the standard by
which he is to judge of his fellows, the resulting thought
must be imperfect and narrow. He must view the race and
not himself — he must look on the tribe and not on an
individual of the tribe— he must deal in facts and not in theo-
ries — ^he must throw aside preconceived notions, fanciful and
metaphysical dreams, conjectural and plausible statements,
and become a sincere searcher after truth for truth's sake ; in
one word, he must put on the garb of the philosopher, and be
animated with the longings of the philanthropist. It is this
feeling which should stimulate our rulers, but alas I how fiur
distant are they from such ennobling intentions I no where
do we behold a man standing forth to advocate the justice of
treating his neighbours on a broad and extended principle.
A low grovelling expediency, the o£fspring of ignorance and
superstition, appears to reign paramount in the world and in
the senate. Men are still imder the influence of their animal
doings — ^they still require to be taught the supremacy of the
intellect and the sentiments, and in speaking of the race, we
may with truth add, humanity yet requires to be humanized.''
The ignorance displayed by society on the subject of
insanity, was clearly seen in the public prints. The language
in these organs of the popular voice was ruthless in the ex-
treme, and with very few exceptions, they advocated the expe-
diency of destroying the poor creature as a warning to others
— they said that society could not be considered safe if he
were not destroyed as an example.'*' The same principles
apply to criminal legislation and to the trial of insane persons.

* When Bellingham shot Mr. Perceval, this destructive feeling was
manifested much more energetically : then with very few exceptions, the
public press called for his immediate executiou, and one, the Times, said,
*' that the trial would take plae on Saturday, and the execution on the
following Monday.''


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Asiociation. 265

'Hie criminals are insane for the time. We ought to look on
both parties as olriects deserving omr protection and our pity
— ^as beings incapable of protecting themselves because of their
natural formation^ and therefore claiming the fulfilment of a
natural rights the right of being protected and of being treated
on the principles of Reason^ Benevolence and Justice.

''On this we should take our stand. We must not
approach our rulers with the intention of asking for just so
much as we imagine they may grant, but we must as philo-
sophers tell the whole truth and declare that till these prin-
ciples are followed — ^till they are considered the basis of the
means to be used for governing the criminal and the insane,
humanity is outraged, and our suffering fellow-creatures im-
justly destroyed. Tell me not that this is a mawkish sympa-
thy. Tell me not that the task of protecting those who cannot
protect themselves is unbecoming the philosopher. The great
aim of the philosopher is to increase happiness and not misery,
is to assist those who are imbedded in crime, ignorance, dis-
ease, or destitution, and to raise as high as the powers he
possess will enable him, all who belong to the great family of
man. This is our duty. If we wish fbr an incentive to
action, let us remember the labours of our great master — he
shaped the stones but we have to raise the pillar — ^he col-
lected the fiacts but we must philosophically apply them — ^in fact
he left us to advance his researches, and to perfect the science
he with so much genius had commenced to investigate.^'

Dr. E. advocated the necessity of adopting some means
for the purpose of placing before the public the opinions of
Cerebral Physiologists.

''The law of insanity,^' he said, "is the result of meta-
physical fiEuicies j but it is in our power to alter it. Do we
not know that de Jure the insane can be hanged, but that
de facto they are innocent and should be consigned te the
wards of a suitable hospital ? Is not this simple statement of
the fact enough to caQ forth all our energy? Do we not
know that it is true ? Ought we not then to protest against
the continuance of such an inhuman law? We are scattered
through the country and each individual in his immediate
circle is slowly producing a reformation in the thoughts and
opinions of his neighbours, but with how much greater force
might we speak, if we were to embody our views on this
vexed question — ^to use our endeavours to lay down correct
principles for the guidance of our law-makers, and to insist
on the recognition of the birthright of every individual re-
siding in a civilized community — humane protection when
diseased, instead of savage and relentless annihilation.''


Digitized by


Google


266 Dr. Engledue's Paper at the

After a long and interesting discussion in which every
speaker coindd^ with the author. Dr. Engledue proposed, —

'< That a Committee be appointed for the purpose of embodying the riews
of cerebral physiologists on the important question of Insanity and Criminal
Jurisprudence, and to forward the same to the Legislature."

The motion was seconded and carried unanimously.


Fifth Sitting,
July 7th. Oeoroe Bird, Esq., in the Chair.

Mr. Hudson Lowe partly read, partly spoke, in the pecu-
liar way described by us at p. 285, with reference to his
communications to the Phrenological Society, " an attempt to
shew that the function of the organ hitherto called that of
Wit, was the manifestation of the idea and suggestion of
Contrast.'' As in the case of the Phrenological Society, he
had no complete paper to deliver to the Secretary, and was
requested to furnish an abstract of what he had said. The
following is that abstract, with such omissions as the identity
of much of it with his communication to the Phrenological
Society, and mere illustrations, rendered necessary.

He began with " a view of the operations of mind, as
contra-distinguished into passive and active. Pure passive
receptivity did not indeed exist in the mind, but certain
implanted forms of cognition preceded even the perception
of sensible images. This was proved by the a priori charac-
ter of our elementary conceptions concerning the external
world. Thus we can affirm that of necessity there can be
no forms that are not reducible to the straight line and the
curve, and that direction can only be of a threefold nature —
horizontal, vertical, and diagonal. These, and all mathema-
tical propositions, are proved by their necessary character to
be other than a result of experience, for experience cannot
arrive at demonstration ; its province is only the contingent.

Though, however, these elementary forms of cognition
connate with the intelligence are the necessary conditions of
sensible perception, and though, therefore, it be correct to
say that the mind is never in a state of pure receptivity, yet
perception is a receptive state, relatively to others, which are
the spontaneous states of mind, viz., association and sugges-
tion, in the last of which a distinct process from association,
though the two have been generally hitherto confounded, the


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 267

Iiighest degree of spontaneity is exlubited. A distinction
has been drawn between the spontaneous and the voluntaiy
activity of mind. But this distinction^ however practically
important, is invalid as regards the operations of intelligence.
It is not probable that unll can ever create an impression,
though it can, by banishing foreign chains of conceptions,
facilitate the making of that over which a command is de-
rived. And in every case, whether in the presence or the
absence of voluntary activity, the mind can only proceed by
the states spoken of, viz., perception, association, and sugges-
tion. Association and suggestion have been hitherto con-
founded.'^

" We shall find the idea of contrast pervading all our con-
ceptions, whether of moral or physical nature, of the world of
consciousness and the senses, of science and of art. We may
adduce the elementary conceptions of light and darkness — of
good and evil. In the physical sciences we find the attraction
and repulsion — ^the great and pervading law of polarity, whe-
ther exhibited in the magnet, or in light, heat and elec-
tricity. In the natural sciences, we find the two sexes. In art,
the great and leading distinction between the ideal and the
real, a less perfect illustration, however than those preceding.
Hume had said that contrast might be resolved into ' a mix-
ture of Causation and Resemblance. Where two objects are
contrary,' he adds, ' the one destroys the other : that is the
cause of its annihilation; and the idea of the annihilation of
an object implies the idea of its former existence.' But in
the case of the relation of polarity, that of the two sexes,
one opposite supposes the existence of the other, instead of
annihilating the idea of this existence : a proof of the insuffi-
ciency of Hume's explanation."

In further iUustration of the principle treated of, he con-
trasted Biationalism with Empiricism, and Mechanism with
Organization. In Biationalism, starting from an idea in the
mind, we seek by an expansive process to envelope within its
circle the greatest possible number of the phenomena of the
external world. In Empiricism, we seek by exhausting the
phenomena of the external world, to arrive at an idea which
represents them with the utmost attainable completeness.
In the imion of the two methods lies true philosophy.
Again, with regard to Mechanism and Organism: in Me-
chanism, the parts are individually completed, and by being
put together a whole is created : in Organism, on the other
hand, it is the whole which first exists, and which gradually
evolves its parts.

Having thus elucidated his idea of Contrast, he passed on to


Digitized by


Google


268 Mr. Hudson Lawt^$ Paper at the

treat of its connexion with a special oi^an in the brain. He
believed it to be connected with the greater part of the organ
called Wit; and when very large^ to form a marked protuber-
ance external to casnality, of which the lecturer offei^ exam-
ples in the busts of Michael Angelo and Godwin. Where the
forehead rose much^ and was very high and large in this
region^ as in Voltaire^ or in Rabenerj of whom the lecturer
subsequently exhibited a portrait^ after Anton Ghraff^ all the
space in thu region was not to be considered as included
under this organ^ but its seat was to be considered as con-
fined to that portion of the brain situate externally to the
organ of Causality^ on the frontal protuberances^ and exhi-
biting about the same degrc^ of external development.

He referred to Gall^s opinions on this oi^n^ or on that
so named of Wit. In a work published in 1809 (Organologie
ou Nouv. Dec. du Docteur Gall)^ he had included it with the
organs of C!omparative Sagacity and Metaphysical Pro-
fimdity, in what he termed the Inductive group^ and of which
he gave as examples Boeihaave and Hdler. It was a pity
that this classification had not been retained^ as there was no
doubt that the portion of brain in question must be consi-
dered as entering into the task of reasoning and investigation.
This view however did not occur in the Fonctions du Cerveau.
He there treating of the organ of Gomparison^ or, more cor-
rectly speakings of the suggestion of Kesemblance and Ana-
logy, observed that it was generally considered that '^ Sagacity
consisted in seizing contrast, and Wit in seizing points of
resemblance ; but that^ as he who had the power of discover-
ing resemblance among objects must necessarily have also
that of seizing their contrasted points, it follows that both
these Acuities are modifications of the same fundamental
power.'' fF. du C, p. 199, tom. v.) Nothing could be more
untenable, or more completely a begging of the question,
than the argument in this case. In comparing two sensible
objects, it might appear for an instant plausible : our faculties
for cognition of form and extension were concerned in recog-
nizing the properties of such objects, whether there were
points of resemblance or contrast. But even in this case,
what could appear more probable than that according to the
strength of original suggestive principles of resemblance or
contrast, would be the facility of seizing the points of resem-
blance or those of opposition. How much more was the ex-
istence of the two distinct principles brought into view in con-
sidering a case of pure suggestion. Any present conception*

* Thus an argumcDt may suggest to tbe mind either a confirmation or a
refutation.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 269

might recall another with which it was analogous^ or to which
it was strongly opposed, and what manifestation of the same
fundamental force do we here recognize ?

It was impossible to assign importance to the opinion
that the portion of brain in question was the organ of Wit.
There were at once many facts of persons eminent for their
wit having a very moderate development of this organ (Swift,
Sheridan, &c.)> and others equally strong of a very large
development with no wit. The head of Godwin was a case
in point.* In the various writings of Godwin which the lec-
turer had read, he had only once met with an attempt at
either wit or humour; viz., in a chapter of the novel of Fleet-
wood, and that a very poor one. Rousseau was another in-
stance. The development of the organ in his head was
enormous. The portrait engraved by Alix, after Garnuav,
exhibits this development, but it was more remarkable still
in the bust by Houdon. All the higher part of the forehead
was very largely developed, but more especially the organ in
question, wUch was the largest of all the intellectual region.
Yet, powerful as was the genius and various the writings of
Rousseau, wit was the very last faculty which could be as-
cribed to him. This hypothesis was therefore fairly untenable.
And if these two last instances militated against the oi^n of
Wit, they did so not less strongly against the oi^an of
Gaiety, to which the position of the portion of brain in ques-
tion, clearly in the line of the higher intellectual organs,
offered another very strong objection.

The lecturer then proceeded to adduce instances in sup-
port of his own view, in regard to the functions of this organ.
Rousseau was the first cited. His writings abound in anti-
thetical clauses, and shew the keenest discernment of opposi-
tions, of incompatibilities. Extracts illustrating, both in matter
and form, the suggestions of contrast, were read from the
Contrat Social, and the Origine de VInigalite des Condiiions"1[
''The portraits of Hdchier, the celebrated French preacher.
Bishop of Nismes, indicated a large development of this
organ, and his sermons and funeral discourses swarmed with
antithesis. The lecturer here read an extract from the
Eloge de Saint Francois de Paule, and commented on its an-
tithetical character, and the manner in which contrast served
to give relief to the subject matter. The portraits of Wm.

* In coDTersatioQ Godwin was dull, uttering; nothing beyond " the most
gentle common -place," according to Serjeant Talfourd. Hazlitt's remarks
on the flatness of his conrersation are much stronger.

t Nan dans les livres de tes semblables qui sont menteurs, mats dans la
nature qui ne mentjmnais,

VOL. I. U


Digitized by


Google


270 Mr. Hudson Lowers Paper at the

Cowper show a large deyelopment of the organ^ and the
manifestations related were conspicuous in his writings.'^
''Another very strong illustration of the organ was Schiller.
It was large in his bust by Danneker, and his portraits, and
his writings manifested the feculty very strongly/^ '' In the
Song of the Bell, the form was an illustration of the activity
of this suggestive power. The verses in which the me-
chanical process of founding were described, serving both
in the abruptness of their metre, and the triviality of their
import, to set off the solemn and interesting theme of the
poem, in its reference to human destiny. In Sterne's head,
the organ was enormous. His writings abounded in con-
trasts,'' some of which the lecturer specially referred to.

'' He next proceeded to refer to the exemplification of the
fietculty in works of art. The portrait of Bibera (Spagnoletto)
indicates a large development of this organ. The broad and
striking contrasts of light and shade, which distinguish his
works, are proverbial. In his subjects we may, perhaps, con-
sider that this tendency is also exemplified. The savage
martyrdoms which his pencil so frequently pourtrays, depend
for their effect on the contrast between the resignation of the
saint, his devoted and sublime character and feeUng, and the
savage and brutal malignity of his persecutors. Again, in
the martyr himself, the expression of bodily suffering may be
contrasted with that of submission, or even pious exultation."
'' Jacob Jordeans possessed a large development of this oi^n,
and his works exemplify it very strongly in its application to
the grotesque. He accumulates the most extravagant varie-
ties of human physiognomy. In the portraits of Both, of
Italy, the organ is yeiry krge. Both, besides employing
chiaro-oscura with great success and effect, delights in that
character of landscape in which the stem and rugged scenery
of mountain passes is contrasted with the hranquil and
smiling aspect in the distance, — of extended plains and mea-
dows, varied with water and foliage. Michael Angelo's bust
had been shown as iUustrating the seat of the organ and its
large development. The lecturer referred to the engravings
of the Pisan Cartoons, and of the Last Judgment, as exem-
plifying the faculty in the excessive variety and opposition of
attitude exhibited by the figures. In Music, reference was
made to the busts of Meyerbeer, Vieuxtemps, and Paganiui,
and to the character of their productions. Meyerbeer's de-
velopment of the organ was enormous ; it was the largest in
his forehead : his opera of the Huguenots was, both in the
very various sentiment of the themes introduced, and in their
form, a very strong illustration of the faculty. The organ
was one frequently much developed in artists of whatever


Digitized by


Google


Phrenohffical Association. 271

branchy and as contrast was one of the strongest means of
effect in art^ this was in harmony with the views presented.

In Dupnis^ author of the Ortgine de Tous les Oultes, ap-
peared a negative instance of this faculty. In the engraving
of the bust of Vohiey^ after David^ the organ appears below
the average. There was a remarkable instance of an exclu-
sive attention to points of resemblance^ to the neglect of
those of antagonism^ in the parallel he had instituted in his
reflections on the Savages of Northern America, between
these savages and the inhabitants of Ancient . Greece.
How could tribes^ essentially nomadic^ be likened to a people
remarkable for their local attachments ; savages incapable of
constructing anything beyond a miserable wigwam^ to the
founders of large and opulent cities^ and the inventors of the
five orders of architecture; savages possessing no art beyond
that of carving a tomahawk or a canoe^ to the nation which
produced Phidias and Praxiteles; lastly, savages possessing
no written language, to the nation which has taken the ini-
tiative in all sciences^ and given models in all classes of
composition ; but by one whose intellect was awake to all
analogies, and neglectful of all points of opposition ?

The address concluded by an investigation whether the
occasional connexion of this organ with Wit, might not in
conformity to this view be explained. A co-existence of re-
semblance and contrast in the same object was a leading
element of Wit. Swifl^s Reflections on a Broomstick were
an illustration of the exactness of this definition. ' But a
broomstick, perhaps you will say, is an emblem of a tree
standing on its head; and pray what is man but a topsy-
turvy creature, his animal faculties perpetually mounted on
his rational; his head, where his heels ought to be, grovelling
on the earth I And yet with all his faults he sets up to be
a universal reformer and corrector of abuses, a remover of
grievances, rakes into every slut's comer of nature, bring-
ing corruption to the light, and making a mighty dust where
there was none before : sharing all the while in the very same
pollutions he pretends to sweep away : his last days are spent
in slavery to women and generally the least deserving, till
worn out to the stumps like his brother besom, or made use
of to kindle flames for others.' This passage is remarkable
for the ingenuity with which one leading contrast being given
between that lofty creature man and the broomstick, a series
of resemblances are evolved, and the ability shown pertains
to the suggestion of resemblance. Another iUusti^tion of the
same class of wit was taken from an article in the London
Magazine for August, 1827, instituting a parallel between the

u2


Digitized by


Google


272 Mr, Hudson Lowers Paper at the

pleasures of yacht sailing and that of writing leading articles
for the Morning Herald, apropos of a criticism condemnatory
of this pastime which had appeared in the newspaper referred
' to. ' The editor sits down to write an article with his pen
a-peak^ the fore-topsail of his vocabulary loose^ and the blue
peter at his mast head for ideas to come on boards the very last
thing he thinks of^ is the coming to a conclusion. If he went
straight to his end^ steaming his way as he recommends to yacht
sailors^ he would run himself out in two or three sentences
at most ; but this would give no pleasure to himself or profit
to his readers ; so he courts the little vicissitudes of weather
— ^now lies like a log on the paper^ becalmed^ now rolling and
tumbling about in a heavy swell of sentences^ &c.' Another
class of wit^ was that when under great similarity in a form
of words^ great variety of meaning is contained. Such was
the pavioiur's reply to Radcliffe* — 'Ah, doctor! miners not
the only bad work that the earth covers:' or the reply of
the French nobleman, when a prince having discovered him
in an equivocal situation with his mistress addressed him
with ' Sortez' — ' Monseigneur, vos ancStres auraient dit, Sor-
tons.' Thus under a trifling variation of phrase reproaching
him with want of honour and courage. With regard to the
common feature in wit and humour, the feeling of the ludi-
crous, by which they were distinguished from other mental
manifestotions, it was very probably connected with the
development of a portion of brain lying at the lower part
of Wonder above and interiorly to Contrast, and exteriorly
to the organ of Imitation or Sympathy, and shown rather by
height than breadth of forehead. The foreheads of Walter
Scott, Voltaire, Theodore Hook, Callot, and that of Rabener,
showed this portion of brain large.''


Sixth Sitting.
B. C. KiBBY, Esq. in the Chair.

Dr. Engledue recapitulated the proceedings of the previous
sittings.

After a discussion in which the force of one member's
development was amusingly displayed and must have struck
strangers with admiration. Dr. EUiotson read the following
note from a mechanic, to whom he had given a ticket for the
night when Dr. Engledue's paper was read, and who was a
trinitarian dissenter, a teetotaler, active to the utmost of his

* Dr. SoQthey's Lires of British Physiciaos.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 273

means for the good of others^ and a model of a husband and
father.

Sir,

I feel both obliged and honoured by your faroar, and beg you to accept
my sincere thanks for your kindness. I was much pleased with Dr. En-
gledoe's clear and manly address last night, and although the declaration
that man is the victim of his organization, and the circumstances by which
he is surrounded appears to strike at the root of moral responsibility, yet
the only way, in my humble opinion, to meet the question is, not for men,
professing to be philosophers, to leave an Association of their equals in edu-
cation and scientific attainments, like angry schoolboys, but to meet argu-
ment with argument, fact with fact, and calmly, but fearlessly, discuss the
subject

Two years back I knew nothing of Phrenology but by name. If, then,
I had heard of a ** Dr. Engledue's Address," I should have feared to enter
upon an examination of the science, simply lest from my defectiTO education
I should not be able to discriminate between truth and error — between so-
phistry and logical deductions.

Much has been said respecting the '^ Schoolmaster abroad," but gentle-
men are not aware of the slender stock of knowledge possessed by those
who form a connecting link between the lower and middle classes of society.
I can look around upon men in my own humble sphere, and can say, without
▼anlty, that small, very small, as is my stock of knowledge, there are num-
bers carrying themselves respectably in the eyes of society, and from whose
exterior better things might be expected, who are very far from being my
equals in this respect To what conclusion, then, must such persons come,
on hearing that instead of Dr. Engledue's sentiments, as expressed by him
in his address, having met with an appropriate answer, they led to a '* split"
in the Association, to the resignation of so many philosophers, but not one
reply to his statements.

This must be the conclusion of the whole matter — that it is truth ; and
that those who have hitherto pretended to walk in the light, love darkness
rather than light Instead, therefore, of benefitting the cause those gentle-
men profess to love, they inflict an immense amount of injury. Truth never
need fear the result of an impartial investigation.

Since I have been honoured by an admission to the meetings of the
Phrenological Society, I have learned much. Many prejudices have been
removed. I have become convinced of the truth of Phrenology. The ab-
surdity of hypothetical theory, and the propriety of a steady collection and
examination and comparison of facts. The folly and wickedness of capital
punishment, indeed of punishment at all, unless as a means to the reforma-
tion of the culprit

Had I been in a meeting of my equals in society last evening, I could
have supplied them with a fact or two corroborative of Dr. Engledue's state-
ments, and your remarks.

Many years back, while sitting at dinner, my eldest girl, then a very
little one, by my side, I felt — the desire shall I say, no, it filled my mind
with horror — but I felt, while looking at her head, an impulse as though I
could cleave the skull with the knife I held in my hand. Now, sir, I love
my children^ and I think, I may say, they dearly love their father. I had
then no feeling of dislike or resentment in my mind towards my dear child :
whence, then, arose that dreadful thought — that horrid impulse ? It is right
to enquire, and the Cerebral Physiologist alone appears to me to be able to
give tne answer.

I have said that two years ago I knew nothing of Phrenology, and what
I know now has made me very cautious. I dare not pronounce an opinion
upon my neighbour, unless some striking peculiarity appears in his cerebral
structure.

About twelve months back, I was talking with the foreman of the factory
where I work, and as we were conversing, a lad of about seventeen years of
age, who had been newly hired as errand-boy, passed us. I was struck


Digitized by


Google


274 Phrenological Association.

with the appearance of bis head. It was small. The iotellectoal aad
moral regions were sadly deficient in proportion to the propensities, bat it
was the marlced deficiency in conscientiousness that irresistibly took hold of
my mind. I said to my friend — ^* Obsenre that head ; if there be any troth
in phrenologT, that is an unfortunate organization — there is great want of
honesty and integrity ; but, (I remarked) we haTe no right to condemn that
lad, and it will t^ both impradent in us, and prejudicial to the lad, to men-
tion this to any one."

About six weeks after this, in passing through the lofts I saw a little
group of workmen : they were talking, and I found the topic of their dis-
course was the detection of a thief. Several of the workmen had lost their
tools^one, a plane ; another, a saw ; and so on ; and one of the workmen
had found that a plane had been pawned, and from the pawnbroker's descrip-
tion of the person from whom he had received it, had taken the lad to the
pawnbroker's shop.

On the road the boy confessed to that and the other thefts, and gave up
the duplicates ; in the whole amounting to about three or four shillings.
He had abstained from meddling with the property of his employers ; sind
the men, to avoid the trouble and expense of a public prosecution, suffered
him to go free, and he was discharged from his employinent.

Thus far the crime might be traced to his organism : now for the cir-
cumstances which, operating upon his unfortunate predisposition, led him to
the committal of crime. He had neither father or mother, was lodging with
a relation, for which he paid eighteen-pence a week, and with the ranainder
of his wages, three and sixpence, he had to purchase food, clothing, and to
pay for the washing of his linen.

I question whe&er any moral philosopher, even if blest with the most
beautiful cerebral arrangement, could have so husbanded his resources as to
live in London upon three and sixpence a .week, even without the necessary
clothing and cleanliness required by nature and society ; and it was well re-
marked last night, that the higher classes of society need to be educated ia
right principles ; gentlemen have a right to ascertain how their dependants
are living, and whether tbev supply them with an adequate remuneration so
as to enable them to pass through life with some degree of happiness. It
may be an irksome task, but it is the demand of inflexible justice. It is a
debt they owe to humanity, and from which nothing but punctual and posi-
tive payment can discharge them.

Thus, then, by appealing to fact, I could say, '* That lad was the victim
to the circumstances in which he was placed, acting upon an unfortunate
organization."

I should not have made so free as to trouble you with these remarks, had
it not been that I have read that Locke never turned away from a communi-
cation made by the humblest individual ; that Gall studied human nature as
well in low and uncultivated as in high and polished society ; and from the
conviction of my own mind, that you, sir, treading in the same honourable
path, well know how to discriminate between impertinence and a desire to
communicate facts.

I have conversed with many persons upon the subject of capital punish-
ments ; have found them like myself, prejudiced in fietvor of that horrid sub-
stitute for reformation, because they had never examined both sides of the
question ; and have invariably succeeded in bringing them to the conclusion
that capital punishments are both unwise, impolitic, and cruel.

If the masses are to be moved forward, in the march of humanity, it most
be by individuals from amongst themselves, being enlightened upon the
subject, in order that they may shew light to others. It will, therefore, be
no waste of time, or useless expenditure of talent, for gentlemen of educa-
tion, science, and humanity, by plain and popular public expositions of their
principles, to commend them to the mind of the humble, half-educated mem-
bers of society.

I am, sir, most respectfully,
Your humble servant,
Jtity lih. 4ic. &c. 6tc.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Association. 275

After this^ the last sitting, the annual general meeting
took place.

B. C. EiRBT, Esq., in the Chair.

The secretary having read the names of twenty-four gen-^
tlemen recommended by the committee for the ensuing year,
it was resolved,

** I. That those twenty-four gentlemen do constitute the conunittee accord-
ingly, with power to add to their nambers.

'< 2. That William Kingdom, Esq., and William Topham, Esq., be ap-
pointed auditors of the accounts for the past session.

** 3. That the following gentlemen, with power to add to their numbers,
be appointed the committee, which was determined upon at the fourth meet-
ing, to report the views of Cerebral Physiologists to the Legislature.

<' Dr. ENGLEDUE.
" Dr. ELLIOTSON.
'<M.J. ELLIS, Esq.
" H. G. ATKINSON, Esq."

The secretary having stated the recommendation of the
committee, that in future every member of the Association
should be called upon for an annual subscription to the
funds of the Association, Mr. Logan said that at the last
annual general meeting of the Association he had given no-
tice of a motion to that effect to be made at the present
annual meeting : in accordance with which he now proposed
that in future each member should now pay an annual con-
tribution of ten shillings.

This being seconded, it was resolved,

'* That the future subscription of erery member of the Association should
be ten shillings per annum."

The Association then adjourned till next summer.


II. Letter from Mr. Trevelyan.

We have great satisfaction in printing the following letter
from one of those unwarily caught by Mr. Simpson, but
whose beautiful organization prevented him from being
caught by Mr. Sampson.

To the Editor of the Zoist.

Edinburgh, August 14/A, 1848.

Dear Sie, — ^The remarks (commencing at page 148 of
your enlightened journal) on '^ The Declaration,'' to which


Digitized by


Google


276 Letter from Mr, Trevelyan.

my name is appended^ I cannot but coincide with^ and there-
fore now would rather my signature had not been given to a
declaration^ (not of " independence/') all the items of which^
at the time of signing it^ I could not agree in ; such as^ —
that truths as propounded by Engledue^ would not injure a
religious fable. Truth will ever have the effect of weakening
falsehood ; at the same time natural truths cannot be at vari-
ance with true religion^ because true religion must come from
nature alone.

Also I believe it very probable^ that, if we are not able at
present, the time will come when " the actual origin or evo-
lution of thought or feeling*' will be discovered.

And further, the promulgation of materialism never ex-
cited any " alarm'' in my cerebration, — " that it would pre-
judice the reception of phrenology," — ^indeed I believe it will
have an effect directly the contrary.

My object for signing (without mature reflection) was
(supposing I agreed with the whole declaration) to exhibit the
puenlity of any person or persons receding from a society on
account of opinions brought forward, not in accordance with
their opinions; and whose opinions, owing to the circum-
stances in which they are placed, their position in society,
and the fear of losing caste ; but more particularly owing to
the formation of their brain, and being trained from youth
in such unsubstantial opinions, render them unable to rise
out of the pit of imagination and wonder, to ascend into the
region of reason and facts.

Further, the declaration coming from my worthy and phi-
lanthropic friend, James Simpson, whose opinions I respect,
and who by his labours, as assisting materially in the regene-
ration of suffering humanity, had great weight in inducing
me to add my signature, thinking a declaration coming from
such a source worthy of all acceptation. And wishing a great
circulation to your enlightening journal,

I remain,

Faithfully yours,

Arthur Trevelyan.


Digitized by


Google


I


Digitized by


Google


THE LMC LORP ELDON.


BASIL MONTAGUE.


Digitized by


Google


( 277 )

III. London Phrenological Society.

April 17, 1843. The President in the Chair.

A paper was read, on the Cast of the late Lord Eldon's head,
by Henry G. Atkinson, P.G.S., 18, Upper Gloucester
Place, Dorset Square.

" The spirit of the life lives on in death, the grave closes
upon the man, but the life still animates the world; good
comes out of evil, and our vices as well as our virtues
shall have their salutary influence, and teach the world
the great lesson of humanity. Interested partizans and
flattering friends may bury the truth, and falsely colour
over the records of the past — ^but all is vanity — ^there is no
pure feeling nor honorable pride in disguising the truth.
' Speak of me as I am — ^nothing extenuate, nor set down
aught in malice.' This should be the sentiment and the
wish of every sincere heart.

And with this belief, I do not hesitate to comply with a
request to read a paper on the head of the late Lord Eldon,
believing that the case is too important to be passed over, and
hid away from the world in the eternal chambers of oblivion.
* A dry bone, an empty skull in the hands of science may now
be made more useful than the whole acts of a man's life, and
may compensate in some measure for the evils which an
imperfect brain may have entailed upon the race-— a skull will
speak out the truth after a thousand years have passed away,
and laugh to ridicule the epitaph on the tomb and the foolish
flatteries or the blunders of historians.

The late Lord Eldon held high station in the state — he
stood out in the world's history, foremost in the tide of
affairs. It is seldom that we have an opportunity of exa-
mining a cast of the head of such an individual, and rarely
indeed when the position is so remarkable as that of Lord
Eldon ; but as his character and his acts were so notorious,
I shall abstain from going into any minute particulars, further
than to point out the more remarkable features of his character
in harmony with the singular conformation of his head,
bearing out the truth of phjrenology in a manner so striking,
that a mere student in the sdence may read it at a glance.
There can be no difference of opinion in such cases as these,
and it is to such cases that phrenologists chiefly refer for the
proof of their doctrines. There we see nature standing out
in hUl and valley — ^in large text raised upon the surface ; and
yet there are still men in our day, who having eyes, cannot


Digitized by


Google


27S Mr. Atkinson's Paper ai the

9ee, or calling themselves philosophers and men of science^
followers of truths yet hide themselves away in the dark caves
of self-conceit — ^too proud to learn — scoffing at that which
they cannot appreciate^ seeking a bubble reputation in the
tide of public opinion — echoing to the world what the world
already knows — ^blind to the plainest and most important
facts^ without a thought above the mass, or one generous
impulse in the desire to elevate their race^ nor ever remem-
bering the admonitions of Lord Bacon, how that ''every man
is a debtor to his profession and to the world to do something
for the cause of truth and for the love of mankind/' I make
these observations as peculiarly called for on this occasion-^
for here is the head of a man of a low, grovelling disposition,
servile, time-serving, selfish in the extreme — bending to
power, holding the strong arm of the law over the poor, —
a man of a party, an aristocrat to the very bone — bigoted to
the last — neglecting his old and true Mend — giving to those
who might be useful to him — ^the spirit of philanthropy
withering away within — the rights of me people never occu-
pying his thoughts — advocating every harsh measure and
death-punishment for stealing the merest trifle,— exclaiming
that the greatest calamity which ever befel England, was
the abrogation of the law of death-punishment for stealing
a pocket handkerchiefl The quality of mercy was strained
to the utmost. His knowledge was confined to law cases— of
these he possessed an abundant store. He became useful to a
party in the game of politics, opposing all reform, clinging to
power, venerating the ancient ways, regardless of truth,
indifferent to the world's advance. He was raised to be Lord
Chancellor of England — ^the king created him a peer of the
realm, — ^but nature had not cast him in the mould of true
nobility; he gained a name and station in an unenlightened
age, but the heart and the understanding could not expand to
any generous impulse in the spirit of true philosophy — good
fruit and beautiful flowers could not spring up in so uncon-
genial a soil. The tree was ill-formed and stunted in its
growth — ^he was never formed for greatness — ^the brain was so
Ul-proportioned, that no circumstances could have ever made
him great and good. He broke faith with his old finend,
who idone stood by to smooth the pillow on which the dying
man reposed; one pang of remorse shot through his soul
at that moment — ^it was not too late to retrieve his error, but
the thought passed away — there was not the brain to
hold it there. He died — neglected alike by family and
friends, excepting the one, that truly noble man who could
stand there true to the last, even to the firiend that was false —


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 279

he died, and left a pension to his dog.* Such was the
end and such was the true character of this peculiar man,
and yet he had the art to dissemble, and was too cautious
ever to get tax wrong in the eyes of the world or of his party.
He was admired by his party for what appeared to be his
consistency in upholding the things that were, in constantly
resisting innovation, ever clinging with venerating fidelity to
the cause of the Tories, — ^nevertheless he became the tool of
those whom he served; he was wary and cautious, plausible
in the extreme, deceiving many, and gaining a reputation and
a station for which he was entirely unfit — ^unfit, for no man
can be fit to reign over the welfare of others who considers
only the selfish interests of himself and of his party. His
religion was one-sided, unscrupulous, ungenerous, — a state-
supporting affair — ^his benevolent feeling following close in
the train of his worldly interests; he had no generous philo-
sophy, no refinement — ^he seemed to care as little for the
beautiful as for the true; he neglected the poor, and was
regardless of the rights of men as members of one fitmily,
extremely mean — ^ilUberal alike in principle and in practice ;
and yet this man was not without his virtues.

I have dwelt upon the darker shades of his character, — ^but
he possessed some retrieving points — and what poor wretch
that was ever hanged at Newgate had not some bright feature,
however it might be obscured. But we are too apt to crush a
man for his sins, without at the same time acknowledging and
rewarding him for his virtues — ^guilty of one, guilty of all, a bad
name and hang him, such is the world^s judgment — ^yet alas I
it too often happens that the besetting sin leavens the whole
character, and casts a blight over the entire heart and the
imderstanding, for the brain acts so much in unity, that it is
mostly drawn in the train of the predominating passions — ^yet
flowers will grow up among the briars — ^the good will peep
out at times, and we are then disposed to attribute it to
hypocrisy, the reflection from some other thing — ^but it may
not be so, for there are none who have not some retrieving
qualities, some good deed accomplished, shining out like a
" taper light'' in a dark world. Lord Eldon possessed attach-
ment and great love of children, and these qualities he
manifested through life — ^for though he quarrelled with his
family because they were not so ambitious, perhaps, as
himself, yet he still cared for his firiend, although he could

* My friendy Edwin Landseer, has painted the portrait of this dog— which
was said at the time to be the richest dog in the world^having a considerable
income from funded property — ten pounds per annum.


Digitized by


Google


280 Mr. Atkinson's Paper at tfie

treat him with injustice^ (the friendly feeling was there^ though
ill supported^) and he loved his dog and left a provision for his
support. He was often kind^ but not consistent — ^he was
a judge without the sentiment of justice — ^but he was re-
spectftil^ and in his calling most diligent and successful,
although that success was not sought for the general good — it
was a gain for selfish ends, achieved by hard drudgery and dis-
graceful subservience to the reigning power. Not that he
was for ever playing a part — he acted much in this from the
natural impulse of his nature, so that when the weak old man
wept over the innovations of the time, perhaps he was sincere ;
his veneration for the great, tenacious aidherence to the
existing laws and institutions of the country arose from the
prevailmg sentiment of his mind, for he had no love for
reform, nor could he see how the ultimate interests of all
were entailed in the cause of truth and the universal rights of
man.

No — doubtless at these times he was true to himself, such
as he was — ^the impulse must have been there, and his
firmness wanting ; so when the current was too strong and
he could no longer resist the opposing stream — ^he wept, wept
like a child — ^but not with tears flowing from the tender heart
of philanthropy, but rather in sorrow that his cherished party
and their privUeges should be disturbed.

'' Next came Fraud, and he had on,

Like Lord E , an ermine gown ;

His big tears, for he wept well,
Turned to mill-stones as they fell ;"

Shellby.

And yet there might be some generous impulse beyond
all this — but it did not freshen into a fountain of pure
wisdom, or flow on mingling in the bright waters of justice,
and of intellect, without which the best feelings are perverted,
and the result is more to be dreaded than the darkest plots of
villainy or the broad and open way of selfishness and sin.

I shall not attempt to go more minutely into the character
of Lord Eldon ; what I have said, I have derived from those
who knew him best, both in his public capacity and through
all the circumstances of his private life. It is possible that I
may have overdrawn the picture, but I have gained sufficient
information upon the subject to convince me of the general
truth of what I have stated, and were it desirable, could
easily prove the correctness of my statements, by detailing anec-
dotes illustrating each position which I have advanced — ^but
this is not my intention, as such would entail some personality
with regard to others, which is always to be avoided wherever


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 281

it is possible. The world is not yet sufficiently rational to
permit us, without oflRence, to tell out every truth of a personal
nature on every occasion — I will now, therefore, refer to the
prominent features in the development of Lord Eldon's
head.

The head is rather large — ^very long — wide and swelling
out above the ears and very high at Veneration.

The intellect is well devel^ed^-the whole anterior lobe
is large, its size being more observable in length than in
height — ^giving considerable mental power and a pleasure
in the mere exercise of the intellect for its own sake, the end
to be obtained by such exercise being chiefly regulated by the
stronger passions and desires. Lord Eldon was a great
plodder — he laboured incessantly, devoting himself to the dry
£Eu;ts of law ; he prided himself on his legal knowledge,
with much contempt for the higher pursuits of others. Few
men possessed a greater knowledge of the recorded cases
of legal proceedings, and to this, his success may chiefly be
attributed — ^but his intellect seemed to rest here, he was not
a man of extensive knowledge — he possessed few other
acquirements. In the cast is observable a marked division
between the oi^ns of the intellect and the rest of the brain,
which I think may be attributed to his continuous application
to the dry facts of law, unconnected with the more generous
and ennobliug feelings. I have observed that when an organ
or portion of the brain is acting in conjunction with other
neighbouring organs, there is a continuous swell — but when
there are decided elevations or divisions between parts, they
act alone; — ^and therefore we always find, that in good heads
where the dispositions are evenly balanced there is a regular
development, and that irregular brains produce, to a certain
extent, a tendency to insanity and idiocy, from particular
faculties acting without the necessary influence of the rest of
the brain. I have made extensive observations on this point,
and consider it to be one of great importance. Ideality is
deficient, and certainly Lord Eldon never shewed any ele-
vation of feeling, any tendency to elegance and refinement,
which that feeling would have given. Veneration is in excess —
and this feeling was strongly exhibited in his veneration for
the great and his attachment to all that had, as it were,
become venerable from the efiPect of time and custom, or in
connection with the old institutions of the country and the
power of the nobles. Hope and the back portion of Bene-
volence seem to combine with this feeling, and together
cause a remarkable elevation on the head — Hope seems to
have been active in stimulating him to exertion. Benevolence


Digitized by


Google


282 Mr, Atkinson's Paper at the

is certainly not a predominant feature, — ^had it been active, it
would have swelled out in an uniform line with Comparison ;
but it is deficient. Firmness is small, and Conscientiousness
very smaU—frigmvUy deficient. He was persevering, but not
firm — ^the sense of Justice, the desire of Truth, the feeling of
Sincerity, all which I attribute to that portion of the brain
called Conscientiousness, seem to have been feebly felt — ^he
was not a true man, nor was he a just one. He possessed
Love of Approbation and Self Esteem to a considerable degree —
great power of Concentration, and Attachment to children and
friends. His large Combativeness gave him power to per-
severe — overcoming difficulties, and made him useful to a
party. Caution, Secretweness, Destructtveness and Acquisitive^
ness are all large — giving a swelling appearance to the sides
of the head, which is the case in most of thenwrderert^ heads —
the action of these faculties was very observable in his con-
duct — ^he was cautious and careful, long in giving judgment,
on which account many have supposed lum to be conscientious^
but the object and the cause were very difiPerent. He was se-
cret and plausible — ^a complete diplomatist — ^fond of hoarding,
mean to a degree — ^a fact which is well known to all who were
acquainted with him — ^while his harsh measures and desire of
continuing the punishment of death for the most trifling mis-
demeanour, sufficiently displayed the destructive tendency.
He had little feeling for the marvellous or for the wonders of
nature, but was essentially of a homely common-place disposi-
tion, wanting that vivifying principle, the effect of Conscien-
tiousness, and more particularly of Ideality and Wonder!
Such was the disposition of the great Lord Eldon, living in an
age of contention, cruelty, and selfishness. And yet there were
many high minds and true hearts around him — a Romilly — a
Montagu were visionaries to him. What could he compre-
hend of the mild justice of benevolence — ^the benevolence
and the justice of mercy — ^his intellect never leaned that way
— ^he was the plodding man of law, bending to the will of a
selfish, ignorant ruler, striving after wealth and station. But
the time will come when men will be governed by the truly
great, when our institutions and our laws will be re-modelled,
and when the first consideration of Government will be to
raise the people, and to advance the progress of truth. But
to what quarter shall we turn in expectation ? — shall we look
to the ignorant bigot who would interfere with every proposed
system of a nationid and a rational education, founded upon en-
larged principles and good morals? Surely not ! No — ^it is to
Cerebral Physiologists that we must look — we want knowledge
— ^knowledge of man, and men who are bold enough to de-


Digitized by


Google


Pkrenohffical Society. 283

clare the truth. The time is at hand when the pitiful expe*
diency of past ages will no longer serve — ^the plain, the
simple, and the whole truth must now be spoken; and those
who are not read^ to stand firm in the great cause, and op-
pose the prejudices and ignorance of the mass, and the
bigotry of the schoolmen, let them desist at once — ^no com-
promise of principle and truth can now avail. We are on
the eve of mighty changes, when every man will be measured
according to his real worth and merits — ^when Lord Eldons
will no longer be tolerated as the advocates of truth and
justice — ^the oracles of kings — ^the rulers of the people. Poor
Eldon! weeping over the advance of intelligence — ^poor
blind man I How powerful in his day — ^how impotent, how
little that power in a succeeding age ! How vain were his
tears and the attempt to stay the progress of freedom and of
thought I 'Tis the same now and ever — ^men may rage,
oppose, or ridicule, call this dangertmSj and that blasphemy y
but truth is not destroyed — the storm and the winds of
winter pass away. But the spring-time of a new year is at
hand — ^the flowers appear, and life and joy are in the world
again — and in the sunshine and intelligence of a happier era,
we smile at the vain efforts of ignorant men, and gain a
lesson of wisdom from amidst the scenes of barbarism and
selfish grandeur. The world is regenerating, while the power
and the glory of the worldly-wise is passing away — mc transit
gloria mundi, but with no reswrgam — all is change, continual
progression — and things appear which it has never entered
into the heart of man to conceive ; and soon shall all exclaim,
and little children shall be shewn, that '^ Phrenology is indeed
the Truth, though it be opposed to the philosophy of ages.''

I cannot give a better or more appropriate contrast to
Lord Eldon, than a sketch of my revered friend, Mr. Basil
Montagu, who for two-and-forty years has laboured to im-
prove the criminal law, and with the assistance of Sir Samuel
Konull^ in parliament, has done more to suppress that brutal
and wicked practice of death-punishment, than any other
man, living or dead. At a time when there were monthly
executions at Newgate alone, for crimes without violence,
of eight or ten poor creatures, many of them men and
women under twenty years of age. Mr. Montagu protested
against the practice, whilst Lord Ellenborough desecrated
hun in the House of Lords as the greatest enemy of his
race; and poor Lord Eldon stood up for the law, crying
out, *^ Hang them ! hang them ! for it is so nominated in the
bond V* And the bishops, being appealed to, maintained that
the practice should be continued — not only to take an eye for


Digitized by


Google


284 Mr, Atkinson's Paper at the

an eye^ and a tooth for a toothy but a life for a pocket hand-
kerchief ! Such was the state of things when Mr. Montagu^
calm in the midst of the storm^ unmoved by all the noise of
ignorance^ year after year sent forth again and again his mild
reproof — ^have mercy and not sacrifice — ^forgive one another
— ^train up the child, and give help to the weak — ^the moral
world is not won by violence or by harsh measures — ^but
study to know thyself, the cause and the remedy of evil. With
what deep-felt satisfaction must Mr. Montagu now pass by
the comer of Newgate — ^what a triumph for a great and vir-
tuous mind. I have heard that he has been seen to take
off his hat and wave it in the air as he passed along, medi-
tating all the way.''*

* We deeply lament that id the little work lately compiled against the
punishment of death, by Mr. M. B. Sampson, and published with the assist-
ance of the Trustees of Mr. Henderson's Fund for aiding Phrenology, not
an allusion is made to the venerable Basil Montagu, now seventy-three
years of age, who stands in the same relation to the abolition of capital pu-
nishment, that the venerable Clarkson does to the abolition of the slave
trade. When a law student, Mr. M. once visited Newgate to have an interview
with a man likely to be condemned, though very probably innocent. He
was presently surrounded by ferocious felons, who damned him, in spite of
his errand of mercy, and told him he would himself be hanged in a week.
From that moment be resolved upon never ceasing to exert himself in this
holy cause. He for many years frequently visited the gaol, to prevent worldly
occupation from weakening his resolution, and, at least once in every year,
attended divine worship in the chapel with the prisoners. He once arrived
at the prison, in Huntingdon, with a reprieve for two poor men, a few mo-
ments before the hour of execution, and as soon as he had returned to his inn,
he saw the people flocking in all directions, and a friend suggested that he
should not be seen in the town, as the mob were not pleoMed with iheir disap-
wnntmeut! Every execution, during the last thirty years, has reminded
him of that day, and he has never ceased to assist in diffusing knowledge
and information upon the subject. He attended the Old Bailey Sessions
regularly, though refusing to practise. The days of execution were to him
days of agony — he never slept ; and before daylight would walk up and
down on the south side of Lincoln's Inn Fields, hearing the tolling of St.
Sepulchre's, bell. The sound once so affected him that he took refuge in
the adjoining Catholic chapel, and the priest was at that moment raising the
holy bell to announce that the sacrament was ready for all who desired to
receive it ; he was so overpowered that he instantly left London. He con-
tinued to attend the Old Bailey, and hear sentence of death passed, at the
endof the session, on the numermu prisoners. He saw the remedy in the
publication of the opinions of moralists and divines ; but he was too poor to
defray the expense. He applied to many booksellers, but they all, even the
kindest and most liberal of them, Johnson, of St. Paul's Churchyard, an-
swered, that a work on the punishment of death would not sell, for the 9ub-
jeci wa» one upon which there was no intereet. However, he proceeded with
his collections. A most benevolent Quaker, named Frederick Smith, was
so distressed by his representations, that, in conjunction with William Allen
and Richard Phillips, he got up a society, and the book was published.
A thousand copies sold in a few weeks; a second edition was published,
and copies sent to Mr. Wyndham, Lord EUenborough— then Lord Chief
Justice of England, and Sir Samuel Romilly. Mr. Wyndham ridiculed him
in the Houte of Commone, Lord EUenborough, tii the House qf Lord$f said


Digitized by


Google


PhrenologiccU Society. 285

April \7th. The President in the Chair. (Ladkff night.)

Mr. Hudson Lowe read an address on ''the subject of the
connection of the views entertained by phrenologists with
regard to what have been termed the reflective organs^ and
those of writers on psychology, or the philosophy of mind,
with regard to the processes of suggestion and association/'
The report is given in Mr. Lowe's own words, as furnished
by him to the Secretary. For no one could attempt to re-
port his papers; since he is sometimes extemporaneous,
sometimes reads, dipping into different papers, backwards
and forwards, pausing to settle what part he shall read next,
and then galloping as hard as if he did not intend his hearers
to presume to dispute his authoritative pourings forth of
words. He began by contending that the definition of phre-
nology as a physiology of the brain confounded two studies,
whidi, however converging to one ultimate object, differed
widely in nature and method, and even in their immediate
ends. " The physiology of the brain, or more properly of the
nervous system (for they cannot be separated), aims at point-
ing out the uses of structure, — ^phrenology at assigning the
organic conditions of moral manifestations. Phrenology,
taking the existence of certain mental faculties as its starting
point, seeks to ascertain the conditions of their existence in
the brain. The physiology of the nervous system, starting
from those visible and material divisions of parts which ana-
tomy indicates, seeks to discover the functions which they
subserve. Thus when the phrenologist has succeeded in as-
certaining the connection of physical love with the cerebellum,
he will in the natural order of his subject pass on to consider
the feculties and the combinations which modify and regulate
the activity of this impulse, its effect on the character, &;c.
On the other hand, the cerebral physiologist, starting from
the existence of the cerebellum, proceeds from this as the
origin of his inquiries, and when he has ascertained its con^

'' I have been Tisited by a book, written, / om terry U m, by a member of
the profession to which I ha^e the honour to belong. In this publication the
author has endeaToured to desecrate the yenerable judges, and to subvert the
law of the land :" and the lords cried loudly, " Hear^ hmr, hear ! T Mr.
Montagu's pulse did not beat once more quickly for this rocket; but he pub-
lished the debate, and again argued against the sticklers for established bar-
barity. He brought Romilly round to the most determined support of his
great cause. The book sold extensively, and his Society addressed the
public, printed the opinions of their adversaries, published two additional
volumes and various tracts, and continued their exertions by every species of
publication, but particularly the newspapers. Mr. Montagu has lived to see
capital punishment nearly abolished. May his peaceful end not arrive before
its abolition .~Zot#<.


VOL. I.


Digitized by


Google


286 Mr. Hudson Lowe? 8 Paper at the

nection with this special impulse^ is by no means authorized
then to stop. He must then proceed to inquire whether it
does not farther subserve motion ; in fact^ it is his business
to exhaust the whole theory of function of the special part
which he makes his study. So long as the phrenologist finds
no stumbling-block in the way of his endeavours to ascertain
the cerebral conditions of character^ he is not called upon to
inquire what are the functions of such and such distinct
portions of the brain. His study embraces the entire field
of human emotion and character^ every department of intel-
lectual exertion^ every gradation and combination of feeling
in the extent of its investigations. He would be deserting
his task for one less noble and productive^ were he to take
the brain for his starting-pointy and inquire into the func-
tions of its distinct anatomical compartments.*

* Physiology is the tcience of the ases, actions, oxfunctvm$ of animal
and vegetable organs. What is phrenology bat a tuhdwisUm or a tpteud
portion of physiology f — but the science of the uses, actions or funetums of one
organic mass,-— of the various portions of the brain f Does not erery phreno-
logist, Mr. Ix>we among the rest, speak of the use or function of this cf re-
bral organ or of that 1 of the /unction of the portion of brain, for instance,
called the organ of Wit? What then can phrenology be but the physiology
of the brain ? Does not Gall invariably call his science the physiology qf the
brain? Mr. Lowe actually quotes a passage in the very next paragraph
vehere Gall uses the very words. Did not Gall entitle his folio and quarto
work the Anatomy and Physiology of the Nervous System in general, and
of the Brain in particular ? and his octavo work, ^* On the Funetums if the
Brain and each qjf its parts V* Is he not styled on the medal struck to his
honour, The creator qf the physiology nf the brain f Does he not call him-
self in his octavo preface, ** the founder cf the physiology ^ the brain r"
Phrenologists are therefore only students of the physiology of the 6nttii~and
are cerebral physiologists. In truth, the word phrenology was never used by
Gall, but by Dr. Spurzheim ; and perhaps the sooner it can be got rid of
the better. For our science is no distinct science — it is simply that of the
functions or physiology of the brain ; and to give it a peculiar name leads to
the oversight of its being merely a fragment of physiology. Whether we
study man as the mere metaphysician, the moralist, the historian, or the
poet studies him, all that man can study of man's character is so much
cerebral physiology, whether he is intelligent enough to know that all is
cerebral function and manifestation or not. The mere metaphysician is but
a partially informed cerebral physiologist. He examines the product only :
stands in the same relation to the perfect cerebral physiologist that an
animal chemist does who analyzes the bile without troubling himself with
the liver and its vital properties and functions ; or the wrestler or dancing
master, who knows nothing of the structure and arrangement of muscles or
their vital properties and functions, but studies merely the results. The
physiologist, on the other hand, who, like the run of physiologists, knows
nothing of pnrenology, but can write and talk about the anatomy of the brain,
and that humblest fragment of its function that regards mere sensation and
motion, is only a miserably informed cerebral physiologist, because he is
ignorant of the science of the uses of the cerebral regions of intellect and
the feeliDgs. The perfect physiologist knows the chemical character of the
bile and the anatomy and physiology of the liver; the attitudes and move-
ments of dancing, wrestling, &c. and the structure and arrangement and
vital properties of muscles.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenoloffical Society. 287

" With regard to the definition of phrenology, as a philo-
sophy of mind, founded on the physiology of the brain, it is
still more erroneous. The discovery of certain innate mental
principles did and must of necessity have preceded* that of
their seats in the brain. Previous to the time of Gall — Karnes,
Hutchinson, and Reid had admitted numerous faculties
closely corresponding to those now recognized by phrenolo-
gists. But further. Gall himself states that this admission
of innate mental principles was a necessary preliminary to
the establishment of cerebral organology. "The innate-
ness,' he says, ' of the moral and intellectual faculties is
the necessary basis of the physiology of brain ; for if instead
of its being demonstrable that they are innate, it could be
proved that they are only the accidental product of external
objects and the external senses, it would be useless to seek
their seat in the brain.* (Ulnn^it^ des Forces Morales, &c.,
p. 67, t. 1, Fonctions du Cerveau,) And passages to the same
effect may be found in the advertisement and introduction.
To prove the innateness of these faculties is accordingly one of
his first preliminary steps. He was led indeed by his views on
the diversity of human character to his investigations on the
brain and skull, and his accuracy in the assignment of orgaits
was generally proportioned to the clearness of view he had
acquired on the faculties beforehand. So far then from
phrenology being a philosophy of mind founded on the phy-


Mr. Lowe says that the physiology of the brain aims at pointing oat the
uses of structure. Why, who but the phrenologist points out the use of the
various convolutions, for example t Do the physiologists who despise phre-
nology aim at shewing the use of a single convolution ?— and the bulk of
the brain is the mass of convolutions : and do not such writers now gra-
dually become more and more phrenological, more and more true cerebral
physiologists, by allowing that the front of the brain seems devoted to intel-
lect, &c. &c., thus shewing that such considerations are a part of their own
cerebral physiology. As the structure of the great mass of the convolutions
is for the intellectual and moral functions, who is to investigate the usiM of
this itrueture but the phrenologist 7 If phrenologists are not investigators of
the functions of the brain, what do they investigate ? If phrenology is not
the science of the functions of the brain, what is it the science of? The
phrenologist who has succeeded in ascertaining the connection of sexual
love with the cerebellum, will not stop there : but examine every fact which
shews motion, or anything else, to be connected with the cerebellum. As
the brain is the organ of the phenomena called mind,— the possessor of the
power of producing these phenomena, the phrenologist, can never rest till
he has discovered £e use of every spot of the brain and its appendages. He
will not start only from manifestation and go to organ ; but often from
organ and go to manifestation, just as physiologists, not phrenologists, do.
Gall sometimes observed external characters similar, and then compared
the heads to learn in what points these agreed ; but sometimes found heads
similar and then compared the characters. — Zoiat,

* Be it remembered that none of this is our composition. — Zoist,

x2


Digitized by


Google


288 Mr, Hudson Lowers Paper at the

siology of the brain^ it would be more correct to term it a
"physiology of the brain^ founded on the philosophy of
mind/'*

" After adverting to some attempts to proscribe the use
of the term mind, and describing as waste paper discourses
on the question of Materialism,t which overlooked the dis-
tinction which Descartes had drawn between matter, or that
which is apprehended by the senses, and conceived under the
form of extension, and mind apprehended by conscious-
ness and conceived as thought or feeling,]: he proceeded

* Phrenology ia a philosophy of miod founded on the physiology of the
brain. For, by connecting distinct mental phenomena with the deirelop-
ment of distinct cerebral parts, we establish the true list of faculties. The
metaphysician may observe without reference to the brain ; he may explain
musical feeling by the ear, the judgment of colors by the eye, the love of
property by the love of power, innate strength or weakness of various
forms by habits of " study or business," as the second or third rate Dugald
Stewart did; but the cerebral physiologist by learning from physiology and
pathology that the senses of music and of color, the love of property, &c.,
depend upon distinct portions of the brain, establishes these faculties as
components of the aggregate of faculties, and therefore establishes his
mental philosophy on the solid foundation of cerebral physiology. If Gall
assumed, or rather saw, that faculties were innate, he also assumed or saw
that every faculty which was innate must be possessed by a portion of
brain ; and he never felt certain that a faculty was distinct till he had dis-
covered a cerebral organ for it

The circumstance that the mental philosophy of Hutchinson and Reid,
au4 other metaphysicians, was not founded on phrenology, surely does not
shew that the mental philosophy of phrenologists does not repose on the
solid basis of observation of function in conjunction with structure. Gall
would open his eyes if he heard Mr. Lowe declare that his mental philoso-
phy was not founded on cerebral physiology, — upon such observations as
metaphysicians make, brought into union with observations on the brain. —
ZoUi,

t Modest, cool, and satisfactory.— Zoi«^

X What right had Mr. Lowe to accuse those, who have thought and read
as deeply as himself upon these subjects, of overlooking Descastes' distinc-
tion between mind and matter, with which they were probably acquainted as
well as with what Hume and Reid and very many others have written, before
he had lived long enough to have seen the name of Descartes? So far from
overlooking, materialists think too deeply not to see the utter absurdity of
the words with which Descartes would distinguish matter and mind. Matter
is indeed something extended and resisting ; but it has endless other pro-
perties which have nothing in common with extension and resistance, except
that they are possessed by the same matter. It is thought a virtue to vilify
matter, and call it inert and brute. Why, it is endowed with endless powers ;
all the powers of the universe are its powers. The universe is but matter
and properties of matter. What analogy exists between extension and the
phenomena of attraction, light, heat, electro-magnetism, of poison, remedy,
vitality, mesmerism ? yet the power of displaying these phenomena matter
possesses. Nay, not only when variously combined or organized and cir-
cumstanced does it exhibit the phenomenon of vitality, as in vegetables, but
also of consciousness, in animals, aye, of consciousness and personality: seen
as really in the microscopic creatures, ten thousand of which may exist in
an inch of space, and come into existence and perish incessantly, in every
habitable point, as in talking and conceited man. If various faculties re-


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 289

to enter on the question of our sources of the knowledge of
mind. The first and necessary basis is consciousness^ or the
cognizance which the mind takes of its own internal opera-
tions. Mind unlike matter is self-cognizant. To the inquirer
into mind we may apply the words of Heinrich lUtter^
'^ Thought is at once the means^ the object, and the matter
of knowledge.'^ '^As to the blind or deaf/' says Dugald
Stewart, " no words can convey the notions of particular
colours, or particular sounds ; so to a being who had never
been conscious of sensation, memory, imagination, pleasure,
pain, hope, fear, love, hatred, no intelligible description could
be given of the import of those terms.'' ''Would you


qaire an immaterial soul ^though what this meaDB we cannot comprehend),
BO mast the personality of each animalcule. Mental phenomena are never
witnessed but, like gravitation and all other phenomena, as phenomena of
matter. To talk of the distinction between mind and matter, is the same
as to talk of the distinction between gravitation and matter; and, to maintain
that they are two distinct essences, is the same as to contend that gravi-
tation, not being extension, is not a phenomenon of matter. Mind is no
more a real separate entity — a spiritual essence, than gravitation ; neither
is it matter, any more than gravitation is matter. It is a phenomenon of
matter peculiarly arranged and circumstanced ; and ceases as soon as the
necessary arrangement or circumstances cease.

It is perfectly true that the phenomenon of thinking or of feeling shows
personaiity — that cogito, ergo «aiit,— as the minutest creature that inhabits
another microscopic creature might say as justly as Lord Bacon. But what
more does this mean than that the phenomenon of thinking implies perso-
nality ? The true philosopher will not stop there, and by a proceeding
worthy of a credulous and contented peasant, fancy this phenomenon proves
the existence of an imaginary thing called by the word soul : but will
examine the conditions which give rise to this phenomenon, and he will then
see as a plain matter of fact that it is a phenomenon of matter, and resulting
from matter peculiarly compounded and organized and acted upon by ex-
ternal circumstances. He will see plainly that it is a phenomenon of brain
or what is really the same as brain ; and that this brain is subject to all the
same laws as the other organs of the animal body, — produced, developed,
supported, decaying, deranged, and influenced in all ways precisely like
all the rest, but exhibiting the phenomena called mind, which are displayed
throughout the animal world exactly in proportion to the complication and
perfection of the material called brain. The word mind is by some employed
in two senses, like the word gravitation, — to signify certain phenomena
and the power or ability of displaying those phenomena. But, as it unfor-
tunately conveys to most unreflecting people the idea of an inunaterial soul
(words incomprehensible to us), just as the fact of gravitation, or any other
natural phenomenon, gives the savage an. idea of a spirit, doing gravita-
tion or other phenomena, we heartily wish the word abolished till such
an absurd meaning is forgotten ; for in this sense there is no such thing as
mind. The existence of mind as anything more than phenomena, or the
ability to display those phenomena, we utterly deny : and assert boldly that
nothing but the blind prejudice of bad education and the subsequent want
of vigorous reflection to right himself, can occasion any man to be insen-
sible to so plain a fact. To speak of the brain as a violin played upon by
somebody ! — why it is a self-acting apparatus requiring only the influence of
the external world, as any plant or self-acting apparatus requires external
influence, to excite it to exert its powers. — ZoiaL


Digitized by


Google


290 Mr, Hudson Lowers Paper fU the

know what thought is/^ says De Craurnz, " it is precisely
that which passes withm you when you think. Stop but here
and you are sufficiently informed. But the imagination^
eager to proceed farther^ would gratify curiosity by comparing
it to fire^ to vapour^ and to other active and subtle principles
in the material world.* And to what can all this tend^ but
to divert our attention from what thought is^ and to fix it
upon what it is not ? It is only by looking inwards that we
can acquire those just ideas of thought and emotion which
must serve as a basis for the study of mind.^' Consciousness
alone however is not a sufficient source of knowledge ; an
individual mind cannot alone afford a sufficient basis for the
study of the race. This may be rendered clear by the con-
sideration that the several faculties may be described as exist-
ing in three distinct states of power and activity. The firsts
that in which they are habitually and spontaneously active
even without external excitement : the second^ that in which
they are readily called into action by external circumstances^
or the influence of related faculties : the third, that in which
they are sluggish and with difficulty roused, even when the
greatest call exists for their activity. Now one man can needs
possess each of the faculties only in one of these degrees of
development. But the influence they exercise over the phe-
nomena in each of these different states is widely various.
Further, it is only in the first and highest state of activity
that the existence of faculties as primitive principles of action
is likely to be readily recognized by internal observation.
It is therefore necessary, that the observation of the actions
of others, and their reduction by analysis to primitive ten-
dencies, should be conjoined with the study of consciousness,
— ^this is the second source of our knowledge of the mental
faculties, as recognized by all phrenologists. It was not fur-
ther enlarged on by the lecturer, who returned to the manner
of combining this observation with the knowledge derivable
from consciousness. We should receive such principles as
were reconcileable with what our own consciousness taught
us, or analogous to those primitive tendencies which we could
recognize within, those which were not we felt instinctively
and not unjustly inclined to reject, and should certainly ques-
tion them more severely. Thus such organs as that of
Sophistry, spoken of by some American pbrenologist, or of
Marriage, admitted by Dr. Vimont, were felt at once as of-
fensive to our judgment.

* Or by calling it a soal, or spiritual substance f — thus diverting attention
from the observation of the phenomena and their conditions* and fixing it
upon an idle and unintelligible fancy.— Zowl.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 291

''With regard to tlie method of comparing character and
cerebral deyelopment^ it was^ if not necessary to the dis-
coYcry of faculties^ yet of great subsidiary importance in
giving an alphabet to those faculties^ and of the highest in
all that relates to the practical application of mental science.
Possessing this key in development to the knowledge of £eicu1-
ties^ we were enabled to determine what combinations led to
intellectual or moral eminence^ and what to criminality and
degradation; what were the sources and characteristics of
real^ and what of conventional eminence.

"Having thus briefly gone through his views of the grounds
and method of inquiry in phrenological science^ the lecturer
proceeded to enter on the discussion of those intellectual
nEu^ulties which he proposed as his special subject^ but which
limitation of time^ and the length of his general remarks,
permitted him but imperfectly to go through. He adverted
first to the organs termed by penologists Reflective, — a
term which he thought inexpressive, — capacity of seizing the
resemblance of things. The comparison of Spurzheim, —
Sens Metaphysique, Profondeur d^Esprit, — or Causality : and
the organ De PEsprit, or Wit, which by Spurzheim was
termed Ghdety. Tins last organ was by Ghdl, in a work termed
Organologie, published in 1807, included with the two others
in a group constituting the Esprit d^Induction. This classi-
fication the lecturer considered as just and correct. The true
function of the organ last named the lecturer considered as
the suggestion of contrast : contrast was not identical with
difference: difference was the mere negation of relation.
Contrast a positive relation, e.g., good and evU, light and
darkness, aUraction and repulsion.

" The functions of these organs, Mr. Lowe considered as
suggestive, — we distinguish in the action of the mind that of
receptivity in which it 1b passive to the influence and impres-
sions of external objects ; that of spontaneous activity in
which it wanders freely tlurough successive states, as they are
suggested to its notice ; and that in which this principle of
activity is modified bv the action of the will. In the receptive
states of the mind, those faculties which are termed by phre-
nologists Perceptive, as Form, Extension, &c., are concerned :
in the spontaneously suggesibive, those of which we have
spoken. The will modifies intellectual activity but cannot
create ideas and the influence which it has, appears to reside
only in the exclusion of irrelevant trains of thought. This
distinction will throw light on a question regarding the organ
of Comparison. GtQl's observations only establish its con-
nection with the suggestion of resemblances, and his defini-


Digitized by


Google


292 Mr. Hudson Lowe's Paper at the

tion at first limited it to this function. But subsequently in
his Fonctions du Cerveau, he says that it seems to him that
the faculty which perceives resemblances must perceive differ-
ences also. Now this is manifestly correct if we refer to the
sensible comparison of two present objects. But in this case
it is the perceptive oi^ns, and not that spoken of^ of which
the activity is recognized. The idea of Resemblance no
doubt is sJways given by Comparison^ but in comparing a
present individual with his portrait for example^ Form recog-
nizes^ and the other perceptive organs^ both differences and
resemblance. When, however, a present object suggests an
absent one to which it is similar, there is no perception pro-
perly speaking, there is only suggestion, and there is no
reason to admit that the faculty which suggests resemblance
suggests difference also. We perceive the pure activity of
this faculty most clearly however in cases where sensible per-
ception is altogether excluded. Bacon, by an allusion to the
fable of Icarus, speaks of philosophers who apply the rules of
science to the scrutinizing of religious matters, as " soaring
to heaven on the waxen wings of the senses.*^ What is there
here either that bears any resemblance to perception, to which
however only can the remark of Gall apply. Spurzheim's
statement again, that the lower activity of this &culty took
cognizance of resemblance, and the higher of difference,
rested on a fallacy. Where two compared objects presented
many more points of difference than resemblance, it was
obvious that to discover those of resemblance would be the
higher intellectual exercise ; where, on the other hand, the
points of resemblance were many, and those of difference
few, it would then require more intellect to discover those <rf
difference.

" Mr. Lowe proceeded to consider the laws of Suggestion
and of Association. These were reduced by Hume to three.
Resemblance, Contiguity in Time or Place, and Necessary
Connection or Cause and Effect. He excluded Contrast by a
refinement which had been rejected by Thomas Brown. With
the exception of this subtlety, which was not an improvement,
he merely followed Aristotle in the classification. Stewart
distinguished among some of the most remarkable, Resem-
blance, Analogy, Contrariety, Vicinity in Place, Vicinity in
Time, Relation of Cause and Effect, of Means and Ends, of
Premises and Conclusion. He considers it unimportant to
determine whether some of these principles may or may not
be reduced to others, and holds that the most powerful of all
principles of Association is undoubtedly Custom. Pew will
be inclined to agree that to determine with accuracy the


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Sociely. 293

number of primitive principles of Association is unimportant.
Custom was improperly included in the same category with
Resemblance and Cause or Effect. For Custom or Habit^
the tendency of acts to become easier and more frequent
in proportion as they are repeated^ is a law of the mind which
may be compared to a series in geometrical progression. But
every science must have a commencement. If two ideas occur
more frequently in conjunction in a ratio proportionate to the
frequency of previous conjunctions^ at least their first con-
junction must have arisen from the influence of some special
principle. Further, as by the conjunction of ideas we only
imderstand their occurrence in the same period of time, they
must at least be associated on the principle of contiguity in
time, and if in time in space also. It is obvious, indeed,
that every two ideas which occur consecutively in the mind,
are at least proximate in time ; but it is equally obvious that
-whenever the mind is engaged in any occupation distinct from
mere passive receptivity, that its ideas first become connected
by analogy or deduction, by some rational and not by the
purely arbitrary link of proximity in time and space. This
leads to a distinction between Association and Suggestion,
which has been hitherto generally omitted. Association is
that process by which two ideas once cor^oined recall each
other. Suggestion, that of mental evolution by which they
are for the first time linked.

^' The principles of Association may be mentioned as those
of Vicinity in Time and Vicinity in Space. But however
instances of local Association may strike us, the principle of
Vicinity in Space seems resolvable into the first and that into
the principle of Succession. Sounds and forms recall the
conceptions with which they were associated as well as placed,
and the principle on which they do so, seems to be merely
that by which in proportion to the vivacity of a conception,
and sensible conceptions are always the most vivacious, those
with which it is linked become more easily recalled. With
regard to the principle of Succession, Mr. Lowe entered into
an analysis of Time ; he distinguished its essence or succes-
sion from its measure or duration. Our own consciousness
was the measure of succession. With regard to that con-
sciousness no two events could be simultaneous, for the
smallest measure we can conceive of duration is inadequate
to portray the fleeting nature of duration. Events therefore
could only stand subjectively in the relation of priority and
sequence. This gave succession as the true form of the prin-
ciple of Association. This principle was connected with the
organ termed by phrenologists, Eventuality.


Digitized by


Google


294 Mr, Hudson Lowe's Paper at the

'^ Mr. Lowe offered some critical remarks^ which should
have found place earlier^ on Mr. Combe's section on Associa-
tion. Mr. Combe considered the yarieties of human intdlect
as opposing insuperable obstacles to a determination of fixed
principles of Association. "As well/* he says, "may we
expect by studying the forms of the clouds which flit along
the sky to-day to be able to discover laws by which their
succession may be regulated to-morrow; as by reflecting
on the ideas which pass in one mind, to discoyer links
of association by which ideas in the minds of mankind in
general will be uniformly connected and introduced in a
determinate succession." Were the diversity of pheno-
mena to frighten us from an attempt to fix primitive prin-
ciples, there could be no such thing as science in any depart-
ment. But the immense diversity of forms, are all but
modifications of two, the curve and the straight line, and
the immense variety of hues, but of a few primitive colours.
The immensely various forms of animal organization had been
reduced more or less closely to certain definite types. Mr.
Lowe pointed out that most of the instances given by Mr.
Combe to show the impossibility of arriving at fixed principles
of connection between ideas, were in fact illustrations of one
principle generally recognized, viz., that of necessary con-
nection or cause and effect, and observed that this was the
more remarkable from the preponderance of Causality among
the intellectual organs in Mr. Combe's bust.

" Mr. Lowe concluded by a few remarks on the organ of
Contrast. He had introduced this term in the printed form
of a prospectus of lectures, published in 1840. The prin-
ciple had been admitted by Aristotie, but its connection with
an organ had not been previously recognized. In a work
published at Brussels in 1841, (Quelques Verites Importantes,
par M. Barthet, Membre de la Soci^ Phr^nologique de
Paris,) the author speaks of the organ as Contrastivit^ ; he
does not enter on detailed confirmations. Mr. Lowe should
not then enter on this special subject. He would mention
however Gall, Bousseau, Sterne, and M^chier, as confirma-
tions of the function. The very large development of the
organ in Rousseau was greatiy at variance with Spurzheim's
definition, but he dealt constantiy in opposition of ideas, anti-
theses, the exposition of incompatibihties. OttlVa discoveiy
depended on the activity of this suggestive principle, and it
was frirther shown by the space and zeal which he devoted to
the individual refritation of objections, not trusting suffi-
ciently perhaps to the harmony of his doctrine. Exceptions,
incompatibilities, objections, would be the proper province


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 295

of this organ : where it was deficient and resemblance pre-
ponderant^ these however striking would be overlooked.
Dnpuis^ the author of the '^ Origme de Tons les CuUes/' af-
forded an illustration of this tendency.


May 1. The President in the Chair.

A discussion was opened by Mr. Symes and supported by
several other members in opposition to many of the opinions
expressed by Mr. Lowe in the paper which he selected for the
last Ladies' night.

The cast of a head was submitted to the members for
their opinion.

The development was pronounced by several to be as
follows.

The whole head large^ with great length before the ear.

Very large.
AmativeDeBS,
Loye of Offspring,
Attachment,
Cautioosness,
Conning,
Benevolence,
Veneration,
FirmnesSy
Locality,

Sente of things and all the centre of the brow.
Comparison.

Large.
lohabitiveness.
Self-esteem,
Love of Praise,
Imitation,
Ideality,
Causality.

Rather large.
Courage,
Order,
Number,
Language,
Wit.

SmaU.
Disposition to Violence,
Love of Property,
Wonder,
Color,
Time,
Tune.

Very smaU.
Hope.

The rest of the coronal surface not broad, but the portion ascribed
to Conscientiousness the broadest.


Digitized by


Google


296 Dr. EUiotson's Paper at the

This was pronounced an excellent practical development,
and it was inferred that the individual possessed great ob-
servation, acuteness, and intelligence, — ^that he might be a
very affectionate husband and father and a most attached
friend, — was by no means proud, but had a sufficiently good
opinion of, and confidence in, himself, — ^was desirous of the
good opinion of others, — ^very cautious, perhaps intriguing,
but most kind-hearted and disinterested, — would shrink
from contention, but be sufficiently courageous when neces-
sary, — ^possessed great firmness and constancy in the pursuit
of an object, — was generally cheerful and fond of society,
but, if there was truth in the organ of Hope, would often
despond.

Dr. EUiotson and Mr. Symes, who well knew the original,
declared that his character agreed admirably with that given
by those who had no idea who he was, except that he was
remarkably sanguine, imless when his family or he himself
were ill, — one who never despaired of his object, but would
pursue it in the midst of the greatest difficulties, even feel-
ing confident of success when all others were cast down.
TUs was considered by some members as an additional fact
against the organ of Hope. Mr. Lowe mentioned that he
possessed casts of several very sanguine persons, with small
development of the organ of Hope; but they had each a
sanguine temperament.


May 15/A. (Ladies' night J

The President delivered an address upon the Influence of
the Feelings on the Intellect.

He began by remarking that persons frequently say of
an individual that he is governed by his feeUngs rather than
his judgment ; but never notice that the same is true of the
majority of mankind at all times, — ^that it is general and con-
stant. What was true in Lockers time is true still. ' But
notwithstanding the great noise made in the world about
errors and wrong opinions, I must do mankind that right as
to say there are not so many men in errors or wrong opinions
as is commonly supposed ; not that I think they embrace the
truth, but indeed because concerning those doctrines they
make such a stir about they have no thought, no opinion at
all/ {Essay, chap, xx.) And yet, if you state this fact to
a person or set of persons, you are immediately assured
that they form their opinions entirely by knowledge and re-


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 297

flection, and are not in the least influenced by their feelings.

The cerebral physiologist knows that the department of
the brain devoted to the feelings is tsx larger than the de-
partment devoted to intellect; and that up to the present
period of human existence — ^a period still of very low civiliza-
tion, however proudly society estimates itself, — ^the department
devoted to the lower feelings exceeds in the majority of men
its due proportion.

We see opinions collected in separate masses. In Ire-
land the vast majority believe the legends and doctrines of
the Roman Catholic religion : in Wales, scarcely any believe
them. One canton of Switzerland is Roman Catholic, ano-
ther is Protestant, and a third is half and half. Whole
fiEuniUes with aU their ramifications from generation to gene-
ration believe the histories of the Old Testament, and disbe-
lieve those of the New — ^are Jews. Other families and their
ramifications from generation to generation all believe the
histories of the Old and New Testaments. They do this
firom their earliest years. Some Protestant families and all
their ramifications ttom generation to generation are all high
church; others all against an establishment. Some families
are all Unitarians from generation to generation. Here and
there you find a member of a fEunily differ from the rest ;
and generally if not for the worse, at least not much for the
better; and then you discover that he or she has accidentaUy
associated with somebody of different persuasions : and on
examination find the difference to rest upon impression, — as
little founded on knowledge and reflection as the opinions
which have been displaced.

Opinions are hdd by most persons without enquiry, —
firom being those of others with whom they live : they are
received Gently with the truths of the senses and never
doubted, and from habit become so fixed that the sugges-
tion of a doubt seems to them an extravagance. If en-
quiry is attempted, it is generally a very feeble business,
badly conducted under a strong bias ; the weakest arguments
on one side are greatly admired, and the strongest arguments
of the other very imperfectly, scarcely at all, attended to.
The enquiry does not deserve the name; they remain as they
were : and yet they hug themselves that they have fully ex-
amined and proved the grounds of their opinions.

When hard pushed, many, rather than give up their
groundless notions, say, ^ Well, all things are matters of opi-
nion, and my opinion is as good as another ;' forgetting that
truth must lie on one side and assumption on the other, and
that results may prove the truth or falsehood of opinions.


Digitized by


Google


298 Dr. Elliotson's Paper at the

In general tlie bias is so strong that persons never
examine the arguments of other sides. Protestants do not
trouble themsehres..with the proofs of the miracles and dogmas
of the Roman Cathc^c : nor the Jew with those of Christians:
nor the Christian with antichristian writings of Jews and In-
fidels. It is amazing to see how people shrink and seem
uncomfortable if a book containing opinions contrary to their
own is placed before them. Nay^ I have known a man^ who
thought himself most conscientious and religious^ refuse to
read a book containing opinions contrary to those he held
from bUnd habit^ after a voluntary promise that he would. So
far from reading it like men who should seek truth and
truth only^ they look like certain persons in the presence of
a cat. Nay^ many will not associate with others who differ
from them in religion. In association with those who agree
with them^ the^ fancy that the circumstance of this agree-
ment of others is a proof that they are right : the mere asser-
tion of the same opinion by others is regarded by them as
proof of its solidity : argument is not required between them :
they encourage each other with words ; are delighted and sa-
tisfiedy and believe themselves conscientious and rational, —
asinw asinumfricat.

Nay, if an argument against them ia made perfectly plain,
they cannot see its force. Malebranche says that the passions
justify themselves ; that is, under a strong passion, the intel-
lect may not believe its indulgence to be wrong. A mother,
when her child is evidently to all others at the point of death,
believes it will recover, — she hopes against hope. In insanity,
we see a strong ambition overcome all attempts to convince
the patient that he is not a king or the Deity. In mesmerism,
a sleep-waker, dreaming that he is in some other place and
otherwise engaged, will so firmly believe it, that, while the
hands are idle, or elevated cataleptically or rigid, he will
maintain he is doing something busily with them ; will hear
the voice of the mesmeriser, and declare he hears no other
noise, however loud it may be. Here we at once recognize
prejudice; but in our own case are blind to its existence.
Religion should make the world one of love and gentleness.
' All the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this. Thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself.* Gal. v. 14. Yet the most pious
persons persecute good men who do not hold their dogmas ;
brand them with opprobrious terms — ^infidel, atheist, &c. ; do
all manner of evil or meanness to them, and if they dared would
spoil and bum them, as Calvin did Servetus with a fire made
of green wood so that it might bum slowly. They see not that
they cannot be religious and feel thus at the same time.


Digitized by


Google


Phrenological Society. 299

A committee of which I was a member gave permission
once in mistake^ without any authority or rights to students
to have certain advantages of a society without payment.
The other members remonstrated; clearly proved that we
were wrongs and required the money which should have been
paid. To demand it of the students whom we had privileged
was impossible. The committee were clearly bound to pay it
themsdves. Yet, though there were men on the committee
considered of the highest principle, and abstractedly, I have
no doubt, of the highest principle, they all refused to pay it
except one physician and myself. We two resolved to pay the
whole sum ; and they could not be made to allow the argu-
ments of the simple justice of the matter, and have now
forgotten all about it, but have saved their money.

What we call prejudice in the case of an individual is
nothing more than what exists in masses ; but, as the mem-
bers of a mass agree, they see no prejudice in the notions of the
mass : all is solid opinion in their eyes. The mass of persons
in any pursuit scout a new truth in masses ; and thus each is
certain that he is right. The medical world scout mesmer-
ism ; therefore this doctor and that surgeon may talk as much
nonsense as he pleases, may deny palpable facts ; but this is
not prejudice because the medical mass, governed by their
feelings, agree with him. They so support each other as to
venture to say they would not believe the facts if they saw
them ; and therefore will not see them or examine decently
into them.

It is the same with the large masses of nations. Feel-
ing, habit, is the chief reason of those opinions being un-
doubted and right in one nation, which are ridiculous and
wrong in another.

Pains enough are taken by teachers to inculcate opi-
nions ; but no pains to teach the solemn duty of examining
into the grounds of all opinions,— of holding no opinion
without good reason. A great business not yet accomplished
is to teach the million to think : to ask themselves the reason
of all they feel assured of: to regard it as low morality to
hold opinions from mere imitation and habit, and not to have
courage to confess ignorance rather than hold opinions with-
out strict examination.


The Society adjourned till the first Wednesday in Novem-
ber. The meetings Vill in future be held at the Marylebone
Institution, Edwards Street, Portman Square: and Ladies
will be admitted every night.


Digitized by


Google


( 300 )


IV. Cures of Palsy by Mesmerism. By Dr. Elliotson.

" Facts sboald therefore be compared before they are reduced to theory ; and when they
may conflict with an aclinowledgcd principle, they should remain in an isolated state till
their tme nature may be better auderstood, or till the principles which they appear to con-
tradict, may be shewn to be erroneous. Had this consideration been duly regaraed, had the
attributes of the Almighty been properly respected, or the thousand facts of Physiology, onr
age had not been sUined with animal magnetism."— />r. Paint^t IntrodMCtttry Lectmreon the
JmHtutM qf Medicine and Materia Medica, in the Vmoenity qf New York, 1841.

" Medical writers and practitioners have deluded themselves. — have allowed themselves
to be led away by hypotheses, by igne$fat%d such as— Mesmerism. Alas I for mediciue, when
such trumpery is allowed to pollute the temple which ought to be devoted to the cultivation
of a pure, a cautious, I had almost said, a sceptical observation. Observation is every thing
in medicine." Dr. MarehaU HaU'e Lectvret on the Theory and Practice qf Medicine,
Lancet, Oct. 1837 ; p. 142.

" He (Dr. Sigmond) had little faith in the sanative powers of Mesmerism. He did not
believe it exerted much influence over diseases." Debate in the Medico-BotaniccU Societp,
Lancet, June Q, 1838, p. 370.

I. Hannah Elizabeth Hunter was admitted into Univeraity
College Hospital on January 1, 1838, having been sent from
Dover expressly to be under my care, by a truly gentleman-
like and estimable surgeon, named Hannan Thomson, now
no more, but at that time Mr. Sanke/s partner. She was
12 years old, and delicate. For many years she had suflFered
fit)m various nervous symptoms. When five years old, she
had pain in her left ear, and this returned at intervals till
she was eight. At the same age of five, she became subject
to attacks of asthma, and for it, in 1835, a practitioner at
Dover gave her emetics, the first of which afforded her great
relief, but the second not only did no good, but caused great
irritation and vomiting for five hours, and palsy of the lower
extremities took place the next day. Another practitioner was
called in, who found her thus palsied and asthmatic, suffering
also from pain of the side and chest, and tenderness of the
whole course of the spine. The palsy had continued more
or less up to the time of her admission into the hospital, but
the asthma had ceased.

The second practitioner also discovered in 1835, a slight
lateral curvature of the spine. For many years she had been
afficted with frequent darting pains in the praecordia, and
more or less of St. Vitus's dance. About the last Midsummer
she had fits of convulsions, rigidity, and insensibility for three
months. These ceased on her being brought to London four
months ago, though nothing particular she said was done
for her : but the attacks of asthma returned and stiU con-
tinue. She was in London under the care of Dr. Latham in
St. Bartholomew's Hospital for a fortnight, but took a great
dislike and therefore returned to Dover. The tenderness of
the skin on the spine caused all her complaints to be referred
to the spinal chord, or its membranes, or both, and so leeches


Digitized by


Google


Palay Cured by Mesmerism. 301

were applied to her chesty and two caustic issues made
in the course of the spine: the sea water bath, the sea
water shower bath, and sea bathing, were employed, and
she was purged and purged, and salivated, and took ses-
quioxyd of iron. At the end of four months she got better
and was able to leave her bed, but still had weakness of her
back, and soon relapsed into her previous state of palsy, and
also had spasmodic twitchings of the muscles of the chest and
back, for which opium was given with the effect of making
them worse, whereas purgatives relieved them somewhat.

As far as I can learn, nothing more was attempted for
her relief till April, 1837, when St, Vitus' s Dance took place,
affecting the neck first and spreading to the extremities and
rest of the system till it was shortly universal and " con-
firmed," and the mother again applied to the doctors, who
ordered the affusion of cold water, the only effect of which
was to produce lock-jaw.

Jan. 1st. At her admission into the hospital on January
1st, 1838, I found her lower extremities so palsied, that not
only could she not stand, but she could only just move them in
bed, and they had no feeling. Her head was heavy and painful,
especially at the left side ; and her sight was often dim. There
were darting pains and tenderness in the left side of the
body, and tenderness to the left of the spine about the middle
dorsal vertebrae. She had frequent attacks of shortness of
breath without cough or expectoration, and frequent attacks
of palpitation. The spine was found slightly bent to the
right. Her pulse was 120, soft and small. Though her ap-
petite was not particularly good, her tongue was clean and
her bowels regular : and, though she had never menstruated,
it must be remembered that she was but twelve years old.

There was no reason to ascribe her complaints to the
digestive or uterine system, as is often done without a shadow
of reason. Sometimes such derangement exists, but in general
only as the result of the same condition of the system, or
quite incidentally. The disease was clearly in portions of the
nervous system, functional and connected with debility.

This is the nature of a large number of nervous diseases,
even though there be irritation : for debility commonly occa-
sions morbid affectibility, — not only morbid excess of move-
ment or action, but morbid excess of sensation. The pain in
the ear, the pain in the side of the head, the pain of the side
of the body, the tenderness of the side of the body, were an
excess of sensibility. The spasmodic asthma, the palpitation
of the heart, the convulsions and rigidity, the dispropor-
tionate vomiting after the second emetic, were all excess of
VOL. I. y


Digitized by


Google


302 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

action^ arising no doubt from the same fundamental state as
the pain^ — morbid aflfectibility. The fits of insensibility and
the palsy, the heaviness of head, the dimness of sight, were,
like the curvature of the spine and the general condition of
the system, so much debUity: and debility was, I have
no doubt, if not the source of the whole train of symptoms,
at least so closely connected with them that while it existed
they would exist, and its removal would have ensured their
disappearance. Occasionally we observe only local weakness.

In some nervous diseases there is, on the contrary, more
or less general fulness, requiring the loss of blood and simi-
lar measures ; or local fulness or inflammation, requiring de-
pletion, and this fulness or inflammation may be occasional,
and, perhaps, very evanescent, requiring, and this is more
frequently the fact, very moderate evacuating measures.

The peculiar condition which gives rise to such symptoms
we do not understand. Neither have we any general direct
power over it. When there is debility on the one hand, or
general or local fulness or an inflammatory state on the
other, and we succeed in lessening or removing these respec-
tive states, we more or less diminish the nervous symptoms ;
and when there is no general debility we diminish or cure
them in certain forms by certain tonics. Iron has great
power over neuralgia or tic doloureux, over St. Vitus's dance,
and tetanus,* when no debility is discernible. Yet over com-
mon hysteria, and epilepsy, and spasmodic asthma, it has
little power, unless when there is evident debility. Zinc,
copper, arsenic, and silver are called tonics, and they exert
more or less power over some of these affections, — St. Vitus's
dance, epilepsy, hysteria, but not more when there is evident
debility, than when there is not. This circumstance, together
with the facts, that, when there is no evident debility, most
other tonic medicines have little or no power, and indeed
but little power when there is debility, and that copper,
arsenic, &c., are not usefully employed in mere debiUty of
body, may render it probable that they exert some peculiar
power over certain parts or conditions of the nervous system,
just as quinine or arsenic have the specific power of curing
the ague condition of the system, while iron, — a most power-
ful tonic, — has no power over the ague condition.

Mesmerism has an extraordinary and mighty power over
the peculiar and not understood state of the svstem that
gives rise to many nervous diseases — ^a great desideratum — a

* See my papers in which I proved the two latter points by a large num-
ber of cures of St. Vitus's dance, and some of Tetanus, published in tlie
TnmtactionM ^ the Royal Medical 4* Chirurgical Society, 1824-7-9, Vol. 13, 15.


Digitized by


Google


Palsy cured by Mesmerism, 303

desideratum which we could hardly have expected ever to
find, unless on the principle that for every disease a remedy
is to be found, if mankind will but persevere in searching.

On the 2nd of January, I saw her, and ordered two
drachms of the sesquioxyd of iron three times a day for four
days, and then four drachms each dose, a daily shower bath,
at first at 90**, then at 85®, and in a week at 80°, with electric
sparks, (not shocks, for these do more harm than good in
most diseases) to the loins and lower extremities every day ;
her diet was to be moderate, — ^what is called middle diet.

In a fortnight she was much improved in her looks and
strength. She was now ordered the full diet of the house,
consisting of meat several times a week ; and on the 20th
it struck me that mesmerism might be of service to her,
and I ordered it to be practised daily for half an hour. I
knew very little of it, though satisfied, by irresistible proof,
of its real and extraordinary powers ; and I had still less
knowledge, and no experience, of its eflScacy in disease,
though aware that very many most creditable writers had
published numerous and astonishing cures wrought by its
means. In these circumstances, I felt justified in employing
it in the present case, though not justified in employing it
to the neglect of other means, which do more or less good.

January 20th. The yery first day it caused drowsiness.

The second day, and ever afterwards, complete sleep.
On the fourth day there was a very striking improvement in
her symptoms and I omitted the shower bath : and at the
end of the week the improvement was such, that she had a
great sensibility qf her limbs, and she could actually walk with
some assistance ; she felt stronger throughout , and her counte-
nance was much improved. I had never witnessed such rapid
improvement &om any treatment previously adopted by me,
and felt so convinced that the mesmerism had effected it, that,
having already omitted the shower bath for four days, I now
order^ both the iron and the electricity to be discontinued,
intending to resume them if she relapsed in the least, or did
not steadily improve. The treatment was thenceforth simply
mesmeric. Though the sesquioxyd of iron is a medicine
which I have caused to be more ecciployed than ever it had
been previously, and shewn to be powerful over some diseases
to which it had not been so particularly applied, and proved
that it may be given far more largely than the profession had
any idea of, and that it cures in large quantities oftener and
more quickly than in small, — so that it has been thought a pet
remedy of mine from my knowing its true value and making

y2


Digitized by


Google


304 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

the most it^ I saw clearlj that the astonishing benefit could
be ascribed to the mesmerism only. Indeed^ this very form
of iron had been given to her at Dover, in vain, as I have
already stated.

On January 29, (the 10th mesmerisation) I find the fol-
lowing note; "Mesmerised. Sound mesmeric sleep produced:
perfectly insensible to pinching or shaking, and was then
recovered by the transvei'se passes upon the eyebrows.

" 30th. Mesmerised in the ward, and carried in a state of
mesmeric sleep down to the theatre :" but this did not rouse
her in the least. She "was then awakened by the usual
transverse passes : was then mesmerised and again awakened
as usual'' — that is, by transverse passes on the eyebrows.

At this time so many practitioners and students of other
hospitals came to see my mesmeric patients, and applied to
bring their friends, and so many persons of science and rank
also applied, that I fixed a day from time to time to demon-
strate the phenomena, and did this in the operating theatre
which every hospital possesses for the express purpose of
practising what would be inconvenient in the wards and could
not be witnessed there by a large assembly. The mechanical
operation and the medical mesmeric process stand precisely
alike in this particular : and I conceived that the physician
had the same right to apply the theatre to its proper use as
the surgeon. Moreover, my clinical lectures were given in it,
and at them I frequently exhibited patients with cutaneous
and some other diseases. As she was a very timid and deli-
cate child, I was anxious not to alarm her by telling her
beforehand that she would be taken into the crowded theatre,
and therefore sent her to sleep in the ward without apprising
her of my intentions. When she was awakened, she was sur-
prised with so natural an expression, that no one could doubt
the reality of the conditions. By our shaking hands with her
and laughing, she presently got over her surprise and fear.

" 31st. Was mesmerised by Elizabeth Okey, and awakened
by her in the usual manner. She then operated upon Okey
in the usual manner, produced sleep, and awoke her by the
transverse movements.

"February Ist. Mesmerised. Could only be awakened by
the transverse movements of both thumbs together over the eye-
brows. Transverse passes on any other part produced no effect ^
and wUess the thumbs were moved together no effect was pro-
duced. Mesmerised several times in succession: the effect
was produced more speedily on each succeeding occasion. By
merely placing the fingers on her forehead, mesmeric sleep was
produced Was mesmerised at 5 p.m., became insensible^ and


Digitized by


Google


Palsy Cured by Mesmerism, 305

continued so until 8 f. m.^ when she was awakened in the
usual manner.

"2nd. Mesmerised by placing fingers on her fwehead for
fowr minutes. Transverse movements over the eyebrows with
the thumb and finger of the same hand produced no effect :
but she was instantly awakened by both thumbs,

" 3rd. Mesmerised by placing fingers on her forehead for a
minute and a half Every attempt to awake her failed concept
the transverse movements of both thumbs." By merely extend-
ing the hand towards her head for a minute and a half she
became insensible and remained with her eyes open ; and on
pushing her head gently back her eyes closed and she was
soon asleep, perfectly insensible, with her jaws firmly closed.
She had said that just before the sleep comes on, she feels
as if some one gave her a blow on the top of her head, and
from that moment she loses her consciousness.

4th. When Eliz. Okey mesmerised her before, Okey was
in her natural state ; I now made Okey in her extraordi-
nary ecstatic delirium mesmerise the little girl, and awake
her by transverse passes. All took place as before.

5th. Having proved the effect of passes, and mere contact
of the forehead, I tried that of the eyes. Without touching
her or even holding up the hand, but by merely looking at her
she went off to sleep in four minutes. Various means of waking
persons in common sleep were had recourse to in vain. Trans-
verse passes by the thumbs of two persons at the same time, one
passing his thumb along one eyebrow and the other his along
the other, had no effect : nor did transverse passes of the
eyebrows unth different substances awake her. But the thumbs
of the same person who used these substances, though covered
with four folds of silk, awoke her.

6th. Mesmerised by passes in three minutes : restored by
transverse passes with the thumbs on the eyebrows. Was
then mesmerised by looking at her for four minutes, and
again awakened by the transverse passes.

7th. Mesmerised by looking at her : continued asleep for
an hour and a half, and was then awakened as usual.

8th. Mesmerised by placing the hand upon her forehead.
I then made transverse passes upon her eyebrows with ?ier
own thumbs held in my hands : the passes were next made by
two different persons, each simultaneously passing a thumb along
an eyebrow: next by a finger along one eyebrow and a thumb of
the same person along the other, at the same moment : — but all
without effect. Three passes of the thumbs of the same per-
son instantly awoke her.

She was now mesmerised in six minutes by passes made at


Digitized by


Google


306 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

the distance of six or eight feet from her. Three tjransverse
passes of the thumbs on the eyebrows awoke her. The first
had no efiPect: at the end oi a minute I made a second,
which produced a deep sigh only : at the end of another
minute, I made a third, and she instantly awoke.

9th. An attempt was made to mesmerise her by looking
steadily at her at tne distance of about thirty yards. At the
end of twenty minutes she seemed sleepy : a hand was then
placed upon her forehead, and she was asleep in four minutes.
The other hand of the mesmeriser was placed upon the fore-
head of Elizabeth Okey at the same time and with the effect
of sending her equally to sleep.

Three transverse passes were made on her brow with in-
tervals of two minutes between them, but the third produced
only a gentle sigh: a fourth only a deeper sigh: a fifth
awoke her instantly. Thus the longer interval allowed the
effect of the previous pass to die nearly away before the
succeeding pass was made: but still more and more effect
remained, as the passes went on. She was sent to sleep, and
transverse passes made with intervals of one minute ; and the
third sufficed to awake her.

10th. Dr. Faraday was present when she was mesmerised.
He suggested aloud various means for rousing her : advised
us in her hearing to bleed her, and then to apply a red-hot
iron to stop the blood. Her arm at his suggestion was actu-
ally bound up, as if we intended to bleed the poor little thing.
But nothing made any impression upon her countenance or pulse,
or roused her. She heard not his words, nor feU the swrgeons
binding up her arm. She was then instantly awakened by
transverse passes with the thumbs along her eyebrows.

Nothing is more amusing than to observe the proceedings
of a sceptic in the most common case of me8merism,-^where
there is insensibility, trying this, and suggesting that, in order
perhaps not to discover the truth, but to prove to us that the
patient is sensible. The proceeding, for his own sake, is all
very proper, but not the less amusing, nay, very often is irre-
sistibly ludicrous, when one knows beforehand, by undoubted
proof, the reality of the case. Dr. Faraday delighted us by the
pains he earnestly took, because his object was, as it always
is, truth. But now that five years have elapsed, and the
ordinary facts of mesmerism are, out of the medical profession,
established and known to hundreds of thousands, the sight of
a wise doctor or surgeon so far behind the world as to be ig-
norant of and to doubt mesmerism, and to pour forth his silly
objections and to try his little devices to prove to us the ex-
istence of imposition in a true patient, is to me as exquisite a


Digitized by


Google


PaUy Cured by Mesmerism. 307

sight as a little dog very serious with its own shadow and at
last working himself up into a frenzy with it, determined to
demolish it, — ^the wicked dog, whose existence he would have
all others believe.

What could be more amusing than to hear the members
of the Medical and Chirurgical Society insist upon the impo-
sition of the poor man whose leg was cut oflf, because he eidii-
bited the phenomenon of insensibility ; — a phenomenon not
only the most elementary and ordinary in mesmerism, known
to hundreds of thousands (mt of the profession, but of every
day occurrence in disease without mesmerism I

Another set of persons who amuse me are those who,
while the most exquisite phenomena are presented to their
view, are so incapable of appreciating them as to ask you in
the midst of the wonderful display what is the state of the pulse,
and, if medical, to pull out their watch and feel the pulse,
looking at the hands of the watch and not at the phenomena
of the patient. They remind me of a man who, while others
were gazing in silence at a Raffael, asked if they did not
admire the frame : and of a Norfolk squire who on the top of
the Duomo of Milan, asked of the English around who were
lost in admiration, whether they could tell, as he could, how
many tons of lead there were on the roof of King's College
Chapel, Cambridge.

"'How did Garrick speak the soliloquy last night?' —
' Oh, against all rule, my lord ; most ungrammatically ; be-
twixt the substantive and the adjective, which should agree
together in number, case, and gender, he made a breach thus
— stopping as if the point wanted settling ; and betwixt the
nominative case, which your lordship knows should govern
the verb, he suspended his voice in the epilogue a dozen times,
three Seconds and three-fifths, by a stop watch, my lord, each
time.'

'^ ' Admirable grammarian I But in suspending his voice,
was the sense suspended likewise? Did no expression of
attitude or countenance fill up the chasm? Was the eye
silent ? Did you narrowly look V — ' / looked only at the stop
watch, my lord.' — ' Excellent observer.' "

12th. Slept an hour on being mesmerised, and awoke by
the usual process.

13th. / mesmerised by pointing my fingers to the back of
her head, without her knowledge. She slept till the transverse
passes were made upon her eyebrows.

The circumstance of mesmerising susceptible patients
without their knowledge, behind their backs, and this with
the eye only, as I myself have done in a case of exquisite


Digitized by


Google


308 Dr. Elliot8m*8 Cases of

susceptibility ; nay^ at a considerable distance ; or by means
of an inanimate mesmerised substance^ — disproves the crude
absurdity of those who would ascribe mesmeric coma^ See., to
fatigue, — ^fatigue, forsooth, of some of the muscles of the optic
apparatus, and subsequent congestion and pressure. I have
sometimes succeeded best by making the patient close the
eyes, and have certainly been ten times as long in mes-
merising a patient at times when there has been unusual
weakness, so that fatigue was felt from the first. Many, in
extreme debility, I have not been able to afiect for weeks.

To ascribe to fatigue and congestion the coma which may
be induced without the patient's knowledge of your attempt
and when he is not at all fatigued ; the wonderful phenomena
of sympathetic sensations and sympathetic movements, move-
ments in obedience to even others than the mesmeriser;
irresistible imitation ; distinction of the mesmeriser ; disagree-
able sensations from the contact of the very end of a finger, or
from the proximity, of any other than the mesmeriser; irresist-
ible attraction to the mesmeriser, — and all this when the ordi-
nary avenues of sense are completely closed ; muscular exer-
tions very far beyond what there is capability of in the natural
state, and this without the sUghtest effort appearing in the
countenance ; the ability of reading what they never saw
previously, and what nobody present either has read or looks
at while they read it, though the eyes are completely — ^yes,
completely — covered, to the occurrence of aU which I can
testify with as much certainty as to the occurrence of ague
from the unseen malaria and its cure by quinine ; besides
endless other phenomena, some of which would be consi-
dered supernatural without experience of their being in the
course of nature under peculiar circumstances, and to which,
though I have not witnessed them, there appears the stibngest
testimony,— all this to be explained by fatigue and congestion!
Oh, the mechanical heads of some men, who cannot discern
the infinitely delicate and various properties of the infinitely
fine particles of matter, according to their infinite combina-
tions, arrangements, and circumstances! as though matter had
only extension and resistance, and was inert, or had none but
mechanical properties, and could be influenced to its highest
properties by mechanical appliances only, — whereas we see it
display the phenomena of electro-magnetism, light, heat, the
phenomena of vegetable and animal life, of poisons, of re-
medies, — aye, and in the animal kingdom, from those micro-
scopic animalcules, myriads of myriads of which form and
perish in points of space every instant, up to man himself,
we see it feel, and think, and will.


Digitized by


Google


Palsy Cured by Mesmerism. 309

22nd. She had been mesmerised five times during the
eight days^ as usual^ but for two days had a pain in her head
and side^ and seemed weaker and rather depressed. She
was sent to sleep to-day in four minutes.

Attempts to awake her were then made^ 1. by rubbing
her eyebrows eocA simultaneously vnth the thumb of a different
person; 2. with the thumb and forefinger of the same hand;

3. with the end of one thumb and the next knuckle of the other;

4. with the end of one thumb and the distant knuckle of the
other. — No effect ensued ; 5. with the ends of the two thumbs
as usual^ and she awoke as usual.

23rd. While the fingers were pointed at her eyes to in-
duce sleep^ an attempt was made to prevent sleep by another
person talking and making her laugh. She became sleepy^ but
at the end of twenty minutes had not fallen asleep. Nothing
was now said to her, and, though the pointing at her eyes
was continued in silence, ten minutes more elapsed before
anything farther than sleepiness occurred. Her eyes then sud-
denly fixed on vacancy, she became universally rigid, and
insensible to speaking, however loudly, and to shaking; and
thus remained like a statue, in the sitting posture, with her
eyes open, immovable and not once winking. She was then
gently pushed back in her chair. Her eyes at last closed.
But, on speaking to her gently y they again opened, though
they appeared stUl fixed on vacancy, and nothing could make
them wink. Presently they closed again, and for some time
were open and closed alternately. The jaw was firmly closed
throughout. The usual means of awakening her failed. She
appeared a senseless lump. After some time she awoke spon-
taneously. But in a short time relapsed ; and then in a few
minutes awoke again. For some time the sleep-waking and
the complete waking state alternated, just as the local closed
and open state of the eyes had previously for some time alter-
nated. Her return to the waking state was at last permanent.

This was the first occurrence of sleep-waking or somnam-
bulism in the hospital, and the first time I had ever witnessed
it, either mesmeric or spontaneous. The little girl fell into it
from neither design, imitation, nor imagination. We were
quite unprepared for it, and she had seen it in no other patient.
Elizabeth Okey had already gone into extatic delirium, but
did not fall into her striking and beautiful sonnambulism till
afterwards.

Though I had lived all my life without witnessing sleep-
waking at all, or catalepsy more than once, and was as igno-
rant of all the most wonderful diseases of the nervous system
as the rest of the profession, I have now a tolerably good ac-


Digitized by


Google


310 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

quaintance with them all^ because mesmerism is a mode of
inducing these rare states artificially. The medical pro-
fession is falling rapidly behind the public in this kind of
medical knowledge, because they refuse to mesmerise and
the public are all mesmerising. The profession very ignor-
rantofthe most wonderful part of medicine! Such is the fiu^.

24th. Mesmerised wUhoui her knowledge : awakened in the
usual way.

26th. Mesmerised by two persons at once, standing before
her at the distance of about five yards.

The same rigidity took place as on the 23rd, and the
transverse passes had no effect. At length she recovered
spontaneously; but relapsed two or three times before she
spontaneously awoke permanently. She complained of some
weakness and pain of the side and head.

27th. The same phenomena took place as yesterday.

28th. Is getting much stronger : though still she has some
pain in the side and occasionally in her head. Not mes-
merised.

March 1st. Mesmerised. When asleep, she seemed to
follow the sidewise movement of my hand ; and when I held
it above her head she made an effort to stand up. These ef-
fects took place only when her eyes were open, and not if I
acted behind her back.

2nd. Mesmerised. She again followed the movements of
the hand. The sleep was allowed to continue all night, and she
was awakened in the morning in the usual way.

I believe it is for the good of a patient not to awake him.
The sleep, I believe, will always terminate of itself sooner or
later : and, if the person cannot eat or drink at first, he may
at length : and, if he does not, still nourishment may not be
required as in the waking state. In spontaneous sleep-
waking, patients do well with little or no food for an astonish-
ing length of time. Mesmeric sleep is so refreshing that pa-
tients improve in proportion as they sleep. To tear them firom
their sweet repose is cruel, irritates the system, and removes
the very remedy of the disease. Recovery would be accom-
plished, I am persuaded, in half the time were patients allowed
to awake spontaneously. If they are intelligent in this state,
we can often fix the sleep for any time thought advisable by
ourselves or the sleep-w^er in his sleep, by making him pro-
mise to sleep for a fixed time. I often make this arrange-
ment for a certain number of hours, perhaps for the whole
night ; and at the desire of the patient have agreed to a sleep
of four and twenty hours or a week.

3rd. Mesmerised. The sleep again allowed to continue all


Digitized by


Google


Palsy Cured by Mesmerism, 311

nigbt ; and she did not relieve the bladder^ so that it was
painfully distended in the morning.

12th. Had been mesmerised on three days since the 3rd.

She was placed in a room by herself. A bandage was ap-
plied to her eyes and she was left alone, but unfortunately no
precaution was taken to ascertain, before she was left, whether
she was already asleep or not. On returning to her in a few
minutes, she was found insensible and in the same position
in which she had been left.

This experiment was repeated, and care taken to leave
her while she was still awake. On returning at the end of a
quarter of an hour, she was found still awake. The bandage
was reapplied and she was then mesmerised without her
knowledge, and was insensible in half a minute.

13th. A bandage was placed over her eyes and she was led
to believe that she was being mesmerised. But, after wait-
ing some time, no eflfect was produced. The mesmeric process
was then begun, and in a short time she was insensible.

On these two days, no explanation could be given on the
ground of imagination. The results shewed the power of
manipulation or the will.

14th. Mesmerised. In her sleep she opened her eyes and
answered questions. Her replies were slow and short, and in
the gentlest whisper. From this time she would also walk
about, if led, very slowly. Tractive passes continued for some
time had no eflfect, and at last only a very slight eflfect. It
was really a beautiful sight to see the innocent - looking
and gentle little girl walk slowly about when led, her eyes
open, but with a strong expression of sleep: and to ob-
serve her appear slightly roused when siddressed, and
slowly begin to answer, and then answer gently in a word
or two, and relapse into silence and a vacant stare. Sleep-
waking or somnambulism was now established.

Her improvement was steady and remarkable. On the
21st, she was frightened by something which happened in the
ward, I forget what, and had a short and moderate fit, re-
sembling epilepsy, at the moment ; and had more slight ones
in the evening, and on the following day another, — so delicate
and nervous was she. — ^They never returned.

April 11th. She has been mesmerised daily, with the usual
effects. After being brought out of her insensibility to-day,
the insensibility returned as she was crossing the passage,
and she dropped on the floor and was not recovered till trans-
verse passes were made. She had not been fuUy awakened :
and too much care cannot be taken to see that patients are
perfectly awake before they are left.


Digitized by


Google


312 Dr. Elliotaon's Cases of

18th. Though she had long been quite well^ I detained her
till to-day in the hospital, and had her regularly mesmerised.

She continued well, has continued well, except little colds,
up to the present time, — now above five years, and is I un-
derstand a fine young woman and about to be married.

The paralysis undoubtedly was simply functional, and
likely to cease spontaneously one day or other : but it had
lasted more or less for three years, and was worse than ever.
She had been ill for seven years, and scarcely out of medical
hands all the time, and had tsiken loads of physic, to say
nothing of issues, &c. &c. Her disease was instantly improved
in the most marked manner by mesmerism : her improvement
was most rapid, and her health for the first time established
permanently.

Had the Okeys never been in the hospital, this case was
full proof of the truth and wonder and efficacy of mesmerism :
and, when they were madly pronounced impostors by an im-
prudent poor ignorant man, whom professors and the profes-
sion madly now made up and clung to, and extolled, the case
of Hannah Hunter was foi^tten. To make the arguments
against the Okeys complete, Hannah Hunter's case should
have been disproved also. There it was in the sight of the
professors, the students, and the medical world : and here it
is, just as it occurred, before the chief wonders of the Okeys
had come forth.

Though certain modes of operating generally induce mes-
meric efiects sooner or later in the susceptible, and certain
modes restore them to themselves, some persons are affected
either to sleep or waking more easily by one mode, some by
another. The modes of inducing the sleep are endless ; and,
just as an operator may have accidentally met with persons
more affected by a particular method, or may have accustomed
them to it, or may have acquired the habit of operating in a par-
ticular method with more ease and energy, he will praise this
method or that. I am certain that there is a great deal of
fancy and nonsense in the specific rules laid down by some,
and the high commendation of particular successions of pro-
ceedings. Steady perseverance day after day, be it for weeks
or months, for at least half an hour, is the greatest point. It
is best to try all ways in turn, till an efficient way is found,
carefully watching what method produces the greatest appear-
ance of effect. After a time, some method wUl often succeed
the best with an individual ; and at length there is sometimes
such susceptibility that almost anything will induce sleep. In-
deed no process at last may be requisite to produce the effect.
I have three patients whom I was originally some weeks in


Digitized by


Google


PaUy Cured by Mesmerism. 313

sending to sleep^ though I gave them each half an hour daily
of manipulations and gazing^ but who now go to sleep on my
merely raising my hand^ or looking at them, when they are
prepared to expect sleep. I told each of them that, if she
sat still, I would mesmerise her in the next room through the
door ; I retired, shut the door behind me, did nothing, but
walked on into a farther room, turned back, and found her
asleep : so with the other two, in succession. While I did this
I thought as little of them as possible, and busied myself with
anything to distract my attention.

The most efficient mode of waking varies far more than
the mode of sending to sleep.

The peculiarity in the present case was very remarkable.
The majority can be awakened by manual friction of the
eye-brows, or by blowing in the face. But many in only a
particular way : and, what is remarkable, a way which was per-
fectly and instantly successful will wear out, — will lose its effi-
cacy, and another mode will at once succeed. If the patient
can speak in the mesmeric state, and there is any difficulty,
it is best to prevail upon him to tell you some mode of waking
him. It may be a very fanciful mode : still, through imagination
I presume, it will succeed when all other modes are fruitless.
The sleep of mesmerism is so peculiar and wonderful, ^o made
up of torpidity of sense and intellect and the feelings, and
partial activity of them all, and perhaps new sensibilities; and
the susceptibility of effect from imagination is so heightened,
that the strangest mode may awaken them from the deepest
sleep which no noise nor mechanical means can in the least
disturb : and at last the efficient mode ordered by the pa-
tient himself may lose its efficacy, and he must be made to
tell you another.

Though imagination has extraordinary power in mesme-
rised subjects, it is fSeur from being the great agency. In
some persons highly susceptible of the effects of emotion, if
they fancy they have taken an aperient or opiate, when they
have not, the specific effect ensues as though they had taken
the drug. Yet no rational being would therefore deny the
specific properties of rhubarb or of opium, and assert that the
action of them is only imagination. When a person has once
had ague from makuria, a thousand things besides malaria
may produce ague. I know a physician who, as well as
Csesar, had an ague in Spain, and some years afterwards,
from the shock of falling over the scraper at the door
of Dr. Hope^s theatre in Edinburgh, had as perfect a pa-
roxysm,— cold stage, hot stage, and sweating, as he ever
had originally. — And here I may ask whether, though the


Digitized by


Google


314 Dr. EUioison's Cases of

powers of rhubarb and opium are undoubted, people al-
ways sleep when they take the usual dose of opium, or
always find an efi'ect on their interior when they take rhu-
barb? do all catch infectious and contagious diseases, or
catch an ague, or catch cold, or suffer sea sickness, when
equally exposed ? nay, does the same person at all times?
And yet you hear people, just as if we were inanimate matter
and every condition in us could be with ease made the same
at all times, — just as if we had only to mix a pair of effer-
vescing powders, say, "I'll believe in mesmerism if you will
affect me/* They might as well say, " Well, if I marry and
have a family, I^U believe that others become papas and
mammas through being married."


II. Cure of palsy with epilepsy.

Master Salmon, the son of Mr. Salmon, an old esta-
blished and most respectable mercer of No. 22, Red Lion
Street, Holbom, was bom in April, 1826. In 1834, when
he was eight years of age, he began to have attacks of violent
pains in the abdomen, and, if in a carriage at the time, he
would vomit. Dr. Roots, Dr. Conquest, Dr. Pearce, and all
the other medical men who were consulted, were understood
by the Mends to say that the glands of the abdomen were too
large ; so that the pain was evidently ascribed to mesenteric
disease. I have no doubt it was neuralgia, as epileptic,
hysterical, and other persons labouring under nervous dis-
eases, are very liable to neuralgic pains, sometimes agonizing,
before, during, and after the epileptic or hysterical attacks, and
chiefly in the head and abdomen ; and in the latter situation,
mesenteric, hepatic, or some other visceral affection, is gene-
raUy declared to exist. That he had no mesenteric affection
is certain ; for he never has had any sign of such an affection;
— ^no enlargement, no emaciation, &c. nothing but the attack
of pain for a time; and abdominal pain is not alone a sufficient
ground for the hjrpothetical opinion of the existence of hepa-
tic or mesenteric affection. But medical men every day give
groundless opinions.

In 1836, while suffering from a severe attack of this kind,
he was seized with an universal shaking and stifiness which
lasted twenty minutes. A similar seizure in all respects took
place the next morning: and a third in the evening. His head
was drawn back at the time. They came about three times a
day for three months, and then more and more frequently
and severely, always morning and evening and soon after
meals. After these attacks had recurred for a year, perfect


Digitized by


Google


PaUy Cured by Mesmerism. 315

epilepsy took place. They no doubt were imperfect epilepsy ;
and the state which had existed in a portion of the nervous
system devoted to sensibility^ and had given rise to the ago-
nizing pain^ was now gone over to a portion devoted to mo-
tion. In the epileptic fits he was perfectly insensible, bit his
tongue, foamed, required many persons to hold him, and
once tore away fix>m four men and stood upright at the end of
the sofa. Their usual duration was an hour. He was again
attended for a fortnight by Dr. Roots, who purged him
strongly with calomel and other things: but he got worse
than ever, and began to bark loudly during the whole of the
attack. He had no warning, but would be seized while
speaking to or kissing his mother ; and remained in a coma-
tose state for an hour or two after the fit. There was but one
continued fit, — ^not a succession united, as in hysteria ; and
he had about one every day: but at one time only on a
Sunday. I have in a few other cases noticed the recurrence
to take place on particular days for a time, and frequently on
a Sunday.

After leaving Dr. Roots, he was placed imder Dr. Laing,
the uromancer, for a year and a half; but with no success. All
sorts of remedies were tried in vain. After a fit, an arm or
leg would occasionally remain paralyzed for a short time. In
other cases I have seen impaired motion or insensibility of
some part or other after a fit ; and sometimes violent neuralgic
pain and tenderness of a part, accordingly as portions of the
nervous system devoted to sensation or motion happened to be
affected, and according to the way in which they were affected.
He had suffered neuralgia before the epilepsy, and was now
subject to palsy after the attacks. Once his lower extremities
remained palsied for a fortnight so that he could not stand,
and then another fit took place and perfectly restored them :
he once lost the use of his side for two days : and once his
speech for half a day.

On January 26th, 1839, I was summoned to him, late in
the afternoon, and found him lying on a couch, so paralyzed
that not only could he not walk, but he could not raise his
head in the least &om the pillow, or move it to one side.
^ others raised him even a few inches, he became insensible ;
or, as the family said, fainted. Of all this I satisfied myself.
A fit which had taken place twelve days before had left him
thus paralyzed in the legs and trunk and neck.

Though I had just resigned at University College bedltuse
I was not allowed to cure my patients with mesmerism, the
father had no view to mesmerism, and gave me pen, ink, and
paper to write a prescription. But knowing, as all medical


Digitized by


Google


316 Dr. ElliotsorCs Case^ of

men in their hearts do, that medicine in the majority of cases
of epilepsy and numerous other nervous affections is of no,
of little, or of secondary use, whatever number of pills and
bottles are consumed and other appliances made, I said no-
thing, but went to my carriage, and requested Mr. Wood
who was in it to come and help me mesmerise a patient. We
returned to the house. I raised the child to the sitting pos-
ture, and almost immediately he became comatose, as many
epileptic and hysterical patients are in the habit of becoming
between the perfect fits or when perfect fits have not yet shewn
themselves. He was not pale, nor was his pulse altered: — ^the
state was coma, not fainting. I restored him to the horizontal
position and mude transverse passes before his chest and face ;
and he awoke suddenly and perfectly, with the usual sudden
inspiration which I had always seen characterize the return qf
the Okeys and many other mesmerised patients to the waking
state. The parents said that the return to consciousness was
much more rapid than they had ever seen il beforCy — shewing
that his state was really mesmeric. I then, without saying a
word, took Mr. Wood^s hand, and he the father's, and with
the other hand I made passes before the child from his face
downwards as he lay. His eyelids presently began to droop,
and in hhoxitfive minutes nearly closed, and were in a state of
rapid tremor. His jaw had become locked ; and he could not
be roused by rough shaking, nor did he appear to hear, ex-
cept that clapping the hands in his face increased the tremu-
lous contraction of his eyelids. I made passes along his arm
and hand and the extremity extended and rose, and presently
fell : then passes transversely, and it somewhat moved trans-
versely : and the longitudinsd passes on being repeated caused
his extremity to extend and rise again. The child was igno-
rant of mesmerism and sleep-waking or somnambulism ; but
beautifully displayed, though unprepared for my mesmeric
proceedings, the phenomena of mesmerism and sleep-waking.
He was fast asleep, as his breathing and indifierence shewed.
He fell asleep in the true mesmeric manner, his eyelids closed
and trembled, and his jaw was locked. Nothing could be
more genuine. To talk of imposition would be preposterous,
and only display ignorance of the subject. But he could,
like many other sleep-wakers, partially hear and see. His
eyes were not completely closed, and I found that he heard
me. For, while making the longitudinal passes I said aloud
that I would make the transverse, but continued the longi-
tudinal. However, his hand moved transversely. The expla-
nation was this. There was excited in him a strong propen-
sity to imitation and obedience. He had no occult power, as


Digitized by


Google


Palsy Cured by Mesmerism. 317

some deep-wakers have^ of knowing what I was doing ; he
judged by his sight and hearing; and, if I could deceive him,
he did what I led him to believe I ordered or was doing.
During the whole of my attendance he scarcely went beyond
this. His eyes were always a little open, as every body clearly
saw, and he directed them to his mesmeriser ; and when he
was able, as he was in a few days, he directed his head
likewise in order to watch his mesmeriser. There was no
disguise : he had a strong propensity to imitate and obey, and
used his external senses naturally for information.* I have
had patients who learnt what was doing without any known
means, and imitated grimaces made behind them, when
their eyes were closed. Persons ignorant of the subject
pronounce patients, circumstanced lie this boy, to be impos-
tors. I did so myself in two or three instances, when I first
attended to mesmerism : and deeply do I now lament the in-
justice I did the individuals. I was not aware that the pro-
pensity to obey and imitate might be excited in sleep-waking,
while no means beyond the external senses existed to supply
the patient with information : and when I deceived a patient
and led him to imitate what he fancied me to do, and not
what I really did, I accused him of imposition. My con-
science is never easy when I think of my injustice. A young
woman in whom this was remarkably the case, and against
whom I became so greatly prepossessed that I scolded her
and did not take any interest in her and ceased to mesmerise
her, died of her diseases in the hospital after I left town one
autumn. My moments are to this day embittered when my
injustice towards her recurs to my memory. My only excuse
is my ignorance. I must be thankful that I did not, like my
brethren, remain ignorant ; but that, seeing there was truth
in mesmerism, applied myself to it, till I became familiarized
with its facts.

I next moved Master Salmon's legs by vertical tractive
movements; and then tried his head. It soon began to move
as if an eflFort were made to raise it. Mr. Wood and myself
made the movements together, and the eflTort became greater
and greater, till at last the boy raised it from the pillow, — a
thing he had not done for ten days. It soon fell back again.
But we persevered again and again, till he rose into the sit-
ting posture. The more we slowly retreated in making these
tractive movements, the stronger appeared to be the influ-
ence. Every time we had retreated as far as the room would
aQow, he fell back powerless. At last, after having drawn him

• See my remarks on this in the last nnmbor of the Zoist, p. 190.
VOL. I. Z


Digitized by


Google


318 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

into the sitting posture^ we made tractive passes &om the top
of his head upwards; and this soon made him elevate his head,
and then elevate his whole frame till he positively stood
erect on the floor. We had moved him to the foot of the
couch with his legs hanging down, before I tried to make
him stand. I walked backwards making tractive passes &om
him to me, and he slowly followed me. The father and
mother were petrified, and called in their people from the
shop to witness the strange sight of their child with his head
nodding in sleep and slowly moving after me, though unable
to raise his head an inch or move his legs at all a quarter of
an hour before. The room was behind the shop and small ;
and I opened the door, receded into the shop, and he slowly
followed me. I turned into the room again, making the trac-
tive passes, and he went round it after me. I stood on one
leg, he stood on one leg ; I turned round, he turned round ;
I opened my mouth, he opened his mouth. I drew him
onwards to the couch and laid him down upon it. I awoke
him two or three times by blowing in his face ; and sent him
to sleep again presently by longitudinal passes before him.

After a sovereign had been held in my hand for a minute,
I put it into one of his, which instantly closed upon it, but
relaxed as soon as a piece of iron was rubbed upon his hand.
This experiment was frequently repeated and invariably with
the same result, except once, and then the rigidity was rather
increased. The iron, I believe, abolished the eflFect of the
gold ; but the friction increased it. If therefore the friction
happened to be rapid, it might more than counterbalance the
speofic effect of the iron. I met with precisely the same
results in the Okeys ; — simple friction, no matter with what,
increased the effects of gold and silver, &c., while iron, held
still, abolished it. After the sovereign was removed, the
palm was rubbed with I forget what, and it closed rigidly
again, but relaxed when a piece of iron was applied to the
back of it.

I moistened my finger with saliva and rubbed it on his
palm, his hand instantly closed : I did the same to the back
of his hand, it instantly extended, and the extension was in-
creased by farther rubbing. At one time when gold had
been applied, he became cataleptic : but his extended arms
or legs could not be made to descend by darting the hands
at them as those of the Okeys could. Friction along the
hand increased the rigidity. I at length made transverse
passes on his eyebrows and awoke him, and did not send him
to sleep again, but asked him whether he had been sitting up
and walking. He repUed, " No, I have been asleep.^' He


Digitized by


Google


Palsy Cvred by Mesmerism. 319

had no knowledge of anything that had transpired^ nor was
he at all fatigued. I gave him my hand and desired him to
sit up. He did so. I then desired him to stand and walk.
He did so ; but was quite at a loss to understand it^ say-
ing, " How is it V I then replaced him in the recumbent
posture; because his newly acquired strength would soon
hare been exhausted.

Jan. 27th. On visiting him in the middle of the next day,
he immediately raised himself on the sofa and held out his hand
to me. He had experienced no headache since the preceding
evening, though before he had long suffered much from it.
I put my gold watch into his hand, but it produced no effect.
After I was gone, however, he had a peculiar sensation in
his hand. As I expected company at three to witness some
mesmeric phenomena, I begged his father to drive him to my
house. When he had arrived, I put him into the sitting
posture in an easy chair, and it was not till the end of five
minutes that his insensibility took place, and his hands be-
came cold. His mother stated to the company that previously
he instantly became insensible if even his head was raised
enough for his nightcap to be put on. I laid him down, and
he soon recovered with the usual sudden inspiration. I
made longitudinal passes before his face, and his eyelids
began to tremble, and in a few minutes he was asleep. I
drew his arms and legs in different directions by tractive
passes ; and then by means of them drew him forwards in the
chair, and then upwards, and he stood upright on the floor,
followed me all about the room, and imitated every movement
which I made. At last I made outward passes with my
thumbs on my own eyebrows. He did the same on his own,
and immediately awoke to his natural state. He was in per-
fect ignorance of all that had happened, and declared himself
not in the least tired.

Before he awoke, finding him quite deaf, I pointed my
fingers just into his ears, and after a short time he heard :
and to my question whether he was asleep, replied, "Yes ;''
and to my second question when he would wake if nothing
were done to him, he repUed, " Never." Thus he had at first
gone into the higher degree of sleep-waking, — in which the
patient knows where he is, his mesmeriser, and perhaps
others, and that he is asleep. In the lower degree, the patient
declares he is not asleep, and mistakes the place, time, and
person of every one addressing him, and, though perfectly
rational on the erroneous assumption, cannot be made to
believe the truth, — ^is in a perfectly rational dream. I have
patients who have never gone beyond the lower degree ; one,

z2


Digitized by


Google


320 Dr. EUiotaon's Cases of

though she has gone into it for two years : others who have
at length passed from the lower to the higher : others who
went at first into the higher : and others who are sometimes
in the higher and sometimes in the lower^ even during the
same fit of sleep-waking.

In his sleep^ before I drew him up fi^m the chair, I
applied gold, first touched a short time by myself (mesme-
rised) to the palm of his hand, which instantly contracted, and
any metal touched by the gold then had the same effect.

28th. Was now able to sit up a long while without insen-
sibility coming on. I sent him to sleep, and, standing at his
right hand, drew up his legs by tractive passes. After they
had dropped, I in the same way attempted to draw up hiis
right arm : but, instead of it, the legs came up again. I then
tried the left arm. It did not rise on account of being
wedged in between his body and the side of the couch : but
his right arm and both legs came up. I disengaged his left
arm, and, standing on his left side, endeavoured to draw up
his left arm, but both arms and both legs rose, and continued
to rise though I ceased to make any tractive movement.

This is very curious, and similar to what I continually
observe. When a muscular effect has been produced, — ele-
vation, depression, extension — ^it has a strong tendency to
recur, when any attempt to produce a muscular effect is
made. The idea seems fixed in the patient, and confounds
itself with the new impression or even gets the upper hand of
it, at least for a time. Not onlv will a previous movement of
the same sitting then return, but a movement of a former
sitting. I had a patient, who, like many others, though
fast asleep mesmerically, and with his eyes bandaged, woidd
close or extend his hand, exactly as I closed or extended
mine near his : though how he knew what I did is a perfect
mystery. The effect came slowly, and, if I placed my fingers
and thumbs in strange positions, very slowly, and not till
aft;er many efforts and mistakes, though at last most accu-
rately. I had one day put my thumb between the fore and
middle fingers, and he had done the same. The following
day I put my hand in some other position, and before he
imitated this, which he at length did, he put his thumb pre-
cisely in the condition of the previous day, and for some time
he continued to shew a tendency to this, when I presented to
his hand my closed or extended hand for him to imitate. An-
other patient would close her hands in imitation of mine. But
after some months, I held mine extended near her's. She
extended her's, but always closed it first, and often two or
three times before she extended it. This patient had her


Digitized by


Google


Palsy Cured by Mesmerism. 321

eyes partially open, though I could never satisfy myself that
she saw. But though they Were open, and she might see, she
invariably for months executed the closiu:^ of the hand before
she would extend it in imitation of mine. It frequently hap-
pens also, that other parts besides those from which the mesme-
riser makes tractive passes will move. Sometimes both hands,
both legs, or all four, if traction is made to one only. Old
movements continually recur, when, if the patient had a
desire to impose they would not, because no steps are taken to
prevent him from seeing what you are about. There is the
disposition to imitate or obey, acting not only upon informa-
tion it receives in any way, but influenced by a previous
association, which may be more powerful than the present
new impulse.

So strong is the disposition when once given, that the
movement will continue after the mesmeriser ceases to give
an impulse ; and, if he hurries to another experiment, the old
effect may continue and be repeated again and again before
his new attempt succeeds ; — and this equally whether no pre-
caution or every precaution is taken to prevent the patient
from knowing what you are attempting.

An iron waiter was placed before his eyes, and his legs rose
again though nothing was done. A hat was placed before
his eyes, and the tendency of his legs to movement now
seemed expended, for they were still; but I attempted to
draw his hand, and it followed mine.

Mesmerised gold caused closure or extension of his hand
as it was applied to the back or the palm.

His hands were quite cold during the sleep.

I awoke him by blowing in his face : sent him to sleep
again by a few longitudinal passes before his face, and again
partially awoke him by an outward pass of the points of my
thumbs upon his eyebrows, and still more by a second pass
of the same kind, and completely by a third, as in the case of
Hannah Hunter.

29th. Much stronger and better. Mesmerised lead and
iron, placed repeatedly in his hands for some time, had no
effect. On a mesmerised half-crown being put into them,
they closed ; and he found considerable difficulty in opening
them, saying, that they stuck. I desired him to close them
again, which he did with some difficultv, and the rigidity was
so much increased that he was unable to open them. I
applied the poker to the back of his left hand, and this in-
stantly opened : I rubbed the palm with the poker, and it
closed again firmly, the friction probably overpowering the
specific influence of the iron. Lead was applied to the back


Digitized by


Google


322 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

of his closed hand, and this slowly relaxed, probably from the
effect of the silver dying away and not from any influence of
the lead.

I took the haif-croim oat, held it in my own hand^ and
then placed it on the back of his. The hand opened more.
Another mesmerised half-crown was put upon the first, and
the hand extended widely and so firmly that he could not
close it. A piece of iron was placed upon the half-crowns, and
he then could close it partially. The half-crowns were re-
moved, and the iron left alone in his hand, and he opened
and shut it with perfect ease. Iron, rubbed on the back or
palm of the hand, caused rigid extension or closure : it was
applied without friction to the back of his hand, and relaxation
at once followed. Two sovereigns first held in my hand and
then wiped, that mesmerised perspiration might have no
influence, were placed in his hands and caused immediate
closure. I rubbed lead on the back of his left hand, and it
opened instantly. I rubbed the back of the right hand
against the arm of the chair, and it opened slowly. Some
patients are not affected by metals : of those who are affected,
some are affected in one manner, some in another: many
precisely as the Okeys were affected, while the susceptibility to
their effect lasted, but its duration was not three years. The
effect of gold, silver and iron, upon this little boy, was so
similar to that upon the Okeys, that I thought of poor Mr.
Wakley when I saw the same phenomena come forth in him.
A hat was held before his face, and I stood at his feet and
said aloud that I would draw up his legs. But I did nothings
and yet his legs soon began to move, and at last rose to a
level with his body. I then said nothing, but endeavoured to
draw up his left arm by passess ; but no effect ensued, and
his sleep was afterwards found to have become very deep. A
board was placed before his face, and I opened my mouth on
the other side of it. Unfortunately a visitor, fancying he saw
the boy^s mouth opening, said, " Oh, yes, he is opening his
mouth ! " Mr. Wood declared he saw nothing : but the mouth
now opened immediately. The same occurred when I put
out my tongue, though nothing was said.

The sleep of sleep-wakers is in general continually fluc-
tuating ; and at moments of great depth experiments do not
succeed. At these times we used to lessen it in the Okeys by
making a pass or two upon the eyebrows, not doing enough
to awake them, and the experiment which was going on
succeeded then perfectly. This I did to the child ; and, the
iron waiter being held before his face, I attempted to draw
up his left arm, and after a considerable time it rose a little.


Digitized by


Google


Palsy cured by Mesmerism. 323

but soon ceased. I rubbed my thumbs again upon his eye-
brows and awoke him : and sent him to sleep again^ so that
he might not be in his former deep sleep^ at least for a short
time. The waiter was held before his face^ and I endeavoured
to draw up his right hand : it followed a little. On making
longitudinal passes along his right arm^ it moved in the same
direction. On attempting to raise his legs^ both hands and
legs rose. Either the boy saw in spite of the waiter; or
he did not see, but had a very faint degree of the occult
power possessed by some sleep-wakers of knowing what we
are doing.

The simultaneous movement of his arms with his legs
would not have occurred, had he been an impostor, because
I could not make movements to draw up all four at the same
time : it was mere sympathy, association, &c.

We should always remember that, in the sleep-waking
state, there is often a touch of morbid mental condition, of
endless variety, and of all degrees, up to decided insanity,*
though perhaps some faculties are at the time extraordinarily
acute, and faculties not seen in the healthy state present
themselves to our astonishment. The ignorance or forgetful-
ness of this puzzles many persons who witness sleep-wakers
and makes them fancy imposition. For what reason I know
not, but, while the iron waiter was held before his face, his
hands rose several times and pressed it violently to his face.
This did not happen when a board was substituted before his
face ; but if, at the same time, the waiter was moved towards
his legs, these soon became agitated, and at last suddenly
kicked against the waiter : and the effect was much greater
when the board was not held before his eyes. The waiter
was presented to his left hand and withdrawn and the hand
followed.

I now drew him by tractive passes off his chair. He stood
and followed me all about the room, and more quickly than
the first night ; but reeling and tottering, though he never
fell ; turning round, sitting down, stooping, standing on one
leg, folding his arms, trying to whistle, exactly as I did.
After great amusement \xy this way, I passed my thumbs upon
his eyebrows and awoke him. His mother wished him to lie
down supposing he must be tired, but he sat up, declaring he
was not tured at all.

This is one of the most striking things in mesmerism : —
that persons very weak, perhaps exhausted by previous exer-

* Dr. Darwin considered somnarobnlism allied to insanity. Every one
disposed to suspect mesmeric sleep-waking should read bis section on or-
dinary somnambalism ; Zoonowaay sect. xix. A beautiful case is giren.


Digitized by


Google


324 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

tion^ shall be thrown into the mesmeric sleep-wakings and
be kept in constant muscular action^ perhaps extending their
arms and legs^ or in a state of rigid flexion, forced into and
retained in the most awkward, and one would think painful,
attitudes, such as they could not support a hundredth part of
the time in the natural state, and on being awakened, know
nothing more than that they feel much stronger and better
than before you sent them to sleep.

30th. So strong that he sits up without any support
of cushion or back, and walks across the room without
assistance.

I drew up one hand; some one else the other; and I then
drew him upright from the floor. When he was sent to sleep,
the attraction to me was so powerful, that he not only followed
me about the room, but stood as close as possible to me, and,
when I sat down, sat in the same chair, pushing violently
at me as if he wished to be in the very same point of space.
I shall in the next number publish a case in which a young
man invariably did this, sitting or standing or kneeling, never
satisfied with mere contact, but driving on against las mes-
meriser. I have two female patients, one of whom approaches
as near as possible, but never touches her mesmeriser, and
the other puts her, head forward, and, as soon as it touches,
she withdraws it and stands fixed. The child now attempted
to drive against me, while standing, but soon gave up and
yielded to his propensity to imitate sJl I did. I took a spoon
off the sideboard and laid it on the floor. He did not go
through the whole of this, but only the latter part, — he
stooped down and put his hand on the floor. When I spoke,
he spoke in a whisper, repeating my very words. He tried to
whistle when I whistled. In following me about he reeled so
far over to one side that we all thought continually that it
was impossible for him not to fall, yet he always righted him-
self and never fell : and though his hands were often within
an inch of the ground, he invariably recovered himself without
touching it with them.

He was again placed in a chair, and a board held before
his eyes. I endeavoured to draw up his right leg : his hands
moved, and his feet came up a little after trying a long while.
I partially awakened him, or rendered his stupor less deep,
by rubbing my thumbs once upon his eyebrows, and again
attempted to draw up his legs. They now followed till they
were on a level with the chair, when they suddenly fell and
the sleep became more profound. Here was a beautiful illus-
tration of a fact invariably observed in the Okeys. After a
strong or continued muscular exertion, as the ascent of an


Digitized by


Google


PcUay Cured by Mesmerism. 32S

arm^ &c.^ &c.^ sudden relaxation would always occur^ and the
sleep become so profound that they dropped powerless and no
impression coula for a time be made upon them. The boy
had never seen them^ — ^all was nature in them and him, and
I may add in thousands of others. I put my fingers on the
back of his hand, and it immediately extended rigidly : I
put them on the palm, and it instantly closed rigidly. What-
ever part of his face I touched became contracted, so that I
could cause him to make all kinds of grimaces. If I rubbed
my hand down the front of his leg, this suddenly flew up,
and higher and higher the more I rubbed. On rubbing the
imder part of one thigh, both were instantly and rigidly
bent back. Now this could not have happened from deceit.
He could not be ignorant which thigh I rubbed, yet both
bent backwards. After remaining bent some time, his thighs
relaxed, and the sleep became more profound. I placed a
mesmerised shilling under his thigh without effect. I sub-
stituted a mesmerised sovereign, and the right leg and thigh
began to shake, and the left also was slightly agitated.

3l8t. Sleep took place with passes made at the distance
of ten feet, though not so quickly as usual. I laid him flat
on his back upon the floor, and by tractive passes upwards
made him rise and stand up without assistance from touching
the floor with his hands. This he was desired to do after he
awoke, btit was unable.

Feb. 1st. His health is very much improved, and he walks
about when awake very well. Hitherto he has been mesmer-
ised daily; but henceforth will be mesmerised only every
other day.

Feb. 2nd. Had a fit this morning which lasted half an
hour only, instead of an hour as formerly. Differently &om
what had ever happened before, he both was not unconscious
during the fit and was afterwards conscious of having had it.
He could not think what was the matter with him while he
was kicking about, and called upon his family to hold him
still.

Such was the insensibility to pain &om mechanical cause
in his mesmeric sleep, that, though &om having for a very
long while had an eruption with open sores upon his head he
could not bear it touched in his waking state, Mr. Wood put
his hand upon it, after sending him to sleep, without occa-
sioning any sign of seiisation. His mother, noticing this,
proposed sending him to sleep every day when she was going
to dress it, as the agony he suffered from having it dressed
was extreme, his irritability of system rendering him a bad
hand at bearing pain, and the hour of the process was dreaded


Digitized by


Google


326 Dr. ElUotson's Cases of

by both him and her. This was done ever afterwards^ till
the head was healed. When about to dress it^ she made a
few passes before his face, sent him to sleep, dressed it without
his noticing what she did, and blew in his face and awoke
him again, and he happily found all the business was done.
The first day, not having been led to expect this, he asked her
sometime after she awoke him, when she meant to dress his
head.

Feb. 6th. Not only does his health improve, but the
sores on his head have healed so much that he can bear his head
touched in his waking state.

15th. For twenty minutes had the shaking which is the
premonitory symptom of a fit ; but no fit. The peevishness
which has existed during the whole of his illness is undi-
minished.

The treatment had consisted simply in sending him to
sleep by a few passes or pointing the fingers before his eyes,
and then drawing up his arms and legs, and drawing him by
passes after me about the room, and talking to him; for
patients are generally better the more you operate upon them
in this way. Patients can tell if great muscular action has
been excited in them, and those who have no muscular power
in the sleep, but can talk, can tell, on waking, whether you
have made them talk much, by the amount of refreshment
they feel on waking, which is proportionate to what you have
made them do.

The same phenomena of attraction and imitation inva-
riably took place. A great number of gentlemen and ladies
went at my visits to witness his walking after me about the
room, staggering and reeling, but never falling, with his eyes
just open and looking full of sleep, and then sitting still in
perfect repose and breathing heavily when I sat still. A few
medical men witnessed the case ; but they merely thought it
very odd and went about their business again like men wise
in their generation, not pondering on such wonders in the
working of the brain, nor thinking of any improvement in the
confused and unsatisfactory, and often absurd and injurious,
treatment which has been followed &om generation to gene-
ration in such diseases.*

The boy never spoke the first ; and he always replied in
a faint whisper and in very few words.

March 7th. In his sleep I asked him if he could tell me
whether he should be cured. He answered. Yes, and that he

* A friend of mine heard a provincial surgeon, who makes £4000 a-year,
say, after witnessing a mesmeric case, ** That it was very funny," and he
never thought of it again.


Digitized by


Google


Palsy Cured by Mesmerism. 327

should have no more fits : bat that he should have five indi-
cations^ and those all in three months. By indications he
meant shakings without unconsciousness ; that is^ premoni-
tory symptoms of his fits, not followed by fits. Many epi-
leptic persons, besides their perfect fits, have fragments of
fits, — ^abortive fits, sudden shaking, catching, or starting, or
powerlessness of their limbs without consciousness, or giddi-
ness amoimting perhaps to momentary unconsciousness. On
asking him how often I ought to mesmerise him, he left this
to my judgment.

9th. Instead of pointing to both eyes, I pointed my fore-
finger to one only — ^the right; and it alone closed. On
speaking to him, he said he was not asleep, but seemed
rather oppressed, and flushed as he always was in his sleep.
I then pointed my finger to the other eye, and it instantly
closed, and he was asleep.

" He assures me again that he shall have no more fits ;
but five " indications," and those in the course of three
months. He adds, however, that this result ?rill depend upon
my mesmerising him every day."

10th. I pointed to one eye only — ^the right. Both equally
nearly closed. When I spoke, he answered faintly that he
was neither asleep nor awf^e : that he could not hear or see
with his right side, — ^that is, hia right half was asleep. If I
raised the right arm, it dropped, for that side was asleep, and
he never was cataleptic. If I raised the left, it remained, for
he had power in his left half, and he voluntarily sustained it.
This was the first time I witnessed mesmerism of one side of
the brain only: and I had forgotten the fact when I saw
cerebral organs of one side only mesmerised for the first time
a year ago. He said that I could not draw him in this state :
nor could L

When I raised his eyelids, I saw more of the cornea of
the left. The right being asleep, was rather turned up. This
was a beautiful fact, and in harmony with the reality of the
rest. The exquisite delicacy of mesmeric phenomena would
be full proof to all, were some not destitute of delicacy of ob-
servation and true feeling and common sense. I then pointed
my fingers towards both eyes; and he suddenly sank and
breathed hard as in sleep. / now drew hkn as usual, I blew
in his face once, without efi*ect: again, and he opened his
eyes slightly, and raised both arms, lus eyes closed again,
but his arms remained up a little longer : again, and he was
wide awake. In a minute, while walking about the room, he
suddenly looked stupid, his eyes closed somewhat, and he
stared at me. I walked: he followed me, but could not


Digitized by


Google


328 Dr. ElUotson'a Cases of

speak. I made an outward pass upon his eyebrows with my
thumbs^ and he half recovered. Another such pass com-
pletely restored him. He told me he had not been able to see.
He had relapsed &om not having been fully awakened^ as
once happened to Hannah Hunter, p. 311.

On another occasion^ when I mesmerised one eye only^ he
said, he was "cut in half/' that is, one half only was power-
less as in sleep.

March 18th. His mother informs me that all his life he
has incessantly required aperient medicine : but that since I
began to mesmerise him his bowels have become more and
more regular, and he now never requires any.

This morning, when up, he fancied he heard a number of
people talking, and was worried at it. Any noise gave him
this idea.

When in mesmeric sleep, he tells me the same thing, and
remarks that the being sent to sleep now seems to excite
him a great deal. I have noticed in other cases that, as re-
covery advanced, mesmerism began to excite, and required to
be performed less frequently. It is a fact similar to that of
patients, who bore and required a certain amount of food, or
wine, or tonic medicine in the height of illness, becoming over
excited by the same quantity as they improve, and requiring
gradual diminution. I judged it right therefore to mesmerise
him but three times a week.

24th. Has gradually walked and stood more firmly, so
that now he never totters in his sleep-waking. Is not sent
to sleep quite so easily, and certainly is not awakened with-
out much more blowing than formerly.

In his sleep-waking state, moments of deep sleep come on
more frequently than before. He has often a pain or sense
of weakness of his right knee : which in his sleep- waking state
he says is a nervous affection.

April 3rd. Sleep induced certainly more slowly : the mo-
ments of deep sleep are still more frequent : and, after wak-
ing, his eyes, which have lately remained closed for a short
time, are more slowly brought to open by breathing or passes
upon them.

19th. He says in sleep-waking that he shall have an indi-
cation about once a fortnight, till they are completed.

The moments of deep sleep are more frequent. The trac-
tion movements are still easy.

In his waking state, his family have noticed a strong at-
tachment to me : and he has prevailed on his father to pur-
chase my lithographed portrait.


Digitized by


Google


Paby Cured by Mesmerism. 329

His predictions were fulfilled accurately. He had his five
"indications/' the last on the 15th of March, and he has
never experienced another, nor a fit, though above four years
have elapsed.

Mr. Wood and I mesmerised him every other day till Mid-
summer; and after he was well he invariably refused to be
mesmerised, being conscious of the influence over him. Last
year he was troubled with headache, and a friend and myself
tried fifteen times to mesmerise him for it : but could never
produce the slightest eflFect. He is in perfect health and in
business.

The liberal manner in which the father allowed any firiend
to see the phenomena, and the independent, honest manner
in which the father asserted the truth of mesmerism from
the first to everybody, are beyond all praise.

The palsy would probably have ceased sooner or later
spontaneously. But the instantaneous efi^ect of mesmerism
upon it was astounding, and the rapid and perfect cure of the
epilepsy, without any other means, after literally pailfuls of
medicine (to use the father's own words) had been taken in
vain, was as astounding. The cure of the sore head, and the
establishment of healthy action in the bowels after years of
costiveness, were very striking.

III. Cure of singular intermittent Palsy by Mesmerism.

The Rev. Mr. Lewis, of Childerditch, called upon me,
June 25th, 1842, respecting the health of his son, and re-
marked that he had seen Mrs. Brett, of Hanningfield, the
day before, perfectly well ; that she had been perfectly well
now for three years ; and that her cure was most wonderful.
I may add that all the usual means had failed before she
came up to town and was mesmerised, and that I lately heard
she is still in good health now, at the end of four years and a
half.

I had received a similar report occasionally fix>m various
quarters ; but the last document I possessed was the follow-
ing:—

" West Hanningfield, June 8, 1839.

" Dear Sir, — I have much pleasure to inform you, that
my wife has been quite well since her return home. My wife
sends her kind respects to you, and to Mr. Wood, for your
kind attention to her.

'' I remain, your humble servant,

" John G. Brett.''

Now Mrs. Brett came under my notice through my friend
the Rev. Mr. Jesse, who, after having been convinced of the


Digitized by


Google


330 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

truth of mesmerism by the facts I showed him, asked me if I
had any objection to subject a small farmer's wife to its influ-
ence, who had,been afflicted for five years and had received no
benefit from the means employed by the various medical men
(rf the county. I assented ; and the woman came up, with
the following letter of introduction : —

'^ Margaretting, Ingatestone, Feb,, 1888.

*' Dear Sir, — I send you a singular patient. You will ex-
cuse my troubling you.

"Case. — Martha Brett, when aged 28, was attacked,
five years ago, after her third accouchement, by a disease
which deprived her of the use of her right side for about
three weeks; then recovered, and for a week was able to
attend to her family. After that, lost her strength again
during two days every week, for several weeks — ^then thrice a
week — ^then four times — at present, is quite incapable of
doing aught five days in the week.

" The disease comes on during sleep, and leaves her during
sleep. If disturbed in her sleep on that night on which the
use of her physical power ought (according to custom) to be
restored to her for the next day following, the disease con-
tinues twenty-four hours longer. She is now thirty-three
years old ; has had two children since her disorder came upon
ner; general health has always been good, and at this time
she can, on well days, attend to the concerns of her family.

"Yours,
" W. Jesse."

I found this to be a most curious case of intermittent he-
nUplegia of the right side ; that the paroxysm always began
in sleep, with a severe fit, and with pain of the head that was
almost instantly followed by the palsy and continued during
the first day only of the palsy ; and that the palsy lasted four
or five days, though originally but two. The pain was chiefly
at the top of the head, and constantly existed in a lower
degree. The palsy was of motion ; but there was a certain
amount of numbness. When seized she was obliged to rise
in her bed, and had a catching in her breath. The recovery
from the palsy invariably took place with a severe fit, of half
an hour's duration, and was incomplete for the first two or
three hours. The affection began three weeks after her third
confinement, with severe pain of the back of the head. She
got into the house with difficulty, went to bed, had two shiver-
ing fits, fell asleep, and awoke with the loss of the use of her
right half; and the palsy continued for three months, when
it gradually subsided, and in two or three months she had


Digitized by


Google


Palsy Cured by Mesmerism. 331

another attack in the nighty that lasted the day and ceased
the next night. From this time the attacks came about once
a months tUi she was again pregnant about nine months after
the commencement of the disease. During the first part of
her pregnancy the attacks were not so frequent ; but^ during
the last fortnight^ continued for four or five days. They
recurred in a month after delivery ; and about every month
up to the time of her next confinement at the end of two
^ears^ though at the beginning of this pregnancy also the
intermissions were longer. For the first three months after
this^ her last^ confinement, she was free; but the attacks
returned, at intervals of a month at first, and then more and
more frequently, lasting also longer and longer. The cata-
menia had appeared but three times in the last year and a
quarter, and were scanty : .they had been absent for the last
ten months. Her bowels, though sluggish, were regular
when she was about ; but would not act for four or five days,
if she was stiU.

I requested my friend Mr. William Wood to mesmerise
her daily for half an hour. This gentleman had been my
clinical clerk in University College Hospital, and most inde-
fatigably assisted me in sdl my mesmeric investigations, firm
to what he knew to be true, and thus regardless of the
miserable professors and those weak students who so sadly
foi^ot themselves. Mr. Wood began to mesmerise her on
Feb. 22, 1839. She had experienced an attack in the night,
and was then paralysed in her right half, and suffering from
headache. The process increased the pain in her head, and
gave her pain between the shoulders ; it caused her also a
difficulty in opening her eyes, that ceased as soon as the pro-
cess was over. While her eyeUds were closed she continued
moaning. Mesmerism was repeated daily till April 29th,
when she went home perfectly well.

The following particulars, fit)m Mr. Wood^s notes, may
be interesting : —

Feb. 23. The same effects were produced as yesterday,
but in a higher degree ; and she likewise felt so faint that she
slid down in her chair, but her face was not pale nor her
pulse altered.

24. Effects the same, but greater; she could not speak
till the mesmerism was desisted from for a few minutes, when
she begged it might not be continued ; she said she had felt
sleepy. The greater part of the effects were removed by
transverse passes. Had pain in the arms and head.

25. Soon after going to bed last night she went to sleep,
and during the sleep the palsy ceased witJiout a fit, which


Digitized by


Google


382 Dr. Emotsm'9 Cases of

before had invariably succeeded its cessation. She was mes-
merised to-day for half-an-hour; the eyes closed^ and were
opened with the greatest difficulty ; the faintness was much
increased.

26. Head much better ; a good night ; effects as before^
but pain of back greater.

27. No return of the palsy. This is the longest internUs-
sion she has had f(yr months. She suffers from nervous ten-
derness of the spine, that is much augmented during mes-
merising.

28. Palsy returned last night.

March 1. Palsy continues, but she is not so helpless as
formerly. During mesmerising, in addition to the other symp-
toms, shivered, and felt a sensation of cold in her head.

2. Palsy last night, without any fit.

3. Lost herself, she said, for a minute or two, while being
mesmerised to-day. The sensation of cold increases for some
time after the process, particularly if she has not been tho-
roughly awakened, and she then feels stupid and requires a
question to be asked her several times before she understands it.

4. During almost the whole time of mesmerising the sen-
sation of coldness is such that her teeth chatter, and she sUps
down in the chair.

7. The palsy returned last night ; so that the intermission
has lasted five days.

8. Palsy ceased last night ; having thus continued but twenty-
four hours.

9. Head better ; slept at night pretty well : said she had
been asleep during the mesmerising; stiU this sensation of
coldness, but no increase of the pain of the back, from mes-
merising.

10. Feels much better. Slept during the process, and had
less sensation of coldness.

11. Slept well last night; head better; not so well as now
since she first came to town; pain in back much less; slept
a long time during the process.

16. Palsy returned last night; so that the intermission
lasted nine days : the palsy was less intense.

17. The palsy ceased last night; having thus again lasted
but twenty 'four hours.

28. The tenderness of the spine is nearly gone ; and the
head-ache is subsiding.

April 14. The catamenia, which had been very irregular for
nearly four years, and entirely suspended for nearly twelve
months, have returned to-day. The tenderness of the spine is
quite gone, and the headache is much better.


Digitized by


Google


Palsy Cured by Mesmerism. 333

20. Scarcely any headache ; feels in much better health than
she has done for years. It is arranged that^ if she remains
free £rom an attack of palsy and has no headache at the end
of another week, she shall return home.

29. No return of palsy since it ceased on the 16th of March,
viz. above stx weeks ; no head€u:he ; feels perfectly well in every
respect. Her daughter, instead of Mr. Wood, has mesmerised
her for the last four days, and produced the same effect. She
is now to return home and be mesmerised by her daughter,
daily, for some time. She always closed her eyes soon after
the process was begun, and said she should otherwise feel
sick ; probably, Mr. Wood remarked, from the movement of
the hand, because she did not feel sick if either the hand was
held stiU or her eyes were dosed.

This satisfactory cure was accomplished, I may observe,
with but moderate sensible effect ; and I have seen patients
cured of various diseases with almost no sensible effect. A
sensible effect, however, renders the cure more probable ; and
the more so, the stronger the sensible effect.

This cure is the more striking, because her sister had an
attack of the same disease, — hemipleffia, after her confinement,
that lasted five years, during winch she had two other fits,
and she then died. I knew a similar case in a surgeon, and
he after some years died of the disease.

After Mrs. Bretf s return home, I begged her to shew
herself to a Cambridge Fellow of the College of Physicians.
The following is an extract from his letter to me : —

May 7, 1839.

I was much gratified last Friday by a Mrs. Brett and her
daughter calling on me, by your request, that I might witness
the agency of mesmerism, as performed by the daughter on
the mother, and who set her to sleep within half an hour, in
my Ubrary, by the manipulations which she practised. Mr.

, the surgeon, was present also, and the act was into-

resting. I will not, of course, occupy your time, or exhaust
my paper, by worrying you with my opinion of the process,
or the science, or the art, or whatever it is. I class it
amongst the effects of the mind on the body in persons whose
fiaith in it is strong ; and / believe that where there is no faith
there would be no effect, which sums up my view of it in a few
words. Infatuated as I hear and know you to be, you will, of
course, smile at my scepticism. It will not be the first occa-
sion of your pitying my ignorance ; and possibly, had I the
advantage of your society and information, I might change
my opinion, and be a proselyte ; but as it is, I view it in the
light I mention. — ^Your's, sincerely, J. C. B.

A A


Digitized by


Google


334 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

This wise opinion must amuse all conversant with mesmer-
ism ; knowing, as they do, that the eflfects may be produced
without the possibility of the knowledge on the part of the
patient of what is doing, at a distance, in sleep, by means of
inanimate substances, and in idiots ; and that certain of the
effects could never, in their nature, be produced by mental
impressions. But it particularly amuses me, from the cir-
cumstance of seeing in Mr. Wood's notes, made before the
patient left London, that ^* she had no idea of mesmerism,
wondering always at finding herself so sleepy during the pro-
cess; was no less surprised at finding herseLT rapidly recover-
ing, although she took no medicine, and nothing apparently
was done : and, when cured, said that she had thought the
object of her coming to town was to undergo some dreadful
operation, and had consequently expected every day that it
was to take place, and was not a little astonish^ to find the
treatment so simple and at the same time so efficacious.^'

rV. Palsy of the left arm, both legs, and the neck, with
exquisite tenderness of the neck, cured by mesmerism.

Elizabeth Kell, aged eleven, of 17, Three-Colt Lane, Cam-
bridge Boad, Bethnid Green, a child of general good health,
was, on the 25th September, 1839, bitten by a cat on the back
of the left hand, immediately after which she lost the use
of both the hand and arm. roultices, leeches, bandages, and
liniments were tried for about three months under the direc-
tions of Mr. West, surgeon. Hackney Boad, but without effect.
She was an out patient of the London Hospital for three
months. Dr. Frampton ordered blisters under her left arm
and on the back of the neck, with various medicines ; but all
proved unsuccessful. Her legs ached very much. On the
night of the 11th June, 1840, the child awoke with a strange
sensation in her head and body. This was very soon followed
by the loss of her voice, and of the use of both her legs: the
back of her neck was exquisitely painful on the least motion :
her appetite so bad that she could take fruit and vegetables
only, and of them scarcely sufficient to support her. She
was not only confined to her bed for six months, but could
not bear her head to be raised ever so little ; so that she lay
with her head in a line with her body.

In November, 1840, a gentleman, a stranger to me, ac-
quainted me with her case, and I went to see her. On my
attempting to raise her neck ever so little, as she lay in bed,
she seemed agonized. I requested a highly respectable young
woman, named Ambrose, who had been perfectly cured of
epilepsy of fifteen years standing, by M. Dupotet, with mes-


Digitized by


Google


Palsy Cured by Mesmerism. 335

merism^ and is still well, to mesmerise her, and she charitably
complied with my request. Miss Ambrose began to mes-
merise her for half an hour daily, on the 26th of November,
1840. In a week her appetite returned, and she could eat any-
thing. At the end of the second week, while being mes-
merised, she sat upright and rigid in her bed : lost, for seven
hours, the little voice she had : but at the end of that time
recovered it completely, and sat up like any other person.

On the 26th of January, after she had been mesmerised
daily for two months, while being mesmerised, she rose and
walked across the room, completely recovering the use of her
legs. The left arm was still powerless, and she was mesmerised
djuly till the 18th of February, when her hand gradually re-
gained its use. It was a few weeks more before her fingers
fully regained their power. I heard she once had a little relapse
in the hand, but I have reason to believe this is very doubtAil.

She required no aperient from the time she toas mesmerised :
but previously during the whole of her illness her bowels were
extremely torpid.

I have learnt by letter this very day, September 8th, that
she is in perfect health, and has been in a situation for a year
and a quarter.

V. Loss of voice cured by mesmerism.

A single lady, nearly thirty years of age, was greatly
annoyed on the 30th of last September, and, while talking,
suddenly found her voice reduced to a whisper. This state,
together with violent headaches, and pain at the pit of the
stomach, night and day, continued in spite of all the mea-
sures she employed.

She had been out of spirits, and weak, pale, sallow, hollow-
eyed, had lost her appetite, and slept badly for some months,
and had suffered such pain at the pit of the stomach and indi-
gestion about a year, that even a piece of bread distressed
her. I called upon her family early in November, and learnt
the circumstance, but said nothing. I called again on the
2nd of December, and found her in the same condition.
Mesmerism was mentioned; and I then told her that I had
no doubt it would cure her, and offered to mesmerise her, if
she would consent to my doing it, as I invariably did, unpro-
fessionally, for my own amusement. We agreed that I should
mesmerise her dsoly, late in the afternoon, and I immediately
mesmerised her for half an hour. Near the end of the pro-
cess, she began to feel a calmness to which she had for some
time been a stranger, and closed her eyes. She felt indined
neither to speak, open her eyes, nor to move, and breathed

aa2


Digitized by


Google


336 Dr. Elliotsm's Cases of

rather heavily, but remained conscious. I aroused her,
greatly to her annoyance, as she afterwards said, by trans-
verse passes outwards on the eyebrows, with the ends of my
thumbs, and by blowing in her face. She spoke rather better
in the evening.

3rd. Less sensible effect.

4th. The effects which occurred on the first day took
place again, and in 20 minutes increased ; for, on my asking
her whether I should rouse her, she implored me not, though
I was obliged to leave her, and she promised to wake up an
hour after I had left her, and actually did rouse up precisely
at the end of an hour, without having the least idea what
o^clock it was. In the evening her voice was decidedly
stronger ; but in the morning, on waking, she found it again
reduced to a whisper.

5th. She presently went into the state of powerlessness,
apparently asleep, but, nevertheless, conscious, upon my
merely pointing my fingers close to her eyes, and did not
rouse up for an hour. In the evening her voice was tnuch
better, but relapsed by morning.

6th. On rousing &om the mesmeric state, she spoke
quite loud, though she found her " voice tremble as a child^s.''

7th. From this time it rapidly and steadily improved, and
her appetite and spirits returned, and she has never lost her
voice for a minute.

She always roused up at the time she said she would ;
but at length I never fixed upon any time, but allowed the
state to go off spontaneously. She bore pinching in her
hand generally without pain; sometimes the sensibility was
absent and unimpaired even at the same sitting.

As the severe pain of indigestion continued, so that she
could not eat a piece of bread comfortably, I continued mes-
merism for nearly two months, leaving off gradually. I tried
some medicines for two or three weeks, but they did no good,
and I therefore relinquished them and trusted only to the
mesmerism. At the end of this time (Jan. 25th) she had lost
all her indigestion. From not having been able to eat bread
without pain, she could eat anything, even salads. The fol-
lowing are her own words in a statement she drew up of her
case : — " I had been suffering a very long time from indiges-
tion ; indeed, it had become so very bad, that I could not
even eat a piece of bread without having a pain in my chest.
However, thanks to Dr. Elliotson^s great kindness and per-
severance, I can now eat anything, even salads, without
feeling any ill effects at all.^^ Though perfectly cured as to
her voice and stomach, she still was ill in other respects, —


Digitized by


Google


Pahy Cured by Mesmerism. 337

bloodless^ and therefore as pale as a deep brunette could be^
and dark about the eyes ; in fact^ she laboured under an affec-
tion very common to females^ and seen even past thirty, and
in married persons, though often not recognized — a want of
due formation of blood, and called anaemia chlorosis.

Over this the mesmerism had no control : and in the only
other case in which I have known it tried, though I cannot
say to what extent, it equally failed. The only direct remedy
for this is iron ; and iron is absolutely a specific, sometimes
in large, sometimes in even very small, doses. She informed
me that all tonics, iron among the rest, gave her such head-
aches that she could not bear them. However, every medi-
cine may be borne, if the quantity is made small. It is no
matter how small, how apparently ridiculously small a dose is,
if it is the largest a patient bears. I gave her a dose of one
grain of the citrate of iron, three times a day; and begged
her to increase it a grain every few days, as far as she found
it agree. She bore two grains for a dose well, but could
not bear three : and by persevering for two months with two
grains three times a day, she has recovered completely.

Whether by mesmerising her half an hour daily, I should
have cured her even of the anaemia, I do not know. But she
was so susceptible of the powerless condition in which she
remained for about an hour, that I merely ran into the house,
pointed my fingers to her eyes for an instant, reducing her to
a state of closed eyes and powerlessness, and left her. Yet
this was sufBicient to cure her severe stomach complaints.
I never found the state deepened or prolonged by my con-
tinuing to mesmerise her for ten or twenty minutes. Though
what would have been the ultimate result if I had mesmerised
her always for half an hour, I know not. The circumstance
of her voice, before it was fully restored, being stronger
during the evening after the mesmerisation, was very striking.
I knew a young lady who was too feeble to walk across her
room, and vomited all solid or even thick food. But, after
being mesmerised for half an hour, could always take such
food, and walk across the room. She was mesmerised daily,
and got well ; with no other sensible eflfect than drowsiness.
If food were given before the daily mesmerisation, instead of
after it, this was invariably rejected, till her improvement
had advanced. Persons who wdk to my house with fatigue,
to be mesmerised, generally walk home strong ; and if expe-
riments in exciting strong muscular efforts are made, they
are still stronger, and stronger the more of these experiments
are made upon them. So far from feeling fatigue, many fe-
males, susceptible of mesmerism, if weak, out of spirits, and


Digitized by


Google


838 Dr. Elliotsan'^ Ca$e9 of

eating and sleeping badly^ are invigorated by once mesmer-
ising them^ and a few times will set them up far better than
medicine and country air. For common fatigue and exhaus-
tion^ a good mesmerisation is excellent. Dwrtng the mesmeric
state^ when there is no muscular debility^ as there is in some
cases^ in that just described^ for example^ the muscular power
is often greatly exalted.

The following is the lady's own account of her fedings in
the mesmeric state : —

''My arms and hands were generally without feeling; at
least if they were pinched/' as she was told, ''though I could
feel that somebody touched me ; still there was always a sort
of deadness which I certainly never had when I was in a
natural state. My head generally had feeling in it, at least
was sensible to touch, and I greatly suffered with headache
while being mesmerised. Latterly I was mesmerised in a
few moments, and generally remained in a quiescent state for
an hour, or even longer. When first I came to myself, I
always felt an inclination to sleep ; but after I roused my-
self, I felt quite refreshed and cheerful, and it never pre-
vented my sleeping at night. Indeed, I slept better at that
time than I did before or have done since.''

It is usual for the mesmeric coma^ perfect or imperfect,
but in proportion to its depth and length, to cause better sleep
at nights, so far is it from interfering, like common sleep in
the middle of the day, with the natural rest. The sleep at
night is generally so much greater and more refreshing from
mesmerism in the day, that, if this is omitted, the night is by
no means good.

"If they disturbed me by talking much in the same
room, I was quite irritable and nervous all the evening, and
this, indeed, generaUy continued till I was mesmerised again
the next day." It was always done in the drawing-room,
where not only the family, but frequently visitors were ; and
for some time it was not imagined that talking and touching
her hands annoyed her, as she remained leaning back on the
sofa, apparently in perfect repose. Persons in the mesmeric
state should never be irritated or annoyed ever so little.
Although I have never seen excitement of the muscles, how-
ever far carried, do harm, cerebral excitement of the affective
fietculties may be easily carried too far; so that afterwards an
evident cerebral irritation or disturbance may remain for a
longer or shorter period.

" When first the mesmerism began to affect me, I always
felt my pulse in my body beat most strongly; but this
gradually subsided again, and I was left in a state of repose.


Digitized by


Google


Palsy Cured by Mesmerism. 889

Indeed^ I think that the best description of my feelings is
that of the most perfect indolence^ although I never once lost
consciousness/' However this was^ I know that on two or
three occasions the voung lady snored rather loudly to our
great amusement. But^ after mesmeric and ordinary naps,
we often &ncy we have not been asleep, when others know
assuredly that we have.

If any little thing was laid upon her ha^d, she generally
moved her hand so as to shake it off, as if annoyed by it. If
touched by any one, she was immediately annoyed. She felt
slight pressure even when she bore hard pinching, as I have
fir^uently observed in others.

The course of cases of this description is generally favour-
able; the voice usually returns spontaneously, sooner or later,
and sometimes suddenly. Medicines I have never found of
the least use in it. Medical men attend long, and give all
sorts of physic, without any advantage to the patient. The
disease, too, very frequently returns, and this repeatedly.
The effect of mesmerism here was decided, immediate, inva-
riable every time, rapid and permanent ; to say nothing of
its restoration of the digestive functions. An elder married
sister has now lost her voice for above a year, and has very
severe neuralgic pelvic pains, and palpitation. Medicines and
change of climate have done no good, nor has mesmerism
yet, though it has been tried for two months. It causes a
little drowsiness only, and, as the disease has lasted so long,
will probably not cure her without great perseverance.

The facts in sensibility displayed by mesmerism are very
curious. In the mesmeric state, a part insensible to the se-
verest pinching, &c. may not only feel contact, whether the
contact of a person or an inanimate thing, but the patient, if
not annoyed by it as this lady was, may even grasp and pull it.
This may occur in one part, and not in another. I have in
some cases known all parts to be insensible to pinching, &;c.
except the face, which was as exquisitely sensible as ever.
Tickling may be acutely felt, when the same part is insensible
to the severest pinching, &c., as was observed in the lady
whose breast was remov^ by M. Cloquet. I have seen the
most exquisite sensibility to temperature, when the same part
was totaUy insensible to the severest pinching, Sec. There may
be complete insensibility to mechanical violence, temperature,
and all contact. There may be a peculiar sensation £rom the
touch of the points of the fingers of the mesmeriser and all
other persons, so that his shall be distinguished from theirs,
and be felt warm and agreeable, whilst theirs is disagreeable
and felt excesdvely cold, though the eyes be thoroughly closed


Digitized by


Google


340 Dr. ElUotsan's Cases of

and blindfolded and no ordinary means of distingnisliing be
possible.

There may be internal insensibility to pain^ or sensibility
while there is external insensibility. I have known patients
cease to feel internally^ when the mesmeric sleep came on ;
or still feel internal pain. While insensible to mechanical
causes of pain^ they may still feel hunger^ or nausea. While one
of the five external senses is paralyzed^ the rest may be unaf-
fected^ or one or more^ or all of the other four^ be likewise lost.

YI. Case of complete Deafness and Dumbness cured by
mesmerism.

On the 25th of last April, a very poor boy, fifteen years
of age, tall and strong, named Thomas Russen, completely
deaf and dumb, was brought to me by his father, with a note
£rom a lady at Twickenham, a stranger to me, requesting I
would take pity upon him, and endeavour to cure him, as she
had herself, she said, been a witness to the wonderful cure of
Master Linell, recorded in the last number of the Zoist.

The account given to me by the father was, that the boy
lived with him, at Twickenham, and supported himself by
fetching small periodicals, about twice a week, from London,
and distributing them in the neighbourhood. Rather more
than three weeks previously, on the 1st of April, he had gone
as usual, to No. 4, Brydges Street, Covent Garden, for books
and newspapers, and hskd to procure four dozen of "Lloyd's
Weekly London Newspaper" He put two dozen upon the
counter : two dozen in lus handkercluef, with the books on the
top of the latter, intending to put the two dozen which were
upon the counter on the top of the books, and tie all up toge-
ther ; but he forgot those on the counter, and tied up only tiie
books and the Lloyds which were in the handkerchief. On
arriving at home, he found only the two dozen of the Lloyds,
and was terrified at the idea of his father's anger. His father
returned home at eight, accused him of being drunk, being
himself by no means a teetotaller, and of having spent the
money in liquor. The boy protested he had tasted oidy water
and tea the whole day. They walked to Richmond, and the
boy got on an omnibus to go to London, hoping to find his
Lloyd's where he had left them. He remembers nothing more
after this than that he one day ''awoke as from a deep
sleep, in a strange place ; began looking around him, tried in
vain to speak, and could not hear any noise at all. Seeing a
board over the fire-place with the words King's College Hos-
pital upon it, he learnt where he was." The father ascer-
tained that when he returned to the newspaper office his pa-


Digitized by


Google


Deafness and Dumbness Cured by Mesmerism. 841

pen had been carried off by some one^ and no more were to be
nad till the next day; that he had gone to a neighbonring coffee
house^ been seized with a most violent epileptic fit^ and car-
ried by the police to King's College Hospital, where he lay
perfectly insensible for four days and five nights. The fol-
lowing is extracted from an account which the boy wrote out
for me after his recovery : —

'* Then I knew where I was, and I found that all was very quiet, and I
tried to speak and could not ; and when the doctors came they asked me a
great many questions'; but the writing has got so dull, that I cannot make
out many of the questions ; and Doctor Ouy asked me if I had ever had the
hands passed before my eyes, and I told him no ; and when the students
came, they began asking me such foolish questions, one was this, * Does your
mother know you are out f and this is my answer, ' That is joking ; but still
she knows that I am not at home now/ — ^ Have you ever been in the same
way before ?' ' I have had fits, but not been so bad before.' — * What is the ring
for?' * For fits.'—* But that does not do you any good f * No, not now, sir.'
And then Dr. Todd hallooed in my ear, and asked me if I felt it, and I told
him that I heard a noise like a pot boiling ; and a great many other foolish
questions they asked me. And a young man in the hospital told me that
Dr. Todd said cuckoo in my ear, and then they wrote down that I should not
have any food till I spoke and asked them for some, but they gave me some
when I told them I could not ask them for any ; and one day Dr. Budd saw
me, and he said, ' Oh, the damn young scoundrel, he is only shamming : if
I was Dr. Todd, I would whip him till he did speak ;' the sister told me ; she
wrote it down ; and when Dr. Todd came, I told him, and he told me to take
off my jacket and shirt, and he would give me the whip ; and I did take
them off, but he did not whip me, and then he ordered me a cold shower
bath every morning, and I had it five times ; and one day when father came
to see me. Dr. Russel, the house-surgeon, told him that it was of no use him
keeping me there any longer, so father brought me out with him, after I had
been in twenty-one days.

'* I do not know what they did to me when there, during the time I was
insensible, which was four days and five nights, only a young man, a patient
in the hospital, told me that they thrust pins in me, and burnt me with hot
spoons, and done several other things to me as well, to make me speak."

It required very little sagacity of observation to know in
five minutes that the boy was completely deaf and dumb.
He could not hear the loudest or shriUest sound, or make
any noise above the faintest jn(^ or mere breath-soimd, how-
ever forcibly he expired.

I subsequently learnt that four years previously he had
been seized with a delirious epileptic fit at church, running
out, beating his head against the tomb-stones, and then be-
coming violently convulsed and insensible, and returning to
himself in five or six hours, but feeling very ill till the next
morning : that he had a second of the same length at the
Queen Dowager's stables at Bushy Park, rather more than
three years ago : and a third two years ago, £rom being made
drunk by two young gentlemen of Twickenham, who engaged
him to attend them while fishing, and took nearly six quarts
of ale with them, of which they partook so fireely that, when


Digitized by


Google


843 Dr. ElUoiwn'9 Ca$es of

the boy wished to drink no more^ thej threatened to throw him
overboard if he did not finish what was left^ amounting to a
large qaantitj. After leaving them, he fell into a ditch and does
not know how he got out : went to his grandmother's and fell
on the floor convulsed and '^ raving mad/' and so remained
till the next morning, when, after a short intermission, his
convulsions and former delirium returned, intermitting for
only short intervals, and he was sent to the union workhouse
and was bled, but did not recover his senses for five days, and
then, being allowed to go into the yard, he got over the wall,
ran home, and was quite well in a few days.

I determined on doing what I could for him with mesme-
rism : and, standing before him, made slow passes downwards
before his face, and after a time merely pomted the fingers
of one hand to his eyes. The former had no sensible effect ;
but, when I merely pointed, his eyelids presently began to
wink, and continued winking more and more strongly to the
end of the half hour which I resolved to devote to him. The
next day, and ever afterwards, the e^es began winking
as soon as I pointed to them. The winkmg became stronger
and stronger, and the itching and smarting of the eyes obliged
him to rub them violently : the upper eyelid descended more
and more, remaining still for a short time when it quite de-
scended, and remaining still in this position longer and
longer, till after a few days the eyes continued closed for
some moments, there being evidently snatches of sleep. The
effect was invariably less the instant I changed the pointing
to passes and soon ceased altogether. The periods of sleep
lasted longer and longer, his body bending forwards, and
he snoring, but soon starting up again awake. The sleep in-
creased in duration, and now he occasionally did not snore.
In a fortnight, I had only to point to his eyes two or three se-
conds, and he always dropped into the profoundest sleep, not
waking for a quarter or half-an-hour, or till I awoke him. If
he awoke spontaneously, I always sent him at once to sle^
again, that he might have his complete half hour of mes-
merism.

On Sunday afternoon. May 14th, I was sitting between
him asleep with his head against the wall, and another
patient who, in her somnambidism, never allows me to leave
her, though she invariable mistakes me for one of her sisters,
her father, or some one else whom she loves ; and not having
found any improvement in him, I resolved to mesmarise
locally: and therefore, as I sat, pointed my right fore-
finger into Ms left ear, and rested my other fingers and
thumb behind and under his ear. In five minutes, he all at


Digitized by


Google


Deafness and Dumbness Cured by Mesmerism. 843

once became agitated, emptied bis pockets, puttiiig some
things in bis bosom, some under Um, clenched hu fists,
and struck about, not, however, very violently, and still sit-
ting. On waking, he stared at finding bis waistcoat pockets
turned inside out, and at my pointing out to him that some
of his little articles were in his chair and a little song book
crumpled up and stuck near his shoulder half under his
cravat. He shook his head and wrote that he had been
dreaming of fighting. I was too busy for two or three days
to do more than send him to sleep and trust to the general
influence of mesmerism for the local benefit. But on the
Thursday I began to point my fingers into both his ears for
some time during his sleep : and he then began to express pain
in them and around, as he slept. In two days more, the pain
was felt at various hours when he was awake, and rapidly in-
creased, till at the beginning of the next week it was dread-
ful, and when I had sent him to sleep, he not only put his
hands to his ears, but struck them violently, drew up his legs
and kicked, struck his head against the wall next to which he
sat with a large cushion for his head, as my easy chairs and
sofa were occupied with other patients fieust asleep, the tears
rolled copiously down his cheeks, his face was fludiied, and he
sometimes was almost frantic : but made not the faintest noise
all this time, nor did he awake. I was obliged at last to lay
him on the floor in his sleep. The pains agonized him in the
waking state, and it was distressing to see him come to me
every morning, with his cheeks flushed, his eyes red with cry-
ing, and his cheeks wet with tears, his handkerchief in lus
hand, and his countenance expressive of the most intense
suffering. He walked £rom beyond Twickenham and back
every day, a distance altogether of two and twenty miles.
He had become so susceptible, that pointing at him even with
anything, or staring at him, immediatelv made his eyeUds
quiver, and in two moments always sent him into his deep
sleep ; which, however, did not last above a quarter of an
hour or twenty minutes, and required to be renewed, unless
experiments were made upon him, and then he would sleep
very long. Mr. H. S. Thompson of Fairfield House, near
York, was with me one day, and made longitudinal passes
down his arm; when we found it extend and grow rigid,
but it soon came down. The phenomenon was induced
more easily and efficiently £rom this time, and continued
longer and longer the oftener the attempt was made. All his
extremities could now be stiffened at pleasure. The extended
limbs would suddenly relax, as we observed in the Okeys :
but could be kept up almost indefinitely by making a pass or


Digitized by


Google


344 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

two down them when they began to descend slowly. Breath-
ing upon an extremity instantly caused it to rehsix. Some-
times if one extremity was acted upon^ the corresponding, and
at last all four, would rise. If any part was pressed against
with the point of the finger or anything else, it immediately
pushed against the object : a finger on his nose caused Ins
head to rise and move forwards : if put on the back of his
head, his head pushed backwards : if on his arm, his arm
rose.

One day (May 17th,) a day or two before the pains were
evident, and three days after I first put my fingers into his
ears, while asleep he appeared in a dream: held up one
finger and inclined his head forward and a Uttle sideways
in the most natural, and therefore beautiful, attitude of
listening, for a short time. A day or two afterwards, while
asleep, he suddenly rose from his chair, walked to the door,
pushing against things in his way, opened the door, took
the proper direction in the hall towards the street door, but
knocked against a bust at a corner where he had to turn,
walked towards the street door, and seated himself in a chair,
upon which he habitually sat while waiting for me, though he
would have sat too near the edge but that I pushed it fully
under him. I was obliged to leave him in the care of a
servant ; but he awoke in five minutes, and was brought back
to me, shaking his head and smiling, puzzled and amused
at finding what must have happened. On the Thursday of
the week in which his pain had become so severe, the second
week of pain, May 25th, I was less busy, and resolved to be-
stow half-an-hour or an hour upon him, and if possible restore
his hearing and speech that morning. As he lay on the floor,
several gentlemen being in the room, I sat behind his head,
held it raised as well as I could, and inserted the extremities
of mv fore-fingers in his ears. This was rather troublesome to
contmue, as he tossed his head in all directions, and struck
his arms and legs about from time to time with agony.
At last he awoke, and on my making some observation
he smiled: — He had recovered his hearing, but he could
not utter a sound. I sent him to sleep again : and kept the
points of all my fingers under the front of his lower jaw,
against the root of his tongue and his larynx at the top of the
windpipe. After a time, he began to make eflfbrts to speak,
the root of the tongue and the larynx moving and the
former swelling. At length an expiratory sound was au-
dible, louder than the fednt breathing sound hitherto heard
when he strained to make a noise. I persevered with my
fingers, and his eflfbrts increased. The sound augmented:


Digitized by


Google


Deafness and Dumbness Cured by Mesmerism. 345

actually became strong : and then he half articulated^ and at
last spoke perfectly well^ waking in the midst of the efforts.

The joy of all present can be imagined. Mr. Thompson
walked across the room^ shook my hand in the warmth
of his heart, and the next day provided for the boy by taking
him into his establishment in Yorkshire, having heard from
my steward-butler, who has lived with me very many years,
that the poor boy's conduct had always appeared to him
strikingly good and that he thought very highly of his
character.

The following note frt)m the lady who sent him to me will
shew the character he bore : —

• Sir,^I cannot forbear retoming my sincere and grateful thankii for
yonr endeavours and success in restoring to the poor lad the blessing of
speech and hearing. The gratitude of the afflicted parents is not to be
described. It has been a painful scene of great interest to all who know
the honesty and good conduct of this family. The lad being also so fortu-
nate as to obtain a situation as servant, is called upon for his utmost exer-
tions, and I sincerely trust he will prove worthy of the kindness bestowed
on him.

The Rev. Calvert Moore, well known to you, will, I am sure, rejoice at
the lad's good fortune. He has known this poor family for many years, and
was anxious that success might crown your endeavours.

Twickenhamy May 27M, 1843.

He told us now how excruciating the pains of his ears
had been, and that thev shot upwards and round the back of
his head. When I pointed to his tongue, pains shot under
the jaws, but were nothing compared with those which he
suffered in his ears.

Finding him so susceptible a subject, I mesmerised him
several times during the few days he remained in London.
Being able to hear and speak, and free frt)m pain, he talked
and answered in his sleep ; for he fell into the first degree of
sleep-waking, — that in wluch the subject mistakes the person,
time, and place, but he was perfectly rational on these
wrong foundations. He would walk about if desired, and
sometimes mistook me for a fellow-patient in the hospital,
who appears to have been a most respectable young man, and
had induced him to take the teetotal pledge, and easily
enough, for he had seen in his own family the miseries of
drinking. At another time he mistook me for a respectable
young woman of his acquaintance, and proposed a walk,
which we took round the room, he thinking we were near
Islington and talking most facetiously and gallantly. At
last I left him, and he was greatly disconcerted, became
very proud, and told me I need not be proud, as my father
had been a bankrupt, which I hear had been the case with


Digitized by


Google


346 Dr. ElUotsm's Cases of

the girl's father^ and comforted himself with saying, that he
knew I should not leave him, as it was growing dusk, and I
should be afraid to go all the way home alone. Before I
thus offended him, I told him I had something very nice for
him, and put some wormwood into his mouth, which he
chewed with great apparent relish, saying, in reply to my
question what it was, that he thought it was sweet cake.
Such is the force of feeling in sleepwaking. Because he mis-
took me for some one whom he liked very much, he fancied
what I gave him was excellent. This is a fine illustration
of the working of prejudice upon our judgment in the
waking state. In the mesmeric state the force of imagina-
tion and feeling is great beyond all conception. Many sleep-
wakers will declare they do not hear the loudest noise, and
yet hear the voice of the mesmeriser perfectly well; and they
really shew not the least indication of hearing. I believe the
action of feeling is so rapid as well as strong, that the sensa-
tion dies away before it can be appreciated, and is therefore
instantly forgotten and unnoticed. I will write upon this
wonderfrd point on some future occasion. At last I woke
the lad, by blowing on him or rubbing his eyebrows. He was
no sooner awake, than he began to make a wry face, looked
at me, showed extreme disgust at something in his mouth,
could scarcely refrain from spitting out, and at last turned
pale and almost vomited. It was with the greatest effort
that he prevented himself from vomiting. He said I had put
something horrid into his mouth. Yet he had just before in
his sleep, when under a sweet illusion, munched the worm-
wood with great satisfaction for several minutes.

In his sleep-waking, the fancied place, time, and person
would change after a while, as is common in the lower degree
of that state.

He could now be drawn in any direction, and would follow
his mesmeriser about, never however recognizing him, but
mistaking him for some one he liked ; unless I plagned him
by pulling him or speaking sharply to him, and then he
always mistook me for Dr. Todd or some other person of
King's College Hospital, and his manly and independent dis-
pleasure with their conduct towards him and mesmerism and
me was most amusing. He told them the truth without any
ceremony.

Nothing could be more droll than to see him push his nose
and head or other parts against one's finger when placed on
him ; for he could thus be led all about, — ^led by the nose.

I found that now, even when not in the mesmeric state,
his arms, legs, or body, would stiffen firmly, by making


Digitized by


Google


Deq/hesi and Dumbness Cured by Mesmerum. 847

longitudinal passes upon them. But this gave him pain^
though none if done in his mesmeric state.

He went to his place^ and has proved a good youth. His
master sent me the following note after his arrival : —

The boy arrived here quite safe on Thursday. I find he has grown very
susceptible. I mesmerised him this morniug by will merely, and when he
was engaged in conversation with some friends of mine who were in the
room : and afterwards he took it into his head to go off when I was passing
the room he was sitting in. I was not aware of it, and went out riding, and
on my return four hours afterwards found him still mesmerised. I was glad
to find he was no worse for the vain attempts that had been made by my ser-
vants to recover him. His limbs were very rigid and he was breathing labo-
riously ; but breathing on him released him immediately, and he did not seem
to have suffered in any way except from a bruise on his head. I think it
will be better for the present to abstain from mesmerising him until he becomes
a little less susceptible ; and I shall not again attempt to mesmerise him in
any other way than the usual mode ; for he seems such an imaginative youth
that he will be falling off his perch whenever he either sees me or thinks of
ne. He seems to like his new situation and is very anxious to please.

While the treatment was going on, he went to King's
College Hospital to carry a nosegay to the nurse who had
been very kind to him and saw the doctors ; and after his
cure he went to shew himself to the doctors.

The following is part of a letter from him to me after he
was settled in Yorkshire : —

And when I went to see them, they told me that mesmerism would never
do me any good, and they told me it was no use to come to you to be mes-
merised ; they wrote it down, and they told me to come again and see them
again. And when I went again I could speak and hear, and they said to
me. Well, have you got your tongue yet, and I said. Yes ; and Dr. Todd
said, How's that? is that with mesmerising 7 and I said. Yes, and he said,
Do you really think that you have been cured by mesmerism, and I said,
Yes ; and they said. Oh foolish boy. you should not think that, because you
would have got your speech and hearing just as soon if you had stopped
here ; and I said to them. What made you send me home then if you could
have cured me ? and then they began laughing at me, and I told them I did
not come there for to be made game of; and Uien they said, That will be a
fine thing for Dr. Elliotson to make something of: and then they asked me a
great many questions, but they laughed at me so that I would not answer
them ; and the questions were about Dr. Elliotson ; and they would laugh at
me so that I would not stop any longer.

Another note firom him ended thus : —

And they made all manner of game of me, and laughed at me, and said
that I was a foolish boy to believe that Dr. Elliotson had cured me by mes-
merism. But I told them that he had certainly cured me. And I said this,
that I had no hearing or speech when I went to him, and that now I could
both hear and speak.


Afl;er he had been in his place some time^ he was agitated
firom overhearing some conversation, and had a fit which left
him deaf and dumb again.


Digitized by


Google


348 Dr. EUiotson'a Cases of

The following are tlie particulars sent me by Mr. Thomp-
son : —

Angast 25tb.
YoQ will be very sorry to hear of our reverses. Thomas is again deqf
and dumb. Yesterday he was waiting at dinner, and the conversation tamed
upon the effect music had upon insanity ; from that, I know not how, some of
the party began to compare the ills that flesh is heir to ; deafness and dumb-
ness and loss of sight were mentioned among the rest, which produced such
a sudden excitement on the lad, that he just got out of the room and went
into a fit. I immediately went and mesmerised him, in half an hour he came
to his senses, and made signs that he would write, and that he could not
speak or hear, or see, I mesmerised his eyes, when he opened them, but
the pupil was dilated and they appeared to be quite insensible to light. I
mesmerised him again, and he then got the use of his eyes, but he still con-
tinued deaf and dumb. I have not mesmerised him for some time lately, and
I imagined the boy was quite well, but now they tell me that he has been
very odd the last day or two, walking about with his arms folded, and that
they thought his hearing was not quite so good, — all this is remembered
now. I shall persevere in mesmerising him regularly, and hope it will
not last long ; he is dreadfully low.

The following was written by the youth to his mistress in
his deaf and dumb state : —

August 25th.
Mrs. Thompson, if you will be so good as to lend me a book that is in-
teresting, some novel or romance, I should like it much better than going to
the races ; and I am afraid that you make yourself uneasy about me, for you
trembled so when you was writing to me this morning ; but do not make
yourself uneasy about me, for it is not your fault but mine, for I ought not
to have heard what you were talking about, but you must pardon me for it,
for I could not help it. I was not listening to you to hear what you were
talking about, but I heard you say deaf and dumb, and when you said it,
it shook me all right through me, and then I beard Mr. Thompson say blind,
and then it shook me again the same with a most thrilling pain right through
me, and I felt myself trembling, and I tried to get out of the room, but I do
not know that I did get out of the room, and I remembered no more till I
found myself in bed, and I tried to open my eyes and speak but I could not,
nor I could not hear any noise but I felt some one mesmerising me as I
thought; and then I wanted to go out and they would not let me go at first,
but they let me go afterwards into the pantry, and then I wrote and told you
what I felt and how I was ; but I hope you will pardon me for taking this
liberty to write to you.

Happily his master, who is versed in mesmerism, soon
restored him.

This was his master's note communicating the happy
intelligence to me : —

August 29th.
I cannot help writing you a line to-night, as I am certain you will be
glad to hear the lad has recovered his hearing and speech ; to-day I mes-
merised him still more, and dropped mesmerised water into his ears. He
wrote, that he heard a roaring like a waterfall, and a sensation as if I thrust
a hot iron into his ear. However, though I continued to mesmerise him for
an hour and a half, there was no symptom of his recovering. After he left
me, the sensation of heat increased, and be began to feel acute pain in his
ears and back of his head, and he came back to me in hopes I should be able
to relieve him. I mesmerised him, and he was so violent, that another man
and myself could scarcely hold him down. I put my hand at the back of


Digitized by


Google


Dec^fness and Dumbness Cured by Mesmerism, 849

his heady and fingers in his ears ; this seemed to excite a propensity for
fighting, and destroying everything, and he was lilce a furious maniac. I
was obliged to hold him down by the head with all my force ; he grew
quieter ; but afterwards we had a sort of spontaneous deTelopment of many
of the faculties, which I suppose I magnetized by holding the head.

He prayed, he sang, danced, laughed, cried, drew himself in the most
dignified manner, prostrated himself on the ground, gave the best representa-
tion of love of order I ever saw, setting everything to rights in the room,
picking up pieces of paper, &c. &c., seeming much amazed at their being
there, ana attempting to mend a hole he found in the carpet ; this of course
was all done with his eyes shut. I found that very soon after I mesmerised
him for the pain, he began to hear : but he did not recover his voice for some
time, until I held a small bar of iron in his mouth, — I dare not venture my
fingers. He remained for an hour and a half in a mesmerised state after he
heard and spoke, and throughout that time he continually manifested the
difl^erent faculties, every now and then recurring to fighting, &c. I had
touched benevolence, and wit, or mirth, after I found he was so excited at
first, to try whether it might change his ideas ; and throughout his perform-
ances, this feeling seemed more or less to pervade all his other feelings. One
moment he tried to bite and strike in the most ferocious manner, then laughed
as if it was only a capital joke, then tried to caress you, then gave such
a ludicrous representation of sentimental love, that I would defy any come-
dian I ever saw to match him. He at last fell into a quiet state, and after
he had remained so a quarter of an hour, I blew in his face, when he
awoke. At first he was not aware that he could either hear or speak, and
was much astonished to find he was restored.

I have this day (Sept. 8th), heard fronx Mr. Thompson,
that the youth is quite well.

Since he appears subject to convulsive attacks, I have
advised his excellent master to mesmerise him two or three
times a week — convinced that this will cure him.


I hope to furnish some cures of fits for the next number
of the Zoist,

John Elliotson.

Londim, Sept, 1843.

BOOKS RECEIVED.

Mesmerism; its History, Phenomena, and Position, with Results of
Cases developed in Scotland. By William Lang, of Glasgow.

[We strongly recommend this little book to our readers, as containing
much of the obserrations made lately in England, and a great amount of
solid mesmeric information, far more for its size than any other work. We
must extract the following passage : '* Although the doctors may be in the
enjoyment of an anti-mesmeric nap, the rest of the world are tolerably wide
awake ; and if matters proceed for a short time at the present rate, they
will soon be the only individuals who, as a class, refuse to recognise the
truths which mesmerism unfolds."]

The American Phrenological Journal and Miscellany ; first tire numbers.
Several Transatlantic Newspapers from Dr. CoUyer.


Digitized by


Google


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

Joseph. He is lost to all shame ; but the fact is becoming more knowD
daily, and his effrontery will not bear him up much longer.

Notwithstanding two additional sheets in the present number, we have
no room for much that we had promised and prepared, and at present have
time only to acknowledge the cymmunications of Dr. Atkinson of Wake-
field, Mr. Costen of Chatham, Mr. Dowe of the Isle of Man, H. P. D.
of Hinckly, Dr. CoUyer of America, G. Nonwist, Vive, and R. R. With
great thanks to R. R., we believe it is wished that the undeniable fact,
mentioned by R. R., of eight teeth having been extracted in a London Hos-
pital lately, without the slightest knowledge on the part of the mesmerised
patient, should not at present be brought prominently forward, lest the go-
vernors should imitate the wise and humane council and medical faculty
of University College, who will soon find they have stereotyped them-
selves for the remotest generations to laugh at.


ERRATA IN No. II.


p. 135, penultimate line, for " has'' read have,
138, 1. 6 and 26, for " wit" read art.


tS^ All AdvertisetnentB must be sent at least a week h^ore the day of publication.


London: printed by WaUon and Mitchell, 24, Wardovftreett Soho.

Digitized by VjOOQIC


'*W"


Digitized by


Google


IH


JOHN CONSTABLE R.A.


Th.lcLstJr%.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC
Zfmdon,.RBa£Uurt.Reg«ra Streel 18JU^


THE ZOIST.

No. IV.


JANUARY, 1844.


I. Education as it is.

The remarks in our second number on the subject of Crimi-
nal Jurisprudence were intended to direct the attention of
moral plulosophers to a few of the difficulties surrounding it^
and to shadow forth the principles on which any future legis-
lative change should be based. We traced the progress of the
criminal from the period of comparative innocence^ onwards
to the extreme limits of criminal debasement; and having
stated the manner in which the evil is produced^ and the
treatment to be pursued^ our next duty is to endeavour to
inculcate the necessity of adopting such measures as our
science plainly indicates^ for the purpose of preventing the
accession of the evil. A disease existing^ and its nature be- j

ing clearly ascertained^ the humane course is to apply the /

remedy. What is the remedy? We unhesitatingly reply,
Education. We use the term, however, in a very compre-
hensive sense. We mean something more than a system of
half-intellectual training adopted by all sects and by all
parties. We mean adult as well as infantile education. We
mean the inculcation of those great physiological and natural
truths, without a recognition of which, man will continue
wretched and but a few degrees removed from a state of bar-
barism.

Men are ignorant of the laws governing their own struc-
ture, and completely disregard the few facts science has
presented to them. The laws presiding over the original
formation of the human being are not considered worthy of
attention, and the usages of society, instead of physiological
science, decide the most important events in human welfare.

VOL. I. B B


Digitized by


Google


853 Education as it is.

Education, when properly conducted, will consiflt of a system
of training calcuktted to produce healthy action of every
portion of the body. The trainer of youth will then consider
that his duty consists in endeavouring to perfect, by judicious
exercise, the child^s physical structure; and the animal, moral,
and intellectual manifestations, the products of a portion of
that structure, will be healthy and vigorous in the same ratio
that his efforts coincide with nature's dictates. Such a system
will not only add to the strength of those organs which are
weak, but it will restrain those which are too active : it will
direct aU to their legitimate use, and thus, by obeying the
laws governing the formation and growth of man's organism,
rear a being, happy, useful, and intelligent. Before, how-
ever, such a system can be adopted, there is a grand pre-
requisite — a knowledge of the structure, the capabilities, and
the wants of the being to be educated ; and if we te«t all
systems of education in this manner, we shall perceive that
they are miserably deficient, and that a great change is re-
quired. But how is this changeto be effected ? Not by the
exertions of men whose views are boundedT)y the narrow Umits
of their own peculiar religious (pinions, — ^whose benevolence
extends to those only professing the same faith, — ^whose views
are fractioual, sectarian, and selfish, and whose estimate of
the power of education is taken from the httle they, with
their irrational means, have been enabled to accomplish.
Such are not the men to redeem the race from moral and
intellectual degradation.

The truths of cerebral jAysiology have swept away a vast
amount of scholastic rubbish, and cerebral physiologists are
evidently destined to place the science of education on a solid
foundation. Cerebral physiology is a science *' without which
the attempt at education must ever be totally futile and un-
successful, and its pretence nothing more than a bitter satire
upon human ignorance, folly, and presumption.'^ Our igno-
rance is great when we know not ourselves, but we centimes
display it in all its hideousness when we attempt to assist
others. The cause of the great diversity of opinion whidi
has hitherto existed must be sought in the fact that men
generally are ignorant of their own nature^ and consequently
of the wants of their fellows. A few years ago, it was by no
means an uncommon occurrence to meet with individuals
who declared that it was not necessary to educate those who
were engaged in manual exertion. At that period two parties
existed — ^the Educationists and the Non-educationists. The
progressive march of intelligence has swept away these parties,
and now, with an occasional exception, all seem to be im-


Digitized by


Google


Education as it is. 353

pressed with the necessity for exertion of some kind or other^
— ^afl appear to perceive that it is no longer safe to neglect
the mord and intellectual culture of the million^ and we wish
thut we could add that it is universally admitted that men
are brethren, possessed of a common nature, — exposed to the
same dangers, — contending with the same influences,— de-
manding the same physical culture, and consequently claim-
ing the same instruction. With such important concessions,
and by the aid of co-operative exertion, we might then with
truth exclaim. The future is pregnant with grander conse-
quences than the past. However, it is allowed that some-
thing must be done, but as regards the course to be pursued,
how numerous the opinions — ^how irrational and varied the
eflforts, how gloomy the results !

Let us consider the proceedings of the last twelve months.
We perceive that two great efforts have been made. The
first by the executive, which has failed, — ^the second by a
wealthy sect, whose exertions have been hitherto confined to
the collection of money to put their educational machinery
into action. It is comparatively a recent effort on the part
of the Government of this country to make any exertion for
the education of the people. But how sickening the recent
attempt I Sectarian of course it was, and how little cal-
culated to meet the spirit of the times, or to engage the
affections of parents, may be seen at a glance. The Bill
which was introduced was so selfish and proselytizing — so
sectarian in its tendencies — so opposed to the wishes of all
parties — so inimical to that extension of brotherly charity
which is essential to the moral elevation of all communities,
that in a few weeks there were 25,000 petitions presented,
containing 4,000,000 signatures, praying for its abandon-
ment.* And at this time what did we hear? Noble lords

* ''A Bill for regulating the employment of children and yoang persona
in factories, and for the better education of children in factory districts.''
This was intended for a national measure, and should have been built on the
broad basis of civil and religions liberty. Behold the justice of our rulers !
** Dissenters are to be compelled to pay towards the support of schools where
religious doctrines are taught of which they disapprove, — schools closely
bound to an establishment from which the dissenters conscientiously separate
themselves, — schools put under the absolute (I may almost say the eole) con-
troul of the clergy, — in which no dissenter can possibly be employed either
as master or assistant, — and in which the children of dissenters are to receive
no religious instruction, unless they consent to receive that of the clergyman,
who would of course do his utmost to proselytize them. Not only are
dissenters to be obliged to pay for these church schools, but those who
belong to the operative classes will be compelled, in the vast majority of
instances, to send their children there, however opposed to their inclination.
It will be unlaui/Ml for them to educate their own ckUdren in the schools qf their
oum community ! ! ! Not only must they pay for exclusive church schools,

B b2


Digitized by


Google


354 Education asiiis.

and rich commoners declared in Parliament that the great
bulk of the population in the manufacturing districts was
buried in the grossest ignorance^ that they were " a fearful
multitude of untutored savages/' — that the crimes of a cer-
tain district " were but the representatives of the mischief
spawned by the filth and corruption of the times/* — ^that
" the moral condition of the people was imhealthy and even
perilous/' — that " a tremendous waste, a great and terrible
wilderness, still remained uncultivated/'* These declarations
were made in the presence of the presumed collective wisdom
of the empire, and if the individuals composing that assembly
had been influenced by the desire to remove the evil — ^to
elevate their common nature — ^to wash away the stigma which
now rests upon them for their neglect, would not some great
and just measure have been the result of their deliberations —
some effort to legislate for the race, to pay off that heavy
debt which they have incurred by the progression of property
and power 7 But they have yet to be taught and to be made
to feel " that property has its duties as well as its rights/*

The Government scheme then was given up, and the
dominant sect, perceiving that there was no chance of sup-
port in that quarter, determined to attempt a religious cru-

and send their children to them, but they are themselves debarred from
receiving one farthing from the poor's rates towards their own schools. Nor
is this all, bat they must pay towards schools which are manifestly designed
and calculated to impoverish and undermine the day schools and Sunday
schools of their several religious communities." The masters and their
assistants were to be approved by the bishop. The clerical trustee was to
inttruct^ cateekize^ and examine the children in the principles of their retigion^
— to be perfectly irrbsponsiblb, '* the inspector of schools being expressly
forbid even to inquire into the religious instruction given, to examine the
scholars upon it, or to make any report thereon, unless he received authority
for that purpose from the archbishop or bishop." — Letter to Lord Whamdijfe
by Edward Baines, jun. In the face of this, the most barefaced and manifest
injustice, in the face of this the deep-laid scheme for getting the education qf
the whole people into the hands qf the clergy, what does the Rev. S. Wilber-
force, Archdeacon of Surrey, say ? ^' By that scheme, the attempt was
once more made to establish in those districts where the wants of the people
were thus horribly urgent, some general plan of instruction. It was pro-
posed to put the established church at the head of the system ; guarding, at
the same time with peculiar care, againtt the possible violation qfany conscientious
scruples on the part qf parents who belonged to any qf the sects. The result is
familiar to us all. On its first proposal the measure was hailed with uni-
Tersal acclamations : it bore in every part the clearest impress qf an honest
patriotism. The festering sores of our divided population were touched with
the tenderest hand ; and aU was provided that prudence could suggest to avoid
exciting the embittered passions qjf parly strife ! I !" — A Charge, delivered at
the ordinary visitation qf the Archdeaconry qf Surrey, November 1843, by
Samuel Wilberforce, M,A., Chaplain to U, R, H. Prince Albert; Archdeacon
qf Surrey, The italics are our own, and we will not trust ourselves to write
one word of comment.

• Lord Ashley's Speech : House of Commons, Feb. 28tb, 1843.


Digitized by


Google


Education as it is. 35S

sade by tbemselves. The daily press is now engaged in
trumpeting forth their exertions. The advertisements blazon
the names of the grandees of the empire — ^portions of the
wealth of a sect is now being poured into a common stocky
to be expended by members of the same sect^ and for the
avowed purpose of making sectarians of as many of the un-
trained as can be entrapped** But it is the last effort of the
party; formonied^ prejudiced^ aristocratic^ and powerful as
it is, it must quail and ultimately succumb before the march
and increasing pressure of human intelligence. Kiches may
give sectarian influence, but do not necessarily give moral
power. We do not rank ourselves with those who hail these
efforts by saying, *' The scheme is not good, but it will do for
a time.'' We consider sectarian education to be productive
of misery ; and if our youth are to be trained thus, we pro-
nounce this last attempt to be another curse, — an attempt
alike mischievous and unjust; for it is but exchanging the
blindness of ignorance for the bigotnr of sectarianism, — ^it is
but lengthening out those interminable and profitless disputes
which have so long disgraced and retarded our race. Think
^ou, that the moral and intellectual education of our youth
IS the only object? Is it not manifestly an attempt to mould
a subservient class ? Is it not an effort to train up individuals
who will bow their necks submissivelv to the yoke of priestly
domination ? Is not the spread of tneir own belief the first
point thought of? It has been stated and as yet without con-
tradiction, " That the only obstacle to a Ubend scheme of na-
tional education, to which the leaders of both parties in the
State would be ready at any moment to give their assent, is
the deliberate resolution of the bishops, with three only ex-
ceptions whose names will readily occur to the reader, that no
scheme of national education shall receive their sanction which
does not leave the appointment of schoolmasters in the hands of
the clergy f" We would ask whether the great schools now
under their especial management, Eton and Winchester to
wit, can be taken as model schools, or are in any way
conducted as a national system of training ought to be?
Is it there that we are to look for proof that they are
the best qualified to have the control of our popular edu-
cation? They are now themselves splitting into sects —
the war of words and party strife is now in full vigour-
ominous denunciations and uncharitable charges are hurled

* " National Society for promoting the Edacation op the Poor in the
principles of the Established Chnrch, throughout England and Wales." At
the present moment (December 10th, 1843,) the collection amiounts to
£130,000. This enormous sum is the product of only 8000 contributions !


Digitized by


Google


356 Education as it is.

by the warriors of the religion of peace ; and all this affords
the best possible proof that sectarian education is inimical to
moral and intellectual progress.

But apart from the proselytizing spirit of the effort^ we
have another objection, — ^it is fractional and sectional^ instead
of being national and universal ; and gigantic and poweiful
as it bids fair to be as regards means^ it, after all, is but the
effort of a few to assist millions. And are the labouring
youth from amongst 27,000,000 to be left to the exertions of
a monied sect ? Is not the cry of the million a national cry ?
And ought it not to be responded to by the national wiU ?

We marvel not at the astonishment which was expressed
so loudly after the speech of Lord Ashley, but we think that
the statistics of that speech might have been enriched by the
report of a few facts gathered from a visit to the neglected
classes of the dty of London. This entrep6t of the riches
of the world, — ^the city claiming to be the most civilized, —
the centre of learning, of the fine arts, and of almost all the
measures yet propounded for the purpose of humanizing hu-
manity, contains in its most populous districts thousands who
are perishing for lack of knowledge, — contains, my Lord
Ashley, " a fearful multitude of untutored savages.'' The
abode of royalty is surrounded by dens of misery, and amid
the luxury and waste of courtly expenditure the yell of dis-
content grows louder and fiercer.* " We see extreme desti-
tution throughout the industrious classes, and at the same
time incontestible evidence of vast wealth rapidly augment-
ing.'' " Side by side appear in fearful and unnatural contrast
the greatest amount of opulence and the most appalling mass
of misery." Truly, these are times calling for exertion.
Truly, those who are watching the progress of events should
now stand forth and proclaim the course to be pursued in the
present crisis. Awake, then, ye who have wealth and power,
and who from your station are imperatively and moraDy called
upon ! Ye, who should be the conservators of human rights
— ^the enforcers of public justice, and the promoters of all
measures calculated to relieve degradation whenever or wher-
ever met with. Alas ! how far short of this standard do your
recent attempts place you? On what side are we to look for
a proof of the disinterestedness of your exertions ? Where is
there a redeeming feature presented by any one of your
movements ? Where are the proofs of your conscientious and

• Read the parental care bestowed by our GoTernment in the two fol-
lowing^ parliamentary grants in the same year : — £30,000 for the Education
of the People,— £70,000 for the erection of Royal Stables and Royal Dog
Kennels !


Digitized by


Google


Bducotian a$itis. 367

benevolent reaolves to mai^ the interest you take in the great
straggle for homan rights and human duties? When or
where have you ventured to publish your intention to abolish
all privileges and all distinctions having for their object the
aggrandizement of the few to the ruin and increasing destitu-
tion of the many f But listen ye of the wealthy classes I

'' The hum of men is up— strange Toices now
Rise from the loom, the anTil, and the plough ;
The warning tramp hath echoed long and loud,
Yet hear'st thou not, nor mark'st the gathering crowd/'

We will not write a catalogue of the delinquencies which
we could bring against you; this would be foreign to our
purpose. We now charge you only with the commission of a
ffesLt crime against humanity — ^the neglect to enforce a na-
tional system of education. You begin to see the enormity
of your crime; and in the same way that we would nourish a
starving man with a piece of breads you rush forward^ and,
in a spirit of slavish superstition, cast vour few paltry pounds
at the feet of the priest, thinking by this to prevent complete
demoralization. While the rights of humanity are not respect-
ed and equal justice is refused, such charity is but another
exemplification of the Lord and the Slave, — ^it is but seizing
the opportunity to denounce with ostentation, — a circumstance
which should produce pain and humiliation. But in a few
years you will attempt a grander scheme, one which will
prove your only safeguard. Great and organic must be the
changes in our system of government, ere "the hum of men'*
is again hushed. A national system of education you will
promote, and apart from religious belief and sectarian influ-
ence ; but you will do so because you will see the whirlwind
collecting its forces, and experience will tell you that, to be
prepared for its power and to limit its effects, you must have
some knowledge of the elements in action. Yes, you will do
that from fear and cowardice, which you refused to do for
right and justice, — ^you will soon tremblingly accede to the
request of the enlightened few for the purpose of protecting
yourselves from the blind power of the uneducated many.

It is our intention to present a few brief observations to
indicate the almost total neglect with which the formation of
character in youth is treated. But we cannot refrain from
directing attention to two recent statistical returns. The
first giving an account of the qualifications of the instructors
of the working classes in the City of London ;* the second

* London Statistical Journal, August 1843.

Digitized by VjOOQIC


358 EducaiioH 09 it is.

gi^ng an accoimt of the number of the instmcted in the
City of Bristol.

The districts visited by the committee, obtaining the fol-
lowing returns in the City of London, comprise a population
of about 1,000,000. There are 280 charity schools for the
education of the poor, and 1,154 private schools. The scholars
are 58,861 (35,928 in charity schools and 22,933 in the pri-
vate schools). The attention of the committee was chiefly
directed to the private schools for the education of the poor.
Every one must be familiar with the fact, that a very large
portion of our population is entrusted to the care of indivi-
duals who have been induced to undertake the office of
teacher from their inability to support themselves in any
other way. Men who, by misfortune or imprudence, have
become reduced in their circimistances, frequently have re-
course to the office of schoolmaster to obtain a livelihood,
and females who have become widows, as a last resource
open a dames' school. The common day schools and the
dames' schools are kept by persons of this description. This
is the case in every town throughout the kingdom. But to
give an idea of the extent to which this system is carried on,
we may remark that in London there are 1,154 schools of
this kind, containing 22,933 scholars, of whom 10,601 are
boys, and 12,332 are girls. In the dames' schools the amount
of weekly payment for a child never exceeds Sd. ; the ave-
rage sum throughout London is 6d. In the common day
schools the average remuneration is from lO^d. to lid. We
have then 23,000 children in the great centre of civiliza-
tion receiving a most inferior education from individuals de-
void of all qualification ; for out of 500 who were asked
whether they had been brought up to the employment of
teacher, only 126 answered in the affirmative ; and of 540
who were asked whether they had any other occupation than
their school, 260 answered that they kept a shop, or took in
washing or needlework ; the rest answered that they had no
other occupation than their schools. Is this not a most la-
mentable account? The children of the lower orders assemble
by the score in their wretched schools, and with less care in
the grouping than that with which beasts are driven to their
pasture-ground. Can we wonder at the result ? The teach-
ers know not what they should teach. Reason prompts the
same regard to fitness in the choice of a teacher as in the
selection of a gardener. "You would not commit your
flower-beds into the hands of a man who could not discern
between clay and gravel and sandy loam ; who would indis-
criminately apply hot compost and cold; who would leave the


Digitized by


Google


Education 08 His. 359

tender plant to straggle for its existence under cold blasts
and burning rays^ and undertake to graft and to bud without
knowing the nature either of stock or shoot.*'

In the report on the educational statistics of the City of
Bristol^'f^ we find that the population is 130^000^ and that
17 per cent, of the inhabitants were receiving instruction in
schools. Compared with other places this is a very small
proportion. In Manchester and Salford the proportion of
scholars is 23 per cent, of the entire population; in the
City of York 20 per cent. In America^ throughout the
States of New York, Massachussetts, and Maine, the scho-
lars constitute 25 per cent, of the population. " Of the
21,865 children attending schools in Bristol, it is estimated
that 4,727 are either under five or above fifteen years of age ;
so that the number of children between the ages of five and
fifteen years, attending schools at the date of this inquiry,
was 17,138, or 13 per cent of the population. Now the
population returns show that the proportion of children firom
five to fifteen years old, is 24 per cent, of the entire popula-
tion ; and according to this, the present population of Bristol
being 130,000, there must be 31,200 children from five to
fifteen years old in this city; but we find only 17,138 between
those ages attending school, and therefore at the date of
this inquiry, there were 14,062 children of a suitable age for
instruction who were not attending any school.^' In one
district of this city, Bedminster, which contains 18,000
inhabitants, there are only 600 children attending school,
whereas there are 4,320 children of a suitable age to be at
school. Contrast this with the state of the Protestant de-
partments of Switzerland, where aU children between the
age of seven and fourteen are placed under a well-arranged
and comprehensive system of instruction !

Even now we may occasionally hear an ignorant individual
exclaim, '' I can see no beneficial result from the education
of the people, — education has done no good.*' The jpeople
have not been educated. Such assertions could not be ad-
vanced if the speaker had exercised his own faculties, and
sought for the causes producing so much wretchedness and
immorality. What ignorance does such an exclamation be-
speak, when in the presence of so much misery it is insinu-
ated that because so little good has been effected, increased
efforts are unnecessary. To such an one we say, remember
the mock education of the 23,000 we referred to. Remember
the total absence of all attempts at education on the 14,062

* Speech of Mr. Norris nt Bristol, November 13th 1843.

Digitized by VjOOQIC


S60 Education as it is.

in the City of BristoL More than one half of the criminak
who pass through our courts and occupy our goals, are young
persons under twenty-five years of age I " It appears that
the early periods of life furnish the greater proportion of
criminals. Children of seven, eight, and niae years are not
unfrequently brought before magistrates ; and a very large
proportion under fourteen years V No beneficial result firom
the education of the people ! Why within twentjr miles of
London, a hundred viUages are to be found in which not a
single agricultural labourer is able to read or write. And
firom the last report of the Registrar-General for 1842, in
the registry of marriage, it appears firom the average of three
years, that 33 men in 100, and 49 women in 100, signed with
marks ! In Darlaston it is said upon good authority, that
there are as many as 1,000 men who do not know their own
names, only their nick-names !

Can we look on such horrible statements, and consider
that the work of human improvement requires not our assist-
ance ? Every human being should have all his faculties and
powers trained, and trained by the state if his station in
life precludes the possibility of its being accomplished in
any other way. "All men are bom fi'ee and equal.*' All pos-
sess the same faculties, but in various degrees of endowment.
Should there not then be some attempt made towards an equa-
lity of national and practical education? Instead of attempting
this course, the million is considered by many to be composed
of an inferior order of beings, whose elevation, beyond a certain
heighty it would be dangerous to attempt. And who are those
who would stop the diffusion of man's greatest blessing ?* —
who would say to their poorer brethren, "Hitherto shalt
thou go, but no fiirther, — and who would limit the quantity
and control the quality of their education ? they are rich,
and in consequence powerfiil ; they are powerful, and shall
we not say in consequence, imjust ? But they are beings
with the same structure, endowed with the same faculties,
and passing through the same ordeal. Upon what principle
then do they arrogate to themselves the right of elevated
moral and intellectual culture f Let us all labour to send

*' Troth's deathless germs to thought's remotest cares."

Education must not be confined to the chosen few, but it
must be universally diffused — ^it must be looked upon as the

* Id CDC of oar leading periodicals, no longer since than February,
1839, it was contended that the mass of the people nerer could become
enlightened and refined — that education rendered them uneasy and restless
and that ignorance was ike parent qf contentment /


Digitized by


Google


Educaium asitis. 361

natural right of every human being. How feur are we from
this happy state I From a statistical examination of our
population, it appears that there are 1,858,819 children to
be instructed, — ^that 844,626 between the ages of three and
thirteen are receiving instruction, but that 1,014,193 are
almost totaQy neglected. Fancy this million of human
beings arrived at the period of manhood and womanhood,
and of necessity added to the already overgrown masses of
ignorance and immorality. It is from this million that the
gaols, the penitentiaries, and the reformatories are to be
filled. How different might be the result !

To the cerebral physiologist, who knows the mighty powers
all possess if properly called forth, the absence of national
and rational training is the cause of much regret. K we
were to conceive the untrained,— educated, and the powers
of the race applied by means of just and wise direction, it
would require no very great indulgence in enthusiasm to
picture to ourselves the moral wilderness converted into the
fruitful vinevard — ^virtue assuming the seat of vice, and the
happiness of all promoted and ensured. Slanderers of hu-
manity, fear not! Fear not for the loftiest exaltation — ^rather
tremble for the consequences of a continued debasement.
Cease your croakings, ye who wotdd with coward-like timidity
aigue for the presentation of the smallest educational pittance,
cease your attempts to limit the exercise and activity of the
powers your poorer brethren possess equally with yourselves,
cease to tremble for your craft, and endeavour by every judi-
cious appliance to raise all higher and higher in the intellectual
and moral scale. '' IS/^ says a writer on popular education,
''there is any chance of the frame-work of society being
strained or disjointed in consequence of the progress of
popular instruction, it is not from the diffusion of knowledge
that the danger is to be apprehended, but from the higher
ranks being left behind in the race of human imjprovement;
and this danger they must ward off, not by supercilious looks
and distant demeanour, still less by the follies and extrava-
gancies of selfish indulgence, or by wastefrd and profligate
expenditure, which the very retainers who profit by it have
learned to despise them for; but by making good their claim
to that superiority of intellect and acquirement which their
command of time and opportunity brings so readily and in-
vitingly within their reach/'

But with regard to the character of education adopted in
our schools, how lamentably deficient is it in every particu-
lar ! The two aristocratic universities, and the more modem
establishments which the spread of liberalism has reared, are


Digitized by


Google


362 Education aa it is.

aa much at firalt as the common school. In none of these
places do we see the attempt to form character at all in ac-
cordance with those ideas of perfection which we should all
labour to realize. Physiological science is scarcely thought
of : all are allowed to grow up in ignorance of their own
structure-— of their capabilities — of the existence and control
of the natural laws^ and of the dependence of all their actions
and all their thoughts on their physical structure. In the
great majority of instances of mere school education, reading,
writing and arithmetic, constitute the sum total of educa-
tional training. These are the staple commodities in the
instruction market. Whereas these acquirements should be
considered as means to an end, — as the tools to be used for
the purpose of obtaining knowledge. The fact is, the teachers
have no dear idea of their duty. The schoolmasters must go
to school. In what school is such a system of education as
we desire carried out ? In what school is the following course
pursued and expounded in clear and intelligible language ?
Education should be so conducted as to lead to the inculca-
tion of knowledge, by which is meant an acquaintance with
ourselves and everything with which we are in relationship.
It should be so conducted as not only to train all into habits
of self-control, and to teach all to respect, promote, and
long after virtuous conduct, but to clearly shew that the in-
terests of each individual, when properly understood, must
promote the interests and happiness of all. Would not such
knowledge tend to rear up a more useful, more virtuous, and
much happier population? If our youth were universally
taught thus, would not some of the great and monster
grievances under which we all suffer, be soon removed ? And
in carrying out such a system what should be the teacher's
conduct ? " He is to encourage in the child a spirit of en-
quiry, and equally to encourage it in himself. He is never
to advance an opmion without shewing the facts upon which
it is grounded : he is never to assert a fact without proving it
to be a fact. He is not to teach a code of morals, any more
than a creed of doctrines; but he is to direct his young
charge to observe the consequence of actions on himself and
on others ; and to judge of the propriety of those actions by
their ascertained consequences. He is not to command h^
feelings any more than his opinions or his actions ; but he is
to assist hun in the analysis of his feelings, in the examina-
tion of their nature, their tendencies, their effects. Let him
do this, and have no anxiety for the result. In the free exer-
cise of his senses, in the fair development of his faculties, in
a course of simple and unrestrained inquiry, he will discover


Digitized by


Google


Education as it is. 363

truth, for he will ascertain facts; he will seize upon virtue,
for he will have distinguished beneficial from injurious actions;
he will cultivate kind, generous, just, and honourable feel-
ings, for he will have proved them to contribute to his own
happiness and to shed happiness around him/' Bright pros-
pects for humanity when such a plan is followed! Some
hopes for the. exaltation of the people when their teachers
have a clear idea of the means to be pursued for the produc-
tion of happiness I

But where shall we begin in our endeavours to recount
the evils produced by the neglect of such a system 7 On all
sides we behold the dire effects. In the broad features of
social intercourse, and in the limited career of individual
exertion. We see breaches of the moral law treated with
indifference where the law-breaker is surroimded with official
sanctity ; we see political turpitude pass for, and honored as,
political acumen ; we see the follies, prejudices, and weak-
nesses of our forefathers nursed and cradled under the desig-
nation of wisdom of antiquity; on every side we behold
intrigue and the workings of a low morality. The public
characters of our time, whether we seek them in the senate,
at the bar, in the church, or amongst the congregated thou-
sands of our provincial cities, are inqst of them governed by
the same wishes and feelings, — hunters after popularity,
dealers in intrigue, searchers after the most expeditious
method to raise themselves above their fellows, not for the
purpose of increasing their happiness, but with the deter-
mined intention of gaining power, station, and affluence for
themselves. By their life and actions they proclaim their
belief, that to know the world is the chief wisdom. Men of
the world I What are they? There are enough and more
than enough of men who depend on the weaknesses and vices,
the follies and vanities of their species to raise themselves to
power. There are enough and more than enough of men who
descend to the meanest subterfuges and pander to the worst
passions to obtain an end, which, if it be worth gaining,
might be sought by other and more ennobling pursuits.
There are enough and more than enough of men, who take
for their motto — " The end justifies the means,*' and think
that they can ensure permanent good by the creation of tem-
porary misery. Such are the men of the world ! Selfishness
is their spring of action — self is the God they worship — self
is the medium through which the actions and thoughts of
their associates are compelled to pass. What is to be expected
from men like these ? Truly they are of the world, but they
are not for the world. The individuality of their actions is


Digitized by


Google


364 Education asitis,

apparent upon all occasions, except nvhen some great measure
is to be carried, involving a principle which will materially
injure the presumed rights of their class (education to wit) ;
then, under the influence of the same craving for power,
they unite, and in one common band, regardless of minor
distinctions, assert that class ascendancy, class rights (?), class
power, and class plunder, must not be interfered with : in
fact, the same tie binds them that unites the bandit with
his brother bandit.

Prom the proceedings within the family circle to the deli-
berations of the national assembly, — ^from the religious as-
sociation to the political club, — ^firom the meeting of our
fellow-townsmen to achieve a local improvement, to the as-
semblage of thousands for the discussion of questions of
nationd importance, we observe a manifest and glaring im-
morality shamelessly stand forth ; men deliberately neglect the
doctrine of abstract right and abstract justice, and content
themselves with advocating the doctrine and upholding mea-
sures of worldly expediency. This is the withering course
which is pursu^ — ^this is the spell which retards the progress
of humanity and prolongs the day of our national regenera-
tion. Expect public morals to improve, when pubUc acts
contradict the first principles of justice ! Expect virtue and
truth in a community, when the moral code involves a sliding
scale, which is moved by the promptings of a pitiful expe-
diency! Expect progression in the masses, when our go-
vernors sacrifice all principle to personal aggrandizement I
Expect our youth to rise higher and higher in morality of
purpose and consistency of action, when we surround them
with the most deteriorating of all influences— evil example !
Our youth are hemmed in fix>m the period of birth till the
period when character is permanently formed, by the most
unfavourable external circumstances. '^ It strikes me dumb,''
says Mr. Carlyle, " to look over the long series of faces such
as any full church, court-house, London-tavern meeting, or
miscellany of men will shew them. Some score or two years
ago, all these were little red-coloured pulpy infants ; each of
them capable of being kneaded, baked into any social form
you chose : yet see how they are fixed and hardened, — ^into
artisans, artists, clergy, gentry, learned Serjeants, and un-
learned dandies, and can and shall now be nothing else
henceforth !'* This is a grand but not an original thought.
Yes ! 27,000,000 of human beings, our present population,
were once as plastic as the clay in the hands of the potter,
and an enlightened, benevolent, and conscientious Govern-
ment could have reared these millions to have been far, very


Digitized by


Google


Mducatum as it is. 865

£Eur superior to their progenitors. But now, as Mr. Cariyle
says, the red pulpy infants have been baked and fashioned so.
We have the results of the baling constantly before us — ^we
lament every day over the peculiar and improper baking —
there is a general cry throughout the land amongst the intel-
ligent and thinking, that new forms and new processes are
required — that the (Government which should stand in loco
parentis^ is contented to listen to the nursery quarrels of the
children, instead of carrying out with a parental hand those
changes and that training so imperatively demanded.

Vhe teacher inculcates moral precepts with the best inten-
tions, but the mere repetition of the precept by the child is
no proof that he understands the reason he should follow its
dictates. If the system pursued is good, why is the resiQt so
far short of the moral standard ? The truth is, the lip-
morality, the morality which consists in words and not in
actions, is not calculated to produce any other than an unfEi-
vourable result. This fact is presented to us in every town
and in every village, nay, in the nursery routine of every
family, and yet we continue to follow the same course. Our
moralists and legislators deplore the state of society, but the
only remedy they surest is an increased supply of the same
inefficient nourishment. Follow out the usual routine of
scholastic education, even to its termination, and we ask
what knowledge of the world has the pupil gained 7 What
rule of life has been given him? He may have repeated
probably a thousand times the sentence, '^Whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them /'
but the practical working of this he has seen belied firom the
moment he considered the actions of his seniors. ''Fear not
the truth,'' "Examine all things,'' are not less important
commands than the preceding, and yet after the inculcation
of them how progresses the thinker f He has been taught
certain doctrines which will not bear the test of his reasoning
fSEumlties. They tell him that the evidence is not sufficient to
authorize the acceptance : he has used the powers nature gave
him to find out the truth, but he fears the truth, and thus
affords a good example of the rottenness of the lip-morality
of the schools. We state advisedly, although the chaise will
be indignantly denied, that it is a maxim, not publicly pro-
claimed certainly, upon which all have acted and still act, —
to debase the grand characteristic of the being to be educated,
— his reason, and to insist on the reception of certain doctrines
and statements by appealing to Ms feelings. This is done so
cunningly and from such an early period, that with the mass
the effect is appalling. And what is the effect? Man's


Digitized by


Google


366 Education as it is.

reason not being considered a safe guide^ not being appealed
to on all occasions as the only test he possesses by means of
which to judge of the truth or falsehood of statements which
are presented to him^ the door is at once opened for the in-
culcation and encouragement of superstitious reverence and
weak fears, and this not only prolongs the reign of ignorance
and slavery, but it forces men to adopt a system of hypocritical
shuffling — a vice the most loathsome and disgusting as re-
gards society, and the most debasing and degrading to the
individual resorting to it. Men dare not utter their own free
thoughts. The practice of sincerity is not encouraged, and,
as a natural consequence, hypocrisy and cowardice reign
paramount. Men profess what they do not believe, or, which
IS equally bad, what they have not inquired into. This is the
case with four-fifths of those we meet with.

Again, in the struggle for power of all kinds how shame-
fully is truth perverted ! Every day false statements and the
basest insinuations pass current with society, because the in-
terests of a party are involved in their general promulgation.
Our youth hear the discussion of questions, which are capable
of rational and just settlement, treated and decided on the
basis of religious or political expediency. Our legislators
shew their zeal and the necessity for education by long speeches
on the immorality and sensuality of the inhabitants of the
manufacturing districts, but, comparatively speaking, they
display in one session more moral tergiversation, more disgust-
ing and selfish improprieties, than the whole mass of their
poorer and neglected fellow-countrymen. The immorality of
the poor man aflfects chiefly himself— his children or his im-
mediate neighbours, — but their faiQts afiect all — ^miUions, —
they retard the progress of the race, they continue to legis-
late for themselves, and thus practically belie what they theo-
retically profess and with weekly Up-service mumble forth,
" Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you,^' &c.
None stand forth to advocate universal justice, — none affirm
that the race should be considered one fEimily, or that the
claims of all should be referred to that standard which alters
not with geographical boundaries or with man's lines of arti-
ficial distinction. "The greatest happiness of the greatest
number 1^' In our universities and our schools such a sound
is never heard. Our youth, consequently, totally disregard
this great moral demand. The legislative acts of our country
prove that the few govern the many not for the happiness of
the greatest number, but for the purpose of pursuing their
own selfish predilections. In fact, amongst what party are
we to look for the fruits of that morality, which with so much


Digitized by


Google


Education asiiis. 367

Pharisaical display is for ever paraded^ but in the hour of
trial is always disregarded? Glance at the state of our
country^ and what do we see ? See we not on all sides and in
every quarter the most lamentable disaffection? Hear we
not assemblages of men crying out for concessions^ which,
if they are to be tested by the principles of right and justice,
should be forthwith conceded? Have not the cries of an
injured and oppressed people been treated with disrespect,
until they are compelled to assert the natural right of self-
government 7 What but selfishness, bigotry, and the animal
craving for power and sectarian ascendancy, has produced this
state ? What is the moral lesson taught to our youth of the
present generation? Is the right acknowledged and the
wrong redressed ? Is charity, peace, and goodwill to all men
proclaimed as a moral engine, and the irritation of the ex-
cited allayed by the benevolent and conscientious government
of the ascendant party ? No ! The cry is, obey the law ;
''if you assemble to make known your miseries and to
assert your rights, we pronounce you rebels and traitors,
and we will put you down by force ;" and this, O ! youth
of England, is another practical illustration of the morals
of the times you live in, — a practical commentary on the
command you received in your education, '' Love mercy and
act justly/'

O I it requires a firm belief in the innate powers of hu-
manity to slowly and surely work out its own redemption, to
enable the moral philosopher to feel at all consolable amidst
the artificial and immoral system by which he is surrounded.
It requires a determination of purpose and a fixity of resolves,
such as is only to be obtained by a careful study of nature —
of man's position, his capabilities and his destinies. And if
a few were not animated thus, slow indeed would be the pro-
gress. The world is moved on by those whom the world
persecutes. The pioneers are the martyrs. *When the millions
reap the advantages previously shadowed forth by the few,
then they begin to think how vile their treatment has been ;
and when the brains which gave birth to the propelling
thoughts have been resolved into their elements and the men
no longer exist, then their memories are worshipped and the
marble pile is reared to denote that such men once lived. But
to the slaughterer of millions — ^the man who has spent his
life in the destruction of his fellows, not for any wrong he
has received, but because individuals whose slave he is com-
manded him to do so, — ^to the glory of this man, while yet alive,
monuments and statues are reared in our public ways, and
our youth are silently bidden to go and do likewise. Let us

c c


Digitized by


Google


368 Education as it is.

not boast then of our civilization, nvhen the horrors of the
battle-field, and the false glare of assembled warriors, are
placed in competition with the peaceful pursuits of science and
the progressive advancement of humanity. Let us not speak
of our country as being enlightened and moral, when our
national actions cast a slur upon humanity and stand forth in
strong opposing contrast with the principles we are engaged
in promulgating.

Even as regards fimdamental points our youth are deplor-
ably deficient. Who am I? What am I? What is my
destiny? What is my duty? Let our readers recall the
period when they left their schools, and confess whether they
could have given a rational answer to these questions. Can
the youth of the present generation afford better examples ?
The thousands that annually enter on their public career have
never bestowed a thought on these matters. If this is doubted,
put it to the experiment. Let any ten of our youth be cate-
chized by the presentation of a few simple questions relating
to these subjects. It is not the return of a parrot^s response
to the query — "What is your duty 1" — which will satisfy us.
No doubt the answer would be given in the most orthodox
phraseology, and the teacher and the pupils have hitherto
considered that here their duty ended. Fatal mistake. This
should be only the commencement of the moral teacher's
task. Here the teacher should pause. Having given a rule
he should teach the application. He should review all the
positions, both public and private, in which his pupil is likely
to be placed. He should present to him the probable residts
of two lines of conduct, indicating on the one hand the good
he may accomplish by a steady perseverance in conscientious
resolves, and shewing on the other hand the misery he may
produce by attending too closely to the whisperings of a
selfish individualism. It is not by precepts, by words, or by
the presentation of a daily lecture containing vague genera-
lities, that our youth are to be raised to that eminence for
which nature has destined them, — but it is by the presenta-
tion of every-day life-movements and life-workings, — by indi-
cating the shoals to be avoided and the goal to be attained, —
by careful and judicious moral and inteUectual training, — ^by
shewing the one and only course which is to be pursued in
all difBiculties, — ^to be in fact "too fond of the right to pursue
the expedient.^' In what juvenile bakery is such a fashion-
ing attempted ? There is not a school in the three kingdoms
where this is done. There is not a teacher amongst the
tens of thousands engaged in the " cultivation of the human
nUnd'^ who has ever dreamed of the necessity of such a course.


Digitized by


Google


Functions of Imitation and Benevolence. 369

We shall continue this subject in our next number^ and
we shall endeavour to depict *^ Education as it ought to
be/'

L. E. G. E.


II. A new view of the Functions of Imitation and Benevolence,*
By Herbert Spencer.

In considering the relationships of the different parts of the
brain, as at present laid down in our phrenological charts, it
has frequently occurred to me that there is not that same
generic affinity between the functions attributed to the neigh-
bouring organs of Imitation and Benevolence that is so
strikingly manifested in other cases. The juxta-position of
Self-esteem and Love of Approbation, of Adhesiveness and
Concentrativeness,of Secretiveness and Cautiousness, of Won-
der and Ideality, seems perfectly natural. There is an evi-
dent similarity in the species of emotion implied by the
associated names, and their proximity might naturally have
been anticipated. But it is not so with Imitation and Bene-
volence ; here there is no apparent analogy, and the question
continually suggests itself— Why should they be placed to-
gether?

In seeking a solution to this difficulty, the first step
was to obtain an exact perception of the nature of Imitation.
The various phenomena connected with it were examined.
The authenticated cases of persons in whom the impulse to
imitate was so strong that they could not avoid copying the
movements of those with whom they were in company, were
called to mind, and the fact, that when witnessing the efforts
of a horse to move a heavy load, I had myself noticed an
involuntary contraction of the muscles of my own body, as
though in anticipation of a similar strain, recurred, as being
doubtless a slight manifestation of the same emotion. The
contagious character of laughter was clearly another effect of
this fundamental feeling. We are frequently unable to avoid
joining in the merriment of our friends whilst yet unaware of

* Since this essay was written the anthor has had his attention directed
to a paper by Mr. Hudson Lowe, which appeared in the Phrenological
Journal for 1841, containing opinions respecting the functions of Imitation
apparently similar to the yiews here set forth. It may be observed, however,
that Mr. Lowe's doctrines are by no means identical with those advocated
by the writer, inasmuch as he (Mr. Lowe) supposes that the faculty in ques-
tion is capable, by iU own independent action^ of producing humane emotions ;
a supposition not at all accordant with the theory now proposed.

C c2


Digitized by


Google


370 A new view of the Functions of

its source, and children are often made to la)igh in the midst
of their tears simply fix)m witnessing the mirth of those
around them. A further illustration was afforded by the cases
of those individuals who experience real physical pain when
they witness the sufferings of others.* The fact that some
persons feel a strong inclination to anger whilst in the pre-
sence of those who are under its influence, furnished a fourth
instance ; and numerous other manifestations of like kind
suggested themselves as springing from the same cause. Now
these peculiar states of mental action were obviously attri-
butable to the influence of what is commonly termed Imita-
tion ; some such faculty was the only possible agent for their
production, and were its aid denied, they would be inex-
plicable. What then was the exact office of the organ as
deducible from these examples? Its specific function ap-
peared to be, to rouse into activity in one being the feelings
that were being exhibited by another — ^to induce a like state
of passion or sentiment ; or, in other words, it was the source
of Sympathy.

Further investigation discovered reasons for concluding
that Sympathy was a name much more expressive of the real
nature of the faculty than Imitation.

1. It was better indicative of the involuntary character of
the impulse. The term Imitation allows and almost implies
volition : Sympathy does not. An individual may say — I wiU
imitate, but he cannot reasonably say — ^I will sympathize.
The one it is within his power to compass — ^the other must be
determined by his feelings irrespective of his will. If we ex-
amine the two names in connexion with the above-mentioned
phenomena which have been presumed to proceed from this
organ, we shall find the one much more applicable than the
other. We should not say of a man who in his own person re-
produced the sufferings exhibited by another being, that he
imitated the emotions of that being, but we should say that he
sympathized with them. Also in the case of muscular con-
traction, induced by observing the struggles of an animal,
we could not admit that the explanatory expression — ^imitative
action, would be nearly so descriptive as — sympathetic action.

2. The title Sympathy was clearly the most comprehen-
sive of the two, and had reference tf mental as well as to
bodily actions. Imitation simply implied the reproduction of
the external manifestations of any feeling, and did not involve
the activity of the faculties from which those manifestations

* There is one instance of this character with which I am acquainted,
where a nervoas affection has been brought on, apparently from no other
cause, than the daily association with a lady simUarly afflicted.


Digitized by


Google


Imitation and Benevolence. 371

proceeded. Sympathy, on the other hand^ required the exist-
ence of the corresponding mental affection ; and the visible
evidences — ^the natural language — of any particular passion
were only the media by which the exciting influence was con-
veyed. Here then appeared to be a fundamental distinction
between the meanings of the two words. The one embracing
only the superficial attributes of a power, the other compre-
hending the power itself.

8. Moreover the term Imitation carried with it an impres-
sion which seemed inconsistent with the above notions of its
action. It had been supposed to give rise to the capacity for
imitating or copying inanimate objects ; was believed to be an
ingredient in the genius of the artist, and had given to it
certain intellectual characteristics. But the name Sympathy
would not permit such an understanding. It incUcated a
sentiment whose functions had reference solely to living
beings, and which could have no dealings with things inca-
pable of feeling. This, therefore, was another irreconcilable
difference in the interpretations of the two terms, and one
which demanded a somewhat modified view of the duties of
the organ itself.

These and other arguments of minor importance led to
the belief that, assuming the preceding phenomena, usuaUy
assigned to the organ in question to be really due to it, the
name Sympathy was a more appropriate one than that by
which it is at present known.

Upon reverting to the origin of these speculations, after
having arrived at this conclusion, it appeared that the adjoin-
ing location of the seemingly unconnected feelings of Imita-
tion and Benevolence was no longer a mystery. If the
creation of sympathetic emotions was the duty of Imitation,
the two had a very obvious and a very close relationship, and
the apparent anomaly no longer existed. Subsequent con-
sideration, however, brought to light a difficulty of a contrary
character. There was now too great a similarity instead of too
greatadisagreement between the characters of thesesentiments.
Sympathy and Benevolence seemed to have too much in com-
mon; nay. Benevolence itself included Sympathy, and in cer-
tain cases there would therefore be two oi^ns provided to do
that which might be performed by one. These objections of
course rendered necessary a still closer analysis of the subject.
I had previously noticed that there was a species of indefi-
niteness about the perception of Benevolence which it was
not easy to understand. The emotions arising from Com-
bativeness or Acquisitiveness are simple and easily compre-
hensible, but if we endeavour to indwidualize the feeling of


Digitized by


Google


372 A new view of the Pmactions of

Benevolence we cannot do it with the same ease. There is a
species of complexity about the impulse which prevents it
from being readily identified and imaged in its uncombined
form before the mind. Hence naturally arose the enqidry —
is the sentiment a simple one 7 and the investigation result-
ing from this question ended in the somewhat startling con-
clusion that it was compound^ and that the organ we have
hitherto entitled Benevolence^ is in reality a seme of pUasvre,
and in its reverse action a sense of pam.

Having thus given an outline of the train of thought
which led to the reception of these novel opinions^ I may at
once proceed with a systematic statement of the arguments
by which they are maintained ; dividing them^ for the sake
of convenience, into the theoretical and the practical.

It is a matter of universal observation that there is a
strong contrast between the manifestations of pleasure and
pain exhibited by different individuals. Some are remarkable
as being the very impersonations of sensitiveness ; they have
most livelyperceptions of the agreeable, — overflow with extades
when others shew not the least excitement of feeling, — ^are
affected to extreme sorrow or joy by the most trifling occur-
rences, — experience acute bodily siiffering from very insigni-
ficant injuries, — and are in every way possessed of high sus-
ceptibility. Others, on the contrary, are noted for their
callousness and imperturbability: their torpid feelings can
scarcely ever be roused into activity, — ^misfortunes and suc-
cesses hardly ruffle the uniform placidity of their minds, —
they have no such words as " delight^' or " distress^' in their
vocabularies, — ^physical accidents or surgical operations cause
them but littie inconvenience, — ^they are careless about all
things, and are wholly characterized by insensibility. The
one class we call enthusiastic — the other phlegmatic.

From a comparison of these two opposite aspects of humanity,
it may be fairly inferred that there is an original difference
in the nervous organization of parties thus strongly distin-
guished. All variations in the power of the other perceptions
we refer to different degrees of development in the oi^ans to
which those perceptions are supposed to belong. The inca-
pabiUty of discriminating between blue and green, we attri-
bute to a deficiency of the organ of Colour; difficulty in
appreciating the relations of sounds is associated with a
defect in the organs of Tune ; and so on with other cases ;
and there is no apparent reason why the gradations of sensi-
bility to pleasure and pain should not be accounted for in a
simUar manner. Perhaps it may be said that these individual
peculiarities are entirely ascribable to the influences of con-


Digitized by


Google


Imitation and Benevolence. 373

stitation; that extreme delicacy of sensation arises from a
preponderance. of the nervous system; contrariwise, that ob-
tuseness of feeling is a result of the lymphatic temperament^
and that all such phenomena are due to the fineness or coarse-
ness, as they may be called, of the corporeal fabric. Were
this true, there would be no reason why all the other faculties
should not be influenced in like manner. If the cause were
solely constitutional, it would affect all the perceptions at the
same time. The sense of pleasure and pain is a perception ;
and if the vividness of its manifestations is entirely deter-
mined by temperament, there seems no substantial cause why
Colour, Tune, Form, and all the rest of the perceptions, being
in the same category, should not have their different degrees
of power wholly accounted for in a similar manner.

The fedlacy of this supposition may also be readily
proved by observation, which will quickly make it evident
that many of the lymphatic temperament are very sensitive,
and that others of a more perfect organization — ^the bilious
for example — are comparatively callous. Without appealing
to these arguments, however, we are compelled to adopt the
same conclusion by a simple consideration of the conditions
of the case. Pleasure and pain are impressions received by
the nerves: those nerves are distributed throughout the whole
fifjrstem, and it is evident that for the conscious being inhaUt-
ing that system to become cognizant of such impressions
there must be some general reservoir to which they are con-
veyed, — some nervous centre to which all the sensations ex-
perienced by the nerves shall be communicated ; that is, there
must be an organ for the perception of pleasure and pain.

In contrasting the enthusiastic and phlegmatic characters,
it will abo be observed that the difference in their susceptibi-
lity is not confined to corporeal sensations, but extends
itself to mental ones also. Insensibility of body co-exists
with insensibility of mind, and vice versa. Exalted physical
delicacy is accompanied by acuteness of mental feeling, and
the capacity for undergoing, without inconvenience, the in-
fliction of external injury, associates itself with a certain
bluntness of moral perception that induces carelessness as to
the agreeable or disagreeable excitements of the sentiments
and i^ections. From this it may be fairly inferred, that the
oi^an of Sensitiveness (for this appears to be the most appro-
priate name), not only observes and conveys to the mind the
comfort or discomfort proceeding from exterior impressions,
but that it serves as a general percipient of the pleasurable
and painful sensations arising from the various impulses of
the passions. Phrenologists have usually taught that each


Digitized by


Google


374 A new view of the Functions of

organ was in itself conscious of the feelings resulting from its
own activity, but if the preceding views are received, it must
be presumed that this faculty supposed to be possessed by
each individual portion of the brain^ is located in some inde-
pendent organ, which acts as a general receiver of those
feelings. Perhaps this may appear an unnecessary and there-
fore unnatural arrangement, but further thought will remove
this impression ; for it must be borne in mind, that even on
the supposition that every organ took cognizance of its own
pleasure and pains, we should still have to assume that
each of them was divided into two portions, one to act, and
the other to perceive the sensations product by the action.
To take any other view would be to go contrary to known
physiological principles. Instance taste, hearing, sight, &c.
in all of which the acting apparatus is totally distinct from
the agent which takes note of the results ; and if it be pre-
sume that the same law holds good with the mental powers,
we have only to imagine that the sentient portions of the
various organs are gathered together into one group, and
placed by themselves in a particular part of the brain, to bring
about the arrangement above set forth. Nor are there want-
ing, analogies to bear out the conclusion that there is one
general centre of feeling. The influence which Firmness
is supposed to exert over the other organs may be cited as an
illustration. It is beUeved to communicate to the passions
and sentiments the stimulus necessary to prevent their falling
too soon into a state of rest, and we know that when the organ is
smaU, all the mental manifestations are transient, uncertain,
and unenduring. Now there is nothing more unnatural in
the centralization of the various sensations than there is in
the transferrence of the sustaining energies of the several
organs to some one governing organ, and we might as reason-
ably object to the relationship which Firmness is said to have
to the other powers of the mind as to that which Sensitiveness
is here supposed to possess.

Assuming then, for the present, the existence of an organ
of Sensitiveness, the reader will be good enough to observe its
bearing upon the question in hand — the functions of Imita-
tion and Benevolence. We have seen that the mind contains
a faculty provided for the express purpose of producing in
itself states of activity similar to those exhibited by other
minds, and phenomena have been mentioned which are only
explicable upon the assumption that such faculty exists.
We have seen likewise that in all probability there is another
faculty, having for its specific object the perception and ap-
preciation of fdl pleasurable and painful impressions^ of which


Digitized by


Google


Imitatum and Benevolence. 375

the body and mind are capable. Keeping the functions of
these two £Eunilties fully before our imaginations^ let us sup-
pose a man in whom they were active and well developed^ to
be brought into the presence of an individual who had oroken
a limb and was manifesting great sufferings or to speak phre-
nologically^ was powerfully exhibiting the natural language
of distressed Sensitiveness. As soon as the visitor sees the
contorted features^ and hears the groans of the patient^ the
faculty of Sympathy creates in his mind a like activity of feel-
ing — ^partially reproduces in himself the sensations he witnesses
— disagreeably excites his own organ of Sensitiveness — ^makes
him distressed and uncomfortable^ and naturally induces him
to relieve as much as possible the agonies of the sufferer^
because in so doing he mitigates the pain he himself feels.

Again^ bring him in contact with a firiend who has lately
received pleasing intelligence^ or met with some piece of good
fortune^ and is consequently in great extacies^ that is^ showing
all the external indices of gratified Sensitiveness ; immedi-
ately on observing these evidences of happiness^ a sympath||^
action is by the same means as before set up in his own mina^
and he evinces by his sparkling eye and smiling countenance^
that he receives delight from the felicity of his Mend. From
the like causes he will be led to act upon all occasions in
such manner as to ensure the gratification of those around
him^ seeing that the agreeable sensations he produces in
others are reflected back upon himself. Now these and other
results of a similar character are those usually supposed to
be secured by what we have hitherto called the organ of
Benevolence. If, however, it be true that there is a faculty
of Sympathy and one of Sensitiveness, having each of them
the properties ascribed to it, which are capable by their con-
joint action of producing the practical effects of pity, charity,
and kindness, then is the existence of an independent organ
of Benevolence rendered unnecessary and therefore unnatural.

Moreover, if we investigate the feelings attendant upon
actions of a humane character, and the impulses from which
they proceed, we shall find that thev exactly harmonize with
this theory. Men behave amiably because they sympathize
with the pleasure their kindness creates ; they long to relieve
a fellow-creature in distress, because by so doing they not
only get rid of the pain which the sight of his misery has
creat^ in their minds, but experience positive pleasure from
perceiving the happiness they have given rise to ; and the
cases alluded to in the preUminary remarks on Imitation,
where absolute physical pain is felt, when it is manifested by
another, are oidy extreme examples of the mode in which


Digitized by


Google


376 A new view of the Functions of

tenderness and compassion are invariably produced. Ana-
lyticaUy, therefore, as well as synthetically, we arrive at the
conclusion, that the sentiment of Benevolence is the pro-
duct of combined Sympathy and Sensitiveness.

It may be said, however, that no argument has yet been
adduced, to show that the organ of Sensitiveness, supposing
it to exist, is situated in the locality heretofore assigned to
Benevolence. This omission, be it remembered, is unavoid-
able, in taking a theoretical view of the matter, seeing that
such a conclusion is beyond the reach of abstract reasoning,
and can only be arrived at by observation and experience.
Nevertheless, it may be well here to point out a few consider-
ations suggestive of the belief that that situation is a most
appropriate one.

When we discover that there is in every human mind a
faculty given apparently for the sole purpose of inducing in
that mind emotions of tiie same character as those manifested
around it, we may naturally assume, judging fiN>m other
phrenological data, that this faculty is located in the neigh-
bourhood of those feelings which it is most desirable to have
acted upon in this manner. We should not, therefore, look
for the organ of Sympathy in the region of Combativeness
and Destructiveness, as it would manifestly tend to aggravate
the evils firequently resulting from these passions, but we
should expect to see it associated with those mental powers,
the multiplication of whose activity, after this fashion, would
be most conducive to the general happiness. This is exactly
the arrangement proved upon inspection to exist; for we
find that the sentiments immediately surrounding Sympathy,
are Hope, Wonder,* MirthfiUness, and — according to the
proposed theory — Sensitiveness ; of which the three distin-
guished by italics, at once identify themselves as belonging
to the class that it is well to have thus excited. It cannot be
denied that cheerfulness and laughter are feelings, whose
propagation by sympathy within reasonable restrictions, tends
to the increase of man's felicity. The direct transmission
from one being to another of pleasure and pain, by the same
means, is of still more importance in producing mercy, good-
nature, and urbanity ; and hence we see that the organ by
whose assistance these mental affections are generated, is
more intimately connected with the exciting agent than either
of the others.

A phenomenon which has been observed by phrenologists,

* The organ of Wonder has another function in connexion with Sym-
pathy, which, with the consent of the editor, the writer will take a future
opportunity of pointing out


Digitized by


Google


Imitatum and Benevolence. 377

respecting one of the assumed functions of Benevolence^ may
also be cited as affording indirect evidence in support of
the present position^ inasmuch as it is more easilj explicable
upon the new hypothesis than upon the old one. I allude to
the remark that has been made from time to time that the
gratification of any one of the passions^ affections^ or senti-
ments^ was accompanied by an excitement of the organ of
Benevolence. Now, the ordinary views of the nature of that
faculty evidently require the supposal of an express provi-
sion for the production of such an effect. That it should be
awakened in this manner was not a circumstance to be origi-
nally expected. Its usual office, — ^the creation of pity and
kindness, — has no obvious connexion with the state of the
other organs ; there is no iq>parent reason why the satisfaction
of a feeling located in some distant part of the brain should
rouse it into activity, and we must therefore imagine an
apparatus constructed for this especial end. Under the pro-
posed theory, on the other hand, the phenomenon becomes a
simple, obvious, and necessary result of existing arrangements.
For if we admit the organ of Sensitiveness to take the place
now marked '* Benevolence,^' and if we allow that it has for
its duty the perception of the pleasures and pains of the
various fSEU^ulties; that it is the grand centre of sensation,
and is excited by the affections of all the other organs, it will
at once be seen that the effect in question is a direct conse-
quence of the ordinary principle of communicated action;
that it arises from the diffusion of stimulus from aroused
Sensitiveness to the adjacent nervous masses, and chiefly to
its closest neighbour — Sympathy^ whose unusual liveliness
thus induced will ensure more than ordinary regard to the
feelings of others; that is, will produce the results commonly
ascribed to excited Benevolence. Nor does the clue which
this supposition affords to the imderstanding of mental mani-
festations end here. It at once suggests a clear and very
beautiful rationale of the other emotions exhibited by persons
experiencing extreme deUght. Following out the principle
of communicated action in its further effects, it will be seen,
that the inci^ased flow of spirits invariably attendant upon
every species of pleasure naturally arises from the excitement
transmitted by active Sensitiveness to the adjoining oi^an of
Hope; moreover that the smiling countenance, indicative of
felicitous feeling, is produced by a partial awakening of the
neighbouring faculty of Mirthfulness; and lastly, that the
laughter proceeding from extreme gratification of any of the
passions, as seen in the chuckling of the miser over his gold,
or the glee of the schoolboy over his successful malice, is only


Digitized by


Google


378 A new view of the Functions qf

a stronger development of the same effect, caused in the like
manner. Here then stands additional presumptive evidence
in our favour.

There is another question which has all its obscurities
cleared up by this mode of viewing the subject. Phrenologists
in treating of the nature of Benevolence, have usually felt
that there was some difficulty in separating in certain cases
the emotions it gave rise to from those generally supposed to
proceed from Adhesiveness and Philoprogenitiveness, and
have considered it necessary to bring forward argument in
answer to the anticipated question — ^Why should not Benevo-
lence fulfil all the offices of the domestic affections ? K, how-
ever, it be conceded that humane impulses spring from the
combined action of Sympathy and Sensitiveness, and not
from a faculty given for the express purpose of securing
them, the obstacle is in a great measure removed. Sympathy
having a general function in regard to various other organs in
the production of a large class of distinct feelings, and having
no exclusive relation to Sensitiveness, and Sensitiveness like-
wise having an extensive range of duties of a different order
to perform, and not having been provided for this sole object,
it becomes apparent that the generation of the sentiments of
humanity was not the only end in view in the implanting of
these powers, but that they form only one group out of a
wide series of emotions to be obtained, and thus the idea of
tmnecessary mechanism is mainly done away. Moreover, the
feeling of Benevolence, when analyzed under the new light
thrown upon it by the foregoing theory, is seen to be more
essentiaUy distinct in its character from the impulses of the
affections than has been heretofore perceived. And finaUy,
when a comprehensive survey is taken of the moral influences
flowing from the joint action of Sympathy and Sensitiveness,
it will be found that the evolution of kind and compassionate
feeling, forms but a small part of the duties for whose fulfil-
ment they were associated, and a part too which, although it
may stand conspicuous as the most important during the
present condition of mankind, will occupy but a secondary
position when the human race shall have attained to a higher
stage of moral development, and when the great purpose of
these faculties will be — the direct mtdttplicaiion of happiness.

Before entering upon an examination of the arguments
deducible from observation, it will be well to make a definite
statement of the two general inferences that may be drawn
from the foregoing matter, so that the facts to be subsequently
investigated may be brought to bear upon certain specific
propositions.


Digitized by


Google


ImUaiion and Benevolence. 379

1. Seeing that Benevolence flows from the combined acti-
vity of Sympathy and Sensitiveness, — ^the agency of both
being essential to its existence, and seeing likewise that there
is a pretty general nniformity in the degrees of susceptibility
to pleasure and pain,— or what is the same thing, that there
is but rarely any great deficiency in the organ of Sensitive-
ness, it follows that variation in the size of Sympathy or Imi-
tation will be the usual cause of the differences in the amount
of amiable and compassionate feeling exhibited by mankind,
and we must therefore look upon this organ as the main
index of humane character.

2. A small development of Sensitiveness wiU be accompa-
nied not only by unusual patience under suffering, and great
callousness of feeling, but also by insensibility to pleasure or
indifference to agreeable excitements, and the two opposite
qualities will be associated in case of a large development.

In commencing the practical branch of the subject, the
writer originally intended to bring forward those illustrations
which he has met with in his own sphere of observation ; but
although these have been exceedingly satisfactory to himself,
and are sufiSciently conclusive to decide the matter in his own
mind, they would be comparatively valueless to the reader, who
)ias no means of verifying them by reference to the cases them-
selves. It will therefore be better to proceed at once to the
consideration of examples which are open to imiversal ex-
amination. And first, let us take the evidencci adducible
in support of the proposition, that the sentiments of pity,
kindness, charity, &c., comprehended under the general
term Benevolence, have their manifestations determined by
the size of the organ of Sympathy.

The form of head usually seen in criminals, and more
particularly in murderers, furnishes one of the most striking
illustrations of the truth of this doctrine. It has I believe
been frequently considered as somewhat anomalous, that
the organ of Benevolence should generally be so well deve-
loped in this class of men. In nearly all cases it is up to the
average size ; in some it is large ; and felons certainly could
not as a body be pointed out as exhibiting in their heads any
remarkable deficiency of the faculty. But if we make en-
quiries concerning their endowment of Imitation, we shall
come to a different result. If we recollect the remark that
has been so universally made in reference to the lateral por-
tions of the moral region in such cases, — the notable slicing-
off at the sides which so uniformly obtains, — ^we have most
distinct evidence that this organ is, in nearly every instance,
exceedingly small. In looking at the transverse outline of


Digitized by


Google


380 A new view of the Functions of

the anterior part of a head of this description, it will be seen
that the surface slopes rapidly away immediately on each side
of Benevolence, in such a manner as to depress the external
boundary of Imitation to some quarter or three-eighths of an
inch below its ordinary level. A class of examples, therefore,
which under the old supposition rather formed a stumbling
block to phrenology, in so far as the sentiment of Benevolence
was concerned, may, with the proposed understanding, be
cited as a very conclusive illustration of its truth.

The same remarks are likewise applicable to whole races
of men, viewed with regard to their national peculiarities ; as
for example to the Nomadic tribes of Northern Asia, the
Mongols, Lapps, &c., whose pyramidal skulls and lozenge-
shaped faces are strongly indicative of that same depressed
form of the ideal, imaginative, and sympathetic division of
the coronal surface, so regularly observed among the worst
specimens of our own race. Here also the deficiency of the
organ of Benevolence is not so marked as to afford a satisfac-
tory explanation of the barbarous and inhuman dispositions
of this section of our species, exhibited during their irruptions
into Europe, and manifested too in their social conduct, — ^their
cruel treatment of their aged parents, and other similar traits
related by travellers who have been amongst them. But by
adopting the new view of the function of Imitation, and
bearing in mind their characteristic organization in reference
to it, we are at once supplied with a key to the mystery.

Turning to the opposite picture of human nature, we find
the like principle forced upon our observation in an equally
striking manner. In no case that has been examined for the
purpose of testing the position that large Imitation was es-
sential to the production of kindly feeUngs, has there been
found an exception. In both Clarkson and Wilberforce its
development is even more remarkable than that of Benevolence.
In each of them the surface of the head, on the upper part of
the frontal bone, remains perfectly horizontal to an unusual
breadth, and does not begin to descend laterally until it
comes to the Organ of Wonder. The likeness of Melancthon
also exhibits this formation; and in all men who have been
noted for great humanity and amiability, a large endowment
of this faculty is observable. The very appearance of such
heads carries with it an impression of good nature, and those
of the contrary character, on the other hand, produce in-
stinctive dislike.

In reference to the second proposition it must be premised
that, in consequence of the gradations of susceptibility not
having hitherto been attributed to the different degrees of en-


Digitized by


Google


IfnUation and Benevolence, 381

dowment of a cerebral organ^ there have been but few observa-
tions made regarding this peculiarity of disposition in those
persons the forms of whose heads are well known^ and there-
fore the individual illustrations that can be generally recog-
nized as indicating the position of Sensitiveness are not nu-
merous. Perhaps the case of Louis XVI. is one of the most
remarkable. The depression of the upper part of the forehead^
as seen in looking at his profile^ is very decided ; showings if
the theory be true, a low degree of excitability. Now few
whose history is extensively known have been so strongly
distinguished by their apathy and insensibility as he was.
The agitating circumstances of his eventful career rarely
produced any external symptoms of aroused feeling, and he
remained almost quiescent under calamities which would have
created in most men the manifestations of extreme anxiety.
Another individual example of the converse character may
be seen in the case of the negro, Eustache, in whose head the
organ is very lai^, especially its posterior portion. That he
possessed an unusual share of susceptibility may be gathered
firom the aspect of the features in his cast, which are drawn
into a very decided and somewhat ludicrous expression of an-
noyance, clearly indicative of the discomfort he experienced
during the operations to which he had to submit in the process
of mould-mi^king. Although this may perhaps be considered
a fSeur-fetched illustration, it is in reality a very trustworthy
one, seeing that the tell-tale countenance under such circum-
stances is a more infallible guide than either speech or action.
But the most satisfactory evidences that the organ of Sen-
sitiveness is situated in the locahty heretofore appropriated to
Benevolence are obtained from an examination of the national
characteristics of different races of men, and still better by
comparing the dispositions of the several species of dogs in
connexion with the forms of their heads. The peculiar traits
of the North American Indians demand our first consideration,
as promising to be particularly decisive. Travellers and others
who have been intimately acquainted with the manners and
usages of these children of the forest, have invariably expressed
their great amazement at the fortitude with which they un-
dergo the infliction of the horrible tortures contrived by re-
vengeful malice; and one of the standing matters of inquiry
amongst those wlio are interested in the philosophy of hu-
manity, has been, — ^What can be the source of this strange
capacity for bearing with an unmoved countenance those
burnings, lacerations and agonizing torments, the mere ima«
gination of which is to us painful ? Some have argued that
it was wholly the result of extremely powerful will,— of great


Digitized by


Google


382 A new view of the Functions of

moral firmness^ combined with, the facility of concealment
due to large secretiveness. Others maintain that a modifica-
tion of the nervous system has been produced by the exposed
mode of life followed through so many generations^ and that
their bodies have in part lost their acuteness of feeling. But
when the question is considered in conjunction with the views
here entertained; the whole matter becomes simple. The
North American Indians have a smaller proportion of the
organ of Sensitiveness than any other division of the human
family. " Humboldt has remarked that there is no race on
the globe in which the frontal bone is so much pressed back-
wards.'^* Their type of head exhibits in its profile a uniform
outUne of but trifling curvature, extending from the region of
the perceptive faculties back to the organ of Firmness, almost
entirely cutting off that prominence of the anterior lobe of
the brain seen amongst Europeans. Here then we discover a
solution of the difficulty. What was before inexplicable, is
now easily understood, and the apparent anomaly ranges it-
self naturally and systematically with other facts. More-
over, it has been shewn that a low endowment of Sensi-
tiveness not only implies unusual carelessness of corporeal
injury, but involves likewise a disregard of moral excitements,
either of an agreeable or disagreeable cast, and will be neces-
sarily accompanied by habitually weak manifestations of plea-
sure and enjoyment, — ^want of interest, — deficient excitability
and a universal coldness of disposition. Now no terms could
be more descriptive of the red man's character. All who
have dipped into the history of the aboriginal wars, must be
aware of the stoical indifference with which these Indians
conduct themselves upon what we should consider very in-
teresting occasions. Their phlegmatic calmness and inva-
riable fingidity of manner are proverbial ; and they are even
known to sneer at " the pale ftices,'' because they consider
the animated feeling and excitement shewn by them to be
undignified. We obtain then on this hypothesis a clear un-
derstanding of the two chief distinguishing features of Indian
disposition, previously unaccoimted for ; and, by tracing both
to the same source, discover a relationship between properties
which before were not known to be connected, and a unity of
character hitherto unobserved.

Let us now consider the evidences that may be derived

* Morton's Crania Americana, It cannot be supposed that a man of
Humboldt's penetration was deceived by artificial deformity. He doubtless
came to this conclusion from having examined those tribes vrho did not
squeese their children's heads, and after making due allowance in the cases
of those that did.


Digitized by


Google


Imitation and Benevolence. 88S

from the inferior creation. Mark the crania of two opposite
varieties of the canine species ; for instance, a greyhound and
one of the smaller breed of spaniels. In the greyhound not
only is the whole upper surface of the skull greatly depressed,
but the medial portion more especially is marked by the deep
furrow that traverses it from back to front, indicating that the
central part of the anterior lobe is unusually small. In the
spaniel, on the other hand, particularly if it be one of the
lap-dog tribe, the entire forehead is found to be much higher
and more fully developed ; in addition to this, the hollow seen
in the greyhound no longer exists, and the front part of the
coronal region is protuberant and of uniform convexity. In
the one case the supposed organ of Sensitiveness is veiy
small, in the other very large. When we compare the quali-
ties of these two families of dogs, we find that the distinctive
traits of disposition that might have been anticipated from a
glance at their discrepant organization are exactly coincident
with their known characteristics. The greyhound is the dull-
est of his species ; his moments of delight are few and far
between ; the greater part of his existence passes in a state
of quiet carelessness ; his grave visage and drooping tail are
but the outward indices of his inward apathy; and fas every
action stamps him as the most phlegmatic of his race. Look
at the contrast exhibited by his merry relation the spaniel,
more especially in the phases of highest cultivation : he is his
very antipodes; seems actually made up of susceptibility,
manifests on all occasions the utmost acuteness of feeling ; is
elevated to extasy by the most trifling act of kindness or the
smallest mark of approbation ; and shews, on the contrary,
by his piteous look and mournful attitude how much he
is distressed whenever he incurs his master^s displeasure.
His manners are eminently expressive of extreme happiness
ot misery as circumstances may determine, and everything
implies the existence of a strong perception of pleasure
and pain.

Another remarkable fact of great significance, when ex-
amined in connexion with the proposed theory, is suggested
by observing the fighting capacities of the several varie-
ties of dogs. All those kinds that are noted for the sa-
vageness and pertinacity of their attacks, such as the bull-
dog and his congeners, who have been in some cases known
to retain their hold even when their limbs have been cut off,
are not only remarkable for their large Combativeness and
Destructiveness, but likewise for the same deficiency in the
organ of Sensitiveness pointed out in the greyhound. Ex-
posed as they are by their snarling propensities to frequent

D D


Digitized by


Google


884 Functions of Imitation and Benevolence.

bites^ wounds^ and bodily injuries of all kinds, it was necessary
that they should be gifted with a lower degree of sensibility
than other animals. Accordingly we find that all such dogs
are thus phrenologically distinguished, and as we ascend the
scale to those of a more placable character, we see that
gradual change in the form of head which is theoretically
indicated until we arrive at the peaceful spaniel, where the
combative instinct is at its minimum and the power of feel-
ing at its maximum; which circumstance is immediately
suggestive of the idea, that as the liabiUty to injury has de-
creased, the bodily susceptibility has increased. The same
relation between the habits of the creature and its cranial
conformation will be found to exist amongst other genera;
the deficiency of Sensitiveness being proportional to the dan-
ger of physical suffering incurred by the mode of life.

Such are a few of the chief practical considerations which
tend to confirm the proposed view of the functions of Imita-
tion and Benevolence. Had there been means of access to
more abundant sources of information, they might doubtless
have been greatly multiplied; as it is, they only embrace
such illustrations as could be derived from the inspection of
ordinary phrenological data. Neither perhaps will they now
appear to the reader so conclusive as they may by and bye
do, when they come to be backed by a host of personal
observations, as they have been in my own case. Meanwhile
it is hoped that the arguments that have been adduced to
show — 1st, That the production of sympathetic impulses is
the true office of Imitation. — 2. That there must exist an
organ of Sensitiveness. — 3. That these two faculties are ca-
pable by their combined agency of generating all the senti-
ments of humanity, thereby rendering a separate faculty of
Benevolence unnecessary.— 4. That between the two oi^ans
of Sympathy is abstractedly the most appropriate position for
that of Sensitiveness, and, — 5. That such an arrangement
very beautifully explains otherwise mysterious phenomena;
together with the facts that have been brought forward re-
lative to the heads of criminals, of the wandering tribes of
Asia, and of our distinguished philanthropists, as illustrative
of the duty of Sympathy, and those that were cited respecting
the heads of Indians and of the different races of dogs, in
exemplification of the influence of Sensitiveness, will procure
to the proposed theory a fair examination.

Derby, November, 1843.

Postscript. — ^The writer hoped to have been able before
the publication of the above article to verify the doctrines


Digitized by


Google


Phrenologioal Society. 885

set forth ia it by the agency of mesmerism^ but he has not
as yet had the opportunity. That the theory of Sensitiveness
afforded an easy explanation of one of the startling pheno-
mena of the mesmeric sleep — the insensibility to pain—- oc-
curred to him at an early stage of the investigation. It was
evident that if the grand centre of feeling — the percipient of
all the sensations of the system — ^were thrown by any such
influence into a state of inactivity, none of the ordinary
mental impressions resulting from bodily injury could be felt,
and a total insensibility to suffering would be the conse-
quence. Following out the idea, it was likewise obvious, that
if during the mesmeric state the organ of Sensitiveness was
excited, there would of course be for the time a revival of all
such perceptions, accompanied by a liability to ordinary nerv-
ous stimuli; and hence by such agency the correctness of the
theory might be determined. Perhaps some of those who
have facilities for observing mesmeric phenomena will make
the experiment.


III. Pkrenoloffical Society, 17, Edwards Street,
Poriman Square.

November 1st, 1843.

A PAPER was read by W. Hering, Esq., entitled " Remarks
on the Phrenological Development and Character of, and on
the character actually manifested by the late John Constable,
Esq., K.A. '/' and illustrated by a cast of the head taken a
few hours after death by Mr. Davis the sculptor.

The whole head was large, and the nervous and sangui-
neous temperaments preponderated, indicating great general
power and activity of Drain. The moral and intellectual re-
gions were much larger than the animal. The organs of the
observing faculties were far better developed than those of
the higher intellectual; and the organs of the social and
domestic feelings greatly predominated over those of the
inferior animal region.

Mr. Hering gave the measurements of the different re-
gions, and an estimate of the relative size of each organ,
stating that in order to guard against the possibility of his
making the development of the cast correspond with what he
knew of Mr. Constable's character, he had applied to two
private friends — well-known phrenologists — who unknown to
each other took the development and inferred the charactei;^
and they completely agreed in their judgments on the cast.

D d2


Digitized by


Google


386 Phrenological Society,

1. The organs estimated as very large, were those of
Destructiveness, Love of Approbation, Benevolence, Firm-
ness, Individuality, Locality, and Order.

2. Those estimated as large were. Love of Offspring, Li-
habitiveness. Adhesiveness, Secretiveness, Acquisitiveness,
Self-esteem, Imitation, Colour, Eventuality, Language, and
Comparison.

8. Pull— Combativeness, Veneration, ConscientiouBness,
Hope, Wit.

4. Moderate — Constructiveness, Alimentiveness, Marvel-
lousness, Ideality, Size, Time, Melody, Causality.

5. And small — ^Amativeness, Cautiousness, Form, Weight,
Number.

From which it was inferred that the character would be
social and domestic ; the intellectual powers infinitely greater
in observing than in reasoning; that he would be persevering
in his intellectual pursuits and steadfast in firiendship ; would
have great love of children and home ; be fond of society and
desirous of its good opinion, but incautious; pacific; would have
little fondness for money, and be very benevolent, especially
towards children ; conscious of his own merits, and impatient
t)f neglect ; not remarkable for religious observances ; firm
in his opinions ; just towards himteff and others. His love
of poetry would be limited to that of the domestic affectiona
and scenery. His appreciation of things, localities, and colours,
would be the conspicuous powers of his intellect. He would
prefer aerial to linear perspective ; would paint better than
he would draw. He would easily acquire languages, and
possess great conversational power. Music moderate. He
would like the certainty of mathematics, but would not easify
become a mathematician. He might have been a genius, but
his inventive power would consist in the modification and ar-
rangement of a few objects in varied localities, for the purpose
of exhibiting more general effects of colour, light, and shadow.

Mr. Hering testified to the accuracy and truthfulness of
the character predicated from the cast, and read some interest-
ing observations and anecdotes of his life in illustration of it.

A paper was afterwards read by Thomas Uwins, Esq. EuA.,
relating more particularly to the works of art of Mr. Consta-
ble, whom he described as the high-priest of nature. " He
«eemed to think that he came into the world to convince
mankind that nature is beautifid. Instead of seeking for the
materials of poetic landscape in foreign countries amidst tem-
ples and classic groves, or in our own amongst castles^ lakes,
and mountains, — he taught that the simple cottage, the vil-
lage green, the church, the meadow covered with cattle, the


Digitized by


Google


Head of Mr. Constable, R,A. 387

canal with its barges^ its locks and weedy banks^ contained
all the materials and called up all the associations necessary-
for picture. He doted upon his native fields. * I love/ said
he, ' every stile and stump and lane in the village : as long
as I am able to hold a brush I shall never cease to paint
them/ So great a lover of simple truth could not tolerate
the common-places of art or Uterature. The freshness and
n^relty of his pictures so surprised and delighted the French
painters, that nothing else was talked of at the time they
were exhibited at the Louvre. They seemed more like the
works of nature than art. The dew of the morning was
found upon the leaves and the grass.

'^ Originality in every art wUl always meet with opposition
firom those whose ideas are bounded by the common-places of
the day. It was Constable's glory that he did not escape;
The damnatory judgment of the critics confirmed him in- his
own views, and gave fresh animation to his exertions.. ' A
great connoisseur/ he says in one of his letters, ' called on
me the other day, and told me he did not like my picture.
This convinces me there must be something good in it.' But
while disgusted with the cant of ordinary criticism, he de-
lighted to hear honest John Bannister say he felt the wind
blowing in his face as he looked at his pictures ; and Fuseli
declare that they made him call for his umbrella. ' I care
not,' he would say with Sterne^ 'for the dogmas of the
schools : let me get at the feelings and the heart in any way
I can.' "

That Constable was right is proved by the result. Pictures
which could find no market while the painter lived are increas-
ing every day in estimation and value.

In the discussion which ensued, Mr. Coode did not altoge-
ther agree with the view which had been taken by Mr. Uwins.
He doubted whether Constable could be considered a really
good colourist ; but he merely suggested this, as he was not
perhaps sufficiently qualified to give a decided opinion. He
considered also, that if Constable paid great attention to
minutiae, he should have had a large organ of Form, and he
did not conceive that his style was of that elevated character
which Mr. Uwins had described.

A discussion ensued, when Mr. Atkinson rose and said,
that in all questions of this nature, it was very necessary to
define terms, that we might clearly understand what we did
each really mean; but in any question concerning poetry or
art, phrenologists always appeared to him to be at a loss, as
though it were all a matter of opinion, and there could be no
fixed principles on which to found a correct philosophy. '^ With


Digitized by


Google


388 Phrenological Society.

regard to the organ of Colour^ which though not smalls is one
of the least in the perceptive region of Constable's head. It
is generally supposed that a good colourist (though few people
or even artists understand what they mean, or should mean,
by good colouring), would have a large organ of Colour,
whereas it is more frequently the reverse, as seen in the head
of Mr. Boxall, whom all acknowledge to possess a charming
sense of colour. Now good colouring depends on a nice per-
ception of colour, which would arise from the purity of the
lenses of the eye, a sufficiently large organ, with a fine tem^
perament ; and on the feeling of harmony and tone, which
does not depend on the mere perception of colour, but chiefly
on a sense of unity of arrangement, and elevation or refine-
ment ; in a great measure the result of Individuality, Order,
and Ideality. An organ of Colour in excess would give a
delight in colour for its own sake, in defiance of other prin-
ciples ; — ^bright, showy, gaudy colouring would predominate,
and a certain pleasure would be felt in crude and violent
contrasts. There would be a want of harmony. It is the
same with those with very large Form : their works exhibit
hard and violent outlines. A very large organ of Self-esteem
again, produces pride, not dignity. Of Benevolence, when
not properly combined, injustice and a mawkish sensibility.
And so it is with the limbs : a strong walker would possess
powerful legs, but to walk with grace and ease would only
require a moderate development, favourably combined. A
large organ of Colour, therefore, would produce a strong or
vivid colourist, but not necessarily a good colourist.

" Constable's colouring was of a low tone, with much of
the freshness of nature, from his constant study in the fields ;
but there was often to be observed a degree of pinky crude-
ness, particularly in his skies, which was very peculiar, and
arose probably from his dwelling on other qufdities in prefer-
ence to colour, or from some defect of sight. Independently
of this, I should say that in his early pictures at least there
was much purity of colouring, though latterly he ran into
one of those singular eccentricities so frequently observable
with artists, when at a certain age they seem to leave nature,
or see all things through a perverted vision, occasioned pro-
babljp^ by the decay of certain faculties, when they become
fancifrd and mannered. As to his attention to minutise, his
large Individuality, with moderate Ideality, induced him to
attend to all the individual objects or accessories as well as
the unity of the whole ; but those objects were worked out
rather in their general effect than with any minute attention
to their form and exact resemblance; and in those works


Digitized by


Google


Head of Mr. Constable, RA. 889

depending altogether on the general effect, his Individoalihr
dwelt npon the one conception without much regarding detail.

'^ I had the pleasure to be acquainted with Constable ; I
have been with him often when ne has been at work. His
small form never induced him to make out a careful outline
or cartoon, but he scumbled out the effect with his brush,
and the exact forms were made out last. He seemed to be
never certain of what he was going to do, and, like Yarlej,
made continual alterations, and was ready to take advantage
of any chance effect which might occur. He was in the
habit of sticking pieces of white paper over his pictures as a
means of studying effect. Such an organization could not
have followed any other line of art with success, nor indeed
any other profession that I am aware of. He was original in
all he did ; so that, when a young man at Lord Mulgrave's, Sir
(George Beaumont, asked hun what style he proposed to follow,
he answered, 'None but Qod Almight/s style. Sir George.'

" He was certainly not a genius of imagination ; he was no
poet ; (his Ideality is not large.) There was a grandeur and
sublimity in some few of his lesser works, but the rest were
of a more homely character, and excellent only for their
strength of feeling and general truth. He did not look at
nature through poetry; he did not seek to elevate, but to
paint what he saw as it appeared to his perceptive eye and
excited the prevailing passions of his nature ; the lovely home
and country, and which is certainly poetry, though rather a
subject for poets than poetry itself. He was fond of intro-
ducing striking effects in his works, as the appearance of
showers and the rainbow ; and there was often a want of
quiet and repose, even in his manner of execution, which
caused Fuseli to exclaim — 'Fetch me my umbrella; I am
going to see Constable's pictures.' The large Individuality
and Eventuality, with the smaller Order and Ideality, would
chiefly account for this. He possessed great vanity and con-
ceit. He thought his own works excellent, and would speak
of Turner as his one great rival. He continually dwelt with
singular minuteness on all which related to himself; — the
organs of Self-esteem and Love of Approbation were remark-
ably large, as was also Conscientiousness, Benevolence, and
the Affections, with the parental feeling very strong, which
extended to a protective feeling over animals. I have seen
him most tenderly engaged in sheltering a poor cat from the
streets on a wet night. He was incautious, and possessed
but little love of onler ; was severe against those who gave
him offence, but kind to those who sought him.

" It is curious that Sir Joshua Bcynolds, who so admired


Digitized by


Google


890 Phrenohyical Society.

Michael Angelo, possessed nothing of his peculiar genius^
and that Constable admired Claude^ whom he so little re-
sembled. In Claude, Ideality, Form, and Order, are re-
markably prominent, which are all deficient in Constable.
The head is a striking confirmation, in every particular, of
the truth of phrenology/'

Mr. Uwins was too much impressed with the truth and
value of phrenology, not to be sure that the character and
the works of the man must correspond with the form of his
head ; and he quite assented to Mr. Atkinson's explanation.
His want of Order was remarkably exhibited in the complete
disorder of everything about him.


November l^th, 1843.

Mr. Atkinson exhibited four casts of the heads of indi-
viduals who were remarkable for the deficiency of the talent
of drawing, and observed that in all these mstances there
was a striking depression of the eyebrow over the organ which
has been commonly called the organ of Size, but which Mr.
Atkinson considered would be more properly termed that of
Space or Extension. The perception of size as that of form
being the result of a combination of several forces ; but this
peculiar depression of the eyebrow Mr. Atkinson had observed
in innumerable instances, and invariably accompanied by the
inability to draw, and therefore considered a full development
of this faculty to be most essential to the draftsman ; whereas
in general it will be found (and he was not aware that this
had ever been observed before) that artists are rather deficient
in the organs called Form and Colour, for when these organs
predominate, crude colouring, violent contrasts, and a harsh
outline will be observed ; there will be a want of that har-
mony so essential to the higher qualities of art. It is true
that these organs are very large in a few great artists, but in
such cases the entire anterior lobe is large, but particularly
Ideality, Order, Comparison, Eventuality, Weight, Indivi-
duality, and Locality; all of which are so essential to a
refined taste. In Mr. Maclise the organs of Form and
Colour are large, and produce sometimes an almost distress-
ing harshness of colouring and of outline, so observable in
this artist's works. In Edwin Landseer, whose drawing is
so exquisite, the organ of Form is hardly full. But in
Michael Angelo the very large organ of Form being so won-
derfully balanced or restrained by the higher powers of that


Digitized by


Google


Mr. Atkinson on the Organ of Size. 391

great mind^ produce only the utmost grandeur of outline for
which that almost superhuman genius was so remarkable.
When the organs of Form, Space, and Order are lai^e, there
will be a disposition to make careful cartoons or outline
drawings previous to beginning to paint; but when these
organs are rather deficient, as in the cases of Yarley and of
Constable, a few scratches will suffice, and the rest will be
worked out with the brush as it were in spaces; considering
the general effect from the sense of individuality rather than
any exactness in drawing. But the whole brain has its in-
fluence, — every power its place in guiding the hand of the
artist, and determining the direction of his talents; and
perhaps there are no means by which you may so clearly
exhibit the distinct powers of the mind as in the works of
artists. We may differ about the meaning of words, but the
effects exhibited by visible objects can hardly be disputed,
and Mr. Atkinson hoped on some future occasion to be able
to illustrate this, and to explain what he conceived to be the
true philosophy of art.

The heads which he exhibited in illustration of his views
on the organ of Size, were, first that of Sir Walter Scott ;
a cast which is interesting, said Mr. Atkinson, as being
the original given by Sir Walter to his father, and as that
which Qtdl examined at Chantry^s, the sculptor; and re-
marked the large constructiveness, which caused a laugh, but
which was indeed a strong point in Scott's character, as Mr.
Atkinson could attest by some hundred letters of Scott's, in
his possession, respecting the building of Abbotsford. Scott
was fond of mechanical pursuits but could never draw : '* If
I attempt to represent a house,'' he says in one of his letters,
" it is just like a haystack." Mr. Atkinson here exhibited
one of Scott's wretched attempts at drawing. In the cast
the organ of size is remarkably depressed.

Mr. Atkinson then referred to the cast of the head of the
late Mr. John Atkinson, who though for some years in an
architect's office could never draw the simplest object. The
cast exhibits the same depression on the eyebrow. It was
the same with the late John Constable the eldest son of the
artist, presenting a remarkable contrast to his father. Mr.
John Constable says in a letter to Mr. Atkinson, " I never
could paint in the least, and my father never considered that
I had any taste. I would sooner walk two or three miles to
see a steam engine than three or four yards to see a picture
gallery." Mr. Atkinson pointed to the depression of the
cerebellum in this instance as an example of the truth of his
new discoveries. '' Even when at school," said Mr. Constable,


Digitized by


Google


392 Mr. Pridemu^M new Views

'' I never took any pleasare in out-door games/' What a
contrast to tiie cast of John Yarley, whose cerebellom is
immense, and who was celebrated for his athletic powers
and great strength even to the last, notwithstanding his
bnlkj figure. Gall, said Mr. Atkinson, might be cited as
another instance of the deficiency of the talent to draw.

Mr. Atkinson here went into some severe strictures on
Mr. Hudson Lowe, who complaining of the course pursued by
Gall and his followers, and professing to have set the world
right, had wandered through the mist of others' thoughts,
and by neglecting the true philosophy of material science,
into the most glaring fallacies; in proof of which Mr. A.
quoted from an article in the People's Phrenologicdl Journal.


IV. Strictwres on the Conduct of H, Watson, F.L.S.; with an
Appendix, containing a Spectdative Analysis of the Mental
Functions. By T. S. Prideaux. Longman and Co.
London, 1840.

Three years have elapsed since the publication of Mr. Fri-
deaux's *' Speculative Analysis of the Mental Functions,'' and
even at this late period we feel anxious to direct the attention
of cerebral physiologists to the work, because it contains
views which we consider exceedingly original and of consi-
derable importance. We are astonished that our northern
contemporary has not as a matter of duty referred to it. Not
a line has appeared at all calculated to inform cerebral physi-
ologists that new organs have been discovered or suggested,
or observations chronicled for the purpose of controverting, if
possible, Mr. Prideaux's positions. We really think this is
cause for complaint. Several practical men amongst our ac-
quaintance have regretted the course pursued, and have ex-
pressed considerable astonishment when their attention has
been called to the new views. In truth, however, we are
obliged to admit that there is an apology, and it is this ;—
when the pamphlet was published the Journal was not con-
ducted by the present editor, and, moreover, the speculative
analysis was appended to the '^ Strictures on the conduct of
H. Watson." We shall not enter into a consideration of the
causes producing the misunderstanding between Mr. P. and
Mr. W. ; but we may remark, that in our opinion the ar-
rangement of the pamphlet should have been reversed ; this
woiUd have brought the views more prominently before those
most likely to benefit by them, and would have placed Mr.
Watson in his true position. However, he obtains a most


Digitized by


Google


in Cerebral Phyriohgy. 898

aerere^ but a well-merited castigation^ and we are pleased
that the Journal was removed from his fostering care and
attention.

But to a consideration of the speculations. There are
many portions we should wish to quote^ and at a future period
we maj occasionally direct attention to them by making short
extracts; for the present, however, we must content ourselves
by giving a condensed summary. Mr. P. refers to several
unpublished essays. It is quite refreshing to meet with
an original thinker in the metaphysical department of our
science, and we trust ere long to be favoured with a perusal
of them.

No man can study cerebral physiology in a practical man-
ner without becoming convinced that there are many pe-
culiarities of character which cannot be fairly considered
functional manifestations of recognized organs. We had
occasion to remark in a former number, that comparatively
speaking ''cerebral analysis had yet to be commenced.'^
Mr. P. says,

** I have long been imbued with the conviction that many shades
of chanu;ter exist, which cannot be formed by any quantitive ad-
mixture of the known primitive powers, and that there necessarily
exist faculties Qualitatively different from any of those yet admitted
as fundamental.

Mr. P. then answers the objection which many advance to
the i priori method of studying our science. We agree with
all his statements on this particular. Astronomy, chemistry,
anatomy, physiology, &c., have all been advanced hj acute
and speculative thinkers. In all these sciences, certain indi-
viduals have caught glimpses of some previously unrecognized
law ; from the known they have predicted the unknown ; or,
they have suggested the possibility of ascertaining certain
phenomena, and which has been the means of awaking a
train of thought in others productive of the most astouncUng
results. We are at a loss to conceive why the same course is
not to be permitted in the study of cerebral physiology. Why
is the original thinker to be denounced as a theorist? Why
are his views to be discarded with this brief notice, '' He is
not a practical man V^ As our author justly remarks,

** Analytic or speculative reasoning is productive of an injurious
effect, only, when it presumptuously disclaims the necessity, and
discards the practice, of verifymg its conclusions by observation.'^

We know that Mr. Prideaux is in possession of a vast
number of facts corroborative of the truth of his suggestions,
and a well-known cerebral physiologist assures us that with


Digitized by


Google


394 Mr, Prideaujc^s new Views

regard to the position of one of these new organs^ '' Love-of-
liberty," he is perfectly satisfied. He has tested it over and
over again, and feels no hesitation in saying that he receives
it as a demonstrated organ.

Our author after entering into the consideration of the
question — ^whether the impressions of each sense are cognized
by a separate organ, or by one in common, and wluch he
answers in the affirmative, describes the organ of ** Love-of«
liberty."

Cerebral physiologists have hitherto attributed the origin
of this emotion, to the joint operation of Firmness and Self*-
esteem. Mr. P. differs from them, and here are his reasons.

"To contrast my notions of Firmness and Love-of-liberty —
Firmness desires to act in a certain way, because it has been pre-
viously resolved to do so — Love-of-liberty, because the resolve emanates
from the unrestrained deliberation of the faculties of the itidividual.
Firmness desires to adhere to resolves once taken, uninfluenced by
changes which may subsequently take place in the desires of the
other faculties, and which had they occurred anteriorly to the resolve
being formed, would have modified its character. JLove-of-liberty,
on me contrary, rather desires to be always free to follow the
impulses of the moment.

" Self-esteem I regard as equally as incompetent as Firmness, to
generate a Love-of-liberty per se ; it may incline an individual to
reject the advice of others, or even feel a sense of mortification at
being dictated to by another; but thb will be either from inferiority
being thus implied, or with reference to loss of rank, precedence,
or power, and a great part of the irritation the loss of these occasions,
must also be attributed to another organ. In short, I consider the
tendency to maintain the rights believed to be possessed, — cmd the
tendency to believe the rights possessed, very extensive to be essentially
distinct faculties; and if I mistake not, those who are conscious of
aspirations for pure liberty, will decide that the emotion has no
connection with wounded feelings of Self-importance."

The position of the organ is thus stated, —

" I believe the emotion of Love-of-liberty to be originated by the
middle third of the portion of brain now assigned to Self-esteem and
Firmness; thus separating these organs from each other; and have
made an extensive number of observations on its development,
confirmative of this opinion, without meeting with any opposed
to it."

The next organ is called " Internality, or Reflex Intel-
lectual Consciousness.^' Mr. P. says,

"Whilst some persons possess an active consciousness of all
that passes within them — make the operations of their own minds .
one of the principle objects of their attention — and often recur in


Digitized by


Google


in Cerebral Pkysioloffy. 895

conversation to their indiyidual experience of emotions — the attention
of others is wholly occupied with external things — they appear to
require to have material objects as a substratum for their ideas —
and to be almost incapable of separating a quality from the substance
in which it inheres, and making the former per se, an object of
contemplation. One dass dwells in shorty in an external, the other
in an internal world.

** A distinguishing tendency in those in whom I suppose this
faculty to be powerful, appears to me to be a fondness for analysis,
and ^at facility in detecting errors of definition. All general, yague,
and mdeterminate notions, are a source of annoyance to them, uiey
habitually take what appears to others, an almost unnecessarily,
dementiury yiew of things, and never lose sight of the fact, that
the greater number of subjects on which men employ their minds,
are complex ideas, made up of a number of simple ones comprehended
under a general term, and by this habit of constantly regarding
general terms, as bundles of simple ideas, rather than as homogeneous
units, and endeavouring to resolve them into their ultimate elements,
their thoughts acquire a precbion, which saves them from entering
into those fruitless discussions, which do not go beyond words. A
large proportion of the most violent controversies which have distracted
mankmd, have arisen from the two parties of disputants not attaching
the same ideas to the same word; for instead of clear ideas, the greater
part of men possess only indefinite notions, concerning which, they
nevertheless, make the most positive affirmations and negations, with
a dogmatism, proportionate to their ignorance of the exact number,
and precise value, of those primitive ideas, they intend to include,
nnder the general terms they make use of.

** In individuals who manifest the mental peculiarities referred
to, I have observed a uniformly full development of that portion
of the forehead on the medial line, which is now r^arded as
forming the upper part of Eventuality and the lower part of Com-
parison. When very prominently developed, the centre of convexity
appears to be about the level of the foot of Causality, and the lower
edge describes a semicircle, the extremities of which overlap the inner
third of the lower edge of Causality, and appear to lose themselves
in that organ. I have never sefip the upper ec^ of this organ defined,
except ne^tively, by the angular outhne of Comparison above it, or
that portion of it m contact with Causality, except by this latter
organ being singly prominent.''

With regard to the special function of the feculty our
author says,

** I am disposed to regard it, as a faculty originating the idea of
Perception — having for its object — the operations of the other powers
— and recognising the existence of Emotions and Perceptions, and
appreciating their qualities, in the same way as Individuality
perceives the existence, and appreciates the quisdities, of external
objects.

**The elements of all human knowledge, consist of a limited


Digitized by


Google


396 Mr. Prideaux^s new Views

number of partieuiar Emotions and Peroeptkms^ eadi of a definite
diaracter — together with a cf^uicity of considering these, under a
limited number oi general points of view, each of a definite character,
viz. as Existing — as Singular or Plural — ^as Co-existing or Associated
— as Wholes — as related in Time and Space — as undergoing Motion
or Change — as Analogous (figurativeljr) — as having certain necessary
Dependencies; and lastly as Perceived — Desired — Willed, The
faculties however which regard the impressions of others, under
these definite points of view, ^the three last excepted), appear to be
exclusively occupied with dieir particular objects, to the exclusion
of any attention to their own functions. They regard external things
as Existing — Co-Existing — Changing, ^c, whilst Intemality r^ards
Existence — Co-existenee — Change, &c., as Existing, To illustrate
my idea of the difference of function, I shall observe, that animals
have, doubtless, perceptions of external objects, and seek, or reject
them in consequence; but it may be questioned, whether they have
any perceptions or conceptions, relative to the act, or moiae, of
perceiving. It appears to me, that the perceptions of Individuality,
(for example,) with relation to an object, terminate with a knowledge
of its outward presence, and that the idea of the act of perceiving,
is framed b^ Intemality, and strictly speaking I regard the general
idea of Existence, not as a conception or Individuality, but as a
conception framed by Intemality, from contemplating the mode of
being effected of this omm; — ^a conception appied to that genera/
inseparable attribute of fdl causes of affections of Individuality, by
virtue of which attribute, such causes, have the power of producing
such affections, — and extended afterwards by analogy to immateriid
things. This definition is I am aware a very imperfect one, as all
definitions of simple ideas necessarily must be, for definition being,
properly speaking, the explanation of a term bv an enumeration of
the simple ideas of which it is composed, terms that stand for simple
ideas, can only be adequately represented by synonymous words,
which of course are insignificant to all those who have not already a
knowledge of the idea.''

We have not space at present to give a full descriptiou of
the other ingenious views advanced by Mr. Prideaujt. There
are some observations on the fcOKtion of Causality — on the

E resent system pursued in the delineation of organs on the
ust — on the necessity of individualizing each convolution of
the brain, and attaching to it its appropriate organ or oi^ans
—on a supposed new organ, " Love of the Past,'' and which
he supposes to be situated before and above the portion of
brain marked (?) — and some remarks on single consciousness.
We need not repeat again the feeling of pleasure we expe-
rienced when we first perused these essays, — ^the fact of our
noticing them three years after their publication will prove
the importance we attach to them. Many individuals advance
" facts'' (?) which prove after a little investigation to be mere


Digitized by


Google


The Trial of Daniel M'Naughten. 397

speculations. Mr. Frideaux's speculations^ the result of the
ci priori method of studying our science, bear the impress of
strong and vigorous thought^ and as far as our limited expe-
rience will enable us to judge, several of them when brought
to the test of rigid observation will turn out to be facts.

L. U. G. E.

V. Medico-Legal Reflections on the TVial of Darnel M^Natighten,
for the Murder of Mr. Drummond ; with Remarks on the
Different Forms of Insanity, and the Irresponsibility of the
Insane. By James George Davey, M.D. BaiUiere,
Begent Street, London.

Recent unfortunate events have prominently brought the
question of insanity before the public, and this in a manner
and on an occasion the most unfavourable for the calm and
philosophic exercise of the judgment on the subject. Even
those however the most disposed to make allowance for these
disturbing causes on the national mind, have been startled
and shocked at the burst of animalism, the explosion of wild,
aimless, senseless, vindictive feeling which has taken place,
and which embodied itself in one wide-spread and all but
universal cry for blood.

Amidst this clamour of ignorance, it is at once a relief
and gratification to us, to see a man of Dr. Davey's acquire-
ments and opportunities for observation, stepping forward to
endeavour to stem the tide of popular error and di£Puse more
correct ideas on the subject, a result we think he can scarcely
fail to achieve, if his " Reflections'' meet with the circula-
tion which their object and tendency render desirable, and
to which their merits entitle them. We have ourselves perused
them with much pleasure, many minor inaccuracies of style
occur, which though trivial in themselves, betoken a care-
lessness the author will do well to avoid in his future publica-
tions, but the matter — the principles laid down, and the
doctrines inculcated, meet with our warm approval, and we
regard them not only as a useful contribution to our know-
ledge of insanity, but as affording a practical illustration of
the benefits which society wiU derive from having the medical
officers of asylums — those to whom is entrusted the treatment
of diseased brains — acquainted with the healthy functions of
this viscus, or, in other words, cerebral physiologists. In
all other diseases the knowledge of the physiology of an
organ is considered indispensable to a comprehension of its
pathology, and that this general law applies with full force to
diseases of the brain, only the insane can doubt.


Digitized by


Google


398 Medico-Legal Reflections

In the advertisement to the reader we find the expression^

'' The united labours of Bell and Gall in what relates to the
Cerebro- Spinal System^ &c."

Now we must confess that we feel reluctant to pass over with-
out notice^ the mode in which the two names are associated.
We are quite sure that Dr. Davey is much too sound a cere-
bral physiologist^ much too fiilly imbued with a sense of the
grandeur of GralFs discoveries and the stupendous results
which will flow from them, ever to have intended to compare
with them the incomparably minor ones of Sir C. Bell, and
therefore regret that he should have inadvertently coupled
the names together, in a manner calculated to lead the imin-
formed to such a conclusion. The Marquess of Northampton
may state in his anniversary addresses to the Royal Society,
*' that whatever we may owe to the genius of other men in
this field of research, the discovery of the grand Aindamental
principle upon which a correct knowledge of the functions of
the nervous system depends, is unquestionably due to Sir C.
Bell;" Mr. Arnott, in Hunterian orations, may award him
the meed of having made ''the greatest discovery in the phy-
siology of the nervous system for twenty centuries,'' and Dr.
W. C. Henry may report to the third meeting of the British
Association, that ''this discovery is the most important since
the time of Harvey :*' but such assertions merely render their
authors ridiculous, and move the mingled pity and derision
of those conversant with the subject.

Let us return however from our digression, to the ques-
tion we are treating of. Many men possess no knowledge,
on the subject of Insanity, but none no opinions, and the
misfortune is that too frequently the latter are clung to with
a tenacity inversely proportionate to the stability on which
they rest. Dr. Davey observes, and we cordially unite with
him,

** It would be a perfect waste of time to enter into the various
and contradictory statements, made both by physicians and lawyers,
relative to the real nature of insanity; its characters and criteria;
suffice it to say, and we do so without the sliffhtest fear of a rational
contradiction, that the general ignorance of the structure and uses
of the brain, in a state of health, necessarilv prevented all parties,
whether medical or not, from making anything more than a verv
slight approach to the elucidation of those sevend phenomena which
constitute disease."

Let those who have been accustomed to discourse very
glibly of mania, monomania, dementia, &c. and who have
themselves been under the illusion that each word represented
an individual and specific disease, in the nature of which


Digitized by


Google


on the Trial of Daniel M'Naughten. 399

they were necessarily as learned as in the etymology of its
appellatives, listen to Dr. Davey :

" The term insanity conveys the idea of unsound mind, and in
order to express its varieties, the words mania, melancholia, mono-
mania, dementia, &c., are in common use. Such import no more
than a very general notion of the character of the disease. . . .
Disease of the brain, may either be confined to a part, or it may
affect the whole; and the disease, or impairment of function, may
be at the same time either the consequence of excessive or diminished
action, and in any case it may be either functional or organic, either
idiopathic or symptomatic. The indications of which several patho-
logical conditions are those recognized by the general term of insa-
nity. Now, disease of any part of the body, including of course
the brain, is indicated by an interruption to its particular and
healthy action; hence it follows that, if as we have shewn the brain
possesses parts or organs whose functions consist of respectively.
Caution, Veneration, Self-esteem, Firmness, Acquisitiveness, Destruc-
tiveness, Combativeness, Ideality, Gaiety, Hope, &c., it follows, I
say, that a derangement of the mind — considered in the abstract-
might be caused by disease affecting one, or two, or more of such func-
tions exclusively. Herein consists the only due whereby to unravel
the mysteries of mental derangement, of, in one word, insanity."

What a thorough disgrace it is to the civilization of the
present day, that lawyers should be heard in our courts of
justice raking up musty precedents, and quoting as avihori-
ties the opinions of men who lived two centuries ago, and
knew no more of the nature of insanity, than they did of
electricity, magnetism, or the polarization of light, who in
fact, neither recognized, nor understood, the possibility of
any insanity but that of the intellect, and made the test for
amenability to the law, consist in the possession of '^ as much
understanding as ordinarily a child of fourteen years hath.'*
Those venerable judges are not however to be blamed ; they
were men learned in their day — men who never perpetrated
the absurdity, of allowing their own judgment to be fettered by
the opinions of predecessors, who possessed less means of com-
ing to a sound conclusion than themselves. Such indications of
wisdom were reserved for the Britons of the nineteenth century,
a race prolific in discoveries in physical science, but trammelled
and bowed to the earth by the chains of opinion, and lament-
ably wanting in that sterling independence, and strong com-
mon sense, which characterized so many of their ancestors.

"If," observes Dr. Davey, " as Sir William Follett has assured
us, the law does not hold that man irresponsible who labours under
partial insanity; who has a morbid disposition of mind, which
would not exist in a sane person; then does insanity under no cir-
cumstances excuse the commission of crime; for this very reason,

£ G


Digitized by


Google


400 Dr. Davey^s Medko-Legal Reflections

that no imane person has every mental faculty diseased. I helieve
there is not one within the walls of Hanwell, even includmg the
idiotic and fatuous, who does not retain some few powers of the
mind, relating either to the intellectual, moral, or animal compart-
ments. Every case of insanity, then, is more or less partial." . . .
** There are in the Hanwell Asylum, kings, queens, hishops,
apostles, deities, &c., &c., almost innumerahle. We have taken
considerable pains to learn the real state of the minds ef these pa-
tients; and our decided opinion is, that their several assumed per-
sonifications must be regarded only as a morbid colouring to their
several deranged moral feelings; as a voluntary and tangible ideal of
their innate, involuutary and morbid impressions. We have never
seen but one case of the kind in which it has appeared to us that

the patient had the slightest belief in her * illusion' "

— '' the speech and actions of the lunatic must be regarded only in
the light of symptoms of the abnormal condition of the affections and
propensities; which, under circumstances of health, as well as dis-
ease, impart the character to man. An apt yet highly painM illus-
tration of the nature of our position is dforded in the condition of
one suffering from hydrophobia. Though impelled to the most
extraordinary and rabid conduct, the sufferer still retains a perfect
consciousness of all he may do or say. We have observed this till
within even a very short period of dissolution."

After reading the preceding extracts, the reader will be
in a position to appreciate the irrationality, the absurdity,
and the cruelty both to the individual and his relatives, of
making ' consciousness^ — the extent, of the impairment of the
intellectual functions, &c., the test of insanity and measure
of accountability. We trust Dr. Davey has given the death
blow, to a doctrine so utterly based on delusion, and so per-
nicious and unjust in its effects. We shall conclude our
extracts from his pamphlet — the whole of which we can
assure our readers will amply repay perusal — ^by the following
case of sudden temporary excitement of a single organ —
Destructiveness — ^the patient preserving the use of all the
other faculties unimpaired.

Only a few days since we were consulted respecting a yoimg
married woman, the subject of a sudden and violent attack of homi-
cidal mania. She had eaten her dinner as usual, in the company of
her husband and family. They had had no kind of dispute. The
husband had hardly returned to his employment, ere he was alarmed
by the sudden appearance of his wife. She ran towards him, in the
most excited and frantic manner, beseeching him to take care of her
child, or she must kill it. She carried it in her arms to him, and
besought him to save its life. We saw her within a short time of
this occurrence. The intensity of the paroxysm happily abated
after a few hours, on the employment of suitable medical and moral
means; and at this time she was occupied only with the contempla-


Digitized by


Google


on the TVial of Daniel M^Naughten, 401

tion of the awful deed which had threatened her. Fmding herself
* entrcAnepar un instinct aveuffle,' and that her moral liberty, her
responsibifitj, was fast leaving hei; she ran to her husband for pro-
tection. Had she not found him, the consequences would probably
have been most serious. Breathes there the man who would have
held her criminal? We fear many."

Such cases are by no means rare^ and but too frequently
have a more fatal termination^ and the fond mother recoiling
with horror from the act to which she is nevertheless irre-
sistibly impelled, imbrues her hands in the blood of her
offspring. The deed once done, every tender maternal in-
stinct rises in judgment against her, and overwhelmed with
the violence of her contending emotions, she abandons her-
self to the most poignant grief and despair. But as if this
were not sufficient punishment for the crime of being stricken
by disease, man in his ignorance, comes forward still further
to make desolate the family hearth, brands this imfortunate
creature as a criminal, and drags her to the scaffold, and
leaves — ^the victims of legal atrocity — a heart-broken family,
blasted in reputation, a prey to disgrace, to associate the
name of murderess with that of the authoress of their being.
As long as such deplorable ignorance prevails every individual
member of society reposes on the brink of a precipice. None
can say, I possess immunity from disease — ^none can tell what
futurity may bring forth, nor feel assured that the health,
liberty, and spotless reputation he enjoys to-day, may not be
exchanged for insanity, a prison, and the brand of criminality
to-morrow. Surely this is a state of things which every man
who possesses superior knowledge is called upon to struggle
to remove.

The reflections which the recent agitation of the question
of insanity has led us to make, have irresistibly impressed us
with the conviction that the whole subject is one loudly de-
manding investigation, that nothing like precision is to be
found in any views on it yet given to the world, but that first
principles will have to be laid down and a nomenclature
created, before we can hope to dispel the obscurity which at
present envelopes it.

The distinctive character of the animal man, depends
upon a degree of equilibrium (varying only within certain
limits) existing between his various instincts. Let these limits
be overstepped, and we have a being, quoad man and the cir-
cumstances by which he is surrounded, insane, or in other
words, no longer governed by the ordinary motives which
influence humanity; and whether this state be caused by
congenital deviations in organs from the normal size, or by

E e2


Digitized by


Google


402 Dr. Davetfs Medico-Legal Reflections

disease unduly exciting or depressing their functional activity,
the result is precisely similar. In the New Hollander we see,
as the eflfect of organization, a degree of indifference to the
future, and tendency to act practically up to the maxim,
" sufficient for the day is the evil thereof,'^ which, when pro-
duced by disease in a healthy Englishman, infallibly lead to
a commission of lunacy being issued against him, and his
property being placed under trustees.

Not a little of the obscurity which has hitherto pervaded
the subject, and especially if judicially considered, has arisen
from the extremely obscure notions which have prevailed as
to the nature of volition and belief; leading in the one case
to the notion that the belief in an absurdity cotdd not exist
tvith integrity of the intellect, and in the other to the doctrine
that no act could be committed without t?ie consent of the wiU.
Now though our ideas of the mode in which the mental state
termed belief arises, are still far from precise, yet we know
enough to convince us that the preceding opinion is errone-
ous ; that the result is controlled by the feelings ; and that
often no amount of intellect is sufficient to shake off the
grossest absurdities when these are imbibed with the mother's
milk. This may be to be regretted on some accounts, but
perhaps it is essential to man's happiness that belief should
not be the result of a purely intellectual action, but that
powerful feelings should have a modifying influence, and thus
induce a belief gratifying instead of painful to themselves ;
and here probably we arrive at the ultimate cause why man
has been so constituted. Were he differently organized, we
should certainly not have to lament that mental blindness
which perpetuates all species of fanaticism, and renders the
judgment of the majority worthless on subjects on which they
once entertain strong prepossessions ; but still undoubtedly
man's happy state is that in which he firmly believes what he
fervently desires, and unquestionably such is generally the
tendency of his mind.

Equally erroneous has been the opinion which has pre-
vailed, that no act can be committed tmthout the consent of the
will, and by consequence the application of the term *' diseased
volition/' as designative of such cases of sudden tendency to
violence as that of the female related by Dr. Davey. Will,
properly speaking, is " the desire produced in the ' faculty of
volition,' by the sum of the impulsions of the organs in
favour of an act or volition, preponderating over those op-
posed to it. When the sum of the impulses of the contend-
ing parties is equal, there is no wiU, but a state of equilibrium
and indifference ; no preference for one act or volition beyond


Digitized by


Google


on the Trial of Daniel M'Naughten, 403

the other^ but merely balanced desires existing for both. The
strength of the will, will be exactly proportionate to the
weight by which the sum of the impulsions of one party ex-
ceed those of the other; whilst the weight of the whole im-
pulsions will be determined by the number, size, texture, and
state of excitement of the organs apprised through the intel-
lect of being interested in the question under deliberation/'
Now if this definition be correct, as we hold it to be, then is
it evident that a sudden ungovernable impulse towards an act
opposed to all the other feelings has nothing in common with
will, correctly so termed. Some adopt the following explana-
tion of such cases. In their opinion, certain organs at the
base of the middle lobe of the brain, whose function is the
preservation of the individual, have the power of causing
muscular movements without the intervention of volition,
which may be justly termed instinctive ; and they hold such a
power to be essential to the safety of animals. Many ob-
servations incline them to the belief that the portion of brain
immediately below Destructiveness presides over muscular
action. But, however this may be, it is quite certain that a
peculiar and intimate relation exists between the faculties ; so
much so, that it is almost allowable to say that the natural
language of Destructiveness is sudden and violent muscular
contractions, and hence when wrought up to a certain pitch
of excitement, the acts of this organ are entirely removed
fjx)m the control of volition.

Great as is the distance which separates the highest point
of moral and intellectual endowment from the lowest grade
of insanity, the intervening space is filled up with a countless
host of gradations, each running so imperceptibly into its
neighbour, that no broad line of demarcation can be drawn
between them ; and thus from the nature of things it becomes
impossible that the want — ^so loudly expressed at the present
day—- of a satisfactory test of amenability to punishment can
ever be obtained. We cannot allow the opportunity to pass
without directing public attention to the instructive lesson
this fact presents. How clearly does it show us, that in pro-
portion as men diverge from truth and wander in the paths
of ignorance and error, so will difficulties of all kinds be mul-
tiplied, and perplexing questions of casuistry arise, involving
them in an inextricable labyrinth of doubts and inconsisten-
cies, from which there is no escape but by abandoning their
errors and recurring to correct first principles. Need we say
in the present instance that the principles we allude to arc
those based on the great truth, that the actions of man are
the necessary resuU of his organization and the agency of ex-


Digitized by


Google


404 Dr. Davey's Medico-Legal Reflections, SfC.

temal objects, — ^that the only difference between the finest
specimens of humanity that ever lived and the worst, has
been that of organization and circumstances, over which nei-
ther had any control, — ^that merit and demerit are words
without meaning when applied to the actions of a finite
being, — ^and that many men deserve pity, but none punish-
ment ? What lessons of charity and forbearance does this
benign doctrine inculcate ! No sooner is it recognized, than
what was before obscure becomes clear, and we cease to be
shocked and bewildered by the painful alternative of being
obliged to do violence either to justice or benevolence ; and
we see at once that we have only one simple object to pursue
— the safety of society, with the infliction of the least possible
amount of suffering on the dangerous party consistent with
Reeling this object : and an enlarged consideration of the
question in all its bearings, will, we are convinced, announce
to us the gratifying fact, that not only are these two results
perfectly compatible, but that each is best attained by the
same means.

To cerebral physiologists preeminently belongs the task
of announcing on all occasions these important truths, be-
cause their science lays bare their foundations, and holds
them forth to view with all the clearness of a syllogism : and
that they should have remained so long in abeyance is a sin-
gular fact, and one for which the authority of Drs. Grail and
Spurzheim is probably not a little responsible. Their ob-
servations on the subject amount to this, — that were man en-
dowed with only one faculty, he could act only in one way,
and would have no freedom of action ; but that being endowed
with a pluraUty of faculties, he has the power of choosing
between a variety of motives, and is thus a free agent. A
singularly weak argument, which altogether loses sight of the
fact, that there is a law which determines his choice.

No effect can take place without a cause ; and it is a ne-
cessary eternal law of organized being, that preponderating
desire shall always be the antecedent to volition, and volition
always the sequent to preponderating desire. Folios may be
written on the subject of "free will," but the question lies in a
nut-shell; and all the interminable discussion which has arisen
on it, has proceeded from the diflSculty men have found in
discriminating between the freedom which man has to follow
his incUnations, and that absolute Uberty to choose his own
conduct, and consequently his own desires, which he has not.
The query then — " Is man a free agent ?" resolves itself into
a question of definition. If free agency be defined to mean
merely that a man is free to act according to his inclinations.


Digitized by


Google


Report of the Northampton Lunatic Asylum. 405

the query must be answered in the aflBrmative; but if the
term be used in its usual acceptation^ that is^ implying that
man is a responsible beings possessing not only the power of
doing what he Ukes^ but of choosing his likings, then has this
finite being no such prerogative. Endow a machine with
consciousness, and let each movement arise from the accumu-
lation of a certain quantum of desire, and you have a man, —
a machine endowed with unlimited freedom as far as the
moving power being seated within himself is concerned, but
no more firee to act in opposition to his mechanism — ^his
nature — ^than the stars are to shoot from the paths which
nature has laid down for them to traverse.

X.


VI. The Physidan-Superintendenfs Report of the Northampton
Lunatic Asylum, pp. 89. 1842.

The attention which has of late years been given to the
subject of insanity, the increasing interest displayed in the
treatment of the insane and the management of asylums for
their reception, as well as the importance of the question of
responsibility, as it concerns those afflicted with partial in-
sanity, will explain our reasons for noticing the Report of
Dr. Prichard ; and which by the bye is rather a treatise on
the subject than the mere Report of a public hospital.

We do so, however, not for the purpose of commending
the excellency of Dr. Prichard's observations on the import-
ance of pubUc institutions, nor those on the advantages of
the non-restraint system, nor on the utility of occupation and
amusement, regarded as remedial means ; but for the purpose
of expressing our surprise — ^and we had almost said indigna-
tion — to find Dr. Prichard, the Medical Superintendent of
the Northampton Lunatic Asylum, an advocate for punishment,
for animal revenge. At page 80, are these words, —

*^ Common sense and unsophisticated humanity alike insist, that
the delusions of the madman, and his conduct, shall stand in direct
relationship to each other as cause and effect, in order to absolve him
from criminality. If morbid impressions or ideas induced him to
commit an act that they would justify if his data were true, he is
clearly irresponsible; if otherwise, the reverse obtains."

If then, for instance, Daniel M^aughten had forged a
will, or stolen a handkerchief, though he had not shot Mr.
Drummond, we have a right to infer that the evidence of
Dr. Prichard would have consigned this unfortunate man to
the treadmill or the hulks, and thereby have supplied an


Digitized by


Google


406 Report of the Northang>ton Lunatic Asybm.

additional and real source of cerebral irritation, only calcu-
lated to aggravate all the symptoms of insanity, and so
progressively diminish the chances of cure and hasten the
termination of the patient's existence. Is there one amongst
our readers who will not sicken at the thought ? We need
not at this time explain that the views entertained by Dr.
Prichard are too superficial to gain more than the attention
of the ignorant.

If modem physicians, if ma^T-doctors particularly, persist
in giving such evident indications of insanity, — ^for surely the
abortive products of an active cerebration cannot be associated
with a normal action of the brain, — how greatly are the un-
professional to be excused their inhumanity and ignorance in
connexion with the subject here considered.

Dr. Prichard has yet we fear to learn the physiology of
the great Grail. A knowledge of the uses of h^thy matter
none need be told must precede sound views of the varied
phenomena presented by disease. In all morbid affections of
the brain or its membranes, inducing insanity, however
partial the diseased action, no matter whether restricted to
this oi^n or to that, to the surfiEice or the substance of the
cerebral mass, it is impossible to define the marginal line of
sanity and of responsibility; to say this act is the result of
disease, and not that, and so on. As Dr. Davey has asked,
" Who would venture to limit the phenomena of a local or
partial disease o( the liver, lungs^ or heart?*'

It is a very considerable source of regret to us, to know
how few of the so-called authorities on insanity know any-
thing of cerebral physiology. We hope that the attention of
the public and the legislature will ere long be awakened to a
sense of its great and indispensable importance to medical
men, and that tfien the governors of our medical colleges will
require all candidates for their several diplomas to possess a
competent knowledge of this branch of physiological science.
Until this course is adopted, we fear that we shall have to
record many similar instances of medical ignorance and inac-
curacy.

We must here take our leave of Dr. Prichard, but not
without exhorting him to a more particular investigation into
the nature and peculiarities of diseased cerebration than it
appears he has yet attempted. That surgeon who probes only
the surface of a wound, is incompetent to judge either of the
extent or probable termination of the injury. We would ad-
vise Dr. Prichard to take the hint, and bear well in mind that —
'* Errors, like straws, upon the sarface flow,
He who would seek for pearls must dive below."

Y.


Digitized by


Google


( 407 )


VII. Cures of Epileptic and other Pits with Mesmerism. By
Dr. Elliotson.

"The metmero-manla baa nearlv dwindled in the nietropoUt Into anile fatnlty; bat
lingers in Mme of tlie prorincet with Uie gobe^uumche$ and cliaw>bacons» who, after gal ping
down a poond of fit pork, would, witli well-greased gnllets, swallow sneh a lot of raesmeric
mommery as would choke an alligator or a boa-constrictor." DR. JAMBS JOHNSON,
Medieo-Chirmrgical BevUw, April Iff, 1843. p. 077.

I. On June 16, 1838, a young gentleman, 16 years of
age, was brought to me by his father-in-law from Wales, on
account of epilepsy, under which he had laboured for a twelve-
month ; and he was none the better for medical treatment.

The fits occurred once or twice a week, or once a fort-
night; and consisted of sudden insensibility with violent
convulsions, foaming at the mouth, frightful contorsions, suf-
fusion of the face and eyes, the appearance of strangulation,
biting the tongue, and at length a dead stupor. One half
of the system, and generaUy the left, was not convulsed, but
perfectly rigid, in the fit.

A minute before the fit, he would sweat, his eyes look
dim and heavy, and his spirits become low. After the attack,
his head always ached severely for the first quarter of an
hour, but at the expiration of the second quarter of an hour
he was as if nothing had happened ; unless the attack had
been severe, and then he would not be perfectly comfortable
for the rest of the day, nor even the next Akj.

The attacks originally occurred three or K>ur times a day.
It is not unusual for epileptic fits to occur much more fre-
quently at first than when they are established.

The first attack took place about half an hour after a
javelin had fallen upon his head in a court of justice.

He could now never attend a place of worship or other
assemblage of persons without a fit. Even the tearing a piece
of doth would bring one on, or any sudden noise.

Neither he nor his Mends, living remotely in Wales, knew
anything of mesmerism. Instead of writing a prescription,
I without saying anything began to make slow longitudinal
passes before his face. He had not suffered an attack for a
fortnight, so that the usual period for one was arrived. In a
minute or two he looked strange, and a fit took place. One
leg kicked out violently, and then the other, repeatedly:
one hand seized his cloak firmly, and the other also assumed
the attitude of clawing, but was for a time perfectly rigid,
and afterwards struck out like the legs. He made a dis-
agreeable noise, partly of strangulation. His face was
hideously contorted, his eyes staring and rolling, and his


Digitized by


Google


408 Dr. ElHotson's Cases of

head and trunk violently convnlaed^ and his £ace livid and
covered with sweat.

I mesmerised him, and in five minutes he was still,
though insensible for some minutes longer, just as happened
ordinarily with him. After the fit, he had no head-ache, but
giddiness and dimness of sight. I applied my hands at the
back and front of his head, and it began to ache. I then
mesmerised him again for five minutes, when the pain ceased,
and he said his giddiness and dimness of sight were much
less than usual after a fit.

I advised that the cure should be attempted with mes-
merism, and mesmerism only, stating that medicines were
not likely to be of any service. Medical men know per-
fectly well that, however long they may deluge their patients
with filthy drugs and torment them with setons, issues, blis-
ters, and that most painful thing, tartar emetic ointment,
they use all their drugs at mere random, being completely
out at sea, and their patients at the end are rarely any better
for all this, and sometimes the worse. The patient and his
father-in-law at once consented, and I directed them to
Mr. Symes of Hill Street, Berkeley Square, who, knowing
the truth and power of mesmerism, employs it in disease
just like any other remedy.

From the day that I mesmerised him he never Jiad another
fit. The following is a letter which I received from him at
the end of nearly a twelvemonth.

« W , M «Mr«,

"April 3rd, 1839.
" To Dr. ElliotsoD,

" Dear Sir,— Having neglected writing for 8o long a period I am almost
ashamed of now addressing you, bat hope you will excuse the delay. I
think I should really be ungrateful, knowing you have so many enemies
with respect to your mesmeric practice, were I longer to delay sending you
the) long-promised account of my health. A case so clear as that of mine
cannot call for any argument. I have not had the slightest attack of my old
complaint since I left London ; in fact I have scarcely given it an oppor-
tunity, for my time has been principally occupied in the sports of the ield,
for the purpose of trying to establish my health. I expect I shall not be in
town for some time ; but should you think it advisable (providing it would
be of any benefit to the practice^ to make use of my name in private, you
are perfectly at liberty to do so ; likewise the name of my step-father (Mr.
T. Y.), the gentleman that was with me when I first consulted you. And
conclude, my dear Sir, wishing you every success in the practice, as it has
been of very great benefit to me, and remain,

" Your most obedient and humble servant,

" R. G."

Three years afterwards (in 1841) I wrote to him to enquire
how he was going on, and he answered that if he was confined
much in his office, (he was articled to a solicitor,) his spirits


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic and other Fits cured by Mesmerism. 409

drooped and his head became uncomfortable : but^ if not^ he
was perfectly "well.

He called upon me a few months ago, — now at the end of
five years, in perfect health. He informed me that once, on
losing a brother to whom he was greatly attached, he suffered
head-ache and giddiness; and, while the corpse was taken out
of the house, he was so overcome as to completely lose his
consciousness for a short time, but had not the slightest con-
vulsion or appearance of epilepsy.

The phenomena which Mr. Symes produced in this young
gentleman were very striking. He fell into sleep-waking:
he slept and walked and taU^ed : but his cerebral functions
were curiously disturbed in this condition. I have mentioned
in my pamphlet upon Surgical Operations without Pain in the
Mesmeric State,^ that in sleep-waking the intellect and feel-
ings may be little changed, but that they may experience aU
the degrees and varieties of change observed in them in
disease, and the various intellectual faculties and feelings
experience them in various proportions. Some become very
dull, some very acute, some perverted, so that the patient
may be variously eccentric, delirious or mad; or, on the
other hand, variously childish and fatuitous : and at the same
time in some points excessively clever. From ignorance of
this, persons often set down a most interesting case of sleep-
waking as a piece of imposition ; and benevolently compas-
sionate the mesmeriser, who is so enthusiastic and blinded
as not to see as clearly as they do, and suffers himself, though
a most amiable and otherwise sensible person, to be under an
illusion. Kind and enlightened friends ! The ignorant crowd
of Abdera told Hippocrates that he would find Democritus
deranged ; for the poor man absolutely thought insanity was
an affection of the brain, and there looked for its cause.

The youth was mesmerised daily till the beginning of
October, and then less frequently during that month ; after
which it was altogether discontinued and he returned home.
Had he not hved at such a distance, I should have advised
his being mesmerised once a week or fortnight for several
months longer ; and indeed whenever he felt the least languor
or uneasiness of any sort in his head. For persons who have
once had a severe nervous affection, whatever its character,
are subsequently liable to occasional languor, loss of appetite,
lowness of spirits, and uncomfortable feelings in the head and
other parts; and a little mesmerism readily dissipates aU
these symptoms, and restores the strength and spirits in a

• pp. 35—38, 42, 43, 44 : and Zitist, No. III., p. 323.

Digitized by VjOOQIC


410 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

remarkable manner^ beyond what all physic^ food^ and even
fresh air and change of air, will do. (See above, pp. 337-8.)
Medical men in their obstinate ignorance may smile at the
statement ; but they forget how they deserve to be smiled
at for their random administration of drugs and their use-
less directions of all sorts to too many of their patients, who
buy experience of the imperfection of the art, and of the
shallow and senseless floundering about of the most popular
doctors from one mode of treatment to another.

I several times saw him mesmerised after the sleep-waking
had been established, and witnessed the phenomena which
characterized it, and which I shall detail from Mr. Symes's
notes.

Two days after I had mesmerised him, Mr. Symes began.
Passes were made downwards, with both hands alternately,
before the head, trunk, and lower extremites. In five minutes
the eyelids began to open and shut convulsively : the head
was put back against the chair with the fingers, and the pa-
tient was asleep. The lower extremities became extended and
rose from time to time convulsively, and grew very rigid ;
but the movements were tranquillized and the rigidity dissi-
pated by passes with contact along the limbs.

Mr. Symes pointed his fingers towards the patient's hands,
and made drawing movements upwards. Soon the hands and
arms rose convulsively and became stiflf : but were tranquil-
lized and relaxed by downward passes with contact as the
lower extremities had been.

The trunk then became rigid and bent backwards, in
other words, opisthotonos took place ; and this also was re-
moved by passes downwards along the back and front of the
body.

On passing the thumbs a few times along his eyebrows
outwards, he awoke partially ; but, on these passes being dis-
continued, he fell asleep again. He was allowed to sleep for
a quarter of an hour, and then awakened by blowing in his
face.

Outward passes on the eyebrows would equally have
awakened him : and blowing in his face would have had the
same effect at first as the outward passes had. Both are in
general equally good; and their union sometimes expedites
the wakening. Outward passes at a less or greater distance
before the face or the whole person will sometimes awaken, —
and even behind the person. When blowing fails, it in some
instances succeeds by our opening one or both eyes and blow-
ing on it or them. I have awakened some patients by merely
opening one or both eyes with my fingers. Others I have


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic and other Fits cured by Mesmerism. 411

awakened by making the outward passes with my thumbs on
the head, or on the upper part of the chest. Some can be
artificially awakened in some peculiar way only, discovered by
accident or pointed out by themselves in their sleep-waking ;
as I mentioned in the last number, p. 313. But all, I believe,
will awake spontaneously if left alone ; and it contributes
much to the cure of disease and all the good effects of mes-
merism, if the patients sleep as long as possible, and be
left to awake of their own accord. See above, p. 310.

19th. When he went into the room to-day, Mr. S. was
mesmerising another patient, an elderly lady, behind whom
he was requested to sit at the distance of about two yards.
The manipulations were directed to both the other patient
and him. In ten minutes, he began to wink and his eyes
half closed. As these effects did not increase during five
minutes more, he was requested to draw his chair a yard
nearer. In another five minutes the eyelids opened and shut
very strongly and rapidly, and the head inclined backwards.
Mr. S. gently pushed the head back against the chair with
his fingers on the forehead, and kept it there a few seconds ;
and the patient slept and was perfectly quiet. Mr. S. pointed
with his fingers towards the feet, and then towards the hands,
with the effect of the same convulsions, rising, and rigidity as
the day before, and the opisthotonos recurred : and all were
removed equally as before by downward passes with contact.
The eyes were closed, and, on the upper lids being raised,
the pupils were seen dilated. His pulse was 64 ; and his
hands cold. After drawing the thumbs two or three times
along the eyebrows outwards, movements were made upwards
with the tips of the fingers before the eyes without contact,
as if to raise the lids, and they rose and closed again convul-
sively several times : and, after having been held up with the
point of the finger a second or two, they remained open for
about a minute and then closed spontaneously.

The elevation of the lids by the upward movements of the
points of the fingers before them, and indeed the direction of
the eyes this way or that at pleasure after they were open, we
had all witnessed times innumerable in the Okeys, just as in
this youth who was quite ignorant of mesmerism ; yet they,
forsooth, were impostors !

The convulsive movements of the limbs returned several
times, but were easily quieted by smoothing the limbs down
as formerly.

Observing the lips move, Mr. S. spoke to him, and he made
an effort as if to answer, but could not, on account of a
spasmodic closure of the jaws^ till a few passes were made


Digitized by


Google


412 Dr. EUiotson'8 Cases of

with the fingers upon the outer part of the cheeks and jaw in
front of the ears.

This spasmodic lock-jaw is very common in the mesmeric
sleep or sleep-waking ; and sometimes remains after the pa-
tient is awake. The circumstance should be known^ because
patients who would speak in their sleep-waking may thus
be prevented^ and the reason not be suspected. Sometimes
they do not hear till a finger has been pointed into one or
both ears, or transverse passes made opposite the ears, or
the ears breathed into. The jaw may be relaxed as this
patient's jaw was ; or by holding the fingers flat upon each
side of it ; or by pointing the fingers on it at the same spot ;
or by breathing gently on it, or behind the ears ; or by ap-
plying something cold ; and probably by other methods.

The jaw being thus relaxed, Mr. S. again addressed him,
and he began to mutter and talk incoherently, like a person
in disturbed common sleep.

The usual means of waking people, such as pinching,
pulling, pushing about, did not wake him. His father-in-law
tried in vain to wake him thus; but it was easily accomplished
by blowing a few times in his face.

June 20th. He was desired to sit down at the side of the
other patient whom Mr. S. was mesmerising when he entered.
Mr. S. continued to make the passes before the other patient,
and merely directed his unoccupied hand towards the youth's
forehead, at the distance of about a yard. In five minutes
he was asleep. Convulsive motions of various parts occurred
from time to time, and were readily subdued as before. Mr.
S. allowed him to sleep an hour, and then took his hand and
began talking to him. He answered rationally, but rather
childishly, and laughed childishly. When told to go away,
he attempted to rise. In answer to questions, he replied that
he saw Mr. S.; but, when a watch was held before his face, he
declared that he could not see it, and did not know what it
was, but he heard it ; and when asked what it said, he an-
swered laughing, " Tick, tick, tick.'' Still he could not tell
what it was. On his hand being pinched, he answered that he
felt nothing : but when his hair was pulled, he turned child-
ishly aside, laughing, and saying, ^^ Oh, don't puU my hair;"
and the same when his arm was pinched.

In the mesmeric sleep- waking, patients sometimes feel no
mechanical violence ; some feel pressure, but not pricking or
cutting : and some feel in one part and not in another. At
this moment I have a patient who, in the second degree of
mesmeric sleepwaking, knowing every person, the place, the
time, having no imperfection of mental function, and differ-


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic and other Fits cured by Mesmerism, 418

ing only from her natural state in being no more reserved to
me than to one of her brothers or sisters, never saying Sir,
as she always does when awake, has no sense of mechanical
injury below the elbows and knees ; although, when in the
first degree of sleep-waking, which is really a dreamy state,
in which she mistakes the person and time, and generally the
place, she has perfect sensibility throughout. Another, in
the second degree of sleep- waking (and she never falls into
any other), has sensibility only in the face and head. A third,
who has never got beyond the first degree of sleep-waking,
though brought into it now above two years, feels no lower than
the neck. Another, who has never got beyond the first degree,
feels mechanical injury in no part of the surface. Yet all
these feel temperature — ^heat or cold — ^far more acutely than
when awake ; and some of them complain of the slightest
pressure, though none of pinching, pricking, &c. The seat
of insensibility in some will vary at different times : insensi-
bility extending more or less at different mesmerisations, and
parts being insensible at one time which are sensible at an-
other.

But the reason of this patient declaring that he did not
feel when his hand was at first pinched, arose not from this
being the fact, but from a disturbed state of his mind. He
really was always found to feel everywhere ; but, if anything
was asked him respecting himself, he invariably answered in
the negative, as we shall see farther on.

Mr. S. opened the youtVs eyes and enquired if he saw.
He looked around, but not at the parties, who were three in
number, and said, "One, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine.^^ Mr. S. held a bird before him, and asked how
many birds he saw. He replied " One.'* Mr. S. held up one
finger, and, on being asked how many fingers he saw, he
replied " One.*' He was awakened by blowing two or three
times in his face.

21st. His hand was put, without effect, for eight minutes
into the hand of the other patient, who was partially under
the influence of mesmerism. Mr. S. then took hold of their
two hands with one of his own, and continued to mesme-
rise the other patient as before, for two minutes ; and then
made passes before each at the same time, with a hand to
each, and eight minutes more elapsed before the youth fell
asleep. He was allowed to sleep forty minutes. Spasmodic
movements occurred spontaneoiisly; but Mr. S. could induce
them in any part at pleasure by pointing his fingers towards
it, and readily calmed them by longitudinal passes with


Digitized by


Google


414 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

contact. Then Mr. S. aroused him somewhat by two or three
outward passes on the eyebrows^ and addressed him.

This plan is often very useful when sleep-wakers are too
soundly asleep to answer^ and I learnt it in treating Elizabeth
Okey. The degree of deep frequently varies. The patient
being well awake^ if I may so speak^ in the sleep-waking;
then becoming sleepy^ nodding the head^ and answering im-
perfectly, and perhaps so deeply asleep that nothing is no-
ticed, and he may snore and fall ; and then lighting up
again. When the sleep predominated over waking in the sleep-
waking state, we used to make the outward passes on the
eye-brows of Elizabeth Okey, and she would open her eyes
and be sensible again of our presence and converse with us ;
and in the midst of this doze oS again into unconsciousness
unless we repeated the process. If we made the passes too
long or too strongly, she would wake outright.

After having thus lightened his sleep, Mr. S. was some
time before he could obtain an answer ; and then it was as
from a person asleep. Mr. S. tried to make him walk, and
he got upon his legs, but his knees bent under him. When
asked if he could see, he answered " No.^' He seemed to
hear much better after Mr. S.^s fingers had been directed to-
wards his ears. Mr. S. next by means of the usual upward
passes opened his eyes, which then remained wide open as
if staring, and fixed, so that if told to look at any thing he
turned the whole head; and the pupils were dilated and
slightly converged, and he saw everything double. He could
not distinguish color, and did not recognize his father-in-law.
At first he called a book a stick, but afterwards called it a
book, or rather two books. On first looking at his own
thumb, he saw only one ; but presently said there was a little
one come by the side of it. He said he would walk on the
morrow. When asked how many miles he could walk in an
hour, he replied, 16J, or more, 17, 15, 15J, &c.

In the sleep-waking of this patient, there was thus a great
disturbance of the mental faculties ; a degree of imbecility.
From ignorance of the variety of condition in the sleep- waking
state, — ^that all the faculties may be entire, perhaps some of
them clearer than in the natural state, and merely less re-
serve exist than usual, and perhaps new faculties be developed ;
and yet that there may be a diminution of some faculties, or a
derangement of them, and that the unsound condition of the
faculties, whether of the intellectual or of the afiective, may
be of the nature of insanity or imbecility, or of the nature of
both, — (as I said at page 4<)9,) persons, who might have been


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic and other Fits cured by Mesmerism, 415

expected to know better, fancied this sleep-waker to be an
impostor. My friend, Mr. Atkinson, had a patient, a poor
girl who had lost an arm, and in whom the stump shook
violently, and could not be stopped by all the means adopted
in hospitals, but whom he cured by mesmerism; and she
in her sleep-waking had childish ways ; though from time
to time she would rise into an extasy, and display in suc-
cession such phenomena of aflfection, veneration, hope, joy,
and distraction, standing entranced in silence, as made
Mr. Rogers the poet reply to a literary friend who asked
him if she did not remind him of Guercino — *' Say not
Guercino, say Raphael ; I fancied she was a being of the
skies, and we all creatiu'es of earth at her feet.^' Yet a cele-
brated delineator of nature who saw her, and who I will ven-
ture to affirm never witnessed by any actor such an exquisite
delineation of feelings, pronounced her an impostor, and me
under an illusion, under which I had been indeed for six
years. The total ignorance of people qualifies them to pro-
nounce poor innocent patients to be rogues, and the well-
informed to be fools. So it has always been, and the ignorant
have died off, and their ignorance and absurdity, having in-
flicted all the evil possible, been forgotten with them, to
be resumed and made mischievous on other subjects by
other persons. Remain stationary and agree with the
slaves of imitation and habit, adhering to dl the nonsense
you learnt from other slaves of imitation and habit before
you had faculties or knowledge to guide you, and you will be
a very sensible and a very respectable person.

The youth complained of head-ache, and, Mr. S. placing
one hand on the forehead and the other on the occiput
to remove it, he partially awoke for a few moments. He
was then awakened completely by having his face blown
upon ; and still complained of the head-ache which, however,
ceased on Mr. S. placing one hand on the forehead and
the other on the back of the head. During the preceding
night he had been very miserable and had a head-ache ; and
this he ascribed to his not having been "stroked down^'
before he left Mr. Symes^s house.

PaMents often have the head-ache or something uncom-
fortable after waking, which breathing on the part affected,
making transverse passes upon it or before it, passing the
hand along it, or laying the hand upon it, generally removes.
Patients should be instructed always to complain of any un-
comfortable feeling left after mesmerisation, in order that
they may not be tormented with it.

22nd. Sent to sleep in three minutes : answered questions

F p


Digitized by


Google


416 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

and saw double as before. By tractive movements at a little
distance^ his arms, legs, and trunk were drawn about at
pleasure.

Tractive movements were made above his head, and this
was drawn up as if by a rope. We could draw the Okeys
up in this way against all the exertions of their will, and draw
them upon their feet involuntarily when l}dng horizontally
on the floor.

The youth slept an hour and a half in spite of all kinds
of loud noises, shaking, pushing, &c. He shook his own
hand when Mr. S. desired him to shake hands. He could
not be made to stand up, so sound asleep was he. Eight
or ten passes of the thumbs upon his brows half roused
him, but he fell asleep again as soon as they were discon-
tinued. He awoke when his face was several times blown
upon : but, feeling not thoroughly awake from the first few
puffs, he asked Mr. S. to blow again, and then became wide
awake. He complained of giddiness, which was at once re-
moved by Mr. S.'s hands being placed upon the forehead and
occiput.

23rd. Was sent to sleep in one minute, and allowed to
remain undisturbed for forty minutes. In addition to a repe-
tition of previous experiments, Mr. S. standing in a chair
drew him out of his chair by tractive movements above his
head to the ceiling; and then by tractive movements drew
him after himself all over the room. Mr. S. opened his eyes
as previously, and, standing before him at the distance
of a yard, made various movements, all which the patient
imitated: raising his arms, folding them together, putting
his thumb to his nose, chin, &c., opening his mouth, raising
one leg. His arms were drawn up and left extended and
rigid for four minutes : at the end of which time they began
to tremble. A gentleman present used considerable force to
pull them down, but in vain.

When his eyes were closed, Mr. S. could draw up his
arms and legs, but not bring him to imitate motions or posi-
tions ; nor did he imitate what was done behind him, if even
his eyes were open. Yet when his eyes were open and
Mr. S. stood before him, and he imitated, he did nolNippear
to look at Mr. S. (See above, p. 317.)

When lifl;ed on his legs, he could not stand, they giving
way under him ; yet, when raised mesmerically, that is by
tractive movements at a greater or less distance, he would
both stand and walk about firmly.

24th. Mr. S. sent him to sleep in less than a minute by
pointing the fingers towards his eyes at the distance of an


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic and other Fits cured by Mesmerism. 417

inch. A little mesmerised water put into his mouth, while
asleep, caused his tongue to be convulsed ; and he made a
£ace as if it was nasty.

25th. Sent to sleep by a medical friend in Mr. S.'s ab-
sence : so that this was not one of those cases in which only
one person can mesmerise a patient. Indeed it turned out
that any body could mesmerise him.

His susceptibility, we observe, increased rapidly.

26th. After being sent to sleep in one minute and
awakened at the end of three quarters of an hour, some
mesmerised water put into his mouth produced no effect.
An attempt to send him to sleep again required many
minutes, and then the sleep was so deep that he could not be
awakened for a long while.

I have not found any regular proportion between the
length of time required to produce sleep and the length of
the sleep. A long mesmerisation often produces but a short
sleep, and some are in a second, by one pass, sent into a sleep
for hours. Some sleep the more soundly if still mesmerised
while asleep : others sleep none the longer or more deeply for
it, at least at that time, though they may ultimately become
the more susceptible.

27th. To-day it was ten minutes before he went to sleep.
He seemed endeavouring to resist the influence as much as
he could ; and several times, when nearly off, he awoke with
a sudden start. He slept one hour and three quarters.

28th. Not mesmerised.

29th. Asleep in one minute.

30th. Asleep in one minute.

In addition to the ordinary experiments, which Mr. S.
made every time, a piece of mesmerised sugar was put into
his mouth. He presently began grimacing, just as when
water on a former occasion was put into it, and he spat the
sugar out again and again, and the lips and tongue continued
in motion for some time afterwards.

If addressed about any part of his body, he denied that
he had it, and his denial was in the language of childhood,
as though he had gone back to the state of his infancy.
Thus, — if Mr. S. said, " Give me your hand,^' he replied,
" I ha^nt got no hand — got no hand — got no hand — ^got no
hand j now you know I ha'nt got no hand ;" and made a sort
of grunting noise : yet if his l^d was pinched, he cried out,
and, when repeatedly pinched and urged to tell where he was
hurt, would answer correctly.

July 1st. He was brought to my house, and I myself mes-

F f2


Digitized by


Google


418 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

merised him. By a few passes he went fast asleep^ with his
eyes closed.

Mr. S. went up to him^ and he then followed Mr. S. about
the room^ and all over the house^ like a child that would not
be left. He was not satisfied with following and being near to
Mr. S.y but pushed against him when standing still or sitting;
endeayouring^ as it were, to be in the very same point of space,
and, as soon as he had pushed Mr. S. away firom the spot
where that gentleman was, he still pushed against him to
occupy the fresh spot. The same thing once was manifested
in Master Salmon^s sleep-waking, mentioned above at page
824.

Whatever Mr. S. did, he did. Sat down, walked, kneeled,
stood on one leg, ran up or down stairs, put his leg over the
balusters, assumed all sorts of attitudes, lay along a table,
got under the table, precisely as Mr. S. did, and as near to
Mr. S. as possible. Then, as soon as the desire to imitate
was satisfied, the attraction would break forth, and he would
push against Mr. S. again ; endeavouring to sit in the same
chair and push Mr. S. out of it, and, as soon as he had pushed
him out of it, pushing on again.

In his sleep-waking his face was flushed; he was, like
Master Salmon, fair, and had light hair and blue eyes, and
his cheeks became very red and his eyes rather suffused. I
observed that his eyes converged, so that he had a slight
double squint in his sleep-waking state, though in that only.
He denied everything in the same hurried manner as already
mentioned. For instance, I asked him if he was asleep ;
and he said, " Sleep, sleep, whafs sleep? Fve got no sleep;
you know Fve got no sleep ; now you know V\e got no sleep ;^^
and half grunted. I could make him follow and imitate me
a little; but, if Mr. S. approached, he soon deserted me for
that gentleman.

This I have noticed in other cases. For instance, last
week, a friend mesmerised one of my patients, whom any one
can send to sleep by two or three passes : I, by one pass. He
made tractive movements before her, and she at length slowly
rose and followed him about ; but when I, who had habituaUy
mesmerised her for months, went near her, she invariably
left him for me ; and, if he then repeated his tractive move-
ments and thus drew her towards himself, so that she followed
him, I had only to make tractive movements also and she
left him again for me.

A mesmerised sovereign was put into his hand, which
immediately closed tightly upon it. By doing as I had always


Digitized by


Google


Ejnleptic and other Fits cured by Mesmerism, 419

done with the Okeys, — pointing to the hand with one or
more fingers^ the same result followed as did in them^ — the
hand opened. He knew nothing of the Okeys^ and this
phenomenon of spasmodic contraction of muscles ceasing —
of closed hands or eyes opening by pointing the finger at the
part^ was shammed in them^ say the mass of medical men^
and for no other reason than because Mr. Wakley chose to
say so. Mesmerised water put upon his lips or the sides of
his nose, set those parts in motion, and caused him to rub
them hard and pettishly as if much annoyed. It seemed that
the simple contact of the sugar or water annoyed him ; for
he was very excitable.

July 2nd. He complained of head-ache before he sat down
to be mesmerised. His eyes began to tremble in a quarter of
a minute, and in three quarters of a minute from the first he
was sound asleep, and was left asleep for an hour.

A mesmerised shilling put into his hand produced agita-
tion of the part and distress in the countenance : placed upon
his under hp, it set the Ups and tongue in motion : when
placed upon his head, it caused agitated movements of the
whole head. Mr. S. wetted his own finger with saliva and
touched the back of his hand with it, and he presently began
to rub his hand violently with the other ; and the hand and
arm were at the same time agitated, and be moaned, and his
countenance expressed great distress for a minute or two, till
Mr. S. quieted him, though with difficulty, by wiping his
hand and stroking down his arm.

A mesmerised sixpence was placed upon a fold of the
bosom of his shirt, a full inch from his body, but in half a
minute convulsions of the whole trunk supervened.

Mr. S. wetted with saliva a piece of paper less than half
an inch square, and placed it on his boot, and in half a minute
he began to kick his leg about and rub it with the other,
struck and rubbed the inside of the lower third of his thigh
with his hand, and cried out that something was running into
his thigh; his countenance aU the time expressing great
anguish, and it was with much difficulty that he was tran-
quBlized. Mr. S. again wetted his own finger and applied it
this time to the patient^s Up : motion of the tongue and jaw
took place, and he several times bit his lip so hard that the
marks of his teeth were left in it. He appeared in such
distress and the convulsive motions of the legs returned so
frequently that Mr. S. endeavoured to awake him, but in
vain. The respiration was at this time extremely slow. After
the lapse of several minutes, he spontaneously fell into his
ordinary calm sleep-waking, and, on his face being but once


Digitized by


Google


420 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

blown upon, awoke, but with a severe head-ache; which,
though he had complained of it before he sat down, he had
not complained of while in the mesmeric state. The head-
ache was presently removed by placing the hands upon the
front and back of his head.

3rd. He was placed two or three yards behind another pa-
tient, whom Mr. S. was mesmerising, and by nothing more
he fell asleep in two minutes and a half.

The same experiments with the same results were made as
yesterday.

While under the influence of the mesmerised shilling and
saliva, the respiration was again observed to be slow, and as-
certained to occur but 4 times in a minute, and his pulse
was 104: each respiration took place with a loud noise.
Afterwards, when he was calm again, the respiration rose to
20, and the pulse fell to 80.

He followed Mr. S. up and down stairs^ and did all as
when at my house.

4th. He was placed seven or eight yards behind the other
patient whom Mr. S. was mesmerising, and fell asleep in two
minutes.

The eyes never closed at any mesmerisation, till Mr. S.
placed his own fingers upon the forehead.

The coins and paper were not wetted, nor intentionally
mesmerised to-day, though touched ; and they produced the
convulsive movements, but less violently.

He complained of great head-ache and stiffness on waking,
— a common result of the application of metals.

5th. Not mesmerised.

6th. Experiments were made to-day with wetted paper;
and, on being awakened, though always perfectly ignorant of
all that happened during his mesmeric state, he complained
of an unpleasant sensation of tickling on the part of his
hand which had been wetted with saliva, and of his foot
upon the boot of which a small piece of paper wetted with
saliva had been placed.

7th. Asleep in haff a minute.

The scrap of paper wetted and placed upon his boot
caused an expression of suffering, and motions of the head
occurred, but scarcely any of the foot. Mr. S. touched his
hand with saliva, and this was soon agitated, and then the
agitated motions commenced in the foot. The whole body
became stiff, and rigidly bent backwards. The respiration
sank to three in a minute. On awaking, he complained of
tickling in the hand and foot upon which saliva had been
placed.


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic and other Pits cured by Mesmerism. 421

8th, 9tli, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th. The same results :
and he was frequently observed to smile when anything ridi-
culous was said or done.

15th. He was brought to my house, and placed in a
chair with his face close to the waU, and told that he would
be mesmerised from behind ; but we stood at the other end
of the room and did nothing. In half a minute his hand
twitched and in two or three minutes he was asleep. His
susceptibility had become such that mere imagination was now
sufficient to induce sleep, as I pointed out above at pp. 812,
813, but not so quickly as when passes were made.

The mesmeric state was genuine, for his body was power-
fully drawn back, and motions of diflferent parts induct, by
passes made in silence at a considerable distance behind him.

Ridiculous things said to him made him smile, and, after
being teazed for a considerable time, he began laughing in a
childish manner, and said in a pettish tone, '^You sha'nt
teaze me.*^

Mesmerised money and paper produced the usual effects,
when placed under or upon him even without his knowledge.
When I avoided mesmerising them first, the agitation was
the same and he tossed about in his chair, if he knew that
they were there : but not if he was ignorant of their presence.
Imagination thus producing what mesmerisation did when
there could be no imagination.

16th, 17th, 18th, 19th, 20th. Mesmerised daily

2l8t. To-day he fell asleep in three minutes, Mr. S. sit-
ting at a distance of several feet and looking carelessly
at him.

To-day, when he was asleep, Mr. S. placed a bandage
over his eyes, so carefully that he could not see by any possi-
bility, and then obtained by tractive movements various ac-
tions of the hands, feet, head, and body, but not so readily
as when the eyes were uncovered, and more especially when
opened. He had a strong propensity to imitate, and partly
saw, and partly possessed a degree of occult power of knowing
without sight what took place. On this fact see my observa-
tions above, p. 317.

He would now stand up sometimes without any attempt
on the part of Mr. S. to raise him by tractive movements ;
especially if Mr. S. took his hand and slightly drew it, as if
rather to hint to him to rise than to pull him up. He went
about the room upon his knees to-day like a child. After
the convulsive movements produced by paper wetted with
saliva upon his head, he dropped out of his chair upon the
floor dead asleep.


Digitized by


Google


422 Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

For some days past, the convulsive and other movements
have taken place spontaneously, without any application of
saliva or mesmerised paper or metals, or pointing or drawing,
though less forcibly. I have frequently remarked the great
eflfect of habit in the mesmeric state in repeating eflFects when
the original cause was no longer applied. The occurrence of
even mesmeric sleep when the habitual mesmeric process
is not employed, and the patient believes it is, must, though
dependent on fancy, be greatly assisted by habit.

22nd to 28th. Similar phenomena took place every day.

His susceptibility was extreme, so that sometimes he was
sent to sleep and sleep-waking by putting mesmerised sove-
reigns or a gold watch into his hand : sometimes by looking
at him ; and in the latter case his eyes did not dose till a
linger was placed on the forehead, they converging, however,
just as when they had closed and been opened by mesmeric
means.

29th. He was brought to my house and mesmerised.
What we did behind his back, he imitated, just as the elder
Okey did, whom he had never heard of. If, behind him in
silence, I opened my mouth, he opened his ; if I put the end
of one thumb to my nose and of the other to the end of the
little finger of that hand, he did the same ; and so of other
movements and positions. He imitated and followed and
drove against Mr. S. exactly as when at my house on
the 15th.

30th. Mesmerised by Mr. S.'s pupil.

31st. By Mr. S.

Aug. 1st. While Mr. S. was mesmerising another patient
he came in, — sat down at the distance of a yard and a half
fix»m Mr. S., to one side and rather behind, with his face to
the window, while Mr. S.^s was turned in an opposite direc-
tion ; but in two minutes he was asleep with his eyes open.

This frequently happened with the Okeys. One day,
Lord Brougham and Mr. Sheil went to see them, and begged
that Elizabeth Okey sitting before them might have nothing
done to her. I told them that from her extreme susceptibi-
lity she woTild go to sleep, through imagination or the mes-
meric influence of those around gazing at and being close to
her. She presently fell sound asleep, and I told them that
they must wait for the other facts I had to shew them, if they
desired a proof. So Elizabeth Okey, at Mr. Wakley's, had
him standing before her, and one of his sons on one side and
one of his reporters on the other, all as close to her as they
could be without contact ; and, because she fell asleep as a
matter of course in her high susceptibility, and because while


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic and other Fits cured by Mesmerism. 423

sitting thus still and thus closely acted upon by the influ-
ence of three persons^ Mr. Wakley would rub a piece of
lead upon her hand^ which never alone a£fected her any more
than it would a post^ he declared she was an impostor. This
too was the spontaneous explanation given afterwards by her-
self in her deep and to some degree clairvoyant sleep-waking.
There was also another circumstance of which and its import-
ance he was ignorant, — ^that he continually put the lead in
contact with mesmerised nickel ; as I mentioned in my fare-
well letter to the students.

The youth had gone to sleep with his eves open as usual.
Mr. S. had hitherto closed them by placmg the point of a
finger upon his forehead ; but now tried pointing at them,
and, though at the distance of a foot, this succeeded.

Mr. S. sat down behind him at the distance of a foot,
with his own face towards his pole, and made several motions,
&c., which he imitated. Sometimes when Mr. S. made one
motion, he at first made another, but appeared dissatisfied
and went on trying till he imitated Mr. S. correctly.

This again was what we had aU seen in Elizabeth Okey. *
What she did in imitation of our grimaces, attitudes, and
movements behind her, she did very slowly, and with great
seriousness, as if deeply anxious, often erring at first, and
then correcting herself till she gave the correct imitation, and
then she remained still.* It is striking to notice the anxiety
of the patient to be correct ; the seriousness and even sigh-
ing that attend the slow and silent efibrts ; the annoyance
felt when he finds himself imitating incorrectly; and the
repose and expression of content as soon as he feels that he
has succeeded in being accurate. These experiments require
extreme care. For, as I formerly mentioned, habit has great
influence, and an attitude, grimace, or movement once made,
has a powerftd tendency to come out again when the patient
is again set upon imitating; and this whether all is done
evidently by an occult power or with the eyes open. Before
the right thing is accomplished, therefore, a wrong one
formerly executed is frequently done ; and the more things
have been done before, the more old movements, grimaces,
&c., are likely to manifest themselves. Again, the efiect
comes often very slowly ; and, if ample time is not given, and
the attempt to bring the patient to imitate a particular thing
is relinquished as hopeless, and another given him to imitate,
the first may come out while the second is given. Ignorance
of all these things united with impatience has spoilt many an

• See above, pp. 190, 317, 320, 322,

Digitized by VjOOQIC


424 Dr. ElUoison's Cases of

experiment of this nature^ and led persons to ridicule this
wonderful branch of the subject, and consequentlj the whole
subject.

Elizabeth Okey exhibited these phenomena at an early
period very remarkably ; but after a time they declined and
then ceased, and could never again be produced. They were
decisive of the truth of her case. Had she been an impostor,
she would not all at once have displayed those phenomena in
perfection, and then become less able, and at last ceased to
display them ; but would have become more and more perfect
in her art. And how often were not these beautiful experi-
ments spoilt by the interference of bystanders, who, instead
of remaining respectfully still as at any other philosophical
experiments or lectures, would on each side of her and behind
her begin giving her something to imitate, and, not finding it
imitated immediately, give her something else for imitation ;
and, when something came out which they had given to imi-
tate previously, but had relinquished for a new grimace or move-
^ment, they were ignorantly dissatisfied : and in fact, sometimes
nothing at all came on account of the confasion of impressions
which they all made. When a thing is given for imitation,
it shoTild be continued till it is imitated, and not be changed
for another impatiently. This youth afforded a beautiJFul
confirmation of Okey^s truth, — ^though the truth of these
phenomena in her was indeed self-evident. When I saw this
youth, how pitiable did those who despised the self-erident
facts of the Okeys at the hospital appear to me.

To-day the youth exhibited a degree of clairvoyance.
Mr. S. took out his own gold watch, and held the back of it
at the distance of three or four inches before his eyes, which
were closed, and asked him, " What o'clock is it V^

" How can I tell ? Tve got no eyes.''

" Oh, but you can see without eyes."

" No I ca'n't : I can see no watch."

*' Well, but try. I am sure you can see if you try."

*' Why now I ca'n't see. Oh, yes, fivith a slight start J
now I see. It has only one finger, — the finger has got a hole
through it." (This was correct). " Yes, now there are two
fingers ; a great finger and a little one. The great one is
between the two strokes and three strokes, and the little one
is just by the twelve." It was about thirteen minutes past
twelve.

A gentleman present took his own gold watch from his
pocket, and Mr. S. held the back of it before the patient's
closed eyes, but he said he could see nothing. Mr. S. breathed
and rubbed his fingers upon it several times and again pre-


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic and other Fits cured by Mesmerism. 425

seated it as before. He exclaimed, " Oh, I see the watch.
I see one great long finger as long as that ;'* (putting his
right forefinger upon his left half way between the second
joint and the knuckles ;) ^^ and the other finger is a short
one, and that has got something sticking out across behind
the top.'' (This was correct, and he luid certainly never
seen the watch before.) *'Oh, and there is another one
below, and that keeps going round.''

" WeU, but what o'clock is it ?"

" Oh, the long finger is between the one and the two, and
the little finger is pointing to the twelve." It was seven
minutes past twelve by this watch.

His father-in-law now took out his watch, and Mr. S.
held it like the others. For a long while he said he could
not see it. At last, he cried out,

" Oh, I see something now. It is not like a watch. It
is black, and not like the others." This watch was silver.
After some time, he said,

" Oh, I see the fingers now, but I ca'n't tell what time
it is."

After much pressing he said, " The long one is at the four
and the short one between the one and the two." It was
twenty minutes past two by this watch, which had been pur-
posely altered.

''Are you sure the short hand is between the one and the
two ? Look again."

He fell back in his chair fast asleep.

How beautifully accordant again was this last circum-
stance with what was continually noticed in the Okeys.
When they were making a great intellectual eflFort, or when
a strong influence was exerted upon them to produce a cer-
tain phenomenon, they would drop in the deepest sleep ; and
it often required great attention and quickness to prevent
serious accidents.

I may here remark, that sleep-wakers frequently require
much persuasion to be prevailed upon to exert their powers.
So far from wishing to display, they are often most unwilling,
and require great coaxing and encouragement; and some-
times we have even to insist before they comply.

On rousing from his deep sleep to the sleep-waking, he
proved too exhausted to manifest again the degree of power
of seeing through his eyelids and other opaque substances ;
and indeed never again exhibited it satisfactonl^.

Not only do various classes of the mesmeric phenomena
occur in various cases, but the respective classes will in many
occur only for a time in the same cases. The phenomena


Digitized by


Google


426 Dr. Elliotsan's Cases of

change^ exactly like the phenomena of extraordinary nervous
diseases^ and even of the ordinary, such as epilepsy. And
some phenomena are intense, and others but moderately de-
veloped. He never shewed this power again to any satisfac-
tory amount. Elizabeth Okey displayed the power of imitat-
ing things done behind her back, her eyes also being closed,
only for a time. She appeared to see with her hand only for
a time ; and with one foot only for a very short time ; and
then to no great degree, — not sufficiently to enable me to
assert the fact.

He continued to the last to exhibit the same phenomena
of sleep, convergence of the eyes, imitation, and imbecile de-
nial of what was asked him respecting himself. When asked,
for instance, to read with his eyes shut on the day when the
successful experiments with the watches were made, he said,

" Bead, read ! I got no read. I never could read.''

"But try.''

" I ca'n't. I never could read.''

When asked who he was, he protested he was nobody : when
his head was mentioned, declared he had no head, no no-
thing : when asked where he was, declared nowhere, &c. Sec.

He manifested great attachment to his mesmeriser, not
only following him about as a child follows its mother and
pushing against him, but on that day expressed himself with
great affection: he was "so happy when Mr. S. was with
him"— he did " love Mr. S. so much," &c., &c. Mr. S.
played the symphonion to him, at which he expressed great
delight. He complained that Mr. S. had " not done so (t. e.
mesmerised him) the day before yesterday, and ought to have
done so, he was always so happy when he was with Mr. S."

On the following day Mr. S. merely begged him to sit
down, and leaving him by one door quietly went round to
the other and mesmerised him through it for five minutes.
On opening the door, Mr. S. found him asleep.

Was mesmerised on the 3rd, 4th, and 5th.

He now began to complain of head-ache, and inability to
collect his thoughts, and was consequently mesmerised less
frequently. For a week it was done but every other day ;
and then but every third or fourth day; then but once a
week ; and left off finally in the middle of October.

I omitted to mention, that, after being awakened, he never
retained the least memory of the occurrences of his sleep-
waking, and always expressed himself greatly refreshed.

Whether he is still susceptible or not I cannot tell. For
when he called upon me lately, as he was in perfect health
and strength, though he was kindly willing to let me try,
I did not, lest I should do wrong by not letting well alone.


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic Histeria, ^c. cured by Mesmerism, 427

II. Epileptic Hysteria, with Lock-jaw and Contraction of
one Leg,

Maria Pearsey, twenty-five years old, a stout and strong-
looking person, was admitted under my care into University
College Hospital, June 25th, 1838, on account of very fre-
quent and violent fits, of an epileptic and hysterical cha-
racter. They occurred daily, and often many times in the
day : seized her suddenly, and produced perfect insensibility
and very violent convulsions, so that many could scarcely re-
strain her.

Her right leg was firmly bent up nearly to the body, and
no force could bring it down. Her jaw was firmly locked ;
and we observed that four of her front teeth had been drawn,
and, as we learnt, for the purpose of passing food into her
mouth and preventing her from being starved.

This lamentable disease had begun nine years before,
when she was sixteen years of age ; up to which time she had
enjoyed perfect health. She was then frightened by a young
gentleman in the house where she was servant jumping sud-
denly up before her, covered with a sheet, while she was
opening the cellar door. She fell insensible, and remained
so for three days ; and from that time had very violent fits,
at first purely hysterical, but at length more of an epileptic
character.

Not only had private practitioners failed to be of any
service to her, but she had been in vain

Four months in St. George's Hospital ;

Four months in St. Thomases Hospital -,

Four months in Guy's Hospital ;

And ten months in the Westminster Hospital,

Where Mr. Guthrie gave her a very large quantity of mer-
cury and salivated her severely, and where Mr. White was
anxious to cut off her beni-up leg.

The following letter was sent to me by the practitioner
under whom she had latterly been.

" upper Tooting,

*<2l8t June, 1838.
'« Dear Sir,

^* Being exceedingly puzzled with a fitly subject, and having
made trial of all known things except that most curious remedy called mes-
merism, I am at last induced to make you the offer of my patient. She is
about twenty-five years old, and has been subject to fits about eight years ;
they were at first purely hysterical, but now they more resemble epilepsy.
She has been an inmate of nearly every London hospital. Four years ago
her right leg contracted immovably over the nates, (she was then in West-
minster Hospital,) so that no art could extend it ; having been under treat-
ment at first by Mr. Guthrie, and lastly by Mr. White, for a whole year : the
latter proposed the summary mode of amputating the limb, and as the plan
was not relished by the patient she returned home. Soon after her return


Digitized by


Google


428 Dr. Elliotaon's Cases of

home, her jaw became locked, and all her limbs contracted and crossed so
inflexibly that it was difficalt to procure space for the faeces to pass. In this
state she continued about six weeks without swallowing anything but toast
and water ; for it was very difficult to administer injections, and the tube
when in the throat occasioned violent spasms. Sir James Clark saw her in
this state. After about six weeks the limbs, during a fit, were suddenly
extended, in which position they became rigidly fixed ; sensation was also
totally extinct After three weeks this condition was converted into one of
outrageous insanity, which obliged me to make use of the straight-jacket.
At length erysipelas spread all over the body and she was gradually restored
to her natural state and the perfect use of her limbs. She continued well
about a year, having a fit now and then. But since that illness she has
passed about an ounce of water once in two or three weeks. She has several
times had, to all appearance, severe peripneumonia with most severe cough
and loss of voice, which have yielded to antispasmodics. The right leg is
now partially contracted, the jaw also, and she has five or six fits a day,
which, with other symptoms, induce me to expect a somewhat similar attack
to the one I have mentioned.

*' I imagine this is a suitable case for your experiments, and should on
that account be glad if you would admit her into the North London Hos-
pital. I must, however, confess myself to be a complete sceptic as to the
virtues and reality of animal magnetism.

*' 1 have the pleasure to remain,
** Dear Sir,

" Yours most truly,
<* Wm. Bainbridob.
" To Dr. Elliotson."

As I foand her bowels greatly confined^ I ordered imme-
diately an enema^ composed of three ounces of oil of turpen-
tine diffused by three ounces of gum water in a quart of
warm water ; and it was repeated the next day, but did not
remain an instant. I determined to trust the treatment
entirely to mesmerism, and requested one of my clinical clerks
to make longitudinal passes before her face for half an hour
daily.

In less than a fortnight her jaw began to open ; it opened
now daily, and on July 12/A, rather more than a fortnighiy it
opened widely.

I have had two cases of similar lock jaw of some continu-
ance, in young women, since I cultivated mesmerism ; and
in both I succeeded perfectly with it. Had mesmerism been
employed by those who treated her previously, the poor girl
might have still been in possession of her upper and lower
front teeth. Not only, however, had the jaw opened widely
enough on the 25th for her to eat her dinner like the other
patients, but her leg had reloaded so much that the toes touched
the ground. Still she had no power to move it, and it was
in some degree contracted.

July 28th. Her leg came quite doum in the night. The
fits gradually lessened, and she went out well in October ; and
never had a return of any of her complaints.

I advised Mr, Bainbridge, a year afterwards, to publish


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic Hysteria, tfc, cured by Mesmerism, 429

the case^ as he knew all its history^ from having had her so
long under his care — trying every thing in vain. But if he
had been agreeable^ the rejection by both the Lancet and
Medical Gazette of Mr. Chandler's case^ published by me in
the second number of The Zoist, was enough to deter him.

He informed me last week (Dec. 16th) that she never had
a fit after leaving the hospital ; and that she died three years
afterwards of a totally different disease — consumption of the
lungs — as appeared on examination after death.

Here was another exquisite case : inexpensive, for she had
only aperient medicine when requisite, and tending to elevate
the reputation of the hospital, where she was easUy and per-
manently cured, after the failure of St. Gteorge^s, St. Thomas's,
Guy's, and the Westminster, through two years of ample
opportunity. But this easy and inexpensive mode of cure
was forbidden, and is now unknown in that place.

No other sensible effect was induced but drowsiness, and
sometimes a little sleep.

If the passes were made quickly, she was distressed, and
a fit brought on.

Being very nervous and having suffered much, she was
agitated and rendered hysterical and convulsed by any rough-
ness of behaviour ; to which I regret she was often exposed.

Mesmerised metals of various kinds put into her hands
caused violent and painfid spasms of the extremity; and,
from my having seen no such effects from lead or copper in
the Okeys, I was once foolishly inclined to doubt the genuine-
ness of the spasm. But enlarged experience has shewn me
that different metals have very different powers on different
persons.

As the leg came down, splints and rollers were applied, to
secure the ground gained ; and, in one of the other cases of
lock-jaw to which I have alluded, I put a cork between the
teeth as the jaw opened more and more, for the same purpose.

III. Most violent Hysterical Convulsions, and Delirium ; with
paroxysms of Ecstasy and Sleep-walking, 8fC. ^c.

The sensation produced by the wonderful effects of mes-
merism on Master Salmon, whose case is described in No. III.
caused the parents of a young lady, in the same neighbour-
hood, while I was still visiting him, to request my attendance
upon one of their daughters, who was labouring under the
severest fits and delirium, requiring several attendants night
and day, and baffling all the efforts of medicine.


Digitized by


Google


430 Dr. ElUotaon's Cases of

Feb. 1, 1839. I found the patient, Miss , of

street, sixteen years of age, a delicate and sweet-looking girl,
in bed, wild, unable to recognise any person, in continual
fits, with a very foul swollen tongue and foetid breath, and a
hot and throbbing head, and reduced appearance; and I
learnt that this had been her condition for nearly three
months, she was having seventy fits every twenty-four hours,
and had not slept for 14 days. She had been delicate from
infancy, and had not experienced the constitutional change.
When very young she once struck her forehead against some
iron railings, and had ever since been often subject to head-
ache and most profuse discharge from the nose, which glued
the handkerchiefs, and made them very heavy, like the dis-
charge from a blister.

On the 10th of November, 1838, she awoke with a severe
head-ache, which continued all day. In the evening at eight
o'clock she fainted, and continued fainting every few minutes
till two in the morning, at which time she passed from a
fainting fit into a delirious state, sometimes frurious and some-
times sitting up in bed and singing, but fainting again on
any sudden noise being made.

Their medical attendant, Mr. Edward White, of Lamb's-
conduit Street, applied leeches to her temples and a blister
to the back of her neck ; ordered injections, a warm foot-
bath, and warm wine and water; and sent her medicine.
But the delirium was unabated ; and at seven in the evening,
about twenty-four hours fit)m the first fainting fit, she had a
violent convtUsive fit, becoming quite insensible, violently con-
torted, foaming at the mouth, &c., &c. Such a fit recurred
at very short intervals, as the previous fainting fits had done ;
not only, however, like them till the next morning, but till
the morning after. When these ceased, and when she went
out of the last, she was no longer delirious, but in her natural
state.

She had become very weak and reduced in appearance,
but continued improving till the 14th, when in the evening
she had a sort of staring fit, sitting up in bed perfectly rigid,
and her hands being clenched.

On the 15 th, as the fits of staring and rigidity recurred
and lasted three or four hours, and there was also taild deli-
rium, Dr. Spurgin was called in by Mr. White, and leeches
were put upon her legs and another blister to the back of the
neck, and medicines of difierent kinds sent.

Thus she continued, without any improvement for a week,
taking an abundance of medicine, having her head shaved
twice, and wetted constantly with cold lotion, and enemata


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic Hysteria, Sfc., cured by Mesmerism^ 431

being administered. The following week she had but three
convulsive fits; but, at its expiration, Nov. 28th, she was
frightened by the fall of a board in the room above her,
and immediately had a most violent attack of delirium,
which continued without any intermission, and in the midst
of if fits, sometimes of rigidity, sometimes of violent con-
vulsions, took place, with insensibility, almost incessantly.
She would also scream and howl and bark in these con-
vulsive fits. All the medical treatment was continued ; Dr.
Spurgin applying blisters "all over the head,^^ and wish-
ing to put one " all over the stomach/^ But the treatment
was fruitless : and so frightful was her state, that Dr. Spur-
gin (Jan. 6th) wrote to a medical mad-house keeper for " a
trustworthy female attendant to take charge of a young lady
labouring under hysterical mania.^' Another practitioner
who was called in advised her removal to a lunatic asylum.
She had taken 18 dozen draughts by the 19th of January.

She had seventy fits of one kmd or another every day,
and required four people lo hold her and prevent her from
injuring herself. In the convulsions she was sometimes so
bent back that her head all but touched her heel (opistho-
tonos) ; sometimes bent to one side (pleurosthotonos) : and
she never slqpt.

Mr. White, greatly to the credit of his candour and in-
tegrity, now mentioned what he had seen at Mr. Salmon's,
and advised the parents to try mesmerism as a last resource.
When it is remembered that this was very nearly five years
ago, and just after Mr. Wakley had made almost the whole
profession his anti-mesmeric adherents, too much praise can-
not be given to Mr. White.

As she lay in bed delirious, I mesmerised her for half an
hour by downward passes before her face, with no apparent
effect. During the process, she had some slight fits, com-
mencing sometimes with contortions of the face, particularly
of the mouth, sometimes with loud grinding of the teeth,
and after a minute or two they would suddenly cease, and
the whole body become stiff, the limbs extended, the arms
fixed closely to the sides, the hands clenched, and the thumbs
bent across the palm, the eyes wide open and fixed, the pupils,
however, contracting during the whole fit, just as they some-
times wUl in hysteria, epilepsy, catalepsy, and even in amau-
rosis. After lying thus for a short time, she would rise
rather suddenly into the sitting posture, though still rigid
throughout, and, after sitting a little, force her head as for-
ward as possible, and generally turning her eyes upwards
towards the ceiling. She would then close her eyes and fall

VOL. I. GO


Digitized by


Google


432 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

back in a deep coma, her trunk and extremities all relaxed,
but her jaw closed, and her lower lip drawn between her
teeth. These the family called her " stiff fits/' Sometimes,
instead of all this, the contortions of the face or grinding of
the teeth were followed by screaming, howling or barking ex-
actly like a dog, general convulsions took place, the body bent
backwards or to one side, and the mouth foamed, the face and
neck swelling and growing very red, the hands and fingers
working rapidly and catching at anything; and then the fit of
rigidity just described came on, and on ceasing left a deep coma
for two or three minutes, at the end of which she awoke with
three or four deep" sighs, sometimes amounting to groans,
into her previous delmous condition. The Okeys always
came from their artificial mesmeric coma, whether long or
short, with a sigh.

Feb. 2nd. I mesmerised her half an hour, still with no
apparent effect.

3rd. Sleepy towards the end of the half hour, and might
have gone to sleep but for the occiurence of a fit which com-
pletely aroused her. This was the first result ; but there was
a second, for she was much more quiet afterwards all night.

4th. At the end of three quarters of an hour fell asleep
for a few moments. A fit took place, from which she went
into her previous delirium. At night she was still more
quiet between the fits than the preceding night; so that
the two results increased.

5th. The two results greatly augmented, for I mesmerised
her into a profound snoring skep much before half an hour
had elapsed. After I had addressed her repeatedly, she
answered me, but only to her Christian name; her eyes,
however, remained closed and she continued snoring. I at-
tempted to draw up her arms and head by tractive movements ;
but failed. But I discovered that if I said aloud they would
move, they did. On being asked why she raised her arms,
she replied she did not know, but could not prevent their
rising, and that she heard me say they would rise up. If I
desired her to raise her arms or move her head, no effect fol-
lowed : but, if I said the thing would take place, it did. It
was so with other voluntary actions, if they can so be termed,
during the whole of her subsequent illness. There was no
attempt at trick in this. She frankly allowed that she
heard me say the thing would take place ; and I believe she
was compelled to do it : though why a command or request
had no such effect is remarkable. But her's was an ano-
malous cerebral condition.

She was now in the mesmeric sleep-waking state, and in


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic HysieriOj ^c, cured by Mesmerism. 433

it not at all delirious. But there were higher results ; for she
possessed an accurate foreknowledge of most events of her
disease. On being asked whether she would awake from this
sleep in her senses^ she replied^ " No/' but that she should
come to her senses on the next Sunday, the 10/A inst,, and
would not be delirious again for a short time^ but be subject to
fits a few months^ and that I should cure her. She said she
should now sleep for half an hour. This might have been
the natural duration of her mesmeric state^ or the length
which her impression would have made it. But in two mi-
nutes a fit^ of which she certainly had shewn no foreknow-
ledge^ occurred^ which broke it up ; and after this she was no
longer in the sleep-wakings but delirious as before I had mes-
merised her to sleep. The fit had dissipated the mesmeric state.
I mesmerised her to sleep again^ and could not wait to allow
its natural termination^ and ascertain how far she might ap-

Cr to have predicted correctly, but woke her by blowing in
£Ace. Had I known as much of mesmerism as I do at pre-
sent, I should not have awakened her whenever my engage-
ments compelled me to leave the house ; because there was no
attachment manifested to me her mesmeriser, and she bore my
absence and the presence and contact of others with indifi^er-
ence. The longer she had remained asleep, the greater
restoration would her system have experienced. Before wak-
ing her, I enquired what medicine she ought to have, and
the reply was " None but sleep :'' and I prevailed upon her to
take a bun and a glass of wine, for she had taken scarcely
any nourishment at all.

6th. Mr. Wood found her playing the piano in her usual
delirious state, recognizing nobody. He placed himself be-
hind her, and made downward passes. In ten minutes she
began to yawn, and said to herself, as she played, that she
felt very funny. The passes were then made before her
face, and in a quarter of an hour she fell into sleepwak-
ing, and, on being questioned, repeated the prediction that
she should come to her senses on the 10th; and moreover at
nUdniffhi. On being asked to play a tune upon the piano,
she enquired where it was, not being aware of what she had
done or known in her delirium. The chair which had been
removed was placed opposite the instrument, and her hands
were raised for her to the level of the keys ; for she at first was
very feeble in her sleep-waking condition. She immediately
remarked, " This is not my piano.'' On enquiry, it appeared
that during her delirium, as she seemed pleased with music,
a piano had been placed in her bed-room, but, her own being
too large^ a smaller one had been hired. At first she could

oo2


Digitized by


Google


434 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

not go through a tune correctly, and several times said she
could not play ; but at last she succeeded very well, and cor-
rectly played three or four tunes which she had learnt when
well, snoring and her head nodding forwards and from side
to side most amusingly all the time. She was awakened at
the end of an hour by blowing in her face.

7th. Mesmerised to sleep, or rather sleep-waking, in
twenty minutes. Fits occurred in the sleep-waking, and did
not, as hitherto, dissipate the sleep-waking, and end in de-
lirium; but the sleep-waking remained when each fit was over.

I drew up her hands and arms by tractive movements,
when not only her eyes were closed, but kept firmly closed
by a person's fingers, so that ordinary vision was impossible.
I did not succeed for some time ; and, when the effect came,
it was at first slight, the hand rising a short distance only,
and dropping again ; precisely as happened at first with the
Okeys and so many others of my patients. I then made no
tractive movement, but merely said that '^her right arm
would go up ;'' and it almost immediately began to move,
and ascended slowly. Whatever movement I said would
occur of any part, it did occur. I asked her how all this
happened; and she replied in the gentle voice which had
always characterized her mesmeric sleep- waking, that ''she
did not know, — ^that she heard what was said, and that she
knew her arm went up, but could not tell why, — ^that she did
not try to Uft it up, — she could not help it, — and when it was
up she could not put it down again ; but when I said it would
go down, it did.'' I then said aloud that she would sit up in
bed and sing a song called the Scarlet Flower, which I was
told was one of her favourites when well. She at once slowly
rose in bed, and began to sing, snoring and nodding, as y£
overpowered with sleep ; sometimes so asleep that she was
silent; and then reviving and resuming the song. I said she
would whistle, and she forthwith attempted. I then said she
would sing a song which I learnt she did not know. She
took no notice, and presently fell into a very deep sleep.
This sudden depth of coma, in which the patient notices
nothing, I witnessed in the Okeys, and have witnessed since
times innumerable when sleep- wakers were urged to do some-
thing impossible or told something disagreeable. I caused her
to sing several songs; and once, when about to begin, she
was prevented from singing by a fit, on coming out of which
she seemed to have lost the impression made upon her before
the fit by my saying she would sing, and made no further
attempt. I removed her sleep-waking by blowing in her face,
and she returned to her delirious state.


Digitized by


Google


Epilqi)tic Hysteria, ^c, cured by Mesmerism. 435

When the limbs were made to move by words or trac-
tive movements^ they always became rigid.

8th. Similar results to idl the former were obtained. She
repeated her prediction of coming to her senses on the 10th,
at 12 p.m. ; but added that she would continue in them two
day^ only, would then be delirious a day, and be both deliri-
ous and in her senses two days : that the fits would be very
severe on the 10th, and continue severe for a month, and
then diminish gradually. When I had caused her arms to
ascend, I found I could cause them to descend by darting
my hands towards them, just as hundreds of persons saw was
the case with the rigidly-extended limbs of Elizabeth Okey,
whom, as well as mesmerism, she had never seen. Indeed
she saw but a momentary experiment, till the month in
which I am writing, December, 1843 ; and all she saw on
this occasion was a person already in a quiet sleep. While
I now said her arm would ascend, I begged Mr. Wood to
say it would not; and it did not for a few minutes, but at
length it did, though slowly, and threateniug every now and
then to descend, — my influence being opposed, but proving
ultimately victorious. As soon as Mr. Wood said with me
that it would ascend, it ascended immediately and freely. In
another experiment, I said the arm would ascend, and by
tractive movements endeavoured at the same time to draw it
down. The arm presently began to ascend, but did not rise
much for some time ; and, when it was elevated, the hand and
fingers turned down in the direction of my hand.

The female function took place to-day; and continued
perfectly regular ever afterwards. Before the mesmerism,
she had taken all sorts of medicine and used hip and steam
baths in vain to excite it.

9th. She had become susceptible of influence before being
actually mesmerised; just as some persons, once rendered
susceptible, may have their limbs drawn and fixed in any
position by the mesmeriser, when in their natural and waking
state.* For, before I mesmerised her to-day, I drew up her
arms by tractive movements in her delirium. She saw them
rising, and could not prevent them. After they had descended,
I s(dd the left would rise and it did ; and, when she was asked
where her left arm was, she put her right hand to the left
side and said, '^ By my side to be sure,^' and was greatly sur-
prised when, being told to look, she found it in the air. She
could not put it down again ; but it descended by my darting
my hand down towards it. I then said her right arm would
go over to her left side, and at the same time endeavoured to

• See above, p. 189.


Digitized by


Google


436 Dr. EUiotsan'a Cases of

draw it by tractive passes to the right : it went over to the
left. In her fits of rigidity, I could now cause her arms to
move in any direction by saying that they woidd. Once
when I had caused her arms to move, and thus rendered them
rigid, and did nothing more, she, having no power over them^
declared she had no arms ; and such was I have no doubt her
feeling. I now mesmerised her.

In her sleep-waking, she was always perfectly rational as
when in health, and I ventured to-day to present her father,
mother, &c., to her as she lay; and she recognized them all
with perfect calmness, and for the first time since Christmas.
They could scarcely believe the evidence of their senses, any
more than the family of Mr. Salmon, when Master Salmon
rose from his bed and walked after me. As soon as the mes-
meric state was over, and she was in her delirium, she never
recognized any body, but addressed all those around her by
some nickname by which she distinguished each, having
formed her acquaintance with them all as strangers during
her delirium.

In her sleep-waking she knew nothing of the events ci
her delirium, only of her sleep-waking and her natural state :
in her delirium she knew nothing of either of those states :
and in her subsequent natural state she has never to this
moment known anything of her sleep-waking or delirious
state.

10th. In her sleep-waking, she said that, though the fits
would be very severe to-night before the delirium ceased, their
severity would be lessened if she were sent into a mesmeric
sleep at half-past ten, and allowed to remain in it till heat
senses returned at twelve : that on their returning she should
be very weak as long as she remained in her senses, and
it would be better for her on this account to remain deliri-
ous. I now awakened her by blowing in her fiace ; and asked
her to eat some bread and butter.

She refused to take the bread and butter, notwithstand-
ing all my entreaties, declaring she did not want it, till I
said, " Now she wiU take the bread and butter out of my
hand and eat it.*' Then, while still declaring she would not
take it, and begging me not to be so tiresome, she slowly ex-
tended her hand, took the bread and butter, and at the very
moment of raising it to her mouth, evidently against her
will, again declaring she would not take it, and I now beg-
ging her not to eat it, but in the same breath saying, "I
am sure she will,'* she put it into her mouth, and continued
eating it in spite of herself till it was all gone.

Half-past ten, p. m. The jSts had been very severe and fre-


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic Hysteria, ^c, cured by Mesmerism. 437

quent since yesterday. I readily sent her into sleep-waking.
She told me that when she came to her senses she should be
very weak and must have some food. I enquired if she ought
to have wine ; and she replied, " No ; it goes up to my head
and increases the pain there.^^ She sho said that she should
have fits for three months : very severely the first month ;
after which they would decline gradually.

Tu?elve & clock struck, and, Mr. Symes suggesting that per-
haps she ought to be awakened, I asked her the question,
and she answered, *^ Yes.^' I acc(»rdingly blew in her face
two or three times, and she began stretching herself as if
about to awake; but an attack came on, she ground her
teeth and had a fit of rigidity, then her mouth was convulsed,
she next barked, and ultimately a violent convulsive fit took
place, ending in coma, from which she soon awoke, but no
longer delirious ; for, turning her head and seeing her sister,
whom she had not recognized for six weeks, always calling
her " Poll Mortimer,'' said, " Oh, Catherine,'' and recognized
all her fEimily, addressing them by their own designations as
they were presented to her in succession, and was perfectly
in her senses. She said, " Oh, father was so angry, because
they made such a noise." I learnt that when she was last
in her senses in Christmas week, her father had been very
angry at a board being allowed to fall down in the room
above her. This noise, as I have already said, instantly had
produced the delirium which had continued up to this very
moment. Thus her existence between the commencement
and termination of the delirium was a blank to her; and the
last previous and first subsequent moments were continuous
to her mind. She supposed herself in Christmas week.
Seing asked what she would like to drink, she said, ^^ Wine
and water," — ^the very thing which in her sleep-waking she
had forbidden us at present to give her. The Okeys and
others would in their sleep-waking forbid what they much
liked, and prescribe what was very painful or disagreeable in
their waking state ; and in their waking state, when possessed
of only their ordinary judgment, would ask for the former,
or entreat me with tears not to insist on the latter. She ate
bread and butter, and I sent her into sleep-waking again, in
which she said she might be allowed to continue till the after-
noon, when she must be awakened, and would be then found
still in her senses. I therefore left her asleep.

11th. She still continues asleep, and has had numerous
and severe convulsive fits. She told me that she should have
another fit in ten minutes, and should be quite cured of both
fits and delirium this day twelve weeks, and be afterwards


Digitized by


Google


438 Dr. EUiotsm's Cases of

better than ever : that next month the fits would be worse
than ever^ and then gradually decline in frequency^ and during
this month she would be in her senses at intervsJs only.

Exactly as the ten minutes expired^ the predicted fit
occurred. After it was over, and she was in her calm sleep-
waking again, I enquired whether she suffered during the
fits, and she stated that there was no suffering in the rigid
fits, but in the screaming convulsive fits very severe pain at
the back portion of the left side of her head.

I awoke her and she was in her natural state : and I then
sent her to sleep again.

12th. Asleep ever since yesterday. The fits were more
numerous and severe till 1 a. m.

I learnt that when a rigid fit is followed by howling before
the convulsive fit begins, this is far more severe, and in
addition she pants, with her tongue out, like a dog. The
convulsive fits end with a little sighing and moaning, as the
stiff ones end when occurring alone.

Last night, after the screaming fit, she did not immedi-
ately return to her sleep- waking, but sighed and moaned once
or twice, her lips were again convulsed, her fingers continued
working, and her arms extended to right angles with the
body, the convulsions returned, the tongue protruded and
was bitten severely, she was bent back with her head towards
her heels, then bent in an arch to one side, and laughed and
howled by turns in the most horrible manner.

In her sleep-waking she requested to be taken out of bed
and washed in this state ; and her request was complied with, .
of course without at all waking her.

While asleep this morning before my arrival, she said that
a sister, whose birthday it was, had received a present of a
religious book with a letter in it from a Mr. B., who had been
there that morning, but had not brought it himself: she also
said that, Mr. White had been below and had just gone out
again. All this was correct ; and her sisters and nurse de-
clared that, when she told it them, they did not know it them-
selves, and no person but themselves had gone into the room
between the arrival of the book and her telling it them. She
herself also assured me of this, but could not explain how
she knew the circumstances. Except the predictions regard-
ing her own disorder, this was the only instance like clairvoy-
ance which was noticed in her : and I only relate it as I heard
it. She said she must now be awakened, and sent to sleep
again at six p.m., and be awakened at twelve, when she
would wake delirious, after having had fifteen fits before that
hour; and must then have a sandwich and some wine and water*


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic Hysteria^ ^c. cured by Mesmerism. 439

On my waking her by blowing in her fece, she was ftdly
in her senses^ but so weak as to be unable to raise her head
from the pillow^ though in her sleep-waking no such great
debility existed. .

This is yery common^ and almost incredible when wit-
nessed for the first time by any person.

She still complained of severe pain at the back part of the
left side of the head. Both arms remained rigidly extended
at her sides^ without the least power on her part to move
them; and when forcibly raised they instantly went down
again. Before waking she had directed that some gold^ or
" other strong metal/' should be put mto her hand for ten
minutes^ ^'to draw out the numbness.^' I placed a piece of
nickel in her left band^ and presently the fingers began to
move about^ then she could move the hands^ then the arms^
and at the expiration of ten minutes she was able to raise her
hands to her head. The left leg^ which was also stifp, re-
covered by the same means. I effected the same results with
the right arm and leg by means of gold. She said the nickel
had felt warm.

When I had left the room^ she begged that her right arm
might be rubbed as it had grown stiff again. It was rubbed
and gold put into it, but it recovered very slowly. When
nickel was substituted, she said it felt '^ so warm/' and almost
immediately she mov^ the arm as finely as the left.

While in hear senses and so weak, she was very desirous
to be mesmerise^, as otherwise, she said, she shoidd get no
sleep. She supposed this was Dec. 28th, her birth-day.

When sent to sleep she again predicted that she would
have fiftieen convulsive fits before midnight, at which time
she must be awakened, and would wake delirious.

Twelve & clock p.m. — Had fiflieen severe fits since six
o'clock. She was awakened soon after midnight, and proved
delirious, very noisy and merry, as she frequently was.

13th. Still delirious ; and the fits as usual. While I was
mesmerising her, a convulsive fit began, but I persevered,
and it went off; and she fell into deep-waking. The fit
returned, and I again mesmerised her, and, though it went
through all its stages, it was far less severe and Jwious than
when l^t to itself.

She said she must be awakened at midnight, and would
be delirious,, and must be left so till I sent her to sleep the
next day. I represented to her that it was very inconvenient
for me to go there at mght, and asked if it would not do as
well to leave her asleep now till I went the next day. She
repUed that I might wake her now and Mr. White might


Digitized by


Google


440 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

send her to sleep at eight in the evenings and leave her asleep
till my visit the next day. All this was done.

14th. Still asleep. Twenty convulsive fits between six
and twelve p.m. yesterday. None from twelve p.m. to three
a.m. Then had ten before noon. Says she shall have another
at four p.m.^ and on being awakened will be found in her
senses^ and continue herself for fifteen minutes^ when she
will have another fit^ from which she will return into her
delirium. That she must be sent to sleep at eight p.m.^ and
left so till my usual visit the next afternoon.

I now blew in her fSeice^ and^ after stretching about a little^
she opened her eyes^ looked about in her perfect senses^ and
asked for her mother. In twelve and a half minutes she had
another fit^ from which she returned into her delirium.

She did^ as usual^ all things I said she would^ both in
her sleep-waking and her delmum, though often declaring
at the very time, in the most positive manner, she "wUl not/'
and extremely angry at finding herself doing them.

She could always answer me whether I touched her or not.
Others she sometimes heard when not touched; and some-
times not till they touched her, — ^whether this aroused her,
or gratified a whim of not appearing to hear them unless
touched, or there was an accidental coincidence of her hear-
ing them and their at length touching her, for the brain is
in these cases subject to extreme fluctuations of activity,
there may be various opinions. I suppose that the second
explanation was generally the truth.

She said she would have fifteen convulsive fits before
twelve at night.

15th. Still asleep. Ktd fifteen convulsive fits before half-
past eleven last night : then none till three, a. m. : from that
time to seven, a. m., ten : from that time to half-past eleven,
none : from that time to one, had fi/ve : from that time till
my visit at four, none. She had said she should have one at
four, and as the clock struck it took place.

In my Physiology, a few years ago, while asserting the
power of sleep-wakers to predict changes in their own disor-
ders, which is the only fulfilled prediction I have ever witnessed,
I professed not to know whether there was an occult intuitive
knowledge, or whether the fulfilment was the involuntary
effect of the imagination after the preconceived idea had en-
tered the head.* Of the power of imagination in the mesmeric
state, and in similar diseased states independent of mesme-
rism, even medical men, I am certain, have in general no
idea. I have proved its power, when, having heard fipom a

•p. 1168—1170.


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic Hysteria, ^c. cured by Meimerism. 441

patient a prediction of some wonderful phenomenon in the
mesmeric state for a certain day^ I have entreated that the
time might be changed^ as I could not then be present to
witness it. This has been done; and the prediction been
verified^ the phenomenon occurring at the time requested :
and yet the phenomenon has been genuine and unquestion-
able. You may not be able to prevail upon the patient to
agree to what you wish ; but, if you can, you will generally
be sure of a successful issue.

We ought always to remember that, besides genuine mes-
meric phenomena, much occurs in these cases, without the
least deception or even exaggeration on the part of patients,
entirely through an impression upon the mind. The prone-
ness to various fSEmcies in different mesmeric cases is great ;
and in the present case it was very great, and the influence
of it as great.

The sleep-waking and the awakening were truly mes-
meric; the phenomena were all real : but a large number of
the r^ities which I produced in this case, were, I feel satis-
fied, the result of an impression only that they would occur.
Thus metals had various effects, just as I led her to expect
them. A glass of water would send her to sleep for hours,
if she said it would, provided it was mesmerised, when I did
not mesmerise it at idl : and yet the sleep was, I fully satis-
fied myself, perfectly real.

I could abnost believe that the stigmata on the hands
and feet and around the heads of certain Roman Catholic
sleep- waking females might not be artificial, but the result
of a strong imagination in the patients that they would
have these marks. See above, p. 313.

The inability of some mesmeric patients to hear no voice
but that of their mesmeriser, I am satisfied is the result
solely of the patient being strongly and involuntarily impelled
to listen to no other person; fori have seen them just as deaf
to any knocking or other such noise made by another, while
they knew this to be the case, but hearing it as soon if they
were deceived into a belief that it came fix>m the mesmeriser.
And yet I am convinced that they attempted no deception, and
were conscious of no deception ; but were acting quite in-
voluntarily and with such rapidity that they were ignorant of
the whole matter.

Mr. White could never wake this patient, though he
readily sent her to sleep every night for me. Neither her
sisters nor any other of the family could even send her to
■ ep.

We msisted that she should devise some method for Mr.

Digitized by VjOOQIC


44a Dr. Elliotson's Cases of

White to awaken her; but she to the last maintained that no
body could ever awaken her but myself. Nor could any
one else wake her from this time forward. For all this she
declared that she could give no reason. A fancy might ope-
rate upon her, I feel certain, without her knowing it : just
as, in natural sleep, a desire operates upon the brain, with-
out our knowledge, to wake at an hour we fixed upon before
we went to sleep, and causes us to wake at that very hour.

She predicted that the fits w6uld continue unabated for a
month from the last Monday, and that nothing would lessen
them before that time. Mr. Wood said that he was sure they
woidd not be so bad the next week, and, after considering
some time, she said they would not.

I now arrived, and she told me that if I liked I might
leave her asleep till to-morrow, but that, if I woke her now,
she would be in her senses for ten minutes, then have a fit,
and awake in her delirium ; and that as soon as I woke her,
she must have a slice of thin bread and butter and a little
water. I blew in her face, she awoke in her senses, took the
bread and butter and water, had the fit in ten minutes, and
awoke from it delirious.

Feb. 16th. Continues in the delirium which came as she
had predicted. Between 6 p.m. and 11 ^ p.m. last night had
fifteen fits : from 11 J till 2 a.m., none : from 2 a.m. till 5 a.m.,
five fits : frx)m 5 a.m. till 8| a.m., none, but slept : from 8^
a.m. till 1 1 p.m., had ten fits : and from 1} p.m. till 3} p.m.,
she had none, but slept. I now arrived, and sent her to
sleep, during which she said she must be left asleep till this
time to-morrow, and should require no food before then,
when on my awaking her she wotdd be delirious. She added,
that she should have fifteen fits before midnight. She had
eaten two or three sandwiches during the morning.

In her sleep-waking, she never spoke unless spoken to ;
and her family and attendants never spoke to her; rarely any
one but myself. All experiments succeeded equally in her
sleep-waking and delirium.

17th. Still asleep. Fifteen fits between 5 p.m. and mid-
night: none till 6 a.m.,: five between 6 a.m. and 6 a.m. :
none between 6 a.m. and 8 a.m. : ten between 8 a.m. and 11
a.m. : none from that time till my arrival at 4 p.m. I blew in
her face and she awoke in her delirium.

She directed that she should be sent to sleep again at 8
p.m., and left till my arrival on the morrow.

Having held my gold watch for a short time in my own
hand, I put it into her^s without any effect. On doing the
same with a half-crown, she began to grind her teeth, became


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic Hysteria^ Sfc. cured by Mesmerism. 448

rigid^ and apparently insensible, and her lips were convnised
as before a fit. I removed the silver and substituted nickel,
when the convulsions instantly ceased, and after two or three
sighs she was conscious again, though delirious as before. A
sovereign had the same effects as the half-crown, and the
nickel equally removed them. I now tried the watch again,
and it acted as the sovereign had done ; and so did pieces of
mesmerised ivory and glass, and the nickel at once removed
these effects. I left her in the delirium.

1,8th. Still in the sleep which Mr. White induced at 8
p.m. last evening. Between 6 p.m. and midnight, she had
fifteen fits: before 3 a.m., none: before 6 a.m., five: be-
fore 8 a.m., none : before 1 p.m., ten : before 4 p.m., none.
Said that when I awoke her, she would be in her senses but
one minute; woidd speak to her father and mother, then
have a fit, and then be delirious. She wished to be sent to
sleep as usual at 8 p.m., and left till my vi^it to-morrow
aft;emoon.

I now blew in her face; and she awoke in her senses,
spoke to her father and mother, and at the end of a minute
had a fit, from which she returned into the delirium.

19th. Was sent to sleep by Mr. White at 10 p.m. Be-
tween 10 and midnight had ten fits : till 4 a.m., none : before
5 a.m., five: before 7 a.m., none: before noon, ten: and
none afterwards up to my arrival at 4 p.m.

This morning she got out of bed in her sleep-waking, took
her hair brush from the table, sat on the floor and brushed
her hair, replaced the brush and went to bed again, without
uttering a word; nor was she spoken to. When in bed
again, she was asked why she had got out of bed ; but she
denied it, and appeared to know nothing about it. She
might speak the truth ; and this might be a distinct cerebral
state in the midst of the mesmeric sleep- waking; as common
somnambulism is in ordinary sleep, and we know that it is
completely forgotten. In other patients I have since wit-
nessed a temporary fresh sleep-waking in the midst of ano-
ther; which sometimes was not remembered in another state,
any more than the mesmeric sleep-waking in which it occur-
red was remembered in another state than itself.

The fits have been less numerous and less severe. She
says they will not diminish any more this week, and during
it she will have twenty-five every day : but that next week
they will be five less numerous, and decrease five week by
week afterwards.

I put mesmerised zinc into her left hand, and mesmerised
iron into her right. Both arms, particularly the right, be-


Digitized by


Google


444 Dr, EUiotson's Cases of

came rigid : she began to grind her te^th and appeared about
to have a fit ; but all these symptoms ceased on the removal
of the metals. She could not tell us what metals had been
used to the respective hands. An angular piece of rough
mesmerised nickel acted like the other metals; but on another
piece of rounds smooth nickel of different shape being sub-
stituted the effects soon ceased. The first she said felt cold,
the second warm and comfortable. I have no doubt that the
effect of all the metak was chiefly dependent upon her imagi-
nation^ as in many other cases : though I have made abun-
dant experiments to prove the reality of their power in many
instances independent of all imagination. Their effect thus
stands in the same predicament as every other effect in mes-
merised patients.

She says she shall be delirious when I wake her, and must
be left so till my visit the next afternoon.

In her delirium she had for some time said much about
an apparition which constantly haunted her, and which she
called Martha Herbert: but latterly she had spoken' much
less of it.

Being asked if any body now could awake her, she
replied, none of her family ; but any medical gentleman.
This was of course fun, see p. 442. Three gentlemen, of whom
one was medical, tried in vain. She gave as the reason that her
sleep was too deep, and advised that I should awake her.
I succeeded by blowing in her face, and she awoke delirious.
While asleep she had said she must have some bread and
butter and a little water, and on waking be left delirious till
the next day. She now refused the bread and butter which
she had ordered in her sleep. But I said repeatedly, ^' She
will eat it,^^ and she did, till by my continuing to say so, it
was all gone.

Whatever ways I drew any parts of her by tractive move-
ments, she replied, " They will go,*' to our laughing at her
for their following my hand.

20th. The delirium continues. From 4 p.m. yesterday
till 10 p.m., no fit : from 10 p.m. to 12 p.m., ten : till 2 J a.m.,
none, and she continued delirious: till 6a.m., five. She
slept from 8 a.m. till 11^ a.m., awakened at intervals by the
fits, but falling asleep again instantly they were over : be-
tween 8 a.m. and 1} p.m., she had altogether ten fits, some
while asleep, some while deUriously awake. By some mis-
take I forgot to send her to sleep at 4 p.m., and she remained
deUrious till evening.

21st. Sent to sleep last night at 10 p.m. Between lOj^ p.m.
and 12 p.m. ten fits : between 5 a.m. and 6 a.m., five fits :


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic Hysteria, ^c. cured by Mesmerism. 445

between 8 a.m. and noon^ ten. Before I awakened her, she
said she might be awakened at 4p.m.| and sent to sleep at
10 p.m. I awoke her^ and she was delirious^ and ate a slice
of bread and bntter. Her delirium has become much less vrra-
iional, and her health greatly improved. She had required no
pocket handkerchief during her illness, but her nose has lat-
terly discharged freely. Her delirium was more violent
yesterday afternoon than usual, no doubt from my having
forgotten to send her to sleep. When I had sent her to sleep^
she denied that she saw me vesterday : and this of necessity^
for she was now asleep^ and yesterday I saw her in her deU-
rium only, having forgotten to send ner to sleep. I awoke
her in her delirium.

22nd. Sent to sleep by Mr. White at 10 p.m. last night.
Between 10 p.m. and midnight, ten fits : between 6 a.m. and

6 a.m., five : and between 10 a.m. and noon, ten.

From my having mentioned the extraordinary changes
of ordinary words as employed by the Okeys, she had a pro-
pensity to mispronounce in her delirium, — not in her mes-
meric sleep -waking state nor in her natural state. But
whereas those were involuntary, unconscious, and from a
disease of the faculty of language, and consequently followed
rules, and were never random during the whole of the long
period that I observed them, her^s being from a mere pro-
pensity, though involuntary and morbid, to do the same for
notoriety, and from no disease in the faculty of language^
proved an utter failure.

I awoke her by blowing in her face, but she had pre-
viously said she must be sent to sleep again at 10 p.m.

23rd. Sent to sleep as usual by Mr. W. last night. Be-
tween 10 p.m. and midnight, ten fits : between 6 a.m. and 8
a.m., five : between 8} a.m. and noon, ten. I awoke her
according to her directions ; and by blowing in her fece.

25th. Sent to sleep last night. Wish^ to be awakened
and sent to sleep in the evening at 9J, before the commence-
ment of the fits ; for last night she had two fits before she was
put to sleep, and they were consequently more severe. Be-
tween ten p.m. and midnight had ten fits; between 5 a.m. and

7 a.m. five ; and between dj^ p.m. and noon, ten. Says she
shall not wake in her senses, and that she is much better when
delirious. Directed me to give her bread and butter and
water, when awakened. I awoke her by blowing in her face.

26th. Sent to sleep last night as usual. Between 10 p.m.
and midnight, had eight fits ; between 5 a.m. and 6} a.m.,
four; and between 8^ a.m. and 11 a.m., eight. Directed to
be sent to sleep in the evening as usual. The fits^ according


Digitized by


Google


446 Dr. Emotion's Cases of

to her prediction, were thus reduced to twenty; hut they are
more severe, and the contortions of the trunk terrific.

27th. Sent to sleep at the usual time last night. Between
10 a.m. and 11^ p.m., had eight fits; between 3^ p.m. and 6
a.m., four ; and between 8 a.m. and noon, eight fits. Said
her head ached very badly; and its heat and the foidness of
tongue and her manner left no doubt of this. Before I woke
her, I enquired if she could not have one or two fits while I
was there, instead of having them all near together. She
replied, that, if I put some silver into her hand, she should
have a fit immediately, and one in the night. This, however,
was not done, as she wished to be awakened directly and have
a. bun and some water; but I first made her promise to have
only eighteen fits instead of twenty, before my arrival the next
day, so that two might occur in my presence. She desired
to be sent to sleep in the evening.

28th. Sent to sleep last night, as usual, by Mr. White.
Between 10 p.m. and midnight, eight fits ; between 7i a.m.
and 8 a.m. eight fits ; between 10 and noon, two fits ; so that
she had reserved two of the twenty for my presence at 4 p.m.,
and they then actually occurred. This was a remarkable
proof of the immense power of her imagination or will over
the real and involuntary occurrences of her disease.

March 1st. Between 10 p.m. and noon to-day, had her
twenty fits.

2nd. Between 6 and 6 p.m. yesterday, while awake in her
delirium, she suddenly heard her father call aloud to one
of the children, and, fancying he was going to beat it, she
screamed, exclaiming, " Oh, there's the devil ;" and imme-
diately had an unusually severe fit, followed by a rapid
succession, and a stupor between them. Mr. White failed to
se^ d her to sleep, and the fits went on. He attempted in
vp. > again at 9 p.m. and they were unabated till midnight,
wJi»^they ceaseid for two hours, but were afterwards violent
ar'.d incessant.

3rd. About 11 a.m. I was sent for, and she really appeared
sinking; the pulse was rapid and scarcely perceptible ; she
was quite pale, and could not raise her head in the least.
The fits continued, all the stages being as it were in minia-
ture, and without noise. After I had mesmerised her a con-
siderable time without eflfect, a perfect and unusually strong fit
took place; and, as soon as it was over, she actually had strength
to sit up in bed, and she smiled as usual, and then suddenly
fell back comatose, and in a minute or two awoke in the deli-
rium. I made passes again for a few minutes and she went
to sleep. I now asked what should be done, and she desired


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic Hysteria, ^c, cured by Mesmerism. 447

to be left asleep till 8 p.m. ; then to be awakened, have bread
and butter, and two aperient pills, and be sent to sleep
again. I enquired if it would not be better for me to wake
her now and give her the bread and butter and pills and then
send her to sleep. She assented, and it was done.

She declared that in consequence of this fright she should
be delirious longer, and be altogether thrown back ; — ^have
twenty.five fits daily for a week from this day, and twenty
daily another week ; though they would not be so severe.
She advised a blister below her left ear, to relieve the pain.
I awoke her, gave her the food and pills and sent her to
sleep again.

3rd. She had twenty-jive fits ; the first ten very severe.
Said in her sleep that the blister had greatly reUeved her, and
she must now have one behind the other ear. Was to be
awakened now and have bread and butter, and be sent to
sleep in the evening. I blew in her face, and she awoke in
the delirium, and ate the bread and butter.

4th. Monday. Sent to sleep last evening by Mr. White.
Has had twenty-five fits. Has had severe neuralgic pains
about the heart and stomach. Desires another blister to-
morrow behind the right ear, as the skin will be suflSciently
healed. I awoke her in delirium, and Mr. White sent her to
sleep in the evening.

5th. Has had severe .'^spasms at the heart,'' and says that
the twenty-five fits will not be reduced to twenty till Satur-
day the 9th. Has had twenty-five fits. She desired to be
awakened now, sent to sleep. at 9^ p.m., and awakened by
me at 4 p.m. to-morrow. I told her I must call at 1 p.m.
instead, and awake her. She replied that this would do,
but that then she must not be awidcened in the evening, but
left asleep till 4 p.m. the following day, and would be the
better for it; and that while asleep she would drink but not
eat, and might have jelly at intervals. I tried in vain to
awake her by outward passes on the eyebrows, but she in-
stantly awoke delirious by blowing in her face.

6th. Has had twenty-five fits; a blister applied at her
desire behind the left ear. I found her asleep at 1 p.m., and,
instead of waking her, left her to sleep till the next day, by
her own direction.

7th. 5 p.m. Has been asleep since the 5th, at 9} p.m.
Has had twenty-five fits. Says she must be awakened, and
left awake till to-morrow afternoon. I blew in her face and
she awoke delirious.

8th. Last night she went to sleep spontaneously a little
before 10, and at 10 £ot out of bed, and, one of her sisters

VOL. I. H H


Digitized by


Google


448 Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

taking her hand to prevent her going down stairs^ ahe waa
excited; and still more at finding the door locked. At length
she was allowed to have her own way^ and she proceeded
down stairs to the drawing-room floor^ to look at the dock^
in the dark ; for she could not bear the light, and the candles
had been put out She seated herself at the piano, and
seemed pleased to find her own again; played several tunes^
and shut it up, and went quietly to bed, and was instantly
seized with her fits, and by 4 p.m. to-day had her twenty-five.

She awoke delirious. I sent her to sleep ; and she de-
sired to be awakened at 8 p.m., have two pills, and again be
sent to sleep till to-morrow afternoon. I proposed waking
her and giving her the pills now, and she consented. I
therefore awoke her and gave her the pills, and sent her to
sleep again. She said, she slept ^'so much better'^ when I
sent her to sleep than when Mr. White did. I usually sent
her to sleep in a minute or two, Mr. Wood in longer time,
and Mr. White in not less than half an hour.

9th. At 10 last night the somnambulism occurred exactly
as the night before ; followed by the fits as soon as she re-
turned to bed. She had her twenty-five fits between 10| p.m.
yesterday and 4 p.m. to-day. At her desire I awoke her into
her delirium, by blowing in her fiEU^; and Mr. White sent
her to sleep in the evening.

10th. After being sent to sleep, she went, at 10 p.m.,
through all the acts of her somnambulism again, playing
for half an hour on the piano in the dark, and had the fits
as soon as she returned to bed. Has had twenty fits.* De*
sired to be awakened now, and sent to sleep in the evening.

11th. Monday. Every thing has occurred as before. She
has had but twenty fits.

12th. Has had twenty fits after being sent to sleep last
night; the somnambulism again took place. I awoke her by
blowing; and, as Mr. White could not attend in the evening, I
resolved to visit her myself, send her to sleep, and watch the
occurrence of her spontaneous somnambulism. Accordingly
at 9i p.m., I sent her to sleep, and, having left the room that
they might put some clothes on her, I returned. When the
clock struck 10, she left her bed, put on her shoes, went to a
closet in the next room and put on a flannel gown, pro-
ceeded to the drawing room, went to the dock, took munc
off the table, opened the piano, and sat down and played.
The room was now perfectly dark, so that we could not see
one another. She appeared to play from music, but knew it
by heart. If I held my hands between the music and her
* My visits were usually between 4 aod 5 p.m.


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic Hysteria, ^c. cttred by MesmeAsm. 449

eyes^ or turned the music upside down^ or substituted other
music^ she played just as well; so that, though perhaps in
true somnambulism, she was evidently pretending to possess
the power of seeing in the dark; and this, I doubt not, through
a morbid ungovernable propensity, of which she knew noth-
ing when in her natural state. I have seen in other patients
genuine somnambulism, in which very great deception was
attempted, through diseased and ungovernable propensities.
As soon as the clock struck lOJ, she left off, put the music
away, muttered some thing in displeasure about confusion,
for she might have heard us derange her music, knocked
against every thing in her way, and as soon as she reached
the stairs darted up them rapidly, took off and locked up her
dressing gown, knelt and said her prayers at the bed-side,
got into bed, covered her head with the clothes, and after
fetching some deep sighs was able to answer questions, as
when in the mesmeric deep. In a few minutes the fits began,
and were longer and more terrific than I had ever seen them,
and several additional actions took place between the convul-
sive fits, at the end of the fits of rigidity, after she had sat
up and pushed her head forwards. One of the new actions
consisted in looking upwards with heavenly smiles, and clasp-
ing her hands together, as if praying; another was crossing
her hands upon her bosom, and looking upwards as if in holy
hope and submission ; another was the expression of attentive
and delighted listening.

From that time forward, this addition to the fits of ri-
gidity took place thirty or forty times a day ; for the fits
of rigidity were constantly occurring, and thought nothing
of, on account of the horrible nature of the convulsive fits.
These beautiful ecstatic fits began with her arms suddenly
extending and her hands becoming closed: then she rose
into a sitting position in her bed ; then pushed her head
forward, stared> and protruded her lips; and, as soon as
this, the " stiff fit'' had gone so far, instead of its terminating
as usual, she assumed all the attitudes of holy rapture :
her hands clasped, or on her bosom, or pointing to the skies ;
her head and shoulders inclined first in this Erection, then
in that ; and her eyes looking upwards in the successive direc-
tions with a beauty of expression unsurpassed by the paint-
ings of Raphael and all other Italian masters. Her counte-
nance became exquisitely beautiful on these occasions. After
going through a series of those attitudes and expressions in
8ilence,for two or three minutes, she always sunk back sense-
less, and then went into her sleep-waking or delirium, which-
ever was present when the fit began.

HH 2


Digitized by


Google


450 'Dr. EUiotson's Cases of

These fits of ecstasy were so beautiful^ that I took hun-
dreds of persons to witness them^ through the kind permis-
sion of the parents. The Duke of Marlborough requested me
to allow him to take Mr. Shield who could not comprehend
the phenomena of the Okeys^ never having seen anything of
the kind before : but he allowed that the state was real^ and
assured me that " not an iota of scepticism now remained in
his mind.^' No one will ever forget her appearance.

Instead of copying my daily report, I will now sum-
marily state that everything continued in this way. I
awoke her daily into delirium in the afternoon, and Mr.
White sent her to sleep-waking in the evening. The terrific
convulsive fits and their bowlings declined in the exact man-
ner she had predicted. She walked in her sleep for half an
hour every night ; and, besides playing the piano, &c., would
go all over the house rapidly, from the garrets to the cellars.
We repeated the experiment of changing the music while she
was playing, and proved again that she only appeared to play
from the book : and, on talking to her about it in the mes-
meric sleep-waking, she said that she had found the music all
out of place, that Mr. Symes had done it (which was ve^
true), that part of one song was put within another, and
that, when I held my hand before her eyes, she was playing
from memory.

We once altered the striking clock, and she rose from her
bed and returned according to it, and not to the real time.
However, the clocks were ever after prevented from striking,
and yet she always rose exactly at ten.

On the 18th, I was sent for, at 11 a.m., as she appeared
dying. Her pulse could scarcely be felt, and she was sense-
less, pale, and cold. I really feared she was dying. Her
mouth was open, the jaw rigid, her tongue doubled upon itself.
I placed a finger on each side of the jaw and each side of the
tongue, and restored them : she fetched a few sighs, her head
fell still more to one side, and she appeared now in her usual
mesmeric sleep, and answered me. She said that she had
come to her senses spontaneously about midnight while
asleep, and from that time had felt exhausted. Besides this,
the two fits which usually occur between 3 and 4 a.m., took
place before midnight, so that she had no time to recover
from one before the other seized her. She wished me to
make her delirious, by putting silver and quicksilver in her
hands ; and I did. She at once began to feel stronger.

She fell into the same exhaustion early in the morning of
March 22nd.

On the 19th, she wished me to bring her to her senses by


Digitized by


Google


Epileptic Hysteria, §•(?., cured by Mesmerism. 451

patting iron and nickel into her hands, and then blowing in
her face. This succeeded, — of coarse from fancy ; and she re-
cognized all her family, but felt exhausted. We noticed
about March 24th that the convulsive fits changed, so that
she howled, barked and laughed in the same fit; whereas
previously she never laughed in the fits in which she made
those noises.

The exquisitely beautiful expressions of holy rapture after
the stiff fits became less earnest and vivid : and this kind of fit
was now evidently fading away more and more. The convulsive
fits were less severe, and the delirium less incoherent ; and in
it she began to recognize her family for a few moments at a
time, and ceased to talk of the apparition, and denied having
ever seen or spoken of such a thing; and in her deUrium
would go down to tea with her mother, whom, however, ex-
cept for a few moments together, she still did not recognize,
but called Mrs. Smith.

On April the 1st, she was frightened again, and pre-
dicted that the diminution of the fits would be thrown back
^ week, and their cessation retarded a week ; and this proved
true.

At one time, her left arm and hand continued twitching
for a week or two : at another, the barking and laughing
ceased, again to occur together, and took place always alter-
nately.

On the 9th of April, on account of great uneasiness of
her left half, from the shoulder to the foot, she directed me
to send her to sleep, and leave her asleep, undisturbed, for a
whok week, half a tea-spoonful of jelly being given her every
half-hour; and this was done. No call of nature disturbed
her for the first five days, — ^not till the sixth; when she
seemed in pain, but could not be awakened, and nature
reUeved her in her comatose state. The uneasiness for which
I sent her to sleep had entirely ceased.

When the fits were reduced to five, they continued to
come in this number daily.

She had no fits of any kind after May the 17th. Her
recovery on the 18th was amazing. She had predicted that
her last fit would occur at midnight on the 17th, and she
should then come to her senses in an hour or two.

The family were all up and prepared : but, as she went
into a quiet sleep after the midnight fit, her parents went to
bed ; two of her sisters and her two nurses sat up, but, being
very tired, they all went to sleep. About 4 a.m. one of them
awoke and saw her standing in the room, looking at them all
in surprise and laughing to see them asleep. She had put


Digitized by


Google


452 Dr. ElUotsan's Case of

on some of the clothes of one of her sisters in mistake that
lay on a chair. She ate the breakfast prepared for her^ having
walked down stairs alone ; though the day before when in her
senses she was too weak to feed herself; played the piano
half an hour^ and slept from 1 p.m. to 2 p.m..

She walked every night at midnight exactly for an hoor^
talking to her sister, playing the piano, and singing if her
sister wished it, during a twelvemonth, — ^till the following
18th of May, 1839. Then irregularly, two or three times a
week, but at the same hour and for an hour, and was violent
if resisted, and sometimes if not resisted. She sang four
songs only in her somnambulism after the fits had ceased;
and never has been able to remember them in her natural
state, though repeatedly requested by a sister to whom she is
greatly attached: and where she learnt them nobody can
imagine, or where they are to be found. She was taken to
reside at a short distance from town in May, 1841, and then
always walked out into the garden with nothing but her bed-
clothes — ^not even slippers, and never caught cold. At length
she walked in her sleep on Saturdays only. In order V>
arrest this, I went to see her, sent her to sleep, and enquirdl
how I could cure her somnambulism. She instructed me to
send her to sleep for five minutes in the afternoon for three
Saturdays, and declared she should then walk no more. I
did so, and on the third Saturday night she did not rise till
five minutes before two, walked but twice across the room,
returned to bed, became senseless for a short time, as was
invariably the case in all her sleep-wakings, and, on recover-
ing from fainting, was asleep, and has never walked in her
sleep since.

She has had no retvm of her complaint, but has sometimes
had a pain of the left side of the head, requiring blisters
behind the ears, and ending with a violent fit of sneezing and a
sudden profuse discharge from the left nostril for half an hour,
generally amounting to half a pint, and once last summer to
a pint, with a discharge for the same time from the left ear.

She is as susceptible as ever ; and, if she is poorly at any
time, I mesmerise her and allow her to sleep a longer or
shorter time with the best efiect.

This case, though so remarkable, was calculated to lead an
inexperienced mesmerist into great error. After a short time
it puzzled me completely. I saw certain mesmeric phenomena,
such as I had witnessed in others, truly genuine : I saw that
the terrific fits, the beautiful ecstatic expression of holy rap-
ture, the deHriuro, the foul and swollen toneue, the rapid
pulse and hot head, and the distinct states of sleep-waking.


Digitized by


Google


Jumpbig Fits cured by Mesmerism. 453

delirium^ and natural condition^ were real. But I saw a strong
propensity to excite wonder and admiration^ and an astonish-
ing influence from fancy which might perhaps explain all
her predictions^ with dear attempts at deception^ — all no
doubt the result of disease^ sometimes perhaps operating al-
most without her knowledge, at any rate irresistible and
insane phenomena, of which in her natural state she has
been up to this moment perfectly ignorant. But still they
took place, and confounded the case, and were likely to lead
into great error the convinced mesmerist on the one hand
and the sceptic on the other. The former might fancy mes-
merism and truth where there were none, and the latter re-
ject both altogether. The influence of mesmerism in pro-
curing repose and thus controlling the disease, and the power
which it gave me over her imagination, were an incalculable
advantage, and led to a speedy termination what might have
continued in some degree for years.

IV. Extraordinary Fits of Jumping and Clapping of Hands,
for several weeks, every spring and autumn.

In March, 1889, while visiting the patient whose case I
have just described, I one day met a lady, who informed me
that a poor woman in the neighbourhood had been severely
afflicted with very strange fits for many years, and I ofiered
to go and see her.

On going to No. 8, Swinton-street, Gra/s-inn-road, I
found a truly respectable family named Grimes, who had
formerly lived at Yeovil, in Scmiersetshire. The daughter,
Mary, was a plain old-fashioned person, unmarried, and
thirty years old.

When she was 19, her father, a quiet inoffensive man, was
cheated by his partner, and ruined. This daughter, the eldest
of eight children, took it so to heart, that, for five months,
she could hardly sleep, but used to get out of bed and go to
the window and say, " There goes the rogue that took a false
oath against father ;'^ and could not bear to be left alone. She
then grew very languid, indisposed to move, and sighed greatly
for a week; next began to feel eveiy evening a pressure in
the throat ; then came also an inability to spesk, — " a spasm
of the tongue ;'* and she began ta move her arms up and
down, and breathed fast, and her jaw chattered. She always
went to the window at the time, possibly fix>m the idea of
the man out of doors haunting her. In a few minutes she
would be calm, and be able to speak, and the spasms gradu-
aUy declined in the manner they had gradually come on : and


Digitized by


Google


454 Dr. ElHotsan's Case of

then they would begin again^ and so on for a considerable
time.

This was in January, 1828; and the attacks lasted six
hours every night for 10 days.

In October they returned with increased violence, and
again in March ; and had returned at those two seasons ever
since, beginning earlier and earlier and ending later and
later, taking place with increasing violence, and lasting at
length about six weeks. But they continued last autumn
later than ever before, and have now been on her four
weeks, and are in full violence and length.

Their long-established course was this. She began to
gape and yawn about three or four o^clock, and turn her
head and body about, and sigh, and feel very languid, cross,
and miserable, unwilling to talk and be with others. As the
evening proceeded, she began to writhe more and breathe
more quickly, and become silent, and throw her arms not
only up and down as at first, but all round herself, and
throw her legs about. She was worse at six, and about
nine the symptoms became intense. She would begin to
pant violently, throw her arms fix)m side to side and up
and down violently, jiunp violently, stamp violently, clap
her hands violently, swaying her body from side to side^
and turning round to one side and the other, and making
a sort of loud, hoarse, grunting, hollow expirations, remind-
ing me of the noise made by paviors in dropping their
wooden rammer on a stone. She drew her breath through
her teeth and grinned, She always involuntarily made to-
wards a chair, and, if she could not, would fall on the ground ;
and she regularly came upon the chair as she descended from
her jumping, and the bumping caused her to be very black
and blue, swollen and tender, before the season of her attack
was over. The violence was such that, though the wooden
chair placed for her was boarded below in all ways to strengthen
it, she in time had broken four to pieces ; and broke the floor
of the room into the rafters in two different houses, and one
day, being suddenly seized in an upper room, the ceiUng of
the room below was shaken down. Therefore in the afternoon
she always went into the ground-floor to have the fit.

The clapping of the hands was such, that they bled, and
she was obliged to put on two pairs of thick gloves^ when
the violence was beginning. If the ceiling was low, she would
strike it with her hands, as she threw them up as well as
about. An attempt to hold her made her worse, and sent
the blood to the head and caused great suffering ; '^ the more
vent, the better she felt.'^ This may suggest the propriety of


Digitized by


Google


Jumping Fits cured by Mesmerism. 455

not restraining people in convulsions^ l)ut allowing the ner-
vous excitement to expend itself without aggravation^ and only
taking care that they do not hurt themselves. If she lay
dowD; a sense of choking compelled her to rise. Sometimes
she struck the floor with her hands ; and she would turn
about^ and quite round and back again. They always placed
a thick well-wadded piece of carpet before the chair for her
to jump upon. In order to keep her at such a distance from
the wall that she could not hurt herself^ they always put
something around her waist, with a long loop, by which they
could hold, and some of the family, in the violent stage of
the paroxysm, stood near her thus to steady her ; and she
felt this " a great help.''

The violence continued till 11 p.m., and then the attack
gradually declined, and she at length gaped and sighed, and
was able to go to bed at half-past twelve.

I went in the evening to witness the attack, and its
strangeness and violence surpassed all my expectations. She
seemed to suffer greatly before it was at all violent; but, at
the height, the sight was awful.

She jumped forty or fifty times, clapping, twisting, stamp-
ing, &c., and panting; and looking wild and agonized : then
she was quiet for a few minutes, not however speaking, and
began again. Two years ago, she jumped but three times in
each division of the fit ; then nine ; then twenty-four ; and at
last, this season, fifty times. Originally, too, before the fit be-
gan, she was delirious, and ran about the house for a short time.

She was always conscious of everything. She could not
bear the weight of a bonnet on her head at any time.

The parents had been at a very great expense. She was at
first attended in vain by Mr. Timpkins, and afterwards also by
Dr. Pinkfield of Yeo^. They then came to London, and
she was under Dr. Watson in the Middlesex Hospital, and
discharged incurable ; under Dr. Stroud at the North Lon-
don Dispensary for three or four years; and under others,
who all pronounced her incurable. She was seen by upwards
of forty different practitioners.

Dr. Watson shaved her head and electrified her. Under
the others she was bled in the arm twenty-five times ; cupped
SEVENTEEN timcs, had TWO setons, three issties, leeches and
blisters without number, and physic without end. She
was in bed for seventeen days in a state of salivation. One
practitioner attended her for a year and gave her carbonate of
iron largely, and made her wear bags of steel filings on her
back and feet^ and silk stockings and gloves : but the filings
increased her sufferings when she jumped.


Digitized by


Google


456 Dr. EUiotsar^s Case qf

The female function once ceased for six years, while she
was bled and cupped : but its return did her no good.

All attempts at remedy had been given up. I told them
that I could not say whether mesmerism woula cure her ; but
I should be happy to try.

I requested Mr. Wood to mesmerise her : but the period
for the fits to decline was now arriying, and great evidence of
benefit could hardly be expected. However, if she was mes-
merised in an attack, it presently became less violent. EUz.
Okey, who was a small feeble girl, mesmerised her once in the
attack, and the mitigation was very great during the process.
Mr. Wood and mysdf mesmerised her on April 11th, in the
evening, in the violence of the attack ; and she suffered less
in it, and it lasted two hours less than usual, so that she was
able to go to bed at eleven, and she slept better in the night.
She was mesmerised for half an hour dmly, early in the after-
noon, for three weeks, when the fits as usual ceased in April.

In October, 1839, as soon as the attacks began, mesme-
rism was practised for half an hour daily, early in the af-
ternoon.

Instead of increasing, as they had done up to the first day
of mesmerisation, the fits went off in a fortnight, and she was
mesmerised for a month longer. She never once jumped in
the fits after the mesmerism was begun for the season.

In March, 1840, when the warnings of the attack b^an,
she was mesmerised daily for half an hour. The fits, kuiead
of increaring, went off. She was mesmerised daily for fourteen
days, with one exception, feeling the worse for diat omission;
and then every other day for a month, and was so much bet-
ter that she did not miss the mesmerism on the blank days.

October 1840. The fits hardly came on. She was mes-
merised seven times during a month.

She has to this hour (Dec. 28, 1843), never had the least
return. Not a particle of medicine was given.

The only sensible effects were great sleepiness, and an
inability or strong disinclination to move or speak, although
she was conscious of eveiy thing. She was sleepy two hours
afterwards also ; and then felt perfectly well. Indeed,
mesmerism always '' strengthened and composed^' her, even
after all signs of the attacks had ceased, — it made her '' so
easy and comfortable.'' Formerly she was so nervous that she
was confined at home most days in the winter; but now
goes out fearlessly in all weathers ; and I saw her to-day in
perfect health.

This case bears a relation to what has been called the
leaping ague ; and solitary instances of a similar kind may


Digitized by


Google


Hysterical EpUepsy cured by Mesmerism. 457

be found in the 5th and 7th vdumes of the Transactions of
the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society of London. The
disease is no doubt an inordinate and irresistible spontaneous
excitement of the portions of the nervous system that pro-
duce the respective kinds of movement witnessed: just as
murderous or thievish monomania is an inordinate and ir-
resistible spontaneous excitement of the cerebral organs of
the disposition to violence and of the love of property.

V. Hysterical Epilepsy.

In December, 1889, I was requested by Mr. Hallion, of
Warren Street, to see a young lady, named Spong, residing
at 31, High-street, Camden Town.

She was sixteen years old, and lying on her back upon a
machine, on account of a curvature of her spine, and had
severe epileptic fits, with some symptoms of Hysteria.

She had enjoyed good health till her thirteenth year, when,
in the spring of 1886, she frequently fainted, and had a pain
in the left side, and her spine became curved. In November
of the same year, the faintings changed to epileptic fits.
She was placed upon her back on an apparatus, under the
care of Mr. Thornber. But the epileptic fits were so violent
that the cure was prevented, and Mr. Thornber wished to give
up the case. She required five people to hold her, and in
spite of them all would turn round on her face. Mr. Carter,
now of Beading, and then Mr. Hallion, mesmerised her twice
a week for six months.

Her fits continued as frequent as before, but were less
violent, so that she did not require holding, and was not ex-
hausted, as previously, on coming out of them. She fell asleep
when mesmerised for a quarter of an hour.

I mesmerised her in December, 1889, and she went to
sleep the first time. I spoke to her and she answered me,
and proved to be in the deeper sleep-waking, for she knew me
and knew she was asleep.

I asked whether I should be able to cure her.

^'Yes.''

I enquired when.

'* In four months.^'

Her attacks were numerous and in rapid succession when
they came upon her. Originally they came every other day
for six months ; then once a week, and for six months on a
Tuesday, at the same hour; then once a fortnight for the
last two years. She had taken medicine all along, but in
vain. Her face was always so swollen and red the next day
that she could not be seen.


Digitized by


Google


458 Dr.ElUotson's Cases of

She predicted to me not only the period of their cessation^
but the day and hour of each attack. She said the next
would be on the Thursday^ and the mother could scarcely
believe her senses when she saw them come on that day.
They returned about once a fortnight, on no regular day or
hour; but always as she foretold to me in the mesmeric sleep-
waking.

She opened her eyes at my bidding ; but no attempt at
tractive or other experiments succeeded; and no other powers
were developed.

I mesmerised her twice a week for a month ; and then
only once a fortnight, — ^when the attack was expected, during
the attack, and after it was over. Mr. Hallion also, however^
mesmerised her always twice a week.

She had nine fits every attack, except the last, and then
she had only one, exactly as she had predicted.

Trusting to her prediction, I discontinued the mesmerism
when the four months were expired, and the disease has never
returned.

I received the following note from Mr. Hallion at the

beginning of this year : —

" My dear Sir,—

** I feel confident you will derive great pleasure in seeing an old
patient of our's (torn Camden Town, Miss Spong, wlio you may recollect
was perfectly cured of epilepsy by mesmerism. Her spinal complaint is
now perfectly well also. I send her to yoa merehf to shew herself, as
another proof of the efficacy of an agent which has been so much calum-
niated.

** I hope you are quite well ; and remaim ever,

" My dear Sir,

"Yours faithfully,
64, Warren St., Fitzroy Sq., " Johm H. Hallion."

Feb. 14th, 1843.

I saw her to day (Dec. 23) in perfect health.

I must bestow the same praise upon Mr. Hallion and Mr.
Carter that I did upon Mr. White.

She was always much stronger after mesmerisation : and,
when I did it, she went to sleep sooner, and was quiet in the
fits, the convulsions working only and not moving any part
of her from its situation.

She lay on her back for the spinal complaint no longer
than the following September.

Her gratitude, like that of nearly all the patients who
have been cured, knows no bounds.

VI. Epilepsy.
A friend in Upper Harley Street requested me to see the
nephew of her housekeeper, as he was troubled with fits;


Digitized by


Google


Epilepsy cured by Mesmerism, 459

and the youth, William Hodges, aged 19, a tailor, of 10
South Molton-street, came to me May 19th, 1841.

Three months previously he fell upon his left side on the
ice, and, though his head was not struck, it was so shaken
that he does not know how he got home, remembering noth-
ing between the fall and his finding himself at home. As
soon as he found himself at home, he had repeated fits, de-
cidedly epileptic, so that many men could scarcely restrain
him ; and in four hours he was bled, and had no more fits for
a day or two. But afterwards the least noise startled him,
and caused a fit, even the sudden cough of a child. They
were very frequent, and each left him weak for an hour.

That I might judge of their present frequency, I enquired
how many had occurred this month, and foimd that there had
been one on the 2nd, the 8th, the 14th, and two on the 15th.

I requested Mr. Wood to mesmerise him for me, and he
was mesmerised for half an hour daily, except on Sundays,

He had no fit for a fortnight after the mesmerism was
begun. He then was frightened by a person behind him say-
ing he would be run over, felt ill, — " felt the fits in him,^^ but
had no fit till evening, when, going up stairs in the dark, a
cat jumped out and he was instantly seized with a paroxysm.
It was very severe — stronger and longer than usual, and he
tried to bite in it; and felt ill and stupid all night, and did
not sleep.

He had no fit again till the second Sunday after this ; and
had another on the foUotving Sunday. As they probably oc-
curred from the omission of the mesmerism on Sundays, he
was afterwards mesmerised every day till the middle of Au-
gust, and he has never had a return to this hour, though very
often frightened enough to occasion them had any predisposition
been left. He got married in August, 1842, and I saw him
in good health to-day (December 24th).

The only sensible effect was an occasional drowsiness
during the process, and invariably after it. Mr. Symes mes-
merised him for Mr. Wood during a fortnight in the middle
of the time, and he felt always very much more drowsy when
Mr. Symes mesmerised him.


I prefixed to this article an ' elegant extract' from Dr.
James Johnson. I close it with the following letter.

"S .8 Dec. 15th, 1843.

« Sir,—

'^ Will you excuse the liberty I take as a stranger in thus trespassing on
your time.

'* I have resided in this town as a general practitioner for the last three
and twenty years, and have been a doubter as to the truth of phrenology


Digitized by


google


460 Mr. IhibWs Cases of

and totally incredulous as to mesmerism ; entertaining such opinions, I haye
considered it waste of time to devote any of that (to me) precious article,
in gaining information which I ought to have obtained before I came to such
a conclusion, which I now much regret ; but which is not to be wondered
at when I say that I hare read Dr. Johnson's Reriew for many years, ia
which the subject is not only treated with ridicule but denounced as un-
worthy the notice of a cultivated mind« The last week has made a strange
revolution in my feelings, having witnessed some most extraordinary phe-
nomena elicited on persons by a Mr. Brown, ^of whom I know nothing,)
in which he appears to excite the phrenological organs into action after
having placed the person into apparently an unconscious state. But as this
is done on a young woman who travels with him, it is liable to the greatest
suspicion, and many persons openly state it to be an imposture. But having
seen some very winderjul cases in my own house and on my own servants,
where there could not possibly be any collusion, and having produced similar
results by my own influence, I am anxious to understand the matter better,
but feel myself like a ship at sea without a rudder. May I then beg the
favour (and to apologize for the liberty I take) to request an answer to this
communication, giving me jfMir advice as to the best means of acquiring in-
formation on the subject, both as to the phrenology and mesmerism, either
in your works or those of any other author. And I am particularly anxious
to know your opinion as to mesmerism as a curative means, and also on
phreno-mesmerism.

'' Your answer (at your perfect convenience)
" Will confer a great favour on. Sir,

" Your very obedient servant,
« To Dr. ElUotson." « W— . B— . 8— •

I eyeiy week receive similar letters from all parts of the
united kingdom. But I trust the journalists will stand out
a Uttle longer for our amusement.

John Elliotson.
37, Conduit Street, Hanover Square,
December 26th, 1843.


VIII. Mr. Tubbs^s Cases of Cures of various Diseases by
Mesmerism.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sir, — Being in London a short time since with a young
gentleman to consult Dr. Elliotson respecting the mesmeric
treatment of Epileptic fits, which he had been subject to for
five years, I mentioned a few cases which had come under
my observation, proving the reality and efficacy of mesmerism
in the treatment of many diseases. The Doctor thinking them
worthy of insertion in some mesmeric publication, I beg to
forward the enclosed notes of the cases for an early insertion
in 7%e Zoist, and shall be happy to furnish any other interest-
ing ones that I may meet with during my practice.
I remain, yours respectfully,

W. J. Ttbbs.
Upwell Isle, Cambridgshire,
September 12th, 1843.


Digitized by


Google


Various Diseases cuped by Mesmerism. 461

I. Delirium from grief cured in a few hours by Mesmerism,
Abraham Pearson^ a shoemaker^ aged 4a7, residing in the

parish of Outwell, left his home at 5 o'clock a.m. on the 20th of
June^ 1843, to go for his daughter, a distance of eight miles,
to assist her mother in making mourning, having just lost
two children with scarlet fever. The poor man, who was
doatingly fond of his children, had not slept during the pre-
vious night, and his grief prevented him from taking break-
fast. On Ins return with his daughter, the day being exceed-
ingly warm, he felt exhausted and stopped at a public house,
at Lod Bridge, drank off a pint of beer, and immediately
proceeded on his journey. When within three or four miles
of his home, he suddenly fell down complaining of violent
pain in his back. A cart was procured and two men had the
greatest difficulty to keep him quiet. He was brought to my
surgery at about 5 o'clock p.m. in a state of delirium. His pulse
was full and rapid, his breathing hurried, and he was unable
to articulate or swallow. Considering this a good case for
mesmerism, I requested that he might be taken home, and
promised to attend upon him as soon as I could leave the
patients then waiting to consult me. At 8 o'clock I accord-
ingly visited Pearson at his own house. On my entering
his chamber, there were three men holding him in bed. His
countenance was flushed; there was a general tremor of the
body, a fixed eye, and still a bounding pulse. I requested
that only one person (his son) might be present ; took my
place on the side of the bed, and commenced mesmerising
him by the thumbs, and aiterwards making passes from
the vertex downwards. I had made but very few passes,
when the patient suddenly fell backwards with his eyelids
closed. I remained magnetizing him for a few minutes, and
then left him, requesting the son to bring me intelligence of
his father at 10 o'clock.

At 10 o'clock the son came, and stated that his father had
not moved since I left him, and was still asleep. At 12
o'clock I went down and found him asleep, and he remained
so until 9 o'clock the following morning, when he was awak-
ened by some one entering his bed-room. I called at about
11 o'clock a.m. : found him rational, and as cheerful as one
could expect under the circumstances : the only uncomfort-
able feeling remaining was a stiffness in his neck and limbs,
which I soon removed by transverse passes and blowing on
the parts.

II. Muscular pain removed in a few minutes by Mesmerism.
Widow Sharp, aged 56, a shopkeeper at Outwell, went


Digitized by


Google


462 Mr. Tubbs^s Cases of

to the river for a pail of water on the 20th of July, 1843,
and on raising the pail sprained her back. She complained
of much pain down the left leg in the evening, and the fol-
lowing day was unable to leave her bed.

Jidy 23rd. Pain much the same ; managed to sit up, but
was unable to walk without excruciating pain in the loins
and leg, and great numbness was felt in those parts.

When I called, the patient was in the recumbent posture,
and had not been able to make her bed for three days. My
patient was perfectly ignorant of mesmerism. Standing be-
hind her, I commenced operating by making passes down the
spine ; when she instantly called out, " Oh ! what are you
doing V^ I then made passes down the leg, when she said
the pain was then in the leg. Transverse passes were now
made, and she said all pain was gone. She instantly got up,
walked to the door, and a few hours after called upon several
neighbours who had visited her in the morning. She is quite
well, and has never felt any pain since.

III. Chronic Rheumatismcuredinthree hours by Mesmerism.

George Fisher, about 35 years of age, labourer, living in
a small dley, in Outwell, had been the subject of rheumatism
for the last seven weeks, fix)m entering a newly-built cottage.
He applied to me on the 3rd of August, 1843, to be mes-
merised. When he called, three gentlemen were taking their
wine with me. I was leaving the room for the purpose of ope-
rating, when my friends urged me to allow the man to be
mesmerised in their presence. The poor man soon made his
appearance in the dining-room, moving slowly, bearing on
two crutches, and his countenance man^esting much pain.

I had never mesmerised him before, but immediately
commenced in the presence of my friends, one of whom was
a surgeon, and all three sceptics, by applying the ends of
my thumbs to those of the patient, and looking steadily in
his eyes. It was twenty minutes before he fell into the mes-
meric state. I attracted his legs some distance from the
ground, then by pointing to the pit of the stomach attracted
him from his chair, and he followed me round the room.

I next tried to excite the phrenological organs. The first
I touched was Combativeness ; when he sprung from his
chair and commenced fighting. I asked him what he was
thinking about ? (remember, I suggested nothing). He re-
pUed, " He deserves it, and I would give him it." Tune and
Language being excited, he sang. Wit, Imitation, and Self-
esteem were all elicited in the most satisfactory manner pos-
sible.


Digitized by


Google


Various Diseases cured by Mesmerism, 463

While I was shewing the attractive power, I stepped
backwards, and made a few darting movements towards my
patient, and threw him backwards into one of the gentle-
men^s arms, and then again attracted him. I also stiffened
the arms and legs at the wish of any present, and by blow-
ing on the rigid limb instantiy restored it to its natural state.
My friends now being perfectly convinced of the reality of
mesmerism, resumed their seats, while I allowed my patient
to remain in the unconscious state.

At the expiration of two hours, I demesmerised him. He
got up, rubbed his eyes, and walked up and down the room
without assistance. On the gentlemen present conversing
with him, he was ignorant of what had passed. All that he
remembered was, that he came into the room with crutches,
and that now he could walk without them. He left one
crutch in my surgery, and the other he whirled in his hand in
triumph on his way home. He has remained perfectly well
ever since.

I have tried to operate on him three times since, but have
failed to produce any mesmeric effects. Mr. H. Brooks being
in the neighbourhood lecturing, he tried, but could not affect
him.

For the accuracy of the above statement, I beg you to
refer to the three gentlemen who were present at this in-
teresting case: — Mr. John Peck, Farmer; Mr. Danford,
Surgeon; both of Pason Drove, near Wisbech: and Mr.
Stanton, Grove Academy, Wisbech, St. Mary^s, Tolomon's
Drove.

We have been favoured with some other interesting cases
treated by Mr. Tubbs, which want of space will prevent us
from inserting at length.

In one young woman he states that he established com-
munity of taste and feeling, &;c., during the mesmeric sleep-
waking.

In a case of paralysis of the nerves of sensation and of
motion in a man about seven feet high and weighing about
17i sioney he succeeded in restoring sensation in the legs by
means of mesmerism, after cupping, moxas, blisters, strych-
nine, &c. £cc., had failed ; but he had not yet succeeded in
restoring motion.

A boy, W. Strickell, aged 8 years, of Outwell, Norfolk,
was seized, on the 8th of November, with head-ache, fever,
&c., from getting his feet wet. On the 17th of November
he was attacked with total loss of power and sensation, ac-
companied by coldness of the lower extremities, and contrac-

VOL. I. II


Digitized by


Google


464 Mr. Brindley^s Cases cf

tion of the ham-strings. "He is like a babe," said his
mother, " the use of his legs is quite gone." After being
mesmerised for forty minutes he could walk, though with a
tottering motion. The following day he was operated upon
for half an hour ; and on the day after refused to be mes-
merised again, as he was quite well. He has never had any
relapse.

Mr. T. says, " I have at this time two cases of wry-neck ;
one of which is gradually getting well after seven weeks mes-
meric treatment. In the other case I have not yet done any
good. I cured one case in two sittings ; the rigid stemo-
deido-mastoid muscle becoming so relaxed during the mes-
meric sleep, that I could bring the head down to the opposite
shoulder : and it remained permanently cured after the se-
cond operation I beg to add, that I have had most

unequivocal evidence of the truth of the phrenological organs
being acted upon ; particulars of which I will give you at
some future time.."

The following extract is taken from a Stamford paper : —
" At the request of many families resident at Wisbech,
St. Mary^s, and the neighbourhood, a lecture was delivered
here on Thursday evening, the 10th inst., on Mesmerism
and Phreno-Magnetism, by W. T. Tubbs, Esq., Surgeon, of
Upwell. The proofs submitted were satisfactory and con-
clusive. The lecturer succeeded with two subjects in acting
upon the organs without contact, and readily brought to an
unconscious state several individuals present who were anxious
to test the operator's powers. Bepeated rounds of applause
were elicited from a respectable and crowded audience ; and
the most sceptical were compelled to admit the important
claims of a science which quackery and prejudice have too
often succeeded in rendering ridiculous. — (A new corre-
spondent,/*


IX. Mr. Brindley^s Cures of various Diseases and Case of
apparent Clairvoyance.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Stourbridge, Nov. llth, 1843.

Sir, — Having been led to believe by Dr. Elliotson and

Mr. Townshend that the following cases, attested as they are

by respectable parties, will be acceptable to you, I have great


Digitized by


Google


Various Diseases cured by Mesmerism. 465

pleasure in sending them to you for insertion in ITie Zoist, if
you deem them worthy a place in its valuable pages.
I have the honour to be, Sir,

Your very obedient servant,

T. B. Bbindley.


I. Cure of Affection of the Heart of seven years standing.

Henrietta Price, Windmill Street, Stourbridge, aged 22,
has suffered from affection of the heart for seven years. She
has been under the medical treatment of one or other of the
foUowing gentlemen during that period, none of whom could
effect her ciure : — Dr. Badley, Dudley ; Dr. Blackinstone,
Birmingham; Dr. Horton, Bromsgrove; Dr. Baker, Bir-
mingham ; Dr. Dudley, and most of the medical gentlemen
of Stourbridge. At length by the kindness of James Foster,
Esq., of Stourton Castle, she was admitted into the Bir-
mingham Hospital, where she remained eleven weeks, at the
expiration of which period she was pronounced incurable.
She left the hospital, and for two years has been unable to
work, and had remained up to the 8th of September, 1843,
in the same afSicted condition. Her disease was pronounced
to be an enlargement of the heart. On the day before men-
tioned, I visited her for the first time. I found her suffering
intense pain, and could discern through her dress the violent
palpitations of her heart. On placing my hand to her left
side, I discovered a large swelling, which I imagine was occa-
sioned by the great pain she suffered. I was informed by the
girFs mother, that if she walked but a very little distance,
the palpitations became so violent that she was ready to fall
to the earth with exhaustion. Some one always accompanied
her up stairs for the same reason. The girl being quite
anxious to see what mesmerism would do for her, I magne-
tized her on my first visit, viz., the 8th of September. She
was sent into the coma in three minutes. While in this state
— after demagnetizing Hearing and exciting Language — I
said to her, "Henrietta, how do you feel ?'^ To which she
replied, " Very bad.^' " Where are you bad ?" " My heart.
Sir." ''Indeed, Tm very sorry for that." ''Are you?"
"Yes, indeed I am." "You are very kind." "What do
you think I had better do at your heart ?" " Please to pass
your hand over it." This was exactly what I had intended
to do, it being recommended by Teste and others. Judge
my surprise therefore to hear this method recommended,
when I had said nothing to her beforehand about the matter.
I passed my hand over her side and manipulated upon it for


Digitized by


Google


466 Mr. Brindley'9 Cases of

about five minutes^ when the palpitations subsided^ and her
heart beat cabnly. I then placed my hand to her side^ and
the pain passed away. When I restored her she was quite
free from pain and palpitation. I continued to mesmerise
her nearly every day till the 17th of September, when the
swelling was quite gone and has not since returned. On that
day she walked to Bellbroughton and back, a distance of ten
miles, without feeling any ill eflfects from the journey. I
have mesmerised her every day since, till the middle of Oc-
tober, and she is now free from pain, palpitation, and swell-
ing at her side, and is quite well in every respect. This case
has excited great interest about mesmerism in Stourbridge,
as the girl is known by half the inhabitants to have been a
great suJBferer for many years.


II. Cure of Affection of the Nervous System and General
DebiUiy, of twelve months standing, at Clent, near Stourbridge.

" I hereby certify that Mr. T. B. Brindley, of Stourbridge,
author of "The Omnipotence of the Deity,'' "The Evening
Walk,'' " Leisure Hours," &c. &c., has in the course of one
fortnight, cured me by mesmerism alone of a diseased brain,
and general debility, of twelve months standing. During
which time several medical men have attended me, and failed
to cure or benefit me, though among them was one of the
first physicians in Liverpool. A fortnight ago my pains were
so excruciating, that my limbs were drawn in all directions,
and I could not leave the house : now I am free from pain
and weakness, and walk any distance I choose with pleasure,
and can eat, drink, and sleep well. My pains were some-
times of so dreadful a nature as to make me groan so loud
that my voice was heard to a very considerable distance, and
I could not keep a limb still, so violently did I tremble and
shake. But the first morning Mr. Brindley came to see me,
he instantly arrested the pain and the violent movements of
my limbs, by passing his hand across my body, and breathing
upon me. At this, of course, I was astonished, and very
willingly consented to be mesmerised, though I expected it
would be a very painful operation, having never seen a person
magnetized. Having submitted to the operation, I was de-
lighted to find it so easy and simple, and now being quite
well, have to thank Grod I ever heard of it ; the doctors having
given me up as incurable. The case is the more astonishiDg
when it is remembered that I am an old man, my age being
68 years.


Digitized by


Google


Various Diseases cured by Mesmerism. 467

"I feel it my duty to Mr. Brindley and the public^ to
make my case known through the medium of your pages.

" (Signed) Thomas Hall.

"Attested by my wife, Margaret Hall, John Brooks,
William Brinton, James Grifl&ths, Edward Partridge, John
Harris, William Pearshouse, Richard Thomas, J. Cooper,
Thomas Deeley, William Deeley, John Lewis, and Richard
Lewis, all of Clent."

III. Serena Price, StouAridge, cured by mesmerism
alone, in one fortnight, of hysteric fits.

IV. John Braund, Stourbridge, cured in three days by
mesmerism, of a violent pain in his left side, with which he
had been troubled for twentyone consecutive days, and
general weakness.

V. Mr. Wm. Webb, Stourbridge, cured by passing and
manipulating, of violent rheumatic pains.

VI. Mr. T. Brindley, Stourbridge, cured by passing and
manipulating, of a rheumatic pain in his head and face, of
one fortnight^s standing.

VII. Miss Thomas, Clent, near Stourbridge, cured by
manipulations and passes, of a violent rheumatic pain in her
head and face. &c. &c. &c. &c.

These cases of cure I think, and I am fearful you will
think, are more than enough. But I could give you many
others, yea, scores of them if required. At &^t I met with
great opposition &om the doctors in our neighbourhood, but
I am happy to inform you, that I have converted two phy-
sicians and three surgeons of the neighbourhood, besides
hundreds of persons residing in the town, by these cures,
and by some cases of clairvoyance. The two first cases I have
sent you, have already appeared in one of our local papers,
and have caused a great sensation in this neighbourhood. The
following cases of clairvoyance shall conclude the present
letter.

On the 5th of October, 1843, I magnetized Henrietta
Price, of Stourbridge, in the presence of Dr. Dudley, R. L.
Freer, Esq., Surgeon, and several others. While in the mes-
meric deep, I stated to Dr. Dudley that she was then in the
clairvoyant state. He immediately said, " To test her then,
send her to my house j and if she tells me what furniture
there is in a certain room, Fll believe that mesmerism is not
what I now believe it to be, — a gross imposture.^' Accord-
ingly, having before satisfied myself by former experiments
that she was really clairvoyant, I said to her, " Henrietta, go


Digitized by


Google


468 Mr. Brindletfs Cases of

to Dr. Dudley's house/' " I do not like/' said she. " Oh, but
Dr. Dudley wishes you to go." " WeU, I'll go then." " Are
you there ?" " Yes." " Gk) into the middle room up stairs,
facing the New Road." " Well, I'm there." " What room
is it, a sitting-room or a drawing-room ?" " Why, neither ;
if s a bed-room." " How do you know ?" " Why, I can see
the bed in it, to be sure." " What else can you see ?" "A
swing glass." " Is it a large one ?" " No ; a middling size."
" Has it a drawer in it ?" " Yes." " Well, open it and see
what is in it." " Why, some razors and a smaU brush with a
bone handle." "What else can you see in the room?"
*' Why, some chairs, but they are not in their right places ;
the room looks all about ; and the carpet is actually turned
up all the way at the sides." " Are there curtains to the
windows ?" " No, I only see a blind." " How many win-
dows are there in the room?" "One, two; only two."
"What sort of bedsteads are they?" " French polished."
"Are they very thick ones?" "Middling; I have seen
thicker." " Do they touch the ceiling ?" " Nearly." " Well,
that will do. Now come back again from Dr. Dudley's to
our dining-room." " Very well." " Are you there ?" " Stop
a bit." "Well?" "Yes, I am there now." "Look into
that closet, and tell me who is in there." " Why, Dr. Dud-
ley." "What is he doing ?" "Tell him to go to market;
there is a market-basket by the side of him." " I know
that. But tell me what he has in his hand?" "Why its
coming winter certainly, and he'll want it." "Well, but

what is it ?" "Tell him to go and ask Miss what it

is." "Oh, nonsense; tell him what it is yourself." "Why
you put gledes in it." " What is the name of it ?" " Well,
if you are so dull, and must have it, ifs a warming-pan." In
every individual instance she was perfectly correct, never fiul-
ing once to tell all we asked her.

I then demagnetized her, and mesmerised her sister,
Serena Price, who had just entered the room, and who had
heard nothing that her sister had said. She also is a clairvoy-
ant subject : so I sent her (mentally) when magnetized to Dr.
Dudley's house. When she was there she said, " Well, here I
am; but I do not intend to stand here all night; how am I
to get in ?" " Why open the door and go in." " Well I am
in ; which room shall I go into ?" " Gk) up stairs." " Which
room shall I go into ?" " How many are there facing the
New Road?" "Three." "Yes, that's right; go into the
middle one." She then accurately described the room, and
said the carpet was put down straight, and everything neat
and in its place. " Is there any one in the room then ?"


Digitized by


Google


Various Diseases Cured by Mesmerism. 469


ti


Yes/' "Who?'' "A young woman." "How is she
dressed?" "Why like a servant should be, to be sure."
" Oh, she is a servant ?" " Yes." " And what is she
doing ?" " Why standing at the table, looking at herself in
the glass." "What is she doing now?" " Fulling her cap
forward on the head." " And now ?" " La' ! why viewing
herself above a trifle." " What is she doing now ?" " She's
gone into the other room, and is moving some clothes off a
chair." " And now ?" " Just gone down stairs." " Where
is she ?" " In the kitchen ?" " What is she doing ?" " Sit-
ting by the fire." I then demagnetized her, and Dr. Dudley
instantly went home to discover whether all was correct that
Serena had told us. Next morning I saw him, and before
several gentlemen in a public room, he had the kindness and
manliness to inform me that it was perfectly correct in every
point, and that he was now a firm believer in the science.


BOOKS RECEIVED.

Le Magn^tisme Animal, consid^r^ comme moyen Tb^rapeutiqae ; son
application au Traitement de deux cas remarquables de Neuropathie. Par
Charles de R^simont, Docteur en M^decine de la Faculty de Paris. Paris,
1843.

The Phreno-Magnet, for December. By Spencer Hall.

The Magnet, for July, August, and September. By La Roy Sunderland.
New York.

The American Phrenological Journal and Miscellany, for July and Aug.

The Proper Sphere of Government. By Herbert Spencer.

Theory of Heat and of the Vital Principle. By Arthur Trevelyan.

Four Tracts, by Cosmopolite.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.

H. F. T. qf HinekUvy is perfectly right. The phenomena of mesmerism
are physical facts, and to be observed and Judged like all other physical
fkcts.

Mr, PhiUp Dowe, ItU ^ Man. We are satisfied of the existence of
ntatter, because we cannot help it We cannot refine away the evidence of
our senses. Mr. Dowe surely believes he has written to us on a mattrial
called paper, with maUriaU called pen and ink. As a believer in the divine
character of the Scriptures, Mr. Dowe must allow that the Almighty assumes
throughout that he has supplied man with suflicient evidence of the reality
of matter : or the Bible would not speak of earth and water, and the bodies
of men and brutes, vrithout first assuring us there are such things. Bishop
Berkeley once knocked violently at Dean Swift's door in a pelting shower
of rain. The Dean enquired the name of his visitor. ** Berkeley." was the
reply. ** Come in," cried the Dean. *' I can't," vociferated the Bishop,
** you must open the door.*' ** Never mind the door," said the Dean, *' come
in, come in, there is no such thing as matter, Berkeley."

We rejoice that such a man as Mr. Dowe considers us ** sincere and ardent
l0ver$ qf truth."


Digitized by


Google


470 Notices to Correspondents.

VJ. r.£.— We rejoice that V.I. V.E. thinka The Zeiit worthy to be called
a ** ghriotu periodical" The word Zoist is not synonymous with the word
Zoologist, becanse we who coined the word gave it a different meaning.
Identity of etymology does not imply identity of meaning. The origin of
the words sociely and asooeiation^ and of phtfsic and physiciy is the same ; bat
each is arbitrarily appropriated to a distinct object. The word Biologitl,
which he proposes, or at least Biology, is already in use as synonymous with
Physiology, and substituted by several writers for the latter. Treviranus
has entitled his work Biologif, and Corote's section on Physiology is styled
Biology in his Philosophic Positive. Besides, we could not now change our
name, since we have a good name; and we hope always to have V.I.V.E.'S
good will.

Dr, AtkUuon, qf Wakefield,— The mental powers of man and other
animals are a matter of observation only, precisely like the vital functions
of plants, and the phenomena of earth, air and water, and the starry
frame ; and are to be learnt by natural, not supernatural, means. When
the Scriptures were appealed to on points of the natural sciences of astro-
nomy and geology, those sciences were impeded and filled with error. The
same holds as to the mental functions. Supernatural information can be in-
tended only for supernatural matters : as Locke says, ** Things l>eyond
the discovery of our natural faculties and above reason, are, when revealed,
the proper object of faith. Thus that part of the angels rebelled against
God, and that the dead shall rise again, being beyond the discovery of
reason, are purely matters of faith." {Essay, b. iv., cb. 18.) Bacon writes
with all his strength against mingling religion with enquiries into nature.
He calls it an iilegitimatef inauspicious connection, more it^urious to science
than open hostility, excluding novelty and improvement, and admitting
only what is orthcKlox. {Nov, Organ., 1. i., 89, and Cogitata et Visa.) Mr.
Dodweli we dare say was very good and very learned, but his lucubrations
are as childish as the An ti- Newtonian views of the pious Pope, and the Anti-
Geological views of a pious methodist. Let us learn from Scripture to do
justice, love mercy, and walk humbly ; to visit the fatherless and widow,
and the prisoner, and do to others as we would they should do to us.

Mr. Cosier. — If sufficient particulars of the case have now been carefully
observed to furnish a history of it, we shall be happy to receive it

Dr. CoUyer. — We are happy to find that this gentleman regards The Zoist
as ** just what was required." We do not see that Dr. CoUyer's letter on
his claims to the discovery of the mesmeric excitement of the distinct cere-
bral organs contains more than was stated in Dr. Elliotson's opening address
to the Phrenological Association, published in No. IH. Dr. Collyer, after
accidentally making the discovery, at first scarcely noticed it, and afterwards
most positively denied last summer *' that the organs were ever excited by the
transmission of any force from the fingers." See above, p. 232.

Nonwist. — We intended publishing his first letter and requesting him to
write us a paper according to the suggestions of his second. We now make
the request ; and, as perhaps the matter of the first letter would be em-
bodied in such a paper, we defer publishing the first letter till we have
heard again from a correspondent from whom we cannot hear too often.

Mr. Enderson, Truro, is disappointed at our not publishing instructions
for mesmerising : while M, A., on the other hand, writes us the following
good letter upon the imprudence of persons mesmerising from printed in-
structions.

*' I observe in the last number of The Zoist, that you purpose publishing
directions how to mesmerise : it is very desirable, that the practice of ex-
perienced magnetizers should be made known, and the application to par-
ticular diseases. I think, however, that it is very imprudent for any one to
practice mesmerism, by printed instructions, without learning from some
person of experience, how to act when those embarrassing symptoms preaent
themselves, which do occur sometimes with susceptible patients, and which
occasion danger, if the mesmeriser is alarmed, or does not know what to do


Digitized by


Google


Notices to Correspondents. 471

in cases of emergency, particularly when too much force has been exerted
on persons whose temperament is not understood. I have practised magnetism
on a great number of persons, and though always acting with great caution,
have had fainting and nenrous attacks, but I haye always retained my pre-
sence of mind, and succeeded in calming my patients and ultimately benefit-
ing their health. I once saw a case of great danger at Caen, during the
time that Mr. La Fontaine was there. £ug€ne^ his subject, who shewed
insensibility during the mesmeric trance in so remarkable a manner, had
become extremely susceptible from continual action. I one day came into
the court-yard of the hotel where he resided, and found Eugene with his .
back against the wall in magnetic sleep. He had been put into that state
by one of the stable boys making a few passes before his face. Madame
La Fontaine had Eugene oouTcyed to an arbour in the garden, and placed
on the ground, and attempted to recover him : but he rolled about in convul-
sions. Monsieur La Fontaine was sent for, and was much alarmed : he
exerted all his force for a length of time ineffectually. The poor lad was
utterly insensible, his jaw sunk, he was black under the eyes, and had
the appearance of death : at last he burst into tears, but the organs of
speech were paralyzed, and he could utter no sound : he was carried to bed,
had symptoms of paralysis and alienation of mind, and was not thoroughly
recovered till the end of a week.

*' Now the works on mesmerism are generally deficient in pointing out
the mode of action, when untoward symptoms present themselves. Moos.
Charpignon says, the magnetizer is always competent to remove any bad
effect he may have occasioned, if he retains command of himself, and acts
boldly without alarm. The most effective modes of proceeding are to make
horizontal passes ; if there are spasms, to press the articulations ; if there
is pain in the stomach, to press the pit of the stomach with the points of the
fingers, drawing them away horizontally, and to make rapid passes from
head to foot with the palm of the hands (not the points of the fingers) at a
little distance from the person ; if there is pain in the head, to pass the
fingers rapidly across the forehead with a slight pressure : magnetized
water also may be given with good effect. By persevering in these modes,
patients may be recovered from a state which would be dangerous, if the
magnetizer did not act with decision and judgment.

'* The danger of mesmerism in inexperienced hands, is strongly pointed
out by Dr. Rostan, in the ' Dictionnaire des Connaissances M^dicales.' He
mentions obstinate head-aches, and partial paralysis, so produced, and he
adds, that he has no doubt, death might ensue, if a magnetizer should be
so imprudent as to venture to attempt to paralyze the organs of respiration.
It would be so lamentable, that the progress of mesmerism should be ar-
rested by any unfortunate case of rash inexperienced application, that I am
induced to hope you may admit this letter of warning.

'« Your humble servant, " M. A."

'* I forward you an extract from a French journal :—

*< Mons. Ricard, the able magnetizer of Paris, has lately undergone
much persecution. The judges of a provincial tribunal, as entirely ignorant
of the subject, as some of the lights of the medical world of London, de-
cided that animal magnetism was a preposterous imposture. The court of
Cassation has absolve Monsieur Ricard from the condemnation pronounced
on him."

We agree so far with M. A., that we have declined giving formal instructions
hitherto, lest we should not give all the information which would qualify a
person for beginning to practice : and we have thought we were fulfilling
our promise of giving practical instructiouy. by regularly publishing Dr. El-
liotson's cases, which are in fact a sort of clinical lectures, such as, when good,
are always highly prized in medical education, and enable the learner to
comprehend the matter more fully and practically than a dry string of rules.

Fletcher Mandiy.—We shall be happy to receive a full account of the
case. We have heard of a similar fact.

VOL. I. K K


Digitized by


Google


472 Notices to Correspondents.

Enquirer, — The meetings of the Phrenological Society are held in the Thea-
tre of the Marylebone Literary and Scientific Institution, 17, Edwards Street,
Portman Square, on the first and third Wednesdays of the month, at eight
o'clock in the evening. Bat in order not to clash with Christmas festirities,
the President announced at the last meeting of the Society that there will
be none on the 3rd of January. The meetings will be resumed on Wed-
nesday, January 17th, when a paper is to be read by Mr. Deseret, of Edin-
burgh, on the Organ of Wonder.

Veritas Veritatis, —Dr. Verity withheld a legacy bequeathed by Dr.
Roberton to the Phrenological Society of Edinburgh, as alluded to in our
first number, p. 41. We give the following summary^from the Gazette des
Tribuneaux, of the 4th and 5th inst. : — '* About two years since, a Dr. Ro-
berton died at Paris, where he had resided above twenty years, bequeathing
a considerable sum to the Geological Society of France, and the remainder
of his fortune, which was estimated at £16,000, to the Phrenological Society
of Edinburgh ; constituting Dr. Verity his sole executor. Upon the grounid,
however, that the Phrenological Society of Edinburgh had no legal existence,
Dr. V. absolutely refused to pay the amount of the legacy to the claimants ;
and, having realized the various securities, paid over two-thirds to the
heifesses-at-law, and quietly put the remaining third into his own pocket.
It seems, however, that no account of the actual amount of the proceeds
could be obtained from him. ' But,' said the senior Judge, Seguier, to
Dr. Verity's counsel, ' you have your pockets full of the bequeathed money ;
why do you not give an account of it?' 'Doubtless,' replied the counsel,
' we have our pockets full, but we do not want to empty them into the
pockets of those who have no right to it, —who are only a being of the ima-
gination, and do not fulfil the first of all conditions — that of existing, &c.'
The Society, having instituted proceedings against Dr. V., prayed that an
iaventory of the securities on the monies arising from the sale of them might
be paid into Court. Dr. V. resisted this in every way, raising all kinds of
technical objections ; and action after action was brought by the Society in
the different French Courts. ' What,' exclaimed the senior Judge again
to Dr. V.'s counsel, ' you make an appeal upon such contemptible grounds
as these ? Why you want the whole of the legacy to be swallowed up in law
expenses !' These remarks of the Judge clearly shew bis view of Dr. V.'s
conduct, upon which we need offer no remark. By the last judgment of the
Court of Appeal, it has been awarded that Dr. V. shall pay into the Court,
within three days of the veidict, the value of the securities, or the proceeds
arising from their sale ; in default of which, he is condemned immediately to
pay into Court the sum of £1200, on account of the same, and £2 a day
until the above sum be paid.

DEPTFORD CASE.

We have every reason to believe that the case of the boy at Deptford was
a genuine and beaut^ul case, though, simply from not having witnessed it,
we will not take upon us to assert there was clairvoyance : and we have
heard from Dr. Elliotson, that he did not see it, but only gave instructions
upon a case laid before him. The boy never was in any danger. We have
seen a letter from Mr. Smith, jun., who mesmerised him, to Dr. Elliotson,
written the day after Christmas-day, in which it is stated not only that the
boy is perfectly well, but ** much improved in health, and is exceedingly
cheerful. Mesmerism has done wonders for him." Mr. Smith adds, '^ We
have had the boy mesmerised twice by Mr. Vernon in the presence of the
medical men of the neighbourhood. Mr. Hope (the surgeon who ventured
to publish in the papers that the whole thing was a hoax) made an arrange-
ment to meet them to-day (26th inst.,) and coward like was afraid to come
and stand the test."

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
