THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. XII (April 1854 to January 1855).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Assembled from the five microfilm issue scans on the Internet Archive (sim_microfilm collection); no bound-volume scan of this volume is available.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XLV.


APRIL, 1854.


I. Table-moving, Rappings, and Spiritual Manifestations.
By J. W. Jackson, Esq.


(Concluded from our last.)


But what is their possession? What is the essential cha-
racter of that mental condition undér which men and women,
in nowise especially distinguished by extraordinary mental
capacity in their usual state, become, nevertheless, capable of
writing or dictating productions which with many pass for
the veritable offspring of defunct genius? What was the
condition, we ask in return, of the poor peasants who, as
demoniacs in the middle ages, used to carry on a vigorous
controversy with the learned ecclesiastics who acted as their
exorcists? What was that condition of mind in which the
poor ignorant persecuted Camisards of the Cevennes used to
utter long and eloquent sermons in their sleep? a phenome-
non re-developed in Sweden in our own day. What is the
nature of that exaltation in the mental functions under which
individuals in the trance life have in all ages been found
capable of performing intellectual achievements to which
they could afford no approximation in their usual condition
of body and mind? As to the vivid and recurrent conscious-
ness of a fictitious personality, the annals of every insane
asylum will furnish abundant illustrations in point, while the
experience of the electro-biologist is sufficient to show that,
given a certain degree of susceptibility and a certain intensity
of impression, you may develop not only an erroneous
human, but even superinduce a false and foul brute, person-
ality; so that not only shall a very simple citizen fancy him-
self Prince Albert, but, by a sad reverse, may afterwards
VOL. XII, B


2 No evidence of spiritual agency.


conceive himself a hound in the royal kennel! These high-
wrought media are no doubt possessed, but it is by an idea,
and not by a spirit. Our good friends of the union err in
supposing .a budding poet or essayist must of necessity be
actually entered by the ghost of the man Shelley or Johnson,
instead of being, as is really the case, possessed, or rather
shall we say filled, by the spirit of his beautiful or thoughtful
works. Alas for the Arcadian simplicity, which is ignorant
of the great fact, that imitation is the condition of production
for nineteen-twentieths of all our perishing literature—
that an original is a Godsent but too seldom vouchsafed—
and that, for many generations afterwards, the utmost which
“marked capacity” of the “talent” order can accomplish, is
but to act as an echo, ever growing fainter and fainter withal,
till a fresh voice be revealed to the ears of a startled genera-
tion! We wish our possessed friends all possible success in
transcribing fresh “ Ravens” and “ Queen Mabs,” and,
indeed, new “ Hamlets” and “Macbeths,” if such be attain-
able by any process of introverted self-consciousness: but
would simply hint, that those who follow can never quite
equal those who lead; and that the imitator must of neces-
sity fall immeasurably short of the transcendent excellence
of an original master. Of internal evidence as to their
spiritual origin, these ghostly dictations contain not a particle
—they, none of them, transcend in depths of thought, in
grandeur of conception, or in elevation of sentiment, those
magnificent and soul-inspiring productions which we have
inherited from genius clothed in flesh. Neither does the
rythm or rhyme tell of those celestial cadences which might
be supposed to convey some faint reverberation of the faultless
harmonies in which the angels express their delight and the
seraphim embody their rapt adoration. The sages of the
past have not become wiser, nor have the poets attained to
an imagination more pure and exalted than when on earth.
Their heavenly companionship has left no traces of its ele-
vating and ennobling influence on their present communi-
cations, as compared with their previous productions. On
the contrary, their excellence has rather become decadent,
and their glory waxed dim, during their heavenly sojourn, so
that it is better to converse with their works as mortal men,
than with these their present revelations as departed spirits.
These credentials, then, are wanting in all the essential evi-
dences of their being more than simple human productions ;
as such, they carry with them no convincing demonstration


of being anything more than the results of unaided human
effort.


Ignorance of Mesmerism displayed throughout. 3


Ignorance of mesmeric facts, and of the results of spon-
taneous extacy in other ages, is manifestly observable through-
out most of the statements and arguments both of the
spiritualists and their opponents. The latter deny facts
which nearly every age has witnessed, and which science is
now perfectly competent to reproduce ; and the latter, while
admitting these extraordinary phenomena, are nevertheless,
from want of acquaintance with their essential character,
tempted to completely misinterpret them. There is plenty
of fanatical zeal on either side, but a sad want of enlighten-
ment on both. The entire movement is but a reproduction
of what other epochs have frequently witnessed, namely, the
birth of a faith by the misinterpretation of nature. The new
creed in sober truth, with all its pompous pretensions of lead-
ing mankind to brighter anticipations in reference to immor-
tality, is obviously founded on a palpable mistake as to facts
connected with abnormal, or at all events, unusual, conditions
of the corporeal system. In place of a grand revelation it is
simply a nervous epidemic, the extravagancies of which have,
as in many other notable instances on record, been incon-
ceivably aggravated by the all-pervading impression on the
minds both of the subjects and spectators that the pheno-
mena devoloped were of a spiritual and miraculous, instead
of a physiological and natural, order. The morbid suscepti-
bility of highly sensitive organisms, with the effects thence
resulting, has been mistaken for the direct intervention of
spiritual agencies. This is a dangerous error, for the exalted
faith of these enthusiasts, having risen to its present towering
altitude under the factitious stimulation of thaumaturgic
wonders, will be but too ready to collapse into fathomless
doubt and disbelief, when the false proofs on which it has so
exultingly rested shall have been removed by the simple pro-
cess of a philosophic explanation of those manifestations,
which have been deemed ghostly on the fallacious ground of
their being rare. A faith so insecurely founded, and yet
withal putting forth such arrogant claims to teach with au-
thority on that mysterious subject, the immediate state of the
departed, whereon the wisest have been contented to hold
their opinions in the suspense of an expectant faith rather
than in the confidence of a direct intuition or of a coercive
logic—a faith so obviously based on ignorance of those very
subjects of investigation to which its pretended wonders are
so nearly allied, cannot fail, we say, to prove a fearfully mis-
guiding light to its votaries now, and one that, when it shall
have been extinguished with all its claims to the preternatural
by a more expansive philosophy, will, I fear, leave its deluded
B2


4 Wonderful feats of these camical spirits.


devotees in the tenfold darkness of a recurrent, and to them
overwhelming, scepticism.

I have now, for the purpose of completing our survey of
the spiritual manifestations, to contemplate some of those
extraordinary results which involve an apparent suspension
or contradiction of the usual and known laws of nature,
among which we are undoubtedly accustomed to think that
of gravitation as among the most extensive in its sphere of
operation and the best established by its ever present facts
with philosophers. But alas, for established truths in these
days of disquietude and disruption! It seems the spiritualists
have set at utter defiance the universally received idea that
everything terrestrial always gravitates towards the earth,
and, in most sovereign contempt for this very respectable
truism, have not only caused sundry grave pieces of house-
hold furniture to execute, untouched by human hands, most
marvellous evolutions of the terpsichorean order—in which
they have pirouetted about drawing rooms never before so
defiled with the unseemly vanities of fashionable life—but, in
addition to this, the originators and prime movers of all this
domestic necromancy, not contented with this strange display
of lightness of purpose in things, have also proceeded to the
quite unjustifiable length of affording a similar exhibition of
all want of gravity in their own proper persons. Thus, not
only have tables been occasionally lifted into the air, and this,
too, when loaded with the corporeal dignity of some comfort-
able senator, but the media have in a similar manner been
projected into the atmosphere, and sustained there quite
unassisted by any perceptible conveniences for such unusual
exaltation. In addition to all this, we find that musical
instruments no longer need the aid of a performer to give
birth to their appropriate sounds, but, on the contrary, in
a state of the most astounding instrumental independence,
occasionally dash off into melodious strains so charming and
withal mysterious that the renowned Paganini himself, were
he alive, might despair of equalling such wild and delicious
tones, even though he were in propria persona to execute his
justly-famed “ dance of witches.” Nay, deceased gentlemen,
it seems, whose autographs on ’Change, or in the ministerial
bureau, were once potentially known, and the recollection of
which is still so vividly preserved among survivors as to
produce an instant recognition on its presentment—these
venerable merchants and statesmen have, despite the absence
of their former corporeal instruments, succeeded in grasping
a pencil, and thus re-executed their usual sign-manual to the
wonder and admiration of all subsequent beholders. Of a


)


tit


OT 5 Kil AT aE ks


in a la ih


The Misses Fox have up the spirit of Mr. Calhoun. 5


very truth we are here verging on the borders of the magical ;
and, lest your readers should suppose that I am testing the
extent of their credulity by the gravity of my jokes, I will
take the liberty of introducing them face to face with a
worthy ex-senator of the Transatlantic republic, who can
thus, being certainly of age, speak for himself.

It should be premised that the following extracts are from
a letter by N. P. Tallmadge, late Senator of the United
States. It was written to a lady, and contains a long
and detailed narrative of his intercourse with the spirit of
his deceased friend, the late Mr. John C. Calhoun, the cele-
brated American statesman. It is dated April 12th, 1852,
and consequently presents us with the existing condition of
“ spiritualism in high places.” I may add this letter appeared
in the New York Tribune of March 23rd, was then copied
into the Spiritual Telegraph, and has been subsequently
published in extenso in this country, together with other
correspondence by Mr. Tallmadge on the same subject, in
the National Quarterly Review of Mr. Robert Owen, who
has been recently converted to the Rappist faith, and with it
to a belief in the existence and immortality of the soul.

“ After the arrival of the Misses Fox in Washington city
in February last, I called on them by appointment, and at
once received a communication from Calhoun.”

The communication is then given, after which the writer
proceeds :—

“ During the above communication of Calhoun, the table
moved occasionally, perhaps a foot, first one way and then
the other. After the communication closed, we all moved
back from the table—from two to four feet, so that no one
touched the table. Suddenly the table moved from the
position it occupied, some three or four feet, rested a few
moments, and then moved back to its original position. Then
it again moved as far the other way, and returned to the
place it started from. One side of the table was then raised,
and stood for a few moments at an angle of about thirty-five
degrees, and then again rested on the floor as usual.”

“The table was a large, heavy, round table, at which ten
or a dozen persons might be seated at dinner. During all
these movements no person touched the table, nor was any one
near it.” After this the spirit requested them to get another
square table: this was accordingly done, when the writer
again proceeds :

“The square table was of cherry, with four legs—a large-
sized tea table. It was brought out and substituted for the
round one, the leaves being raised. I took my seat on the


6 Cathoun’s spirit rings bells and plays the guitar.


centre ; the three ladies sat at the sides and end, their
hands and arms resting upon it. This of course added to
the weight to be raised; namely, my own weight, and the
weight of the table. Two legs of the table were then raised
about six inches from the floor, and then the other two were
raised to a level of the first, so that the whole table was
suspended in the air about six inches above the floor. While
thus seated on it, I could find a gentle vibratory motion, as if
floating in the atmosphere. After being thus suspended in
the air for a few moments, the table was gently let down
again to the floor.

“ At a subsequent meeting, Calhoun directed me to bring
three bells and a guitar: I brought them accordingly. The
bells were of different sizes—the largest like a small-sized
dinner bell. He directed a drawer to be put under the
square table. I put under it a bureau drawer, bottom-side up.
He directed the bells to be placed on the drawer. The three
ladies and myself were seated at the table, with our hands
and arms resting upon it. The bells commenced ringing in
a sort of chime. Numerous raps were made, as if beating
time toa march. The bells continued to ring, and to chime
in with the beating of time. The time of the march was
slow and solemn; it was beautiful and perfect; the most
fastidious ear could find no discrepancy in it.

“The raps then ceased, and the bells rang violently for
several minutes. A bell was then pressed on my foot, my
ankle, and my knee. This was at different times repeated ;
knocks were made most vehemently against the under side
of the table, so that a large tin candlestick was by every blow
raised completely from the table by the concussion.

“ Here the ringing of the bells ceased, and then I felt sen-
sibly and distinctly the impression of a hand on my foot, ankle,
and knee. “These manifestations were several times repeated.

“1 was then directed to put the guitar on the drawer. We
were all seated as before, with our hands and arms resting on
the table.

“The guitar was touched softly and gently, and gave forth
sweet, and delicious sounds, like the accompaniment to a
beautiful and exquisite piece of music. It then played a sort
of symphony, in much louder and bolder tones.”

The following is the writer’s account of the mode in which
he obtained the spiritual autograph of his deceased friend :—

“We met pursuant to appointment, took our seats at the
table, our hands and arms resting on it as usual. I placed
the paper with my silver cased pencil on the drawer, and
said—‘ My friend, I wish the sentence to be in your own


ee ee


Sa


——


Judge Edmonds does wonderful feats. 7


handwriting, so that your friends will recognize it. He
replied, ‘ You will know the writing.’ He then said, ‘ Have
your mind on the spirit of John C. Calhoun.’ I soon heard
a rapid movement of the pencil on the paper, and a rustling
of the paper, together with a movement of the drawer. I was
then directed to look under the drawer. I looked, and found
my pencil outside of the drawer, near my feet, but found no
paper in the drawer where I placed it. On raising up the
drawer, I discovered the paper all under it; the sheets were a
little deranged, and, on examining, I found on the outside
sheet these words—‘ I’m with you still.’ This autograph was
subsequently shown to several of Mr. Calhoun’s friends, and
at once recognized as his.”

Have your readers borne with me during these lengthened,
and we may truly say, terrible, extracts? I would not have
subjected them to such an infliction, but it is so eminently
characteristic throughout of the higher range of narratives now
flooding America in ever increasing numbers. Judge Edmonds,
to whom I have already alluded, has, it is said, without the
aid of the Misses Fox, produced effects equally marvellous.
I trust that all will now perceive the grievous absurdity of
limiting our remarks on this subject to table-moving, or to
the achievements of the media who have yet arrived in
Britain. Wait till the hierophants of this modern magic
appear in the European Babylon. Belgravia has been stirred
from the repose of its fashionable sanctuaries already by the
performances of those simple priestesses, who have come but
as the precursors of those true thaumaturgic vestals, the
Misses Fox, already, it is said, preparing for a descent this
winter on that Californian realm for the celebrated—the west
end during the season. And what is to become of excitable
Paris, and mystic Germany, under such an influx of the
unaccountable? Shall we be pardoned for asking what will
be the result of all this, even to grave and decorous Scotland,
should such things be achieved here in her Athenian capital,
and subsequently throughout the length and breadth of her
varied provinces? Is it to be wondered at that tens of
thousands have been carried away by such a current into the
gulph of a boundless fanaticism, where they become the easy
victims of every fresh hallucination which may chance to be
conceived in the brain of some powerful medium. Verily,
the matter is of an aspect sufficiently important to attract the
most serious attention of all who have the moral and
intellectual well being of the community at heart, and who
would not willingly permit this flood of superstition to come
upon an utterly unprepared generation.


Distant action, as well as perception, possible.


But to return to our attempted explanation of the fore-
going phenomena. To what class of facts do they belong?
and have we anything analogous to them in previous history ?
They are the results of the will power, and the records of the
supposed preternatural in all ages and countries abound with
narratives of similar manifestations. These, it must be
admitted, are bold assertions: but let us to the proof. That
the human organism can under certain conditions radiate
a force, which, like that of the magnet in relation to iron,
can attract or repel various substances, such as articles of
furniture, &c., was clearly shewn in the case of Angelique
Cottin, a young French glovemaker, aged fourteen, investi-
gated by the veteran Arago, and reported upon by him to
the Paris Academy of Sciences, at its sitting on the 16th of
February, 1846. In this case, however, the movements were
involuntary ; but in the narrative of the disturbances at
Mr. Mompesson’s house in Tedworth, in the year 1661, we
have equally astounding results produced by the will of an
absent drummer, who, it seems, contrived to sustain a most
harassing series of marches and other military harmonies
upon a drum, then kept securely in the possession of Mr. M.,
who had taken possession of this martial instrument by way
of punishing its errant master, who, in return, inflicted the
most vexatious annoyances on the worthy gentleman. We
have also somewhat similar results in the case of Frederica
Hauffe, the celebrated seeress of Prevorst, whose voice has
thus been heard in one locality while she was in another, and
who also could produce raps and other sounds at a distance.
In short, the records of all time show that men can, under
certain circumstances, act as well as perceive at a distance.
This seems indeed to be the positive phase of extatic mani-
festation, that in which there is not merely the receptive
power in reference to impressions from remote objects, but
also the still higher ability to ray forth a force upon them.
It exhibits the clairvoyant percipient rising to the level of a
reactive agency, proportionate to his recipient susceptibility.
It is an exhibition of power comparatively unknown in these
latter ages, but with which the thaumaturgists of antiquity
were once familiar. It is the grand motor for all genuine
magical phenomena of the physical order, and, however un-
palatable to our savans, it is a power whose astounding effects
they will yet have to humbly investigate. I believe, then,
that the effects testified to by Mr. Tallmadge, although
no doubt greatly exaggerated in the narrative, had a basis in
fact, and were, in so far as they were actual, produced by
spirits, but by spirits clothed with mortal garments like


The Misses Fox the motors, and Mr. T. the regulator. 9


ourselves. They were, in short, the result of the combined
will of himself and party, the Misses Fox furnishing the
principal motor, and Mr. T. the chief regulating or directing,
power. It was a fine reproduction of those necromantic
scenes by which Apollonius of Tyana and other masters
of the occult so powerfully impressed their disciples in the
olden time, when the usually latent energies of the human
mind were effectually evolved by the prolonged and careful
training of individuals endowed with organizations of the
requisite susceptibility for such extraordinary feats.

Such an explanation will of course be laughed to scorn by
all who are ignorant of or disbelievers in the higher range of
mesmeric phenomena, or who are unread in the mystic lore of
the occult sciences. Such individuals will at once deny the
facts, however supported by apparently unexceptionable and
continually increasing evidence. This is no doubt a source of
safety, while the enchanters remain at a distance: but it is a
circumstance not a little noteworthy, as attaching to these
extraordinary displays of mental power, that precisely those
who were the most firm in denying the facts when only
supported by evidence, generally succumbed the most
abjectly to a superstitious belief in the supernatural when
the “incredible and impossible” phenomena were actually
presented to their own senses. As we have before remarked,
ignorance, so far from being a safeguard, is a snare. The
adept is only potential as a preternatural wonder-worker
among those who are unacquainted with his processes, and
who cons’ quently, overwhelmed by his results, sink at once
and withvac further enquiry into a blind submission to his
teachings. Were the narrative of Mr. Tallmadge the only
one of the kind extant, I should be inclined to account for
his experiences by attributing them solely to a biological
condition of his system at the time he witnessed these
portentous effects: but similar testimony is so continually
borne by other and independent observers that such an ex-
planation, however plausible, would, I feel assured, eventually
prove untenable. Let it be distinctly recollected that we
shall have to look such facts in the face, that their arrival
here is only a question of time, and that a shallow philosophy
of mere negation will prove utterly incompetent to save either
its professors or the multitude from the consequences which
have ever ensued under similar circumstances—namely, that
those who pertinaciously deny the phenomena of nature as
facts, are, on their undeniable presentment, compelled to
receive them as miracles.

It appears that only in a very few instances have the


10 Spirits of educated people shew sad ignorance.


ghosts yet become either visible or vocal, under both which
highly satisfactory forms of presentment, however, I suspect
they will yet afflict or edify our transatlantic friends. The
movement has obviously not yet attained to its culminating
point ; in short, the known limits of nature in the production
of results have not yet been reached, and consequently there
is still a considerable margin left for exaltation in the
character of the phenomena. Neither apparently has the
maximum of numerical progression been yet passed, for the
rate of conversion seems to be rather increasing than di-
minishing, while there is obviously a growing confidence in
the ultimate success of their creed, and a steadily advancing
tendency to missionary enterprises on the part of the
Rappists, anything but indicative of a failure in spirit or
resources. They profess to aim at nothing less than the
spiritual enlightenment of the whole world, and I doubt not
that their “rise and progress” will be among the more
important features of our age that history will have to
narrate as circumstances characteristic of the nineteenth
century.

I will now, for the purpose of concluding my remarks on
this strange and truly portentous revival of heathen and me-
dizval superstition, endeavour to sum up and state as con-
cisely as possible some of the objections which have been
urged against the doctrines and practices of the rappists on
moral and logical grounds, together with their advocacy and
reply. Their opponents, then, have dwelt much on the fact,
that the supposed spiritual interlocutors, who come to teach
the simple inhabitants of earth with such paramount authority
in reference to things celestial, have not, in the majority of
instances, made themselves so far acquainted with things
terrestrial as to maintain an accurate observance even of
the simple rules of orthography, in rapping out their supra-
mundane communications through the alphabet. While
others exhibit such a sovereign contempt for the laws of
syntax, and other recondite mysteries of grammar, as
clearly to shew that Lindley Murray’s labour of love was
very nearly in vain, in so far at least as the progress of his
ghostly pupils was concerned. Nay, what is still more
astounding, it is found that certain illustrious literati, who
certainly never were suspected of labouring under such
deficiencies during life, have now, in their upward and
onward progress from sphere to sphere, left so much of their
mortal dross behind as to have actually become oblivious of
some of the simplest principles of composition; and, while
no doubt effectually mastering supernal lore, have apparently


It is not the ignorance of the spirits, but of the Mediums. 11


forgotten, as probably beneath their regard, those manifold
temporal attainments to which in some measure they doubt-
less owed their well-earned reputation with mortal men.
Nay, the spirits of deceased savans have, it is said, on some
notable occasions, displayed but a very superficial knowledge
of the laws of the physical universe, and have replied to
certain searching questions in a manner so vague and
unsatisfactory as to indicate anything but a profounder and
more accurate knowledge of nature than that which they
possessed when denizens of this lower terraqueous realm.
To all these rather grave and admitted objections it has been
somewhat ingeniously replied, that the medium, as the name
implies, is the instrument for transmitting all this spiritual
knowledge—is the one channel through which it has to be
passed—is in short the moral atmosphere through which
alone such transcendent solar luminosity can reach our dull
and corporeal senses, and so act upon our contracted and
materialized minds. Now, suns may shine as brightly as
they please, but envious clouds will nevertheless occasionally
intervene, and obscure the radiance which is yet pouring
with unmitigated effulgence behind them. So it is, say
these easy and good-natured apologists, with the media;
they, by their ignorance and incapacity, but too often obscure
and stultify the lucid messages which they, as incompetent
agents, transmit from the inhabitants of one sphere of being
to those of another. It is not in short the spirits who are
ignorant but their reporters, who, it seems, by an inversion
of the process said to be employed in reference to a certain
honourable house, so far from converting turgid nonsense,
confused statements, and meaningless platitudes, into the
readable expositions of sentiment contained in our news-
papers, do, on the contrary, in the most culpable manner,
confound, weaken, and utterly vitiate, the truly sublime and
exalted communications of which they thus become the
lamentably inefficient vehicles. Now all this may or may not
be true, and its acceptance as a sufficient apology will of
course depend to some extent on the calibre—we had almost
determined to use the vulgar word “ swallow”—of the minds
to whom it may be addressed: but, accepted or rejected, we
do not see how it can very greatly modify the estimate we
are likely to form of the genuineness and authenticity as
spiritual revelations of the communications yet received. If
these heavenly messages, to a considerable extent, confes-
sedly take their tone as high or low in sentiment, clear or
confused in statement, correct and elegant or vulgar and
contemptible in language, as the medium used chances to be


12 The spirits are terrible liars.


educated or the reverse, or, when highly susceptible to
thought-reading, as the company assembled happens to be of
a superior or inferior order of minds, what evidence have we,
I say, that the whole seeming communication is anything
more than a psychical echo of ideas already existing in, or of
knowledge already attained to by, the mortal intelligences
who constitute the circle or are in rapport with its mem-
bers? Of the entire honesty of the narrators of these
extraordinary transactions I do not for a moment doubt ;
but of their ignorance of mesmerism, or incapacity to apply
its facts to the scientific elucidation of the phenomena now
occurring in America, the entire literature of the rappists
affords the most ample and convincing evidence.

But a still more formidable objection to receiving the
teachings of such spirits as have thus far spoken through
most of the existing media yet remains to be stated, and
this is, that they are confessedly liars. The same spirit will
sometimes contradict him or herself in statements respecting
either this world or the next, and nothing is more common
than for one ghostly interlocutor to declare that some other
who has previously communicated is an untrustworthy and
deceiving spirit! Nay, when one purporting to be Benjamin
Franklin has uttered his “ wise saws,” it is no unusual thing
for a second to announce himself as the veritable American
sage, and forthwith declare that his predecessor was a shame-
less counterfeit! And there is somewhere in the States a
select orthodox circle whose purer celestial visitants roundly
assert that the spirits of all other circles are mere wonder-
working devils, sent on earth with permission to undermine
the faith and practice of all who are so foolish as to place
trust in them! And already a multitudinous diversity of
ridiculous tests are being had recourse to for the purpose
of “trying the spirits” and discovering whether they be in
truth what they represent themselves. Sundry recipes for
detecting the bad and detaining the good spirits are also
occasionally promulgated, together with many other absurdi-
ties, visible enough to those on the outside of these charmed
enclosures, but seemingly quite invisible to all who are in-
volved in this moral “dance of death.” What does the
reader think of the following admission by the Rev. Adin
Ballou, one of the most eloquent and amiable advocates of
the spirit theory who has yet written on the subject. “ Re-
sponses have been made purporting to come from the spirits
of persons deceased, giving their names, relationships to the
living, and various communications, but afterwards it turned
out that the persons represented as dead were alive in the


ae


The spirits have their old terrestrial pleasures. 13


flesh.” “In other (cases) low, uncouth, profane, obscene,
and vulgar sentences of words were spelled out.” After
many similar admissions, the reverend writer concludes his
strange paragraph thus:—‘In fine, specimens of almost
everything incoherent, contradictory, deceitful, and absurd
have come from what purported to be spirits, in this class of
manifestations.” No wonder Mr. Ballou and his co-believers
find it necessary to divide the spirits into reliable and un-
reliable.

Let us now look at some of the logical inconsequences and
preposterous statements of our rapping friends. They tell
us that in the next sphere of being every mind forms its own
environment from habits of thought and action indulged in
here, and that, nevertheless, each spirit is comparatively
happy and essentially progressive. In plain language, they
mean that every human being is at death translated to a
sphere of existence in which he or she is rendered capable of
gratifying all previous desires to the uttermost, without any
of the moral or physical restraints which are happily interposed
between desire and gratification; and that, nevertheless,
amidst this unlimited indulgence there is moral progress.
That with everything to tempt and nothing to restrain, with
exhaustless facilities for pleasure and an utter incapacity for
the experience of pain, natures utterly brutalized and de-
graded here can yet undergo an effective purification and
edification of their entire moral and intellectual being there.
Have these credulous people ever seen some grovelling crea-
ture, unfortunately endowed with that “ open sesame,”—a
well-filled purse, that is, with temporal and practical ability
for extensive, although fortunately not unlimited, indulgence
in the prevailing propensities of his nature; and have they
not too often seen the sad result of this combination of cir-
cumstances, namely, human beastiality carried to its ulti-
mate? Are the gamester, the drunkard, and the profligate,
on the road to progress, when supplied with the means for
recommencing their career and reperpetrating their demora-
lizing actions, without death to awe or disease and poverty to
restrain them? Alas! for the enunciation of amiable twaddle
on subjects so serious !

That the delectable young ladies, who constitute so large
a proportion of the more celebrated media in America, would
make a very endurable hereafter by the realization of all the
pretty desires, we can readily conceive. To pass the earlier
stages of an eternal existence in tinting roses, reading novels,
executing everlastingly new polkas, and at due intervals
soothing the sublime sorrows or checking the amiable fro-


lt The spiritual communications a lie against nature.


wardness of some immortal lap-dog, may perhaps seem very
innocent, if not very ennobling, avocations for departed
spirits. But—aye, we repeat that grave monosyllable—but,
all earthly minds have not so limited their desires, so regu-
lated their habits; and, if translated to immortality with all
their present pursuits and proclivities, with all their custo-
mary associates and adjuncts, and endowed, moreover, with
the fearful prerogative of an indefinite call for everything
which a thoroughly sensualized mind could wish, I fear, such
minds so conditioned, instead of steadily ascending to a
higher, would inevitable descend to a lower, sphere. More-
over, what a palpable contradiction have we here; for, if the
next sphere be in truth the analogue of this, then it must be
so entirely and not partially. Why, if that too be a state of
trial and tuition like this; why, we say, leave out the sombre
analogues of our death, disease, disgrace, poverty, hunger,
and the thousand other painful processes of discipline by
which an erring humanity is providentially restrained within
some limitation and the fearful tide of a world’s depravity
has boundaries set to its advance by One who can say with
power to its consuming waves, thus far and no farther?
Away, we say, to the priests of Brahma and Budha, whose
painful transmigrations preach a sterner morality than this.
Away to the Moslem Moollah, whose sensual heaven is at
least reserved for the faithful of his creed. Does man indeed
reap as he has sown? Then not on the downy beds of ease
will the criminally voluptuous expiate their sins against the
purity and weal of our common race. The creed that dares
not avow those laws which are the unavoidable requirements,
the inevitable necessity, of a moral universe, and substitutes
in the place of this stern legislation the mawkish dreams of
a maudlin sentimentality, stands thereby, in the face of the
whole creation, a God-proclaimed falsity, a lie against the
fundamental constitution of things, and will prove a snare
to its votaries now, and be considered as a contemptible sole-
cism in morals by every manly and right-minded generation
hereafter. These pretended spiritual communications bear
throughout the stamp and impress of minds which dare not
look consequences in the face. In their puerile sketch of an
ulterior condition of being, the pusillanimous wish has indeed
proved father to the weak and pitiable thought. Talk of
their descriptions of heavenly spheres as authentic delinea-
tions by their inhabitants! Why, one stroke from the pen
of true genius, one terrible line from Dante, one sublime
burst from Milton, were of more worth, for true grandeur
and power of embodiment, than all the diffused feebleness


Mr. Spicer a waspish gentleman. 15


and strained inanity which have yet been riddled from the
confused heap of conflicting trash thus palmed on the world
as an authorized communication from celestial intelligences.
It now only remains, by way of completing our sketch of
this strange movement, to inform the reader of those sources
whence he may obtain access to facts and details that the
nature and necessarily limited extent of the present commu-
nication would not permit of my introducing. The first
work, then, to which I would recommend his attention, is
Sights and Sounds, by Spicer, an English gentleman, who
was in America during most of the excitement on the rap-
ping, &c., and who has furnished us with a very readable
narrative of “the mystery of the day,” as he terms the spirit


manifestations.


The author advances no theory, and merely


furnishes an historical sketch of the facts which had tran-
spired from the commencement of the movement till he pub-
lished his work. The volume also contains a slight sketch of
similar manifestations at other periods, and is altogether
a very pleasing production, not the less so, perhaps, for
being obviously the work of an unpractised hand. The
writer, in short, is no bookmaker; not in the slightest sense
of the term “an author by profession.” In his “ Sequel,”
I am sorry to observe a certain waspish tendency towards his
reviewers and opponents. Above all, he need not have hit
quite so hard at Mrs. Zoist, seeing that the old lady, if such
she be, has certainly done some good service in her day and
generation to the cause of “ truth against the world.” When
Mr. Spicer has had a few years more experience in the ad-
vocacy of an unpopular subject, he will know the full value
of insensibility, whether natural or acquired. No man should
attempt to disturb the hornets who has not the hide of a
rhinoceros wherein to receive their stings !

The next work which should be read is, The Philosophy of
Mysterious Agents, by E.C. Rogers, an American savant, who
endeavours to account for the raps and their revelations, the
self-movement of tables, and the independent performance
of instruments, by automatic nervous action ; cerebral when
there is intelligence, ganglionic or spinal when there is none.
The author has certainly favoured us with a most profoundly
systematic development of his theory, and I would not advise
any one to attempt a thorough perusal of this most learned
exposition who is not a good wader. The fault of the hypo-
thesis is like that of so many other ingenious elaborated con-
ceptions, namely, that it proves too much, and, carried out
to its ultimate, would prove, not only that the media and all


clairvoyant subjects are automatic in their mental manifesta-


16 Mr. Rogers instructive, but not amusing.


tions, but that so much of what we accomplish in the ordi-
nary processes of life is “ purely mechanical” that it would
certainly be much the most convenient to consider ourselves
as “mere machines,” nervous spindles, set going by “ appro-
priate mundane influences,” in virtue of which, one man
spins a Paradise Lost, and another sets it up in type! Ad-
mirable mechanisms both! Like many other earnest thinkers,
Mr. Rogers rides his hobby a little too hard; but his book is
so full, not only of many “wise saws,” but also of many
“modern (and we may add parenthetically, ancient) in-
stances,” that, despite much dry repetition, it certainly is an
instructive, although I can scarcely add amusing, work.

To those who are desirous of knowing what the American
pulpit has to say on the subject, I would recommend the
Rev. Charles Beecher’s (brother of Mrs. Beecher Stowe)
Review of the Spiritual Manifestations. The author admits
the facts, but denies that they are natural; and thus, assum-
ing them to be supernatural, he endeavours to prove them
demoniacal. The hypothesis is, “ spirits can only obtain
access through prepared odylic conditions.” When we state
that Mr. Beecher thinks demons, by which he means the
unblessed spirits of the departed, may occasion blindness,
deafness, &c., by depriving the rightful owner of these senses
that they (the demons) may thereby furnish themselves with
such faculties, the essential character of the work may be at
once estimated. Such ideas are, no doubt, eminently suit-
able to the latitude of Tartary, but must, one would suppose,
prove rather at a discount in New York and London. It is
said that one extreme begets another, and that in this way
the due equipoize of things is maintained. Perhaps this
rather curious condemnation of the manifestations was thus
evoked by the spiritual advocacy of the Rev. Adin Ballou,
who, in entire reliance on their preternatural origin, has
furnished us with a very pleasing exposition of these recent
wonders. Of all the melancholy exhibitions attendant on
this fanatical movement, we know of none more so than
those furnished by these two clergymen. On the one hand,
dark retrogressions into the black diablerie of the middle
ages: quotations from Jamblicus to illustrate new facts in
natural philosophy by referring them to the direct interven-
tion of archones! On the other, an almost blind submission
to the teachings of a few excitable clairvoyants, and a wild
pursuit of truth by mystical lights which have already
brought their followers to the verge of that abyss out of
whose fathomless depths the grim shadows of Brahminism,
Budhism, and Rosicrucianism, and every other form of ex-


da em. Senne ee Sate get dima te


4


Reply to the Quarterly Review. 17


tatic tuition, have in all ages been emerging. Verily, it is a
sad and serious thing to see men who have stood in Christian
pulpits come to such a pass that they are fain to accept the
guidance of heathen oracles for deliverance from the dilem-
mas on which, by their own misguided proclivities to the
occult, they have needlessly fallen. We may safely leave
the Reichenbachs and Gregorys, the Elliotsons and Esdailes,
of our age, to do battle with the host of misunderstood phe-
nomena. These men will in the end doubtless prevail to sift
the facts from the fallacies, the true from the false; and I
suspect that, when this shall have been accomplished, the world
(embracing even our American cousins) will find that the
ghost, which has occasioned so much disturbance, was, after
all, only mesmerism in disguise! come in this Puck fashion
to laugh at a generation which, having refused the sage clothed
in wisdom and beneficence, was nevertheless but too happy
to receive the fool clad in his motley and bells!
J. W. Jackson.

Edinburgh.


II. An account of “ Mesmerism proved True, and the Quar-
terly Reviewer reviewed. By the Rev. Chauncy Hare
Townshend, A.M., of Trinity Hall, Cambridge. London :
Thomas Bosworth, 215, Regent Street. 1854.” pp. 216.


Tue name of Chauncy Hare Townshend is dear to all British
mesmerists. In 1839, he published his work entitled, Facts
in Mesmerism, with reasons for a dispassionate inquiry into it.
At that time the storm was raging most violently against
mesmerism. The Professors and Council of University Col-
lege were absolutely rabid, having just forbidden the patients
of the hospital to be any longer cured by mesmerism, although
many had been pleasantly and beautifully cured by it;
having pronounced mesmerism to be all delusion and collu-
sion and too vile a thing for them to permit it in their scien-
tific, pure, and refined establishment; and attempting to justify,
to all they met, their ignorant and uncivilized proceedings
and their contempt of him who had made their medical
school what it never had been before and never has been
since : the language of some of the professors was disgraceful.
The medical journalists were at the height of their coarse
abuse, and the whole medical profession storming in every
town and village. Mr. Townshend displayed high rectitude
and great moral courage. Few British mesmerists have
VOL. XII. c


18 Bad spirit of the Reviewer.


not read the Facts in Mesmerism. It reappeared in a second
edition in 1844, Mr. Townshend having absolutely made a
present of this edition to Mr. Bailliére, the bookseller. The
Rev. Mr. Sandby, in his admirable work, Mesmerism and its
Opponents, p. 21, calls Mr. Townshend’s volume a “ philoso-
phical book,” and the character is amply deserved. It isa
sound, solid production, evincing a thorough knowledge of
the subject obtained from experience, and careful reflection
upon this experience. The work abounds in proofs of mes-
meric effects in cases where suggestion was as impossible as
in the case of an eruption of Mount Vesuvius: but all which,
like those in which The Zoist abounds, were entirely passed
over, without a single allusion even to the work any more
than to The Zoist, by these humble—most humble, highly
informed—very highly informed, far sighted—very far sighted,
modest—very modest, writers—par nobile—each alter idem,
two writers in one, of the article in the Quarterly Review.

Mr. Townshend in his first pages shews that the review
is begun in a bad spirit: and all the world will agree with
him. One of the Reviewer’s first assertions is impudent and
false: “To the class of earnest and vigorous enquirers, (mo-
dest and unselfish B., and modest C., we suppose, to use
letters only,) whom the true philosopher, whatever be his
pursuit, welcomes as his most valuable coadjutors, the mes-
merists and their allies have ever shewn a decided repug-
nance.”


“This (says Mr. Townshend) is not the language of a humble
lover of truth. To discredit one’s antagonist is an easy way of
knocking him down. But is the assertion true? I propose an
amendment—‘ To the class of prejudiced and lax enquirers,’ (amongst
whom we may perhaps discover the Reviewer himself,) ‘ the mes-
merists have ever shewn a decided repugnance.’ There is, in fact,
a class of pseudo-philosophers, of men of science falsely so called,
who decline to enlarge the narrow boundaries of their limited expe-
rience by admitting any new principle into their vocabulary. Such
men cannot step beyond the A BC of science. Routine is their
existence. For them every new term is a bugbear. Yes, every new
term—more than any new fact : for as long as they can refer new
facts to old principles they seem to be content.”—>p. 4.


Mr. T. conceives that in biologizing, hypnotizing, &c.,
the one human being is exerting an occult influence upon the
other by his will.


“* His (the Reviewer's object) being to shew that the phenomena
are self-evolved, methinks he had done wiser to have got rid of all
extraneous preliminaries whatsoever. Nay, I cannot see how phe-
nomena that are induced by any methods of which a human being


Mesmerism far different from Biology. 19


is the employer can apply to the present question. Whatever may
be their quality, they have been originated, and are wielded, by the
presence, the commands, the prescriptions of a human being. There
is the man in the room. You cannot ged rid of him. . . . Mr. Braid
may have his doubts whether he should be obliged to the Reviewer
who holds him up to praise on the ground that he had not originated
his own wonders. The great Hypnotizers and Biologists of the day,
stripped of their wand and laurel crown, may henceforth hide their
heads. We need them not. It is the patients who do it all them-
selves! and yet, without the Hypnotist, or Biologist, the phenomena
do not occur. Thus have we seen that the Reviewer’s handle to his
theory does not truly fit the occasion, just because of the man in the
room. ’—pp. 9, 11.

** Biology differs as much from Mesmerism as Judaism from
Christianity—yet resembles it perhaps in about the same proportion.
There may be the same agent, but there is a different development in
each. And these two dissimilar reasons are equally potent in ren-
dering Biology an unhappy illustration for the Reviewer. It cannot
suit his purpose both because of likeness and unlikeness. The like-
ness, which consists in the human agency, and induction aé extra,
renders it unfit to prop a Theory of Suggestion: the unlikeness,
which consists in its adulteration and distortion, bars that through
its sides a man should attack Mesmerism.

“One service at least the Reviewer has unconsciously rendered
us. He has set the difference between Biology and Mesmerism in
the strongest light. He has shewn that Biology has on it a broad
stamp of suggestive influence which is wanting in Mesmerism : for
it is precisely on these grounds that he has chosen the former as a
weapon of attack against the latter. Patently, and on the surface,
the Biologists (whatever be their ultima ratio) use Suggestion
largely as a handle to their influence. But all this is the reverse of
Mesmerism, or of the methods used by Mesmerists. Again I say,
let any one visit the Mesmeric Hospital. Will he there witness the
same things as in a biologic chamber? No! He will not see per-
sons straining their eyes, or hear them told they cannot remember
their names: he will behold real effects produced by quiet methods
—patients recovering their sight, or the health of their nervous
system, by the simple passes made in undemonstrative silence.

“ Briefly—the object of the Biologist is to rouse Suggestion, and
to work on Fancy ; the object of the Mesmerist is to eliminate them
both. The one does not care how mixed and impure are the pheno-
mena which he elicits: the other carefully sequestrates those facts
which the accurate observer would wish to examine in their most
rigid simplicity. To him, the effects of a pass made behind a patient’s
back, or attraction from a distance, are worth all the wonders in the
world into which Imagination and Suggestion cannot but largely
enter. So different indeed are Biology and Mesmerism that they
will stand apart by mere definition. If the Mesmeric state be
defined as a state induced by passes of the human hand (and indeed
on the human hand alone a chapter might be written of which Bell

c 2


~


20 Impudence of the Reviewer.


never dreamt), then is Biology plainly excluded from the same
category.”—pp. 40—42.


Mr. T. remarks on the impudence of the Reviewer in
asserting that mesmerism is still doubted because mesmerists
have not called in the assistance of their antagonists ; that is,
of himself and friends, who are ignorant of the subject. Oh
the modesty of these youths who, as though those that had
studied the subject long, laboriously, and conscientiously,
wanted the help of the ignorant, conceited, and unscru-
pulous, say that they entertain the lowest opinion of the
logical powers of the great bulk of the upholders of the
mesmeric system and that they have never met with “a
single believer in these higher mysteries who has exhibited
the qualities of mind which would entitle his testimony to
respect upon any other subject in which his feelings were
interested.” This is also the very language used constantly by
those sworn allies, Messrs. Braid and Carpenter, in conversa-
tion.


“They undervalue us, and, like that amiable party whom the
Psalmist depicts, cry out, ‘It is we who ought to teach! Who is
lord over us?’ ....The true philosopher smiles in silence at this
extraordinary pride in a defect (ignorance) ; for it is not the European,
but the Esquimaux, who glorifies himself because he has got a club
foot.”—pp. 53, 54.


Mr. T. exposes the vast ignorance of the facts of mes-
merism in the Reviewer, and castigates and ridicules charm-
ingly—though perhaps the sin is not ignorance but wilful
and most unprincipled ignoring, which arises from the lowest
and worst of feelings, certain ultimately to brand the writer
indelibly for the contempt and scoff of society.


‘Throughout the whole of this matter, it is not we,” says
Mr. T., “who are to be charged with negligent examination or ig-
norance of our subject, but it is our adversaries who err towards us
by ignoring the amount of our knowledge and what we are really
doing.” —p. 60.

The Reviewer


** Declares, that ‘ the rapport was not discovered until long after
the practice of the art had come into vogue, having been unknown
to Mesmer and his immediate disciples.’ Now Deleuze, a contem-
porary, if not immediate disciple, of Mesmer, (and Mesmer did
not die till 1815,)* discovered at a very early stage of Mesmeric


* Deleuze first began to study mesmerism practically in 1784, when two and
thirty years old; and in 1813 published a work upon it that cost him twenty-
five years of preparation by experience and reflexion. See Foissac’s Rapports et
Discussions, p. 243.—Zoist. .


ene


Blunders of the Reviewer. 21


observation the existence of that peculiar sympathy and attraction
which the subject has to the Mesmeriser, and which is technically
called ‘ Rapport.’ ”’—p. 61.


We all know that this rapport continually comes out
unexpectedly, in persons who never heard of it, and even in
children. Yet the Reviewer coolly says that,—


«¢ «Several Mesmerisers have not been able, for some time, to
detect the ‘ Rapport,’ but ‘have obtained immediate evidence of it
when once the idea had been put into their own minds and thence
transferred into those of their subjects.’

“The words marked by me in italics are, as regards the interests
of the Reviewer, perilous, and fraught with dangerous matter.
We ask directly, how ?—how is the idea transferred from one mind
to another? Not always verbally I am sure. When I Mesmerised,
many proofs presented themselves to me that ‘Rapport’ existed
without any thought of it on my part, or any previous knowledge of
it on the part of my patient. I remember a remarkable instance
when I Mesmerised a very talented man, Mr. Arthur Clough,
author of some clever poems. He assured me, previously to the
Mesmerising, that he knew nothing about Mesmerism, but was
willing to try what it felt like.

“I had sneceeded in inducing the sleep, when, so little was I
thinking about ‘ Rapport,’ I left my patient comfortably installed in
an arm chair, and went into an adjoining room. Suddenly I heard
a great kicking, and, going back, I found Mr. Clough in a most
excited state, throwing himself about, seizing whatever was next
him, and hurling cushions, &c., about the room. I found that the
only means to calm him was to remain near him, and to make passes
over him. When recovered, he said, ‘You must not go away from
me. When you did just now, it made me feel very ill.

** As the reverse of the medal, I can say that I have also met
with patients whom no Suggestion could persuade into ‘ Rapport.’

“Though Mesmerised they went about the room freely, con-
versed with anybody; and, when asked if they felt uneasy on my
leaving them, invariably answered, ‘ Not at all!’”’—pp. 62, 63.


The following assertion is most true, and the illustrations
most interesting :—


**As one experienced in Mesmerism, I assert that it is the
Subject who teaches the Mesmeriser, not the Mesmeriser who
Suggests to the Subject. Sometimes indeed the latter astonishes
him by new and unexpected phenomena, which lie wholly beyond
his control. With regard to this very matter of Rapport, I can
relate some singular caprices in Somnambulists, the development of
which was spontaneous.

“Once I was trying the experiment of Mesmerising what is
called ‘the chain’—meaning a row of persons, who sit holding each
other’s hands, while the Mesmeriser performs passes before them
all. Four persons, in this case, formed the chain. The two in the


22 Enormous self-esteem of the Reviewer.
middle were ladies who knew a good deal about Mesmerism; the
two at the ends were a young lady and gentleman, who were
altogether ignorant of Mesmerism. Yet these two were precisely
the persons who were affected by the passes. In a short time,
while the others remained unimpressed, they seemed to pass into
profound coma. Soon a curious circumstance was observable. One
of them began to stir as if passing into the sleep-waking state ;
immediately the other performed the same gesture. This occurred
several times with reciprocal exactness. If the young man rubbed
his brow, the lady (a cousin of mine) rubbed hers also. If the
lady leant her head back, the young man leant his head back. This
curious state of things I silently pointed out to the attention of the
two wide-awake ladies, to whom I also signed that they should
remain as they were; and then, standing so as to hide my doings
from one of those who had passed into mutual Rapport, I performed
a series of most interesting experiments—the more interesting from
being wholly unexpected. I found I could, by only acting on one,
influence the two simultaneously, just as if I held the wires of two
puppets. If I attracted the arm, or leg, or head of the one, the
corresponding arm, or leg, and the head of the other performed
precisely the same motion. Nay, I could make their mouths open
and shut at the same moment. See each other they could not, for
they were both leaning back in their chairs, so that the two middle
persons blocked them out from the view of each other. At length,
the ladies who had remained awake got tired of their position
and broke the chain, when instantly the simultaneous phenomena
ceased.” —pp. 64, 65.


Mr. T. has no mercy upon the conceit of the superficial,
flimsy Reviewer, for his refusal to be taught by those who
only are qualified to teach him: and ridicules him in a
way calculated to make him feel, did not his conceit—his
enormous development of self-esteem, render him as insen-
sible to the most exquisite ridicule as the thickness of the
skin of the sagacious rhinoceros to a bullet from a Minie
rifle.


“He (the Reviewer) advises all men (oyer! oyer!) ‘to receive
none of these statements’ (such, namely, as disagree with the
Reviewer's opinions) ‘upon the unsupported testimony of believers.’
(Reviewer’s italics.)

** Yet, what other testimony would the man have? What other
testimony cou/d he have.

*‘ Decidedly, he is from potatoe-land !

“Would he have the testimony of unbelievers? A curious
testimony that would be—Something of that kind of witness which
the Jews would bear to the truth of the Gospel!

*‘Our opponents, forsooth, want, in dealing with us, to be
Judge and Jury both. Yet Wordsworth, not a lawyer, was called
to decide on a legal literary question, and to pronounce, by internal


—


|


Politeness of the Reviewer. 23


evidence of style, whether certain letters attributed to an author
were genuine or not. He was heard on his own subject as a com-
petent witness.

“And have we not competent witnesses to the purity of our
facts ?

‘Bear witness of the names of Archbishop Whately, of Dr.
Elliotson, of a Sandby, a Gregory, an Esdaile, a Monckton Milnes.
Surely these are sufficient to counterpoise the credit due to Doctors
Holland, Carpenter, &c.; and, with such men as the above to con-
duct our experiments, we must consider the Reviewer’s assertion,
that we want ‘observers qualified for the task by habits of philoso-
phic discrimination,’ to be as weak and inconclusive as his other
statements respecting us. At least, Whately knows logic, and the
Reviewer might read his admirable book on that subject to advan-
tage. Every one of the Anti-Mesmerists may be considered as
adherents to old exploded systems. They are ‘deceitful on the
weights. They are altogether lighter than vanity itself.’ Their
peculiar methods with us shew the weakness of their cause. The
whole, with them, is gratuitous assumption and reasoning in a
vicious circle. Their mouth-piece first takes for granted the incom-
petence of Mesmeric observers, then does away with the law which
sets any observer of any sequence of facts above any non-observer of
such facts, and then declines to receive the testimony of experi-
mental believers, because he has pronounced them incompetent
observers.” —pp. 71—73.

“«*There are many cases (says the Reviewer) of asserted Clair-
voyance, to which, if all that is stated of them be true (my italics),
none of these causes of fallacy apply.’ So then, we lie, do we?
Alas, how little does the Reviewer know of the strictness with
itself of an honest mind!

“We dare not deceive ourselves. We dare not lie. ‘C'est
facile d’employer de pareils moyens; c’est difficile de s’y resoudre.’

**A Mesmeriser is not the dishonest thing which the Reviewer
supposes. He is a human being, ready to be more severe with him-
self than anybody can be over him. He has had a work to do,
compared with which, to convince the world, or even a Reviewer, is
very nearly a worthless task. He has had to convince himself !

** And think you he will do this lightly ?

“Nay, but the human breast is severe in its requisitions.
Though, sometimes, ‘ what we wish to believe, Hope conceives may
be true ;’ yet, in the long run, what the heart wishes to believe, it
guards against. To live, and be a lie to oneself, who could bear it ?
Fear not, then, reader, to trust the Mesmerist! For his own sake
he will be—not, perhaps, a ‘philosophical investigator,’ but an
honest one. He will not say (to use Carlyle’s forcible thought on
Religion) ‘Yes and no’—but ‘Yes or no.’ And in what does
greater honesty consist? In believing the evidence of hourly expe-
rience, or, in denying to experimentalists the common trust reposed
under the same circumstances in every human being? .
“Had those ‘thorough-going believers,’ of whom the Reviewer


24 Beautiful and decisive experiments.


manifests such a horror, (and no wonder, for they are too thorough-
going for him,) been dealt with fairly, the world would not have
now to enquire into the question of human influence exercised with-
out the subject being pre-warned or suggestified.

“Very recently I witnessed a most conclusive experiment, under
this head, at the house of Mr. L , a gentleman residing at
Geneva, who, having been cured by Mesmerism of a paralytic affec-
tion, is naturally interested in the subject.

“The Mesmeriser was a master carpenter of Geneva—one of a
class which, often more intelligent than what is called the superior,
is not unfrequently led to the study of new phenomena. The sub-
ject was a young dressmaker, whom Mr. D , the carpenter,
mesmerised for her health, which was rapidly improving under the
influence. The young woman was soon thrown into sleep-waking,
and the experiment regarding unsuggested influence was as follows: —

“The patient who did not mind the operator leaving her, and
who conversed freely with everybody in the room, was left with part
of Mr. L’s family in the dining-room, while the Mesmeriser, with
Mr. L , myself, and others, went into the drawing-room, which
was divided from the dining-room by folding-doors. These doors
were shut—indeed, closely shut. Then, one of the party present
with the Mesmeriser (myself) in the first place gave a silent signal,
in the midst of our talking, which we did not interrupt: and in-
stantly the Mesmeriser, as agreed, made a quiet pass of a beckoning
nature towards the drawing-room. Instantly we heard the somnam-
bulist rush at the folding-doors, which she forced open so suddenly,
in the beginning of our experiment, that we feared she might hurt
herself; and (different persons present repeating the experiment
several times) left them, afterwards, (though still closed,) not so
firmly fastened as before. The party in the other room, who had
tried to engage the girl in conversation, and even to hold her back,
declared that her sudden and instantaneous rush to the door, that
we knew, but they did not, to be simultaneous with the Mesmeriser’s
pass, was something extraordinary and almost fearful.

**Such experiments as these have not been performed merely in
private, but before the world. A millionth part of the evidence
accumulated for Mesmerism would have sufficed to settle any other
question.

**For months, Dr. Elliotson was shewing to the world a series of
experiments with the Okeys, most rigidly conducted.

**T once had the pleasure of talking with Mrs. Somerville about
those very experiments, and I asked her what she saw. ‘ Why,’
she replied, ‘I saw Dr. Elliotson standing on one side of a screen,
and the Okeys on the other, where certainly they could not possibly
see him; and, whatever the Doctor did, they did. If he moved his
left arm, they moved their left arms; if he made a face, they made
the same face, &c.’ ‘Well,’ I asked, ‘did not all this strike you as
very extraordinary?’ ‘Why, no,’ responded the lady. ‘I own I
did not trouble myself to think much about it, as I concluded it was
a sort of trick.’


Ow


FA ad es


Beautiful and decisive experiments. 25


“So it is ever with us and our opponents. Shew them the most
accurate experiments, they have two things to fall back upon—fraud
or folly. There is either collusion or deplorable weakness.

‘“*T may also add that I have had the two Okeys at my house for
hours together—young women, whose sincerity, in spite of the
trumped-up stories of their having confessed to imposition, &c., I
never had the slightest reason to doubt; and I have fixed Elizabeth
Okey, by the most slight and distant passes down her back, when
she was talking or laughing or going to fetch anything, into the
most statue-like rigidity, and into attitudes which, so arrested, had
all the grace of a statue as well as the beauty of life. At the time,
also, when Dr. Elliotson was shewing his most interesting experi-
ments with these girls to half London, anybody was allowed, by
trial, to convince himself of the effect upon them of sudden passes
from a distance and behind their backs.

** Again, I was present at a mesmeric s¢ance which took place at
Lord L’s house in St. James’s Square, and in the course of which
the strictest proofs of influence without suggestion were afforded to
a scientific party, amongst whom was Dr. Arnott, and, (I think)
Mr. Babbage.

“The subject was a maid of Lady L——, (neither Lord nor
Lady L was present during the séance.) After the girl had
entered into sleep-waking, the Mesmeriser, who was himself chosen
by the committee of enquirers, stood behind her chair, which was
studiously placed where there was no mirror opposite, or any means
whereby the subject could be made aware of the Mesmeriser’s
motions. The different doubters then handed silently to the Mes-
meriser slips of paper, on which each had written, according to his
fancy, what the Mesmeriser was to do. If it were written, ‘ Raise
your right arm!’ he raised it up—if, ‘Nod your head,’ he nodded
it—if, ‘ Lift up your left leg,’ he lifted up his left leg; and in no
one single instance did the mesmerised girl fail to perform the same
motion. But, as usual, what seemed too extraordinary to be
believed was scarcely believed. ‘Curious coincidence,’ it appeared,
was to do duty for the day. At last some one wrote, ‘ Put out your
tongue ;’ and this was done on the part of the Mesmeriser, and so
rapidly repeated by the patient, that all doubt seemed in a moment
to be thawed out of the whole assembly, and a chorus of assent,
and of applause, ran round the room.

** Another open demonstration, which took place about the same) _
time as the foregoing, in London, was at the apartments of Mr.)~
Monckton Milnes in Pall Mall. Mr. Stafford O’Brien, and many’
others amongst whom I was one, were present to witness the singular
susceptibility of Mr. Christie, who at the slightest Mesmeric pass
directed with intention towards himself, whether seen or unseen by
him, fell into spasmodic convulsions of the most violent kind, during
which, however, he never lost his consciousness. At the commence-
ment of the experiments his eyes were so firmly closed through the
action of the passes that he declared he could not open them,—then
succeeded extraordinary contortions of the face, and, as the subject


26 Beautiful and decisive experiments.


was more worked upon, his whole body became convulsed. Of
course, the great point for which we were convened was to prove
‘Influence without Suggestion.’ Accordingly, the operator was
placed behind Mr. Christie, and at a considerable distance from him.
Anybody could produce the effect. The experiment that seemed to
strike every one the most was the following, in which I was the
operator. Mr. Christie was placed with his back to the whole com-

any, farther off from us than the middle of Mr. Monckton Milnes’s
arge sitting-room—an apartment, I should guess, about thirty feet
in length. I was placed, at the desire of the others, with my back
to Mr. Christie, and close to the fire-place, which was at one end of
the room. The experiment had a double end in view: namely, not
only to ascertain ‘Influence without Suggestion,’ but also how far
the Influence was capable of reflection from mirrors. I was there-
fore requested to direct at a particular signal, the single pass, which
had been before sufficient to produce the desired effect, towards the
figure of Mr. Christie reflected in a large looking-glass over the
chimney-piece. I must observe that there was no mirror opposite or
elsewhere in the room. Close to me was the deputy of the company,
who was to give the signal for me to waive my hand. Every expe-
dient was resorted to that might prevent any motion of mine from
being a signal to my patient, even by the slight possible sound that
the raising of my arm might make; and things were done to mystify
Mr. Christie and to make me uncertain when the true signal might
come. It was delayed for some little time, and no effect whatever
was manifested. Mr. Christie stood always in the same position
with his head parallel to the side walls and slightly bent down.
Then the silent signal—the mere waiving of a hand—was given. I
responded directly by one single slight and noiseless pass directed
towards the glass, when instantly Mr. C. fell, as if shot, to the floor,
and had an access of most violent convulsive movements, which
lasted a considerable time. He was lifted up by two or three of the
company and carried to the sofa, where the spasmodic action still
continued till it seemed to wear itself out.

*‘ Another person who was remarkably susceptible to the Influ-
ence conveyed by passes was Mr. Bush. In him, as if to baffle the
suggestion-mongers, was this peculiarity. He was not affected by
passes made in front of him for however long a time, but by passes
made behind his back (often without his knowledge), and directed
towards the neck, where the spinal marrow abuts upon the brain.
Many persons will recollect that it was quite an amusement with
those who loved to experimentalize, to put Mr. Bush to sleep with-
out his knowledge or consent. So far from his being proud of this
faculty of sensitiveness, I believe he was annoyed at it, and would,
if he could, have suggested to himself utter resistance to those sly
yet amicable tormentors who passed the drowsy spell upon him.

“Such openly demonstrated experiments ought to stand as so
much ground gained to the Mesmerist. No such thing. All com-
mon rules are to be reversed in our case. What is once proved in
other matters stands as a perpetual heir-loom to science. Not so as


ede cline


Fit a evn SAR


Conduct of a Trinity D.D. Cantab. 27


regards Mesmerism. We may convince men nine hundred and
ninety-nine times, but the thousandth time we are called upon to do
the work all over again. What never was asked of any experimen-
talists before is demanded at our hands. We are called upon to live
in a constant state of proof. This is all the harder because the pre-
judice, the impatience, the wrong conceptions, the unreasonable
demands, of our adversaries really do render our task peculiarly
difficult.”—pp. 73—80.


We must relate an instance of the common behaviour of
our adversaries :—


**A clever, well-known divine, whom I will call Dr. W——,
came, at his own request, to“a s¢ance, at which I was to mesmerise
a patient remarkable for his power of reading and seeing objects by
abnormal vision. Before the mesmerisation, nothing could be fairer
than Dr. W I expounded to him somewhat of my theory,
and he seemed pleased at the notion that some of the phenomena
which he was about to see would bear on the subject of a vibratory
ether; for, with regard to the theory of vibrations, Dr. W was
not only avery strong believer, but a powerful advocate in print.
However, the result proved that he would believe in nobody’s vibra-
tions but his own. Dr. W continued in the candid mood until
the critical moment, when the phenomena were before him. Then
I, having mesmerised my patient, begged him to place his fingers
himself on the patient’s eyes to ascertain that they were shut, (Dr.
Ww thought this the most satisfactory test,) at the same time
warning him that the eye-balls would move beneath his finger, as
they always do in Mesmeric patients, but authorizing him to use
any degree of pressure short of injurious violence. He held his
fingers pressed tightly down on the patient’s eyes, who then named
every object held before him. Surely if Dr. W: did not hold
down the eyelids to his satisfaction, it was his own fault, and he had
nobody to blame but himself. Thus he let the experiments go on
for two or three minutes, and then, in a highly excited manner, and
trembling from vehemence, called out, ‘His eyes are not shut! It
is all a trick and pretence !’

‘*Some persons present seemed annoyed at the manner of Dr.
WwW , and proposed bandaging the patient’s eyes with a black silk
handkerchief, and then stuffing with cotton, declaring that they
should be satisfied if, in that state, the patient named objects held
directly before the bandage. To gratify them, I allowed the eyes to
be so bandaged. But, in the meantime, Dr. W. had gone off
from observing the phenomena at all, and had seated himself on a
chair in a distant part of the room, where he turned performer him-
self. He got himself also bandaged, without cotton, and very
loosely, and he was writhing about in order to get the bandage dis-
placed and to have a peep at a card which some one held before him. ;
Such is the influence of name, that nearly all the persons in the |
room deserted the Somnambulist and me, to look at the mountebank }
tricks of the Doctor. However, a few patient investigators of truth


——


28 Uniform behaviour of Antimesmerists.


remained near the Mesmerisee, and were amply rewarded by seeing
some beautiful phenomena growing out of the very conduct that was
meant to crush us. Though the Sleep-waker sat with closely-
bandaged and wadded eyes and his back to the grimacing part of the
company, he described everything they were doing with the most
comic humour ; and he asked, ‘ What in the world is that gentleman
in the chair making such faces for, and what is he giving himself
such trouble about? Tell him from me that the card he is trying to
see is so and so”—at the same time naming the card correctly.
Some of the persons composing our small group called out what had
been done; but the Doctorites, absorbed in admiration of their
chief's sagacity, took no heed; and, though I am not aware that
the Doctor ever succeeded in seeing anything, yet, when he rose
from his chair, and announced that he ‘ had discovered the whole
imposition—that the pretended Somnambulist only did a clever trick
by sleight of eye, which was equivalent to a conjuror’s sleight of
hand’ (what true analogy!) ‘and that, though he could not yet do
the trick to the same perfection, he thought that by practice he
might,’—when, I say, the Cambridge Doctor had so expressed him-
self, all his adherents seemed perfecily satisfied, and joined in a
chorus of approbation. Then, though a few persons present en-
treated Dr. W to stay a little while longer, and to give the
thing a little more patient attention, he quitted the room in a hurry,
and (sad to say) all his tail made their exit with him.

“‘ However, the room was none the worse for the emptying it
had undergone. The true and patient observers of Nature were
thus made manifest, and the half-dozen men of real candour who
remained were rewarded for their steadfastness by witnessing a series
of most satisfactory phenomena.”—pp. 85—88.


We have heard from some who were present that the
divine doctor was the humble, mild, and kind Dr. Whewell,
of Trinity.

We have curious accounts of the antimesmeric behaviour
of a doctor at Antwerp, of the late Mr. Shiel, and of some
living savans of Geneva, and of the worthy Mr. H. of
Lausanne, who pins his faith on Dr. Roget. We have inte-
resting details of experiments upon the thought-reading of
Mdlle. Prudence Bernard,* and of the misconduct of the
adversaries, who, as usual, behaved most irrationally and un-
fairly: of the mesmerisation of an idiot baby and of birds.

After pointing out the facility and duty of each person in-
vestigating mesmerism for himself, and the causes of our
adversaries declining the test of personal experience, in a
clear, decided, facetious, bantering, and yet severe manner,


* Said to be also a good clairvoyante, and now resident at No. 10, Great
Castle Street, Oxford Street, with another very respectable French lady, who is
a remarkably good mesmeriser.— Zoist.


_ae


ele Dn cee, eR a ace


© Ae DE wee


Arago allows the progress of Mesmerism. 29


he surveys the present state of public opinion upon the sub-
ject. He remarks, as Anti-Glorioso did in our last Number,
which he did not see till long after his book was written, that
the “ Review admits facts which once were pooh-poohed with
all possible ridicule:” and he holds up Mr. Braid, happy Mr.
Braid! so befriended by the Reviewer, for us all to laugh at,
as we do till our sides ache.


** Another advantage that the Review in the Quarterly has given
us is, that we now have the ultimatum of our opponents. The
enemy has not, indeed, become a friend, but is reduced to his last
intrenchments. According to the Frenchman’s mis-translation,
“voila la derniére chemise” of the Anti-Mesmerists. All that is
now denied is the dynamic agent, and clairvoyance. We have,
besides, at last, the hypothesis of our antagonists. They have long
had ours. Our’s was too much for them. Their’s, alas, proves too
little for us! But, at any rate, we know where we are. The ground
is narrowed ; the real question is fairly got at; the combat, hand-to-
hand, may begin. Thus all that was meant for the destruction of
Mesmerism ends to her advantage. Everything lends her a helping
hand. Instead of being smothered under the feather-bed of Biology,
she starts up refreshed. New discoveries give her new impetus;
even turning-tables send her forward on her course ; even Spirit-
rapping knocks additional energy into her. The Article in the
Quarterly itself stands as a landmark to her conquests, and a dura-
ble monument of her triumphs. And it is about her that the
interest is grouped and concentrated. As amber embalms flies, she
consecrates the trivialities even of a Review. Just as we read the
memoirs of Sir Hudson Lowe only to get at everything about Na-
poleon, the world reads what comes out against Mesmerism only for
Mesmerism’s sake. :

“Even our adversaries are only trying, really, to get out of
their scrape, and to come gracefully to terms with us. They desire,
as we hope (!) the Emperor of Russia does with regard to the
Western Powers, after a few nominal victories, to conclude a treaty
of peace. Denying that they stir, they are yet converging to our
central point. They are on the turn.”—pp. 118, 119.


He gives instances of the use of mesmerism in a severe
case of abscess of the female breast, and in an injury to the
hand of Sivori, who by mesmerism was enabled to perform at
Geneva after being declared by the surgeons to be disabled
in his wrist for ever.

He quotes Arago’s account of Bailly, the astronomer,
for the fact of the advance of mesmerism.


“««The greater part of the phenomena, which are grouped about
modern Somnambulism, were neither known nor enunciated in 1783.
A Mesmeriser of our day says, assuredly, the least probable thing
in the world, when he affirms that such or such artificial Somnam-


30 Continental facts the same as those of the Okeys.


bulists can see every object in the profoundest darkness, can read
through obstacles, and even without using their eyes. But these
things have nothing to do with the matter which Lavoisier, Franklin,
or Bailly investigated ; they penetrate into an entirely new domain,
of which those illustrious philosophers did not even suspect the
existence.

*“*I cannot approve’ (proceeds Arago) ‘the tone of mind in
which some of our men of science go to assist at Mesmeric expe-
riments.. Doubt is a proof of modesty, and is rarely prejudicial to
the advance of knowledge. But we cannot say the same of Incre-
dulity. Any one who pronounces the word ‘ impossible !” except
where mathematical certainties are concerned, is deficient in pru-
dence. Caution is, above all, requisite where the animal organiza-
tion is concerned. Our senses, notwithstanding twenty-four centuries
of study and research, are far from being an exhausted subject.’ ”
—pp. 129, 130.

The whole of Mr. T.’s section on the consideration of
mesmerism itself is particularly beautiful and satisfactory.
He points out the difference between supernatural and con-
tranatural; gives a remarkable instance of intuitive know-
ledge of distant places not only on shore but at sea; remarks
how formerly no epithet of vituperation was strong enough
against the virtuous, blameless Apollonius, the Tyanean
clairvoyant, who at Ephesus beheld the assassination of
Domitian at Rome, and declared each step of it to those
around him as it proceeded, crying out, “ Strike the tyrant
—strike :” “not like one who guessed at what was passing
from seeing its image in a mirror, but from literally seeing it,
and, as it were, promoting, it.” He refers to the influence
of a dying person upon Elizabeth Okey, and a similar ex-
ample in a gentleman at Brussels which rang with it.

We have next a copious detail of some mesmeric experi-
ments just made at Lausanne by a Signor Regazzoni, an
Italian gentleman of good family, in which experiments the
mesmeric effects were precisely similar to many which hun-
dreds must have witnessed in the cases of the Okeys, and
sufficient to put to confusion those medical men who affected,
in obedience to Mr. Wakley, to regard the two sisters as
impostors, and in which suggestion was entirely out of the
question. Some of Signor Regazzoni’s go further than those
with the Okeys. The signatures of gentlemen who wit-
nessed these decisive experiments are given.

Mr. T. contends strongly for a peculiar substance or
mesmeric medium by which mesmeric effects are produced :
and gives it the title of Zoogen.

He gives his testimony to the fact of two delicate ladies
and two gentlemen, he twice being one, lifting a very tall


a m


Proofs of the Divining Rod. 31


man by the points of their fingers, according to a well-known
experiment.* He states that Professor Agassiz told him,


“That at Neufchatel they use a man, gifted with the power of
using the Divining Rod, whenever they want to dig a well in the
neighbourhood, which is remarkably devoid of water. The Professor
assured me that, for this purpose, he and a whole band of expec-
tant persons have gone out to watch the motions of the rod which
was held by the Diviner. Anxious to test the phenomenon, Pro-
fessor Agassiz has caused diggings to be made where the rod did not
turn; but never found water there: while, in a spot perhaps near
the other, where the rod did turn, water was invariably discovered.
Besides, as the Professor remarked, why does the rod turn in par-
ticular hands only? In his own the rod never turned, while in that
of his friend and coadjutor, Mr. De Sorr, whose name is associated
with that of Agassiz in the experiments upon glaciers, the rod turned
readily to point out the existence of a spring.”—p. 183.


Although Mr. T. is well aware that tables are turned
every day by unconscious muscular action, he gives many
reasons for believing that they may be also turned by an
occult power emanating from the nervous system of the ope-
rating party. There is nothing more unlikely in this than
in motion induced by the electric power, which at one time
was occult. It is refreshing to hear him, a clergyman, stig-
matize the proceedings of the Rev. Messieurs Gillson and
Godfrey, “ bigotry and folly in the dark places,” and “silly
blasphemy.” He considers that every instance of rapping is
not an imposture, not disbelieving that there may be ab-
normal causes of sound: and he relates a striking account
which is of a nature familiar to, and admitted by, all mes-
merists, except the portion of the story relating to noises ;
and possibly these may be as true as the rest and capable of
mesmeric explanation. He pronounces the Medium, a priori,
to be “a most illogical animal—an ill-baptized being, that
seems to have little connexion with the subject in hand,” and
begs us to “ observe how entirely the talking tables of Messrs.
Gillson and Godfrey respond to the uncharitable and bigoted
impulses of their own brains.” He is both powerful and
facetious in exposing the fooleries of the spirit-rapping fra-
ternity.

The whole book is delightful, but the latter portion still
more delightful than the rest. The lover of truth, the highly
educated and refined man, the gentleman, the careful and
acute observer, the man of soundly reflecting brain, the wag,
the despiser and castigator of all narrowness in both scientific


* See Zoist, No. XXXVI.


32 Did Dr. C. puff himself and Mr. B. ?


views and moral feelings, are conspicuous in every page. Let
every mesmerist buy the book: let everybody read it.
We will conclude with Mr. Townshend’s conclusion :—


** Let ‘the incapable and presumptuous’ write muddy essays on
metaphysical powers, which are nothing ad rem: Mesmerism shall
start a spirit as well as Suggestion. Let Quarterly, or any other
Reviews, conclude their empty peal with ‘ Dominant Ideas,’—we will
give a cheer for Mesmerism instead.

“* Be of good courage, ye true-hearted! The big awkward whale
that has floundered into our seas is in its death-flurry, and all the
foam and froth that it stirs up about it is but the lashing of its
expiring tail.

** And so, Reader, I bid you heartily farewell.”


Postscript to the above article.


We have received the following :—


“To the Editor of The Zoist.

“‘Sir,—I have read with great interest the remarks in the last
Zoist by Anti-Glorioso, on the article in the Quarterly Review, ‘on
Electro-Biology, Mesmerism,’ &c., &c., and beg to say that he is
perfectly right in supposing that Dr. Carpenter is the author of it :
this I can substantiate. It is positively too bad for any man to puff
himself as Dr. C. does in that article, and lug in Mr. Braid and his
hypnotism in the way he does.

“You are at liberty to publish this for the information of your
readers if you think fit.

“Iam, Sir, yours truly,
**H. Hastines, M.D.
** Cheltenham, Feb. 27, 1854.”


Now we do not pronounce Dr. Carpenter to be the author
of the review in the Quarterly, though he is the dear friend
of the renowned Mr. Braid of Manchester. We trust he is
not the author, because he is a bookseller’s fag, and thus
copiously supplies reviews, &c. ; and particularly because he is
a teacher of young men in University College, having got up
a course of lectures on forensic medicine that he reads an-
nually to innocent young lads. For him to set such an
example as the writer of the article in question sets morally
and intellectually would be grievous in the sight of all good
men. No, no, we cannot endure the thought that Dr.
Carpenter is the man.


Another person insane through spirit fancies. 33


Second Postscript.


We have raised our voice from the first against the folly
and insanity of ascribing natural phenomena of any kind, and
therefore against ascribing those alleged phenomena of the mo-
tion and sound of inanimate bodies through an occult living
influence, if such table-moving and rapping, independent of
muscular agency, be a fact, to supernatural means,—to the
agency of spirits, good or evil. We have denounced these
outrages upon common sense and upon piety in the strongest
manner, and again and again. What would chemists say to
a man or woman who ascribed the decomposition of a com-
pound: what would electricians say to a man or woman who
ascribed the electrical sparks and snaps: what would the
astronomer say to a man or woman who ascribed the motion
of a comet or any other heavenly body, the descent of an
areolite or the appearance of the meteors which we behold in
such numbers twice a year,—to the agency of spirits? They
would call either a blockhead, for a blockhead he or she must
be. We have also given examples, alas ! too numerous, in our
last Number, of insanity produced by these ignorant fancies :
and now we have to record another in the person of a well-
known authoress, who always had indulged in such super-
stitions and has of course adopted all the recent spirit fancies.
She has gone stark mad and stark naked on the spirit-
rapping. She was found the other day in the open street, as
her mother bore her, except that she had a pocket handker-
chief in one hand and a card in the other. She said the
spirits had informed her that, if she walked out so prepared,
she would be invisible. She is now in a madhouse.


Third Postscript.


We must indulge our readers with a letter written by a
medical man, a member of the Irvingvite, or, as now proudly
called, Catholic Apostolic, sect, against the humble and
simple benevolence of a mesmeric charity :—


‘I desire to record my testimony* against a so-called Mes-
meric Hospital, considering the same likely to be productive of much
mischief in its locality.

“You may be aware that the Canaanites of old filled up the cup
of their iniquity by having dealings with Satan and evil spirits,
working under various forms, designated by the terms divination,


* Testimony! The poor creature cannot know the meaning of the word
he uses. —Zoist.


VOL, XIT.


dD


34 Mesmerists are Mediums and Satan’s Agents.


soothsaying, enchantment, charming, witchcraft, sorcery, necro-
mancy, &c. The persons using these curious arts and diabolical
powers are called in Scripture charmers, witches, wizards, diviners,
soothsayers, necromancers, consulters with familiar spirits, astro-
logers, &c. Satan is now coming in like a flood with all these his
old works of power, either personally by his spirit or by his spirits,
under a new nomenclature, viz., mesmerism, biology, clairvoyance,
consulting with spirits of the departed, &c.

“The old works of Satan in power are now performed under
these new names by the various persons who are in our day arranged
under the general term ‘ Media,’ which term seems to comprehend
mesmerists, biologists, &c., as well as consulters with the spirits of
friends and distinguished persons departed.

“In this country, and in all Europe, all these workings of evil
power are done under the title of ‘ science,’ ‘ falsely so called ;’ but
in America, where the ordinances of God are less respected, some of
them, if not all, are done directly, openly, and confessedly by
sPrRiTs, without the guise of science to cover their works. Ina
pamphlet before me it is stated that in America there are thirty
thousand persons recognized as the so-called ‘ Menta,’ or consulters
of, and workers with, spirits, which at their bidding cause tables,
chairs, &c., to move and dance about as they will. Europe abounds
with these persons under various names ; and, as the consulters with
these ‘ Media,’ or evil workers, as well as the evil workers, render
themselves an abomination to God, it is very clear that the nations
of Christendom are thereby filling up the cup of their iniquity, and,
like the Canaanites of old, are rapidly preparing themselves for the
judgment of God by the sword.

“This brief statement will tend to shew you that I am very
averse to the establishment of any hospital where these abominations
are practised under the guise of science, and shall always raise my
voice against the evil spiritual works that are therein done, by what-
ever name they are designated.”


III. Cures of Palsy, Deafness, Convulsions, apparent Con-
sumption, Dropsy, Psoriasis, Inflammation of the Bowels,
Measles. By B. B. Morrison, Esq.


‘*M. Henry, surgeon at Arnaville (Meurthe) established an electrical corre-
spondence with M. Lapostile by wires running between their villas. M. Henry
wrote Oct. 31, 1836, to the Minister of Commerce, and published works respect-
ing his telegraph, but was answered that the plan could not be applied on a
large scale, and would not answer the expectations of the author. The latter
was discouraged at this reply, and discontinued his experiments.’’—L’ Union Mé-
dicale, quoted in the Lancet, August 6, 1853. The Lancet exclaims, ‘‘ So much
for the opinions of certain boards of art and manufactures !’’*


* We beg to remind Mr. Wakley of a passage in St. Luke’s Gospel, chap.
vi. 41, 42: ‘* And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but
perceivest not the beam that is in thine owe eye? Either how canst thou say to


on anetga


Cures of Palsy, Deafness, Convulsions. 35


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


47 Great Brunswick Street, Dublin,
February 9th, 1854.

S1r,—Should you consider the following cases of cures by

mesmerism an acquisition to the pyramid of other stupendous

ones now before the world, and fit for insertion in the in-

valuable Zoist, they are at your disposal. The parties named,

in gratitude for their signal recovery, for the credit and re-

putation of our great science, and in the hope that other

suffering fellow-creatures may be induced to submit to its

healing influence, have kindly requested of me to send their
names to you for publicity.


I. Palsy.

Mrs. Chappel, Royal Esplanade, had lost, on a sudden, the
power of motion in the muscles of the whole body. She
could neither move nor speak for eleven days. In addition
to this, violent fever, with delirium, had supervened, together
with most excruciating pains all through the frame, and great
prostration of strength. After resorting to a variety of cura-
tive means, which left her exactly as they found her, she was
induced to send for me and submit to mesmeric treatment.
This lady, after four mesmerisations, was perfectly cured.
She drank copiously of mesmerised water. Her father had
died suddenly of a similar disease. The “ eminent phy-
sicians” who were first in attendance pronounced her illness
mysterious. When they were informed of her quick and per-
manent recovery, their eyes almost started from their sockets
with amazement.


II. Deafness.

Sergeant Cartwright, Queen’s Bays, Royal Barracks, had
been deaf for seven years. His deafness had been produced
by lying in a damp bed. He had consulted several eminent
physicians with no benefit. I had mesmerised this man but
three times, when he recovered his hearing perfectly. This
is but one of 211 cases of deafness.that I have cured by mes-
merism alone during my practice, when all the resources of
the old medical art had failed even to relieve.


III. Convulsions.
John Mark, Temple Street, aged three weeks, became sud-


thy brother, Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou
thyself beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast
out first the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to pull
out the mote that is in thy brother’s eye.” —Zoist.


p 2


~


36 Cure of apparent Consumption, and of Dropsy.


denly convulsed from some unknown cause. He had been in
this state 48 hours when I saw him. From the violence of
the illness, his head and heels almost met, and the whole
body was perfectly rigid. I made a few “ passes” over him,
when the rigidity gave way, and the body got into its natural
position. He went into the mesmeric sleep at once. This
was about two o’clock in the day. He slept till one o’clock
that night, when he awoke for a second, and went to sleep
again until twelve o’clock next day, and then awoke in perfect
health, which he still enjoys.


IV. Apparent Consumption.

Mrs. Hursh, Temple Street, apparently, and said to be, in
the last stage of consumption, having been ill nineteen con-
secutive weeks. She was attended by Dr. Foretooth. Her
father and sister had died of consumption. She had gone
through a severe and debilitating process of common medical
treatment. On my arrival at her bed-side, the cough, pain
of the side, sinking of the eyes, partial loss of voice, and great
prostration of strength, indicated unmistakeably that life was
fast moving off. I mesmerised her once for an hour, and she
felt herself a new being altogether; and I mesmerised her
only a few times more, when all consumptive symptoms left
her ; and she felt every way well, except the weakness, which
a nutritious diet soon removed. She is now quite well. I
could send you a list of 40 cases of apparent and alleged con-
sumption alone, nearly as far gone as the present, that
I have cured by mesmerism.

Mr. James Morrissy, 23 Clarendon Street, has been cured
of apparent consumption in its second stage by me. Dr.
Peebles, of 26 Dorset Street, attended this man for ten weeks.
He was unable to leave his bed. The disease was getting
worse. He sent for me: was mesmerised five times; drank
mesmerised water for three weeks ; and is now quite well, and
at work.

V. Dropsy.

John Smyth, Temple Street, aged two years and seven
months, had been suffering from dropsy for fifteen months,
and gone through medical treatment all this time in vain.
When the doctors had done their best, or their worst, as the
case might be, they gave him up as incurable. I was then
summoned to attend. On examination, I found a flabby
swelling of the parts affected, with a great increase in their
temperature, a dryness and pallor of the skin, scanty secretion
of urine, though he was drinking large quantities of liquids to
extinguish thirst. There was a troublesome cough, and teasing


Cure of Skin Disease, and of Inflammation of the Bowels. 37


hiccup, which greatly distressed the little invalid, who re-
quired to be kept in an erect position for fear of being suffo-
cated. I began to mesmerise him, and, until two hours had
expired, no change appeared. Suddenly, the bowels began
to act ; there was a copious discharge of urine and sweat ; and,
after three quarters of an hour, the child felt better, called for
something to eat, and slept well that night. Accordingly as
his treatment progressed, all the bad symptoms began gradu-
ally to subside. I mesmerised this little fellow 114 times ;
gave him mesmerised water; put him on a prescribed regimen ;
and he is now quite well. He never went into the mesmeric
sleep until his cure was entirely finished. This extraordinary
cure in a child so young, and so far gone, has astonished all
his friends. It is not long since I cured another boy aged
twelve years of the same disease, after six physicians in con-
sultation had pronounced him incurable: and the cure,
indeed, astonished myself.


VI. Skin Disease—Psoriasis.

Miss M. Naylor, aged fifteen years, residing on Arbor Hill,
had been afflicted for five years with this abominable scourge.
Every mode of treatment which she had gone through had
utterly failed in making the slightest impression on her fearful
disease. From the effects of all the drugs she had taken, she
was reduced to a mere skeleton, with all the incipient symp-
toms of consumption. This horrid disease had first made its
appearance in the form of red itching patches: these became
covered with small scurfy laminz, or scales, which were
easily rubbed off. Deep fissures had formed in many parts,
such as the face, head, neck, &c. There was a fetid discharge
from both ears, and her eyes were nearly blind. This young
lady was mesmerised 180 times; drank mesmerised water ;
and observed a prescribed regimen. She slept profoundly
every time. She is now perfectly cured. The eruption has
entirely disappeared ; the sight is perfectly restored ; the fetid
discharge from the ears all gone; and the skin, before so dis-
gusting, is now transparently clear and fair, and of snowy
whiteness. This young lady became clairvoyant; has told
the hour to the very second, and predicted the sudden death
of her grandmother in England two days previously. Being
perfectly restored, she has returned to her father, Major Naylor,
Queen’s Bays, Royal Barracks.


VII. Fearful Inflammation of the Bowels.
Mrs. Naylor, wife of Major Naylor, and mother of the


38 Three doctors petrified and advising strangely.


above named young lady, had been using corrosive drugs,
both externally and internally, for the cure of obstinate skin


disease, without deriving any benefit. Inflammation of the
bowels, to a most alarming extent had supervened; and,
strange to say, three most eminent physicians, Drs. Durham,
of Nahor’s Quay, No. 23, Foretooth and Molagh of the
Queen’s Bays, Royal Barracks, (the English of this last
name, which is pure Irish, is malediction,) who had been in
constant attendance two days and nights, could not arrest its
progress; and, when, in spite of drugs, all the premonitory
symptoms of death were present, they left, saying that she
would be a corpse in ten minutes. Kind providence would
have it that one of her nurses at once recommended mesmer-
ism, and said that, if had recourse to even in articulo mortis,
it would most indubitably bring back life. Accordingly I
was sent for; and, on my arrival, a lifeless patient, to all ap-
pearance, lay before me. I began the usual enquiries and
examination in such cases. I could hear no breathing; could
feel no pulse, nor heat in her frame. The body had a cada-
verous appearance; the jaws were firmly locked; and the
countenance throughout fearfully disfigured from the effects
of the awful convulsions which had preceded her loss of all


consciousness.


The abdomen was enormously tumefied, and


there was an obstinate constipation which, from the outset of
the disease, had defied all the drastic means had recourse to,
by the above-named three “ most eminent” physicians.

With these encouraging symptoms, and in the presence
of twelve other witnesses, who came to be present at hei
death, I began to impart to her the all-powerful and seldom-
failing influence of mesmerism. In a few minutes the bowels
gave way, the eyes, which had been closed in apparent death,
opened, the palsied tongue moved, and in three quarters of
an hour all was right again; and she, who had been to all
appearance dead, sat up and began to speak. Language is
totally inadequate to convey an idea of the amazement of the
The recovery of this lady by mesmerism was
soon noised abroad; her three eminent physicians were
amongst the first who ran to see if it could be true. Nothing
could equal their surprise. They said that her recovery was
miraculous ; and, after a short pause, told her, as she felt so
well, not to dip any deeper into mesmerism, as it was found that
its repetition was debilitating and dangerous: especially the


bystanders.


sleep. ‘ Impossible,


”?


replied Major Naylor; “for, if what


you say be true, my daughter, who has slept upwards of


180 times, must be more than dead. But she is all life,


Cure of Measles. 89


and cured of her psoriasis.” This silenced the three eminent
physicians, who directly made their best bow, and withdrew,
evidently disconcerted.

This lady was quite well, and went out in ten days time.
She remains quite healthy up to this time. She did not go
into the mesmeric sleep at all, and drank mesmerised water
copiously. The three eminent physicians who attended first
had, during this lady’s convalescence, sent, and gone them-
selves, to induce her to take some little opening medicine ;
but she could not be prevailed upon to do so; and, in reply,
said she did not require it; that mesmerism was all-sufficient.
Major Naylor remarked that they merely wanted to see if
she was drug proof. Whenever mesmerism is spoken of in
the presence of these great physicians, they ludicrously toss
up their aristocratic noses in such a manner as to impress all
present that the very word itself conveys some disagreeable
influence to their olfactories.


VIII. Measles.

Three days ago, I had been called to see Misses Fanny and
Emily Barr, Barrack Street, aged three and five years, who
were very sick in the measles. There was great fever, anxiety,
restlessness, irregular convulsive movements of the limbs, and
bleeding from the nostrils. Miss Fanny seemed entirely un-
conscious, and unable to recognize any one. I mesmerised
these children only three times: when they were perfectly
cured, as well in fact as if they had never had measles. These
were the only cases of measles that I ever had an opportunity
of treating by mesmerism during my ten years’ practice of it.


IX. Epilepsy.

Charles Cavanagh, Esq., magistrate, Born’s House, County
of Carlow, and son to Lady Harriet Cavanagh, had been af-
flicted with epilepsy from his birth in an unusually severe and
uncommon manner. He had travelled the wide world to get
cured, but all in vain. He had been under the medical treat-
ments of Sir Philip Crampton and Sir Henry Marsh of this
city for three years, without receiving any benefit. He was
accompanied by his mother to my residence, and, after some
time, I succeeded in influencing him. I then dismissed him,
with the assurance that he should be free from any attack
until that day month, -provided he attended me daily. This
seemed to surprise both him and his mother, as he never
passed a night since his birth without being attacked. At
the end of the month he had a very slight attack, and none
at all for two months more. This was three months alto-
gether without being ill but once. The enemy of all good


40


Death in Epilepsy.


would have it that he suddenly changed me for another mes-
meriser, who had but a few weeks’ experience and the little
information received from a few lectures on mesmeric science.
I wrote to both parties on the danger of submitting to another’s
cross influence in such a case, and stated that death in all its
horrors would be the final consequence. But all to no effect.
The convulsions returned in a most terrific manner, and bid
defiance to empirical mesmerism. The man’s countenance
fell; gloom had overspread it ; he went home almost insane,
and next morning was found in his bed-chamber burned to
death! ! !
I remain, with respect and esteem,
Your obedient servant,
B. B. Morrison,


PS.—I could add to these instances of mesmeric success
a vast number of others ; but the above will suffice just now
for all intents and purposes.


IV. An account of the living and dead brain of the late Mr.
Benjamin Robert Haydon, historical painter. By Jamzs
Srraton, Esq., of Aberdeen, and some other gentlemen.


I. Notes on the Cerebral Development, by James Straton, Esq.


Tue stucco cast sent me is obviously the first from a mould
of the head taken after death: many of the hairs from the
head are adhering to the cast. The mould seems to have
been carefully taken. The top of the head had been bald,
and the hair round the back and sides had been short, but
not shaved. The mould had been made in three pieces, and
the ridges of stucco on the cast where the pieces joined have
been cut away. In doing so, the workman was quite justified
by practice hitherto prevalent ; but the practice is pernicious,
and should be abandoned. When such a cast is taken for
scientific purposes, no tool should touch it after leaving the
mould: no scraping, rubbing, cutting, or smoothing, should
be permitted. We must henceforth insist on having the
most ample means of judging both of the excellencies and
the defects of every specimen which we value.

The average dimensions of the stucco representing the
brain and its coverings are full 7-4 inches long, 5°75 broad,
and 3°85 high: the size is therefore 165 cubic inches. The
stucco cast is generally larger than the head which it repre-
sents, in consequence (1) of the imperfect joining of the


HEAD OF THE LATE MR HAYDON, THE PAINTER


Dimensions of casts, heads, and brains. 41


pieces of the mould, and (2) of the expansion of the stucco
in the act of consolidating. I have frequently seen casts 12,
15, and 20, inches larger than the heads they represented,
although first copies from the original mould ; and I have also
seen 30 inches of difference between two casts of the same
head.

These are some of the particulars which have hitherto
been overlooked, and we shall meet with others as we pass
on: their importance will be obvious.

Taking it for granted that the moulding and casting were
done with proper care and skill, I will estimate the excess in
size of the cast as not more than 5 inches beyond that of the
head represented, and consequently hold that the living organ
would have measured 160 inches.

From the fine texture of the hair, and the sharp, well
defined, features of the face, I infer that there was a consi-
derable dash of the nervous in the constitution, or tempera-
ment, and therefore that the bones of the skull, the integu-
ment, and muscles, were thinner than the average to the
extent of one-tenth of an inch on each of the three dimen-
sions, length, breadth, and height.

Lest this appear fastidious precision, I will in a sentence
or two shew its importance and necessity. Let A, B, and C,
represent three males at maturity—that is, fifty years of age.
Let each of the three heads be exactly the same size—say
150 cubic inches, being the average of the mature male head
in this country. A is of highly nervous temperament, and
the bone, skin, &c., covering the brain are the minimum
thickness ; B is highly lymphatic, and the coverings are the
maximum thickness; C is an equally mixed temperament,
having the coverings of the brain of average thickness. Now,
after carefully measuring the thickness of the bones, muscles,
and skin of a great number of cases after death, I am justi-
fied in stating as a near approximation to the truth, that,
though all the three heads measure the same size externally,
yet the sizes of the brains they enclose are very different.
Let us bear in mind that it is the size of the drain, not of the


head, which it is essential to obtain. The cases given stand
thus :—


A. Brain, 120 inches; bone, skin, &c., 30 inches; in all 150 inches.
B. Brain, 80 inches; bone, skin, &c., 70 inches; in all 150 inches.
C. Brain, 100 inches; bone, skin, &c., 50 inches; in all 150 inches.


_ From these we see that, whilst C is an average man in
size of brain and mental power, B is only equal to the average
boy of ten years old in these particulars, and A is far beyond


42 Absolute and relative size of Haydon’s head.


the average man at maturity, being quite up to the class of
minds in which Haydon ranks. From these we see also that
very much of the power which has hitherto been attributed to
quality is really due to quantity, of brain ; and, though doubt-
less something still remains attributable to quality, the influ-
ence is so little compared with quantity, that I have not yet
been able to give quality a definite value, either plus or minus.
So far as I have gone however all is certain, and greater pre-
cision is unquestionably possible if it be important. Nature
has provided ample facilities, as I have elsewhere shewn,* for
determining the thickness of the bone, muscle, and integu-
ment in the living head, and the dead cranium can be easily
measured at all points; but plaster casts of both heads and
crania leave us very much in the dark on these particulars,
and hence their greatly inferior value for the purposes of
science.

After making the addition which seems to be warranted
by the specified conditions to raise the skin, bone, &c., to the
average thickness, we obtain a volume of head equal to 175,
and, deducting 5 for expansion of stucco, as previously stated,
we have 170 as the size to which the living brain corre-
sponded. We can now specify Haydon’s place in the scale of
cerebral development and power, and compare him with the
mass of men at his age.

Haydon was about 60 years old at death. The human
brain attains its greatest development at 50 years of age, as
I have formerly shewn (Zoist, January, 1851). At that age,
the average size of the male head in this country is 150 cubic
inches ; the smallest (excluding idiots) is 110; and the largest
(excluding a few extremely rare instances) is 190 inches.
Mr. Haydon’s place is therefore just half way between the
average and the largest of his age and sex. This size of brain
and concomitant mental power may be called full, ample,
large indeed, but certainly not great, either as a whole or in
any of its parts. About five of every hundred of his age and
sex are quite his equal in this country, and as many are
superior to him in cerebral development and power.


Absolute and relative Size of the Head.


Males at maturity: smallest, 110; average, 150; Haydon, 170;
largest, 190.


* This paper would exceed all reasonable bounds for the pages of The Zoist
were I to enter into particulars which I cannot in justice to the subject in hand
avoid adverting to. I must therefore refer the reader to more ample details con-
tained in an abstract of my researches which I have furnished to the Appendix
of Dr. Symes’s forthcoming translation of Gall’s great work on the Anatomy
and Physiology of the Brain.—J. S.


Absolute and relative size of each of his organs.


Absolute and relative Development of the Cerebral Organs.


43


eee se

ORGANS. } Haydon. Average. [Superior | Inferior.

1. Amativeness .................. | 155 | 160 | 155 | 180

2. Philoprogenitiveness ......... | 175 | 155 | 160 | 150

8. Concentrativeness ............ | 165 | 150 | 160 | 145

4. Adhesiveness................. | 165 | 150 | 150 | 150

5. Combativeness ............... | 175 | 150 155 | 180

6. Destructiveness ............+.. | 180 150 | 155 | 190

7.. BERIOIEIUMEND...... <<, c0<.cecesors | 175 | 150 | 155 | 185

8. Acquisitiveness ............... 175 | 155 | 165 | 180

| 9. Constructiveness ............ | 175 | 150 | 155 | 155

| 10. Self-esteem ..........c.c00-0. | 170 | 180 | 160 | 155

11. Love of Approbation ...... 165 | 145 | 150 | 135

er re | 170 | 155 | 160 | 145

| 13. Benevolence ............c0000 | 170 | 150 | 175 | 125

14. Veneration 170 | 150 | 175 | 185

gg SS eee ae rerryr | 165 | 155 | 175 | 145
16. Conscientiousness ............ | 170 | 150 | 170 | 140 |
a ee eee rears ere | 170 | 150 | 160 | 185 S|
_ ARE 170 | 150 | 160 | 135 |
eee 170 | 145 | 160 | 125

_ “Se aees 170 | 140 | 160 | 125

| Wh, FD snasenneccecsesccpten | 175 | 145 | 160 | 135

22. Individuality .................. | 165 | 150 | 170 | 145

De WU Gridilstenvcnsoseniverinaies | 165 150 | 170 | 145

| “ee eA pg ane Bap oP | 175 | 150 | 170 | 145

25. Weight ......0sscserereee | 180 | 150 | 170 | 145

Rs I iso ns Care cnscapdlizes 175 | 145 | 160 | 140

eT EET | 175 | 150 | 170 | 145

Pe ii sou nickecsins patos | 165 | 150 | 170 | 140

De siensteiiesite 155 | 145 | 165 | 135

| 30. Eventuality ...............+0 155 | 150 | 170 | 140

£3 Sse ee | 165 | 150 | 165 | 135

8 ae 165 140 | 160 | 130

Ra eres 170 | 150 | 170 | 140

A, COD. cockccvsccmancsten 160 150 | 175 | 135

35. Causality ...... 170 | 150 | 175 | 130


The development of each part or organ, as well as of the
whole brain, was ascertained by measurement exclusively.
There is no guesswork or “ estimating by the eye and hand”


according to the usual practice.


The method of measuring


cannot be described in a few lines: I must therefore again


refer to Gall’s Appendix.


The principle on which the deve-


44 Absolute and relative size of organs.


lopment of each organ is stated in the columns is simple,
definite, and easily understood.

The size of the head,—the development of the whole being
170, as we have just seen, that number (170) is used to
indicate the development of each organ which is in medium or
equal balance proportion to the whole brain. If therefore all
the organs were developed to an equal extent, they would all
be in medium, or equal, balance proportion, and each number
in column Ist (Haydon’s) would be 170. We never find
this, however, in any individual instance. It always happens
that some of the organs are more, and of course others are
less, than the equal balance development. Indeed, it seldom
happens, particularly in the male head, that all parts are so
near the equal balance development as in the present case.
This is one of its marked peculiarities. Ten of the thirty-five
organs are exactly the equal balance development,—170;
fourteen are below (being 165, 160, and 155); and eleven are
above, the medium proportion, being 175 and 180.

It will be noticed that the absolute or positive develop-
ment (not relative only) of each part is shewn by the numbers
referred to; and, in studying the organs either individually,
or in groups, the absolute development, and the power which
that development is capable of manifesting, is a point of first
importance. If the development of any of the organs was
stated as being 110, the individual would, in that faculty, have
no more than the power of the average boy of six years, and
would, consequently, be all but an idiot throughout the entire
range of the function of that organ, whatever the training,
health, and other circumstances might be. In columns 2, 3,
and 4, average examples of males at the same age are shewn
for comparison, as will be explained farther on. In column 4,
it may be observed that many of the propensities are up to the
maximum of the mature male (180 and 190): whilst the su-
perior sentiments and reflective faculties barely equal those of
the average lad of 12 to 15 years—namely 125 to 135.

In Haydon’s development no organ is less than 155. He
was therefore quite equal to the average man (shewn in
column 2) in development and power, even in the most de-
fective organ: whilst the most prominent (180) are far on to
the maximum of his age and sex.

The next point to be noticed is the ReLative development
of the various organs. This, as is well understood, determines
the tendency of the individual. Here again two particulars
have to be kept in view, (1) the direction of the tendency,
and (2) its force or power. The direction of the tendency is
determined by the functions of the respective organs, as to


.


a le tS iS lle


en


Phrenologists but little advanced since Gall. 45


lust, to avarice, to pride, to vanity, by the excess of certain
organs, or the reverse by their deficiency. The power or
force of the tendency is shewn by the difference between the
s absolute degrees of development of any two or more organs,
as between 160 and 165, 170, or 180. When the difference
is under 10, the tendency is only seen in testing circum-
stances, and by those who have ample opportunities of study-
ing the character minutely. But when the difference amounts
to 15, 20, or more, the power of the tendency becomes ob-
vious to all, and forms the leading features of the individual
character.

With these particulars in view, we are prepared to ap-
preciate to some extent the capabilities and tendencies of the
: case in hand ; but, to aid us still farther in this, I have placed
beside Mr. Haydon’s development that of the average man,
—including all classes of society,—of the same age in column
2nd; the average of the superior or educated class of society,
including doctors, lawyers, professors and teachers, artists,
leading merchants and manufacturers, &c., in column 3rd;
and the 4th column shews the average of the most degraded
of our nature, whom [ have found in jails, asylums, hospitals,
and phrenological museums.

I have followed the naming, numbering, and mapping of
the cerebral organs shewn on the Edinburgh Bust and Mr.
Combe’s System of Phrenology, as being that most generally
known in this country; and I take it for granted, for the
moment, that the localities and functions of the organs there
specified are tolerably near the truth. But I must also avow
my conviction that much of what has been done by others
than Gall must be done anew, and with far more definite and
positive evidence in view than has yet been collected. When
the followers of that great man learn from his example
to appreciate precision, and to enjoy the certainty, the calm
4 satisfaction, which scrupulous accuracy in collecting, recording,

and investigating evidence can alone give in this, as in every

other department of science, they will first be amazed at the

flimsy foundation of some parts of their faith, and then admire
| the unceasing toil with which Gall collected and sifted evi-
' dence, and the caution with which he drew conclusions from
what would to many seem superfluous evidence. As I am
impressed with these convictions, my remarks will be brief
4 compared with what many “ professing phrenologists” might
be disposed to indulge in.

We have in the case before us a man far beyond the aver-
age of men in cerebral development, and mental power, but


det in i Ra aa


416 Haydon’s organs pretty equally developed.


also decidedly below a small per centage of the community
in these particulars. Excluding the bulk of the people, the
labouring classes, from the calculation, Haydon ranks quite up
to and even slightly beyond the mass of the directing minds
in the active business of life in this and other countries. In
many departments of science and literature, art or eloquence,
he was capable of rising far, very far beyond mediocrity : but
in none was he capable of attaining the highest excellence.

The amount of power which he could manifest for a time
on a subject engrossing his attention would be decidedly in-
creased by the near approach to equal development of many
of the cerebral organs. This is a peculiarity which I have long
noticed in such cases. It is much more common in youth
than in maturity, and much more common in females than in
males. Who has not been at times astonished at the Her-
culean efforts, both of mind and body, put forth by females,
when under the influence of some engrossing emotion,—a
sense of duty, a labour of love, or a mission of mercy. All
are like effects, and spring from like causes. From the
general equality of the parts, the whole organism seems to
act simultaneously with a unison, a harmony, not compatible
with a greater inequality of the parts. It is on such indi-
viduals that circumstances exercise the greatest influence in
forming the character. It is such individuals as these that ma-
nifest the greatest change of disposition when placed in changed
circumstances. Haydon most closely resembled this class,
and was in marked contrast to the classes represented by the
3rd and 4th columns of averages. In those of the third, the
sentiments and intellect decidedly preponderate, and the in-
dividuals are seldom reduced to vice and depravity by the
most adverse influences. In the 4th, the propensities greatly
preponderate, and the victims are rarely rescued by the most
favourable combination of circumstances.

In Haydon’s development the first organ in the column
arrests our notice. The cerebellum, the organ of Amative-
ness is usually from 5 to 15 above the medium of the male
brain, and, in grovelling natures, it is often greatly in excess,
as shewn in the 4th column. Haydon is not only below the
medium of his development (170) in this part, but even a
shade below the average man, (col. 2nd), being 155 to an
average of 160. Licentiousness would not, therefore, be a be-
setting sin with him; and, if Haydon at any time joined in
the fashionable nocturnal vices, we may fairly attribute the
error more to the influence of associates, than to his own de-
pravity. The other social organs are all unusually powerful for


Lateral organs preponderate and coronal expanded. 47


a male brain. He must have been a home-loving man, a
faithful husband, a doting father, and constant friend to
those whose friendship was congenial to him.

All the lateral parts, Combativeness, Destructiveness,
Secretiveness, Acquisitiveness, and Constructiveness, are
slightly in preponderance. This is not usual at mature age,
as may be seen by comparing his with the next two columns.
The impulsive energy of this group must have been marked
peculiarities of his character at every period of his life, but
more so in youth than after his fiftieth year. Self-esteem
and Firmness are rather less, and Love of Approbation de-
cidedly greater than usual in the mature male brain of this
size; he would hence be less proud, but more vain; less dog-
matic, but more sensitive regarding the opinions of contem-
poraries, and the judgment of posterity, than our mature
males generally are. The relative development of this group
to the other parts of the brain is more that of the French,
than either the English or Scotch, characteristic, and more
that of the female than of the male in this country; equally
active and more energetic, often wayward, and always impul-
sive, he could often appear to others as changeable and in-
consistent. Conscious that he possessed high powers, yet
suspicious that others might excel him, he could not avoid
envy and jealously. He could join in complimenting parties
present, and in railing at them when absent. He could often
promise and forget to perform, and frequently begin with
enthusiastic ardour what he could not complete with patient
perseverance.

The anterior parts of the coronal region, including the
organs named Benevolence, Veneration, Wonder, Ideality,
and one or two unknown organs, are beautifully expanded.
It is not uncommon to see the two first named, the central
organs, Benevolence and Veneration, beyond the medium
proportion in all sizes of mature heads, but we very seldom
see the lateral part of the group up to the equal balance
development as in this instance.

Unfortunately our knowledge of the localities and func-
tions of this important group of organs is still in the most
unsatisfactory state. We find the part mapped out and
named on the model busts, one way in Edinburgh, and
another in London; one way in Paris, and another in New
York. The organs named, and the functions assigned to
them, must therefore be regarded as merely conjectural till
additional evidence establish the truth. This much is certain,
however, that the part in question is intimately connected
with the love of the new, the improved, the excellent, the


Anterior organs.


beautiful, the perfect, the grand, the sublime, and the poetic
in mind and matter. Equally certain is it that the part in
question is defective in the young, compared with the ado-
lescent and mature brain ; defective in the low and grovelling,
compared with the aspiring and refined; defective in the
stationary and sinking savage, compared with the progressing
and civilized in every quarter of the globe.

An ample development of the group referred to is un-
doubtedly indispensable to artistic, as to every other refined
excellence, and Haydon was thus endowed to a very unusual
extent. We can therefore fully believe that his ideals were
vivid, exalted, grand, and varied; and that his anxiety to
grasp, to imitate, and to embody his ideals in material ex-
pression, must have been intense for a time, till new objects,
new scenes, new creations obtruded on his active imagination.

The anterior part of the brain, including the perceptive
and reflective organs, covered by the lower half of the frontal
bone is, viewed as a whole, scarcely up to the medium for the
size of the brain; and if, instead of measuring the organs
from the centre to the periphery,—from the medulla to the
convoluted surface, as I do, we were to estimate this lobe
from Constructiveness, or any point before the ear, as some
maintain it should be done, then Haydon, instead of being
nearly up to the superior average (col. 3) would barely reach
the general average,—barely reach mediocrity as shewn in
column 2nd.

This moderate development of the intellectual lobe is to
me, who had some vague notions of his being a great man,
an unexpected peculiarity. I have generally found that male
brains of so large a size, well balanced otherwise, and actively
engaged through life, have this part up to 175, 180, 190, and
even higher at mature development. Of the artists whom I
have examined, and who have attained a respectable place in
their profession, there happens to be none below 160 in this part
at thirty years of age. Three amateurs of my acquaintance
who have reached a fair degree of excellence, two as painters
and one in sculpture, by practice in the few leisure hours
which extensive business engagements leave them, have the
anterior lobe up to 190, 200, and 210 respectively. The
mask of Canova, taken after death at an advanced age, when
the whole brain had probably as usual diminished consider-
ably from the mature dimensions, shews all parts of this lobe
essential to the artist fully 190. For years past I have been
in the habit of dissuading youths from adopting art as a pro-
fession except I was quite sure that the intellectual organs
would exceed 160 ere they reached their thirtieth year ; hold-


Haydon’s intellectual organs defective. 49


ing as I did that a lower degree of intellectual capabability
could not ensure them even a moderate living in the prac-
tice of their profession. It is quite possible, however, that I
err to some extent in underrating the power of an intellectual
development of 160. Fortunately the error, if it be so, is on
the safe side. Certain I am, that, if Haydon, who scarcely
averaged 170 in this part, achieved great things in art, there
is a fair sprinkling of our living artists who, if their training
has been equal or superior to Haydon’s, are capable of
achieving decidedly more than he did,—at least so far as
artistic greatness is achieved by intellectual power.

Individuality, Form, Order, Eventuality, Comparison, and
an unknown organ between Comparison and Benevolence,
called Sympathy by Mr. Prideaux, and ‘“ Human Nature” by
the Americans, are among the least of Haydon’s intellectual
organs,—ranging from 155 to 160. This is a development
and power so little beyond mediocrity that their cultivation,
up to a point of high excellence, must have been a work of so
great labour that we may well doubt whether it was ever
accomplished, and may take leave to ask whether the defects
of development in these particulars are not obvious to well
trained eyes in the most carefully executed of Haydon’s
works.

What these defects may altogether include I am not
enough of an artist to say: but it appears to me that inappro-
priate forms, ungraceful and untrue drawing, particularly of
objects in motion or action, vague and indefinite outlines,
faulty composition, arrangement and classification, and trust-
ing for effect to peculiar management of light and shade and
tint and colour, instead of elaborating truth, grace, and
beauty, by masterly manipulation, would be obvious parts of
his defects. He would imagine more than he could delineate,
and perceive excellence which he could not imitate; just as
the imbecile and the infant, who cannot themselves speak,
nevertheless understand quite well what others say. In many
essential particulars his intellectual faculties were unable to
embody by his hand the objects and forms in the action, spirit,
grace, and beauty, which his mind could create. Did Haydon
not mistake in the choice of his profession? At 20 years of
age his cerebral development was 5 to 10 less in the lateral
and posterior, and 20 less in the coronal and anterior parts (see
my appendix to Dr. Symes’s Gall) than at his death. At 20
years of age much greater chances of success, with equal labour
and study, might have been safely predicated of him as a writer
or speaker, an orator or actor, a preacher or a poet, than as a


painter or sculptor. He would have had as much energy in
VOL. XII. E


50 Mr. Straton’s phrenological deductions agree with


declamation as Father Gavazzi, with much more elegance
and grace in his rhetoric and much more sound logic in his
reasoning.

The most important particulars that can be added are the
history, the education, the intellectual, and moral training, of
Mr. Haydon, and the judgment of those fully competent to
judge of his productions. Knowing as we now do what his
brain was at maturity, and proximately what it had been
at all previous periods of his life (Zoist, January, 1851, and
more fully in the Appendix to Gail), we can recognize similar
developments when we meet with them at any period of youth,
and we desire to know what that development is and is not
capable of achieving in art and in every other department,
so that we may neither over nor underrate its powers. Haydon’s
must be an instructive example so far as it goes. What then
were the excellencies, and what the defects of his works? In
what did he succeed, in what did he fail ?

I had written thus far in ignorance of Mr. Haydon’s his-
tory, life, and labours, excepting the vague impressions, rather
calculated to mislead than otherwise, which passing reports
or newspaper notices had left on my mind. I had never met
him, nor obtained a knowledge of his development, (a mask of
the face is in most of the museums, but it is of little use,) to
give interest in his doings. I intended to add nothing farther :
but some acquaintances, who knew more of Mr. Haydon than
I did, read my notes, and a friend pointed me to an excellent
paper on the subject in the Edinburgh Review for October
1853. The writer seems to have studied the character atten-
tively, and to appreciate his labours justly. We agree on
many points, but the evidence of Haydon’s insanity is, I fear,
too strong to be resisted. Of course, to whatever extent, and
for whatever length of time, that was the case, he is unsuitable
for our present purpose. During a long period of his life,
however, his exertions to rise in his profession and to raise it
were every way admirable; but latterly his moral character
in some particulars, his miserable life and deplorable death,
are torturing to contemplate. We can only wonder that the
crisis was delayed so long.

Mr. Haydon began to draw and resolved to be a painter
at a very early age. His education and training with that
view were unquestionably good. If not the best that might
have been, yet, assuredly, much better than many great
artists had access to. Let us glance at the results as reported
by the writer in the Review just named.

** As it has been well observed, ‘failures detract little from the
reputation of those who have done really great things;’ but it was


the opinions of the Edinburgh Review. 51


the misfortune of Haydon that he never did anything great enough
to make us forget his failures. Often in describing what he means
to do, he places a far finer picture before the mind’s eye than his
hands could realize. The sublime shapes which throng his fancy in
the hour of meditation when he sits down to his easel refuse to wait
upon his summons. It is not that he could not give to these spirits
a form; he could not give to forms a spirit to lift them to the height
of his own conceptions.” (p. 526.) ‘For in spite of the Elgin
Marbles—in spite of his admirable theories of excellence—in spite of
labour never spared, and perseverance never daunted—his picture of
Dentatus, with many fine points, and energetic drawing, is violent,
mannered, even in some parts caricatured.” (p. 534.) ‘‘The Judg-
ment of Solomon is certainly the best in composition and in colour;
with less confusion in the arrangement, and less of exaggeration and
effort in the individual forms than is usual with him. The vindictive
sneer on the face of the wicked mother is too vulgar, too like that of a
common female cheat; the draperies are heavy and ungraceful, and in
texture like wet wool; but altogether it is a fine picture.” (p. 536.)
“The head of Lazarus—staring ghastly with awakening life—is
finely conceived ; the head and figure of Christ a failure—and worse
—positively bad and mean. Wherever refined or purely intellectual
feeling was required, Haydon has seldom succeeded. As in the ex-
pression of power he is almost always exaggerated, so in the expres-
sion of refinement he is almost always weak or vapid.” (p. 548.)
“In 1829 he painted a picture of Punch—a satire on human life—full
of power and humorous expression in the heads, and with bits of
charming colour and fine painting.” (p. 554.) ‘The human face
divine was always a trouble to Haydon when he could not do what
he liked with it. It was remarked that in both his pictures of
Napoleon and Wellington he had turned away the face.” (p. 563.)


Perhaps the time is not come when Haydon’s works can
be fully judged of with stern impartiality: but the above
remarks, touching matters of fact rather than of opinion or
fancy, are not likely to be materially modified by lapse of
time or change of taste. It does not appear then that the
case of Haydon will justify any modification of the views I
have stated,—that an intellectual development under 160, or
even 170, is incompetent to either great or uniformly good
productions in the highest walks of art; though it is unques-
tionably true that capabilities far below his are ample for
many of the departments of art extensively demanded in
every civilized country. For miniature, cabinet, and casket
work, for engraving, decoration, and ornament, in which
activity, not energy, minute manipulation, dexterity, and
patient industry are required, cerebral developments ranging
from 135,—the average female, to 150,—the average male, at
maturity, with a fine constitution, and the anterior lobe
slightly preponderating, are the best adapted. The impul-

E 2


52 Estimate of Haydon’s talents by an artist.


sive energy of the large brain and preponderating lateral
region render such as Haydon quite unsuited for these de-
partments. A Haydon must either be great or nothing. If
he failed, none but those more highly gifted by nature can
entertain a rational hope of success. A “ happy hit” or two
in inspired moments may save from oblivion, cherish hope,
inspire confidence, fire ambition, and—consign to misery for
life. Such is the lesson of Haydon’s history, as of many others
before him ; but few are so complete and so instructive as his.


II. The following remarks have been sent us by a Phrenological
Artist, who knew Mr. Haydon well.


The first time I saw Mr. Haydon was when he was con-
templating the beauty and grandeur of the Elgin marbles
in the British Museum. This first sight I had of him did
not impress me in his favour, as he had put his body into a
most pompous attitude in order to shew the public how a
great genius would arrange his body and limbs for viewing
works of high art. Previously to my first sight of Mr.
Haydon, I had been informed that he was an artist of great
genius, and that there was no historical painter who could be
compared with him; but, on seeing him in such an affected
attitude, I concluded that a very unjust estimate had been
formed of him, and that he was a most vain and pompous
person acting under the impulse of the organs of Love of
Approbation and Self-esteem. These organs were his great
moving power; and he could with ease make bold attacks
upon other painters, caring not about the truth of his asser-
tions, but only about the force of the blows he could inflict,
having Destructiveness, Wit, and Language large. Adula-
tion he was continually seeking, and would receive flattery
from mere pretenders with as much satisfaction as he would
from his superiors. This was an unfortunate weakness in
him, and laid him open to much condemnation, though he
could not act otherwise than as he was organized. Since
his organs of Comparison, Eventuality, and Individuality
were small, good sound sense could not be expected from
him: and particularly, as he came from a vain stock (his
father having an over and above share of vanity), and had been
trained in vanity, we had no right to expect correct reason
from him. His action, habits, speech, and his criticisms on
art, were of a turbulent character. If we look to his profes-
sional qualities—his choice of subjects, we shall see a pre-


His pictures very defective.


ference for violent action ; tranquil and peaceable subjects
were not exciting enough for his active organs of Destruc-
tiveness and Secretiveness.

In his early career, when he produced his picture of
Dentatus, he was pronounced to be a great genius; but I
could not help then concluding from his eccentricities that
there was more of insanity than sanity in him. The subject
was one of violence, and he gave Dentatus a most ferocious
and slaughtering attitude, of commonplace character. His
picture of Macbeth shewed considerable talent, and from
it the hopes of the lovers of art were raised to a high
pitch: but they were not realized. It had a murderous sub-
ject, and was the best he executed. Solomon’s Judgment was
the third picture he painted—another instance of his prefer-
ence for violence. Sword and dagger subjects must have
had charms for his contemplation. This picture is almost as
good as the Macbeth; but the story is not so well told, and
there are several discrepancies in it: the wise man’s legs are
much too short—the mother’s expression is too cold—the
false woman does not express herself correctly—Solomon is
devoid of the expression that the subject demands, he is too
like a modern youth: but the executioner is more true, and
is expressive of what he has to perform. This picture and
Macbeth are by far the best pictures that Haydon painted.
The next picture was Christ’s entry into Jerusalem, and was
much more defective than the previous two: but there were
many parts of the figures well painted, though the subject
was feebly treated. Such a peaceable subject must have ill
suited his turbulent mind, and consequently could not be
treated successfully. His other pictures—the Raising of
Lazarus, &c., &c., are not worth mentioning, so inferior are
they to the previous three: and the reason of this inferiority
was the increase of his insanity. The unharmonious arrange-
ment of his organization was the cause of the inconsistencies
that pervaded his works; and as he was so deficient in the
organs of Individuality, Eventuality, and Comparison, it was
out of his power to portray natural expression and action :
and I have no doubt that he was not aware of this inability,
but considered his artistical productions as perfection, from
the small size of the requisite cerebral organs.

_ He was equally inconsistent in his actions as he was in
his artistical labours. He cared not from whom he borrowed
money, nor about returning it. He obtained it by very
unworthy means, stating unwarrantable falsehoods in order
to induce the unwary to part with their money for a month
or two to save him from difficulties: but, after it was in his


5


I Facts and opinions respecting Haydon


possession, he never troubled himself about the poor artists
who had lent him their all, and they had the greatest difficulty
in getting their money back again.

I was always surprised on finding that others could not
see his insanity, so painfully apparent as it was; and the
more so when his works, which were as inconsistent as his
mind, could be so easily compared with his habits, manners,
and actions. But amidst his insane ways he possessed much
cunning, and to the religious and moral he could appeal with
a fervour that was sure to cajole them out of their sense and
reason.


III. Some extracts from an article in the Quarterly Review
for last September on his biography compiled by Mr. Tom
Taylor from his autobiography and journals.


** The last page of (Mr. Tom Taylor’s Life of Benjamin Haydon,
historical painter) should have been the first. There we read that
Benjamin Robert Haydon died on the 22nd of June, 1846, by
‘ self-inflicted death,’ and that—

«The coroner’s jury found that the suicide was in an unsound
state of mind when he committed the act.’—iii. 322.

“This is, we think, the key to his whole life—/e mot de [’ énigme
—the explanation of a series of delusions, follies, eccentricities, and
inconsistency, such as we believe were never before deliberately re-
corded—of wild talents mistaken and misapplied—of extravagant
pretensions and feeble powers—of enthusiastic professions of piety
and honour, shamelessly contradicted by a laxity of practice which
can hardly be less severely characterized than as dishonesty and
swindling. We can have no doubt that the mind was ‘unsound’—
or, to adopt the vulgar but expressive metaphor, cracked—from the
beginning. The main symptom was the early mistake of fancying
that he was destined to be a great painter; while there was, on the
contrary, hardly any vocation in which his cleverness, ardour, and
perseverance would not probably have had better success. This
misconception of his vocation, and the wayward eccentricities of style
by which he endeavoured to conceal and supply the want of natural
powers, brought on failure, disappointment, and distress. Then
came mortified vanity, degrading want, and desperate old age—


‘** Tristisque senectus,
Et metus et malesuada fames et turpis egestas.’


** Such a life has obviously no just claims to the distinction of a
special biography, and one’s first impression is, the less said about it
the better. He himself seems to have had misgivings that no one
would be found to write it, and his characteristic vanity provided
against such neglect by writing it himself. He left behind him his


in the Quarterly Review. 55


‘ Autobiography’—a narrative of his life to 1820—which occupies
the first of these volumes. ‘This,’ he desires in his will, ‘may not
be curtailed by an editor.’ Whether this has been exactly obeyed
the editor does not say; he hints, indeed, that it has been ‘ com-
pressed ;> but more than enough remains; ‘as to the rest of his
life,’ says the will, ‘his journals will suffice.’ These journals are
twenty-six large folio volumes.”

“Our wonder is that any person having the least personal regard
for Haydon should have consented to the appearance of a work
which does him no credit as an artist, and is positively disgraceful
tohimasaman. It will be pleaded that Haydon himself ordered
the publication in his will. No doubt he did, but what was that
but another symptom of his mental infirmity? The will was written
but a few moments before the final act of insanity. Admitting,
however, that he had throughout his life the same design, the same
question will arise, Would it have been justifiable to have lent him
a pistol or procured him poison to execute the suicide which he com-
mitted, merely because he were mad enough to desire it, and is it
more justifiable to have helped his posthumous insanity to inflict
suicide on his character ?”

“Tt is both morally and physically curious to have from the
patient himself so remarkable an example of the co-existence in the
same mind of, as Dryden phrases it, ‘ wit and madness,’ of sagacity
and delusion, of a sound judgment on many subjects with a perma-
nent and incorrigible aberration on one.”

** We find—apart from his delusions about himself and his own
style of art—no inconsiderable degree of acuteness and justice in his
appreciation of artistical subjects, and particularly a great deal of
critical and biographical observation and information on the works
and private characters of his contemporaries, too often, no doubt,
tinged with something of personal spleen and jealousy, but, on the
whole, freer from such blots than we could have expected from the
peculiar temper of the man, or from the general effect of profes-
sional rivalry. His natural disposition was to be kind and candid.”

“Haydon, though incapable of producing even a tolerable por-
trait with his pencil, turns out to have had a great deal both of talent
and taste in sketching with his pen. By dint of what may be called
enthusiasm for art—but which would be more generally and justly
characterized as impudence and importunity—he forced himself into
communication with a number of the most eminent men of his day,
not only in art, but in literature and politics ; and by registering, as
he did assiduously in his journals, what he saw and heard amongst
them with an easy and off-hand cleverness, evident diligence, and
general good faith, he has left us a collection of anecdotes very en-
tertaining, and not without a certain importance as to the characters
of several of the most remarkable personages of his time and
ours.”

“Haydon was born at Plymouth on the 25th of January, 1786,”
the son of a bookseller, and “was bound apprentice to his father’s
trade, for which it soon appeared that he had neither taste nor


56 Violent and self-deluded from boyhood.


temper.” ‘‘ He was of a temperament that during his whole career
created opposition where he would not otherwise have found it. By
a series of accidents he was inoculated with a love of drawing. He
probably had some hereditary turn—we cannot say taste—that way;
for his grandfather was, if Northcote may be credited, an execrable
amateur dauber. It happened too that one of his schoolmasters
and two of his father’s apprentices and an Italian bookbinder in his
employ had the same propensity :—

““*The apprentices,’ he adds, ‘thought they were geniuses
because they were idle. One, I remember, did nothing but draw
and paint.’

**Haydon’s own turn for drawing seems to have been much like
that of the apprentices—an excuse for being idle :—

** * My father’s business realized a handsome income: I had no-
thing to do but to pursue his course, and independence was certain,
but my repugnance to my work grew daily. I rose early, and wan-
dered by the sea; sat up late, and pondered on my ambition. I
hated my books, ledgers, &c. I hated standing behind the counter,
and insulted the customers. I hated the town and the people in it.’

“‘One day, after insulting a customer, he flew out of the shop
and never entered it again.

*** Now what was to be done? Into the shop I would not go,
and my father saw the absurdity of wishing it. He was a good,
dear, fond father. We discussed my future prospects, and he asked
me if it was not a pity to let such a fine property goto ruin? “I
could not help it.” ‘* Why?” ‘ Because my whole frame con-
vulsed when I thought of being a great painter.” ‘‘ Who has put
this stuff into your head?” ‘Nobody; I have always had it.”
“You will live to repent it.” ‘‘ Never; I would rather die in the
trial.” Friends were called in; aunts consulted; uncles spoken to:
my language was the same; my defestation of business unaltered ;
my resolution no tortures of the rack would have altered.’


About this time his eyes became inflamed, he was blind
for six weeks, and the inflammation became chronic, so that
he never perfectly recovered his sight. Yet this only exas-
perated his ambition and resolution to become a great painter.
People said, “ What folly! How can you think of being a
painter? Why you can’t see.” “I can see enough,” was
his reply, “ and see or not see a painter I’ll be; and if 1 am
a great one without seeing, I shall be the first.” This he
calls the stirring of the Divinity within him.

** «Tt is curious,’ he writes in his journal, ‘‘ that my dim sight
never occurred to me as an obstacle. Not a bit of it. I found that


I could not shoot as I used to do: but it never struck me that I
should not be able to paint.’ ”


The reviewer never saw one of his pictures without a
strong impression that he had an eye even for form, but
above all for colour, different from that of the rest of man-


Wild fancy of the use of anatomical knowledge. 57


kind. This seemed to depend on hereditary organization,
for he tells us that, when on his arrival in London he waited
on Northcote, the old gentleman,


*** Looked maliciously at me and said, ‘I remember yeer vather,
and yeer grandvather tu; he used tu peint.” ‘So I have heard,
sir.” ‘Kes; he peinted an elephant once for a tiger, and he asked
my vather what colour the indzide of ’s ears was, and my vather told
un, reddish, and your grandvather went home, and painted un a vine
vermilion.’ ”


Before he left the country he bought two casts of the
Discobolos and Apollo :—


***T looked at them so long that I made my eyes ill again. I
doated over them, I dreamt of them, and when well, wandered
about the town in listless agony in search of books of art.”


He found Reynolds’s lectures and a volume of anatomical
drawings :—


«The spark which had for years lain struggling to blaze now
burst out for ever. I came down to breakfast with Reynolds under
my arm, and opened my fixed intentions in a style of such energy
that I demolished all arguments. My mother, regarding my looks,
which probably were more like those of a maniac than of a rational
being, burst into tears. My father was in a passion, and the whole
house was in an uproar. Every body that called during the day was
had up to bait me, but I attacked them so fiercely that they were
glad to leave me to my own reflections. Affection for home was
smothered, not extinguished, in me, I thought only of London—
Sir Joshua—drawing—dissection—and high art.’

‘One of his ideas of high art was, that a painter must be a
practical anatomist ; but of what use could anatomy be to one who
never attained any certainty of copying even the external form of the
living model? Of what avail was it to him to ‘get by heart all the
muscles of the body? How many heads to the deltoid? [one of the
humeral muscles.] Where does it rise? Where is it inserted?”
‘If he could have accurately copied that action from his model, he
had all of the deltoid that was required for a representation of visible
nature, which is the object of the painter. No one will deny that a
knowledge of anatomy may enable an artist to understand better the
appearances of his models, but we cannot see how it will advance
the power of imitating them. Old Northcote and others, whom he
talked to, told him plainly ‘it was of no use;’ that Sir Joshua, like
most, if not all great painters, knew nothing about it.” But, being
summoned home to his father’s death, ‘‘ ‘ he got bones and muscles
from the surgeon of the hospital and was hard at work that very night.’
Well might his uncle, after seeing him stretched on the floor of his
lodgings in London studying anatomical plates, report to his afflicted
father, ‘Oh, he is mad—he is certainly mad.’

“We have dwelt the longer on these early proofs of an obstinate


58 Fate of Haydon’s great pictures.


irregularity of mind, first, because it grew with his growth, and is
to be traced, we think, in every subsequent event and production of
his artistic life, but still more, because they show that all the ver-
biage about grand style and high art with which he duped himself,
and not a few followers, were really the self-excuses of a man who
had neither eyes to see, nor judgment to appreciate, any more than
he had a hand to copy the simple and unexaggerated aspects of
nature.”


After his professional career had begun,


‘The insatiable pretensions, importunity, and ingratitude with
which Haydon confesses that he harassed all his patrons, we might
say his patients, must tend to disgust even the most benevolent
from the indulgence of either taste or charity in that direction.
There is, we think, no instance in which those whom Haydon ap-
plied to in his distress, high or low—and his audacity neither spared
the highest nor his meanness the lowest—who did not help him
kindly, liberally—many of them nobly; and there is not one towards
whom these pages do not attest his flagrant ingratitude and in-
justice.”


He thanked God that he never had a patron, as Jackson
had in Lord Mulgrave,


**¢ And I would have shewn the door to any man who had offered
me such patronage.’ But within ten pages we find him in rapturous
extasy at obtaining through the recommendation of that very Jackson,
the patronage of that very Lord Mulgrave. ‘This roused my spirits.
I had got my first commission for a grand historical picture to
set me going, as Lord Mulgrave had promised.’ ‘I was really become
a public character.’ And the whole of his after life was employed
in shifts—sometimes very mean—to allure patrons, whom he as con-
stantly disgusted by his incapacity, his arrogance, his worryings, and,
in some instances, his extortion.”

“The fate of his pictures painted before 1826, he himself was
doomed to record in that year, when old Reinagle the artist asked
him, ‘Where is your Solomon, Mr. Haydon?’ ‘Hung up in a
grocer’s shop.’ ‘Where your Jerusalem?’ ‘In a ware room in Hol-
born.’ ‘Where your Lazarus?’ ‘In an upholsterer’s shop in Mount
Street.” ‘And your Macbeth?’ ‘In Chancery.’ ‘Your Pharoah?
‘In an attic pledged!’ ‘My God! and your Crucifixion?’ ‘In a
hayloft.’” ‘And Silenus? ‘Sold for half price.’ And ten years
later, ‘an accomplished Frenchman came to my room to see my
works, “I havenone.” ‘ Where are they?” ‘“‘ My Solomon is rotting
in a carpenter’s shop—my Lazarus in a-kitchen!’’ These bitter
lessons had no effect on Haydon: and he persisted in pursuing the
same ungrateful class of subjects in the same unpalatable style of
execution, and went on believing, or at least asserting, to his dying
hour, that this universal neglect arose from the hostility of indivi-
duals, and the bad taste of the public, and not from any demerit in
the repudiated pictures.”


His wildness and impetuosity. 59


He all at once resolved to turn portrait painter, notwith-
standing his contempt for such art and a promise to Fuseli
that he would never practise it, and had painted and exhibited
and sold a successful historical piece, and had a commission
from Lord Mulgrave for another—the Dentatus. He went
down to Plymouth, painted his friends at fifteen guineas
a head, and execradle as he confesses his portraits were,—


“* Rapidly accumulated money, not probably because my efforts
were thought successful, even by sitters, but more because my friends
wished to give me a lift.’ ”

* All that followed was delusion and deception, and, because he
found that he could not paint reality at Plymouth, he hastened back
to paint fiction, which he called history, in London.”


His Dentatus took him two years altogether, and fifteen
months of uninterrupted labour. In October, 1808, when
he was more than half way in the time occupied, we find the
following entries in his journal :—


*** 1808, Oct., Tuesday. Determined to obliterate my principal
figure, and did so: what time one loses from inexperience! I now
am happy that it’s over.

*** Wednesday. Had Sam, one of the Academy porters—he sat,
and I sketched in the whole of my figure much better.

‘“«* Friday. Put in the head of my hero.

«Saturday. Dashed out my head without a moment’s hesitation.

*** Monday. Painted the chest of my dying figure.

** * Wednesday. The chest of my dying figure looked so miserable
that I rubbed it out.

*** November 17th. My hero’s head is finished: but I see that
it is not what I had determined on, and so out it comes to-morrow.

** Monday 21st. Expected a model that never came. ~Got a West
Indian I picked up in the street : a fine head. Took out my hero.’

* After the last rubbing out of his hero’s head, he adds,

“**T have made up my mind that it shall be such as the GREAT-
EST PAINTER THAT EVER WAS would have made it.’ ”


Yet it is considered by the reviewer to be “an absurd
chaos of vulgarity and distortion ;’ and, when, two years
after its exhibition at the Royal Academy, he went to Lord
Mulgrave to look after it, he heard that it had been “ nailed
up in its packing case and left in a stable.”


“ Before he began Solomon (considered by many to be his best
picture), he had this dialogue with his friend, Mr. Prince Hoare,—

““*What are you going to paint?’ ‘Solomon’s Judgment.’
‘ Rubens and Raffaelle have both tried it.’ ‘So much the better,’
I said, ‘ I'll tell the story better.’

** Even in the last months of his exhausted life, while he was
expending the last dregs of whatever power he possesed in an almost


60 His unprincipledness.


mechanical reproduction of his own Napoleon and Wellington, he
stands before one of those manufactures and apostrophises himself in
a burst of admiration.

*** What magic ! what fire! what unerring hand and eye ! what
Sancy ! what power! what a gift of God! I bow and amgrateful.’”

Yet ‘he was, it appears, a good husband, an affectionate father,
and—a less ordinary merit—a kind and even fond step-father.”

** What he may have been in ordinary social life we know not,
but the journals afford such innumerable instances of friends made
and lost, and yet regained, and of dupes deceived and cheated, but
who were still willing to be deceived and cheated to the last, that we
cannot doubt that he must have had, under a decided air of vulgar
arrogance, considerable plausibility, and even attraction—perhaps
naturally—when he had a point to carry.”

“The most prominent features of his journals are the disgraceful
manceuvres by which he endeavoured to escape from the pecuniary
difficulties in which his folly and extravagance had ‘ steeped him to
the very lips.’”” ‘Whenever it came to a question of payment,
£s.d. were only the symbols of Lies, Shifts, Dishonesty. He
seems to have out-Sheridaned Sheridan.” ‘ He lived in an agony of
pecuniary difficulties, amounting, as he tells us over and over again,
to madness, and that certainly was sufficient to have produced it in a
sounder mind. He was in the company of bailiffs and in sponging
houses oftener than we can reckon up: he was four times in prison,
and twice passed through the Insolvent Court without having paid
his creditors a penny ; and he died at least £3000 in debt, and this
after having received more benevolent patronage (which we distin-
guish from a mere purchasing patronage), more pecuniary assistance,
more indulgence, more liberality, and in fact more charity than any
artist that we have either read or heard of.”

** He had the unpardonable dishonesty of inducing some of the
young and inexperienced pupils, whom his pretensions and fanfaron-
nades had procured him, to sign bills, on which he raised money,
leaving the poor youths and their families to get out of the scrape as
best they could.”


“ He declared war against the patrons, the connoisseurs,
the Academy, and the whole artistic world.” He confesses in
his diary that his friends advised him to be quiet, but that he
was unmanageable, and that the idea of being a Luther or
John Knox in art got the better of his reason.


“In the midst of all these wild and wayward extravagances, and
these reiterated instances of culpable misconduct, we are at first
startled and afterwards shocked at the introduction of frequent and
energetic prayer,—shocked, we say, because these solemn addresses
to God are grievously misplaced in such a journal, and are themselves
conceived in a tone the very reverse of what a really devout spirit
would have prompted.”


Here are specimens :—


His distraction. 61
*«*Q, God, Thou who hast brought me to the point, bring me
through that point. Grant, during the exhibition, nothing may
happen to dull its success, but that it may go on in one continual
stream of triumphant success to the last instant. O God/ Thou
knowest I am in the clutches of a villain: grant me the power entirely
to get out of them, for Jesus Christ’s sake. dmen. And subdue the
evil disposition of that villain, so that I may extricate myself from his
power without getting further into it. Grant me this for Christ’s
sake. Amen, with all my soul.’”

“«* Perhaps God may punish me, as he did Napoleon, as an ex-
ample, for pursuing a grand object with less regard to moral principle
than became a Christian,—that is, raising money to get through,
careless of the means of repaying ; though I had reason to hope the
aristocracy would have helped me, by purchasing, to keep my word.’

“He chooses to forget that the aristocracy, and the democracy
too, had helped and helped him till he had wearied them with never-
ending improvidence and never-mending incapacity ; yet he pursued
the same reckless course even when all reasonable hope was ex-
hausted—everything was exhausted except his self-sufficiency and
these wayward formulas of devotion.”


After toning down a cloud to his satisfaction one day, he
writes,—

** To Paan! and I fell on my knees, and thanked God, and bowed
my forehead and touched the ground, &c. This is B. R. Haydon—the


real mau—may he live a thousand years! and here he sneezed.
Lucky ! ”


His difficulties increased. He competed for designs to
embellish the Houses of Parliament—and wrote in his journal,


***T trust in God, and we shall see who is most powerful—He
or the Royal Commission. We shall see !’ ”


And he failed—“ a total and humiliating failure.’ He
made an exhibition of his recent works: and this failed. His
agony was dreadful—increased hourly.


*« «20th. O God, bless us all through the evils of this day. Amen.
«21st. Slept horribly. Prayed in sorrow, and got up in agi-
tation.
«22nd. God forgive me. Amen.
Finis
of
B. R. Haydon.
*« «Stretch me no longer on this rough world.’—Lear.
*«« End of the Twenty-sixth Volume.’ ”


“To this Mr. Taylor adds,—
“«* This closing entry was made between half-past ten and a quar-
ter to eleven on the morning of Monday the 22nd of June. Before
eleven the hand that wrote it was stiff and cold in self-inflicted death.


His suicide.


On the Morning of that Monday, Haydon rose early and went out,
returning, apparently fatigued, at nine. He then wrote. At ten
he entered his painting-room, and soon after saw his wife, then
dressing to visit a friend at Brixton, by her husband’s special desire.
He embraced her fervently, and returned to his painting-room.
About a quarter to eleven his wife and daughter heard the report of
fire-arms, but took little notice of it, as they supposed it to proceed
from the troops then exercising in the park. Mrs Haydon went out.
About an hour after, Miss Haydon entered the painting-room, and
found her father stretched out dead before the easel on which stood
his unfinished picture of Alfred and the first British Jury—his
white hairs dabbled in blood—a half-opened razor, smeared with
blood, at his side—near it a small pistol, recently discharged—in
his throat a frightful gash, and a bullet-wound in his skull. A
portrait of his wife stood on a smaller easel facing his large picture.
On a table near was his Diary (open at the page of that last entry),
his watch, a Prayer-book (open at the Gospel for the Sixth Sunday
after the Epiphany), letters addressed to his wife and children, and
this paper, [containing his will, &c.,] headed, ‘Last thoughts of
B. R. Haydon, half-past ten:—No man should use certain evil for
probable good, however great the object. Evil is the prerogative of
the Deity.’”


IV. An account of the appearances after Haydon’s death, with
some reflections upon Phrenology and Phrenologists, by
Dr. Elliotson.


‘* Men ought to know that, from the drain only proceed pleasure and joy, and
laughter and sport, as well as griefs, anxieties, sorrows, and weeping. By it we
are wise especially, and understand, and see, and hear, and appreciate what is
base and honourable, good and bad, pleasant and unpleasant, distinguishing them
partly by habit, partly by their utility. By it we distinguish what is pleasurable,
and what disagreeable, according to circumstances; and, by it, the same things
do not please us in all circumstances. By it we are insane and delirious;
experience terrors and fears, partly by night, partly by day; and sleeplessness,
and ill-timed errors, and groundless cares; do not recognize those who are with
us; lose our habits, and forget our experience. And all this we suffer from the
brain if it is not healthy, &c.: wherefore I say, that the brain is the messenger
and interpreter of intelligence and wisdom. But the precordia have obtained
the name of @péves among the Greeks, by custom, not from fact and nature ;
and I know not what property they have of knowing and understanding, except
that in sudden and great joy or sorrow they leap,’’ &c.—HipProcraTEs on
Epilepsy.


I knew Mr. Haydon, from having been requested by him
to visit some of his family in sickness, and I always cheer-
fully gave them my professional assistance. At the time of
his suicide, Mr. Walter Bryant of the Edgware Road invited
me, with great good feeling, to assist in the inspection of the
body. It was a frightful sight to behold him on the floor


His character. 63


with a gun-shot wound in his head, a deep gash in each side
of his throat, and a half-opened bloody razor at his side.
The melancholy of the scene was increased by the strong
marks of vanity in the arrangement of the death show—the
body lying in his painting room, before an imperfect picture
on his easel, a portrait of his wife placed opposite, and his
diary open and just completed. When it is considered that a
prayer book also lay open at the gospel for the sixth Sunday
after the Epiphany, and there were affectionate letters ad-
dressed to his wife and children and a paper of directions, con-
fessing distraction and wildly expressed insane vanity—“ I
have done nothing all my life that will render me fearful of
appearing before the awful consciousness of my invisible God,
or hesitate to explain my actions !”— and a hope that his
worthy and unworthy creditors would forgive him,—the whole
was harrowing and an epitomeof his previous life. Imperfection
in his art—inordinate vanity—selfishness—strong domestic
affection—bitterness, moral unscrupulousness, which is surely
unprincipledness—violence—only moderate intelligence, pha-
risaical airs, and superstition, characterized him. His religion
was very different from genuine piety. It was the feeling and
conduct which might be shewn towards a very powerful per-
son who could inflict misery and grant him what he wished—
grant that his son should get through the examination at
Cambridge, that he might sell two of his pictures, and that
people should flock to the exhibition of his pictures,—to
effect which purpose he wrote also strong and vulgar puffs.
Mr. Taylor accurately describes his prayers as “ begging let-
ters, in fact, dispatched to the Almighty,” and adds that
his faith “ was not strong enough to induce a calm and stead-
fast waiting upon God’s will.””*

The cerebral composition and organization of Haydon,
with the circumstances in which he lived, explain his whole


* Mr. Taylor archly adds, as to his prayers, ‘ that it must not be forgotten
that the prayers of many eminently pious people, and indeed of whole churches
and sects, are little more than this ;’’ and, as to his faith, ‘‘ neither, as it seems
to me, is the faith of the most prayerful persons of this character,’’ (vol. iii.,
p. 357.)

People desire public prayers and fasts against the cholera and other epi-
demics, but never against railway accidents, however thickly, epidemically, these
may occur. All depend equally upon natural causes : but the causes of the latter
are understood, and therefore praying against them is never thought of—but the
companies are looked after.

Haydon believed in omens. ‘ In driving along the cab-borse fell. Would
any man believe this annoyed me? As an omen, the same thing happened before
the Cartoon contest. Such are human beings. Napoleon’s coach broke down
on his return from Elba.”” ‘In putting in my letters for the private day, I let
three parts fall on the pavement—about 300. Another fall! now for the truth
of omens.’’— Diary, March 29, 31, 1846.


64 His cerebral development.


life, as they do those of every being from the cradle to the
grave. His composition gave him a highly sanguine tempe-
rament, so that his colour was florid and his whole frame
most excitable: and his brain partook of his general compo-
sition and nature. He walked fast, as thousands must have
seen: I have heard that he ate fast: he talked fast; was
sudden and quick in action, and dashed impetuously even in
painting : he prayed very hard.

Let any ever so little acquainted with the true physiology
of the brain, as discovered by Gall, look at his cast,* and
not read the whole character. The three lithographs were
executed from a calotype kindly made for me from the cast
by Mr. Barker, of North Crescent, Bedford Square. On
looking at the front view, we are struck with the great size of
the lateral organs—of violence (Destructiveness), cunning
(Secretiveness), love of property (Acquisitiveness), and Con-
structiveness: the deficiency of the central organs of the
forehead—those of talent for observation and comparison (In-
dividuality and Eventuality, Comparison). The lateral view
shews the enormous Love of Notoriety (vanity), and—the
domestic group, Philoprogenitiveness, or love of offspring,
Friendship, and probably an organ of Marriage,t—and the
moderate development of the forehead. The back view ex-
hibits the great breadth above the ears and the great size of
Combativeness.

Thus the brain of Haydon, like every other when consi-
dered with full knowledge of cerebral physiology, confirms in
the most ample manner the discoveries of Gall. What can
scoffers at the true physiology of the brain reply? The his-
tory of Haydon’s life is not made for the occasion: nor has
the cast been got up for the occasion. They are both inde-
pendent of us: and so were those of Rush, the Mannings,
and all the others presented in The Zoist to the public. I
have no hesitation to declare that every person who rejects
Gall’s physiology of the brain is totally ignorant of it, and
incompetent to give an opinion. Those who reject it, after
having formerly received it and upheld it, prove that they
had accepted it upon no good grounds, but from mere feeling
—imitation—credulity, and neglect of careful study of nature
herself: and that their present is as worthless as their former
opinion—that they are not sound and hardworking men—but


* I have placed the original cast in the Mesmeric Institute of London
(36, Weymouth Street, Portland Place). Casci, the Italian, who took it for me,
furnishes others at his house, No. 3, Harford Place, Drury Lane.

+ From my own observation, I fancy, with Gall, that there are such a faculty
and organ, and that they fie close to the love of offspring.


Gall’s cerebral physiology and true science. 65


are led by feeling more than intellect. For phrenology is to
a great extent a matter of fact, not of opinion; a science ;
but, like every other science, is still limited and imperfect.

Forty years have now elapsed since I first began to study
phrenology, and not by books only but also by observation ;
and I have not passed a day without bestowing upon it some
reflection and observation. The subject to which I have de-
voted all my adult life is the nature and treatment of diseases.
Whatever else I have studied, anatomy, physiology—both at
large and of the brain inclusively—chemistry, &c., &c., has
been in subservience to the practice of medicine: and there-
fore in none but it have I attempted original observation
and investigation. No person can be properly acquainted
with the diseases of the nervous system who is not a phreno-
logist: and I have not seen any reason to change the con-
clusions to which I came almost forty years ago respecting
the functions of various parts of the brain. I wrote in its
favour in 1817, in the Annals of Medicine and Surgery—now
a very scarce book, in my notes to every one of the five edi-
tions of my translation of Blumenbach’s Physiology,* in ail
my lectures, and in The Zoist from the very first number
through the eleven years of its course. At this very moment
I declare my conviction to be the same as ever—to be as
strong as my conviction of anything which I know in astro-
nomy, chemistry, or any other science, and to be fortified
by the additional experience of every day which has passed.
The reason of this is that I have admitted nothing which
examination into nature did not satisfy me to betrue. I
read all that Spurzheim and other phrenologists advanced on
discoveries unknown to Gall; but I never concluded that
these were true because they were advanced. I soon saw the
difference between Gall’s statements and those of Dr. Spurz-
heim and others. Three and twenty years ago—


**I sent to Mr. Combe, for the Phrenological Journal, a paper
read by me to the Phrenological Society of London, with a title to
this effect, and bearing my name. In it I casually expressed my
regret that Dr. S. had not followed Gall’s plan of detailing the origin
and progress of each of his discoveries of organs and of laying a
body of individual instances in proof to his readers, but merely
made an assertion; so that one was inclined to think that he had
reasoned himself into the belief of faculties, and then considered
where their organs were most likely to lie; not having first met with


* Each edition contained less and less by Blumenbach and more and more
by myself, and the last contained so little by Blumenbach that I felt justified in
calling the book by my own name. The first edition appeared in 1815.

VOL, XII, TF


66 General ignorance of Gall’s werks.


the facts and extended his observations in consequence. Mr. Combe
thought proper to strike this out of the paper without communica-
tion with me.”—See my Human Physiology, p. 1162.


The dishonesty strack me as disgraceful—so wrong in
itself, so injurious to the cause of truth, that I ceased from
that moment to contribute to the Journal or to hold any
intercourse with Mr. Combe.* I saw that he was not a
lover of truth but of party. No party on any subject have
I ever belonged to in my life. I now boldly declare what I
declared several years ago—that phrenology would have now
been in a far better condition had neither Dr. Spurzheim nor
Mr. Combe, nor any other of the Edinburgh party, written a
word about it.t They caused a rapid increase of the number
of phrenologists: but of superficial and unsound phrenolo-
gists. They have damaged phrenology from the day they
each first wrote. They have not followed the example of the
great founder of the science, whose labour to discover truth
was immense, but have imagined, invented, and argued,
but neglected careful observation of nature. Mr. Combe and
his allies adopted what Dr. Spurzheim asserted, neglected
Gall’s writings, and to this wilful ignorance added cruel in-
justice to Gall. A great number of persons attended to
phrenology, and saw sufficient truth to make them converts.
They generally admitted all they read in the writings of Dr.
Spurzheim, Mr. Combe, and their allies who supported the
Phrenological Journal; making no distinction between what
Gall asserted and what these very inferior men asserted ; and
not one in a thousand ever read the writings of Gall himself.
They received all at once, in faith, indiscriminately, and would
have equally admitted a few dozen more organs had these also
been thrown in, regarding all as of course equally well founded


* ‘‘When I complained, his apology was that the Editor was answerable for
everything in the Journal, and that differences among phrenologists were inju-
rious; and that posterity would settle the respective merits of Gall and Dr. S.
I replied, 1. That the paper professed to be a certain paper read at a certain
place. If it was mutilated, it was not what it professed to be. 2. That, as it
bore my name, the Editor was not responsible for its sentiments, as in the case
of anonymous reviews in which everything is considered as the Editor’s. 3.
That when a phrenologist is wrong, the sooner his error is corrected the better :
the more error spreads, the greater will be the difficulty when the time arrives,
as it always must, for its correction: so as to Gall and Dr. S., if the present
generation of their cotemporaries allow injustice to prevail, posterity will have a
fine argument in our silence that all was right and Dr. S. what he pretended to
be.””—Human Physiology, p. 1162.

+ In 1843 I wrote, “I have a firm conviction that, if Gall’s 8vo. work had
been translated, and neither Dr. S. nor Mr. Combe had published their works,
phrenology would by this time have been far better appreciated and understood,
and would many years ago have been received as extensively as it is at present.”
—Human Physiology, p. 1161,


A race of mere believers generated. 67


on observation. Mr. Combe and his allies powerfully aided
this by always mentioning in print and in public speeches
that the two founders of phrenology were Gall and Spurz-
heim: while they knew that Gall was the sole founder; and
if they did not know it, exhibited a most deplorable and dis-
creditable ignorance.* All this I have urged for many years :
and it may be seen in print in those parts of the fifth edition
of my Physiology that were printed in 1837 and 1843, pp.
376—389, 1147—1162, which portions, I trust, will set the
world right upon these points for ever, and shew how
thoroughly dishonest and unsatisfactory was Dr. Spurzheim,
and how ignorant, dishonest, and unsatisfactory have been
Mr. Combe and his allies.

I feel acutely and write strongly upon this matter, because
phrenology has been put back thirty years by the Edinburgh
phrenologists. They spread phrenology greatly, and at p.
403 I gave them great praise. They saw phrenology was
true, and then boldly admitted it, and Spurzheim and Combe
gained money in abundance by their writings. But, through
the kind of converts whom they made, the race of phrenologists
in Great Britain have been led into groundless opinions, and,
as this is now growing evident, phrenology is being cast off
by those who learnt it from Dr. Spurzheim and the Edin-
burgh school. I asserted in 1837 that, if Gall’s works had
been translated, and not a syllable written by Dr. Spurzheim,
Mr. Combe, or the other Scotch phrenologists, phrenology
would have been more rapidly advanced. I will add that
it would have been admitted on solid grounds and now per-


* Mr. Combe, in the preface to his work entitled Functions of the Cerebellum,
p- xxiv, coolly says “ Drs. Gall and Spurzheim have the merit of having first
taught the true anatomy and physiology of the brain.” Now all the world know
that Gall had promulgated his discoveries many years before Dr. Spurzheim
was at all acquainted with one. Dr. Spurzheim was twenty years his junior,
and learnt phrenology by attending Gall’s lectures. In 1837 I wrote, ‘‘I am
not acquainted with six persons whose native tongue is English, even among
writers and lecturers on phrenology, who have not learned phrenology second-
hand from Dr. S., or third-hand from Mr. Combe’s writings, since these are
in English, and comparatively short, while Gall’s are in French, and of great
extent. That the injustice done to Gall is such as to demand the pains I
have taken, is proved by the custom among phrenological writers in the English
language of speaking of the system of Gall and Spurzheim, of the founders
of phrenology (for instance, Edinburgh Phrenological Journal, No. iv., p. 628 ;
No. v., pp. 98, 110; No. vi., p. 186), and the habit of such writers of
quoting from Dr. S.’s works passages which were written by Gall and are taken
from his works (Mr. Combe, Phrenology, p. 100, also p. 3, 5, and 44). Nay,
many of Dr. S.’s friends used always to declare that Gall had not given the phi-
losophy of phrenology, but merely collected facts. At a public dinner given to
Dr. S., Mr. Combe intentionally disparaged Gall by declaring that Dr. Spurz-
heim had infused philosophy and system into the facts brought to light by obser-
vation. Edinburgh Phrenological Journal, vol. v.”—Human Physiology, p. 387.

€


F


68 The proper mode of inferring from the head.


manently established in this country, instead of being with
most persons little more than an opinion or belief. I have
never contended for the truth of all the organs discovered
even by Gall. I am satisfied of the truth of a sufficient
number to establish phrenology as a science.* The truth of
those alleged to be discovered by Dr. Spurzheim and others
has yet to be established. This I have invariably said: and
it delights me to find that Mr. Straton, who is perhaps the
best phrenologist living, and has most laboriously made thou-
sands of original examinations, and examined more heads
than even Gall himself, and has the talent, the truthfulness,
and love of pure science that with industry render a man a
real philosopher, is of the same opinion.


*T must also avow my conviction that much of what has been
done by others than Gall must be done anew, and with far more
definite and positive evidence in view than has yet been collected.
When the followers of that great man learn from his example to
appreciate precision, and to enjoy the certainty, the calm satisfaction,
which scrupulous accuracy in collecting, recording, and investigating
evidence can alone give in this, as in every other department of
science, they will first be amazed at the flimsy foundation of some
parts of their faith, and then admire the unceasing toil with which
Gall collected and sifted evidence, and the caution with which he
drew conclusions from what would to many seem superfluous evi-
dence.”—Supra, p. 45.


* “Gall does not pretend to have discovered the ultimate nature of all the
fundamental faculties which he has pointed out. ‘I preferred,’ says he, ‘leaving
something for those who come after me to do, rather than give them an oppor-
tunity to disprove what I had prematurely advanced.’ (Fonctions du Cerveau, t. v.,
p. 243.) Neither does he pretend to have enumerated all the fundamental faculties of
the mind. ‘ Probably,’ says he, ‘ those who follow me in the career which I have
opened, will discover some fundamental forces and some organs which have
escaped my researches.’’’ (t. v., p. 406.)

** Constant strength of certain parts of the mind is accompanied by strong
development of certain parts of the brain, and, consequently, of the skull,
except in disease and old age; and deficient development of certain parts of the
brain, and, consequently, of the skull, accompanied by deficient strength of cer-
tain parts of the mind.” ‘ Inquirers, however, must not expect always to find
the converse of the statement verified,—to find strength of development always
attended by strength of certain parts of the mind ; nor deficiency of the mani-
festations of certain parts of the mind always attended by deficient development.
Because the development of the head may arise from other causes than brain, or
the quality of the brain may not be healthy ; and, on the other hand, deficiency
of the manifestations of a part of the mind may arise from mere want of excite-
ment, or from disease. The head may be large, generally or locally, from fluid,
morbid growth of bone, &c.; or the brain, though the cause of the size, may be
of bad quality from original fault of structure, from subsequent disease, or from
old age. But the existence of disease is generally known, and old age must be
evident. Again, defective manifestation of a part of the mind from mere want
of excitement rarely occurs except in regard to the intellectual powers ; for ex-
ternal circumstances almost always exist around sufficient for the play of the


Mr. Straton’s opinion of Dr. Spurzheim, &c. 69


It will be observed that every organ on which I rest the
proof of phrenology in Haydon’s head is one of those dis-
covered by Gall. The same is the case with those spoken
of by Mr. Straton, with the exception of Order, and the
existence of such a faculty Gall had always thought probable.
Mr. Straton, in a letter to me of March 4, this year, writes,


“All which Gall did is admirably done so far as it goes, and
he did a most extraordinary quantity of labour for one man, shew-
ing an example of industry, caution, care, and honesty, which is
yet without a parallel in any of his successors. That he approxi-
mated the locality and the function of at least twenty of the cerebral
organs, seems to me certain; but that considerable modifications as
to the boundaries and centres, considerable additions of organs and
subdivisions, and clearer definition of the functions, have still to be
made, appears equally certain.”

“In Spurzheim’s doings among the organs I have no confidence
whatever. It may be that I do him injustice in this particular.
Mr. Combe repeatedly stated to me that Spurzheim introduced
changes in the mapping when in America, so extensive that he
(Mr. C.) could never understand them. He states the same senti-
ment at the close of a paper in an early volume of the Phrenological
Journal.

“This ‘unkindest cut of all’ from an ardent admirer was fatal
to coufidence on my part, and his notions about estimating the size
of the organs goes far to stamp him in my mind as a reckless theo-
rizer. He tells us that he first drew attention to the breadth of the
organs which Gall had neglected, and Mr. Combe insists upon that
at great length, as well as the projection beyond points, lines, plains,
&c. These particulars lay directly in my way: I was compelled to
examine them, and must pronounce them puerile absurdities, refuted
by the most marked cases in our collections. I am however dis-
posed to think well of Spurzheim as a cerebral anatomist; but as to
the organs, I think much more of Vimont of Paris than any other,
excepting Gall. Vimont, you are aware, extends the list to 42, not


feelings. Thus, although any phrenologist may always without fear assert posi-
tively of the head from constant positive exhibitions of the mind, and always
fearlessly assert negatively of the mind from negative exhibitions of the head ;
he would not assert respecting the mind from positive exhibitions of the head,
nor respecting the head from negative exhibitions of the mind, without certain
provisions, viz., that the size of the head depends upon healthy brain, and the
deficiency of mind arises from no want of excitement, or from disease. Yet, in
the far greater number of instances, the development of the head agrees with the
mind. In the greater number of those in which it does not, the probability of
the want of agreement is evident; and in the rest, the phrenologist cannot be
wrong, because he will never assert from positive development of the head, nor
from negative manifestation of the mind. Even in unsoundness of mind, the
character generally agrees with the development; the parts of the mind that may
remain sound, generally manifest themselves according to the development of the
head ; and those faculties which are diseased, are usually excited in proportion to
the development of the corresponding parts of the head.’’—Human Physiology,
pp. 373, 374.


70 Positive-philosophy people.


including 4 or 5 said by others to exist. I am willing to admit the
whole 47 or 48 as probable, but very few of them as finally settled
in position, boundary, and function.”


It is gratifying to find that what I expressed so many
years ago to the astonishment and in the face of the Spurz-
heimite phrenologists is now corroborated by the man who is
perhaps the most qualified to deliver an opinion.


“Such was Gall’s philosophy that he told me that, although
Dr. 8.’s conduct had been such as to determine him never to see
Dr. S. again, he was far more vexed at the speculative turn which
Dr. S. gave to phrenology,—more vexed that, while he himself had
adhered closely to observation, Dr. S. had introduced conjecture and
inference from too few observations. Gall lamented to me this turn
in the Edinburgh phrenologists ; and so, strange to say, did Dr. 8.”
—Human Physiology, p. 386.*


Much as I rejoice in the opportunity of giving confirma-
tion to Gall’s philosophy by another head of a character whom
no one will dispute, I should not have laid Haydon’s head
before the public had not a full exposure of the poor man
been made to the public by the lamentable publication of his
autobiography. When I took the cast I longed to lay it
before the public, but refrained from delicacy to the deceased


and to his family for whom I deeply felt. But now that his
character is laid open to the world and I can mention nothing
which is not already universally known, and give no opinion
which is not already in print, I do not hesitate to discuss his
development for the sake of phrenology. To do this is in
fact a kindness to his memory. For it will prove to all that
he was the “man Haydon” by inevitable laws of nature—
that, as he did not make himself, nor a particle of his orga-
nization, so all his thoughts and actions resulted from the


* Some of those who profess adhering to positive philosophy often commit
the same injurious error. I recollect that the late well-knowa Mr. Taylor of
Norwich, who knew nothing of phrenology, told me that Gall had misplaced the
organ of Music; and that its seat was behind the ear. He could give me no
proof. All science is positive philosophy. If philosophy is not positive, it is
not science, not the knowledge of nature, but speculation on nature, and, if not
rather probable, is dreaming and may be absolute wildness. A friend writes
to me :—‘“‘In the little volume just published by Lewes, giving a translation or
epitome of Compte’s recent labours, there is a chapter on cerebral physiology, in
which Compte acknowledges that he is indebted to Gall for the first hints and
even the general outline of what is there given. But he turns round and accuses
Gall of having misplaced a number (I forget how many) of the cerebral organs.
This conclusion Compte reaches from theoretical considerations : Constructive-
ness, for example, should have been near Adhesiveness instead of being for-
ward in the anterior lobe. He seems to hold that Gall was at liberty to place
the organs where he pleased, instead of looking where nature had placed them.
If this is not a degree of ignorance of the first principles of positive science
that would disgrace a first-form schoolboy, judge ye.”’


Proper application of the doctrine of necessity. 71


brain which he was and the position in which he was placed
—resulted as inevitably as a tune does from a hand-organ—
accordingly as this is constructed and circumstanced after it
is constructed. Had his head resembled those of Oberlin
and Jeannin,* he would not have acted as he did. We
shall perceive it our duty to pity him, and confess that
with his organization and circumstances we should have
thought and done all that he thought and did, and thus
“pour contempt on all our pride.” “ Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do.” As to willing as we choose,
that is, willing without a cause, that is impossible. Every
thing, and the act of willing therefore like everything else,
must have a cause which effects the willing by absolute ne-
cessity. When the organization and composition are bad,
and when ordinary external circumstances do not produce
proper and virtuous willing, even with good advice and train-
ing, we are obliged to give additional motives to the will by
suitable conduct towards the erring individual and by what
is called punishment; that is, we must give stronger conse-
quences to their conduct than might naturally ensue. Every
body should be spoken and written of, and treated while
alive and when dead, exactly according to his deeds. Were
this not done, the bad would be ten thousand times worse,
and the good be afflicted and discouraged. As a dangerous
or loathsome brute animal or vegetable must be guarded
against and kept in its place, so must bad human beings, who
are to be viewed as bad articles, though to be pitied for being
so constituted. Thus the bad will be improved, and their
neighbours protected; and thousands, who would be bad, be
prevented from so turning out. By viewing conduct as the in-
evitable effect of certain causes, we shall learn to forgive our
most bitter enemies, to feel pity towards them, and to be anxi-
ous to reform them ; though we may also feel it right to avoid
them, restrain them, and hold up their conduct to condem-
nation. This is the use of examining organizations and
surrounding circumstances: this leads to true religion, what-
ever be the creed, and to a horror of malevolence.

The good we should admire and love, and yet not regard
them as really meritorious and real objects of applause,
but as beings who ought to be thankful, who are, in reli-
gious language, debtors to grace. So in regard to ourselves,
if we are stupid or wicked, we ought to despise ourselves as
bad articles; and if we are clever, handsome, or virtuous, we
ought to take no praise whatever, but be thankful and humble.


* See the engravings in No. II.
+ See what a lady and I say on free-will, No. XII., p. 416.


Appearances in Haydon’s head.


A person vain of birth, rank (however high), beauty, talent,
learning or riches acquired even by industry (for the spirit
of industry is a gift), or virtue, is so far a weak fool.


In Haydon there was unfortunate composition as well
as bad development. He was very florid, and subject to irre-
gular gout, and his whole frame was very excitable, and his
brain therefore so in common with every other part. All this
he increased by drinking quantities of hot port-wine negus
(and it was strongly sugared) ; and he really drank hard and
was once intoxicated just before his death. An honest man
in his straitened circumstances would not have spent a far-
thing in alcoholic drinks. Stimulants were poison to him.
Even flesh food was improper for such a man. Had he been
a strict water-drinker, he would have been less passionate
and impetuous, less unhappy, and possibly been still alive.
With his domestic affection he would, notwithstanding his
innate excitability, not have played the tyrant so much over
his wife and children, as he continually did, as well as over
his servants.

The skull and the covering or membrane of the brain
called dura mater were thick and dense, the membrane be-
come like vellum and grown very firmly to the skull—all
which appearances are common after chronic insanity and
chronic vascular excitement of the brain. The membrane
called arachnoid from its delicacy had become opake upon
the upper surface of the brain, and fluid had collected beneath
it, and there were innumerable bloody dots throughout the
substance of the brain—all which three appearances are
noticed after both chronic and recent vascular excitement of
the brain. His excitement had greatly increased latterly
and his head had ached much. The arteries also of the brain
bore the marks of long-standing disease. The large artery
called basilar from lying at the base of the brain was to a great
extent partly ossified, partly in the state called atheromatous.

Thus the innate morbid excitability of his head had gra-
dually increased as life proceeded till at length the structures
became diseased.

We found a gun-shot wound in the scalp at the lower and
outer side of the right organ of the Love of Notoriety or
Approbation,—of Vanity: and a pistol-ball had lain two or
three inches from it under the scalp: a fine circular fracture of
the external layer of the bone, with a little groove near it,
from the bone being chipped, containing lead to about one-
third of its length: and below this a much larger fracture of
the inner layer of the bone, and the latter fractured portion


His self-inflicted wounds. 73


was driven down upon the brain and ragged, having wounded
an artery and thus given rise to a clot of blood. We found
also a gash in the neck on each side, beginning very shallow
and far back; and the right gash beginning in two places,
shewing that he had no sooner begun to cut than he shifted
and lowered the razor and began again, for he had begun so
high that the razor must have gone against the skull-bone ;
the second, the completed, cut on his right side was deeper
at its origin than the corresponding part of the gash on the
left side: the gash on each side grew deeper as it advanced
forwards and downwards, wounding the external jugular vein,
but not the internal jugular vein nor the carotid artery, and
became again so shallow as to expose, but not wound, the
windpipe. He cut so high as to have little chance of wounding
the carotid artery, his study of anatomy availing him no
more than it had done in his drawing. The right gash ex-
tended further forwards than the left, and became very
shallow at its termination, wounding merely the skin. Of
course he first fired the pistol, and, when it had failed to
destroy him, cut his throat. There was a pool of blood at
the door, another at the easel, and blood all along the floor
between them. Whether he made the first gash at the easel,
and, having gone from some cause to the door, returned to
the easel and made the second; or whether he made the first
gash, or even the second, at the door, or only the second at
the easel, he managed to die at the easel before his unfinished
picture, and thus give effect to the scene: and the second
must have been that on the left side and made with the right
hand, for in this hand a razor was found very tightly grasped—
so tightly that the fingers continued rigidly bent after the
razor had been forcibly drawn from them before the body was
put into the coffin.*

Haydon was unquestionably of unsound mind: insane in
common language, but not insane in legal language, for no
one could ever have had the right of confining or restraining
him by force. Thousands who roam at large belong to his
class, inflicting hourly misery upon their innocent wives and


* The account published in the third volume of Mr. Tom Taylor’s book,
professing to have been received from Mr. Bryant and myself, was drawn up by
that gentleman from short badly written and unconnected notes, offered with the
most friendly feeling to Mr. T. Taylor, and is so inaccurate that Mr. Bryant and
myself are not answerable for it. A proof was sent to Mr. Bryant and one to myself
with a notice that it was to be corrected instantly while the boy waited, as though
it was sure to find us disengaged and required no reflection : and afterwards I
found that much was added which was not in my proof. Why the whole was
hurried so strangely I cannot say. I gave no opinion as to the effect of Hay-
don’s singular use of spectacles, as I am said to have done.


74 Dr. Samuel Johnson a great brute.


children, and tormenting their more distant relatives and
friends, and perhaps injuring their own means, They may
have no delusion, or monomania of intellect, (though Haydon
had the delusion of vanity,) but conduct themselves in an
absurd and perhaps distressing manner. Should their con-
duct lead to no acts criminally injurious to themselves or
others, we cannot restrain them; but, if it does lead to such
acts, we are allowed to restrain them. If they are inacces-
sible to the motives which ordinarily influence mankind, we
regard them as irresistibly impelled, and thus morally mad,
and we so treat them: but, if this cannot be proved, they,
having no delusion, are not considered mad but culpable.
This inaccessibility to ordinary motives requires decided facts
for its proof: and, where there is no delusion, it is sometimes
doubtful. We may call them mad as soon as they have killed
themselves, and are censured if we call them mad while they
are alive.


V. Mesmeric Cases. By Dr. Espatte. Communicated through
Dr. Elliotson.


“On the 7th I left town by express train to visit Mrs. Gwatkins at Plymouth,”
** the last relic left us of the Johnsonian-Burkeian period. She is in her eighty-
ninth year,’’ “niece to Sir Joshua Reynolds.” ‘She said she came to Sir
Joshua quite a little girl, and at the first grand party Dr. Johnson stayed, as he
always did, after all were gone: and that she being afraid of hurting her new
frock, went up stairs and put on another, and came down to sit with Dr. J. and
Sir soshua. Johnson thundered out at her, scolded her for her disrespect to him,
in supposing he was not as worthy of her best frock as fine folks. He sent her
crying to bed, and took a dislike to her ever after.”’

The old lady told him another anecdote of this coarse and self-sufficient man.
** She had a goldfinch which she had left at home. Her brother and sister
dropped water upon it from a great height for fun. The bird died from fright
and turned black. She told Goldsmith, who was writing his Animated Nature.
Goldsmith begged her to get the facts and he would allude to it. ‘Sir,’ roared
out Johnson, ‘ if you do, you’ll ruin yourself: for depend upon it i¢’s a lie.’”

‘She said that after Sir Joseph Banks and Dr. Solander came from their
voyage, at a grand dinner at Sir Joshua’s, Dr. Solander was relating that in
Iceland he had seen a fowl boiled in a few minutes in the hot springs. Johnson
broke up the whole party by roaring out, ‘ Sir, unless I saw it with my own eyes
I would not believe it.” Nobody spoke after, and Banks and Solander rose and
left the dining room.”—Mr. Tom Taylor’s Life of Robert Haydon, vol. iii.,
p- 313.


My dear Dr. Elliotson,—I propose to give you some cases
in this letter illustrative of the curative effects of mesmerism
in various complaints, in which medicine had been found
useless, or held out no prospect of being of service. The
practical mesmerist will find nothing new in my report, but
it will help to shew what mesmerism can and cannot do.

You may remember that some-time ago I consulted you


Benefit of Mesmerism to Mrs. Esdaile. 75


about my wife’s health which had been constantly declining for
more than a year. She suffered from intense periodic head-
aches, indigestion, pain in the sacrum, and complete prostration
of strength; symptoms which medicine could not even relieve.
I therefore called in a professional mesmeriser, and had her
regularly mesmerised for three months, but with very little
benefit for a long time. She only felt comforted, and missed
the process when it was omitted. At last, her digestion
began to improve, and she is now better than she has been
for several years. As her sufferings arose from a nearly
exhausted state of the nervous system, the consequence of a
long residence in India, no rapid improvement could be
reasonably expected from any curative measures whatever,
and her improvement was so gradual that I cannot be confi-
dent of this not being a post hoc mesmeric cure. My wife’s
own impression is, that mesmerism husbanded her strength
better than anything else could have done till time brought
her relief: and I agree with her. But, that the following
cases in my own family were genuine mesmeric cures in which
no other agency was concerned, I feel quite confident. The
patients were my sister-in-law and niece, whose nervous
systems were only greatly disordered, but not exhausted,
like my wife’s, and their cases shew the rapid renovating
power of mesmerism when the nervous system is capable of
sudden reaction. My brother’s wife had been suffering for
more than a year from great nervous debility and irritability,
accompanied with hysteria, great and constant pain in the
neck and sacrum, sleeplessness, and fainting fits. I con-
sidered her state to be the result of rapid child-bearing and
suckling, which had extraordinarily exhausted her brain and
spinal marrow, and therefore very likely to be benefited by
mesmerism. But, knowing her to have a secret dread and
fear of mesmerism, I did not propose it to her, but trusted
to being able to restore her health by the usual orthodox
treatment. She was therefore put upon a tonic course of
medicine and diet, with the occasional use of anti-spasmodics,
for six months, and with considerable benefit at first; but
this soon ceased, and she fell into a most distressing and
alarming state, which medicine, as known to me, could not
even alleviate, far less cure. She lost all appetite, her nights
were sleepless, her head turned when she sat up in bed, and
even turning in bed brought on violent palpitations. She
could not look steadily at any object for a few moments with-
out becoming giddy, and she was haunted with panic fears
and a constant feeling of impending death, &c. In short,
she appeared to be on the verge of falling into phrenzy or


76 Dr. Esdaile’s sister-in-law and niece cured.


brain fever, and I should like to know what were or are the
resources of medicine in a case like this. Opium? Her
uncle, a medical man of long experience, dared not give it
her. It might paralyse the brain, but could never healthily
subdue such a state of cerebral excitement. Antiphlogistic
treatment? Bleeding, blistering, purging, or leeching, would
have driven her permanently out of her senses, I felt con-
vinced. Will our brethren of the “ancien regime” kindly
inform me what I should have done? I confess that I should
have been at my wit’s end, but for mesmerism.

Things had become too serious now for the farther indul-
gence of mere fancies, and mesmerism as her last resource
was recommended, and reluctantly submitted to. As she
could not sit up or look at her mesmeriser without turning
giddy, and the light was intolerable, she was mesmerised
lying in bed, with eyes closed, and in a darkened room. She
was soothed without going to sleep the first day. On the
second day, she was entranced in a few minutes, slept well
all night afterwards, and awoke feeling quite well. Her ap-
petite and natural sleep returned from this date, and on the
third day she walked to the top of a hill 500 feet high behind
my house. The difficulty was to get her to believe that she
could not be so soon cured of so long and severe a disease,
and that it was therefore necessary to continue the treatment
for a length of time. This her husband did, and she is now
very well.

My niece, who was still weak from a late attack of mea-
sles, overexerted herself in attending upon my sister-in-law.
She felt quite prostrated, and suffered from acute pain in the
neck, and at the bottom of the spine. One of her legs
became numb and nearly insensible, and she could not move
without help. Mesmerism was prescribed for her also. She
was easily put to sleep on the first trial, and awoke free from
pain, and able to walk down stairs alone. Her natural sleep
and appetite, which she had lost, returned, and weakness
only remained, which was soon removed by a good appetite.

If any medicine could have done so much for these two
ladies in so short a time, I have not been fortunate enough
to meet with it in twenty years practice.

Mr. Craven, the person employed by me to mesmerise
my relatives, has been prosecuting his art here with great
success ; and, as this must depend upon the judicious selection
of the cases, I, although no longer practising my profession,
have permitted him to bring his patients to me for my
opinion regarding their suitableness for exclusive mesmeric
treatment.


More benefits from Mesmerism. 77


The patients in the following cases were considered by
me, more or less, proper subjects for mesmeric treatment,
and the results are described by themselves :—


“ Mr. Craven.
** 12th December, 1853.
“My dear Sir,—I believe that throughout the whole of your
practice as a mesmeric operator, you never had a case which com-
bined such a number of complicated and deep-seated disorders as
those under which I have suffered for the last quarter of a century.
These disorders are, I am afraid, incurable by any human instru-
mentality: but, notwithstanding, I believe that in no case has the
mesmeric influence been more strongly manifested. At the first
operation, my whole system was most powerfully influenced: at the
second, my right leg, which had been so sompletely paralysed for
twenty years that I dragged it along like a dead weight, and could
not move my toes, experiencing a strange, thrilling sensation through
every part. After the third operation I was able to move my toes,
and every subsequent day I received an increase of power, until
after the ninth time, when all the muscular action was partially
restored. For twenty-four years I had never been able to rise from
a chair without laying hold of some object, or pressiug my hands on
the seat; but now I could rise up with ease from a low footstool,
jump from the ground, and even hop a little on my lame leg. It is
true that my many deep-seated disorders prevent me from reaping
the benefit I otherwise might have had from the restored muscular
action, but nevertheless it remains a fact, and thus demonstrates
the power of mesmerism as a curative agent. I can can also bear
testimony to its soothing influences ; for often have I been labouring
under intense suffering at the beginning of an operation, and yet at
its close I have risen free from all pain and uneasiness. Indeed, I
am always soothed by it. I know, from long and painful experience,
that I can get no medicine to relieve my sufferings so completely as is
done by the mesmeric passes. I still continue to receive it daily:
and, having reaped so much benefit from it myself, I feel it due to
others to bear my humble testimony in its favour.
** Yours truly,


“e


** Mr. Craven.
“Perth, 31st August, 1853.
** Dear Sir,—I am happy to say I feel much benefited by your
mesmeric operations. Previous to my applying to you, I had for
several years slept very little; indeed, many a night had no sleep at
all; had a continual noise in my head, and a throbbing sensation,
and an unpleasant nervous feeling all over my system. After several
mesmerisations, and frequent draughts of mesmerised water, I have
slept well: the throbbing has quite gone, and the nervous feeling
much abated. My health is very much improved since being under
your treatment. Feeling grateful to you for these pleasant changes,
“‘T am, dear Sir, yours respectfully, 4


78 Three more cases of mesmeric benefit.


** Mr. Craven.
November 14th, 1853.
** Dear Sir,—As so little is yet known of mesmerism as a cura-
tive power, it seems desirable that all who have derived benefit from
it should bear testimony to its efficacy. I, for one, am happy to
add my testimony in its favour. For the last ten or twelve years I
have suffered greatly from indigestion, accompanied, as it often is,
with alternations of feverish excitement, distressing lassitude, and a
whole host of nervous feelings, which defied all my efforts to over-
come. I tried all the well-known remedies, but the relief afforded
was only temporary. Through the influence of kind friends, I was
persuaded to go to Perth and try mesmerism. My faith was quickly
strengthened, for I soon began to experience decided relief: a more
healthy tone was given to the digestive powers, and an increase of
life and vigour infused into the whole system. I had to leave Perth
by the end of the second week—much too short a time for a case
like mine—yet I still continue to feel decidedly better, and feel
grateful to you as my mesmerist, for the benefit I received. I sin-
cerely hope that you may be made the instrument, under a higher
power, of greatly alleviating the sufferings of your fellow-men.
‘I am, dear Sir, yours very truly,


** Mr. Craven.
*€ 1st October, 1853.
“Dear Sir,—I think it right to state the result of your atten-
dance on me. For nearly two years I suffered greatly from indiges-
tion, loss of appetite, sleepless nights, palpitation of the heart,
and general weakness, particularly of the back and limbs, and
extreme languor. All the while I employed the best medical advice,
without experiencing any benefit. I placed myself under your
charge, having for a week previously discontinued the use of wine
and medicine, that mesmerism might have a fair trial. During the
first three weeks of August, you visited me every day, and, although
I was not very susceptible to the mesmeric influence, I gradually got
better under it. Appetite returned, the palpitation ceased. I now
sleep soundly, and am in excellent health and spirits, and feel grate-
ful to you, as the means, under God, of restoring me to health.
“I am, Sir, yours truly,


“e sd


a
.


** Mr. Craven.
** Perth, 10th December, 1853.
**My dear Sir,—I think it my duty to bear testimony to the
curative powers of mesmerism. About ten or eleven months ago,
I was suddenly laid prostrate by disease. I consulted some of the
ablest medical practitioners of the country, without experiencing
much permanent benefit. Having heard of some of the cures you
had effected by mesmerism, I felt anxious to try it, thinking it
would do no harm, if it did no good. When you first visited me,
in September last, I was afraid to walk, for I had no command of
the ground with my left foot, seldom knowing whether it touched


Antimesmeric follies in Edinburgh ; and Dr. Bennett. 79


the ground or not, besides having constant giddiness and lightness
in my head, often accompanied with great pain; the nape of the
neck was considerably swollen. The first time you mesmerised me,
the afflicted side was very much influenced, and the pain removed.
I began to improve daily—the swelling in the neck was reduced—I
got more command over the leg, and soon began to walk with confi-
dence—the swimming in the head became less frequent, and my
general health improved. If I had pain from flatulence, &e., a few
passes invariably removed it. I have now been at my employment
for two months; and though, as inspector of the railway, I have to
walk a number of miles every day, I seldom feel any inconvenience,
but find myself daily gaining strength. With best thanks for your
exertion in my behalf,
“TI am, dear Sir, yours truly,
“Cartes Hitton.”


A most amusing change has come over the spirit of the
Edinburgh medical editors. You may remember that about
a year ago they would not admit a paper of mine on the
Anesthetic and curative powers of Mesmerism, although Dr.
Simpson, one of the editors, had asked me to write it for the
journal. I printed the rejected article, and dedicated it to
the medical profession, and this elicited such an expression of


feeling from various quarters, that the more liberal editors
soon after felt themselves compelled to print a long paper by
Mr. Braid on the Curative powers of Hypnotism. The only
difference in our two articles was in the name; and, if I had
known that Mesmerism was such a word of fear to an Edin-
burgh editor’s ear, I would have changed the title of m

paper to The anesthetic and curative effects of the Unknown
Power; being perfectly indifferent to what it was called,
provided they would allow people to be benefited by it. The
publication of Mr. Braid’s paper gave mortal offence to some
of the ultra obstructive editors, and both parties took to
abusing each other virulently in their own journal. The
quarrel has ended in a dissolution of partnership, it seems,
and the assumption of the editorial dignity by the offending
and too liberal (though anti-mesmeric) Dr. Bennett, who
thus delivers himself in his last number, when speaking of
the hypnotic and mesmeric phenomena. “It is surely in-
cumbent upon medical practitioners to be as conversant with
the subject as the well-informed patients they have to con-
verse with. Above all, it is their duty to relieve pain, and cure
diseases, and, if it can be shewn that this or that method of
treatment can effect the one and accomplish the other, they
are bound to give it a fair trial.” This is just what you have
been preaching for the last twenty-five years, but, thank God!


80 Mr. Rutter’s new book.


we are all of one mind now. “Je suis Frangais,—vous
etes Francais,—nous sommes Francais,—embrassons nous,
cher Docteur Bennett.”

Yours very sincerely,


JAMES EsDAILE.
Fairmount, Perth, Dec. 16th, 1853.


VI. Review of “ Human Electricity: the means of its deve-
lopment, illustrated by experiments. By J. O. N. Rutter,
F.R.A.S.” By PHicaerues.


“Je me convainquis, avec autant de certitude que de surprise, que si quel-
quefois les savans ont moins de prejugés que les autres hommes, ils tiennent, en
revanche, encore plus fortement & ceux qu’ils ont.”*—Rovusseau, Confessions,
vol. ii., p. 16.


**Tt has not been uncommon presumptuously to depreciate investigations
arbitrarily characterized as ‘ purely theoretic,’ forgetting that in the observation
of a phenomenon, which shall, at first sight, appear isolated, may be concealed
the germ of a great discovery.””—Humso.pt's Cosmos, vol. i., p. 36.


Tue tone and spirit in which this book is written are ad-
mirable. There is a perfect abSence of everything that could
offend or generate an angry incredulity. Mr. Rutter simply
offers a lucid exposition of his facts, leaving them, if it may
be so said, to tell their own tale, and adding himself but few
comments upon them, from the evident consciousness that
sooner or later they must make their way with the public.
And yet few men have been more unfairly treated than he
has been. His statements have been misrepresented, and
his experiments explained away, by those who have neither
examined nor even seen his instruments and their operations ;
and some, who have seen them, have not allowed themselves
the time for a fitting observation. But this unworthy treat-
ment of himself and this neglect of the proper scientific con-
ditions have not ruffled the philosophic temper of our author.
He refers, indeed, to the arguments which have been em-
ployed against him, but in no disputatious or offended tone ;
to the assumptions of his sceptics he replies by fact; to their
theories he opposes fresh phenomena. Whether those pheno-
mena and facts will bear the test of further examination,
time will shew. To some persons, and to no one more than
to the writer of this article, they appear demonstrably esta-


* “*T became convinced, with as much certainty as surprise, that, if sometimes
the learned have fewer prejudices than other men, they, in return, cling with
greater tenacity to those they have.”’


Mr. Rutter’s modesty. 81


blished ; to others the proof may yet remain inadequate ; but,
whatever differences of opinion may still obtain as to the
facts themselves, there can be no question that the book in
which they are narrated invites perusal by the information
which it conveys and the pleasant style in which it is put
together.

Mr. Rutter is evidently a master of his subject. His
scientific knowledge is considerable. This appears, not so
much, indeed, by what he actually states, as from that which
he incidentally lets fall from his pen. He has, we can see
plainly enough, passed through a long novitiate of careful
experimental observation ; and his qualifications, therefore,
for being heard as a witness upon philosophic questions, are
of the highest order. And yet, as is most generally the case
with the real man of science, nothing can be more marked
than the humility with which he expresses himself. He calls
himself but a learner,—“ a learner,” he adds, “for nearly
forty years.”


“This book, he says, “is not intended for scientific readers.
It contains very little which is not, or which ought not to be, known
and easily understood, by those who make any reasonable pretentions
to the study of natural philosoplty ; especially that interesting, just
now increasingly interesting, part of experimental investigation in-
cluded under the comprehensive term—rELeEctTRIciTY. It is pos-
sible that some few things in the following pages may be the means
of suggesting an occasional thought, or of giving a different direc-
tion to those which already exist ; so that by turning old thoughts
into new channels, the lines of divergence may be somewhat multi-
plied and perhaps greatly extended: whilst the common centre
remains undisturbed.”


Again, he says :—


“Nothing new or extraordinary is promised. All that is in-
tended, or that will be attempted, is to put together, it is hoped in
a readable form, some curious, isolated, and, to some persons, pro-
bably unknown, facts relating to a subject which is not now for the
first time attracting attention. . . . The difficulties, be their nature
what it may, are not of my making. What some consider difficult
is to me perfectly easy. Without any fanciful theory of my own to
establish, my chief concern has been to make sure of the facts.
These are plain and intelligible. 4 great deal more, undoubtedly,


remains to be done ; but I see no necessity for being in a hurry.” —
p- 5.


To a few of our readers, perhaps, Mr. Rutter’s name, and
the curious experiments which have been associated with it,
may be but slightly or not at all known. It may, therefore,
be convenient, if we offer a brief resumé of certain facts con-

VOL, XII. G


82 Mr. Rutter invented the Magnetoscope.


nected with the subject. The nature of the present publica-
tion will by that means be better understood.

It has been alleged, for very many years, that, if a gold
ring were suspended by a thread of about 8 inches long, which
should be held between the thumb and forefinger of the right
hand, very curious oscillations would result. In many cases,
if held steadily, the ring, it was said, would begin to oscillate
like a pendulum, and in a direction to and from the operator.
The experiment was regarded as being rather childish—and
was only introduced into a drawing room for amusement.
In 1851, however, the subject assumed a more formal; shape.
In Chambers’ Edinburgh Journal for March of that year,
there appeared an account of certain experiments which had
been shewn to Dr. Herbert Mayo by Herr Caspari. Mr.
Rutter, of Black Rock, Brighton, having had his attention
directed towards them, delivered a lecture upon these alleged
facts, calling them “certain electrical phenomena in con-
nexion with human physiology,” and added also several illus-
trations, devised by himself, and which had not occurred to
other operators. He soon became persuaded that the oscil-
lations were not the effect of accident, and that the subject
was not one of mere curiosity. Some great truth lay con-
cealed at the bottom. Accordingly as the operator’s hand
was touched by a man or a woman, so would the ring rotate
in opposite directions. Now what was the cause of this, for
the oscillation appeared to be a real physical phenomenon?
Suggestion was the answer, or rather unintentional direction
on the part of the operator. Mr. Rutter doubted this; and
therefore invented an instrument, to which he gave the name
of Magnetoscope, by which he hoped to reduce the experi-
ment to scientific precision. He considered that these move-
ments, varying as they did in singular diversity according to
the respective conditions, were dependent on what is ana-
logous to magnetic or electric currents or influences ; and he
shortly afterwards published a small pamphlet, called Mag-
netoid Currents, their forces and directions, in which he gave
a copious description of his own experiments, and the phe-
nomena attendant upon them. An observation of the requi-
site conditions, he there said, was most essential. A little
practice gave great command to the hand.


**A careful operator, with a steady hand, could always perform
the experiments to his own satisfaction. There is a consciousness
that the motions are involuntary, that is, perfectly independent of
the hand as regards their directions.” (p. 8.) ‘ Other conditions
being the same, each hand of both sexes is capable of producing the
same kind of motions. There is, however, a deficiency of power in


This second work extends and confirms. 83


the left hand. Ail persons do not possess the power in an equal
degree; and there are some who appear to be entirely without it.
It varies in the same person at different times, and seems to be
closely connected with health ; the effects of medicine, of anxiety,
and of fatigue being easily discernible,” &c. (p. 9.)


In short, great diversity of experiments was mentioned,
which varied with various conditions: and the inevitable con-
clusion from the whole was (supposing these several experi-
ments to be real and to be scientifically established) that
something of a material character (called by certain writers
a magnetic aura) did emanate from the human body, and
did produce effects analogous to some that resulted from
magnetic or electric influences.

The sensation produced by this pamphlet and by the ex-
periments at Brighton was great. Considerable attention
was paid to them for a time, and considerable opposition was
consequently raised up to prevent their reception. We shall
not disgust our readers with any narrative of the odious
falsehoods and scurrility with which these purely scientific
questions were assailed. It is sufficient to say that the
sceptics presented their different explanations. The favourite
hypothesis was of course that of mental expectation. It was
alleged that the motion of the hand and the unconscious dis-
position of the mind were sufficient to cause the vibrations :
that the apparatus was so arranged that the greatest sensible
effect was produced by the smallest amount of imparted
motion: and that dominant ideas directed the oscillations
under the guidance of the muscles and of the visual sense.

It is, then, to establish the truthfulness of his own expe-
riments, and to give still further information on the subject,
that Mr. Rutter publishes his present work.


‘Animal electricity in general,” he says in his Preface, “ and
human electricity in particular, are established facts, as easily proved
as that air and food and water are necessary to the sustentation of
life. ... I believe electricity to be operating within and around us,
and exercising a powerful influence over our capabilities.” ‘ And
my desire is to give such a connected view of the various branches
of electricity, magnetism, and electro-magnetism, as shall enable
the reader to understand their relations, and especially to judge cor-
rectly of some of the electrical phenomena of the human body.”
(Appendix, p. 35.)


The two first chapters contain sundry explanations which
are needful to the general reader, with a description of what
is meant by animal electricity. A good deal of scientific
instruction is here conveyed in popular and intelligible lan-

9


G “@


84 Electrical relations differ in different persons.


guage, forming a judicious introduction to the demonstra-
tions which follow next.

The third chapter illustrates the fact of the human body
being electrical. Much curious information is here given,—
but we have only room for a few extracts of obvious interest
to those who study The Zoist and the effects of mesmerism.


“There seems to be something due (in the success of an experi-
ment) to constitutional habits and temperament ; so that in one
person electricity is freely elicited, whilst in another, scarcely any
evidence of it can be obtained.” (p. 34.) ,

Equally interesting will be the examination of the electrical
conditions of different persons and of the same persons at different
times ; bearing in mind that such experiments should, as far as
practicable, be always conducted in the same room and under the
same circumstances.” (p. 36.) ;

“There appear to be differences in the electrical habits of in-
dividuals, equally great as in their stature, complexion, colour of
eyes, hair, and other peculiarities. It has been mentioned that
when all conditions are, as nearly as possible, alike, there are some
persons who can produce scarcely any sensible electrical effects by
the friction of wax or glass.” (p. 42.)

“This (experiment) favours the opinion that the living organism
is a source of electricity; that it is generated within the body, and
is therefore a condition essential to healthful action among its several
parts ; its proper development being more closely bound up with our
sensations and emotions, than ever we may have suspected. . . . It
must be concluded that all substances, animate and inanimate, con-
tain electricity. It is, in the largest sense of the term, an universal
agent, occupying all the space in which we are immediately inte-
rested.” (p. 46)


The 4th, 5th, and 6th chapters relate to Magnetism, to
Electro-Magnetism, and to Muscular and Nervous Electrical
Currents. The conmexion between some of these subjects
and human electricity may not at first be very apparent : but
the author shews that, without a correct notion of magnetism
and of electro-magnetism, the most remarkable developments
of electricity by the human body would be uniatelligible.
He gives us, therefore, a copious collection of facts and ex-
periments, illustrating the subject, and forming, as it were,
a foundation upon which he builds up his subsequent state-
ments. The nature of our pages will not allow us to do
more than recommend the reader to study these chapters
carefully.


“Whatever,” says Mr. Rutter, “ may be the identities or the
diversities of electricity and magnetism, if they be one in principle
whilst various in their manifestations, we have no difficulty in recog-
nizing proofs of earnest coéperation. Thankful ought we to be that


The Galvanoscope.


we know and are able to do so much. Our knowledge or ignorance
has much to do with our weal or woe.”


In chapter vii. we arrive at the description of a new, a
most important, and most ingenious instrument, which by
its operations corroborates the fact, that there does exist a
human electrical current. This instrument is called a Gal-
vanoscope. If we attempted to offer a brief description of
the apparatus, our description would be unintelligible, and
for a fuller delineation we have really not the space. Let it
be sufficient to say, that, by the hands of the operator being
placed in two basins of water, in which are deposited two
platinum plates connected by copper wires with a stand upon
which a magnet is supported horizontally, an index is made
to move. It should be said that the hands of the operator
do not come in contact with the platinum or the wire, but
are simply placed in the same basins with them. The effects
are most striking and yet of the simplest character: but our
columns can only afford room for a few of the author’s
remarks.


“‘Here is galvanic electricity eliminated by the muscles and
nerves of the living body. Call it chemical, or animal or vital elec-
tricity, or by any other name we may choose, and all we do is to
make distinctions where it is very difficult to detect any differences.
.. +. But it is not the quantity or force of the current in the living
organism which is the chief object of our search. We want to
know 7f there be in the human body any electricity, and if so, how
it manifests itself, and whether its properties, so far as our instru-
ments will enable us to examine them, are like or similar to those
exhibited by the electricity of inorganic substances. Here is the
proof; for which we have to thank the phenomena of electro-
magnetism.

“The experiment with the galvanoscope, proving the existence
of an electrical current, which manifests itself by the forcible con-
traction of the muscles of the hands and arms, has been repeated a
great number of times by myself and other members of my family,
and in my presence, by more than a hundred and sixty other per-

There is no evidence, in anything I have witnessed, that
the difference in the force of the current, as shewn by different per-
sons, is any test of strength or muscular power. On the contrary,
it has been found that persons possessing the greatest amount of
muscle, both men and women, provided they be in good health,
almost always manifest less electrical power as shewn in this way,
than do others who have weaker bodies, but who seem to have a
larger share of nervous sensibility.... From a great number of
observations, on myself and others, I am led to believe that a
healthy and vigorous person is unable to develop the electrical cur-
rent as freely and forcibly as another with some accidental or con-


86 Mr. Rutter answers the Quarterly Review.


stitutional defect, even when it may not be sufficient to occasion pain,
or other symptoms of ill health. Quite as much appears to depend
upon the nerves as the muscles. . . . It may be that nerves are more
sensitive conductors in some persons than in others, and in the same
person, according to the state of health, at one time than another.
. ++ The galvanoscope is an exceedingly sensitive electrical appa-
ratus. Taking into account the quickness with which it can be used,
and the little risk there is of putting it out of order, it is perhaps
more sensitive than any instrument previously made.” (pp. 123—
131.)


We cannot but compliment Mr. Rutter upon the ability
which he has shewn in the construction and arrangement of
this apparatus, and upon the patience and care which he has
also exhibited in the prosecution of his experiments. The
galvanoscope presents valuable corroborative testimony in
regard to the truth of sundry physiological facts, and we
have reason to thank our author for his codperation and
support.

Chapter the 8th contains a description of “ Magnetoid
Currents,” (such as was given more at length in the original
pamphlet by Mr. R.,) with the addition of some fresh and
very important facts. These facts include, as it were, a reply
to the objections of the unbeliever. There is also in the
Appendix* an answer to the article in the Quarterly Review
that discussed the subject in so superficial a mode. We
will examine the two together, falling, as they both do, under
one head ; and we shall be curious to see what efficient answer
will be now attempted in reply to Mr. Rutter. It will be
remembered that the objectors contended that the motions
of the pendulum were produced by “ pulsation,” by “ me-
chanical force,” by “ expectant attention,” or the “will.” It
had also been said that the immobility of the magnetoscope
was a necessary condition on Mr. Rutter’s part, but that
experience had proved that the pendulum could be made to
vibrate. To this Mr. Rutter in the first place replies, that
the—


*‘Immobility of the magnetoscope had never been insisted upon
or even hinted at by him, as a necessary condition; and that he
never attempted to make it immoveable, because it is impossible to
do so. That the pendulum can be moved intentionally in various
directions, no one would ever think of denying. But though this is


* We take this opportunity of observing that there is a great deal of useful
and curious matter in the Notes of the Appendix. The student in natural phi-
losophy will find historical information, pleasantly given, respecting Galvani,
Gilbert, Volta, Oersted, &c. ; whilst for those who are more advanced in science
there are some singular extracts from the Philosophical Transactions, &c.


Mr. Rutter answers by questions. 87


said to be so easy, it had never been done in his presence, by the
most skilful manipulators, without being instantly detected; as it
has also been by other observers as quickly as by himself.”


But, asks Mr. Rutter, if “definite movements” are so
easily produced, either intentionally or involuntarily, that is,
by expectant attention influencing the muscles, how will the
following questions be answered? As these questions enter
into the very pith and substance of the argument, we will
place them seriatim before the reader for his careful con-
sideration.*

I. If these movements are so easily made, how is it that
all who try to produce them, do not succeed? It is found in
actual practice that, comparatively, a very small number
only are able to produce these movements; and that others,
many of whom are particularly anxious to do so, invariably
fail. And, even among those who possess the power, there
are differences in degree. There are differences in the same
person at different periods, even of the same day, and which
seem to be connected with the state of health, with the use
of certain kinds of food, and with the effects of anxiety or
of fatigue. How then is this, if the movements be so readily
produced ?

II. How is it that the movements or vibrations of the
pendulum are brought so quickly to a dead stop? Is there a
new law discovered in mechanical forces by which this is
accomplished? or is the conducting power of the magneto-
scope arrested, and are the currents checked? It is found
that, if a piece of ivoryt be held in the left hand of the ope-
rator, the motion of the pendulum will cease. This is a
remarkable phenomenon. When the pendulum has acquired
a certain momentum, either rotatory or oscillatory, if deft to
itself, it will oocupy seven or ten minutes in coming to what
might be considered a state of rest. If a piece of ivory be
placed in the left hand of the operator, the pendulum is
brought to a rest “in from five to twenty seconds.” By what
law is this effected ?

III. Why does the pendulum move only in such a small
number of directions, and, the conditions being the same,
always in the same directions? An objector, who attempts to
accomplish this, cannot effect a movement without being


* In reply, too, to an objection about the magnetoscope being constructed
so as to produce the greatest effect by the smallest motion, Mr. R. mentions
that other forms of apparatus have been made, in which the results are pre-
cisely the same.


+ A feather, a dead fly, or a bone will equally bring the pendulum to a state
of rest.


~~ 2 ep te - er ry ow


88 Motions produced in the insulated instrument.


detected: how then is this uniformity of movements ex-
plained? The reader is referred to the eighth chapter, where
a series of experiments, illustrative of this fact, is given.

IV. Why is Mr. Rutter able (and he has never failed, he
says) to influence the magnetoscope through the hand of an-
other person, and to produce precisely the same results as
when his own thumb and finger are in contact with the in-
strument ?

V. How does a crystal of quartz produce specific motions
of the pendulum, when the hand of the operator touches the
crystal only, and not the instrument? This is an important
question, and refers to a fresh fact. If a crystal, held
steadily between the thumb and finger of the right hand of
the operator, be placed against the brass cap of the magneto-
scope, certain definite motions of the pendulum will be pro-
duced. How is this explained? The hand of the operator
is not placed on the brass cap, so as to secure a particular
movement,—but a piece of quartz intervenes. Can this
piece of quartz obtain a specific vibration,—or is it an auxi-
liary conductor of an electrical current ?

VI. Mr. Rutter asks, in the last place, how is it that
precisely the same motions are produced, when neither the
crystal nor the hand of the operator are in contact with the
magnetoscope? Mr. R. asserts that the power of a crystal
is further shewn by placing it on a stand, entirely detached
from the table which supports the magnetoscope, and in such
a manner that it shall only be very near to, but not in actuai
contact with, the brass cap of the instrument. In this posi-
tion, if the right hand of the operator be laid upon the
crystal, whilst the pendulum is perfectly at rest, it will soon
begin to move in one of the directions already indicated, ac-
cording to the part of the crystal that is directed towards the
instrument. If this fact be established, its importance is
great: but we have seen nothing of it ourselves. At the
same time we know that Mr. R. is a most conscientious and
careful experimenter: and he himself adds that “these last-
mentioned experiments require great care, quietness, and
attention.” We shall be glad to learn that other experi-
menters have produced the same effects.


“Whatever,” says our author towards the close of the eighth
chapter, “‘be the cause of the various motions of the pendulum,
it is sufficient to have described some of the results of my own ex-
perience. Whether the motions be entirely electrical, or whether
they be of a mixed character, partly dependent on vitality and
partly on electricity, and which cannot be disassociated, is more
than I will undertake to decide.”


Why the term Animal Magnetism first used. 89


We cannot venture to follow our author through the inte-
resting subjects which he raises in his last chapter; but we
will present one important deduction, which he derives from
the data and facts established in his preceding pages.


“That man possesses inherent electricity which is generated, not
derived, and that it manifests itself in both forms, common and
galvanic.”

To this deduction he adds these queries :—


“If electro-magnetism be a constant attendant upon electricity,
are there not magnetic, as well as electric, currents always circulat-
ing in the human body? And if so, were some of the old writers
very far wrong in their curious guesses about animal magnetism ?
instead of some, and only a comparatively small number of, per-


sons being sensitive to magnetism, is it not more wonderful that the
number so affected is not greater ?”’


“ Electricity being so closely associated with vitality, is it not
probable that it exercises a powerful influence over the operations of
mind? May not the brain* be like a central telegraph-station—a
medium of communication between the mental and the corporeal ?”


In the additional Notes of the Appendix there are one or
two remarks introduced, which we shall be glad to quote, or
corroborate by a few observations of our own.

In a useful note upon mesmerism, our author explains
how the term magnetism became first applied to the treat-
ment ; because, as he observes, the phrase is apt to mislead
those who are not acquainted with its origin. The influence
of the loadstone, or of artificial magnets,+ was generally sup-
posed to pervade all substances and every form of animated
being. The effects of magnetism on persons of peculiar tem-
perament had been noticed long before the discovery of the
more remarkable phenomena produced by the influence which,
under certain conditions, one living being exercises over an-
other. The first-mentioned phenomena, i.e., those educed
by artificial magnets, when exhibited in animated beings,
were attributed to what was then called animal magnetism,
to distinguish it from mineral and vegetable magnetism.
After magnets ceased to be thus used, or rather were very
rarely so employed, the name was retained, because it was
believed that the effects of ordinary magnetism on sensitive


* In one of the Notes of the Appendix is the following most suggestive
remark :—‘‘I believe that there is in every human being a force which is very
much under the control of the mind, and associated with the action of the brain,
which in some respects resembles electric and electro-magnetic forces, by operat-
ing at a distance, and passing through all kinds of interposed media.”

+ Schiller speaks of “der Magnete hassen und lieben,’’—the antipathies
and sympathies of the magnets.


”


)
j


nt sane


90 Some truth under popular superstitions.


persons were identical with those produced by the manipu-
latory processes invented by Mesmer. “ But,” adds Mr.
Rutter, with the judicious reserve of a true man of science,
not hastening beyond that which he can demonstrably prove,


*‘The most that with certainty can be said, on a subject so imper-
fectly understood, is this:—in mesmeric phenomena there are un-
doubtedly some remarkable analogies and resemblances to magnetism,
or perhaps more strictly speaking, to electro-magnetism. These,
however, are too feeble in their action, too quick in their movements,
too delicate in their indications, to be examined by ordinary rules,
or measured by any known instruments. Judged by their effects,
they are not deficient in energy or activity ; but it is the energy of a
ray of light in painting a portrait, and the activity of a galvanic
current in a telegraphic wire. In photography and in telegraphy we
know that some unseen and powerful agent has been present with
us ; but this we know only by reason of its having done the work
we had assigned it. So is it in the phenomena of mesmerism. They
manifest themselves by their effects. We must be content, for the
present, to confess that very little is known about their cause.”


The illustration in the above passage strikes us as being
very happy and correct; and the cautious language at the
end is exactly what we approve. In fact, The Zoist has al-
ways discouraged the use of the term “animal magnetism,”
as being in itself the postulate of a theory, which, though
built on most plausible data, is at present very far removed
from being established. The name “ mesmerism” carries
with it no such inference, and is moreover an appropriate

upliment to the memory of one most unjustly traduced in
his lifetime.

In the same note there are some excellent remarks in
regard to the firm hold which many old errors have taken in
popular estimation. To a superficial observer nothing seems
easier than to abolish such errors by a blow,—but they are
not to be dealt with thus summarily.


**Taking any one of what are called popular superstitions, we
shall be sure to discover in it a firm underlaying stratum of truth.
There may be more than we suspected of folly and of fancy; but
when these are stripped off, there remains quite enough to puzzle
the learned. Underneath a great deal of absurdity something really
valuable is often concealed. It is much easier to prove that, than
to explain how it came there.”


It is greatly to be wished that opinions like these were
more generally remembered and acted upon. Much odious
misrepresentation and calumny would be thereby often spared.
Even philosophers, who lecture at the Royal Institution,
might profit by the instruction, and platform-polemics nearly


A remnant of the savage in the Satanites. 91


as much as the philosophers. We recollect with some satis-
faction that Mr. Sandby in his work on mesmerism has de-
voted one very useful chapter to an examination of this topic.


«* Whatever accumulation of falsehood has been superadded in
the progress, the original fact, from which the pretended miracle
(or popular superstition, as Mr. R. calls it) has taken its rise, has
in general been a genuine and undoubted occurrence, for which a
natural or secondary cause may be discovered. . . . Oftentimes the
whole transaction has seemed, on mesmeric principles, nothing but
a probable and natural chain of facts, and a charge of imposition
would be wanton and unphilosophical.’”’*


Justly therefore does Mr. R. remark, that it well deserves
the attention of the philosopher, the physician, and the divine,
each in his department, to separate the true from the false in
matters of belief. A too palpable truism! and why the work
is not oftener attempted, can only arise from the ignorance
of the instructors themselves, or from the interest that they
respectively feel in keeping up the delusion.

Certainly, after all that has been written upon it, we had
hoped that the phantom of Satanic agency had been suffi-
ciently exorcised, especially in regard to matters of a purely
physical nature. Mr. Rutter apparently thinks otherwise ;
for he has introduced a few strictures on the subject. There
is not, however, much that is new to be said about it: but
we met the other day in Humboldt’s Cosmos so very appro-
priate a passage, that we venture to transcribe part of it for
the reader’s instruction.


**We find amongst the most savage nations a secret and terror-
mingled presentiment of the unity of natural forces, blending with
the dim perception of an invisible and spiritual essence manifesting
itself through these forces: . . . amongst nations least advanced in
civilization, the imagination delights in strange and fantastic crea-
tions; . . . instead of examining, men content themselves with con-
jecturing, dogmatizing and interpreting supposed facts which have
never been observed.” +


Humboldt then, in this passage, appears to be of opinion
that the propensity to discover Satanic interference in what-
ever may be at variance with our ordinary experience arises
from a semi-civilized condition of mind. The brain of the
man who is thus panic-stricken, is evidently in an unhealthy
or rather untutored state; and a remnant of the savage yet


* See chapter vii. of Sandby’s Mesmerism and its Opponents, especially the
cases of the Tyrolese Ecstatics, Maria Morl, and the Addolorata ; and those of
the Shepherdess of Cret, of the Bohemian Prophetess, of the Wesleyan Pro-
phetess, and of the Witch of Paris.

T Cosmos, vol. i., p. 16.


™


ee ee ee eee


92  Satanites scattered like Robinson Crusoe’s savages.


adheres to him. He may indeed have passed through a cer-
tain curriculum of study at Oxford or Cambridge, and been
crammed with the customary allotment of patristic and classic
lore: but this by itself does not constitute education ; for the
tendencies of the wild man may yet be lurking in his orga-
nization uneradicated. This is what we may fairly infer from
Humboldt’s language: and really there is a good deal of pro-
priety in the notion. Let us examine, for instance, the amu-
sing account which appeared in the last number of The Zoist
of the Anti-Satanic Meeting that was held at the Hanover
Square Rooms, and of the unexpected way in which Mr.
Nottage dispersed the half-civilized faction. A combination
of fiery fanatics had met together to anathematize clairvoy-
ance and table-moving; there they stood, raving and raging
in the fiercest strains of pseudo-religious fervour, fulminating
the most awful denunciations against those who differed from
them, and adjuring Antichrist and Satan to go out from
among them and leave the tables alone ; when suddenly Mr.
Nottage presents himself, and ia his usual clear and intelli-
gent way proposes to offer a few words. ‘Terrified, as it were,
at the prospect of too much light being let in upon them,
the exorcists rise up together in holy wrath, thunder forth a
short psalm at their very loudest pitch, and then rapidly
make their exit out of the room by a back door! Did any
body ever hear of a more ludicrous termination to a religious
assembly! I can never read the account, but, bearing Hum-
boldt’s comments respecting uncivilized man in mind, I am
driven to compare the above scene to an incident that Defoe
mentions in his popular work. It will be remembered that
some savages from a neighbouring island had landed near
Crusoe’s dwelling for the purpose of burning and eating poor
Friday: there they were dancing round the victim with
hideous contortions, and shouting forth incantations with a
hungry zeal, when, on the appearance of the hero of the
tale, like some being of a superior nature, the disappointed
cannibals rushed to their canoes, howling in anger to their
gods! Exactly similar was the result when Mr. Nottage,


** Like an eagle in a dove-cote,
Fluttered the Volscians at Corioli:’’


There was on their part the same savage appetite for burning
and devouring mesmerisers and table-movers ; there was the
same semblance of sacred zeal in the blasphemous maledic-
tions with which they denounced their intended victims : but,
in a moment, a few plain words of good sense silenced their
impieties, and acted like a charm; for out of the room fled


Mr. Faraday’s apparatus an established failure. 93


Messieurs Godfrey, Dibdin, Gillson, and Company, precisely
like their sable-skinned brotherhood of the western hemi-
sphere.

In regard, indeed, to table-moving itself, Mr. Rutter asks,
is it a delusion, or is it a physical phenomenon, the cause of
which is at present unknown? He thinks, like ourselves,
that it is extremely difficult to understand how a table, which
requires the united strength of two persons to move it only
a few inches, can by a different process, that is, if the same
persons touch it gently with the tips of their fingers, be
moved several feet at a time.


“A recent attempt to prove that table-moving is the result of
involuntary muscular force, by one (Professor Faraday) whose opi-
nion on many other subjects is entitled to the utmost respect, is very
generally acknowledged to have been unsuccessful. Neither the
arguments nor the apparatus have settled the question.” (Appendix,
p- 51.)


We quite agree with our author, and we have also thought
in addition, that Professor Faraday ought to have been the
last person to call these phenomena in question, since his
own induced currents of electricity shew the probability that
all terrestrial substances are capable of assuming transitory
magnetic relations. The Professor has moreover himself said,
that the “more he studies the subject, the more convinced
he is of his own total ignorance of the nature of electricity.”
This was very becoming language on his part: and we can
only regret that he should have lost sight of it, when in his
letter to the Atheneum respecting muscular movements, he
should have spoken with such overweaning self-satisfaction
respecting the ignorance of others. If so many believe that
table-moving may be effected, either wholly or in part, by
the agency of electricity, it is, perhaps, because Professor
Faraday’s own lectures have “educated” us into the notion
that electrical action is so universally diffused and so little
understood.

In conclusion, then, we can honestly say, that we have
perused Mr. Rutter’s book with considerable satisfaction, and
that we strongly recommend it to all who feel interest in the
subject. But still more do we urge those, whose leisure may
tempt them to visit Brighton, to call upon the intelligent
author, and ask permission to see him repeat his experiments.
It should, however, be said that Mr. R. is engaged in im-
portant avocations, and that his time is valuable: still he has
always been ready to receive a conscientious inquirer with
kindness and urbanity, and to devote himself with much


94 Four sets of phenomena independently discovered.


patience to an explanation of his apparatus. The oculis sub-
jecta fidelibus will be of immense value in this instance.

We cannot close without making one general remark.
The course of time has recently brought to our notice a series
of phenomena, perfectly independent one of the other, having
no connexion whatever in their origin, but all converging to
one point, and all establishing the reality of some material
emanation, or influence, or fluid, proceeding from the human
body. Call it electric, magnetic, mesmeric, od, or what you
will, the fact remains that something of some kind or other,
imponderable, invisible,—but of active, and occasionally of
powerful, effect, is transmitted from our animal frame.

I. There are those facts in mesmerism in which imagina-
nation can play no part, and which have been especially men-
tioned in Dr. Esdaile’s last work, in Professor Gregory’s
Letter on the Theory of Imagination (Zoist, No. XXXVIL.),
in Mr. Sandby’s review of Sir Henry Holland’s book (Zoist,
No. XL.), and in sundry other papers in this periodical.

II. There are Reichenbach’s curious, and also carefully
noted, experiments with his different sensitives, which have
been published in his larger work, translated by Dr. Gregory
and Dr. Ashburner, and again in Professor Gregory’s three
valuable contributions to the Eleventh Volume of The Zoist.

III. There are the singular facts of table-turning and
hat-moving, even after liberal deductions are made for erro-
neous experiments.

IV. There are the phenomena produced by the galvano-
scope and magnetoscope of Mr. Rutter.

Here, we repeat it, are these four perfectly independent,
yet strongly connected facts, all tending and conducting to
one common conclusion. Why, then, are they not accepted ?
To attribute them ail to the miraculous powers of “ sugges-
tion,” “expectant attention,” or “dominant ideas,” seems
to be as unphilosophical as it is absurd. Rather should we
say with Humboldt, in the second motto prefixed to this
paper, that we see in this singular combination of accordant
but distinct phenomena, “the germ of a great discovery con-
cealed.” But again we ask, why are they not studied, and
admitted by the scientific magnates of the day? Much has
been written respecting the latent causes of this incredulity,
and of the disposition to depreciate our various phenomena :
but we believe that Jean Jacques in his Confessions has, after
all, come nearest to the truth. The savans, he says, make
atonement for their freedom from the prejudices by which
other men are swayed, by clinging with greater tenacity to
those they themselves hold. This we believe to be the fact :


Surgeon Searle’s acuteness and politeness. 95


and thus, by a happy compensation, common mortals like
ourselves are placed nearly upon a level with the popes and
potentates of science. Such a doctrine, of course, is humi-
liating to them, but most consolatory to us: it proves that
there is good in everything: and that even the follies of the
wise with their prejudices and blunders are not without
their use.
PHILALETHES.


VII. Cure of a very large Ganglion on the knee, thigh, and leg,
by Mr. Capern, of St. John’s Wood: and of a smaller
Ganglion on the back of the hand, by Mr. William Lloyd,
of the Society of Friends, Fulford, near York. Com-
municated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘* Evidence of the most satisfactory character is next addaced to prove that it
was a case of genuine cancer ; and testimony equally satisfactory is advaneed five
years afterwards, to prove that the cancerous tumor had disappeared, and that
the patient had been restored to health. But, to represent that the disease was
cured by mesmerism or the passes of the hand over the part, as practised by Dr.
Elliotson, and mesmerists in general, is to me truly marvellous. Seeing that,
during the period the patient was under this treatment, it is mentioned, though
but incidentally, as of no importance—so blind are men when under some favourite
delusion—that the patient suffered by four several attacks of inflammation of the
lungs and pleura; and which, with one exception, are all distinctly represented
to have been successfully treated by bleeding and blistering: and as the exhibition
of calomel to the extent of four doses is also mentioned in the treatment of the
first case, it is fair to conclude, as this forms a part of the ordinary treatment of
such cases, that it was employed in the treatment of the others also. Surely no
person but a mesmerist could have failed to perceive, that in a disease purely of
the blood, like cancer, thus withdrawing a quantity of the diseased blood, and
in no sparing way, as it is mentioned that the patient was in the first instance
bled to faintness, and drawing off some of the corrupted humours by blistering,
and exciting at the same time the liver and purifying organs of the body by
calomel, must have had something to do with the patient’s recovery! And fur-
ther, if in possession of a small amount of medical knowledge, such a person
could not fail to notice, that these were the appropriate remedies for a painful
tumor, whether seated in the breast or elsewhere. And he might further be dis-
posed to concur with me in opinion, that these were the only really efficient means
pursued on the occasion. Although he might not agree with me as the patient’s
hands and complexion had become sallow for some months before the attack,—
(at least I infer so, seeing that it is mentioned that these symptoms, of a dis-
ordered liver, had existed for many months,) that these symptoms might stand,
by virtue of the impurity of the blood which would ensue as a consequence of
such disorder of the liver, in the character of a cause of the cancerous affection
which subsequently occurred ; or if not its cause absolutely, be otherwise inti-
mately associated with its occurrence.” (p. 70.

‘*Its unfortunate sufferers are not to be condemned to the tender mercies of
the charlatan, who may profess to cure the disease by poisoning him with arsenic
or aconite; nor to the frivolity of the mesmerist, who, if he do not kill the
patient by poison, allows the disease to run its destructive career under the delu-
sive hope of success in a treatment in which there can be no hope, to the neglect
of those timely and more rational means, which every person of common sense


96 Burse mucose and ganglions.


cannot by this time fail to perceive, consists, in divesting the blood of its cancer-
ous impurities, and altering and improving its condition, and that of the general
health.’’—“ The Liver, the great purifying organ of the body, its importance to
health ; and the extreme frequency of its disorder: with the numerous derange-
ments, both nervous and dyspeptic, its disorder gives rise to, fully explained, and
their treatment. To which are added some observations on the cause and cure of
Cancer. By Charles Searle, M.D., M.R.C.S.E., late of the E. I. C. Madras


Establishment, and author of ’—(nobody knows how many celebrated works).
p- 74.


Every person knows that in joints there is a thick smooth
fluid to facilitate the play of the bones upon each other.
There are likewise scattered over the body little bags con-
taining the same kind of fluid, lying chiefly under the leaders
or tendons of the muscles, to facilitate, like friction wheels,
the play of these chords. Their scientific name is dburse
mucose, or mucous bags. The fluid is called synovia by the
learned, and joint-oil by the unlearned. It is not oil, but
resembles white of egg. It is liable to accumulate in excess
in both joints and bursze mucosz from any cause of irrita-
tion: and the irritation which produces the accumulation
may amount to inflammation, or not rise near to this point
or give any pain at all. Sudden cold, sudden mechanical
violence, as a fall, a blow, a sprain; or slow mechanical in-
jury, as continued or frequent pressure, causes it. It accu-
mulates in the joints occasionally from merely an unhealthy
disposition or damp situation. When the accumulation is in
these bags, not in the joints, the distended bag is called a
ganglion. Maid-servants frequently have one upon the knee
from the circumstance of kneeling so much in scouring and
thus irritating a large bursa situated there. Occasionally the
bag inflames and matter is generated within it: occasionally
the contents become solidified.

The common treatment is to bind something tight upon
the part—to rub up and down upon it and round about it
with liniments of all sorts, even with mercurial ointment,
ointment of iodine or iodide of potassium or of both—to
blister again and again—or to apply very irritating things after
a blister and thus keep open a raw discharging surface—to
puncture the swelling, or to strike it violently in the hope of
bursting it under the skin, and then bind something tight
upon it—to put in a seton—to cut the ganglion out—posi-
tively to amputate the limb. Some of these measures cause
extreme suffering, and have occasionally excited violent in-
flammation and even ruined a joint, rendered amputation
necessary, or absolutely destroyed life.

In the Medical Times for March 27, 1852, are the follow-


ing cases :—


Two Ganglions cut out.


‘LONDON HOSPITAL.
“By NATHANIEL WARD, Esq., F.R.C.S.


“Enlarged Bursa over the right and left Patella removed by excision.


‘A baker’s wife, stout and fat, about 40 years old, came under
my care, suffering considerable inconvenience from enlargement of
the bursa over the right and left patella (knee-cap). The left bursa
was larger than any [ have had an opportunity of seeing. It mea-
sured round the base 12 inches; was prominent from the surface of
the limb about 4 inches; contained a large quantity of fluid; was
unadherent to the skin, the surface of which was red and inflamed,
and very thin over the centre of the cyst. The patella could not be
isolated from the bursa, but was overlapped by it, and apparently
imbedded in its substance at the back part. There were considerable
pain and tenderness on pressure ; in fact, about three or four weeks
before her admission, a severe attack of inflammation had come on
* in the bursa without any perceptible cause, leading to an increase in
its volume. Prior to this attack she had never had any pain in it, and
it had been gradually increasing for four or five years, the time that
she first directed her attention to it.

“The bursa over the right patella measured round its base seven
inches, was prominent from the surface to the extent of three inches,
felt more dense than the left, but was adherent in a similar manner
to the patella behind, overlapping its circumference. No symptoms
of acute inflammation had at any time supervened in it. The walls
felt very dense and no fluctuation was sensible to the touch. It had
been observed growing about the same time as the left; and the
woman before her marriage, about a year prior to admission into
the hospital, had been a housemaid, and had had a great deal of
kneeling.

‘The patient was put on the middle diet of the hospital, and the
left limb was placed on an inclined plane, and cold lotions kept con-
stantly applied. A purgative was occasionally administered. This
treatment was continued for nine days, at the end of which time the
acute inflammation had subsided, accompanied with a slight dimi-
nution in the volume of the tumor, and a cessation of pain and
tenderness on pressure. An incision of an elliptical form was then
made over the centre of the tumor, about 44 inches long, and the
bursa carefully dissected away from the structures with which it was
in connexion. It was found, as had been anticipated, firmly ad-
herent to the capsular ligament and the patella, but, by keeping the
edge of the knife turned towards the cyst, no difficulty was expe-
rienced in removing the bursa entire; no vessel required a ligature.
The wound was brought together by sutures, and the knee-joint
covered over with strips of wet linen and oiled-silk-over them, and a
straight splint was applied at the back of the knee-joint, and kept
in place by a turn or two of a wet roller. A full opiate was given
after the operation, and the limb was placed on the inclined plane.
The patient passed a restless night. The knee-joint was dressed on
the following day with strips of linen and oiled silk, and covered

VOL. XII. H


98 A Ganglion severely treated.


over with a many-tailed bandage, which was more easy of application
than the roller, as it could be put on without any disturbance to the
limb. The patient went on very well for a day or two, when she
had a severe bilious attack, which subsided under treatment in a few
days. On the fourteenth day she complained of tenderness at the
inner part of the knee. In this situation the integument looked
puffy and red, and, on making gentle pressure on it, pus oozed out
from the middle of the onal. From this time to the twentieth
day, gentle pressure by a dossil of lint under the wet strips of linen
was made, with much relief to the pain originally complained of,
and, on the twenty-fifth day after the removal of the bursa, the
cicatrix was complete, and the parts surrounding it involved in the
operation were sound. Three days after this, the right knee was
operated on ; the patient, before being removed to the theatre, having
had the left knee kept straight by a splint bound on behind, in order
to prevent any straining of the cicatrix, which could not at present be
considered very firm. The bursa was removed in a similar manner
as the left, and the same precautions were had recourse to, inasmuch
as it was found similarly adherent to the patella. The cicatrix was
completed in one month, the same local applications having been
had recourse to.” (p. 319.)


“ Enlarged Bursa connected with the tendon of the semitendinosus.—
Puncture.—Suppuration of the sac.—Cure.
“Case 2.—A boy, aged 8 years, came under my care on account


of a tumor in the popliteal region. It was convex on the surface, and
pushed backward the skin to the extent of three-quarters of an inch ;
it measured two inches from above downwards, and about an inch
transversely. There was a slight horizontal constriction in the cen-
tre. It was firm, elastic, and yielding on pressure, and was some-
what oval in outline. When the thigh was flexed, the tendon of the
semitendinosus could be felt gliding obliquely over it, along its inner
and lower part. The development of the tumor could not be traced
to a blow, or any unusual strain; and his mother had only acci-
dentally noticed it three months before his coming to the hospital.
It had gradually increased since that time, but its growth was un-
attended with pain. As the boy was attending as an out-patient, it
was not deemed prudent to puncture it, but powerful counter-irritants
were applied at intervals during a fortnight, without any benefit.
He was admitted into the hospital. A grooved needle was passed
into the tumor, and the contents of the cyst emptied by firm
pressure. The contained fluid resembled that usually met with in
the bursze about the wrist, but was somewhat more dense, and of a
yellowish tinge. Firm pressure was immediately made by a large
dossil of lint and a bandage, and the limb was confined in a straight
thigh-splint. On the second day, a good deal of fever had come on,
and the boy was sick, and complained of headache and thirst. The
back part of the leg was hot and tender to the touch. He was
ordered saline medicine, and an occasional purgative ; the bandage
was taken off the limb, and the leg was dressed with wet rags and


Another Ganglion cut out. 99


oiled silk. On the ninth day, there was considerable swelling in the
popliteal space, and the surface of the skin was hot, red, and tender.
Fluctuation was distinct. A free opening was made, and gave vent
to three ounces of pus, mixed with a little venous-looking blood.
The abscess kept on discharging for thirteen days, when a piece of
lint which had been kept in the opening could no longer be intro-
duced. The patient shortly after left the hospital, the back of the
leg and thigh being protected with soap plaster and a bandage.


“ Bursa over the internal malleolus of the right foot.—Failure of
puncture.—Excision.

“Case 3.—A boy, aged 11, came under my care with a bursa
tumor as large as half a walnut, situated over the internal malleolus.
He perceived, about four months ago, a small painless swelling, which
he could not refer to any injury; it had gradually increased in size.
It appeared to have no connexion with the tibialis anticus.

“It was punctured with an exploring needle. The cyst was
found extremely dense; and about a drachm of clear limpid fluid
escaped, which was much thinner than that usually contained in
similar cysts. The escape of the fluid diminished the volume of
tumor but little. A compress, secured by a bandage tightly applied
round a leg splint, was placed over the ankle. Four days after the
puncture, the bursa was quite as large as it was originally, was very
moveable, and gave the idea of being but loosely connected with the
surrounding parts. An incision was made over it, and the bursa
fully exposed to view. It was found very firmly adherent to the
internal malleolus ; the anterior three-fourths were consequently only
removed, and the remainder left in contact with the bone. The
wound was brought together with sutures and strapping, and over
this warm-water dressing, and a splint and bandage were applied.
For two days succeeding the removal of the bursa great pain con-
tinued. The wound had cicatrized on the twentieth day by the
granulation process.” (pp. 319, 320.)


Mr. Capern has sent me the following account :—


Mr. Capern’s cure of very large Ganglion of the knee.


Mrs. Julian, residing at No. 66, High Street, Marylebone,
in the early part of November, 1851, began to feel consider-
able pain in her left knee, particularly after any exertion:
and at the same time it gradually became swollen. Both the
pain and swelling continued to increase, and in February
she was unable to walk even across the street without great
difficulty and suffering. She now called in Mr. Woolltorton,
a surgeon, residing in Seymour Place, New Road, who gave
her homeopathic medicines and applied poultices. Still
the pain and swelling increased, and he therefore called in
Mr. Walne, a surgeon, residing at No. 72, Guildford Street,
Russell Square. This gentleman visited her three times, and

H 2


100 Wonderful effect of Mesmerism.


advised vapour baths. The vapour baths did no good—still
the pain and swelling increased: and at his last visit Mr.
Walne said he should propose to cut it away, only that such
an operation would prove fatal; and that her leg must be
amputated. Dr. Quin was then called in also. He agreed
with Mr. Walne that ¢o cut it away would be dangerous, and
that nothing could save the limb.

Mr. Woolltorton then proposed mesmerism as the last
resource, remarking that it would do no harm if it should do
no good, and adding that he would watch its progress. Dr.
Quin, on this suggestion, considered that mesmerism might
produce benefit.

Mr. Woolltorton himself applied to Mr. Capern on the
third of April, 1852, and on the fifth accompanied him to
the patient’s house. The swelling extended more than 5
inches above the knee, more than 4 inches below it, and
more than 16 inches in circumference. Mr. Capern began
local mesmerism by slow straight passes, slightly touching
the parts, and often not touching them at all, with his
fingers, and breathing upon the knee. He sometimes began
with a few passes before her face: and she then was a little
drowsy.

At the third visit the pain was greatly mitigated, and after
the fourth nearly subdued : in fact, she had no pain at all unless
she exerted herself. At the end of the first week the swelling
was decidedly diminished: and at the end of the first fortnight
she could walk a mile without pain or difficulty.

After having been thus mesmerised daily for half an hour,
and drinking mesmerised water daily, and applying this to
the knee daily and always with relief, during eight weeks, she
resolved, as she was well, to visit her friends in the country ;
and, when there, she on several occasions walked five miles
a day without any inconvenience.

On the 3rd of June, 1852, a country surgeon, who
doubted the power of mesmerism, was taken by her brother
to see her, and confessed that, if he had attended her, he
should have amputated the limb, and expressed his astonish-
ment at the effect of mesmerism.

After her return to London she, in July, walked a great
many miles one day, and at the same time took a violent
cold, when immediately the knee swelled again and became
painful. Mr. Capern recommenced mesmerising the part,
and in a fortnight she was as well as before.

After staying in London for some months, she went to
Jersey, and often strolled several miles a day over the rocky
irregular part of the island, clambering as well as walking.


A Surgeon’s sneer. 101


On her return to London, the knee was of its natural size
and perfectly flexible, and her general health better than it
had long been.

Several medical men saw her, and even those who were
opposed to mesmerism confessed it was a wonderful cure.

Being quite well, she again forgot she had ever been ill,
and thought that nothing would hurt her; and so continued
to indulge her propensity to walk very long distances; and
again caught a bad cold, and was very ill, in October, and
the knee swelled a little again; but it was presently reduced
to its natural size by Mr. Capern.

The remainder of the narrative I obtained from Mrs.
Julian herself.

In February, 1843, she paid a visit to a friend at Croydon,
while the fatal malarious fever was still in existence. She
arrived in the evening, and went to bed in perfect health at
eleven o’clock. At two o’clock she awoke with severe head-
ache, vomiting, and pains all over her. The knee began to
swell and to ache excruciatingly, and in six hours was as
large as ever. Mr. Woolltorton was sent for from London
and prescribed homceopathic medicines and fomentations, but
without the least advantage. She was conveyed home and
the treatment continued, as well as mesmerism resumed.
But with no advantage. Onwards the disease went. Indeed
she found the passes over the knee aggravate her pain, and
she could not bear them. Mr. Capern was at the time
troubled with tooth-ache (forgetting that it might have been
cured), had a cold, and was uncomfortable from different
causes and in a great bustle in removing from the Mesmeric
Infirmary to St. John’s Wood, and mesmerised her knee too
pers and too seldom, not more than two or three times a
week.

Mr. Walne saw her again, and, having always had too
strong a contempt for mesmerism to make himself in the
least acquainted with it, and having formerly sneered at it
when Mr. Capern was mesmerising the limb and curing it
after he had condemned it to amputation, now began by
sneeringly saying, “ so pawing has not cured you,” forgetting
how often he must fail to cure his patients : and how often after
he has cured them some carelessness brings back the disease.
I presume that every medical man is anxious that all he says
against mesmerism should be made public, in order that his
light may shine before men and he may be known to pos-
terity for at least one thing—his sagacity in discerning the
absurdity and nothingness of mesmerism while we poor
noodles are so stupid as to prize it. The antimesmerists


102 Greatrakes’s facts verified.


must rejoice that there is a Zoist to record their sayings and
doings, and secure them fame for ages. The scoffers at the
circulation of the blood, though their name was Legion, are
all forgotten except a very small number, because they lived
before the time of The Zoist. There was no Zoist in their
day, as there is in ours.


‘* Multi: sed omnes illacrimabiles
Urgentur, ignotique longa
Nocte, carent quia vate sacro.”
Horat., Carm. iv. 9.


Oh happy, thrice happy, antimesmerists !

After his remark on pawing he could suggest nothing to
cure poor Mrs. Julian, and said that, if the knee burst, the
disease would run on and drain her till it brought her to the
grave, unless the limb were amputated. Thus again he would
have deprived her of her foot, leg, knee, and half her thigh.

All this time she was allowed to eat all she could: was
plied with the strongest soups and bottled porter, &c.

However, nature had her way, and, in two months from
the attack, burst the tumor in three places, giving vent to a
copious discharge of fluids.

Mr. Capern was now in better health and less bustle, and
mesmerised her daily with the invariable effect of soothing
her greatly, so that she always looked forward with eager-
ness to his visit.

The passes were made downwards as far as the feet and
then beyond the toes. But once she happened to have her
shoe on, and Mr. Capern did not extend the passes beyond the
back of the foot where the shoe began; not carrying off as
usual beyond the points of the toes. That night she woke
up in great pain in the instep and foot, below where the
passes that day had terminated: and the pain was still in
the foot at his visit the next day. The same thing had for-
merly occurred in another case to Mr. Capern. On learning
the circumstance, he begged her to take her shoe off, and he
made the passes from the knee beyond the points of the toes,
and the pain was completely dislodged from the instep and
foot in two or three passes. This is a fact well known to
mesmerisers and was observed by old Greatrakes.*

He mesmerised it two months after the tumor burst, and
under his operations the part became completely restored,
ceasing to discharge instead of discharging till it destroyed
her; and she recovered so completely that her leg has not


* See Zoist, No. XI., p. 100.


Remarkable cures. 103


required Mr. Walne to cut it off, but is quite as sound and
as useful as ever it was in her life.

Three times was the disease completely cured by mes-
merism, and violent external causes brought it back as they
might inflammation of the lungs, rheumatism, or any other
affection cured by ordinary medicines. It is to be regretted
that mesmerism was not continued long after the disease was
well. This should be a rule. On the fourth occasion it may
be urged that nature effected the cure. But we must re-
member that every mesmerisation benefited the patient : and
that the properties of mesmerism are to soothe and strengthen,
and that ulcers are admirably cured by mesmerism, as the
pages of The Zoist amply shew.* The antimesmerists, more-
over, had predicted a fatal termination with their remedies
only, without amputation.


Mrs. Julian, so thoroughly convinced of the mighty cura-
tive power of mesmerism in her own person, felt anxious that
others should participate in its blessings, and made a few
good cures herself.

On paying a visit to her brother, she found he had been
agonized by pain in his back for a fortnight; and in the time
four medical men had seen him without affording him any


relief. This was in Germany: and he had just come back to
England.

Very soon a dull pain was felt in one knee for two days,
and then in the night the pain suddenly arose to agony. She
visited him while in this agony, found him unable to move his
leg, mesmerised it at half-past 2 o’clock p.m. for half an hour,
and he immediately walked down stairs. She mesmerised it
again for half an hour when he was in bed: and the next
morning he was perfectly well.

She cured also a case of neuralgia of the face at one sit-
ting after a medical practitioner at Banbury had attended it
in vain for four months. Another such case she did not cure,
but always relieved the pain at the time, insomuch that the
patient invariably went to sleep in the midst of the pain.
Long perseverance would probably have effected a cure.

Mrs. Julian resides at present at No. 10, Richmond
Villas, Seven Sisters’ Road, near Holloway.


* Cures, and some very remarkable, of diseases of the knee only, will be
found in Nos. V., pp. 84, 126; VI., p. 266; VII., p. 383; XX., p. 388;
XXIV., p. 416; XXXIIL., pp. 71, 92, 93; XXXVIII., p. 173.


|
!
|
|


Surgery fails, Mesmerism cures.


Cure of a Ganglion on the hand, by Mr. W. Lloyd.


“ Fulford, near York, 11th month, 17th, 1853.
“Very esteemed Friend, Dr. Elliotson,—Ellen Penty,
aged about 16 years, daughter of John Penty of Naburn, had,
for several years, a lump of the above description on the
back of her right hand, near the wrist, which increased to
about the size of half a walnut, when, as it appeared to be
making progress, her father took her seven miles to a surgeon
in very high repute, and resorted to for many miles round.
He expressed strong confidence that he should cure it, fur-
nished them with plaisters, and gave them directions in
other particulars, all which were attended to, and the plais-
ters duly applied for seven or eight months; occasionally
seeing him in the interim. At length, finding no benefit or
any reduction in size, they discontinued the treatment ; after
which, as I happened to be at their house, at two or three
different times, I applied a few mesmeric passes, which
appearing to have a little effect in reducing the size, her
mother was anxious it should be continued. I therefore
attended to it every other day, and after a perseverance of
eight or nine weeks, it entirely disappeared. The mesmeric
sleep was not induced, nor was it attempted until the latter
part of my attendance, when, by getting the patient as near
the state of coma asI could, I thought the progress was
facilitated thereby.
“T remain, sincerely, and respectfully thy friend,
“Wa. Lioyp.”


As the treatment was not continued for any time after
the cure, and the poor girl of necessity used her hand as
habitually, the disease gave signs of return.


“Fulford, 12th month, 4th, 1853.
“My dear Friend, Dr. Elliotson,—I feel bound in can-
dour to inform thee, that Ellen Penty’s mother told me, the
other day, that there are some symptoms of the return of the
ganglion.
“With sincere regard, I remain thy Friend,
“Wa. Lioyp.”


I immediately begged Mr. Lloyd to recommence the
treatment, and to rest assured that he would soon dissipate
the swelling. He followed my directions.


“Fulford, 2nd month, 26th, 1854.
“My dear Friend, Dr. Elliotson,—I have now paid some
further attention to the case of ganglion, and am glad to


Two Ganglions cured by Passes without contact. 105


report, that the little appearance of return has been for some
weeks quite dissipated; so that I suppose the account may
appear as at first narrated. Hoping thou art in good health
and spirits,
“T remain, sincerely, thy Friend,
“Wa. Luoyp.”


I wishing to know whether he made passes with contact
or without, he sent the following answers to my enquiries :—


“Fulford, 3rd month, 26th, 1854.

“My dear Friend, Dr. Elliotson,—The cure remained per-
fect about ten days or a fortnight ago. Generally the passes
were without contact, though I did sometimes stroke my
thumb, with contact, down in the same direction, that is,
from above the wrist, over the affected part, and off at the
finger ends.

“T also generally laid the ball of my thumb, with moderate
pressure, on the ganglion, for about five minutes, more than
less, exercising my best will and desire for its reduction;
indeed this concern I endeavoured to maintain with every
pass. Continuance of process, half an hour.

“No sleep was produced nor attempted till towards the
latter end of my attention to the case, when I thought the
state of quietude produced, facilitated the reduction of the
malady.

“T remain, sincerely, thy Friend,
“Wa. Luoyp.”


The lightness of the contact when the passes were made
with any, and the usual absence of contact while they were
being made, prevents our opponents from ascribing the cures
to friction.

In No. XI., p. 318, I have recorded the cure of two
solid ganglions as large as a pea on the first and second joint
of the middle finger of a patient of my own, by passes with-
out contact for half an hour night and morning, made by her
sister. A surgeon had previously cut one away, but the
disease then reappeared in two places. The mesmeric cure
has proved permanent now for nine years. Several parti-
culars in the case make it worth perusal.

If friction did not effect these cures, Drs. Braid, Car-
penter, and Holland, must ascribe them to dominant ideas,
suggestion, and expectant attention, and ought to petition
for the introduction of these into the next Pharmacopeeia of
the Royal College of Physicians.


I must now make a few remarks upon the motto. The


106 Medicinal power of Mesmerism.


power of mesmerism in causing the dispersion of morbid in-
creases—solid or fluid—is very great. The general expression
of the medicinal power of mesmerism is, that it strengthens
and soothes, and increases the restorative power of the living
system—the vis medicatrix nature—to resist, bear up under,
and to throw off disease, whatever be the kind—functional or
structural, and in whatever organ situated. It may fail, as
all other medicinal measures do hourly in the hands of all
medical men: but it is by far the greatest, the gentlest, and
pleasantest addition to our means of mitigation and cure ever
granted to us, and surpasses all previous expectation and
hope of medical progress. The Zoist teems with instances of
its success in endless cases which fall under the physician:
and the cures of ganglion, now presented to the public, (I
wish I could say the medical public, but the profession will
not in its pride bestow its attention for an instant upon one
of them,) prove that it can effect what surgery does not, and
in cases in which the surgical means—fruitlessly or success-
fully employed—are often severe and hazardous. I even had
a patient with an unquestionably cancerous growth in the
breast, sure to prove fatal even after a surgical operation.
For the operation of removal by the knife is altogether useless,
and the disease so uniformly returns in true cases, that I now
regard an operation as a most improper practice, a discre-
dit to the professional knowledge or the moral character of
the surgeon. A true cancer always returns, and I have seen
the disease return in dozens of cases, and in many after 2
second extirpation, and in some after a third, by the kuife,
and then destroy life, when the poor sufferer had submitted to
this succession of cruelties. A tumor not cancerous, but
called cancerous from ignorance or design, as is frequently
the case, may of course never return. Though I had seen
mesmerism dissipate two hard ganglions in the hand of one
of my patients, I had not hoped that it would dissipate a
gristly cancerous mass. Yet it did; and the exquisite case
will be found in No. XXIII. But the writer of the pamphlet
called The Liver, &c., calculated to excite a smile in a well-
informed medical man and to catch weak, dyspeptic, and
nervous patients, insists upon it that the cure was effected
quite independently of mesmerism. He is perfectly unknown
to me, but does not hesitate to abuse me,—pronounces me
BLIND under a favourite DELUSION, FAILING TO PERCEIVE
what none but a mesmerist could have failed to perceive,
and what I should have perceived, even 1r I HAD BEEN IN
POSSESSION OF A SMALL AMOUNT OF MEDICAL KNOWLEDGE:
says that the case ought not to have been trusted to me—at least


A true Cancer dissipated by Mesmerism. 107


not to the FRIVOLITY OF THE MESMERIST, who, if he does not
kill the patient by poison allows the disease to run its destruc-
tive career under the delusive hope of success in a treatment in
which there can be no hope, to the neglect of those timely
and more rational means which EVERY PERSON OF COMMON
seNsE, &c. Yet the patient did lose her cancer and died
a year after of influenza, following a stroke of palsy. I
never expressed a hope that the cancerous tendency in the
system would be removed by mesmerism, nor say that this
was in this case. The power of mesmerism is proved to extend
only to the retardation and dissipation of an individual can-
cerous mass: and numerous are the cases in which I have
seen the progress of the disease surprisingly retarded and the
patients’ health and comfort greatly maintained.

It so happened that, during the five years of the mesmeric
treatment of my patient,* she three times caught a violent
cold, for which I thought it right to bleed her to the extent
of a few ounces: the first time after she had been improving
under mesmerism for eleven months, and the second time a
year and three quarters after the first, the third time nine
months after this; and never again during the two years she
was afterwards mesmerised,—up to her perfect cure. Yet
the cure is ascribed to these distant and brief little treatments
of her chest, and not to the mesmerism, which was practised
daily all the time, and with marked success; removing the
pain, reducing the tumor, and recruiting her health, long
before the first little bleeding. ‘‘ The first mesmerisation gave
her a better night than usual,” (p. 215)—* the pain lessened so
that her nights became greatly better, and her health and spirits
improved, the sallowness of her complexion lessened,” and all
without medicine, or any thing but mesmerism. In proportion
as she was mesmerised she improved; and twice when mes-
merism was neglected the cancer increased. (pp. 218—227.
She was never the better for the treatment which her chest
required for a few days. I defy any person to prove a single
case of cancer cured by bleeding or mercury, little or much :
the disease would then be very manageable, and be cured
almost invariably ; and we should no longer speak of a cancer
with horror. The most determined antimesmerists will laugh
at poor Mr. Searle and Mr. Searle’s poor book.

He resembles Mr. Wakley, who was so enraged at the
cure as to assert that scores of cancers have been cured by
pressure. I defied him to the proof.t Not one can be found.


* See Zoist, No. XXIII., pp. 213, 312.
+ Zoist, No. XXIV., p. 421.


108 Mesmerism in Edinburgh.


Five years have passed, and he has not noticed my defiance.
Bleeding and mercury tend to act upon the system in cancer,
and thus encourage the disease; and pressure causes intoler-
able suffering and cannot be continued, nor has ever yet cured
a case. In the practice of what hospital or what surgeon are
either bleeding, mercury, or pressure employed or thought of?


VIII. Mesmerism in Edinburgh.


We have the intense satisfaction of announcing the formation
of a Mesmeric Institution in a place remarkable for a good
sprinkling of worldly prudence and dark-age backwardness
of opinion, in the midst of learning, intelligence, honesty,
and manliness, which we all know to abound in it: and
where the medical and clerical portion of society has sig-
nalized itself by the direst hostility to mesmerism.


SCOTTISH CURATIVE MESMERIC ASSOCIATION.


NAMES OF OFFICE-BEARERS.


President.
Wiri1aM Grecory, Esq. M.D., F.R.S.E.,
Professor of Chemistry in the University of Edinburgh.
Vice-presidents.
General Sir Thomas Makdougall Bris- | Sir George Scott Douglas, Bart.
bane, Bart., G.C.B., G.C.H., Cor- | Sir Walter C. Trevelyan, Bart.
responding Member of the Institute | John C. Colquhoun, Esq., Advocate,
of France, President of the Royal Sheriff of Dumbartonshire.
Society of Edinburgh, LL.D. of | JamesEsdaile, Esq.,M.D.,H.E.I.C.S.,
Oxford, &c., &c. late Presidency Surgeon of Calcutta.


Directors.
Dr. James Scott, F.R.S.E. Deputy In- | Alex. Melville Bell, Esq.
spector of Hospitals and Fleets. A. G. Home, Esq. M.D.
William Neilson, Esq. George Swinton, Esq.
Arthur Trevelyan, Esq. J. Howison, Esq.


Alex. J. Ellis, Esq., B.A. D. Brodie, Esq., M.D.
Captain Davidson.


Consulting Physician.
Dr. James Scott.
Treasurer.
Mr. J. Home Hay, John’s Place, St. Leonard’s.
Corresponding Secretary.
William Neilson, Esq., 1, North Charlotte Street.
Secretary.
Mr. James Cameron, Jun., 265, High Street.


‘Noble men and noblemen.


Acting Committee.
(With power to add to their number.)


Messrs W. F. Vernon. Messrs J. Swinton.
G. Plowman. D. Lawson.
J. Home Hay. G. Mitchel.
G. Macdougall, John Baillie.
Wm. M’Crindle. G. E. Burtt.
J. Bannerman. David White.
W. Laing. Thos. Ramsay.
J. Cameron, Jun.


Drs. Elliotson and Engledue and Mr. Prideaux were
elected honorary members of the association.

Dr. Gregory is in his proper place—at the head of the
institution. His conduct, he being a professor in the Uni-
versity with such antimesmeric colleagues as Drs. Bennett,
Simpson, Miller, and Christison, is beyond all praise.* Let
us bestow due honour upon Drs. Esdaile, James Scott, A. G.
Home, and D. Brodie (whose name appears as the seconder
of a motion at the meeting), and Mr. Swinton, who was
once, we believe, a medical officer in India. Messrs.
Jackson and Davey deserve great praise. Their strenuous,
honest, intelligent, and wisely-conducted labours have as-
sisted in revolutionizing the Scottish mind.

We understand that six and twenty gentlemen enrolled
themselves as pupils of the association in order to confer the
blessings of mesmerism. But where are the rest of the me-
dical men of Edinburgh? where the rest of those who ac-
knowledge the truth of mesmerism in private before mes-
merists, but shrink before the despotism of the medical
bodies and the blustering antimesmeric doctors?+ The
believing doctors are afraid of each other, and inveigh against
it before its foes. Where is the Duke of Argyll, to whom
Dr. Gregory so amiably dedicated his book on mesmer-
ism? Where is the Earl of Eglinton, who so patronized
the American electro-biology people—Stone and Darling?
We fear these noblemen are indifferent to mesmerism and
its healing powers, and regard all its effects as dependent
upon imagination. Are such the effects upon them of electro-
biology which once so enamoured them? Dr. Simpson could
bustle about clairvoyance and offer a reward for a proof of it ;
but when something more certain and also permanently a


* He also subscribes to the London Mesmeric Infirmary. Here is an
example to English non-subscribing medical mesmerists.

+ The conduct of Professors Miller, Simpson, and Bennett, and D. A. Wood,
is fully detailed in No. XXV., p. 102; XXXV., pp. 296, 329, 334.


110 Messrs. Jackson and Davey.


blessing to mankind in mesmerism is the point, he stirs not,
for he can gain no silly applause. He is fond of empty pro-
fessional popularity : but his wise course would have been the
reverse of that which he has pursued. He knows mesmerism
to be true: he acknowledged its truth years ago,* and
made experiments on it: and so he has lately with a patient
in his own house, as a lady who witnessed this, and was his
patient, has mentioned in London, and yet he laughs at
it the next moment before sceptics.t| And where are Mr.
George Combe and his relatives, disciples, and coadjutors ?
And they would have us believe that they are friends of
progress! Mr. Combe is worthy of his friend and country-
man, Sir James Clark.

We have no space to detail the account of the meeting.
We are told that 1500 persons were present: and we read in
the report that the association


**Is wholly composed of pupils of Messrs. Jackson and Davey,
who after receiving the-requisite instruction from them determined
to make a practical application of their knowledge in the attempted
cure or alleviation of disease among their friends, neighbours, and
the suffering poor around. For this purpose they determined to
hold weekly meetings for mutual encouragement and advice, and at
which reports of cases should be made and entered in the minutes.
From these they select a few cases,” &c.


Here follow accounts of nine most successful cases.

There will be more public meetings in Edinburgh, and
organized missions to the chief towns in Scotland.

We wish the association all success. It will succeed,
but let its noble supporters remember that similar attempts
in Dublin, Bristol, and Exeter have failed. The London
institution flourishes more and more every day. We are here
all perfectly disinterested: all work for it without reward:
have no view to gain anything by it in even the most indirect
manner, and are all deeply impressed with the grandeur of


* No. XXXIV., p. 334.

t+ In No. XXXVIIIL., p. 225, we told our readers that a shilling would be
well bestowed in the purchase of a pamphlet by Dr. Esdaile, entitled, The intro-
duction of Mesmerism as an Anesthetic and Curative Agent into the hospitals of
India: 1852. It is replete with the most important and astounding facts, and
controverts the ridiculous opinions of Drs. Simpson, Bennett, &c., that mes-
merism operates by fixing attention and suggestion.

It was in part composed for the Edinburgh Monthly Journal at the request of
Dr. Simpson. But this valiant accoucheur and his colleagues afterwards re-
jected it. Dr. Simpson merely acknowledged it in a complimentary note, and
said that it was not sufficienlly practical for him to publish! Why it was the
most practical essay that could be written, and Dr. Simpson knew this. He
ought to blush for ever. The fifth and sixth pages tell a sad tale of him.


Books received. lll


mesmeric truths and the duty of applying their mighty reme-
dial powers to suffering man. We believe that this is the
case also with the Scotch Association. The strength of the
Scotch character is shewn in all parts of the globe and in all
departments of life. The supporters of the association, act-
ing solely from love of enlightenment and benevolence, will
establish it firmly.

In London, the committee meet once a week, admit and
discharge patients, and hear a detail by the secretary of the
daily mesmerisation of each patient, its duration and effects,
and the weekly results. Without this plan no regularity or
reality can be ensured. No phenomena are aimed at or en-
couraged: no show is made or allowed: no other treatment
is mixed with the mesmeric: no clairvoyants are employed.
The whole proceeds in the most beautiful manner. All will
depend upon the secretary or general superintendent. The
London Infirmary is eminently fortunate in this respect.
Mr. Gardiner is an excellent man, benevolent and conscien-
tious and calm, and devoted to mesmerism as a remedy, and
always at his post. Let a sense of simple duty actuate our


Scottish brethren, as it will, and their institution will not
fail,


BOOKS RECEIVED.


The Autobiography of Elizabeth Squirrel, of Shottishan, and selections
from her writings: together with an examination and defence of her statements
relative to her sufferings, blindness, deafness, entire abstinence from food and
drink during twenty-five weeks, and other extraordinary phenomena: and facts
and opinions illustrative and suggestive. By one of her Watchers. London :
Simpkin and Marshall, Stationers’ Hall Court: 1853.

We hope to notice this in our next.


A practical investigation into the truth of Clairvoyance: containing revela-
tions of the fate of Sir John Franklin, and some enquiry into the mysterious
rappings of the present day. By an Unprejudiced Observer. London: Bail-
liere, 219, Regent Street: 1854.

This publication is without a name. Anonymous testimony will not be
received by the world, though true. We entreat the writer to affix his name if
he loves his cause.


Cronaca del Magnetismo Animale, redatta dal D. Giuseppe Terzaghi.
Volume Secundo. Milano: 1854.

We have not received the First Volume. The present contains a translation
of the last Report of the London Mesmeric Infirmary: and of Dr. Esdaile’s
protest and petition to the American Congress: and several interesting original
communications. The Editor appears a man of honour, learning, and courage.
Mesmerism is rapidly spreading all over the civilized earth.


112 Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c.


Mesmerism proved True, and the Quarterly Reviewer reviewed. By the
Rev. Chauncy Hare Townshend, of Trinity Hall, Cambridge. Bosworth, Regent
Street: 1854.

This we have reviewed at length in Article II.


Human Electricity : the means of its development, illustrated by experiments,
with additional notes. By J. O. N. Rutter, F.R.A.S. Parker and Son, West
Strand: 1854.

This also is noticed by us at full length in Article VI.


The Principle of Health transferable. By George Barth. Bailliere: 1853.

Observations on the Dentition of the Lilliputian Aztecs. By Dr. Robert
Reid, Dentist to the Merchant Maiden Hospital, Edinburgh. Reprinted from the
Monthly Journal of Medical Science, for February, 1854.

On first seeing these interesting young human beings, Dr. Reid conceived
that they were not of the same race. The boy’s nose was prominent, his eyes
brilliant and protruding, his brow retreating, his hair silky. The girl’s facial angle
is entirely different, her eyes smaller, her hair curling and even crisp. Thus he
appears of Asiatic, and she of African origin. The breadth and roundness of her
upper dental-arch resemble that of the negro. From the teeth Dr. Reid judges
the boy to be twelve years old; the girl eight. Professor Owen came to the
same opinion of their ages from general considerations.


On the British Tritons. By John Higginbottom, F.R.S. From the
Annals and Magazine of Natural History, for December, 1853 : London.

Gy tics: an tial branch of National Education, both public and
private: the only remedy to improve the present physical condition of man. By
Captain Chiosso, Professor of Gymnastics at University College School. London:
Walton and Maberly, Upper Gower Street: 1854.

This is a very interesting sound book: deserving to be read by all who have
the charge of the young. Gymnastics should always form part of education:
and perhaps some will agree with us on being informed that ‘‘ at Buckingham
Palace gymnastic exercise is resorted to very regularly and perseveringly by the
whole Royal Family down to the very infant.”


The British Journal of Homeopathy. January, 1854. Aylott and Co.,
Paternoster Row.

Truths maintained. By James Biden, Monckton House, Anglesea, Hants,
Author of the True Church. Aylott and Co., Paternoster Row: 1854.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


The great press of matter has occasioned us to postpone some communi-
cations.

J. S., D.B., and others.—We are authorized to state that the plates for Dr.
Symes’s translation of Gall are now completed, and, the letter-press being in the
hands of the printers, the publication of this important work, which has been so
long delayed from unavoidable circumstances, will be proceeded with forthwith.

We return our warmest thanks to Mr. Janson for his advertisement of The
Zoist in the Phonotypic Examiner and the Western Times, and for his distri-
bution of many numbers of it.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XLVI.


JULY, 1854.


I. An account of the perfectly painless and successful removal
of a female breast in Mesmeric Sleep-waking at the
London Mesmeric Infirmary by W. J. Tubbs, Esq., of
Upwell, on April 26, 1854: with accounts of other in-
stances of the same fact, and a list of operations performed
equally without pain through the innocent and gentile
agency of Mesmerism. By Dr. Evxiotson.


‘I desire to record my testimony against the so-called Mesmeric Hospital,
considering the same likely to be productive of much mischief in its locality.”

‘“‘ The Canaanites of old filled up the cup of their iniquity by having dealings
with Satan and evil spirits.”

“Satan is now coming in like a flood with all these his old works of power,
either personally by his spirit or by his spirits under a new nomenclature, viz.,
mesmerism, biology, clairvoyance, consulting with spirits of the departed, &c.

“The old works of Satan in power are now performed” (painless removals of
female breasts?) “under these new names by the various persons who are in
our day arranged under the general term ‘ Media,’” (good Mr. Tubbs little
thinks he is a Medium!) ‘‘ which term seems to comprehend mesmerists, biolo-
gists, &c., as well as consulters with the spirits of friends and distinguished per-
sons departed.

‘In this country, and in all Europe, all these workings of evil power are done
under the title of ‘ science,’ ‘ falsely so called ;’ but in America, where the ordi-
nances of God are less respected, some of them, if not all, are done directly,
openly and confessedly by spirits without the guise of science to cover their
works.”’

“It is very clear that the nations of Christendom are filling up the cup of
their iniquity, and, like the Canaanites of old, are rapidly preparing themselves
for the judgment of God by the sword.

‘This brief statement will tend to shew you that I am very averse to the
establishment of any hospital where these abominations are practised under the
guise of science, and shall always raise my voice against the evil spiritual works
that are therein done, by whatever name designated. June 13, 1853.””—Protest
of an Irvingite Surgeon against allowing the beneficent Mesmeric Infirmary to
remain in Fitzroy Square (see Zoist, No. XLV., pp. 33, 34).


On the 25th of last April, a most respectable married woman,


the mother of four little children, named Flowerday, a pa-
VOL. XII. 1


114 Previous history of the case.


tient of Mr. Tubbs, of Upwell, Cambridgeshire, arrived with
her husband from that village at the Mesmeric Infirmary,
No. 36, Weymouth Street, Portland Place. The following
morning Mr. Tubbs arrived, accompanied by a surgical friend,
Mr. Burman of Wisbeach.

Mr. Tubbs, had previously written to, say that he was
about to remove the diseased breast of one of his female
patients in the mesmeric state of insensibility to pain, and
that, if the Committee of the Mesmeric Infirmary were
agreeable to his doing it within the walls of the Institution,
he would be happy to send her up and perform the operation
in their presence.

One of the rules of the Infirmary is, “that the medical
officers of the Institution shall be unlimited in number: and
that all regularly licensed medical gentlemen, being governors
of this Institution, may be appointed medical officers of the
Infirmary by the Committee, and, as such, may attend at the
Infirmary, during the hours of business fixed by the Com-
mittee, to mesmerise any patients recommended by them-
selves or by another governor, who may express a wish in
writing to the Committee that such patient shall be under
the care of that particular medical officer.”

Accordingly Mr. Tubbs’s courageous offer was accepted,
and on this occasion a bed-room occupied by one of the
Secretary’s family was kindly given up by him for the recep-
tion of Mr. and Mrs. Flowerday, though the charity is not
rich enough to receive in-patients.

Mr. Flowerday is a gardener, and Mrs. Flowerday is
80 years of age, has been married nine years, and is the
mother of four children, the youngest three years old. Since
the birth of the youngest she has been subject to ague, which
prevails at Upwell, and to periodical menorrhagia, usually
lasting ten days. She has also been subject to severe colds with
cough and a degree of asthma. The affection of the breast
was first noticed by her two years ago: but she had not con-
sulted Mr. Tubbs for it more than a month.

Ever since these periodical losses began, she had been
subject to attacks of severe fainting.

Mr. Tubbs, as soon as he examined the breast, con-
demned it to removal, and began mesmerising her: and at
the first attempt he induced sleep-waking and insensibility
to pain in forty minutes. He continued to mesmerise her
daily, indeed often twice a day, for an hour or more, till she
left home; allowing her to be altogether from one to three
hours in the sleep-waking every time. He soon found her
quite fit for the operation, but various little circumstances


Preparation for, and performance of, the operation. 115


in London caused us to defer the visit of Mr. Tubbs and his
patient to us for a while.

On the 26th of April, everything was prepared for the
operation at the Infirmary, in the room at the left-hand side
on the first floor, in which the female patients are mesmerised.
The instruments, bandages, &c., were placed in the back
part of the room, upon a table behind one of the two folding
doors—the door which was nearest the entrance into the front
part of the room from the stairs—so that, when the patient
came into the room at a quarter past two o’clock, she saw
none of them. She was placed in a chair in the midst of
the room, well supported by cushions. There were present
eight members of the Committee, two medical subscribers
who had been invited, and a friend of Mr. Amor admitted
at the request of this gentleman, the Secretary, the Matron,
and three mesmerisers, besides Mr. Tubbs and his friend,
Mr. Burman, who always kindly assists at Mr. Tubbs’s ope-
rations.

Mr. Tubbs induced sleep-waking in nine minutes by
holding her hands and staring into her eyes. After a time
her eyelids quivered and her eyes converged and turned up-
wards; and, in nine minutes from the first, her eyes closed
and her head drooped, as she reclined in her chair. Mr. Tubbs
then ceased to hold first one hand and then the other; and
each dropped powerless into her lap. The left hand was
allowed to lie where it fell; the right hand and arm were
held up and aside by Mr. Burman, that they might be
out of the operator’s way. She was quite insensible to pain
from mechanical violence; but, we were told, could hear,
and speak in a very gentle voice, swallow and walk, though
unable to open her eyes. The table with all the articles for
the operation was moved from behind the folding door to the
side of the operator, and the door folded back. To maintain
the soundness of the sleep-waking, the Secretary, standing
behind her, at Mr. Tubbs’s request, made slow passes during
the whole of the operation over her head from before back-
wards. Mr. Tubbs sat down before her, opened her dress,
took his knife, and made a deep cut at the highest and inner
part of the right breast, carrying it elliptically downwards.
The attention of all was breathless. Familiar as I am with
all the phenomena of mesmerism, I confess that I looked
with deep anxiety and deep astonishment at the knife passing
slowly down, making a deep frightful gash five inches in
length into the beautiful white and plump breast of a young
woman, and at her placid countenance and breathing, with
every expression of a sweet and undisturbed sleep. Another
12


116 ° The patient awakened.


similar incision was made on the outer side of the breast,
joining the first at its beginning and its termination. He
then cut out all the breast between them, and, putting his
fingers into the wound in all directions to ascertain if any
diseased part remained, he found a small lump, and delibe-
rately cut it away. There was scarcely any loss of blood.
Five needles armed with ligatures were passed through the
edges of the incision, the two ends of each ligature were
drawn and tied together, and strips of adhesive plaster and
a bandage applied, the patient’s dress was adjusted, the table
moved away again into the back room, and the folding door
brought forward again before it, so that no sign remained
anywhere of what had been done. During the whole of the
operation, which was performed with unusual slowness to
prevent the assertion that it was performed too rapidly for
her to have suffered much, not a sound escaped the patient ;
she sat perfectly still, silent, and relaxed, like any one in
the sweetest sleep—not a part quivered or twitched ; her lips
were relaxed and motionless; and, in order further to shew
that she exerted no effort to restrain herself while the gashes
were making, I moved the ends of her fingers backwards and
forwards, in complete relaxation, with the tip of one of my
fingers. There was no holding or catching of her breath:
all was the relaxation and placidity of complete repose. In
fact, her countenance, which is extremely good, expressed
the height of composure: and she was not subjected to re-
straint of any kind.

Before she was mesmerised I felt her pulse, and it was
60; after she was sent off Mr. Tubbs found it 54; and her
face became flushed a little. At the latter part of the ope-
ration, after the incisions were made, and while the ligatures
were being applied, I observed her grow pale, and I felt her
pulse. It was too rapid, feeble, and irregular for me to count ;
and, finding that one of her habitual attacks of fainting was
seizing her, I poured out a glass of wine, mixed it with water
in a tumbler, and put it to her lips. She began to sip it,
and slowly finished it. Her pulse and colour returned.

Mr. Tubbs, after waiting a little and addressing the com-
pany upon the most marvellous, the most important, and the
most blessed sight which we had witnessed, proceeded to
awake her, and succeeded in less than a minute by transverse
passes before her.

She looked around like one awaking from sleep; and, on
being asked how she felt, replied, “ Very well.’ Mr. Tubbs
then asked her if she thought the operation had been per-
formed. She said she did not know, and asked if it had


She walked up to bed. 117


been. Not receiving an answer, she looked at the com-
pany and her own bosom, and, observing all to be as when
she sat down, seemed bewildered, as though from Mr. Tubbs’s
manner she fancied it had been performed, and yet she could
not believe it had. She was now informed of the fact, and
was very thankful. On being asked whether she had felt
anything, she answered, “ Nothing ;” and to the question—
what was the last thing she recollected, she replied to Mr.
Tubbs, “ Your sending me to sleep, Sir, and the last thing
I saw was your eyes.”

It was proposed to carry her to bed, but she unaffectedly
declined, and deliberately walked up two pairs of stairs, got
into bed, and was sent back into her mesmeric trance by a
few downward passes before her face.

Before Mrs. Flowerday was awakened, Mr. Tubbs asked
her how she was. She replied in a low gentle tone, ‘‘Com-
fortable,” and said no more, having apparently been uncon-
scious of what had passed: and I observed, in every subse-
quent sleep-waking, that she took no notice of anything that
was done to her; being evidently exceedingly torpid. Had
she made this reply after waking, and said as she did that
she had felt nothing, it would not have been satisfactory,
because she might have forgotten that she had suffered: just
as persons, after the effect of chloroform is over, prove no-
thing when they declare that they had felt no pain although
they might have roared and resisted during the operation.
Surgeons always declare that such patients felt nothing:
whereas in all probability they felt acutely, but forgot all on
waking. This was the conviction of the late Mr. Humphrey,
Q.C., who declared to me that he was persuaded that he had
felt acutely in an operation performed upon him. A single
groan or twitch from a mesmerised patient would cause sur-
geons to declare that he felt pain; and, if he said that he
had not felt, to brand him as an impostor. I unfortunately
asked Mrs. Flowerday no questions, intending to ask them
in her next mesmeric sleep, as the circumstances of one
sleep-waking are usually remembered in another. But in
her I subsequently found that there is no recollection in
one sleep-waking of the occurrences of a preceding one.

All those who were present unhesitatingly signed the
following declaration: “ We, the undersigned, witnessed the
removal of Mrs. Flowerday’s breast by Mr. W. J. Tubbs, of
Upwell, Cambridgeshire, to-day, at the Mesmeric Infirmary,
No. 36, Weymouth Street, and are perfectly satisfied that
she suffered not the slightest pain, as indeed she herself de-
clared on being awakened out of her mesmeric trance, and


118 Chloroform would probably have killed her.


that she had no idea of the operation having been performed.
After the operation she walked up two pairs of stairs to bed.
John Elliotson, Conduit Street ; E.S. Symes, M.D., Bourdon
House, Berkeley Square; A. Kiste, 37, Maddox Street ;
R. Goff, 21, Kensington Gore; John Amor, 135, New Bond
Street; Smith Burman, Surgeon, Wisbeach; F. C. Beard,
Surgeon, 44, Welbeck Street; M. E. Bagnold, Lieut.-Col.,
14, Upper Hamilton Terrace, St. John’s Wood; T. W. Shaw,
Kensington; W. Underwood, 1, Vere Street, Oavendish
Square; T. Purland, Surgeon-Dentist, 7, Mortimer Street ;
W. Fisher, 18, Euston Place, Euston Square ; C. Mayhew,
33, Alfred Street; E. Sherborn, Matron; T. Gardiner, Re-
sident Secretary.”

In a letter which I received a week afterwards from Mr.
Tubbs, he writes, “ My firm conviction is she did not feel
the knife. Had it been under chloroform I should have
taken it out in half the time: but I was determined to do it
coolly, though I must admit I was rather nervous when I
made my first cut down to the pectoral muscle. It was in-
deed an anxious moment; but, when I did not perceive a
quiver, I gained confidence and took the cutting coolly.
Mr. Burman* has candidly acknowledged he never saw so
good a case under chloroform. Will you not agree with me
that it would have been a dangerous case for chloroform ?
I believe she would have died.”

I also firmly believe that chloroform would have killed
her,—such was the fainting which seized her while the
wound was being sewn up. The poor woman was subject to
ague and asthma, and fits of fainting, had a cough, and was
weakened by her periodical losses.

Mr. Tubbs in another letter writes :—“ amputated
under chloroform at (not far from Upwell) just before
Mrs. Flowerday’s operation: the patient died twelve hours
after the operation: it was nothing but the action of chloro-
form at the first instant. The knife had no sooner made the
first cut than the patient’s face turned pale, the lips blue,
and respiration almost ceased. had the limb off as
quickly as possible. I had to command the circulation. The
patient was laid down, pressure on the chest was made, cold
water applied to the head and face: and animation returned.
Stimulants were given, but the patient remained exhausted,


* Mr. Burman operates a great deal, but always under chloroform: not yet
daring to face the prejudices against mesmerism. As he is a good man, I trust
he will now imitate his friend Tubbs. The interest he has taken in this case, and
his kindness and indifference to trouble, place him very high in my esteem.


She took no medicine. 119


and death closed the scene in twelve hours. After this I
would not let Mrs. Flowerday take chloroform :* but urged
her being mesmerised.”

Had that patient died at once, the death would have been
ascribed to fright and shock, or to chloroform and fright and
shock ; like one that occurred in the month of May in a
London hospital in an operation like that of Mrs. Flowerday.

Many indeed are the deaths from chloroform unregistered,
unpublished, and spoken not of by the surgeon, because
fortunately for him the death does not occur at the time of
the operation, but, as in this example, twelve, or twenty-four
hours, or possibly two, three, or several days, subsequently,
so that some other cause can be given for the poisoning.

Mrs. Flowerday never suffered an ache or pain after-
wards. A slight bleeding occurred in an hour, but soon ceased
of itself. She was sent into the mesmeric sleep by a single
pass night and morning, and allowed to remain in it a couple
of hours. She ate and slept well as if no operation had been
performed : her pulse was always at the natural standard : her
tongue quite clean and moist: her bowels were regular. The
catamenia came at the proper time, four days after the ope-
ration, but were less profuse than usual, and ceased in four
days. The wound healed rapidly and perfectly. She left
the Infirmary. for Upwell on the 3lst of May, quite well,
and might have left ten days before with safety. On the
29th of May (a very wet day), she without asking permission
walked to London Bridge, went by the train to Sydenham,
and, after walking about and looking at the Crystal Palace,
returned in the evening: all the better she said for the trip.

She would have returned much earlier, but that, unfor-
tunately, at the end of a week, she walked down stairs and
sat in the large room where the operation had been per-
formed, and put on a thinner shawl than she was accustomed
to wear. These errors brought on a severe cold fit of her
ague, running at the nose, quick breathing, cough, and fever-
ishness. By keeping her in bed, lowering her flesh diet to
slops, and mesmerising her chest well while she was in the
mesmeric sleep, all presently subsided.

She did not take a particle of medicine while in the
Infirmary.

Dr. Symes was so good as to superintend the manage-
ment of the case after the operation.

A report of the operation appeared in the Examiner, the
Morning Herald, and Sun: and was copied into the Times,


* Mr. Tubbs has operated very many times under chloroform.—J. E.


120 Her husband equally susceptible of Mesmerism.


Standard, Globe, and Morning Advertiser daily papers, and
numerous Sunday and provincial papers, as well as into
Galignani and other foreign journals. The newspaper press
did its duty fearlessly.

A great impression has been made throughout the country,
and indeed the Continent : and hundreds of thousands of con-
verts have been made to mesmerism.

Mrs. Flowerday is a very nice person, with every mark
of the exemplary wife, mother, and friend. She has pleased
all of us. Mr. Tubbs once wrote to me, “She bears an
excellent character, shews a mild contented disposition in all
her domestic duties, and is satisfied with whatever we have
done for her.”

While Mrs. Flowerday remained in the Infirmary, I as-
certained that she did not remember in one sleep-waking
what occurred in another. This is the only example of the
kind I have met with.

She heard nothing in her sleep-waking that was done or
said, unless when she was addressed and the speaker was
quite close to her. She exhibited no other phenomena.
Whereas her husband, who is as susceptible as herself, and
has had a sound tight tooth extracted and a seton inserted
without sensation, becomes extremely rigid when in sleep-
waking, exhibits attraction and repulsion, and mesmeric ex-
citement of distinct cerebral organs. He was first mesmerised
for severe and daily epilepsy, of which he has been cured
now for above two years.

I one day, before she left London, made an experiment
to learn whether, besides not feeling pain in her mesmeric
state from mechanical causes, she was not ignorant also of
everything that was going on. I raised her arms and let
them drop: and pinched the skin of one hand so severely as
to leave a mark. She of course gave no sign of feeling.
When I asked her what I had been doing, she gently and
slowly replied, “ Nothing that I know of, Sir.” In fact, I
saw that she was ignorant of the whole, and I believe she
was unconscious of the whole steps of the operation, from
undressing to the readjustment of her dress.

I will mention a little circumstance which may be striking
to those who are unacquainted with the powers of mesmerism.
When new strips of plaster were to be applied to the bosom
five days after the operation, the old strips were of course
removed ; and it happened that an end of one of them did
not peel off with perfect facility like the rest, but adhered a
little closely. At the moment when it came off, she slightly
screwed her lips together and sucked the air through with a


The same thing done in Paris twenty-six years ago. 121


little sound, just as we do on occasion of a sudden smart.
This shewed what her sensibility was in her ordinary
waking state, and what agony she would have felt without
mesmerism during the operation. All was natural and un-
affected. Nobody was present but Dr. Symes and myself,
the Secretary and the Matron: and we made no remark.
As it cannot be said that she was only a resolute woman, able
to disguise pain: so neither can it be said that she was a
woman in whom pain could not be produced. Yet, in the
case of the painless amputation in Nottinghamshire read
at the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, this was sug-
gested by those who unwisely made the Society regard the
poor man as a vile impostor—by Sir Benjamin Brodie and Mr.
Coulson, surgeon of St. Mary’s Hospital; by Mr. Blake and
Mr. Alcock, young surgeons, Dr. Marshall Hall and Dr.
Truman—all now I know not where; and by Mr. Liston and
Mr. Bransby Cooper, dead and buried, while the poor man re-
mains still a living proof of the blessed truth of mesmerism :
notwithstanding it had been stated by the authors of the
paper—Mr. Topham, barrister (now Lieut.-Col. Topham of
Her -Majesty’s Body Guard), and by Mr. Ward, the operator
—that the man’s agony was intense in the waking state on
the least motion being given to his leg.


And yet this beautiful affair was but a repetition of what
was done six and twenty years ago in Paris by the well-
known surgeon, M. Jules Cloquet, who, as well as the mes-
meriser, Dr. Chapelain, is still alive.


Painless removal of a breast in Paris.


“* Madame Plantin, aged 64, living at No. 151, Rue Saint-Denis,
consulted M. Cloquet, April 8th, 1829, respecting an open cancer
which had existed for several years in her right breast, and which
was complicated with a considerable enlargement of the axillary
ganglions. M. Chapelaiv, her physician, who had mesmerised her
for some months, with the view of dissipating the disease, could effect
only a profound sleep, in which sensation appeared suspended, but
intellect remained perfect. He suggested to M. Cloquet to operate
upon her in the mesmeric sleep-waking. M. Cloquet, having judged
the operation indispensable, consented, and it was fixed for the fol-
lowing Sunday, April 2nd. The previous two days she was mes-
merised several times by Dr. Chapelain, who prevailed upon her
when in the state of sleep-waking to bear the operation without fear,
and brought her even to converse about it calmly; although, when
she was awake, she could not listen to the proposal for horror.

“On the day fixed, M. Cloquet arrived at half-past ten in the
morning, and found the lady dressed in an arm-chair, in the attitude


122 The operation and dressing.


of a person calmly asleep. She had returned about an hour from
mass, which she habitually attended at that time of the day. Dr.
Chapelain had thrown her into the mesmeric sleep on her return.
She spoke with perfect calmness of the operation which she was
about to undergo. All being ready, she undressed herself, and sat
upon a common chair.

‘Dr. Chapelain supported her right arm. The left was allowed
to hang at her side. a Pailloux, internal student of the Hospital
Saint-Louis, had the charge of presenting the instruments and
applying the ligatures. ‘The first incision was begun at the arm-pit,
and carried above the breast as far as the inner side of the nipple.
The second was begun at the same point, and carried under the
breast till it met the first. M. Cloquet dissected out the enlarged
ganglions with care, on account of their proximity to the axillary arte-
ries, and removed the breast. The operation lasted ten or twelve
minutes.

** During all this time, the patient conversed calmly with the
operator, and gave not the least sign of sensibility ; no movement
occurred in the limbs or FEATURES, no change in the RESPIRATION
or VOICE, no emotion EVEN IN THE PULSE, was discernible ; this
patient remained uninterruptedly in the same state of automatic in-
difference and passiveness, (état d’abandon et d’impassibilité auto-
miques, or, as Mr. Topham says of his patient, ‘uncontrolled, in
perfect stillness and repose,’ ‘like a statue!’) in which she was
some minutes before the operation. There was no necessity to
restrain her, we had only to support her. A ligature was applied to
the lateral thoracic artery, which was opened in removing the gan-
glions. The wound was closed with sticking plaster and dressed,
and the patient was put to bed, still in the same state of sleep-
waking ; and was left in this state for eight and forty hours. An
hour after the operation a slight heemorrhage occurred, which proved
of no importance.

“The first dressing was removed on Tuesday the 14th; the
wound was washed and dressed afresh ; the patient shewed no sign
of pain ; the pulse was undisturbed. After this dressing, Dr. Cha-
pelain awoke the patient, whose sleep-waking had lasted from one
hour before the operation, i. e., two days. The lady seemed to have
no idea, no conception, of what had passed ; but, on learning that
she had been operated upon, and seeing her children around her,
she experienced a very strong emotion, to which the mesmeriser put
an end by immediately sending her to sleep again.”

** I have extracted the case of the lady from the highly-favourable
report, in 1831, of the Committee appointed by the French Academy
of Medicine to report upon mesmerism, and to be found in Dr.
Foissac’s excellent work.* The Committee continues thus :—

“«* The Committee see in this case the most evident proof of the
suspension of sensibility during sleep-waking, and declare that,


* “ Rapports et Discussions de ! Académie Royale de Médecine sur le Magné-
tisme Animal. 1833. p. 156.”


The same thing done in America. 123


though they did not witness the case, they find it so stamped with the
character of truth, it has been attested and reported to them by
so good an observer who had communicated it to the surgical sec-
tion, that they do not fear to present it to you as a most unques-


tionable proof of the state of torpor and stupefaction produced by
mesmerism.’ ”’*


People, and especially medical men, have always been
talking of the condemnation of mesmerism by French Com-
missions, omitting the fact that the last French Committee,
—in 1831,—was highly favourable to mesmerism.

Be it remembered that, when the account of the painless
amputation in Nottinghamshire had been read in the Royal
Medical and Chirurgical Society, Dr. Copland rose in a rage
and “would allow no trace to remain that such a paper had
been read,” and declared that “the fact was unworthy of
their consideration because pain is a wise provision of nature,
and patients ought to suffer pain while their surgeon is ope-
rating: they are all the better for it, and recover better.” +
The truth is, that the most painful operations are not better
recovered from than the least painful, and that al/ the opera-
tions performed in the mesmeric state have been well reco-
vered from: many better than in ordinary circumstances. {


Painless removal of a Breast iu America,


Another removal of a breast during mesmeric insensi-
bility took place in America in 1845. The patient was Mrs.
Clark, wife of Mr. Jesse Clark, of Columbia County, Georgia ;
the operator, Dr. L. A. Ducas, Professor of Physiology in the
Medical College of Georgia, who detailed it in the Southern
Medical and Surgical Journal, published in Augusta City.
Several eminent physicians were present. On consulting Dr.
Ducas, she mentioned that,—


**She had been advised by Mr. Kenrick to be mesmerised ; but
as she knew nothing about it, she would ask my advice, and would
abide by it. To which I replied that there were several well-
authenticated cases on record, in which surgical operations had been
performed, under mesmeric influence, without the consciousness of
the patient; that I would be happy to test the subject in her case ;


* Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations without Pain in the Mesmeric
State ; with remarks upon the opposition of many members of the Royal Medical
and Chirurgical Society and others to the reception of the inestimable blessings
of Mesmerism. By John Elliotson, M.D., Cantab., F.R.S. p. 78, &c.

t+ See Zoist, No. XIII., pp. 3,4. Also my Numerous Cases, p. 59. A Mr.


Garlick of Halifax wrote the same nonsense in the newspapers. No. XVL.,
p- 601.


} Zoist, No. XIII.


124 The operation.


and that I would endeavour to mesmerise her, instead of operating
as had been proposed, on the day following.”


Mesmerism was accordingly performed by Mr. Kenrick
on the 4th of January, and she went to sleep and became
insensible to pain. The process was repeated daily.


“On the 9th January, I invited Professor Ford to be present,
and after pricking and pinching strongly the patient without evidence
of pain, the mesmeriser was requested to leave the room, when we ex-
posed the breast, handled it roughly in examining the tumor, and
readjusted the dress, without the consciousness of the patient. We
then held to her nostrils a vial of strong spirits of hartshorn, which
she breathed freely for a minute or two, without the least indication
of sensation, unless the fact that she swallowed once be regarded as
such, instead of a mere reflex action. On the 11th of January, in
the presence of Professors Ford and Mead, in addition to the
usual tests, I made with my pocket knife an incision about two inches
in length, and half an inch in depth, into the patient’s leg, without
indication of sensation.

‘Fully satisfied now of our power to induce total insensibility, I
determined to operate upon her the next day at noon, but carefully con-
cealed any such design from the patient and her friends, who did not
expect its performance until several days later.

“On the 20th January, at twenty minutes past 11 a.m., Mrs.
Clark was put to sleep in forty-five seconds, without touch or pass of
any kind, the facility with which the mesmeric influence was- pro-
duced having gradually increased at each sitting. At 12 0’clock a.m.,
in the presence of Professors Ford, Mead, Garvin, and Newton,
and Dr. Halsee, the patient being in a profound sleep, I prepared
her dress for the operation, and requested my professional brothers to
note her pulse, respiration, complexion, countenance, &c., before,
during, and after the amputation in order to detect any evidence of
pain, or modification of the functions. As Mr. Kenrick had never
witnessed a surgical operation, he feared he might lose his self-posses-
sion, and requested to be blindfolded, which was done. He now
seated himself on the couch near the patient, and held her hand in
his during the operation. This was accomplished by two elliptical
incisions about eight inches in length, comprehending between them
the nipple and a considerable portion of the skin ; after which the
integuments were dissected up in the usual manner, and the entire
mamma removed. It weighed sixteen ounces. The wound was then
left open about three quarters of an hour, in order to secure the
bleeding vessels, six of which were ligated. The ordinary dressing
was applied, and all appearances of blood carefully removed, so that
they might not be seen by the patient when aroused. The amount
of heemorrhage was rather more than is usual in such cases.

“‘ During the operation the patient gave no indication whatever of
sensibility, nor was any of the functions observed by those present
modified in the least degree. She remained in the same sound and
quiet sleep as before the use of the knifé. Subsequently the pectoral


This operation as painless as the two others. 125


muscle, which had been laid bare, was twice or thrice seen to con-
tract when touched with the sponge in removing the blood. About
15 minutes after the operation, a tremulous action was perceived in
the lower jaw, which was instantaneously arrested by the application
of the mesmeriser’s hand to the patient’s head. This phenomenon
recurred in about ten minutes after, and was again in the same man-
ner requited. Professor Ford, who counted the pulse and respiration,
states that before any preparation was made for the operation, the
pulse was 96, and the respiration 16 per minute; that after remov-
ing the patient to arrange her dress for the operation, and just
before this was commenced, the pulse was 98, and the respiration
17; that immediately after the detachment of the breast, the
pulse was 96—respiration not counted; and that after the final
adjustment of the bandages and dress, which required the patient
to rise and move about, the pulse was 98 and the respiration 16.
All present concur in stating that neither the placid countenance
of the patient, nor the peculiar natural blush of the cheeks, ex-
perienced any change whatever during the whole process ; that she
continued in the same profound and quiet sleep, in which she was
before noted, and that, had they not been aware of what was being
done, they would not have suspected it from any indications fur-
nished by the patient’s condition.

‘The patient having been permitted to sleep on about half an
hour after the final arrangement of her dress, the mesmeriser made
passes over the seat of the operation in order to lessen its sensibility,
and aroused her in the usual manner, when she engaged in cheerful
conversation with Mr. Kenrick and myself, as though she had no
suspicion of what had taken place. I then introduced to her the
gentlemen, who had placed themselves so as not to be seen by her
on awakening, and observed that I had invited them to come in dur-
ing her sleep, in order that we might fully test her insensibility pre-
paratory to the operation. After a few minutes of conversation, I
asked her when she would like to have the operation performed?
To which she replied, ‘ The sooner the better,’ as she was anxious
to get home. I added, ‘Do you really think that I could remove
your entire breast when asleep without your knowledge?” Answer
—‘ Why, doctor, the fact is, that from the various experiments I am
told you have made on me, I really do not know what to think of it.’
‘ Well, madam, suppose I were to perform the operation one of these
days, and to inform you of it when you would awake, would you
believe me, and could you control your feelings on finding that it had
been done?” Answer—‘I could not suppose that you would deceive
me, and of course I would be very glad, but would try not to give
way to my feelings.’ ‘Have you perceived since your arrival here,
or do you now perceive, any change in the ordinary sensations of the
affected breast?’ ‘No, sir, it feels about as it has done for some
time back.’

** About a quarter of an hour having elapsed since she awoke, I
then told her that as we found her in a proper state for the opera-
tion, I had performed it, and that the breast was now removed. She


126 The same thing repeated in America.


expressed her incredulity—said I was certainly jesting, as it was im-
possible that it could have been without her ae it at the time,
or feeling anything of it now. She became convinced only on carry-
ing her hand to the part and finding that the breast was no longer
there. She remained apparently unmoved for a few moments, when,
her friends approaching to congratulate her, her face became flushed,
and she wept unaffectedly for some time. The wound healed by the
first intention.

“In laying the above narrative before the profession, it is due to
the cause of truth to state, that it has been submitted to all the phy-
sicians at the operation, and that I am authorized by them to say
that it accords in every particular with their own observations so far
as they were present. I should also add, that having no other ob-
ject in view than the establishment of the fact that a surgical opera-
tion may be performed under such circumstances without the con-
sciousness of the patient, I have designedly avoided any mention of
the various and interesting mesmeric phenomena manifested prior
and subsequently to the operation. These have been carefully and
judiciously recorded by Mr. Kenrick, whose well-directed zeal has
enabled him to collect a body of highly important facts from a field
unfortunately explored too exclusively in ignorance and charlatanism.

** Augusta, Ga., Ist Feb., 1845.”*


Painless removal of the same disease on its return.


The disease returned in May: formed a distinct tumor,
which increased rapidly, became painful, and was attended
by slow fever. The same gentlemen mesmerised and ope-
rated: and the affair is detailed by him in the same journal,
for September, 1845.


“I now requested Mr. Kenrick to ascertain whether he could
still mesmerise her, and, if she were susceptible, to repeat the ope-
ration in a few days, so that we might test her sensibility in that
state. Mrs. C. was readily put into the mesmeric state, and found
to be entirely insensible during its continuance. Deeming it unne-
cessary to repeat the tests, I determined to operate on the 13th
June, several days sooner than was expected by either herself or
her friends. The operation was performed in presence of Professors
L. D. Ford and Jos. A. Eve, Drs. L. Kennon and J. F. Hammond,
the Rev. Mr. Alfred Ford, and Mr. F. J. Martin. The patient was
mesmerised at 9 o'clock a.m., and the extirpation effected at about
10 o'clock, by making a semilunar incision along a portion of the
circumference of the tumor, turning over a flap, and dissecting
away the indurated mass and surrounding tissues, making up the
volume of a hen’s egg.

** During the operation, Mr. Kenrick, being blindfolded to avoid
the unpleasant spectacle, sat by the patient, with her hands in his.
Mr. K. avers that Mrs. C. evinced no uneasiness by grasping his


* Zoist, No. XI., p. 380.


No London surgeon has done likewise. 127


hands, that her fingers did not twitch, and in short, that her hands
remained perfectly passive. Professor Ford, whom I had requested
to note the pulse and respiratory act particularly, informs me that
there was no appreciable change in their character and frequency
before, during, and after the operation. The countenance of the
patient and the hue of her cheeks presented no change whatever, nor
was there the least indication of sensibility detected during or subse-
quently to the operation, by those who were present and anxiously
watching the result. There was neither twitching of the pectoral
muscle when touched with the sponge, nor tremor of the lower jaw.
Indeed the patient slept on as quietly as an undisturbed infant,
through the entire operation.

“The wound was left open about half an hour, a small vessel
ligated and the ordinary dressing applied. The patient was per-
mitted to sleep on, and awoke spontaneously at a quarter-past one
o’clock p.m. in the presence of Dr. Ford, the Rev. Mr. Ford, Mr.
Kenrick, and myself. Dr. Kennon arrived a moment afterwards.
She appeared entirely unconscious of what had been done, and was
much surprised as well as gratified on being informed that the ope-
ration was over. She stated that she had not suspected our design,
and had no recollection of having experienced the least uneasiness
during her nap.

“I will add on this occasion, as I did on reporting the former
case, that the above statement has been submitted to all the profes-
sional gentlemen, and that they fully concur in its accuracy.”*


At the end of the article by myself which contains the
account of this and other painless operations performed in
France at Cherbourg, where a painless amputation had been
effected a little previously, I terminated some facts and re-
flections in these words :—


“Yes! sixteen years elapsed, as far as I know, before the great
fact at Paris of Dr. Chapelain’s production of painlessness under
M. Cloquet’s operation was imitated in France: and then it was
imitated in a remote province. Not one of the great operations
which have been performed in England has been performed in
London, or our other cities, where there are schools, great hospitals,
and redoubtable surgeons. The first amputation was performed in
the village of Wellow, at a hospital supported by a few wealthy
families, and possessing but twelve beds ;—the others at the water-
ing place of Torquay; in the country town of Leicester, a place of
no medical or surgical reputation; and at some place called Alyth,
in Perthshire, not in Edinburgh or Glasgow: and all these by men
whom Sir Benjamin Brodie, Mr. Keate, Mr. Key, and the rest of
our metropolitan surgeons, regard as humble and obscure individuals.
Indeed no surgical operation beyond extraction of teeth, the intro-
duction of setons, and bleeding, has yet been performed in London,
Edinburgh, or any other British city; and these have been per-


* See Zoist, No. XIIL., p. 4.


128 Dr. Esdaile removed two breasts painlessly in India.


formed at the instance of the few known individuals who have sub-
jected themselves to the persecution of the medical profession. The
other amputations, removal of tumors, &c., have been performed in
our colonies, eastern and western, or in the country which was our
colony | nobly wrested from our unjust domination. This is a sad
tale to tell.”


This paragraph I wrote in April, 1846: and every word
of it holds good now in 1854. How enlightened, how noble
minded, how courageous, how benevolent and conscientious,
does Mr. Tubbs stand forth above the surgeons of our towns
and cities and the metropolis, some of them making thousands
a year, some of them authors, and, forsooth, teachers of the
rising generation at the various medical schools! Mr. Tubbs
practises all the branches of his profession in a little obscure
village among the fens of Cambridgeshire.

On February the 28th of the same year Dr. (Sir John)
Forbes wickedly wrote in the Atheneum, “It is well known
that the most striking and attractive delusions of recent times
are homeopathy and mesmerism.”


Dr. Esdaile removed two breasts painlessly in India: one
in 1846, the other in 1849 :—


Painless removal of a breast in India.


“November 9th. Doahmony, a peasant woman, aged 50, has
come from Benares to get an immense scirrhous tumor of the right
breast removed. It commenced two years ago, and is moveable,
hard, and elastic; there is no enlargement of the axillary glands,
and she does not look in very bad health.

“On the 7th day of mesmerising, she was entranced, her arms
were partially cataleptic, and she was insensible to pricking. Next
day, she was again put to sleep, and two-thirds of the tumor removed
without her moving or appearing to feel it. She then awoke up,
and appeared to recover her senses before the operation was finished.
No manual restraint was used during the excision of the mass, but
she became very violent immediately after, and required to be forcibly
held down while the arteries were being tied.

** The breast weighed 7 pounds.

“December 29th. Discharged at her own request, her friends
having come for her from Benares. The sore is nearly healed.”


Two thirds were certainly removed without sensation :
the remaining third most probably without sensation, though
the patient woke up. For mesmerised, like chloroformed,
persons sometimes feel no pain though they are awake. Mr.
Case, of Fareham, related the following instance in The
Zoist, No. V., p. 107 :—


Mesmerism may induce want of sensation and no sleep. 129


“Sarah Pink, aged 20, was mesmerised with an intention of
having a tooth removed.

‘* Effects were produced in about twenty minutes ; among which
there was an entire insensibility. She answered questions readily ;
but, after doing so for about a quarter of an hour, she suddenly awoke.

‘She was mesmerised again the next day with equal effect: but,
after conversing for about ten minutes, she again suddenly awoke.

** Long-continued attempts were made on the day following to
mesmerise her, but without producing any effect; and then she de-
termined to have her tooth extracted,—this was immediately done.
As soon as it was out, she arose hastily from her chair, and declared
that she had felt no pain whatever during the operation, and this she
again and again positively repeated. Nor did. she certainly express
any sense of pain; though on the occasion of a former operation
without mesmerisation, her expressions of pain were quite eacessive
and vehement.”


Some patients who have been operated upon under chloro-
form have assured me that, though they felt no pain at all, they
were otherwise wide awake and observed all the steps of the
operation. Dr. (Sir John) Forbes, being in high excitement
as soon as the news of the anesthetic power of the dangerous
inhalation of*ether arrived in England (all for the benefit
of suffering human nature, no doubt, as his conduct in re-
ference to the anesthetic blessings of mesmerism had shewn !),
and hoping to damage for ever the utility of the anzsthetic
power of invariably innocent mesmerism, published in the
Times of Dec. 28, 1846, (such a hurry was he in,) an article
which he was preparing for his own journal; and in it he
related that one patient


*“* Knew what the operator was doing, perceived him, for example,
take hold of the tooth and draw it out, felt the grating of the instru-
ments, but still felt no pain.”


Had this occurred under mesmerism the patient would
have been vilified as an impostor by Messrs, Forbes, Wakley,
Brodie, and all the profession.

Various effects of mesmerism, rigidity of one part or other,
for example, occasionally remain after a person is awake again :
and so may anesthesia, local or general. A remarkable ex-
ample of this was published by Dr. Esdaile, and will be found
in the Thirteenth Number of The Zoist, p.41. The insen-
sibility to pain lasted a short time after a Hindoo was awake.


** Application of strong acid.—‘ Aug. 8th. Gendo, a Hindoo
woman, aged 50. There is a large sloughing ulcer covering all the
right temple. She was mesmerised at 10 o’clock, and at half-past 11
I applied muriatic acid (there being no nitric acid in store) freely to
VOL. XII. K


130 Strong acid applied painlessly to a sore.


the whole surface, without her shewing any sensibility : she awoke
twenty minutes after, and knew nothing about it.’ ”

‘Aug. 13th. Dr. Finch” (editor of the Calcutta Medical
Journal, and bound therefore to look as sagacious as Wakley, Forbes,
and the other medical editors of England) “freely applied muriatic
acid (such as is furnished by the Company’s Dispensary) to the sore
covering the whole right temple of the woman Gendo, who was mes-
merised in their presence by one of the hospital attendants, without
her shewing the smallest degree of consciousness ; and it was with
great difficulty that I awoke her, after they had failed to do so.
On coming to her senses, she declared that she knew nothing
about it.”

** Aug. 18th. The woman Gendo next fell under his observa-
tion. The ulcer on this woman’s temple was covered with muriatic
acid by Dr. Finch on the 11th instant, with the results already
related. Dr. Bedford asked leave to apply the acid to her when
awake; and whatever I might think of such a proposal, I consented.
The end of the glass-stopple wetted with the acid was applied once
or twice, and the woman for a few seconds shewed none of the in-
stinctive movements of acute pain. There could be no mistake
about it—she was found out, and I confess that I felt considerably
obfuscated, and not relieved from my thick-coming fancies by Dr. B.
suggesting that ‘she was probably a naturally insensible person.’
I began to think the arch-deceiver was at the bottom of it after all;
and that having set a snare and delusion for me, he was now laugh-
ing at my beard. Then again, I thought of complaining to the
Medical Board against the Apothecary-General for furnishing such
asses’ milk as mineral acids for the public service—when lo! I was
roused from my trance of bewilderment by hearing the woman com-
plain, that we had ‘ put pepper on her head ;’ and her actions eor-
responded with such an idea, for she sat up shewing that she was in
great pain, and immediately after declared her head was on fire ;
got out of bed, and walked distractedly about the room in great
agony. I ordered her head to be fomented to soothe her; Dr. B.
saying, that ‘he had done more than he intended.’ The defective
sensibility that had nearly compromised my mesmeric surgical ope-
rations, and the honesty of my patients and the Company’s acids, was
simply a film of insensible lymph that adhered to the surface of the
sore, and protected, for a moment, the nerves below. As the most
effectual means of assuaging the poor woman’s sufferings, I desired
the Durwan, who is her mesmeriser, to endeavour to throw her into
the trance; this he succeeded in doing, and I took the occasion to
pare off some tubercles around the sore that prevented it from heal-
ing; she moved a little, and put her hand to her ear; but imme-
diately after became quite tranquil. In about half an hour I awoke
her with very great difficulty, that Dr. B. might see her awake, and
hear her first words; which were, that she knew nothing about what
we were talking of, she had even forgotten* being burned.”


* On this curious point see my facts ip No. XII., p. 476.—J. E.


The second breast removed painlessly in India. 131


As no manual restraint was required after the woman
Doahmony awoke while the remaining third of the breast was
being cut away, and, as she became so violent afterwards, I
have no doubt that the insensibility to pain lasted some se-
conds after she woke—till the removal was completed. Sen-
sibility then returned, and her shrieks while the arteries were
tying shewed how strong it was. Means ought to have been
taken during the operation to maintain her sleep, and, when
she awoke, to induce it afresh.


Painless removal of another breast in India.


“The second patient was a young woman of 23, one of whose
mammee was so large that it rested on her thigh when she sat up.
The disease commenced only a year ago, and this rapid growth pro-
duced the following singular results. The tumor, larger than a
man’s head, was attached to the body by an isthmus, a foot long,
and it was evident that the mammary gland, or true breast, had left
the chest altogether and was lodged in the tumor. Dr. Esdaile,
before proceeding to operate, pointed this out to the spectators, and
thus accounted for it. He supposed that the mass was a fatty tumor
that had involved the mammary gland, which however had not be-
come diseased nor contracted adhesions to the neighbouring parts,
but by the sudden and great growth of the tumor he believed that
the mammary gland had been loosened from its natural connections,
and, as the skin was lengthened by the depending weight, it alto-
gether left the body, and was lodged in the centre of the tumor at
the distance of a foot from the chest. This woman was so sensitive
to the mesmeric influence, that she was fit to be operated upon the
first day, in a quarter of an hour. Her picture was taken in the
trance the second day, and yesterday the tumor was removed without
the slightest disturbance of the body from head to foot ; and at the
end of an hour, when our informant left the hospital, she was still
sleeping as tranquilly as a healthy child.

“The tumor weighed 10 Ibs., and when cut open was found to
correspond very exactly with Dr. Esdaile’s theoretic description of
it. The mammary gland was enclosed in the centre of a fatty mass,
and quite healthy in structure, but considerably enlarged.”’*


In April, 1839, Dr. James Johnson wrote thus in his
Medical and Chirurgical Review :—


‘Where is this celebrated science?” ‘The brief career and
tragic tale of animal magnetism may exercise a beneficial influence
on our profession, which, alas! has proved itself—at least a por-
tion of it—to be credulous as the ignorant African or the benighted
Hindoo! Half a century hence, when the periodicals of this time
are pored over by some book-worm of that day, the investigator will
rub his eyes and wipe his spectacles, on turning to the pages of the
Lancet and Gazette for 1838. He will scarcely believe that men,


* Zoist, No. XVIIL., p. 179; No. XXX., p. 191.
K 2


132 Painless Mesmeric operations before 1844.


whose names, too, may go down the stream of time, with credit and
honour, in other respects, should have been so infatuated as to give
a moment’s credence to such outrageous ravings as those of animal
magnetism. ... But he will learn with satisfaction that an over-
whelming majority of the profession set their faces against the im-
—_ and scouted the credulity of their deluded brethren. The
esson has been placed on record, that such delusions cannot be
participated in, or even countenanced with impunity. It is quite
unnecessary to advert to the disastrous consequences which have
followed in the train of this momentary mania! They will serve as
a beacon to prevent the shipwreck of others.”


In my pamphlet upon Surgical Operations performed with-
out Pain in the Mesmeric State that was published in 1843,
I gave the details of the amputation of the leg in Notting-
hamshire, and of the fury with which the Royal Medical
and Chirurgical Society scouted it, declaring the poor patient
an impostor trained for the purpose by mesmerists, and not
allowing the account to appear in their records, nor even
a minute that such an account had been read before them :
and I gave equal details of every operation performed up to
that period.


** They were Cloquet’s removal of a breast, in France—the first
mesmeric painless operation recorded, we believe ; the insertion of a
seton in Elizabeth Okey’s neck, in University College Hospital ; the
division of the ham strings, by Dr. Engledue ; the extraction of
teeth ; an operation on the jaw; and the amputation of the Notting-
hamshire peasant’s leg.

“ Cloquet’s case was totally disregarded by himself and all other
surgeons. The first operation rendered painless in Great Britain by
mesmerism was the insertion of the seton in Elizabeth Okey ; the
second was Dr. Engledue’s. In the pamphlet was recorded also the
opening of an abscess: and the removal of a large wart.”


The Zoist came into existence at the same time with my
pamphlet, and the following are the painless operations which
it has recorded.


1844.


Venesections.

Extractions of teeth, some of which were performed in
America before the insertion of the seton into Elizabeth
Okey’s neck, so that America followed France, and preceded
England, in painless surgical operations: a remarkable in-
stance of a woman in whom the mesmeric process, conducted
by Mr. Case, surgeon, at Fareham, Hants, induced no other
effect than that she felt no pain while the tooth was ex-
tracted: a patient similarly circumstanced in University


Painless Mesmeric operations in 1844, 1845, 1846. 133


College Hospital, Londori, was declared by the ignorant to
have shammed (No. V., p. 108).


Establishment of setons and issues.

Excisions of tumors.

Openings of abscesses.

Four amputations.

An operation for squinting.

The painless cutting down upon the length of a nail and
extracting a splinter.


1845.


Five painless amputations.

Three removals of tumors.

Removal of a breast.

Removal of a polypus from the nose.

Forcible extension of a contracted cicatrix or scar.
Paring an ulcer of a heel.

Deep incisions into abscesses.

Several extractions of teeth.


1846.


Six amputations.

Twenty-one removals of tumors: some weighing 30 lbs. ;
one 40 lbs. ; and one 112 lbs.

Cutting out a nail.

Application of strong acid to a sore.

Application of red-hot iron to a sore.

Many applications of caustic to the eye.

Removal of an enlarged testis—two cases.

Removal of preputium.

Removal of breast—two cases.

Paring sores—four cases.

Tapping—two cases.

Opening abscesses, &c.

Operations, consisting in simple incisions, or for fistula—
eleven cases.

Injecting hydrocele—five cases.

Operation for cataract.

Removal of excrescence—two cases.

Tearing adhesions asunder.

Extending a contracted knee.

Extractions of teeth, numerous.

Introduction of setons.

Dividing the tendon of the heel.

Prevention of pain in reducing prolapsed intestine.


134 Painless Mesmeric operations in 1847—1851.


1847.


Removal of a breast.

Eight removals of tumors: one 40lbs., and another
100 lbs. in weight.

Opening of a whitlow.

Cutting down upon and tying an artery.

Extractions of téeth.


1848.


Thirty-four removals of tumors, some of very great size
and weight.

Amputation of a great toe.

For hydrocele.

Lithotomy.

Extractions of teeth.

Removal of scirrhous testis—two cases.

The application of strong nitric acid to a sore.

Ditto of caustic to a sore.

Painless parturition—two cases.


1849.


Ten removals.of tumors—some very large.

Removal of a malignant tumor of the eye, and subse-
quent application of strong nitric acid to the wound.

Application of strong nitric acid to a sore.

Reports in one half year, of THIRTY-oNE capital opera-
tions: and in the next, of THIRTY-ONE.

In one place we read that after 100 capital operations in
the mesmeric insensibility, only two patients died within a
month—one from cholera, and the other of lock-jaw.


1850.


Bursting a ganglion by a blow.

The application of caustic to an inflamed eye.
The making an issue—two cases.
Venesection.

Teeth extractions.

Almost painless parturition.

Painless removal of a breast.


1851.


The removal of a very painful wart.

Many extractions of teeth.

Painless parturition.

Dr. Esdaile had now left India; and no one like him rose


"


Painless Mesmeric operations since 1851. 135


up to compensate for the depravity, I use the word advisedly,
of the medical profession, who strenuously withheld the
blessing of mesmerism from the inhabitants of India.


1852.
Painless removal of a large tumor.


Twenty-nine painless operations in India.
Numerous teeth extractions.


1853.
Teeth extractions.


Endless, though small, surgical operations have been
performed without pain, but not recorded.

Mr. H. 8. Thompson informed me the other day that he
once extracted a tooth, and once opened a very large boil,
besides the whitlow in 1847. The whitlow was so tender in the
waking state as not to bear the least touch: yet Mr. Thompson
entranced the poor girl in a few minutes at the first attempt
and opened it with a penknife without her knowledge. Last
week, Dr. Mitchelson mentioned to me that, though he had
never witnessed mesmerism, he once tried it and instantly
succeeded so as to lance a breast without pain. Mr. Town-
shend relates the fact in his last work :—


**A poor woman had an abscess of the breast, to attend which
Dr. M was called in. The complaint was of the worst kind.
The patient could not bear the diseased part to be touched ever so
lightly: yet a speedy operation was essential. Dr. M » from
circumstances in the patient’s constitution, had fears of chloroform,
and opiates were out of the question. In this dilemma, suddenly it
struck the Doctor, that he might try to mesmerise the patient.
Having merely gained her consent to make passes over her, which
he said would do her good, he proceeded, without further ‘ sugges-
tion,’ to the work.

‘‘Where Nature requires the mesmeric sleep, it is not slow to
come. In ten minutes, the poor woman was in the deepest trance :
and then and there, Dr. M lanced the breast, handled it without
exciting the least sensation, and, to use his own expression, ‘ Squeezed
it like an orange.’ When the patient was awoke, she would not, till
she had ocular and palpable demonstration, believe that an operation
had been performed.

“The next day, in furtherance of the cure, Dr. M wished
to mesmerise the patient again—but, mark the sequel. The woman
had, in the meantime, learned from a neighbour that she had been
‘ mesmerised !’—that the soothing and simple operation of hand-
waving, whereby she had been made to sleep, was that horrid, wicked
thing called ‘ mesmerism’—that witchcraft, of which the patient had


136 Deaths from Chloroform.


heard always with trembling. In fine, her husband forbade any
further se, ma of the beneficial ‘ gift of God.’ ”’*


DEATHS FROM CHLOROFORM.


In No. XXVIII. (January, 1850) I recorded all the pub-
lished deaths with which I was acquainted from ether and
chloroform, mentioning the operation, the time, and place.
Far more must have occurred, because when the death takes
place several days afterwards, the patient gradually sinking,
it is not spoken of as the effect of the poison. It is amusing
to notice the strange views of medical men on this point.
A London lecturer on midwifery, Dr. Barnes, gives a case in
the Lancet for July 3, 1850; p. 50, of one of these unrecorded
deaths from chloroform :—“ A lady underwent amputation of
the breast from chloroform. She was utterly unconscious of
the operation, but the shock was too manifest to be mistaken.
The energies of life were fatally struck; the pulse ebbed
away hour by hour: on the sixth day she was dead. What
did chloroform effect here? It saved the patient the percep-
tion of pain, the mental shock. The blow had been struck
at the heart.”

Can any one doubt that no bodily shock, but poisonous
chloroform, killed the patient? Such cases are continually
occurring in which the operation could occasion no shock, as
it was the extraction of a tooth, the removal of a little pile,
&c.: whereas when, not chloroform, but mesmerism, has been
employed, tumors weighing from ten to above a hundred
pounds have been cut away again and again, and never has
an instance of death taken place.

From ether there had been published since 1847 r1eur.

From chloroform, EIGHTEEN.

I will now record the subsequent deaths which I find in
the medical journals. But will first detail three accounts of
the prevention through mesmerism of deaths from chloroform.
The first two are by M. Ricord, the celebrated Parisian
surgeon.


“Case 1.—The — who furnishes the subject of my first
case, was a woman of about 26, from whom I was about to remove
some growths of no great size. She was previously chloroformed,
to which she only submitted after repeated entreaties, for she ap-
peared to be excessively timid.

‘The anesthetic effect of the chloroform was very rapid, for
after a few respirations she appeared asleep; the sponge was re-
moved, and I commenced excising the growths, but had scarcely


* Mesmerism proved True, &c., p. 117.


Mesmeric preventions of death from Chloroform. 137


given two or three cuts, when one of my assistant-surgeons told me
that the pulse appeared to be failing. I now saw, in fact, that the
beating of the heart was suspended, that all respiratory movements
had ceased, and that the lips were livid, and hung down. The limbs
were completely relaxed, and the paleness of the face showed that
the patient was in that state of syncope which is the herald of
death. All the remedies indicated in such a case were forthwith
employed, as cold currents of air, sprinkling cold water on the face,
tickling the nostrils, &c. Artificial respiration, by pressure on the
walls of the chest, was tried.

**The syncope continued, and death seemed close at hand. I
began to be uneasy, and determined to try direct insufflation. I ap-
plied my mouth to that of che patient. After some inspirations the
dying woman gave a sigh, her chest heaved, the face resumed its
normal colour, the heart and pulse commenced beating in an appre-
ciable manner, and the eyes opened ; respiration had again brought
into play all the functions of life, and the return of sensation was
evidenced by asmile. The patient was saved, and we escaped with
a fright.

**Casz 2.—The second time that I experienced the dangers of
chloroform was with a patient under my care in the Southern Hos-
pital (Hépital du Midi). He was a young man whose case required
circumcision. As this operation is generally painful enough, he
asked me to send him to sleep with the chloroform. A sponge im-
pregnated with it was given him to respire from: the action was
very rapid, without any appearance of preceding excitement, and
the patient was soon plunged into total insensibility. I performed
the operation, but when it was concluded, the patient did not recover
his consciousness, and remained in a state of alarming stillness. The
pulse gradually sank ; the heart ceased to beat; all the sphincters
were relaxed, and his cadaverous face seemed to testify that death
was near.

** All the means I have indicated in the preceding case were
tried, but without avail, and it became necessary to have recourse to
direct insufflation, which had already so well succeeded in one case.
Success crowned my efforts, and the patient recovered.” *


The third case is by Mr. Bleeck, surgeon, of Warminster.


‘On July 3rd of last year, I removed a large scirrhous breast
from a strong stout woman, Mrs. K , aged 42, the wife of a
plumber, of this town. It was her wish that she should be put
under the influence of chloroform, which was accordingly done.
For several minutes her system resisted the influence of the remedy,
and it was not till three drachms were used, and the vapour concen-
trated by placing a fold of lint over the back of the inhaler, that she
was rendered unconscious.

“The removal of the breast occupied about four minutes, during


* Lancet, Feb. 16, 1850; p. 208.


138 Another Mesmeric prevention of death from Chloroform.


which she showed not the slightest consciousness of pain, or of what
was going on; just as the last incision was completed, she slipped
from the chair in which she was sitting, and from the grasp of an
athletic woman who was holding her, and fell apparently dead upon
the floor; her face was of a deadly pallid and livid colour, and her
lips, lobes of the ears, and finger-nails, of a deep purple hue; her
eyes were fixed, pupils rather dilated; irides motionless; her limbs
relaxed and perfectly still; no pulse to be felt at the wrist or caro-
tids; and on placing my ear upon her chest, not the slightest sound
of the heart’s action or respiratory murmur was audible. The win-
dow was thrown open, and cold water, ammonia, &c., called for.
I immediately perceived that all these would avail nothing, when it
occurred to me that artificial respiration, by direct insufflation,—in
the way, indeed, in which I have always used it for resuscitating
still-born children, and which I learnt from my midwifery pre-
ceptor, the late Dr. Hugh Ley,—might possibly save her. Inter-
vening a single fold of my pocket handkerchief, I placed my lips
within hers, and breathed strongly into her mouth, at the same time
closing her nostrils with the thumb and forefinger of my left hand,
and pressing her larynx towards the spinal column with my right
fingers and thumb, so as in some degree to close the cesophagus.
At the fourth inspiration she gave a slight convulsive gasp, and this
was soon followed by other and more regular respiratory efforts; her
pulse returned, and her countenance soon resumed its natural colour,
and I had the delightful relief to see her revive. After a few mi-
nutes, I proceeded to remove a diseased gland from the axilla; at
this she cried out a little; though it was evident that the anzesthetic
influence of the chloroform was still to a degree kept up, yet she
was quite conscious of what was being done. . . . We all looked on
the woman as irrecoverably dead, and were as much surprised as
gratified to see her restored.’’*


A fourth case at Paris is given in the Lancet for Sept. 10,
1854.

The air which saved these patients after fresh air had
failed was foul air: but it was air from the body, and there-
fore mesmerised. The superiority of animal heat, that is, of
warmth from a living body over warmth from inanimate sub-
stances, was acknowledged by Sydenham. I beg to refer to
my paper on the subject in Zoist, No. XXIII., p. 259.+


* Lancet, March 2, 1850; p. 283.

t After quoting the Bible for the ancient prevalence of this opinion, I added,
‘* Far more infants die among those brought up by hand than among the suckled.
The child before birth exists in living mesmeric substances, and is nourished by
living mesmerised fluits. After birth the place provided for it is its mother’s warm
mesmerising bosom, and its nourishment is her warm mesmerised milk: and,
whatever warmth and nourishment it may have without vital influence from both
these sources, it usually droops.” See also my Human Physiology, p. 957.


won


oad


Eighteen deaths from Chloroform since 1849. 139


Deaths.


Strong man—amputation of a finger-stump. Guy’s Hospital.
Lancet, July 6, 1850.

A baker. Stepney Union House. Medical Times, May 24,
1851.

A Mulatto on board the Hospital Thames Ship, the Dread-
nought—removal of testes. Lancet, July 12, 1851.

Woman, 27 years old—obstructed rectum in cancer of the
uterus. Chipping Norton. Medical Times, Dec. 6,
1851.

Lady, 36 years old—extraction of teeth. Strasburg. Lancet,
Aug. 30, 1851.

[Dr. Crisp stated in the Medical Society of London,
that he had read of 20 deaths from chloroform—the ma-
jority in young and sound individuals, and at the second
inhalation.

Dr. Theophilus Thompson truly said that after chlo-
roform many have declared “they have not recovered their
full powers of mind and body for weeks and even for
months.”

Dr. Chowne had seen most disastrous consequences;
not merely immediate, but serious mental disorders.—
Medical Times, March 6, 1852.]


Man, 23 years of age—aneurysm by anastomosis. St. Bar-
tholomew’s Hospital. Lancet, March 20, 1853.

A soldier—some operation. Bruges; and

Two more deaths unreported. Dr. Richardson in Medical
Society of London. Medical Times, March 6, 1852.

A soldier, 27 years old—aneurysm of bone. Avignon. Lancet,
Aug. 14, 1852.

Gentleman, 73 years old—lithotrity. Medical Times, Oct.
6, 1852.

A cattle-dealer—application of caustic to ulcers. Earl Town,
Newcastle. Lancet, Oct. 23, 1852.

Man—fistula. Australia, Melbourne. Medical Times, Nov.
20, 1852.

Factory operative—malignant tumor on right leg. Newton
Moor, near Hyde. Lancet, Jan. 1, 1853.

Woman, 28 years old—application of nitric acid to sores.
University College Hospital. Lancet, March 26, 1853.

A young man, 24 years old—tumor on the chest. Paris.
Lancet, June 4, 1853.

Man—prolapsus ani (had aneurysm of the aorta). Hdétel de
Pitié, Paris. Lancet, June 18, 1853.

Strong man, 25 years old—tumor in cheek. Orleans. Me-

dical Times, July 9, 1853.


140 Eight more recorded deaths from Chloroform.


Man—operation for stricture. Edinburgh Infirmary. Me-
dical Times, Oct. 15, 1853.

Woman, 40 years old—strangulated umbilical hernia. Uni-
versity College Hospital. Lancet, Oct. 29, 1853.

Woman, 22 years old—tumor in pudendum. St. Bartho-
lomew’s Hospital. Ditto, ditto.

Woman—removal of left breast. Sheffield. Medical Times,
March 4, 1854.

Woman, 40 years old—uterine polypus. Paris. Lancet,
April 29, 1854.

Woman, 37 years old—disease of left breast. St. George’s
Hospital. Lancet, May 14, 1854.

Young man, 18 years old—phimosis. Lock Hospital. Ditto,
ditto.

Woman—cancer of breast. Association Journal, May 26,
1854.


Probably this list presents a fraction only of the deaths
which have occurred in the period. I chance to know of two
more: the one mentioned by Mr. Tubbs at p. 118, and one
which took place lately in a fine youth at Lausanne. He
required a tooth to be extracted. His father, a doctor, in-
sisted upon his inhaling chloroform. The poor lad implored
his father not to insist upon it. The father did insist: the
boy inhaled the chloroform, and died on the spot. A friend
of mine heard the dismal toll of the bell sounding on the
banks of the lake of Geneva.

On Nov. 12th of last year, p. 504, Mr. Spencer Wells, the
editor of the Medical Times, closes an article on such deaths
in these words:—“In the meantime, these recent deaths
should teach us to continue researches for some anesthetic
agent which may confer upon mankind all the advantages
derivable from chloroform without its dangers.”” Why then
not quote the magnificent multitude in The Zoist of instances
of operations rendered painless by mesmerism? He well
knows why: and Mr. Churchill, his employer, well knows
why. He thus speaks of mesmerism :—


“** The Sophistry of Empiricism, pp. 84. London: 1853.’ The
book is a very good one;” ‘‘it is calculated to open the eyes of many
victims to the chicanery which it exposes and denounces.” “It
attacks quackery en masse, and groups together mesmerism, with
its subdivisions of phreno-mesmerism and clairvoyance, homceopathy,
hydropathy, Coffinism, &c.”’ ‘‘ We are not in despair for the cause of
legitimate medicine, which will still triumph when the absurdities of
quackery are consigned to the shadows and the oblivion of the past.”
— Medical Times, July 23, 1853; p. 97.


Elizabeth Squirrell’s case. 141


I can unhappily still, in 1854, repeat what I wrote in
January, 1850 :—


“The editors of the medical journals preserve a dead silence
upon all the mighty mesmeric facts, medical and surgical, which
occur and are reported in The Zoist.” ‘Their hearts are hardened:
and they care not for the welfare of their fellow-creatures ; madly
believing that they will long be able, even while their own time lasts,
to conceal from the medical profession what they know to be truths,
and truths surpassing all other natural truths in both philosophical
and practical importance—truths concerned with life, nay, with sen-
tient, moral, and intellectual nature, with the cure of diseases, even
the most afflicting, and with the alleviation, removal, and prevention
of pain.”


Let me repeat what I wrote at the end of the fatal lists
drawn up by me in that number of The Zoist :-—


**T read these facts with real sorrow, because, in common with
every mesmerist, I should have rejoiced to see inhalations —
successful and innocent. That I speak the truth is proved by the
conduct of us all from the first announcement of ether and chloro-
form,* and during all the indecent exultation and insults of our ad-
versaries.”’


II. An account of the “ Autobiography of Elizabeth Squirrell,
together with an examination and defence of her state-
ments relative to her sufferings, blindness, deafness, entire
abstinence from food and drink during twenty-five weeks,
and other extraordinary phenomena, &c. By one of her
Watchers.”


‘* Formerly such accounts would have been regarded as incredible, and as ex-
ceeding the bounds of possibility: but such conjectures can be of no avail
against historical facts repeatedly attested and undeniably proved. Now that
men are better acquainted with the wonderful flexibility of human organization,
and with those marvellous powers which slumber concealed within it, they are
less disposed to form light and hasty decisions on phenomena of this descrip-
tion.’”’—Philosophy of History. By Frederick Von Schlegel; p. 186.


We see no reason to call in question the leading points
narrated in this publication. The history is certainly pecu-
liar, and the alleged facts are of a singular nature: still
somewhat similar cases have been met with before, abnormal
and perplexing as they doubtless are. It is of course easy to
get rid of such a difficulty, as is presented in this work, by


* Zoist, No. XVI., p. 376. We were among the first to announce the anes-
thetic powers of ether.

+ Zoist, No. XVII., p. 44; XVIII., p. 187; XXII, p. 210. Mr. Liston,
Professors Millar and Simpson, No. XXV., p. 102.


142 History of her health in childhood.


imputing credulity and imposture to those who have been
mixed up in the events described; but the arcana of phy-
siology are not learnt after the best manner by such rapid
conclusions. We shall act more wisely and more humanely,
if we rather devote some time to a study of the case,—even
though our settled notions of belief may be somewhat dis-
turbed by the result.

Elizabeth Squirrell, the subject of this work, was born at
Shottisham, near Woodbridge, Suffolk, in 1838. Ata very
early age, her health seems to have given way. When she
was only two years old, her right eye was affected by cataract,
and the sight was gradually lost. At three years of age she
was attacked by severe inflammation, which left her in a
most debilitated state. When she was seven, she suddenly
became very ill and was unable to leave home, many symp-
toms of consumption supervening. However, she recovered
to a degree, and was able to attend school, though irregularly.
At ten she was very tall for her age. Soon after she was
eleven, a severe attack of illness came on, which, after slight
intermissions at first, assumed a permanent form and con-
tinued for three years. Spinal weakness, fits of nervous
hysteria and of epilepsy, pains in her back, and at the top of
the brain, heaviness over the eyebrows, spasmodic contrac-
tions, paralysis, and palpitations of the heart, formed part of
what she suffered. Her first medical attendant pronounced
her case to be hopeless. The second agreed with him that
her case was too much for their skill, and that they had never
seen anything like it before. The third, in addition, thought
that she had amaurosis, and would probably lose the sight of
the remaining eye. As all the three medical men failed in
procuring for her any effectual remedy, the parents were ad-
vised to place Elizabeth in the Ipswich Hospital: there she
remained six weeks, but returned home weaker than she went
in. She soon became rapidly worse, and her end seemed to
be approaching fast.


**I had been home,” she tells us in her autobiography, “little
more than a week before I quite lost the power to swallow mecha-
nically. I was eating a baked apple, when I suddenly felt the
muscles of my throat contract, and they would not permit me to
receive the apple. We were greatly alarmed, and means were re-
sorted to expel the rigidity, but to no purpose: disease raged on,
and in less than ten days my jaws became immoveably closed. Here
was new cause for alarm: but I had only partly passed through my
ordeal of suffering. Of course, I could partake of no food by an
ordinary process: all the nourishment I received was from the in-
sertion of liquids through my teeth, some of which the absorbents


Anomalous nervous symptoms, spitting of blood, &c. 148


took up. Weeks passed over, and to the astonishment of all I still
survived. For the first twelve weeks that I had the misfortune to
crave food, I was rapacious; and yet was unable to take a morsel.
At one time this craving was so importunate, that, as by impulse, I
would rub food against my teeth, in hopes to extract some particle
of its nutriment.”

Her sight, she says, soon became materially affected: her
hearing too was very defective and lessened exceedingly in a
day or two, till suddenly, as by a stroke, she became per-
fectly blind,—in addition to the loss of the senses of hearing
and of smelling, and to the inability of separating her teeth.
She continued in a state of lock-jaw for twenty-one weeks:
at the end of which she gave indications of a revival of the
flexibility of her jaws, and soon had the ability to open them,
though with much pain. Her mouth and tongue were co-
vered with small festering sores, and in places flayed. It was
quite painful to receive nourishment or even to moisten her
glands. For five weeks of the time during which she craved
food, her sufferings had been so great, that she could only
endure them by being in perpetual motion, and her parents
kept her so by rocking her on her couch. After that the
craving for food ceased, she lay for a whole month in a kind
of cataleptic fit, as rigid as if she had been a corpse, and
unable even to have her head turned upon the pillow.

She remained, in short, in a state of lethargy or half
consciousness, till, at the end of twenty-one weeks, she was
relieved from the contraction of her jaws. She was of course
at that time exceedingly weak and emaciated, and loathed
solid food, and could only receive into her stomach fluid, and
that only of one kind, milk boiled and sweetened with sugar.
As the summer advanced, she revived very much: but with
the autumn, she made no progress: and at the approach of
winter she relapsed considerably, and gave symptoms of
deeply-rooted disease : she still subsisted only on milk, taking
it in her mouth and ejecting it again, except what might
have passed imperceptibly down, for nothing could pass the
cesophagus by a muscular action.

During the winter she expectorated daily, and cast up at
times large quantities of blood, suffering acute pains in the
lungs and liver. In the spring, however, she was greatly
relieved by an inflammatory gathering upon her chest, which
at first was of an intense heat, and extremely painful. But
as it subsided, her sufferings lessened, and she appeared
better. But though this relieved her pain, it was but the
forerunner of an unaccountable phenomenon, viz., that of
long abstinence from food and drink : for as this gathering


144 Lost all desire of food and drink.


left her, she gradually lost the desire to take, and finally
abstained from, all nourishment (she tells us) for twenty-five
weeks, during nearly all of which time the ordinary secretions
ceased entirely.

She then tells us, that during this long abstinence she
never felt the natural sensations of hunger or thirst ; that
this painful protuberance on her chest had been succeeded
by an icy coldness which kept increasing; and that though
the lower extremities were very attenuated, and the abdomen
quite collapsed, she was on the whole not so emaciated as
might have been expected, but retained much of her former
vigor, and even looked blooming, though delicate. Neither
was there the slightest excoriation.

She continued, then, as we have before stated, in this
deplorable condition for twenty-five weeks. About the end
of that period mesmerism was strongly recommended to her,
and its application was adopted, and her system was soon
very powerfully affected by it, and a change produced. Miss
Squirrell also considered that she derived benefit from homeo-
pathic treatment. She first began to experience an internal
warmth, and a sort of energy about the stomach; and after
a time she felt a desire to moisten her mouth. By dint of
repeated persuasions she attempted to take part of the yolk
of an egg well beaten with milk: but this induced spasmodic
fits of sickness and severe suffering. Gradually, however,
she mastered her repugnance, and was able to swallow a few
mouthfuls. Sago became her chief article of diet: and of
fruit she soon became excessively fond. By degrees her
health improved ; still she was not sensible of any improve-
ment in her physical powers; she could neither sit unsup-
ported, nor walk nor stand. Neither was she able to see or
to hear: and of the food that she took into her mouth, she
obtained the liquid, and rejected the residue. Still, she
says herself, that though she continued to have no feeling of
thirst and no desire to drink, and that when she took food,
it was rather from a sense of faintness than from a sensation
of hunger, nevertheless her condition was greatly ameliorated
by her increased power of endurance consequent on the
nourishment she received.


The editor adds in a note, that since the autobiographical
account was written, Elizabeth Squirrell had undergone con-
siderable change. She had been able to take a larger amount
and a greater variety of food; and the nutritive system had
greatly improved; but she had gained little or no strength
in the lower part of her body, being still without power even
to sit up in bed. °


Other similar cases of abstinence. 145


On the 3rd of May, 1853, she first expressed herself as
thirsty ; and on the 15th she first partook of bread food; but
still without the power to swallow. We have no details of
later date that can be relied on; but we understand that the
patient has rather improved in health and strength than
otherwise, though the main features of her illness remain
much the same.

Now, waiving, for the present, the consideration of
sundry collateral topics introduced into the autobiographical
narrative, and of certain other alleged and most marvellous
facts appended to it, let us first ask, how much of the above
story is true? That Elizabeth Squirrell had been for a very
long time seriously ill, there can be no doubt. She had been
under the care of several medical men, both in the Ipswich
Hospital and out of it, without deriving any benefit. Her
sufferings and sickness are, then, a patent fact: but this
alleged abstinence from all food for twenty-five long weeks is
a different question. Let us first examine into the possibility
or probability of such an event before we enter upon the
other points in her story.

In the first place, the editor of this book mentions that
there are several cases of a similar nature on record, which
circumstance increases the probability of the truth of the
one in question. Dr. George Moore, in his work on the
Use of the Body in relation to the Mind, says,—


“Notwithstanding the detection of many fasting impostors, we
are bound to confess that the power of continuing a long period
without food is not incompatible with what we know of vital possi-
bility. Dr. Willan attended a patient who took only a little water,
flavoured with orange-juice, for sixty-one days; but more marvellous
still, cases of abstinence from solid food, for ten, fifteen, or eighteen
years, are unimpeachably testified.” (p. 311.)


In the Transactions of the Royal Philosophical Society of
London for the year 1777, Sir John Pringle communicates
the case of Janet Mac Leod, which in many of its features
bears a remarkable resemblance to that before us. Dr. Good
in his writings has referred to this case as meriting particular
attention.

In the London Encyclopedia, published in 1829, under
the article “‘ Abstinence,” several cases of a similar character
are recorded, with the names of the authorities appended,—
viz., Petrus de Abano, Joubertus, Krantzius, and Hildanus.
Silvius mentions three cases, one of a young woman in Spain,
one in Narbonne, and one in Germany. All these writers,
it should be added, belong to a date far back: but several

VOL, XIt, L


146 Several more cases of abstinence.


more modern instances are subjoined, viz., that of Gilbert
Jackson of Scotland, in 1716; that of John Ferguson, in
1724; that of Mary Thomas of Wales, in 1770, related by
Peanant ; and that of a country-girl, in Osnaburck, in 1798,
who for nearly four years abstained from all food and drink.
This last case is related by the celebrated Hufeland. We can
also refer our readers to Elliotson’s Physiology, pp. 53, 54,
&e. :—


* If abstinence,” he says, “is not forced upon the system, but is
absolutely a part of disease, it may, like suspension of respiration in
morbid states of insensibility,* and like immense doses of powerful
medicines in various diseased states, be borne with wonderful indiffer-
ence; and this occurs chiefly among females. But the most extraor-
dinary case that I recollect, stated upon unquestionable authority, is
that of a young Scotchwoman, who laboured under an anomalous
nervous affection, and, excepting that on two occasions she swallowed
some water, received no nourishment whatever for eight years. She
passed urine enough twice a week to wet a shilling, and for three
years had no intestinal evacuation. (PAil. Trans., vol. Ixvii.) Ina
remarkable instance of imperfect abstinence during fifty years, the
woman voided a little feculent matter like a piece of roll-tobacco, or
a globule of sheep’s dung, but once a year, and that always in March,
for sixteen years. (Edinb. Med. and Phys. Essays, vol. vi.) It
would be interesting to examine the changes induced in the air by
the lungs and skin of such patients.

** Pouteau mentions the case of one of his patients, a young lady
thirteen years of age, who was affected with convulsions and insen-
sibility at a certain period, generally every day, sometimes not quite
so often, and great irritability of stomach, lived eighteen months,


* “An example of the impunity with which a long exclusion of air may be
borne, when the system is in a morbid nervous state, may appear to advantage
by the side of similar illustrations of the deprivation of food. ‘The story of
Ann Green,’ says the Rev. Mr. Derham, ‘executed at Oxford, Dec. 14, 1650,
is still well remembered among the seniors there: she was hang’d by the Neck
near half an Hour, some of her Friends thumping her on the Breast, others
hanging with all their Weight upon her Legs, sometimes lifting her up and then
pulling her down again with a sudden Jirk, thereby the sooner to dispatch her
out of her Pain, as the printed Account of her informs us. After she was in her
Coffin, being observ’d to breathe, a lusty Fellow stampt with all his Force on her
Breast and Stomach, to put her out of Pain. But, by the Assistance of Dr.
Peity, Dr. Willis, Dr. Bathurst, and Dr. Clark, she was again brought to Life.
I myself saw her many Years after, between which Time and the Date of her
Execution she had, as I am inform’d, borne several Children.’ (Physico-Theology,
p. 156.) Her nervous insensibility appears from another writer, who states that
‘ she neither remembered how the fetters were knocked off, how she went out of
prison, when she was turned off the ladder, whether any psalm was sung or not,
nor was she sensible of any pain that she could remember. What is most re-
markable is, that she came to herself as if she had awakened out of a sleep, not
recovering the use of her speech by slow degrees, but in a manner altogether,
purer to speak just where she left off on the gallows.’ (Plott’s History of

ford.” )


A later case at Milan. 147


and grew more than two inches and a half, on syrup of capillaire and
cold water. Here, the abstinence was not part of the disease, but
the extraordinary state of the system enabled it to bear the absti-
nence. (uvres Posthumes, t. i., p. 27.’’)*

‘* For every example of extraordinary abstinence among females
we have a counterpart in voraciousness among males. When the
appetite is so great, it is seldom nice ; and not only all animals in
all states are devoured, but glass, flints, metals, sand, wood, &c.
A Frenchman, named Tarare, and described by Drs. Percy and
Laurent, in some measure from their own observation, will form
a good contrast to the Scotch girl. When a lad, he once swallowed
a large basket of apples, after some person had agreed to pay for
them; and at another time a quantity of flints, corks, and similar
substances. The colic frequently compelled him to apply at the
Hétel Dieu,” &c.


It would appear, then, from the above collection of in-
stances, that the power of continuing a long period without
food is not incompatible with what we know of vital possi-
bility. The case of Elizabeth Squirrell is very far from being
the first of the kind on record. However inexplicable may
have been her alleged condition upon any physiological prin-
ciple with which we are acquainted, still similar facts have
been encountered, and their reality established upon evidence


* Dr, Coltelli, an Italian physician now in London, has mentioned to us
a case of long sleep which occurred in Italy about twenty years ago, and the ac-
count of which is detailed in the monthly Annali di Medicina di Milano.

“The patient was a young woman about 20 years old, of extremely nervous
temperament, with very variable health from her infancy, and whose female
function had been irregular and imperfect. After some vexations she became
weaker and was seized with paroxysms of trembling that lasted many hours.
She was treated with opiates: dyspepsia took place, and in a short time she lost
all appetite, and was unable to chew or swallow any kind of solid food. After-
wards every function became as inactive as can be conceived: she fell into a
state of stupor, or something like sleep, that lasted for nearly three years. In
all this time she lay constantly in bed without motion or speech, and many func-
tions were suspended—menstruation, secretions, digestion, &c. She was like a
dead body, and life only shewed itself by slow breathing and by the pulse. The
latter was also slow and small, but rather equal in the beats. The sleep all this
time was never completely broken; but every day, and sometimes only every
other day, before sunset, she moved the muscles of the face and of the arms, and
inarticulately pronounced some words, asking for water. This was supplied to
her lips by a sponge or other similar means. A few ounces a day were sufficient,
and this was the only substance which entered into her body during the whole
time of the phenomena. The drowsy state passed away after some sudden
changes in the weather; when she was able to speak. She was however inca-
pable of explaining whether she suffered or not, and she had no recollection of
what had passed in her or about her. After her recovery, her general health be-
came better than before the lethargic state had commenced. In my opinion the
disease presented by Elizabeth Squirrell last year has some analogy with this.

‘The natural winter sleep of hybernating animals which pass so long a
time without injury, sleeping and taking no food or drink, throws light upon
those states which in the human being are morbid.’’

L2


148 The watching of Elizabeth Squirrell was perfect.


of an unimpeachable character. Here, therefore, one diffi-
culty—and a most important one—is surmounted : and it now
remains to be considered whether there can be adduced in
this particular case adequate testimony in favour of its credi-
bility. Irrespective of the statement of the girl herself, and
of her parents and friends, have we the corroborative evidence
of competent and conscientious persons, upon whose affirma-
tions reliance can be placed ?

It seems that three separate and systematic “ watchings ”
of the case were instituted: the results of which were as fol-
lows. The first watch was carried on by two females for eight
days. They declare that they prosecuted their duty most
vigilantly ; that the child took not the smallest quantity of
food and drink ; and that there was no secretion from the
kidneys or bowels ; and that they were perfectly satisfied with
the result. The second watch was not so satisfactory, and
gave rise to a great deal of excitement. It was appointed to
take charge of the case for eight days, but terminated in five
days, in consequence of some circumstances which were con-
sidered as evidence of fraud. But there was no proof what-
ever that the child took either food or drink. The members
of the watch seem to have quarrelled with each other; and
their differences broke up their attendance. The third watch
however, was the important one, and extended over a period
of fourteen days. This watch originated at the request of the
parents ; it consisted of a number of respectable persons,—
three of whom were women, one acting as nurse; and this
book, containing the history of the case, was written by one
of the watchers. At the commencement of the watch a
thorough search was made of the bed on which the child
was lying, and of all its appendages, and during the exami-
nation she was removed to another bed. The parents were
not allowed to enter the room during the whole period of the
watch ; and the bed was examined daily by the females in
attendance. We have the testimonies and letters of the seve-
ral watchers appended: all seem perfectly satisfied with the
result ; and we can scarcely conceive how a stricter scrutiny
could be established, or more decisive evidence be obtained
in favour of the case. The names and residences of twelve
watchers are given: their attendance was afforded at con-
siderable inconvenience to themselves: they had no motive
nor interest in the matter; and we must regard their testi-
mony as conclusive.

There is one very curious fact connected with her con-
dition, which this young girl mentions in her narrative.

** As soon as I refrained from touching any food or liquid with


Conduct of the neighbouring medical men. 149
my lips, I felt, as it were, an instinctive need of water in some way;
and all through my abstinence I was frequently applying it to my
face, hands and arms ; and it has been calculated that upon an average
I absorbed four ounces each day by its application. . . . I would ap-
pear sometimes as if overcome with exhaustion, and on water being
brought I would use it, and feel instantly exhilarated and renovated.
. . . But afterwards, from the time that I began to take nourishment
I had no desire but rather a repugnance to water, except for the or-
dinary purposes of cleansing.”


This fact strongly corresponds with a statement which the
editor of this book quotes from Carpenter’s Physiology, prov-


ing thereby the close analogy that exists between all these
cases.


“It is a fact now well established that when the amount of fluid
in the body has been greatly reduced, absorption of water through
the skin may take place to a considerable amount. There is a case
recorded by Dr. Currie of a patient who suffered under obstruction
of the gullet of such a kind that no nutriment, either solid or fluid,
could be received into the stomach, and who was supported for some
weeks by immersion of his body in milk and water, and by the in-
troduction of food into the lower end of the intestines.”


There are also other cases of a somewhat analogous nature
recorded in medical journals; which tend to make it appear
possible that the occasional use of fluid is sufficient to sustain
life during protracted abstinence from food ; and in the case
of Elizabeth Squirrell, there is no doubt she imbibed a
considerable quantity of fluid, though not by the ordinary
channel.

There is another fact, recorded in these pages, so charac-
teristic of the medical profession, that we cannot forbear from
referring to it. It may probably be asked, What did the
gentlemen of the faculty, resident in the district, say to this
case? What part did they take in the inquiry? What
opinions did they promulgate as to its reality? Our author
says,

“A nobleman in the neighbourhood, who felt an interest in the
case, and who wished to arrive at a knowledge of its facts, offered
to defray the expences of a medical investigation. This challenge
was communicated to the physicians of Ipswich by a gentleman of
high respectability, in a letter to the Editor of the Ipswich Journal
signed ‘“ Charitas.” The proposal was, that any physician in Ips-
wich, or all in consultation, should attend the case and make their
report ; and that their professional fees and every other expense
should be paid. To this no public reply was made, but a letter
from one of the physicians was addressed to ‘ Charitas,” in which
he expressed his willingness to attend Elizabeth Squirrell profes-
sionally ; he was immediately requested to do so, and to call in any


eo


150 Her mental faculties exalted.


of his medical brethren. A letter, however, was shortly after re-
ceived by “‘ Charitas”’ from this gentleman, in which he said that
having consulted with other members of the profession, and finding
they were not disposed to attend the case, he wished also to decline
doing so; and here the matter ended.”


How thoroughly professional! and how consistent with
all that their brethren elsewhere have done in regard to mes-
merism! They trembled at the approach of truth, and hid
their faces under the shelter of a safe and ignominious igno-
rance. The men of Ipswich, says the author, saw a disagree-
able something looming in the distance as the penalty of in-
quiry ; and so inquiry must be abandoned, and truth neglected,
and the unhappy patient live on a victim to slander and mis-
representation. We feel ashamed at recording such cowardice
on the part of educated men; but it must be remembered
that to “ be just and fear not” is no portion of the instruction
that is given in our present medical schools.

The exaltation of the faculties, which is so frequently
attendant on cases of fasting and abstinence, and in cases of
peculiar disease, has been strikingly developed in this instance.

The brain of Elizabeth Squirrell exhibited a precocious
condition, and some of her senses displayed a most abnormal
acuteness. Her letters, and some miscellaneous writings in
prose and verse, which are introduced into the volume, to-
gether with her autobiographical narrative, are extraordinary
productions, when we take her age into consideration. In
her mesmerised state, too, she responded in a convincing
manner to experiments made with the magnet, crystal, silver
and gold ; and shewed the magnetic attraction and sympathy
very clearly, and amongst other phenomena she exhibited at
times a kind of partial clairvoyance.

We now arrive at a point in this history which has done
more to prevent its reception in the world than all the above
perplexing statements of abstinence and fasting,—that is, the
professed communication of Elizabeth Squirrell with the spirit-
world. The writer of this book says, that she is perfectly
sincere in her professions, he has no doubt. Her prevailing
impression is, that she is attended by a guardian angel. “I
am no fanatic,” she says, “this is not the working of an
over-heated brain. I see these things; I do not imagine
them,—I see them.” But an intercourse with the invisible
world is not the most difficult or mysterious part in the story ;
by far the strangest point is the alleged ringing or pealing of
a glass without contact. The glass, it should be added, is an
ordinary half-sized tumbler: and we will now give the girl’s
own account of the matter. °


Had wandering fancies. 151


‘I had had in the morning of the day in which it was first heard
a choice rose brought to me, and being anxious to preserve it from
decay, I requested a young friend who assisted in nursing me to
fetch me a tumbler of water, that I might place it in. After a few
hours the rose faded, and I wanted more water. The glass was
emptied and left standing by my side. Towards evening, as my
mother was leaving the room, she heard a sound as if I were touch-
ing the glass with something soft—producing a clear soft tone. She
came to my side and inquired if I had touched the glass: I replied
in the negative, upon which she listened with breathless attention,
and in less than two minutes she distinctly heard it again twice or
thrice. Convinced now that no earthly agent or hand was in com-
munication with the glass, she was at liberty to attribute it to other
and supernatural causes. Certain it is that I knew that it was rung
by an invisible agency, and connected with my intercourse with
spirits. ... I had indisputable evidence here that a guardian spirit
was hovering over, and did act upon that material object in order to
make us aware of its presence, or to rescue me from what must,
without doubt, have soon occasioned my death.”

Miss Squirrell then gives an account of the comfort and
delight which she experiences from these spiritual visitations.
The visions produced in her, she says, calmness and self-
possession. The author mentions that at times a most ec-
static smile played upon her countenance, she seemed inde-
scribably happy, and said, “O! if you had seen that beautiful
angelic form.” She would continue in this state of ecstacy
for an hour, and during that time her pains appeared to leave
her. In short, the ringing of the glass and the presence of
the guardian angel were her solace and happiness during her
long and severe trial.

Now in examining these two points, it is clear that we
must make a broad distinction between them. Though ap-
parently connected together, and most especially so by Eliza-
beth Squirrell herself, the alleged visitation of spirits, and
the fact of the ringing of the glass are two independent and
separate things. They may indeed be both the product of
cerebral disease, but otherwise there is no necessary connec-
tion between them. And we therefore do not agree with the
patient when she says, that whoever believes the one (the
sounding of the tumbler) cannot reject the other (her inter-
course with spirits).

We think that we have a very intelligible clue to the latter
point, afforded by the autobiography itself. Elizabeth there
tells us that from her very earliest age she possessed a con-
templative, serious, and imaginative mind. When she was
only six years old, she lost one of her best friends.


“The dear girl was her chosen confidante, and the heroine of


152 Had an original tendency to superstition.


her tales. The keen anguish with which she looked on, as they
deposited her spiritless remains in their last narrow home, will never
be effaced from her memory.” . . . “‘I returned from her interment
wonderingly : I sat down musingly: I fanned my retentive faculties
to give me back our moments spent together: I glanced over her
life. Was her conduct such as would mould her for a better life in
the glorious spirit-land? Was her spirit one of light? I thought
how differently must her spirit appear divested of its earthly garb.
I wished to be with her, and I have often, as I walked alone, spoken
to her, calling her by her once familiar name. It is true I have re-
ceived no response ; but the echo of her radiant being upon my soul
has sufficed me.”


The reader who remembers that these imaginary conver-
sations took place when the little girl was only in her seventh
year, will perceive that a very natural foundation was being
laid for her subsequent intercourse with spirit-land.

Again she tells us that she loved much, when she was quite
a child, to gaze on the bodies of the departed; and while so
doing, feelings the most strangely delightful would pervade
her mind. Some of her most exquisite moments were those
which she spent with the dead, or when she visited their
graves. She felt quite assured too that death had a visible
form to the eyes of the departing. Her reading also was of
one particular character. She cared little for play or childish
amusements: but was delighted with Bunyan’s unrivalled
dream ; and after the perusal of Fox’s Martyrs, the sufferings
of the victims were too much for her sensitive imagination,
aad made her at night, the subject of painful nervous at-
tacks.

The death of her grandfather, the good and pious old pas-
tor of the Baptist chapel, seems also to have produced a
strong effect. He died before she had terminated her
seventh year; and his spiritual dialogues with her evidently
wrought a lasting impression.

When she was only eleven, she says that she endeavoured
to inhale the atmosphere of abstruse subjects, and was ‘fond’
of reading about the invisible world, the nature and work of
angels, and other kindred topics. And at this age, she says
that “she cherished the possibility of man holding intercourse
with spirits. It was an intuitive conviction.


**I distinctly believed spirits to communicate with man, and that
space only intervened between our place and their state, where spirits
were nearly connected with and were able to exert an influence over
men and matter; and during my state, at the time of which I am
now speaking, I more than ever desired to be the medium of some
communication of the kind.” .


Her cerebral development corresponded. 153


And there are other passages of the same character in the
autobiography and in her journals.

Here, then, we possess a simple key to this part of the
mystery. A young girl ina most sickly and delicate con-
dition of body, for years confined to her bed or sofa, from
her earliest childhood of a reflective and serious cast of mind,
adopts the strong persuasion that spirits are commissioned to
visit and guard the human race; and therefore, feeling that
angels “of every virtue must be around her,” she desires
most intensely to be the medium of communication between
them and this world. Her wishes, therefore, and habits of
thought and conversation go all together, and unite continu-
ously on the same topic; and when we add to this confession
from her own pen two facts which are mentioned by an ex-
perienced phrenologist, viz., that Veneration and the powers
of Ideality and Marvellousness are the most prominently
developed organs in her head, we obtain most interesting
confirmation of a scientific character for our conclusions. We
see at once how this cerebral illusion has by degrees taken
growth. It is not necessary, as some persons imagine, that
in order to have this state induced, the brain of the patient
should be worked up into a feverish or overheated condition,
or that she should be living in a species of diseased excite-
ment. Such a notion isa mistake. Experience shews that
these delusions are consistent with the greatest calmness and
self-possession. Constant contemplation and mental abstrac-
tion, or in other words, the continuous dwelling of the mind,
on one favorite topic, especially when the person is very
young and very ill, and also left much to herself and her own
day dreams, will bestow a quasi-reality upon anything. There
is no creed, however strange,—there is no creation of the
fancy, however extravagant, respecting which a firm belief
cannot be generated if it be made the besetting subject of
reading, of study, of conversation, of thought. In such a
case, the solitary invalid can bring herself to see, to hear, and
to imagine anything. This is a physiological fact, which all
experience establishes. The brain becomes morbidly influ-
enced, but is not thereby necessarily over-excited or inflamed.
A deceptive serenity may systematically prevail: and it is
this very serenity which imposes upon the patient and her
friends, and conducts them into an involuntary error on the
subject of spiritual manifestations,—as has been in this in-
stance the case with Elizabeth Squirrell.

It is really a curious physiological fact, when we consider
the very opposite results upon the human brain, which this
inordinately indulged love of communication with the so-


154 Indulgence in spiritual fancies very dangerous.


called spirit world, is apt to induce. With some persons, es-
pecially if they have been long the victims of ill health or ill
usage, and have drunk largely from the cup of earthly sorrow,
this fancied converse with ideal beings has a soothing and
consolatory effect. A tranquillized feeling of happiness is im-
parted to them for the moment, and they forget their pains
and their afflictions during the supposed presence of their
beloved associates. Such for example was the case with this
poor suffering girl at Ipswich. But these instances are rare
and most exceptional, and certainly not to be quoted as ex-
amples for encouragement. When they do occur, the effects
perhaps may be said to be innocuous in great degree to the
parties themselves, whatever may be their tendencies to those
around them; but innocuous or not, these cases form, as we
have said, an exception. With a large proportion of these
devotees to spiritual conferences, the results are most preju-
dicial, and in some instances dangerous and deplorable: and
we therefore feel it a solemn duty to take every occasion of
warning our readers upon the subject. The brains of many
persons, who persevere in this apparently intoxicating pur-
suit, become in a short time as much inflamed and overthrown
as if they were under the influence of opium or inebriating
drinks. Their thoughts are so engrossed by this new ab-
sorbing topic, that they cease to be rational and companiona-
ble on any other. Such a feverish action is introduced into
their system, that some of the worst passions and feelings,
which had been perhaps latent in them for years, become de-
veloped or drawn out. They become often coarse, offensive,
intractable and intolerant, and deeming themselves privileged
personages are careless of the feelings of their friends, and
neglectful of the usages of society : and if they do not always
end in being inmates of an asylum, are in too many instances
slenderly removed from a state in which admission would be
desirable. We speak advisedly and also sorrowfully, when
we speak thus strongly; some sad instances have lately come
to our knowledge: and we shall therefore never lose an op-
portunity of lifting up our voices against this melancholy
though now popular delusion. We are well aware that in
taking this course we shall offend many whom it would grieve
us to lose, and subject ourselves and some of our friends (who
are not responsible for our facts or our opinions) to vulgar
letters and flippant and pitiful expostulations : for this we are
prepared. The Zoist was not established to speak smooth
things and propagate deceits, but on all and every occasion
to tell the truth, and the whole truth, and to “shame the
doctors and the devil.”


vege’


Sounds heard near her by many. 155


To return, however, to Elizabeth Squirrell, we repeat that
we possess in her case an adequate solution as to the origin
and nature of her spiritual intercourse; and that there is no
reason why she should be taxed with imposture or deception
in the matter: but in the next place, what are we disposed to
affirm in regard to the ringing of the glass, which we men-
tioned above? This, it will be seen, is a distinct question,
and one far more difficult: and here, therefore, we must pro-
ceed with every caution. First, is the thing true? In other
words, is it a fact, that a tumbler, without being touched,
has at different and repeated periods given forth sounds in
the presence of this sick girl? We must admit, that the
evidence in favour of the fact, as stated in this book, is very
valid and trustworthy, if it be not absolutely conclusive, which
we do not say that it is not. The ringing has been heard by
several impartial and independent persons, by visitors, by
sceptics, by parties who had gone specially to the house to
sift, and if need be, to expose the trick or misconception.
More than forty persons have heard it. One gentleman of
unimpeachable veracity has heard it upwards of fifty times.
The writer of the book has heard it on several occasions, and
felt certain, he says, that the sound proceeded from the glass
without the agency of the child or her parents. Other
watchers make the same declaration. Any one was at liberty
to handle the glass, to place it upon books, or hold the girl’s
hands at the time. Some persons thought that an instru-
ment was concealed in the room or under the bed-clothes,
which caused the sound: but investigations soon disposed of
that notion. The glass, it should be added, stood on a table
near the girl’s bed; and she says towards the close of her
biography, that the last time it was heard was about six weeks
back (at the time she was writing) and that it had not sounded
since. We cannot, of course, affirm anything ourselves as to
the competency, or caution, or veracity of the witnesses : we are
merely judging of the evidence as exhibited in the book : still
it appears to be a case in which common sense aided by
honesty of purpose would be equal to the making all needful
examination ; and as every proper precaution appears to have
been employed, we cannot reject the account as too mon-
strous for consideration.

This ringing of the glass is certainly very analogous to
some of the stories which have been reported in regard to
table-rappings, apart from the assumed intervention of spirits.
Upon these table-rappings our opinions are known. We
have detected gross and impudent imposture on the part of
the Medium, and we have exposed the vulgarities and ridicu-


156


Similar sounds heard in other cases.


lous ignorance of the incorporeal representatives of those,
who in this life were highly educated and intellectual: but
we have never denied the possibility that there might be
occasionally evolved some material agent or force of an invi-
sible nature. Upon this subject, while we are not ashamed
to confess that we know next to nothing, our language has
from the first been studiously cautious and undogmatic. In
our earliest paper on this topic, while we denounced the
mendacious trickery of the spiritual part of the business, we
expressly added, that “on real electric phenomena we gave
no opinion.”* And to this view of the question, we still
adhere. We admit, with certain writers, that several most
extraordinary occurrences are recorded on trustworthy evi-
dence, which are only explicable on some theory of an exter-
nal force proceeding from the human organism, but we must
wait for further information and evidence, before we can
venture on an hypothesis. Our readers are aware, that it is
not our custom to exhibit a politic circumspection, when we
see our way and are sure of our facts; and they will therefore
appreciate our present reserve in a question on this difficulty.
At the same time, we are not unwilling to entertain the sub-
ject, and invite the opinions of our friends. The Rev. Mr.
Townshend, who is entitled to be regarded as an authority,
has in his recent admirable work, observed, that for certain


‘Singular noises there have been found abnormal reasons. In
Hibbert on Apparitions, it is allowed that many of the mysterious
noises in old houses, such as rappings, bell-ringings, sounds like
people walking about, and even displacements of furniture, incon-
testably proceed from the disengagement of gases from the bodies of
the dying or the dead. ...In a book called Bealing’s Bells, to
which the Quaker poet, Bernard Barton, has given the sign manual
of his belief in some excellent verses, are some very curious accounts
of bells, which, untouched by hands, have rung unaccountably from
the chambers of sick persons. If we apply these things to the solu-
tion of spirit-rapping, we shall be immediately struck by observing
that the mediums are often persons of disordered health and un-
strung nerves, (circumstances of their constitution which listening
for spirits is not likely to improve), and hence we may conjecture
that some irregular disengagement of zoogen from their system
causes these abnormal rappings. . . . Furthermore, rappings of ab-
normal character may be both heard and created, under the influence
of mere temporary indisposition, by those who have no belief in
spirit-rapping. Two instances of this kind have come under my
cognizance, ... And the readers of the Seherin Von Prevorst will


* Our express words were: “ we write of that only which we have witnessed :
on real electric phenomena we give no opinion.””—Zoist, Vol. XI., p. 96.


Some things thought impossible, are true. 157


remember proofs being given of the power of the somnambulist,
rendered so by sickness, to produce by will and cerebral action effects
like rapping. . . . These facts aid our thesis, that there is some con-
nexion between the restless state of the brain and the rappings—and
that cerebral excitement produces in rare instances, abnormal and
audible effects.”’*


The author of this work, too, upon E. Squirrel], refers to
sundry other instances of this character, especially to the
well-known case of Angelique Cotton, which was investigated
by M. Arago. This ringing of the bell, therefore, evidently
falls under the same head: and what strengthens the resem-
blance is the fact mentioned by E. Squirrell herself, that the
sound ceased about the time that her health began to improve
under the mesmeric treatment. This statement evidently
accords with the opinion propounded by Mr. Townshend.
At any rate we confess that at present we see no other
rational explanation of the phenomenon, and that a primd
facie case is established in its favour, unless indeed we adopt
the monstrous alternative that “ all men are liars,” and that no
evidence, however competent or numerous, is to be received
in contradiction to our own limited and partial experience.t

We cannot close our account of this curious history with-
out adverting to that extract from one of the most philoso-
phical writers of our age, which we have placed at the head of
this article. Frederick Von Schlegel is there referring to the
facts, so well-known in India, of the abstraction or mental
absorption which is accomplished by the Yogis. The Indian
Yogi is a hermit or penitent who, abstracted in mystic or
intellectual contemplation, remains often for years fixed im-
movably to a single spot. Such a phenomenon, says he, is
most strange, and appears totally incredible and almost
impossible, although it has been repeatedly attested by eye-
witnesses, and is a well ascertained historical fact. In the
Indian forests and deserts, and in the neighbourhood of holy
places of pilgrimage, there are many hundreds of these her-
mits. Now, adds Schlegel, the reports, as to what these
hermits do and suffer, would be rejected upon a priori reason-
ing, as facts exceeding the bounds of possibility; but such
conjectures can be of no avail now, since men are better
acquainted with the wonderful flexibility of human organiza-
tion. We know, says he, the marvellous powers which slum-
ber concealed within it. We know it well, we may ourselves


* See Mesmerism Proved True, by the Rev. C. Hare Townshend, p. 197, &c.
+ In Cardan’s Life, just published, there is an account of some noises and
rappings, which agrees with what is suggested above. Yol.i., p. 162.


158 Unjust and cruel persecution of her and her family.


add, and we may apply the language of the philosophic
German to the case, which we have been just examining, of
Elizabeth Squirrell. But alas! though we say that we know
it well,—how few practically remember it! If an unusual
phenomenon presents itself in a neighbourhood, a cry of im-
posture and of knavery is at once raised. A system of cruel
persecution is permitted to prevail. Those, who by their pro-
fession ought to understand the real nature of the event, and
by their acquaintance with physiology could throw light upon
the subject, stand aloof in nervous timidity, and with the
modern Esculapian discretion affect a total ignorance of the
details. Alas! if they would but examine,—and if they would
but speak, what human misery might they obviate. A poor
girl, for example, in humble circumstances, is visited by a
severe and lengthened affliction. The trial of herself and of
her parents is more than usually painful. The phenomena,
attendant upon the trial, add to the misery, and yet at the
same time increase the interest of the case. A storm of in-
dignation and of passion gathers round the cottage. The
victim of disease is punished for the anomalies of nature.
Her parents, members for several years of the Baptist church,
are expelled, contrary to all practice and all justice, from the
congregation, without any intimation of the proceedings and
without any opportunity of defence. Their trade, too, and
their very means of subsistence are withdrawn from them,—
and their lives,—and the life of the helpless bedridden suf-
ferer are placed in danger by the threats of the deluded
populace. Those, who by their attendance on the sick girl,
might have silenced the cry and stopped the persecution,
connive with secret satisfaction at what goes on. Though it
was proposed to them, that their professional fees should be
paid, and every expense defrayed, if they would but attend
the case and make a report, they decline to do good on such
conditions. Better that the poor girl should suffer and her
parents be ruined, than that their practice and position should
be placed in jeopardy. What might the public answer, if
they told the truth, and recommended mercy! And yet
these are the men, who claim for themselves a monopoly in
the art of healing, and who call out for penalties and for acts
of parliament, against those who presume to dispense with
certain items of their Pharmacopeia, and to deviate from the
canons of their college. These are the men, who though they
dare not enter in themselves, endeavour to lock the door of
nature against those who do. A mesmeriser in their vocabu-
lary is only another term for heretic or quack; and though
such heretics may not now be burned, they may at least be


Some excellent and rational persons come forward. 159


blackened to their heart’s content. And such, we under-
stand, was the humane fashion with which the practitioners
of the district responded to the proposal presented to them.
We blush while we quote the tale. But though these priests
and Levites of the medical temple passed over to the other
side, when they were told that a fellow-creature was left, as it
were, half-dead; there were sundry good Samaritans in the
vicinity who visited their neglected sister in her affliction,
pouring oil and wine into her wounds. Foremost of these
was the Rev. Mr. Norton, incumbent of an adjoining parish,
who acted the true part of a Christian minister, and was
regular in his attendance at Shottisham for many weeks,
giving the poor girl the comfort of his sympathy and support.
We fancy, too, that he published a small pamphlet on the
subject, which however, we have not had the advantage of
seeing. Many other friends and neighbours also did their
utmost to stem the tide of persecution that set in against this
unfortunate family. Some benevolent ladies from a distance
were frequent in their visits. And amorig those, who in the
latter stage of the proceedings interested themselves in the
case, may be mentioned, as we understand, the Rev. Mr.
Cobbold, Rector of Wortham, Suffolk,—the well-known au-
thor of many popular works,—and who has also, it is said,
been successful in several remarkable cures by mesmerism,
with the history of which, it is much to be regretted that he
does not favour the world. By the aid of some of these kind
friends, the family was enabled to remove from Shottisham to
Ipswich: and the father procured some fresh means of em-
ployment. How the poor sick girl has been latterly proceed-
ing, we do not know, and should be glad to learn. The last
reliable intelligence that we received was as far back as
February last, at which time no particular change in the case
had taken place.

We ought to add that the author of this little book has
executed his task very admirably. He exhibits an extensive
range of reading, and much general and special knowledge of
the subject. He calls himself “one of the watchers ;” but it
is to be regretted that he has not given his name, which
would have added strength to his statement, and silenced the
calumny of the malignant. Perhaps his name may be well-
known in that part of Suffolk, where the events, which he
narrates, took place: but it is not known to us; and its
omission detracts from the value of a work, which in so many
respects is full and satisfactory.


III. Great benefit of Mesmerism in a case of Indigestion,
Debility of Brain, and generally impaired health: and in
one of “ flow of blood to the head.” By Joun Rawe,
Esq., of Hampstead, late of Cornwall.* Communicated
by Dr. Elliotson.


“i Street, London,
* Oct. 23, 1853.

‘** Dear Sir,—I beg to thank you for your kindness in lending me The Zoist,
which I have read with a mingled feeling of pleasure and surprise.

** The cases stated, shew that there is, as J have always thought, much good
in mesmerism, and that it is a powerful agent in tranquillizing nervous irritation
and excitement, and apparently exercises a powerfully sedative effect ; conse-
quently must be a very valuable adjunct to more active treatment, directed to the
suppression and removal of the various morbid phenomena producing these pro-
tean nervous anomalies. ‘Sublata causa, tollitur effectus,’ is a motto I should
be happy to see more fully appreciated by my professional brethren; if so, many
fatal issues, or perhaps, what is far worse, the maimed, crippled, enervated, pa-
ralytic, and apoplectic conditions of half our fellow-creatures, would be obviated.
The practice is symptomatical, that is, to mask or remove the symptom or effect,
and to suffer the cause to exist—vertigos, coughs, diarrhoeas, &c., &c., are all
thus treated. Mesmerism is not curative of any disease—useful in many dis-
orders (an essential distinction to be observed), and invaluable in some, and, like
homeeopathy, hydropathy, and all the violent abstruse theories of the present
delirious age, have all their advantages when rationally used and not abused.

** I have long known, revered and admired Dr. Elliotson, who was the pet of
the profession, and still I do so: no man living has a better head or better heart ;
no one, the former better furnished, or the latter moved by more honourable,
benevolent, gentlemanly impulses ; and my sincere regret is, that so much excel-
lence should be tarnished by so fanatical an adherence to mesmerism.

** Apologizing for intruding these remarks upon you,

‘*T am, dear Sir,
** Yours obliged,
a


—.’'t


Ir is probable that the number of those who thoroughly dis-
believe mesmerism is comparatively small ; although, amongst
public opponents, some still supply the place of argument by
a repetition of the old tale, that the science is nothing more
than collusion and delusion. The charge of fraud and col-
lusion, if it ever had any foundation in truth, could have
applied only to scenes got up by certain itinerant and mer-
cenary lecturers, whose day happily is passed. The assertion


* See Mr. Rawe’s valuable papers in Nos. XXXII., XXXIII., XXXV.,
XXXIX. In the latter he exposes Mr. Druitt.

+ Letter written to Mr. Rawe by a London general practitioner ; who, living
in the heart of London, is so ignorant of mesmerism as to feel surprise for the
first time at the contents of The Zoist at the end of 1853, and not to know that
diseases, not disorders (as he chooses to distinguish them), are cured by mes-
merism—ulcers, enlargements, deposits (causing blindness if in the substances of
the eye), and other structural affections, and inveterate skin diseases, &c., and
that its use is not limited to affections of the nervops system, but extends to
every point of the animal frame, and that it not only assuages but cures. He
could not spend his time better than in reading The Zoist carefully through.—
J. Exxiorson.


Cure of Indigestion and Debility of Brain. 161


of delusion may not be quite so easily disposed of, for, if we
consider the imperfection of human knowledge, and the cir-
cumstance that the discoveries of one generation overturn
many of the conclusions of the preceding, it may be argued
that much which is considered science may be delusion. But,
if mesmerism is a delusion, it is such a one as a philanthro-
pist would wish long to continue. Hundreds of diseased and
suffering persons, many after having exhausted every other
means of cure, believe themselves restored to health by mes-
merism. I can imagine German mystics holding that disease
is only an idea, and its cure an illusion; but sober-minded
people will always believe the contrary.

My observations refer to simple or curative mesmerism,
judiciously practised ;. and, in bringing forward two instances
of its utility, these introductory remarks were suggested to
my mind by a recollection of the thorough conviction of its
value that the two individuals felt, and have moreover shewn
by their advocacy of it.


I. Indigestion, Debility of Brain, and generally Impaired
Health.
Mr. William Trevail, after an apprenticeship to a draper,


went into a large house of business at Bath. The confine-
ment and the close atmosphere of the shop undermined a
naturally weak constitution, and he had to lodge out of the
town and take medicine. Subsequently he relinquished busi-
ness, and sought the best medical advice. But, all failing,
he went to stay in the country with his brother-in-law, Mr.
Treleaven, of Kestle, about a mile and a half from my house.
In his occasional friendly visits to me, I learned that he
had all his life had weak digestion, had gradually got worse,
and become correspondéntly weak. The stomach would now
retain only a very few articles of diet, and his ailment made
him exceedingly nervous and irresolute, so that to go into a
room where there were two or three persons required a great
effort. He was fond of reading, but of late his brain always
felt so clouded that study was impossible. His rest by night
was very bad.

Mr. Trevail at this time knew very little of mesmerism,
and I considered his long-standing ailment would, if curable
at all, require a length of time that I was not able to bestow :
but I offered to make a few trials. In these, his eyes would
close in a few minutes and a light slumber follow, sometimes
amounting to total unconsciousness.. After every sitting he
felt his head clear and his nerves braced, and at least one good
night’s rest followed. He availed himself of this treatment

VOL. XII. M


162 Homeopathy and Hydropathy fruitless.


a great many times, and evidently gained in general health ;
so that it was a fair presumption that an unbroken course of
it, and caution on the part of the patient, would have
brought about as high a degree of health as his constitution
admitted of.

Mr. Trevail had been advised to try homeopathy under a
physician at Plymouth, and accordingly went there, I think,
for three months. But, receiving no benefit, he took a journey
to nearly the opposite extremity of England, to a celebrated
hydropathic establishment. The baths, combined with the
bracing air of the hills, for some months, failed to produce
any apparent improvement. The nervous excitability still
afflicted him, and he used sometimes to tell his companions
that he would rather have one such mesmerising as he used
to get in Cornwall than half a score baths. Experience had
made him an advocate of mesmerism, and his frequent re-
marks set several of the inmates on trying their hands at it.
I afterwards learned that one sufferer from epilepsy thought
of paying me a visit.

After Mr. Trevail’s return, he used frequently to call and
get a mesmeric nap, attended with the same results as
before. The failure of all else that had been resorted to
enhanced his estimate of mesmerism, the beneficial effect of
which was evident. To have been systematically taken in
hand would have required not only regular mesmerisation,
but a regulation of his daily life, for a little fatigue or indis-
cretion in diet always threw back the work of days; and in
this respect he was, lke the majority of invalids, very foolish.
On the whole he improved, and often expressed gratitude
for what I had done. My friend is a member of the religious
body of Methodists, and is a worthy example of unosten-
tatious and genuine piety. Being a local preacher on their
plan, he was desirous of attending to his appointment when-
ever his strength permitted, and would at times come to me
previously with the view of being enabled to go through the
duty. He came one day after having gone as a hearer to a
morning service, where he had found his head in so confused
a state that, after a vain attempt to attend to the sermon, he
had given it up. He had a sitting, and the next day in-
formed me that at the evening service he was quite clear and
comfortable.

Ultimately Mr. Trevail gained sufficient health, partly I
suppose through mesmerism, and partly through country air,
to engage in business, and has now continued in it between
one and two years.


Cure of “ flow of blood to the head.” 163


II. “ Flow of blood to the head.”

In the summer of 1850, Mr. Trevail repeatedly urged me
to mesmerise his brother-in-law, who was subject to painful
attacks of disease. But, considering the latter, from all I
then knew, to be a very unsuitable subject for the influence,
I always declined. My notions at that time as to the cha-
racteristics of persons who were susceptible subjects were
derived from books and conversation ; and I have observed
that almost every one, if he knows nothing more, can tell
you all about the sort of persons who are good subjects, and
the reverse. The individual proposed as a patient was Mr.
Treleaven before mentioned, a respectable farmer, aged about
40. In person he is of a very robust frame, and an active
country life keeps him in a muscular condition, without being
fat: his weight is eleven stone: he has a well-developed
head, and a countenance expressive of firmness of character :
his hair is black and curly.

Mr. Treleaven had ascertained that I was going to visit
an ailing neighbour, and went to the house before I arrived.
Finding him so desirous, I at once offered to try what could
be done. I will here describe the symptoms of his very
peculiar disorder.

For the last eight years he had been subject to what was
called a “flow of blood to the head.” Theories of life and
disease have been very numerous, some persons regarding
the animal body as an electrifying machine, others as a gal-
vanic battery. Not being a thorough convert to either doc-
trine, I will describe the interesting phenomena of the
present case without any colouring of my own.

In the sub-acute state, there was a slight sensation of
fulness in the left side of the gastric region of the abdomen,
and a dull pain in the back of the head and neck on the
right side, with a feeling of heat in these parts, The occur-
rence of hot weather, or his remaining in a warm room,
increased the symptoms, and added a sensation as though a
fluid were passing up through the tissues at the back of the
neck, The use of alcoholic liquors and the attitude of stoop-
ing were also injurious. If the disorder increased, the voice
became husky, and he felt, when walking, a giddiness as
though the upper part of the skull were lifting up. When
suffering to this extent, or even less, Mr. Treleaven was in
constant danger of a much more severe attack ; which had at
times happened. If he were a scientific man, I have no
doubt that he would be able to make his sensations more
comprehensible: but, from frequent conversations with him,
I gather that the first occurrence in a bad attack was com-

M 2


164 Many of his relatives died of this.


parable to a sudden flash, to use his own word, from the
uneasy part in the side to the back of the head, followed by
a sensation of burning heat in the body, with pain in the
head, and he was impelled to rise into the erect position from
an intolerable feeling of oppression which threatened to over-
power him.

During the several years that Mr. Treleaven had been
subject to this complaint, he had the advice of siz different
medical men; and was almost continually under some treat-
ment. In no instance was the benefit more than palliative.
But, for the last twelvemonths he had found no benefit at all,
although his doctor had tried the most heroic practice. Strong
doses of medicine, venesection to a very unusual extent, with
diet little else than bread and water, had failed to subdue
his disease : but had made him otherwise unwell.

The history of the other members of his family shewed
that the worst consequences were to be apprehended. Not
many years since they were a family of eight brothers and
sisters, and it had been remarked that rarely could so many
fine grown persons be seen in one family: yet two only are
now alive. 1 believe two died of decline, but the relatives I
have conversed with, as well as Mr. Treleaven himself, con-
sider that the diseases of which several of them died were
essentially the same as his own. The father died suddenly in
a fit.
The first mesmerisation was on the 16th of September,
1850, at the house where he met me as before stated. The
eyes closed in twenty minutes and a light doze followed.
The sitting occupied about three quarters of an hour, and
at the conclusion he found himself free from pain. He had,
however, not suffered acutely on that day.

On the next day at my house, sleep was produced in ten
minutes: powerful tractive passes were then used for a con-
siderable time from the back of the head and neck over the
shoulders and arms, and some general passes from head to
foot. He afterwards described the singular impression made
by the tractive passes. Those made towards the left seemed
to move something from the back of the head in that direc-
tion. It was not the sensation, described by some patients,
of quicksilver or cold water trickling down: but he compared
it to a compact body, drawn gradually on, and dissipated at
the shoulder and down the arm. What may be considered
more strange is, that the track along which the imagined
removal took place was sore to the external touch, and this
for more than a day afterwards. At the nezt interview, two
days afterwards, he came in high spirits, feeling much better :


He has an attack. 165
had felt little pain, and none at all in the head. The opera-
tion was repeated three times a week, and never failed, when
there was pain in any part, to drive it away.

Repetition made him rather more susceptible, and the
sleep was tolerably sound. In three weeks he considered
himself cured, but I continued the treatment about a month
longer. Medicine was entirely discontinued, and, I believe,
dietetic substances disregarded. Mr. Treleaven is a temperate
man, but business transactions in the country are almost
invariably accompanied by a glass of beer or grog, and
when, on a fair or market day, a person has to make bargains
or settlements with several parties, he sometimes takes more
than his judgment approves. This he experienced some
weeks after our last meeting, and he came to me with un-
easy feelings in the side and head: but these were entirely
removed by two sittings. He came to be mesmerised seven
or eight times in the next three months, on the first appear-
ance of any symptom of his old disorder. One sitting only
was had on each occasion. These visits ceased about the end
of March, 1851.

The summer had always been the most trying season
to him, but this year the month of August arrived before
he felt anything amiss, and I have no doubt that a sit-
ting or two then would have kept him right. Yet, al-
though he felt the premonitory symptoms, he allowed the
calls of business, and the notion that he could at any time
get relieved, to lead him to procrastinate for several weeks,
and that in the hottest season of the year. He afterwards
saw his error.

One evening, just at his bed-time, having a feeling of
oppression, he went out in the cool air and took a short walk
to shake it off, and then retired to bed. Shortly afterwards,
one of his fearful attacks came on. I received a message
from Mrs. Treleaven, hoping I would go over at once, as her
husband was very ill. I complied. I told her that the only
proper course in any serious attack of illness was to send for
the medical man first, and that I was sorry they had not
done so now, as I had a great objection to have anything to
do with such cases unless under professional sanction. Her
reply was, “I wanted to send for the doctor, but my husband
overruled it : he said, ‘Send for Mr. Rawe first: I have tried
all: if mesmerism does not relieve me nothing will: what-
ever happens let all the blame be on me.’ ”

On going into his bed-room, I found him supporting
himself in the standing position, and appearing as nearly
faint as it was possible for a person to be and keep up: his


166 He is cured.
voice was almost inaudible: and he said he thought he should
not be able to sit or remain still to be mesmerised. After a
little while it was decided to make the attempt. On his
being seated, I at once commenced making gentle passes
down in front. His countenance was white, the respiration
quick and feeble, the surface cold, with sweat standing on
the face ; the pulse almost as small as a thread.

While sitting before him and endeavouring to give timely
aid to the depressed powers of life, I anxiously watched for
any change which might appear. After a little time, it was
evident that a gradual improvement was going on, the pulse
became little a stronger, and the countenance a little less death-
like; and I observed the process until, at the end of three
quarters of an hour, the heart beat as usual, and the blood
had fully returned to the cheeks. He now felt nothing to
complain of, but had not sufficient confidence in the perma-
nency of the improvement to venture to retire to bed at once.
I staid half an hour longer, and, as nothing appeared amiss,
I left. The next forenoon he walked over to me at Lemaile
to have a sitting; had passed a good night, and was free
from pain. He was enthusiastic about mesmerism ; contrast-
ing his experience in this attack with former ones treated in
the ordinary way, after which he was generally unwell for a
fortnight at least.

He closed his remarks with this very reasonable conclu-
sion :—“ The doctors ought to know about this: you ought
to make my case known to the great men at the head of the
profession.” Poor man! he had no idea of the task he pro-
posed for me.

After this time he had a few sittings; but the occurrence
of any symptom of the complaint became much less frequent
through the year 1852, and last year there was none at all.
On my deciding to remove with my family to the neighbour-
hood of the metropolis, he was much concerned. I promised
to give him a good mesmerising on my visits to Cornwall,
probably two or three times a year.

When at Christmas last I bade him adieu, he said, “I
can never repay you for what you have done for me. I con-
sider that I owe my life to mesmerism : but for that, I believe
I should have gone as my brothers and sisters have. I shall
always be glad to testify to it in any way that you may
wish.”

Joun Rawe.
Chesnut Cottage, Haverstock Hill, Hampstead,
March 11th, 1854. |


Observations on these cases.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


These two cases are invaluable. The first is one such as
medical men have always in abundance under their care, try-
ing first one drug and plan of diet and general management,
and then another: and most frequently with unsatisfactory
results, except that such are very profitable to the practi-
tioner. The family or habitual medical adviser has such a
patient under his care often and long, and is wearied with
the everlasting complainings: and others are continually
consulted or tried for longer or shorter periods. The amount
of drugs taken in these cases is prodigious: and trading
writers of books on indigestion and nervous complaints, like
those who write on gout and rheumatism, and those who
write on urinary affections and cutaneous diseases and affec-
tions of the chest, reap a plentiful harvest by advertising
their books with their names incessantly, and thus catching
the eye of unfortunate valetudinarians, as the advertising
tailors and other tradesmen so well know how to catch
customers. The advertisement of medical books on common
disorders is a genteel and cunning way of imitating Messieurs
Moses, Solomon, Mechi, Hyam, Savory, and others, who
legitimately advertise as tradesmen, and in a direct and open
manner for customers, who are their patients. Some of
these medical authors succeed in getting passages from their
books that are the most likely to excite the attention of un-
fortunate persons with dyspeptic, nervous, gouty, rheumatic,
urinary, cutaneous, and chest affections, inserted from time
_to time into both the London and provincial newspapers.
Writers on individual diseases are thought to know the most
about them: but generally know nothing more of them
than the rest of the profession, and are often moreover less
acquainted with general practical medical science and the
powers and general proper administration of remedies—a
knowledge of all which is indispensable to the treatment of
individual diseases.

The second case, though pronounced by the medical
practitioner to be flow of blood to the head, was evidently in
the attack witnessed by Mr. Rawe a fit of exhaustion of
nervous energy, and calculated to be injured by all debili-
tating means. Ammonia, and not the lancet, was at least
at that time the suitable remedy. Innumerable persons have
been destroyed in all kinds of diseases by bleeding and other
debilitating means; and innumerable persons, though not
killed, been made worse or uncured, in neuralgic seizures,
mistaken for inflammation; in giddiness, drowsiness, throb-


168 Extremes of medical and surgical practice.


bing, heat, palsy, pains and other affections of the head, &c.,
ascribed to determination and congestion of blood, when
they are dependent upon debility, and congestion is the
effect of the nervous affection. The distinction is often easy :
but often requires a very careful consideration of all the
present symptoms and all the previous history of the patient,
and a thorough knowledge of the varieties of the same dis-
ease. The sacrifice of human life by this ignorance must
have been enormous. But now medical men run into the
opposite extreme, and lose lives, or cause diseases to become
protracted or not be cured at all, by not bleeding when they
ought—


‘* Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt.’’


When called to a celebrated writer a few years ago, I
found he had been labouring many days under inflammation
of the bowels, and been treated with merely a little rhubarb
and similar things without advantage. His state was highly
dangerous, and I gave it as my opinion that he would cer-
tainly die if not bled, and might even if he were bled. The
practitioner remarked that he had not bled a patient for two
years, and that the gentleman was very bulky. I replied
that I would wait and regulate the quantity and take all the
responsibility upon myself. The practitioner most courteously
yielded to my wishes and bled the patient. I allowed no
more blood to flow after the pulse was slightly affected. It
proved to be in a highly inflammatory state, as I foretold.
The patient was at once relieved, and with suitable medicines
and diet from that moment advanced to perfect health. I
myself had a very violent inflammation in my chest during
last November. Nothing controlled it: and I one night
begged a medical friend to bleed me. About twenty ounces
were removed, and from that moment I recovered. In
March I had a second still severer attack. I went on with-
out relief for some time, and then begged the same friend to
bleed me one evening. The loss of less than a pint was
required on this occasion, and the results were all the same
as before—immediate relief and perfect cure ; and I took not
a particle of medicine. I had never been so ill in my life as
each time before I was bled. On casually mentioning this to
a surgeon of St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, he said that he
was sure that no other person was bled in London on the
day when I was bled. Perhaps he was right, for such are
the extremes of the practice of medicine, and it is the same
with surgery. Some years ago, patients were bled for
almost everything: and people feared that they should not


No more means to be used than indispensable. 169


continue in health unless they were bled twice a year. The
surgeries of country practitioners were filled at spring and
fall with healthy persons attending to be bled.

But in bleeding not a drop more should be taken away
than is required for the purpose: the age and powers of the
patient should be considered : and his internal sensations, as
ringing in the ears, giddiness, confusion, dimness of sight,
faintness, nausea, and debility, inquired into every few mo-
ments: and the pulse constantly felt, that the least diminu-
tion of strength or quickness, or irregularity, or increased
quickness of it, may be noticed, as well as any relief in the
pain or in other symptoms. If any of these effects takes
place, the flow should be arrested: and if they cease, and
the original state of things returns, and the patient is not
relieved, the blood should be allowed to flow again, and
according to the same rules. Sometimes none of these things
occurs and there is no relief: and yet the quantity of blood
taken is as great as we think the patient can with propriety
lose. Here the flow should be arrested. The effects enu-
merated, few or more, occasionally begin after the arm is
bound up, and thus relief is not obtained immediately, but
still obtained. The patient should be bled in the upright
position, because the loss of less blood in the sitting or
standing position produces all the effects described than if the
patient lies; and to remove the faintness, &c., we have then
in general merely to lay him down. We should always en-
deavour to accomplish our purpose without the loss of one
drop more than is absolutely required : and thus will seldom
be under “the necessity of bleeding a second time, or at any
rate a third. All this I anxiously inculcated when I first
even began to lecture in St. Thomas’s Hospital, between
twenty and thirty years ago, and I protested against the enor-
mous and repeated bleedings practised by some through inat-
tention to these rules. It is shocking to read the deluges of
blood that some writers boast of having perpetrated in curing
their patients. Many I am sure feel the effects of great loss
of blood long and perhaps for life, and not unfrequently have
some disease induced which shortens their life considerably.

So with drugs. Not a particle more should be taken than
is necessary to relieve or cure the patient. The aim should
be to benefit the patient with the smallest number of grains
or drops: and it is still better if we attain our object
without any drugs at all—by diet and general management
alone. Yet the sound practitioner, who aims at this, will
augment his doses steadily, and continuously, till he obtains
the good which he desires, or sees that by going on he


170 Correct mode of arranging doses.


shall produce a threatening of some effects which he does not
desire. In the latter case, he will instantly reduce the dose
or omit the medicine altogether for a time.

If it is wrong to give one grain or drop, or half a grain
or drop, more than indispensable, it is equally wrong to give
up a medicine till it has been taken in such quantities and for
such a period as to have proved that the system has felt its
power. The sound practitioner will appear to the ignorant
sometimes to give doses ridiculously small, and sometimes
doses preposterously large. He will not boast of giving large
doses or small doses, but aim at giving the proper dose.

Some positively have a fixed dose for each medicine.
When iodide of potassium, one of the most useful medicines
ever discovered, was first used thirty years ago, Sir
, being unluckily prejudiced against it as he is now
against mesmerism, frightened some of my patients and for
a time deterred them from its use, though they afterwards
saw he was wrong. When its use became established, he
and Dr. C————— never gave more than two grains for a
dose, and told all patients and practitioners that this was the
largest dose which was proper. Now there can be no fixed
dose of any medicine: the effect of every medicine, and not
the quantity, should be considered. Sometimes a quarter of
a grain, nay an eighth, of this very medicine, is the utmost
quantity borne: and sometimes no result is obtained from
less than very many grains. I have explained to patients,
and always successfully, this common sense view of the ad-
ministration of this and other drugs, and they have always


seen the error of this dictum of Sir and
Dr. C—————. Indeed it is now happily disregarded. I
recollect that one day I met Dr. C———— in consultation


upon one case and the late Dr. H upon another—both
gentlemen being physicians of St. ’s Hospital and
teaching the same pupils. In each case, iodide of potassium
was agreed upon as the medicine. Dr. C————— said he
always gave, as did Sir , two grains of it
and never more, even if it produced no effect. Dr. H
said he always began with ten grains. Now to begin with a
large dose was as improper as to continue at one fixed small
dose. Yet both these gentlemen passed as very sensible men.

While many practitioners give medicines in inefficient
doses, others relinquish them before they, on account of
the smallness of the dose or the short period of their adminis-
tration, have done any good: and thus are changing their
prescriptions incessantly: and the patient fancies he has tried
everything, whereas he has really tried nothing, and has lost


Purgatives and mercury have been over-given. 171


all his time. One of the physicians at University College
Hospital, who was not over educated or wise, but violently
opposed mesmerism, declaring that he had never seen it and
had always turned his eyes away from my patients while they
were being mesmerised in the wards, generally made a full
sweep at every visit or two of all the drugs he had prescribed
at the previous visit. When prescriptions are continually
changed, either the practitioner is usually prescribing fool-
ishly, or is baffled at any rate: though of course sometimes
changes in the symptoms require such changes of medicines.

The public have no conception of the absurd mode in
which medicines are administered by men who have an abun-
dance of practice, or of the oceans of liquid physic and
mountains of pills and powders which are swallowed without
having, either through being unfit for the case or improper
in the doses or shortness of the period of administration,
the smallest chance of benefiting the patient. Sir Benjamin
Brodie twenty years ago in consultation remarked to me how
badly medicines are in general prescribed, adding that very
few prescribed them so properly asI did. Yet I am sure I
never prescribe them otherwise than as the very humblest
common sense suggests,—such common sense as every person,
one would suppose, is endowed with.

Till very lately, it was the custom to give cathartics as
improperly as to bleed; to give them when they were, like
bleeding, absolutely injurious, or to give them too violently
or often, a pill and black draught being the staple of many
practitioners in all ailments: and in chronic cases to worry
the bowels incessantly with them when nature ought to be
left alone: just as some persons spoil a good horse by inces-
santly whipping or spurring it, and a poor dear child by
incessantly punishing it so as to deprive nature of a chance.
It is by no means requisite that the bowels of every person
should act every twenty-four hours; nor, because they are
sluggish, that aperients should be given, and time not be
allowed to nature, who, if trusted, will generally in a day or
two or more do her duty. This error I have always pro-
tested against.

Another prevalent folly has been to prescribe mercury on
all occasions of giving an aperient. This is one of the best
of medicines, but not required on every occasion of an ape-
rient being proper. Yet till lately (and too generally at pre-
sent it is the case), every prescription for an aperient pill
contained mercury, when some simple aperient, with no
drug calculated to get into the system as well as to act on
the bowels, was required.


172 The kidney now is all the rage.


For thirty years the liver was the favourite organ ; all
diseases were referred to it, all treatment was directed to it.*
Of late years the kidneys have had an equal run, and I am
sick of hearing about renal diseases and albuminous urine,
which are serving at present to shew the folly and weakness
of too many medical men, and to answer the purpose of
too many of those whose ways are those of quacks. Above
twenty years ago I steadily opposed the doctrine which
sprung up, that albumen in the urine indicated structural
disease of the kidney. I kept my ground firmly, because
I rested on careful observation: and now this fancy is given
up. But disease of the kidney is continually declared to
exist when the result proves that it did not exist. If it
really exists as one item in a list of affections, then are the
rest continually declared to depend upon it, and important
diseases of other organs slighted, and it is set up as the
great enemy for attack, although in structural disease of the
kidney medicine can in general do little or nothing and fre-
quently is most mischievously employed. How long this
nephromania will last I cannot guess. The mesmero-phobia
will soon be beaten.

Every practitioner, he who has for some reason or other
a name among titled and fashionable people for whom he is
prescribing from morning to night, and he who prescribes
for the inhabitants of the humblest streets or villages, should
be fully acquainted with the transcendent assuaging and
curative powers of mesmerism, instead of running wild with
the follies which I have now pointed out. He would then
be ten thousand times more useful to the community than
he is at present. I speak literally and advisedly. What-
ever be the disease, acute or chronic, occurring in the infant
or the adult, in whatever part of the body, mesmerism in an
immense number of cases will render the most powerful, the
most blessed assistance. It can interfere with no other treat-
ment and can do noharm. But it is too frequently employed
with little chance of doing good. Some persons expect to be
cured of a disease, perhaps of long standing, at one sitting.
Some, who are not so ignorant, are yet so impatient that, if
they are not presently relieved, they give it up. Some, while
going through a course of it, do the most unwise things from
time to time and frustrate its operations. And then again


* I often think of the following lines in Lord Byron’s Don Juan, suggested
by the medical mania which prevailed even upwards of thirty years ago :—


** So that all mischiefs spring up from this entrail
Like earthquakes from the hidden fire called central.”’


The duties of Mesmerisers. 173


there are many very bad mesmerisers. Some talk while they
mesmerise ; whereas they and the patients, and every body in
the room, should observe perfect silence, and there should
be nothing to distract the attention of either patient or ope-
rator. Some mesmerisers are listless: get up from time to
time for some silly purpose or other, or look about the room,
or give other signs of want of earnestness: whereas the mes-
meriser should never take his eyes off his patient or intermit
his work, but go steadily and uninterruptedly on, slowly and
intently. Some make passes too quickly and jerk their
hands at every pass or snap their fingers or do some other
mountebankery ; whereas all should be simplicity and sobriety.
Some labour hard, strain, and puff and blow: but there is
no occasion for the least muscular effort, and the more gently
and easily the arms and hands are used the better ; provided
the attention is never taken off the patient—who, on his
part, should be quiet and still, and keep his attention fixed
on the mesmeriser, and keep his eyes wide open, unless this
requires an effort. If local mesmerism is proper, there should
still be no muscular effort ; the hands and tips of the fingers
should be passed slowly and very lightly upon the parts: and
absolute contact is not always indispensable.*


* See observations on mesmerisers in No. XXVIII., p. 389 :—*“‘ A very large
number of those who profess to mesmerise do not a hundredth part of the good
they might, and thus injure individual patients and the progress of the subject.
It is difficult to find a professed mesmeriser who gives me satisfaction. Too
many are full of whims of their own and act the quack, talking as if possessed
of extraordinary knowledge, making all sorts of displays in their methods, in
fact, playing all sorts of antics, and talking all sorts of nonsense. Many of my
patients have been made so nervous by these mesmerisers as to be unable to con-
tinue to employ them. Some thoughtlessly talk all the time. Now a good mes-
meriser works in silence, and allows no talking in the room, nor anything else
that can excite the patient. The passes should be made very slowly, or they may
excite rather than calm, and may prevent sleep. The mesmeriser should look
earnestly at the patient, and be absorbed in the attempt to produce a silent
influence. It is in general best to persevere with one method, for the diversify-
ing the attempt is very likely to excite the curiosity and wonder of the patient
and prevent repose. One sort of passing, or mere pointing, or gazing, may,
for some unknown reason, suit one patient better than another: but, when a
patient, by mere continuance of attempts, has become affected, the method em-
ployed at the moment of success is likely from association to be afterwards, at
least for a long while, far more effectual, if not even exclusively effectual, than
others. I would not allow a patient of mine to be mesmerised by one who,
while the process is going on, talks at all, or laughs, or makes quick passes,
snaps his fingers, makes flourishes, or plays any monkey tricks ; or is careless
and listless. All should be done calmly and even solemnly: for mesmerism is a
serious, holy thing. There is no occasion to hold the hands, or sit with knees
against knees ; or in general to touch the patient at all. And all may be done
as well by the operator standing to one side of the patient as opposite. There is
no occasion for the operator to vibrate his hands or head, or make any muscular
effort. The best mesmerisers are those who do all quietly and gently.

** Some persons, whom I have recom ded as risers, have taken the


( 174 )


IV. More insanity from Spirit-rapping fancies.
By Dr. Exxiorson.


“ the stars,
Which in thy cradle beamed so brightly sweet,
Were gods to the distempered playfulness
Of thy untutored infancy : the trees,
The grass, the clouds, the mountains, and the sea,
All living things that walk, swim, creep, or fly,
Were gods : the sun had homage, and the moon
Her worshipper. Then thou becamest a boy
More daring in thy phrenzies : every shape,
Monstrous or vast, or beautifully wild,
Which from sensation’s relics, fancy culls :
The spirits of the air, the shuddering ghost,
The genii of the elements, the powers
That give a shape to nature’s varied works,
Had life and place in the corrupt belief
Of thy dlind heart.”

SHELLEY.


Tue Zorst has done its duty (as in every matter it always
has fearlessly, and I trust always will) in exposing the ig-


liberty of passing an opinion upon the medical treatment which I had prescribed
at the same time ; or, where there was no other treatment, of suggesting medical
treatment. One person, quite ignorant of medicines, took the liberty of apply-
ing leeches when exhaustion forbad any such measures : one introduced a foreigner
to assist her in mesmerising, who was a linendraper in Brussels and passed him-
self off as a doctor, and he mesmerised and prescribed. Some, instead of simply
mesmerising, as I directed, introduced pretended clairvoyants, absolute im-
postors. I advise all medical men to allow nothing of this sort when they
employ mesmerisers. But, on the other hand, they should not interfere with
the mesmeriser, or take any measures without conferring with him, provided
they understand nothing of it and he is a fully informed and discreet mesmeriser.

‘* Some amateur mesmerisers do injury to the cause by their want of perse-
verance. If they produce no benefit, or no sensible effect, in the first few trials,
of perhaps only a quarter of an hour each, they give up the case. I wish such
persons would never take a case in hand, because their failures must be very
numerous, and the poor patient conceives that mesmerism, perhaps his last and
only hope, is no remedy for him, and our adversaries register the more failures.
In truth, mesmerism cannot be said to have failed under a trial of a year or more
in chronic cases. Let no one mesmerise who is not prepared to give a daily trial
of at least half an hour for many months or still longer.

‘On the other hand, I must also entreat the afflicted never to begin mes-
merism unless firmly resolved to give it a fair trial ; and not to give it up because
they are not better soon, or do not go to sleep. I often foolishly lose all patience
with people, to whom I have explained the possibility of no effect occurring for
a length of time, and of benefit without sleep, returning or writing to me in a
few days with a declaration that, as they felt nothing, they should not continue
it. Some go about saying they cannot be sent to sleep because Mr. Somebody
tried one day without effect. If a complaint is worth the trouble of curing, it
is worth the trouble of submitting to a remedy causing neither pain nor annoy-
ance, but requiring merely perseverance. Some give up in a few weeks or
months. It is surprising how many persons in the world have no force of cha-
racter: are only big children—holding silly opinions on various subjects of which
they know nothing, and acting without reason or steadiness.’’


Education very defective. 175


norance and preposterous absurdity of those poor creatures
who believe in spirit-rappings and spirit-table-movings. The
abettors of this pernicious folly are all very angry at being
considered imperfectly educated and weak: and, the more
angry they are, the better for themselves and others. In the
last Number (XLV., p. 33) was this passage :—


“We have also given examples, alas! too numerous, in our last
Number, of insanity produced by these ignorant fancies: and now
we have to record another in the person of a well-known authoress,
who always had indulged in such superstitions and has of course
adopted all the recent spirit fancies. She has gone stark mad and
stark naked on the spirit-rapping. She was found the other day in
the open street, as her mother bore her, except that she had a
pocket handkerchief in one hand and a card in the other. She said
the spirits had informed her that, if she walked out so prepared,
she would be invisible. She is now in a madhouse.”


Two more instances have since occurred within my own
knowledge. A member of a trading firm called upon me in
great concern to say that the wife of one of their workmen
had gone mad upon the subject of spirit-rapping. She and
her husband had read poor old Mr. Robert Owen’s silly ac-
counts of his interviews with the spirit of His Royal High-
ness the Duke of Kent, who still enjoys his aristocratic rank
and observes his earthly punctuality, and I dare say his
other earthly habits (“ still punctual, your Royal Highness !”) ;
and with other spirits; and had dwelt upon the trash till,
probably out of compliment to her sagacity, spirits began to
visit her also. In superstition woman usually leads the way ;
and begins before her husband or brothers, or father or sons ;
and, after their conversion, is the support of the folly. The
ancient heathen temples were crowded with women, and
Strabo says that the props of the priests were the women.
The evil spirit is represented to have known that Eve would
listen to him more easily than Adam, and that she could
bring Adam round to her way of thinking. Men are edu-
cated badly enough in the highest and in the humblest semi-
naries ; but women infinitely worse. Little sound, solid and
elevating, knowledge is taught. The nonsense which, instead
of the positive and grand facts of nature, is inculcated into
the young, is appalling. The higher orders are even worse
off in this respect than the humble. A wise woman is a
noble being: but I should prefer death to having a supersti-
tious, silly wife; and, if I had children, would prefer seeing
them lie dead to their being trained up in pernicious, idiotic
absurdities, which no pains might afterwards eradicate.

To learn singing and playing on instruments is not edu-


176 Two more cases of spirit-rapping insanity.


cation: the acquisition of languages and literature is not
education: the knowledge of any science or art is not edu-
cation. Each of these things is excellent and worth learning,
but, alone, does not secure the expansion of the intelligence,
nor give a grasp of intellect, or noble aspiration. Exten-
sive views of all the truths of nature, inanimate, living, in-
tellectual, and moral, are indispensable to sound education,
and a far, very far, higher and different moral training than
that which prevails in the titled and aristocratic world, in the
middle-class world, the political world, the religious world,
or in the scientific world, in all which miserable views and
miserable conduct meet our eyes at every turn. As to the
education afforded by mere mathematics, allow me to quote
Mr. Dugald Stewart :—* In the course of my own experience
I have never met with a mere mathematician who was not
credulous to a fault, not only with respect to human testimony
but credulous also in matters of opinion, and prone on all
subjects which he had not carefully studied to repose too
much faith in illustrious and consecrated names.”’*

The wife was at the time of the introduction of these
distempered fancies into her head a beautiful and clever
woman, and had been up to that time an excellent wife and
mother. After reading Mr. Owen’s pamphlet she began to
have consultations with spirits; heard them rapping at all
hours day and night ; neglected her poor little children, and
at length became so violent and mischievous that her relatives
came forward and insisted upon placing her in the lunatic
asylum at Brixton. This was above two months ago, and
she is still there, totally unfit to be taken out. But, before
this necessary step was taken, she had brought over her weak
husband to her own folly, and, though he goes to work,
where he had worked four years—from the origin of the
establishment—he has communications with spirits, hears them
rap around him, has grown “as pale as a ghost,” to use the
words of my informant, and sometimes has no sleep all night
through the visits and conversations of the spirits. He says
they have told him to go to the chief constable of St.
Pancras and get his wife out, and that money is coming to
him from Australia: sometimes he sees his wife coming in at
the door and she talks to him.

This unhappy pair have several little children.

Such histories it is melancholy to think upon: and ac-
cursed are all those who disseminate these worse than absurd,
these wicked, doctrines.


* Moral Philosophy, vl. iii., p. 280.


Mrs. Augustus de Morgan’s letter. 177


I know more than one family in whom the youthful
daughters have seen the absurdity of their parents, and con-
fessed at last to others that they amused themselves by pre-
tending that the spirits rapped answers and moved tables. It
is a lamentable state of things when children lose respect for
their parents, and it is shocking when they sport with the
folly of their father and mother. I heard of an instance in
which a mother was constantly talking about and trying the
spirits instead of performing her maternal duties, and so ex-
cited and worn down was one of her children that disease
took an easy hold of it, and probably prejudiced and inef-
ficient treatment soon carried off the poor thing. A magis-
trate in a distant country is said on good authority to have
consulted the spirits before he passed judgment upon a
culprit: and a medical man in this country to consult the
spirits before he prescribes. We are all bound to denounce
this abomination.

But, Gentlemen Editors, I have a crow to pluck with you.
You ought to be ready to give the name and address in
private of the parties of whom you write. But in your ac-
count of the lady who went into the streets stark mad and
stark naked through her spirits, you make no such offer to
your readers. The consequence of which is, that, as you do
not mention the lady’s age nor even her country, whether
England, Scotland, Ireland, or Wales, a lady has been fixed
upon, and has fixed upon herself, who perhaps never was mad
for an instant in her life, nor ever listened to spirits com-
manding her to sacrifice her modesty for the good of her soul ;
and poor I, though I did not write one word of the descrip-
tion, have been fixed upon and abused as if I were the real
culprit. First came a letter from Mrs. de Morgan, giving me
her unasked-for opinion, and containing the following pas-
sages, which, in justice to Mrs. Crowe, and to shew you
what my sufferings under such remonstrances must be, I am
bound to send you for publication.


** I cannot help expressing my regret to you that an article should
have a place in The Zoist calculated to give much pain to the subject
of it—my friend, Mrs. Crowe, who is no doubt the person referred
to. This lady had, it is true, an attack of cerebral congestion about
five weeks ago, in consequence of want of attention to her health.
She was looking out for a lodging—got her meals ill cooked, or did
not get them regularly—had a young and heedless servant, who did
not perceive the feverish attack coming on, and in consequence was
seriously delirious for two days. The attack was removed by a very
simple dose of medicine; but in the meantime, some of her friends
believing her to be permanently insane, had her brought up by a
VOL. XII. 3"


178


Mrs. Crowe’s letter.


night train to Hanwell. Dr. Conolly soon saw that she was not a
fit inmate for his place, and assisted her in extricating herself.
She is now in a lodging at the west end of London, where I saw
and had a long talk with her a fortnight since. She was twice at
the play the week before last. You have probably heard all this
already, but I send it on the chance.”


When any one falls into a passion from some vexation,
there is congestion of the brain, but that is not the cause of
the fury. If the lady of The Zoist went naked into the streets,
exposing her exquisite and hitherto unseen and unappreciated
beauties of shape and hue, she must to my poor apprehension


have been mad,
ad true madness,
What is it but to be nothing else than mad ?’’


and very fit for Dr. , who, perhaps, sent her away,
whoever she was, both because she was no longer mad and
moreover was very disagreeably disagreeable.

But the great letter to me is from Mrs. Crowe herself.


“Dr. Wilson’s, Great Malvern,
* May 3rd.

** Sir,—I think before you inserted that ‘ unmanly’ paragraph
(as the Daily News justly calls it) in The Zoist, which has been
thence copied into the newspapers, you should have taken the
trouble to ascertain the truth of the statement.

“ A little enquiry would have enabled you to learn that I was not
mad about spirit-rapping or anything else; but that I had been
since the 26th of February, and was still, very ill, and that when
the magazine was published, I was residing in London for the benefit
of medical advice, and had been so since the 14th of March. Since
during the whole of my stay in London, I was in the daily habit of
visiting, and being visited by, many of your acquaintance, the fact
would have been easily ascertained.

“The world has been ready enough to call you mad for your
heterodox beliefs, and if I did believe in the spirits it would be no
proof of madness: as it happens, my judgment is yet suspended on
the subject; but as I happened to be investigating the phenomena
at the time I was taken ill, in the aberration of mind that accom-
panied the illness I fancied myself haunted by spirits.

“I did not know till a few days since that you had done me this
friendly turn. I should have thought your own experience would
have made you more just and merciful to others: I have always been
indignant at the persecution you have sustained ; but since you are
so ready and eager to persecute others, you thoroughly deserve
what you have met with.


** CATHERINE CROWE.”’


Now I really had no desire to make enquiries of Mrs.
Crowe’s friends: nor was I aware that I knew even one of


Many mad through spirit-rappiug fancies. 179


them. I recollect the good lady at an evening party at Mrs.
Milner Gibson’s, and at another at Mrs. Monckton Milnes’s ;
and perhaps at one or two others, but where I forget.
People go to evening parties continually who can hardly be
said to have any acquaintance with those whom they thus
visit. I should never have thought of enquiring of either
lady about her: and till now I was not aware that she was
acquainted with Mrs. de Morgan, even should their inves-
tigations and convictions be identical. I really know no-
thing more of Mrs. Crowe than that I am informed she wrote
a book of which I never read nor am likely to read a line,
and which I never saw. Why should the world fancy that
Mrs. Crowe was the lady ?

Your sole object was evidently to stay this plague: and I
will aid you to the utmost of my poor power.

Who Mrs. Crowe’s friend in the office of the Daily
News is, I am not aware. But this is certain, that the Daily
News some months ago did not refrain from publishing a list
of persons, with their names and residences, who had gone
mad through spirit-rapping.*


* “The wife of Michael Catt, of Decker Township, Indiana, was shot on
Monday last by her daughter-in-law, who was much excited on supernatural
objects at the time.

“ Mr. Orville Hatch, of Franklin, Connecticut, has become insane, having
devoted considerable attention to the subject of spiritual rappings. Mr. Hatch
is a farmer, and has been instrumental in introducing many important improve-
ments in agriculture.

‘Mr. Barber, a deacon in one of the churches (Congregational) in Warwick,
has become insane, in consequence of surrendering himself to the ‘ spiritual-
rapping’ delusion. His wife and other members of the family are in a similar
state.
“Mr. B. Peabody hung himself in a barn in Grafton, Lovain county, on
Friday last. He was an amiable, intelligent, and respected young man, and be-
came so absorbed in rappings as to unbalance his mind. His case is but one of
a long list of insane, made so by modern rappings and spiritualism.

‘*The annual report of the Ohio Lunatic Asylum discloses the fact, that
there are no fewer than 26 persons (13 men and 13 women) who have found their
way there by means of the spiritual rappings.

‘** Samuel Dole, of Warlington county, Ohio, was made insane by the spirit-
rappings, and became possessed with the idea that he must offer, like Abraham,
a sacrifice to the Supreme. He accordingly proceeded to cut off one of his own
feet, which he succeeded in doing in a very scientific manner, and with heroic
determination. His family, fearing that some other of his limbs might be de-
manded in a like cause, had him conveyed to the lunatic asylum.

‘*A young woman was removed to the asylum at Utica this week, having
become insane in consequence of witnessing some ‘spiritual’ experiments in
Massachussets. She is now wild with madness.

‘‘ Mr. Christopher Snevely, a very worthy and industrious citizen of Harris-
burg, Pennsylvania, has become insane in consequence of attending to ‘ spiritual
manifestations,’ and has been conveyed to the Pennsylvania Lunatic Asylum, and
is now a raving maniac.

“Ebenezer Pope, of Milton, hung himself on the 14th instant ; cause, ‘ spi-


nN 2


180 Annual Meeting of the Mesmeric Infirmary.


I hope she will give the results to the scientific world of
her investigations into this recondite and doubtful matter of
true science: and when she writes to me again will not aim
at surpassing the very pretty little bit of Christianity which
closes her epistle.


V. Report of the Fifth Annual Meeting of the Mesmeric
Infirmary of London.


Tu1s Meeting was held on the 7th of June, at Willis’s
Rooms, King Street, St. James’s.

On the motion of Jonn Frere, Esq., one of the magis-
trates for Middlesex, Ricuarp Monckton Mines, Esq., M.P.,
took the chair.

Mr. Mines opened the Meeting by stating, that his
conviction of the truth and value of mesmerism was grounded
upon attentive observation, and had existed for nearly twenty
years. He pointed out the opposition which the greatest
discoveries had always met with and the great antiquity of
many, mesmerism among the rest, that were thought to be
of late date, but had really at their origin been suppressed
through the opposition and intolerance of mankind. He
had been a subscriber to the Infirmary from the beginning,
and was pleased that the hope expressed by him at the first
meeting that no exhibition of phenomena would be allowed
had been fulfilled: and he commended the Rev. Mr Town-
shend’s recent answer to the Quarterly Review, entitled Mes-
merism proved True, or, the Quarterly Reviewer Reviewed.

Dr. E.iorson then read the Report of the Committee.

“ At the last General Meeting we had to announce a
difficulty which had unexpectedly come upon us. Although
we had never received in-patients nor intended to receive
any, and therefore could never treat patients with fevers or
any infectious diseases, some few of the gentlemen of Fitzroy
Square became so excited by our presence that they met
together, stirred up the rest, and got up an address to the
ground-landlord, requesting him to remove us lest we should
endanger the health of themselves, their wives, and their


ritual rappings.” He was one of the select men, and leaves a family to mourn
over his terrible delusion.

‘* We regret to announce that a lady of Northampton, Massachussets, a lady
too of great beauty, loveliness, and intelligence, the mother of six children, has
become raving mad through the influence of ‘ spiritual manifestations.’ She was
conveyed to the Battleborough Insane Hospital, on Wednesday, in such a state
of excitement that it took two attendants to hold her. These instances are mul-
tiplying with fearful rapidity in every quarter of the country. Some of the most
sane, too, out of the madhouse, talk like madmen.”’


Has a new house, 181
little ones. We informed them repeatedly of their error:
but in vain. They persisted in their misrepresentations.
They also urged that there would be unsightly collections of
patients at our door, although our door was not in the Square,
but in an adjoining street. We replied that there never
could be a crowd, because our patients did not come all at
one hour, but came, one or two only at atime, every half
hour between ten and four o’clock, each having his fixed
period for coming, and each leaving the house separately.
We made this reply: but also in vain. They farther con-
tended that no house in that Square ought to be other than
a private residence; notwithstanding that there are abso-
lutely shops, or club-houses, or public institutions, in many
squares inhabited by the highest nobility—in St. James’s
Square, in Cavendish Square, and in Hanover Square—and
notwithstanding that an open surgery or doctor’s shop was
kept by the medical inhabitant of the opposite corner of
Fitzroy Square, into which, in exact correspondence with our
door which was not in the Square but in Grafton Street, was
a door in the side street, into and from which poor persons
were passing at pleasure all day long with bottles or with
sores that required dressing: whereas we give no physic,
dress no sores, and present no appearance different from what
is presented by the rest of the Square. In private their
complaint was that Fitzroy Square, and even the very house
we had taken, had borne so unfavourable a name, and the
surrounding streets still had so unfavourable a name, that
the Square could not afford the least loss of respectability ;
could not afford to suffer the degradation of having one of its
houses devoted to silent deeds of sympathy and the removal
of suffering.

“The Committee did not feel justified in spending any of
the Society’s slender funds upon the uncertainty of the law,
and therefore resolved to submit. Happily we were able to
let the house to a solid and respectable tenant for the whole
term of our lease, and at the same rent which we paid for it.
We found a house with a sufficient number of rooms; not
quite so large, but perfectly adapted to the purposes of the
Institution, at the west end of town, in an infinitely better
district, and in a highly respectable street, which is known
to every body, very accessible, and in the midst of streets
composed of the most distinguished residences. We took a
lease of No. 36, Weymouth Street for 14 years, at a rent of
£120 per annum, including a coach-house and stables, which
yield to the Infirmary £12 a year, and we paid a premium of


182 Great progress of Mesmerism.


£130. We have done it up, and find it everything that we
require.

“We have a new Secretary in the room of the worthy
Mr. Capern, who has set up as a private mesmeriser. Mr.
Gardiner has proved himself devoted to the cause of mes-
merism and the well-doing of the Infirmary. His unwearied
attention to his duties, his undeviating kindness to the pa-
tients, his firmness in keeping all things in order, his mild-
ness, conscientiousness, and disinterestedness, are admir-
able. He and his family reside in the house, and one of his
eldest daughters has taken some of our female and very
young patients as an amateur. Both he and this daughter
felt uncomfortable till we consented to their becoming annual
subscribers, although his salary is only the same which we
gave to our first Secretary—Mr. Buckland, when we opened
the Institution, not knowing whether we should be able to
carry it on, and when the labour was light.

“The progress which the knowledge and the conviction of
the truth of mesmerism has made since the last meeting is
immense: we might say that its truth is universally ad-
mitted. The few who, for consistency, still pretended not to
believe it, say but little, and their chief opposition is in
ascribing the phenomena to imagination, suggestion, and
dominant ideas; passing over in silence, shortsightedly as
well as dishonestly, the innumerable facts recorded, and
occurring daily, in which there can be no imagination, no
suggestion, no dominant ideas; passing over in silence the
innumerable splendid mesmeric cures of all kinds of diseases
and the alleviation of distress and agony, as well as the pre-
vention of pain from the knife, the corroding caustics, and
hot irons of the surgeon. As the folly of denying the truth
of mesmerism may now be considered to have passed away,
so will the absurd explanations of its genuine effects; and
the wickedness—the wickedness—of ignoring in the medical
journals and other medical writings, and in the lectures de-
livered in the medical schools, must soon be given up in very
despair and shame.

“Since the last annual meeting we have had 27 dona-
tions and 25 new annual subscribers. Many of the new do-
nors and subscribers are, like many of former years, inhabi-
tants of distant parts of the country; some inhabitants of
Ireland, Scotland, and Wales; and even a native physician
at Milan has become a subscriber to those sufferers in London
who cannot procure the blessings of mesmerism in ordinary
hospitals, dispensaries, and infirmaries ;—knowing the small-


We use Mesmerism medically only. 183


ness of our means, and are, no doubt, anxious to support
what is a great standing fact which proves the existence and
reality and utility of mesmerism and is open to the observa-
tion of all who choose to visit it.

“We cannot help regretting that some mesmerists who
openly declare their convictions, some who have even mes-
merised with effect, nay, some who have published cures and
written in its favour, still hold aloof from us, notwithstanding
that earnest applications have been made to them for assist-
ance which they are well able to afford. Some of even wealth,
high station, and rank, whose request to witness mesmeric
phenomena has always been accorded by mesmerists, and who
have expressed their conviction and delight, do not yet con-
tribute their mite. If this is a sad view of human nature,
there is on the other hand a cheering view in witnessing the
little contributions of some who can ill afford to part with
money, but feel a deep concern, in some instances through
gratitude, in our holy cause.

“We must be pardoned for expressing our sorrow at
another circumstance: our subscriptions are of course all due
in advance—but, as in every other charity, too many subscri-
bers are still in arrear.

“Through some unfortunate circumstances, with which
your Committee had no connection, the donation boxes were
not distributed so early by very many months as they ought
to have been; and consequently our advantages from this
source are not what they should have amounted to. In
future the Committee will look to this matter themselves.
We entreat the friends of mesmerism to take boxes, whether
they are able to subscribe to us or not. Those young ladies
especially, who are always seeking to promote the universal
welfare, might assist us powerfully in this respect and solicit
aid on every occasion. The Secretary will be happy to furnish
boxes and to send for them back before the meeting in 1855.

“ Everything proceeds in our institution with steadiness,
earnestness, seriousness and propriety. We challenge the
closest scrutiny by all our foes. The Committee meet regu-
larly once a week, receiving a report of the daily treatment,
and of the weekly result, in every case.

“‘ Medical effects are our only aim. Phenomena occur-
ring spontaneously we are obliged to witness, and are not
unwilling that others should witness, while the individual
patient is being mesmerised. But we make no display of
them; we have no exhibitions. Although we know clairvoy-
ance to be a truth, we never employ it, since it is often in fault,
and what appears to be reality is occasionally delirious wan-


= ee


184 Number of cases.


dering only, or absolute pretence in order to impose upon the
credulous. Still-in an undoubted and exquisite case, the
instruction of clairvoyance may be of importance: but such
cases are too rare to render it proper to allow clairvoyance to
be attended to, without special permission from the Com-
mittee after grave examination into the facts of a case.

“ Above all we keep clear of supernaturalism. We are
cultivators of natural knowledge, as every candidate is told
by the president on his admission into the Royal Society ;
and we allow nothing that is termed spirit-rapping or spirit
table-turning ; although we express no opinion upon the sub-
ject, nor as to whether a power, hitherto overlooked, exists
in us and other animals of causing movements in inanimate
bodies independently of mechanical impulse, and a power in
some conditions of the system of causing certain sounds.

“We have treated 237 patients during the last twelve
months. There were 39 on hand at the beginning of it, we
have 43 in hand at present, and there have been 198 fresh
patients. Our removal from Fitzroy Square caused both ex-
pense and a great interruption to the good which we were
effecting. Patients who lived near, and especially those who
lived on the other side of our former house, were in many
instances unable to reach our present locality ; and, from our
tenant absolutely refusing to allow a board near the door or
a paper in the window for the purpose of indicating our new
residence till he inhabited the house, many persons, both
poor and rich, were unable to understand where we had gone.
Without the great activity, intelligence, and endurance of
inconveniences and annoyances, possessed by our Secretary,
the business of the charity must have been suspended for a
much longer time than it was.

42 cases have been cured.

9 are all but cured.

64 improved to a greater or less extent.

43 are still under treatment.

“ Nearly all the rest of the patients attended but a short
time—far too short for improvement to have been possible ;
some attended only two or three times, some even only once.
For mesmerism is conceived of by a large number of people
as a magical remedy, curing at once if it does cure; and not
worth being continued beyond a day or two, nor capable of
doing good, unless sleep or some peculiar effect is produced ;
whereas it often requires long perseverance, and often simply
cures without any other effect. It is to be remembered that
the greater number of our patients come to us after other
treatment has failed and when other is not likely to succeed.


Cures of Rheumatism. 185


A large number have been under several medical men, been
in more medical institutions than one, and gone through long
and not unfrequently severe treatment in the way of strong
and disgusting drugs and severe external applications, to
which some of the medical profession had rather that their
patients should be subjected, even with little or no chance of
benefit, than be treated by our mild and easy, nay, agreeable,
method, with great probability of cure or alleviation. Let
them not blame their journalists too severely for keeping
them in the dark and wilfully ignoring our facts. The jour-
nalists, and their employers the proprietors, know what will
please the profession and procure customers. Nineteen pur-
chasers of the Lancet out of twenty, said its editor to one of
us sixteen years ago, are against mesmerism. The editor’s
course was therefore clear.

“The cases which come to us are thus for the most part
intractable in their natures, and an exceedingly small number
are recent, short in their character, or readily removed, even
by nature herself, as is the fact with the majority of those
complaints for which persons take physic.

“The meeting will be gratified by hearing a few speci-
mens of the remedial power of mesmerism. The following
are rapid cures of rheumatism :—

“ Elizabeth Chittle, 59 years of age, residing at 94, John-
street, Tottenham Court Road, had acute rheumatism eleven
years ago, and ever since had continually suffered severely
from the disease, in her hips, knees, ankles, arms, hands and
head, more or less indeed in all her joints; been confined for
months together ; and under the care of many medical men.
She went to the infirmary on August the 9th with the aid of
a stick, both maimed and lame. She was mesmerised by
Miss Job, one of our unpaid mesmerisers. On the 16th she
was very much better, and on the 23rd so much improved and
delighted, that she said she could jump out of the window
for joy and she walked without her stick. On the 3rd of
September she was perfectly well.

“ William Clarke, aged 35, living at Stanmore, was seized
with acute rheumatism five years before; and for two years
was unable to work. The first year he was perfectly helpless,
and afterwards walked with a crutch and a stick ; but during
the second year he could do no work. After remaining a
year at home at Spawford, in Yorkshire, whither he had been
sent after the first year, he began to work, but he got wet
and caught cold in August, 1852, and from that period had
no use of his legs, not being able to raise them from the
ground, but obliged, when seated in a chair and wishing to


186 Cures of Rheumatism.


move them, to employ his hands for this purpose. He was
sent to us by the Rev. H. Hill, of Stanmore, for the only
probable chance of benefit, and crawled into the Infirmary on
two sticks, with difficulty drawing one leg after the other.
He was mesmerised by Mr. Coney, one of our unpaid mes-
merisers, for the first time on September the 7th. On the
20th there was relief and general improvement; on the 27th
he could walk with a stick tolerably well; on the 12th of
October, he could walk without crutch or stick, and returned
thanks in person to the Committee for such a blessing as
mesmerism.

“ As we have no in-patients, Mr. Hill obtained a resting
place for him while in London, at that useful institution in
Rose Street, Soho, called the House of Charity.

“ Elizabeth Clifford, aged 46, living at 13, Marsham Square,
Westminster, had laboured under rheumatic gout every
three or four months for the previous two years. She tried
various practitioners ; and, being seized in the Charter House
Square Hospital, where she was in order to undergo an ope-
ration, with one of her severe attacks, was told it was the
best thing which could have happened to her. She fancied
otherwise, and took all sorts of medicine in vain. She came
to us on the 26th of October. William Fisher mesmerised
her, and she was considerably relieved at the first sitting, and
on the 18th was well and presented herself to the Committee
to express her gratitude.

“ William James Young, aged 43, and living at No. 33,
Park Street, Dorset Square, had for three years experienced
attacks of rheumatism in his hands. Each attack was worse
than the preceding. The pain almost destroyed his sleep.
He had taken no medicine, but applied mustard poultices and
blisters, though without any relief.

“He was perfectly cured by William Fisher in five
sittings.

“Miss M , aged 46, residing in Rutland Street,
Hampstead Road, had been afflicted eight years with frequent
attacks of severe pain in the hips, knees, and shoulders, as
well as other parts. She had been under various practi-
tioners, and gone through courses of violent medicine, not
only without relief, but with the effect of weakening her
digestive organs and of other evils. Miss Brunning mes-
merised her on September the 17th: by the 20th she was
much relieved, and completely cured by the 30th. This lady
was a paying patient.

“The following are rapid cures of neuralgic pains :—

“Miss W » @ paying patient, aged 25 years, was ex-


Cures of Neuralgia. 187


ceedingly nervous, and suffered such pain and sense of weight
in the head, that she had but little sleep. She suffered like-
wise from constipation and indigestion. Mr. Gardiner began
mesmerising her on the 6th of September. She was much
relieved at the very first sitting, and lost all her symptoms in
a week.

“Mr. F , of Hammersmith, also a paying patient,
aged 20, had been tormented with neuralgia of the face and
jaw for three months and had taken ordinary and homeo-
pathic medicines in vain. William Fisher mesmerised him
the first time, without any relief, on the 27th of September.
By October the 1st he was much relieved, and by the 3rd
entirely liberated from his sufferings, and he expressed great
thankfulness for his cure.

“Caroline Bryant, aged 44, living at 18a, Cleveland
Street, Fitzroy Square, was seized in July, 1852, with agoniz-
ing pain in the left shoulder that increased considerably and
extended down the arm, accompanied by numbness and a
pricking sensation at the ends of the fingers, so that she
dropped everything and at length lost the use of her thumb
and fingers. She suffered thus for a year, finding no means
of relief, and feared that she should quite lose the use of her
hand and arm. Miss Job began to mesmerise her on the
12th of September. By the 20th she was much relieved, and
by the 11th of October perfectly cured, and she returned
thanks to the Committee on the 13th, saying that she could
then go through a day’s washing—a thing which she had
been unable to do for a twelvemonth.

“Mary Ann Lickfold, aged 40, and living at No. 3,
Marshall Street, Golden Square, applied to a homeopathic
institution seven years ago, on account of an eruption, a
horrid sensation of dryness in the throat and mouth, a sensa-
tion of a hair on the tongue, and extreme nervousness.
These symptoms subsided in some measure; but were soon
succeeded by others. She could not sleep, took a fancy that
her bed was unsuited for her, and by its reclining position
occasioned her nervousness and her pains in the loins. She
procured a new bed, but without any advantage. She grew
worse and worse. She found great difficulty in walking with
the support of a friend to the institution. William Fisher
began to mesmerise her on the 29th of September. On the
12th of October her pain was less and her health improved
considerably : on January the 9th her improvement had been
so rapid that she walked down to the Infirmary; and on
February the 14th she was perfectly restored to health, and
attended to thank the Committee.


188 Cure of Nervous Affections.


“The following cure of distressing nervous affection is
full of interest. George Keene, aged 38, living at No. 14,
Newman Terrace, Kentish Town, had for 14 years, and chiefly
in the spring, been affected with indigestion and lowness of
spirits, so that he was anxious to die and meditated self-
destruction. He believed that he never should be well again ;
that a curse was upon all he did; that all around him were
happy, but that everything he did was sure to turn out badly.
He fancied that people were watching him and he had endless
wretched fancies. He took immense quantities of all kinds
of medicines in vain: and his teeth were frequently loose ;
through them, as he conceived. He applied at the Infirmary
on February the 23rd, and was mesmerised by Mr. Gardiner.
By March the 7th he was much improved in spirits and gene-
ral health; on the 21st began to think he should be cured:
and by the 16th of April he was quite well; and he put five
shillings into the poor box of the Infirmary.

“The only other cure of a nervous affection that we will
mention is very remarkable and was thought to be accom-
panied by ovarian disease. Mary Ann Lee, 40 years old, and
living at No. 28, Norfolk Street, Middlesex Hospital, applied
on the 8th of August, on account, she said, of ovarian tumor.
About twelve years previqusly she noticed an enlargement of
her body. She applied to at least as many as twenty medical
men, but with no advantage. She continued to increase:
suffering great discomfort, and sometimes felt as if she would
be suffocated. One told her that she had internal ulcers;
two pronounced her case to be ovarian dropsy, and declared
that a surgical operation would be required. We could not
find any distinct ovarian tumor, but there was clearly intense
hysteria and enlargement of the abdomen, chiefly on the left
side. She looked very ill and evidently suffered greatly.
William Fisher mesmerised her, and by the 29th of the
month she had improved in general health and was reduced
in size. By the 8th of November she measured six inches
less around the body. On February the 28th, was steadily
advancing towards a cure and in excellent spirits. On the
18th of April she ailed nothing, and had all the appearance
of health—after suffering in spite of medicine for upwards of
twelve years. Whether there was ovarian disease or not, the
medical members of the Committee have seen very great
benefit from mesmerism in ovarian disease.

“ We must trespass upon the time of the meeting to detail
a remarkable cure of a disease of the shoulder, the same as
what in other situations is called hip disease and white swell-
ing of the knee. A little boy, named Joseph William


Cure of a diseased shoulder. 189


Stephens, 11 years old, living with his parents at No. 65,
High Street, Marylebone, was sent on the 11th of March to
Dr. Elliotson, by the Rev. Mr. Sandham, with a note request-
ing his advice for the little fellow. For three months the left
shoulder had ached, and been so tender that not the slightest
touch could be borne, and the lad was compelled to keep it
constantly raised, because the weight and dragging of the
arm were insupportable. This was thought to be only a bad
habit by his family, and he was continually scolded as children
often are when they are ill and not believed. But Mr.
Sandham, on hearing the account and questioning the lad,
determined at once to procure a medical opinion. He could
not lie on that side for the tenderness. The disease had come
on slowly without any known cause. He looked delicate.
As the joint was a little misshapen, Dr. Elliotson examined
it carefully and ascertained that there was no fracture or dis-
placement ; but he sent the boy to his neighbour Mr. Fer-
gusson, Professor of Surgery in King’s College, for the favour
of that gentleman’s opinion before he treated it as a chronic
inflammation. Mr. Fergusson kindly wrote back that he
could discover nothing beyond slow inflammation, and advised
a small blister to be applied once a week; and cod liver to be
administered, as the boy was thin. Since it seemed desirable
to lessen the tenderness as soon as possible, Dr. Elliotson
ordered four leeches to be applied immediately, and at the
end of a week, before the blistering was begun ; and he pre-
scribed the cod liver oil. At the expiration of the week, four
leeches were applied again, but there was no improvement.
Being unwilling to subject the child to pain, and knowing
how doubtful is the use of common means in these cases, Dr.
Elliotson entreated the mother to take him to the Mesmeric
Infirmary, near to which she lived, and to trust to mes-
merism. Mr. Gardiner began to mesmerise the shoulder
upon the 22nd of March. By the 30th, that is, after eight
mesmerisations, the pain and tenderness were considerably
relieved. On the 6th of April the pain was removed from the
shoulder to the chest. Ou May the 13th he could move the
shoulder in all directions, allow it to hang down, and bear it
to be pressed upon and the arm to be moved in all directions
by another person. The cod liver oil had been discontinued
when the bottle in hand was finished. No medicine was
taken, nor anything applied externally.

“This case is both instructive and beautiful. It exempli-
fies the fact, that mesmerism is useful in other than nervous
affections, and cures inflammation: and it exhibits the cure
of a disease which threatened to produce devastation of the


190 A painless surgical operation performed.


shoulder joint, suppuration, exfoliation, and all the sad results
of scrofulous disease of joints. After the cure, Dr. Elliotson
sent the patient to Mr. Fergusson, who kindly wrote back,
that it was ‘indeed highly gratifying to see such a favour-
able change in a case which looked so alarming.’ The cure
was in truth rapid; and, if ordinary means had succeeded,
their operation would have been very slow, and the boy’s
health perhaps impaired.


“ Besides cures, striking for their rapidity or for their
accomplishment after ordinary measures, long carried on, and
perhaps disagreeable and painful, had failed, we have wit-
nessed in the Infirmary a surgical operation, which in ordi-
nary circumstances is agonizing, performed without the
slightest pain and recovered from as if nothing had been
gone through. Mr. Tubbs, a surgeon in Cambridgeshire, one
of our earliest and very liberal subscribers, who for many
years has practised mesmerism even to his own serious in-
jury, and honestly published in The Zoist astonishing cures,—
wrote up to say that he was about to remove a female breast
in the mesmeric state of insensibility to pain, and would
perform the operation in our Infirmary, if we were agreeable
to it. As so public a proof of the power and utility of
mesmerism in the metropolis, where no hospital surgeon has
ever operated under mesmerism or employed it, seemed likely
to produce a decided conviction in the minds of society at
large, and through this conviction to improve the conduct of
the medical profession, we availed ourselves of Mr. Tubbs’s
courageous offer, and the operation was performed in the
presence of those members of the Committee who attend
regularly, and of two medical gentlemen invited, and of
a friend of Mr. Amor, who are not on our Committee.
Never was success more complete. The effect upon the
public mind in this country and abroad has fulfilled our
hopes: and the conviction of the truth of mesmerism has
made a gigantic stride. Yet the fact was no more than had
been done in some hundreds of cases during the last five
and twenty, and especially the last ten, years: and full ac-
counts of these cases have been regularly published in The
Zoist and in other mesmeric works. But the medical pro-
fession have up to this moment sternly refused to open these
books, or acknowledge the existence of their contents. A
work by Dr.. Esdaile, containing the most astounding rela-
tions of very numerous and terrific operations performed
successfully by him at Calcutta publicly, without pain or the
knowledge of the patient, lies as -waste paper on the pub-


Remedial powers of Mesmerism. 191


lisher’s shelves, although almost any of those formidable opera-
tions, if performed by Sir Benjamin Brodie, Sir Astley Cooper,
Mr. Liston, or other popular surgeons, even with pain, and
the severest pain, would have been trumpetted in the me-
dical journals all over the land. What makes this the more
disgraceful to the medical profession is that so numerous are
the deaths from chloroform (to say nothing of the few or
more temporary ill effects) that the editor of the Medical
Times wrote even in last November, ‘These recent deaths
should teach us to continue researches for some anzsthetic
agent which may confer upon mankind all the advantages
derivable from chloroform without its dangers.’*

“ But the good time is now coming: and the noble ex-
amples of Dr. Esdaile and Mr. Tubbs will have their effect
even in the lifetime of those gentlemen.

“Our change of residence interfered lamentably during
a part of the last twelvemonths with our proceedings : lessen-
ing the number of our patients, of our visitors, and of our
new subscribers. But we never before were so well circum-
stanced as at present in any respect—situation, administra-
tion, or public consideration: and we trust that we shall
assist powerfully in accomplishing an universal and complete
recognition of the incalculable blessings which mesmerism
can bestow. We have no desire to depreciate the value of
well-established medicines or methods of treatment. In
private those of us belonging to the medical profession employ
them fully. But we know that numerous diseases are in-
curable by ordinary measures, though invariably repeated in
such diseases without a shadow of hope: we know that ordi-
nary measures hourly fail in diseases which really are more
or less amenable to treatment: and we know that many of
our most useful means are attended by inconvenience or even
great annoyance and suffering. On the other hand, we
know that mesmerism will cure some diseases in which all
other means fail: that it will generally codperate with esta-
blished means and render cures more easy : that it will cure
some diseases quite as well as ordinary measures, and with
this advantage, that it neither annoys nor torments, and
that it is perfectly safe and harmless. It makes an approach
to an universal remedy: for it soothes and strengthens, and
powerfully and pleasantly assists nature in her efforts to throw
off disease. We wish to see it employed in almost every
case, whatever other suitable measures may be (and very
properly) adopted. If mothers habitually mesmerised their


* See above, p. 140.—Zoist.


192 Subscribers entreated to pay up.


children when ill, great good would be the result. It is
equally adapted for local and for general use. But it requires
to be performed seriously, calmly, silently, slowly, regularly,
and perseveringly. ,

“Those who cannot procure mesmerism in their family
or by friends, and who cannot afford the expense of a pro-
fessional mesmeriser, are mesmerised in private rooms at the
Infirmary for five shillings a week : and all who may wish to
learn to mesmerise are welcome to be taught gratuitously, if
they bring good certificates of respectability and engage to
attend regularly.

“We will not trouble the Meeting with the details of our
finances : a statement lies upon the table, and will be printed
with the report of the Meeting.

“We earnestly entreat our friends to procure us all the
donors and subscribers whom they can, and to point out to
those subscribers who are in arrear the great importance and
duty of paying their subscriptions regularly.


“The accounts have been very kindly and carefully audited
by Mr. Tuzopostus Purtanp and Mr. James Satmon” (their
statement will be found at p. 195).


The following resolutions were moved, seconded, and
carried unanimously.

Taomas Cottey Grattan, Esq., moved, and Asnurst
Masenpiz, Esq., F.R.S., seconded,—“ That the Report be
received and adopted.”

Gerorce 8S. Norrace, Esq., moved, and the Rev. C. K.
Paut, of Eton College, seconded,—“ That T. A. Shaw, Esq.,
Theodosius Purland, Esq., Surgeon-dentist, of Mortimer
Street, M. Taruam, Esq., and Frepertcx Carr Bearp, Esq.,
Surgeon, of Welbeck Street, be elected members of the
Committee in the room of Dr. Ashburner, Lieut.-Col. Topham,
Capt. the Hon. W. F. Scarlett, who have not been able to at-
tend more than once, and C, Underwood, Esq., resigned.”

The Rev. Georce Sanpsy moved, and Lieut.-Colonol
Toruam seconded,—“That the manner in which the In-
firmary is conducted, and the benefits derived from it, render
it a highly valuable institution, deserving of the support of
all who know the truth of mesmerism, or who have obtained
relief for themselves or their friends through its aid.”

(In the course of his address Mr. Sandby remarked that
it was lamentable to think what numbers there were who


Mr. Sandby’s remarks on non-subscribers. 193


knew the value of mesmerism, and yet shrank from joining
their ranks. There was one class of persons whom he had
often met; people of rank and intelligence, who inquired
into the facts of mesmerism with interest, and were struck
with admiration at its results, and went away, deeply and
powerfully impressed, proclaiming at once their faith in its
truth; but, meeting afterwards some medical friend, who
asked with a sneer, can you really believe all this ? were afraid
to confess their convictions and speak their mind. These
parties, therefore, declined to join the society from cowardice
of heart and want of moral courage: they made a pope of
their apothecary,—adopting his dicta as infallible, though in
their innermost feelings they knew that he was wrong. He
was ashamed of such social poltroonery. There was a second
class still worse than the first. People of property and dis-
tinction who had themselves been benefited by mesmerism ;
who had seen members of their own family cured by its aid ;
and who therefore publicly acknowledged its truth, and spoke
out about its power. Why did not they unite in assisting
the Infirmary? Their refusal did not arise from moral
cowardice, as in the former instances, but from some nig-
gardly feelings: they had been benefited themselves,—but
from too great a love of money declined to help their poorer
brethren by subscribing to our Institution, through the
means of which what had already been done to themselves
might now be done to others. There was a third class, still
worse than the other two. Those who had promised us help,
and put down their names as subscribers ; and on the faith
of whose word we had embarked in our undertaking and
incurred considerable expense, but who now fell back from
their pledges, and left us to encounter all the difficulty and
the risk. He was sorry, and he was ashamed, to refer to
such things, but the truth had better be mentioned and no
facts kept back. Yet, if this was the unworthy neglect and
desertion which the Infirmary received from so many of
whom better things might be expected, it was delightful to
state that there was a hearty and truth-loving support from
an increasing number of sincere friends. For many who
lived at a distance in the country,—and whose pecuniary
means were limited,—medical men, too, who had to encounter
the opposing scorn of professional brethren, had cheerfully
assisted with us in upholding the good cause and in sub-
scribing towards its support. With the help of such cordial,
honest and admirable friends, he had no fear but that the
Institution would flourish: and that many, who now held
aloof, would soon be compelled by the force of public opinion

VOL. XII. 0


194 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


to lend their aid. Mr. Sandby concluded by calling upon all
the friends of mesmerism to render their best support to the
Infirmary.)

Capt. Hupson moved, and T. A. Saw, Esq., seconded,—
“That the progress of mesmerism in different parts of the
kingdom continues to be most satisfactory, and offers every
encouragement to its friends to persevere in its support.”

(Capt. Hudson is the active and successful apostle of
mesmerism in the north of England, and some of the cures
which he related will be found im the next article. His
speech was full of energy and ability, and made a great
impression.)

W. J. Tusss, Esq., moved a vote of thanks to the
Chairman.

(Great interest was excited by the appearance of the ope-
rator in the case of painless removal of a breast.)


Note by The Zoist.

An anonymous lady has written to us expressing her astonish-
ment that the existence of the Ladies’ Committee was not commu-
nicated to the General Meeting in the Report. Why is she asto-
nished? The President, Vice-Presidents, and Treasurer were not
alluded to. The world was told last year and the year before that
there is a Ladies’ Committee, and the fact is universally known.
This Committee is mentioned on the first page of all the reports ; and
in the two last reports was declared to meet weekly, and one of its
members to visit daily. The names of all the members of it are
always printed, like those of the Gentlemen’s Committee, on the
second page. Changes in the latter Committee are always announced,
for one-third vacate their office annually: but each lady continues in
office as long as she pleases, and is not subjected to re-election.

Our anonymous fair friend also regrets that the public was not
informed that the Institution has a resident Matron. But the public
was told so last year, and there stands the important fact in the
Report published in The Zoist of last July, p. 205. And after all,
is it not amusing to think the matter worth any notice! For there
are in the house neither patients nor mesmerisers before ten o'clock,
nor after four o’clock, when all mesmerism is over: and there is no
servant kept. The grown-up daughters of the Secretary reside with
him in the house (see above, p. 182).

Some ladies on the Committee will smile at our correspondent, if
she advises them to remonstrate with the Gentlemen’s Committee on
these points.

We are happy to hear from her that she thinks it probable that
the member of the Ladies’ Committee, who is said to have stopped
the Secretary when he was very properly preparing, as a matter of
course, to send out the boxes again (see p. 183), will make good the
loss which the Charity has thus sustained, of at least £17:5:63.
The contents last year were £27:13:3: this year they are only
£10:7:81.


16 gog ‘ccttt tt eee sitq ranboqoxy sary
8 8 BF “TC tT tt thee? yUEg UOTE ye couNEg OF “YIZ ouNS
“pSel


, § ‘NOWIVS SANVE


I Ol 62L¥ ”
°


8 Bh clttessessss s+ yueg mommy 72 aouepeg
Pe LlZ ccc cc cect? sloqUBg Jog


L £ OU **°*** sttg aenbeyoxg up
—? youayuy
soceeeeees gouaned-Surked fq syuomfeg
soeess qn s ommeg ‘ayy aod syuey


E Ol 63LF
09 9 ‘**** eenbg foizy1y ‘sommgxtg JO UoryenTe,

8 we Pi ,
8
~JIMOLJ "SII UO UONesedo 943 Surpusze
sasuadxa 10430 pue ‘sfoumof suoe%img
tite teense seereeeeereeeess QOOTE
UO Si9q}0 pue ouIneg “1p sod souvinsuy
ssees* gaenbg Aoizygy 4 “org ‘spurg
10) ‘Sf L¥ JO [Tq & Zurpnjour ‘oanjiaing Rt. eS? aaa
seeereeese es snoy mou Joy uniueId | sqaaqqoo Auuad sorpey og
O€1F Zurpnpour ‘osvoy uo sosuedxy vy fl SLO “**"** Mooy syueHEA OIC

cwomasioApy pue ‘Sunuug ‘ArouoyEg FL €1 € TH w soxog sed suoyeuog
** ‘og ‘Sunureg Zurpnjour ‘sosuedxq G ., sehen ey Cree es sess se: eee


er ‘sZunjg ‘[eaomey jo sosuedxy tL ts a a re
vsetsessceeesee® SORND, POW SORRHE 861 sr eeeesess suonduosqng jenuuy Oy, “ys ounr


Satns desoekedpuin seen su0H “PS8I
** slasLiousayy pue Arejoioeg jo savpeg Ag 9 “yis ouns lpg ccc crete cts yuRg omy ye soURfeg OF, “YIg ouNLS
“Posi F “eSst


os
~~
4
z
S
S
S
x
>
‘3
~
=
©
~~
8
~~
Q


al


‘hivusyfuy nsausayy uopuo'y ay} Yyjim yunoIgD Ut 4ainsvALT IYT de


( 196 )


VI. Relief given and cures effected in Palsy, Weakness of
Knees, Contraction of a Foot and of a Leg, Deafness,
Head-ache, Rheumatism, Shaking Palsy, Debility, Palsy,
Spinal Affection, and Delirium, by Capt. Hudson during
his visit to Sheffield the last few months.

‘The British and Foreign died a natural death. The Medico-Chirurgical has
also expired. The Medical Gazette, whose special mission it was to crush
ourselves, died of dulness and debility: the Medical Times of stupidity and in-
famy. A hybrid spectral illusion, commemorating the joint names of these two
departed journals, and putting on as its only hope, our outward form and sem-
blance, is all that now remains.”—Lancet. Editorial Article, January Ist,
1854, on its rivals in abuse of mesmerism.


Palsy.
Mary Ann Millington, of Furnival Street, who had been
subject to fits, and was thrice seized with paralysis, which
gradually affected her mental as well as physical powers, has
been restored: “has perfect command of her arms and legs:
and her right leg and side, which were contracted, are all
right now, and she can walk with ease and freedom.”


Weakness of Knees.

Joseph Martin, 153, Trafalgar Street, “suffered from
weakness in the knees, which knocked together. Can now
walk quite firmly.”

Contraction of a Foot.

Mrs. Wood, of Shipley, belonging to the Society of
Friends, had had “ a contraction in her foot, and had suffered
much pain for more than seven years; had been attended by
many skilful medical men, and was an out-patient at the
Huddersfield Infirmary, until the foot became so painful that
she could neither walk on it nor bear it on the ground, and
amputation was recommended.” Can now walk with a stick
and expects soon to throw that aside. “She was able to put
her foot to the ground the first time the Captain mesmerised
her.”

Deafness.

Amelia Hutton, of Milton Street, “had long suffered from

deafness, but is now able to hear quickly.”


Contraction of Leg.

Isabella Lee, of 11, Low Street, Park, “ when a little girl,
had a fall which injured her knee and contracted her leg
more than four inches. Since she has been mesmerised the
contraction is reduced, and she can now set her foot flat on
the ground, bearing the whole weight of her body on that one
leg: a thing which she had not done for more than twenty-
four years.” ,


* a ‘


Captain Hudson’s cases. 197


Pain of Head and Back.

Caroline Brookfield, 45, Green Lane, “had been afilicted
twelve years with severe pain in her head and back—had been
under some medical men, and three times in the Sheffield
Infirmary—but was no better till mesmerised by Capt. Hudson.
After three weeks of treatment she was cured.”


Rheumatism.

P. Hepworth, of Ecclesall, near Sheffield, previously to
being mesmerised by Capt. Hudson, “ suffered from weak and
swollen knees—in 1844 was an out-patient at the Sheffield
Infirmary six months, but received no benefit—had had advice
of several eminent physicians—had been under the homeo-
pathic treatment; but still was no better. She is now able
to kneel, which she had not done for ten years—has but little
pain and expects to receive further benefit.”


Rheumatism.

George Allen, infant-school-master, Park, Sheffield, “had
suffered for above six years in his left hand from swollen
wrist and tied knuckles, brought on by rheumatic pains.
After being mesmerised by Capt. Hudson was set at liberty
and freed from pain.”


Shaking Palsy.

John England, of Wellington Street, “has been cured by
Capt. Hudson, of shaking of the hand, having been affected
about five years.”

Rheumatism.
John Chapman, Fir View, “ has received a cure of rheu-


matism in his ankle, of twelve months’ standing, at the hands
of Capt. Hudson.”


Palsy.
Jane Peacock, 51, Victoria Street, “ became paralyzed in
her hands in 1846. One medical man was of opinion that


the cause was a spinal affection, a second that it was a nerv-
ous disorder, and a third that it was rheumatism—had had
many blisters and leeches—was attended by several medical
geutlemen at Manchester, and had tried sea air and many
other remedies in vain. Since she has been under Capt.
Hudson’s care her fingers have become moveable, and her
hands and arms have received strength and plumpness, so
that she can now open her hands, and hopes that in a short
time she will have the full use of them.”


Spinal affection.
William Hawbey, of Arundel Street, ‘“ who for fourteen


198 Powerful effect in Delirium.


years had received sick pay from the Masons’ Sick Society,
on account of a spinal disease, is now restored by Capt.
Hudson, and has ceased to receive pay from the society by
order of the committee.”

Palsy.


“ Joseph Dickenson was afflicted three years with para-
lysis in his left side, and was deranged in his mind—is now
cured, and able to work.”

Debdility.

“Sophia Brown, of High Flats, had been afflicted with
debility and confined to her house and bed for nine years :
and one of her medical attendants, after examining her, said
that if they lifted her off the bed she would immediately die.
She can now get up, and has been taken out in a gig.”


Rheumatism.

“ Joseph Laycock, of Gate Field, had suffered severely for
twelve months from rheumatism—had had advice from dif-
ferent medical men, but all things were of no effect till he
applied to Capt. Hudson. Since then he has been able to
walk with perfect ease without his stick.”


Delirium.

On Thursday, May 18th, W. S., of Sheffield, (who pre-
viously had been unwell,) began to shew signs of delirium,
arising, it was thought, from too close application to business ;
he got worse during the night, and the next morning was in
a high state of fever, frequently starting up in affright, and
did not know any one about him, not even his own family ;
his friends called in a physician, who at once declared him to
be in a brain fever, ordered twelve or fourteen leeches to his
temples immediately, recommended two or three strong men
to be got into his room, saying that they would be needed, as
he would soon be raging mad ; and after writing a prescription
went away. As the doctor was leaving, Capt. Hudson, who
had previously been requested to see him, entered the room,
advanced cautiously to the bedside, made a few passes un-
perceived by the patient at first, and in about five minutes
had him in a deep sleep, from which he awoke in about two
and a half hours, calm and sufficiently composed to suffer
the leeches to be applied: he rapidly recovered with four or
five times mesmerising, and a few days in the country have
restored him to perfect health, both of body and mind. It
may be as well to state that only a little of the medicine
ordered was given, as it evidently was not required. His
family and friends beg to return their grateful thanks to
Capt. Hudson, as having been the means, under Divine Pro-


Judge Edmonds and Dr. Dexter. 199


vidence, of restoring their dear relative to health, and saving
them the expense and inconvenience of a long and severe
affliction. E. Dickenson,

A. Walton.


“T have seen Mr. S , and am happy to testify in Capt.
Hudson’s behalf, that the effect produced through him is
most astonishing and gratifying. The case was a desperate
one and the cure apparently most effectual.”

J. F. Witty,
Incumbent of St. Matthew’s, Sheffield.


VII. An account of “ Spiritualism, by John W. Edmonds
and George T. Dexter, M.D.: with an Appendix by
Nathaniel P. Tallmadge, late U.S. senator and governor
of Wisconsin. New York: Partridge and Brittan.”

‘* We are so wise: we have women politicians, children metaphysicians : every
silly fellow can square a circle, make perpetual motions, find the philosopher's
stone, interpret apocalypsis, make new theorics, a new system of the world, new
logic, new philosophy, &c. Nostra utique regio, saith Petronius, our country is
so full of deified spirits, divine souls, that you may sooner find a god than a man


amongst us: we think so well of ourselves, and that is an ample testimony of
much folly.’”,—Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy, vol. i., p. 61.*


Tuis work by the celebrated Judge Edmonds and his friends
is among the newest and most celebrated of that peculiar
class of productions, to which the recent “rapping” move-
ment in America has given birth. The greater part of the
volume—a goodly octavo of 505 pages, is occupied with what
purports to be communications from the spirits of Swe-
denborg and Bacon, delivered generally in Judge Edmonds’s
house, but through the instrumentality of Dr. Dexter as a
writing medium. The supposed revelations of the Baron,
who, in section first, enters somewhat abruptly on the scene,
with the magniloquent announcement, “In the name of God
I am Sweedenborg,” (with the double e,) may be curtly de-
scribed as a confused mass of maudlin mysticism, of which
the simplest neophyte of the New Jerusalem Church would
be ashamed to acknowledge the authorship. As to “ Francis
of Verulam,” his condition is indeed most pitiable, for the
utmost effort of his gigantic intellect, liberated from the
thraldom of matter, and rejoicing in all the glorious expan-
siveness of the spirit-sphere, eventuates simply in the pro-
duction of scientifico-theological twaddle. His former depth


* We have supplied this motto, as we do nearly all.—Zoist.


209  Bacon’s spirit far inferior to old Bacon himself.


of thought and terseness of expression, his unapproachable
grandeur of conception and pregnant brevity of style, have
sunk into the watery platitudes and vapoury commonplaces of
a vulgar stump-orator on Yankee progress. Andrew Jackson
Davis is readable, and Adin Ballou is amusing, but Judge
Edmonds, Governor Tallmadge, and Dr. Dexter are only
wearisome. Not only have they contrived to most outrage-
ously caricature the two distinguished men whose supposed
spirits sustain the principal interlocutors and dissertationists
throughout the work, but, what is certainly not a little ex-
traordinary, these presumed spiritual communications, pur-
porting to come from such exalted supernal sources, and
delivered through the instrumentality of such dignified ter-
restrial agents, are, either as literary essays or philosophic
dissertations, inferior both in style and matter to the already
published productions of many other media of far less nota-
bility and pretension. Indeed, weakness amounting to
pitiable inaptitude and confusion, which sets every attempt
at logical sequence in the development of ideas at defiance,
characterizes nearly every page of this wretched conglomera-
tion of shallow philosophy and contradictory theology. With
God, heaven, and man in his temporal and eternal relation-
ships, as the subject-matter of their disquisitions, there is,
with the exception of the Judge’s own analogical visions,
scarcely a true poetical idea in the whole volume. How, on
such sublime and exalted topics as God’s paternity and man’s
immortality, well-bred and highly-educated individuals, like
those whose names grace the title-page of this strange book,
could contrive to be so intolerably prosy, is in itself a marvel
not the least difficult of solution. It would seem that, utterly
devoid of invention, with the idealistic and creative powers
of the human mind at the lowest possible ebb, a matter-of-
fact transference of the dull routine of ordinary life in time
to the spheres of eternity was all which their utmost efforts
at conception, in reference to man’s ulterior destiny, could
accomplish. In this desperate endeavour to realize the detail
of existence “ beyond the veil,” the convulsive throes of their
incompetent imaginations end only in birthing the miserably
ridiculous. Here, for instance, is a specimen of spirit-life
supposed to be described by Swedenborg:—“ We occupy
earth tangible, positive earth—as much as your earth; but
the advanced state of both spirit and locality renders it unne-
cessary for us to labour much to obtain food for the support
of our bodies. Then again the earth brings forth sponta-
neously most of the food required for our bodies. And I
would say, the advanced spirits do hot require as much food


Solemn nonsense and portentous trash. 201


as those who are below them.” A little farther on he says:
*“We have trees—real trees and flowers, and mountains and
rivers, and rocks, and everything material.” Of some spirits
not so favourably circumstanced as the above, we are told:
“They do not sing, write, or enjoy life in any way, except
the delight they may have in tormenting those around. They
toil for sustenance, and as their Jand is sandy and no sun-
light, there must be great labour to enable the earth to bring
forth enough to sustain them.” Alas! say we, for men
not “born poets,” who nevertheless experience, as in the
present instance, an irresistible vocation to the prophetic
office : for their desperately spasmodic efforts after the sublime
end only in the absurd. Woe to him who, mistaking the
artificial exaltation of a stilt for the true growth of gigantic
stature, fancies his display of the grotesque to be command-
ing, and thus in place of inspiring awe evokes only contempt.
Of course, in a work of such extent, and on such subjects,
composed too by men, who, whatever may be their special
weakness on this point, are undoubtedly gentlemen and scho-
lars, some passages of a very superior character occasionally
intervene, and break the dull monotony of the commonplace
by the rare scintillation of a thought somewhat beyond the
average. But, even in these more favourable paragraphs, the
reader at all acquainted with either Swedenborgian or rappist
literature cannot fail to detect the source of these borrowed
and oftentimes distorted conceptions. In the utter absence
of all originality and force, in the total want of invigorating
freshness and power, we have seldom read a volume which
more thoroughly disappointed us: for, from the prestige of its
authors, and the expectations excited by previous announce-
ments of the forthcoming work, we had prepared ourselves
for some rather startling display of extatic exaltation. We
anticipated the pleasure of witnessing minds, naturally power-
ful, and assisted by all the aids of education and experience,
developing their usually latent resources under the excite-
ment of at least partial clairvoyance. But, in place of this,
we are treated only with the ordinary routine of rapping
communications, in which the mediocre individuality of the
medium, Dr. Dexter, is everywhere unmistakeably apparent.
In addition to several hundred pages of such solemn non-
sense and pretentious trash, as we have just described, where
blasphemy as an effect, with insanity as a cause, meet one at
every step, there is an introduction by the Judge and another
by Dr. Dexter, giving an account of their individual experi-
ences, and consequently affording us a glimpse of the processes


202 Judge Edmonds is properly dismissed.


by which they became media. By this it appears they were
both inducted by visiting circles; and consequently may be
placed in the category of sympathetic extatics. We could
have wished more from the Judge and less from the Doctor :
but the spirits we suppose will select their own vehicles, and
from their decision there is no appeal. The Judge’s Visions
have a slight dash of Bunyan in them, and if selected and col-
lected might make perhaps an endurable pamphlet. There
is also an appendix by Governor Tallmadge, whom we have
introduced to the reader’s notice in our former paper on the
rappings,* in which are letters and some other communica-
tions from artists, from which it appears that some of the
gentle brethren of the easel have become media; and, like
our own gifted but unfortunate Blake, have commenced
drawing from their own visions. One of these sketches
accompanies the present volume, and we apprehend that such
productions will constitute about the most endurable things
= which the present phase of popular superstition will give
irth.

We perceive that Mr. Edmonds’s late title of “ Judge” has
been omitted from the title-page of this work on spiritualism.
And we also find from the Spiritual Telegraph, and other
periodicals of the rappist body, that this distinguished func-
tionary has deemed it expedient to vacate his exalted official
position. On this fact, a great cry of “ persecution,” has of
course been raised by his co-believers, who declare that he
has been virtually deprived of his Judgeship in consequence
of his public profession of the rappist faith and his additional
avowal of personal mediumship. But we really do not wonder
that a great law-officer of the state, in whose hands the lives,
fortunes, and reputations of his fellow-citizens, are placed, in
full dependence not only on his integrity, but also his sound-
ness of judgment, should be deemed partially unqualified for
his very onerous and responsible duties, when, as in the case
under consideration, he fancies that he has, ever and anon,
interviews with and communications from the spirits of those
wretched criminals who have been executed under his sen-
tence. The following scene is, we apprehend, sufficient under
this point, and will amply justify the more rational portion of
the American public in their determination to relieve the
Hon. Mr. Edmonds of his judicial labours.

After considerable difficulty in getting a refractory spirit
to tell his name, the Judge at last said—


* See Zoist for April, pp. 5—7.


evel


a


bated


Dr. Dexter’s prescriptions may be the worse for spirits. 203


“ Judge.—‘ It is in the name of God I demand it. It (the
spirit in the body of the medium) looked at me, and then,
after something of a pause, said, in a gentle voice,’—

“ Spirit.—‘ Yes; I must tell my name.’

« Judge.—‘ Well, what is it?’

“ Spirit.—‘ Tom Jones.’

“ Judge.— You are fooling me, I want your true name,
not a fictitious one.’

“ Spirit.—‘ My true name, is Jones.’

“ Judge.—‘ Are you then the spirit of one who was tried
before me for murder, was condemned to death by me, and
executed ?”

“ Spirit.—‘ Yes; I am he, Judge: Oh! forgive me, for-
give me !’”

And so this strange colloquy proceeds through two ad-
ditional pages. Now, to say nothing of the want of taste and
feeling evinced in publishing such a scene, let’ us only glance
at it in its relation to Mr. Edmonds’s presumed qualification
for the efficient discharge of his most important duties. Here
is a high legal functionary, liable to what he supposes visita-
tions, not only from the dead in general, but from those to
whose coerced departure from this sublunary sphere he was
mainly instrumental. Now let us conceive him on the eve
of another court day, when a second case of murder or other
capital crime is to be tried before him, receiving one of these
spiritual visitations, with a broad hint from the departed as
to the guilt or innocence of the prisoner. Where, let us ask,
would then be his usual acuteness in sifting evidences, his
impartiality in addressing the jury, or his unbiassed sense of
justice in passing the sentence? Considering the influence
which a judge must exercise over the fate of the criminals,
the results to the latter, in case the visions of the presiding
chief magistrate should chance to have been unfavourable,
are frightful to contemplate. As to Dr. Dexter, his patients
may perhaps still retain their confidence in his prescriptions :
but we must confess to some fears lest a sly suggestion from
the higher powers should some day interfere with either his
diagnosis or his treatment. As to ex-governor Tallmadge,
this venerable gentleman, having altogether surceased from
his exalted duties, has doubtless a prescriptive right to in-
dulge himself in such lucubrations as may most effectively
conduce to the comfort of his declining years. Perhaps,
however, were he once more to seek a seat in the high council
of his nation, he might find that a belief in habitual spi-
ritual intercourse would not be considered by electors gene-


204 Judge Edmonds ignorant of higher Mesmerism.


rally as the most favourable of his qualifications for their
suffrages.

Altogether this work has only confirmed us in the esti-
mate we had previously formed of the limited scientific
knowledge, the superficial thought, and feeble imagination of
the rappists. It is true they dilate on “ progress” with the
intensity and perseverance of monomaniacs. But, has it never
occurred to them that, in certain exceptional cases, whether
of individuals, sects, or nations, there may be regress? If not,
we think the sooner they study the laws of imitation, mis-
apprehension, and other phenomena of mental enfeeblement,
the better. This book, which some of their most distin-
guished converts have given to the world, would, but for
their names, and the blind zeal of their party, have been at
once recognized for what it is,—a second-hand echo of works
previously published on the same subject,—themselves but a
ridiculous compound of the misapprehended spiritualism of
Swedenborg and the misapplied principles of the Vestiges.

We cannot indeed conclude this short notice of a volume,
remarkable alike for the social distinction of its authors, and
the mediocre character of its contents ; for the pomposity of
its pretensions, and the futility of its results; without here
again specially remarking, as in our former article on the
rappings, on the palpable ignorance of the American spi-
ritualists in reference to all the higher phenomena of mes-
merism. This Judge Edmonds tells us in his Introduction.
“Much to my surprise, I received a communication pointed
directly to two trains of thought in my mind,—one that had
been there for some twenty-five years, and another that had
been there some two or three months, but neither of which
had I ever uttered, or even hinted at, to mortal man or
woman.” He says, farther on, “I must confess this staggered
me: and, the more I thought upon it, the more inexplicable it
seemed. I procured books on mesmerism, to see if I could
find a solution, but still the fact—the fact was there!” Aye,
to be sure it was,—a fact in thought-reading, with which
every competent mesmerist in England is familiar, either by
personal experience or by reading. A fact which, however
beautiful and interesting as a natural phenomenon, has, it
seems, been tortured by ignorance into the service of super-
stition ; and thus, instead of proving an aid to enlightenment,
has been, as far as possible, converted into an obstacle to the
progress of the human mind. As to the books which the
learned jurist consulted, as they are not named, we of course
cannot pretend to estimate their character. But, judging by


Mr. Plowman’s cures. 205
the utter darkness in which they left the mind of the distin-
guished student, we should suppose they must have been
more remarkable for bulk than quality, and, as Sheridan said
of a certain author, were less luminous than voluminous!
The fact, as the learned Judge is fond of such “stubborn
things,” is simply this,—that he and Governor Tallmadge
became involved in the more recondite results of clairvoyance,
while their minds were utterly unprepared for it; and hence
they were “ staggered,” where better informed persons would
have been simply interested. We have heard much of the
scholastic attainments of the accomplished authors of the
work before us, and we doubted not that in this respect
report has spoken truly. But Latin and Greek, though once
supposed to be more than a match for Satan when incarnated
in some wretched demoniac, are now found to be perfectly
incompetent to the solution of the simplest fact in nature.
Thus even in England we have the melancholy example of
Rev. BB.AA. and MM.AA. anathematizing investigations into
the laws of God’s universe, as processes for consulting the
devil. The spirituality of the rappists, and the diablerie of
the ultra-orthodox, are each but the lamentable and pitiable
result of ignorance; and this, too, ignorance of that much
despised but most glorious science, MESMERISM.


J. W. Jackson.
Edinburgh, June, 1854.


VIII. Cures effected by Mr. George Plowman, a Missionary—
Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Locked-jaw, Tooth-ache, Ring-
worm, Bad Leg, Inflamed Breast, Blindness, and De-
bility. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘* There is every reason to believe that homeeopathists, allopathists*, mzsmer-
1sTs, mountebanks, extortioners, ef id genus omne, are at present increasing in
numbers, and the public, singularly deficient in this matter in judgment and
discrimination, are preyed upon on all sides, and cheated and plundered to an
alarming extent.”’—-Mr. Waxtry, Lancet, October 15, 1853.

‘*The MESMERIC DELUSION was at its height in France, in 1788.’’—Jbid.,
December 17, 1853.


16 Buccleugh Street, Edinburgh,

Dr. Elliotson. May 27th, 1854.
Dear Sir,—As I have derived much instruction and en-
couragement from reading various accounts of cures given in


* Why Mr. Wakley where are your brains? All medical men who are not
homeeopathists are allopathists. Old Monsieur Jourdain, in the Bourgeois Gentil-
homme, did not know that what is not poetry is prose : and you do not know that


206 Religious visitors might mesmerise.


The Zoist, would you do me the favour to find a place in its
most valuable pages for the following cases of cures effected
by the application of mesmerism. I should like to have them
inserted for two reasons :—First, in the hope that it may be the
means of leading some of my brethren and fellow-labourers
in the Gospel, whose daily work brings them into contact
with the diseased, to think seriously of the advantage of mes-
merism to the sick poor, who, it may be, have not the means
of employing other medical aid, and who on that account
must be often very ill attended, and when a few passes might
entirely free the sufferer from all pain. I am aware that in
many instances there is a feeling amongst the patrons and
managers of religious institutions, that, if their agents were
to spend their time in paying attention to the body, their
minds would become secularized and unfitted for attending
to the higher and nobler work of healing the soul. As an
individual, I have no sympathy with any such idea. The
religion that ignores the body whilst it manifests great love
and zeal for the soul is at best but pure sentimentalism,—a
system founded in ignorance,—one not built on the truth.
“ The servant is not greater than his Lord,” who, although
He was engaged during His ministry on earth in the great
and noble work of reconciling men unto God, did not, on
account of that, forget to do good to the body ; nay, the body
often received His first attention. He cured the body, that
He might the more easily get at the mind. Secondly, To
let your readers know that in Edinburgh there is something
being done to alleviate suffering. I may mention that I am
a member of the Scottish Curative Mesmeric Association.
My attention was at first called to study this subject by
hearing the Messrs. Davey and Jackson lecture on it. I was
led from that to join their classes, where I received the neces-
sary instructions, for the treatment of various kinds of dis-
ease. It is now about twelve months since I began to practise
mesmerism for the cure of disease, during which time I have
applied it to above one hundred patients, the greater portion
of whom have been cured, and all, with the exception of
three or four, have derived great benefit from it. I have
employed it in all kinds of disease where I had an opportunity
of doing so.
Neuralgia.
Miss F. N——, Mirth Street, Edinburgh, had been, for


all givers of medicines who are not homceopathists are allopathists, and there-
fore say that the public is preyed upon, cheated, and plundered by the ordinary
members of the medical profession.—Zoist.


Cures of Locked-jaw, Inflamed Breast, &c. 207


upwards of twenty years, subject to attacks of most excru-
ciating pains in the stomach. She had passed through the
hands of many of the medical men in this city, without de-
riving any benefit. The only relief she obtained when these
attacks came on her was from stretching herself at full length
before a large fire. I offered to mesmerise her. At first she
did not agree to this, but did so afterwards. I made passes
all over the body, and excited Hope phreno-mesmerically. I
also made local passes in contact over the seat of the pain,
for the first six or eight sittings. Although taken away at
the time, the pain returned with greater severity than before.
Then it began to lessen in severity and frequency, until it
entirely left her. Her general health and strength became
very much improved under the treatment. I found the free
use of mesmerised water to be of great service in this case.


Locked-jaw.

Widow I , Old Newington House, Edinburgh. The
jaw had been four days locked before I was called in. At
the time I first saw her, she was rigid all over the body, and
suffering from extreme pain, especially in the head. At the
first sitting, the rigidity of the limbs and body was removed,
and the pain in the head was much relieved. After the
second sitting, she was able to drink a cup of tea, and eat a
rice biscuit, although she had been without food for five days
previously. I continued to mesmerise her twice a day for
four or five days; and once a day for about a week longer ; at
the end of which time she was able to be out of bed and to
masticate her food with perfect ease. All that medical skill
could devise had been done for her before I was asked to see
her. This cure, I may remark, was effected without the in-
duction of sleep.


Swollen Breast.

Mrs. I. R , Craighside House, Edinburgh, was suffer-
ing from a swollen breast, which gave her great pain. Ona
former occasion, she had had the same breast three times
lanced for this disease. The breast was swollen to an enor-
mous size, and was very hard. By two applications of mes-
merism, this was entirely removed, and a complete cure
effected. This lady fell into states of great perspiration. This
patient was also cured of a Bealing throat.


Debility and Blindness.

Mrs. L , Henry Street, Edinburgh, was afflicted with
inflammation of the eyes about two years ago. Up to that
time she enjoyed perfect health. She was bled, blistered,
and drugged for the disease until she was reduced to a perfect


208 Cure of a Bad Leg, &c.


shadow. True, the inflammation was removed : but blindness
and debility were given in its stead. At the time I was
asked by a friend to see her she could not move herself in
bed from weakness, and this was accompanied by shooting
pains and severe head-ache. I mesmerised her once a week,
for ten or twelve weeks. Now her health is quite good; she
is free from all pain, her strength is daily improving, and her
sight is so far restored that she can see to read large print
on a bright and sunny day.


Head-ache.

E. P , Berwick-on-Tweed. This young woman had
been subject to severe head-aches for several years. She
being in Edinburgh on a visit, I was introduced to her. At
the time I saw her she was suffering great pain. I mes-
merised her for a few minutes, and she was entirely relieved.
I saw her several months after, and she had experienced no
return of pain at that time.


Rheumatism.

Mr. Gardiner, Huddersfield, Leith, had been afflicted for
several years with rheumatism. For two weeks he had been
obliged to leave off work: could not lie in bed for pain:
could not raise his arms, nor his right leg, but with great
difficulty and pain. I mesmerised him for about twenty or
twenty-five minutes, and sent him away free from all pain.
To use his own words, “ I feel like a boy of 16.” He has had
no attack of rheumatism since.


Bad Leg.

Widow B , aged 68 years, East Adam Street, Edin-
burgh, had been suffering from a bad leg for about twenty
years. In the autumn of each year, she was seized with
strong inflammation, which confined her to her bed-room all
the winter. Last autumn she was attacked as before, and
was mesmerised. The inflammation was removed, and the
ulcerations prevented. In the course of a few weeks, black
spots on the leg, some of them of twenty years’ standing,
were greatly removed, and the natural colour restored. I
found the use of the wet compress dipped in mesmerised
water to be of much value in this case. She also drank
mesmerised water very freely.


Tooth-ache.
Miss , No. 2 Hewit Place, Grange Lane, Edinburgh,
had been suffering the most severe pain for days, arising from
tooth-ache. She came to me in that state: in the course of


Cure of Ringworm and cases of Neuralgia. 209


four or five minutes the pain was removed, and has not re-
turned since.
Ringworm.

Miss E. S , Meadow Place, Edinburgh, aged six years,
had been suffering from ringworm on the head for three years.
The best skill that could be had in the city was obtained in
her case, but without effecting a cure. A very eminent medi-
cal man told her mother that she should not distress herself
about the matter, informing her at the same time that her
daughter would carry the disease to the grave with her. I
was asked to mesmerise her. I did so; and in the course of
three or four weeks, the head was completely cured. This
child went into the mesmeric sleep. In this case also, mes-
merised water was used to sponge with. Breathing through
flannel over the diseased part I found to be of great service.


Neuralgia in the Cheek.

Mr. A. M , South Clerk Street, Edinburgh, had been
suffering the most excruciating pain for several days. When
he came to me, he said, “I have been nearly mad; I am
afraid that I shall land in Morningside Asylum.” In less
than half an hour the pain was taken away, and I am happy
to say that it has not since found its way back.


Neuralgia, with alleged Disease of the Liver.

Mr. J. A , No. 104 High Street, Edinburgh. For
three years this patient had suffered great pain under the
left breast, and right shoulder, which threw him into severe
spasms, in which he lay sometimes as dead for hours. He
was so much reduced in strength, as not to be able to walk
except with great difficulty. The weakness of the left arm
was such, that he was unable to bear the weight of his cane.
This case required three months to complete the cure; al-
though the pain was removed at the first sitting, it occasion-
ally returned, though less severely, until it entirely disappeared.
This patient now feels quite well. In personal appearance he
is as fresh and vigorous as before he became diseased.

I might give many additional cases, but fear that I have
already trespassed too much on your valuable space. If you
think proper to forward the above cases, I shall feel obliged by
your doing so, and, if not the whole, any portion you may
think proper.


I remain, dear Sir, yours respectfully,
Gerorce Piowman, Missionary.


VOL. XII.


210


( )


OMISSIONS AND CORRECTIONS.
Dispersion of a large abscess.


In our account of Captain Hudson’s cures we omitted one in
which a large abscess was dispersed.


** Sir,—My son had an enormously large and painful swelling on
his neck. He called in a surgeon, who advised that it should be
lanced. By the aid of magnetism Capt. Hudson cured it after five
applications, to the astonishment of the medical gentleman. I can
bear testimony to the above statement.

** J. Hepworth,
** Hunter’s Row, near Sheffield.”’


In our last Number, p. 39, a case of epilepsy is recorded by
Mr. B. B. Morrison, in which the mesmeriser is said to have been
changed for one of only a few weeks experience ; the patient and
friends were told that this was dangerous and would end in death ; the
disease after being in abeyance to have returned in a most terrific man-
ner ; the patient become gloomy and almost insane, and found burnt
to death in his bed. We have received the following letters upon
the case :—


** To the Editors of The Zoist.
** Merton, Cullenswood, Dublin,
** June 5th, 1854.

“ Gentlemen,—My attention has just been called to an article
which appeared in the last number of The Zoist, and which was
forwarded to you by a Mr. Morrison of Dublin, relative to the case
of the late Mr. Charles Kavanagh, of Borris, County Carlow. Now,
as Mr. Kavanagh was a patient of mine at the time of his accidental
death and is the party referred to by Mr. Morrison, it is obvious
that a reply is essentially necessary. I regret extremely that, in con-
sequence of my own copy of The Zoist having been lost even before I
had opened it, my attention was not called to it for some time after,
or I should at once have written to you. In reading over the article
I find Mr. Morrison has not hesitated in making four statements,
which I am most positively able to contradict.

** Ist.—* That Mr. Kavanagh had been taken out of his hands,
and placed under a mesmeriser who had had but a few weeks ex-
perience.’

**2nd.—‘ That the convulsions returned in a most terrific
manner.’

“3rd.—‘ That gloom had overspread his countenance, and that
he returned home almost insane.’

** 4th.—* That he was on the next morning found in his bed-
chamber burnt to death.’

‘* Now with regard to the Ist, I had had at the time some years’
experience in using mesmerism as a curative agent, and with, thank
God (as well known), unbounded success.

“‘2nd.—Lady Harriet Kavanagh’s letter (a copy of which I


Alleged misstatements in an Irish case, 211


enclose you) will at once shew that her son was rapidly recovering,
and the fits were hardly perceptible to the person who had been in
constant attendance upon him.

“‘3rd.—That he was in the very best of spirits on his return
home on the Saturday, (I having accompanied him down to Borris
the same day on a visit,) looking forward as he was to the happy
prospect before him in his marriage, which was to have taken place
in another month.

** Lastly,—He was not found in his bed-chamber burnt to death :
he was partly dressed on the Sunday morning when the accident
occurred, and, finding his shirt had taken fire, he got into bed to
extinguish it, but finding he had set the bed on fire, he got up, seized
the water jug, extinguished the fire in his room completely, and
then went into my room at the other end of the passage, where I
FOUND him sitting on the bed, of course greatly burnt, from the
effects of which he did not die until Monday night. So much for
Mr. Morrison’s statements.

** Should Mr. Morrison make any further misstatements on this
subject, I shall consider it my duty to publish the threatening letters
he sent to poor Mr. Kavanagh.

**T am, Gentlemen, yours very truly,
“ Facconer Mives.”


Lady Harriet Kavanagh's letter.


*“ Dear Sir,—I cannot imagine where the report originated which
you mention that I and the family of my poor son had ever said
that we had not thought him better since you commenced treating
his case, and it is indeed due to you that I shall give such a report
a positive contradiction. My poor Charles had made such a decided
progress toward a cure, that if it had been God’s will to spare him,
I consider that there was every reason to hope that he would soon
have been perfectly cured: the attacks had not only diminished in
frequency but still more in violence, and the last one he had before
his fatal accident was so slight that his servant, who was in the
room at the time, said it was hardly perceptible. But not only had
his health improved, but his memory, his mind, and his powers of
application were all returning to their former strength, and all the
listlessness and inactivity which had been produced by the disease
he laboured under were rapidly giving way. All his friends re-
marked the happy change, and our anticipations for him were all
most cheering; but the Lord’s will and ways are not as ours—a
brighter and more complete happiness awaited him than this earth
could have afforded, and it was the will of his Saviour that he should
be with Him where He is, and, thank God, I can say it is well.

** Believe me, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
“* Borris House, April 5th.” “H. Kavanaca.


More mischief from spirit fancies.


Mr. Fradelle, whose striking case of insanity in a young woman
from spirit table-turning fancies appeared in No. XLIV., p. 366,


212 Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c.


informs us of another instance in which the friends of the mother of
four young children in a street opening into Oxford Street have been
compelled to remove her from her family on account of the same
calamity. When she and her husband began to give themselves up
to this folly, Dr. Elliotson in vain pointed out to them the nonsense
of what they shewed him, many months ago; and since her removal
from home Mr. Fradelle has in vain argued with the husband to
convince him of his absurdities.

We know of a London mesmeriser who not only believes in these
things but talks of them, and listens for raps, while mesmerising
his patients; by which folly they are excited and his attention slack-
ened—two grievous circumstances.

In our last, at p. 109, we said that we believed Mr. Swinton
was once a medical officer in India. We are informed that this
gentleman belongs to the Civil Service of the Honourable East India
Company on the Bengal Establishment, and that when he left India
upwards of twenty years ago he held the office of Chief Secretary to
the Government.


BOOKS RECEIVED.


Miracles and Science. By Edward Strachey, author of Hebrew Politics in
the times of Sargon and Sennacherib. London: 1854.

The Peoples of Europe and the War in the East. By J. W. Jackson, Esq.
Edinburgh : 1854.

This work of our distinguished contributor deserves the perusal of every
physiologist and politician.

The British Journal of Homeopathy. April. London.

Phrenology, Psychology, and Pneumatology: or, the importance of training
the whole being. By an Introvisor. London: 1853.

Discours Prononcée & l'issue d’une séance de Phrenologie, du Docteur Castle,
par F. Bret, Ministre du Saint Evangile. Genéve: 1854.

Psychological Inquiries : in a series of essays intended to illustrate the mutual
relations of the physical organization and the mental faculties. London: 1854.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


We regret that we have no room in the present Number for the communica-
tions of the Rev. M. R. Barrett, Senior Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge,
the Rev. C. Kegan Paul of Eton College, the Rev. L. Lewis of Bristol, Mr. Saun-
ders of Clifton, Mr. Capern, Mr. Tubbs, Mr. Squires of Hills Court, Exeter,
Mr. Barton of Woolwich, and the Rev. C. B. S.

Non-Wist is surely not right in taking it for granted that Mr. C. Hare
Townshend is not aware of the article on Human Levity in No. XXXIX.,
p. 303, because he has not referred to it: nor was Mr. Townshend bound to
know of it.

We return thanks to Mr. Janson for advertising our last Number in the
Western Times. He also generously advertised Mr. Townshend’s new work.


Errata in last Number.


p- 3, 1. 6, for ‘“‘ the latter,”’ read the former.
p- 107, 1. 9, for “‘ nor say that this was,” read nor said that it was.
p- 108, 1. 2, for ‘* to act upon the system,” read to cut up the system.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XLVII.


OCTOBER, 1854.


I. Mesmeric cure of a Lady who had been twelve years in the
horizontal position with extreme suffering. By the Rev.
R. A. F. Barrett, B.D., Senior Fellow of King’ s College,
Cambridge.


“* Harvey’s Cambridge training, however, or his Paduan teaching, or even his
own bright perception, would have failed to raise him to his pinnacle of fame,
had he wanted his amazing perseverance: he was modest also, and loved truth
for her sake alone. His discoveries had to bear the test of factious opposition :
claiming erroneously his bright example; many a@ false and vain discoverer is
ready to attribute each counter-argument to envy—that hanger-on of virtue, and
to appeal to Harvey’s persecution, as if it proved the truth of their pretensions.
Miserable boasters ! opposition does not prove the truth : the final triumph only
shows where it exists. Were it not so, the most ridiculous absurdities would,
merely because controverted, seem most true. Let not our order yield to
fallacies which require such vain arguments for their support: and let not
mesmerists, table-prophets, homceopathists, mountebanks, or any of their tribe
pollute the honoured name of Harvey by claiming his example to favour their
presumption. Truth is indestructible, and cannot be extinguished by oppression :
therefore Harvey triumphed finally.””-—Harveian Oration delivered before the
Royal College of Physicians, London, July 1, 1854, by Dr. Alderson, late of
Hull, now of London. Medical Times, July 8; p. 46.*


Tue lady, who in the following pages is designated A, having
been cured by mesmerism, I wrote to R. Guthrie, Esq., R.N.,
the medical gentleman who for many years had the chief
management of the case, requesting him to favour me with
his opinion respecting it, and a statement of the particulars.
He kindly obliged me with the following account.


“On Christmas-day, 1837, we anchored in Plymouth
Sound, in H.M.S. President, bearing the flag of the late
Admiral Ross, on our way to the Pacific; and a few days
after I was requested by that officer to visit who had


* We refer our readers to Dr. Elliotson’s remarks upon this notable folly at
the end of the present article. —Zois?.


VOL, XII. Q


Severe fits and severe measures.


come there a short time before, relatively to the propriety of
her proceeding to sea with us for the benefit of her health.
I found her much attenuated (though not nearly to the state
she was in when I saw her in 1852), very pale, and so weak
as to be unable to raise herself from the horizontal posture,
or to sit up when placed in that position. She complained
of having constant headache, and while conversing she on a
sudden became insensible, the body rigid, the hands and feet
extended, and there was slight nervous twitching of the mus-
cles of the face. On inquiry I found this to be of frequent
occurrence and of longer or shorter duration, ending in gene-
ral relaxation, and after making two or three deep crowing
inspirations she would express herself as again better, with
the view of relieving her anxious relatives. I am unable to
inform you in what the treatment consisted at this time, ex-
cept that she was frequently cupped between the shoulders
and the nape of the neck, had her head shaved and blistered,
and ultimately had an issue placed at the junction of the
frontal and parietal bones. As it was hoped that sea air in
aid of other means might prove beneficial to her, she was car-
ried on board on the 4th of January, 1838, and we sailed for
our destination on the 8th of the same month. Whether
from the excitement of embarking on an element she had
seen for the first time, I know not, but the convulsive attacks
became very frequent, succeeded by excruciating headache,
delirium, and a high state of fever, so that it was deemed
necessary, notwithstanding her weak and attenuated state, tu
use the lancet freely. Under this and other depletory means
her complaints were subdued, and, though she continued for
a long time unable to leave her bed or couch, she gradually
improved, and by the time we had rounded Cape Horn and
made the coast of Chili (the passage from Plymouth having
occupied 88 days) she was able to walk upwards of an hour
without assistance. After getting into port she enjoyed both
pedestrian and equestrian exercise, but this favourable state
I regret to say was only of short duration, for she was seized
with all her former complaints in a most aggravated form,
added to which she had great intolerance of light, very acute
and painful hearing, and distressing irritability of stomach.
Altogether for several weeks she underwent an amount of
suffering I have never seen equalled, the half of which I
imagined would have carried off one of a most robust consti-
tution. So soon as she was able to bear the usual noise of
the ship we started for Peru, and she gradually improved ;
but it was many months before she was able to sit up, and
nearly a year before she could walk. At the end of this time


Agonizing spasms. 215


(May or June, 1839), we returned to Valparaiso, when the
Admiral and family disembarked and slowly gained
strength, suffering only occasional headache ; but she was able
to take long walks and rides and frequently to enjoy the
dances at the numerous parties given at the Admiral’s house.

“When I was absent from Valparaiso in the months of
July and August, 1841, she, after taking a long ramble on
the hills and getting heated, was suddenly attacked in a most
aggravated way with all her former complaints, and after
suffering for some weeks she was for the first time seized with
spasms, which caused her the most exquisite torture, each last-
ing from one to two minutes and recurring very frequently,
but after eight or ten days gradually subsiding, and then only
appearing after certain intervals.

“When she was taken on board in January, 1842, she
had no spasm for two months, but, though her cot was sus-
pended from a pole and carried carefully on men’s shoulders,
and though the distance to the boat was short, she had three
seizures and they recurred at intervals during the first ten
days, but the voyage she stood well. Again, however, in re-
moving her from the ship at Portsmouth to lodgings on shore,
she suffered severely, and at intervals for the first ten days ;
but after recruiting there for a month, an invalid carriage was
procured, and we proceeded per rail by London and Chelten-
ham into Worcestershire. She suffered dreadfully on the
journey which was accomplished in one day, but we were
aware that had we stopped on the road she would have been
unable to resume it for a considerable time, and been obliged
to live among strangers deprived of all necessary comforts,
and have had to undergo the same ordeal when she resumed
the journey. During the succeeding week while I remained
with her, her sufferings were intense from the frequency and
severity of the spasms ; and the headache, delirium, and other
complaints which succeeded were severe and protracted.

“From this period (June 1842) to May 1849, I had not
seen her, but I believe she was subject to spasms at intervals,
and these recurred often when under any kind of excitement,
as was most painfully evinced on the death of her parents,
and when she heard of that of her brother who had been with
us in the Pacific. She informed me that during all that time
she had been unable to allow herself to be raised from the
horizontal posture, as any attempt caused a return of pain
and spasm; and I was much struck with the attenuated state
in which I found her. I visited her again in 1851 without
observing any change, but she informed me that some of her
symptoms were improved, and that the spasms did not always
Q2


216 Origin of the disease.


recur at the former intervals: there was no improvement
however as to position or strength, all attempts to raise her
couch threatening or bringing back those torturing spasms.

“Having had no spasm from August, 1851, to May,
1852, and being in other respects better, she begged me to
visit her to assist in another attempt to get her into a sitting
posture as a step in advance. We made three attempts for a
minute each time, always producing great pain; and on the
last occasion it was nearly bringing on spasm. After this
she suffered much for a week, and I then lost all hope of any
amelioration until quite an advanced period of life, and I
thought it more than doubtful that her constitution could
so long withstand the great shock it had already sustained
from her unparelleled and very protracted sufferings, and I
was sure that any affliction or other exciting cause would
produce a renewal of her complaints in all their severity, and
terminate fatally.

“In the foregoing very imperfect statement I have only
spoken of what I myself witnessed or ascertained from her-
self; but I have no doubt she has informed you that she has
had the advice of many professional men of the first emi-
nence: and I believe all, at least all those with whom I have
come in contact, gave a very unfavourable prognosis as to her
recovery. You will conclude where so many were consulted
the remedies were equally numerous. Our want of success,
therefore, extending over so long a period, only the more
redounds to your credit in effecting so happy, so complete,
and so unexpected a recovery.”


The patient’ own statement.


“Tn 1841, I caught a severe cold at Valparaiso: the fol-
lowing day I was seized with shivering fits and convulsions,
which for three weeks resisted all the remedies given by Dr.
Addison, who during that time scarely left me for an hour.

“1 then gradually recovered, and continued to improve
for a month, when I again became subject to convulsive fits
and spasms of frightful pain, which rendered me so prostrate
in brain that I could not bear the light. Once during twenty-
four hours I had thirteen spasms more or less severe, followed
by prostration and delirium, and for months continued in a
darkened room, and subject to great agony. The frequency
of the attacks, their severity and danger, obliged my friends
to keep constant watch, day and night. I had three persons
in my room, one of whom, a medical man, administered all
that skill could dictate for my relief, but without effect.


The agony dreadful. 217


Nine doctors, French, English, and American, attended me
during two months, and each declared he had never witnessed
agony so great.

“ When all other remedies had been exhausted, my brother
cupped me on the back for nine days, three or four times
each day. By this treatment he succeeded in lessening the
number of spasms, my senses returned, and I could bear a
little light and air in my room.

“1 was then removed in a cot to the ship, which was
ready to sail for England. During the voyage I partially
recovered, and the spasms, which at first had been daily or
almost hourly, only occurred once every month or five weeks.
I continued to improve till the ship anchored at Portsmouth,
when, apprehending no inconvenience from the removal to
a friend’s house, I was at my own request placed in the car-
riage: but, though still in a reclining position, I felt great
pain, and spasms, the moment the carriage moved, and in-
tense spasms continued to occur once or twice each four and
twenty hours for ten days, when their violence abated, and I
prepared for home. I was placed in an invalid carriage, and
bore the railroad journey to town very well; but as soon as
horses were put to the carriage, the spasms returned, and I
I continued screaming and half delirious until I arrived at
the other station, the movement invariably producing ago-
nizing pain.

“Intervals of spasm remained with me for two years,
during which time I was not left alone for a quarter of an
hour, as fits would come on even when I was feeling better,
and in good spirits.

“The death of my father increased my sufferings tenfold.
My brother himself, a medical man, never left me for weeks,
and expected my death each recurring spasm. He consulted
the first medical men in London, and, being obliged to
attend to his professional duties, he placed me under the im-
mediate care of Mr. , who lived near me. I continued
to suffer for some time, when not improving, and anxious to
be with my mother, I determined to risk the removal, a
distance of three miles. My brother was again summoned,
and, though he believed it might prove fatal, was obliged to
yield to my solicitation, and I was placed in a reclining
carriage, accompanied by my brother and another medical
man; but as horses were put to, and the carriage moved, I
felt pain, which fearfully increased. I became delirious, and
they could scarcely hold me down, although my brother sat
upon me, and the other held me down by force.

“Three weeks passed, during which time I had constant


.


218 Mesmerism proposed by medical men.


pain and spasms day and night, without one moment’s con-
sciousness. I then once more revived, only suffering at in-
tervals as before, but I could not be raised in the slightest
degree without bringing on excruciating spasm and a sense of
something falling internally. Eminent medical men were
consulted, and no good derived excepting the doubtful one
of their testimony—that my sufferings were of an uncommon
and fearful nature, none having witnessed paroxysms of such
agony.

“Mental affliction always produced attacks of extreme
pain and consequent prostration: the death of my mother,
and years afterwards that of my brother, in turn reduced me
to the brink of the grave. For eleven years I had been
unable to bear any movement, or to be in other than a re-
clining position, two persons moving me from one couch to
another in the same room.

“In 1847, my sister urged me to try mesmerism, but I
long resisted her wishes, when Dr. Wilson gratuitously came
to visit me in the hope of relieving my sufferings. He hap-
pened to witness one of my attacks, and administered a large
dose of chloroform, which was then my only momentary
relief, and left me, being certain medical aid could not avail
me. Returning when the attack was over, he expressed his
belief (although not practising it himself) that mesmerism
properly persevered in would cure me, and another able M.D.
had previously recommended it as likely to relieve me. I
felt it a duty to yield. After several professed mesmerisers
had in vain attempted to influence me, a friend at length
succeeded in putting me partially to sleep: he mesmerised
me occasionally for two months, but was unable to continue
the treatment, and I was falling into my old state of unmiti-
gated and almost constant pain and depression with sleepless
nights, loss of appetite, and such debility that I was unable
to read, or even to pray for myself. When you first began
to mesmerise me I had for a fortnight past been in constant
pain, which in five minutes you removed. I wrote to my me-
dical friend, Mr. Guthrie, who had constantly attended me,
and watched the treatment of all whom I had consulted. Al-
though he had no faith in mesmerism, yet he sanctioned my
recourse to it, saying, if from any cause I derived one mi-
nute’s refreshing sleep or freedom from pain, it was a boon.
I have constantly written to him during the period you have
mesmerised me, and he has from time to time begged me to
solicit your persevering in the treatment, and at length pro-
nounced you te have accomplished what no medical man
could have done—bdanished all serious symptoms, and pro-


Mesmerism perfectly successful. 219


duced others of perfect health, though he séi// doubted the
propriety of my attempting to be raised. I am now, through
your persevering, kind treatment, quite well, never feel pain,
and can walk four miles with ease in the day.”


History of the mesmeric treatment.


In January, 1852, I was calling upon the lady above
referred to, when she happened to tell me that she had been
in considerable pain for a fortnight past ; that the only thing
that relieved her was mesmerism ; but the friend who used
to mesmerise her was gone, and she had great difficulty in
finding persons who could affect her, and of those the influ-
ence was generally disagreeable. I offered to try, and after
I had mesmerised her for about five minutes the pain was
relieved, and I continued to mesmerise her occasionally for
about two months, generally about ten minutes or quarter
of an hour a day, but during part of this time I was myself
unwell, and for two or three weeks unable to go to her at all.

About the sixth or seventh day she surprised me by say-
ing, “Ah! I would not have let you send me to sleep if I
could have helped it.” Her eyes were shut, but she was
talking so rationally that I could scarcely believe she was
asleep: at which she was somewhat offended. From this
period she always went into mesmeric sleep after she had
been mesmerised for about ten minutes; and in that state
continued singing and talking until I awoke her, which was
usually in about a quarter of an hour. At the end of two
months all her symptoms were better ; she slept more soundly,
her appetite was improved, and she was almost entirely free
from pain.

Before I mesmerised her, she had occasionally evinced a
power of seeing into the causes of illness; her sister there-
fore suggested that she should endeavour to look into my
brain and discover the cause of a facial paralysis under which
I had been sometime labouring. She put her hands to my
head, and, after mesmerising it, with some difficulty dis-
covered a dark spot on the side of the brain opposite to the
paralysis ; described the size of it; the mark indicating its
former extent; said that the flesh on the paralyzed side ap-
peared much whiter than that on the other side of the face ;
that the nerves were destitute of their proper fluid ; and some
other symptoms, which of course cannot be verified. I would
merely state that in proportion as she has seen the symptoms
decrease, I have recovered.

I usually mesmerised her by simple downward passes ; in


220 Became clairvoyant.


about ten minutes she used to feel great pain in the bridge of
the nose, and directed me to place my thumbs there ; when
she invariably began to sing, which was usually the first
indication I had of her being asleep. This, as I afterwards
learnt, was caused by the other parts of my hand resting
over the organs of Time and Tune.

I left her in March, and returned in October, 1853, after
an absence of about six months.

She had experienced the good effects of the mesmerism
for some time, but was then gradually falling back into her
former state; growing weaker, suffering much pain, and ap-
prehending a return of spasms.

From about the middle of October, 1852, to November 19,
I mesmerised her at first once, latterly twice, a day, keeping
her asleep rather more than an hour each time. Under the
mesmerism her health and strength improved steadily. After
some time she told me that medical men had thought that
certain ligaments were broken, but she could see plainly they
were not broken, only elongated, and one of them sore as if
it had been partially torn; that she should quite recover if
properly mesmerised, but it would take a long time, probably
six months; that one of the ligaments was more elongated
than the other, and that was the reason why her spasms were
so unusually painful.

During a great part of the time she has been asleep she
has mesmerised me for facial paralysis, and has always de-
clared that she should eventually cure me.

Nov. 9, 1852, morning. A. felt well, and had been mes-
merising her servant for the head-ache, which she had re-
moved. The head-ache however had returned, and I offered
to make some passes myself. I mesmerised the girl for about
ten minutes—she professed to feel no pain and I soon left her
apparently asleep, and then proceeded to mesmerise A. She
had, while I was making passes over the servant, seen the
light playing from my fingers, and was already partially af-
fected; when her eyes were shut, perhaps half-mesmerised,
she had seen this light more plainly. She felt very uneasy,
sick and trembling, and thought it was because I had touched
the girl. I washed my hands in cold water and the passes
ceased to have a disagreeable effect.

In about threequarters of an hour I awoke A., and then
proceeded to demesmerise the servant ; but I first made a few
passes, &c., to quiet her, as she was crying and hysterical.
The head was easy but she still felt weak and hysterical, and
I then returned to A. whom I had left thoroughly awake, but,
in consequence of the passes I had again made over her


Distinct cerebral organs mesmerised. 221


servant, she was half-mesmerised, and felt the same uneasy
symptoms as before. I washed my hands and then mesmer-
ised her, when the unpleasant effect ceased. I tried one pass
with my hands wet: she said it demesmerised her.

Nov. 9, evening. I kept her asleep an hour and a quarter.
The girl whom I had mesmerised for head-ache was well. A.
said she had quite lost a swelling on her wrist which she had
had for three years, and which was no better when I began
to mesmerise her three weeks ago.

Nov. 12., morning. A. felt well: was quickly mesmerised
and began to sing. I told her I was trying to write down
her case.

A. “ You should say—In 1852 I became acquainted with
a lady who for 11 years had not been able to be raised from
her couch, &c., &. On my return I found her suffering
more than usual from symptoms which generally preceded
severe attacks; but accompanied by a good deal of fever
which for two or three weeks had rendered her nights sleep-
less, and caused days of langour and depression of spirits.
She was also under treatment for a rash on her chest and
stomach. Their name was legion when I commenced mes-
merising her. In two days they had quite disappeared. Her
appetite was good, and her sleep calm and refreshing ; I con-
tinued mesmerising her one week, during which she hada
return of severe pain and every symptom of return of agon-
izing spasm, when I redoubled my exertions, and gave her
an additional hour every morning, &c.; when physical strength
was indisputably given to her, and symptoms which were
withheld from me made their appearance by which she was
able to gratify me by the assurance that I had benefitted her
not only by temporary relief, but by giving hopes of per-
manent good. Now that’s an end of it. I think great stress
ought to be laid upon waking so fresh after (my nights) sleep
—to invalids that must be of consequence. In the morning
your mesmerism is so much heavier.” In answer to some
questions I put to her she said, “If you went on breathing
on me, I should perhaps sleep for a month, and might wake
up an idiot ; just before I go to sleep the feeling is exquisite,
quite like Elysium.”

Nov. 18th, morning. As soon as A. was mesmerised she
began to sing; I touched Language, when she began to talk
Spanish ; said she was feeling more in want of mesmerism ;
she saw her sister near London, described the room, persons
in it, &c., &c.; said she saw the procession of the Duke’s
funeral which she described : presently she saw a man falling
(from a window or some height), which so horrified her that


222 Alleged effect of silk and alpaca.


I was obliged to take away the sight. On the same even-
ing some persons who returned from the funeral told us
that a man had been killed by a fall.

Nov. 18th, evening. I kept her asleep about two hours,
part of the time she mesmerised me; saw a small spray of
some nerves in my face alive, which before was dead, and
drew a picture of it.

When I left her, about Nov. 20, 1852, she said that the
effects of the mesmerism would last some little time, but that
on the Saturday fortnight she should have a spasm at 10 p.m.,
that it would not be a bad spasm, she should be in bed all
the Sunday and able to get up on the Monday; that she had
better not be told of it beforehand that there might be no room
for fancy. This attack came on exactly as she had predicted.

From December 19 to January 4, I believe I generally
mesmerised her, regularly keeping her asleep from one to two
hours a day. On one occasion she had on an alpaca dress ;
she said that the mesmerism did not affect the body through
the alpaca dress, and she directed me to take hold of her
hands that I might mesmerise her body through them, and
to make passes over the head, which she said was comfortable
but not equally so as when the body was mesmerised, and
that she must not wear the alpaca dress again. She always
declared that the mesmerism did not pass through silk or
alpaca, and whenever she had on any silk dress, she merely
obtained the mesmerism which found its way into the body
through the hands, throat, or those parts which were not
covered with silk.

In every instance I found phreno-mesmerism answered ;
she however did not like me to touch Locality as the first
effect was to make her very dark, and then she said she came
down wherever it might happen to be and could not help
seeing whatever was taking place, whether the sight were
horrid or not. On one occasion she said, “I do not know
how it is, but all my ideas seem a chaos until you place your
thumbs between my eyes and that seems to give them form.”
It then occurred to me for the first time that my thumbs
were always placed over the organ of Form. When awake
she knew nothing about phrenology and had no faith in it.

Dec. 31st. A friend being present who wished to witness
some of the phenomena, I mesmerised her with my hands
over Time and Tune, she commenced singing vigorously ; I
placed them on Veneration, the song was changed into an
anthem. I then placed my fingers on Locality.

; A. “Oh! I wish I could have one of those beautiful
flowers.” ;


Clairvoyance.


I. “ Where ?”

A. “In the garden at Valparaiso.”

I. “ How do you know they are there ?”

A. “I can see them.”

I. “ How can you see in the dark. What time is it
there ?”

A. “It is full morning ?”

I. “ How can you see there ?”

A. “I am there, my spirit hovers over, I could drop
anything into that cactus; I can see they have stripped the
grapes off, there ought to be nearly a ton of them.”

I. “You are here on the sofa talking to me.”

A. “My tongue talks to you, my spirit is hovering over
Valparaiso.”

I. “ How is it you can see me when your spirit is at
Valparaiso ?”

A. “ How is it that the stars are in the firmament? The
spirits which hover over me don’t move, but they can convey
their messages. My spirit hovers above and I can see you or
the garden at Valparaiso.”

I. “ Don’t you think that my touching Locality makes you
imagine.”

A. “No. Iam there; if it were imagination why should
I tell you that they had stripped the grapes off? I should
have expected to see them on: or that they had changed the
stables into a pigstye ?”

Another time she said, “ The things you see when mes-
merised are not imagination; I know what imagination is.
The objects are quite palpable; I see them quite as plain as
when I am awake.”

On another occasion I touched Locality, she requested
me not to do so. When I had taken away the effect she said,
“ You placed me at St. Lorenzo then, it is where they brought
the first potatoe from; it is up to the knees in dust there,
but it makes me feel so dark until I am there.” I touched
Gustativeness, she said, “It is a great pity that when
has a party she does not send to Worcester for ice, it is so
good at such a shop. Do you like figs, I have some.”

At her request I eat one, and demesmerised Gustative-
ness ; she said, “I am not quite sure that I like figs, don’t
eat any more.”

From January 4 to March 13, 1853, I mesmerised her
generally once, oftener twice during the day, keeping her
asleep on the average rather more than an hour each time,
and sending her into heavy coma for a few minutes or longer ;
during this time, her health steadily improved, her strength


224 Blessed effects of Mesmerism.


increased ; the mesmerism enabled her to sleep well at night,
which she had not done for years. When I first began to
mesmerise her the effect was often in some respects unpleasant
and made her tremble, feel sick, faint, and uncomfortable. I
had gradually discovered that all these effects were owing to
cross-mesmerism, and that, if I carefully excluded the light,
allowed no one in the room except those who did not cross-
mesmerise her, and carefully avoided touching any one before
I came to her, no unpleasant effect ensued, and she derived
much more benefit from the sleep. As I took these precau-
tions she gradually became much more sensitive; and if a
person came close to the outside of the room she was in; if
after washing my hands I was obliged to shake hands with
any acquaintance I met; if I had brought any new bank
notes with me in my pocket, she was certain to be unwell
and cross-mesmerised. But, if all such causes were carefully
avoided, she always said that the pleasure of being mesmer-
ised was exquisite, beyond description, and one hour of mes-
meric sleep rested and refreshed her more than a whole night
of natural sleep. I had discovered that by breathing on the
body or keeping my hands upon her, the common mesmeric
sleep might be deepened into a heavy coma in which she ap-
peared to be quite insensible, and could not hear me. In
this stage I could allow any person to see her whom she could
not otherwise have borne in the room, and any operation
might have been performed with ease. If she were at all
tired from any over exertion in the usual stage, she would ask
me to send her into the coma, or as she called it put her to
sleep, and it always seemed to rest and strengthen her; al-
though on one or two occasions when I kept her in it nearly
half an hour she complained of its making her heavy. During
this time her power of seeing herself and other persons
seemed to increase ; she could accurately describe the symp-
toms of any one on whom she could bear to lay her hand,
which was the means she usually employed to see things by ;
and declared she could see the smallest nerve or vessel in the
body, and how everything acted. In more than one case
where medical men have been completely at fault, she has
given most accurate diagnosis, as has been proved by the
result. On these occasions she always spoke with the greatest
confidence, said she could see plainly, and could not possibly
be mistaken.

Before March 29, 1853, she told me at various times she
was cured of her original disease, and that if she were allowed
to remain in her present position she should have no more
attacks of spasm; but that she could not be raised from her


Her directions for her own treatment. 225


recumbent position, because in consequence of some former
inflammation an internal adhesion had taken place ; that as
soon as she were raised the adhering parts would pull, cause
acute pain, and the attempt to raise her would prove fatal if
persisted in: that over the adhering parts there was a branch
of nerves then looking dead, like a piece of twisted lasso ;
but that it still retained the power of life, and mesmerism
would gradually soften and restore it to activity, and that it
would then of itself tear asunder the adhering parts: that
this process would take a fortnight, during which time she
should be subject to paroxysms of pain as bad as her original
spasms, and that, if she were not properly mesmerised, she
should sink under it, but that if she were mesmerised she
should recover, and after the parts had been torn asunder
should be able to be raised, and gradually recover. She said
that while she was suffering from the paroxysms of pain I
should not be able to put her to sleep, yet that I could before
they came on, or as soon as they were over; but that there
was no way for her to escape the pain, because during mes-
meric sleep the parts were all so tranquil that the separation
could not go on, and that if she were put to sleep just before
the attack commenced the pain would come on as soon as she
awoke, and the shock of waking out of the mesmeric sleep
into acute pain would be very bad: that she must not take
chloroform, as it would be worse than cross-mesmerism. I
tried the effect of putting her into mesmeric sleep and de-
mesmerising part of the body, but I found that she could
feel pain in that part of the body which was demesmerised.

Jan. 22nd. She said that if she had not been mesmerised
she should then be very ill: that there was a great deal to
do before the dormant nerve was brought to life; that the
blood-vessels were still very weak ; that the mesmerism helped
the blood-vessels by giving health to the nerves round about.

Jan. 23rd. She had caught a stiff neck from sleeping
with the window open. When mesmerised she said that the
cells of the muscles looked stuffed up. I kept her asleep an
hour; when she awoke, the neck was cured.

Jan. 24th. I found her unwell. When mesmerised she
asked me to put her to sleep [coma], that she might not see
herself.

I. “ What can you see?”

A. “There seems a struggle between mesmerism and ill-
ness ; what would have been pain pulls up all the nerves.”

I. “ That is quite unintelligible.”

A. “Well, now, I’ll tell you better: the resistance which
the mesmerism offers to an immense weight prevents the


raw


226


Sees her own interior.


nerve from being pulled out. Dear me, I hope I am not
going to have face-ache, I can see my jaw inflamed.”

I mesmerised it. When I went in the evening she had
had bad face-ache, which continued at intervals for a few
days, but was always relieved by mesmerism.

Feb. 7th. When asleep she said, “I can see in me some
small veins active which I have never seen active before: the
blood runs freely through them: it is near the sore place.
There is a place looks hard, as though I could pull something
off from it if I could put my nail under. When I am regu-
larly mesmerised I have great difficulty in keeping my caustic
issue open.

Feb. 9th. A piece of hair had been sent to see if the
owner could mesmerise a person who was with her. She
said the hair was like a dead thing, and she could tell no-
thing by it. I then gave hera piece of mine. On applying
it to the patient, she said it curdled the patient’s own mes-
merism. A piece of the patient’s own hair was then applied.
She said that it looked as if there were the same contest
going on between the two mesmerisms which there was at
first.

Feb. 12th. She said that she should be ill on Tuesday
(15th) ; that it would be a spasm except for the mesmerism.

Feb. 15th, morning. She had felt ill, had a bad night,
and no breakfast. When asleep there were some spasmodic
motions inside the stomach, which I quieted by putting my
hand there. She said it would be a spasm except for the
mesmerism. It wanted to pull the ligaments, but they would
not be pulled: they were not stretched. When she awoke
she felt better.

15th, evening. When asleep she said that the mesmerism
had done her an immense deal of good. She looked better.
The ligaments were not at all elongated. Several things still
were not healthy. The parts which would become healthy
next were some very small vessels (not nerves) which ran
round the base of the ligaments. She added, “ When my
stomach shook this morning there was a small vessel which
had no loophole, and it had to break itself; and it did, and
the blood flowed out.”

I. “ Was that right ?”

A. “ Yes; I am as well as I can be.”

Feb. 17th, morning. She felt ill. When asleep she said
she should have had a fit except for the mesmerism : she saw
something stopped.

17th, evening. When she was mesmerised I asked her
what she had seen in herself in the morning. She said,


Does not reason: but knows intuitively. 227


“T saw something shut up quite close, and it appeared as
if it would not allow the blood to leave the heart for about a
quarter of a minute: it made me feel very sick. I believe it
to be the same thing which caused my fits. You have cured
the cause of the spasms I used to have. When you went
away (December, 1852) it was not cured, but it is now. You
could not put me on my feet now ; it would bring back spasm.
All that now is required to be done is to strengthen that
nerve.”

Feb. 21st. She was strongly cross-mesmerised as soon as
I began, which I could only attribute to some new notes and
money I had in my pocket. I washed my hands, put away
some of the silver, and kept her some time in coma. When
she became sensible she said,

“T have received a great deal of mesmerism, and can see
myself very plainly: I can see what I caught cold in. I
have not done what they think is the matter with me; that
is not why I cannot sit up, for I have recovered from that,
and yet should have spasm if they attempted to raise me.
I should like to try to show—one spasm would not hurt
much. Before I get well I shall have a great deal of pain.”

= the evening when asleep she told me the same, and
said,

“T see when I get better and the nerve begins to move
I shall have a great deal of pain: I could not get well with-
out feeling pain (Feb. 22). People say mesmerism has not a
sanative power, but I see it has; for it will do for me what
they would want to do with a knife if they could get at me.”

Feb. 23rd. Could see herself plainly: said, ‘ All appears
healthy except that nerve ; that lies dead like a piece of lasso:
when that begins to work, all will be excited round about it,
and it will begin to pull. I did not believe Mr. , but I
do now: he said, if a man cut his throat badly, he might
live while the vein was cut, but not when it healed ; I see,
because when it healed it would stop up the aperture.”

Feb. 24th. She said, “When I get well—in about five
weeks—TI shall have acute pain at intervals for about a fort-
night: I must have it, or [ shall not get well. When the
time approaches, I shall be able to tell you more clearly when
it will come, and how long it will last.”

I. “ How can you tell? do you reason ?”

A. “No; I don’t reason: because when I am awake, if
I were told the facts I could not draw the inferences from
them: something tells me I know, but I can’t say how. I
suppose it is a kind of instinct, or intuition.”

“In the evening she said, “ The pain will be so bad that


228 Predicts accurately.


I shall be delirious part of the time; I shall be obliged to
scream out: but I cannot get well without having the pain.”

March 13th. Upon being questioned she said, “ 1 am not
getting better now because I am getting nearer to the time
when I shall have that pain. I shall probably begin soon to
have pains. To-morrow, after being moved I shall have pain
in the back and down to the legs.”

From March 13th to March 29th I generally mesmerised
her twice a day. During this time she appeared to be grow-
ing worse, and had several attacks of pain. When asleep
she usually foretold when these attacks would come, and ex-
plained the cause of them. Whenever I found her suffering,
she was always asleep, and quite easy after a few mesmeric
passes.

March 15th. She said she should have pain after eight
o’clock, which would continue all night unless she were mes-
merised. I went at nine o’clock and found her in pain: I
kept her asleep three quarters of an hour. She said that the
pain would not return, and she should have a good night:
the pain she was suffering from was caused by the part which
was cured sympathizing with the part which was formerly
dead and now coming to life.”

March 20th. A. said, “I shall have pain to-morrow: it
will be very slight for some hours, and then severe. If you
mesmerise me in the morning, it will not come on acutely
until 4p.m. If I am not mesmerised, it will destroy my
night’s rest; if I am mesmerised in the evening, the pain
will cease, and I shall have a good night.”

March 2\st. “I mesmerised her in the morning. She
told me the same as the preceding day. I went in the even-
ing at a quarter before six. The pain had come at four
o'clock, had been very intense, and was then slightly better.
I kept her asleep an hour and a half, one hour in coma.
She said the pain would not return the next day, and she
should have a good night. “If I am mesmerised regularly
the bad pain will come on Monday at nine o’clock p.m. ; it
will increase, and at 11 o’clock I shall be prostrated and ex-
hausted from it. Until then you will not be able to put me
to sleep. The pain now is caused by the nerve having
swelled,” &c.

March 24th, evening. She said, “I shall have pain to-
morrow between three and four p.m.; the mesmerism will
take it away. The next day I shall have very bad pain as
soon as I am moved. I am getting out of order altogether
now ; my liver looks bad, not the right colour. I shall have
bad pain in it to-night.” I mesmerised it for some minutes


Continues to predict accurately. 229


according to her directions. She said it was much better,
and she should scarcely have any pain in it.

March 25th. I went at four o’clock, and found her in
great pain, which had come on about a quarter of an hour
before. The mesmerism took it away. I went again in the
evening. When asleep she said she should have very bad
pain as soon as she was moved, and it was settled that she
should not be moved until I came. .

March 26th. I went at ll a.m. At 10 o’clock she had
felt so well that she had insisted upon being moved. Acute
pain came on directly, and when I arrived she was scarcely
able to speak. When asleep she said she should have pain
again at half-past three.

I went again at twenty minutes past three. She had no
pain, but soon began to feel uneasy, and I put her to sleep.
Whilst in coma she had a kind of fit. On various other
occasions she had fits whilst in coma; they appeared to be
caused by the mesmerism collecting in one place, and were
quieted by making passes down to the feet. She said, “I
shall have pain to-morrow if not mesmerised before six in the
evening, but it won’t be bad.” This I prevented by mesmer-
ising her.

March 29th. She told me that if I did not want the bad
pain to come on, I must not mesmerise her any more: that
she might safely be left for a week or so, and should only
have a little lancinating pain, and lose a day or two.

I went away, and recommenced mesmerising her on
April 9th. She was asleep in ten passes, but could not see
herself very plainly. I mesmerised her again in the evening,
when she told me that it would require two or three days
before the bad pain would come. Being uncertain whether
I could give her the time necessary, I again omitted the
mesmerism for three days. I recommenced on April 13th—
two hours.

April 14th. When asleep she said, “If you mesmerise
me well twice to-morrow and once on Saturday, the bad pain
will come on about two hours after Saturday’s mesmerising.
I settled to bring it on Saturday in the day-time.”

April 15th. I kept her asleep two hours. When in coma
she had a bad fit, but on coming to her senses knew nothing
about it. She said, “If you do not wish me to have the bad
pain to-morrow, you must not mesmerise me again tu-day.
I shall have some pain. I look very bad inside. If you mes-
merise me again to-day I shall have the bad pain soon after
I am mesmerised to-morrow. If you do not mesmerise me
until Sunday, and then twice on Monday, I shall have it after
VOL, XIT. R


230 Sees her internal condition.
being mesmerised on Tuesday; at least I will tell you how to
bring it on in the day time on Tuesday.”

Sunday 17th. I mesmerised her once.

April 18th. Three times in the morning she said she
should have some pain at four p.m. I went at five minutes
past four, and found her in acute pain, which had just come
on. When asleep she described the appearance of the nerves
inside, and said she should be in a good deal of pain if she
were awake.

April 19th, morning. When in coma she had a fit; when
she came out of it, and her arms were demesmerised (which
she always made me do, otherwise she could not move them),
her hand was still contracted, as in the fit. She directed me
to mesmerise it, and then demesmerise it ; when it opened.

She said, “The attack of pain will come on about four
p-m. You had better be here part of the time I am ill, as,
although you will not be able to put me to sleep until the
attack is over, you will be preparing me to receive the mes-
merism. It is of no use your being here during the whole
of the attack ; whatever time you can spare you had better
give me afterwards, when I shall want as much mesmerism
as you can give me. If you come at quarter past five you
will begin to mesmerise me at quarter to six, and I shall be
mesmerised at six.” She then gave sundry directions about
what we were to do. I awoke her, and returned at quarter
past five p.m. I heard her screams before I got to the room.
She was in bed writhing, screaming, and dashing herself
about. So she continued, sometimes easier, sometimes deli-
rious, until quarter before six. I mesmerised her all the time.
At quarter before six she appeared almost free from pain; at
six o’clock she was asleep. I kept her in comaone hour. Her
sister said that just before four o’clock she complained of
thirst, and very soon after of pain, and she was put into bed ;
in about ten minutes after that they could not have moved
her. The pain increased, occasionally intermitting, until I
came : during part of the time she had been delirious. When
she came out of coma she said that she was disappointed ; the
place had not torn yet, but only pulled. She thought she
should have six or seven more attacks; that I had soothed
her when I came; if I had been there all the time the pain
would have been less but longer. The vessels at the bottom
of the stomach were gorged with blood almost to bursting.
The brain looked pressed down, as she supposed an idiot’s
would be; should have some head-ache when awake. I re-
lieved the head by passes and manipulations. She said she
was afraid of the gorged vessels: if she strained or cried they


Severe spasm as predicted. 231


would burst. I tried to empty them by passes, &c., &c.; in
about ten minutes she said they had disgorged their blood,
but would still look black. I continued until she said I could
do no more good. She said she should not sleep much;
should feel very weak when she awoke, with slight headache ;
should be better after she was mesmerised to-morrow ; thought
the next attack would come on to-morrow at about eight or
nine o’clock p.m.; the piece would then rip; the pain would
be sharper and last about an hour.—I had kept her asleep
rather more than two hours and a half, of which more than
one was coma.

April 20th, morning. I kept her asleep an hour and three
quarters. She said the next spasm would come on at eight
p-m. and last an hour, and be more acute: the place would
rip. The danger consisted in the probability of the blood
vessels of the stomach rupturing. She did not think that
they would, but they might: she directed us what to do to
prevent it, and also what remedies we were to use in case
they did. She said she should have six attacks more and a
= She could only see Friday night, and expected the third
then.

April 20th, evening. I went at a few minutes past eight,
and heard her screams as soon as I entered the house. The
attack had only commenced a few minutes ; it appeared more
acute than the first. I mesmerised her all the time; by
about ten minutes to six she was delirious, and soon after
that I put her to sleep. I kept her in coma half an hour.
When sensible she said that the vessels looked very bad ;
under her directions I accumulated the mesmerism over them
for half an hour, and then made occasional passes until they
were disgorged. She said, “You soothed me by the mes-
merism. I got a great deal of it, and it prevented my body
from being ill with the pain. If you had not been here at
all the vessels would have burst, and I should be dead. The
place has ripped a little. The next attack will be on Friday
evening; it will be as acute as this, but not so long. On
Monday next I shall have two in the day. On Friday the
first part of the nerve will be up; the rest of the nerve is not
sufficiently alive to rip it up; it has tried to rip up in the
middle, but could not. If I were now left without any more
mesmerism the thing would not rip up of itself. When I
am in delirium I feel the pain, but do not recollect it when I
am awake; now I recollect what I said in delirium.” She
has repeatedly told me that in her mesmeric state she could
recollect everything that passed in delirium years ago; that
persons should be careful how they treat delirious persons,
R 2


Benefit from the mesmeriser eating.


for that in delirium we:know what passes around us, and feel
pain as acutely as when we are in our ordinary state; but
that the pain does not shock the system as much, and that
the consciousness that exists in delirium is forgotten after-
wards, just as that of the mesmeric trance is.

April 21st. I kept her asleep an hour and a quarter in
the morning, and the same in the evening. She said her
throat looked parched and feverish ; at her request I ate some
black currant paste, which she said moistened it. Said she
should have an attack on the morrow at about eight p.m.,
and had better not be moved all day.

April 22nd, morning. She felt pain over the stomach; I
said I would ask her about it when asleep. I kept her asleep
an hour and three quarters; during the time I ate something
for her. She said, “ Before you ate my stomach was con-
tracted, and had a queer looking sort of moisture in it ; now
the stomach is its full size, and does not look shrunk, and
part of the moisture is gone.”

I. “ But you could not get nourishment so.”

A. “Yes; I could get all my system wants.”

On another occasion she told me that my eating for her
did not give her any blood, but gave her the nervous strength,
and raised the stomach when it had collapsed from emptiness.

A. “The next attack will come at five minutes past eight ;
it will last more than half an hour. The latter end of it I
shall be delirious, but you will not be able to put me into
sound sleep then; the delirium will be from weakness. I
ought to be mesmerised for two hours afterwards; it does not
matter being kept in coma. The left leg looks paralyzed ;
the place that is so irritated has stopped the nervous fluid
from passing into the leg, and diverted the blood from going
in. If I had been awake I should have had no sensation or
power of motion there.” I mesmerised it for about ten
minutes, when she said the nerves had become roused, and
the free circulation of blood followed.

April 22nd, evening. I went at five minutes past eight:
the attack had just commenced. I mesmerised her all the
time ; in about thirty-five minutes she was delirious ; in about
forty minutes she was asleep. The attack had been very
severe ; occasionally she had been gasping for breath, and not
able even to scream. I kept her in coma some little time ;
when she became sensible she said that the pain was worse
when she could not scream ; she thought it might have been
fatal if I had not been there. The mesmerism gave a pleasant
sensation through the system, although it did not ease the
pain. .


Her account of the nerves and nervous fluid. 233


A. “The attack after the two will be very bad; as bad
as this. If I am mesmerised on Sunday I shall have two
attacks on Monday ; the second wili be the worse.” At her
request I drank some tea for her and ate some toast, which
she relished quite as much as if she had taken it herself. I
kept her asleep two hours and a half; about half an hour of
itin coma. She told me all inflammation was gone, and I
might go in safety.

April 23rd, morning. She felt weak, but not that empty
feeling she had suffered from previously. When mesmerised
she said, “If I had not been mesmerised I should have had
inflammation from pain to pain: we have many nerves thinner
than spiders webs, many more than are marked in the ana-
tomical books, I see them in me and in you also, the thinnest
texture that you can think of but they are the same; the nervous
fluid goes into them, I can see it quite plainly, the fluid does
not appear as if it would wet your finger if you put it on.”

On all occasions when I questioned her on such points
she invariably said, that the nerves were hollow tubes with
their own proper fluid passing down them; this fluid she
described in appearance as a thin gas; that if medical men
cannot discern any aperture in the nerves after death, it must
be that they close up; in the living subject she sometimes
saw nerves closed, but always in disease, such as paralysis,
neuralgia, faceache, lameness. The size of the aperture in
the nerves was to the aperture in the veins in the proportion
of a hollow bit of elder to a quill, but the vein would expand,
the nerve would not.

April 23rd, evening. I kept her mesmerised two hours
and a half and ate my dinner, which she relished as much as
if she had been awake and eaten it herself.

April 24th. She had had a pretty good night, and felt
stronger ; had taken some coffee and one or two mouthfuls of
cake. I kept her asleep two hours and three quarters, and
had some tea and toast for her. When asleep she said that
she must be mesmerised for ten minutes on Monday morning
as she should have two attacks during the day : the first would
come at 2 p.m., and would uot last half an hour; that I was
not to come until it was nearly over as she would require to
be mesmerised for two hours after it to strengthen her for
the second attack which would come at 7 p.m., and be severe
and last nearly three quaters of an hour. In about half an
hour she should be delirious.

April 25th. I went at twenty minutes past two and found
her in great pain, screaming and writhing. Whilst the attack
lasted, it seemed much the same as the preceding ones: by


The mesmeriser dined for her.


half-past 2 she was asleep. I kept her in coma a quarter of
an hour, when she awoke she said,

A. “If a doctor could see me now he would say there
was no hope.”

I. “ Why ?”

A. “Because there is so much inflammation.”

In about three quarters of an hour I had reduced the in-
flammation by accumulating the mesmerism over the inflamed
parts and then making passes according to her directions.
In answer to my questions, she said, “ The inflammation is
gone, but I still look very black. The attack in the evening
will come on at seven o’clock, be very bad and last half an
hour. Between this and Friday I see something, I don’t
think it will be pain, I think it will be great sickness; on
Friday when I am gasping for breath, if I attempt to raise
myself up you must not let me, as it would be fatal. The
danger on Friday will be from exhaustion, as I have eaten
nothing and made no blood. I see that some of the tubes
which nourish the bulbs of my hair have stopped. In a
fortnight I should be grey or my hair would fall off if this
were to last.”

I went again a little before seven, and staid in a room
below; at seven o’clock I heard her screams and went up. The
attack had just commenced, at a quarter before seven she
had felt a burning pain which had made a cold perspiration
stand on her hand. The attack was so bad, that for some
time she was unable to scream, and was gasping for breath :
at half-past seven she was delirious, and in a few minutes
afterwards asleep. I kept her in coma about ten minutes,
when she awoke she told me that there was a great deal of
inflammation and directed me how to subdue it.

A. “Now I see the mesmerism has lighted up the bones
in my leg: because the nerves would not take it, it has gone
down the bones. The greater part of the nerve has torn, the
other part will begin to tear on Friday. I shall have bad
retching on Thursday evening and part of Friday.”

April 26th. She felt weak, and could not move the leg. I
kept her mesmerised two hours, occasionally putting her into
coma, and mesmerising the paralysed leg and side. In about
an hour and a half she said that most of the muscles were
relaxed: in two hours she said that the nerves of the side
were beginning to take the mesmerism, but it would be more
than an hour before the leg would be right. I demesmerised
her and returned at a quarter past four; I put her to sleep
and ate dinner for her, which she declared did her much
good; I kept her asleep for an hour and a half, occasionally


The mesmeriser dined and took tea for her. 235


putting her into coma and mesmerising the side and leg. After
an hour and a quarter she said, “‘ Now the mesmerism goes
into the nerves ; if I awoke I could move my leg.” When I
demesmerised her the paralysis had gone. In the evening I
kept her asleep one hour and took tea for her.

April 27th, Wednesday morning. I kept her asleep an
hour and a half. She told me that the next attack would
come on Friday at 9 p.m., and would last half an hour until
she was delirious. In reply to my questions she said, “The
danger will be when I begin to pick the bed-clothes: then
you must put your hand on my heart, not press it, but keep
it warm and prevent my rising or moving my shoulder up,
and moisten my lips with ginger wine: be careful not to have
the cloth too wet so as to let a drop goin. I was once equally
ill at , my brother put a mustard poultice over me and
then the heart began to beat: the mesmerism will do more,
and act more quickly. When that is over and I begin to
scream, a little wine will do me good. I am sure I shall get
through the attack, because I see other pains beyond. If I
could not see other pains beyond, I should tell you that you
might call in other people, and that I was not sure.” I de-
mesmerised her and came back in three quarters of an hour;
she felt weak. I put her to sleep; she said her stomach had
shrunk. I ate dinner, when she said her stomach had got
up again, and she felt much stronger. She said the stomach
had not shrunk after the first time until to day, and that was
because she had been moved to have the bed made. I kept
her asleep nearly two hours.

April 27th, evening. I kept her asleep two hours. She
said she had swallowed a small bit of barbary which irritated
the stomach, and would bring on retching at night after being
moved. I mesmerised the stomach. This brought some juice
over the barbary, but did not remove it. I had tea for her.

April 28th. The retching had come on the preceding night
as she had predicted. I kept her asleep two hours, and had
dinner for her: she told me that I had better come at 6 p.m.
and 9 p.m. She should have very bad retching. If she were
kept mesmerised until Friday evening the retching would
come during the bad attack, which would be worse. On
Friday the danger would last about a minute; she should not
feel then, and be past crying; it would be after the attack
had lasted about a quarter of an hour; afterwards her eyes
would squint ; at the end the brain would sink; that I must
take care not to let her move her shoulders up, as in that
case she should die. She felt certain she should get over it.
April 28th. I went again at six p.m. She had had very


236 Leg palsied and cured, as predicted.


bad retching. I kept her asleep two hours, and had tea for
her. She said the barbary was gone: she should have two
attacks of retching before I came at nine; and again in the
morning, but it would not come on again after the morning’s
mesmerism.

Nine o’clock. I kept her asleep one hour; she said the
stomach looked worse than when I left her in the morning.
I subdued the irritation by passes and breathing, &c. She
said she should have retching in the morning at times, until
mesmerised.

Friday, April 29th. The retching continued so bad from
seven a.m. until half-past twelve, that they sent for me. I
found her retching, with pain in the chest and a taste of
blood. She had had a good deal of ice. I put her to sleep.
She said that one of the small vessels at the bottom of the
throat was cracked, that it would not matter; she saw inflam-
mation about the chest, stomach, and elsewhere: after about
an hour she said, “If I were awake I should be sick now:
the tube is trying to make the stomach sick.” I kept her
asleep three hours, during which time I had some gruel for
her. She said that the inflammation was reduced, that she
should have no more sickness, but that the left leg would be
again paralysed after the attack at night, but that I should
take it away on the following day.

I went again in the evening and kept her asleep an hour
and a quarter, during which time I had tea for her. She said
that the attack would come at nine o’clock, with a burning
feeling first; that two-thirds of the nerve would rip up. I
went again a little before nine, but did not let her know I
was in the house. The attack commenced at nine and was,
if possible, still more severe than the preceding ones. She
had complained of a burning pain before it came on. After I
had been with her about a quarter of an hour, she was gasp-
ing for breath, unable to scream, and the arms were stiff and
stretched out convulsively. This lasted a short time ; the only
difference then was that the stiffened fingers began to pick
convulsively at the bed clothes. Her sister who was moisten-
ing her lips told me that the tongue was swollen and protrud-
ing, and the eyes starting from the sockets. I followed the
directions she had given me and in about a minute she was
able to breathe and scream again. In about half an hour
she was delirious and I put her to sleep. After I had mes-
merised her two hours and a half according to her directions,
she said the inflammation caused by the attack was reduced,
and I awoke her. Her left leg was paralysed.

April 30th, I kept her asleep two hours and a quarter in


Sits for the first time for twelve years. 237


-he morning, one hour in the evening, eating for her as usual.
The paralysis was removed by the mesmerism as before.

She had two more attacks after this, in most points like
the preceding ones, except that the last, which she had called
a bit of an attack, lasted only a quarter of an hour. The
exact times when the attacks would commence, their duration
and main symptoms she predicted as before, and was invari-
ably correct. Before the last one she said that if, when the
attack had lasted ten or twelve minutes, she asked me to
raise her I might do so with safety, as she should have an
instinctive feeling that the parts had torn asunder, and the
obstacle to her sitting up was removed. The attack while it
lasted was as severe as the preceding ones. After about ten or
twelve minutes she writhed herself up into an arch supported
as it seemed to me only by her head and héels, she soon fell
back and sprung up in a sitting position, (the first time for
twelve years,) she supported herself by me for a short time,
and then fell back, became delirious and was soon put to
sleep. When asleep she said that the place had torn and she
might be raised with safety. I continued to mesmerise her
regularly until May 27th, generally twice a day, keeping her
asleep three or four hours each day, and having my dinner
and tea by her side when she was in mesmerie sleep. After
a few days I began to put her up into a sitting position for a
very short time each day. At first it was accompanied by
various bad effects in consequence both of the weak state she
was in, and of having been so long in one position; after
each attempt I put her into mesmeric sleep, and she then
told me, if any mischief was done, how it was to be remedied,
and what precautions were to be taken. When I left her,
May 27th, she said if she were not mesmerised again she
should gradually but very slowly recover; she was able to be
carried out and laid on a sofa in the garden, but was still
very much emaciated, both by the sufferings she had gone
through, and the abstinence. A week previous to the attack
her appetite fell off, for eight days she tasted solid food only,
viz., one or two mouthfuls of cake once ; for thirteen days
after that she tasted nothing solid, only a little coffee in the
morning and half a cup of tea at evening, and some ice
during the time she was subject to the retching Not only
when asleep but when awake also, she seemed to derive real
benefit from my eating by her side when she was in mesmeric
sleep, and when she awoke could always tell by her own feel-
ing whether I had eaten or not. In sleep she said it gave
her no blood, but gave her all the nervous strength she would
have derived from really eating.


238 Remarkable clairvoyance as to disease in others.


I went away May 28, and returned in July.

From July 12 to August 16 inclusive, I generally mes-
merised her twice a day, keeping her asleep between one and
two hours each time. She had felt weak for some days: she
could not see herself clearly the first time because she had
not much mesmerism in her. In the evening she could see
herself, and said, “ When I am first put up I shall have a
stinging pain in the stomach ; it will not matter—it won’t be
inflammation, but when I am awake I shall be afraid of it.
When I first walk a sort of cord will appear to pull my leg ;
I must disregard that: it will be caused by muscles acting
which have been so long dormant. I shall be sure to walk.”

She sat up each day for about a minute at a time, and as
soon as she felt any bad effect, I put her to sleep to see what
it was caused by: usually the blood had flowed too quickly
to some particular vein where she had suffered before.

July 22nd. She sat up six minutes without bad effect.

July 23rd. I put her on her fect in her waking state.
She said she never should be able to walk: she could not
straighten her legs; it seemed as if a cord pulled her. I
put her on her feet twice. When she was mesmerised she
said it had tried her a good deal, but she should be able to
walk. I put her on her feet each day. On August 3 she
walked into another room with support; and when [I left her
on August 16 she was able to walk nearly two hundred yards
with my support: not so long with any one else, as she said
that my holding her gave her a partial mesmerism.

During this time we discovered that, if before she was
put to sleep herself she mesmerised a person in another room,
she could when asleep see that person, and describe the
state of his nerves, organs, &c., which was very convenient,
as she was thereby enabled to give diagnoses in cases of
illness in which she could not have borne the patient in the
same room; in fact at least nine persons out of ten cross-
mesmerised her. When she thus saw a patient, it was his
internal not his external form she saw; and the vision
seemed rather microscopic. She would examine one organ
at a time, and nothing seemed too minute for her to per-
ceive: but that the perception was real we often had proof
independently of the diagnosis she gave; as in some cases
mesmerism was recommended, and she was requested to tell
how the mesmerism acted, and which out of several mes-
merisers would suit the patient. On these occasions she
would tell exactly how the passes were being made in the
room below, with other accidental circumstances. One thing
she always maintained, that in serious cases it was of the


Had extatic delirium : is perfectly cured. 239


utmost consequence what mesmeriser was employed. Some-
times when several have been tried, she has declared that one
would soothe and cure, that all the others would do harm;
or that the nervous fluid which they sent forth clouded that
of the patient. When I asked her how she saw, she said she
could not explain it; I should not understand her: it ap-
peared to her as if the whole of what was inside her shell
saw the object.

About this time she exhibited a third stage of mesmerism.
On several occasions when I had kept her a long time in
coma she would utter a slight moan, upon which I used to
let her come out of the coma into the ordinary state of som-
nambulism. But I found that, if I continued to keep her in
coma after the moaning, she would pass into an ecstatic
state, in which she would shout out and try to rise up to
some visions she saw above. In this state I could only col-
lect what she saw from what she said; for she did not hear
me: and when she passed back into the usual mesmeric
state she knew nothing about it; she said it was as great a
mystery to her as the common mesmeric state was to her
when awake. She appeared however to be brighter after
being put into this stage, and to derive real good from it.

I went away and returned Dec. 28th. During this time
she had grown stronger, could walk with support about two
hundred yards in the course of the day, but complained of
pain in the back, and had felt slight numbness in the arm.
She was as usual mesmerised in three or four passes, but at
first could not see herself. The third time she began to see,
and said she had strained the back by sitting up, and should
have had paralysis if she had gone on.

I mesmerised her for more than four months, sometimes
twice, usually once a day, keeping her asleep between one
and two hours on the average each time. All bad symptoms
and local debility gradually disappeared. Before four months
were over she was quite well, and able to walk more than a
mile in the course of the day.

During this time her power of seeing persons in the mes-
meric state increased, and she still retained her power of pre-
vision in her own case.

January 31st, 1854. She had been unwell in the day.
When asleep she could see what had made her ill: she said
there was inflammation in a valve of the heart, which had
contracted it, and the blood would not pass through: that
she should be ill in the morning, and not able to rise early :
about one o’clock she should tumble down ; she could not tell
the exact time, as if she walked about it would bring it on


240 Visions of her delirium.


earlier, but she thought it would not be before one o’clock :
that she must be watched and not allowed to walk out: that
it would kill a strong man, but not her: the mesmerism
would not stop it, as there was no nerve to carry the mes-
merism down to the valve, but it would do her good after-
wards. I acquainted her sister with what she had said, and
on the following day went at about forty minutes past one p.m.
I found her lying on the sofa, and was told that she had been
ill all the morning: soon after one, she rose to shut the
door, and fell down; her sister, who was watching her, was
only just in time to prevent her from hurting herself against
the fender. The mesmerism speedily relieved her.

Two or three times when she has been asleep I have re-
quested her to see what was the effect of a magneto-electric
machine upon myself and others. She used to say that it
was quite a gross thing compared with mesmerism: that it
did not enter the nerves, but merely acted upon the muscles :
that it would stimulate them, and give them blood if they
required it. When applied to the liver, she was surprised at
its meandering about the liver, and not passing from point
to point instantly as she expected.

I have frequently tried the effect of causing her to pass
from coma into the higher state of mesmerism, to which I
alluded before: it gradually became more defined, and I
found that if no serious symptoms came on, she awoke out
of it into the common stage refreshed and brighter. As in
the higher stage she gave no sign of hearing me, and when
she came back into common sleep knew nothing of what had
passed, I could only collect by what she said that she be-
lieved she was hearing beautiful music, seeing visions, and
talking with one or two angels who seemed to attend her.
After a little time she would attempt to rise up to what she
saw, but I found that by breathing on the sofa behind I
could draw her back and prevent her rising. Sometimes,
however, when in this stage she would see a person who was
considered dying, and about whom she was interested; in
which case the symptoms were rather alarming, and she used
to pass off into another state, with the arms perfectly rigid,
the breathing apparently stopped; from which I had some
difficulty in rousing her, and when aroused she would say
she looked ill, and request to be put to sleep [#. e., into coma].
Fortunately she had before this begun occasionally to pass
into this rigid state, and had told me how to rouse her from
it, which was to desmesmerise her strongly and then put her
into coma. She said that when she was in that rigid state
her spirit could not come back. -At first she affirmed that it


Her view of the spleen’s action. 241


did not matter keeping her in it a long time, provided I did
not go away and used the proper means to rouse her—the
feeling was exceedingly delightful; but latterly after it had
come on in consequence of something disturbing her during
the higher stage of mesmerism, she said, “ I don’t think it
would do keeping me too long in that stage.”

I. “ Why ?”

A. “I think perhaps my spirit would not come back.”

I. “Do you mean you should die ?”

A. “You could not call it death: it is so very pleasant.”

I. “ But you would have to be buried ?”

A. “Yes; I should have to be buried.”


As she had frequently seen the spleen diseased in patients,
and did not know its use, she requested me to allow her to
watch mine, which she did for nearly two hours, after a meal.
What she told me was as follows :—

“The position of the spleen indicates that it is of great
consequence. I see the blood is purer when it comes out
from the spleen than when it goes into it: the blood in pass-
ing through the spleen changes its character. The spleen
mingles a secretion of its own making with the blood. The
use of the organ is not to receive the overplus of the blood
from the heart, but to change the character of the blood.
The kidnies and the glands receive secretions from the blood,
but this gives a secretion of its own which seems to change
the character of the blood. Whenever I see persons with
their blood heavy and loaded, they always have bad spleens :
the blood cannot be good without the secretion which the
spleen affords it.”

In answer to some questions I put to her she said, “ The
secretion appears to mix with all except the red part of the
blood, as cream mixes with tea, and softens and corrects it.
The secretion is not an acid ; it corrects acid: I don’t exactly
know what an alkali is, but if the blood were too acid the
secretion would mingle with the acid and neutralize it. All
the blood in the heart passes through the spleen; I should
think a bucket full in a little time; but it does not all go
through directly, as if you poured it from one vessel into
another, but it all goes through before it comes back to the
heart. I could not tell what proportion the spleen gives to
the blood, unless I saw other specimens; perhaps more or
less according to the character of the blood. It seems odd
to me when awake that thought should act upon the glands,
but now it seems natural, because I see how the nerves press
upon the glands. If the spleen acts during the night as


242 Dr. Elliotson’s remarks on the motto.
actively as it is acting now, I should think it would give a
gallon full in the twenty-four hours: I can’t see where it
gets the gallon full from—it appears to make it ; perhaps I
may find out by watching it more, but I am tired now.”


In conclusion I may add, that the cure effected by the
mesmerism seems permanent: the lady is now well, and has
been travelling about.

R. A. F. Barrett, B.D.,
Senior Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge.
August 11, 1854.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON TO THE MOTTO.


It is lamentable for the public to learn that the Fellow of
the London College of Physicians, a graduate of the Uni-
sity of Cambridge, who delivered the Harveian Oration so
late as the middle of 1854, displayed either wilful and utter
ignorance of a body of thoroughly established medical truths,
or unbounded effrontery in denying what he knew to be true.

Whichever be the case, the public is not unlikely to con-
sider that, as he must be conscious of the wretchedly imper-
fect state of medicine and the duty of neglecting no means of
improving it, he displayed a cold-blooded disregard of the
sufferings of his fellow-creatures, which, arising whether from
the agonizing nature of surgical measures or from the ravages
of unremedied disease, mesmerism has the power of so won-
derfully preventing, assuaging, and curing, without the
slightest danger or even annoyance, nay, even with the most
comfortable feelings—what cannot be said of chloroform,
blisters, sinapisms, issues, setons, emetics, purgatives, nar-
cotics, mercury, and the host of nauseous drugs.

The public is likely to be amazed not only at a London
physician of the present day acting in this way, but at his
conceiving that the College could be in such a state as to
listen without disgust to such an outpouring. The public
presumes that the College of Physicians consists of observing
and reflecting men, who know that facts in science or in art
must be determined by observation and trial; and sees that
Dr. Alderson’s bare declamation, without any argument upon
the subject, is unworthy of a moment’s regard, and in the
case of chemistry, astronomy, or any other science or art,
would be estimated as idle wind.

The public not only must see this, but must feel asto-


Dr. Alderson’s foul language.


nished that, in a society supposed to consist of gentlemen,
coarse language should be ventured upon, instead of a courte-
ous expression of difference of opinion. Formerly discussions
were carried on with abuse: but in modern days such a want
of decency is not met with among scholars or scientific men.
Why those Fellows of the College and other gentlemen who
are known to be conversant with the truths of mesmerism,
and who have announced their belief modestly, though firmly,
and given their reasons, should be treated differently from
the investigators of all other sciences, it is hard to guess.
But Dr. Alderson without any ceremony forgets himself so
unfortunately as to call us, who certainly are in no respect,
intellectual, moral or social, his inferiors, “false and vain
discoverers,” “ miserable boasters,” “mountebanks.’* This is
calculated to give the public a very poor opinion of the intel-
ligence and manners of the College of Physicians. The
Bishop of Oxford, who was present and is equally convinced
from experiment of the truth of mesmerism with myself, must
have smiled at Dr. Alderson’s display: so must Dr. Billing,
Dr. Mayo, Dr. Watson, and other Fellows of the College,
and Mr. Green, formerly President of the College of Sur-


* In a lecture delivered before the College, and quoted and commented upon
by myself at some length in 7he Zoist, No. XXXIX., Dr. Alderson called mes-
merism the “ monster delusion of the century!” said it was an “ absurdity,”
“with pretensions actually superhuman :” that we declared it could “ cause the
spirit to shuffle off its mortal coil, and endue a creature with a sort of omnipre-
sence and omnipotence,” and that the world “ may search in vain for one single
well-attested practical benefit from the inventors of this system.” Tolerably cool !
but unreproved by the College in—1852.

In the Harveian Oration of 1850, and quoted and commented upon by myself
in The Zoist, No. XXXI., Dr. John Arthur Wilson said, “ Jf this or that duke,
earl, senator, knight, who trust their wives or daughters to these indecent mes-
meric or obstetric of ic bishops, of arch ic arch-bishops,—
allow me for this one day, while Iam among my brother doctors, to hold my
tongue out of sheer disgust, out of modesty, out of MY REVERENCE FOR RELI-
Gion.”” ‘* Get out of the way you modern patrons, you homeopathists, you
hydropathists, you visionaries, you mesmerists.”

In a lecture previously delivered by him before the College of Physicians
(see Zoist, No. XXIII.) he had ‘“‘ ridiculed mesmerism as an imposture some-
times shewn in drawing-rooms to fashionable dowagers with not half the sense of
laundry-maids, and talked about by Rosicrusian parsons and semi-delirious
butlers.”

In the Harveian Oration of 1848 (see Zoist, No. XXIII.), Dr. Francis
Hawkins said, ‘“ Do not quacks hunt out the vices or infirmities of mankind to
turn them to profit, some selecting one and some another for their purpose ?
Among quacks, the impostors, called mesmerists, are in my opinion the especial
favourites of those, both male and female, in whom the sexual passions burn
strongly, either in secret or notoriously. Decency forbids me to be more ex-
plicit.” ‘From these and similar artifices, the physician should be carefully
removed and guarded: and this can hardly be accomplished except by a sound
education, which will teach him to thoroughly abhor all deceit and trick.”


24-4 Harvey's castigation of his opponenis.


geons, who are no less convinced than the Bishop of Oxford,
though they do not work much for the cause.

“ Harvey was modest also, and loved truth—not for his
own preferment, but for her sake alone. His discoveries had
to bear the test of factious opposition.” We too are “ modest,”
aware that the discoveries are not our own: we too are
“amazingly persevering,’ but we are intrepid in the cause of
nature’s truths,—of truths most important: and “not for
our own preferment,’ Dr. Alderson well knows, “ but for her
sake alone :’’ and we laugh to scorn all our uninformed and
unscrupulous and self-sufficient “factious” opponents. In
my Harveian Oration delivered in June, 1846, in obedience
to the will of the founder of the oration, 1 introduced mes-
merism in these respectful words :—


“Let us never allow authority, conceit, habit, or the fear of
ridicule, to make us indifferent, much less to make us hostile, to
truth: and thus, being single-hearted lovers of truth, and prizing
it above everything else, we shall all love one another. Let us al-
ways have before our eyes this memorable passage in Harvey’s
works,” &c., &c.

“**Some are clamorous with groundless and fictitious assertions
on the authority of their teachers, plausible suppositions, or empty
quibbles: and some rail with a torrent of expressions which are dis-
creditable to them, often spiteful, insolent, and abusive, by which
they only display their own emptiness, absurdity, bad habits, and
want of argument (which results from sense) and show themselves
mad with sophistries opposed to reason.’ ‘ How difficult it is tu
teach those who have no experience or knowledge derived from the
senses, and how unfit to learn true science are the unprepared and
inexperienced, is shown in the opinions of the blind concerning
colours and of the deaf concerning sounds.’

** Never was it more necessary than at the present moment to
bear all these things in mind. A body of facts is presented to us
not only wonderful in physiology and pathology, but of the very
highest importance in the prevention of suffering under the hands
of the surgeon and in the cure of disease. The chief phenomena
are indisputable: authors of all periods record them, and we all
ourselves witness them, some rarely, some every day. The point
to be determined is whether they may be produced artificially and sub-
jected to our control: and it can be determined by experience only.
The loss of common feeling,—anzsthesia, is but a form of palsy,
and in it wounds give no pain. If this condition can be induced
temporarily by art, we of necessity enable persons to undergo sur-
gical operations without suffering. Whether the artificial production
of those phenomena, or the performance of the processes which so
often induce them, will mitigate or cure disease, can likewise be
determined by experience only. It is the imperative, the solemn,
duty of the profession, anxiously and dispassionately to determine


Dr. Alderson’s two English versions. 245


these points by experiment, each man for himself. I have done so
for ten years, and fearlessly declare that the phenomena, the preven-
tion of pain under surgical operations, the production of repose and
comfort in disease, and the cure of many diseases, even after the
failure of all ordinary means, are true. In the name, therefore, of
the love of truth, in the name of the dignity of our profession, in
the name of the good of all mankind, I implore you carefully to
investigate this important subject.”


As I have not yet seen Dr. Alderson’s Oration in print
and was not present at its delivery, never having attended a
College meeting since the vulgar insults of Dr. F. Hawkins
in his Oration, that were equally unrebuked with those sub-
sequently uttered in the Oration of Dr. J. A. Wilson, I am
obliged to content myself with a report of it. The report is
unquestionably accurate, because it is given in both the
Lancet and the Medical Times, with the greater part of the
words quoted by me so nearly identical and remarkable that
no two persons could have given such a pair of translations,
even if the matter translated had not been unfamiliar Latin
and merely spoken. They are by the same hand; and, di-
rectly or indirectly, there can be no question that Dr.
Alderson sent an English version of his Latin to each of these
two journals, with a few trifling variations to conceal their
source.

“ Harvey’s Cambridge training, however, or his Paduan
teaching, or even his own bright perception, would have failed
to raise him to his pinnacle of fame, had he wanted his amazing
perseverance : he was modest, also, and loved truth for her
sake alone. His discoveries had to bear the test of factious
opposition : claiming erroneously his bright example, many
a false and vain discoverer is ready to attribute each counter-
argument to envy—that hanger-on of virtue, and to appeal to
Harvey’s persecution, as if it proved the truth of their pre-
tensions. Miserable boasters ! opposition does not prove the
truth: the final triumph only shows where it exists. Were it
not so, the most ridiculous absurdities would, merely because
controverted, seem most true. Let not our orpErR* yield
to fallacies which require such vain arguments for their sup-
port: and let not mesmerists, table-prophets, homeopathists,
mountebanks, or any of the tribe, pollute the honoured name
of Harvey by claiming his example to favour their presump-
tion. Truth is indestructible, and cannot be extinguished
by oppression : therefore Harvey triumphed finally.””—Medical
Times, July 8, 1854; p. 46.


* The late Lord Grey over again !
VOL. XII.


246 Dr. Alderson’s misrepresentations.


“ Harvey's Cambridge.training, or his Paduan studies, or
his own bright perception, would have failed to raise him to
his pinnacle of fame, but for his amazing perseverance. Loving
truth and seeking her most ardently, yet his discoveries had
to bear the test of factious opposition. Many a false dis-
coverer has since presumed to claim him as their prototype,
and attribute every counter-argument to envy—the hanger-on
of virtue. Miserable boasters! opposition is no evidence of
truth. Mesmerists! table-prophets! homeopathists ! moun-
tebanks ! Harvey’s persecution cannot change your fallacies
to facts. The final triumph only shows where truth exists.” —
Lancet, July 8, 1854; p. 17.

Dr. Alderson reminds us, “ miserable boasters !”’ that “ op-
position does not prove the truth; the final triumph only shows
where it exists :” that “many a false and vain discoverer,” be-
cause “ Harvey’s discoveries had to bear the test of factious op-
position,” “ claiming erroneously his bright example, is ready to
attribute each counter-argument to envy,” “as if persecution
proved the truth of their pretensions.” No: we argue not thus.
Dr. Alderson entirely misrepresents us. We say that the
most general opposition does not disprove a discovery : that
asserted facts are not the less likely to be facts because they
are at first opposed and denied: and we refer among a host
of medical examples* to the example of the long and virulent
opposition to Harvey. We are not absurd, as Dr. Alderson
absurdly supposes. The argument which he uses against us
was urged by the Aldersons, John Arthur Wilsons, Francis
Hawkinses, Wakleys, Bushnans, Spencer Wellses, John
Forbeses, and every sine nomine bustler of the day against
Harvey :—that opposition and persecution did not prove the
truth of his pretensions. Nor, while opposition and perse-
cution went on, could Harvey point to final triumph as a
proof of their truth.

Happily for mankind, our final triumph is near at hand,
and very few more Harveian orators will venture to cut the
same figure as Dr. Alderson, or even to make a disrespectful
allusion to mesmerism : but our opponents will remain trans-
fixed in The Zoist for the amusement of beholders through
all generations.t


* See my Harveian Oration, p. 67 of the English version.

+ In my Harveian Oration, when speaking of Caius, I said that he “ em-
ployed his great influence with Mary to advance Gonville Hall to a College,
enlarging this with a new square, and endowing it during his lifetime, and when
old and likely to love money, with estates for the maintenance of three fellows
and twenty scholars.”


Wishing to refer to my Oration, and having but one copy, which a friend had


( 247 )


II. Mesmer’s Grave at Meersburg in Suabia. By the Rev.
C. Kecan Paut, of Eton College.


‘* At Florence, under Demetrius Chalcondylas, an Athenian, he (Linacre) learnt
Greek, which was then not taught at Oxford, where it is now so prized and was
introduced against the fiercest opposition, THE FACTIONS OF GREEKS AND
TROJANS COMING FREQUENTLY TO BLOWS. On his return from Italy to Oxford,
he perpetrated the innovation of teaching Greek before a professorship of that
language was founded by Cardinal Wolsey; and, after the spirits of those,
whose manners the ingenuous arts had failed to soften and preserve from asperity,
were grown cool, and Greek was taught as a matter of course, an equally furious
opposition was made by a party of the Grecians to the introduction of a more
correct pronunciation of their language—the Roman Catholics fighting for the old


asked me to lend him, and not knowing where another copy was to be found
except in the library of the College of Physicians, although I had printed a
thousand, I borrowed this copy from the College, and found that some person had
written, not valiantly but anonymously, in pencil, the following remark upon that
passage, in the Latin version—

“Error! Halls and Colleges at Cambridge have always been on a perfect
equality.”

To this I reply, that I never spare pains to be accurate either in quoting,
observing, or experimenting: I absolutely fag. I conceived that I had good
authority for saying that the Hall was advanced to a College: I did not say ad-
vanced in power or authority, but advanced—the expression found by me in my
authors and implying perhaps in size and revenue only. If any halls were united
into one, this was called a college: and it was surely an advance when after two
hundred years Gonville Hall was enlarged and enriched by Caius, and the title
of College given to it by the Queen’s permission.

Speed writing about 1627, about seventy years after Caius’s foundation, says
of Gonville Hall, ‘‘ Caius, newly repairing it, obtained leave of King Philip and
Queen Mary to be a founder, and named it Gonville and Caius College.’’

The witty Dr. Thomas Fuller, writing about twenty-five years later (1650),
says, ‘‘ John Caius, Doctor of Physic, improved the ancient Hall of Gonville into
a new College of his own name.’’

Dr. Aikin, in his Biographical Memoirs of Medicine in Great Britain, says,
“ Caius obtained leave to advance Gonville Hall into a College, on condition of
enlarging the institution at his own expense.’’—p. 107.

Another writer :—‘ He succeeded in 1557 in obtaining from his sovereign
Queen Mary the power of enlarging Gonville Hall, and of so far originating it
by his property as to make it a regular College.”’ The friend at Cambridge who
mentioned this to me has forgotten the writer’s name.

In Ackermann’s History of Cambridge, vol. i., pp. 81—85, there is informa-
tion on these points: and it is said, ‘‘ In 1557, John Caius, who was at that
time physician to Queen Mary, obtained permission to give to Gonville Hail the
title of a College,” &c.

I have every reason to believe that the pencilled remark in the College copy
of my Oration was written by Dr. Alderson, for he had just before borrowed my
Oration from the College library, he is a Cambridge man, and is exactly the
person to do such a thing. Only one other Fellow has, as far as I can learn,
had out my Oration since I presented it to the College: for I gave a copy
to every Fellow in London. This was Dr. Formby, of Liverpool, who, I
hear, is nearly blind, and not likely to have read the Latin, and still less to have
troubled himself to writein a borrowed work.

A little cross was placed opposite three or four Latin words. If this implied
that the Latin was not good, the crossmaker displayed a very moderate acquaint-
ance with the language of Cicero.


s2


248 Greek formerly not allowed in Oxford.


pronunciation, the Protestants for the new—Bishop Gardiner, on the authority of
the king and council, whipping, degrading, and expelling those who refused to con-
tinue the corrupt sounds, and declaring that, RATHER THAN ALLOW THE INNO-
VATION OF THE IMPROVED, IT WOULD BE BETTER FOR THE GREEK TONGUE TO
BE BANISHED FROM THE University.” ‘‘ Rabelais, who was twenty years
younger than Linacre, and, though generally known only as an incorrigible wit,
was a prodigy of learning and science and an eminent physician, published and
lectured upon Hippocrates and Galen, and was hated and abused by all his
French brethren on account of his extraordinary merit, ‘ particularly because he
studied Greek,’ THE NovELTY of that language making them esteem it not only
barbarous but ANTICHRISTIAN.”*


WE left the boat, the quaint old street,
To climb where frowns the castle hill
And drawbridge, o’er the cotton mill,

O’er noise of shuttles ’neath their feet.


Though far above us all things told

Of warrior lords and iron knocks,

The torrents cried from quarried rocks,
“The new age undermines the old.”


Up, past these towers to other halls,
Dismantled home of princely priest,
Where mingled tones of prayer and feast

Still seem to lurk on curtained walls ;


Up, higher up, we came, where vines
Enclasp the rude-hewn crucifix,
And summer suns and showers mix

Their golden glory into wines ;


Up, higher up, we saw the wave

Reflect the mountain’s rosy show,

We found a churchyard baked in glow,
And there we stood by Mesmer’s grave.


* The Harveian Oration, delivered before the Royal College of Physicians,
London, June 27th, 1846. By John Elliotson, M.D., Cantab. F.R.S., Fellow
of the College. With an English Version and Notes: pp. 38, 39.

It gives us pleasure to see that the bitterness of Mr. Wakley towards Dr.
Elliotson has declined. For in the Lancet of June 17, 1854; p. 647, in an
address lately delivered at Nottingham by Dr. Marshall Hall on his return from
America, is a quotation of many lines from Dr. Elliotson’s Oration, introduced
in these words,—‘‘ Let empiricism, except a very enlightened empiricism, cease.
Above all things, adopt the precepts of the immortal Harvey, as quoted by an
illustrious living physician.” When the language used by Mr. Wakley in his
Lancet respecting this Oration is remembered (see Zoist, No. XXIV., p. 402),
the insertion of any passage from it, and especially of such complimentary expres-
sions, is a matter of astonishment. Mesmerism now makes giant strides.— Zoist.


Canning and Perceval scoffed at Med. Jurisprudence.


A pleasant rest ! for him who sought
To lift the veil from Nature’s face,
And bore the laugh of all his race

Who dread results of honest thought.


A pleasant rest! and we, for whom
The laws he groped for dimly dawn,
The breakings of a glorious morn,

May learn in standing near his tomb


To toil in patience, till the gold
Of sunrise light the hills of truth,
For science aye renews her youth,
“ The new age undermines the old.”


III. A remarkable case of Cure of Lameness from infancy,
through the agency of Clairvoyance. By the Rev. James
Peep, A.B., Trin. Col. Dubl., Rector of the Union of
Haretown, County Wexford.*


‘Dr. Andrew Duncan, jun., was the first professor of medical jurisprudence
in any British University. His venerable father had for some years previous
urged its importance on the public, and even delivered, I believe, a course of
private lectures: but it was not until 1806 that Dr. Duncan, jun., received his
appointment.” “ It was for this appointment that the Fox ministry of that day
were so much reviled.’’ “In the House of Commons, June 30, 1807, Mr.
Perceval, in moving for the renewal of the finance committee, took occasion to
attack the abolition ministry, which had just been turned out. Among other
things he said, ‘ He should not dwell in detail upon all the acts of the late admi-
nistration, but he confessed himself at a loss to understand what they could mean
by the appointment of a Professor of Medical Jurisprudence. He acknowledged
that he was ignorant of the duty of that Professor, and could not comprehend
what was meant by the science he professed.’ On the same day Mr. Canning
said, “He could alone account for such a nomination by supposing that after a
long debate, in the swell of insolence, and to show how far they could go, they
had said, ‘We will shew them what we can do—we will create a Professor of
Medical Jurisprudence.’—Stockdale’s Annual Register. 1807. pp. 206, 210.”
Elements of Medical Jurisprudence, by T. R. Beck, M,D. Introduction.t


Dublin, 28th July, 1854.

My dear Sir,—In compliance with your wish, I give you,

somewhat in detail, the facts respecting the remarkable case

of clairvoyance, of which I communicated the heads when I
had lately the pleasure of calling on you in town.


* See Mr. Peed’s interesting account of his visit to London and the Mesmeric
Infirmary, in No. XXX1X.—Zoist.

+ Every medical school has now long had such a professor, and every can-
didate for a medical examination been compelled to attend such a course of lec-
tures.—Zoist.


250 Accurately describes what she had never known.


All the facts of the case I can give from my personal
knowledge, and have reason to thank this wondrous faculty
of clairvoyance, as the means—under the divine blessing—of
conferring a signal benefit on a member of my family.

In the beginning of September last, as nearly as I can
recollect, I was requested by a Mrs. A. to call to see her
daughter, Miss A., who was at the time under the care of an
eminent Dublin surgeon, Dr. E., and had once been a patient
of mine, when suffering under a severe attack of illness by
which she had all but lost the sight of her left eye, though
this was happily restored by the agency of mesmerism.

Miss A. had for years been confined to her couch in spinal
disease ; and, when I called on her, suffered in addition from
a contraction of the left leg. With the permission of her
medical attendant, a professed unbeliever in mesmerism—I
proposed to mesmerise Miss A. three times a week, for a fort-
night: Dr. E. kindly volunteering to discontinue for that
period his own treatment and watch the result of mine—
which he looked upon, at least, as harmless.

Before the expiration of the fortnight, the contraction of
the leg was removed, and Dr. E. called on me to fix a day to
meet at the residence of his patient.

Miss A. was readily put into the true mesmeric coma,
and while in that state was extremely lucid, generally of her
own accord conversing during the entire sitting.

A day or two before Dr. E. called on me, Miss A., during
her mesmeric sleep, was speaking on indifferent subjects—
when, abruptly turning towards me, she asked, “ Why does
not Mr. P.” (meaning myself,) “get something done for his
sister ?”

“ His sister” I replied, “is in very good health.”

“Oh, you know what I mean—his sister-in-law.”

“ What is the matter with her ?”

“Why don’t you know she is lame? her foot when she
rests on it, bends so,” (illustrating the affection on her own
foot—the same foot by the way on which my sister-in-law was
lame,) “she has not you know a club foot, there is no distor-
tion, Dr. E. cured a lady of 40 years of age the other day, of
a club foot ; he can easily cure Mr. P’s. sister-in-law.”

“ When did she become lame?”

“ Let me see—she certainly was not born so—her foot got
an injury when she was a mere child at nurse—Dr. E. can
cure it easily.”

I confess Iwas much surprised at Miss A.’s minute acquaint-
ance with the ailment of one of my sisters-in-law. Miss A. had
never seen her, nor had I mentioned one word about her.


Her anatomical accuracy astounds. 251


When Miss A. was awake, I questioned her about my
sister-in-law, but she was, as I anticipated, in perfect igno-
rance of her; and I did not of course allude to the conversa-
tion that had just passed, of which she evidently retained no
recollection in her normal state.

On Dr. E.’s calling on me, as I have said above, I told
him the communication Miss A. had made to me, and we
agreed to test her as fully as possible on the subject.

Accordingly Dr. E. and I met a few days after at Miss
A.’s residence ; at his request, and, with Miss A.’s permission,
I put her into the state of sleep-waking. Leaning on my
arm, she was able to walk across the room—a thing which she
could not attempt without vigorous assistance when awake—
and Dr. E., having first tested the completeness of the removal
of all contraction of the leg, proceeded to put some questions
to Miss A. respecting the extent and nature of my sister-in-
law’s lameness.

To these Miss A. replied accurately and without hesitation
—tracing on her own foot the tendons, &c., affected—placing
at his request, her finger on the seat of the malady, and
shewing the sinews secondarily, as well as those primarily,
engaged. After undergoing a searching and minute exami-
nation on the subject, she walked back with me to the sofa—
when I awoke her.

On leaving with Dr. E., I told him that my sister-in-law—
whom he had not yet seen—had for years been under treat-
ment by some of the most eminent members of the faculty in
Dublin, and that her case had been for some considerable
time past given up as hopeless. Dr. E. replied that he would
examine the case, and, if it proved one on which he could
pronounce favourably, he would perform the requisite opera-
tion.

My sister-in-law came, at my request, to Dublin, and met
Dr. E. at my house. Dr. E., after examining her foot atten-
tively, declared Miss A. must have seen it when she was
awake. He then corrected himself and said it was a foolish
observation, (as indeed it was,) for that no one but an ana-
tomist of experience could have given the description of the
foot that Miss A. had given him, and which, with unfeigned
astonishment, he pronounced to be wonderfully correct. Dr.
E. then described the necessary operation, and fixed the day
on which he would perform it.

Meanwhile, I again mesmerised Miss A., and questioned
her m4 the nature of the proposed operation and its probable
result.

She told me the operation itself would be a mere trifle—


252 Predicts with equal accuracy.
but that immediately after it my sister-in-law would suffer
much pain all along the leg; that this could be at once re-
moved by mesmerism ; that the after treatment, in which
some surgical machinery must be used, would be both tedious
and trying; that in three weeks my sister-in-law would be
able to walk down stairs without assistance, but that it would
take three months before her cure would be complete.

_ Inevery one of the above particulars, Miss A.’s predic-
tions turned out accurately correct—as I can myself testify,
my sister-in-law staying at my house while under Dr. E.’s
kind and skilful treatment. Nor had Dr. E. or myself had any
communication on the subject with Miss A. in her normal state.

I must add that subsequently from time to time I mes-
merised Miss A. with a view to ascertain her opinion on the
progress of my sister-in-law’s cure. She always told me how
matters were going on, and generally let me know before
hand of any change of treatment. Indeed, on one occasion,

I had just reached home after having mesmerised Miss A.,
before Dr. E. had concluded his visit, and I said, Dr. E., you
are going to prescribe so and so this morning—telling him
what Miss A. had just been telling me. Some members of
my family who were in the room burst out laughing, and told
me I had repeated almost in Dr. E.’s own words the direc-
tions he had just been giving.

Some time after my sister-in-law’s cure had been effected,

I asked Miss A. when in her sleep-waking state, how she
could have known anything about the case. She replied at
once, “It was very easy—the foot with bared nerves, sinews,
veins, &c., came before me on the cloud—I could trace them
all with ease.”

Oddly enough she fancies in the mesmeric state that she
floats on a luminous cloud, far above her body and our earth.
I have now, my dear Sir, given you a brief detail of this
very curious case, and I had hoped that Dr. E. would have drawn
up an account of the case himself, as far at least as the facts
came under his personal knowledge. This he at once, when

I applied to him, agreed to do, though, as still, a disbeliever in
mesmerism. But he put off doing so from time to time, until
at length, as he pleaded fault of memory and unwillingness to
have any remarks of his made public, I thought it better to
give the statement as well as I was able in my own words.

You are aware of Dr. E.’s address, in case you would wish
to refer to him to procure more minute information on the
subject.

I remain, my dear Sir,
Faithfully yours,
bi James PEED.


Dr. Elliotson.


( 258 )


IV. Case of Leprosy cured with Mesmerism. By the Rev.
Jerrery Exins, Rector of Sampford, Essex.


‘*‘ UmBRELLAS.—An umbrella is described in early dictionaries, as a ‘‘ portable
pent-house to carry in a person’s hand to screen him from violent rain or heat.”
Umbrellas are very ancient. It appears by the carvings at Persepolis that um-
brellas were used at very remote periods by the eastern princes. Niebhur, who
visited the southern parts of Arabia, informs us that he saw a great prince of
that country returning from a mosque, preceded by some hundreds of soldiers,
and that he and each of the princes of his numerous family caused a large um-
brella to be carried by his side. The old china-ware in our pantries and cup-
boards shews the Chinese shaded by an umbrella. It is said that the first person
who used an umbrella in the streets of London was the benevolent Jonas Hanway,
who died in 1786. For a long while it was not usual for men to carry them
without incurring the brand of effeminacy. At first, a single umbrella seems to
have been kept at a coffee-house for extraordinary occasions—lent as a coach or
chair in a heavy shower, but not commonly carried by the walkers. The Female
Tatler advertises, ‘The young gentleman belonging to the custom-house who, in
fear of rain, borrowed the umbrella from Wilk’s coffee-house, shall the next time
be welcome to the maid’s pattens.’ As late as 1788, one John Macdonald, a
footman, who wrote his own life, informs us that he had a fine silk umbrella,
which he brought from Spain ; but he could not with any comfort to himself use
it, the people calling out—‘ Frenchman! why don’t you get a coach?’ The fact
was, the hackney-coachmen and chairmen, joining with the true esprit de corps,
were clamorous against this portentous rival. The footman, in 1788, gives us
some further information. ‘At this time, there were no umbrellas worn in
London, except in noblemen’s and gentlemen’s houses, where there was a large
one hung in the hall to hold over a lady, if it rained, between the door and her
carriage.’ This man’s sister was compelled to quit his arm one day, from the
abuse he drew down on himself and on his umbrella. But he adds that ‘ he per-
sisted for three months, till they took no notice of this novelty. Foreigners
began to use theirs, and then the English. Now it is become a great trade in
London.’ ’’—National Advertiser, Jan. 14, 1854.


‘*A correspondent of the Durham Advertiser says, it is reported that the
Rev. Peter Barlow, incumbent of Cockfield, has given so much offence to several
of his parishoners by wearing his beard, that they have discontinued their attend-
ance at church !’’—Newspaper, 1854.


Sion House, Tunbridge Wells,
August 17th, 1854.

My dear Sir,—I beg to forward at your request the notes
I took of a case of severe cutaneous disease. ‘The result is, I
must confess, passing strange to myself; it has, moreover,
excited not only the wonder but the interest and confidence
of the neighbourhood in which I live. I have in consequence
of this one case had many applications, so numerous, and
some indeed from such a distance, that I could not attend to
them.

One thing I wish to observe with respect to Daniel
Andrews. I never saw any one so patient under severe suf-
ferings, so confident of being cured, and so grateful for any
relief or mitigation of pain I was instrumental in procuring
for him. I dwell very much on the quality of gratitude be-


254 Mesmeric patients generally grateful.


cause I have found, by experience, that poor people seldom
think of their benefactors after they have received a benefit,
whereas I have remarked that mesmeric patients at the in-
firmary and elsewhere, retain a lively and thankful remem-
brance of the mercies vouchsafed to them by Providence
through the medium of a fellow creature. May not the mys-
terious communication which conveys not only vitality, but
beneficent feelings, from the operator to the afflicted, tend to
enhance the moral as well as physical efficacy of the mesmeric
influence ?
I am, dear sir,
Yours very truly,

Dr. Elliotson. Jerrery ExIns.


Daniel Andrews, labourer, will be 69 years of age next
May. He has the leprosy in the right leg, having caught
cold after working in a ditch ten days, at the beginning of
Dec. 27th, 1852. The complaint gradually spread all over
his body ; he suffered a great deal of pain and had very little
sleep, being tormented with a burning sensation. He lives
in the adjoining parish of Old Sampford, and I did not hear
of his state till some time after he was attacked with this dis-
ease; but, on being informed by the Vicar of his parish (who
had visited the Mesmeric Infirmary in London, and was dis-
posed to admit the efficacy of mesmerism) that the man was
a great sufferer, and that I might possibly be able to relieve
him, I went to see him.

Feb. 2nd. I mesmerised him for half an hour, making
passes (without contact) from the knee to the toes. The leg
was much swelled and inflamed, being of a reddish purple
colour which was overspread with a scurfy-scaly crust, and
the skin from the ancle downwards was thickly covered with
a white mealy-looking powder.—He suffered much pain,
he told me, after I left him, and he slept badly the three
following nights. On the fourth night he had relief, and a
place in the middle of the fore part of his leg which I ob-
served to look more angry than the rest of the leg, broke out
into a sore which discharged freely.

Feb. 6th. I mesmerised his leg again as before. The sore
looked augry and was still discharging more freely (as the
patient said) than when it first broke out. After a few passes
the reddish purple colour from the knee to the middle of the leg
disappeared, and he felt “ dashes””—shooting pains, lower down
the leg towards the ancle. The disappearance of the angry
colour was noticed by the patient and his daughter who lives
with him, of their own accord.


The pain brought lower and lower. 255


a absent from home I did not see him till March
11th.

March 11th. He told me he had suffered less during this
interval. I mesmerised him for forty minutes. The pain is
still descending and is less violent, and he enjoys better nights.

15th. I mesmerised him as before. He was much re-
lieved ; the swelling of the leg is greatly reduced, and the
mealy-looking crust which covered his foot is beginning to
disappear. He suffers less pain, and this is mostly felt at the
ancle, This man, who had never heard of mesmerism, spon-
taneously affirmed that the passes alone had done him good.
His daughter as well as himself again noticed the change which
had taken place in the colour of the leg during the time I was
making the passes, which I continued, as at first, from the
knee downwards without contact and without any intention
or endeavour to put him to sleep.

21st. He told me that on the evening of the 15th, the
pain encreased, but it was succeeded by relief. To-day the
sensations were as usual. During mesmerisation shooting
and shifting pains were felt towards the toes. The pain seems
to rest in the instep. The leg is less swelled and less dis-
coloured. He still constantly affirms that the passes are
doing him good.

March 28th. About three hours after he was last mes-
merised he felt heat and pain in the foot, that continued at
intervals during the night. He was better the next day and
continued so till to-day, when I found the leg of a less angry
colour, the skin not so scurfy, and the foot less covered with
powder. The pain is now advanced towards the toes. Hitherto
he had with difficulty crawled about his cottage with the help
of a crutch and a stick: now he walks about with comparative
ease in his garden and in the adjoining field. I mesmerised
him for half an hour. He declares he feels himself better,
and is confident of being cured. The sore which broke out
in the middle of his legs after the first mesmerisation has
been healed some time, and is still skinned over, scarcely pre-
senting the appearance of a scar. The parish apothecary, who
has no objection to my attendance on his patient, told me
that he had the water brash, and he (the doctor) found that
sulphur had no effect in mitigating the cutaneous affection, and
that he had resorted to arsenic and liquor potasse apparently
with as little success. Andrews for some time has ceased to
be under the apothecary’s treatment; and he only occa-
sionally took some opening medicine given by the apothecary
when it was wanted.

April 1st. He continues to have good nights. The colour


256 Peculiar appearance of mesmerised water.


of the leg improves. He walks about with still greater ease,
but does not lay aside his crutch and stick. He evidently
feels himself better in every way. I mesmerised him a quarter
of an hour, finishing with strong quick passes which he said
caused the “ dashes” to be felt in the ancle on the right side
where the sensation, scarcely amounting to pain, is situated.

5th. I found him suffering severely from distention and
pain of the stomach arising from acidity. After strong retch-
ings he vomited about half a pint of brown liquid like rhubarb
in colour. I made passes over the stomach, and he was
somewhat relieved. His leg looks much better and is almost
free from pain. I made passes over it at his request. He
went to his church on the preceding Sunday—a distance of
nearly a quarter of a mile.—and he thinks this attack was
brought on by fatigue and exposure to the cold. I was with
him three quarters of an hour

8th. I found him free from pain in the stomach. It left
him the day after my last visit. The leg still improves in
appearance; the pain is lessened, and is removed from the
ancle joint towards the little toe. I found him walking in the
field next his cottage with tolerable ease, supported by his
crutch and stick. He said of his own accord that he would
walk to my house, a mile and a half distant, in a week’s time.

13th. He sleeps a great deal better at night. His leg is
now reduced to its natural size, and in colour it differs very
little from the other. The sensation of pain (still very slight)
is brought down to the instep towards the little toe. He
feels “dashings” on that part most when the strong quick
passes are being made. He is very sanguine and grateful,
still urging his intention of walking to my house.

15th. He continues to sleep well. The leg has nearly re-
gained its natural colour. The powder is almost entirely gone
from the foot. He drinks (as he did from the first) water
which I mesmerise and put into a bottle before I make the
passes over his leg. He also bathes the leg and foot with
mesmerised water.

18th. He complained of heat in the instep. After the
usual passes I put a rag soaked in mesmerised water on the
instep and gave him some to drink. His daughter, on seeing
me mesmerise the water, noticed bubbles rising from the
bottom of the jug and bursting near the surface. Some time
after the water was poured into a bottle, we all casually look-
ing at the bottle observed a quantity of bubbles rising to the
top, as if an effervescence was going on*. Andrews in-

Pp See Mr. Ekins’s former observations of the same kind in Nos. XL., XLI

—Lost. :


Leprous appearance nearly gone. 257


variably sleeps as much as five hours a night, whereas before I
saw him, he did not, as he told me, sleep more than one hour a
night in the whole course of the week.

24th. The leg appeared rather more discoloured, but not
inflamed. He felt “dashes” as soon as I began the slow
passes. When at the beginning of the séance I mesmerised
the water in the jug, his daughter saw only a few small
bubbles. When it was poured into the bottle, it was quite
still; but twenty minutes after, we all (four persons) observed
the appearance of a slight effervescence. The bubbles were
distinct and followed each other quickly, bursting as they
reached the surface.

May 3rd. Half an hour after my last visit, Andrew’s son-
in-law on entering the cottage was desired by Andrews to
look at two bottles of water standing in the window, one of
them being filled with water as it had been drawn from the
well, the other with mesmerised water.* He immediately
observed that bubbles were quickly rising in the bottle con-
taining the mesmerised water. During the interval between
the last and present visit, Andrews had suffered a return of
his pain and had vomited bile.

9th. Andrews is better again. He insists on walking to
my house on Friday the 12th. There was thunder and hail
during this day; nd bubbles were seen in the mesmerised
water.

12th. He did walk to my house, and, on examining his
leg, I found it much less discoloured. I mesmerised him for
a quarter of an hour. The “ dashings” were less frequent
and less violent whilst I was making the passes.

16th. I found him at his cottage not the worse for his
walk to my house and back, three miles. I mesmerised him
for twenty minutes, and before I left off his daughter ob-
served that the inflamed appearance on the instep was much
diminished. He felt twinges as soon as I began the passes.
He says the pain is gradually descending.

19th. He moves about his cottage with tolerable ease
without stick or crutch. He felt only one slight twinge in his
ancle during the passes. The leprous appearance of the
instep is nearly gone. Five minutes after I poured mes-
merised water into two bottles, the bubbles were seen to rise
as before, and continued to rise for twenty-five minutes. I
have since been told by him that the bubbles continued to
rise more numerously after I left till eight o’clock, when he
went to bed. His daughter and son-in-law also saw the same.


* No suggestion was made as to what was to be seen.
4


Pronounced convalescent by the surgeon.


23rd. He walked again to my house: on this as well as on
the former occasion he walked with the help of a stick only.
I mesmerised him as usual. The passes brought on the
** dashes” which were drawn towards the toes.

26th. I mesmerised him as usual. He had walked to his
church without fatigue. He declares that he feels decidedly |
better, and the parish apothecary who chanced to see him
pronounced him to be convalescent.

June 5th. He had not been so well since my last visit.
The leg looked inflamed, and the pain had risen to the mid-
dle of the leg. I had on a former occasion given him nux
vomica for the acidity of stomach to which he was subject.
The dose was twelve globules dissolved in nine teaspoonfuls
of water, one teaspoonful to be taken thrice aday.* After
taking this dose, he said he felt a heavy sensation in the
limbs and drowsiness. After a quarter of an hour’s mesme-
risation, the pain shifted to the instep and the angry colour
greatly abated. During the passes he felt twinges which
gradually were drawn down to the toes. Water five minutes
after it was mesmerised began to effervesce, and continued to
do so five minutes more.

10th. He is decidedly better. He slept well on the night
of the 5th, and on the 7th he observed that his leg had lost its
angry colour. He takes nux vomica ortce (one teaspoonful)
at night, and does not feel the same sensations as when he
took it thrice a day. The mesmerised water began to effer-
vesce at once, and I saw it continue to do so during my visit
of forty minutes. This effect was also noticed by a little boy,
by Andrews, and his daughter. I mesmerised him for
twenty minutes: he felt the twinges follow the direction of
my fingers. About half an hour after, I called again at the
cottage with my wife who clearly saw the bubbles which were
still rising in the bottle. Andrew’s daughter saw them im-
mediately when I began mesmerising the water in the jug.

14th. In less then three minutes after I began mes-
merising the leg, Andrews (who was looking at the clock)
felt twinges moving from the instep to the toes. Very few
and faint bubbles were seen in the water by his daughter.
There is thunder in the air. On the last occasion the water
was seen bubbling at seven o’clock in the evening by four
persons.

19th. In less than a minute he felt the twinges which are
more faint each time of mesmerisation. Whilst I was making


* This quantity was recommended by a clergyman in the neighbourhood,
who adopts homeeopathic treatment in his parish with success


The use of the parson’s passes doubted. 259


the passes, the colour on the instep grew paler, and the whole
leg is of a better colour since the last visit. The mesmerised
water had not begun to bubble when I left. Last time it
continued to bubble strongly till seven o’clock, and went on
in the same way after the cork was taken out of the bottle.

24th. He has improved greatly since the last visit. The
sensation in the instep scarcely amounts to pain. He sleeps
calmly and undisturbedly at night, and is not forced, as he
was at first, to thrust his leg out of the bed clothes in order
to cool and quiet the burning agonies he used to suffer. The
mesmerised water began to send up small bubbles before I
left. On my last visit they began two hours after I went,
and continued to work two hours more.

July 3rd. Though I had not seen him for more than a
week, the leg was much better in appearance. He still sleeps
well. Within three minutes after I began to mesmerise, he
felt faint twinges down the leg.*

8th. He felt the same twinges in the foot in less than a
minute from the time the passes began. He does not now
suffer from acidity of stomach.

15th. The same sensations as before. This is my last
visit : from first to last, I mesmerised him between the hours
of four and five. During the time I visited him, he saw
many persons, who were much surprised at seeing the pro-
gress he had made, for it was generally believed that his case
was incurable as the “doctor” could do nothing more for
him. He was repeatedly asked, especially by the Dissenters,
if he thought that the “ parson’s” passes had done him any
good. His reply invariably was, “I don’t think, because I
know it.” On the following week Andrews was well enough
to go to town to see his son, and on Wednesday 19th, he
called by my desire at the Mesmeric Infirmary where he was
examined, and the case was pronounced to be satisfactory.

Jerrery EKINs.


V. A few words in favour of Mesmerism. By the Rev.
Cuartes Bouun Smyru, Vicar of Alfriston, near
Lewes.

“Witness the effect produced by the well-earned triumph of the yacht


America. Five years before, some of our leading yacht’s-men and most cele-
brated yacht builders had their attention called to the subject of hollow bows,


* The Vicar of Old Sampford in the course of his customary visits called on
him between six and seven on June 24th, and distinctly saw the bubbling of the
mesmerised water.


260 Stupid obstinacy of our shipbuilders.


with a hint that, if they continued to refuse to adopt them, the result would be,
that, sooner or later, their crack craft would get disgracefully beaten. The friendly
warning was received with contempt and derision. One well-known builder
wrote a work on ship building, containing the usual orthodox platitudes on—new
Sangled notions,—presumption of those who set aside the authority of ages,—folly
of abandoning rules sanctioned by experience, &c., &c. The same year which
witnessed the publication of this book witnessed the victory of the 4merica, fur-
nishing an appropriate commentary on the wisdom of the writer.

‘* We are now (1853) busily engaged in building Screw line-of-battle ships,
but, instead of being in our proper position—the leaders of the world—we are
become followers, in the wake of the Americans and the French. In 1837, Capt.
Ericsson (who subsequently introduced the Screw in the United States) with a
small Screw vessel only 45 ft. long and 8 ft. wide, towed the Admiralty barge,
with their Lordships on board, from Somerset House to Blackwall Wharf, at the
rate of 10 miles an hour. Notwithstanding the highly satisfactory result of the
experiment, Capt. Ericsson was told, in a reply which the subseqnent success of
the Screw has already rendered historical, ‘that their Lordships declined to en-
tertain the project.’ One would have supposed that the vast superiority of the
Screw over the Paddle-wheel, for vessels of war, would have been seized at a
glance, but some are afflicted with weak vision ; and, as Schiller so forcibly and
happily expresses it, ‘Mit der Dummheit kimpfen Gétter selbst vergebens.’
‘ Alas! there is no possibility for poor Columbus at any of the Public Offices;
till once he become an Actuality, and say ‘ Here IS the America I was telling
you of.’—Carlyle’s Life of Cromwell.’? On Economy of Fuel, particularly with
reference, to Reverberatory Furnaces for the manufacture of lron, and to Steam
Boilers. By T. Symes Prideaux, Esq., author of various papers in The Zoist.
London, J853.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Vicarage, Alfriston, Sussex,
June 14th, 1854.

Srir,—Everything progresses in science, art, and me-
chanics, and what was once valuable in astronomy, law,
medicine, and polity, is not only no longer regarded, but
almost quite forgotten. As a humble friend to my afflicted
race, I can truly affirm, Humani nihil a me alienum puto.
“ Jam jam efficaci do manus scientie.” I participate not in
the hue and cry raised against the astonishing powers put
forth by the healing wand. Let others profess what they
please, and insist, “‘ Non persuadebis, eliamsi persuaseris.” As
for myself, I will reason like the far-seeing Gamaliel, and
adopt his prudential maxim, and caution certain people as
the Hebrew did, namely, “ And now I say unto you, refrain
from these men, and let them alone; for if this counsel or
this work be of men, it will come to nought: but if it be of
God (not of Satan, the enemy of man), ye cannot overthrow
it.” Acts v.

Is not this view, some may ask, a mere assumption on my
part,—a petitio principii? The onus of proving may be mine,
but the onus of disproving concerns the opposite thinkers.
One thing is however certain, that there is infinitely more
behind the curtain of concealment, and vitally concerning


Let us hail Mesmerism with gratitude. 261


soul and body, than has ever been dreamt of in human philo-
sophy. Nous verrons. Let us hail with reverence what the
goodness of God has in these latter days discovered to us in
the realms of learning, and not imitate the illiterate friar
who preferred his ‘‘ mumpsimus” to the “ sumpsimus” in his
Breviary, and let us prefer to travel at the rate of the new
line instead of moving by means of the slow waggons of past
times. A stand-still there neither is nor can be in this world,
and the last century and the present bear ample witness that
a new era is commencing. These remarks seem called for in
the case which excites such general attention and inquiry,—the
case of Mesmerism, as now rising into deserved reputation.
I hear on all sides questions to this purport, what is Mes-
merism, and its co-relative systems? Well, whatisit? I ask
as one who am not altogether acquainted with the arcana of
Creation, as one who has lost the double ignorance of the
Platonists, for I am no longer ignorant of my ignorance, I
seem to be traversing the Himalayan highlands of Asian
mystery. I want the help of others, not for my body, which
is never troubled with aches or illness, but for my head and
understanding, that I may use, and not abuse, the new lights
shooting across the new regions brought to view. This ques-
tion concerns all nations. The whole world presents a scene
of varied suffering. What blessings have flowed into other
lands of the sunrise and far-west from enlightened Europe, I
merely hint at, for to Christendom has pertained the mission
of civilizing, humanizing, and evangelizing man, and it is not
too much to hope that the Almighty may, in the absence of
positive miracles, empower his true worshippers to work equally
salutary works, to rouse the body and the soul together, as
what affects the one more or less affects the other also.
Convinced that the results of the new system of invigorating
life rests not alone, or even predominantly, upon excited
imagination, and knowing that the phenomena connected
with table-movement, whilst tables have no sort of imagina-
tion to be acted on, depend on an external agency, on the
active rational will and corporeal force, we may argue a for-
tiort and conclude that, if the inanimate matter obeys the
animated, much more must the rational principle respond to
the spiritual between two similar beings, through the very
highest element in man.

But sickly imagination is the stronghold of anti-mes-
merism, and such is the reasoning which has been brought to
bear upon the doctrine of divine influence and grace upon the
human spirit, viz., that spiritual exercises and visitations
VOL, XII. T


262 Sufferers will look beyond Corporations.


spring from mere fancy and delusion, and so the doctrine of
the Holy Spirit is questioned, or denied by anti-spiritualists.

Believing that the created forces, or human souls, contain
a will which is operative, and affections which are co-opera-
tive, that our thoughts are stimuli from within, as objects are
from without, since thought went forth, which will sleep no
more; it is more probable, that from the well-directed new
agency, from its germ, there will flourish a forest of ideas,
like the oracular oaks of old from the cup of an acorn, as a
grand maternal idea. For ideas, like an irresistible torrent,
carry before them the most stagnant multitudes, but do not
turn to actions, before sentiment gives them life. Such is
the fortune of this new discovery.

At first, the philosophical and religious leaders turned
mesmerism and its professors into ridicule, as satirists, libel-
lers, and sceptics. To little purpose, for a time, were apolo-
gies and arguments arrayed against clamour. Some were
Gallios, who had made up their minds, with Horace, “ nil
admirari,” to see nothing but nonsense in what was deemed
an outlandish extravagance, which was to be put out of the
pale of society, “vi et armis,’”’ as not worth being argued out
of the world ; whilst others waited in suspense for fuller infor-
mation, or were kept in awe and alarm by the fear of infring-
ing on forbidden ground, for fear of eating a forbidden fruit,
which some have tried and tasted without injury to soul or body.

I allude to Mr.O—n. Has Mr. O—n received no bene-
fit, directly or indirectly, from the inferences this theory fur-
nishes of a future state? He is no longer a disciple of a most
desolate creed. Did Satan work this change, or man, or the
Omnipotent by man, not as a miraculous agent, but a second
and a natural cause? and must we follow such as would bid
us to view these matters of this healing art under the cate-
gory of the “ works of darkness, the doctrines of demons, and
of the deceivableness of unrighteousness?” Such were the
judgments of a darker age in reference to the discoveries of
Galileo, who was hauled over the coals of the Inquisition, as
the modern man of science is in the circle of critics. “If
ignorance is bliss, it is folly to be wise.” But the racked
sufferer will not thank you for your wisdom, which would bid
him be cheerful in the midst of misery : he will try any arm to
lean on ; he will accept any well-intended remedy ; he will not
believe in the monopoly of wisdom claimed by close corpora-
tions, but try the new spirits, and prove all things, and hold
fast what is good. Such is my intention in my hours of need.

I subscribe myself, yours respectfully,
Cuaxces Bonun Smyta.


The late Dr. Mantell’s sufferings and perverseness. 263


P.S. I cannot imagine a more happy event than that a


powerful mesmeriser, or several of this class, should accom- |


pany the bands of soldiers and sailors through all the casual-
ties of war. For if medicine-chests, or instruments, &c., &c.
were not at hand, then, in certain cases, the sufferers might
find alleviation by various aids now in use.


VI. A case of Mesmeric Disturbance. By the Rev. L. Lewis.
Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘It appears that considerable doubts existed in the minds of Dr. Mantell’s
professional friends as to the exact nature of the affection, but by many it was
supposed to be a lumbar abscess, connected in all probability with caries of some
of the vertebre; others, feeling a prominent swelling, partly hard and partly
fluctuating, in the lumbar region, concluded that there was a tumor of doubtful
character. The patient used to suffer most excruciating agony. After death it
was ascertained by Mr. Adams that there was no disease either of the bones or the
intervertebral substances: that there was no trace of any abscess, all the sur-
rounding tissues being quite healthy: but the vertebre were twisted in such a
way that, with considerable lateral curvature, there existed a backward projection
of the lumbar transverse processes, to an extent sufficient to form a prominence.
The spinous processes were in their proper relation to each other.’’—Lancer,
July 8, 1854: p. 9.*


To Dr. Elliotson.
Linton Villa, Cotham Road, Bristol.
Dear Sir,—I send you the enclosed case for your perusal.
Should you wish to forward it to The Zoist, it would be well


* The poor medical man who was thus agonized might perhaps have derived
great relief from mesmerism : but he despised it, and vilified those who knew and
asserted its truth. This instance corroborates what I have always believed, that
the professional opposition to mesmerism arises not from self-interest, but from
stupid and conceited obstinacy, such as is seen in a donkey which suddenly takes
it into his wise and amiable head not to stir an inch.

The inability of all the numerous and eminent physicians and surgeons who
attended him to lessen his suffering, and their universal blunders as to the nature
of his disease, ought to inspire modesty, and will make the public doubt the
soundness of medical judgment as to mesmerism.

In No. XL., p. 347, will be found Dr. Mantell’s ignorant and opprobrious
language uttered not one month before his death. ‘‘‘ As the alchemists of old,
who, in their crude and visionary research for the philosopher’s stone, instituted
experiments which drew attention to the wonders of chemistry, and laid the foun-
dation of experimental philosophy, in like manner the mesmerists and animal
magnetizers of our times, while practising on the credulity of their patients or
audience, may elicit vital phenomena, which, investigated by men of superior
minds and honest intentions, may shed important light on some of the most my-
sterious laws of vitality and organization. At present we can only exclaim with
the great philosopher, La Place, ‘ Ce que nous connaissons est peu de chose: ce
que nons ignorons est immense.’””—G. A. Manrery, LL.D., F.R.S.: Address
delivered to the Members of the Western Medical and Surgical Society of London
by him as President, Oct.15,+ 1852. Med. Times, Oct. 30, 1852.’’—J. ELxiotsown.


+ ‘* After Dr. Mantell had uttered this absurdity and unprovoked insult, he
died on the 10th of November.—Joun Entrotson.”


T2


—


264 Mesmerism in fun by the perfectly ignorant.


to accompany it with remarks and illustrations of your own.
I know the lady, Mrs. W.; I was at her house last week, but
did not see the servant, as she was in a state of convalescence.

I have taken the whole account from Mrs. W.’s MS., and
for the most part in her own words. She made ample notes
of the case every day, but I have brought the whole within
a shorter compass, without, I think, leaving out anything
material.

I remain, yours truly,

May 19, 1854. L. Lewis.


On the 28th of September, 1853. Mr. W. from home ;
Mrs. W. and five eldest children out to tea: at home, six
little children in bed; Seward the cook (age 27, dark com-
plexion, brown eyes, firm character, superior intellect, strong,
energetic will, violent temper); Ann, housemaid (age 20, fair,
regular features, blue eyes, soft, gentle manners, apparently
an easy temper, mediocre understanding—no cultivation) ;
Elizabeth Miller (age 16, brisk and intelligent, amiable and
sensible—above the average).

These three servants were together in the kitchen about
seven o’clock. Ann complained of head-ache, which she had
had some hours. Seward proposed to mesmerise her, as it
might do her good.

Seward declares that she never saw mesmeric phenomena:
disbelieved the existence of such a power as mesmerising ;
had heard of it, but considered it a superstitious humbug ;
and was not aware that the sleep it was expected to produce
differed from ordinary slumber.

Her proposal was made in fun : Ann agreed to it. Seward
took Ann’s hands and laid hers against them, palm to palm,
and looked fixedly at Ann. In about a minute the door-bell
rang, and Seward went to answer it. On returning to the
kitchen, the servants sat and conversed, and had tea to-
gether. Seward noticed Ann yawning a great deal and ad-
vised her to go to bed, calling her stupid and lazy. Ann
said at last, “I wish you would finish a thing when you begin
it, and not leave it half done. Why don’t you make me go
to sleep downright ?” Seward then said, ‘ Well, come then,
and I'll finish it if you like.” She then took her hands
again as before. After about two minutes looking at her,
the girl suddenly fell back in her seat, in a complete stupor
and, as it appeared, sound sleep.

Thus she remained when Mr. W. came home, and, going
through the kitchen, saw Ann asleep. Seward spoke to her
in order to rouse her, and succeeded partially, and then ad-


Sleep-waking and Mesmeric Attachment. 265


vised her to go to bed. Assisted by Seward and E. Miller,
she was got upstairs, and undressed and put to bed. The
sleep was not shaken off, but she occasionally tossed her arms,
rolled her head, and sighed. About half-past 10 Mrs. W.
and family came home. At 11 Ann began laughing immo-
derately, but although she frequently said, “ How droll!
what fun ! I never had such a spree !” she answered no ques-
tions, and took no heed of her fellow-servants. She seemed
quite unconscious of anything around her, and appeared fast
asleep. This laughter continued at intervals till one o’clock :
she then became quite still, and slept till about seven in the
morning. Seward did not sleep: she felt uneasy at what she
had done, and perplexed at the result. About seven she
tried to awake Ann, but had considerable difficulty in doing
so. When dressed, Ann went about her daily work with
half closed eyes, never speaking except when questioned, and
then answering reluctantly, and complaining of pain in her
eyes and head. She followed Seward like her shadow, and
yet at the same time begged Seward not to look at her.
Being unfit to follow her work, she was again advised to go
to bed, and instantly fell into a state of lethargic sleep.
Seward stood near her, anxious and perplexed, but it was
with great difficulty that she obtained any answer from her,
and Ann became cold and restless, Seward being obliged to
be absent for several hours, during which time Ann slept
soundly and quietly and became equably warm; and at the
end of that time she answered by nods and shakes of the
head questions put to her by Mrs. W.

“ Shall your mistress wake you ?”—“ No.”

“ Shall Seward ?”—“ Yes.”

“ Shall she awake you now ?”—“ No.”

“ By and bye in the evening ?”—“ Yes.”

When the evening came, she partially awoke. Her first
words on awaking were, “ Don’t you do it again.” To this
Seward energetically replied, “No, I never will, I promise you.”
After this she had some food, which she would not take
without much pressing and then very languidly, sighing very
frequently. To some questions put to her she said, “I have
been all day with Seward, and I have been to all sorts of
places, I have been so tormented. I have been out of the
world, but Seward has been with me everywhere.” She also
said that “her eyes ached and that sighing did her good.”
Seward, who was alarmed and agitated, and reproaching her-
self with imprudence, failed to bring Ann back to her usual
state of healthy consciousness. A medical man therefore was
sent for,—Mr. P., who professed himself unacquainted with


ee at eh Se


ad


266 Absurd and ignorant medical treatment.


mesmerism. After having heard an account of the whole
matter, he examined the patient’s pulse, and tongue, &c., he
ordered her a hot foot bath, food, wine, anti-spasmodic medi-
cine, and a blister on the nape of the neck. He had tested
her insensibility by pinching her arm violently and running
a pin beneath the skin; but she did not appear in the least
sensible to pain.

A curious circumstance then occurred, shewing the sym-
pathy existing between Ann and Seward. The latter, over-
come at the idea of having occasioned all this trouble, ran up
stairs, and in her own room gave way to a fit of agitated
weeping. This was unknown to the party in the kitchen, but,
to their surprise, Ann, at the same time, burst out into hyste-
rical crying. Upon this, Mrs. W. going to find Seward, and
seeing that she also was sobbing violently, told her decidedly
that, for the sake of the patient, she must try to control her
feelings. This she did by a great effort and followed her
mistress down stairs, where they found that Ann also had
ceased crying and fallen sound asleep. After awhile Mr. P.
left, Ann was taken to bed, and the prescriptions were fol-
lowed. Whenever she was roused, which could be done only
by Seward, she complained of distressing pain in the chest
and back and numbness in her limbs. When Seward called
her next morning, she was still in a state of stupor, and Mrs.
W.., finding her unfit to go about her work, caused the blister
to be applied and castor oil to be given her. She suffered
Seward to dress her and went down, but could not open her
eyes. After an hour she was sick and vomited bile. When
Mr. P. called he found her in another fit of hysterical crying,
Seward having been sent away for the day. Mrs. W. now
adopted a decided tone with her, by which means she was
induced to allow Mr. P. to take off the blister. She then
answered his questions better than before and partially
opened her eyes. He ordered her to take a walk and advised
that she should be required to do her work and not be noticed,
or pitied or talked to about her sensations.

These directions were followed, but whatever she did, the
patient seemed still heavy and absorbed in herself. She in-
quired for Seward, saying that she had been with her all the
previous day, persisting that she had been out of the world
and hoping that, if she went again, it would be for good.

Some days however she would feel better, but generally
towards evening she would relapse into the dull state, taking
no notice of any one. One day Mrs. W. went to meet Se-
ward in the garden; she had come to make inquiries about
Ann, whom she was not allowed to see. Notwithstanding


Delirium in her Sleep-waking. 267


this, Ann said that she knew Seward had called. Seward
came back and went about her work next day, but, whenever
she came in Ann’s presence, the latter yawned, though by
degrees she became a little better. The medical man’s
opinion was, that, however caused, the patient’s symptoms
and state were identical with those presented by hysteria ;
and as such he treated this extraordinary case, though the
girl while under the influence assured us that she never had
drowsy fits before, never had been in that state and never
had hysterics.
Subsequent circumstances.

About a fortnight after what has been related, Seward
herself shewed many symptoms of weakness; her appetite
failed, her pulse was feeble. She lost her rest at night, and
her strength was prostrated, so that it became necessary to
send her home for rest and a change of air. After this, Ann
became much more lively though she occasionally sighed as
if uneasy at her absence. Whenever questioned about being
mesmerised, she always spoke of it as something mysterious
and not to be spoken of. She once said that she had seen
beautiful places and lots of people, more children than grown
people, that they would not let her be awakened till she had
promised not to tell what she had seen and heard there.
She also said, ‘When Seward dies, I shall die,” and that
Seward was with her all the time in that beautiful place and
would go there with her again some day. She was a long
while going there, but came back in a moment.

In about a week Seward came to Mrs. W., but Ann was
seized with yawning and stupor as soon as she saw her. A
few days after, the same thing happened when Seward came ;
and Ann said she could not bear to look at her, it hurt her
eyes and head and gave her dreadful numbness in her arms,
and made her eyes more or less inflamed. The next time,
about a week later, that Seward came, but before she arrived
at the house, Ann suddenly exclaimed as if in fear, “Oh, I
know she is coming.”

It was now evident that these two servants could not live
together ; so Seward left her place. Though Ann cried much
and hysterically after she was gone, she revived wonderfully
in a few days and seemed quite to throw off the influence
which began before Christmas. But Seward, having occasion
to speak to Mrs. W., went to the house. Before she knocked
at the door, however, Ann shuddered and yawned, and said,
“I’m sure she is coming,” and her eyes became inflamed and
she was much agitated. She ran up stairs but said that Se-
ward’s eyes were like two great flames of fire and that they


268 An eminent Medical Man as ignorant as the first.


went right before her in the dark all up the stairs. She
would not come down till Seward was gone.

Since this time, the two servants have not met. Wednes-
days have passed with merely a few yawns. Ann is in better
spirits and better health, though not in all respects as well as
she was before. This is now the 11th of January, 1854, and
a Wednesday evening, and Ann is not much more sleepy
than on other days, but has referred with sighs to Seward
as usual.


To later inquiries made of Mrs. W., the following letters
were received :—
“ Lyme, 27th May, 1854.
“ Dear Sir,—I hardly know how to give you an account of
the state of Ann’s health at present, without referring in some
detail to certain symptoms which have varied throughout and
appear to have been more or less dependant on the imagina-
tion. For instance, the very decided and immediate effect of
nine drops of tincture of steel given only ¢wice in one day,
(about six weeks ago,) at the suggestion of an eminent medi-
cal man (to whom I related the case, but who laughs at
mesmerism, and, believing it all to be the effect of imagina-
tion, desired me to “invest the bottle of drops with some
mystery, as being a rare medicine specially useful in cases
like her own, and ordered by some learned old grey beard),”
Ann’s imagination so helped the steel, that it seemed to me
unfit to pursue it after two doses. The like result occurred
at a subsequent period when I thought it best to try the effect
of the drops again. Since then, about a fortnight ago, she
fell suddenly ill, being low, nervous, dull and sick for several
days. I attributed it to the smell of new paint in the house ;
but her fellow-servant told me that, while walking with her,
(the day before she was taken ill, and whilst in excellent
spirits,) they had met Seward (the mesmeriser), and Ann had
instantly turned ashy pale, and trembled violently, and could
hardly walk home; and that she had not recovered herself
throughout the day. This informant believed that it was this
upset of the nerves which was the true cause of her illness on
the following day. Ann looked so weak and pale and dejected
that I sent her home six miles off for change of air, and I
have not since heard of her. Should she become quite strong
in a few days, she will return; otherwise, it is understood
between us that she will not resume her service with me.
She has been a very inefficient servant from the variableness
of her states, and frequent fits of dullness, apathy, and want of
head and memory, but she attributes all to the mesmerising.


Medicine was of course useless. 269


She has looked pale and more delicate and fragile, instead of
brighter and stronger, ever since she was mesmerised ; and I
do not see that the steel has improved her in these respects.
“IT am, Sir, yours obediently,
«“C. M. W—.”


“ Lyme, 20th June.
“Dear Sir,—My servant Ann returned to me after a
week’s absence. She had during that time been under medi-
cal care for symptoms considered by her doctor to be pro-
duced by the paint in this house. She has, since her return,
been very much better in all respects; her spirits livelier and
her head clearer. She does her work better, and there ap-
pears to be now no constitutional derangement. Meantime,
her mesmeriser has obtained a situation sixty or seventy miles
away; and the communication of this fact to Ann was
attended by a marked relief to her mind.
“T am, dear Sir, yours truly,
«C.M. W—.”


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


This was an instance of mesmeric disturbance, which
shews, Ist, that no person should mesmerise who is perfectly
ignorant of the subject ; 2ndly, that no medical man should
presume to prescribe for a mesmeric case whose absurd con-
ceit has prevented him from becoming acquainted with mes-
merism.

What is necessary to be known may be soon learnt: but
mesmerism is not to be played with by the perfectly ignorant.

The time will come when every medical man will be as
much ashamed of acknowledging his ignorance of mesmerism
as he would be at present of acknowledging his ignorance of
the use of the stethoscope. Professional men at present feel
no scruples, in truth they glory, in telling their patients that
they know nothing of mesmerism. I recollect the time—
from five and twenty to thirty years ago—when few in
England besides myself knew anything of the use of the
stethoscope, and it was ridiculed in lectures before the College
of Physicians and in speeches at London medical societies,
and habitually in conversation between medical men and in
the remarks of medical men to their patients, who of course
believed them to be oracles, and considered that they “ must
know,” and be “ quite competent to judge,’—from Dr. Cham-
bers, then the fashionable physician, to the humblest drug-


— ee ee ee OE PO


270 Former general contempt of the Stethoscope.


gist-apothecary.* At present almost every medical man
considers stethoscopic knowledge a necessary and established
part of his profession, and, however deficient in it, would be
vexed at being thought at all deficient, carries a stethoscope
in his pocket, and has one or more visible in his consulting
room. A similar time will come for mesmerism: and no


* In my Physiology I thus wrote seventeen years ago :—‘* When Laennec first
published his great work, I procured a stethoscope and investigated his statements.
Although the facts of percussion, as detailed by Avenbrugger about half a century
ago, must of physical necessity exist, I had always been taught, by the first teacher
of medicine in London, at Guy’s Hospital, Dr. James Curry, that they were falla-
cies, and they were dismissed in three minutes as unworthy of the slighest atten-
tion. Education, therefore, tended to make me sceptical. But I soon found that
Avenbrugger had been disgracefully neglected in this country ; and that Laennec,
like Avenbrugger, had opened to usa new and extensive scene in disease, to
which, though it had always existed, we were blind—that we had eyes and saw
not—or really, to drop metaphor, that we had ears and heard not. For a length
of time I found some at St. Thomas’s treat percussion and auscultation with
ridicule ; some with absolute indignation; and others, for years, treated it with
silent contempt; who all, I am happy to say, now practise both. I was there-
fore in the habit of studying them in the wards alone, and at hours when I
expected to be unobserved. When I at length advocated and taught them in the
school, one of my colleagues, I heard, pronounced it nonsense or worse in his
lecture ; and at the College of Physicians I heard a senior fellow, in a Croonian
lecture, denounce the folly of carrying a piece of wood (some called the stethos-
cope inutile lignum) into sick chambers and making observations to the destruc-
tion of all philosophical and dignified views, such as become men whose minds
have been enlarged by the education which Oxford and Cambridge afford. When
another fellow of the College (Dr. Chambers) was asked his opinion of ausculta-
tion, in the wards of his hospital, he at once, as I was informed by the gentleman
who asked the question, condemned it as nonsense ; and when told ‘ that Elliotson
assured his friends that he had a high opinion of it and made his diagnosis of
affections of the chest with infinitely more accuracy by its means,’ he replied,—
‘Oh! it’s just the thing for Elliotson to rave about!’ Yet good sense and truth
have prevailed. This physician has now a work on auscultation dedicated to
him, as to one who had the candour to examine auscultation at an early period,
when others despised it, and who materially assisted to spread its adoption!
Even Dr. Spurzheim was as unphilosophical on this point, as others were in
regard to phrenology. On seeing a stethoscope one day (in 1824) upon my table,
he said,—‘ Ah! do you use that hocus pocus!’ And on my replying that it was
highly important to employ the ear, he added, ‘ You learn nothing by it; and if you
do, you cannot treat diseases the better.’ Both which remarks were incorrect,
and shewed an unhappy state of mind. An old physician, on seeing me use the
stethoscope, began our consultation by informing the practitioner, whom he had
never seen before, and myself, that he ‘ never made use of these French fooleries.’
Yet ignorance of percussion and auscultation is now considered a sufficient proof
that a man knows but half his profession, and Laennec’s name has become
imperishable.’”’—Human Physiology, pp. 398-9.

The first court physician of his day—the late Sir Henry Halford—who had
been physician to I know not how many of our monarchs, and other members of
the Royal Family without number, as well as to nearly all our aristocracy, died
in entire ignorance of the use of the stethoscope, though President of the Royal
College of Physicians. Whether the present President, Dr. Paris, in whose
presidency and in whose presence the four successive discreditable outpourings of
Drs. Hawkins, Wilson, and Alderson (the latter in lecture and oration), were ven-
tured upon, knows anything about it, I am not prepared to say: but I know that
for very many years he spoke incessantly and restlessly against it as an absurdity.


Conduct of the President of the College of Physicians. 271


practitioner will venture to express a doubt of its truth or
utility, or to appear ignorant of it: no Harveian orator will
venture to vilify its supporters, nor will any occasion be given
for a supporter of it to point out the gross antimesmeric
language of an orator, as I did in the mildest manner to the
President, Dr. Paris, when Dr. Hawkins called us quacks,
impostors, the favourites of males and females whose sexual
passions burn strongly, either in secret or notoriously, decency
forbidding him, he said, to be more explicit. The President,
Dr. Paris, took no notice of my letter for three months: I
then in the mildest manner wrote again, requesting to know
whether my letter had been received : and he replied that he
had received it, but declined to take part in any controversy
on mesmerism. He refused all redress: Drs. Wilson and
Alderson knew consequently that they might follow Dr.
Hawkins’s example with impunity. The following is the ac-
count of the whole affair published in No. XXIV., pp. 404,
405 :—


“T immediately wrote the following letter to the Presi-
dent :


‘Dr. Elliotson, as a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians,
presents his compliments and begs to direct the attention of the
President to the following portion of the Harveian Oration just re-
ceived by him from Dr. Francis Hawkins.

*** Quin etiam vitia, sive infirmitates hominum, nonne aucu-
pantur, et queestui habent, alii alia, Circumforanei? De genere
hoe, preestigiatores, quos vocant, Mesmerici, ni fallor, iis preecipue
arrident, quos, utriusque sexus, Mater seeva Cupidinum aut ceecis
urit ignibus, aut palam exagitat, Sed ex quibus hoc subintelligi
potest, ea pudoris ergo, sunt reticenda. Ab his, et talibus artificiis,
segregandus est Medicus et sepiendus sedulo. Quod vix prestari
potest, nisi recta et bona institutione, ita informetur, ut a dolis et
fallaciis prorsus abhorreat.’

**Dr. Elliotson is universally known to have asserted the truth of
the greater part of the mesmeric phenomena and of their production
by artificial means, as well as the inestimable advantage of mes-
merism in the alleviation and cure of diseases and the prevention of
pain in surgical operations, and to have done this in his Harveian
Oration, and continually to prescribe, and sometimes, though always
gratuitously, to practise, mesmerism.

** August 9, 1848.”


“T received no answer for three months, and then thought
it time to address the following note to the President :—


“‘ Dr. Elliotson presents his compliments and takes the liberty of
requesting to be informed whether the President of the Royal College
of Physicians received a note from him in August last, pointing out


SPORE ee


272 The word Hysteria covers Medical Ignorance.


some passages in the last Harveian Oration relating to mesmerists,
of whom he is universally known to be one.
** Nov. 15.”


“T received this reply :—

** Dover Street, No. 16, 1848.

“Dr. Paris presents his compliments and informs Dr. Elliotson
that he did receive from him, in August last, a note in which he
directed his attention to some passages relating to mesmerism in Dr.
Hawkins’s Harveian Oration, but as Dr. Paris must decline becoming
a party to any controversy upon the subject, whatever opinion he
may entertain privately, it is his determination to act with that im-
partiality which led to Dr. Elliotson’s appointment to the oration.”

“To this I wrote the following reply :-—

‘Dr. Elliotson presents his compliments to the President of the
Royal College of Physicians of London, and begs to remark that he
did not request the President’s attention to passages of Dr. Francis
Hawkins’s Oration relating to mesmerism, or of a controversial cha-
racter, for there are none such; but to passages relating to mes-
merists, of whom he, a Fellow of the College, has for ten years
openly been one—passages stigmatizing mesmerists as quacks and
impostors and the especial favourites of both males and females whose
sexual passions are secretly or notoriously violent, respecting which
point Dr. Hawkins declared that decency forbad him to say more.

** Conduit Street, Nov. 17, 1848.”


“To this I have received no reply. The matter is now
for posterity.
“Joun E v.iotson.
“ Dec. 30, 1848.”


Had the medical man who was called in by the mistress
of the servant-maid not been discreditably ignorant of mes-
merism, he would not have blistered and physicked the poor
girl. In such cases, blisters, cupping-glasses, purgatives
and other drugs, are the ridiculous routine which suggests
itself to the doctor. He could see nothing more than hy-
steria. But is he fully acquainted with all the forms of -
hysteria? In hysteria there are sometimes more wonderful
things than are suspected by practitioners.* In states induced
by mesmeric processes these wonders are usual. Common
hysteria and the mesmeric states are very different things.
The present patient should at the first have been steadily
mesmerised into a deep sleep, allowed to remain in it till it
ceased spontaneously, and again and again been sent to sleep


* See the cases, for example, recorded by Dr. Petetin of Lyons, in which
the higher phenomena of mesmerism took place. I extracted them into No. XL..,
Art. 2. :


Proper treatment of mesmeric disturbance. 273


till she woke in a calm state of her own accord. She instinc-
tively begged for sleep—begged to “ have the sleep finished.”
It requires immense perseverance sometimes to produce mes-
meric effects in these states. In an article upon mesmeric
disturbances published by me in 1849, in No. XXVII., in
which I collected many most interesting facts, I gave direc-
tions for the treatment of such cases at p. 246 :—


**The proper way to remove disturbances from the absence of
the mesmeriser or the proximity of others is for all but the mes-
meriser to withdraw, and the mesmeriser to approach the patient,
take his hand, and continue to hold it and soothe him by every mark
of kindness. If attempts to mesmerise do not irritate, they may
be made: but frequently whether the state be marked by delirium,
violent or not, or merry, or by fatuity or stupor, the patient is for a
time apparently quite insusceptible of true mesmeric influence.
From time to time attempts to mesmerise him may be made by his
mesmeriser. If sleep is induced, and maintained by the mes-
meriser’s contact or continued gazing, passing, &c., the patient
may wake up in his natural state: but frequently relapses occur for
atime. The deeper the sleep the better: and any means known to
deepen it in the particular patient should be employed. I have seen
some of these mishaps, and they have all been soon removed, though
I can conceive that if a person is strongly predisposed to insanity, or
idiotcy, or fits, terror thus induced may give rise to any of them
more or less permanently, just as terror from other causes is known
to produce them. There is occasionally so much depression, pale-
ness, faintness, and feebleness of pulse in these cases, that, during
the occurrence and afterwards, wine is required and borne in quanti-
ties which could not be borne at other times. It in general aggra-
vates the symptoms if another person attempt to assist, unless he
has mesmerised the patient on other occasions, or is liked by the
patient in the natural state: and it often aggravates even then.
Decidedly nothing can be worse in a case of mesmeric dislike than
for others to go up to the patient and try to soothe him: and yet all
generally surround the patient and try all sorts of means; and pro-
bably a medical man, ignorant of mesmerism, proposes bleeding,
cupping, purging, &c., when the mesmeriser has only to keep all at
a distance, take the patient’s hand, and above all to breathe (not
blow) very softly upon the patient, especially on his face and bosom,
to speak kindly, and he will at last see all come right. Public ex-
hibitions must in many cases derange mesmeric phenomena, especially
if strangers approach and behave ill.” :


When observation and cautious trial shew that others, or
one other person, are borne by him, their presence should be
gradually enjoined, and the operator should be separated
from him as soon as this can be borne without irritation, so
that the attachment may gradually die away.

The present case was one of mesmeric attachment, as


Mesmeric attachment perfectly pure.


shewn by the patient following the mesmeriser about, and of
a disturbance of the nervous system produced by the operator
leaving the patient when in the mesmeric sleep-waking
and mesmeric attachment, and aggravated by the means
employed to rouse and benefit her. She thus was strongly
attracted but at the same time dreaded her mesmeriser, fan-
cying her eyes like balls of fire, and not daring to go down
stairs till she was gone. The coexistence of such feelings is
possible. Even love and hatred of the same person, endear-
ment and cruelty, are compatible.

The present case corroborates what I long ago felt satis-
fied of from observation—that the mesmeric attachment is
simply attachment. It occurred here in a female towards a
female. In the interesting mesmeric case at Brighton re-
corded by Mr. Parsons,* it occurred in a youth towards that
gentlemen. In Master Salmon it occurred towards me: but
if any other person, male or female, mesmerised him, it
occurred towards that individual, and he repelled me strongly.
Nay, if one person mesmerised half of him, and another
person the other half, both persons males or both females,
or one a male and the other a female, one half of him was
attached to the mesmeriser of that side and of that side
only, and repelled the other person.t In these cases there
may be the greatest disparity of years between the patient
and the mesmeriser—the patient may be a child. In all
these cases, there is a horror of all or most other persons,
male and female. In one of my patients, a young lady,


** Whose attachment in the mesmeric state was so violent and so
exclusive, that she always insisted on holding my hand; was dis-
pleased, when even 5 mon | in a very deep sleep, if I spoke to
others; appeared to hear nothing said by others, though what was
said might be calculated to render her unable to restrain herself
from shewing that she heard it; appeared not to hear any noise,
however loud, sudden, or disagreeable, made by others, unless she
mistook it for a noise made by me ; would allow nobody but myself to
be at a short distance from her, nor more than two, sometimes not
more than one, besides myself, to be in the room, nor allow any other
animal, even a bird, to be near her; nor allow me to mention any other
person, nor even a living brute. She was angry if I mentioned her
father or sister, both whom she dearly loved when awake ; if I men-
tioned a dog, bird, fish, a fly, or even the mites of cheese, as alive: but
if I spoke of birds or fishes as dishes, and therefore no longer alive,
she experienced no annoyance. Jealousy could not be carried to a
higher pitch.”—No. IX., p. 53.


* No. XXIV., pp. 349—352.
+ This beautiful case is detailed in No. XXXIV., &c., p. 178. References to
many such will be found there.


Attachment most inordinate sometimes. 275
Their proximity, if known, creates uneasiness: the con-
tact of their hands absolutely distresses. The moment Master
James Salmon was thrown into the mesmeric state by me, he
could not endure the touch of another person’s hand by his
own, though he could bear another person to touch his arm
through his clothes: he implored any one who touched him
to desist. In Master Henry Adlard, this peculiarity extended
to things touched by others: nay, it occurred in reference to
things touched by the half of the mesmeriser not correspond-
ing with his own.


“T have one, who, though always in a silent sleep without speak-
ing, becomes uncomfortable and wakes if I cease to hold his hand ;
and will not bear the touch of a stranger, nor the contact of metals
previously touched by another; and, though he often grasps my
hand, he lets it go if 1 converse with or touch others: nay, each half
of his brain experiences affection distinctly ; for he often grasps one
of my hands with one of his while the other continues perfectly indif-
ferent. When both halves of his brain are experiencing affection,
his right half has an affection for only my right half and his left for
my left, as shewn by his grasping my right with his right and taking
no notice of it with his left, and my left with his left, but taking no
notice of it with his right; nay, by his withdrawing his right angrily
from my left if I touch it with my left, and his left from my right if
I touch it with my right; and, what is more wonderful, his right
hand will not endure the contact of gold first held in my left hand or
his left hand, nor his left endure the contact of gold first held in my
right hand or his right hand. If, while his hands are grasping eac
of my corresponding hands, another person touches me anywhere, or
if I bring my two hands in contact at the smallest point, the end of
a finger for example, he lets go my hands with angry indifference.
All this I may remark happens equally when such care is taken as to
render his seeing or hearing by any of the five ordinary senses what
is done absolutely impossible.””—No. IX., p. 53.


The pleasure in the proximity or contact of the mes-
meriser is clearly not sexual feeling at all. I saw this fact
very many years ago, and all I have witnessed since has con-
tinued to prove it. I am more than ever anxious to insist
upon this because an elementary mesmeric book has been
published in which an incorrect view is taught. At the
same time, if a loose individual is mesmerised, improper feel-
ings may present themselves: but they are not mesmeric,
and they arise from the individual’s character and the oppor-
tunity afforded for it to come out: just as may and sometimes
does take place in the confidence of medical or of religious
attendance. I have steadily refused to mesmerise any female
of the soundness of whose principles and habits I was not per-
fectly satisfied. This is a duty which every mesmeriser owes


276 Claivoyants may speak of unascertainable things.


to the holy cause of mesmerism. Again; an honourable
sexual attachment may spring up from mesmerism, as it may
from any other professional attendance or any close and fre-
quent intercourse with one of the other sex : and a happy mar-
riage has taken place between a mesmeriser and his patient.

All this is a different matter from that peculiar suscep-
tibility of satisfaction from the mesmeriser, and of misery from
other persons, that I have portrayed.


In my article, already quoted, upon mesmeric disturb-
ances, I gave my observations upon clairvoyance : and, lest any
one should imagine that, because a patient believes he sees or
hears spiritual beings, and perhaps receives his clairvoyant
information from them, this is any proof of such beings ma-
nifesting themselves to him, or a proof of any opinions which
he may express on supernatural matters, I will take the
liberty of quoting it :—


“The existence of a mesmeric fluid is pure hypothesis. The
phenomena may depend upon a peculiar matter, or upon a peculiar
state of some matter which is the source of other phenomena of
nature. I think it best always to speak of phenomena only, and to
say power, property, or force, which gives rise to them. We have no
proof of a nervous fluid, an electric fluid, a soul, &e. The respective
phenomena of mesmerism, electricity, heat, life common to vege-
tables and animals, and the mental phenomena of intellect, feeling,
and will of the animal kingdom, may result from properties of ordi-
dary matter peculiarly circumstanced, and, in the case of living be-
ings, peculiarly composed, organized, and circumstanced in regard
to external circumstances, or may depend upon a peculiar matter in
ordinary matter; but we see them only as phenomena of ordinary
matter, and the peculiar matter is imaginary only. As to what
clairvoyants say, they may say what they like on matters where
there is no means of ascertaining whether they are right or wrong.
The phenomena of light seem to depend upon the vibrations of some
matter: but what this is, and whether the same holds good of the
other phenomena of heat, electricity, gravitation, life, mind, in vari-
ous circumstances, we know not. We have no right to speak of
these but as the result of conditions of common matter.”

“The declarations of mesmerised patients thought to be clair-
voyant upon these matters is not worth a moment’s consideration.
I am satisfied of the truth of clairvoyance—of an occult power of
foreknowing changes in the patient’s own health that are not cog-
nizable to others; of knowing things distant and things past; and
sometimes, though rarely, events to come. But I am sure that most
clairvoyants imagine much, speak the impressions of their natural
state or of those about them, and may be led to any fancy. Some
talk Swedenborgianism: some Roman Catholicism: some Calvinism:
some Deism: some Atheism: some prescribe homceopathy, some


Clairvoyance often accompanied by illusion. 277


allopathy. Cerebral sympathy—a fact totally unknown to the
medical world, is continually mistaken for clairvoyance, and the
opinions of patients may thus be sympathetically those of their mes-
merisers. They will deceive from vanity or love of money or even of
fun. Many patients pretend to the power who have it not at all,

and those really possessed of it in some degree or other pretend to it
when it is not in action. I first noticed this in 1838, and have seen
it every month from that to the present time.”


In a note upon clairvoyant dreams in No. XLI., p. 80:—


** Certain excitement of various portions of the brain, if not of
other divisions of the nervous system, gives the appearance of un-
existing or absent beings and inanimate objects, gives the impression
of unreal sounds, tastes, smells, and feelings,—to use the term feel-
ings in the signification of all sensations included in the generic word
touch. Any of these phenomena may occur singly, or in combina-
tion with one or more of the others, or with different diseases of the
nervous system. A madman may believe their reality, as he does
the reality of all his fancies; and so may a person not mad but ig-
norant—unacquainted with their true nature, which is diseased
nervous action. The ignorant suppose such appearances of beings
to be supernatural beings or real souls of terrestrial men separated
from the body for the moment. However, the appearance of their
clothes, of books, and of all the other inanimate objects, is not to
be so explained,—not by supernatural clothes, books, trees, &c., &c.,
nor by separated souls of clothes, of books, trees, &c.: and these
appearances may be produced by narcotic poisons, blows on the head,
indigestible food, &c., &c., and be dispelled by emetics, bleeding,
&e., &c. Clairvoyance is sometimes, but not necessarily, attended
by this sort of hallucination—by an appearance or impression of some
unreal being or inanimate object, which seems to make the commu-
nication. In the highest form of the sleep-waking of the elder
Okey, when she had a degree of clairvoyance and presented such an
extatic appearance as no one could assume, she fancied her commu-
nications, whether true clairvoyance or illusion is not the present
question, were made by a beautiful negro. If a question was asked
her, she was observed to whisper as if to some one with her—then
to pause, as if receiving an answer,—and then to answer the ques-
tion. This idea I traced to her having seen a handsome young New
Zealand Chief, brought to the hospital by Mr. Gibbon Wakefield to
witness her phenomena. Her sister Jane at one time fell into an
analogous state without any true clairvoyance, and she fancied she
saw a gentleman. Subsequent reading informed me that these deli-
rious ideas were often recorded by authors who have described the
cases of clairvoyants that fell under their own observation. At the
very time the two Okeys were in University College Hospital, a young
lady was in an analogous condition at Neufchatel under Dr. Castell,
and subsequently at “Aix in Savoy under the care of Dr. Despine,
senior, who has detailed her most interesting case.’

“The peculiar modes of detection mentioned in No. XXIV., pp.
VOL, XII, U


278 Supernatural things require supernatural evidence.


338—40, as employed by Mr. Parson’s youth, appear to me to be
the result of an insane condition: and his mode of telling the time
by an imaginary dial, p. 338, to be the result of at least eccentricity.
I conceive that Frank had an extraordinary faculty of judging of
time, but went through certain unnecessary processes, which, how-
ever, he sometimes made necessary, and yet not always, for he
sometimes judged accurately without them (No. XXIV., p. 355 and
perhaps 353).”


To shew that no reader need be alarmed at my assertion
that we have no proof of a nervous fluid, an electric, or a
soul, I refer to my note in No. XXXIX., pp. 313-40: and
to No. XL., p. 430:—


** We have always contended that man is a material body, en-
dowed with certain properties or powers, existing from a certain com-
position in certain circumstances: and that, when he dies, he by
nature ends for ever: but that the Christian doctrine declares he will
enjoy immortality,—will live again, not in virtue of his nature, but
by a miracle, (see Nos. III., p. 288; XII., pp. 421-6; XXL., p.
112; XXIX., pp. 68-9; XXXIV., pp. 125-6; XXXIX., pp. 313-
5); and Bishop Law, it will be seen at p. 314, says, ‘ But neither
do these words, nor any other, so far as I can find, ever stand for a
purely immaterial principle in man, or a substance, whatever some
imagine they mean by that word, wholly separable from, and inde-
pendent of, the body.’ When he lives again, the Scripture declares
that his condition will be different. To us it is incomprehensible :
we have not faculties to comprehend it: but it is termed spiritual.
What is natural must be learnt from experience and reasoning on
experience: what is supernatural, as a future state, must be believed
on supernatural authority.”


VII. A few supplementary remarks upon “ Mesmerism proved
true, and the Quarterly Reviewer Reviewed, by the Rev.
Chauncy H. Townshend.” By Anti-Gtortoso.

* La Jeunesse.
‘** Mais, pardi, quand, une chose est vraie ?’ ””
“ Don Bartholo.


*** Quand une chose est vraie! Si je ne veux pas qu'elle soit vraie, je pre-
tends bien qu'elle ne soit pas vraie.”*—Beaumarchais, vol. i., p. 456.


TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.


July, 1854.
GenTLEMEN,—The more I look into Mr. Townshend’s


* “ La Jeunesse.
“«* But, what, when a thing is true?’ ”
** Don Bartholo.
“**When a thing is true! If I don’t wish a thing to be true, 7 ahvays
pretend it is not true.’”


Mr. Townshend’s book deserves a second notice. 279


book, the more do I agree with your opinion respecting it.
The ability with which it is written, the tact and knowledge
of the subject displayed, the soundness of the logic, and the
gentlemanly pleasantry interspersed throughout, all combine
to render it a most instructive, and at the same time a most
agreeable work I feel somewhat competent to offer this
judgment respecting it, having myself travelled over the
same road that the author has, and with the same object in
view; in other words, having examined the article in The
Quarterly Review on Mesmerism, with the intention of dis-
secting it critically. Indeed, could I have known that so
accomplished a writer as Mr. Townshend was addressing him-
self to the task, I should have hesitated before I presented
my crude remarks to the consideration of your readers.*
However, the Quarterly Reviewers, both through impudence
and ignorance, exposed so large a surface for flagellation, that
there was ample space afforded for two good scourgings.
It is a satisfaction to observe, that the parts which I selected
for the task, were not so much those upon which my coad-
jutor in the good work applied the whip. The castiga-
tion, which he has inflicted, is of no common order. And so
desirable do I deem it to keep his able comments before the
public, that copious as was the review of the book in The
Zoist, 1 venture to draw attention to sundry most interesting
passages, which the length of your paper evidently did not
allow you to introduce. Mr. Townshend, in short, writes so
ably and so pleasantly, that his book well merits a second
notice.

I was glancing the other day over those two lively come-
dies, which were written by Beaumarchais a short time pre-
vious to the great French revolution, and from one of which
the motto affixed to this paper is taken. I wanted to find
out, what it was which created such intense sensation upon
their representation. For to judge from the description, that
is given by some French historians, of their effect upon the
feelings of the Parisians, these comedies must have somewhat
accelerated the advent of that tremendous convulsion which
shook all Europe to its foundation ; and I was therefore pre-
pared to meet with opinions, both social and political, of a
most portentous tendency; but I discovered nothing of the
kind. The comedies, indeed, are very animated productions,
containing a great deal of smart dialogue and amusing re-
partee ; but scarcely anything appears in them of what in


* See Stray Notes upon the article on Mesmerism in the Quarterly Review.—
Zoist, Vol. XI., p. 390.


U2


280 What a convenient thing it is to ignore.


our days would be called political. Their popularity evidently
arose in great measure from the opposition which the court of
Louis XVI. offered to their representation. Had those in
power possessed the wisdom of being silent or neutral, these
revolutionary dramas would soon have found their level, and
been merely remarkable for the contrast which they presented
to the formal and dignified style that then prevailed on the
stage. As it was, their representation set all Paris in an up-
roar. But though I did not exactly find what was expected,
there was, en revanche, a good deal of sparkling wit, scattered
here and there, which to a degree repaid me for my lost time.
The writer was a man keenly alive to the pomposities and
pedantries of his day. He appreciated at its full value the
self-importance of the would-be dictator in science,—of the
man, for example, who because he knows some things well,
deems himself therefore entitled to pronounce authoritatively
upon things respecting which ke knows little or nothing.
How admirably would Beaumarchais have shewn up a great
professor and lecturer, railing at the ignorance and imperfect
education of his fellows, because they dissent from his preci-
pitate conclusions on a subject of inquiry that is difficult of
explanation. How thoroughly would he have understood the
materials of which Quarterly Reviewers are occasionally con-
stituted: and how he would have pierced through the anfi-
mesmeric innocence of Sir Henry Holland and Dr. Carpenter.
Our motto at the head of this letter hits off these philosophers
to a nicety, in regard to their recent physiological researches.
“ But, pardi, quand une chose est vraie, when a thing is true,”
The Zoist may be supposed to say to one of these honesty-
loving writers; for instance, “ when a blind man or an infant,
or a patient by manipulations behind his back, are put to
sleep, how do you explain these facts by your hypothesis of
suggestion?” “Oh, when we don’t wish a thing to be true,”
they reply, “ we pretend ignorance of its existence; when we
meet with facts in mesmerism that inconveniently upset our
theories, we take no notice of the transaction; and that is
the manner by which we contrive to write books and articles
on physiology.” Now that is the very language which Beau-
marchais puts into the mouth of one of his characters. Dr.
Bartholo never knows anything of which it is convenient for
him to affect an ignorance. Dr. Bartholo can assume the
most accommodating blindness when the occasion suits him.
Dr. Bartholo can put on the most bland and virtuous inno-
cence, and pen a book and propound a theory, with the use
of only those materials which accord with his own conclusions.
And it is because Mr. Townshend’s recent book so admirably


Suggestion is mostly indirect. 281


unmasks this literary hypocrisy, and exposes the shallowness
of argument by which sundry medical writers sustain their
dishonest views, that we again venture to recommend its
perusal to all believers in mesmerism.

In regard to this term “Suggestion,” which has now be-
come the favourite phrase of the anti-mesmerists, Mr. Town-
shend writes with a real philosophy. There is a depth and
searching correctness in his observations, which prove that
he has closely examined our nature and the workings of our
brain. He shews what the true character of Suggestion is,
or rather what is not Suggestion. He shews that it acts
generally indirectly. And he shews that the Reviewers have
misapplied the term, and framed a species of imaginary sug-
gestion to suit their own views and argument. The whole
passage is well deserving of careful study, for it goes to the
root of the subject: a few extracts only can be given—


** But view Suggestion in a wider range, we come to a veiled god-
dess,—a mystery, which resumes the whole question of man’s exist-
ence,—a secret which is to be approached with awe, and scrutinized
with reverence. Before her impenetrable shrine, genius and philo-
sophy have bowed their heads. To define exactly what she is, has
tasked the powers of metaphysicians. Even the name of this Isis
has been matter of deep deliberation. Sometimes as suggestion, at
others, as association, she meets the ear.

** But Reviewers


‘ Rush in where angels dare not tread.’


“‘In what an easy, dashing, off-hand manner, does the writer of
the article on Biology and Mesmerism, pounce upon and dispose of
the mystery of our being. Fearlessly he flounders on, no matter
whether in his depth, or out of his depth, seizes on poor Suggestion
in her most vulgar form, bottles her, as Sir Astley Cooper would
have bottled an anatomical preparation, in spiritu vini, and trium-
phantly holds her up to view in her post mortem glory.

** And I will tell you why.

‘The Mesmerists,’ and still more, the Biologists’ commands to
his patient, look like direct suggestion; and with this superficial
resemblance the Reviewer (faute de mieux) is fain to take up.

‘For he wants direct suggestion, and why should he demur about
such a trifle as that Suggestion mostly acts in an indirect way? He
first makes it, and then takes it; a compendious mode of dealing,
peculiarly his own. He clips and frames his axioms to the occasion,
—‘pro re nata’—as the doctors say. But, unluckily, Suggestion.
of any kind, direct or indirect, will not stand at the head of a theory,
for this plain reason. It is not a principle, but a law of action. I¢
does not originate, it guides. How Suggestion is suggested, is a pro-
blem in itself which resumes the whole of our being. It is properly
a vital phenomenon; the very breath of the rational soul... . But


282 The Quarterly Reviewer a slippery fellow.


the Reviewer applies the word Suggestion indiscriminately to any
power of impulsion, or state of sensation, at one and the same time,
both cause and effect. How much is there on this subject to explain
and to guard, to state clearly, and define logically, which the Reviewer
chooses to ignore.

“ How carefully should we distinguish between internal and ex-
ternal Suggestion; terms which the Reviewer mentions indeed, but
which he woefully confounds.

“Yet, more cautiously should we draw the line between normal
and abnormal Suggestion; and again, between normal and abnormal
methods of inducing a suggestive state.

“Gliding away, like the scuttle-fish, in a cloud of his own ink,
the Reviewer does not touch the true question at all, which is, how
Suggestion, that subtle thing, is abnormally suggested, and held
down, directed, and controlled by alien will.

“The fact is, that to an honest view the Suggestion of common
life, and the abnormal suggestion of mesmerism and biology, have
very little in common. It is a dictated suggestion that is the mar-
vel: and on this the Reviewer has thrown no light... . But when
we come to the notion of suggesting sleep, the absurdity deepens.
Neither at other’s bidding, nor our own, comes the capricious god.
In spite of placing before our fancy, biologically,


‘A flock of sheep that leisurely pass by
One after one,’


in spite of counting to a thousand, we are a thousand miles away
from the manageable state in which we may suggest ourselves into
slumber.

** All this is so palpable, that our Reviewer does, in fact, betray
a latent sense of weakness in his theory, by the manner in which he
tries to patch it up with other things. He gives us dissertations on
Suggestion, Abstraction and Reverie, but not one word as to the
wonder how these states are prompted, guided and governed by
extraneous human command.”—pp. 13—17.


The above must surely be regarded as very sound and
philosophical writing It shews that Mr. Townshend has
dived into the very heart of the subject. His reasoning is
not of that superficial, ad captandum nature, which suits a
popular review, that we take up for a half-hour’s desultory
reading and then throw aside for ever; but is made of that
stern stuff, which will admit of repeated examination.

The following passage, too, is very clear and satisfactory.


‘“* The Reviewer founds much on the assertion, that recent events,
(such as Electro-Biology, Hypnotism, &c.,) have greatly facilitated
the examination of mesmerism. The course of his argument is this.
A large number of the same phenomena which appear under mes-
merism may be developed under Hypnotism, Biology, &. Now
Hypnotism and Biology do not claim to make use of a hidden agency.
Therefore in Mesmerism there is no hidden agency.


et


Dr. John Wilson’s mesmeric experiments on brutes. 283


‘There is immense fallacy in all this. The reasoning is wrongly
based. It proceeds upon two assumptions, namely, that like things
are identical, and that similar things have identical causes. But did
the Reviewer forget the poet’s philosophic line,


‘ Like, but oh! how different.’


Apparently he did, both in theory and practice—for all he adduces
is “like, but oh! how different,”’ to what it should be. But super-
ficial resemblances mislead superficial observers. You cannot, in
matters of sensation, carry out the mathematical axiom, “things that
are equal to the same are equal to one another ;” for this reason, vital
phenomena are not straight lines, and are never utterly similar,
though, like the leaves on trees, they may appear so. Indeed, if the
lemma were once admitted that ‘similarity constitutes identity,’ what
confusion would ensue in every art, in every science. Little has the
Reviewer perceived how far every one of the bases, which he has used
to confound mesmerism, would go to make a muddle of the whole of
human life.”—>p. 36.


Among the facts, which anti-mesmerists have conveniently
chosen to ignore, are those connected with the mesmerisation
of the lower animals. In their case Imagination or Sugges-
tion could play no part. So far back as 1839, Dr. John
Wilson, physician at that time to the Middlesex Hospital,
published a small pamphlet, called, Trials of Animal Magnet-
ism on the Brute Creation. These trials related to some ex-
periments which he himself made with several of the wildest
animals at the Zoological gardens. The results were most
decisive ; and it is strange, how writers opposed to mesmerism,
have continued to place on one side the facts contained in Dr.
Wilson’s pamphlet. No allusion, as far as I am aware, has
ever been made to those experiments; at least, not by any of
the recent controversialists. Sir H. Holland, for instance,
passes them over with his usual soft and arcadian simplicity.
Such facts would damage most impertinently the one grand
idea that forms the basis of “ Human Physiology.” Other
writers have imitated their prototype’s prudent taciturnity.
Suggestion is we know their ruling notion; and Sir Henry
has “ suggested” to them the wisdom of being silent, on points
where language could not successfully conceal their secret
inevitable convictions. And yet, since Dr. Wilson published
his pamphlet, other facts of a similar nature have taken place ;
the narrative of which has appeared in The Zoist. Stilla
politic silence has yet prevailed. And therefore it is that, in
reply to the Suggestionists, Mr. Townshend produces some
curious facts which have come under his own cognizance.


“To obtain proper evidence of the existence of a peculiar medium,
let a doubter begin by trying the passes where suggestion cannot be


284 A mesmeric medium necessary.


an ingredient in the case. Let him mesmerise dadies, if he will. I
have seen even an idiot infant, who never otherwise slept, thrown in
five minutes, into a mesmeric sleep so sound, that it was tost about
and thrown on a bed without the possibility of waking it. Or, let
any one make experiments on brutes, above all on dirds. I have
had, in two instances, birds which were so easily affected by mes-
merism that the head followed the finger, even when held out of sight,
as iron follows the magnet. One of the birds, when once put to
sleep, as it was thoroughly by mesmeric action, could be tost into
the air, and caught again in the hand like a ball. This was a species
of tom-tit. The other, a nightingale, was still more susceptible. It
could be mesmerised by the eye of any person with whom it was
familiar; and would, if fixedly looked at, even from across a room,
stretch out its wings level with the table on which it might be perch-
ing, close its eyes, and so, in that state, manifest attraction of the
head to the human hand, from side to side.

“* That every bird should be so sensitive to the human influence
is indeed not to be expected. Every tyro, whether he try to mes-
merise birds or men, must make up his mind to many failures, but
in this he will only be like any other neophyte on any other subject.

“* Dogs are difficult to mesmerise because of their natural watch-
fulness; but fish are easily affected. Fish kept in glass bowls will
recognize the hands of particular persons, and seem to have pleasure
in being taken out of the water by them; while on the contrary
no amount of habit reconciles them to being touched or even ap-
proached by certain other hands. I once restored to animation by
mesmeric passes several fish that had been apparently killed by
shocks from an immense horse-shoe magnet, which was used in a
lecture on terrestrial magnetism; and these fish, the lecturer assured
me, would have never revived in ordinary circumstances.”’—p. 102.


Such facts as these, which are mentioned on Mr. Town-
shend’s own authority, are so convincing, that no mesmeriser
doubts the existence of some external agent : this is the point,
however, on which from the beginning the Quarterly Reviewer
tries to throw discredit. And therefore I ask, why are these
alleged facts not examined? If they be true, they prove
something: if they be not true, what constitutes their false-
hood? The incompetency of the witnesses? Upon this point,
we should be glad of an answer. But if our witnesses cannot
be taxed either with incompetency or with falsehood, how will
the explanatory theory of the Quarterly Reviewers apply in
this matter of the lower animals? For our opponents, it will
be remembered, have theorized: they admit our facts, but
offer a theory in explanation. Now (as Mr. Townshend ob-
serves in his preface,) this is a fact of great significance. It
is evident that our phenomena are so important and remark-
able, as to drive the Anti-Mesmerists to Theory; it is also
evident that, by rejecting our Theory, they are driven out of


An agency exists which is not suggestion. 285


their entrenchments into a very weak and exposed position.
We have the thing in black and white; and as the The Quar-
terly Review may be considered a resumé of all that can be
most subtly urged against Mesmerism, and is no doubt the
best that can be said on the side of our opponents, we behold
the utmost of which prejudice is capable. And this fact, our
author well remarks, “is an era in the history of that world-
wide thing, Mesmerism.”

On the subject of Theory, it strikes me that there is a
freshness and originality in the following observations of Mr.
Townshend.


“There is a cant of the day about Theories,—a cant which our
practice contradicts. All are crying out, ‘Give us facts—no theo-
ries!’ Yet every body really does theorize for himself. To reason,
to deduce is the prerogative of man; and we, in truth, take every
fact, however mysterious, in connexion with a presumed cause. A
visible phenomenon forces on us the conviction that there is behind
it an adequate agency, even though that agency be occult. Every
fact is a theory, if we did but know it. The fall of an apple includes
the system of the universe. Now, in Mesmerism, every fair judge
has before his eyes. phenomena induced upon one human being by
the action of another, while at the same time this action takes effect
in such a way as to render a medium of communication between the
two beings as much a thing of certainty as terrestrial magnetism is
when established by the motion of a needle near a magnet. Some
wise heads indeed recur mustily to the old dictum that we must not
call in a pew agency, when what are called (and how foolishly called !)
known causes suffice. But, in the case of Mesmerism, these said
known causes will not suffice. To prove this, I will relate what has
just occurred at a séance at my house near Lausanne.” —p. 140.


Mr. Townshend then describes a series of mesmeric expe-
riments of a most interesting nature, which were conducted
under the direction of Mr. Regazzoni, a mesmeriser from
Bergamo in Italy. These experiments produced on all who
witnessed them the most thorough conviction that there exists
in mesmerism, an occult agency, independent of Suggestion ;
however, the description is too long for insertion, but every
one, who feels an interest in this question, will be well repaid
by a perusal. Mr. Townshend recurs to the subject of a
“Theory” towards the close of his book.


‘We have phenomena before us, and the human mind (even as
the attempt in the Quarterly proves) seeks for a solution of those
phenomena. But an inadequate Theory is as inadmissible as medio-
crity in poetry. It is not natural, for nature deals out her powers
with a lavish hand. . . . Now the Mesmeric Theory, which briefly is,
‘the human influence acting through a medium,’ is amply adequate


2386 Mr. Townshend is an honour to the great cause.


to our exigencies, with this beautiful peculiarity: it is never hurtful.
It suffices, but it does not harm. Let us remark too that the Mes-
meric Theory is but an expression of facts. What proves remark-
ably how little we have had to do with Theory as mere Theory is,
that since Mesmer’s time we have said very little about any Theory
at all. Each Mesmerist has worked for himself in the vast field of
nature. Since Mesmer’s discovery, the methods of mesmerisation
have been changed, improved, rendered more safe and certain; and
this in itself shews that we are not authority-mongers, who go by
precedent (another name for want of principle). But the time is
now come to re-take up Theory. Nay, we are forced to arms; for
our opponents themselves begin to theorize. Hitherto in their igno-
rance and arrogance,—which they call common sense—they have had
matters pretty much their own way; but it is time that we assume
our proper position.” —pp. 212, 213.

I could with ease have selected many more thoughtful and
instructive passages; but I would rather urge our readers to
refer to the book itself. There is matter enough in it to
furnish the substance for twenty volumes, such as volumes
are in these superficial days. Indeed, the more I examine
Mr. Townshend’s writings, the more am I impressed with
their deep philosophy, and with their strikingly suggestive
character. His mind is evidently of that reflective class which
can look before and after. Truly, we may well say that
accidents shape out for us the very bent of our studies. If
the fates, for instance, had placed our author in less fortunate
circumstances of birth and station, and had compelled him to
exercise his brain for the multiplication of his bread, we might
have seen Mr. Townshend occupying the chair of Morai Phi-
losophy in some Northern University, delivering profound
lectures on Metaphysics, or putting forth volumes which
might have rivalled those of Dr. Brown, Dugald Stewart, and
Macintosh, for the breadth and depth of their views: Diis
aliter visum: and, instead of that, the man of refinement and
of diversified reading and accomplishments shines out in every
page; philosophy and humor are happily blended, each acting
as the handmaid to the other, and each keeping its proper
place; and a book is produced, from which the wisest may
borrow many a thought and hint, and which the less in-
structed may read with ease and pleasure. Every mesmerist
has reason to be proud of such an ally as Mr. Townshend,
and should keep his two works in a prominent position before
him. "'

I am, gentlemen, yours, &c.,
Ant1-GLorIoso.


( 287 )


VIII. A case of Spirit-rapping above three hundred years old,
equal to any of the newest, sagaciously viewed, skilfully
cured, and recorded by the Abbé Lenglet. Translated by
Dr. Elliotson. With the testimony and opinions of the
Rev. Dr. Cumming on Rapping and Table-moving.


“*There was a Negro,’ said he, ‘who had a pretty wife, to whom another
Negro was rather attentive when he had an opportunity. One day the husband
went out to hunt, and the other party thought it a good opportunity to pay a visit
to the lady. The husband, however, returned rather unexpectedly, and the visitor
climbed up on the rafters to be out of sight among the old boards and baskets that
were stowed away there. The husband put his gun by in a corner, and called to
his wife to get his supper, and then sat down in his hammock. Casting his eyes
up to the rafters, he saw a leg protruding from among the baskets, and, thinking
it something supernatural, crossed himself, and said, ‘ Lord, deliver us from the
legs appearing overhead!’ The other, hearing this, attempted to draw up his legs
out of sight, but, losing his balance, came down suddenly on the floor in front of
the astonished husband, who, half frightened, asked ‘ Where do you come from !’
‘I have just come from heaven,’ said the other, ‘and have brought you news of
your little daughter Maria.’ ‘Oh! wife, wife! come and see a man who has
brought us news of our little daughter Maria;’ then, turning to the visitor, con-
tinued : ‘And what was my little daughter doing when you left?’ ‘Oh! she was
sitting at the feet of the Virgin, with a golden crown on her head, and smoking a
golden pipe a yard long.’ ‘ And did she not send any message to us?’ ‘ Oh yes,
she sent many remembrances, and begged you to send her two pounds of your
tobacco from the little rhossa: they have not got any half so good up there.’
‘Oh! wife, wife! bring two pounds of our tobacco from the little rhossa, for our
daughter Maria is in heaven, and she says they have not any half so good up
there.’ So the tobacco was brought, and the visitor was departing, when he was
asked, ‘ Are there many white men up there?’ ‘ Very few,’ he replied; ‘they
are all down below with the diabo.’ ‘I thought so,’ the other replied, apparently
quite satisfied ; ‘good night!’’”"—A Narrative of Travels on the Amazon and
Ro Negro, with an account of the native tribes, and observations on the cli-
mate, geology, and natural history of the Amazon Valley. By Alfred R. Wallace.*


“Te illustrious house of St. Mesmin had bestowed a great
deal of property upon the convent of the Cordeliers, and its
burial-place was in their church. The wife of a lord of St.
Mesmin, provost of Orleans, having died, her husband, thinking
his ancestors had impoverished themselves enough by giving
to the monks, made the fraternity a present which did not
content them. These good Franciscans resolved to disinter
the deceased in order to make the widower reinter her in
their holy ground, and pay them better. The plan was not
wise, because the lord of St. Mesmin would have buried her
elsewhere. But imprudence often attends roguery.

“ At first the spirit of the lady of St. Mesmin appeared
to two only of the monks. It said to them, ‘I am damned,
like Judas, because my husband has not given enough.’
The two little rogues who reported these words did not per-


* Are the spirit-table-movers and spiri/-rappers wiser than the negro hus-
band ?—-Zois¢.


288 Raps given at pleasure by the monks.


ceive that they would do more harm than good to the convent.
The object of the convent was to extort money from the lord
of St. Mesmin for the repose of his wife’s soul. But, if
Madame de St. Mesmin was damned, all the money in the
world could not save her: nothing would have to be given:
the Cordeliers must lose their pay.

“ At that period there was very little good sense in France.
The nation had been brutalized by the invasion of the Francs,
and subsequently by the invasion of scholastic theology : still
there were some persons in Orleans who reasoned. They
doubted whether, if the Great Being had permitted the spirit
of Madame St. Mesmin to appear to two Franciscans, it was
natural for this spirit to declare itself damned like Judas.
The comparison seemed out of place. The lady had not sold
our Lord Jesus Christ for thirty pieces of silver; she had not
hanged herself; her bowels had not burst from her body:
there was no ground for comparing her to Judas.

“This created suspicion; and there was the more talk in
Orleans because some heretics did not believe certain visions,
and, though they admitted absurd principles, did not fail to
draw sound conclusions from them. The Cordeliers therefore
changed their mode of attack, and put the lady in purgatory.

“So she appeared again; and declared that she was in
purgatory: but begged to be disinterred. It was not the
custom to disinter people who were in purgatory, but the
monks hoped that M. de St. Mesmin would pay them some
money to prevent the possibility of this extraordinary affront.
The request to be removed from the church increased the
suspicions. People knew very well that souls have often ap-
peared, but that they never beg to be disinterred.

“ The spirit from this time never spoke: but it plagued
every person in the convent and in the church. The Cor-
deliers exorcised it. Brother Peter of Arras, in order to
conjure it, adopted a method which was anything but wise.
He said to it, ‘Jf you are the spirit of Madame de St.
Mesmin, nar four times:’ and the four rars were heard.
‘If you are damned, rar six times: and the six RAPS were
heard. ‘If you are the more tormented in hell because your
body is buried in holy ground, nar six times more :’ and these
six naps were heard still more distinctly. ‘If we disinter
your body, and leave off praying to God for you, will you be
less damned? nap five times to certify this :’ and the spirit
certified by five naps.

“This interrogation of the spirit by Peter of Arras was
signed by two and twenty Cordeliers, at the head of whom
was the reverend provincial father. This provincial put the


Dr. Cumming attended a table-turning party. 289


same questions the next day himself, and received the same
answers.

“ It may be said that, the spirit having declared itself to
be in purgatory, the Cordeliers had no right to suppose it
was in hell; but I am not to blame if some theologians
contradict themselves.

“The lord of St. Mesmin presented a petition to the
king against the Cordeliers. They presented another. The
king appointed judges, at the head of whom was Adrien
Fumée, master of the requests.

“ The procureur-général of the commission requested that
the said Cordeliers might be burnt: but the sentence ordered
all of them to make the amende honourable only with a torch
in their hands, and by being banished. This sentence was
passed on the 18th of February, 1534.

“ After such a spiritual manifestation, no others can be
required : they all belong to the class of knavery or madness.
Those of the first class come under the hands of the law:
those of the second are either the visions of madmen in dis-
ease, or of madmen in good health. The first requires medi-
cines: the second the madhouse.”


The preceding case is recorded, it appears, by the Abbé
Lenglet in his Histoire des Apparitions et Visions. But, as I
have been unable to procure this work, I was compelled to
have recourse to Voltaire’s Dictionnaire Philosophique, article
Vistons.—JoHN ELLioTson.


The Rev. Dr. Cumming has published his experience in
table-moving and table-revelation, and his views of the subject
in the following passages so accord with my own experience
and the views published in The Zoist (Nos. XLI., XLIL.,
XLIII., XLIV., XLV., XLVI.), that I append them to this


communication.—J. E.


“T was asked to go and visit two of the most able and
effective performers upon tables in the house of a dear and
valued friend, a member of my congregation. I watched,
suspiciously, the whole from beginning to end. It is im-
portant, however, to discriminate two things confounded.
There is table-moving, which is one thing; there is table-
speaking, or disembodied spirits speaking through tables (as
it is alleged), which is a totally different thing. The one
may be a scientific phenomenon; the other I shall try to
describe as I think it deserves. It may seem presumptuous |


290 Table-turning is a natural fact.


| to say, even with deepest deference, that I am satisfied that
Faraday in his letter does not explain the phenomenon. This
may be my érror, but it is my impression. Whether it be
by electricity, or galvanism, or mesmerism, or any other yet
undetected motive and subtle element, it is a fact, that the
fingers of a lady laid lightly on a heavy table, made it, in my
presence, spin round, lift its legs, stamp the floor, and throw
itself into most extraordinary and unbecoming convulsions.
Table-turning is an amusement for children. Table-talking
is not so. The one is child’s-play, the other is either down-
right nonsense or worse. It is important that we should
understand, if possible, what pretends to be above human ;
for while expecting miracles, and signs supernatural, or
rather infra-natural, in the last days, we must be on our guard
against imposture, and prepare to decide what are, and what
are not so. My friends asserted in their drawing-room, not
only that this new motive power was true (which may or may
not be), but that there was something above and beyond
table-moving, or the supernatural. It may be electricity, it
may be galvanism, it may be neither; or it may be some
other natural influence which we do not, at present, know of ;
or it may be what Faraday suggests. I am aware there are
difficulties in supposing the existence in human fingers of an
undetected power, for how does it happen that when people
sit down to dine, and lay their fingers on the table, it does
not begin to dance? But it is a fact that I saw a table,
touched lightly by the fingers of a lady, whose muscular
powers, I am sure, were not very formidable, rise, leap, and
move from side to side in the most extraordinary manner.
Faraday I think does not, and I cannot explain this. But it
is not therefore supernatural. My two friends, however, said
that it was supernatural. They set the table in motion, and
then asked me to put questions to the supposed spirit, which
had just taken possession of the table. 1 said, ‘ No, I decline
to do so; I am here simply as a spectator, and have reasons
for declining, which I need not state. I am here simply as
an inquirer: you begin, and I will look on.’ The question
was asked, ‘Do you know the Rev. Mr. Reeve?’ The table
gave three gentle taps, which means in the table vernacular,
‘Yes.’ ‘Do you know the Rev. Mr. Fisk?’ The table gave
three gentle raps, in precisely the same manner. After ask-
ing two or three questions about various persons, present or
absent, and receiving similar polite and courteous replies,
my friend asked the supposed spirit, ‘Do you know Dr.
Cumming? The table positively forgot all the respect due
to a lady’s drawing-room, and threw itself into a state of


The rapper rapped very blunderingly. 291


convulsive kicking, which made me anxious, not about my
creed, but about the table’s safety. My friends then asked
how many shillings were in my pocket. It guessed eleven,
and there were only five. They then asked how may sove-
reigns I had. It guessed five, and I had only one. It was
then asked, ‘ Will you answer Dr. Cumming at all?’ The
answer, according to their interpretation, was, ‘No,’ in the
most decided manner. ‘Why not? An alphabet was then
laid on the table, and, certainly, the proceeding was very
curious. We began: A, the table stood still; B, it gave
three taps. That was set down as the first letter of the
answer. We then began again: A, the table was silent; B,
still silent. We went on till we came to E, then there were
three taps. This was proceeded with till the words were
made out,—‘ Because he laughs.’ When I heard this, I sub-
mitted that my laughing and incredulity ought to be a reason
for convincing me, and not leaving me a sceptic. But the
table, or if not the table its manipulator, seemed to dislike
me excessively. I confess I saw much that was curious; a
great deal ingeniously done: but I have also seen very re-
markable things in the feats of tumblers in the streets of
London, in the tricks of card-shufflers in a room, and in the
conversaziones of ventriloquists in a chimney-nook. But I
have seen nothing necessarily supernatural about it; and
mark, if there be a doubt that a thing is a miracle, it is no
miracle. In the days of our Lord there was no doubt ex-
pressed by bitter enemies that what he did was miraculous ;
the puzzle was, ‘Is it from the devil below, or is it from
God above?’ But table-talking is so equivocal, that the
parties present witnessing the so-called miraculous responses
are puzzled to determine whether it be supernatural, or only
very clever and talented. Now, in the last days, I look not
for equivocal feats and dubious miracles, but for terrible
startling manifestations of superhuman power, which shall
deceive, if possible, the very elect.

“ But a word more on this subject. I have read on one
side the Rev. Mr. Close and the Rev. D. Wilson, who have
written very ably and admirably ; though I do not agree with
either as to the grounds of their decision, yet I agree with
their conclusions. I have read every pamphlet 1 could find
on the other side, from Mr. Dibdin, one of the best and
most pious men in London, to Mr. Godfrey, Mr. Gillson,
and others who have written in favour of their views ; and in
reading those various interesting works, I noticed that each |
inquirer of the table got all his answers very much in the |
direction of his own wishes and predilections. Let us mark '


292 Satan too busy to make tables talk.


well that fact. For instance: according to the Rev. R. W.
Dibdin, demons enter into the table and tell lies, and declare
that the worship of the Virgin Mary is right ; that is, they
are Jesuits, or Popish demons. According to Mr. Godfrey,
it is the spirits of departed sinners that emerge from hell and
confirm every doctrine of the Bible; that is, Protestant
spirits. According to Owen, the infidel and Socialist, Vol-
taire, and Diderot, and D’Alembert, and Paine, all come down
from eternal happiness, and tell him how perfectly happy
they are, and have been, and expect to be! According to
the Rev. Mr. Gillson, spirits speak against Popery; while,
according to Mr. Dibdin, they praise it, as if they had been
the priests of Dr. Wiseman. Now, I cannot believe that an
evil spirit would speak the truth, or attest the inspiration of
the Bible; for if a kingdom be divided against itself, how can
it stand? I cannot, in the next place, believe that an evil
spirit would be so stupid a blunderer as to preach the worship
of the Virgin Mary to so sound and pious a Protestant as
Mr. Dibdin. And I can never believe that godly, pious, and
evangelical ministers, are the media by whom devils come
from hell, to tell lies or truths to mankind. Nor can I
believe that ‘ Alfred Brown,’ the name given by one spirit,
could describe his torment, as recorded in the book of Mr.
Godfrey ; or that any other lost spirit ever can be, or is, suf-
fered to come up to this world and tell the transactions of its
awful prison-house, as long as I read the petition of the rich
man and the decisive answer that was given him. ‘I pray
thee, father, that thou wouldest send Lazarus unto my
father’s house, for I have five brethren, that he may testify
unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment.
And Abraham said unto him, They have Moses and the
prophets : if they hear not them, neither would they be per-
suaded though one rose from the dead.’ Now, mark you, if
the Old Testament alone was sufficient eighteen hundred
years ago to render unnecessary and impossible an apparition
from the dead to attest its truth, the Old and New Testament
together are, @ fortiori, more than sufficient to render unne-
cessary, unexpected, impossible, untrue, an apparition of a
spirit from the realms of the lost for the same object and
mission. I expect supernatural deeds before this dispensa-
tion closes ; but table-talking is not such proof of the mani-
festation of Satan as we are to look for. Besides, Satan has
higher game to fly at ; he is at present too busy in spreading
German Rationalism, Tractarianism, Popery, and various
kinds of moral evil, to have any disposable force and time to
spare for such bungling manifestation as table-talking. 1


Superstitious resistance to improvements. 293


admit that there is much in it asa physical phenomenon that
is curious, much that I cannot explain ; but I protest against
the conclusion that, because I cannot explain a phenomenon,
I am bound to attribute it to supernatural and miraculous
agency. The only trace of the serpent’s presence, if such it
be at all, that I can discover in the matter, is, I confess, to
me a very sad one. It is this: that the absurd excitement
it has produced should make lunatics in America—that the
monstrous thing should be organized into a church, as they
call it, in Philadelphia—that a clergyman should advertise a
lecture on the theology of table-talk in the metropolis of the
world ; and that Christian ministers, of undoubted piety and
talent, purity of life, and clearness of mind, should waste
their influence and weaken their power, by publishing me-
dizval fancies, monkish nonsense, profane and anile fables.”


IX. A farther account of the lad George Walker, a sufferer
from Electro-Biology, whose case was described in Vol. X. :
with the recent untrue statements of the Lancet. By a
Clergyman of the Church of England.


‘* When fanners were first introduced to assist in winnowing corn from the
chaff by producing artificial currents of air, it was argued that ‘winds were
raised by God alone, and it was irreligious in man to attempt to raise wind for
himself and by efforts of his own.’ One Scottish clergyman actually refused the
holy communion to those of his parishioners who thus irreverently raised the
‘ Devil’s wind.’ Few of the readers of Old Mortality will forget honest Mause
Headrigg’s indignation when it was proposed that her ‘son Cuddie should work
in the barn wi’ a new-fangled machine for dighting the corn frae the chaff, thus
impiously thwarting the will of Divine Providence, by raising wind for your
leddyship’s air particular use by human art, instead of soliciting it by prayer, or
waiting patiently for whatever dispensation of wind Providence was pleased to
send upon the sheeling hill.’ A route has just been successfully opened by
Panama between the Atlantic and Pacific. In 1588 a priest named Acosta wrote
respecting a proposal then made for this very undertaking, that it was his opinion
that ‘ human power should not be allowed to cut through the strong and impene-
trable bounds which God has put between the two oceans, of mountains and iron
rocks, which can stand the fury of the raging seas. And, if it were possible, it
would appear to me very just, that we should fear the vengeance of heaven for
attempting to improve that which the Creator in his almighty will and providence
has ordained from the creation of the world.’ When forks were first introduced
into England some preachers denounced their use ‘as an insult on providence,
not to touch our meat with our fingers.” Many worthy people had great scruples
about the emancipation of the negroes, because they were the descendants of Ham,
on whom the curse of perpetual slavery had been pronounced. Many others
plead against the measure for ‘the emancipation of the Jews, that the bill is a
direct attempt to contravert the will and word of God, and to revoke his sentence
upon the chosen but rebellious people.” —Scottish Review, Jan., 1854.


Ir is a common thing for those who are conscious of any
radical fault or error in themselves to take the greatest
VOL. XII, x


291. The Lancet ignores all mesmeric truths.


pleasure in searching out and exposing the defects of others.
Whatever is good they hate, simply because it reflects upon
themselves ; and the more it is esteemed by others, the more
diligently they labour to find some fault or deficiency by
which they may bring it into disrepute. To compare such
persons with philosophers seeking spots in the sun’s disc,
would be paying them too high a compliment. The vulture,
hovering above the natural beauties of the earth and pounc-
ing down upon the carrion, regardless of everything else, is
a more correct illustration of their state of mind; or it may
be seen portrayed in the German fable of the toad, spitting
venom at the glow-worm in pure hatred and envy at its light.

The Lancet, which chooses rather to be consistent in
error than bold and independent in the truth, began its
abuse of mesmerism through mere ignorance; and now the
sure and steady advance of that science, and the high esti-
mation it has gained among men of the greatest learning and
ability by its highly curative powers and its splendid physio-
logical effects, stirs up the Lancet, angry at its own hasty
blunder, to more determined hatred and more unscrupulous
and eager search for accusations against it.

The thousands of cures of diseases (pronounced by or-
thodox authority “incurable”) ; the operations performed
not only without pain, but without subsequent ill effects,
under its influence ; the innumerable cases of relief where all
medical appliances have failed,—these, though recorded in
The Zoist during the last eleven years, are all ignored by
the Lancet. It has no eyes for such effects as these, no cars
for reports so excellent and true, no tongue to tell others of
the power by which such seeming miracles are wrought : but,
if at any time there is a rumour of some miscarriage, of
some injury by careless mesmerisers, or of some unhappy
and unforeseen result, no matter whether it be true or false,
the Lancet grasps at it with the greatest delight, and gives it
as much publicity as its own circulation will allow. A strik-
ing proof of the innocence of mesmerism, when properly
applied, is presented in the fact that the Lancet can find
nothing worse to say against it than is contained in the fol-
lowing false and garbled statement, copied from its number
for June 16, 1854 :—


** Alleged Insanity produced by Electro-Biology.


“It appears that about two years ago, when the mesmeric mania
was attacking so many people, a boy named George Walker, of
Northampton, had been operated upon by a Mr. Reynolds, a lec-
turer, and by the Rev. Thomas Millington. Some time ago he


The boy went mad through Electro-Biology. 295


began to indicate that all was not right with him. Dr. Elliotson
was consulted, and recommended the demesmerising process, assur-
ing a recovery. The lad did not recover, and about six weeks since
he became so violent that it was necessary to place him under
restraint. The mother subsequently made an application to the
magistrates for his admission into a lunatic asylum, which was im-


mediately granted, as he appeared to have become a confirmed
lunatic.”


If our readers will take the trouble to refer to the Thirty-
ninth Number of The Zoist, Vol. X., p. 321, they will find
a full account of the circumstances which took place at
Northampton at the time here alluded to. They will see
that Northampton was then visited by several lecturers on
electro-biology, a violent and injurious perversion of mes-
merism; which, being practised by itinerant and illiterate
men for the sake of their own emolument and the amusement
of others, bears about the same relation to true mesmerism
as the medical treatment of the “wise women” in some of
our country villages bears to the scientific practice of our
London physicians. Electro-biology, when thus practised,
is an ignorant tampering with the most powerful of all agen-
cies; and mesmerists, who do all in their power to repress
it, are no more responsible for its effects than is the Royal
College of Surgeons for the injury done by quack doctors
and mountebank medicine vendors.

A boy named Walker, 16 years of age, was operated
upon repeatedly by one of these “ biologists,” and it appears
that he was suffered to leave the lecture-room without having
been released from the impressions of which he had been
made the subject. In course of a short time an alarming
degree of excitement and irritability manifested itself, and
soon afterwards symptoms of insanity appeared: the boy
became violent, he had no rest by night or day, and kept on
incessantly shouting, leaping, running to and fro and creat-
ing the greatest noise and confusion. Dr. Elliotson was
applied to by Mr. Millington, the Curate of the parish, for
advice ; and by his direction Mr. Millington endeavoured to
procure the assistance of a mesmeriser ; but, not succeeding
in this, after the patient had been ten days in this condition,
he undertook the case himself and commenced the mes-
merising. On the second day the improvement was so ma-
nifest, that the magistrates, before whom the boy was then
brought for the second time at Petty Sessions, and who had
seen him before in his violent state, expressed their surprise
and satisfaction and recommended that he should be left in
the mesmeriser’s hands ; while the mother earnestly declared
x2


296 The boy was cured by Mesmerism.


that “ Mr. Millington was the best friend the boy had.” On
the fourth day the lad was perfectly well and able to resume
his work as usual.

Compare this account with the above extract from the
Lancet. The Lancet says, the boy was operated upon by
Mr. Reynolds and Mr. Millington, ascribing this to the
mesmeric mania, and leaving it to be inferred that he was
mesmerised. The fact is that he was never mesmerised at all
till after his insanity: Mr. Reynolds did not profess to mes-
merise, and Mr. M. never saw the boy or had anything to do
with him till, at the request of his parents, he undertook the
eure.

“ Dr. Elliotson,” the Lancet asserts, ‘recommended the
demesmerising process.” Dr. Elliotson recommended nothing
of the kind, as the following extract from his letter (printed
in The Zoist, Vol. X., p. 321) will shew :—“ Pray let some
healthy person mesmerise the youth twice a day, very slowly,
very calmly, and very kindly, ... making very slow passes
from opposite the forehead to opposite the stomach.” Every
body, even the Lancet, must know well that demesmerism
is the very contrary of this.

The Lancet says, “ Dr. Elliotson assured a recovery ; but
the lad did not recover.” The lad did recover completely.
Though he had been suffering from the disorder more than
five weeks, and had been in a state of violent insanity for ten
days; yet, on the fourth day of his being mesmerised, he was
perfectly restored and as sound in mind and body as he had
ever been in his life.

The sequel is the only part that has any truth in it; and
what does this amount to? The boy whose case was declared
hopeless by the Northampton doctors two years ago, who
would have been committed to the lunatic asylum then but
for the kind interference of Dr. Elliotson and Mr. Millington,
and who is indebted to mesmerism for two years of health
and sanity, has now been sent thither without, as it appears,
any trial of that remedy which alone was found to be effectual
then. Who can say what causes may have concurred to pro-
duce disorder in the poor lad’s brain at this time? Who can
say that he might not have been restored as before to perfect
health if he had been again subjected to mesmeric treatment ?
What barbarous cruelty, to hand him over to the lunatic
asylum without first attempting every means for his recovery !
Dr. Elliotson gave his advice before most kindly and willingly
and would not take a farthing for it from anybody: the
bottles of physic (which were sent by the Northampton
doctors, and not taken) cost money, but the mesmerism cost


After two years mad again and not mesmerised. 297


nothing ; therefore there could be no excuse for not applying
to the same advice and to the same remedy again. But the
parents were poor illiterate people, and this course would not
have suited the purpose of those who cater for the Lancet
and its anti-mesmeric readers: the opportunity of fathering
a catastrophe upon mesmerism had been lost once, and must
not again escape them. Let the poor lad suffer ; let him live
and die a lunatic rather than be cured a second time by
means which they abhor.

Mr. Millington was absent from Northampton when
Walker’s insanity returned. He had been compelled by the
conduct of Dr. Robertson and other medical men to resign
his curacy, or to hold it under conditions to which no con-
scientious man could agree.* But for this, he might have
interfered again in the lad’s behalf; but he knew nothing of
the circumstance until he read in the Northampton paper of
his committal to the lunatic asylum. He then wrote to the
Northampton Herald, giving the true version of the matter
—denying, for his own part, that he had been in any way
concerned in it, except in administering relief according to
Dr. Elliotson’s advice, and remonstrating on the cruelty of
suffering the young man to be incarcerated without taking
proper steps for the recovery by mesmerism, though, as he
justly remarked, there was but small encouragement for any
one to interfere a second time in this behalf, seeing with
what gross misrepresentation and cruel persecution his own
efforts had been rewarded by those who ought to have been
foremost in the attempt to alleviate a case of bodily disease
and suffering.

If the Lancet drew its information from the report in the
Northampton paper, it might have noticed the contradiction
which appeared in it the following week. In any case it
ought not to have been ignorant of the real circumstances
detailed at full length in No. XXXIX. of The Zoist at the
time they occurred.


X. Further particulars of the case of Elizabeth Squirrell,
reviewed in our last Number.


*‘ John Fitch, a native of Connecticut, was probably the earliest inventor of
the steamboat. In the year 1786, on the Delaware River, was made his first
successful experiment; but, from lack of sufficient patronage, he was unable to
carry out the discovery. His life was one of hardship and penury, and ended in


* See note at the end of the article above mentioned, Zoist, Vol. X., p. 324.


298 The inventor of the steamboat died of disappointment.


grief and disappointment. He was confident, however, to the last, in the ultimate
success of his invention, and predicted all its future vastness and advantages.
His dying request was, ‘that he might be buried on the banks of the Ohio,
where the song of the boatmen might enliven the stillness of his resting-place, and
the music of the steam-engine soothe his spirit,’—the ruling passion strong in
death, and it was gratified.’’—Preface to a Poem called The Dying Machinist, in
an American Magazine, 1843.


We have received the two following letters upon this inte-
resting case :—
“ Ipswich, July 14, 1854.

“ Sir,—As the editor of the work on Elizabeth Squirrell,
I felt much gratified in reading your impartial, manly, and
noble review in The Zoist of this month, and at the consi-
deration which you have bestowed on a case which the world
at large, and the literary world not excepting, have noticed,
only to reject, to trample on, and persecute.

“T read to her (in her mesmeric state) your remarks on
her spirit-seeing, and I wished you had been present to hear
her observations on the subject. She also wished you could
visit her; and indeed if you could spare time to come to
Ipswich I am sure you would be greatly interested in seeing
her. She is a most remarkable subject in every respect.
Her case is to me increasingly interesting and wonderful ;
all the remarkable phenomena that have characterized it still
occasionally occur, while new phases also arise: she fasted
three weeks in January last (taking only a little water), and
a week in May (taking neither atom nor drop), and was as
well in both cases the last day as the first, and felt very littie
more than occasional languor (for a few minutes or half an
hour perhaps) until the state passed off, whatever it might be,
that occasioned fasting, and which she describes as icy cold-
ness at the stomach ; after that the sense of hunger and ex-
haustion followed.

“ She is now undergoing another change, which I am satis-
fied will result in her partial recovery of sight and hearing.

“T shall feel highly gratified if you will pay me a visit.

“T have taken copious notes of all I have seen remarkable
in her for a long time. Iam more than ever convinced of
the truth of all the statements made by herself and parents.

“T am, Sir, yours obediently,
“J. M. Burton.
“To the Editor of The Zoist.”


“2, John’s Place, Woodbridge Road, Ipswich,
“July 12, 1854.
“ Mr. Editor.
“ Dear Sir,—It was with great pleasure I perused the able


Elizabeth Squirrel continues full of interest. 299


and satisfactory review in The Zoist for this month of the
Autobiography of that most unjustly and malignantly perse-
secuted daughter of affliction—M. E. Squirrell; and perceiv-
ing therefrom that not having heard of her condition since
February you would be glad to know, permit me to say, that
I deem it an honour to be enabled to inform you somewhat
respecting the case, and should I, by so doing, assist in the
slightest degree to mitigate the undeserved obloquy which
has so copiously been showered upon this unfortunate young
person and her family, it will be an act of which I shall have
reason to rejoice until time with me shall be no more.

“Tt is some six months back that I first became per-
sonally acquainted with Elizabeth, and since that time I have
had frequent and interesting interviews with her, conversing
by means of the ‘dumb alphabet.’ She is most decidedly a
very clever, ingenuous, and, I believe, pious young creature :
one whom I should suppose utterly incapable of denying
the truth in the smallest respect, much more of uttering, or
participating in uttering, such a tissue of falsehoods, and
concocting such vile deceptions as those with which she has
been charged, more especially by one, who, professing to be
a Christian and teacher of others, has thus so unguardedly
infringed the golden rule of love. I allude to the minister
of the church from which Elizabeth’s parents were so hastily
and uncharitably expelled.

“ She has continued in about the same state as usual since
February, although we fancy rather improving than otherwise.
It has, however, been her wont lately in the mesmeric (when
she is in what she terms the ‘deep’) state to foretell the
various changes of note which are to occur in her disease,
and which predictions have invariably been fulfilled to the
letter (of course, as is the case with patients generally under
the influence of this power, she is totally unconscious of her
doings and sayings, nor does she generally like to be told of
them afterwards); and about a month back she predicted
that at the latter end of this month or beginning of next she
would both hear and see, to a certain extent, for a time, after
which she would relapse into her former state of deafness
and blindness for two or three months, and then ultimately
recover the use of her lost senses permanently. It now re-
mains to be proved how this prophecy will have its accom-
plishment. It is a remarkable fact that, since its announce-
ment, her eyes and ears have caused her exceeding pain,
insomuch that she is now compelled to have her room very
considerably darkened, the smallest ray of light painfully


300 A late instance of her Clairvoyance.


affecting her organs of vision, whereas previously she could
a the glare of a candle placed immediately before
them.

“ The following circumstance, with other instances which
have come to my knowledge, most clearly, to my mind, esta-
blishes the truth of clairvoyance, and its existence in her
case. On entering her room a few evenings since, I found
her in the mesmeric state, into which she had gone volun-
tarily, or spontaneously rather, and in which condition, I
should premise, she has (but not until within the last fort-
night or so) the use of both hearing and sight; and I was
very much interested at seeing her copying a letter (which a
friend was dictating) with the greatest facility. During the
time she was thus engaged, her mother was in a room next but
one to Elizabeth’s: the latter, being in a position from which
it was impossible to look into the said room, cried out, ‘ Don’t
you burn yourself, waking’s mother.’ I immediately turned
my head, and, being seated in a convenient place, saw her
mother (whose back was turned to me) at the fire-place, yet
could not observe what she was doing; but presently on her
coming into the room where we were, I mentioned the cir-
cumstance, and she informed me that she had just been
putting a red-hot heater into a smoothing iron, and that her
daughter was often in the habit of exclaiming under similar
circumstances. I should remark, that, when speaking of her
mesmeric and natural states, the one she calls her ‘ sleeping,’
the other her ‘ waking’ self; this accounts for the expression,
‘ waking’s mother’ It is also a singular fact that in the
former state she never voluntarily uses the name ‘God,’ but
always speaks of him as ‘the great God.’ I remained with
her that evening until she became demesmerised, when she
appeared like a person awaking from natural sleep, and
seemed very much refreshed, but totally unconscious of any
thing that had occurred. Upon venturing to tell her that
she had finished her letter, her astonishment and pleasure
were most unfeigned: it was a very long epistle, and one
which she had proposed to copy when in her natural waking
state.

“In the foregoing statements I have endeavoured to give
you a plain, unvarnished recital of Elizabeth’s present con-
dition and her hopes for the future, with a desire that it may
prove useful to the furtherance of truth and defence of inno-
cence, and for which purpose you have, Mr. Editor, full
liberty to make use of the whole or any part of my intelli-
gence in whatever way you may choose. I will also add, that


Lieut. Maury at first disregarded by practical men. 301


such additional information which may from time to time be
im my power to afford, I shall be most happy to render you
if required, and in the meantime beg to subscribe myself,

“ Dear Sir, very respectfully yours,


“ CuarLes Moopy.
‘To the Editor of The Zoist.


“P.S. Since writing the above, I have again visited Miss
Squirrell, who is suffering intense pain in her eye, which was
much discoloured and had been discharging a kind of matter.
She describes her feelings to be as though the eye was being
pressed into the head, and ascribes all to the beneficial results
of mesmerism, which, she thinks, has revived the nerves. (It
will be seen from her Autobiography that she has always been
deprived of the use of her right eye by cataract. This will
not be restored, and causes no pain.”)


XI. Lancinating Pains in the Chest, instantly relieved by
Mesmerism. Communicated by Dr. Hastings, M.R.C.S.,
L.S.A., Cheltenham.


“It was long before the captains of American vessels could be induced to
keep their log-books in an improved fashion. Practical men shook their heads at
the idea. He wished them to record the set of currents, the depths of the ocean
bed, the heat of the water. They did not see his purpose, and for a long time
they gave him little assistance. Materials nevertheless slowly grew in bulk under
his eye; he compared the information which he obtained with older logs :—and
at the end of six years he announced his first practical discovery—a new route to
Rio.

“ Practical men still shook their heads. They who had crossed the line a
hundred times were not to be taught navigation by a person who spent his days
in star-gazing or poring over old logs. It was not easy therefore to get a sailor
beld enough to venture on the new route; for seamen, more strongly wedded to
tradition than perhaps any other body of professionals, were afraid of the Great
Belt of Calms near the equator, and of a bugbear of a current setting on Cape
St. Roche in South America. At length a bolder than the rest proposed to sail
under Lieut. Maury’s directions; and the consequence was, that he reached the
line in twenty-four days instead of forty-one. He had sailed nearly as the crow
flies, instead of running seven or eight hundred miles out of the direct course to
avoid imaginary dangers.

“* After this great discovery Lieut. Maury had little trouble with the seamen.
To use his own words, ‘navigators now for the first time appeared to comprehend
what it was I wanted them to do—and why.” It was this ‘“‘ why” that had
made them indifferent. They could see no advantage in recording the minute
details asked for by the astronomer, and they failed in many cases to give them-
selves the trouble. Lieut. Maury’s next service was—shortening at various
points the route to California. He succeeded in reducing the entire sea voyage
from 180 to 100 days. It is with such practical recommendations in his hand,
that the American astronomer has now come to offer to Europe a share in the
glory and the benefits of a larger, more systematic, and more minute ocean
survey than has ever before been made.’’—Atheneum, Oct. 1, 1853.


302 Disease caused by unjust severity.


Tue subject of the following remarks is the young lady
whose case is cursorily stated at p. 16 and 17 of the pamphlet
which I herewith forward you, on Medicina Mentis. Her
age is 24 years, temperament nervous lymphatic, very thin
make, height moderate, full of spirits and animation when
free from pain, highly susceptible to physical and mental
impressions. Parents of a scrofulous habit; mother, aged
about 40, father 70.

She enjoyed tolerable health until about five years ago,
when her father scolded her very severely for some little faux
pas, after which she sank into a desponding state, and be-
came very ill, and kept her bed for some considerable time.
Since then she never has recovered her former health, and
has been constantly subject to attacks similar to that which I
relate in my pamphlet, together with the severe lancinating
pains at the chest of which I am about to speak.

In her first attack she had these pains, and her medical
attendants considered that she was consumptive. She was
bled and blistered, and physicked ad nauseam, for them, but to
no avail, and the consequence was that she wasted much, and
became disgusted with medicine, and would take no more.
Remaining, however, in a pining, suffering, and desponding
condition, her parents became very uneasy about her state,
and as she could not be persuaded to take any more drugs,
she consented to try homeopathy, and for this purpose was
placed under my care.

Her bowels are generally loose, and catamenia too copi-
ous and frequent : chagrin, too much exercise, any irregularity
in diet, will bring on the pains in chest. She describes them
to be just like “ bayonets running through her,” from the
middle of the sternum to the back-bone, accompanied with
intolerable head-ache.

When suffering from them, she can only speak in a
whisper; cannot take one particle of food, nor any drink:
she generally lies with her head tucked in a sofa-cushion,
eyes shut, and breathing scarcely perceptible; pulse quick
and weak ; skin cold and of a brownish hue: the least noise
makes her start, and brings on a spasmodic attack in her
throat and left side at the diaphragm: swallowing is totally
impeded, as the least attempt to take anything brings on
these spasms in throat and side—the limbs also frequently
become rigid and cramped.

When I attended her at first for these attacks, I en-
deavoured to relieve her by administering what I considered
the homeopathic medicine by olfaction, that is, by smelling,
and I found belladonna to generally give relief, in removing


Homeopathic treatment failed. 303


the spasmodic state of the limbs, but did not effect any ame-
lioration of the pains in the chest: these I succeeded in re-
moving by other medicines, but not immediately ; it required
some time.

Being convinced that mesmerism would be generally
beneficial in her case, I began to mesmerise her regularly,
and to keep her at the same time taking homeopathic
medicine: the result of which was that these attacks became
less frequent, and she told me that “the mesmerism always
removed the pains of her chest like magic.” <A few days ago
she had a very severe attack of these pains, produced entirely
by chagrin. I tried several homeopathic medicines, and,
being anxious to see if they would avail anything I kept her
taking them for two days and nights: but to no purpose, as at
the end of this time her sufferings were just as great as ever,
she having had during this time neither any sleep nor food.
I now mesmerised her, and away flew all her pains and aches,
her appetite returned and she ate a hearty meal and with
great gusto in my presence, chatting and talking with the
greatest animation, perfectly forgetful of all her suffering
an hour ago.

You and your readers will perhaps say, ‘ Why did I not
mesmerise her sooner?” I could not, as my time would not
permit me, nor is there anyone here that I could recommend.

She is quite in raptures with mesmerism, and the very
idea of being mesmerised infuses energy and life into her.

Now, Sir, here is a case, which has alike resisted allopathic
and homeopathic treatment, at once relieved by simple mes-
merism ; and, although this has not as yet cured her, it is
surely notwithstanding a blessed thing to know that one has
the power of relieving a fellow-creature from agonizing pains,
in an hour’s time, which days cannot accomplish under any
other means.

Would to God that medical men would study seriously,
and as they are morally bound to do, this excellent Medicina
Mentis, i. e., Mesmerism.

Would you, Sir, allow me to observe that I consider there
is a great omission in all the cases of mesmeric cures, nar-
rated in The Zoist. I mean the omission of the manner in
which the passes have been made, the length of time em-
ployed, and number of mesmerisms. I may be wrong, but I
consider this a most important omission. To merely say, “I
mesmerised him or her on the 9th,” without saying how or
how long, seems to me exceedingly indefinite, and sounds
something like saying, “I gave him medicine,” without say-
ing what it was, or how it was administered.


304 Dr. Cumming calls Mesmerism a crotchet.


Severe Hiccup removed by Mesmerism.

At six o’clock in the evening of the day, 17th July, on
which I wrote the above, I received a note from the mother
of the above young lady requesting me “ to come and see her
poor Mary Ann who has been suffering from an attack of
violent hiccup for the last four hours, and as it does not
appear to go away, but get worse, I am getting quite alarmed
about it.” I went directly and found my patient lying on
the sofa hiccuping away most furiously. I raised her up, and
began making transverse passes across her throat, and in
twenty minutes the hiccup was completely subdued. This
attack was brought on by the close state of the atmosphere,
and by fright, caused by a clap or two of thunder, about
three o’clock this afternoon.

18th July. My patient is quite well to-day, only com-
plaining of a great tenderness over the anterior part of the
throat, when touched.

Cheltenham, 18th July, 1854.


XII. Cure of so-called Erysipelas: of Vomiting by upward
passes in two cases with success: of an Inflamed and
Wounded Finger: Immediate Removal of the Pain of a
Burn: ditto of Tooth-ache : Speedy Cure of Violent Pal-
pitation. By 8. D. Saunpers, Esq., of Clifton.


“If you look at medicine, one day hydropathy carries all before it ac an
irresistible wave; the next day homceopathy, with its infinitesimal doses, cures
all diseases; then mesmerism displaces both, and everybody rushes to be mes-
merised: allopathy returns again, and continues till some new crotchet takes its
place.”’—Signs of the Times: the Moslem and his Creed: the Christian and his
Hope. By the Rev. John Cumming, D.D., F.R.S.E. London, 1854, p. 60.*


Penrose Cottage, Clifton, May 29th, 1854.

Dear Sir,—Should you deem the accompanying cases of
sufficient importance for The Zoist, perhaps you will oblige me
by forwarding them. I give you the names of all the parties
connected with the case of erysipelas, but do not wish them to


* So Dr. Cumming takes upon himself to pronounce mesmerism to be a
crotchet, in spite of it preventing the agony of surgical operations, and of it curing
cases of all kinds of disease that resist all other treatment! Consider, Sir, the
mischief you may do, the misery you may cause to be unrelieved, by this loose
and ignorant scribbling. We are not aware that hydropathy ever drove out all
other treatment, or was beaten by homceopathy, or that both were ever dis-
placed by mesmerism: or that all people ever rushed to be mesmerised: or that
allopathy ever disappeared and returned and is now only awaiting the coming
of a new crotchet in its room,—“ nor foolish talking,” says the apostle, ‘‘ nor
jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving of thanks.” —Zoist.


Immediate great benefit from Mesmerism. 305


be made public, though I am quite certain the patient would
be happy to answer any inquiries from parties suffering from
the same disease.
I remain, dear Sir,
Yours obediently,
J. Elliotson, Esq., M.D. S. D. SaunpErs.


I. Cure of Erysipelas (so called).

In the month of January last, a lady residing in Bath
sent for me, to ask if mesmerising would be of any use in
a case of so-called erysipelas of the neck. I found the left
side of her neck very much inflamed, of a red or purple
hue. There was slight swelling with great heat and pain.
The other side of her neck was also affected, but to a less
degree. She told me she had suffered from the same disease.
erysipelas phlegmunades, during the whole of the last winter,
and, though she had been attended by one of the leading
physicians in London, it did not leave her till the middle of
the summer. Finding it again return this winter, her sister
wrote to the same practitioner in London, who sent her down
a prescription, telling her at the same time that she would
have it all the winter: that she must take his prescription
and most likely it would go away in the spring: that she
should be careful not to go out till the warm weather arrived.
I told her that I thought mesmerism would be of service and
very likely cure the complaint, and this perhaps in a few
weeks : that she need not confine herself entirely to the house,
but merely tie a neckerchief round her neck when she went
out, so as to prevent the cold and damp from striking it. I
then mesmerised her neck by very strong passes for about
half an hour; and, seeing a tendency to light-headedness, I
directed a nurse, who was attending another of my patients in
the same house, to mesmerise her from the head to the feet
when she was in her bed. Just before retiring to bed she
felt the pain in her neck very much increased, with consider-
able fulness in her head: she became a little frightened and
wrote to a surgeon who resided near her requesting him to
call on her the following morning. She then went to bed
and the nurse mesmerised her as I had directed for nearly
two hours; and, though she was at first light-headed, she
soon became much more calm, and at the end of the two
hours, feeling drowsy, she requested the nurse to leave her,
and she slept well the whole night. When I saw her the
next morning her head was well and the disease was confined
to the throat. I pointed my fingers to it for some time and


306 The cure effected decidedly by Mesmerism.


brought out a great quantity of water bubbles, which ran
down the neck in little streams. I therefore applied blotting-
paper. As long as I did not point over the disease no water
appeared ; but the re-pointing for a few minutes always caused
the bubbles to make their appearance. A hot poultice had
been applied which caused a slight excoriation : this I ordered
to be discontinued, and a piece of linen saturated with mes-
merised water to be applied in its stead, with of course an
oil-silk covering. The surgeon who had been requested to
call in the morning came, and, upon being shewn the neck,
said it was a very bad description of erysipelas, and asked
what was being done for it. She said, “I am trying mes-
merism.” “Qh,” he replied, “ nothing but plenty of patience,
time, and my medicine will cure you: it will take a very long
time to cure and you must have patience.” He accordingly
sent some medicine; but the patient, finding herself getting
better by mesmerism, put his medicine into the fire and sent
him a note saying, that, as he thought it would take a long
time to cure her by Ais treatment, and as she already felt con-
siderable relief from the mesmeric treatment, she would not
require his attendance any more: and had made up her mind
to trust to mesmerism alone. This she did for about a fort-
night or three weeks, when the disease entirely left her: and,
though there had been many “bulla” or bladders, which
burst, the neck soon became perfectly smooth again without
any peeling of the skin: and all this too without rubbing the
neck with caustic, applying leeches, or taking any medicine.
I found that pointing the fingers drew out first of all water
and then thick serum. In this case I was most materially
assisted by the nurse who was an exceedingly intelligent
woman, with none of the usual prejudices so prevalent
amongst nurses. She was a sceptic at first, but, upon perceiv-
ing the benefit derived by the patient, she soon became a
believer and under my instructions mesmerised exceedingly
well. She also became very susceptible herself, so that, if she
had a pain in any part of her body, I could cure it by a very
few passes. A pass down her back would close her eyes and
make her spine as stiff as iron. If I placed my finger upon
the organ of Firmness of my patient, the nurse, having hold
of my patient’s hand, would, though asleep and her eyes closed,
immediately rise up from her chair. But I will enter more
fully into her case upon a future occasion, when I hope also
to give a cure of total paralysis of the system of a lady who
ought to have died (so the doctors predicted) very many
months ago.


Vomiting by upward passes cures pain. 807


Il. Vomiting by upward passes cures a Pain in the Side
at once.

In the April number of The Zoist for 1853, I spoke of the
effect of the upward passes for the purpose of producing sick-
ness. I have upon several occasions since then had opportu-
nities of testing the efficacy of that plan. Almost a month
ago Mrs. Saunders felt very ill with pain in her side. I sent
her into the sleep and she said, “There is another of those
balls forming in my side and you must make me sick as you
did before.”” I accordingly made the upward passes from the
stomach to the mouth, and she soon vomited as before a little
gritty yellow matter with some phlegm. This was repeated
several times during the day, and the next day she was quite
well with the exception of weakness caused by an attack of
dysentery, from which she soon recovered by being well
mesmerised.


III. Vomiting by upward passes cures a severe sick head-
ache.

My stable boy feeling very unwell with a sick head-ache
and pain in the stomach, I advised him to take some warm
water to make himself sick. This he did without the desired
effect: but, after some time by my making some upward
passes he began to vomit and felt much relieved. He went
to bed and got up the next morning quite well.


IV. Cure of an Inflamed Finger from a wound.

Mr. Bourn of Bristol called upon me one evening with
his forefinger in a bread poultice. He said he had cut a
piece out of the upper side of it with a chissel, and that it had
pained him exceedingly for several days and was getting
much worse. I took off the poultice and found the finger
very much inflamed and considerably swollen, and in the
wound was proud flesh. He said it looked worse than it had
done at all. I began to mesmerise it by pointing for about
twenty minutes, during which time he felt a good deal of heat
passing out of his finger. I then made passes, and the finger
became cool and comfortable: we then tied it up in linen
saturated with mesmerised water. I gave him some mes-
merised water and told him to dip his finger, without remov-
ing the linen, in the water very frequently. This he did, and
at the end of three days upon taking off the linen he found
his finger quite well.


V. Another instance of vomiting from upward passes. —
The nurse alluded to in the case of erysipelas has just


308 Immediate cures of pains and palpitation.


informed me that, finding the lady whom I am attending for
paralysis required an emetic, she made the passes, as I had
instructed her, from the pit of the stomach to the mouth, and
in a few minutes the stomach was relieved of its contents
without producing the severe head-ache which generally
results from an emetic.


VI. Immediate removal of pain from a burn.
A few days ago the cook of the family burnt her finger
very badly, she (the nurse) mesmerised it by pointing over
the burn, and in a very short time the pain went away.


VIL. Immediate removal of Tooth-ache.

Also yesterday one of the ladies in the house was troubled
with severe tooth-ache and slight swelling of the face. She
came down stairs to ask me to mesmerise it: but, as I had
just left my patient, the nurse made passes over the cheek
and in a very few minutes all was quite well.


VIII. Cure of Heart Disease (so called).

Miss Barker summoned me, in consequence of suffering,
according to the statements of her medical adviser, from
disease of the heart. The palpitations were very severe and
she was of a highly excitable temperament. She looked the
picture of health, but was nevertheless very weak. She was
extremely fond of horse exercise, but had been compelled to
relinquish it for some time past in consequence of its pro-
ducing extreme palpitation. She suffered also from bad
head-aches, the top of her head being very hot. Sometimes
her face would be excessively red, and at others very pale.
I mesmerised her for about three quarters of an hour, during
which time her eyes closed, and, though she remained per-
fectly conscious, she was quite unable to open them or speak
or move out of her chair.

After I left her, she remained quiet for about an hour,
when she came perfectly to herself, quite refreshed, and with-
out any palpitation of the heart, and the head was free from
pain.

I continued to mesmerise her daily for a week, but she
considered herself quite cured after the first sitting, as she
had no return of the palpitations and took horse exercise,
(her horse being a frisky troublesome animal), without its in
the slightest degree inconveniencing her heart.

Finding that she was so easily cured by mesmerism, she
asked her medical adviser who pretends to favour mesmerism
if he would allow her brother who was under him and suffered


Franklin had no hope of a Literary Fund. 309


terribly from epileptic fits without deriving any benefit from
his prescriptions, whether he would allow him to be mes-
merised. But he said, “ No, I wish him to be kept very quiet
in order that my medicines may produce their proper
effect.”’*


S. D. Saunpers.


XITI. Cure of a severe case of Debility and Pain, after the
failure of common means: and of a case of Neuralgia.
By Mr. Squrres, of Exeter. Communicated by H. U.
Janson, Esq.


“ As early as 1773, Mr. David Williams proposed the formation of a Literary
Fund to a small club of literary men which met at the Prince of Wales’ Tavern,
in Conduit-street, Hanover-square, and which allowed its members to vary the
proceedings of their meetings by introducing short papers on subjects of science
and learning. In one of these papers, Mr. Williams proposed the Institution of
a Literary Fund, ‘as an object deserving the attention of the members, who, if
they should not obtain the power of justly assigning the equivalents of scientific
and literary benefits, would hold out to genius—to every man having the faculty
of rendering public service—the kind and generous promise that his studies, his
time, his efforts, his privations, should not leave him in misery.’

The Chairman on this occasion was the celebrated Benjamin Franklin, who,
in discussing the merits of Mr. Williams’s proposal, expressed great regret in
declaring his opinion, that a Fund of any considerable amount, for a purpose he
acknowledged to be truly noble, could not be obtained, because the impression
to be made by an appeal to the public must be very feeble. ‘ An Institution for
the relief of misery,’ said Franklin, ‘which is so far from being intrusive and
obvious—so far from pressing on the senses that it withdraws from observation—
is an institution whose object will be ever lost to the common classes of subscribers
to public charities.’ ‘I perceive,’ said Dr. Franklin, at a later period, ‘ that our
friend does not acquiesce in our opinions, and that he will undertake this Institu-
tion. The event, be it what it may, will be honourable to him: but it will
require so much time, perseverance, and patience, that the anvil may wear out
the hammer.’ ’’—Address of the Committee of the Literary Fund, now so wealthy a
charity, 1854.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Pensylvania Park, Exeter, May Ist, 1854.

Str,—I have been requested by Mr. Squires, of Hill’s
Court, Exeter, (the zealous and successful mesmeric operator
mentioned in page 354, Vol. XI., of The Zoist,) to send
you the enclosed cases, in hope that you may not consider
them unworthy of a place in your July number. They are


* This was wickedness. It is incumbent upon us to speak plainly. Medical
men play this game daily. When they cannot cure a case and their consent
to mesmeric treatment is requested, they, rather than the patient should be cured
by it, say—No; your’s is not a case for it: or, it will drive the blood to your
head: or, it will excite you: or, it will produce fits: or, it will cause insanity.
How loffg will this wickedness last? The public must put an end to it before
long. —Zoist.


VOL. XII. ¥


310 Mr. Squires, of Exeter, a good mesmeriser.


very briefly detailed; having been furnished, at the request
of Mr. 8., by the patients themselves, and, I may add, that,
having ample knowledge of both parties, I can fully corrobo-
rate statements. It need not however excite any surprise
that the patients, being ladies of respectability, should be
desirous of withholding their names and addresses, when we
consider that, even yet, a great majority of “The Faculty”
continue to promulgate the impression that any one who pro-
fesses to have been cured by mesmerism must be either a fool
ora “humbug!” It is moreover to be kept in mind that
our cause has met with more virulent opposition down here
than perhaps in any other provincial town in the kingdom:
and we have even had the abominable (and I believe unique)
case of one medical man attacking the character of another
medical man’s private patient in the public newspapers !

It therefore cannot be a matter of surprise that incognito
should be considered desirable.

In conclusion, I cannot help expressing my regret, in the
first place, that far more individuals do not turn their atten-
tion to what I denominate “ Mesmerism Proper.” If all the
time and attention that have been wasted upon “ table-
turning” and “ spirit-rapping,” &c., had been devoted to the
relief of the sick, by means of mesmeric passes, what an
amount of benefit might have been conferred! And secondly,
it is a great pity that so many of those cases, which, like
these enclosed, are attended by delightful success, should
nevertheless remain unpublished; and thus be unknown
beyond their own immediate locality.

Hoping that my remarks may be kindly received, and
practically adopted by the readers of The Zoist,

I remain, Sir,
Yours most respectfully,
Henry U. Janson.


P.S. Mr. Squires is a capital fellow: a worthy, honest,
good man. He is by trade an ornamental gardener.


I. Cure of Intense Debility and Pain.

A young lady had been suffering many months from nerv-
ous debility. She tried change of air, and medical advice,
without any alleviation; and became so weak that walking a
short distance gave her intense pain on the top of her head,
as if caused by a violent blow. Her eyes were so weak that
she could not bear exposure to light, and reading or working
brought on severe head-ache. She was recommended: to try
mesmerism.


The picture of Harvey and Charles I. 311
Having heard Mr. Squires highly spoken of, she sent for


him. He went to her for three weeks, and mesmerised her
for half-an-hour every evening. During this time she gra-
dually improved ; and at the end of that time felt better than
she had been for years, and has not had any return of the
complaint.

II. Cure of Neuralgia.

Miss §., having tic douloureux severely in her face and
head, was recommended to try mesmerism; and, having
known Mr. Squires many years, sent for him—when suffer-
ing such intense pain that she could not touch the part
affected. After a few “passes” she was able to bear Mr. S.
to press hard on her temples and head, and even felt relief
from it. He continued his visits for some weeks, and she
ascribes her ultimate recovery to his exertions.

Exeter, 1854.


XIV. Cures of Neuralgia, and of Stiff Necks, &c.
By Mr. Carern.


‘* The courtier behind is one of that class of gentlemen who, in reference to
the advancement of social and philosophical conditions, ‘ cares for none of these
things ;’ he is permitting himself to be entertained by some of Harvey’s oppo-
nents. These are incarnations of pedantic bigotry and stolid imbecility—the two
great opponents of scientific progress—who, by insult and obloquy, shew their
hatred of him who dares, by asserting truth, unsettle their long-cherished ab-
surdities. He who would make mankind wiser and happier must in his lifetime
endure ‘moral tribulation ;’ and few men felt this truth more keenly than the
immortal Harvey.’”’— Descriptive Key to the engraving of Harvey demonstrat-
ing to Charles I. his theory of the circulation of the blood, p. 9.*


Speedy cure of intense Neuralgia of the Leg.
“In 1848 I was attacked with neuralgia, which extended
from my hip to my heel. I at times suffered so much that I
could not sit upon my chair, but was obliged to lie on a sofa
and have soft pillows under me when I took my meals. I
called in my own physician and an apothecary of some note.
They recommended all sorts of medicines, and I was confined
to my house for six weeks. Then I was advised to try medi-
cated baths, which I did but without any benefit. I hada
dreadful attack last May, and was confined to my bed for ten
days. As it was impossible for me either to get in or out of
it, for my left leg was perfectly useless, I tried a new medical
man: he gave me a quantity of medicines, and would allow


and it is the property of Mr. J. Hodgson, of Westbourne Terrace, Hyde Park,


who smiles at mesmerism.— Zoist.


312 Rapid cures.


me to drink nothing but seltzer water and sherry. I occa-
sionally suffered much pain. The last attack I had was about
a few days before Christmas, when I could not walk except
like a paralyzed man: in fact, my friends thought me para-
lyzed. I was again obliged to lie up for some days. Although
I went to business I was in a dreadful state of pain. How-
ever, by the advice of Mr. Beedell, I went to Mr. Capern to
try what mesmerism would do. I saw him for the first time
on the second of January: and I can solemnly swear that
after the second visit I jumped over a large chair in my
dining-room, and that after the sixth time of being mes-
merised I have had no return of the pain. I can now walk
from my house to the Customs, three miles, and back home
in the afternoon: whereas before seeing Mr. Capern I could
not walk five yards. Mr. Capern made no restriction as to
eating or drinking.

“ Aubrey Walsh.
“ Harrington Square, Hampstead Road.”*


The following three cases were attended to on three con-
secutive days.


Instantaneous cure of Rigidity.

John Thomas Bettinson, aged one year ten months, son
of Mr. J. G. Bettinson, 21, Charles Street, St. John’s Wood.
On the morning of the 25th April the parents of this little
child were alarmed by observing an unusual and extraordinary
stiffness in his neck, having no power of motion. His
mother apprehended that there was a formation of water on
the brain, as his head rested wholly on the shoulders; whilst
his grandmother believed it to be paralysis, and feared the
result. Mr. Capern called at the house, and, observing the
condition of this fine child, said that he came opportunely,
and prepared to mesmerise him: and, having made the ma-
nipulations for three or four minutes, the stiffness entirely
disappeared, and the head regained its original position, and
shortly after he was engaged in playing with other children,
unconscious of the great benefit derived from mesmerism.


Very speedy cure of pain and difficulty of swallowing from cold.
Statement of Elizabeth Rodwell, 8, Wellington Terrace, St.
John’s Wood.

April 26th. Elizabeth Rodwell states that, on Sunday the
23rd April, she took a cold, which occasioned a stiffness in


* In consequence of Mr. Capern making no charge, Mr. Aubrey Walsh be-
came a subscriber to the Mesmeric Infirmary.


os eee


Medical and Catholic-Apostolic opposition. 313


the neck, and an inability to swallow any solid food, and
even to take liquids was very difficult and hurt her. This
continued from Sunday until Wednesday morning, when Mr.
Capern attended at her residence to visit a patient who had
been benefitted by mesmerism, and, observing that she moved
her head with difficulty, offered to relieve her; and after a
few minutes mesmerising she was relieved from her stiffness
and pain, and was able to swallow her food without difficulty ;
and has experienced no inconvenience from it since. She
had also pains in her chest and limbs, which were entirely
dissipated by three sittings, of about ten minutes each time.*


Cure of Pains of the Chest.
Extract from a letter received from Mr. Muskett, Malvern
Wells, May 28.

“T am truly obliged by your note, enclosing some more
packets of mesmerised sugar. Two of those formerly sent
I have taken, and found they immediately relieved slight
spasms in the stomach, producing at the same time the cus-
tomary mesmerised lull in the head and generally through
the frame.

“T have much pleasure in complying with your request,
and testifying to the cure operated upon my cook, Elizabeth
Smyth, who, after suffering for a week or more from pains in
the chest, was completely relieved after two or three sittings.”

The sittings did not occupy above twelve minutes each.

Mr. Muskett called at the Infirmary nearly two years
since, and made a donation to the institution.


* We have heard that the mistress of this patient was greatly relieved by
Mr. Capern. She had been operated upon fruitlessly by an oculist on account
of blindness; and the failure of the operation caused palpitation, irregular action
of the heart, and universal neuralgic pain. She expressed her wish to be mes-
merised to her oculist, who instantly requested her not to allow any one to mes-
merise her, as she was too weak! WHowever, she did request Mr. Capern to
mesmerise her: and her ordinary medical attendant, no less than her friends,
was astonished at the benefit. Soon afterwards she called on her physician, who
allowed the marked improvement, but declared that these mesmerists would take
their practice from them; adding that her surgeon had informed him of it, and
had done the same to her brother, a physician, in America.

We have heard too that a friend of the lady, witnessing the benefit of mes-
merism, wished to be also mesmerised, but, being an Irvingite, dared not till she
had asked the permission of the elders of the Catholic-Apostolic Church in
Gordon Square. These holy and sympathizing Christians instantly forbad it,
preferring that she should go on suffering rather than avail herself of ‘‘ the gift
of God,” to use Mr. Sandby’s words. Talk of English education! of English
common sense! of English Christianity! of the bigotry and intolerance of
Roman Catholics !—Zoist.


( 814 )


XV. A case of Convulsions cured by Mesmerism.
By Mr. Barron, of Woolwich.


73, Minerva Place, King Street, Woolwich,
September 21st, 1853.

Sir,—I beg leave to acquaint you with a very remarkable
instance of the successful application of mesmerism that
has happened here within the last few days.

A little boy, aged one year and nine months, whose pa-
rents are labouring people, named Slade, living on Plumstead
Common, was seized on Saturday night last with convulsive
fits of such a violent character as to threaten immediate
death. The mother in great alarm and anxiety, after seeking
the aid of six different doctors in Woolwich, who were either
absent or unable to attend, at length obtained the assistance
of Dr. Bossey, who upon seeing the condition of the child
said he had been summoned too late : some powders, however,
were given by the Doctor’s direction. The symptoms con-
tinued unabated during the night, and, when Dr. B. visited
the child on the Sunday morning, he expressed his surprise
at finding it still alive.

At the request of Mr. Mc Bride (whose infant son I had
radically cured of epileptic fits of the most dangerous cha-
racter by mesmerism, after Dr. Bossey had given up the case
as hopeless, and homeopathic treatment had failed under
Dr. Epps), I saw this little boy on Sunday morning immedi-
ately after the Doctor had called. The child was then in a
kind of lethargy, but presently a severe fit came on; and,
while those around were busied in applying vinegar to its
head and hands, I desired them to stand aside, and, laying
my hands upon its forehead, the symptoms seemed to be
arrested, for the child at once became quiet and fell asleep.
I continued to mesmerise it for half an hour, placing one
hand to the back of its head and making downward passes
with the other. I then left it in a deep and tranquil sleep.

Upon calling again the same evening, I was surprised to
find the child sitting up, feeding itself with arrow root, and
asking repeatedly for more. I found that the sleep had con-
tinued for five hours after I had left, and no more fits had
occurred. The family were astonished at the change which
had taken place. I again mesmerised it for half an hour as
before, producing a deep sleep, which lasted for eight hours.

Upon my calling on the Monday morning, the child was
up and dressed and appeared perfectly well: it had eaten a
very hearty breakfast, and no further symptoms of the dis-
order had appeared. In fact, the recovery was complete. I


The blessings of Mesmerism incalculable. 315


thought there would be no harm in mesmerising it again ; but
this time sleep was not produced, probably because the system
did not require it.

The mother, who has lost seven children by the same
disorder, which carried them off at about the same age as
this little boy, loaded me with thanks and congratulations,
for she was sure that mesmerism had saved the child, though
such is the stupid prejudice existing on the subject that it
was not without hesitation and reluctance that she consented
to have it tried at a time when the child’s death was looked
for as certain.

I think that any one who had witnessed this case would
pronounce it one of the most undeniable proofs ever adduced
of the efficacy of mesmerism. j

I have given these brief particulars, hoping the nature of
the case will sufficiently excuse my trespassing upon your
attention.

I am, Sir, your most obedient servant,


G. Barton.
To Dr. Elliotson, for the Editor of The Zoist.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


I consider this a very important, though a small and mo-
destly related, fact. In such cases mesmeric treatment is
invaluable. The common routine is to put the child ina
warm bath,—which is all very well; to put leeches on the
head or take blood in some other way,—a measure but
too often unsatisfactory, useless, and sometimes injurious ;
and to give purgatives, which may be more or less beneficial,
but too often fail, and may be readily carried injuriously
far : the horrid application of blisters and other irritants, and
heaps of filthy drugs generally given in addition, do no more
in most cases than distress the poor little thing, and possibly
aggravate matters. A dose of aperient without taste, such as
a few grains of calomel, enough to operate of itself, mixed
with sugar, and the application of cold, if possible iced, water
to the head, are very proper. But the child should be steadily
mesmerised by very slow passes from head to foot, or by
pointing at its eyes, or at their region if they are closed, or by
keeping the bare hand upon the head hour after hour, or by
all. But indefatigable perseverance may be required. If
mesmerism were habitually used by parents in all the diseases
of children, acute and chronic, the benefit would be incalcu-
lable. repeat the word, incalculable. 1 cannot refer to all


316 Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &€c.


the proofs of the utility of mesmerism in the diseases of
childhood recorded in The Zoist, but may beg attention to
the very interesting cases of Mr. W. Snewing’s child by him-
self in No. XIX., p. 252, and of Mr. Colbourne’s child by
himself in No. XXXIV., p. 6.

A retired medical gentleman, who a year or two ago saw
clearly that mesmerism was a reality, had a child seized with
fever. He enquired whether I thought mesmerism would be
of service, and I assured him it would. The child recovered,
and this is his letter :—

«7, Claremont, Hastings, Sussex, Oct. 30, 1853.

“ Dear Sir,—I write to tender you my sincere thanks for your
kindness in recommending mesmerism for my little girl, who had
fever at Hampstead : I believe it was the only thing which saved her
life under the blessing of God.

‘* Believe me, yours very truly,
** Dr. Elliotson.” “Joun W. Wess.


If the profession did not hourly and indefatigably exert
itself to prevent mankind from possessing one of the greatest
blessings ever bestowed upon our race, and mankind would
rise above the influence of the profession, oh how greatly would
the sufferings of innocent childhood be lessened !


BOOKS RECEIVED.

Medicina Mentis, or, Spiritualism ! commonly called Animal Magnetism, o:
Mesmerism, considered entirely as a curative agent. By Hugh Hastings. M.D.
Cheltenham: 1854.

The British Journal of Homeopathy. July. London: 1854.

Magnétisme et Magnétotherapie. Par le Comte de Stzapary. Deuxiéme
Edition. Paris: 1854.

Great Truths in Little Stories : or, drops of wisdom for childhood. 1854.

Tales of a large Family: or, records of the hive, the nest, and the bower.
1854.

Poems from my Fireside: an affectionate offering for the young. 1854.

All by Miss Goodluck, No. 6, Ormond Street, Queen Square.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


We return thanks to Mr. Andrew Beater, of 4, Aldermanbury, for his kind-
ness in twice advertising our last Number in the Critic: and to Mr. Janson, of
Exeter, for sending copies of it to different papers at his own expense.

In our next we hope to publish Dr. Castell’s phrenological account of
M. Alexander Dumas, and mesmeric communications from Dr. Motherwell of
Australia, Mr. Tubbs, Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Ricard, and Dr. Elliotson.


Errata.


p- 210, 1. 15, for “‘ was,’’ read were.
p- 243, 1. 31, for “ Dr. John Arthur Wilson,”’ read Dr. James Arthur Wilson.
p- 246, 1. 27, ditto.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XLVIII.


JANUARY, 1855.


I. Reichenbach and his Researches : being some account of the
new work, entitled, “ Der Senstt1vE MENSCH UND SEIN
VERHALTEN zuM Ope, &c.; or, The Sensitive and his
behaviour towards Od. A series of experimental inves-
tigations on their mutual powers and properties, with re-
ference to their almost infinite practical applications to
Physics, Chemistry, Mineralogy, Botany, Physiology, Me-
dicine, Medical Jurisprudence, Law, Military Affairs,
Education, Psychology, Theology, Insanity, Art, Industry,
Domestic Circumstances, Knowledge of Man, and Social
Life. By Cuartzs Baron Von Retcuensacn, Phil.
Dr. and a. 1. Mr., Honorary Citizen of his native city,
Stuttgart ; Knight of the Royal Wuertemberg Order of
the Crown; Possessor of Imperial Austrian and Royal
Wuertemberg Medals for Merit ; Lord of Gutenbrunn
and Raidling in Lower Austria, Nisko in Gallicia, and
Reisenberg by Vienna; Corresponding, Ordinary, and
Honorary Member of the Imperial Academy of Sciences
at Vienna, of the Natural Philosophical Societies at

Halle, Breslau, Erlangen, Minden, Jassy, the Geological

Societies at Berlin and Paris, the Hufeland Society at

Berlin, the Vienna Society of Physicians, the Bohemian

Museum, the Apothecaries’ Union in North Germany,

the Horticultural Society in Vienna, the Union of Anti-

quaries at Ulm, the Agricultural Unions of Bruenn,

Vienna, Stuttgart, the Technic (Civil Engineers’) Socie-

ties at Prague, Frankfort on the Main, Vienna, Muehl-

hausen, Berlin, &c., &c. Vol. I. Stuttgart and Tue-
bingen: J. G. Cotta. 1854. pp. lvi. 838. 8vo.”’*


* Reichenbach gives all these particulars not from vanity, for he is a true
philosopher, but to shew the world that he is at least as well known as his
opponents.—Zoist.


VOL. XII. Z


The work explains the investigation.


‘* Urit enim FULGORE suo,” —
Horart. Epist. ii. 1. 13.


Tue Preface is obligingly translated for The Zoist by Alex-
ander John Ellis, B.A., formerly Scholar of Trinity College,
Cambridge.

“The present work—to speak frankly—has occupied fully
ten years of my life, during which I have devoted myself to
it exclusively, neglecting almost every other duty. The in-
tense interest of the subject enchained and impelled me.
The more deeply I studied it, the more clearly 1 perceived
its infinite ramifications in all directions, through all sciences,
in every minutia of practical life, material and spiritual.
Penetrated with the feeling of the comprehensive importance
of my subject, I found no difficulty in giving myself up to it
with the greatest ardour. If I have succeeded in clearing
up many phenomena which were previously obscure and
confused, and in reducing them to common theoretical
views in scientific connexion, I owe this to the charm which
the victory over any difficulty, the gain of any enlighten-
ment, offers to the natural philosopher, and which changes
his Jaborious perseverance into delightful elevation of spirits.

My intention in this work is to set forth a widely-ramified
investigation ; not to write a book for teaching, and still less a
manual. I am desirous that the reader should not forget
this. I have indeed attempted as far as possible to arrange
the subject according to its various branches, and to bring
together similar points in experiments and conclusions, so
that the result is a tolerably systematic arrangement. But
the historical character inseparable from an exposition of em-
pirical researches necessarily predominated ; and this per-
petual conflict between system and history, which pervades
the entire work, and often threw difficulties in the way
of its composition, occasionally rendering some tautology
inevitable, will be recognized and excused by the critical
reader.

Many will think that I might have often been briefer in
citing proofs, and, generally speaking, I am inclined to agree
with them. But regard must be paid to the unusual circum-
stances of my particular case. I have been so violently
attacked by opponents, and my propositions have been so
rudely controverted, that I am compelled beyond all other
natural philosophers to build my inductions upon the broadest
basis, and to collect such numerous facts in support of every
single statement, as to make objection border on the absurd.
That I have to fight not merely against untenable, but even


aed


Von Liebig attacks it. 319
against irrational attacks, every one knows who has only
seen, among other things, Baron Von Liebig’s so-called
Inaugural Address to his lectures at the University of Munich,
which originally appeared in the papers, and has been subse-
quently published in a separate form. Among other shallow
objections, this writer says that “the new science of od has
not found admittance into natural philosophy,” without
feeling that he of all men in the world is least justified in
using such an expression, as it was he himself who introduced
this new science of od into the field of natural philosophy
through the medium of two numbers of his Annals of Che-
mistry, in March and May, 1845. If od has no firm foun-
dation in nature and in the facts which I -have laid before
men of science, how does Herr Von Liebig venture to expose
himself by laying two extra numbers of empty, baseless
scribbling before the world? On the other hand, if he has
convinced himself of the thoroughness of my labours, and
bestowed his approval on them, as is clear not only from his
editing seven of my essays in his periodical, but from letters
which I possess in his own handwriting, how comes it that at
the expiration of nearly ten years, when the facts of my
investigations are much more matured and established, Herr
Von Liebig proclaims ‘the new science of od’ to be without
foundation? Such behaviour is wanting both in consistency
and tact, to use the mildest expression.

In this Address Herr Von Liebig asserts that ‘none of
the phenomena which od is said to produce, have ever been
witnessed by unprejudiced persons with healthy senses ;’ that
my ‘sensitives are not in a condition to describe of them-
selves what they see and feel,’ andsoon. This shews that
Herr Von Liebig speaks either without a knowledge of my
writings, or without literary truthfulness ; for in these works
I have adduced the most highly-educated men, including
celebrated natural philosophers, as sensitive observers, whose
freedom from prejudice and ready power of expressing
themselves, Herr Von Liebig himself might find it occa-
sionally difficult to imitate. The celebrated savant, Professor
Endlicher ; the imperial privy counsellor, prelate Baron Von
Schindler, last president of the Republic of Cracow; the
evangelical superintendent, Pfauer of Vienna; Baron Von
Oberlaender ; Counts Von Coronini; the royal Swedish body-
physician, Dr. Husz of Stockholm ; Professors Unger, Schabus,
Ragsky, Roesner; doctors of medicine, Ekkard, Koeller, Froeh-
lick, Stainer, Diesing, Kollar; the Swiss Ambassador, Herr
Steiger ; the manufacturer, Fichtner; the well-known poet,
Herr Alexander Baumann, and so many other learned sen-
z2


320 Distinguished men are sensitives.


sitive men; not to name highly-cultivated women like the
lady of General Von Augustin, Frau Von Littrow, and
others,—are all of these to be reckoned, according to Herr
Von Liebig, among the prejudiced, and declared to have
unhealthy senses, and to be unable ‘to describe of them-
selves’ what they saw and felt in my dark room? I doubt
whether the Deutche Volkshalle would say of any one of these
men’s works, what it said of the Munich Jnaugural Address,
that you might take out any sentence and replace it by
another without injuring the connexion. Or are Herr
Kotschy, who has twice been into the heart of Africa, and
has now left for Asia; Herr Philippi, major of engineers, who
has several times circumnavigated the globe; Dr. Natterer,
who has just returned from the Red Sea, has travelled in
balloons, and boldly undertaken the most dangerous experi-
ments in condensing gases,* to be considered as men of weak
nerves with unhealthy senses? Does Herr Von Liebig feel
no hesitation in uttering such rash assertions before the
Munich public?

And whence has Herr Von Liebig derived the certainty
that sensitives are people ‘of weak nerves,’ as he so off-hand
declares my assistants to be? He might run the risk here of
being turned back with one of his usual over hasty conclu-
sions. Sensitives have more excitable, not weaker nerves
than non-sensitives. He does not draw this distinction, and
hence his confusion. But physiology nowhere proclaims ex-
citability to run pari passu with weakness. On the contrary
excitability usually decreases as weakness increases, and con-
sequently increases with strength and power. The sensitive
phenomena do not rest on a weak, but contrariwise on an
exalted, increased, strengthened action of the nerves. Sensi-
tives are so far from being weak, that they must be reckoned
as strong, in respect to nerves, at least in regard to their odic
impressibility. They are not sensitive because they are ill,
for in that case almost every patient would be sensitive, but
because the excitability of their nerves is exalted, for which
illness is not a necessary condition, as is shewn by a large
number of my thoroughly healthy sensitives. We know from
pathology that when vegetative life appears depressed, nervous
activity is frequently increased ; in this case the patient suf-
fers locally in the vegetative sphere, and not essentially in the
general nervous system. The latter is excited, and roused to
an augmented activity, and consequently affected, but it is


* Fortschritte der Physik (Progress of. Physics), 6th and 7th year; p. 274.


Sensitives are in perfect health. 321


not therefore necessarily diseased; on the contrary the
strength and health of the diseased vegetative parts must be
derived from that of the general nervous system. Sensitives
feel and see more, not because they are weak, but because
their capacity of perception is exalted, and their receptive
power increased. I have in my mind male and female sensi-
tives of extraordinary nervous strength, and Herr Von Liebig’s
assertion, arbitrarily uttered, without examination or expe-
rience, is totally incorrect.

He goes on to declare that ‘persons whose nervous
system is not in a perfectly healthy condition, are totally un-
fitted to observe,’ and immediately concludes that all odic
observations with sensitives are consequently faulty, and
hence scientifically worthless. Now in the first place it is
quite unsound and erroneous to assert that persons whose
nervous system is not in a perfectly healthy condition are
totally unfitted to observe. When is our nervous system,
then, in a perfectly healthy condition? This Herr Von Liebig
will have to explain preliminarily, for our nervous system is
scarcely ever in a perfectly healthy condition. The most
insignificant disturbance of our health, over exertion, any
local indisposition, any depressing or joyful excitement, the
slightest chill on the skin, the least irregularity in eating or
drinking, a restless night, are enough to destroy the equili-
brium of our nervous system, untune it, and disturb its per-
fectly healthy condition ; not to mention more violent attacks
of illness or the fact that scarcely any man is perfectly healthy
and that therefore in the strict sense of the words no one’s
nervous system is in a perfectly healthy condition. But apart
from this, what foundation is there for the bold assertion that
persons whose nervous system is not in a ‘perfectly’ healthy
condition are ‘totally’ unfitted to observe? Cannot a man
be ill, and yet perfectly healthy in his understanding? see,
hear, smell, and feel perfectly well? Are we not perfect mas-
ters of our intellect in a hundred nervous affections, in a
thousand diseased conditions so long as we are not absolutely
delirious ?

Sensitives, including all degrees, form a third, if not a
half of the human race, as I have often shewn; according to
Herr Von Liebig then every other man has a bee in his bon-
net. Matters are not so bad as that. Why should a slightly
sensitive man, who suffers so little in his nerves as not to be
aware of the fact, not have a clear, correct, and certain appre-
hension of the simple sensuous impressions which suffice for
the demonstration of odic phenomena? Why should the
head-ache, stomach-ache, spasm, or fainting of a more highly


822 Liebig’s legerdemain.
sensitive man not be real? Why should it be all imagination
and deception? Such a proposition is without all scientific
foundation, is uttered at random, and is absolutely nothing
but one of those arbitrary baseless assertions which Herr Von
Liebig has a peculiarly facile talent for propping up his conclu-
sions, dazzling and bribing his public withal, but which the
strictly scientific Berzelius has laid bare, blamed and rebuked
as tares sown among science, and unworthy of an investigator
of nature. Just as his glittering assertion was untrue that
all organic power is derived from chemical action, whereupon
he forthwith raised an immense hylozoistic system, unproved
in its foundation, and overhasty like so much that has fallen
from his pen; in a still higher degree it is downright false
that persons are totally unfit to observe unless their nervous
system is perfectly healthy. This would be as much as to say
that any one who has the slightest complaint is forthwith not
much better than a madman. For he who is totally incapable
of sensuous intuition and simple observation with his senses,
must be altogether wrong in his senses, and he whose senses
are no longer clear, who is deluded instead of being instructed
by them, is so far forth insane. If that is the case, might
not the healthy reason of Herr Von Liebig himself be occa-
sionally questionable? What would a physician have to guide
himself by in diagnosis? Hitherto he has been guided by
the observations which the patient indicated to him in ac-
cordance with the characteristic feelings which he perceived
internally by means of his nerves. Now these indicaticus
are according to Herr Von Liebig’s deductions mere insanity.
Hence he throws overboard the whole of pathological semio-
tics and medicine itself, that is, his assertion when applied
leads straightway to absurdities, and is therefore hollow and
false. Such is the transition to that philosophical legerde-
main, where it is not supported by sure facts. An apparently
true proposition is fabricated; the crowd trusts the master
and does not immediately espy the flaw; he proceeds at once
to heap beam on beam till he has built up a whole glittering
palace over it, for all the world to admire—except the man of
knowledge who has examined the substructure. And this is
the way in which Herr Von Liebig has pillaged the greater
half of his repute; but he will not succeed as he imagines,
by such means as these, in upsetting and annihilating the
theory of od. I will expose the deceptions of his false logic
on the following pages, and thus break its barbs.

But apart from all this, has not Herr Von Liebig perceived
that my sensitives include not merely the sick, but propor-
tionably very few sick, and much more of those who are com-


Liebig accuses falsely. 323


monly called healthy? Does he not see that sensitives like
Kotschy, Philippi, Natterer, Koeller, &c., have such iron
frames as are seldom to be met with? That Endlicher, Husz,
Unger, Ragsky, Schabus, and so many others, with almost
all of whom he is personally acquainted, have firmly knit
bodies abounding with a fulness of health enough for any
man? Has Herr Von Liebig passed from ignorance, or care-
lessness, or really on purpose, over that most important and
most emphatically marked peculiar result of my investiga-
tions, that not merely the diseased, but essentially many more
of those that the world calls perfectly healthy powerful men
possess distinct, and not unfrequently very powerful sensitive-
ness? Has he not read the first page of my treatise on the
Imponderables, &c.,* where it is circumstantially stated that
by far the greater number of those on whom I have experi-
mented are entirely healthy persons? If he then pronounces
judgment on a matter, of which he has not properly read the
explanation and which he does not thoroughly understand,
his truthless judgment is on the one hand a piece of presump-
tion, and on the other an open insult to the public that listens
to him. If however he ignores my principal propositions
designedly, I have nothing further to say in public concerning
him. Such behaviour condemns itself.

Baron Von Liebig proceeds to say that the sensitives I
employed during my researches ‘must have had their atten-
tion directed by my questions to the several parts of the
phenomena and their peculiarities and have been led by the
questioner, who however does not see, and has never yet seen
the phenomena themselves. Was ever a more insulting
speech pronounced by one natural philosopher against an-
other? What Herr Von Liebig here assumes is nothing less
than to accuse me publicly of forging experiments, by sug-
gesting reactions and palming them off on the world as newly
discovered truths! And he does not perceive how he exposes
himself by the self-contradiction which runs through the
whole of these unworthy polemics! More than 160 persons
have given thoroughly concordant indications concerning the
odic sensations. If I have suggested and prompted all of them
in succession as to what they had to see and feel, where did I
myself get these facts and these elements of observation?
They must have come from some quarter or another. Does
he not himself say that I neither see nor have ever seen the


* The treatise translated by Dr. Gregory under the title of Researches on
Magnetism, Electricity, Heat, Light, Crystallization, and Chemical Attraction, in
their relations to the Vital Force. London: Taylor and Walton. 1850.


324 Liebig’s assertions totally untrue.


phenomena myself! How then am I to draw the attention
of the sensitives to particular points, and mislead them to
make statements about matters of which I myself can have
no knowledge whatever? How can I suggest to any one what
I do not know myself? In fine, how can I make them believe
in sensuous intuitions with which I am unacquainted, and
which might in fact have no existence at all? The ridiculous-
ness of this self-contradiction is so provocative of mirth, that
the only incomprehensibility is, how Herr Von Liebig failed
to feel it himself when he made the assertion.

And how long is it since putting a question has acted
injuriously in the investigation of concealed truth? How
long is it since it has been forbidden to seek illustration and
confirmation of natural phenomena by questions? Is every-
thing which has been discovered by questions and an over-
whelming number of corcordant replies, to be considered
unworthy of scientific consideration, because the observer has
not experienced it in himself? Because a physician does not
feel the sufferings which his patient describes in reply to his
questions, are these replies to be held as useless? Is a diag-
nosis valueless, merely because it is based on the replies of the
patient to the physician’s questions ?—Not a word need be
lost over such perverted argumentation.

But the reader must yet inquire of Herr Von Liebig how
it can be shewn that I ‘draw the attention of the sensitives
to the several parts of the phenomena and their peculiarities.’
We have just heard that neither I nor my sensitives are sup-
posed to feel or see anything ; but here on the contrary Herr
Von Liebig speaks of the ‘ parts and peculiarities of the odic
phenomena.’ But what has parts and peculiarities to which
attention may be directed, must certainly be some existing
thing, an object as the substratum of these predicates. Now
if he admits this existence in this way, what purpose does his
whole objection serve? In one sentence he denies the exist-
ence of odic phenomena and in the next he speaks of their
parts and peculiarities to which people’s attention is drawn.
Thus each line involves a self-contradiction.

But is it then true, as my overhasty opponent lightly
mentions as a conceded point, that I ‘the questioner,’ see
nothing and never have seen anything of the odic phenomena?
—No, it is totally untrue! There is very much which I have
not seen; but both I and other non-sensitives have perfectly
well observed very important and decisive facts. Among
others the reader will see below in the chapter on the odic
effects of ‘the material universe,’ § 1390 and fll., and it has
been often declared in all my writings on this subject, that


Berzelius convinced by Reichenbach. 325


sensitives are able to distinguish bodies according to their
electro-chemical value. For example, when I placed in the
hand of a middling sensitive a bottle of sulphuric acid, and
afterwards let him grasp with the same hand a bottle of a
concentrated solution of caustic potash, he declared one bottle
to be cool and the other warmish. When I had done the
same for other bodies of different kinds and put the cool ones
on one side and the warmish ones on the other, J saw that
one group always consisted of electro-negative and the other of
electro-positive bodies. And when I caused a series of simple
chemical substances to be thus examined by sensitive hands,
and to be arranged according to the strength of their rela-
tively cool or warmish effects, I saw to my astonishment that
they formed the electro-chemical series. This exceedingly
surprising result of my labours, a result which forces an ex-
pression of genuine astonishment from every one acquainted
with the subject, J saw with my own eyes as it was evolved
from the mass of experiments, as often as I tried it. This
extraordinary delicacy of sensitive perceptibility, this peculiar
capacity of a sensitive for perceptions which lie far beyond
all non-sensitive powers of observation, this new quality
hitherto totally unknown to the whole of natural philosophy,
which all matter manifests to the touch by peculiar emana-
tions—a quality which runs exactly parallel to its electro-
chemical value, is checked by it and thus strikes its roots in
amongst the deepest depth of the nature of all matter—these
and similar results of odic and sensitive action, which com-
mand the most breathless attention and the warmest sympa-
thy in ‘every man of sense,’ the sensible Baron Von Liebig
excepted, I ‘the questioner’ have myself seen before my own
eyes, as often as I desired. If this had been the whole and
sole result of all my exertions, ten years’ labour would have
been richly rewarded by it. It is a discovery which will I
believe hardly be reckoned inferior at some future time in its
significance and the importance of its consequences to Oer-
sted’s in 1820, as every one will easily perceive who has
only glanced at the wide physical and physiological extent of
the subject.* This and much else of no less importance,


* Reichenbach relates the following interesting anecdote in relation to this
part of the subject; Der Sensitive Mensch, § 1394, p. 706. ‘* When Berzelius
visited Karlsbad in 1845, to seek some alleviation of his weak health, he invited
me in a letter from Stockholm to meet him there, in order to converse with him
respecting the subject of od, which I had just made known, and in which he felt
a lively interest. 1 had discussed the subject with him for several days, and had
been endeavouring to find a sensitive in Karlsbad, in order to give him a practical
proof of the truth of my propositions. By the polite intervention of the distin-
guished bath physician of the place, Hofrath Hochberger, I at last discovered a


326 Liebig’s falsehood cast in his teeth.


which will be found in the following investigations, I have
seen well enough. But all this is unperceived by Herr Von
Liebig. Like Teddy the Tiler, he stands so high aloft that
he no longer sees such trifles concerning us wee folk below,
and is thus misled to ill conceived, absolutely false assertions,
and must submit to have their downright falsehood publicly
cast in his teeth.

But suppose that it was not the sensitives, but I myself
who had perceived the odic phenomena of sensation and light,
how much better would matters then stand as to the correct-
ness of my facts and deductions? Would Herr Von Liebig
then say: Reichenbach is the discoverer of paraffine, creosote,
assamar, eupion, capnomor, &c., substances which have been
proved to exist by the experiments of other chemists, and he
has thus shewn himself to understand the practice and method
of scientific research, so that we must regard him as an accre-
dited natural philosopher in whom we should have confi-
denge ?—Hardly! On the contrary he would say: One man’s
evidence is no man’s evidence ; and he would be right. Well,
then, the reproach which he now casts against me, that it is
not I, but 160 named witnesses who have perceived the phe-
nomena,—can this weigh a grain of condemnation? Is it not


highly sensitive lady, Freifraeulein (Honourable Miss) Elise Von Seckendorf of
Sondershausen, who was kind enough to give us a séance. Dr. Hochberger con-
ducted Berzelius and myself to her room. She related to us a long series of
wonderful somnambulistic events which she had experienced, but which I was
obliged to interrupt with the observation, that these where psychical phenomens,
whereas we who were visiting her were natural philosophers, who had only to deal
with phenomena perceptible by the senses and left the others to psychologists.
I now instituted several experiments. Among others I had brought with me a
pocketful of different chemical preparations each wrapped up in paper and look-
ing like bits of confectionery. No one could recognise them, or even guess what
they were, from their external appearance. I scattered them about on the table
in any order, but about a span distance from each other, and after waiting a little
requested the lady to pass her flat hand slowly over them at the height of about
three fingers’ width, and tell me if she experienced any difference of sensation
from different parcels. She did so with her right hand, and soon declared that
some of these paper parcels seemed to produce a drawing effect upon her hand,
while others did not. At my request she separated the drawing from the non-
drawing pieces. When she had gathered together a heap of each, I took one in
one hand and one in the other, and placed them before Berzelius. ‘These draw,’
said I ‘and those do not. Now let us open the parcels and see what they con-
tain.’ When this was done, we observed the remarkable fact, that all that did
not draw contained electro-positive substances, as rhodium, nickel, iridium,
caffeine, &c., and all that did draw had electro-negative contents, as sulphur,
selenium, antimony, tartaric acid, &c. The great master of the electro-chemical
theory was not slightly astonished to discover in the sensitive nerve an entirely
new reagent that must lend a new pillar to his edifice. From this moment he
was gained over for my views, and, as is well known, he announced the fact in a
public address at Bonn, and afterwards in his Annual Report, in 1846. The
noble Swede is dead, but the witness of this little, but not insignificant incident,
Dr. Hofrath Hochberger, is still alive and well at Karlsbad.”’


Some spectators scientific, others only curious. 827


rather a circumstance in my favour? Has Herr Von Liebig
never heard the old saying: plus vident oculi quam oculus ?
The very fact that I, the reporter, feel and see nothing, but
have to collect the reality of the circumstances first for myself
and then for the world from the agreement of hundreds of
witnesses to observations, and to build them up into a theory
out of about 13,000 experiments which I have up to this time
performed, this very fact is the strongest argument in favour
of the credibility of my statements. Self-delusion is here
almost entirely excluded. The perception of one sensitive
confirms that of another, and that of hundreds establishes
that of each individual. The very point then where Liebig
thinks to find me weakest, is the point of my greatest
strength, and the most powerful pledge for the incontroverti-
bility of my thesis.

Here Liebig resembles the blind man, who because he
saw nothing, had the hardihood to deny the existence of light
and colour.

It is easy to find the key of the well whence he has drawn
these absurdities. Many people come to me after having
read my Letters on Od,* and wish to test the sensitiveness of
which they have found some marks in themselves. Some of
these are men of science ; others are merely led by curiosity.
I am happy to be at their commands, and take them into my
darkened rooms. With the first I make regular researches,
put questions and listen to the replies, which instruct me
and give me matter for further investigations. To the others,
who promise me no scientific results, I play the cicerone ;
shew them what satisfies their curiosity, explain the odic
tools, and relate their use and effect in the light and in the
dark ; then I stop with them in the dark, and shew them the
luminous odic phenomena, asking them whether they see or
feel this or that which I have described, pictured and related
to them, just as a man chats with a visitor whom he wishes to
entertain in a friendly manner, and no more. It so happened
that some gentlemen from the ranks of natural science called
on me whom I saw myself obliged to classify with my chatty
friends. These travelled from Vienna to Wiesbaden to the
congress of natural philosophers, and called on Herr Von
Liebig by the way. Here my name was mentioned perhaps
in not the most favourable manner on all points; and what
the travellers related concerning the dark chamber at Schloss
Reisenberg, according to what they had seen and I had ex-
plained, Herr Von Liebig, confusing experiment with demon-


* Translated by Dr. Gregory, Zoist, Nos. XLII., XLIII., and XLIV.


328 Liebig published Reichenbach’s facts.


stration, imagined to be well adapted as an ornament to deck
his Inaugural Address withal, and perform the funeral obse-
quies of myself and od. He may have miscalculated. If
Herr Von Liebig cannot produce better weapons than such
misunderstood arguments drawn from a troubled source,
which fall to the ground at the first breath, he will do neither
of us much damage in the eyes of those who understand the
subject. ‘No man of sense,’ says he in conclusion, ‘can
believe that by so false a method, by visual and sensuous
appearances, provoked in patients with weak nerves, the exist-
ence of a new natural power can be established.’ And why
was this method not false, as Herr Von Liebig published it
in seven essays in his Chemical Annals? I can only reply
that no man of sense will allow himself to be dazzled by
such false assertions and illogical objections, or permit facts
to be thus talked away which are mainly so simple, and many
of which lie so much on the surface that a child will literally
soon be able to put his hand upon them. If such is the
utterance of Herr Von Liebig’s men of sense, I have never
heard more nonsensical objections in all my life. There is
nothing more ridiculous than a clever man uttering silliness.

A new natural power cannot be established by the odic
phenomena, says Herr Von Liebig. Every natural pheno-
menon is the effect of a generating cause. So much I sup-
pose he will allow. If the cause is occult, we call it in
general terms a power. Power is the unknown cause of phe-
nomena, ‘the agent in events,’ to express myself in philo-
sophical language. This Herr Von Liebig may find at the
beginning of every book on metaphysics, if he ever opened
one, which his Munich address might lead one to doubt.
Hence, wherever there are phenomena there must be some
power concerned. As long as we are able to refer determi-
nate phenomena to powers which have been already assumed,
our explanation meets with no difficulty. But if any phe-
nomena occur which cannot be explained by these assumed
powers: if we find ourselves unable to reduce the new facts,
which present themselves, to known causes: then we are
under the necessity to conclude the existence of new unknown
reasons, and, for example, in natural philosophy, of new and
hitherto unperceived powers, and to refer the facts to these
by way of hypothesis. As, then, I have brought to light
the odic phenomena, which he is unable to explain by any of
the known powers of nature, he is out of all propriety in
opposing the assumption of some unknown power. ‘The fun-
damental cause of the odic phenomena is either a known or
an unknown power. As long as Herr Von Liebig is unable


A hundred and sixty witnesses. 329


to shew a known cause for them, he must submit to the
assumption of an unknown one. He must; the law of
thought obliges him.

From this point the question in its retrogressive develop-
ment penetrates still further, namely, as to whether the odic
phenomena are really true or not, or, to express myself ac-
cording to rule, whether they constitute a complex scientific
fact or not. Simple metaphysical considerations shew us
indisputably that we are unable to attain an immediate
knowledge of the absolute constitution of any object of sense,
but that we must be always content with the appearance or
phenomenon ; that is, with the little which meets our senses.
Its general objective truth we then proceed to establish for
ourselves and others by induction, according to the rules of
thought. The inductive proof is conducted by evidence.
This is indispensable in science, as no one can feel and view
everything with his own senses. The witnesses must be
trustworthy, disinterested, concordant in their statements
without previous combination. The greater the number of
such witnesses, the more varied their relations to the object,
so much the higher rises the force of the inductive proof, and
finally reaches a height nearly on a level with demonstration.
If the perceptions and declarations of such persons who have
never seen each other, and who conduct their observations
under the most different circumstances, agree in hundreds
and thousands of cases, the induction becomes complete, and
consequently logical, certainty. Philosophy has no other
criterion for truth besides this unanimous agreement. It is
not necessary that every one of us should have seen America ;
if only a large number of persons have been there and trodden
on the firm land, their concordant testimony, vitiated by no
prior combination, is sufficient to assure us of the existence
of the great western continent; if we follow their indica-
tions, we shall find it there—it will be really existent. So
with the odic phenomena of sensation and light. They have
been brought to my knowledge by more than 160 concordant
and named witnesses, and by many thousands of the most
varied observations; thousands of witnesses, too, have, in
consequence of my writings, observed them in themselves
and their friends, in my native Germany, in England, France,
and everywhere on both sides the ocean: a large number of
them are so well known, a part of universal popular lore, I
might say, that I have only to name them to be certain of
their general acknowledgment. Dislike to yellow and pre-
ference for blue ; incapability of remaining between others ;
abhorrence of a looking-glass; oppression caused by close


330 Odic facts are unassailable.


spaces ; faintings in church; impossibility of sleeping on the
left side; disgust at metal vessels; shrinking from all contact
of hands; nervous attacks at table-moving ; writing cramps;
and a hundred similar phenomena, which imperiously rule a
large proportion of mankind in common,—these are known
to all the world, and Herr Von Liebig may do as he pleases,
he will not be able to talk them away; not to mention a
thousand other physiological odic processes which I have
demonstratively established. The fact of odic phenomena is
logically unassailable. Now when the facts are once esta-
blished in their scientific signification, the laws of logical
evolution require the constructive form of an hypothesis, as
the only way of extending the sphere of our knowledge ; it
is not merely allowed, it becomes inéellectually indispensable.
Our ideas of heat, light, a magnetic and electric principle,
are hypotheses, under which we combine groups of facts in-
comprehensible in their causes, and nothing more. The nu-
merous new phenomena which I introduce, form a similar,
comprehensive, concordant group of similarly inexplicable
facts. Now since Herr Von Liebig is unable to explain them
by the imponderables already known, and must admit his
inability to do so, the preliminary assumption of a peculiar
and hitherto unknown natural power, whence they result in
scientific connexion, that is, the hypothesis of od, rests upon
a perfectly justifiable foundation. The logical conditions of
the inductive proof, and the consequent hypothetical sub-
struction, have been throughout more than satisfied. Ii
would be mere superfluity of wealth to give more. Those
who are not satisfied with this, but continue to delight in
making frivolous objections, such as we have just read, are
entirely ignorant of the criteria of scientific truth; i. e., have
no philosophically educated brains, and their disorderly talk
is worthy of no further consideration.

Herr Von Liebig, by accusing me of a ‘false method,’
has turned over the scientific dispute into the arena of logic,
and this gives me an opportunity of inspecting the weapons
of his ratiocination. This we will ‘now do, secundum artem.
We must speak somewhat by the card with this gentleman,
who is inclined to go beyond his strength. In his address he
treats of observation, and says, ‘ No art is so difficult as the
art of observation: it requires a well-informed sober spirit,
and a well-schooled experience (wohigeschulte Erfahrung,
sic!)’ &c. Remarkable! I have hitherto believed that a
baby in arms made observations by the dozen; even dogs,
and cats, and unschooled apes make observations. Nay, I
have heard of industrious fleas, that could only have been


Liebig’s arrant sophistry. 331
trained by acting on their powers of observation. Observa-
tion belongs to the elementary psychical developments, and
lies amid the lowest synthetic notional forms. When the
plough-ox stops, he receives a blow. Standing still and
being beaten become associated in the ox’s brain, and
form themselves synthetically to the excited observation, that
blows always follow stopping. In consequence of the exer-
cise of this art then, which Herr Von Liebig finds more dif-
ficult than any other, our bovine friend trudges on step by
step in the furrow. Perhaps, however, higher scientific ob-
servation is meant to be different from common observation.
If so, this is a psychological error. The mental process is
precisely the same in both cases. But when the scientifically
educated man observes, a much larger number of related
ideas which he has already in store spontaneously suggest
themselves, and thus support, enrich, and sharpen the ob-
servation generated from them. The simple intellectual act
is, however, unaltered. How then can any one term a
spontaneous psychical process an ‘art!’ Herr Von Liebig
then proceeds to apply his new philosophical discovery con-
cerning the attributes of ‘observation’ to make a sally
upon me and my unwelcome ‘ odic science,’ as he betitles it.
Let us revert for a moment to what has already been said.
Observation requires its instruments, the sensuous and nerv-
ous apparatus, to be healthy, we heard him say, and then he
forms the following syllogism :—
Masor.—All sensitives have an unhealthy nervous appa-
ratus ;
Minor.—An unhealthy nervous apparatus is totally unfitted
for making observations ;
Conciusion.—Therefore sensitives are totally unfitted for
making observations ;
and thence unhesitatingly concludes that all such observations
are false, and not fit for the use of any ‘ man of sense.’ Thus
put, his honest German readers and admirers accept all he
says, confiding in the verba magistri, and don’t perceive that
he is leading them into a snare. For, in the first place,
our preceding remarks shew the major to be false—that all
sensitives have an unhealthy nervous apparatus; and, in the
next place, the minor is false—that unhealthy people are un-
suited for observation; and thirdly, the middle term—‘ an
unhealthy nervous apparatus’—is a flexible plastic expression,
which is suited to receive a different signification in every
new relation. There are motor nerves, nerves of sensation,
of animal and vegetative life, differing as far as the poles
asunder in their functions. Which of these were intended


832 Liebig does not believe his own assertions.


by Liebig in this place? Not all certainly. We may see
excellently with the nervous apparatus of the eye, and be
deaf with the ear; we may have lost an arm or leg, and yet
have an exquisite touch; we may be deeply diseased in the
sympathetic, the vena porte system, and be perfectly healthy
in the pulmonary and cardiac nervous system ; we can hear,
understand, and think, without being able to stir so much
as a finger; we may be raving mad in the brain, but have an
excellent digestion: all of which are various parts and appa-
ratuses of nerves, which may be here and there sorely dis-
eased, and yet often enough have not the slightest injurious
influence on sensitive perceptions. The whole question turns
upon which set of nerves is meant, and he quietly slips by
the point. But we will analyze Liebig’s processes of thought
a little closer, as he seems to have lost the rule for their
development. How much health of sense and nerve does he
reckon sensitives to require in order to perform correct mental
operations in my experiments? What must they do, to be
capable of observing? I willtell him. Of the great ‘art of
observation’ they must possess enough to know that light
shines, and wet moistens; that blue is not yellow, and red
not green; that warm is not cold, and disgust not inviting.
That is all. Their sensuous and nervous apparatus has no
more to do. Now does Herr Von Liebig believe honestly
that Professor Endlicher, Dr. Natterer, Professor Husz, Me-
dicinal Counsellor Ekkard, Dr. Koeller, Major Schwarzman,
the Counts Coronini, and a hundred other healthy and sundry
unhealthy people, are not able to distinguish white from
black in this way? No; he does not believe it. He him-
self does not believe what he would by his fallacy lead others
to believe. For independently of the untruthfulness of the
unproved major, and the equally untruthful minor, it is evi-
dent that the indeterminate and vague middle term in Liebig’s
syllogism has a totally different meaning in the two premises.
In the first it is general, and merely denotes unhealthiness
without any mental weakness; but in the second it signifies
disease to the amount of perfect insanity, in which a man is
incapable of immediate and axiomatic elementary apprehen-
sion. Hence he presents us with a conclusion drawn from
four terms ; the middle term being ambiguous, i. e., a decep-
tive conclusion ex fallacia falsi medii, which logicians call
subreptio, and Germans Erschleichung—swindling. Now it is
just this very sophistical art of swindling conclusions by
an incorrect application of the laws of thought, in which
all Liebig’s writings shew him to be a master. By this he
has managed to bewilder and bribe the public so often with


=e


ERE CUTS ee


= 7


Liebig guilty of many falsehoods. 333


half truths. It could only have been in such a deceptive
way that he could persuade people of such absurdities, as
that the cultivation of beet sugar—that blessing to Germany
—was inadmissible and silly; coffee and tea, those active
sleep-destroying nervous drinks, were healthy articles of diet ;
tobacco with its poisonous nicotine, the most disgusting
dirtiness that ever came into the world, with which a man
makes a chimney of his throat, sacrifices his nose, his teeth
and his palate to filth, soot, and mould, and fills his dress,
furniture, and the atmosphere of his rooms with stinks, was
advantageous, good, and decorous; and soon. By thus en-
deavouring to apply the false lever of logical swindling to me,
too, with his sweeping expression ‘ unhealthy sensuous and
nervous apparatuses,’ he hopes to lead the judgment of the
public astray and deter them from my laboriously gained
truths of sensitiveness. It is not my method of investigation
which is false, for that must be adjusted here as elsewhere to
the nature of the subject under investigation: it is the turbid
criticism upon it due to Liebig’s illogical argumentation
which is false. But we must uncover the obliquity of the
lordly analyst’s dialectics, and lay our finger on its nakedness.
He carries.unfair weapons, as we have seen, and these must
be wrested from him.

If we analyze Herr Von Liebig’s address into its separate
parts, which is not difficult, for they almost fall asunder of
themselves, we shall see that his attack upon me has no con-
nexion with the object and construction of his lecture, but
has been as it were plucked from the hedge and stuffed into
it, merely with the malicious intention of personally hurting
me. An article in a journal properly introduced would not
have answered this purpose : he chose a solemn act which would
re-echo through Europe ; and in this he thought to destroy me
and my attempts with one blow. Whether Herr Von Liebig
has done himself or me the most harm by this attempt, time
will shew. In the meantime, if I collect the inconsistent and
ill-judged phraseology which he directed against me, and the
above analysis of it, into a few lines, it is evidently false,—that
he should attempt to depreciate to-day what he once was the
foremost to praise-and approve ; false,—that no unprejudiced
persons have observed the odic phenomena; false,—that only
sick people of weak nerves have taken part in them; false,—
that these are only uneducated men, incapable of describing
their observations of themselves; false,—that I have sug-
gested their observations to them ; fa/se,—that I have led
them to particulars within their consideration ; false,—that
sensitives as such are always persons of weak nerves ; false,
VOL. XII. AA


334 Odstinate incredulity shews barbarism.


—that one diseased in body must be necessarily diseased in
his senses and intellect ; fa/se,—that even diseased persons
are unable to have correct sensuous perceptions; false and
downright absurd, that my communications are valueless,
because the facts have not been perceived by myself, but by
hundreds of other persons; false and totally opposed to all
sound logic, that my method of investigation does not satisfy
the demands of physical science, and the logical conditions
of inductive proof and of regular hypothetical development :
and consequently the whole of this shallow sally is without
the slightest truthful or logical foundation. It is simply, as
every unprejudiced person who knows anything about the
subject must admit—a piece of scientific slander.

As a conclusion to my defence, I will put it to the reader
how he can reconcile the sallies of the Munich Jnaugural
Address against od and myself with the following passage
in a letter written to me by Herr Von Liebig on 7th January,
1845.—‘I wish and hope that your* (odic) treatises will be
read by every one with the same pleasure that they have
given me and Hoffman, and all who are acquainted with
them; and if I cannot admit your views in every particular,
as I tell you frankly, yet this has in no wise impaired the
delight with which I have entered into your ingenious and
brilliant experiments, observations, and speculations. The
mode we take of spreading a knowledge of your investiga-
tions (through the Annals) must open a way for your views.
May the new year fulfil all your wishes in this respect, as i
have no doubt it will.’ ”


(This Preface will be concluded in our next.)


II. Cures of Gout and Rheumatism and alleged Liver Com-
plaint: with an instance of Clairvoyant Sleepwaking in a
lunatic. By Wixu1am Luioyp, of the Society of Friends.


‘*In the present instance, their faith in what was past carried them not for-
ward to the obvious conclusion, that He who snatched the daughter of Jairus
from the jaws of death, and raised a young man from his coffin, would be able to
bring back Lazarus from his grave. And this indeed was what was to be ex-
pected from persons like them, of low occupations and mean attainments, whose
minds were unimproved by education and experience: for, however certain
modern pretenders to superior wisdom may affect to speak contemptuously of the
credulity of the vulgar, and think that they display their own refinement and
penetration by a resistance of the evidence which satisfies the generality of men,


* Liebig addresses Reichenbach in the second person singular ; a mark of
most intimate friendship or near relationship in Germany.— 7ransiator.


ea


Cure of Gout. 335


the truth is, that nothing is so much a genuine mark of barbarism as an obstinate
incredulity.


‘ The evil-minded and the illiterate from very different causes agree, however,
in this, that they are always the last to believe upon any evidence less than the
testimony of their own senses. Ingenuous minds are unwilling to suspect those
frauds in other men to which they feel an aversion themselves: they always there-
fore give testimony its fair weight. The larger a man’s opportunities have been
of becoming acquainted with the occurrences of his own and former ages, the
more he knows of effects daily arising from causes which never were expected to
produce them,—of effects in the natural world of which he cannot trace the
causes ; and of facts in the history of mankind which can be referred to no prin-
ciple in nature—to nothing within the art and contrivance of man. Hence the
man of science and speculation, as his knowledge enlarges, loses his attachment
to a principle to which the barbarian steadily adheves—that of measuring the
probability of strange facts by his own experience. He will at least be as slow
to reject as to receive testimony; and he will avoid that obstinacy of unbelief
which is satisfied with nothing but ocular demonstration, as of all erroneous prin-
ciples the most dangerous, and the greatest obstacle to the mind’s improvement.
The illiterate man unimproved by study and by conversation, thinks that nothing
can be of which he hath not seen the like: from a diffidence perhaps of his own
ability to examine evidence, he is always jealous that you have an intention to
impose upon him and mean to sport with his credulity: hence his own senses are
the only witnesses to which he will give credit.

‘Pam persuaded that nothing hath so much contributed to spread infidelity
among the lower ranks of people, as the fear of discovering their weakness by
being over credulous, and the use which artful men have made of that infirmity.’’
—Bisnop Horstey. Sermon 36, on the raising of Lazarus.


Fulford, 9th month, 14th, 1854.

Very Esteemed Friend, Dr. Elliotson,—Should the sub-

joined cases, in the absence of more important communica-

tions, be deemed acceptable as a contribution to the pages of
The Zoist, 1 forward them for insertion.


Cure of a Fit of Gout.

It is to me a subject of regret, that the painful and com-
mon malady of gout should so seldom be subjected to the
genial influence of mesmerism: for I believe this would be
generally found effectual in affording relief and cure more
expeditiously than any other remedy. And yet, how many
endure severe and prolonged sufferings, without any thought
or inclination to seek relief, through the agency of this
potent, sanative principle.

In the only two instances in which I have had the oppor-
tunity of applying it for the relief of gout, it proved singularly
effectual: and, by reference to six volumes which I possess
of The Zoist, I find that, out of the few cases recorded, several
were cured very expeditiously.

When recently in London, I went down to Poplar to see
a relative, James Hardwicke, of Randall Street, whom I found
laid by with an attack of the gout, to which he is subject, and
which always lasts from a week to ten days. It was then the
AA


336 Cure of Gout, Rheumatism, &c.


third day of its continuance: his foot and great toe being in
an inflamed and swollen condition. I applied local passes for
about half an hour, during which process the inflammation in
part subsided: and I subsequently found that the following
morning he was able to put on his usual shoe, and proceed
with his accustomed avocations, without any necessity for
further treatment. Thus I think it may be fairly concluded
that mesmerism saved him from some days further suffering.


II. Second Cure of a Fit of Gout.

The other case was far more extreme, and cured by me in
five days. But I do not feel at liberty to report particulars,
and therefore the information may be taken for just what it is
worth in the estimation of the reader.


III. Cure of Rheumatism.

I was previously in London in 1851, when I called to see
an old acquaintance of mine, the wife of William Mead,
builder, Cannonbury Park, Islington. She complained of
being afflicted with rheumatism in one of her knees. As I
sat talking with her for perhaps about three quarters of an
hour, I made passes over it, devoting as much will and atten-
tion to it as the circumstances admitted, and left her, not
knowing what the result might be. But, calling again on
the occasion of my recent visit to London, I had the gratifi-
cation to find that she had been perfectly free from her
malady ever since, a period of three years, notwithstanding
it had previously been of twelve or thirteen years continuance.


IV. Cure of alleged Liver Complaint.

Mary Garbutt, housekeeper to an intimate friend of mine
in York, had been ailing for about six months, during a part
of which time she had been attended by a surgeon of good
repute. But, as she experienced no permanent improvement,
she applied for advice to one of the most skilful physicians
in York. He very patiently examined the case, and pro-
nounced it to be a liver complaint, prescribing medicines for
her, which she took accordingly: but still she found little or
no benefit. The pains in her head, back, and side, were at
times very intense, insomuch that she said she would will-
ingly undergo the operation of having the diseased part cut
out, if thereby she could obtain relief. She happened one
day to come to my residence at Fulford, when I offered to
mesmerise her: I did so for about half an hour, producing
light coma, and applying local passes to the several seats of
pain. In a few days I learned that she had experienced con-


Spontaneous Sleep-waking and Clairvoyance.


siderable relief thereby; and in about a week from the first
time of mesmerising her I did so again, in the same way.
Ever since that, a period of about five months, she declares
herself perfectly well, and free from all pain, notwithstanding
there has been no further application. Subsequently to the
cure she met the physician accidentally in the street. He
congratulated her on her improved appearance, and asked if
she were not better. She told him that she was, and that a
gentleman at Fulford had mesmerised her. He told her she
did very right to get relief in any way she could: cautioned
her not to bring on a relapse through want of care, and gave
her a string of precautions for her guidance.
With much goodwill,
I remain respectfully thy friend,
Wo. Luoyp.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


This excellent man has already sent many other cures to
The Zoist, in Nos. XXXTII., XLIL., XLV. Itis worth remark
that he is sixty-three years of age, small and slim: yet his
curative powers are great. He is brimful of benevolence,
modesty, and singleness of heart: the very beau ideal of what
I understand by the terms primitive Christian.

The following are extracts from a letter which I received
from him in the spring :—


“TI am acquainted with ——, the proprietor of
Lunatic Asylum. Some years ago he was a prominent mesmerist in
———. He is afraid to try it on his patients, lest the higher
powers should debar him of his licence. I was there once, when
he informed me that an insane and very epileptic young woman-
subject had, the evening before, spontaneously fallen into a state of
lucid and delirious sleep-waking. On speaking to her he found her
communicative, and appearing to be in happy communion with her
deceased mother, whom my friend did not previously know was dead,
in a state of happiness, and that she wanted her to come to her ; also
that she saw a brother in a state of misery. My friend requested
her to try if she could see his father: and this she soon professed to
do, gave a correct description of his personal appearance, and re-
marked with pleasure his happy condition: whilst a brother of my
friend was in a similar position with her own.

“She spontaneously remarked, ‘Oh, here’s Mr. , & pre-
vious proprietor several years dead, whom she never knew, and who
was not in my friend’s thought, nor Was she under his influence.
She correctly described him and observed that he walked and spoke
with difficulty. This was the case previously to his death, and I
believe from paralysis. She also intimated that he was in a state of


338 The true Clairvoyance partly delirious.


happiness. My friend told her to inquire after this person’s wife,
who died subsequently to himself, the reply to which query was,
‘She is not in my kingdom.’ He then told her to ask why he
altered his will: (in this my friend was interested,) he gave no reply
but disappeared and was not again visible. She then said she saw
his wife and that she was one of the miserable. My friend observed
that, according to the condition of those she saw, her countenance and
manner were either happy joyous placidity or gloom and uneasiness.

** He inquired of her respecting a friend of his at a distance, who
he apprehended was very ill. She told him either that he was well
or that he was much better, and the next post brought a letter from
the person, to say he was coming to —— to see his friend.

“* He inquired of her respecting two others who were ill, respect-
ing both of whom she predicted their death, and in one of the cases
she gave the day and time. But, though they both died, yet the
latter outlived the specified date.

** He tried by the usual means to awaken her but found she was
proof against his effort. Yet upon touching Firmness she rose up on
her feet so that they walked her up to her room and I think put her
to or on the bed, and as my friend had failed to awaken her he told
her to come down at a certain given time, and have an egg for her
supper, expecting her to come in her normal condition, but did not
intimate so much. She went down exactly at the time, but still in
the same state, with her eyes shut. She sat awhile and then asked
for her egg, ate her supper, still in trance and eyes shut. I am not
certain but rather think that he then requested her to come out of
that condition, and that she did so: but at any rate they got her to
bed, and when they left her for the night, (for they did not continue
to watch her,) she was in the abnormal state. He requested that, at
a given time in the morning, she would awake up into her natural
waking condition, and go down and assist the servant in the kitchen
as she had been in the practice of doing. This charge she obeyed
and at breakfast told the servants something of what she had seen,
and that an angel had told her she should have no more fits. This
she appeared to say in a very humble reverential and tender state of
mind, and at that time had a recollection of the particulars of the
trance and the delightful feelings and views attendant. But subse-
quently this vivid recollection became clouded and the feelings in-
distinct.

** After breakfast went again into the abnormal state for about an
hour and a half, during a part of which time the sceptical Dr. *
who has written discreditably against Dr. Elliotson, was present, he
being the visiting physician.

** She remained quite well in respect of insanity and fits for some
months ; when, having been discharged as a patient, she returned as
a servant in the establishment, after which she had a fit, and being
detected in some dishonesty*was discharged. I remonstrated with
my friend for his precipitancy, but he thought for example sake be-
fore other servants it would not have done to retain her.

“The several months she remained a patient, she was perfectly


References to ail the cases of Clairvoyance in The Zoist. 339


sane and entirely free from fits. When she had the fit after her return
whilst in the capacity of a servant, she had been standing on a pair
of steps cleaning windows and was found lying on the ground on her
back. She said she had fallen, but my friend’s judgment was that
it was the result of a fit.

‘*Upon questioning her she had never been mesmerised but once,
and that was by a doctor somebody (not the one who once forwarded
a striking account in No. XIV. of The Zoist) at ———.”


This is another valuable illustration of what we mes-
merists are always asserting, —that mesmerism produces what
occurs in various cases without mesmerism, and of the com-
mon circumstance of delirium being united with sleep-waking
and even with clairvoyance. Instances of spontaneous clair-
voyance without any kind of mesmeric process, with delirium,
and of genuine clairvoyance in insane patients, will be found in
various numbers of The Zoist., In No. XXXV., p. 234, will
be found references to all the cases of clairvoyance with and
without mesmerism in The Zoist up to that period. Since
then, cases of clairvoyance have been published in No.
XXXV. p. 290; XXXVI. (in brutes) pp. 392, 402, 422;
XXXVII. p. 37; XXXVIII. pp. 142, 184, 221; XL. pp. 333,
349, 375, 405, 416; XLI. pp. 68, 72, 75, 79; XLIV. p. 300;
XLVII. pp. 213, 249.


III. Phrenological appreciation of the character of Alexandre
Dumas (published by his permission). By M. A. Castxe,
M.D., of Montmorency, near Paris.*


‘* Non mediocris hominis hc sunt officia. Syr. O lepidum caput!’
Terentivus, Adelphi, 971.
Bor lately arrived in France, I had yesterday for the first


time the pleasure of seeing Alexandre Dumas.t He was
good enough to allow me to examine his head, and I con-


* Dr. Castle was introduced to our readers in No. VII., in which he pub-
lished an elaborate account of the phrenology of the celebrated German theolo-
gian, the Rev. Dr. Strauss.—Zoist.

+ M. Dumas is the author of more than 500 volumes: he has translated
several classical works, amongst others some books of the Jliad, and from the
English some plays of Shakespeare. In his private life he is about the happiest
man existing: he writes from fourteen to sixteen hours a day: has earned and
spent more than three millions of francs: earns still immense sums, qui n’ont
pas le temps de s’échauffer dans ses mains. His romance, Monte Cristo, brought
him an enormous sum, and with it he built his house near St. Germains, called
** Monte Cristo,’’ which cost him 130,000 francs, and which he sold a few years
afterwards for 30,000. He is noted for the generosity of his acts, and it is said
that more than twenty persons find means to live entirely at his expense.—Zoist.


340 Cerebral development of Alexandre Dumas.


gratulated myself on having the opportunity of studying so
exceptional an organization. Were I to say that I at once
found indications of a rich literary talent, of an inexhausti-
ble imagination, of an unwearying capability of intellectual
labour, I should say nothing new to any one. All will na-
turally feel more curious. to obtain the phrenological key to
the extraordinary power he possesses of delineating with so
much truth so great a variety of characters. Nowhere is the
varied power I speak of more striking than in the Trois
Mousquetaires and Vingt ans apres. In these works (or rather
this work) are characters which I look upon as typic. They
are delineated with a truthfulness and a completeness of
detail amounting in my opinion to the most complete ex-
pression of psychological science in its two great branches:
the primitive capacities of man, and the manifestations of
these capacities in all kinds of. circumstances.

I am curious to solve this problem, which, it appears to
me, must equally interest all those in any degree versed in
the study of man. But such a rapid investigation as I am
about to make must necessarily leave much to be desired.
The subject is sufficiently rich to furnish a volume. As I
have obtained permission to speak with all philosophical im-
partiality, I may possibly undertake to treat it more com-
pletely at some future time: it would be a valuable addition
to the phrenological gallery I have already commenced of
illustrious contemporaries.

In the meantime all I can give to the public is a simple
sketch, encumbered with as little that is merely technical as
possible. There is nothing arbitrary in my appreciations,
and I can, if required, furnish proof of the inevitableness of
my inductions: I write under the dictum of principles and
facts which are demonstrable to all.

I shall speak first of the faculties which constitute the
moral and affective character, and afterwards of the intel-
lectual faculties.


Cerebral ensitaiees ¢ Alexandre Dumas.


Amativeness......... . very large.
Philoprogenitiveness ateieges "large.

Adhesiveness ............Yather large.
Approbativeness .......... large.

Veneration .............. Tather large.
Benevolence.... ......... Very large.
Jombativeness............ moderate or rather large.
Destructiveness .......... rather large.
Firmness................ Very large.


Self-esteem .. large.


to


ren


Acquisitiveness


Eventuality


EE aad ora


Distance


an


Colour


A ere
RED ness seneandan
Woo oad Gone a eaeas
BS ee Wea ae oe eke


Wit
Comparison
Causality


Temperament: sanguine, a little lymphatic.
Age, 54 years.


ee ee |


Concentrativeness ...
Secretiveness .......
Circumspection
Conscientiousness........
BE aibweteceeceneenen
Ideality .....
Marvellousness eat said
Constructiveness.........
SL ac vas ch eee ee
Sd awaaceaue eke
Individuality ..
MIN ox 650


ee ee es


Individual organs and general measurements. 341


rather above moderate.
. rather large.
.- moderate.
moderate or rather large.
.. rather large or large.
rather large.
. very large.
. rather large or large.
. rather large or large.
moderate.
moderate or rather large.
. large.

. rather large.
. large.
. rather large.
. large.
. rather large.
. rather above moderate.
. rather large.
. very large.
. moderate or rather large.
. moderate or rather large.
. rather large.
.. very large.

. large.


Approximative measurements of the Head.


. Circumference, passing over Individuality, Destruc-
tiveness, and Philoprogenitiveness —
. Circumference, passing over Comparison and Con-


I oan i da chan bake aoe am aes


. From the centre of Individuality to the centre of


Philoprogenitiveness, passing over Comparison and


Self-esteem... ....
. From centre of Firm
tiveness, passing over Cautiousness


The following are the chief effects to be deduced from
the cerebral organization of Alexandre Dumas, independently
of the modifications occasioned by external circumstances.

Frank in the expression of his feelings and thoughts,
naturally averse to oblique courses, his character represents
the negation of the instinct of intrigue.
affectionate, caressing, and, above all, disposed to that wide
affection which is more than the mere need of friendship—
the need of comradeship. This tendency is equivalent to the


ness to centre of Destructive-


re ee


He is expansive,


22 inches.


342 Primitive character of Alexandre Dumas.


absence of exclusiveness in affection, and of the jealousy
which is ever in some degree inherent in all exclusive affec-
tion.

He feels an affectionate sympathy for the feeble and suffer-
ing, and for those younger than himself, and, on the other
hand, for the aged. He has a strong desire to please, great
confidence in himself, and is yet inclined to respect others.

Feeling strongly the need of love, this passion is however
in him more material than sentimental: moreover, the desire
to please being equally active, it must very frequently have
happened that frivolous vanity and gallantry have held the
place of sincere love. The exceptions will have been but as
episodes in his life.

From his earliest years he must have manifested a strong
tendency to obstinacy, meriting even the qualifications of
blind and unreasonable.

He is more drave than courageous, and more resolute than
brave. These distinctions will be explained.

Irritable rather than irascible, and not often either; yet
capable, as an exception, of violent and blind anger. Some-
what vindictive, but appearing more so than he really is,
owing to the vivacity and obstinacy called into play by oppo-
sition. Indeed he generally evinces more energy against
attack than he feels enmity to his adversaries.

He has a natural tendency to covetousness, less marked,
however, than the other traits mentioned.

Naturally buoyant, he is inclined to see things couleur de
rose.

He has a strong primitive tendency to piety ; at the same
time his conscience will have interfered but little with the
satisfaction of desires that may have needed control; its in-
fluence coming generally aprés coup, that is, not inciting to
abstinence, but being rather reserved for contrition.


The above are the principal features of the primitive cha-
racter of Monsieur Dumas. It has necessarily become some-
what modified, though not to so great a degree as is the case
with characters less powerfully constituted, by the progress of
time and by external circumstances, which are rarely pro-
pitious to the development of all that is excellent in any cha-
racter—even in those most morally endowed.

Monsieur Dumas is still characterized by affectionate
expansion, by frankness and independence of sentiment. To
this frankness and independence there exists now however a
counterpoise in an acquired faculty of employing, in case of
need, indirect means of attaining the end he has in view.


His passion of love. 343


Yet the moment inevitably comes when he despises such aid,
throws it aside and advances openly to his object.

As I have before stated, the passion of love in Mr. A:
Dumas is, in its primitive nature, more material than sen-
timental. Considering the confidence which he felt at an
early age in himself, in connexion with this state of things,
there can be little doubt of the precocity of his experience
in gallantry.

If his need of love were great, the pleasure of pursuit
and the vanity of triumph were equally so. The desire to
please, having generally so large a share in love, as he feels
it, predominating as it does over the simple affection of
Adhesiveness, gives rise to a very characteristic feature of his
nature,—the need of variety in love. For instance, even
when sufficiently attached to a person to feel regret at sepa-
ration, he will nevertheless be capable of experiencing passion
for another, or even for more than one; such new affection
in no wise effacing the first.

The secret of this lies chiefly im the great share Bene-
volence holds in his affection for one with whom there can be
no longer question of the vanity of conquest.

If you object that this is not in accordance with morality,
remember that my task is to analyze character; that I say
what is, not what ought to be.

Little as Mr. D. was at any time disposed to sentiment
in love, he has gradually become even less so, and has reached
a point where he can dispense alike with the vanity of con-
quest and with sentiment ; excepting in some rare instances
which might furnish a curious page in this monography.

For the present, I will merely note one or two traits, as
contrasting remarkably with his general character.

Though strongly disposed to treat love lightly and to pre-
serve his independence, he will scarcely have escaped playing
now and then the passive part; that is, being controlled
rather than controlling, more susceptible of suffering than
having power to afflict. But such passive part being little
consistent, as we know, with the tenor of his character, his
impulsiveness, his impatience of restraint, the impetuosity of
his desires, whatever they may be, his pride, all rise up
against it.

Again, Mr. A. D. will more than once have been cre-
dulous, even to simplicity, of protestations of affection, be-
lieving nothing disadvantageous of the person interesting
him, even on evidence more than conclusive to every one else.
A want of attention or coldness to himself would more surely
awaken him to a sense of his infatuation, by wounding his


344 Elements of courage.


vanity and affection, or what may be termed his affectionate
vanity.

The chagrin caused by such disenchantment will have
been felt keenly, and have been accompanied possibly by
vindictive thoughts; but soon both regret and the desire of
retaliation will have merged into contempt, indifference, and
forgetfulness. By the strength of his feelings he is suscep-
tible of acute suffering; by proud will he endeavours to sur-
mount it; and he succeeds in doing so the more easily from
the facility with which new emotions are awakened in him.
Such is his protean nature.

The ingenuousness to which I have just alluded is but a
partial manifestation of a high tendency in this character,
viz., the belief in absolute truth and in the goodness inse-
parable from it. As in external nature, so in man, all is
united (solidaire), nothing isolated. It is thus that we find
so high a feeling as the one in question called into alliance
with vanity and love.

The complete idea embraced in the word courage is that
of an instinctive and moral force employed against difficulty
and danger. It is a common error to suppose that courage
is a simple faculty of the mind, differing in men only in
degree. The contrary of this is so evident, that courage will
be seen not only to vary in its manifestations in different
individuals, but, at different times, in the same individual,
according to the influence of faculties not immediately con-
cerned in producing courage, and even according to age.

How often is it remarked that men, courageous under
certain circumstances, are vacillating and timid under others.
I cannot now enter at length on this subject, the theory of
which rests however on as solid a foundation as any branch
of mental science. I confine myself to the following brief
development.

There are three direct elements constituting complete
courage: Destructiveness, Combativeness, and Firmness.

The first, Destructiveness, communicates energy of attack,
and is the chief element of that manifestation of courage
called bravery ; shewn, for instance, when a man rushes un-
reflectingly into danger.

The instinct which gives rise to this bravery does not
suffice for the production of that resistance which is necessary
for continuing the struggle. Resistance of this continuous
kind depends principally on the instinct named Combative-
ness, which gives duration to the energy of Destructiveness,
from which in its turn it receives additional energy.

The third direct constitutive element of courage is Firm-


Courage of M. Dumas. 345


ness, which gives stability to the two former, and renders
instinctive courage complete, by adding to it the quality of
inflexibility.

Firmness forms also the basis of the courage termed
moral, and is the chief source of fortitude under both phy-
sical and moral suffering.

There are two other faculties, Self-esteem and Hope, which
also exercise a most powerful influence on the formation of
complete courage: Self-esteem, by giving confidence in self-
resource, and by raising the barrier of pride against sub-
mission ; Hope, by inspiring anticipations of triumph.

If any person glances at M. Dumas’s organography, he
will now understand the qualification I gave to his courage,
which I will proceed to analyze.

In former years his courage was more active, more im-
pulsive, more rash than at present ; more influenced by con-
fidence in himself, approaching more nearly to what I have
termed bravery.

If less impulsive, his courage is now more resolute than
in earlier life. It is still, as formerly, greatly stimulated
by amour-propre. Danger of any kind is still preferable in
his eyes to the slightest possibility of ridicule. His prudence,
however, easily awakened, leads him to avoid difficulties to
which he does not perceive the chance of a favourable issue.
But, if forced by some imperious motive into a position of
difficulty, he arms himself with a resolution not easily to be
shaken. In case of a duel, for instance, the desire of ven-
geance would, with him, be no auxiliary to the ardour of
combat, for though somewhat vindictive, he is not sanguinary.
He will expose his life nevertheless, and avoid initiating con-
ciliatory measures at once from pride and from resolution, or
obstinacy, if you will. Whatever internal trepidation he may
experience, he will mask by an effort of his will from the eye
of the keenest observer. Rarely or never does he lose his
presence of mind. In a character where imagination plays
so great a part as in his, no little effort of the will is required
to produce the effect just mentioned ; for, where imagination
is active, danger is conceived in all its possible forms.

M. Dumas will assuredly not deny the fact, that, in any
position of danger, his first and strong impulse would lead
him to retreat, and that it costs him an effort to overcome
this instinct. His pride must so often have suffered from the
mere consciousness of this weakness that he will never have
ceased to combat it, being more afraid of fear itself than of
the danger which causes it. His resoluteness of character is
moreover powerfully sustained by his intelligence ; for if, on


346 Eygoism.


one hand, his imagination exaggerates danger, on the other,
this exaggeration is corrected by the facility with which he
weighs the respective advantages and disadvantages of acting
on the defensive, or of assuming the offensive ; and by the
perspicacity with which he discerns the moral worth and
guages the courage of his adversaries.

It is evident then that his is a courage which gains by
reflection. Such courage is not only more estimable, but
often more formidable, than that which is merely impulsive.
The first rises in proportion to the difficulties it encounters,
whilst the second is exhausted by their prolongation.

It is not then too much to say that, in the best sense of
the term, Alexandre Dumas is courageous.

To his large endowment of Firmness are also to be traced
in a great measure his characteristic independence, and the
courage with which he sustains his opinions. It is indeed in
this sphere that his independence and courage will have shone
most conspicuously.

Before answering the question, “ Monsieur Dumas is he
or is he not an egoist?” I am tempted to criticise the too
general meaning attached to the word; for evidently most
persons look upon egoism as a special faculty. This being
the case, some words of explanation are necessary before
proceeding with my subject.

Every faculty of the mind has two issues or two kinds of
manifestation, which may be compared to the centripetal and
centrifugal movements in external nature: the one tendig
to centralize feeling or to concentrate it on self; the other,
to bring us into relation with the outer world, animate and
inanimate. In other words, the one issue is egotistical, the
other, social and religious.

Strict analysis discovers in all the faculties, with perhaps
only one exception, a certain amount of eguism ; the propor-
tion of this egoism becomes greater as we descend from the
higher to the lower faculties ; or, which amounts to the same
thing, on ascending the scale, the egotistic gives way to the
social element. For instance, the family affections are more
social and less egotistic than those presiding over self-
preservation and the preservation of the race; whilst the
feelings giving rise to patriotism are more social and less
egotistic than the family affections.

I am aware that it is a hazardous attempt to treat this
subject in a cursory manner. But perhaps the following
short analysis, shewing the degree of selfishness inherent in
the five faculties which I class as affections, may render my
meaning clear.


Degree of egoism in different fuculties. 347


Of all the affections Amativeness is the most egotistic,
for its gratification is not inseparable from the contentment
of its object.

Adhesiveness is less egotistic and more social, because it
is incapable of any satisfaction independent of that of the
object or objects which awaken it.

Approbativeness is less egotistic and more social than
Adhesiveness, inasmuch as its action extends to an indefinite
number of our fellow-creatures, and even to posterity; and
inasmuch as it is capable of great efforts for little reward.

Veneration is still more social and less egotistic, because
it embraces the past, the present, and the future (the latter,
inasmuch as it extends to God, whom our imagination pic-
tures in the future), and because it leads to abnegation.

Benevolence, the highest in the scale, is the only affection
in which no egoism can be traced. At the first glance, Ve-
neration might also appear to be entirely devoid of this ele-
ment, but on examination we discover its existence (though
in a very limited degree) by the fact that Veneration acts by
predilection. Whereas Benevolence, universal in its action,
desires the happiness of all beings, feels pity for all suffering,
even when the rest of the nature of which it makes part is
revolted.

Egoism is then nothing other than the primary impulse
of our feelings, their natural solicitation for satisfaction,
and, in this sense, is the basis of every human character.
Therefore in proportion as an organization is richly endowed,
and its needs are strong and numerous, the craving for their
gratification becoming more imperious, it is, in the above
sense, more egotistic.

Nothing tends so much to develop the egotistic tendencies
of our nature at the expense of the more social, as repression
and suffering, which excite continual and painful concentra-
tion on self. The poor wretch who suffers from cold and
want, and whose misery from day to day is alleviated by no
hope’ for the morrow, may be endowed by nature with the
tenderest affections and the most generous impulses. But
can we wonder that this nobler part of his being, having no
possible field for exercise, lies dormant, his whole mind being
inevitably bent on satisfying the first, most pressing instincts
of nature? For, though all our primitive faculties demand,
and ever will demand, satisfaction, that of the lower instincts
being essential to our very existence, nature has wisely ren-
dered them the most imperious.

If such necessities, not only of the lower instincts but of
our integral being, be inherent and ineradicable in human


348 Justifiable egoism is termed personalism.


nature, must we therefore necessarily conclude that evil will
ever be the result? Is it not rather the task of those who
take upon themselves the mission of enlightening society, to
seek the circumstances favourable to the development of man’s
primitive character, conjointly with the general good ; instead
of pertinaciously and vainly endeavouring to bend him to
heterogeneous circumstances ?

It is by considerations of the above nature that phre-
nology can meet the objection frequently brought against it,
that fine organizations are so often found among the per-
verted and vicious.

It is true that the highest organizations are those which,
though endowed with strong feelings, are nevertheless capable
of abnegation. But no man or class of men has the right to
require abnegation or sacrifice from others: the very demand
implies indeed the highest degree of egoism on the part of
those who make it.

It is evident from what precedes that the desire for self-
satisfaction, or egoism, is inseparable from the primitive
faculties of our nature, and that it is not that primordial law
of our existence to which must be attached the stigma
usually implied by the word. That stigma is just and salutary
only in as far as egoism manifests itself without regard to the
rights and welfare of others.

This latter kind of egoism is exhibited under two con-
ditions; the first exists where the lower or animal instincts
predominate over the higher or more social; the secoid,
where these higher instincts have been repressed in their
development by the reaction of heterogeneous circumstances.

The task of the phrenologist, as far as regards this ques-
tion, is then, first, to point out how far, in any special
organization, the inferior faculties predominate over the
higher ; and, methodic study having made him acquainted
with the proportion of egoism in each faculty, the measure
of egoism in the integral organization is thus obtained. He
must then weigh the influence that may have been exercised
by circumstances on the egotistic, as on every other element
of the character.

On account of the vague manner in which the word
egoism is commonly used, I have adopted the word per-
sonalism to express that first description of egoism which I
have defined as compatible with respect for the rights and
welfare of others.—To return to my prototype. This epithet
alone can be justly applied to him ; for, whatever may have
been the irregularities of his moral character, they will rarely
or never have been flagrant against the dictates of justice and


Acquisitiveness. 349


benevolence,—rarely or never will they have consisted in
setting at nought the welfare and happiness of another for
self-satisfaction.

For one so richly organized, impulsive, energetic, pos-
sessing many active passions, all of which concur in produc-
ing that intolerance of restraint, that need of absolute in-
dependence, which I have traced in him, it is difficult to
avoid that manifestation of self which, as I have shewn, is the
natural and very legitimate language of powerful feeling and
thought. :

If, however, led away by the activity and energy of his
nature, he have ever caused ill to another, it is certain that,
becoming aware of his injustice or unkindness, he will have
done all in his power to atone for it.

From the protean nature of his character and his careless
independence of manner, the judgments passed on him will
inevitably be widely divergent. By some he will be deemed
greatly selfish, by others greatly generous. Those who judge
him in the latter light know him best. He is, indeed, in-
spired by the sovereign feeling of benevolence, and by affec-
tions acting conjointly with it, capable of acts of rare gene-
rosity and delicacy, full of devotedness to a friend, of com-
passion for the suffering ; and often his imagination, intelli-
gence, veneration, conscience, and benevolence, acting in one
accord, inspire him with the need of befriending humble and
unprotected merit.

It is thus I answer your question. But the subject of
egoism will necessarily come on the tapis again incidentally
in treating of Acquisitivness and Vanity.

To those who may not readily admit the justice of my
appreciation of M. Dumas’s egoism, I would say that many
a character less contrasted in its elements, less energetic, less
frank in its manifestations, may easily be more egotistic than
his, though having more skill in hiding its egoism.


On Acquisitiveness.

There are two faculties, Acquisitiveness and Self-esteem,
which tend to concentrate feeling and attention upon self
only, and are therefore purely personal. A certain degree
of prejudice is commonly entertained against these faculties,
as if they were less providentially ordained than others con-
stituting the mental organism. Before, then, appreciating
their manifestation in M. Dumas’s character, I intrude upon
your attention a few words relative to them.

The phrenological definition of Acquisitiveness is “ the
love of property,” “the instinct to acquire.” A thorough
VOL, XII. BB


350 Theft not necessarily from Acquisitiveness.


investigation of this tendency in man would throw great light
upon social questions of deep interest, concerning which such
widely-divergent views have been, and are, held by great
writers of all nations. Among these views, one, namely,
Communism, must fall to the ground if the phrenological
theory contain, as I deem it, the true explanation of the
mental functions. The variety of tendencies,—of power,
allotted to different characters, as well as the existence of an
instinct for personal possession, prove that although the asso-
ciation, the consolidation of the interests of each man with
those of all, be certainly indispensable, yet that no social
system can prosper when each is not individually recompensed,
when each does not hold the place he is fitted for by his
organization. This being admitted, we must, on the other
hand, avoid an error too much accredited, namely, that the
desire of possessing,—generally seen under the form of love
of riches,—is the dominant faculty of the human mind. It
is true that effectively it is one of the most active, because up
to the present time society has been so organized as to make
all liberty—the satisfaction of almost all our desires—de-
pendent upon riches. But, as an organ, Acquisitiveness is
not generally greatly developed in men, and many of the
effects commonly attributed to its direct agency originate, in
fact, in other feelings. I do not deny that Gall and many
phrenologists have recognized thieves by the powerful deve-
lopment of this organ; such may sometimes be the case ;
but far oftener, nay generally, analysis will disclose the fact
that acts of theft spring from the imperious needs of other
faculties. The majority of thieves are among the poor: and
remark moreover, that what they acquire, they rarely hoard.

Every passion may lead to theft. An instance in which
love was the primary agent, came under my notice in the case
of a young man in the prison of Padua. His character had
previously been admirable for conscientious economy as far
as himself was concerned, and for generosity towards others ;
but becoming enthralled by an all-absorbing passion, he
lavished all he possessed on its object, and had then com-
mitted forgery to obtain means to follow her he loved to a
distant country. Again; is it not evidently vanity which
prompts the servant-girl to steal from her mistress some gay
article of dress? and gluttony, which incites the school-boy
to rob the orchard? and so on with every other passion.

It is then to the exigencies of the passions in general
that must be chiefly attributed the predominance among men
of the desire to possess. In order to form a just estimate
with regard to the extent of covetousness in a character, it


aati a


M. Dumas not Acquisitive. 351


is therefore indispensable to consider not only the develop-
ment of the organ of Acquisitiveness itself, but the kind
and power of the other passions, and also the social position
occupied by the individual. The different species of covetous-
ness are easily distinguishable—their aspects are widely dif-
ferent. He that is instinctively acquisitive lives only in his
avarice: what he gains, he hoards; with difficulty will he
spend for himself or for those he loves best. On the other
hand, when riches are regarded not as an end but as a means,
—when the love of gain arises from the ardour of other
desires, morey is coveted, but only to spend. The covetous-
ness springing from the indirect source is transient; that
originating in acquisitiveness is constant.

The qualification rather above moderate applied to Acqui-
sitiveness in M. Dumas’s organography, shews sufficiently
that in his character covetousness is not a marked trait. At
the same time, we find also indicated strong passions, which
may at different epochs of his life, but especially in youth,
have developed a great ardour for riches. Among these
stands prominent the thirst for approbation, and there is no
passion which favours more powerfully the action of acquisi-
tiveness; for none, generally speaking, is more thwarted by
poverty, or more dependent upon wealth for its satisfaction ;
it being an indisputable fact that now, as in the past, wealth
obtains the most flattering suffrages from the multitude. In
stating this, I am perfectly aware that Approbativeness may
find nobler satisfaction in other directions. For such higher
manifestations, however, it must be seconded by a due action
of Self-esteem, Firmness, Conscience, and the intellectual
faculties, conferring moral independence of character. Thus
associated, the desire to please cannot be too active, for it is
kept within bounds by the necessity felt to merit approbation,
and also by the limited number of those whose suffrage is
capable of affording gratification.

This degree of discernment however will not, as I shall
presently shew, have characterized A. D. in his youth, and
he may, like many others, have experienced bitter disappoint-
ment on perceiving how frequently brilliancy of intelligence
is left unnoticed when brought into contact with brilliancy of
fortune. How many men, noble-hearted and of high intelli-
gence, are discouraged, crushed in their energies by this
monopoly of the world’s consideration by the wealthy.

Circumstances of the nature of those just mentioned,
would have rapidly brought the character of our prototype
into a new phase. His pride, his resolution to attract the
world’s attention, his desire for riches, would have become
BB2


352 Pride and Vanity.


greatly excited. But his desire of gain, however strongly
provoked by similar contingencies, can never have become a
ruling trait of his character. Momentarily, he may have
manifested a parsimonious spirit—the likely consequence of a
resolution to be prudent in pecuniary matters,—a resolution
persisted in to an exaggerated degree with regard to trifles,
but vanishing before the exigencies of the first passion or
caprice. Such improvidence, however blameable it may ap-
pear to those of a more cautious and economical disposition,
is nevertheless a proof of the absence of that penurious ten-
dency, which may render persons antipathetic, though their
habits of life be irreproachable.

A. D. may be prodigal,—but he spends with and for
others ; his prodigality will thus in all probability be injurious
only to himself, while others will reap pleasure and good from
it, for let it not be forgotten that generosity is a strong fea-
ture of his character.


On Self-esteem and Love of Approbation.

Pride, Vanity,—these words are also among the many
fallen into vague usage.

Pride springs from Self-esteem, unmodified by the desire
of approbation. Vanity is the effect of Self-esteem, tempered
by Love of Approbation. The proud man is contented with
himself and indifferent to the opinion of others. The vain
man, whilst contented with himself, needs also approbation
and admiration from others.

Haughtiness is pride devoid of all generous feeling. It is
at once the sense of one’s own superiority and of the inferio-
rity of others, and awakens antipathy far more than either
pride or vanity. A proud man shocks only by his reserve
and his indifference to sympathy. A vain man appears
fidiculous and often contemptible owing to his unfounded
pretensions and the trifling nature of his ambition. Buta
haughty man awakens antipathy, because he would evidently
command deference as a right, and give none in return.

The three manifestations just considered are perversions
of Self-esteem and Approbativeness, in the same manner that
cruelty is a perversion of Destructiveness and avarice of
Acquisitiveness. Such abuses occur only where Self-esteem
and Approbativeness are wanting in the due counterpoise of
higher moral faculties and of intelligence. I say higher moral
faculties, for Self-esteem and Approbativeness, considered in
their primitive intention, are also moral faculties. Self-
esteem may be defined as the instinct to value self, the ten-
dency to self-respect; in the same manner that Veneration


Self-esteem and Love of Approbation. 353


may be defined as the tendency to respect others. It is the
principal basis of dignity, and has a powerful influence in
producing the need of independence or the love of liberty.

Approbativeness may be defined as the desire for admira-
tion. It incites to the pursuit of reputation and glory and is
a main element in the feeling of honour.

Both these faculties are providentially instituted, to stimu-
late man to progress and to self-perfection; and if their
isolated action give rise to the vitiated effects noticed above,
their inactivity or poor development is, on the other hand,
very apt to produce general indifference and indolence.

He who possesses Self-esteem and the Love of Approba-
tion, but in subordination to higher faculties, at each step he
advances towards perfection, is happy and justly contented
with himself; in progress only does he feel himself to live ;
if he retrograde, however little, in moral and intellectual
worth, he will feel himself fallen ;—the status quo, idleness,
passiveness, produce in him—more than ennui—humiliation.
He feels that activity, which, well understood, means labour
and progress, is the law of human existence, and can expe-
rience self-satisfaction, can feel himself noble, only when
labouring, not for himself alone, but for others also; so true
is it that all our faculties, in their highest manifestations,
tend to fraternal union and to the general consolidation of
interests.

In Alexandre Dumas, Self-esteem and Approbativeness are
largely developed, the latter organ however predominating.
From the brief exposition just given, you will be prepared to
find them producing varied and even opposite effects, accord-
ing as they act together or separately ; in combination with,
or in opposition to, other faculties.

I made a few remarks in reference to the manifestation
of the above faculties in Dumas’s youth. At that period of
his life, thirsting for admiration, he will have sought it at
every source, and it is even probable that the dawn of youth-
ful passion—rarely so desecrated—will have been signalized
by fatuity and indiscretion. This perverted effect of Self-
esteem and Approbativeness—this vanity—must also have
shewn itself in his career as author. Thus, the desire of
attracting the attention of the world will have preceded the
love of art

An integral view of his character at the present time,
shews it under a modified aspect. Whatever satisfaction he
may still find in marks of approbation, he is now often indif-
ferent to those of improbation—a state of mind peculiarly
favoured by a strong tendency to live in a world of his own


354 Contrasts in M. Dumas’s Character.


imagining, and also very probably by satiety of the compli-
ments and attentions by which undoubtedly he will be con-
stantly assailed. In such not unfrequent moments of apathy,
or retirement within himself, he will be impatient, peremp-
tory in speech, negligent of those he loves most, and liable
to transgress even the laws of politeness with regard to per-
sons for whom he is at other times full of courtesy. He is at
such moments capable of forgetting the very existence of
those whose sympathy he had previously won by his good
offices, and of deeply wounding them by unexpected careless-
ness. During this gloomy period, benevolence and the desire
to please which animate him in general, lie dormant, and
leave free scope to the rude suggestions of selfishness alone,—
and this the more completely, from his having no instinct
nor art to conceal.

Very different are his days of sunshine—days when Bene-
volence and Approbativeness resume their habitual sway. He
is then, though still indifferent to animadversion, contented
in feeling himself the object of attention and admiration.
Under these circumstances his intercourse must be full of
charm. I conceive him devoid of all pretension, with a facile
laisser-aller, his smile radiant with kindness and intelligence.

You can easily imagine how, in his cloudy days, his want
of reserve, his unrestrained humour, may have injured him
in the eyes of his warmest admirers. The animadversions
to which he exposes himself will moreover be further provoked
by a singular trait of his character. I refer to his facility
(prompted by the desire to please and to oblige), in making
promises of all kinds, which afterwards he neglects to execute,
or even forgets altogether. I hasten to add that he is also
capable of making sacrifices to fulfil an engagement con-
tracted lightly. But no persevering efforts nor goodwill on
his part, would suffice to realize the expectations which he
must be in the habit of exciting.

Whatever traces may still remain of former vanity, it is
undoubtedly true, (and this is one of the many contrasts in
A. D.’s character,) that often he experiences a reaction of
sincere humility ; his powerful and lucid imagination picture
to him an ideal of excellence, to which he would aspire, and

from which he feels ever far away. It is to this power of
personifying the good, the beautiful and the true, that is also
to be attributed his perception of these qualities when he
encounters them in others. All personal feeling recedes, for
awhile at least, before the superiority he recognizes in ano-
ther. At the same time may it not be allowed for one so
exceptionally endowed to feel also his own superiority, rela-


Genius. 355


tively to the majority of men, without being taxed with blind
self-esteem.

I shall next speak of Alexandre Dumas’s intellectual
powers.


Do you allow, I have been asked, that Alexandre Dumas
is aman of genius? And if so, would it have been possible
to discover his genius by phrenological examination ?

The answer to the first of these questions will better find
its place in a later stage of this analysis. In the meantime,
it will not be irrelevant to endeavour to determine the signi-
fication of the word genius.

Lavater says with great niiveté, “ Celui gui n’ a pas de
génie, ne saurait le définir, et celui qui en a, ne le définira
pas.” This is but eluding the question. To speak seriously,
the word genius, as I understand it, represents a superlative
degree of mental power, which, in whatever direction it pene-
trates, discovers and applies new truths. In this sense it
may be defined as the creative power in man.

With regard to the second question, I reply that, though
difficult, perhaps impossible, to recognize with certainty the
exact degree of activity and power of any mental faculty, or
of any entire organization, yet there do exist indications by
which these qualities may be approximately estimated by the
phrenologist.

These indications are discernible, in the first place, in
activity of temperament, and in the volume of the cerebral
organs, the one being essential to quality, the other to guan-
tity, of mental manifestation ; in the second place, in peculiar
combinations of the faculties, which give rise to spontaneous-
ness, fertility, and nerve. It is indeed especially in the har-
monious co-ordination of the faculties that I believe the secret
of genius to lie.

How far such indications exist in the present case will be
seen as we advance in our analysis.

Any one at all versed in phrenology would at once recog-
nize in Dumas strong passions and great intellectual powers.
In the frontal region, several organs are largely developed ;
among the perceptives, Individuality, Eventuality, and, in a
remarkable degree, Language ; and all the reflective faculties,*
but more especially Comparison

Upon the limits of the intellectual region we find also


* Among these I class the faculty ordinarily designated by phrenologists as
Wit. It is in fact the perception of contrasts, the third and complementary rea-
soning faculty.


556 Dumas’s Perceptive Organs predominate.


largely developed two organs essential to the production o.
imagination, viz., Ideality and Marvellousness: the former,
especially, is remarkably developed; whereas a third organ
of the same group, Imitation, is so small that it may almost
be declared to be absent.

From these data may be inferred at a glance the existence
of considerable imaginative tendency, but little for the
plastic arts; a great spirit of observation and an excellent
memory, particularly for facts, giving great aptitude for his-
torical study ; a philosophical tendency ; and a certain apti-
tude for natural and experimental science.

It is not difficult, however, to perceive that, in conse-
quence of the predominating action of the instinctive, moral
and imaginative parts of this organization, the literary and
imaginative will greatly overrule the scientific tendencies, and
that there will be a very probable deficiency of that attention
and continuity of purpose indispensable for profound inves-
tigation.

Whenever the instinctive and moral predominates over the
intellectual region of the brain, the mind tends to intuitive
and impassioned manifestations. In such organizations, truth
of an affective and moral order—that which is understood as
spiritual truth—is tmp.icit Ly felt.

The perceptive region predominating, the intellect tends
to occupy itself more particularly with material and external
things. This kind of intelligence also possesses truth intui-
tively—truth under the form of artistic conceptions and
aptitudes.

Both these orders of truth present themselves to the
mind as self-evident, or needing no demonstration. Thus,
the conceptions of poets have often foreshadowed the disco-
veries of science and the conclusions of philosophers. Thus,
the laws of harmony are intuitively felt by many entirely
ignorant of its scientific principles; and there are numerous
instances of untutored mechanical and calculating genius.

When finally the reflective faculties predominate over the
rest of the organization, a third order of intelligence results,
giving an imperative need to acquire rational conviction,
even where truth is intuitively felt.

Dumas’s intelligence, as we have seen, appertains more
particularly to the first of the above classes. ‘To this predo-
minance of instinct and sentiment over reflection must be
attributed the dramatic propensity of his imagination, by
which I do not understand simply the tendency to scenic,
but also, and more particularly, to mental personification ;
i.e., to the conception and representation of human passion


Organ of Imitation deficient in Dumas. 357


and character in all their varied manifestations. In this
sense, the dramatic power exists no less in the poet, novelist,
musician, than in the actor and theatrical writer.

So true is it that the predominant activity of the instinc-
tive and sentimental part of our nature gives the need of
dramatizing all our emotions, that, before the intelligence
has acquired its equilibrium, and, above all, before time and
experience have dissipated the illusions of youth, almost every
man is more or less a dramatic poet, though often for him-
self alone.

In order to raise this disposition, so frequent in youth, to
the dignity of real talent, the sustaining and vivifying influ-
ence of Jdeality and Marvellousness is required. Of these
indeed, Ideality, whose mission would appear to be to com-
municate the warmth of feeling to thought, and to reflect the
light of thought on feeling, is absolutely indispensable.
Should Imitation also be large, the poetic talent will be the
more complete.

It has been seen that the two former only of these facul-
ties are well developed in Dumas; but combined with his
generally rich organization, they are amply sufficient to pro-
duce a powerful imagination, chiefly, as I have said, of the
instinctive and sentimental kind, but also perceptive and
reflective.

I have alluded to the remarkable deficiency in this orga-
nization of Imitation—a faculty essential to complete artistic
talent of any kind. It is indeed mainly owing to this defi-
ciency that I have denied Dumas any talent for the plastic
arts, although several of the perceptive organs, on which these
immediately depend, are well developed.

The present analysis, however, purposing merely to de-
velop the most striking features of this character, I shall
trace only the principal results arising from the negation of
the faculty in question.

The chief, though not the only effect of Imitation, is to
give the desire of a model as a guide to the diverse manifesta-
tions of the intellect. Combined with powerful reflective and
perceptive faculties, it seeks that model in nature.

If the reflective and perceptive powers, or the reflective
alone, are feeble, Imitation leads the mind to follow in the
track of that of other men. Originality is by no means in-
compatible with the presence of the imitative faculty justly
balanced ; whereas, from its deficiency may be feared a de-
parture from the true aspect and proportions of nature in
artistic conceptions and delineations.

In the present case, this danger is probably in a great


358 Ideality pre-eminently developed in Dumas.


measure obviated by that truthfulness of instinctive and
moral inspiration, characteristic, as I have shewn, of orga-
nizations of that class to which Dumas belongs. Dumas
is moreover perfectly capable of serving as Aristarch to him-
self; his reflective powers are fully equal to the task, but, as
will be seen later, he has little tendency to direct his ana-
lytical acumen to his own productions, with a view to perfect-
ing them.

There is no doubt that the absence of Imitation is further
compensated, in this character, by the superior activity
which is thereby enforced on the other faculties, left entirely
to their own resources.

Three faculties especially, highly developed in Dumas’s
organization, confer on him a power rarely found where
Imitation is deficient, namely, that of assimilating and re-
producing in new and varied forms, all impressions received,
all facts observed, all ideas communicated. These three
faculties are, Individuality, Eventuality, and Comparison, al-
ready alluded to as occupying the medial line of the forehead.

The first, Individuality, gives the perception of the con-
crete or of entities, under which form the understanding
recognizes feelings no less than material objects; for, an idea
is a mental image derived either from an emotion or from an
external impression. In their origin, all ideas are concrete,
and are primarily realized by Individuality. When an idea
is regarded as abstract, it is merely because the sensible form
in which it originally appeared has become gradually effaced
from the mind.

The second, Eventuality, is the perception of events, or
of movements in time and space. Every faculty of the mind
is capable of various sensations,—of pain, pleasure, &c.: a
change or movement from one of these states to another con-
stitutes, no less than a change in external objects, an event,
and is recognized as such by Eventuality.

The third faculty is Comparison, which traces the analo-
gies existing between our inward being and external nature,
as is illustrated by the figurative language continually in use,
e.g., ardent affection, lively hope, bitter pain, unbending
will, &c.

From this outline of the mode of action of these three
faculties will be recognized their influence in producing that
mental assimilation of which I have spoken ; hence, of ali-
menting the imagination by lending their concourse to
Ideality—a faculty pre-eminently well developed in Dumas.

No power of the mind is more rebellious to analysis than
that of Imagination. It has been defined as an innate force,


Imagination. 859


sui generis, identical with intuition; as consisting merely
in a faculty of re-arranging in new and harmonious combi-
nations, phenomena collected by the memory, &c. Phreno-
logists regard it as a third mode of action, or a third property,
inherent in each of the intellectual faculties.

I can discover no clear idea of the nature of the imagina-
tion in these different opinions. Without attempting in this
place a definition, I will merely say that observation has con-
vinced me that the imagination takes greater proportions
according to the number and power of the faculties which act
in concert with Jdeality.

Imagination has, then, as many ¢ributaries as there are
faculties in the mind. Each instinct, each sentiment, each
reflective or perceptive faculty, may give to it a special direc-
tion. Thus may be explained the manifold forms assumed
by the imaginative power,—the marvellous imagination, ex-
pressing itself differently in a Coleridge, a Haffman, a Rad-
cliffe ; the lyric imagination of a Petrarch, a Moore ; lyric
and satiric of Byron; descriptive of Walter Scott; religious
and sentimental of Chateaubriand.

In like manner is our prototype distinguished by several
kinds of imagination, deriving colour and strength from the
various endowments of his powerful nature, and giving him
that force and originality, that prompt conception of human
passion and character, which entitle him to the rank of a
man of genius. It is a word I would not use lightly, and I
do not here apply it without mature reflexion.

I had intended to give a résumé of my phrenological re-
marks on the character of Alexandre Dumas, but I modify
my plan in order to reply to some of the questions which
require farther elucidation.

To the first I reply, that originality is not only impressed
on the intellect, but is observable in the whole bearing of
Dumas. His moderate Secretiveness already favours the un-
reserved manifestation of every impulse and every emotion,
the unreflecting expression of every thought. This frankness
(of which I have shewn previously some of the least amiable
effects) is alone sufficient to give a rare originality to his
manners,—so commonly does the need which each man has
of his fellow-creatures force him to conceal the salient points
of his character,—so generally does contact with the world
wear away and obliterate original peculiarities. The ten-
dency to copy the manners of others is particularly observ-
able in those who have a strong instinct of Secretiveness com-
bined with a facility of Imitation. The contrary conditions
existing in Dumas, the physiognomic expression and general


360 Dumas’s Imagination is Protean.


bearing which characterized him as a young man, will pro-
bably have undergone but imperceptible modification at fifty
years of age. He is utterly unable to adapt himself from
imitation,—I had almost said even from a sense of propriety,
—to the habits of others; or, if ever such adaptation have
taken place, it will have beea caused by an affectionate sym-
pathy, an assimilation of sentiment, of the nature of that
noticed with regard to his intelligence.

Again ; the objection that the existence of dramatic talent
appears incompatible with the deficiency of Imitation.

When dramatic conception, either in romance or in thea-
trical representations, springs from a profound sentiment of
human passion, there is always originality, often genius. In
the mind of the reader or spectator an echo is awakened of
emotions already experienced, or a capacity of feeling re-
vealed which he possessed unknown to himself. On the
other hand, productions originating chiefly in the imitative
faculty may be admirable for correctness and good taste, but
remain ever cold and uninspired compared with the former.
There is between the two all the difference which exists be-
tween a reproduction of the known and a disclosure of the
unknown.

I need hardly say that where the imitative talent and the
inspiration of the sentiments are united, dramatic conception
and talent are higher and more complete than when derived
from either of these sources alone.

These remarks have a direct application to Dumas, who
is pre-eminently a dramatic artist, from the power and the
tendency he has to give an external form to all that presents
itself to his understanding and his imagination. He feels
incessantly the need of exercising this capacity, and, though
it may serve his love of gain or his ambition, the pleasure it
procures to himself is ever the first incentive. The exercise
of his imagination adds zest to his happiness, and chases
sorrow and ennui away. In this respect he resembles all
true artists, but he is peculiar in having no taste for contem-
plating his own productions, no desire to reconsider his crea-
tions. His imagination—his whole intelligence, is protean ;
his conceptions spring rapidly into life, and as rapidly pass
from his mind to make place for others.

He appreciates with equal promptitude the ideas of others,
and reads with astonishing rapidity, but does not the less
seize, and generally with precision, the meaning of what he
reads. But if he happen not to apprehend the sense of an
author immediately, he grows impatient and gives up the
attempt. ,


He creates rapidly without looking back. 361


There is a disadvantageous side to this rapidity of crea-
tion and of understanding in a not unfrequent deficiency of
order and ensemble in his ideas,—a defect almost inevitable
where a talent is ever producing without looking back to
ascertain whether tuo much or too little has been created.
This defect is more especially grave with regard to serious
studies; for, reading with his characteristic ardour, it is
hardly likely that Dumas will ever, except in case of great
necessity, investigate thoroughly any question. It appears
to me a legitimate induction that he has never been a serious
student. It is true that such moments of application as may
have been forced on him by necessity or by the desire of
knowledge, will have been sufficient to furnish his ready and
retentive memory more richly than that of many laborious
students.

The deficiencies I have noticed in this intelligence may
have been greatly mitigated by the desire to be useful and
to attain artistic perfection, and by the advantage of an edu-
cation adapted to Dumas’s natural disposition. But unhap-
pily the latter condition—the more important in proportion
as the organization is richer,—is one most difficult to find in
the present day.

Considering, however, this intelligence, unmodified by
circumstances, manifesting spontaneously the brilliant and
varied endowments it has been seen to possess, its high rank
cannot be contested, notwithstanding its occasional incon-
sistency and even futility.

Among Dumas’s admirers, many doubtless would wish
him to bestow more care on his writings, even though he
should produce less. Such a desire is perfectly legitimate,
though naturally no one can pretend to dictate to an author
the degree of attention he should give to his works.

With regard to the author’s own conscience,—that
wsthetic conscience which aspires to perfection,—it is far
different. His conscience might say to him, “Labour to
render your productions ever more perfect, more worthy of
your genius. Let your ambition be to be known to posterity
first by the excellence, and then by the number of your
works,”

Leaving, however, full scope to criticism, the genius of
Dumas, such as it has shewn itself in a very pyramid of
works, many of them chefs-d’euvre, assures him a place in
the literature not only of his country, but of his century.
M. A. Castize, M.D., Montmorency.


( 362 )


IV. Cure of a Ganglion of the Knee, or of a case of house-
maid’s knee, with Local Mesmerism, by the Patient’s
Mother. By Dr. Ex.ivtson.


‘** Provided only a man be born baronet or lord, we are ready to accept him
for a born scavenger and born physician as well ; nor can any amount of science
or learning be esteemed paramount in our regard, except the science of address-
ing and mesmerising constituencies, or the knack of palavering either house.’—
Examiner. The concluding sentence will be very palatable, no doubt, to those of
our Cotemporaries who have failed to second our endeavours to have a Board of
Medical Men at the nEAp of the sanitary administration of the Empire, and have
supported the appointment of the present MesMERIc-homceopathic President.”’—
Mepicat Times, Nov. 4, 1854. Mr. Spencer Wells, Editor of the Medical
Times ; p. 472.


Hannau Gruss, aged twenty-three, servant to Mr. Cripps,
livery-stable keeper in Bond Street, having requested through
the head of my establishment to be allowed to call at my
house, presented herself to me on the 9th of last May.

I found, upon her left knee-pan, a tumor such as is
termed a ganglion, and, when situated at the knee, causes
the condition of the joint to be called “ the housemaid’s knee,”
on account of housemaids being subject to it from kneeling
while scouring floors, stairs, and steps. The poor girls ought
always to be provided by their employers with good cushions
for such work.

The particulars of ganglion I detailed sufficiently in the
seventh article of No. XLV. of The Zoist. The tumor was
rather larger than a pigeon’s egg, and extended from the
upper edge of the knee-pan, or patella, to the lower.

Some months previously, she had fallen upon and bruised
her left knee. When the discolouration from the injury had
disappeared, she noticed a swelling of the size of a small nut
at the front of the knee ; but, after increasing to the size of a
large hazel nut, it disappeared. One day, about two months
after her fall, she scoured longer than usual upon her knees,
with only a thin mat under them. She felt the left knee
tender the next morning while dressing, and noticed a swell-
ing upon the knee pan. The swelling continued of the same
size for a month, and then enlarged downwards. It had ex-
isted two months when I saw it: and was very tender.

I recommended that some female should draw the ends of
her fingers slowly downwards over the tumor, with very slight
contact, from just above it to just below it, for half an hour
night and morning.

My advice could not be put in practice for a month, as
she remained in her situation: and all this time the swelling


The cure safe, quick, and agreeable. 363


continued to increase, notwithstanding she paid a charwoman
to do all her scouring, and scoured but twice herself, and
then with good cushions under her knees, as I had advised:
but at the end of that time she went home to her mother,
who at once began to follow my directions tothe letter. The
tumor presently began to diminish: and when she called
upon me on the 29th of June and told me this, I could dis-
cover very little of it remaining.

On August the 10th she called again, and I could not dis-
cover a remnant of it: nor was there the least tenderness.

The mother was still mesmerising the knee as diligently
as ever: and I, knowing the importance of continuing all
remedies, whether mesmerism, drugs, or regimen, for some
time after diseases have disappeared, begged that the mes-
merism might still be continued once a day for a month, and
then every other day for another month.

I examined her knee on November the 10th, and no rem-
nant of disease was discernible.

Thus was the cure completed—iuto, celeriter, et jucunde
—safely, quickly, and agreeably.*

How safely, how quickly, how agreeably the cure would
have been effected, if effected at all, by the established means,
such as every hospital surgeon would have adopted and such
as a young man in his examination before the College of
Surgeons would be expected to detail as the proper treatment,
may be seen by referring to my article, entitled, “ Cure of a
very large Ganglion on the knee, thigh, and leg, by Mr. Capern,
of St. John’s Wood: and of a smaller Ganglion on the back
of the hand, by Mr. William Lloyd, of the Society of Friends,
Fulford, near York,’ in No. XLV.+


“The common treatment is to bind something tight upon the
part—to rub up and down upon it and round about it with liniments
of all sorts, even with mercurial ointment, ointment of iodine or
iodide of potassium, or of both—to blister again and again—or to
apply very irritating things after a blister and thus keep open a raw
discharging surface—to puncture the swelling, or to strike it violently
in the hope of bursting it under the skin, and then bind something
tight upon it—to put in a seton—to cut the ganglion out—positively
to amputate the limb. Some of these measures cause extreme suf-
fering, and have occasionally excited violent inflammation and even


ruined a joint, rendered amputation necessary, or absolutely destroyed
life.”


* “ Asclepiades officium esse medici dicit ut tuto, ut celeriter, ut jucunde
curet.”—Celsus, 1. i., c, 4.

+ At p. 105, I refer to two cures of ganglion effected by a sister under my
directions ; and recorded by me in No. XI., p. 318.


364 Mesmerists need not now fear the light.


Let Mr. Spencer Wells, the reputed editor of the Me-
dical Times, to whom I am indebted for my motto, reflect
upon all this before he again attempts in his little way to
iasult Sir Benjamin Hall. With homeopathy or with the
propriety of the recent appointment of the member for
Marylebone, neither The Zoist nor myself have any concern.
But with the vulgar sneer of the editor in the employ of
Mr. Churchill, the bookseller, against this gentleman for em-
ploying mesmerism, and for speaking boldly and honestly in
its praise on all occasions, I have. Sir Benjamin Hall suf-
fered dreadfully, and applied to more eminent practitioners
than one, who treated him in the best way they could with
active measures of the established routine. But in vain:
and he was incapacitated for all duties both in parliament and
in his county. I was consulted upon the propriety of trying
mesmerism, and I strongly advised it. At first it was per-
formed by the hospital surgeon whom I met in consultation,
and who, having now for so many years acknowledged its
truth in private, and practised it under the rose, is bound, |
think, to come forward like a man, and speak out in the face
of all men, and not allow the insults of the journals which pub-
lish his lectures and his hospital cases for him to be received
by us only, while he escapes them like the Irish hero who hid
himself among the cabbages. No benefit resulted, but the
reverse: and another mesmeriser was engaged. Such good
soon ensued that Sir Benjamin was able to resume all his
public duties, and every person who reads the newspapers
knows that his life has now for a long time been one of the
greatest and most useful activity. Except at that single con-
sultation, I have never visited him nor had any communica-
tion with him.

And for being thus blessed and shewing himself thankful
for the blessing, not concealing the means of his cure, like
some miserable, selfish, and contemptible persons, who have
no feeling for other sufferers, Sir Benjamin Hall is to be
insulted by the Editor of the Medical Times! This Editor,
like all his brethren, knows of the hundreds of agonizing
surgical operations performed in India, Europe, and America
without a pang or a moment’s annoyance, through the means
of mesmerism: he knows of the innumerable and exquisite
cures effected by mesmerism after all other means had failed :
he knows them all well. But to curry favour with the pro-
fession and procure customers for the journal on which he is
employed, he thinks it conscientious, mauly, philosophical, to
ignore these mighty truths: while he calls on his brethren to
find out an anesthetic which shall not be full of danger like


Swedenborg and the Zoist. 365


chloroform :* while he talks of suffering humanity and the
glorious vocation of the profession, and writes a book cal-
culated, like books on indigestion, nervousness, and chest
affections, to attract patients, never reminding the gouty and
rheumatic that mesmerism is very efficacious in those dis-
eases,—so efficacious that even the cures recorded by that
excellent Friend, William Lloyd, in the present number of
The Zoist, are worth far more than all that Mr. Spencer
Wells advances to subdue the sufferings of gout. Medical
editors, authors, teachers, and practitioners act thus, and
then complain of the want of honour and respect shewn to
to the profession, while votaries of Law and Divinity receive
riches and titles without limit.
Joun ELviotson.


V. Mr. Jackson’s decisive answer to the remarks of the Editor
of the Intellectual Repository and New Jerusalem Ma-
gazine upon that gentleman’s statements respecting Swe-
denborg in No. XLIV.


“


erratque auris et tempora circum
Crebra manus ; duro crepitant sub vulnere male.”’
VirGit, Aneid, v. 46, 47.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Dear Sir,—It appears that my article, the Rappings, &c.,
which appeared in your January number for this year, has
given some offence to that most respectable body of Chris-
tians who have adopted the views of Baron Swedenborg ; so
at least I am induced to suppose from some remarks which
appeared in the March number of one of their periodicals,
the Intellectual Repository and New Jerusalem Magazine. The
following is the passage to which I refer :—


“‘Swedenborg and The Zoist.


** The Zoist records the phenomena of mesmerism and clairvoy-
ance, and treats of extraordinary cures which have been effected by
mesmeric agency. We have no objection to a full and free discussion
of these extraordinary phenomena, and we think The Zoist is doing
right to devote its pages to this new field of human experience, from
which, it certainly appears, much relief in sickness and many cures
have been effected. But what we object to is, the lugging in of
Swedenborg on every trifling occasion, and misrepresenting both his
philosophy and his theology. Swedenborg is the only writer that


* See Zoist, No. XLVI., p. 149.
VOL. XII.


366 Conduct of the Swedenborgian Editor.


has ever taught men anything reliable and rational as to the spiritual
world, its relation to this world, and the nature of spirits. At this
moment the human mind is in many cases ardently longing after a
true psychology, and Swedenborg is the only man to supply this
knowledge, and he has supplied it in great abundance. It would
seem that some men have a strong inclination to believe that Swe-
denborg is the only teacher on these points, but they cannot ap-
proach him without a contemptuous sneer on their countenances.
Thus in a paper in the last number of The Zoist, entitled, Table-
movings, Rappings, and Spiritual Manifestations, by J. W. Jackson,
Esq., the author frequently alludes to Swedenborg, but in every case
he either misrepresents or perverts him. Not having read a single
book of Swedenborg, he of course knows nothing about his writings;
nevertheless he makes statements and pronounces judgments, all of
which are entirely false. Many of these statements, such as this,
“The Baron’s ideas had their preparation in the reveries of Jacob
Behmen,” are so utterly false, that the merest tyro in Swedenborg
can see through them at a glance. We do therefore hope and trust,
that for the sake of truth, the writers in The Zoist, as well as in
other publications, will be careful when they mention anything about
Swedenborg and his writings—that they previously study the sub-
ject, and state what is true, otherwise their publications will only
meet with the contempt they deserve.”


Such is the ex cathedra castigation which we, “ the writers
in The Zoist,’ have received from the editorial we of the
Repository. Now punishment or reproof, when deserved,
ought most assuredly to be submitted to with thanks ; but
when the administrant is in error, we are bound, “ for the
sake of truth,” to disabuse him of his misconceptions. Acting,
then, on this conviction, I transmitted the following defence
and explanation of the statements contained in my paper on
the rappings to the editor of the Intellectual Repository. I
did this at the request of a member of the council appointed
by the Conference of the New Jerusalem Church for the
management of the magazine, who also wrote to the editor,
requesting that my paper might be inserted. From month
to month, however, it failed te make its appearance, although
my friend the counsellor, who is also a good practical mes-
merist, wrote a second time, with an ez officio request, that
the editor would reconsider his decision as to its exclusion ;
but it would seem without avail. In these circumstances but
one course remained, namely, to obtain the return of my
paper, and then transmit it with this short explanation for
insertion in your pages. It arrived, I am sorry to say, only
last night, September 4th, having been delayed a fortnight
by the bearer, and so will, I fear, be almost too late for the
present quarter. ‘


Professor Bush an authority against the Editor. 367


** To the Editor of the Intellectual Repository.


**Sir,—I perceive by a notice in the Intellectual Repository for
March, that your attention has been directed to an article by me, in
The Zoist for January last. In your observations on this communi-
cation, you bring a charge against writers in The Zoist for using the
name of Swedenborg while utterly ignorant of his works or doctrines.
That writers on mesmerism frequently cite the learned Baron as a
fine example of interior or extatic illumination must be admitted,
and that they consider his visions and those of their higher subjects
as phenomena which may be arranged under the same category, can-
not be denied. To what extent they are justified in thus identifying
the experiences of their clairvoyants with those of the founder of the
New Jerusalem Church is a question of fact on which, perhaps, those
are the most competent to decide, whose knowledge embraces both
Mesmerism as a science and Swedenborgianism as a system. And
certainly judging from the statements and opinions of such men as
Professor Bush, of America, and Dr. Haddock, of Bolton, whom
you acknowledge, and of such authors as the late Cahagnet, of
Paris, and others whom I understand you repudiate, but whose
familiarity with the productions of Swedenborg is obvious, mes-
merists in general cannot be held very blameworthy, if, with such
authorities to guide them, they have come to the conclusion, that
the visions of the Baron and those of their extatics, are correlative
results of psychic susceptibility to supersensuous impressions.

My especial culpability on the present occasion, however, appears
to consist in the assertion; firstly, that the rapping movement of the
American spiritualists is pervaded by Swedenborgian doctrines; and
secondly, that the ideas of Swedenborg had their preparation in the
reveries of Jacob Behmen, and that German mysticism as a whole
is but a derivative result from the Sooffeism of Western and the
Brahminism of Eastern Asia. For a confirmation of the first asser-
tion, I refer you to a work by the same Professor Bush already
alluded to, entitled Mesmer and Swedenborg, in which that learned
member of your church clearly points out the similarity which
exists between the teachings of Swedenborg and those of A. J. Davis,
who may be considered as the doctrinal leader and hierophant of the
spiritualist movement in the States. In the same work also the
Professor shows how nearly the views of the Seeress of Prevorst coin-
cided with those of Swedenborg. Now that Frederica Hauffe was a
disciple of the Behmenite school cannot admit of a doubt, on the
part of those who have compared her expositions with those of the
extatic revealer of spheres. The evidence of Professor Bush then
goes to prove a manifest similarity between the fundamentals at
least of Swedenborgianism and Behmenism, and the order of se-
quence will I suppose determine their respective claims to be primal
or derivative. As to the orientalism of many of Swedenborg’s ideas,
I beg also to refer you to the Religion of Good Sense, by Edward
Richter, of Nantes, of which a translation was published by Mr.
Simms, of Belfast, in his spiritual library, and where the obvious
cc2


368 So also is Edward Richter, of Nantes.


resemblance of Swedenborg’s views, respecting the constitution of
heaven, to those of the Brahmins, is admitted, and used as an argu-
ment for the truthfulness of his revelation of supersensuous mysteries,
in consequence of this agreement in fundamentals between him and
these independent witnesses. Both, for example, locating the ra-
tional intelligences of the universe, according to their work and con-
dition, in the head, breast, arms, loins, legs, &c., of the celestial
man, together with many other points of similarity in essentials,
though of course with considerable diversity in nominals. Now if
these grave expositors of the truth, as it is in Swedenborg, be in
error, on the rather important matters just glanced at, blame them
and not the ignorant public, whom they have no doubt unintention-
ally misled.

**I do not believe Swedenborg is ‘the only teacher of a true
psychology,’ although I admit he holds a high, a very high rank,
among those peculiarly experienced minds, to whose development of
the interior life we are indebted for whatever we know of the more
profoundly subjective sphere of being. In his most exalted hour,
however, he never ceased to be the son of a Lutheran bishop, and
consequently, in his most rapt visions, he was even more or less con-
ditioned by the specialities of his paternal faith. Hence I cannot
admit that he ever arose to the sphere of the absolute. His forms
of thought bear such obvious traces of the Judaic, Christian, and
Protestant moulds in which they were cast, that his works can only
be considered as the truthful revelation of an individual subjectivity,
fashioned in northern Europe in the eighteenth century ; and which,
if formed on the Bosphorus or the Ganges, in ancient Greece or in
modern Thibet, would have given us a very different account of
things, both celestial and infernal. Asa divinely authorized teacher,
therefore, I must demur to his claims, while nevertheless admitting
the unsullied purity of his moral, and in some respects, the almost
unequalled grandeur, of his intellectual nature. He was unapproach-
ably the greatest master of analogy that has yet appeared, and may
be considered as the most naturally-gifted and most profoundly eru-
dite mind, in whom the light of ecstacy has been developed during
the Christian epoch. Standing in time, however, like a spectator
on the Brocken, he projected his own shadow on the infinite, and
and mistook it for a divine reality. I admit the vastitude of his
thoughts, but cannot receive them as the everlasting clothing of
eternal veracity. He was great, but I live in the faith that we shall
have a greater. The profound reverence of his disciples does not
astonish me, for he taught with the authority of a seer. But they
will yet learn that he was one of an order, and having had prede-
cessors will doubtless have successors. Had he been a man of action,
he might have shaken the principalities and powers of earth to their
foundation. This, however, is the work reserved for another, who,
coming after him, will be preferred before him.

** Yours respectfully,
«J. W. Jackson.
** Edinburgh, 15th April, 1854.”


=—_


Dr. Laycock and Dr. Lankester’s tirades. 369


Perhaps I may be pardoned for observing, in conclusion,
that, since the above was written, we have had, in the strange
work of Judge Edmonds, reviewed in the last number but
one of The Zoist, additional proof, if any were needed, of
the extent to which Swedenborgian doctrines pervade the
spirit-rapping movement in America. While out of the pages
of the Intellectual Repository itself ample evidence might be
adduced of the truth of my assertion as to the similarity
which exists between the teachings of Behmen and those of
Swedenborg, I refer to a paper in the September number
for 1847, by Alfred Roffe, in which the identity of their
views, on such important subjects as the Trinity, Angels, the
Grand Man, Freewill, &c., is clearly shewn in a series of ex-
tracts from the writings of Behmen.

Were this a matter merely of personal exculpation, I
might give an extract from a letter published by me in June,
1850, on the character of Swedenborg, from which it might
be judged whether my ignorance in reference to his writings
and doctrines even at that time was quite so great as the reve-
rend editor of the Intellectual Repository seems to have some-
what gratuitously assumed. But enough has, I trust, been
already said to shew the readers of The Zoist that they have
not been so thoroughly misled by its writers as the criticism
and assertions of its intellectual cotemporary would seem to
imply.

I am, Sir, yours respectfully,
J. W. Jackson.
Edinburgh, 5th September, 1854.


Vl. Rapid cure of Agony of the Head, Neck, Arm, and Hand.
By the Rev. Jerrery Ex1ns.


Dr. Laycock dwelt most strongly upon the danger of tolerating such delu-
sions a8 MESMERISM, &c., the results exhibited from which were traceable to
DERANGEMENTs of that delicate organ the brain, which was INJURIOUSLY acted
upon by external influences.

Mr. Leighton, apparently a stranger in the section, entered into a defence of
mesmerism practised under proper conditions and for important curative objects,
and was replied to in emphatic terms by Dr. Lankester, who considered that the
profession of mesmerism could only arise from a want of knowledge of the phy-
siology of the brain. Ir MUST OPERATE INJURIOUSLY UPON THE NERVOUS
SYSTEM: and to the independent action of the brain we owed biology, table-
turning, and that awful delusion, table-talking. He could not too strongly con-
demn such quacKERIES.— Report of the proceedings of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science, assembled at Liverpool in September, 1854, as given
at great length and apparently with great accuracy in the Liverpool Mercury,
Sept. 22, 26, and 29. See Mercury of Tuesday, Sept. 26; p. 11.


870


Most of Mr. Ekins’s patients are Dissenters.


Sampford, Nov. 17, 1854.
My dear Sir,—I beg to send you a case of speedy cure
by mesmerism which perhaps you may think proper to for-
ward for the next number of The Zoist. Though the rapidity
and, I trust, permanency of the cure in this instance do not
exceed the wonders effected at the Infirmary and elsewhere,
[ am still anxious to contribute as much as possible the results
of my own personal practice in testimony of the fact that
mesmerism is spreading widely in rural districts, that it is
not opposed by medical men in this neighbourhood, and that
the poor people with whom I have been brought into contact
have evinced their full belief in its curative power by coming
to me of their own accord, humbly begging me to attend
them, and invariably expressing the most lively thankfulness
for the relief they have received. It is delightful to find that
the party spirit which riots in civilized towns, and in learned
societies, does not disturb “the pleasures of the plains ;” and,
as a proof that professional ill feeling is yielding to humanity
and truth, I can cite the example of a surgeon in an adjoin-
ing parish (a friend, by the way, of Dr. Engledue) who is not
afraid to practise mesmerism. I find, too, mesmerists among
dissenters, and most of my patients are dissenters ;


‘*Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine agetur.’’


I trust the time is not far distant when at least a clerical
mesmerist will be found in every parish, and when we shall
hear no more of that supine prejudice which refuses to make
these simple and easy exertions for the relief of a suffering
fellow-creature.


** Medicas adhibere manus ad vulnera Pastor
Abnegat,”’


was the censure passed by the poet on the pagan keeper of
cattle ; it may also be applied with all the truth of prose to
many undiscerning Christians who confound mesmerism with
spirit-rapping and with other quasi-spiritual manifestations,
and who attribute its beneficent co-operation with the vis
medicatriz nature to “ Satanic agency !”
I remain, my dear Sir, yours very truly,
Jerrery EKINs.
John Elliotson, Esq., M.D.


Ruth Goldstone, who lives in the adjoining parish of Old
Sampford, having heard from Daniel Andrews, whose cure is
reported in the last number of The Zoist, that mesmerism
alone had removed his leprosy and restored to him the per-


Immediate Relief from Agony. 371


fect use of his limbs, accosted me one day as I passed her
cottage, and with great earnestness begged me to visit her.

I accordingly called on her. She is a married woman
with a large family, 62 years of age, and has been suffering
from dropsy for two years. But she chiefly wished to draw
my attention to the circumstance that for the last sixteen
months she had been afflicted with constant pain from under
the left ear down to the ends of her fingers. The whole arm
is much swelled, particularly between the shoulder and the
elbow, and she has no use of the hand andarm. She told
me that the seizure took place whilst she was washing, when
she felt a pain in the shoulder and a numbness in the hand,
so that she did not know whether she was rubbing her hand
or the linen. The pain and the numbness came on at the
same time, and in a short time the pain extended to the
hand, and as the numbness abated the pain increased. She
consulted tbe parish surgeon, but receiving no benefit she
attended the Royal Free Hospital (where Mr. Wakley, jun.,
is surgeon, and an inquest was held last summer) in Gray’s
Inn Lane twice a week for four months. The treatment she
received there relieved the dropsy, but did not mitigate the
pain in the hand and arm.

Sept. 25th. I mesmerised her for a quarter of an hour,
during which time she did not appear to suffer much; but
just before the last passes, which were made more strongly
and quickly than the first, she felt strong throbbings and
sharp pain on the top of the shoulders.

Sept. 28th. On the nights of the 25th and 26th she slept
quite well,—a blessing she had not enjoyed since her seizure.
After a few passes to-day from the shoulder to the hand,
the pain left her hand, and she could bend her fingers for the
first time. Her arm, which hitherto had been very cold, was
made hot by the passes.

Oct. 2nd. She slept soundly on the night of the 28th,
and folerably well the following nights. The pain is now
confined to the shoulder, having entirely left the hand. I
mesmerised her as usual with contact passes for a quarter of
an hour, during which time the pain in the shoulder abated
alittle. At the last visit she could move only two fingers:
now she can move and bend them all, and even can turn the
wrist, though the action caused some pain in the shoulder.
She has now @ healthy colour in her face, which on the day
she requested my attendance was pale, worn, and flabby. She
feels a genial warmth all over her body, which had long been
cold and torpid, and she particularly notices a great heat in


872 General Health astonishingly improved.


the shoulder. Her circulation is decidedly better since mes-
merisation.

5th. She has slept well every night since the last visit.
There is no return of pain in the hand. Yesterday the pain
in the shoulder changed from a dull wearing ache to a throb-
bing sensation of a less severe character. Yesterday she
found she could turn her arm more easily at the elbow: the
power of her fingers increases, and she is confident that she
will soon be able to work. Yesterday she observed that the
water I mesmerised for her to drink in my absence bubbled
slightly. I mesmerised her as usual, giving her mesmerised
water to drink before and after manipulating. Her face is
now quite ruddy and healihy, and her spirits are so much im-
proved as to be noticed by all her neighbours. Her case ap-
pears to me to resemble that of Caroline Bryant.*

9th. She slept well every night since the 5th. The pain
between the shoulder and elbow is still the same, but it is
entirely gone from under the ear as well as from the head.
The action of the hand and arm is so much improved that
she can dress herself and has employed herself more than
an hour in sewing. She has peeled turnips and potatoes,
and made her bed; in fact, she has the full use of her hand,
which she could not even move when I first saw her. Many
persons have seen her and bear witness to her improvement.
She saw a slight effervescence in the mesmerised water the
day after I saw her. I mesmerised her for a quarter of an
hour, making passes from the head to the elbow; then from
the stomach to the feet; finishing with quick strong passes
from head to foot.

12th. Still sleeps well. Yesterday the pain abated in the
arm. The hand, which had been swollen as well as the arm,
is reduced to its natural size, and she feels more strength in
it every day. I saw her lift with ease a large can of water.
No effect has been seen in mesmerised water: of late there
has been much lightning in the air. I mesmerised her as
usual. The hand and arm, which were rather cold, became
quite warm after a few passes, and there was much perspira-
tion in the palm of her hand.

16th. Still good nights ; the pain much abated, and yes-
terday night the pain left the arm and has not returned. She
now can do everything for herself except washing the floor
of her room, which at present she is unwilling to attempt.
I mesmerised as usual. She now feels no effect of the passes


* See the Report of the Mesmeric Infirmary for 1854, in Zoist, No. XLVI.,
p. 187.


Mesmerised Water drunk long after passes omitted. 373


at the time, but is confident that they procure her rest at
night and improve circulation.

19th. Pain is entirely gone. She has the full use of her
arm, and can sew with ease for some hours at a time: she
has nearly finished a shirt, which she began after my last
visit. I mesmerised her, making passes from the head to the
elbow, finishing with slow passes without contact from the
stomach to the feet. She always feels warmer whilst under
manipulation, even without contact. I always visit her about
40’clock. On leaving she persisted in helping me on with
my great coat, saying she was “ proud to shew me how much
she could do,” adding that she could not be too thankful for
the benefit she had received. She was very anxious to do
some washing, but this I did not recommend at present.

24th. She is well in every respect except the dropsy,
which is not reduced. Yesterday she carried a good-sized
child on the arm that had been disabled, several hundred
yards. Mesmerised water still bubbles, though slightly, the
day after mesmerisation. I mesmerised her as at the last visit.

27th. She feels a peculiar lightness and alertness in her
body and increasing cheerfulness of spirits. She has washed
some linen, and has nearly finished making another shirt.
In fact, the arm and hand are cured. After charging her
head, I made passes (some of them with contact) from the
right side of the abdomen, which is the seat of the dropsical
swelling. She has hegun to-day to take two globules of ar-
senicum in one teaspoonful of water twice a day. I have
now ceased mesmeric treatment by passes with the view of
trying the effect of homeopathy.

3lst. I gave her some mesmerised water. The dropsy is
already relieved by arsenicum.

Nov. 3rd. Dropsy is much reduced since homeopathic
treatment has been adopted. I still give her mesmerised
water. She declares herself perfectly cured of the affection
in the arm and hand, and can work as weil as ever she did.

Nov. 15th. I have discontinued mesmeric treatment, and
called to-day merely to ask her how she was. She declared
she was quite well, that she had the full use of her hand and
arm, which are free from pain. She also stated that the
dropsical swelling in her dody had altogether subsided, and
that the swelling of the legs was considerably diminished.

Nov. 27th. She is in perfect health, works resolutely, and
regards her cure as almost miraculous.

Jerrery Exins,
Rector of Sampford, Essex.


374 Reproof to Drs. Laycock and Lankester.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON UPON THE MOTTO.


Such are the follies of some wise men who take a part in
the proceedings of the British Association for the ADVANCE-
MENT (!) of Science.

Dr. Laycock, who, as far as I know, is altogether a
stranger to me, exposed himself a few years ago by his to-
tally unprovoked, ignorant, and vulgar tirade in the British
and Foreign Medical Review, under the editorship of Dr.
Carpenter, who is thought by some to have assisted in the
article, for an account of which I refer to a powerful notice
in The Zoist for October, 1850, No. XXXI., by one of the
Editors, compared with whom Dr. Laycock is the smallest of
pigmies. The following passages from Dr. Laycock’s article
will be found in that number of The Zoist :—


***Let us bring the conduct of Dr. Elliotson to this standard ;
and it is soon made manifest how recklessly and how constantly he
has sinned against sound professional ethics, from the time that he
invited laymen to meet him at the North London Hospital. If that
fallen man had undertaken the investigation of mesmeric phenomena
with a due regard to the dignity of his profession, and in a spirit
of a sound philosophy, medicine might by this time have been en-
riched with not only a new and most valuable curative agent, but
with large additions to one of its most defective departments—the
physiology of the cerebrum; and Dr. Elliotson would have been
honoured and esteemed. But Dr. Elliotson preferred the empirical
course ; he invited laymen to be present at his manipulations; he
has published, or suffered cases to be published, in the newspapers,
and in journals intended for popular circulation; he has boasted of
his cures; but we need not prolong this painful matter; he is indeed
a beacon set on high to warn his brethren against the treacherous
quicksands that have engulphed him, and against a course which has
been even more disastrous to science than to himself. To his con-
duct may be traced, in a great degree, the seizure of mesmerism in
England by quacks and jugglers, &c., and its proscription by ¢rue
science.’ ’


The overwhelming answer to this I will not extract. It
will be a treat to any sensible and honest man who may read
it, afler enduring to read as many gross mis-statements in
Dr. Laycock’s composition as there are lines.

Dr. Lankester ought to blush, if he really has stated
that we who have been satisfied of the truth of mesmerism
are ignorant of the physiology of the brain and employ a
measure which must injure our patients. He was my pupil
in University College, London. I have attended some of
his relatives, and attended him in illness since he has been my
neighbour and in practice: and ever been on friendly terms


Opposition to Galileo, Raleigh, and Gilbert. 375


with him. Yet he allows his bitterness against mesmerism
to make him forget truth and decency so far as to accuse me
(being an asserter of the truth of mesmerism, and an em-
ployer of it to cure diseases and lessen the sufferings of my
fellow-creatures), in common with Dr. Gregory, the chemical
professor in the University of Edinburgh, and so many others
of our profession, of ignorance of the physiology of the brain :
and to declare that the measures which we employ must in-
jure the nervous system and are quackeries. I am not aware
that he is any authority : that he has yet advanced his profes-
sion or any branch of science, or done anything in the least
more than talk and bustle: and it is commonly said that, when
he offered himself to the College of Physicians for examination
as to his fitness to practise in London, he was refused a license,
and has not yet obtained one. This report he may contradict
if incorrect. Let him learn wisdom, and pause before he
makes another attack upon those whom he is on every ac-
count bound to respect.


VII. Observations by the Rev. Chauncy Hare Townshend on
the case of Mesmeric Disturbance recorded in the last
Zoist by the Rev. L. Lewis.


** Galileus and others in Italy suffered extremities for their celestial disco-
veries: and here in England, Sir Walter Raleigh, when he was in his greatest
lustre, was notoriously slandered to have erected a school of atheism, because he
gave countenance to chemistry, to practical arts, and to curious mechanical ope-
rations, and designed to form the best of them into a college. And Queen
Elizabeth’s Gilbert was a long time esteemed extravagant for his magnetisms ;
and Harvey for his diligent researches in pursuance of the circulation of the
blood.”


‘*And now let envy snarl, it cannot stop the wheels of active philosophy in
no part of the known world ;—not in France, either in Paris or in Caen ;—not
in Italy, either in Rome, Naples, Milan, Florence, Venice, Bononia, or Padua ;
—in none of the universities, either on this or that side of the seas, Madrid and
Lisbon, all the best spirits in Spain and Portugal, and the spacious and remote
dominions to them belonging ;—the imperial court and the princes of Germany ;
the northern kings and their best luminaries, and even the frozen Muscovite and
Russian, have all taken the operative ferment: and it works high and prevails
every way, to the encouragement of all sincere lovers of knowledge and virtue.”’
—OLpENBERG’s Preface to the Transactions of the Royal Society for 1672, and
his dedication of the Transactions for 1670 to the Hon. Robert Boyle.


Lausanne, Mon Loisir, Oct. 12th, 1854.

My dear Elliotson,—I have received the last most inte-
resting Zoist, for which a thousand thanks. I wish I knew
Anti-Glorioso to thank him for his mention of my work
(Mesmerism proved True) in terms so kind and favourable


376 The Witches of Warboys.


that I am deeply gratified—I will not say flatiered, because
people use that word very coldly and insincerely as it appears
to me.

I have been particularly struck by a paper, called, A case
of Mesmeric Disturbance, by the Rev. L. Lewis. The subject
strikes me as interesting and important, and all that Mr.
Lewis relates is in perfect accordance with my experience
of facts. The mesmeric influence of one particular person
over another particular person, and the disturbance thereby
induced, unless the case be guided by a skilful hand, have
fallen, more than once, under my own observation.

But that which strikes me most in this particular instance,
is the perfect resemblance of the symptoms to those related
in old books, as supposed instances of the power of witch-
craft. Had Seward and Ann lived in the reign of James I.,
the former would certainly have been burnt as a witch on the
evidence of the latter particularly-bewitched person. In a
very interesting work, called, Narratives of Sorcery and
Magic from the most authentic sources, by Thomas Wright,
Esq., M.A., &c., published in 1851, there is a history en-
titled “the Witches of Warboys,” which manifestly in these
days would have been classed by the initiate under the head
of “ mesmeric disturbance,” and by the uninitiate would have
been pooh-poohed as merely describing the effects of imagina-
tion. Happy is it for us that we can explain such things
any way, so that it be natural; for, while in our time, it
was found sufficient for the cure of Ann the sufferer to send
away Seward the innocent originator of the “ mesmeric dis-
turbance ;” it was, in the year of grace, 1593, thought ne-
cessary for the relief of the bewitched parties to hang a
whole family,—father, mother, and daughter, who were un-
luckily too much gifted with the mesmeric faculty.

The story, in its essential parts, is this—

In the low grounds of the County of Huntingdon—a
locality doubtless favourable to the development of nervous
derangements—lived, in a village called Warboys, a poor
labouring family of the name of Samwell, consisting of a
man and his wife, and their grown-up daughter, Agnes.

Unfortunately for these poor persons, their cottage stood
near the noble residence of the Throgmortons, and doubtless
in the yet feudal-tainted times of Elizabeth, the hatred of
class had somewhat to do with the antipathies which developed
themselves.

The family of Robert Throgmorton consisted of himself
and his wife, five daughters, of whom the eldest, Joan, was
fifteen years of age, and a rather numerous set of servants.


Mother Samwell as innocent as Seward. 377


About the 10th of November, 1589, one of the Throgmorton
girls—a child under ten years of age—was attacked by fits,
and soon it was discovered that mother Samwell had bewitched
the child, for whenever the old lady appeared before her,
Miss Jane called out, “ Did you ever see any one more like
a witch?” Take her away! I cannot abide to look at her!”
After about a month, two other young Throgmortons, and
in process of time the whole of the five daughters, were
attacked by fits; but Joan, the eldest, was by far the most
affected, (being doubtless the most mesmeric of them all,)
and seems to have often fallen into a state of delirium, or
semi-clairvoyance, similar to that in which the Okeys often
were. When thus excited, Joan would say strange things,
and appeared to hold converse with some invisible person or
spirit. In this state she declared that twelve persons would
he bewitched in the house, through the agency of mother
Samwell, and she named the other seven, who were all ser-
vants in the family. The servants were really soon after
attacked in the same manner, and similarly called out, “Take
the witch away.” It is remarkable that when the servants
had left their places and removed to a distance, they became
perfectly well, while those who came in their room were
immediately exposed to the same attacks.

This looks hike a local influence either of atmosphere or
mesmeric agency, or possibly of both,

But some persons may think that the fits and the deli-
rium, and the horror of Mother Samwell, and her “ thumbed
cap,” can be accounted for by disagreeable impressions upon
the imagination, by the creed of the day respecting witches,
and finally by the communicable nature of hysterical dis-
orders. Doubtless these causes had their due operation ; but
they will not account for the fact that when Mother Sam-
well only entered the hall, before she had been seen by the
children, three of them fell down at one moment on the
ground (just as the three patients did in my garden at Mon
Loisir, when Signor Regazzoni, unseen by them, made passes)*
“leaped and sprung like a fish newly taken out of the water,
their bellies lifting up, and their head and heels still remain-
ing on the ground.”

I need not remind the mesmerist how apt are patients,
when strongly acted on by mesmerism, to assume, if they lie
upon the ground, the form of an arch, either perfect or in-
verted, a fact which I have remarked in my late work, Mes-
merism proved True, p. 152.


* See Mesmerism proved True, p. 149.


378 The Symptoms exactly the same as in Mesmeric Cases.


Indeed, one of the Throgmortons, Elizabeth, shewed
every feature of the mesmeric state so strongly, that a mes-
meriser of this day, in describing a case, could hardly depict
more correctly the sleep-waking phenomena.

“ Sometimes she (Elizabeth) would be in a state of insen-
sibility except to one thing on which she was occupied,” such
as a game of cards. Then again, “ All her fits were merry,
full of exceeding laughter, and so hearty and excessive, that
if she had been awake, she would have been ashamed of being
so full of trifling toys; and some merrie jests of her own
making would occasion herself, as well as the standers by, to
laugh at them.” Her eyes in these attacks were always
nearly closed. In some of her fits, she had evidently par-
ticular mesmeric relationship with an uncle. She chose him
to play at cards with her, and when another person laid a
book before her, she threw herself backward; but, the book
being taken away, she recovered, and played again. This
was evidently mesmeric repulsion caused by whatever was
not her uncle. Moreover, “she knew her uncle and nobody
else; she heard and answered him, and no other person.”
Like the young lady, whom Mr. Bulteel described to me as
being under spontaneous mesmerism, she sometimes “saw
a little child,” but no other creature present. (By the way,
this seeing children and young things only is a curious and
not unfrequent feature of the mesmeric state. Ann, in
her delirious sleep-waking, also saw “more children than
grown-up people.”)

Again ; Elizabeth Throgmorton, in one of her attacks of
evident sleep-waking, predicted that if carried to Warboys—
to her father’s—she should recover at a particular spot. ‘To
try this, they carried her towards Warboys on horseback, and,
being scarce gone a bow-shot, by a pond-side, she awaked,
wondering where she was, not knowing anything; but no
sooner the horse’s head was turned, but she fell into her fit
again, (or mesmeric state,) and for three days after, as often
as she was carried to the pond, she awaked, but, as soon as
she turned back, she fell into the fit.”

Also, her insensibility to pain, while in sleep-waking,
must have been great; for, “when going out once with a
nod she hit her forehead against the latch, which raised a
lump as big as a walnut, and, being carried to the pond and
there awaking, she asked how she came to be hurt.”

A friend of the Throgmortons, Lady Cromwell (ances-
tress of Oliver) having cut off a lock of Mother Samwell’s
hair, as an approved antidote against witchcraft, was next
attacked by an illness from which she never recovered, and


The cases much the same as those of the Okeys. 379


poor old Mother Samwell herself, as if by a recoil of her
own power, was once attacked by fits, just as Seward also
seemed affected by her own perturbed mesmerism, and had a
“ fit of agitated weeping.”

Then, a new phase of the influence, but perfectly in
accordance with mesmeric experience, took place.

In 1592, the children began only to be quiet when the
presumed witch was near them, and it was found necessary
to introduce her into the house as their nurse. Once, she
was persuaded to pronounce an exorcism against the spirits,
who presumably tormented the children, when they were
immediately relieved, and started up at once. In short,
Mother Samwell was evidently mistress of the spell, and
seems to have been partly conscious that she was so; for one
day she said to Mr. Throgmorton, “Oh! Sir, I have been
the cause of all this trouble to your children!” Nay, the
poor old thing was much distressed at her involuntary mis-
chief, asked forgiveness of the children, trusted in God they
would never be troubled again, and kissed them. The chil-
dren forgave her, and all of them endeavoured to make her
easy, but she would not be comforted, and wept all night.

However, Jane Throgmorton was not the better for
Mother Samwell’s sorrow, and presumed repentance. The
young lady began to see spirits of the strangest form, and
announced their names to her astonished auditors. There
was Master Blew, and Pluck, and Hardname, and Mrs. Smack.
In fact, Jane was in the stage of delirious sleep-waking so
often exhibited by the Okeys, and which might have been
purely amusing, had not the result been so sad as regarded
the Samwell family. The droll nonsense that she talked
about the spirits fighting each other and getting black eyes
and coming with an arm in a sling, all became a part of the
wise Dr. Dorrington’s (he was a minister of the town) evi-
dence against Mother Samwell.

She was carried before the Bishop of Lincoln, whose
worshipful presence so perturbed her, that she confessed she
was really a witch, nor can one wonder that she, perceiving
such strange powers in herself, actually thought so. On this
confession Mother Samwell was committed to Huntingdon
Jail, and soon after Mr. and Miss Samwell (one does not
well know why) were also incarcerated. The indictments
against them specified the offences against the children and
servants of the Throgmortons, and the “bewitching unto
death” of the Lady Cromwell. One shudders to think that
all the three, accused of witchcraft, were actually hanged.


380 The innocent were murdered by Law.


When judgment of death was pronounced against her,
the old woman, a miserable wretch, of sixty years of age,
scarcely knowing what she was doing or saying, pleaded, in
arrest of judgment, that she was with child, a plea which
only produced a laugh of brutal derision. She confessed to
whatever was put into her mouth. The husband and daughter
asserted their innocence to the last; and the historian of this
strange event assures us that from that moment Robert
Throgmorton’s children were permanently freed from all
their sufferings—a fact, which, on the supposition of theirs
being cases of mesmeric disturbance, is perfectly credible.

In memory of the conviction and punishment of the
“witches of Warboys,” Sir Henry Cromwell (could he have
been ancestor to the great Noll ?), as lord of the manor, gave
a certain sum of money to the town, to provide annually the
sum of forty shillings to be paid for a sermon against witch-
craft, to be preached by a member of Queen’s College, Cam-
bridge, in Warboys Church, on Lady-day every year. I
know not if this sermon is still continued, but, if certain
spirit-rapping divines come under the provisions of the en-
dowment, it possibly may be.

Humiliating is it to see how little progress in knowledge
has been made since the days of Queen Bess. Though we
do not hang or burn for witchcraft, we do not, as yet, gene-
rally know how to treat cases under mesmeric disturbance,
and we allow the poor sufferers to be tormented by doctors,
and to have their health irretrievably injured by bleediugs,
cuppings, and drugs, when a few simple passes from an
experienced mesmerist would effect a cure.

I need not point out to you, my dear Elliotson, how
remarkably similar are the cases of the Throgmortons and of
the servant Ann mentioned in The Zoist. Just as the pre-
sumedly bewitched children fell down on the ground, before
they could, otherwise than mesmerically, be aware of Mother
Samwell’s presence, so Ann, before Seward knocked at the
door, shuddered and yawned, and said, “I’m sure she’s
coming.” And all these facts are most valuable, as proving
a real agency independent of the imagination.

The world has to thank you for the very admirable note
which you have appended to the case of “ mesmeric disturb-
ance.” Nothing can surpass the practical wisdom both of
the explanation and of the directions for obviating the ill
effects of perturbed mesmeric influence. Only the most
complete experience could have dictated the “note ;” and I
may add, that only the most perfect combination of know-


Persecutors of Mesmerism worse than those of Witchcraft. 881


ledge, sincerity, and moral energy would have sufficed to
administer to the opponents of mesmerism the admirable
castigation which the “ note” contains.

Now, my dear Elliotson, whatever you like to send of the
above to The Zoist is at your service. I am delighted with
the last Zoist.


Ever and very affectionately yours,
C. Hare TownsHeEnD.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


The matter of this letter is so sound, and the manner so
charming, (as of all Mr. Townshend’s mesmeric writings,)
that I hasten to forward it to The Zoist. I was unacquainted
with the Throgmorton case of witchcraft; and Mr. Town-
shend, by pointing it out and its parallelism with Mr. Lewis’s
case, has rendered a service to the study of mesmerism.

Those who lament the cruelty and ignorance of the days
of witchcraft, and at the same time scoff at mesmerism,
should reflect that they are displaying cruelty and ignorance
equally with the believers in witchcraft and the persecutors
of the supposed culprits, and even greater cruelty and greater
ignorance.

Through the habitual resistance of the people to the civil
and ecclesiastical tyranny of those in power, persecutors
cannot in this country at present inflict imprisonment, tor-
ture, and legal murder upon those who are innocent* and
possibly wiser and better than themselves: but they inflict
to the utmost the cruelty which they still have the power to
perpetrate. They slander with tongue and pen, and anxiously
injure in every possible way both in private and in public.
Between the persecutors of witchcraft and them there is no
comparison. The men of former days were cruel to the
supposed witches from sympathy with those whom they be-
lieved to be the victims of the witches’ cruelty. But the
persecutors of mesmerism exercise their miserable spite
against persons who are striving to simply benefit their suf-
fering fellow-creatures, and, as is universally known, are
positively doing great good to the afflicted, and this to an
amount unheard of before from any single or perfectly safe
remedy. The persecutors of witchcraft, being actuated by
pity for the supposed victims, were cruel to the poor inno-


* Till very lately indeed insane persons who had taken away the lives of
others were sometimes hung; as The Zoist records. Juries now seem resolved
to put an end to this.


VOL. XIT. pv


382 Catalepsy was once denied.


cent witches only. The persecutors of mesmerism are cruel
to those also upon whom the mesmerists operate, for they
are bent upon preventing these sufferers from being safely
spared surgical agony and from being safely cured of disease
or more or less relieved. They are thus as cruel again as the
persecutors of supposed witches, and are cruel to an inde-
finite extent, because supposed witches and their victims
must be limited in number, whereas any healthy person may
mesmerise beneficially, and there is no disease or bodily suf-
fering which may not iu innumerable cases be at least miti-
gated by mesmerism. Indeed our enemies are twice cruel to
the sufferers: for they exert themselves to prevent these from
receiving the blessings of mesmerism, and during the treat-
ment if phenomena occur, and after it if either phenomena
occurred or alleviation or a cure has been effected, they
stigmatize the innocent patients as vile impostors.

The ignorance of the persecutors of witches is surpassed
by the professed or real ignorance of the persecutors of mes-
merists. They were the public at large and could not be
expected to know better: but the chief of our persecutors
are the medical profession, and they have appeared before
the world as ignorant of the most unquestionable nervous
affections and phenomena—subjects with which they are
bound in mere honesty to be acquainted. Catalepsy was
frequently denied, and I have heard a living hospital phy-
sician, a Fellow of the London College of Physicians, and
one who has been an examiner, deny its occurrence, and call
all cataleptics impostors, although some instances of this
disease had fallen under my own notice before I had ever
witnessed mesmerism. In his Medical Dictionary, Dr. Cop-
land says of catalepsy, “ This disease is very rare: so much
so that its existence has been doubted by many writers, wHo
CONSIDER IT TO HAVE BEEN FEIGNED. Its occasional occur-
rence, however, is WELL ASCERTAINED.” If, without the cata-
lepsy, or with it, there were cases of insensibility to pain, the
poor patients were sometimes also called impostors: and the
late surgeon Liston, who was a very ignorant, coarse, and vio-
lent man, and merely a carpenter-surgeon, actually tore off with
his nails a portion of skin from the hand of a poor cataleptic
girl in the Edinburgh Infirmary, so that she suffered severely
after returning to her natural state of sensibility. She was
not his patient, but under the care of Dr. Duncan, jun., who
expressed his indignation with Mr. Liston in a clinical lec-
ture.* Cases of insensibility to pain are nervous affections,


* See Lancet, May, 22, 1830, p. 278, vol. xviii.


Other nervous affections denied. 383
and as well-established facts as any in medicine. The insen-
sibility may be partial or general, and may be continued or
occur in paroxysms.

The equally established cases of double consciousness, or
the change of sleep-waking to the ordinary state, with for-
getfulness of the occurrences of the sleep-waking, and the
change back again, were denied ; and it is in the recollec-
tion of all that these, and endless other, genuine phenomena
in the two sisters Okey were flatly denied and despised by
the medical faculty of University College, the English me-
dical journalists, and the profession at large; and that the
poor girls were loaded with the most scandalous abuse.
The believers in witchcraft were far more intelligent and
candid than the persecutors of mesmerism. They acknow-
ledged the truth of the facts which they witnessed, and they
were willing to witness them, and could appreciate testimony.
Their error was in accounting erroneously for the faets
through ignorance. The medical profession, when their
denial is sincere, are too poor observers to discern the cha-
racter of evident palpable facts—that is to say, they allow
their passions to obscure their intelligence—have eyes and
see not, ears and hear not—falling lower in apprehension
than those who are ignorant of medicine. An instance of
sleep-waking occurred many years ago at Tinsbury near Bath,
and is recorded in the Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London. In a recent little book, called,
Psychological Inquiries: in a series of Essays, intended to
illustrate the mutual relations of the physical organization and
the mental faculties, written according to every body by Sir
Benjamin Brodie, and bearing the initials B. C. B., the fol-
lowing account is given :—


** A case recorded in the Philosophical Transactions, very forcibly
illustrates the extent to which such an imposture may be carried.

“A young man, the son of a farmer in the neighbourhood of
Bath, fell into what was supposed to be a state of profound sleep,
which lasted during seventeen weeks. During this time he was
visited by a great number of persons, and various attempts were
made to awaken him, but without success. He was cupped; spirit
of ammonia was held to his nostrils, and even poured into them so as
to occasion inflammation and blisters, but all in vain. He slept on
as before, and hence Dr. Oliver, who relates the case, was satisfied
that ‘ he was really asleep, and no sullen counterfeit as some persons
thought him.’

“The correctness of Dr. Oliver’s opinion may, however, well be
questioned: as every night his mother placed on a stool by his bed-
side some bread and cheese and beer, which always had disappeared
pp2


384 Genuine case of Sleep-waking and Anesthesia.


in the morning ; and as certain functions, the necessary consequence
of eating and drinking, were regularly and decently performed.

“‘Impostures of this kind will appear in no degree extraordinary
to those who are accustomed to witness surgical operations, not per-
formed under the influence of anzesthetic agents, and who know how
common it is for patients to undergo even those of the most painful
kind without uttering a complaint, or in any way expressing what
they feel.”


In the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society of London,
on the memorable occasion when the idea of the man
Wombell having had his leg taken off without pain, was
scouted, and the poor man loaded with insult as an impostor,
Sir Benjamin Brodie, being of the foremost in all this,
said that the case before the society was the companion
to one, equally an imposture, which occurred 149 years
ago, and was published by the Royal Society in the 24th
volume of their Philosophical Transactions, in 1706. He
informed the meeting that a man at Tinsbury, near Bath,
pretended to sleep for weeks and even months; and once on
waking could not be persuaded he had slept so long, “ till
going into the Fields he found every body busy in getting in
the Harvest, and he remembered very well when he went to
sleep they were sowing of Barley and Oats, which he then
saw ripe and fit to be cut down.”” This, told with a smirk,
as an impudent trick, raised a roar of laughter in the room,
and was without hesitation received by the meeting on Sir
Beujamin’s authority as a case of imposture; the members
not appearing sufficiently learned in the Philosophical Trans-
actions to know the case which, however, I related in my
Physiology, and not as an imposture, many years ago. He
proceeded to state that in this pretended sleep the man was
bled, blistered, cupped and scarified, but all in vain :—the
impostor still slept, bore it all unmoved, and gave no sign of
pain. Nay, the man was so barefaced that, though bread
and cheese and beer placed by his bedside regularly disap-
peared, and evacuations regularly appeared in the utensil,
nobody ever saw him eat or evacuate. He was therefore de-
cidedly an impostor; and, as he was an impostor, the patient
at Wellow was an impostor, and all mesmerism is false. A
rogue shams an epileptic fit in the streets, therefore all epi-
leptic people are impostors, and there is no such disease as
epilepsy. Soldiers and sailors sham rheumatic pains and
palsied limbs, therefore there are no such diseases as palsy or
rheumatism.

But Sir Benjamin Brodie gave an entirely false colouring
to the case. The man was indeed, for periods, not seen


Sir B. Brodie grossly misrepresents the facts. 385


eating, probably because he ate all his food at once, possibly
when he employed the utensil, and because he might, being
no doubt aware of the presence of others, like most sleep-
wakers, though ignorant on awaking of everything that had
passed, have an antipathy to eat as well as to evacuate when
others were present or stirring about the house; just as often
occurs in insanity, for in the sleep-waking state the activity of
brain that does occur is generally attended with some peculi-
arity of the feelings; and, indeed, if the acts of eating and
employing the utensil were continuous with him, there would
be a sufficient reason for his selecting periods for eating when
he was undisturbed. But, nevertheless, he was sometimes
found taking his victuals and relieving himself in his sleep.
The narration runs thus: “ Sometimes they have found him
fast asleep with the Pot in his Hand in Bed, and sometimes
with his Mouth full of Meat.” Again, “In this manner he
lay till the 19th of November, when his Mother hearing him
make a noise ran immediately up to him, and found him
Eating.” Again, he did not always eat and evacuate with
regularity, as Sir Benjamin Brodie represented: “In this
manner he lay for about ten weeks, and then could eat no-
thing at all, for his Jaws seemed to be set, and his teeth
clenched so close, that with all the Art they had with their
Instruments they could not open his Mouth, to put anything
into it to support him. At last, observing a hole made in his
Teeth, by holding his Pipe in his Mouth, as most great
Smokers usually have, they, through a Quill, poured some
Tent into his Throat now and then, and this was all he took
Jor six weeks and four days, and of that not above three pints
or two quarts, some of which was spilt too; he made water but
once and never had a stool all that time.”

The narrator, Dr. Oliver, F.R.S., a physician of high
standing, an F.R.S. in days when the fellowship was not so
common as at present, did not pronounce the man an im-
postor as Sir Benjamin Brodie so fearlessly does. “I have
no room,” he says, “ to suspect this to be any Cheat, because
I never heard of any gain to the family by it, though so near
the Bath, and so many People went thither out of Curiosity
to see the Sleeper, who, when awake, was a support to his
old Mother by his Labour, but now a certain charge to her.
Besides, there was seldom any body in the house to attend any
profit that might be made by it, he being left alone in the
house and every body at liberty to go up to his Bedside.”
Indeed, the old Mother was so far from deserving the charge
of collusion with her son that, being as ignorant of his disease
as Sir B. Brodie, she at first believed his sleep was only sulki-


386


Sir B. Brodie unqualified to give an opinion.


ness or “sullen humour,” and placed food at his bedside lest
he should be starved. How, indeed, could Dr. Oliver for a
moment have thought the man an impostor! For, to pass
over the scarifyings and various external irritations, hollowing
his name in his ears repeatedly and as loudly as possible,
pulling him by his shoulders, pinching his nose, and stop-
ping his nose and mouth till Dr. Oliver feared he might choke
the man, running “a large Pin into his Arm to the very
Bone, but all to no purpose, for in all this time he gave (me)
not the least signal of his being sensible,” Dr. Oliver held
a phial of solution of ammonia under one of the man’s nostrils
A CONSIDERABLE TIME, 80 strong that he himself “ could not
bear it under his own nose A MOMENT without making his Eyes
water ; but he felt it not at all. Then,” continues Dr. Oliver,
“I threw it, at several times, up that same Nostril, it made
his nose run and gleet, and his Eyelids shiver and tremble a
very little, and ¢his was all the effect I found, though I poured
up into one Nostril about half an ounce Bottle of this fiery
Spirit, which was as strong almost as Fire itself. Finding
no success with this neither, I crammed that Nostril with
powder of White Hellebore,” “byt he never gave any token
that he felt what I had done, nor discovered any manner of
uneasiness by moving or stirring any one part of his Body.”
“ Yet, the next day his Nose was inflamed and swelled very
much, and his Lips and the inside of his Right Nostril diis-
tered and scabby with my spirit and hellebore.” Nay, wish-
ing to remove him to another house, they carried him “down
stairs, which were somewhat narrow, and struck his Head
against a Stone, and gave him a severe knock, which broke his
head, but he never moved any more at it than a dead man
would.” This accident was an equally strong test with the
applications of ammonia and hellebore, for it was violent and
unexpected ; and they, altogether, were tests which Sir B.
Brodie never saw an impostor bear, and which he passed over
in silence. Educated as he was for surgery, and occupied as
he all his life has been with the mechanical matters of the
profession, Sir Benjamin Brodie must be pardoned for not
appreciating aud understanding this case; but I do not
pardon him for omitting some of its most decisive proofs of
insensibility, nor for declaring that the man was never seen
to eat and was therefore a cheat, nor for presuming to under-
stand a form of disease of which he knows nothing. What
deception did the man attempt when his food “ very regu-
larly” disappeared, once daily or every two days, and evacua-
tions appeared “ very regularly” in the utensil? Did the man
intend his mother to believe that the latter were supplied by


otha


Suspicion of imposition ridiculous. 387


any one but himself? If he had meditated something won-
derful in this way, he would have prevented all signs of such
matters; and that he could easily have done, as he was gene-
rally left alone in the house, while his mother worked out of
doors. But, as these circumstances were not calculated to
impose, so imposture was not suspected from them. The
food at his bedside, in his first paroxysm of sleep, “ was spent
every day, and, supposed, by him ;” in the second paroxysm,
victuals stood by him as before, which he ate of now and
then, “but nobody ever saw him eat or evacuate, though he
did both very regularly as he had occasion.” In fact, all sus-
picion of imposition is preposterous. We have a simple, art-
less, natural narration of a case of sleep-waking, bearing
upon itself the very stamp of truth to the eyes of every well-
informed physician.

The changes which occurred at different times were highly
characteristic of these more rare affections. After his first
paroxysm of sleep he was dumb for a whole month. During
the first fortnight of his second paroxysm of sleep he would
open his eyes, but afterwards he did not ;—a likely thing
that a man feigning sleep would ever lie with his eyes open,
or open them from time to time! At one period he ceased
to eat and evacuate: his jaws closed, and neither food put at
his bedside disappeared, nor did an alvine evacuation appear
in his utensil for six weeks and four days, though once he
made water. At another period, when he was called on by
his name, “he seemed to hear them and be somewhat sen-
sible, though he could not make them any answer;”’—was
this likely in a man feigning absolute sleep? His eyes were
not now shut so close, and he had frequent great tremblings
of his eyelids:—a probable thing this, that he would have
kept his eyes constantly in this irksome state of movement
when sleep would have been better shammed by keeping
them closed! The countryman could never have devised all
these little circumstances which practitioners, who have seen
as many cases of this description as I now have, recognize at
once as striking peculiarities of such affections. It is worthy
of notice that the man was so inveterate a smoker as to have
“a hole made in his Teeth, by holding his Pipe in his Mouth ;”
yet, by sleeping thus, first in 1694 for a month, then in 1696
for seventeen weeks, and then in 1697 for six months with
the exception once of a few minutes, he deprived himself of
what must have been an indispensable pleasure.

On waking from his sleep of seventeen weeks, so far from
wishing it to be believed, he could not easily be brought to


388 Characters of Sleep-waking.


believe it himself till he saw the oats and barley ripe which
were sowing when he last saw the fields.

I should say that a more beautifully genuine case of sleep-
waking in which coma predominated never occurred. When
Sir Benjamin Brodie sat down, Dr. Symes pointed out to
him and the meeting the true nature of the case,—that it
was an instance of sleep-waking, with double consciousness,
the man being in a sleep, generally profound, but sometimes
with sufficient activity of the sleeping brain to enable him to
do certain things—eat, drink, and evacuate, in all these
actions voluntarily administering to himself, but not remem-
bering one of them on awaking. In some instances of this
peculiar sleep, there is from time to time more activity than
he shewed, so that persons walk, talk, write and work, nay,
they may do some things better than when awake, though
the sleep continue and they be insensible to mechanical in-
jury, and snore; and in most instances, as in the present
case, nothing is afterwards remembered, and the period passed
in this sleep-waking state is as a separate existence. Some-
times the coma is profound and little or no activity of brain
is discernible ; sometimes there is no coma but great activity
of the mind, as a separate period of existence, the character
or ways of the person being more or less different from those
habitual, and entirely forgotten when the brain passes again
into its natural state: and between these two extremes are
endless gradations of activity in the various cerebral faculties.
Sleep-waking is the most appropriate title, as it comprehends
all actions that may be performed ; though the word somnam-
bulism is often loosely employed, which strictly applies to
those cases in which the patient walks. When the coma is
profound the second term waking is hardly appropriate; and
when there is no coma the first term sleep is hardly appro-
priate, and extatic delirium should rather be the designation.
But, as a generic denomination, the expression sleep-waking
is very convenient and characteristic. Extatic delirium was
the wild, and, toa philosophic observer, deeply interesting,
state in which the Okeys were usually seen when not in a
profound coma or in their natural condition.

Cases of the same kind are well established.

I saw a case of the kind a few years ago at the Middlesex
Hospital. Dr. Wilson, under whose care the patient was
and who to his honour knew and boldly declared the truth
of mesmerism, was from this knowledge able to recognize
the case: but some uninformed and spiteful person about the
Hospital wrote to the lady who kindly interested herself in the


A true case at the Middlesex Hospital. 389


poor boy that his only complaint was temper, and a medical
whisper reached me that the case was an imposition. The
boy, who, in his natural state, was very respectful and par-
ticular in his behaviour, was very regardless of both persons
and places in his delirium, sang with great feeling, and recited
with capital power of imitation, and ate most voraciously,
and his writing was a great curiosity,—quite different from his
habitual writing, and blotted all over. I unhesitatingly
declared the case to be as real as the boy’s existence, and
should never have been tired of studying it. The case was
drawn up and sent to the Royal Medical and Chirurgical
Society by Dr. Wilson, November, 1842, under the title of a
case of double consciousness, and a notice affixed in the
library that it would be read. But, when the members,
having declared that the history of the amputation, being
mesmeric, had disgraced them, learned that this case was
analogous to mesmeric cases, they actually took down the
notice, gave half a hint to Dr. Wilson that he might with-
draw the paper, a report went about that the boy shammed,
and the paper was not read till Feb. 28. I am told that
Mr. Bransby Cooper would not believe the occurrence of such
cases, and therefore said that the boy should have had a good
thrashing, which would soon have cured him.

In the Edinburgh Philosophical Transactions for 1822,
and copied into my Physiology, p. 368, is a similar case of a
girl, sixteen years old, who, because she recollected in her
natural state nothing that occurred in the diseased, was
treated in the most depraved manner; and one still more
remarkable occurred in a little girl in America, and is printed
by Dr. Belden, under the title of An account of Jane Rider,
the Springfield Somnambulist, a copy of which I deposited in
the Library of the Society.

I was once called by Dr. Arnott in consultation upon
another such case in 1849. The patient was a Spanish lady
of consideration, about 40 years of age, who had married at
14, miscarried every three months for two years, and then
had a child, and afterwards a second. Soon after the birth
of the second and up to the time I saw her,—a period of
above twenty years, she was subject to fits of sleep, which
often lasted three weeks, during the whole of which she would
swallow nothing but a little water. The fits of sleep would
come on suddenly, and she was once seized at the opera.
They would cease as suddenly, so that she often on waking
went to the opera. In them she was insensible to light and
all noise but the voice of her infant. Dr. Gregory the second,
of Edinburgh, habitually mentioned in his lectures, when I


390 A true case seen by Dr. Arnott and myself.


was his pupil, the case of a cataleptic lady whom he attended,
and whose disease had been induced by misfortunes very
similar to the history of Isabella in the Fatal Marriage; and
in her paroxysms of insensibility she appeared perfectly blind,
except when her baby was brought near her, and then she
gave slight signs of recognizing it. Had the peculiar condi-
tions of these ladies been induced artificially by mesmerism,
the doctors would have pronounced them at once most shame-
less impostors, feigning insensibility, but not able to carry it
on when maternal feelings were too strong for them. The
same phenomenon is often witnessed in mesmerism. I have
had several cases, in persons of both sexes, and of high and
humble rank, of perfect deafness in the mesmeric state,
except to the voice of the mesmeriser or a noise made by him.

Like the boy stigmatized by Sir Benjamin Brodie as an
impostor, the Spanish lady, in her fits of sleep, would relieve
her bowels, and she rose out of bed for this purpose, and even
performed the usual subsequent act : though in one paroxysm
the call of nature was unheeded by her, and an immense
collection of hardened matters took place.

She was insensible to mechanical injury,—pinching, prick-
ing, &c., but not to cold; and this again is a common fact in
mesmerism. I have had many patients who gave no sign
of feeling, however you pinched them, but withdrew the
hand instantly that a cold body touched or even was brought
near to it. The lady was, on the other hand, fond of cold,
for, if ice were given her, she would sit up in bed, smell at it,
and appear to like it.

When I visited her, she was in an attack. I found her
eyes firmly closed and her upper extremities rigid, not yield-
ing to an attempt to move them, and her hands placed up
against her face. I blew in her face, and her eyelids corru-
gated the first time, but did not upon repetition. I under-
stand that at 11 p.m. the rigidity regularly ceased, and she
sunk completely relaxed into a deep sleep.

How analogous, how identical, will not every one, familiar
with the state artificially induced by mesmerism, recognize
these phenomena to be with those of mesmeric patients !

The attacks had become less frequent of late and shorter,
continuing a week only; but the present had lasted ten days,
and Dr. Arnott informed me that when he called the next
day she was still asleep. Head-ache preceded the first attack,
and often continued and tormented her. The present attack
was ascribed to improper food. The afflicted lady was tired
of her disease, and wished for death. I recommended mes-
merism as an almost certain cure, if properly and persever-


A true case in France and one in Italy. 391


ingly employed ; but did not visit her again as she was about
to leave England immediately. It was lucky for her cha-
racter that she was not a patient in the University College,
or, as it was formerly called, North London, Hospital ; that
neither Mr. Wakley, nor the Edinburgh surgical experimenter
Mr. Liston, nor Sir Benjamin Brodie, nor Mr. Bransby Cooper,
was allowed to see her; and that her case was not described
to the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society of London.

In the London Medical Gazette for May, 1850, another
case was recorded that occurred in France, and no doubt was
expressed of its perfect truth :—


oi H , aged 19 years, of a good constitution, lym-
phatic temperament, with black hair and brown eyes, having good
general health, menstruation regular, moderate in religious observ-
ances, of a gay and thoughtless character, fell asleep one evening
about seven o'clock: her mother, who was at the time absent from
home, was surprised on her return to find her daughter asleep, and
endeavoured to wake her, but without avail. Being alarmed, she
summoned M. Maugin, who found her lying on her back in a quiet
and calm sleep, interrupted every now and then by deep sighs; the
pulse was regular, soft, and slow; the limbs supple and moveable.
The eyelids being opened, remained so; the pupils were insensible
to light, and no means of excitation addressed to either of the senses
succeeded in rousing her. She was insensible even to cutting and
pricking and pinching the surface of the body.

‘This state lasted from the Sunday evening until Tuesday morn-
ing at ten o’clock, when suddenly she rose from her bed, fell on her
knees by its side, and opening her eyes, which she raised towards
heaven, joined her hands, and began a scene impossible to be de-
scribed, and worthy the pen of a romance writer. All the cate-
chisms, prayers, sermons, pious books that she had ever known or
read, were repeated with the fervency almost of inspiration. The
state of physical insensibility remained. She continued thirteen
hours in the same condition, and thus occupied. On waking she
expressed surprise at the concourse of people that surrounded her,
and complained only of debility.

** When questioned she stated that she had dreamt that an angel
had conducted her to heaven. She gave a most rapturous account
of the happiness she had experienced in her dream.

“This state of ecstasy returned four times, twice at intervals of
fourteen days, and once of eight days; and lasted on one occasion
twenty-six hours. Her general health has not suffered. M. Maugin
regards the case as one of a peculiar form of insanity.”


In The Zoist for last July there is communicated by
myself, though I did not write the article to which the ac-
count is a note, a case which occurred in Italy twenty years
ago, and is detailed in the Annali di Medicina di Milano :—


392 Sir B. Brodie observes badly in surgical operations.


“Dr. Coltelli, an Italian physician now in London, bas men-
tioned to us a case of long sleep which occurred in Italy about twenty
years ago, and the account of which is detailed in the monthly
Annali di Medicina di Milano.

“<The patient was a young woman about 20 years old, of ex-
tremely nervous temperament, with very variable health from her f
infancy, and whose female function had been irregular and imperfect.

After some vexations she became weaker and was seized with pa-

roxysms of trembling that lasted many hours. She was treated with

opiates: dyspepsia took place, and in a short time she lost all appe-

tite, and was unable to chew or swallow any kind of solid food.
Afterwards every function became as inactive as can be conceived:

she fell into a state of stupor, or something like sleep, that lasted for

nearly three years. In all this time she lay constantly in bed with-

out motion or speech, and many functions were suspended—men-

struation, secretions, digestion, &c. She was like a dead body, and

life only shewed itself by slow breathing and by the pulse. The

latter was also slow and small, but rather unequal in the beats. The

sleep all this time was never completely broken; but every day, and

sometimes only every other day, before sunset, she moved the muscles

of the face and of the arms, and inarticulately pronounced some ‘
words, asking for water. This was supplied to her lips by a sponge |
or other similar means. A few ounces a day were sufficient, and
this was the only substance which entered into her body during the
whole time of the phenomena. The drowsy state passed away after
some sudden changes in the weather; when she was able to speak.
She was however incapable of explaining whether she suffered or not,
and she had no recollection of what had passed in her or about her.
After her recovery, her general health became better than before the
lethargic state had commenced. In my opinion the disease pre-
sented by Elizabeth Squirrell last year has some analogy with this.

*** The natural winter sleep of hybernating animals which pass so
long a time without injury, sleeping and taking no food or drink,*
throws light upon those states which in the human being are morbid.’ ”

I regret that a medical man holding Sir Benjamin Brodie’s
position should display such an unacquaintance with thoroughly
established disease, and shoyld condescend to such conduct
as ignoring in his statements both all particulars which tell
against his own unfounded prejudices and the answers which
have been given to his crude objections. The example set j
him of ignoring by Sir Henry Holland, Dr. Carpenter, and
the body of English medical journalists, and the rest of that
very short-sighted school, should not have been followed by
a man so ambitious of fame and authority. He also errs
lamentably in speaking of patients undergoing the most
painful surgical operations without uttering a complaint or in
any way expressing what they feel, though no anesthetic


* See also a Chinese case, with more waking than sleeping, Zoist, No. XL., p. 375.


In silent agony, some effect discernible. 393


agent be employed. Various speakers in the Medical and
Chirurgical Society on that disgraceful evening spoke in the
same way, shewing how carelessly too many medical men
observe. I do not believe that any under agonizing cir-
cumstances of surgical operations have expressed no pain.
I do not believe that those who say so observe with sufficient
minuteness. I, during a period equal to three years, while
a student at the two hospitals of St. Thomas and Guy, saw a
very large number of operations, as these were both great
establishments and close to the river and in a very crowded
district, as operations were then far more frequently resorted
to than at present, and as Sir Astley Cooper was surgeon to
one of them and his glory was to operate, and I do not know
that I was absent from a single operation. Yet I never wit-
nessed such a prodigy as apparent éofal indifference to pain.
I recollect a sailor astonishing Sir Astley Cooper by not ut-
tering the faintest sound while his leg was taken off: but the
man folded his arms firmly together and his lips were firmly
compressed. No one will doubt the high courage of the late
Marquis of Anglesey. While his leg was amputated he ut-
tered not a sound. A bystander might have supposed that
he felt no pain. But the brother officer, whose hand he held
all the time, told a clergyman, a friend of mine, that he never
had such a squeeze in his life. Some who have uttered no
sound have held their own thigh during an amputation of the
leg: but then they could give silent vent to their sufferings
by squeezing the limb. Some, when under the surgeon’s
hand, keep their jaws or lips firmly closed ; some sing, whistle,
chatter, laugh, or smoke, all the time, and thus find relief.
I knew an old clergyman who had senile gangrene of a toe,
to which Sir Astley Cooper frequently applied nitric acid,
and he told me that, not liking to cry out and not being able
to swear, he always relieved himself in his agony by spout-
ing a sentence of the Philippics,—a avdpes "A@nvaior, Kc.
Savages, criminals, and martyrs in different causes, have in
all ages borne torture bravely, defying pain. But then they
have laughed, prayed, sung, talked, or performed some other
muscular motion: pr, although silent and still, would, I have
no doubt, have betrayed to a good observer some sign of suf-
fering or determination in their breathing, lips, closed jaws,
or fixed look,—in acting strongly with some part of their
body. If a man has held his hand in the fire, he has held it
firmly. Dr. Barnes, of Tavistock Place, who was acting sur-
geon at Macquarie Harbour during 1826 and 1827, for nine-
teen months, informed me that he saw in all 17,000 lashes
given in that penal settlement. The whip had a wooden


394 Sir Benjamin Brodie ignored important Facts.


handle a foot in length, and nine lashes, each composed of
two layers of whip-cord about a yard and a quarter long,
with nine post-boy’s knots towards the end, and about two
inches apart; the extreme point of each lash was made firm
with waxed thread. The culprit was bound arms and legs to
a post, and the number of each stroke called out by the chief
constable before the lash fell, and about three per minute
were given, so that a hundred lashes occupied a considerable
time. Dr. Barnes assures me of what every rational man
would anticipate,—that no good ever resulted from these dis-
gusting, disgraceful barbarities. The spirit of the tortured
person was broken, and he was rendered reckless for ever.
As it is a point of reputation with the convicts to appear to
despise the torture, and numbers of them are the most daring,
determined, and courageous of men, he continually witnessed
the absence of all exclamation: but in every instance some-
thing was noticeable which disclosed suffering or determina-
tion,—the shoulders were generally kept raised, shewing the
strong action of the surrounding muscles,—or perhaps a bullet
in the mouth was found afterwards flattened out to the thin-
ness of a wafer by the action of the jaw.

In an account which Dr. Barnes once kindly wrote for
me of some of these cases, he remarks: “ Although those
men, by a species of false pride, would endeavour to shew
what they termed a manly spirit, and bear unflinchingly
that most dreadful torture, without calling out or making
any demonstration of bodily suffering by the writhing of the
trunk, limbs, or muscles of the countenance,—yet in every
instance when punishment was inflicted, the culprit evidently
prepared himself to bear up against it, by placing himself in
a particular position ; for instance, the hands grasped firmly
the halberts, the back was curved and the shoulders were
raised, the chest was emptied and the abdomen was drawn
inwards, the breathing was short and the pulse quickened.”

Sir B. Brodie in his unfortunate condemnation of Wom-
bell took great care to ignore, not only the statement that the
poor fellow was throughout silent, breathing most placidly,
motionless, and with his hands and lips perfectly relaxed,
like the poor woman whose breast was this year removed in
the Mesmeric Infirmary (Zoist, No. XLVI.), although the
sensitiveness of his leg was agonizing up to the moment when
he was thrown into mesmeric sleep, but to ignore the state-
ment that under mesmerism his nights and health greatly
improved.


Joun EL.iorson.


395)


VIII. Cure of Lameness of the Knee from pain and weakness.
By the Rev. R. A. F. Barrett, B.D., Senior Fellow of
King’s College, Cambridge.

> says Galileo, ‘‘is written in that great book, I mean the

universe, which is constantly open before our eyes; but it cannot be understood

except we first know the language and learn the character in which it is written.”

‘* I think I discover in Tarsi, a firm belief that, in philosophizing, it is neces-
sary to lean upon the opinion of some celebrated author; as if our mind must
necessarily remain unfruitful and barren till it be married to another man’s


| ** Philosophy,’


; reason.” ‘* No; the case is not so. When we have the decrees of nature,
| authority goes for nothing; reason is absolute.””—ZJ/ Saggiatore, ii. 247. 200.
|


In November, 1852, soon after a long railway journey, I felt
pain and weakness in my knee. 1 consulted an eminent
surgeon, who told me that the affection, though not serious,
might prove troublesome, as the principal remedy was rest.
He prescribed an embrocation, which I used to an extent
sufficient to punish me considerably. Soon afterwards I
managed with some difficulty to get to Malvern, where I
used various fomentations, hydropathic and allopathic, with-
out any benefit except temporary alleviation of pain. In
spite of them all I could only move with crutches and a sling
to my leg, and my health suffered from want of exercise, of
which I require a great deal.

At the time I was mesmerising A. (the case mentioned in
The Zoist of October), she repeatedly told me the state of
the knee: and to the best of my recollection it was, “ The
membrane over the bone irritated: the oil not lubricating
the joint properly: and some irritation and stiffness of the
muscles and adjoining parts.” She said that counter-irritants
would only do me harm, and repeatedly urged me to have the
knee mesmerised.

I directed a bathman to make contact passes over the
knee: and he did so for about ten minutes twice a day.

In a very few days I was sensibly better, and the knee
steadily recovered. In a few weeks 1 could walk as usual,
and occasional returns of pain were always relieved by the
mesmerism.


R. A, F. Barrett.
King’s College, Cambridge.


( 896 )


1X. An instance of Sleep and Cure by Imagination only.
By Dr. Exttortson.

‘*It appears to me, that the general conclusions established by Mesmer’s
practice, with respect to the physical effects of the principle of imagination (more
particularly in cases where they co-operated together), are incomparably more
curious than if he had actually demonstrated the existence of his boasted science :
nor can I see any good reason why a physician, who admits the efficacy of the
moral agents employed by Mesmer, should, in the exercise of his profession,
scruple to copy whatever processes are necessary for subjecting them to his com-
mand, any more than that he should hesitate about employing a new physical
agent, such as electricity or galvanism.””—DuGaup Stewart, Elem. of the Phil.
of the Human Mind, vol. iii., p. 221.


No members of the medical profession are so alive to the
influence of imagination upon the system in both health and
disease as those who acknowledge the truth of mesmerism.*
We know, moreover, that in mesmeric states the effect of
imagination is far greater than in the ordinary state, and we
suspect that in persons not in the mesmeric state, but who
have been formerly mesmerised, the power is far greater than
in those who have never been mesmerised. We can refer to
the earliest papers in The Zoist for proof of this.
In No. IIL., p. 313, I wrote that,—


** Imagination has extraordinary power in mesmerised subjects.”
In No. IV., pp. 440-1, 1 wrote,—


** Of the power of imagination in the mesmeric state, and in
similar diseased states independent of mesmerism, even medical men,
I am certain, have in general no idea. I have proved its power,
when, having heard from a patient a prediction of some wonderful
phenomenon in the mesmeric state for a certain day, I have entreated
that the time might be changed, as I could not then be present to
witness it. This has been done; and the prediction been verified,
the phenomenon occurring at the time requested: and yet the phe-
nomenon has been genuine and unquestionable. You may not be
able to prevail upon the patient to agree to what you wish; but, if
you can, you will generally be sure of a successful issue.

** We ought always to remember that, besides genuine mesmeric
phenomena, much occurs in these cases, without the least deception
or even exaggeration on the part of patients, entirely through an
impression upon the mind. The proneness to various fancies in dif-
ferent mesmeric states is great; and in the present case it was very
great, and the influence of it as great.

“ The sleep-waking and the awakening were truly mesmeric ; the
phenomena were all real: but a large number of the realities which
I produced in this case, were, I feel satisfied, the result of an im-


* See No. IX., for an article by myself, almost all printed in 1820 in my
Human Physiology, and exhibiting extraordinary examples of the power of ima-
gination in men and brutes. ,


Sereno


Instances of the power of Imagination. 397


pression only that they would occur. Thus metals had various
effects, just as I led her to expect them. A glass of water would
send her to sleep for hours, if she said it would, provided it was
mesmerised, when I did not mesmerise it at all: and yet the sleep
was, I fully satisfied myself, perfectly real.

‘IT could almost believe that the stigmata on the hands and feét
and around the heads of certain Roman Catholic sleep-waking females
might not be artificial, but the result of a strong imagination in the
patients that they would have these marks.”


In No. IX., p. 47, where I related the most interesting
case of a young woman, I said,—


‘Gradually the number of passes required to send her to sleep
diminished, till @ single pass was sufficient to plunge her at once
into it, and she remained asleep for several hours, once for nearly
six, if not awakened ; and pointing had almost instantly the same
effect ; and looking at her produced it quickly.. Mere imagination
was at length sufficient. For I one day told her and two others that
I would retire into the next room and mesmerise them through the
door. I retired, shut the door, performed no mesmeric passes, but
tried to forget her, walked away from the door, and busied myself
with something else—even walked through into a third room; and
on returning, in less than ten minutes from the first, found her
soundly asleep, and she answered me just as was usual in her sleep-
waking condition.

“It has been said that we hear of imagination keeping persons
awake, but never of its setting them to sleep. Here, however, was
an instance of it. Nay, we read that persons have gone into the
sleep of death by imagination.


*« Some have been wounded with conceit,
And died of mere opinion straight.’


“In Dr. Z. Grey’s notes to these lines, the Athenian Oracle is
quoted for an account of a malefactor who was told he was con-
demned to be bled to death. They

“** Accordingly blindfolded him, tied up his arm: then one of
them thrust a lancet into his arm, but purposely missed the vein:
however, they soon began to describe the poor man’s gradual loss of
blood, and of course a gradual faintness occasioned thereby ; and
just before the supposed minute of his death, the surgeons said una-
nimously, Now he dies. The malefactor thought all this true, and
died by mere conceit, though he had not lost above twenty drops of
blood.’

“Of Britton, the small-coal man, who, though a good man, was
called by some enemies an Atheist, by others a Presbyterian, and by
others a Jesuit, so easy is it for Phasleoes to give a bad name to
those they hate, we read that

“*One Honeyman, a ventriloquist, was introduced into his com-
pany by a Justice Robe, who played at the concerts: this man,
making his voice appear to come from a distance, announced to
VOL. XII. EE


398 Palsy and morbid sensibility.


Britton his approaching dissolution, and bade him prepare himself
by repeating the Lord’s Prayer on his knees. The poor man did so,
and such an effect had the affair altogether upon his imagination,
that he died in a few days,—a victim to the heartlessness which so
commonly characterizes the practical joker.’ ”


A lady, just passed the middle age, was some years ago
cured of an affection of her spinal marrow with mesmerism
after long-continued, irksome, and torturing means had failed.
Her case has been published. She had entirely lost her voice
for three years: been incapable of being moved from her sofa
for nine years, and if placed upon her feet became insensible
for hours: never been free from pain, sometimes of indescrib-
able severity, and for nine years had not slept soundly, and
had taken an aperient every night: been under several me-
dical men, and had submitted to two setons for months, to
two large caustit-issues with five horse-beans in each upon
both sides of the spine, repeated blisters on the back, half a
dozen caustic plasters, leeches, liniments, and medicines
without end: despaired of recovering, but, on leaving off all
these remedies and being mesmerised, recovered rapidly.

Three years after her cure she was travelling alone in a
stage-coach, when it was overturned, and she was found with
her head bent under her: and the result of the concussion
was great loss of vision, palsy of the right arm and of the
legs. After a time there remained complete loss of power,
and impairment of sensibility, in the lower extremities, with
great tenderness of the spine. Mesmerism was curing her,
when the shock of an accident which happened to one of her
sisters renewed her former state: but mesmerism again com-
pletely cured her.

Six years after her second cure she began to feel poorly,
and at length became so much worse that she visited me in
October, 1853. Her legs were weak and her tongue and
throat so painful that she could with difficulty swallow even a
teaspoonful of arrow-root, so that she cried over food because
she could not satisfy her hunger. There was also great pain
from the throat and tongue to the back of the head. Her
original mesmeriser had gone far away, and the gentleman
who had mesmerised her in her second attack had no time to
spare. She came up to London and called upon me, when
I of course prescribed the only remedy which could benefit
her, and the remedy which I knew might be relied upon.
But there was no one near in her part of the world now to
mesmerise her efficiently, as her first mesmeriser had done.
Kuowing that cases have been recorded in which mesmerism
has acted at a distance even when the patient had not been


Imagined she was mesmerised when she was not. 399


prepared for it, I told her that as she had been well mes-
merised formerly it was possible I might be able to affect her
in the country by willing the effect and making passes in
London, though the distance was thirty miles, and that at a
certain hour on the next Sunday evening and on subsequent
evenings I would make the attempt. I fixed an hour, that
she might not actively engage herself during my attempt but
give me every chance, and that imagination might help if it
could: for my purpose was not to make an experiment, but
to produce a mesmeric effect upon her for the removal of her
distressing symptoms.

When the evening and hour arrived I had forgotten all
about the matter, unluckily not having made a memorandum
of my appointment, and the press of my engagements kept
it out of my thoughts, so that I still forgot all about it till I
received the following letter from her :—


o , Nov. 1, 1853.

“ My dear Sir,—I returned home on Saturday, and, ac-
cording to your request, now write to tell you the result of
Sunday evening. At about twenty-five minutes past seven
in the evening I began to fidget, they tell me, and in less
than five minutes my eyes closed: I had no power to open
them. I did not look at the time myself: my nephew was
at home with me, he considers I slept an hour and a half.
I awoke, had my supper and went to bed, and scarcely woke
throughout the night. I felt irritability in the nervous sys-
tem: my mind was wandering over large houses and persons
I knew nothing about.

“Yesterday evening (Monday) I was busy over my work,
began to feel drowsy and fidgetty, and at a quarter to eight
could no longer keep my eyes open. I went direct to bed,
slept until near 10 o’clock, awoke and had my supper, then
went off again for the night.

“Now, Sir, you best know if this is imagination, or
what the cause is: I do not wish to deceive myself or others.
I have thought that I should like some one to test the experi-
ment unknown to myself; that is to say, the day, hour, &c.

“ Yours respectfully,


“ 33


I made no reply, and still forgot all about the case every

evening, and in a week received this second note :—
“Nov. 8, 1853.

“‘ My dear Sir,—I hope you will not think I trouble you
too frequently: you requested that I would write. I con-
tinued to prepare myself for the influence, 7 I kept
EE


400 The effects repeated without Mesmerism.


at home every evening since my return. Last Wednesday
evening I was out until seven, and before I got home my
eyes were partially closed. On Friday and Saturday I
could not, although I fried, sleep or close my eyes: I only
felt languid. Sunday, the influence came again, and I slept
two hours. Last evening I felt nothing until nine o’clock,
and then it came over me in the midst of talking, and I
could not resist. It is strange, but I always feel hungry or
craving during the influence, and usually eat or drink some-
thing to satisfy my appetite, if possible. I think I feel
better already.

“T hope, my dear Sir, I do not tire you, and that you
will kindly excuse all errors.

“ Believe me, very gratefully and obediently yours,
“cc


I still neither wrote nor did I once think of the case in
the evening, but I received a third letter.

“Nov. 28, 1853.

“ Dear Sir,—I trust I shall not be troublesome, but think
you will like to know howI go on. My voice is certainly
stronger, and I feel less pain in swallowing my food, or, rather,
in masticating it. I have not felt any particular influence
since I wrote last, except on the two occasions I now men-
tion ; then it was irresistible. First, on the 9th. I had not
had any power to sleep for several evenings, although I set
myself quite quiet, and I thought I might venture to a lec-
ture given at our institution upon the Ludicrous in Life; and,
although the audience were kept in a roar of laughter, I
could not resist the influence. The place was too crowded
for me to leave, and I sat partially asleep. My brother and
other friends sat by my side, and he led me home, my eyes
fast closed. You know, dear Sir, if this was imagination. I
did not sleep again until the 20th. I thought I might ven-
ture to the evening service at church, but I was obliged to
leave and got home just in time, as I had to walk to bed
with my eyes fast closed: since then I have felt nothing of
the influence.


“T beg to remain, Sir, your obliged,
“ ”?


I did not hear again till April, when I wrote to enquire
after her, never having thought of her in the evening.
“ April 7, 1854.
“ Dear Sir,—It is singular, but I proposed writing to you
as yesterday, but was prevented. I now hasten to comply
with your request, and I am happy to tell you that I suffer


She experiences great benefit. 401


but little inconvenience from my throat; my voice is quite
strong, and I can now eat a sufficiency at one meal, and, ge-
nerally speaking, without pain. I cannot say I am perfectly
free from pain always, but I have not shed tears because I
could not take enough to appease hunger since you so kindly
interested yourself in my behalf. I have got through this
cold winter with but slight colds, and have ventured out in the
sharpest of the season. My duties this winter have not been
slight, but I have not given up a single day, or had recourse
to a drop of medicine. My eyes have been weak, and I con-
fess through my own folly ; for, as some said that all was ima-
gination, I endeavoured to keep my eyes open while under the
influence, and I fear I strained the nerves, for they have felt
inflamed ever since. I did not sleep except occasionally after
T last wrote : I now and then feel an inclination to do so, but
it goes off quickly. Could it be imagination? I have often
sat down and tried to sleep by thinking of mesmerism, but
never could : others have had the power over me I know ; and
when I did not know until dates were compared. I have
frequently wished my mesmeriser would test the experiment
without my knowledge of the time, the hour, or place: I
mean, some person not my relative. Would it not prove
that my imagination had nothing to do with the matter, and
satisfy many of the incredulous? I think I told you that so
strong was the influence that I went to sleep in the midst of
a lecture upon the Ridiculous in Life. I was led home with
my eyes fast closed.

“T fear I have trespassed too long upon your valuable
time, and it was the fear of troubling you that kept me silent
so long: any question I feel happy to answer,

** And beg to remain,
“Very gratefully and obediently yours,
it 3


”?


“ May 22, 1854.

“ Dear Sir,—I received your kind communication on Sa-
turday morning: I do indeed feel grateful for the interest
you take in my welfare. I felt the influence at six on Sa-
turday evening, and my eyes fast closed for nearly three
hours ; I then got up, had supper, and slept soundly through
the night again; last evening the same; to-night I have not
at present, and it is half-past seven: the cause you of course
know: I cannot tell; I feel a sensation about the brain and
eyes I can scarcely describe, but not the usual sleep. I feel
that you will like to hear, therefore will excuse my troubling
you with this so quickly,

“ And remain, dear Sir, yours faithfully,


“ ”


She is cured.


“ July 20, 1854.

“ Dear Sir,—I beg you will excuse my writing : I am now
staying a few days in London, and if you would allow me to
call, and name the day and time, I shall feel most happy
to do so. I am now quite well.


“ Yours very gratefully,


She called upon me, and I found her perfectly recovered.
I enquired again before drawing up the case.

“ Dec. 3, 1854.

“ Dear Dr. Elliotson,—I hasten to comply with your re-
quest, and am happy to state that I continue quite well, and
have within the last four months undergone an amount of
fatigue I could scarcely believe myself capable of.

“ T remain, dear Sir, yours very gratefully,
“c


From first to last I never once tried to mesmerise her or
send her to sleep, and I never once thought of her in the
evening.

A striking example of the power of imagination in one
of a family very susceptible of mesmerism and who were mes-
merised, and of the importance of its employment in the cure
of a disease, by Mr. Chandler, will be found in No. XVIII.


We thus have always acknowledged to a far greater ex-
tent than the opponents of mesmerism the power of imagina-
tion upon the human system in both health and disease, and
we thus do not hesitate to employ it for the alleviation and
cure of disease: whereas our adversaries, however loud they
are in proclaiming its force, never think of turning it to a
good account, and clamour about it as they do of chlo-
roform and ether solely from malice towards mesmerism.
Yet are we as certain as of the facts of gravitation and elec-
tricity that a power exists to which the term mesmeric has
been given. Those who deny it are grossly ignorant, I re-
peat the words, grossly ignorant, or they most unconscien-
tiously and barefacedly, though shortsightedly, ignore the ac-
counts of what they are bound to witness and to investigate
carefully.

Let them no longer ignore ; but let them reply if they
can to what Dr. Gregory has written in No. XX XVII.

To what Mr. Sandby has written in Nos. XX.; XXIV.,
p. 234; XXXV., p. 297; XL.

To No. IL., pp. 175, 176, 178, 190, 334.

No. IIT., p. 244. :


True Mesmerism without Imagination.


No. V., p. 53.

No. IX., pp. 38, 48, 515.

No. XII., pp. 477-8.

No. XVIL., Art. 1.

No. XVIII., Art. 4; also p. 129.

No. XIX., p. 243.

No. XLIV., p. 403, &e.

If I had time I could refer to many other parts of The
Zoist for proofs of mesmeric influence where imagination was
out of the question.

In our eleven volumes are splendid cures, many such as
medicine never produced: cures not of affections of the nerv-
ous system only, but of various organs, and not of merely
functional, but of structural diseases, deposits, inflammations,
ulcerations, &c., &c. Some of these cures were accomplished
in those who had no faith in mesmerism and submitted merely
to please their friends: some in persons who did not know
what was meant by the process, or did not know its ultimate
object : some in persons who scoffed at mesmerism: some in
children : some in the brute creation. In these eleven volumes
are some hundreds of painless operations, some terrific, per-
formed chiefly upon ignorant Indians under its influence,
that did well, neither terminating immediately or after some
days in death, as is happening every week from chloroform,
nor followed, as chloroform often is, by long unpleasant
symptoms. So with regard to the common effects of mes-
merism. The Zoist teems with examples of its power over
brutes, children, persons asleep, blind persons, and persons
unconscious of the agency, or, if conscious, not knowing
what it was for, or despising and defying its influence. More-
over, the various phenomena at first come without the patient
expecting any such result, and sometimes without his know-
ing that such phenomena ever happen in human beings, and
without the operator intending that they should come.

As to imagination, a person might imagine himself into
sleep ; but the mesmeric state is not sleep, it is sleep-waking
—a peculiar state of which patients are usually very or quite
ignorant, and in which various singular phenomena come
forth, some in ont patient, some in another, without the
operator knowing what they will be. Imagination may in-
deed produce this when once it has been produced in a pa-
tient and become known to him.


( 404 )


X. Case of Inflammation of the Periosteum, or membrane
covering the bones, of the leg, with disease of the bone
itself, illustrating the great value and marvellousness of
Mesmerism. Drawn up by the patient, John Kemp;
his employer and mesmeriser, Mr. Mitchell ; and com-
municated by Dr. Elliotson, his adviser.


‘* In his report to the Czar, Prince Menschikoff attributes his repulse on the
5th very much to the English rifle. From General Canrobert’s reports of the
siege it also appears, that, when the French rifle had got within 300 yards of the
batteries of Sebastopol, the Russian Artillerymen were compelled to use iron
shutters to the embrasures. Yet hitherto the self-sufficiency of our military men,
high and low, has succeeded in preventing the universal employment of this noble
weapon, and we cannot suppose that, of the 8,000 great souls who were so faithful
and so true to the pride of England on the 5th, so many as 1,000 were armed
with it. They who know thoroughly its use and power are quite certain, from
the configuration of the ground, and the respective positions of the Russian
advance and the English defence, that had every one of our immortal 8,000 been
armed with it they would not have lost a single man by the bayonet, nor very many
by the musket, while, of those who were neither killed nor wounded by shot or
shell, probably every man would have disposed of five Russians at the least—
indeed of every Russian within his range. No one who knows anything of the
battle of New Orleans, no one who has ever seen the Tyrol and knows what the
rifle did there, will doubt this.

“ It takes a little longer to learn the use of the rifle than of the musket, and
the soldier who is not so taught it as to become enamoured and proud of his
weapon, from a conviction of the power that it gives him, will not perhaps learn
to appreciate and cherish it until he has seen man after man of his enemies fall
before him. The Czar, however, is not going to wait until boards ‘ have re-
ported ;’ ‘ official forms have been complied with ;’ or stupid prejudices of routine,
precedent, and self-satisfied conceit have been humoured and overcome. He, we
learn by the news of this week, has lost no time in ordering regiments of Rifie-
men to be formed at once, and before next summer their balls will be in many
an English heart.

‘* Notwithstanding all this there is little prospect of getting the musket utterly
discarded and the rifle universally substituted amongst ourselves, unless the will
of the public can be evoked in the matter, just as it was regarding the soldiers’
clothing, their stocks, the hospital and medica! departments, and other shortcom-
ings and abuses which by that means have found remedy.

‘* A military man ought naturally to be the best judge of the best weapon for
a soldier’s use, and ours would be good ones, we dare say, were they not en-
thralled by the system to which they belong. How misleading must be the influ-
ence of that is clear from considering that the whole object of enlisting, feeding,
clothing, and forming a recruit is that he should be able, when called upon, to
throw an ounce of lead straight at an enemy from an iron tube, while our ‘ mi-
litary men’ have stood up to the last for giving a soldier a weapon that could not
by any possibility enable him to do this, and for rejecting a weapon that could.
It is now to be hoped that the public will at once unmistakeably insist upon it,
that all our men be every one armed with an excellent rifle with a Swiss or Ame-
rican stock, and taught to shoot with it as the Swiss and Americans do; that the
ball be no heavier than thirty-two to the pound; and that this be done as fast as
gunsmiths here, in America, and in the Low Countries, can make them. There
is no way of achieving this result but by the serious and decided action of the
public refusing any excuse or delay, and insisting upon immediate execution.” —
Examiner, Dec. 2, 1854.


Mr. John Kemp has Typhus fever. 405


From Mr. Mitchell to Dr. Elliotson.
Printing Office, Wardour Street, Soho,
November 14, 1854.

Dear Sir,—I have much pleasure in sending you the fol-
lowing instance of the success of mesmerism in a case of
abscess of what is called, I believe, the periosteum in the
leg: you may think it of sufficient importance to be for-
warded to The Zoist.

The patient, John Kemp, one of our compositors, is a
brother-in-law of Mrs. Kemp, whose case of severe neuralgia
is recorded in the Sixth Volume of The Zoist (No. XXIII.),
and who, I am happy to state, has experienced no relapse up
to this hour. The following is the patient’s statement of
his case :—

* 39, Little George Street, Euston Square,
* March 22, 1854.
To Dr. Elliotson.


“ Sir,—I have committed to paper all I can remember
of my late severe illness, and also how I was treated by my
club-doctor.

“On the 30th of September (1853), whilst following my
employment, I was taken suddenly ill with severe pains in
the head, sickness, and great depression of spirits. 1 imme-
diately applied to Mr. Woolley, of Moreton Terrace, Kentish
Town, and he directly ordered me a mustard-plaster to my
chest and to confine myself to my bed. He said it was an
attack of typhus fever.

“Oct. 1st. Very bad, but my doctor did not come to
see me.

“Oct. 2nd. Still worse, and quite delirious. My wife
sent for the doctor immediately, but he did not come till the
afternoon, and his excuse for not coming earlier was that he
had quite forgot me. However, he ordered me lotions and
medicine: but they were of no avail. Five days elapsed
before he or his assistant saw me again, during which time
my sufferings were painful in the extreme: my senses at
times entirely left me. I imagined that evil spirits were
hovering over me and tearing me to pieces, and also that I
was taken in my bed to a high mountain and birds of prey
picked my eyes out, and then I was dashed to pieces. And
oh! Sir, I shall never forget the sinful thoughts that came
into my head and of my planning some scheme to put an
end to my existence, for my life was a burden to me.

“During these five days my wife went regularly for the
medicine, but could see no doctor, and was told by a lad of
about 14, who used to mix my medicine, that I should soon


406 The disease of the leg begins.


get better, as the mixture was very strengthening that I was
taking. But I got worse, and my wife again sent for the
doctor; and he came in the afternoon, and ordered me a
fresh mixture. Having nothing in my stomach, and con-
stantly retching, I brought up nothing but lumps of blood.
I was so weak that I was obliged to be held up in bed. A
few days afterwards he came to see me again, and gave my
wife a few drops of another mixture, which was to be mixed
in water, to be given to me if I got worse, with strict injunc-
tions to keep it out of the way, as it was the most deadly
poison.

“TI gradually got better, and he advised me change of
air. I accordingly went into the country, but was obliged to
return in less than a week owing to severe pains in my right
leg. On my arrival I sent for Mr. Day, a surgeon, who
advised me to go into the hospital directly. 1 accordingly
became an in-door patient in the Middlesex Hospital on the
15th November under the care of Mr. De Morgan, who
treated me with the greatest kindness.

* Nov. 16th. Suffering the most excruciating pain from my
knee-cap down to my ancle: besides lying in anxious suspense
for twelve hours, picturing to myself what would be the
result, when Mr. Flowers, along with two other gentlemen,
came to me, and looked at my leg, and then left me. I
then went to sleep for about ten minutes, when I was awak-
ened by some one. The excitement 1 then felt was beyond
description. On my right hand a female was holding a basin
of hot water; and on my left another with bandages, tow,
&e. Two gentlemen then held me down on the bed, whilst
Mr. Flowers drew from his pocket a knife, cleaned it before
my eyes, and then, oh horror! made an incision just below
the knee-cap of about two inches. The inflammation of the
part from the knee to the ancle being very great at the time,
my sufferings were agonizing in the extreme. He then ordered
linseed-poultices and hot-water applications, and left me.

“ Noy. 17th. Was attended to by Mr. De Morgan. My
leg being still very bad, I was ordered to have iodine applied
to my leg every morning, but the pain still increased, my
rest was much broken both day and night, and my leg no
better.

“18th. Still very bad with severe pains in my left leg.

“19th. Had my left leg probed, and was ordered blue
ointment to be spread from the knee-cap to the ankle, but
with no beneficial results. Mr. De Morgan then ordered
Mr. Flowers to make an incision in my left leg, which he did
that afternoon. I was then placed under Mr. Bakewell:


Agonized by the Surgeons’ knives and probes. 407


previously to my being under him, Mr. Flowers told him it
was a very obstinate case, for he had cut me three times in
that place, and still the discharge would not flow. Three
days afterwards Mr. Bakewell probed my leg for about ten
minutes. The pain was so severe that I told him I could not
stand it any longer, and entreated the nurse to give me a
glass of water, for I felt very faint. He said, whilst probing
my leg, ‘Do you hear that?—there is a piece of bone to
come away from here,’ meaning my leg.

“Thus I continued to be week after week tortured with
iodine, blue ointment, &c., up to the lst of January, when
I was advised by my relatives to leave the hospital, which I
did on the 3rd, after having had my legs cut about eight times
and probed many more.

“T was an out-patient for three weeks, when Mr. Henry
having told me I had better come into the hospital again and
that he would see what could be done for me, I did not go
again. The idea of going into the hospital again to be tor-
tured was death to me to think about.

“One of the principal reasons for my leaving the hos-
pital was, that I was strongly advised to try mesmerism: and
thankful am I that I took that advice, for I may say that my
legs are all but well, and I can now walk with ease; whereas
before I was mesmerised I could hardly hobble along even
with a stick.

“Since I have been under mesmeric treatment I have
had three lumps formed in one of my legs, but I am happy
to say that they have been entirely dispersed by mesmerism ;
and I have not the least doubt in stating that, if I had been
mesmerised in the first instance, there would have been no occa-
sion to have cut my legs about, and I should have been spared
all the horrible agony I have gone through.

“T now conclude with my sincere thanks to my employer,
Mr. Mitchell, of Wardour Street, for whose kindness to me
during my illness I cannot find words to express my grati-
tude, and to whom I am indebted for my recovery.

“ Hoping that I have not trespassed too much on your
valuable time,

“1 remain, Sir, your obedient servant,
“ Joun Kemp.”


On leaving the Middlesex Hospital, he was mesmerised
by his brother for a few days, who however was prevented
by his occupation from continuing his kind office, and there-
fore I was induced to undertake it.


408 Great benefit from Mesmerism immediately.


When I took the case in hand (Jan. 16th), John Kemp
had left the hospital about a fortnight, and could with diffi-
culty walk even a short distance supported by a stick. The
wound was of a very formidable character, and inflammation
extended several inches around it. He was exceedingly
weak, and complained much of want of rest in the night.

Two or three passes were sufficient to throw him into the
sleep-waking state, and the happiness and comfort depicted
on every feature from the moment the sleep-waking state
began, amply repaid the trouble, if such a word may be used
here. The leg, which in his natural state could not be touched
without very great pain, might, in the mesmeric state, be firmly
grasped without the slightest discomfort.

After being mesmerised for two or three days, his natural
sleep throughout the night was deep and refreshing. Indeed
so soundly did he sleep that, even after nine or ten hours
of sleep, he required to be aroused.

As I did not presume to interfere with the medical treat-
ment, having no wish to influence him in that respect, and
as he was still an out-patient of the hospital, he went there
at the end of the first week, when he was told that there
were pieces of bone to be taken away, and that he must
return to the hospital for that purpose. This distressed him
very much, and somewhat shook my confidence. I felt the
responsiblity too great; and at this stage I therefore sought
your kind advice, which was most readily, and I need hardly
say, gratuitously given. You stated that the improvement
in his general health was so great as to warrant the hope that
nature aided by mesmerism would accomplish the cure; that
very likely there might be portions of diseased bone to come
away, but that this would be accomplished without the aid of
any surgical operation.

Thus encouraged by your valuable opinion, I continued
to mesmerise him daily and at the same hour, for about three
quarters of an hour at each sitting. My mode of proceeding
was,—to throw him into the sleep, which, as I before ob-
served, was produced by two or three passes: nay, a single
slow pass was sufficient for this effect; and then to make
passes down the leg, frequently pointing over the wound.
The latter manipulation rendered the leg very rigid, and
invariably caused him to pass into the deep sleep. The
rigidity was very remarkable. When he was in sleep-waking,
whatever part of the frame was touched, whether hand, arm,
leg, or head, it became immediately fixed, and would remain
so till desmesmerised. This was found very convenient ; for,


Quite cured and better than for years. 409


as I was occasionally called away while mesmerising him,
there was no danger in leaving him, and I invariably found
him in the exact position in which I had left him.

At the end of a fortnight, he no longer required his stick,
he was able to resume his work, and the improvement in his
health was very marked. He continued to sleep soundly
each night, his appetite increased, and his countenance as-
sumed a healthy hue, which was observed by all who knew
him. Occasionally proud flesh appeared about the wound,
but the application of a piece of linen steeped in mesmerised
water soon removed it. At the end of the third week a piece
of bone came from the wound, and shortly afterwards another
piece.

His general health appearing to be quite established, I
determined to bestow all the sitting upon the leg, and told
him one day that I would mesmerise his leg only, without
putting him to sleep. However, to my astonishment, I had
not made above a dozen passes before his head began to
droop, and in a few seconds he was asleep. The next day I
proceeded in the same way, but without making a remark,
and with the same result. Subsequently, on several occa-
sions, I have got a friend to keep him in conversation while
I made the passes down the leg, in order to ascertain how
long the influence could be resistedin these circumstances.
But scarcely any difference of time in passing into the sleep-
waking was perceptible; and it was very curious to observe
his passing into it from the ordinary state of consciousness
while replying to questions put to him. The replies at first
would be given in a distinct tone of voice ; then there seemed
a confusion of the ideas, with a slow utterance; and then
the voice as it were died away, or he would stop in the middle
of a sentence. Then if the conversation were continued after
he had passed into sleep-waking, he was entirely ignorant of
what had just passed in the natural state, though he would
answer readily any question asked in this latter state. Surely
the solution of these interesting phenomena must be sought
elsewhere than in the power of imagination.

Mesmerism was thus continued for ten weeks, at the end
of which time the wound was entirely healed. This would
have been accomplished in much less time probably, but for
two accidents which unfortunately threw him back. The first
was, his being struck on the leg by a shutter while returning
from his work ; and the second, and more severe injury, was
caused by his falling over a pail of water which had been
carelessly left in the way. His leg is now perfectly sound,
and his general health better than it has been for years.


410 Formerly cross-mesmerised.


I have reason to think that the greatest kindness and
attention were bestowed upon him in the hospital: but it
must be regretted that mesmerism was not employed during
the necessary operations upon his leg. H'&d it been em-
ployed, all suffering would have been spared during these ope-
rations, and any amount of sleep obtained at any time, asa
single slow pass, or a steady look for one minute, would have
rendered him insensible to all pain. This fact could not have
failed to carry conviction to the minds of the medical gen-
tlemen who witnessed its great power and inestimable value.*

As the question may be naturally asked why mesmerism
was not had recourse to at an earlier period of his illness,
when it was known the patient was so very susceptible of the
influence, it is necessary to state that about seven years ago
he was the subject of severe cross-mesmerism. At that time
Mr. Spencer Hall delivered a course of lectures on mesmerism
at an institution in Holborn. At one of the lectures Mr.
Kemp was present, and, while sitting immediately in front
of the lecturer, listening to the introductory remarks, he be-
came unintentionally influenced by Mr. Hall, and passed into
the mesmeric sleep. He was subsequently conducted to the
platform in the sleep-waking state, and, while he was in this
state, Mr. Hall exhibited a series of interesting experiments
upon him. He was then allowed, without being properly
demesmerised, to retire to the back of the platform, where a
portion of the audience was seated. Here he was an object
of curiosity to those among whom he sat; and he was again
mesmerised by a fellow-workman, who had accompanied him
to the lecture. On his way home, as I afterwards learnt, he
fell down in the street in a fit, and subsequently had no
knowledge how he at length got home. On coming to work
in the morning he was found to be very unwell, and shortly
fell down in a fit. He was immediately mesmerised by the
person who had accompanied him to the lecture, and by whose
kindness in mesmerising him he had, a few months prior
to this occurrence, been cured of an affection of the heart.
In the sleep-waking state, he now exhibited every symptom
of insanity ; was very violent, and expressed great indigna-
tion with Mr. Hall, whom he fancied to be present. He was
removed into the open air, and no one but the mesmeriser
allowed to be present: then he was thrown into a deep
mesmeric sleep for some time, by continuing the passes
longer than usual: on passing again from the deep sleep into


* Some mesmerists will doubt this, and others who may not doubt this will
doubt that the convinced medical gentlemen would have given the poor fellow the
benefit of the fact.—Zoist. °


Mesmerism always brought him out of a fit. 411


sleep-waking, he directed cold water to be poured upon his
head. This was done for an hour or two, and had the effect
of relieving him: after this he was again thrown into the
deep sleep, and left in a room by himself for some hours,
when he was demesmerised. He awoke perfectly collected,
and much better, but still complained of pain at the back
part of the head. This continued for several days, when
Mr. Hall, who had discovered where he was employed, called
to ask him to attend his lectures for the purpose of exhibit-
ing experiments, and offered to pay him for his services.
This was at once declined. On the mischievous effects which
had resulted from his attendance at the lecture being men-
tioned, Mr. Hall instantly offered to mesmerise him with a
view of affording relief, and made long passes from head to
foot for about five minutes, and then woke him. The patient
stated that he now felt well, and was entirely free from pain.
Mr. Hall expressed astonishment, and said it was the most
extraordinary case in connexion with mesmerism that he had
met with,* adding that since that lecture he had felt very
unwell himself and been under medical treatment, but that,
while demesmerising this young man, he found instant relief.

This circumstance so affected Mr. Kemp that he could
seldom be prevailed upon to submit to be mesmerised by any
one, though during the following years he had several severe
attacks of illness. When he was attacked with the fits, as
he was passive, mesmerism was always adopted, and with
instant success. His antipathy was at last wholly overcome
only by the severe suffering occasioned by the surgical ope-
rations upon his leg.

A month or two after his cross-mesmerism, he lost his
mother, to whom he had been much attached: and on the
day of the funeral fell down in a fainting fit by the grave
while the body was being lowered to its resting-place. This
fit he had prognosticated while suffering from the cross-
mesmerism on the day following Mr. Hall’s lecture ; and so
confident was I, from previous observation, of the fulfilment
of his prediction, that I recommended the fellow-workman
before mentioned to accompany the funeral, which he did,
for the purpose of watching Kemp, and to guard against
mesmeric disturbance which had recently been productive of
such distressing consequences. The fit came on; he was
quietly removed to a little distance, mesmerised, and woke
collected and walked home. For some months such fits were


* Such things are very common when no caution is observed, as the pages of
The Zoist shew.—Zoist.


412 Tooth-ache transferred.


of frequent occurrence. Without the slightest warning he
would drop while at his work in a state of insensibility. He
was always immediately mesmerised into sleep-waking, and
in this state he would direct what was to be done to relieve
him, and his measures invariably succeeded. These fits oc-
curred for about eight months, the intervals between them
gradually increasing.

He was also subject to ulcerated throat, and in one very
severe attack his brother called to see him and found him
suffering exceedingly. He had not been able to swallow
anything but a little liquid for two days. He consented to
be mesmerised by his brother. Instant relief was afforded,
and, to the astonishment of his brother, he took up a raw
chestnut and ate it with great relish, swallowing it without
the slightest inconvenience. I need hardly say that on awak-
ing he was quite unconscious of anything that had taken
place. This occurred on Friday, and on the following Monday
he returned to his work.

On another occasion, when he had just recovered from one
of his fainting fits above mentioned, and was sitting in the
printing office to regain his strength before going home, I
found him in the mesmeric state, and being puzzled to ac-
count for this, I ascertained that a lad, close by the place
where Mr. Kemp was sitting, observed him to be slipping
from his seat, and had raised him up, and thus unconsciously
mesmerised him. The lad, who is totally ignorant of mes-
merism, was desired to make the tranverse passes and to
blow in his face, when Kemp at once awoke.

A singular occurrence took place one day. One of our
apprentices was suffering from severe tooth-ache. Kemp
volunteered his services to mesmerise the affected part ; in a
few minutes he dropped into the mesmeric sleep-waking, but
complaining sadly of tooth-ache. The apprentice had ob-
tained instant relief, but from appearance had transferred
his enemy to Kemp with good interest. The scene was beau-
tifully interesting, but laughable; the whole being the work
of a few minutes. I need hardly add that Kemp was soon
relieved of the tooth-ache on his jaw being mesmerised, but
vowed he would never mesmerise for tooth-ache again.

Another time, just before taking his breakfast, which
had been brought in to him, he was seized with a fit, and
in falling struck his head violently on some stone pave-
ment. He was instantly mesmerised, and while in sleep-
waking ate his breakfast as if nothing had happened. When
awoke, he looked at once for his breakfast, which he was on
the point of commencing when he was seized, and could not


&
Cured by Mesmerism alone when as bad as ever. 413


be persuaded that he had already eaten it ; his manner clearly
proving that on being roused the mind reverted to the instant
of time when he was seized : the interval was evidently blank
to him, as I believe it is in the majority of cases, if not in-
variably.

When I undertook to mesmerise him, I assured him that
no experiments whatever should be made with him, and there-
fore my attention was directed solely to the production of the
sleep and the mesmerising of the leg, and I rejoice to say
that such have been the beneficial results.

It may be well to mention, that the susceptibility to the
influence gradually wore off in proportion as his health
seemed to improve, so that, when I last mesmerised him, it
occupied me twenty minutes to throw him into the sleep.

With many thanks for your great kindness and advice in
this case, '

I remain, dear Sir, yours respectfully,
To Dr. Elliotson. Joun MircHeL..


It must distress any person who feels for other sentient
beings to reflect upon the often repeated agony which this
poor young man suffered, and that he might have escaped
it altogether had the surgeons of the Middlesex Hospital em-
ployed mesmerism in his case. Every probing and every cut
would have been made without sensation: and probably in-
deed no probing and no cutting would have been necessary,
but the cure silently, perfectly, and by no means slowly
effected by the mesmerism only, as was the case when the
leg was as bad as ever after he had left the hospital and when
mesmerism was the sole remedy employed.

Joun Ex.iorson.


XI. Some rapid Cures by Dr. Esdaile. Communicated by
Dr. Elliotson.


‘* Never was there so great an appearance of wisdom, nor so much exercise
_of study, in so many faculties, in so many regions, for this last forty years.
Doctors are dispersed everywhere, in every castle, in every borough, and espe-
cially by the students of two orders, which has not happened except for about
forty years. And yet there never was so much ignorance, so much error.’’—
Rocer Bacon. Quoted by Dr. S. Jebb in his Preface to Roger Bacon’s Opus
Majus.


My dear Dr. Elliotson,—Since we cannot get our or-
thodox brethren to benefit their patients by the curative


powers of mesmerism, we must do our duty by shewing the
VOL, XII. PF


414 Dr. Esdaile cures a hand, a breast, and a tooth.


public how they can often effectually help themselves, and be
independent of orthodox doctors and physic on many painful
occasions. Unfortunately mesmerism partakes of the uncer-
tainty of all human means of cure, but it often enables us to
cure even acute diseases in the simplest and most expeditious
manner, of which the following is an instance, and most
persons may do as much among their friends when they meet
with susceptible constitutions.

About two years ago, I reported to you the wonderful
effects of mesmerism upon my sister-in-law, who was suffer-
ing from nervous exhaustion and irritability of the brain and
spine. Her health has been wonderfully good ever since, and
she paid me a visit last week to recruit a little after the fa-
tigues of weaning a child. She awoke one morning with
pain and stiffness in her right hand, and complained a good
deal of it for two days. On the second evening, being seated
by her on a couch, I examined her hand and found it to be
considerably swelled and painful on pressure; upon which I
said, “ If you are still sensitive to mesmerism, I dare say that
I could cure this. Place your hand on the couch, and let me
try.’ She did so, and I made a few passes over the hand ;
but remembering that she used to have uncomfortable feel-
ings about the heart before going to sleep, I said, without
looking up at her, “ Don’t look; I do not desire to put you
to sleep.” She made no reply, and on looking at her I
found her to be already profoundly entranced, with her eyes
wide open and fixed. She shortly awoke with a start on
being spoken to; and on moving her hand found that she
did so freely; and next morning the swelling was quite
gone.

One day after dinner, she appeared very uneasy and went
and lay down, pressing her hands upon her breasts, which,
on enquiry, she confessed to be very painful, swelled, and
knotty from the accumulation of milk. I made passes from
the chest to her feet, and she instantly went to sleep, awak-
ing after half an hour lively and free from pain: next morn-
ing her breasts were soft and easy, and have continued so
ever since. In a letter just received from her, she says,
“It is singular that I have not had the slightest return of
annoyance from my milk since James so kindly spirited it
away.”

On the last day of her stay with us, she was obliged to
leave the table on account of violent tooth-ache, and on her
return, I said jokingly, “ You need not guffer any pain in
my company,” making some passes over her cheek at the
same time, and she almost immediately cried out in astonish-


A man vain of his knowledge is mad. 415


ment, “It’s gone!” The pain did not return while she was
with us.

All this immediate and complete relief to three distinct
and painful affections was procured without the least discom-
fort to the patient or to the family circle; whereas if our
orthodox brother bolus had been called in, she would have
been lotioned, potioned, and motioned for a week, and the
house turned most needlessly into a hospital. This, I repeat,
most medical men may often do, if they please; and if they
will not, then people should help themselves, and do without
them.

Yours very sincerely,
James Espal.e.
Fairmount, Perth, Dec. 10th, 1854.


XII. Extraordinary recovery of a young person, after being
eleven years confined to her bed perfectly unable to move
hand or foot. By Capt. Fatconer Mixes.

‘*Man is incapable of perfect wisdom in this life; it is hard for him to as-
cend towards perfection, easy to glide downwards to falsehoods and vanities: let
him then not boast of his wisdom, or extol his knowledge: what he knows is
little and worthless, in respect of that which he believes without knowing: and
still less in respect of that which he is ignorant of. He is mad who thinks highly
of his wisdom ; he most mad, who exhibits it as something to be wondered at.”
—Rocer Bacon, Opus Majus, p. 15.

Azsovut the commencement of April, 1854, some influential

ladies called upon me to consult me about a young person, a

Miss Dunne, of Kells, in whom they appeared greatly in-

terested. They stated that she was about 26 years of age,

and had been for the last eleven years perfectly unable to
stir hand or foot, and that everything she ate was imme-
diately thrown up again; that she had a continuous spas.
modic twitching in the face, and swooning off frequently ;
she suffered also from the most distressing breathing, with a
severe cough. Every means had been tried that medical
skill could devise without any relief whatever: at last one
medical gentleman, whose name I regret to say I have for-
gotten, recommended that mesmerism should be tried. Con-
sequently her friends called upon me to consult me in the
matter. I said I would with pleasure do what I could for
her. She was accordingly brought to Dublin, and placed in

lodgings near me, on the 17th of April, 1854.

When I saw her first, I found her after her journey by
train in such a state of utter prostration that I really did not
think she could live an hour: her breathing was so laborious


416 A rapid and complete cure.
and distressing that you might have heard her in the street.
She was no sooner out of one swoon than she was off into
another. Her servant could not leave her for an instant,
applying stimulants to her nose. I mesmerised her for about
twenty minutes, and quieted her considerably. The next
day I found her much the same: she had recovered from her
journey, but was, as usual, utterly unable to move. If she
were raised in the least, her head would fall down perfectly
helpless as in an infant of a day old; and she was fearfully
emaciated. I mesmerised her three times a day for about
fifteen minutes each, without any marked results. On the
Monday week I first began to find her getting under the in-
fluence, and was able by tractive passes without contact to
raise her hand. On the tenth day I got her pretty well under
the influence, and by tractive passes from the foot of the bed
was enabled to raise her up and then gradually allow her to
sink back again, accordingly as I moved my hand. I found
also I could perfectly control the violent breathing by placing
one hand upon her forehead, the other on the diaphragm,
however violent it might be: I was able also to communicate
great strength to her by holding both hands for a few
minutes.

Her case now becoming known, a great many influential
persons, medical and others, came to see her, amongst them
His Grace the Archbishop of Dublin.

On the 8th of May she was able for the first time to dress
herself, and then when under the mesmeric influence I made
her get out of bed with my assistance. From this date I
made her dress daily, and practised her frequently in getting
up and walking about the room: of course, with assistance.
Her delight on first sitting up and looking out of the window
was really quite extraordinary.

About this time Sir Henry Marsh very kindly came to
see her, and examined her case minutely. He was greatly
astonished, and was much struck at my being able so quickly
to stop the violent breathing, and which he said was most
difficult to manage.

She continued to improve daily under my treatment: the
spasmodic affection of the face had quite left her, the sick-
ness of stomach nearly ceased, and in the middle of June
was able to go out to walk, and be drawn about in a Bath
chair. She is at present able to walk remarkably well with-
out the slightest assistance, and can go up and down two
flights of stairs as quickly as any one, and, until the cold
weather set in, was out daily walking, and riding a donkey :
she has also grown quite fat. But I thought it advisable to


Science is concerned with the natural only. 417


keep her near me during the winter for fear of any return.
In spring, please God, she will return home truly a new
creature.

She has been visited by numbers, both medical and others,
who are all quite astonished at her recovery ; and indeed it
is no wonder, for she was apparently the most hopeless case
I ever saw. Certainly it proves that mesmerism, with God’s
blessing, without which we can do nothing, is indeed a
powerful agent; and from experience I am satisfied that in
most cases where mesmerism has proved unsuccessful, it
arises solely from want of perseverance in the treatment.
Now one remarkable feature in Miss Dunne’s case, is, that
she was not brought under the influence for ten days, and
though she became afterwards very sensitive to mesmeric in-
fluence, she has never been put into an unconscious state.

Her friends look upon the case as almost miraculous ; but
to God be all the praise—to Him be all the glory.

Merton, Cullenswood, Dublin,
Dec. 6th, 1854.


XIII. More frightful mischief from spirit fancies.


“ According to Paracelsus and his school, besides material and immaterial
beings there are elementary spirits, which hold an intermediate place,—sylvans,
nymphs, gnomes, salamanders, &c., by whose agency various processes of en-
chantment may be acquired, and things apparently supernatural explained. Thus
the spiritualist scheme dealt with a world of its own by means of fanciful inven-
tions and mystic visions, instead of making any step in the study of nature.’”’—
The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, founded upon their History. By the
Rev. William Whewell, B.D. Vol. ii., p. 9.


Science is the knowledge of nature and nothing else, and is
therefore concerned with facts only, which must be ascer-
tained by observation and experiment and by reasoning on
facts. The science of mesmerism and all that relates to it
excludes all dreamy fancies and superstitions. Our pages
have been devoted to mesmeric and cerebral science, and
we have set ourselves against the admixture of dreamy
fancies with them, holding forth the baneful consequences of
this ignorance and folly, and caring nothing for the pain we
might give in mentioning instances of its direful effects.

We extract the following from the new edition of Mr.
Townshend’s Mesmerism proved True :—

“‘With regard to Table-turning, and Table-talking, the muscular


hypothesis does not satisfy me a whit more than when I wrote my
book. On the contrary, I have lately seen some curious cases of


|
j
|
i
|
|


418 The real cause of Table-turning and Table-talking.


Table-motion, which confirm me in the idea that certain individuals
under certain conditions dispense an imponderable force, by very
strong volition, and very slight contact, from the brain to the object
which they touch. I have seen a table violently agitated, when only
the tips of the fingers of one or two persons, in whom I have thorough
trust, were laid upon it. But what has struck me most was the
result of some experiments made at my house in London, with an
instrument called a psychograph—a very delicate instrument for
testing slight agencies—somewhat resembling a pentegraph in form
and contrivance. The different way in which it was influenced by
different persons, who lightly laid a finger on it, was extremely
remarkable. Some persons had no effect upon it at all. I had very
little ; but a young lady, Miss E. C. (the daughter of a distinguished
authoress who is now, alas, no more), in spite of her own utter incre-
dulity, in the beginning of the trial, produced, by the lightest touch,
so powerful an effect upon the instrument, that it did not merely
move, it few, and darted about, like a needle under the starts of the
strongest electricity.

**In addition to this, I, on this occasion, received confirmation
of my notion, that the brain is adequate to produce all the most
mysterious phenomena of what is termed ‘ Spirit-rapping.’

“‘ The aunt of Miss E. C., was placed in communication with her
niece by lightly touching her, and then thought of the name of some
person ; upon which the farther end of the psychograph, which held
a pointer over an alphabet, went over, successively, such letters as
spelt out the name thought of. Some of the first letters of a name
which I thought of were also pointed to, but I seemed to have less
influence and less Mesmeric relation with Miss E. C. than her aunt
had, and the experiment was incomplete.

** Since my return to Lausanne, I have seen, in my own house,
what is called ‘ Table-talking ;’ and I had every reason to believe in
the good faith of the parties concerned in the experiment. The
communication was kept up by the leg of the table, lifting up and
rapping, as the alphabet was called over. The answers were curious,
but entirely confirmed me in my belief that action (perhaps uncon-
scious action) of the brain calls forth the answers that are (without
a shadow of evidence) attributed to spiritual and external agency.
The moving force belongs, I believe, to persons peculiarly endowed,
who, from what I observed, are, during the operation, in a peculiar
state of excitement, perhaps semi-mesmeric. They sigh frequently
while they are influencing the table, exactly like persons under in-
cipient sleep-waking. The answers, also, are just of that strange,
capricious, semi-rational kind, as are answers verbally given by im-
perfectly mesmerised persons—a sort of characteristic of table-
talking which induced a friend of mine, who was rather given to the
spirit-hypothesis, to say, that ‘one should be rather apt ta attribute
the answers obtained by spirit-rapping to the agency of capricious,
half-malignant fairies, and Puck-like elves, than to spirits of an
elevated rank.’ There is no need, however, to go out of this world
for our solution. As a late paper in’The Zoist (by the Rev. Dr.


Striking results of spirit superstition. 419


Cumming) admirably remarks, the answers to querists, in the Spirit-
rapping line, all savour of the individual who puts the question. ‘I
have read’ (says Dr. Cumming) ‘every pamphlet I could find on the
subject, from Mr. Dibdin, one of the best and most pious men in
London, to Mr. Godfrey, Mr. Gilson, and others who have written
in favour of their views; and, in reading those various interesting
works, I noticed that each enquirer of the table got all his answers
very much in the direction of his own wishes and predilections.’

“It is so. And what is remarkable (at least I found it so, in
my case) the answers savour of the querist more than of the, medium.

** While a lady was influencing the table, and I putting my ques-
tions, I received answers that confirmed all my theologic views ; with
which, however, the lady was previously unacquainted. In every
reply, I found (as it were) the echo of my own brain. And I cannot
say that I flatter myself to be so infallible in my opinions (however
conscientiously formed) as to call down a sanction to them from a
superior world. I created what was answered to me.

“Thus, I deny not the facts. I explain them; and that in such
a way as to steady the brain down to this world—a world that has
quite enough marvels of its own to occupy us healthily.”

*€ Since I published Mesmerism proved True, 1, in passing through
the town of B , called on a family, of whom, some years ago,
I had seen a good deal. They are of the Swedenborg persuasion;
all of them amiable, all of them talented, all of them—from the
fragile mother to the pale, large-eyed youngest daughter—seers of
spirits, .and dreamers of dreams. To hear the talk of such a family
is like being in another world. They speak of unseen things as
familiarly as of a garter. They live so alone, and so abstracted, that
their language is scarcely of this earth.

“ Highly interesting is a visit to such persons—but deeply
painful too. I saw, manifestly, health, usefulness, reason itself, de-
parting under the belief of spirit-intercourse. Who could look at
the attenuated frame, care-worn face, and large dilated eye of the
especial ghost-seer—the youngest daughter (whom I will call Olivia),
without, a sigh of pity, and a wish that, in her mind, wild belief
might be superseded by true philosophy ?

“She told me in quick, low, hurried accents, which almost
sounded like breathings from a ghostly visitant, that ‘the spirits’
had, a few nights before, played a piece of music to her, in which
she had heard the sound of various instruments. To recall the piece
in all its grandeur was for her impossible ; but she recollected, and
indeed had written down, after the unearthly visitors had departed,
a faint idea of the strain. As I knew her to be an accomplished
performer both on harp and piano, I asked to hearit. She sat down
to the piano, and played a sort of march, certainly the wildest and
most wonderful thing I ever heard. It positively thrilled me by its
unearthliness, and the fair performer, while she played it abstractedly,
and seemed lost to the outer world, knew how to pour into it the
effect of various instrumeats—now near, now far, now high, now
low, now dying away in the finest diminuendo, now swelling up, as


420 Swedenborg must have been influenced by Behmen.


if upon the midnight breezes, into a storm of harmony. And all the
time, the performer’s eye how rapt, how dreamy! Such a strain
from such a sybil-looking person might almost have worked belief of
its supernatural origin.

“As I was taking my leave of Olivia, she startled me by saying
in her singular suppressed tones, ‘ Your mother will be very glad to
hear some news of you from me.’ (Olivia knew my mother, who
has been long dead.) I answered by a question, ‘Cannot my mother,
if a spirit, obtain news of me for herself?’ ‘Oh no! answered my
fair visionary, ‘the spirits dwell in different circles of the spirit-
world, and the higher circles cannot communicate with the lower, or
with this earth, save by means of mediums.’ I felt, as Charles
Lamb says, ‘I knew not the laws of that land,’ so I could not pre-
sume to question them.

** However, I could not help remarking to Olivia that this sort
of visionary communication must be very bad for the medium’s
health, and a great strain upon the nerves. Olivia owned it was so,
and added with a sigh, ‘ Do not wish for such a power—do not try
for it—do not ask for it!’ I assured her, with all sincerity, that
such a power was the very /ast thing I should covet ; adding men-
tally that I prayed that Olivia herself might be cured of those delu-
sions, which were tending directly to insanity.”


XIV. Postscript to the article on Swedenborg.


In the hurry of forwarding my remarks on Swedenborg, to
be in time if possible for the October number of The Zoist,
I forgot to mention, that many of the Baron’s disciples
declare he never could have derived any of his ideas from
Behmen, since there is a letter extant, in which he declares
that he never perused the works of his predecessor. This
letter I have read, and the impression which it left on my
mind is, that it affords no evidence whatsoever that the me-
ditations of Behmen did not influence the mind of the learned
Swede. Behmenism was the dominant form of religious
mysticism, throughout protestant Europe, for more than a
century after the death of its author. And to suppose there-
fore that so universal a reader as Swedenborg could have
been altogether free from the action of the extatic Sutor, is
simply absurd. The power of a master-spirit is incalculable.
His principles, like a subtle aura, pervade the whole atmo-
sphere of thought, and penetrate by multitudinous interme-
diate agencies into the most sheltered recesses of mind.
How much of Platonism do we find in the works of men who
never read a line of the Grecian sage? Behmen, we reassert,
was an important link between the religious mysticism of the


A A tt ts


ns


Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c. 421
past and the present, and in so far as Swedenborgianism
agrees with his system we have a right to consider it deriva-
tive, seeing that it was the later of the two. Such are the
canons of criticism applied to all schools of speculation,
ancient and modern, and without which no intelligible his-
tory of philosophy could by possibility be written.

J. W. Jackson.


BOOKS RECEIVED.


The \.ustRatep Practical Mesmerist, curative and scientific. By William
Davey. Edinburgh; 1854.

This is an excellent manual: with sixteen good representations of different
mesmeric processes.


Bulletin de V Athénée Magnétique de Lyon; Journal des Sciences Psycho-
Physiques. Sept., Oct., Nov., Dec., 1854. Lyon.

The Brain in relation to the Mind. By Joseph Swan. Longman, London,
1854.

Mesmerism proved True. By the Rev. Chauncy Hare Townshend, A.M.
New Epirtion, with a new Preface. Bailliére, London, 1855.

Errors dispelled : or, Mesmerism without Sleep and Mesmerism with Medicine.
By S. D. Saunders, Medical Mesmerist, Clifton. London, Bailliére, 1855.

The British Journal of Homeopathy. October, 1854. Groombridge, London.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


We regret that, though we have exceeded our usual limits, we have no room
for Dr. Elliotson’s case of cure of Delirium Tremens with Mesmerism only :
nor his case of cure of Fistula in Ano condemned to operation by a hospital
surgeon: nor for Mr. Tubbs’s and Mr. Parker’s interesting collections of mes-
meric cures. The honesty of these two gentlemen in daily and hourly combining
mesmerism with their ordinary practice, are shining examples. Their cases will
not fail to appear in our next, together with the continuation of our account of
Reichenbach’s new work.

We thank our Lincoln correspondent for pointing out to us the vagaries of
the wise and wonderful surgeon Bottomley of Croydon. The elegant old gen-
tleman will not be forgotten in our Number on the first of April. We have no
doubt that he is descended from Bottom the weaver, and has had Jey added to the
family name in honour of his roaring like a “ Lion,” spouting in “ Ercles’ vein,”
like his great ancestor, and in addition Yelling at mesmerism “ like anything.”
‘* It appears by his small light of discretion that he is on the wane: but yet, in
courtesy, in all reason, we must stay the time.”—Midsummer Night’s Dream,
act v., sc. 1.

We feel obliged to the Graf von Viettingholt, M.D., for his communication
of a case of mesmeric sleep-waking which arose out of a mesmeric sleep,—both
which were preceded by pains of the head and face, typhus and scarlatina, in suc-
cession, and followed by complete oblivion of all these occurrences.

Mrs. Flowerday.—We are informed by Mr. Tubbs that Mrs. Flowerday,
whose breast was removed last spring in the Mesmeric Infirmary of London
painlessly and without her knowledge, remains perfectly well. Every day she
may be seen fetching water from Mr. Tubbs’s pump, from which he allows all
his neighbours, rich and poor, to obtain excellent water from seven in the morn-
ing till ten at night.

We have to thank Mr. Janson for again generously advertizing The Zoist
and distributing many copies of it.


VOL. XII. GG


Obituary.


Mr. Colquhoun, the distinguished author of Isis Revelata, expired suddenly
at dinner in November. His early, learned, and courageous advocacy of the
truth of mesmerism in this able work will secure him a permanent name. He
wrote also a work on magic three years ago. Although a scholar and a gen-
tleman, he was very impetuous and prejudiced He would not examine phre-
nology or the experiments in phreno-mesmerism : and was credulous and in-
credulous, and very bitter against phrenologists and those who were not spi-
ritualists nor of his religious and political creeds. But he was a veite man.


MESMERIC INFIRMARY.
36, WEYMOUTH STREET, PORTLAND PLACE.


Donations since September. P
8.

A Friend, per Capt. Hudson, Liverpoo! weveive” 9-4
A Lady* (for the paces of Coals c the ‘Tnfirmary) . 10
Baume, J., Esq. ini cn weeoe 10
Blunt, Edward, Esq., ‘Kempsholt P Park i (Ged donation) Co ccessccces 0
Bond, Mrs.. pesecvceste 15
Chapman, Miss ... 10
Clover, Mrs., 35, Mile-end-road . iewneue Ge uaee 10
Craddock, George, Esq., 11, Camden-terrace, West Cede ceeccccece
G——, Miss ..... ee ce sesee
Hu—. Miss, per Adolphe Kiste, Esq. oe edden eves se
Hall, Richard, Esq., 21, en Camden-town ..........
Harvey, Charles, Esq. - wv ewbews ee
Herring, Rev. Armine, M. A., , Thorpe Rectory, "Norwich (2nd don.)..
P——, Miss Emma, per Mrs. John Cole Coles dna opened
Preston, Miss Jane, Norwich (3rd Ey see cececces
Ridley, Miss ... ceeceees
Runciman, Patrick, Esq. 3, Queen’ s-place Hammersmith ovecece
Saunders, Mrs. .. ceecce
Saunders, Miss .........
Shaw, Mrs. . pedo cccddeetene
Silver, Mrs., 5, "George- street, Hanover-square oe ceccdess
Skipper, Mrs. Henry, per Dr. Elliotson . ,
Sterling, Charles, Esq., Glasgow ......
Taylor, George, High-street, Camden-town


New Subscriptions since September.
Bird, John James, Esq., 22, Maddox-street, Hanover-square
Capern, Thomas, Esq., ‘Alpha-place, St. John’s Wood . wbees
Colvin, A. J., Esq., Gloster- place, Portman-square (additional
Edwards, Miss, per Mr. Saunders, Clifton .... .
Fagan, Christopher, Esq., 9, Albion-street, Hyde- park ..
Haywood, E. J., Esq., “The Ormond Club, Bloomsbury ””


—
—_


SCOCOrN RK Or NH NrKooroors
a
wurwuoqoooovrud


.
to
oct
— oa
oorrS
coocoooeooosoosesoosesosoosooo®


“one
an

oonrwro

ocooooo


_
i)


* This is the same lady who presented to the Infirmary much useful and
valuable furniture, has clothed the boy, paid for cleaning the windows, &c.,
&c. She declines being on the ’ Committee, though as a life governor she
is eligible; but she visits the oe hi two or three times a week, observing
everything and always enquiring what service she can render. She wishes her name
not to appear in print.


Errata.
p- 3, lL. 6, for “latter,” read fc


‘ormer.
p- 107, for “‘ say that it,’ ” read said it.
p. 108, for “ act upon," read cut up.


END OF VOL.


XII.


LONDON


MESMERIC INFIRMARY,


36, WEYMOUTH STREET, PORTLAND PLACE.


Tus Infirmary is established for the alleviation and cure of
diseases, and for the relief and prevention of pain, by means
of MesMerism.


It is supported by the voluntary contributions of those
persons who, knowing the medical efficacy of Mesmerism,
are anxious that the poor may partake of the benefits which
Mesmerism affords. It is also designed to extend a prac-
tical knowledge of the science ; for which purpose persons


are instructed, in the Institution, free of expense.


The Governors consist of donors of at least Ten Guineas
at one payment, and of Subscribers of at least One Guinea
annually: and for every such donation or annual subscrip-
tion the Governor is entitled to recommend one patient
annually.


The Institution is under the direction of a Medical and
General Committee, which meets every Wednesday at 2
o’clock ; and of a Committee of Ladies, one of whom visits
the Infirmary daily.


Non-subscribers are admitted to see the Infirmary between
2 and 4 o’clock, on shewing the card of a Governor.


The MOST REV. THE ARCHBISHOP OF DUBLIN.


Right Hon. the EARL OF CARLISLE.

Right Hon. the EARL STANHOPE.

Right Hon. the EARL OF DUNRAVEN.

The BARON DE GOLDSMID, F.R.S.

J. H. LANGSTON, Esq., M.P.

R. MONCKTON MILNES, Esq., M.P.

Rev. GEORGE SANDBY, M.A., Oxon.

Rev. CHAUNCY HARE TOWNSHEND, A.M., Canvas.
Professor AUGUSTUS DE MORGAN.

Professor GREGORY.


J. AMOR, Esq.
Col. BAGNOLD.
F. C. BEARD, Esq., Surgeon.
T. CHANDLER, Esq., Surgeon.
J. FRERE, Esq.
R. GOFF, Esq.


Miss BRINE.


Miss GOLDSMID.

Mrs. HERRING.

Dowager Lady MOLESWORTH.
Mrs. AUG. DE MORGAN.


Hesitent Secretary and Superintendent.
Mr. THOMAS GARDINER.


LIST OF OFFICERS


JOHN ELLIOTSON, M.D. Cantas. F.R.S.


President.


Vire- Presidents.


Creasurer.


Committer.


ADOLPHE KISTE, Esq.

T. PURLAND, Esq., Surg.-Dent.
T. A. SHAW, Esq.

Dr. E. 8S. SYMES.

M. H. TATHAM, Esq.

W. UNDERWOOD, Esq.


Covies’ Committe.


Mrs. SANDBY.
Miss SWANWICK.
Mrs. SYMES.

Mrs. WHATELY.»


AWE naan


Abadurn, —, Esq., Midderton Hall, ‘Cieantienties..

Adams, N., Esq., Surgeon, Lymington. .

Adlard, H., Esq., jun., Hatton-garden. . ‘on whee

Aglionby, Miss, Wigton Hall, Wigton, Cunbetend

Se TEE A. 53-5. b:0'cs wee bhetens ae eens be beak

Akroyd, Edward, Esq., Bankfield, Halifax ............

Allison, —, Esq., Edinburgh

Amor, J., Esq., New Bond-street. eeeee
Ditto (donation of money mapeniel by him in Mr.


Baume’s affair) .
Anonymous, enpeiive


Anson, S. H., Esq., Bichopeguios’ street.

Archer, Major, Hampton Court

Armytage, Mrs., Gaussin, Miesenbury. .

Arnold, —, Esq., Stamford, Essex .. Se Ee

Ashburner, Dr., York-place, Portman-square ..........
Se SOS 90°F 0 cce we een sansa ene OE ones


Ditto, a Lady by


Ashness, Dr., Clapham............


Bagnold, Colonel, 28, Hamilton-terrace, St. John’s Wood
Baldock, T., Esq., Dockyard, Devonport..............
Baikie, Dr. 11, Inverness-road, Bayswater ............
Bailey, Samuel, Esq., Burn Greave, Sheffield ..........


Bailliére, H.,


Esq., 219, Regent-street .


Ditto, for his daughter, who sonpeniall antes Mes.


EEE Gains ko bowen s oalale eaten aves'acrtnaewn
Bailliére, Miss, 219, Regent-street ..........-.00000-
Barnard, G. S., by W. Underwood, Esq...............


Barnes, James, Esq., 6, West-place, West-square
Barrett, Jonathan, Esq., Croydon ;
Barrett, Richard, Esq., Waddon. ........


Barrett, Rev. R., B.D.,
re eer ee et es pe


Senior Fellow of King’ 8 ‘College,


— om


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS.


Dons.


Ann Subs.


£s. ad
: 2 <
. ae®
100
1 1 0
: & &
g 4
>. 8
110
: & fs
=
1.49
s.4 4
» £9
>'4.-@
20 0


Barth, George H., Esq., 4, Mornington-crescent........
Barton, Edward, Esq., + aan Boundary-road,
St. John’s Wood .
H., Esq., 23,
Regent’s-park o*
Baume, P. P., Esq., Friern lalien, Barnet, Middlesex
Beard, Frederick Carr, Esq., Surgeon, Welbeck-street
Bell, Dr., Norwich wee
Benson, W. H., Esq., 22, Gesenteeaen .. ‘
Bentinck, the Lady Mary, Harcourt Sous, Cuveniide
square ches
Bertie, the Hon. Seeusiew C., ‘Serend Life penne re
Bettinson, Thomas, Esq., 21, Charles-street, St. John’s
Wood (Mrs. Bettinson — derived benefit at
the Infirmary) . °
Biggs, Wm., Esq., M.P., ditto..
PT ee eee ee


Batson, “Albert. salt Gloucester,


Bishop, John, Esq., Hastings
Black, Dr., Surrey-street, Strand. .
Black, Mrs., ditto ditto .
Blunt, Edward, Esq., Senpdeih-euh, Sues
Blythe, P. P., Esq., Sion House, Lower Clapton
Boutflower, Rev. Douglass, Exeter .........
Bowdoin, Miss Temple, 37, Gloucester-square...
Briggs, J., Esq., Nottingham-place, — nina.
Briggs, W., Esq., York. ‘ coscccceseewes
Brigstock, Mrs., 11, Hyde. nary MED sc cctncaivains
Brine, John, Esq., South-row, New-road............+-
Pe errr Tt eee
ee eee
ditto . Riis
=- GON. be Xs adee rane eats
Brine, Miss E., TD i609. 66 pe.nkensiohelnnss
Brine, Misses, collected by the... .. 0.2... 00sec cece cece
Ditto BN 63 és ocneeeneevew ts kiiewkh onus
Ditto ditto ..
Ditto, Servants of the .
Brown, W. Berry, Gothic Seen,
terrace, St. John’s Wood.... «thi da odie
Browne, = » Esq., I ba ne6sud sc aneeande veo
Browne, W., Esq., ditto 66
ee Miss, 10, Stafford-street, ‘thew pEPOVE 200200
Buckland, T., Esq., Byron Cottage, Great Malvern......
Buckley, Major, Bengal Cavalry .............seseee:
ee eee ee
Ditto, Second Friend of ret Pete ee
Bele, J., Beg., DURRQOMREE. 2. 0 s.c0 dese elec cececccscs


Brine, Mrs.,
Brine, Charles, Esq.,
Brine, Miss,


on Hamilton-


— bP


tS wo


—
—


Nm we Ww WH


—
one


—— — oT — ©


~— =


Dons.


L£


&.


~-— © Cc


£


2


10


inn, Subs.


&.


9


“


— i


d
0


Burney, Miss, Morton Hall, Norwich ................
Bushe, John, Esq., Chester-square ......

Butler, Edward, Esq.

Buxton, Dr., Brownlow-street . bad Se See
Byrne, Miss, 25, Charlotte- at, Portland. aie bees oe


Capern, Thomas, Esq., Alpha-place, a Friend by........
Ditto, Mrs. A GUE sa 6s nb4b ds. cb anbndd doen ence
Se Oh NP NL Gca oe ks walseee os Gkua heen ae eyes
Ditto, B. T. L., by
Ditto, Miss » by ;

Cargill, W. W., Esq., 5, Princes-terrace, ., Knightsbridge. .

Carlisle, the Right Hon. the Earl of, Grosvenor-place. .

Cautley, Rev. Joshua, Thorney, Peterborough

Chambers, Alex., Esq., Ratcliffe-highway ............

Chandler, T., Esq., Surgeon, Rotherhithe .........

Chandler, M., Esq., Surgeon, 53, Eastbourne- con
Hyde-park.. cveceee

Chapman, Dr., 25, Maenaainatint .

Child, a token of gratitude from a, ie -_ derived me
benefit from Mesmerism, and
something to the Infirmary .

Clark, James, Esq., Surgeon, Acton- see Kingsland- ont

Clarke, James, Esq., Steet, Glastonbury, Somersetshire. .

Clarkson, Miss R. .

Clifford, Mrs., a token of raid raat a poor 1c pationt for


wishes to send


her cure. ceccceoceone

ae Miss, 7, Duke- street, “Ondine “square. .

Cochrane, Dr., Rio Janeiro ......
Coles, Mrs. J., Beulah Spa, cunt . ea sak ee
Collins, Miss E., Prescolt, Rainhill ..............00.-
Collis, Mrs., 59, Russell-square Jane
Colvin, E. J., Esq., Gloucester-place, Foshan -square
Cook, Rev. Joseph, Purley Hall, Oxfordshire ........
Coombe, J., Esq., 3, Cambridge-terrace, Regent’ peek.
Creyke, Ralph, Esq., Rowcliffe Hall, Selby, Yorkshire ..
Crewse, A. F. B., Esq., 8, Marlborough-hill, St. John’s

Wood. . 5 awecis jececase uh oeue

Croft, Col., Shellington Hall, Yorkshire cece ecccceeees
Crompton, Joshua, Esq., Sion-hill, Thirsk ............
Cryer, —, Esq., Brentford .
Currey, F. E., Lismore Castle, Ireland
D’ Aguilar, Lieut.-Colonel, Albany .......
Davey, W., Esq.. :
Davidson, Captain, 40, Charlotte- sian, Portland- idies..
Davies, J. Silvester, Esq., Pembroke College, Oxford. . ..


£8
ss
: @
5 0
0 10
1 0
: 3
010
4 0
1 10
3 3
5 5
0 5
s §
5 0
0 5
|
4 0
5 0
1 0
§ 0
3
5 60
10 0
1 0
1 1
0 10


Dons.


Ann.


£


0


&.


Subs.


d.


£
Davis, R., Esq., 9, Great St. Helen’s ..... covece 32


Deverel, John, Esq., Purbrook-park, Pertemeuth eye
Deyman, C. O., Esq., 10, South-square, Gray’s Inn ..
Dickens, Charles, Esq., Tavistock House, Tavistock-square 3


Dobson, H. H., Esq., 32, Piccadilly 1
EN oc cn vh' se kwastaveeeds saceieiecs ©
Dodsworth, Sir C., Bart .... oe ne 5
Donne, Mrs., 6, Craven-hill........ ite on wie aa
Dovey, William, 17, Elizabeth-terrace, Liverpool-road,
Islington (having been cured by Mesmerism).... 0
Dowman, Mrs., Peacock-street, Newington............ 1
Downshire, the Marchioness of, Hanover-square...... ..
Dublin, the eee Pe Oe ee ee
Ducie, Earl of . a aece Madea a ote aon ais «ame
Duke, Miss, See
Dunlop, Mrs., 2, Howley- see, Maida- hill. ‘
I i ee ig cee
Edwards, Rev. John, Cheltenham ................-. 2
Ekins, Rev. Jeffrey, Braintree, Essex ..............--
Ellick, Mr. J., 7, Canterbury Villas, Maida-vale, a
EE Uehths tadeh ade cade se ores eanp eaten
ONE, Tila MS © os hone 06460000 006.40 saan sree Ae
Ditto, Anonymous, manne i ee eT eee ee
Ditto, a Lady by 1
Ditto, a Lady by ....... ann i a
Ellis, A. J., Esq., hesiep-alann, Bristol ke caine oe 5


Ditto (in addition to his former pice of £2)

Ditto, a Friend of . ee ckee 1
Ellison, C. J., Esq., 24, “Ola hem, Lincoln's s-inn- n-fields ‘
Enfield, —, Esq., Nottingham . .

Espie, Robert, Esq., Surgeon, R. N., " Blythe Hill, ‘Soe
ham (by Mr. Barth) ..

Espie, Mrs., Blythe Hill, Spleen (by Mr. Barth) . 1

Evans, Treyer, Esq., Notting-hill . oie « en pe


Ewart, William, Esq., M.P., Cambridge- eequare ........ 5
Farley and Boys, Messrs., 16, ee ccaee oe
Farrow, W., Esq., Woburn .......

Featherstonhaugh, J. D., Esq., Ealing... 5


Fitzgerald, Mrs., Cork . cece

Fletcher, Major, Ulesusbo-gleee, Sedhincn., “re
Forbes, Sir Charles, Bart.. pup hGteebGtecaeeveces OE
Ford, Mrs., 123, Park-street, ‘Gomme. MEETS . 0. 20-00
Fossett, J., Esq., 28, Regent’s Quadrant ..............
Fradelle, H. J., Esq., 5, Brecknock-crescent, Camden-
COR: Sc cues bese secasees


Dons.


&.
12


com - ©


0


Ann.


£


_— —


nN


~~ — i


Subs.

d.
0 0
1 0
1 0
2 0
1 0
1 0
1 0
0 0
1 0
y 8
2 0
1 0
1 0
1 0
2 0
1 0
1 0
0 0
1 0
1 0
1 0


Dons. Ann. Subs.
Sad. £324 |
Friedlander, Rev. E. A., Kingston House, Clapham .... 1 1 0
Friedlander, Dr. C. M., Grove House, Clapham ........ a oe
en ee eee eee eee
Frend, H. T., Esq... ‘ dbibese scan” ee
Frere, J., Esq., Stamford- beats “Chiswick . iteaen DOO Ba «cdo 4
Ditto, for defraying the expenses of pate Meeting,
ET eee TEE T ere ee ee
Gardiner, Mr. Thomas, Secretary, Infirmary .......... 1. B 2
a I ss cei cxseteed. cess imemer . ae
Content, Biri, 0 Te WG ccs cc wc cesvcsiccessoesss OR ©
Garnier, the Lady Harriet. . ~~ 2 eS
Gibbs, D. A., Esq., Pembury rv las, Redon mann " ee . Jae
Gibson, Mrs. Milner, 49, Wilton-crescent ............ A, 4. 3
Gibson, A., Esq., Saffron Walden. . eee ee
Gill, W., Esq., 42, Inverness-road, Rueeiee.. avai .. = i
Goff, R., Esq., 21, Kensington Gore. . nie’ cconagtts 5 0 0
Goldsmid, Baron de, F.R.S. bien unm © 3
Goldsmid, Miss, St. John’s Lede, Regent’ ory ae 1 1 0
Goldsmid, Miss C., St. John’s Lodge, Regent’s-park .. .. 110
Goldsmid, Miss Isabel, 2, Park-crescent, Portland-place. . 1 1 0
Goodwin, R., Esq., Acton-place, Camden-road 110
Gordon, J. A., Esq., Naish, Bristol . . rece me
Gossett, Mrs., 3, Westbourne-place, Hyde- oath. ; ; i 6
Grattan, Thomas Colley, Esq., 32, Curzon-street, ‘ty fair ee ¢
Green, Thomas, Esq., Chichester . aa 23 0
Gregory, Dr., Professor in the Univ vatily of Edinburgh .. . =s
Grignon, the Rev. W. S., Brighton .................. ss <
Hachmester, Mrs., 49, King-street, Soho.............. 1 1 0
Hall, Mrs., 22, Great Pulteney-street, Golden- -square.. 1 0 0
Halse, W. H., Esq., 22, Brunswick-square . ay 1 10
Hambleton, Mrs., 7, St. John’s-wood-road, Regent rent 3.2 s
Hamilton, W. H., Esq., Brighton. . : 5 0 0
Hammersley, Charles, Esq., 25, uli crescent, Portland-
BE oc oc enue . SWed vate os i. @& 6
Hands, J., Esq., Sage, ‘Duke-s street, , Grevenns-cquane 5 5 0
Hankey, Miss Aliers, 5, Hyde-park-gardens .......... 1 1 0
Hankin, Mrs. hitont 9, Marlborough-place, St. John’ 8
Wood. . & 348
Hare, Lieut., Bath. . fis 100
Harrison, Leonard, Esq., Cannan street . 010 0
Hayman, S., Esq., Sidmouth OTR ce eee
Heath, H., Esq., 123, — ak We SO asi lahta kaos gical a
ER ne Pe ne eee 015 O
Hennen, Mrs., Denmark- hill. Ee ee
Herring, Mrs. W., St. Faith’s- lene, Norwich


Dons. Ann. Subs.
f£a@ £68 4.
Herring, Miss, Brighton ...... rh ewe $s 6
Herring, the Rev. Armine, Thorpe ‘Rastoy, Norwich ce 0
Hewes, J. T., Esq., East Lodge, East Greenwich ......
Hicks, Captain, Bath 7
Hill, Mrs., at Lady Downshire’s, Saesvere -square
Hoare, —, Esq., Deptford Taek on ebsdsses
BEOGe, BER. Weg GHUPTIIM. 5 oo os cect cde ccesccesss
Hodgson, Captain Ellis. . oes
Holland, James, Esq., 6, Laurie- earsase, ‘New Cres ooae
Hollings, J. F., Esq., Leicester. .
Holmes, Mrs., 2, Upper Porchesten-cteett, ‘Cambetige-
square snares
Holtop, L., Esq., 4, Russell- glass, Ftzroy-s -square ..
Horn, Mrs., Clapham-rise. ,
Houghton, W. N., Esq., 162, “Bond- stuest . ie aeas
Howell, Joseph, Esq., Howarden, North W ae Pag prs
Howly, John Hugh, Esq., Thame, Oxfordshire .. .
Hudson, Captain, 6, Nile-street, Liverpool ............
Hussey, Edward, Esq., Scotney Castle, Lamberhurst .. ..


Isham, Sir Charles, Bart, Lamport Hall, Northampton-


James, Captain, Littlebourne Rectory, Kent

James, Captain John, ditto rani re

Janson, H. U., Esq., Pennsylvania Park, Exeter ndienes
Ditto, Second Donation


Jeaffreson, Mrs., 14, Green-street, Cee. “square. .

Jekyl, Captain, Bramley House, Guildford ............

Johnstone, F. G., Esq., Surgeon, Conduit-street...... ..

Jones, M. Lewis, Esq., 47, Conduit-street, Hanover-
square .

Jones, J., Esq., fede.


Kavanagh, Morgan, Esq., 4, Charlotte-street, Fitzroy-
square
Kavanagh, L., Esq., Berkeley. cleat, , Petmanequne..
Kingdom, W., Esq., Reform Club . be
King, Dr., Master of Queen’s College, Cambridge eres
Kindersley, Miss C. G., 54, Upper Brook-street........
Kinnard, H. J., Esq., Iron Works, Falkirk............
Kiste, Adolphe, Esq., 37, Maddox-street..............
Ditto, Second mS
Ditto, Miss C.,
mane ne Red ibiteacan ove
Klein, William, Esq., Red Hill, Gene


Dons.


Kent .. TTT
Ditto, Second Sendien
Ditto, Third Donation ...... rs
Knight, C. Allinson, Esq., Saheateit “St. panes dwe


Knatchbull, the Rev. Wyndham, D.D., Smeethe Rectory,


La Breton, Sir Thomas, Jomaey.... 606s ccscsiccccsess

Lang, W. &., Mag, Giangow. .ooccccccssccccesccecss

Langhorne, Mrs., Kingston, Surrey............++..+:

Langston, J. H., Beg, MP. once cs cccccccccccc cece IO

Laurie, Dr. W. Forbes, Dunstable ........ 1

Law, Rev. Edmund, D.D., Chaplain to the British >

bassy, St. Petersburg . ‘ iden as et

Lawrance, Capt., Largean, Kirkudbrightshire, Wk we é0

Lawson, Capt. Henry, 11, Fortess-terrace, Kentish Town

Liogd, W. W., Hee, 77, Guew TB... 06 siccawice sc cees

Lloyd, —, Esq., Rockville, Roscommon, Ireland

Lloyd, Mrs., 30, Dorset-square . ‘

Louch, W. S., Esq., 12, Bushinghem set, Adelphi.

Loverton, Mr., 26, Hertford-street, Fitzroy-square .

Lucas, Major, Newport Pagnel. . ,

Ludlow, J. M., Esq., 3, Chequers, Lincoln’ 8- un..

Luxmoore, J. C., Esq., Reform Club . cP

Lyle, W. G., Esq., 17, Bloomsbury- teat, ‘Bedford-s -square 10
TS DON ov csectesisvisss iri Ss

M., Miss Julia, — Hall, Norfolk................00.-

Maberly, Joseph, Esq., 17, Harley-street..............

Maclin, J., Esq., Surrey-square, Old Kent-road........ 0

Majendie, A., Esq., F.R.S., Hedingham Castle, Essex... 5

Marshall, James G., Esq., Munk Coniston, Ambleside... 50

Marshall, John, Esq., Halesworth, Suffolk ............ 0
artineau, R., Esq., Edgbaston ......

Mason, Miss, Harmony Hall, Wilnthorpe, ‘Westnentant

Matthews, Miss, Wigton Hall, Cumberland ...........

Matts, S., Esq., a aeNgonees Bb 66 code cose bee as ce

Maurice, Miss . :

Mc Donald, Dr., pene in the eben ersity of St. yoree 8
CR IN hind oc Geer or acctensecedeegeess

Meek, Captain ......

Melhuish, Mrs., 9, Bedford-street, Red Lion- ninth.

Miller, W., Esq., 4, Baker-street, London-street, Brighton

Milnes, R. Monckton, Esq,, M.P., 16, ge Brook-street

Minto, Miss, 32, Cambridge-terrace. . ;

Mitchell, George, Esq., Thorahill-square, Sdiegien. .

Mitchell, Miss, 10, Abbey-place, St. John’s Wood. .

Mitchell, Mr., jun., ditto


Ann. Subs.


£


&.


d.


10


Dons.


Moffatt, George, Esq., M.P., Eaton-square............
Molesworth, the Dowager Lady, Lowndes-street .......
Moreton, Hon. Augustus, 8, Great Cumberland-place . ..
Morgan, Mrs. Augustus de .. .

Ditto, a Friend by

Ditto, a Friend by enon ease ta
Muskett, Mrs., Highgate ...........
Mowatt, J., Esq. ObeSSs kn Rs bebe he scacnaeear et
Myers, 1. J., Heg., Prestom .. 2.20.0


Newnham, W., Esq., Surgeon, Farnham..............

GE, Seg MEENND 6 00 node cectbe 60s os

Nicholls, H. F., Esq., Beidgowster amas sen cces

Nottage, George S., Esq., 67, Upper Thanee-a street ....

Noyes, Sarah Ann (a servant cured by Mesmerism after
all other means had failed) ..........+...5455


Opening of the Donation-box (1852) .............+..
Donation-boxes (1853) .
(1854) . —
Ormerod, Miss, Tenchly Park, Ly spel, near lien
Surrey :

Ormerod, H. E., Esq., Merton College, ‘Oxford .

Ditto, Sueeh Donation ch nite ihe tel oink a
Ottley, Mrs., 5, Dean-street, Park- ae ee eee ee


Miia Ci CY an de Gk os ee velba bk ge oe ke cabbies

Paine, J. M., Esq., Farnham ....... iid

Parks, Mrs., 1, Westbourne-park-terrace, Paddington pre

Ditto, Second Donation Fag’

Parker, Mr., Mercer-street, Long-acre. a<

Partridge, Dr., York-place, Posteanoqeee Waals ebb eons

Patten, H., Esq., 50, Berners-street ......... 2.000005

Paul, the Rev. C. Kegan, Eton College

Pearson, Miss, 22, Upper Baker-street su alanis

Pearson, Miss A., 22, Upper Baker-street ............

Pearson, the Misses GES aagnne 5050000800025

Phipps, Miss, Canonbury . + _

Penrice, David, Esq., Suene, Thema, near rane ich os

Pettit, James, Esq., 16, Allsop-terrace, New-road ......

Powell, Mrs. L. Y., 12, Ladbroke Villas, Notting-hill . ..

P , Miss . avet «cnueh pihevbiieswake

P » Miss Sues 5 ore

ache Miss Jane (a ouit ation yaa an - obliged
patient of H. U. Janson, Esq., in grateful acknow-
ledgment of his kind services) .... ..

Ditto, Second Donation


Ann, Subs.


£ s.


d.


iI


Dons.


£ 2.
Purland, Theodosius, Esq., Mortimer-street, Cavendish-
EE don sc na venvesquanes ehevseeensteeeen
Purland, Mrs. ditto


R. G.. ‘

Rawe, John, en, ™ ‘Chesnut Cottage, Shseeaieit Hill...

Rhynhart, Joseph, Esq., 21, Great Queen-street, Holborn

Riviere, Frederick, Esq., 95, Great Russell-street, Bedford-
square . .

Robertson, Rev. T, Blandford. -square . yaseaee

Robertson, —, Esq., Editor of Mechanics’ Maseatien ‘soe

Robinson, A., Esq., 5, Woburn-square. .

Roth, Dr., Old Cavendish-street. .. 0... 0.00 cc cece ceee

I Fag y CHUN node vc snccses 42 Ubelbes


Salmon, James, Esq., Red Lion-street, Holborn........
Sandby, Rev. G., Flixton, Suffolk.................4-
Sandby, Mrs. ditto. .

Ditto, a Friend by. anas
Saunders, S. D., Esq., ‘1. Sian Come, Clifton...
Scarlett, Captain the Hon., Scotch Fusileer Guards
Scripps, Miss, Bromley ..............+
Schonburg, the Prince of, Deseden .
Selfe, S., Esq., Bridgewater. . pices made
Shackleton, E., Esq., Moone Mills, Ballitore . Pearse
Sharp, Isaac, Esq., Middlesbro, Yorkshire .
Shaw, T. A., Esq., Holly Lodge, Campden Hill, Ken-

sington ......
Shephard, Miss, North ‘Hiddon Cottage, engubel..
Shepherd, G., Esa., 6, Effingham-crescent, Dover......
Simpson, Dr., York . see sor
Simpson, Mrs., 21, Ghmenten denis echene -square .
Sims, C., Esq., Hubbard’s Hall, Harlow, Essex........ 5
Sims, Rev. H. B., Great Parndon Rectory, Essex ...... 10
Skipper, H., Esq. 16, Park-place Villas, Maida Hill West 10
Slade, Edgar, Esq., 3, Sussex-place, New Kensington... 1
Smith, Hubert, Esq., St. Leonards, Bridgnorth........
Smith, William G., Esq., jun., 2, Deptford Bridge.. ....
Smith, Miss, Champion Hill, Camberwell ............
Smith, Mrs. G., ditto, per Miss H. Travers .... .:
Smyth, Isaac, Esq., Acton ...... CEL or ae
Smith, Rev. C. B., Vicar of Alfriston, mpeg
Snee, —, Esq., Colebrook-row, Islington. . ‘
Sneed, James, Esq., 1, Beresford-terrace, W eect .
Snewing, —, Esq., Kenilworth Lodge, Kenilworth. .
Snewing, C., Esq., Alpha-place, — Regent’s 8-
WR dsivitadases


Ann.


£


Subs.


8.


d.


Dons. Ann. Subs.
ca © £ 2.
Snewing, Mrs. C., ditto GR aia aeciastdixatbe ya 3.6
Snewing, W., Esq., New Oxford-street ............+: 1 1
Spedding, Miss, Mirehouse, Cumberland .............-
Spicer, H., Esq., 100, Mount-street, Grosvenor-square ..
Spiller, Joel, Esq., Bridgewater
Stanhope, Earl, Chevening, Sevenoaks. . ‘sia =
Stapleton, Captain W. P., Salcombe- veutiag, Sidmouth .
Ditto, Second Donation Sc ta aeeesaree es ws em
CR ins vi ca tol esee aeae ee enbe ws en
Stapleton, —, Esq., Ballingtore cedtebensmes
Steele, C. W., Esq., Surgeon, “parry Jahren wh in ch th
Stirling, W., Esq., IR cies et nnce nc ac te enusieeas
Stringer, Mrs., Goudhurst, Kent .........00....e2005-
Stringer, Mrs., Ventnor, Isle of —_— RS ee
Sullivan, J., Esq. . it ateb alee weer
Swanwick, Miss, 27, Ween: POUINEE: cncocedetsieecee
Symes, Dr., Bourdon House, Davies-street, Berkeley-
square je CESSES he Anes Gabe bane eter
Symes, Mrs., N25. BG twG cae de de bane ceneas cans


Talbot, G., Esq., Honeybrook, Kidderminster ..........

Tanner, Mrs., Blacklands, Calne, Wilts .............-
Ditto, Second Donation ‘

Tatham, Michael H., Esq., 11, Staples =i


Taylor, Thomas, Esq., 12, Duke-street, Bee
Taylor, —, Esq., Dockeray Hall, Cumberland..........
Taylor, C. N., Esq., 4, Ampton-place, Gray’s-inn-lane ..
Taylor, Charles Johnson, Esq., Lansdowne Villa, Upper
Norwood ieee
Taylor, Mark, Esq., 48, Useer hen street ween
Thomas, Capt., Longearn, Carmarthenshire............
Thompson, H. S., Esq., Fairfield House, near York.... ..
Thompson, Mrs., ditto ; eek aie
Thomson, Adam, Esq., 25, New Renta Sims ise
Tillett, Ann (a patient of the Infirmary) ..........-...
Ditto, Second Donation
Tillerton, —, Esq., Kingston , Rees ee
Todhunter, Miss, 19, Highbury-terrace, “Islington nevale'vt
Topham, Lieut.-Colonel, Conservative Club............
Topham, the Rev. Edward, Ticehurst, Sussex..........
Towgood, Frederick, Esq., Si. Neots, Hunts ‘
Townsend, Mrs., 14, Upper Marylebone-street, her child
having been cured of white — of the knee at
the Infirmary. .
Townsend, B., Esq., 5, ‘Kidbrook- tonaee, ‘Blackheath
Townshend, Rev. C. Hare, Norfolk-street, Park-lane .. ..
Travers, Miss H., Champion-hill .


Ore teense


Dons. Ann, Subs.


a & a Ze ad
Trevelyan, Sir Walter C., Bart.. cb ai kame kp eae ee “im oa


Trevelyan, A., Esq., Wallington, nih . cone me
Trigg, Mrs. James, Westfield, Hoddesden ..

Truelove, Mr., 22, John-street, Fitzroy-square ....

Tubbs, W. J., Esq., Surgeon, Upwell Isle, Cambridgeshire
Tucker, Mr., Mesmeriser, F. F., a patient of ..........


Udall, Henry, Esq., Temple

Underwood, W., Esq., Vere-street .

Underwood, C., Esq., 13, Holles-street . oe

Upjohn, T. R. S., Esgq., ron 6, Westbourne-villas,
Harrow-road .


Uxbridge, tho Counters of dd sede etonusiae es case Nees


Vials, John P., Esq., 14, Duke-street, Adelphi ........
Vernon, Mrs. Ethel, Shrawley, Worcestershire ......


Vieusseux, F. T., Esq., 6, Gloster-place, _— eee
WEE 400 suhb bs En veld eens’


Voltege, —, Esq., Victoria-square, Reading ..........

Von der Heyde, Mrs., Sydenham..........-+++++e+0+

W. G. W., Esq., Great Portland-street. .

Waleen, W. H., Esq., 6, Lodge-road, St. John’: 8 W oat

Wallace, Miss, 4, Russell-place, Fitzroy-square ........

Wallis, H., Esq., 64, Long-acre ......

Walsh, Aubrey, Esq., Harrington-square, Hampstend-road

Walton and Mitchell, Messrs., 24, Wardour-street. .

Walton, Mrs., 1, Blenheim-road, St. John’s Wood. .

Walton, Richard, Esq., Oak-cottage, Norfolk-road, “St.
John’s Wood.

Wedgwood, Mrs. oe

West, T., Esq., Barrister, 6, ene court, . Caante..

West, Mrs.. satis keds ate ee ee cae ROU

White, Gaunt ‘Bath “ee

Whitfeld, H., Esq., Surgeon, Ashford . eee

Whitfield, Miss Ann, 3, Sidmouth- stenet, Guy todanaead.

Whitear, Rev., W., 6, Trafalgar-place, Ramsgate........

Wilberforce, W., Esq., 51, Cadogan-place

Williams, Mrs. T. G., Hackney-road 6 beads

Webb, John Whiteman, Esq., Priory House, Rasa .

Wedgwood, Mrs., Barlaston, Staffordshire . di

Whitty, Rev. John, St. Matthew’s, Sheffield ed cece esos

Woods, —, Esq., 3, Newman-court, Cornhill........

Woods, S., Esq., Walthamstow


Dons. Ann. Subs.
& € £s. d
EE Oi EL vv c's on 05 0:6 86 50 8% ve 02 op teenle pet ae
vermen, D.C, Man, Get .. 2... soos cbsnee nema: oe


PRODUCE OF PENNY SUBSCRIPTION BOXES.


Amor, John, Esq., New Bond-street

Bailliére, H., Esq., 219, eee

Bently, Miss ......... Tee

Brine, Miss, 8, South-row, tee ary

Brunning, Miss, 32, Park-street . .

Capern, Thomas, Esq., Alpha- alase, teens

Dunn, Mrs., Pentonville-hill. .

Elliotson, Dr., 37, Conduit-street. . . . epee Bee
Fradelle, H. J., Esq., 5, Beuhesdss crescent, Cuniien’ Pbk. anes
Gardiner, Miss Clara, Infirmary

0 wad

Kemp, G., Esq., re aah Kentish-t. town . oe
Knight, James, Esq., 5, Torriano Avenue, Camden. read villas ore
Phipps, Mrs. . . ict Pires

Salmon, Pa See, Red nee street, kien . ‘ veinite
ee MN anne whl ends wide nein ep asics ¥0Ule Sie
Taylor, Mrs. .


a


Su o w are


~
ee we we


wow ww


Thompson, Adam, 25, New Bond-street . Pusan tAiee hoes eng’
Mere, W., Tem, Vermin ac co ic ccseccecc es cownnees
Wright, Eliza


It is earnestly requested that those ladies and gentlemen, whose subscriptions
are still due, will no longer delay to forward them.

The demand for mesmerism is so great that the funds of the institution are
much too small to meet them.

Subscriptions and Donations may be transmitted to Mr. Thomas Gardiner,
Secretary and Resident Superintendent, at the House of the Institution, 36,
Weymouth Street, Portland Place.

Fine Crystals may be purchased there at a very moderate price.

Patients who do not think it right to avail themselves of charity, but would
not find it convenient to pay a private mesmeriser the usual fee of ten shillings a
week, when he has no great distance to go, are mesmerised ai the Institution for
Jive shillings a week in rooms separate from those of the other patients.

Subscribers and Visitors introduced by members of the Committee are allowed
to visit the Institution between the hours of two and four o'clock.

The house is not open on Sundays.


Walton and Mitchell, Printers, W: eodour- shrect, Oxford-street.

==============================================================================

INDEX.


page
Alderson, Dr., his coarse Harveian Oration ...........+.++eee+++ 213, 242
IE ooo n6 5s UEC Sa Ce yRneieRedas Westen eee a
Atheneum ...... OP EET STEP O TOE Te Toe ee ee
Attachment, tenis pure..
By TE a6 bs 6050 soca
Barrett, Rev. Dr., his cures Noe eye
Beards opposed by a country congregation ..
Beater, Mr., his generosity
Beaumarchais . ‘ é+p obs
Beck’s Elements of Medical Sdsteneinn .
Beecher, Rev. Mr., his supernatural views ........
Blindness, lessened 6 anh ee lar Seether tom
Bone and its covering, diseased, pane
Bottomley, surgeon, of Croydon .....
Breast, swollen, cured pulaisits
Brodie, Sir B., his mistakes and niet.
Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy .. $5 06 60.9005.00 9040604
Canning, George, his opposition to Medical Sites. °
Capern, Mr., his cures ........ ov ccsees
Carpenter, Dr., his wretched onde » os errr, Ter
Castle, Dr., Cerebral Development of pecan te te deen ences ge bane
Chest, pain of, instantly cured .........ccccccccccccecccvcccces BU,
Chloroform, new list of deaths from ................ oe
Clairvoyance ...... oe cceccccecs "223, &e., 250, "300,
Colquhoun, Mr., author of  Tsia + Revelata, j just dead..
Combe, Mr. George, his conduct ....


Consumption, apparent, cured ..........
Convulsions cured .. . i
— in Child cured
Crowe, Mrs. ey
Cumming, Rev. Dr., on anenens tes Table- mail
S 5 gf Pere ree ee


428883


INDEX


Currents, Ocean..........
Cutaneous Disease cured
Deafness cured


Head-ache cured.


page
301
37
25


Diebillty camed woos cc ccccccccccccccccccccce Fb, F6, 160, 198, 207, 08


ES PE oe NE ET TOC eee
De Morgan, Mrs. Augustus ...... 179, 196
Dexter, Mr., his book on spiritualism ...... 6... ee cece ee ence eeeeeee 199
Disturbance, Mesmeric 263, 375
Dropsy cured . be diaeeronan ores 36
Dumas, Minnie his Cerebral Sinn. 333
Re, ME Boe vecc nena caceed decd soncesencoecsseces Ee
Edmonds, Judge, his book on spiritualism ..........--++e+eeeeeeeeee 199
Ekins, Rev. J., his.cures. 253, 369
Elliotson, a , his cain on Mr. B, R. Sheen &e.. 62
—— on medical extremes in practice 167
oo -- instances of mischief from spirit fancies .............. 174
————--————- account of Mr. Tubbs’s painless removal of a Breast and
history of all others onesies 113
on Mesmeric Disturbance... .........sescesecscesees 269
——--——-—-- cure of Ganglion pain an ene 362
-——— = on Drs. Laycock and Lankester .........+++-+- 374
— on the mistakes of Sir B. Brodie and others .......... 382
—_——_—_—— care by Tenaginaliom .....cccccsccsccssscesccescces § SRG
Ellis, Mr. A. J., translation of Reichenbach’s Preface 317
Erysipelas (so called) cured ........ccccccceccccececceeesesscees 305
ne gis hg IRS ali RAR a 74, 413
Beaminer DOwepape? .. 2.2... escccccccccccccscccvccccccsvccescses S04
PN CRIED 6 «oi cive vender sive seveeecécdenenceiccetsiongetces ORR
ieee, See, CUE onic. cc crtv cc cece cvcscvcsscctecsctessccesss TP
Fitch, inventor of steamboats... ... 297
Flowerday, Mrs., alive and well 421
Foot, contraction of, cured ee ee eee 196
Franklin, Dr., his despair of success of Literary Fund 309
IL Cit pun gh Keene bs bcd eeeanieed Ghia havheh ankeutinnsd chk ae
IE «ooo 05 5 kccaned Si 56 hein ceeveves secs usevescnacew
Gout cured sane 335, 336
Greek, study of, saniaie at Oxford . 247
Guthrie, Mr., his account of a severe nervous case .........+seeee0e++ 213
Hall, Sir Benjamin, sneered at by Mr. Spencer Wells 362
Hall, Dr. Marshall, his politeness...............+0+5- 248
Hastings, Dr., his cure ......... bald 301
Haydon, Mr. B. R., his character me hate 10


INDEX.


Heart, affection of, cured . iio
Hippocrates, his accurate ieoninitn of me use ” the bate pvonlsnsaecae UE
I NNN sine o0ba i500 0000808064 5e0eeunessecenen pheneeda eee
BNE Gin oan sichsecd aise gene ee seaseees ences béandeue enn
Hudson, Capt., Beenie cocvececcecsccccosccesevesssesvoancsesss EGG
eT, DE VO oo 6c ins ni ounces sacodneckecs acletinese bean
Benpeaias, GONE OE ow occ ce cc ccc sccccccesesccenascecitanscces! “Ae


corcccnes 48
MIE. a6 sive 0 ic 60'ns csp ananse bees teeneneenseeeee 78


Sem NS IR oo aie 't'y. windsor eo cecacmce ws we ase natn


a a
NOD ons is cn dneueesades0endw acne snaeneeens anne
I GUID on. o na 55.b050 Ksice kernc eeecee es 2s00vennss eee ee
Eevingites .....00+ Peer
Jackson, Mr. J. W., on Table- louie Sten é R8.. csc ae aees 1
his account of Judge Edmonds and Mr. “Dexter's

CP CTT TT PO, nT ee


Cm: CRIED as 0 69:00:00 00.00 00 86200 eeceewe CO
Janson, Mr., his generosity ...........seeeseeeee+ 112, 212, 309, 316, 321
Johnson, Dr. Samuel, illustration of his character ............e00e000: 74
Kemp, Mr. John, account of his own case ..........eeseeeeeeeeseeee 404
i, UE GE, GE v0 0:0 56 06.00 00 0s vase ie ws eee eee x eee
Lancet . ee ET ee Ter me
ieutiabe, Dr., his wise inane. (ev eestwevereescehansecn Te
Laycock, Dr., his ignorance and vulgar sieheitads crerieensccenen oe Seep eee
Leg, comtracted, OUTOd .. 0.0. cccccccccccccccccccccccecscccccceccs 6106
Leg, ulcerated and inflamed, cured ........--.scccccscccccccccccces 208
BND GION. go ccs 5c d0 0s 54 kd seks en seeneres KeEsasinees esse eer OEE
Lewis, Rev. L., case of Mesmeric Disturbance ...........-seeeeeee+- 263
Liebig, his exposure by Reichenbach ........-.s+eeeeeecesceeeeseeee SID
Literary Fund, despaired of by Franklin ............e0eeseeeeeeeeess 309
Liver Complaint, alleged, cured .......sceeecscscccverescccesecces B00
Lloyd, Mr. W., his cures ....cccscccccsccccccvcccccescsccecce 1064, 334
BGPOR EE oc ce cece ence cece ever cccess cavsevesenaciceescocesesse. Se
ite, Tae, Bile Wee Bie GUE oo 0:0: 6:0 09 0 0' 00 we 0 00 00: 306600 008006"
Maury, Lieut., unsuccessful at first ......0-cccececccecrcesvecreceses SOL
IN 5 x x.0'bt oi 44 24 0c CHS 26h bs Oe VERRAN RSE ORR 39
nn Pe a ae,
Miles, Capt. Faloomer, his cure... ......0-.ccscccccccccscscscccccces 415
Military Officers, prejudice Of ..........ccccccccccscscccccsessccce 404
Mitchell, Mr., his cure of diseased bone and its covering .............. 404
ae Te I ook. cnntcw dees ctdeetes dens beeen 34
Neck, stiffness of, instantly cured ........ 00sec cccececeecceeees SIZ, 31D
IS CHINE ok nc once hc 000s kode anes ce deeneseneaeeaseneneeen ME


INDEX.


page

Nervous Disease, old and intense, cured .........+ june 213
Nervous Attacks cured ...... va sees eews 163
Nervous Disorder, wonderful case of ... sis "M6, 297
Neuralgia cured .. Kedaeee dene de teen anes "187, 206, 209, 310, 311, 370
tie emmeeebentind .. i ecbebesrecdvosereserecececes Se
Oldenberg, Preface to Phil hie l 1 Tr tions . ° ° 373
Ovarian Disease, alleged, cured... 188
Pain from a burn cured . es 308
Dabieccieehelethen . Seb esebew ee cece cn enee 113
Operations under einai list of . bheceauneen| ee

Palsy cured jue 35, 196, 197, 198
, Shaking, meal. . 197
Panama, route by, paaanry eeses eee 293
Paul, Rev. C. Kegan, lines on Mesmer’s ‘hon 5 247
iy SEN Mies NED Snide ne de dccnce nabs 6600 00nd en oe 249
Perceval, Spencer, his opposition to Medical J heel covccccessce BD
Phreno-Mesmerism ....... (hab weeoe 220, &c.
Plowman, Mr. (Missionary), his cures . 205
Prideaux, Mr., on economy of fuel .. 260
Quarterly Review ...... sdbbeecenveees 18
Raleigh, Sir W., accused of Athelom 375
Rapping . 2
Rawe, Mr., Ke his cures . 160


Reichenbach, account of his new aah.


TS GENE ck cc ensccocsccsvscessn BE 186, "197, 198, 208, 336, 414


317


Ringworm cured .. oeeee (ceneeceteuntecesco” Ge
Rogers, Mr. E. C., his views oe Spirit-r rapping, &c. 15
Rousseau ergo re ree ‘ 80
nila, Min. comet et eenn teak WErTriTTirtre TT eer 80
es, Ce Ge a INR sc on we ncn ae ecdebe abibevebarabeveas ae
Schlegel, F. 141
BE SRE kecicndeinssenssadeveescencns 293
Searle, Dr., his misrepresentations 95
BNO co ands oneb eens 80 6680 Ke eee ee ees 174
Shipbuilding, improvements in, opposed .............0ceceseceeeeees 260
Shoulder, white swelling of, cured ‘ vererrrrrer rT Ter te
Simpson, Dr., of Edinburgh, his ways................eeeeeeeeeeeeee 110
Sleep, extraordinary instances of . 7” Peer tT Tae
Smyth, Rev. C. Bohun, his ene of meaden peetesdeinsideaessl ae
ts Seis GY MII. 0 o.c 0c 00 ce cdee 06 ce'sdne 0006 seseeees 24
Be IN I i nin nine bared deed dv ener ns c00eens0uedens eee
Spirit fancies, their mischief .. . . 33, 417
ET NP cs ce icei cence veuccwes osd0cendusaeeeeeae Sw


I Ds MOGI sino ns xcne sues suvasends
Squirrell, Elizabeth, her case . rrr re or
Steamboat, original inventor of, cupunl oe


Stewart, Dugald ..
Swedenborg .. ..


Telegraph, Electric, at first neglected ..........
Terence eee aacies

Throat, sore, presently weal

Times, Medical. . seca grap ewes aad
Tom Taylor, Mr., . in saliidians to onl B. ‘RB. heme

Tooth-ache cured. . eacins
Townshend, Rev. C.1 H., his new idle.


Wells, Mr. Spencer, his folly .. .. 2... 2.0 scceccesseccaccs


Straton, Mr., Cerebral Reais of Mr. B. 'R. Gete ee eee
Surgeon in London, his ignorance of Mesmerism...............++++++:


EE oo ak wk evince ve ninda or cnlen ed sna bn wenndn ene
Talmadge, Senator, his excitement .. .......0 0c ccccsececsessececces


140, 362


Vii

page
309

141, 297”
297
396
40
160


. 200, 365
2, 289, 419


7
34
339
313
140, 362


. 34, 63, 73
. 209, 309, 414


17, 278 “

—— ——— on mesmeric facts shaten for Ww Vitcheraft 376
snes tipalnilialt eal Mlle nang os-exox'se 417

Tubbs, Mr., his painless removal of a Breast ........... 113
Umbrellas originally opposed 253
Virgil . savneas 365
Venable tn maces ET EE TO ee
Wee Fig MIP GEE oc cece seve evcccssccescncaescssecesescscsse | =SRe
his improvement os coccccsccccccccce §6SB

Wer, Ga, BIND oc ok we cece cd ccnecccccececessionctstsvesss, EE
TO FURIE oo 6 0 000s enue ase senee 287
Whewell, Rev. Dr., his conduct . aah tea cis amie 27
Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences cocccccece GF

Witchcraft, mesmeric facts mistaken for ............e00005 375
